Dialogues of the Buddha (Digha Nikaya), Vol. 2
T. W. & C. A. F. Rhys Davids, trans. (1910)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/dialoguesofbuddh02davi
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

|lurcljascb frotn

■


xv


THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE BUDDHISTS


SACRED BOOKS OF THE BUDDHISTS


TRANSLATED


BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

T. W. RHYS DAVIDS

LL.D., Ph.D., D.Sc, F.B.A.

PROFESSOR OF COMPARATIVE RELIGION AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MANCHESTER


PUBLISHED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF SIAM


VOL. Ill


Bonbon
HENRY FROWDE

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN CORNER, E.C.

I91O


TO
THE MEMORY OF

F. MAX MULLER

WHO FOUNDED THIS SERIES OF THE SACRED

BOOKS OF THE BUDDHISTS AND WHO DID IN

SO MANY OTHER WAYS SO MUCH FOR THE

CAUSE OF ORIENTAL LEARNING

THIS VOLUME

IS GRATEFULLY DEDICATED

BY THE TRANSLATORS


DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA


TRANSLATED FROM THE PALI
OF THE DIG HA NIK A YA


BY


T. W. and C. A. F. RHYS DAVIDS


PART II


Bonbon

HENRY FROWDE

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN CORNER, E.C.

19IO


6<p
, £ : Z 5


PRINTED IN ENGLAND,


CONTENTS.

14. Mahapadana Suttanta PAGE

Introduction (Buddhas, Bodhisats, and Arahants) . 1 4

X iLA I » a • > • • • • > • -|

15. Maha Nidana Suttanta

Introduction (The doctrine of natural causation) . 42 I
Text 50 I

16. Maha Parinibbana Suttanta

Introduction (Passages in this Suttanta compared with
others) 71

Text .......... 78

17. Maha Sudassana Suttanta

Introduction (Comparison with other versions) . .192
Text. . . . . . . . . 199


18. Jana-vasabha Suttanta

Introduction (Buddhist irony. Two expressions dis-
cussed) .........

Text 23,


233 (
237 1


19. Maha-Govinda Suttanta

Introduction (More irony. Other versions compared) 253
Text 259

20. Maha-Samaya Suttanta

Introduction (A glimpse of the evolution of gods) . 282
Text .......... 284

21. Sakka-Panha Suttanta

Introduction (The conversion of a god. The Sakka

myth) 294

Text 299


Vlll DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.

22. Maha Satifattjjana Suttanta page

Introduction (Discussion of the title) . . . .322
Text. ......... 327


23-


Payasi Suttanta


Introduction (Teaching of the Community after the

Buddha's death. Doctrine of Dana) . . . 347

Text 349

Index of Principal Subjects and Proper Names. . . 375

Index of Pali Woris 381


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

mahApadAna suttanta.

We find in this tract the root of that Bira;/a-weed which,
growing up along with the rest of Buddhism, went on spread-
ing so luxuriantly that it gradually covered up much that was
of value in the earlier teaching, and finally led to the down-
fall, in its home in India, of the ancient faith. The doctrine
of the Bodhisatta, of the Wisdom-Being, drove out the
doctrine of the Aryan Path. A gorgeous hierarchy of
mythological wonder-workers filled men's minds, and the older
system of self-training and self-control became forgotten.

Even at its first appearance here the weed is not attractive.
The craving for edification is more manifest in it than the
desire for truth. We have legends of six forerunners of the
historical Buddha, each constructed with wearisome iteration,
in imitation of the then accepted beliefs as to the life
of Gotama. So exactly do these six legends follow one
pattern that it has been possible, without the omission of any
detail, to arrange them in parallel columns.

The main motive of this parallelism is revealed in the con-
stantly repeated refrain Ayam ettha dhammata: 'That, in
such a case, is the rule,' the Norm, the natural order of things,
according to the reign of law in the moral and physical world.
Precisely the same idea is emphasized in the doctrine of depen-
dent origination, the Padcca-samuppada, placed here in the
mouth of Vipassi, the most ancient of these six teachers of
old. The fact that it is so placed shows that the early
Buddhists, when our Suttanta was composed, believed this
doctrine to have been pre-Buddhistic.

It is probable that all the great religious teachers of
antiquity appealed, in support of their views, to the wise men
of still older times. It is so recorded of most of them ; and
where it is not recorded, as in the cases of Lao Tsii and Zara-
thustra, that is probably due to the meagreness of the extant
records. In every country where the level of intelligence
was sufficient to produce a great leader of men in matters of
religion, it was sufficient also to bear in remembrance the
names at least, and a vague notion as to some of the doctrines,
of former, if perhaps less successful and famous, reformers.

ill. B


INTRODUCTION.


But a Wisdom-Being, appearing from aeon to aeon under
similar circumstances to propound a similar faith ! This is
an exclusively Indian conception ; in Indian literature it is
mainly Buddhist ; and in Buddhist literature its first ap-
pearance is in documents of the date of our Suttanta. Did
the Buddha himself know anything of this theory ? Possibly
not. The theory of a number of successive Buddhas pre-
supposes the conception of a Buddha as a different and more
exalted personage than an Arahant. Now in our oldest
documents these two conceptions are still in a state of fusion.
The word Buddha does not occur in its later, special, technical
sense. It occurs often enough in ambiguous phrases, where
it may be translated by 'Converted One, Awakened One.'
Thus at Sutta Nipata 48 it is said, of Gotama, 'The
Awakened One (Buddho) came to Rajagaha' ; but the time
referred to is some years before he had become a Buddha
in the later technical sense. And at Sutta Nipata 167 it is
said : ' Let us ask Gotama, the awakened one who has passed
beyond anger and fear ' ; but the very same adjectives are
used at Itivuttaka, No. 68, of any ordinary Arahant. So the
phrases used to describe the mental crises in Gotama's career
are invariably precisely the same as those used under similar
circumstances of his disciples ; and this holds good both of
his going forth, and of his victory and attainment of Nirvana
under the Tree of Wisdom. Further than that, in long descrip-
tions of Gotama — such for instance as that in Sutta Nipata,
verses 153 to 167 — all the epithets used are found elsewhere
applied to one or other of his disciples. The teacher never
called himself a Buddha (as distinct from an Arahant). When
addressed as Buddha, or spoken of as such, by his followers,
it is always doubtful whether anything more is meant than an
enlightened Arahant.

It is needless to state that this does hot in the least imply
any sense of equality between the teacher and his disciples.
The very oldest documents represent the difference as im-
measurable ; but as a difference of degree, not of kind. The
question is as to the manner of the gVowth and hardening
of this sense of difference ; and as to the consequent gradual
change in the connotation of words.

In the episode of the events between the Wisdom Tree and
the First Discourse, in which — for the first time perhaps — we
twice have the epithet Sammasambuddha1, it is in a similar
way associated both times on equal terms with A rah a. So

1 Majjhima I, 171; Vinaya I, 8, 9; Katha Vatthu 289; compare
D'vy» 393; Mahavastu III, 326; Jataka II, 284.


INTRODUCTION.


the word Bodhisatta has gradually changed its meaning and
implication. First used of Gotama between the Going Forth
and the Nirvana, it is then used of him from the moment
of conception ; then of all the Buddhas from conception
to Arahantship ; then of those beings on earth — men or
animals — who were eventually to become Buddhas ; then
of gods ; and finally it became a sort of degree in theology,
and was used as a term of respect for any learned and able
Mahayanist doctor.

The word Apadana, used in the title of this Suttanta for
the legend or life-story of a Buddha, is also used as a title of
a book in the supplementary Nikaya. There it has come
generally to mean the legend or life-story of an Arahant,
male or female, though the older connotation is also found.
In later books it is never used, I think, for the legend of a
Buddha. The full title may mean the Story of the Great
Ones — that is the Seven Buddhas — or the Great (the important)
Story — that is the Story of the Dhamma, and its bearers and
promulgators. The last is probably what is meant, as in the
corresponding title of the Mahavastu.


B 2


[XIV. mahapadAna suttanta.

THE SUBLIME STORY.]

i. [l] Thus have I heard. The Exalted One was
once staying at Savatthi, in Anatha Pi^ika's pleasaunce
in the J eta Wood, at the Kareri-tree cottage \ Now
among many bhikkhus who had returned from their
alms-tour and were assembled, sitting- together after
their meal, in the pavilion in the Kareri grounds 2,
a religious conversation bearing on previous births
arose, to the effect that thus and thus were previous
births 3.

2. And the Exalted One, with clear and Heavenly
Ear surpassing the hearing of men, overheard this
conversation among the bhikkhus 4. And arising from

1 Kareri, according to Childers, is Capparis trifoliata. The Cy.
states that this tree which stood by the entrance to the cottage was
a Varuwa-tree, suggestive, if true, of the superseded tree-cult into which
Varuwa-worship had declined. See Rhys Davids's 'Buddhist India,'
p. 235; Jat. IV, 8. There were four principal buildings in the Jeta
Wood : the cottage or chamber in question, the Kosamba-tree cottage,
a perfumed chamber, and the fir-tree house (sala/a = sarala-ghara).
According to the commentator each cost 100,000 [? kahapawas] to
build, but the ancient bas-relief on the Bharahat Tope shows clearly
cottages, and apparently cottages of only one room each. In § 12
below this cottage is called a vihara; and the latter word, in the
ancient texts, always means a single room or lodging-place. Anatha-
pindika had built the first three, King Pasenadi the last.

2 Ma/o. Buddhaghosa describes this as a nisidana-sa la, or sitting-
room, built near the cottage. At the time when this Suttanta was
composed it meant a thatched roof supported by wooden pillars.
There were no walls to it.

3 According to the Cy. only religious teachers, religious disciples,
Pacceka-Buddhas, and the Saviour Buddhas could recall their own or
other previous lives, and, of the first, only those who taught Karma.
Except the memories of the great Buddhas, which have no limit what-
ever, a limit is given in the case of each of these classes, past which
they could not recall. This systematizing of a popular belief seems to
indicate that, when Buddhaghosa lived, no claim to such transcendent
memory was actually made among his contemporaries.

4 Buddhaghosa distinguishes between the ' omniscient knowledge '
by which the Buddha realizes the drift of the talk in the Brahmajala


D. ii. 2. THE SUBLIME STORY. 5

his seat he came to the pavilion in the Kareri grounds,
and took his seat on the mat spread out for him. And
when he had sat down he said to the brethren : —
'What is the talk on which you are engaged sitting
here, and what is the subject of conversation between
you ? ' [And they told him all.]

3. [2] Then he said : — ' Do you not wish, brethren,
to hear some religious talk on the subject of former
lives ? '

' Now is the time, O Exalted One, now is the time,

0 Welcome One, for the Exalted One to give us a
religious discourse on the subject of former lives.
When the brethren have heard it from the Exalted
One they will bear it in mind.'

' Wherefore then, brethren, hearken well to me, and

1 will speak.'

' So be it, lord,' replied the brethren. And the
Exalted One said : —

4. ' It is now ninety-one aeons ago, brethren, since
Vipassi, the Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme,
arose in the world. It is now thirty-one aeons ago,
brethren, since Sikhi, the Exalted One, Arahant,
Buddha Supreme, arose in the world. It was in that
same thirty-first aeon, brethren, that Vessabhu, the
Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme, arose in the
world. It was in this present auspicious aeon, brethren,
that Kakusandha, the Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha
Supreme, arose in the world. It was in this auspicious
aeon, brethren, that Konagamana, the Exalted One,
Arahant, Buddha Supreme, arose in the world. It was
in this auspicious aeon, brethren, that Kassapa, the
Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme, arose in
the world. It is in this auspicious aeon, brethren,
that now I, an Arahant, Buddha Supreme, have arisen
in the world.'

5-12. [And in like manner the rest of the statements
in the following table are given in similar paragraphs.]

Suttanta (' Dialogues,' I, 2), and the divine hearing, as by a finer sense,
operating here.


XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA.


D. ii. 2.


Kappa, Aeon.

Jati, Social
rank.

Gotta,
Family.

Length
of life
at that
epoch.

Tree under

which he

became

enlightened.

Years

i . Vipassi

91st from now

Noble

Kondafina

80000

Patali

2. Sikhi

31st from now

do.

do.

70000

Pu«</arika

3. Vessabhu

do.

do.

do.

60000

Sala

4. Kakusandha

In this aeon

Brahmin

Kassapa

40000

Sirisa

5. Konagamana

do.

do.

do.

30000

Udumbara

6. Kassapa

do.

do.

do.

20000

Nigrodha

7. Gotama

do.

Noble

Gotama

100

Assattha

13. [8] Now not long after he had gone out, this
talk arose amonor the brethren: — 'How wonderful a
thing, brethren, and how strange is the great genius,
the master mind of the Tathagata, that he should
remember the Buddhas of old, who attained final
completion, who cut off obstacles, who cut down bar-
riers, who have ended the cycle, who have escaped
from all sorrow — that he should remember of these
that such was their rank, such were their personal names,
such were their family names, such the span of their
lives, such their pair of disciples, and such the number
of the congregations of their disciples, telling us : — " Of
such was the birth of those Exalted Ones, such were
their names, and their clans ; such were their morals,
their doctrines, their wisdom ; thus did they live, and
thus they gained emancipation." Now, what think you,
brother ? Has this principle of truth been clearly
discerned by the Tathagata, so that by his discernment
of it he remembers [all those facts] about the Buddhas
of the past ? Or have gods revealed this matter to
the Tathagata, so that thereby he remembers ? '


D. ii. ii.


THE SUBLIME STORY.


Names of
two chief
disciples.


Kha«</a
Tissa

Abhibhu
Sambhava

Sowa
Uttara

Vidhura
Sanjiva

Bhiyyosa

Uttara

Tissa
Bb.aradva.ja

Sariputta
Moggallana


Number of
Arahants
present at

assemblies.


68 lacs
iooooo
80000
iooooo
80000
70000
80000
70000
60000

40000


30000


20000


1250


Name

of usual

attendant

Bhikkhu.


Asoka

Khemahkura

Upasannaka

Buddhija

Sotthija

Sabbamitta

Ananda


Father.


Bandhuma

Aruwa

Suppatita

Aggidatta

Yannadatta

Brahmadatta

Suddhodana


Mother.


Bandhumati

Pabhavati

Yasavati

Visakha

Uttara

Dhanavati

Maya


Birth-place.


Bandhumati

Pabhavati

Anopama

Khemavati

Sobhavati

Barawasi

Kapilavatthu


14. [a] Now such was the trend of the talk that
was going on among the brethren when the Exalted
One, rousing himself at eventide from meditation,
went to the pavilion in the Kareri grounds, and took
his seat on the mat spread out for him. And when
he had sat down, he said to the brethren : — ' What is
the talk on which you are engaged, brethren, as ye sit
here, and what was the subject of conversation between
you ? ' [And they told him all.]

15. [10] 'It is through his clear discernment of
a principle of the truth, brethren, that the Tathagata
is able to remember [all those facts about the Buddhas
of old *]. And gods also have revealed these matters
to him, enabling him to remember [all those things].
Do ye not wish, brethren, to hear yet further religious
discourse bearing on former lives ? '

[ll] * Now, O Exalted One, is the time, now, O
Welcome One, is the time ! Whatsoever the Exalted


1 In the text is a full repetition of the reminiscence given in § 13.


8 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. II.


One may tell us further bearing on former lives, the
brethren will listen to it and bear it in mind.'

' Wherefore, brethren, hearken and attend well, and
I will speak.'

' So be it, lord,' replied the brethren. The Exalted
One said : —

1 6. ' I have told you, brethren, when Vipassi, the
Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme, arose in the
world, into what rank and family he was born, how
long he lived, where he became a Buddha, the names
of his leading disciples, the number of his disciples,
the name of his ministering bhikkhu, of his father,
his mother, and of their place of residence1.

1 7. [12] ' Now Vipassi, brethren, when, as Bodhisat,
he ceased to belong to the hosts of the heaven of
Delight, descended into his mother's womb mindful
and self-possessed2. That, in such a case, is the
rule ?'.

1 The text repeats verbatim all that was said above of Vipassi.

2 This and following paragraphs (to § 30 inclusive) recur in the
Acchariyabbhutadhamma Sutta (M. Ill, pp. 119-24). The notes
appended by Dr. Neumann to his translation of that Sutta, giving
parallels from Christian archaeology, are of great interest. [Reden
Gotamo Buddho's Majjhimanikayo, III, pp. 253 ft.) How the Birth-
legend had developed in the fifth century a. d. may be seen in the
Nidanakatha, translated in Rhys Davids's 'Buddhist Birth Stories,'
pp. 62 ff.

This state of mind in Rule the first, according to a voluminous
comment by Buddhaghosa, refers more to the termination of the
Bodhisat's life in the Tusita heaven, than to any miraculous embryonic
commencement. He is depicted as being fully aware, with his angelic
neighbours, of the imminent culminating career awaiting him, and to
have selected country, region, town, father and mother, on the eve of
his 'fall' from heaven. He is further said to be conscious that he
was qua god deceased : — ' Thus fallen (or deceased) he knows ' I fall.'
But he is not aware of his cuti-cittarh, or dying thought. As to when
there is awareness of re-conception, the Buddhist fathers were not
agreed. But they admit that, in its content, the dawning idea was
either the first, or the fifth of the eight types of 'good thought'
enumerated in Dhamma-Sangam (pp. 1, 39 of the translation). But
we learn, under § 21, that there was no consciousness by way of the
five senses before birth.

3 Dhammata, i.e. says the Cy. in the nature, or order of things.
The five old-world order of things is the Order of Karma, of the


D. ii. 12. THE SUBLIME STORY. 9

' It is the rule, brethren, that, when the Bodhisat
ceases to belong to the hosts of the heaven of Delight,
and enters a mother's womb, there is made manifest
throughout the universe — including the worlds above
of the gods, the Maras and the Brahmas, and the world
below with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and
peoples — an infinite and splendid radiance, passing the
glory of the gods. Even in those spaces which are
between the worlds, baseless \ murky and dark, and
where even moon and sun, so wondrous and mighty,
cannot prevail to give light, even there is made mani-
fest this infinite and splendid radiance, passing the
glory of the gods. And those beings who happen to
be existing there 2, perceiving each other by that
radiance, say : — " Verily there be other beings living
here ! " And the ten thousand worlds of the universe
tremble and shudder and quake. And that this infinite
splendid radiance is made manifest in the world, pass-
ing the glory of the gods — that, in such a case, is the
rule.

1 7a. ' It is the rule, brethren, that, when the Bodhisat
is descending into a mother's womb, four sons of the
gods go toward the four quarters to protect him, say-
ing : — " Let no one, be he human, or non-human, or
whatsoever he be, work harm to the Bodhisat or to the
mother of the Bodhisat ! " That, in such a case, is the
rule.

1 8. 'It is the rule, brethren, that, when the Bodhisat
is descending into a mother's womb, the mother of
the Bodhisat is a woman virtuous through her own
nature : — averse from taking life, averse from taking
what is not given, averse from unchastity, averse from

Seasons, of Life-germs, of Mind, and of the Dhamma. The last
named is here implicated.

1 Asarhvuta. Cy. — not supported from beneath.

2 In the Great Inter-world Hell. They would be undergoing
purgatory for karma of grievous offences against parents and the
religious world, and of cruelty to animals. Very long in body and
with bats' nails, they were condemned to crawl up the Cakkava/a rock,
till finding no food, they turned back and fell into the river of brine
flowing round the world. Cy.


IO XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 12.

lying speech, averse from indulgence in strong drinks.
That, in such a case, is the rule.

19. [13] ' It is the rule, brethren, that, when the
Bodhisat is descending into a mother's womb, that
mother has no mind for indulgence in the pleasures of
sense with men, and is incapable of transgression with
any man whatever who may be enamoured of her.
That, in such a case, is the rule.

20. 'It is the rule, brethren, that, when the Bodhisat
is descending into a mother's womb, that mother is
living in the enjoyment yielded by the five senses, is
addicted to it, possessed of it, surrounded by it. That,
in such a case, is the rule.

21. ' It is the rule, brethren, that, when the Bodhisat
is descending into a mother's womb, no ailment what-
soever befalls that mother ; at ease is she and un-
afflicted in body ; and within her womb she sees the
Bodhisat complete in the endowment of all his organs
and his limbs. Just as if, brethren, there were a beau-
tiful cat's-eye gem1, of purest water, octangular, cut
with supreme skill, translucent and flawless, excellent
in every way. And through it were strung a thread,
blue or orange, red, white, or yellow. If a man who
had eyes to see were to take it into his hand, he would
clearly perceive how the one was strung on the other.
Even so, brethren, when the Bodhisat is descending
into a mother's womb, no ailment whatever befalls that
mother ; at ease is she and unaffected in body ; and
within her womb she sees the Bodhisat complete in the
endowment of all his organs and his limbs. That, in
such a case, is the rule.

22. [14] ' It is the rule, brethren, that, on the seventh
day after the birth of a Bodhisat, the mother of the


1 This simile, occurring in a similar connexion in M. Ill, 121, is
elsewhere (' Dialogues,' I, 87 ; M. II, 17) applied to self-knowledge, i. e.
of one's body and mind and their interdependence. The point of the
simile is not the perfection of the jewel, but the clarity of vision. The
myth of the visible embryo recurs in mediaeval Christian art. See
Neumann, op. cit. ; and ' Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. 65 n.


D. ii. I!-;. THE SUBLIME STORY. II


'.)


Bodhisat dies, and rises again in the heaven of Delight.
That, in such a case, is the rule.

23. 'It is the rule, brethren, that, whereas other
women bring forth after bearing either nine or ten
months \ the mother of a Bodhisat brings not forth
till she has borne the child ten months. That, in such
a case, is the rule.

24. 'It is the rule, brethren, that, whereas other
women bring forth sitting or reclining, the mother of
a Bodhisat brings forth not so, but standing. That, in
such a case, is the rule.'

25. ' It is the rule, brethren, that, when a Bodhisat
issues from his mother's womb, gods receive him first,
afterwards men 2. That, in such a case, is the rule.

26. 'It is the rule, brethren, that, when a Bodhisat
issues from his mother's womb, and has not yet touched
the earth, for four sons of the gods to receive him, and
present him to the mother, saying : — " Rejoice, lady, for
Mighty is the son that is born to thee ! " That, in such
a case, is the rule.

27. 'It is the rule, brethren, that, when a Bodhisat
issues from his mother's womb, he comes forth stain-
less, undefiled by watery matter, undefiled by mucus,
undefiled by blood, undefiled by any uncleanness what-
ever, pure, spotless. Just as if, brethren, a jewel were
laid down on Benares muslin ; the jewel is not stained
by the muslin, nor is the muslin stained by it ; and why
is that ? Because of the purity of both. Even so,
brethren, is it at the birth of a Bodhisat. That, in such
a case, is the rule.

28. [15] ' It is the rule, brethren, that, when a Bodhi-
sat issues from his mother's womb, two showers of


1 The Cy. holds that these disjunctives may be understood to
include a term of from seven to twelve months. Seven months'
embryos, it adds, live, but cannot endure heat or cold ; eight months'
babes do not live — a midwife tradition that, we fancy, is still current
here and now.

2 Cf. the account of the birth of Gotama, ' Buddhist Birth Stories,'
p. 66, and of the /bur, not three, adoring kings in some early Christian
bas-reliefs, Neumann, op. cit.


12 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 15.

water appear from the sky, one of cold, the other of
warm water, wherewith they do the needful bathing
of the Bodhisat and of his mother. That, in such
a case, is the rule.

29. 'It is the rule, brethren, that, when a Bodhisat
has come to birth, he stands firm on both feet and,
with his face to the north, takes seven strides, the
while a white canopy is held over him \ and, looking
around on every side, he utters as with the voice of
a bull : — " Chief am I in the world, Eldest am I in the
world, Foremost am I in the world ! This is the last
birth ! There is now no more coming to be 2 ! " That,
in such a case, is the rule.

30. 'It is the rule, brethren, that, when a Bodhisat
issues from his mother's womb, there is made manifest
throughout the universe — including the worlds above
of the gods, the Maras and the Brahmas, and the
world below with its recluses and brahmins, its princes
and peoples, — an infinite and splendid radiance passing
the glory of the gods. Even in those spaces which
are between the worlds, baseless, murky and dark, and
where even moon and sun, so wondrous and mighty,
cannot prevail to give light, even there is manifest this
infinite and splendid radiance, passing the glory of the
gods. And those beings who happen to be existing
there, perceiving each other by that radiance, say : —
" Verily there be other beings living here ! ': And
the ten thousand worlds of the universe tremble and
shudder and quake. And this infinite and splendid


1 As an emblem of sovereignty, says the Cy., in which case the
emblem is usually named, not its bearers. But these were devata,
angels or fairies or gods.

2 Each action of the babe had for the later Buddhists its symbolical
meaning. Standing on the earth meant obtaining the Four Iddhipadas.
Facing the north meant the spiritual conquest of multitudes. The
seven strides were the Seven Bojjhangas. The canopy was the
umbrella of emancipation. Looking around meant unveiled know-
ledge. The bull-cry meant the irrevocable turning of the wheel of
the Truth or Law. The ' lion-roar ' of ' the last birth ' meant the
arahantship he would attain in this life.


D. ii. 16. THE SUBLIME STORY. 1 3

radiance is made manifest in the world, passing the
glory of the gods. This, in such a case, is the rule.'

31. [16] 'When the boy Vipassi, brethren, was born,
they brought word to Bandhuman the raja saying : —
" A son, my lord, is born to you ! May it please you to
see him?" Now when Bandhuman the raja had seen the
babe, he sent for the brahmin soothsayers1, saying: —
" Let the reverend brahmin soothsayers see the child."
Then, brethren, when the brahmin soothsayers had
seen the child, they said to Bandhuman the raja : —
" Rejoice, lord, for one of the Mighty Ones is born thy
son ! Fortune is thine, my lord, good fortune is thine,
in that in thy family such a son has come to birth !
For this babe, my lord, is endowed with the thirty-two
marks of the Great Man ; and to one so endowed two
careers lie open, and none other. If he live the life of
the House, he becomes Lord of the Wheel2, a righteous
Lord of the Right 3, ruler of the four quarters, con-
queror, guardian of the people's good, owner of the
Seven Treasures. His do those seven treasures become,
to wit, the Wheel treasure, the Elephant treasure, the
Horse treasure, the Gem treasure, the Woman treasure,
the Steward treasure, the Eldest Son treasure making
seven 4. More than a thousand sons will be his, heroes,
vigorous of frame, crushers of the hosts of the enemy.
He, when he has conquered this earth to its ocean
bounds, is established not by the scourge, not by the
sword, but by righteousness. But if such a boy go
forth from the life of the House into the Homeless
state 5, he becomes an Arahant, a Buddha Supreme,
rolling back the veil from the world.


1 Literally, mark-men, or augurs. See 'Dialogues,' I, 16, n. 1.

2 Turner of the Wheel, the now well-known Indian symbol of empire.

3 Dhamma-raja.

4 For details of each of these see below in the Maha-Sudassana
Suttanta, No. XVII.

5 This vigorous and picturesque idiom — agarasma anagariyam
pabbajati — has been here and elsewhere rendered as literally as
possible.


14 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 16.

32. '"And what, my lord, are the thirty-two marks
of the ' Great Man V wherewith endowed this child
hath two careers open to him, and only two : — that of
the Lord of the Wheel . . . that of Buddha Supreme ?

[17] ' " This babe, my lord, has feet with level tread2.
That this is so counts to him as one of the marks of
a Great Man.

"'On the soles of the babe's feet wheels appear with
a thousand spokes, with tyre and hub, in every way
complete. That this is so counts to him as one of the
marks of a Great Man.

' " This babe has projecting heels 3,

He is long in the fingers and long in the toes4,

Soft and tender in hands and feet,

With hands and feet like a net 5.

His ankles are like rounded shells 6 ;

His legs are like an antelope's 7.

Standing and without bending he can touch and rub
his knees with either hand.

His male organs are concealed in a sheath.

His complexion is like bronze, the colour of gold.

[is] His skin is so delicately smooth that no dust
cleaves to his body 8.

1 Given also at M. II, 136, 137. Comp. the note above Vol. I,
p. no. The whole theory is pre-Buddhistic.

2Suppa///nta-pado: literally, 'well-planted feet.' The tra-
ditional meaning is, that the whole under-surface touched the ground
at once. The Great Man was ' flat-footed,' and did not toe or heel
the ground in walking.

3 If the foot of a ' Great Man ' be measured in four parts, two are
taken up by the sole and toes, one is under the leg, and one is the
heel projecting rearward.

4 And all four, fingers and toes, are of equal length, like a monkey's.
Cy.

6 Like a lattice, says the Cy., and explains this to mean that there
is no 'webbing' between fingers and toes, but that these are set in
right lines, like the meshes of a net.

6 Ensuring the maximum of flexibility. Cy. This is desirable in
sitting cross-legged.

7 With protuberant well-modelled joints, like an ear of rice or
barley. Cy.

8 Hence the Buddhas only wash as an example to their fol-
lowers. Cy.


D. ii. iS. THE SUBLIME STORY. I 5

The down on it grows in single hairs, one to each
pore,

The small hairs on his body turn upward, every hair
of it, blue-black in colour like eye-paint, in little curling
rings, curling to the right.

' " This babe has a frame divinely straight x.

He has the seven convex surfaces 2.

The front half of his body is like a lion's 3.

There is no furrow between his shoulders 4.

His proportions have the symmetry of the banyan-
tree 5 : — The length of his body is equal to the compass
of his arms, and the compass of his arms is equal to
his height.

His bust is equally rounded 6.

His taste is supremely acute7.

His jaw is as a lion's 8.

He has forty teeth 9,

Regular teeth.

Continuous,

The eye-teeth very lustrous. His tongue is very
long 10.

1 He will not stoop, nor lean backward, as if catching at the stars,
nor have a crooked spine, but tower up symmetrically like a golden
tower-gate in a city of the gods. Cy.

2 The backs of the four limbs, the shoulders and the trunk are well
fleshed. Cy.

3 i. e. proportionately broad and full.

4 Citantararhso, lit. he has the shoulder-interval filled up. The
Cy. explains, the two sides of the back have no depression in the
middle, nor look separated, but from the small of the back upwards
the fleshy covering is as a level golden slab.

5 Literally, he has the banyan circumference. It was believed that
a banyan always measured the same, like the diameter of a circle, in
height as in width.

6 Samavattakkhandho. According to the Cy. the exterior of
the whole vocal apparatus is here meant, rather than the trunk or
shoulders only.

7 Rasaggasaggi.

8 That is, with the lower jaw relatively fuller than the upper. Cy.

9 That is, the Great Man at a more adult stage has eight more
than the normal thirty-two. How the learned brahmins saw these
signs in the babe is not explained.

10 See 'Dialogues,' I, 131.


1 6 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 18.

He has a divine voice like the karavika-bird's l.

His eyes are intensely blue2,

He has the eyelashes of a cow :;.

Between the eyebrows appears a hairy mole, white
and like soft cotton down.

His [19] head is like a royal turban 4.

This too counts to him as one of the marks of a Great
Man5.

33. ' " Endowed, my lord, as is this babe with these
two-and-thirty marks of the Great Man, two careers and
none other are open to him . . ." [as above, $ 31] . . .

' Thereupon Bandhuman the raja, brethren, let the
brahmin soothsayers be invested with new robes and
gratified their every desire.

34. ' And Bandhuman the raja, brethren, engaged
nurses for the babe Vipassi. Some suckled him, some
washed him, some nursed him, some carried him about
on their hip. And a white canopy was held over him
day and night, for it was commanded : — " Let not cold
or heat or straws or dust or dew annoy him ! " And
the boy Vipassi, brethren, became the darling and the
beloved of the people, [20] even as a blue or red or
white lotus is dear to and beloved of all, so that he was
literally carried about from lap to lap G.

35. ' And when the boy Vipassi was born, brethren,
he had a lovelv voice, well modulated and sweet and


1 According to Childers, the Indian cuckoo. The Great Man's
voice is very clear and pure-toned, neither worn nor broken nor
harsh. Cy. Yoga-culture is to-day held to yield, as one result,
a pleasant musical voice.

2 Like flax-blossom. Cy. Perhaps a tradition of Aryan origin.

3 Completely surrounding the eyes, thick like a black cow's ; bright
and soft like a new-born red calf's. Cy.

4 U«hisa-siso. This expression, says the Cy., refers to the
fullness either of the forehead or of the cranium. In either case the
rounded highly-developed appearance is meant, giving to the unadorned
head the decorative dignified effect of a crested turban, and the smooth
symmetry of a water-bubble.

5 In the text this refrain occurs after the naming of each mark.

6 Literally by hip to hip; women passing him from arm to arm,
men from one shoulder to another, explains the Cy.


D. ii. 21. THE SUBLIME STORY. 1 7

charming, just as the voice of the karavika-bird in the
mountains of Himaiaya is lovely and sweetly modulated
and charming l.

36. ' And when the boy Vipassi was born, brethren,
there was manifested in him the Heavenly Eye born
of the result of his karma 2, by the which verily he
could see as far as a league by day and eke by night.

3J . ' And when the boy Vipassi was born, brethren,
he looked forward with unblinking eyes, like the gods
in the heaven of Delight. Now it was because of this,
people exclaiming " Vipassi, Vipassi " — a Seer, a Seer !
— that this became his name 3. And again, brethren,
while Bandhuman raja was sitting as judge, he would
take the boy on his hip and so lay down the law as to
the cases arising till verily the boy, thus [21] seated on
his father's hip, and continually considering, would also
determine the points of the matter according to justice4.
Then at the thought "It is the babe who is judging
cases arieht " ever more and more did that word " a
Seer, a Seer" become used as his name.

38. 'Now Bandhuman raja, brethren, had three
palaces built for the boy Vipassi, one for the rains,
one for the winter and one for the summer, and he
had them fitted with every kind of gratification for the
five senses. Thus it came to pass that Vipassi spent


1 The Cy. relates of the bird that it sings a flute-like song after
pecking at honey and mangoes, and that the song exercises a sort
of Orpheus- spell over every beast that hears it. Asandhimitta, the
consort of Asoka, was converted by it. She had inquired of the
Order, if it were known what the Buddha's voice was like; and on
its being compared to the karavika's song, wished to hear that. Asoka
sent for one, which would not sing in its cage, till a mirror was placed
by it. Fancying it saw a kinsman, it sang, throwing every one into
ecstasies, and so exalting the queen's idea of the Buddha's voice, that
she attained 'the fruit of sotapatti.'

2 That is, not by special practice, but as the result of action in
former births, as with the fairies' power of vision. Cy.

3 Vipassi refers rather to the inward vision of the seer. Vipassana
is insight or intuition.

4 Namely by giving signs of dissatisfaction when a decision was
wrong.

III. C


1 8 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 21.

the four months of the rainy season in the rains-palace,
ministered to by bands of female musicians l ; and not
once did he come down (from the upper terrace) into
the mansion.'

Here endeth the Birth chapter.


II.

i . ' Now the young lord Vipassi, brethren, when many
years, many centuries, many thousands of years had
passed by 2, bade his charioteer make ready the state
carriages, saying : — " Get ready the carriages, good
charioteer, and let us go through the park to inspect
the pleasaunce." "Yea, my lord," replied the charioteer,
and harnessed the state carriages and sent word to
Vipassi : — " The carriages are ready, my lord ; do now
what you deem to be fit." Then Vipassi mounted a
state carriage, and drove out in state into the park.

2. ' Now the young lord Vipassi saw, brethren, as he
was driving to the park, [22] an aged man as bent as
a roof gable, decrepit, leaning on a staff, tottering as he
walked, afflicted and long past his prime. And seeing
him Vipassi said : — " That man, good charioteer, what
has he done, that his hair is not like that of other men,
nor his body ? "

' " He is what is called an aged man, my lord."

1 Nippurisehi turiyehi. Both words are ambiguous. Childers,
following B. R., who follow Wilson, renders turiya by musical
instrument. It is very doubtful whether it ever means that. Music,
or orchestra, seems to be required in such passages as I have noted.
Nippurisa (only found as yet in this connexion) may be non-human
(that is, fairy), or not male. See D. II, 171 ; M. I, 571 ; A. I, 145;
Vin. I, 15 ; II, 180 ; J. I, 58, and Senart's note at Mahavastu III, 486.
The alternative rendering would therefore be ' fairy music' But the
commentator evidently takes the words in the meaning given above.

2 The legendary age of humans at the time of Vipassi was 80,000
years, so that we may reckon 1000 of his years as one of ours.
When this legend is afterwards related of Gotama Buddha (in the
Nidanakatha), he is said to have reached his majority (sixteen years)
when the drives begin.


D. ii. 24. THE SUBLIME STORY. I 9


' " But why is he called aged ? "

• " He is called aged, my lord, because he has not much
longer to live."

1 " But then, good charioteer, am I too subject to old
age, one who has not got past old age ? "

1 " You, my lord, and we too, we all are of a kind to
grow old, we have not got past old age."

1 " Why then, good charioteer, enough of the park
for to-day ! Drive me back hence to my rooms 1."

1 " Yea, my lord," answered the charioteer, and drove
him back. And he, brethren, going to his rooms sat
brooding sorrowful and depressed, thinking : — " Shame
then verily be upon this thing called birth, since to one
born old age shows itself like that ! "

3. ' Thereupon Bandhuman raja, brethren, sent
for the charioteer and asked him : — " Well, good
charioteer, did the boy take pleasure in the park ?
was he pleased with it ? "

'"No, my lord, he was not."

' " What then did he see on his drive ? "

[23] ' [And the charioteer told the raja all.]

4. ' Then the raja, brethren, thought thus : — " We
must not have Vipassi declining to rule. We must not
have him going forth from the House into the Homeless
state. We must not let what the brahmin soothsayers
spoke of come true."

' So, that these things might not come to pass, he
let the youth be still more surrounded by sensuous
pleasures. And thus Vipassi continued to live amidst
the pleasures of sense.

5. ' Now after many years, many centuries, many
thousands of years had passed by, the young lord
Vipassi, brethren, again bade his charioteer make ready,
and drove forth as once before 2.

6. [24] ' And Vipassi, brethren, saw as he was driving


1 Ante pur am, or harem. Tradition adds that he 'dismissed his
womenfolk, and sat alone in his bedchamber, pierced in heart by
this first dart.'

2 Text repeats in full as in § 1 .

C 2


20 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 24.

to the park, a sick man, suffering and very ill, fallen
and weltering in his own water, by some being lifted
up, by others being dressed. Seeing this, Vipassi asked,
" That man, good charioteer, what has he done that
his eyes are not like others' eyes, nor his voice like the
voice of other men ? "

' " He is what is called ill, my lord."

' " But what is meant by ' ill ' ? "

' " It means, my lord, that he will hardly recover from
his illness."

' " But am I too then, good charioteer, subject to
fall ill ; have not I got out of reach of illness ? "

' " You, my lord, and we too, we all are subject to fall
ill, we have not got beyond the reach of illness."

' " Why then, good charioteer, enough of the park
for to-day ! Drive me back hence to my rooms."
" Yea, my lord," answered the charioteer, and drove
him back. And he, brethren, going to his rooms sat
brooding sorrowful and depressed, thinking : — " Shame
then verily be upon this thing called birth, since to
one born decay shows itself like that, disease shows
itself like that."

7. 'Thereupon Bandhuman raja, brethren, sent for the
charioteer and asked him : — " Well, good charioteer,
did the young lord take pleasure in the park and was
he pleased with it ? "

' " No, my lord, he was not."

' " What did he see then on his drive ? "

'[And the charioteer told the raja all.]

8. [25] ' Then the raja, brethren, thought thus : —
" We must not have Vipassi declining to rule ; we
must not have him going forth from the House to
the Homeless state ; we must not let what the brahmin
soothsayers spoke of come true."

' So, that these things might not come to pass, he
let the young man be still more abundantly surrounded
by sensuous pleasures. And thus Vipassi continued to
live amidst the pleasures of sense.

9. ' Now once again after many years . . . the young
lord Vipassi . . . drove forth.


D. ii. 27. THE SUBLIME STORY. 21

10. ' And he saw, brethren, as he was driving to the
park, a great concourse of people clad in garments of
different colours constructing a funeral pyre. And
seeing them he asked his charioteer : — " Why now are
all those people come together in garments of different
colours, and making that pile ? "

[26] '"It is because some one, my lord, has ended
his days."

4 " Then drive the carriage close to him who has
ended his days."

' " Yea, my lord,'' answered the charioteer, and did so.
And Vipassi saw the corpse of him who had ended his
days and asked : — " What, good charioteer, is ending
one's days ? "

1 " It means, my lord, that neither mother, nor father,
nor other kinsfolk will see him any more, nor will he
ever again see them."

'"But am I too then subject to death, have I not
got beyond the reach of death ? Will neither the raja,
nor the ranee, nor any other of my kin see me more, or
I ever again see them ? "

' " You, my lord and we too, we all are subject to
death, we have not passed beyond the reach of death.
Neither the raja, nor the ranee, nor any other of your
kin would see you any more, nor would you ever again
see them."

' " Why then, good charioteer, enough of the park
for to-day ! Drive me back hence to my rooms."

' " Yea, my lord," replied the charioteer, and drove
him back.

' And he, brethren, going to his rooms, sat brooding
sorrowful and depressed, thinking : — " Shame then
verily be upon this thing called birth, since to one
born the decay of life, since disease, since death shows
itself like that ! "

11-12. 'Thereupon Bandhuman raja, brethren,
[questioned the charioteer as before [27], and as before
let Vipassi be still more surrounded by sensuous
enjoyments]. And thus Vipassi continued to live
amidst the pleasures of sense.


2 2 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 28.

13. [28] ' Now once again after many years . . . the
lord Vipassi . . . drove forth.

14. 'And he saw, brethren, as he was driving to
the park, a shaven-headed man, a Wanderer, wearing
the yellow robe. And seeing him he asked the
charioteer : — " That man, good charioteer, what has
he done, that his head is unlike other men's heads and
his clothes too are unlike those of others ? "

' " That is what they call a Wanderer, because, my
lord, he is one who has gone forth.''

' "What is that, to have gone forth ? "

1 " To have gone forth, my lord, means being
thorough in the religious life, thorough in the peaceful
life, thorough in good actions, thorough in meritorious
conduct, thorough in harmlessness, thorough in kind-
ness to all creatures."

' " Excellent indeed [29], friend charioteer, is what
they call a Wanderer, since so thorough is his conduct
in all those respects. Wherefore drive up to that
fortho-one man."

' " Yea, my lord," replied the charioteer, and drove
up to the Wanderer. Then Vipassi addressed him,
saying : — " You, master, what have you done that
your head is not as other men's heads, nor your
clothes as those of other men ? "

' " I, my lord, am one who has gone forth."

' " What, master, does that mean ? "

' " It means, my lord, being thorough in the religious
life, thorough in the peaceful life, thorough in good
actions, thorough in meritorious conduct, thorough in
harmlessness, thorough in kindness to all creatures."

' " Excellently indeed, master, are you said to have
gone forth, since so thorough is your conduct in all
those respects."

15. 'Then the lord Vipassi, brethren, bade his
charioteer, saying : — " Come then, good charioteer,
do you take the carriage and drive it hence back to
my rooms. But I will even here cut off my hair, and
don the yellow robe, and go forth from the House
into the Homeless state."


D.ii. 30. THE SUBLIME STORY. 23

' " Yea, my lord," replied the charioteer, and drove
back. But the lord Vipassi, there and then, cutting
off his hair and donning the yellow robe, went forth
from the House into the Homeless state.

16. 'Now at Bandhumati, brethren, the raja's seat,
a great number of persons — some eighty-four thousand
souls x — heard of what lord Vipassi had done, [30] and
thought : — " Surely this is no ordinary religious rule,
this is no common going forth, in that the lord Vipassi
himself has had his head shaved and has donned the
yellow robe and has gone forth from the House into
the Homeless state. If the lord Vipassi has done
this, why then should not we also ? " And they all
had their heads shaved, and donned the yellow robes,
and in imitation of Vipassi the Bodhisat they went
forth from the House into the Homeless state. So
Vipassi the Bodhisat went on his rounds through the
villages, towns, and cities accompanied by that multi-
tude.

1 7. ' Now there arose, brethren, in the mind of
Vipassi the Bodhisat, when he was meditating in
seclusion, the following consideration : — " That indeed
is not suitable for me that I should live beset. 'Twere
better were I to dwell alone, far from the crowd ! "

' So after a time he dwelt alone, away from the
crowd. These eighty-four thousand Wanderers went
one way, and Vipassi the Bodhisat went another way.

18. 'Now there arose, brethren, in the mind of
Vipassi the Bodhisat, when he had gone to his place 2,
and was meditating in seclusion, the following con-
sideration:— "Verily this world has fallen upon trouble ;
one is born, and grows old, and dies, and falls from
one state, and springs up in another."

1 Pa«a, 'living creatures.' The number is the usual idiom for
a multitude, no more pretending to accuracy than our ' a thousand
thanks.'

2 Vasupagato. The commentary explains this as meaning ' when
seated under his Wisdom-Tree.' But the word in the text is quite
vague ; and it is only the later tradition which thought it edifying to
limit all such deep questions as the one discussed in the following
sections to one time and place.


24 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 31.

[31] ' " And from this suffering, moreover, no one
knows of any way of escape, even from decay and death.
O when shall a way of escape from this suffering be
made known, from decay and from death ! "

1 Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this thought
occurred : — " What now being present, is decay and
dying also present ; what conditions decay and dying ?"
Then, brethren, from attention to the cause1 arose
the conviction through reason : — " Where birth is,
there is decay and dying ; birth is the condition of
decay and dying."

' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — " What now being present, is birth also
present ; what conditions birth ? " Then, brethren,
from attention to the cause arose the conviction
through reason : — " When becoming is, birth also is
present; becoming is the condition of birth."

' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — " What now being present, is becoming
also present ; what conditions becoming ? " Then,
brethren, from attention to the cause arose the convic-
tion through reason : — " Where grasping 2 is, there is
becoming ; grasping is the condition of becoming."


1 Yoniso manasikara. The Cy. paraphrases thus that interesting
idiom: 'i.e. from attention to expedients (upaya, that is, expedients
in analysis, comp. S. II, 17; III, 135; III, 53; III, 161 ; A. V, iii):
from attention to the course [of things] (patha); the attention of
one who is attending to impermanence and the rest [dukkha, anatta]
as such ; the attention of one who is observing the continuity, that is
to say the rising and passing away, of the phenomena in question
under either their positive or negative aspect.' There is here no
attempt to substitute, as an equivalent for yoni, a term for origin or
basis — nidana, e.g. or inula. The observation that is yoniso
appears to Buddhaghosa to be of causation viewed as phenomenal
only, as process of invariable antecedent and consequent, with applica-
tion of the methods of induction known since J. S. Mill as the Methods
of Agreement and Difference.

2 The translating of upadanaw must always be inadequate; we
having no word to fill its dual sense of something-to-hand, Staff, fuel,
and a laying hold of something. If ' data,' which is etymological!)'
akin, had chanced to be dan da, there would have been an approxi-
mation in implication. That the term, in the commentarial tradition,


D, ii. 32. THE SUBLIME STORY. 25

' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — "What now being present, is grasping also
present ; what conditions grasping ? " Then, brethren,
from attention to the cause arose the conviction
through reason : — " Where craving is, there is grasp-
ing ; craving is the condition of grasping."

' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — " What now being present, is craving also
present; what conditions craving?" Then, brethren,
from attention to the cause arose the conviction
through reason : — " Where feeling is, there is craving: ;
feeling is the condition of craving-."

' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred: — "What now being present, is feeling also
present ; what conditions feeling ? " Then, brethren,
from attention to the cause arose the conviction
through reason : — [32] " Where contact is, there is
feeling; contact is the condition of feeling."

1 Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — " What now being present, is contact also
present; what conditions contact?" Then, brethren,
from attention to the cause arose the conviction
through reason : — " Where is the sixfold held, there is
contact ; the sixfold field is the condition of contact1."

' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred: — "What now being present, is the sixfold
field also present ; what conditions the sixfold field ? "
Then, brethren, from attention to the cause arose the
conviction through reason : — " Where name-and-form
is, there is the sixfold field ; name-and-form is the
condition of the sixfold field2."

' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — " What now being present, is name-and-
form also present ; what conditions name-and-form ? "

held this active force is clear from anupadaya, 'void of grasping,'
being paraphrased by agahetva, not having laid hold of. See also
'Psychological Ethics,' p. 322, n. 1 ; ' Asl.' pp. 385, 450.

1 The sixfold field is the sphere of action of the six senses ; that is,
our five senses, and the representative faculty.

2 Name-and-form is what we should call mind and body.


26 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 32.

Then, brethren, from attention to the cause arose the
conviction through reason : — " Where cognition is
there is name-and-form ; cognition is the condition
of name-and-form1."

' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — " What now being present, is cognition
also present ; what conditions cognition ? ' Then,
brethren, from attention to the cause arose the convic-
tion through reason : — " Where name-and-form is, there
is cognition ; name-and-form conditions cognition."

19. ' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — " Cognition turns back from name-and-
form ; it goes not beyond. Only as follows can one
be born or stow old or die or fall from one condition
or reappear in another ; that is, in that cognition is
conditioned by name-and-form, and name-and-form by
cognition 2, the sixfold field by name-and-form, contact
by the sixfold field, feeling by contact, [33] craving by
feeling, grasping by craving, becoming by grasping,
birth by becoming, decay and dying by birth, and
so too grief, lamentation, ill, sorrow and despair come
to pass. Such is the coming to be of this entire body
of 111."

' " Coming to be, coming to be ! " — at that thought,
brethren, there arose to Vipassi the Bodhisat a vision
into things not called before to mind, and knowledge
arose, reason arose, wisdom arose, light arose.

1 The Cy.here inquires into the omission of thetwoultimate links in the
• Chain of Causation ' that are given in most of the passages where the
formula occurs — notably in the Nidana Samyutta and in the Majjhima
Nikaya (I, pp. 49-52, 261, &c.) ; also in Dh. S., p. 348, and Vibh.,
pp. 135 ff. It judges that, whereas avijja and sahkhara relate to
existence prior to that in which the remainder of the terms from vinfia-
;/arh to jaramarawarh, for any given individual, hold true, Vipassi's
vipassana was confining itself to any given present life. Mr. Loveday,
in his essay on the ' Chain,' also came to the conclusion that, to apply
the links in succession to any individual life, ' ignorance ' and ' the
sahkharas' must be referred to prior existence. (J. A. O. S., 1894.)

2 In S. II, 144 their independence is compared to two sheaves of reeds
leaning one against the other. Elsewhere — in definitions of nama-
rupa7« — nama is sometimes made to include vinna;jam, Dh. S.,
pp. 341, 342, sometimes not, M. I, 53; Vibh. 136.


D. ii. 35- TI1E SUBLIME STORY. 2J


20. ' Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — " What now being absent, is decay and
dying also absent ; by the ceasing of what does decay
and dying cease ? " Then, brethren, from attention
to the cause arose the conviction through reason : —
" Where birth is absent, decay and dying are absent ;
when birth ceases, decay and dying cease . . . Where
becoming is absent, birth is absent ; when becoming-
ceases, birth ceases . . . Where grasping is absent,
becoming is absent ; when grasping ceases, becoming
ceases . . . Where craving is absent, grasping is absent ;
when craving ceases, grasping ceases . . . [34] Where
feeling is absent, craving is absent ; when feeling
ceases, craving ceases . . . Where contact is absent,
feeling is absent ; when contact ceases, feeling ceases
. . . Where the sixfold field is absent, contact is absent ;
when the sixfold field ceases, contact ceases . . . Where
name-and-form is absent, the sixfold field is absent ;
when name-and-form ceases, the sixfold field ceases . . .
WThere cognition is absent, name-and-form is absent ;
when cognition ceases, name-and-form ceases . . .
Where name-and-form is absent, cognition is absent ;
when name-and-form ceases, cognition ceases."

21. 'Then to Vipassi the Bodhisat, brethren, this
occurred : — " Lo ! I have won to this, [35] the Way to
enlightenment through insight \ And it is this, that
from name-and-form ceasing, cognition ceases, and
conversely ; that from name-and-form ceasing, the
sixfold field ceases ; from the sixfold field ceasing, con-
tact ceases ; from contact ceasing, feeling ceases ; from
feeling ceasing, craving ceases ; from craving ceasing,
grasping ceases ; from grasping ceasing, becoming
ceases ; from becoming ceasing, birth ceases ; from
birth ceasing, decay and dying, grief, lamentation, ill,
sorrow and despair cease. Such is the ceasing of this
entire body of 111."


1 Literally ' the Vipassana Way to insight.' As this is not a stock
phrase in this connexion it doubtless contains a play on the name
Vipassi.


2 8 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 35.

1 " Ceasing to be, ceasing to be ! " — at that thought,
brethren, there arose to Vipassi the Bodhisat a vision
into things not called before to mind, and knowledge
arose, reason arose, wisdom arose, light arose.

22. ; Thereafter, brethren, Vipassi the Bodhisat
dwelt in the discernment of the rising and passing
away of the five groups [of individual life] depending
on grasping x : — " Such is form, such is the coming to
be of form, such is its passing away ; such is feeling,
such is the coming to be of feeling, such is its passing
away ; such is perception, such is its coming to be,
such is its passing away ; such are the syntheses, such
is their coming to be, such is their passing away ;
such is cognition, such is its coming to be, such is its
passing away."

' And for him, abiding in the discernment of the
rising and passing away of the five groups depending
on grasping, not long was it before his heart, void of
grasping, was set free from the " Intoxicants2."

Here endeth the Second Portion for recitation.


1 That is, the new individual, divisible into five constituent parts,
called into being by the grasping attitude maintained during the
previous life. K hand ho, group, is rendered by 'body' in § 19 —
• whole body of 111 ' — and, in both connexions, is always paraphrased
by rasi, or heap. Buddhist Pluralism turned away from unifying
concepts, and chose to picture organic processes under aggregates.
The concept is not so atomistic as we might think, the ' heap '
referring to past and potential repetition of process.

2 This is the standing phrase for the attainment, not of Buddha-
hood, but of Arahantship. Nevertheless Vipassi is henceforth called
a Buddha. Compare what is said above, p. 2. On the Asavas, here
rendered Intoxicants, see above, Vol. I, pp. 92, 93. The Jain use
of the term is referred to by Bhandarkar, 'Report, &c.,' p. 100.
Other Pali references are J. IV, 222, 3 and A. I, 124, 7, which confirm
the suggested connotation of a poisonous, intoxicating drug.


D. ii. 36. THE SUBLIME STORY. 29

III.

i. ' Then to Vipassi the Exalted One, Arahant,
Buddha Supreme, brethren, this occurred l : — " What
if I were now to teach the Truth 2."

'Then to him, brethren, this occurred3: — [36] "I
have penetrated this Truth, deep, hard to perceive,
hard to understand, calm, sublime, no mere dialectic 4,
subtle, intelligible only to the wise. But this is a race
devoting itself to the things to which it clings, devoted
thereto, deliehtin^ therein. And for a race devoting
itself to the things to which it clings, devoted thereto,
delighting therein, this were a matter hard to perceive,
to wit, that this is conditioned by that, and all that
happens is by way of cause 5. This too were a matter
hard to discern : — The tranquillization of all the


1 The following episode occurs also in Vinaya I, 4 (translated in
Vin. Texts, I, 84-8), and M. I, 167-9 (translated by Dr. Neumann,
« Reden G. Buddho's, Mittlere Sammlung,' I, pp. 268 ff.), and S. I,

137-4*-

2 Dhamma, more literally the Norm. On this difficult but

all-pervading term see Rh. D. 'American Lectures/ pp. 2, 38, and
'Buddhist India,' 292-4.

8 In the eighth week, says the Cy., after his attainment of Buddha-
hood, the intervening weeks having been spent in places corresponding
to those where Gotama Buddha is alleged, in the Nidanakatha, to
have spent them. Rh. D. 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' pp. 105-9. But
there is nothing in the text to confirm this.

4 See 'Dialogues,' I, 26 : — 'not to be grasped by mere logic' —
atakkavacaro. ' Only by fiawani ' — knowledge, insight — adds the
Cy. Takka, meaning fundamentally thinking, is perhaps too much
honoured, in the meaning it had come to bear, by being rendered
'logic' In the Takka-jataka, e.g. where the soubriquet 'takka-
p a n d'\t a,' date-sage, is considered by Mr. Chalmers to imply a word-
play on date and logic, the pundit's occupation is said to be foretelling
' what were lucky and unlucky seasons ' to villagers for pay. Such
low crafts, however, are not classed as takka in the 'Moralities' list
of Dialogues, I, pp. 16 ff. And it is very possible that 'takka' con-
veyed, to the religious mind of that day, much the same that so-called
' mere logic ' or ' sophistry ' does at the present time.

5 Idapaccayata pa/iccasamuppado : — more literally, that con-
ditionedness, genesis by way of cause. The second term implies the
universal law, the first is its application to any given case.


30 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 36.

activities of life 1, the renunciation of all substrata
of rebirth, the destruction of craving, the death of
passion, quietude of heart, Nirvana. And if I were
now to teach the Truth, and other men did not acknow-
ledge it to me, that would be wearisome to me, that
would be hurtful to me."

2. ' And then verily, brethren, to Vipassi the Exalted
One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme were revealed on the
spur of the moment2 these verses unheard of before: —
" This that through many toils I've won —
Enough ! why should I make it known ?
By folk with lust and hate consumed
Not this the Truth that can be grasped !
Against the stream of common thought,
Deep, subtle, difficult, delicate,
Unseen 'twill be by passion's slaves
Cloaked in the murk of ignorance 3."
' In these words, brethren, pondering over the
matter, did the heart of Vipassi incline to be averse
from exertion and not to preach the Truth. There-
upon to one of the Great Brahmas \ when he became
aware in thought of the thoughts of Vipassi, [37] this
occurred : — " Alas ! the world will perish ! Utterly
alas ! will the world perish, now that the heart of
Vipassi the Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme,
inclines to be averse from exertion and not towards
preaching the Truth ! "

1 i.e. of the sankharas of actions, speech and thoughts. 'When
Nirvana is reached,' says the Cy., ' all their diffusions are calmed. So
too all cravings are destroyed, all evil passions are quenched, all
suffering ceases.' For Buddhaghosa, Vipassi's ' Truth ' is the calm
and detachment of the intellectually and ethically free man.

2 Anacchariya, i. e. anu-acchar-iya, instantaneous; analogous
to the Greek dm x/jojw, and similar to the later iv dro/xui of the New
Testament (i Cor. xv. 52). The expression is frequently used of
the Buddha's similes.

3 Ignorance, not explicit in the text, is usually symbolized by dark-
ness— tamokkhandho — and is so referred to in the Cy.

4 ' Although merely referred to,' says the Cy., ' as one among them,
he is to be understood as the chief Great-Brahma in this universe.'
But the title of Sahampati, given in the Vinaya and Majjhima versions,
seems to be a later gloss.


D. ii. 38. THE SUBLIME STORY. 3 I

3. ' Then, brethren, did that Great Brahma, like a
strong man stretching" his bent arm out, or drawing-
back his outstretched arm, vanish from the Brahma
world and appear before Vipassi. And the Great
Brahma, brethren, draping his outer robe over one
shoulder and stooping his right knee to the ground,
raised his joined hands towards Vipassi the Exalted
One, the Arahant, the Buddha Supreme and said : —
" Lord ! may the Exalted One preach the Truth ! May
the Welcome One preach the Truth ! There are
beings whose eyes are hardly dimmed by dust, they
are perishing from not hearing the Truth ; they will
come to be knowers of the Truth."

4. ' At these words, brethren, Vipassi the Exalted
One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme, spoke thus to the
Great Brahma : — " To me too, O Brahma, did it
occur : — ' What if I now were to preach the Truth ?
But I judged that the world was not fit for it, would
not acknowledge it ; and that that would be wearisome
for me, hurtful for me ' . . . [3s] And so, O Brahma,
pondering over the matter, my heart inclined to be
averse from exertion, and not towards preaching the
Truth."

5. ' But this Great Brahma, brethren, addressed
Vipassi a second time . . .

6. ' . . . and again a third time, saying : — " Lord ! let
the Exalted One preach the Truth ! Let the Welcome
One preach the Truth ! There are beings whose eyes
are but hardly dimmed with dust ; they are perishing
from not hearing the Truth ; they will come to be
knowers of the Truth ! "

1 Then, brethren, when Vipassi the Exalted One,
Arahant, Buddha Supreme, became aware of the en-
treaty of the Brahma, because of his pitifulness towards
all beings, he looked down over the world with a
Buddha's Eye \ And so looking, brethren, he saw
beings whose eyes were nearly free from dust,

1 On the super-normal sense of a Buddha, one of his ten balas
or powers, see ' Vibhanga,' p. 340.


32 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 38.

and beings whose eyes were much dimmed with dust,
beings sharp of sense and blunted in sense, beings of
good and of evil disposition, beings docile and indocile,
some among them discerning the danger in rebirth
and in other worlds, and the danger in wrong doing.
As in a pond of blue, or red, or white lotuses, some
lotus-plants born in the water grow up in the water,
do not emerge from the water, but thrive sunken
beneath ; and other lotus-plants, born in the water
and grown up in the water, reach to the level ; while
other lotus-plants born in the water and grown up in
the water, stand thrusting themselves above the water,
undrenched by it ; [39] even so, brethren, did Vipassi
the Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme, look down
over the world with a Buddha's Eye, and see beings
whose eyes were nearly free from dust, and beings whose
eyes were dim with dust, beings sharp of sense and
blunted in sense, beings of good and of evil disposi-
tion, beings docile and indocile, and some among them
discerning the danger in rebirth in other worlds, and
the danger in wrong doing.

7. ' Thereupon that Great Brahma, brethren, when
he became aware in thought of the thoughts of Vipassi,
spoke to him in verse 1 : —
"As on a crag, on crest of mountain standing,
A man might watch the people far below,

E'en so do thou, O Wisdom fair, ascending,
O Seer of all, the terraced heights of Truth,

Look down, from grief released, upon the nations
Sunken in grief, oppressed with birth and age.

Arise, thou Hero ! Conqueror in the battle!

Thou freed from debt ! Lord of the pilgrim band !

Walk the world o'er, sublime and blessed Teacher 2 !
Teach us the Truth ; there are who'll understand."

1 The following verses and the response are otherwise arranged
in the Vinaya and Majjhima versions, in the former immediately
following the deity's petition, in the latter immediately following the
lotus simile.

2 In the text simply, O Exalted (or Blessed) One ; — practically the
only expression not literally reproduced.


D. ii. 40. THE SUBLIME STORY. 33

1 Thereupon, brethren, Vipassi, the Exalted One,
Arahant, Buddha Supreme, made response in verse to
that great Brahma : —

" Wide opened are the portals to Nirvana ! !

Let those that hear renounce their empty faith 2 !
Despairing of the weary task, O Brahma,
I spake not of this doctrine, sweet and good, to men."

' Then, brethren, that Great Brahma thinking : —
" Verily I am the one by whom an opening has been
given for the preaching of the Truth by Vipassi the
Exalted One, the Arahant, the Buddha Supreme," [4o]
bowed down before Vipassi, and passing round him by
the left vanished away.

8. ' Then to Vipassi, brethren, the Exalted One,
Arahant, Buddha Supreme, this occurred : — " To whom
now should I first preach the Truth ? Who will
quickly understand this doctrine?" And he thought: —
" There is Kha;wfa a raja's son, and Tissa, the chaplain's
son, both dwelling at Bandhumati. They are learned,
open-minded and wise, and for long have had but
little dust in their eyes. If I were now to teach the
Truth first to them, they would quickly understand it."
Thereupon, brethren, did Vipassi, like a strong man
stretching his bent arm out, or drawing back his
outstretched arm, vanish from the Wisdom Tree
and appear in the Sanctuary, in the deer-park at
Bandhumati 3.

9. ' And Vipassi, brethren, bade the park-keeper,
saying : — " Ho you, good park-keeper, go into Ban-

1 Amatassa dvara; literally the doors of ambrosia. On this
term see Appendix I. Cf. also M. I, 227 : — amatadvaram. ' Wide-
flung the living gate, the safe (road) leading to Nirvana.'

2 Pamuficantu saddha?«. The expression is ambiguous. Olden-
berg, ' Vinaya Texts/ I, 88, renders it ' Let them send forth faith to
meet it.' We think it means let them give up their faith in rites, and
gods, and ceremonies, with especial references to the offerings to the
dead. Comp. R. 0. Franke in Z.D.M.G., 1909, p. 7.

3 Tradition apparently identified this with Isipatana, the deer-park,
in Gotama Buddha's time, at Benares, and attributed the name Khema
to the park as having been given as a deer-preserve, or refuge. Cy.

III. D


34 XIV- MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 40.

dhumati and tell Kha^a the raja's son, and Tissa
the chaplain's son, that : — Vipassi, the Exalted One,
Arahant, Buddha Supreme, has arrived at Bandhumati
and abides in the Khema deer-park. He wishes to
see you." " Ay, my lord," replied the park-keeper,
and went to Bandhumati and gave this message to
Khanda. and Tissa.

10. [41] ' Then they, ordering out their state carriages,
mounted, and drove out from Bandhumati to the deer-
park. As far as there was a road they drove, and then
alighting went on foot into the presence of Vipassi.
And being come they saluted Vipassi, the Exalted One,
Arahant, Buddha Supreme, and seated themselves
beside him.

11. 'To them Vipassi discoursed in due order1;
that is to say, he gave them illustrative talk on gene-
rosity, on right conduct, on heaven, on the danger,
the vanity and the defilement of lusts, on the
advantages of renunciation. When the Exalted One
saw that they had become prepared, softened, un-
prejudiced, upraised and believing in heart, then he
proclaimed that Truth which the Buddhas alone have
won ; that is to say, the doctrine of Sorrow, of its
origin, of its cessation, and the Path. And just as a
clean cloth, from which all stain has been washed
away, will readily take the dye, just even so did
Khaw^a and Tissa obtain, even while sitting there,
the pure and stainless Eye for the Truth, and they
knew : — " Whatsoever has a beginning, in that is also
inherent the necessity of passing away."

12. 'Then they having seen the Truth, won the
Truth, understood the Truth, sounded the depths of
Truth, having crossed the waters of doubt and put
away perplexity, having gained full confidence and
become dependent on none other for the teaching of
the Master, addressed Vipassi, the Exalted One,
Arahant, Buddha Supreme, and said : —

1 " Most excellent, lord, most excellent, lord ! Just

1 Cf. 'Dialogues,' I, p. 135.


P. ii. 42. THE SUBLIME STORY. 35


as if a man were to set up that which has been thrown
down, or were to reveal that which has been hidden
away, or were to point out the right road to him who
has gone astray, or were to bring a light into the
darkness so that those who had eyes could see external
forms, — even so has the truth been made known in
many a figure by the Exalted One. We here, lord,
betake ourselves to the Exalted One [42] as our guide,
and to the Truth. May we be suffered to go forth
from the world under the Exalted One, may we be
suffered to obtain ordination."

13. 'And so, brethren, Kha/^a the raja's son and
Tissa the chaplain's son obtained retreat and ordina-
tion under Vipassi, the Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha
Supreme. Them did Vipassi instruct, arouse, incite
and gladden with religious discourse, making clear the
danger, the vanity and the corruption of component
things, and the advantage in Nirvana. And they thus
instructed, aroused, incited and gladdened by his
discourse, their hearts ere long, being void of grasping,
were set free from the Intoxicants.

14. 'Now a great multitude, brethren, of the in-
habitants of Bandhumati — some 84,000 souls — heard
that Vipassi, the Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha
Supreme, had come to Bandhumati and was staying
at the Sanctuary (Khema), in the deer-preserve ; and
how Kha;^a the raja's son and Tissa the chaplain's
son, had actually at his instigation shaved their heads
and put on the yellow robe, and had gone forth from
the House into the Homeless state. And hearing it
they thought : — " Surely this is no ordinary religious
rule, this is no common going forth, in that the raja's
son and the chaplain's son have had their heads
shaved, have donned the yellow robe and gone forth
from the House into the Homeless state. Khanda. and
Tissa have indeed done this ; why then should not we?"

' So all that multitude came out from Bandhumati
to see Vipassi, the Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha
Supreme, and when they were in his presence they
saluted him and sat down by him.

d 2


2>6 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 43.

15. [43] 'And to them Vipassi discoursed, even as
he had discoursed to Kha^a and Tissa. . . .

16. ' And they too as those . . . who have gained
full confidence and become dependent on none other
for the teaching of the Master, addressed Vipassi even
as Khanda and Tissa had done, asking that they might
obtain ordination.

1 7. ' And so, brethren, those 84,000 souls obtained
retreat and ordination under Vipassi the Exalted One,
Arahant, Buddha Supreme. Them did Vipassi instruct,
arouse, incite and gladden with religious discourse,
[44] making clear the danger, the vanity and the cor-
ruption of component things, and the advantages in
Nirvana. They thus instructed, aroused, incited and
gladdened by his discourse, their hearts ere long,
being void of grasping, were set free from the Intoxi-
cants.

18. ' Now a great multitude, brethren, of recluses —
some 84,000 — heard from the former multitude of
Vipassi's visitation. And they, too, went out from
Bandhumati to see him.

19. 'And to them did Vipassi likewise discourse,
and it happened even so with them.

20. 21. [45] '. . . and their hearts too ere long were
set free from the Intoxicants.

22. ' Now at that time, brethren, a vast company of
bhikkhus1 was staying at Bandhumati. And to Vipassi
the Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme, as he
meditated in solitude, this idea arose in his mind : —
" There is now a vast company of bhikkhus dwelling
at Bandhumati. What if I were now to grant leave to
the bhikkhus and say : — ' Fare ye forth, brethren, on
the mission that is for the good of the many, for the
happiness of the many, to take compassion on the
world, to work profit and good and happiness to gods
and men. Go not singly ; go in pairs ; teach ye,
brethren, [48] the Truth, lovely in its origin, lovely in


1 A/Ma-sa/Miw sata-sahassa?;/ — 6,800.000 — is the literal
figure given. See p. 39.


I>. ii. 48. THE SUBLIME STORY. ^>7

its progress, lovely in its consummation, both in the
spirit and in the letter, proclaim ye the higher life in
all its fullness and in all its purity. Beings there are
whose eyes are hardly dimmed with dust, perishing
because they hear not the Truth. Moreover after
every six years have passed come ye to Bandhumati,
the royal residence, there to recite the summary of the
Rules of the Order V "

23. 'Now one of the Great Brahmas, brethren, when
he became aware in thought of the thoughts of Vipassi,
like a strong man stretching his bent arm out, or draw-
ing back his outstretched arm, vanished from the
Brahma-world and appeared in the presence of Vipassi
the Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme. Then,
draping his outer robe over one shoulder, he raised his
joined hands towards the Exalted One, saying : —
" Even so, O Exalted One ! Even so, O Wel-
come One ! Let the Exalted One thus grant leave
to this great company of bhikkhus, as he has a
mind to do . . . Moreover we too, lord, will do even
as the bhikkhus after every six years have passed ;
we will come to Bandhumati there to recite the Pati-
mokkha."

1 Thus, brethren, spake that Great Brahma. And
bowing down before the Exalted One, he passed round
by the left, and forthwith disappeared.

24, 25. [47] 'Then Vipassi, brethren, arose towards
eventide from his meditations and told the bhikkhus
[of what he had deliberated and of the visitation of the
Great Brahma].

26. [48] ' " I grant ye leave, brethren ! Fare ye forth
on the mission that is for the good of the many, for
the happiness of the many, to take compassion on the
world and to work profit and good and happiness to
gods and men. Go not singly but in pairs ; teach ye,


1 Patimokkha, literally the Disburdenment. The text as we have
it (translated in ' Vinaya Texts/ Vol. I) dates only from the times of
early Buddhism, and it is not likely that this technical name used as
the title was much older.


38 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 48.

brethren, the Truth, lovely in its origin, lovely in its
progress, lovely in its consummation, both in the spirit
and in the letter ; proclaim ye the higher life in all its
fullness and in all its purity. Beings there are whose
eyes are hardly dimmed with dust, perishing because
they hear not the Truth ; they will become knowers of
the Truth. Moreover, brethren, after every six years
have passed come ye to Bandhumati, there to recite
the Patimokkha."

' Then those bhikkhus, brethren, for the most part on
that very day, set forth on their mission among the
people.

27. ' Now at that time, brethren, there was a very
great number of religious dwellings in Jambudipa —
some 84,000. As one year was drawing to a close
the angels proclaimed the news : — " Ho, friends ! one
year is ending ; now five years remain. At the end of
five years we have to go to Bandhumati to recite the
Patimokkha."

' And [this they did at the close of each remaining
year, proclaiming] at the end of the sixth year : — " Ho,
friends ! The six years are at an end. Now is the
time for us to go to Bandhumati to recite the Pati-
mokkha." Then, brethren, those bhikkhus, some by
their own magic power, some by the magic power of
the gods, on that very day came to Bandhumati to
recite the Patimokkha.

28. [49] ' Then verily, brethren, did Vipassi, the
Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme, thus rehearse
a Patimokkha : —

" How may ye best the flesh subdue ?

Be patient, brethren, be forbearing.
What is the highest, what the best ?

Nirvana, brethren, say the Buddhas.
For he 's no Wanderer who harms

His fellow man ; he's no recluse
Who works his neighbour injury.

Work ye no evil ; give yourselves to good ;

Cleanse ye your hearts, — so runs the Buddhas' word.


D. ii. gl. THE SUBLIME STORY. 39

Blame not, strike not, restrain self in the Law,
With temperance eat, lonely seek rest and sleep,
Given to thoughts sublime, — so runs the Buddhas'
word '."

29. [so] ' At one time I, brethren, was dwelling at
Ukka/7//a, in the Delectable Wood, beneath a giant
sal tree. Now to me as I meditated in solitude this
idea arose in my mind : — " There is but one abode of
beings easily accessible that I have not dwelt in for
a very long time, and that is among the gods of the
Pure Mansions 2. What if I were now to repair
thither ? Then, brethren, as a strong man stretching
his bent arm out, or drawing back his outstretched
arm, so did I vanish from beneath the giant sal tree in
the Delectable Wood at Ukka//^a and appear among
the gods of the Aviha heaven. In that group of gods,
brethren, several thousands of them came up to me,
and saluting me, stood by and spake thus : —

1 " Friend, it is now ninety-one aeons since Vipassi the
Exalted One, Arahant, Buddha Supreme, arose in the
world. Vipassi, friend, was of the noble class and was
born in a noble family. Vipassi, friend, was by family
a KondaMa. . . . The span of life in his time, friend,
was 80,000 years. He attained enlightenment, friend,
under a trumpet-flower tree His chief disciples, friend,
were a pair named Kha^a and Tissa. [5l] He had,
friend, three companies of disciples, sixty-eight lacs,
one lac, and eighty thousand in number. His special
attendant, friend, was named Asoka. His father was
the raja Bandhuman, whose ranee, Bandhumati, was
his mother, and whose seat was the town of Bandhu-


1 These verses, except lines 8 and 9, have been included in the
Dhammapada 184-6.

2 The Suddhavasa deva comprise the five highest spheres of
celestials in the so-called Rupa loka, i.e. the universe of Form, the five
being named successively in the text. Beyond these five heavens were
yet four spheres of the Formless. The following paragraphs develop
the assertion on p. 7 : ' And gods also have revealed these matters to
him.' . . .


40 XIV. MAHAPADANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 51.

mati. His leaving the world, his becoming a recluse,
his travail, his enlightenment, his setting the Wheel of
Truth a-rolling, were each on such and such wise.
And we being of those who have lived the holy life
under Vipassi our Exalted One, and purged the lusts
of the flesh, have been reborn here."

30. ' And again, brethren, in that group of gods,
several thousands of them . . .*. And again, brethren,
several hundreds of them came up to me, and saluted,
and stood on one side, and said : — " Friend ! in this
fortunate aeon the Exalted One has now arisen in the
world as an Arahant, Buddha Supreme. The Exalted
One, friend, is of noble birth, born in a clan of nobles,
in a family with Gotama for surname. Small, friend,
is the span of life in the Exalted One's time, [52] brief
and soon past ; he who is longlived lives a hundred
years more, or less. The Exalted One, friend, became
a Buddha under an aspen tree. He has, friend, two
chief disciples, Sariputta and Moggallana, a glorious
pair. He has had one assembly, friend, of disciples,
1250 in number, and in this company all are arahants.
He hasfor attendant, friend, for chief attendant, one
named Ananda. His father, friend, is the raja Suddho-
dana, whose wife Maya is his mother, and whose seat
is the town of Kapilavatthu. His leaving the world,
his becoming a recluse, his travail, his enlightenment,
his setting the Wheel of Truth a-rolling, were each on
such and such wise. And we, friend, being of those
who lived the holy life under our Exalted One, and
purged the lusts of the flesh, have been reborn
here."

31, 32. 'Thereafter, brethren, I resorted, not only
to the Aviha gods, but also to the home of the Cool
gods ; and so, including both the Aviha gods and the


1 The text here is greatly abbreviated. It is intended that num-
bers of the gods claim to have been, in a previous birth, the followers
of each successive Buddha; and § 29 is to be understood, in full, for
each Buddha. The full text is given, as usual, for the first and last
cases only.


D. ii. 54- THE SUBLIME STORY. 4 1

Cool gods', I came to the home of the Fair gods2.
Then on, including thus the Aviha and Cool and Fair
gods, I came to the home of the Wellseeing gods.3
And yet on, including thus Aviha and Cool and Fair
and Wellseeing gods, till I came to the home of the
Senior gods. [And in each of these heavens numbers
of the gods accosted me and told me of their previous
birth under Vipassi and the following Buddhas down
to the present one, myself.]

33- [53] 'Thus, brethren, through his clear discern-
ment of that principle of the Truth, is the Tathagata
able to remember the Buddhas of old, who attained
final completion, who cut off obstacles, who cut down
barriers, who have ended the cycle, who have escaped
from all sorrow, — so that he can remember as to their
birth, their names, their families, [54] the span of life
usual in their time, their pair of disciples, and their
congregations of disciples, and can say : — " Of such
was the birth of those Exalted Ones, such were their
names, their families, such were their morals, their
doctrines, their wisdom ; how they lived and how they
gained emancipation.'"

Thus spake the Exalted One. And the brethren,
pleased at heart, rejoiced at the word of the Exalted
One.


1 The Cy. interprets as active: — na kafici sattarh tapentiti —
they torment no one.

2 Paraphrased as ' lovely to look at, beautiful, charming.'

3 Paraphrased as ' because they see vividly the beautiful vision of
the former.'


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

mahA-nidAna-suttanta.

The doctrine of Pa/icca-samuppada — that all dhamma
(phenomena physical and mental) are pa^iccasamuppanna
(happen by way of cause) finds in the following Suttanta the
fullest exposition accorded to it throughout the Pi/akas. It
is true that for some reason (cf. p. 26, n. 1) the Dighabha^akas
(recorders of the Digha-Nikaya) excluded the first two of
the Twelve Nidanas — avijja, sankhara. — and that, in the
Paccayakara-vibhanga of the Abhidhamma, the formula is
reiterated and analysed with greater variety of presentation.
But in the present instance the doctrinal contents are more
fully worked out. There is another feature in this Digha
exposition which seems to us of no little significance.

But before discussing this feature, we would point to yet
another factor in the statement of the chain of the Nidanas
which does not find a place in the Nidana-Suttanta. This is
the schematized, or abstract formula of the whole sequence,
showing the logic of it without the contents — ' That being
thus, this comes to be, from the coming to be of that, this
arises. That being absent this does not happen, from the
cessation of that, this ceases.' (M. II, 32.) In the other
Nikayas the scheme usually precedes the full formula, and
in one case where the principle of the latter is called 'the
Dhamma,'' supersedes the formula. It is on all fours with
the modern formulation of the law of causation — ' That every
event is the result or sequel of some previous event, or events,
without which it could not have happened, and which, being
present, it must take place.'

The significant feature is this : — although the formula, as
expounded in this Suttanta, ends in the usual way — ' Such is
the uprising of this whole body of 111' — the burden of the
Dialogue is in no way directly concerned with 111, pain or
sorrow. In certain other passages, on the other hand, where
the Nidana-chain occurs, dukkha occupies the foreground.
Thus in A. I, 177, the formula of the Paricca-samuppada is
rehearsed to explain the Aryan Truth of the uprising of 111.


INTRODUCTION. 43


In M. I, 190 the context of the formula is an exhortation by
Sariputta on the primary importance of a right attitude to-
wards, and understanding of, the nature and causes of 111, so
that the brethren may meet persecutions — ills not due to their
own ill deeds — with fortitude and serenity. In the Nidana-
Sawyutta of the Sawyutta-Nikaya, all the contexts of the
formula known to the compilers are grouped together. Of
the ninety-three brief Suttas of which this division consists,
only one-sixth of those in which the formula occurs, have
Dukkha (or its opposite) for their subject. A slightly larger
proportion of the Suttas (16) are so many statements up-
holding the truth of the evolution of phenomena by way of
natural causation. That any being exists absolutely and
eternally is at the same time denied. And that any being
ever perishes absolutely is equally denied. Of the remaining
Suttas, four, in which Loka, the world of sense-perception, is
substituted in the Pa/icca-samuppada for Dukkha, belong
virtually to the foregoing sixteen. Seven are concerned with
rebirth, eight are ethical exhortations to destroy Craving, and
thirty-six emphasize the importance of mastering the principle
of the Pa/icca-samuppada. That holds the key to insight ; to
understand it is therefore the test of true knowledge and
sound doctrine. This too is the point in Sawyutta V, 387-9,
where the formula again occurs. Once more, in the very
strongly emphasized rehearsal of the formula in the ' Great
Ta?zha-sankhaya-Sutta ' of M. I, 256, the doctrine there in-
culcated is not in any way hedonistic, sentimental or, directly,
moral. It has nothing to say about Dukkha. It is a re-
pudiation of the belief in any permanent, transmigrating
intelligent principle (vi fin aw a) in man, and the affirmation of
the contrary view — that vifina;za is a contingent phenomenon,
a happening by way of cause and effect, something that
' becomes ' and dies away.

Dukkha, on the other hand, and the causes of it — ' evam
. . . samudayo'— holds, in nearly every case, the last word in
this notable formula. And according to the Buddhist records,
as told in the preceding Suttanta, the fact and sequence of
those causes dawn ever on the mind of every Buddha in
response to the anguished questionings of his mind brooding
over the misery of the world, and of the infinite living and
dying in it.

Hence in trying to account adequately for the profound
significance and high importance attached by the founders of
Buddhism to the doctrine of the Pa/icca-samuppada, we need
to keep in view this dual aspect of it — that it is a way of ex-
plaining phenomena, and that the most interesting phenomenon


44 INTRODUCTION.


to be explained is that of Dukkha l. The latter standpoint
is that of man as recipient or percipient, the former, that of
man as intellective or interpreting.

Now if to this twofold aspect we add that of man as react-
ing, by will and deed, to his impressions and his interpretations,
and take the Buddha's doctrine of the Eightfold Path, as the
corresponding formula, we have not only the whole of Early
Buddhism in a nutshell, but also just those points concerning
which we find the most emphatic affirmations of Dhamma as
Dhamma ascribed to Gotama —

' Both in the past and now do I set forth just this : — " dukkha
and the cessation of dukkha 2."

1 Let us put aside questions of the Beginning and the End.
I will teach you the Dhamma: — That being thus, this comes
to be. From the coming to be of that, this arises. That
being absent, this does not happen. From the cessation of
that, this ceases 3.

' There is a Middle Path . . . discovered by the Tathagata
(discovered by none but a Tathagata, S. V, 14) . . . this Aryan
Eightfold Path . . . 4.' This Path, my friend, is the religious
life (brahmacariya) 5.'

These three central tenets are put, by our earliest and best
authorities, in these or other words, into the mouth of Gotama
himself at the very outset of his career, in his first sermon, as
the doctrine of the Four Aryan or Noble Truths. And the
Pa/icca-samuppada, with its positive formula of uprising
(Sa mud ay a), and its negative formula of passing away
(Nirodha), covers the ground staked out by the second and
third of these Truths. It is frequently quoted in this con-
nexion c, and its importance in the Dhamma is thereby made
the more evident.

But the reason for that importance only becomes clear,
when we look away from the dukkha to which the formula is


1 It is regrettable that later Buddhist teaching, yielding to this fact
of 'interest,' obscured the great causal principle taught by Gotama,
through the simile of a wheel, so as to include the va//a, or round of
Samsara. A ladder or stairway (nissewi), like that used to illustrate
the way to see Brahma (' Dialogues/ I, 308, Tevijja-Sutta), would have
been more appropriate.

2 M.I, 140.

s lb. II, 32. Cf. ib. I, 190, where Sariputta says — 'The Exalted
One has said, that he who sees the Pa/icca-samuppada, sees the
Dhamma, and he who sees the Dhamma sees the Pa/icca-samuopada.'

4 Vin. I, 10. 5 S. V, 15.

e e.g. S. II, 14-16, 28, 29, 57-9, 108, 109, 129-31, A. I, 177.


INTRODUCTION. 45


so often applied, away too from the antecedents of dukkha,
and consider all that is implied in the Pa/icca-samuppada by
way of method and Weltanschauung.

If we persist in viewing either Dukkha or its causes as the
' secret ' of the doctrine, we might omit the formula altogether,
since the nature and cause and effect of each nidana is fully
taught in each Nikaya. Nor is the order of sequence the
main tenet. Frequent liberties are taken in the Canon with
both order and number of nidanas1. Nor finally could the
arrangement of antecedents and consequences in an iterated
rigmarole (convenient for oral transmission) appeal with the
runic force of a Shibboleth to a movement of thought like
that of Buddhism, any more than would the similarly arranged
fragment of formula contained in the Sankhya Karika have
appealed, as such, to the followers of that school. No reformers
who so carefully purged their literature of all the ' eulalic '
reiterations of Om ! Hari ! and the rest, that so throng the
pages of the Upanishads, would care a brass farthing for any
' accumulative jingle' accounting for things after the fashion of
the widely spread pre-historic folk-rune, ' The cat began to kill
the rat, the rat began to gnaw the rope,' &c. . . . ' and so the
old woman got home that night.' Evam etassa, &c.

It was not the fact of Dukkha, nor the fairly obvious
conditions of birth and so on, leading up to it, that come as
a revelation to each Buddha, beneath his Bo-tree. It was the
process of samudaya and nirodha as a natural and universal
law. ' Coming to pass ! Coming to pass ! At that thought
there arose in me a Vision into things not called before to
mind, and knowledge arose, insight, wisdom, light arose2.'
Not uncaused and casually, nor by the flat of Icvara — Indra,
Soma, Varuwa, Brahma 3 — did events happen, painful or other-
wise ; not as Job and the Psalmist taught — ' God distributeth
sorrows in his anger.' For ' God is a righteous judge, and
God is angry every day4.' Events came impelled by preceding
conditions, causes that man could by intelligence and good
will, study and govern, suspend or intensify5.

1 e. g. this Suttanta omits the first two. In ' Dialogues,' I, p. 53
(Brahmajala S.), the first five are omitted, so also in S. II, 92. S. II,
101, instead of the usual order of the twelve nidanas, gives 3, 4, 2, n,
12 only, and in this order. In M. I, 191, a different group of antece-
dents are said to have dukkha as their consequence — desire, attach-
ment, indulgence, lusting after.

2 See above, p. 26. s See ' Dialogues,' I, p. 310.

4 Job xxi. 17, Ps. vii. 2.

5 Cf. herewith Prof. Oltramare's ' La Formule bouddhique des douze


46 INTRODUCTION.


Thus Buddhaghosa, in explaining the name Pa/icca-samup-
pada1, points out that it excludes all theories of absolutism,
nihilism, chance, irregular causation 2, and indeterminism 3.
And of such theories, it is concerning the implied rejection
of the first two that he is most explicit. Namely, that there
is no persistent ego reaping results in one life sown as causes
in a previous life, and that it is not a different, an alien ego
either, which reaps. The latter person (attabhava) is the
resultant, the creature, the ' evolute ' of the former. Thus
faithfully was the tradition of the Pi/akas preserved, wherein
the view of vinnawa as a persistent ego was categorically
contradicted in the words anekapariyayena pa/icca-
samuppanna (causally evolved in various ways). M. I, 256.

Let it be remembered that the ' immanent ' absolutism
opposed by Buddhism was chiefly the Brahmanic theosophy.
According to this, the atman of the individual was not so
much an efflux of the World-Atman, as was the latter im-
manent in, and identified with, each man-soul. ' In the
beginning this world was only Soul, in the shape of a man
. . . world-guardian, world-lord, this that is My Soul 5.' ' My
Soul ' was therefore, in that theosophy, the personal First


causes' (Geneve, 1909), which we have had the good fortune to read
before going to press. ' Le Bouddha a voulu apprendre . . . que la
misere ne vient point a. Phomme de quelque agent externe echappant
a sa prise, et qu'elle n'est pas non plus inheVente a une substance
immuable, ce qui la rendrait elle-meme incurable. . . . Le Pratityasa--
mutpada est une tentative d'expliquer la qualite de la vie, sans
qu'interviennent ni la notion d'ame, ni la notion de Dieu,' &c. And
yet to these luminous remarks he prefixes the statement, that the
Buddha certainly did not wish to affirm any formula of universal
causality, since that theory riintfresse que Vhomme. To us it seems
that precisely for this reason it would be the object of the quest of him
men called the Naruttama, the Aggapuggala — the supreme Man — who
combined ' philosophical curiosity ' or rather, insight, with the practical
bent of a saviour of men.

1 Visuddhi-Magga, ch. xvii.

2 Visama-hetu-vado. Warren translates this 'heresy of exis-
tences due to an over-ruling power.' Buddhism did virtually reject an
Issara, but scarcely in such terms as those above.

8 Vasavattivado, Warren has 'self-determining existences.'
4 Cf. H. Oldenberg, 'Buddha' (London, 1882). 'Where there is
no being, but only becoming, it is not substance, but only a law, which
can be recognized as the first and the last.' The significance of the
Pa/icca-samuppada as the discerning of such a law has found adequate
emphasis in this scholar's work.

B Brhad. Up. I, 4. 1 ; Kaush. Up. Ill, 8.


INTRODUCTION. 47


Cause and Final Cause. And hence the PaAcca-samuppada
of Buddhism was as decided a negation of all teleology as
was the theorem of Demokritus and his master Leukippus,
that ' nothing happens by chance, but everything through a
cause and of necessity V

Had the fates been kinder to the writings of the Atomist
of Abdera, had the ' teleological reaction ' not been led by
two men of such extraordinary genius as Plato and Aristotle,
it is conceivable that the whole philosophy, not to say the
Dhamma, of the West, might have flowed along a channel in
which the influence of the mikros and the megas Diakosmos
might have brought both that philosophy and that Dhamma
more nearly parallel to the informing principle of the Pa/icca-
samuppada. As it happened, Europe learned from Athens
compromise and comprehensiveness, learned to believe in a
universe governed partly by necessity and partly by chance,
learned to combine belief in unchanging natural law with
belief in first and final causes.

And so gradually has the realm of regular, causal sequence
encroached upon that of the casual and the arbitrary, that
on no period in the intellectual development of Europe can
we place our finger and say : — Here the concept of a universe
governed, as to its every movement and happening, by
natural causation, was brought home to the minds of men, —
to the mind of one man. There is nothing resembling the
intellectual earthquake caused half a century ago by that
extension of the law of causation : the theory of evolution.
Or was there some such milestone of rational development
reached, when Demokritus formulated the philosophy of
Atomism, and won renown as a great prophet and teacher
of mankind ?

In the history of Indian thought, on the other hand, we
can point to such an epoch-making crisis, we can discern the
significance of the law of universal causation breaking in on
a great mind with a flash of intuition. The law, we read,
stands as fundamental, whether Tathagatas have arisen or
not. But the Tathagata penetrates and masters it, and delivers
the knowledge thereof to the world 2.

1 Lange, ' History of Materialism,' I, ch. 1. Demokritus flourished
apparently about half a century after the Buddha's death. See also
Vis. Magga XVII : ' the wheel of becoming is without known beginning,
lacking both maker (karako) . . . such as Brahma . . . and percipient
(vadako) " I." For each consequent proceeds by reason of its ante-
cedent.'

2 S. II, 25.


48 INTRODUCTION.


No such crisis of thought is patent in the literature of
the Brahmins, though that literature extends over practically
the whole era of Indian culture. Those Upanishads which
are ranked as the oldest show a naif animism : those ranked
later reveal thought attained to relative maturity l. But there
is no evidence of a transition causing a mental upheaval. In
the seventy-two stanzas of the Sankhya Karika, again, 25 per
cent, contain some consciously generalized affirmation re-
specting cause and effect. The abstract causal concept shows
as a well-matured instrument of metaphysical thought.
Throughout the Yoga Sutra too we find allusions to causality
as an abstract idea 2. It is only in the Buddhist Nikayas that
we come up against the actual effort itself of the human mind
to get at a more scientific view of world-order, — an effort
which is marked with the freshness and vigour of a new fetch
of intellectual expansion, and the importance and gravity of
which is affirmed with the utmost emphasis, both in the earliest
records and in the orthodox literature of ten centuries later.

The significance of the Pi/akas, as the vehicle of this evolu-
tionary cry of travail and new birth, is not minimized by the
objection, that a gospel promulgated by laymen (Khattiyas),
and preached to the man in the street, would naturally regard,
as truths new and wonderful, axioms which, to the more
esoteric, philosophical schools of the day, were the common-
places of dialectical metaphysic. For we have shown that, in
the one case where such a school has preserved its ancient
literature, we find books of pre-causational and post-causational
thought, but nothing indicating that the conviction of a law
of universal natural causation was taking birth. The
aphorisms, constituting the oldest existing survivals of Yoga
and Sankhya thought, reveal no inner evolution of philosophic
progress, and no traces of early animistic culture such as
appear in certain of the Upanishads. Most of the Jain
literature still awaits it editor, but we have Dr. Jacobi's learned
authority for it, that, in spite of an atomistic theory of some
interest, its philosophy was crude, animistic and mere 'common

1 Cf. Aitareyya Up. ' The Atman deliberated : I will send forth
worlds — he then formed the person ... he brooded over him, and

... a mouth burst forth like an egg' — with Cvetasvatara Up.
' Should time, or nature, or necessity, or chance, or the elements, or
the Person be considered as the cause ? '

2 In one passage (IV, 1 1), the statement takes the /orm of the nega-
tive part of the Buddhist formula. ' As the sahkharas are collected by
cause, effect, substratum, and support, therefore through the absence 0/
these, there t's a ft absence of the sankhdras.'


INTRODUCTION. 49


sense.' It is not likely therefore that the Angas which are
still ineditcd will reveal any conception of causation possessing
deep philosophical insight. Hence all early Indian literature,
for which any such insight is claimed, except that of Buddhism,
either shows both the child-like and the more adult stages of
thought without the (supremely interesting) transitional stage,
or else it has preserved only its more adult records, or else it
never had any but adult records to show, i.e. it is later
literature only.

Now in the history of philosophy, whether its concepts be
sought in the cell and the academy of the originating seer, or
in the reaction to his influence in thoughtful and earnest minds,
nothing is more illuminating either for chronology or for
interpretation, than to catch the intelligence in the act of
ascending to a fresh vantage-point in its interpretation of the
world —

. . . dhammamayam, Sumedha.
pasadarh aruyha, Samantacakkhu . . .
avekkhassu ! :

And since no auspicious day amid Egyptian or trans- Aegean
ruins has brought back to us Leukippus or Demokritus, the
Buddhist Pi/akas, by presenting this evolutionary moment,
possess a unique interest for the historian of human ideas, not.
only in India, but in the entire world of culture.

1 See preceding Suttanta, p. 39 of the text.


III.


xv. mahA-nidAna-suttanta.

(the great discourse on causation.)

i. [55] Thus have I heard. The Exalted One was
once dwelling among the Kurus1. Now a township
of that country is named Kammassadamma. And the
venerable Ananda came to where the Exalted One was,
bowed in salutation before him, and took a seat on one
side. And so seated he said to the Exalted One : —
' Wonderful, lord, and marvellous it is, that whereas
this doctrine of events as arising from causes is so
deep and looks so deep 2, to me it seems as clear as
clear can be ! '

' Say not so, Ananda, say not so ! Deep is this
doctrine of events as arising from causes, and it looks
deep too. It is through not understanding this doctrine,
through not penetrating it, that this generation 3 has
become a tangled skein, a matted ball of thread4, like


1 The Kurus occupied the country of which Indraprastha, close to
the modern Delhi, was the capital. See Rh. D. ' Buddhist India,'
p. 27.

- Water, muses the Cy., may be shallow and look deep like a pool
black with the rotten leaves beneath the surface ; it may be deep and
look shallow, like the jewel-like translucence of Ganges water ; it may
be and look shallow, like the contents of a basin ; it may be and look
deep, like the ocean at the foot of Mount Sineru. But this doctrine is
ever and only deep both in substance and appearance.

3 The Greek yeVvr/^a of the Gospels has much the same vague
meaning as paja- — offspring, here rendered 'generation.'

4 A more literal rendering than Warren's picturesque ( entangled
warp . . . ensnarled web.' The similes are drawn from weaving cloth
and making nets. The tangle is due to bad workmanship or the teeth
of mice; the matting, to grease (kafijiyasuttarh), the ball resembling
a bird's nest. Both similes are to illustrate the confused state of the
popular mind, lost in fallacies of opinion, prejudice and superstition
e.g. among the sixty-two heresies of the first Suttanta (Vol. I). Cy.


D. ii. 56. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 51

to munja-grass and rushes \ unable to overpass the
doom of the Waste 2, the Woeful Way, the Downfall,
the Constant Round [of transmigration] :i.

2. ' If you, Ananda, were asked : — " Is old age and
death due to a particular cause ? " you should say : —
" It is." And to the question : — " From what cause
is old age and death ? " you should say : — " Birth is
the cause of old a^e and death."

' If you, Ananda, were asked : — " Is birth due to a
particular cause ? " [56] you should say : — " It is." And
to the question: — "From what cause is birth?" you
should say :; — " Becoming 4 is the cause of birth."

' If you, Ananda, were asked : — " Is becoming due to
a particular cause" ? you should say : — " It is." And
to the question : — " From what cause is becoming ? "
you should say : " Grasping is the cause of becoming."

1 If you, Ananda, were asked : — " Is grasping due to
a particular cause ?" you should say : — " It is." And
to the question : — " From what cause is grasping ? "
you should say : — " Craving is the cause of grasping?"

' If you, Ananda, were asked : " Is craving due to
a particular cause ?" you should say : — " It is." And
to the question : — " From what cause is craving ? " you
should say :— " Sensation is the cause of craving."

' If you, Ananda, were asked : — " Is sensation due
to a particular cause ? " you should say : — " It is."
And to the question: — "From what cause is sensation?"
you should say : — " Contact is the cause of sensation."

1 When these are withering and cut in autumn, if gathered up in
sheaves wherever they fall, it becomes difficult to extricate stalk from
stalk and lay them in parallel order. (Cy.)

2 Apaya. For the concrete meaning see above, Vol. f , p. 125. In
the secondary sense the word is often — quite wrongly, rendered 'hell.'
There is no hell, i. e. no existence of unending torment, in Indian
thought.

3 These four terms all refer to a change for the worse in rebirth, i.e.
to one or other of the four infra-human grades of existence — purgatory,
animal kingdom, shades or ghosts, and asuras or fallen angels.

4 The Cy. is at no pains to explain here the staple terms in the
chain of causation, the author having expounded them after his fashion
i'i the Visuddhi Magga.

E 2


52 XV. MAHA-NIDANA-SUTTANTA. P. ii. 56.

1 If you, Ananda, were asked : — " Is contact due to
a particular cause ? " you should say : — " It is." And
to the question : — " From what cause is contact ? " you
should say:—'' Name-and-form is the cause of contact."

' If you, Ananda, were asked : — " Is name-and-form
due to a particular cause ? " you should say : — " It is."
And to the question : — " From what cause is name-
and-form ? " you should say : — " Cognition is the cause
of name-and-form."

A

3. ' Thus then is it, Ananda, that cognition, with
name-and-form as its cause ; name-and-form, with cog-
nition as its cause ; contact, with name-and-form as its
cause ; sensation with contact as its cause ; craving, with
sensation as its cause ; grasping, with craving as its
cause ; becoming, with grasping as its cause ; birth,
with becoming as its cause ; old age and death, with
birth as its cause ; grief, lamentation, ill, sorrow and
despair, all come into being. [57] Such is the coming
to pass of this whole body of 111.

4. ' I have said that birth is the cause of old age
and death. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to
be understood after this manner. Were there no
birth of any sort or kind whatever of any one anywhere
— that is to say, of gods to godhood, of Gandharvas '
after their kind, of Yakshas after their kind, of goblins 2
after their kind, of humans to humanity, of quadrupeds
to the animal kingdom, of birds to winged things, or of
insects to the insect-world — were there no birth after
the several kind of every one of these classes of beings,
then, there being no birth whatever, would there, owing
to this cessation of birth, be any appearance of old age
and death ? '

' There would not, lord.' .

A ' *

'Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the groujncl, that

1 The Cy., following S. Ill, 250, speaks of these beings as fairies
residing in the perfumes given out by roots and other parts of trees
and flowers, saying nothing of their ' celestial musicianship ' (see
Hardy, ' Manual of Buddhism,' 43), or of Sakka as their king (see
Jat. VI, 260).

2 Bhutci.


D. ii. 58. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 53

is the basis, that is the genesis, that is the cause of old
age and death, to wit, birth.

5. ' I have said that becoming1 is the cause of birth.
Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to be under-
stood after this manner. Were there no becoming of
any sort or kind whatever of any one anywhere, that is
to say, no coming to be of any sentient, formed, or
formless being 2, then there being no becoming what-
ever, would there, owing to this cessation of becoming,
be any appearance of birth ? '

' There would not, lord/

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, that
is the basis, the genesis, the cause of birth, to wit,
becoming.

6. ' I have said that grasping 3 is theA cause of
becoming. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is
to be understood after this manner. Were there no
grasping of any sort or kind whatever by any one at
anything — [58] that is to say, no grasping at the things
of sense, no grasping through speculative opinions,
no grasping after mere rule and ritual, no grasping
through theories of soul — then there being no grasping


1 Tattha bhavatiti bhavo. ' Here bhavo means one becomes'
(so the Vis. Mag. opens its comment) — not atthi, one is. Burnouf,
Oldenberg, Warren all choose ' existence.' Winternitz (' Religions-
geschichtliches Lesebuch,' p. 236) has Dasein. But the mobile,
plastic, evolutionary thing, ever in progress, that life appears as con-
ceived by the Indian, fits ills in the more rigid Western metaphysic of
Being. As Buddhist sponsors, possibly also as philosophers, we lost
much when we dropped weortha?i for becumen, and may envy
our German colleagues with their Werden (see Mrs. Rh. D. in
'Buddhism,' March, 1904, pp. 389, 390; Rangoon). Moreover,
according to the Vibhanga (p. 137) the bhava which is the cause of
birth is not only uppattibhavo,-— the becoming which is 'coming
into sentient being' of some sort — but also kammabhavo, or the
generating of effective actions, effective in good or bad results, or in
result which is ' beyond good and bad,' viz. meritorious activity,
demeritorious activity, and ' unmoved ' or ' static activity ' (anenjabhi-
sankharo). ' Existence ' fits here still worse.

2 These three exhausted, for the Buddhist, the living universe. See
Dh. S., §§ 1281-6 (Trans., p. 334).

s Upadana. See preceding Suttanta, II, 18, and the note there.


54 XV. MAHA-NIDANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 58.

whatever, would there, owing to this cessation of
grasping, be any appearance of becoming ? '

' There would not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of becoming, to wit,
grasping.

7. ' I have said that craving 1 is the cause of
grasping. Now in what way that is so, Ananda,
is to be understood after this manner. Were there no
craving of any sort or kind whatever by an)- one for
anything — that is to say, no craving for sights, sounds,
odours, tastes, tangibles or ideas — then there being no
craving whatever, would there, owing to this cessation
of craving, be any appearance of grasping ? '

' There wouldA not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, that is
the basis, the genesis, the cause of grasping, to wit,
craving.

8. ' I have said that sensation - is the cause of crav-
ing. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to be
understood after this manner. Were there no sensa-
tion of any sort or kind whatever in any one for any-
thing, that is to say, no sensations born of impressions
received by way of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch,
or imagination, — then there being no sensation what-
ever, would there, owing to this cessation of sensation,
be any appearance of craving ? '


1 Tawha. Usually translated 'thirst,' but not used to express
physical thirst in the Pi/akas. Dr. Neumann sometimes uses the
equivalent (to craving) — Begier. Winternitz has Gier.

2 Vedana, which is usually, in the Pi/akas, resolved into feeling,
pleasurable, painful, neutral, is here explained in terms of sense-
reaction to contact. Now the term ' feeling,' in its widest psycho-
logical meaning (namely, as consisting essentially in our being affected
or acted upon), is able to bear this connotation as well as the more
emotional aspect. But since we have the alternative term ' sensation,'
since Buddhaghosa himself emphasizes the different aspect: dvarato
vedana vutta (' the vedana mentioned refers to sense,' Vis. Mag.),
— and since other translators are unanimous in using ' sensation,' this
rendering is followed here. In Sum. Vil., Buddhaghosa characterizes
the term in this passage as vipaka-vcdana, 'resultant vedana.'


D. ii. 59. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 55

' There would not, lord.'

'Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of craving, to wit,
sensation.'

9. ' Thus it is, Ananda, that craving ' comes into
being because of sensation, pursuit because of craving,
gain because of pursuit, decision 2 because of gain,
desire and passion '• because of decision, tenacity
because of desire and passion, possession because of
tenacity, avarice 4 because of possession, watch and
ward because of avarice, [59] and many a bad and
wicked state of things arising from keeping watch and
ward over possessions :• — blows and wounds, strife,
contradiction and retort, quarrelling 5, slander and lies.

10. ' I have said that many a bad and wicked state
of things arising from keeping watch and ward over
possessions, blows and wounds, quarrelling and the
like, come into being. Now in what way that is so,
Ananda, is to be understood after this manner. Were
there no watch and ward of any sort or kind whatever
by any one over anything, then there being no watch
and ward whatever, would there, owing to this cessation
of watch and ward, be any coming into being of those
many bad and wicked states of things ? '

' There would not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the

1 This and the nine following sections constitute a digression in the
exposition of the chain which is thus explained by the Cy. Craving-
may be considered under two aspects : — There is the primordial
craving which is the root or base of transmigration (va//a-mula-
bhuta purima-ta«ha),and there is craving as manifested in conduct
(samudacara-tawha). The former, with the remaining links, is now
put aside, ' as if one were putting a clamorous person out of the road,
hitting him on the back and seizing his hair.' And the latter is dis-
cussed under the twofold subdivision of craving in the quest, and
craving in the found quarry — seeking and gloating over.

2 Vinicchayo, explained as deciding what to do with one's gains.

3 Chandarago. From these selfish considerations volitions both
weak and strong arise. Chan do is weak passion (or lust, rago).

4 Macchariyaw ; the not suffering others to share.

5 On tuvawtuvaw, see E. Muller, ' Pali Grammar,' p. 38.


56 XV. MAHA-NIDANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 59.

basis, the genesis, the cause of blows and wounds, of
strife, contradiction and retort, of quarrelling, slander
and lies, to wit, the guarding of property.

11. 'I have said that watch and ward is because of
avarice. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to be
understood after this manner. Were there no avarice
of any sort or kind whatever in any one about anything,
then there being no avarice whatever, would there,
owing to this cessation of avarice, be any appearance
of watch and ward ? '

' There would not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of watch and ward, to wit,
avarice.

1 2. ' I have said that avarice is because of posses-
sion. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to be
understood after this manner. [60] Were there no
possession of any sort or kind whatever by any one of
anything, then there being no possessing whatever,
would there, owing to this cessation of possession, be
any appearance of avarice ? '

'There would Anot, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of avarice, to wit,
possession.

1 3. ' I have said that tenacity is the a cause ot
possession. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is
to be understood after this manner. Were there no
tenacity of any sort or kind whatever shown by any one
with respect to anything, then there being no tenacity
whatever, would there, owing to this cessation of
tenacity, be any appearance of possession ? '

' There would ^not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of possession, to wit,
tenacity.

14. 'I have said that tenacity is because of desire
and passion. Now in what way that is so, Ananda,
is to be understood after this manner. Were there no
passion or desire of any sort or kind whatever in any


D. ii.6i. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 57

one for anything, then there being no passion or desire
whatever, would there, owing to this cessation of
passion and desire, be any appearance of tenacity ? '

1 There would not, lord.'

* Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of tenacity, to wit, desire
and passion.

1 5. ' I have said that passion and desire is because
of decision. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is
to be understood after this manner. Were there no
purpose of any sort or kind whatever devised by any
one for anything, then there being no purpose what-
ever, would there, owing to this cessation of purpose,
be any appearance of passion and desire ? '

[6i] ' There would not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of passion and desire, to
wit, decision.

16. ( I have said that decision is because of gain.
Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to be under-
stood after this manner. Were there no gain of any
sort or kind whatever by any one of anything, then,
there being no gain whatever, would there, owing to
this cessation of gain, be any appearance of decision ? '

' There would not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of decision, to wit, gain.

1 7. ' I have said that gain^ is because of pursuit.
Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to be under-
stood after this manner. Were there no pursuit of any
sort or kind whatever by any one after anything, then
there being no pursuit whatever, would there, owing
to this cessation of pursuit, be any appearance of
gain r

' There would Anot, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of gain, to wit, pursuit.

18. ' I have said that pursuit is because of craving.
Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to be under-
stood after this manner. Were there no craving of


5S XV. MAHA-NIDANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 6l.

any sort or kind whatever by any one for anything,—
that is to say, the lust of the flesh, the lust of life
eternal and the lust of the life that now is 1 — then,
there being no craving whatever, would there, owing
to this cessation of craving, be any appearance of
pursuit ? '

' There would not, lord.'

'Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of pursuit, to wit, craving.

' So now, Ananda, these two aspects [of craving]
from being- dual become united through the sensation
[which conditions them]2.'

19. [62] ' I have said that contact is the cause of
sensation. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to
be understood after this manner. Were there no con-
tact of any sort or kind whatever between any one and
anything whatever, — that is to say, no reaction3 of
sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch or imagination —
then, there being no contact whatever, would there,
owing to this cessation of contact, be any appearance
of sensation ?

' There would not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of sensation, to wit,
contact.

20. ' I have said that name-and-form is the cause of
contact. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to
be understood after this manner. Those modes,
features, characters, exponents, by which the aggre-
gate called 'name' manifests itself, — if all these were
absent, would there be any manifestation of a corre-


1 See Rh. D. 'Buddhist Suites,' p. 148, ;/. 4. On the three kinds
the Cy. remarks, that the first, k a mat a n ha, means craving for the five
classes of sense- objects, the second is the passion characterizing
Eternalism, the third, that characterizing Nihilism (see 'Dialogues,' I,
pp. 27. 46).

2 'These two aspects' (dhamma), i.e. according to the Cy.. the
two aspects of craving specified above, p. 55. n. 1.

s Samphasso.


D. ii. 62. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 59

sponding- verbal impression in the aggregate called
[bodily] form ? l '

' There would not, lord.'

' Those modes, features, characters, exponents, by
which the aggregate called [bodily] form manifests
itself— if all these were absent, would there be any
manifestation of an impression of sense-reaction - in the
aggregate called name ? '

' There would not, lord.'

'And if all those modes, &c, of both kinds were
absent, would there be any manifestation of either
verbal or sensory impression ? '

' There would not, lord.'

' So that, if all those moods, &c., by which name-and-
form manifests itself were absent, there would be no
manifestation of contact ? '

' There would not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of contact 3, to wit, name-
and-form.


1 Rupakaye adhivacanasamphasso. This and its complement
the pa/ighasamphasso in 'name' (rendered 'impression of sense-
reaction') occur in the Vibhanga, p. 6, as two modes of saftfta, or
perception, the former being described as refined, subtle, delicate, the
latter as gross, coarse, thick. If the psychological comments of
Buddhaghosa on these two expressions in the Sammoha-Vinodani and
the Sumangala Vilasini be a correct guide to the Buddha's utterance,
then the passage under consideration reveals what would now be
called a psycho-physiological standpoint of much interest. The ' modes

. . . exponents ' of ' name ' are not physical expressions, but the pro-
cesses of subjective consciousness, — feelings, perceptions, &c. The
consciousness, bent back upon itself — pi//^iva//aka hutva —
refoidee stir soi-vmne — gives the name to what it finds. The
modes, &c, of ' form ' are the modes of sensation, by which ' form
manifests itself to the mind, — 'at the mind-door,' as the Cy. has it.

2 See Dh. S., translation, p. 172, n. 1, 183, n. 1.

3 i. e. of this twofold contact, as the Cy. points out, of mental object
with mind-activity or mind, and of sense-object with sense-organ. Cf.
Dh. S., §§ 3-5, and translation, p. 5, n. 2. The former mode of
contact is there called ceto-samphasso, manovinfia;/adhatu-
samphasso.

The Cy. sums up the relation between namarupa and phasso as
follows : — In the channels of the five senses, sight, hearing, &c, by


60 XV. MAHA-NIDANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 62.

21. 'I have said that cognition is the cause of name-
and form [63]. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is
to be understood after this manner. Were cognition
not to descend ] into the mother's womb, would name-
and-form become constituted therein 2 ? '

' It would not, lord.'

' Were cognition, after having descended l into the
mother's womb, to become extinct, would name-and-
form come to birth in this state of being ? '

• It would not, lord.'

' Were cognition to be extirpated from one yet young,


means of visual and other objects, are the ' form,' while the [other four]
skandhas, brought into relation therewith, are the ' name.' Thus in
a fivefold way is name-and-form the cause of contact. Moreover in
the channel of the sixth sense (ma no, ideation) its physical basis, —
the heart — as well as such corporeal form as becomes its mental
object, constitute ' form,' while the related states of consciousness
induced, as well as such incorporeal form as becomes its mental object,
constitute incorporeal form. Thus in saying that name-and-form is
the cause of contact, we must also include contact that is mental (i.e. of
ideas). Name-and-form is therefore in many ways the cause of con-
tact. (On the heart, see Dh. S., translation, p. lxxviii; Pras. Up.
HI, i, 5.)

1 The animistic implication adhering to this term (okkamissatha;
ava, down-f- \/kram, stride) would of course have no significance for
Buddhist doctrine. Accordingly it is, in the Cy., paraphrased as
follows : — ' having entered, so to speak, and staying (vattamanarh = the
Latin idiom, versatum est), by means of conception, were not to
keep going on.' The contradictory term, vokkamissatha, 'become
extinct,' rendered by Warren 'go away again,' is paraphrased
nirujjhissatha, and only signifies that the advent is in some way
annulled. There is no conception of cognition, as a unity, descending
from outside into the womb like a ball into a bag. At Sawyutta
V, 283 we are told of happiness descending on a man, and at Mil. 299
of drowsiness descending into or on to a man. So okkantika piti
is a standing expression for a particular sort of joy. In each of these
cases the bliss, or drowsiness, or joy is supposed to develop from
within ; and so also here of cognition.

2 Samucchissatha, derived by Dr. Konow (J. P. T.S., 1908)
from sam+ \Anurch, to thicken, and by him and Warren rendered 'to
be consolidated.' So also Cldenberg 'Buddha5,' p. 259; and
Windisch, ' Buddha's Geburt,' p. 39. The Cy. has kalaladi-bhavena
. . . missibhuta/zz hutva, 'become mixed with the embryo in its
different stages.'


D. ii. 64. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 6 1


youth or maiden, would name-and-form attain to growth,
development, expansion ? '
It would not, lord.'

1 Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of name-and-form, to wit,
cognition.

22. ' I have said that name-and-form is the cause of
cognition. Now in what way that is so, Ananda, is to
be understood after this manner. Were coomition to
gain no foothold in name-and-form, would there then,
in the coming years, be manifested that concatenation
of birth, old age, death and the uprising of 111 ? '

' There would not, lord.'

' Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the
basis, the genesis, the cause of cognition, to wit, name-
and-form.

' In so far only, Ananda, can one be born, or grow
old, or die, or dissolve, or reappear, in so far only is
there any process a of verbal expression, in so far only
is there any process of explanation, in so far only is
there any process of manifestation, in so far only is
there any sphere of knowledge, in so far only do we go
round the round of life [64] up to our appearance amid
the conditions of this world 2 — in as far as this is, to wit,
name-and-form together with cognition.'


2\ 'Now with declarations concerning the soul,
Ananda, how many such declarations are there 3 ?

1 Patho, literally, course, path.

2 Itthattaw pafifrapanaya, lit. for the making manifest thus-
ness. Warren's rendering: — 'And it is all that is reborn to appear
in the present shape,' — is beside the point, as well as free. Barely
stated, the summary amounts to this : — : Only through cognition,
language and bodily form do we live and express ourselves.' The
little paragraph contains a great part of modern psychology in the
germ-state.

3 The doctrine of origin by way of cause having now been set
forth, the following is, according to the Cy., an illustration of how
'this generation has become a tangled skein,' &c, as asserted above
(§ 1). These different impressions as to the nature of the atta


62 XV. MAHA-NIDANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 64.

Either the soul is declared to have form and to be
minute, in the words : — " My soul has form and is
minute." Or the soul is declared to have form and to
be boundless, in the words : — " My soul has form and
is boundless." Or the soul is declared to be formless
and minute, in the words : — " My soul is formless and
minute." Or the soul is declared to be formless and
boundless, in the words : — " My soul is formless and
boundless."

A

24. ' And in each case, Ananda, he who makes the
declaration, makes it with regard either to the present
life, or to the next life, or else his idea is : — " My soul
not being like that, I will refashion it into that like-
ness." That being so, Ananda, we have said enough
about the case of one who is given to the theories that
the soul has form and is minute, . . . has form and is
boundless, and so on.

[65] 'In so many ways, Ananda, are declarations
made concerning the soul.

25. ' And in how many ways, Ananda, when no
declaration concerning the soul is made \ is such de-
claring refrained from ? Either the soul is not declared
to have form and to be minute, in the aforesaid formula,
or the soul is not declared to have form and to be
boundless, in the aforesaid formula, or the soul is not
declared to be formless and minute, in the aforesaid
formula, or the soul is not declared to be formless and
boundless, in the aforesaid formula.


(atman), soul, or mannikin, are, according to the Cy., deductions
from Jhana experience. For instance, in the first ' declaration,' ' he
who, on gazing at a particular kasiwa' (one of ten kinds of objects
for inducing meditative rapture), ' gets hold of an after-image where
there is no expansion (a.va.dd/1'ita.m), and of a consciousness that " it is
the soul," declares that it, the soul, has form and is minute ' — and so on.
Comp. on the whole exposition above Vol. I, pp. 45 foil.

1 ' Who are they,' asks the Cy., ' who refrain ? All ariya-puggala
— noble-minded persons, learned persons : — those who know the
Three Pi/akas (by heart), or two, or one, or even only one of the
Nikayas, and can discourse thereon, and are of alert insight. These
take die kasi«as for what they are, and, for them, the constituents
of mind (the four khandhas) are such and no more.'


P. ii.66. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 63

26. ' And in each case, Ananda, he who refrains
from making; the declaration, does not make it with
regard either to the present life, or to the next life, nor
is it his idea : — " My soul not being like that, I will re-
fashion it into that likeness." [66] That being so,
Ananda, we have said enough about the case of those
who are not given to theories respecting the form and
dimensions of the soul.

' In so many ways, Ananda, is there a refraining from
declarations concerning the soul.'


A

27. ' And under how many aspects, Ananda, is the
soul regarded ? The soul is regarded x either as feeling,
in the words : — " My soul is feeling " — or the opposite,
in the words : — " Nay, my soul is not feeling, my soul
is not sentient " ; or again : — " Nay, my soul is not feel-
ing, nor is it non-sentient ; my soul has feelings, it has
the property of sentience." Under such aspects as
these is the soul regarded.

28. ' Herein, Ananda, to him who affirms : — " My
soul is feeling" — answer should thus be made : — " My
friend, feeling is of three kinds. There is happy feel-
ing, painful feeling, neutral feeling. Of these three
feelings, look you, which do you consider your
soul is ? "

A

* When you feel a happy feeling, Ananda, you do not
feel a painful feeling, or a neutral feeling ; you feel just
a happy feeling. And when you feel a painful feeling,
you do not feel a happy feeling, or a neutral feeling, but
just a painful feeling. And when you feel a neutral
feeling, you do not then feel a happy feeling or a pain-
ful feeling ; you feel just a neutral feeling.

1 These three forms of the ' individuality-heresy ' amount to an
interesting and metaphysically more discriminating statement of the
oft-quoted theories identifying the soul or mannikin with one or other
of the five Khandhas. (See Vin. I, 13 (' Vin. Texts,' 1, 100) ; M. 1, 138,
300; S. Ill, 66; IV, 34, &c.) According to the Cy., the second
assertion is the identification with the body (rupakkhandha-
vatthuka), which is usually placed first; the third assertion includes
identification of the soul with the other three Khandhas — with, let us
say, thinking and volition.


64 XV. MAIIA-NIDANA-SUTTANTA. P. ii. 66.


29. 'Moreover, Ananda, happy feeling is imperma-
nent, a product *, the result of a cause or causes, liable
to perish [67], to pass away, to become extinct, to
cease. So too is painful feeling. So too is neutral
feeling. If when experiencing a happy feeling one
thinks : — " This is my soul," — when that same happy
feeling ceases, one will also think : — " My soul has de-
parted." So too when the feeling is painful, or neutral.
Thus he who says : — " My soul is feeling," — regards, as
his soul, something which, in this present life, is imper-
manent, is blended of happiness and pain, and is liable
to begin and to end. Wherefore, Ananda, it follows
that this aspect : — " My soul is feeling " — does not
commend itself.

A

30. ' Herein again, Ananda, to him who affirms : —
" Nay, my soul is not feeling, my soul is not sentient,"
— answer should thus be made : — " My friend, where
there is no feeling of anything, can you there say: — ' I
am r

' You cannot, lord V

' Wherefore, Ananda, it follows that this aspect : —
" Nay, my soul is not feeling, my soul is not sentient,"
— does not commend itself.

A

31. ' Herein again, Ananda, to him who affirms : —
" Nay, my soul is not feeling, nor is it non sentient ; my
soul has feelings, it has the property of sentience," —
answer should thus be made : — " My friend, were feel-
ing of every sort or kind to cease absolutely, then there
being, owing to the cessation thereof, no feeling what-
ever, could one then say : — ' I myself am ' ? "

' No, lord, one could not.'

1 Sankhata, con-fected, composite, the resultant of conditions.
The soul, according to the then current animism, was considered to
be unique, not a product, not causally modifiable through temporal
or spatial conditions. The commentary explains sankhata as 'that
which, having through such and such causes (lit. doings) come to-
gether, is made.'

■ All the MSS. agree in putting this answer in the mouth of
Ananda, instead of in that of the soul-theorist. And it would be quite
like him to rush in, in this way, with his opinion. And so also
below.


D. ii. 68. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 65

' Wherefore, Ananda, it follows that this aspect : —
" Nay, my soul is not feeling, nor is it non-sentient ; my
soul has feelings, it has the property of sentience," —
does not commend itself.

32. [68] ' Now when a brother, Ananda, does not
regard soul under these aspects, — either as feeling, or
as non-sentient, or as having feeling, — then he, thus
refraining from such views, grasps at nothing whatever
in the world ; and not grasping he trembles not ; and
trembling not, he by himself attains to perfect peace.1
And he knows that birth is at an end, that the higher
life has been fulfilled, that what had to be done had
been accomplished, and that after this present world
there is no beyond !

' And of such a brother, Ananda, whose heart is
thus set free, if any one should say : — " His creed
is that an Arahant 2 croes on after death " — that
were absurd. Or : " His creed is that an Arahant
does not go on . . . does, and yet does not, go on . . .
neither ooes on nor cr0es not on after death " — all
that were absurd. Why is that ? Because, Ananda,
whatever verbal expression there is and whatever
system of verbal expression, whatever explanation
there may be, and whatever system of explanation,
whatever communication is possible and whatever
system of communication, whatever knowledge there
is and whatever sphere of knowledge, whatever
round of life and how far the round is traversed, —
by mastery over all this that brother is set free.
But to say, of a brother who has been so set free


1 Parinibbayati. Usually rendered 'he attains complete Nirvana'
or 'attains Parinirvana,' or even 'enters Nirvana.' The term is
applied to the death of an Arahant, but it is also used to express
perfected tranquillity, as in the case of a horse (M. I, 446), or of
a man (M. I, 251 ; S. Ill, 54). Tradition, as represented by the Cy.,
did not associate the hour of death with the term, for it says, ' Having
thus completely parinibbana-ed (by extinguishing all evil) he goes
on to reflect, " Birth is at an end," ' &c.

2 Tathagata; perhaps it merely means 'mortal.' See M. I, 542.

III. F


1


66 XV. MAHA-NIDANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 68.

by insight : — " He knows not, he sees not " — that were
absurd ! l '


33. ' There are seven resting-places for Cognition 2,
Ananda, and two Spheres 3. Which are the seven ?

[69] ' There are beings differing in body and differ-
ing in intelligence 4, for instance, human beings and
certain of the gods and some of those in purgatory.
This is the first resting-place for Cognition.

' There are beings differing in body but of uniform
intelligence, for instance, the gods of the Brahma-
heaven who are there reborn by means of the First
[Jhana]5. This is the second resting-place for Cognition.

' There are beings uniform in body and differing in
intelligence, for instance, the Luminous Gods 6. This
is the third resting-place for Cognition.


1 The argument in this paragraph seems to have appealed in
a special degree to the early Buddhists, for it has been made the basis
of a whole Suttanta, the Jaliya (which is itself repeated, occurring first
as part of the Mahali, and then again separately). The main point
there emphasized is that the converted man will have gone so far
beyond them that all such questions will have ceased to interest him.
The two other Suttantas have been translated in full in Vol. I; but
see especially pp. 200-5.

2 The Sangiti Suttanta (' Dialogues,' III) and A. IV, 39, 40 also
name seven. S. Ill, 54 gives only four.

3 The Pali thus rendered is /hiti and ayatanaw respectively.
The Cy. paraphrases the first by ' this is an equivalent for a setting-up
(pati/Mana) of vinnawa.' Pati//Mnaw* is the affording of a standing-
place, resting-place, locus standi, or foothold for. Thii'i again is the
term for the central, static moment in any process, contrasting with two
others in the same category, viz. inception and dying-out. ' Rest ' is
not satisfactory, but no English term suggests itself which exactly
meets the requirement. For ' sphere ' the paraphrase is simply : —
' nivasana//Mnaw,' dwelling-place,. . . 'These are included to
exhaust [the contents] of the Cycle (sawsara), for the Cycle goes not
on merely by way of vihnawa-resting places.'

4 No two human beings, says the Cy., are ever exactly alike ; even
in twins that are undistinguishable in likeness of appearance and com-
plexion, there will be some difference in look, speech, gait or carriage.

5 Cf. Dh. S., §§ 160 ff., 266 ff. ; transl., pp. lxxxvii-ix, 43 ff.,
72 ff.

6 Ranking sixth in the heavens of Rupabrahmaloka.


D. ii. 69. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 67

' There are beings uniform in body and of uniform
intelligence, for instance, the All- Lustrous Gods \ This
is the fourth resting-place for Cognition.

1 There are beings who, by having passed wholly
beyond all consciousness of form, by the dying out of
the consciousness of sense-reaction, by having turned
the attention away from any consciousness of the
manifold, and become conscious only of " space as
infinite," are dwellers in the realm of infinite space 2.
This is the fifth resting-place for Cognition.

' There are beings who, by having passed wholly
beyond the realm of infinite space, and become con-
scious only of " cognition as infinite," are dwellers in
the realm of infinite cognition. This is the sixth

o

resting-place for Cognition.

' There are beings who, by having passed wholly
beyond the realm of infinite cognition, and become
conscious only that " there is nothing whatever," are
dwellers in the realm of nothingness. This is the
seventh resting-place for Cognition.

' The Sphere of beings without consciousness :!.

' Next to that, the Sphere of beings who neither
have consciousness nor yet have it not 4.

34. ' Now there, Ananda — in that first resting-
place for Cognition, of differing bodies and differing
intelligences, — to wit, human beings and certain of the
gods and certain of those in purgatory — think you that
he who both knows what that state is, and how it
comes to be, and how it passes away, — knows too the
pleasures of it, and the miseries 5 of it, and the way of


1 Ranking ninth in the same.

2 The Cy. refers the inquirer to the Vis. Mag. for further comment.
Cf. next Suttanta, and Dh. S., §§ 265-8 ; trans., pp. 71-5.

3 Sanna, perhaps awareness would be a better rendering.

4 The Cy. here includes cognition with awareness, the extreme
tenuity or refinement (sukhumatta??/) of both being in this sphere
such that it is as a zero point between presence and absence of either.
See passage last cited in previous note.

5 Or the peril of it (adinavo), i.e. the thought of its impermanence,
changeableness, &c. Cy.

F 2


I


68 XV. MAHA-NIDANA-STJTTANTA. D. ii. 69.

escape from it, — think you that it were fitting for such
an one to take delight in it ? * '

[70] ' Nay, lord.'

' And in those other six resting-places for Cognition,
and in those two Spheres, — think you that he who both
knows them for what they are, how they come to be,
and how they pass away, knows too the pleasures of
them, and the miseries of them, and the way of escape
from them, — think you that it were fitting for such an
one to take delight in them ? '

' Nay, lord.'

' But, Ananda, when once a brother has understood
as they really are the coming to be and the passing
away, the pleasures and the miseries of, and the way
of escape from, these seven resting-places for Cognition,
and these two Spheres, that brother, by being purged
of grasping, becomes free. And then, Ananda, he is
called Freed-by- Reason2 .'


35. 'Now these, Ananda, are the eight stages of
Deliverance :;. Which are they ?


1 This standpoint of insight into the limitations of all sentient
experience when estimated according to its emotional or hedonistic
values is claimed by the Buddha as a monopoly of his own doctrine,
distinguishing it from other ethical systems. See his graphic exposition
in the Great Suttanta on the Body of 111 ; and the passages quoted
under Yathabhutazw in the Sa/z/yutta Index (vol. vi).

2 Panna. vimutto, i.e. says the Cy. 'emancipated without the aid
of the following eight grades of deliverance ' — by native insight. So
PP. 14, 73. Here, as throughout, when panna. is rendered by
'reason/ it is but a pis-aller. Panna is really intellect as conversant
with, engaged upon, general truths, and thus comes out as approxi-
mately Kant's Vernunfi, and Reason as distinct from Understanding,
a distinction very general in English and European philosophy. See
Dh. S., transl., p. 17, n. 2. By 'emancipated ' the Cy. understands
' having effected the non-perpetuity (in rebirths) of name and form.'

3 Vimokha. See the following Suttanta, p. 1 1 1 of the text; A.
IV, 306, 349 ; Dh. S., §§ 248-50 ; transl., pp. 63-5. Buddhaghosa's
comments on the last citation are approximately the same as those on
the first three stages here given. Here, too, he explains Release as
deliverance from adverse conditions, so that the attention is sustained
with all the detachment and confidence felt by the little child borne on
his father's hip, his limbs dangling, and no need felt to clutch. In the


D. ii. 71. THE GREAT DISCOURSE ON CAUSATION. 69

4 Having one's self external form, one sees [these]
forms. This is the first stage.

' Unaware of one's own external form, one sees
forms external to one's self. This is the second stage.

[71] ' " Lovely ! " — with this thought one becomes
intent. This is the third stage.

' Passing wholly beyond 1 perceptions of form, all
perceptions of sense-reaction dying away, heedless of
all perceptions of the manifold, conscious of space as
infinite, one enters into and abides in the sphere of
space regarded as infinite. This is the fourth stage.

' Passing wholly beyond the sphere of space regarded
as infinite, conscious of reason as infinite, one enters
into and abides in the sphere of cognition regarded as
infinite. This is the fifth stare.

o

' Passing wholly beyond the sphere of reason re-
garded as infinite, conscious of there being nothing
whatever, one enters into and abides in the sphere of
nothingness. This is the sixth stage.

' Passing wholly beyond the sphere of nothingness,
one enters into and abides in the sphere of " neither-
consciousness-nor-unconsciousness." This is the seventh
stage.

1 Passing wholly beyond the sphere of " neither-
idcation-nor-non-ideation," one enters into and abides


first stage, Jhana is induced by intense concentration on the colour
of some bodily feature. In the second, the kasiwa is an object
external to one's body. In the third, consciousness of an uprising
glamour (around or superseding the kasiwa) of perfectly pure colour
or lustre is meant. The aesthetic suffusion was held to quicken the
sense of emancipation from morally adverse conditions analogously to
that perception of ethical rapture induced by the Four Divine or
Sublime Moods, described in the Maha Sudassana Suttanta. The
Pa/isambhidamagga is again referred to by the Cy., viz. II, p. 39, in
this connexion. The curious thing is that in reply to the question,
' How is there release thus : — " How lovely it is — with this thought he
becomes intent ? " ' — the reply is simply and solely the Formula of the
Four Sublime Moods. A

1 The 4th— 7th stages were afterwards known as the Four Aruppa
Jhanas, or the four Jhanas to be cultivated for attaining to the Form-
less Heavens (see Dh. S., §§ 265 ff.).


JO XV. MAHA-NIDANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 71*

in a state of suspended perception and feeling. This
is the eighth stage.

4 These, Ananda, are the eight stages of Deliver-
ance.

36. ' Now when once a brother, Ananda, has
mastered these eight stages of Deliverance in order,
and has also mastered them in reverse order, and again,
in both orders consecutively, so that he is able to lose
himself in, as well as to emerge from, any one of them,
whenever he chooses, wherever he chooses, and for
as long as he chooses — when too, by rooting out the
Taints, he enters into and abides in that emancipation
of heart, that emancipation of the intellect which he by
himself, here in this present world, has come to know
and realize — then such a brother, Ananda, is called

A

" Free-in-both-ways V And, Ananda, any other Free-
dom-in-both-ways higher and loftier than this Free-
dom-in-both-ways there is not ! '

Thus spake the Exalted One. Glad at heart the
Venerable Ananda delighted in his words.

Here endeth the Maiia-Nidana-Suttanta.


1 Ubhato-bhaga-vimutto, i.e. freed both by Reason and also
by the intellectual discipline of the Eight Stages. According to a
scholastic elaboration of the term, emanating from the Giri-vihara
of the great Loha-pasada (or Brazen Palace), ' both ways ' meant the
Four Jhanas and the Aruppa-jhanas. How this can be reconciled with
this paragraph — confirmed by PP. 14 and 73 and by M. I, 477-8 —
is not stated. ' Taints ' are the Four Asavas, rendered ' Intoxicants '
above, p. 28, ;/. 2.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.

THE general conclusions we have to draw as to the gradual
growth of the various books in the Buddhist canon have been
stated in Chapter X of ' Buddhist India.' To work out the
details of it will be greatly facilitated by tabular statements
of the differences and resemblances found in the various books,
whether in matters of form or of ideas. The following table
gives a list of all such passages in this book as have, so far,
been traced elsewhere. Others will, no doubt, be discovered ;
but those here given will throw some light on the method
of construction followed in the book. Only parallel passages
are given, passages in which some other book has at least
a paragraph or more couched in identical, or almost identical,
words.

A glance at column three, giving the pages of the text,
shows a remarkable result. There are ninety-six pages of
Pali text, beginning on p. 72. With a few gaps — pp. 92, 3;
1 13-15; 1 17-21; 13C-3; 137-40; 148-50; 153; 15s~6°l
164-7 (nine in number) — the whole text is found, in nearly
identical words, elsewhere. The gaps, filled with matter
found only in the Book of the Great Decease, amount alto-
gether to about 32 or ^ pages, that is to about one-third
of the whole. That proportion would be reduced if we were
to include passages of similar tendency, or passages of shorter
length.

Secondly ; the parallel passages are found, without exception,
in those books which belong to the oldest portion of the canon.
In ' Buddhist India,' p. 188, there is a table showing, in groups,
the probable relative order in time of the Buddhist literature
down to the time of Asoka.

All these passages belong to the two earliest groups ; all
are found in books included in groups 4-6 ; not one occurs
in any of the books included in the later groups — groups 7, 8, 9,
and 10. So far as it goes, therefore, the present table is in
harmony with the order suggested in the table referred to.
Thirdly ; the slight differences, the more important of which


72 INTRODUCTION.


Book of the Great Decease. Other Old Pali Books.

i Chap. I §§ i-io pp. 72-80 A. IV, 16-24

2 16, 17 81-83 D. XXVIII and S. V, 159-161

3 20-34 84-89 Ud. VIII, 6 and Vin. I, 226
tt (s- v» 43i; Vin. I, 231 and

4 II 2>3 90,9i { Nettii66

5 i2> x3 94>95 s- IV- 2I1

6 14-19 95-98 Vin. I, 231-233 x

7 22-26 98-101 S. V, 152-154, §26, ib. 164, 5

8 III 1-20 102-109 A. IV, 308-313

9 1-10 102-107 S. V, 259-263 and Ud. VI, 1
10 21-23 109, no A. IV, 30 (nearly = M. I, 72)
n 24-32 110,111 A.IV,3o5and348;M.II, 13,14

(D. II, 70, 71 : A. IV, 306 and

12 33 in, 112 1 ' ' ' ' ' ' °
65 ' I 349

13 43 II6 Quoted KV. 559

T^ TV a q 122 12* 1 A. II, i, 2 and A. IV, 105 (quoted

M IV 2, 3 122,123 \ Kv. n5)2

15 7-11 123-126 A. II, 167-170

16 I3-25 126-129 Ud. VIII, 5

17 39-43 1 34-1 36 Ud. VIII, 5

18 V n 141, 142 D. II, 161

19 12 142,143 A. II, 245, 6

20 15 144 S. V, 16 (nearly)

21 16 145, 146 A. II, 132

22 17,18 146,147 D. II, 169, 170

23 27 151 Quoted KV. 601

jD.I,i76;M.I39i494;S.II,

* ° { 21 ; Vin. 1, 69, 71

25 VI 5 154,5 A. II, 79, 80

26 7-10 155-158 s.i, 157-1593

27 9 156 A. IV, 410 ff.

28 10 157 Th. I, 905, 1046; A. I, 236

29 17 161 D. II, 141, 2

30 19-20 162,163 Vin. II, 284, 5 4

31 27 167 (end of text)


1 Diners as to locus in quo.
' Differs as to application.

3 Differs as to order of sentences.

4 Differs as to order of sentences.


INTRODUCTION. 73


are noted in the table, arc very suggestive. No. 26 is the
episode of the stanzas uttered at the moment of the Buddha's
death. The Sawyutta gives it in the Brahma-Sa7//yutta
because the first verse is attributed to Brahma. The last
two verses are there put into the mouths of Ananda and
Anuruddha respectively, perhaps because Anuruddha's verse
forms a more fitting conclusion. In the Digha Ananda's
comes last, either in deprecation of Ananda (which is scarcely
probable), or for the reason given in the note to the translation.

In No. 14 we have four lines of verse, and the prose intro-
ductory to them, ascribed in the Digha to the Buddha,
ascribed in the Anguttara to a former teacher whose story is
there told by the Buddha. That previous teacher, though not
a Buddha, is highly praised in the story ; the epithet applied
to him in the verses (sattha) is quite in the right place in that
connexion ; and the verses when spoken by the Buddha of
another teacher, are quite appropriate. On the other hand,
when put as the Digha puts them, into the mouth of the
Buddha as spoken of himself, they are not in the best of taste,
and sound forced. There can, I think, be no doubt but that
the application of these verses to Sunetta the Teacher was the
original one, and that the little poem was only later applied
to the Buddha himself. But it does not follow in the least
that the Anguttara is older than the Digha. For, as is shown
by the references in the table, the Anguttara itself contains,
in an earlier part of the work, the later application of these
verses. There it gives the episode, word for word, as it occurs
in the Digha. The two passages cannot be of the same age.
It is not possible that the same story was told originally of two
different people. But the two collections (Nikayas) may
very well have been put together, from older materials oi
varying age, at the same time.

No. 30 is the episode of the explosion of ill-will on the
part of Subhadda. There is a slight but very suggestive
difference here between the two texts, one found in our
Suttanta the other in the Pahcasatika Khandaka of the
Vinaya. For convenience of comparison the two versions
of this episode are here reprinted side by side.

Digha. Vinaya.

Now at that time the venerable Now the venerable Maha Kas-

Maha Kassapa was journeying sapa addressed the Bhikkhus and

along the high road from Pava. to said : ' Once I was journeying

Kusinaia with a great company along the high road from Pava to

of the brethren, with about five Kusinara with a great company

hundred of the brethren. And of the brethren, with about five


74


INTRODUCTION.


the venerable Maha Kassapa left
the high road, and sat himself
down at the foot of a certain tree.
Just at that time a certain
ascetic who had picked up a
Mandarava flower in Kusinara
was coming along the high road
to Pava. Now the venerable
Maha Kassapa saw the ascetic
coming in the distance, and on
seeing him he said to that ascetic :
' O friend ! surely thou knowest
our Master ? '

' Yea, friend ! I know him.
This day the Sama;/a Gotama
has been dead a week. That is
how I obtained this Mandarava
flower.'

On that of those of the brethren
who not yet free from the passions,
some stretched out their arms and
wept, and some fell headlong on
the ground, and some reeled to
and fro in anguish at the thought :
' Too soon has the Exalted One
died ! Too soon has the Happy
One passed away ! Too soon
has the Light gone out in the
world ! ' But those of the brethren
who were free from the passions
(the Arahants) bore their grief
self-possessed and composed at
the thought : ' Impermanent are
all component things ! How is
it possible that (they should not
be dissolved?).'

Now at that time a brother
named Subhadda, who had been
received into the Order in his old
age, was seated in that company.
And Subhadda, the recruit in his
old age, said to those brethren :
' Enough, Sirs ! Weep not, neither
lament ! We are well rid of the
great Sama//a. We used to be
annoyed by being told : " This
beseems you, this beseems you
not." But now we shall be able


hundred of the brethren. And I
left the high road and sat myself
down at the foot of a certain tree.
Just at that time a certain
ascetic who had picked up a
Mandarava flower in Kusinara
was coming along the high road
to Pava. Now I saw that ascetic
coming in the distance, and on
seeing him I said to that ascetic :
' O friend ! surely thou knowest
our Master?'

'Yea, friend! I know him.
This day the Samara Gotama
has been dead a week. That is
how I obtained this Mandarava
flower.'

On that, Sirs, of those of the
brethren who were not yet free
from the passions, some stretched
out their arms and wept, and
some fell headlong on the ground,
and some reeled to and fro in
anguish at the thought : ' Too
soon has the Exalted One died !
Too soon has the Happy One
passed away ! Too soon has the
Light gone out in the world ! '
But those of the brethren who
were free from. the passions (the
Arahants) bore their grief self-
possessed and composed at the
thought : ' Impermanent are all
component things ! How is it
possible that (they should not be
dissolved ?).'

Then I, Sirs, spoke thus to
the Bhikkhus : ' Enough, my
brethren, weep not, neither
lament ! Has not the Exalted
One, Sirs, formerly declared this>
that it is in the very nature of all
things near and dear to us that we
must divide ourselves from them,
leave them, sever ourselves from
them. How, then, can this be
possible — whereas anything what-
ever born, brought into being,


INTRODUCTION.


75


to do whatever we like ; and what
we do not like, that we shall not
do!'

But the venerable Maha Kas-
sapa exhorted the brethren :
' Enough, my brethren ! Weep
not, neither lament ! Has not
the Exalted One formerly declared
this, that it is in the very nature
of all things near and dear unto
us that we must divide ourselves
from them, leave them, sever our-
selves from them? How then,
brethren, can this be possible —
whereas anything whatever born,
brought into being, and organized
contains within itself the inherent
necessity of dissolution — how
then can this be possible that
such a being should not be dis-
solved? No such condition can
exist ! '


and organized contains within
itself the inherent necessity of
dissolution — how then can this
be possible that such a being-
should not be dissolved ? No such
condition can exist ! '

Now at that time, Sirs, a brother
named Subhadda, who had been
received into the Order in his old
age, was seated in that company.
And Subhadda, Sirs, the recruit in
his old age, said to those brethren :
' Enough, Sirs ! Weep not, neither
lament ! We are well rid of the
great Samara. We used to be
annoyed by being told : " This
beseems you, this beseems you
not." But now we shall be able
to do whatever we like ; and what
we do not like that we shall not
do.'


A glance at the above columns shows that the two texts arc-
identical except in two particulars. The Digha gives the
episode in narrative form, whereas the Vinaya puts it into
the mouth of Kassapa himself. And secondly, whereas the
Digha puts Kassapa's speech after the outburst of Subhadda,
the Vinaya puts it before — that is, the last two paragraphs
in the Digha are transposed in the Vinaya.

Professor Oldenberg, who was the first to point out (more
than thirty years ago) l the parallelism between the two texts,
acutely suggests that the change is due to the position
occupied by this episode in the Vinaya. It is there used as
introduction to the account of the Council at Rajagaha held,
according to the tradition, to counteract such sentiments as
were expressed in Subhadda's outburst. It was considered
more appropriate, therefore, that in that connexion, Subhadda's
words should come last, to lead up to what follows. The
whole of the story is accordingly taken from our Suttanta.
But the last paragraphs are transposed, and the whole is put
into the mouth of Kassapa, on whose advice the Council is
stated to have been convened.

This seems a very probable explanation of the transposition,
and of the existence of two slightly different accounts of the


1 Introduction to the Vinaya, xxvi— xxviii.


76 INTRODUCTION.


episode. If we accept it — and I think we should1 — we have
to face the further question : Why was the episode inserted in
the Digha? It is given there in the middle of the account
of the cremation of the Buddha at Kusinara. It has very little
to do either with what precedes, or with what follows it ; and
is said to have taken place away from Kusinara. The out-
burst itself was of little importance in the long story of the
Buddha's last days ; and (in the older order as preserved in
the Digha) is immediately overwhelmed by Maha Kassapa's
apt quotation from the Master's words. Have we not here
a very similar motive, acting on either the same or very
similar minds ? Is it not precisely the part played by this
anecdote in the traditional account of the First Council that
led the compilers of the Digha to find a place for it in the
Book of the Great Decease? They might so easily have left
it out. As it stands it only breaks in upon the narrative.
And, apart from the tradition about the First Council, it had
no importance.

There has been much discussion both for and against the
authenticity of this First Council. Is this really necessary ?
Oldenberg's analysis of the comparative date of the different
parts of the Vinaya has shown conclusively that the record,
as we have it, is later than the Council of Vesali, that is at
least a hundred years later than the meeting whose proceedings
it purports to record. What can be the value of so late a
record ? It may be objected to this that though the extant
record is late the tradition may be older. No one can prove
that it was not. But this would not help matters at all. We
must then point out that the details as given are, as one might
expect, quite inaccurate2.

Space will only allow of one example being taken.

It is well known that all the ancient sacred literatures of the
world have grown up gradually, and are a mosaic of earlier


1 It does not quite follow that the Vinaya is borrowing direct from
the Digha. That may be so. But the Subhadda story may have been
in existence before either Digha or Vinaya was put into its present
shape. If so, it was doubtless current in the form now preserved by
the Digha ; and was changed by the compilers of the Vinaya. Both
Oldenberg {Joe. cit.) and Franke (J. P. T. S., 1908, 8-12) suppose the
Vinaya to be borrowing from the Digha. It is quite possible that
the two books — Digha and Vinaya — may have been put together, as
we now have them, at the same time.

2 It is admitted there were no reporters present. There were at
the time of the Buddha's death no mechanical means available for
writing anything beyond the most meagre notes.


INTRODUCTION. ' 77


and later material. The Buddhist Pi/akas form no exception.
As regards the Nikayas I have shown this elsewhere in
considerable detail l. Now the record, as we have it, pre-
supposes the existence, already at the time of the Buddha's
death, of the Five Nikayas in their present arrangement !

It follows that both on general principles of comparative
criticism, and on consideration of a particular instance in this
special case, the details given us in the Vinaya about the First
Council cannot be trusted. But it does not follow, as a matter
of certainty, that there was no Council at all. It is quite
possible, and even probable, that the Order held a ' General
Chapter,' as we should call it, soon after the Buddha's death.
They kept no proper minutes of the meeting. We may
conjecture what happened at it, but it would be only conjecture.
And we must continue patiently, from the incidental references
in the books themselves, to formulate a probable theory as to
the method in which the literature gradually sprang up. The
record handed down to us in the Vinaya is authentic enough ;
but only in the only ivay in zvliicJi any stick record can be con-
sidered authentic, that is, as evidence of beliefs held at the
date at which it was composed.

1 ' Dialogues,' I, x-xx ; ' Buddhist India/ 161-208.


[XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA.

The Book of the Great Decease.
CHAPTER I.]

i. [72] Thus have I heard. The Exalted One was
once dwelling in Rajagaha, on the hill called the
Vulture's Peak. Now at that time Ajatasattu, the
son of the queen-consort of the Videha clan \ the king
of Magadha, had made up his mind to attack the
Vajjians ; and he said to himself, ' I will strike at these
Vajjians, mighty and powerful- though they be, I will
root out these Vajjians, I will destroy these Vajjians,
I will bring these Vajjians to utter ruin ! '

2. So he spake to the brahmin Vassakara (the Rain-
maker), prime-minister of Magadha, and said : —

1 Ajatasattu Vcdehiputto. The first word is not a personal name
but an official epithet, ' he against whom there has arisen no (worthy
or equal) foe' (so already in the Rig Veda but Sum. 131 different).
The second gives us the maiden family, or tribal (not personal) name
of his mother. Her name, according to a Tibetan authority quoted
by Rockhill, ' Life of the Buddha,' p. 63, was Vasavi.

Persons of distinction are scarcely ever mentioned by name in
Indian Buddhist books, a rule applying more especially to kings, but
extended not unfiequently to private persons. Thus Upatissa, the
disciple whom the Buddha himself declared to be ' the second founder
of the kingdom of righteousness,' is referred to either as Dhamma-
senapati or as Sariputta ; epithets of corresponding origin to those in
the text. See above, Vol. 1, pp. 193-5.

By the Jains Ajatasattu is called Ku/rika or Komka, which again is
probably not the name given to him at the rice-eating (the ceremony
corresponding to infant baptism), but a nickname acquired in after-life.

2 Evammahiddihike evammahanubhave. There is nothing
magical or supernatural about the iddhi here referred to. Etena
tesaw samagga-bhavaw kathesi says the commentator simply:
thus referring the former adjective to the power of union, as he does
the second to the power derived from practice in military tactics
(hatthisippadihi). See above, Vol. I, p. 273.


D. ii. 73- TIIE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 79


4 Come now, brahmin, do you go to the Exalted
One, and bow down in adoration at his feet on my
behalf, and inquire in my name whether he is free
from illness and suffering, and in the enjoyment of ease
and comfort and vigorous health. Then tell him that
Ajatasattu, son of the Vedehi, the king of Magadha,
in his eagerness to attack the Vajjians, has resolved,
" I will strike at these Vajjians, mighty and powerful
though they be, I will root out these Vajjians, I will
destroy these Vajjians, I will bring these Vajjians to
utter ruin ! " And bear carefully in mind whatever
the Exalted One may predict, and repeat it to me.
For the Buddhas speak nothing untrue ! '

3. [73] Then the brahmin Vassakara, the Rain-
maker, hearkened to the words of the king, saying,
' Be it as you say.' And ordering a number of state
carriages to be made ready, he mounted one of them,
left Rajagaha with his train, and went to the Vulture's
Peak, riding as far as the ground was passable for
carriages and then alighting and proceeding on foot
to the place where the Exalted One was. On arriving
there he exchanged with the Exalted One the oreetinsfs
and compliments of politeness and courtesy, sat down
respectfully by his side (and then delivered to him the
message even as the king had commanded1).

4. Now at that time the venerable Ananda was
standing behind the Exalted One, and fanning him.
And the Blessed One said to him : — ' Have you heard,
Ananda, that the Vajjians foregather often and frequent
the public meetings of their clan ? '

' Lord, so I have heard,' replied he.

' So long, Ananda,' rejoined the Blessed One, ' as
the Vajjians foregather thus often, and frequent the
public meetings of their clan ; so long may they be
expected not to decline, but to prosper.'

(And in like manner questioning Ananda, and
receiving a similar reply, the Exalted One declared


The wording of § 2 is here repeated.


8o XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 73.

as follows the other conditions which would ensure the
welfare of the Vajjian confederacy1.)

[74] ' So long, Ananda, as the Vajjians meet together
in concord, and rise in concord, and carry out their
undertakings in concord — so long as they enact nothing
not already established, abrogate nothing that has
been already enacted, and act in accordance with the
ancient institutions of the Vajjians, as established in
former days — so long as they honour and esteem and
revere and support the Vajjian elders, and hold it
a point of duty to hearken to their words — so long
as no women or girls belonging to their clans are
detained among them by force or abduction — [75] so
long as they honour and esteem and revere and
support the Vajjian shrines 2 in town or country, and
allow not the proper offerings and rites, as formerly
given and performed, to fall into desuetude — so long
as the rightful protection, defence, and support shall
be fully provided for the Arahants among them, so
that Arahants from a distance may enter the realm,
and the Arahants therein may live at ease — so long may
the Vajjians be expected not to decline, but to prosper.'

5. Then the Exalted One addressed Vassakara the
brahmin and said : —

' When I was once staying, O brahmin, at Vesali at
the Sarandada Shrine3, I taught the Vajjians these
conditions of welfare ; and so long as these conditions
shall continue to exist among the Vajjians, so long as the
Vajjians shall be well instructed in those conditions, so
long may we expect them not to decline, but to prosper.'

' We may expect then,' answered the brahmin, ' the
welfare and not the decline of the Vajjians when they
are possessed of any one of these conditions of welfare,
how much more so when they are possessed of all

1 In the text there is a question, answer, and reply with each clause.

2 Cetiyani, which Sum. Vil. explains as Yakkha-cetiyani.

3 The commentator adds that this was a vihara erected on the site
of a former shrine of the Yakkha Sarandada. The teaching referred
to is set out in full at A. IV, 16, but the persons taught are there
called Licchavis.


D. ii. 76. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 8 1

the seven. [76] So, Gotama, the Vajjians cannot be
overcome by the king- of Magadha ; that is not in
battle, without diplomacy or breaking up their alliance1.
And now, Gotama, we must go ; we are busy and
have much to do.'

' Whatever you think most fitting, O brahmin,' was
the reply. And the brahmin Vassakara, the Rain-
maker, delighted and pleased with the words of the
Exalted One, rose from his seat, and went his way.

6. Now soon after heA had gone the Exalted One
addressed the venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Go now,
Ananda, and assemble in the Service Hall such of
the brethren2 as live in the neighbourhood of Rajagaha.'

And he did so ; and returned to the Exalted One,
and informed him, saying : —

■ The company of the brethren, lord, is assembled,
let the Exalted One do as seemeth to him fit.'

And the Exalted One arose, and went to the Service

1 'Overcome' is literally 'done' (karawiya), but the word evidently
has a similar sense to that which ' done ' occasionally has in colloquial
English. Upalapana, which I have only met with here, must mean
'humbug, cajolery, diplomacy;' see the use of the verb upa-lapeti, at
S. I, 102 ; Vin. II, 119; IV, 139; Jat. II, 266, 267; IV, 56. Sum.
Vil. explains it, at some length, as making an alliance, by gifts, with
hostile intent, which comes to much the same thing. The root, I
think, is If.

2 The word translated ' brethren ' throughout is in the original
bhikkhu, a word most difficult to render adequately by any word
which would not, to Christians and in Europe, connote something
different from the Buddhist idea. A bhikkhu, literally 'beggar,' was
a disciple who had joined Gotama's order ; but the word refers to their
renunciation of worldly things, rather than to their consequent mendi-
cancy ; and they did not really beg in our modern sense of the word.
Hardy has 'priests;' I have elsewhere used 'monks' and sometimes
' beggars ' and ' members of the order.' This last is, I think, the best
rendering ; but it is too long for constant repetition, as in this passage,
and too complex to be a really good version of bhikkhu. The
members of the order were not priests, for they had no priestly powers.
They were not monks, for they took no vow of obedience, and could
leave the order (and constantly did so and do so still) whenever they
chose. They were not beggars, for they had none of the mental and
moral qualities associated with that word. ' Brethren ' connotes very
much the position in which they stood to one another ; but I wish
there were a better word to use in rendering bhikkhu.

III. G


82 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 76.

Hall ; and when he was seated, he addressed the
brethren, and said : —

' I will teach you, O mendicants, seven conditions
of the welfare of a community. Listen well and attend,
and I will speak.'

' Even so, lord,' said the brethren, in assent, to the
Exalted One ; and he spake as follows : —

' So long, O mendicants, as the brethren foregather
oft, and frequent the formal meetings of their Order —
so long as they meet together in concord, and rise in
concord, and carry out in concord the duties of the
Order — [77] so long as the brethren shall establish
nothing that has not been already prescribed, and
abrogate nothing that has been already established,
and act in accordance with the rules of the Order as
now laid down — so long as the brethren honour and
esteem and revere and support the elders of experience
and long standing, the fathers and leaders of the Order,
and hold it a point of duty to hearken to their words —
so long as the brethren fall not under the influence
of that craving which, springing up within them, would
give rise to renewed existence — so long as the brethren
delight in a life of solitude — so long as the brethren so
train their minds in self-possession that good men
among their fellow-disciples shall come to them, and
those who have come shall dwell at ease — so long may
the brethren be expected, not to decline, but to prosper.
So long as these seven conditions shall continue to
exist among the brethren, so long as they are well-
instructed in these conditions, so long may the brethren
be expected not to decline, but to prosper.

7. ' Other seven conditions of welfare will I teach
you, O brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I will
speak.'

And on their expressing their assent, he spake as
follows : —

[78] ' So long as the brethren shall not engage in,
or be fond of, or be connected with business — so long
as the brethren shall not be in the habit of, or be fond
of, or be partakers in idle talk — so long as the brethren


D. ii. 79. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 83

shall not be addicted to, or be fond of, or indulge in
slothfulness — so long as the brethren shall not frequent,
or be fond of, or indulge in society — so long as the
brethren shall neither have, nor fall under the influence
of, wrong desires * — so long as the brethren shall not
become the friends, companions, or intimates of evil-
doers— so long as the brethren shall not come to a stop
on their way (to Nirvana in Arahantship 2) because they
have attained to any lesser thing — so long may the
brethren be expected not to decline, but to prosper.

1 So long as these conditions shall continue to exist
among the brethren — so long as they are instructed in
these conditions — so long may the brethren be expected
not to decline, but to prosper.

8. ' Other seven conditions of welfare will I teach
you, O brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I will
speak.'

And on their expressing their assent, he spake as
follows : —

4 So long as the brethren shall be full of faith,
modest in heart, afraid of wrong- doing 3, full of learning-,
[79] strong in energy, active in mind, and full of
wisdom — so long may the brethren be expected not to
decline, but to prosper.

' So long as these conditions shall continue to exist
among the brethren — so long as they are instructed in

1 The blundering misstatement that Buddhism teaches the suppres-
sion of desire (not of wrong desire) is still occasionally met with. The
question is fully discussed in Mrs. Rhys Davids's article on ' The Will
in Buddhism' (J.R.A.S., 1898).

2 This is an interesting analogue to Philippians iii. 13 : — ' I count not
myself to have apprehended : but this one thing I do, forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which
are before, I press toward the mark,' &c. See also below, Chap. V,
§68.

s The exact distinction between hiri and ottappa is here explained
by Buddhaghosa as loathing sin as contrasted with fear of sin. But
this is rather a gloss than an exact and exclusive definition. Ahirika
is shamelessness, anotappa;/* frowardness. At Jat. I, 207 we find
hiri described as subjective, and ottappa as objective, modesty of
heart as contrasted with decency in outward behaviour. See further
Mrs. Rhys Davids in 'Buddhist Psychology,' p. 20.

G 2


84 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 79.

these conditions — so long may the brethren be expected
not to decline, but to prosper.

9. ' Other seven conditions of welfare will I teach
you, O brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I will
speak.'

And on their expressing their assent, he spake as
follows : —

' So long as the brethren shall exercise themselves
in the sevenfold higher wisdom, that is to say, in
mental activity, search after truth, energy, joy, peace,
earnest contemplation, and equanimity of mind — so
long may the brethren be expected not to decline, but
to prosper.

' So lonsf as these conditions shall continue to exist
among the brethren — so long as they are instructed in
these conditions — so long may the brethren be expected
not to decline, but to prosper.

10. ' Other seven conditions of welfare will I teach
you, O brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I will
speak.'

And on their expressing their assent, he spake as
follows : —

' So long as the brethren shall exercise themselves
in the realization of the ideas of the impermanency
of all phenomena, bodily or mental, the absence [in
them of any abiding principle] of any " soul," of
corruption, of the danger of wrong thoughts, of the
necessity of getting rid of them, of purity of heart,
of Nirvana — so long may the brethren be expected not
to decline, but to prosper.

[so] ' So long as these conditions shall continue to
exist among the brethren — so long as they are in-
structed in these conditions — so long may the brethren
be expected not to decline but to prosper.

11. 'Six conditions of welfare will I teach you,
O brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I will
speak.'

And on their expressing their assent, he spake
as follows : —

1 So long as the brethren shall persevere in kindness


D. ii. 8i. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 85

of action, speech, and thought towards their fellow-
disciples, both in public and in private — so long as
they shall divide without partiality, and share in
common with their upright companions, all such things
as they receive in accordance with the just provisions
of the Order, down even to the mere contents of
a begging-bowl — so long as the brethren shall live
among the saints in the practice, both in public and
in private, of those virtues which [unbroken, intact,
unspotted, unblemished] are productive of freedom \
and praised by the wise ; which are untarnished [by
the desire of future life, or by the belief in the efficacy
of outward acts] - ; and which are conducive to con-
centration of heart — so long as the brethren shall live
among the saints, cherishing, both in public and in
private, that noble and saving insight which leads
to the complete destruction of the sorrow of him who
acts according to it — so long may the brethren be
expected not to decline, but to prosper.

[8l] ' So long as these six conditions shall continue
to exist among the brethren — so long as they are
instructed in these six conditions — so long may the
brethren be expected not to decline, but to prosper.'


12. Now it was while the Exalted One was staying
there at Rajagaha on the Vulture's Peak that he held
that comprehensive religious talk with the brethren,
saying : — ' Such and such is upright conduct ; such and
such is earnest contemplation ; such and such is intelli-

1 Buddhaghosa takes this in a spiritual sense. He says : — ' These
virtues are bhujissani because they bring one to the state of a free
man by delivering him from the slavery of craving/

2 The commentator explains: — 'These virtues are called apara-
ma//Mni because they are untarnished by craving or delusion, and
because no one can say of him who practises them, "you have been
already guilty of such and such a fault." Craving is here the hope of
a future life in heaven, and delusion the belief in the efficacy of rites
and ceremonies (the two nissayas), which are condemned as unworthy
inducements to virtue. At A. Ill, 132 these five qualities are called
phasu-vihara, states of bliss.


86 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 8l.

gence. Great becomes the fruit, great the advantage
of earnest contemplation, when it is set round with
upright conduct. Great becomes the fruit, great the
advantage of intellect when it is set round with earnest
contemplation. The mind set round with intelligence
is set quite free from the Intoxications, that is to say,
from the Intoxication of Sensuality, from the Intoxica-
tion of Becoming, from the Intoxication of Delusion,
from the Intoxication of Ignorance1.'

13. Now when the Exalted One had sojourned at
Rajagaha as long as he thought fit, heA addressed the
venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Come, Ananda, let us
o;o to Ambala////ika.'

1 So be it, lord ! said Ananda in assent, and the
Exalted One, with a large company of the brethren,
proceeded to Ambalti/Mika.

14. There the Exalted One stayed in the king's
house and held that comprehensive religious talk with
the brethren, saying : — ' Such and such is upright
conduct ; such and such is earnest contemplation ;
such and such is intelligence. Great becomes the
fruit, great the advantage of earnest contemplation,
when it is set round with upright conduct. Great


1 This paragraph is spoken of as if it were a well-known summary,
and it is constantly repeated below. The word I have here rendered
'earnest contemplation' is samadhi, which occupies in the Five
Nikayas very much the same position as faith does in the New Testa-
ment ; and this section shows that the relative importance of samadhi,
panna, and sila played a part in early Buddhism just as the distinc-
tion between faith, reason, and works did afterwards in Western
theology. It would be difficult to find a passage in which the Buddhist
view of the relation of these conflicting ideas is stated with greater
beauty of thought, or equal succinctness of form. See further Rhys
Davids's ' The Yogavacara's Manual of Indian Mysticism,' pp. xxv
foil, and above, Vol. I, p. 156. Also E. W. West, ' Pahlavi Texts,'
III, 37 ; Anguttara I, 233 ; Itivuttaka, No. 59.

The expression 'set round with' is in Pali paribhavita. In
a constantly recurring simile (M. I, 104; S. Ill, 153) eggs are said
to be paribhavitani by a brooding hen. In medicine the word
means ' charged with, impregnated with.5 See Jat. I, 380 ; IV, 407 ;
and compare Mil. 361, 382, 394. Comp. Bhag. Gita III, 38 for this
simile.


D. ii. 82. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 87

becomes the fruit, great the advantage of intellect
when it is set round with earnest contemplation. The
mind set round with intelligence is set quite free from
the Intoxications, that is to say, from the Intoxication
of Sensuality, from the Intoxication of Becoming,
from the Intoxication of Delusion, from the Intoxication
of Ignorance.'

15. Now when the Exalted One had sojourned at
Ambala/^ika asA long as he thought fit, he addressed
the venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Come, Ananda,
let us go on to Nalanda1.'

' So be it, lord ! ' said Ananda, in assent, to the
Exalted One.

Then the Exalted One proceeded, with a great
company of the brethren, to Nalanda ; and there, at
Nalanda, the Exalted One stayed in the Pavarika
mango grove.

16. 2 Now the venerable Sariputta came to the place
where the Exalted One was, and having saluted him,
took his seat respectfully at his side, [82] and said : —
' Lord ! such faith have I in the Exalted One, that
methinks there never has been, nor will there be, nor
is there now any other, whether wanderer or brahmin,
who is greater and wiser than the Exalted One, that
is to say, as regards the higher wisdom/

'Grand and bold are the words of thy mouth,
Sariputta : verily, thou hast burst forth into a song
of ecstasy ! of course then thou hast known all the
Exalted Ones who in the long ages of the past have
been Able, Awakened Ones3, comprehending their

1 Afterwards the seat of the famous Buddhist University for so many
centuries the centre of learning in India.

2 The following conversation is also given at length in the Sam-
pasadaniya Suttanta of the Digha Nikaya, and a third time in the
Satipa/Mana Sawyutta of the Sazrcyutta Nikaya (S. V, 159). It was
evidently a very popular passage, and is quite possibly the one referred
to in Asoka's Bhabra Edict as the ' Question of Upatissa,' that is, of
Sariputta.

3 Arahant Buddhas. The meaning of these words must have
been very present to the minds of those who used them at the time of
the rise of what we call Buddhism ; and there was little or no difference


88 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 82.

minds with yours, and aware what their conduct was,
what their wisdom, what their mode of life, and what
the emancipation they attained to ? '

' Not so, O lord ! '

' Of course then thou hast perceived all the Exalted
Ones who in the long ages of the future shall be Able
Awakened Ones comprehending [in the same manner
their whole minds with yours] ? '

' Not so, O lord ! '

' But at least then, O Sariputta, thou knowest me as
the Able Awakened One now alive, and hast penetrated
my mind [in the manner I have mentioned] ? '

' Not even that, O lord ! '

' You see then, Sariputta, that you know not the
hearts of the Able Awakened Ones of the past and
of the future. [83] Why therefore are your words so
grand and bold ? Why do you burst forth into such
a song of ecstasy ? '

17. ' O lord ! I have not the knowledge of the
hearts of the Able Awakened Ones that have been,
and are to come, and now are. I only know the
lineage of the faith.

'Just, lord, as a king might have a border city,
strong in its foundations, strong in its ramparts
and towers, and with only one gate ; and the king
might have a watchman there, clever, expert, and wise,
to stop all strangers and admit only men well known.
And he, on patrolling in his sentry walks over the
approaches all round the city, might not so observe
all the joints and crevices in the ramparts of that city
as to know where even a cat could get out. He might
well be satisfied to know that all living things of larger
size that entered or left the city, would have to do so


between the connotation of the two terms. As time went on the two
were more and more differentiated, and hardened into technical terms.
See Sav/yutta III, 65 on the difference between the two : and see
Sawyutta I, 233; III, 160; IV, 175 for very old explanations of
Araha, and Pa/isambhida I, 172 for an ancient commentary on the
meaning of Buddha.


D. ii. 84. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 89

by that gate. Thus only is it, lord, that I know the
lineage of the faith.

1 1 know that the Able Awakened Ones of the past,
putting away all hankering after the world, ill-will,
sloth, worry and perplexity — those five Hindrances,
mental faults which make the understanding weak ; —
training their minds in the four kinds of mental
activity ; thoroughly exercising themselves in the
sevenfold higher wisdom, received the full fruition of
Enlightenment. And I know that the Able Awakened
Ones of the times to come will [do the same]. And
I know that the Exalted One, the Able Awakened
One of to-day, has [done so] now1.'


18. [84] There too at Nalanda in the Pavarika
mango grove the Exalted One held that comprehen-
sive religious talk with the brethren, saying : — ' Such
and such is upright conduct ; such and such is earnest
contemplation ; such and such is intelligence. Great
becomes the fruit, great the advantage of earnest con-
templation, when it is set round with upright conduct.
Great becomes the fruit, great the advantage of in-
tellect when it is set round with earnest contemplation.
The mind set round with intelligence is set quite free
from the Intoxications, that is to say, from the Intoxi-
cation of Sensuality, from the Intoxication of Becom-


1 The tertium quid of the comparison is the completeness of the
knowledge. Sariputta acknowledges that he was wrong in jumping
to the wide conclusion that his own lord and master was the wisest of
all the teachers of the different religious systems that were known to
him. So far — after the cross-examination by the Buddha — he admits
that his knowledge does not reach. But he maintains that he does
know that which is, to him, after all the main thing, namely, that all
the Buddhas must have passed through the process here laid down as
leading up to the Enlightenment of Arahantship.

All the details he gives are details, not of Buddhahood, but of
Arahantship. He makes no distinction between the two states of
attainment. This is most important for the history of that Buddhology,
which, in after centuries, was the main factor in the downfall of
Buddhism.


90 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 84.


ing, from the Intoxication of Delusion, from the Intoxi-
cation of Ignorance.'

19. Now when the Exalted One had sojourned as
lono- as he thought fit at Nalanda, he addressed the

O A O 'a

venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Come, Ananda, let us
cro on to Pa/aliorama.'

O O A

' So be it, lord ! ' said Ananda, in assent, to the
Exalted One.

Then the Exalted One proceeded, with a great com-
pany of the brethren, to Paialigama.

20. Now the disciples at Pa/aligama heard of his
arrival there, and they went on to the place where he
was, took their seats respectfully beside him, and in-
vited him to their village rest-house. And the Exalted
One signified, by silence, his consent.

21. Then the Paialigama disciples seeing that he
had accepted the invitation, rose from their seats, and
went away to the rest-house, bowing to the Exalted
One and keeping him on their right as they passed
him. On arriving there they strewed all the rest-house
with fresh sand, placed seats in it, set up a water-pot,
and fixed an oil lamp. Then they returned to the
Exalted One, and saluting him they stood beside him,
and told him what they had done and said : — ' It is
time for you to do what you deem most fit.'

22. [85] And the Exalted One robed himself, took
his bowl and other things, went with the brethren to
the rest-house, washed his feet, entered the hall, and
took his seat against the centre pillar, with his face
towards the east. And the brethren also, after wash-
ing their feet, entered the hall, and took their seats
round the Exalted One, against the western wall, and
facing the east. And the Pa/aligama disciples too,
after washing their feet, entered the hall, and took
their seats opposite the Exalted One, against the
eastern wall, and facing towards the west.

23. Then the Exalted One addressed the Pa/aligama
disciples, and said : — ' Fivefold, O householders, is the
loss of the wrong-doer through his want of rectitude.
In the first place the wrong-doer, devoid of rectitude,


D. ii. 86. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 9 1

falls into great poverty through sloth ; in the next
place his evil repute gets noised abroad ; thirdly, what-
ever society he enters — whether of nobles, brahmins,
heads of houses, or men of a religious order — he enters
shyly and confused ; fourthly, he is full of anxiety when
he dies ; and lastly, on the dissolution of the body,
after death, he is reborn into some unhappy state of
suffering or woe l. This, O householders, is the five-
fold loss of the evil-doer !

24. [86] ' Fivefold, O householders, is the gain of
the well-doer through his practice of rectitude. In the
first place the well-doer, strong in rectitude, acquires
great wealth through his industry ; in the next place,
good reports of him are spread abroad ; thirdly, what-
ever society he enters — whether of nobles, brahmins,
heads of houses, or members of a religious order — he
enters confident and self-possessed ; fourthly, he dies
without anxiety ; and lastly, on the dissolution of the
body, after death, he is reborn into some happy state
in heaven. This, O householders, is the fivefold gain
of the well-doer.'

25. When the Exalted One had thus taught the
lay disciples at Pa/aligama, and incited them, and
roused them, and gladdened them, far into the night
with religious discourse, he dismissed them, saying : —
' The night is far spent, O householders. It is time
for you to do what you deem most fit.' ' Even so,
lord ! ' answered the disciples of Pa/aligama, and they
rose from their seats, and bowing to the Exalted One,
and keeping him on their right hand as they passed
him, they departed thence.


And the Exalted One, not long after the disciples


1 Four such states are mentioned, apaya, duggati, vinipato, and
nirayo, all of which are temporary states. The first three seem to be
synonyms. The last is one of the four divisions into which the first
is usually divided, and is often translated hell; but not being an
eternal state, and not being dependent or consequent upon any
judgement, it cannot be accurately so rendered. See p. 51.


92 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 86.

of Pa^aligama had departed thence, entered into his
private chamber \

26. At that time Sunidha and Vassakara, the chief
ministers of Magadha, were building a fortress at
Pa/aligama to repel the Vajjians, [87] and there were
a number of fairies who haunted in thousands the plots
of ground there. Now, wherever ground is so occupied
by powerful fairies, they bend the hearts of the most
powerful kings and ministers to build dwelling-places
there, [and fairies of middling and inferior power bend
in a similar way the hearts of middling or inferior kings
and ministers2.]

27. And the Blessed One, with great and clear
vision, surpassing that of ordinary men, saw thousands
of those fairies haunting Pa/aligama. And he rose up
very early in the morning, and said to Ananda: — .' Who
is it then, Ananda, who is building a fortress at
Pa/aligama ?'

' Sunidha and Vassakara, lord, the chief ministers of
Magadha, are building a fortress there to keep back
the Vajjians.'

28. ' They act, Ananda, as if they had consulted with
the Tavatiwsa angels.' [And telling him of what he
had seen, and of the influence such fairies had, he
added]: — ' And as far, Ananda, as Aryan people resort,
as far as merchants travel, this will become the chief
city, Pa/ali-putta, a centre for the interchange of all
kinds of wares. [88] But three clangers will hang over
Pa/ali-putta, that of fire, that of water, and that of
dissension among friends V


1 Compare Vinaya III, 93.

2 The curious popular belief as to good and bad fairies haunting
the sites of houses gave rise to a quack science, akin to astrology,
called vatthu-vijja, which Buddhaghosa explains here at some
length, and which is frequently condemned elsewhere in the Five
Nikayas. See, for instance, I of the Maha-silam, translated above,
Vol. I, p. 18. The belief is turned to ridicule in the edifying legend,
No. 40, in my 'Buddhist Birth Stories/ pp. 326-34.

3 This paragraph is of importance to the orthodox Buddhist as
proving the Buddha's power of prophecy and the authority of the


D. ii. 88. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 93

29. Now Sunidha and Vassakara, the chief ministers
of Magadha, proceeded to the place where the Exalted
One was. And when they had come there they
exchanged with the Exalted One the greetings and
compliments of politeness and courtesy, and stood
there respectfully on one side. And, so standing,
Sunidha and Vassakara, the chief ministers of Magadha,
spake thus to the Exalted One :—

' May the venerable Gotama do us the honour of
taking his meal, together with the company of the
brethren, at our house to-day.' And the Exalted One
signified, by silence, his consent.

30. Then when Sunidha and Vassakara, the chief
ministers of Magadha, perceived that he had given his
consent, they returned to the place where they dwelt.
And on arriving there, they prepared sweet dishes of
boiled rice, and cakes ; and informed the Exalted One,
saying : —

' The hour of food has come, O Gotama, and all is
ready.'

And the Exalted One robed himself early, took his
bowl with him, and repaired, with the brethren, to the
dwelling-place of Sunidha and Vassakara, and sat
down on the seat prepared for him. And with their
own hands they set the sweet rice and the cakes before
the brethren with the Buddha at their head, and waited
on them till they had had enough. And when the
Exalted One had finished eating his meal, the ministers
brought a low seat, and sat down respectfully at his
side.

31. And when they were thus seated the Exalted
One gave thanks in these verses : —

' Wheresoe'er the prudent man shall take up his
abode


Buddhist scriptures. To those who conclude that such a passage
must have been written after the event that is prophesied (if any), it
may be valuable evidence of the age both of the Vinaya and of this
Maha Parinibbana Suttanta. See the note at ' Vinaya Texts,' II, 102.


94 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 88.


Let him support the brethren there, good men of

self-control,
And give the merit of his gifts to the deities who

haunt the spot l.
Revered, they will revere him : honoured, they

honour him again ;
Are gracious to him as a mother to her own, her

only son.
And the man who has the grace of the gods, good

fortune he beholds.'

32. [89] And when he had thanked the ministers in
these verses he rose from his seat and departed thence.
And they followed him as he went, saying, ' The gate
the Samana Gotama goes out by to-day shall be called
Gotama's gate, and the ferry at which he crosses the
river shall be called Gotama's ferry.' And the gate
he went out at was called Gotama's gate.


33. But the Exalted One went on to the river. And
at that time the river Ganges was brimful and over-
flowing ; and wishing to cross to the opposite bank,
some began to seek for boats, some for rafts of wood,
whilst some made rafts of basket-work. Then the
Exalted One as instantaneously as a strong man would
stretch forth his arm, or draw it back again when he
had stretched it forth, vanished from this side of the
river, and stood on the further bank with the company
of the brethren.

34. And the Exalted One beheld the people who
wished to cross to the opposite bank looking some of
them for boats and some of them for rafts of wood,
and some of them for rafts of basket-work ; and as he
beheld them he brake forth at that time into this
song : —


1 Tasa-w dakkhi;/aw iidise. See Theri Gatha 307, 311;
Mil. 294.


D. ii. 89. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 95

' They who have crossed the ocean drear
Making a solid path across the pools —
Whilst the vain world ties its basket rafts —
These are the wise, these are the saved indeed!1 '

End of the First Portion for Recitation.


1 That is, those who cross the ' ocean drear ' of t a;/ ha, or craving ;
avoiding by means of the ' dyke ' or causeway of the Aryan Path, the
' pools ' or shallows of lust, and ignorance, and delusion (comp.
Dhp. 91), whilst the vain world looks for salvation from rites, and
ceremonies, and gods, — ' these are the wise, these are the saved
indeed ! '


CHAPTER II.

i. [90] Now the Exalted One addressed the venera-
ble Ananda, and said : — ' Come, Ananda, let us go on
to Ko/io-ama.'

' So be it, lord ! ' said Ananda, in assent, to the
Exalted One.

The Exalted One proceeded with a great company
of the brethren to Ko/igama ; and there he stayed in
the village itself1.

2. And at that place the Exalted One addressed the
brethren, and said : — ' It is through not understanding
and grasping four Aryan Truths, O brethren, that we
have had to run so long, to wander so long in this
weary path of transmigration, both you and I !

' And what are these four ? '

' The Aryan truth about sorrow ; the Aryan truth
about the cause of sorrow ; the Aryan truth about the
cessation of sorrow ; and the Aryan truth about the
path that leads to that cessation. But when these
Aryan truths are grasped and known the craving for
future life is rooted out, that which leads to renewed
becoming is destroyed, and then there is no more
birth!2'

3. Thus spake the Exalted One ; and when the
Happy One had thus spoken, then again the Teacher
said : — [91]

' By not seeing the Aryan Truths as they really are,
Long is the path that is traversed through many
a birth ;

1 As will be observed from the similar passages that follow, there is
a regular sequence of clauses in the set descriptions of the Buddha's
movements. The last clause should specify the particular grove or
house where the Exalted One stayed ; but it is also (in this and one
or two other cases) inserted with due regularity even when it adds
nothing positive to the sense.

2 Compare below, Chapter IV, §§ 2. 3; p. 131.


r > - ii.gr. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


When these are grasped, the cause of rebirth is

removed,
The root of sorrow uprooted, and then there is no

more birth.'


4. There too, while staying at Ko/igama, the
Exalted One held that comprehensive religious talk
with the brethren, saying : — ' Such and such is upright
conduct ; such and such is earnest contemplation ; such
and such is intelligence. Great becomes the fruit,
great the advantage of earnest contemplation, when it
is set round with upright conduct. Great becomes the
fruit, great the advantage of intellect when it is set
round with earnest contemplation. The mind set
round with intelligence is set quite free from the
Intoxications, that is to say, from the Intoxication of
Sensuality, from the Intoxication of Becoming, from
the Intoxication of Delusion, from the Intoxication of
Ignorance.'

5. Now when the Exalted One had remained as
lone as he thought fit at Ko/ieama, he addressed the
venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Come, Ananda, let us go
on to the Nadikas.'

' So be it, lord ! ' said Ananda, in assent, to the
Exalted One.

And the Exalted One proceeded to the Nadikas
with a great company of the brethren ; and there, at
Nadika, the Exalted One stayed in the Brick Hall l.

1 At first Nadika is (twice) spoken of in the plural number (a clan-
name); but then, thirdly, in the last clause, in the singular (a local
name derived from the clan-name). Buddhaghosa explains this by
saying that there were two villages of the same name on the shore oi
the same piece of water. The ' Brick Hall ' was the public resting-
place for travellers, and the name is noteworthy as almost all buildings
were then of wood.

The expression used here is an idiomatic phrase descriptive of the
arrival of travellers at a place : — ' and there, at X. so and so stayed in
Y.' where X. is the name of the town or village, and Y. is the lodging-
place the traveller occupies. (See just above in § 1 for a good
instance.) The first name, the name X., is always the name of the

III. H


C)8 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii.91.

6. And the venerable Ananda went to the Exalted
One and paid him reverence and took his seat beside
him. And when he was seated, he addressed the
Exalted One, and said:- — ' The brother named Sa/ha has
died at Nadika, lord. Where has he been reborn, and
what is his destiny ? The sister named Nanda has
died, lord, at Nadika. Where is she reborn, and what
is her destiny ? ' [92] [And in the same terms he
inquired concerning the lay disciple Sudatta, and the
devout lady Sugata, the lay disciples Kakudha, and
Kalinga, and Nika/a, and Ka/issabha, and Tu/Z/^a, and
Santu/Ma, and Bhadda, and SubhaddaA.]

7. ' The brother named Sa/ha, Ananda, by the
destruction of the Intoxications has by himself, and in
this world, known and realized and attained to Arahant-
ship, to emancipation of heart and to emancipation of
mind. The sister named Nanda, Ananda, has, by the
complete destruction of the five bonds that bind people
to these lower worlds of lust, become an inheritor of
the highest heavens, there to pass entirely away, thence
never to return. The devout Sudatta, Ananda, by the
complete destruction of the three bonds, and by the
reduction to a minimum of lust, ill-will, and stupidity,
has become a Sakadagamin, who on his first return to
this world will make an end of sorrow. The devout

A

Sugata, Ananda, by the complete destruction of the
three bonds, has become converted, is no longer liable
to be reborn in a state of suffering, and is assured of
hereafter attaining to the enlightenment [of Arahant-
ship]1. The devout Kakudha, Ananda, by the com-
plete destruction of the five bonds that bind people to
these lower worlds of lust, has become an inheritor of
the highest heavens, there to pass entirely away, thence
never to return. [The same of Kalinga, Nika/a,

town, and never an adjective in agreement with the second name. It
seems simple enough ; but even the best Sanskritists appear sometimes
to be unfamiliar with the force of this Pali idiom.

1 See Rhys Davids's 'Buddhism,' pp. 108-10; above, Vol. I,
pp. 190-2; below, at VI. 6, and in the translation of D. II, 201 ;
also Divyavadana, pp. 533-4-


P.ii.93- THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 99

Ka^issabha, Tutt/ta., Santu///£a, Bhadda, and Subhadda,
[93] and with more than fifty devout men in Nadika.]
More tiian ninety devout men in Nadika, who have
died, Ananda, have by the complete destruction of the
three bonds, and by the reduction of lust, ill-will and
stupidity, become Sakadagamins, who on their first
return to this world will make an end of sorrow.
More than five hundred devout men of Nadika who

A

have died, Ananda, have by the complete destruction
of the three bonds become converted, are no longer
liable to be reborn in a state of suffering, and are
assured of hereafter attaining the enlightenment [of
Arahantship].

8. ' Now there is nothing strange in this, Ananda,
that a human being should die ; but that as each one
does so you should come to me, and inquire about
them in this manner, that is wearisome to me. I will,
therefore, teach you a way of truth, called the Mirror
of Truth, which if a disciple of the noble ones possess
he may, if he should so desire, himself predict of him-
self:— "Purgatory is destroyed for me, and rebirth as an
animal, or a ghost, or in any place of woe. I am con-
verted, I am no longer liable to be reborn in a state of
suffering, and am assured of hereafter attaining to the
enlightenment [of Arahantship]."

9. ' What then, Ananda, is this Mirror of Truth ? [It
is the consciousness that] the disciple of the Arahants
is in this world possessed of faith in the Buddha —
believing the Exalted One to be the Arahant, the
Fully-enlightened One, Wise, Upright, Happy, World-
knowing, Supreme, the Bridler of men's wayward
hearts, the Teacher of gods and men, the Exalted and
Awakened One. And that he [the disciple] is possessed
of faith in the Truth — believing the Truth to have
been proclaimed by the Exalted One, of advantage in
this world, passing not away, welcoming all, leading to
salvation, and to be attained to by the wise, each one
for himself. And that he [the disciple] is possessed
of faith in the Order — believing the multitude of the
disciples of the Exalted One who are walking in the

H 2


IOO XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 93.

four stages of the noble eightfold path, the righteous,
the upright, the just, the law-abiding — [94] believing
this church of the Exalted One to be worthy of honour,
of hospitality, of gifts, and of reverence ; to be the
supreme sowing ground of merit for the world ; to be
possessed of the virtues beloved by the good, virtues
unbroken, intact, unspotted, unblemished, virtues which
make men truly free, virtues which are praised by the
wise, are untarnished by the desire of future life or by
the belief in the efficacy of outward acts, and are con-
ducive to concentration of heart 1.

' This, Ananda, is the way, the Mirror of Truth,
which if a disciple of the noble ones possess he may, if
he should so desire, himself predict of himself : — " Pur-
gatory is destroyed for me ; and rebirth as an animal,
or a ghost, or in any place of woe. I am converted ;
I am no longer liable to be reborn in a state of suffer-
ing, and am assured of finally attaining to the enlighten-
ment [of Arahantship]."


10. There, too, at the Brick Hall at Nadika the
Exalted One held that comprehensive religious talk
with the brethren, saying : — ' Such and such is upright
conduct ; such and such is earnest contemplation ; such
and such is intelligence. Great becomes the fruit,
great the advantage of earnest contemplation, when it
is set round with upright conduct. Great becomes the
fruit, crreat the advantage of intellect when it is set
round with earnest contemplation. The mind set
round with intelligence is set quite free from the
Intoxications, that is to say, from the Intoxication of
Sensuality, from the Intoxication of Becoming, from
-the Intoxication of Delusion, from the Intoxication of
Ignorance.'

ii. Now when the Exalted One^had remained as
long as he wished at Nadika, he addressed Ananda,
and said : — ' Come, Ananda, let us q-o on to Vesali.'


See above, I, n.


D.ii. 95* THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.

' So be it, lord ! ' said Ananda, in assent, to the
Exalted One.

Then the Exalted One proceeded, with a great com-
pany of the brethren, to Vesali ; and there at Vesali
the Exalted One stayed at Ambapali's grove.

12. Now there the Exalted One addressed the
brethren, and said : — ' Let a brother, O mendicants, be
mindful and self-possessed ; this is our instruction to
you1.

' And how does a brother become mindful ?

' Herein, O mendicants, a brother continues as to the
body, so to look upon the body that he remains
strenuous, [95] self-possessed, and mindful, having
overcome both the hankering and the dejection com-
mon in the world. [And in the same way as to feel-
ings, moods, or ideas, he continues so to look upon
each] that he remains strenuous, self-possessed, and
mindful, having overcome both the hankering and the
dejection common in the world.

13. 'And how does a brother become self-possessed?
' He acts, O mendicants, in full presence of mind

whatever he may do, in going out or coming in, in
looking forward or in looking round, in bending in his
arm or in stretching it forth, in wearing his robes or in
carrying his bowl, in eating or drinking, in masticating
or swallowing, in obeying the calls of nature, in walk-
ing or standing or sitting, in sleeping or waking, in
talking and in being silent.

Thus let a brother, O mendicants, be mindful and
self-possessed; this is our instruction to you V

1 Quoted Mil. 378.

2 This doctrine of being ' mindful and self-possessed ' is one of the
lessons most frequently inculcated in the Pali Pi/akas, and is one of
the " Seven Jewels of the Law.' It is fully treated of in each of the
Nikayas, forming the subject of the Maha Satippa/Mana Suttanta in
the Digha Nikaya, and the Satippa//Mna Suttanta of the Majjhima
Nikaya, and the Satippa/Z^ana Sa/«yutta of the Sawyutta Nikaya, as
well as of various oassages in the Anguttara Nikaya, and of the
Vibhahga. See abo\^, Vol. I, pp. 80, 81 ; and the translation, below,
of pp. 290 foil, of the text. The point is there discussed in detail.

Buddhaghosa has no comment here on the subject itself, reserving


102 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 95.

14. x Now the courtezan Ambapali heard that the
Exalted One had arrived at Vesali, and was staying
there at her mango grove. And ordering a number of
state vehicles to be made ready, she mounted one of
them, and went forth with her train from Vesali
towards her garden. She went in the carriage as far
as the ground was passable for carriages ; there she
alighted ; and she proceeded on foot to the place where
the Exalted One was, and took her seat respectfully
on one side. And when she was thus seated the
Exalted One instructed, aroused, incited, and gladdened
her with religious discourse.

Then she — instructed, aroused, incited, and glad-
dened with his words — addressed the Exalted One,
and said : —

' May the Exalted One do me the honour of taking
his meal, together with the brethren, at my house to-
morrow?'

And the Exalted One gave, by silence, his consent.
Then when Ambapali the courtezan saw that the
Exalted One had consented, she rose from her seat
and bowed down before him, and keeping him on
her right hand as she passed him, she departed
thence.


what he has to say for the comment on the Suttantas devoted entirely
to it ; but he observes in passing that the reason why the Exalted
One laid stress, at this particular time and place, on the necessity of
being ' mindful and thoughtful,' was because of the imminent approach
of the beautiful courtezan in whose grove they were staying. The use
of the phrase sati upa////apetabba below, Chap. V, 9 (text, p. 141).
in reference to the way in which women should be treated, is quite in
accordance with this explanation. But see the next note.

1 From this point down to the words ' he rose from his seat,' in
II, 24 is, with a few unimportant variations, word for word the same
as Vinaya, Vol. I, pp. 231-3. But the passage there follows im-
mediately after the verses translated above, I, 34, so that the events
here (in §§ 14-18) localized at Vesali, are there localized at Ko/igama.
Our section II, 5 is then inserted between our sections II, 18 and
II, 19 ; and our section II, 1 1 does not occur at all, the Exalted One
only reaching Ambapali's grove when he goes there (as in our section
II, 19) to partake of the meal to which he had been invited. Kuddha-
ghosa passes over this apparent discrepancy in silence.


I>. ii.96. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 103

15. [96] Now the Licchavis of Vesali heard that the
Exalted One had arrived at Vesali, and was staying at
Ambapali's grove. And ordering a number of state
carriages to be made ready, they each mounted one of
them and went forth with their train from Vesali.
Some of them were dark, dark in colour, and wearing
dark clothes and ornaments : some of them were fair,
fair in colour, and wearing light clothes and ornaments :
some of them were red, ruddy in colour, and wearing
red clothes and ornaments : some of them were white,
pale in colour, and wearing white clothes and orna-
ments.

16. And Ambapali drove up against the young
Licchavis, axle to axle, wheel to wheel, and yoke to
yoke, and the Licchavis said to Ambapali the courtezan :
— ' How is it, Ambapali, that thou drivest up against
us thus ? '

' My lords, I have just invited the Exalted One and
his brethren for their morrow's meal,' said she.

1 Ambapali ! give up this meal to us for a hundred
thousand,' said they.

' My lords, were you to offer all Vesali with its
subject territory, I would not give up so honourable
a feast ! '

Then the Licchavis cast up their hands, exclaiming :
— ' We are outdone by this mango girl ! we are out-
reached by this mango girl 1 ! ' and they went on to
Ambapali's grove.

17. When the Exalted One saw the Licchavis
approaching in the distance, he addressed the brethren,
and said : —

' O brethren, let those of the brethren who have
never seen the Tavati;;/sa gods, gaze upon this com-
pany of the Licchavis, behold this company of the
Licchavis, compare this company of the Licchavis —
for they are even as a company of Tavatiwsa gods V

1 Literally ' by this woman.' But I have tried to reproduce the
evident word-play. Ambapali means mango grower, one who looks
after mangoes.

2 The Tavatimsa-deva are the gods in the heaven of the Great


104 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 97.

18. [07] And when they had ridden as far as the
ground was passable for carriages, the Licchavis
alighted there, and then went on foot to the place
where the Exalted One was, and took their seats
respectfully by his side. And when they were thus
seated the Exalted One instructed and roused and in-
cited and gladdened them with religious discourse l.

Then they — instructed and roused and incited and
gladdened with his words — addressed the Exalted One,
and said : — ' May the Exalted One do us the honour
of taking his meal, together with the brethren, at our
house to-morrow ? '

' O Licchavis, I have promised to dine to-morrow
with Ambapali the courtezan,' was the reply.

Then the Licchavis cast up their hands, exclaiming :
— ' We are outdone by this mango girl ! we are out-
reached by this mango girl ' ! And expressing their
thanks and approval of the words of the Exalted One,
they rose from their seats and bowed down before the
Exalted One, and keeping him on their right hand as
they passed him, they departed thence.

19. And at the end of the night Ambapali the
courtezan made ready in her mansion sweet rice and
cakes, and announced the time to the Exalted One,
saying: — ' The hour, lord, has come, and the meal is
ready ! '

And the Exalted One who had dressed himself
early in the morning, took his bowl, and his robe, and
went with the brethren to the place where Ambapali's
mansion was : and when he had come there he seated
himself on the seat prepared for him. And Ambapali

Thirty-Three, the principal deities of the Vedic Pantheon. See
A. Ill, 239; Sum. I, 310; Mahavastu I, 262.

1 The Malalahkara-vatthu gives the substance of the discourse on
this occasion. ' The princes had come in their finest and richest
dress; in their appearance they vied in beauty with the nats (or
angels). But foreseeing the ruin and misery that was soon to come
upon them all, the Buddha exhorted his disciples to enteriain
a thorough contempt for things that are dazzling to the eyes, but
essentially perishable and unreal in their nature/ — Bigandet, 2nd
ed., p. 260.


I). ii..iS. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 105

the courtezan set the sweet rice and cakes before the
Order, with the Buddha at their head, and waited upon
them till they refused any more.

And when the Blessed One had quite finished his
meal, and had cleansed the bowl and his hands, the
courtezan had a low stool brought, and [98] sat down
at his side, and addressed the Exalted One, and said :
— ' Lord, I present this pleasaunce to the order of
mendicants, of which the Buddha is the chief.' And
the Exalted One accepted the gift ; and after instruct-
ing, and rousing, and inciting, and gladdening her with
religious discourse, he rose from his seat and departed
thence.1

20. While at Ambapali's mango grove the Exalted
One held that comprehensive religious talk with the
brethren, saying : — ' Such and such is upright conduct ;
such and such is earnest contemplation ; such and such
is intelligence. Great becomes the fruit, great the
advantage of earnest contemplation, when it is set
round with upright conduct. Great becomes the fruit,
great the advantage of intellect when it is set round
with earnest contemplation. The mind set round with
intelligence is set quite free from the Intoxications,
that is to say, from the Intoxication of Sensuality, from
the Intoxication of Becoming, from the Intoxication of
Delusion, from the Intoxication of Ignorance.'


21. Now when the Exalted One had remained so
long as he wished at Ambapali's grove, he addressed
Ananda, and said : — ' Come, Ananda, let us go on to
Beluva V


1 Bishop Bigandet says : — ' In recording the conversion of
a courtezan named Apapalika, her liberality and gifts to Budha and
his disciples, and the preference designedly given to her over princes
and nobles, who, humanly speaking, seemed in every respect better
entitled to attentions — one is almost reminded of the conversion of
' a woman that was a sinner,' mentioned in the Gospels (' Legend of
the Burmese Budha,' 2nd ed., p. 258).

2 The Vinaya (I, 233) says they went to the Great Wood near


106 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 98.

' So be it, lord,' said Ananda, in assent, to the
Exalted One.

Then the Exalted One proceeded, with a great
company of the brethren, to Beluva, and there the
Exalted One stayed in the village itself.

22. Now the Exalted One there addressed the
brethren, and said : — ' O mendicants, do you take up
your abode round about Vesali, each according to the
place where his friends, acquaintances, and intimates
may live, for the retreat in the rainy season [for vassa].
I shall enter upon the rainy season here at Beluva.'

' So be it, lord ! ' said those brethren, in assent, to
the Exalted One. And they entered upon the rainy
season round about Vesali, each according to the place
where his friends, acquaintances, and intimates lived :
[99] whilst the Exalted One stayed even there at
Beluva.

23. Now when the Exalted One had thus entered
upon the rainy season, there fell upon him a dire sick-
ness, and sharp pains came upon him, even unto death.
But the Exalted One, mindful and self-possessed, bore
them without complaint.

Then this thought occurred to the Exalted One : — 'It
would not be right for me to pass away without
addressing the disciples, without taking leave of the
Order. Let me now, by a strong effort of the will,
bend this sickness down again, and keep my hold on
life till the allotted time be come V

And the Exalted One, by a strong effort of the will,
bent that sickness down again, and kept his hold on
life till the time he fixed upon should come. And the
sickness abated upon him.

24. Now very soon after the Blessed One began to
recover. And when he had quite got rid of the sick-
ness, he came out from his lodging, and sat down in
the shadow thereof on a seat spread out there. And

Vesali, that is, it skips the context here as far as III, 64. Our
sections 27-35 are in [he Sa?«yutta V, 152-4.
1 Compare Divyavadana 203.


D.ii. IOO. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 107

A

the venerable Ananda went to the place where the
Exalted One was, and saluted him, and took a seat re-
spectfully on one side, and addressed the Exalted One,
and said : — ' I have beheld, lord, how the Exalted
One was in health, and I have beheld how the Exalted
One had to suffer. And though at the sight of the
sickness of the Exalted One my body became weak
as a creeper, and the horizon became dim to me, and
my faculties were no longer clear \ yet notwithstanding
I took some little comfort from the thought that the
Exalted One would not pass away until at least he had
left instructions as touching the Order.'

25. [100] 'What, then, Ananda? Does the Order
expect that of me ? I have preached the truth without
making any distinction between exoteric and esoteric
doctrine ; for in respect of the truths, Ananda, the
Tathagata has no such thing as the closed fist of
a teacher, who keeps some things back2. Surely,
Ananda, should there be any one who harbours the
thought, " It is I who will lead the brotherhood," or,
' The Order is dependent upon me," it is he who should
lay down instructions in any matter concerning the
Order. Now the Tathagata, Ananda, thinks not that
it is he who should lead the brotherhood, or that the
Order is dependent upon him. Why then should he
leave instructions in any matter concerning the Order ?
I too, O Ananda, am now grown old, and full of years,
my journey is drawing to its close, I have reached my
sum of days, I am turning eighty years of age ; and
just as a worn-out cart, Ananda, can be kept going-
only with the help of thongs, so, methinks, the body of
the Tathagata can only be kept going by bandaging it
up :;. It is only, Ananda, when the Tathagata, by


1 Compare A. J II, 69.

2 Compare Jataka II, 221, 250; Mil. 144.
Vegha-missakena, the meaning of which is not clear. The

Maldlahkara-vatthu, as rendered by Bigandet, has 'repairs.' The
Sumangala Vilasini agrees, but in such a way as to throw no light on
the derivation of the word. In the Sawyutta Nikaya (V, 153) the


I08 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. IOO.

ceasing to attend to any outward thing, becomes
plunged by the cessation of any separate sensation in
that concentration of heart which is concerned with no
material object — it is only then that the body of the
TathaQfata is at ease x.

26. 2 ' Therefore, O Ananda, be ye lamps unto your-
selves. Be ye a refuge to yourselves. Betake your-
selves to no external refuge. Hold fast to the Truth
as a lamp. Hold fast as a refuge to the Truth. Look
not for refuge to any one besides yourselves. And
how, Ananda, is a brother to be a lamp unto himself,
a refuge to himself, betaking himself to no external
refuge, holding fast to the Truth as a lamp, holding fast
as a refuge to the Truth, looking not for refuge to any
one besides himself?

' Herein, O mendicants, a brother continues, as to
the body, so to look upon the body that he remains
strenuous, self-possessed, and mindful, having over-
come both the hankering and the dejection common in
the world. [And in the same way] as to feelings . . .
moods . . . ideas, he continues so to look upon each
that he remains strenuous, self-possessed, and mindful,
having overcome both the hankering and the dejection
common in the world.

[101] ' And whosoever, Ananda, either now or after
I am dead, shall be a lamp unto themselves, and
a refuge unto themselves, shall betake themselves to
no external refuge, but holding fast to the Truth as


Burmese Phayre MS. reads vekhamissakena and another Burmese
MS. vedha — but SS. all read vegha. The Siamese edition has ve/u.
My Digha Nikaya confirms Childers's reading, which no doubt
correctly represents the uniform tradition of the Ceylon MSS. On
the use of the word missaka at the end of a compound see Jataka
II, 8,420,433; and compare M.I, 82; Thera-gatha 143; Mil. 1 59 ;
and the discussion in ' J.P.T. S.,' 1884, pp. 97-101.

1 This is very interesting as giving what is, no doubt, the original
meaning of animitta as applied to ceto-samadhi. See my
' Yogavacara's Manual of Indian Mysticism,' p. xxvii.

2 This section recurs at S. V, 163, compare III, 42, and the
example ?iven at V, 221.


1). ii. 101 . THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. IO9

their lamp, and holding fast as their refuge to the
Truth, shall look not for refuge to any one besides
themselves — it is they, Ananda, among my bhikkhus,
who shall reach the very topmost Height! — but they
must be anxious to learn V

End of the Second Portion for Recitation.


1 Buddhaghosa says : — 'Tamatagge is for tamagge. The "t" in
the middle is used for euphony. This word means, " These are the most
pre-eminent, the very chief." Having, as above stated, broken every
bond of darkness (tama), those bhikkhus of mine, Ananda, will be at
the very top, in the highest condition. They will be at the very top
of whom ? Those bhikkhus who are willing to learn, and those who
exercise themselves in the four ways of being mindful and thoughtful,
they shall be at the top of all (the rest). Thus does he make Arahant-
ship the three-peaked height of his discourse ' (compare on this last
phrase Nibbanena desana>£utam gawhati, Jataka I, 275, 393,
401 ; and see also I, 114). Uttama, the highest (scil. bhava, condition),
is used absolutely of Arahantship or Nirvana at Jataka I, 96 ; Agga-
phala occurs in the same sense at Jataka I, 114; and even Phalagga
at Mahavarasa XV, 209. The last words, ' but they must be anxious to
learn,' seem to me to be an afterthought. It is only those who are
thoroughly determined to work out their own salvation, without looking
for safety to any one else, even to the Buddha himself, who will, whilst
in the world, enter into and experience Nirvana. But, of course, let
there be no mistake, merely to reject the vain baubles of the current
superstitious beliefs is not enough. There is plenty to learn and to
acquire, of which enough discourse is elsewhere.


CHAPTER III.

i.1 [102] Now the Exalted One robed himself early
in the morning, and taking his bowl in the robe, went
into Vesali for alms. When, after he had returned
from the round for alms, he had^ finished eating the
rice, he addressed the venerable Ananda, and said : —
' Take up the mat, Ananda ; I will go and spend the
day at the Chapala Shrine.'

' So be it, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One. And taking up the mat
he followed step for step behind the Exalted One.

2. So the Exalted One proceeded to the Chapala
Shrine, and when he had come there he sat down on the
mat spread out for him, and the venerable Ananda took
his seat respectfully beside him. Then the Exalted
One addressed the venerable Ananda, and said : —
' How delightful a spot, Ananda, is Vesali, and how
charming the Udena Shrine, and the Gotamaka Shrine,
and the Shrine of the Seven Mangoes, and the Shrine
of Many Sons, and the Sarandada Shrine, and the
Chapala Shrine 2 !

3. [103] ' Ananda, whosoever has developed, prac-
tised, dwelt on, expanded and ascended to the very
heights of the four paths to Iddhi 3, and so mastered
them as to be able to use them as a vehicle, and as a

1 1-20 recur in A. IV, 308 foil. ; 1-10 in Udana VI, 1. and S. V,
259 foil. Compare Divy., pp. 200-8.

• 2 Shrines of pre-Buddhistic worship. They were probably trees and
barrows ; but as no excavations have yet been made at Vesali the point
is uncertain. The Anglo-Indian use of the word Chetiya. as equivalent
to our Temple, is quite wrong.

3 Iddhi. The four paths are : — (1) will, (2) effort, (3) thought, and
(4) investigation, each united to earnest thought and the struggle
against evil. On the Iddhi to be reached by them see above, Vol. I,
pp. 272, 273; and the translator's 'Buddhism,' pp. 174-7. The
whole set of participles is used elsewhere of other conditions of mind.
So, for instance, of universal love (metta) at A. V, 342, quoted
Jataka II, 61, Mil. 198. An ancient commentary on them is preserved
at Pa/is. I, 172.


1). ii. 104. THE HOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. I I I

basis, he, should he desire it, could remain in the same
birth for an aeon or for that portion of the aeon which
had yet to run. Now the Tathagata has thoroughly
practised and developed them [in all respects as just
more fully described], and he could, therefore, should
he desire it, live on yet for an aeon, or for that portion
of the aeon which has yet to run.'

4. But even though a suggestion so evident and a
hint so clear were thus given by the Exalted One, the
venerable Ananda was incapable of comprehending
them ; [104] and he besought not the Exalted One,
saying : — ' Vouchsafe, lord, to remain during the aeon !
Live on through the aeon, O Happy One ! for the good
and the happiness of the great multitudes, out of pity
for the world, for the good and the gain and the weal of
gods and men ! ' So far was his heart possessed by the
Evil One l.

5. A second and a third time did the Exalted One
[say the same thing, and a second and a third time was
Ananda's heart thus hardened].

6. Then the Exalted One addressed the vener-

1 Yatha tarn Marena pariyu///ntacitto. Here ta.m is the
indeclinable particle, yatha taw introducing an explanation. My
MS. of the Digha Nikaya and the Tumour MS. of the Sumangala
Vilasini read parivu///zita, and either spelling is correct. The fact
is that the ' y ' or ' v ' in such cases is even less than euphonic ; it is an
assistance not to the speaker, but merely to the writer. Thus in the
Sinhalese duwanawa, 'to run,' the spoken word is duanawa, and
the ' w ' is written only to avoid the awkward use in the middle of
a written word of the initial sign for the sound ' a '. That the speakers
of Pali found no difficulty in pronouncing two vowels together is
abundantly proved by numerous instances. The writers of Pali, in
those cases in which the second vowel begins a word, use without
hesitation the initial sign ; but in the middle of the word this would be
so ungainly that they naturally prefer to insert a consonantal sign to
carry the vowel sign. The varying readings I have pointed out are
a strong confirmation of the correctness of the pronunciation of
modern native scholars (in this case pari-u///nta) ; and we may the
more readily adopt it as the question is not really one concerning the
pronunciation of Pali, but concerning the use which modern native
copyists make of their own alphabet. I would pronounce therefore
pari-utthita-citto. See Windisch, ' Mara und Buddha,' p. 40; M.I,
43.3-4; Vin. II, 289; IV. 94, 229.


112 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 104,

A A

able Ananda, and said : — ' You may leave me, Ananda,
awhile, and do whatsoever now seemeth to Athee fit.'

' So be it, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One, and passing him on the
right sat down at the foot of a certain tree not far off
thence.


A

7. Now not long after the venerable Ananda had
been gone, Mara, the Evil One, approached the Ex-
alted One and stood beside him. And so standing
there, he addressed the Exalted One in these words : —

' Pass away now, lord ; let the Exalted One now
die. Now is the time for the Exalted One to pass away
— even according to the word which the Exalted One
spoke when he said l : — ■" I shall not die, O Evil One !
until the brethren and sisters of the Order, and until the
lay-disciples of either sex 2 shall have become true
hearers, wise and well trained, ready and learned, carry-
ing the doctrinal books in their memory, masters of the
lesser corollaries that follow from the larger doctrine,
correct in life, walking according to the precepts — until
the)-, having thus themselves learned the doctrine, shall
be able to tell others of it, preach it, make it known,
establish it, open it, minutely explain it and make it
clear — until they, when others start vain doctrine easy
to be refuted by the truth, shall be able in refuting it,
to spread the wonder-working 3 truth abroad ! '

8. ' And now, lord, the brethren and sisters of the
order and the lay-disciples of either sex have become
[all this], are able to do [all this]. [105] Pass away
now therefore, lord ; let the Exalted One now die !
The time has come for the Exalted One to pass away —


1 The words here quoted were spoken by the Buddha, after he had
been enjoying the first bliss of Nirvana, under the goatherd's Nigrodha
tree (see below, ch. Ill, § 34).

2 The whole paragraph is repeated, here and below, § 35, for each of
these classes of persons.

3 Sappa/ihariya?« dhammam. (Comp. the opposite idea
appa/ihfra-kataw bhasitaw, D. [, 193, 239.) The two ideas are
contrasted at KV. 561.


D. ii. 107. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. II3

even according to the word which he spake when he
said, " I shall not die, O Evil One ! until this pure
religion of mine shall have become successful, pros-
perous, wide-spread, and popular in all its full extent—
until, in a word, it shall have been well proclaimed
among men." And now, lord, this pure religion of
thine has become [all this]. Pass away now therefore,
lord ; let the Exalted One now die ! The time has
come for the Exalted One to pass away ! '

9. [106] And when he had thus spoken, the Exalted
One addressed Mara, the Evil One, and said : — ' O
Evil One ! make thyself happy, the death of the Tatha-
gata shall take place before long. At the end of three
months from this time the Tathagata will pass away.'


10. Thus the Exalted One while at the Shrine of
Chapala deliberately and consciously rejected the rest
of his natural term of life *. And on his so rejecting it
there arose a mighty earthquake, awful and terrible,
and the thunders of heaven burst forth. [107] And
when the Exalted One beheld this, he broke out at that
time into this hymn of exultation : —

' His sum of life the sagfe renounced,
The cause of life immeasurable or small ;
With inward joy and calm, he broke,
Like coat of mail, his life's own cause ! 2 '


ii.3 Now the following thought occurred to the

A. A.

1 Ayu-sawkharaw ossaji. The difficult term Ayu-sawzkhara
must here have the meaning in which it is used at Majjhima I,
pp. 295, 296 ; Sawyutta II, 266 ; Jataka IV, 215. He renounced those
tendencies, potentialities, which in the ordinary course of things, would
otherwise have led to the putting together of, the building up of, more
life (that is, of course, in this birth. Any more life in a future birth
he had already renounced when, under the Wisdom Tree, he attained
Nirvana).

2 This verse is obscure and possibly corrupt. See Windisch,
' Mara und Buddha/ pp. 37, 72 ; Ud. VI, 1 ; S. V, 263; Div. 203.

The narrative is now interrupted by the insertion of paragraphs
which at first sight seem to be quite out of place. But the connexion,
or want of connexion, between them and the main story is very
III. I


114 XVI« mahA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 107.

venerable Ananda : — ' Wonderful indeed and mar-
vellous is it that this mighty earthquake should arise,
awful and terrible, and that the thunders of heaven
should burst forth ! What may be the proximate, what
the remote cause of the appearance of this earthquake ? '

12. Then the venerable Ananda went up to the
place where the Blessed One was, and did obeisance
to the Exalted One, and seated himself respectfully at
one side, and said :— ' Wonderful indeed and marvellous
is it that this mighty earthquake should arise, awful
and terrible, and that the thunders of heaven should
burst forth ! What may be the proximate, what the
remote cause of the appearance of this earthquake ? '

13. 'Eight are the proximate, eight the remote
causes, Ananda, for the appearance of a mighty earth-
quake. What are the eight ? This great earth,
Ananda, is established on water, the water on
wind, and the wind rests upon space. And at such a
time, Ananda, as the mighty winds blow, the waters
are shaken by the mighty winds as they blow, and by
the moving water the earth is shaken. These are the
first causes, proximate and remote, of the appearance
of a mighty earthquake \

14. [108] 'Again, Ananda, a recluse or a brahmin of
great [intellectual] power, and who has the feelings

suggestive as to the way in which the Suttanta was put together. The
whole chapter is an answer to a possible objection, either from out-
siders or from weaker members of the fold, that if the Buddha were
really so great why did he die at all. The suggested answer is that he
could have lived on if he had so wished ; but he did not wish because
he had certain kinds of power and insight and self-mastery which pre-
vented him from doing so. For the purpose of this answer these
paragraphs, already in existence among the Suttas current in the com-
munity, and dealing with these powers, are here repeated without any
such connecting argument as we should find under similar circum-
stances, in a modern (written) book of apologetics. The argument
suggested by them follows exactly the same lines as that in the Mahali
Suttanta, translated in the former volume (Number VI of the
' Dialogues ').

1 Windisch, ' Mara und Buddha,' 61, adduces a number of interest-
ing parallels, from European writers, to this curious old theory of
earthquakes.


P. ii. 108. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. II5

of his heart well under his control ; or a god or fairy
(devata *) of great might and power, — when such a one
by intense meditation on the idea of the minutest por-
tion of earth and on the idea of the widest expanse of
water [has succeeded in realizing the comparative value
of things] he can make this earth move and tremble
and be shaken violently 2. These are the second causes,
proximate and remote, of the appearance of a mighty
earthquake.


1 Devata is a fairy, god, genius, or angel. I am at a loss how to
render this word without conveying an erroneous impression to those
not familiar with ancient ideas, and specially with ancient Indian ideas,
of the spirit world. It includes gods of all sorts; tree and river
nymphs; the kindly fairies or ghosts who haunt houses (see my
' Buddhist Birth Stories,' Tale 40) ; spirits in the ground (see above, I,
26); the angels who minister at the great renunciation, the temptation,
and the death of the Buddha ; the guardian angels who watch over
men, and towns, and countries ; and many other similar beings.
' Celestial beings ' would be wholly inapplicable, for instance, to the
creatures referred to in the curious passage above (I, 26). ' Super-
human being ' would be an inaccurate rendering ; for all these light
and airy shapes come below, and after, man in the Buddhist order of
precedence. ' Spirit ' being used of the soul inside the human body,
and of the human soul after it has left the body, and figuratively of
mental faculties — none of which are included under devata — would
suggest ideas inconsistent with that of the Pali word. As there is
therefore no appropriate general word I have chosen, for each passage
where the expression occurs, the word used in English of the special
class more particularly referred to in the passage of the text. Here all
kinds of devatas being referred to, and there being no word in
English for them all, I have ventured to put the word devata into my
version, and to trouble the reader with this note.

2 Buddhaghosa here tells a long story how Sangharakkhita
Samawera, the nephew of Naga Thera, attained Arahantship on the
day of his admission to the order ; and at once proceeded to heaven,
and standing on the pinnacle of the palace of the king of the gods,
shook the whole place with his big toe ; to the great consternation
and annoyance of the exalted dwellers therein ! There is no doubt
a real truth in the idea that deep thought can shake the universe, and
make the palaces of the gods to tremble, just as faith is said in
Matthew xxi. 21 to be able to remove mountains, and cause them to
be cast into the sea. But these figurative expressions have, in
Buddhism, become a fruitful soil for the outgrowth of superstitions and
misunderstandings. The train of early Buddhist speculation in this
field has yet to be elucidated.

I 2


Il6 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 108.

15. ' Again, Ananda, when a Bodhisatta consciously
and deliberately leaves his [temporary] form in the
heaven of delight and descends into his mother's womb,
then is this earth made to quake and tremble and is
shaken violently. These are the third causes, proximate
and remote, of the appearance of a mighty earthquake l.

16. ' Again, Ananda, when a Bodhisatta deliberately
and consciously quits his mother's womb, then the
earth quakes and trembles and is shaken violently.
This is the fourth cause, proximate and remote, of the
appearance of a jnighty earthquake.

1 7. ' Again, Ananda, when a Tathagata arrives at
the supreme and perfect enlightenment, then this earth
quakes and trembles and is shaken violently. This is
the fifth cause, proximate and remote, of the appear-
ance of a mighty; earthquake.

18. ' Again, Ananda, when a Tathagata founds the
sublime kingdom of righteousness, then this earth
quakes and trembles and is shaken violently. This is
the sixth cause, proximate and remote, of the appear-
ance of a mighty^ earthquake.

19. ' Again, Ananda, when a Tathagata consciously
and deliberately rejects the remainder of his life, then
this earth quakes and trembles and is shaken violently.

1 The Bodhisatta's voluntary incarnation is looked upon by the
Buddhists as a great act of renunciation, and curious legends have
gathered about it. One is that on the night when she conceived his
mother dreamt that a white elephant entered her side. The account
will be found at length in my 'Buddhist Birth Stories ' (pp. 62-4), and
the earthquake is there mentioned in terms identical with those in the
text. As I have pointed out in 'Buddhism' (p. 184), the white
elephant legend is one of those hallowed sun stories by which half-
converted Indians strove to embellish the life-story of the Teacher
whose followers they had become. In the Lalita Vistara (Calc. ed.,
p. 63) the entrance of the elephant into Maya precedes the dream ;
but though the ignorant may have therefore accepted it as a fact, it is
of course only a figure of speech — and I venture to think from the
Indian standpoint, a beautiful figure of speech — to express the incarna-
tion of divine mildness and majesty in a human form. The use of
such a figure is not confined to India. In one of the Apocryphal
Gospels, the Gospel according to the Hebrews, the incarnation of the
divine gentleness and love is expressed by saying that a dove from
heaven ' entered into ' the human form.


1). ii. 109. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. II7


This is the seventh cause, proximate and remote, of the
appearance of almighty earthquake.

20. ' Again, Ananda, when a Tathagata passes en-
tirely [109] away in that utter passing away in which
nothing whatever is left behind, then this earth quakes
and trembles and is shaken violently. This is the
eighth cause, proximate and remote, of the appearance
of a mighty earthquake.'


A

21. ' Now of eight kinds, Ananda, are these assem-
blies. Which are the eight ? Assemblies of nobles,
brahmins, householders and wanderers, and of the
angel hosts of the Guardian Kings, of the Great
Thirty-Three, of the Maras, and of the Brahmas.

22. ' Now I call to mind, Ananda, how when I used
to enter into an assembly of many hundred : nobles,
before I had seated myself there or talked to them or
started a conversation with them, I used to become in
colour like unto their colour, and in voice like unto
their voice. Then with religious discourse I used to
instruct and incite, and quicken them, and fill them
with gladness. But they knew me not when I spoke,
and would say : — " Who may this be who thus speaks ?
a man or a god ? ' Then having instructed, incited,
quickened, and gladdened them with religious dis-
course, I would vanish away. But they knew me not
even when I vanished away : and would say : — " Who
may this be who has thus vanished away ? a man or
a god ? "

23. [And in the same words the Exalted One spake
of how he had been used to enter into assemblies of
each of the other of the eight kinds, and of how he had
not been made known to them either in speaking or in
vanishing away.] ' Now these, Ananda, are the eight
assemblies.'


1 Windisch, 'Mara und Buddha,' p. 75, makes this number refer
to the number of entrances, and quotes Itivuttaka, p. 15, in support.
The Singhalese version (p. 758) is as above.


Il8 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. no.

A

24. [no] l Now these, Ananda, are the eight posi-
tions of Mastery [over the delusion arising from the
apparent permanence of external things 1]. What are
the eight ?

25. ' When a man having subjectively the idea of
form sees forms external to himself which are finite,
and pleasant or unpleasant to the sight, and having
mastered them, is conscious that he knows and sees —
this is the first position of mastery.

26. ' When a man having subjectively the idea of
form sees externally forms which are boundless, and
pleasant or unpleasant to the sight, and having mas-
tered them, is conscious that he knows and sees — this
is the second position of mastery.

27. ' When a man without the subjective idea of form
sees forms external to himself which are finite, and
pleasant or unpleasant to the sight, and having mas-
tered them, is conscious that he knows and sees — this
is the third position of mastery.

28. ' When a man without the subjective idea of
form sees externally forms external to himself which
are boundless, and pleasant or unpleasant to the sight,
and having mastered them, is conscious that he knows
and sees — this is the fourth position of mastery.

29. ' When a man without the subjective idea of
form sees externally forms external to himself that are
blue, blue in colour, blue in appearance, and reflecting
blue, — just, for instance, as the flax blossom is blue in
colour, blue in appearance, and reflecting blue ; or, again,

. 1 This and the next paragraph are based upon the Buddhist belief
as to the long-vexed question between the Indian schools who repre-
sented more or less closely the European Idealists and Realists.
When cleared of the many repetitions inserted for the benefit of the
repeaters or reciters, the fundamental idea seems to be that the great
necessity is to get rid of the delusion that what one sees and feels is
real and permanent. Nothing is real and permanent but character.

The so-called eight Positions of Mastery are merely an expansion of
the first two of the following eight Stages of Deliverance, and the whole
argument is also expressed in another form in the passage on the nine
successive 'Cessations,' of which an abstract will be found in Childers,
sub voce nirodha.


D. ii. 112. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. II9

as that fine muslin of Benares, of delicate finish on both
sides, is blue in colour, blue in appearance, and reflect-
ing blue, — when a man without the subjective idea of
form sees externally forms which, just in that way, are
blue, blue in colour, blue in appearance, and reflecting
blue, and having mastered them, is conscious that he
knows and sees — that is the fifth position of mastery.'
30-2. [ill] [The sixth, seventh, and eighth posi-
tions of mastery are explained in words identical with
those used to explain the fifth ; save that yellow, red,
and white are respectively substituted throughout for
blue ; and the Kanikara flower, the Bandhu-givaka
flower, and the morning star are respectively substi-
tuted for the flax blossom, as the first of the two
objects given as examples.]


33. 1 [112] ' Now these stages of Deliverance, Ananda
[from the hindrance to thought arising from the sen-
sations and ideas due to external forms], are eight in
number. Which are the eight ?

' A man possessed of form sees forms — this is the
first stage of deliverance.

1 Unaware of his own form, he sees forms external to
himself — this is the second stage of deliverance.

' With the thought " it is well," he becomes intent —
this is the third stage of deliverance.

' By passing quite beyond all idea of form, by
putting an end to all idea of sensory impact 2, by paying
no attention to the idea of multiformity, he, thinking
" it is all infinite space," reaches [mentally] and re-
mains in the state of mind in which the idea of the
infinity of space is the only idea that is present — this
is the fourth stage of deliverance.

' By passing quite beyond all idea of space being the
infinite basis, he, thinking " it is all infinite reason,"

1 These have already occurred in the Maha Nidana (p. 70 of the
text). The English version here is made somewhat fuller.

2 On these technical terms see Mrs. Rhys Davids's ' Buddhist Psy-
chology,' pp. 72, 182, 204.


120 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 112.

reaches [mentally] and remains in the state of mind to
which the infinity of reason is alone present — this is the
fifth stage of deliverance.

' By passing quite beyond the consciousness of the
infinity of reason, he, thinking " nothing at all exists,"
reaches [mentally] and remains in the state of mind to
which nothing at all is specially present — this is the
sixth stage of deliverance.

' By passing quite beyond all idea of nothingness he
reaches [mentally] and remains in the state of mind to
which neither ideas nor the absence of ideas are speci-
ally present — this is the seventh stage of deliverance.

' By passing quite beyond the state of " neither ideas
nor the absence of ideas " he reaches [mentally] and
remains in the state of mind in which both sensations
and ideas have ceased to be — this is the eighth stage
of deliverance.

' Now these, Ananda, are the eight stages of
Deliverance.'

A

34. ' On one occasion, Ananda, I was resting under
the goatherd's Nigrodha tree on the bank of the river
Neranjara immediately after having reached the great
enlightenment. Then Mara, the Evil One, came,
Ananda, to the place where I was, and standing beside
me he addressed me in the words : — " Pass away now,
lord, from existence ! Let the Exalted One now die !
Now is the time for the Exalted One to pass away ! "

35. [113] ' And when he had thus spoken, Ananda,
I addressed Mara, the Evil One, and said : — " I shall
not pass away, O Evil One ! until not only the brethren
and sisters of the Order, but also the lay-disciples of
either sex shall have become true hearers, wise and
well trained, ready and learned, carrying the doctrinal
books in their memory, masters of the lesser corollaries
that follow from the larger doctrine, correct in life,
walking according to the precepts — until they, having
thus themselves learned the doctrine, shall be able to
tell others of it, preach it, make it known, establish it,
open it, minutely explain it and make it clear — until


D. ii. 115- THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 121

they, when others start vain doctrine easy to be refuted
by the truth, shall be able in refuting it to spread the
wonder-working truth abroad ! I shall not die until
this pure religion of mine shall have become successful,
prosperous, wide-spread, and popular in all its full
extent — until, in a word, it shall have been well pro-
claimed anions men ! '

O A

36. 'And now again to-day, Ananda, at Chapala's
Shrine Mara, the Evil One, came to the place where I
was, and standing beside me addressed me [in the same
words]. /

$j. [114] ' And when he had thus spoken, Ananda, I
answered him and said : — " Make thyself happy, the
passing away of the Tathagata shall take place before
long. At the end of three months from this time the
Tathagata will pass away ! "

' And now again, Ananda, the Tathagata has to-day
at Chapala's Shrine consciously and deliberately re-
jected the rest of his allotted term of life.'

38. [lis] And when he had thus spoken the vener-
able Ananda addressed the Exalted One, and said : —
4 Vouchsafe, lord, to remain during the aeon : live on
through the kalpa, O Exalted One ! for the good and
the happiness of the great multitudes, out of pity for
the world, for the good and the gain and the weal of
gods and men ! '

' Enough now, Ananda, beseech not the Tathagata ! '
was the reply. 'Thetime for making such request is past.

39. And again, the second time, the venerable
Ananda besought the Exalted One [in the same words.
And he received from the Exalted One the same^ reply].

And again, the third time, the venerable Ananda
besought the Exalted One [in the same words].

' Hast thou faith, Ananda, in the wisdom of the
Tathagata ? '

' Even so, lord ! '

1 Now why, then, Ananda, dost thou trouble the
Tathagata even until the third time ? '

40. ' From his own mouth have I heard from the
Exalted One, from his own mouth have I received


122 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 115.

this saying : — " Whosoever has developed, practised,
dwelt on, expanded, and ascended to the very heights of
the four paths to Iddhi, and so mastered them as to be
able to use them as a vehicle, and as a basis, he, should
he desire it, could remain in the same birth for an
aeon, or for that portion of the aeon which had yet to
run." Now the Tathagata has thoroughly practised
and developed them [in all respects as just now fully
described], and he could, therefore, should he desire it,
live on yet for an aeon, or for that portion of the aeon
which has yet to run.'

' Hast thou faith, Ananda ? '

' Even so, lord ! '

' Then, O Ananda, thine is the fault, thine is the
offence — in that when a suggestion So evident and a
hint so clear were thus given thee by the Tathagata,
thou wast yet incapable of comprehending them, and
thou besoughtest not the Tathagata, saying : — " Vouch-
safe, lord, to remain during the aeon for the good and
the happiness of the great multitudes, out of pity for
the world, for the good and the gain and the weal of
gods and men." If thou shouldst then have so besought
the Tathagata, the Tathagata might have rejected
the appeal even to the second time, but the third time
he would have granted it. Thine, therefore, O Ananda,
is the fault, thine is the offence !

41. 'On one occasion, Ananda, I was dwelling at
Rajagaha, on the hill called the Vulture's Peak. Now
there, Ananda, I spoke to thee, and said : — [lie] " How
pleasant a spot, Ananda, is Rajagaha ; how pleasant
is this Vulture's Peak. Whosoever, Ananda, has de-
veloped, practised, dwelt on, expanded, and ascended
to the very heights of the four paths to Iddhi, and so
mastered them as to be able to use them as a vehicle,
and as a basis, he, should he desire it, could remain in
the same birth for an aeon, or for that portion of the
aeon which had yet to run. Now the Tathagata has
thoroughly practised and developed them [in all re-
spects as just now fully described], and he could, there-
fore, should he desire it, live on yet for an aeon, or for


D. ii. n6. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 23

that portion of the aeon which has yet to run." But
even when a su^orestion So evident and a hint so clear
were thus given thee by the Tathagata, thou wast yet
incapable of comprehending them, and thou besought-
est not the Tathagata, saying : — " Vouchsafe, lord, to
remain during the aeon. Live on, O Exalted One !
through the aeon for the good and the happiness of the
great multitudes, out of pity for the world, for the good
and the gain and the weal of gods and men." If thou
shouldst then have so besought the Tathagata, the
Tathagata might have rejected the appeal even to
the second time, but the third time he would have

A

granted it. Thine, therefore, O Ananda, is the fault,
thine is the offence !

42. ' On one occasion, Ananda, I was dwelling at
that same Rajagaha in the Banyan Grove — on one
occasion at that same Rajagaha at the Robbers' Cliff —
on one occasion at that same Rajagaha in the Satta-
pa«;zi cave on the slope of Mount Vebhara — on one
occasion at that same Rajagaha at the Black Rock on the
slope of Mount Isigili— on one occasion at that same
Rajagaha in the Sitavana Grove in the mountain cave
Sappasow^ika — on one occasion at that same Rajagaha
in the Tapoda Grove — on one occasion at that same
Rajagaha in the Bambu Grove in the Squirrels' Feed-
ing Ground — on one occasion at that same Rajagaha
in Jivaka's Mango Grove — on one occasion at that
same Rajagaha in the Deer Forest at Maddakucchi.

43. ' Now there too, Ananda, I spoke to thee, and
said : — " How pleasant, Ananda, is Rajagaha ; how
pleasant the Vulture's Peak ; how pleasant the Banyan
tree of Gotama ; how pleasant the Robbers' Cliff ;
how pleasant the Sattapawm cave on the slope of
Mount Vebhara ; how pleasant the Black Rock on
the slope of Mount Isigili ; how pleasant the mountain
cave of the Serpent's Pool in the Sitavana Grove ;
how pleasant the Tapoda Grove ; how pleasant the
Squirrels' Feeding Ground in the Bambu Grove ; how
pleasant Jivaka's Mango Grove ; how pleasant the
Deer Forest at Maddakucchi ! "


124 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 117.

44. [117] ' " Whosoever, Ananda, has developed,
practised, dwelt on, expanded, and ascended to the
very heights of the four paths to Iddhi, and so
mastered them as to be able to use them as a vehicle,
and as a basis, he, should he desire it, could remain
in the same birth for an aeon, or for that portion of
the aeon which had yet to run. Now the Tathagata
has thought out and thoroughly practised them [in all
respects as just now fully described], and might, should
he desire it, remain alive for an aeon, or for that
portion of an aeon which has yet to run." But even
when a suggestion so evident and a hint so clear were
thus given thee by the Tathagata, thou wast yet
incapable of comprehending them, and thou besought-
est not the Tathagata, saying : — " Vouchsafe, lord, to
remain during the aeon. Live on, O Exalted One !
through the aeon for the good and the happiness of
the great multitudes, out of pity for the world, for the
good and the gain and the weal of gods and men."
If thou shouldst then have so besought the Tathagata,
the Tathagata might have rejected the appeal even
to the second time, but the third time he would have
granted it. Thine, therefore, O Ananda, is the fault,
thine is the offence !

45. ' On one occasion, Ananda, I was residing here
at Vesali at the Udena Shrine. And there too,
Ananda, I spoke to thee, and said : — " How pleasant,

> Ananda, is Vesali: how pleasant the Udena Ketiya.
Whosoever, Ananda, has thought out, developed, prac-
tised, dwelt on, expanded, and ascended to the very
heights of the four paths to Iddhi, and so mastered
them as to be able to use them as a vehicle, and as
a basis, he, should he desire it, could remain in the
same birth for an aeon, or for that portion of the
aeon which had yet to run. Now the Tathagata has
thought out and thoroughly practised them [in all
respects as just now fully described], and might, should
he desire it, remain alive for an aeon, or for that
portion of an aeon which has yet to run." But when
a suggestion so evident and a hint so clear were thus


D.ii. Il8. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 125

given thee by the Tathagata, thou wast yet incapable
of comprehending them, and thou besoughtest not
the Tathagata, saying : — " Vouchsafe, Lord, to remain
during the aeon. Live on, O Exalted One ! through

o o

the aeon for the good and the happiness of the great
multitudes, out of pity for the world, for the good and
the gain and the weal of gods and men." If thou
shouldst then have so besought the Tathagata, the
Tathagata might have rejected the appeal even to
the second time, but the third time he would have

A

granted it. Thine, therefore, O Ananda, is the fault,
thine is the offence !

46. [lis] ' On one occasion, Ananda, I was dwelling
here at Vesali at the Gotamaka Shrine — on one
occasion here at Vesali at the Shrine of the Seven
Mangoes — on one occasion here at Vesali at the
Bahuputta Shrine — on one occasion here at Vesali
at the Sarandada Shrine [and on each occasion I spoke
to thee, Ananda, in the same words].

47. ' And now to-day, Ananda, at the Chapala
Shrine, Ia spoke to thee, and said :• — " How delightful
a spot, Ananda, is Vesali, how charming the Udena
Shrine, and the Gotamaka Shrine and the Shrine of
the Seven Mangoes, and the Shrine of Many Sons,
and the Sarandada Shrine, and the Chapala Shrine.
Whosoever, Ananda, has developed, practised, dwelt
on, expanded, and ascended to the very heights of the
four paths to Iddhi, and so mastered them as to be
able to use them as a vehicle and as a basis, he, should
he desire it, could remain in the same birth for an
aeon or for that portion of the aeon which had yet
to run. Now the Tathagata has thoroughly practised
and developed them [in all respects as just more fully
described], and he could, therefore, should he desire it,
live on yet for an aeon, or for that portion of the aeon
which has yet to run." But even when a suggestion
so evident and a hint so clear were thus given thee,
Ananda, by the Tathagata, thou wast yet incapable
of comprehending them, and thou besoughtest not the
Tathagata, saying : — " Vouchsafe, lord, to remain during


126 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 118.

the aeon. Live on, O Exalted One ! through the
aeon for the good and the happiness of the great
multitudes, out of pity for the world, for the good and
the gain and the weal of gods and men." If thou
shouldst then have so besought the Tathagata, the
Tathagata might have rejected the appeal even to
the second time, but the third time he would have
granted it. Thine, therefore, O Ananda, is the fault,
thine is the offence ! '


48. ' But now, Ananda, have I not formerly declared
to you that it is in the very nature of all things, near
and dear unto us, that we must divide ourselves from
them, leave them, sever ourselves from them ? How,
then, Ananda, can this be possible — whereas anything
whatever born, brought into being, and organized,
contains within itself the inherent necessity of dis-
solution— how then can this be possible that such
a being should not be dissolved ? No such condition
can exist ! And that which, Ananda, has been relin-
quished, cast away, renounced, rejected, and abandoned
by the Tathagata — the remaining sum of life surren-
dered by him — verily with regard to that the word
has gone forth from the Tathagata, saying : — " The
passing away of the Tathagata shall take place before
long. [ll9] At the end of three months from this time
.the Tathagata will die ! " That the Tathagata for the
sake of living should repent him again of that saying —
this can no wise be ! J

' Come, Ananda, let us go to the Ku/agara Hall, to
the Mahavana.'


1 I do not understand the connexion of ideas between this para-
graph and the idea repeated with such tedious iteration in the
preceding paragraphs. The two seem to be in marked contrast, if
not in absolute contradiction. Perhaps we have here the older
tradition ; and certainly this paragraph is more in accordance with
the general impression of the character, and with the other sayings, of
Gotama as handed down in the Pali Pi/akas.


D. ii. ii(j. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. \2"]

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One.

49. Then the Exalted One proceeded, and Ananda
with him, to the Mahavana, to the Ku/agara Hall :
and when he had arrived there he addressed the
venerable Ananda, and said : —

A '

' Go now, Ananda, and assemble in the Service
Hall such of the brethren as reside in the neighbour-
hood of Vesali.'

A

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One. And when he had
assembled in the Service Hall such of the brethren
as resided in the neighbourhood of Vesali, he went
to the Exalted One and saluted him and stood beside
him. And standing beside him, he addressed the
Exalted One, and said : —

' Lord ! the assembly of the brethren has met
together. Let the Exalted One do even as seemeth
to him fit.'

50. Then the Exalted One proceeded to the Service
Hall, and sat down there on the mat spread out for
him. And when he was seated the Exalted One
addressed the brethren, and said : —

' Therefore, O brethren — ye to whom the truths
I have perceived have been made known by me —
having thoroughly made yourselves masters of them,
practise them, meditate upon them, and spread them
abroad ; in order that pure religion may last long and
be perpetuated, in order that it may continue to be
for the good and happiness of the great multitudes,
out of pity for the world, to the good and the gain and
the weal of gods and men !

'Which then, O brethren, are the truths which,
when I had perceived, I made known to you, which
when you have mastered it behoves you to practise,
meditate upon, and spread abroad, in order that pure
religion may last long and be perpetuated, in order
that it may continue to be for the good and the happi-
ness of the great multitudes, out of pity for the world, to
the good and the gain and the weal of gods and men?


128 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTAKTA. D. ii. 120.

[120] ' They are these : —

The four earnest meditations,

The fourfold great struggle against evil,

The four roads to saintship,

The five' moral powers,

The five organs of spiritual sense.

The seven kinds of wisdom, and

The Aryan eightfold path.

These, O brethren, are the truths which, when I had
perceived, I made known to you, which when you have
mastered it behoves you to practise, meditate upon,
and spread abroad, in order that pure religion may
last long and be perpetuated, in order that it may
continue to be for the good and the happiness of the
great multitudes, out of pity for the world, to the good
and the gain and the weal of gods and men ! '

51. And the Exalted One exhorted the brethren,
and said : —

' Behold now, O brethren, I exhort you, saying : —
" All component things must grow old. Work out
your salvation with diligence. The final extinction
of the Tathagata will take place before long. At the
end of three months from this time the Tathagata
will die ! "

' My age is now full ripe, my life draws to its close :
I leave you, I depart, relying on myself alone !
Be earnest then, O brethren, holy, full of thought !
Be steadfast in resolve ! Keep watch o'er your own
hearts !

. Who wearies not, but holds fast to this truth and


1


aw


1


Shall cross this sea of life, shall make an end of
grief.'

End of the Third Portion for Recitation2.


1 Dhamraa and vinaya. The Buddhist religion, as just sum-
marized, and the regulations of the Order.

2 It is of great interest to notice what are the points upon which
Gotama, in this last address to his disciples, and at the solemn time,


D. ii. 120. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 29

when death was so near at hand, is reported to have lain such
emphatic stress. Unfortunately we have only a fragment of the
address, and, as it would seem from its commencement, only the
closing fragment. This, however, is in the form of a summary, con-
sisting of an enumeration of certain aggregates, the details of which
must have been as familiar to the early Buddhists as the details of
similar numerical terms — such as the ten commandments, the twelve
tribes, the seven deadly sins, the four gospels, and so on — afterwards
were to the Christians. This summary of the Buddha's last address
may fairly be taken as a summary of Buddhism, which thus appears
to be simply a system of earnest self-culture and self-control.

The following are the details of the aggregate technical terms used
in the above summary, but it will be understood that the English
equivalents used give rather a general than an exact representation of
the ideas expressed by the Pali ones. To attempt more would de-
mand a treatise rather than a note.

The four Earnest Meditations are : —

1. Meditation on the body.

2. Meditation on the sensations.

3. Meditation on the ideas.

4. Meditation on reason and character.

The fourfold Great Struggle against evil is divided into : —

1. The struggle to prevent evil arising.

2. The struggle to put away evil states which have arisen.

3. The struggle to produce goodness not previously existing.

4. The struggle to increase goodness when it does exist.

The four Roads to Saintship are four means by which Iddhi (see
above, § 3, note) is to be acquired. They are : —

1. The will to acquire it united to earnest meditation and the
struggle against evil.

2. The necessary exertion united to earnest meditation and the
struggle against evil.

3. The necessary preparation of the heart united to earnest medita-
tion and the struggle against evil.

4. Investigation united to earnest meditation and the struggle
against evil.

The five moral powers (balani) are said to be the same as the next
class, called organs (indriyani). It is no doubt most remarkable
that, in a summary like this, two classes out of seven should be
absolutely identical except in name. The difference of name is
altogether too unimportant to account, by itself, for the distinction
made. Either the currently accepted explanation of one of the two
aggregate terms must be incorrect, or we must look for some
explanation of the repetition other than the mere desire to record the
double title. Is it impossible that the one class was split into two to
bring the number of the classes up to the sacred number seven,
corresponding to the seven Ratanas of a Cakkavatti ?

III. K


1 30 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 120.

The details of both classes are : —

1. Faith. 2. Energy. 3. Thought. 4. Contemplation. 5. Wisdom.

The seven kinds of Wisdom are : —

1. Energy. 2. Thought. 3. Contemplation. 4. Investigation (of
Scripture). 5. Joy. 6. Repose. 7. Serenity.

The Aryan Eightfold Path consists of: —

1. Right views. 2. High aims. 3. Right speech. 4. Upright
conduct. 5. A harmless livelihood. 6. Perseverance in well-doing.
7„ Intellectual activity. 8. Right rapture.


CHAPTER IV.

i. [122] Now the Exalted One early in the morning
robed himself, and taking his bowl, entered Vesali for
alms ; and when he had passed through Vesali, and
had eaten his meal and was returning from his alms-
seeking he gazed at Vesali with an elephant look 1 and
addressed the venerableA Ananda, and said : — ' This
will be the last time, Ananda, that the Tathagata
will behold Vesali. Come, Ananda, let us go on to
Bha;^a-eama.'

O A

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One.

And the Exalted One proceeded with a great com-
pany of the brethren to Bha/^a-gama ; and there the
Exalted One stayed in the village itself.

2. There the Exalted One addressed the brethren,
and said : — ' It is through not understanding and grasp-
ing four truths 2, O brethren, that we have had to
run so long, to wander so long in this weary path of
transmigration — both you and I.

' And what are these four ? The noble conduct of
life, the noble earnestness in meditation, the noble
kind of wisdom, and the noble salvation of freedom.
[123] But when noble conduct is realized and known,
when noble meditation is realized and known, when
noble wisdom is realized and known, when noble
freedom is realized and known — then is the craving
for future life rooted out, that which leads to renewed
existence is destroyed, and there is no more birth.'

1 Nagapalokitaw Vesaliyaw apaloketva. The Buddhas were
accustomed, says Buddhaghosa, on looking backwards to turn the
whole body round as an elephant does ; because the bones in their
neck were firmly fixed, more so than those of ordinary men !

2 Or Conditions (Dhamma). They must, of course, be carefully
distinguished from the better known Four Noble Truths above,
p. 96.

K 2


132 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 123.

3. Thus spake the Exalted One ; and when the
Happy One had thus spoken, then again the Teacher
said l : —

' Righteousness, earnest thought, wisdom, and freedom
sublime —

These are the truths realized by Gotama, far-
renowned.

Knowing them, he, the knower, proclaimed the truth
to the brethren.

The master with eye divine, the quencher of griefs,
is at peace V


4. There too, while staying at Bha^rta-gama, the
Exalted One held that comprehensive religious talk
with the brethren, saying : — ' Such and such is upright
conduct ; such and such is earnest contemplation ;
such and such is intelligence. Great becomes the
fruit, great the advantage of earnest contemplation,
when it is set round with upright conduct. Great
becomes the fruit, great the advantage of intellect
when it is set round with earnest contemplation. The

1 This is merely a stock phrase for introducing verses which repeat
the idea of the preceding phrase (see above, paragraph 32). It is an
instructive sign of the state of mind in which such records are put
together, that these verses could be ascribed to Gotama himself with-
out any feeling of the incongruity involved.

2 The last word, Parinibbuto, was misunderstood by Childers.
\ It is used in the Nikayas of living persons in the sense of set free

(from evil), at peace. In one passage (M. I, 446) it is even used of
a living horse. In all of these passages Childers's rendering 'ex-
tinguished, extinct, dead ' would be quite inexplicable. Such passages
are Majjhima I, 45, 235, 251 ; II, 102 ; Thera-gatha 5, 7, 8, 9, &c. ;
Sutta Nipata 359, 758; Sarayutta III, 26, 54; Itivuttaka 52, 56;
Dhammapada 89. The same usage is still found in later books
(Milinda 50 ; Jataka IV, 303, 453). But, just as in the somewhat
analogous Christian expression entered into rest, the word (still in its
ordinary meaning as above) is once or twice used, figuratively, of
Arahants who have died. They are at peace, set free. There is no
word in the Buddhist phrase corresponding to the Christian ' entered.'
The Buddhists never say entered into Nirvana of a deceased person.
So far as I know the phrase occurs only once (Sutta Nipata 514), and
then it is used of a living person.


D. ii. 124. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASK. I 33

mind set round with intelligence is set quite free from
the Intoxications, that is to say, from the Intoxication
of Sensuality, from the Intoxication of Becoming, from
the Intoxication of Delusion, from the Intoxication of
Ignorance.'

5, 6. Now when the Exalted One had remained at
Bha/^a-gama as long- as he desired, he addressed
the venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Come, Ananda,
let us go to Hatthi-gama.'

[Then in similar words, end of § i and §§2, 3, and 4
repeated, it is related how the Buddha went there, and
then on to Amba-gama, and then on to Jambugama,
at each place holding similar discourses ; and then
went on to Bhoga-nagara.]


7. Now there at Bhoga-nagara the Exalted One
stayed at the Ananda Shrine.

There the Exalted One addressed the brethren
and said : — ' I will teach you, O brethren, these four
Great Authorities \ Listen thereto, and give good
heed, and I will speak.'

[124] ' Even so, lord ! ' said the brethren, in assent 2,
to the Exalted One, and the Exalted One spoke as
follows : —

8. 'In the first place, brethren, a brother may say
thus : — " From the mouth of the Exalted One himself


1 The meaning of mahapadesa is not quite clear. Perhaps it
should be rendered ' true authorities.' I have followed Buddhaghosa in
taking apadesa as the last part of the compound. He says: — maha-
padesa ti maha-okase maha-apadese va. Buddhadayo
mahante mahante apadisitva vuttani mahakara;/ani ti attho,
' the causes (authorities) alleged when referring to Buddha and other
great men.' Mr. Samarasekara takes it as maha-padesa.

2 I ought perhaps to have explained why I have ventured to differ
from Childers in the rendering of the common word patisuwati.
The root sru seems to have meant 'to sound' before it meant 'to
hear'; and, whether this be so or not, pati-suwati means not
simply ' to consent,' but ' to answer (assentingly).' It has been pointed
out to me that answer was formerly andstverian where swerian is
probably not unrelated to the root svar, 'to sound.'


134 XVL MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 124.

have I heard, from his own mouth have I received it.
This is the truth, this the law, this the teaching of the
Master." The word spoken, brethren, by that brother
should neither be received with praise nor treated with
scorn. Without praise and without scorn every word
and syllable should be carefully understood and then
put beside the Suttas [the stock paragraphs learnt by
heart in the community] and compared with the Vinaya
[the rules of the Order]1. If when so compared they
do not harmonize with the Suttas, and do not fit in with
the rules of the Order, then you may come to the con-
clusion : — " Verily, this is not the word of the Exalted
One, and has been wrongly grasped by that brother."
Therefore, brethren, you should reject it. But if they
harmonize with the Suttas and fit in with the rules
of the Order, then you may come to the conclusion : —
" Verily, this is the word of the Exalted One, and has
been well grasped by that brother." This, brethren,
you should receive as the first Great Authority.

9. ' Again, brethren, a brother may say thus : — " In
such and such a dwelling-place there is a company
of the brethren with their elders and leaders. From
the mouth of that company have I heard, face to face
have I received it. This is the truth, this the law,
this the teaching of the Master." The word spoken,
brethren, by that brother should neither be received
with praise nor treated with scorn. Without praise
and without scorn every word and syllable should be
carefully understood, and then put beside the Suttas
and compared with the rules of the Order. If when
so compared they do not harmonize with the Suttas,
and do not fit in with the rules of the Order, then you
may come to the conclusion : — " Verily, this is not the
word of the Exalted One, and has been wrongly
grasped by that company of the brethren." Therefore,
brethren, you should reject it. But if they harmonize


1 Sutte otaretabbani vinaye sandassetabbani, where one
would expect to find the word Pi/aka if it had been in use when this
passage was first written or composed.


D. ii. 125. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. I35

with the Suttas and fit in with the rules of the Order,
then you may come to the conclusion : — [125] " Verily,
this is the word of the Exalted One, and has been
well grasped by that company of the brethren." This,
brethren, you should receive as the second Great
Authority.

10. ' Again, brethren, a brother may say thus : — " In
such and such a dwelling-place there are dwelling
many elders of the Order, deeply read, holding the
faith as handed down by tradition, versed in the
truths, versed in the regulations of the Order, versed
in the summaries of the doctrines and the law. From
the mouth of those elders have I heard, from their
mouth have I received it. This is the truth, this the
law, this the teaching of the Master." The word
spoken, brethren, by that brother should neither be
received with praise nor treated with scorn. Without
praise and without scorn every word and syllable
should be carefully understood, and then put beside
the Suttas and compared with the rules of the Order.
If when so compared they do not harmonize with the
Suttas and do not fit in with the rules of the Order,
then you may come to the conclusion : — " Verily, this
is not the word of the Exalted One, and has been
wrongly grasped by those elders." Therefore, brethren,
you should reject it. But if they harmonize with the
Suttas and fit in with the rules of the Order, then you
may come to the conclusion : — " Verily, this is the word
of the Exalted One, and has been well grasped by
those elders." This, brethren, you should receive as
the third Great Authority.

11.' Again, brethren, a brother may say : — " In such
and such a dwelling-place there is there living a
brother, deeply read, holding the faith as handed
down by tradition, versed in the truths, versed in the
regulations of the Order, versed in the summaries of
the doctrines and the law. From the mouth of that
elder have I heard, from his mouth have I received it.
This is the truth, this the law, this the teaching of
the Master." The word spoken, brethren, by that


136 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 125.

brother should neither be received with praise nor
treated with scorn. Without praise and without scorn
every word and syllable should be carefully understood,
and then put beside the Suttas and compared with the
rules of the Order. If when so compared they do not
harmonize with the Suttas, and do not fit in with the
rules of the Order, then you may come to the con-
clusion : — " Verily, this is not the word of the Exalted
One, and has been wrongly grasped by that brother."
Therefore, brethren, you should reject it. But if they
harmonize with the Suttas and fit in with the rules of
the Order, then you may come to the conclusion : —
[126] " Verily, this is the word of the Exalted One, and
has been well grasped by that brother." This, brethren,
you should receive as the fourth Great Authority.
' These, brethren, are the Four Great Authorities.'


12. There too, the Exalted One held that comprehen-
sive religious talk with the brethren, saying : — ' Such
and such is upright conduct ; such and such is earnest
contemplation ; such and such is intelligence. Great
becomes the fruit, great the advantage of earnest
contemplation, when it is set round with upright con-
duct. Great becomes the fruit, great the advantage
of intellect when it is set round with earnest con-
templation. The mind set round with intelligence
is set quite free from the Intoxications, that is to
say, from the Intoxication of Sensuality, from the
Intoxication of Becoming, from the Intoxication of
Delusion, from the Intoxication of Ignorance.'


13. Now when the Exalted One had remained as
long as heA desired at Bhoga-gama, heAaddressed the
venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Come, Ananda, let us
go on to Pava.'

'Even so, lord!' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent to the Exalted One. And the Exalted One
proceeded with a great company of the brethren to
Pava.


D. ii. 127. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. I 37

And there at Pava the Exalted One stayed at the
Mango Grove of Chunda, who was by family a smith.


14. Now Chunda, the worker in metals, heard that the
Exalted One had come to Pava, and was staying there
in his Mango Grove.

And Chunda, the worker in metals, went to the place
where the Exalted One was, and saluting him took
his seat respectfully on one side. And when he was
thus seated, the Exalted One instructed, aroused,
incited, and gladdened him with religious discourse.

15. Then he, instructed, aroused, incited, and glad-
dened by the religious discourse, addressed the Exalted
One, and said : — ' May the Exalted One do me the
honour of taking his meal together with the brethren,
at my house to-morrow ? '

And the Exalted One signified, by silence, his
consent.

16. Then seeing that the Exalted One had con-
sented, [127] Chunda, the worker in metals, rose from
his seat and bowed down before the Exalted One,
and keeping him on his right hand as he passed him,
departed thence.

1 7. Now at the end of the night, Chunda, the worker
in metals, made ready in his dwelling-place sweet rice
and cakes, and a quantity of truffles *. And he


1 Sukara-maddava. See the note in my translation of the
Milinda (1890), Vol. I, p. 244. Dr. Hoey informs me that the
peasantry in these districts are still very fond of a bulbous root, a sort
of truffle, found in the jungle, and called sukara-kanda. Mr. K. E.
Neumann, in his translation of the Majjhima (1896), p. xx, has
collected several similar instances of truffle-like roots, or edible plants,
having such names. The Sinhalese translation of the Digha (London
and Colombo, 1905), p. 796, simply repeats the Pali word. Buddhists
do not attach much importance to the point. They have been mostly
vegetarians, and are increasingly so. But their scheme of ethics works
from within; and the Buddha expressly refused, in the case of
Devadatta's schism, to lay down any hard and fast rule as to abstinence
from flesh as food. It is perhaps of importance that the food prepared
by Chunda and eaten by the Buddha is called Bhatta (below, § 21) :
this is not used elsewhere of meat.


1^8 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. i:


announced the hour to the Exalted One, saying : — ' The
hour, lord, has come, and the meal is ready.'

1 8. And the Exalted One robed himself early in
the morning, and taking his bowl, went with the
brethren to the dwelling-place of Chunda, the worker in
metals. When he had come thither he seated himself
on the seat prepared for him. And when he was
seated he addressed Chunda, the worker in metals, and
said : — ' As to the truffles you have made ready, serve
me with them, Chunda : and as to the other food, the
sweet rice and cakes, serve the brethren with it.'

' Even so, lord ! ' said Chunda, the worker in metals,
in assent, to the Blessed One. And the truffles he
had made ready he served to the Exalted One ; whilst
the other food, the sweet rice and cakes, he served to
the members of the Order.

19. Now the Exalted One addressed Chunda, the
worker in metals, and said: — 'Whatever truffles,
Chunda, are left over to thee, those bury in a hole. I see
no one, Chunda, on earth nor in Mara's heaven, nor in
Brahma's heaven, no one among Samaras and Brah-
maz^as, among gods, and men, by whom, when he has
eaten it, that food can be properly assimilated, save by
a Tatha^ata.'

' Even so, lord ! ' said Chunda, the worker in metals,
in assent, to the Exalted One. And whatever truffles
remained over those he buried in a hole. And he
went to the place where the Exalted One was ; and
when he had come there, took his seat respectfully on
one side. And when he was seated, the Exalted One
instructed and aroused and incited and gladdened
Chunda, the worker in metals, with religious discourse.
And the Exalted One then rose from his seat and
departed thence.

20. Now when the Exalted One had eaten the rice
prepared by Chunda, the worker in metals, there fell
upon him a dire sickness, the disease of dysentery, and
sharp pain came upon him, even unto death. [12s] But
the Exalted One, mindful and self-possessed, bore it
without complaint.


D. ii. 129. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 139

A

And the Exalted One addressed the venerable Ananda,

A

and said: — ' Come, Ananda, let us go on to^ Kusinara.'
'Even so, lord!' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One.

' When he had eaten Chunda's food,
The copper-smith's — thus have I heard —
He bore with fortitude the pain,
The sharp pain even unto death !

When he had eaten, from the truffles in the food

There fell upon the teacher sickness dire,

Then after nature was relieved the Exalted One

announced and said :
' I now am going on to Kusinara1.'


21. Now the Exalted One went aside from the path
to the foot of a certain tree; and when he had come there
he addressed the venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Fold,

A ' '

I pray you, Ananda, the robe^ in four ; and spread it
out for me. I am weary, Ananda, and must rest
awhile ! '

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One, and spread out the robe
folded fourfold.

22. And the Exalted One seated himself on the
seat prepared for him ; and when he was seated, he
addressed the venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Fetch
me, I pray you, Ananda, some water. I am thirsty,
Ananda, and would drink.'

When he had thus spoken, the venerable Ananda
said to the Exalted One : — ' But just now, lord, about
five hundred carts have eone over. That water stirred
up by the wheels has become shallow and flows fouled
and turbid. [129] This river Kaku/^a, lord, not far
off, is clear and pleasant, cool and transparent, easy to

1 ' It should be understood,' says Buddhaghosa, ' that these are
verses by the Theras who held the council.' And he repeats this at
§§ 38, 41. These here seem to be two different versifications of the
same legend.


I40 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 129.

get down into, and delightful. There the Exalted
One may both drink the water, and cool his limbs.'

23. Again the second^ time the Exalted One
addressed the venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Fetch
me, I pray you, Ananda, some water. I am thirsty,
Ananda, and would drink.'

And again the second time the venerable Ananda
said to the Exalted One : — ' But just now, lord, about
five hundred carts have gone over. That water stirred
up by the wheels has become shallow and flows fouled
and turbid. This river Kaku///^a, lord, not far off, is
clear and pleasant, cool and transparent, easy to get
down into, and delightful. There the Exalted One
may both drink the water, and cool his limbs/

24. Again the third time the Exalted One addressed
the venerable Ananda, and said : — ' Fetch me, I pray
you, Ananda, some water. I am thirsty, Ananda, and
would drink.'

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One : and taking a bowl he
went down to the streamlet. And lo ! the streamlet
which, stirred up by the wheels, was but just now
become shallow, and was flowing-- fouled and turbid,
had begun, when the venerable Ananda came up to it,
to flow clear and bright and free from all turbidity.

25. Then Ananda thought : — ' How wonderful, how
marvellous is the great might and power of the Tatha-
gata ! : For this streamlet which, stirred up by the
wheels, was but just now become shallow and was
flowing foul and turbid, now, as I come up to it, is
flowing clear and bright and free from all turbidity.'

And taking water in the bowl he returned towards
the Exalted One ; and when he had come where the
Exalted One was he said to him : — ' How wonderful,

1 This is a most unusual way of speaking of the Buddha. In the
Suttantas believers are represented as addressing him as bhante, lord
or sir (the same form as that used by junior members of the Order in
addressing their seniors) ; and as speaking of him by the epithet
BhagavS the Exalted One. Unbelievers address him as bho
Gotama, and speak of him as the Sama;/a Gotama.


D.ii. 130. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 141

how marvellous is the great might and power of the
Tathagata ! For this streamlet which, stirred up by
the wheels, was but just now become shallow and was
flowing foul and turbid, now, as I come up to it, is
flowing clear and bright and free from all turbidity.
Let the Exalted One drink the water ! Let the Happy
One drink the water ! '

Then the Exalted One drank of the water.


26. [i3o] Now at that time a man named Pukkusa l,
a young Mallian, a disciple of A/ara Kalama's, was
passing along the high road from Kusinara to Pava.

And Pukkusa, the young Mallian, saw the Exalted
One seated at the foot of a tree. On seeing him, he
went up to the place where the Exalted One was, and
when he had come there he saluted the Exalted One,
and took his rest respectfully on one side. And when
he was seated Pukkusa, the young Mallian, said to the
Exalted One: — ' How wonderful a thing it is, lord!
and how marvellous, that those who have gone forth
out of the world should pass their time in a state of
mind so calm !

27. 'Formerly, lord, A/ara Kalama was once walk-
ing along the high road ; and leaving the road he sat
himself down under a certain tree to rest during the
heat of the day. Now, lord, five hundred carts passed
by one after the other, each close to A/ara Kalama.
And a certain man, who was following close behind
that caravan of carts, went up to the place where A/ara
Kalama was, and when he was come there he spake as
follows to A/ara Kalama : —

' " But, lord, did you see those five hundred carts
goby?"

' " No, indeed, I saw them not."

1 The Pukkusas were one of the despised tribes. Compare M. II,
152; A. IL85; PP. IV, 19; Jar. IV, 205, 306; Lalita Vistara
XXI, 17. But Buddhaghosa says Pukkusa must here be simply
a name, as the Mallas were Khattiyas. He adds that this Pukkusa
was the owner of the five hundred carts that had just passed by ; and
that A/ara Kalama was called A/ara because he was Digha-pingalo,
Kalama being his family name.


142 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 130.

' " But, lord, did you hear the sound of them ? "

' " No, indeed, sir, I heard not their sound."

' " But, lord, were you then asleep ? "

' " No, sir, I was not asleep."

' " But, lord, were you then conscious ? '

' " Even so, sir."

' " So that you, lord, though you were both conscious
and awake, neither saw, nor heard the sound of five
hundred carts passing by, one after the other, and each
close to you. Why, lord, even your robe was
sprinkled over with the dust of them ! " '

' " It is even so, sir." '

' Then thought that man : — " How wonderful a thing
is it, and how marvellous, that those who have gone
forth out of the world should pass their time in a state
of mind so calm ! [i3l] So much so that a man though
being both conscious and awake, neither sees, nor hears
the sound of five hundred carts passing by, one after
the other, and each close to him."

' And after giving utterance to his deep faith in
A/ara Kalama, he departed thence.'

28. ' Now what think you, Pukkusa, which is the
more difficult thing either to do or to meet with — that
a man, being conscious and awake, should neither see,
nor hear the sound of five hundred carts passing by,
one after the other, close to him, — or that a man, being
conscious and awake, should neither see, nor hear the
sound thereof when the falling rain goes on beating
and splashing, and the lightnings are flashing forth, and
the thunderbolts are crashing ? '

29. ' What in comparison, lord, can these five
hundred carts do, or six or seven or eight or nine or
ten hundred, yea, even hundreds and thousands of
carts ? That certainly is more difficult, both to do and
to meet with, that a man, being conscious and awake,
should neither see, nor hear the sound thereof when
the falling rain goes on beating and splashing, and the
lightnings are flashing forth, and the thunderbolts are
crashing.'

30. ' Now on one occasion, Pukkusa, I was dwelling


D. ii. 132. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 143

A

at Atuma, and was at the Threshing-floor. And at
that time the falling rain began to beat and to splash,
and the lightnings to flash forth, and the thunderbolts
to crash ; and two peasants, brothers, and four oxen
were killed. Then, Pukkusa,a great multitude of people
went forth from Atuma, and went up to the place where
the two peasants, brothers, and the four oxen, lay killed.'

31. 'Now at that time, Pukkusa, I had gone forth
from the Threshing-floor, and was walking up and down
thinking at the entrance to the Threshing-floor. And
a certain man came, Pukkusa, out of that great
multitude of people, up to the place where I was ; and
when he came up he saluted me, and took his place
respectfully on one side. And as he stood there,
Pukkusa, I said to the man : —

32. '"Why then, sir, is this great multitude of
people assembled together?'"

[132] ' " But just now, the falling rain began to beat
and to splash, and the lightnings to flash forth, and the
thunderbolts to crash ; and two peasants, brothers,
were killed, and four oxen. Therefore is this great
multitude of people gathered together. But where,
lord, were you ? " '

' " I, sir, have been here all the while."

1 " But, lord, did you see it ? "

' " I, sir, saw nothing."

' " But, lord, did you hear it ? "

' " I, sir, heard nothing."

' " Were you then, lord, asleep ? "

' " I, sir, was not asleep."

1 "Were you then conscious, lord?"
liven so, sir.

' " So that you, lord, being conscious and awake,

neither saw, nor heard the sound thereof when the

i falling rain went on beating and splashing, and the

/ lightnings were flashing forth, and the thunderbolts

/ were crashing." '

' "That is so, sir."

33. 'Then, Pukkusa, the thought occurred to that
man : —


144 XVI- MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 132.

' " How wonderful a thing is it, and marvellous, that
those who have gone forth out of the world should
pass their time in a state of mind so calm ! — so that
a man, being conscious and awake, neither sees, nor
hears the sound thereof when the falling rain is beat-
ing and splashing, and the lightnings are flashing forth,
and the thunderbolts are crashing." And after giving
utterance to his deep faith in me, he departed from me
[with the customary demonstrations of respect].'

34. And when he had thus spoken, Pukkusa, the
young Mallian, addressed the Blessed One in these
words : — ' Now I, lord, as to the faith that I had in
A/ara Kalama, that I winnow away as in a mighty
wind, and wash it away as in a swiftly running stream.
Most excellent, lord, are the words of thy mouth, most
excellent ! Just as if a man were to set up that which
is thrown down, or were to reveal that which is hidden
away, or were to point out the right road to him who
has gone astray, or were to bring a lamp into the dark-
ness, so that those who have eyes can see external
forms — just even so, lord, has the truth been made
known to me, in many a figure, by the Exalted One.
[133] And I, even I, betake myself, lord, to the Ex-
alted One as my refuge, to the Truth, and to the
Brotherhood. May the Exalted One accept me as a
disciple, as a true believer, from this day forth, as long
as life endures ! : '

35. Now Pukkusa, the young Mallian, addressed a
certain man and said : — ' Fetch me, I pray you, my
good man, a pair of robes of cloth of gold, burnished
and ready for wear/

' So be it, sir ! ' said that man, in assent, to Pukkusa,
the young Mallian ; and he brought a pair of robes of
cloth of gold, burnished and ready for wear.


1 This is a stock phrase constituting the final answer of a hitherto
unconverted man at the end of one of those argumentative dialogues bv
which Gotama overcame opposition or expounded the truth. After
a discussion of exalted themes it fits in very appropriately ; here and
elsewhere it is incongruous and strained. See below, V, 50.


D. ii. T.13- THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 45

And the Mallian Pukkusa presented the pair of robes
of cloth of gold, burnished and ready for wear, to the
Exalted One, saying : — ' Lord, this pair of robes of bur-
nished cloth of gold is ready for wear. May the Ex-
alted One show me favour and accept it at my hands ! '

1 In that case, Pukkusa, robe me in one, and Ananda
in one.'

' Even so, lord ! ' said Pukkusa, in assent, to the Ex-
alted One ; and in one he robed the Exalted One, and
in one, Ananda.

-;6. Then the Exalted One instructed and aroused
and incited and gladdened Pukkusa, the young Mallian,
with religious discourse. And Pukkusa, the young
Mallian, when he had been instructed and aroused and
incited and gladdened by the Exalted One with reli-
gious discourse, arose from his seat, and bowed down
before the Exalted One ; and keeping him on his right
hand as he passed him, departed thence.


37. Now not long after the Mallian Pukkusa had
gone, the venerable Ananda placed that pair of robes
of cloth of gold, burnished and ready for wear, on the
body of the Exalted One ; and when it was so placed on
the body of the Exalted One it appeared to have lost
its splendour a !

And the venerable Ananda said to the Exalted One: —
' How wonderful a thing is it, lord, and how marvellous,
that the colour of the skin of the Exalted One should

1 To understand what is here represented to have happened one
must understand the mode in which the Buddhist Wanderers wore
their robes. There was no tailoring at all. The set of three robes
was simply three lengths of cotton cloth about a yard wide. One
piece, folded in half, was wrapped round the body. Another piece
covered the limbs from the waist to the ankles. It was supported by
a girdle and went three or four times round. The third piece was put
on over this last, went twice round the legs, and then the rest of it
was thrown over the left shoulder, and passed under the right arm
across the body. See below, ch. V, § 19.

Pukkusa had placed the two lengths of cloth, shawl-wise, over the
shoulders of the recipients. When he left them Ananda assisted the
Buddha to put them on as Nos. 1 and 3 of a set of robes.

III. L


I46 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 133.

be so clear, so exceeding bright ! For when I placed
even this pair of robes of burnished cloth of gold and
ready for wear on the body [134] of the Exalted One,
lo ! it seemed as if it had lost its splendour ! '

' It is even so, Ananda. There are two occasions,
Ananda, on which the colour of the skin of a Tathagata
becomes clear and exceeding bright. What are the
two ?

A

' On the night, Ananda, on which a Tathagata attains
to the supreme and perfect insight, and on the night in
which he passes finally away in that utter passing away
which leaves nothing whatever to remain — on these two
occasions the colour of the skin of the Tathagata be-
comes clear and exceeding bright.

38. ■ And now this day, Ananda, at the third watch
of the night, in the Upavattana of Kusinara, in the
Sala Grove of the Mallians, between the twin Sala
trees, the utter passing away of the Tathagata will
take place. Come, Ananda ! Let us go on to the river
Kakuttha.'

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One.

The pair of robes of cloth of gold,
All burnished, Pukkusa had brought,
Clad on with them the Master then
Shone forth in colour like to gold * !


39. Now the Exalted One with a great com-
pany of the brethren went on to the river Kakuttha ;
and when he had come there, he went down into the
water, and bathed, and drank. And coming up out
again on the other side he went on to the Mango
Grove.

1 We have here the commencement of the legend which afterwards
grew into an account of an actual ' transfiguration ' of the Buddha.
It is very curious that it should have taken place soon after the Buddha
had announced to Ananda his approaching death, and that in the
Buddhist Sutta it should be connected so closely with that event ; for
a similar remark applies also to the Transfiguration mentioned in the
Gospels.


D. ii. 135. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. I47

And when he was come there he addressed the
venerable Chundaka, and said : — ' Fold, I pray you,
Chundaka, a robe in four and spread it out. I am
weary, Chundaka, and would lie down.'

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Chundaka, in
assent, to the Exalted One. And he folded a robe
in four, and spread it out.

40. And the Exalted One laid himself down on his
right side, with one foot resting on the other ; and
calm and self-possessed he meditated, intending to
rise up again in due time. [135] And the venerable
Chundaka seated himself there in front of the Exalted
One.

41. The Buddha to Kakuttha's river came,
Whose clear and pleasant waters limpid flow.
He plunged beneath the stream wearied and worn.
The Buddha without equal in the world !
When he had bathed and drunk, the teacher then
Crossed o'er, the brethren thronging round his steps ;
The Blessed Master, preaching the while the truth,
The Mighty Sage came to the Mango Grove.
There spake he to the brother Chundaka : —
' Spread me the fourfold robe out as a couch.'
Urged by the Holy One, he quickly spread
The fourfold robe in order on the ground.
The Master laid him down, wearied and worn ;
And there, before him, Chunda took his seat.


42. And the Exalted One addressed the venerable
Ananda, and said : — ' Now it may happen, Ananda,
that some one should stir up remorse in Chunda the
smith, by saying : — " This is evil to thee, Chunda, and
loss to thee in that when the Tathagata had eaten his
last meal from thy provision, then he died." Any such
remorse, Ananda, in Chunda the smith should be
checked by saying: — "This is good to thee, Chunda, and
gain to thee, in that when the Tathagata had eaten his
last meal from thy provision, then he died. From the
very mouth of the Exalted One, Chunda, have I heard,

l 2


I48 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 135.

from his own mouth have I received this saying : —
' These two offerings of food are of equal fruit, and of
equal profit, and of much greater fruit and much greater
profit than any other — and which are the two ? [136]
The offering of food which, when a Tathagata has
eaten, he attains to supreme and perfect insight ; and
the offering of food which, when a Tathagata has
eaten, he passes away by that utter passing away in
which nothing whatever remains behind — these two
offerings of food are of equal fruit and of equal profit,
and of much greater fruit and much greater profit than
any others. There has been laid up by Chunda the
smith a karma redounding to length of life, redounding
to good birth, redounding to good fortune, redounding to
good fame, redounding to the inheritance of heaven, and
of sovereign power.' : In this way, Ananda, should be
checked any remorse in Chunda the smith V

43. Then the Exalted One, perceiving how the
matter stood, uttered on that occasion this hymn of
exultation : —

' To him who gives shall virtue be increased ;
In him who curbs himself, no anger can arise ;
The righteous man casts off all evil ways,
And by the rooting out of lust, and bitterness,
And all infatuation, is at peace ! '

End of the Fourth Portion for Recitation, containing
The Episode of A/ara.

1 Here, and above pp. 137-9, we have spelt the name of the smith,
in English, as it is pronounced in Pali, and should be pronounced in
English.


CHAPTER V.

i. [137] Now the Exalted One addressed the verier-

A A

able Ananda, and said : — ' Come, Ananda, let us go on
to the Sala Grove of the Mallas, the Upavattana of
Kusinara, on the further side of the river Hiranya-
vatiY

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One.

And the Exalted One proceeded with a great com-
pany of the brethren to the Sala Grove of the Mallas,
the Upavattana of Kusinara, on the further side of the
river Hiranyavati : and when he had come there he
addressed the venerable Ananda, and said : —

' A

' Spread over for me, I pray you, Ananda, the couch
with its head to the^ north, between the twin Sala
trees \ I am weary, Ananda, and would lie down.'

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One. And he spread a covering
over the couch with its head to the north, between the
twin Sala trees. And the Exalted One laid himself
down on his right side, with one leg resting on the
other ; and he was mindful and self-possessed.


2. Now at that time the twin Sala trees were all
one mass of bloom with flowers out of season ; and

1 According to the commentator 'tradition says that there was
a row of Sala trees at the head (sis'a) of that couch, and another at
its foot, one young Sala tree being close to its head, and another
close to its foot. The twin Sala trees were so called because the two
trees were equally grown in respect of the roots, trunks, branches,
and leaves. There was a couch there in the park for the special use
of the (periodically elected) chieftain of the Mallas, and it was this
couch which the Exalted One asked Ananda to make ready.'

There is no further explanation of the term uttara-sisaka#z,
which may have been the name for a slab of wood or stone reserved
on great occasions for the use of the leaders of the neighbouring
republic, but available at other times for passers-by.


1 50 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 137.

all over the body of the Tathagata 1 these dropped
and sprinkled and scattered themselves, out of rever-
ence for the successor of the Buddhas of old. And
heavenly Mandarava flowers, too, and heavenly sandal-
wood powder came falling from the sky, and all over
the body of the Tathagata they descended and sprinkled
[138] and scattered themselves, out of reverence for
the successor of the Buddhas of old. And heavenly
music was sounded in the sky, out of reverence for
the successor of the Buddhas of old. And heavenly
songs came wafted from the skies, out of reverence
for the successor of the Buddhas of old !

3. Then the Exalted One addressed the venerable
Ananda and said : — ' The twin Sala trees are all one
mass of bloom with flowers out of season ; all over the
body of the Tathagata these drop and sprinkle and
scatter themselves, out of reverence for the successor
of the Buddhas of old. And heavenly Mandarava
flowers, too, and heavenly sandal-wood powder come
falling from the sky, and all over the body of the
Tathagata they descend and sprinkle and scatter them-
selves, out of reverence for the successor of the
Buddhas of old. And heavenly music sounds in the
sky, out of reverence for the successor of the Buddhas
of old. And heavenly songs come wafted from the
skies, out of reverence for the successor of the Buddhas
of old !

A

' Now it is not thus, Ananda, that the Tathagata is
rightly honoured, reverenced, venerated, held sacred
or revered. But the brother or the sister, the devout
man or the devout woman, who continually fulfils all
the greater and the lesser duties, who is correct in life,
walking according to the precepts — it is he who rightly
honours, reverences, venerates, holds sacred, and
reveres the Tathagata with the worthiest homage.


1 We have here the unusual case of the Buddha being called Tatha-
gata, not by himself, but by a third person, the compiler of the
Suttanta. The paragraph is perhaps moulded by inadvertence on the
next one. But see § 10. Compare the note above on IV, 25.


D. ii. 139. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 5 1

Therefore, O Ananda, be ye constant in the fulfilment
of the greater and of the lesser duties, and be ye
correct in life, walking according to the precepts ; and
thus Ananda, should it be taught.'

4. Now at that time the venerable Upava/za was
standing in front of the Exalted One, fanning him.
And the Exalted One was not pleased with Upavawa,
and he said to him : — ' Stand aside, O brother, stand
not in front of me ! '

Then this thought sprang up in the mind of the
venerable Ananda : — [139] ' This venerable Upavawa
had long been in close personal attendance and service
on the Exalted One. And now, at the last moment,
the Exalted One is not pleased with Upava^a, and
has said to him : — " Stand aside, O brother, stand not
in front of me ! " What may be the cause and what
the reason that the Exalted One is not pleased with
Upavawa, and speaks thus with him ? '

5. And the venerable Ananda said to the Exalted
One : — ' This venerable Upava^a has long been in close
personal attendance and service on the Exalted One.
And now, at the last moment, the Exalted One is not
pleased with Upavawa, and has said to him : — " Stand
aside, O brother, stand not in front of me ! " What
may be the cause and what the reason that the Exalted
One is not pleased with Upava^a, and speaks thus
with him ? '

' In great numbers, Ananda, are the gods of the ten
world-systems assembled together to behold the
Tathagata. For twelve leagues, Ananda, around the
Sala Grove of the Mallas, the Upavattana of Kusinara,
there is no spot in size even as the pricking of the
point of the tip of a hair which is not pervaded by
powerful spirits \ And the spirits, Ananda, are mur-


1 Buddhaghosa explains that even twenty to sixty angels or gods
(devatayo) could stand aragga-ko/i-nittudana- (MS. nittad-
dana-) matte pi, 'on a point pricked by the extreme point of a
gimlet,' without inconveniencing one another (annam anfiam avya-
badhenti). It is most curious to find this exact analogy to the
notorious discussion as to how many angels could stand on the point


152 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 139.

muring, and say : — " From afar have we come to behold
the Tathagata. Few and far between are the Tatha-
gatas, the Arahant Buddhas who appear in the world :
and now to-day, in the last watch of the night, the
death of a Tathagata will take place ; and this eminent
brother stands in front of the Tathagata, concealing
him, and in his last hour we are prevented from
beholding the Tathagata " ; thus, Ananda, do the
spirits murmur.'

6. ' But of what kind of spirits is the Exalted One
thinking ? '

' There are spirits, Ananda, in the sky, but of
worldly mind, who dishevel their hair and weep, who
stretch forth their arms and weep, [140] who fall
prostrate on the ground, and roll to and fro in anguish
at the thought : — " Too soon will the Exalted One die !
Too soon will the Exalted One pass away ! Full
soon will the Light of the world vanish away * ! "

' There are spirits, too, Ananda, on the earth,
and of worldly mind, who tear their hair and weep,
who stretch forth their arms and weep, who fall pros-


of a needle in a commentary written at just that period of Buddhist
history which corresponds to the Middle Ages of Christendom. The
passage in the text does not really imply or suggest any such doctrine,
though the whole episode is so absurd that the author of the text
could not have hesitated to say so, had such an idea been the common
belief of the early Buddhists. With these sections should be com-
pared the similar sections in Chapter VI, of which these are perhaps
merely an echo.

There is no comment on nittudana, but there can be little doubt
that Childers's conjectural reading is correct.

1 It is literally, ' the Eye in the world will vanish away,' where Eye
is of course used figuratively of that by the aid of which spiritual truths
can be perceived, corresponding exactly to the similar use in Europe
of the word Light. The Master is often called ' He with the Eye,'
' He of the Spiritual Eye ' (see, for instance, the last verses in this
Book), and here by a bold figure of speech he is called the Eye itself,
which was shortly about to vanish away from the world, the means
of spiritual insight which was no longer to be available for the common
use of all men. But this is, it will be noticed, only the lament of the
foolish and ignorant.


I), ii. 140. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 153

trate on the ground, and roll to and fro in anguish
at the thought : — " Too soon will the Exalted One die !
Too soon will the Happy One pass away ! Full soon
will the Eye of the world disappear from sight."

' But the spirits who are free from passion bear
it, calm and self-possessed, mindful of the saying which
begins: — "Impermanent indeed are all component things.
How then is it possible [whereas anything whatever,
when born, brought into being, and organized, contains
within itself the inherent necessity of dissolution —
how then is it possible that such a being should not
be dissolved ? No such condition can exist 1 ! "

7. ' In times past, lord, the brethren, when they
had spent the rainy season in different districts, used
to come to see the Tathagata, and we used to receive
those very reverend brethren to audience, and to wait
upon the Exalted One. But, lord, after the end of
the Exalted One, we shall not be able to receive those
very reverend brethren to audience, and to wait upon
the Exalted One.'

8. ' There are these four places, Ananda, which
the believing clansman should visit with feelings of
reverence. Which are the four ?

A

' The place, Ananda, at which the believing man can
say : — " Here the Tathagata was born ! ' is a spot to
be visited with feelings of reverence.

' The place, Ananda, at which the believing man can
say : — " Here the Tathagata attained to the supreme
and perfect insight ! " is a spot to be visited with
feelings of reverence.

A

' The place, Ananda, at which the believing man
can say: — " Here was the kingdom of righteousness set
on foot by the Tathagata ! ': is a spot to be visited
with feelings of reverence.

' The place, Ananda, at which the believing man can
say : — " Here the Tathagata passed finally away in that
utter passing away which leaves nothing whatever to


1 The words in brackets have been inserted from par. Ill, 48 above.
See par. VI, 19 below.


I 54 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 140.

remain behind ! " is a spot to be visited with feelings
of reverence. [i4l] These are the four places, Ananda,
which the believing clansman should visit with feelings
of reverence.

A

' And there will come, Ananda, to such spots,
believers, brethren and sisters of the Order, or devout
men and devout women, and will say : — " Here was the
Tathagata born ! " or, " Here did the Tathagata attain
to the supreme and perfect insight!" or, " Here was
the kingdom of righteousness set on foot by the
Tathagata ! " or, " Here the Tathagata passed away
in that utter passing away which leaves nothing what-
ever to remain behind ! "

' And they, Ananda, who shall die while they, with
believing heart, are journeying on such pilgrimage,
shall be reborn after death, when the body shall
dissolve, in the happy realms of heaven.'


9. ' How are we to conduct ourselves, lord, with
regard to womankind ? '

' As not seeing them, Ananda.'

' But if we should see them, what are we to do ? '

' No talking, Ananda.'

' But if they should speak to us, lord, what are we
to do ? '

' Keep wide awake, Ananda.'


10. 'What are we to do, lord, with the remains of
the Tathagata ? '

O A

' Hinder not yourselves, Ananda, by honouring the
remains of the Tathagata. Be zealous, I beseech you,
Ananda, in your own behalf! Devote yourselves to
your own good ! Be earnest, be zealous, be intent
on your own good ! There are wise men, Ananda,
among the nobles, among the brahmins, among the
heads of houses, who are firm believers in the Tatha-
gata ; and they will do due honour to the remains
of the Tathagata.


D. ii. 142. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. I 55

11. l ' But what should be done, lord, with the
remains of the Tathagata ? '

1 As men treat the remains of a kino- of kin^s, so,

o o

Ananda, should they treat the remains of a Tathagata.'
' And how, lord, do they treat the remains of a
king of kings 2 ? '

' They wrap the body of a king of kings, Ananda,
in a newr cloth. When that is done they wrap it in
carded cotton wool 3. When that is done they wrap
it in a new cloth, [142] and so on till they have wrapped
the body in five hundred successive layers of both
kinds. Then they place the body in an oil vessel
of iron, and cover that close up with another oil vessel
of iron 4. They then build a funeral pyre of all kinds


1 This conversation occurs also below (VI, 17), and the older tradi-
tion probably had it only in that connexion.

2 King of kings is an adequate rendering of the ' King of the Roll-
ing Wheel,' the wheels of whose chariot roll unhindered through the
land ; that is to say, a king whose power no other king can dispute,
who is an acknowledged overlord. The idea, which is explained very
fully in the next Suttanta, may have arisen with the rise of the Kosala
power ; but it may also be later. If we could trace its history it would
afford us a guide to the date at which the Maha Parinibbana Suttanta
assumed its present form.

3 Buddhaghosa explains this passage thus : — ' As Benares cloth, by
reason of its fineness of texture, does not take the oil, he therefore
says: — "with vihata cotton wool," that is, with cotton wool that has
been well forced asunder.' The technical use of the word, as applied
to cotton wool, has only been found in this passage. It usually means
' torn ' with grief.

4 Ayasaya tela-dowiya, where one would expect ayasaya, but
my MS. of the Digha Nikaya confirms twice over here, and twice again
below (VI, 33, 35) the reading given by Childers. Buddhaghosa says
the word here means gold. Ay as was originally used for bronze, and
only later for iron also, and at last exclusively of iron. As ka;«sa is
already a common word for bronze in very early Buddhist Pali texts,
I think ayasa (not ayasa) would here mean ' of iron.' When Buddha-
ghosa says it is here a name for gold, we can only conclude that iron
had become, in his time, a metal which he might fairly consider too
base for the purpose proposed. The whole process as described is
not very intelligible; and one might suppose that ayasa after all had
nothing to do with any metal, and was a technical term descriptive of
some particular size or shape or colour of oil vessel. But it is fre-
quently found in the MSS. when iron is clearly meant. Thus in the


156 XVI MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. U. ii. 142.

of perfume, and burn the body of the king of kings.
And then at the four cross roads they erect a cairn *
to the king of kings. This, Ananda, is the way in
which they treat the remains of a king of kings.

' And as they treat the remains of a king of kings,
so, Ananda, should they treat the remains of the
Tathagata. At the four cross roads a cairn should
be erected to the Tathagata. And whosoever shall
there place garlands or perfumes or paint, or make
salutation there, or become in its presence calm in
heart — that shall long be to them for a profit and
a joy.'

12. ' The men, Ananda, worthy of a cairn, are four
in number. Which are the four ?

1 A Tathagata, an Able Awakened One, is worthy
of a cairn. One awakened for himself alone is
worthy of a cairn 2. A true hearer of the Tathagata
is worthy of a cairn. A king of kings is worthy of a
cairn.

' And on account of what circumstance, Ananda, is
a Tathagata, an Able Awakened One, worthy of a
cairn ?

' At the thought, Ananda : — " This is the cairn of that
Exalted One, of that Able Awakened One," the hearts
of many shall be made calm and happy ; and since
they there had calmed and satisfied their hearts they
will be reborn after death, when the body has dis-
solved, in the happy realms of heaven. It is on
account of this circumstance, Ananda, that a Tatha-
gata, an Able Awakened One, is worthy of a cairn.

popular verse at Sawyutta I, 77 on which a Jataka is based (II, 140),
which is inserted in the ' Anthologies ' (Dhammapada 345, Khar. MS.
No. 102), and twice quoted in the Netti (35, 153), the MSS. have both
forms in spite of the metre favouring the long vowel. In this passage
both Panfiananda's Colombo edition of 1877, and Samarasekara's
version (Col. and Lond. 1 905) have the short vowel only.

1 Thupa. A solid mound or tumulus or barrow, in the midst of
which the bones and ashes are to be placed. The dome of St. Paul's
as seen from the Thames Embankment gives a very good idea of one
of the later of these Buddhist monumental mounds.


P. ii. 143. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 157

* And on account of what circumstance, Ananda, is
one awakened for himself alone J worthy of a cairn ?

' At the thought, Ananda : — " This is the cairn of
that Exalted One awakened for himself alone " [143]
the hearts of many shall be made calm and happy ; and
since they there had calmed and satisfied their hearts
they will be reborn after death, when the body has
dissolved, in the happy realms of heaven. It is on
account of this circumstance, Ananda, that one awakened
for himself alone is worthy of a cairn.

' And on account of what circumstance, Ananda, is
a true hearer of the Exalted One, the Able Awakened
One, worthy of a cairn ?

' At the thought, Ananda : — " This is the cairn of that
true hearer of the Exalted Able Awakened One," the
hearts of many shall be made calm and happy ; and
since they there had calmed and satisfied their hearts
they will be reborn after death, when the body has
dissolved, in the happy realms of heaven. It is on
account of this circumstance, Ananda, that a true
hearer of the Exalted One, the Able Awakened One,
is worthy of a cairn.

1 And on account of what circumstance, Ananda, is
a king of kings worthy of a cairn ?

' At the thought, Ananda : — " This is the cairn of that
righteous king who ruled in righteousness," the hearts
of many shall be made calm and happy ; and since
they there had calmed and satisfied their hearts they
will be reborn after death, when the body has dis-
solved, in the happy realms of heaven. It is on
account of this circumstance, Ananda, that a king of
kings is worthy of a cairn.

'These four, Ananda, are the persons worthy of a cairn.'

13. 'Now the venerable Ananda went into the
Vihara 2, and stood leaning against the lintel of the

1 Pacceka-buddho. One who has attained to the supreme and
perfect insight ; but dies without proclaiming the truth to the world.

2 The expression that Ananda went ' into the Vihara' at the end of
a conversation represented as having taken place in the Sala Grove,


158 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 143.

door, and weeping at the thought : — ' Alas ! I remain
still but a learner, one who has yet to work out his
own perfection 1. And the Master is about to pass
away from me — he who is so kind ! '

Now the Exalted One called the brethren, and
said : — ' Where thenx brethren, is Ananda ? '

' The venerable Ananda, lord, has gone into the
Vihara, and stands leaning against the lintel of the
door, and weeping at the thought : — " Alas ! I remain
still but a learner, one who has yet to work out his
own perfection. And the Master is about to pass
away from me — he who is so kind ! " '

And the Exalted One called ascertain brother, and
said : — ' Go now, brother, and call Ananda in my name,
and say : — " Brother Ananda, the Master calls for thee "

[144].

4 Even so, lord ! ' said that brother, in assent, to
the Exalted One. And he went up to the place where
the Exalted One was : and when he had come there,
he said to the venerable Ananda : — ' Brother Ananda,
the Master calls for thee.'

4 Very well, brother,' said the venerable Ananda,
in assent, to that brother. And he went up to the
place where the Exalted One was, and when he had
come there, he bowed down before the Exalted One,
and took his seat respectfully on one side.

14. Then the Exalted One said to the venerable
Ananda, as he sat there by his side : — ' Enough,
Ananda ! Do not let yourself be troubled ; do not
weep ! Have I not already, on former occasions,
told you that it is in the very nature of all things

would seem to point to the fact that this episode originally stood in
some other connexion. Buddhaghosa attempts to explain away the
discrepancy by saying that Vihara here means Ma;/<7ala. As the
spot was the place for the performance of the communal ceremonies
of the clan there was most likely a Ma;/^ala there, and there must,
from the context below, § 25, have been also some small closed-in
building, a hut or cottage. It is only this latter that could have been
called a Vihara.

1 Ananda had entered the Noble Path, but had not yet reached the
end of it. He had not attained to Nirvana.


1). ii . 145. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 59


most near and dear unto us that we must divide our-
selves from them, leave them, sever ourselves from
them ? How, then, Ananda, can this be possible —
Avhereas anything whatever born, brought into being,
and organized, contains within itself the inherent
necessity of dissolution — how, then, can this be pos-
sible, that such a being should not be dissolved ? No
such condition can exist ! For a long time, Ananda,
have you been very near to me by acts of love, kind
and good, that never varies1, and is beyond all
measure. For a long time, Ananda, have you been
very near to me by words of love, kind and good, that
never varies, and is beyond all measure. For a long-
time, Ananda, have you been very near to me by
thoughts of love, kind and good, that never varies,
and is beyond all measure. You have done well,
Ananda ! Be earnest in effort, and you too shall soon
be free from the Intoxications — [of sensuality, and
individuality, and delusion, and ignorance.]2!'


15. Then the Exalted One addressed the brethren,
and said : — ' Whosoever, brethren, have been Able
Awakened Ones through the long ages of the past,
they also had servitors just as devoted to those Exalted
Ones as Ananda has been to me.

'He is a clever man, brethren, is Ananda, and
wise3. He knows when it is the right time for the
brethren or for the sisters of the Order, for devout
men [145] and devout women, for a king, or for a king's
ministers, or for other teachers or for their disciples,
to come and visit the Tathagata.

16. ' Brethren, there are these four wonderful and
marvellous qualities in Ananda. Which are the four ?

1 Advayena, which Buddhaghosa explains as not being that kind
of love which is now one thing and now another, or which varies in
the presence or the absence of the object loved.

2 That is, you too shall become an Arahant, shall attain Nirvana in
this life.

3 A word has here slipped out of the text, medhavi should stand
before janati.


l6o XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 145.


' If, brethren, a number of the brethren of the Order
should come to visit Ananda, they are filled with joy
on beholding him ; and if Ananda should then preach
the truth to them, they are filled with joy at the
discourse ; while the company of brethren is ill at ease,
brethren, when Ananda is silent.

' If, brethren, a number of the sisters of the Order,
. . . or of devout men, ... or of devout women, should
come to visit Ananda, they are filled with joy on
beholding him ; and if Ananda should then preach the
truth to them, they are filled with joy at the discourse;
while the company of sisters is ill at ease, brethren,
when Ananda is silent.

' Brethren, there are these four wonderful and mar-
vellous qualities in a king of kings. What are the four?

' If, brethren, a number of nobles, or brahmins, or
heads of houses, or members of a religious order should
come to visit a king of kings, they are filled with joy
on beholding him ; and if the king of kings should
then speak, they are filled with joy at what is said ;
while they are ill at ease, brethren, when the king of
kings is silent [146].

'Just so, brethren.^ are the four wonderful and mar-
vellous qualities in Ananda.

' If, brethren, a number of the brethren of the Order,
or of the sisters of the Order, or of devout men, or of
devout women, should come to visit Ananda, they are
filled with joy on beholding him ; and if Ananda
should then preach the truth to them, they are filled
with joy at the discourse ; while the company of
brethren is ill at ease, brethren, when Ananda is silent.

' Now these, brethren, are the four wonderful and
marvellous qualities that are in Ananda.'


1 7. When he had thus spoken, 1 the venerable Ananda
said to the Exalted One: —

1 From here down to the end of section 18 is found also, nearly
word for word, in the beginning of the Maha-Sudassana Suttanta,
translated below.


D. ii. 147. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. l6l


4 Let not the Exalted One die in this little wattle-
and-daub town, in this town in the midst of the jungle,
in this branch township1. For, lord, there are other
great cities, such as Champa, Rajagaha, Savatthi,
Saketa, Kosambi, and Benares. Let the Exalted One
die in one of them. There there are many wealthy
nobles and brahmins and heads of houses, believers in
the Tathagata, who will pay due honour to the remains
of the Tathaorata2.'

1 Say not so, Ananda ! Say not so, Ananda, that
this is but a small wattle-and-daub town, a town in the
midst of the jungle,A a branch township.

18. ' Long ago, Ananda, there was a king, by name
Maha-Sudassana, a king of kings, a righteous man who
ruled in righteousness, Lord of the four quarters of the
earth, conqueror, the protector of his people, possessor
of the seven royal treasures. This Kusinara, Ananda,
was the royal city of King Maha-Sudassana, under the
name of Kusavati, and on the east and on the west it
was twelve leagues in length, and on the north and on
the south it was seven leagues in breadth.

1 That royal city Kusavati, Ananda, was mighty and
prosperous [147] and full of people, crowded with men,
and provided with all things for food. Just, Ananda,
as the royal city of the gods, A/akamanda by name, is
mighty, prosperous, and full of people, crowded with
the gods, and provided with all kinds of food, so,

1 KufiWa-nagarake ti pa/irupake sambadhe khuddakana-
gare. Uggangala-nagarake ti visama-nagarake (S. V, fol.
thau) Kudda, if this explanation be right, seems to be merely an old
and unusual form for kshudra, and the Burmese correction into
khudda to be unnecessary: but I venture to think it is more likely
to be = kudya, and to mean a wall built of mud and sticks, or what
is called in India, of wattle and daub. When Buddhaghosa explains
u^angala as 'lawless,' he is expressing his view that a town in the
jungle is likely to be a heathen, pagan sort of place.

2 With reference to Childers's note in his Dictionary on mahasala,
with which every one must entirely agree, Buddhaghosa's explanation
of the word will be interesting as a proof (if proof be needed) that the
Ceylon scholars are not always trustworthy. He says: — Khattiya-
mahasala ti khattiya-mahasara, sarapatta mahakhattiya.
Eso nayo sabbatha.

III. M


1 62 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 147.


Ananda, was the royal city Kusavati mighty and pros-
perous, full of people, crowded with men, and provided
with all kinds of food.

4 Both by day and by night, Ananda, the royal city
Kusavati resounded with the ten cries ; that is to say,
the noise of elephants, and the noise of horses, and the
noise of chariots ; the sounds of the drum, of the tabor,
and of the lute ; the sound of singing, and the sounds
of the cymbal and of the gong ; and lastly, with the
cry : — " Eat, drink, and be merry ! " '


19. 'Go now, Ananda, and enter into Kusinara, and
inform the Mallas of Kusinara, saying : — " This day,
O Vase///*as, in the last watch of the night, the final
passing away of the Tathagata will take place. Be
favourable herein, O Vase#/zas, be favourable. Give
no occasion to reproach yourselves hereafter, saying: —
4 In our own village did the death of our Tathagata
take place, and we took not the opportunity of visiting
the Tathagata in his last hours.' "

4 Even so, lord,' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One ; and he robed himself and
taking his bowl, entered into Kusinara attended by
another member of the order1.

20. Now at that time the Mallas of Kusinara were
assembled in the council hall on some [public] affair -.

1 Literally ' Put on his under-garment, and taking his upper-
garment and his bowl, &c.' This sounds complicated; and why
should he take his bowl? The Wanderers when at their lodging
places on their travels lived (naturally in that beautiful climate) in
undress — with only one robe on, the one from the waist to the feet.
When they set out for the village on a visit, or on any ceremonious
occasion, they put on the second robe, and (just as a European often
carries his great-coat on his arm) carried the third with them. At
some convenient spot near the village they would put this also on, and
enter — so to speak — in full canonicals. And the bowl belonged to,
formed part of, their official costume. See J. I, 55 ; III, 379 ; Sum. I,
45, 186; and the note above on Ch. IV, § 37, p. 145.

: Kena/i'id eva karawiyena. Professor Pischel, in his edition of
the Assalayana Sutta (p. 1), prints this expression kena£i devakara-
wiyena, and translates it (p. 28), 'for some religious purpose.' It


D. h". 148. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 63

A

And the venerable Ananda went to the council hall
of the Mallas of Kusinara ; and when he had arrived
there, he informed them, saying : — ' This day, O Vase-
////as, in the last watch of the night, the final passing
away of the Tathagata will take place. Be favourable
herein, O Vase//^as, be favourable. Give no occasion
to reproach yourselves hereafter, saying : — " In our own
village [148] did the death of our Tathagata take place,
and we took not the opportunity of visiting the Tatha-
gata in his last hours." '

21, And when they had heard this saying of the
venerable Ananda, the Mallas with their young men
and maidens and their wives were grieved, and sad,
and afflicted at heart. And some of them wept,
dishevelling their hair, and stretched forth their arms
and wept, fell prostrate on the ground, and rolled to
and fro in anguish at the thought : — ' Too soon will the
Exalted One die ! Too soon will the Happy One pass
away! Full soon will the Light of the world vanish
away ! '

Then the Mallas, with their young men and maidens
and their wives, being grieved, and sad, and afflicted at
heart, went to the Sala Grove of the Mallas, to the
Upavattana, and to the place where the venerable
Ananda was.

22. Then the venerable Ananda thought: — 'If
I allow the Mallas of Kusinara, one by one, to pay
their respects to the Exalted One, the whole of the
Mallas of Kusinara will not have been presented to
the Exalted One until this night brightens up into the
dawn. Let me, now, cause the Mallas of Kusinara to
stand in groups, each family in a group, and so present
them to the Exalted One, saying : — " Lord ! a Malla of
such and such a name, with his children, his wives, his
retinue, and his friends, humbly bows down at the feet
of the Exalted One." '

And the venerable Ananda caused the Mallas of

seems to me that he has been misled by the commentary, which really
presupposes the more correct division.

M 2


164 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 148.


Kusinara to stand in groups, each family in a group,
and so presented them to the Exalted One, and said : —
' Lord ! a Malla of such and such a name, with his
children, his wives, his retinue, and his friends, humbly
bows down at the feet of the Exalted One.'

And after this manner the venerable Ananda
presented all the Mallas of Kusinara to the Exalted
One in the first watch of the night.


r>i.


Now at that time a Wanderer named SubhaddaT
who was not a believer, was dwelling at Kusinara.
And the Wanderer Subhadda heard the news : — ' This
very day, they say, in the third watch of the night, will
take place the final passing away of the Samara
Gotama.'

[149] Then thought the Wanderer Subhadda : — ' This
have I heard from fellow Wanderers old and well
stricken in years, teachers and disciples, when they
said : — " Sometimes and full seldom do Tathagatas
appear in the world, the Able Awakened Ones." Yet
this day, in the last watch of the night, the final passing
away of the Samara Gotama will take place. Now
a certain feeling of uncertainty has sprung up in my
mind ; and this faith have I in the Samara Gotama,
that he, methinks, is able so to present the truth that
I may get rid of this feeling of uncertainty.'

24. Then the Wanderer Subhadda went to the Sala
Grove of the Mallas, to the Upayattana of Kusinara,
to the place where the venerable Ananda was.

And when he had come there he said to the vener-
able Ananda : — ' Thus have I heard from fellow
Wanderers, old and well stricken in years, teachers and
disciples, when they said : — " Sometimes and full
seldom do Tathagatas appear in the world, the Able
Awakened Ones." Yet this day, in the last watch of
the night, the final passing away of the Samara Gotama
will take place. Now a certain feeling of uncertainty-
has sprung up in my mind ; and this faith have I in
the Samara Gotama, that he, methinks, is able so to
present the truth that I ma)- get rid of this feeling of


D. ii. 150. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 165

A

uncertainty. O that I, even I, Ananda, might be
allowed to see the Samara Gotama ! '

And when he had thus spoken the venerable Ananda
said to the Wanderer Subhadda : — ' Enough ! friend
Subhadda. Trouble not the Tathagata. The Exalted
One is weary.'

And again the Wanderer Subhadda [made the same
request in the same words, and received the same
reply] : and the third time the Wanderer Subhadda
[made the same request in the same words, and received
the same reply]. [!5o]

25. Now the Exalted One overheard this conver-
sation of the venerable Ananda with the Wanderer
Subhadda. And the Exalted One called the venerable

A A

Ananda, and said : — ' It is enough, Ananda ! Do not
keep out Subhadda. Subhadda, Ananda, may be
allowed to see the Tathagata. Whatever Subhadda
may ask of me, he will ask from a desire for know-
ledge, and not to annoy me. And whatever I may
say in answer to his questions, that he will quickly
understand.'

Then the venerable Ananda said to Subhadda, the
Wanderer : — ' Enter in, friend Subhadda ; for the
Exalted One gives you leave.'

26. Then Subhadda, the Wanderer, went in to the
place where the Exalted One was, and saluted him
courteously, and after exchanging with him the com-
pliments of esteem and of civility, he took his seat on
one side. And when he was thus seated, Subhadda,
the Wanderer, said to the Exalted One : — ' The leaders
in religious life ] who are heads of companies of

1 Samawa-brahmawa, which compound may possibly mean
Samanas and Brahmanas as it has usually been rendered, but I think
not necessarily. Not one of those here specified were brahmins by
birth, as is apparent from the Sumangala Vilasini on the Samahna-
Phala Suttanta, §§ 3-7. Compare the use of Kshatriya-brahmano,
' a soldier priest.' a Kshatriya who offered sacrifice ; and of Brahmawo,
absolutely, as an epithet of an Arahant. In the use of the word
samawa there seems to me to be a hopeless confusion between,
a complete mingling of the meanings of, the two roots sram and sam
(which, in Pali, would both become sam). It connotes both asceticism


1 66 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 150.

disciples and students, teachers of students, well
known, renowned, founders of schools of doctrine,
esteemed as good men by the multitude — to wit,
Pura^a Kassapa, Makkhali of the cattle-pen, A^ita of
the garment of hair, KaMayana of the Pakudha tree,
San^aya the son of the Bela/Mi slave-girl, and
Niga?z//za of the Natha clan [l5l] — have they all,
according to their own assertion, thoroughly under-
stood things ? or have they not ? or are there some
of them who have understood, and some who have
not?'

' Enough, Subhadda ! Let this matter rest whether
they, according to their own assertion, have thoroughly
understood things, or whether they have not, or
whether some of them have understood and some

A

have not ! The truth, Ananda, will I teach you.
Listen well to that, and give ear attentively, and
I will speak ! '

' Even so, lord ! ' said the Wanderer Subhadda, in
assent, to the Exalted One.

27. And the Exalted One spake: — ' In whatsoever
doctrine and discipline, Subhadda, the Aryan eightfold
path is not found, neither in it is there found a man of
true saintliness of the first, or of the second, or of the
third, or of the fourth degree. And in whatsoever
doctrine and discipline, Subhadda, the Aryan eightfold
path is found, in it is found the man of true saintliness
of the first, and the second, and the third, and the
fourth degree l. Now in this doctrine and discipline,
Subhadda, is found the Aryan eightfold path, and in it

and inward peace, and might best be rendered ' devotee,' were it not
for the intellectual inferiority implied by that word in our language.
A Sama;/a-brahmin should therefore mean a man of any birth, who bj
his saintliness of life, by his renunciation of the world, and by his
reputation as a religious thinker, had acquired the position of a quasi-
brahmin and was looked up to by the people with as much respect as
they looked up to a brahmin by birth. Compare further my ' Buddhist
Birth Stories,' vol. I, p. 260; and see J. I, 57, 187 ; M. I. 285-6,
400 ; II, 54 ; A. I, 180 ; III, 228.

1 On these degrees in the religious life, see M. I, 63 ; A. II, 238.
They are described in my ' Buddhism' (21st ed., pp. 108 foil.).


D. ii. 152. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 67

too, are found, Subhadda, the men of true saintliness
of all the four degrees. Void are the systems of
other teachers — void of true saints. And in this
one, Subhadda, may the brethren live the Life that's
Right, so that the world be not bereft of Arahants 1.

' But twenty-nine was I when I renounced
The world, Subhadda, seeking after Good.
For fifty years and one year more, Subhadda,
Since I went out, a pilgrim have I been
Through the wide realm of System and of Law —
Outside of that no victory can be won ! 2

' Yea, not of the first, [152] nor of the third, nor of the
fourth degree. Void are the systems of other teachers
— void of true saints. But in this one, Subhadda, may
the brethren live the perfect life, that the world be not
bereft of Arahants.'


1 Arahants are those who have reached Nirvana, the ' supreme
goal, the highest fruit ' of the Aryan Eightfold Path. To live ' the
Life that's Right' (samma) is to live in the Noble Path, each of the
eight divisions of which is to be samma, round, right and perfect,
normal and complete. To live right (samma) is therefore to have : —
(i) Right views, free from superstition ; (2) right aims, high and worthy
of the intelligent and earnest man; (3) right speech, kindly, open,
truthful ; (4) right conduct, in all concerns of life ; (5) right livelihood,
bringing hurt or danger to no living thing ; (6) right perseverance, in
all the other seven; (7) right mindfulness, the watchful, active mind;
(8) right contemplation, earnest thought on the deep mysteries of life.
In each of these the word right is samma, and the whole paragraph
being on the Aryan Path, the allusion is certainly to this central
doctrine of the Buddhist Dhamma.

Buddhaghosa says that bhikkhu samma viharati, who, having
himself entered the Aryan Path, leads his brother into it, and this is,
no doubt, good Buddhism. But it is a practical application of the
text, a theological exegesis, and not a philological explanation. Even
so it seems to lay the stress too much on ' bereft,' and too little on
' Arahants.'

- Literally ' There is no sama?za.' See note on § 26. I have
followed, though with some doubt, Childers's punctuation. Buddha-
ghosa refers padesa-vatti to samawo ; and ito, not to padesa, but
to magga, understood; and it is quite possible that this is the correct
explanation. On samadhikani see the comment at Jataka II, 383 :
Watters, ' On Yuan Chwang,' II, 33, and Ed. Hardy, ' Buddhismus,'
p. 44. Both Pafinananda and Samarasekhara render it as above.


1 68 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D.ii. 152.

28. And when he had thus spoken, Subhadda, the
Wanderer, said to the Exalted One : — ' Most excellent,
lord, are the words of thy mouth, most excellent ! Just
as if a man were to set up that which is thrown down,
or were to reveal that which is hidden away, or were
to point out the right road to him who has gone astray,
or were to bring a lamp into the darkness, so that
those who have eyes can see external forms; — just even
so, lord, has the truth been made known to me, in
many a figure, by the Exalted One. And I, even I,
betake myself, lord, to the Exalted One as my refuge,
to the truth, and to the Order. I would fain be accepted
as a probationer under the Exalted One, as a full
member in his Order.'

29. ' Whosoever, Subhadda, has formerly been a
follower of another doctrine, and thereafter desires to
be received into the higher or the lower grade in this
doctrine and discipline, he remains on probation for the
space of four months ; and at the end of the four
months, the brethren, exalted in spirit, receive him
into the lower or into the higher erade of the order.
Nevertheless in this case I acknowledge the difference
in persons.'

'If, lord, whosoever has formerly been a follower
of another doctrine, and then desires to be received
into the higher or the lower grade in this doctrine
and discipline, — if, in that case, such a person remains
on probation for the space of four months ; and at
the end of the four months, the brethren, exalted in
spirit, receive him into the lower or into the higher
grade of the Order — I too, then, will remain on proba-
tion for the space of four months ; and at the end of
the four months let the brethren, exalted in spirit,
receive me into the lower or into the higher grade of
the Order ! '

But the Exalted One called the venerable Ananda,
and said : — ' As it is, Ananda, receive Subhadda into
the Order!'

'Even so, lord!' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Exalted One.


T). ii. 153. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 69

30. And Subhadda, the Wanderer, said to the
venerable Ananda : — ' Great is your gain, friend
Ananda, great is your good fortune, friend Ananda,
in that you all have been sprinkled with the sprinkling
of discipleship in this brotherhood at the hands of the
Master himself! '

[153] So Subhadda, the Wanderer, was received
into the higher grade of the Order under the Exalted
One ; and from immediately after his ordination the
venerable Subhadda remained alone and separate,
earnest, zealous, and resolved. And ere long he
attained to that supreme goal of the higher life \ for
the sake of which the clansmen go out from all and
every household gain and comfort to become houseless
wanderers — yea, that supreme goal did he, by himself,
and while yet in this visible world, bring himself to
the knowledge of, and continue to realize, and to see
face to face ! And he became conscious that birth
was at an end, that the higher life had been fulfilled,
that all that should be done had been accomplished,
and that after this present life there would be no
beyond !

So the venerable Subhadda became yet another
among the Arahants ; and he was the last disciple
whom the Exalted One himself converted 2.


End of the H irannavatiya portion, being the
Fifth Portion for Recitation.


1 That is, Nirvana. Compare Mangala Sutta 10, n, and the
Dhammapada, verses 180, 354, and above, Chap. I, § 7.

2 Buddhaghosa says that the last five words in the text (the last
twelve words in my translation) were added by the Theras who held
the Council. On Subhadda's ordination he has the following interest-
ing note : — ' The Thera (that is, Ananda), they say, took him on one
side, poured water over his head from a water vessel, made him repeat
the formula of meditation on the impermanency of the body (see my
'• Buddhist Birth Stories," p. 161), shaved off his hair and beard, clad
him in the yellow robes, made him repeat the " Three Refuges," and
led him back to the Exalted One. The Exalted One himself admitted
him then into the higher rank of the brotherhood, and pointed out to


170 XVI. MAHA PAR1NIBRANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 153.


him a subject for meditation (kamma//Mna). He accepted this,
and walking up and down in a quiet part of the grove, he thought
and meditated upon it, till overcoming the Evil Spirit, he had acquired
Arahantship, and with it the discriminating knowledge of all the
Scriptures (Pa/isambhida). Then, returning, he came and took his
seat beside the Exalted One.'

According to this, no set ceremony for ordination (Sahgha-
k am maw), as laid down in the Vinaya, took place ; and it is other-
wise probable that no such ceremony was usual in the earliest days of
Buddhism.


CHAPTER VI.

i. [154] Now the Exalted One addressed the vener-
able Ananda, and said : — ' It may be, Ananda, that in
some of you the thought may arise, " The word of the
master is ended, we have no teacher more ! " But it is
not thus, Ananda, that you should regard it. The
Truths, and the Rules of the Order, which I have set
forth and laid down for you all, let them, after I am
gone, be the Teacher to you.'

2 . ' Ananda ! when I am gone address not one
another in the way in which the brethren have hereto-
fore addressed each other — with the epithet that is, of
" Avuso" (Friend). A younger brother may be
addressed by an elder with his name, or his family
name, or the title " Friend." But an elder should be
addressed by a younger brother as "Sir'' or as
" Venerable Sir 1." '


3. ' When I am gone, Ananda, let the Order, if it
should so wish, abolish all the lesser and minor
precepts V

4. ' When I am gone, Ananda, let the higher penalty
be imposed on brother Channa.'

' But what, lord, is the higher penalty ? '

' Let Channa say whatever he may like, Ananda, the


1 Bhante or ayasma. This question has been fully discussed by
Prof. Franke in the ' Journal of the Pali Text Society,' 1908.

2 According to tradition (trans, by Rhys Davids and Oldenberg,
' Vinaya Texts,' III, 377 foil.) the Order considered this matter shortly
after the Buddha's death, and declined to avail themselves of this
permission. As to what these lesser precepts were see Rhys Davids,
' Questions of King Milinda,' I, 202 foil.


172 XVI. MAHA PAR1NIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 154.

brethren should neither speak to him, nor exhort him,
nor admonish him V


5. Then the Exalted One addressed the brethren,
and said : — ' It may be, brethren, that there may be
doubt or misgiving in the mind of some brother as to
the Buddha, or the doctrine, or the path, or the method2.
Inquire, brethren, freely. Do not have to reproach
yourselves [155] afterwards with the thought : — " Our
teacher was face to face with us, and we could not
bring ourselves to inquire of the Exalted One when
we were face to face with him." '

And when he had thus spoken the brethren were
silent.

And aijain the second and the third time the Exalted
One addressed the brethren, and said: — 'It maybe,
brethren, that there may be doubt or misgiving in the
mind of some brother as to the Buddha, or the doctrine,
or the path, or the method. Inquire, brethren, freely.
Do not have to reproach yourselves afterwards with
the thought : — " Our teacher was face to face with us,
and we could not bring ourselves to inquire of the
Exalted One when we were face to face with him."

And even the third time the brethren were silent.

Then the Exalted One addressed the brethren, and
said : — ' It may be, brethren, that you put no questions
out of reverence for the teacher. Let one friend com-
municate to another.'

And when he had thus spoken the brethren were
silent.

6. And the venerable Ananda said to the Exalted


1 This brother is represented as an obstinate, perverse man ; so
destitute of the proper esprit dc corps that he dared to take part with
the sisterhood, and against the brotherhood, in a dispute which had
arisen between them. But after the social penalty here referred to
had been duly imposed upon him, even his proud and independent
spirit was tamed ; he became humble ; his eyes were opened ; and he,
also, attained to the ' supreme goal ' of the Buddhist faith. (The
passages are shown in the index to ' Vinaya Texts.')

2 Comp. D. II, 287.


D. ii. 156. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. I 7,


One : — l How wonderful a thing is it, lord, and how
marvellous ! Verily, I believe that in this whole
assembly of the brethren there is not one brother who
has any doubt or misgiving as to the Buddha, or the
doctrine, or the path, or the method ! '

' It is out of the fullness of faith that thou hast
spoken, Ananda ! But, Ananda, the Tathagata knows
for certain that in this whole assembly of the brethren
there is not one brother who has any doubt or mis-
giving as to the Buddha, or the doctrine, or the path,
or the method ! For even the most backward, Ananda,
of all these five hundred brethren has become con-
verted, is no longer liable to be born in a state of
suffering, and is assured of hereafter attaining to the
Enlightenment [of Arahantship] \


7. Then the Exalted One addressed the brethren,
and said : — [156] ' Behold now, brethren, I exhort you,
saying : — " Decay is inherent in all component things !
Work out your salvation with diligence ! "

This was the last word of the Tathagata !


8. Then the Exalted One entered into the first stage
of Rapture2. And rising out of the first stage he
passed into the second. And rising out of the second
he passed into the third. And rising out of the third
stage he passed into the fourth. And rising out of
the fourth stage of Rapture, he entered into the state
of mind to which the infinity of space is alone present 3.
And passing out of the mere consciousness of the
infinity of space he entered into the state of mind
to which the infinity of thought is alone present.
And passing out of the mere consciousness of the


1 Compare above, Chap. II, § 7. By ' the most^ backward ' accord-
ing to Buddhaghosa, the Exalted One referred to Ananda, and he said
this to encourage him.

2 The full text and an explanation of this Rapture will be found in
the translator's 'Buddhism,' pp. 174-6.

3 Compare above, Chap. Ill, § 33, p. 119.


174 XVI- MAHA PARINIBHANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 156.

infinity of thought he entered into a state of mind to
which nothing at all was specially present. And
passing out of the consciousness of no special object
he fell into a state between consciousness and uncon-
sciousness. And passing out of the state between
consciousness and unconsciousness he fell into a state
in which the consciousness both of sensations and of
ideas had wholly passed away \

Then the venerable Ananda said to the venerable
Anuruddha : — l O my lord, O Anuruddha, the Exalted
One is dead ! '

' Nay ! brother Ananda, the Exalted One is not
dead. He has entered into that state in which both
sensations and ideas have ceased to be ! '

9. Then the Exalted One passing out of the state
in which both sensations and ideas have ceased to be,
entered into the state between consciousness and un-
consciousness. And passing out of the state between
consciousness and unconsciousness he entered into
the state of mind to which nothing at all is specially
present. And passing out of the consciousness of no
special object he entered into the state of mind to
which the infinity of thought is alone present. And
passing out of the mere consciousness of the infinity
of thought he entered into the state of mind to which
the infinity of space is alone present. And passing
out of the mere consciousness of the infinity of space
he entered into the fourth stage of Rapture. And
passing out of the fourth stage he entered into the
third. And passing out of the third stage he entered
into the second. And passing out of the second he
entered into the first. And passing out of the first
stage of Rapture he entered into the second. And
passing out of the second stage he entered into the

1 These nine states are called in the Milinda, p. 176, the nine
Anupubba-Viharas. We have therefore, in this list, a technical,
scholastic, attempt to describe the series of ideas involved in what was
considered the highest thought. No one, of course, can have known
what actually did occur ; and the eight boundary lines between the
nine states are purely conjectural.


1). ii. 1/57. THE HOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. I 75

third. And passing out of the third stage he entered
into the fourth stage of Rapture. And passing out
of the last stage of Rapture he immediately expired.


io. When the Exalted One died there arose, at the
moment of his passing out of existence, a mighty earth-
quake, terrible and awe-inspiring : and the thunders
of heaven burst forth [157].

When the Exalted One died, Brahma Sahampati,
at the moment of his passing away from existence,
uttered this stanza : —

' They all, all beings that have life, shall lay
Aside their complex form — that aggregation
Of mental and material qualities,
That gives them, or in heaven or on earth,
Their fleeting individuality !
E'en as the teacher — being such a one,
Unequalled among all the men that are,
Successor of the prophets of old time,
Mighty by wisdom, and in insight clear —
Hath died!1'

When the Exalted One died, Sakka, the king of
the gods, at the moment of his passing away from
existence uttered this stanza : —

' They're transient all, each being's parts and powers,
Growth is their very nature, and decay.

1 Brahma, the first cause, the highest result of Indian theological
speculation, the one God of the Indian Pantheists, is represented as
using expressions full of deep allusions to the most characteristic
Buddhist doctrines. The Samussaya is the result of the temporary
collocation of the 'aggregations' (khandha) of mental and material
qualities which give to each being (bhuto, that is, man, animal,
god, ghost, fairy, or what not) its outward and visible shape, its
individuality. Loka is here not the world in our sense, but the
' locality ' in the Buddhist universe which such an individual occupies
until it is dissolved. (Comp. Chap. II, §§ 12, 26.) Brahma appears
therefore as a veritable Doctor in theology, and I have been obliged
to expand the translation to bring out all the meaning in the text.


176 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 157.

They are produced, they are dissolved again :
To bring them all into subjection — that is bliss V

When the Exalted One died, the venerable Anu-
ruddha, at the moment of his passing away from
existence, uttered these stanzas : —

' When he who from all craving want was free,
Who to Nirvana's tranquil state had reached,
When the great sage finished his span of life,
No gasping struggle vexed that steadfast heart !

All resolute, and with unshaken mind,
He calmly triumphed o'er the pain of death.
E'en as a bright flame dies away, so was
The last emancipation of his heart.'


1 On this celebrated verse see below the Introduction to Maha-
Sudassana-Suttanta. It must be the original of the first verse in the
Chinese work, Fa Kheu Pi Hu (Beal, Dhammapada, p. 32), though it
is there so changed that every clause has lost its point.

' Whatever exists is without endurance,
And hence the terms ' flourishing ' and 'decaying.'
A man is born, and then he dies.
Oh, the happiness of escaping from this condition ! '

The very meaning which is here the most essential connotation of
sahkhara is lost in the phrase 'whatever exists.' By a misappre-
hension of the, no doubt, difficult word D ham ma, which, however,
never means ' term,' the second clause has lost its point. And by
a grammatical blunder the third clause in the Chinese confines the
doctrine, erroneously, to man. In a Chinese tale, called Ngan shih
niu, translated by Mr. Beal, in the ' Indian Antiquary ' for May, 1880,
the following verses occur; and they are possibly another reflection of
this stanza : —

'All things that exist are transitory,
They must of necessity perish and disappear ;
Though joined together, there must be separation ;
Where there is life there must be death.'

Compare the constantly repeated phrase : — ' Whatsoever hath an
origin in that is inherent the necessity of dissolution.' The per-
ception of this is emphatically called the Eye for the Truth ; and the
doctrine is referred to in the next section.


D. ii. 158. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 77

When the Exalted One died, the venerable Ananda,
at the moment of his passing away from existence,
uttered this stanza : —

1 Then was there terror !
Then stood the hair on end!
When he endowed with every grace —
The supreme Buddha— died ! * '

2 When the Exalted One died, of those of the
brethren who were not yet free from the passions,
some stretched out their arms and wept, and some fell
headlong on the ground, rolling to and fro in anguish
at the thought : — [158] ' Too soon has the Exalted One
died! Too soon has the Happy One passed away!
Too soon has the Light gone out in the world ! '

But those of the brethren who were free from the
passions [the Arahants] bore their grief collected and
composed at the thought : — ' Impermanent are all com-
ponent things ! How is it possible that [they should
not be dissolved] ? '

11. Then the venerable Anuruddha exhorted the
brethren, and said : — ' Enough, my brethren ! Weep
not, neither lament ! Has not the Exalted One formerly
declared this to us, that it is in the very nature of all
things near and dear unto us, that we must divide our-
selves from them, leave them, sever ourselves from
them ? How then, brethren, can this be possible —
that whereas anything whatever born, brought into
being, and organized, contains within itself the inherent
necessity of dissolution — how then can this be possible
that such a being should not be dissolved ? No such


1 In these four stanzas we seem to have the way in which the
death of the Buddha would be regarded, as the early Buddhist
thought, by four representative persons — the exalted God of the
theologians ; the Jupiter of the multitude (allowing in the case of
each of these for the change in character resulting from their con-
version to Buddhism); the holy, thoughtful Arahant; and the loving,
childlike disciple.

2 Nearly = V, § 6 ; and below, VI, 19.

III. N


178 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 158.

condition can exist ! Even the spirits, brethren, will
reproach us V

' But of what kind of spirits, Sir, is the venerable
Anuruddha thinking ? '

' There are spirits, brother Ananda, in the sky, but
of worldly mind, who dishevel their hair and weep,
and stretch forth their arms and weep, fall prostrate
on the ground, and roll to and fro in anguish at the
thought : — " Too soon has the Exalted One died ! Too
soon has the Light gone out in the world !"

' There are spirits, too, Ananda, on the earth, and
of worldly mind, who tear their hair and weep, and
stretch forth their arms and weep, fall prostrate on the

1 U^Myanti. I have followed the reading of my own MS.,
which is confirmed by the Sumangala Vilasini and the Malalahkara-
vatthu. Vi^Myanti, which Childers reads, would be questionable
Buddhism. The spirits do not become extinct ; that is, not as
a general rule, as would be implied by the absolute statement : — ' Even
the spirits, brethren, become extinct.' It is no doubt true that all
spirits, from the lowest to the highest, from the most insignificant
fairy to the God of theological speculation, are regarded as temporary.
But when they cease to exist as gods or spirits (devata), they do not
go out, they are not extinguished (vi^Myanti); they continue to
exist in some other form. And though that other form would, from
the European point of view, be a different being, as there would be no
continuity of consciousness, no passage of a ' soul ' from the one to
the other; it would, from the Buddhist point of view, be the same
being, as it would be the resultant effect of the same Karma. There
would follow on the death of a devata, not extinction, but a trans-
mutation of force, a transmigration of character, a passing on, an
inheritance of Karma. Only in the exceedingly rare case of an
anagamin, of which an instance will be found above Chap. II, § 7,
could it be said that a spirit becomes extinct.

The expression ' of worldly mind,' here and above in V, 6, is in
Pali paMavi-safifiiniyo, an ambiguous phrase which has only
as yet been found in this connexion. The word is here opposed to
vitaraga, 'free from passion,' and I have therefore taken it in
a spiritual sense. There is another possibility, viz. that it is used in
an intellectual sense, ' making the idea of earth present to their mind' ;
and this would be in accordance with the use of sanfii in the
Kasiwa meditations, in which spirits, like men, were supposed to
indulge; see Digha II, 108. But how easily, especially in Buddhism,
the intellectual merges into the religious may be seen from such
a Kasina phrase as mara/ia-safifiino, used at Mahavawsa V, 159,
of good men.


1). ii. 159. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. I 79


ground, and roll to and fro in anguish at the thought :—
" Too soon has the Blessed One died ! Too soon has
the Happy One passed away ! Too soon has the
Light gone out in the world ! "

' But the spirits who are free from passion bear it,
calm and self-possessed, mindful of the saying which
begins :— " Impermanent indeed are all component
things. How then is it possible [. . . that such a being
should not be dissolved] ? ] '


1 2. Now the venerable Anuruddha and the venerable
Ananda spent the rest of that night in religious dis-
course. Then the venerable Anuruddha said to the

A A

venerable Ananda : — ' Go now, brother Ananda, into
Kusinara and inform the Mallas of Kusinara, saying: —
" The Exalted One, O Vase///^as, is dead ; do, then,
whatever seemeth to you fit !

' Even so, lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the venerable Anuruddha. And having
robed himself early in the morning, he took his bowl,
and went into Kusinara with one of the brethren as
an attendant [159].

Now at that time the Mallas of Kusinara were
assembled in the council hall concerning that very
matter.

And the venerable Ananda went to the council hall
of the Mallas of Kusinara ; and when he had arrived
there, he informed them, saying : — ' The Blessed One,
O Vase///£as, is dead ; do, then, whatever seemeth to
you fit ! '

And when they had heard this saying of the vener-
able Ananda, the Mallas, with their young men and
their maidens and their wives, were grieved, and sad,
and afflicted at heart. And some of them wept,
dishevelling their hair, and some stretched forth their
arms and wept, and some fell prostrate on the ground,
and some reeled to and fro in anguish at the thought : —
' Too soon has the Exalted One died ! Too soon has


1 See the end of the first paragraph of this section.

N 2


l8o XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 159.

the Happy One passed away! Too soon has the
Light gone out in the world ! '


13. Then the Mallas of Kusinara gave orders to
their attendants, saying : — ' Gather together perfumes
and garlands, and all the music in Kusinara ! '

And the Mallas of Kusinara took the perfumes and
garlands, and all the musical instruments, and five
hundred suits of apparel, and went to the Upavattana,
to the Sala Grove of the Mallas, where the body of
the Exalted One lay. There they passed the day in
paying honour, reverence, respect, and homage to the
remains of the Exalted One with dancing, and hymns,
and music, and with garlands and perfumes ; and in
making canopies of their garments, and preparing
decoration wreaths to hang thereon1.

Then the Mallas of Kusinara thought : —

' It is much too late to burn the body of the Exalted
One to-day. Let us now perform the cremation
to-morrow.' And in paying honour, reverence, respect,
and homage to the remains of the Exalted One with
dancing, and hymns, and music, and with garlands and
perfumes ; and in making canopies of their garments,
and preparing decoration wreaths to hang thereon,
they passed the second day too, and then the third day,
and the fourth, and the fifth, and the sixth day also.


14. Then on the seventh day the Mallas of Kusi-
nara [160] thought : —


1 The dress of the Mallas consisted probably of mere lengths of
muslin or cotton cloth ; and a suit of apparel consisted of two or, at
the outside, of three of these — one to wrap around the loins, one to
throw over the shoulders, and one to use as a turban. To make
a canopy on occasions of state they would join such pieces together ;
to make the canopy into a tent they would simply add walls of the
same material ; and the only decoration, as simple as it is beautiful,
would be wreaths of flowers, or single lotuses, hanging from the roof,
or stretched along the sides. Every civil servant travelling on duty
in remote districts in Ceylon has such a tent or canopy put up for him
by the peasantry.


D. ii. i6o. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 8 1


' Let us carry the body of the Exalted One, by the
south and outside, to a spot on the south, and outside
of the city, — paying it honour, and reverence, and
respect, and homage, with dance, and song, and music,
with garlands and perfumes, — and there, to the south
of the city, let us perform the cremation ceremony ! '

And thereupon eight chieftains among the Mallas
bathed their heads, and clad themselves in new gar-
ments with the intention of bearing the body of the
Exalted One. But, behold, they could not lift it up !

Then the Mallas of Kusinara said to the venerable
Anuruddha : — l What, lord, can be the reason, what
can be the cause, that eight chieftains of the Mallas
who have bathed their heads, and clad themselves in
new garments with the intention of bearing the body
of the Exalted One, are unable to lift it up ? '

1 It is because you, O Vase///^as, have one purpose,
and the spirits have another purpose.'

15. ' But what, lord, is the purpose of the spirits ? '

' Your purpose, O Vase///^as, is this : — Let us carry
the body of the Exalted One, by the south and outside,
to a spot on the south, and outside of the city, — paying
it honour, and reverence, and respect, and homage,
with dance, and song, and music, with garlands and
perfumes, — and there, to the south of the city, let us
perform the cremation ceremony. But the purpose of
the spirits, Vase^as, is this : — Let us carry the body
of the Exalted One by the north to the north of the
city, and entering the city by the north gate, let us
bring it through the midst of the city into the midst
thereof. And going out again by the eastern gate, —
paying honour, and reverence, and respect, and homage
to the body of the Exalted One, with heavenly dance,
and song, and music, and garlands, and perfumes, —
let us carry it to the shrine of the Mallas called
Maku/a-bandhana, to the east of the city, and there
let us perform the cremation ceremony.'

' Even according to the purpose of the spirits, so,
lord, let it be.'


1 82 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. I), ii. 160.


1 6. Then immediately all Kusinara down even to
the dust bins and rubbish heaps became strewn knee-
deep with Mandarava flowers from heaven ! and while
both the spirits from the skies, and the Mallas of
Kusinara upon earth, paid honour, and reverence, and
respect, and homage to the body of the Exalted One,
with dance, and song, and music, [l6l] with garlands,
and with perfumes, they carried the body by the north
to the north of the city ; and entering the city by the
north gate they carried it through the midst of the
city into the midst thereof; and going out again by
the eastern gate they carried it to the shrine of the
Mallas, called Maku/a-bandhana ; and there, to the
east of the city, they laid down the body of the Exalted
One1.

172. Then the Mallas of Kusinara said to the vener-
able Ananda : — ' What should be done, lord, with the
remains of the Tathagata ? '

' As men treat the remains of a king of kings,
so, Vase/Mas, should they treat the remains of a
Tathagata.'

' And how, lord, do they treat the remains of a king
of kings ? '

' They wrap the body of a king of kings, Vase/Z/^as,
in a new cloth. When that is done they wrap it in
carded cotton wool. When that is done they wrap it
in a new cloth,— and so on till they have wrapped the
body in five hundred successive layers of both kinds.
Then they place the body in an oil vessel of iron,
and cover that close up with another oil vessel of iron.
The}- then build a funeral pyre of all kinds of perfumes,

1 The point of this interesting legend is that the inhabitants of an
Indian village of that time would have considered it a desecration or
pollution to bring a dead body into or through their village.
Authorities differ as to the direction in which it should be taken to
avoid this. The old custom, according to Caland (p. 23) was to take
it to the East or the West. Later priestly books (Manu, for instance,
V, 92) say to the North. The Mallas wanted to go to the South.
The remedy proposed by the spirits who are shocked at this im-
propriety, is more shocking still.

2 Compare Chap. V, §§ 11, 12.


D. ii. 162. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 83

and burn the body of the king of kings. And then at
the four cross roads they erect a cairn to the king of
kings. This. Vase/^as, is the way in which they
treat the remains of a king of kings.

' And as they treat the remains of a king of kings,
so, Vase////as, should they treat the remains of the
Tathagata. At the four cross roads a cairn should be
erected to the Tathagata. And whosoever shall there
place garlands or perfumes or paint, or make salutation
there, or become in its presence calm in heart — that
shall long be to them for a profit and a joy.'

18. Therefore the Mallas gave orders to their
attendants, saying : — ' Gather together all the carded
cotton wool of the Mallas ! '

Then the Mallas of Kusinara wrapped the body of
the Exalted One in a new cloth. And when that was
done, they wrapped it in carded cotton wool. And
when that was done, they wrapped it in a new cloth,
[162] — and so on till they had wrapped the body of the
Exalted One in five hundred layers of both kinds.
And then they placed the body in an oil vessel of iron,
and covered that close up with another oil vessel of
iron. And then they built a funeral pyre of all kinds
of perfumes, and upon it they placed the body of the
Exalted One.


19. Now at that time the venerable Maha Kassapa
was journeying along the high road from Pava to
Kusinara with a great company of the brethren, with
about five hundred of the brethren. And the vener-
able Maha. Kassapa left the high road, and sat himself
down at the foot of a certain tree.

Just at that time a certain naked ascetic1 who had
picked up a Mandarava flower in Kusinara was coming
along the high road to Pava.

Now the venerable Maha Kassapa saw the naked
ascetic coming in the distance ; and when he had seen
him he said to that naked ascetic : —

An Ajivaka. See the note above at Vol. I, p. 71.


184 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 162.

' O friend ! surely thou knowest our Master ? '

' Yea, friend ! I know him. This day the Samara
Gotama has been dead a week ! That is how
I obtained this Mandarava flower.'

On that of those of the brethren who were not yet
free from the passions, some stretched out their arms
and wept, and some fell headlong on the ground, and
some reeled to and fro in anguish at the thought: — 'Too
soon has the Exalted One died ! Too soon has the
Happy One passed away ! Too soon has the Light
gone out in the world ! '

But those of the brethren who were free from the
passions [the Arahants] bore their grief self-possessed
and composed at the thought : — ' Impermanent are all
component things! How is it possible that [they
should not be dissolved] ? '


20. Now at that time a brother named Subhadda,
who had been received into the Order in his old age,
was seated in that company 1.

And Subhadda the recruit in his old age said to
those brethren : — ' Enough, sirs ! Weep not, neither
lament ! We are well rid of the great Samara. We
used to be annoyed by being told: — "This beseems you,
this beseems you not." But now we shall be able to
do whatever we like ; and what we do not like, that
we shall not have to do ! '

But the venerable Maha Kassapa exhorted the
brethren :• — ' Enough, my brethren ! Weep not, neither
lament! [163] Has not the Exalted One formerly
declared this, that it is in the very nature of all things
near and dear unto us that we must divide ourselves


1 At p. xxvi of the Introduction to his edition of the Vinaya,
Prof. Oldenberg identifies this Subhadda with Subhadda the last
convert, mentioned above at the end of Chap. V. They are different
persons; the last convert being represented as a man of high
character, incapable of the conduct here ascribed to this Subhadda.
The last convert was a brahmin, traditionally supposed to be younger
brother to Anna Kondafifia, the first convert ; this Subhadda had been
a barber in the village Atuma.


D. ii. 163. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 85

from them, leave them, sever ourselves from them ?
How then, brethren, can this be possible — whereas
anything whatever born, brought into being, and
organized contains within itself the inherent necessity
of dissolution — how then can this be possible that such
a being should not be dissolved ? No such condition
can exist ! '


21. Now just at that time four chieftains of the
Mallas had bathed their heads and clad themselves in
new garments with the intention of setting on fire the
funeral pyre of the Exalted One. But, behold, they
were unable to set it alight !

Then the Mallas of Kusinara said to the venerable
Anuruddha : — ' What, lord, can be the reason, and
what the cause [of this] ? '

' The purpose of the spirits, O Vase////as, is
different'

1 But what, sir, is the purpose of the spirits ? '

' The purpose of the spirits, O Vase/^as, is this : —
That venerable brother Maha Kassapa is now journey-
ing along the way from Pava to Kusinara with a great
company of the brethren, with five hundred brethren.
The funeral pyre of the Exalted One shall not catch
fire until the venerable Maha Kassapa shall have been
able reverently to salute the feet of the Exalted One.'

' Even according to the purpose of the spirits so, sir,
let it be!'

22. Then the venerable Maha Kassapa went on to
Maku/a-bandhana of Kusinara, to the shrine of the
Mallas, to the place where the funeral pyre of the
Exalted One was. And when he had come up to it
he arranged his robe on one shoulder ; and after bow-
ing down with clasped hands, he thrice walked
reverently round the pyre, and then, uncovering the
feet, he bowed down in reverence at the feet of the
Exalted One.

And those five hundred brethren arranged their
rcbes on one shoulder ; and bowing down with clasped


l86 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 163.

hands, they thrice walked reverently round the pyre,
and then bowed down in reverence at the feet of the
Exalted One [164].

And when the homage of the venerable Maha
Kassapa and of those five hundred brethren was ended,
the funeral pyre of the Exalted One caught fire of
itself1.

23. Now as the body of the Exalted One burned
itself away, from the skin and the integument, and the
flesh, and the nerves, and the fluid of the joints, neither
soot nor ash was seen. Only the bones remained
behind. Just as one sees no soot or ash when ghee
or oil is burned ; so, as the body of the Exalted One
burned itself away, from the skin and the integument,
and the flesh, and the nerves, and the fluid of the
joints, neither soot nor ash was seen. Only the bones
remained behind. And of those five hundred pieces
of raiment the very innermost and outermost were both
consumed.

And when the body of the Exalted One had been
burnt up, there came down streams of water from the
sky and extinguished the funeral pyre of the Exalted
One ; and there burst forth streams of water from the
storehouse of the waters [beneath the earth], and
extinguished the funeral pyre of the Exalted One.
The Mallas of Kusinara also brought water scented


1 It is possible that we have here the survival of some ancient
custom. Spence Hardy appropriately refers to a ceremony among
Jews (of what place or time is not mentioned) in the following terms : —
' Just before a Jew is taken out of the house to be buried, the relatives
and acquaintances of the departed stand round the coffin ; when the
feet are uncovered ; and each in rotation lays hold of the great toes,
and begs pardon for any offence given to the deceased, and requests
a favourable mention of them in the next world ' (' Manual of
Buddhism,' p. 348).

The Buddhist bhikkhus in Siam and the great majority of those in
Ceylon (the adherents of the Siyam-samagama) always keep one
shoulder uncovered. It is evident that the bhikkhus in Burma and
those in Ceylon, who belong to the Amara-pura-samagama, are
more in accordance with ancient custom in wearing the robe
ordinarily over both shoulders. ,


D. ii. 165. THE MOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 1 87


with all kinds of perfumes, and extinguished the
funeral pyre of the Exalted One'.

Then the Mallas of Kusinara surrounded the
bones of the Exalted One in their council hall with
a lattice work of spears, and with a rampart of bows ;
and there for seven days they paid honour, and rever-
ence, and respect, and homage to them with dance, and
song, and music, and with garlands and perfumes.

24. Now the king of Magadha, Ajatasattu, the son
of the queen of the Videha clan, heard the news that
the Exalted One had died at Kusinara.

Then the king of Magadha, Ajatasattu, the son of
the queen of the Videha clan, sent a messenger to the
Mallas, saying, — ' The Exalted One was a Kshatriya
and so am I. I am worthy to receive a portion of the
relics of the Exalted One. Over the remains of the
Exalted One will I put up a sacred cairn, and in their
honour will I celebrate a feast ! '

And the Licchavis of Vesali heard the news that the
Exalted One had died at Kusinara. And the Licchavis
of Vesali sent a messenger to the Mallas, saying: — 'The
Exalted One was a Kshatriya and so are we [165].
We are worthy to receive a portion of the relics of the
Exalted One. Over the remains of the Exalted One
will we put up a sacred cairn, and in their honour will
we celebrate a feast ! '

And the Sakiyas of Kapila-vatthu heard the news
that the Exalted One had died at Kusinara. And the


1 There is something very quaint in the way in which the faithful
Mallas are here represented as bringing coals to Newcastle. The
'storehouse of the waters' is in Pali udaka-sala, on which Buddha-
ghosa has two theories : first, that the Sala trees around shed down
a miraculous rain from their trunks and branches and leaves ; and
next, that the waters burst up from the earth and became as it were
a diadem of crystal round the pyre. On the belief that water thus
burst up miraculously through the earth, see ' Buddhist Birth Stories,'
pp. 64, 67. If the reading be correct it is scarcely possible that sala
can here have anything to do with Sala trees ; but the other interpreta-
tion is open to the objections that sala means an open hall rather
than a storehouse, and that the belief in a ; storehouse of water ' has
not, as yet, been found elsewhere.


1 88 XVI. MAHA PARINIBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 165.


Sakiyas of Kapila-vatthu sent a messenger to the
Mallas, saying :- — ' The Exalted One was the pride of
our race. We are worthy to receive a portion of the
relics of the Exalted One. Over the remains of the
Exalted One will we put up a sacred cairn, and in their
honour will we celebrate a feast ! '

And the Bulis of Allakappa heard the news that the
Exalted One had died at Kusinara. And the Bulis of
Allakappa sent a messenger to the Mallas, saying : — ' The
Exalted One was a Kshatriya and so are we. We are
worthy to receive a portion of the relics of the Exalted
One. Over the remains of the Exalted One will we
put up a sacred cairn, and in their honour will we
celebrate a feast ! '

And the Koliyas of Ramagama heard the news that
the Exalted One had died at Kusinara. And the
Koliyas of Ramagama sent a messenger to the Mallas,
saying: — 'The Exalted One was a Kshatriya and so are
we. We are worthy to receive a portion of the relics
of the Exalted One. Over the remains of the Exalted
One will we put up a sacred cairn, and in their honour
will we celebrate a feast ! '

And the brahmin of Ve///adipa heard the news that
the Exalted One had died at Kusinara. And the
brahmin of Ve^adipa sent a messenger to the Mallas,
saying: — ' The Exalted One was a Kshatriya, and I am
a brahmin. I am worthy to receive a portion of the
relics of the Exalted One. Over the remains of the
Exalted One will I put up a sacred cairn, and in their
honour will I celebrate a feast ! '

And the Mallas of Pava heard the news that the
Exalted One had died at Kusinara.

Then the Mallas of Pava sent a messenger to the
Mallas, saying : — ' The Exalted One was a Kshatriya
and so are we. We are worthy to receive a portion of
the relics of the Exalted One. Over the remains of
the Exalted One will we put up a sacred cairn, and in
their honour will we celebrate a feast! '


D. ii. t66. THE T.OOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 189


25. When they heard these things the Mallas of
Kusinara spoke to the assembled crowds, saying: —
[166] ' The Exalted One died in our village domain.
We will not give away any part of the remains of
the Exalted One ! '

When they had thus spoken, Do/^a the brahmin
addressed the assembled crowds, and said : — ■

' Hear, gracious sirs, one single word from me.
Forbearance was our Buddha wont to teach.
Unseemly is it that over the division
Of the remains of him who was the best of beings
Strife should arise, and wounds, and war !
Let us all, sirs, with one accord unite
In friendly harmony to make eight portions.
Wide spread let cairns spring up in every land
That in the Light of the world mankind may trust ! '

' Do thou then, O brahmin, thyself divide the remains
of the Exalted One equally into eight parts, with fair
division V

' Be it so, sirs ! ' said Do«a the brahmin, in assent, to
the assembled brethren. And he divided the remains
of the Exalted One equally into eight parts, with fair
division. And he said to them : — ' Give me, sirs, this
vessel, and I will set up over it a sacred cairn, and in
its honour will I establish a feast.'

And they gave the vessel to Do^a the brahmin.


26. And the Moriyas of Pipphalivana heard the
news that the Exalted One had died at Kusinara.

Then the Moriyas of Pipphalivana sent a messenger
to the Mallas, saying : — ' The Exalted One was a
Kshatriya and so are we. We are worthy to receive
a portion of the relics of the Exalted One. Over the
remains of the Exalted One will we put up a sacred
cairn, and in their honour will we celebrate a feast ! '

And when they heard the answer, saying: — 'There is


1 Here again the commentator expands and adds to the com-
paratively simple version of the text.


I90 XVI. MAHA PARTNTBBANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 166.


no portion of the remains of the Exalted One left over.
The remains of the Exalted One are all distributed,'
then they took away the embers.

27. So the king of Magadha, Ajatasattu, the son of
the queen of the Videha clan, made a cairn in Rajagaha
over the remains of the Exalted One, and celebrated
a feast [167].

And the Licchavis of Vesali made a cairn in Vesali
over the remains of the Exalted One, and celebrated
a feast.

And the Sakiyas of Kapila-vatthu made a cairn in
Kapila-vatthu over the remains of the Exalted One,
and celebrated a feast.

And the Bulis of Allakappa made a cairn in Alla-
kappa over the remains of the Exalted One, and
celebrated a feast.

And the Koliyas of Ramagama made a cairn in
Ramagama over the remains of the Exalted One, and
celebrated a feast.

And Ve///adipaka the brahmin made a cairn in
Ve//£adipa over the remains of the Exalted One, and
celebrated a feast.

And the Mallas of Pava. made a cairn in Pava. over
the remains of the Exalted One, and celebrated
a feast.

And the Mallas of Kusinara made a cairn in
Kusinara over the remains of the Exalted One, and
celebrated a feast.

And Do//a the brahmin made a cairn over the vessel
[in which the remains had been collected] and celebrated
a feast.

And the Moriyas of Pipphalivana made a cairn over
the embers, and celebrated a feast.

Thus were there eight cairns (Thupas) for the
remains, and one for the vessel, and one for the embers.
This was how it used to be \

1 Here closes Buddhaghosa's long and edifying commentary. He
has no note on the following verses, which he says were added by


I), ii. 167. THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. 191


[28. Eight measures of relics there were of him of

the far-seeing eye,
Of the best of the best of men. In India seven are

worshipped,
And one measure in Ramagama, by the kings of the

serpent race.
One tooth, too, is honoured in heaven, and one in

Gandhara's city,
One in the Kalinga realm, and one more by the

Naga race.
Through their glory the bountiful earth is made

bright with offerings painless —
For with such are the Great Teacher's relics best

honoured by those who are honoured,
By gods and by Nagas and kings, yea, thus by the

noblest of humans —
Bow down with clasped hands !
Hard, hard is a Buddha to meet with through

hundreds of ages !]

End of the Book of the Great Decease.


Theras in Ceylon. The additional verse found in the Phayre MS.
was in the same way probably added in Burma.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA.

This Suttanta is an expansion of the conversation recorded
in the Book of the Great Decease (above, Ch. V, § 17).

The same legend recurs as the Maha-Sudassana Jataka,
No. 95 in Mr. Fausboll's edition. As the latter differs in
several important particulars from our Suttanta, it is probably
not taken directly from it, but is merely derived from the
same source. To facilitate comparison between the two I add
here a translation of the Jataka.

The part enclosed in square brackets | | is the so-called
Story of the Present : and the whole was probably written in
Ceylon in the fifth century of our era. There is every reason
to believe, for the reasons given in my ' Buddhist India '
(pp. 201-7), that the stories themselves belong to a very early
period in the history of Buddhism and are, many of them, older
even than Buddhism. We may be sure that if this particular
story had been abstracted by the author of the commentary
from our Suttanta, he would not have ventured to introduce
such serious changes into what he regarded as sacred writ.

MAHA-SUDASSANA jAtaka.

[• How transient arc all component things.' This the Master
told when lying on his death-couch, concerning that word
of Ananda the Thera, when he said : — ' Do not, O Exalted One,
die in this little town,' and so on.

When the Tathagata was at the Jetavana ] he thought : —


1 It is not easy with our present materials to reconcile the apparently
conflicting statements with regard to the Buddha's last journey.
According to the Malalahkara-vatthu this refers here to a residence at
the Jetavana, which took place between the end of § 23 in Chap. II in
the Book of the Great Decease, and the beginning of § 24.

Mr. Fausboll, by his punctuation, includes these words in the
following thought ascribed to the Exalted One, but I think they only
describe the time at which the thought is supposed to have arisen.


INTRODUCTION. 1 93


'The Thcra Sariputta, who was born at Nalagama, has died,
on the day of the full moon in the month of Kattika, in the
chamber in which he had been born x ; and Maha-Moggallana
in the latter, the dark half of that same month. As my two
chief disciples are thus dead, I too will pass away at Kusinara.'
Thereupon he proceeded straight on to that place, and lay
down on the Uttarasisaka couch, between the twin Sala trees,
never to rise again.

Then the venerable Ananda besought him, saying: — 'Let not
the Exalted One die in this little township, in this little town
in the jungle, in this branch township. Let the Exalted One
die in one of the other great cities, such as Rajagaha, and the
rest ! '

But the Master answered : — ' Say not, Ananda, that this is
a little township, a little town in the jungle, a branch township.
I was dwelling formerly in this town at the time when I was
Sudassana, the king of kings ; and then it was a great city,
surrounded by a jewelled rampart, twelve leagues in length ! '

And at the request of the Thera, he, telling the tale, uttered
the Maha-Sudassana-Sutta 2.]

Now on that occasion when Queen Subhadda saw Maha-
Sudassana when he had come down out of the Palace of
Righteousness, and was lying down, not far off, on the
appropriate couch, spread out in the grove of the seven kinds
of gems, and when she said : — ' Thine, O king, are these four
and eighty thousand cities, of which the chief is the royal city
of Kusavati. Set thy heart on these ' ; —

Then replied Maba-Sudassana: 'Speak not thus, O queen!
but exhort me rather, saying : — " Cast away desire for these,
long not after them 3." '

1 The text reads ' at Varaka.' But this is a mistake. The word
which has puzzled Mr. Fausboll is ovaraka. The modern name of
the village, afterwards the site of the famous Buddhist university of
Nalanda, is Baragaon. The full-moon day in Kattika is the first of
December. An account of the death of Sariputta will be found in the
Malalahkara-vatthu (Bigandet, 'Legend,' &c, 3rd ed., II, 1-25), and
of the murder of Moggallana by the NigawMas in the Dhammapada
commentary (Fausboll, p. 298 seq.), of which Spence Hardy's account
(' Manual of Buddhism,' p. 338) is nearly a translation ; and Bigandet's
account (loc. cit., pp. 25-7) is an abridgement.

2 In the earliest description of this conversation (above, ' Book of
the Great Decease/ V, 17) there is no mention of this. But it is
inserted most incongruously in the present Suttanta.

3 Both these speeches are different from those given on the same
occasion in the Suttanta below.

III. O


194 INTRODUCTION.


And when she asked : — ' Why so, O king ? ' ' To-day my
time is come, and I shall die ! ' was his reply 1.

Then the weeping queen, wiping her eyes, brought herself
with difficulty and distress to address him accordingly. And
having spoken, she wept, and lamented ; and the other four
and eighty thousand women wept too, and lamented ; and
of the attendant courtiers not one could restrain himself, but
all also wept.

But the Bodisat stopped them all, saying : — ' Enough, my
friends ! Be still ! ' And he exhorted the queen, saying : —
' Neither do thou, O queen, weep : neither do thou lament.
For down even unto a grain of sesamum fruit there is no such
thing as a compound which is permanent ! All are transient,
all have the inherent quality of dissolution ! '

And when he had so said, he further uttered this stanza : —

' How transient are all component things !
Growth is their nature and decay :
They are produced, they are dissolved again :
To bring them into full subjection, that is bliss V

[In these verses the words ' How transient are all component
things ! ' mean ' Dear lady Subhadda, wheresoever and by
whatsoever causes made or come together, compounds 3, — that
is, all those things which possess the essential constituents
[whether material or mental] of existing things4, — all these
compounds are impermanence itself. For of these form 5 is
impermanent, reason 6 is impermanent, the [mental] eye 7 is
impermanent, and qualities 8 are impermanent. And whatever
treasure there be, whether conscious or unconscious, that is
transitory. Understand therefore " How transient are all
component things!"

'And why? "Growth is their nature and decay." These,
all, have the inherent quality of coming into [individual]
existence, and have also the inherent quality of growing old ;
or [in other words] their very nature is to come into existence
and to be broken up. Therefore should it be understood that
they are impermanent.

' And since they are impermanent, when " they are produced,
they are dissolved again." Having come into existence,


1 This question and answer are not in the Suttanta.

2 All this is omitted in the Suttanta. It is true the verse occurs
.here, but it is placed in the mouth of the Teacher, after the account of
Maha-Sudassana's death.

3 Sankhara. * Khandayatanadayo. B Rfipam.

'• Vififianam. 7 Cakkhum. 8 Dhamma.


INTRODUCTION. 1 95


having reached a state1, they are surely dissolved. For all
these things come into existence, taking an individual form ;
and are dissolved, being broken up. To them as soon as there
is birth, there is what is called a state ; as soon as there is
a state, there is what is called disintegration 2. For to the
unborn there is no such thing as state, and there is no such
thing as a state which is without disintegration. Thus are all
compounds, having attained to the three characteristic marks
[of impermanency, pain, and want of any abiding principle],
subject, in this way and in that way, to dissolution. All
these component things therefore, without exception, are
impermanent, momentary, despicable, unstable, disintegrating,
trembling, quaking, unlasting, sure to depart 3, only for a time 4,
and without substance ; as temporary as a phantom, as the
mirage, or as foam !

• How then in these, dear lady Subhadda, can you feel any
sign of satisfaction ? Understand rather than " to bring them
into subjection, that is bliss." For to bring them into subjection,
since it involves mastery over the whole circle of transmigration,
is the same as Nirvana. That and this are one 5. And there
is no other bliss than that.']

And when Maha-Sudassana had thus brought his discourse
to a point with the ambrosial great Nirvana, and had made
exhortation also to the rest of the great multitude, saying : —
' Give gifts ! Observe the precepts ! Keep the sacred days G ! '
he became an inheritor of the world of the gods.

[When the Master had concluded this lesson in the truth, he
summed up the Jataka, saying: — ' She who was then Subhadda
the queen was the mother of Rahula, the great adviser was
Rahula, the rest of the retinue the Buddha's retinue, and
Maha-Sudassana I myself.']


The word translated ' component things ' or ' compounds ' is
sarikhara, literally confections, from kar, 'to make,' and sam,
' together.' It is a word very frequently used in Buddhist
writings, and a word consequently of many different connota-
tions ; and there is, of course, no exactly corresponding word

1 Thiti. 2 Bhango.

3 Payata, literally 'departed.' The forms payati and payato,
given by Childers, should be corrected into payati and payato.

4 Tavakalika. See Jataka I, 121, where the word is used of
a cart let out on hire for a time only.

5 Tad ev ekam eka/«, which is not altogether without ambiguity.

6 This paragraph, too, is omitted in the Suttanta.

O 2


I96 INTRODUCTION.


in English. ' Production ' would often be very nearly correct,
although it fails entirely to give the force of the preposition
sam ; but a greater objection to that word is the fact that it is
generally used, not of things that have come into being of
themselves, but of things that have been produced by some one
else. It suggests, if it does not imply, a producer ; which is
contrary to the whole spirit of the Buddhist passages in which
the word sankhara occurs. In this important respect the
word ' compound ' is a much more accurate translation, though
it lays somewhat too much stress on the sam.

The term Confections (to coin a rendering) is sometimes
used to denote all things which have been brought together,
made up, by pre-existing causes ; phenomena in general.
In this sense it includes, as the commentator here points out,
all those material or mental qualities which unite to form an
individual, a separate thing or being, whether conscious or
unconscious.

It is more usually used, (with special reference to their origin
from pre-existing causes, and with allusion to the wider mean-
ings just above explained), of the mental confections only,
the mental constituents, of all sentient beings generally, or of
man alone. In this sense it forms by itself one of the five
classes or aggregates (khan d ha) into which the material and
mental qualities of each separate individual are divided in
Buddhist writings— the class of dispositions, capabilities, and
all that goes together to make what we call character. This
class has naturally enough been again divided and subdivided ;
and a full list of the Confections in this sense, as now
acknowledged by orthodox Buddhists, will be found in my
manual 'Buddhism' (pp. 91, 92). At the time when the Five
Nikayas reached their present form, no such elaborate list
of Confections in detail seems to have been made ; but the
general sense of the word was, as is quite clear from the
passages in which it occurs, the idea which these details
together convey. It is this second and more usual meaning
of the term which is more especially emphasized in the
concluding verse of the above stanza.

Turning now to the Suttanta itself, we find that the portion
of the legend omitted in the Jataka throws an unexpected
light upon the tale ; for it commences with a long description
of the riches and glory of Maha-Sudassana, and reveals in its
details the instructive fact that the legend is nothing more nor
less than a spiritualized sun-myth.

It cannot be disputed that the sun-myth theory has become
greatly discredited, and with reason, by having been used too


INTRODUCTION. 1 97


carelessly and freely as an explanation of religious legends
of different times and countries which have really no historical
connexion with the earlier awe and reverence inspired by the
sun. The very mention of the word sun-myth is apt to call
forth a smile of incredulity, and the indubitable truth which
s the basis of the theory has not sufficed to protect it from
the shafts of ridicule. The ' Book of the Great King of Glory '
.seems to afford a useful example both of the extent to which
the theory may be accepted, and of the limitations under
which it should always be applied.

It must at once be admitted that whether the whole story
is based on a sun-story, or whether certain parts or details
of it are derived from things first spoken about the sun, or not,
it is still essentially Buddhistic. A large proportion of its
contents has nothing at all to do with the worship of the sun ;
and even that which has, had not, in the mind of the author,
when the book was put together. Whether indebted to a
sun-myth or not, it is therefore perfectly true and valid evidence
of the religious belief of the people among whom it was
current ; and no more shows that the Buddhists were un-
conscious sun-worshippers than the story of Samson, under
any theory of its possible origin, would prove the same of
the Jews.

What we really have is a kind of wonderful fairy tale,
a gorgeous poem, in which an attempt is made to describe in
set terms the greatest possible glory and majesty of the
greatest possible king, in order to show that all is vanity, save
only righteousness — just such a poem as a Jewish prophet
might have written of Solomon in all his glory. It would
have been most strange, perhaps impossible, for the author
to refrain from using the language of the only poets he knew,
who had used their boldly figurative language in an attempt
to describe the appearance of the sun.

To trace back all the rhetorical phrases of our Sutta to their
earliest appearance in the Vedic hymns would be an interest-
ing task of historical philology, though it would throw more
light upon Buddhist forms of speech than upon Buddhist forms
of belief. In M. Senart's valuable work, ' La Legende du
Bouddha,' he has already done this with regard to the seven
treasures (mentioned in the early part of the Suttanta) on the
basis of the corresponding passage in the later Buddhist
Sanskrit poem called the Lalita Vistara. The description
of the royal city and of its wondrous Palace of Righteousness
has been probably originated by the author, though on the
same lines ; and it reminds one irresistibly, in many of its
expressions, of the similar, but simpler and more beautiful


I98 INTRODUCTION.


poem in which a Jewish author, some three or four centuries
afterwards, described the heavenly Jerusalem.

When the Northern Buddhists, long afterwards, had smothered
the simple teaching of the founder of their religion under the
subtleties of theological and metaphysical speculation, and had
forgotten all about the Aryan Path, their goal was no longer
a change of heart in the Arahantship to be reached on earth,
but a life of happiness, under a change of outward condition,
in a heaven of bliss beyond the skies. One of the most popular
books among the Buddhists of China and Japan is a description
of this heavenly paradise of theirs, called the Sukhavati-vyuha,
the ' Book of the Happy Country.' It is instructive to find
that several of the expressions used are word for word the
same as the corresponding phrases in our much older ' Book
of the Great King of Glory.'

Incidentally the details given in this Suttanta enable us to
judge as to what was considered, at the time when it was put
together, to be the greatest possible luxury and glory of the
mightiest and most righteous king. In spite of the exuberance
of some of the language used, the luxury is after all curiously
simple, and mostly of an out-of-door kind. A summary of the
conclusions which can be drawn from the sacred books of the
Buddhists as to the social and economic condition of the Ganges
valley, at the time when those books were composed, will be
found in my ' Buddhist India,' ch. IV-VI. The very simple
character of the luxury here depicted is in accordance with the
evidence there given.


[XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA.

The Great King of Glory1.

CHAPTER I.J

1. [169] Thus have I heard. The Exalted One was
once staying at Kusinara in the Upavattana, the Sala
grove of the Mallas, between the twin Sala trees, at
the time of his death.

2. Now the venerable Ananda went up to the place
where the Exalted One was, and bowed down before
him, and took his seat respectfully on one side. And
when he was so seated, the venerable Ananda said to
the Exalted One : —

' Let not the Exalted One die in this little wattle-and-
daub town, in this town in the midst of the jungle, in
this branch township. For, lord, there are other
great cities, such as Champa, Rajagaha, Savatthi, Sa-
keta, Kosambi, and Benares. Let the Exalted One
die in one of them. There there are many wealthy
nobles and brahmins and heads of houses, believers in
the Tathagata, who will pay due honour to the remains
of the Tathagata.'

3. ' Say not so, Ananda ! Say not so, Ananda, that
this is but a small wattle-and-daub town, a town in the
midst of the jungle, a branch township. Long ago,
Ananda, there was a king, by name Maha-Sudassana,
a king of kings, a righteous man who ruled in righteous-
ness, an anointed Kshatriya 2, Lord of the four quarters

1 Sudassana means ' beautiful to see, having a glorious appearance/
and is the name of many kings and heroes in Indian legend.

2 Khattiyo muddhavasitto, which does not occur in the Maha-
parinibbana, the Mahapadana, and the Lakkhawa Suttantas, and other
places where this stock description of a king of kings is found. It is
omitted also in the Lalita Vistara. The Burmese Phayre MS. of the


200 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 169.

of the earth, conqueror, the protector of his people,
possessor of the seven royal treasures. [17°] This
Kusinara, Ananda, was the royal city of king Maha-
Sudassana, under the name of Kusavati, and on the
east and on the west it was twelve leagues in length,
and on the north and on the south it was seven leagues
in breadth. That royal city Kusavati, Ananda, was
mighty, and prosperous, and full of people, crowded
with men, and provided with all things for food. Just,
Ananda, as the royal city of the gods, A/akamanda by
name, is mighty, prosperous, and full of people, crowded
with the gods, and provided with all kinds of food, so,
Ananda, was the royal city Kusavati mighty and pros-
perous, full of people, crowded with men, and provided
with all kinds of food. Both by day and by night,
Ananda, the royal city Kusavati resounded with the ten
cries ; that is to say, the noise of elephants, and the
noise of horses, and the noise of chariots ; the sounds
of the drum, of the tabor, and of the lute ; the sound of
singing, and the sounds of the cymbal and of the gong ;
and lastly, with the cry: — " Eat, drink, and be merry1!"


A

4. ' The royal city Kusavati, Ananda, was surrounded
by Seven Ramparts. Of these, one rampart was of
gold, and one of silver, and one of beryl, and one
of crystal, and one of agate, and one of coral, and
one of all kinds of ^ems !

5. ' To the royal city Kusavati, Ananda, there were
Gates of four colours. One gate was of gold, and one
of silver, and one of jade, and one of crystal. [i7i] At
each gate seven pillars were fixed ; in height as three
times or as four times the height of a man. And one
pillar was of gold, and one of silver, and one of beryl,
and one of crystal, and one of agate, and one of coral,
and one of all kinds of gems.


India Office reads here muddabhisitto, but this is an unnecessary
correction. The epithet is probably inserted here from § 7 below.

1 This enumeration is found also at Jataka I, 3, only that the chank
is added there — wrongly, for that makes the number of cries eleven.


D. ii. 172. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 201

A

6. 'The royal city Kusavati, Ananda, was surrounded
by Seven Rows of Palm Trees. One row was of
palms of gold, and one of silver, and one of beryl, and
one of crystal, and one of agate, and one of coral, and
one of all kinds of gems.

1 And the Golden Palms had trunks of gold, and
leaves and fruits of silver. And the Silver Palms had
trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold. And
the Palms of Beryl had trunks of beryl, and leaves and
fruits of crystal. And the Crystal Palms had trunks
of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl. And the
Agate Palms had trunks of agate, and leaves and fruits
of coral. And the Coral Palms had trunks of coral,
and leaves and fruits of agate. And the Palms of
every kind of Gem had trunks and leaves and fruits
of every kind of gem.

1 ' And when those rows of palm trees, Ananda,
were shaken by the wind, there arose a sound sweet,
and pleasant, and charming, and intoxicating.

'just, Ananda, as the seven kinds of instruments
yield, when well played upon, to the skilful man, a
sound sweet, and pleasant^ and charming, and intoxi-
cating— [172] just even so, Ananda, when those rows of
palm trees were shaken by the wind, there arose a
sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and intoxi-
cating.

4 And whoever, Ananda, in the royal city Kusavati
were at that time gamblers, drunkards, and given to


1 This section should be compared with one in the Sukhavati-
vyuha, translated by Professor Max Miiller as follows (' Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society,' 1880, p. 170): —

1 And again, 0 Sariputra, when those rows of palm trees and strings
of bells in that Buddha country are moved by the wind, a sweet and
enrapturing sound proceeds from them. Yes, O Sariputra, as from
a heavenly musical instrument consisting of a hundred thousand kotis
of sounds, when played by Aryas, a sweet and enrapturing sound pro-
ceeds; a sweet and enrapturing sound proceeds from those rows of
palm trees and strings of bells moved by the wind.

' And when the men there hear that sound, reflection on Buddha
arises in their body, reflection on the Law, reflection on the Assembly.'

Compare also below, § 32, and Jataka I, 32.


202 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 172.


drink, they used to dance round together to the sound
of those palms when shaken by the wind.'


7. ' The Great King of Glory, Ananda, was the
possessor of Seven Precious Things, and was gifted
with Four Marvellous Powers.

' What are those seven ?

A

1 ' In the first place, Ananda, when the Great King
of Glory, on the Sabbath day 2, on the day of the full
moon, had purified himself, and had gone up into the
upper story of his palace to keep the sacred day, there
then appeared to him the heavenly Treasure of the
Wheel,3 with its nave, its tire, and all its thousand
spokes complete.

4 When he beheld it the Great King of Glory
thought : —

1 " This saying have I heard, ' When a king of the
warrior raCe, an anointed king, has purified himself on
the Sabbath day, on the day of the full moon, and has
gone up into the upper story of his palace to keep the
sacred day ; if there appear to him the heavenly Trea-
sure of the Wheel, with its nave, its tire, and all its
thousand spokes complete — that king becomes a king
of kings invincible.' May I, then, become a king of
king-s invincible4."

8. ' Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory rose
from his seat, and reverently uncovering from one
shoulder his robe, he held in his left hand a pitcher,
and with his right hand he sprinkled water up over the
Wheel, as he said : —

' " Roll onward, O my lord, the Wheel ! O my lord,
go forth and overcome ! "

O A

' Then the wondrous Wheel, Ananda, rolled onwards


' The following enumeration is found word for word in several
other Pali Suttas, and occurs also, in almost identical terms, in the
Lalita Vistara (Calcutta edition, pp. 14-19).

2 Uposatha, a weekly sacred day ; being full-moon day, new-moon
day, and the two equidistant intermediate days. Comp. § 12.

;! This is the disk of the sun.

4 A king of the rolling wheel.


D. ii. 174. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 20;


towards the region of the East, and after it went the
Great King of Glory, and with him his army, horses,
and chariots, and elephants, and men. [173] And in
whatever place, Ananda, the Wheel stopped, there the
Great King of Glory took up his abode, and with him
his army, horses, and chariots, and elephants, and men.

9. ' Then, Ananda, all the rival kings in the region
of the East came to the Great King of Glory and
said : —

' " Come, O mighty king ! Welcome, O mighty
king! All is thine, O mighty king! Do thou, O
mighty king, be a Teacher to us ! "

'Thus spake the Great King of Glory : — " Ye shall
slay no living thing. Ye shall not take that which has
not been given. Ye shall not act wrongly touching the
bodily desires. Ye shall speak no lie. Ye shall drink
no maddening drink. Ye shall eat as ye have eaten V

' Then, Ananda, all the rival kings in the region of
the East became subject unto the Great King of
Glory.

10. ' But the wondrous Wheel, Ananda, having
plunged down into the great waters in the East, rose
up out again, and rolled onward to the region of the
South [and there all happened as had happened in the
region of the East. And in like manner the wondrous
Wheel rolled onward to the extremest boundary of the
West and of the North ; and there, too, all happened
as had happened in the region of the East J.

11. [174] ' Now when the wondrous Wheel, Ananda,
had gone forth conquering and to conquer over the
whole earth to its very ocean boundary, it returned
back again to the royal city of Kusavati and remained
fixed on the open terrace in front of the entrance to
the inner apartments of the Great King of Glory, as


1 Yathabhuttambhunjatha. Buddhaghosa has no comment on
this. I suppose it means, ' Observe the rules current among you
regarding clean and unclean meate.' If so, the Great King of Glory
disregards the teaching of the Amagandha Sutta (translated in my
' Buddhism/ p. 131).


204 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 174.

a glorious adornment to the inner apartments of the
Great Kingof Glory.

' Such, Ananda, was the wondrous Wheel which
appeared to the Great King of Glory.'

A

1 2. ' Now further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory the Elephant Treasure J, all white,
seven-fold firm 2, wonderful in power, flying through
the sky — the Elephant-King, whose name was " The
Changes of the Moon 3."

' When he beheld it the Great King of Glory was
pleased at heart at the thought : —

' " Auspicious were it to ride upon the Elephant, if
only it would submit to be controlled ! "

1 Then, Ananda, the wondrous Elephant — like a fine
elephant of noble blood long since well trained — sub-
mitted to control.

A

' And long ago, Ananda, when the Great King of
Glory, to test that wondrous Elephant, had mounted
on to it early in the morning, it passed over along the
broad earth to its very ocean boundary, and then re-
turned again, in time for the morning meal, to the royal
city of Kusavati 4.

' Such, Ananda, was the wondrous Elephant that
appeared to the Great King of Glory.

1 3. * Now further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory the Horse Treasure \ all white

3 Hatthi-ratana.

2 Satta-ppatittho, that is, perhaps, in regard to its four legs, two
tusks, and trunk. The expression is curious, and Buddhaghosa has
n.o note upon it. It is quite possible that it merely signifies ' exceed-
ing firm,' the number seven being used without any hard and fast
interpretation.

1 Uposatho. In the Lalita Vistara its name is 'Wisdom'
(Bodhi). Uposatha is the name for the sacred day of the moon's
changes — first, and more especially the full-moon day ; next, the new-
moon day ; and lastly, the days equidistant between these two. It was,
dierefore, a weekly sacred day, and, as Childers says, may often be
well rendered ' Sabbath.'

4 Compare on this and § 29 my • Buddhist Birth Stories/ p. 85,
where a similar phrase is used of Kanthaka.

' Assa-ratanam.


D. ii. I7,r THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 205

with a crow-black head, and a dark mane, wonderful
in power, flying through the sky — the Charger-King,
whose name was " Thunder-cloud V

' When he beheld it, the Great King of Glory was
pleased at heart at the thought : —

v " Auspicious were it to ride upon that Horse if only
it would submit to be controlled ! "

[175] ' Then, Ananda, the wondrous Horse — like a
fine horse of the best blood long since well trained —
submitted to control.

A

' When long ago, Ananda, the Great King of Glory,
to test that wondrous Horse, mounted on to it early in
the morning, it passed over along the broad earth to its
very ocean boundary and then returned again, in time
for the morning meal, to the royal city of Kusavati.

' Such, Ananda, was the wondrous Horse that ap-
peared to the Great King of Glory.

14. 'Now further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory the Gem-Treasure z. That Gem
was the Ve/uriya, bright, of the finest species, with
eight facets, excellently wrought, clear, transparent, per-
fect in every way.

' The splendour, Ananda, of that wondrous Gem
spread round about a league on every side.

' When, long ago, Ananda, the Great King of Glory,
to test that wondrous Gem, set all his fourfold army in
array and raised aloft the Gem upon his standard top,
he was able to march out in the gloom and darkness of
the niVht.

O A

1 And then too, Ananda, all the dwellers in the
villages round about, set about their daily work,
thinking : — " The daylight hath appeared."

1 Valahako. Compare the Valahassa-Jataka (Fausboll, No. 196),
of which the Chinese story translated by Mr. Beal at pp. 332-40 of his
' Romantic History,' &c, is an expanded and altered version. In the
Valahaka Sawyutta of the Sawyutta Nikaya the spirits of the skies are
divided into Uwha-valahakaDeva, Sita-valahaka Deva, Abbha-
valahaka Deva, Vata-valahaka Deva, and Vassa-valahaka
Deva, that is, the cloud-spirits of cold, heat, air, wind, and rain
respectively.

2 Mawi-ratanaw.


206 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 175.

A

' Such, Ananda, was the wondrous Gem that ap-
peared to the Great King of Glory.'

A

15. ' Now further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory the Woman-Treasure \ graceful in
figure, beautiful in appearance, charming in manner,
and of the most fine complexion ; neither very tall, nor
very short ; neither very stout, nor very slim ; neither
very dark, nor very fair ; surpassing human beauty, she
had attained unto the beauty of the gods 2.

1 The touch too, Ananda, of the skin of that wondrous
Woman was as the touch of cotton or of cotton wool ;
in the cold her limbs were warm, in the heat her limbs
were cool ; while from her body was wafted the perfume
of sandal wood and from her mouth the perfume of the
lotus.

A

' That Pearl among Women too, Ananda, used to
rise up before the Great King of Glory, [176] and after
him retire to rest ; pleasant was she in speech, and ever
on the watch to hear what she might do in order so to
act as to give him pleasure.

' That Pearl among Women too, Ananda, was never,
even in thought, unfaithful to the Great King of Glory —
how much jess then could she be so with the body !

' Such, Ananda, was the Pearl among Women who
appeared to the Great King of Glory.'


16. ' Now further, Ananda, there appeared unto the
Great King of Glory a Wonderful Treasurer3, possessed,

-1 Itthi-ratana;«.

2 The above description of an ideally beautiful woman is of frequent
occurrence.

3 Gahapati-ratana/;/. The word gahapati has been hitherto
usually rendered ' householder,' but this may often, and would certainly
here, convey a wrong impression. There is no single word in English
which is an adequate rendering of the term, for it connotes a social
condition now no longer known among us. The gahapati was the
head of a family, the representative in a village community of a family,
the pater fajnilias. So the god of fire, with allusion to the sacred
fire maintained in each household, is called in the Rig-veda the
gr/'hapati, the pater familias, of the human race. It is often


D. ii. 177. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 207

through good deeds done in a former birth, of a mar-
vellous power of vision by which he could discover
treasure, whether it had an owner or whether it had
not.

4 He went up to the Great King of Glory, and said : —

' " Do thou, O King, take thine ease ! I will deal
with thy wealth even as wealth should be dealt
with."

4 Long ago, Ananda, the Great King of Glory, to test
that wonderful Treasurer, went on board a boat, and
had it pushed out into the current in the midst of the
river Ganges. Then he said to the wonderful steward : —

1 " I have need, O Treasurer, of yellow gold ! "

1 44 Let the ship then, O Great King, go alongside
either of the banks."

' " It is here, O Treasurer, that I have need of yellow
gold."

Then the wonderful Treasurer reached down to the
water with both his hands, and drew up a jar full of
yellow gold, and said to the Great King of Glory : —

' " Is that enough, O Great King ? Have I done
enough, O Great King ? "

' And the Great King of Glory replied : —
' It is enough, O Treasurer. You have done
enough, O Treasurer. You have offered me enough,
O Treasurer ! " [177]

' Such was the wonderful Treasurer, Ananda, who
appeared to the Great King of Glory.'


used in opposition to brahma«a very much as we used 'yeoman'
in opposition to 'clerk' (Jataka I, 83); and the two combined are
used in opposition to people of other ranks and callings held to be
less honourable than that of clerk or yeoman (Jataka I, 218). The
compound brahmawa-gahapatika as a collective term comes to
be about equivalent to ' priests and laymen ' (see, for instance, below,
§ 21, and Vinayal, 35, 36). Then again the gahapati is distinct from
the subordinate members of the family, who had not the control and
management of the common property (Samanna Phala Suttanta 133,
= Tevijja Suttanta I, 47); and it is this implication of the term that
is emphasized in the text. Buddhaghosa uses, as an explanatory
phrase, the words se//^i-gahapati.


208 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 177.

17. 'Now further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory a Wonderful Adviser \ learned,
clever, and wise ; and qualified to lead the Great King
of Glory to undertake what he ought to undertake, and
to leave undone what he ought to leave undone.

' He went up to the Great King of Glory, and said : —

' " Do thou, O King, take thine ease ! I will be thy
guide."

' Such, Ananda, was the wonderful Adviser who
appeared to the Great King of Glory.

' The Great King of Glory was possessed of these
Seven Precious Things.

18. ' Now, further, Ananda, the Great King of Glory
was gifted with Four Marvellous Gifts 2.

' What are the Four Marvellous Gifts ?

A

' In the first place, Ananda, the Great King of Glory
was graceful in figure, handsome in appearance, pleas-
ing in manner, and of most beautiful complexion, beyond
what other men are.

' The Great King of Glory, Ananda, was endowed
with this First Marvellous Gift.

A

19. ' And besides that, Ananda, the Great King of
Glory was of long life, and of many years, beyond those
of other men.

' The Great King of Glory, Ananda, was endowed
with this Second Marvellous Gift.

A

20. ' And besides that, Ananda, the Great King of
Glory was free from disease, and free from bodily
suffering ; and his internal fire was neither too hot nor
too cold, but such as to promote good digestion, beyond
that of other men 3.

1 Pari«ayaka-ratana?«. Buddhaghosa says that he was the
eldest son of the king. The Lalita Vistara makes him a general.

2 The Four Iddhis. Here again, as elsewhere, it will be noticed
that there is nothing supernatural about these four Iddhis. See the
passages quoted above, Vol. I, pp. 272 foil. They are merely attri-
butes accompanying or forming part of the majesty (iddhi) of the
King of kings.

3 The same thing is said of Ra////apala in the Ra//<6apala Sutta,
where Gogerly renders the whole passage : — ' Ra/7/japala is healthy, free
from pain, having a good digestion and appetite, being troubled with


D. ii. 178. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 209

' The Great King of Glory, Ananda, was endowed
with this Third Marvellous Gift.

A

21. [178] 'And besides that, Ananda, the Great
King of Glory was beloved and popular with priests
and with laymen alike. Just, Ananda, as a father is
near and dear to his own sons, just so, Ananda, was the
Great King of Glory beloved and popular with priests
and with laymen alike. And just, Ananda, as his sons
are near and dear to a father, just so, Ananda, were
priests and laymen alike near and dear to the Great
King of Glory.

'Once, Ananda, the Great King of Glory marched
out with all his fourfold army to the pleasure ground.
There, Ananda, the priests and laymen went up to the
Great King of Glory, and said : —

' " O King, pass slowly by, that we may look upon
thee for a longer time ! "

1 But the Great King of Glory, Ananda, addressed
his charioteer, and said : —

1 " Drive on the chariot slowly, charioteer, that I may
look upon my people [priests and laymen] for a longer
time ! "

A

' This was the Fourth Marvellous Gift, Ananda,
with which the Great King of Glory was endowed.

' These are the Four Marvellous Gifts, Ananda,
with which the Great King of Glory was endowed.'


A

22. ' Now to the Great King of Glory, Ananda,
there occurred the thought : —


no excess of either heat or cold ' (' Journal of the Ceylon Asiatic
Society,' 1847-8, p. 98). The gaham is a supposed particular
organ or function situate at the junction of the stomach and intestines.
Moggallana explains it, udare tu tatha pacanalasmiw gahawi
(Abhidhana-ppadipika 972), where Subhuti's Sinhalese version is
' kukshi, pakagni,' and his English version, 'the belly, the internal
fire which promotes digestion.' Buddhaghosa explains samavipakiya
kammaga-tejo-dhatuya, and adds : — ' If a man's food is dissolved
the moment he has eaten it, or if it remains like a lump, he has not the
samavepakini gahawi, but he who has appetite (bhattacchando)
when the time for food comes round again, he has the samavepakini
gahawi,' — which is delightfully nai've.

III. 1 P


2IO XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 178-

' " Suppose, now, I were to make Lotus-ponds in the
spaces between these palms, at every hundred bow-
lengths."

' Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory, in the
spaces between those palms, at distances of a hundred
bow-lengths, made Lotus-ponds.

' And those Lotus-ponds, Ananda, were faced with
tiles of four kinds. One kind of tile was of gold, and
one of silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal.

' And to each of those Lotus-ponds, Ananda, there
were four flights of steps, of four different kinds.
One flight of steps was of gold, and one of silver, and
one of beryl, and one of crystal. [170] The flight of
golden steps had balustrades of gold, with the cross
bars and the figure-head of silver. The flight of silver
steps had balustrades of silver, with the cross bars and
the figure-head of gold. The flight of beryl steps had
balustrades of beryl, with the cross bars and the figure-
head of crystal. The flight of crystal steps had balus-
trades of crystal, with cross bars and figure-head of
beryl.

' And round those Lotus-ponds there ran, Ananda,
a double railing. One railing was of gold, and one was
of silver. The golden railing had its posts of gold, and
its cross bars and its capitals of silver. The silver
railing had its posts of silver, and its cross bars and its
capitals of gold1.

1 Pokkharawi, the word translated Lotus-pond, is an artificial pool
or small lake for water-plants. There are some which are probably
nearly as old as this passage still in good preservation in Anuradbapura
in Ceylon. Each is oblong, and has its tiles and its four flights of steps,
and some had railings. The balustrades, cross bars, figure-head, and
railings are in Pali thambha, suciyo, unhisa, and vedika, of the
exact meaning of which I am not quite confident. They do not occur
in the description of the Lotus-lakes in Sukhavati. General Cunningham
says that the cross bars of the Buddhist railings are called suciyo in
the inscriptions at Bharahat ('The Stupa of Bharhut,' p. 127).
Buddhaghosa, who is good enough to tell us the exact number of the
ponds — to wit, 84,000, has no explanation of these words, merely
saying that of the two vedikas one was at the limit of the tiles and
one at the limit of the parivewa. See below §31; and Rhys Davids,
' Buddhist India,' Figures 6, 7 ; pp. 74-6.


D. ii. i8o. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 211


23. ' Now, to the Great King of Glory, Ananda,
there occurred the thought : —

1 " Suppose, now, I were to have flowers of every
season planted in those Lotus-ponds for all the people
to have garlands to put on1 — to wit, blue water-lilies and
blue lotuses, white lotuses and white water-lilies."

[And the king had such flowers planted there
accordingly.]

' Now, to the Great King of Glory, Ananda, oc-
curred the thought : —

' " Suppose, now, I were to place bathing-men on the
banks of those Lotus-ponds, to bathe such of the people
as come there from time to time."

[And the king had such bathing-men placed there
accordingly.]

' Now, to the Great King of Glory, Ananda, occurred
the thought : —

' " Suppose, now, I were to establish a perpetual
grant by the banks of those Lotus-ponds — to wit, food
for the hungry, drink for the thirsty, raiment for the
naked, means of conveyance for those who have need
of it, couches for the tired, wives for those who want
wives, gold for the poor, and money for those who are
in want."

[180] ' Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory
established a perpetual grant by the banks of those
Lotus-ponds — to wit, food for the hungry, drink for the
thirsty, raiment for the naked, means of conveyance for
those who needed it, couches for the tired, wives for
those who wanted wives, gold for the poor, and
money for those who were in want.'

24. ' Now, Ananda, the people [priests and laymen]
went to the Great King of Glory, taking with them
much wealth. And they said : —

' " This abundant wealth, O King, have we brought

1 Literally ' have garlands planted for all the people to put on ' — an
elliptical expression revealing the ideas of that early time as to the
only possible use of flowers. I think the reading should be
anavarazw.

P 2


2 1 2 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 180.

here for the use of the King of kings. Let the King
accept it of us ! "

' " I have enough wealth, my friends, laid up for
myself, the produce of righteous taxation. Do you
keep this, and take away more with you ! "

' When those men were thus refused by the King
they went aside and considered together, saying : —

' " It would not beseem us now, were we to take back
this wealth to our own houses. Suppose, now, we
were to build a mansion for the Great King of Glory."

' Then they went to the Great King of Glory, and
said : —

' " A mansion would we build for thee, O King ! "

' Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory signified,
by silence, his consent.'


25. ' Now, Ananda, when Sakka, the king of the
gods, became aware in his mind of the thoughts that
were in the heart of the Great King of Glory, he
addressed Vissakamma the god, and said : —

' " Come now, Vissakamma, create me a mansion for
the Great King of Glory — a palace which shall be called
1 Righteousness '."

' " Even so, lord ! " said Vissakamma, in assent,
Ananda, to Sakka, the king of the gods. [181] And as
instantaneously as a strong man might stretch forth
his folded arm, or draw in his arm again when it was
stretched forth, so quickly did he vanish from the
heaven of the Great Thirty-Three, and appeared before
the Great King of Glory.

' Then, Ananda, Vissakamma the god said to the
Great King of Glory : —

' " I would create for thee, O King, a mansion — a
palace which shall be called ' Righteousness ' ! "

' Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory signified,
by silence, his consent.

1 So Vissakamma the god, Ananda, created for the
Great King of Glory a mansion — a palace to be called
" Righteousness ".'


Z>. ii. 182. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 213

26. ' The Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, was
on the east and on the west a league in length,
and on the north and on the south half a league in
breadth.

A

1 The ground-floor, Ananda, of the Palace of Right-
eousness, in height as three times the height to which a
man can reach, was built of bricks, of four kinds. One
kind of brick was of gold, and one of silver, and one
of beryl, and one of crystal.

' To the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, there
were eighty-four thousand pillars of four kinds. One
kind of pillar was of gold, and one of silver, and one of
beryl, and one of crystal.

' The Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, was fitted
up with seats of four kinds. One kind of seat was of
gold, and one of silver, and one of beryl, and one of
crystal.

' In the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, there were
twenty-four staircases of four kinds. One staircase was
of gold; and one of silver, and one of beryl, and one of
crystal. The staircase of gold had balustrades of gold,
with the cross bars and the figure-head of silver. The
staircase of silver had balustrades of silver, with the
cross bars and the figure-head of gold. [182] The
staircase of beryl had balustrades of beryl, with the
cross bars and the figure-head of crystal. The stair-
case of crystal had balustrades of crystal, with cross
bars and figure-head of beryl.

' In the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, there were
eighty-four thousand chambers of four kinds. One
kind of chamber was of gold, and one of silver, and one
of beryl, and one of crystal.

' In the golden chamber a silver couch was spread ;
in the silver chamber a golden couch ; in the beryl
chamber a couch of ivory ; and in the crystal chamber
a couch of coral.

1 At the door of the golden chamber there stood a
palm tree of silver ; and its trunk was of silver, and its
leaves and fruits of silver.

' At the door of the beryl chamber there stood a palm


214 XVII. MAIIA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 182.


tree of crystal ; and its trunk was of crystal, and its
leaves and fruits of beryl.

' At the door of the crystal chamber there stood a
palm tree of beryl ; and its trunk was of beryl, and its
leaves and fruits of crystal.'


27. ' Now there occurred, Ananda, to the Great King
of Glory this thought : —

' " Suppose, now, I were to make a grove of palm
trees, all of gold, at the entrance to the chamber of the
Great Complex \ under the shade of which I may pass
the heat of the day."

' Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory made a
grove of palm trees, all of gold, at the entrance to the
chamber of the Great Complex, under the shade of
which he might pass the heat of the day.

28. ' The Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, was
surrounded by a double railing. [183] One railing was
of gold, and one was of silver. The golden railing had
its posts of gold, and its cross bars and its figure-head of
silver. The silver railing had its posts of silver, and
its cross bars and its figure-head of gold.

29. ' The Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, was hung
round with two networks of bells. One network of
bells was of gold, and one was of silver. The golden
network had bells of silver, and the silver network had
bells of sfold.

' And when those networks of bells, Ananda, were
shaken by the wind there arose a sound sweet, and
pleasant, and charming, and intoxicating.

'Just, Ananda, as the seven kinds of instruments
yield, when well played upon, to the skilful man, a
sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and intoxi-
cating— just even so, Ananda, when those networks of


1 Mahavyuhassa ku/agarassa dvare. The ' Great Complex '
contains a double allusion, in the same spirit in which the whole legend
has been worked out: (1) To the Great Complex as a name of the
Sun God regarded as a unity of the deities; and (2) To the Great
Complex as a name of a particular kind of deep religious meditation
or speculation.


D. ii. 184. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 2 I 5


bells were shaken by the wind, there arose a sound
sweet, and pleasant) and charming, and intoxicating.

' And whoever, Ananda, in the royal city Kusavati
were at that time gamblers, drunkards, and given to
drink, they used to dance round together to the sound
of those networks of bells when shaken by the wind.'


30. ' When the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda,
was finished it was hard to look at, destructive to the
eyes. Just, Ananda, as in the last month of the rains
in the autumn time, when the sky has become clear and
the clouds have vanished away, the sun, springing up
along- the heavens, is hard to look at, and destructive
to the eyes — [184] just so, Ananda, when the Palace of
Righteousness was finished was it hard to look at, and
destructive to the eyes.'


31. ' Now there occurred, Ananda, to the Great King
of Glory this thought : —

' " Suppose, now, in front of the Palace of Right-
eousness, I were to make a Lotus-lake to bear the
name of Righteousness'."

' Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory made a
Lotus-lake to bear the name of " Righteousness".

1 The Lake of Righteousness, Ananda, was on the
east and on the west a league in length, and on the
north and on the south half a league in breadth.

' The Lake of Righteousness, Ananda, was faced
with tiles of four kinds. One kind of tile was of gold,
and one of silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal.

1 The Lake of Righteousness, Ananda, had four and
twenty flights of steps, of four different kinds. One
flight of steps was of gold, and one of silver, and one
of beryl, and one of crystal. The flight of golden steps
had balustrades of gold, with the cross bars and the
figure-head of silver. The flight of silver steps had
balustrades of silver, with the cross bars and the figure-
head of gold. The flight of beryl steps had balustrades
of beryl, with the cross bars and the figure-head of


2l6 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 184.

crystal. The flight of crystal steps had balustrades of
crystal, with cross bars and figure-head of beryl.

' Round the Lake of Righteousness, Ananda, there
ran a double railing. One railing was of gold, and one
was of silver. The golden railing had its posts of gold,
and its cross bars and its capitals of silver. The silver
railing had its posts of silver, and its cross bars and its
capitals of gold.

32. 'The Lake of Righteousness, Ananda, was sur-
rounded by seven rows of palm trees. One row was
of palms of gold, and one of silver, and one of beryl,
and one of crystal, and one of agate, and one of coral,
and one of all kinds of gems.

1 And the golden palms had trunks of gold, and
leaves and fruits of silver. [!85] And the silver palms
had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold.
And the palms of beryl had trunks of beryl, and leaves
and fruits of crystal. And the crystal palms had trunks
of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl. And the agate
palms had trunks of agate, and leaves and fruits of
coral. And the coral palms had trunks of coral, and
leaves and fruits of agate. And the palms of every
kind of gem had trunks and leaves and fruits of every
kind of gem.

' And when those rows of palm trees, Ananda, were
shaken by the wind, there arose a sound sweet, and
pleasant, and charming, and intoxicating.

' Just, Ananda, as the seven kinds of instruments
yield, when well played upon, to the skilful man, a
sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and intoxi-
cating,— just even so, Ananda, when those rows of
palm trees were shaken by the wind, there arose a
sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and intoxi-
cating.

' And whosoever, Ananda, in the royal city Kusa-
vati were at that time gamblers, drunkards, and given
to drink, they used to dance round together to the
sound of those palms when shaken by the wind.'


A

33. ' When the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, was


D. ii. 185. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 21 7

finished, and the Lotus-lake of Righteousness was
finished, the Great King of Glory entertained with all
good things those of the Wanderers who, at that time,
were held in high esteem, and those of the brahmins
who, at that time, were held in high esteem. Then he
ascended up into the Palace of Righteousness.'


End of the First Portion for Recitation.


CHAPTER II.

i. ' Now there occurred, Ananda, this thought to the
Great King of Glory : —

' " Of what previous character, now, may this be the
fruit, of what previous character the result, that I am
now so mighty and so great ? "

[186] ' And then occurred, Ananda, to the Great
King of Glory this thought : —

1 " Of three qualities is this the fruit, of three qualities
the result, that I am now so mighty and so great, —
that is to say, of giving, of self-conquest, and of self-
control 1." '.

2. ' Now the Great King of Glory, Ananda, ascended
up into the chamber of the Great Complex ; and there
he broke out into a cry of intense emotion : —

' " Stay here, O thoughts of lust !
Stay here, O thoughts of ill-will !
Stay here, O thoughts of hatred !
Thus far only, O thoughts of lust !
Thus far only, O thoughts of ill-will !
Thus far only, O thoughts of hatred ! "

3. 'And when, Ananda, the Great King of Glory
had entered the chamber of the Great Complex, and
had seated himself upon the couch of gold, having put
away all passion and all unrighteousness, he entered
into, and remained in, the First Rapture, — a state of
joy and ease, born of seclusion, full of reflection, full
of investigation.

' By suppressing reflection and investigation, he
entered into, and remained in, the Second Rapture, —

1 I have here translated kamma by ' previous character ' and by
' quality.' The easiest plan would, no doubt, have been to preserve
in the translation the technical term karma, which is explained at
some length in ' Buddhism,' pp. 99-106.


D. ii. i86. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 2IQ.


a state of joy and ease, born of serenity, without reflec-
tion, without investigation, a state of elevation of mind,
of internal calm.

' By absence of the longing after joy, he remained
indifferent, conscious, self-possessed, experiencing in his
body that ease which the noble ones announce, saying: —
" The man indifferent and self-possessed is well at ease,"
and thus he entered into, and remained in, the Third
Rapture.

1 By putting away ease, by putting away pain, by the
previous dying away both of gladness and of sorrow, he
entered into, and remained in, the Fourth Rapture, —
a state of purified self-possession and equanimity, with-
out ease, and without pain 1.

4. ' Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory went
out from the chamber of the Great Complex, and
entered the oolden chamber and sat himself down on
the silver couch. And he let his mind pervade one
quarter of the world with thoughts of Love ; and so
the second quarter, and so the third, and so the fourth.
And thus the whole wide world, above, below, around,
and everywhere, did he continue to pervade with heart
of Love, far-reaching, grown great, and beyond measure,
free from the least trace of anger or ill-will.

' And he let his mind pervade one quarter of the
world with thoughts of Pity ; and so the second quarter,
and so the third, and so the fourth. And thus the whole
wide world, above, below, around, and everywhere, did
he continue to pervade with heart of Pity, far-reaching,
grown great, and beyond measure, free from the least
trace of anger or ill-will.

' And he let his mind pervade one quarter of the


1 The above paragraphs are an endeavour to express the inmost
feelings when they are first strung to the uttermost by the intense
effects of deep religious emotion, and then feel the effects of what
may be called, for want of a better word, the reaction. Most deeply
religious natures have passed through such a crisis ; and though the
feelings are perhaps really indescribable, this passage is dealing, not
with a vain mockery, but with a very real event in spiritual ex-
perience. It implies neither hypnotism nor trance.


220 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 186.

world with thoughts of Sympathy ; and so the second
quarter, and so the third, and so the fourth. And
thus the whole wide world above, below, around, and
everywhere, did he continue to pervade with heart of
Sympathy, far reaching, grown great, and beyond
measure, free from the least trace of anger or ill-will.

'And he let his mind pervade one quarter of the
world with thoughts of Equanimity l ; [187] and so the
second quarter, and so the third, and so the fourth.
And thus the whole wide world, above, below, around,
and everywhere, did he continue to pervade with heart
of Equanimity, far-reaching, grown great, and beyond
measure, free from the least trace of an^er or ill-will.

5. ' The Great King of Glory, Ananda, had four and
eighty thousand cities, the chief of which was the royal
city of Kusavati :

' Four and eighty thousand palaces, the chief of
which was the Palace of Righteousness :

' Four and eighty thousand chambers, the chief of
which was the chamber of the Great Complex :

' Four and eighty thousand divans, of gold, and
silver, and ivory, and sandal wood, spread with long-
haired rugs, and cloths embroidered with flowers, and
magnificent antelope skins ; covered with lofty canopies ;
and provided at both ends with purple cushions :

' Four and eighty thousand state elephants, with
trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden cover-
ings of network, — of which the king of elephants, called
" the Changes of the Moon," was chief:

' Four and eighty thousand state horses, with trap-
pings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden coverings
of network, — of which " Thunder-cloud," the king of
horses, was the chief:

' Four and eighty thousand chariots, with coverings
of the skins of lions, and of tigers, and of panthers, —

1 These are the four Appamanflas or infinite feelings, also called
(e.g. below, § 13) the four Brahma-viharas or Sublime Con-
ditions. They are here very appropriately represented to follow
immediately after the state of feeling described in the Raptures ; but
they ought to be the constant companions of a good Buddhist.


D. ii. 188. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 221

of which the chariot called " the Flag of Victory " was
the chief:

' Four and eighty thousand gems, of which the
Wondrous Gem was the chief:

' Four and eighty thousand wives, of whom Subhadda,
the Queen of Glory1, was the chief: [188]

' Four and eighty thousand yeomen, of whom the
Wonderful Steward was the chief :

' Four and eighty thousand nobles, of whom the
Wonderful Adviser was the chief:

1 Four and eighty thousand cows, with jute trappings,
and horns tipped with bronze :

1 Four and eighty thousand myriads of garments, of
delicate textures, of flax, and cotton, and silk, and
wool :

1 Four and eighty thousand dishes, in which, in the
evening and in the morning rice was served V


A

6. ' Now at that time, Ananda, the four and eighty
thousand state elephants used to come every evening
and every morning to be of service to the Great King
of Glory.

1 And this thought occurred to the Great King of
Glory : —

1 These eighty-four thousand elephants come every
evening and every morning to be of service to me.
Suppose, now, I were to let the elephants come in
alternate forty-two thousands, once each, every alternate
hundred years ! "

1 Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory said to the
Great Adviser : —

' " O, my friend, the Great Adviser ! these eighty-
four thousand elephants come every evening and every
morning to be of service to me. Now, let the elephants

1 Subhadda Devi. Subhadda, 'glorious, magnificent/ is a not
uncommon name both for men and women in Buddhist and post-
Buddhistic Hindu literature.

2 Most of the trappings and cloths here mentioned are the same as
those referred to in the Moralities translated above, Vol. I, pp. n, 12.
The whole paragraph is four times repeated below.


2 22 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 188.

come, O my friend, the Great Adviser, in alternate forty-
two thousands, [189] once each, every alternate hundred
years !

' " Even so, lord ! " said the Wonderful Adviser, in
assent, to the Great King of Glory.

' From that time forth, Ananda, the elephants came
in alternate forty-two thousands, once each, every
alternate hundred years.'


A

7. ' Now, Ananda, after the lapse of many years, of
many hundred years, of many thousand years, there
occurred to the Queen of Glory this thought : —

' " 'Tis long since I have beheld the Great King of
Glory. Suppose, now, I were to go and visit the Great
King of Glory."

' Then, Ananda, the Queen of Glory said to the
women of. the harem : —

' " Arise now, dress your hair, and clothe yourselves in
fresh raiment. 'Tis long since we have beheld the
Great King of Glory. Let us go and visit the Great
King of Glory ! "

' " Even so, lady ! " said the women of the harem,
Ananda, in assent, to the Queen of Glory. And they
dressed their hair, and clad themselves in fresh raiment,
and came near to the Queen of Glory.

' Then, Ananda, the Queen of Glory said to the
Great Adviser : —

' " Arrange, O Great Adviser, the fourfold army in
array. 'Tis long since I have beheld the Great King
of Glory. I am about to go to visit the Great King of
Glory."

' " Even so, O Oueen ! " said the Great Adviser,
Ananda, in assent, to the Queen of Glory. And he
set the fourfold army in array, and had the fact
announced to the Queen of Glory in the words : —

' " The fourfold army, O Queen, is set for thee in
array. Do now whatever seemeth to thee fit."

8. [190] ' Then, Ananda, the Queen of Glory, with
the fourfold army, repaired, with the women of the
harem, to the Palace of Righteousness. And when she


D. ii. 190. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 223

had arrived there she mounted up into the Palace of
Righteousness, and went on to the chamber of the
Great Complex. And when she had reached it, she
stopped and leant against the side of the door.

' When, Ananda, the Great King of Glory heard the
noise he thought : —

1 " What, now, may this noise, as of a great multitude
of people, mean ? "

' And going out from the chamber of the Great
Complex, he beheld the Queen of Glory standing
leaning up against the side of the door. And when
he beheld her, he said to the Queen of Glory : —

' " Stop there, O Queen ! Enter not ! " '


A

9. ' Then the Great King of Glory, Ananda, said to
one of his attendants : —

' " Arise, good man ! take the golden couch out of
the chamber of the Great Complex, and make it ready
under that grove of palm trees which is all of gold."

' " Even so, lord ! " said the man, in assent, to the
Great King of Glory. And he took the golden couch
out of the chamber of the Great Complex, and made it
ready under that grove of palm trees which was all
of gold.

' Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory laid himself
down in the dignified way a lion does ; and lay with one
leg resting on the other, calm and self-possessed.'


A

10. ' Then, Ananda, there occurred to the Oueen of
Glory this thought : —

' " How calm are all the limbs of the Great King of
Glory! How clear and bright is his appearance! O may
it not be that the Great King of Glory is dead1 ! '

' And she said to the Great King of Glory : —

1 " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand

1 On the approach of death, explains the commentator, people are
transfigured, shine forth. This idea may be the source of the legend
of the Transfiguration translated above, p. 146, 'Book of the Great
Decease/ IV, 37.


224 xvn- MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. rqo.

cities, the chief of which is the royal city of Kusavati.
Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these ! quicken
thy longing after life ! [l9l]

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
palaces, the chief of which is the Palace of Righteous-
ness. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these,
quicken thy longing after life.

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
chambers, the chief of which is the chamber of the Great
Complex. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for
these, quicken thy longing after life.

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
divans, of gold, and silver, and ivory, and sandal wood,
spread with long-haired rugs, and cloths embroidered
with flowers, and magnificent antelope skins, covered
with lofty canopies, and provided at both ends with
purple cushions. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire
for these, quicken thy longing after life.

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
state elephants, with trappings of gold, and gilded flags,
and golden coverings of network, — of which the king
of elephants, called ' the Changes of the Moon,' is
chief. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these,
quicken thy longing after life.

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
state horses, with trappings of gold, and gilded flags,
and eolden coverings of network, — of which ' Thunder-
cloud,' the king of horses, is the chief. Arise, O King,
re-awaken thy desire for these, quicken thy longing-
after life.

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
chariots, with coverings of the skins of lions, and of
tigers, and of panthers, — of which the chariot called
'the Flag of Victory' is the chief. Arise, O King,
re-awaken thy desire for these, quicken thy longing
after life.

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
gems, of which the Wondrous Gem is the chief. Arise,
O King, re-awaken thy desire for these, quicken thy
loncnnsf after life.


D. ii. 192. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 225

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
wives, of whom the Queen of Glory is the chief. Arise,
O King, re-awaken thy desire for these, quicken thy
longing after life.

( " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
yeomen, of whom the Wonderful Steward is the chief.
Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these, quicken
thy longing after life.

* " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
nobles, of whom the Wonderful Adviser is the chief.
Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these, quicken
thy longing after life.

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
cows, with jute trappings, and horns tipped with bronze.
Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these, quicken
thy longing after life [192].

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
myriads of garments, of delicate textures, of flax, and
cotton, and silk, and wool. Arise, O King, re-awaken
thy desire for these, quicken thy longing after life.

' " Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand
dishes, in which, in the evening and in the morning,
rice is served. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire
for these, quicken thy longing after life." '


II. 'When she had thus spoken, Ananda, the Great
King of Glory said to the Queen of Glory : —

' " Long hast thou addressed me, O Queen, in
pleasant words, much to be desired, and sweet. Yet
now in this last time you speak in words unpleasant,
disagreeable, not to be desired."

' " How then, O King, shall I address thee ? ';

' " Thus, O Queen, shouldst thou address me — The
nature of all things near and dear to us, O King, is
such that we must leave them, divide ourselves from
them, separate ourselves from them *. Pass not away,

1 The Pali words a^e the same as those at the beginning of the
constantly repeated longer phrase to the same effect in the ' Book of
the Great Decease.'

III. Q


226 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 192.

O King, with longing in thy heart. Sad is the death
of him who longs, unworthy is the death of him who
longs \ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty
thousand cities, the chief of which is the royal city
of Kusavati. Cast away desire for these, long not
after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
palaces, the chief of which is the Palace of Righteous-
ness. Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

[193] ' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty
thousand chambers, the chief of which is the chamber
of the Great Complex. Cast away desire for these,
long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
divans, of gold, and silver, and ivory, and sandalwood,
spread with long-haired rugs, and cloths embroidered
with flowers, and magnificent antelope skins, covered
with lofty canopies, and provided at both ends with
purple cushions. Cast away desire for these, long not
after life.

' "Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
state elephants, with trappings of gold, and gilded flags,
and golden coverings of network, — of which the king
of elephants, called ' the Changes of the Moon,' is the
chief. Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

' "Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
state horses, with trappings of gold, and gilded flags,
and golden coverings of network, — of which 'Thunder-
cloud,' the king of horses, is the chief. Cast away
desire for these, long not after life.

' "Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
chariots, with coverings of the skins of lions, and of
tigers, and of panthers, — of which the chariot called
4 the Flag of Victory' is the chief. Cast away desire
for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
gems, of which the Wondrous Gem is the chief. Cast
away desire for these, long not after life.

1 Compare Jataka, No. 34.


D. ii. 194. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 227


1 " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
wives, of which the Queen of Glory is the chief. Cast
away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
yeomen, of whom Wonderful Steward is the chief.
Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
nobles, of whom the Wonderful Adviser is the chief.
Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
cows, with jute trappings, and horns tipped with bronze.
Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

[194] ' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty
thousand myriads of garments, of delicate textures, of
flax, and cotton, and silk, and wool. Cast away desire
for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
dishes, in which, in the evening and in the morning,
rice is served. Cast away desire for these, long not
after life." '

12. 'When he thus spake, Ananda, the Queen of
Glory wept and poured forth tears.

'Then, Ananda, the Queen of Glory wiped away
her tears, and addressed the Great King of Glory,
and said :

' " The nature of all things near and dear to us,
O King, is such that we must leave them, divide
ourselves from them, separate ourselves from them.
Pass not away, O King, with longing in thy heart.
Sad is the death of him who longs, unworthy is the
death of him who longs. Thine, O King, are these
four and eighty thousand cities, the chief of which is
the royal city of Kusavati. Cast away desire for these,
long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
palaces, the chief of which is the Palace of Righteous-
ness. Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
chambers, the chief of which is the chamber of the

Q2


2 28 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 194.

Great Complex. Cast away desire for these, long not
after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
divans, of gold, and silver, and ivory, and sandalwood,
spread with long-haired rugs, and cloths embroidered
with flowers, and magnificent antelope skins, covered
with lofty canopies, and provided at both ends with
purple cushions. Cast away desire for these, long not
after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
state elephants, with trappings of gold, and gilded flags,
and golden coverings of network, — of which the king
of elephants, called 'the Changes of the Moon,' is the
chief. Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
state horses, with trappings of gold, and gilded flags,
and golden coverings of network, — [195] of which
'Thunder-cloud,' the king of horses, is the chief. Cast
away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
chariots, with coverings of the skins of lions, and of
tigers, and of panthers, — of which the chariot called
' the Flag of Victory ' is the chief. Cast away desire
for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
gems, of which the Wondrous Gem is the chief. Cast
away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
wives, of whom the Queen of Glory is the chief. Cast
away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
yeomen, of whom the Wonderful Steward is the chief.
Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
nobles, of whom the Wonderful Adviser is the chief.
Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

' " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
cows, with jute trappings, and horns tipped with bronze.
Cast away desire for these, long not after life.

■ " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand


D. ii. 196. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 229

myriads of garments, of delicate textures, of flax, and
cotton, and silk, and wool. Cast away desire for these,
long not after life.

1 " Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand
dishes, in which, in the evening and in the morning,
rice is served. Cast away desire for these, long not
after life." '

A

13. 'Then immediately, Ananda, the Great King of
Glory died. Just, Ananda, as when a yeoman has
eaten a hearty meal he becomes all drowsy, just so
were the feelings he experienced, Ananda, as death
came upon the Great King of Glory.

[196] ' When the Great King of Glory, Ananda, had
died, he came to life again in the happy world of
Brahma.

' For eight and forty thousand years, Ananda, the
Great King of Glory lived the happy life of a prince,
for eight and forty thousand years he was viceroy and
heir-apparent, for eight and forty thousand years he
ruled the kingdom, and for eight and forty thousand
years he lived, as a layman, the noble life in the
Palace of Righteousness. And then, when full of
noble thoughts he died, he entered, after the dissolution
of the body, the world of Brahma V


14. ' Now it may be, Ananda, that you may think
" The Great King of Glory of that time was another
person." But, Ananda, you should not view the
matter thus. I at that time was the Great King of
Glory.

' Mine at that time were the four and eighty thousand
cities, of which the chief was the royal city of Kusavati.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand palaces, of
which the chief was the Palace of Righteousness.

1 The 'noble thoughts' are the Brahma-viharas, the sublime
conditions described above, Chap. II, § 4. The ' noble life ' is the
Brahmacariyajtt, which does not mean the same as it does in
Sanskrit. The adjective Brahma may have reference here also to
the subsequent (and consequent?) rebirth in the Brahmaloka.


2 30 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 196.

1 Mine were the four and eighty thousand chambers, of
which the chief was the chamber of the Great Complex.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand divans, of
gold, and silver, and ivory, and sandalwood, spread with
long-haired rugs, and cloths embroidered with flowers,
and magnificent antelope skins, covered with lofty
canopies, and provided at both ends with purple cushions.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand state
elephants, with trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and
golden coverings of network, — of which the king of
elephants, called " the Changes of the Moon," was the
chief.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand state
horses, with trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and
golden coverings of network, — of which " Thunder-
cloud," the king of horses, was the chief.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand chariots
[197] with coverings of the skins of lions, and of tigers,
and of panthers, — of which the chariot called " the
Flag of Victory " was the chief.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand gems, of
which the Wondrous Gem was the chief.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand wives, of
whom the Queen of Glory was the chief.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand yeomen, of
whom the Wonderful Steward was the chief.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand nobles, of
whom the Wonderful Adviser was the chief.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand cows, with
jute trappings, and horns tipped with bronze.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand myriads of
garments, of delicate textures, of flax, and cotton, and
silk, and wool.

' Mine were the four and eighty thousand dishes, in
which, in the evening and in the morning, rice was
served.'

15. 'Of those four and eighty thousand cities,
Ananda, one was that city in which, at that time, I used
to dwell — to wit, the royal city of Kusavati.


D. ii. 198. THE GREAT KING OF GLORY. 23 1

' Of those four and eighty thousand palaces, too,
Ananda, one was that palace in which, at that time, I
used to dwell — to wit, the Palace of Righteousness.

' Of those four and eighty thousand chambers, too,
Ananda, one was that chamber in which, at that time,
I used to dwell — to wit, the chamber of the Great
Complex.

' Of those four and eighty thousand divans, too,
Ananda, one was that divan which, at that time, I used
to occupy — to wit, one of gold, or one of silver, or one
of ivory, or one of sandalwood.

' Of those four and eighty thousand state elephants,
too, Ananda, one was that elephant which, at that time,
I used to ride — to wit, the king of elephants, " the
Changes of the Moon."

[198] ' Of those four and eighty thousand horses,
too, Ananda, one was that horse which, at that time,
I used to ride — to wit, the king of horses, " the
Thunder-cloud."

' Of those four and eighty thousand chariots, too,
Ananda, one was that chariot in which, at that time, I
used to ride — to wit, the chariot called " the Flag of
Victory."

1 Of those four and eighty thousand wives, too,
Ananda, one was that wife who, at that time, used to
wait upon me — to wit, either a lady of noble birth, or
a Velamikani.

' Of those four and eighty thousand myriads of suits
of apparel, too, Ananda, one was the suit of apparel
which, at that time, I wore — to wit, one of delicate
texture, of linen, or cotton, or silk, or wool.

' Of those four and eighty thousand dishes, too,
Ananda, one was that dish from which, at that time, I
ate a measure of rice and the curry suitable thereto.'


16. 'See, Ananda, how all these things are now
past, areA ended, have vanished away. Thus imper-
manent, Ananda, are component things ; thus transitory,
Ananda, are component things ; thus untrustworthy,


232 XVII. MAHA-SUDASSANA-SUTTANTA. D. ii. 198.

Ananda, are component things. Insomuch, Ananda,
is it meet to be weary of, is it meet to be estranged
from, is it meet to be set quite free from the bondage
of all component things ! '


17. ' Now I call to mind, Ananda, how in this spot
my body had been six times buried. And when I was
dwelling here as the righteous king who ruled in
righteousness, the lord of the four regions of the earth,
the conqueror, the protector of his people, the possessor
of the seven royal treasures — that was the seventh
time.

' But I behold not any spot, Ananda, in the world of
men and gods, nor in the world of Mara, nor in the
world of Brahma — no, not among the race of Samaras
or Brahmins, of gods or men, — where the Tathagata
for the eighth time will lay aside his body V

Thus spake the Exalted One ; and when the Happy
One had thus spoken, once again the Teacher said : —

1 How transient are all component things !
Growth is their nature and decay;
They are produced, they are dissolved again ;
To bring them all into subjection — that is bliss V

End of the Maha-Sudassana-Suttanta.


1 The whole of this conversation between the Great King of Glory
and the Queen is very much shorter in the Jataka. This may be
perhaps partly explained by the narrative style in which the stories are
composed — a style incompatible with the repetitions of the Suttas, and
confined to the facts of the story.

But I think that no one can read this Suttanta in comparison with
the short passage found in the ' Book of the Great Decease ' (above,
Chap. V, § 18) without feeling that the latter is the more original of
the two, and that the legend had not, when that passage or episode
was first composed, attained to its present extended form.

2 On this celebrated verse, see the note at Mahaparinibbana
Suttanta VI, 16, where it is put into the mouth of Sakka, the king
of the gods. The principal word, sawkhara (states, or things, or
phenomena), is discussed in the Introduction to this Suttanta. See
the 'Journal of the Pali Text Society' for 1909, and below, p. 248.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

JANA-VASABHA SUTTANTA.

JUST as the Maha-Sudassana is based on one paragraph now-
incorporated in the Book of the Great Decease, and the
Sampasadaniya is based on another, so our present Suttanta is
based on a third.

In the other two cases it is probable, but not certain, that
the expansion is later than the paragraph. In this case the
available evidence, small as it is, points to a more decisive con-
clusion. It is easy to point out that probably no one can read
the opening paragraphs of the Jana-vasabha, with the episode
about the Nadika adherents in the Book of the Great Decease l
in his mind, without seeing at once that the latter is older.
It is not so easy to point out why — so much depends, in the
comparison of two passages of literature, on the personal
equation, so evasive are the slight nuances of meaning when
it is attempted to set them forth at length.

But this can be said. In the Book of the Great Decease the
rebirths of certain followers at Nadika are explained. In the
Jana-vasabha, for the sake of the story that follows about
Bimbisara, the well-known king of Magadha, it was necessary
to include Magadha ; and it was desirable to emphasize
Magadha. Magadha is accordingly left out in the first list of
localities, and special reasons are then given why it should be
included. The story begins by stating that the Buddha used
to tell how adherents of the new teaching, who belonged to
one or other of ten tribes, had fared in their rebirths. As an
example of how he did so the paragraph about the adherents
in Nadika — which is not one of the ten tribes just men-
tioned— is given word for word. Now, unless that paragraph
had been before the story-teller he would surely have given,
as an example, one or other, or all, of the ten tribes. As
it stands the Nadika paragraph, and indeed the mention of
Nadika at all, is out of place. On the supposition that the

1 Digha II, 91-93.


2 34 INTRODUCTION.


prologue to the story was composed on the basis of the
Nadika paragraph, additions necessary or desirable for the sake
of the subsequent story being added to it, everything explains
itself, and is in good order.

It is perhaps as well to repeat the caution that it would
not follow that the Jana-vasabha, as we have it, is younger
than the Maha-parinibbana, as we have it. The Nadika
paragraph may have been in existence, as a separate episode,
before both of them. The collection (Nikaya) containing
both may have been put together, from older material of
varying dates, at the same time l. And this is, in point of
fact, what seems, in the present state of our knowledge to have
been, most probably, the case.

After the prologue, here discussed, the story turns into a
fairy tale, quite well told, and very edifying, and full of subtle
humour 2. The manner in which the gods, even the highest,
give themselves away, must have been quite satisfactory to the
adherents of the new doctrine, and is quite on a par with
the famous passage in the Kevaddha3. Just as the supreme
being of the priestly speculation is there raised to the highest
pinnacle of power and glory that words are able to express,
only to be then described as confessing ignorance ; so here,
after his imposing entry into the Council Hall of the gods, he
materializes himself into the form of a Gandharva only to
propagate among them the new gospel. Just previously the
gods have been rejoiced to find that adherents of the new
Teacher, who have died and been reborn among them, out-
shine them all in radiance and glory ; and Sakka, the king of
the gods, has voiced their satisfaction in a hymn of praise to
the Teacher, and his doctrine of the reign (not of the gods
but) of Law.

The irony of it all falls rather flat now. Brahma and Sakka
are mere names to us, void of vitality or power. So confident
are we that there are no beings in the universe, worth con-
sidering, except human beings, that the whole story seems
simply absurd ; and so strange to us is a narrative composed,
not to be read, but to be recited, that however clearly the
necessity for them is explained, the repetitions continue to jar
upon our sense of literary fitness.

It was far different then. Having no books (in our sense of
the word) they liked and looked for the repetitions. The
mixture of irony and earnestness appealed to their literary

1 See above, p. 73.

2 Compare above, Vol. I, pp. 160-63.

3 Translated above, Vol. I, pp. 280 ff.


INTRODUCTION. 235


taste. And they all accepted as a matter of course the
existence of gods and fairies, and ethereal beings of varied
character and radiance. We cannot therefore be surprised to
find that this group of Suttantas all directed to the one pur-
pose of persuading the people that the gods were on the side
of the reforming party, attained a lasting success. Even when
the Buddhists, some centuries after the death of the Buddha,
began to write in Sanskrit, they still quoted from these Pali
mythological legends, and from those passages of them which
seem to our taste the most bizarre *.


There are two expressions in our Suttanta which merit a
longer discussion than is possible in a note. These are

kenacid eva kara;ziyena and

yavad eva manussehi suppakasitaw

In each case the question arises whether the d is to be taken
as added for euphony, or whether it should be taken with the
following eva to form the word deva, god.

Buddhaghosa comments on the former phrase when it
occurs in the Assalayana (M. II, 147). There certain
brahmins are said to be staying at Savatthi kenacid eva
karawiyena (as Sir Robert Chalmers prints it), that is, 'on
some business or other.' Prof. Pischel, however, in the separate
edition he published at Chemnitz in 1880, prints it kena ci
devakarawiyena, that is 'on some matter connected with
worship of the gods.' The Papanca Sudani has kenacidevati
yanniipasanadina. aniyamita-kiccena, ' on some undeter-
mined matter such as sacrifice, worship, or so on.' This is an
explanation of the meaning of the phrase as found in that
connexion, and not a direction as to whether the phrase con-
tains the word deva or the word eva. The gloss would be
equally correct in either case. In our Suttanta the phrase
occurs in § 11 where Jana-vasabha is sent by one god to
another kenacid eva kara/nyena. Here it seems quite
unnecessary to mention that he was sent ' on business referring
to the god,' and the phrase may well be taken in its ordinary
sense as, for instance, in the Maha-parinibbana (D. II, 147).
There Ananda goes to the Mallas to announce the impending
death of the Buddha and finds them assembled in their Mote
Hall kenacid eva kara^iyena — clearly, in this connexion
' on some business or other.' (Cp. D. II, 159.) It may, indeed,
be objected that the clansmen may have been consulting about
some business ' connected with the gods.' That seems, how-

1 See further the remarks in 'Buddhist India,' pp. 219 flf.


236 INTRODUCTION.


ever, unlikely. If really meant it would have been expressed
otherwise. And frankly it is most doubtful whether the
suggested phrase deva-kara;ziya 'god-business' is really
a good Pali idiom at all. The best conclusion therefore, in
the present state of our knowledge of that idiom, is that the
right reading is eva, not deva, and that the phrase always
means ' on some business or other.'

The other case is more difficult. The phrase occurs at the
end of the epilogue to our Suttanta. It recurs in the Sam-
pasadaniya (D. Ill, 122). In both places it is evidently an
excerpt from the stock episode found in the Anguttara IV,
308 ff., the Sawyutta V, 258 ff., and the Udana VI, 1, and
incorporated in the Maha-parinibbana (D. II, 102 ff., see
especially pp. 106, 114). There the Buddha refuses to die
till certain things have been accomplished. These are (1)
until the Bhikkhus shall have become true hearers, wise and
well trained, &c. — (2) until they, having themselves learned
the doctrine, shall be able to tell others of it, preach it, ex-
pound it, &c. — (3) until they shall be able, by the truth, to
refute vain doctrine — (4) until the way of good life shall have
become wide spread and popular — (5) yavad eva manussehi
pakasitaw, apparently meaning 'until it shall have been
well proclaimed among men ' (or perhaps ' by men ' as Prof.
Windisch renders, Mara and Buddha, p. 72). The same
set of conditions is then repeated, reading for ' Bhikkhus,'
' Bhikkhunis,' ' laymen ' and ' lay women ' respectively. The
conditions, it will be observed, are all of them conditions to
obtain among humans. Nevertheless the Divyavadana (p. 202),
in Sanskritising (or re-writing) the passage, doubles the d
(yavad devamanushyebhya/^),andso introduces the gods —
'until it shall have been well proclaimed among (or hy) gods
and men.' Later tradition does the same. Buddhaghosa
brings in the gods in his comments on the Digha passages.
But the question is, did the version of the episode, as
originally composed, have this meaning? The context is
against it. Another constantly repeated phrase about the
reform being ' for the good and the weal and the gain of gods
and men,' is, as Dr; Estlin Carpenter suggests to me, in its
favour. But it may be precisely the haunting memory of that
phrase that influenced the author of the version included in the
Divyavadana, and also Buddhaghosa. When once the gods
got in, it would be most difficult to dislodge them. There the
matter must, for the present, be left.


[XVIII. JANA-VASABHA SUTTANTA.

jana-vasabha's story.]

Thus have I heard.

i. [200] 1 The Exalted One was once staying in
Nadika, at the Brick House. Now at that time the
Exalted One was wont to make declarations as to the
rebirths of such followers (of the doctrine) as had
passed away in death among the tribes round about
on every side — among the Kasis and Kosalans, the
Vajjians and Mallas, the Chetis and Va;?zsas, the Kurus
and Panchalas, the Macchas and Surasenas — saying :
' Such an one has been reborn there, and such an
one there 2. From Nadika upwards of fifty adherents,
who passed away in death after having completely
destroyed the Five Bonds that bind people to this
world 3, have become inheritors of the highest heavens,
there to pass utterly away, thence never to return.
Full ninety adherents in Nadika, who have passed
away in death after having completely destroyed the
Three Bonds, and reduced to a minimum lust ill-will
and delusion, have become Once-returners, and on
their first return to this world shall make an end of
pain. Over five hundred adherents of Nadika, who
have passed away in death after having completely
destroyed the Three Bonds, and become converted,
cannot be reborn in any state of woe, but are assured
of attaining to the Insight (of the higher stages of
the Path).'

2. [201] Now the adherents at Nadika, when they
heard these revelations, were pleased, gladdened and
filled with joy and happiness at these solutions by the

1 See above pp. 97 ff., and the notes there.

2 For the details see above, p. 98, § 7.

3 See 'Dialogues,' I, pp. 200, 201.


238 XVIII. JANA-VASABHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 201.

Exalted One of the problems that had been put
to him.

3. Now the venerable Ananda heard [of these declara-
tions made by the Exalted One, and of the satisfaction
felt by the adherents at Nadika].

4. And this idea occurred to him : — ' But there
were also [202] adherents in Magadha, many of them,
and of long religious experience, who have passed
away in death. One might think that Anga and
Magadha were void of adherents who have passed
away in death. For they too had entire faith in the
Buddha the Law and the Order, they had fulfilled
the moral precepts. And yet concerning them, since
they passed away in death, nothing has been declared
by the Exalted One. It were surely a good thing to
evoke a response as to them ; for much folk would
believe, and would hereafter enter into bliss. Then
too there was Seniya Bimbisara, king of Magadha,
righteous and ruling righteously, benign to priests and
laymen, to town-folk and country-folk. His fame are
men verily spreading abroad saying: — " Dead is our
so righteous king of righteous rule who made us so
happy! How well have we lived in the kingdom of
that righteous king ! " Now he too had entire faith in
the Buddha the Law and the Order, and fulfilled the
moral precepts. And people verily have also said,
" Seniya Bimbisara, king of Magadha, who up to the
day of his death was given to praises of the Exalted
One, is dead." Concerning him who has passed away
in death nothing has been declared by the Exalted
One. It were surely a good thing to evoke a response
as to him ; for much folk would believe, and would here-
after enter into bliss. Moreover the Exalted One
attained supreme Insight in Magadha. Now where
that took place, how should there be no declaration
from the Exalted One concerning adherents in
Magadha who have passed away in death ? [203] If the
Exalted One declare nothing concerning them they
will be hurt. And since they wouM be hurt, how can
the Exalted One keep silence ? '


D. ii. 205. JANA-VASABHA S STORY. 239

5, 6. Having thus pondered, alone and privately,
concerning the Mao-adhese adherents, the venerable
Ananda rose up the next morning and came into the
presence of the Exalted One, and being come, saluted
him and sat down on one side. And so sitting, he told
the Exalted One [all that he had heard and thought *].
[204] And when he had made an end of thus speaking
before the Exalted One, he rose from his seat, saluted
the Exalted One rightwise, and went away.

7. Then the Exalted One, not long after the
venerable Ananda had gone away, robed himself in
the morning and, taking a bowl and cloak, went forth
for alms to Nadika. And when he had walked through
Nadika for alms, after his meal, when he had come back
again from his round for alms and bathed his feet, he
entered the Brick House and sat down on a seat made
ready, thinking over and cogitating upon and concen-
trating his whole mind on the Magadhese adherents,
saying to himself : ' I will find out their future, their
fate after this life, whither these good men are bound,
what their destiny is.' And he, the Exalted One, saw
the Magadhese adherents, whither they were bound,
[205] and what their destiny was. Then at eventide
the Exalted One, arising from his meditation, went
out of the Brick House, and sat down on a mat spread
in the shade behind the lodging place.

8. Then the venerable Ananda came into the
presence of the Exalted One, saluted him and sat
down on one side. Thus seated he said to the Exalted
One : — ' My lord the Exalted One looks serene, his
complexion shines forth, as it were, owing to the tran-
quillity of his faculties. Has the lord the Exalted
One spent a pleasant day ?'

9. ' When you had made that speech to me, Ananda,
concerning the Magadhese adherents and had gone
away, I, when I had gone to Nadika for alms, had
dined, returned, bathed my feet and entered the Brick
House, sat me down on a mat spread there and thought

1 Repeated from §§1,2, 4, nearly word for word.


240 XVIII. JANA-VASABHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 205.

over, cogitated upon, and concentrated my whole mind
on those Magadhese adherents, resolving to know
their future, their fate after this life, whither these good
men were bound, what their destiny would be. And
I saw, Ananda, those Magadhese adherents, whither
the good men were bound, what their destiny would
be. Thereupon an invisible spirit made himself heard,
saying : — " I am Jana-vasabha, O Exalted One ; I am
jana-vasabha, O Welcome One ! " Now do you allow,
Ananda, that you have ever heard of any one bearing
such a name as Jana-vasabha ?'

' I confess, lord, that I have never heard of one
bearing such a name as Jana-vasabha. Moreover,
lord, on hearing such a name as Jana-vasabha, I am
thrilled with excitement \ and I fancy [206] it can be
no ordinary spirit who bears such a name as Jana-
vasabha 2.'

A

10. ' After those words had been spoken, Ananda,
the spirit himself appeared before me, a splendid
presence. And he made a second utterance : — " I am
Bimbisara, O Exalted One ! I am Bimbisara, O
Welcome One ! 'Tis now the seventh time, lord, that
I am reborn into the communion of the great King
Vessava^a. Deceased as a human king, I am in
heaven become a non-human king-.

Hence seven, thence seven, in all fourteen rebirths —
So much I know of lives I've lived in the long past.

Long, lord, have I, who am destined not to be re-
born in states of woe, been conscious of that destiny,
and now is there desire in me to become a Once-
returner."

' Wonderful is this, marvellous is this that you, the
venerable spirit Jana-vasabha, tell me : — " Long have
I who am destined not to be reborn in states of woe,

1 Literally, the down of my skin bristles.

2 Literally, the ' Bull of the Folk,' that is glorious among the people.
The name seems scarcely to justify the good Ananda's excitement,
as such epithets were then, as now, common enough in India. But it
is part of the art of the story-teller to make a mystery of it.


D. ii. 207. JANA-VASABHA S STORY. 24 1

been conscious of that destiny ; " and again : — " Now is
there desire in me to become a Once-returner." How
has it come about that Jana-vasabha the venerable
spirit recognizes his attainment to a distinction so
splendid ? '

11." Nowise save through thy word, O Exalted One,
nowise save through thy word, O Blessed One ! From
the moment when I had gone over, in absolute and
entire faith to the Exalted One, from that moment,
lord, [207] did I who am destined not to be reborn in
states of woe, been conscious of that destiny ; and I now
desire to become a Once-returner. Now, lord, I have
been sent on a message concerning some business by
King Vessava;za to King Viru/haka ; and on my way
I saw the Exalted One entering the Brick House,
and sitting down to think over, to cogitate upon, to
concentrate his whole mind upon the deceased Maga-
dhese adherents, in the resolve to know their future,
their fate after this life ; whither the good men are
bound, what their destiny is. Now it was only the
moment before, lord, that I had heard face to face
and had understood from his own mouth from King
Vessava/za, how he had said to his assembly whither
those good men were bound, and what their destiny
was, so it occurred to me that I would visit the Exalted
One, and I would announce it to him. These, lord,
are the two reasons why I came forth to visit the
Exalted One \

1 2 2. In days gone by, lord, in days long long gone by,
it came to pass that on the night of the feast of the
fifteenth day at the full moon in the month for entering
upon Retreat3, the month Asa/hi, the whole of the
gods in the retinue of the Thirty-Three were assembled

1 These two reasons are : firstly, that he had heard a statement
by Vessavawa ; secondly, that (having noticed, on his way, how the
Exalted One had been thinking on that very matter) he wished to
report it to him.

2 Recurs slightly altered below, Maha-Govinda Suttanta, § 2.

3 Vassupanayika. Vassa is here used in its technical sense of
the yearly Retreat during the rains. See A. I, 51 ; Vin. I, 137.

III. R


242 XVIII. JANA-VASABHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 207.

together, seated in the hall of Good Counsel. And
around them on every side a vast celestial company
was seated ; and at the four quarters of the firmament
sat the Four Great Kings. There was Dhatara^a,
king of the East, seated facing the west, presiding
over his host ; Viru/haka, king of the South, seated
facing the north, presiding over his host ; Virupakkha,
king of the West, seated facing the east, presiding
over his host ; and Vessava;m, king of the North,
seated facing the south, presiding over his host. [208]
Whenever, lord, all the gods in the heaven of the
Thirty-Three are assembled and seated in their hall of
Good Counsel, with a vast celestial company seated
around them on every side, and with the Four Great
Kings at the four quarters of the firmament, this is the
order of the seats of the Four. After that come our
seats. . And those gods, lord, who had been recently
reborn in the hosts of the Thirty-Three because they
had lived the higher life under the Exalted One, they
outshone the other gods in appearance and in glory.
And thereat, lord, the Thirty-Three were glad and
of good cheer, were filled with joy and happiness,
saying : — " Verily, sirs, the celestial hosts are waxing,
the titanic hosts are waning."

13. Now, lord, Sakka, ruler of the gods, when he
saw the satisfaction felt by the retinue of the Three-
and-Thirty, expressed his approval in these verses : —

The Three-and-Thirty, verily, both gods and lord,

rejoice,
Tathagata they honour and the cosmic law sublime *,
Whereas they see the gods new-risen, beautiful and

bright,
Who erst the holy life had lived, under the Happy

One,
The Mighty Sage's hearers, who had won to higher

truths 2,

1 Literally, ' and the fair Normness of the Norm,' that is, the rule,
not of gods, but of Law.

2 Visesupagata. See above, Vol. I, p. 296: 'attains to distinc-


D. ii. 209. JANA-VASABHA'S STORY. 243

Come hither ; and in glory all the other gods out-
shine.

This they behold right gladly, both lord and Thirty-
Three,

Tathagata they honour and the cosmic law sublime.

Hereat [209], lord, the Three-and-Thirty Gods were
even more abundantly glad and of good cheer and
filled with joy and happiness, saying : — " Verily the
celestial hosts are waxing, the titanic hosts are
waning ! "

14. Then, lord, concerning the object for which the
Three-and-Thirty gods were assembled in their seats
in the Hall of Good Counsel, they took counsel and
deliberated about it ; and with respect to that object
the Four Great Kings were addressed, and with respect
to that object the Four Great Kings were admonished,
standing by their seats : —

The uttered word th' admonished Kings accepted there,
Serene in mind and calm they stood each at his place.

15. Then, lord, a splendid light came forth out of
the North, and a radiance shone around surpassing the
divine glory of the gods. And, lord, then did Sakka,
king of the gods, say to the retinue of the Thirty-
Three : — " According, friends, to the signs now seen, —
the light that ariseth, the radiance that appeareth —
Brahma will be manifested. For this is the herald
sign of the manifestation of Brahma to wit, when the
light ariseth and the glory shineth x " : —

The portents now are seen, so Brahma draweth nigh,
For this is Brahma's sign, this glorious splendour vast.

16. Then, lord, the gods of the Thirty-Three sat
down in their own places, saying : — " We will ascertain
what shall be the result of this radiance, when we have

tion so excellent.' Perhaps this technical phrase is to be taken here
(as in § 28) in its ordinary sense. It would then mean : 'who have
attained to the distinction of rebirth among the gods.'

1 So also in the Kevaddha (p. 200, translated above, Vol. I, p. 281).

R 2


244 XVIII. JANA-VASABHA-SUTTATMTA. D. ii. 209.

realized it, we will go to meet him. The Four Great
Kings also sat down in their own places, saying the
same. [210] And when they had heard this, the gods of
the Three-and-Thirty were all together agreed : — " We
will ascertain what shall be the result of this radiance ;
when we have realized it, we will go to meet him."

1 7. When, lord, Brahma Sanawzkumara l appears
before the Thirty-Three gods, he appears as a
(relatively) gross personality which he has specially
created. For Brahmas usual appearance is not
sufficiently materialized to impress the vision of the
Thirty-Three Gods. And, lord, when Brahma Sana/;z-
kumara appears before the Thirty-Three Gods, he out-
shines the other gods in colour and in glory. Just,
lord, as a figure made of gold outshines the human
frame, so, when Brahma Sana;//kumara appears before
the Thirty-Three Gods, does he outshine the other
gods in colour and in glory. And when, lord, Brahma
Sanawkumara appears before the Thirty-Three Gods,
there is no god in all that assembly that salutes him,
or rises up, or invites him to be seated. They all sit
in silence, with clasped hands and cross-legged, think-
ing- : — " Of whichever god Brahma Sanawkumara now
desires anything, he will sit down on that god's divan."
And by whichever god he does sit down, that god is
filled with a sublime satisfaction, a sublime happiness,
even as a Kshatriya king newly anointed and crowned
is filled with a sublime satisfaction, a sublime happiness.

18. [211] So, lord, Brahma Sana;;zkumara having
created a grosser personality and become in appearance
as the youth Five-crest 2, manifested himself thus to the
gods of the company of the Thirty-Three. Rising up
into the air he sat down cross-legged in the sky. Just,
lord, as easily as a strong man might sit down cross-
legged on a well-spread divan or a smooth piece of


1 See Vol. I, p. 121.

2 Pancasikha, which became a famous name in Indian legends,
and was adopted by Saivite and Sankhya writers. It is nowhere
explained what, or how disposed, his five crests were.


D. ii. 212. JANA-VASABIIA S STORY. 245

ground, even so did Brahma Sanawkumara, rising up
into the air, sit down cross-legged in the sky. And
seeing the tranquillity of the gods of the company of
the Thirty-Three he expressed his pleasure in these
verses : —

The Three-and-Thirty, verily, both gods and lord,
rejoice,

Tathagata they honour and the cosmic law sublime,

Whereas they see these gods new-risen, beautiful and
bright,

Who erst the holy life had lived, under the Happy
One,

The Mighty Sage's hearers, who had won to higher
truths,

Come hither ; and in glory all the other gods out-
shine.

This they behold right gladly, both lord and Thirty-
Three,

Tathagata they honour and the cosmic law sublime.

19. This was the matter of Brahma Sana^zkumara's
speech. And he spoke it with a voice of eightfold
characteristics — in a voice that was fluent, intelligible,
sweet, audible, continuous, distinct, deep, and resonant.
And whereas, lord, Brahma Sana;;/kumara communi-
cated with that assembly by his voice, the sound thereof
did not penetrate beyond the assembly. He whose
voice has these eight characteristics is said to be
Brahma-voiced.

20. Then, lord, Brahma Sana;/zkumara, having
created thirty-three shapes of himself [212], sitting each
on the couch of each of the Thirty-Three Gods, thus
addressed the Gods : —

" Now what think ye, my lord gods Thirty-and-
Three ? Inasmuch as the Exalted One hath acted for
the welfare of the peoples, for the happiness of the
peoples, out of pity for the world, for the advantage,
for the welfare, for the happiness of gods and men,
they, whoever they be, Sirs, who have taken the
Buddha for their refuge, the Truth for their refuge,


246 XVIII. JANA-VASABHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 212.

the Order for their refuge, they, on the dissolution of
the body after death, have been reborn, some of them
into the communion of the Paranimmita-Vasavatti
gods, some of them into the communion of the Tusita
ofods, or of the crods in the retinue of Yama, or of the
Thirty-Three Gods, or of the Four Great Kings.
Those who fill the number of the lowest group, they
go to fill the number of the Gandharva host."

21. This was the matter of Brahma Sanawkumara's
speech. And he spoke it with such a voice, that each
god fancied1: — "He who is on my divan, he alone
hath spoken."

Speaks but one Brahma-shape, the Thirty-Three all

speak ;
Silently sits one shape, they all in silence sit.
Then all the Three-and-Thirty with their king too

think,
Pie who is on my couch, 'tis he alone that spake 2.

22. Then, lord, Brahma Sana^kumara betook him-
self to one end [of the Hall] and then [213] sitting down
on the divan of Sakka, lord of the gods, addressed the
Thirty-Three Gods : —

" Now what think ye, my lord gods Thirty-and-Three,
of the completeness wherewith the Exalted One, who
knows, who sees, the Arahant, Buddha Supreme, hath
revealed the Four Ways to Iddhi for the develop-
ment, thereof, for proficiency therein, for the elabora-
tion thereof? Which are the Four Ways? In the
first place a brother practises that way which is com-
pounded of concentration and effort with desire. In
the second place a brother practises that way which is
compounded of concentration and effort with energy.
In the third place a brother practises that way which

1 In the text read so so devo.

2 The first couplet of this verse, oddly enough it seems to us, was
a great favourite. It survived among the Buddhists for many cen-
turies, and is extant in its Sanskritiscd form in the Divydvadana,
]). 1 66; and also in the Madhyamaka V/Ytti, p. 118 of the edition
published by the Buddhist Text Society.


D. ii. 214. JANA-VASABHA S STORY. 247

is compounded of concentration and effort with a
[dominant] idea. In the fourth place a brother prac-
tises that way which is compounded of concentration
and effort with investigation. These, sir, are the Four
Ways to Iddhi revealed by the Exalted One who
knows, who sees, the Arahant, Buddha Supreme, for the
development thereof, for proficiency therein, for the
elaboration thereof1. Now those recluses or brahmins
who, in past times, have enjoyed Iddhi in one or more
of its forms, they have all done so through practice
and improvement in just these Four Ways. And
those recluses or brahmins who, in future times, will
enjoy Iddhi in one or more of its forms, they
will all do so through practice and improvement in
just these Four Ways. And those recluses or brahmins
who, at the present time, enjoy Iddhi in one or more
of its forms, they all do so through practice and im-
provement in just these Four Ways.

Do ye see, my lord gods Thirty-and-Three, in me
a potency of Iddhi like that ? "

" Yea, Brahma."

" I too, Sirs, through practice and improvement in
just these Four Ways to Iddhi [214], have acquired
such power and potency therein."

23. Such was the matter of Brahma Sanawzkumara's
speech. And having thus spoken he addressed the
Thirty-Three Gods : —

" Now what think ye, my lord gods Thirty-and-
Three, of the Three Avenues for arriving at Bliss
manifested by the Exalted One who knows, who sees,
by the Arahant, Buddha Supreme ? Which are the
Three ?

In the first place, Sirs, take a brother who is living
in indulgence in the pleasures of sense, in association
with bad conditions. He on a certain occasion hears
the Aryan Truth, studies it and acquires both the main

1 There are two sorts of Iddhi, the worldly and the spiritual. On
the former see above, Vol. I, pp. 272, 3 ; and on the latter Digha III,
112, 113.


248 XVIII. JANA-VASABHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 214.

and the subsidiary doctrines. Having come to this
hearing, studying and acquisition, he takes to a life
detached from the pleasures of sense, not associated
with bad conditions. Under these circumstances he
experiences ease and more than ease, happiness. Just
as a feeling of complacency may develop into gladness,
so does for him, under those circumstances, first ease
arise, and, then more than ease, happiness. This, Sirs,
is the First Avenue for arriving at Bliss manifested by
the Exalted One . . . Buddha Supreme.

24. In the next place, Sirs, take a brother in whom
the grosser conditions precedent 1 to action, speech and
thought are not entirely calmed down. He on a
certain occasion hears the Aryan Truth preached, studies
it and acquires both the main and subsidiary doctrines.
Having arrived at this hearing, studying and acquisi-
tion, the grosser conditions precedent to action, speech
and thought in him become entirely calmed down. And
from this ease is experienced, and then more than ease,
happiness. Just as a feeling of complacency may
develop into gladness, so does for him, under those
circumstances, first ease arise and then more than ease,
happiness. [215] This, Sirs, is the Second Avenue for
arriving at Bliss manifested by the Exalted One . . .
Buddha Supreme.

25. In the third place, Sirs, take the case of a
brother who does not really know that ' This is good,'
' This is bad,' ' This is wrong,' ' This is not wrong,'
' This is to be followed,' ' This is to be avoided,'
4 This is base,' ' This is excellent,' ' This is of mixed dark
and bright quality.' He on a certain occasion hears
the Aryan Truth, studies it and acquires the main and
subsidiary doctrines. Having arrived at this hearing,
study and acquisition, he now really knows that ' This
is good,' he really knows that ' This is bad,' ' This is
wrong,' ' This is not wrong,' ' This is to be followed,'
4 This is to be avoided,' ' This is base,' ' This is


1 Sahkhara. This paragraph throws light on the celebrated verse
given above, p. 232.


D. ii. 216. JANA-VASABHA S STORY. 249

excellent,' ' This is of mixed dark and bright quality.'
For him thus knowing, thus seeing, ignorance is put
away, wisdom has arisen. From this extinction of
ignorance, from the arising of wisdom, a sense of ease
arises and, then more than ease, happiness. Just as
a feeling of complacency may develop into gladness, so
does for him, under these circumstances, first ease
arise, and then more than ease, happiness. This, Sirs,
is now the Third Avenue for arriving at Bliss manifested
by the Exalted One who knows, who sees, Arahant,
Buddha Supreme.

These, Sirs, are [216] the Three Avenues for
arriving at Bliss manifested by the Exalted One, who
knows and sees, the Arahant, Buddha Supreme."

26. On this matter, lord, did Brahma Sana^kumara
speak. And having so spoken he addressed the
Thirty-Three Gods : —

"Now what think ye, my lord gods Thirty-and-
Three, of the completeness wherewith the Exalted
One, who knows, who sees, the Arahant, Buddha
Supreme, hath revealed the Four Inceptions of Mind-
fulness 1 for attaining" to the Good. And which are the
Four ? Take, Sirs, a brother who abides subjectively
watchful over the body, ardent self-possessed mindful,
that he may discern the unhappiness arising from
coveting the things of the world. So, subjectively
watchful, he attains to right concentration and right
calm. He, having right concentration and right calm
in his physical being, evokes knowledge of and insight
into all other physical forms external to himself. So,
again, he abides subjectively watchful over his feelings
. . . over his heart, . . . over his ideas, ardent self-
possessed mindful, that he may discern the unhappiness
arising from coveting the things of the world. So,
subjectively watchful, he attains to right concentration
and right calm. He, having right concentration and
right calm in his feelings ... his heart ... his ideas,


1 The four Satipa//Mnas.


250 XVIII. JANA-VASABHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 216.

evokes knowledge of and insight into the ideas of
others external to himself.

These, Sirs, are the Four Inceptions of Deliberation
for attaining to the Good completely revealed by the
Exalted One, who knows, who sees, the Arahant,
Buddha Supreme."

27. On this matter did Brahma Sana7«kumara
speak. And having spoken he addressed the Thirty-
Three Gods : —

" Now what think ye, my lord gods Thirty-and
Three, of the completeness wherewith the Exalted
One, who knows, who sees, the Arahant, Buddha
Supreme, hath revealed the Seven Requisites of In-
tellectual Concentration \ for practice of right Rapture,
for the perfecting of Rapture ? Which are the Seven ?
Right views, right intention, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, [217] right effort, right mindfulness.
That concentration of thought, Sirs, which is prepared
by these seven factors, is called the Noble Right
Rapture together with its bases, together with its
requisites. Right intention suffices to maintain right
views, right speech suffices to maintain right intention,
right action suffices to maintain right speech, right
livelihood suffices to maintain right action, right effort
suffices to maintain right livelihood, right mindfulness
suffices to maintain right effort, right rapture suffices to
maintain right mindfulness, right knowledge suffices
to maintain right rapture, right freedom suffices to
maintain right knowledge.

If any one uttering right speech, Sirs, were to say : —
'Well hath the Exalted One proclaimed the Truth, —
the Norm that in this life beareth fruit, that avails not
for a time only -, that welcometh every one, that leadeth
away and onward, that each one who hath intelligence
may of and by himself understand ! ' Then in saying :

" Wide opened are the portals to Nirvana ! ,;


1 Samadhi-parikkhara.

2 akalika. The opposite tavakalika occurs above, p. 195.


I), ii. 218. JANA-VASABHA S STORY. 25 I

He would be rightly saying that. For, Sirs, the
doctrine well proclaimed by the Exalted One is all
that ; and

"Wide opened are the portals to Nirvana! "

For, Sirs, whosoever has unwavering1 faith in the
Buddha, unwavering faith in the Truth, unwavering faith
in the Order, and is endowed with the virtues pleasing
to the Noble Ones ; and whatsoever new gods have
appeared in our midst, led hither by the Law, to wit
more than twenty-four lacs of Magadha disciples now
dead and gone 2 ; these all through complete destruction
of the Three Bonds, have become converted, and cannot
be reborn in any state of woe, but are assured of
attaining to the Insight (of the highest stages of the
Path). [218] Moreover there are here Once-returners ;

" But of that other Breed to tell,
Of higher merit 3, lo ! the tale
I cannot reckon, lest perchance
I should offend against the truth."

28. This, lord, was the matter of Brahma Sana?//-
kumara's speech. And concerning what he had spoken,
the reflection arose in the mind of the Great King-
Vessava^a : — " Wonderful truly is it, Sirs, marvellous
is it, that there should be so glorious a Teacher, so
glorious a proclaiming of the Truth, and that such
glorious avenues to distinction4 should be made
known ! "


1 Avecca, not as Childers thought from ava + eti but from
a + vi + eti. Buddhaghosa says acala. Veti (not in Childers) is to
wane (see S. I, 135; A. II, 51; KV. 66; Asl. 329), but one can
scarcely say ' unwaning faith.'

2 The reading is uncertain. As it stands the deceased disciples
belong only to the second group — the new gods. It is quite possible
that it is intended to include them also among the men of faith and
virtue in the first group.

3 These must be Anagamins, Non-returners, those who, reborn
in one of the heavens, will attain Arahantship there, without returning
at all to this world.

4 Visesadhigama. See note above on § 13.


252 XVIII. JANA-VASABHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 218.

Then, lord, Brahma Sanawkumara discerning this
reflection in the mind of the Great King Vessavawa,
spake thus to him : —

" Now what thinks my lord, the Great King Vessa-
vana. ? There both has been in past times, a Teacher
so glorious, a proclaiming of the Truth so glorious, a
making known such glorious avenues to distinction,
and there will be also in future times a Teacher so
glorious, [214] a proclaiming of the Truth so glorious,
a making known such glorious avenues to distinction."


29. This was the matter whereof Brahma Sana??z-
kumara spoke to the Thirty-Three Gods. And this
matter the Great Kingf Vessavazza, when he had, in
his own person, heard it and assented to it, reported to
his own following. And this matter the spirit Jana-
vasabha, when he had in his own person heard it so
reported by Vessavawa, reported to the Exalted One.
And this matter the Exalted One, when he had in his
own person heard it and assented to it, and had also
intuitively discerned itv reported to Ananda. And this
matter the venerable Ananda, when he had in his own
person heard it from the Exalted One and assented
to it, reported to the brethren and the sisterhood, to
believing laymen and laywomen. And the System
waxed influential and prosperous and expanded and
broadened with the numbers that joined, so well was
it spread abroad among men.1

Here endeth Jana-vasabha's Story.

1 Afterwards interpreted to mean ' gods and men ' (see pp. 235, 236).
But the last two sentences refer here to men and women only. To
put in the gods spoils the climax.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

mahA-govinda suttanta.

This Suttanta is certainly, in some respects, among the
most interesting in the collection ; and for the history of the
literature is of great importance.

The subject is twofold, both necessary points at the time,
and both scarcely intelligible, without a little attention, to
modern Western minds. Even in the East, and to Buddhists,
the story now seems somewhat strange and antiquated. The
success of the method of argument here adopted has been so
far complete that the need of the argument has ceased, the
point of view has changed, and the Suttanta, among the most
popular in early times, is now, compared to others dealing
with the positive side of the doctrine, considered of minor
value.

The two points are those of the brahmins and the gods.
The method of the argument is not to argue about anything ;
to accept the opponents' position throughout, and simply to
out-flank it by making the gods and the brahmins themselves
act and speak as quite good Buddhists, and take for granted
the Buddhist position on ethical matters. This is of course,
from one point of view, logically absurd. No militant brahmin,
in favour of the pecuniary or social advantages allowed to
brahmins by birth, would speak or act thus. No god, as he
was supposed by his worshippers to be (and he existed only as
such), would speak or act thus. But the composer (or com-
posers) of the Govinda knew this quite well. And he is (or
they are) scrupulously polite. The actions imputed to the
brahmin and the gods, the words put into their mouths, are
quite admirable. No one can blame the story-teller that they
happen also to be Buddhist. The question as to what the
good brahmin ought to be, what a good god ought to do or
say, is quietly begged in the most delicate way. On this point
— the ethical doctrine — the narrator is thoroughly in earnest ;
and he no less thoroughly enjoys the irony of the incongruities
involved. It is the fashion to label all Buddhist writings,
without discrimination, as insufferably dull ; and the fashion


254 INTRODUCTION.


will be kept up, no doubt, among those who do not see the
point of the really very able way in which, sometimes, it is all
done. But we may be permitted to appreciate a clever story
(even with a moral) in spite of the fact that the story part is
a story — all make-believe, none of it historically true.

It has been pointed out above (Vol. I, 208), how a brahmin
law book, at a time when the increasing respect paid to
Wanderers and Bhikkhus threatened loss of prestige and
profit to the sacrificing priests, puts into the mouth of Pra-
japati the ferocious remark that he who praises such people
(the wandering teachers, &c.) ' becomes dust and perishes.'
The writer hoped (quite in vain as it turned out) to gain
acceptance for his view by attributing it to a deity. This
polemical device was quite in accord with the literary ethics of
the day. The choice of the god has an artistic touch, and the
anecdote se 11011 c vero e ben trovato. Quite a number of other
instances might be quoted from Indian books of all ages, though
not from Pali works later than the Nikayas, nor from works
written in Ceylon or Burma. And they are found also in
other lands and other literatures. The device is peculiar, not
to India, but to a certain stage in religious beliefs and literary
taste. It is not in reality so good a device as, at first sight, it
seems to be. There are many instances, like the one just
quoted, where it has altogether failed. As applied here, in the
Govinda, the device has failed as regards the brahmins K Where
it has had a measure of success (that is, where the opinion thus
fathered on a deity has become more or less an accepted
opinion), it probably owes more to its validity, or to its appeal
to the feeling of the times, than to the help of the deity
invoked. The reader may be reminded that the habit of
assuming that the deity is on one's own side, of taking it for
granted that He shares one's own opinions, comes out quite
clearly in modes of expression in constant use, even by very
exalted personages, in the Europe of to-day.

Our Suttanta introduces us, in the first scene of the play, to
heaven. There the gods rejoice at the increase in their numbers
through the appearance, in their midst, of new gods produced
by the good Karma of the followers of the new view of life
put forward by Gotama. The king of the gods voices their
satisfaction in a hymn ; and then utters, in eight paragraphs,
a eulogy on the Buddha. In scene two the still higher god,
Maha-brahma, appears. He desires to hear the eulogy, which
is accordingly repeated for his benefit. He approves of it, and

1 This question has been fully discussed, and the reasons for the
failure given, above, Vol. I, pp. 105, 138 ff., and especially 141.


INTRODUCTION. 255


adds that the Exalted One had long been as wise as that. In
support of this he then tells the story which forms the second
act, as it were, in many scenes. Here we have Brahma's view
(that is, the view of the author or authors of the Govinda) con-
cerning the ideal brahmin. It is really very funny ; whether
we compare it with the actual brahmin of to-day, or with the
brahmin as described in the epics and the law books, or with
the brahmin as he probably really was in the Buddha's time.
The last must have been in the authors' mind all the time ;
and the incongruity, though quite courteous, is sufficiently
startling.

The episode told in Act I, Scenes 1 and 2, has already
occurred, nearly word for word, in the Jana-vasabha : —

Jana-vasabha 12, 13 = Govinda 2, 3.

14-19= „ 14-18.

The intervening passage (Govinda 4-13) contains Sakka's
eulogy. A eulogy is also part of the Jana-vasabha (§§ 22 ff.).
But it is there put, at a later stage in the episode, into the
mouth of Brahma, and deals accordingly with much deeper
matters l.

What is the conclusion to be drawn from these facts ? They
would be explained if the episode had existed in the com-
munity before either of these Suttantas had been put into its
present shape ; and had been so popular that it had been
worked up, by different authors, in slightly differing ways. Or
the author or authors of either Suttanta might have altered an
episode, already incorporated in the other, to harmonize better
with the particular lines of his own story. In that case it must
be the Govinda version that is the later. In it the eulogy is
put into the mouth of Sakka, and altered to suit that divinity,
because Brahma's speech was wanted for the story to follow.
In either case it is evident that, at the time when these Suttantas
were put together as we have them, the legendary material
current among the community was still in a fluid, unstable,
condition, so that it was not only possible, it was considered
quite the proper thing, to add to or alter it.a

1 This difference in the mental endowments of the two gods, — the
one the mere king of the gods, an Indian Zeus ; and the other the
Great First Cause, the outcome of the hightest speculation — is always
carefully observed in the various speeches ascribed, in the early
Buddhist texts, to these divinities. See above, p. 175, for another
instance.

2 The doctrinal material stands on a different footing. Already in
1877 I ventured to point out the difference (in ' Buddhism,' pp. 86-7),
and the point has since increasingly forced itself upon my notice.


256 INTRODUCTION.


The whole story is retold, in a Sanskrit dialect and in different
phraseology and order, in the Mahavastu. The following table
will make the degree of the resemblance and difference plain.

Maha-govinda Suttanta. Govindiya Sutta in Mahavastu.

§ 1 Vol. Ill, p. 197

2 198

4 J99

5, 6 200

8 201

9 200

10 201

12 201

13 198
17 203
19-27 202

29 204

30 205
31, 32 206
34 2°7
35, 36 208
37. 38 209
43,44 210,11

45 2I2

46 213,14

47 215

48 217


49


218


50 216

51 219
56 220

57, 58 222

60 223

61 215

Now we do not know exactly when and where Buddhists
began to write in Sanskrit, though it was probably in Kashmir
some time before the beginning of our era. They did not then
translate into Sanskrit any Pali book. They wrote new books.
And the reason for this was twofold. In the first place they
had already come to believe things very different from those
contained in the canon ; they were( no longer in full sympathy
with it. In the second place, though Pali was never the
vernacular of Kashmir, it was widely known there, and even
very probably still used for literary work ; translations were
therefore not required.

This gives a possible explanation of the most astounding

Professor Windisch (in 'Die Composition des Mahavastu,' Leipzig,
1909, p. 494) supports this view.


INTRODUCTION. 257


fact we know about the Mahavastu. It purports to be the
Vinaya (that is, the Rules regulating the outward conduct of
the members of the Order), as held by the school of the
Lokottara-vadins. In M. Senart's admirable edition it fills
three bulky volumes. There is not, from beginning to end of
them, even one single Rule of the Order! No explanation
has been given of this extraordinary state of things, though it
was pointed out at once on the publication of the edition K
Prof. Windisch in his able discussion (just above referred to)
of the actual contents of the book does not refer to this
remarkable omission.

The old Vinaya begins with the Sutta Vibhanga, that is, the
Rules themselves elucidated by discussion of their origin and
meaning. This occupies 615 pages in Oldenberg's editions.
Then follow in 660 pages the Khandhakas, twenty-two in
number, dealing with various points of Canon Law. At the
beginning of these is an Introduction, explaining how the Order
arose ; and at the end an Appendix, on the Councils 2. This
old Vinaya has never been translated into Sanskrit. The
Mahavastu is based on the Introduction to the Khandhakas,
rewritten, added to, enormously expanded, and arranged
according to the order of the Pali Nidana Katha. Now why
did the Lokottara-vadins, in their Vinaya, omit practically the
whole of the Vinaya, and confine themselves to rewriting
the Introduction to what is only a part of the Vinaya ? Why
did not they also rewrite the rest? May it be because, when
they wrote, the old rules and explanations, with which they did
not quarrel in the least, were still well known and used in the
original Pali, or in some closely cognate shape? 3

It must have been from some such cognate recension, and not
from our Pali text, that the Govinda story was Sanskritised.
The differences between the Digha and the Mahavastu are too
great to have arisen at one stage. The whole point of the
story in the Digha is the way in which Brahma describes his


1 Rhys Davids, J. R. A. S., 1898, 424.

2 There is a supplementary work, the Parivara, much shorter, and
consisting mainly of what we should now call examination papers.
This volume, though most interesting from the point of view of the
history of Indian education, presupposes the old Vinaya, and is later.

As is well known the Khandhakas come first in Oldenberg's
edition, but the order in the MSS. is as above. See for instance
Oldenberg's 'Catalogue of the Pali MSS. in the India Office Library/
J.P.T. S., 1882, p. 59.

3 Compare Oldenberg's remarks on the Chinese translations of
Vinava at the end of his introduction to the Pali Text.

J

III. S


258 INTRODUCTION.


ideal brahmin as quite emancipated from animistic superstitions
and practices. He gains access to Brahma by practising (with
reference, no doubt, to the closing scene of the Maha-Sudassana,
and also to the Tevijja and other passages) the Rapture of
Mercy, one of the Brahma-viharas, or Sublime Conditions.
The Mahavastu is not satisfied with that. It makes him add
to it the kindling of the mystic Fire, Agni (D. II, 239 and
Mhvst. Ill, 210). The paean of delight at the arrival of the
new gods (D. II, 227 and Mhvst. Ill, 203) is introduced in the
Mahavastu by the words : ' He (Brahma) addressed them in
verses.' But it gives only one verse. The others are found
in the Digha. Perhaps their ethical standpoint did not appeal
any more to the Lokottara-vadins. In the eulogy on the
Buddha (D. II, 222 and Mhvst. 111,199) the Mahavastu mentions
that there are eight points concerning which the Buddha was
worthy of praise. It gives, however, only seven, differing in
order and meaning from the eight given in the Digha. Verbal
differences throughout the whole story are found in almost every
paragraph.

In column 136 of Bunyiu Nanjio's catalogue of Chinese
Buddhist books we find mentioned a translation of the Maha-
Govinda evidently from some recension different from the Pali.
It would be interesting to know whether there has, in this
version, been preserved an intermediate stage between the
Digha and the Mahavastu.


[XIX. mahA-govinda suttanta.

THE LORD HIGH STEWARD.]

[220] Thus have I heard.

1. The Exalted One was once staying at Rajagaha
on Vulture-peak Hill. Now when the night was far
spent, Five-crest of the Gandharva fairies,1 beautiful to
see, irradiating the whole of Vulture-peak, came into
the presence of the Exalted One, and saluted him, and
stood on one side. So standing Five-crest the Gan-
dharva addressed the Exalted One, and said : —

' The things, lord, that I have seen, the things I have
noted when in the presence of the gods in the heaven
of the Three-and-Thirty, I would tell to the Exalted
One.'

' Tell thou me, Five-crest,' said the Exalted One.

2. ' In days gone by, lord, in days long long gone by,
on the Fifteenth, the holy-day, at the Feast of the
Invitations 2 on the night of full moon, all the gods in
the heaven of the Thirty-Three were assembled, sitting
in their Hall of Good Counsel. And a vast celestial
company was seated round about, and at the four quar-
ters of the firmament sat the Four Great Kings. There
was Dhatara^a, king of the East, seated facing the
west, presiding over his host ; Viru/haka, king of the
South, seated facing the north, presiding over his host ;
[221] Virupakkha, king of the West, seated facing the
east, presiding over his host ; and Vessava^a, king
of the North, seated facing the south, presiding
over his host. Whenever, lord, all the gods in
the heaven of the Thirty-Three are assembled,
and seated in their Hall of Good Counsel, with the
vast celestial company seated around them, and with
the Four Great Kings at the four quarters of the firma-

1 Paficasikho Gandhabbo. See above, p. 244.

2 PavarawS.

S 2


26o XIX. MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 221.

merit, this is the order of the seats of the four. After
that come our seats. And those gods, lord, who had
been recently reborn in the hosts of the Three-and-
Thirty because they had lived the higher life under
the Exalted One, they outshone the other gods in
appearance and in glory. Thereat, verily, lord, the
Three-and-Thirty gods were glad and of good cheer,
were filled with joy and happiness, saying, " Verily, sirs,
the celestial hosts are waxing ; the hosts of the titans
are waning ! "

3. ' Then Sakka, lord, ruler of the gods, when he
saw the satisfaction felt by the Three-and-Thirty gods,
expressed his approval in these verses : — -

The Three-and-Thirty, verily, both gods and lord,
rejoice,

Tathagata they honour and the cosmic law sublime,

Whereas they see these gods new-risen, beautiful and
bright,

Who erst the holy life had lived, under the Happy
One,

The Mighty Sage's hearers, who had won to higher
truths,

Come hither ; and in glory all the other gods out-
shine.

This they behold right gladly, both lord and Thirty-
Three,

Tathagata they honour and the cosmic law sublime.

1 Hereat, lord, [222] the Three-and-Thirty gods were
even more abundantly glad and of good cheer, and
filled with joy and happiness, saying : " Verily, sirs, the
celestial hosts are waxing ; the hosts of the titans are
waning ! " 1

4. ' Then Sakka, lord, perceiving the satisfaction of
the Three-and-Thirty gods, addressed them thus : —

"Is it your wish, gentlemen, to hear eight truthful
items in praise of that Exalted One ? "
" It is our wish, sir, to hear them."
1 Then Sakka, lord, ruler of the gods, uttered before


P. ii. 223. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 261

the Three-and-Thirty gods these eight truthful items
in praise of the Exalted One : —

5. " Now what think ye, my lords gods Three-and-
Thirty ? Inasmuch as the Exalted One has so wrought
for the good of the many, for the happiness of the
many, for the advantage, the good, happiness of gods
and men, out of compassion for the world — a teacher
of this kind, of this character, we find not, whether we
survey the past or whether we survey the present —
save only the Exalted One.

6. " Inasmuch, again, as the Doctrine has been pro-
claimed by that Exalted One, a Doctrine for the life
that now is, a Doctrine not for mere temporary gain,
a Doctrine of welcome and of guidance, to be compre-
hended by the wise each in his own heart — a preacher
of such a Doctrine so leading us on, a teacher of this
kind, of this character we find not, whether we survey
the past, or whether we survey the present, save only
the Exalted One.

7. " ' This is good ; that is bad ' — well has this been
revealed by that Exalted One, well has he revealed that
this is wrong, [223] and that is right, that this is to be
followed, that to be avoided, that this is base and that
noble, that this is of the Light and this of the Dark1.
Such a Revelation of the nature of things, a teacher of
this kind, of this character we find not, whether we
survey the past, or whether we survey the present, save
only the Exalted One.

8. "Well revealed, again, to his disciples by that
Exalted One is the Way leading to Nirvana ; they run
one into the other, Nirvana and the Way. Even as
the waters of the Ganges and the Jumna now one into
the other, and go on together united, so it is with that
well-revealed Way leading to Nirvana; they run one
into the other, Nirvana and the Way. A revealer of
such a Way leading to Nirvana, a teacher of this kind,


1 In Milinda, these contrasted distinctions are given to illustrate the
exercise of sati ('minding' or 'remembering') by way of careful
practice. ' Questions of King Milinda,' i. 58.


262 XIX. MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 223.

of this character we find not, whether we survey the
past, or whether we survey the present, save only that
Exalted One.

9. " Comrades too has this Exalted One gotten,
both students only, travelling along the Way, and
Arahants who have lived ' the life.' Them does he not
send away, but dwells in fellowship with them whose
hearts are set on one object. A teacher so dwelling, of
this kind, of this character, we find not, whether we
survey the past, or whether we survey the present, save
only that Exalted One.

10. "Well established1 are the gifts made2 to that
Blessed One, widely established is his fame, so much so
that the nobles, methinks, continue well disposed to-
wards him. Yet notwithstanding, that Exalted One
takes sustenance with a heart unintoxicated by pride.
One so living, a teacher of this kind, of this character,
we find not, whether we survey the past, or whether
we survey the present, save only that Exalted One.

1 1. [224] " The acts, again, of that Exalted One con-
form to his speech ; his speech conforms to his acts.
One who has so carried out hereby the greater and the
lesser matters of the Law, a teacher of this kind, of
this character, we find not, whether we survey the past,
or whether we survey the present ; save only that
Exalted One.

12. " Crossed, too, by that Exalted One has been the
sea of doubt, gone by for him is all question of the
' how ' and ' why,' accomplished for him is every pur-
pose with respect to his high resolve and the ancient
rule of right. A teacher who has attained thus far, of
this kind, of this character, we find not, whether we
survey the past, or whether we survey the present, save
only that Exalted One."

' These eight true praises, lord, of the Exalted One


1 Abhinippanno labho.

2 Ajjhasayaw adi-brahmacariyaOT. Buddhaghosa says these
two words are to be taken distributively, and refer to his lofty intentions
and to the ethics of the Aryan Path.


D. ii. 225. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 263

did Sakka, ruler of the gods, utter before the Three-
and-Thirty gods. Hereat the Three-and-Thirty gods
were even more abundantly pleased, gladdened and
filled with joy and happiness over the things they had
heard.

13. 'Then certain gods, lord, spoke thus: — "Oh!
sir, if only four supreme Buddhas might arise in the
world and teach the Doctrine even as the Exalted One !
That would make for the welfare of the many, for the
happiness of the many, for compassion to the world, for
the good and the gain and the weal of gods and men."

' And certain other gods spoke thus : — " It would
suffice, sir, if there arose three supreme Buddhas in the
world."

' And certain other gods spoke thus : — " It would
suffice, sir, if two supreme Buddhas arose in the world
. . . for the good and the gain and the weal of gods
and men."

14. [225] 'Then answered Sakka, ruler of the gods
to the Three-and-Thirty : — " Nowhere, gentlemen, and
at no time is it possible that, in one and the same
world-system, two Arahant Buddhas supreme should
arise together, neither before nor after the other. This
can in no wise be. Ah ! gentlemen, would that this
Blessed One might yet live for long years to come,
free from disease and free from suffering" ! That would
make for the welfare of the many, for the happiness of
the many, for loving compassion to the universe, for
the good and the gain and the weal of gods and
men !

' Then, lord, the Three-and-Thirty gods having thus
deliberated and taken counsel together concerning- the
matter for which they were assembled and seated in the
Hall of Good Counsel, with respect to that matter the
Four Kings were receivers of the spoken word, the
Four Great Kings were receivers of the admonition
given, remaining the while in their places, not retiring1.

1 This sounds very much as if the Four Great Kings were looked
upon as Recorders (in their memory, of course) of what had been


264 XIX- MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 225.

Taking the uttered word and speech, the Kings
Stood there, serene and calm, each in his place.

15. ' Then, lord, from out of the North came forth
a splendid light, and a radiance shone around, surpass-
ing the divine glory of the gods. Then did Sakka,
ruler of the gods, say to the dwellers in the heaven
of the Three-and-Thirty : — "According, gentlemen, to
the signs now seen, the light that ariseth, the radiance
that appeareth — will Brahma now be made manifest.
For this is the herald sign of the manifestation of
Brahma, when the light ariseth and the glory shineth.

Even by yonder signs great Brahma draweth nigh.
For this is Brahma s sign, this glorious splendour vast.

[226] c Then, lord, the Three-and-Thirty gods sat
down again in their own places, saying : — " We will
ascertain what shall be the result of this radiance ;
when we have realized it, we will go to meet him."
The Four Kings also sat down in their places, saying
the same- And when they heard that, the Three-and-
Thirty gods were all agreed saying : " We will ascer-
tain what will be the result of this radiance ; when we
have verified it, we will go to meet him."

16. 'When, lord, Brahma Sana^zkumara appears
before the Three-and-Thirty gods, he manifests him-
self as an individual of relatively gross substance which
he has specially created. For Brahma's usual appear-
ance is not sufficiently materialized for the scope of the
sight of the Three-and-Thirty gods. And, lord, when
Brahma Sana;?zkumara is manifested before these gods,
he outshines the other gods in his appearance and his
glory. Just as a figure made of gold outshines the
human frame, so, when Brahma Sanawkumara is mani-
fested before the Three-and-Thirty gods, does he out-
shine the other gods in his appearance and his glory.
And when, lord, Brahma Sanawkumara is manifested


said. They kept the minutes of the meeting. If so (the gods being
made in the image of men) there must have been such Recorders at
the meetings in the Mote Halls of the clans.


D. ii. 228. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 265

before the Three-and-Thirty gods, not one god in that
assembly salutes him, or rises up, or invites him to be
seated. They all sit in silence with folded hands and
cross-legged, each thinking : ' Of whichever god Brahma
Sanawkumara now desires anything, he will seat him-
self on that god's divan. And that god by whom he
does so seat himself is filled with a sublime satisfaction,
a sublime happiness, [227] even as a Kshatriya king
that is just anointed and crowned, is filled with a sub-
lime satisfaction, a sublime happiness.

17. 'Then, lord, Brahma Sana;^kumara, perceiving
how gratified were those Three-and-Thirty gods, uttered
his approval while invisible in these verses : — .

The Three-and-Thirty, verily, both gods and lord,
rejoice,

Tathagata they honour and the cosmic law sublime,

Whereas they see these gods new-risen, beautiful and
bright,

Who erst the holy life had lived, under the Happy
One,

The Mighty Sage's hearers, who had won to higher
truths,

Come hither ; and in glory all the other gods out-
shine.

This they behold right gladly, both lord and Thirty-
Three,

Tathagata they honour and the cosmic law sublime.

18. 'This, lord, was the substance of Brahma the
Eternal Youth's speech. And he spoke it with a voice
of eightfold quality — a voice that was fluent, intelligible,
sweet and audible, sustained and distinct, deep and
resonant. And whereas, lord, he made himself audible
to that assembly by his voice, the sound thereof did not
penetrate beyond the assembly. He whose voice has
these eight qualities is said to have a Brahma-voice.

19. ' Then, lord, to Brahma the Eternal Youth the
Three-and-Thirty gods spoke thus : —

" 'Tis well, O Brahma ! we do rejoice at this that we
have noted. [228] Moreover Sakka, ruler of the gods,


266 XIX. MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 228.


hath rehearsed to us eight truthful praises of that
Exalted One, and these too we have marked and do
rejoice thereat."

' Then, lord, Brahma the Eternal Youth spoke thus
to Sakka, ruler of the gods : — " Tis well, O ruler of the
gods ; we too would hear the eight truthful praises of
that Exalted One."

" So be it, O Great Brahma," replied Sakka. And
thereupon, beginning " Now what thinketh my lord, the
Great Brahma ? " [he uttered once more those eight
truthful praises of the Blessed One, §§ 2 1-27]1. Hereat,
lord, Brahma the Eternal Youth was pleased and glad-
dened, and was filled with joy and happiness when he
had heard those praises.

28. [230] ' And so, lord, Brahma the Eternal Youth
materializing himself and becoming in appearance like
the youth Five-crest, manifested himself to the Three-
and-Thirty gods, and rising up into the air, he sat down
cross-legged in the sky. J ust, lord, as easily as a strong
man might sit down cross-legged on a well-spread divan
or a smooth piece of ground, even so did Brahma the
Eternal Youth, rising up into the air, sit down cross-
legged in the sky. And he addressed the Three-and-
Thirty gods thus : —

29. "Now what think ye, my lord gods Thirty-and-
Three ? For how long hath the Blessed One been of
great wisdom? 2

Once upon a time there was a king named Disam-
pati. And king Disampati's minister was a brahmin
named Govinda (the Steward) 3. And king Disampati
had a son named Re/m, and Govinda had a son named
Jotipala. And prince Renu. and the young Jotipala
and six other young nobles — these eight — were great
friends. [231] Now in the course of years Govinda

1 §§ 5—1 2 repeated in the text.

2 The Cy. here supplements: Himself desirous of clearing up this
problem, it is as if he went on to say, that there was nothing wonder-
ful in that, so he tells the story.

3 It is evident from §§ 30, 31 that Govinda, literally 'Lord of the
Herds,' was a title, not a name, and means Treasurer or Steward.


D. ii. 232. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 267

died. And king Disampati mourned for him, saying :
— ' Alas ! just when we had devolved all our duties on
Govinda the brahmin, and were surrounded by and
giving ourselves up to the pleasures of sense, Govinda
has died ! '

Then said prince Keuu to the king : — ' Mourn not,
sire, so excessively for Govinda, the brahmin. Govinda
has a son, young Jotipala, who is wiser than his father
was, better able to see what is profitable than his father.
Let Jotipala administer all such affairs as were entrusted
to his father.'

1 Do you think so, my boy ? '

' I do, sire.'

30. Then king Disampati summoned a man and
said: 'Come you, good man, go to Master Jotipala,
and say to him : — May good fortune attend the honour-
able Jotipala! King Disampati calls for the honourable
Jotipala. King Disampati would like to see the
honourable Jotipala.'

' So be it, sire,' responded the man, and going to
Jotipala he [232] repeated the message.

' Very good, sir,' responded Jotipala, and went to
wait upon the king. And when he had come into the
king's presence, he exchanged with the king the greet-
ings and compliments of politeness and courtesy, and
sat down on one side. Then said king Disampati to
Jotipala: — "We would have the honourable youth
Jotipala administer for us. Let him not refuse to do
so. I will set him in his father's place and appoint him
to the Stewardship1."

' So be it, sire,' replied Jotipala in assent.

31. So king Disampati appointed Jotipala as his
Steward, and set him in his father's place. And thus
appointed and installed, whatever matters his father
had administered, those did Jotipala administer ; and


1 Govindiye abhisificissami. Literally, ' I will anoint him to
the Govinda-ship ' (the Lordship over the herds). The expression
' anoint ' is noteworthy. It suggests that the office was of royal rank.
But a king was of lower rank then than now.


268 XIX. MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 232.

whatever his father had not administered, those matters
did he too not administer. And whatever works his
father had accomplished, and no others, even such
works, and no others, did he too accomplish. Of him
men said : — ' The brahmin is verily a Steward !
A Great Steward is verily this brahmin ! ' And
on this wise Jotipala came to be called the High
Steward.

32. Now it came to pass that the Great Steward
went to those six nobles, and said to them : ' Disampati
the king is old and wasted with age, [233] full of years,
and arrived at the term of life. Who indeed can
answer for the survival of the living ? When the king
dies, it will behove the king-makers to anoint Re/m
the prince as king. I suggest, gentlemen, that you
wait on prince Re72u, and say to him thus : ' We are
the dear, beloved, and congenial friends of our lord
Re/m. We are happy when our lord is happy ; un-
happy when he is unhappy. Disampati, our lord
king, is old and wasted with age, full of years and
arrived at the term of life. Who indeed can answer
for the living ? When the king dies, it will behove
the kin^-makers to anoint our lord Re;m kin^. If
our lord Re;/u should gain the sovereignty, let him
divide it with us." '

33. ' So be it,' responded the six nobles, and waiting
upon prince Re;m they repeated these words to him.

' Why, sirs, who besides myself ought to prosper in
this realm if it be not you ? If I, sirs, shall gain the
sovereignty, I will divide it with you.'

34. [234] And it came to pass in course of time that
king Disampati died. And after his death, the king-
makers anointed Re/m his son king. And he, when
he was made king, lived surrounded by and given up
to the pleasures of sense. Then the High Steward
went to those six nobles and said thus : —

' Disampati, gentlemen, is dead, and my lord Re;m
lives surrounded by and given up to the pleasures of
sense. Well, gentlemen, who can say ? The pleasures
of sense are intoxicating, I would suggest, gentlemen,


D. ii. 235. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 269

that you wait on king Rezm and say to him : " king
Disampati, my lord, is dead, my lord Re/m is anointed
king. Does my lord remember his promise ? "

' Very good, sir,' responded the six nobles, and going
into ReWs presence, they said : —

' King Disampati, sire, is dead, and my lord Re?zu
is anointed king. Does my lord remember his pro-
mise ? '

1 I do remember my promise, gentlemen. Which of
you gentlemen now is able successfully to divide this
mighty earth, so broad on the north and ... x on the
south, into seven equal portions ? '

' Who, sire, is able if it be not the Great Steward,
the brahmin ?'

35. Then king Re;m sent a man to the Great
Steward, saying : — ' Come, my good fellow, go to the
Great Steward, the brahmin, and say : " The king has
sent for you, my lord." [235] And the Great Steward
was told and obeyed, and, coming into the king's
presence, exchanged with him the greetings and com-
pliments of politeness and courtesy, and sat down on
one side. Then said the king to him : ' Will you go,
my lord Steward, and so divide this great earth wide
on the north and .... on the south into seven equal
portions, all . . .'

' Very good, sire,' responded the High Steward, [And
this he did.]

36. And king Re;m's country held the central posi-
tion. As it is said : —


1 Saka/amukka. This adjective, applied here to the earth, and
at the end of the next section to the seven kingdoms, is at present
quite unintelligible ; and is left untranslated. The traditional ex-
planations differ. Samarasekara (Colombo, 1905) translates here
(p. 1016) dakurcu pasin gael mukhayak lesa/a, that is, 'on the
south side like a waggon's mouth.' Buddhaghosa has nothing here ;
but below as applied to the kingdoms he explains ' with their mouths
debouching together.' Neither is satisfactory. It has been suggested
that it might mean ' facing the Wain,' that is, the constellation of the
Great Bear. But this is unfortunately in the North. The front
opening of a bullock waggon is (now) elliptical in form.


2 70 XIX. MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 235.

Dantapura of the Kalingas, and Potana for the

Assakas,
Mahissati for the Avantis, and Roruka in the Sovira

land.

Mithila of the Videhas, and then Campa among the

Aiigas,
Lastly Benares in the Kasi realm :— all these did the

Great Steward wisely plan.

[236] Then were those six nobles well pleased each
with his allotted gain, and at the success of his plan.
For they said : — ' What we wished for, what we
desired, what we intended, what we aimed at, lo !
that is what we have gotten.' And the seven kings
were named : —

Sattabhu and Brahmadatta, Vessabhu with Bharata,
Kenu and two Dhatara/Mas : — These are the seven
Bharatas.1

Here ends the first Portion for Recitation.

1 If we follow the order of the names in this no doubt very old
mnemonic doggrel, the result may be tabulated thus : —

City. Tribe. King.

x. Dantapura Kalingas Sattabhu.

2. Potana Assakas Brahmadatta.

3. Mahissati Avantis Vessabhu.

4. Roruka Soviras Bharata.

5. Mithila Videhas Re;*u.

6. Campa Ahgas Dhatara/Ma.

7. Barawasi Kasis Dhatara///za.
This list is enough to show that the verses do not fit with the story.

Re?zu's kingdom is said in the text to be in the middle. No one of
these seven kingdoms is in the midst of the others. Benares would
suit that position less badly, than any other. It was probably in-
tended therefore that Disampati and Re;/u were kings or chieftains in
Benares. The king Bharata of the Soviras of J. Ill, 470 may be the
same as the Bharata who also appears in the table here as king of the
Soviras. The Remi of J. IV, 444 is king of the Kurus. None of the
numerous Brahmadattas in the Jatakas can be identified with our
Brahmadatta. Our Disampati and Re/m are referred to, apparently
as kings of Benares, at Dipava/wsa III, 40.

The verses survived, but in a very corrupt state, down to the time
of the Mahavastu (Vol. Ill, p. 208, ed. Senart).


B. ii. 238. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 27 1

37. Now those six nobles came to the High Steward
and said to him : — ' Just as the honourable Steward
was dear, beloved and congenial as companion to Re;m
the king, so has he been also to us a companion, dear,
beloved and congenial. We would that the honourable
Steward administer our affairs ; we trust he will not
refuse to do so.'

' Very good, sirs,' replied the Great Steward. And
so he instructed those seven anointed kings in govern-
ment ; and he taught the mantras to seven eminent
and wealthy Brahmins and to seven hundred young
graduates.

38. [237] Now later on the excellent reputation of
the brahmin, the High Steward, was noised abroad
after this fashion: — 'With his own eyes the High
Steward sees Brahma ! Face to face does the High
Steward commune with Brahma, converse and take
counsel with Him ! ' Then the High Steward thought :
4 This flattering rumour is noised abroad about me,
that I both see Brahma and hold converse with Him.
Now I neither see Him, nor commune with Him, nor
converse or take counsel with Him. But I have heard
aged and venerable brahmins, teachers and pupils,
say : "He who remains in meditation the four months
of the rains, and practises the ecstasy of pity, he sees
Brahma, communes, converses, takes counsel with
Brahma ? What if I now were to cultivate that
discipline ? " '

39. So the High Steward waited on king Re?^u, and
telling him of the reputation imputed to himself, and
of his wish to practise seclusion, added : ' I wish, sir,
to meditate during the four months of the rains and to
practise the ecstasy of pity. No one is to come near
me save some one who will bring me my meals.'

' Do, honourable Steward, whatever seems to you fit.'

40. [238] And the High Steward went round to each
of the six nobles, told them the same, and took his
leave of them also.

41. Then he went to those seven eminent and
wealthy Brahmins, and to the seven hundred graduates,


2 72 XIX. MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 238.

and telling them [too of the rumours and of his
wish to practise seclusion], said : — ' Wherefore, sirs,
according as you have heard the mantras and have
committed them to memory, continue to rehearse
them in full, and teach them to each other. I, sirs,
wish to meditate during the four months of the rains,
and to practise the ecstasy of pity. No one is to
come near me save some one who shall bring me my
meals.'

' Do, honourable Steward, whatever seems to you
fit.'

42. [239] Next the High Steward went to his forty
wives who were all on an equality, and told them [too
of the rumours and of his wish to practise ecstasy in
seclusion. And they replied like the others.]

43. Then the High Steward had a new rest-house
built eastward of the city, and there for the four months
of the rains he meditated, rapt in the Ecstasy of Pity ;
nor did any one have access to him save one who
brought him his meals. But when the four rainy months
were over, then verily came disappointment and anguish
over him as he thought : ' Here have I heard aged
and venerable brahmins, teachers and their pupils,
say : "He who remains in meditation the four months
of the rains, and practises the Ecstasy of Pity, he sees
Brahma, communes, converses, and takes counsel with
Brahma." But I see not Brahma, I commune not, nor
converse, nor take counsel with Him.'

44. Then Brahma, the Eternal Youth, when in his
mind he knew the thoughts [240] of the High Steward's
mind, vanished from his heaven, and, like a strong
man shooting his arm out or drawing back his out-shot
arm, appeared before the High Steward. Then verily
came fear, then came trembling upon the High Steward,
then did the hair of his flesh stand up * when he saw
this thing that had never been seen before. And he,
full of fear and dread with stiffening hair, addressed
Brahma the Eternal Youth in these verses : —

1 See above, p. 240.


D. ii. 241. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 27


J


' O Vision fair, O glorious and divine !
Who art thou, lord ? knowing thee not we ask,
That we may know ! '

1 In heaven supreme I'm known
As the Eternal Youth. All know me there.
Know me e'en thou, Govinda.'

' To a Brahma Blest
Let seat and water for the feet and sweet
Cooked cakes and drink be brought. We ask what gift
The Lord would take. Would he himself decide
The form for us V

' Hereby we take thy gift,
And now — whether it be for good and gain
In this thy present life, or for thy weal
In that which shall be — Thou hast leave. Come, ask,
Govinda, whatsoe'er thou fain would'st have ? '

45. Then the High Steward thought: 'Leave is
given me by Brahma the Eternal Youth ! What now
shall I ask of him, some good thing for this life, or
a future good ? ' [24l] Then it occurred to him : ' I am
an expert regarding what is profitable for this life.
Even others consult me about that. What now if I
were to ask Brahma the Eternal Youth for something
of advantage in a life to come ? ' And he addressed
the god in these verses : —

' I ask the Brahma, the Eternal Youth,
Him past all doubt I, doubting, ask anent
The things that others would fain know about.
Wherein proficient, in what method trained
Can mortal reach th' immortal world of Brahm ? '


1 The expressions here are all elliptical, and it is not certain that
the meanings supplied are quite right as the idioms agghe pucchati
and aggha7« no karoti do not occur elsewhere. The sequence of
ideas would seem to be : ' Only such and such are fit to be offered as
a mark of respect to so holy a deity. But not knowing which is best,
I ask. Let the Holy One make it right.' Then the deity, who wants
nothing, taking the will for the deed, says he accepts ; and offers
a boon.


III.


2 74 XIX« MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 241.

' He among men, O Brahmin, who eschews
All claims of " me " and " mine " ; he in whom thought
Rises in lonely calm, in pity rapt,
Loathing all foul things, dwelling in chastity, —
Herein proficient, in such matters trained,
Mortal can reach th' immortal heav'n of Brahm.'

46. 'What the Lord saith touching "eschewing all
claims of 'me' and 'mine' I understand. It is to
renounce all property whether it be small or large,
and to renounce all family life, whether the circle of
one's kin be small or large, and with hair and beard
cut off and yellow robes donned, to go forth from the
home into the homeless life. Thus do I understand
this.

' What the Lord saith touching " thought rising in
lonely calm" I understand. It is when one chooses
a solitary abode — the forest, at the foot of a tree,
a mountain brae, a grotto, a rock-cavern, a cemetery,
or a heap of grass out in the open field. Thus do I
understand this [242].

' What the Lord saith touching " in pity rapt " I
understand. It is when one continues to pervade one
quarter of the horizon with a heart charged with pity,
and so the second quarter, and so the third, and so the
fourth. And thus the whole wide world, above, below,
around and everywhere does one continue to pervade
with a heart charged with pity, far-reaching, expanded,
infinite, free from wrath and ill will. Thus do 1 under-
stand this.

' Only in what He saith touching " loathing the foul "
do I not understand thee, Lord.

' What mean'st thou by " foul odours among men,"
O Brahma ? here I understand thee not.
Tell what these signify, who knowest all.
When cloaked and clogged by what is man thus foul,
Hell-doomed, and shut off from the heaven of Brahm ? '

[243] ' Anger and lies, deceit and treachery,
Selfishness, self-conceit and jealousy,


D. ii. 244. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 275

Greed, doubt, and lifting hands 'gainst fellow men,
Lusting and hate, dulness and pride of life, —
When yoked with these man is of odour foul,
Hell-doomed, and shut out from the heav'n of Brahm.'

4 As I understand the word of the Lord concerning
these " foul odours," they cannot easily be suppressed
if one live in the world. I will therefore go forth
from the home into the life of the homeless state.'
1 Do, lord steward, whatever seems to you fit.'
47. Then the High Steward waited on king Re/m
and said to him : — ' Will my lord now seek another
minister, who will administer my lord's affairs ? I wish
to leave the world for the homeless life. I am going
forth in accordance with the word of Brahma which I
have heard concerning- foul odours. These cannot be
easily suppressed when one is living in the world.

1 King Re«u, lord o' the land, I here declare : —
Do thou thyself take thought for this thy realm !
I care no longer for my ministry.'

' If for thy pleasures aught there lacketh yet,
I'll make it good. If any injure thee,
Them I'll restrain, warlord and landlord I !
Thou art my father, Steward, lo ! I am thy son !
Abide with us, Govinda, leave us not.'

' Naught lack I for my pleasures, nor is there
One who doth injure me. But I have heard
Voices unearthly. Henceforth home holds me not.'

[244] ■ What like is this Unearthly ? What did He say
To thee, that having heard thou will straightway
Forsake our house and us and all the world ? '

' Ere I had passed through this Retreat, my care
Was for due altar-rites, the sacred fire
Was kindled, strewn about with kusa-grass.
But lo ! Brahma I saw, from Brahma's heav'n,
Eternal god. I asked ; he made reply ;
I heard. And now irksome is home to me.'

T 2


276 XIX. MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 244.

' Lo ! I believe the words that thou hast said.
Govinda. Having heard the Unearthly Voice.
How could it be thou should'st act otherwise ?
Thee will we follow after. Be our guide,
Our teacher ! So, like gem of purest ray,
Purg'd of all dross, translucent, without flaw, —
As pure as that we'll walk according to thy word.'

' If the honourable Steward goes forth from the
home into the homeless, I too will do the like. For
whither thou goest, I will go.'

48. Then the High Steward, the brahmin, waited
upon the six nobles, and said to them : ' Will my lords
now seek another minister who will administer my
lords' affairs ? I wish to leave the world for the
homeless life. I am going forth in accordance with
the word of Brahma which I have heard concerning-
foul odours. These cannot be easily suppressed when
one is living in the world.'

Then the six nobles went aside together [245] and
thus deliberated : — ' These brahmin folk are greedy
for money. What if we were to gain him over
through money?' And coming to the High Steward
they said : — ' There is abundance of property, sir, in
these seven kingdoms. Wherefore, sir, take of it as
much as seems profitable to you.'

' Enough, sirs ! I have already abundant possessions,
thanks to the action of my lords. It is that luxury
that I am now relinquishing in leaving the world for
the homeless life, [even as I have told you].'

49. Then the six nobles went aside together, and
thus deliberated : ' These brahmin folk are greedy
about women. What if we, were to gain him over
through women?' And coming to the High Steward
they said : ' There is, sir, in those seven kingdoms
abundance of women. Wherefore, sir, conduct away
with you as many as you want.'

' Enough, sirs ! I have already these forty wives
equal in rank. All of them I am forsaking in leaving
the world for the homeless life, [even as I have told you].'


D. ii. 247. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 277

50. [248] ' If the honourable Steward goes forth
from the home into the homeless life, we too will do
the like. Whither thou goest we will go.'

• If ye would put off fleshly lusts that worldling's heart

coerce,
Stir ye the will, wax strong, firm in the power of

patience.
This is the Way, the Way that's Straight1, the Way

unto the End 2,
The Righteous Path that good men guard, to birth

in Brahma's heaven.'

51. 'Wherefore, my lord Steward, wait yet seven
years, and when they are over, we too will go forth from
the world into the homeless life. Whither thou goest
we will go.'

' Too long, my lords, are seven years ! I cannot
wait for my lords seven years. For who can answer
for the living ? 3 We must go toward the future, we
must learn by wisdom 4, we must do good, we must
walk in righteousness, for there is no escaping death
for all that's born. Now I am o-oino- forth in accord-
ance with the word of Brahma which I have heard
concerning foul odours. They cannot be easily sup-
pressed when one is living in the world.'

52. 'Well then, lord Steward, wait for us six years,
. . . [or] wait five years . . . four years . . . three . . .
two years . . • one year. When a year has gone by
we too will leave the world for the Homeless State.
Whither thou goest we will go.'

53. 'Too long, my lords, is one year. I cannot
[247] wait for my lords one year. For who can answer
for the living ? We must go towards the future, we
must learn by wisdom, we must do good, we must walk

1 See S. I, 33 : — ' Straight is that way named.'

2 Anuttaro, lit. having no beyond. The Cy. interprets asadiso,
uttamo (unique, supreme).

3 See above, p. 268.

* Mantaya. Manta vuccati pafifia, says Buddhaghosa. Cp.
the commentary on Dhp. 363; and Anguttara II, 141-228.


278 XIX. MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 247.

in righteousness, for there is no escaping death for all
that's born. Now I am going forth in accordance
with the word of Brahma which I have heard con-
cerning foul odours. They cannot easily be suppressed
when one is living in the world.'

54. ' Well then, lord Steward, wait for us seven
months . . . six months . . . five . . . four . . . three . . .
two months . . . one month . . . [55] half a month . . .
seven days, [248] till we have devolved our kingdoms
on to our sons and brothers. When seven days are
over, we will leave the world for the Homeless State.
Whither thou goest we will go.'

' Seven days, my lords, is not a long time. I will
wait, my lords, for seven days.'

56. Then the High Steward, the brahmin, came to
those seven eminent and wealthy brahmins and to
those seven hundred graduates, and said: — 'Will ye
now seek another teacher, sirs, who will (by repetition)
teach you the mystic verses ? * I wish to leave the
world for the homeless life. I am going forth in
accordance with the word of Brahma which I have
heard concerning foul odours. These cannot easily be
suppressed when one is living in the world.'

' Let the honourable Steward not leave the world
for the homeless life ! Leaving the world means little
power and little gain ; to be a brahmin brings great
power and great gain.'

' Speak not so, gentlemen, of leaving the world or of
being a brahmin. Who for that matter has greater power
or wealth than I ? I, sirs, have been hitherto as a king
of kings, as Brahma to brahmins, as a deity 2 to house-
holders. And this, all this, I put away in leaving the
world, in accordance with th? word of Brahma . . .' [249]

' If the lord Steward leaves the world for the Home-
less State, we too will do the like. Whither thou goest,
we will go.'

1 Mante. See last note.

2 Devata; ' like Sakka, king of gods, to all other heads of families.'
Cy. The phrase might be taken to mean that Brahma was not a
devata.


1). ii. 250. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 279

57. Then the High Steward, the Brahmin, went to
his forty wives, all on an equality, and said : — ' Will
each of you, ladies, who may wish to do so, go back
to her own family and seek another husband ? I wish,
ladies, to leave the world for the homeless life, in
accordance with the word of Brahma . . .'

4 Thou, even thou, art the kinsman of our hearts'
desire ; thou art the husband of our hearts' desire.
If the lord Steward leaves the world for the Homeless
State, we too will do the like. Whither thou sroest,
we will go.'

58. And so the High Steward, the brahmin, when
those seven days were past, let his hair and beard be
cut off, donned the yellow robes and went forth from
his home into the Homeless State. And he having
so acted, the seven kings also, anointed kshatriyas,
as well as the seven eminent and wealthy brahmins
and the seven hundred graduates, the forty wives all
on an equality, several thousand nobles, several thou-
sand brahmins, several thousand commoners and
several young women from women's quarters, let
their hair be cut, donned the yellow robes and went
forth from their homes into the Homeless State. And
so, escorted by this company, the High Steward, the
brahmin, went a-wandering through the villages, towns,
[250] and cities. And whether he arrived at village or
town or city, there he became as a king to kings, as
Brahma to brahmins, as a deity to commoners. And
in those days when any one sneezed or slipped, they
called out : — ' Glory be to the High Steward, the
brahmin ! Glory be to the Minister of Seven ! '

59. Now the High Steward, the brahmin, continued
to pervade each of the four quarters of the horizon
with a heart charged with love . • . with pity . . . with
sympathy in joy . . . with equanimity. And so the
whole wide world above, below, around, and every-
where did he continue to pervade with heart charged
with equanimity, far-reaching, expanded, infinite, free
from wrath and ill will. And he taught to disciples the
way to union with the world of Brahma.


28o XIX. MAHA-GOVINDA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 250.

60. Now all they who at that time had been the
High Steward's disciples and in all points wholly
understood his teaching, were after their death reborn
into the blissful world of Brahma. They who had not
in all points wholly understood his teaching, were after
their death reborn into the company either of the gods
who Dispose of Joys purveyed from without, or of the
gods of the Heaven of Boundless Delight, or of the
gods of the Heavens of Bliss, or of the Yama gods,
[25l] or of the Three-and-Thirty gods, or of the gods
who are the Four Kings of the Horizon. Even they
who accomplished the lowest realm of all, attained to
the realm of the Gandharva fairies.

Thus of all those clansmen there was not one whose
renunciation proved vain or barren ; in each case it
bore fruit and development.'


61. ' Does the Exalted One remember?'

' I do remember, Five-crest. I was the High
Steward of those days.1 I taught my disciples the
way to communion with the Brahma world. But,
Five-crest, that religious life did not conduce to
detachment, to passionlessness, to cessation of craving,
to peace, to understanding, to insight of the higher
stages of the Path, to Nirvana, but only to rebirth in
the Brahma-world. On the other hand my religious
system, Five-crest, conduces wholly and solely to
detachment, to passionlessness, to cessation of craving,
to peace, to understanding, to insight of the higher
stages of the Path, to Nirvana. And that is the
Aryan Eightfold Path, to wit, right views, right in-
tention, right speech, right, action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, right rapture.

62. ' Those of my disciples, Five-crest, who in all
points wholly understand my teaching, they from the

1 In spile of this express statement this legend of the High
Steward does not appear in the canonical collection of Birth Stories.
See Rhys Davids's ' Buddhist India,' p. 196, for other instances.


D. ii. 252. THE LORD HIGH STEWARD. 28 1

destruction of the Deadly Taints have by and for
themselves understood, realized and attained to, even
in this life, freedom from taint, liberty of heart, liberty
of intellect. [252] Those who do not in all points
wholly understand my teaching, some of them, in that
they have broken away the five Fetters belonging to
the Hither Side, are reborn without parents, where
they will utterly pass away, being no more liable to
return to this world. And some of them, in that they
have broken away three [other] Fetters, and have worn
down passion and hate and dulness, become Once-
Returners, who after once returning to this world shall
make an end of 111. And some of them, again, in
that they have broken away those three Fetters, be-
come Stream-Attainers, not liable to be reborn in any
state of woe, but assured of attaining to the Insight.
And so, Five-crest, of all, even all those persons, there
is not one whose renunciation is vain or barren ; in
each case it will have brought fruit and development'
Thus spoke the Exalted One. And Five-crest of
the Gandharva fairies was pleased at the word of the
Exalted One, and in delight and gladness he saluted
the Exalted One, and with the salutation of the right
side he vanished from that place.

Here endeth the Story of the Lord High

Steward.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

MAHA-SAMAYA suttanta

The method followed in this poem is nearly the same as in
the two previous Suttantas, only here it is rather the minor
gods, — the local deities, the personification of natural pheno-
mena, guardian spirits, fairies, harpies, naiads, dryads, and
many others — who are represented as themselves proclaiming
their adherence to the new movement. Important gods are
indeed incidentally mentioned ; and it is perhaps not without
intention that great and small are here thrown together, as if
Soma and Varu/^a and Brahma were really all of the same
kind as the long list of spirits and fairies in which they
appear *.

The poem is almost unreadable now. The long list of
strange names awakes no interest. And it is somewhat
pathetic to notice the hopeless struggle of the author to
enliven his unmanageable material with a little poetry. It
remains, save here and there, only doggrel still.

There are three parts to the poem. The first is the list
of gods ; the second the frame-work, put into the Buddha's
mouth, at the beginning (after the prologue), and at the end ;
the third the prologue, with the verses of the four gods of the
Pure Abode. The prologue has been preserved as a separate
episode in the Sa;«yutta, I, 27. The way in which the list is
fitted into the frame-work in our sections 4, 5, and 6 is very
confused and awkward ; and the grammar of the frame-work
is inconsistent with the grammar of the list. It is highly
probable therefore that the list itself, and also the epilogue,
had been handed down as independent works in the community
before our Suttanta was composed. The frame-work may be
the work of the editor.

Our list here begins in §§ 7, 8, with seven classes or groups
of gods, without personal names. The personal names begin
at § 9, with the four Great Kings of the four quarters ; and

1 So above, Vol. I, p. 1 7, the worship of Agni is deliberately inserted
in a list of animistic hocus-pocus.


INTRODUCTION. 2%X


0


§§ 10-20 follow with ten other groups in each of which the
principal personal names are given. There is another list of
gods in the A/ana/iya (No. 32 in the Digha). This other list
also begins with the four Great Kings ; and then adds, as a
sort of afterthought or appendix, the names of forty-one gods,
all mentioned one after another, without division into groups,
and without any details. Our §§ 10-20 look very much like
an improved and enlarged edition of the bare list in the
A/ana/iya. The latter is just such a mnemonic doggrel as
was found useful in other cases also by the early Buddhists,
who had no books, and were compelled to carry their
dictionaries and works of reference in their heads. There
are other instances in Pali literature of the original mnemonic
verses, and their subsequent expansion, having both been
preserved.

As the contents of the two lists, and their great importance
for the history of religion in India, have been discussed else-
where \ it is only necessary here to remind the reader that
when these Suttantas were composed the names they con-
tain were full of meaning to the people ; and that the legends
here told were intended to counteract the animistic delusions
about them then so prevalent in the Ganges valley. They
are almost the only evidence we have as yet outside the
priestly books. Perhaps the most important fact to which
they bear testimony is the continual change in animistic belief
that went on in India. They are of especial value, as they
show what those beliefs were at a particular period. We
shall not be able to have a scientific history of religion in
India until the absurd anachronisms of the classical Sanskrit
literature have been discarded ; and until we have learnt care-
fully to distinguish between the divers faiths and gods
which, in those books, are mixed up together, and supposed to
have remained the same for many centuries on end.

1 Rhys Davids's 'Buddhist India/ pp. 219-237.


[XX. mahA-samaya suttanta.

The Great Concourse.]

i. [253] Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
once dwelling among the Sakiyas, at Kapilavatthu in
the Great Wood, together with a great band of the
brethren, about five hundred of them, all being
Arahants. And gods from the ten thousand world-
systems oft-times assembled there that they might
visit the Exalted One and the band of brethren.

2. Now to four gods of the hosts of the Pure Abodes
this thought occurred : — ' That Blessed One is now
dwelling among the Sakiyas, at Kapilavatthu in the
Great Wood, together with a great band of the brethren,
about five hundred of them, all being Arahants. And
gods from the ten thousand world-systems oft-times are
assembling there to see the Exalted One and his band
of brethren. What if we, too, were to go into his
presence, and before him were to recite each of us
a poem ? '

3. Then those gods, as easily as a strong man might
stretch out his arm, or draw back his out-stretched
arm, [254] vanished from the Pure Abodes, and
appeared before the Exalted One. There they saluted
him and stood on one side. And so standing one of
the gods recited to the Blessed One this verse : —

' Great is the gathering in the glade ! The hosts of

heaven together met !
We too are come unto this congress blest, and fain
would see

The Company Invincible.'

Then another god recited to the Exalted One this
verse : —


D-.ii. 255. THE GREAT CONCOURSE. 285


' The brethren there, wrought up to concentration rapt,
make straight their hearts,
Wisely, as driver keeping grip on rein, their faculties
they guard.'

Then another £od recited to the Exalted One this


verse : —


1 All bars and bolts are hewn in twain for them,
The threshold is dug up.1

In purity, their way they go,
Stainless, with vision clear, like well-tamed elephants.'

[255] Then the other god recited to the Exalted
One this verse : —

' Who in the Buddha refuge take, they shall not go to

woeful doom.
WThen they put off this human frame they shall fill
up the hosts in heaven.'

4. Then said the Exalted One to the brethren : —
'Oft-times, brethren, do gods from the ten world-
systems foregather to see the Tathagata and the com-
pany of the Brethren. Whosoever, brethren, in the
past were Arahant Buddhas supreme, upon them
waited a like number of the heavenly hosts, and a like
number shall wait upon whosoever shall, in the future,
be Arahant Buddhas supreme. I will detail to you,
brethren, the names of the hosts of gods, I will publish
abroad, brethren, their names, I will teach you,
brethren, their names. Hearken hereunto and pay
heed, and I will speak.'

' Even so, lord,' responded the brethren. And the
Exalted One spake thus : —

5. 'In measured speech I will give utterance : —
Where'er their realm, there will ye find the gods,
But they who in the bowels of the hills

Sit with heart throughly purged and well com-
posed,

1 ' The bars and bolts and hindering threshold stone of lust, ill-will
and stupidity,' explains Buddhaghpsa.


286 XX. MAHA-SAMAYA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 255.

Like to so many lions crouching still,
Are vanquishers over the creeping dread,
White-minded, pure, serene and undefiled.

[256] Seeing within Kapilavatthu's grove

Five hundred such and more, disciples all,

To them who loved his word the Master spoke :

" Celestial hosts draw nio-h !
Look to it, brethren, that ye them discern ! "
And they, hearing the Buddha's word, forthwith
Strove ardently to see.1

6. And lo ! in them
Arose vision of those not born of men.

Some saw one hundred gods, ten hundred, some,
And some saw seventy thousand, others saw
Infinite multitudes throngfino- around.
And all their sight and seeing He Who Sees
Intuitively marked and understood.

Then to his followers who loved his Word
The Master turned and spoke : — " Celestial hosts
Draw near ! Them do ye, brethren, recognize
As I, in rhythmic speech, each in their turn
Proclaim them unto you in order due : — "

7. Seven thousand Yakkhas of our country's soil
Of wondrous gifts and powers exceeding great,
And comeliness, and splendid following 2,

Are come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.


'£>


Six thousand Yakkhas from Himalaya,
Diverse in hue, of wondrous gifts and powers


1 The connexion of the various clauses of this stanza is obscure ;
and the interpretations of the native scholars differ. We have
followed the version of the Colombo Sannaya of 1 89 1 . Samarasekhara's
translation (Col. 1905) takes the assita in line 1 to refer to the
Arahants. Buddhaghosa's commentary may be understood either
way. All agree in referring fiatva in line 5 to the Buddha.

2 Yassassino, glossed here by Buddhaghosa as parivarasam-
panna, and later, in this Suttanta, by yasena samannagata.


D. ii. 257. THE GREAT CONCOURSE. 287

And comeliness and splendid following,
Are come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

From Sata's Hill three thousand Yakkhas more,
Diverse in hue, of wondrous gifts and powers
And comeliness, with splendid following,
Have come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

Thus have I sixteen thousand Yakkhas told,
Of diverse hue, of wondrous gifts and powers
And comeliness, and splendid following,
Who come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

8. [257] Five hundred more from Vessamitta's host,
Of diverse hue, of wondrous gifts and powers
And comeliness and splendid following,
Have come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

Kumbhira, too, of Rajagaha town,
Having his dwelling on Vepulla's mount,
More than a hundred thousand in his train,
This Yakkha likewise to the wood is come.

9. King Dhatara///£a rules the Eastern clime,
Lord of Gandhabbas, mighty monarch he,
With splendid following. Sons has he too,
Many and strong, all after Indra named.
And these of wondrous gifts and mighty power
And comeliness and splendid following,
Have come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

Viru/ha, ruler of the Southern clime,
Lord of Kumba;^as, mighty monarch he,
With splendid following. Sons has he too,
Many and strong, all after Indra named.
And these of wondrous gifts and mighty power
And comeliness and splendid following,
Have come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.


288 XX. MAHA-SAMAYA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 257.

Virupakkha rules o'er the Western clime,
Lord of the Nagas, mighty monarch he,
With splendid following. Sons has he too,
Many and strong, all after Indra named.
And these, of wondrous gifts and mighty power
And comeliness and splendid following,
Have come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

Kuvera rules over the Northern clime,
Lord of the Yakkhas, mighty monarch he,
With splendid following. Sons has he too,
Many and strong, all after Indra named.
And these, of wondrous gifts and mighty power
[258] And comeliness and splendid following,
Have come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

So stood those four great kin^s within the wood
Of Kapilavatthu, on the four climes
Shedding effulgent radiance round about :
Over the East King- Dhatara///^a shone,
To right, Viru/haka, westward
Virupakkha, Kuvera o'er the North.

10. With them are come their vassals versed in craft,
Hoodwinking wizards, apt to cloak and feign : —
Maya, Ku/e/^u, Ve/e/^u, ViAi,

Vi/ucca, Candana, Ramase////a too,

K'mnugha.udu, Nighandu (nine in all).

Next, these Gandhabba chieftains all are come : —

Panada, Opamanfia too, and Matali

The driver of the gods, Cittasena

The Gandhabba, Nala, Janesabha,

Pancasikha and Suriyavaccasa,

Daughter of Timbaru. These princes all

And with them other chiefs, Gandhabbas too,

Are come rejoicing to the forest glade

To see the brethren met together there.

1 1. Now too Nagas are come from Nabhasa,
And from Vesali and from Tacchaka,


D. ii. 259. THE GREAT CONCOURSE. 289

Kambalas, Assataras, Payagas

With all their kin. Nagas from Yamuna,

And Dhatara///£a, too, with brilliant trains,

Eravana, great among Naga folk,

He too is come into the forest glade.

They who twice-born \ winged and keen
Of sight, the heavenly Harpies who,
With violence prey on Naga chiefs, —
Gaudy and Well-winged are their names —
Have flown into the wood. [259] —
The cobra kings felt quite secure.
A refuge from the dreadful birds
Buddha had made. With gentle words
Entreating one another they,
The Harpies and their prey alike
To the Buddha as their Sanctuary come.

12. They whom the Lightning- Hand did smite,
Now dwellers in the ocean, A suras,
Vasava's brethren, they of wondrous gifts
And splendid train 2 : — The Kalakanjas all
Of fearsome shape, the Danaveghasas,
Sucitti, Vepacitti, and Paharada —

With them came Namuci, spirit of Evil ;
And Bali's hundred sons, all of them named
After Veroca 3, having armed a host
Of warriors, hied them to their noble liege,
And Rahu said, " Good luck attend this mote
For which the brethren now have sought the
wood ! "

13. The gods of Fire and Water, Earth and Air
Are hither come ; celestial Varu^as


1 All birds are twice-born, first from the mother's womb (when
she lays the egg), and then from the egg itself.

2 These are all born of Suja, Vasava's mother, and had been
driven out of heaven by ' Him-with-the-thunderbolt-in-his-hand.'
The latter had been identified, at the time when this poem was com-
posed, with Sakka.

8 That is, their uncle Rahu.
III. U


290 XX. MAHA-SAMAYA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 259.

With their attendant Varuneian sprites,
And Soma with Yaso. Come, too, the gods
From Love and Pity born, with splendid train.
These ten, a tenfold host in all, of hue
Diverse, of wondrous gifts and mighty power,
And comeliness, with splendid following,
Are come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

14. Come Vishnu with his gods, the Sahalis,
The Asamas and the Yama twins 1 ; the elves
That dwell within the moon attend the Moon,
The solar fairies too attend the Sun,

While fragile spirits of the Clouds attend
The Constellations ; [260] Lord of the Vasus, too,
God Sakka, Generous One of yore 2 : —
These ten, a tenfold host in all, of hue
Diverse, of wondrous gifts and mighty powers,
And comeliness, with splendid following,
Are come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

15. Now too are come the fairies Sahabhu,
In flaming radiance like crests of fire : —
The Ari/Z/zakas, Rojas, like azure flowers,
With Varuwa and eke Sahadhamma,
And Accuta is come, Anejaka

And Suleyya and Rucira are come,

Come too Vasavanesi deities.

These ten, a tenfold host in all, of hue
Diverse, of wondrous gifts and mighty powers,
And comeliness, with splendid following,
Are come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren' met together there.


'&


16. Samanas, Great Samanas, sprites like men
And sprites like Supermen, are come, the gods

» — — . — ■ ■ ■■ — ...... , . , , . .. . . ,

1 The Castor and Pollux of Indian mythology.

2 This seems to come in here most strangely : but it is an epithet
of Sakka expressly designed to distinguish him from Indra, the Vedic
god, whose epithet was 'Destroyer of Towns,' see p. 297.


B. ii. 261. THE GREAT CONCOURSE. 29 1

Debauched-by-sport x are come and those

Debauched-
In-mind2, fairies that haunt the Green and they
That wear the Red, they too that Pass-Over,
And the Great Passers-o'er, with splendid following.
These ten, a tenfold host in all, of hue
Diverse, of wondrous gifts and mighty powers,
And comeliness, with splendid following,
Are come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

17. Sukka, Arufta, Karumha fairies too,
With Veghanasas, having at their head
Th' Odatagayhas, come ; Vicakkha/zas,
Sadamattas, Haragajas, and they

Called the Mixed gods with splendid following ;
Pajunna thundering is come, he who
Pours down the rains upon the quarters four.
These ten, a tenfold host in all, of hue
Diverse, of wondrous gifts and mighty powers,
And comeliness, with splendid following,
Are come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

18. [261] The Khemiyas and gods from Tusita
And Yama heav'ns, the Kanakas and suite,
Lambitakas and the chief Lama-gods,

The Fiery spirits, and the Asavas,
They who rejoice in shapes they make themselves,
And they who use creations not their own 2.
These ten, a tenfold host in all, of hue
Diverse, of wondrous gifts and mighty powers,
And comeliness, with splendid following,
Are come rejoicing to the forest glade
To see the brethren met together there.

19. These sixty spirit hosts, of divers hues,
According to their name and class are come,

1 On these described in the Brahmajala Suttanta, see Dialogues I,

32> 33-

2 Nimmanarati, Paranimmita[vasavatti].

U 2


292 XX. MAHA-SAMAYA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 261.

And with them others, whosoe'er they be,
Saying " Him who has outlived birth, for whom
No barrier stands, for whom the flood is crossed,
The Asavas are not, Him shall we see,
Ferry-man o'er the flood, mighty through purity \
Moon that has passed beyond th' enshrouding dark."

20. Then Tissa, the Eternal Youth, and with
Him Paramatta and Subrahma, sons
Of the Potent One, came to the congress-wood.
Great Brahma, suzerain of thousand worlds
In Brahma-heaven, has thither been reborn2,
Mighty in power, and in shape awesome
And vast, of great renown. Ten of his lords,
Each regnant o'er a Brahma-world, are come,
And in their midst with all his suite comes Harita3.

1 In this word-play, Nago means also N'agu, not having sin, says
the Cy. : — agum akarawato. So the gods, too, make bad puns! —
untranslateable ones, alas.

2 Upapanno. Note the Buddhist care to bring even ' Great
Brahma ' under the universal Law, ' rem inexorabilem.'

3 The inter-dependence of the clauses, and also of the names, in
this stanza, is ambiguous. It may hereafter become clear that the
author (or authoress) thought of Tissa and the Eternal Youth as two
distinct persons, or of the Eternal Youth and the Great Brahma of the
Buddha's time as one. The grammar is against the first of these
suppositions. But we have seen (above, p. 272, 3) that the Maha-
Brahma of Govinda's time was Sanaw-kumara, the Eternal Youth (so
also D. I, 200 compared with D. II, 209, 225) ; and Tissa according to
tradition (Smp. p. 296, 7) was the name of a Maha-Brahma. Buddha-
ghosa explains ' the Potent One ' (i d d h i m a) as the Buddha ; it is
much more likely to have been intended for Brahma, who claims
(above, p. 247) to have acquired the potency of i d d h i.

This legend of the Ever-virgin Knight, Sanaw-kumara, is the Indian
counterpart of the European legend of Sir Galahad. The oldest men-
tion of it is in the Chandogya Upanished (Ch. VII), where the ideal
of the saintly knight teaches a typical brahmin about the highest truth
(compare Deussen's note on p. 171 of Sechzig Upanishads '). In the
Nikayas the Eternal Youth is frequently quoted as the author of a
famous verse which says that, though the knight takes precedence
among all those that trust in lineage, he that is perfect in wisdom takes
precedence over all (see above, I, 121, and M. I, 358; S. I, 153;
A. V, 326. At S. II, 284 the verse is ascribed to the Buddha). A
similar sentiment is ascribed to him in the Great Bharata. In
mediaeval literature he is said to have been one of five or seven mind-


D. ii. 262. THE GREAT CONCOURSE. 293

21. To all of them thus hither come, those eods,
Marshalled around the Lord and Great Brahma,
The host of Mara cometh up. Lo ! now

The folly of the Murky One J :— [262] " Come on
And seize and bind me these, let all be bound
By lust ! Surround on every side, and see
Ye let not one escape, whoe'er he be ! "
Thus the Great Captain bade his swarthy host 2,
And with his palm did smite upon the ground
Making a horrid din, as when a storm-cloud
Thunders and lightens, big with heavy rains.
Then he recoiled, still raging, powerless
Aught to effect.

22. And He-Who-Sees by insight knew all this
And understood. Then to his followers

Who loved his word the Master spake: " The host
Of Mara comes ! Brethren, beware of them ! '
And they, hearing the Buddha's word, forthwith
Held themselves all alert. The foe departs
From them in whom no lust is found, nor e'er
Upon whose bodies stirs a hair. [Then Mara

spake : — ]
" All they, those victors in the fight, for whom
All fear is past, great of renown, His followers,
Whose fame among the folk spreads far and wide,
Lo ! now with all creation they rejoice3."

born sons of Brahma, like the Sons of the Potent One in our verse.
(For the five see the references in Wilson's ' Vishwu Purawa,' I, 38 ;
for the seven those in Garbe's ' Sawkhya-philosophie,' p. 35).
Buddhaghosa has a similar tale (quoted J. R.A.S., 1894^.344). Alater
and debased Jain version of the legend tells us at length of the love
adventures and wives of the chaste knight, with a few words at the end
on his conversion to the saintly life (Jacobi, ' Ausgewahlte Erzahlun-
gen in Mahara^/ri,' pp. 20-28, translated by de Blonay in 'Rev. de l'H.
des Rel.,' 1895, pp. 29-41).

1 Ka«ho, for Mara. Cf. Kali, the Black Woman.

2 Mara is called Ma ha-se no, his army being of course sen a. The
Pali, making no distinction between syena (hawk) and sena, it is
not impossible that a pun is here intended.

3 We have followed the traditional interpretation in ascribing these
last four lines to Mara. They may quite as well, or better, be a
statement by the author himself.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA.

THIS is the last of the series of mythological dialogues, and
in some respects the most interesting of them all. Here we
reach the culmination, in the last paragraph, in the conversion
of Sakka. Though the various episodes leading up to this
culmination are not all equal in literary skill to the charming
story and striking verses of Five-crest, they have each of them
historical value ; and they lead quite naturally up to the
conversion at the end.

It seems odd to talk of the conversion of a god. But what
do we understand by the term god ? He — it is often more
correct to say she, or it — is an idea in men's minds. To the
worshipper he seems immense, mysterious, unchanging, a unity.
And he is, in a sense, a unity — a temporary unity of a complex
of conceptions, each of them complex. To use the technical
Buddhist terms a god is kha^ika, and sawkhara. In the
same sense we can speak of a chemical compound as a unity ;
but to understand that unity we must know of what it is
compounded. Now what are the ideas of which the unity we
know under the name of Sakka is made up ? Let us take
them in the order of personal character, outward conditions,
and titles.

Personal.

Sakka has not become free from the three deadly evils —
lust, illwill, and stupidity (A. I, 144; S. I, 219).

He is not free from anxiety (S. I, 219).

He is still subject to death) and rebirth (A. I, 144). As
examples of this it is mentioned that Sunetta had thirty-
five times been reborn as Sakka (A. IV, 105), a statement
transferred to the Buddha (A. IV, 89) \

He comes down from heaven to confirm Uttara's teaching

1 We have had another instance (above, p. 73) of a detail in
Sunetta's biography being taken over into the biography of the
Buddha.


INTRODUCTION. 295


that one should bear in mind and compare one's own and
others' failings and attainments (A. IV, 162).

One of the shortest of the Sawzyuttas is devoted to Sakka.
It has twenty- five short Suttas. In the first and second,
Sakka praises energy (viriya). In the third he denounces
timidity. In the fourth he shows forbearance to his enemy \
In the fifth he advocates the conquest of anger by kindness ;
in the sixth kindness to animals ; in the seventh he denounces
trickery even towards enemies ; and in the ninth he preaches
courtesy and honour to the wise (to Rishis). In eleven it is
said he acquired his position as Sakka by having observed
in a former birth seven lifelong habits — support of his parents,
reverence to clan elders, gentleness of speech, dislike of
calumny, generosity, truth, and freedom from anger. Twelve
and thirteen repeat this and explain his titles. In fourteen
Sakka explains how new gods who outshine the old ones do
so because they have observed the Buddha's teaching2. In
fifteen he says that the most beautiful spot is where Arahants
dwell. In sixteen he praises gifts to the Order. In seventeen
he praises the Buddha, but is told he has selected the wrong
attributes for praise. In eighteen to twenty he says that,
whereas brahmins and nobles worship him, he himself wor-
ships good men, and Arahants. Nos. 21, 22, 24 and 25 are
against anger, and 23 is against deceit.

In one passage Sakka is represented as coming down from
heaven to make an inquiry about Nirvana (S. I, 201), and in
another as listening, in heaven, to Moggallana's exposition of
the simplest duties of a good layman (S. IV, 269-280).

He, Sakka, is present at the death of the Buddha and utters,
in verse, a simple lament very different from the thoughtful
verses ascribed to Brahma (above, p. 1 75).

He proclaims a eulogy on the Buddha, in which he em-
phasizes eight points of comparatively simple character (above,
p. 260).

These Nikaya passages are sufficient to show that Sakka
was considered by the early Buddhists to be a god of high
character indeed, kindly and just ; but not perfect, and not
very intelligent. He has reached as far as a good layman
might have reached, to the point where his conversion was
immanent.

Outward conditions.

Sakka dwells in the Tavatiwsa heaven, that is, in the
heaven of the thirty-three great gods of the Vedic pantheon.

1 This Sutta is repeated at Sa/wyutta IV, 201.

J The very words of the Sakka-panha are here used.


296 INTRODUCTION.


This is not by any means the highest plane of being, nor is it
quite the lowest. It is an essential part of the early Buddhist
cosmogony (and not held by any other school in India) that
there were twenty-six planes of celestial beings : — 1. The Four
Great Kings, guardians of the four quarters of the world.
2. The Thirty-Three. 3. The Yama gods. 4. The Tusita
gods. 5. The Nimmana-rati gods. 6. The Paranimitta-
vasavatti gods l. Above these are the twenty worlds of
Brahma. For practical ethical purposes the stress is laid on
two planes only — the six just mentioned, which have a
collective name (Kamavacara-devaloka), and the world of
Brahma 2. It is only the lower of these two that is meant when
heaven (sagga) is referred to. Sakka dwells therefore in the
lowest heaven but one of the lower plane.

There he dwells in the palace Victoria (Vejayanta, S. I,
235, 6). It was built by Sakka, is described at Majjhima
I, 253, and is illustrated on the Bharahat Tope 3.

Dwelling in that palace he is king over all the Thirty-Three.
When the gods fight the Titans (Asuras) it is under his
banner, and under his orders, that they fight. But he is no
absolute monarch. He is imagined in the likeness of a chief-
tain of a Kosala clan. The gods meet and deliberate in their
Hall of Good Counsel ; and Sakka, on ordinary peaceful
occasions, consults with them rather than issues to them his
commands. Yet in ten matters he surpasses them all — in
length of life, in beauty, in happiness, in renown, and in lord-
ship, and in the degree of his five sensations, sight, hearing,
smelling, taste, and touch (A. IV, 242).

Titles.

Sakka. In its Sanskrit form, S'akra, it occurs nearly fifty
times in the Vedas as an adjective qualifying gods (usually
Indra). It is explained as meaning ' able, capable *.' It is
not found as a name in pre- Buddhistic literature.

Kosiya used, not in speaking of, but in speaking to Sakka,
just as the family (gotta) name, not the personal name, is used


1 These are often mentioned in sequence. See, for instance, above,
Vol. I, pp. 280, 281.

2 The later Maha-bharata borrowed this idea, though, as Hopkins
points out (' Religions of India,' 358), it is 'a view quite foreign to
the teaching current elsewhere in the epic'

3 Cunningham, ' Stupa of Bharhut,' p. 137.

4 For another derivation, a pretty piece of word-play, see Sawyutta,
I, 230.


INTRODUCTION. 297


by polite persons in addressing a man 1. It means ' belonging
to the Kusika family,' and occurs D. II, 270; M. I, 252.
It is used once in the Rig Veda of Indra, in what exact sense
is not known. Have we a survival here from the time when
Indra was only the god of a Kusika clan?

Vasava, as chief of the Vasu gods'- (D. II, 260, 274;
S. I, 223-30; SN. 384).

Purindada, ' the generous giver in former births '(S. 1,230;
P. V. II, 9, 12, 13 ; Jat. V, 395), no doubt with ironical allusion
to the epithet of Indra, Purandara, ' destroyer of cities.'

Sujampati, the husband of Suja. (S. I, 225, 234-6;
SN. 1024).

Maghava, because, as a man, he had once been a brahmin
of that name (S. I, 230 ; cp. Jat. IV, 403 = V, 137). This had
been also, for another reason, an epithet of Indra and other
gods.

Thousand-eyed (Sahassa-cakkhu, sahassakkha, S. I,
230, sahassa-netta, S. I, 226; SN. 346). This also had been
used of Indra.

Yakkha. Scarcely perhaps an epithet : but it is interesting
to notice that even so high a god as Sakka was considered to
be a Yaksha (M. I, 252 ; see S. I, 206).

Inda ( = Indra). This is used occasionally of the Vedic god
(e.g. D. I, 244; ii. 274; SN. 310), but is applied also to
Sakka himself (D. I, 221, 261, 274 ; SN. 316, 679, 1024). The
god Indaka, of S. I, 206 and PV. 11,9, *s quite another person.

Conclusions.

Now what are the conclusions which can fairly be drawn
from the above facts? In the first place it is evident that
Sakka and Indra are quite different conceptions. Of course
Indra is also a complex conception, and not by any means
only the savage ideal of a warrior, big and blustering and
given to drink. But we shall not be far wrong if we say that
no single item of the personal character of Sakka is identical
with any point in the character of the Vedic Indra, and not
one single item of the character of Indra has been reproduced
in the descriptions of Sakka. Some of the epithets are the
same, and are certainly borrowed, though they are explained
differently in harmony with the new conception. Some of the
details of the outward conditions may be, and probably are,
the outgrowth of corresponding details as told of the older


1 This point has been discussed above, Vol. I, pp. 193-6.

2 Their names (ten of them) in PVA., p. 111.


298 INTRODUCTION.


god, but varied and softened m harmony with the new con-
ception.

And further, all these mythological dialogues are Tendenz-
schriften, written with the object of persuading the Kosala
clansmen that they need not be in the least afraid, for their
own gods were on the side of the reformation. The story-
tellers who invented them have twisted the details to suit their
purpose. But they will not have changed the figure of the
god so much that there could be any doubt as to the god they
talked of being the then popular god. To do so would have
been to defeat their object. We may be sure that at the time
when Buddhism arose the popular god in Kosala was already
very different from Indra, so different that he was spoken of
under a new name. This remains true, though he probably
was a degeneration, as the brahmins would say, or a develop-
ment, as their opponents would say, of the old Vedic hero-god.

We cannot be surprised to learn that the conception which
appealed so strongly to a more barbarous age, and to clans
when engaged in fighting their way into a new country, were
found discordant, unattractive, not quite nice, in the settled
and prosperous districts of Kosala, after many centuries of
progress and culture. It is so with every god known to
history. He seems eternal. But by the gradual accumulation
of minute variations there comes a time, it may be in a few
generations, it may be after the lapse of centuries, when the
old name no longer fits the new ideas, the old god falls from
his high estate, and a new god, with a new name, occupies the
place he filled in the minds of men. Of course the priests
went on repeating the old phrases about Indra. But even to
the priests they had become barely intelligible. The people
paid little heed to them ; they followed rather other gods more
up-to-date, and of their own making. And it was of these
new gods that the leaders of the new movement told their new
stories to point a new moral *.

1 The above is based exclusively on Nikaya evidence. It is con-
firmed by that of the later books given by Childers {sub voce Sakko).


XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA1.

THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA.

i. [263] Thus have I heard. The Exalted One was
once staying in Magadha, to the east of Rajagaha, at
a brahmin village named Ambasaw^/a. There he
resided on the Vediya mountain to the north of the
village, in the cave called the cave of Indra's Sal Tree '-'.
Now at that time a longing came over Sakka, the king
of the gods, to visit the Exalted One.

And this idea occurred to him : — 'Where may he now
be staying, the Exalted One, the Arahant, the Buddha
supreme ? ' And Sakka saw that he was staying in
Magadha at Ambasa;^a, east of Rajagaha, in the cave
called Indra's Saltree Cave on the Vediya mountain to
the north of the village. And seeing that, he said to
the Three-and-Thirty gods : — ' Gentlemen, that Exalted
One is staying in Magadha, to the east of Rajagaha at
a brahmin village named Ambasawda, in the cave called
Indra's Saltree Cave, on the Vediya mountain to the
north of the village. How would it be, gentlemen, if
we were to go and visit the Exalted One ? '

' So be it and good luck to you ! ' replied the Three-
and-Thirty gods consenting.

1 This Suttantais quoted by name at Sawyutta III, 13 ; Mahavastu
I, 350; Milinda 350; Sumahgala Vilasini I, 24 (where it is called
vedalla). The last passage is repeated at Gandha Va/wsa 57.

1 Inda-sala-guha. Buddhaghosa says there was a cave here
between two overhanging rocks with a large Sal tree at the entrance.
The village community had added walls with doors and windows;
and ornamented it with polished plaster scroll-work and garlands, and
presented it to the Buddha. In Fa Hian's time (Legge, p. 81) it was
still inhabited. In Yuan Chwang's time (Watters, II, 173) it was
deserted. Both pilgrims were told that certain marks on the rock had
been made by Sakka writing his questions (!). The Sanskritisation
of the name into Indra-saila-guha (Schiefner, Bohtlingk-Roth,
Julien, Legge, and Beal) is a mere blunder. The name Indra enters
into the names of several plants, probably merely in the sense of
excellent. There is nothing to justify the idea that Indra was
supposed to haunt this tree.

I


300 XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 263.

2. Then Sakka [made the same statement and pro-
posal to Five-crest the Gandhabba, [264] and received
the same reply] and Five-crest taking his lyre of yellow
Beluva wood, followed in attendance on Sakka, the
king of the gods.

So Sakka, the king of the gods, surrounded by the
Thirty-and-Three, and attended by Five-crest the
Gandhabba, vanished from his heaven as easily as a
strong man might shoot out his arm, or draw in his arm
outshot, and reappeared in Magadha, standing on the
Vediya mountain.

3. Now at that time the Vediya mountain was
bathed in radiance, and so was Ambasa;^a, the
brahmin village, — such is the potency of the celestials
— so much so that in the villages round about folk
were saying : — ' For sure the Vediya mountain is on
fire to-day, for sure the Vediya mountain is burning
to-day, for sure the Vediya mountain is in flame to-day !
Why, O why, is the Vediya mountain bathed in radiance
to-day, and Ambasa;^a too the brahmins' village ? '
And they were anxious and sore afraid.

4. Then said Sakka, the king of the gods, to Five-
crest the Gandhabba : — [265] ' Difficult of approach,
dear Five-crest, are Tathagatas, to one like me, when
they are rapt in the bliss of meditation, and for that
purpose abiding in solitude. But if you were first to
gain over the Exalted One [by your music] then might
I afterwards come up and visit him, the Arahant, the
Buddha supreme.'

' So be it and good luck to you ! ' consented Five-
crest, and taking his lyre he went to the Indra-Saltree-
cave. On coming there he thought : — ' Thus far will
the Exalted One be neither too far from me nor too
near to me, and he will hear my voice.' And he stood
on one side, and let his lyre be heard and recited
these verses concerning the Awakened One and the
Truth, the Arahants and Love : — 1

1 This idea is found again in the Maha-bharata (I, 2. 383). That
poem there claims to be artha-sastra, dharma-sastra, and kama-


D. ii. 266. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 3OI


5. ' Lady, thy father Timbaru I greet
With honour due, O Glory-of-the-Sun ! x
In that he wrought a thing so nobly fair
As thou, O fount divine of all my joy !

Sweet as the breeze to one foredone with sweat,
Sweet as a cooling drink to one athirst,
So dear art thou, O presence radiant !
To me, dear as to Arahants the Truth.

[266] As medicine bringing ease to one that's

sick,
As food to starving man, so, lady, quench,
As with cool waters, me who am all a-flame.

E'en as an elephant with heat oppressed,
Hies him to some still pool, upon whose face
Petals and pollen of the lotus float,
So would I sink within thy bosom sweet.

E'en as an elephant fretted by hook,
Dashes unheeding curb and goad aside,
So I, crazed by the beauty of thy form,
Know not the why and wherefore of my acts.

By thee my heart is held in bonds, and all
Bent out of course ; nor can I turn me back,
No more than fish, once he hath ta'en the bait.

Within thine arm embrace me, lady, me
With thy soft languid eyne embrace and hold,
O nobly fair ! This I entreat of thee.

Scanty in sooth, O maid of waving locks,
Was my desire, but now it swelleth aye,
Indefinitely great, e'en as the gifts
Made by the faithful to the Arahants.

sastra. So Windisch ('Buddha's Geburt,' 82) speaks of a group of
ideas, recurrent in Indian literature, which very happily sums up and
exhausts the matter — the Useful, the True, and the Agreeable— to
which Emancipation is sometimes added as a fourth. Our passage
here is the earliest in which such a group appears.

1 Suriya-vaccase, the young lady's name; sunshine in prose.
See § 10 of the Maha-samaya.


I


XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 267.


[267] Whate'er of merit to such holy ones
I've wrought, be thou, O altogether fair,
The ripened fruit to fall therefrom to me.

Whate'er of other merit I have wrought
In the wide world, O altogether fair,
Be thou the fruit thereof to fall to me.

As the great Sakyan Seer, through ecstasy
Rapt and intent and self-possessed, doth brood
Seeking ambrosia, even so do I
Pursue the quest of thee, O Glory-of-the-Sun !

As would that Seer rejoice, were he to win

Ineffable Enlightenment, so I

With thee made one, O fairest, were in bliss.

And if perchance a boon were granted me

By Sakka, lord of Three-and-Thirty gods,

'Tis thee I'd ask of him, lady, so strong

My love. And for thy father, wisest maid —

Him as a sal-tree freshly burgeoning

I worship for such peerless offspring giv'n.'

6. When Five-crest had finished the Exalted One
said to him : — ' The sound of your strings, Five-crest,
so harmonizes with that of your song, and the sound
of your voice with that of the strings, that your lyre
does not too much colour your song, nor your song
too much colour your play. Where, Five-crest, did
you learn these verses " concerning the Awakened
One and the Truth, the Arahants, and Love ? "

* The Exalted One, lord, was once staying at
Uruvela, on the bank of the Neranjara river, at the
foot of the Goatherd's Banyan tree [268] before he
attained to Enlightenment. I Now at that time, lord,
the lady called Bhadda, in appearance as Sunshine,
daughter of Timbaru, king of the Gandhabbas, was
beloved by me. But that lady, lord, was in love with
another — Sikhaddi, son of Matali the charioteer. And
since I could not get the lady by any method whatever,
I took my lyre of yellow Beluva wood, and going to
the abode of Timbaru, king of the Gandhabbas, I


D. ii. 268. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 303

played my lyre and recited these verses concerning
the Awakened One, the Truth, the Arahants and
Love : —

7. ' Lady, thy father Timbaru I greet
With honour due, O Glory-of-the-Sun,
In that he wrought a thing so nobly fair
As thou, O fount divine of all my joy !

Sweet as the breeze to one foredone with sweat,
Sweet as a cooling drink to one athirst,
So dear art thou, O presence radiant !
To me, dear as to Arahants the Truth.

As medicine bringing ease to one that's sick.

As food to
Starving man, so, lady, quench,
As with cool waters, me who am a-flame.

E'en as an elephant with heat oppressed,
Hies him to some still pool, upon whose face
Petals and pollen of the lotus float,
So would I sink within thy bosom sweet.

E'en as an elephant fretted by hook,
Oashes unheeding curb and goad aside,
So I, crazed by the beauty of thy form,
Know not the why and wherefore of my acts.

By thee my heart is held in bonds, and all
Bent out of course ; nor can I turn me back,
No more than fish, once he hath ta'en the bait.

Within thine arm embrace me, lady, me
With thy soft languid eyne embrace and hold,
O nobly fair ! This I entreat of thee.

Scanty in sooth, O maid of waving locks,
Was my desire, but now it swelleth aye,
Indefinitely great, e'en as the gifts
Made by the faithful to the Arahants.

Whate'er of merit to such holy ones
I've wrought, be thou, O altogether fair,
The ripened fruit to fall therefrom to me.


304 XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 268.

Whate'er of other merit I have wrought
In the wide world, O altogether fair,
Be thou the fruit thereof to fall to me.

As the great Sakyan Seer, through ecstasy-
Rapt and intent and self-possessed, doth brood
Seeking ambrosia, even so do I
Pursue the quest of thee, O Glory-of-the-Sun !

As would that Seer rejoice, were he to win

Ineffable Enlightenment, so I

With thee made one, O fairest, were in bliss.

And if perchance a boon were granted me

By Sakka, lord of Three-and-Thirty gods,

'Tis thee I'd ask of him, lady, so strong

My love. And for thy father, wisest maid —

Him as a sal- tree freshly burgeoning

I worship for such peerless offspring giv n.

' And when I had finished, lord, the Lady Suriya-
vaccasa said to me : —

" That Blessed One, sir, I have not seen face to face,
and yet I heard of him when I went to dance at the
Sudhamma Hall of the Three-and-Thirty gods \ Since
you so extol the Blessed One, let there be a meeting
between thee and me to-day. [269] So, lord, I met
that lady, not on that day but afterwards."

8. Now Sakka, the king of the gods, thought : —
' Five-crest and the Exalted One are in friendly con-
verse.' And he called to Five-crest and said : — ' Salute
the Exalted One for me, dear Five-crest, and tell him : —
" Sakka, lord, the ruler of the gods, with his ministers
and suite, does homage at the foot of the Exalted One."
[And Five-crest did so.] ,

1 May good fortune, Five-crest, attend Sakka, ruler of
gods, and his ministers and suite. For they desire hap-
piness— those gods and men, Asuras, Nagas, Gandhab-
bas, and whatever other numerous hosts there be ! '

1 When Sakka pronounced his eulogy in the Maha-govinda, says
Buddhaghosa.


D. ii. 271. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 305

On this wise do the Tathagatas salute these dignitaries.
And so saluted by the Exalted One, Sakka, the king
of the gods, entered the cave of Indra's Sal-tree, and
saluting the Exalted One stood on one side. Thus
did also the Three-and-Thirty gods and Five-crest the
Gandhabba.

9. Now at that time in the cave the rough passages
were made smooth, the narrow spaces were made wide,
and in the dark cavern it became bright, such was the
potency of the celestials [270], Then said the Exalted
One to Sakka : — ' Wonderful is this ! marvellous is
this, that the venerable Kosiya, with so much to do,
so much to perform, should come hither ! '

' For a long time, lord, have I been desirous of
coming to see the Exalted One, but I was hindered
by one task and another that I had to perform for the
Three-and-Thirty gods, and was not able to come.
On one occasion the Exalted One was staying at
Savatthi, in the Sa/ala cottage. So I went to Savatthi
to see the Exalted One.

10. ' Now at that time, lord, the Exalted One was
seated, rapt in some stage of meditation, and Bhunjati,
wife of Vessava^a l, was waiting on him, worshipping
with clasped hands. Then I said to Bhunjati : —
" Madam, do you salute the Exalted One for me, and
say : — ' Sakka, lord, ruler of gods, with ministers and
suite, does homage at the feet of the Exalted One.'
And Bhunjati replied : — " 'Tis not the right time,
sir, for seeing the Exalted One ; he is in retreat."
[271] " Well then, madam, when the Exalted One rouses
himself from his meditation, salute him for me and
say what I have told you." Did the lady so salute the
Exalted One, lord, for me ? And does the Exalted
One remember what she said ? '

' She did salute me, ruler of gods. I remember her
words. And this too — that it was the noise of your


1 That is, Kuvera, king of the North Quarter, ruler over Yakkhas.
See previous Suttanta, § 9.

III. X


306 XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 271.

excellency's chariot wheels that aroused me from that
meditation.'

11. 'Lord, I have heard and understood when in
the presence of those gods who were reborn into the
heaven of the Three-and-Thirty before Us, that when
a Tathagata, an Arahant Buddha supreme, arises in
the world, the celestial hosts wax in numbers, and
the Asura hosts wane. And I myself, lord, have
seen and can witness that this is so. Take, lord,
this case. There was, at Kapilavatthu, a daughter of
the Sakyans named Gopika, who trusted in the
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Order, and who fulfilled
the precepts. She, having abandoned a woman's
thoughts and cultivated the thoughts of a man, was,
at the dissolution of the body after her death, re-
born to a pleasant life, into the communion of the
Three-and-Thirty gods, into sonship with us. And
there they knew her as " Gopaka of the sons of the
gods, Gopaka of the sons of the gods." Moreover,
lord, there were three bhikkhus who, having followed
the religious life prescribed by the Exalted One, were
reborn into a lower state among the Gandhabbas.
Surrounded by and enjoying the pleasures of the five
senses, they used to wait upon and minister to us.
Things being so, Gopaka upbraided [272]them saying : —
" Where were your ears, sirs, that ye hearkened not
to the Dhamma of the Exalted One ? Here am I who
being but a maiden, trusting in the Buddha, the
Dhamma and the Order, and fulfilling the precepts,
abandoned all my woman's thoughts and, cultivating
a man's thoughts, was reborn after my death into a
pleasant life, into communion with the Three-and-
Thirty gods, into the sonship of Sakka, the lord of the
gods, and am known as Gopaka, son of the gods. But
ye, sirs, following the religious life of the Exalted One,
have only been reborn into the lower state of Gan-
dhabbas. A sad thing, indeed, is this to see, when we
behold our co-religionists reborn into the inferior con-
dition of Gandhabbas." Of those fairies, lord, thus
rebuked by Gopaka, two acquired in that same lifetime


D. ii. 273. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 307

mindfulness, and therewith the heaven of the ministers
of Brahma. But the third fairy clave to sensuous
enjoyment.

12. Gopaka's Verses.

" Disciple once of Him-Who-Sees, —

By name they called me : — Gopika, —
In Buddha, Dhamma, firm my trust,

I served the Order glad of heart.
Through this good service paid to Him

Behold me son of Sakka, born
All glorious in the Deva-world,

Of mighty power, and known henceforth
As Gopaka. Now saw I men

Who, bhikkhus in a former birth,
Had won to mere Gandhabba rank.

What ! persons erst of human kind,
And followers of Gotama, —

Supplied by us with food and drink
And tended in our own abode, — [273]

Where were their ears that they, so blest,
Yet failed to grasp the Buddha's Law ?

The Gospel well proclaimed to all
And understood by Him-Who-Sees,

Each for himself must comprehend.
I, serving only you, have heard

The orood words of the Noble Ones —
And now behold me reborn here,

All glorious and powerful,
As Sakka's son in Deva-world,

But you who served the Best of men,
And by the Highest shaped your lives,

Have re-appeared in lowly rank,
Degraded from your due advance.

An evil sight is this, to see
One's co-religionists sunk low,

Where, as Gandhabba spirits, sirs,
Ye come to wait upon the gods.

For me see ! what a change is here !

x 2


308 XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 273.

From house-life as a woman, I,
A male to-day, a god reborn,
In joys celestial take my share."

Upbraided thus by Gopaka,
Disciple erst of Gotama,

They in sore anguish made response : —
" Yea verily ! let us go hence

And strive our utmost, lest we live
The slaves of others ! ,] Of the three [274]

Two bent their will unto the work,
Mindful of Gotama's behests.

The perils in the life of sense
They saw, e'en here cleansing their hearts ;

And like an elephant that bursts
Each strap and rope, so they o'ercame

The fetters and the bonds of sense,
Ties of the Evil One, so hard

To get beyond — yea, e'en the gods,
The Three-and-Thirty, seated round

With Indra, with Pajapati,
Enthroned in Sudhamma's Hall,

The heroes twain left far behind,
Purging all passion, ousting lust.

At sight of them distress arose
In Vasava, ruler of gods,

In midst of all his retinue : —
" Lo now ! these, born to lower rank,

Outstrip the Three-and-Thirty gods ! '
His sovereign's apprehension heard,

Gopaka spake to Vasava : —
" O Indra ! in the world of men

A Buddha, called the Sakya Sage,
Is conqueror o'er the world of sense.

And these his children, who had lost
All conscience when they left the world,

Through me their conscience have regained.
[275] One of the three yet dwelleth here,

Reborn among Ganclhabba folk ;
And two, on highest Wisdom bent,

In deepest rapture scorn the gods.


D. ii. 275. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 309

Let no disciple ever doubt

That by the kind who here abide

The Truth may yet be realized.

All hail to Buddha who hath crossed

The flood and put an end to doubt,
Great Conqueror and Lord of all ! "


They recognized thy Truth e'en here ; and they
Have onward passed and won to eminence.
'Mong Brahma s ministers they twain have won
A higher place than this. And we are come,
O master, here that we too may attain
That Truth1. If the Exalted One should grant
Us leave, Master, we fain would question him.'

13. Then the Exalted One thought: 'For a long-
time now this Sakka has lived a pure life. Whatever
question he may ask of me will be to good purpose,
and not frivolous. And what I shall answer, that will
he quickly understand.' Then did the Exalted One
address these verses to Sakka, lord of gods : —

' Question me, Vasava, whate'er thy mind desires,
And on each problem put I'll end thy doubts ! '

End of the First Portion for Recitation.


1 We follow the printed text. It is more probable that pattiya is
the gloss. In that case the version would be : ' For that Truth's sake,
O master, have we come.' The full stop after vises agu is a misprint.


CHAPTER II.

i. [276] Thus invited, Sakka, the ruler of the gods,
asked this first question of the Exalted One : — ' By
what fetters, sir, are they bound — gods, men, Asuras,
Nagas, Gandhabbas, and whatever other great classes
of beings there be — in that they, wishing thus : —
" Would that, without hatred, injury, enmity, or
malignity, we might live in amity ! " — do nevertheless
live in enmity, hating, injuring, hostile, malign ? '

Such was the fashion of Sakka's first question to the
Exalted One. To him the Exalted One so asked
made answer : —

' By the fetters of envy and selfishness, ruler of gods,
are they bound — gods, men, Asuras, Nagas, Gan-
dhabbas and whatever other great classes of beings
there be — in that they wishing thus : — " Would that,
without hatred, injury, enmity, or malignity, we might
live in amity ! " — do nevertheless live in enmity, hating,
injuring, hostile, malign.'

Such was the fashion of the Exalted One's answer
to Sakka's question. And Sakka, delighted with the
Exalted One's utterance, expressed his pleasure and
appreciation saying : — ' That is so, Exalted One, that
is so, Welcome One ! I have got rid of doubt and am
no longer puzzled, through hearing the answer of the
Exalted One.'

2. [277] So Sakka, expressing pleasure and appre-
ciation, asked a further question of the Exalted One : —
' But envy and selfishness, sir, — what is the source
thereof, the cause thereof ? what gives birth to them ?
how do they come to be ? What being present, are
envy and selfishness also present ? What being absent,
are they also absent ? '

' Things as dear and not dear to us, ruler of gods, —
this is the source and cause of envy and selfishness, this


D. ii. 277. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 3II

is what gives birth to them, this is how they come to
be. In the presence of what is dear or not dear, envy
and selfishness come about, and in the absence of such
feelings, they do not come about'

' But what, sir, is the source, what the cause of things
being dear and not dear, what gives birth to these
feelings, how do they come to be ? What being pre-
sent, do we so feel, and what being absent, do we not
so feel ? '

' Desire \ ruler of gods, is the source and cause of
things being dear or not dear, this is what gives birth
to such feelings, this is how they come to be. If desire
be present, things become dear and not dear to us ; if
it be absent, things are no more felt as such.'

' But desire, sir, — what is the source and cause of
that ? What gives birth to it, how does it come to be ?
What being present, is desire present, and what being
absent, is desire also absent ? '

' Mental pre-occupation 2, ruler of gods, — this is the
source, this is the cause of desire, this is what gives
birth to desire, this is how desire comes to be. Where-
with our mind is pre-occupied, for that desire arises ; if
our mind is not so pre-occupied, desire is absent.'

1 But what, sir, is the source and what is the cause of
our mind being pre-occupied ? What gives birth to
such a state, how does it come to be ? What being
present, does our mind become pre-occupied, and what
being absent, does it not ? '

1 C hand a. The Cy. distinguishes exegetically five kinds of
chanda: — desire to seek, to gain, to enjoy, to hoard, to spend, and
includes all in the present connexion with the words : ' here it is used
in a sense tantamount to craving (ta^ha).'

2 Vitakka. The Cy. does not give the Abhidhamma definition of
this term (see Dh. S., § 7 ; ' Bud. Psy.,' p. 10 : 'the disposing, fixating,
focusing, applying the mind.' Cf. also ' Compendium of Buddhist
Philosophy,' Appendix: vitakka, P.T.S., 1910), but gives as a
parallel term vinicchaya (see above, p. 55 ' labhaw pa/icca vinic-
chayo' — 'deciding respecting gain '). The word is used, according
to Suttanta method, not with any fine shade of psychological meaning,
but in its popular sense of ^epi/xvaw, ' taking thought for ' (Matt. vi. 25),
' being pre-occupied about.'


312 XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 277.

' The source, ruler of gods, the cause of our becoming
pre-occupied is what we may call obsession l. This is
what gives birth to pre-occupation of mind, this is how
that comes about. If that obsession is present, our
mind is pre-occupied [by the idea by which we are
obsessed] ; if it is absent, it is not.'

3. ' But how, sir, has that bhikkhu gone about who
has reached the path suitable for and leading to the
cessation of obsession ? '

'[278] Happiness, ruler of gods, I declare to be two-
fold, according as it is to be followed after, or avoided.
Sorrow too I declare to be twofold, according as it is to
be followed or avoided. Equanimity too I declare to
be twofold, according as it is to be followed or avoided.

'And the distinction I have affirmed in happiness,
was drawn on these grounds : — When in following- after
happiness I have perceived that bad qualities developed
and good qualities were diminished, then that kind of
happiness was to be avoided. And when, following
after happiness, I have perceived that bad qualities
were diminished and good qualities developed, then
such happiness was to be followed. Now of such happi-
ness as is accompanied by pre-occupation and travail
of mind, and of such as is not so accompanied, the
latter is the more excellent.

1 Thus, ruler of gods, when I declare happiness to be


1 Papafica-sanfia (idde fixe). An exactly similar sequence of
ethical states is put elsewhere (M. I, 111, 112) into the mouth of
Maha Kaccana. Buddhaghosa glosses pap ana here by mattappa-
matta.kara-pa.pana, where papana is etymological word-play, and
mattappamatta may be rendered 'infatuation.' The infatuation is
either craving (tawha) in one or other of its 108 forms, or self-conceit
(man a) in one or other of its nine /orms, or speculation (di/Mi) in
one or other of its sixty-two forms.

This is one of the most recurrent conceptions of the higher Buddhism,
the system of the Aryan Path (see above, Vol. I, p. 188), and is one of
the many ways in which the early Buddhists struggled to give more
precise and ethical an implication to the Indian conception of Avijja.
It is also one of the technical terms most frequently misunderstood.
Neumann all through the Majjhima renders it Vielheit, plurality, and
Dahlke follows him.


B. ii. 279. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 313

twofold, according as it is to be followed after, or
avoided, I say so for that reason.

' Again, ruler of gods, when I declare sorrow to be
twofold, according as it is to be followed after, or
avoided, for what reason do I say so ? When, in
following after sorrow * I have perceived that bad
qualities developed and good qualities were diminished,
then that kind of sorrow was to be avoided. And
when, following after sorrow, I have perceived that bad
qualities were diminished and good qualities were
developed, then such sorrow was to be followed after.
Now of such sorrow as is accompanied by pre-occupa-
tion and travail of mind, and of such as is not so
accompanied, the latter2 is the more excellent. Thus,
ruler of gods, when I declare sorrow to be twofold,
according as it is to be followed after, or avoided, I say
so for that reason.

' [279] Again, ruler of gods, when I declare
equanimity to be twofold, according as it is to be
followed after, or avoided, for what reason do I say
so ? When, in following after equanimity, I have per-
ceived that bad qualities developed and good qualities
were diminished, then that kind of equanimity was to
be avoided. And when, following after equanimity,
I perceived that bad qualities were diminished and good
qualities were developed, then that kind of equanimity
was to be followed after 3. Now of such equanimity

1 The two sorts of sorrow or grief are geha-sita and nekkhamma-
sita, and are well paralleled by St. Paul's tov koct/jlov Xv7rrj and Kara
Oebv Xvirrj (2 Cor. vii. 10). And the working of the latter: 'for that
ye sorrowed after a godly sort . . . wrought in you . . . what vehement
desire, yea, what zeal' — has its counterpart in Buddhaghosa's exposi-
tion, namely, that through insight into the impermanence of all sensuous
satisfaction ' arouses yearning for deliverances even without beyond
(anuttaresu), and that yearning leads to sorrow, when one thinks,
O that I might reach that state wherein the elect (Ariyas) do dwell
even now.'

2 According to the Cy., 'the latter' in this and the foregoing para-
graph refers especially to the state of mind reached in the second and
higher stages of Jhana, as compared with the first, which is savitakkaw
savicaraw/.

3 For equanimity thus ethically distinguished, see M. I, 364. The


3 '4 XXI- SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 279.

as is accompanied by pre-occupation and travail of
mind and of such as is not so accompanied, the latter
is the more excellent. Thus, ruler of gods, when I
declare equanimity to be twofold, according as it is to
be followed after, or avoided, I say so for that reason.

' And it is on this wise that a bhikkhu, ruler of gods,
must have gone about, who has reached the path
suitable for, and leading to, the cessation of perceiving
and taking account of distractions.'

Such was the fashion of the Exalted One's answer
to Sakka's question. And Sakka, delighted with the
Exalted One's utterances, expressed his pleasure and
appreciation saying : — ' That is so, Exalted One, that
is so, O Welcome One ! I have got rid of doubt and
am no longer puzzled, through hearing the answer of
the Exalted One.'

4. So Sakka, expressing his pleasure and appre-
ciation, asked a further question of the Exalted One : —
' But how, sir, has that bhikkhu gone about who has
acquired the self-restraint enjoined by the Patimokkha?'

' I say, ruler of gods, that behaviour in act and in
speech, as well as those things we seek after are two-
fold, according as they are to be followed after or
avoided. [280] And for what reason do I say so ?
When, in following some mode of behaviour in act or
speech or in pursuing some quest, I have perceived that
bad qualities developed and good qualities diminished,
then such behaviour or such pursuits were to be
avoided. And when, again, I perceived as the con-
sequence of some other mode of behaviour in act or
speech, or of some other pursuit that bad qualities were
diminished and good qualities were developed, then
that behaviour, or that pursuit, was to be followed after.
Thus when I, ruler of gods, declare that behaviour in
act, behaviour in speech, and the things we seek after
are twofold, I say so for those reasons.

Commentator (who repeats his comment in Asl. 194) describes the
former ethical indifference (upekha) as that of the foolish average
person, confused in mind, who has not overcome limitations or results
(of Karma), but is bound by his world of objects of sense.


I). ii. 282. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 3 I 5

[28l] ' And it is on this wise, ruler of gods, that a
bhikkhu must have gone about to have acquired the
self-restraint enjoined by the Patimokkha.'

Such was the fashion of the Exalted One's answer
to Sakka's question. And Sakka, delighted with the
Exalted One's utterance, expressed his pleasure and
appreciation saying : — ' That is so, Exalted One, that
is so, O Welcome One ! I have got rid of doubt and
am no longer puzzled, through hearing the answer of
the Exalted One.'

5. So Sakka, expressing his pleasure and appre-
ciation, asked a further question of the Exalted One : —
' But how, sir, has that bhikkhu gone about who has
acquired control of his faculties ? '

' I say, ruler of gods, that the objects of the senses —
visible, audible, odorous, sapid, tangible and mental
objects 1 — are twofold, according as they are to be
followed after or avoided.'

Then said Sakka to the Exalted One: — 'I, sir,
understand the details of that which you have told me
in outline. [282] Those sense-objects which are not to
be followed are such as cause bad qualities to develop
and good qualities to diminish ; and those sense-objects
which have the opposite effect are to be followed after.
And because I can thus understand in detail the mean-
ing of that which the Exalted One has told me in
outline, I have got rid of doubt and am no longer
puzzled, now that I have heard the Exalted One's
answer to my question.'

6. So Sakka, expressing his pleasure and appreciation,
asked a further question of the Exalted One : — ' Are
all recluses and brahmins, sir, wholly of one creed, one
practice, one persuasion 2, one aim ? '

1 According to Buddhist psychology, these are not ideas as distinct
from impressions, but are any presentations or objects of conscious-
ness, whether on occasion of sense or of reflexion, at that stage when
mind 'turns toward' the object and 'receives' it (avajjana, sampa-
/icchana).

2 Ekantacchanda, lit. of one desire, will or purpose ; but equated
by the Cy. with ekaladdhika, of one heresy.


3l6 XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 282.

' No, ruler of gods, they are not.'

' But why, sir, are they not ? '

1 Of many and divers elements, ruler of gods, is this
world composed. And that being so, people naturally
incline to adhere to one or another of those elements ;
and to whichsoever it be they, being so inclined, become
strongly and tenaciously addicted, holding that "just
this is true, the rest is foolish." And therefore it is
that recluses and brahmins are not all wholly of one
creed, one practice, one persuasion, one aim.'

[283] ' Are all recluses and brahmins, sir, perfectly
proficient, perfectly saved, living perfectly the best life1,
have they attained the right ideal 2 ? '

' No, ruler of gods, they are not all so.'

' Why, sir, are they not all so ? '

1 Those recluses and brahmins, ruler of gods, who
are set free through the entire destruction of craving,
only they are perfectly proficient, only they are per-
fectly saved, only they are living perfectly the best life
and have attained the ideal. Therefore is it that not
all recluses and brahmins are perfectly proficient, per-
fectly saved, living perfectly the best life, and have
attained the ideal V

Such was the fashion of the Exalted One's answer
to Sakka's question. And Sakka, delighted with the
Exalted One's utterances, expressed his pleasure and
appreciation saying : — ' That is so, Exalted One, that is
so, O Welcome One ! I have got rid of doubt and am
no longer puzzled, through hearing the answer of the
Exalted One.'

7. So Sakka, expressing his pleasure at, and appre-

1 Accanta-brahmacari = ' se//Aa/Mena brahmawi ariya-
maggawz caratiti.' Cy. ' Walking 'in the highest, Aryan Path.'

2 Accanta-pariyosana = ' pariyosanan ti nibbanaw.' Cy.
' The ideal ' is a free rendering, the term meaning the end, goal or
climax.

3 This paragraph is quoted as from the Sakka-pa/zha at Sawyutta
III, 13. Two unnecessary words are there added at the end of it.
Buddhaghosa does not say anything on the discrepancy. The two
words are either there added by mistake from Majjhima I, 251, where
the phrase recurs, or stood originally in our text here.


D. ii. 284. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 31 7

ciation of the Exalted One's utterance, spoke thus : —
1 Passion \ lord, is disease, passion is a cancer, passion
is a dart, passion drags a man about by one rebirth and
then another, so that he finds himself now up above
now down below. Whereas other recluses and brahmins
not of your followers, lord, gave me no opportunity to
ask these questions, the Exalted One has answered for
me, instructing me at length, so that the dart of doubt
and perplexity has by the Exalted One been extracted.'

[284] ' Do you admit to us, ruler of gods, that you
have put the same questions to other recluses or
brahmins ? '

< I do, lord.'

1 Then tell me, if it be not inconvenient to you, how
they answered you.'

1 It is not inconvenient to me when the Exalted One
is seated to hear, or others like him.'

' Then tell, ruler of gods.'

' I went to those, lord, whom I deemed to be recluses
and brahmins, because they were dwelling in secluded
forest abodes, and I asked them those questions. Being
asked, they did not withdraw themselves, but put a
counter-question to me : — "Who is the venerable one ? "
I replied, " I, sir, am Sakka, ruler of gods." They asked
me further : — "What business has brought the venerable
ruler of gods to this place ? " Whereupon I taught
them the Dharma as I had heard and learnt it. And
they with only so much were well pleased saying : —
" We have seen Sakka, ruler of gods, and he has
answered that which we asked of him ! " And actually,
instead of me becoming their disciple, they became
mine. But I, lord, am a disciple of the Exalted One,
a Stream-winner, who cannot be reborn in any state of
woe, and who has the assurance of attaining to en-
lightenment V

1 Eja = calana////ena ta«ha. Cy., i.e. 'Craving, with respect to
the thrill' (e-motion, com-motion) caused by it. 'Passion' lacks
etymological coincidence with the implication of ' movement ' in e j a, but
no other term is forceful enough.

2 Cf. Vol. I, pp. 190-2.


,l8 XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 284.


' Do you admit to us, ruler of gods, that you have
ever before experienced such satisfaction and such
happiness as you now feel ? '

[285] ' Yes, lord, I do admit it.'

' And what do you admit, ruler of gods, with regard
to that previous occasion ? '

' In former times, lord, war had broken out between
gods and asuras. Now in that fight the gods won and
the asuras were defeated. Then when the battle was
over, to me the conqueror the thought occurred : 'The
gods will henceforth enjoy not only celestial nectar but
also asura-nectar." But, lord, the experiencing satis-
faction and happiness such as this, which was wrought
by blows and by wounds, does not conduce to detach-
ment, nor to disinterestedness, nor to cessation, nor to
peace, nor to the higher spiritual knowledge1, nor to
enlightenment, nor to Nirvana. But this satisfaction,
lord, this happiness that I have experienced in hearing
the Dhamma of the Exalted One, this which is not
wrought by blows and by wounds does conduce to
detachment, to disinterestedness, to cessation, to peace,
to spiritual knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nirvana.'

8. ' What are the things present to your mind, ruler
of gods, when you confess to experiencing such satis-
faction and such happiness ? '

'Six are the things present to my mind, lord, that
I feel such satisfaction and happiness : —

' I who here merely as a god exist
Have [by my acts]2 incurred the destiny
To live again once more. Hear, sir, and know !

' This, lord, is the first meaning implied in what
I said. [286]

' Deceasing from the gfods I shall forsake
The life that 's not of men, and straight shall go
Unerring to that womb I fain would choose.


1 Abhinna, i.e. knowledge of that advanced (abhi-) nature, which
is neither conveyed by the channels of sense, nor is occupied with
sense-experience as such.

2 Cy. afinena kammavipakena, by another result of action.


D. ii. 287- THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 319

1 This, lord, is the second meaning implied in what
I said.

' I who have had my problems rendered clear
And live delighting in His Word, shall then
Live righteously, mindful and self-possessed.

1 This, lord, is the third meaning implied in what
I said.

' And if into my life thus rightly led
Enlightenment should come, then shall I dwell
As one who Knows, and this shall be the end.

' This, lord, is the fourth meaning implied in what
I said.

' Deceasing from the human sphere, I then
Forsake the life of men, and lo ! once more
A god I'll be, best in the Deva-world.

' This, lord, is the fifth meaning implied in what
I said.

' Finer than Devas are the Peerless Gods *
All glorious, while my last span of life
Shall come and go 'tis there my home will be.

[287] ' This, lord, is the sixth meaning implied in my
confession of experiencing such satisfaction and such
happiness.

' These, lord, are the six things present to my mind
that I feel such satisfaction and such happiness.'

9. ' With aspirations unfulfilled, perplexed

And doubting, long I wandered seeking him
Who-had-on-That -wise-Thither-Come. Me-

thought,
Hermits who dwell secluded and austere
Must sure enlightened be ! To them I'll fare.
" What must I do to win, what doing fail ? '
Thus asked they rede me naught in Path or Ways.

1 Those called Akani//M.


320 XXI. SAKKA-PANHA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 287.

But me, forsooth, whereas they know that I
Who come, am Sakka of the gods, 'tis me
They ask, " What would'st thou that thou comest

here ? "
Thereat to them I teach, as I have heard,
As all may hear, the Dhamma ; whereat they
Rejoicing cry, forsooth, " Vasava have we seen ! "

But since I've seen the Buddha, seen my doubts
Dispelled, now would I, all my fears allayed,
On him, the Enlightened One, adoring wait.
Him do I worship who hath drawn the dart
Of craving, him the Buddha, peerless Lord.
Hail, mighty hero ! hail, kin to the sun !
[288] E'en as by gods is Brahma reverenced,
Lo ! even thus to-day we worship thee.
Thou art the Enlightened One, Teacher

Supreme
Art thou, nor in the world, with all its heav'ns
Of gods, is any found like unto thee ! '

10. Then spake Sakka, ruler of gods, to Five-crest of
the Gandhabbas : — ' Great has been your help to me,
dear Five-crest, in that you first placated the Exalted
One. For it was after you had first placated him, that
we were admitted to his presence to see the Exalted
One, the Arahant, Buddha Supreme. I will take the
place of father to you, and you shall be king of the
Gandhabbas, and I will give to you Bhadda, the Sun-
maiden, whom you have longed for.'

Then Sakka, touching the earth with his hand to
call it to witness, called aloud thrice : —

* Honour to the Exalted One, to the Arahant, to
the Buddha Supreme ! '

Now while he was speaking in this dialogue, the
stainless spotless Eye for the Truth arose in Sakka, the
ruler of the cmds, to wit : ' Whatsoever thingr can come
to be, that must also cease to be '.' And this happened
also to eighty thousand of devas besides.

1 See Vol. I, p. 184.


B. ii. 289. THE QUESTIONS OF SAKKA. 32 1

[239] Such were the questions which Sakka was
invited to ask, and which were explained by the
Exalted One \ Therefore has this dialogue the name
of ' The Questions of Sakka.'


1 'Was invited' is doubtful. Sakka had not been invited to put
any particular questions. Leave had been granted him generally to
put any question he liked. Yet the editions printed in Siam and
Ceylon read 'the invited questions put.' Buddhaghosa reads ajjhitta.
It is doubtful whether the other reading (ajji//M) could be properly
applied to a question. In Vin. I, 113 it is applied to a person who
is invited to speak. It looks here like a conjectural emendation of
a lectio difficihor.


III.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

MAHA SATIPA77WANA SUTTANTA.

The doctrine here expounded is perhaps the most im-
portant, after that of the Aryan Path, in early Buddhism ;
and this tract, the oldest authoritative statement of the
doctrine, is still in frequent and popular use among those
Buddhists who have adhered to the ancient faith.

The two doctrines are closely connected. The exposition
here of mindfulness (Sati) includes that of the Path, and no
exposition of the Path is complete without the inclusion of
mindfulness. Whosoever neglects the fourfold practice of
mindfulness he misses the Path, whosoever practises mindful-
ness has found the Path (Sa/wyutta V, 179, 180, 294). The
right way to the practice of mindfulness is precisely the
Aryan Path (ibid. 183). And that practice is in turn, in one
passage, called the Path to the Unconditioned (Asawkhata,
that is, Arahantship, Nirvana, the goal of the Aryan Path).1

What then is this Mindfulness? This Suttanta will show.
But a few observations may help the student of it. Etymo-
logically Sati is Memory. But as happened at the rise of
Buddhism to so many other expressions in common use,
a new connotation was then attached to the word, a connota-
tion that gave a new meaning to it, and renders ' memory '
a most inadequate and misleading translation. It became the
memory, recollection, calling-to-mind, being-aware-of, certain
specified facts. Of these the most important was the im-
permanence (the coming to be as the result of a cause, and the
passing away again) of all phenomena, bodily and mental.
And it included the repeated application of this awareness, to
each experience of life, from the ethical point of view. ' Thus
does he cultivate those qualities which ought to be practised,
and not those which ought not. That is how repetition is the
mark of Mindfulness,' says Nagasena2, in complete accord
with our Suttanta.


1 Satfzyutta IV, 363. 2 Questions of King Milinda, I, 59.


INTRODUCTION. 32


5


When Christians are told : ' Whether therefore ye eat or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God,' a way
is shown by which any act, however lowly, can, by the
addition of a remembrance (a Sati), be surrounded by the
halo of a high moral enthusiasm ; and how, by the continual
practice of this remembrance, a permanent improvement in
character can be obtained. The Buddhist idea is similar.
But the remembrance is of what we should now call natural
law, not of a deity. This has been made a corner-stone of
the system of ethical self-training. The corresponding corner-
stone in the West is conscience ; and indeed, so close is the
resemblance in their effects that one scholar has chosen ' con-
science' as a rendering of Sati; — wrongly, we think, as this
introduces a Western idea into Buddhism. The curious
notion of an internal monitor, distinct from the soul, yet
speaking independently of the will of the man himself, is
confined to animistic modes of thought. Buddhaghosa uses
it, indeed, as a simile, to explain the connotations of Sati;
but he expressly pours scorn on any idea of a separate
entity.1

On the other hand though Sati (Smrti) does not occur in
any ethical sense in pre-Buddhistic literature, it is possible
that the Buddhist conception was, in one way, influenced by
previous thought. Stress is laid in the Upanishad ideal on
Intuition, especially as regards the relation between the soul,
supposed to exist inside each human body, and the Great
Soul. In the Buddhist protest against this, the doctrine of
Sati, dependent not on intuition, but on grasp of actual fact,
plays an important part. This opposition may have been
intentional. On the other hand, the ethical value of Mindful-
ness (in its technical sense) would be sufficient, without any
such intention, to explain the great stress laid upon it.

The following are some of the proposed translations of
Sati:—

Conscience, Spence Hardy, 'Manual,' 412.

Attention, Spence Hardy, ' Manual,' 497.

Meditation, Gogerly, ' Ceylon Buddhism,' 584.

„ Childers, ' Dictionary.' 2

Memory, Oldenberg, ' Vinaya Texts,' I, 96.

„ E. Hardy, ' Buddha,' 40.

1 See Mrs. Rhys Davids's 'Buddhist Psychology,' p. 16, note 1 ;
and note 1 above on Vol. I, p. 81.

2 He renders kayagata sati, where the word occurs in its technical
sense, as 'meditation on the body.' He has other renderings for
popular usage.

Y 2


1 24 INTRODUCTION.


Contemplation, Warren, ' Buddhism in Translations,' 353.
Insight, Neumann, ' Majjhima,' I, 85.

Thought, Pischel, < Buddha,' 28.

„ Oldenberg, 'Buddha' (English translation),

128.

The other word in the compound that gives the title to this
Suttanta is Pa^/dna — which would mean etymologically
' putting forward, setting forth.' It does not occur in pre-
Buddhistic literature. It has not been yet found in the
Nikayas in its concrete, primary, sense ; or in any connexion
except this. Buddhaghosa here paraphrases it, exegetically
only, by gocara, which is the feeding- ground, resort, of an
animal. The mediaeval use of the word (in its Sanskrit form)
was in the sense of starting off, going away, departure. It is
the title of the most often quoted book in the Abhidhamma,
and there means probably Origins, Starting-points, as it gives
under twenty- four categories the paccayas (causes) of pheno-
mena. In one passage of a fifth-century commentator
(Tat. I, 78.5) the Abhidhamma Pi/aka as a whole is said to be
samantapa//Mna, ' having (or giving) the settings-on-foot,
the points of departure, of all things.' Childers gives the
word as a neuter. It is masculine throughout our Suttanta.
But he analyses the compound (sub voce u pa ////an a m), not
into Sati + pa////ana, but into Sati + upa////ana. This is
a possible contraction, and Buddhaghosa gives it as an alter-
native explanation which he does not adopt. Had we adopted
it, the rendering of the title would have been ' The getting-
ready of Mindfulness.' Neumann renders it ' Pillars of In-
sight,' and Warren ' Intent Contemplations.' Neither of these
is much more than a distant cousin of the Pali.

It is not easy at first sight to understand the choice of just
those four fields or areas (comp. pa////ana = thana = gocara),
to which, in this Suttanta, ' mindfulness ' is to be applied, or in
respect to which it is to be set up. We need ourselves to be
mindful, lest, in interpreting them, we follow too closely
European points of view. In trying to avoid this danger, we
do not consider our choice of terms leaves nothing to be
desired, or to be explained. 1

The ethical desirableness of Sati, as the instrument most
efficacious in self-mastery, lay in the steady alertness of
inward vision which it connoted, whether past or present
experience was contemplated. In discussing it, the Buddhist
was concerned, not with the outer world as such, but with the
microcosm of his subjective experience, and with the vehicles
thereof — sense and mind. These he is here represented as
considering under the fourfold aspect of —


INTRODUCTION. 32


(1) kaya, physical structure and activities,
(a) vedana, the emotional nature, first as bare feeling, then
as having ethical implications.

(3) citta, conscious life, consciousness or intelligence, con-

sidered under ethical aspects.

(4) d ha mm a, with its subdivisions —

(#) the Five Hindrances.

(b) the Five Groups.

(c) the Six Spheres of Sense.

(d) the seven Factors of Enlightenment.

(e) the four Aryan Truths.

Now it is always difficult to make any English term co-
incide with either dhamma or dhamma. Here, as else-
where in Buddhist diction, it is chiefly the context that must
be the guide to meaning. The Suttanta is a discipline — the
supreme discipline — in ethical introspection. And in Buddhist
introspective analysis, dhamma (elsewhere translatable now
by ' things,' now by ' qualities ') are, more especially, ' cog-
noscible objects,' These are related to ma no (consciousness
as apprehending), just as each kind of sense-object is related
to one kind of sense-organ ; thing-seen, for example, to sight.
A cognoscible object is any presentation (German, Vorstellung),
that has got beyond the stage of mere sensory re-action. It
is an idea or perception in the wider sense used by Locke : —
' Whatsoever is the immediate object of perception, thought, or
understanding.' But neither cognoscible object, nor presen-
tation, is a term which lends itself with sufficient simplicity
and impressiveness to ethical homily. We have therefore
decided to perpetuate the Lockean ' idea.'

For the same reason we use 'thought ' for citta, in prefer-
ence to a term of more psychological precision ; and we
understand by 'thought', thinking, or knowing, or being
intelligently conscious, and do not restrict the word to any
special mode of cognition.

Hence we get this distinction of aspects in (3) and (4) :
under citta, the ever-changing ever-active continuance of
consciousness, or re-acting intelligence; under dhamma,
those same activities considered objectively, as concrete states,
procedure, ' content of consciousness,' as the psychologists
phrase it. Under (3) we watch the agency as a whole, in its
chameleon-like phases. Under (4) we take transverse cuttings,
so to speak, of our subjective experience.

It is interesting to note that Buddhaghosa, explaining the
inclusion, under No. 4, of the Six Senses and the fivefold
Khandha doctrine, says : — ' in contemplation of the body the
Exalted One taught only the grasp of matter, in contemplation


326 INTRODUCTION.


of feeling and consciousness, only the grasp of the immaterial.
Now in order to teach grasp of matter and the immate-
rial mixed (ruparupamissakapariggaho), he' spoke of
d ham ma. And again: 'grasp of the rupa-khanda being
taught by contemplation of body, and grasp of the khandhas
of feeling and viiifiawa (cognition or consciousness) by con-
templation of feeling and citta, He now, to teach grasp of
the khandhas of perception and sankhara (let us say, volition
and other mental factors) went on' to speak of dhamma.


[xxn. mahAsatipatyt/Anasuttanta.

*

SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS.]

[290] Thus have I heard.

i. The Exalted One was once staying among the
Kurus. Kammassadhamma is a city of the Kuril
country. There the Exalted One addressed the
brethren, saying, ' Bhikkhus ! ' ' Reverend sir ! ' re-
sponded the brethren. And the Exalted One said :

The one and only path, Bhikkhus leading to the
purification of beings, to passing far beyond grief and
lamentation, to the dying-out of ill and misery, to the
attainment of right method1, to the realization of Nir-
vana, is that of the Fourfold Setting up of Mindfulness.2

Which are the Four? Herein3, O bhikkhus, let
a brother, as to the body, continue so to look upon the
body that he remains ardent, self-possessed, and mindful,
having overcome both the hankering and the dejection
common in the world. And in the same way as to
feelings, thoughts, and ideas, let him so look upon
each, that he remains ardent, self-possessed, and mind-
ful, having overcome both the hankering and the
dejection common in the world.


1 Naya. Practical Buddhism is summed up (Majjhima I, 181,
197) as exertion in naya,^dhamma, and kusala (the Method, the
Norm, and the Good). Naya is defined at Sa#zyutta V, 388 as
what comes pretty much to our method in philosophy. Above (p. 167)
it is rendered System. There, in a very old verse, the Buddha says
that seeking after Good he had been a pilgrim through the realm of
System and Law, outside of which no victory can be won.

2 See Introduction.

3 The commentarial tradition sees in this word id ha, the implica-
tion of 'belonging to this order or doctrine or school' (imasmirh
sasane), and thus an antithesis to 'ito bahiddha/ outside this [order]
— an expression which occurs immediately after the verse mentioned
in the last note.


328 XXII. MAHA SATIPA7T#ANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 291.


J


2. [29l] And how, bhikkhus, does a brother so con-
tinue to consider the body ?

1 Herein, O bhikkhus, let a brother, going into the
forest, or to the roots of a tree, or to an empty chamber,
sit down cross-legged, holding the body erect, and set
his mindfulness alert2.

Mindful let him inhale, mindful let him exhale.
Whether he inhale a long breath, let him be conscious
thereof; or whether he exhale a long breath, let him
be conscious thereof. Whether he inhale a short
breath, or exhale a short breath, let him be conscious
thereof. Let him practise with the thought ' Conscious
of my whole body will I inhale ' ; let him practise with
the thought 'Conscious of my whole body will I exhale.'
Let him practise with the thought ' I will inhale tran-
quillizing my bodily organism : ; let him practise with
the thought ' I will exhale tranquillizing my bodily
organism.'

Even as a skilful turner, or turner's apprentice,
drawing (his string) out at length, or drawing it out
short, is conscious that he is doing one or the other,
so let a brother practise inhaling and exhaling.

[292] So does he, as to the body, continue to con-
sider the body, either internally or externally, or both
internally and externally. He keeps on considering
how the body is something that comes to be, or again
he keeps on considering how the body is something
that passes away ; or again he keeps on considering
the coming to be with the passing away ; or again,
conscious that ' There is the body,' mindfulness hereof
becomes thereby established, far enough for the pur-
poses of knowledge and of self-collectedness. And he
abides independent, grasping 'after nothing in the world

1 Quoted Pa/isambhida I, 175, and 'Yogavacara Manual/ p. 1.
Each quotation gives a word for word commentary ; and so does
Sum. I, 210.

2 Parimukha/tt satim upa/Mapati, literally, 'set up his memory
in face of (the object of his thought). The ultimate object is through-
out, as the ' Yogavacara Manual ' says, Nirvana. Examples of the
subsidiary, changing, objects of thought are given in what follows.


D. ii. 293. SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS. 329

whatever. Thus, bhikkhus, does a brother continue to
regard the body.

3. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother, when he is
walking, is aware of it thus : — ' I walk ' ; or when he
is standing, or sitting, or lying down, he is aware of it.
However he is disposing the body, he is aware thereof.

So does he, as to the body, continue to consider the
body, either internally or externally, or both internally
and externally. He keeps on considering how the
body is something that comes to be, or again he keeps
on considering how the body is something that passes
away ; or again he keeps on considering the coming
to be with the passing away ; or again, conscious that
' There is the body,' mindfulness hereof becomes thereby
established, far enough for the purposes of knowledge
and of self-collectedness. And he abides independent,
grasping after nothing in the world whatever. Thus,
bhikkhus, does a brother continue to regard the body.

4. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother — whether he
departs or returns, whether he looks at or looks away
from, whether he has drawn in or stretched out [his
limbs], whether he has donned under-robe, over-robe,
or bowl, whether he is eating, drinking, chewing,
reposing, or whether he is obeying the calls of nature
— is aware of what he is about. In going, standing,
sitting, sleeping, watching, talking, or keeping silence,
he knows what he is doing.

[293] So does he, as to the body, continue to con-
sider the body, either internally or externally, or both
internally and externally. He keeps on considering
how the body is something that comes to be, or again
he keeps on considering how the body is something
that passes away ; or again he keeps on considering
the coming to be with the passing away ; or again,
conscious that ' There is the body,' mindfulness hereof
becomes thereby established, far enough for the pur-
poses of knowledge and of self-collectedness. And he
abides independent, grasping after nothing in the world
whatever. Thus, bhikkhus, does a brother continue to
consider the body.


330 XXII. MAHA SATIPA7TtfANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 293.

5. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother reflects upon
this very body, from the soles of his feet below upward
to the crown of his head, as something enclosed in skin
and full of divers impurities : — ' Here is in this body
hair and down, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones,
marrow, kidney, heart, liver, membranes, spleen, lungs,
stomach, bowels, intestines ; excrement, bile, phlegm,
pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, serum, saliva, mucus,
synovic fluid, urine.'

Just as if there were a double-mouthed sample-bag l,
bhikkhus, full of various sorts of grain, such as rice,
paddy, beans, vetches, sesamum or rice husked for
boiling ; and a keen-eyed man were to reflect as he
poured them out: — 'That's rice, that's paddy, those
are beans,' and so forth. Even so, bhikkhus, does
a brother reflect upon the body, from the soles of the
feet below upward to the crown of the head, as some-
thing enclosed in skin and full of divers impurities.

So does he, as to the body, continue to consider the
body, either internally or externally, or both internally
and externally. He keeps on considering how the
body is something that comes to be, or again he keeps
on considering how the body is something that passes
away ; or again he keeps on considering the coming
to be with the passing away ; or again, conscious that
' There is the body,' mindfulness hereof becomes thereby
established, far enough for the purposes of knowledge
and of self-collectedness. And he abides independent,
grasping after nothing in the world whatever. Thus
bhikkhus, does a brother continue to regard the body.

6. [294] And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother reflects
upon this very body, however it be placed or disposed,
with respect to its fundamenials : — ' There are in this
body the four primary elements of earth, water, heat,

1 Mutoli. Buddhaghosa has no explanation. But Darami/ipola
says mallak pasumbiyak, that is, a small bag, such as is used by
grain merchants for keeping samples in. The particular kind meant
is kept tied up with string at both ends, and either end can be opened.
The word only occurs in this connexion (here, and at M. I, 57; III,
90). The spelling of the word is uncertain.


D. 11.295. SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS. 33 1

and air.' Just as a cattle-butcher, or his apprentice,
when he has slain an ox, displays the carcase piece-
meal at the crossvvays as he sits, even so, bhikkhus,
does a brother reflect upon this very body . . . with
respect to its fundamental constituents . . .

So does he, as to the body, continue to consider the
body, either internally or externally, or both internally
and externally. He keeps on considering how the
body is something that comes to be, or again he keeps
on considering how the body is something that passes
away ; or again he keeps on considering the coming
to be with the passing away ; or again, conscious that
; There is the body,' mindfulness hereof becomes thereby
established, far enough for the purposes of knowledge
and of self-collectedness. And he abides independent,
grasping after nothing in the world whatever. Thus
bhikkhus, does a brother continue to regard the body.

7. [295] And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother, just as
if he had seen a body abandoned in the charnel-field,
dead for one, two, or three days, swollen, turning black
and blue, and decomposed, applies that perception to
this very body (of his own), reflecting : ' This body,
too, is even so constituted, is of even such a nature,
has not got beyond that (fate).'

So does he, as to the body, continue to consider the
body, either internally or externally, or both internally
and externally. He keeps on considering how the
body is something that comes to be, or again he keeps
on considering how the body is something that passes
away ; or again he keeps on considering the coming
to be with the passing away ; or again, conscious that
' There is the body,' mindfulness hereof becomes thereby
established, far enough for the purposes of knowledge
and of self-collectedness. And he abides independent,
grasping after nothing in the world whatever. Thus
bhikkhus, does a brother continue to regard the body.

8. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother, just as if he
had seen a body abandoned in the charnel-field pecked
by crows, ravens, or vultures, gnawn by dogs or jackals
or by various small creatures, applies that perception


32,2 XXII. MAHA SATIPATTtfANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 295.

to this very body (of his own), reflecting : ' This body,
too, is even so constituted, is of such a nature, has not
got beyond that (fate).'

[296] So does he, as to the body, continue to con-
sider the body, either internally or externally, or both
internally and externally. He keeps on considering
how the body is something that comes to be, or again
he keeps on considering how the body is something
that passes away ; or again he keeps on considering
the coming to be with the passing away ; or again,
conscious that ' There is the body,' mindfulness hereof
becomes thereby established, far enough for the pur-
poses of knowledge and of self-collectedness. And he
abides independent, grasping after nothing in the world
whatever. Thus, bhikkhus, does a brother continue to
regard the body.

9. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother, just as if he
had seen a body abandoned in the charnel-neld [reduced
to] a chain of bones hanging together by tendons, with
flesh and blood yet about it, or stripped of flesh but yet
spotted with blood ; or cleaned of both flesh and blood ;
or reduced to bare bones, loosed from tendons, scattered
here and there, so that the bones of a hand lie in one
direction, in another the bones of a foot, in another
those of a leg, in another a thigh bone, in another the
pelvis, in another [297] the spinal vertebrae, in another
the skull, applies that perception to this very body
(of his own) reflecting : ' This body, too, is even so
constituted, is of such a nature, has not got beyond
that (fate).'

So does he, as to the body, continue to consider the
body, either internally or externally, or both internally
and externally. He keeps 'on considering how the
body is something that comes to be, or again he keeps
on considering how the body is something that passes
away ; or again he keeps on considering the coming
to be with the passing away ; or again, conscious that
1 There is the body,' mindfulness hereof becomes thereby
established, far enough for the purposes of knowledge
and of self-collectedness. And he abides independent,


T). if. 299. SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS. 333

grasping after nothing in the world whatever. Thus,
bhikkhus, does a brother continue to regard the body.

10. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother, just as if
he had seen a body abandoned in the charnel-field,
[reduced to] white bones the colour of a sea-shell . . .
or to a mere heap of bones a year old ... or to rotten
powder, this perception does he apply to this very
body (of his own) reflecting : — ' This body too is even
so constituted, is of such a nature, has not got beyond
that (fate).'

So does he, as to the body, continue to consider the
body, either internally or externally, or both internally
and externally. He keeps on considering how the
body is something that comes to be, or again he keeps
on considering how the body is something that passes
away ; or again he keeps on considering the coming
to be with the passing away ; or again, conscious that
' There is the body,' [298] and mindfulness hereof be-
comes thereby established, far enough for the purposes
of knowledge and of self-collectedness. And he abides
independent, grasping after nothing in the world what-
ever. Thus, bhikkhus, does a brother, as to the body,
continue to consider the body.

ii. And how, bhikkhus, does a brother, as to the
feelings, continue to consider the feelings ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, is a brother when affected by
a feeling of pleasure, aware of it, reflecting : ' I feel a
pleasurable feeling.' So, too, is he aware when affected
by a painful feeling, or by a neutral feeling, or by
a pleasant or painful or neutral feeling concerning
material things, or by a pleasant or painful or neutral
feeling concerning spiritual things.

So does he, as to the feelings, continue to consider
feeling, both internally and externally, or internally
and externally together. He keeps on considering
how the feelings are something that comes to be, or
again he keeps on considering how the feelings are
something that passes away, or he [299] keeps on con-
sidering their coming to be with their passing away.
Or again, with the consciousness : ' There is feeling,'


334 xxn- MAHA SATIPA7T27ANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 299.

mindfulness thereof becomes thereby established far
enough for the purposes of knowledge and of self-
collectedness. And he abides independent, grasping
after nothing in the world whatever. Thus, bhikkhus,
does a brother, with respect to the feelings, continue
to consider feeling.

1 2. And how, bhikkhus, does a brother, as to thought,
continue to consider thought 1 ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother, if his thought be
lustful, is aware that it is so, or if his thought be free
from lust, is aware that it is so ; or if his thought be
full of hate, or free from hate, or dull, or intelligent,
or attentive, or distrait, or exalted, or not exalted, or
mediocre, or ideal, or composed, or discomposed, or
liberated, or bound, he is aware in each case that his
thought is so, reflecting : ' My thought is lustful,' and
so on.

So does he, as to thought, continue to consider
thought, internally or externally, or internally and
externally together. He keeps on considering how
thought is something that comes to be, or again he
keeps on considering how a thought is something that
passes away, or again he ever considers its coming to
be and passing away together. Or again, with the
consciousness : ' There is a thought,' mindfulness
thereof becomes thereby established, [300] far enough
for the purposes of knowledge and of self-possession.
And he abides independent, grasping after nothing in
the world whatever. Thus, bhikkhus, does a brother,
with respect to thought, continue to consider thought.

13. And how, bhikkhus, does a brother, as to ideas2,
continue to consider ideas ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother, as to ideas, continues


1 Citta. The reader is reminded that 'thought' is used here for
citta in the widest sense possible to that term, such as is intended
when, in the Christian tradition, it is made to complement the ' word
and deed ' of the Epistles. And as such it is ' thinking ' rather than
' what is thought,' that should be understood.

2 Dhamma. See Introduction.


D. ii. 302. SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS. 335

to consider ideas from the point of view of the Five
Hindrances1.

And how, bhikkhus, does a brother, as to ideas,
continue to consider ideas relating to the Five
Hindrances * ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother, when within him is
sensuous desire, is aware of it, reflecting : ' I have
within me sensuous desire.' Or again, when within
him is no sensuous desire, he is aware of this. And
he knows of the uprising of such desire unfelt before,
knows too of his putting aside that uprisen sensuous
desire, knows too of the non-arising in future of that
banished sensuous desire.

[The paragraph is repeated [30i] of ill-will, sloth
and torpor, flurry and worry, and doubt]

So does he, as to ideas, continue to consider them,
both internally or externally, or internally and externally
together. He ever considers how an idea is a thing
that comes to be, again he ever considers how an idea
is a thing that passes away, or he ever considers their
coming to be with their passing away ; or again, with
the consciousness : ' There is such and such an idea,'
mindfulness thereof is thereby established, far enough
for purposes of knowledge and of self-possession. And
he abides independent, grasping after nothing in the
world whatever. Thus, bhikkhus, does a brother, with
respect to dispositions, continue to consider dispositions
in the case of the Five Hindrances.

14. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother, as to ideas,
continues to consider these from the point of view of
the Five Skandhas of Grasping. And how, bhikkhus,
does he so consider them ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother reflects : ' Such is
material form, such is its genesis, such its passing
away ; such is feeling — perception — the mental activi-
ties— such is cognition, its genesis, its passing away.

So does he, as to dispositions, continue to consider
them, .... [302] . . .

1 Literally, ' in the Five Hindrances.'


336 XXII. MAHA SATIPA7THANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 302.

15. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother, as to ideas,
continues to consider ideas from the point of view of
the Six Internal and External Spheres of Sense. And
how does he do this ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother is aware of the organ
of sight, is aware of the objects of sight, and any Fetter
which arises on account of them both — of that, too, is
he aware ; and how there comes an uprising of a Fetter
not arisen before — of that, too, is he aware ; and how
there comes a putting-aside of a Fetter that has arisen
— of that, too, is he aware ; and how in the future there
shall arise no Fetter that has been put aside — of that,
too, is he aware.

And so, too, with respect to the organ of hearing and
sounds, to the organ of smell and odours, to the organ
of taste and tastes, to the organ of touch and tangibles,
to the sensorium and images, he is aware of the sense
and of the object, of any Fetter which arises on account
of both, of how there comes an uprising of a Fetter
not arisen before, of how there comes a putting-aside
of a Fetter that has arisen, and of how in the future
there shall arise no Fetter that has been put aside.

So does he, as to ideas, continue to consider ideas,
from the point of view of the Six Internal and External
Spheres of Sense. [303]

1 6. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother, as to ideas,
continues to consider ideas, with respect to the Seven
Factors of Enlightenment. And how does he do this ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother, if there be present
to him subjectively mindfulness as a factor of enlighten-
ment, is aware that it is present. Or if it be absent,
he is subjectively aware of its absence. And how
there comes an uprising of such mindfulness not
hitherto uprisen — of that, too, is he aware ; and how
there comes a full development of such mindfulness
when it has arisen — of that too is he aware. And
so too with respect to the other subjective factors of
enlightenment: — search the truth, energy, joy, serenity,
rapture, equanimity — he is aware if they are subjec-
tively present, or absent, and he is aware of how there


D. ii. 305. SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS. T>37

comes an uprising of any factor not hitherto uprisen,
and of how there comes a full development of such
factors when it has arisen.

So does he, as to ideas, continue to consider ideas
from the point of view of the Seven Factors of
Enlightenment. [304]

1 7. And moreover, bhikkhus, a brother, as to ideas,
continues to consider ideas from the point of view of
the Four Aryan Truths. And how does he do this ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother at the thought :
'This is 111!' is aware of it as it really is ; — at the
thought: 'This is the coming to be of 111!' is aware
of it as it really is ; — at the thought : ' This is the
cessation of 111!' is aware of it as it really is; — at
the thought : ' This is the way leading to the cessation
of 111 ! ' is aware of it as it really is.


181. [305] And what, bhikkhus, is the Aryan truth
[regarding] 111 ?

Birth is painful, old age is painful 2, death is painful,
grief, lamentation, suffering, misery and despair are
painful, painful is it not to get what is wished for, in


1 What follows (down to the line and space on p. 345) is not found
in the Majjhima recension of the Satipa/Mana (M. I, 55 ff.). Except
for this the two recensions agree, and ours here is doubtless called
the Maha-satipa//Mna, precisely because, to that extent, it is longer.
That would show that when that title was first used the Majjhima
recension was already known. It would not follow that the Digha is
younger than the Majjhima; they may have been edited at the same
time from older material.

The Digha addition is interesting as containing a fragment of Old
Commentary (as old as the texts) of which other fragments are found
in the Nikayas, and also in the Vinaya.

The Vibhanga (99-106) quotes this Digha addition verbatim.

2 Many MSS. and the Colombo edition of 1876 add 'disease is
painful.' But this is not mentioned in the word-for-word com-
mentary that follows. It is probably transferred as a gloss from the
Sawvutta recension of the Four Truths (S. V, 421) which differs
slightly from that of the repeaters of the Digha (the Digha-
bhawaka).

III. Z


33& XXII. MAHA SATIPATTtfANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 305.

a word, the Five Groups that arise from Grasping are
connected with pain l.

And what, bhikkhus, is birth ? Birth is the produc-
tion, the outcome 2, the rising up in a new form, the
appearance of the Groups, the acquisition of sense-
spheres, by this or that being in this or that class of
beings. This is what is called birth.

And what, bhikkhus, is growing old3? Growing
old is the decay, the decrepitude, the breaking-up, the
hoariness, the wrinkled state, the shrinkage of life's
span, the collapse 4 of the sense-faculties of this or that
being in this or that class of beings. This is what is
called growing old.

And what, bhikkhus, is dying ?

Dying is the fall (out of any state), the dropping
out of it, the dissolution, the disappearance, the death,
the dying, the accomplishment of the life-term, the
breaking up of the Groups, the laying down of the
body of this or that being in this or that class of
beings. This is called dying.

And what, bhikkhus, is grief?

Grieving is the state of woe, heart ache, and afflic-
tion. The inward grief, the hidden wretchedness, of
one who is visited by some calamity or other, of one
who is smitten by some kind of ill. [306] This is
what is called grief.

And what, bhikkhus, is lamenting ?


1 Pane' upadanakkhandha. The Groups are the five groups
of material and mental qualities that form, in combination brought
about by grasping, an individual. One might, therefore, express this
central thought of the first Aryan truth in modern Western language
by saying that pain is involved in individuality — a most pregnant and
far reaching suggestion. The rest o/ the Truth is merely a statement
of facts universally admitted.

2 Saiijati only found elsewhere as yet Digha I, 227, where it
means the produce arising out of an estate and accruing to the
landlord.

3 Cf. Dh. S. and Bud. Psy. on rupassa jarata. (§ 644).

* Paripaka, which in all other passages means maturity, must here
mean over-ripeness, loss of power through having reached their full
vigour and begun to give out.


T>. ii. 308. SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS. 339

Lamenting is the act and the state of mourning,
lamentation, deploring, of one who is visited by some
calamity or other, of one who is smitten by some kind
of ill. This is what is called lamenting.

And what, bhikkhus, is suffering ?

Suffering is bodily ill, bodily pain, ill that is born of
bodily contact, the being bodily affected by what is
painful. This is what is called suffering.

And what, bhikkhus, is misery ?

Misery is mental ill, mental pain, ill that is born of
mental contact, the being mentally affected by what is
painful. This is what is called misery.

And what, bhikkhus, is despair ?

Despair is the act and state of dejection, of despon-
dency, of one who is visited by some calamity or other,
of one who is smitten by some kind of ill. This is
what is called despair.

[307] And what, bhikkhus, is the ill of not getting
what is wished for ?

In beings subject to birth the wish arises : — ' Ah !
if only we were not subject to birth, if only we could avoid
being born ! ' But this is not to be got by wishing.
This is the ill of not getting what is wished for. So too
in the case of growing old, falling ill, dying, grieving,
lamenting, suffering, being in misery and in despair, in
being subject to these the wish arises : — 'Ah ! if only we
were not subject to this one or that one of those things !
If only we could avoid them ! ' But this cannot be had
for the wishing. This again is the ill of not getting
what is wished for.

And what, bhikkhus, is ' in a word the Five Groups
that arise from Grasping' ? These are the Groups of
material form, of feeling, of perception, of dispositions,
and of cognition that arise from grasping. This is
what is called ' in a word the Five Groups that arise
from Grasping are associated with 111.'

This, bhikkhus, is the Aryan Truth regarding 111.

19. [308] And what, bhikkhus, is the Aryan Truth
concerning the coming to be of 111 ?

Even this Craving, potent for rebirth, that is accom-

z 2


340 XXII. MAHA SATIPA7Ttf ANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 308.

panied by lust and self-indulgence, seeking satisfaction
now here now there, to wit, the craving for the life of
sense, the craving for becoming (renewed life), and the
craving for not becoming (for no rebirth) 1.

Now this Craving, bhikkhus, where does it take its
rise, where does it have its dwelling? In those
material things of this world which are dear to us,
which are pleasant. There does Craving take its rise,
there does it dwell.

What things in this world are dear, what things are
pleasant ? The sense of sight, the sense of hearing, the
senses of smell, taste, touch and imagination — these are
the things in this world that are dear, that are pleasant.
There does Craving take its rise, there does it dwell.

Things seen, things heard, things smelt, tasted,
tangible, things in memory recalled — these are the
things in this world that are dear, that are pleasant.
There does Craving take its rise, there does it dwell.

The thoughts that arise through sight, the thoughts
that arise through hearing, the thoughts that arise
through smell, taste, touch and imagination — these are
the things in this world that are dear, that are pleasant.
There does Craving take its rise, there does it dwell.

The stimulus of visual sense, the stimulus of auditory
sense, the stimulus of the senses of smell, taste, touch
and imagination — these are the things in this world
that are dear, that are pleasant. [309] There does
Craving take its rise, there does it dwell.

Feeling that is born of the stimulus of the visual
sense, feeling that is born of the stimulus of the


1 Vibhava. This word usually means power, prosperity, success —
the prefix vi being used as an intensitive particle. In this particular
connexion the traditional interpretation takes the prefix in a negative
sense, and paraphrases the word by ' the absence of becoming
(bhava).' This view is apparently supported by some Nikaya
passages (S. Ill, 57 ; It, no. 49), and by the Dhamma Sa/»ga»l 13 14.
I3ut it may be derived from them; and it is odd that the word should
have been found nowhere else in that sense. It is quite possible that
the original sense was the usual one. At Dhp. 282 it seems to mean
decline in wisdom.


D. ii. 310. SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS. 34 1

auditory sense, feeling that is born of the stimulus of
the senses of smell, taste, touch and feeling born of
imagination — these are the things in this world that
are dear, that are pleasant. There does Craving take
its rise, there does it dwell.

The perceiving of things visible, the perceiving of
things audible, the perceiving of things odorous, sapid,
tangible, of things in memory recalled — these are the
things in this world that are dear, that are pleasant.
There does Craving take its rise, there does it dwell.

Intentions concerned with things visible, intentions
concerned with things audible, intentions concerned
with things odorous, sapid, that may be smelt, tasted,
touched, tangible, with things in memory recalled — these
are the things in this world that are dear, that are
pleasant. There does Craving take its rise, there does
it dwell.

Craving for things visible, craving for things audible,
craving for things that may be smelt, tasted, touched,
for things in memory recalled — these are the things in
this world that are dear, that are pleasant. There
does Craving take its rise, there does it dwell.

Pre-occupation about things seen, pre-occupation
about things heard, pre-occupation about things smelt,
tasted, tangible, about things in memory recalled —
these are the things in this world that are dear, that
are pleasant. There does Craving take its rise, there
does it dwell.

Deliberating about things seen, deliberating about
things heard, deliberating about things smelt, tasted,
tangible, about things in memory recalled — these are
the things in this world that are dear, that are pleasant.
And there does Craving take its rise, there does it dwell.

[310] This, bhikkhus, is what is called the Aryan
Truth concerning- the coming to be of 111.

20. And what, bhikkhus, is the Aryan Truth con-
cerning the cessation of 111 ?

The utter cessation of and disenchantment about
that very Craving, giving it up, renouncing it, emanci-
pation from it, detachment from it.


342 XXII. MAHA SATIPATrtfANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 310.

But now this Craving, bhikkhus, where, in being
put away, is it put away ; where, in ceasing, does it
cease ? In those material things of this world which
are dear to us, which are pleasant — there may this
Craving be put away, there does it cease.

What things in this world are dear, what things are
pleasant ? The sense of sight, the sense of hearing,
the senses of smell, taste, touch and imagination — these
are the things in this world that are dear, that are
pleasant. Here may this Craving be put away, here
does it cease.

Things seen, things heard, things smelt, tasted,
tangible, things in memory recalled — these are the
things in this world that are dear, that are pleasant.
Here may this Craving be put away, here does it cease.

The thoughts that arise through sight, the thoughts
that arise through hearing, the thoughts that arise
through smell, taste, touch and imagination — these are
the things in this world that are dear, that are pleasant.
Here may this Craving be put away, here does it cease.

The stimulus of visual sense, the stimulus of auditory
sense, the stimulus of the senses of smell, taste, touch
and imagination — these are the things in this world
that are dear, that are pleasant. [3ll] Here may this
Craving be put away, here does it cease.

Feeling that is born of the stimulus of the visual
sense, feeling that is born of the stimulus of the
auditory sense, feeling that is born of the stimulus of
the senses of smell, taste, touch and feeling born of
imagination — these are the things in this world that
are dear, that are pleasant. Here may this Craving
be put away, here does it cease.

The perceiving of things, visible, the perceiving of
things audible, the perceiving of things odorous, sapid,
tangible, of things in memory recalled — these are the
things in this world that are dear, that are pleasant.
Here may this Craving be put away, here does it cease.
Intentions concerned with things visible, intentions
concerned with things audible, intentions concerned
with things odorous, sapid, that may be smelt, tasted,


D. ii. 312. SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS. 343

touched, tangible, with things in memory recalled — these
are the things in this world that are dear, that are
pleasant. Here may this Craving be put away, here
does it cease.

Craving for things visible, craving for things audible,
craving for things that may be smelt, tasted, touched,
for things in memory recalled — these are the things in
this world that are dear, that are pleasant. Here
may this Craving be put away, here does it cease.

Pre-occupation about things seen, pre-occupation
about things heard, pre-occupation about things smelt,
tasted, tangible, about things in memory recalled —
these are the things in this world that are dear, that
are pleasant. Here may this Craving be put away,
here does it cease.

Deliberating about things seen, deliberating about
things heard, deliberating about things smelt, tasted,
tangible, about things in memory recalled — these are
the things in this world that are dear, that are pleasant.
Here may Craving be put away, here does it cease.

This, bhikkhus, is what is called the Aryan Truth
concerning the cessation of 111.

21. And what, bhikkhus, is the Aryan Truth con-
cerning the Way that leads to the Cessation of 111 ?

This is that Aryan Eightfold Path, to wit, right
view, right aspiration, right speech, right doing, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right rapture.

And what, bhikkhus, is right view ? [312]

Knowledge, bhikkhus, about 111, knowledge about
the coming to be of 111, knowledge about the cessation
of 111, knowledge about the Way that leads to the
cessation of 111. This is what is called right view.

And what, bhikkhus, is right aspiration ?

The aspiration towards renunciation1, the aspiration

1 Nekkhamma. Burnouf (' Lotus,' 334) derives this word from
nis + karma; Oldenberg ('Vinaya Texts,' I, 104) from nis + kama,
and Childers {sub voce) from nis + kramya. These three deri-
vations would give the meaning respectively as having no Karma,
being devoid of lust, and going forth from home. Darami/ipola
explains it here as meaning either the second or the third. No doubt


344 xxn- MAHA SATIPA7TJ7ANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 312.

towards benevolence, the aspiration towards kindness.
This is what is called right aspiration.

And what, bhikkhus, is right speech ?

Abstaining from lying, slander, abuse and idle talk.
This is what is called right speech.

And what, bhikkhus, is right doing ?

Abstaining from taking life, from taking what is not
given, from carnal indulgence. This is what is called
right doing.

And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, the Aryan disciple having put
away wrong livelihood, supports himself by right
livelihood.


And what, bhikkhus, is right effort


?


Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother makes effort in bring-
ing forth will that evil and bad states that have not
arisen within him may not arise, to that end he stirs
up energy, he grips and forces his mind. That he may
put away evil and bad states that have arisen within
him he puts forth will, he makes effort, he stirs up
energy, he grips and forces his mind. That good
states which have not arisen may arise he puts forth
will, he makes effort, he stirs up energy, he grips and
forces his mind. That good states which have arisen
may persist, may not grow blurred, may multiply, grow
abundant, develop and come to perfection, he puts
forth will, he makes effort, he stirs up energy, he grips
and forces his mind. This is what is called right effort.
And what, bhikkhus, is right mindfulness ? [313]
Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother, as to the body, con-
tinues so to look upon the body, that he remains ardent,


Oldenberg is right as to the derivation. But Darami/ipola is also
right if we take his note as exegetical, not philological. The fact is
that the derivation had been, from very early times, forgotten or
confused ; and the connotation of the word was renunciation
generally, with special reference to these two kinds. It never had
anything to do with Karma.

The three aspirations of our paragraph here recur at Sazwyutta
II, 152, and on p. 151 nekkhamma is replaced by kama. See also
It. no. 72, and M. I, 114.


D. ii. 314. SETTING-UP OF MINDFULNESS. 345

self-possessed and mindful, having overcome both the
hankering and the dejection common in the world.
And in the same way as to feelings, thoughts and ideas,
he so looks upon each, that he remains ardent, self-
possessed and mindful, having overcome the hankering
and the dejection that is common in the world. This
is what is called right mindfulness.

And what, bhikkhus, is right rapture ?

Herein, O bhikkhus, a brother, aloof from sensuous
appetites, aloof from evil ideas, enters into and abides
in the First Jhana, wherein there is cogitation and
deliberation, which is born of solitude and is full of
joy and ease. Suppressing cogitation and deliberation,
he enters into and abides in the Second Jhana, which
is self-evoked, born of concentration, full of joy and
ease, in that, set free from cogitation and deliberation,
the mind grows calm and sure, dwelling on high. And
further, disenchanted with joy, he abides calmly con-
templative while, mindful and self-possessed, he feels in
his body that ease whereof Aryans declare ' He that
is calmly contemplative and aware, he dwelleth at
ease.' So does he enter into and abide in the Third
Jhana. And further, by putting aside ease and by
putting aside mal-aise, by the passing away of the
happiness and of the melancholy he used to feel, he
enters into and abides in the Fourth Jhana, rapture of
utter purity of mindfulness and equanimity, wherein
neither ease is felt nor any ill. This is what is called
right rapture.

This, bhikkhus, is the Aryan Truth concerning the
Way leading to the cessation of 111. [314=]


So does he, with respect to ideas continue to con-
sider ideas, both internally, or externally, or internally
and externally together. He ever considers how ideas
are something that comes to be, again he ever con-
siders how they are something that passes away, or
again he ever considers their coming to be with their
passing away ; or again with the consciousness ' There
are ideas,' mindfulness thereof is thereby established,


346 XXII. MAHA SATIPATrffANA SUTTANTA. D. ii. 314.

far enough for purposes of knowledge and of self-
possession. And he abides independent, grasping
after nothing in the world whatever. Thus, bhikkhus,
does a brother, with respect to ideas, continue to con-
sider ideas with respect to the Four Aryan Truths.

22. Bhikkhus! whoso shall thus practise these Four
Applications of Mindfulness for seven years, in him
one or two kinds of fruition may be looked for : —
either in this present life The Knowledge \ or, if there
be yet residuum for rebirth, the state of him who
returns no more. Or, not to speak of seven years,
bhikkhus, whoso shall thus practise these Four for
six years, for five only, for four only, for three only,
for two only, for one year only, in him one or two kinds
of fruition may be looked for : either in this present
life The Knowledge, or, if there be yet residuum for
rebirth, the state of him who returns no more. Or not
to speak of one year, bhikkhus, whoso shall thus prac-
tise these Four for six months, or for five months, for four
only, or three, or two, or one month only, [315] or half
a month only, in him one or two kinds of fruition may
be looked for ; either in this present life The Know-
ledge, or, if there be yet residuum for rebirth, the state
of him who returns no more. Or not to speak of half
a month, bhikkhus, whoso shall thus practise these Four
for seven days, in him one of two kinds of fruition may
be looked for : either in this present life The Know-
ledge, or if there be yet residuum for rebirth, the state
of him who returns no more. It was on account of
this that that was said which was said (at the beginning)
' The one and only path, bhikkhus, leading to the puri-
fication of beings, to passing far beyond grief and
lamentation, to the dying out, of ill and misery, to the
attainment of right method, to the realization of Nir-
vana, is that of the Four-fold Setting-up of Starting.

Thus spake the Exalted One. Pleased were the
brethren, delighting in that which was spoken by the
Exalted One.

1 AFifia; one of the many epithets of Arahantship.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

pAyAsi suttanta.

This Dialogue is one of the few which refer to events
that took place in the Community after the Buddha's death.
We hear from Dhammapala (in his commentary on the
1 Vimana Vatthu,' p. 297) that the Dialogue was believed,
when he wrote (that is, at Kaficipura in South India in the
fifth century) to have taken place after the erection of the
cairns (thupas) over the ashes of the Teacher. He does not
say how long after ; and the length of the interval is not very
important, for all the Dialogues were put together more than
fifty years at least after the Buddha's death 1. The difference
is only this, that whereas the Dialogues in which the principal
part is ascribed to the Buddha himself may well, and very
often undoubtedly do, contain material much older than the
date of the redaction of the Digha, this Suttanta (and that
is also true of the few others that fall into the same category)
may not. The difference is not great.

In this particular case we find nothing fresh in the Suttanta.
The climax, led up to at the end, shows us a messenger from the
gods coming down from heaven to teach the doctrine of gene-
rosity (dana) by laymen. We have discussed above in the
Introduction to the - Maha-govinda Suttanta ' (p. 254) the
reasons which induced ancient authors to bring down a divinity
from heaven to support any particular opinion. Why was it
done here ? It seems scarcely necessary.

True, the doctrine does not occupy a very high position in
the earliest documents. It does not appear at all in the
thirty-seven points (afterwards called the Bodhi-pakkhiya-
dhamma) in which the Buddha, just before his death, summed
up his teaching2.

3 See the general Introduction to the 'Dialogues,' I, 19.

2 See above, pp. 128-30. The Wings of Wisdom are really only
thirty, not thirty-seven, as seven of them are repeated. So there was
plenty of room, had it been wanted, for charity. The Aryan Path is
in the list. But the Path, though open to laymen and lay-women,
contains no mention of dana.


348 INTRODUCTION.


It does not appear in the Dhammapada, an anthology of
verses current in the Community on twenty-six subjects which
the makers of the anthology held of most importance. There
is a miscellaneous section into which verses on charity might
well have been introduced, had it been considered a point of
equal value with the rest ; but it is not there. It is the first
and lowest in the list of the ten Paramitas, the virtues
necessary to the attainment of Buddhahood \ But this list is
a late one, and is not found in the Four Nikayas, or even in
the Vinaya.

On the other hand there are several incidental references
to giving in charity, and always by way of approval, in the
Dialogues and the Sawyutta. And in the Anguttara (which
contains a good deal more of the milk for babes than the
other three of the great Nikayas) 2 there is a special Dana
Vagga with seven short Suttas on the subject, and six or
seven more are scattered through the work 3.

It is clear therefore, though this particular virtue is ranked
after the thirty Wings of Wisdom, that it is accorded, in the
earliest Buddhism, a very respectable place. Nevertheless at
this particular juncture, when the death of their Master had
weakened the prestige of the Order, it is quite possible that
the brethren, finding their numbers in excess of the sources of
income and support, should have found it advisable to invoke
the help of a deus ex machina to set the discrepancy right.

The rest of the Suttanta throws some light on the reputation
in which Kassapa, the Boy- Wanderer, was held by his fellows.
As becomes a flowery speaker (citra-kathi) he is lavish in
illustration, and tells a number of stories, some of them quite
good, and all of them bearing more or less relation (usually
less) to the particular point in dispute. They are sufficient,
however, to throw dust into the eyes of Payasi, whose argu-
ments, futile as they are, do not depend so exclusively on
analogy, that most misleading of guides.

1 The scholastics, by dividing each of the ten into three (see
Childers, sub voce), have brought the number up to thirty, the same as
the real number of the more ancient Wings of Wisdom, to which this
later list is meant as a counterblast or rival.

2 Compare Mrs. Rhys Davids's remarks in the Introduction to
vol. VI.

3 See Miss Hunt's 'Indexes,' under Dana.


[XXIII. pAyAsi suttanta.

REBIRTH AND KARMA.]

[316] Thus have I heard.

i. The venerable Kumara Kassapa1 was once walk-
ing on tour in Kosala together with a great company
of bhikkhus, to the number of about five hundred, and
coming to the Kosalese city named Setavya, he there
abode. And there the venerable Kumara Kassapa
dwelt to the north of Setavya, in the Si^sapa-tree
Grove. Now at that time the chieftain Payasi was
residing at Setavya, a spot teeming with life, with much
grass-land and wood-land, with water and corn, on a
royal domain granted him by King Pasenadi of Kosala,
as a royal gift, with power over it as if he were the
king 2.

2. Now at that time there came over Payasi an evil
view of things to this effect : — ' Neither is there any
other world, nor are there beings reborn otherwise
than from parents, nor is there fruit or result of deeds
well done or ill done.'

[317] Now the brahmins and householders of Setavya
heard the news : — ' They say that the wanderer Master
Kassapa, disciple of the wanderer Gotama, walking
on tour with a great company of bhikkhus, to the
number of about five hundred, has arrived at Setavya
and is staying there to the north of the town, in the


1 The touching story of his birth is told in the Introductory Story
to the twelfth Jataka, translated in Rhys Davids's ' Buddhist Birth
Stories,' pp. 199 ff. He was declared by the Buddha to be the best
of the preachers in the Order (A. I, 24). Kumara was a nickname,
' The Boy ' (because he was Ordained so young), which distinguished
him from the other Kassapas in the Order, and clung to him even in
advanced years. It was the more appropriate, as kumara means
a boy of good family, a young gentleman, a master ; and Kassapa,
the son of a clansman, had been brought up at Pasenadi's court.

2 See Vol. I, p. 1 08, note 1.


35° XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D.ii. 317.

Siwsapa-tree Grove. Now regarding that Master
Kassapa, such is the excellent reputation that has been
raised abroad : — ' Wise and expert is he, abounding in
knowledge and learning, eloquent and excellent in
discourse, venerable too and an Arahant. And good is
it to interview Arahants like him.' Then the brahmins
and householders of Setavya, coming out from the town
in companies and bands from each district so that they
could be counted1, went by the north gate, to the
Siwsapa-tree Grove.

3. Now at that time Payasi, the chieftain, had gone
apart to the upper terrace of his house for siesta. And
seeing the people thus go by he said to his doorkeeper : —
' Why are the people of Setavya going forth like this
towards the Siwsapa-tree Grove ? ' [318] Then the
doorkeeper told him the news. And he said : — ' Then,
good doorkeeper, go to the brahmins and householders
of Setavya and say to them : — " Payasi, sirs, bids you
wait ; he will come himself to see the Wanderer
Master Kassapa." That Boy Kassapa will be win-
ning over at the outset those foolish and inexpert
brahmins and householders of Setavya to think : —
" There is both another world and there are beings
who are born not of parents, and there is fruit, and
result of deeds well done and ill done." But, my good
doorkeeper, these three things do not exist.'

' Even so, sir,' said the doorkeeper, and carried out
his master's bidding.

4. So Payasi, the chieftain, surrounded by the brah-
mins and householders of Setavya, came to the Si^sapa-
tree Grove, and finding the venerable Kassapa,
exchanged with him the greetings and compliments of
politeness and courtesy, and took his seat on one side.
[319] And as to the brahmins and householders of
Setavya, some of them bowed before the venerable
Kassapa and took their seats on one side ; some of
them exchanged with him the greetings and compli-
ments of politeness and courtesy and then took their

1 The expression is somewhat ambiguous. See the note on 1, 145.


D. ii. 320. REBIRTH AND KARMA. 35 I

seats on one side ; some of them saluted him with
joined hands and took their seats on one side ; some
of them called out their name and family and did
likewise, some of them took their seats on one side in
silence.

5. And when he was seated Payasi spoke thus to
the venerable Master Kassapa : —

' I, Master Kassapa, am of this opinion, of these
views : — Neither is there another world, nor are there
beings reborn not of parents, nor is there fruit or result
of deeds well done or ill done.'

' I, Prince, have neither seen or heard of any one
holding such a view, such an opinion. How then can
you declare, as you do, that " there neither is another
world, nor rebirth as inheritor of the highest heavens,
nor fruit or result of deeds well-done or ill-done " ?
Wherefore, Prince, I will cross-question you herein,
and do you reply in what way you may approve. What
think you, yon moon and sun, are they in this world or
in another world, are they divine or human ? '

' This moon and sun, Master Kassapa, are in another
world, not in this, they are gods, not human.'

' Then, Prince, let this be taken as evidence that
there is both another world, and rebirth as inheritor of
the highest heavens, and fruit and result of deeds done
well or ill:'

6. ' Even though Master Kassapa says thus, it still
appears to me that not one of these things exists.'

' Have you, Prince, any proof to establish that they
do not exist ? '

[320] ' I have, Master Kassapa.'

' As how ? '

' Here it is, Master Kassapa. I have had friends, com-
panions, relatives, men of the same blood as myself, who
have taken life, committed thefts, or fornication, have
uttered lying, slanderous, abusive, gossiping speech,
have been covetous, of malign thoughts, of evil opinions.
They anon have fallen ill of mortal suffering and
disease. When I had understood that they would not
recover from that illness, I have gone to them and


352 XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 320.

said : — " According to the views and opinion held, sirs,
by certain wanderers and brahmins, they who break
the precepts of morality, when the body breaks up
after death, are reborn into the Waste, the Woeful Way,
the Fallen Place, the Pit. Now you, sirs, have broken
those precepts. If what those reverent wanderers and
brahmins say is true, this, sirs, will be your fate. If
these things should befall you, sirs, come to me and
tell me, saying : — ' There is another world, there is
rebirth not of parents, there is fruit and result of deeds
well-done and ill-done.' You, sirs, are for me trust-
worthy and reliable, and what you say you have seen,
will be even so, just as if I myself had seen it." They
have consented to do this, saying, " Very good,"
[321] but they have neither come themselves, nor
dispatched a messenger. Now this, Master Kassapa,
is evidence for me that there is neither another world,
nor rebirth not by human parents, nor fruit or result
of deeds well done and ill.'

7. ' Well then, prince, I will yet ask you this, and do
you answer even as you think fit. What think you ?
Take the case of men who have taken a felon red-
handed and bring him up saying : — " My lord, this felon
was caught in the act ; inflict what penalty you wish."
He replies : — " Well then, sirs, bind this man securely,
his arms behind him, with a strong cord ; shave his
head ; lead him around, to the sound of a sharp drum,
from street to street, from cross-road to cross-road, and
out at the southern gate ; there, south of the town in
the place of execution, cut off his head." They, assent-
ing with " Very good," proceed to carry out these
orders, and, in the place of execution, make him sit
down. Now would the felo^ gain permission of this
sort from his executioners : " Let my masters, the
executioners, wait till I have visited my friends and
advisers, my kinsmen by blood, in this or that village
or town, and come back" ? [322] Or would the
executioners cut off the head of this vain talker ? '

1 They would not grant the permission, Master
Kassapa ; they would cut off his head.'


D. ii. 323. REBIRTH AND KARMA. 353


* But this felon, prince, is human and cannot get
leave from human executioners. How much less then
would your friends and relatives, after death, in the Pit,
gain permission from the keepers of the Pit, saying: —
" Let my masters, the Pit-keepers, wait till we have
gone and told the chieftain Payasi, that there is both
another world and rebirth other than of parents, and
fruit and result of deeds well-done and ill ? " Be this
exposition a proof to you, Prince, that these things
exist.'

8. ' Even though Master Kassapa says thus, it still
appears to me that not one of these things exists.'

' Have you, prince, any further proof to establish
that they do not exist ? '
1 I have, Master Kassapa.'
' As how ? '

[323] ' Here it is, Master Kassapa. I have had
friends and companions, kinsmen, men of the same
blood as myself, who have abstained from taking life,
from committing thefts, or fornication, from lying,
slandering, rude, or frivolous speech, who have not
coveted, or had malign thoughts or evil opinions. They
anon have fallen ill of mortal suffering and disease.
When I had understood that they would not recover
from that illness, I have gone to them and said :
" According, sirs, to the views and opinions held by
some Wanderers and Brahmins, they who keep the
precepts of morality, when the body breaks up, are
after death reborn into the bright and happy world.
Now you, sirs, have kept those precepts. If what
those reverend samaras and brahmins say is true, this,
sirs, will be your fate. If these things should befall
you, sirs, when you have been there reborn, come to
me and let me know that there is both another world,
rebirth other than of parents, and fruit and result of
deeds well-done and ill-done. You, sirs, are for me
trustworthy and reliable, and what you say you have
seen, will be even so, just as if I myself had seen it."
They have consented to do this, saying " Very good " ;
but they have not come and let me know, nor have
in. a a


A-- A


354 XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 323.

they dispatched a messenger. Now this again,
Master Kassapa, is evidence to me that [324] there
is neither another world, nor rebirth other than of
parentage, nor fruit and result of deeds well-done and
ill-done.'

9. ' Well then, Prince, I will make you a simile, for
by a simile some intelligent persons will recognize the
meaning of what is said. Just as if a man were plunged
head-under in a pit of mire. And you were to order
men saying : — " Well now, masters, pull the man out of
that pit." They, saying " Very good," were to comply
and pull him out. You were then to say to them : —
" Well now, masters, brush the mire smearing him
from off his body with split bamboo 1." And they
were to obey you. And you were to say to them : —
" Well now, masters, shampoo this man's body a treble
massage with yellow shampoo powder." And they
were to do so. And you were to say to them : — " Now,
masters, rub him with oil, and bathe him three times
using fine chunam." And they were to do so. And
you were to say to them : — " Well, masters, now dress
his hair 2." And they were to do so. [325] And you
were to say to them : — " Now, masters, deck him with
a costly garland and costly unguent and costly gar-
ments." And they were to do so. And you were to
say to them : — " Well, masters, take him up on to the
palace and amuse him with the pleasures of the five
senses." And they were to do so. Now what think
you, O chieftain ? Would this man, well bathed, well
anointed, shaved and combed, dressed, wreathed and
adorned, clad in clean raiment, taken to the upper
palace, and indulging in, surrounded by, treated to, the
five pleasures of sense, be desirous of being plunged
once more into that pit of mire ? '

' No indeed, Master Kassapa.'


1 No doubt a sort of brush made of split bamboo.

2 How elaborate were the coiffures used by men at this date may
be seen from the illustration in Rhys Davids's ' Buddhist India,'
p. 97.


D. ii. 327. REBIRTH AND KARMA. 355

' And why ?'

' Foul, Master Kassapa, is a pit of mire, foul and
counted as such, stinking, disgusting, repulsive, and
counted as such.'

' Even so, Prince, are human beings in the eyes of
the gods, foul and counted as such, stinking, disgust-
ing, repulsive, and counted as such. The smell of man
offends the gods a hundred leagues away. What then ?
Shall your friends and companions, your kinsmen and
connexions who, having kept the precepts, are reborn
into the bright and happy place, come and bring you
word that there is another world, that there is rebirth
other than by parentage, [326] that there is fruit and
result of deeds well-done and ill-done ? Let this
exposition, chieftain, be evidence to you that these
things exist.'

10. 'Even though Master Kassapa says so, it still
appears to me that not one of these things exists.'

' Have you any further evidence, prince ? ' . . .

1 1 have, Master Kassapa.'

'As how?'

' Here it is, Master Kassapa. I have had friends,
companions, kinsmen, men of the same blood as myself,
who kept the precepts, abstaining from taking life ;
from taking what was not given, from inchastity, lying
speech and strong intoxicating liquors. They anon
have fallen mortally ill ; and I, having told them how
some samaras and brahmins say that, after such a life,
one would be reborn in the communion of the Three-
and-Thirty Gods, have asked them, if they were so
reborn, to come and let me know that there was
another world, birth other than of parents, and fruit
and result of deeds well-done and ill-done. [327]
They have promised to do so, but they have neither
come and told me, nor sent a messenger. This, Master
Kassapa, is evidence to me that not one of those things
exists.'

ii. 'Well then, Prince, I will reply by asking you
something, and do you answer as you think fit. That
which, humanly speaking, is a century, this to the

a a 2


o


56 XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 327.


Three-and-Thirty Gods is one night and day. Of
such a night thirty nights are the month — of such a
month twelve months are the year — of such a year
the celestial thousand years are the life-span of the
Three-and-Thirty Gods. Those of whom you now
speak will have attained rebirth into the communion
of these Gods. If it should occur to them thus : —
" Let us for two or three days indulge ourselves, sur-
rounded by and steeped in the five pleasures of sense,
and thereafter let us go and tell the chieftain Payasi
that there is another world, rebirth other than of
parents, and fruit and result of deeds well-done and
ill-done" — would they then have come to you, and
told you so ? '

' Certainly not, Master Kassapa ; for we should have
been dead long before. But who lets Master Kassapa
know all these things : — that there are Three-and-
Thirty Gods, or that the Three-and-Thirty Gods live
so many years ? We do not believe him when he says
these things.' [328]

' That, Prince, is just as if there were a man born
blind who could not see objects as dark or bright, as
blue, yellow, red or brown ; who could not see things
as smooth or rough, nor the stars, nor moon, nor sun.
And he were to say : — " There are none of these things,
nor any one capable of seeing them. I don't know
them, I don't see them ; therefore they don't exist."
Would one so speaking, speak rightly, Prince ? '

' Not so, Master Kassapa. The visual objects of
which you speak do exist, and so does the faculty of
seeing them. [329] To say " I don't know them, I
don't see them ; therefore they don't exist" : that would
not be speaking rightly.'

' But even so, methinks, do you, Prince, talk like
the blind man in my parable when you say : — " But
who lets Master Kassapa know that there are Three-
and-Thirty Gods, or that the Three-and-Thirty Gods
live so many years ? We do not believe him when he
says these things." For, Prince, the other world is not,
as you imagine, to be regarded with this fleshly eye.


X>. ii. 330. REBIRTH AND KARMA. 357

Those Wanderers and Brahmins who haunt the lonely
and remote recesses of the forest, where noise, where
sound there hardly is, they there abiding strenuous,
ardent, aloof, purify the eye divine ; they by that puri-
fied eye divine, passing the vision of men, see both
this world and that other world, and beings reborn not
of parents. In this way, Prince, is the other world to
be seen, and not, even as you imagine, by this fleshly
eye. Let this be a proof to you that there is another
world, that there are beings reborn not of parents,
that there is fruit and result of deeds well-done and
ill-done.'

12. 'Even though Master Kassapa says so, [330]
yet it still appears to me that not one of these things
exists.'

' Have you any further evidence, Prince ? '

' I have, Master Kassapa.'

'As how?'

' Here it is, Master Kassapa. I see Wanderers and
Brahmins moral and of virtuous dispositions, fond of
life, averse from dying, fond of happiness, shrinking
from sorrow. Then I think, Master Kassapa : — " If
these good Wanderers and Brahmins were to know
this — 'When once we are dead we shall be better off'
— then these good men would take poison, or stab
themselves, or put an end to themselves by hanging,
or throw themselves from precipices. And it is because
they do not know that, once dead, they will be better
off, that they are fond of life, averse from dying, fond
of happiness, disinclined for sorrow. This, Master
Kassapa, is for me evidence that there is no other
world, no beings reborn otherwise than of parents, no
fruit and no result of deeds well and ill-done.'

13. 'Well then, Prince, I will make you a simile,
for by way of a simile some wise men discern the
meaning of what is spoken. Once upon a time, Prince,
there was a brahmin who had two wives. By one he
had a son, ten or twelve years of age ; the other was
pregnant and near her time. Then the brahmin
died. Now the boy said to his mother's co-wife : — ■


358 XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 330.

" Whatever treasure there is, lady, or grain, or silver,
or gold, all that is mine. [33l] There is nothing here
for you whatever ; make over to me, lady, the heritage
of my father ! " Then the brahminee made answer to
him: — "Wait, my lad, till my child is born. If 'twill
be a boy, one portion shall be his ; if a girl, she shall
wait on you."

'But the boy reiterated his claim again and yet again.
Then the brahminee, taking a sword, entered an inner
room and ripped up her belly, saying : — " If I can only
find out whether 'tis a boy or a girl." Thus did she
destroy both her own life and her unborn infant, and
her wealth also, through the foolish and thoughtless
way in which, seeking a heritage, she met with ruin
and disaster. Even so you, Prince, foolish and thought-
less that you are, will meet with ruin and disaster by
seeking without wisdom for another world. [332] Moral
and virtuous Wanderers and Brahmins do not force
maturity on that which is unripe ; they, being wise,
wait for that maturity. The virtuous have need of
their life. In proportion to the length of time such
men abide here, is the abundant merit that they pro-
duce and accomplish for the welfare of many, for the
happiness of many, out of compassion for the world,
for the advantage, the welfare, the happiness of gods
and men. Let this then be a proof to you, Prince, that
there is another world, that there is rebirth other than
of parentage, that there is fruit and result of deeds
well and ill-done.'

14. 'Even though Master Kassapa says so, it still
appears to me that not one of these things exists.'

1 Have you further evidence, Prince ? '

' I have, Master Kassapa.' 1

' As how, Prince ? '

1 Here it is, Master Kassapa. Take the case of
men who having taken a felon red-handed bring him
up, saying : — " This felon, my lord, was caught in the
act. Inflict on him what penalty you wish." And I
should say : — " Well then, my masters, throw this man
alive into a jar ; close the mouth of it and cover it


D. ii. 334. SEARCH FOR THE SOUL. 359

over with wet leather, put over that a thick cement
of moist clay, put it on to a furnace and kindle a fire."
[333] They saying " Very good " would obey me and . . .
kindle a fire. When we knew that the man was dead,
we should take down the jar, unbind and open the
mouth, and quickly observe it, with the idea : — " Per-
haps we may see the soul of him coming out ! " We
don't see the soul of him coming out ! This, master
Kassapa, is for me evidence that there neither is
another world, nor rebirth other than by parentage,
nor fruit or result of deeds well or ill-done.'

15. ' Well then, Prince, I will in reply ask you some-
thing, and do you answer as you may please. Do you
not admit, Prince, that, when you are taking siesta,
you see dreams of enjoyment in garden, grove, country,
or lake side ? '

' I do admit it, Master Kassapa.'

' Are you at that time watched over by attendant
women — hunchbacks and dwarfs, and maidens * and
girls ? '

' That is so, Master Kassapa.'

' Do they see your soul entering or leaving you ? '

[334] ' Not so, Master Kassapa.'

4 So they who are living do not see the soul of you
who are living entering or leaving you (when you
dream). How then will you see the soul of a dead
person entering or leaving him ? Let this be a proof
to you, Prince, that those things do exist.'

16. 'Even though Master Kassapa says so, it still
appears to me that not one of those things exists.'

' Have you any further evidence, Prince ? '

' I have, Master Kassapa.'

4 As how ? '

' Take the case, Master K assapa, of men taking a felon
red-handed, and bringing him up saying : — " My lord,
we caught this felon in the act. Inflict what penalty


1 Velamika, 'very young and childish,' says Buddhaghosa here.
Above, p. 231, it seems to be a clan name, but used in a similar
connexion.


1


60 XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 334.


you wish." And I say: — " Well then, my masters,
take this man and weigh him alive ; then strangle him
with a bowstring and weigh him again." And they do
so. While he lives, he is more buoyant, supple, wieldy.
When he is dead, he is weightier, stiffer, unwieldier.
This, Master Kassapa, is evidence for me that there is
neither another world, nor rebirth other than by human
parentage, nor fruit nor result of deeds well-done or
ill-done.'

1 7. ' Well now, Prince, I will give you a simile [335],
for by way of a simile some wise men discern the mean-
ing of what is said. It is just as if, Prince, a man
were to weigh in a balance a ball of iron that had been
heated all day, and was burning and glowing with heat ;
and were to weigh it later on in a balance when it was
cool and quenched. When would that ball of iron be
lighter, softer and more plastic ? When it was burn-
ing and glowing with heat, or when it was cool and
quenched ? '

' When, Master Kassapa, that ball of iron, with its
lambent and gaseous concomitants, is burning and
glowing with heat, then it is lighter, softer, more plastic,
but when, without those lambent and gaseous concomi-
tants, it is cool and quenched, it is then heavier, more
rigid, less plastic'

' Even so, Prince, when this body has its concomitants
of life, heat and intelligence, then it is lighter, softer
and more plastic. But when it lacks those three
concomitants, then it is heavier, more rigid, less plastic.

1 Let this, Prince, be a proof to you that there is both
another world, rebirth other than of parents, and fruit
and result of deeds well and ill-done.'

1 8. ' Even though Master Jvassapa says this, it still
appears to me that not one of those things exists.'

' Have you any further evidence, Prince ? '

' I have, Master Kassapa.'

' What might that be like ?'

' Take the case, Master Kassapa, of the men taking
a felon red-handed and bringing him up, saying : — " My
lord, this felon was caught in the act. [336] Inflict on


D. ii. 337. REBIRTH AND KARMA. 36 1

him what penalty you wish." And I say: — " Well, my
masters, kill this man by stripping off cuticle and skin
and flesh and sinews and bones and marrow." They
do so. And when he is half dead, I say : — " Lay him
on his back, and perhaps we may see the soul of him
pass out." And they do so, but we see the passing of
no soul. Then I say: — "Well then, lay him bent
over ... on his side ... on the other side . . . stand
him up . . . stand him on his head . . . smite him with
your hand . . . with clods ... on this side ... on that
side ... all over; perhaps we may see the soul of him
pass out." And they do so, but we see the passing of
no soul. He has sight and there are forms, but the
organ does not perceive them ; he has hearing and
there are sounds, but the organ does not perceive
them ; he has smell and there are odours, [337] but the
organ does not perceive them, he has a tongue and
there are tastes, but the organ does not perceive them ;
he has a body and there are tangibles, but the organ
does not perceive them. This, Master Kassapa, is for
me evidence that there is neither another world, nor re-
birth other than of parents, nor fruit or result of deeds
well or ill-done.'

19. ' Well then, Prince, I will give you a simile, for
by way of a simile some wise men discern the meaning
of what is said. Once upon a time, Prince, a certain
trumpeter, taking his trumpet of chank-shell, travelled
to the folk on the border. When he came to a certain
village, he stood in its midst and blew thrice on his
trumpet, then laying it on the ground sat down beside
it. Now, Prince, those border folk thought: — "Whose
is this sound so charming, so lovely, so sweet, so con-
straining, so enervating ? " Coming together they
asked the trumpeter. " This, my masters, is what men
call a trumpet, the sound whereof is so charming, so
lovely, so sweet, so constraining, so enervating." They
laid the trumpet on its back and said : — " Speak, master
trumpet ! speak, master trumpet ! " No sound did the
trumpet make. They laid the trumpet curving down-
ward, on this side, on that side, they stood it upright,


A.. *


362 XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 337.

they stood it topsy turvy, they struck it with their hands,
with a clod, with a stick, with a sword, on one side, on
the other, on every side, saying : — " Speak, master
trumpet ! speak, master trumpet ! " [338] Then, Prince,
the trumpeter thought : — " How silly are these border
born men ! Why will they seek so senselessly for the
trumpet's sound ? " And while they looked on, he
took his trumpet, blew thrice upon it and, taking it
with him, went away. Then, Prince, those border born
men thought thus : — " When forsooth there was with
that trumpet a man, and an effort, and air, that same
trumpet made sounds. But when there was with it
neither man, nor effort, nor air, that same trumpet
made no sounds." Even so, Prince, when this body
has its concomitants of life, heat and intelligence, then
it goes about and comes back, it stands and sits and
lies down, it sees forms with the eye, hears sounds with
the ear, smells odours with the smell, tastes tastes with
the tongue, touches the tangible with the body, cognizes
things with the mind. But when it lacks those three
concomitants, it can do none of these things. Let this,
Prince, be to you a proof that there both is another
world, rebirth other than of parents, and fruit and result
of deeds well and ill-done.'

20. ' Even though Master Kassapa says this, [339] it
still appears to me that there is neither another world,
nor rebirth other than of parents, nor fruit or result of
deeds well or ill-done.'

' Have you any further evidence, Prince?'
' I have, Master Kassapa.'
' What may that be like ? '

* Take the case, Master Kassapa, of men who have
taken a felon red-handed and bring him up, saying : —
" My lord, we caught this felon in the act ; inflict on
him what penalty you wish." And I say : — " Well, my
masters, flay this man alive, perchance we may see the
soul of him passing out." They do so, but no passing
of the soul of him do we see. And in cutting out his
integument, and his flesh, and his nerves, and breaking
his bones and extracting the marrow thereof, still no


D. ii. 341. REBIRTH AND KARMA. 363

soul of him do we see. This, Master Kassapa, is for me
evidence that there is neither another world, nor rebirth
other than of parents, nor fruit or result of deeds well
or ill-done/

21. ' Well now, Prince, I will give you a simile, for
it is by way of a simile that some intelligent men discern
the meaning of what is spoken. Once upon a time,
Prince, a fire-worshipping Ja^ila was dwelling in a leaf-
hut in a woodland spot. Now the people of a certain
country-side migrated. And their leader, after spend-
ing one night near the Ja/ila's hermitage, went away.
[340] Then the Ja/ila thought: — " If I were to go to
that leader's camp, I might perhaps get something
useful." And rising up betimes he came to the leader's
camp, and there he saw, abandoned and lying on its
back a little baby. And when he saw it he thought : —
" It is not fit that I should let a human being die while
I look on. What if I were to carry this baby to my
hermitage, and foster, tend, and rear it ? ' So he
carried the baby to his hermitage, and fostered, tended,
and reared it. When the boy had attained the age of
ten or twelve years, it happened that the Ja/ila had
something or other to do in the country-side. So he
said to the boy : — " I want to go to the country-side, my
lad ; keep up the fire ; do not let it go out. If it should
go out, here is a hatchet, here are sticks, here is the fire
drill, so that if you do let the fire out, you can rekindle
it again." And having thus instructed the boy, the
Ja/ila went off to the country-side. Intent upon his
play, the boy let the fire out. Then he thought : —
" Father told me, ' Tend the fire, my lad ; let it not go
out. If it should go out, here is a hatchet, here are
sticks, here is the fire drill, so that if you do let the fire
out, you can rekindle it again.' What if I were now
to do so ? " [341] Then the boy chopped the fire drill
with the hatchet, thinking :— " Perhaps that's how I
shall get fire." No fire got he. He split the fire drill
in twain, in three, four, five, ten, a hundred pieces, he
made it into piecemeal, he then pounded it in a mortar,
and winnowed it in the wind, thinking that so he might


364 XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D- ii. 341.

perhaps get fire. No fire got he. Then the Ja/ila,
having accomplished his business, came back to his
own hermitage and said to the boy : — " Why, child,
you have let the fire out ! " " Father, the fire went
out because I was busy at my game. Then I thought
of what you had told me, and I set about rekindling
it. And I chopped the fire drill with the hatchet to
get fire, but no fire came. And I went on till I had
smashed the fire drill into atoms, pounded it in a mortar
and winnowed it in the wind, but I never got any fire ! "
Then the Ja^ila thought : — " How silly, how unin-
telligent is the lad ! Why will he be seeking fire in
this senseless manner ? " And while the boy looked on,
he took a fire drill, and making fire said to him : — [342]
" This is how to make fire, my lad. One doesn't try
to get it as you, so silly and unintelligent, were trying."
Even so, Prince, have you, silly and unintelligent,
sought after another world. Renounce, Prince, this
evil set of opinions. Let them not involve you for
long in bale and sorrow ! '

22. ' Even though Master Kassapa says this, I still
cannot bring myself to renounce this evil set of opinions.
King Pasenadi the Kosalan knows me, and so do
foreign kings, as holding to the creed and the opinion
that there is neither another world nor rebirth other than
of parents, nor fruit or result of deeds well and ill-done.
If I, Master Kassapa, renounce these opinions, people
will say of me : — " How silly is Prince Payasi, how
unintelligent, how badly he grasps anything ! " In wrath
thereat will I keep to it. In guile will I keep to it.
In self-respect will I keep to it ! '

23. ' Well then, Prince, I will give you a simile ;
for it is by way of a simile that some intelligent men
discern the meaning of what has been said. Once
upon a time, Prince, a great caravan of a thousand
carts was going from the East country into the West
country. Wherever it went, it consumed swiftly straw,
wood, water and verdure. Now in that caravan were
two caravan leaders, each commanding one half of the
carts. [343] And this occurred to them : —


D. ii. 345- REBIRTH AND KARMA. 365

' " This is a great caravan, one of a thousand carts.
Wherever we go, we consume everything. What if
we were to divide this caravan into two, five hundred
carts in each."

' So they divided that caravan into two equal
portions. Then one of the leaders collected large
quantities of straw, wood and water, and started [his
carts]. On the second or third march the leader saw
a swarthy red-eyed man coming from the opposite
direction, armed with a quiver, wearing a lotus wreath,
his garments and hair wet, and driving a chariot drawn
by asses, its wheel splashed with mud. When he saw
this man he said : — " Whence come you, Sir ? ';

1 " From such and such a district "

' " Whither go you ? "

' " To such and such a district."

' " Has there, Sir, been any great fall of rain recently
in the jungle ? "

1 " Yes indeed, Sir, there has been a great rain in
the jungle just in front, the roads are well watered,
there is much grass and wood and water. [344] Throw
away the grass and wood and water, Sir, you have
already got ; with light-laden carts you will go quite
quickly ; do not tire your teams."

' Then the leader told his carters what the man had
said, and bade them throw away their provender and
wood, that the caravan might travel more quickly.

' " So be it, sir," the carters replied, and did so. But
at their first camp they saw no grass or wood or water,
nor at the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth or seventh
camp. So they all met with ruin and disaster. And
then that fiend, the yakkha, devoured all the men and
the cattle in that caravan, leaving only the bones
behind.

' When the second caravan leader knew that the
other caravan had got well on its way, he took in large
supplies of grass and wood and water and set out.
And he too met a swarthy red-eyed man, [345] and
exchanged with him the same remarks, and was also
bidden to throw away his provender.


366 XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 345.

1 Then that leader said to his carters : " This man,
sirs, says that there has recently been much rain in
the jungle, that the roads are watered, and there is
plenty of grass and wood and water. And he advises
us to throw away our provender, so that, with lightened
carts we may travel quicker and not weary our teams.
But this man, 6irs, is not a friend of ours, nor a kins-
man, nor of our blood. Why should we act as if we
trusted him ? Our stock of provender is not to be
thrown away ; let the caravan proceed with the goods
we brought ; let us not part with what we have."

1 " So be it, sir,*'* agreed the carters, and went on
with the stock they had loaded. And at seven suc-
cessive camping places they saw no grass or wood or
water ; [346] but they saw the other caravan that had
come to grief. And they saw the skeletons of the men
and cattle devoured by that yakkha fiend.

1 Then the caravan leader said to the carters : " That
caravan, my masters, met with ruin and disaster, through
having that silly caravan leader for its guide. Well
then, let us leave here such of our wares as are of little
value, and take from that caravan such wares as are of
great value. " So be it, master," replied the carters,
and made the transfer, and passed safely through the
jungle, through having this wise caravan leader for
their guide.1

1 Even so you, Prince, silly and unintelligent, will
meet with ruin and disaster in that you seek so sense-
lessly after another world, even like that former caravan
leader. They who fancy that they can believe what-
ever they hear, will meet with ruin and disaster, even
like those carters. Renounce, Prince, this evil set of
opinions ; renounce them, I say ! Let them not involve
you long in bale and sorrow ! '

24. ' Even though Master Kassapa says this, I still

1 This story has been turned into a Jataka by identifying the hero
as the Buddha in a previous birth, and has been made the first story
in the collection afterwards put together as the Jataka Book. It is
one of twelve stories in that book found in the older texts. See
'Buddhist India,' p. 195.


D. ii. 348. REBIRTH AND KARMA. 367

cannot bring myself to renounce this evil set of opinions.
King Pasenadi the Kosalan knows me, and so do foreign
kings, as holding to the creed and the opinion [347] that
there is neither another world, nor rebirth other than of
parents by human parentage, nor fruit or result of deeds
well and ill-done. If I, master Kassapa, renounce these
opinions people will say of me : " How silly is prince
Payasi, how unintelligent, how badly he grasps any-
thing !" In wrath thereat will I keep to it. In guile
will I keep to it. In self-respect will I keep to it ! '

25. 'Well then, Prince, I will give you a simile, for
it is by way of a simile that some intelligent men discern
the meaning of what has been said. Once upon a time,
Prince, a certain swineherd was going from his own
village to another village. There he saw a heap of
dry dung thrown away. Seeing it he thought : — " That's
a lot of dry dung thrown away which will feed my pigs.
What if I were to carry it away ? " So he spread out
his cloak and collecting the dry dung tied it into a
bundle and lifting it on to his head went on. In the
after-part of his journey there fell a heavy shower of
rain out of season. He, splashed with muck to his nail-
tips, bearing his oozing, dripping dung-burden, went on
his way. And men seeing him said : — " Gramercy, you
must be mad, you must be out of your senses ! How
can you tote along that oozing, dripping load of dung,
splashed with muck to your nail-tips ? ' " It's you that
are mad, you that are out of your senses ; by this my pigs
will get food." [348] Even so, methinks, Prince, do you
talk, like this dung-carrying simile. Renounce, Prince,
this evil set of opinions, renounce them, I say ! Let
them not be long a cause of bale and sorrow to you.'

26. 'Even though Master Kassapa says this, I cannot
bring myself to renounce this evil set of opinions. King
Pasenadi the Kosalan knows me, and so do foreign kings,
as holding to the creed and the opinion that there is
neither another world, nor rebirth other than of parents
by human parentage, nor fruit or result of deeds well or
ill-done. If I, Master Kassapa, renounce these opinions,
people will say of me: — " How silly is Prince Payasi,how


368 XXIII. PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 348.

unintelligent, how bad is his grasp of things ! " In anger
thereat will I keep to it. In guile will I keep to it. In
self-respect will I keep to it ! '

27. ' Well then, Prince, I will give you a simile, for it
is by way of a simile that some intelligent men discern
the meaning of what is said. Once upon a time, Prince,
two gamesters were playing with dice. One gamester
swallowed as it came each adverse die. The other
gamester saw him do this and said: — "Look here, friend,
you've won outright ; give me the dice ; I will make
a votive offering of them." " Good, friend," said the
other, and handed over the dice. Then the second
gamester smeared over the dice with poison, and pro-
posed to the former : — " Come along, friend, let's play."
" Good, friend," replied the other. Again, therefore,
they played, and again that gamester swallowed each
adverse die. [349] The second gamester saw him doing
so and said : —

The man knows not the swallowed die
With sharpest burning is smeared o'er.

Swallow, you false cheat, swallow now !
Bitter the hour at hand for you ! l

1 Even like the simile of the gamester, Prince, methinks
is what you say. Renounce, Prince, this evil set of
opinions, renounce them, I say ! Let them not be long
a source of bale and sorrow to you ! '

28. ' Even though Master Kassapa says this, I still
cannot bring myself to renounce this evil set of opinions.
King Pasenadi the Kosalan knows me, and so do foreign


1 This story is also in the Jataka Book, I, 380. The modus
operandi of the cheat is rendered obscure by our ignorance of the
game played. Liiders in his ' Wurfelspiel der alten Inder ' has
shown that the dice were seeds of a tree called the Vibhitaka, and
that the usual game was probably to throw a number of seeds on
a board, having previously fixed on a certain number. The seeds
fell some upright, some on their sides. Only the upright ones
counted. If they were less than the agreed number it was a draw ; if
equal the thrower won and threw again ; if more he lost, and lost the
throw. An extra seed was called the kali, 'the unlucky die.' This
the cheat seems to have managed to pick up, and swallow.


D.ii.35°- REBIRTH AND KARMA. 369

kings, as holding to the creed and the opinion that
there is neither another world, nor rebirth other
than of parents, nor fruit or result of deeds well or
ill-done. If I, Master Kassapa, renounce these opinions,
people will say : " How silly is Prince Payasi, how un-
intelligent, how bad is his grasp of things ! ' In wrath
thereat will I keep to it. In guile will I keep to it. In
self-respect will I keep to it.'

29. 'Well then, Prince, I will give you a simile, for it
is by way of a simile that some intelligent men discern
the meaning of what is said. Once upon a time, Prince,
a certain country-side migrated. And one man said
to his crony : — " Let's go friend, to that country-side ;
perhaps we may come upon some treasure." " Good,
friend," assented the other. And they came to where,
in that country-side, there was a certain village street.
[350] There they saw a heap of hemp thrown away.
Then one said to the other : " Here's a heap of hemp:
do you make some into a bundle, I'll do the same and
we'll carry it away." The other consented, and they
did so.

' Bearing this burden they went on to another village
street. There they saw a heap of hempen thread
thrown away, and one said to the other : — " This heap
of hempen thread thrown away is just the thing we
want hemp for. Well then, friend, you throw away
your load of hemp, I'll throw away mine, and we'll take
away each a load of hempen thread." " I've brought
this load of hemp a long way, friend, and it's well tied
up — that's enough for me ; you choose for yourself."
So the former changed his load for one of hempen
thread.

1 Then they came to another village street. There
they saw a heap of hempen cloths. And the one
said to the other : — " This heap of hempen cloths is
just the thing we want hemp for, or hempen thread
for. Well then, friend, do you throw away your load
of hemp, I'll throw away my load of hempen thread,
and we'll each take a load of hempen cloth." " I've
brought this load of hemp a long way, friend, and it's
in. b b


37° PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 350.

well tied up — that's enough for me ; you choose for
yourself." So the former changed his load for one of
hempen cloth.

' Then they came to another village street. There
they saw a heap of flax ; and to another where they
saw linen thread ; and to another where they saw linen
cloth. And at each place the one crony made a change
for the better, the other retained his hemp. [35i]
Further they saw cotton-down, cotton thread and
calico ; and the same thing happened. Further they
saw iron, copper, tin, lead, silver, gold. So that in the
end the one crony had a load of gold, the other of hemp.

' So they came to their own village. There the
crony who brought a load of hemp pleased neither
his parents, nor his own family, nor his friends, and
won neither pleasure or happiness. [352] But the other
with his load of gold both gave and won pleasure.

' Even like the simile of the load of hemp, methinks
Prince, is what you say. Renounce, Prince, this evil
set of opinions, renounce them, I say ! Let them not
be long a source of bale and sorrow to you.'

30. 'With Master Kassapa's first simile I was pleased,
I was charmed ; moreover I wanted to hear his ready
wit in questions, for I regarded Master Kassapa as
one who was to be opposed. It is wonderful, Master
Kassapa, it is marvellous! just as if one were to set
up what has been upset, or were to reveal that which
has been hidden away, or were to point out the road
to the bewildered, or were to bring a lamp into the
darkness, so that they that have eyes may see — even
so has the truth been declared in many a figure by
Master Kassapa. And I, even I, betake myself for
refuge to Gotama the Exahed One, to the Doctrine
and to the Brotherhood. May Master Kassapa accept
me as a disciple, as one who from this day forth as
long as life endures, has taken him as his guide. And
I should like, Master Kassapa, to offer a great sacrifice.
Let Master Kassapa instruct me herein that it may
bring me long welfare and happiness.'

31. 'At the sort of sacrifice, Prince, where oxen are


D. ii. 354. THE RIGHT SACRIFICE. 37 1

slain, or goats, or fowls and pigs, or clivers creatures
are put an end to ; [353] and those that take part in
the sacrifice have wrong views, wrong intention, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong en-
deavour, wrong mindfulness, wrong rapture, such a
sacrifice, Prince, is neither of great fruitfulness nor of
great profit, nor of great renown, nor of widespread
effect \ It is just as if a farmer, Prince, were to enter
a wood taking with him plough and seed, and were
there, in an untilled tract, in unfavourable soil, among
unuprooted stumps, to plant seeds that were broken,
rotten, spoilt by wind and heat, out of season, not in
good condition, and the god were not to give good
rain in due season. Would those seeds attain to
growth, increase and expansion, or would the farmer
2fet abundant returns ? '

1 No indeed, Master Kassapa.'

1 So is it, Prince, with that sort of sacrifice. But
where, Prince, neither oxen are slain, nor goats, nor
fowls and pigs, nor are divers creatures put an end to,
and those that partake of the sacrifice have right
views, right intention, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right endeavour, right mindfulness, right
rapture, such a sacrifice is of great fruitfulness, of great
profit, of great renown, of widespread effect. It is
just as if a farmer, Prince, were to enter a wood,
taking with him plough and seed, and were there, in
a well-tilled tract, in favourable soil well cleared of
stumps, [354] to plant seed that was unbroken, free
from mildew, unspoilt by wind or heat, in season and
in good condition, and the god were to give good rain
in due season. Would those seeds grow, increase, ex-
pand, and would the farmer get abundant returns ? '

' He would indeed, Master Kassapa/

' So is it, Prince, with that sort of sacrifice, where . . .
no creatures are put to death, and those that take part


1 So of the sacrifice intended by the Very Reverend Sir Gold-stick
Sharp- tooth in the KuVadanta. See especially above, I, 163.

B b 2


372 PAYASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 354.

therein are of high character. Such a sacrifice is of
great fruitfulness, profit, renown and widespread effect.'

32. Then Prince Payasi instituted a gift to Wan-
derers and Brahmins, the poor, wayfarers, beggars and
petitioners. In that gift such food was given as gruel
and scraps of food, and coarse robes with ball-fringes \
And at that gift a young brahmin named Uttara was
passed over 2. When the largesse had been distributed
he mocked, saying : ' By this largesse I have met Prince
Payasi in this world, but how about the next?3' [355]
Payasi heard of this, and sent word to Uttara asking
him if it was true that he was saying this ?

4 Yes, sir,' replied Uttara.

' But why have you been saying this, my dear
Uttara ? Do not we who are seeking merit look for
result from caving- ? '

1 In your gift, sir, such food as gruel and broken
meats are given which you, sir, would not touch with
your foot, much less eat ; also coarse ball-fringed robes
which you, sir, would not deign to use as carpets,
much less to wear. You, sir, are pleasant and dear
to us ; how are we to associate what is pleasant and
dear with what is unpleasant?'

'Well then, my dear Uttara, do you arrange that
such food shall be given as I eat, and such garments
be given as I wear.'

'Very good, sir,' replied Uttara, and did so4.

1 To keep the robes down.

2 Vyava/o. This became almost a technical term in connexion
with largesse. It is literally 'hindered'; but when the things to be
given were too limited as compared with the number of applicants,
some had to be passed over. They were dana-vyava/a 'hindered
at the largesse ' (Jat. Ill, 129). Compare D. II, 141 ; Sum. I, 296 ;
Jat. I, 89; VVA. 298. But heie perhaps it may simply mean
' objected to the largesse.'

3 Literally ' do not associate (with him) in the next.' The gibe
intended must be very nearly as we have rendered. But both the
reading of the text and the grammatical construction are doubtful.
The word we have rendered 'mocked' (uddissati) has only been
found here. Perhaps it means ' showed (the matter) up,' which
comes to much the same as to point the finger of mockery.

' Apparently at his own cost.


X>. ii. 357. THE RIGHT WAY TO GIVE. 373

[356] Now prince Payasi, inasmuch as he had be-
stowed his gift without thoroughness, not with his own
hands, without due thought, as something discarded,
was, after his death, reborn into the communion of the
Four Great Kings1, in the empty mansion of the
Acacia. But the youth Uttara, who had objected to
that gift and had bestowed his gift thoroughly, with
his own hands, with due thought, not as something
discarded, was, after his death, reborn in a bright and
happy world, into the communion of the Three-and-
Thirty Gods.

2)2,- Now at that time the venerable Gavampati2
used frequently to go for siesta to the empty mansion
of the Acacia. And Payasi, now one of the gods, came
up to him and, saluting him, stood on one side. To
him so standing the venerable Gavampati said : — ' Who
art thou, friend ? '

' I, sir, am prince Payasi.'

1 Wert thou not once of the opinion that there was
no other world, no rebirth other than of parents, no
fruit or result of deeds well or ill-done ? '

[357] ' I was indeed, sir, but through his reverence
Kumara Kassapa I detached myself from that evil set
of opinions.'

' But the youth Uttara, who objected to thy gift,
friend, whereunto has he been reborn ? '

' He, Sir, having objected to my gift, and having
himself bestowed a gift thoroughly, with his own hands,
with due thought, not as something discarded, has,
since he died, been reborn in the bright and happy
world, into the communion of the Three-and-Thirty
Gods. I, sir, inasmuch as I bestowed my gift without
thoroughness, not with my own hand, without due
thought, as something discarded, was after my death

1 The guardian spirits of the four quarters. See the Introduction
to the Maha-samaya Suttanta.

2 He had been the son of a merchant at Benares ; and had been
received into the Order by the Buddha at the very beginning of his
career as a teacher (Vin. I, 19). This legend supposes him, still a
man, going for meditation to the lower heavens.


->74 XXIII. PAVASI SUTTANTA. D. ii. 357.


0


reborn into the communion of the Four Great Kings,
in the empty mansion of Acacia. Wherefore, Gavam-
pati, Sir, go thou into the world of men and tell
them : — " Give ye your gifts with thoroughness, with
your own hands, with due thought, and give not as if
ye were discarding somewhat. For so did not prince
Payasi ; and he after his death was reborn into the
communion of the Four Great Kings, in the empty
mansion of the Acacia. But the youth Uttara, who
bestowed his gifts in the right way, was after his death
reborn in the bright and happy world, into the com-
munion of the Three-and-Thirty Gods."

34. So the venerable Gavampati came back to the
world of men, and there told these things.


The Payasi Dialogue is ended.


INDEX I.

PRINCIPAL SUBJECTS AND
PROPER NAMES.


Accuta, a fairy, 290.

Ajata-sattu, king of Magadha, 78,
187

Akanittba, gods, 319.

Ambapali, courtezan, 102-105.

Ambasanda, village in Magadha, 299.

Ananda, 158-160, 177.

Anejaka, fairies, 290.

Anuruddha, 176, 177.

Arahant, 167 ; his qualities com-
pared with those of a Buddha,
2, S8, 89.

Architecture, 210-214.

Ariftj6akas, fairies, 290.

Aryan, truths, the four, 96, 3 37—
345 ; merchants, 92.

Asavas, gods, 291.
Taints, 28.

Assakas, a tribe, 270.

Assatarc Nagas, 289.

Asuras, 289. See Titans.

Babe, visible in the womb, 10.

Bandhuman, raja, father of Vipassi
Buddha, 1 3 ff .

Bali, god, 289.

Bhadda, name of Suriya-vaccasa,
302, 320.

Bharahat Tope, evidence of, 4.

Bharata, king, 270.

Bharatas, the seven, kings, 270.

Bhunjatt, wife of Vessavawa, 305.

Bimbisara, king of Magadha, 238,
240.

Birth, results of, 21, 52; definition
of, 338 ; cause of, 51.

Bodhisatta, Wisdom-Being, 1, 2;
various changes in the meaning
of the term, 3 ; sixteen events
at the birth of a, 8-12 ; earth-
quakes at incarnation of, 116.


Brahma, verses by, 32, 175 ; recites
Patimokkha, 37; portent of,
243, 264; commune with, 272-
275.

Brick Hall, at Nadika, 97, 237, 239.

Buddha, an Awakened One, at first
referred to an Arahant, 2 ; after-
wards acquired its present tech-
nical sense, 2; the Buddha never
called himself the B., 2 ; how
far a B. can recollect previous
births, 4 ; his div'ne hearing, 5 ;
the seven Buddhas, details as
to, 6, 7; B.'s last meal, 137;
modes of addressing a B., 140 ;
only one B. at a time, 263.

Buddhism, the Buddha's last sum-
mary of, 127-129; description
of, 250; result of, 280, 281.

Cairn, burial, four people worthy
of, 156; over the Buddha's
ashes, 1 87-1 91.

Candana, a god, 288.

Channa, not to be spoken to, 171.

Christianity and Buddhism, 311, 313,
323.

Chunda, a bhikkhu, 147; called
Chundaka, 147.

Chunda, copper-smith, 137 ff., 147,
148.

Citta-sena, a god, 288.

Cloth of gold, 145.

Conversion, two talks leading to,
34-36.

Cosmogony, the inter-world space,
9, 12, 296 ; ten thousand world-
systems, 9, 1 2 ; three worlds of
Gods, 9, 12; highest heavens,
39-41, 67.

Council at Rajagaha, 76, 77, 169.


376


DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.


Courtezan, the converted, 102 ff.

Craving, 339-343-

Cremation, of a king, 155, 182; of

the Buddha, i8off.
Cries, the ten, 152.

Danaveghasas, gods, 289.
Danta-pura, in Kalinga, 270.
Death, with longing in one's heart,

226; when full of noble thoughts,

229.
Delight, heaven of, 8, 9, 11 ; eyes

blink not there, 17.
Deliverance, from delusion, eight

stages of, 119.
Desire, suppression of, not taught in

Buddhism, 83; source of, 311.
Dhataratt&i, god of the East quarter,

259, 287.
king, 270 ; Naga, 289.
Digestion, ancient theory of, 208,

209.
Disam-pati, king, 266.
Dreams, soul leaves the body during,

359-

Ear, heavenly, far reaching, 5.

Earthquakes, eight causes of, 114;
at the Buddha's death, 175.

Economic conditions in the Buddha's
time, 198.

Effort, the right, 344.

Ejama, fairies, 291.

Elephant, dream of, 116 ; elephant
look, 121; mystic elephant, 204.

Enlightenment, seven factors of, 336.

Equanimity, 313.

Eravawa, Sakka's elephant, 289.

Esoteric doctrine, none in the Bud-
dha's teaching, 107.

Ethics, see lay ; see faith and works.

Eye, heavenly, can see a league off,
17; can perceive the other
world, 357 ; a Buddha's eye sur-
veys the world, 31 ; sees fairies
and gods, 92, 286, 293 ; eye for
the Truth, 34, 176, 320 ; eye of
the World, 152 ; the Devas
cannot see Brahma, 244.

Faith, and works, 86 ; in the three

jewels, 99.
Five-crest, a fairy, 300 ff., 320.

Gandhabbas, gods, 288, 308.
Gavampati, 373.
Gem, the mystic, 205.


Gifts, right method of, 374.

Gods, like men, 103, 117; haunt
sites, 92 ; receive merit from
men, 94 ; in perfumes, 50 ; take
precedence below men, 115;
death of, 178; list of, 246;
keep the Feast of Invitations,
259 ; smell of men offends,
355 ; length of days and years
of, 356.

Gopaka, and Gopika, 306 ff.

Govinda, 266 ff.

Grant, perpetual, 211.

Great-Man, potentate or prophet,
has thirty-two marks, 13.

Happiness, when to be sought after,

312.
Haramatta fairies, 291.
Heart, seat of imagination, 60.
Hell, wrong rendering, 91.

Inda-sala-guha, cave, 299.
Individuality, pain involved in, 338.
Indra, 297, 308.
Intoxications, the four, 28, 105.
Iron, 155.

Jana-vasabha, 240 ff.
Janesabha, a god, 288.
Jeta's Wood, near Savatthi, 4.
Jotipala, afterwards Maha-Govinda,
267 ff.

Kakusandha, one of the six previous

Buddhas, 6, 7.
Kalakanjas, gods, 289.
Kambala Nagas, 289.
Kawha-Mara, 293.
Kassapa, one of the six previous

Buddhas, 6, 7.
Kassapa, the Boy, 349 ff.
Kassapa, the Great, 75, 183-185.
Kanaka, fairies, 291.
Khemiya gods, 291.
KinnughaWu, a god, 288.
Koliyas, of Rama-gama, 188.
Konagamana, one of the six previous

Buddhas, 6, 7.
Kosiya, epithet of Sakka, 297, 305.
Kumbhira, local god at Rajagaha,

287.
Kus'mara, where the Buddha died,

149, 161, 187.
Ku/eWu, god, 288.
Kuvera, god of the North, 288.


PRINCIPAL SUBJECTS AND PROPER NAMES.


377


Lama, gods, 291.

Lambitakas, gods, 291.

Lao Tsii, 1.

Law, realm of system and, 167.

Lay ethics, for clansmen, 80 ; for

householders, 91.
Licchavis, 103, 187.
Light, universal, at conception and

birth of a Bodhisat, 9, 12.
Lotus ponds, their architecture, 210,

215.

Maghava, epithet of Sakka, 297,

Mahapadana Suttanta, 1 ff.; mean-
ing of, 3.

Maha-purisa, see Great Man.

Maha-sudassarta, king, 161, 192 ff.

Mahavastu, meaning of, 3 ; contents
of, 257. ^

Mallas, of Kusinara, 149, 162 ff.;
called Vasetf^as, 179, 181.

Maras, a class of gods, 9, 12, 117,
293.

Mastery, over delusion, eight posi-
tions of, 118.

Matali, a Gandharva, charioteer to
Sakka, 288.

Maya, the Buddha's mother, 7, 116.

Maya, goddess of guile, 288.

Merit of gifts may be transferred to
gods, 94.

Migration, of a community, 369.

Mind, power over body, 106, 108,
138; mind and matter, 115.

Mindful and self-possessed, 101, 106,
109, 330 ff.

Mirror of truth, 99 ff.

Missionaries, sending forth of, 36.

Mnemonic doggrek, 283.

Moriyas, of Pipphali-vana, 190.

Mother, of a Bodhisat, character of,
9, 10.

Musical instruments, seven, 214.

Nabhasa, a town, 288.
Nadika, in Videha, 97, 237.
Nala, a god, 288.
Nalanda, in Magadha, 87.
Namuci, Spirit of evil, 289.
Needle, angels on the point of a,

151.
Niga«/^a of the Natha clan, 166.
Nighaw^u, a god, 288.
Nirvana, entered into, of a living

man, 132.

Odata-gayhas, fairies, 291.


Opamanna, a Gandharva, 288.
Ordination, was at first without
ceremony, 170.

Paharada, god, 289.

Pajapati, a god, 308.

Palaces, Vipassi's three, 17.

Panada, a Gandharva, 288.

Panca-sikha, heavenly musician, 288.

Paramatta, a god, 292.

Pasenadi, king of Kosala, 4.

Pa/ali-putta, fort on the Ganges,
prophecy concerning, 92.

Paf icca-samuppada, dependent origi-
nation, doctrine of, older than
Buddhism, 1 ; discussed, 42-49.

Patimokkha, Brahma gods recite,
37 ; Vipassi's version of the, 38 ;
Sakka's question about the, 314.

Payaga Nagas, 289.

Pilgrimages, 154.

Potana, in Assaka, 270.

Pre-existence, 4.

Probation, of four months, 168.

Pukkusa, the Mallian, 141ft0.

Purindada, epithet of Sakka, 297.

Rahu, demon, 289.
Rainy season (Vassa), 106.
Rama-gama, 188-191.
Rama-setf£a, a god, 288.
Rapture, nine stages of, 174 ; the
four, 215; practice of, 250,

345.

Rebirth, 98.

Reign of Law, the Buddhist doctrine
of, 1.

Re«u, prince and king, 267 ff.

Rest, at (deceased), 132.

Retreat, see Rainy season, 241.

Righteousness, kingdom of, founda-
tion of, 116.

Road, 34.

Robes, method of wearing, 145,
186, 202.

Rojas, fairies, 290.

Roruka, in Sovira, 270.

Rucira, a fairy, 290.

Sacred places, four kinds of, 153.

Sacrifice, the ideal, 371-374.

Sadamatta, fairies, 291.

Sahali, gods, 290.

Sakiyas, the Buddha's clan, 187,

188.
Sakka, king of the gods, 290, 294-

298 ; verses by, 175, 260; builds


378


DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.


a palace, 212 ; his eulogy of the
Buddha, 261-263.
Sakya sage, 308.
Sa/ala, cottage, 305.
Sanaw-kumara, 245, 264, 292.
Sanskrit Buddhist literature, 256.
Sanskrit literature, anachronisms in,

283.
Sariputta, his names, 78 ; his death,

193.
Sata, a hill, 287.
Satipa//Mnas, the four, 249.
Serpent-race, 191.
Sikaddhi, son of Matali, 302.
Sikhi, one of the six previous

Buddhas, 6, 7.
Similes :
The threaded jewel, 10.
The jewel laid on muslin, n.
The lotus, 16, 32.
The man on the crag, 32.
Clean cloth and dye, 34.
The tangled skein, and matted

thread, 50.
Child on his father's hip, 68.
The brooding hen, 86.
The city walls and the cat, 88.
The causeway and the rafts, 95.
Mirror of Truth, 99.
Jewels of the Law, roi.
The lamp, 108.
The topmost height, 109.
Golden image, 244.
The confluence of Ganges and

Jumna, 261.
The pure gem, 276.
The elephant, 301, 308.
The bag of samples, 330,
The butcher, 331.
The man in the pit of mire, 354.
The blind man and colours, 356.
The posthumous child, 357.
The soul of the boiled man, 359.
The hot iron, 360.
The country bumpkins and the

trumpet, 361.
The forest lad and the fire, 363.
The caravan leaders and the

demon, 365.
The swineherd and the dung,

367.
The gambler and the poisoned

dice, 368.
The two treasure seekers, 369.
Sneezing, phrase to counteract evil

from, 279.
Soma, 282, 290.


Soothsayers, 13, 16.

Sorrow, when to be sought after,

3i3.
Soul, seven theories of, 61 ff. ; three
aspects of, 636°.; search for,

. .359-36i-

Spirits, 178. See Gods; cloud-
spirits, five kinds of, 205.

Subhadda, the last convert, 164-
169 ; was a Brahmin, 184.

Subhadda, the old barber, 184.

Subhadda, queen, 193 ff., 221.

Sublime conditions, the Four, 219,
256,^279.

Subrahma, a god, 292.

Sucitti, god, 289.

Suddhodana, the Buddha's father, 7.

Sudhamma, council-hall of the gods,
304, 308.

Suicide, 357.

Sukhavati-vyuha, origin of phrases
in the, 198.

Suleyya, a fairy, 290.

Sunetta, a prophet, 73, 294.

Sun-myths, how far to be accepted,
197.

Suriya-vaccasa, goddess, 288.

Tacchaka, a town, 288.
Teachers, the six, 166.
Timbaru, a god, 288, 301.
Titans, 243.
Tooth-relics, 191.
Transfiguration, rise of legend of,

146, 223.
Treasurer, the mystic, 207.
Treasures, the seven, of the Lord of

the Wheel, 13, 202-208.
Trees, musical, 201, 214, 217.
Truffles, 137.
Tusita, heaven of delight, 8, 9, 11.

Upava«a, 151.
Uttara, 294, 372.

Vajjians, Videha clan, 78-81.
Varusa, Vedic god, associated after-
wards with tree-cult, 4, 289.
Vasava, god, 289, 308, 320.
Vasavanesi, deities, 290.
Vasus, gods, 290.
Vediya, bill, 299.
Veghanasas, gods, 291.
Vejayanta, Sakka's palace, 297.
Vepacitti, god, 289.
Veroca, god, 289.
Vessabhu, a king, 270.


PRINCIPAL SUBJECTS AND PROPER NAMES.


379


Vessabhu, one of the six previous

Buddhas, 6, 7.
Vessamitta, god, 287.
Vessavawa, a god, 241, 251, 259, 305.
Ve^eWu, god, 288.
Veft&a-dipa, brahmin of, 188.
Vicakkha/?a fairies, 291.
Vihara, in old texts a room, not a

monastery, 4, 106, 157.
Vipassi, a former Buddha, 6 ff. ;

people's derivation of the name,

17.
Viru/haka, a guardian spirit, 241,

259, 287.
Virupakkha, god of the West quarter,

259, 288.
Vishsu, 290.
Visions, the four; aged, diseased,

dead man, and a wanderer, 18 ff.

See Eye.
Vissakamma, architect to the gods,

212.
ViVu, and Vi/ucca, gods, 288.


Voice, the ideal kind of, 16.

Wanderer, described, 22.

Weighing a dead man, 360.

Welfare, conditions of, for clans-
men and Wanderers, 80 ff.

Wheel, the mystic, behaviour of,
202-204.

Wheel, Lord of the, king of the
Golden Age, 13, 155, 157.

Wings of Wisdom, the thirty-seven,
128, 129.

Wisdom Tree, 23, 33, 113.

Women, 98, 102, 154, 160, 163, 206,
276, 279, 306.

World, the next, messenger from,
352-355-

Yama, twins, 290.
Yasa, a god, 290.

Zarathustra, 1,


INDEX II.


PALI WORDS DISCUSSED.


AjjhittS, 321.
Anna, 346.
Advaya, 159.
Anacchariya, 30.
Anuttara, 277.
Apadana, 3.
Apaya, 51.
Abhifina, 318.
Amata, 33.
Ayasa, 155.
Araha, 2.
Avijja, 312.
Avecca, 251.

Asava, 28, 291.

Iddhi, 78, no, 208, 246.

Eja, 317.

Unhisa, 210.
U«hisa-s'so, 16.
Udaka-sala, 187.
Uddisati, 372.
Upadana, 24, 53.
Upalapana, 81.
Upekha, 314.

Okkamati, 60.
Ottappa, 83.

Karavika, 16.
Kenacideva, 235.

Gahawi, 209.
Gahapati, 206.
Govindiye, 267.

Jarata, 338.

Citta, 325, 334.
Cetiya, 80, in.

Chanda, 311, 315.
Chanda-rago, 55.


Takka, 29.
Tawha, 54, 5S, 58.
Tathagata, 65.
Tamatagge, 109.
Turiya, 18.

Thiti, 195.
Thupa, 156.

Dana, 347, 34S.
Devata, 115, 278.
Dhamma, 325.
Dhammata, S.

Nama-rupa, 59.
Nippurisa, 18.
Nekkhamma, 343.

Pa//suKati, 133.
Parana, 324.
Paja, 50.
Puniia, 68.
Papanca, 312.
Pamuncantu, 33.
Paramatf^a, 85.
Pariwayaka, 208.
Parinibbayati, 65.
Parinibbuto, 132.
Paripaka, 338.
Parimukkha, 329.
Pariyu///jita, in.
Pariyosana, 316.
Pokkharawi, 210.

Buddha, 2.
Bodhisatta, 3.

Brahma-, 316.

Bhatta, 137.
Bhavo, 53.
Bhikkhu, 81.
Bhujissa, 85.


382


PALI WORDS DISCUSSED.


Maddava, 137.
Manta, 277, 278.
Mahavastu, 3.
Mahasala, 161.
Ma/o, 4.
Missaka, 108.
Mutoli, 330.

Yavadeva, 236.

Vatthu-vijja, 92.
Vitakka, 311
Vinicchayo, 55, 311.
Vipassana, 17.
Vibhava, 340.
Visesa, 242, 251.
Vihara, 4, 106, 157,


Vegha, 108.
Vedana, 54.
Vedika, 210.
Velamika, 231,
Vyavato, 372.
Vyfiha, 214.


359-


Sawvuta, 9.

Sawkhata, 64.

Sawkhara, 113, 176, 196, 248.

Saka/a-mukha, 269.

Sanjati, 338.

Saiini, 178.

Sati, 322-324.

Sama«a, 165.

Samavatta, 15.

Samucchati, 60.

Samphasso, 58-59.


OXFORD : HORACE HART
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


Date Due

3uiv§ <sf

D6 '62

W\'<*"

L. B. Cat. No. 1 137


WELLESLEY COLLEGE LIBRARY


3 5002 03107 2650


BQ 1292 . E53 D3 1899 2
Tipi^taka.


Dialogues of the Buddha


m&.


m


m


W&


mfflm
