Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (A. V. Dicey, 1885)
==========================================================
Dicey's doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty and the rule of law — the most influential constitutional theory in the common-law world. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/introductiontost0000albe_g5o8).

https://archive.org/details/introductiontost0000albe_g5o08 

INTRODUCTION 

TO THE STUDY OF THE 

LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 

BY 

A. V. DICEY, K.C., Hon. D.C.L. 

OF THE INNER TEMPLE; VINERIAN PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH LAW 
FELLOW OF ALL SOULS COLILEGR, OXFORD 
HON. LL.D. CAMBRIDGE, GLASGOW, AND EDINBURGH 

SEVENTH EDITION 

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 
ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON 
1908" 

First Edition, 1885. Second Edition, 1886. 

Third Edition, 1889. Fourth Edition, 1893 
Fifth Edition, 1897. Sixth Edition, 1902. 

Seventh Edition, 1908. 

This scarce antiquarian book is included in our special 
Legacy Reprint Series. In the interest of creating a more 
extensive selection of rare historical book reprints, we 
have chosen to reproduce this title even though it may 
possibly have occasional imperfections such as missing 
and blurred pages, missing text, poor pictures, 
markings, dark backgrounds and other reproduction 
issues beyond our control. Because this work is 
culturally important, we have made it available as a part 
of our commitment to protecting, preserving and 
promoting the world’s literature. Thank you for your 

understanding. 

: 
> ip 
- 
_ ‘ 
i oe 
er 
| 8 ‘ > 
j eS a 
j 4n f J 
aad d es } 

a ae, bind bahia af elie i 
nibs, sao ey, ob om ¥ 
siete! vee warade FER 

nad «sisi sa aia is 

mite. He. Ae thse Pe adi spr bis 7 
em  Seeigahag, of eemmigagon 

‘voip rob wten Gime catghatae Bt | 

Fun a Torys rh we act a 
Any 4 i age) ti dtieeap wht tdi le Retin 7 

luniw Tintemeie! tp Pe a 

GHW: Sasa ait 
“Mien his aah veal, ge 
is ip Seas aie: —_ 
i, aa 
; 7 egal | 

s 

a By 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

Tuts book is (as its title imports) an introduction to 
the study of the law of the constitution; it does not 
pretend to be even a summary, much less a complete 
account of constitutional law. It deals only with 
two or three guiding principles which pervade the 
modern constitution of England. My object in pub- 
lishing the work is to provide students with a manual 
which may impress these leading principles on their 
minds, and thus may enable them to study with 
benefit in Blackstone’s Commentaries and other 
treatises of the like nature those legal topics which, 
taken together, make up the constitutional law of 
England. In furtherance of this design I have not 
only emphasised the doctrines (such, for example, as 
the sovereignty of Parliament) which are the founda- 
tion of the existing constitution, but have also 
constantly illustrated English constitutionalism by 
comparisons between it and the constitutionalism on 
the one hand of the United States, and on the other 
of the French Republic. Whether I have in any 

v 

vi LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 

measure attained my object must be left to the 
judgment of my readers. It may perhaps be allow- 
able to remind them that a book consisting of 
actually delivered lectures must, even though revised 
for publication, exhibit the characteristics inseparable 
from oral exposition, and that a treatise on the 
principles of the law of the constitution differs in its 
scope and purpose, as well from a constitutional 
history of England as from works like Bagehot’s 
incomparable English Constitution, which analyse 
the practical working of our complicated system of 
modern Parliamentary government. 

If, however, J] insist on the fact that my book has 
a special aim of its own, nothing is further from my 
intention than to underrate the debt which I owe 
to the labours of the lawyers and historians who 
have composed works on the English constitution. 
Not a page of my lectures could been have written 
without constant reference to writers such as Black- 
stone, Hallam, Hearn, Gardiner, or Freeman, whose 
books are in the hands of every student. To three 
of these authors in particular I am so deeply indebted 
that it is a duty no less than a pleasure to make special 
acknowledgment of the extent of my obligations. 
Professor Hearn’s Government of England has taught 
me more than any other single work of the way 
in which the labours of lawyers established in early 
times the elementary principles which form the basis 

PREFACE vii 

of the constitution. Mr. Gardiner’s History of Eng- 
land has suggested to me the conclusion on which, 
confirmed as I found it to be by all the information I 
could collect about French administrative law, stress 
is frequently laid in the course of the following pages, 
that the views of the prerogative maintained by 
Crown lawyers under the Tudors and the Stuarts 
bear a marked resemblance to the legal and adminis- 
trative ideas which at the present day under the 
Third Republic still support the driot administratif 
of France. To my friend and colleague Mr. Freeman 
I owe a debt of a somewhat different nature. His 
Growth of the English Constitution has been to me 
a model (far easier to admire than to imitate) of the 
mode in which dry and even abstruse topics may be 
made the subject of effectivé and popular exposition. 
The clear statement which that work contains of the 
difference between our so-called “written law” and © 
‘our conventional constitution” originally led me to 
seek for an answer to the inquiry what may be the 
true source whence constitutional understandings 
which are not laws derive their binding power, whilst 
the equally vigorous statements contained in the 
same book of the aspect in which the growth of the 
constitution presents itself to an historian forced 
upon my attention the essential difference between 
the historical and the legal way of regarding our 
institutions, and compelled me to consider whether 

viii LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 

the habit of looking too exclusively at the steps by 
which the constitution has been developed does not 
prevent students from paying sufficient attention to 
the law of the constitution as it now actually exists. 
The possible weakness at any rate of the historical 
method as applied to the growth of institutions, is 
that it may induce men to think so much of the 
way in which an institution has come to be what it 
is, that they cease to consider with sufficient care 
what it is that an institution has become. 

A. V. DICEY. 

Aut Sours CoLiece, 
Oxrorp, 1885. 

PREFACE TO THE SEVENTH EDITION 

Tats edition is in substance, with one exception, a 
reprint, though a carefully edited reprint, of the Law 
of the Constitution as published in 1902. It contains, 
however, one change which requires notice. Chapter 
XII., on Droit Administratif, has been to a great 
extent rewritten. I have been led to rewrite it for 
three reasons:—I have wished to meet criticisms, 
some of them just, on my description of a branch of 
French law which I was the first to introduce to the 
attention of the English public, and which I have 
re-studied carefully since I examined in 1885 a topic 
then new to me: I have desired to incorporate with 
the body of my work the effect of two long Notes 
on droit admimstratif which formed part of the 
Appendix to the sixth edition: I have, lastly, wished 
to show that the modern administrative law of France, 
though, as amended since 1870 partly by legislation 
and still more by case-law, it approaches to a regular 
though peculiar system of law, is opposed in its 

fundamental principles to ideas which lie at the basis 
ix 

x LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 

of English constitutional government, and that this 
opposition, which, however, now tends every day 
to diminish owing mainly to the enlightenment of 
French jurists, is admirably illustrated by the history 
of French droit administratyf between 1800 and 1870. 
In my attempt to correct some actual errors, and still 
more to obtain a just view of modern French drovt 
administratif, I have received aid, for which I can 
hardly express my thanks in strong enough terms, 
from the suggestions of my friend Professor Jéze, who 
is an admitted master of the subject on which I 
sought for information. It is the greatest pleasure 
to acknowledge the debt which I owe to him. It is 
at the same time an act of fairness to him to state 
that I am solely responsible for every statement I 
have made about administrative law. I make this 
statement both because it is possible that, from the 
difficulty which every lawyer must have experienced 
of entering fully into the spirit of a law which is 
not that of his own country, I may at times have 
misunderstood Mr. Jéze’s statements of French law, 
and still more because the principles of even the 
modern administrative law of France appear to me, 
whether rightly or not, to be more opposed to the 
principles of the English common law than they would 
be held to be either by my friend Professor Jéze or 
by most French critics of my book. 

I take with pleasure this opportunity of acknowledg- 

PREFACE xi 

ing the great valuc of the suggestions I have received 

from Mr. A. B. Keith of the Colonial Office as to 

many points which I have been forced to touch upon 

in relation to the constitutions of our self-governing 
colonies. 

: A. V. DICEY. 

Attu Souts CoLiEecE, 
OxFoRD, 1908. 

S&S \ ate wo 66'S Se 
ed ou wulely’ vaspaneible te cranes 
Sete phate ont sdemigletetive la. 
vito Wk biome + Pie a] 
‘ea 9 Sich sory biwpes tes BaP 
) ecerig th 9 the alk of | 
ork es of binScen compte, 1 ty ap files 
vuitlos i Tia Ge stalemate oF por 

. A, a er on 
ocr apve low al Fras eae Se 

vie UP éid, © ‘a Sar ie 

i! Loe Dityish Gimmes Paw Dent ay 

6 ae? oy aap Baal 33 

» > 

n LR Pree’ ae % tacks 
ict we wot. cs pcauie a 

CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 

PAGE 

THe Trvz Nature or ConstitotionaL Law : : 1 

PART I 
THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

CHAPTER I 

THe NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY : 5 ely 
CHAPTER II 

PARLIAMENT AND NON-SOVEREIGN Law-Makine Boprigs oS 

CHAPTER III 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY AND FEDERALISM : . 134 

: PART II 
THE RULE OF LAW 

CHAPTER IV 

Tue Rove or Law: ims NaTuRE AND GENERAL APPLICA- 
TIONS. A . ; . - . 179 
xili 

xiv LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 

CHAPTER V 

rags 

Tae RicHT To PERSONAL FREEDOM . : ; . 202 
CHAPTER VI 

Toe Ricut To FREEDOM oF Discussion ; ; _ SRE 

CHAPTER VII 

Tae Ricat or Pusiic MEETING ‘ i ; . 266 

CHAPTER VIII 

MartTiaL Law : é : , : . 280 
CHAPTER IX 

THe ARMY . a s : : : . 291 
CHAPTER X 

THe REVENUE A : ‘ : : . 308 
CHAPTER XI 

THe RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS . ; : > BRM 

CHAPTER XII 

Rue oF LAW COMPARED WITH Droir ADMINISTRATIF . 5 BREE 

CHAPTER XIII 

RELATION BETWEEN PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY AND THE 
Ruiz or Law . : ‘ : : . 402 

CONTENTS 

PART III 

THE CONNECTION BETWEEN THE LAW OF THE 
CONSTITUTION AND THE CONVENTIONS 
OF THE CONSTITUTION 

CHAPTER XIV 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION . 

CHAPTER XV 

Tae SaNcTION BY WHICH THE CONVENTIONS OF THE Con- 
STITUTION ARE ENFORCED 

APPENDIX 
NOTE I.—Rieipity or Frencn Constitvutioxs 

IJ.— Division or Powers IN FEDERAL STATES 

” 

III].—DistTINcTION BETWEEN A PARLIAMENTARY EXECv- 
TIVE AND A NON-PARLIAMENTARY EXECUTIVE . 

IV.—Tue Rigat or Se.F-DEFENCE 

” 

V.—QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THE Ricw#t or PUBLIC 

” 

MEETING 

VI.— Dory or SoLDIERS CALLED UPON TO DISPERSE AN 
UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY . 

” 

VIL—Tue MEANING oF AN “UNCONSTITUTIONAL” Law 

n 

»VIII.—Swiss FEDERALISM 

IX.—AUSTRALIAN FEDERALISM 

XV 

PAGE 

413 

435 

469 

476 

480 

489 

497 

512 

516 

617 

529 

xvi LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 

PAGE 
NOTE X.—Martiat Law rN ENGLAND DURING TIME OF WAR 

OR INSURRECTION ’ : : . 538 
» X].—-CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL DES CoNFLITS . 555 
» AIL—PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE CROWN : -. 556 

INDEX : : : : 4 ; - 559 

i 

INTRODUCTION 
THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 

“GREAT critics,” writes Burke in 1791, “‘ have taught us optimistic 
** one essential rule. . . . It is this, that if ever we should hrs 
“find ourselves disposed not to admire those writers [mt 
“or artists, Livy and Virgil for instance, Raphael or 

“ Michael Angelo, whom all the learned had admired, 

“not to follow our own fancies, but to study them until 

“‘we know how and what we ought to admire ; and if 

“‘we cannot arrive at this combination of admiration 
“with knowledge, rather to believe that we are dull, 
“than that the rest of the world has been imposed on, 

‘It is as good a rule, at least, with regard to this ad- 

“ mired constitution (of England). We ought to under- 
“stand it according to our measure; and to venerate 
“where we are not able presently to comprehend.” * 

‘* No unbiassed observer,” writes Hallam in 1818, 
‘who derives pleasure from the welfare of his species, 
“‘can fail to consider the long and uninterruptedly in- 

“‘ creasing prosperity of England as the most beautiful 
“‘ phenomenon in the history of mankind. Climates 
“more propitious may impart more largely the mere 
‘* enjoyments of existence ; but in no other region have 
1 Burke, Works, iii. (1872 ed.), p. 114. 
z B 

2 INTRODUCTION 

“the benefits that political institutions can confer been 
“ diffused over so extended a population ; nor have any 
‘‘ people so well reconciled the discordant elements of 
“wealth, order, and liberty. These advantages are 
“surely not owing to the soil of this island, nor to the 
“atitude in which it is placed; but to the| eat of ita | \ 
*laws,\from which, through various means, the char- 
“acteristic independence and aden of our 
“nation have been derived. The constitution, there- 
“fore, of England must be to inquisitive men of all 
“countries, far more to ourselves, an object of superior 
“interest ; distinguished, especially, as it is from all 
“free governments of powerful nations, which history 
“has recorded, by its manifesting, after the lapse of 
“several centuries, not merely no symptom of irre- 
“ trievable decay, but a more expansive energy.” ’ 
_ These two quotations from authors of equal though 
of utterly different celebrity, recall with singular 
fidelity the spirit with which our grandfathers and 
our fathers looked upon the institutions of their 
country. The constitution was to them, in the quaint 
language of George the Third, “the most perfect of 
human formations”;? it was to them not a mere 
polity to be conan with the government of any 
other state, but so to speak a sacred mystery of states- 
mansbip ; it “ had (as we have all Heard from our youth 
up) not been made but had grown”; it was the fruit 
not of abstract theory but of that instinct which (it is 
supposed) has enabled Englishmen, and especially un- 

1 Hallam, Middle Ages (12th ed.), ii. p. 267, Nothing gives a more 
vivid idea of English sentiment with regard to the constitution towards 
the end of the eighteenth century than the satirical picture of national 
pride to be found in Goldsmith’s Citizen of the World, Letter IV. 

2 See Stanhope, Life of Pitt, i. App. p. 10. 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 3 
eee eT ee ee errs eRe otro 
civilised Englishmen, to buildup sound and lasting insti- 
tutions, much as bees construct a honeycomb, without 
undergoing the degradation of understanding the prin- 
ciples on which they raise a fabric moresubtlely wrought 
than any work of conscious art. The constitution was 
marked by more than one transcendent quality which in 
the eyes of our fathers raised it far above the imitations, 
counterfeits, or parodies, which have been set up during 
the last hundred years throughout the civilised world ; 
no precise date could be named as the day of its birth ; 
no definite body of persons could claim to be its creators, 
no one could point to the document which contained 
its clauses; it was in short a thing by itself, which 

Englishmen and foreigners alike should “venerate, — 

where they are not able presently to comprehend.” 
The present generation must of necessity look on 
the constitution in a spirit different from the senti- 
ment either of 1791 or of 1818. We cannot share the 
religious enthusiasm of Burke, raised, as it was, to the 
temper of fanatical adoration by just hatred of those 
“doctors of the modern school,” who, when he wrote, 
were renewing the rule of barbarism in the form of the 
reign of terror; we cannot exactly echo the fervent 
self-complacency of Hallam, natural as it was to an 
Englishman who saw the institutions of England 
standing and flourishing, at a time when the attempts 
of foreign reformers to combine freedom with order 
had ended in ruin. At the present day students of 
the constitution wish neither to criticise, nor to vene- 
rate, but to understand ; and a professor whose duty 
it is to lecture on constitutional law, must feel that he 
is called upon to perform the part neither of a critic 
nor of an apologist, nor of an eulogist, but simply of 

4 INTRODUCTION 

an expounder; his duty is neither to attack nor 
to defend the constitution, but simply to explain 
its laws. He must also feel that, however attractive 
be the mysteries of the constitution, he has good 
reason to envy professors who belong to countries, 
such as France, Belgium, or the United States, en- 
dowed with constitutions of which the terms are to be 
found in printed documents, known to all citizens and 

‘ accessible to every man who is able to read. What- 
_ ever may be the advantages of a so-called “ unwritten” 

constitution, its existence imposes special difficulties 

/on teachers bound to expound its provisions. Any 

Special 
difficulty of 
comment- 

constitu- 
tion. 

one will see that this is so who compares for a moment 
the position of writers, such as Kent or Story, who 
commented on the Constitution of America, with the 
situation of any person who undertakes to give instruc- 
tion in the constitutional law of England. 

When these distinguished jurists delivered, in the 
form of lectures, commentaries upon the Constitution 
of the United States, they knew precisely what was 
the subject of their teaching and what was the proper 
mode of dealing with it. The theme of their teaching 
was a definite assignable part of the law of their 
country ; it was recorded in a given document to 
which all the world had access, namely, “the Consti- 
tution of the United States established and ordained 
by the People of the United States.” The articles of 
this constitution fall indeed far short of perfect logical 
arrangement, and lack absolute lucidity of expression ; 
but they contain, in a clear and intelligible form, 
the fundamental law of the Union. This law (be 
it noted) is made and can only be altered or repealed 
in a way different from the method by which other 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 5 
ss <tinsen So7 en Sca SORAB ASR aioe aon a 
enactments are made or altered; it stands forth, 
therefore, as a separate subject for study; it deals 
with the legislature, the executive, and the judiciary, 
and, by its provisions for its own amendment, in- 
directly defines the body in which resides the legisla- 
tive sovereignty of the United States. Story and 
Kent therefore knew with precision the nature and 
limits of the department of law on which they in- 
tended to comment; they knew also what was the 
method required for the treatment of their topic. 
Their task as commentators on the constitution was 
in kind exactly similar to the task of commenting on 
any other branch of American jurisprudence. The 
American lawyer has to ascertain the meaning of the 
Articles of the Constitution in the same way in which 
he tries to elicit the meaning of any other enactment. 
He must be guided by the rules of grammar, by his 
knowledge of the common law, by the light (occa- 
sionally) thrown on American legislation by American 
history, and by the conclusions to be deduced from a 
careful study of judicial decisions. The task, in short, 
which lay before the great American commentators 
was the explanation of a definite legal document in 
accordance with the received canons of legal interpre- 
tation. Their work, difficult as it might prove, was 
work of the kind to which lawyers are accustomed, 
and could be achieved by the use of ordinary legal 
methods. Story and Kent indeed were men of extra- 
ordinary capacity ; 80, however, were our own Black- 
stone, and at least one of Blackstone’s editors. If, as 
is undoubtedly the case, the American jurists have 
produced commentaries on the constitution of the 
United States utterly unlike, and, one must in truth 

es 

6 INTRODUCTION 

add, vastly superior to, any commentaries on the con- 
atitutional law of England, their success is partly due 
to the possession of advantages denied to the English 
commentator or lecturer. His position is entirely 
different from that of his American rivals. He may 
search the statute-book from beginning to end, but he 
will find no enactment which purports to contain the 
articles of the constitution ; he will not possess any 
test by which to discriminate laws which are constitu- 
tional or fundamental from ordinary enactments; he 
will discover that the very term “constitutional law,” 
which is not (unless,my memory deceives me) ever 
employed by Blackstone, is of comparatively modern 

_ origin; and in short, that before commenting on the 

Commen- 
tator secks 
help from 
constitu- 
tional 
lawyers, 
constitu- 
tional his- 
torians and 
constitu- 
tional 
theorists. 

law of the constitution he must make up his mind 
what is the nature and the extent of English constitu- 
tional law.’ 

His natural, his inevitable resource is to recur to 
writers of authority on the law, the history, or the 
practice of the constitution. He will find (it must 
be admitted) no lack of distinguished guides; he may 
avail himself of the works of lawyers such as Black- 
stone, of the investigations of historians such as 
Hallam or Freeman, and of the speculations of philo- 
sophical theorists such as Bagehot or Hearn. From 
each class he may learn much, but for reasons which 

1 See this point brought out with great clearness by Monsieur 
Boutmy, Etudes de Droit Constitutionnel (2nd ed.), p. 8, English trans- 
lation, p. 8. Monsieur Boutmy well points out that the sources of 
English constitutional law may be considered fourfold, namely—(1) 
Treaties or Quasi-Treaties, t« the Acts of Union ; (2) The Common 
Law ; (3) Solemn Agreements (pacts), eg. the Bill of Rights ; (4) 
Statutes. This mode of division is not exactly that which would be 
naturally adopted by an English writer, but it calls attention to dis- 
tinctions often overlooked between the different sources of English 
constitutional law. ee. a Ree, 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 7 

I am about to lay before you for consideration, he is 
liable to be led by each class of authors somewhat 
astray in his attempt to ascertain the field of his 
labours and the mode of working it; he will find, 
unless he can obtain some clue to guide his steps, 
that the whole province of so-called “ constitutional 
law” is a sort of maze in which the wanderer is 
perplexed by unreality, by antiquarianism, and by 
conventionalism. 

Let us turn first to the lawyers, and as in duty 
bound to Blackstone. 

Of constitutional law as such there is not a word 
to be found in his Commentartes. The matters which 
appear to belong to it are dealt with by him in the 
main under the head Rights of Persons. The Book 
which is thus entitled treats (inter alia) of the 
Parliament, of the King and his title, of master and 
servant, of husband and wife, of parent and child. 
The arrangement is curious and certainly does not 
bring into view the true scope or character of consti- 
tutional law. This, however, is a trifle. The Book 
contains much real learning about our system of 
government. Its true defect is the hopeless confusion 
both of language and of thought, introduced into the 
whole subject of constitutional law by Blackstone's 
habit—common to all the lawyers of his time—of 
applying old and inapplicable terms to new institu- 
tions, and especially of ascribing in words to a modern 
and constitutional King the whole, and perhaps more 
than the whole, of the powers actually possessed and 
éxercised. by William the Conqueror. 

“We are next,” writes Blackstone, ‘“‘to consider 
‘‘ those branches of the royal prerogative, which invest 

yer’s view 
of con- 
stitution. 
Its un- 

stone. 

| 

8 INTRODUCTION 

« thus our sovereign lord, thus all-perfect and immortal 
“in his kingly capacity, with a number of authorities 
“and powers; in the exertion whereof consists 
‘‘the executive part of government. This is wisely 
“placed in a single hand by the British constitution, | 
“for the sake of unanimity, strength, and dispatch. 
“Were it placed in many hands, it would be subject 
“to many wills: many wills, if disunited and drawing 
« different ways, create weakness in a government ; and 
“to unite those several wills, and reduce them to one, is 
“a work of more time and delay than the exigencies of 
‘‘ state will afford. The King of England is, therefore, 
“not only the chief, but properly the sole, magistrate 
“of the nation; all others acting by commission from, 
‘and in due subordination to him; in like manner as, 
“upon the great revolution of the Roman state, all the 
“powers of the ancient magistracy of the common- 
‘wealth were concentrated in the new Emperor: so 
“that, as Gravina expresses it, in ejus unius persona 
‘ veteris reipublicae vis atque majestas per cumulatas 
“magistratuum potestates exprimebatur.” ' 

The language of this passage is impressive; it 
stands curtailed but in substance unaltered in 
Stephen’s Commentarves. It has but one fault; the 
statements it contains are the direct opposite of the 
truth. The executive of England is im fact: placed 
in the hands of a committee called the Cabinet. If 
there be any one person in whose single hand the 
power of the State is placed, that one person is not the 

’ King but the chairman of the committee, known as 

| the Prime Minister. Nor can it be urged that 

Blackstone’s description of the royal authority was a 
1 Blackstone, Commentaries, i. p. 250. 

THE TRUE NA1URE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 9 
a he eh Se ee 
true account of the powers of the King at the time when 
Blackstone wrote. George the Third enjoyed far more 
real authority than has fallen to the share of any of 
his descendants. But it would be absurd to maintain 
that the language I have cited painted his true posi- 
tion. The terms used by the commentator were, when 

he used them, unreal, and known? to be so. They |’ 

have become only a little more unreal during the cen- 
tury and more which has since elapsed. ‘The King,” 
he writes again, “is considered in domestic affairs . . . 
‘‘as the fountain of justice, and general conservator 
“of the peace of the kingdom. . . . He therefore 
“has alone the right of erecting courts of judicature: 
“for, though the constitution of the kingdom|hath en- 
“trusted him with the whole executive power of the 

1 The following passage from Paley’s Moral Philosophy, published 
in 1785, is fall of instruction. ‘In the British, and possibly in all 
“‘ other constitutions, there exists a wide difference between the actual 
“state of the government and the theory. The one results from the 
“other ; but still they are different. When we contemplate the theory 
“of the British government, we see the King*invested with the most 
“absolute personal impunity ; with a power of rejecting lawa, which 
‘have been resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament ; of conferring 
“by his charter, upon any set or succession of men he pleases, the 
“ privilege of sending representatives into one House of Parliament, as by 
‘‘his immediate appointment he can place whom he will in the other. 
‘‘ What is this, a foreigner might ask, but a more circuitous despotism 1 
‘Yet, when we turn our attention from the legal existence to the actual 
“exercise of royal authority in England, we see these formidable pre- 
“ rogatives dwindled into mere ceremonies; and in their stead, a sure 
“and commanding influence, of which the constitution, it seems, is totally 
“ignorant, growing out of that enormous patronage, which the increased 
“extent and opulence of the Empire has placed in the disposal of the 
“executive magistrate.”—Paley, Moral Philosophy, Book vi cap. vii. 
The wholechapter whence this passage is taken repaysstudy. Paley sees 
far more clearly into the true nature of the then existing constitution 
than did Blackstone. It is further noticeable that in 1785 the power 
to create Parliamentary boroughs was still looked upon as in theory an 
existing prerogative of the Crown. The power of the Crown was still 
large, and rested in fact upon the possession of enormous patronage. 

10 INTRODUCTION 

“laws, it is impossible, as well as improper, that he 
« should personally carry into execution this great and 
“extensive trust: it is consequently necessary, that 
“ courts should be erected to assist him in executing this 
“power ; and equally necessary, that if erected, they 
“should be erected by his authority. And hence it is, 
“that all jurisdictions of courts are either mediately 
“or immediately derived from the Crown, their pro- 
“ ceedings run generally in the King’s name, they pass 
“under his seal, and are executed by his officers.” * 
Here we are in the midst of unrealities or fictions. 
Neither the King nor the Executive has anything to 
do with erecting courts of justice. We should rightly 
conclude that the whole Cabinet had gone mad if 
to-morrow’s Gazette contained an order in council not 
authorised by statute erecting a new Court of Appeal. 
It is worth while here to note what is the true injury 
to the study of law produced by the tendency of 
Blackstone, and other less famous constitutionalists, 
to adhere to unreal expressions. The evil is not 
merely or mainly that these expressions exaggerate 
the power of the Crown. For such conventional 
exaggeration a reader could make allowance, as easily 
as we do for ceremonious terms of respect or of social 
courtesy. The harm wrought is, that unreal language 
obscures or conceals the true extent of the powers, 
both of the King and of the Government. No one, 
indeed, but a child, fancies that the King sits 
crowned on his throne at Westminster, and in his 
own person administers justice to his subjects. But 
the idea entertained by many educated men that an 
English King or Queen reigns without taking any 
1 Blackstone, Commentaries, i. p. 267. 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 11 

part in the government of the country, is not less far 
from the truth than the notion that Edward VII. 
ever exercises judicial powers in what are called his 
Courts. The oddity of the thing is that to most 

Englishmen the extent of the authority actually | 

exercised by the Crown—and the same remark applies 

(in a great measure) to the authority exercised by the / 

Prime Minister, and other high officiala—is a matter of 
conjecture. We have all learnt from Blackstone, and 
writers of the same class, to make such constant use 
of expressions which we know not to be strictly true 
to fact, that we cannot say for certain what is the 
exact relation between the facts of constitutional 
government and the more or less artificial phraseology 
under which they are concealed. Thus to say that 
the King appoints the Ministry is untrue; it is also, 
of course, untrue to say that he creates courts of 
justice ; but these two untrue statements each bear a 
very different relation to actual facta. Moreover, of 
the powers ascribed to the Crown, some are in reality 
exercised by the Government, whilst others do not in 
truth belong either to the King orto the Ministry. The 
general result is that the true position of the Crown as 
also the true powers of the Government are concealed 

under the fictitious ascription to the sovereign of | 

political omnipotence, and the reader of, say, the first 
Book of Blackstone, can hardly discern the facts of 
law with which it is filled under the unrealities of the 
language in which these facts find expression. 

Let us turn from the formalism of lawyers to the 
truthfulness of our constitutional historians. 

Here a student or professor troubled about the 
nature of constitutional law finds himself surrounded 

II. Histo- 

rian’s view ()) | 

of constitu- 

ie Its 
antiquari- 

anism, 

fi 
| 

12 INTRODUCTION 

by a crowd of eminent instructors. He may avail 
himself of the impartiality of Hallam: he may dive 
into the exhaustless erudition of the Bishop of Oxford: 
he will discover infinite parliamentary experience in 
the pages of Sir Thomas May, and vigorous common 
sense, combined with polemical research, in Mr. Free- 
man’s Growth of the English Constitution. Let us 
take this book as an excellent type of historical con- 
stitutionalism. The Growth of the English Constitu- 
tion is known to every one. Of its recognised merits, 
of its clearness, of its accuracy, of its force, it were 
useless and impertinent to say much to students who 
know, or ought to know, every line of the book from 
beginning to end. One point, however, deserves 
especial notice. Mr. Freeman’s highest merit is his 
unrivalled faculty for bringing every matter under 
discussion to a clear issue. He challenges his readers 
to assent or deny. If you deny you must show good 
cause for your denial, and hence may learn fully as 
much from rational disagreement with our author as 
from unhesitating assent to his views. Take, then, 
the Growth of the English Constitution as a first-rate 
specimen of the mode in which an historian looks at 
the constitution. What is it that a lawyer, whose 
object is to acquire the knowledge of law, will learn 
from its pages? A few citations from the ample and 
excellent head notes to the first two chapters of the 
work answer the inquiry. 

They run thus :— 

The Landesgemeinden of Uri and Appenzell; 
their bearing on English Constitutional History ; 
political elements common to the whole Teutonic race: 
monarchic, aristocratic, and democratic elements to 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 13 

be found from the beginning ; the three classes of men, 
the noble, the common freeman, and the slave; uni- 
versal prevalence of slavery ; the Teutonic institutions 
common to the whole Aryan family; witness of 
Homer; description of the German Assemblies by 
Tacitus; continuty of English institutions; English 
nationality assumed; Teutonic institutions brought 
into Britain by the English conquerors ; effects of the 
settlement on the Sea aR probable increase of 
slavery ; [Earls | and Churls ;) | growth of the kingly 
power; nature of kingship; aoeish sanctity of the 
King; wmmemorral distinction between Kings and 
Ealdormen. ... Gradual growth of the English 
constitution ; new laws seldom called for ; importance 

of precedent; return to early principles in modern | < 

legislation; shrinking up of the ancient national 
Assemblies ; constitution of the Witenagemét; the 
Witenagemét continued in the House of Lords; 
Geméts after the Norman Conquest ; the King’s right 
of summons; Infe Peerages; origin of the House of 
Commons; comparison of English and French 
national Assemblies ; of English and French history 
generally ; course of events influenced by particular 
men; Simon of Montfort... Edward the First; 
the constitution finally RE under him; nature 
of later changes; difference between English and 
continental legislatures. 

All this is interesting, erudite, full of historical 
importance, and thoroughly in its place in a book 
concerned solely with the “growth” of the constitu- 
tion; but in regard to English law and the law of the 
constitution, the Landesgemeinden of Uni, the witness 
of Homer, the ealdormen, the constitution of the 

pa) 

14 INTRODUCTION 

Witenagem6t, and a lot more of fascinating matter are 
mere antiquarianism. Let no one suppose that to say 
this is to deny the relation between history and law. 
It were far better, as things now stand, to be charged 
with heresy, than to fall under the suspicion of 
lacking historical-mindedness, or of questioning the 
universal validity of the historical method. What 
one may assert without incurring the risk of such 
crushing imputations is, that the kind of constitu- 
tional history which consists in researches into the 
antiquities of English institutions, has no direct 
bearing on the rules of constitutional law in the 
sense in which these rules can become the subject 
of legal comment. Let us eagerly: learn all that is 
known, and still more eagerly all that is not known, 
about the Witenagemsét. But let us remember that 

_ antiquarianism is not law, and that the function of 

a trained lawyer is not to know what the law of 

‘| England was yesterday, still less what it was centuries 
| ago, or what it ought to be to-morrow, but to know 

and be able to state what are the principles of law 
which actually and at the present day exist in 
England. For this purpose it boots nothing to know 
the nature of the Landesgemeinden of Uri, or to 
understand, if it be understandable, the constitution 
of the Witenagemét. All this is for a lawyer's 
purposes simple antiquarianism. It throws as much 
light on the constitution of the United States as 
upon the constitution of England ; that is, it throws 
from a legal point of view no light upon either the 
one or the other. 

The name of the United States serves well to 
remind us of the true relation between constitutional 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 15 

historians and legal constitutionalists. They are each Contrast 
concerned with the constitution, but from a different ealefpeal 
aspect. An historian is primarily occupied with rane 
ascertaining the steps by which a constitution has ‘tation 
grown to be what it is. He is deeply, sometimes 
excessively, concerned with the question of “ origins.” 

He is but indirectly concerned in ascertaining what 

are the rules of the constitution in the year 1908. 

To a lawyer, on the other hand, the primary object 

of study is the law as it now stands; he is only 
secondarily occupied with ascertaining how it came 

into existence. This is absolutely clear if we com- 

pare the position of an American historian with the 
position of an American jurist. The historian of the 
American Union would not commence his researches 

at the year 1789; he would have a good deal to say 
about Colonial history and about the institutions of 
England ; he might, for aught I know, find himself 
impelled to go back to the Witenagemét; he would, 

one may suspect, pause in his researches considerably 

short of Urii A lawyer lecturing on the constitution 

of the United States would, on the other hand, neces- 
sarily start from the constitution itself. But he would 

soon see that the articles of the constitution required 

a knowledge of the Articles of Confederation ; that the 
opinions of Washington, of Hamilton, and generally of 

the “Fathers,” as one sometimes hears them called in 
America, threw light on the meaning of various con- 
stitutional articles; and further, that the meaning of 

the constitution could not be adequately understood 

by any one who did not take into account the situa- 

tion of the colonies before the separation from England 

and the rules of common law, as well as the general 

16 INTRODUCTION 

conceptions of law and justice inherited by English 
colonists from their English forefathers. As it is with 
the American lawyer compared with the American 
historian, so it is with the English lawyer as compared 
with the English historian. Hence,even where lawyers 
are concerned, as they frequently must be, with the 
development of our institutions, arises a further dif- 
' ference between the historical and the legal view of 
the constitution. Historians in their devotion to the 
earliest phases of ascertainable history are infected 
with a love which, in the eyes of a lawyer, appears 
inordinate, for the germs of our institutions, and seem 
to care little about their later developments. Mr. 
Freeman gives but one-third of his book to anything 
as modern as the days of the Stuarts. The period of 
now more than two centuries which has elapsed since 
what used to be called.the “Glorious Revolution,” filled 
as those two centuries are with change and with growth, 
seems hardly to have attracted the attention of a 
writer whom lack, not of knowledge, but of will has 
alone prevented from sketching out the annals of 
our modern constitution. A lawyer must look at 
the matter differently. It is from the later annals of 
England he derives most help in the study of existing 
law. What we might have obtained from Dr. Stubbs 
had he not surrendered to the Episcopate gifts which 
we hoped were dedicated to the University alone, is 
now left to conjecture, But, things being as they 
are, the historian who most nearly meets the wants of 
lawyers is Mr. Gardiner. The struggles of the seven- 
teenth century, the conflict between James and Coke, 
Bacon's theory of the prerogative, Charles’s effort to 
substitute the personal will of Charles Stuart for the 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 17 

legal will of the King of England, are all matters 
which touch not remotely upon the problems of actual 
law. A knowledge of these things guards us, at any 
rate, from the illusion, for illusion it must be termed, 
that modern constitutional freedom has been estab- 
lished by an astounding method of retrogressive pro- 
gress; that every step towards civilisation has been 
a step backwards towards the simple wisdom of 
our uncultured ancestors. The assumption which 
underlies this view, namely, that there existed among 
our Saxon forefathers a more or less perfect polity, 
conceals the truth both of law and of history. To ask 
how a mass of legal subtleties “would have looked 
S . in the eyes of a man who had borne his part 
‘‘in the elections of Eadward and of Harold, and 
‘‘who had raised his voice and clashed his arms in 
“the great Assembly which restored Godwine to his 
“lands,” ‘is to put an inquiry which involves an unten- 
able assumption; it is like asking what a Cherokee 
Indian would have thought of the claim of George the 
Third to separate taxation from representation. In 
each case the question implies that the simplicity of a 
savage enables him to solve with fairness a problem of 
which he cannot understand the terms. Civilisation 
may rise above, but barbarism sinks below the level of 
legal fictions, and our respectable Saxon ancestors were, 
as compared, not with ourselves only, but with men so 
like ourselves as Coke and Hale, respectable barbarians. 
The supposition, moreover, that the cunning of lawyers 
has by the invention of legal fictions corrupted the 
fair simplicity of our original constitution, underrates 
the e statesmanship of lawyers as much as it overrates 

1 See Freeman, Growth of the English Constitution (let ed.), p. 125. 
Cc 

J — um 
hu —¢ 

18 INTRODUCTION 

the merits of early society. The fictions of the Courts 
have in the hands of lawyers such as Coke served 
the cause both of justice and of freedom, and served 
it when it could have been defended by no other 
weapons. For there are social conditions under 

| which legal fictions or subtleties afford the sole means 
_ of establishing that rule of equal and settled law which 
' is the true basis of English civilisation. Nothing can 

be mere pedantic, nothing more artificial, nothing 
more unhistorical, than the reasoning by which Coke 
induced or compelled James to forego the attempt 
to withdraw cases from the Courts for his Majesty’s 
personal determination.’ But no achievement of sound 
argument, or stroke of enlightened statesmanship, ever 
established a rule more essential to the very existence 
of the constitution than the principle enforced by the 
obstinacy and the fallacies of the great Chief-Justice. 

_ Oddly enough, the notion of an ideal constitution 
' corrupted by the technicalities of lawyers is at bottom 

a delusion of the legal imagination. The idea of 
retrogressive progress is merely one form of the 
appeal to precedent. This appeal has made its 
appearance at every crisis in the history of England, 
and indeed no one has stated so forcibly as my friend 
Mr. Freeman himself the peculiarity of all English 
efforts to extend the liberties of the country, namely, 
that these attempts at innovation have always assumed 
the form of an appeal to pre-existing rights. But 

' the appeal to precedent is in the law courts merely 

a useful fiction by which judicial decision conceals its 
transformation into judicial legislation; and a fiction 
is none the less a fiction because it has emerged from 

1 See 12 Rep. 64 ; Hearn, Government of England (2nd ed.), chap. iii. 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 19 

ae ae 
the Courts into the field of politics or of history. 
Here, then, the astuteness of lawyers has imposed 
upon the simplicity of historians. Formalism and 

antiquarianism have, so to speak, joined hands; they ,..). 

have united to mislead students in search for the law 
of the constitution. 

Let us turn now to the political theorists. 

No better types of such thinkers can be taken 

III. View 

than Bagehot and Professor Hearn. No author of naam 

modern times (it may be confidently asserted) has 
done so much to elucidate the intricate workings of 
English government as Bagehot. His English Con- 
stitution is so full of brightness, originality, and wit, 
that few students notice how full it is also of know- 
ledge, of wisdom, and of insight. The slight touches, 
for example, by which Bagehot paints the reality of 
Cabinet government, are so amusing as to make a 
reader forget that Bagehot was the first author who 
explained in accordance with actual fact the true 
nature of the Cabinet and its real relation to the 
Crown and to Parliament. He is, in short, one of 
‘those rare teachers who have explained intricate 
matters with such complete clearness, as to make 
the public forget that what is now so clear ever 
needed explanation. Professor Hearn may perhaps 
be counted an anticipator of Bagehot. In any case 
he too has approached English institutions from a 
new point of view, and has looked at them in a fresh 
light; he would be universally recognised among us 
as one of the most distinguished and ingenious ex- 
ponents of the mysteries of the English constitution, 
had it not been for the fact that he made his fame 
as a professor, not in any of the seats of learning in 

Its defect 
that it 
deals solely 

ith con- 
ventions of 
constitu- 
tion. 

20 INTRODUCTION 

‘the United Kingdom, but in the University of 
Melbourne. From both these writers we expect to 
learn, and do learn much, but, as in the case of Mr. 
Freeman, though we learn much from our teacher 
which is of value, we do not learn precisely what as 
lawyers we are in search of. The truth is that both 
Bagehot and Professor Hearn deal and mean to deal 
mainly with political understandings or conventions 
and not with rules of law. What is the precise moral 
influence which might be exerted by a wise constitu- 
tional monarch; what are the circumstances under 
which a Minister is entitled to dissolve Parliament ; 
whether the simultaneous creation of a large number 
of Peers for a special purpose is constitutionally 
justifiable; what is the principle on which a Cabinet 
may allow of open questions ;—these and the like 
are the kind of inquiries raised and solved by writers 
whom, as being occupied with the conventional under- 
standings of the constitution, we may term con- 
ventionalists. These inquiries are, many of them, 
great and weighty; but they are not inquiries which 
will ever be debated in the law courts. If the 
Premier should advise the creation of five hundred 
Peers, the Chancery Division would not, we may be 

gure, grant an injunction to restrain their creation. 

If he should on a vote of censure decline to resign 
office, the King’s Bench Division would certainly 
not issue a quo warranto calling upon him to show 
cause why he continues to be Prime Minister. Asa 
lawyer, I find these matters too high for me. Their 
practical solution must be left to the profound wisdom 
of Members of Parliament; their speculative solution 
belongs to the province of political theorists. 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 1 
ae ee eo ee 

One suggestion a mere legist may be allowed to 
make, namely, that the authors who insist upon and 
explain the conventional character of the understand- 
ings which make up a great part of the conatitution, 
leave unexplained the one matter which needs ex- 
planation. They give no satisfactory answer to the 

And con- 
ventional 
view does 
not ex- 
plain how 
conven- 
tions 
enforced. 

inquiry how it happens that the understandings of | 
politics are sometimes at least obeyed as rigorously 
as the commands of law.’ To refer to public opinion — 

and to considerations of expediency is to offer but a 
very inadequate solution of a really curious problem. 
Public opinion approves and public expediency re- 
quires the observance of contracts, yet contracts are 
not always observed, and would (presumably) be 
broken more often than they are did not the law 
punish their breach, or compel their performance. 
Meanwhile it is certain that understandings are not 
Jaws, and that no system of conventionalism will ex- 
plain the whole nature of constitutional law, if indeed 
constitutional law” be in strictness law at all. 

For at this point a doubt occurs to one’s mind 
which must more than once have haunted students 
of the constitution. Is it possible that so-called 
“constitutional law” is in reality a cross between 
history and custom which does not properly deserve 
the name of law at all, and certainly does not belong 
to the province of a professor called upon to learn 
or to teach nothing but the true indubitable law 

1 See further on this point, Part III. post. 
2 Tocqueville, Huvres Complétes, i. 166, 167. 

Ie con- 
stitutional 
law really 
“law” at 
all ? 

It consists 
of two 
different 
kinds of 
rules, 

22 INTRODUCTION 
RR OS 
the whole matter? In this case lawyers would gladly 
surrender a domain to which they can establish no 
valid title. The one half of it should, as belonging 
to history, go over to our historical professors. The 
other half should, as belonging to conventions which 
illustrate the growth of law, be transferred either to 
my friend the Corpus Professor of Jurisprudence, 
because it is his vocation to deal with the oddities or 
the outlying portions of legal science, or to my friend 
the Chichele Professor of International Law, because 
he being a teacher of law which is not law, and 
being accustomed to expound those rules of public 
ethics which are miscalled international law, will find 
himself at home in expounding political ethics which, 
on the hypothesis under consideration, are miscalled 
constitutional law. 

Before, however, admitting the truth of the sup- 
position that “constitutional law” is in no sense law 
at all, it will be well to examine a little further into 
the precise meaning which we attach to the term con- 
stitutional law, and then consider how far it is a fit 
subject for legal exposition. 

Constitutional law, as the term is used in England, 
appears to include all rules which directly or indirectly 
affect the distribution or the exercise of the sovereign 
power in the state.’ Hence it includes (among other 
things) all rules which define the members of the 

1 Compare Holland, Jurisprudence (10th ed.), pp. 138, 139, and 359- 
363. ‘‘ By the constitution of a country is meant so much of its law as 
“relates to the designation and form of the legislature ; the rights and 
“functions of the several parts of the legislative body ; the construction, 
“‘ office, and jurisdiction of courts of justice. The constitution is one 
“principal division, section, or title of the code of public laws, dis- 
“tinguished from the rest only by the superior importance of the eub- 
“ject of which it treats.”—Paley, Moral Philosophy, Book vi. chap. vii. 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 23 

sovereign power, all rules which regulate the relation 
of such members to each other, or which determine 
the mode in which the sovereign power, or the mem- 
bers thereof, exercise their authority. Its rules pré- 
scribe the order of succession to the throne, regulate 
the prerogatives of the chief magistrate, determine 
the form of the legislature and its mode of election. 
These rules also deal with Ministers, with their 
responsibility, with their spheres of action, define the 
terntory over which the sovereignty of the state 
extends and settle who are to be deemed subjects or 
citizens. Observe the use of the word “rules,” not 
“laws.” This employment of terms is intentional. 
Its object is to call attention to the fact that the 
rules which make up constitutional law, as the term 
is used in England, include two sets of principles or 
maxims of a totally distinct character. 

The one set of rules are in the strictest sense “laws,” 
since they are rules which (whether written or un- 
written, whether enacted by statute or derived from the 
mass of custom, tradition, or judge-mademaxims known 
as the Common Law) are enforced by the Courts ; these 
rules constitute “constitutional law” in the proper 
sense of that term, and may for the sake of distinction 
be called collectively ‘the law of the constitution.” 

The other set of rules consist of conventions, | under- 
standings, habits, or practices which, though they may 
regulate the conduct of the several members of the 
sovereign power, of the Ministry, or of other officials, 
are not in reality laws at all since they are not enforced 
by the Courts. This portion of constitutional law may, 
for the sake of distinction, be termed the “ conven- 
tions of the constitution,” or constitutional morality. 

| 

(i.) Rules 
which are 
true laws 
—law of 
the con- 

stitution. 

(ii.) Rules 
which are 
not laws— 
conven- 
tions of the 
constitu: 
tion. 

Examples 

of rules be- 

longing to 

law of con- 

stitution. 

24 INTRODUCTION 

To put the same thing in a somewhat different 
shape, “constitutional law,” as the expression is used 
in England, both by the public and by authoritative 
writers, consists of two elements. The one element, 
here called the “law of*the constitution,” is a body 
of undoubted law; the other element, here called 
the “conventions of the constitution,” consists of 
maxiris or practices which, though they regulate 

strictness laws at all. The contrast between the law 
of the constitution and the conventions of ,the consti- 
tution may be most easily seen from examples. 

To the law of the constitution belong the following 
rules :— 

“The King can do no wrong.” This maxim, as 
now interpreted by the Courts, means, in the first 
place, that by no proceeding known to the law can 
the King be made personally responsible for any act 
done by him; if (to give an absurd example) the 
King were himself to shoot the Premier through the 
head, no court in England could take cognisance of 
the act. The maxim means, in the second place, that 
no one can plead the orders of the Crown or indeed 
of any superior officer in defence of any act not other- 
wise justifiable by law; this principle in both its 
applications is (be it noted) a law and a law of the 
constitution, but it is not a written law. ‘‘ There is 
no power in the Crown to dispense with the obligation 
to obey a law ;” this negation or abolition of the dis- 
pensing power now depends upon the Bill of Rights ; 
it is a law of the Constitution and a written law. 
“Some person is legally responsible for every act 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 25 

done by the Crown.” This responsibility of Ministers 
appears in foreign countries as a formal part of the 
constitution ; in England it results from the combined 
action of several legal principles, namely, first, the 
maxim that the King can do no wrong; secondly, the 
refusal of the Courts to recognise any act as done by 
the Crown, which is not done in a particular form, a 
form in general involving the affixing of a particular 
seal by a Minister, or the counter-signature or 
something equivalent to the counter-signature of a 
Minister; thirdly, the principle that the Minister 
who affixes a particular seal, or countersigns his 
signature, is responsible for the act which he, so to 
speak, endorses ;' this again is part of the constitu- 
tion and a law, but it is not a written law. So again 
the right to personal liberty, the right of public 
meeting, and many other rights, are part of the law 
of the constitution, though most of these rights are 
consequences of the more general law or principle 
that no man can be punished except for direct 
breaches of law (t.e. crimes) proved in the way pro- 
vided by law (i.e. before the Courts of the realm). 

To the conventions of the constitution belong the 
following maxims :— 

“The King must assent to, or (as it is inaccurately Examples 
A 12 : _. of rules 
expressed) cannot ‘veto’? any bill passed by the two which be- 
Houses of Parliament ;”—‘“‘ the House of Lords does (ioe or 
not originate any money bill; ”—‘‘ when the House of fhe constt 

Lords acts as a Court of Appeal, no peer who is not a 
law lord takes part in the decisions of the House ;”— 
1 Compare Hearn, Government of England (2nd ed.), chap. iv. 
2 As to the meaning of “veto,” see Hearn, Government of England 
(2nd ed.), pp. 51, 60, 61, 63, 548, and the article on the word Veto 
in the last edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica, by Professor Orelli. 

26 INTRODUCTION 

een 

“ Ministers resign office when they have ceased to 
command the confidence of the House of Commons ;” 
—‘‘a bill must be read a certain number of times 
before passing through the House of Commons.” 
These maxims are distinguished from each other by 
many differences;’ under a new or written constitu- 
tion some of them probably would and some of them 
would not take the form of actual laws. Under the 
English constitution they have one point in common: 

court would take notice of their violation. 

1 Some of these maxims are never violated, and are universally 
admitted to be inviolable. Others, on the other hand, have nothing 
but a slight amount of custom in their favour, and are of disputable 
validity. The main distinction between different classes of conven- 
tional rules may, it is conceived, be thus stated : Some of these rules 
could not be violated without bringing to a stop the course of orderly 
and pacific government ; others might be violated without any other 
consequence than that of exposing the Minister or other person by 
whom they were broken to blame or unpopularity. 

This difference will at bottom be found to depend upon the degree 
of directness with which the violation of a given constitutional maxim 
brings the wrongdoer into conflict with the law of the land. Thusa 
Ministry under whose advice Parliament were not summoned to meet 
for more than a year would, owing to the lapse of the Mutiny Act, 
etc, become through their agents engaged in a conflict with the Courts. 
The violation of a convention of the constitution would in this case 
lead to revolutionary or reactionary violence. The rule, on the other 
hand, that a Bill must be read a given number of times before it is 
passed is, though a well-established constitutional principle, a con- 
vention which might be disregarded without bringing the Government 
into conflict with the ordinary law. A Ministry who induced the 
House of Commons to pass an Act, eg. suspending the Habeas Corpus 
Act, after one reading, or who induced the House to alter their rules 
as to the number of times a Bill should be read, would in no way be 
exposed to a contest with the ordinary tribunals. Ministers who, after 
Supplies were voted and the Mutiny Act passed, should prorogue the 
House and keep office for months after the Government had ceased to 
retain the confidence of the Commons, might or might not incur grave 
unpopularity, but would not necessarily commit a breach of law. See 
farther Part IIT. post. 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 27 

It is to be regretted that these maxims must be 
called “‘ conventional,” for the word suggests a notion 
of insignificance or unreality. This, however, is the 
last idea which any teacher would wish to convey to 
his hearers. Of constitutional conventions or prac- 
tices some are as important as any laws, though 
some may be trivial, as may also be the case with 
& genuine law. My object, however, is to contrast, 
not shams with realities, but the legal element with 

\u aqal 
¥ ! 

the conventional element of so-called “ constitutional 

”? 

law. 

This distinction differs essentially, it should be 
noted, from the distinction between “ written law” (or 
statute law) and “unwritten law” (or common law). 
There are laws of the constitution, as, for example, the 
Bill of Rights, the Act of Settlement, the Habeas 
Corpus Acts, which are “‘ written law,” found in the 
statute-books—in other words, are statutory enact- 
ments. There are other most important laws of the 
constitution (several of which have already been men- 
tioned) which are ‘‘ unwritten ” laws, that is, not statu- 
tory enactments. Some further of the laws of the 
constitution, such, for example, as the law regulating 
the descent of the Crown, which were at one time 
unwritten or common law, have now become written 
or statute law. The conventions of the constitution, 
on the other hand, cannot be recorded in the statute- 
book, though they may be formally reduced to 
writing. Thus the whole of our parliamentary pro- 
cedure is nothing but a mass of conventional law; 
it is, however, recorded in written or printed rules. 
The distinction, in short, between written and un- 
written law does not in any sense square with the 

Distinction 
between 
laws and 
conven- 
tions not 
the same as 
difference 

28 INTRODUCTION 

napa Sc ici Ah whee eS 
| distinction between the law of the constitution (con- 
 gtitutional law properly so called) and the conven- 
tions of the constitution. This latter is the distinction 
on which we should fix our whole attention, for it is 
of vital importance, and elucidates the whole subject 
of constitutional law. It is further a difference which 
may exist in countries which have a written or statu- 
tory constitution.’ In the United States the legal 
powers of the President, the Senate, the mode of 
electing the President, and the like, are, as far as the 
law is concerned, regulated wholly by the law of the 
constitution. But side by side with the law have 
grown up certain stringent conventional rules, which, 
though they would not be noticed by any court, 
have in practice nearly the force of law. No Presi- 
dent has ever been re-elected more than once: the 
popular approval of this conventional limit (of which 
the constitution knows nothing) on a President's 
re-eligibility proved a fatal bar to General Grant's 
third candidature. Constitutional understandings 
have entirely changed the position of the Presiden- 
tial electors. They were by the founders of the con- 

1 The conventional element in the constitution of the United 
States is far larger than most Englishmen suppose. See on this 
subject Wilson, Congresstonal Government, and Bryce (3rd ed.), American 
Commonwealth, chaps. xxxiv. and xxxv. It may be asserted without 
much exaggeration that the conventional element in the constitu- 
tion of the United States is now as large as in the English con- 
stitution. Under the American system, however, the line between 
“conventional rules” and “laws” is drawn with a precision hardly 
possible in England. 

Under the constitution of the existing French Republic, constitu- 
tional conventions or understandings exert a considerable amount of 
influence, They considerably limit, for instance, the actual exercise 
of the large powers conferred by the letter of the constitution on 
the President. See Chardon, L’Administration de la France—Les 
Fonctionnaires, pp. 79-105. 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 29 

stitution intended to be what their name denotes, 
the persons who chose or selected the President; the 
chief officer, in short, of the Republic was, according 
to the law, to be appointed under a system of double 
election. This intention has failed; the “electors” 
have become a mere means of voting for a particular 
candidate ; they are no more than so many ballots 
cast for the Republican or for the Democratic nominee. 
The understanding that an elector is not really to 
elect, has now become so firmly established, that for 
him to exercise his legal power of choice is considered 
a breach of political honour too gross to be committed 
by the most unscrupulous of politicians. Public 
difficulties, not to say dangers, might have been 
averted if, in the contest between Mr. Hayes and Mr. 
Tilden, a few Republican electors had felt themselves 
at liberty to vote for the Democratic candidate. Not 
a single man among them changed his side. The 
power of an elector to elect is as completely abolished 
by constitutional understandings in America as is the 
royal right of dissent from bills passed by both 
Houses by the same force in England. Under a 
written, therefore, as under an unwritten constitu- 
tion, we find in full existence the distinction 
between the law and the conventions of the con- 
stitution. 

Upon this difference I have insisted at possibly 
needless length, because it lies at the very root of the 
matter under discussion. Once grasp the ambiguity 
latent in the expression ‘constitutional law,” and 
everything connected with the- subject falls so com- 
pletely into its right place that a lawyer, called upon 
to teach or to study constitutional law as a branch of 

Constitu- 
tional law 
as subject 
of legal 
study 
means 
solely law 
of con- 
stitution. 

30 INTRODUCTION 

the law of England, can hardly fail to see clearly the 
character and scope of his subject. 

With conventions or understandings he has no 
direct concern. They.vary from generation to genera- 
tion, almost from year to year. Whether a Ministry 
defeated at the polling booths ought to retire on 
the day when the result of the election is known, or 
may more properly retain office until after a defeat in 
Parliament, is or may be a question of practical im- 
portance. The opinions on this point which prevail 
to-day differ (it is said) from the opinions or under- 
standings which prevailed thirty years back, and are 
possibly different from the opinions or understandings 
which may prevail ten years hence. Weighty pre- 
cedents and high authority are cited on either side of 
this knotty question; the dicta or practice of Russell 
and Peel may be balanced off against the dicta or 
practice of Beaconsfield and Gladstone. The subject, 
however, is. not one of law but of politics, and need 
trouble no lawyer or the class of any professor of 
law. If he is concerned with it at all, he is so only 
in so far as he may be called upon to show what 
is the connection (if any there be) between the 
conventions of the constitution and the law of the 
constitution. 

This the true constitutional law is his only real 
concern. His proper function is to show what are the 
legal rules (z.e. rules recognised by the Courts) which 
are to be found in the several parts of the constitution. 
Of such rules or laws he will easily discover more than 
enough. The rules determining the legal position of 
the Crown, the legal rights of the Crown’s Ministers, 
the constitution of the House of Lords, the constitu- 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 31 

tion of the House of Commons, the laws which govern 
the established Church, the laws which determine the 
position of the non-established Churches, the laws 
which regulate the army,—these and a hundred other 
laws form part of the law of the constitution, and are 
as truly part of the law of the land as the articles of 
the Constitution of the United States form part of the 
law of the Union. 

The duty, in short, of an English professor of law 
is to state what are the laws which form part of the 
constitution, to arrange them in their order, to explain 
their meaning, and to exhibit where possible their 
logical connection. He ought to expound the un- 
written or partly unwritten constitution of England, 
in the same manner in which Story and Kent have 
expounded the written law of the American constitu- 
tion. The task has its special perplexities, but the 

Law of 
constitu- 
tion can be 
expounded 
like any 
other 
branch of 
English 
law. 

difficulties which beset the topic are the same in— 

kind, though not in degree, as those which are to 
be found in every branch of the law of England. 
You are called upon to deal partly with statute law, 
partly with judge-made law; you are forced to rely 
on Parliamentary enactments and also on judicial 
decisions, on authoritative dicta, and in many cases 
on mere inferences drawn from judicial doctrines; it 
is often difficult to discriminate between prevalent 
custom and acknowledged right. This is true of the 
endeavour to expound the law of the constitution ; 
all this is true also in a measure of any attempt to 
explain our law of contract, our law of torts, or our 
law of real property. . 

Moreover, teachers of constitutional law enjoy at 
this moment one invaluable advantage. Their topic 

32 INTRODUCTION 
sieimiatPacatipin tet coh ace i eh sc a cl a Bae 
has, of recent years,’ become of immediate interest and 
of pressing importance. These years have brought 
into the foreground new constitutional questions, and 
have afforded in many instances the answers thereto. 
The series of actions connected with the name of 
Mr. Bradlaugh® has done as much to clear away the 
obscurity which envelops many parts of our public 
law as was done in the eighteenth century by the series 
of actions connected with the name of John Wilkes. 
The law of maintenance has been rediscovered; the 
law of blasphemy has received new elucidation. 
Everybody now knows the character of a penal action. 
It is now possible to define with precision the relation 
between the House of Commons and the Courts of 
the land; the legal character and solemnity of an 
oath has been made patent to all the world, or at 
any rate to all those persons who choose to read 
the Law Reports. Meanwhile circumstances with 
which Mr. Bradlaugh had no connection have forced 
upon public attention all the various problems con- 
nected with the right of public meeting. Is such a 
right known to the law? What are the limits 
within which it may be exercised? What is the 
true definition of an ‘unlawful assembly”? How 
far may citizens lawfully assembled assert their right 
of meeting by the use of force? What are the limits 
within which the English constitution recognises the 
right of self-defence? These are questions some of 

1 This treatise was originally published in 1885. Since that date 
legal decisions and public discussion have thrown light upon several 
matters of constitutional law, such, for example, as the limits to the 
right of public meeting and the nature of martial law. 

2 Written 1885. See for Bradlaugh’s political career, Dict. Nat. 
Biog., Supplement, vol. i. p, 248, 

THE TRUE NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 433 
eee ee Na etenietrens tet hap nn 
which have been raised and all of which may any day 
be raised before the Courts. They are inquiries which 
touch the very root of our public law. To find the 
true reply to them is a matter of importance to every 
citizen. While these inquiries require an answer the 
study of the law of the constitution must remain a 
matter of pressing interest. The fact, however, that 
the provisions of this law are often embodied in cases 
which have gained notoriety and excite keen feelings 
of political partisanship may foster a serious miscon- 
ception. .Unintelligent students may infer that the 
law of the constitution is to be gathered only from 
famous judgments which embalm the results of grand 

Belge,’ or Thomas v. The Queen,® touch upon or 
decide principles of constitutional law. Indeed every 
action against a constable or collector of revenue en- 
forces the greatest of all such principles, namely, that 
obedience to administrative orders is no defence to an 
action or prosecution for acts done in excess of legal 
authority. The true law of the constitution is in 
short to be gathered from the sources whence we 
collect the law of England in respect to any other 
topic, and forms as interesting and as distinct, though 
not as well explored, a field for legal study or legal 
exposition as any which can be found. The subject 
is one which has not yet been fully mapped out. 
Teachers and pupils alike therefore suffer from the 
inconvenience as they enjoy the interest of exploring 

14 P.D.129; 6 P. D. 197. Compare Walker v. Batrd [1892], 
A. C. 491, 497. 
2LR,10Q.B 31. 

34 INTRODUCTION 

a province of law which has not yet been entirely 
reduced to order.’ 

This inconvenience has one great compensation. 
We are compelled to search for the guidance of first 
principles, and as we look for a clue through the 
mazes of a perplexed topic, three such guiding prin- 
_ciples gradually become apparent. They are, first, 
the legislative sovereignty of Parliament ;* secondly, 
the uffiversal rule or supremacy throughout the con- 
stitution of ordinary law ;* and thirdly (though here 
we tread on more doubtful and speculative ground), 
the dependence in the last resort of the conventions 
‘upon the law of the constitution.‘ To examine, to 
elucidate, to test these three principles, forms, at any 
rate (whatever be the result of the investigation), a 
suitable introduction to the study of the law of the 
constitution. 

1 Since these words were written, Sir William Anson’s admirable 
Law and Custom of the Constitution has gone far to provide a complete 
echeme of English constitutional law. 

2 See Part I. post. 3 See Part IL post. 
4 See Part III. poet. 

PART I 

THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

35 

tama ths the 

‘ thyes Sw were Sameleetihiie! She 

oe pes 

i 

So near ee 

of pt 

"ce wat 

we Pos 

CHAPTER I 
THE NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 

THE sovereignty of Parliament is (from a legal point ee 
of view) the dominant characteristic of our political 
institutions. 

My aim in this chapter is, in the first place, to aimof 
_ explain the nature of Parliamentary sovereignty and 
to show that its existence is a legal fact, fully recog- 
nised by the law of England; in the next place, to 
prove that none of the alleged legal limitations on 
the sovereignty of Parliament have any existence ; 
and, lastly, to state and meet certain speculative 
difficulties which hinder the ready admission of the 
doctrine that Parliament is, under the British con- 
stitution, an absolutely sovereign legislature. 

A. Nature of Parliamentary Sovereignty.—Par- Nature of 
liament means, in the mouth of a lawyer (though the pipet 
word has often a different sense in ordinary conversa- -irty, 
tion), the King, the House of Lords, and the House 
of Commons ; these three bodies acting together may 
be aptly described as the ‘“‘ King in Parliament,” and 
constitute Parliament.’ 

The principle of Parliamentary sovereignty means 

1 Conf. Blackstone, Commentaries, i. p. 153. 
37 

38 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

neither more nor less than this, namely, that Parlia- 
ment thus defined has, under the English constitu- 
tion, the right to make or unmake any law whatever ; 
and, further, that no person or body is recognised by 
the law of England as having a right to override or 
set aside the legislation of Parliament. 

A law may, for our present purpose, be defined as 
“any rule which will be enforced by the Courts.” 
The principle then of Parliamentary sovereignty may, 
looked at from its positive side, be thus described : 
Any Act of Parliament, or any part of an Act of 
Parliament, which makes a new law, or repeals or 
modifies an existing law, will be obeyed by the Courts. 
The same principle, looked at from its negative side, 
may be thus stated: There is no person or body of _ 
persons who can, under the English constitution, make 
rules which override or derogate from an Act of 
Parliament, or which (to express the same thing in 
other words) will be enforced by the Courts in con- 
travention of an Act of Parliament. Some apparent 
exceptions to this rule no doubt suggest themselves. 
But these apparent exceptions, as where, for example, 
the Judges of the High Court of Justice make rules 
of court repealing Parliamentary enactments, are re- 
solvable into cases in which Parliament either directly 
or indirectly sanctions subordinate legislation. This 
is not the place for entering into any details as to the 
nature of judicial legislation;' the matter is men- 
tioned here only in order to remove an obvious 
difficulty which might present itself to some students. 

1 The reader who wishes for fuller information on the nature of 
judge-made law will find what he wants in Dicey’s Law and Public 
Opinion in England, App. Note iv. p. 481, and in Sir Frederick 
Pollock’s Essays in Jurisprudence and Ethics, p, 237. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 39 
a a ec en rer ew 
It will be necessary in the course of these lectures to 
say a good deal more about Parliamentary sovereignty, 
but for the present the above rough description of its 
nature may suffice. The important thing is to make 
clear that the doctrine of Parliamentary sovereignty 
is, both on its positive and on its negative side, fully 
recognised by the law of England. 

I. Unlimited legislative authority of Parliament. 
—The classical passage on this subject is the following 
extract from Blackstone’s Commentaries :— 

ae The power and jurisdiction of Parliament, says 
“ Sir Edward Coke, is so transcendent and absolute, 

SEN ee | per- 
sons, within any bounds. And of this high court, he 

66 
i ; 
s , It may be truly said, ‘Si antiquitatem spectes, 

“ est vetustissima ; si dignitatem, est honoratissima ; st 

“jurisdictionem, est capacissima.’ It hath sovereign 
‘and uncontrollable authority in the making, confirm- 
“ing, enlarging, restraining, abrogating, repealing, re- 
“‘viving, and expounding of laws, concerning matters 
‘of all possible denominations, ecclesiastical or tem- 
‘poral, civil, military, maritime, or criminal: this 
“being the place where that absolute despotic power, 
‘‘ which must in all governments reside somewhere, is 
« entrusted by the constitution of these kingdoms. All 
‘‘mischiefs and grievances, operations and remedies, 
“that transcend the ordinary course of the laws, are 
‘within the reach of this extraordinary tribunal. It 
“can regulate or new-model the succession to the 
“Crown ; as was done in the reign of Henry VIII. and 
“‘ William III. It can alter the established religion 

! Fourth Institute, p. 36, 

Chapter 

Unlimited 
legislative 
authority 
of Par- 
liament, 

Part I. 

40 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

‘“‘of the land; as was done in a variety of instances, 
“in the reigns of king Henry VIII. and his three 
“children. It can change and create afresh even the 
“ constitution of the kingdom and of parliaments them- 
“selves; as was done by the act of union, and the 
“ several statutes for triennial and septennial elections. 
‘Tt can, in short, do everything that is not naturally 
“impossible; and therefore some have not scrupled 
“to call its power, by a figure rather too bold, the 
‘omnipotence of Parliament. True itis, that what the 
‘Parliament doth, no authority upon earth can undo. 
“So that it is a matter most essential to the liberties of 
“this kingdom, that such members be delegated to this 
‘important trust, as are most eminent for their probity, 
“their fortitude, and their knowledge; for it was a 
“known apophthegm of the great lord treasurer Bur- 
“leigh, ‘that England could never be ruined but by 
‘a Parliament’: and, as Sir Matthew Hale observes, 
“this being the highest and greatest court over which 
“none other can have jurisdiction in the kingdom, if 
‘“‘by any means a misgovernment should any way fall 
“upon it, the subjects of this kingdom are left without 
‘all manner of remedy. To the same purpose the 
‘president Montesquieu, though I trust too hastily, 
‘‘ presages ; that as Rome, Sparta, and Carthage have 
“lost their liberty and perished, so the constitution of 
“England will in time lose its liberty, will perish : 
‘it will perish whenever the legislative power shall 
“become more corrupt than the executive.” ! 

1 Blackstone, Commentaries, i. pp. 160, 161. Compare as to 
sovereignty of Parliament, De Republica Anglorum; A Discourse on 
the Commonwealth of England, by Sir Frederick Smith, edited by L. 

Alston, Book ii. chap. i. p. 148. The book was originally published 
in 1583. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 41 

De Lolme has summed up the matter in a gro- Chapter 
tesque expression which has become almost proverbial. _ + 

‘It is a fundamental principle with English lawyers, 
“that Parliament can do everything but make a 
“woman & man, and a man a woman.” 

This supreme legistative authority of Parliament: Historical 

is shown historically in a large number of instances. Srraic 

The descent of the Crown was varied and finally fixed D&'* 
under the Act of Settlement, 12 & 13 William III., c. 2; v. 
the King occupies the throne under a Parliamentary ie 
title ; his claim to reign depends upon and is the result ™°™* 
ofastatute. This is a proposition which, at the present 
day, no one is inclined either to maintain or to dis- 
pute; but a glance at the statute-book shows that 
not much more than two hundred years ago Parlia- 
ment had to insist strenuously upon the principle of 
its own lawful supremacy. The first section of 6 
Anne, c. 7, enacts (inter alia), ‘‘ That if any person or 
“‘ persons shall maliciously, advisedly, and directly by 
“writing or printing maintain and affirm that our 
‘sovereign lady the Queen that now is, is not the 
“lawful and rightful Queen of these realms, or that the 
“‘ pretended Prince of Wales, who now styles himself 
“ King of Great Britain, or King of England, by the 
“‘ name of James the Third, or King of Scotland, by the 
name of James the Eighth, hath any right or title to 
‘the Crown of these realms, or that any other person 
“‘ or persons hath or have any right or title to the same, 

“ otherwise than according to an Act of Parliament 
‘made in England in the first year of the reign of their 
“late Majesties King William and Queen Mary, of 
‘ever blessed and glorious memory, intituled, An Act 
« declaring the rights and liberties of the subject, and 

Part L. 

Acts of 
Union. 

Septennial 
Act. 

42 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

“settling the succession of the Crown ; and one other 
“ Act made in England in the twelfth year of the reign 
“of his said late Majesty King William the Third, 
“intituled, An Act for the further limitation of the 
‘Crown, and better securing the rights and liberties of 
“the subject ; and the Acts lately made in England 
‘‘and Scotland mutually for the union of the two 
“kingdoms ; or that the Kings or Queens of this realm, 
“with and by the authority of Parliament, are not able 
“to make laws and statutes of sufficient force and 
“‘ validity to limit and bind the Crown, and the descent, 
‘limitation, inheritance, and government thereof ; 
‘every such person or persons shall be guilty of high 
“ treason, and being thereof lawfully convicted, shall be 
‘‘ adjudged traitors, arid shall suffer pains of death, and 
‘all losses and forfeitures as in cases of high treason,” * 

The Acts of Union (to one of which Blackstone 
calls attention) afford a remarkable example of the 
exertion of Parliamentary authority. But there is no 
single statute which is more significant either as to 
the theory or as to the practical working of the 
constitution than the Septennial Act.? The circum- 
stances of its enactment and the nature of the Act 
itself merit therefore special attention. 

In 1716 the duration of Parliament was under an 
Act of 1694 limited to three years, and a general 
election could not be deferred beyond 1717. The 
King and the Ministry were convinced (and with 
reason) that an appeal to the electors, many of whom 
were Jacobites, might be perilous not only to the 
Ministry but to the tranquillity of the state. The 

1 6 Anne, c. 41 (otherwise 6 Anne, c. 7), sec, 1. This enactment 
is still in force. 2 1 George I. st. 2, c. 38. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 43 

Parliament then sitting, therefore, was induced by the 
Ministry to pass the Septennial Act by which the 
legal duration of Parliament was extended from three 
to seven years, and the powers of the then existing 
House of Commons were in effect. prolonged for four 
years beyond the time for which the House was 
elected. This was a much stronger proceeding than 
passing say an Act which enabled future Parliaments 
to continue in existence without the necessity for a 
general election during seven instead of during three 
years. The statute was justified by considerations 
of statesmanship and expediency. This justification 
of the Septennial Act must seem to every sensible 
man 80 ample that it is with some surprise that one 
reads in writers so fair and judicious as Hallam or 
Lord Stanhope attempts to minimise the importance 
of this supreme display of legislative authority. 
“‘ Nothing,” writes Hallam, ‘“‘can be more extravagant 
“than what is sometimes confidently pretended by 
“the ignorant, that the legislature exceeded its rights 
“by this enactment; or, if that cannot legally be 
‘‘ advanced, that it at least violated the trust of the 
** people, and broke in upon the ancient constitution ;” 
and this remark he bases on the ground that “the 
‘‘law for triennial Parliaments was of little more than 
“twenty years’ continuance. It was an experiment, 
‘which, as was argued, had proved unsuccessful ; it 
‘was subject, like every other law, to be repealed 
“entirely, or to be modified at discretion.” ’ 

“We may,” says Lord Stanhope, “. . . cast aside 
“the foolish idea that the Parliament overstepped its 
“legitimate authority in prolonging its existence; an 

1 Hallam, Constitutional History of England, iii. (1872 ed.), p. 236. 

Chapter 

Part L. 

44 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

“idea which was indeed urged by party-spirit at the 
‘time, and which may still sometimes pass current in 
‘‘ harangues to heated multitudes, but which has been 
“treated with utter contempt by the best constitu- 
“tional writers.” ' ; 
These remarks miss the real point of the attack .on 

ot the Septennial Act, and also conceal the constitutional 

importance of the statute. The thirty-one peers 
who protested against the Bill because (among other 
grounds) “it is agreed, that the House of Commons 
“must be chosen by the people, and when so chosen, 
“they are truly the representatives of the people, 
‘which they cannot be so properly said to be, when 
“continued for a longer time than that for which they 
“were chosen ; for after that time they are chosen by 
“the Parliament, and not the people, who are thereby 
“deprived of the only remedy which they have against 
“those, who either do not understand, or through 
“corruption, do wilfully betray the trust reposed in 
“them ; which remedy is, to choose better men in their 
“places,” * hit exactly the theoretical objection to it. 
The peculiarity of the Act was not that it changed 
the legal duration of Parliament or repealed the 
Triennial Act ;* the mere passing of a Septennial Act 
in 1716 was not and would never have been thought 
to be anything more startling or open to graver cen- 
sure than the passing of a Triennial Act in 1694. 
What was startling was that an existing Parliament 
of its own authority prolonged its own legal existence. 
Nor can the argument used by Priestley,‘ and in effect 

1 Lord Mahon, Htstory of England, i. p. 302. 
? Thorold Rogers, Protests of the Lords, i. p. 218. 
36 Wm. & M.c. 2. 
4 See Priestley on Government (1771), p. 20. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 45 

by the protesting Peers, “that Septennial Parliaments 
‘‘were at first a direct usurpation of the rights of the 
‘people; for by the same authority that one Parlia- 
“ment prolonged their own power to seven years, they 
“might have continued it to twice seven, or like the 
“Parliament of 1641 have made it perpetual,” be 
treated as a blunder grounded simply on the “ignorant 
assumption” that the Septennial Act prolonged the 
original duration of Parliament.! The contention of 
Priestley and others was in substance that members 
elected to serve for three years were constitutionally 
so far at least the delegates or agents of their con- 
stituents that they could not, without an inroad on 
the constitution, extend their own authority beyond 
the period for which it was conferred upon them by 
their principals, z.e. the electors. There are countries, 

and notably the United States, where an Act like the 

Septennial Act would be held legally invalid; no 
modern English Parttament-would for the sake of 

keeping a government or party in office venture to 
pass say a Decennial Act and thus prolong its own 
duration ; the contention therefore that Walpole and 
his followers in passing the Septennial Act violated 
the understandings of the constitution has on the 
face of it nothing absurd. Parliament made a legal 
though unprecedented use of its powers. To under- 
rate this exertion of authority is to deprive the 
Septennial Act of its true constitutional importance. 
That Act proves to demonstration that in a legal point 
of view Parliament is neither the agent of the electors 
nor in any sense a trustee for its constituents. It is 
legally the sovereign legislative power in the state, 
1 Hallam, Constitutional History, ifi. (1872 ed.), p. 236 (n.). 

Chapter 

46 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

and the Septennial Act is at once the result and the 
standing proof of such Parliamentary sovereignty. 

Hitherto we have looked at Parliament as legally 
omnipotent in regard to public rights. Let us now 
consider the position of Parliament in regard to those 
private rights which are in civilised states justly held 
specially secure or sacred. Coke (it should be noted) 
particularly chooses interference with private rights 
as specimens of Parliamentary authority. 

“Yet some examples are desired. Daughters and 
‘heirs apparent of a man or woman, may by Act of 
‘Parliament inherit during the life of the ancestor. 

“Tt may adjudge an infant, or minor, of full age. 

“To attaint a man of treason after his death. 

“To naturalise a mere alien, and make him a 
‘subject born. It may bastard a child that by law 
‘is legitimate, viz. begotten by an adulterer, the 
“husband being within the four seas. 

“To legitimate one that is illegitimate, and born 
“before marriage absolutely. And to legitimate 
“secundum quid, but not simpliciter.” ' 

Coke is judicious in his choice of instances. 
Interference with public rights is at bottom a less 
striking exhibition of absolute power than is the 
interference with the far more important rights of 
individuals; a ruler who might think nothing of 
overthrowing the constitution of his country, would - 
in all probability hesitate a long time before he 
touched the property or interfered with the contracts 
of private persons. Parliament, however, habitually 
interferes, for the public advantage, with private 
rights. Indeed such interference has now (greatly to 

1 Coke, Fourth Institute, p. 36. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 47 
Scherer + hanna tellin sti adintethamdi nt nacalas 
the benefit of the community) become so much a 
matter of course as hardly to excite remark, and few 
persons reflect what a sign this interference is of the 
supremacy of Parliament. The statute-book teems 
with Acts under which Parliament gives privileges or 
rights to particular persons or imposes particular 
duties or liabilities upon other persons. This is of 
course the-case with every railway Act, but no one 
will realise the full action, generally the very bene- 
ficial action of Parliamentary sovereignty, who does 
not look through a volume or two of what are called 
Local and Private Acts. These Acts are just as 
much Acts of Parliament as any Statute of the Realm. 
They deal with every kind of topic, as with railways, 
harbours, docks, the settlement of private estates, and 
the like. To these you should add Acts such as those 
which declare valid marriages which, owing to some 
mistake of form or otherwise, have not been properly 
celebrated, and Acts, common enongh at one time but 
now rarely passed, for the divorce of married persons. 

One further class of statutes deserve in this con- 
nection more notice than they have received—these 
are Acts of Indemnity. 

Chapter 

An Act of Indemnity is a statute, the object of Acts of 

which is to make legal transactions which when they 
took place were illegal, or to free individuals to whom 
the statute applies from liability for having broken 
the law; enactments of this kind were annually 
passed with almost unbroken regularity for more than 
a century (1727-1828) to free Dissenters from penal- 
ties, for having accepted municipal offices without 
duly qualifying themselves by taking the sacrament 
according to the rites of the Church of England. To 

Indemnity. 

Part L 

authority. 

The King. 

Statute of 
Proclama- 
tions. 

48 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

the subject of Acts of Indemnity, however, we shall 
return in a later chapter.1 The point to be now 
noted is that such enactments being as it were the 
legalisation of illegality are the highest exertion and 
crowning proof of sovereign power. 

So far of the sovereignty of Parliament from its 
positive side: let us now look at the same doctrine 
from its negative aspect. 

II. The absence of any competing legislative 
power.—The King, each House of Parliament, the 
Constituencies, and the Law Courts, either have at 
one time claimed, or might appear to claim, inde- 
pendent legislative power. It will be found, however, 
on examination that the claim can in none of these 
cases be made good. 

(i.) The King.—Legislative authority originally 
resided in the King in Council,’ and even after the 
commencement of Parliamentary legislation there 
existed side by side with it a system of royal legis- 
lation under the form of Ordinances,’ and (at a later 
period) of Proclamations. 

These had much the force of law, and in the year 
1539 the Act 31 Henry VIII., c. 8, formally empowered 
the Crown to legislate by means of proclamations. 
This statute is so short and so noteworthy that it may 
well be quoted in extenso. ‘The King,” it runs, “ for 
‘the time being, with the advice of his Council, or the 
“more part of them, may set forth proclamations under 

1 See Chap. V. post. 

® See Stubbs, Constitutional History, i. pp. 126-128, and ii. pp. 
245-247. 

8 Stubbs, thid. ii. chap. xv. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 49 

much penalties and pains as to him and them shall 

“seem necessary, which shall be observed as though 
“they were made by Act of Parliament ; but this shall 

“not be prejudicial to any person’s inheritance, offices, 
* liberties, goods, chattels, or life; and whosoever shall 
‘‘ willingly offend any article contained in the said pro- 

‘‘clamations, shall pay such forfeitures, or be so long 

“imprisoned, as shall be expressed in the said pro- 

‘‘clamations; and if any offending will depart the 
‘realm, to the intent he will not answer his said 
“ offence, he shall be adjudged a traitor.” * 

This enactment marks the highest point of legal 
authority ever reached by the Crown, and, probably 
because of its inconsistency with the whole tenor of 
English law, was repealed in the reign of Edward the 
Sixth. It is curious to notice how revolutionary 
would have been the results of the statute had it 
remained in force. It must have been followed by 
two consequences. An English king would have 
become nearly as despotic as a French monarch. The 
statute would further have established a distinction 
between “laws” properly so called as being made by 
the legislature and “ ordinances” having the force of 
law, though not in strictness laws as being rather 
decrees of the executive power than Acts of the legis- 
lature. This distinction exists in one form or another 
in most continental states, and is not without great 
practical utility. In foreign countries the legislature 
generally confines itself to laying down general prin- 
ciples of legislation, and leaves them with great 
advantage to the public to be supplemented by decrees 
or regulations which are the work of the executive. 

1 31 Henry VIII, « 8. 
E 

Chapter 

Part L 

50 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

The cumbersomeness and prolixity of English statute 
law is due in no small measure to futile endeavours of 
Parliament to work out the details of large legislative 
changes. This evil-has become so apparent that in 
modern times Acts of Parliament constantly contain 
provisions empowering the Privy Council, the judges, 
or some other body, to make rules under the Act for 
the determination of details which cannot be settled 
by Parliament. But this is only an awkward miti- 
gation! of an acknowledged evil, and the substance no 
less than the form of the law would, it is probable, be 
a good deal improved if the executive government of 
England could, like that of France, by means of decrees, 
ordinances, or proclamations having the force of law, 
work out the detailed application of the general 
principles embodied in the Acts of the legislature.* 
In this, as in some other instances, restrictions wisely 
placed by our forefathers on the growth of royal power, 
are at the present day the cause of unnecessary 
restraints on the action of the executive government. 
For the repeal of 31 Henry VIII, c. 8, rendered 
1 A critic has objected to the words “awkward mitigation of an 
acknowledged evil” on the ground that they condemn in England a 
system which as it exists abroad is referred to as being not without 
great practical utility. The expression objected to is, however, 
justifiable. Under the English system elaborate and detailed statutes 
are passed, and the power to make rules under the statute, eg. by 
order in council or otherwise, is introduced only in cases where it 
is obvious that to embody the rules in the statute is either highly in- 
expedient or practically impossible. Under the foreign, and especially | 
the French system, the form of laws, or in other worda, of statutes, is 
permanently affected by the knowledge of legislators and draftsmen 
that any law will be supplemented by decreea English statutes 
attempt, and with very little success, to provide for the detailed execu- 
tion of the laws enacted therein. Foreign laws are, what every law 

ought to be, statements of general principles. 

* See Duguit, Manuel de Droit Public Francais—Droit Constitu- 
tionnel, a8. 140, 141. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY st 

governmental legislation, with all its defects and 
merits, impossible, and left to proclamations only 
such weight as they might possess at common law. 
The exact extent of this authority was indeed for 
some time doubtful. In 1610, however, a solemn 
opinion or protest of the judges! established the 
modern doctrine that royal proclamations have in no 
sense the force of law; they serve to call the attention 
of the public to the law, but they cannot of themselves 
impose upon any man any legal obligation or duty not 
imposed by common law or by Act of Parliament. In 
1766 Lord Chatham attempted to prohibit by force of 
proclamation the exportation of wheat, and the Act of 
Indemnity (7 George III., c. 7), passed in consequence 
of this attempt, may be considered the final legislative 
disposal of any claim on the part of the Crown to 
make law by force of proclamation. 

The main instances * where, in modern times, pro- 

1 See Coke, 12 Rep. p. 74; and Gardiner, History of England, ii. 
pp- 104, 105. 

2 In rare instances, which are survivals from the time when the 
King of England was the true “sovereign” in the technical sense of 
that term, the Crown exercises legislative functions in virtue of the 
prerogative. Thus the Crown can legislate, by proclamations or orders 
in council, for a newly conquered country (Campbell v. Hall, Cowp. 
204), and has claimed the right, though the validity thereof is doubt- 
ful, to legislate for the Channel Islands by orders in council In the 
Matter of the States of Jersey, 9 Moore P. C.,n.8 184, 262. See 
Stephen, Commentaries (8th ed.), i. pp. 100-102. “The Channel Islands 
indeed claim to have conquered England, and are the sole fragments 
of the dukedom of Normandy which still continue attached to the 
British Crown. For this reason, in these islands alone of all British 
possessions does any doubt arise as to whether an Act of the imperial 
Parliament is of its own force binding law. In practice, when an Act 
is intended to apply to them, a section is inserted authorising the King 
in Council to issue an Order for the application of the Act to these 
islands, and requiring the registration of that Order in the islands, and 
the Order in Council is made by the King and registered by the States 
accordingly.” Sir H. Jenkyns, British Rule and Jurisdiction beyond the 

Chapter 

Part L 

Houses of 
Parlia- 

ment, 

Resola- 
tions o 
either 

House. 

52 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

clamations or orders in council are of any effect are 
cases either where, at common law, a proclamation is 
the regular mode, not of legislation, but of announcing 
the executive will‘of the King, as when Parliament is 
summoned by proclamation, or else where orders in 
council have authority given to them by Act of 
Parliament. 

(ii.) Resolutions of either House of Parliament.— 
The House of Commons, at any rate, has from time to 
time appeared to claim for resolutions of the House, 
something like legal authority. That this pretension 
cannot be supported is certain, but there exists some 
difficulty in defining with precision the exact effect 
which the Courts concede to a resolution of either 
House. 

Two points are, however, well established. 

First, The resolution of neither House is a law. 

This is the substantial result of the case of Stock- 
dale v. Hansard.‘ The gist of the decision in that 
case is that a libellous document did not cease to be 
a libel because it was published by the order of the 
House of Commons, or because the House subsequently 
resolved that the power of publishing the report which 
contained it, was an essential incident to the constitu- 
tional functions of Parliament. 

Secondly, Each House of Parliament has complete 

Seas, p. 37. But whatever doubt may arise in the Channel Islands, 
every English lawyer knows that any English court will hold that an 
Act of Parliament clearly intended to apply to the Channel Islands is 
in force there proprio vigore, whether registered by the States or not. 

As to the legislative power of the Crown in Colonies which are not 
self-governing, see further British Rule and Jurisdiction beyond the Seas, 
p. 95, 

19A&E. 1. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 53 

control over its own proceedings, and also has the 
right to protect itself by committing for contempt any 
person who commits any injury against, or offers any 
affront to the House, and no Court of law will inquire 
into the mode in which either House exercises the 
powers which it by law possesses.’ 

The practical difficulty lies in the reconciliation of 
the first with the second of these propositions, and is 
best met by following out the analogy suggested by 
Mr. Justice Stephen, between a resolution of the 
House of Commons, and the decision of a Court from 
which there is no appeal. 

““T do not say,” runs his judgment, ‘“‘that the 
“resolution of the House is the judgment of a Court 
“not subject to our revision; but it has much in 
“common with such a judgment. The House of 
‘Commons is not a Court of Justice; but the effect 
“of its privilege to regulate its own internal concerns, 
‘‘ practically invests it with a judicial character when 
‘it has to apply to particular cases the provisions of 
** Acts of Parliament. We must presume that it dis- 
‘charges this function properly, and with due regard 
“to the laws, in the making of which it has so great 
‘a share. If its determination is not in accordance 
‘with law, this resembles the case of an error by a 
“judge whose decision is not subject to appeal. There 
“is nothing startling in the recognition of the fact 
‘that such an error is possible. If, for instance, a 
“jury in a criminal case give a perverse verdict, the 
‘law has provided no remedy. The maxim that there 

1 See Stockdale v. Hansard,9 A. & E.1; Case of Shertff of Middlesex, 
11 A. & E. 273; Burdett v. Abbot, 14 East, 1, 111, 131; Bradlaugh 
y. Gossett, 12 Q. B. D. 272, : 

Chapter 

Part L 

Law as to 
effect of 
resolutions 
of either 
House. 

54 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

“is no wrong without a remedy, does not mean, as it 
‘ig sometimes supposed, that there is a legal remedy 
“for every moral or political wrong. If this were its 
“meaning, it would be manifestly untrue. There is 
“no legal remedy for the breach of a solemn promise 
“not under seal, and made without consideration ; 
“nor for many kinds of verbal slander, though each 
“may involve utter ruin; nor for oppressive legisla- 
“tion, though it may reduce men practically to 
“slavery; nor for the worst damage to person and 
‘‘ property inflicted by the most unjust and cruel war. 
“The maxim means only that legal wrong and legal 
“remedy are correlative terms; and it would be more 
‘‘intelligibly and correctly stated, if it were reversed, 
“so as to stand, ‘ Where there is no legal remedy, 
“there is no legal wrong.’ ”’* 

The law therefore stands thus. Hither House of 
Parliament has the fullest power over its own pro- 
ceedings, and can, like a Court, commit for contempt 
any person who, in the judgment of the House, is 
guilty of insult or affront to the House. The Case of 
the Sheriff of Middlesex? carries this right to the very 
farthest point. The Sheriff was imprisoned for con- 
tempt under a warrant issued by the Speaker. Every 
one knew that the alleged contempt was nothing else 
than obedience by the Sheriff to the judgment of the 
Court of Queen’s Bench in the case of Stockdale v. 
Hansard, and that the Sheriff was imprisoned by the 
House because under such judgment he took the 
goods of the defendant Hansard in execution. Yet 
when the Sheriff was brought by Habeas Corpus before 
the Queen’s Bench the Judges held that they could 

1 Bradlaugh v. Gossett, 12 Q. B. D. 271, 285. 211A. & E, 273. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 55 

not inquire what were the contempta for which the 
Sheriff was committed by the House. The Courts, in 
other words, do not claim any right to protect their 
own Officials from being imprisoned by the House of 
Commons for alleged contempt of the House, even 
though the so-called contempt is nothing else than an 
act of obedience to the Courts. A declaration or 
resolution of either House, on the other hand, is not in 
any sense a law. Suppose that X were by order of 
the House of Commons to assault A out of the House, 
irrespective of any act done in the House, and not 
under a warrant committing A for contempt; or 
suppose that X were to commit some offence by 
which he incurred a fine under some Act of Parlia- 
ment, and that such fine were recoverable by A asa 
common informer. No resolution of the House of 
Commons ordering or approving of X’s act cauld be 
pleaded by X as a legal defence to proceedings, either 
civil or criminal, against him.’ If proof of this were 
wanted it would be afforded by the Act 3 & 4 Vict. 
c. 9. The object of this Act, passed in consequence of 
the controversy connected with the case of Stockdale 
v. Hansard, is to give summary protection to persons 
employed in the publication of Parliamentary papers, 
which are, it should be noted, papers published by the 
order of one or other of the Houses of Parliament. 
The necessity for such an Act is the clearest proof 
that an order of the House is not of itself a legal 
defence for the publication of matters which would 
otherwise be libellous. The House of Commons, “ by 
“invoking the authority of the whole Legislature to 
“give validity to the plea they had vainly set up 

1 Conf. Attorney-General v. Bradlaugh, 14 Q. B. D. (C. A.), 667. 

Chapter 

Part L 

56 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

“in the action [of Stockdale v. Hansard], and by 
“not appealing against the judgment of the Court 
‘Cof Queen’s Bench, had, in effect, admitted the 
“ correctness of that judgment and affirmed the great 
“principle on which it was founded, viz. that no single 
“branch of the Legislature can, by any assertion of its 
“alleged privileges, alter, suspend, or supersede any 
“known law of the land, or bar the resort of any 
“Englishman to any remedy, or his exercise and 
“enjoyment of any right, by that law established.” ? 

1 Arnould, Memoir of Lord Denman, ii. p. 70. Nothing is harder 
to define than the extent of the indefinite powers or rights possessed 
by either House of Parliament under the head of privilege or law and 
custom of Parliament. The powers exercised by the Houses, and 
especially in practice by the House of Commons, make a near approach 
to an authority above that of the ordinary law of the land. Parlia- 
mentary privilege has from the nature of things never been the subject 
of precise legal definition, One or two points are worth notice as 
being clearly established. 

1. Either House of Parliament may commit for contempt, and the 
Courts will not go behind the committal and inquire into the facts 
constituting the alleged contempt. Hence either House may commit 
to prison for contempt any person whom the House think guilty of 
contempt. 

2. The House of Lords have power to commit an offender to prison 
for a specified term, even beyond the duration of the session (May, 
Parliamentary Practice (11th ed.), pp. 91, 92). But the House of 
Commons do not commit for a definite period, and prisoners committed 
by the House are, if not sooner discharged, released from their confine- 
ment on 8 prorogation. If they were held longer in custody they 
would be discharged by the Courts upon a writ of Habeas Corpus 
(May, Parliamentary Practice, chap. iii.). 

3. A libel upon either House of Parliament or upon a member 
thereof, in his character of a member, has been often treated as a 
contempt. (Ibid.) 

4. The Houses and all the members thereof have all the privileges 
as to freedom of speech, etc., necessary for the performance of their 
duties, (See generally May’s Parliamentary Practice, chap. iii) 
Compare as to Parliamentary privilege Shaftesbury’s Case, 6 St. Tr. 
1269 ; Flower’s Case, 8 T. R. 314 ; Ashby v. White, 1 Sm. L. Cas. (9th 
ed.), 268 ; Wilkes’s Case, 19 St. Tr. 1153 ; Burdett v. Colman, 14 East, 
163 ; Rex v. Creevy, 1 M. & 8. 273; Clarke v. Bradlaugh, 7 Q. B. D. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 57 
SR ONS VEY CV HA AA 08S! 

(iii.) The Vote of the Parliamentary Electors.— chapter 
Expressions are constantly used in the course of 1! 
political discussions which imply that the body of Tbe Con- 
persons entitled to choose members of Parliament 
possess under the English constitution some kind of 
legislative authority. Such language is, as we shall 
see, not without a real meaning;’ it points to the 
important consideration that the wishes of the con- 
stituencies influence the action of Parliament. But 
any expressions which attribute to Parliamentary 
electors a legal part in the process of law-making are 
quite inconsistent with the view taken by the law of 
the position of an elector. The sole legal right of 
electors under the English constitution is to elect 
members of Parliament. Electors have no legal 
means of initiating, of sanctioning, or of repealing the 
legislation of Parliament. No Court will consider for 
@ moment the argument that a law is invalid as being 
opposed to the opinion of the electorate; their opinion 
can be legally expressed through Parliament, and 
through Parliament alone. This is not a necessary 
incident of representative government. In Switzer- 
land no change can be introduced in the constitution ° 
which has not been submitted for approval or dis- 
approval to all male citizens who have attained their 
majority ; and even an ordinary law which does not 
involve a change in the constitution may, after it has 
been passed by the Federal Assembly, be submitted 
on the demand of a certain number of citizens to a 

38, 8. App. Cas. 354; The Attorney-General v. Bradlaugh, 14 
Q B.D. 667. 

1 See pp. 70-74, post. 

2 Constitution Féderale de la Confédération Sutsse, Arta. 118-121; 
see Adams, The Swiss Confederation, chap. vi. 

58 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

Part popular vote, and is annulled if a vote is not obtained 
in its favour.’ 

TheCourts,  (iv.) The Law Courts.—A large proportion of 
English law is in reality made by the judges, and 
whoever wishes to understand the nature and the 
extent of judicial legislation in England, should read 
Pollock’s admirable essay on the Science of Case 
Law.* The topic is too wide a one to be considered 
at any length in these lectures. All that we need 
note is that the adhesion by our judges to pre- 
cedent, that is, their habit of deciding one case in 
accordance with the principle, or supposed principle, 
which governed a former case, leads inevitably to the 
gradual formation by the Courts of fixed rules for 
decision, which are in effect laws. This judicial legis- 
lation might appear, at first sight, inconsistent with 
the supremacy of Parliament. But this is not so. 
English judges do not claim or exercise any power to 
repeal a Statute, whilst Acts of Parliament may over- 
ride and constantly do override the law of the judges. 
Judicial legislation is, in short, subordinate legislation, 
carried on with the assent and subject to the super- 
vision of Parliament. 

Alleged B. Alleged legal limitations on the legislative 
imitations. sovereignty of Parliament.—All that can be urged 
as to the speculative difficulties of placing any limits 
whatever on sovereignty has been admirably stated 
by Austin and by Professor Holland.’ With these 

1 Constitution Fédérale de la Confédération Sutsse, Art. 89. 

2 Pollock, Essays in Jurisprudence and Ethics, p. 237, and see 
Dicey, Law and Opinion in England, pp. 359, 481. 

® See Austin, Jurisprudence, i. (4th ed.), pp. 270-274, and Holland, 
Jurisprudence (10th ed.), pp. 47-52 and 359-363. The nature of 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 59 
Dit ic el lal ld Iola ia ost oe ieee, 
difficulties we have, at this moment, noconcern. Nor 
18 it necessary to examine whether it be or be not 
true, that there must necessarily be found in every 
state some person, or combination of persons, which, 
according to the constitution, whatever be its form, 
can legally change every law, and therefore consti- 
tutes the legally supreme power in the state. Our 
whole business is now to carry a step further the 
proof that, under the English constitution, Parliament 
does constitute such a supreme legislative authority 
or sovereign power as, according to Austin and other 
jurists, must exist in every civilised state, and for 
that purpose to examine into the validity of the 
various suggestions, which have from time to time 
been made, as to the possible limitations on Parlia- 
mentary authority, and to show that none of them 
are countenanced by English law. 

The suggested limitations are three in number.’ 

First, Acts of Parliament, it has been asserted, 
are invalid if they are opposed to the principles of 
morality or to the doctrines of international law. 
Parliament, it is in effect asserted, cannot make a Jaw 
opposed to the dictates of private or public morality. 
Thus Blackstone lays down in so many words that 

sovereignty is also stated with brevity and clearness in Lewis, Use 
and Abuse of Political Terms, pp. 37-53. Compare, for a different view, 
Bryce, Studies in History and Jurisprudence, ii., Easay ix., Obedience ; 
and Essay x., The Nature of Sovereignty. 

1 Another limitation has been suggested more or less distinctly by 
judges such as Coke (12 Rep. 76 ; and Hearn, Government of England 
(2nd ed.), pp. 48, 49); an Act of Parliament cannot (it has been inti- 
mated) overrule the principles of the common law. This doctrine 
once had a real meaning (see Maine, Early History of Institutions, 
pp. 381, 382), but it has never received systematic judicial sanction 
and is now obsolete. See Colonial Laws Validity Act, 1865, 28 & 29 
Vict. c. 63. 

Chapter 

Moral law. 

Part L 

60 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

the “law of nature being coeval with mankind, and 
“ dictated by God himself, is of course superior in 
“ obligation to any other. It is binding over all the 
“ globe, in all countries, and at all times: no human 
“ laws are of any validity if contrary to this ; and such 
‘of them as are valid derive all their force and all 
“their authority, mediately or immediately, from this 
“original ;”! and expressions are sometimes used by 
modern judges which imply that the Courts might 
refuse to enforce statutes going beyond the proper 
limits (internationally speaking) of Parliamentary 
authority. But to words such as those of Black- 
stone, and to the obiter dicta of-the Bench, we must 
give a very qualified interpretation. There is no 
legal basis for the theory that judges, as exponents 
of morality, may overrule Acts of Parliament. Lan- 
guage which might seem to imply this amounts in 
reality to nothing more than the assertion that the 
judges, when attempting to ascertain what is the 
meaning to be affixed to an Act of Parliament, will 
presume that Parliament did not intend to violate 
the ordinary rules of morality, or the principles of 
international law, and will therefore, whenever pos- 
sible, give such an interpretation to a statutory 
enactment as may be consistent with the -doctrines 
both of private and of international morality. A 
modern judge would never listen to a barrister who 
argued that an Act of Parliament was invalid because 

1 Blackstone, Commentaries, i. p. 40; and see Hearn, Government 
of eae (2nd ed.), pp. 48, 49. 
See Ex parte Blain, 12 Ch. D. (C. A.), 522, 531, jud 
Sears! ( ), 522, 531, judgment of 
$ See Colquhoun v. Brooks, 21 Q. B. D. (C. A.), 52; and compare 

the language of Lord Esher, pp. 57, 58, with the judgment of F 
L. J. ibid. pp. 61,62. i ve Y 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 61 

it was immoral, or because it went beyond the limits 
of Parliamentary authority. The plain truth is that 
our tribunals uniformly act on the principle that a 
law alleged to be a bad law is ex hypothesi a law, and 
therefore entitled to obedience by the Courts. 

Secondly, Doctrines have at times! been main- 
tained which went very near to denying the right of 
Parliament to touch the Prerogative. 

In the time of the Stuarts* the doctrine was main- 
tained, not only by the King, but by lawyers and 
statesmen who, like Bacon, favoured the increase of 
royal authority, that the Crown possessed under the 
name of the “ prerogative” a reserve, so to speak, of 
wide and indefinite rights and powers, and that this 
prerogative or residue of sovereign power was superior 
to the ordinary law of the land. This doctrine com- 
bined with the deduction from it that the Crown 
could suspend the operation of statutes, or at any rate 
grant dispensation from obedience to them, certainly 
suggested the notion that the high powers of the pre- 
rogative were to a certain extent beyond the reach 
of Parliamentary enactment. We need not, however, 
now enter into the political controversies of another 
age. All that need be noticed is that though certain 
powers—as, for example, the right of making treaties 
—are now left by law in the hands of the Crown, and 
are exercised in fact by the executive government, no 
modern lawyer would maintain that these powers or 
any other branch of royal authority could not be regu- 
lated or abolished by Act of Parliament, or, what is 

1 See Stubbs, Constitutional History, ii. pp. 239, 486, 513-515. 
2 Gardiner, History, iii. pp. 1-5; compare, as to Bacon’s view of 
the prerogative, Francis Bacon, by Edwin A. Abbott, pp. 140, 260, 279. 

Chapter 
L 

Pre- 
rogative. 

Part L 

Acts of 
Parlia- 
ment. 

The Acts 
of Union. 

62 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

the same thing, that the judges might legally treat 
as invalid a statute, say, regulating the mode in which 
treaties are to be made, or making the assent of 
the Houses of Parliament necessary to the validity 
of a treaty.’ 

Thirdly, Language has occasionally been used in 
Acts of Parliament which implies that one Parliament 
can make laws which cannot be touched by any sub- 
sequent Parliament, and that therefore the legislative 
authority of an existing Parliament may be limited 
by the enactments of its predecessors.’ 

That Parliaments have more than once intended 
and endeavoured to pass Acts which should tie the 
hands of their successors is certain, but the endeavour 

1 Compare the parliamentary practice in accordance with which the 
consent or recommendation of the Crown is required to the introduction 
of bills touching the prerogative or the interests of the Crown. 

2 This doctrine was known to be erroneous by Bacon. “The 
“ principal law that was made this Parliament was a law of a strange 
“nature, rather just than legal, and more magnanimous than provident. 
“This law did ordain, That no person that did assist in arme or 
‘otherwise the King for the time being, should after be impeached 
“therefor, or attainted either by the couree of law or by Act of 
“Parliament ; for if any such act of attainder did hap to be made, it 
“should be void and of none effect. . . . But the force and obligation 
“‘of this law was in iteelf illusory, as to the latter part of it; (by a 
“‘precedent Act of Parliament to bind or frustrate a future). For a 
“supreme and absolute power cannot conclude itself, neither can that 
‘‘which is in nature revocable be made fixed; no more than if a man 
“should appoint or declare by his will that if he made any later will 
‘it should be void. And for the case of the Act of Parliament, there 
‘is a notable precedent of it in King Henry the Eighth’s time, who 
“doubting he might die in the minority of his son, provided an Act to 
“pass, That no statute made during the minority of a king should 
“bind him or his successors, except it were confirmed by the king 
“under his great seal at his fullage. But the first Act that passed in 
‘*King Edward the Sixth’s time was an Act of repeal of that former 
“Act; at which time nevertheless the King was minor. But things 
“that do not bind may satisfy for the time.” Works of Francis Bacon, 
vi., by Spedding, Ellis, and Heath (1861), pp. 159, 160. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 63 
Ce NY DAA BRINGS BNC) 1 
has always ended in failure. Of statutes intended to 
arrest the possible course of future legislation, the 
most noteworthy are the Acts which embody the 
treaties of Union with Scotland’ and Ireland.* The 
legislators who passed these Acts assuredly intended 
to give to certain portions of them more than the 
ordinary effect of statutes. Yet the history of legisla- 
tion in respect of these very Acts affords the strongest 
proof of the futility inherent in every attempt of one 
sovereign legislature to restrain the action of another 
equally sovereign body. Thus the Act of Union with 
Scotland enacts in effect that every professor of a 
Scotch University shall acknowledge and profess and 
subscribe the Confession of Faith as his profession of 
faith, and in substance enacts that this provision shall 
be a fundamental and essential condition of the treaty 
of union in all time coming.* But this very provision 
has been in its main part repealed by the Universities 
(Scotland) Act, 1853,‘ which relieves most professors 
in the Scotch universities from the necessity of sub- 
scribing the Confession of Faith. Nor is this by any 
means the only inroad made upon the terms of the 
Act of Union; from one point of view at any rate the 
Act 10 Anne, c. 12,° restoring the exercise of lay 
patronage, was a direct infringement upon the Treaty 
of Union. The intended unchangeableness, and the 
real liability of these Acts or treaties to be changed 
by Parliament, comes out even more strikingly in the 
history of the Act of Union with Ireland. The fifth 

1 The Union with Scotland Act, 1706, 6 Anne, c. 11. 
2 The Union with Ireland Act, 1800, 39 & 40 Geo. IIL, c. 67. 
3 See 6 Anne, c. 11, art. 25. 

416&17 Vict. c. 89, 6 1. 
5 Compare Innes, Law of Oreeds in Scotland, pp. 118-121. 

Chapter 

Part L 

Act limit- 
ing right of 
Parliantent 
to tax 
colonies. 

= 

64 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
iniiineeriabcmiai ihciern eS cnn acon OPE PS 
Article of that Act runs as follows :—‘‘ That it be the 
“fifth article of Union, that the Churches of England 
“ and Ireland as now by law established, be united into 
‘one Protestant episcopal Church, to be called the 
“United Church of England and Ireland; and that 
“the doctrine, worship, discipline, and government of 
“the said United Church shall be and shall remain 
“in full force for ever, as the same are now by law 
“established for the Church of England; and that 
‘the continuance and preservation of the said United 
‘Church, as the established Church of England and 
“Treland, shall be deemed and be taken to be an 
“ essential and fundamental part of the Union.” 

That the statesmen who drew and passed this 
Article meant to bind the action of future Parliaments 
is apparent from its language. That the attempt has 
failed of success is apparent to every one who knows 
the contents of the Irish Church Act, 1869. 

One Act, indeed, of the British Parliament might, 
looked at in the light of history, claim a peculiar 
sanctity. It is certainly an enactment of which the 
terms, we may safely predict, will never be repealed 
and the spirit will never be violated. This Act is the 
Taxation of Colonies Act, 1778.1 It provides that Par- 
liament “will not impose any duty, tax, or assessment 
‘whatever, payable in any of his Majesty’s colonies, 
“provinces, and plantations in North America or the 
‘‘ West Indies; except only such duties as it may be 
‘expedient fo impose for the regulation of commerce ; 
“the net produce of such duties to be always paid and 
‘applied to and for the use of the colony, province, or 
“plantation, in which the same shall be respectively 

1 18 Geo, III, « 12. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 65 
Se ETE BR PEN ALDER RG BN AO BE, 
“levied, in such manner.as other duties collected by 
“the authority of the respective general courts, or 
“general assemblies, of such colonies, provinces, or 
“plantations, are ordinarily paid and applied.” } 

This language becomes the more impressive when: 
contrasted with the American Colonies Act, 1776, 
which, being passed in that year to repeal the Acts 
imposing the Stamp Duties, carefully avoids any 
surrender of Parliament’s right to tax the colanies. 
There is no need to dwell on the course of events of 
which these two Acts are a statutory record. The 
point calling for attention is that though policy and 
prudence condemn the repeal of the Taxation of 
Colonies Act, 1778, or the enactment of any law 
inconsistent with its spirit, there is under our con- 
stitution no legal difficulty in the way of repeal- 
ing or overriding this Act. If Parliament were to- 
morrow to impose a tax, say on New Zealand or on 
the Canadian Dominion, the statute imposing it would 
be a legally valid enactment. As stated in short by a 
very judicious writer—“ It is certain that a Parliament 
“cannot so bind its successors by the terms of any 
‘‘ statute, as to limit the discretion of a future Parlia- 

“ment, and thereby disable the Legislature from: 

“entire freedom of action at any future time when 
“it might be needful to invoke the interposition of 
“Parliament to legislate for the public welfare.” ° 

1 18 Geo. LIL, c. 12, 8. 1. 2 6 Geo. III., c. 12. 
8 Todd, Parliamentary Government in the Brittsh Colontes, p. 192. 
It is a matter of curious, though not uninstructive, speculation to con- 
sider why it is that Parliament, though on several occasions passing 
Acts which were intended to be immutable, has never in reality 
succeeded in restricting its own legislative authority. 
This question may be considered either logically or historically. 
The logical reason why Parliament has failed in its endeavours to 
¥F 

Part L 

66 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

a 

Parliamentary sovereignty is therefore an un- 
doubted legal fact. 
It is complete both on its positive and on its 

enact unchangeable enactments is that a sovereign power cannot, while 
retaining ite sovereign character, restrict its own powers by any 
particular enactment. An Act, whatever its terms, passed by Parlia- 
ment might be repealed in a subsequent, or indeed in the same, session, 
and there would be nothing to make the authority of the repealing 
Parliament less than the authority of the Parliament by which the 
statute, intended to be immutable, was enacted. “Limited Sovereignty,” 
in ahort, is in the case of a Parliamentary as of every other sovereign, 
a contradiction in terma. Its frequent and convenient use arises from 
its in reality signifying, and being by any one who uses words with 
any accuracy understood to signify, that some person, ¢g. a king, 
who was at one time a real sovereign or despot, and who is in name 
treated as an actual sovereign, has become only a part of the power 
which is legally supreme or sovereign in a particular state. This, it 
may be added, is the true position of the king in most constitutional 
monarchies. 

Let the reader, however, note that the impossibility of placing a 
limit on the exercise of sovereignty does not in any way prohibit 
either logically, or in matter of fact, the abdication of sovereignty. 
This is worth observation, because a strange dogma is sometimes put 
forward that a sovereign power, such as the Parliament of the United 
Kingdom, can never by its own act divest iteelf of sovereignty. This 
position is, however, clearly untenable. An autocrat, such as the 
Russian Czar, can undoubtedly abdicate; but sovereignty or the 
possession of supreme power in a state, whether it be in the hands of 
a Czar or of a Parliament, is always one and the same quality. If 
the Czar can abdicate, so can a Parliament. To argue or imply that 
because sovereignty is not limitable (which is true) it cannot be 
surrendered (which is palpably untrue) involves the confusion of two 
distinct ideas. It is like arguing that because no man can, while he 
lives, give up, do what he will, his freedom of volition, so no man 
can commit suicide. A sovereign power can divest itself of authority 
in two ways, and (it is submitted) in two ways only. It may 
simply put an end to its own existence, Parliament could extinguish 
iteelf by legally dissolving iteelf and leaving no means whereby a 
subsequent Parliament could be legally summoned. (See Bryce, 
American Commonwealth, i, (3rd -ed.), p. 242, note 1.) A step nearly 
approaching to this was taken by the Barebones Parliament when, 
in 1653, it resigned its power into the hands of Cromwell. A 
sovereign again may transfer sovereign authority to another pereon or 
body of persons, The Parliament of England went very near doing 
this when, in 1539, the Crown was empowered to legislate by pro- 
clamation ; and though the fact is often overlooked, the Parliaments 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 67 
eee 

negative side. Parliament can legally legislate on 
any topic whatever which, in the judgment of Parlia- 

both of England and of Scotland did, at the time of the Union, each 
transfer sovereign power to 4 new sovereign body, namely, the Parlia- 
ment of Great Britain. This Parliament, however, just because it 
acquired the full authority of the two legislatures by which it was 
constituted, became in its turn a legally supreme or sovereign legis- 
lature, authorised therefore, though contrary perhaps to the intention 
of ite creators, to modify or abrogate the Act of Union by which it 
was constituted. If indeed the Act of Union had left alive the Par- 
liaments of England and of Scotland, though for one purpose only, 
namely, to modify when necessary the Act of Union, and had con- 
ferred upon the Parliament of Great Britain authority to pass any law 
whatever which did not infringe upon or repeal the Act of Union, then 
the Act of Union would have been a fundamental law unchangeable 
legally by the British Parliament: but in this case the Parliament of 
Great Britain would have been, not a sovereign, but a subordinate, 
legislature, and the ultimate sovereign body, in the technical sense of 
that term, would have been the two Parliaments of England and of 
Scotland respectively. The stateamen of these two countries saw fit 
to constitute a new sovereign Parliament, and every attempt to tie 
the hands of such a body necessarily breaks down, on the logical and 
practical impossibility of combining absolute legislative authority with 
restrictions on that authority which, if valid, would make it cease to 
be absolute. 

The historical reason why Parliament has never succeeded in 
passing immutable laws, or in other words, has always retained its 
character of a supreme legislature, lies deep in the history of the English 
people and in the peculiar development of the English constitution, 
England has, at any rate since the Norman Conquest, been always 
governed by an abeolute legislator. This lawgiver was originally the 
Crown, and the peculiarity of the process by which the English con- 

‘ stitution has been developed lies in the fact that the legislative authority 
of the Crown has never been curtailed, but has been transferred from 
the Crown acting alone (or rather in Council) to the Crown acting 
first together with, and then in subordination to, the Houses of Par- 
liament. Hence Parliament, or in technical terme the King in 
Parliament, has become—it would perhaps be better to eay has always 
remained—a supreme legislature. It is well worth notice that on the 
one oceasion when English reformers broke from the regular course of 
English historical development, they frained a written constitution, 
anticipating in many respects the constitutionalism of the United 
States, and placed the constitution beyond the control of the ordinary 
legislature. It is quite clear that, under the Instrument of Govern- 
ment of 1653, Cromwell intended certain fundamentals to be beyond 
the reach of Parliament, It may be worth observing that the con- 

Chapter 

Part L. 

Difficulties 
as to Par- 
liamentary 
sove- 
Teisnty. 

Difficulty 
from 
Austin’s 
theory. 

68 - THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
ee en 
ment, is a fit subject for legislation. There is no 
power which, under the English constitution, can 
come into rivalry with the legislative sovereignty of 
Parliament. . . 

No one of the limitations alleged to be imposed by 
law on the absolute authority of Parliament has any 
real existence, or reeeives any countenance, either 
from the statute-book or from the practice of the 
Courts. 

This doctrine of the legislative supremacy of Par- 
liament is the very keystone of the law of the consti- 
tution. But it is, we must admit, a dogma which 
does not always find ready acceptance, and it is well 
worth while to note and examine the difficulties 
which impede the admission of its truth. 

C. Difficulties as to the doctrine of Parliamentary 
Sovereignty.—The reasons why many persons find 
it hard to accept the doctrine of Parliamentary 
sovereignty are twofold. 

The dogma sounds like a mere application to the 
British constitution of Austin’s theory of sovereignty, 

' and yet intelligent students of Austin must have 

noticed that Austin’s own conclusion as to the 
persons invested with sovereign power under the 
British constitution does not agree with the view 
put forward, on the authority of English lawyers, in 

stitution of 1653 placed the Executive beyond the control of the 
legislature. The Protector under it occupied a position which may 
well be compared either with that of the American President or of 
the German Emperor. See Harrison, Cromwell, pp. 194-203. For a 
view of sovereignty which, though differing to a certain extent from 
the view put forward in this work, is full of interest and instruction, 
my readers are referred to Professor Sidgwick’s Klements of Politics, 
ch. xxxi, “ Sovereignty and Order.” 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 69 
ao as eer mal ec alt earch 
these lectures. For while lawyers maintain that 
sovereignty resides in “ Parliament,” 1. in the body 
constituted by the King, the House of Lords, and 
the House of Commons, Austin holds? that the 
sovereign power is vested in the King, the House of 
Lords, and the Commons or the electors. 

Every one, again, knows as a matter of common 
sense that, whatever lawyers may say, the sovereign 
power of Parliament is not unlimited, and that King, 
Lords, and Commons united do not possess anything 
like that “restricted omnipotence” —if the term 
may be excused—which is the utmost authority 
ascribable to any human institution. There are 
many enactments, and these laws not in themselves 
obviously unwise or tyrannical, which Parliament 
never would and (to speak plainly) never could pass. 
If the doctrine of Parliamentary sovereignty involves 
the attribution of unrestricted power to Parliament, 
the dogma is no better than a legal fiction, and cer- 
tainly is not worth the stress here laid upon it. 

Both these difficulties are real and reasonable 
difficulties. They are, it will be found, to a certain 
extent connected together, and well repay careful 
consideration. 

As to Austin’s theory of sovereignty in relation 
to the British constitution.—Sovereignty, like many 
of Austin’s conceptions, is a generalisation drawn in 
the main from English law, just as the ideas of the 
economists of Austin’s generation are (to a great 
extent) generalisations suggested by the circum- 

1 See Austin, Jurisprudence, i. (4th ed.), pp. 251-255. Compare 
Austin’s language as to the sovereign body under the constitution of 
the United States. (Austin, Jurisprudence, i. (4th ed.) p. 268.) 

Chapter 
L 

Difficulty 
from actual 
limitation 
on power 
of Parlia- 
ment. 

Criticism 
on Austin’s 
theory. 

kK 

7° THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

stances of English commerce. In England we are 
accustomed to the existence of a supreme legislative 
body, #.e. a body which can make or unmake every 
law ; and which, therefore, cannot be bound by any 
law. This is, from a legal point of view, the true 
conception of a sovereign, and the ease with which 
the theory of absolute sovereignty has been accepted 
by English jurists is due to the peculiar history of 
English constitutional Jaw. So far, therefore, from 
its being true that the sovereignty of Parliament is 
a deduction from abstract theories of jurisprudence, 
a critic would come nearer the truth who asserted 
that Austin’s theory of sovereignty is suggested 
by the position of the English Parliament, just as 
Austin’s analysis of the term “law” is at bottom an 
analysis of a typical law, namely, an English criminal 
statute. 

It should, however, be carefully noted that the 
term “sovereignty,” as long as it is accurately em- 
ployed in the sense in which Austin sometimes’ uses 
it, is a merely legal conception, and means simply the 
power of law-making unrestricted by any legal limit. 

If the term “sovereignty” be thus used, the sove- 

reign power under the English constitution is clearly 
“Parliament.” But the word “sovereignty ” is some- 
times employed in a political rather than in a strictly 
legal sense. That body is “ politically ” sovereign 
or supreme in a state the will of which is ultimately 
obeyed by the citizens of the state. In this sense of 
the word the electors of Great Britain may be said 
to be, together with the Crown and the Lords, or 
perhaps, in strict accuracy, independently of the King 
1} Compare Austin, Jurisprudence, i. (4th ed.), p. 268. 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 71 

and the Peers, the body in which sovereign power is 
vested. For, as things now stand, the will of the 
electorate, and certainly of the electorate in com- 
bination with the Lords and the Crown, is sure 
ultimately to prevail on all subjects to be determined 
by the British government. The matter indeed may 
be carried a little further, and we may assert that 
the arrangements of the constitution are now such 
as to ensure that the will of the electors shall by 
regular and constitutional means always in the end 
assert itself as the predominant influence in the 
country. But this is a political, not a legal fact. 
The electors can in the long run’ always enforce their 
will. But the Courts will take no notice of the will 

1 The working of a constitution is greatly affected by the rate at 
which the will of the political sovereign can make itself felt. In this 
matter we may compare the constitutions of the United States, of 
the Swiss Confederacy, and of the United Kingdom respectively. 
In each case the people of the country, or to speak more accurately 
the electorate, are politically sovereign. The action of the people of 
the United States in changing the Federal Constitution is impeded by 
many difficulties, and is practically slow; the Federal Constitution 
has, except after the civil war, not been materially changed daring the 
century which has elapsed since its formation. The Articles of the 
Swiss Confederation admit of more easy change than the Articles of the 
United States Constitution, and since 1848 have undergone consider- 
able modification. But though in one point of view the present con- 
stitution, revised in 1874, may be considered a new constitution, it 
does not differ fundamentally from that of 1848. As things now 
stand, the people of England can change any part of the law of the 
constitution with extreme rapidity. Theoretically there is no check 
on the action of Parliament whatever, and it may be conjectured that 
in practice any change however fundamental would be at once carried 
through, which was approved of by one House of Commons, and, after 
a dissolution of Parliament, was supported by the newly elected House. 
The paradoxical and inaccurate assertion, therefore, that England is 
more democratically governed than either the United States or Switzer- 
land, contains a certain element of trath ; the immediate wishes of a 
decided majority of the electorate of the United Kingdom can be more 
rapidly carried into legal effect than can the immediate wishes of a 
majority among the people either of America or of Switzerland. 

Chapter 
L 

Part I. 

72 ‘THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

of the electors. The judges know nothing about any 
will ‘of the people except in so far as that will is 
expressed by an Act of Parliament, and would never 
suffer the validity of a statute to be questioned on 
the ground of its having been passed or being kept 
alive. in opposition to the wishes of the electors. 
The political sense of the word “sovereignty ” is, it 
is true, fully as important as the legal sense or 
more so. But the two significations, though inti- 
mately connected together, are essentially different, 
and in some part of his work Austin has apparently 
confused the one sense with the other. 

“ Adopting the language,” he writes, “of some of 
‘the writers who have treated of the British constitu- 
‘tion, I commonly suppose that the present parlia- 
‘“‘ment, or the parliament for the time being, is possessed 
“of the sovereignty : or I commonly suppose that the 
“ King and the Lords, with the members of the Com- 
‘‘mons’ house, form a tripartite body which is sove- 
‘reign or supreme. But, speaking accurately, the 
“members of the Commons’ house are merely trustees 
“for the body by which they are elected and 
‘appointed: and, consequently, the sovereignty 
“always resides in the King and the Peers, with the 
“electoral body of the Commons. That a trust is 
‘imposed by the party delegating, and that the party 
“representing engages to discharge the trust, seems 
‘‘to be imported by the correlative expressions delega- 
“tion and representation. It were absurd to suppose 
“that the delegating empowers the representative 
‘party to defeat or abandon any of the purposes for 
‘“‘which the latter is appointed: to suppose, for 
“example, that the Commons empower their repre- 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 73 
ao ISMN S868 8 Sn reer nS mie!” 
“sentatives in parliament to relinquish their share in 
“the sovereignty to the King and the Lords.”? 

Austin owns that the doctrine here laid down by 
bim is inconsistent with the language used by writers 
who have treated of the British constitution. It is 
further absolutely inconsistent with the validity of the 
Septennial Act. Nothing is more certain than that 
no English judge ever conceded, or, under the present 
constitution, can concede, that Parliament is in any 
legal sense a “‘ trustee” * for the electors. Of such a 
feigned “ trust” the Courts know nothing. The plain 
truth is that as a matter of law Parliament is the 
sovereign power in the state, and that the “ supposi- 
tion” treated by Austin as inaccurate is the correct 
statement of a legal fact which forms the basis of our 
whole legislative and judicial system. It is, however, 
equally true that in a political sense the electors are 
.the most important part of, we may even say are 
actually, the sovereign power, since their will is under 
the present constitution sure to obtain ultimate 
obedience. The language therefore of Austin is as 
correct in regard to “ political” sovereignty as it is 
erroneous in regard to what we may term “ legal” 
sovereignty. The electors are a part of and the pre- 
dominant part of the politically sovereign power. 
But the legally sovereign power is assuredly, as 
maintained by all the best writers on the constitution, 
nothing but Parliament. 

It may be conjectured that the error of which 

1 Austin, Jurisprudence, i. (4th ed.), p. 253. 

2 This Austin concedes, but the admission is fatal to the con- 
tention that Parliament is not in strictness a sovereign. (See Austin, 
Jurisprudence, i. (4th ed.), pp. 252, 253.) 

Chapter 
L 

Part I. 

Existence 
of actual 
limitations 
to power 
not incon- 
sistent with 
sovereignty, 

External 
limit. 

74 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

ne cate a i Reg Phe aei rere 
(from a lawyer's point of view) Austin has been 
guilty arises from his feeling, as every person must 
feel who is not the slave to mere words, that Parlia- 
ment is (as already pointed out’) nothing like an 
omnipotent body, but that its powers are practically 
limited in more ways thanone. And this limitation 
Austin expresses, not very happily, by saying that 
the members of the House of Commons are subject 
to a trust imposed upon them by the electors. This, 
however, leads us to our second difficulty, namely, the 
coexistence of parliamentary sovereignty with the 
fact of actual limitations on the power of Parliament. 

As to the actual limitations on the sovereign 
power of Parliament.—The actual exercise of authority 
by any sovereign whatever, and notably by Parlia- 
ment, is bounded or controlled by two limitations. 
Of these the one is an external, the other is an internal 
limitation. 

The external limit to the real power of a sovereign 
consists in the possibility or certainty that his subjects, 
or a large number of them, will disobey or resist his 
laws. 

This limitation exists even under the most despotic 
monarchies. A Roman Emperor, or a French King 

‘during the middle of the eighteenth century, was (as 

is the Russian Czar at the present day) in strictness a 
‘sovereign ” in the legal sense of that term. He had 
absolute legislative authority. Any law made by him 
was binding, and there was no power in the empire or 
kingdom which could annul such law. It may also be 
true,—though here we are passing from the legal to 
the political sense of sovereignty,—that the will of an 
1 See p. 69, ante, 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 75 
a ER A eG wt AS 5? 
absolute monarch is in general obeyed by the bulk of 
his subjects. But it would be an error to suppose 
that the most absolute ruler who ever existed could 
in reality make or change every law at his pleasure. 
That this must be so results from considerations which 
were long ago pointed out by Hume. Force, he 
teaches, is in one sense always on the side of the 
governed, and government therefore in a sense always 
depends upon opinion. “Nothing,” hewrites, “appears 
“‘more surprising to those, who consider human affairs 
“‘ with a philosophical eye, than the easiness with which 
“‘the many are governed by the few; and the implicit 
‘‘ submission, with which men resign their own senti- 
“ments and passions to those of their rulers. When 
“ we inquire by what means this wonder is effected, we 
“shall find, that, as force is always on the side of the 
“‘ governed, the governors have nothing to support 
“them but opinion. It is, therefore, on opinion only 
“that government is founded ; and this maxim extends 
“to the most despotic and most military governments, 
“as well as to the most free and most popular. The 
“‘Soldan of Egypt, or the Emperor of Rome, might 
‘‘ drive his harmless subjects, like brute beasts, against 
‘their sentiments and inclination: But he must, at 
“least, have led his mamalukes or pretorian bands, 
“like men, by their opinion.” * 

Chapter 

The authority, that is to say, even of a despot, iastra- 

tions of 

depends upon the readiness of his subjects or of some external 

portion of his subjects to obey his behests; and this 

limit on 

exercise of 

readiness to obey must always be in reality limited. *remie 

This is shown by the most notorious facts of history. 
None of the early Caesars could at their pleasure have 
1 [Iume, Essays, i. (1875 ed.), pp. 109, 110. 

wer. 

Part J. 

76° THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

subverted the worship or fundamental institutions 
of the Roman world, and when Constantine carried 
through a religious revolution his success was due to 
the sympathy of a large part of his subjects. The 
Sultan could not abolish Mahommedanism. Louis the 
Fourteenth at the height of his power could revoke 
the Edict of Nantes, but he would have found it impos- 
sible to establish the supremacy of Protestantism, and 
for the same reason which prevented James the Second 
from establishing the supremacy of Roman Catholi- 
cism. The one king was in the strict sense despotic ; 
the other was as powerful as any English monarch. 
But the might of each was limited by the certainty of 
popular disobedience or opposition. The unwilling- 
ness of subjects to obey may have reference not only 
to great changes, but even to small matters. The 
French National Assembly of 1871 was emphatically 
the sovereign power in France. The majority of its 
members were (it is said) prepared for a monarchical 
restoration, but they were not prepared to restore the 
white flag: the army which would have acquiesced in 
the return of the Bourbons, would not (it was antici- 
pated) tolerate the sight of an anti-revolutionary 
symbol : ‘‘the chassepots would go off of themselves.” 
Here we see the precise limit to the exercise of legal 
sovereignty ; and what is true of the power of a 
despot or of the authority of a constituent assembly is 
specially true of the sovereignty of Parliament; it is 
limited on every side by the possibility of popular 
resistance. Parliament might legally. establish an 
Episcopal Church in Scotland; Parliament might 
legally tax the Colonies; Parliament might without 
any breach of law change the succession to the throne 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 77 

or abolish the monarchy; but every one knows that 
in the present state of the world the British Parlia- 
ment will do none of these things. In each case 
widespread resistance would result from legislation 
which, though legally valid, is in fact beyond the 
stretch of Parliamentary power. Nay, more than this, 
there are things which Parliament has done in other 
times, and done successfully, which a modern Parlia- 
ment would not venture to repeat. Parliament would 
not at the present day prolong by law the duration of 
an existing House of Commons. Parliament would 
not without great hesitation deprive of their votes 
large classes of Parliamentary electors; and, speaking 
generally, Parliament would not embark on a course 
of reactionary legislation ; persons who honestly blame 
Catholic Emancipation and lament the disestablish- 
ment of the Irish Church do not dream that Parlia- 
ment could repeal the statutes of 1829 or of 1869. 
These examples from among a score are enough to 
show the extent to which the theoretically boundless 
sovereignty of Parliament is curtailed by the external 
limit to its exercise. 

The internal limit to the exercise of sovereignty 
arises from the nature of the sovereign power itself. 
Even a despot exercises his powers in. accordance 
with his character, which is itself moulded by the 
circumstances under which he lives, including under 
that head the moral feelings of the time and the 
society to which he belongs. ‘The Sultan could not 
if he would change the religion of the Mahommedan 
world, but if he could do so it is in the very highest 
degree improbable that the head of Mahommedanism 
should wish to overthrow .the religion of Mahomet ; 

Chapter 
I. 

4 nternal 
limit. 

Illustra- 

tions. 

Part L 

78 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

the internal check on the exercise of the Sultan’s 
power is at least as strong as the external limitation. 
People sometimes ask the idle question why the 
Pope does not introduce this or that reform? The 
true answer is that a revolutionist is not the kind 
of man who becomes a Pope, and that the man who 
becomes a Pope has no wish to be a revolutionist. 
Louis the Fourteenth could not in all probability have 
established Protestantism as the national religion of 
France; but to imagine Louis the Fourteenth as 
wishing to carry out a Protestant reformation is 
nothing short of imagining him to have been a being 
quite unlike the Grand Monarque. Here again the 
internal check works together with the external check, 
and the influence of the internal limitation is as great 
in the case of a Parliamentary sovereign as of any 
other; perhaps it is greater. Parliament could not 
prudently tax the Colonies; but it is hardly con- 
ceivable that a modern Parliament, with the history 
of the eighteenth century before its eyes, should wish 
to tax the Colonies. The combined influence both of 
the external and of the internal limitation on legislative 
sovereignty is admirably stated in Leslie Stephen’s 
Science of Ethics, whose chapter on“‘ Law and Custom” 
contains one of the best statements to be met with 
of the limits placed by the nature of things on the 
theoretical omnipotence of sovereign legislatures. 
‘‘Lawyers are apt to speak as though the legisla- 
“ture were omnipotent, as they do not require to go 
“beyond its decisions, It is, of course, omnipotent 
“in the sense that it can make whatever laws it pleases, 
“Inasmuch as a law means any rule which has been 
‘“‘made by the legislature. But from the scientific 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 79 

“point of view, the power of the legislature is of course Chapter 
“strictly limited. It is limited, so to speak, both from _!_ 
“within and from without ; from within, because the 
“legislature is the product of a certain social condition, 

‘and determined by whatever determines the society ; 

‘“‘and from without, because the power of imposing 
‘‘laws is dependent upon the instinct of subordination, 
‘which is itself limited. If a legislature decided that 

“all blue-eyed babies should be murdered, the preserva- 

‘tion of blue-eyed babies would be illegal; but legis- 
“‘lators must go mad before they could pass such a 
“Jaw, and subjects be idiotic before they could submit 

“to it.”? 

Though sovereign power is bounded by an external Limits 
and an internal limit, neither boundary is very de- taycge 
finitely marked, nor need the two precisely coincide. 

A sovereign may wish to do many things which he 
either cannot do at all or can do only at great risk of 
serious resistance, and it is on many accounts worth 
observation that the exact point at which the external 
limitation begins to operate, that is, the point at which 
subjects will offer serious or insuperable resistance to 
the commands of a ruler whom they generally obey, 
is never fixed with precision. It would be rash of 
the Imperial Parliament to abolish the Scotch law 
Courts, and assimilate the law of Scotland to that of 
England. But no one can feel sure at what point 
Scotch resistance to such a change would become 
serious. Before the War of Secession the sovereign 
power of the United States could not have abolished 
slavery without provoking a civil war; after the War 
of Secession the sovereign power abolished slavery 
1 Leslie Stephen, Science of Ethics, p. 143. 

coincidence 
between 
external 
and internal 
limit. 

80 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

and conferred the electoral franchise upon the Blacks 
without exciting actual resistance. 

In reference to the relation between the external 
and the internal limit to sovereignty, representative 
government presents a noteworthy peculiarity. It is 
this. Theaimand effect of such government is to produce 
a coincidence, or at any rate diminish the divergence, 
between the external and the internal limitations on the 
exercise of sovereign power. Frederick the Great. may 
have wished to introduce, and may in fact have intro- 
duced, changes or reforms opposed to the wishes of his 
subjects. Louis Napoleon certainly began a policy of 
free trade which would not be tolerated by an assembly 
which truly represented French opinion. In these 
instances neither monarch reached the external :limit 
to his sovereign power, but it might very well have 
happened that he might have reached it, and have 

thereby provoked serious resistance on the part of his 

subjects. There might, in short, have arisen a diver- 
gence between the internal and the external check. 
The existence of such a divergence, or (in other words} 
of a difference between the permanent wishes of the 
sovereign, or rather of the King who then constituted 
a predominant part of the sovereign power, and the 
permanent wishes of the-nation, is traceable in England 
throughout the whole period beginning with the acces- 
sion of James the First and ending with the Revolu- 
tion of 1688. The remedy for this divergence was 
found in a transference of power from the Crown 
to the Houses of Parliament; and in placing on the 
throne rulers who from their position were induced to- 
make their wishes coincide with the will of the nation 
expressed through the House of Commons; the differ- 

NATURE OF PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 381 

ES AID UP AER EGOE SY 
ence between the will of the sovereign and the will of 
the nation was terminated by the foundation of a 
system of real representative government. Where a 
Parliament truly represents the people, the divergence 
between the external and the internal limit to the 
exercise of sovereign power can hardly arise, or if it 
arises, must soon disappear. Speaking roughly, the 
permanent wishes of the representative portion of 
Parliament can hardly in the long run differ from the 
wishes of the English people, or at any rate of the 
electors ; that which the majority of the House of 
Commons command, the majority of the English 
people usually desire. To prevent the divergence 
between the wishes of the sovereign and the wishes 
of subjects is in short the effect, and the only certain 
effect, of bon& fide representative government. For 
our present purpose there is no need to determine 
whether this result be good or bad. An enlightened 
sovereign has more than once carried out reforms in 
advance of the wishes of his subjects. This is true 
both of sovereign kings and, though more rarely, of 
sovereign Parliaments. But the sovereign who has 
done this, whether King or Parliament, does not in 
reality represent his subjects.’ All that it is here 
neceasary to insist upon is that the essential property 
of representative government is to produce coincidence 
between the wishes of the sovereign and the wishes 
of the subjects; to make, in short, the two limitations 
on the exercise of sovereignty absolutely coincident. 
This, which is true in its measure of all real repre- 
sentative government, applies with special truth to 
the English House of Commons. 

1 Compare Law and Opinion in England, pp. 4, 5. 
G 

Chapter 

Part I. 

82 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

“The House of Commons,” writes Burke, “‘ was sup- 
“ posed originally to be no part of the standing govern- 
“ment of this country. It was considered as a control, 
“ issuing immediately from the people, and speedily to 
‘be resolved into the mass from whence it arose. In 
“this respect it was in the higher part of government 
“‘ what juries are in the lower. The capacity of a magis- 
‘ trate being transitory,and that of a citizen permanent, 
“the latter capacity it was hoped would of course pre- 
“ponderate in all discussions, not only between the 
“people and the standing authority of the Crown, but 
‘between the people and the fleeting authority of the 

“ House of Commons itself. Itwas hoped that, being of a 

‘middle nature between subject and government, they 
‘would feel with a more tender and a nearer interest 
‘‘ everything that concerned the people, than the other 
‘“‘remoter and more permanent parts of legislature. 

‘‘ Whatever alterations time and the necessary ac- 
“‘commodation of business may have introduced, this 
‘* character can never be sustained, unless the House of 
‘Commons shall be made to bear some stamp of the 
“actual disposition of the people at large. It would 
‘‘ (among public misfortunes) be an evil more natural and 
“tolerable, that the House of Commons should be in- 
“fected with every epidemical phrensy of the people, 
‘‘as this would indicate some consanguinity, some sym- 
‘pathy of nature with their constituents, than that they 
“should in all cases be wholly untouched by the opinions 
“and feelings of the people out of doors. By this want of 
“‘sympathythey would cease to bea House of Commons.”? 

1 Burke, Works, i. (1871 ed.), pp. 347, 348. See further in refer- 

ence to Parliamentary sovereignty, App. Note IIL, Distinction between 
a Parliamentary Executive and a Non-Parliamentary Executive. 

CHAPTER II 
PARLIAMENT AND NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 

IN my last chapter I dwelt upon the nature of Par- Chapter 
liamentary sovereignty; my object in this chapter _™ 
is to illustrate the characteristics of such sovereignty aim of 
by comparing the essential features of a sovereign ““?" 
Parliament like that of England with the traits 
which mark non-sovereign law-making bodies. 

A. Characteristics of Sovereign Parliament.— Pania- 
The characteristics of Parliamentary sovereignty may fore.” 
be deduced from the term itself. But these traits "ey 
are apt to escape the attention of Englishmen, who 
have been so accustomed to live under the rule of 
a supreme legislature, that they almost, without 
knowing it, assume that all legislative bodies are 
supreme, and hardly therefore keep clear before their 
minds the properties of a supreme as contrasted with 
a non-sovereign law-making body. In this matter 
foreign observers are, as is natural, clearer-sighted 
than Englishmen. De Lolme, Gneist, and Tocque- 
ville seize at once upon the sovereignty of Parliament 
as a salient feature of the English constitution, and 
recognise the far-reaching effects of this marked 

peculiarity in our institutions. 
83 

Part I. 

No law 
Parliament 
cannot 
change. 

84 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

“In England,” writes Tocqueville, “the Parlia- 
“ment has an acknowledged right to modify the 
“constitution; as, therefore, the constitution may 
‘undergo perpetual changes, it does not in reality. 
“exist; the Parliament is at once a legislative and 
“a constituent assembly.” ’ 

His expressions are wanting in accuracy, and 
might provoke some criticism, but the description of 
the English Parliament as at once ‘a legislative 
and a constituent assembly” supplies a convenient 
formula for summing up the fact that Parliament can 
change any law whatever. Being a “legislative” 
assembly it can make ordinary laws, being a “ con- 
stituent” assembly it can make laws which shift the 
basis of the constitution. The results which ensue 
from this fact may be brought under three heads. 

First, There is no law which Parliament cannot 
change, or (to put the same thing somewhat differ- 
ently), fundamental or so-called constitutional laws 
are under our constitution changed by the same 
body and in the same manner as other laws, namely, 
by Parliament acting in its ordinary legislative 
character. 

A Bill for reforming the House of Commons, a 
Bill for abolishing the House of Lords, a Bill to give 
London a municipality, a Bill to make valid marriages 
celebrated by a pretended clergyman, who is found 
after their celebration not to be in orders, are each 
equally within the competence of Parliament, they 
each may be passed in substantially the same manner, 
they none of them when passed will be, legally 

1 Tocqueville, i. (translation), p. 96, @urres Completes, i. pp. 166, 
167. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 85 

speaking, a whit more sacred or immutable than the Chapter 
others, for they each will be neither more nor less 
than an Act of Parliament, which can be repealed as 
it has been passed by Parliament, and cannot be 
annulled by any other power. 

Secondly, There is under the English constitution No ais. 
no marked or clear distinction between laws which tween con 

tween con- 
are not fundamental or constitutional and laws which “tion! 

and ordi- 
are fundamental or constitutional. The very language ™ry Jews 
therefore, expressing the difference between a “ legis- 
lative” assembly which can change ordinary laws and 
a “constituent” assembly which can change not only 
ordinary but also constitutional and fundamental laws, 
has to be borrowed from the political phraseology of 
foreign countries. 

This absence of any distinction between constitu- Relation 
tional and ordinary laws has a close connection with er 
the non-existence in England of any written or enacted pesneth 
constitutional statute or charter. Tocqueville indeed, ‘224% %™ 
in common with other writers, apparently holds the coustite- 
unwritten character of the British constitution to! — 
be of its essence: “L’Angleterre n’ayant point de 
constitution écrite, qui peut dire qu’on change sa 
constitution?” But here Tocqueville falls into an 
error, characteristic both of his nation and of the 
weaker side of his own rare genius. He has treated 
the form of the constitution as the cause of its 
substantial qualities, and has inverted the relation of | 
cause and effect. The constitution, he seems to have’ 
thought, was changeable because it was not reduced: 
to a written or statutory form. It is far nearer 

the truth to assert that the constitution has never. 

1 Tocqueville, Zuvres Completes, i. p. 312. 

Part I. 

86 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

been reduced to a written or statutory form because 
each and every part of it is changeable at the will of 
Parliament. When a country is governed under a 
constitution which is intended either to be unchange- 
able or at any rate to be changeable only with special 
difficulty, the constitution, which is nothing else than 
the laws which are intended to have a character of 
permanence or immutability, is necessarily expressed 
in writing, or, to use English phraseology, is enacted 
asa statute. Where, on the other hand, every law 
can be legally changed with equal ease or with equal 
difficulty, there arises no absolute need for reducing 
the constitution toa written form, or even for looking 
upon a definite set of laws as specially making up the 
constitution. One main reason then why constitu- 
tional laws have not in England been recognised 
under that name, and in many cases have not been 
reduced to the form of a statutory enactment, is that 
one law, whatever its importance, can be passed and 
changed by exactly the same method as every, other 
law. But it is a mistake to think that the whole law 
of the English constitution might not be reduced to 
writing and be enacted in the form of a constitutional 
code. The Belgian constitution indeed comes very 
near to a written reproduction of the English constitu- 
tion, and the constitution of England might easily be 
turned into an Act of Parliament without suffering 
any material transformation of character; provided 
only that the English Parliament retained—what the 
Belgian Parliament, by the way, does not possess— 
the unrestricted power of repealing or amending the 
constitutional code. 

Thirdly, There does not exist in any part of the 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BCDIES 8; 

British Empire any person or body of persons, execu- 
tive, legislative or judicial, which can pronounce void 

any enactment passed by the British Parliament on * 

the ground of such enactment being opposed to the 

pronounce 
Act of Par- 

constitution, or on any ground whatever, except, of lisment 

course, its being repealed by Parliament. 

These then are the three traits of Parliamentary 
sovereignty as it exists in England: first, the power 
of the legislature to alter any law, fundamental or 
otherwise, as freely and in the same manner as other 
laws ; secondly, the absence of any legal distinction 
between constitutional and other laws; thirdly, the 
non-existence of any judicial or other authority having 
the right to nullify an Act of Parliament, or to treat 
it as void or unconstitutional. 

These traits are all exemplifications of the quality 
which my friend Mr. Bryce has happily denominated 
the “flexibility ”? of the British constitution. Every 
part of it can be expanded, curtailed, amended, or 
abolished, with equal ease. It is the most flexible 
polity in existence, and is therefore utterly different 
in character from the “rigid” constitutions (to use 
another expression of Mr. Bryce’s) the whole or some 
part of which can be changéd only by some extra- 
ordinary method of legislation. 

B. Characteristics of non-sovereign law-making 
bodies.—From the attributes of a sovereign legislature 
it is possible to infer negatively what are the charac- 
teristics all (or some) of which are the marks of a 
non-sovereign law-making body, and which therefore 

1 See Bryce, Studies in History and Jurisprudence, i, Essay III, 
Flexible and Rigid Constitutions. 

Told, 

Flexibility 
of the con- 
stitution, 

Character- 
istics of 
non- 
sovereign 
law- 
making 
bodies, 

Part I. 

Meaning of 
term “Jaw- 

88 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

may be called the marks or notes of legislative sub- 
ordination. 

These signs by which you may recognise the 
subordination of a law-making body are, first, the 
existence of laws affecting its constitution which 
such body must obey and cannot change; hence, 
secondly, the formation of a marked distinction be- 
tween ordinary laws and fundamental laws; and 
lastly, the existence of some person or persons, judicial 
or otherwise, having authority to pronounce upon the 
validity or constitutionality of laws passed by such 
law-making body. 

Wherever any of these marks of subordination 
exist with regard to a given law-making body, they 
prove that it is not a sovereign legislature. 

Observe the use of the words ‘‘ law-making body.” 

This term is here employed as an expression which 
may include under one head’ both municipal bodies, 

1 This inclusion has been made the subject of criticism, 

The objections taken to it are apparently threefold. 

First, There is, it is said, a certain absurdity in bringing into one 
class things so different in importance and in dignity as, for example, 
the Belgian Parliament and an English School-board. This objection 
rests on a misconception. It would be ridiculous to overlook the pro- 
found differences between a powerful legislature and a petty corpora- 
tion. But there is nothing ridiculous in calling attention to the points 
which they have in common. The sole matter for consideration is 
whether the alleged similarity be real. No doubt when features of 
likeness between things which differ from one another both in appear- 
ance and in dignity are pointed out, the immediate result is to produce 
a sense of amusement, but the apparent absurdity is no proof that the 
likeness is unreal or undeserving of notice. A man differs from a rat. 
But this does not make it the Jeas true or the less worth noting that 
they are both vertebrate animals. 

Secondly, The powers of an English corporation, it is urged, can in 
general only be exercised reasonably, and any exercise of them is 
invalid which is not reasonable, and this is not true of the laws made, 
eg., by the Parliament of a British colony. 

This objection admits of more than one reply. It is not univer- 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 89 

such as railway companies, school-boards, town coun- 
cils, and the like, which possess a limited power of 
making laws, but are not ordinarily called legislatures, 
and bodies such as the Parliaments of the British 
Colonies, of Belgium, or of France, which are ordi- 
narily called “legislatures,” but are not in reality 
sovereign bodies. 

The reason for grouping together under one name 

sally true that the bye-laws made by a corporation are invalid unless 
they are reasonable. But let it be assumed for the sake of argument 
that this restriction is always, as it certainly is often, imposed on the 
making of bye-lawa This concession does not involve the consequence 
that bye-laws do not partake of the nature of laws. All that follows 
from it is’ a conclusion which nobody questions, namely, that the 
powers of a non-sovereign law-making body may Le restricted in very 
different degrees. 

Thirdly, The bye-laws of a corporation are, it is urged, not laws, 
because they affect only certain persons, ¢.g. in the case of a railway 
company the passengers on the railway, and do not, like the laws of a 
colonial legislature, affect all persons coming under the jurisdiction of 
the legislature ; or to put the same objection in another shape, the bye- 
laws of a railway company apply, it is urged, only to persons using 
the railway, in addition to the general law of the land by which such 
persons are also bound, whereas the laws, ¢.g., of the New Zealand 
Parliament constitute the general law of the colony. 

The objection is plausible, but does not really show that the simi- 
larity insisted upon between the position of a corporation and, ¢9., a 
colonial legislature is unreal In either case the laws made, whether 
by the corporation or by the legislature, apply only to a limited class 
of persona, and are liable to be overridden by the laws of a superior 
legislature. Even in the case of a colony so nearly independent as New 
Zealand, the inhabitants are bound first by the statutes of the Imperial 
Parliament, and in addition thereto by the Acts of the New Zealand 
Parliament. The very rules which are bye-laws when made by a cor- 
poration would admittedly be laws if made directly by Parliament 
Their character cannot be changed by the fact that they are made by 
the permission of Parliament through a subordinate legislative body. 
The Council of a borough, which for the present purpoee is 8 better 
example of my meaning than a railway company, passes in accordance 
with the powers conferred upon it by Parliament a bye-law probibiting 
processions with music on Sunday. The same prohibition if contained 
in an Act of Parliament would be admittedly a law. It is none the 
less a law because made by a body which is permitted by Parliament 

to legislate. 

Part I. 

Subordin- 
ate bodies. 

Corpora- 
tions. 

go THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

such very different kinds of “ law-making” bodies is, 
that by far the best way of clearing up our ideas as 
to the nature of assemblies which, to use the foreign 
formula,’ are “legislative” without being “ consti- 
tuent,” and which therefore are not sovereign legis- 
latures, is to analyse the characteristics of societies, 
such as English railway companies, which possess a 
certain legislative authority, though the authority is 
clearly delegated and subject to the obvious control 
of a superior legislature. 

It will conduce to clearness of thought if we divide 
non-sovereign law-making bodies into the two great 
classes of obviously subordinate bodies such as cor- 
porations, the Council of India, etc., and such legis- 
latures of independent countries as are legislative 
without being constituent, ze. are non-sovereign 
legislative bodies. 

The consideration of the position of the non- 
sovereign legislatures which exist under the com- 
plicated form of constitution known as a federal 
government is best reserved for a separate chapter.’ 

I. Subordinate Law-making Bodies. 

(i1.) Corporations.—An English railway company 
is as good an example as can be found of a subordinate 
law-making body. Such a company is in the strictest 
sense a law-making society, for it can under the 
powers of its Act make laws (called bye-laws) for the 
regulation (inter alia) of travelling upon the railway,* 

1 See p. 84, ante. 2 See Chap. III. post. 

% See especially the Companies Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845 
(8 & 9 Vict. c. 20), secs. 103, 108-111. This Act is always embodied 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW:MAKING BODIES 9! 

and can impose a penalty for the breach of such laws, 
which can be enforced by proceedings in the Courts. 
The rules therefore or bye-laws made bya company 
within the powers of its Act are “laws” in the 
strictest sense of the term, as any person will dis- 
cover to his own cost who, when he travels by rail 
from Oxford to Paddington, deliberately violates a 
bye-law duly made by the Great Western Railway 
Company. 

But though an English railway company is clearly 
a law-making body, it is clearly a non-sovereign 
law-making body. Its legislative power bears all 
the marks of subordination. 

First, The company is bound to obey laws and 
(amongst others) the Act of Parliament creating the 
company, which it cannot change. This is obvious, 
and need not be insisted upon. 

Secondly, There is the most marked distinction 
between the Act constituting the company, not a line 
of which can be changed by the company, and the 
bye-laws which, within the powers of its Act, the 
company can both make and change. Here we have 
on a very small scale the exact difference between 
constitutional laws which cannot, and ordinary laws 
which can, be changed by a subordinate legislature, 
i.e. by the company. The company, if we may 
apply to it the terms of constitutional law, is not 
a constituent, but is within certain limits a legislative 
assembly ; and these limits are fixed by the constitu- 
tion of the company. 

Thirdly, The Courts have the right to pronounce, 

in the special Act constituting the company. Its enactments therefore 
form part of the constitution of a railway company. 

Chapter 

Part I. 

92 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

and indeed are bound to pronounce, on the validity 
of the company’s bye-laws ; that is, upon the validity, 
or to use political terms, on the constitutionality of 
the laws made by the company as a law-making body. 
Note particularly that it is not the function of any 
Court or judge to declare void or directly annul a 
bye-law made by a railway company. The function 
of the Court is simply, upon any particular case 
coming before it which depends upon a bye-law made 
by a railway company, to decide for the purposes of 
that particular case whether the bye-law is or is not 
within the powers conferred by Act of Parliament 
upon the company ; that is to say, whether the bye- 
law is or is not valid, and to give judgment in the 
particular case according to the Court’s view of the 
validity of the bye-law. It is worth while to examine 
with some care the mode in which English judges deal 
with the inquiry whether a particular bye-law is or is 
not within the powers given to the company by Act 
of Parliament, for to understand this point goes a 
good way towards understanding the exact way in 
which English or American Courts determine the 
constitutionality of Acts passed by a non-sovereign 
legislature. 

The London and North-Western Railway Company 
made a bye-law by which “any person travelling with- 
“out the special permission of some duly authorised 
‘servant of the company in a carriage or by a train of 
‘a superior class to that for which his ticket was issued 
“is hereby subject to a penalty not exceeding forty 
‘shillings, and shall, in addition, be liable to pay his 
‘‘fare according to the class of carriage in which he is 
‘travelling from the station where the train originally 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 93 
ES SEG LT 
“* started, unless he shows that he had no intention to 
*‘ defraud.” X, with the intention of defrauding the 
company, travelled in a first-class carriage instead of 
a second-class carriage for which his ticket was issued, 
and having been charged under the bye-law was con- 
victed in the penalty of ten shillings, and costs. On 
appeal by X, the Court determined that the bye-law 
was illegal and void as being repugnant to 8 Vict. 
c. 20, s. 103, or in effect to the terms of the Act 
incorporating the company,’ and that therefore X 
could not be convicted of the offence charged against 
him. 

A bye-law of the South-Eastern Railway Company 
required that a passenger should deliver up his ticket 
to a servant of the company when required to do so, 
and that any person travelling without a ticket or 
failing or refusing to deliver up his ticket should be 
required to pay the fare from the station whence the 
train originally started to the end of his journey. X 
had a railway ticket enabling him to travel on 
the South-Eastern Railway. Having to change 
trains and pass out of the company’s station he 
was asked to show his ticket, and refused to do so, 
but without any fraudulent intention. He was 
summoned for a breach of the bye-law, and convicted 
in the amount of the fare from the station whence the 
train started. The Queen’s Bench Division held the 
conviction wrong on the ground that the bye-law was 
for several reasons invalid, as not being authorised 
by the Act under which it purported to be made.’ » 

1 Dyson v. L. & N.-W. Ry. Co., 7 Q. B.D. 32. 

2 Saunders v. S.-E. Ry. Co, 5 Q. B. D. 456. Compare Bentham 
v. Hoyle, 3Q. B. D. 289, and L. Bd S.C. Ry. Co. v. Watson, 3 
C. P. D. 429; 4C.P. D. (C. A), 118. 

Chapter 

Part L 

94 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

Now in these instances, and in other cases where 
the Courts pronounce upon the validity of a bye-law 
made by a body (e.g. a railway company or a school- 
board) having powers to make bye-laws enforceable 
by penalties, it is natural to say that the Courts 
pronounce the bye-laws valid or invalid. But this is 
not strictly the case. What the judges determine is 
not that a particular bye-law is invalid, for it is not 
the function of the Courts to repeal or annul the 
bye-laws made by railway companies, but that in a 
proceeding to recover a penalty from X for the breach 
of a bye-law judgment must be given on the basis of 
the particular bye-law being beyond the powers of 
the company, and therefore invalid. It may indeed 
be thought that the distinction between annulling a 
bye-law and determining a case upon the assumption 
of such bye-law being void is a distinction without a 
difference. But this is not so. The distinction is 
not without importance even when dealing with the 
question whether X, who is alleged to have broken a 
bye-law made by a railway company, is liable to pay 
a fine; it is of first-rate importance when the question 
before the Courts is one involving considerations of 
constitutional law, as for example when the Privy 
Council is called upon, as constantly happens, to 
determine cases which involve the validity or con- 
stitutionality of laws made by the Dominion Parlia- 
ment or by one of the provincial Parliaments of 
Canada. The significance, however, of the distinction 
will become more apparent as we proceed with our 
subject ; the matter of consequence now is to notice 
the nature of the distinction, and to realise that when 
a Court in deciding a given case considers whether 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 95 

a bye-law is, or is not, valid, the Court does a 
different thing from affirming or annulling the bye- 
law itself. 

(ii.) Legislative Council of British India.\— Laws 
are made for British India by a Legislative Council 
having very wide powers of legislation. This Council, 
or, as it is technically expressed, the ‘Governor-General 
in Council,” can pass laws as important as any Acts 
passed by the British Parliament. But the authority 
of the Council in the way of law-making is as com- 
pletely subordinate to, and as much dependent upon, 
Acts of Parliament as is the power of the London and 
North-Western Railway Company to make bye-laws. 

The legislative powers of the Governor-General 
and his Council arise from definite Parliamentary 
enactments.” These Acts constitute what may be 
termed as regards the Legislative Council the con- 
stitution of India. Now observe, that under these 
Acts the Indian Council is in the strictest sense a non- 
sovereign legislative body, and this independently of 
the fact that the laws or regulations made by the 
Governor-General in Council can be annulled or dis- 
allowed by the Crown; and note that the position of 
the Council exhibits all the marks or notes of legis- 
lative subordination. 

First, The Council is bound by a large number of 
rules which cannot be changed by the Indian legis- 

1 See Ilbert, Government of India, pp. 199-216, Digest of Statutory 
Enactments, se. 60-69. 

2 The Government of India Act, 1833 (3 & 4 Will. IV. c. 85), ss. 
45-48, 51, 52; The Indian Councils Act, 1861 (24 & 25 Vict. c. 67), 
sa, 16-25; The Government of India Act, 1865 (28 & 29 Vict. c. 17). 

The Indian Council is in some instances under Acts of Parliament, 
eg. 24 & 25 Vict. c 67; 28 & 29 Vict. c. 17; 32 & 33 Vict. c. 98, 
empowered to legislate for persons outside India. 

Chapter 
I. 

Council of 
British 
India, 

Part L 

96 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

lative body itself, and which can be changed by the 
superior power of the Imperial Parliament. 

Secondly, The Acts themselves from which the 
Council derives its authority cannot be changed by 
the Council, and hence in regard to the Indian 
legislative body form a set of constitutional or fun- 
damental laws, which, since they cannot be changed 
by the Council, stand in marked contrast with the 
laws or regulations which the Council is empowered 
to make. These fundamental rules contain, it must 
be added, a number of specific restrictions on the 
subjects with regard to which the Council may legis- 
late. Thus the Governor-General in Council has no 
power of making laws which may affect the authority 
of Parliament, or any part of the unwritten laws or 
constitution of the United Kingdom, whereon may 
depend in any degree the allegiance of any person 
to the Crown of the United Kingdom, or the sove- 
reignty or dominion of the Crown over any part of 
India." 

Thirdly, The Courts in India (or in any other 
part of the British Empire) may, when the occasion 
arises, pronounce upon the validity or constitutionality 
of laws made by the Indian Council. 

The Courts treat Acts passed by the Indian Council 
precisely in the same way in which the King’s Bench 
Division treats the bye-laws of a railway company. 
No judge in India or elsewhere ever issues a decree 
which declares invalid, annuls, or makes void a law 
or regulation made by the Governor-General in 
Council. But when any particular case comes before 
the Courts, whether civil or criminal, in which the 

1 See 24 & 25 Vict. c. 67, 8. 22, 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 97 

rights or liabilities of any party are affected by the 
legislation of the Indian Council, the Court may have 
to consider and determine with a view to the particular 
case whether such legislation was or was not within 
the legal powers of the Council, which is of course the 
same thing as adjudicating as regards the particular 
case in hand upon the validity or constitutionality 
of the legislation in question. Thus suppose that 
X is prosecuted for the breach of a law or regula- 
tion passed by the Council, and suppose the fact to 
be established past a doubt that X has broken this 
law. The Court before which the proceedings take 
place, which must obviously in the ordinary course 
of things be an Indian Court, may be called upon to 
consider whether the regulation which X has broken 
is within the powers given to the Indian Council by 
the Acts of Parliament making up the Indian con- 
stitution. If the law is within such powers, or, in 
other words, is constitutional, the Court will by giving 
judgment against X give full effect to the law, just 
as effect is given to the bye-law of a railway company 
by the tribunal before whom an offender is sued 
pronouncing judgment against him for the penalty. 
If, on the other hand, the Indian Court deem that 
the regulation is ultra vires or unconstitutional, they 
will refuse to give effect to it, and treat it as void by 
giving judgment for the defendant on the basis of 
the regulation being invalid or having no legal 
existence. On this point the Empress v. Burah’ 
is most instructive. The details of the case are 
immaterial; the noticeable thing is that the High 

1 3 Ind. L. R. (Calcutta Series), p. 63. 

Chapter 

98 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

Part. Court held a particular legislative enactment of the 
Governor-General in Council to be in excess of the 
authority given to him by the Imperial Parliament 
and therefore invalid, and on this ground entertained 
an appeal from two prisoners which, if the enactment 
had been valid, the Court would admittedly have 
been incompetent to entertain. The Privy Council, 
it is true, held on appeal’ that the particular enact- 
ment was within the legal powers of the Council and 
therefore valid, but the duty of the High Court of 
Calcutta to consider whether the legislation of the 
Governor-General was or was not constitutional, was 
not questioned by the Privy Council. To look at 
the same thing from another point of view, the 
Courts in India treat the legislation of the Governor- 
General in Council in a way utterly different from 
that in which any English Court can treat the Acts 
of the Imperial Parliament. An Indian tribunal 
may be called upon to say that an Act passed by 
the Governor-General need not be obeyed because it 
is unconstitutional or void. No British Court can 
give judgment, or ever does give judgment, that an 
Act of Parliament need not be obeyed because it 
is unconstitutional. Here, in short, we have the 
essential difference between subordinate and sovereign 
legislative power.? 
Baglish (iii.) English Colonies with Representative Govern- 
’ ments, — Many English colonies, and notably the 
Dominion of New Zealand (to which country our 
attention had best for the sake of clearness be specially 

1 Reg. v. Burah, 3 App. Cas, 889. 
2 See especially Empress v. Burak and Book Singh, 3 Ind. L. R 
(Calcutta Series, 1878), 63, 86-89, for the judgment of Markby J. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 99 
fo a na a ee 
directed), possess representative assemblies which Chap 
occupy @ somewhat peculiar position. a 
The Parliament of the Dominion of New Zealand Powers 
exercises throughout that country’ many of the by eotental 
ordinary powers of a sovercign assembly such as the it 
Parliament of the United Kingdom. It makes and 
repeals laws, it puts Ministries in power and dismisses 
them from office, it controls the general policy of the 
New Zealand Government, and generally makes its 
will felt in the transaction of affairs after the manner 
of the Parliament at Westminster. An ordinary 
observer would, if he looked merely at the everyday 
proceedings of the New Zealand legislature, find no 
reason to pronounce it a whit less powerful within its 
sphere than the Parliament of the United Kingdom. 
No doubt the assent of the Governor is needed in 
order to turn colonial Bills into laws: and further 
investigation would show our inquirer that for the 
validity of any colonial Act there is required, in 
addition to the assent of the Governor, the sanction, 
either express or implied, of the Crown. But these 
assents are constantly given almost as a matter of 
course, and may be compared (though not with 

1 No colonial legislature has as such any authority beyond the 
territorial limits of the colony. This forms a considerable restriction 
on the powers of a colonial Parliament, and a great part of the 
imperial legislation for the colonies arises from the Act of a colonia] 
legislature having, unless given extended operation by some imperial 
statute, no effect beyond the limits of the colony. 

In various instances, however, imperial Acta have given extended 
power of legislation to colonia] legislatures. Sometimes the imperial 
Act authoriees a colonial legislature to make Jaws on a specified 
subject with extraterritorial operation [¢.g. the Merchant Shipping Act, 
1894, ss. 478, 735, 736]. Sometimes an Act of the colonial legislature 
is given the force of law throughout British dominions. (Compare 
Jenkyns, British Rule and Jurisdiction beyond the Seas, p. 70.) 

100 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

oom a ws Se fi lea A CERIN ee ren 
absolute correctness) to the Crown’s so-called “veto” 
or right of refusing assent to Bills which have passed 
through the Houses of Parliament. 

Yet for all this, when the matter is further looked 
into, the Dominion Parliament (together with other 
colonial legislatures) will be found to be a non- 
sovereign legislative body, and bears decisive marks 
of legislative subordination. The action of the 
Dominion Parliament is restrained by laws which 
it cannot change, and are changeable only by the 
Imperial Parliament ; and further, New Zealand Acts, 
even when assented to by the Crown, are liable to be 
treated by the Courts in New Zealand and elsewhere 
throughout the British dominions as void or uncon- 
stitutional, on the ground of their coming into con- 
flict with laws of the Imperial Parliament, which the 
colonial legislature has no authority to touch.’ 

That this is so becomes apparent the moment 
we realise the exact relation between colonial and 
Imperial laws. The matter is worth some little 
examination, both for its own sake and for the 
sake of the light it throws on the sovereignty of 
Parliament. 

1 As also upon the ground of their being in strictness ultra vires, 
t.e. beyond the powers conferred upon the Dominion legislature. This 
is the ground why a colonial Act is in general void, in eo far as it is 
intended to operate beyond the territory of the colony. ‘In 1879, the 
Supreme Court of New Zealand held that the Foreign Offenders 
Apprehension Act, 1863, of that colony, which authorises the deporta- 
tion of persons charged with indictable misdemeanours in other 
colonies, was beyond the competence of the New Zealand legislature, 
for it involved detention on the high seas, which the legislature could 
not authorise, as it could legislate only for peace, order, and good 
government within the limits of the colony.” Jenkyns, British Rule 
and Jurisdiction beyond the Seas, p. 70, citing In re Gleich. Ollivier 
Bell and Fitzgerald’s N. Z. Rep., S. C. p. 39. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 101 

The charter of colonial legislative independence is 
the Colonial Laws Validity Act, 1865.) 

This statute seems (oddly enough) to have passed 
through Parliament without discussion; but it per- 
manently defines and extends the authority of colonial 
legislatures, and its main provisions are of such im- 
portance as to deserve verbal citation :— 

“Sec. 2. Any colonial law which is or shall be in 
“any respect repugnant to the provisions of any Act 
“of Parliament extending to the colony to which 
‘such law may relate, or repugnant to any order or 
“regulation made under authority of such Act of 
“Parliament, or having in the colony the force and 
‘‘effect of such Act, shall be read subject to such 
“ Act, order, or regulation, and shall, to the extent of 
“such repugnancy, but not otherwise, be and remain 
‘absolutely void and inoperative. 

“3. No colonial law shall be or be deemed to 
“have been void or inoperative on the ground of 
“‘repugnancy to the law of England, unless the same 
“shall be repugnant to the provisions of some such 
“Act of Parliament, order, or regulation as afore- 
** said. 

“4, No colonial law, passed with the concurrence 
“of or assented to by the Governor of any colony, or 
‘to be hereafter so passed or assented to, shall be or 
“be deemed to have been void or inoperative, by 
“reason only of any instructions with reference to 
“such law or the subject thereof which may have 
“been given to such Governor by or on behalf of 
“Her Majesty, by any instrument other than the 

1 98 & 29 Vict. « 63. See on this enactment, Jeukyns, British 
Rule and Jurisdiction beyond the Seas, pp. 71, 72. 

Chapter 
IL 

Colonial 
we 

Validity 

Act, 1865. 

Part L 

102 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

“Jetters- patent or instrument authorising such 
‘‘Governor to concur in passing or to assent to 
“laws for the peace, order, and good government 
‘of such colony, even though such instructions 
“may be referred to in such letters-patent or last- 
“ mentioned instrument. 

“5, Every colonial legislature shall have, and be 
“deemed at all times to have had, full power within 
“its jurisdiction to establish courts of judicature, and 
‘to abolish and reconstitute the same, and to alter the 
“constitution thereof, and to make provision for the 
‘administration of justice therein; and every repre- 
‘‘sentative legislature shall, in respect to the colony 
“under its jurisdiction, have, and be deemed at all 
‘“‘times to have had, full power to make laws re- 
“specting the constitution, powers, and procedure 
“‘of such legislature; provided that such laws shall 
‘‘have been passed in such manner and form as may 
“from time to time be required by any Act of 
‘Parliament, letters-patent, order in council, or 
‘colonial law for the time being in force in the- 
‘‘gaid colony.” 

The importance, it is true, of the Colonial Laws 
Validity Act, 1865, may well be either exaggerated 
or quite possibly underrated. The statute is in one 
sense less important than it at first sight appears, 
because the principles laid down therein were, before 
its passing, more or less assumed, though with some 
hesitation, to be good law and to govern the validity 
of colonial legislation. From another point of view 
the Act is of the highest importance, because it 
determines, and gives legislative authority to, prin- 
ciples which had never before been accurately defined, 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 103 

and were liable to be treated as open to doubt.’ In 
any case the terms of the enactment make it now 
possible to state with precision the limits which bound 
the legislative authority of a colonial Parliament. 

The Dominion Parliament may make laws opposed 
to the English common law, and such laws (on re- 
ceiving the required assents) are perfectly valid. 

Thus a New Zealand Act which changed the 
common law rules as to the descent of property, which 
gave the Governor authority to forbid public meet- 
ings, or which abolished trial by jury, might be 
inexpedient or unjust, but would be a perfectly valid 
law, and would be recognised as such by every 
tribunal throughout the British Empire.’ 

The Dominion Parliament, on the other hand, 
cannot make any laws inconsistent with any Act of 
Parliament, or with any part of an Act of Parlia- 
ment, intended by the Imperial Parliament to apply 
to New Zealand. 

Suppose, for example, that the Imperial Parliament 
were to pass an Act providing a special mode of trial 
in New Zealand for particular classes of offences 
committed there, no enactment of the colonial Parlia- 
ment, which provided that such offences should be 
tried otherwise than as directed by the imperial 
statute, would be of any legal effect. So again, no 
New Zealand Act would be valid that legalised the 

1 Up to 1866 the prevalent opinion in England seems to have 
been that any law seriously opposed to the principles of English law 
was repugnant to the law of England, and colonial laws were from 
time to time disallowed solely on the ground of such supposed 
repugnancy and invalidity. 

3 Assuming, of couree, that such Acts are not inconsistent with 
any imperial statute applying to the colony. (Compare Robinson v. 
Reynolds, Macassey’s N. Z. Rep. p. 562.) 

Chapter 
I. 

Part I. 

Acts of 
colonial 
legislature 
may be pro- 
nounced 
void by 
Courts. 

104. THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
et a ek eee ee 
slave trade in the face of the Slave Trade Act, 1824, 
5 Geo. IV. c. 113, which prohibits slave trading 
throughout the British dominions; nor would Acts: 
passed by the Dominion Parliament be valid which 
repealed, or invalidated, several provisions of the 
Merchant Shipping Act 1894 meant to apply to 
the colonies, or which deprived a discharge under the 
English Bankruptcy Act of the effect which, in virtue 
of the imperial statute, it has as a release from 
debts contracted in any part whatever of the British’ 
dominions. No colonial legislature, in short, can 
override imperial legislation which is intended to 
apply to the colonies. Whether the intention be 
expressed in so many words, or be apparent only 
from the general scope and nature of the enactment, 
is immaterial. Once establish that an imperial law 
is intended to apply to a given colony, and the con- 
sequence follows that any colonial enactment which 
contravenes that law is invalid and unconstitutional.’ 
Hence the Courts in the Dominion of New Zealand, 
as also in the rest of the British Empire, may be 
called upon to adjudicate upon the validity or con- 
stitutionality of any Act of the Dominion Parliament. 
For if a New Zealand law really contradicts the 
provisions of an Act of Parliament extending to New 
Zealand, no Court throughout the British dominions 
could legally, it is clear, give effect to the enactment 
of the Dominion Parliament. ‘This is an inevitable 
result of the legislative sovereignty exercised by the 
Imperial Parliament. In the supposed case the 

1 See Tarring, Law Relating to the Colonies (2nd ed.), pp. 232-247, 
for a list of imperial statutes which relate to the colonies in general, 
and which therefore no colonial legislation can, except under powers 
given by some Act of the Imperial Parliament, contravene. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 105 

Dominion Parliament commands the judges to act in Chapter 
a particular manner, and the Imperial Parliament _™ 
commands them to act in another manner. Of these 
two commands the order of the Imperial Parliament 
is the one which must be obeyed. This is the very 
meaning of Parliamentary sovereignty. Whenever, 
therefore, it is alleged that any enactment of the 
Dominion Parliament is repugnant to the provisions 
of any Act of the Imperial Parliament extending to 
the colony, the tribunal before which the objection 
is raised must pronounce upon the validity or con- 
stitutionality of the colonial law.’ 

The constitution of New Zealand is created by and Colonial 
depends upon the New Zealand Constitution Act, feat may 
1852, 15 & 16 Vict. c. 72, and the Acts amending "0" 
the same. One might therefore expect that the (7m 
Parliament of the Dominion of New Zealand, which 4. 
may conveniently be called the New Zealand Parlia- 
ment, would exhibit that “mark of subordination” 
which consists in the inability of a legislative body 
to change fundamental or constitutional laws, or 
(what is the’same thing) in the clearly drawn distinc- 
tion between ordinary laws which the legislature can 
change and laws of the constitution which it cannot 
change, at any rate when acting in its ordinary 
legislative character. But this anticipation is hardly 
borne out by an examination into the Acts creating 
the constitution of New Zealand. A comparison of 
the Colonial Laws Validity Act, 1865, s. 5, with 
the New Zealand Constitution Act, as subsequently 
amended, shows that the New Zealand Parliament 

1 See Powell v. Apollo Candle Co., 10 App. Cas. 282; Hodge v. 
The Queen, 9 App. Cas. 117. 

Part L 

106 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

can change the articles of the constitution. This 
power, derived from imperial statutes, is of course in 
no way inconsistent with the legal sovereignty of the 
Imperial Parliament.' One may fairly therefore 
assert that the New Zealand Parliament, in common 
with many other colonial legislative assemblies, is, 
though a “subordinate,” at once a legislative and 
a constituent: assembly. It is a “subordinate” 
assembly? because its powers are limited by the 

1 The constitutions of some self-governing colonies, ¢g. Victoria, 
certainly show that a Victorian law altering the constitution must in 
some instances be passed in a manner different from the mode in 
which other laws are passed. This is a faint recognition of the 
difference between fundamental and other laws. Compare 18 & 19 
Vict. c. 55, Sched. I. s. 60 ; but there appears to have been considerable 
laxity in regard to observing these constitutional provisions. See 
Jenks, Government of Victoria, pp. 247-249. 

2 It is usually the case that a self-governing colony, such as New 
Zealand, has the power in one form or another to change the colonial con- 
stitution. The extent, however, of this power, and the mode in which it 
can be exercised, depends upon the terms of the Act of Parliament, or of 
the charter creating or amending the colonial constitution, and differs in 
different cases. Thus the Parliament of New Zealand can change almost 
all, though not quite all, of the articles of the constitution, and can 
change them in the same manner in which it can change an ordinary 
colonial law. The Parliament of the Canadian Dominion cannot 
change the constitution of the Dominion. The Parliament of the 
Australian Commonwealth, on the other hand, occupies a peculiar 
position. It can by virtue of the terms of the constitution itself alter, 
by way of ordinary legislation, certain of the articles of the constitution 
(see, eg., Constitution of Commonwealth, ss. 65, 67), whilst it cannot, by 
way of ordinary legislation, change other articles of the constitution. 
All the articles, however, of the constitution which cannot be changed 
by ordinary Parliamentary legislation can—subject, of course, to the 
sanction of the Crown—be altered or abrogated by the Houses of the 
Parliament, and a vote of the people of the Commonwealth, as provided 
by the Constitution of the Commonwealth, s. 128. The point to be 
specially noted is, that the Imperial Parliament, as a rule, enables a 
self-governing colony to change the colonial constitution. The excep- 
tion in the case of Canada is more apparent than real ; the Imperial 
Parliament would no doubt give effect to any change clearly desired 
by the inhabitants of the Canadian Dominion. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 107 
eR rere 4 ets al! ee 

legislation of the Imperial Parliament; it is a con- 
stituent assembly since it can change the articles of 
the constitution of New Zealand. The authority of 
the New Zealand Parliament to change the articles 

of the constitution of New Zealand is from several . 

points of view worth notice. 

We have here a decisive proof that there is no 
necessary connection between the written character 
and the immutability of a constitution. The New 
Zealand constitution is to be found in a written docu- 
ment; itis a statutory enactment. Yet the articles 
of this constitutional statute can be changed by the 
Parliament which it creates, and changed in the 
same manner as any other law. This may seem an 
obvious matter enough, but writers of eminence so 
often use language which implies or suggests that 
the character of a law is changed by its being 
expressed in the form of a statute as to make it 
worth while noting that a statutory constitution 
need not be in any sense an immutable constitution. 
The readiness again with which the English Parlia- 
ment has conceded constituent powers to colonial 
legislatures shows how little hold is exercised over 
Englishmen by that distinction between fundamental 
and non-fundamental laws which runs through almost 
all the constitutions not only of the Continent but 
also of America. The explanation appears to be that 
in England we have long been accustomed to consider 
Parliament as capable of changing one kind of law 
with as much ease as another. Hence when English 
statesmen gave Parliamentary government to the 
colonies, they almost as a matter of course bestowed 
upon colonial legislatures authority to deal with 

Chapter 
i. 

Reason of 
his. 

Part L 

How con- 
flicts 
between 
imperial 
and colon- 
ial legisla- 
tion 
avoided. 

108 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

every law, whether constitutional or not, which 
affected the colony, subject of course to the proviso, 
rather implied than expressed, that this power should 
not be used in a way inconsistent with the supremacy 
of the British Parliament. The colonial legislatures, 
in short, are within their own sphere copies of the 
Imperial Parliament. They are within their own 
sphere sovereign bodies; but their freedom of action 
is controlled by their subordination to the Parliament 
of the United Kingdom. 

The question may naturally be asked how the 
large amount of colonial liberty conceded to countries 
like New Zealand has been legally reconciled with 
Imperial sovereignty ? 

The inquiry lies a little outside our subject, but 
is not really foreign to it, and well deserves an 
answer. Nor is the reply hard to find if we keep in 
mind the true nature of the difficulty which needs 

_ explanation. 

The problem is not to determine what are the 
means by which the English Government kceps the 
colonies in subjection, or maintains the political 
sovereignty of the United Kingdom. This is a 
matter of politics with which this book has no 
concern, 

The question to be answered is how (assuming 
the law to be obeyed throughout the whole of the 
British Empire) colonial legislative freedom is made 
compatible with the legislative sovereignty of Parlia- 
ment? How are the Imperial Parliament and the 
colonial legislatures prevented from encroaching on 
each other’s spheres ? 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 109 
eS Soe aS 

No one will think this inquiry needless who Chapter 
remarks that in confederations, such as the United ; 
States, or the Canadian Dominion, the Courts are 
constantly occupied in determining the boundaries 
which divide the legislative authority of the Central 
Government from that of the State Legislatures. 

The assertion may sound paradoxical, but is confiicts 
nevertheless strictly true, that the acknowledged ipesehcl, 
legal supremacy of Parliament is one main cause of *7,% 
the wide power of legislation allowed to colonial lisment: 
assemblies. } 

The constitutions of the colonies depend directly 
or indirectly upon imperial statutes. No lawyer 
questions that Parliament could legally abolish any 
colonial constitution, or that Parliament can at any 
moment legislate for the colonies and repeal or over- 
ride any colonial law whatever. Parliament moreover 
does from time to time pass Acts affecting the 
colonies, and the colonial,’ no less than the English, 
Courts completely admit the principle that a statute 
-of the Imperial Parliament binds any part of the 
British dominions to which the statute is meant to 
apply. But when once this is admitted, it becomes 
obvious that there is little necessity for defining or 
limiting the sphere of colonial legislation. If an Act 
of the New Zealand Parliament contravenes an 
imperial statute, it is for legal purposes void ; and if 
an Act of the New Zealand Parliament, though not 
infringing upon any statute, is so opposed to the 
interests of the Empire that it ought not to be 
passed, the British Parliament may render the Act 
of no effect by means of an imperial statute. 

1 See Todd, Parliamentary Government, pp. 168-192. 

110 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
a eS 

Part I. This course, however, is rarely, if ever, necessary ; 
(i) right for Parliament exerts authority over colonial legisla- 
ofvet. tion by in effect regulating the use of the Crown's 

“veto” in regard to colonial Acts. This is a matter 
which itself needs a little explanation. 

The Crown’s right to refuse assent to bills which 
have passed through the Houses of Parliament is 
practically obsolete.! The power of the Crown to 
negative or veto the bills of colonial legislatures 
stands on a different footing. It is virtually, though 
not in name, the right of the Imperial Parliament 
to limit colonial legislative independence, and is 
frequently exercised. ; 

1 This statement has been questioned—see Hearn (2nd ed.), p. 63 
—but is, it is submitted, correct. The so-called “veto” has never 
been employed as regards any public bill since the accession of the 
House of Hanover. When George the Third wished to stop the 
passing of Fox’s India Bill, he abstained from using the Crown’s 
right to dissent from proposed legislation, but availed himself of his 
influence in the House of Lords to procure the rejection of the measure. 
No stronger proof could be given that the right of veto was more than 
a century ago already obsolete. But the statement that a power is 
practically obsolete does not involve the assertion that it could under 
no conceivable circumstances be revived. On the whole subject of the 
veto, and the different senses in which the expreasion is used, the 
reader should consult an excellent article by Professor Orelli of Zurich, 
to be found under the word “Veto” in Encyclopedia Britannica (9th 
ed.), xxiv. p. 208. 

The history of the Royal Veto curiously illustrates the advantage 
which sometimes arises from keeping alive in theory prerogatives which 
may seem to be practically obsolete, The Crown’s legislative “veto” 
has certainly long been unused in England, but it has turned out a 
convenient method of regulating the relation between the United 
Kingdom and the Colonies. If the right of the King to refuse his 
assent to a bill which had passed the two Houses of Parliament had 
been abolished by statute, it would have been difficult, if not im- 
possible, for the King to veto, or disallow, Acts passed by the Parliament 
of a self-governing colony, ¢.g. New Zealand. It would, in other words, 
have been hard to create a parliamentary veto of colonial legislation. 
Yet the existence of such a veto, which ought to be, and is, sparingly 
used, helps to hold together the federation known as the British Empire. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES WI 
eee 

This check on colonial legislation is exerted in 
two different manners.’ 

The Governor of a colony, say New Zealand, may 
directly refuse his assent to a bill passed by both 
Houses of the New Zealand Parliament. In this case 
the bill is finally lost, just as would be a bill which 
had been rejected by the colonial council, or as would 
be a bill passed by the English Houses of Parliament 
if the Crown were to exert the obsolete prerogative of 
refusing the royal assent. The Governor, again, may, 
without refusing his assent, reserve the bill for the 
consideration of the Crown. In such case the bill 
does not come into force until it has received the 
royal assent, which is in effect the assent of the 
English Ministry, and therefore indirectly of the 
Imperial Parliament. 

1 The mode in which the power to veto colonial legislation is 
exercised may be best understood from the following extract from the 
Rules and Regulations printed some years ago by the Colonial Office :— 

RULES AND REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER III 
§ 1. Legislutive Councils and Assemblies 

48, In every colony the Governor has authority either to give or to withhold 
his assent to laws passed by the other branches or members of the Legislature, 
and until that assent is given no such law is valid or binding. 

49. Laws are in some cases passed with suspending clauses ; that is, although 
assented to by the Governor they do not come into operation or take effect in the 
colony until they shal] have been specially confirmed by Her Majesty, and in 
other cases Parliament has for the same purpose empowered the Governor to 
reserve laws for the Crown’s assent, instead of himself assenting or refusing his 
assent to them. ; } 

50. Every law which has received the Governor's assent (unless it contains a 
suspending clause) comes into operation immediately, or at the time specified in 
the law itself. But the Crown retains power to disallow the law; and if such 
power be exercised . . . the law ceases to have operation from the date at which 
such disallowance is published in the colony. 

51. In colonies having representative assemblies the disallowance of any law, 
or the Crown's assent to a reserved bill, is signified by order in council. The 
confirmation of an Act passed with a suspending clause, is not signified by 
order in council unless this mode of confirmation is required by the terms of the 
suspending clause itself, or by some special provision in the constitution of the 
colony. 

Chapter 
I. 

How right 
of ‘‘ veto.” 
exervised. 

Part L 

112 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

The Governor, on the other hand, may, as repre- 
senting the Crown, give his assent to a New Zealand 
bill. The bill thereupon comes into force throughout 
New Zealand. But such a bill, though for a time a 
valid Act, is not finally made law even in New Zealand, 
since the Crown may, after the Governor's assent has 
been given, disallow the colonial Act. ‘The case is thus 
put by Mr. Todd :—‘ Although a governor as repre- 

52. In Crown colonies the allowance or disallowance of any law is generally 
signified by despatch. 

53. In some cases a period is limited, after the expiration of which local 
enactments, though not actually disallowed, cease to have the authority of law in 
the colony, unless before the lapse of that time Her Majesty's confirmation of 
them shal] have been signified there ; but the general rule is otherwise. 

54. In colonies possessing representative assemblies, laws purport to be made 
by the Queen or by the Governor on Her Majesty’s behalf or sometimes by the 
Governor alone, omitting any express reference to Her Majesty, with the advice 
and consent of the council and assembly. They are almost invariably designated 
as Acts. In colonies not having such assemblies, laws are designated as ordin- 
ances, and purport to be made by the Governor, with the advice and consent of 
the Legislative Council (or in British Guiana of the Court of Policy). 

The “ veto,” it will be perceived, may be exercised -by one of two 
essentially different methods: first, by the refusal of the Governor’s 
assent ; secondly, by the exercise of the royal power to disallow laws 
even when assented to by the Governor. As further, the Governor 
may reserve bills for the royal consideration, and as colonial laws are 
sometimes passed containing a clause which suspends their operation 
until the signification of the royal assent, the check on colonial 
legislation may be exercised in four different forms— 

(1) The refusal of the Governor's assent to a bill. 

(2) Reservation of a bill for the consideration of the Crown, and 
the subsequent lapse of the bill owing to the royal assent 
being refused, or not being given within the statutory time. 

(3) The insertion in a bill of a clause preventing it from coming 
into operation until the signification of the royal assent 
thereto, and the want of such royal assent. 

(4) The disallowance by the Crown of a law passed by the Colonial 
Parliament with the aasent of the Governor. 

The reader should note, however, the essential difference between 
the three first modes and the fourth mode of checking colonial legislation. 
Under the three first a proposed law passed by the colonial legislature 
never comes into operation in the colony. Under the fourth a colonial 
law which has come into operation in the colony is annulled or die- 
allowed by the Crown from the date of such disallowance. In the 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 113 

“senting the Crown is empowered to give the royal 
“ assent to bills, this act is not final and conclusive : 
‘the Crown itself having, in point of fact, a second 
“veto. All statutes assented to by the governor of 
“a colony go into force immediately, unless they 
“contain a clause suspending their operation until the 
“issue of a proclamation of approval by the queen 
“in council, or some other specific provision to the 
“contrary; but the governor is required to trans- 
“‘mit a copy thereof to the secretary of state for the 
“colonies; and the queen in council may, within 
“two years after the receipt of the same, disallow 
“any such Act.”? 

The result therefore of this state of things is, that 
colonial legislation is subject to a real veto on the 
part of the imperial] government, and no bill which 
the English Ministry think ought for the sake of im- 
perial interests to be negatived can, though passed by 
the New Zealand or other colonial legislature, come 
finally into force. The home government is certain 
to negative or disallow any colonial law which, either 
in letter or in spirit, is repugnant to Parliamentary 
legislation, and a large number of Acts can be given 
which on one ground or another have been either 
not assented to or disallowed by the Crown. In 

case of more than one colony, such disallowance must, under the Con- 
stitution Act or letters-patent, be signified within two years. See the 
British North America Act, 1867, sec. 56. Compare the Australian 
Constitutions Act, 1842 (5 & 6 Vict. c. 76), secs. 32, 33 ; the Australian 
Constitutions Act, 1850, 13 & 14 Vict. c. 59; and the Victoria Con- 
stitution Act, 1855 (18 & 19 Vict. c. 55), sec. 3. 

Under the Australian Commonwealth Act the King may disallow 
an Act assented to by the Governor-General within one year after the 
Governor-General’s assent. (Commonwealth of Australia Constitution 
Act, sec, 59.) . ; 

1 Todd, Parliamentary Government in the British Colonies, p. 137. 

I 

Part L 

114 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

1868 the Crown refused assent to a Canadian Act re- 
ducing the salary of the Governor-General.’ In 1872 
the Crown refused assent to a Canadian Copyright 
Act because certain parts of it conflicted with imperial 
legislation. In 1873 a Canadian Act was disallowed 
as being contrary to the express terms of the British 
North America Act, 1868; and on similar grounds in 
1878 a Canadian Shipping Act was disallowed.* So 
again the Crown has at times in effect passed a veto 
upon Australian Acts for checking Chinese immigra- 
tion? And Acts passed by a colonial legislature, 
allowing divorce on the ground solely of the husband's 
adultery or (before the passing of the Deceased Wife's 
Sister's Marriage Act, 1907, 7 Edw. VII. c. 47) legal- 
ising marriage with a deceased wife’s sister or with a 
deceased husband’s brother, have (though not consist- 
ently with the general tenor of our colonial policy) 
been sometimes disallowed by the Crown, that is, in 
effect by the home government. 

The general answer therefore to the inquiry, how 
colonial liberty of legislation is made legally recon- 
cilable with imperial sovereignty, is that the complete 
recognition of the supremacy of Parliament obviates 
the necessity for carefully limiting the authority of 
colonial legislatures, and that the home government, 
who in effect represent Parliament, retain by the use 
of the Crown’s veto the power of preventing the 
occurrence of conflicts between colonial and imperial 

1 Todd, Parliamentary Government in the British Colonies, p. 144, 

2 Ibid., pp. 147, 150. 

® As regards the Australian colonies such legislation has, I am in- 
formed, been heretofore checked in the following manner. Immigration 
bills have been reserved for the consideration of the Crown, and the 
Pai of the Crown not having been given, have never come into 
orce, 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 115 

laws. To this it must be added that imperial treaties 
legally bind the colonies, and that the “ treaty-making 
power,” to use an American expression, resides in the 
Crown, and is therefore exercised by the home govern- 
ment in accordance with the wishes of the Houses of 
Parliament, or more strictly of the House of Commons : 
whilst the authority to make treaties is, except where 
expressly allowed by Act of Parliament, not possessed 
by any colonial government.’ 

It should, however, be observed that the legisla- 
ture of a self-governing colony is free to determine 
whether or not to pass laws necessary for giving effect 
to a treaty entered into between the imperial govern- 
ment and a foreign power; and further, that there 
might in practice be great difficulty in enforcing 
within the limits of a colony the terms of a treaty, 
e.g. as to the extradition of criminals, to which 
colonial sentiment was opposed. But this does not 
affect the principle of law that a colony is bound by 
treaties made by the imperial government, and does 
not, unless under some special provision of an Act of 
Parliament, possess authority to make treaties with 
any foreign power. 

Any one who wishes justly to appreciate the 
nature and the extent of the control exerted by Great 
Britain over colonial legislation should keep two 
points carefully in mind. The tendency, in the first 
place, of the imperial government is as a matter of 
policy to interfere less and less with the action of the 
colonies, whether in the way of law-making ’* or other- 

1 See Todd, Parliamentary Government in the British Colontes, pp. 

192-218. 
2 Thus the New Zealand Deceased Husband’s Brother Act, 1900, 

No. 72, legalising marriage with a deceased husband’s brother, the 

Chapter 

Policy of 
imperial 
govern- 
ment not 
to interfere 
with action 
of colonies, 

Part I. 

116 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

ee 

wise.! Colonial Acts, in the second place, even when 
finally assented to by the Crown, are, as already 
pointed out, invalid if repugnant to an Act of Parlia- 
ment applying to the colony. The imperial policy 
therefore of non-intervention in the local affairs of 
British dependencies combines with the supreme 
legislative authority of the Imperial Parliament to 
render encroachments by the Parliament of the 
United Kingdom on the sphere of colonial legisla- 
tion, or by colonial Parliaments on the domain of 

imperial legislation, of comparatively rare occur- 
rence.” 

Immigration Restriction Act, 1901, passed by the Commonwealth 
Parliament, the Immigrants’ Restriction Act, 1907, No. 15, passed 
by the Transvaal Legislature, have all received the sanction of the 
Crown. The last enactment illustrates the immensely wide legislative 
authority which the home government will under some circumstances 
concede to a colonial Parliament. The Secretary of State for the 
Colonies (Mr. Morley) ‘‘ regrets that he cannot agree that the Act in 
“question can be regarded as similar to the legislation already 
“sanctioned in other self-governing colonies. . . . Section 2 (4) of 
“the Transvaal Act introduces a principle to which no parallel can 
“be found in previous legislation. This clause . .. will debar 
“from entry into the Transvaal British subjects who would be free to 
‘enter into any other colony by proving themselves capable of pass- 
“ing the educational teats laid down for immigrants. It will, for 
“instance, permanently exclude from the Transvaal members of 
“Jearned professions and graduates of European Universities of Asiatic 
“origin who may in future wish to enter the colony.” See Parl. 
Paper (Cd. 3887), Correspondence relating to Legislation affecting Asiatice 
tn the Transvaal, pp. 52, 53, and compare pp. 31, 32. 

1 Except in the case of political treaties, such as the Hague Con- 
ventions, the imperial government does not nowadays bind the colonies 
by treaties, but secures the insertion in treaties of clauses allowing 
colonies to adhere to a treaty if they desire to do so. 

? The right of appeal to the Privy Council from the decision of the 
Courts of the colonies is another link strengthening the connection 
between the colonies and England. 

There have been, however, of recent years a good number of 

conflicts between imperial and colonial legislation as to matters affect- 
ing merchant shipping. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 117 
a ee ee SOs i ee 

II. Foreign Non-sovereign Legislatures. 

We perceive without difficulty that the Parlia- 
ments of even those colonies, such as the Dominion 
of Canada, or the Australian Commonwealth, which 
are most nearly independent states, are not in reality 
sovereign legislatures. This is easily seen, because 
the sovereign Parliament of the United Kingdom, 
which legislates for the whole British Empire, is 
visible in the background, and because the colonies, 
however large their practical freedom of action, do 
not act as independent powers in relation to foreign 
states; the Parliament of a dependency cannot itself 
be a sovereign body. It is harder for Englishmen to 
realise that the legislative assembly of an independ- 
ent nation may not be a sovereign assembly. Our 
political habits of thought indeed are so based upon 
the assumption of Parliamentary omnipotence, that 
the position of a Parliament which represents an in- 
dependent nation and yet is not itself a sovereign 
power is apt to appear to us exceptional or anomalous. 
Yet whoever examines the constitutions of civilised 
countries will find that the legislative assemblies of 
great nations are, or have been, in many cases legisla- 

tive without being constituent bodies. To determine 

in any given case whether a foreign legislature be a 
sovereign power or not we must examine the constitu- 
tion of the state to which it belongs, and ascertain 
whether the legislature whose position is in question 
bears any of the marks of subordination. Such an 
investigation will in many or in most instances show 
that an apparently sovereign assembly is in reality a 
non-sovereign law-making body. 

Part I. 

Constitu- 
tional 
monarchy 
of Louis 
Philippe. 

118 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

France has within the last hundred and thirty 
years made trial of at least twelve constitutions.’ 

These various forms of government have, amidst 
all their differences, possessed in general one common 
feature. ‘hey have most of them been based upon 
the recognition of an essential distinction between 
constitutional or “fundamental” laws intended to 
be either immutable or changeable only with great 
difficulty, and “ordinary” laws which could be 
changed by the ordinary legislature in the common 
course of legislation. Hence under the constitutions 
which France has from time to time adopted the 
common Parliament or legislative body has not been 
a sovereign legislature. 

The constitutional monarchy of Louis Philippe, in 
outward appearance at least, was modelled on the 
constitutional monarchy of England. In the Charter 
not a word could be found which expressly limits 
the legislative authority possessed by the Crown 
and the two Chambers, and to an Englishman it 
would seem certainly arguable that under the Orleans 
dynasty the Parliament was possessed of sovereignty. 
This, however, was not the viewaccepted among French 
lawyers. The “immutability of the Constitution of 
“France,” writes Tocqueville, “is a necessary con- 
“sequence of the laws of that country. ... As the 
‘‘King, the Peers, and the Deputies all derive their 
“authority from the Constitution, these three powers 
“united cannot alter a law by virtue of which alone 
‘they govern. Out of the pale of the Constitution 
“they are nothing; where, then, could they take their 

1 Demombynes, Les Constitutions européennes, ii, (2nd ed.), pp. 
1-5, See Appendix, Note I., Rigidity of French Constitutions 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW.MAKING BODIES 119 

“stand to effect a change in its provisions? The alter- 
“native is clear: either their efforts are powerless 
“against the Charter, which continues to exist in spite 
‘‘of them, in which case they only reign in the name 
“of the Charter; or they succeed in changing the 
“Charter, and then the law by which they existed 
“being annulled, they themselves cease to exist. By 
“destroying the Charter, they destroy themselves. 
‘This is much more evident in the laws of 1830 than 
‘in those of 1814. In 1814 the royal prerogative 
“took its stand above and beyond the Constitution ; 
“but in 1830 it was avowedly created by, and de- 
*‘ pendent on, the Constitution. A part, therefore, of 
“the French Constitution is immutable, because it is 
“united to the destiny of a family ; and the body of 
“the Constitution is equally immutable, because there 
“appear to be no legal means of changing it. These 
‘remarks are not applicable to England. That country 
“having no written Constitution, who can assert when 
“its Constitution is changed?” * 

Tocqueville's reasoning* may not carry con- 
viction to an Englishman, but the weakness of his 
argument is of itself strong evidence of the influence 
of the hold on French opinion of the doctrine which 
it is intended to support, namely, that Parliamentary 
sovereignty was not a recognised part of French con- 
stitutionalism. The dogma which is so naturally 

1 A. de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, ii. (translation), App. 
pp. 322, 323. Cuvres Completes, i. p. 311. 

2 His view is certainly paradoxical. (See Duguit, Manuel de droit 
constitutionnel francais, 8. 149, p. 1090.) As a matter of fact one 
provision of the Charter, namely, art. 23, regulating the appointment 
of Peers, was changed by the ordinary process of legislation. See 

Law of 29th December 1831, Hélie, Les Constitutions de la France, 
p- 1006. 

Chapter 

Part I. 

Republic 
of 1848. 

Present 
Republic. 

120 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
alr ira SS 8 Se Ee he ee 
assented to by Englishmen contradicta that idea of 
the essential difference between constitutional and 
other laws which appears to have a firm hold on most 
foreign statesmen and legislators. 

The Republic of 1848 expressly recognised this 
distinction ; no single article of the constitution pro- 
claimed on 4th November 1848 could be changed in 
the same way as an ordinary law. The legislative 
assembly sat for three years. In the last year of its 
existence, and then only, it could by a majority of 
three-fourths, and not otherwise, convoke a constituent 
body with authority to modify the constitution. This 
constituent and sovereign assembly differed in num- 
bers, and otherwise, from the ordinary non-sovereign 
legislature. 

The National Assembly of the French Republic 
exerts at least as much direct authority as the English 
Houses of Parliament. The French Chamber of 
Deputies exercises at least as much influence on the 
appointment of Ministers, and controls the action of 
the government, at least as strictly as does our House 
of Commons. The President, moreover, does not 
possess even a theoretical right of veto. For all 
this, however, the French Parliament is not a sove- 
reign assembly, but is bound by the laws of the 
constitution in a way in which no law binds our 
Parliament. The articles of the constitution, or 
“fundamental laws,” stand in a totally different 
position from the ordinary law of the land. Under 
article 8 of the constitution, no one of these funda- 
mental enactments can be legally changed otherwise 
than subject to the following provisions :— 

“8. Les Chambres auront le droit, par délibéra- 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 121 
a EE eS | BEN 
“‘twns séparées, prises dans chucune & la majorité 
“absolue des voix, soit spontanément, soit sur la 
“demande du Président de la République, de déclarer 
“qui y a leu de réviser les lois constitutionnelles.— 
“ Apres que chacune des deux Chambres aura pris 
“cette résolution, elles se réuniront en Assemblée 
“nationale pour procéder a la révision.—Les dé- 
“libérations portant révision des lois constitution- 
“‘nelles, en tout ou en partie, devront étre prises 
“da la majorité absolue des membres composant 
“T Assemblée nationale.” } 

Supreme legislative power is therefore under the 
Republic vested not in the ordinary Parliament of 
two Chambers, but in a “national assembly,” or con- 
gress, composed of the Chamber of Deputies and the 
Senate sitting together. 

The various constitutions, in short, of France, 

1 Duguit et Monnier, Les Constitutions de la France depuis 1789, 
pp. 320, 321. A striking example of the difference between English 
and French constitutionalism is to be found in the division of opinion 
which exists between French writers of authority on the answer to the 
inquiry whether the French Chambers, when sitting together, have 
constitutionally the right to change the constitution. To an English- 
man the question seems hardly to admit of discussion, for Art. 8 of the 
constitutional laws enacts in so many words that these laws may be 
revised, in the manner therein set forth, by the Chambers when sitting 
together asa National Assembly. Many French constitutionalists there- 
fore lay down, as would any English lawyer, that the Assembly is a 
constituent as well as a legislative body, and is endowed with the right 
to change the constitution (Duguit, Manuel, s. 151; Moreau, Prec 
Glémentaire de droit constituttonnel (Paris, 1892), p. 149). But some 
eminent authorities maintain that this view is erroneous, and that in 
spite of the words of the constitution the ultimate right of constitu- 
tional amendment must be exercised directly by the French people, and 
that therefore any alteration in the constitutional laws by the Assembly 
lacks, at any rate, moral validity unless it is ratified by the direct vote 
of the electors. (See, on the one side, Duguit, Manuel, s, 151 ; Bard et 
Robiquet, La Constitution frangatse de 1875 (2nd ed.), pp. 374-390, 
and on the other side, Esmein, Droit constitutionnel (4th ed.), p. 907 ; 
Borgeand, Etablissement a revision des constitutions, pp. 303-307.) 

Distinction 
between 
flexible 
and rigid 
constitu- 
tions, 

Part J. 

Flexible 
constitu- 
tions. 

122 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

which are in this respect fair types of continental 
polities,’ exhibit, as compared with the expansiveness 

_ or “flexibility ” of English institutions, that char- 

acteristic which may be conveniently described as 
“rigidity.” ? 

And here it is worth while, with a view to under- 
standing the constitution of our own country, to make 
perfectly clear to ourselves the distinction already 
referred to between a “flexible” and a“ rigid” con- 
stitution. 

A “flexible” constitution is one under which every 
law of every description can legally be changed with 
the same ease and in the same manner by one and 
the same body. The “flexibility ” of our constitu- 
tion consists in the right of the Crown and the two 
Houses to modify or repeal any law whatever; they 
can alter the succession to the Crown or repeal the 
Acts of Union in the same manner in which they 
can pass an Act enabling a company to make a new 
railway from Oxford to London. With us, laws there- 
fore are called constitutional, because they refer to 
subjects supposed to affect the fundamental institu- 
tions of the state, and not because they are legally 
more sacred or difficult to change than other laws. 

1 No constitution better merits study in this as in other respects 
than the constitution of Belgium. Though formed after the English 
model, it rejects or omits the principle of Parliamentary sovereignty. 
The ordinary Parliament cannot change anything in the constitution ; 
it is a legislative, not a constituent body ; it can declare that there is 
reason for changing a particular constitutional provision, and having 
done 80 is tpso facto dissolved (aprés cette déclaration les deux chambres 
sont dissoutes de plein droit). The new Parliament thereupon 

elected has a right to change the constitutional article which has 

been declared subject to change (Constitution de La Belgique, Arte. 
131) 71); 

2 See Appendix, Note L., Rigidity of French Constitutions. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 123 
tah Lc laren RE ig a 
And as.a matter of fact, the meaning of the word | Chapter 
“constitutional” is in England so vague that the| _™ 
term “a constitutional law or enactment” is rarely 
applied to any English statute as giving a definite 
description of its character. 

A “rigid” constitution is one under which certain Rigid con- 
laws generally known as constitutional or fundamental “"°™ 
laws cannot be changed in the same manner as 
ordinary laws. The “rigidity” of the constitution, 
say of Belgium or of France, consists in the absence 
of any right on the part of the Belgian or French 
Parliament, when acting in its ordinary capacity, to 
modify or repeal certain definite laws termed consti- 
tutional or fundamental. Under a rigid constitution 
the term “constitutional” as applied to a law has a 
perfectly definite sense. It means that a particular 
enactment belongs to the articles of the constitution, 
and cannot be legally changed with the same ease and 
in the same manner as ordinary laws. The articles of 
the constitution will no doubt generally, though by no 
means invariably, be found to include all the most 
important and fundamental laws of the state. But it 
certainly cannot be asserted that where a constitution 
is rigid all its articles refer to matters of supreme 
importance. The rule that the French Parliament 
must meet at Versailles was at one time one of the 
constitutional laws of the French Republic. Such 
an enactment, however practically important, would 
never in virtue of its own character have been termed 
constitutional ; it was constitutional simply because 
it was included in the articles of the constitution.' 

1 The terms “flexible” and “rigid” (originally suggested by my 
friend Mr. Bryce) are, it should be remarked, used throughout this 

Part L 

Whether 
rigidity of 
constitu- 
tion secures 
perma- 
nence 

124 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

The contrast between the flexibility of the English 
and the rigidity of almost every foreign constitution 
suggests two interesting inquiries. 

First, Does the rigidity of a constitution secure 
its permanence and invest the fundamental institu- 
tions of the state with practical immutability ? 

To this inquiry historical experience gives an 
indecisive answer. 

In some instances the fact that certain laws or 
institutions of a state have been marked off as placed 
beyond the sphere of political controversy, has, appar- 
ently, prevented that process of gradual innovation 
which in England has, within not much more than 
sixty years, transformed our polity. The constitution 
of Belgium stood for more than half a century with- 
out undergoing, in form at least, any material change 
whatever. The constitution of the United States has 
lasted for more than a hundred years, but has not 
undergone anything like the amount of change which 
has been experienced by the constitution of England 
since the death of George the Third.’ But if the 

work without any connotation either of praise or of blame. The 
flexibility and expansiveness of the English constitution, or the rigidity 
and immutability of, ¢g. the constitution of the United States, may 
each be qualities which according to the judgment of different critics 
deserve either admiration or censure. With such judgments this 
treatise has no concern. My whole aim is to make clear to my 
readers the exact difference between a flexible and a rigid constitu- 
tion. It is not my object to pronounce any opinion on the question 
vibe th the flexibility or rigidity of a given polity be a merit or a 
efect. 

1 No doubt the constitution of the United States has in reality, 
though not in form, changed a good deal since the beginning of last 
century ; but the change has been effected far leas by formally enacted 
constitutional amendments than by the growth of customs or institu- 
tions which have modified the working without altering the articles of 
the constitution. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 125 

inflexibility of constitutional laws has in certain 
instances checked the gradual and unconscious 
process of innovation by which the foundations of a 
commonwealth are undermined, the rigidity of consti- 
tutional forms has in other cases provoked revolution. 
The twelve unchangeable constitutions of France have 
each lasted on an average for less than ten years, 
and have frequently perished by violence. Louis 
Philippe’s monarchy was destroyed within seven years 
of the time when Tocqueville pointed out that no 
power existed legally capable of altering the articles 
of the Charter. In one notorious instance at least 
—and other examples of the same phenomenon 
might be produced from the annals of revolutionary 
France—the immutability of the constitution was 
the ground or excuse for its violent subversion. 
The best plea for the Coup d'état of 1851 was, 
that while the French people wished for the re- 
election of the President, the article of the con- 
stitution requiring a majority of three-fourths of 
the legislative assembly in order to alter the law 
which made the President’s re-election impossible, 
thwarted the will of the sovereign people. Had the 
Republican Assembly been a sovereign Parliament, 
Louis Napoleon would have lacked the plea, which 
seemed to justify, as well as some of the motives 
which tempted him to commit, the crime of the 2nd 
of December. 

Nor ought the perils in which France was involved 
by the immutability with which the statesmen of 
1848 invested the constitution to be looked upon as 
exceptional; they arose from a defect which is in- 
herent in every rigid constitution. The endeavour to 

Chapter 

Part L 

constitu- 
tional 
legislation ? 

126 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

create laws which cannot be changed is an attempt to 
hamper the exercise of sovereign power ; it therefore 
tends to bring the letter of the law into conflict with 
the will of the really supreme power in the state. The 
majority of French electors were under the constitu- 
tion the true sovereign of France; but the rule which 
prevented the legal re-election of the President in 
effect brought the law of the land into conflict with 
the will of the majority of the electors, and produced, 
therefore, as a rigid constitution has a natural tend- 
ency to produce, an opposition between the letter 
of the law and the wishes of the sovereign. If 
the inflexibility of French constitutions has provoked 
revolution, the flexibility of English institutions has, 
once at least, saved them from violent overthrow. 
To a student, who at this distance of time calmly 
studies the history of the first Reform Bill, it is 
apparent, that in 1832 the supreme legislative auth- 
ority of Parliament enabled the nation to carry 
through a political revolution under the guise of a 
legal reform. 

The rigidity, in short, of a constitution tends to 
check gradual innovation ; but, just because it impedes 
change, may, under unfavourable circumstances, occa- 
sion or provoke revolution. 

Secondly, What are the safeguards which under 
a rigid constitution can be taken against unconstitu- 

- tional legislation ? 

The general answer to our inquiry (which of 
course can have no application to a country like 
England, ruled by a sovereign Parliament) is that 
two methods may be, and have been, adopted by 
the makers of constitutions, with a view to render- 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 127 

ing unconstitutional legislation, either impossible, or 
inoperative. 

Reliance may be placed upon the force of public 
opinion and upon the ingenious balancing of political 
powers for restraining the legislature from passing 
unconstitutional enactments. This system opposes 
unconstitutional legislation by means of moral sanc- 
tions, which resolve themselves into the influence of 
public sentiment. 

Authority, again, may be given to some person 
or body of persons, and preferably to the Courts, 
to adjudicate upon the constitutionality of legislative 
acts, and treat them as void if they are inconsistent 
with the letter or the spirit of the constitution. This 
system attempts not so much to prevent unconstitu- 
tional legislation as to render it harmless through the 
intervention of the tribunals, and rests at bottom on 
the authority of the judges. 

This general account of the two methods by 
which it may be attempted to secure the rigidity of 
a constitution is hardly intelligible without further 
illustration. Its meaning may be best understood 
by a comparison between the different policies in 
regard to the legislature pursued by two different 
‘classes of constitutionalists. 

French constitution-makers and their continental 
followers have, as we have seen, always attached 
vital importance to the distinction between funda- 
mental and other laws, and therefore have constantly 
created legislative assemblies which possessed “‘legis- 
lative” without possessing “constituent” powers. 
French statesmen have therefore been forced to 
devise means for keeping the ordinary legislature 

Chapter 

Safeguards 
provided 
by conti- 
nental 
constitu- 
tionalists. 

Part L 

128 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

—E 

within its appropriate sphere. Their mode of pro- 
cedure has been marked by a certain uniformity ;- 
they have declared on the face of the constitution 
the exact limits imposed upon the authority of the 
legislature ; they have laid down as articles of the 
constitution whole bodies of maxims intended to 
guide and control the course of legislation; they 
have provided for the creation, by special methods 
and under special conditions, of a constituent body 
which alone should be entitled to revise the con- 
stitution. They have, in short, directed their 
attention to restraining the ordinary legislature from 
attempting any inroad upon the fundamental laws 
of the state; but they have in general trusted to 
public sentiment,’ or at any rate to political con- 
siderations, for inducing the legislature to respect 
the restraints imposed on its authority, and have 
usually omitted to provide machinery for annulling 

1 Aucun des pouvoirs institués par la constitution n’a le droit 
“de la changer dans son ensemble ni dans ses parties, sauf les réformes 
‘qui pourront y &tre faites par la voie de la révision, conformément 
“aux dispositions du titre VII. ci-dessua. 

‘“‘L’Assemblée nationale constituante en remet le dépdt A la 
“fidélité du Corpa législatif, du Roi et dee juges, & la vigilance des 
“peres de famille, aux épouses et aux méres, & Vaffection des jeunes 
“citoyens, au courage de tous les Frangais.”—Constitution de 1791, 
Tit. vii. Art. 8; Duguit et Monnier, Les Constitutions de la France 
depuis 1789, p. 34. 

These are the terms in which the National Aesembly entrusts the 
Constitution of 1791 to the guardianship of the nation. It is just 
possible, though not likely, that the reference to the judges is intended 
to contain a hint that the Courts should annul or treat as void un- 
constitutional laws. Under the Constitution of the Year VIII. the 
senate had authority to annul unconstitutional laws But this 
was rather a veto on what in England we should call Bills than 
a power to make void laws duly enacted. See Constitution of 
Year VIII, Tit. ii Arts. 26, 28, Hélie, Les Constitutions de la 
France, p. 579. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 129 
unconstitutional enactments, or for rendering them 
of no effect. 

These traits of French constitutionalism are 
specially noticeable in the three earliest of French 
political experiments. The Monarchical constitution 
of 1791, the Democratic constitution of 1793, the 
Directorial constitution of 1795 exhibit, under all 
their diversities, two features in common.' They 
each, on the one hand, confine the power of the legis- 
lature within very narrow limits indeed; under the 
Directory, for instance, the legislative body could not 
itself change any one of the 377 articles of the con- 
stitution, and the provisions for creating a constituent 
assembly were so framed that not the very least 
alteration in any of these articles could have been 
carried out within a period of less than nine years.* 
None of these constitutions, on the other hand, 
contain a hint as to the mode in which a law is 
to be treated which is alleged to violate the con- 
stitution. Their framers indeed hardly seem to 
have recognised the fact that enactments of the 
legislature might, without being in so many words 
opposed to the constitution, yet be of dubious con- 
stitutionality, and that some means would be 
needed for determining whether a given law was 
or was not in opposition to the principles of the 
constitution. 

These characteristics of the revolutionary consti- 
tutions have been repeated in the works of later 
French constitutionalists. Under the present French 

1 See Appendix, Note I., Rigidity of French Constitutions. 
2 See Constitution of 1795, Tit xiii. Art. 338, Hélie, Les Consts- 

tutions de la France, p. 463. 
K 

Chapter 
IL 

French 
Revolu- 
tionary 
constitu- 
tions. 

Existing 
Republican 
constitu- 
tion. 

Part L 

Are the 
articles of 
continental] 
constitu- 
tions 
“laws”? 

130 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

Republic there exist a certain number of laws (not 
it is true a very large number), which the Parlia- 
ment cannot change; and what is perhaps of more 
consequence, the so-called Congress’ could at any 
time increase the number of fundamental laws, and 
thereby greatly decrease the authority of future 
Parliaments. The constitution, however, contains 
no article providing against the possibility of an 
ordinary Parliament carrying through legislation 
greatly in excess of its constitutional powers. Any 
one in fact who bears in mind the respect paid 
in France from the time of the Revolution on- 
wards to the legislation of de facto governments 
and the traditions of the French judicature, will 
assume with confidence that an enactment passed 
through the Chambers, promulgated by the Presi- 
dent, and published in the Bulletin des Lovs, will 
be held valid by every tribunal throughout the 
Republic. 

This curious result therefore ensues, The restric- 
tions placed on the action of the legislature under 
the French constitution are not in reality laws, since 
they are not rules which in the last resort will be 
enforced by the Courts. Their true character is that 
of maxims of political morality, which derive what- 
ever strength they possess from being formally in- 
scribed in the constitution and from the resulting 
support of public opinion. What is true of the con- 
stitution of France applies with more or less force to 
other polities which have been formed under the 

The term is used by French writers, but does not appear in the 
Lows Constrtutionnelles, and one would rather gather that the proper 
title for a so-called Congress is L’ Assemblée Nationale, 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 131 

influence of French ideas. The Belgian constitution, 
for example, restricts the action of the Parliament 
no less than does the Republican constitution of 
France. But it is at least doubtful whether Belgian 
constitutionalists have provided any means whatever 
for invalidating laws which diminish or do away 
with the rights (e.g. the right of freedom of speech) 
“guaranteed” to Belgian citizens. The jurists of 
Belgium maintain, in theory at least, that an Act of 
Parliament opposed to any article of the constitution 
ought to be treated by the Courts as void. But 
during the whole period of Belgian independence, no 
tribunal, it is said, has ever pronounced judgment 
upon the constitutionality of an Act of Parliament. 
This shows, it may be said, that the Parliament has 
respected the constitution, and certainly affords some 
evidence that, under favourable circumstances, formal 
declarations of rights may, from their influence on 
popular feeling, possess greater weight than is gener- 
ally attributed to them in England; but it also 
suggests the notion that in Belgium, as in France, 
the restrictions on Parliamentary authority are sup- 
ported mainly by moral or political sentiment, and 
are at bottom rather constitutional understandings 
than laws. 

To an English critic, indeed, the attitude of con- 
tinental and especially of revolutionary statesmen 
towards the ordinary legislature bears an air of 
paradox. They seem to be almost equally afraid 
of leaving the authority of the ordinary legislature 
unfettered, and of taking the steps by which the 
legislature may be prevented from breaking through 
the bonds imposed upon its power. The explanation 

Chapter 

Part I. 

132 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
I a Ai nt en 
of this apparent inconsistency is to be found in two 
sentiments which have influenced French constitu- 
tion-makers from the very outbreak of the Revolution. 
—an over-estimate of the effect to be produced by 
general declarations of rights, and a settled jealousy 
of any intervention by the judges in the sphere of 
politics. We shall see, in a later chapter, that the 
public law of France is still radically influenced by 
the belief, even now almost universal among French- 
men, that the law Courts must not be allowed to 
interfere in any way whatever with matters of state, 
or indeed with anything affecting the machinery of 
government.” 

The authors of the American constitution have, 

. for reasons that will appear in my next chapter, been 

even more anxious than French statesmen to limit 
the authority of every legislative body throughout 
the Republic. They have further shared the faith 
of continental politicians in the value possessed by 
general declarations of rights. But they have, unlike 
French constitution-makers, directed their attention, 
not so much to preventing Congress and other legis- 
latures from making laws in excess of their powers, 
as to the invention of means by which the effect of 
unconstitutional laws may be nullified; and this 
result they have achieved by making it the duty of 
every judge throughout the Union to treat as void 
any enactment which violates the constitution, and 
thus have given to the restrictions contained in the 
constitution on the legislative authority either of 
Congress or the State legislatures the character of 

1 A. de Tocqueville, Euvres Completes, i. pp. 167, 168. 
2 See Chap. XII. 

NON-SOVEREIGN LAW-MAKING BODIES 133 

real laws, that is, of rules enforced by the Courts. Chapter 
This system, which makes the judges the guardians _™ 
of the constitution, provides the only adequate safe- 

guard which has hitherto been invented against 
unconstitutional legislation. 

Part L 
Subject. 

CHAPTER III 
PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY AND FEDERALISM 

My present aim is to illustrate the nature of Parlia- 
mentary sovereignty as it exists in England, by a 
comparison with the system of government known as 
Federalism as it exists in several parts of the civilised 
world, and especially in the United States of America.’ 

There are indeed to be found at the present time 

‘ three other noteworthy examples of federal govern- 

ment—the Swiss Confederation, the Dominion of 
Canada, and the German Empire.* But while from a 
study of the institutions of each of these states one 
may draw illustrations which throw light on our 
subject, it will be best to keep our attention through- 
out this chapter fixed mainly on the institutions of 
the great American Republic. And this for two 
reasons, The Union, in the first place, presents 
the most completely developed type of federalism. 
All the features which mark that scheme of govern- 
ment, and above all the control of the legislature by 
the Courts, are there exhibited in their most salient 

1 On the whole subject of American Federalism the reader should 
consult Mr. Bryce’s American Commonwealth, and with a view to matters 
treated of in this chapter should read with special care vol. i. part i 

? To these we must now (1908) add the Commonwealth of Australia. 
See Appendix, Note IX. Australian Federalism. 

134 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 135 
a ee a ee Lae 
and perfect form ; the Swiss Confederation,? moreover, 
and the Dominion of Canada, are more or less copied 
from the American model, whilst the constitution of 
the German Empire is too full of anomalies, springing 
both from historical and from temporary causes, to be 
taken as a fair representative of any known form of 
government. The Constitution of the United States, 
in the second place, holds a very peculiar relation 
towards the institutions of England. In the principle 
of the distribution of powers which determines its 
form, the Constitution of the United States is the 
exact opposite of the English constitution, the very 

Chapter 

essence of which is, as I hope I have now made clear, , 
the unlimited authority of Parliament. But while - 

the formal differences between the constitution of the 

American Republic and the constitution of the English ; 
monarchy are, looked at from one point of view, . 
immense, the institutions of America are in their , 

spirit little else than a gigantic development of the 

ideas which lie at the basis of the political and legal . 

institutions of England. The principle, in short, 
which gives its form to our system of government is 
(to use a foreign but convenient expression) “ uni- 
tarianism,” or the habitual exercise of supreme legis- 
lative authority by one central power, which in the 
particular case is the British Parliament. The prin- 
ciple which, on the other hand, shapes every part of 

1 Swiss federalism deserves an amount of attention which it has 
only of recent years begun to receive. The essential feature of the 
Swiss Commonwealth is that it is a genuine and natural democracy, 
but a democracy based on Continental, and not on Anglo-Saxon, idess 
of freedom and of government. 

The constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia contains at 
least one feature apparently suggested by Swiss federalism. See 
Appendix, Note IX., Australian Federalism. 

meow ee - ee 

136 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

Part 1 | the American polity, is that distribution of limited, 

‘ executive, legislative, and judicial authority among 
bodies each co-ordinate with and independent of the 
other which, we shall in a moment see, is essential to 
the federal form of government. The contrast there- 
fore between the two polities is seen in its most salient 
form, and the results of this difference are made all 
‘the more visible because in every other respect the 
‘ institutions of the English people on each side the 
Atlantic rest upon the same notions of law, of justice, 
and of the relation between the rights of individuals 
and the rights of the government, or the state. 

We shall best understand the nature of federalism 
and the points in which a federal constitution stands 
in contrast with the Parliamentary constitution of 
England if we note, first, the conditions essential to 
the existence of a federal state and the aim with 
which such a state is formed ; secondly, the essential 
features of a federal union; and lastly, certain 
characteristics of federalism which result from its 
very nature, and form points of comparison, or con- 
trast, between a federal polity and a system of 
Parliamentary sovereignty. 

Conditions A federal state requires for its oration two 

and aim of 
federalism. CONitions.? 

1 For United States see Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of 
the United States (4th ed.), and Bryce, American Commonwealth. 

For Canada see the British North America Act, 1867, 30 Vict. c. 3; 
Bourinot, Parliamentary Procedure and Practice in the Dominton of 
Canada, 

For Switzerland see Constitution Fédérale de la Confédération Sutsse du 
29 Mat 1874; Blumer, Handbuch des Schwetzerischen Bundesstaatsrechtes ; 
Lowell, Governments and Parties in Continental Europe, ii. chapa xi.-xiii ; 
Sir F. 0. Adame’s Swiss Confederation ; and Appendix, Note VIII, 
Swiss Federaliam. 

For the Commonwealth of Australia, the Constitution whereof 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 137 

There must exist, in the first place, a body of 
countries such as the Cantons of Switzerland, the 
Colonies of America, or the Provinces of Canada, so 
closely connected by locality, by history, by race, or 
the like, as to be capable of bearing, in the eyes of 
their inhabitants, an impress of common nationality. 
It will also be generally found (if we appeal te 
experience) that lands which now form part of a 
federal state were at some stage of their existence 
bound together by close alliance or by subjection to 
a& common sovereign. It were going further than 
facts warrant to assert that this earlier connection is 
essential to the formation of a federal state. But it 
is certain that where federalism flourishes it is in 
general the slowly-matured fruit of some earlier and 
looser connection. 

A second condition absolutely essential to the 
founding of a federal system is the existence of a 
very peculiar state of sentiment among the inhabit- 
ants of the countries which it is proposed to unite. 
They must desire union, and must not desire unity. 
If there be no desire to unite, there is clearly no basis 
for federalism; the wild scheme entertained (it is 
said) under the Commonwealth of forming @ union 
between the English Republic and the United Pro- 
vinces was one of those dreams which may haunt 
the imagination of politicians but can never be trans- 
formed into fact. If, on the other hand, there be a 
desire for unity, the wish will naturally find its 
deserves careful examination, the reader should consult Quick and 
Garran, Annotated Constitution of the Australian Commonwealth ; Moore, 
The Commonwealth of Australia; and Bryce, Studies in History and 

Jurisprudence, i. Eesay VIII., “ The Constitution of the Commonwealth 
of Australia.” See further, Appendix, Note IX., Australian Federalism. 

Chapter 
nL 

Countries 
capable of 
union. 

Existence 
of federal 
sentiment, 

Part I. 

138 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

satisfaction, not under a federal, but under a uni- 
tarian constitution; the experience of England and 
Scotland in the eighteenth and of the states of 
Italy in the nineteenth century shows that the sense 
of common interests, or common national] feeling, 
may be too strong to allow of that combination of 
union and separation which is the foundation of 
federalism. The phase of sentiment, in short, which 
forms a necessary condition for the formation of a 
federal state is that the people of the proposed state 
should wish to form for many purposes a single 
nation, yet should not wish to surrender the in- 
dividual existence of each man’s State or Canton. 
We may perhaps go a little farther, and say, that 
a federal government will hardly be formed unless 
many of the inhabitants of the separate States feel 
stronger allegiance to their own State than to the 
federal state represented by the common government. 
This was certainly the case in America towards the 
end of the eighteenth century, and in Switzerland at the 
middle of the nineteenth century. In 1787 a Virginian 
or a citizen of Massachusetts felt a far stronger 
attachment to Virginia or to Massachusetts than to 
the body of the confederated States. In 1848 the 
citizens of Lucerne felt far keener loyalty to their 
Canton than to the confederacy, and the same thing, 
no doubt, held true in a less degree of the men of 
Berne or of Zurich. The sentiment therefore which 
creates a federal state is the prevalence throughout 
the citizens of more or less allied countries of two 
feelings which are to a certain extent inconsistent— 
the desire for national unity and the determination 
to maintain the independence of each man’s separate 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 139 

State. The aim of federalism is to give effect as far Chapter 
as possible to both these sentiments. ma 
A federal state is a political contrivance intended 720 %2 
to reconcile national unity and power with the main- 
tenance of “state rights.” The end aimed at fixes 
the essential character of federalism. For the method 
by which Federalism attempts to reconcile the ap- 
parently inconsistent claims of national sovereignty 
and of state sovereignty consists of the formation 
of a constitution under which the ordinary powers? 
of sovereignty are elaborately divided between the 
common or national government and the separate 
states. The details of this division vary under every 
different federal constitution, but the general prin- 
ciple on which it should rest is obvious. Whatever 
concerns the nation as a whole should be placed under 
the control of the national government. All matters 
which are not primarily of common interest should 
remain in the hands of the several States. The pre- 
amble to the Constitution of the United States recites 
that ‘‘ We, the people of the United States, in order 
‘to form a more perfect union, establish justice, 
‘ensure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common 
‘‘ defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the 
“blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, 
“do ordain and establish this Constitution for the 
“United States of America.” The tenth amendment 
enacts that “the powers not delegated to the United 
“States by the Constitution nor prohibited by it to 
“the States are reserved to the States respectively or 
“to the people.” These two statements, which are 
reproduced with slight alteration in the constitution 
1 See Appendix, Note II., Division of Powers in Federal States. 

Supremacy 
of consti- 
tation. 

140 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

of the Swiss Confederation,’ point out the aim and 
lay down the fundamental idea of federalism. 

From the notion that national unity can be recon- 
ciled with state independence by a division of powers 
under a common constitution between the nation on 
the one hand and the individual States on the other, 
flow the three leading characteristics of completely 
developed federalism,—the supremacy’of the constitu- 
tion—the distribution among bodies with limited and 
co-ordinate authority of the different powers of 
government—the authority of the Courts to act as 
interpreters of the constitution. 

A federal state derives its existence from the 
constitution, just as a corporation derives its exist- 
ence from the grant by which it is created. Hence, 
every power, executive, legislative, or judicial, whether 
it belong to the nation or to the individual States, is 
subordinate to and controlled by the constitution. 
Neither the President of the United States nor the 
Houses of Congress, nor the Governor of Massachusetts, 
nor the Legislature or General Court of Massachusetts, 
can legally exercise a single power which is incon- 
sistent with the articles of the Constitution. This 
doctrine of the supremacy of the constitution is 
familiar to every American, but in England even 
trained lawyers find a difficulty in following it out to 
its legitimate consequences. The difficulty arises from 
the fact that under the English constitution no prin- 
ciple is recognised which bears any real resemblance to 
the doctrine (essential to federalism) that the Con- 
stitution constitutes the ‘supreme law of the land.” 

1 Constitution Fédérale, Preamble, and art. 3. 
? See Constitution of United States, art. 6, cl. 2. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 141 
oe ee ee ares 
In England we have laws which may be called 
fundamental’ or constitutional because they deal 
with important principles (as, for example, the 
descent of the Crown or the terms of union with 
Scotland) lying at the basis of our institutions, but 
with us there is no such thing as a supreme law, or 
law which tests the validity of other laws. There 
are indeed important statutes, such as the Act em- 
bodying the Treaty of Union with Scotland, with 
which it would be political madness to tamper 
gratuitously ; there are utterly unimportant statutes, 
such, for example, as the Dentists Act, 1878, which 
may be repealed or modified at the pleasure or 
caprice of Parliament; but neither the Act of Union 
with Scotland nor the Dentists Act, 1878, has more 
claim than the other to be considered a supreme law. 
Each embodies the will of the sovereign legislative 
power; each can be legally altered or repealed by 
Parliament; neither tests the validity of the other. 
Should the Dentists Act, 1878, unfortunately contra- 
vene the terms of the Act of Union, the Act of Union 
would be pro tanto repealed, but no judge would 
dream of maintaining that the Dentists Act, 1878, 
was thereby rendered invalid or unconstitutional. 
The one fundamental dogma of English constitutional 
law is the absolute legislative sovereignty or despotism 
of the King in Parliament. But this dogma is 
incompatible with the existence of a fundamental 
compact, the provisions of which control every 
authority existing under the constitution.” 

1 The expression “fundamental laws of England” became current 
during the controversy as to the payment of ship-money (1635). 
See Gardiner, History of England, viii. pp. 84, 85. 

2 Compare especially Kent, Commentaries, i. pp. 447-449. 

Chapter 
Ii. 

Part I. 

Conse- 
quences, 
Written 
constitu- 
tion. 

Rigid con- 
stitution. 

142 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

In the supremacy of the constitution are involved 
three consequences :— 

The constitution must almost necessarily be a 
“written ” constitution. 

The foundations of a federal state are a compli- 
cated contract. This compact contains a variety of 
terms which have been agreed to, and generally after 
mature deliberation, by the States which make up the 
confederacy. To base an arrangement of this kind 
upon understandings or conventions would be certain 
to generate misunderstandings and disagreements, 
The articles of the treaty, or in other words of the 
constitution, must therefore be reduced to writing. 
The constitution must be a written document, and, if 
possible, a written document of which the terms are 
open to no misapprehension. The founders of the 
American Union left at least one great question 
unsettled. This gap in the Constitution gave an 
opening to the dispute which was the plea, if not the 
justification, for the War of Secession.’ 

The constitution must be what I have termed a 
“rigid” * or “ inexpansive ” constitution. 

The law of the constitution must be either legally 
immutable, or else capable of being changed only by 
some authority above and beyond the ordinary legis- 

? No doubt it is conceivable that a federation might grow up by 
the force of custom, and under agreements between different States 
which were not reduced into writing, and it appears to be questionable 
how far the Achwan League was bound together by anything equiva- 
lent to a written constitution. It is, however, in the highest degree 
improbable, even if it be not practically impossible, that in modern 
times a federal state could be formed without the framing of some 
document which, whatever the name by which it is called, would be 
in reality a written constitution, regulating the rights and duties of 
the federal government and the States composing the Federation. 

2 See pp. 87, 121-124, ante, 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 143 

lative bodies, whether federal or state legislatures, 
existing under the constitution. 

In spite of the doctrine enunciated by some jurists 
that in every country there must be found some 
person or body legally capable of changing every 
institution thereof, it is hard to see why it should 
be held inconceivable’ that the founders of a polity 
should have deliberately omitted to provide any 
means for lawfully changing its bases. Such an 
omission would not be unnatural on the part of the 
authors of a federal union, since one main object of 
the States entering into the compact is to prevent 
further encroachments upon their several state rights ; 
and in the fifth article of the United States Constitu- 
tion may still be read the record of an attempt to 
give to some of its provisions temporary immutability. 
The question, however, whether a federal constitu- 
tion necessarily involves the existence of some ulti- 
mate sovereign power authorised to amend or alter 
its terms is of merely speculative interest, for under 
existing federal governments the constitution will be 
found to provide the means for its own improvement. 
It is, at any rate, certain that whenever the founders 

1 Eminent American lawyers, whose opinion is entitled to the 
highest respect, maintain that under the Constitution there exists no 
person, or body of persons, possessed of legal sovereignty, in the sense 
given by Austin to that term, and it is difficult to see that this opinion 
involves any absurdity. Compare Constitution of United States, art. 
5. It would appear further that certain rights reserved under the 
Constitution of the German Empire to particular States cannot under 
the Constitution be taken away from a State without ita assent. (See 
Reicheverfassung, art. 78.) The truth is that a Federal Constitution 
partakes of the nature of a treaty, and it is quite conceivable that the 
authors of the Constitution may intend to provide no constitutional 
means of changing its terms except the assent of all the parties to 
the treaty. 

Chapter 

Part I. 

144 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

of a federal government hold the maintenance of a 
federal system to be of primary importance, supreme 
legislative power cannot be safely vested in any 
ordinary legislature acting under the constitution.’ 
For so to vest legislative sovereignty would be incon- 
sistent with the aim of federalism, namely, the per- 
manent division between the spheres of the national 
government and of the several States. If Congress 
could legally change the Constitution, New York and 
Massachusetts would have no legal guarantee for the 
amount of independence reserved to them under the 
Constitution, and would be as subject to the sovereign 
power of Congress as is Scotland to the sovereignty 
of Parliament; the Union would cease to be a federal 
state, and would become a unitarian republic. If, on 
the other hand, the legislature of South Carolina 
could of its own will amend the Constitution, the 
authority of the central government would (from a 
legal point of view) be illusory; the United States 
would sink from a nation into a collection of inde- 
pendent countries united by the bond of a more or 
less permanent alliance. Hence the power of amend- 
ing the Constitution has been placed, so to speak, 
outside the Constitution, and one may say, with 
sufficient accuracy for our present purpose, that the 

1 Under the Constitution of the German Empire the Imperial 
legislative body can amend the Constitution. But the character of the 
Federal Council (Bundesrath) gives ample security for the protection of 
State rights. No change in the Constitution can be effected which is 
opposed by fourteen votes in the Federal Council. This gives a veto 
on change to Prussia and to various combinations of some among the 
other States. The extent to which national sentiment and State 
patriotism respectively predominate under a federal system may be 
conjectured from the nature of the authority which has the right to 
modify the Constitution. See Appendix, Note II., Division of Powers 
in Federal States. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 145 
SSMS 
legal sovereignty of the United States resides in the 
States’ governments as forming one aggregate body 
represented by three-fourths of the several States at 
any time belonging to the Union.! Now from the 
necessity for placing ultimate legislative authority in 
some body outside the Constitution a remarkable conse- 
quence ensues. Under a federal as under a unitarian 
system there exists a sovereign power, but the sovereign 
is in a federal state a despot hard to rouse. He is not, 
like the English Parliament, an ever-wakeful legis- 
lator, but a monarch who slumbers and sleeps. The 
sovereign of the United States has been roused to 
serious action but once during the course of more 
than a century. It needed the thunder of the Civil 
War to break his repose, and it may be doubted 
whether anything short of impending revolution will 
ever again arouse him to activity. But a monarch 
who slumbers for years is like a monarch who does 
not exist. «A federal constitution is capable of change, 
but for all that a federal constitution is apt to be 
unchangeable. 

Every legislative assembly existing under a federal 

1 “The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both houses shall deem 
“it necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or, on the 
“application of the legislatures of two-thirds of the several States, shall 
‘call a convention for proposing amendments, which, in either case, 
“shall be valid to all intenta and purposes, as part of this Constitution, 
“when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States, 
“or by conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the one or the other 
“ mode of ratification may be proposed by the Congress ; provided that 
“no amendments which may be made prior to the year one thoueand 
“ eight hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the first and fourth 
“ clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that no State, 
“without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the 
“ Senate.”—Conatitution of United States, art. 5. Compare Austin, i, 
p. 278, and see Bryce, American Commonwealth, i. (3rd ed.), chap. xxxiL, 
on the Amendment of the Constitution. 

L 

Chapter 
Ti. 

— 

Part I. 

146 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
TT —OlOraOe OTT 
constitution is merely’ a subordinate law-making 
body, whose laws are of the nature of bye-laws, valid 
whilst within the authority conferred upon it by the 
constitution, but invalid or unconstitutional if they 
go beyond the limits of such authority. 

There is an apparent absurdity * in comparing the 
legislature of the United States to an English railway 
company or a municipal corporation, but the comparison 
is just. Congress can, within the limits of its legal 
powers, pass laws which bind every man throughout 
the United States. The Great Eastern Railway Com- 
pany can, in like manner, pass laws which bind every 
man throughout the British dominions. A law passed 
by Congress which is in excess of its legal powers, as 
contravening the Constitution, is invalid ; a law passed 
by the Great Eastern Railway Company in excess of 
the powers given by Act of Parliament, or, in other 
words, by the legal constitution of the company, is 
also invalid; a law passed by Congress is called an 
“Act” of Congress, and if wltra vires is described 
as “unconstitutional”; a law passed by the Great 
Eastern Railway Company is called a “bye-law,” 
and if ultra vires is called, not ‘“ unconstitutional,” 
but “invalid.” Differences, however, of words must 
not conceal from us essential similarity in things. 
Acts of Congress, or of the Legislative Assembly 
of New York or of Massachusetts, are at bottom 
simply “bye-laws,” depending for their validity 

1 This is 80 in the United States, but it need not necessarily be 
so, The Federal Legislature may be a sovereign power but may be 
so constituted that the rights of the States under the Constitution are 
practically protected. This condition of things exists in the German 

Empire. 
2 See p. 88, note 1, ante. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 147 
Pea er ce 
upon their being within the powers given to Con- 
gress or to the state legislatures by the Consti- 
tution. The bye-laws of the Great Eastern Railway 
Company, imposing fines upon passengers who travel 
over their line without a ticket, are laws, but they 
are laws depending for their validity upon their 
being within the powers conferred upon the Com- 
pany by Act of Parliament, t.e. by the Company's 
constitution. Congress and the Great Eastern Rail- 
way Company are in truth each of them nothing 
more than subordinate law-making bodies. Their 
power differs not in degree, but in kind, from the 
authority of the sovereign Parliament of the United 
Kingdom.' 

The distribution of powers is an essential feature 
of federalism. The object for which a federal state 
is formed involves a division of authority between 
the national government and the separate States. 
The powers given to the nation form in effect so many 
limitations upon the authority of the separate States, 
and as it is not intended that the central government 
should have the opportunity of encroaching upon the 
rights retained by the States, its sphere of action 
necessarily becomes the object of rigorous definition. 
The Constitution, for instance, of the United States 
delegates special and closely defined powers to the 
executive, to the legislature, and to the judiciary of 
the Union, or in effect to the Union itself, whilst it 
provides that the powers “ not delegated to the United 

1 See as to bye-laws made by municipal corporations, and the 
dependence of their validity upon the powers conferred upon the cor- 
poration: Johnson v. Mayor of Croydon, 16 Q. B. D. 708; Reg. v. 

Powell, 51 L. T. 92; Munro v. Watson, 57 L. T. 366. See Bryce, 
American Commonwealth, i. (3rd ed.), pp. 244, 245. 

Chapter 

Distribu- 
tion of 
powers, 

fact beyond 
necessary 
limit. 

148 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
ee a 

States by the Constitution nor prohibited by it to 
the States are reserved to the States respectively or 
to the people.” * 

This is all the amount of division which is essen- 
tial to a federal constitution. But the principle of 
definition and limitation of powers harmonises so well 
with the federal spirit that it is generally carried 
much farther than is dictated by the mere logic of the 
constitution. Thus the authority assigned to the 
United States under the Constitution is not concen- 
trated in any single official or, body of officials. The 
President has definite rights, upon which neither 
Congress nor the judicial department can encroach. 
Congress has but a limited, indeed a very limited, 
power of legislation, for it can make laws upon eighteen 
topics only; yet within its own sphere it is inde- 
pendent both of the President and of the Federal 
Courts. So, lastly, the judiciary have their own 
powers. They stand on a level both with the Presi- 

1 Constitution of United States, Amendments, art. 10. See pro- 
visions of a similar character in the Swiss Constitution, Constitution 
Fédérale, art. 3. Compare the Constitution of the Canadian Dominion, 
British North America Act, 1867, seca. 91, 92. 

There exists, however, one marked distinction in principle between 
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the 
Canadian Dominion. The Constitution of the United States in sub- 
stance reserves to the separate States all powers not expressly conferred 
upon the national government. The Canadian Constitution in sub- 
stance confers upon the Dominion government all powers not assigned 
exclusively to the Provinces. In this matter the Swiss Constitution 
follows that of the United States. 

The Constitution of the Australian Commonwealth follows in effect 
the example of the Constitution of the United States, The powers 
conferred upon the Commonwealth Parliament are, though very large, 
definite ; the powers reserved to the Parliaments of the States are 
indefinite. See Commonwealth Act, ss, 51, 52, and 107, and Appendix, 
Note II., Division of Powers in Federal States, and Note IX., Aus- 
tralian Federalism. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 149 

dent and with Congress, and their authority (being 
directly derived from the constitution) cannot, without 
a distinct violation of law, be trenched upon either by 
the executive or by the legislature. Where, further, 
States are federally united, certain principles of policy 
or of justice must be enforced upon the whole con- 
federated body as well as upon the separate parts 
thereof, and the very inflexibility of the constitu- 
tion tempts legislators to place among constitutional 
articles maxims which (though not in their nature 
constitutional) have special claims upon respect and 
observance. Hence spring additional restrictions on 
the power both of the federation and of the separate 
states. The United States Constitution prohibits both 
to Congress’ and to the separate States* the passing 
of a bill of attainder or an ex post facto law, the grant- 
ing of any title of nobility, or in effect the laying of 
any tax on articles exported from any State,* enjoins 
that full faith shall be given to the public acts and 
judicial proceedings of every other State, hinders any 
State from passing any law impairing the obligation 
of contracts,‘ and prevents every State from entering 
into any treaty, alliance, or confederation; thus it 
provides that the elementary principles of justice, 
freedom of trade, and the rights of individual pro- 
perty shall be absolutely respected throughout the 
length and breadth of the Union. It further ensures 
that the right of the people to keep and bear arms 
shall not be infringed, while it also provides that no 
member can be expelled from cither House of Con- 

1 Constitution of United States, art. 1, sec. 9. 
3 Tbid., art. 1, sec. 10. 

3 [bid., art. 1, sec, 9. But conf, art. 1, sec. 10. 
4 Ibid., art. 1, sec. 10. 

Part I. 

150 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
(net rae Es 
gress without the concurrence of two-thirds of the 
House. Other federal constitutions go far beyond 
that of the United States in ascribing among con- 
stitutional articles either principles or petty rules 
which are supposed to have a claim of legal sanc- 
tity ; the Swiss Constitution is full of “ guaranteed” 
rights. 

Nothing, however, would appear to an English 
critic to afford so striking an example of the con- 
nection between federalism and the “limitation of 
powers” as the way in which the principles of the 
federal Constitution pervade in America the constitu- 
tions of the separate States. In no case does the 
legislature of any one State possess all the powers of 
“state sovereignty ” left to the States by the Consti- 
tution of the Republic, and every state legislature is 
subordinated to the constitution of the State.’ The 
ordinary legislature of New York or Massachusetts 
can no more change the state constitution than it can 
alter the Constitution of the United States itself; 
and, though the topic cannot be worked out here in 
detail, it may safely be asserted that state govern- 
ment throughout the Union is formed upon the 
federal model, and (what is noteworthy) that state 
constitutions have carried much further than the 
Constitution of the Republic the tendency to clothe 
with constitutional immutability any rules which 
strike the people as important. Illinois has em- 

' Contrast with this the indefinite powers left to State Parliaments 
under the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, ss, 106, 107. 
The Constitutionalists of Australia who created the Commonwealth 
have been as much influenced by the traditions of English Parlia- 
mentary sovereignty as American legislators have in their dealings 

with the State Constitutions been influenced by the spirit of 
federalism. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 153 
——— 

bodied, among fundamental laws, regulations as to Chapter 

elevators,’ ae 
But here, as in other cases, there is great diffi- 

culty in distinguishing cause and effect. If a federal 

form of government has affected, as it probably has, 

the constitutions of the separate States, it is certain 

that features originally existing in the State constitu- 

tions have been reproduced in the Constitution of the 

Union ; and, as we shall see in a moment, the most 

characteristic institution of the United States, the 

Federal Court, appears to have been suggested at 

least to the founders of the Republic, by the relation 

which before 1789 already existed between the state 

tribunals and the state legislatures.” 

The tendency of federalism to limit on every side Division of 
powers dis- 

the action of government and to split up the strength finguishes 

of the state among co-ordinate and independent So , 

authorities is specially noticeable, because it forms rt 

the essential distinction between a federal system Olea 
such as that of America or Switzerland, and a uni- — 
tarian system of government such as that which 

1 See Munn v. IUinotis, 4 Otto, 113, 

2 European critics of American federalism have, as has been well 
remarked by an eminent French writer, paid in general too little atten- 
tion to the working and effect of the state constitutions, and have over- 
looked the great importance of the action of the state legislatures. 
See Boutmy, Ktudes de Droit Constitutionnel (2nd ed.), pp. 103-111. 

“It has been truly said that nearly every provision of the Federal 
‘Constitution that has worked well is one borrowed from or suggested 
“by some State Constitution ; nearly every provision that has worked 
“badly is one which the Convention, for want of a precedent, was 
“ obliged to devise for itself.”"—Bryce, American Commonwealth, i. (8rd 
ed.) p. 35. One capital merit of Mr. Bryce’s book is that it for the 
first time reveals, even to those who had already studied American 
institutions, the extent to which the main features of the Constitution 
of the United States were suggested to its authors by the characteristics 
of the State governinents. 

Part L 

152 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

exists in England or Russia. We talk indeed of 
the English constitution as resting on a balance of 
powers, and as maintaining a division between the 
executive, the legislative, and the judicial bodies. 
These expressions have a real meaning. But they 
have quite a different significance as applied to 
England from the sense which they bear as applied 
to the United States. All the power of the English 
state is concentrated in the Imperial Parliament, and 
all departments of government are legally subject 
to Parliamentary despotism. Our judges are inde- 
pendent, in the sense of holding their office by a 
permanent tenure, and of being raised above the 
direct influence of the Crown or the Ministry ; but the 
judicial department does not pretend to stand on a 
level with Parliament; its functions might be modi- 
fied at any time by an Act of Parliament; and such 
a statute would be no violation of the law. The 
\ Federal Judiciary, on the other hand, are co-ordinate 
| with the President and with Congress, and cannot 
without a revolution be deprived of a single right by 
President or Congress. So, again, the executive and 
the legislature are with us distinct bodies, but they 
are not distinct in the sense in which the President 
is distinct from and independent of the Houses of 
Congress. The House of Commons interferes with 
administrative matters, and the Ministry are in truth 
placed and kept in office by the House. A modern 
Cabinet would not hold power for a week if censured 
by a newly elected House of Commons. An American 
President may retain his post and exercise his very 

j Important functions even though his bitterest oppo- 
| nents command majorities both in the Senate and 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 153 

in the House of Representatives. Unitarianism, in 
short, means the concentration of the strength of the 
state in the hands of one visible sovereign power, be 
that power Parliament or Czar. Federalism means 
the distribution of the force of the state among a 
number of co-ordinate bodies each originating in and 
controlled by the constitution. 

Whenever there exists, as in Belgium or in France, 
& more or less rigid constitution, the articles of which 
cannot be amended by the ordinary legislature, the 
difficulty has to be met of guarding against legisla- 
tion inconsistent with the constitution. As Belgian 
and French statesmen have created no machinery 
for the attainment of this object, we may conclude 
that they considered respect for the constitution to 
be sufficiently secured by moral or political sanctions, 
and treated the limitations placed on the power of 
Parliament rather as maxims of policy than as true 
laws. During a period, at any rate of more than 
sixty years, no Belgian judge has (it is said) ever 
pronounced a Parliamentary enactment unconstitu- 
tional. No French tribunal, as has been already 
pointed out, would hold itself at liberty to disregard 
an enactment, however unconstitutional, passed by 
the National Assembly, inserted in the Bulletin des 
Lows, and supported’ by the force of the government ; 
and French statesmen may well have thought, as 
Tocqueville certainly did think, that in France 
possible Parliamentary invasions of the constitution 
were a less evil than the participation of the judges 
in political conflicts, France, in short, and Belgium 
being governed under unitarian constitutions, the 
non-sovereign character of the legislature is in each 

Authority 
of Courts. 

Part L 

How 
authority 
of the 
Courts is 
exerted. 

154 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

case an accident, not an essential property of their 
polity. Under a federal system it is otherwise. The 
legal supremacy of the constitution is essential to the 
existence of the state; the glory of the founders of 
the United States is to have devised or adopted 
arrangements under which the Constitution became 
in reality as well as name the supreme law of the 
land. This end they attained by adherence to a 
very obvious principle, and by the invention of 
appropriate machinery for carrying this principle 
into effect. 

| The principle is clearly expressed in the Constitu- 
‘tion of the United States. ‘The Constitution,” runs 
; article 6, ‘and the laws of the United States which 
\**shall be made in pursuance thereof ... shall be 
“the supreme law of the land, and the judges in 
‘every State shall be bound thereby, anything in 
the constitution or laws of any State to the con- 
“‘trary notwithstanding.” The import of these 
expressions is unmistakable. ‘Every Act of Con- 
“« gress,” writes Chancellor Kent, “and every Act of 
: the legislatures of the States, and every part of the 
“constitution of any State, which are repugnant to 
‘the Constitution of the United States, are neces- 
‘sarily void. This is a clear and settled principle 
‘of [our] constitutional jurisprudence.”* The legal 
uty therefore of every judge, whether he act as a 
judge of the State of New York or as a judge of the 
Supreme Court of the United States, is clear. He is 
bound to treat as void every legislative act, whether 
proceeding from Congress or from the state legis- 

1 Constitution of United States, art. 6. 
* Kent, Commentaries, i. (12th ed.), p. 314, and conf. Ibid. p. 449. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 155 

latures, which is inconsistent with the Constitution 
of the United States. His duty is as clear as that 
of an English judge called upon to determine the 
validity of a bye-law made by the Great Eastern or 
any other Railway Company. The American judge 
must in giving judgment obey the terms of the Con- 
stitution, just as his English brother must in giving 
judgment obey every Act of Parliament bearing on 
the case. 

To have laid down the principle with distinctness 
is much, but the great problem was how to ensure 
that the principle should be obeyed ; for there existed 
a danger that judges depending on the federal 
government should wrest the Constitution in favour 
of the central power, and that judges created by the 
States should wrest it in favour of State rights or 
interests. This problem has been solved by the 
creation of the Supreme Court and of the Federal 
Judiciary. 

Of the nature and position of the Supreme Court 
itself thus much alone need for our present purpose 
be noted. The Court derives its existence from the 
Constitution, and stands therefore on an equality 
with the President and with Congress ; the members 
thereof (in common with every judge of the Federal 
Judiciary) hold their places during good behaviour, at 
salaries which cannot be diminished during a judge’s 
tenure of office.| The Supreme Court stands at the 
head of the whole federal judicial department, which, 
extending by its subordinate Courts throughout the 
Union, can execute its judgments through its own 
officers without requiring the aid of state officials. 

1 Constitution of United States, art. 3, seca 1, 2. 

Chapter 

Supremacy 
of consti- 
tation 
secured by 
creation of 
Supreme 
Court. 

Nature and 
action of 
Supreme 
Court. 

Part I. 

156 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

RD 

The Supreme Court, though it has a certain amount 
of original jurisdiction, derives its importance from its 
appellate character ; it is on every matter which con- 
cerns the interpretation of the Constitution a supreme 
and final Court of Appeal from the decision of every 
Court (whether a Federal Court or a State Court) 
throughout the Union. It is in fact the final inter- 
preter of the Constitution, and therefore has authority 
to pronounce finally as a Court of Appeal whether a 
law passed either by Congress or by the legislature of 
a State, e.g. New York, is or is not constitutional. 
To understand the position of the Supreme Court we 
must bear in mind that there exist throughout the 
Union two classes of Courts in which proceedings can 
be commenced, namely, the subordinate federal Courts 
deriving their authority from the Constitution, and 
the state Courts, e.g. of New York or Massachusetts, 
created by and existing under the state constitutions ; 
and that the jurisdiction of the federal judiciary and 
the state judiciary is in many cases concurrent, for 
though the jurisdiction of the federal Courts is mainly 
confined to cases arising under the Constitution and 
laws of the United States, it is also frequently 
dependent upon the character of the parties, and 
though there are cases with which no state Court can 
deal, such a Court may often entertain cases which 
might be brought in a federal Court, and constantly 
has to consider the effect of the Constitution on the 
validity either of a law passed by Congress or of state 
legislation. That the Supreme Court should be a 
Court of Appeal from the decision of the subordinate 
federal tribunals is a matter which excites no surprise, 
The point to be noted is that it is also a Court of 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 157 
oer aa» Fl clea le aie RR 
Appeal from decisions of the Supreme Court of any 
State, e.g. New York, which turn upon or interpret 
the articles of the Constitution or Acts of Congress. 
The particular cases in which a party aggrieved by 
the decision of a state Court has a right of appeal to 
the Supreme Court of the United States are regulated 
by an Act of Congress of 24th September 1789, the 
twenty-fifth section of which provides that “a final 
“‘judgment or decree, in any suit in the highest court 
“of law or equity of a State, may be brought up on 
“error in point of law, to the Supreme Court of the 
‘United States, provided the validity of a treaty, or 
‘‘statute of, or authority exercised under the United 
“States, was drawn in question in the state court, and 
‘the decision was against that validity ; or provided 
“the validity of any state authority was drawn in 
** question, on the ground of its being repugnant to the 
‘‘ Constitution, treaties, or laws of the United States, 
“and the decision was in favour of its validity ; or pro- 
‘vided the construction of any clause of the Constitu- 
“tion or of a treaty, or statute of, or commission held 
‘“‘ under the United States, was drawn in question, and 
“the decision was against the title, right, privilege, 
“or exemption, specially claimed under the authority 
“of the Union.”! Strip this enactment of its techni- 
calities and it comes to this. A party to a case in 
the highest Court, say of New York, who bases his 
claim or defence upon an article in the Constitution 
or law made under it, stands in this position: If 
judgment be in his favour there is no further appeal ; 
if judgment goes against him, he has a right of appeal 
to the Supreme Court of the United States. Any 
1 Kent, Commentaries, i. (12th ed.), pp. 299, 300. 

Chapter 
mi. 

Part L 

158 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

lawyer can see at a glance how well devised is the 
arrangement to encourage state Courts in the per- 
formance of their duty as guardians of the Constitu- 
tion, and further that the Supreme Court thereby 
becomes the ultimate arbiter of all matters affecting 
the Constitution. 

Let no one for 8 moment fancy that the right of 
every Court, and ultimately of the Supreme Court, 
to pronounce on the constitutionality of legislation 
and on the rights possessed by different authorities 
under the Constitution is one rarely exercised, for it 
is in fact a right which is constantly exerted with- 
out exciting any more surprise on the part of the 
citizens of the Union than does in England a judg- 
ment of the King’s Bench Division treating as 
invalid the bye-law of a railway company. The 
American tribunals have dealt with matters of 
supreme consequence; they have determined that 
Congress has the right to give priority to debts due 
to the United States,’ can lawfully incorporate a 
bank,’ has a general power to levy or collect taxes 
without any restraint, but subject to definite prin- 
ciples of ‘uniformity prescribed by the Constitution ; 
the tribunals have settled what is the power of 
Congress over the militia, who is the person who has 
a right to command it,* and that the power exercised 
by Congress during the War of Secession of issuing 
paper money was valid.“ The Courts again have 
controlled the power of the separate States fully as 

! Kent, Commentaries, i (12th ed.), pp. 244-248, 

2 Ibid., pp. 248-254. 3 Ibid, pp. 262-268, 

* Story, Commentaries on the Constitution (4th ed.), ii secs. 1116, 
1117. See Hepburn v. Griswold, 8 Wallace, 603, Dec. 1869, and 
Knox v. Lee, 12 Wallace, 457, 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 159 

vigorously as they have defined the authority of the 
United States. The judiciary have pronounced un- 
constitutional every ex post facto law, every law 
taxing even in the slightest degree articles exported 
from any State, and have again deprived of effect 
state laws impairing the obligation of contracts. 
To the judiciary in short are due the maintenance of 
justice, the existence of internal free trade, and the 
general respect for the rights of property; whilst a 
recent decision shows that the Courts are prepared 
to uphold as consistent with the Constitution any 
laws which prohibit modes of using private property, 
which seem to the judges inconsistent with public 
interest.. The power moreover of the Courts which 
maintains the articles of the Constitution as the 
law of the land, and thereby keeps each authority 
within its proper sphere, is exerted with an ease and 

regularity which has astounded and perplexed con- ~ 

tinental critics. ‘The explanation is that while the 
judges of the United States control the action of the 
Constitution, they nevertheless perform purely judicial 
functions, since they never decide anything but the 
cases before them. It is natural to say that the 
Supreme Court pronounces Acts of Congress invalid, 
but in fact this is notso. The Court never directly 
pronounces any opinion whatever upon an Act of 
Congress. What the Court does do is simply to 
determine that in a given case J is or is not entitled 
to recover judgment against X ; but in determining 
that case the Court may decide that an Act of 

1 Munn v. Illinois, 4 Otto, Rep. 113. See especially the Judg- 
ments of Marshall, C. J., collected in The Writings of John Marshall 
upon the Federal Constitution (1839). 

160 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

Si oe oe ee eee 
Congress is not to be taken into account, since it is an 
Act beyond the constitutional powers of Congress.’ 

If any one thinks this is a distinction without a 
difference he shows some ignorance of politics, and 
does not understand how much the authority of a 
Court is increased by confining its action to purely 
judicial business. But persons who, like Tocque- 
ville, have fully appreciated the wisdom of the 
statesmen who created the Union, have formed per- 
haps an exaggerated estimate of their originality. 
Their true merit was that they applied with extra- 
ordinary skill the notions which they had inherited 
from English law to the novel circumstances of the 
new republic. To any one imbued with the traditions 
of English procedure it must have seemed impossible 
to let a Court decide upon anything but the case 
before it. To any one who had inhabited a colony 
governed under a charter the effect of which on the 
validity of a colonial law was certainly liable to be 
considered by the Privy Council, there was nothing 
startling in empowering the judiciary to pronounce 
in given cases upon the constitutionality of Acts 
passed by assemblies whose powers were limited 
by the Constitution, just as the authority of the 
colonial legislatures was limited by charter or by 
Act of Parliament. To a French jurist, indeed, filled 
with the traditions of the French Parliaments, all 
this might well be incomprehensible, but an English 
lawyer can easily see that the fathers of the republic 
treated Acts of Congress as English Courts treat 
bye-laws, and in forming the Supreme Court may 
probably have had in mind the functions of the Privy 

1 See Chap. II. pp. 91-95, ante. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 161 
_ Sat nnn mse i lita lia ans sags acca 
Council. It is still more certain that they had before 
their eyes cases in which the tribunals of particular 
States had treated as unconstitutional, and therefore 
pronounced void, Acts of the state legislature which 
contravened the state constitution. The earliest case of 
declaring a law unconstitutional dates (it is said) from 
1786, and took place in Rhode Island, which was then, 
and continued till 1842, to be governed under the 
charter of Charles II. An Act of the legislature was 
declared unconstitutional by the Courts of North 
Carolina in 1787 and by the Courts of Virginia in 
1788,’ whilst the Constitution of the United States was 
not adopted till 1789, and Marbury v. Madison, the 
first case in which the Supreme Court dealt with the 
question of constitutionality, was decided in 1803.° 

But if their notions were conceptions derived from 
English law, the great statesmen of America gave to 
old ideas a perfectly new expansion, and for the first 
time in the history of the world formed a constitution 
which should in strictness be “ the law of the land,” 
and in so doing created modern federalism. For the 
essential characteristics of federalism—the supremacy 
of the constitution—the distribution of powers— 
the authority of the judiciary—reappear, though 
no doubt with modifications, in every true federal 
state. 

Turn for a moment to the Canadian Dominion. 
The preamble to the British North America Act, 1867, 
asserts with diplomatic inaccuracy that the Provinces 

1 Martin, 421. 2 1 Va, Caa 198. 

8 1 Cranch, 137. For the facts as to the early action of the State 
Courts in declaring legislative enactments unconstitutional I ain in- 

debted, as for much other Fag ore eens See constitu- 
tionalist my friend the late Profs Thayer of Harvard University. 
set M 

Chapter 
Td. 

——— 

The 
Canadian 
Dominion. 

Part I 

162 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

of the present Dominion have expressed their desire 
to be united into one Dominion “ with a constitution 
similar in principle to that of the United Kingdom.” 
If preambles were intended to express anything like 
the whole truth, for the word “ Kingdom” ought to 
have been substituted “ States”: since it is clear that 
the Constitution of the Dominion is in its essential 
features modelled on that of the Union. This is 
indeed denied, but in my judgment without adequate 
grounds, by competent Canadian critics.’ The differ- 
ences between the institutions of the United States 
and of the Dominion are of course both considerable 
and noteworthy. But no one can study the provisions 
of the British North America Act, 1867, without 
seeing that its authors had the American Constitution 
constantly before their eyes, and that if Canada were 
an independent country it would be a Confederacy 
governed under a Constitution very similar to that of 
the United States, The Constitution is the law of 

1 The difference between the judgment as to the character of the 
Canadian Constitution formed by myself, and the judgment of com- 
petent and friendly Canadian critics, may easily be summarised and 
explained. If we look at the federal character of the Constitution of 
the Dominion, we must inevitably regard it as a copy, though by no 
means a servile copy, of the Constitution of the United States Now 
in the present work the Canadian Constitution is regarded exclusively 
as federal government. Hence my assertion, which I still hold to be 
correct, that the government of the Dominion is modelled on that of 
the Union. If, on the other hand, we compare the Canadian Executive 
with the American Executive, we perceive at once that Canadian govern- 
ment is modelled on the system of Parliamentary cabinet government as 
it exists in England, and does not in any wise imitate the Presidential 
government of America. This, it has been suggested to me by a friend 
well acquainted with Canadian institutions, is the point of view from 
which they are looked upon by my Canadian critics, and is the justifica- 
tion for the description of the Constitution of the Dominion given in the 
preamble to the British North America Act, 1867. The suggestion isa 
just and valuable one ; in deference to it some of the expressions used in 
the earlier editions of this book have undergone a slight modification. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 163 

the land; it cannot be changed (except within narrow 
limits allowed by the British North America Act, 
1867) either by the Dominion Parliament? or by the 
Provincial Parliaments ;? it can be altered only by the 
sovereign power of the British Parliament.* Nor does 
this arise from the Canadian Dominion being a de- 
pendency. New Zealand is, like Canada, a colony, but 
the New Zealand Parliament can with the assent of 
the Crown do what the Canadian Parliament cannot 
do—change the colonial constitution. Throughout 
the Dominion, therefore, the Constitution is in the 
strictest sense the immutable law of the land. Under 
this law again, you have, as you would expect, the 
distribution of powers among bodies of co-ordinate 
authority ;* though undoubtedly the powers bestowed 
on the Dominion Government and Parliament are 
greater when compared with the powers reserved 
to the Provinces than are the powers which the 
Constitution of the United States gives to the federal 
government. }In nothing is this more noticeable 
than in the authority given to® the Dominion Govern- 
ment to disallow Provincial Acts.° 

1 See, however, British North America Act, 1867 (30 Vict. c. 3), 
s. 94, which gives the Dominion Parliament a limited power (when 
acting in conjunction with a Provincial legislature) of changing to a 
certain extent the provisions of the British North America Act, 1867. 

2 The legislatures of each Province have, nevertheless, authority 
to make laws for “ the amendment from time to time, notwithstanding 
“anything” [in the British North America Act, 1867] “of the 
46 Constitution of the Province, except as regards the office of Lieutenant 
‘ Governor.” See British North America Act, 1867, 8, 92. 

3 See for an example of an amendment of the Dominion Constitu- 
tion by an Imperial statute, the Parliament of Canada Act, 1875. 

4 British North America Act, 1867, seca 91, 92. 

5 Ibid., seca. 56, 90. 

6 Bourinot, Parliamentary Procedure and Practice tn the Dominion 
of Canada, p. 76. 

Chapter 

Part I. 

The Swiss 
Confedera- 
tion. 

164 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 
Oe eee ST Se ae ee ee 
This right was possibly given with a view ta 
obviate altogether the necessity for invoking the law 
Courts as interpreters of the Constitution; the 
founders of the Confederation appear in fact to have 
believed that ‘‘the care taken to define the respective 
“powers of the several legislative bodies in the 
“ Dominion would prevent any troublesome or danger- 
“ous conflict of authority arising between the central 
“ and local governments.”’ The futility, however, of a 
hope grounded on a misconception of the nature of 
federalism is proved by the existence of two thick 
volumes of reports filled with cases on the constitu- 
tionality of legislative enactments, and by a long list: 
of decisions as to the respective powers possessed by 
the Dominion and by the Provincial Parliaments— 
judgments given by the true Supreme Court of the 
Dominion, namely, the Judicial Committee of the 
Privy Council. In Canada, as in the United States, 
the Courts inevitably become the interpreters of the 
Constitution. 
Swiss federalism repeats, though with noteworthy 
variations, the essential traits of the federal polity as 
it exists across the Atlantic. The Constitution is the 
law of the land, and cannot be changed either by 
the federal or by the cantonal legislative bodies; the 
Constitution enforces a distribution of powers be- 
tween the national government and the Cantons, 
and directly or indirectly defines and limits the 
power of every authority existing under it. The 
Common Government has in Switzerland, as in 
America, three organs—a Federal Legislature, a 

1 Bourinot, Parliamentary Procedure and Practice in the Dominton 
of Canada, p. 694. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 165 

Federal Executive (Bundesrath), and a Federal Court 
(Bundesgericht). 

Of ‘the many interesting and instructive peculi- 
arities which give to Swiss federalism an individual 
character, this is not the occasion to write in detail. 
It lies, however, within the scope of this chapter to note 
that the Constitution of the Confederation differs in 
two most important respects from that of the United 
States. It does not, in the first place, establish any- 
thing like the accurate division between the executive 
and the judicial departments of government which 
exists both in America and in Canada; the Executive 
exercises, under the head of “ administrative law,” 
many functions’ of a judicial character, and thus, for 
example, till 1893 dealt in effect with questions * having 
reference to the rights of religious bodies. The Federal 
Assembly is the final arbiter on all questions as to the 
respective jurisdiction of the Executive and of the 
Federal Court. The judges of that Court are elected by 
the Federal Assembly, they are occupied greatly with 
questions of public law (Staatsrecht), and so experi- 
enced a statesman as Dr. Dubs laments that the Federal 
Court should possess jurisdiction in matters of private 
law." When to this it is added that the judgments of 
the Federal Court are executed by the government, it 
at once becomes clear that, according to any English 
standard, Swiss statesmanship has failed as distinctly 

1 Constitution Fédérale, art. 113, Lot; 27 June 1874, art. 59 ; and 

Dubs, Das dffentliche Recht der schweizertechen Eidgenossenschaft, ii. 
(2nd ed.), p. 90. 

2 The decision thereof belonged till 1893 to the Assembly, guided 
by the Federal Council ; it now belongs to the Federal Court. See 
Dubs, ii, pp. 92-95; Lowell, Governments and Parties, ii. pp. 217, 
218. 

8 Constitution Fédérale, art. 113 ; and Dubs, ii. (2nd ed.), pp. 92-95. 

Chapter 

166 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

as American statesmanship has succeeded in keeping 
the judicial apart from the executive department of 
government, and that this failure constitutes a serious 
flaw in the Swiss Constitution. That Constitution, 
in the second place, does not in reality place the 
Federal Court on an absolute level with the Federal 
Assembly. That tribunal cannot question the con- 
stitutionality of laws or decrees passed by the Federal 
Parliament.! From this fact one might suppose 
that the Federal Assembly is (unlike Congress) a 
sovereign body, but this is not so. The reason 
why all Acts of the Assembly must be treated as 
constitutional by the Federal Tribunal is that the 
Constitution itself almost precludes the possibility of 
encroachment upon its articles by the federal legisla- 
tive body. No legal revision can take place without 
the assent both of a majority of Swiss citizens and 
of a majority of the Cantons, and an ordinary law 
duly passed by the Federal Assembly may be legally 
annulled by a popular veto. The authority of the 
Swiss Assembly nominally exceeds the authority of 
Congress, because in reality the Swiss legislative body 
is weaker than Congress. For while in each case 
there lies in the background a legislative sovereign 
capable of controlling the action of the ordinary 
legislature, the sovereign power is far more easily 
brought into play in Switzerland than in America. 
When the sovereign power can easily enforce its will, 
it may trust to its own action for maintaining its 
rights ; when, as in America, the same power acts but 
rarely and with difficulty, the Courts naturally become 

oa Constitution Fédérale, art. 113; and Dubs, ii. (2nd ed.), pp. 
“95. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 167 
eee 

the guardians of the sovereign’s will expressed in the 
articles of the Constitution. 

Our survey from a legal point of view of the 
characteristics common to all federal governments 
forcibly suggests conclusions of more than merely 
legal interest, as to the comparative merits of 
federal government, and the system of Parliamentary 

sovereignty. 
Federal government means weak government.’ 

The distribution of all the powers of the state 
among co-ordinate authorities necessarily leads to the 
result that no one authority can wield the same amount 
of power as under a unitarian constitution is possessed 
by the sovereign. A scheme again of checks and 
balances in which the strength of the common govern- 
ment is so to speak pitted against that of the state 
governments leads, on the face of it, to a certain 
waste of energy. A federation therefore will always 

1 This weakness springs from two different cauees: first, the 
division of powers between the central government and the States ; 
secondly, the distribution of powers between the different members 
(s.g. the President and the Senate) of the national government, The 
first cause of weakness is inherent in the federal system; the second 
cause of weakness is not (logically at least) inherent in federalism. 
Under a federal constitution the whole authority of the national 
government might conceivably be lodged in one person or body, 
but we may feel almost certain that in practice the fears enter- 
tained by the separate States of encroachments by the central 
government on their State rights will prohibit such a concentration 
of authority. 

The statement that federal government means weak government 
should be qualified or balanced by the consideration that a federal 
system sometimes makes it possible for different communities to be 
united as one state when they otherwise could not be united at all 
The bond of federal union may be weak, but it may be the strongest 
bond which circumstances allow. 

The failure and the calamities of the Helvetic Republic are a 
warning against the attempt to force upon more or less independent 
states a greater degree of political unity than they will tolerate. 

Chapter 
I. 

Com- 
parison 
between 
system of 
federalism 
and of par- 
liamentary 
sove- 

reignty. 

Weakness 
of federal- 
iam, 

Part L 

168 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

be at a disadvantage in a contest with unitarian 
states of equal resources.. Nor does the experience 
either of the United States or of the Swiss con- 
federation invalidate this conclusion. The Union is 
threatened by no powerful neighbours and needs no 
foreign policy.’ Circumstances unconnected with 
constitutional arrangements enable Switzerland to 
preserve her separate existence, though surrounded by 

powerful and at times hostile nations. The mutual — 
jealousies moreover incident to federalism do visibly 
weaken the Swiss Republic. Thus, to take one 
example only, each member of the Executive must 
belong to a different canton.* But this rule may 
exclude from the government statesmen of high merit, 
and therefore diminish the resources of the state. A 
rule that each member of the Cabinet should be the 
native of a different county would appear to English- 
men palpably absurd. Yet this absurdity is forced 
upon Swiss politicians, and affords one among num- 
erous instances in which the efficiency of the public 
service is sacrificed to the requirements of federal 
sentiment. Switzerland, moreover, is governed under 
a form of democratic federalism which tends towards 
unitarianism. ach revision increases the authority 
of the nation at the expense of cantonal independence. 
This is no doubt in part due to the desire to strengthen 
the nation against foreign attack. It is perhaps also 
due to another circumstance. Federalism, as it de- 
fines, and therefore limits, the powers of each depart- 
ment of the administration, is unfavourable to the 

1 The latter part of statement is perhaps leas true in 1908 
than it was in 1885. 
2 Constitution Fédérale, art. 96. 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 169 

interference or to the activity of government. Hence Chapter 
a federal government can hardly render services to the 
nation by undertaking for the national benefit func- 
tions which may be performed by individuals. This 
may be a merit of the federal system ; it is, however, 
& merit which does not commend itself to modern 
democrats, and no more curious instance can be found 
of the inconsistent currents of popular opinion which 
may at the same time pervade a nation or a genera- 
tion than the coincidence in England of a vague 
admiration for federalism alongside with a far more 
decided feeling against the doctrines of so-called 
laissez faire. A system meant to maintain the status 
quo in politics is incompatible with schemes for wide 
social innovation. 
Federalism tends to produce conservatism. . Wess 
This tendency is due to several causes. The con- federalism 
stitution of a Federal state must, as we have seen, 
generally be not only a written but a rigid constitu- 
tion, that is, a constitution which cannot be changed 
by any ordinary process of legislation. Now this 
essential rigidity of federal institutions is almost 
certain to impress on the minds of citizens the idea 
that any provision included in the constitution is im- 
mutable and, so to speak, sacred. The least observa- 
tion of American politics shows how deeply the notion 
that the Constitution is something placed beyond the 
reach of amendment has impressed popular imagina- 
tion. The difficulty of altering the Constitution 
produces conservative sentiment, and national con- 
servatism doubles the difficulty of altering the 
Constitution. The House of Lords has lasted for 
centuries; the American Senate has now existed for 

Part L 

Legal 
spirit of 
federalism 

170 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

more than one hundred years, yet to abolish or alter 
the House of Lords might turn out to be an easier 
matter than to modify the constitution of the Senate. 
To this one must add that a federal constitution 
always lays down general principles which, from being 
placed in the constitution, gradually come to command 
a superstitious reverence, and thus are in fact, though 
not in theory, protected from change or criticism. 
The principle that legislation ought not to impair 
obligation of contracts has governed the whole course 
of American opinion. Of the conservative effect of 
such a maxim when forming an article of the constitu- 
tion we may form some measure by the following re- 
flection. If any principle of the like kind had been 
recognised in England as legally binding on the Courts, 
the Irish Land Act would have been unconstitutional 
and void ; the Irish Church Act, 1869, would, in great 
part at least, have been from a legal point of view so 
much waste paper, and there would have been great 
difficulty in legislating in the way in which the 
English Parliament has legislated for the reform of 
the Universities, One maxim only among those 
embodied in the Constitution of the United States 
would, that is to say, have been sufficient if adopted 
in England to have arrested the most vigorous efforts 
of recent Parliamentary legislation. 

Federalism, lastly, means legalism—the predomi- 
ance of the judiciary in the constitution—the pre- 
alence of a spirit of legality among the people. 

That in a confederation like the United States the 
Courts become the pivot on which the constitutional 
arrangements of the country turn is obvious. Sove- 
reignty is lodged in a body which rarely exerts its 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 171 
ee 

authority and has (so to speak) only a potential 
existence ;_no legislature throughout the land is more 
than a subordinate law-making body capable in strict- 
ness of enacting nothing but bye-laws; the powers of 
the executive are again limited by the constitution ; 
the interpreters of the constitution are the judges. 
The Bench therefore can and must determine the 
limits to the authority both of the government and 
of the legislature ; its decision is without appeal; the 
consequence follows that the Bench of judges is not 
only the guardian but also at a given moment the 
master of the constitution." Nothing puts in a 

1 The expression “master of the constitution ” has been criticised 
on the ground of exaggeration (Sidgwick, Elements of Polttics, p. 618). 
The expression, however, though undoubtedly strong, is, it is sub- 
mitted, justifiable, if properly understood. It is true, as my friend 
Mr. Sidgwick well pointed out, that the action of the Supreme Court 
is restrained, first, by the liability of the judges to impeachment for 
misconduct, and, secondly, by the fear of provoking disorder. And to 
these restraints a third and more efficient check must be added. The 
numbers of the Court may be increased by Congress, and ita decision 
in a given case has not even in theory that force as a decisive precedent 
which is attributable to a decision of the House of Lords; hence if the 
Supreme Court were to pronounce judgments which ran permanently 
counter to the opinion of the party which controlled the government 
of the Union, its action could be altered by adding to the Court 
lawyers who shared the convictions of the ruling party. (See Davis, 
American Constitutions; the Relations of the Three Departments as 
adjusted by a Century, pp. 52-54.) It would be idle therefore to 
maintain, what certainly cannot be asserted with truth, that the 
Supreme Court is the sovereign of the United States. It is, how- 
ever, I conceive, true that at any given moment the Court may, 
on a case coming before it, pronounce a judgment which determines 
the working of the Constitution. The decision in the Dred Scott 
Case for example, and still more the judicial opinions delivered in 
deciding the case, had a distinct influence on the interpretation of 
the Constitution both by slave-owners and by Abolitionists. In term- 
ing the Court the “ master of the constitution” it was not my intention 
to suggest the exercise by it of irregular or revolutionary powers. 
No doubt, again, the Supreme Court may be influenced in delivering 
its judgments by fear of provoking violence. This apprehension is 
admittedly a limit to the full exercise of ite theoretical powers by 

Chapter 

Part I. 

judiciary. 

172 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

stronger light the inevitable connection between 
federalism and the prominent position of the judicial 
body than the history of modern Switzerland. The 
statesmen of 1848 desired to give the Bundesgericht 
a far less authoritative position than is possessed by 
the American Supreme Court. They in effect made 
the Federal Assembly for most, what it still is for 
some, purposes, a final Court of Appeal. But the 
necessities of the case were too strong for Swiss states- 
manship ; the revision of 1874 greatly increased the 
power of the Federal Tribunal. 

From the fact that the judicial Bench supports 

. under federal institutions the whole stress of the con- 

stitution, a special danger arises lest the judiciary 
should be unequal to the burden laid upon them. In 
no country has greater skill been expended on con- 
stituting an august and impressive national tribunal 
than in the United States. Moreover, as already 
pointed out, the guardianship of the Constitution is 
in America confided not only to the Supreme Court 
but to every judge throughout the land. Still it is 
manifest that even the Supreme Court can hardly 

support the duties imposed upon it. No one can 

doubt that the varying decisions given in the legal- 

the most absolute of despots. It was never my intention to assert 
that the Supreme Court, which is certainly not the sovereign of the 
United States, was in the exercise of its functions free from restraints 
which limit the authority of even a sovereign power. It must further 
be noted, in considering how far the Supreme Court could in fact 
exert all the authority theoretically vested in it, that it is hardly con- 
ceivable that the opinions of the Court as to, say, the constitutional 
limits to the authority of Congress should not be shared by a large 
number of American citizens. Whenever in short the Court differed 
in its view of the Constitution from that adopted by the President 
or the Congress, the Court, it is probable, could rely on a large amount 
of popular support. : 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 173 

tender cases, or in the line of recent judgments of 
which Munn v. Illinois is a specimen, show that the 
most honest judges are after all only honest men, and 
when set to determine matters of policy and states- 
manship will necessarily be swayed by political feeling 
and by reasons of state. But the moment that this 
bias becomes obvious a Court loses its moral authority, 
and decisions which might be justified on grounds of 
policy excite natural indignation and suspicion when 
they are seen not to be fully justified on grounds of 
law. American critics indeed are to be found who 
allege that the Supreme Court not only is proving 
but always has proved too weak for the burden it is 
called upon to bear, and that it has from the first 
been powerless whenever it came into conflict with a 
State, or could not count upon the support of the 
Federal Executive. These allegations undoubtedly 
hit a weak spot in the constitution of the great 
tribunal. Its judgments are without force, at any 
rate as against a State if the President refuses the 
means of putting them into execution. “John 
Marshall,” said President Jackson, according to a 
current story,’ “has delivered his judgment; let 
him now enforce it, if he can”; and the judgment 
was never put into force. But the weight of 
criticisms repeated from the earliest days of the 
Union may easily be exaggerated.” Laymen are apt 
to mistake the growth of judicial caution for a sign 

1 See W. G. Sumner, Andrew Jackson, American Statesmen Series, 
’ en Davis, American Constitutions ; the Relations of the Three De- 
partments as adjusted by a Century. Mr. Davie is distinctly of opinion 
that the power of the Courts both of the United States and of the 
separate States has increased steadily since the foundation of the 
Union. See Davis, American Constitutions, pp. 55-57. 

Chapter 
I. 

ee 

Part L 

174 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

See ee ne Re eee 
of judicial weakness. Foreign observers, moreover, 
should notice that in a federation the causes which 
bring a body such as the Supreme Court into existence, 
also supply it with a source of ultimate power. The 
Supreme Court and institutions like it are the pro- 
tectors of the federal compact, and the validity of 
that compact is, in the long run, the guarantee for 
the rights of the separate States. It is the interest 
of every man who wishes the federal constitution 
to be observed, that the judgments of the federal 
tribunals should be respected. It is therefore no bold 
assumption that, as long as the people of the United 
States wish to keep up the balanced system of 
federalism, they will ultimately compel the central 
government to support the authority of the federal 
Court. Critics of the Court are almost driven to 
assert that the American people are indifferent to 
State Rights. The assertion may or may not be true ; 
it is a matter on which no English critic should 
speak with confidence. But censures on the working 
of a federal Court tell very little. against such an 
institution if they establish nothing more than the 
almost self-evident proposition that a federal tribunal 
will be ineffective and superfluous when the United 
States shall have ceased to be in reality a federation. 
A federal Court has no proper place in a unitarian 
Republic. 

Judges, further, must be appointed by some 
authority which is not judicial, and where decisions 
of a Court control the action of government there 
exists an irresistible temptation to appoint magis- 
trates who agree (honestly it may be) with the views 
of the executive. A strong argument pressed against 

PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY & FEDERALISM 175 

Mr. Blaine’s election was, that he would have the 
opportunity as President of nominating four judges, 
and that a politician allied with railway companies 
was likely to pack the Supreme Court with men 
certain to wrest the law in favour of mercantile cor- 
porations. The accusation may have been baseless; 

Chapter 

the fact that it should have been made, and that even | 

“ Republicans” should declare that the time had come 
when “Democrats” should no longer be excluded 
from the Bench of the United States, tells plainly 
enough of the special evils which must be weighed 
against the undoubted benefits of making the Courts 
rather than the legislature the arbiters of the consti- 
tution. 

That a federal system again can flourish only 
among communities imbued with a legal spirit and 
trained to reverence the law is as certain as can be 
any conclusion of political speculation. Federalism 
substitutes litigation for legislation, and none but a 
law-fearing people will be inclined to regard the 
decision of a suit as equivalent to the enactment of 
a law. The main reason why the United States has 
carried out the federal system with unequalled success 

is that the people of the Union sre more thoroughly 
imbued with legal ideas than any other existing © 

nation. Constitutional questions arising out of either 
the constitutions of the separate States or the articles 
of the federal Constitution are of daily occurrence 

and constantly occupy the Courts. Hence the | 

citizens become a people of constitutionalists, and 

matters which excite the strongest popular feeling, ' 

as, for instance, the right of Chinese to settle in the 
country, are determined by the judicial Bench, and 

ederalism 
possible 
here a 
spirit 
oes not 
revail. 

176 THE SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT 

the decision of the Bench is acquiesced in by the 
people. This acquiescence or submission is due to the 
Americans inheriting the legal notions of the common 
law, ze. of the “most legal system of law” (if the 
expression may be allowed) in the world. Tocque- 
ville long ago remarked that the Swiss fell far short 

_of the Americans in reverence for law and justice.’ 

The events of the last sixty years suggest that he 
perhaps underrated Swiss submission to law. But 
the law to which Switzerland is accustomed recognises 
wide discretionary power on the part of the execu- 
tive, and has never fully severed the functions of the 
judge from those of the government. Hence Swiss 
federalism fails, just where one would expect it to fail, 
in maintaining that complete authority of the Courts 
which is necessary to the perfect federal system. But 
the Swiss, though they may not equal the Americans 
in reverence for judicial decisions, are a law-respecting 
nation. One may well doubt whether there are many 
states to be found where the mass of the people 
would leave so much political influence to the Courts. 
Yet any nation who cannot acquiesce in the finality 
of possibly mistaken judgments is hardly fit to form 
part of a federal state.’ 

1 See passage cited, pp. 180-182 post. 
2 See Appendix, Note VIII., Swiss Federalism. 

PART II 

THE RULE OF LAW 

177 

CHAPTER IV 

THE RULE OF LAW: ITS NATURE AND GENERAL 
APPLICATIONS 

Two features have at all times since the Norman Chapter 
Conquest characterised the political institutions of _!Y: 
England. Saal 
The first of these features is the omnipotence or 
undisputed supremacy throughout the whole country 
of the central government. This authority of the 
state or the nation was during the earlier periods of 
our history represented by the power of the Crown. 
The King was the source of law and the maintainer 
of order. The maxim of the Courts, tout furt in luy 
et vient de lur al commencement,’ was originally the 
expression of an actual and undoubted fact. This 
royal supremacy has now passed into that sovereignty 
of Parliament which has formed the main subject of 
the foregoing chapters.’. 
The second of these features, which is closely con- 
nected with the first, is the rule or supremacy of law. 
This peculiarity of our polity is well expressed in the 
old saw of the Courts, “La ley est le plus haute 
1 Year Books, xxiv. Edward III.; cited Gneist, Englische Ver- 

waltungsrecht, i. p. 454. 2 See Part I. 
179 

180 THE RULE OF LAW 

Part Il. “inheritance, que le roy ad; car par la ley il méme 
et toutes ses sujets sont rulés, et si la ley ne fuit, 
“nul rot, et nul inheritance sera.” ? 

This supremacy of the law, or the security given 
under the English constitution to the rights of indi- 
viduals looked at from various points of view, forms 
the subject of this part of this treatise. 

The rule Foreign observers of English manners, such for 
Englund eXample as Voltaire, De Lolme, Tocqueville, or Gneist, 
relates: *y have been far more struck than have Englishmen 
observers. themselves with the fact that England is a country 
governed, as is scarcely any other part of Europe, 
under the rule of law ; and admiration or astonishment 
at the legality of English habits and feeling is 
nowhere better expressed than in a curious passage 
from Tocqueville's writings, which compares the 
Switzerland and the England of 1836 in respect of 
the spirit which pervades their laws and manners. 
Tooque- “T am not about,” he writes, ‘‘ to compare Switzer- 
vast ot “land * with the United States, but with Great Britain. 
reepect for «* When you examine the two countries, or even if you 

law in 

Switzer.“ only pass through them, you perceive, in my judg- 

cas “ment, the most astonishing differences between them. 
land. “Take it all in all, England seems to be much more re- 
“publican than the Helvetic Republic. The principal 
“ differences are found in the institutions of the two 
“countries, and especially in their customs (meurs). 
‘1. In almost all the Swiss Cantons liberty of the 
‘‘ press is a very recent thing. 
1 Year Books, xix. Henry VI., cited Gneist, Englische Verwal- 
tungsrecht, i, p. 455. 
3 Many of Tocqueville’s remarks are not applicable to the Switzer- 

land of 1902; they refer to a period before the creation in 1848 of 
the Swiss Federal Constitution. 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 181 
Se ee ee eee 
“2. In almost all of them individual liberty is by 
“no means completely guaranteed, and a man may 
‘‘be arrested administratively and detained in prison 
‘without much formality. 

“3. The Courts have not, generally speaking, a 
‘‘perfectly independent position. 

‘4, In all the Cantons trial by jury is unknown. 

“5. In several Cantons the people were thirty- 
“eight years ago entirely without political rights. 
“ Aargau, Thurgau, Tessin, Vaud, and parts of the 
‘Cantons of Zurich and Berne were in this condition. 

“The preceding observations apply even more 
“strongly to customs than to institutions. 

“i, In many of the Swiss Cantons the majority of 
“the citizens are quite without taste or desire for sel/- 
government, and have not acquired the habit of it. 
“In any crisis they interest themselves about their 
‘‘ affairs, but you never see in them the thirst for 
“political rights and the craving to take part in 
“public affairs which seem to torment Englishmen 
“throughout their lives. 

“ii, The Swiss abuse the liberty of the press on 
“account of its being a recent form of liberty, and 
‘Swiss newspapers are much more revolutionary and 
‘much less practical than English newspapers. 

“iii. The Swiss seem still to look upon associa- 
‘tions from much the same point of view as the 

Chapter 
IV. 

“French, that is to say, they consider them as a © 

‘“means of revolution, and not as a slow and sure 
‘method for obtaining redress of wrongs. The art of 
‘associating and of making use of the right of asso- 
ciation is but little understood in Switzerland. 

‘ty. The Swiss do not show the love of justice 

Bearing of 
Tocque- 
ville’s re- 
marks on 
meaning of 
rule of law. 

182 THE RULE OF LAW 

A a cia age es 
“ which is such a strong characteristic of the English. 
“Their Courts have no place in the political arrange- 
“ments of the country, and exert no influence on 
“public opinion. The love of justice, the peaceful 
“and legal introduction of the judge into the domain 
“of politics, are perhaps the most standing character- 
“istics of a free people. 

‘“‘y, Finally, and this really embraces all the rest, 
“the Swiss do not show at bottom that respect for 
“justice, that love of law, that dislike of using force, 
‘ without which no free nation can exist, which strikes 
“ strangers so forcibly in England. 

“IT sum up these impressions in a few words. 

‘“‘ Whoever travels in the United States is involun- 
‘‘tarily and instinctively so impressed with the fact 
“that the spirit of liberty and the taste for it have 
“* pervaded all the habits of the American people, that 
“he cannot conceive of them under any but a Repub- 
“ican government. In the same way it is impossible 
“to think of the English as living under any but a 
“free government. But if violence were to destroy the 
“ Republican institutions in most of the Swiss Cantons, 
“it would be by no means certain that after rather a 
“short state of transition the people would not grow 
“accustomed to the loss of liberty. In the United 
‘States and in England there seems to be more liberty 
‘‘in the customs than in the laws of the people. In 
‘Switzerland there seems to be more liberty in the 
“Jaws than in the customs of the country.”? 

Tocqueville’s language has a twofold bearing on 
our present topic. His words point in the clearest 

1 See Tocqueville, @uvres Completes, viii. pp. 455-457, 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 183 

law as the distinguishing characteristic of English Chapter 
institutions. They further direct attention to the 
extreme vagueness of a trait of national character 
which is as noticeable as it is hard to portray. 
Tocqueville, we see, is clearly perplexed how to define 
a feature of English manners of which he at once re- 
cognises the existence ; he mingles or confuses together 
the habit of self-government, the love of order, the 
respect for justice and a legal turn of mind. All 
these sentiments are intimately allied, but they cannot 
without confusion be identified with each other. If, 
however, a critic as acute as Tocqueville found a 
difficulty in describing one of the most marked pecu- 
liarities of English life, we may safely conclude that 
we ourselves, whenever we talk of Englishmen as 
loving the government of law, or of the supremacy of 
law as being a characteristic of the English constitu- 
tion, are using words which, though they possess a 
real significance, are nevertheless to most persons who 
employ them full of vagueness and ambiguity. If 
therefore we are ever to appreciate the full import of 
the idea denoted by the term “rule, supremacy, or 
predominance of law,” we must first determine pre- 
cisely what we mean by such expressions when we 
apply them to the British constitution. 

When we say that the supremacy or the rule of Three 
law is a characteristic of the English constitution, we orient 
generally include under one expression at least three rab 
distinct though kindred conceptions. 

We mean, in the first place, that no man is punish- Absence of 
able or can be lawfully made to suffer in body or power on 
goods except for a distinct breach of law established in ae 
the ordinary legal manner before the ordinary Courts ™™* 

184 THE RULE OF LAW 

Part IL of theland. In this sense the rule of law is contrasted 

with every system of government based on the exer- 

cise by persons in authority of wide, arbitrary, or 
discretionary powers of constraint. 

Contrast Modern Englishmen may at first feel some surprise 

England that the ‘rule of law” (in the sense in which we are 

Continent DOW using the term) should be considered as in any 

at present way a peculiarity of English institutions, since, at the 

present day, it may seem to be not so much the pro- 

perty of any one nation as a trait common to every 

civilised and orderly state. Yet, even if we confine 

our observation to the existing condition of Europe, 

we shall soon be convinced that the “rule of law” 

, even in this narrow sense is peculiar to England, or 

we to those countries which, like the United States of 

America, have inherited English traditions. In almost 

every continental community the executive exercises 

far wider discretionary authority in the matter of 

arrest, of temporary imprisonment, of expulsion from 

its territory, and the like, than is either legally 

claimed or in fact exerted by the government in 

England ; and a study of European politics now and 

again reminds English readers that wherever there is 

discretion there is room for arbitrariness, and that in a 

republic no less than under a monarchy discretionary 

authority on the part of the government must 

mean insecurity for legal freedom on the part of its 

subjects. 

Contrast If, however, weconfined our observation to the Europe 

Eaglead of the twentieth century, we might well say that in 

anitdering Most European countries the rule of law is now nearly 

cighteenth as well established as in England, and that private 

individuals at any rate who do not meddle in politics 

1TS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 185 
i i ean li, Se 
have little to fear, as long as they keep the law, either 
from the Government or from any one else; and we 
might therefore feel some difficulty in understanding 
how it ever happened that to foreigners the absence 
of arbitrary power on the part of the Crown, of the 
executive, and of every other authority in England, has 
always seemed a striking feature, we might almost say 
the essential characteristic, of the English constitution.’ 

Our perplexity is entirely removed by carrying 
back our minds to the time when the English consti- 
tution began to be criticised and admired by foreign 
thinkers. During the eighteenth century many of 
the continental governments were far from oppressive, 
but there was no continental country where men were 
secure from arbitrary power. The singularity of Eng- 
land was not so much the goodness or the leniency 
as the legality of the English system of government. 
When Voltaire came to England—and Voltaire 
represented the feeling of his age—his predominant 
sentiment clearly was that he had passed out of the 
realm of despotism to a land where the laws might be 
harsh, but where men were ruled by law and not by 
caprice.? He had good reason to know the difference. 

1 “Ta liberté est le droit de faire tout ce que les lois permettent ; 
“et si un citoyen pouvoit faire ce qu’elles défendent, il n’auroit plus de 
“liberté, parce que les autres auroient tout de méme ce pouvoir.” — 
Montesquieu, De Esprit des Lois, Livre XI. chap. iii. 

“Tl y a aussi une nation dans le monde qui a pour objet direct de 
“sa constitution la liberté politique.”—Jbid. chap. v. The English 
are this nation. 

2 “Teg circonstances qui contraignaient Voltaire & chercher un 
“refuge chez nos voisins devaient lui inspirer une grande sympathie 
“pour des institutions oh il n’y avait nulle place 4 l’arbitraire. ‘La 
“raison est libre ici et n’y connait point de contrainte,’ On y respire 
“on air plus généreux, l’on se sent au milieu de citoyens qui n’ont pas 
“ tort de porter le front haut, de marcher fitrement, sfrs qu’on n’efit pu 

Part I. 

186 THE RULE OF LAW 

In 1717 Voltaire was sent to the Bastille for a poem 
which he had not written, of which he did not know 
the author, and with the sentiment of which he did 
not agree. What adds to the oddity, in English eyes, 
of the whole transaction is that the Regent treated the 
affair as a sort of joke, and, so to speak, “ chaffed ” the 
supposed author of the satire “J have seen” on being 
about to pay a visit to a prison which he “had not 
seen.”' In 1725 Voltaire, then the literary hero of 
his country, was lured off from the table of a Duke, 
and was thrashed by lackeys in the presence of their 
noble master; he was unable to obtain either legal or 
honourable redress, and because he complained of this 
outrage, paid a second visit to the Bastille. This 
indeed was the last time in which he was lodged within 
the walls of a French gaol, but his whole life was a 
series of contests with arbitrary power, and nothing 
but his fame, his deftness, his infinite resource, and 
ultimately his wealth, saved him from penalties far 
more severe than temporary imprisonment. More- 
over, the price at which Voltaire saved his property 
and his life was after all exile from France. Whoever 
wants to see how exceptional a phenomenon was that 
supremacy of law which existed in England during 
the eighteenth century should read such a book as 
Morley’s Infe of Diderot. The effort lasting for 
twenty-two years to get the Encyclopédie published 
was a struggle on the part of all the distinguished 
literary men in France to obtain utterance for their 
thoughts. It is hard to say whether the difficulties 

“‘toucher & un seul cheveu de leur téte, et n’ayant 4 redoubter nilettres de 
‘cachet, ni captivité immotivée.”—Desnoiresterres, Voltaire, i. p. 365. 
1 Desnoiresterres, i. pp. 344-364, 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 187 

or the success of the contest bear the strongest 
witness to the wayward arbitrariness of the French 
Government. 

Royal lawlessness was not peculiar to specially 
detestable monarchs such as Louis the Fifteenth: it 
was inherent in the French system of administration. 
An idea prevails that Louis the Sixteenth at least was 
not an arbitrary, as he assuredly was not a cruel ruler. 
But it is an error to suppose that up to 1789 anything 
like the supremacy of law existed under the French 
monarchy. The folly, the grievances, and the mystery 
of the Chevalier D’Eon made as much noise little more 
than a century ago as the imposture of the Claimant 
in our own day. The memory of these things is not 
in itself worth reviving. What does deserve to be 
kept in remembrance is that in 1778, in the days of 
Johnson, of Adam Smith, of Gibbon, of Cowper, of 
Burke, and of Mansfield, during the continuance of the 
American war and within eleven years of the assem- 
bling of the States General, a brave officer and a dis- 
tinguished diplomatist could for some offence still 
unknown, without trial and without conviction, be 
condemned to undergo a penance and disgrace which 
could hardly be rivalled by the fanciful caprice of the 
torments inflicted by Oriental despotism.’ 

Nor let it be imagined that during the latter part 
of the eighteenth century the government of France 
was more arbitrary than that of other countries. To 
entertain such a supposition is to misconceive utterly 
the condition of the continent. In France, law and 

1 It is worth notice that even after the meeting of the States 
General the King was apparently reluctant to give up altogether the 
powers exercised by lettres de cachet. See “ Déclaration des intentions 
du Roi,” art. 15, Plouard, Les Constitutions Frangatses, p. 10. 

Chapter 

Part IL 

188 THE RULE OF LAW 

public opinion counted for a great deal more than in 
Spain, in the petty States of Italy, or in the Princi- 
palities of Germany. All the evils of despotism which 
attracted the notice of the world in a great kingdom 

’ such as France existed under worse forms in countries 

where, just because the evil was so much greater, it 
attracted the less attention. The power of the French 
monarch was criticised more severely than the law- 
lessness of a score of petty tyrants, not because the 
French King ruled more despotically than other 
crowned heads, but because the French people ap- 
peared from the eminence of the nation to have a 
special claim to freedom, and because the ancient 
kingdom of France was the typical representative of 
despotism. This explains the thrill of enthusiasm 
with which all Europe greeted the fall of the Bastille. 
When the fortress was taken, there were not ten 
prisoners within its walls; at that very moment 
hundreds of debtors languished in English gaols. Yet 
all England hailed the triumph of the French popu- 
lace with a fervour which to Englishmen of the 
twentieth century is at first sight hardly compre- 
hensible. Reflection makes clear enough the cause 
of a feeling which spread through the length and 
breadth of the civilised world. The Bastille was 
the outward and visible sign of lawless power. Its 
fall was felt, and felt truly, to herald in for the rest 

of Europe that rule of law which already existed in 
England.’ 

1 For English sentiment with reference to the servitude of the 
French, see Goldsmith, Citizen of the World, iii. Letter iv. ; and see 
Ivid., Letter xxxvii. p. 143, for a contrast between the execution of 
Lord Ferrers and the impunity with which a French nobleman was 
allowed to commit murder because of his relationship to the Royal 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 189 

We mean in the second place,’ when we speak o eben 

the “rule of law” as a characteristic of our country 
not only that with us no man is above the law, bu 
(what is a different thing) that here every man,| 

Every man 
so at to 
\ ordinary 

?\ law admini- 

whatever be his rank or condition, is subject to the|stred by 
ordinar 
ordinary law of the realm and amenable to the j juris- |tribunals. 

diction of the ordinary tribunals. 

In England the idea of legal equality, or of the 
universal subjection of all classes to one law admini- 
stered by the ordinary Courts, has been pushed to its 
utmost limit. With us every official, from the Prime 
Minister down to a constable or a collector of taxes, 
is under the same responsibility for every act done 
without legal justification as any other citizen. The 
Reports abound with cases in which officials have 
been brought before the Courts, and made, in their 
personal capacity, liable to punishment, or to the 
payment of damages, for acts done in their official 
character but in excess of their lawful authority. A 
colonial governor,® a secretary of state,’ a military 
officer,‘ and all subordinates, though carrying out the 
commands of their official superiors, are as responsible 
for any act which the law does not authorise as is 
any private and unofficial person. Officials, such for 
family ; and for the general state of feeling throughout Europe, 
Tocqueville, Guvres Completes, viii. pp. 57-72. The idea of the rule of 
law in this sense implies, or is at any rate closely connected with, the 
absence of any dispensing power on the part either of the Crown or 
its servants, See Bill of Rights, Preamble 1, Stubbs, Select Charters 
(2nd ed.), p. 523. Compare Miller v. Knox, 6 Scott, 1; Attorney- 
General v. Kissane, 32 L.R. Ir, 220. 

1 For first meaning see p. 183, ante. 

2 Mostyn v. Fabregas, Cowp. 161; Musgrave v. Pulido, 6 App. 
Cas. 102; Governor Wall's Case, 28 St. Tr. 51. 

8 Entick y. Carrington, 19 St. Tr. 1030, 
4 Phillips v. Eyre, L. R., 4 Q. B. 225. 

4 

Part IL 

Contrast in 
this respect 
between 

England 
and France. 

190 THE RULE OF LAW 

example as soldiers’ or clergymen of the Established 
Church, are, it is true, in England as elsewhere, 
subject to laws which do not affect the rest of the 
nation, and are in some instances amenable to tri- 
bunals which have no jurisdiction over their fellow- 
countrymen ; officials, that is to say, are to a certain 
extent governed under what may be termed official 
law. But this fact is in no way inconsistent with the 
principle that all men are in England subject to the 
law of the realm; for though a soldier or a clergy- 
man incurs from his position legal liabilities from 
which other men are exempt, he does not (speaking 
generally) escape thereby from the duties of an 
ordinary citizen. 

An Englishman naturally imagines that the rule 
of law (in the sense in which we are now using the 
term) is a trait common to all civilised societies. But 
this supposition is erroneous. Most European nations 
had indeed, by the end of the eighteenth century, 
passed through that stage of development (from which 
England emerged before the end of the sixteenth 
century) when nobles, priests, and others could defy 
the law. But it is even now far from universally 
true that in continental countries all persons are 
subject to one and the same law, or that the Courts 
are supreme throughout the state. If we take 

- France as the type of a continental state, we may 

assert, with substantial accuracy, that officiala— 
under which word should be included all persons 
employed in the service of the state—are, or have been, 
in their official capacity, to some extent exempted 
from the ordinary law of the land, protected from the 
1 As to the legal position of soldiers, see Chapa, VIII. and IX. post. 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 191 

Jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals, and subject 
in certain respects only to official law administered 
by official bodies." 

There remains yet a third and a different sense in 
which the “rule of law” or the predominance of the 
legal spirit may be described as a special attribute of 

Chapter 
IV. 

- General 

rules of 
constitu- 
tional law 
are result 
of ordinary 
law of the 

English institutions. We may say that the constitu- ma 

tion 18 pervaded by the rule of law on the ground 
that the general principles of the constitution (as for 
example the right to personal liberty, or the right 
of public meeting) are with us the result of judicial 

decisions determining the rights of private persons in 

particular cases brought before the Courfs;* whereas 
under many foreign constitutions the security (such 
as it is) given to the rights of individuals results, or 
appears to result, from the general principles of the 
constitution. 

This is one portion at least of the fact vaguely 

hinted at in the current but misguiding statement 

that “the constitution has not been made but has 
“grown.” This dictum, if taken literally, is absurd. 
* Political institutions (however the proposition may 
“be at times ignored) are the work of men, owe their 
‘origin and their whole existence to human will. 
‘Men did not wake up on a summer morning and 
“find them sprung up. Neither do they resemble 
“trees, which, once planted, are ‘aye growing’ while 
‘men ‘are sleeping.’ In every stage of their existence 

1 See Chapter XII. as to the contrast between the rule of law and 
foreign administrative law. 

2 Compare Calvin’s Case, 7 Coke, Rep. 1 ; Campbell v. Hall, Cowp, 
204; Wilkes v. Wood, 19 St. Tr. 1153 ; ‘Mostyn v. Fabregas, Cow}. 181. 
Parliamentary declarations of the law such as the Petition of Right 
and the Bill of Rights have a certain affinity to judicial decisions 

b He tt 

wi 

Part I. 

192 THE RULE OF LAW 

“they are made what they are by human voluntary 
“agency.” ? 

Yet, though this is so, the dogma that the form 
of a government is a sort of spontaneous growth so 
closely bound up with the life of a people that we 
can hardly treat it as a product of human will and 
energy, does, though in a loose and inaccurate fashion, 
bring into view the fact that some polities, and among 
them the English constitution, have not been created 
at one stroke, and, far from being the result of legis- 
lation, in the ordinary sense of that term, are the 
fruit of contests carried on in the Courts on behalf of 

, the rights of individuals. Our constitution, in short, 

Contrast 
between 
the English 
constitu- 
tion and 
Foreign 
constitu- 
tions. 

is a judge-made constitution, and it bears on its face 

‘ all the features, good and bad, of judge-made law. 

Hence flow noteworthy distinctions between the 
constitution of England and the constitutions of most 
foreign countries. 

There is in the English constitution an absence of 
those declarations or definitions of rights so dear to 
foreign constitutionalists. Such principles, moreover, 
as you can discover in the English constitution are, 
like all maxims established by judicial legislation, 
mere generalisations drawn either from the decisions 
or dicta of judges, or from statutes which, being 
passed to meet special grievances, bear a close resem- 
blance to judicial decisions, and are in effect judg- 
ments pronounced by the High Court of Parliament. 
To put what is really the same thing in a somewhat 
different shape, the relation of the rights of individuals 
to the principles of the constitution is not quite the 
same in countries like Belgium, where the constitution 

1 Mill, Representative Government, p. 4. 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 193 

is the result of a legislative act, as it is in England, 
where the constitution itself is based upon legal 
decisions. In Belgium, which may be taken as a type 
of countries possessing a constitution formed by a 
deliberate act of legislation, you may say with truth 
that the rights of individuals to personal liberty flow 
from or are secured by the constitution. In England 
the right to individual liberty is part of the constitu- 
tion, because it is secured by the decisions of the 
Courts, extended or confirmed as they are by the 
Habeas Corpus Acts. If it be allowable to apply the 
formulas of logic to questions of law, the difference in 
this matter between the constitution of Belgium and 

Ninth 

the English constitution may be described by the | 

statement that in Belgium individual rights are de- 

ductions drawn from the principles of the constitution, .,..):. 

whilst in England the so-called principles of the con- 
stitution are inductions or generalisations based upon 
particular decisions pronounced by the Courts as to 
the rights of given individuals. 

This is of course a merely formal difference. 
Liberty is as well secured in Belgium as in England, 
and as long as this is so it matters nothing whether 
we say that individuals are free from all risk of arbi- 
trary arrest, because liberty of person is guaranteed 
by the constitution, or that the right to personal 
freedom, or in other words to protection from arbi- 
trary arrest, forms part of the constitution because it 
is secured by the ordinary law of the land. But 
though this merely formal distinction is in itself of no 
moment, provided always that the rights of individuals 
are really secure, the question whether the right to 

personal freedom or the right to freedom of worship is 
0 

Part I. 

194 THE RULE OF LAW 

likely to be secure does depend a good deal upon the 
answer to the inquiry whether the persons who con- 
sciously or unconsciously build up the constitution of 
their country begin with definitions or declarations of 
rights, or with the contrivance of remedies by which 
rights may be enforced or secured. Now, most foreign 
constitution-makers have begun with declarations of 
rights. For this they have often been in nowise 
to blame. Their course of action has more often 
than not been forced upon them by the stress of 
circumstances, and by the consideration that to lay 
down general principles of law is the proper and natural 
function of legislators. But any knowledge of history 
suffices to show that foreign constitutionalists have, 
while occupied in defining rights, given insufficient 
attention to the absolute necessity for the provision 
of adequate remedies by which the rights they pro- 
claimed might be enforced. The Constitution of 
1791 proclaimed liberty of conscience, liberty of the 
press, the right of public meeting, the responsibility 
of government officials.. But there never was a 
period in the recorded annals of mankind when each 
and all of these rights were so insecure, one might 
almost say so completely non-existent, as at the 
height of the French Revolution. And an observer 
may well doubt whether a good number of these 
liberties or rights are even now so well protected 
under the French Republic as under the English 
Monarchy. On the other hand, there runs through 
the English constitution that inseparable connection 
between the means of enforcing a right and the right 

1 See Plouard, Les Constitutions Francatses, pp. 14-16 ; Duguit and 
Monnier, Les Constitutions de la France (2nd ed.), pp. 4, 5. 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 195 

to be enforced which is the strength of judicial legis- 
lation. The saw, ubi jus 1bt remedium, becomes from 
this point of view something much more important 
than a mere tautologous proposition. In its bearing 
upon constitutional law, it means that the English- 
men whose labours gradually framed the complicated 
set of laws and institutions which we call the Consti- 
tution, fixed their minds far more intently on providing 
remedies for the enforcement of particular rights or 
(what is merely the same thing looked at from the 
other side) for averting definite wrongs, than upon 
any declaration of the Rights of Man or of English- 
men. The Habeas Corpus Acts declare no principle 
and define no rights, but they are for practical pur- 
poses worth a hundred constitutional articles guaran- 
teeing individual liberty. Nor let it be supposed that 
this connection between rights and remedies which 
depends upon the spirit of law pervading English 
institutions is inconsistent with the existence of a 
written constitution, or even with the existence of 
constitutional declarations of rights. The Constitu- 
tion of the United States and the constitutions of the 
separate States are embodied in written or printed 
documents, and contain declarations of rights.’ But 

1 The Petition of Right, and the Bill of Rights, as also the American 
Declarations of Rights, contain, it may be said, proclamations of general 
principles which resemble the declarations of rights known to foreign 
constitutionaliste, and especially the celebrated Declaration of the Rights 
of Man (Declaration des Droits de PHomme et du Citoyen) of 1789. But 
the English and American Declarations on the one hand, and foreign 
declarations of rights on the other, though bearing an apparent 
resemblance to each other, are at bottom remarkable rather by way 
of contrast than of similarity. The Petition of Right and the Bill of 
Rights are not so much “declarations of rights” in the foreign sense 
of the term, as judicial condemnations of claims or practices on the 
part of the Crown, which are thereby pronounced illegal. It will be 

Chapter 

196 THE RULE OF LAW 

the statesmen of America have shown unrivalled skill 
in providing means for giving legal security to the 
rights declared by American constitutions. The rule 
of law is as marked a feature of the United States as 
of England. 

The fact, again, that in many foreign countries the 
rights of individuals, e.g. to personal freedom, depend 
upon the constitution, whilst in England the law of 
the constitution is little else than a generalisation of 
the rights which the Courts secure to individuals, has 
this important result. The general rights guaranteed 
by the constitution may be, and in foreign countries 
constantly are, suspended. They are something ex- 
traneous to and independent of the ordinary course of 
the law. The declaration of the Belgian constitution, 
that individual liberty is “‘ guaranteed,” betrays a way 
of looking at the rights of individuals very different 
from the way in which such rights are regarded by 
English lawyers. We can hardly say that one right 
is more guaranteed than another. Freedom from 
arbitrary arrest, the right to express one’s opinion on 
all matters subject to the liability to pay compensa- 
tion for libellous or to suffer punishment for seditious 
or blasphemous statements, and the right to enjoy one’s 
own property, seem to Englishmen all to rest upon 
the same basis, namely, on the law of the land. To 
say that the “constitution guaranteed” one class of 

found that every, or nearly every, clause in the two celebrated docu- 
ments negatives some distinct claim made and put into force on behalf 
of the prerogative. No doubt the Declarations contained in the 
American Constitutions have a real similarity to the continental de- 
clarations of rights. They are the product of eighteenth-century ideas; 
they have, however, it is submitted, the distinct purpose of legally con- 
trolling the action of the legislature by the Articles of the Constitution. 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 197 

rights more than the other would be to an English- 
man an unnatural or a senseless form of speech. In 
the Belgian constitution the words have a definite 
meaning. They imply that no law invading personal 
freedom can be passed without a modification of the 
constitution made in the special way in which alone 
the constitution can be legally changed or amended. 
This, however, is not the point to which our immediate 
attention should be directed. The matter to be noted 
is, that where the right to individual freedom is a 
result deduced from the principles of the constitution, 
the idea readily occurs that the right is capable of 
being suspended or taken away. Where, on the other 
‘hand, the right to individual freedom is part of the 
constitution because it is inherent in the ordinary law 
of the land, the right is one which can hardly be 
destroyed without a thorough revolution in the in- 
stitutions and manners of the nation. The so-called 
‘suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act” bears, it is 
true, a certain similarity to what is called in foreign 
countries “ suspending the constitutional guarantees.” 
But, after all, a statute suspending the Habeas Corpus 
Act falls very far short of what its popular name 
seems to imply; and though a serious measure 
enough, is not, in reality, more than a suspension 
of one particular remedy for the protection of 
personal freedom. The Habeas Corpus Act may 
be suspended and yet Englishmen may enjoy almost 
all the rights of citizens. The constitution being 
based on the rule of law, the suspension of the con- 
stitution, as far as such a thing can be conceived 
possible, would mean with us nothing less than a 
revolution. 

Chapter 

I THE RULE OF LAW 

That “rule of law,” then, which forms a funda- 
mental principle of the constitution, has three mean- 
ings, or may be regarded from three different points 
of view. 

It means, in the first place, the absolute suprem- 
acy or predominance of regular law as opposed to the 
influence of arbitrary power, and excludes the exist- 
ence of arbitrariness, of prerogative, or even of wide 
discretionary authority on the part of the govern- 
ment. Englishmen are ruled by the law, and by the 
law alone; a man may with us be punished for a 
breach of law, but he can be punished for nothing 
else. 

It means, again, equality before the law, or the 
equal subjection of all classes to the ordinary law of 
the land administered by the ordinary Law Courts ; 
the “rule of law” in this sense excludes the idea of 
any exemption of officials or others from the duty of 
obedience to the law which governs other citizens or 
from the jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals; there 
can be with us nothing really corresponding to the 
“administrative law” (drowt administratif) or the 
“administrative tribunals” (tribunaux administratifs) 
of France.’ The notion which lies at the bottom of 
the “‘ administrative law” known to foreign countries 
is, that affairs or disputes in which the government 
or its servants are concerned are beyond the sphere 
of the civil Courts and must be dealt with by special 
and more or less official bodies. This idea is utterly 
unknown to the law of England, and indeed is funda- 
mentally inconsistent with our traditions and customs. 

The “rule of law,” lastly, may be used as a 

1 See Chap. XII 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 199 

formula for expressing the fact that with us the law Chapter 
of the constitution, the rales which in foreign 
countries naturally form part of a constitutional code, 
are not the source but the consequence of the rights 
of individuals, as defined and enforced by the Courts ; 
that,.in short, the principles of private law have with 
us been by the action of the Courts and Parliament 
so extended as to determine the position of the Crown 
and of its servants; thus the constitution is the 
result of the ordinary law of the land. 

General propositions, however, as to the nature of Influence 
the rule of law carry us but a very little way. If we ¢ en 
want to understand what that principle in all its siarmea) 
different aspects and developments really means, we 0fconstite- 
must try to trace its influence throughout some of 
the main provisions of the constitution. The best 
mode of doing this is to examine with care the 
manner in which the law of England deals with the 
following topics, namely, the right to personal free- 
dom ;' the right to freedom of discussion ;* the right 
of public meeting ;* the use of martial law;* the 
rights and duties of the army ;° the collection and 
expenditure of the public revenue ;° and the respon- 
sibility of Ministers.’ The true nature further of the 
rule of law as it exists in England will be illustrated 
by contrast with the idea of drow administraty, or 
administrative law, which prevails in many continental 
countries. These topics will each be treated of in 
their due order. The object, however, of this treatise, 

1 Chap. V. 2 Chap. VI. 8 Chap. VII. 
4 Chap. VIII. 5 Chap. IX. 6 Chap. X. 
7 Chap. XI. 8 Chap. XII. 

Part IL 

ee THE RULE OF LAW 

as the reader should remember, is not to provide 
minute and ful] information, e.g. as to the Habeas 
Corpus Acts, or other enactments protecting the 
liberty of the subject ; but simply to show that these 
leading heads of constitutional law, which have 
been enumerated, these “articles,” so to speak, of the 
constitution, are both governed by, and afford illus- 
trations of, the supremacy throughout English institu- 
tions of the law of the land.’ If at some future day 
the law of the constitution should be codified, each 
of the topics I have mentioned would be dealt with 
by the sections of the code. Many of these subjects 
are actually dealt with in the written constitutions 
of foreign countries, and notably in the articles of 
the Belgian constitution, which, as before noticed, 
makes an admirable summary of the leading maxims 
of English constitutionalism. It will therefore often 
be a convenient method of illustrating our topic to 
take the article of the Belgian, or it may be of some 
other constitution, which bears on the matter in 
hand, as for example the right to personal freedom, 
and to consider how far the principle therein em- 
bodied is recognised by the law of England; and if 
it be so recognised, what are the means by which 
it is maintained or enforced by our Courts. One 

1 The rule of equal law is in England now expoeed to a new peril. 
“The Legislature has thought fit,” writes Sir F. Pollock, “by the 
Trade Disputes Act, 1906, to confer extraordinary immunities on 
combinations both of employers and of workmen, and to some extent 
on persons acting in their interests. Legal science has evidently 
nothing to do with thie violent empirical operation on the body 
politic, and we can only look to jurisdictions beyond seas for the 
further judicial consideration of the problems which our Courts were 

endeavouring (it is submitted, not without a reasonable measure of 

success) to work out on principles of legal justice.”—Pollock, Law of 
Torts (8th ed.), p. v. 

ITS NATURE AND GENERAL APPLICATIONS 201 

reason why the law of the constitution is imperfectly 
understood is, that we too rarely put it side 
by side with the constitutional provisions of other 

countries. Here, as elsewhere, comparison is essential 
to recognition. 

Chapter 

Part IL 

Security 
for per- 
sonal free- 
dom under 

Belgian 
. Constitu- 
tion. 

How 
secured in 
England. 

CHAPTER V 
THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 

THE seventh article of the Belgian constitution 
establishes in that country principles which have 
long prevailed in England. The terms thereof so 
curiously illustrate by way of contrast some marked 
features of English constitutional law as to be worth 
quotation. 

“Art. 7. La liberté individuelle est garantie. 

“Nul ne peut étre poursuiv que dans les cas 
“ prévus par la loi, et dans la forme qu'elle prescrit. 

“ Hors le cas de flagrant délt, nul ne peut étre 
“arrété quien vertu de lordonnance motivée du juge, 
“‘ qua dott étre signifiée au moment de l'arrestation, ou 
“au plus tard dans les vingt-quatre heures.” * 

The security which an Englishman enjoys for 
personal freedom does not really depend upon or 
originate in any general proposition contained in any 
written document. The nearest approach which our 
statute-book presents to the statement contained in 
the seventh article of the Belgian constitution is the 
celebrated thirty-ninth article* of the Magna Charta: 

1 Constitution de la Belgique, art. 7. 
2 See Stubbs, Charters (2nd ed.), p. 301. 
202 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 203 
ee 
“ Nullus liber homo capiatur, vel imprisonetur, aut 
“ dissaisvatur, aut utlagetur, aut exuletur, aut aluquo 

Chapter 
Vv. 

“modo destruatur, nec super eum ibimus, nec super - 

- “eum mittemus, nisi per legale judicium parium 
““suorum vel per legem terrae,” which should be read 
in combination with the declarations of the Petition 
of Right. And these enactments (if such they can 
be called) are rather records of the existence of a 
right than statutes which confer it. The expression 
again, “guaranteed,” is, as I have already pointed 
out, extremely significant; it suggests the notion 
that personal liberty is a special privilege insured to 
Belgians by some power above the ordinary law of 
the land. This is an idea utterly alien to English 
modes of thought, since with us freedom of person is 
not a special privilege but the outcome of the ordinary 
law of the land enforced by the Courts. Here, in 
short, we may observe the application to a particular 
case of the general principle that with us individual 
rights are the basis, not the result, of the law of the 
constitution. 

The proclamation in a constitution or charter of 
the right to personal freedom, or indeed of any other 
right, gives of itself but slight security that the right 
has more than a nominal existence, and students who 
wish to know how far the right to freedom of person 
is in reality part of the law of the constitution must 
consider both what is the meaning of the right and, 
a matter of even more consequence, what are the 
legal methods by which its exercise is secured. 

The right to personal liberty as understood in 
England means in substance a person’s right not 
to be subjected to imprisonment, arrest, or other 

204 THE RULE OF LAW 

Part IL physical coercion in any manner that does not admit 
of legal justification. That anybody should suffer 
physical restraint is in England prima facie illegal, 
and can be justified (speaking in very general terms) 
on two grounds only, that is to say, either because 
the prisoner or person suffering restraint is accused of 
some offence and must be brought before the Courts 
to stand his trial, or because he has been duly con- 
victed of some offence and must suffer punishment 
for it. Now personal freedom in this sense of the 
term is secured in England by the strict maintenance 
of the principle that no man can be arrested or im- 
prisoned except in due course of law, 1.e. (speaking 
again in very general terms indeed) under some legal 
warrant or authority,’ and, what is of far more con- 
sequence, it is secured by the provision of adequate 
legal means for the enforcement of this principle. 
These methods are twofold;* namely, redress for 
unlawful arrest or imprisonment by means of a pro- 
secution or an action, and deliverance from unlawful 
imprisonment by means of the writ of habeas corpus. 
Let us examine the general character of each of these 
remedies. 

Proceed- i. Redress for Arrest.—If we use the term redress 
ings for : . 

wrongful iN & Wide sense, we may say that a person who has 
srs. suffered a wrong obtains redress either when he gets 

1 See as to arrests, Stephen, Commentaries, iv. (14th ed), pp. 
303-312. 

® Auother means by which personal Jiberty or other righta may 
be protected is the allowing a man to protect or assert his rights by 
force against a wrongdoer without incurring legal liability for injury 
done to the aggressor. The limite within which English law permits 
so-called “self-defence,” or, more accurately, “the assertion of legal 
rights by the use of a person’s own force,” is one of the obscurest legal 
questions. See Appendix, Note IV., Right of Self-Defence. 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 205 

the wrongdoer punished or when he obtains compensa- 
tion for the damage inflicted upon him by the wrong. 

Each of these forms of redress is in England open 
to every one whose personal freedom has been in any 
way unlawfully interfered with. Suppose, for ex- 
ample, that X without legal justification assaults A, 
by knocking him down, or deprives A of his freedom— 
as the technical expression goes, “imprisons” him— 
whether it be for a length of time, or only for five 
minutes; A has two courses open to him. He can 
have X convicted of an assault and thus cause him to 
be punished for his crime, or he can bring an action 
of trespass against X and obtain from X such com- 
pensation for the damage which 4 has sustained from 
X’s conduct as a jury think that A deserves. Sup- 
pose that in 1725 Voltaire had at the instigation of 
an English lord been treated in London as he was 
treated in Paris. He would not have needed to 
depend for redress upon the goodwill of his friends 
or upon the favour of the Ministry. He could have 
pursued one of two courses. He could by taking 
the proper steps have caused all his assailants to be 
brought to trial as criminals. He could, if he had 
preferred it, have brought an action against each and 
all of them: he could have sued the nobleman who 
caused him to be thrashed, the footmen who thrashed 
him, the policemen who threw him into gaol, and the 
gaoler or lieutenant who kept him there. Notice 
particularly that the action for trespass, to which 
Voltaire would have had recourse, can be brought, 
or, as the technical expression goes, “lies,” against 
every person throughout the realm. It can and has 
been brought against governors of colonies, against 

Chapte 

Part 1. 

206 THE RULE OF LAW 

secretaries of state, against officers who have tried 

_by Court-martial persons not subject to military law, 

against every kind of official high or low. Here then 
we come across another aspect of the “rule of law.” 
No one of Voltaire’s enemies would, if he had been 
injured in England, have been able to escape from 
responsibility on the plea of acting in an official 
character or in obedience to his official superiors.’ 
Nor would any one of them have been able to say 
that the degree of his guilt could in any way whatever 
be determined by any more or less official Court. 
Voltaire, to keep to our example, would have been 
able in England to have brought each and all of his 
assailants, including the officials who kept him in 
prison, before an ordinary Court, and therefore before 
judges and jurymen who were not at all likely to think 
that official zeal or the orders of officia] superiors were 
either a legal or a moral excuse for breaking the law. 

Before quitting the subject of the redress afforded 
by the Courts for the damage caused by illegal inter- 
ference with any one’s personal freedom, we shall do 
well to notice the strict adherence of the judges in 
this as in other cases to two maxims or principles 
which underlie the whole law of the constitution, and 
the maintenance of which has gone a great way both 
to ensure the supremacy of the law of the land and 
ultimately to curb the arbitrariness of the Crown. 
The first of these maxims or principles is that every 
wrongdoer is individually responsible for every unlaw- 
ful or wrongful act in which he takes part, and, what 
is really the same thing looked at from another point 
of view, cannot, if the act be unlawful, plead in his 

1 Contrast the French Code Pénal, art. 114. 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 207 

defence that he did it under the orders of a master 
or superior. Voltaire, had he been arrested in Eng- 
land, could have treated each and all of the persons 
engaged in the outrage as individually responsible for 
the wrong done to him. Now this doctrine of indi- 
vidual responsibility is the real foundation of the 
legal dogma that the orders of the King himself are 
no justification for the commission of a wrongful or 
illegal act. The ordinary rule, therefore, that every 
wrongdoer is individually liable for the wrong he has 
committed, is the foundation on which rests the 
great constitutional doctrine of Ministerial responsi- 
bility. The second of these noteworthy maxims is, 
that the Courts give a remedy for the infringement 
_ of a right whether the injury done be great or small. 
The assaults and imprisonment from which Voltaire 
suffered were serious wrongs; but it would be an 
error to fancy, as persons who have no experience in 
the practice of the Courts are apt to do, that pro- 
ceedings for trespass or for false imprisonment can be 
taken only where personal liberty is seriously inter- 
fered with. Ninety-nine out of every hundred 
actions for assault or false imprisonment have refer- 
ence to injuries which in themselves are trifling. If 
one ruffian gives another a blow, if a policeman makes 
an arrest without lawful authority, if a schoolmaster 
keeps a scholar locked up at school for half an hour 
after he ought to have let the child go home,’ if 
in short X interferes unlawfully to however slight a 
degree with the personal liberty of A, the offender 
exposes himself to proceedings in a Court of law, 
and the sufferer, if he can enlist the sympathies of 
1 Hunter v. Johnson, 13 Q. B. D. 225. 

Chapter 

208 THE RULE OF LAW 

a jury, may recover heavy damages for the injury 
which he has or is supposed to have suffered. The 
law of England protects the right to personal liberty, 
as also every other legal right, against every kind of 
infringement, and gives the same kind of redress (I 
do not mean, of course, inflicts the same degree of 
punishment or penalty) for the pettiest as for the 
gravest invasions of personal freedom. This seems to 
us so much a matter of course as hardly to call for 
observation, but it may be suspected that few features 
in our legal system have done more to maintain the 
authority of the law than the fact that all offences 
great and small are dealt with on the same principles 
and by the same Courts. The law of England now 
knows nothing of exceptional offences punished by . 
extraordinary tribunals.’ 

The right of a person who has been wrongfully 
imprisoned on regaining his freedom to put his 
oppressor on trial as a criminal, or by means of an 
action to obtain pecuniary compensation for the 
wrong which he has endured, affords a most insuffi- 
cient security for personal freedom. If X keeps A 
in confinement, it profits A little to know that if he 
could recover his freedom, which he cannot, he could 
punish and fine X. What A wants is to recover his 
liberty. Till this is done he cannot hope to punish 
the foe who has deprived him of it. It would have 
been little consolation for Voltaire to know that if he 
could have got out of the Bastille he could recover 
damages from his enemies. The possibility that he 

1 Contrast with this the extraordinary remedies adopted under the 
old French monarchy for the punishment of powerful criminals, As 
to which eee Fléchier, Mémoires sur les Grand-Jours tenues a Clermont 
en 1665-66. 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 209 

might when he got free have obtained redress for 
the wrong done him might, so far from being a 
benefit, have condemned him to lifelong incarcera- 
tion. Liberty is not secure unless the law, in addi- 
tion to punishing every kind of interference with a 
man’s lawful freedom, provides adequate security that 
every one who without legal justification is placed in 
confinement shall be able to get free. This security 
is provided by the celebrated writ of habeas corpus 
and the Habeas Corpus Acts. 
"il, Writ of Habeas Corpus.\—It is not within 
the scope of these lectures to give a history of the 
writ of habeas corpus or to provide the details of the 
legislation with regard to it. For minute informa- 
tion, both about the writ and about the Habeas Corpus 
Acts, you should consult the ordinary legal text-books. 
My object is solely to explain generally the mode in 
which the law of England secures the right to per- 
sonal freedom. I shall therefore call attention to 
the following points: first, the nature of the writ; 
secondly, the effect of the so-called Habeas Corpus 
Acts; thirdly, the precise effect of what is called 
(not quite accurately) the Suspension of the Habeas 
Corpus Act; and, lastly, the relation of any Act 
suspending the operation of the Habeas Corpus Act 
to an Act of Indemnity. Each of these matters has 
a close bearing on the law of the constitution. 
Nature of Writ.—Legal documents constantly give 
the best explanation and illustration of legal prin- 
ciples. We shall do well therefore to examine with 
care the following copy of a writ of habeas corpus :— 

1 See Stephen, Commentaries (14thed.), iii. pp.697-707 ; 16 Car. I.c.10 ; 
31 Car. II. c.2; 56 George III. c. 100; Forsyth, Opinions, 436-452, 481. 
Pe 

Chapter 

Writ of 
habeas 

corpus. 

Nature of 
Writ. 

Part IL 

210 THE RULE OF LAW 

“Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the United 
“ Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen, 
“ Defender of the Faith, 

“To J. K., Keeper of our Gaol of Jersey, in the 
“Island of Jersey, and to J. C. Viscount of sad 
“Island, greeting. We command you that you have 
“ the body of C. C. W. detained in our prison under 
“your custody, as it is said, together with the day 
“and cause of his being taken and detained, by 
“whatsoever name he may be called or known, in 
“our Court before us, at Westminster, on the 18th 
“day of January next, to undergo and receive all 
‘‘and singular such matters and things which our 
‘said Court shall then and there consider of him in 
“this behalf; and have there then this Writ. Witness 
“Tomas Lord Denman, at Westminster, the 23rd 
‘day of December in the 8th year of our reign. 

“ By the Court, 
** Robinson,” * 
“At the instance of C. C. W. 
ft. MOR. © 

“W. A. L., 7 Gray's Inn Square, London, 
“« Attorney for the said C. C. W.” 

The character of the document is patent on its 
face. It is an order issued, in the particular instance, 
by the Court of Queen’s Bench, calling upon a person 
by whom a prisoner is alleged to be kept in confine- 
ment to bring such prisoner—to “have his body,” 

1 Carus Wilson’s Case, 7 Q. B. 984, 988. In this particular case 
the writ calls upon the gaoler of the prison to have the body of the 
prisoner before the Court by a given day. It more ordinarily calls 

upon him to have the prisoner before the Court “immediately after 
the receipt of this writ.” 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 211 

whence the name habeas corpus—before the Court to 
let the Court know on what ground the prisoner is 
confined, and thus to give the Court the opportunity 
of dealing with the prisoner as the law may require. 
The essence of the whole transaction is that the Court 
ean by the writ of habeas corpus cause any person 
who is imprisoned to be actually brought before the 
Court and obtain knowledge of the reason why he is 
imprisoned ; and then having him before the Court, 
either then and there set him free or else see that he 
is dealt with in whatever way the law requires, as, 
for example, brought speedily to trial. 

The writ can be issued on the application either of 
the prisoner himself or of any person on his behalf, 
or (supposing the prisoner cannot act) then on the 
application of any person who believes him to be 
unlawfully imprisoned. It is issued by the High 
Court, or during vacation by any judge thereof; and 
the Court or a judge should and will always cause 
it to be issued on being satisfied by affidavit that 
there is reason to suppose a prisoner to be wrongfully 
deprived of his liberty. You cannot say with strict- 
ness that the writ is issued “as a matter of course,” 
for some ground must be shown for supposing that a 

case of illegal imprisonment exists. But the writ is 

granted “asa matter of right,”—that is to say, the 
Court will always issue it if prima facie ground is 
- shown for supposing that the person on whose behalf 
it is asked for is unlawfully deprived of his liberty. 
The writ or order of the Court can be addressed to 
any person whatever, be he an official or a private 
individual, who has, or is supposed to have, another 
in his custody. Any disobedience to the writ exposes 

Chapter 

212 THE RULE OF LAW 
a eg es er ee ee 
Part I. the offender to summary punishment for contempt of 
——~ Court,! and also in many cases to heavy penalties 
recoverable by the party aggrieved.*? To put the 
matter, therefore, in the most general terms, the case 
stands thus. The High Court of Justice possesses, 
as the tribunals which make up the High Court used 
to possess, the power by means of the writ of habeas 
corpus to cause any person who is alleged to be kept 
in unlawful confinement to be brought before the 
Court. The Court can then inquire into the reason 
why he is confined, and can, should it see fit, set him 
then and there at liberty. This power moreover is 
one which the Court always will exercise whenever 
ground is shown by any applicant whatever for the 
belief that any man in England is unlawfully deprived 
of his liberty. 
Habeas The Habeas Corpus Acts.—The right to the writ 
Acta. of habeas corpus existed at common law long before 
the passing in 1679 of the celebrated Habeas Corpus 
Act,’ 31 Car. II. c. 2, and you may wonder how 
it has happened that this and the subsequent Act, 
56 Geo. III. c. 100, are treated, and (for practical 
purposes) rightly treated, as the basis on which rests 
an Englishman’s security for the enjoyment of his 
personal freedom. The explanation is, that prior to 
1679 the right to the writ was often under various 
pleas and excuses made of no effect. The aim of the 
Habeas Corpus Acts has been to meet all the devices 
by which the effect of the writ can be evaded, either 
on the part of the judges, who ought to issue the 

1 Rex v. Winton, 5 T. R. 89, and conf. 56 Geo. III. c. 100, 8 2; 
see Corner, Practice of the Crown Side of the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
2 31 Car. II. c. 2, 8. 4. 8 See also 16 Car. I. c. 10, 8. 6. 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 213 
eee 

same, and if necessary discharge the prisoner, or on Chapter 
the part of the gaoler or other person who has the _: 
prisoner in custody. The earlier Act of Charles the 
Second applies to persons imprisoned on a charge of 
crime ; the later Act of George the Third applies to 
persons deprived of their liberty otherwise than on a 
criminal accusation. 

Take these two classes of persons separately. 

A person is imprisoned on a charge of crime. If Habeas 
he is imprisoned without any legal warrant for his 167, 81 
imprisonment, he has a right to be set at liberty. If, eat 
on the other hand, he is imprisoned under a legal 
warrant, the object of his detention is to ensure his 
being brought to trial. His position in this case 
differs according to the nature of the offence with 
which he is charged. In the case of the lighter 
offences known as misdemeanours he has, generally 
speaking,’ the right to his liberty on giving security 
with proper sureties that he will in due course sur- 
render himself to custody and appear and take his 
trial on such indictment as may be found against him 
in respect of the matter with which he is charged, or 
(to use technical expressions) he has the right to be 
admitted to bail. In the case, on the other hand, of 
the more serious offences, such as felonies or treasons, 

a person who is once committed to prison is not en- 
titled to be let out on bail. The right of the prisoner 
is in this case simply the right to a speedy trial. 
The effect of the writ of habeas corpus would be evaded 
either if the Court did not examine into the validity of 

1 See Stephen, Digest of the Law of Criminal Procedure, art. 276, 
note 1, and also art. 136 and p. 89, note 1. Compare the Indictable 
Offences Act, 1848 (11 & 12 Vict. c, 42), 8, 23. 

Part IL. 

214 : THE RULE OF LAW 

iui i hn ahem 
the warrant on which the prisoner was detained, and if 
the warrant were not valid release him, or if the Court, 
on ascertaining that he was legally imprisoned, did not 
cause him according to circumstances either to go out 
on bail or to be speedily brought to trial. 

The Act provides against all these possible failures 
of justice. The law as to persons imprisoned under 
accusations of crime stands through the combined 
effect of the rules of the common law and of the 
statute in substance as follows. The gaoler who has 
such person in custody is bound when called upon to 
have the prisoner before the Court with the true 
cause of his commitment. If the cause is insufficient, 
the prisoner must of course be discharged; if the 
cause is sufficient, the prisoner, in case he is charged 
with a misdemeanour, can in general insist upon 
being bailed till trial; in case, on the other hand, the 
charge is one of treason or felony, he can insist upon 
being tried at the first sessions after his committal, 
or if he is not then tried, upon being bailed, unless 
the witnesses for the Crown cannot appear. If 
he is not tried at the second sessions after his 
commitment, he can insist upon his release without 
bail. The net result, therefore, appears to be that 
while the Habeas Corpus Act is in force no person 
committed to prison on a charge of crime can be kept 
long in confinement, for he has the legal means of 
insisting upon either being let out upon bail or else 
of being brought to a speedy trial. 

A person, again, who is detained in confinement 

’ but not on a charge of crime needs for his protection 

the means of readily obtaining a legal decision on 
the lawfulness of his confinement, and also of getting 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 215 

an immediate release if he has by law a right to his 
liberty. This is exactly what the writ of habeas 
corpus affords. Whenever any Englishman or foreigner 
is alleged to be wrongfully deprived of liberty, 
the Court will issue the writ, have the person 
aggrieved brought before the Court, and if he has 
a night to liberty set him free. Thus if a child is 
forcibly kept apart from his parents,’ if a man is 
wrongfully kept in confinement as a lunatic, if a nun 
is alleged to be prevented from leaving her convent, 
—if, in short, any man, woman, or child is, or is 
asserted on apparently good grounds to be, deprived 
of liberty, the Court will always issue a writ of 
habeas corpus to any one who has the aggrieved 
person in his custody to have such person brought 
before the Court, and if he is suffering restraint with- 
out lawful cause, set him free. Till, however, the year 
1816 (56 Geo. III.) the machinery for obtaining the writ 
was less perfect * in the case of persons not accused of 
crime than in the case of those charged with criminal 
offences, and the effect of 56 Geo. III. c. 100, was in 

1 See The Queen v. Nash, 10 Q. B. D. (C. A.) 454; and compare 
Re Agar-Ellis, 24 Ch. D. (C. A.) 317. For recent instances of effect of 
Habeas Corpus Act see Barnardo v. Ford [1892], A. C. 326 ; Barnardo 

v. McHugh [1891], A. C. 388 ; Reg. v. Jackson [1891], 1 Q. B. (C. A.) - 

671; Cox v. Hakes, 15 App. Cas. 506 ; Reg. v. Barnardo, 24 Q. B. D. 
(C. A.) 283; and 23 Q. B. D. (C. A.) 305. Compare as to. power of 
Court of Chancery for protection of children independently of Habeas 
Corpus Acts, Reg. v. Gyngall [1893], 2 Q. B. (C. A.) 232. 

As to appeal to Privy Council, see Att. Gen. for Hong Kong v. 
Kvwok-A-Sing (1873), L. R. 5 P. C. 179. 

2 The inconvenience ultimately remedied by the Habeas Corpus 
Act, 1816, was in practice small, for the judges extended to all cases 

of unlawful imprisonment the spirit of the Habeas Corpus Act, 1679, 

and enforced immediate obedience to the writ of habeas corpus, even 
when issued not under the statute, but under the common law authority 
of the Courte. Blackstone, Comm. iii. p. 138. 

Chap 

Part I. 

216 THE RULE OF LAW 

substance to apply to non-criminal cases the machinery 
of the great Habeas Corpus Act, 31 Car. II. « 2. 

At the present day, therefore, the securities for 
personal freedom are in England as complete as 
laws can make them. The right to its enjoyment is 
absolutely acknowledged. Any invasion of the right 
entails either imprisonment or fine upon the wrong- 
doer; and any person, whether charged with crime 
or not, who is even suspected to be wrongfully im- 
prisoned, has, if there exists a single individual willing 
to exert himself on the victim’s behalf, the certainty of 
having his case duly investigated, and, if he has been 
wronged, of recovering his freedom. Let us return - 
for a moment to a former illustration, and suppose 
that Voltaire has been treated in London as he was 
treated in Paris. He most certainly would very 
rapidly have recovered his freedom. The procedure 
would not, it is true, have been in 1726 quite as easy 
as it is now under the Act of George the Third. Still, 
even then it would have been within the power of 
any one of his friends to put the law in motion. It 
would have been at least as easy to release Voltaire in 
1726 as it was in 1772 to obtain by means of habeas 
corpus the freedom of the slave James Sommersett 
when actually confined in irons on board a ship lying 
in the Thames and bound for Jamaica.? 

The whole history of the writ of habeas corpus 
illustrates the predominant attention paid under the 
English constitution to ‘ remedies,” that is, to modes 
of procedure by which to secure respect for a legal 
right, and by which to turn a merely nominal into 
an effective or real right. The Habeas Corpus Acts 

1 Sommersett’s Case, 20 St. Tr. 1. 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 217 

are essentially procedure Acts, and simply aim at 
improving the legal mechanism by means of which 
the acknowledged right to personal freedom may be 
enforced. They are intended, as is generally the case 
with legislation which proceeds under the influence 
of lawyers, simply to meet actual and experienced 
difficulties. Hence the Habeas Corpus Act of Charles 
the Second’s reign was an imperfect or very restricted 
piece of legislative work, and Englishmen waited 
nearly a century and a half (1679-1816) before the 
procedure for securing the right to discharge from 
unlawful confinement was made complete. But this 
lawyer-like mode of dealing with a fundamental right 
had with all its defects the one great merit that 
legislation was directed to the mght point. There 
is no difficulty, and there is often very little gain, in 
declaring the existence of a right to personal freedom. 
The true difficulty is to secure its enforcement. The 
Habeas Corpus Acts have achieved this end, and 
have therefore done for the liberty of Englishmen 
more than could have been achieved by any declara- 
tion of rights. One may even venture to say that 
these Acts are of really more importance not only 
than the general proclamations of the Rights of Man 
which have often been put forward in foreign countries, 
but even than such very lawyer-like documents as the 
Petition of Right or the Bill of Rights, though these 
celebrated enactments show almost equally with the 
Habeas Corpus Act that the law of the English 
constitution is at bottom judge-made law." 

1 Compare Imperial Constitution of 1804, sa. 60-63, under which 
a committee of the Senate was empowered to take steps for putting an 
end to illegal arrests by the Government. See Plouard, Les Constitu- 

tions Frangatses, p. 161. 

Chapter 
Vv. 

Part Il. 

Effect of 
writ of 
habeas 
on 
authority 
of judges, 

218 THE RULE OF LAW 

Every critic of the constitution has observed the 
effect of the Habeas Corpus Acts in securing the 
liberty of the subject; what has received less and 
deserves as much attention is the way in which the 
right to issue a writ of habeas corpus, strengthened 
as that right is by statute, determines the whole 
relation of the judicial body towards the executive. 
The authority to enforce obedience to the writ is 
nothing less than the power to release from imprison- 
ment any person who in the opinion of the Court is 
unlawfully deprived of his liberty, and hence in effect 
to put an end to or to prevent any punishment which 
the Crown or its servants may attempt to inflict in 
opposition to the rules of law as interpreted by the 
judges. The judges therefore are in truth, though 
not in name, invested with the means of hampering 
or supervising the whole administrative action of the 
government, and of at once putting a veto upon any 
proceeding not authorised by the letter of the law. 
Nor is this power one which has fallen into disuse by 
want of exercise. It has often been put forth, and 
this too in matters of the greatest consequence ; the 
knowledge moreover of its existence governs the con- 
duct of the administration. An example or two will 
best show the mode in which the “judiciary” (to use 
a convenient Americanism) can and do by means 
of the writ of habeas corpus keep a hold on the acts 
of the executive. In 1839 Canadian rebels, found 
guilty of treason in Canada and condemned to trans- 
portation, arrived in official custody at Liverpool on 
their way to Van Diemen’s Land. The friends of the 
convicts questioned the validity of the sentence under 
which they were transported: the prisoners were 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 219 
ee ene I ae EE 8 hot et oe gs 
thereupon taken from prison and brought upon a writ 
of habeas corpus before the Court of Exchequer. 
Their whole position having been considered by the 
Court, it was ultimately held that the imprisonment 
was legal. But had the Court taken a different view, 
the Canadians would at once have been released from 
confinement.’ In 1859 an English officer serving 
in India was duly convicted of manslaughter and 
sentenced to four years’ imprisonment: he was sent 
to England in military custody to complete there his 
term of punishment. The order under‘which he was 
brought to this country was technically irregular, and 
the convict having been brought on a writ of habeas 
corpus before the Queen’s Bench, was on this purely 
technical ground set at liberty.? So, to take a very 
notorious instance of judicial authority in matters 
most nearly concerning the executive, the Courts have 
again and again considered, in the case of persons 
brought before them by the writ of habeas corpus, 
questions as to the legality of impressment, and as to 
the limits within which the right of impressment may 
be exercised; and if, on the one hand, the judges 
have in this particular instance (which by the way is 
almost a singular one) supported the arbitrary powers 
of the prerogative, they have also strictly limited the 
exercise of this power within the bounds prescribed 
to it by custom or by statute.’ Moreover, as already 
pointed out, the authority of the civil tribunals even 

1 The Case of the Canadian Prisoners, 5 M. & W. 32. 

2 In re Allen, 30 L. J. (Q. B), 38. 

8 See Case of Pressing Mariners, 18 St. Tr. 1323 ; Stephen, Com- 
mentaries, ii. (14th ed.), p. 574; conf. Corner, Forms of W rits on Crown 
Side of Court of Queen’s Bench, for form of habeas corpus for an impressed 
seaman, 

Chapter 
Vv. 

Part I. 

220 THE RULE OF LAW 

rcs ab i ee 
when not actually put into force regulates the action 
of the government. In 1854 body of Russian sailors 
were found wandering about the streets of Guildford, 
without any visible means of subsistence; they were 
identified by a Russian naval officer as deserters from 
a Russian man-of-war which had put into an English 
port; they were thereupon, under his instructions 
and with the assistance of the superintendent of 
police, conveyed to Portsmouth for the purpose of 
their being carried back to the Russian ship. Doubts 
arose as to the legality of the whole proceeding. The 

’ law officers were consulted, who thereupon gave it as 

their opinion that “the delivering-up of the Russian 
‘sailors to the Lieutenant and the assistance offered 
“by the police for the purpose of their being con- 
‘veyed back to the Russian ship were contrary to 
‘“‘law.”? The sailors were presumably released ; they 
no doubt would have been delivered by the Court 
had a writ of habeas corpus been applied for. Here 
then we see the judges in effect restraining the action 
of the executive in a matter which in most countries 
is considered one of administration or of policy lying 
beyond the range of judicial interference. The 
strongest examples, however, of interference by the 
judges with administrative proceedings are to be 
found in the decisions given under the Extradition 
Acts. Neither the Crown nor any servant of the 
Crown has any right to expel a foreign criminal 
from the country or to surrender him to his own 
government for trial.” A French forger, robber, or 

1 See Forsyth, Opinions, p. 468. 
See, however, Rex v. Lundy, 2 Ventris, 314; Rez v. Kimberley, 
2 Stra., 848 ; East India Company v. Campbell, 1 Vea. Senr., 246; 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 221 
a EE ee 
murderer who escapes from France to England 
cannot, independently of statutory enactments, be 
sent back to his native land for trial or punishment. 
The absence of any power on the part of the Crown 
to surrender foreign criminals to the authorities of 
their own state has been found so inconvenient, that 
in recent times Extradition Acts have empowered the 
Crown to make treaties with foreign states for the 
mutual extradition of criminals or of persons charged 
with crime. The exercise of this authority is, how- 
ever, hampered by restrictions which are imposed by 
the statute under which alone it exists. It therefore 
often happens that an offender arrested under the 
warrant of a Secretary of State and about to be 
handed over to the authorities of his own country 
conceives that, on some ground or other, his case 
does not fall within the precise terms of any Extra- 
dition Act. He applies for a writ of habeas corpus ; 
he is brought up before the High Court; every 
technical plea he can raise obtains full consideration,’ 

Mure v. Kaye, 4 Taunt. 34; and Chitty, Criminal Law (1826), pp. 14, 
16, in support of the opinion that the Crown possessed a common law 
right of extradition as regards foreign criminals. This opinion may 
possibly once have been correct. (Compare, however, Reg. v. Bernard, 
Annual Register for 1858, p. 328, for opinion of Campbell, C. J., cited 
In re Castions [1891], 1 Q. B. 149, 153, by Sir C. Russell, arguendo.) 
It has, however, in any case (to use the words of a high authority) 
“ceased to be law now. If any magistrate were now to arrest a 
‘person on this ground, the validity of the commitment would 
“certainly be tested, and, in the absence of special legislative provi- 
“gions, the prisoner as certainly discharged upon application to one 
‘of the superior Courts,”—Clarke, Extradition (3rd ed.), p. 27. The 
case of Musgrove v. Chun Teeong Toy [1891], A. C. 272, which 
establishes that an alien has not a legal right, enforceable by action, 
to enter British territory, suggests the possible existence of a common 
law right on the part of the Crown to expel an alien from British 
territory. 
1 In re Bellencontre [1891], 2 Q. B. 122. 

Chapter 

Part IL 

222 THE RULE OF LAW 

and if on any ground whatever it can be shown that 
the terms of the Extradition Act have not been 
complied with, or that they do not justify his arrest 
and surrender, he is as a matter of course at once set 
at liberty.1 It is easy to perceive that the authority 
of the judges, exercised, as it invariably must be, in 
support of the strict.rules of law, cuts down the 
discretionary powers of the Crown. It often prevents 
the English government from meeting public danger 
by measures of precaution which would as a matter 
of course be taken by the executive of any con- 
tinental country. Suppose, for example, that a body 
of foreign anarchists come to England and are 
thought by the police on strong grounds of suspicion 
to be engaged in a plot, say for blowing up the 
Houses of Parliament. Suppose also that the exist- 
ence of the conspiracy does not admit of absolute 
proof. An English Minister, if he is not prepared 
to put the conspirators on their trial, has no means 
of arresting them, or of expelling them from the 
country.? In case of arrest or imprisonment they 
would at once be brought before the High Court 
on a writ of habeas corpus, and unless some specific 
legal ground for their detention could be shown they 
would be forthwith set at liberty. Of the political 
or, to use foreign expressions, of the “‘ administrative ” 
reasons which might make the arrest or expulsion of 
a foreign refugee highly expedient, the judges would 
hear nothing; that he was arrested by order of the 
Secretary of State, that his imprisonment was a 

1 In re Coppin, L. R. 2 Ch. 47; The Queen v. Wilson, 3 Q. B. D. 42. 

2 Contrast the dealings of Louis Philippe’s Government in 1833 

with the Duchesse de Berry, for which see Grégoire, Histoire de France, 
i, pp. 356-361. 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 223 

simple administrative act, that the Prime Minister or 
the Home Secretary was prepared to make affidavit 
that the arrest was demanded by the most urgent 
considerations of public safety, or to assure the Court 
that the whole matter was one of high policy and 
concerned national interests, would be no answer 
whatever to the demand for freedom under a writ 
of habeas corpus. All that any judge could inquire 
into would be, whether there was any rule of common 
or of statute law which would authorise interference 
with a foreigner’s personal freedom. If none such 
could be found, the applicants would assuredly obtain 
their liberty. The plain truth is that the power 
possessed by the judges of controlling the administra- 
tive conduct of the executive has been, of necessity, 
so exercised as to prevent the development with us 
of any system corresponding to the ‘‘ administrative 
law ” of continental states. It strikes at the root of 
those theories as to the nature of administrative 
acts, and as to the “separation of powers,” on 
which, as will be shown in a later chapter,’ the drovt 
administratif of France depends, and it deprives the 
Crown, which now means the Ministry of the day, 
of all discretionary authority. The actual or possible 
intervention, in short, of the Courts, exercisable for 
the most part by means of the writ of habeas corpus, 
confines the action of the government within the 
strict letter of the law ; with us the state can punish, 
but it can hardly prevent the commission of crimes. 
We can now see why it was that the political con- 
flicts of the seventeenth century often raged round 
the position of the judges, and why the battle might 
1 See Chap. XII. 

Chapter 

Contests 
of seven- 
teenth 
century 
about 
position of 
judges. 

Suspension 
of Habeas 

Corpus 
Act. 

224 THE RULE OF LAW 

oe 

. turn on a point so technical as the inquiry, what 

might be a proper return to a writ of habeas corpus. 
Upon the degree of authority and independence to be 
conceded to the Bench depended the colour and work- 
ing of our institutions. To supporters, on the one 
hand, of the prerogative who, like Bacon, were not 
unfrequently innovators or reformers, judicial inde- 
pendence appeared to mean the weakness of the 
executive, and the predominance throughout the state 
of the conservative legalism, which found a repre- 
sentative in Coke. The Parliamentary leaders, on 
the other hand, saw, more or less distinctly, that the 
independence of the Bench was the sole security 
for the maintenance of the common law, which was 
nothing else than the rule of established customs 
modified only by Acts of Parliament, and that Coke in 
battling for the power of the judges was asserting the 
rights of the nation; they possibly also saw, though 
this is uncertain, that the maintenance of rigid 
legality, inconvenient as it might sometimes prove, 
was the certain road to Parliamentary sovereignty.” 
Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act.—During 
periods of political excitement the power or duty of 
the Courts to issue a writ of habeas corpus, and 
thereby compel the speedy trial or release of persons 
charged with crime, has been found an inconvenient 
or dangerous limitation on the authority of the 
executive government. Hence has arisen the occa- 
sion for statutes which are popularly called Habeas 
Corpus Suspension Acts. I say “ popularly called,” 

1 Darnel’s Case, 3 St. Tr. 1. 

2 See Gardiner, History of England, ii. chap. xxii, for an admir- 
able statement of the different views entertained as to the position of 
the judges. 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 225 

because if you take (as you may) the Act 34 Geo. III. 
c. 54" as a type of such enactments, you will see 
that it hardly corresponds with its received name. 
The whole effect of the Act, which does not even 
mention the Habeas Corpus Act, is to make it im- 
possible for any person imprisoned under a warrant 
signed by a Secretary of State on a charge of high 
treason, or on suspicion of high treason, to insist 
upon being either discharged or put on trial. No 
doubt this is a great diminution in the securities for 

1 Of which s. 1 enacts “ that every person or persons that are or 
“shall be in prison within the kingdom of Great Britain at or upon 
“the day on which this Act shall receive his Majesty’s royal assent, 
“for after, by warrant of his said Majesty’s most honorable Privy 
* Council, signed by six of the said Privy Council, for high treason, 
“ suspicion of high treason, or treasonable practices, or by warrant, 
“signed by sny of his Majesty’s secretaries of state, for such causes 
‘* as aforesaid, may be detained in safe custody, without bail or main- 
“prize, until the first day of February one thousand seven hundred 
“and ninety-five ; and that no judge or justice of the peace shall bail 
“or try any such person or persons 80 committed, without order from 
“his said Majesty’s Privy Council, signed by six of the said Privy 
“Council, till the said first day of February one thousand seven 
“hundred and ninety-five; any law or statute to the contrary 
“ notwithatanding.” 

The so-called suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act under a statute 
such as 34 Geo, III. c. 54, produces both less and more effect than 
would the total repeal of the Habeas Corpus Acts. The suspension, while 
it lasts, makes it possible for the government to arrest and keep in 
prison any persons declared in effect by the government to be guilty 
or suspected of treasonable practices, and such persons have no means 
of obtaining either a discharge or a trial. But the suspension does 
not affect the position of persons not detained in custody under 

suspicion of treasonable practices. It does not therefore touch the - 

ordinary liberty of ordinary citizens. The repeal of the Habeas 
Corpus Acta, on the other hand, would deprive every man in England 
of one security against wrongful imprisonment, but since it would 
leave alive the now unquestionable authority of the judges to issue 
and compel obedience to a writ of habeas corpus at common Jaw, it 
would not, assuming the Bench to do their duty, increase the power 
of the government to imprison persons suspected of treasonable 
practices, nor materially diminish the freedom of any class of English- 
men. Compare Blackstone, Comm. iii. p. 138. ; 

Q 

Part I. 

226 THE RULE OF LAW 

personal freedom provided by the Habeas Corpus 
Acts; but it falls very far short of anything like a 
general suspension of the right to the writ of habeas 
corpus; it in no way affects the privileges of any 
person not imprisoned on a charge of high treason ; 
it does not legalise any arrest, imprisonment, or 
punishment which was not lawful before the Sus- 
pension Act passed; itdoes not in any wise touch 
the claim to a writ of habeas corpus possessed by 
every one, man, woman, or child, who is held in 
confinement otherwise than on a charge of crime. 
The particular statute 34 Geo. III. c. 54 is, and (I 
believe) every other Habeas Corpus Suspension Act 
affecting England, has been an annual Act, and must, 
therefore, if it is to continue in force, be renewed 
year by year. The sole, immediate, and direct 
result, therefore, of suspending the Habeas Corpus 
Act is this: the Ministry may for the period 
during which the Suspension Act continues in force 
constantly defer the trial of persons imprisoned on 
the charge of treasonable practices. This increase in 
the power of the executive is no trifle, but it falls 
far short of the process known in some foreign coun- 
tries as “suspending the constitutional guarantees,” 
or in France as the ‘proclamation of a state of 
siege”; it, indeed, extends the arbitrary powers of the 
government to a far less degree than many so-called 
Coercion Acts. That this is so may be seen by a 
mere enumeration of the chief of the extraordinary 
powers which were conferred by comparatively recent 

1 See Duguit, Manuel de Droit Constitutionnel, pp. 510-513, and 
article “Etat de Sitge” in Chéruel, Dictionnaire Historique des 
Institutions de la France (6th ed.). 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 227 
ee ee BONE SE FREI FROM 
enactments on the Irish executive. Under the Act of 
1881 (44 Vict. c. 4) the Irish executive obtained the 
absolute power of arbitrary and preventive arrest, 
and could without breach of law detain in prison any 
person arrested on suspicion for the whole period for 
which the Act continued in force. It is true that 
the Lord Lieutenant could arrest only persons sus- 
pected of treason or -of the commission’ of some act 
tending to interfere with the maintenance of law 
and order. But as the warrant itself to be issued 
by the Lord Lieutenant was made under the 
Act conclusive evidence of all matters contained 
therein, and therefore (inter alia) of the truth 
of the assertion that the arrested person or “sus- 
pect” was reasonably suspected, e.g. of treason- 
oble practices, and therefore liable to arrest, the 
result clearly followed that neither the Lord Lieu- 
tenant nor any official acting under him could by any 
possibility be made liable to any legal penalty for 
any arrest, however groundless or malicious, made in 
due form within the words of the Act. The Irish 
government, therefore, could arrest any person whom 
the Lord Lieutenant thought fit to imprison, pro- 
vided only that the warrant was in the form and 
contained the allegations required by the statute. 
Under the Prevention of Crime (Ireland) Act,-1882— 
45 & 46 Vict. c. 25—the Irish executive was armed 
with the following (among other) extraordinary 
powers. The government could in the case of certain 
crimes’ abolish the right to trial by jury,’ could 

1 Viz. (a) treason or treason-felony ; (6) murder or manslaughter ; 
(c) attempt to murder; (d) aggravated crime of violence against the 
person ; (e) arson, whether by common law or by statute ; (/) attack 
on dwelling-house. 2 Sect. 1. 

Chapter 
Ve 

Part I. 

Act of In- 
demnity. 

ne THE RULE OF LAW 
ep oat ee Is Le e. 
arrest strangers found out of doors at night under 
suspicious circumstances,’ could seize any newspaper 
which, in the judgment of the Lord Lieutenant, con- 
tained matter inciting to treason or violence,’ and 
could prohibit any public meeting which the Lord 
Lieutenant believed to be dangerous to the public 
peace or safety. Add to this that the Prevention of 
Crime Act, 1882, re-enacted (incidentally as it were) 
the Alien Act of 1848, and thus empowered the 
British Ministry to expel from the United Kingdom 
any foreigner who had not before the passing of the 
Act been resident in the country for three years.’ 
Not one of these extraordinary powers flows directly 
from a mere suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act ; 
and, in truth, the best proof of the very limited 
legal effect of such so-called suspension is supplied 
by the fact that before a Habeas Corpus Suspension 
Act runs out its effect is, almost invariably, sup- 
plemented by legislation of a totally different char- 
acter, namely, an Act of Indemnity. 

An Act of Indemnity.—Reference has already 
been made to Acts of Indemnity as the supreme 
instance of Parliamentary sovereignty.‘ They are 
retrospective statutes which free persons who have 
broken the law from responsibility for its breach, and 
thus make lawful acts which when they were com- 
mitted were unlawful. It is easy enough to see the 
connection between a Habeas Corpus Suspension Act 
and an Act of Indemnity. The Suspension Act, as 
already pointed out, does not free any person from 
civil or criminal liability for a violation of the law. 

1 Sect. 12. , 2 Sect. 13. 8 Sect. 15. 
See pp. 47, 48, ante. 

is La 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 229 

Suppose that a Secretary of State or his subordinates 

should, during the suspension of the Habeas Corpus. 

Act, arrest and imprison a perfectly innocent man 
without any cause whatever, except (it may be) 
the belief that it is conducive to the public safety 
that the particular person—say, an influential party 
leader such as Wilkes, Fox, or O’Connell—should be 
at a particular crisis kept in prison; and thereby 
deprived of influence. Suppose, again, that an arrest 
should be made by orders of the Ministry under 
circumstances which involve the unlawful breaking 
into a private dwelling-house, the destruction of 
private property, or the like. In each of these in- 
stances, and in many others which might easily be 
imagined, the Secretary of State who orders the arrest 
and the officials who carry out his commands have 
broken the law. They may have acted under the 
bona fide belief that their conduct was justified by 
the necessity of providing for the maintenance of 
order. But this will not of itself, whether the 
Habeas Corpus Act be suspended or not, free the 
persons carrying out the arrests from criminal and 
civil liability for the wrong they have committed. 
The suspension, indeed, of the Habeas Corpus Act 
may prevent the person arrested from taking at the 
moment any proceedings against a Secretary of State 
or the officers who have acted under his orders. For 
the sufferer is of course imprisoned on the charge of 
high treason or suspicion of treason, and therefore 
will, not, while the suspension lasts, be able to get him- 
self discharged from prison. The moment, however, 
that the Suspension Act expires he can, of course, 
apply for a writ of habeas corpus, and ensure that, 

Chapter 

Part IL 

230 THE RULE OF LAW 

either by means of being put on his trial or otherwise, 

. his arbitrary imprisonment shall be brought to an end. 

In the cases we have supposed the prisoner has been 
guilty of no legal offence. The offenders are in reality 
the Secretary of State and his subordinates. The 
result is that on the expiration of the Suspension Act 
they are liable to actions or indictments for their 
illegal conduct, and can derive no defence whatever 
from the mere fact that, at the time when the unlaw- 
ful arrest took place, the Habeas Corpus Act was, 

partially at any rate, not in force. It is, however, 
almost certain that, when the suspension of the Habeas 
Corpus Act makes it possible for the government to 
keep suspected persons in prison for a length of time 
without bringing them to trial, a smaller or greater 
number of unlawful acts will be committed, if not 
by the members of the Ministry themselves, at any 
rate by their agents. We may even go farther than 
this, and say that the unavowed object of a Habeas 
Corpus Suspension Act is to enable the government 
to do acts which, though politically expedient, may 
not be strictly legal. The Parliament which destroys 
one of the main guarantees for individual freedom 
must hold, whether wisely or not, that a crisis has 
arisen when the nights of individuals must be post- 
poned to considerations of state. A Suspension Act 
would, in fact, fail of its main object, unless officials 
felt assured that, as long as they bona /ide, and 
uninfluenced by malice or by corrupt motives, carried 
out the policy of which the Act was the visible sign, 
they would be protected from penalties for conduct 
which, though it might be technically a breach of 
law, was nothing more than the free exertion for 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 231 

the public good of that discretionary power which 
the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act was in- 
tended to confer upon the executive. This assurance 
is derived from the expectation that, before the 
Suspension Act ceases to be in force, Parliament 
will pass an Act of Indemnity, protecting all persons 
who have acted, or have intended to act, under the 
powers given to the government by the statute. 
This expectation has not been disappointed. An Act 
suspending the Habeas Corpus Act, which has been 
continued for any length of time, has constantly been 
followed by an Act of Indemnity. Thus the Act to 
which reference has already been made, 34 Geo. III. 

Chapter 
We 

ce. 54, was continued in force by successive annual . 

re-enactments for seven years, from 1794 to 1801. In 
the latter year an Act was passed, 41 Geo. III. 
ce. 66, “‘indemnifying such persons as since the first 
“day of February, 1793, have acted in the apprehend- 
“ing, imprisoning, or detaining in custody in Great 
‘“‘Britain of persons suspected of high treason or 
“‘treasonable practices.” It cannot be disputed that 
the so-called suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, 
which every one knows will probably be followed 
by an Act of Indemnity, is, in reality, a far greater 
interference with personal freedom than would appear 
from the very limited effect, in a merely legal point of 
view, of suspending the right of persons accused of 
treason to demand a speedy trial. The Suspension 
Act, coupled with the prospect of an Indemnity Act, 
does in truth arm the executive with arbitrary powers. 
Still, there are one or two considerations which limit 
the practical importance that can fairly be given 
to an expected Act of Indemnity. The relief to be 

Part IL. 

232 THE RULE OF LAW 

obtained from it is prospective and uncertain. Any 
suspicion on the part of the public, that officials had 
grossly abused their powers, might make it difficult 
to obtain a Parliamentary indemnity for things done 
while the Habeas Corpus Act was suspended. As 
regards, again, the protection to be derived from the 
Act by men who have been guilty of irregular, illegal, 
oppressive, or cruel conduct, everything depends on 
the terms of the Act of Indemnity. These may 
be either narrow or wide. The Indemnity Act, for 
instance, of 1801, gives a very limited amount of 
protection to official wrongdoers. It provides, indeed, 
a defence against actions or prosecutions in respect 
of anything done, commanded, ordered, directed, or 
advised to be done in Great Britain for apprehend- 
ing, imprisoning, or detaining in custody any person 
charged with high treason or treasonable practices. 
And no doubt such a defence would cover any irregu- 
larity or merely formal breach of the law, but there 
certainly could be imagined acts of spite or extortion, 
done under cover of the Suspension Act, which would 
expose the offender to actions or prosecutions, and 
could not be justified under the terms of the Indem- 
nity Act. Reckless cruelty to a political prisoner, or, 
still more certainly, the arbitrary punishment or the 
execution of a political prisoner, between 1793 and 
1801, would, in spite of the Indemnity Act, have left 
every man concerned in the crime liable to suffer 
punishment. Whoever wishes to appreciate the 
moderate character of an ordinary Act of Indemnity 
passed by the Imperial Parliament, should compare 
such an Act as 41 Geo. III. c. 66, with the 
enactment whereby the Jamaica House of Assembly 

THE RIGHT TO PERSONAL FREEDOM 233 

attempted to cover Governor Eyre from all liability 
for unlawful deeds done in suppressing rebellion during 
1866. An Act of Indemnity, again, though it is the 
legalisation of illegality, is also, it should be noted, itself 
a law. It is something in its essential character, there- 
fore, very different from the proclamation of martial 
law, the establishment of a state of siege, or any other 
proceeding by which the executive government at its 
own will suspends the law of the land. It is no doubt 
an exercise of arbitrary sovereign power; but where 
the legal sovereign is a Parliamentary assembly, even 
acts of state assume the form of regular legislation, 
and this fact of itself maintains in no small degree 
the real no less than the apparent supremacy of law. 

Chapter 

CHAPTER VI 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 

parti. THE Declaration of the Rights of Man’ and the 

Freodomot French Constitution of 1791 proclaim freedom of 

discussion. discussion and the liberty of the press in terms which 
are still cited in text-books* as embodying maxims of 
French jurisprudence. 

Principles “La libre communication des pensées et des 

Papen AL opinions est un des droits les plus précieux de 

constitu: ««Thomme; tout citoyen peut donc parler, écrire, 
“amprimer librement, sauf & répondre de V'abus de 
“ cette liberté dans les cas déterminés par la lov.” * 

« Ta constitution garantit, comme droit naturel et 
“cwil. . . la liberté a tout homme de parler, d’écrire, 
‘““dimprimer et publter ses pensées, sans que ses écrits 
“‘ puissent étre soumis & aucune censure ou inspection 
“avant leur publication.” * 

Belgian law, again, treats the liberty of the press 
as a fundamental article of the constitution. 

“Art. 18. La presse est libre; la censure ne 

1 Plouard, Les Constitutions Frangatses, p. 16 ; Duguit et Monnier, 
Les Constitutions de la France, p. 1. 

2 Bourguignon, Eléments Généraux de Législation Francaise, p. 468. 

% Déclar. des droits, art. 11, Plouard, p. 16, Duguit et Monnier, p. 2. 

* Constitution de 1791, Tit. 1; Plouard, p. 18, Duguit et Monnier, 
p. 4. 

234 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 235 

“pourra jamais étre établie: il ne peut étre exigd Chapter 
““de cauttonnement des écrivains, éditeurs ou im- Me 
“ primeurs. 

“ Lorsque V'auteur est connu et domicilié en Bel- 
“* guque, Véditeur, Vimprimeur ou le distributeur ne 
“peut étre poursuin.” | 

Both the revolutionists of France and the con- No pris- 
stitutionalists of Belgium borrowed their ideas about ftetom of 
freedom of opinion and the liberty of the press from Steniey 
England, and most persons form such loose notions by Fuelish 
as to English law that the idea prevails in England 
itself that the right to the free expression of opinion, 
and especially that form of it which is known as the 
“liberty of the press,” are fundamental doctrines of 
the law of England in the same sense in which they 
were part of the ephemeral constitution of 1791 and 
still are embodied in the articles of the existing Belgian 
constitution ; and, further, that our Courts recognise 
the right of every man to say and write what he 
pleases, especially on social, political, or religious 
topics, without fear of legal penalties. Yet this 
notion, justified though it be, to a certain extent, 
by the habits of modern English life, is essentially 
false, and conceals from students the real attitude of 
English law towards what is called “freedom of 
thought,” and is more accurately described as the 
“right to the free expression of opinion.” As every 
lawyer knows, the phrases “freedom of discussion ” 
or “liberty of the press” are not to be found in any 
part of the statute-book nor among the maxims of the 
common law. As terms of art they are indeed quite 
unknown to our Courts. At no time has there in 

1 Constitution de la Belgique, art. 18. 

e 

236 THE RULE OF LAW 

Part. England been any proclamation of the right to 
liberty of thought or to freedom of speech. The 
true state of things cannot be better described than 
in these words from an excellent treatise on the law 

of libel :— 
English “Our present law permits any one to say, write, 
caw and publish what he pleases; but if he make a bad 
that no one 

shall be ‘(use of this liberty he must be punished. If he 

“unjustly attack an individual, the person defamed 

statements ‘may sue for damages; if, on the other hand, the 

be breach “words be written or printed, or if treason or im- 
‘morality be thereby inculcated, the offender can be 
“tried for the misdemeanour either by information 
“or indictment.” ? 

Any man may, therefore, say or write whatever 
he likes, subject to the risk of, it may be, severe 
punishment if he publishes any statement (either 
‘by word of mouth, in writing, or in print) which 
he is not legally entitled to make. Nor is the 
law of England specially favourable to free speech 
or to free writing in the rules which it maintains in 
theory and often enforces in fact as to the kind of 
statements which a man has a legal right to make. 
Above all, it recognises in general no special privilege 
on behalf of the “ press,” if by that term we mean, 
in conformity with ordinary language, periodical 
literature in general, and: particularly the news- 
papers. In truth there is little in the statute- 
book which can be called a “press law.”? The law 

1 Odgers, Lebel and Slander, Introd. (3rd ed.), p. 12. 

? For exceptions to this, see ¢.g. 8 & 9 Vict. c. 75; 44 & 45 Vict 
c. 60,8. 2. It is, however, true, as pointed out by one of my critics 

(see the Law of the Press, by Fisher & Strahan, 2nd ed. p. iii.), that * there 
is slowly growing up a distinct law of the press.” The tendency of 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 237 
ee eS re he Loe 
of the press as it exists here is merely part of the 
law of libel, and it is well worth while to trace out 
with some care the restrictions imposed by the law 
of libel on the “freedom of the press,” by which 
expression I mean a person’s right to make any state- 
ment he likes in books or newspapers. 

There are many statements with regard to in- 
dividuals which no man is entitled to publish in 
writing or print; it is a libel (speaking generally) thus 
to publish any untrue statement about another which 
is calculated to injure his interests, character, or 
reputation. Every man who directly or indirectly 
makes known or, as the technical expression goes, 
publishes” such a statement, gives currency to a 
libel and is liable to an action for damages. The 
person who makes a defamatory statement and 
authorises its publication in writing, the person who 
writes, the publisher who brings out for sale, the 
printer who prints, the vendor who distributes a libel, 
are each guilty of publication, and may each severally 
be sued. The gist of the offence being the making 
public, not the writing of the libel, the person who 
having read a libel sends it on to a friend, is a libeller ; 
and it would seem that a man who reads aloud a 
libel, knowing it to be such, may be sued. This 
separate liability of each person concerned in a wrong- 
ful act is, as already pointed out, a very noticeable 
recent press legislation is to a certain extent to free the proprietors of 
newspapers from the full amount of liability which attaches to other 
pereons for the bona fide publication of defamatory statements made at 
public meetings and the like. See especially the Libel Law Amend- 
ment Act, 1888 (51 & 52 Vict. c. 64), «4. Whether this deviation 
from the principles of the common law is, or is not, of benefit to 

the public, is an open question which can be answered only by 
experience. 

Chapter 
VL 

Libels on 
individ- 
uals. 

Part IL 

238 THE RULE OF LAW 
ee ee ee ee 
characteristic of our law. Honest belief, moreover, 
and good intentions on the part of a libeller, are no 
legal defence for his conduct. Nor will it avail him 
to show that he had good reason for thinking the 
false statement which he made to be true. Persons 
often must pay heavy damages for giving currency to 
statements which were not meant to be falsehoods, 
and which were reasonably believed to be true. Thus 
it is libellous to publish of a man who has been con- 
victed of felony but has worked out his sentence that 
he “‘is a convicted felon.” It is a libel on the part of 
X if X publishes that B has told him that A’s bank 
has stopped payment, if, though B in fact made the 
statement to X, and X believed the report to be true, 
it turns out to be false. Nor, again, are expressions 
of opinion when injurious to another at all certain not 
to expose the publisher of them to an action. A 
“fair” criticism, it is often said, is not libellous; but 
it would be a grave mistake to suppose that critics, 
either in the press or elsewhere, have a right to 
publish whatever criticisms they think true. Every 
one has a right to publish fair and candid criticism. 
But “a critic must confine himself to criticism, and 
“not make it the veil for personal censure, nor allow 
‘‘ himself to run into reckless and unfair attacks merely 
‘from the love of exercising his power of denuncia- 
“tion.”* A writer in the press and an artist or actor 
whose performances are criticised are apt to draw the 
line between “candid criticism” and “ personal cen- 
sure” at very different points. And when on this 
matter there is a difference of opinion between a critic 
and his victim, the delicate question what is meant by 

) Whistler v. Ruskin, “The Times,” Nov. 27, 1878, per Huddleston, B. 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 239 

fairness has to be determined by a jury, and may be 
so answered as greatly to curtail the free expression 
of critical judgments. Nor let it be supposed that 
the mere “ truth” of a statement is of itself sufficient 
to protect the person who publishes it from liability 
to punishment. For though the fact that an assertion 
is true is an answer to an action for libel, a person 
may be criminally punished for publishing statements 
which, though perfectly true, damage an individual 
without being of any benefit to the public. To write, 
for example, and with truth of A that he many years 
ago committed acts of immorality may very well 
expose the writer X to criminal proceedings, and X 
if put on his trial will be bound to prove not only 
that 4A was in fact guilty of the faults imputed to 
him, but also that the public had an interest in the 
knowledge of A’s misconduct. If X cannot show 
this, he will find that no supposed right of free dis- 
cussion or respect for liberty of the press will before 
an English judge save him from being found guilty 
of a misdemeanour and sent to prison. 

So far in very general terms of the limits placed 
by the law of libel on freedom of discussion as regards 
the character of individuals. Let us now observe for 
a moment the way in which the law of libel restricts 
in theory, at least, the right to criticise the conduct 
of the government. 

Every person commits a misdemeanour who pub- 
lishes (orally or otherwise) any words or any docu- 
ment with a seditious intention. Now a seditious 
intention means an intention to bring into hatred or 
contempt, or to excite disaffection against the King 
or the government and constitution of the United 

Chapter 
NAG 

Libels on 
govern- 
ment. 

Part I. 

Expression 
of opinion 
ou religious 
or moral 
questions. 

240 THE RULE OF LAW 

Kingdom as by law established, or either House of 
Parliament, or the administration of justice, or to 
excite British subjects to attempt otherwise than by 
lawful means the alteration of any matter in Church 
or State by law established, or to promote feelings of 
illwill and hostility between different classes.’ And 
if the matter published is contained in a written or 
printed document the publisher is guilty of publish- 
ing a seditious libel. The law, it is true, permits the 
publication of statements meant only to show that 
the Crown has been misled, or that the government 
has committed errors, or to point out defects in the 
government or the constitution with a view to their 
legal remedy, or with a view to recommend alterations 
in Church or State by legal means, and, in short, 
sanctions criticism on public affairs which is bona fide . 
intended to recommend the reform of existing institu- 
tions by legal methods. But any one will see at once 
that the legal definition of a seditious libel might 
easily be so used as to check a great deal of what is 
ordinarily considered allowable discussion, and would 
if rigidly enforced be inconsistent with prevailing 
forms of political agitation. 

The case is pretty much the same as regards the 
free expression of opinion on religious or moral 
questions. Of late years circumstances have recalled 
attention to the forgotten law of blasphemy. But it 
surprises most persons to learn that, on one view of 
the law, any one who publishes a denial of the truth 
of Christianity in general or of the existence of God, 
whether the terms of such publication are decent or 

1 See Stephen, Digest of the Criminal Law (6th ed.), arts. 96, 97, 98. 
2 Ibid. arts. 179-183, 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 241 

otherwise, commits the misdemeanour of publishing 
a blasphemous libel, and is liable to imprisonment; 
that, according to another view of the law, any one 
is guilty of publishing a blasphemous libel who 
publishes matter relating to God, Jesus Christ, or the 
Book of Common Prayer intended to wound the 
feelings of mankind, or to excite contempt against 
the Church by law established, or to promote immor- 
ality; and that it is at least open to grave doubt 
how far the publications which thus wound the 
feelings of mankind are exempt from the character 
of blasphemy because they are intended in good 
faith to propagate opinions which the person who 
publishes them regards as true.’ Most persons, again, 
are astonished to find that the denial of the truth of 
Christianity or of the authority of the Scriptures, 
by “‘ writing, printing, teaching, or advised speaking ” 
on the part of any person who has been educated in 
or made profession of Christianity in England, is by 
statute a criminal offence entailing very severe penal- 
ties.? When once, however, the principles of the 
common law and the force of the enactments still 
contained in the statute-book are really appreciated, no 
one can maintain that the law of England recognises 
anything like that natural right to the free communi- 
cation of thoughts and opinions which was proclaimed 
in France a little over a hundred years ago to 

1 See especially Stephen, Digest of the Criminal Law (6th ed.), art. 
179, and contrast Odgers (3rd ed.), pp. 475-490, where a view of the 
law is maintained differing from that of Sir J. F. Stephen. 

2 See 9 & 10 Will. IIL c. 35, as altered by 53 Geo. III. c. 160, 
and Stephen’s Digest of the Criminal Law, art. 181. Conf. Attorney- 
General v. Bradlaugh, 14 Q. B. D. (C. A), 667, p. 719, judgment of 

Lindley, L. J. . 

Chapter 
VI. 

Part IL 

242 THE RULE OF LAW 

be one of the most valuable Rights of Man. It is 
quite clear, further, that the effect of English law, 
whether as regards statements made about individuals, 
or the expression of opinion about public affairs, or 
speculative matters, depends wholly upon the answer 
to the question who are to determine whether a given 
publication is or is not a libel. The reply (as we all 
know) is, that in substance this matter is referred to 
the decision of a jury. Whether in any given case 
a particular individual is to be convicted of libel 
depends wholly upon their judgment, and they have 
to determine the questions of truth, fairness, intention, 
and the like, which affect the legal character of a 
published statement.’ 

Freedom of discussion is, then, in England little 
else than the right to write or say anything which a 
jury, consisting of twelve shopkeepers, think it ex- 
pedient should be said or written. Such “liberty” 
may vary at different times and seasons from unre- 
stricted license to very severe restraint, and the 
experience of English history during the last two 
centuries shows that under the law of libel the 
amount of latitude conceded to the expression of 
opinion has, in fact, differed greatly according to the 
condition of popular sentiment. Until very recent 
times the law, moreover, has not recognised any 

1 “The truth of the matter is very simple when stripped of all 
“ornaments of apeech, and a manof plain common sense may easily 
‘“‘understand it. It is neither more nor less than this: that a man 
“may publish anything which twelve of his countrymen think is not 
“blamable, but that he ought to be punished if he publishes that 
“which is blamable [te that which twelve of his countrymen think 
“is blamable}. This in plain common sense is the substance of 
“all that has been said on the matter.”—Rez v. Cuthill, 27 St. Tr. 
642, 675. 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 243 

privilege on the part of the press. A statement 
which is defamatory or blasphemous, if made in a 
letter or upon a card, has exactly the same character 
if made in a book or a newspaper. The protection 
given by the Belgian constitution to the editor, 
printer, or seller of a newspaper involves a recognition 
of special rights on the part of persons connected with 
the press which is quite inconsistent with the general 
theory of English law. It is hardly an exaggeration 
to say, from this point of view, that liberty of the 
press is not recognised in England. 

Why then has the liberty of the press been long 
reputed as a special feature of English institutions ? 

The answer to this inquiry is, that for about two 
centuries the relation between the government and 
the press has in England been marked by all those 
characteristics which make up what we have termed 
the “rule” or “supremacy” of law, and that just 
because of this, and not because of any favour shown 
by the law of England towards freedom of discussion, 
the press, and especially the newspaper press, has 
practically enjoyed with us a freedom which till 
recent years was unknown in continental states. 
Any one will see that this is so who examines care- 
fully the situation of the press in modern England, 
and then contrasts it either with the press law of 
France or with the legal condition of the press 
in England during the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries. 

The present position of the English press is marked 
by two features. 

First, ‘‘ The liberty of the press,” says Lord Mans- 
field, “consists in printing without any previous 

Chapter 

Why the 
liberty of 
the press 
has been 
thought 
peculiar to 
England. 

Part IL 

The posi- 
tion of the 
press in 
modern 
England. 
No censor- 
ship. 

244 THE RULE OF LAW 

« license, subject to the consequences of law.”’ ‘The 
“law of England,” says Lord Ellenborough, “is 8 
“law of liberty, and consistently with this liberty 
‘we have not what is called an imprimatur; there 
“is no such preliminary license necessary; but if 
‘a man publish a paper, he is exposed to the penal 
“ consequences, as he is in every other act, if it be 
“ illegal.” ? 

These dicta show us at once that the so-called 
liberty of the press is a mere application of the 
general principle, that no man is punishable except 
for a distinct breach of the law.* This principle is 
radically inconsistent with any scheme of license or 
censorship by which a man is hindered from writing 
or printing anything which he thinks fit, and is hard 
to reconcile even with the right on the part of the 
Courts to restrain the circulation of a libel, until 
at any rate the publisher has been convicted of 
publishing it. It is also opposed in spirit to any 
regulation requiring from the publisher of an in- 
tending newspaper a preliminary deposit of a certain 
sum of money, for the sake either of ensuring that 
newspapers should be published only by solvent 
persons, or that if a newspaper should contain libels 
there shall be a certainty of obtaining damages from 
the proprietor. No sensible person will argue that 
to demand a deposit from the owner of a newspaper, 
or to impose other limitations upon the right of 
publishing periodicals, is of necessity inexpedient or 
unjust. All that is here insisted upon is, that such 

1 Rex v. Dean of St. Asaph, 3 T. R. 431 (note). 
2 Rex v. Cobbett, 29 St. Tr. 49 ; see Odgers, Libel and Slander (3rd 
ed.), p. 10. ® See p. 183, ante. 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 245 

checks and preventive measures are inconsistent with 
the pervading principle of English law, that men are 
to be interfered with or punished, not because they 
may or will break the law, but only when they have 
committed some definite assignable legal offence. 
Hence, with one exception,’ which is a quaint sur- 
vival from a different system, no such thing is known 
with us as a license to print, or a censorship either 
of the press or of political newspapers. Neither the 
government nor any other authority has the right to 
seize or destroy the stock of a publisher because it 
consists of books, pamphlets, or papers which in the 
opinion of the government contain seditious or libel- 
lous matter. Indeed, the Courts themselves will, only 
under very special circumstances, even for the sake 
of protecting an individual from injury, prohibit the 
publication or republication of a libel, or restrain 
its sale until the matter has gone before a jury, and 
it has been established by their verdict that the 
words complained of are libellous.2 Writers in the 
press are, in short, like every other person, subject to 
the law of the realm, and nothing else. Neither the 
government nor the Courts have (speaking generally) 
any greater power to prevent or oversee the publica- 
tion of a newspaper than the writing and sending of 
a letter. Indeed, the simplest way of setting forth 
broadly the position of writers in the press is to say that 
they stand in substantially the same position as letter- 
writers. A man who scribbles blasphemy on a gate* 

1 I~, the licensing of plays. See the Theatres Act, 1843, 6 & 7 
Vict. c. 68; Stephen, Commentaries (14th ed.), iii. p. 227. 

2 Compare Odgers, Libel and Slander (3rd ed.), chap. xiii, especially 

pp. 388-399, with the first edition of Mr. Odgers’ work, pp. 13-16. 
S Reg. v. Pooley, cited Stephen, Digest of Criminal Law (6thed.), p. 125. 

Chapter 

Part IL 

246 THE RULE OF LAW 

ane a es rere 
and a man who prints blasphemy in a paper or in 
a book commit exactly the same offence, and are 
dealt with in England on the same principles. Hence 
also writers in and owners of newspapers have, or 
rather had until very recently, no special privilege 
protecting them from liability." Look at the matter 
which way you will, the main feature of liberty of the 
press as understood in England is that the press 
(which means, of course, the writers in it) is subject 
only to the ordinary law of the land. 

Secondly, Press offences, in so far as the term can 
be used with reference to English law, are tried and 
punished only by the ordinary Courts of the country, 
that is, by a judge and jury.” 

Since the Restoration,® offences committed through 
the newspapers, or, in other words, the publication 
therein of libels whether defamatory, seditious, or 
blasphemous, have never been tried by any special 
tribunal. Nothing to Englishmen seems more 4 
matter of course than this. Yet nothing has in reality 
contributed so much to free the periodical press from 
any control. If the criterion whether a publication 

1 This statement must be to a certain extent qualified in view of 
the Libel Act, 1843, 6 & 7 Vict. c. 96, the Newspaper Libel and 
Registration Act, 1881, 44 & 45 Vict. c. 60, and the Law of Libel 
Amendment Act, 1888, 51 & 52 Vict. c. 64, which do give some 
amount of special protection to bona fide reports, ¢.g. of public meetings, 
in newspapers. 

* The existence, however, of process by criminal information, and 
the rule that truth was no justification, had the result that during the 
eighteenth century seditious libel rose almost to the rank of a press 
offence, to be dealt with, if not by separate tribunals, at any rate by 
special rules enforced by a special procedure. 

® See as to the state of the press under the Commonwealth, Masson, 
Life of Milton, iii. pp. 265-297. Substantially the possibility of trying 
press offences by special tribunals was put an end to by the abolition 
of the Star Chamber in 1641, 16 Car. I. ¢. 10. 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 247 
ea en ye 
be libellous is the opinion of the jury, and a man may 
publish anything which twelve of his countrymen think 
is not blamable, it is impossible that the Crown or 
the Ministry should exert any stringent control over 
writings in the press, unless (as indeed may sometimes 
happen) the majority of ordinary citizens are entirely 
opposed to attacks on the government. The times 
when persons in power wish to check the excesses of 
public writers are times at which a large body of 
opinion or sentiment is hostile to the executive. But 
under these circumstances it must, from the nature of 
things, be at least an even chance that the jury called 
upon to find a publisher guilty of printing seditious 
libels may sympathise with the language which the 
officers of the Crown deem worthy of punishment, and 
hence may hold censures which are prosecuted as 
libels to be fair and laudable criticism of official errors. 
Whether the control indirectly exercised over the ex- 
pression of opinion by the verdict of twelve common- 
place Englishmen is at the present day certain to 
be as great a protection to the free expression of 
opinion, even in political matters, as it proved a 
century ago, when the sentiment of the governing 
body was different from the prevalent feeling of the 
class from which jurymen were chosen, is an interest- 
ing speculation into which there is no need to enter. 
What is certain is, that the practical freedom of the 
English press arose in great measure from the trial 
with us of ‘press offences,” like every other kind of 
libel, by a jury. 

The liberty of the press, then, is in England simply 
one result of the universal predominance of the law 
of the land. The terms “ liberty of the press,” “ press 

Chapter 

Compari- 
son with 
the press 
law of 
France. 

248 THE RULE OF LAW 

offences,” “censorship of the press,” and the like, are 
all unknown to English lawyers, simply because any 
offence which can be committed through the press is 
some form of libel, and is governed in substance by 
the ordinary law of defamation. 

These things seem to us at the present day so 
natural as hardly to be noticeable ; let us, however, 
glance as I have suggested at the press law of France 
both before and since the Revolution; and also at the 
condition of the press in England up to nearly the 
end of the seventeenth century. Such a survey will 
prove to us that the treatment in modern England of 
offences committed through the newspapers affords 
an example, as singular as it is striking, of the legal 
spirit which now pervades every part of the English 
constitution. 

An Englishman who consults French authorities 
is struck with amazement at two facts: press law’ 
has long constituted and still constitutes to a certain 
extent a special department of French legislation, and 
press offences have been, under every form of govern- 
ment which has existed in France, a more or less 

1 The press is now governed in France by the Lot sur la liberté 
de la presse, 29-30 Juill. 1881. This law repeals all earlier edicts, 
decrees, laws, ordinances, etc. on the subject. Immediately before 
this law was passed there were in force more than thirty enactments 
regulating the position of the French press, and inflicting penalties 
on offences which could be committed by writers in the press; 
and the three hundred and odd closely printed pages of Dalloz, 
treating of laws on the press, show that the enactments then in 
vigour under the Republic were as nothing compared to the whole 
mass of regulations, ordinances, decrees, and laws which, since the 
earliest days of printing down to the year 1881, have been issued by 
French rulers with the object of controlling the literary expression 
of opinion and thought. See Dalloz, Répertoire, vol. xxxvi., ‘¢ Presse,” 
pp. 384-776, and especially Tit. I. chap. i., Tit. II. chap. iv. ; Roger 
et Sorel, Codes et Lot Usuelles, “ Presse,” 637-652 ; Duguit, Manuel de 
Drowt Constitutionnel, pp. 575-582. 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 249 

special class of crimes. The Acts which have been 
passed in England with regard to the press since the 
days of Queen Elizabeth do not in number equal one- 
tenth, or even one-twentieth, of the laws enacted 
during the same period on the same subject in 
France. The contrast becomes still more marked if 
we compare the state of things in the two countries 
since the beginning of the eighteenth century, and 
(for the sake of avoiding exaggeration) put the laws 
passed since that date, and which were till 1881 in 
force in France, against every Act which, whether 
repealed or unrepealed, has been passed in England 
since the year 1700. It will be found that the French 
press code consisted, till after the establishment of the 
present Republic, of over thirty enactments, whilst 
the English Acts about the press passed since the 
beginning of the last century do not exceed a dozen, 
and, moreover, have gone very little way towards 
touching the freedom of writers. 

The ground of this difference lies in the opposite 
views taken in the two countries of the proper rela- 
tion of the state to literature, or, more strictly, to the 
expression of opinion in print. 

In England the doctrine has since 1700 in sub- 
stance prevailed that the government has nothing to 
do with the guidance of opinion, and that the sole 
duty of the state is to punish libels of all kinds, 
whether they are expressed in writing or in print. 
Hence the government has (speaking generally) exer- 
cised no special control over literature, and the law of 
the press, in so far as it can be said to have existed, 
has been nothing else than a branch or an application 
of the law of libel. 

Chapter 

250 THE RULE OF LAW 

In France, literature has for centuries been con- 
sidered as the particular concern of the state. The 
prevailing doctrine, as may be gathered from the 
current of French legislation, has been, and still to 
a certain extent is, that it is the function of the ad- 
ministration not only to punish defamation, slander, or 
blasphemy, but to guide the course of opinion, or, at 
any rate, to adopt preventive measures for guarding 
against the propagation in print of unsound or danger- 
ous doctrines. Hence the huge amount and the special 
and repressive character of the press laws which have 
existed in France. 

Up to the time of the Revolution the whole litera- 
ture of the country was avowedly controlled by the 
state. The right to print or sell books and printed 
publications of any kind was treated as a special 
privilege or monopoly of certain libraries; the regu- 
lations (réglements) of 1723 (some part of which was 
till quite recently in force’) and of 1767 confined the 
right of sale and printing under the severest penalties 
to librarians who were duly licensed.? The right to 
publish, again, was submitted to the strictest censor- 
ship, exercised partly by the University (an entirely 
ecclesiastical body), partly by the Parliaments, partly 
by the Crown. The penalties of death, of the galleys, 
of the pillory, were from time to time imposed upon 
the printing or sale of forbidden works. These 
punishments were often evaded; but they after all 
retained practical force till the very eve of the Revolu- 
tion. The most celebrated literary works of France 

1 See Dalloz, Répertoire, vol. xxxvi., “ Presse,” Tit. I. chap. iL 
bee Roger et Sorel, Codes et Lois, “ Presse,” pp. 637-652. 
Thid. 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 25 

were published abroad. Montesquieu’s Esprit des 
Lois appeared at Geneva. Voltaire’s Henriade was 
printed in England ; the most remarkable of his and 
of Rousseau’s writings were published in London, in 
Geneva, or in Amsterdam. In 1775 a work entitled 
Philosophie de la Nature was destroyed by the order 
of the Parliament of Paris, the author was decreed 
guilty of treason against God and man, and would 
have been burnt if he could have been arrested. In 
1781, eight years before the meeting of the States 
General, Raynal was pronounced by the Parliament 
guilty of blasphemy on account of his Histoire des 
Indes.' The point, however, to remark is, not g0 
much the severity of the punishments which under 
the Ancien Régime were intended to suppress the 
expression of heterodox or false beliefs, as the strict 
maintenance down to 1789 of the right and duty of 
the state to guide the literature of the country. It 
should further be noted that down to that date the 
government made no marked distinction between 
periodical and other literature. When the Lettres 
Philosophiques could be burnt by the hangman, when 
the publication of the Henriade and the Encyclopédie 
depended on the goodwill of the King, there was no 
need for establishing special restrictions on news- 
papers. The daily or weekly press, moreover, hardly 
existed in France till the opening of the States 
General.’ 

1 See Dalloz, Répertotre, vol. xxxvi., “ Presse,” Tit. lL chap. i. 
Compare Roger et Sorel, Codes e Lots, “ Presse,” pp. 637-652. 

2 See Rocquain, L’Esprit Révolutionnatre avant la Revolution, for 
a complete list of “ Livres Condamnés” from 1715 to 1789. Rocquain’s 
book is full of information on the arbitrariness of the French Govern- 
ment during the reigns of Louis XV. and Louis XVI. 

Chapter 

Part II. 

252 THE RULE OF LAW 

The Revolution (it may be fancied) put an end to 
restraints upon the press. The Declaration of the 
Rights of Man proclaimed the right of every citizen 
to publish and print his opinions, and the language 
has been cited’ in which the Constitution of 1791 
guaranteed to every man the natural right of speaking, 
printing, and publishing his thoughts without having 
his writings submitted to any censorship or inspec- 
tion prior to publication. But the Declaration of 
Rights and this guarantee were practically worthless. 
They enounced a theory which for many years was 
utterly opposed to the practice of every French 
government. 

The Convention did not establish a censorship, 
but under the plea of preventing the circulation of 
seditious works it passed the law of 29th March 1793, 
which silenced all free expression of opinion. The 
Directory imitated the Convention. Under the First 
Empire the newspaper press became the property of 
the government, and the sale, printing, and publica- 
tion of books was wholly submitted to imperial 
control and censorship.” 

The years which elapsed from 1789 to 1815 were, 
it may be suggested, a revolutionary era which pro- 
voked or excused exceptional measures of state inter- 
ference. Any one, however, who wants to see how 
consonant to the ideas which have permanently 
governed French law and French habits is the notion 
that the administration should by some means keep 
its hand on the national literature of the country, 
ought to note with care the course of legislation from 

1 See p. 234, ante. 
? Dalloz, Répertotre, xxxvi. “ Presse,” Tit, I. chap. i 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 253 

the Restoration to the present day. The attempt, 
indeed, to control the publication of books bas been 
by slow degrees given up; but one government after 
another has, with curious uniformity, proclaimed 
the freedom and ensured the subjection of the news- 
paper press. Between 1814 and 1830 the censorship 
was established (21st Oct. 1814), was partially 
abolished, was re-extended (1817), was re-abolished 
(1819), was re-established and extended (1820), and 
was re-abolished (1828). In 1830 the Charter made 
the abolition of the censorship part of the constitution, 
and since that date no system of censorship has been 
in name re-established. But as regards newspapers, 
the celebrated decree of 17th February 1852 enacted 
restrictions more rigid than anything imposed under 
the name of la censure by any government since the 
fall of Napoleon I. The government took to itself 
under this law, in addition to other discretionary 
powers, the right to suppress any newspaper without 
the necessity of proving the commission of any crime 
or offence by the owner of the paper or by any writer 
in its columns. No one, further, could under this 
decree set up a paper without official authorisation. 
Nor have different forms of the censorship been the 
sole restrictions imposed in France on the liberty of 
the press. The combined operations of enactments 
passed during the existence of the Republic of 1848, 
and under the Empire, was (among other things) to 
make the signature of newspaper articles by their 
authors compulsory,” to require a large deposit from 

1 Décret, 17 Février, 1852, sec. 32, Roger et Sorel, Codes ¢ Lois, 

. 648. ; 
‘ 2 Roger et Sorel, Codes et Lows, p. 646. Lois, 16 Juillet 1850, 

Chapter 
VL 

Part IL 

254 THE RULE OF LAW 

any person who wished to establish a paper,’ to with- 
draw all press offences whatever from the cognisance 
of a jury,* to re-establish or reaffirm the provision 
contained in the réglement of 1723 by which no one 
could carry on the trade of a librarian or printer 
(commerce de la librairie) without a license. It may, 
in fact, be said with substantial truth that between 
1852 and 1870 the newspapers of France were as 
much controlled by the government as was every 
kind of literature before 1789, and that the Second 
Empire exhibited a retrogression towards the despotic 
principles of the Ancien Régime. The Republic,’ it 
is true, has abolished the restraints on the liberty of 
the press which grew up both before and under the 
Empire. But though for the last twenty-seven years 
the ruling powers in France have favoured the liberty 
or license of the press, nothing is more plain than 

1 Roger et Sorel, Codes et Lots, p. 646. Lois, 16 Juillet 1850. 

2 Lois, 31 Déc. 1851. 

3 One thing is perfectly clear and deserves notice. The legislation 
of the existing Republic was not till 1881, any more than that of the 
Restoration or the Empire, based on the view of the press which 
pervades the modern law of England. “Press law” still formed a 
special department of the law of France. ‘“ Press offences” were a 
particular class of crimes, and there were at least two provisions, and 
probably several more, to be found in French laws which conflicted 
with the doctrine of the liberty of the preas as understood in England. 
A law passed under the Republic (6th July 1871. Roger et Sorel, 
Codes et Lois, p. 652) reimposed on the proprietors of newspapers the 
necessity of making a large deposit, with the proper authorities, as a 
security for the payment of fines or damages incurred in the course 
of the management of the paper. A still later law (29th December 
1875, 8. 5. Roger et Sorel, Codes ¢ Lois, p. 652), while it submitted 
some press offences to the judgment of a jury, subjected others to the 
cognisance of Courts of which a jury formed no part. Recent French 
legislation exhibits, no doubt, a violent reaction against all attempts to 
check the freedom of the press, but in its very effort to secure this 
freedom betrays the existence of the notion that offences committed 
through the press require in some sort exceptional treatment. See 
Duguit, Drott Constitutionnel, pp. 575-582, 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 255 
IN Pin na ti als Sebi nn 
that until quite recently the idea that press offences 
were a peculiar class of offences to be dealt with in 
a special way and punished by special courts was 
accepted by every party in France. This is a matter 
of extreme theoretical importance. It shows how 
foreign to French notions is the idea that every 
breach of law ought to be dealt with by the ordinary 
law of the land. Even a cursory survey—and no 
other is possible in these lectures—of French legis- 
lation with regard to literature proves, then, that from 
the time when the press came into existence up to 
almost the present date the idea has held ground 
that the state, as represented by the executive, ought 
to direct or control the expression of opinion, and that 
this control has been exercised by an official censor- 
ship—by restrictions on the right to print or sell 
books—and by the subjection of press offences to 
special laws administered by special tribunals. The 
occasional relaxation of these restrictions is of import- 
ance. But their recurring revival is of far more 
significance than their temporary abolition.’ 

Let us now turn to the position of the English 
press during the sixteenth and seventeenth cen- 
turies. 

The Crown originally held all presses ‘in its own 
hands, allowed no one to print except under special 

1 Note the several laws passed since 1881 to repress the abuse of 
freedom in one form or another by the press, 4g. the law of 2nd 
August 1882, modified and completed by the law of 16th March 1898, 
for the suppression of violations of moral principles (outrages aux bonnes 
maurs) by the press, the law of 28th July 1894, to suppress the 
advocacy of anarchical principles by the press, and the law of 16th 
March 1893, giving the French government special powers with 
regard to foreign newspapers, or newspapers published in a foreign 
language. Conf. Duguit, Manuel de Droit Constituttonnel, p. 582. 

Chapter 
vi. 

Contrast 
with posl- 
tion of 
press in 
England 
during 
seven- 
teenth 
century. 

Part IL 

Original 
likeness 
and subse- 
quent un- 
likeness 
between 
press law 
of England 
and of 
France. 

256 THE RULE OF LAW 

license, and kept all presses subject to regulations put 
forward by the Star Chamber in virtue of the royal 
prerogative: the exclusive privilege of printing yes 
thus given to ninety-seven London stationers and 
their successors, who, as the Stationers’ Company, 
constituted a guild with power to seize all publications 
issued by outsiders; the printing-presses ultimately 
conceded to the Universities existed only by a decree 
of the Star Chamber. 

Side by side with the restrictions on printing— 
which appear to have more or less broken down— 
there grew up a system of licensing which constituted 
a true censorship.’ 

Press offences constituted a special class of crimes 
cognisable by a special tribunal—the Star Chamber— 
which sat without a jury and administered severe 
punishments.? The Star Chamber indeed fell in 1641, 
never to be revived, but the censorship survived the 
Commonwealth, and was under the Restoration (1662) 
given a strictly legal foundation by the statute 13 & 
14 Car. IJ. c. 33, which by subsequent enactments 
was kept in force till 1695.° 

There existed, in short, in England during the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries every method of 
curbing the press which was then practised in France, 
and which has prevailed there almost up to the 
present day. In England, as on the Continent, the 
book trade was a monopoly, the censorship was in full 
vigour, the offences of authors and printers were 

1 See for the control exercised over the press down to 1695, 
Odgers, Libel and Slander (3rd ed.), pp. 10-13. 

® Gardiner, History of England, vii. pp. 51, 130; «bid, viii, pp- 

225, 234. 
3 See Macaulay, History of England, iv. chaps. xix. xxi. 

ey eS 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 257 
ny ta ttc, a i lt lla tae 
treated as special crimes and severely punished by 
special tribunals. This similarity or identity of the 
principles with regard to the treatment of literature 
originally upheld by the government of England and 
by the government of France is striking. It is 
rendered still more startling by the contrast between 
the subsequent history of legislation in the two 
countries. In France (as we have already seen) the 
censorship, though frequently abolished, has almost as 
frequently been restored. In England the system of 
licensing, which was the censorship under another 
name, was terminated rather than abolished in 1695. 
The House of Commons, which refused to continue the 
Licensing Act, was certainly not imbued with any 
settled enthusiasm for liberty of thought. The 
English statesmen of 1695 neither avowed nor enter- 
tained the belief that the “free communication of 
“ thoughts and opinions was one of the most valuable 
‘of the rights of man.”’ They refused to renew the 
Licensing Act, and thus established freedom of the 
press without any knowledge of the importance of 
what they were doing. This can be asserted with 
confidence, for the Commons delivered to the Lords a 
document which contains the reasons for their refusing 
to renew the Act. 

“This paper completely vindicates the resolution 
“to which the Commons had come. But it proves 
“at the same time that they knew not what they 
‘“‘were doing, what a revolution they were making, 
‘what a power they were calling into existence. 
“They pointed out concisely, clearly, forcibly, and 
“ sometimes with a grave irony which is not un- 

1 See Declaration of the Rights of Man, art. 11, p. 234, ante. 
8 

Chapter 

Part IL. 

258 THE RULE OF LAW 

“becoming, the absurdities and iniquities of the 
“statute which was about to expire. But all their 
“objections will be found to relate to matters of 
“detail. On the great question of principle, on the 
“ question whether the liberty of unlicensed printing 
“be, on the whole, a blessing or a curse to society, 
“not a word is said. The Licensing Act is con- 
“demned, not as a thing essentially evil, but on 
“account of the petty grievances, the exactions, the 
‘jobs, the commercial restrictions, the domiciliary 
‘‘ visits, which were incidental to it. It is pronounced 
‘mischievous because it enables the Company of 
‘Stationers to extort money from publishers, because 
“it empowers the agents of the government to search 
‘“‘houses under the authority of general warrants, 
“because it confines the foreign book trade to the 
‘port of London; because it detains valuable 
“packages of books at the Custom House till the 
“pages are mildewed. The Commons complain that 
“the amount of the fee which the licenser may 
“demand is not fixed. They complain that it is 
‘‘made penal in an officer of the Customs to open a 
‘“box of books from abroad, except in the presence 
‘‘of one of the censors of the press. How, it is 
“very sensibly asked, is the officer to know that 
‘there are books in the box till he has opened it? 
‘Such were the arguments which did what Milton’s 
‘ Areopagitica had failed to do.”?} 

How slight was the hold of the principle of the 
liberty of the press on the statesmen who abolished 
the censorship is proved by their entertaining, two 
years later, a bill (which, however, never passed) to 

1 Macaulay, History of England, iv. pp. 541, 542. 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 259 

prohibit the unlicensed publication of news. Yet 
while the solemn declaration by the National Assembly 
of 1789 of the right to the free expression of thought 
remained a dead letter, or at best a speculative maxim 
of French jurisprudence which, though not without 
influence, was constantly broken in upon by the 
actual law of France, the refusal of the English Par- 
liament in 1695 to renew the Licensing Act did 
permanently establish the freedom of the press in 
England. The fifty years which followed were a 
period of revolutionary disquiet fairly comparable 
with the era of the Restoration in France. But the 
censorship once abolished in England was never re- 
vived, and all idea of restrictions on the liberty of the 
press other than those contained in the law of libel 
have been so long unknown to Englishmen, that the 
rare survivals in our law of the notion that literature 
ought to be controlled by the state appear to most 
persons inexplicable anomalies, and are tolerated only 
because they produce so little inconvenience that 
their existence is forgotten. 

To a student who surveys the history of the liberty 
of the press in France and in England two questions 
suggest themselves. How does it happen that down 
to the end of the seventeenth century the principles 
upheld by the Crown in each country were in sub- 
stance the same? What, again, is the explanation of 
the fact that from the beginning of the eighteenth 
century the principles governing the law of the press 
in the two countries have been, as they still continue 
to be, essentially different? The similarity and the 
difference each seems at first sight equally perplexing. 

1 Macaulay, History of England, iv. pp. 771, 772. 

Chapter 

Questions 
suggested 
by original 
similarity 
and final 
difference 
between 
press law 
of France 
and of 
England. 

Part IT. 

Reasons 
for original 
similarity. 

260 THE RULE OF LAW 

Ta pe es a eee 
Yet both one and the other admit of explanation, 
and the solution of an apparent paradox is worth 
giving because of its close bearing on the subject 
of this lecture, namely, the predominance of the 
spirit of legality which distinguishes the law of the 
constitution. 

The ground of the similarity between the press 
law of England and of France from the beginning 
of the sixteenth till the beginning of the eighteenth 
century, is that the governments, if not the people, 
of each country were during that period influenced - 
by very similar administrative notions and by similar 
ideas as to the relation between the state and indi- 
viduals. In.England, again, as in every European 
country, the belief prevailed that a King was respon- 
sible for the religious belief of lis subjects. This 
responsibility involves the necessity for regulating 
the utterance and formation of opinion. But this 
direction or control cannot be exercised without 
governmental interference with that liberty of the 
press which is at bottom the right of every man to 
print any opinion which he chooses to propagate, 
subject only to risk of punishment if his expressions 
contravene some distinct legal maxim. During the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, in short, the 
Crown was in England, as in France, extending its 
administrative powers; the Crown was in England, 
as in France, entitled, or rather required by public 
opinion, to treat the control of literature as an affair 
of state. Similar circumstances produced similar 
results; in each country the same principles pre- 
vailed; in each country the treatment of the press 
assumed, therefore, a similar character, 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 261 
nnn Nee tint A SI sl gs Sc weap epon a 

The reason, again, why, for nearly two centuries, Chapter 
the press has been treated in France on principles _Y! 
utterly different from those which have been accepted Reasons for 
in England, lies deep in the difference of the spirit start 
which has governed the customs and laws of the two 
countries. 

In France the idea has always flourished that the 
government, whether Royal, Imperial, or Republican, 
possesses, as representing the state, rights and powers 
as against individuals superior to and independent of 
the ordinary law of the land. This is the real basis 
of that whole theory of a drow administratif; which 
it is so hard for Englishmen fully to understand. 
The increase, moreover, in the authority of the central 
government has at most periods both before and since 
the Revolution been, or appeared to most Frenchmen 
to be, the means of removing evils which oppressed 
the mass of the people. The nation has in general 
looked upon the authority of the state with the same 
favour with which Englishmen during the sixteenth 
century regarded the prerogative of the Crown. The 
control exercised in different forms by the executive 
over literature has, therefore, in the main fully har- 
monised with the other institutions of France. The 
existence, moreover, of an elaborate administrative 
system, the action of which has never been subject 
to the control of the ordinary tribunals, has always 
placed in the hands of whatever power was supreme 
in France the means of enforcing official surveillance 
of literature. Hence the censorship (to speak of no 
other modes of checking the liberty of the press) has 
been on the whole in keeping with the general action 

1 See Chap. XII. post. 

Part IL 

262 THE RULE OF LAW 

cece es ee ee 
of French governments and with the average senti- 
ment of the nation, whilst there has never been 
wanting appropriate machinery by which to carry 
the censorship into effect. 

No doubt there were heard throughout the eight- 
eenth century, and have been heard ever since, vigorous 
protests against the censorship, as against other forms 
of administrative arbitrariness ; and at the beginning 
of the Great Revolution, as at other periods siuce, 
efforts were made in favour of free discussion. Hence 
flowed the abolition of the censorship, but this attempt 
to limit the powers of the government in one par- 
ticular direction was quite out of harmony with the 
general reverence for the authority of the state. 
As long, moreover, as the whole scheme of French 
administration was left in force, the government, in 
whatever hands it was placed, always retained the 
means of resuming its control ever the press, when- 
ever popular feeling should for a moment favour the 
repression of free speech. Hence arose the constantly 
recurring restoration of the abolished censorship or of 
restraints which, though not called by the unpopular 
name of la censure, were more stringent than has ever 
been any Licensing Act. Restrictions, in short, on 
what Englishmen understand by the liberty of the 
press have continued to exist in France and are 
hardly now abolished, because the exercise of pre- 
ventive and discretionary authority on the part of 
the executive harmonises with the general spirit of 
French law, and because the administrative machinery, 
which is the creation of that spirit, has always placed 
(as it still places) in the hands of the executive the - 
proper means for enforcing discretionary authority. 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 263 

In England, on the other hand, the attempt made 
by the Crown during the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries to form a strong central administration, 
though it was for a time attended with success, 
because it met some of the needs of the age, was 
at bottom repugnant to the manners and tradi- 
tions of the country ; and even at a time when the 
people wished the Crown to be strong, they hardly 
liked the means by which the Crown exerted its 
strength. 

Hundreds of Englishmen who hated toleration and 
eared little for freedom of speech, entertained a keen 
jealousy of arbitrary power, and a fixed determination 
to be ruled in accordance with the law of the land.' 
These sentiments abolished the Star Chamber in 
1641, and made the re-establishment of the hated 
Court impossible even for the frantic loyalty of 1660. 
But the destruction of the Star Chamber meant much 
more than the abolition of an unpopular tribunal ; it 
meant the rooting up from its foundations of the 
whole of the administrative system which had been 
erected by the Tudors and extended by the Stuarts. 
This overthrow of a form of administration which 
contradicted the legal habits of Englishmen had no 
direct connection with any desire for the uncontrolled 
expression of opinion. The Parliament which would 
not restore the Star Chamber or the Court of High 
Commission passed the Licensing Act, and this 
statute, which in fact establishes the censorship, was, 
as we have seen, continued in force for some years 
after the Revolution. The passing, however, of the 

1 See Selden’s remarks on the illegality of the decrees of the Star 
Chamber, cited Gardiner, History of England, vii. p. 51. 

Chapter 
Vi. 

Part II. 

264 THE RULE OF LAW 

statute, though not a triumph of toleration, was a 
triumph of legality. The power of licensing depended 
henceforward, not on any idea of inherent executive 
authority, but on the statute law. The right of 
licensing was left in the hands of the govern- 
ment, but this power was regulated by the words of a 
statute; and, what was of more consequence, breaches 
of the Act could be punished only by proceedings in 
the ordinary Courts. The fall of the Star Chamber 
deprived the executive of the means for exercising 
arbitrary power. Hence the refusal of the House of 
Commons in 1695 to continue the Licensing Act was 
something very different from the proclamation of 
freedom of thought contained in the French Declara- 
tion of Rights, or from any of the laws which have 
abolished the censorship in France. To abolish the 
right of the government to control the press, was, 
in England, simply to do away with an exceptional 
authority, which was opposed to the general tendency 
of the law, and the abolition was final, because the 
executive had already lost the means by which the 
control of opinion could be effectively enforced. 

To sum the whole matter up, the censorship 
though constantly abolished has been constantly re- 
vived in France, because the exertion of discretionary 
powers by the government has been and still is in 
harmony with French laws and institutions. The 
abolition of the censorship was final in England, 
because the exercise of discretionary power by the 
Crown was inconsistent with our system of adminis- 
tration and with the ideas of English law. The 
contrast is made the more striking by the paradoxical 
fact, that the statesmen who tried with little success 

THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF DISCUSSION 265 

to establish the liberty of the press in France really 
intended to proclaim freedom of opinion, whilst the 
statesmen who would not pass the, Licensing Act, and 
thereby founded the liberty of the press in England, 
held theories of toleration which fell far short of 
favouring unrestricted liberty of discussion. This 
contrast is not only striking in itself, but also affords 
the strongest illustration that can be found of English 
conceptions of the rule of law. 

Principles 
of English 
law as to 
right of 
public 
meeting. 

CHAPTER VII 

THE RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING ! 

TuE law of Belgium’ with regard to public meetings 
is contained in the nineteenth article of the constitu- 
tion, which is probably intended in the main to re- 
produce the law of England, and runs as follows :— 

“ Art. 19. Les Belges ont le drowt de s'assembler 
“‘ paistblement et sans armes, en se conformant aux 
“lots, qui peuvent régler Texercice de ce droit, 
“sans néanmoins le sowmettre & une autorisation 
“ préalable. 

“Cette disposition ne s’'applique point aux ras- 
*‘ semblements en plein arr, qut restent enterement 
“ soumis aux lots de police.” * 

The restrictions on the practice of public meeting 
appear to be more stringent in Belgium than in 
England, for the police have with us no special 
authority to control open-air assemblies. Yet just 
as it cannot with strict accuracy be asserted that 

1 See generally as to the right of public meeting, Stephen, 
Commentaries, iv. (14th ed.), pp. 174-178, and Kenny, Outlines of 
Criminal Law (3rd ed.), pp. 280-286. See Appendix, Note V., 
Questions connected with the Right of Public Meeting. 

2 See Law Quarterly Review, iv. p. 159. See also as to right of 
public meeting in Italy, thd. p. 78; in France, ibid. p. 165; in 
Switzerland, thid, p. 169; in United States, thid. p. 257. See as to 
history of law of public meeting in France, Duguit, Manuel de Droit 
Conststutionnel, pp. 554-559. 

8 Constitution de la Belgique, art. 19. 

266 

THE RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 267 

English law recognises the liberty of the press, so it 
can hardly be said that our constitution knows of 
such a thing as any specific right of public meeting. 
No better instance can indeed be found of the way 
in which in England the constitution is built up 
upon individual rights than our rules as to public 
assemblies. The right of assembling is nothing more 
than a result of the view taken by the Courts as to 
individual liberty of person and individual liberty of 
speech. There is no special law allowing A, B, and 
C to mect together either in the open air or else- 
where for a lawful purpose, but the right of A to go 
where he pleases so that he does not commit a 
trespass, and to say what he likes to B so that his 
talk is not libellous or seditious, the right of B to do 
the like, and the existence of the same rights of C, 
D, EH, and F, and so on ad infinitum, lead to the 
consequence that A, B, C, D, and a thousand or ten 
thousand other persons, may (as a general rule)’ mcet 
together in any place where otherwise they each 
have a right to be for a lawful purpose and in a 
lawful manner. A has a right to walk down the 
High Street or to go on to a common. JB has the 
same right. C, D, and all their friends have the same 
right to go there also. In other words, A, B, C, 
and D, and ten thousand such, have a right to hold 
a public meeting; and as A may say to B that he 
thinks an Act ought’-to be passed’ abolishing the 
House of Lords, or that the House of Lords are 
bound to reject any bill modifying the constitution 

1 It is not intended here to express any opinion on the point 
whether an agreement on the part of A, B, and C to meet together 
may not under exceptional circumstances be a conspiracy. 

Chapter 

268 THE RULE OF LAW 

oe EE Se eee 
Part. of their House, and as B may make the same remark 
to any of his friends, the result ensues that A and 
ten thousand more may hold a public meeting either 
to support the government or to encourage the 
resistance of the Peers. Here then you have in 
substance that right of public meeting for political 
and other purposes which is constantly treated in 
foreign countries as a special privilege, to be exer- 
cised only subject to careful restrictions. The asser- 
tion, however, that A, B, C, and D, and a hundred 
thousand more persons, just because they may each 
go where they like, and each say what they please, 
have a right to hold meetings for the discussion of 
political and other topics, does not of course mean 
that it is impossible for persons so to exercise the 
right of meeting as to break the law. The object 
of a meeting may be to commit a crime by open 
force, or in some way or other to break the peace, in 
which case the meeting itself becomes an unlawful 
assembly." The mode in which a meeting is held 
may threaten a breach of the peace on the part of 
those holding the meeting, and therefore inspire 
peaceable citizens with reasonable fear; in which 
case, again, the meeting will be unlawful. In either 
instance the meeting may lawfully be broken up, and 
the members of it expose themselves to all the con- 
sequences, in the way of arrest, prosecution, and 
punishment, which attend the doing of unlawful 
acts, or, in other words, the commission of crimes. 
Meeting A public meeting which, from the conduct of those 

not unlaw- 

ful because ehgaged in it, as, for example, through their marching 
it will 
bain 1 For the meaning of the term “unlawful assembly ” see Appendix, 

opposition, Note V., Questions connected with the Right of Public Meeting. 

THE RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 269 
gst lect nalts tee 
together in arms, or through their intention to excite 
& breach of the peace on the part of opponents,’ fills 
peaceable citizens with reasonable fear that the peace 
will be broken, is an unlawful assembly. Buta meeting 
which is not otherwise illegal does not * become an un- 
lawful assembly solely because it will excite violent 
and unlawful opposition, and thus may indirectly lead 
to a breach of the peace. Suppose, for example, that 
the members of the Salvation Army propose to hold 
a meeting at Oxford, suppose that a so-called Skeleton 
Army announce that they will attack the Salvation- 
ists and disperse them by force, suppose, lastly, that 
thereupon peaceable citizens who do not like the 
quiet of the town to be disturbed and who dread 
riots, urge the magistrates to stop the meeting of the 
Salvationists. This may seem at first sight a reason- 
able request, but the magistrates cannot, it is sub- 
mitted,’ legally take the course suggested to them. 
That under the present state of the law this must be 
so is on reflection pretty clear. The right of A to 
walk down the High Street is not, as a rule,‘ taken 
away by the threat of X to knock A down if A 
takes his proposed walk. It is true that A’s going 

1 Compare O’Kelly v. Harvey, 14 L. R. Ir. 105, Humphries v. 

Connor, 17 Ir. C. L. R. 1, 8, 9, judgment of Fitzgerald, J. 

2 This statement must be read subject to the limitations stated, 
p. 273, post. 

$ I assume, of course, that the Salvationists meet together, as 
they certainly do, for a lawful purpose, and meet quite peaceably, 
and without any intent either themselves to break the peace or to 
incite others to a breach thereof. The magistrates, however, could 
require the members of the Skeleton Army, or perhaps even the 
members of the Salvation Army, to find sureties for good behaviour 
or to keep the peace, Compare Kenny, Outlines of Criminal Law 
(3rd ed.), pp. 282, 486; Wise v. Dunning [1902], 1 K. B. 167. 

4 See p. 278, post, and compare Humphries v. Connor, 17 Ir. 
c.LR 1. 

Part 1. 

270 THE RULE OF LAW 

into the High Street may lead to a breach of the 
peace, but A no more causes the breach of the peace 
than a man whose pocket is picked causes the theft 
by wearing a watch. A is the victim, not the author 
of a breach of the law. Now, if the right of A to 
walk down the High Street is not affected by the 
threats of X, the right of A, B, and C to march 
down the High Street together is not diminished by 
the proclamation of X, Y, and Z that they will not 
suffer 4, B, and C to take their walk. Nor does it 
make any difference that A, B, and C call them- 
selves the Salvation Army, or that X, Y, and Z call 
themselves the Skeleton Army. The plain principle 
is that A’s right to do a lawful act, namely, walk 
down the High Street, cannot be diminished by X’s 
threat to do an unlawful act, namely, to knock A 
down. This is the principle established, or rather 
illustrated, by the case of Beatty v. Gillbanks.1 The 
Salvation Army met together at Weston-super-Mare 
with the knowledge that they would be opposed by 
the Skeleton Army. The magistrates had put out a 
notice intended to forbid the meeting. The Salva- 
tionists, however, assembled, were met by the police, 
and told to obey the notice. X, one of the members, 
declined to obey and was arrested. He was subse- 
quently, with others, convicted by the magistrates of 
taking part in an unlawful assembly. It was an 
undoubted fact that the meeting of the Salvation 
Army was likely to lead to an attack by the Skeleton 
Army, and in this sense cause a breach of the peace. 
The conviction, however, of X by the magistrates 
was quashed on appeal to the Queen’s Bench Division. 
19Q.B. D. 308. 

THE RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 271 
tener eat ee denen ileaeenelinenemaretinnetes 
“What has happened here,” says Field, J., “is 
“that an unlawful organisation [the Skeleton Army] 
‘has assumed to itself the right to prevent the appel- 
“lants and others from lawfully assembling together, 
“and the finding of the justices amounts to this, that 
“a man may be convicted for doing a lawful act if 
“he knows that his doing it may cause another to do 
“an unlawful act. There is no authority for such a 
** proposition.” } 

The principle here laid down is thus expressed by 
an Irish judge in a case which has itself received the 
approval of the English King’s Bench Division. 

‘‘ Much has been said on both sides in the course of 
“the argument about the case of Beatty v. Gillbanks.* 
“T am not sure that I would have taken the same view 
. “of the facts of that case as was adopted by the Court 
“that decided it; but I agree with both the law as laid 
“down by the Judges, and their application of it to the 
“facts as they understood them. The principle under- 
‘lying the decision seems to me to be that an act 
“innocent in itself, done with innocent intent, and 

“reasonably incidental to the performance of a duty, 
‘to the carrying on of business, to the enjoyment of 

1 Beatty v. Gillbanks, 9 Q. B. D. 308, at p. 314. Beaty v. ieee 
W. N. 1884, p. 93; Reg. v. Justices of Londonderry, 28 L. R. Ir. ote 
with which contrast Wise v. Dunning [1902], 1 K. B. 167, and st e 
Irish cases, Humphries v. Connor, 17 Ir.C. L. R. 1; Reg. v. M‘Naghton, 
14 Cox C. C. 572; O’Kelly v. Harvey, 14 L. R, Ir. 105, a 

It is to be noted that the King’s Bench Division in deciding a 
v. Dunning did not mean to overrule Beatty v. Gallbanks, and apparently 
conceived that they were following Reg. v. Justices of Eliane tds . 

See also Appendix, Note V., Questions connected with the Rig 
az nee Ra Ftaa of Londonderry, 28 L. R. Ir. 440; Wse v. 
Dunning [1902], 1 K. B. 167, 179, judgment of Darling, J. 

§9Q.B. D. 308. 

Chapter 

Part IL 

272 THE RULE OF LAW 

IM Rs 3 ne = aoa rane 
“ legitimate recreation, or generally to the exercise of 
“a legal right, does not become criminal becanse it 
“may provoke persons to break the peace, or other- 
‘wise to conduct themselves in an illegal way.”” 

Nor is it in general an answer to the claim of, e.g. 
the Salvationists, to exercise their right of meeting, 
that whilst such exercise may excite wrongdoers to 
break the peace, the easiest way of keeping it is to 
prevent the meeting, for “if danger arises from the 
“ exercise of lawful rights resulting in a breach of the 
“peace, the remedy is the presence of sufficient force 
“to prevent that result, not the legal condemnation of 
“those who exercise those rights.” * 

The principle, then, that a meeting otherwise in 
every respect lawful and peaceable is not rendered 
unlawful merely by the possible or probable mis- 
conduct of wrongdoers, who to prevent the meeting 
are determined to break the peace, is, it is submitted,” 
well established, whence it follows that in general an 
otherwise lawful public meeting cannot be forbidden 

1 The Queen v. Justices of Londonderry, 28 L. R. Ir. 440, pp. 461, 
462, judgment of Holmes, J. 

2 Reg. v. Justices of Londonderry, 28 L. R. Ir. 440, p. 450, judg- 
ment of O’Brien, J. : 

3 Wise v. Dunning [1902], 1 K. B. 167, or rather some expressions 
used in the judgments in that case, may undoubtedly be cited as laying 
down the broader rule, that a public meeting in itself lawful, and 
carried on, so far as the promoters and the members of it are concerned, 
perfectly peaceably, may become unlawful solely because the natural 
consequence of the meeting will be to produce an unlawful act, viz a 
breach of the peace on the part of opponents (see pp. 175, 176, judg- 
ment of Alverstone, C. J.; p. 178, judgment of Darling, J.; pp. 179, 
180, judgment of Channell, J.). It should be noted, however, that Wise 
v. Dunning has reference, not to the circumstances under which a meet- 
ing becomes an unlawful assembly, but to the different question, what 
are the circumstances under which a person may be required to find 
Berea for good behaviour? (see Kenny, Outlines of Oriminal Law, 
p. 486). 

THE RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 273 

or broken up by the magistrates simply because the Chapter 
meeting may probably or naturally lead to a breach 
of the peace on the part of wrongdoers. 

To the application of this principle there exist 
certain limitations or exceptions. They are grounded 
on the absolute necessity for preserving the King’s 
peace. 

First limitation.—If there is anything unlawful (1) where 
in the conduct of the persons convening or addressing eto 
@ meeting, and the illegality is of a kind which Provoke. 
naturally provokes opponents to a breach of the Pe. 
peace, the speakers at and the members of the meet- 
ing may be held to cause the breach of the peace, and 
the meeting itself may thus become an unlawful 
meeting. If, for example, a Protestant controver- 
sialist surrounded by his friends uses in some public 
place where there is a large Roman Catholic popula- 
tion, abusive language which is in fact slanderous of 
Roman Catholics, or which he is by a local by-law 
forbidden to use in the streets, and thereby provokes 
a mob of Roman Catholics to break the peace, the 
meeting may become an unlawful assembly. And 
the same result may ensue where, though there is 
nothing in the mode in which the meeting is carried 
on which provokes a breach of the peace, yet the object 
of the meeting is in itself not strictly lawful, and may 
therefore excite opponents to a breach of the peace.’ 

Second limitation.—Where a public meeting, (2) Where 
though the object of the meeting and the conduct of meeting 

ul 
the members thereof are strictly lawful, provokes a but parse 
oe! ce . can on 
breach of the peace, and it is impossible to preserve or te kept by 
dispersing 
it. 
1 Compare Wise v. Dunning [1902], 1 K. B. 167, and 0’ Kelly v. 
Harvey, 14 L. R. Ir. 105. 
T 

Part I 

274 THE RULE OF LAW 

etme te OO ne ee Sat eee 
restore the peace by any other means than by dispers- 
ing the meeting, then magistrates, constables, and 
other persons in authority may call upon the meeting 
to disperse, and, if the meeting does not disperse, it 
becomes an unlawful assembly. Let us suppose, for 
example, that the Salvation Army hold a meeting at 
Oxford, that a so-called Skeleton Army come together 
with a view to preventing the Salvationists from 
assembling, and that it is in strictness impossible for 
the peace to be preserved by any other means than by 
requiring the Salvationists to disperse. Under these 
circumstances, though the meeting of the Salvation 
Army is in itself perfectly lawful, and though the 
wrongdoers are the members of the Skeleton Army, 
yet the magistrates may, it would seem, if they can in 
no other way preserve the peace, require the Salvation- 
ists to disperse, and if the Salvationists do not do so, 
the meeting becomes an unlawful assembly ; and it is 
possible that, if the magistrates have no other means 
of preserving the peace, «ec. cannot protect the 
Salvationists from attack by the Skeleton Army, they 
may lawfully prevent the Salvationists from holding 
the meeting.’ But the only justification for prevent- 
ing the Salvationists from exercising their legal 
tights is the necessity of the case. If the peace can 
be preserved, not by breaking up an otherwise lawful 

1 See especially O'Kelly v. Harvey, 14 L. R. Ir. 105. 

? It is particularly to be noted that in O'Kelly v. Harvey, 14 L. R. 
Ir. 105, the case in which is carried furthest the right of magistrates to 
preserve the peace by dispersing a lawful meeting, X, the magistrate 
against whom an action for assault was brought, believed that there 
would be a breach of the peace if the meeting broken up continued 
assembled, and that there was no other way by which the breach of 
the peace could be avoided but by stopping and dispersing the meet- 
ing. Ibid. p. 109, judgment of Law, C. 

THE RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 275 
ee ee ee ee Ee SRR 
meeting, but by arresting the wrongdoers—in this Chapter 
case the Skeleton Army—the magistrates or con- _"~ 
stables are bound, it is submitted, to arrest the wrong- 
doers and to protect the Salvationists in the exercise 
of their lawful rights.’ 

One point, however, deserves special -notice since 
it is apt to be overlooked. 

The limitations or restrictions which arise from the Limite 
paramount necessity for preserving the King’s peace right of 

are, whatever their extent,—and as to their exact ede 
3 : : mies ° : are really 
extent some fair doubt exists,—in reality nothing itatsen 
else than restraints, which, for the sake of preserving %™ iz- 
dividual] 

the peace, are imposed upon the ordinary freedom of freedom. 
individuals. 

Thus if A, a religious controversialist, acting 
alone and unaccompanied by friends and supporters, 
addresses the public in, say, the streets of Liverpool, 
and uses language which is defamatory or abusive, or, 
without being guilty of defamation, uses terms of 
abuse which he is by a local by-law forbidden to use 
in the streets, and thereby, as a natural result of his 
oratory, excites his opponents to a breach of the peace, 
he may be held liable for the wrongful acts of which 
his language is the cause though not the legal justi- 
fication, and this though he does not himself break 
the peace, nor intend to cause others to violate it. 
He may, certainly, be called upon to find sureties for 
his good behaviour, and he may, probably, be pre- 
vented by the police from continuing addresses which 
are exciting a breach of the peace, for ‘the cases with 
“‘ respect to apprehended breaches of the peace show 

1 This is particularly well brought out in O'Kelly v. Harvey, 14 
L. R Ir. 105. 

Part II. 

276 THE RULE OF LAW 

“that the law does regard the infirmity of human 
“temper to the extent of considering that a breach of 
“ the peace, although an illegal act, may be the natural 
“consequence of insulting or abusive language or 
“ conduct.” * 

So again‘it may, where the public peace cannot 
otherwise be preserved, be lawful to interfere with 
the legal rights of an individual and to prevent him 
from pursuing a course which in itself is perfectly 
legal. Thus A, a zealous Protestant lady, walks 
through a crowd of Roman Catholics wearing a 
party emblem, namely, an orange lily, which under 
the circumstances of the case is certain to excite, and 
does excite, the anger of the mob. She has no inten- 
tion of provoking a breach of the peace, she is doing 
nothing which is in itself unlawful ; she exposes her- 
self, however, to insult, and to pressing danger of 
public attack. A riot has begun ; -X, a constable who 
has no other means of protecting A, or of restoring 
the peace, requests her to remove the lily. She 
refuses to do so. He then, without use of any need- 
less force, removes the flower and thereby restores the 
peace. The conduct of X is apparently legal, and A 
has no ground of action for what would otherwise 
have been an assault. The legal vindication of X’s 
conduct is not that A was a wrongdoer, or that the 
rioters were within their rights, but that the King’s 
peace could not be restored without compelling A to 
remove the lily.’ - 
me eae [1902], 1 K. B. 167, at pp. 179, 180, judgment 

2 Humphries v. Connor, 17 Ir. C. 4D R. 1. The case is very 

noticeable ; it carries the right of magistrates or constables to i 
Rit inter- 
fere with the legal conduct of A, for the sake of preventing or terminat- 

THE RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 277 

No public meeting, further, which would not 
otherwise be illegal, becomes so (unless in virtue of 
some special Act of Parliament) in consequence of 
any proclamation or notice by a Secretary of State, 
by a magistrate, or by any other official. Suppose, 
for example, that the Salvationists advertise through- 
out the town that they intend holding a meeting in 
a field which they have hired near Oxford, that they 
intend to assemble in St. Giles’s and march thence 
with banners fiying and bands playing to their 
proposed place of worship. Suppose that the Home 
Secretary thinks that, for one reason or another, it is 
undesirable that the meeting should take place, and 
serves formal notice upon every member of the army, 
or on the officers who are going to conduct the so- 
called ‘‘campaign” at Oxford, that the gathering 
must not take place. This notice does not alter the 
character of the meeting, though, if the meeting be 
illegal, the notice makes any one who reads it aware 
of the character of the assembly, and thus affects his 
responsibility for attending it.’ Assume that the 

ing a breach of the peace by X, to its very furthest extent. The inter- 
ference, if justifiable at all, can be justified only by necessity, and an 
eminent Irish judge has doubted whether it was not in this case 
carried too far. ‘‘I do not see where we are to draw the line. If 
““[X ] is at liberty to take a lily from one person [A] because the wear- 
“ing of it is displeasing to others, who may make it an excuse for a 
“breach of the peace, where are we to stop? It seems to me that we 
“are making, not the law of the land, but the law of the mob supreme, 
“‘and recognising in constables a power of interference with the rights of 
“the Queen’s subjects, which, if carried into effect to the full extent of 
“the principle, might be accompanied by constitutional danger. If it 
‘had been alleged that the lady wore the emblem with an intent to 
“provoke a breach of the peace, it would render her a wrongdoer ; and 
‘she might be chargeable as a person creating a breach of the peace,” 
Humphries v. Connor, 17 Ir. C. L. R. 1, at pp. 8, 9, per Fitzgerald, J. 
1 See Rex v. Fursey, 6 C. & P. 81; 3 St. Tr. (a. 8) 543. 

Chapter 
VIL 

Meeting 
not made 
unlawful 
by official 
proclama- 
tion of its 

illegality. 

278 THE RULE OF LAW 

ama Se Sg I sit en se le ee 
Part 0. meeting would have been lawful if the notice had 
not been issued, and it certainly will not become 
unlawful because a Secretary of State has forbidden 
it to take place. The proclamation has under these 
circumstances as little legal effect as would have a 
proclamation from the Home Office forbidding me or 
any other person to walk down the High Street. It 
follows, therefore, that the government has little or 
no power of preventing meetings which to all appear- 
ance are lawful, even though they may in fact turn 
out when actually convened to be unlawful because 
of the mode in which they are conducted. This is 
certainly a singular instance of the way in which adher- 
ence to the principle that the proper function of the 
state is the punishment, not the prevention, of crimes, 
deprives the executive of discretionary authority. 

Meeting A meeting, lastly, may be lawful which, neverthe- 
Ieful less, any wise or public-spirited person would hesitate 
though its 

holdmg +0 convene. For A, B, and C’ may have a right to 
fo bie Bold a meeting, although their doing so will as a 
interest. matter of fact probably excite opponents to deeds of 
violence, and possibly produce bloodshed. Suppose 
a Protestant zealot were to convene a meeting for 
the purpose of denouncing the evils of the con- 
fessional, and were to choose as the scene of the 
open-air gathering some public place where meetings 
were usually held in the midst of a large town filled 
with a population of Roman Catholic poor. The 
meeting would, it is conceived, be lawful, but no one 
can doubt that it might provoke violence on the part 
of opponents. Neither the government, however, 
nor the magistrates could (it is submitted), as a rule, 
at any rate, prohibit and prevent the meeting from 

THE RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 279 

taking place. They might, it would seem, prevent 
the meeting if the Protestant controversialist and his 
friends intended to pursue a course of conduct, e.g. 
to give utterance to libellous abuse, which would be 
both illegal and might naturally produce a breach of 
the peace, or if the circumstances were such that the 
peace could not be preserved otherwise than by 
preventing the meeting.’ But neither the govern- 
ment nor the magistrates can, it is submitted, solely 
on the ground that a public meeting may provoke 
wrongdoers to a breach of the peace, prevent loyal 
citizens from meeting together peaceably and for a 
lawful purpose. Of the policy or of the impolicy of 
denying to the highest authority in the state very 
wide power to take in their discretion precautionary 
Measures against the evils which may flow from the 
injudicious exercise of legal rights, it is unnecessary 
here to say anything. The matter which is worth 
notice is the way in which the rules as to the right 
of public meeting illustrate both the legal spirit of 
our institutions and the process by which the decisions 
of the courts as to the rights of individuals have in 
effect made the right of public meeting a part of the 
law of the constitution. 

1 See p. 269, ante, and compare O'Kelly v. Harvey, 14 L. R Ir. 
105, with Reg. v. Justices of Londonderry, 28 L. R. Ir. 440, and Wrse 
v. Dunning [1902], 1 K. B. 167, with Beatty v. Gillbanks, 9 Q. B. D. 
308. And the magistrates might probably bind over the conveners 
of the meeting to find sureties for their good behaviour. The law on 
this point may, it appears, be thus summed up: “Even a pereon who 
‘has not actually committed any offence at all may be required to 
‘find sureties for good behaviour, or to keep the peace, if there be 
“‘ reasonable grounds to fear that he may commit some offence, or may 
“incite others to do eo, or even that he may act in some manner 
“ which would naturally tend to induce other people (against his desire) 
“to commit one.”—Kenny, Outlines of Criminal Law, p. 486, 

Part 1. 

No sharp 
line can 
be drawn 
between 
rules of 
private 
law or of 
criminal 
law and 
constitu- 

tional law. 

CHAPTER VIII 

MARTIAL LAW 

TuE rights already treated of in the foregoing chapter, 
as for example the right to personal freedom or the 
right to free expression of opinion, do not, it may be 
suggested, properly belong to the province of consti- 
tutional law at all, but form part either of private law 
strictly so called, or of the ordinary criminal law. 
Thus 4’s right to personal freedom is, it may be said, 
only the right of A not to be assaulted, or imprisoned, 
by X, or (to look at the same thing from another 
point of view) is nothing else than the right of A, if 
assaulted by X, to bring an action against X, or to 
have X punished as a criminal for the assault. Now 
in this suggestion there lies an element of important 
truth, yet it is also undoubted that the right to 
personal freedom, the right to free discussion, and the 
like, appear in the forefront of many written constitu- 
tions, and are in fact the chief advantages which 
citizens hope to gain by the change from a despotic to 
a constitutional form of government. 

The truth is that these rights may be looked upon 
from two points of view. They may be considered 
simply parts of private or, it may be, of criminal law ; 

thus the right to personal freedom may, as already 
280 

MARTIAL LAW 281 

pointed out, be looked at as the right of A not to have 
the control of his body interfered with by X. But in 
so far as these rights hold good against the governing 
body in the state, or in other words, in so far as these 
rights determine the relation of individual citizens 
towards the executive, they are part, and a most im- 
portant part, of the law of the constitution. 

Now the noticeable point is that in England the 
rights of citizens as against each other are (speaking 
generally) the same as the rights of citizens against 
any servant of the Crown. This is the significance of 
the assertion that in this country the law of the con- 
stitution is part of the ordinary law of the land. The 
fact that a Secretary of State cannot at his discretion 
and for reasons of state arrest, imprison, or punish any 
man, except, of course, where special powers are con- 
ferred upon him by statute, as by an Alien Act or by 
an Extradition Act, is simply a result of the principle 
that a Secretary of State is governed in his official as 
in his private conduct by the ordinary law of the 
realm. Were the Home Secretary to assault the 
leader of the Opposition in a fit of anger, or were 
the Home Secretary to arrest him because he thought 
his political opponent’s freedom dangerous to the 
state, the Secretary of State would in either case be 
liable to an action, and all other penalties to which 
a person exposes himself by committing an assault. 
The fact that the arrest of an influential politician 
whose speeches might excite disturbance was a strictly 

Chapter 

administrative act would afford no defence to the 

Minister or to the constables who obeyed his orders. 
The subjects treated of in this chapter and in the 
next three chapters clearly belong to the field of 

282 THE RULE OF LAW 

—_—_—— 

. constitutional law, and no one would think of object- 

ing to their treatment in a work on the law of the 
constitution that they are really part of private law. 
Yet, if the matter be looked at carefully, it will be found 
that, just as rules which at first sight seem to belong 
to the domain of private law are in reality the foun- 
dation of constitutional principles, so topics which 
appear to belong manifestly to the law of constitu- 
tion depend with us at bottom on the principles of 
private or of criminal law. Thus the position of a 
soldier is in England governed, as we shall see, by the 
principle, that though a soldier is subject to special 
liabilities in his military capacity, he remains while in 
the ranks, as he was when out of them, subject to all 
the liabilities of an ordinary citizen. So, from a legal 
point of view, ministerial responsibility is simply one 
application of the doctrine which pervades English 
law,’ that no one can plead the command of a superior, 
were it the order of the Crown itself, in defence of 
conduct otherwise not justified by law. 

Turn the matter which way you will, you come 
back to the all-important consideration on which we 
have already dwelt, that whereas under many foreign 
constitutions the rights of individuals flow, or appear 
to flow, from the articles of the constitution, in Eng- 
land the law of the constitution is the result, not the 
source of the rights of individuals. It becomes, too, 
more and more apparent that the means by which the 
Courts have maintained the law of the constitution 
have been the strict insistence upon the two principles, 
first of ‘“‘equality before the law,” which negatives 

1 See Mommsen, Romische Staatsrecht, p. 672, for the existence of 
what seems to have been a similar principle in early Roman law. 

MARTIAL LAW 283 
ee es Se 
exemption from the liabilities of ordinary citizens or 
from the jurisdiction of the ordinary Courts, and, 
secondly, of “ personal responsibility of wrongdoers,” 
which excludes the notion that any breach of law on 
the part of a subordinate can be justified by the orders 
of his superiors; the legal dogma, as old at least as 
the time of Edward the Fourth, that, if any man arrest 
another without lawful warrant, even by the King’s 
command, he shall not be excused, but shall be liable 
to an action for false imprisonment, is not a special 
limitation imposed upon the royal prerogative, but 
the application to acts done under royal orders of 
that principle of individual responsibility which runs 
through the whole law of torts.' 

‘Martial law,”* in the proper sense of that 
term, in which it means the suspension of ordinary 
Jaw and the temporary government of a country 
or parts of it by military tribunals, is unknown to 
the law of England.* We have nothing equivalent 
to what is called in France the ‘‘ Declaration of the 
State of Siege,” * under which the authority ordinarily 
vested in the civil power for the maintenance of 

1 See Hearn, Government of England (2nd ed.), chap. iv.; and 
compare Gardiner, History, x. pp. 144, 145. 

2 See Forsyth, Opinions, pp. 188-216, 481-563 ; Stephen, History 
of Criminal Law, i. pp. 201-216; Rez v. Pinney, 5 OC. & P. 254; 3 St. 
Tr. (n. 8.) 11; Reg. v. Vincent, 9 C. & P. 91; 3 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 1037; 
Reg. v. Neale, 9 C. & P. 431. 

8 This statement has no reference to the law of any other country 
than England, even though such country may form part of the British 
Empire. With regard to England in time of peace the statement 
is certainly true. As to how far, if at all, it ought to be qualified 
with regard to a state of war, see Appendix, Note X., Martial Law in 
England during Time of War or Insurrection. 

4 See Loi sur [état de sidge, 9 Aout 1849, Roger et Sorel, Codes et 
Lois, p. 436; Lot 3 Avril 1878, art. 1, and generally Duguit, Manuel 
de Droit Constitutionnel, ». 76, pp. 510-513, 926. See p. 288, post. 

Chapter 

Martial 

Part IL 

In what 

ogn: 
by English 
law. 

284 THE RULE OF LAW 

order and police passes entirely to the army (autorité 
militaire). This is an unmistakable proof of the per- 
manent supremacy of the law under our constitution. 

The assertion, however, that no such thing as 
martial law exists under our system of government, 
though perfectly true, will mislead any one who does 
not attend carefully to the distinction between two 
utterly different senses in which the term “ martial 
law” is used by English writers. 

Martial law is sometimes employed as a name for 

~ the common law right of the Crown and its servants 

to repel force by force in the case of invasion, insur- 
rection, riot, or generally of any violent resistance to 
the law. This right, or power, is essential to the very 
existence of orderly government, and is most assuredly 
recognised in the most ample manner by the law of 
England. It is a power which has in itself no special 
connection with the existence of an armed force. The 
Crown has the right to put down breaches of the 
peace. Every subject, whether a civilian or a soldier, 
whether what is called a “servant of the govern- 
ment,” such for example as a policeman, or a person 
in no way connected with the administration, not 
only has the right, but is, as a matter of legal duty,’ 
bound to assist in putting down breaches of the peace. 
No doubt policemen or soldiers are the persons who, 
as being specially employed in the maintenance of 
order, are most generally called upon to suppress a 
riot, but it is clear that all loyal subjects are bound to 
take their part in the suppression of riots. 

1 Compare Miller v. Knoz, 6 Scott 1. See statement of Commis- 
siouers including Bowen, L.J., and R. B. Haldane, Q.C., for Inquiring into 
the Disturbances at Featherstone in 1893 (C. 7234], and see Appendix, 
Note VL, Duty of Soldiers called upon to disperse Unlawful Agsembly. 

MARTIAL LAW 285 

It is also clear that a soldier has, as such, no 
exemption from liability to the law for his conduct in 
restoring order. Officers, magistrates, soldiers, police- 
men, ordinary citizens, all occupy in the eye of the 
law the same position ; they are, each and all of them, 
bound to withstand and put down breaches of the 
peace, such as riots and other disturbances; they are, 
each and all of them, authorised to employ so much 
force, even to the taking of life, as may be necessary 
for that purpose, and they are none of them entitled 
to use more ; they are, each and all of them, liable to 
be called to account before a jury for the use of ex- 
cessive, that is, of unnecessary force; they are each, 
it must be added—for this is often forgotten—hable, 
in theory at least, to be called to account before the 
Courts for non-performance of their duty as citizens in 
putting down riots, though of course the degree and 
kind of energy which each is reasonably bound to 
exert in the maintenance of order may depend upon 
and differ with his position as officer, magistrate, 
soldier, or ordinary civilian. Whoever doubts these 
propositions should study the leading case of Rez v. 
Pinney,’ in which was fully considered the duty of 
the Mayor of Bristol] in reference to the Reform Riots 
of 1831. 

So accustomed have people become to fancy that 
the maintenance of the peace is the duty solely of 
soldiers or policemen, that many students will prob- 
ably feel surprise on discovering, from the doctrine 
laid down in Rex v. Pinney, how stringent are the 
obligations of a magistrate in time of tumult, and how 
unlimited is the amount of force which he is bound to 

16C & P. 254; 3 St. Tr. (u. 2.) 11. 

Chapter 
VIIL 

286 THE RULE OF LAW 

employ in support of the law. A student, further, 
must be on his guard against being misled, as he well 
might be, by the language of the Riot Act.’ That 
statute provides, in substance, that if twelve rioters 
continue together for an hour after a magistrate has 
made a proclamation to them in the terms of the Act 
(which proclamation is absurdly enough called read- 
ing the Riot Act) ordering them to disperse, he may 
command the troops to fire upon the rioters or charge 
them sword in hand.? This, of course, is not the 
language, but it is the effect of the enactment. Now 
the error into which an uninstructed reader is likely 
to fall, and into which magistrates and officers have 
from time to time (and notably during the Gordon 
riots of 1780) in fact fallen, is to suppose that the 
effect of the Riot Act is negative as well as positive, 
and that, therefore, the military cannot be employed 
without the fulfilment of the conditions imposed by 
the statute. This notion is now known to be erro- 
neous ; the occasion on which force can be employed, 
and the kind and degree of force which it is lawful 
to use in order to put down a riot, is determined by 
nothing else than the necessity of the case. 

If, then, by martial law be meant the power of the 
government or of loyal citizens to maintain public 
order, at whatever cost of blood or property may be 
necessary, martial law is assuredly part of the law of 
England. Even, however, as to this kind of martial 
law one should always bear in mind that the question 
whether the force employed was necessary or excessive 
will, especially where death has ensued, be ultimately 

1 1 Geo, I. stat. 2, c. 5. 
+ See Stephen, History of Criminal Law, i. pp. 202-205. 

MARTIAL LAW 287 

determined by a judge and jury, and that the estimate 
of what constitutes necessary force formed by a judge 
and jury, sitting in quiet and safety after the sup- 
pression of a riot, may differ considerably from the 
judgment formed by a general or magistrate, who is 
surrounded by armed rioters, and knows that at any 
moment a riot may become a formidable rebellion, 
and the rebellion if unchecked become a successful 
revolution. 

Martial law is, however, more often used as the 
name for the government of a country or a district 
by military tribunals, which more or less supersede 
the jurisdiction of the Courts. The proclamation of 
martial law in this sense of the term is, as has been 
already pointed out,’ nearly equivalent to the state 
of things which in France and many other foreign 
countries is known as the declaration of a “state of 
siege,” and is in effect the temporary and recognised 
government of a country by military force. The 
legal aspect. of this condition of affairs in states which 
recognise the existence of this kind of martial law 
can hardly be better given than by citing some of the 
provisions of the law which at the present day regu- 
lates the state of siege in France :— 

1 This statement does not contradict anything decided by Ez parte 
D. F. Marais [1902], A. C. 109, nor is it inconsistent with the language 
used in the judgment of the Privy Council, if that language be strictly 
construed, as it ought to be, in accordance with the important principles 
that, first, “a case is only an authority for what it actually decides” 
(Quinn v. Leathem(1901}, A. C. 506, judgment of Halsbury, L. C.), and, 
secondly, “every judgment must be read as applicable to the particular 
“facta proved, or assumed to be proved, since the generality of the 
“expressions which may be found there are not intended to be exposi- 
“tions of the whole law, but governed and qualified by the particular 
“ facts of the case in which such expressions are to be found ” (tbtd.). 

2 See p. 283, ante. 

Chapter 

In what 
sense mar- 
tial law 
not recog- 
Dised by 
English 
law. 

288 THE RULE OF LAW 

“7, Aussitét état de siege déclaré, les pouvorrs 
“dont l'autorité civile était revétue pour le maintien 
“de lordre et de la police passent tout enters a 
“Vautorité militaire—L'autorité civile continue 
“neanmoins & exercer ceux de ces pouvoirs dont 
“Vautorité militaire ne [a pas dessaisie. 

“8. Lest ribunaux militatres peuvent étre sarsis 
“de la connaissance des crimes et délits contre la 
“streté de la République, contre la constitution, 
“contre Tordre et la pais: publique, quelle que soit 
“la qualité des auteurs principaux et des complices. 

“9, L’autorité militaire a le droit,—l° De faire 
“ des perquisitions, de jour et de nutt, dans le domicile 
“des citoyens ;—2° Déloigner les repris de justice et 
“les individus qui n'ont pas leur domicile dans les 
“leux, soumrs & [état de siege ;—3° Dordonner la 
‘« remise des armes et munitions, et de procedér a leur 
“recherche et a leur enlévement ;—4° D’interdire les 
‘‘mublacations et les réunions qu'elle juge de nature 
“4 exciter ou a entretenir le desordre.” ' 

We may reasonably, however, conjecture that the 
terms of the law give but a faint conception of the 
real condition of affairs when, in consequence of tumult 
or insurrection, Paris, or some other part of France, is 
declared in a state of siege, and, to use a significant 
expression known to some continental countries, ‘‘ the 
constitutional guarantees are suspended.” We shall 
hardly go far wrong if we assume that, during this 
suspension of ordinary law, any man whatever is liable 
to arrest, Imprisonment, or execution at the will of a 
military tribunal consisting of a few officers who are 
excited by the passions natural to civil war. However 

1 Roger et Sorel, Codes et Lois, pp. 436, 437. 

MARTIAL LAW 289 

this may be, it is clear that in France, even under the 
present Republican government, the suspension of law 
involved in the proclamation of a state of siege is 
a thing fully recognised by the constitution, and 
(strange though the fact may appear) the authority 
of military Courts during a state of siege is greater 
under the Republic than it was under the monarchy 
of Louis Philippe.’ 

Now, this kind of martial law is in England utterly 
unknown to the constitution. Soldiers may suppress 
a riot as they may resist an invasion, they may fight 
rebels just as they may fight foreign enemies, but 
they have no right under the law to inflict punish- 
ment for riot or rebellion. During the effort to 
restore peace, rebels may be lawfully killed just as 
enemies may be lawfully slaughtered in battle, or 
prisoners may be shot to prevent their escape, but 
any execution (independently of military law) in- 
flicted by a Court-martial is illegal, and technically 
murder. Nothing better illustrates the noble energy 
with which judges have maintained the rule of 
regular law, even at periods of revolutionary vio- 
lence, than Wolfe Tone's Case.’ In 1798, Wolfe Tone, 
an Irish rebel, took part in a French invasion of 
Ireland. The man-of-war in which he sailed was 
captured, and Wolfe Tone was brought to trial before 
a Court-martial in Dublin. He was thereupon sen- 
tenced to be hanged. He held, however, no commis- 
sion as an English officer, his only commission being 

1 See Geoffroy’s Case, 24 Journal du Palais, p. 1218, cited by 
Forsyth, Opinions, p. 483. Conf., however, for statement of limits 
imposed by French law on action of military authorities during state 
of siege, Duguit, Manuel de Drow Constitutionnel, pp. 512, 513. 

2 97 St. Tr. 614. 
U 

Chapter 
Vii. 

Part IL 

290 THE RULE OF LAW 

one from the French Republic. On the morning when 
his execution was about to take place application was 
made to the Irish King’s Bench for a writ of habeas 
corpus. The ground taken was that Wolfe Tone, not 
being a military person, was not subject to punishment 
by a Court-martial, or, in effect, that the officers who 
tried him were attempting illegally to enforce martial 
law. The Court of King’s Bench at once granted the - 
writ. When it is remembered that Wolfe Tone’s 
substantial guilt was admitted, that the Court was 
made up of judges who detested the rebels, and that 
in 1798 Ireland was in the midst of a revolutionary 
crisis, it will be admitted that no more splendid 
assertion of the supremacy of the Jaw can be found 
than the protection of Wolfe Tone by the Irish Bench. 

CHAPTER IX 

THE ARMY? 

Tue English army may for the purposes of this Chapter 
treatise be treated as consisting of the Standing Army _™:- 
or, in technical language, the Regular Forces? and of The A™y- 
the Territorial Force,’ which, like the Militia,‘ is a 

1 See Stephen, Commentaries, ii. book iv. chap. viii.; Gneist, Das 
Englische Verwaltungsrecht, ii. 952-966 ; Manual of Military Law. 

As to Standing Army, 1 Will & Mary, c 5; see the Army 
Discipline and Regulation Act, 1879, 42 & 43 Vict. c. 33; the Army 
Act, te. the Army Act, 1881, 44 & 45 Vict. c 58, with the amend- 
ments made up to 1907. 

2 “The expressions ‘regular forces’ and ‘His Majesty’s regular 
forces’ mean officers and soldiers who by their commission, terms of 
enlistment, or otherwise, are liable to render continuously for a term 
military service to His Majesty in any part of the world, including, 
subject to the modifications in this Act mentioned, the Royal Marines 
and His Majesty’s Indian forces and the Royal Malta Artillery, and 
subject to this qualification, that when the reserve forces are subject to 
military law such forces become during the period of their being s0 
subject part of the regular forces” (Army Act, 8 190 (8)). 

8 See the Territorial and Reserve Forces Act, 1907 (7 Edw. VII. 
c. 9), especially s. 6, 8. 1, sub-s. (6), and the Army Act. 

4 The Militia.— The Territorial and Reserve Forces Act, 1907, 
does not repeal the various Militia Acts. Until these Acts are 
repealed the statutory power of raising the militia, either regular or 
local, and of forming thereof regiments and corps will continue to 
exist, (For the law regulating the militia see 13 Car. II. stat. 1. 
c. 6; 14 Car. II. 3; 15 Car. IL c 4; the Militia Act, 1802, 42 
Geo. ITI. c. 90; Militia Act, 1882, 45 & 46 Vict. c. 49; and Regula- 
tion of the Forces Act, 1881, 44 & 45 Vict. « 57.) The militia as 
long as it exists is in theory a local force levied by conscription, but 

291 

Part IL 

292 THE RULE OF LAW 

territorial army for the defence of the United 
Kingdom. ; 

Each of these forces has been rendered subordinate 
to the law of the land. My object is not to give 
even an outline of the enactments affecting the army, 
but simply to explain the legal principles on which 
this supremacy of the law throughout the army has 
been secured. 

It will be convenient in considering this matter to 
reverse the order pursued in the common text-books ; 
these contain a great deal about the militia, the terri- 
torial force of its day, and comparatively little about 
the regular forces, or what we now call the “army.” 
The reason of this is that historically the militia is 
an older institution than the permanent army, and the 
existence of a standing army is historically, and 
according to constitutional theories, an anomaly. 

the power of raising it by ballot has been for a considerable time 
suspended, and the militia has been in fact recruited by voluntary 
enlistment. Embodiment converts the militia into a regular army, 
but an army which cannot be called upon to serve abroad. Embodi- 
ment can lawfully take place only in case “of imminent national 
danger or of great emergency,” the occasion being first communicated 
to Parliament if sitting, or if not sitting, proclaimed by Order in Council 
(Militia Act, 1882, 8 18; 2 Steph. Comm. (14th ed.) p. 469). The 
maintenance of discipline among the members of the militia when 
embodied depends on the passing of the Army (Annual) Act, or in 
popular language, on the continuance of the Mutiny Act (see p. 305, 
post). 

The position of the militia, however, is affected by the Territorial 
and Reserve Forces Act, 1907, in two ways :— 

(1) All the units of the general (or regular) militia may, and will, 
it is said, in a short time have either been transferred to the Army 
Reserve (under 8. 34) or have been disbanded. 

(2) The personnel of the regular militia will shortly, it is said, 
cease to exist as such. 

The actual position of the militia, however, until the Acts on 
which its existence depends have been repealed, is worth noting, as it 
is conceivable that Parliament may think it worth while to keep alive 
the historical right of the Crown to raise the militia. 

THE ARMY 293 
EEN So a ae 
Hence the standing army has often been treated by 
writers of authority as a sort of exceptional or sub- 
ordinate topic, a kind of excrescence, so to speak, on 
the national and constitutional force known as the 
militia.’ As a matter of fact, of course, the standing 
army is now the real national force, and the territorial 
force is a body of secondary importance. 

As to the Standing Army. —A permanent army of 
paid soldiers, whose main duty is one of absolute 
obedience to commands, appears at first sight to be 
an institution inconsistent with that rule of law or 
submission to the civil authorities, and especially to 
the judges, which is essential to popular or Pazrlia- 
mentary government; and in truth the existence of 
permanent paid forces has often in most countries and 
at times in England—notably under the Common- 
wealth—been found inconsistent with the existence of 
what, by a lax though intelligible mode of speech, is 
called a free government.’ The belief, indeed, of our 
statesmen down to a time considerably later than the 
Revolution of 1689 was that a standing army must be 
fatal to English freedom, yet very soon after the 
Revolution it became apparent that the existence of a 
body of paid soldiers was necessary to the safety of 

1 In the seventeenth century Parliament apparently meant to rely 
for the defence of England upon this national army raised from the 
counties and placed under the guidance of country gentlemen. See 
14 Car, II. c. 3. 

2 See, ag. Macaulay, History, iii. pp. 42-47. ‘Throughout the 
period [of the Civil War and the Interregnum] the military authorities 
“maintained with great strictnesa their exclusive jurisdiction over 
“ offences committed both by officers and soldiers, More than once 
“conflicts took place between the civil magistrates and the commanders 
“of the army over this question.”—Firth, Cromwell’s Army, p. 310, 
Mr, Firth gives several examples (pp. 310-312) of the assertion or 
attempted assertion of the authority of the civil power even during a 
period of military predominance. 

Chapter 

peas 

Ite e Hs 
ence recon- 
ciled with 
Parlia- 
mentary 
govern- 
ment by 
annual 
Mntiny 
Acta. 

Part II 

294 THE RULE OF LAW 

Fe oe eh ne el eg a a te 
the nation. Englishmen, therefore, at the end of the 
seventeenth and the beginning of the eighteenth 
centuries, found themselves placed in this dilemma. 
With a standing army the country could not, they 
feared, escape from despotism; without a standing 
army the country could not, they were sure, avert 
invasion ; the maintenance of national liberty appeared 
to involve the sacrifice of national independence. 
Yet English statesmanship found almost by accident 
a practical escape from this theoretical dilemma, and 
the Mutiny Act, though an enactment passed in a 
hurry to meet an immediate peril, contains the 
solution of an apparently insolvable problem. 

In this instance, as in others, of success achieved by 
what is called the practical good sense, the political 
instinct, or the statesmanlike tact of Englishmen, we 
ought to be on our guard against two errors. 

We ought not, on the one hand, to fancy that Eng- 
lish statesmen acted with some profound sagacity or 
foresight peculiar to themselves, and not to be found 
among the politicians of other countries. Still less 
ought we, on the other, to imagine that luck or chance 
helps Englishmen out of difficulties with which the 
inhabitants of other countries cannot cope. Political 
common sense, or political instinct, means little more 
than habitual training in the conduct of affairs; this 
practical acquaintance with public business was en- 
joyed by educated Englishmen a century or two 
earlier than by educated Frenchmen or Germans; 
hence the early prevalence in England of sounder 
principles of government than have till recently pre- 
vailed in other lands. The statesmen of the Revolu- 
tion succeeded in dealing with difficult problems, not 

THE ARMY 295 
a ar et ee 
because they struck out new and brilliant ideas, or 
because of luck, but because the notions of law and 
government which had grown up in England were in 
many points sound, and because the statesmen of 
1689 applied to the difficulties of their time the 
notions which were habitual to the more thoughtful 
Englishmen of the day. The position of the army, in 
fact, was determined by an adherence on the part of 
the authors of the first Mutiny Act to the funda- 
mental principle of English law, that a soldier may, 
like a clergyman, incur special obligations in his 
official character, but is not thereby exempted from 
the ordinary liabilities of citizenship. 

The object and principles of the first Mutiny Act? 
of 1689 are exactly the same as the object and 
principles of the Army Act,’ under which the 
English army is in substance now governed. A 
comparison of the two statutes shows at a glance 
what are the means by which the maintenance of 
military discipline has been reconciled with the 
maintenance of freedom, or, to use a more accurate 
expression, with the supremacy of the law of the land. 

The preamble to the first Mutiny Act has re- 
appeared with slight alterations in every subsequent 
Mutiny Act, and recites that ‘‘ Whereas no man may 
‘be forejudged of life or limb, or subjected to any 
“kind of punishment by martial law, or in any other 
‘manner than by the judgment of his peers, and 
“according to the known and established laws of 
“this realm; yet, nevertheless, it” [is] ‘‘ requisite for 
“retaining such forces as are, or shall be, raised 

1 1 Will. & Mary, c. 5. 
2 Combined with the Army (Annual) Act, passed each year, 

Chapter . 
IX. 

296 THE RULE OF LAW 

Bt ae 

“during this exigence of affairs, in their duty an 
“ exact discipline be observed; and that soldiers who 
“shall mutiny or stir up sedition, or shall desert 
“their majesties’ service, be brought to a more ex- 
“emplary and speedy punishment than the usual 
‘forms of law will allow.”? 

This recital states the precise difficulty which per- 
plexed the statesmen of 1689. Now let us observe 
the way in which it has been met. 

A soldier, whether an officer or a private, in a stand- 
ing army, or (to use the wider expression of modern 
Acts) ‘‘a person subject to military law,” * stands in a 
two-fold relation: the one is his relation towards his 
fellow-citizens outside the army; the other is his 
relation towards the members of the army, and 
especially towards his military superiors ; any man, 
in short, subject to military law has duties and rights 
as a citizen as well as duties and rights as a soldier. 

1 See Clode, Military Forces of the Orown, i. p. 499. Compare 47 
Vict. c. 8. The variations in the modern Acta, though slight, are 
instructive, 

2 Part V. of the Army Act points out who under English law are 
‘‘ persons subject to military law,” that is to say, who are liable to be 
tried and punished by Court-martial for military, and in some circum- 
stances for civil, offences under the provisions of the Act. 

For our present purpose such persons (speaking broadly at any rate) 
appear to come within three descriptions :—first, persons belonging to 
the regular forces, or, in popular language, the standing army (eee 
Army Act, as. 175 (1), 190 (8)); secondly, persons belonging to the 
territorial force, in certain circumstances, viz. when they are being 
trained, when acting with any regular forces, when embodied, and 
when called out for actual military service for purposes of defence 
(Army Act, ss, 176, 190 (6) (a)); thirdly, persons not belonging to 
the regular forces or to the auxiliary forces who are either employed 
by, or followers of, the army on active service beyond the seas (ibid. 
8. 176 (9) (10)). The regular forces include the Royal Marines when 
on shore and the reserve forces when called out. See Army Act, 
secs. 175, 176 ; conf. Marks v. Frogley [1898], 1 Q. B. (C. A.) 888, 

THE ARMY 297 

His position in each respect is under English law 
governed by definite principles. 

A soldier's position as a citizen. —The fixed 
doctrine of English law is that a soldier, though a 
member of a standing army, is in England subject to 
all the duties and liabilities of an ordinary citizen. 
“Nothing in this Act contained” (so runs the first 
Mutiny Act) “shall extend or be construed to exempt 
“any officer or soldier whatsoever from the ordinary 
“process of law.”' These words contain the clue 
to all our legislation with regard to the standing 
army whilst employed in the United Kingdom. A 
soldier by his contract of enlistment undertakes 
many obligations in addition to the duties incumbent 
upon a civilian. But he does not escape from any 
of the duties of an ordinary British subject. 

The results of this principle are traceable through- 
out the Mutiny Acts. 

A soldier is subject to the same criminal liability as 
a civilian.” He may when in the British dominions 
be put on trial before any competent “civil” (1.e. 

Chapter 
Ix. 

Soldier's 
position as 
citizen. 

Criminal 
liability. 

non-military) Court for any offence for which he - 

would be triable if he were not subject to military 
law, and there are certain offences, such as murder, 
for which he must in general be tried by a civil 
tribunal. Thus, if a soldier murders a companion or 
robs a traveller whilst quartered in England or in 
Van Diemen’s Land, his military character will not 

1 1 Will & Mary, c. 5, & 6; see Clode, Military Forces of the 
Crown, i. p. 500. 

2 Compare Army Act, secs. 41, 144, 162. 

8 Compare, however, the Jurisdiction in Homicide Act, 1862, 
25 & 26 Vict. c. 65, and Clode, Milstary Forces of the Crown, i. 
pp. 206, 207, 

liability. 

Order of 
superiors 
no defence 
to charge 

of crime. 

298 THE RULE OF LAW 

save him from standing in the dock on the charge 
of murder or theft. 

A soldier cannot escape from civil liabilities, as, 
for example, responsibility for debts ; the only exemp- 
tion which he can claim is that he cannot be forced 
to appear in Court, and could not, when arrest for 
debt was allowable, be arrested for any debt not 
exceeding £30." 

No one who has entered into the spirit of con- 
tinental legislation can believe that (say in France or 
Prussia) the rights of a private individual would thus 
have been allowed to override the claims of the public 
service. 

In all conflicts of jurisdiction between a military 
and a civil Court the authority of the civil Court 
prevails. Thus, if a soldier is acquitted or convicted 
of an offence by a competent civil Court, he cannot 
be tried for the same offence by a Court-martial ;* 
but an acquittal or conviction by a Court-martial, say 
for manslaughter or robbery, is no plea to an indict- 
ment for the same offence at the Assizes.* 

When a soldier is put on trial on a charge of crime, 
obedience to superior orders is not of itself a defence.* 

1 See Army Act, s 144. Compare Clode, Military Forces of the 
Crown, i. pp. 207, 208, and Thurston v. Mills, 16 East, 254. 

2 Army Act, 8. 162, sub-ss. 1-6. 

8 Ibid. Contrast the position of the army in relation to the law of 
the land in France. The fundamental principle of French law is, aa 
it apparently always has been, that every kind of crime or offence com- 
mitted by a soldier or person subject to military law must be tried 
by a military tribunal. See Code de Justice Militatre, arts. 55, 56, 76, 
77, and Le Faure, Les Lois Militatres, pp. 167, 173. 

* Stephen, History of Criminal Law, i. pp. 204-206, and compare 
Clode, Military Forces of the Crown, ii. pp. 125-155. The position of 
a soldier is curiously illustrated by the following case, .X was a 
sentinel on board the Achille when she was paying off. “The 
“orders to him from the preceding sentinel were, to keep off all boats, 

THE ARMY 299 

This is a matter which requires explanation. 

A soldier is bound to obey any lawful order which 
he receives from his military superior. But a soldier 
cannot any more than a civilian avoid responsibility 
for breach of the law by pleading that he broke the 
law in bona fide obedience to the orders (say) of the 
commander-in-chief. Hence the position of a soldier 
is in theory and may be in practice a difficult one. 
He may, as it has been well said, be liable to be shot 
by a Court-martial if he disobeys an order, and to be 
hanged by a judge and jury if he obeys it. His 
situation and the line of his duty may be seen by 
considering how soldiers ought to act in the follow- 
Ing cases. 

During a riot an officer orders his soldiers to fire 
upon rioters. The command to fire is justified by 
the fact that no less energetic course of action would 

“‘unless they had officers with uniforms in them, or unless the officer 
“‘on deck allowed them to approach ; and he received a musket, three 
‘blank cartridges, and three balls. The boats pressed; upon which 
“he called repeatedly to them to keep off; but one of them persisted 
“‘and came close under the ship; and he then fired at a man who was 
“in the boat, and killed him. It was put to the jury to find, whether 
“the sentinel did not fire under the mistaken impression that it was 
“his duty; and they found that he did. But a case being reserved, 
“the judges were unanimous that it was, nevertheless, murder. They 
“thought it, however, a proper case for a pardon; and further, they 
“were of opinion, that if the act had been necessary for the pre- 
“servation of the ship, as if the deceased had been stirring up a 
“mutiny, the sentinel would have been justified.”"—Russell, Crimes 
and Misdemeanors (4th ed.), i. p. 823, on the authority of Rex v. Thomas, 
East, T., 1816, MS, Bayley, J. The date of the decision is worth 
noticing ; no one can suppose that the judges of 1816 were disposed 
to underrate the rights of the Crown and its servants. The judgment 
of the Court rests upon and illustrates the incontrovertible priuciple 
of the common law that the fact of a person being a soldier and 
of his acting strictly under orders, does not of iteelf exempt him 
from criminal liability for acts which would be crimes if done by a 
civilian. 

Part IL 

300 THE RULE OF LAW 

See in aril le eee 
be sufficient to put down the disturbance. The 
soldiers are, under these circumstances, clearly bound 
from a legal, as well as from a military, point of view 
to obey the command of their officer. It is a lawful 
order, and the men who carry it out are performing 
their duty both as soldiers and as citizens. 

An officer orders his soldiers in a time of political 
excitement then and there to arrest and shoot without 
trial a popular leader against whom no crime has 
been proved, but who is suspected of treasonable 
designs. In such a case there is (it is conceived) no 
doubt that the soldiers who obey, no less than the 
officer who gives the command, are guilty of murder, 
and liable to be hanged for it when convicted in due 
course of law. In such an extreme instance as this 
the duty of soldiers is, even at the risk of disobeying 
their superior, to obey the law of the land. 

An officer orders his men to fire on a crowd who 
he thinks could not be dispersed without the use of 
firearms. As a matter of fact the amount of force 
which he wishes to employ is excessive, and order 
could be kept by the mere threat that force would be 
used. The order, therefore, to fire is not in itself a 
lawful order, that is, the colonel, or other officer, who 
gives it is not legally justified in giving it, and will 
himself be held criminally responsible for the death 
of any person killed by the discharge of firearms. 
What is, from a legal point of view, the duty of the 
soldiers? The matter is one which has never been 
absolutely decided; the following answer, given by 
Mr. Justice Stephen, is, it may fairly be assumed, as 
nearly correct a reply as the state of the authorities 
makes it possible to provide :— 

THE ARMY 301 

“‘T do not think, however, that the question how 
“far superior orders would justify soldiers or sailors 
“in making an attack upon civilians has ever been 
‘brought before the Courts of law in such a manner 
“as to be fully considered and determined. Probably 
“upon such an argument it would be found that the 
“order of a military superior would justify his in- 
“ feriors in executing any orders for giving which they 
“might fairly suppose their superior officer to have 
‘“‘good reasons. Soldiers might reasonably think 
“that their officer had good grounds for ordering 
“them to fire into a disorderly crowd which to them 
“might not appear to be at that moment engaged in 
“acts of dangerous violence, but soldiers could hardly 
“suppose that their officer could have any good 
“‘ grounds for ordering them to fire a volley down a 
“crowded street when no disturbance of any kind 
‘“‘was either in progress or apprehended. The doc- 
“ trine that a soldier is bound under all circumstances 
“‘ whatever to obey his superior officer would be fatal 
“to military discipline itself, for it would justify the 
‘private in shooting the colonel by the orders of the 
“ captain, or in deserting to the enemy on the field of 
“battle on the order of his immediate superior. I 
“think it is not less monstrous to suppose that 
“superior orders would justify a soldier in the 
“massacre of unoffending civilians in time of peace, 
“or in the exercise of inhuman cruelties, such as the 
‘slaughter of women and children, during a rebellion. 
“The only line that presents itself to my mind is 
“that a soldier should be protected by orders for 
“which he might reasonably believe his officer to 
“have good grounds. The inconvenience of being 

Part IT. 

Soldier's 
position as 
member of 
army. 

302 THE RULE OF LAW 

“ subject to two jurisdictions, the sympathies of which 
“are not unlikely to be opposed to each other, is an 
“inevitable consequence of the double necessity of 
“preserving on the one hand the supremacy of the 
“law, and on the other the discipline of the 

11 

“arm 

The hardship of a soldier's position resulting from 
this inconvenience is much diminished by the power 
of the Crown to nullify the effect of an unjust con- 
viction by means of a pardon.? While, however, a 
soldier runs no substantial risk of punishment for 
obedience to orders which a man of common sense 
may honestly believe to involve no breach of law, he 
can under no circumstances escape the chance of his 
military conduct becoming the subject of inquiry 
before a civil tribunal, and cannot avoid liability on 
the ground of obedience to superior orders for any act 
which a man of ordinary sense must have known to 
be a crime.’ 

A soldier’s position as a member of the army.— 

1 Stephen, Hist. Criminal Law of England, i. pp. 205, 206. Com- 
pare language of Willes, J., in Keighly v. Bell, 4 F. & F. 763. See 
also opinion of Lord Bowen, cited in Appendix, Note VI., Duty of 
Soldiers called upon to disperse an Unlawful Assembly. 

2 As also by the right of the Attorney-General as representing 
the Crown to enter a nolle prosequt. See Stephen, History of Criminal 
Law, i. p. 496, and Archbold, Pleading in Criminal Cases (22nd ed), 
p. 125. 

8 Buron v. Denman, 2 Ex. 167, is sometimes cited as showing 
that obedience to the orders of the Crown is a legal justification to an 
officer for committing a breach of law, but the decision in that case 
does not, in any way, support the doctrine erroneously grounded upon 
it. What the judgment in Buron v. Denman shows is, that an act 
done by an English military or naval officer in a foreign country to a 
foreigner, in discharge of orders received from the Crown, may be an 
act of war, but does not constitute any breach of law for which an 
action can be brought against the officer in an English Court. Com- 
pare Feather v. The Queen, 6 B. & S. 257, 295, per Curiam. 

THE ARMY 303 

A citizen on entering the army becomes liable to 
special duties as being “‘a person subject to military 
law.” Hence acts which if done by a civilian would 
be either no offence at all or only slight misdemeanours, 
e.g. an insult or a blow offered to an officer, may 
when done by a soldier become serious crimes and 
expose the person guilty of them to grave punish- 
ment. A soldier’s offences, moreover, can be tried and 
punished by a Court-martial. He therefore in his 
military character of a soldier occupies a position 
totally different from that of a civilian; he has not 
the same freedom, and in addition to his duties as 
a citizen is subject to all the liabilities imposed by 
military law; but though this is so, it is not to be 
supposed that, even as regards a soldier’s own position 
as a military man, the rule of the ordinary law is, at 
any rate in time of peace, excluded from the army. 

The general principle on this subject is that the 
Courts of law have jurisdiction to determine who are 
the persons subject to military law, and whether a 
given proceeding, alleged to depend upon military 
law, is really justified by the rules of law which 
govern the army. 

Hence flow the following (among other) conse- 
quences. 

The civil Courts determine’ whether a given person 
is or is not “a person subject to military law.” * 

Enlistment, which constitutes the contract’ by 

1 See Wolfe Tone’s Case, 27 St. Tr. 614; Douglass Case, 3 Q. B. 
825; Fry v. Ogle, cited Manual of Military Law, chap. vii. a. 41. 
2 See Army Act, as. 175-184, 
3 “The enlistment of the soldier is a species of contract between 
the sovereign and the soldier, and under the ordinary principles of 
“law cannot be altered without the consent of both parties. The 
‘result is that the conditions laid down in the Act under which a 

Chapte 

Part I. 

304 THE RULE OF LAW 

which a person becomes subject to military law, is 
a civil proceeding, and a civil Court may sometimes 
have to inquire whether a man has been duly enlisted, 
or whether he is or is not entitled to his discharge.’ 
If a Court-martial exceeds its jurisdiction, or an 
officer, whether acting as a member of a Court-martial 
or not, does any act not authorised by law, the action 
of the Court, or of the officer, is subject to the super- 
vision of the Courts. ‘The proceedings by which 
“the Courts of law supervise the acts of Courts- 
‘martial and of officers may be criminal or civil. 
‘Criminal proceedings take the form of an indict- 
‘‘ment for assault, false imprisonment, manslaughter, 
“or even murder. Civil proceedings may either 
“be preventive, 2.e. to restrain the commission 
‘or continuance of an injury; or remedial, 1.e. to 
‘afford a remedy for injury actually suffered. Broadly 
‘speaking, the civil jurisdiction of the Courts of law 
“is exercised as against the tribunal of a Court- 
“martial by writs of prohibition or certiorari; and as 
“against individual officers by actions for damages. 
“A writ of habeas corpus also may be directed to 
“any officer, governor of a prison, or other, who has 

“man was enlisted cannot be varied without his consent.”—Manual 
of Military Law, chap. x. 8. 18. 

1 See Army Act, s. 96, for special provisions as to the delivering 
to a master of an apprentice who, being under twenty-one, has enlisted 
asa soldier. Under the present law, at any rate, it can very rarely 
happen that a Court should be called upon to consider whether a person 
is improperly detained in military custody as a soldier. See Army Act, 
8. 100, sub-ss. 2, 3. The Courts used to interfere, when soldiers were 
impressed, in cases of improper impresament. See Clode, Military 
Forces, ii. pp. 8, 587. 

A civil Court may also be called upon to determine whether a 
person subject to military law has, or has not, a right to resign his 
commission, Hearson v. Churchill [1892], 2 Q. B. (C. A.) 144. 

THE ARMY 305 

“in his custody any person alleged to be improperly 
‘‘ detained under colour of military law.” ! 

Lastly, the whole existence and discipline of the 
standing army, at any rate in time of peace, depends 
upon the passing of what is known as an annual 
Mutiny Act,’ or in strict correctness of the Army 
(Annual) Act. If this Act were not in force a soldier 
would not be bound by military law. Desertion would 
be at most only a breach of contract, and striking an 
officer would be no more than an assault. 

As to the territorial force.—This force in many 
respects represents the militia and the volunteers. 
It is, as was in fact the militia in later times, raised 
by voluntary enlistment. It cannot be compelled to 
serve outside the United Kingdom. It is from its 
nature, in this too like the militia, a body hardly 
capable of being used for the overthrow of Parlia- 
mentary government. But even with regard to the 
territorial force, care has been taken to ensure that 
it shall be subject to the rule of law. The members 
of this local army are (speaking in general terms) 
subject to military law only when in training or when 
the force is embodied.’ Embodiment indeed converts 

1 Manual of Military Law, chap. viii. & 8. It should, however, 
be noted that the Courts of law will not, in general at any rate, deal 
with rights dependent on military status and military regulations 

2 The case stands thus: The discipline of the standing army depends 
on the Army Act, 1881, 44 & 45 Vict. c. 58, which by s 2 continues 
in force only for such time as may be specified in an annual Act, 
which is passed yearly, and called the Army (Annual) Act. This Act 
keeps in existence the standing army and continues the Army Act in 
force. It is therefore, in strictness, upon the passing of the Army 
(Annual) Act that depends the existence and the discipline of the 
standing army. 

® But in one case at least, t.¢ failure to attend on embodiment, a 
man of the territorial force may be liable to be tried by Court-martial, 

though not otherwise subject to military law. (Territorial and Reserve 
x 

Chapter 

Territorial 
Force. 

Part IL. 

306 THE RULE OF LAW 

Pic cei dh eccrine Ni ere me rt a 
the territorial force into a territorial army, though an 
army which cannot be required to serve abroad. 

But the embodiment can lawfully take place only 
in case of imminent national danger or great emer- 
gency, or unless the emergency requires it, until 
Parliament has had an opportunity of presenting an 
address against the embodiment of the territorial force. 
The general effect of the enactments on the subject 
is that, at any rate when there is a Parliament in 
existence, the embodiment of the territorial force 
cannot, except under the pressure of urgent necessity, 
be carried out without the sanction of Parliament.’ 
Add to this, that the maintenance of discipline among 
the members of the territorial force when it is embodied 
depends on the continuance in force of the Army Act 
and of the Army (Annual) Act.’ 

Forces Act, 1907, 8. 20; see also as to cases of concurrent jurisdiction 
of a Court-martial and a Court of summary jurisdiction, ebid. ss. 24, 25.) 

1 Compare the Territorial and Reserve Forces Act, 1907, 8. 7, the 
Reserve Forces Act, 1882, ss. 12, 13, and the Militia Act, 1882, 3 18, 
and see note 4, p. 291, ante. 

2 There exists an instructive analogy between the position of 
persons subject to military law, and the position of the clergy of the 
Established Church. 

A clergyman of the National Church, like a soldier of the 
National Army, is subject to duties and to Courts to which other 
Englishmen are not subject. He is bound by restrictions, as he enjoys 
privileges peculiar to his class, but the clergy are no more than 
soldiers exempt from the law of the land. Any deed which would be 
a crime or a wrong when done by a layman, is a crime or a wrong 
when done by a clergyman, and is in either case dealt with by the 
ordinary tribunals. 

Moreover, as the Common Law Courts determine the legal limits 
to the jurisdiction of Courts-martial, eo the same Courts in reality 
determine (subject, of course, to Acts of Parliament) what are the limits 
to the jurisdiction of ecclesiastical Courts. 

The original difficulty, again, of putting the clergy on the same 
footing as laymen, was at least as great as that of establishing the 
supremacy of the civil power in all matters regarding the army. 
Each of these difficulties was met at an earlier date and has been 

THE ARMY 307 

overcome with more completeness in England than in some other Chapter 
countries. We may plausibly conjecture that this triumph of law IX. 
was due to the acknowledged supremacy of the King in Parliament, 
which itself was due to the mode in which the King, acting together 
with the two Houses, manifestly represented the nation, and therefore 
was able to wield the whole moral authority of the state. 

Part I. 

Revenue. 

CHAPTER X 

THE REVENUE! 

As in treating of the army my aim was simply to 
point out what were the principles determining the 
relation of the armed forces of the country to the 
law of the land, so in treating of the revenue my 
aim is not to give even a sketch of the matters 
connected with the raising, the collection, and the 
expenditure of the national income, but simply to show 
that the collection and expenditure of the revenue, 
and all things appertaining thereto, are governed 
by strict rules of law. Attention should be fixed 
upon three points,—the source of the public revenue 
—the authority for expending the public revenue— 
and the securities provided by law for the due 
appropriation of the public revenue, that is, for 
its being expended in the exact manner which the 
law directs. 

Source of public revenue.—It is laid down by 
Blackstone and other authorities that the revenue 
consists of the hereditary or “ordinary” revenue 
of the Crown and of the “extraordinary” revenue 

1 Stephen, Commentaries, ii. bk. iv. chap. vii.; Hearn, Government 
of England (2nd ed.), c. 13, pp. 351-388 ; May, Parliamentary Practice, 

chap, xxi. ; see Exchequer and Audit Act, 1866, 29 & 30 Vict. c. 39, 
and 1 & 2 Vict. c. 2, 8. 2. 

308 

THE REVENUE 309 
<wamarnersatr = ar operon eT ee 
depending upon taxes imposed by Parliament. 
Historically this distinction is of interest. But for 
our purpose we need hardly trouble ourselves at 
all with the hereditary revenue of the Crown, arising 
from Crown lands, droits of admiralty, and the like. 
It forms an insignificant portion of the national 
resources, amounting to not much more than 
£500,000 a year. It does not, moreover, at the 
present moment belong specially to the Crown, for 
it was commuted at the beginning of the reign of 
the present King,’ as it was at the beginning of 
the reign of William IV. and of the reign of Queen 
Victoria, for a fixed “civil list,”? or sum payable 
yearly for the support of the dignity of the Crown. 
The whole then of the hereditary revenue is now 
paid into the national exchequer and forms part 
of the income of the nation. We may, therefore, 
putting the hereditary revenue out of our minds, 
direct our whole attention to what is oddly enough 
called the ‘‘extraordinary,” but is in reality the 
ordinary, or Parliamentary, revenue of the nation. 

The whole of the national revenue had come to 
amount in a normal year to somewhere about 
£144,000,000.° It is (if we put out of sight the 
small hereditary revenue of the Crown) raised wholly 
by taxes imposed by law. The national revenue, 
therefore, depends wholly upon law and upon 
statute-law ; it is the creation of Acts of Parliament. 

While no one can nowadays fancy that taxes 

1 Civil List Act, 1901, 1 Ed. VIL «. 4. 

2 See as to civil list, May, Constitutional Hist. i. chap. iv. 

8 The Chancellor of the Exchequer, in his Budget speech of 18th 

April 1907 (172 Hansard (4th ser-), col. 1180), gave the total revenue 
for the year (Exchequer receipts) 1906-7 at £144,814,000. 

Chap 
©: 

Part I. 

310 THE RULE OF LAW 

I Ms sbi cea i Die pet 
can be raised otherwise than in virtue of an Act of 
Parliament, there prevails, it may be suspected, 
with many of us a good deal of confusion of mind 
as to the exact relation between the raising of the 
revenue and the sitting of Parliament. People 
often talk as though, if Parliament did not meet, 
no taxes would be legally payable, and the assem- 
bling of Parliament were therefore secured by the 
necessity of filling the national exchequer. This 
idea is encouraged by the study of periods, such as 
the reign of Charles I., during which the Crown 
could not legally obtain necessary supplies without 
the constant intervention of Parliament. But the 
notion that at the present day no money could 
legally be levied if Parliament ceased to meet is 
unfounded. Millions of money would come into the 
Exchequer even though Parliament did not sit at 
all. For though all taxation depends upon Act of 
Parliament, it is far from being the case that all 
taxation now depends upon annual or temporary Acts. 

Taxes are made payable in two different ways, 
z.e. either by permanent or by yearly Acts. 

Taxes, the proceeds of which amounted in the 
year 1906-7 to at least three-fourths of the whole 
yearly revenue, are imposed by permanent Acts; 
such taxes are the land tax,’ the excise,? the stamp 
duties,” and by far the greater number of existing 
taxes. These taxes would continue to be payable 
even though Parliament should not be convened 
for years. We should all, to take an example which 

1 38 George III. c. 5. 
7 See Stephen, Commentaries, ii. pp. 552, 553. 
5 Stamp Act, 1891, 54 & 55 Vict. c. 39, 

THE REVENUE 311 

comes home to every one, be legally compellable 
to buy the stamps for our letters even though Par- 
liament did not meet again till (say) a.p. 1910. 

Other taxes—and notably the income tax—the 
proceeds of which make up the remainder of the 
national income, are imposed by yearly Acta.’ If by 
any chance Parliament should not be convened for a 
year, no one would be under any legal obligation to 
pay income tax. 

This distinction between revenue depending upon 
permanent Acts and revenue depending upon tempo- 
rary Acts is worth attention, but the main point, of 
course, to be borne in mind is that all taxes are 
imposed by statute, and that no one can be forced 
to pay a single shilling by way of taxation which 
cannot be shown to the satisfaction of the judges to 
be due from him under Act of Parliament. 

Authority for expending revenue.—At one time 
revenue once raised by taxation was in truth and in 
reality a grant or gift by the Houses of Parliament 
to the Crown. Such grants as were made to Charles 
the First or James the First were moneys truly given 
to the King. He was, as a matter of moral duty, 
bound, out of the grants made to him, as out of the 
hereditary revenue, to defray the expenses of govern- 
ment; and the gifts made to the King by Parliament 
were never intended to be ‘‘money to put into his 
own pocket,” as the expression goes. Still it was 
in truth money of which the King or his Ministers 

1 The only taxes imposed annually or by yearly Acts are the 
customs duty on tea, which for the year ending 3let March 1907 
amounted to £5,888,288, and the income tax, which for the same 

year amounted to £31,891,949, giving a total of annual taxation 
raised by annual grant of £37,780,237. 

Chapter 

Authority 
for ex- 
penditure. 

312 THE RULE OF LAW 

Te ee eee 
could and did regulate the distribution. One of the 
singularities which mark the English constitution 
is the survival of medizval notions, which more or 
less identified the King’s property with the national 
revenue, after the passing away of the state of society 
to which such ideas naturally belonged; in the time 
of George the Third many public expenses, as, for 
example, the salaries of the judges, were charged 
upon the civil list, and thus were mixed up with 
the King’s private expenditure. At the present 
day, however, the whole public revenue is treated, 
not as the King’s property, but as public income; 
and as to this two matters deserve special observa- 
tion. 
First, The whole revenue of the nation is paid 
into the Bank of England’ to the “account of his 
Majesty’s Exchequer,”* mainly through the Inland 
Revenue Office. That office is a mere place for the 
receipt of taxes; it isa huge money-box into which 
day by day moneys paid as taxes are dropped, and 
whence such moneys are taken daily to the Bank. 
What, I am told, takes place is this. Each day 
large amounts are received at the Inland Revenue 
Office ; two gentlemen come there each afternoon in 8 
cab from the Bank; they go through the accounts for 
the day with the proper officials; they do not leave 
till every item is made perfectly clear; they then take 

1 Or into the Bank of Ireland. See Exchequer and Audit De- 
partments Act, 1866 (29 & 30 Vict. c. 39), 8, 10, 

? Ibid. and Control and Audit of Public Receipts and Expenditure, 
pp. 7, 8. But a system of appropriations in aid has been introduced 
during the last few years under which certain moneys which before 
were treated as extra receipts, and paid into the exchequer, are not 

paid into the Exchequer, but are applied by the department where 
they are received in reduction of the money voted by Parliament. 

THE REVENUE 313 

all the money received, and drive off with it and pay 
it into the Bank of England. 

Secondly, Not a penny of revenue can be legally 
expended except under the authority of some Act of 
Parliament. 

This authority may be given by a permanent Act, 
as, for example, by the Civil List Act, 1 & 2 Vict. 
ce. 2, or by the National Debt and Local Loans Act, 
1887; or it may be given by the Appropriation 
Act, that is, the annual Act by which Parliament 
“appropriates” or fixes the sums payable to objects 
(the chief of which is the support of the army and 
navy) which are not provided for, as is the pay- 
ment of the National Debt, by permanent Acts of 
Parliament. 

The whole thing, to express it in general terms, 
stands thus. 

There is paid into the Bank of England in a 
normal year’ a national income raised by different 
taxes amounting to nearly £144,000,000 per annum, 
This £144,000,000 constitutes the revenue or “ con- 
solidated fund.” 

Every penny of it is, unless the law is broken, 
paid away in accordance with Act of Parliament. 
The authority to make payments from it is given in 
many cases by permanent Acts; thus the whole of the 
interest on the National Debt is payable out of the 
Consolidated Fund under the National Debt and Local 
Loans Act, 1887. The order or authority to make 
payments out of it is in other cases given by a yearly 
Act, namely, the Appropriation Act, which determines 
the mode in which the supplies granted by Parliament 

1 See p. 309, ante (3). 

Chapter 
xX. 

Part IL 

Security 
for proper 
expendi- 
ture. 

314 THE RULE OF LAW 

(and not otherwise appropriated by permanent Acts) 
are to be spent. In either case, and this is the point 
to bear in mind, payments made out of the national 
revenue are made by and under the authority of the 
law, namely, under the directions of some special Act 
of Parliament. 

The details of the method according to which 
supplies are annually voted and appropriated by 
Parliament are amply treated of in works which deal 
with Parliamentary practice.’ The matter which 
requires our attention is the fact that each item of 
expenditure (such, for example, as the wages paid 
to the army and navy) which is not directed and 
authorised by some permanent Act is ultimately 
authorised by the Appropriation Act for the year, or 
by special Acts which for convenience are passed 
prior to the Appropriation Act and are enumerated 
therein. The expenditure, therefore, no less than the 
raising of taxation, depends wholly and solely upon 
Parliamentary enactment. 

Security for the proper appropriation of the 
revenue.— What, it may be asked, is the real security 
that moneys paid by the taxpayers are expended by 
the government in accordance with the intention of 
Parliament ? 

The answer is that this security is provided by 
an elaborate scheme of control and audit. Under 
this system not a penny of public money can be 
obtained by the government without the authority 
or sanction of persons (quite independent, be it 
remarked, of the Cabinet) whose duty it is to see 
that no money is paid out of the Exchequer except 

1 See especially May, Parliamentary Practice, chap. xxi. 

THE REVENUE 315 
ee ee ee ee eS 
under legal authority. To the same officials ulti- 
mately comes the knowledge of the way in which 
money thus paid out is actually expended, and they 
are bound to report to Parliament upon any ex- 
penditure which is or may appear to be not author- 
ised by law. 

The centre of this system of Parliamentary control 
is the Comptroller and Auditor General.! 

He is a high official, absolutely independent of 
the Cabinet; he can take no part in politics, for 
he cannot be either a member of the House of 
Commons, or a peer of Parliament. He in common 
with his subordinate—the Assistant Comptroller and 
Auditor General—is appointed by a patent under 
the Great Seal, holds his office during good behaviour, 
and can be removed only on an address from both 
Houses of Parliament.* He is head of the Exchequer 
and Audit Department. He thus combines in his 
own person two characters which formerly belonged 
to different officials. He is controller of the issue 
of public money; he is auditor of public accounts. 
He is called upon, therefore, to perform two different 
functions, which the reader ought, in his own mind, 
to keep carefully distinct from each other. 

In exercise of his duty of control the Comptroller 
General is bound, with the aid of the officials under 
him, to see that the whole of the national revenue, 
which, it will be remembered, is lodged in the Bank 
of England to the account of the Exchequer, is paid 
out under legal authority, that is, under the pro- 
visions of some Act of Parliament. 

1 Control and Audit of Public Receipts and Expenditure, 1885. 
2 The Exchequer and Audit Departments Act, 1886 (29 & 30 
Vict. c. 39), sec. 3. 

Chapter 
X. 

Part I. 

316 THE RULE OF LAW 

The Comptroller General is enabled to do this 
because, whenever the Treasury (through which office 
alone the public moneys are drawn out from the 
Bank) needs to draw out money for the public 
service, the Treasury must make a requisition to 
the Comptroller General authorising the payment 
from the public moneys at the Bank of the definite 
sum required.’ 

The payments made by the Treasury are, as 
already pointed out, made either under some per- 
manent Act, for what are technically called ‘‘ Con- 
solidated Fund services,” as, for example, to meet 
the interest on the National Debt, or under the 
yearly Appropriation Act, for what are technically 
called “supply services,” as, for example, to meet 
the expenses of the army or the navy. 

In either case the Comptroller General must, 
before granting the necessary credit, satisfy himself 
that he is authorised in doing so by the terms of 
the Act under which it is demanded. He must also 
satisfy himself that every legal formality, necessary 
for obtaining public money from the Bank, has been 
duly complied with. Unless, and until, he is satisfied 
he ought not to grant, and will not grant, a credit 
for the amount required; and until this credit is 
obtained, the money required cannot be drawn out 
of the Bank. 

The obtaining from the Comptroller General of a 
grant of credit may appear to many readers a mere 
formality, and we may suppose that it is in most 
cases given as a matter of course. It is, however, a 

1 See Control and Audit of Public Receipts and Expenditure, 1885 
pp. 61-64, and Forms, No. 8 to No. 12, ty 

THE REVENUE 317 

formality which gives an opportunity to an official, 
who has no interest in deviating from the law, for 
preventing the least irregularity on-the part of the 
government in the drawing out of public money. 

The Comptroller's power of putting a check on 
government expenditure has, oddly enough, been 
pushed to its extreme length in comparatively 
modern times. In 1811 England was in the midst 
of the great war with France; the King was a 
lunatic, a Regency Bill was not yet passed, and a 
million pounds were required for the payment of 
the navy. Lord Grenville, the then Auditor of 
the Exchequer, whose office corresponded to a 
certain extent with that of the present Comptroller 
and Auditor General, refused to draw the necessary 
order on the Bank, and thus prevented the million, 
though granted by Parliament, from being drawn 
out. The ground of his lordship’s refusal was that 
he had received no authority under the Great Seal 
or the Privy Seal, and the reason why there was 
no authority under the Privy Seal was that the 
King was incapable of affixing the Sign Manual, 
and that the Sign Manual not being affixed, the 
clerks of the Privy Seal felt, or said they felt, that 
they could not consistently with their oaths allow 
the issue of letters of Privy Seal upon which the 
warrant under the Privy Seal was then prepared. 
All the world knew the true state of the case. The 
money was granted by Parliament, and the irregu- 
larity in the issue of the warrants was purely 
technical, yet the law officers—members themselves 
of the Ministry—advised that Lord Grenville and 
the clerks of the Privy Seal were in the right. 

Chapte 

Part I. 

318 THE RULE OF LAW 

VATE) oe EEE aa a ene 
This inconvenient and, as it seems to modern readers, 
unreasonable display of legal scrupulosity masked, 
it may be suspected, a good deal of political by- 
play. If Lord Grenville and his friends had not 
been anxious that the Ministry should press on 
the Regency Bill, the officials of the Exchequer 
would perhaps have seen their way through the 
technical difficulties which, as it was, appeared 
insurmountable, and it is impossible not to suspect 
that Lord Grenville acted rather as a party leader 
than as Auditor of the Exchequer. But be this as 
it may, the debates of 1811+ prove to demonstration 
that a Comptroller General can, if he chooses, put 
an immediate check on any irregular dealings with 
public moneys. 

In exercise of his duty as Auditor the Comptroller 
General audits all the public accounts;* he reports 
annually to Parliament upon the accounts of the 
past year. Accounts of the expenditure under the 
Appropriation Act are submitted by him at the 
beginning of every session to the Public Accounts 
Committee of the House of Commons—a Committee 
appointed for the examination of the accounts— 
showing the appropriation of the sums granted by 
Parliament to meet the public expenditure. This 
examination is no mere formal or perfunctory super- 
vision; a glance at the reports of the Committee 
shows that the smallest expenses which bear the 
least appearance of irregularity, even if amounting 
only to a pound or two, are gone into and discussed 

1 Cobbett’s Parl. Debates, xviii. pp. 678, 734, 787. 

* In auditing the accounts he inquires into the legality of the 
purposes for which public money has been spent, and in his report to 
Parliament calls attention to any expenditure of doubtful legality. 

THE REVENUE 319 
a a 
by the Committee. The results of their discussions 
are published in reports submitted to Parliament. 

The general result of this system of control and 
audit is, that in England we possess accounts of the 
national expenditure of an accuracy which cannot 
be rivalled by the public accounts of other countries, 
‘and that every penny of the national income is 
expended under the authority and in accordance 
with the provisions of some Act of Parliament.’ 

How, a foreign critic might ask, is the authority 
of the Comptroller General compatible with the 
orderly transaction of public business ; how, in short, 
does it happen that difficulties like those which arose 
in 1811 are not of constant recurrence ? 

The general answer of course is, that high English 
officials, and especially officials removed from the 

1 The main features of the system for the control and audit 
of national expenditure have been authoritatively summarised as 
follows :— 

“The gross revenue collected is paid into the Exchequer. 

“Tssues from the Exchequer can only be made to meet expenditure 
“which has been sanctioned by Parliament, and to an amount not 
‘exceeding the sums authorised. 

“The issues from the Exchequer and the audit of Accounts are 
‘under the control of the Comptroller and Auditor General, who is 
““an independent officer responsible to the House of Commons, and 
“who can only be removed by vote of both Houses of Parliament. 

“Such payments only can be charged against the vote of a year as 
“actually came in course of payment within the year. 

“The correct appropriation of each item of Receipt and Expendi- 
“ture is ensured. 

“ All unexpended balances of the grants of a year are surrendered 
“to the Exchequer, as also are all extra Receipts and the amount of 
« Appropriations-in-Aid received in excess of the sum estimated to be 
“taken in aid of the vote. 

“The accounts of each year are finally reviewed by the House of 
“Commons, through the Committee of Public Accounts, and any 
‘excess of expenditure over the amount voted by Parliament for any 
“service must receive legislative sanction.”—Control and Audi of 

Public Receipts and Expenditure, 1885, pp. 24, 25. 

Chap 

Part I. 

320 THE RULE OF LAW 

—_—_ —____— 

sphere of politics, have no wish or temptation to 
hinder the progress of public business; the Auditor 
of the Exchequer was in 1811, be it noted, a peer 
and a statesman. The more technical reply is, that 
the law provides two means of overcoming the per- 
versity or factiousness of any Comptroller who should 
without due reason refuse his sanction to the issue 
of public money. He can be removed from office on 
an address of the two Houses, and he probably might, 
it has been suggested, be coerced into the proper 
fulfilment of his duties by a mandamus’ from the 
High Court of Justice. The worth of this suggestion, 
made by a competent lawyer, has never been, and 
probably never will be tested. But the possibility 
that the executive might have to seek the aid of the 
Courts in order to get hold of moneys granted by 
Parliament, is itself a curious proof of the extent to 
which the expenditure of the revenue is governed by 
law, or, what is the same thing, may become depend- 
ent on the decision of the judges upon the meaning of 
an Act of Parliament. 

1 See Bowyer, Commentaries on Constitutional Lavo, p. 210; Hearn, 
Government of England (2nd ed), p. 375. 

CHAPTER XI 
THE RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS 

MINISTERIAL responsibility means two utterly different 
things. 

It means in ordinary parlance the responsibility of 
Ministers to Parliament, or, the liability of Ministers 
to lose their offices if they cannot retain the confidence 
of the House of Commons. 

This is a matter depending on the conventions of 
the constitution with which law has no direct concern. 

It means, when used in its strict sense, the legal 
responsibility of every Minister for every act of the 
Crown in which he takes part. 

This responsibility, which is a matter of law, rests 
on the following foundation. There is not to be 
found in the law of England, as there is found in 
most foreign constitutions, an explicit statement that 
the acts of the monarch must always be done through 
a Minister, and that all orders given by the Crown 
must, when expressed in writing, as they generally 
are, be countersigned by a Minister. Practically, 
however, the rule exists. 

In order that an act of the Crown may be re- 
cognised as an expression of the Royal will and have 
any legal effect whatever, it must in general be 
done with the assent of, or through some Minister 

or Ministers who will be held responsible for it. For 
321 ve 

Chapter 
xi. 

Ministerial 
responsi- 
bility. 

Part IL 

322 THE RULE OF LAW 

Ss ee 
the Royal will can, speaking generally, be expressed 
only in one of three different ways, viz. (1) by order 
in Council ; (2) by order, commission, or warrant under 
the sign-manual; (3) by proclamations, writs, patents, 
letters, or other documents under the Great Seal. 

An order in Council is made by the King “by 
and with the advice of his Privy Council” ; and those 
persons who are present at the meeting of the Council 
at which the order was made, bear the responsibility 
for what was there done. The sign-manual warrant, or 
other document to which the sign-manual is affixed, 
bears in general the countersignature of one responsible 
Minister or of more than one; though it is not unfre- 
quently authenticated by some one of the seals for the 
use of which a Secretary of State is responsible. The 
Great Seal is affixed to a document on the responsibility 
of the Chancellor, and there may be other persons also, 
who, as well as the Chancellor, are made responsible 
for its being affixed. The result is that at least one 
Minister and often more must take part in, and there- 
fore be responsible for, any act of the Crown which 
has any legal effect, e.g. the making of a grant, the 
giving of an order, or the signing of a treaty.’ 

The Minister or servant of the Crown who thus 
takes part in giving expression to the Royal will is 
legally responsible for the act in which he is con- 
cerned, and he cannot get rid of his liability by 

1 On the whole of this subject the reader should consult Anson, 
Law and Custom of the Constitution, vol. ii, The Crown (3rd ed.), 
App. to ch. i. pp. 50-59. Anson gives by far the best and fullest 
account with which I am acquainted of the forms for the expression 
of the Royal pleasure and of the effect of these forms in enforcing 
the legal responsibility of Ministers. See also Clode, Military Forces 

of the Crown, ii. pp. 320, 321; Buron v. Denman, 2 Ex. 167, 189, and 
the Great Seal Act, 1884, 47 & 48 Vict. « 30. 

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS 323 

pleading that he acted in obedience to royal orders. 
Now supposing that the act done is illegal, the Minister 
- concerned in it becomes at once liable to criminal 
or civil proceedings in a Court of Law. In some 
instances, it is true, the only legal mode in which 
his offence could be reached may be an impeachment. 
But an impeachment itself is a regular though unusual 
mode of legal procedure before a recognised tribunal, 
namely, the High Court of Parliament. Impeach- 
ments indeed may, though one took place as late as 
1805, be thought now obsolete, but the cause why 
this mode of enforcing Ministerial responsibility is 
almost out of date is partly that Ministers are now 
rarely in a position where there is even a temptation 
to commit the sort of crimes for which impeachment 
is an appropriate remedy, and partly that the result 
aimed at by impeachment could now in many cases 
be better obtained by proceedings before an ordinary 
Court. The point, however, which should never be 
forgotten is this: it is now well-established law that 
the Crown can act only through Ministers and accord- 
ing to certain prescribed forms which absolutely 
require the co-operation of some Minister, such as 
a Secretary of State or the Lord Chancellor, who 
thereby becomes not only morally but legally respon- 
sible for the legality of the act in which he takes 
part. Hence, indirectly but surely, the action of 
every servant of the Crown, and therefore in effect 
of the Crown itself, is brought under the supremacy 
of the law of the land. Behind Parliamentary re- 
sponsibility lies legal liability, and the acts of 
Ministers no less than the acts of subordinate 
officials are made subject to the rule of law. 

Chapter 

Part I. 

Tntroduo- 
tion, 

CHAPTER XII 
1 
RULE OF LAW COMPARED WITH DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 

In many continental countries, and notably in France, 
there exists a scheme of administrative law *—known 
to Frenchmen as droit administratif—which rests on 

2 On droit administratif see Aucoc, Conferences sur administration et 
le drott administratif (3rd ed.); Berthélemy, Tratté Elémentaire 
de Droit Administratsf (5th ed. 1908); Chardon, L’ Administration de 
la France, Les Fonctionnaires (1908) ; Duguit, Manuel de Drott Con- 
stitutionnel (1907); Duguit, L’Etat, les gouvernants et les agents 
(1903) ; Esmein, Eléments de Droit Constitutionnel (1896); Hauriou, 
Précis de Droit Administratyf ; Jacquelin, La Juridiction Adminisratire 
(1891) ; Jacquelin, Les Principes Dominants du Contentieux Adminis- 
tratif (1899); Jéze, Les Principes Généraux du Droit Administratsf 
(1904) ; Laferritre, Tratté de la Juridiction Administrative, 2 vols. (2nd 
ed. 1896); Teissier, La Responsabilité de la Puissance Publique (1906). 

It is not my aim in this chapter to give a general account of 
drowt administratif. My object is to treat of drow administratif 
in eo far as its fundamental principles conflict with modern English 
ideas of the rule of law, and especially to show how it always has 
given, and still does give, special protection or privileges to the servants 
of the state. I cannot, however, avoid mentioning some other aspects 
of a noteworthy legal system or omit some notice of the mode in 
which the administrative law of France, based as it originally was 
on the prerogatives of the Crown under the ancien régime, has of recent 
years, by the genius of French legists, been more or less “ judicialised ” 
—if so I may render the French term “ jurtdictionnaliser ”—and incor- 
porated with the law of the land. 

2 Known in different countries by different names, e.g. in Germany 
as Verwaltungsrecht. The administrative law of France comes nearer 
than does the Verwaltungsrecht of Germany (conf. Otto Mayer, Le 
Droit Administratif Allemand, i. (French translation), p. 293 8. 17), 
to the rule of law as understood by Englishmen. Here, as elsewhere, 

324 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 325 

ideas foreign to the fundamental assumptions of our 
English common law, and especially to what we have 
termed the rule of law. This opposition is specially 
apparent in the protection given in foreign countries 
to servants of the State, or, as we say in England, of 
the Crown, who, whilst acting in pursuance of official 
orders, or in the bona fide attempt to discharge 
official duties, are guilty of acts which in themselves 
are wrongful or unlawful. The extent of this pro- 
tection has in France—with which country we are 
for the most part concerned—varied from time to 
time. It was once all but complete; it is now far 
less extensive than it was thirty-six years ago.’ It 
forms only one portion of the whole system of droit 
admunstratif, but it is the part of French Jaw to 
which in this chapter I wish to direct particularly the 
attention of students. I must, however, impress 
upon them that the whole body of droit administratif 
is well worth their study. It has been imitated in 
most of the countries of continental Europe. It 
illustrates, by way of contrast, the full meaning of 
that absolute supremacy of the ordinary law of the 
land—a foreign critic might say of that intense 
legalism—which we have found to be a salient feature 
of English institutions. It also illustrates, by way 
of analogy rather than of contrast, some phases in the 
it is the similarity as much as the dissimilarity between France and 

England which prompts comparison. The historical glories of French 
arms conceal the important fact that among the great States of 

Europe, France and England have the most constantly attempted, _ 

Chapter 

though with unequal success, to maintain the supremacy of the civil | . 
power against any class which defies the legitimate sovereignty of the 

nation. 

L' Etat, p. 624, note 1. 

1 Or than it still is throughout the German Empire. See Duguit, 

326 THE RULE OF LAW 

“eé | eee eee 
Part IL constitutional history of England. For droit adminis- 
tratif has, of recent years, been so developed as to 
meet the requirements of a modern and a democratic 
society, and thus throws light upon one stage at least 
in the growth of English constitutional law." 

Our subject falls under two main heads. The one 
head embraces the nature and the historical growth 
of droit administratif, and especially of that part 
thereof with which we are chiefly: concerned. The 
other head covers a comparison between the English 
rule of law and the drowt adminvstratif of France. 
@preit For the term droit admimstratif English legal 

if, phraseology supplies no proper equivalent. The 

words ‘‘administrative law,” which are its most 
natural rendering, are unknown to English judges 
and counsel, and are in themselves hardly intelligible 
without further explanation. 

This absence from our language of any satisfactory 
equivalent for the expression droit administratif is 
significant ; the want of a name arises at bottom 
from our non-recognition of the thing itself. In 
England, and in countries which, like the United 
States, derive their civilisation from English sources, 
the system of administrative law and the very 
principles on which it rests are in truth unknown. 
This absence from the institutions of the American 
Commonwealth of anything answering to droit 
administratef arrested the observation of Tocqueville 
from the first moment when he began his investiga- 
tions into the characteristics of American democracy. 
In 1831 he writes to an experienced French judge 
(magistrat), Monsieur De Blosseville, to ask both for 

1 See pp. 371-378, post. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 327 

an explanation of the contrast in this matter between 
French and American institutions, and also for an 
authoritative explanation of the general ideas (notions 
générales) governing the droit administratif of his 
country.’ He grounds his request for information on 
his own ignorance ? about this special branch of French 
jurisprudence, and clearly implies that this want of 
knowledge is not uncommon among French lawyers. 
When we know that a legist of Tocqueville’s 
genius found it necessary to ask for instruction in 
the “general ideas” of administrative law, we may 
safely assume that the topic was one which, even in 
the eyes of a French lawyer, bore an exceptional 
character, and need not wonder that Englishmen find 
it difficult to appreciate the nature of rules which are, 
admittedly, foreign to the spirit and traditions of 
our institutions. It is, however, this very contrast 
between administrative law as it exists in France, 
and still more as it existed during by far the greater 

1 Tocqueville’s language is so remarkable and bears so closely on 
our topic that it deserves quotation: “Ce gut m’empéche le plus, je 
** vous avoue, de savoir ce qui se fait sur ces différents points en Amérique, 
“est Pignorer, a pew pres completement, ce qui existe en France. 
“ Vous savez que, chez nous, le droit administratif et le droit civil forment 
“ comme deux mondes séparés, qui ne vivent point toujours en patz, mats 
“ qui ne sont ni assez amis ni assez ennemis pour se bien connatire. Jat 
“toujours vécu dans Pun et suis fort ignorant de ce qui se passe dans 
“ Pautre. En méme temps que jat sents le besoin Dacquérir les notions 
‘* générales qui me manquent a cet égard, fat pensd que je ne pouvats 
“mieux faire que de m’adresser & vous.” —Tocqueville, Huvres Completes, 
vii. pp. 67, 68. 

2 This want of knowledge is explainable, if not justifiable. In 
1831 Tocqueville was a youth of not more than twenty-six years of 
age. There were at that date already to be found books on drow 
administratif written to meet the wants of legal practitioners. But 
the mass of interesting constitutional literature represented by the 
writings of Laferritre, Hauriou, Duguit, Jéze, or Berthélemy which 
now elucidates the theory, and traces the history of a particular and 
most curious branch of French law, had not come into existence. 

Chapter 
xIL 

(1) Nature 
of droit 
adminis- 
tratif. 

328 THE RULE OF LAW 

part of the nineteenth century, and the notions of 
equality before the law of the land which are firmly 
established in modern England, that mainly makes 
it worth while to study, not of course the details, but 
what Tocqueville calls the notions générales of French 
droit administratif. Our aim should be to seize the 
general nature of administrative law and the principles 
on which the whole system of droit administratif 
depends, to note the salient characteristics by which 
this system is marked, and, lastly, to make clear to 
ourselves how it is that the existence of a scheme of 
administrative law makes the legal situation of every 
government official in France different from the 
legal situation of servants of the State in England, 
and in fact establishes a condition of things funda- 
mentally inconsistent with what Englishmen regard 
as the due supremacy of the ordinary law of the land. 

Droit adminestratif, or “ administrative law,” has 
been defined by French authorities in general terms 
as ‘“‘the body of rules which regulate the relations 
“of the administration or of the administrative 
‘authority towards private citizens”;' and Aucoc 
in his work on droit administratif describes his topic 
in this very general language :* “ Administrative law 
‘‘ determines (1) the constitution and the relations of 
‘‘ those organs of society which are charged with the 

1 “On le définit ordinairement Vensemble des régles qui régissent les 
“rapports de l’admsnistration ou de l’autorité administrative avec les 
“‘citoyens.”—Aucoc, Droit Administratif, i. 8. 6. 

2 “Nous préférerions dire, pour notre part: Le droit administratsf 
“dé&ermine: 1° la constitution et les rapports des organes de la socidtd 
“chargé du soin des intéréts collectifs qui font Vobjet de l’administration 
“ publique, Cest-d-dire des différentes personnifications de la société, dont 
“Etat est la plus importante; 2° les rapports des autorités administra- 
“tives avec les citoyens,”—Ibid. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF «329 

“care of those social interests (intéréts collectifs) which 
“are the object of public administration, by which 
‘term is meant the different representatives of society 
‘among which the State is the most important, and 
(2) the relation of the administrative authorities 
“towards the citizens of the State.” 

These definitions are wanting in precision, and their 
vagueness is not without significance. As far, how- 
ever, as an Englishman may venture to deduce the 
meaning of droit administratif from foreign treatises, 
it may, for our present purpose, be best described 
as that portion of French law which determines, (i.) 
the position and liabilities of all State officials, (ii.) 
the civil rights and liabilities of private individuals 
in their dealings with officials as representatives of 
the State, and (iii.) the procedure by which these 
rights and liabilities are enforced. 

Au English student will never, it should particu- 
larly be noticed, understand this branch of French 
law unless he keeps his eye firmly fixed upon its 
historical aspect, and carefully notes the changes, 
almost amounting to the transformation, which drovwt 
admintstratif has undergone between 1800 and 1908, 
and above all during the last thirty or forty years. 
The fundamental ideas which underlie this department 
of French law are, as he will discover, permanent, 
but they have at various times been developed in 
different degrees and in different directions. Hence 
any attempt to compare the administrative law of 
France with our English rule of Jaw will be deceptive 
unless we note carefully what are the stages in the 
Jaw of each country which we bring into comparison. 
If, for instance, we compare the law of England and 

Chapter 

Part IL 

(2) Histori- 
cal de- 

velopment, 

Napoleon 
and the 
Restora- 
tion. 

330 THE RULE OF LAW 

the law of France as they stand in 1908, we are 
likely to fancy (in my judgment erroneously) that, 
e.g. in regard to the position or privileges of the 
State and its servants when dealing with private 
citizens, there may be little essential difference 
between the laws of the two countries. It is only 
when we examine the administrative law of France 
at some earlier date, say between 1800 and 1815, or 
between the accession to the throne of Louis Philippe 
(1830) and the fall of the Second Empire (1870), that 
we can rightly appreciate the essential opposition 
between our existing English rule of law and the 
fundamental ideas which lie at the basis of adminis- 
trative law not only in France but in any country 
where this scheme of State or official law has obtained 
recognition. 

The modern administrative law of France has 
grown up, or at any rate taken its existing form, 
during the nineteenth century; it is the outcome of 
more than a hundred years of revolutionary and con- 
stitutional conflict.’ Its development may conveni- 
ently be divided into three periods, marked by the 
names of the Napoleonic Empire and the Restoration 
(1800-1830), the Orleanist Monarchy and the Second 
Empire (1830-1870), the Third Republic (1870- 
1908). 

First Period.—Napoleon and the Restoration, 
1800-1830. In the opinion of Frenchmen true drovt 
admunistratif owes its origin to the consular constitu- 
tion of the Year VIII. (1800) created by Bonaparte 

1 For the history of droit administratif see especially Laferrizre, i. 
(2nd ed.), bk. i. c, i.-iv. pp. 137-301. The Second Republic (1848- 

1851) produced little permanent effect on French administrative law. 
I have included it in the second of our three periods, 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 331 

after the coup d’état of the 18th of Brumaire. 
But legists,’ no less than historians, admit that the 
ideas on which droit administratif rests, may be 
rightly traced back, as they have been by Tocque- 
ville? to the ancien régime; every feature of Bona- 
parte’s governmental fabric recalls some characteristic 
of the ancient monarchy ; his Conseil d’Etat revives 
the Conseil du Roi, his Prefects are copies of the 
royal Intendants. Yet in this instance public opinion 
has come to a right conclusion. It was from Bona- 
parte that modern droit administratif received its 
form. If he was the restorer of the ancien régime, 
he was also the preserver of the Revolution. What- 
ever he borrowed from the traditions of old France 
he adapted to the changed conditions of the new 
France of 1800. At his touch ancient ideas received 
a new character and a new life. He fused together 
what was strongest in the despotic traditions of the 

1“ Aussi haut que l’on \remonte dans notre histoire, depute que des 
“juridictions réguliéres ont dd instituées, on ne trouve pas d’époque ors les 
‘corps judiciatres charges d’appliquer les lois civiles et criminelles atent 
“< dé en méme temps appelés a statuer sur les difficultés en matiere d’adminte- 
“tration publique.”—Laferriére, i. p. 139, and compare thd. p. 640. 

2 “Ce qui apparatt . . . quand on étudie les paperasses administra- 
‘tives, cest [intervention continuelle du pouvoir administratif dans la 
“‘ sphere judiciaire. Les légistes administrati/s nous dtsent sans cease, 
“ que le plus grand vice du gouvernement intéerieur de Pancien régime etatt 
“que les juges administratent. On pourrait se plaindre avec autant de 
“raison de ce que les administrateurs jugeaient. La seule difference est 
“que nous avons corrigé Tancien régime sur le premier point, et Vavons 
“imité sur le second. J’avais eu jusqu’a présent la simplicité de crotre 
“ que ce que nous appelons la justice administrative éatt une création de 
“ Napoléon, Cvest du pur ancien régime conservé ; et le principe que 
‘“‘lors méme quwil s’agit de contrat, ¢est-d-dire d’un engagement formel et 
se régulierement pris entre un particulier et UV Etat, cest a [Etat & juger la 
“cause, cet axvome, tnconnu chez la plupart des nations modernes, datt 
“ tenu pour aussi sacré par un intendant de [ancien régime, qu’tl pourratt 
“Pétre de nos jours par le personnage qut ressemble le plus a celur-ld, je 
“ veux dire un préfet."—Tocqueville, Huvres Completes, vi. pp. 221, 222. 

Chapter 

Part U1. 

Droit 
admints- 
tratif—its 
two leading 
principles. 

Privileges 
of the 
State. 

332 THE RULE OF LAW 

monarchy with what was strongest in the equally 
despotic creed of Jacobinism. Nowhere is this fusion 
more clearly visible than in the methods by which 
Bonaparte’s legislation and policy gave full expres- 
sion to the ideas or conceptions of royal prerogative 
underlying the administrative practice of the ancien 
régime, and emphasised the jealousy felt in 1800 by 
every Frenchman of the least interference by the law 
Courts with the free action of the government. This 
jealousy itself, though theoretically justified by 
revolutionary dogma, was inherited by the Revolution 
from the statecraft of the monarchy. 

Any one who considers with care the nature of 
the droit administratif of France, or the topics to 
which it applies, will soon discover that it rests, 
and always has rested, at bottom on two leading 
ideas alien to the conceptions of modern Englishmen. 

The first of these ideas is that the government, 
and every servant of the government, possesses, as 
representative of the nation, a whole body of special 
rights, privileges, or prerogatives as against private 
citizens, and that the extent of these rights, privileges, 
or prerogatives is to be determined on principles 
different from the considerations which fix the legal 
rights and duties of one citizen towards another. An 
individual in his dealings with the State does not, 
according to French ideas, stand on anything like the 
same footing as that on which he stands in dealings 
with his neighbour.' 

1 “Un particulier qui n’exécute pas un marché doit 4 Ventrepreneur 
“une indemnité proportionnée au gain dont tl le prive; le Code civil Véablit 
“ainsi. L’administration qui rompt un tel marché ne dott d’indemnitéd 
“quien raison de la perte éprouvée. C'est la rdgle de la jurisprudence 
“administrative, A moins que le drott ne sy oppose, elle tient que [ Etat, 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 333 

The second of these general ideas is the necessity 
of maintaining the so-called “separation of powers” 
(séparation des pouvoirs), or, in other words, of 
preventing the government, the legislature, and the 
Courts from encroaching upon one another's province. 
The expression, however, separation of powers, as 
applied by Frenchmen to the relations of the executive 
and the Courts, with which alone we are here concerned, 
may easily mislead. It means, in the mouth of a 
French statesman or lawyer, something different 
from what we mean in England by the “indepen- 
dence of the judges,” or the like expressions. As 
interpreted by French history, by French legislation, 
and by the decisions of French tribunals, it means 
neither more nor less than the maintenance of the 
principle that while the ordinary judges ought to be 
irremovable and thus independent of the executive, 
the government and its officials ought (whilst acting 
officially) to be independent of and to a great extent 
free from the jurisdiction of the ordinary Courts.’ It 
were curious to follow out the historical growth of the 
whole theory as to the “separation of powers.” It 
rests apparently upon Montesquieu’s Esprit des Lois, 

“¢ o’est-d-dire la collection de tous les citoyens, et le trésor public, c'est-a-dire 
“ Pensemble de tous les contribuables, doivent passer avant le citoyen ou le 
“contribuable tsolés, défendant un intérét individuel.”—Vivien, Etudes 
Administratives, i. pp. 141-142. This was the language of a French 
lawyer of high authority writing in 1853. The particular doctrine 
which it contains is now repudiated by French lawyers. Vivien’s 
teaching, however, even though it be no longer upheld, illustrates the 
general view taken in France of the relation between the individual 
and the state. That Vivien’s application of this view is now re- 
pudiated, illustrates the change which French droit administratyf and 
the opinion of Frenchmen has undergone during the last fifty-five 
ears. 

1 See Aucoc, Droit Admintstratt/, ss. 20, 24. 

Chapter 
XIL 

Separation 
of powers. 

Part IL. 

Character- 
istics, 

(1) Rights 
of State 
determined 
by special 
rules. 

334 THE RULE OF LAW 

Book XI. c. 6, and is in some sort the offspring 
of a double misconception; Montesquieu misunder- 
stood on this point the principles and practice of the 
English constitution, and his doctrine was in turn, if 
not misunderstood, exaggerated, and misapplied by the 
French statesmen of the Revolution. Their judgment 
was biassed, at once by knowledge of the incon- 
veniences and indeed the gross evils which had 
resulted from the interference of the French “ parlia- 
ments” in matters of State and by the belief that 
these Courts would offer opposition, as they had done 
before, to fundamental and urgently needed reforms. 
Nor were the leaders of French opinion uninfluenced 
by the traditional desire, felt as strongly by despotic 
democrats as by despotic kings, to increase the power 
of the central government by curbing the authority of 
the law Courts. The investigation, however, into the 
varying fate of a dogma which has undergone a 
different development on each side of the Atlantic 
would lead us too far from our immediate topic. All 
that we need note is the extraordinary influence 
exerted in France, and in all countries which have 
followed French examples, by this part of Montesquieu’s 
teaching, and the extent to which it still underlies 
the political and legal institutions of the French 
Republic. 

To the combination of these two general ideas may 
be traced four distinguishing characteristics of French 
administrative law. 

The first of these characteristics is, as the reader 
will at once perceive, that the relation of the govern- 
ment and its officials towards private citizens must 
be regulated by a body of rules which are in reality 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 335 

laws, but which may differ considerably from the laws Chapter 
which govern the relation of one private person to 2 
another. This distinction between ordinary law and 
administrative law is one which since 1800 has been 
fully recognised in France, and forms an essential 
part of French public law, as it must form a part of 
the public law of any country where administrative 
law in the true sense exists.’ 

The second of these characteristics is that the (2) law 
ordinary judicial tribunals which determine ordinary Snane 
questions, whether they be civil or criminal, between {t"sdicton 

in matters 

man and man, mu - the Bat 
an, must, speaking generally, have no con- coucerniz 

cern whatever with matters at issue between a private aid adios 
person and the State, 1.e. with questions of adminis- litigation 
trative law, but that such questions, in so far as Bet He 
they form at all matter of litigation (contentieux tii” 
administratif), must be determined by administrative ©" 
Courts in some way connected with the government 

or the administration. 

No part of revolutionary policy or sentiment was 
more heartily accepted by Napoleon than the con- 
viction that the judges must never be allowed to 
hamper the action of the government. He gave 
effect to this conviction in two different ways. 

In the first place, he constituted, or reconstituted, 
two classes of Courts. The one class consisted of 
“judicial” or, as we should say, “common law” 
Courts. They performed, speaking generally, but 
two functions. The one function was the decision of 

disputes in strictness between private persons; this 

1 Of course it is possible that rules of administrative law may exist 
in a country, ¢g. in Belgium, where these rules are enforced only by 
the ordinary Courts. 

Part I. 

336 THE RULE OF LAW 

duty was discharged by such Courts as the Courts of 
First Instance and the Courts of Appeal. The other 
function was the trial of all criminal cases; this duty 
was discharged by such Courts as the Correctional 
Courts (Tribunaux Correctionnels) or the Courts of 
Assize! (Cour d’Assises). At the head of all these 
judicial tribunals was placed, and still stands, the 
Court of Cassation (Cour de Cassatvon), whereof 
it is the duty to correct the errors in law of the 
inferior judicial Courts.* The other class of so-called 
Courts were and are the administrative Courts, such 
as the Courts of the Prefects (Conseil de Préfecture) ° 
and the Council of State. The function of these 
bodies, in so far as they acted judicially (for they 
fulfilled many duties that were not judicial), was to 
determine questions of administrative law. The 
two kinds of Courts stood opposed to one another. 
The judicial Courts had, speaking generally,‘ no 
concern with questions of administrative law, or, in 
other words, with cases in which the interest of the 
State or its servants was at issue; to entrust any 
judicial Court with the decision of any administrative 
suit would have been deemed in 1800, as indeed it 

1 The Courts of Aesize are the only Courts in France where there 
is trial by jury. 

2 The Cour de Cassation is not in strictness a Court of Appeal. 

8 With the Courte, or Councils, of the Prefects an English student 
need hardly concern himeelf, 

* There existed even under Napoleon exceptional instances, and 
their number has been increased, in which, mainly from motives of 
immediate convenience, legislation has given to judicial Courts the 
decision of matters which from their nature should fall within the 
sphere of the administrative tribunals, just as legislation has exception- 
ally given to administrative tribunals matters which would naturally 
fall within the jurisdiction of the judicial Courts. These exceptional 
instances cannot be brought within any one clear principle, and may 
for our purpose be dismissed from consideration. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 337 

is still deemed by most Frenchmen, a violation of the 
doctrine of the separation of powers, and would have 
allowed the interference by mere judges with cases in 
which the interest of the State or its servants was at 
issue. The administrative Courts, on the other hand, 
had, speaking generally, no direct concern with 
matters which fell within the jurisdiction of the 
judicial tribunals, but when we come to examine 
the nature of the Council of State we shall find that 
this restriction on the authority of a body which in 
’ Napoleon’s time formed part of the government itself 
was far less real than the strict limitations imposed 
on the sphere of action conceded to the common 
law Courts. 

Napoleon, in the second place, displayed towards 
the ordinary judges the sentiment of contemptuous 
suspicion embodied in revolutionary legislation. The 
law of 16-24 August 1790’ is one among a score 
of examples which betray the true spirit of the 
Revolution. The judicial tribunals are thereby for- 
bidden to interfere in any way whatever with any 
acts of legislation. Judicial functions, it is laid down, 
must remain separate from administrative functions. 
The judges must not, under penalty of forfeiture, 
disturb or in any way interfere with the operations of 
administrative bodies, or summon before them admin- 
istrative officials on account of anything done by 
reason of their administrative duties. Napoleon had 
imbibed to the utmost the spirit of these enactments. 
He held, as even at a much later date did all persons 
connected with the executive government, that ‘the 
“ judges are the enemves of the servants of the State, 

1 Tit. ii. arta 11-13. 
Z 

Chapter 

Part 1. 

338 THE RULE OF LAW 

“el OE aS 
“ and that there is always reason to fear their attempts 
“to compromise the public interests by their male- 
“ volent, or at best rash, interference in ‘the usual 
“course of government business.”’ This fear was 
during the Empire, at any rate, assuredly groundless. 
Administrative officials met with no resistance from 
the Courts. After the Revolution the judges exhibited 
boundless humility and servile submission, they 
trembled before the power and obeyed the orders, often 
insolent enough, of the government.’ It is difficult, 
however, to see how in the days of Napoleon the 
ordinary judges could, whatever their courage or bold- 
ness, have interfered with the conduct of the govern- 
ment or its agents. They are even now, as a rule, 
without jurisdiction in matters which concern the 
State. They have no right to determine, for instance, 
the meaning and legal effect in case it be seriously 
disputed of official documents, as, for example, of a 
letter addressed by a Minister of State to a sub- 
ordinate, or by a general to a person under his 
command, They are even now in certain cases with- 
out jurisdiction as to questions arising between a 
private person and a department of the government. 
In Napoleon’s time * they could not, without the con- 

1 “On a subst Pinfluence de ce préjugé dominant chez les gouvernants, 
“ dans Padministration et méme chez la plupart des jurisconsultes, que les 
“agents judictatres sont les ennemis nes des agents administratifs, qu'il y 
“@ toujours a craindre leurs tentatives de compromettre la chose publique 
“par leur intervention—malveillante ou tout au moins inconsidérée—dans 
“la marche normale de Cadministration.”—Jéze, p. 139. 

2 « Les agents administratifs, dans leur arbitratre véritablement tnoui, 
“ne recontrerent aucune résistance chez les agents judiciatres. Ceuzx-ci, 
- apres la Révolution, ont montré une humilité sans limite et une soumis- 
“sion servile, Crest en tremblant qu’ils ont toujours obA aux ordres 

“ parfots insolents du Gouvernement.”—Jéze, p. 128. 
* See Constitution of Year VIII., art. 75, p. 343, post. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 339 
fa ere Nr 
sent of the government, have entertained criminal or 
civil proceedings against an official for a wrong done 
or a crime committed by such official in respect of 
private individuals when acting in discharge of his 
official duties. The incompetence, however, of the 
judicial Courts did not mean, even under Napoleon, 
that a person injured by an agent of the government 
was without a remedy. He might bring his grievance 
before, and obtain redress from, the administrative 
tribunals, t.e. in substance the Council of State, or 
proceedings might, where a crime or a wrong was 
complained of, be, with the permission of the govern- 
ment, taken before the ordinary Courts. 

The co-existence of judicial Courts and of adminis- 
trative Courts results of necessity in raising questions 
of jurisdiction. A, for example, in some judicial 
Court claims damages against X for a breach of 
contract, or it may be for what we should term an 
assault or false imprisonment. -X’s defence in sub- 
stance is that he acted merely as a servant of the 
State, and that the case raises a point of adminis- 
trative law determinable only by an administrative 
tribunal, or, speaking broadly, by the Council of 
State. The objection, in short, is that the judicial 
Court has no jurisdiction. How is this dispute to 
be decided? The natural idea of an Englishman 
is that the conflict must be determined by the 
judicial Courts, t.e. the ordinary judges, for that 
the judges of the land are the proper authorities to 
define the limits of their own jurisdiction. ‘This 
view, which is so natural to an English lawyer, is 
radically opposed to the French conception of the 
separation of powers, since it must, if systematically 

Chapter 

(3) Con- 
flicts of 
jurisdic- 
tion. 

Part I. 

340 THE RULE OF LAW 

carried out, enable the Courts to encroach on the 
province of the administration. It contradicts the 
principle still recognised as valid by French law 
that administrative bodies must never be troubled 
in the exercise of their functions by any act 
whatever of the judicial power;* nor can an 
Englishman, who recollects the cases on general 
warrants, deny that our judges have often inter- 
fered with the action of the administration. The 
worth of Montesquieu’s doctrine is open to ques- 
tion, but if his theory be sound, it is clear that 
judicial bodies ought not to be allowed to pro- 
nounce a final judgment upon the limits of their own 
authority. 

Under the legislation of Napoleon the right to 
determine such questions of jurisdiction was in 
theory reserved to the head of the State, but was 
in effect given to the Council of State, that is, to 
the highest of administrative Courts. Its authority in 
this matter was, as it still is, preserved in two different 
ways. If a case before an ordinary or judicial Court 
clearly raised a question of administrative law, the 
Court was bound to see that the inquiry was referred 
to the Council of State for decision. Suppose, how- 
ever, the Court exceeded, or the government thought 
that it exceeded, its jurisdiction and trenched upon 
the authority of the administrative Court, a 
prefect, who, be it remarked, is a mere government 
official, could raise a conflict, that is to say, could, by 
taking the proper steps, insist upon the question of 
jurisdiction being referred for decision to the Council 
of State. We can hardly exaggerate the extent of 

1 See Aucoc, Drott Administrattf, a 24. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 341 
eee ceed SLE A Zee ey a 
the authority thus conferred upon the Council. It chapter 
had the right to fix the limits of its own power, it 
it could in effect take out of the hands of a 
judicial Court a case of which the Court was already 
seised.' 

The fourth and most despotic characteristic of (4) Protec- 
droit administratif lies in its tendency to protect? dmeisls 
from the supervision or control of the ordinary law 
Courts any servant of the State who is guilty of an 
act, however illegal, whilst acting in bona fide obedi- 
ence to the orders of his superiors and, as far as 
intention goes, in the mere discharge of his official 
duties. 

Such an official enjoyed from 1800 till 1872 a 
triple protection (garantie des fonctionnaires). 

In the first place, he could not be made respon- Act of 
sible before any Court, whether judicial or adminis- ri 
trative, for the performance of any act of State 
(acte de gouvernement). 

The law of France has always recognised an 
indefinite class of acts, 1.e. acts of State, which, as 
they concern matters of high policy or of public 
security, or touch upon foreign policy or the execu- 
tion of treaties, or concern dealings with foreigners, 
must be left to the uncontrolled discretion of the 

1 Up to 1828 it was possible to raise a conflict (clever un confixt) in 
any criminal no less than in any civil case. Nor is it undeserving of 
notice that, whilst a conflict could be raised in order to prevent a 
judicial Court from encroaching on the sphere of an administrative 
Court, there was in Napoleon’s time and still is no legal means for 
raising a conflict with a view to prevent an administrative Court from 
encroaching on the sphere of a judicial Court. 

2 This protection of officials may be displayed in parts of French 
law (¢.g. Code Pénal, art. 114) which do not technically belong to droit 
administratif, but it is in reality connected with the whole system of 

‘administrative law. 

Part II. 

Obedience 
to orders. 

342 THE RULE OF LAW 

i" Ee ee Pee ee 
government, and lie quite outside the jurisdiction 
of any Court whatever. What may be the exact 
definition of an act of State is even now, it would 
appear in France, a moot point on which high 
authorities are not entirely agreed. It is therefore 
impossible for any one but a French lawyer to 
determine what are the precise qualities which 
turn conduct otherwise illegal into an act of 
State of which no French Court could take cognis- 
ance. Of recent years the tendency of French 
lawyers has certainly been to narrow down the sense 
of an ambiguous term which lends itself easily to the 
justification of tyranny. We may feel sure, however, 
that during the Napoleonic era and for long after- 
wards any transaction on the part of the government 
or its servants was deemed to be an act of State 
which was carried out bona fide with the object 
of furthering the interest or the security of the 
country. 

In the second place, the French Penal Code, Art. 
114,’ protected, as it still protects, an official from 
the penal consequences of any interference with the 
personal liberty of fellow citizens when the act com- 

1 “Art. 114. Loraqu’un fonctionnaire public, un agent ou un préposé 
“du Gouvernement, aura ordonné ou fait quelque acte arbitraire, 
“ attentatotre sott @ la liberté individuelle, sott aux droits civiques dun 
“ou de plusieurs citoyens, soit d la Charte, tl sera condamné @ la peine de 
“la dégradation civique. 

“St néanmoins il justifie qu’tl a agi par ordre de ses supérieurs pour 
“des objets du ressort de ceux-ci, sur lesquels il leur Aart dd ob¢issance 
“hiérarchique, tl sera exempté de la peine, laquelle sera, dans ce cas, 
“appliqués seulement aux supérieurs qui auront donné Cordre.”—Code 
Pénal, art. 114; and Gargon, Code Pénal annoté, p.245. With this read 
Gargon, Code Pénal, arts, 34 and 87, compare Code d’instruction criminelle, 
art. 10; Duguit, Manuel, pp. 524-527, and generally Dugnit, L’ Etat, 
ch. v. 8 10, pp. 615-634. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 343 
a 

plained of is done under the orders of his official 
superior.’ 

In the third place, under the celebrated Article 75 * 
of the Constitution of the Year VIIL, i.e. of 1800, no 
official could, without the permission of the Council 
of State, be prosecuted, or otherwise be proceeded 
against, for any act done in relation to his official 
duties. 

The protection given was ample. Article 75 reads 
indeed as if it applied only to prosecutions, but was 
construed by the Courts so as to embrace actions 
for damages.* Under the Napoleonic Constitution no 
servant of the State, whether a prefect, a mayor, or 
a policeman, whose conduct, however unlawful, met 
with the approval of the government, ran any real 
risk of incurring punishment or of paying damages for 

1 None but a French criminalist can pronounce with anything like 
certainty on the full effect of Art. 114, but Gargon’s comment thereon 
(Code Penal, pp. 245-255) suggests to an English lawyer that an 
offender who brings himself within the exemption mentioned in the 
second clause of the Article, though he may be found guilty of the 
offence charged, cannot be punished for it under Art 114, or any 
other Article of the Penal Code, and that Art. 114 protects a very 
wide class of public servants. (See Gargon, comment under heads D 
and E, pp. 249-252, and under G, p. 253, and para. 100, p. 254. 
Read also Duguit, Manuel, ss. 75-77, especially pp. 504, 527 ; Duguit, 
L’ Etat, pp. 615-634.) 

It is difficult for an Englishman to understand how under the 
Code Pénal a prefect, a policeman, or any other servant of the State, 
acting bona fide under the orders of his proper official superior, can be 
in danger of punishment for crimes such as assault, unlawful imprison- 
ment, and the like. 

2 & Les agents du Gouvernement, autres que les ministres, ne peuvent étre 
“ poursuivis pour des faits relatifs a leurs fonctions, qwen vertu dune 
“ décision du conseil Pétat: en ce cas, la poursuite a lieu devant les 
“ tribunauz ordinatres.”—Duguit and Monnier, Les Constitutions de la 
France (deuxiéme ed.), p. 127. yp 

8 See Jacquelin, Lee Principes Dominants du Contentieux Admints- 
tratif, p. 127. 

344 THE RULE OF LAW 

any act which purported to be done in discharge of 
his official duties. 

The effect practically produced by the four charac- 
teristics of droit administratif, and especially the 
amount of the protection provided for officials acting 
in obedience to the orders of their superiors, depends 
in the main on the answer to one question: What 
at a given time is found to be the constitution and 
the character of the Council of State? Was it then 
under Napoleon a law Court administering judicially 
a particular branch of French law, or was it a 
department of the executive government? The 
answer is plain. The Council, as constituted or 
revived by Bonaparte, was the very centre of his 
whole governmental fabric. It consisted of the most 
eminent administrators whom Napoleon could gather 
round him. The members of the Council were 
entitled and were bound to give the supreme ruler 
advice. The Council, or some of the Councillors, 
took part in affairs of all descriptions. It is hardly 
an exaggeration to say that, subject to the absolute 
will of Napoleon, the members of the Council con- 
stituted the government. They held office at his 
pleasure. The Councillors dealt with policy, with 
questions of administration, with questions of adminis- 
trative law. In 1800 it is probable that adminis- 
trative suits were not very clearly separated from 
governmental business. The Council, moreover, even 
when acting judicially, was more of a Ministry than 
of a Court, and when the Council, acting as a Court, 
had given its decision, or tendered its advice, it 
possessed no means for compelling the executive to 
give effect to its decisions. As a matter of fact, years 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 345 
em ey 
have sometimes elapsed before the executive of the 
day has thought fit to put the judgments of the 
Council into force, and it was not till 1872 that its 
decisions acquired by law the character of real judg- 
ments. It was, moreover, as we have already pointed 
out, originally the final Conflict-Court. It had a right 
to determine whether a given case did or did not 
concern administrative law, and therefore whether it 
fell within its own jurisdiction or within the juris- 
diction of the ordinary Courts. Thus the state of 
things which existed in France at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century bore some likeness to what 
would be the condition of affairs in England if there 
were no, or little, distinction between the Cabinet as 
part of the Privy Council and the Judicial Committee 
of the Privy Council, and if the Cabinet, in its 
character of a Judicial Committee, determined all 
questions arising between the government on the 
one side, and private individuals on the other, and 
determined them with an admitted reference to con- 
siderations of public interest or of political expediency. 
Nor was any material change produced by the fall of 
Napoleon. ‘The restored monarchy eagerly grasped 
the prerogatives created by the Empire. There was 
even a sort of return to the unrestrained arbitrariness 
of the Directory. It was not until 1828, that is, 
within two years of the expulsion of Charles X., that 
public opinion enforced some restriction on the 
metiiods by which the administrative authorities, 7.¢. 
the government, invaded the sphere of the judicial 
Courts. 

There are two reasons why it is worth while to 
study with care the droit administratef of our first 

Chapter 

Part IL 

Monarch- 
fcal period. 

346 THE RULE OF LAW 

period. The administrative law of to-day has been 
built up on the foundations laid by Napoleon. The 
Courts created by him still exist; their jurisdiction 
is still defined in accordance, in the main, with the 
lines which he laid down. ‘True it is that machinery 
invented to support a scheme of rational absolutism 
has in later times been used by legists and reformers 
for the promotion of legal liberty. But it is a fact 
never to be forgotten that the administrative law 
of France originated in ideas which favour the pre- 
rogatives of the government as the proper defence 
for the interest of the nation. 

Second Period.—The Orleans Monarchy and the 
Second Empire 1830-1870.’ 

This period deserves the special attention of 
English students. Napoleonic Imperialism was 
absolutism; the Restoration was reaction; neither 
admits of satisfactory comparison with any govern- 
mental system known to modern England. The 
forty years, on the other hand, which intervened 
between the expulsion of Charles X. and the fall of 
Napoleon III., though marked by three violent 
changes —the Revolution of 1848, the coup détat 
of 1851, the overthrow of the Second Empire in 1870 
—form, as a whole, a time of civil order. During 
these forty years France was, with the exception of 
not more than six months, governed under the 
established law of the land. An age of peaceful 
progress gives an opening for illuminative comparison 
between the public law of France and the public law 

1 Little account need be taken of the Second Republic, 1848-1851. 
Its legislative reforms in administrative law did not outlive its brief 
and troubled duration. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 347 

of England. This remark is particularly applicable 
to the reign of Louis Philippe. He was, in the eyes 
of Englishmen, above all things, a constitutional 
king.’ His Parliamentary ministries, his House of 
peers, and his House of deputies, the whole frame- 
work and the very spirit of his government, seemed 
to be modelled upon the constitution of England ; 
under his rule the supremacy of the ordinary law of 
the land, administered by the ordinary law Courts, 
was, as Englishmen supposed, as securely established 
in France as in England. They learn with surprise, 
that during the whole of these forty years few, if 
any, legislative or Parliamentary reforms’? touched 
the essential characteristics of droit administratif 
as established by Napoleon. It remained, as it 
still does, a separate body of law, dealt with by 
administrative Courts. With this law the judicial 
Courts continued to have, as they still have, 
no concern. The introduction of Parliamentary 
government took from the Council of State, during 
the reign of Louis Philippe, many of its political 
functions. It remained, however, as it does to-day, 
the great administrative Court. It preserved what 
it does not now retain,’ the right to define the juris- 
diction of the judicial Courts. Servants of the State 

1 His accession to the throne was aided by an obvious, but utterly 
superficial, analogy between the course of the English Revolution in 
the seventeenth century and of the great French Revolution in the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Louis Philippe, it was supposed, 
was exactly the man to perform in France the part which William III. 
had played in England, and close the era of revolution. 

2 It was, however, gradually reformed to a great extent by a 
process of judicial legislation, ie. by the Council of State acting in the 
spirit of a law Court. 

3 See as to present Conflict-Court, p. 360, post. 

Chapter 

348 THE RULE OF LAW 

<._s._— = sae ee 
Part I. remained in possession of every prerogative or privi- 
lege ensured to them by custom or by Napoleonic 
legislation. Droit administratif, in short, retained 
till 1870 all its essential features. That this was so 
is apparent from two considerations :— 
The Coun. First. The Council of State never, during the 
shaslutaly period with which we are concerned, became a 
Hes thoroughly judicial body. 

This indeed is a point on which an English 
critic must speak with some hesitation. He will 
remember how easily a Frenchman, even though 
well acquainted with England, might at the present 
moment misinterpret the working of English in- 
stitutions, and imagine, for instance, from the 
relation of the Lord Chancellor to the Ministry, 
that the Cabinet, of which the Chancellor is always 
a member, could influence the judgment given in an 
action entered in the Chancery Division of the High 
Court, whereas, as every Englishman knows, centuries 
have passed since the Lord Chancellor, when acting 
as a judge in Chancery, was in the slightest degree 
guided by the interest or the wishes of the Cabinet. 
An English critic will also remember that at the 
present day the Council of State commands as profound 
respect as any Court in France, and stands in popular 
estimation on a level with the Court of Cassation— 
the highest of judicial tribunals—and further, that the 
repute of the Council has risen during every year since 
1830. Yet, subject to the hesitation which becomes 
any one who comments on the working of institutions 
which are not those of his own country, an English 
lawyer must conclude that between 1830 and 1870 
the Council, while acting as an administrative 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 349 

tribunal, though tending every year to become 
more and more judicialised, was to a considerable 
extent an official or governmental body, the members 
of which, when acting in the discharge of quasi- 
judicial functions, were likely to be swayed by 
ministerial or official sentiment. This assertion does 
not imply that the Council, consisting of persons 
of the highest eminence and character, did not aim 
at doing or did not constantly do justice. What is 
meant is that the Council’s idea of justice was not 
likely to be exactly the same as that entertained by 
judicial or common law Courts. 

Secondly. The legal protection of officials suffered 
no diminution. 

No man could be made liable before any Court 
whatever for carrying out an act of State (acte 
de gouvernement).' And under the rule of Louis 
Philippe, as under the Second Empire, wide was the 
extension given, both in theory and in practice, to 
this indefinite and undefined expression. 

In 1832 the Duchesse de Berry attempted to 
raise a civil war in La Vendée. She was arrested. 
The king dared not let her leave the country. 
He would not put on trial the niece of his wife. 
Republicans and Legitimists alike wished her to be 
brought before a law Court. The one class desired 
that “Caroline Berry” should be treated as an 
ordinary criminal, the other hoped to turn the Duchess 
into a popular heroine. The case was debated in 
Parliament again and again. Petitions demanded 
that she should either be set at liberty or brought 
before a jury. The government refused to take 

1 See p. 341, ante, 

No diminu- 
tion in pro- 
tection of 
officials. 

Part I. 

350 THE RULE OF LAW 

either course. She was detained in prison until 
private circumstances deprived her both of credit and 
of popularity. She was then quietly shipped off to 
Sicily. The conduct of the government, or in fact 
of the king, was illegal from beginning to end. 
The Ministry confessed, through the mouth of 
Monsieur Thiers, that the law had been violated. A 
vote of the Chamber of Deputies—not be it noted an 
act of legislation—supplied, it was held, full justi- 
fication for a breach of the law.’ This was the kind 
of authority ascribed in 1832 by the constitutional 
Ministers of a constitutional monarch to an act of 
State. This most elastic of pleas was, it would 
seem, the excuse or the defence for the dealings of 
Napoleon III. with the property of the Orleans 
family ; nor is it easy to believe that even as late 
as 1880 some of the proceedings against the un- 
authorised congregations were not examples of the 
spirit which places an act of State above the law 
of the land. 

The Penal Code Article 114,’ protecting from 
punishment, though not from legal condemnation, an 
agent of the government who though he committed 
a crime acted in obedience to the commands of his 
official superiors, remained, as it still remains, in 
full force. 

The celebrated Article 75 of the Constitution of 

1 oe M. Thiers, dans la séance du 20 juin, avoua hautement tout ce 
“qual y avait ew d’illégal dans Carrestation, la déention, la mise en 
“laberté de la duchesse ; céait a la Chambre a decider si Pon avatt agi 
“dans Vintérét bien entendu du salut public. La Chambre passa 
“ordre du jour.”—Grégoire, Histoire de France, i. p. 364. See also 
ibid. pp. 292-308, 356-364. 

2 See p. 342, note 1, ante. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 351 

fe EI EE ee 
the Year VIII.,’ which made it impossible to take 
legal proceedings for a crime or a wrong against 
any official without the permission of the Council of 
State, which surely in this case must have acted in 
accordance with the government of the day, still 
stood unrepealed. 

Public opinion refused to regard the Council as 
a judicial tribunal, and condemned the protection 
extended to official wrongdoers. Hear on this point 
the language of Alexis de Tocqueville : 

“In the Year VIII. of the French Republic a 
‘constitution was drawn up in which the following 
“clause was introduced: ‘Art. 75. All the agents 
‘of the government below the rank of ministers can 
‘‘only be prosecuted’ for offences relating to their 
‘‘ several functions by virtue of a decree of the Con- 
‘seil d’Etat; in which case the prosecution takes 
“place before the ordinary tribunals.’ This clause 
‘‘ survived the ‘Constitution de ]’An VIII.,’ and it is 
‘still maintained in spite of the just complaints of 
“the nation. I have always found the utmost diffi- 
“culty in explaining its meaning to Englishmen or 
‘‘ Americans. They were at once led to conclude 
“that the Conseil d’Etat in France was a great 
“tribunal, established in the centre of the king- 
“dom, which exercised a preliminary and somewhat 
“ tyrannical jurisdiction in all political causes. But 
“when I told them that the Conseil d’Etat was not 
‘a judicial body, in the common sense of the term, 
“but an administrative council composed of men 

1 See p. 343, ante. 

2 This term was extended by legal decisions #0 4s to cover actions 
for damages. See Jacquelin, Les Principes Dominants du Contenteux 
Administratif, p. 127. 

Chapter 

Part IL 

352 THE RULE OF LAW 

‘dependent on the Crown, so that the King, after 
“ having ordered one of his servants, called a Prefect, 
“to commit an injustice, has the power of command- 
“ing another of his servants, called a Councillor of 
“ State, to prevent the former from being punished ; 
“when I demonstrated to them that the citizen who 
‘(has been injured by the order of the sovereign is 
“obliged to solicit from the sovereign permission to 
“obtain redress, they refused to credit so flagrant an 
“abuse, and were tempted to accuse me of falsehood 
“or of ignorance. It frequently happened before 
‘the Revolution that a Parliament issued a warrant 
“against a public officer who had committed an 
“ offence, and sometimes the proceedings were stopped 
“by the authority of the Crown, which enforced 
‘‘compliance with its absolute and despotic will. It 
‘ig painful to perceive how much lower we are sunk 
“than our forefathers, since we allow things to pass 
“under the colour of justice and the sanction of the 
‘law which violence alone could impose upon them.” ? 

This classical passage from Tocqueville's Democracy 
in America was published in 1835, when, at the 
age of 30, he had obtained a fame which his friends 
compared to that of Montesquieu. His estimate of 
droit administratif assuredly had not changed when 
towards the end of his life he published L’Ancten 
Régime et la Révolution, by far the most poner 
and the most mature of his works. 

“We have, it is true,” he writes, “ axtelled the 
‘judicial power from the sphere of government into 
“‘ which the ancien régime had most unhappily allowed 

1 A.de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, i. (translation), p. 101; 
uvres Completes, i. pp. 174, 175. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 353 

‘‘its introduction, but at the very same time, as any 
‘one can see, the authority of the government has 
“gradually been introducing itself into the natural 
‘sphere of the Courts, and there we have suffered 
‘it to remain as if the confusion of powers was not 
“‘as dangerous if it came from the side of the govern- 
‘‘ment as if it came from the side of the Courts, or 
“even worse. For the intervention of the Courts of 
“« Justice into the sphere of government only impedes 
‘“‘ the management of business, whilst the intervention 
“of government in the administration of justice 
“‘depraves citizens and turns them at the same time 
‘both into revolutionists and slaves.” * 

These are the words of a man of extraordinary 
genius who well knew French history, who was well 
acquainted with the France of his day, who had for 
years sat in Parliament, who at least once had been a 
member of the Cabinet, and to whom the public life of 
his own country was as well known as the public life 
of England to Macaulay. Tocqueville’s language may 
bear marks of an exaggeration, explainable partly by 
his turn of mind, and partly by the line of thought 
which made him assiduously study and possibly 
overrate the closeness of the connection between 
the weaknesses of modern democracy and the vices 
of the old monarchy. Be this as it may, he 

1 Nous avons, tl est vrat, chased la justice de la sphere admimstrative 
“ od Pancien régime Cavatt laissés #introdutre fort inddment ; mars dans 
“le méme temps, comme on le voit, le gouvernement sintrodutsait sans 
“‘ cesse dans la sphere naturelle de la justice, e nous Py avons latesd - 
‘comme si la confusion des pouvoirs n’était pas aussi dangereuse de ce 
“ cté que de Vautre, e& méme pire; car Vintervention de la justice dans 
“ Vadmintstration ne nuit qu’aux affaires, tandts que Vintervention de 
“ Padministration dans la justice déprave les hommes et tend a les rendre 
tout & la fois révolutionnaires et serviles.”—Tocqueville, L’ Ancien 
Régime et la Révolution, septitme édition, p. 81. 

2A 

Chapter 
xi. 

Part IL 

Effect of 

354 THE RULE OF LAW 

assuredly expressed the educated opinion of his 
time. A writer who has admirably brought into 
view the many merits of the Council of State and 
the methods by which it has in matters of adminis- 
trative litigation acquired for itself more and more 
of a judicial character, acutely notes that till the 
later part of the nineteenth century the language 
of everyday life, which is the best expression of 
popular feeling, applied the terms “ courts of justice ” 
or ‘‘justice” itself only to the judicial or common law 
Courts! What stronger confirmation can be found 
of the justice of Tocqueville’s judgment for the time 
at least in which he lived ? 

We can now understand the way in which from 

a rae 1830 to 1870 the existence of a droit administratif 

on position 

of French 
officials. 

affected the whole legal position of French public 
servants, and rendered it quite different from that 
of English officials, 

Persons in the employment of the government, 
who formed, be it observed, a more important part of 
the community than do the whole body of English 
civil servants, occupied in France a situation in some 
respects resembling that of soldiers in England. For 
the breach of official discipline they were, we may 
safely assume, readily punishable in one form or 
another. But if like English soldiers they were 
subject to official discipline, they enjoyed what even 
soldiers in England do not possess, a very large 
amount of protection against proceedings before the 
judicial Courts for wrongs done to private citizens. 
The position, for instance, of say a prefect or a 
policeman, who in the over-zealous discharge of his 

1 Jéze, p. 138, note 1. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 355 

duties had broken the law by committing an assault 
or a trespass, was practically unassailable. He might 
plead that the wrong done was an act of State. If 
this defence would not avail him he might shelter 
himself behind Article 114 of the Penal Code, and 
thus escape not indeed an adverse verdict but the 
possibility of punishment. But after all, if the 
Ministry approved of his conduct, he had no need 
for legal defences. He could not, without the assent 
of the Council of State, be called upon to answer 
for his conduct before any Court of law. Article 75 
was the palladium of official privilege or irresponsi- 
bility. Nor let any one think that this arm of 
defence had grown rusty with time and could not 
in practice be used. Between 1852 and 1864 there 
were 264 applications for authorisations under Article 
75 to take proceedings against officials. Only 34 were 
granted, or, in other words, 260 were refused.’ The 
manifest injustice of the celebrated Article had been 
long felt. Even in 1815 Napoleon had promised its 
modification. 

Third Period.—The Third Republic—1870-1908. 

Within two years from the fall of the Second 
Empire public opinion insisted upon three drastic 
reforms in the administrative or official law of France. 

On the 19th of September 1870 Article 75 was 
repealed. 

It had survived the Empire, the Restoration, the 
Orleans Monarchy, the Republic of 1848, and the 
Second Empire. The one thing which astonishes an 

1 See Jacquelin, Les Principes Dominants du Contenticuxr Adminis 
tratif, p. 364. 

It is worth notice that the principle of Article 75 was, at any rate 
till lately, recognieed in more than one State of the German Empire. 

Chapter 

Repeal of 
Art. 75. 

Part I. 

356 THE RULE OF LAW 
hiaipd sii ehh tac tt 2 
English critic even more than the length of time 
during which the celebrated Article had withstood 
every assault, is the date, combined with the method 
of its abolition. It was abolished on the 19th of 
September 1870, when the German armies were press- 
ing on to Paris. It was abolished by a Government 
which had come into office through an insurrection, 
and which had no claim to actual power or to moral 
authority except the absolute necessity for protecting 
France against invasion. It is passing strange that a 
provisional government, occupied with the defence of 
Paris, should have repealed a fundamental principle of 
French law. Of the motives which led men placed 
in temporary authority by the accidents of a revolu- 
tion to carry through a legal innovation which, in 
appearance at least, alters the whole position of French 
officials, no foreign observer can form a certain opinion. 
It is, however, a plausible conjecture, confirmed by 
subsequent events, that the repeal of Article 75 was 
lightly enacted and easily tolerated, because, as many 
lawyers may have suspected, it effected-a change 
more important in appearance than in reality, and 
did not after all gravely touch the position of French 
functionaries or the course of French administration." 
A circumstance which fills an English lawyer with 
further amazement is that the repeal of Article 75 

1 For some confirmation of this view, see Aucoc, Droit Administrats, 
as. 419-426 ; Jacquelin, Juridiction Administrative, p. 427 ; Laferriére, 
i. bk. iii, ch. vii. 

The admission, however, involved in the repeal of Article 75 of 
the general principle that officials are at any rate prima facie liable 
for illegal acts, in the same way as private persons, marks, it is said 
by competent authorities, an important change in the public opinion of 
France, and is one among other signs of a tendency to look with 
jealousy on the power of the State. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 357 
ee eee ee Seen Sie eee Pn eee NY 
became, and still without any direct confirmation by Chapter 
any legislative assembly remains, part of the law of ~Z 
the land. Here we come across an accepted principle 
of French constitutional law which betrays the im- 
mense authority conceded both by the law and by 
the public opinion of France to any de facto and 
generally accepted government. Such a body, even 
if like the provisional government of 1848 it is called 
to office one hardly knows how, by the shouts of a 
mob consisting of individuals whose names for the 
most part no one now knows at all, is deemed to 
possess whilst it continues in power the fullest legisla- 
tive authority. It is, to use French terms, not only 
a legislative but a constituent authority. It can 
issue decrees, known by the technical name of decree 
laws (decréts lovs),’ which, until regularly repealed by 
some person or body with acknowledged legislative 
authority, are as much law of the land as any Act 
passed with the utmost formality by the present 
French National Assembly. Contrast with this ready 
acceptance of governmental authority the view taken 
by English Courts and Parliaments of every law passed 
from 1642 to 1660 which did not receive the Royal 
assent. Some of them were enacted by Parliaments 
of a ruler acknowledged both in England and in many 

1 See for the legal doctrine and for examples of such decree laws, 
Duguit, Manuel, pp. 1037, 1038 ; Moreau, Le Réglement Admintstratif, 
pp. 103, 104. Such decree laws were passed by the provisional govern- 
ment between the 24th of February and the 4th of May 1848; by 
Louis Napoleon between the coup @état of 2nd December 1851 and 
29th March 1852, that ia, a ruler who, having by a breach both of the 
law of the land and of his oaths usurped supreme power, had not as 
yet received any recognition by a national vote; and lastly, by the 
Government of National Defence between 4th September 1870 and 
12th February 1871, that is, by an executive which might in strictness 
be called a government of necessity. 

Part IL 

358 THE RULE OF LAW 

Oo ee ot een eee 
foreign countries as the head of the English State ; 
the Protector, moreover, died in peace, and was 
succeeded without disturbance by his son Richard. 
Yet not a single law passed between the outbreak of 
the Rebellion and the Restoration is to be found 
in the English Statute Book. The scrupulous 
legalism of English lawyers acknowledged in 1660 
no Parliamentary authority but that Long Parliament 
which, under a law regularly passed and assented 
to by Charles I., could not be dissolved without 
its own consent. A student is puzzled whether 
most to admire or to condemn the sensible but, 
it may be, too easy acquiescence of Frenchmen in 
the actual authority of any de facto government, 
or the legalism carried to pedantic absurdity of 
Englishmen, who in matters of statesmanship placed 
technical legality above those rules of obvious ex- 
pediency which are nearly equivalent to principles of 
justice. This apparent digression is in reality germane 
to our subject. It exhibits the different light in which, 
even in periods of revolution, Frenchmen and English- 
men have looked upon the rule of law. 

The strange story of Article 75 needs a few words 
more for its completion. The decree law of 19th 
September 1870 reads as if it absolutely subjected 
officials accused of any breach of the law to the juris- 
diction of the judicial Courts. This, moreover, was in 
fact the view taken by both the judicial and the 
administrative Courts between 1870 and 1872. 
But judicial decisions can in France, as elsewhere, 
frustrate the operation of laws which they cannot 

1 See in support of this view, Jacquelin, Les Principes Dominants 
du Contenticux Administratif, pp. 127-144. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 359 

repeal, After 1870 proceedings against officials, and 
officials of all ranks, became frequent. This fact is 
noteworthy. The government wished to protect its 
own servants. It brought before the newly con- 
stituted Conflict-Court’ a case raising for reconsidera- 
tion the effect of the decree law of 19th September 
1870. The Court held that, though proceedings 
against officials might be taken without the leave 
of the Council of State, yet that the dogma of the 
separation of powers must still be respected, and 
that it was for the Conflict-Court to determine 
whether any particular case fell within the juris- 
diction of the judicial Courts or of the administrative 
Courts, that is in effect of the Council of State.? The 
principle of this decision has now obtained general 
acceptance. Thus a judgment grounded on that 
doctrine of the separation of powers which embodies 
traditional jealousy of interference by ordinary judges 
in affairs of State has, according at any rate to one 
high authority, reduced the effect of the repeal of 
Article 75 almost to nothing. ‘To sum the matter 
up,” writes Duguit, ‘‘the only difference between the 
actual system and that which existed under the 
Constitution of the Year VIII. is that before 1870 the 
prosecution of State officials was subject to the 
authorisation of the Council of State, whilst to-day it 
is subject to the authorisation of the Conflict-Court.”* 

1 See p. 360, post. 

2 See Pelletier’s Case, decided 26th July 1873 ; and in support of an 
interpretation of the law which bas now received general approval, 
Laferritre, i. pp. 637-654; Berthélemy, p. 65; Duguit, Manuel, « 
67, pp. 463, 464 ; Jéze, pp. 133-135. 

8 « Hinalement la seule difference entre le systeme actuel et celui de la 

constitution de [an VIII., cest qu’avant 1870 la poursutte contre les 
« fonctionnaires était subordonnée & Vautorisation du Conseil d Etat, et 

Part IL 

(2) De- 
cisions of 
Council of 
State 
become 
judgmeuts. 

(3) Crea- 
tion of 
indepen- 
dent Con- 
flict-Court. 

360 THE RULE OF LAW 

Under the law of 24th May 1872,' the decisions of 
the Council of State concerning cases of administrative 
law received for the first time the obligatory force 
of judgments. They had hitherto been in theory, 
and from some points of view even in practice, as 
already pointed out,’ nothing but advice given to 
the head of the State. 

The same law’ which enhanced the authority of 
the Council’s decisions diminished its jurisdiction. 
The Council had, since 1800, decided whether a given 
case, or a point that might arise in a given case, fell 
within the jurisdiction of the judicial Courts or of 
the administrative Courts, 1.e. in substance of the 
Council itself. This authority or power was, in 1872, 
transferred to a separate and newly constituted 
Conflict-Court.* 

This Conflict-Court has been carefully constituted 
so as to represent equally the authority of the Court 
of Cassation—the highest judicial Court in France— 
and the authority of the Council of State—the 
highest administrative Court in France. It consists 
of nine members :—three members of the Court of 
Cassation elected by their colleagues ; three members 
of the Council of State, also elected by their col- 
Jeagues ; two other persons elected by the above six 
judges of the Conflict-Court. All these eight members 
of the Court hold office for three years. They are 
re-eligible, and are almost invariably re-elected. 

“ quaujourd’hut elle est subordonnée 4 Pautorisation du tribunal des 
“* conflits.”—Duguit, Manuel, p. 464. 

1 Sect. 9. 2 See p. 344, ante. 

3 Law of 24th May 1872, Tit iv. art. 25-28. 

* Such a separate Conflict-Court had been created under the 
Second Republic, 1848-1851. It fell to the ground on the fall of 
the Republic iteelf in consequence of the coup d'état of 1851. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 361 

The Minister of Justice (garde des sceaux) for the 
time being, who is a member of the Ministry, is ex 
officio President of the Court. He rarely attends. 
The Court elects from its own members a Vice- 
President who generally presides The Confiict- 
Court comes near to an absolutely judicial body ; it 
commands, according to the best authorities, general 
confidence. But its connection with the Government 
of the day through the Minister of Justice (who is 
not necessarily a lawyer) being its President, and the 
absence on the part of its members of that permanent 
tenure of office,? which is the best security for perfect 
judicial independence, are defects, which, in the 
opinion of the fairest among French jurists, ought to 
be removed,* and which, as long as they exist, detract 
from the judicial character of the Conflict-Court. An 
Englishman, indeed, can hardly fail to surmise that 
the Court must still remain a partly official body 
which may occasionally be swayed by the policy of 
s Ministry, and still more often be influenced by 
official or governmental ideas. Nor is this suspicion 
diminished by the knowledge that a Minister of 
Justice has within the year 1908 defended his 
position as President of the Court on the ground that 
it ought to contain some one who represents the 
interests of the government.‘ 

These three thorough-going reforms were carried 

1 See Appendix, Note XI., Constitution of Tribunal des Con/flits ; 
Berthélemy (5th ed.), pp. 880, 881 ; Chardon, p. 412. 

Chapter 

The re- 
forms the 
result of 
evolution 

of drot 
adminis- 

2 A member of the Council of State does not hold his position as ¢ratiy. 

Councillor for life He may be removed from the Council by the 
government. But no Councillor has been removed since 1875. 
8 Laferridre, i. p. 24; Chardon, p. 4, note 2; Jéze, pp. 133, 134. 
4 See Jéze, Revue de Droit public, etc. (1908), vol. xxv. p. 257. 

Part I. 

362 THE RULE OF LAW 

out by legislative action. They obviously met the 
requirements of the time.' They were rapid; they 
appeared to be sudden. This appearance is delusive. 
They were in reality the outcome of a slow but con- 
tinuous revolution in French public opinion and also 
of the perseverance with which the legists of the 
Council of State, under the guidance of French juris- 
prudence and logic, developed out of the arbitrariness 
of administrative practice a fixed system of true 
administrative law. To understand this evolution of 
droit administratif during the lapse of more than a 
century (1800-1908) we must cast a glance over the 
whole development of this branch of French law and 
regard it in the light in which it presents itself, not 
so much to an historian of France as toa lawyer who 
looks upon the growth of French public law from an 
historical point of view. We shall then see that the 
years under consideration fall into three periods or 
divisions.? They are :— 

(i.) The period of unnoticed growth, 1800-18 
(Période d'élaboration secréte). During these years 
the Council, by means of judicial precedents, created 
a body of maxims, in accordance with which the 
Council in fact acted when deciding administrative 
disputes. | 

(ii.) The period of publication, 1818-60 (Période 

1 They were either tacitly sanctioned (decree law of 19th September 
1870) or enacted (law of 24th May 1872) even before the formal 
establishment of the Republic (1875) by a National Assembly of 
which the majority were so far from being revolutionists, or even 
reformers, that they desired the restoration of the monarchy. 

? See Hauriou, pp. 245-268. These periods do not precisely corre- 
spond with the three eras marked by political changes in the annals 

of France under which we have already considered (see p. 330, ante) 
the history of droit administratif. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 363 

de divulgation). During these forty-two years various 
reforms were carried out, partly by legislation, but, to 
a far greater extent, by judge-made law. The judicial 
became more or less separated off from the administra- 
tive functions of the Council. Litigious business (le 
contenteux administratif) was in practice assigned 
to and decided by a special committee (section), and, 
‘what is of equal consequence, such business was 
decided by a body which acted after the manner of 
a Court which was addressed by advocates, heard 
arguments, and after public debate delivered judicial 
decisions. These decisions were reported, became the 
object of much public interest, and were, after a 
manner with which English lawyers are well ac- 
quainted, moulded into a system of law. The 
judgments, in short, of the Council acquired the 
force of precedent. The political revolutions of 
France, which have excited far too much notice, 
whilst the uninterrupted growth of French institu- 
tions has received too little attention, sometimes 
retarded or threw back, but never arrested the con- 
tinuous evolution of droit administratif; even under 
the Second Empire this branch of French jurisprudence 
became less and less arbitrary and developed more 
and more into a system of fixed and subtle legal rules. 

(iii.) The period of organisation, 1860-1908 
(Période dorganisation). During the last forty- 
eight years, marked as they have been in France by 
the change from the Empire to a Republic, by the 
German invasion, and by civil war, the development 
of droit administratif has exhibited a singular and 
tranquil regularity. Sudden innovations have been 
rare and have produced little effect. The reforms 

I. Likeness, 

1st Point. 

364 THE RULE OF LAW 
{EOS SSS CG Se ae 
introduced by the decree law of 19th September 
1870, and by the law of 24th May 1872, are, taken 
together, considerable; but they in reality give effect 
to ideas which had since 1800 more or less guided the 
judicial legislation and practice both of the Council 
of State and of the Court of Cassation. If the legal 
history of France since 1800 be looked at as a 
whole, an Englishman may reasonably conclude 
that the arbitrary authority of the executive as it 
existed in the time of Napoleon, and even as it was 
exercised under the reign of Louis Philippe or of 
Louis Napoleon, has gradually, as far as the jurisdic- 
tion of the administrative Courts is concerned, been 
immensely curtailed, if not absolutely brought to an. 
end. Droit administratif, though administered by 
bodies which are perhaps not in strictness Courts, and 
though containing provisions not reconcilable with the 
modern English conception of the rule of law, comes 
very near to law, and is utterly different from the 
capricious prerogatives of despotic power. __ 

A comparison between the administrative law of 
France and our English rule of law, if taken from the 
right point of view, suggests some interesting points 
of likeness, no less than of unlikeness. 

It will be observed that it is “modern” English 
notions which we have contrasted with the ideas 

Droit ad: 
eerie, of administrative law prevalent in France and other 

opposed 
to English 
ideas 
current in 
sixteenth 
and seven- 
teenth 
centuries. 

continental states. The reason why the opposition 
between the two is drawn in this form deserves notice. 
At a period which historically is not very remote 
from us, the ideas as to the position of the Crown 
which were current, if not predominant in England, 
bore a very close analogy to the doctrines which have 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 365 

given rise to the droit administratif of France.’ 
Similar beliefs moreover necessarily produced similar 
results, and there was a time when it must have 
seemed possible that what we now call adminis- 
trative law should become a permanent part of 
English institutions. For from the accession of the 
Tudors till the final expulsion of the Stuarts the 
Crown and its servants maintained and put into 
practice, with more or less success and with varying 
degrees of popular approval, views of government 
essentially similar to the theories which under 
different forms have been accepted by the French 
people. The personal failings of the Stuarts and the 
confusion caused by the combination of a religious 
with a political movement have tended to mask the 
true character of the legal and constitutional issues 
raised by the political contests of the seventeenth 
century. A lawyer, who regards the matter from an 
exclusively legal point of view, is tempted to assert 
that the real subject in dispute between statesmen 
such as Bacon and Wentworth on the one hand, 
and Coke or Eliot on the other, was whether a strong 
administration of the continental type should, or 
should not, be permanently established in England. 
Bacon and men like him no doubt underrated the 
risk that an increase in the power of the Crown 
should lead to the establishment of despotism. 
But advocates of the prerogative did not (it may be 
supposed) intend to sacrifice the liberties or invade 
the ordinary private rights of citizens; they were 

1 This is illustrated by the similarity between the views at one 
time prevailing both in England and on the continent as to the 
relation between the government and the press, See pp. 255-259, 
ante. 

Part IL 

366 THE RULE OF LAW 

struck with the evils flowing from the conservative 
legalism of Coke, and with the necessity for enabling 
the Crown as head of the nation to cope with the 
selfishness of powerful individuals and classes. They 
wished, in short, to give the government the sort of 
rights conferred on a foreign executive by the prin- 
ciples of administrative law. Hence for each feature 
of French drowt administratif one may find some 
curious analogy either in the claims put forward or 
in the institutions favoured by the Crown lawyers of 
the seventeenth century. 

The doctrine, propounded under various metaphors 
by Bacon, that the prerogative was something beyond 
and above the ordinary law is like the foreign doc- 
trine that in matters of high policy (acte de 
gouvernement) the administration has a discre- 
tionary authority which cannot be controlled by 
any Court. The celebrated dictum that the judges, 
though they be “lions,” yet should be “lions under 
“the throne, being circumspect that they do not 
“check or oppose any points of sovereignty,”’ is a 
curious anticipation of the maxim formulated by 
French revolutionary statesmanship that the judges 
are under no circumstances to disturb the action of 
the administration, and would, if logically worked 
out, have led to the exemption of every administra- 
tive act, or, to use English terms, of every act alleged 
to be done in virtue of the prerogative, from judicial 
cognisance. The constantly increasing power of the 
Star Chamber and of the Council gave practical 
expression to prevalent theories as to the Royal 
prerogative, and it is hardly fanciful to compare 

1 Gardiner, History of England, iii. p. 2. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 367 

these Courts, which were in reality portions of the 
executive government, with the Conseil d'état and 
other Tribunaux admintstratifs of France. Nor is a 
parallel wanting to the celebrated Article 75 of the 
Constitution of the Year VIII.'| This parallel is to 
be found in Bacon’s attempt to prevent the judges by 
means of the writ De non procedendo Rege inconsulto 
from proceeding with any case in which the interests 
of the Crown were concerned. “The working of this 
“writ,” observes Mr. Gardiner, “if Bacon had 
“obtained his object, would have been, to some 
“extent, analogous to that provision which has been 
“found in so many French constitutions, according 
“to which no agent of the Government can be sum- 
‘“moned before a tribunal, for acts done in the exercise 
“‘ of his office, without a preliminary authorisation by 
“the Council of State. The effect of the English writ 
being confined to cases where the King was him- 
‘self supposed to be injured, would have been of less 
“universal application, but the principle on which it 
* rested would have been equally bad.”* The prin- 
ciple moreover admitted of unlimited extension, and 
this, we may add, was perceived by Bacon. ‘The 
“writ,” he writes to the King, ‘is a mean provided 
‘by the ancient law of England to bring any case 
“that may concern your Majesty in profit or power 
“ from the ordinary Benches, to be tried and judged 
‘ before the Chancellor of England, by the ordinary 
‘and legal part of this power. And your Majesty 
“knoweth your Chancellor 1s ever a principal 
* counsellor and instrument of monarchy, of im- 

1 See p. 343, ante. 
2 Gardiner, History of England, iii. p. 7, note 2. 

Chapter 

368 THE RULE OF LAW 

“mediate dependence on the king; and therefore 
“like to be a safe and tender guardian of the 
“egal rights.”* Bacon's innovation would, if 
successful, have formally established the funda- 
mental dogma of administrative law, that ad- 
ministrative questions must be determined by 
administrative bodies. 

The analogy between the administrative ideas 
which still prevail on the Continent* and the con- 
ception of the prerogative which was maintained by 
the English crown in the seventeenth century has 
considerable speculative interest. That the adminis- 
trative ideas supposed by many French writers to 
have been originated by the statesmanship of the 
great Revolution or of the first Empire are to a great 
extent developments of the traditions and habits of 
the French monarchy is past a doubt, and it is a 
curious inquiry how far the efforts made by the 
Tudors or Stuarts to establish a strong government 
were influenced by foreign examples. This, however, 
is a problem for historians. A lawyer may content 
himself with noting that French history throws light 
on the causes both of the partial success and of the 
ultimate failure of the attempt to establish in Eng- 
land a strong administrative system. The endeavour 
had a partial success, because circumstances, similar 
to those which made French monarchs ultimately 
despotic, tended in England during the sixteenth 
and part of the seventeenth century to augment the 
authority of the Crown. The attempt ended in 

1 Abbot, Francis Bacon, p. 234. 

2 It is worth noting that the system of “administrative law,” 
though more fully judicialised in France than elsewhere, exists in one 
form or another in moet of the Continental States. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 369 

failure, partly because of the personal deficiencies 
of the Stuarts, but chiefly because the whole 
scheme of administrative law was opposed to those 
habits of equality before the law which had long 
been essential characteristics of English institutions. 
Droit administratif is in its contents utterly un- 
like any branch of modern English law, but in the 
method of its formation it resembles English law 
far more closely than does the codified civil law of 
Francé. For drowt administratif is, like the greater 
part of English law, ‘“case-law,” or “ judge-made 
law.” 1 The precepts thereof are not to be found in any 
code ; they are based upon precedent : French lawyers 
cling to the belief that drow administratif cannot be 
codified, just as English and American lawyers main- 
tain, for some reason or other which they are never 
able to make very clear, that English law, and especi- 
ally the common law, does not admit of codification. 
The true meaning of a creed which seems to be 
illogical because its apologists cannot, or will not, 
give the true grounds for their faith, is that the 
devotees of droit administratif in France, in common 
with the devotees of the common law in England, 
know that the system which they each admire is 
the product of judicial legislation, and dread that 
codification might limit, as it probably would, 
the essentially legislative authority of the tribunaux 
administratifs in France, or of the judges in England. 
The prominence further given throughout every 
treatise on droit administratif to the contentieux 

1 See Dicey, Law and Opinion in England, Lect. XI. p. 359, and 
Appendix, Note IV. p.481. It may be suspected that English lawyers 
underrate the influence at the present day exerted by precedent (Jurvs- 
prudence) in French Courts. ; 

B 

Chapter 
XII. 

2nd Point. 
Droit 
adminis- 
tratif is 
case-law. 

Part IT. 

370 THE RULE OF LAW 

administratif recalls the importance in English law- 
books given to matters of procedure. The cause is 
in each case the same, namely, that French jurists 
and English lawyers are each dealing with a system 
of law based on precedent. 

Nor is it irrelevant to remark that the drovt 
administratif of France, just because it is case-law 
based on precedents created or sanctioned by 
tribunals, has, like the law of England, been pro- 
foundly, influenced by the writers of text-books and 
commentaries. There are various branches of English 
law which have been reduced to a few logical prin- 
ciples by the books of well-known writers. Stephen 
transformed pleading from a set of rules derived 
mainly from the experience of practitioners into a 
coherent logical system. Private international law, 
as understood in England at the present day, has 
been developed under the influence first of Story’s 
Commentarres on the Conflict of Laws, and next, at 
a later date, of Mr. Westlake’s Private International 
Law. And the authority exercised in every field of 
English law by these and other eminent writers has 
in France been exerted, in the field of administrative 
law, by authors or teachers such as Cormenin, 
Macarel, Vivien, Laferritre, and Hauriou. This is no 
accident. Wherever Courts have power to form the 
law, there writers of text-books will also have in- 
fluence. Remark too that, from the very nature of 
judge-made law, Reports have in the sphere of droit 
administratif an importance equal to the importance 
which they possess in every branch of English law, 
except in the rare instances in which a portion of our 
law has undergone codification. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 371 

But in the comparison between French droit 
administratif and the law of England a critic ought 
not to stop at the points of likeness arising from 
their each of them being the creation of judicial 
decisions. There exists a further and very curious 
analogy between the process of their historical 
development. The Conseil d’ Etat has been converted 
from an executive into a judicial or quasi-judicial body 
by the gradual separation of its judicial from its 
executive functions through the transference of the 
former to committees (sections), which have assumed 
more and more distinctly the duties of Courts. These 
“judicial committees” (to use an English expression) 
at first only advised the Conseil d’ Etat or the whole 
executive body, though it was soon understood that the 
Council would, as a general rule, follow or ratify the 
decision of its judicial committees. This recalls to a 
student of English law the fact that the growth of our 
whole judicial system may historically be treated as the 
transference to parts of the King’s Council of judicial 
powers originally exercised by the King in Council ; 
and it is reasonable to suppose that the rather ill- 
defined relations between the Conseil d’Htat as a 
whole, and the Comité du contentveux,’ may explain 
to a student the exertion, during the earlier periods 
of English history, by the King’s Council, of hardly 
distinguishable judicial and executive powers; it 
explains also how, by a natural process which may 
have excited very little observation, the judicial 
functions of the Council became separated from its 
executive powers, and how this differentiation of 
functions gave birth at last to Courts whose connection 

1 See Laferritre, i. p. 236. 

Chapter 
x. 

3rd point. 
Evolution 
of drott 
adminis- 
tratif. 

372 THE RULE OF LAW 

with the political executive was merely historical. 
This process, moreover, of differentiation assisted at 
times, in France no less than in England, by legisla- 
tion, has of quite recent years changed the Conse 
d’ Etat into a real tribunal of droit administratt/, as 
it created in England the Judicial Committee of the 
Privy Council for the regular and judicial decision of 
appeals from the colonies to the Crown in Council. 
Nor, though the point is a minor one, is it irrelevant 
to note that, as the so-called judgments of the Con- 
seil d’Etat were, till 1872, not strictly “judgments,” 
but in reality advice on questions of drowt adminis- 
tratif given by the Conseil d’ Etat to the head of the 
Executive, and advice which he was not absolutely 
bound to follow, so the ‘‘judgments” of the Privy 
Council, even when acting through its judicial com- 
mittee, though in reality judgments, are in form 
merely humble advice tendered by the Privy Council 
to the Crown. This form, which is now a mere 
survival, carries us back to an earlier period of English 
constitutional history, when the interference by the 
Council, t.e. by the executive, with judicial functions, 
was a real menace to that supremacy of the law 
which has been the guarantee of English freedom, 
and this era in the history of England again is 
curiously illustrated by the annals of droit adminis- 
tratif after the restoration of the Bourbons, 1815-30. 

At that date the members of the Conseil d’ Etat, 
as we have seen,’ held, as they still hold, office at the 
pleasure of the Executive ; they were to a great extent 
a political body; there existed further no Conflict- 
Court; or rather the Conseil d’Etat was itself the 

1 See p. 344, ante. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 373 

Conflict-Court, or the body which determined the 
reciprocal jurisdiction of the ordinary law Courts and 
of the administrative Courts, i.e. speaking broadly, 
the extent of the Council’s own jurisdiction. The 
result was that the Conseil d’ Etat used its powers to 
withdraw cases from the decision of the law Courts, 
and this at a time when government functionaries 
were fully protected by Article 75 of the Constitution 
of the Year VIII. from being made responsible before 
the Courts for official acts done in excess of their 
legal powers. Nevertheless, the Conse d’ Etat, just 
because it was to a great extent influenced by legal 
ideas, resisted, and with success, exertions of arbitrary 
power inspired by the spirit of Royalist reaction. It 
upheld the sales of the national domain made between 
1789 and 1814; it withstood every attempt to in- 
validate decisions given by administrative authorities 
during the period of the Revolution or under the 
Empire. The King, owing, it may be assumed, to 
the judicial independence displayed by the Consevl 
d’ Etat, took steps which were intended to transfer 
the decision of administrative disputes from the 
Council or its committees, acting as Courts, to 
Councillors, acting as part of the executive. Ordi- 
nances of 1814 and of 1817 empowered the King 
to withdraw any administrative dispute which was 
connected with principles of public interest (toutes les 
affaires du contentieux de ladminstration qui se 
lieraient & des vues d'intérét général) from the juris- 
diction of the Conseil d’ Etat and bring it before the 
Council of Ministers or, as it was called, the Consedl 
d’en haut, and the general effect of this power and of 
other arrangements, which we need not follow out 

Chapter © 

Part IL 

374 THE RULE OF LAW 

into detail, was that questions of droit administratryf, 
in the decision of which the government were in- 
terested, were ultimately decided, not even by a quasi- 
judicial body, but by the King and his Ministers, 
acting avowedly under the bias of political considera- 
tions.! In 1828 France insisted upon and obtained 
from Charles X. changes in procedure which dimin- 
ished the arbitrary power of the Council.? But no 
one can wonder that Frenchmen feared the increase of 
arbitrary power, or that French liberals demanded, 
after the Revolution of 1830, the abolition of adminis- 
trative law and of administrative Courts. They felt 
towards the jurisdiction of the Conseil d’Etat the 
dread entertained by Englishmen of the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries with regard to the jurisdiction 
of the Privy Council, whether exercised by the Privy 
Council itself, by the Star Chamber, or even by the 
Court of Chancery. In each country there existed 
an appreciable danger lest the rule of the prerogative 
should supersede the supremacy of the law. 

The comparison is in many ways instructive; it 
impresses upon us how nearly it came to pass that 
something very like administrative law at one time 
grew up in England. It ought, too, to make us per- 
ceive that such law, if it be administered in a judicial 
spirit, has in itself some advantages. It shows us 
also the inherent danger of its not becoming in strict- 
ness law at all, but remaining, from its close connection 
with the executive, a form of arbitrary power above 

or even opposed to the regular law of the land. It is 

+ See Laferriére, i. pp. 226-234, and Cormenin, Du Conseil d’ Etat 
envisagé comme conseil et comme juridiction (1818). 
? Ordinance of 1st June 1828, Laferriére, i. p- 232. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 375 
ant RE AO a TRUSS Eee 

certain that in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
the jurisdiction of the Privy Council and even of the 
Star Chamber, odious as its name has remained, 
did confer some benefits on the public. It should 
always be remembered that the patriots who re- 
sisted the tyranny of the Stuarts were fanatics for 
the common law, and could they have seen their way 
to do so would have abolistied the Court of Chancery 
no less than the Star Chamber. The Chancellor, 
after all, was a servant of the Crown holding his 
office at the pleasure of the King, and certainly 
capable, under the plea that he was promoting justice 
or equity, of destroying the certainty no less than 
the formalism of the common law. The parallel 
therefore between the position of the English 
puritans, or whigs, who, during the seventeenth 
century, opposed the arbitrary authority of the 
Council, and the position of the French liberals 
who, under the Restoration (1815-30), resisted the 
arbitrary authority of the Conseil d’Etat and the 
extension of droit administratzf, is a close one. In 
each case, it may be added, the friends of freedom 
triumphed. 

The result, however, of this triumph was, it will 
be said, as regards the matter we are considering, 
markedly different. Parliament destroyed, and de- 
stroyed for ever, the arbitrary authority of the Star 
Chamber and of the Council, and did not suffer any 
system of administrative Courts or of administrative 
law to be revived or developed in England. The 
French liberals, on the expulsion of the Bourbons, 
neither destroyed the tribunaua administratefs nor 
made a clean sweep of droit administratif. 

Chapter 
XI. 

ee 

Part I. 

376 THE RULE OF LAW 

The difference is remarkable, yet any student who 
looks beyond names at things will find that even 
here an obvious difference conceals a curious element 
of fundamental resemblance. The Star Chamber was 
abolished; the arbitrary jurisdiction of the Council 
disappeared, but the judicial authority of the Chan- 
cellor was touched neither by the Long Parliament 
nor by any of the Parliaments which met yearly 
after the Revolution of 1688. ‘The reasons for this 
difference are not hard to discover. The law ad- 
ministered by the Lord Chancellor, or, in other words, 
Equity, had in it originally an arbitrary or dis- 
cretionary element, but it in fact conferred real 
benefits upon the nation and was felt to be in many 
respects superior to the common law administered 
by the common-law Judges. Even before 1660 acute 
observers might note that Equity was growing into 
a system of fixed law. Equity, which originally 
meant the discretionary, not to say arbitrary inter- 
ference of the Chancellor, for the avowed and often 
real purpose of securing substantial justice between 
the parties in a given case, might, no doubt, have 
been so developed as to shelter and extend the 
despotic prerogative of the Crown. But this was 
not the course of development which Equity actually 
followed; at any rate from the time of Lord 
Nottingham (1673) it was obvious that Equity was 
developing into a judicial system for the application 
of principles which, though different from those of 
the common law, were not less fixed. The danger 
of Equity turning into the servant of despotism had 
passed away, and English statesmen, many of them 
lawyers, were little likely to destroy a body of law 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF Bis 

which, if in one sense an anomaly, was productive of 
beneficial reforms. The treatment of droit adminis- 
tratef in the nineteenth century by Frenchmen bears 
a marked resemblance to the treatment of Equity in 
the seventeenth century by Englishmen. Droit 
administratif has been the subject of much attack. 
More than one publicist of high reputation has 
advocated its abolition, or has wished to transfer to 
the ordinary or civil Courts (tribunaux judiciaires) 
the authority exercised by the administrative tri- 
bunals, but the assaults upon droit administratif 
have been repulsed, and the division between the 
spheres of the judicial and the spheres of the ad- 

ministrative tribunals has been maintained. Nor, 

again, is there much difficulty in seeing why this 
has happened. Droit administratif with all its 
peculiarities, and administrative tribunals with all 
their defects, have been suffered to exist because 
the system as a whole is felt by Frenchmen to 
be beneficial. Its severest critics concede that it 
has some great practical merits, and is suited to 
the spirit of French institutions. Meanwhile drovt 
administratif has developed under the influence 
rather of lawyers than of politicians; it has during 
the last half-century and more to a great extent 
divested itself of its arbitrary character, and is 
passing into a system of more or less fixed law ad- 
ministered by real tribunals ; administrative tribunals 
indeed still lack some of the qualities, such as com- 
plete independence against the executive, which 
Englishmen and many Frenchmen also think ought 
to belong to all Courts, but these tribunals are 
certainly very far indeed from being mere departments 

Chapter 

378 THE RULE OF LAW 

Part IL of the executive government. To any person versed 
in the judicial history of England, it would therefore 
appear to be possible, or even probable, that drovt 
administratif may ultimately, under the guidance 
of lawyers, become, through a course of evolution, 
as completely a branch of the law of France (even 
if we use the word “law” in its very strictest sense) 
as Equity has for more than two centuries become 
an acknowledged branch of the law of England. 
4thPoint | The annals of droit administratif during the 
caPits of nineteenth century elucidate again a point in the 
case-law. earlier history of English law which excites some 
perplexity in the mind of a student, namely, the 
rapidity with which the mere existence and working 
of’ law Courts may create or extend a system of 
law. Any reader of the History of English Law 
by Pollock and Maitland may well be surprised at 
the rapidity with which the law of the King’s Court 
became the general or common law of the land. This 
legal revolution seems to have been the natural result 
of the vigorous exertion of judicial functions by a 
Court of great authority. Nor can we feel certain 
that the end attained was deliberately aimed at. It 
may, in the main, have been the almost undesigned 
effect of two causes: the first is the disposition 
always exhibited by capable judges to refer the 
decision of particular cases to general principles, 
and to be guided by precedent; the second is the 
tendency of inferior tribunals to follow the lead given 
by any Court of great power and high dignity. 
Here, in short, we have one of the thousand illus- 
trations of the principle developed in M. Tarde’s 
Lois de limitation, that the innate imitativeness of 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 379 

mankind explains the spread, first, throughout one 
country, and, lastly, throughout the civilised world, 
of any institution or habit on which success or any 
other circumstance has conferred prestige. It may 
still, however, be urged that the creation under 
judicial influence of a system of law is an achieve- 
ment which requires for its performance a consider- 
able length of time, and that the influence of the 
King’s Court in England in moulding the whole law 
of the country worked with incredible rapidity. It 
is certainly true that from the Norman Conquest to 
the accession of Edward I. (1066-1272) is a period 
of not much over two centuries, and that by 1272 
the foundations of English law were firmly laid; 
whilst if we date the organisation of our judicial 
system from the accession of Henry II. (1154), we 
might say that a great legal revolution was carried 
through in not much more than a century. It is at 
this point that the history of drowt administratif 
helps the student of comparative law. 

One need not, however, be greatly astonished at 
rapidity in the development of legal principles and of 
legal procedure at a period when the moral influence 
or the imaginative impressiveness of powerful tribunals 
was much greater than during the later stages of human 
progress. In any case it is certain—and the fact is a 
most instructive one—that under the conditions of 
modern civilisation a whole body of legal rules and 
maxims, and a whole system of quasi-judicial pro- 
cedure, have in France grown up within not much 
more than a century. The expression “grown up” 
is here deliberately used; the development of drovt 
administratif between 1800 and 1908 resembles a 

Chapter 
xi. 

Part IL 

IL. Unlike- 
ness, 

lst Point. 
Droit ad- 
ministratif 
not to be 
identified 
with any 
part of law 
of England. 

380 THE RULE OF LAW 

natural process. It is as true of this branch of 
French law as of the English constitution that it 
“has not been made but has grown.” 

An intelligent student soon finds that drovt 
administratif contains rules as to the status, the 
privileges, and the duties of government officials. 
He therefore thinks he can identify it with the 
laws, regulations, or customs which in England 
determine the position of the servants of the Crown, 
or (leaving the army out of consideration) of the 
Civil Service. Such “ official law” exists, though 
only to a limited extent, in England no less than 
in France, and it is of course possible to identify 
and compare this official law of the one country with 
the official law of the other. But further investiga- 
tion shows that official law thus understood, though 
it may form part of, is a very different thing from 
droit administratif. The law, by whatever name 
we term it, which regulates the privileges or dis- 
abilities of civil servants is the Jaw of a class, just 
as military law is the law of a class, namely, the 
army. But droit administratif is not the law of 
a class, but—a very different thing—a body of law 
which, under given circumstances, may affect the 
rights of any French citizen, as for example, where 
an action is brought by A against X in the ordinary 
Courts (tribunaux judiciatres), and the rights of the 
parties are found to depend on an administrative act 
(acte administratif), which must be interpreted by 
an administrative tribunal (tribunal administratif ). 
In truth, drowt administratif is not the law of the 
Civil Service, but is that part of French public law 
which affects every Frenchman in relation to the acts 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 381 

of the public administration as the representative of Chapter 
the State. The relation indeed of droit administratif *™ 
to the ordinary law of France may be best compared 

not with the relation of the law governing a particu- 

lar class (e.g. military law) to the general law of 
England, but with the relation of Equity to the 
common law of England. The point of likeness, 
slight though in other respects it be, is that droit 
administratyf in France and Equity in England each 
constitute a body of law which differs from the 
ordinary law of the land, and under certain circum- 
stances modifies the ordinary civil rights of every 
citizen. 

When our student finds that drow administratif 
cannot be identified with the law of the Civil Service, 
he naturally enough imagines that it may be treated 
as the sum of all the laws which confer special powers 
and impose special duties upon the administration, 
or, in other words, which regulate the functions of 
the Government. Such laws, though they must 
exist in every country, have till recently been few 
in England, simply because in England the sphere of 
the State’s activity has, till within the last fifty or 
sixty years, been extremely limited. But even in 
England Jaws imposing special functions upon govern- 
ment officials have always existed, and the number 
thereof has of late vastly increased; to take one 
example among a score, the Factory legislation, which 
has grown up mainly during the latter half of the 
nineteenth century, has, with regard to the inspection 
and regulation of manufactories and workshops, given 
to the Government and its officials wide rights, and 
imposed upon them wide duties. If, then, drovt 

Part I. 

382 THE RULE OF LAW 
“et ee ee 
administratif meant nothing more than the sum of 
all the laws which determine the functions of civil 
servants, droit administratif might be identified in 
its general character with the governmental law of 
England. The idea that such an identification is 
possible is encouraged by the wide definitions of droit 
administratif to be gathered from French works of 
authority,' and by the vagueness with which English 
writers occasionally use the term “ administrative 
law.” But here, again, the attempted identification 
breaks down. Droit administratif, as it exists in 
France, is not the sum of the powers possessed or of 
the functions discharged by the administration; it 
is rather the sum of the principles which govern the 
relation between French citizens, as individuals, and 
the administration as the representative of the State. 
Here we touch upon the fundamental difference be- 
tween English and French ideas. In England the 
powers of the Crown and its servants may from time 
to time be increased as they may also be diminished. 
But these powers, whatever they are, must be exer- 
cised in accordance with the ordinary common law 
principles which govern the relation of one English- 
man to another. A factory inspector, for example, 
is possessed of peculiar powers conferred upon him by 
Act of Parliament; but if in virtue of the orders of 
his superior officials he exceeds the authority given 
him by law, he becomes at once responsible for the 
wrong done, and cannot plead in his defence strict 
obedience to official orders, and, further, for the tort 
1 See Aucoc, Droit Administratif, i. 8 6 ; Hauriou, Precis de Droit 

Administratyf, 3rd ed., p. 242, and 6th ed., pp. 391, 392 ; Laferriére 
1. pp. 1-8. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 383 

he has committed he becomes amenable to the ordinary 
Courts. In France, on the other hand, whilst the 
powers placed in the hands of the administration 
might be diminished, it is always assumed that the 
relation of individual citizens to the State is regu- 
lated by principles different from those which govern 
the relation of one French citizen to another. Droit 
administratif, in short, rests upon ideas absolutely 
foreign to English law: the one, as I have already 
explained,’ is that the relation of individuals to the 
State is governed by principles essentially different 
from those rules of private law which govern the 
rights of private persons towards their neighbours ; 
the other is that questions as to the application of 
these principles do not lie within the jurisdiction of 
the ordinary Courts. This essential difference renders 
the identification of droit adminstratif with any 
branch of English law an impossibility. Hence in- 
quiries which rightly occupy French jurists, such, for 
example, as what is the proper definition of the con- 
tentieux administratif ; what is the precise difference 
between actes de gestion and actes de puissance 
publique, and generally, what are the boundaries 
between the jurisdiction of the ordinary Courts 
{tribunaux judiciaires) and the jurisdiction of the 
administrative Courts (tribunaux admimstratifs) have 
under English law no meaning. 

Has droit administratif been of recent years 
introduced in any sense into the law of England ? 

This is an inquiry which has been raised by 
writers of eminence,? and which has caused some 

1 See p. 332, ante. 
2 See Leferritre, i. pp. 97-106. To cite such enactments as the 

Chapter 

2nd Point. 
Droit ad- 

ministratiy~ 
not in 
reality 
introduced 
into law of 
England. 

Part IL 

384 THE RULE OF LAW 

perplexity. We may give thereto a decided and 
negative reply. 

The powers of the English Government have, dur- 
ing the last sixty years or so, been largely increased ; 
the State has undertaken many new functions, such, 
for example, as the regulation of labour under the 
Factory Acts, and the supervision of public educa- 
tion under the Education Acts. Nor is the import- 
ance of this extension of the activity of the State 
lessened by the consideration that its powers are in 
many cases exercised by local bodies, such, for ex- 
ample, as County Councils. But though the powers 
conferred on persons or bodies who directly or in- 
directly represent the State have been greatly increased 
in many directions, there has been no intentional 
introduction into the law of England of the essential 
principles of droit administratef. Any official who 
exceeds the authority given him by the law incurs 
the common law responsibility for his wrongful act ; 
he is amenable to the authority of the ordinary 
Courts, and the ordinary Courts have themselves 

Public Authorities Protection Act 1893, which by the way does little 
more than generalise provisions, to be found in a lot of Acts extend- 
ing from 1601 to 1900, as an example of the existence of administra- 
tive law in England, seems to me little else than playing with words. 
The Act assumes that every person may legally do the act which by 
law he is ordered todo. It also gives a person who acta in pursu- 
ance of his legal duty, ¢g. under an Act of Parliament, special privi- 
leges as to the time within which an action must be brought against 
him for any wrong committed by him in the course of carrying out 
his duty, but it does not to the least extent provide that an order 
from a superior official shall protect, ¢g. a policeman, for any wrong 
done by him. 

There are, indeed, one or two instances in which no legal remedy 
can be obtained except against the actual wrong-doer for damage in- 
flicted by the conduct of a servant of the Crown. These instances are 
practically unimportant. See Appendix, Note XII., “ Proceedings 
against the Crown.” 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 385 
ir etint eerie cia mnt ote NaF ee ptm ee 
jurisdiction to determine what is the extent of his 
legal power, and whether the orders under which he 
has acted were legal and valid. Hence the Courts 
do in effect limit and interfere with the action of the 
‘‘administration,” using that word in its widest sense. 
The London School Board, for example, has claimed 
and exercised the right to tax the ratepayers for the 
support of a kind of education superior to the 
elementary teaching generally provided by School 
Boards ; the High Court of Justice has decided that 
such right does not exist. A year or two ago some 
officials, acting under the distinct orders of the Lords 
of the Admiralty, occupied some land alleged to 
belong to the Crown; the title of the Crown being 
disputed, a court of law gave judgment against the 
officials as wrong-doers. In each of these cases nice 
and disputable points of law were raised, but no 
English lawyer, whatever his opinion of the judg- 
ments given by the Court, has ever doubted that 
the High Court had jurisdiction to determine what 
were the rights of the School Board or of the 
Crown. 

Droit administratif, therefore, has obtained no 
foothold in England, but, as has been pointed out by 
some foreign critics, recent legislation has occasionally, 
and for particular purposes, given to officials some- 
thing like judicial authority. It is possible in such 
instances, which are rare, to see a slight approxima- 
tion to droit administratif, but the innovations, 
such as they are, have been suggested merely by 
considerations of practical convenience, and do not 
betray the least intention on the part of English 

statesmen to modify the essential principles of 
2C 

Chapter 

Part IL 

386 THE RULE OF LAW 

English law. There exists in England no true drovt 
admimstratif. 

An English lawyer, however, who has ascertained 
that no branch of English law corresponds with the 
administrative law of foreign countries must be on 
his guard against falling into the error that the drovt 
administratif of modern France is not “law” at all, 
in the sense in which that term is used in England, 
but is a mere name for maxims which guide the 
executive in the exercise if not of arbitrary yet of 
discretionary power. That this notion is erroneous 
will, I hope, be now clear to all my readers. But for 
its existence there is some excuse and even a certain 
amount of justification. 

The French Government does in fact exercise, 
especially as regards foreigners, a wide discretionary 
authority which is not under the control of any 
Court whatever. For an act of State the Executive 
or its servants cannot be made amenable to the 
jurisdiction of any tribunal, whether judicial or 
administrative. Writers of high authority have 
differed’ indeed profoundly as to the definition of 
an act of State (acte de gouvernement).? Where on 
a question of French law French jurists disagree, an 
English lawyer can form no opinion; he may be 
allowed, however, to conjecture that at times of dis- 
turbance a French Government can exercise discre- 
tionary powers without the dread of interference on 
the part of the ordinary Courts, and that administra- 
tive tribunals, when they can intervene, are likely to 

1 See p. 342, ante. 
3 Compare Laferritre, ii, bk. iv. ch. ii p- 32, and Hauriou, pp. 

282-287, with Jacquelin, pp. 438-447. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 387 

favour that interpretation of the term act of State 
which supports the authority of the Executive. 
However this may be, the possession by the French 
Executive of large prerogatives is apt, in the mind of 
an Englishman, to be confused with the character of 
the administrative law enforced by Courts composed, 
in part at any rate, of officials. 

The restrictions, again, placed by French law on 
the jurisdiction of the ordinary Courts (tribunauz 
judiciaires) whereby they are prevented from inter- 
fering with the action of the Executive and ite 
servants, seem to an Englishman accustomed to a 
system under which the Courts of law determine the 
limits of their own jurisdiction, to be much the same 
thing as the relegating of all matters in which the 
authority of the State is concerned to the discretion 
of the Executive. This notion is erroneous, but it 
has been fostered by a circumstance which may be 
termed accidental. The nature and the very exist- 
ence of droit administratyf has been first revealed to 
many Englishmen, as certainly to the present writer, 
through the writings of Alexis de Tocqueville, whose 
works have exerted, in the England of the nineteenth 
century, an influence equal to the authority exerted 
by the works of Montesquieu in the England of 
the eighteenth century. Now Tocqueville by his 
own admission knew little or nothing of the actual 
working of droit administratif in his own day.’ He 
no doubt in his later years increased his knowledge, 
but to the end of his life he looked upon droit 
administratif, not as a practising lawyer but as the 
historian of the ancien régime, and even as an 

1 Tocqueville, vii, Huvres Completes, p. 66. 

Chapter 

Part 7. 

388 THE RULE OF LAW 

We. Le eee eee 
historian he studied the subject from a very peculiar 
point of view, for the aim of L’ Ancien Régime et la 
Révolution is to establish the doctrine that the 
institutions of modern France are in many respects 
in spirit the same as the institutions of the ancient 
monarchy ; and Tocqueville, moved by the desire to 
maintain a theory of history which in his time 
sounded like a paradox, but, owing greatly to his 
labours, has now become a generally accepted truth, 
was inclined to exaggerate the similarity between 
the France of the Revolution, the Empire, or the 
Republic, and the France of the ancien régime. 
Nowhere is this tendency more obvious than in his 
treatment of droit administratif. He demonstrates 
that the ideas on which drovt administratif is based 
had been accepted by French lawyers and statesmen 
long before 1789; he notes the arbitrariness of 
drowt admanistratif under the monarchy; he not 
only insists upon but deplores the connection under 
the ancien régime between the action of the Execu- 
tive and the administration of justice, and he 
certainly suggests that the droit administratif of 
the nineteenth century was all but as closely con- 
nected with the exercise of arbitrary power as was 
the droit administratif of the seventeenth or the 
eighteenth century. 

He did not recognise the change in the character 
of drow admunistratif which was quietly taking 
place in his own day. He could not by any possi- 
bility anticipate the reforms which have occurred 
during the lapse of well-nigh half a century since his 
death. What wonder that English lawyers who first 
gained their knowledge of French institutions from 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 389 
ee ee ee ee ee 
Tocqueville should fail to take full account of that 
Judicialisation (jurzdictionnalisation) of adminis- 
trative law which is one of the most surprising 
and noteworthy: phenomena in the legal history of 
France. 

It is not uninstructive to compare the merits 

and defects, on the one hand, of our English 4 

rule of law, and, on the other, of French droit 
administrate. 

Our rigid rule of law has immense and un- 
deniable merits. Individual freedom is thereby 
more thoroughly protected in England against 
oppression by the government than in any other 
European country; the Habeas Corpus Acts’ pro- 
tect the liberty no less of foreigners than of British 
subjects; martial law’* itself is reduced within the 
narrowest limits, and subjected to the supervision 
of the Courts; an extension of judicial power which 
sets at nought the dogma of the separation of 
powers, happily combined with judicial indepen- 
dence, has begotten reverence for the bench of 
judges. They, rather than the government, repre- 
sent the august dignity of the State, or, in accordance 
with the terminology of English law, of the Crown. 
Trial by jury is open to much criticism; a dis- 
tinguished French thinker may be right in holding 
that the habit of submitting difficult problems of 
fact to the decision of twelve men of not more than 
average education and intelligence will in the near 
future be considered an absurdity as patent as ordeal 
by battle. Its success in England is wholly due to, and 
is the most extraordinary sign of, popular confidence 

1 See p. 212, ante. ? See p. 280, ante. 

Chapter 

IIT. Merits 

Defects, 

390 THE RULE OF LAW 

in the judicial bench. A judge is the colleague and 
the readily accepted guide of the jurors. The House 
of Commons shows the feeling of the electors, and 
has handed over to the High Court of Justice the 
trial of election petitions. When rare occasions 
arise, a3 at Sheftield in 1866, which demand inquiries 
of an exceptional character which can hardly be 
effected by the regular procedure of the Courts, it 
is to selected members of the bench that the nation 
turns for aid. In the bitter disputes which occur in 
the conflicts between capital and labour, employers 
and workmen alike will often submit their differences 
to the arbitration of men who have been judges of the 
High Court. Reverence, in short, for the supremacy of 
the law is seen in its very best aspect when we recog- 
nise it as being in England at once the cause and the 
effect of reverence for our judges. 

The blessings, however, conferred upon the nation 
by the rule of law are balanced by undeniable, though 
less obvious, evils. Courts cannot without consider- 
able danger be turned into instruments of government. 
It is not the end for which they are created; it is a 
purpose for which they are ill suited at any period 
or in any country where history has not produced 
veneration for the law and for the law Courts.’ 
Respect for law, moreover, easily degenerates into 
legalism which from its very rigidity may work con- 
siderable injury to the nation. Thus the refusal to 
look upon an agent or servant of the State as standing, 

1 In times of revolutionary passion trial by jury cannot secure 
respect for justice. The worst iniquities committed by Jeffreys at 

the Bloody Assize would have been impossible had he not found 

willing accomplices in the jurors and freeholders of the western 
counties. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 391 
rhe ine se dt pt cl ERE came 
from a legal point of view, in a different position from 
the servant of any other employer, or as placed under 
obligations or entitled to immunities different from 
those imposed upon or granted to an ordinary citizen, 
has certainly saved England from the development of 
the arbitrary prerogatives of the Crown, but it has 
also in more ways than one been injurious to the 
public service. 

The law, for instance, has assuredly been slow to 
recognise the fact that violations of duty by public 
officials may have an importance and deserve a 
punishment far greater than the same conduct on 
the part of an agent of an ordinary employer. Some 
years ago a copyist in a public office betrayed to the 
newspapers a diplomatic document of the highest 
importance. Imagination can hardly picture a more 
flagrant breach of duty, but there then apparently 
existed no available means for punishing the culprit. 
If it could have been proved that he had taken from 
the office the paper on which the communication of 
state was written, he might conceivably have been 
put on trial for larceny.' But a prisoner put on 
trial for a crime of which he was in fact morally 
innocent, because the gross moral offence of which 
he was guilty was not a crime, might have counted 
on an acquittal. The Official Secrets Act, 1889, now, 
it is true, renders the particular offence, which could 
not be punished in 1878, a misdemeanour, but the 
Act, after the manner of English legislation, does not 
establish the general principle that an official breach 

1 See Annual Register, 1878, Chronicle, p. 71. At the moment 
when these pages are going to the press an attempt 1s being made to 
amend and extend the operation of the existing Act. 

Chapter 

Part IL 

392 THE RULE OF LAW 

of trust is acrime. It is therefore more than possible 
that derelictions of duty on the part of public servants 
which in some foreign countries would be severely 
punished may still in England expose the wrong-doer 
to no legal punishment. 

Nor is it at all wholly a benefit to the public that 
bona fide obedience to the orders of superiors is not a 
defence available to a subordinate who, in the discharge 
of his functions as a government officer, has invaded 
the legal rights of the humblest individual, or that 
officials are, like everybody else, accountable for their 
conduct to an ordinary Court of law, and to a 
Court, be it noted, where the verdict is given by a 
jury. 

In this point of view few things are more instructive 
than an examination of the actions which have been 
brought against officers of the Board of Trade for 
detaining ships about to proceed to sea. Under the 
Merchant Shipping Acts since 1876 the Board have 
been and are bound to detain any ship which from its 
unsafe and unseaworthy condition cannot proceed to 
sea without serious danger to human life.’ Most 
persons would suppose that the officials of the Board, 
as long as they, bona fide, and without malice or 
corrupt motive, endeavoured to carry out the pro- 
visions of the statute, would be safe from an action 
at the hands of a shipowner. This, however, is not 
so. The Board and its officers have more than once 
been sued with success? They have never been 
accused of either malice or negligence, but the mere 
fact that the Board act in an administrative capacity 

1 Merchant Shipping Act, 1894 (57 & 58 Vict. c. 60), a 459, 
2 See Thomson v. Farrar, 9 Q. B.D. (C. A), 372. 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 393 

is not a protection to the Board, nor is mere obedience 
to the orders of the Board an answer to an action 
against its servants. Any deviation, moreover, from 
the exact terms of the Acts—the omission of the most 
unmeaning formality—may make every person, high 
and low, concerned in the detention of the ship, a 
wrong-doer. The question, on the answer to which 
the decision in each instance at bottom depends, is 
whether there was reasonable cause for detaining the 
vessel, and this inquiry is determined by jurymen who 
sympathise more keenly with the losses of a ship- 
owner, whose ship may have been unjustly detained, 
than with the zeal of an inspector anxious to perform 
his duty and to prevent loss of life. The result has 
{it is said) been to render the provisions of the 
Merchant Shipping Acts, with regard to the detention 
of unseaworthy ships, nugatory. Courts and juries 
are biassed against the Government. A technical 
question is referred for decision, from persons who 
know something about the subject, and are impartial, 
to persons who are both ignorant and prejudiced. 
The government, moreover, which has no concern but 
the public interest, is placed in the false position of a 
litigant fighting for his own advantage. These things 
ought to be noticed, for they explain, if they do not 
justify, the tenacity with which statesmen, as partial 
as Tocqueville to English ideas of government, have 
clung to the conviction that administrative questions 
ought to be referred to administrative Courts. 

The merits of administrative law as represented by 
modern French droit administratif, that is, when 
seen at its very best, escape the attention, and do not 
receive the due appreciation of English constitution- 

Chapter 

Part II. 

304 THE RULE OF LAW 

alists.1 No jurist can fail to admire the skill with 
which the Council of State, the authority and the 
jurisdiction whereof as an administrative Court year 
by year receives extension, has worked out new 
remedies for various abuses which would appear to be 
hardly touched by the ordinary law of the land. The 
Council, for instance, has created and extended the 
power of almost any individual to attack, and cause 
to be annulled, any act done by any administrative 
authority (using the term in a very wide sense) which 
is in excess of the legal power given to the person or 
body from whom the act emanates. Thus an order 
issued by a prefect or a bye-law made by a corporation 
which is in excess of the legal power of the prefect or 
of the corporate body may, on the application of a 
plaintiff who has any interest in the matter whatever, 
be absolutely set aside or annulled for the benefit not 
only of the plaintiff, but of all the world, and this 
even though he has not himself suffered, from the act 
complained of, any pecuniary loss or damage. The 
ingenious distinction * again, which has been more and 
more carefully elaborated by the Council of State, 
% 1 One, and not the least of them, is that access to the Council of 
State as an administrative Court is both easy and inexpensive. 

2 French law draws an important distinction between an injury 
caused to a private individual by act of the administration or govern- 

ment which is in excess of its powers (faute de service), though duly 
carried out, or at any rate, carried out without any gross fault on the 

. part of a subordinate functionary, ¢.g. a policeman acting in pursuance 

of official ordera, and injury caused to a private individual by the 
negligent or malicious manner (faute personelle) in which such sub- 
ordinate functionary carries out official orders which may be perfectly 
lawful. In the first case the policeman incurs no liability at all, and 
the party aggrieved must proceed in some form or other against the 
State in the administrative Courts (tribunauz administratifs). In the 
second case the policeman is personally liable, and the party aggrieved 
must proceed against him in the ordinary Courts (tribunauz judtciatres) 

DROIT ADMINISTRATIF 395 

between damage resulting from the personal fault 
(faute personnelle), e.g. spite, violence, or negligence 
of an official, e.g. a prefect or a mayor, in the carrying 
out of official orders, and the damage resulting, with- 
out any fault on the part of the official, from the 
carrying out of official orders, illegal or wrongful in 
themselves (faute de service), has of recent years 
afforded a valuable remedy to persons who have 
suffered from the misuse of official power, and has also, 
from one point of view, extended or secured the 
responsibility of officials—a responsibility enforceable 
in the ordinary Courts—for wrongful conduct, which 
is in strictness attributable to their personal action. 
And in no respect does this judge-made law of the 
Council appear to more advantage than in cases, 
mostly I conceive of comparatively recent date, in 
which individuals have obtained compensation for 
governmental action, which might possibly be con- 
sidered of technical legality, but which involves in 
reality the illegitimate use of power conferred upon 
the government or some governmental hody for one 
object, but in truth used for some end different from 
that contemplated by the law. One example explains 
my meaning. The State in 1872 had, as it still has, 
a monopoly of matches. To the government was 
given by law the power of acquiring existing match 
factories under some form of compulsory purchase. 
It occurred to some ingenious minister that the fewer 

(see Hauriou, pp. 170, 171; Laferriére, i. p. 652), and apparently 
cannot proceed against the State. ira) 

French authorities differ as to what is the precise criterion by 
which to distinguish a faute personnelle from a faute de service, and 
ahow a tendency to hold that there is no faute personnelle on the part, 
e.g. of a policeman, when he has bona fide attempted to carry out his 
official duty. See Duguit, L’ Etat, pp. 638-640. 

Chapter 
xIL 

—E 

Part IL 

Defects. 

396 THE RULE OF LAW 

factories there were left open for sale, the less would 
be the purchase-money which the State would need to 
pay. A prefect, the direct servant of the govern- 
ment, had power to close factories on sanitary grounds. 

‘Under the orders of the minister he closed a factory 

belonging to A, nominally on sanitary grounds, but in 
reality to lessen the number of match factories which 
the State, in the maintenance of its monopoly, would 
require to purchase. There was no personal fault 
on the part of the prefect. No action could with 
success be maintained against him in the judicial 
Courts,’ nor, we may add, in the administrative 
Courts.? A, however, attacked the act itself before 
the Council of State, and got the order of the prefect 
annulled,? and ultimately obtained, through the 
Council of State, damages from the State of over 
£2000 for the illegal closing of the factory, and this 
in addition to the purchase-money received from the 
State for taking possession of the factory.° 

No Englishman can wonder that the jurisdiction 
of the Council of State, as the greatest of adminis- 
trative Courts, grows apace; the extension of its 
power removes, as did at one time the growth of 
Equity in England, real grievances, and meets the 
need of the ordinary citizen. Yet to an Englishman 
imbued with an unshakeable faith in the importance 
of maintaining the supremacy of the ordinary law 
of the land enforced by the ordinary Law Courts, the 
droit administratif of modern France is open to 
some grave criticism. 

The high and increasing authority of the Council 

1 Dalloz, 1875, i. 495. 2 Dalloz, 1878, iii, 13. 
8 Dalloz, 1880, iii. 41. 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 397 

of State must detract, he surmises, from the dignity 
and respect of the judicial Courts. “The more there 
is of the more, the less there is of the less” is a 
Spanish proverb of profound wisdom and wide appli- 
cation. There was a time in the history of England 
when the judicial power of the Chancellor, bound up 
as it was with the prerogative of the Crown, might 
have overshadowed the Courts of Law, which have 
protected the hereditary liberties of England and the 
personal freedom of Englishmen. It is difficult not 
to suppose that the extension of the Council’s 
jurisdiction, beneficial as may be its direct effects, 
may depress the authority of the judicial tribunals. 
More than one writer, who ought to represent the 
ideas of educated Frenchmen, makes the suggestion 
that if the members of the Council of State lack that 
absolute security of tenure which is universally ac- 
knowledged to be the best guarantee of judicial 
independence, yet irremovable judges, who, though 
they may defy dismissal, are tormented by the 
constant longing for advancement,’ are not more 
independent of the Government at whose hands 
they expect promotion than are members of the 

Council of State who, if legally removable, are by _ 

force of custom hardly ever removed from their high 
position. 

Trial by jury, we are told, is a joke, and, as far as 
the interests of the public are concerned, a very bad 
joke.? Prosecutors and criminals alike prefer the 
Correctional Courts, where a jury is unknown, to the 
Courts of Assize, where a judge presides and a jury 

gives a verdict. The prosecutor knows that in the’ 

1 See Chardon, pp. 326-328. 2 Ibid. 

398 THE RULE OF LAW 

Correctional Court proved guilt will lead to con- 
demnation. The criminal knows that though in the 

_ inferior Court he may lose the chance of acquittal 

by good-natured or sentimental jurymen, he also 
avoids the possibility of undergoing severe punish- 
ment. Two facts are certain. In 1881 the judges 
were deprived of the right of charging the jury. 
Year by year the number of causes tried in the Assize 
Courts decreases. Add to this that the procedure of 
the judicial Courts, whether civil or criminal, is 
antiquated and cumbrous. The procedure in the 
great administrative Court is modelled on modern 
ideas, is simple, cheap, and effective. The Court of 
Cassation still commands respect. The other judicial 
Courts, one can hardly doubt, have sunk in popular 
estimation. Their members neither exercise the power 
nor enjoy the moral authority of the judges of the 
High Court. 

It is difficult, further, for an Englishman to believe 
that, at any rate where politics are concerned, the 
administrative Courts can from their very nature 
give that amount of protection to individual freedom 
which is secured to every English citizen, and 
indeed to every foreigner residing in England. 
However this may be, it is certain that the dis- 
tinction between ordinary law and administrative 
law, the doctrine of the separation of powers, at any 
rate as hitherto interpreted by French jurists, and, 
above all, the conviction that the agents of the 
government need, when acting in bona fide discharge 
of their official duties, protection from the control 
of the ordinary law Courts. That this is so is 
proved by more than one fact. The desire to protect 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 399 

servants of the State has dictated the enactment of the 
Code Pénal, Article 114. It kept alive for seventy 
years Article 75 of the Constitution of the Year 
VIII. It influenced even the men by whom that 
Article was repealed, for the repeal itself is expressed 
in words which imply the intention of providing some 
special protection for the agents of the government. 
It influenced the decisions which more or less nulli- 
fied the effect of the law of 19th December 1870, 
which was at first supposed to make the judicial 
Courts the sole judges of the liability of civil servants 
to suffer punishment or make compensation for acts 
of dubious legality done in the performance of their 
official duties. Oddly enough, the success with which 
administrative Courts have extended the right of 
private persons to obtain damages from the State 
itself for illegal or injurious acts done by its servants, 
seems, as an English critic must think, to supply a 
new form of protection for the agents of the govern- 
ment when acting in obedience to orders. There 
surely can be little inducement to take proceedings 
against a subordinate, whose guilt consists merely in 
carrying out a wrongful or illegal order, given him 
by his official superior, if the person damaged can 
obtain compensation from the government, or, in 
other words, from the State itself.’ But turn the 

1 Consider, too, the extended protection offered to every eervant of 
the State by the doctrine, suggested by at least one good authority, 
that he cannot be held personally responsible for any wrong (faute) 
committed whilst he is acting in the spirit of his official duty. “&, 
“en effet, le fonctionnaire a agt dans Vesprit de sa fonction, c’est-d-dire en 
“poursuivant effectivement le but qu’avatt VEtat en elablissant cette 
“ fonction, il ne peut étre responsable ni vis-d-vis de U Etat, ni vis-d-vis des 
“‘ particuliers, alors méme qu’il ait commis une faute.”—Duguit, L Etat, 
p. 638. 

Chapter 

Part IL 

/ 

4oo THE RULE OF LAW 

eog~  soghe-x:) > ere per ep ae en 
matter which way you will, the personal immunities 
of officials who take part, though without other fault 
of their own, in any breach of the law, though con- 
sistent even with the modern droit adminstratif 
of France, are inconsistent with the ideas which 
underlie the common law of England. This essential 
opposition has been admirably expressed by a French 
jurist of eminence. 

“Under every legal system,” writes Hauriou, 
“the right to proceed against a servant of the govern- 
“ment for wrongs done to individuals in his official 
“capacity exists in some form or other; the right 
‘corresponds to the instinctive impulse felt by every 
“victim of a legal wrong to seek compensation from 
“the immediately visible wrong-doer. But on this 
“point the laws of different countries obey utterly 
‘different tendencies. There are countries (such, for 
‘example, as England or the United States] where 
“every effort is made to shelter the liability of the 
“State behind the personal responsibility of its 
‘servant. There are other countries where every 
‘effort is made to cover the responsibility of the 
‘servant of the State behind the liability of the 
“State itself, to protect him against, and to save 
‘him from, the painful consequences of faults com- 
“mitted in the service of the State. The laws of 
“centralised countries, and notably the law of France, 
“are of this type. There you will find what is 
“called the protection of officials” (garantie des 
fonctionnaries).* 

1 “Ce principe est admis par toutes les législations, la poursuite du 
“foncttonnaire existe partout, d’autant qu'elle répond & un mourement 
“inatinctef qui est, pour la victime d’un méfait, de s'en prendre & Pauteur 

DROIT ADMINISTRA TIF 401 

“ immédiatement visible. Mats les législations obéiesent a deux tendances 
“‘ bien opposées: il en est qui sefforcent d’abriter [ Etat derriare le fonction- 
“natre, tl en est d’autres, au contraire, qui sefforgent de faire coutrir le 
“ fonctionnatre par P Etat, de le protéyer, de le rassurer contre les con- 
ee Sicheuses de ses erreurs. Les l&gislations des pays centralisés 
“ et notamment celle de la France sont de ce dernier type ; tl y a ce que 
“Ton appelle une garantie des fonctionnaires”—Hauriou, Précis de 
Droit Administratyf, Troisitme édit., pp. 170, 171. 

2D 

Chapte 

Part IL. 

Parlia- 
mentary 
sovereignty 
favours 
rule of law. 

CHAPTER XIII 

RELATION BETWEEN PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 
AND THE RULE OF LAW 

TuE sovereignty of Parliament and the supremacy of 
the law of the land—the two principles which per- 
vade the whole of the English constitution—may 
appear to stand in opposition to each other, or to be 
at best only counterbalancing forces. But this ap- 
pearance is delusive; the sovereignty of Parliament, 
as contrasted with other forms of sovereign power, 
favours the supremacy of the law, whilst the predomi- 
nance of rigid legality throughout our institutions 
evokes the exercise, and thus increases the authority, 
of Parliamentary sovereignty. 

The sovereignty of Parliament favours the suprem- 
acy of the law of the land. 

That this should be so arises in the main from two 
characteristics or peculiarities which distinguish the 
English Parliament from other sovereign powers. 

The first of these characteristics is that the com- 
mands of Parliament (consisting as it does of the 
Crown, the House of Lords, and the House of Com- 
mons) can be uttered only through the combined 

Pee Pei Eee 
action of its three constituent parts, and must, there- 

fore, always take the shape of formal and deliberate 

402 

RELATION TO PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 403 

legislation. The will of Parliament? can be expressed 
only through an Act of Parliament. 

This is no mere matter of form; it has most 
important practical effects. It prevents those inroads 
upon the law of the land which a despotic monarch, 
such as Louis XIV., Napoleon I., or Napoleon III., 
might effect by ordinances or decrees, or which the 
different constituent assemblies of France, and above 
all the famous Convention, carried out by sudden 
resolutions. The principle that Parliament speaks 
only through an Act of Parliament greatly increases 
the authority of the judges. A Bill which has passed 
into a statute immediately becomes subject to judicial 
interpretation, and the English Bench have always 
refused, in principle at least, to interpret an Act of 
Parliament otherwise than by reference to the words 
of the enactment. An English judge will take no 
notice of the resolutions of either House, of anything 
which may have passed in debate (a matter of which 
officially he has no cognisance), or even of the changes 
which a Bill may have undergone between the moment 
of its first introduction to Parliament and of its 
receiving the Royal assent. All this, which seems 
natural enough to an English lawyer, would greatly 
surprise many foreign legists, and no doubt often does 
give a certain narrowness to the judicial construction 
of statutes. It contributes greatly, however, both (as 

1 A strong, if not the strongest, argument in favour of the so 
called “ bi-cameral” system, is to be found in the consideration that 
the coexistence of two legislative chambers prevents the conufsion of 
resolutions passed by either House with laws, and thus checks the 
substitution of the arbitrary will of an assembly for the supremacy of 
the ordinary law of the land. Whoever wishes to appreciate the force 

of this argument should weigh well the history, not only of the French 
Convention but also of the English Long Parliament. 

Chapter 

E 

Part IL 

404 THE RULE OF LAW 

I have already pointed out) to the authority of the 
judges and to the fixity of the law.’ 

The second of these characteristics is that the 
English Parliament as such has never, except at 
periods of revolution, exercised direct executive 
power or appointed the officials of the executive 
government. jemi itifi 

No doubt in modern times the House of Commons 
has in substance obtained the right to designate for 
appointment the Prime Minister and the other mem- 
bers of the Cabinet. But this right is, historically 
speaking, of recent acquisition, and is exercised in a 
very roundabout manner ; its existence does not affect 
the truth of the assertion that the Houses of Parlia- 
ment do not directly appoint or dismiss the servants 
of the State; neither the House of Lords nor the 
House of Commons, nor both Houses combined, could 
even now issue a direct order to a military officer, a 
constable, or a tax-collector; the servants of the 
State are still in name what they once were in 
reality—‘servants of the Crown”; and, what is 
worth careful notice, the attitude of Parliament 
towards government officials was determined origin- 
ally, and is still regulated, by considerations and 
feelings belonging to a time when the “servants of 
the Crown” were dependent upon the King, that is, 
upon a power which naturally excited the jealousy 
and vigilance of Parliament. 

1 The principle that the sovereign legislature can express its com- 
mands only in the particular form of an Act of Parliament originates 
of course in historical causes; it is due to the fact that an Act of 
Parliament was once in reality, what it still is in form, a law “enacted 
“by the King by and with the advice and consent of the Lords and 
“Commons in Parliament assembled.” 

RELATION TO PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 405 

Hence several results all indirectly tending to 
support the supremacy of the law. Parliament, 
though sovereign, unlike a sovereign monarch who is 
not only a legislator but a ruler, that is, head of the 
executive government, has never hitherto been able 
to use the powers of the government as a means of 
interfering with the regular course of law ;? and what 
is even more important, Parliament has looked with 
disfavour and jealousy on all exemptions of officials 
from the ordinary liabilities of citizens or from the 
jurisdiction of the ordinary Courts; Parliamentary 
sovereignty has been fatal to the growth of “ad- 
ministrative law.” The action, lastly, of Parliament 
has tended as naturally to protect the independence 
of the judges, as that of other sovereigns to protect 
the conduct of officials. It is worth notice that 
Parliamentary care for judicial independence has, 
in fact, stopped just at that point where on a prio 
grounds it might be expected to end. The judges 
are not in strictness irremovable; they can be re- 
moved from office on an address of the two Houses; 
they have been made by Parliament independent 
of every power in the State except the Houses of 
Parliament. 

The idea may suggest itself to a reader that the 
characteristics or peculiarities of the English Parlia- 
ment on which I have just dwelt must now be 
common to most of the representative assemblies 
which exist in continental Europe. The French 
National Assembly, for example, bears a consider- 
able external resemblance to our own Parliament. 

1 Contrast with this the way in which, even towards the end of the 
eighteenth century, French Kings interfered with the action of the Courts. 

Chapter 

Tendency 
to support 
rule of law 
often not 
found in 
foreign 
represeu- 
tative 
assemblies. 

Part IL. 

Rule of law 
favours 
Parlia- 
mentary 
sove- 

reignty. 

406 THE RULE OF LAW 

It is influenced, however, by a different spirit; it is 
the heir, in more ways than one, of the Bourbon 
Monarchy and the Napoleonic Empire. It is appar- 
ently, though on this point a foreigner must speak 
with hesitation, inclined to interfere in the details of 
administration. It does not look with special favour 
on the independence or authority of the ordinary 
judges. It shows no disapprobation of the system of 
droit administratif which Frenchmen—very likely 
with truth—regard as an institution suited to their 
country, and it certainly leaves in the hands of the 
government wider executive and even legislative 
powers than the English Parliament has ever conceded 
either to the Crown or to its servants. What is true 
of France is true under a different form of many other 
continental states, such, for example, as Switzerland 
or Prussia. The sovereignty of Parliament as de- 
veloped in England supports the supremacy of the law. 
But this is certainly not true of all the countries 
which now enjoy representative or Parliamentary 
government. 

The supremacy of the law necessitates the exercise 
of Parliamentary sovereignty. 

The rigidity of the law constantly hampers (and 
sometimes with great injury to the public) the action 
of the executive, and from the hard-and-fast rules of 
strict law, as interpreted by the judges, the govern- 
ment can escape only by obtaining from Parliament 
the discretionary authority which is denied to the 
Crown by the law of the land: Note with care the 
way in which the necessity for discretionary powers 
brings about the recourse to exceptional legislation. 
Under the complex conditions of modern life no 

RELATION TO PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 407 

government can in times of disorder, or of war, 
keep the peace at home, or perform its duties towards 
foreign powers, without occasional use of arbitrary 
authority. During periods, for instance, of social 
disturbance you need not only to punish conspirators, 
but also to arrest men who are reasonably suspected 
of conspiracy ; foreign revolutionists are known to be 
spreading sedition throughout the land; order can 
hardly be maintained unless the executive can expel 
aliens. When two foreign nations are at war, or 
when civil contests divide a friendly country into two 
hostile camps, it is impossible for England to perform 
her duties as a neutral unless the Crown has legal 
authority to put a summary check to the attempts 
of English sympathisers to help one or other of the 
belligerents. Foreign nations, again, feel aggrieved if 
they are prevented from punishing theft and homicide, 
—if, in short, their whole criminal law is weakened 
because every scoundrel can ensure impunity for his 
crimes by an escape to England. But this result 
must inevitably ensue if the English executive has 
no authority to surrender French or German offenders 
to the government of France or of Germany. The 
English executive needs therefore the right to 
exercise discretionary powers, but the Courts must 
prevent, and will prevent at any rate where personal 
liberty is concerned, the exercise by the government 
of any sort of discretionary power. The Crown 
cannot, except under statute, expel from England 
any alien’ whatever, even though he were a murderer 
who, after slaughtering a whole family at Boulogne, 
had on the very day crossed red-handed to Dover. 
1 See, however, p. 220, note 2, ante. 

Chapte 
x1. 

Part IL 

408 THE RULE OF LAW 

The executive therefore must ask for, and always 
obtains, aid from Parliament. An Alien Act enables 
the Ministry in times of disturbance to expel any 
foreigner from the country ; a Foreign Enlistment Act 
makes it possible for the Ministry to check intervention 
in foreign contests or the supply of arms to foreign 
belligerenta. Extradition Acts empower the govern- 
ment at the same time to prevent England from 
becoming a city of refuge for foreign criminals, and 
to co-operate with foreign states in that general re- 
pression of crime in which the whole civilised world 
has an interest. Nor have we yet exhausted the 
instances in which the rigidity of the law necessitates 
the intervention of Parliament. There are times of 
tumult or invasion when for the sake of legality itself 
the rules of law must be broken. The course which 
the government must then take is clear. The Ministry 
must break the law and trust for protection to an Act 
of Indemnity. A statute of this kind is (as already 
pointed out’) the last and supreme exercise of Parlia- 
mentary sovereignty. It legalises illegality ; it affords 
the practical solution of the problem which perplexed 
the statesmanship of the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries, how to combine the maintenance of law and 
the authority of the Houses of Parliament with the 
free exercise of that kind of discretionary power or 
prerogative which, under some shape or other, must at 
critical junctures be wielded by the executive govern- 
ment of every civilised country. 

This solution may be thought by some critics a 
merely formal one, or at best only a substitution of 
the despotism of Parliament for the prerogative of the 

1 See pp. 47, 48, 228-233, ante 

RELATION TO PARLIAMENTARY SOVEREIGNTY 409 

Crown. But this idea is erroneous. The fact that 
the most arbitrary powers of the English executive 
must always be exercised under Act of Parliament 
places the government, even when armed with the 
widest authority, under the supervision, so to speak, 
of the Courts. Powers, however extraordinary, which 
are conferred or sanctioned by statute, are never really 
unlimited, for they are confined by the words of the 
Act itself, and, what is more, by the interpretation 
put upon the statute by the judges. Parliament is 
supreme legislator, but from the moment Parliament 
has uttered its will as lawgiver, that will becomes 
subject to the interpretation put upon it by the 
judges of the land, and the judges, who are influenced 
by the feelings of magistrates no less than by the 
general spirit of the common law, are disposed to 
construe statutory exceptions to common law prin- 
ciples in a mode which would not commend itself 
either to a body of officials, or to the Houses of 
Parliament, if the Houses were called upon to in- 
terpret their own enactments. In foreign countries, 
and especially in France, administrative ideas— 
notions derived from the traditions of a despotic 
monarchy—have restricted the authority and to a 
certain extent influenced the ideas of the judges. In 
England judicial notions have modified the action and 
influenced the ideas of the executive government. By 
every path we come round to the same conclusion, 
that Parliamentary sovereignty has favoured the rule 
of law, and that the supremacy of the law of the 
land both calls forth the exertion of Parliamentary 
sovereignty, and leads to its being exercised in a 
spirit of legality. 

F 
E 

dint; ait 
oi erin 
yi. path pass, 

* LiF AS 
rE li ot 44 oy alt 
a * shih 

Rr iS ae civ 
= hy as bye ; 
Sus Wes 4 ee uaate 
a agent | nisi, + 5 Abit 5 at a 
| ol 3 : 

se 
ne 
ra = >." 

_ Bd a 
™4 

PART III 

THE CONNECTION BETWEEN 
THE-LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION AND THE 
CONVENTIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION 

CHAPTER XIV 
NATURE OF OONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

In the Introduction to this work stress was laid upon chapter 
the essential distinction between the “law of the *IV- 
constitution,” which, consisting (as it does) of rules ens 
enforced or recognised by the Courts, makes up a ae 
body of “laws” in the proper sense of that term,“ ”"” 
and the ‘conventions of the constitution,” which 
consisting (as they do) of customs, practices, maxims, 
or precepts which are not enforced or recognised by 
the Courts, make up a body not of laws, but of con- 
stitutional or political ethics ; and it was further urged 
that the law, not the morality of the constitution, 
forms the proper subject of legal study.’ In ac- 
cordance with this view, the reader’s attention has 
been hitherto exclusively directed to the meaning 
and applications of two principles which pervade the 
law of the constitution, namely, the Sovereignty of 
Parliament? and the Rule of Law.® 

But a lawyer cannot master even the legal side 
of the English constitution without paying some 
attention to the nature of those constitutional under- 
standings which necessarily engross the attention of 

1 See pp. 29-31, ante. 2 See Part I. 8 See Part II. 
413 

Nature of 
constitu- 
tional 
under- 
standings, 

414. LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

historians or of statesmen. He ought to ascertain, at 
any rate, how, if at all, the law of the constitution 
is connected with the conventions of the constitu- 
tion ; and a lawyer who undertakes this task will soon 
find that in so doing he is only following one stage 
farther the path on which we have already entered, and 
is on the road to discover the last and most striking 
instance of that supremacy of the law which gives to 
the English polity the whole of its peculiar colour. 

My aim therefore throughout the remainder of 
this book is to define, or ascertain, the relation or 
connection between the legal and the conventional 
elements in the constitution, and to point out the way 
in which a just appreciation of this connection throws 
light upon several subordinate questions or problems 
of constitutional law. 

This end will be attained if an answer is found 
to each of two questions: What is the nature of the 
conventions or understandings of the constitution ? 
What is the force or (in the language of jurisprudence) 
the ‘“‘sanction” by which is enforced obedience to the 
conventions of the constitution? These answers will 
themselves throw light on the subordinate matters to 
which I have made reference. 

The salient characteristics, the outward aspects so to 
speak, of the understandings which make up the consti- 
tutional morality of modern England, can hardly be 
better described than in the words of Mr. Freeman :— 

“We now have a whole system of political 
‘morality, a whole code of precepts for the guidance of 
“public men, which will not be found in any page 
“of either the statute or the common law, but which 
“are in practice held hardly less sacred than any 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 415 

‘principle embodied in the Great Charter or in the 
“Petition of Right. In short, by the side of our 
“‘written Law, there has grown up an unwritten or 
‘‘conventional Constitution. When an Englishman 
‘speaks of the conduct of a public man being consti- 
“tutional or unconstitutional, he means something 
“wholly different from what he means by conduct 
“being legal or illegal. A famous vote of the House 
‘of Commons, passed on the motion of a great states- 
‘“‘man, once declared that the then Ministers of the 
“‘Crown did not possess the confidence of the House 
‘of Commons, and that their continuance in office 
‘was therefore at Variance with the spirit of the con- 
“stitution. The truth of such a position, accord- 
“ing to the traditional principles on which public men 
“have acted for some generations, cannot be disputed ; 
‘but it would be in vain to seek for any trace of such 
“doctrines in any page of our written Law. The 
‘proposer of that motion did not mean to charge the 
“existing Ministry with any illegal act, with any act 
‘which could be made the subject either of a prose- 
‘“‘cution in a lower court or of impeachment in the 
‘High Court of Parliament itself. He did not mean 
“that they, Ministers of the Crown, appointed 
“during the pleasure of the Crown, committed 
‘any breach of the Law of which the Law could 
“take cognisance, by retaining possession of their 
“offices till such time as the Crown should think 
“good to dismiss them from those offices. What he 
‘‘meant was that the general course of their policy 
‘was one which to a majority of the House of Com- 
‘‘mons did not seem to be wise or beneficial to the 
‘nation, and that therefore, according to a conven- 

Chapter 

Part If. 

Examples 
of consti- 
tutional 
under- 
standings. 

416 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 
GRMN Ad iil i tt ee chs Bat he eae ne ieee ae ce, 
“tional code as well understood and as effectual as 
“the written Law itself, they were bound to resign 
“ offices of which the House of Commons no longer 
“held them to be worthy.”? 

The one exception which can be taken to this 
picture of our conventional constitution is the con- 
trast drawn in it between the “written law” and 
the “unwritten constitution”; the true opposition, 
as already pointed out, is between laws properly so 
called, whether written or unwritten, and under- 
standings, or practices, which, though commonly 
observed, are not laws in any true sense of that 
word at all. But this inaccuracy is hardly more than 
verbal, and we may gladly accept Mr. Freeman's 
words as a starting-point whence to inquire into the 
nature or common, quality of the maxims which 
make up our body of constitutional morality. 

The following are examples’ of the precepts to 
which Mr. Freeman refers, and belong to the code 
by which public life in England is (or is supposed 
to be) governed. ‘A Ministry which is outvoted 
in the House of Commons is in many cases bound 

to retire from office.” ‘‘A Cabinet, when outvoted 
on any vital question, may appeal once to the 
country by means of a dissolution.” ‘If an appeal 

to the electors goes against the Ministry they are 
bound to retire from office, and have no right to 
dissolve Parliament a second time.” ‘The Cabinet 
are responsible to Parliament as a body, for the 
general conduct of affairs.” “They are further 
responsible to an extent, not however very definitely 

1 Freeman, Growth of the English Constitution (lat ed.), pp. 109, 110. 
® See, for further examples, pp. 25, 26, ante, 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 417 

fixed, for the appointments made by any of their 
number, or to speak in more accurate language, 
made by the Crown under the advice of any member 
of the Cabinet.” “The party who for the time being 
command a majority in the House of Commons, have 
(in general) a right to have their leaders placed in 
office.” ‘The most influential of these leaders ought 
(generally speaking) to be the Premier, or head of 
the Cabinet.” These are precepts referring to the 
position and formation of the Cabinet. It is, how- 

ever, easy to find constitutional maxims dealing: 

with other topics. ‘Treaties can be made without 
the necessity for any Act of Parliament; but the 
Crown, or in reality the Ministry representing the 
Crown, ought not to make any treaty which will 
not command the approbation of Parliament.” ‘The 
foreign policy of the country, the proclamation of 
war, and the making of peace ought to be left in 
the hands of the Crown, or in truth of the Crown’s 
servants. But in foreign as in domestic affairs, 
the wish of the two Houses of Parliament or (when 
they differ) of the House of Commons ought to 
be followed.” ‘The action of any Ministry would 
be highly unconstitutional if it should involve the 
proclamation of war, or the making of peace, in 
defiance of the wishes of the House.” “If there is 
a difference of opinion between the House of Lords 
and the House of Commons, the House of Lords 
ought, at some point, not definitely fixed, to give 
way, and should the Peers not yield, and the House 
of Commons continue to enjoy the confidence of the 
country, it becomes the duty of the Crown, or of 

its responsible advisers, to create or to threaten to 
25 

Chapter 

Part II. 

Common 
character- 
istic of con- 
stitutional 
under- : 
standings. 

418 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

create enough new Peers to override the opposition 
of the House of Lords, and thus restore harmony 
between the two branches of the legislature.” ’ 
“Parliament ought to be summoned for the despatch 
of business at least once in every year.” “If a 
sudden emergency arise, e.g. through the outbreak 
of an insurrection, or an invasion by a foreign 
power, the Ministry ought, if they require additional 
authority, at once to have Parliament convened 
and obtain any powers which they may need for 

-the protection of the country. Meanwhile Ministers 

ought to take every step, even at the peril of 
breaking the law, which is necessary either for 
restoring order or for repelling attack, and (if the 
law of the land is violated) must rely for protection 
on Parliament passing an Act of Indemnity.” 

These rules (which I have purposely expressed in 
a lax and popular manner), and a lot more of the 
same kind, make up the constitutional morality of 
the day. They are all constantly acted upon, and, 
since they cannot be enforced by any Court of law, 
have no claim to be considered laws. They are 
multifarious, differing, as it might at first sight 
appear, from each other not only in importance but 
in general character and scope. They will be found 
however, on careful examination, to possess one 
common quality or property; they are all, or at 
any rate most of them, rules for determining the 
mode in which the discretionary powers of the 
Crown (or of the Ministers as servants of the Crown) 
ought to be exercised; and this characteristic will 
be found on examination to be the trait common 

1 See however Hearn, Government of England (2nd ed.), p. 178. 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 419 
not only to all the rules already enumerated, but 
to by far the greater part (though not quite to the 
whole) of the conventions of the constitution. This 
matter, however, requires for its proper understanding 
some further explanation. 

The discretionary powers of the government mean 
every kind of action which can legally be taken by 
the Crown, or by its servants, without the neces- 
sity for applying: to Parliament for new statutory 
authority. Thus no statute is required to enable 
the Crown to dissolve or to convoke Parliament, to 
make peace or war, to create new Peers, to dismiss 
a Minister from office or to appoint his successor. 
The doing of all these things lies legally at any 
rate within the discretion of the Crown; they belong 
therefore to the discretionary authority of the govern- 
ment. This authority may no doubt originate in 
Parliamentary enactments, and, in a limited number 
of cases, actually does so originate. Thus the 
Naturalization Act, 1870, gives to a Secretary of 
State the right under certain circumstances to con- 
vert an alien into a naturalized British subject; and 
the Extradition Act, 1870, enables a Secretary of 
State (under conditions provided by the Act) to over- 
ride the ordinary law of the land and hand over a 
foreigner to his own government for trial. With the 
exercise, however, of such discretion as is conferred on 
the Crown or its servants by Parliamentary enact- 
ments we need hardly concern ourselves, The mode 
in which such discretion is to be exercised is, or may 
be, more or less clearly defined by the Act itself, 
and is often so closely limited as in reality to become 
the subject of legal decision, and thus pass from the 

Constitu- 
tional con- 
ventions 
are mainly 
rules for 
governing 
exercise of 
preroga- 
tive. 

Part HI. 

420 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

domain of constitutional morality into that of law 
properly so called. The discretionary authority of 
the Crown originates generally, not in Act of Parlia- 
ment, but in the “ prerogative”—a term which has 
caused more perplexity to students than any other 
expression referring to the constitution. The “ pre- 
rogative” appears to be both historically and as a 
matter of actual fact nothing else than the residue 
of discretionary or arbitrary authority, which at any 
given time is legally left in the hands of the Crown. 
The King was originally in truth what he still is 
in name, ‘the sovereign,” or, if not strictly the 
“sovereign” in the sense in which jurists use that 
word, at any rate by far the most powerful part 
of the sovereign power. In 1791 the House of 
Commons compelled the government of the day, 
a good deal against the will of Ministers, to put 
on trial Mr. Reeves, the learned author of the 
History of English Law, for the expression of 
opinions meant to exalt the prerogative of the Crown 
at the expense of the authority of the House of 
Commons. Among other statements for the publica- 
tion of which he was indicted, was a lengthy com- 
parison of the Crown to the trunk, and the other 
parts of the constitution to the branches and leaves 
of a great tree. This comparison was made with the 
object of drawing from it the conclusion that the 
Crown was the source of all legal power, and that 
while to destroy the authority of the Crown was to 
cut down the noble oak under the cover of which 
Englishmen sought refuge from the storms of 
Jacobinism, the House of Commons and other 
institutions were but branches and leaves which 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 421 

might be lopped off without serious damage to the 
tree.’ The publication of Mr. Reeves’s theories 
during a period of popular excitement may have 
been injudicious. But a jury, one is happy to know, 
found that it was not seditious; for his views un- 
doubtedly rested on a sound basis of historical fact. 
The power of the Crown was in truth anterior to 
that of the House of Commons. From the time of 
the Norman Conquest down to the Revolution of 
1688, the Crown possessed in reality many of the 
attributes of sovereignty. The prerogative is the 
name for the remaining portion of the Crown’s 
original authority, and is therefore, as already 
pointed out, the name for the residue of discretionary 
power left at any moment in the hands of the Crown, 
whether such power be in fact exercised by the King 
himself or by his Ministers. Every act which the 
executive government can lawfully do without the 
authority of the Act of Parliament is done in virtue of 
this prerogative. If therefore we omit from view (as 
we conveniently may do) powers conferred on the 
Crown or its servants by Parliamentary enactments, 
as for example under an Alien Act, we may use the 
term “ prerogative” as equivalent to the discretionary 
authority of the executive, and then lay down that 
the conventions of the constitution are in the main 
precepts for determining the mode and spirit in which 
the prerogative is to be exercised, or (what is really 
the same thing) for fixing the manner in which any 
transaction which can legally be done in virtue of the 
Royal prerogative (such as the making of war or the 
declaration of peace) ought to be carried out. This 
- | See 26 St. Tr. 530-534, 

Chapter 

E 

Part ITI. 

422. LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

statement holds good, it should be noted, of all the 
discretionary powers exercised by the executive, other- 
wise than under statutory authority ; it applies to acts 
really done by the King himself in accordance with 
his personal wishes, to transactions (which are of more 
frequent occurrence than modern constitutionalists 
are disposed to admit) in which both the King and 
his Ministers take a real part, and also to that large 
and constantly increasing number of proceedings 
which, though carried out in the King’s name, are 
in truth wholly the acts of the Ministry. The con- 
ventions of the constitution are in short rules intended 
to regulate the exercise of the whole of the remaining 
discretionary powers of the Crown, whether these 
powers are exercised by the King himself or by the 
Ministry. That this is so may be seen by the ease 
and the technical correctness with which such conven- 
tions may be expressed in the form of regulations in re- 
ference to the exercise of the prerogative. Thus, to say 
that a Cabinet when outvoted on any vital question 
are bound in general to retire from office, is equivalent 
to the assertion, that the prerogative of the Crown to 
dismiss its servants at the will of the King must be 
exercised in accordance with the wish of the Houses of 
Parliament; the statement that Ministers ought not 
to make any treaty which will not command the ap- 
probation of the Houses of Parliament, means that the 
prerogative of the Crown in regard to the making of 
treaties—what the Americans call the “ treaty-making 
power "ought not to be exercised in opposition to 
the will of Parliament. So, again, the rule that Par- 
lament must meet at least once a year, is in fact the 
rule that the Crown’s legal right or prerogative to call 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 423 

Parliament together at the King’s pleasure must be 
so exercised that Parliament meet once a year. 

This analysis of constitutional understandings is 
open to the one valid criticism, that, though true as 
far as it goes, it is obviously incomplete; for there 
are some few constitutional customs or habits which 
have no reference to the exercise of the royal power. 
Such, for example, is the understanding—a very 
vague one at best—that in case of a permanent con- 
flict between the will of the House of Commons and 
the will of the House of Lords the Peers must at 
some point give way to the Lower House. Such, 
again, is, or at any rate was, the practice by which 
the judicial functions of the House of Lords are dis- 
charged solely by the Law Lords, or the understand- 
ing under which Divorce Acts were treated as judicial 
and not as legislative proceedings. Habits such as 
these are at bottom customs or rules meant to 
determine the mode in which one or other or both of 
the Houses of Parliament shall exercise their dis- 
cretionary powers, or, to use the historical term, their 
‘‘ privileges.” The very use of the word “ privilege” 
is almost enough to show us how to embrace all the 
conventions of the constitution under one general 
head. Between “ prerogative ” and “ privilege” there 
exists a close analogy : the one is the historical name 
for the discretionary authority of the Crown; the 
other is the historical name for the discretionary 
authority of each House of Parliament. Understand- 
ings then which regulate the exercise of the prerogative 
determine, or are meant to determine, the way in 
which one member of the sovereign body, namely the 
Crown, should exercise its discretionary authority ; 

Chapter 
XIV. 

Some con- 
stitutional 
conven- 
tions refer 
to exercise 
of Parlia- 
mentary 
privilege. 

Part 1 

Aim of con- 
stitational 
under- 
standings. 

424 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

understandings which regulate the exercise of privilege 
determine, or are meant to determine, the way in 
which the other members of the sovereign body 
should each exercise their discretionary authority. 
The result follows, that the conventions of the con- 
stitution, looked at as a whole, are customs, or under- 
standings, as to the mode in which the several members 
of the sovereign legislative body, which, as it will be 
remembered, is the “King in Parliament,” * should 
each exercise their discretionary authority, whether 
it be termed the prerogative of the Crown or the 
privileges of Parliament. Since, however, by far the 
most numerous and important of our constitutional 
understandings refer at bottom to the exercise of the 
prerogative, it will conduce to brevity and clearness 
if we treat the conventions of the constitution, as 
rules or customs determining the mode in which the 
discretionary power of the executive, or in technical 
language the prerogative, ought (1.e. is expected by 
the nation) to be employed. 

Having ascertained that the conventions of the 
constitution are (in the main) rules for determining 
the exercise of the prerogative, we may carry our 
analysis of their character a step farther. They 
have all one ultimate object. Their end is to secure 
that Parliament, or the Cabinet which is indirectly 
appointed by Parliament, shall in the long run give 
effect to the will of that power which in modern 
England is the true political sovereign of the State— 
the majority of the electors or (to use popular though 
not quite accurate language) the nation. 

At this point comes into view the full importance 

1 See p. 37, ante. 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 425 

of the distinction already insisted upon! between 
“legal” sovereignty and “political” sovereignty. 
Parliament is, from a merely legal point of view, the 

Chapter 

absolute sovereign of the British Empire, since every - 

Act of Parliament is binding on every Court through- 
out the British dominions, and no rule, whether of 
morality or of law, which contravenes an Act of Par- 
liament, binds any Court throughout the realm. But 
if Parliament be in the eye of the law a supreme 
legislature, the essence of representative government 
is, that the legislature should represent or give effect 
to the will of the political sovereign, t.e. of the 
electoral body, or of the nation. That the conduct of 
the different parts of the legislature should be deter- 
mined by rules meant to secure harmony between the 
action of the legislative sovereign and the wishes of 
the political sovereign, must appear probable from 
general considerations. Ifthe true ruler or political 
sovereign of England were, as was once the case, the 
King, legislation might be carried out in accordance 
with the King’s will by one of two methods. The 
Crown might itself legislate, by royal proclamations, 
or decrees ; or some other body, such as a Council of 
State or Parliament itself, might be allowed to legis- 
late as long as this body conformed to the will of the 
Crown. If the first plan were adopted, there would 
be no room or need for constitutional conventions. 
If the second plan were adopted, the proceedings of 
the legislative body must inevitably be governed by 
some rules meant to make certain that the Acts of 
the legislature should not contravene the will of the 
Crown. The electorate is in fact the sovereign of 
1 See pp. 68-73, ante. 

426 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

England. It is a body which does not, and from its 
nature hardly can, itself legislate, and which, owing 
chiefly to historical causes, has left in existence a 
theoretically supreme legislature. The result of this 
state of things would naturally be that the conduct 
of the legislature, which (ex hypothesi) cannot be 
governed by laws, should be regulated by understand- 
ings of which the object is to secure the conformity 
of Parliament to the will of the nation. And this is 
what has actually occurred. The conventions of the 
constitution now consist of customs which (whatever 
their historical origin)are at the present day maintained 
for the sake of ensuring the supremacy of the House of 
Commons, and ultimately, through the elective House 
of Commons, of the nation. Our modern code of consti- 
tutional morality secures, though in a roundabout way, 
what is called abroad the “sovereignty of the people.” 

That this is so becomes apparent if we examine 
into the effect of one or two among the leading 
articles of this code. The rule that the powers of the 
Crown must be exercised through Ministers who are 
members of one or other House of Parliament and who 
“command the confidence of the House of Commons,” 
really means, that the elective portion of the legisla- 
ture in effect, though by an indirect process, appoints 
the executive government; and, further, that the 
Crown, or the Ministry, must ultimately carry out, 
or at any rate not contravene, the wishes of the 
House of Commons. But as the process of repre- 
sentation is nothing else than a mode by which the 
will of the representative body or House of Commons 
is made to coincide with the will of the nation, it 
follows that a rule which gives the appointment 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 427 

and control of the government mainly to the House 
of Commons is at bottom a rule_which gives the 
election and ultimate control of the executive to the 
nation. The same thing holds good of the under- 
standing, or habit, in accordance with which the 
House of Lords are expected in every serious political 
controversy to give way at some point or other to the 
will of the House of Commons as expressing the 
deliberate resolve of the nation, or of that further 
custom which, though of comparatively recent growth, 
forms an essential article of modern constitutional 
ethics, by which, in case the Peers should finally re- 
fuse to acquiesce in the decision of the Lower House, 
the Crown is expected to nullify the resistance of the 
Lords by the creation of new Peerages.’ How, it 
may be said, is the “‘ point” to be fixed at which, in 
case of a conflict between the two Houses, the Lords 
must give way, or the Crown ought to use its pre- 
rogative in the creation of new Peers? The question 
is worth raising, because the answer throws great 
light upon the nature and aim of the articles which 
make up our conventional code. This reply is, that the 
point at which the Lords must yield or the Crown 
intervene is properly determined by anything which 
conclusively shows that the House of Commons 
represents on the matter in dispute the deliberate 
decision of the nation. The truth of this reply will 
hardly be questioned, but to admit that the deliberate 
decision of the electorate is decisive, is in fact to 
concede that the understandings as to the action of 

1 Mr. Hearn denies, as it seems to me on inadequate grounds, the 
existence of this rule or understanding. See Hearn, Government of 
England (2nd ed.), p. 178. . 

Part IIL 

tion of Par- 
liament. 

428 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

the House of Lords and of the Crown are, what we 
have found them to be, rules meant to ensure the 
ultimate supremacy of the true political sovereign, or, 
in other words, of the electoral body.’ 

By far the most striking example of the real sense 

- attaching to a whole mass of constitutional conven- 

tions is found in a particular instance, which appears 
at first sight to present a marked exception to 
the general principles of constitutional morality. 
A Ministry placed in a minority by a vote of the 
Commons have, in accordance with received doctrines, 
aright to demand a dissolution of Parliament. On 
the other hand, there are certainly combinations of 
circumstances under which the Crown has a right 
to dismiss a Ministry who command a Parliamentary 
majority, and to dissolve the Parliament by which the 
Ministry are supported. The prerogative, in short, of 
dissolution may constitutionally be so employed as to 
override the will of the representative body, or, as it 
is popularly called, “The People’s House of Parlia- 
ment.” This looks at first sight like saying that in 
certain cases the prerogative can be so used as to sct 
at nought the will of the nation. But in reality it 
is far otherwise. The discretionary power of the 
Crown occasionally may be, and according to con- 
stitutional precedents sometimes ought to be, used to 
strip an existing House of Commons of its authority. 
But the reason why the House can in accordance 
with the constitution be deprived of power and of 
existence is that an occasion has arisen on which 
there is fair reason to suppose that the opinion of the 
House is not the opinion of the electors. A dissolu- 
1 Compare Bagehot, English Constitution, pp. 25-27. 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 429 

tion is in its essence an appeal from the legal to the 
political sovereign. A dissolution is allowable, or 
necessary, whenever the wishes of the legislature are, 
or may fairly be presumed to be, different from the 
wishes of the nation. 

This is the doctrine established by the celebrated 
contests of 1784 and of 1834. In each instance the 
King dismissed a Ministry which commanded the 
confidence of the House of Commons. In each case 
there was an appeal to the country by means of a 
dissolution. In 1784 the appeal resulted in a decisive 
verdict in favour of Pitt and his colleagues, who had 
been brought into office by the King against the will 
of the House of Commons. In 1834 the appeal led 
to a verdict equally decisive against Peel and Wel- 
lington, who also had been called to office by the 
Crown against the wishes of the House. The essential 
point to notice is that these contests each in effect 
admit the principle that it is the verdict of the 
political sovereign which ultimately determines the 
right or (what in politics is much the same thing) 
the power of a Cabinet to retain office, namely, the 
nation. 

Much discussion, oratorical and literary, has been 
expended on the question whether the dissolution of 
1784 or the dissolution of 1834 was constitutional.’ 
To a certain extent the dispute is verbal, and depends 
upon the meaning of the word “constitutional.” If 
we mean by it “legal,” no human being can dispute 
that George the Third and his son could without 
any breach of law dissolve Parliament. If we mean 
“usual,” no one can deny that each monarch took 
1 See Appendix, Note VII., The Meaning of an Unconstitutional Law. 

The dis- 
solutions of 
1784 and 
1834. 

Part IIL 

430 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

a very unusual step in dismissing a Ministry which 
commanded a majority in the House of Commons. If 
by “constitutional” we mean “in conformity with 
the fundamental principles of the constitution,” we 
must without hesitation pronounce the conduct of 
George the Third constitutional, 1.e. in conformity 
with the principles of the constitution as they are now 
understood. He believed that the nation did not 
approve of the policy pursued by the House of Com- 
mons. He was right in this belief. No modern con- 
stitutionalist will dispute that the authority of the 
House of Commons is derived from its representing 
the will of the nation, and that the chief object of a 
dissolution is to ascertain that the will of Parliament 
coincides with the will of the nation. George the 
Third then made use of the prerogative of dissolution 
for the very purpose for which it exists. His conduct, 
therefore, on the modern theory of the constitution, 
was, as far as the dissolution went, in the strictest 
sense constitutional. But it is doubtful whether in 
1784 the King’s conduct was not in reality an inno- 
vation, though a salutary one, on the then prevailing 
doctrine. Any one who studies the questions con- 
nected with the name of John Wilkes, or the disputes 
between England and the American colonies, will see 
that George the Third and the great majority of 
George the Third’s statesmen maintained up to 1784 
a view of Parliamentary sovereignty which made Par- 
liament in the strictest sense the sovereign power. 
To this theory Fox clung, both in his youth as a Tory 
and in his later life as a Whig. The greatness of 
Chatham and of his son lay in their perceiving that 
behind the Crown, behind the Revolution Families, 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF’ CONSTITUTION 431 

behind Parliament itself, lay what Chatham calls the 
“great public,” and what we should call the nation, 
and that on the will of the nation depended the 
authority of Parliament. In 1784 George the Third 
was led by the exigencies of the moment to adopt the 
attitude of Chatham and Pitt. He appealed (oddly 
enough) from the sovereignty of Parliament, of 
which he had always been the ardent champion, 
to that sovereignty of the people which he never 
ceased to hold in abhorrence. Whether this appeal 
be termed constitutional or revolutionary is now of 
little moment; it affirmed decisively the fundamental 
principle of our existing constitution that not Parlia- 
ment but the nation is, politically speaking, the 
supreme power in the State. On this very ground 
the so-called “penal” dissolution was consistently 
enough denounced by Burke, who at all periods of 
his career was opposed to democratic innovation, 
and far less consistently by Fox, who blended in 
his political creed doctrines of absolute Parliamentary 
sovereignty with the essentially inconsistent dogma 
of the sovereignty of the people. 

Of William the Fourth’s action it is hard to 
speak with decision. The dissolution of 1834 was, 
from a constitutional point of view, a mistake; it 
was justified (if at all) by the King’s belief that the 
House of Commons did not represent the will of the 
nation. The belief itself turned out erroneous, but 
the large minority obtained by Peel, and the rapid 
decline in the influence of the Whigs, proved that, 
though the King had formed a wrong estimate of 
public sentiment, he was not without reasonable 
ground for believing that Parliament had ceased to 

Chapter 

432, LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

represent the opinion of the nation. Now if it be 
constitutionally right for the Crown to appeal from 
Parliament to the electors when the House of 
Commons has in reality ceased to represent its 
constituents, there is great difficulty in maintaining 
that a dissolution is unconstitutional simply because 
the electors do, when appealed to, support the 
opinions of their representatives. Admit that the 
electors are the political sovereign of the State, and 
the result appears naturally to follow, that an appeal 
to them by means of a dissolution is constitutional, 
whenever there is valid and reasonable ground for 
supposing that their Parliamentary representatives 
have ceased to represent their wishes. The con- 
stitutionality therefore of the dissolution in 1834 
turns at bottom upon the still disputable question 
of fact, whether the King and his advisers had 
reasonable ground for supposing that the reformed 
House of Commons had lost the confidence of the 
nation. Whatever may be the answer given by 
historians to this inquiry, the precedents of 1784 
and 1834 are decisive; they determine the principle 
on which the prerogative of dissolution ought to be 
exercised, and show that in modern times the rules 
as to the dissolution of Parliament are, like other 
conventions of the constitution, intended to secure 
the ultimate supremacy of the electorate as the true 
political sovereign of the State; that, in short, the 
validity of constitutional maxims is subordinate and 
subservient to the fundamental principle of popular 
sovereignty. 

The necessity for dissolutions stands in close 
connection with the existence of Parliamentary 

NATURE OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 433 

sovereignty. Where, as in the United States, no Chapter 
legislative assembly is a sovereign power, the right 7”: 
of dissolution may be dispensed with; the con- Mlstion 

right of 
stitution provides security that no change of vita] disolutica 

importance can be effected without an appeal to the mentary 
people; and the change in the character of a legisla- reigaty. 
tive body by the re-election of the whole or of part 
thereof at stated periods makes it certain that in 
the long run the sentiment of the legislature will 
harmonise with the feeling of the public. Where 
Parliament is supreme, some further security for 
such harmony is necessary, and this security is given 
by the right of dissolution, which enables the Crown 
or the Ministry to appeal from the legislature to 
the nation. The security indeed is not absolutely 
complete. Crown, Cabinet, and Parliament may 
conceivably favour constitutional innovations which 
do not approve themselves to the electors. The 
Septennial Act could hardly have been passed in 
England, the Act of Union with Ireland would not, 
it is often asserted, have been passed by the Irish 
Parliament, if, in either instance, a legal revolution 
had been necessarily preceded by an appeal to the 
electorate. Here, as elsewhere, the constitutionalism 
of America proves of a more rigid type than the 
constitutionalism of England. Still, under the con- 
ditions of modern_ political life, the understandings 
which exist with us as to the right of dissolution 
afford nearly, if not quite, as much security for 
sympathy between the action of the legislature and 
the will of the people, as do the limitations placed 
on legislative power by the constitutions of American 

States. In this instance, as in others, the principles 
2 F 

Part OL 

434 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

explicitly stated in the various constitutions of the 
States, and in the Federal Constitution itself, are im- 
pliedly involved in the working of English political 
institutions. The right of dissolution is the right 
of appeal to the people, and thus underlies all those 
constitutional conventions which, in one way or 
another, are intended to produce harmony between 
the legal and the political sovereign power. 

CHAPTER XV 

THE SANCTION BY WHICH THE CONVENTIONS OF THE 
CONSTITUTION ARE ENFORCED 

Wuat is the sanction by which obedience to the 
conventions of the constitution is at bottom en- 
forced ? 

This is by far the most perplexing of the specula- 
trve questions suggested by a study of constitutional 

law. Let us bear in mind the dictum of Paley, that 

it is often far harder to make men see the existence 
of a difficulty, than to make them, when once the 
difficulty is perceived, understand its explanation, 
and in the first place try to make clear to ourselves 
what is the precise nature of a puzzle of which most 
students dimly recognise the existence. 
Constitutional understandings are admittedly not 
laws; they are not (that is to say) rules which will 
be enforced by the Courts. If a Premier were to 
retain office after a-vote of censure passed by the 
House of Commons, if he were (as did Lord Pal- 
merston under like circumstances) to dissolve, or 
strictly speaking to get the Crown to dissolve, Parlia- 
ment, but, unlike Lord Palmerston, were to be again 
censured by the newly elected House of Commons, 
and then, after all this had taken place, were still to 
435 

Chapter 
XV. 

The 
problem to 
be solved. 

Part I. 

Partial 
answer, 
that con- 
stitutional 
under- 
standings 
often clis- 
obeyed. 

436 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

remain at the head of the government,—no one could 
deny that such a Prime Minister had acted uncon- 
atitutionally. Yet no Court of law would take 
notice of his conduct. Suppose, again, that on the 
passing by both Houses of an important bill, the 
King should refuse his assent to the measure, or 
(in popular language) put his “veto” on it. 
Here there would be a gross violation of usage, 
but the matter could not by any proceeding 
known to English law be brought before the judges. 
Take another instance. Suppose that Parliament 
were for more than a year not summoned for the 
despatch of business. This would be a course of pro- 
ceeding of the most unconstitutional character. Yet 
there is no Court in the land before which one could 
go with the complaint that Parliament had not been 
assembled.’ Still the conventional rules of the con- 
stitution, though not laws, are, as it is constantly 
asserted, nearly if not quite as binding as laws. 
They are, or appear to be, respected quite as much 
as most statutory enactments, and more than many. 
The puzzle is to see what is the force which habitually 
compels obedience to rules which have not behind 
them the coercive power of the Courts. 

The difficulty of the problem before us cannot 
indeed be got rid of, but may be shifted and a good 
deal lessened, by observing that the invariableness 
of the obedience to constitutional understand- 
ings is itself more or less fictitious. The special 
articles of the conventional code are in fact often 

1 See 4 Edward III. c 14; 16 Car. II. c 1; and 1 Will, & 
Mary, Seas, 2,c. 2. Compare these with the repealed 16 Car. I. 
. tt which would have made the assembling of Parliament a matter 
of law. 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 437 
shee Lat ee el a a na 
disobeyed. A Minister sometimes refuses to retire 
when, as his opponents allege, he ought constitu- 
tionally to resign office; not many years have 
passed since the Opposition of the day argued, if not 
convincingly yet with a good deal of plausibility, that 
the Ministry had violated a rule embodied in the Bill 
of Rights; in 1784 the House of Commons main- 
tained, not only by argument but by repeated votes, 
that Pitt had deliberately defied more than one 
constitutional precept, and the Whigs of 1834 
brought a like charge against Wellington and Peel. 
Nor is it doubtful that any one who searches through 
the pages of Hansard will find other instances in 
which constitutional maxims of long standing and 
high repute have been set at nought. The uncertain 
character of the deference paid to the conventions 
of the constitution 1s concealed under the current 
phraseology, which treats the successful violation of a 
constitutional rule as a proof that the maxim was not 
in reality part of the constitution. If a habit or 
precept which can be set at nought is thereby shown 
not to be a portion of constitutional morality, it 
naturally follows that no true constitutional rule is 
ever disobeyed. 

Yet, though the obedience supposed to be rendered 
to the separate understandings or maxims of public 
life is to a certain extent fictitious, the assertion that 
they have nearly the force of law is not without 
meaning. Some few of the conventions of the 
constitution are rigorously obeyed. Parliament, for 
example, is summoned year by year with as much 
regularity as though its annual meeting were provided 
for by a law of nature; and (what is of more con- 

Chapter 
XV. 

But prin- 
ciple of 
conformity 
to will of 
the nation 
always 
obeyed. 

438 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 
ee A a alt ii A AS SIE RIESE 
Part OL sequence) though particular understandings are of 
uncertain obligation, neither the Crown nor any 
servant of the Crown ever refuses obedience to the 
grand principle which, as we have seen, underlies all 
the conventional precepts of the constitution, namely, 
that government must be carried on in accordance 
with the will of the House of Commons, and ulti- 
mately with the will of the nation as expressed 
through that House. This principle is not a law; it 
is not to be found in the statute-book, nor is it a 
maxim of the common law; it will not be enforced 
by any ordinary judicial body. Why then has the 
principle itself, as also have certain conventions or 
understandings which are closely connected with it, 
the force of law? This, when the matter is reduced 
to its simplest form, is the puzzle with which we 
have to deal. It sorely needs a solution. Many 
writers, however, of authority, chiefly because they 
do not approach the constitution from its legal side, 
hardly recognise the full force of the difficulty which 
requires to be disposed of. They either pass it by, 
or else apparently acquiesce in one of two answers, 
each of which contains an element of truth, but 
neither of which fully removes the perplexities of 
any inquirer who is determined not to be put off 
with mere words. 
Insufficient A reply more often suggested than formulated in 
Impeach. 8O Many words, is that obedience to the conventions 
men of the constitution is ultimately enforced by the fear 
of impeachment. 
If this view were tenable, these conventions, it 
should be remarked, wouldnot be “understandings” 
at all, but “laws” in the truest sense of that term, 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 439 

and their sole peculiarity would lie in their being 
laws the breach of which could be punished only by 
one extraordinary tribunal, namely, the High Court 
of Parliament. But though it may well be conceded 
—and the fact is one of great importance—that the 
habit of obedience to the constitution was originally 
generated and confirmed by impeachments, yet there 
are insuperable difficulties to entertaining the belief 
that the dread of the Tower and the block exerts any 
appreciable influence over the conduct of modern 
statesmen. No impeachment for violations of the 
constitution (since for the present purpose we may 
leave out of account such proceedings as those taken 
against Lord Macclesfield, Warren Hastings, and Lord 
Melville) has occurred for more than a century and a 
half. The process, which is supposed to ensure the 
retirement from office of a modern Prime Minister, 
when placed in a hopeless minority, is, and has long 
been, obsolete. The arm by which attacks on freedom 
were once repelled has grown rusty by disuse ; it is laid 
aside among the antiquities of the constitution, nor will 
it ever, we may anticipate, be drawn again from its 
scabbard. For, in truth, impeachment, as a means for 
enforcing the observance of constitutional morality, 
always laboured under onegrave defect. The possibility 
of ita use suggested, if it did not stimulate, one most 
important violation of political usage; a Minister who 
dreaded impeachment would, since Parliament was 
the only Court before which he could be impeached, 
naturally advise the Crown not to convene Parliament. 
There is something like a contradiction in terms in 
saying that a Minister is compelled to advise the 
meeting of Parliament by the dread of impeachment 

Chapter 

Part OL 

Power of 
pablic 
opinion, 

440 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

if Parliament should assemble. If the fear of Parlia- 
mentary punishment were the only difficulty in the 
way of violating the constitution, we may be sure 
that a bold party leader would, at the present day, as 
has been done in former centuries, sometimes suggest 
that Parliament should not meet. 

A second and current answer to the question 
under consideration’ is, that obedience to the conven- 
tional precepts of the constitution is ensured by the 
force of public opinion. 

Now that this assertion is in one sense true, stands 
past dispute. The nation expects that Parliament 
shall be convened annually ; the nation expects that 
a Minister who cannot retain the confidence of the 
House of Commons, shall give up his place, and no 
Premier even dreams of disappointing these expecta- 
tions. The assertion, therefore, that public opinion 
gives validity to the received precepts for the conduct 
of public life is true. Its defect is that, if taken 
without further explanation, it amounts to little else 
than a re-statement of the very problem which it is 
meant to solve. For the question to be answered is, 
at bottom, Why is it that public opinion is, apparently 
at least, a sufficient sanction to compel obedience to 
the conventions of the constitution? and it is no 
answer to this inquiry to say that these conventions 
are enforced by public opinion. Let it also be noted 
that many rules of conduct which are fully supported 
by the opinion of the public are violated every day of 
the year. Public opinion enjoins the performance of 
promises and condemns the commission of crimes, but 
the settled conviction of the nation that promises 
ought to be kept does not hinder merchants from 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 441 

going into the Gazette, nor does the universal execra- 
tion of the villain who sheds man’s blood prevent the 
commission of murders. That public opinion does to 

& certain extent check extravagance and criminality 

is of course true, but the operation of opinion is in 
this case assisted by the law, or in the last resort by 
the physical power at the disposal of the state. The 
limited effect of public opinion when aided by the 
police hardly explains the immense effect of opinion 
in enforcing rules which may be violated without any 
risk of the offender being brought before the Courts. 
To contend that the understandings of the con- 
stitution derive their coercive power solely from 
the approval of the public, is very like maintaining 
the kindred doctrine that the conventions of inter- 
national law are kept alive solely by moral force. 
Every one, except a few dreamers, perceives that the 
respect paid to international morality is due in great 
measure, not to moral force, but to the physical force 
in the shape of armies and navies, by which the com- 
mands of general opinion are in many cases supported ; 
and it is difficult not to suspect that, in England at 
least, the conventions of the constitution are supported 
and enforced by something beyond or in addition to 
the public approval. 

What then is this ‘‘something”? My answer is, 
that it is nothing else than the force of thelaw. The 
dread of impeachment may have established, and 
public opinion certainly adds influence to, the pre- 
vailing dogmas of political ethics. But the sanction 
which constrains the boldest political adventurer to 
obey the fundamental principles of the constitution 
and the conventions in which these principles are 

True 
answer, — 
Obedience 
to conven- 
tions 
enforced 
by power 
of law. 

Part IIL 

Explana- 
tion. 

Yearly 
meeting 
of Parlia- 
ment. 

442. LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

Ts Bc ES AG Ge NEES Sl Ree 
expressed, is the fact that the breach of these 
principles and of these conventions will almost 
immediately bring the offender into conflict with 
the Courts and the law of the land. 

This is the true answer to the inquiry which I 
have raised, but it is an answer which undoubtedly 
requires both explanation and defence. 

The meaning of the statement that the received 
precepts of the constitution are supported by the law 
of the land, and the grounds on which that statement 
is based, can be most easily made apparent by con- 
sidering what would be the legal results which would 
inevitably ensue from the violation of some indis- 
putable constitutional maxim. 

No rule is better established than that Parliament 
must assemble at least once a year. This maxim, as 
before pointed out, is certainly not derived from the 
common law, and is not based upon any statutory 
enactment. Now suppose that Parliament were pro- 
rogued once and again for more than a year, so that 
for two years no Parliament sat at Westminster. 
Here we have a distinct breach of a constitutional 
practice or understanding, but we have no violation 
of law. What, however, would be the consequences 
which would ensue? They would be, speaking gener- 
ally, that any Ministry who at the present day 
sanctioned or tolerated this violation of the con- 
stitution, and every person connected with the 
government, would immediately come into conflict 
with the law of the land. 

A moment's reflection shows that this would be so. 
The Army (Annual) Act would in the first place 
expire. Hence the Army Act, on which the discipline 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 443 

of the army depends, would cease to be in force. 
But thereupon all means of controlling the army 
without a breach of law would cease to exist. Either 
the army must be discharged, in which case the 
means of maintaining law and order would come to 
an end, or the army must be kept up and discipline 
must be maintained without legal authority for its 
maintenance. If this alternative were adopted, 
every person, from the Commander-in-Chief down- 
wards, who took part in the control of the army, and 
indeed every soldier who carried out the commands 
of his superiors, would find that not a day passed 
without his committing or sanctioning acts which 
would render him liable to stand as a criminal in the 
dock. Then, again, though most of the taxes would 
still come into the Exchequer, large portions of the 
revenue would cease to be legally due and could not 
be legally collected, whilst every official, who acted as 
collector, would expose himself to actions or prosecu- 
tions. The part, moreover, of the revenue which 
came in, could not be legally applicd to the purposes 
of the government. If the Ministry laid hold of the 
revenue they would find it difficult to avoid breaches 
of definite laws which would compel them to appear 
before the Courts. Suppose however that the Cabinet 
were willing to defy the law. Their criminal daring 
would not suffice for its purpose ; they could not get 
hold of the revenue without the connivance or aid 
of a large number of persons, some of them indeed 
officials, but some of them, such as the Comptroller 
General, the Governors of the Bank of England, and 

1 In popular, though inaccurate language, “the Mutiny Act would 
expire.” See note 2, p. 305 ante. 

Part DL 

444 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

the like, unconnected with the administration. None 
of these officials, it should be noted, could receive 
from the government or the Crown any protection 
against legal liability ; and any person, e.g. the Com- 
mander-in-Chief, or the colonel of a regiment, who 
employed force to carry out the policy of the govern- 
ment would be exposed to resistance supported by 
the Courts. For the law (it should always be borne 
in mind) operates in two different ways. It inflicts 
penalties and punishment upon law-breakers, and 
(what is of equal consequence) it enables law-respect- 
ing citizens to refuse obedience to illegal commands. 
It legalises passive resistance. The efficacy of such 
legal opposition is immensely increased by the non- 
existence in England of anything resembling the drovt 
admimstratif of France,’ or of that wide discretionary 
authority which is possessed by every continental 
government. The result is, that an administration 
which attempted to dispense with the annual meeting 
of Parliament could not ensure the obedience even of 
its own officials, and, unless prepared distinctly to 
violate the undoubted law of the land, would find 
itself not only opposed but helpless. 

The rule, therefore, that Parliament must meet 
once a year, though in strictness a constitutional 
convention which is not a law and will not be 
enforced by the Courts, turns out nevertheless to be 
an understanding which cannot be neglected without 
involving hundreds of persons, many of whom are 
by no means specially amenable to government 
influence, in distinct acts of illegality cognisable by 
the tribunals of the country. This convention there- 

1 See chap. xii., ante, 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 445 

es 

fore of the constitution is in reality based upon, and 
secured by, the law of the land. 

This no doubt is a particularly plain case. I have 
examined it fully, both because it is a particularly 
plain instance, and because the full understanding of 
it affords the clue which guides us to the principle on 
which really rests such coercive force as is possessed 
by the conventions of the constitution. 

To see that this is so let us consider for a moment 
the effect of disobedience by the government to one 
of the most purely conventional among the maxims 
of constitutional morality,—the rule, that is to say, 
that a Ministry ought to retire on a vote that they 
no longer possess the confidence of the House of 
Commons. Suppose that a Ministry, after the 
passing of such a vote, were to act at the present 
day as Pitt acted in 1783, and hold office in the face 
of the censure passed by the House. There would 
clearly be a primd facie breach of constitutional 
ethics. What must ensue is clear. If the Ministry 
wished to keep within the constitution they would 
announce their intention of appealing to the con- 
stituencies, and the House would probably assist in 
hurrying on a dissolution. All breach of law would 
be avoided, but the reason of this would be that the 
conduct of the Cabinet would not be a breach of 
constitutional morality; for the true rule of the 
constitution admittedly is, not that a Ministry can- 
not keep office when censured by the House of 
Commons, but that under such circumstances a 
Ministry ought not to remain in office unless they 
can by an appeal to the country obtain the election 
of a House which will support the government. 

Chapter 

Resigna- 
tion of 
Ministry 
which has 
lost con- 
fidence of 
the House 
of Com- 

mons. 

Part IL 

Objections, 

446 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

Suppose then that, under the circumstances I have 
imagined, the Ministry either would not recommend 
a dissolution of Parliament, or, having dissolved 
Parliament and being again censured by the newly 
elected House of Commons, would not resign office. 
It would, under this state of things, be as clear as 
day that the understandings of the constitution had 
been violated. It is however equally clear that the 
House would have in their own hands the means of 
ultimately forcing the Ministry either to respect the 
constitution or to violate the law. Sooner or later 
the moment would come for passing the Army 
(Annual) Act or the Appropriation Act, and the 
House by refusing to pass either of these enactments 
would involve the Ministry in all the inextricable 
embarrassments which (as I have already pointed out) 
immediately follow upon the omission to convene Par- 
liament for more than a year. The breach, therefore, 
of a purely conventional rule, of a maxim utterly un- 
known and indeed opposed to the theory of English 
law, ultimately entails upon those who break it direct 
conflict with the undoubted law of the land. We 
have then a right to assert that the force which in 
the last resort compels obedience to constitutional 
morality is nothing else than the power of the law 
itself. The conventions of the constitution are not 
laws, but, in so far as they really possess binding 
force, derive their sanction from the fact that who- 
ever breaks them must finally break the law and 
incur the penalties of a law-breaker. 

It is worth while to consider one or two objec- 
tions which may be urged with more or less plausi- 
bility against the doctrine that the obligatory force 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 447 

of constitutional morality is derived from the law 
itself. 

The government, it is sometimes suggested, may 
by the use of actual force carry through a coup d'état 
and defy the law of the Jand. 

This suggestion is true, but is quite irrelevant. 
No constitution can be absolutely safe from revolution 
or from a coup d'état; but to show that the laws may 
-be defied by violence does not touch or invalidate the 
statement that the understandings of the constitution 
are based upon the law. They have certainly no 
more force than the law itself. A Minister who, like 
the French President in 1851, could override the law 
could of course overthrow the constitution. The 
theory propounded aims only at proving that when 
constitutional understandings have nearly the force of 
law they derive their power from the fact that they 
cannot be broken without a breach of law. No one is 
concerned to show, what indeed never can be shown, 
that the Jaw can never be defied, or the constitution 
never be overthrown. 

It should further be observed that the admitted 
sovereignty of Parliament tends to prevent violent 
attacks on the constitution. evolutionists or con- 
spirators generally believe themselves to be supported 
by the majority of the nation, and, when they suc- 
ceed, this belief is in general well founded. But in 
modern England, a party, however violent, who count 
on the sympathy of the people, can accomplish by 
obtaining a Parliamentary majority all that could be 
gained by the success of a revolution. When a spirit 
of reaction or of innovation prevails throughout the 
country, a reactionary or revolutionary policy is 

Chapter 
XV. 

Law may 
be over- 
powered 
by force. 

_ 448 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

enforced by Parliament without any party needing to 
make use of violence. The oppressive legislation of 
the Restoration in the seventeenth century, and the 
anti-revolutionary legislation of the Tories from 
the outbreak of the Revolution till the end of 
George the Third’s reign, saved the constitution 
from attack. A change of spirit averted a change of 
form; the flexibility of the constitution proved its 
strength. 

If the maintenance of political morality, it may 
with some plausibility be asked, really depends on 
the right of Parliament to refuse to pass laws 
such as the Army (Annual) Act, which are necessary 
for the maintenance of order, and indeed for 
the very existence of society, how does it happen 
that no English Parliament has ever employed 
this extreme method of enforcing obedience to the 
constitution ? 

The true answer to the objection thus raised 
appears to be that the observance of the main and the 
most essential of all constitutional rules, the rule, that 
is to say, requiring the annual meeting of Parliament, 
is ensured, without any necessity for Parliamentary 
action, by the temporary character of the Mutiny Act, 
and that the power of Parliament to compel obedience 
to its wishes by refusing to pass the Act is so complete 
that the mere existence of the power has made its use 
unnecessary. In matter of fact, no Ministry has since 
the Revolution of 1689 ever defied the House of Com- 
_ mons, unless the Cabinet could confide in the support 
of the country, or, in other words, could count on the 
election of a House which would support the policy of 
the government. To this we must add, that in the 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 449 

rare instances in which a Minister has defied the 
House, the refusal to pass the Mutiny Act has been 
threatened or contemplated. Pitt’s victory over the 
Coalition is constantly cited as a proof that Parliament 
cannot refuse to grant supplies or to pass an Act 
necessary for the discipline of the army. Yet any 
one who studies with care the great ‘“‘Case of the 
Coalition” will see that it does not support the 
dogma for which it is quoted. Fox and his friends 
did threaten and did intend to press to the very 
utmost all the legal powers of the House of Com- 
mons. They failed to carry out their intention solely 
because they at last perceived that the majority of the 
House did not represent the will of the country. 
What the “leading case” shows is, that the Cabinet, 
when supported by the Crown, and therefore possess- 
ing the power of dissolution, can defy the will of a 
House of Commons if the House is not supported by 
the electors. Here we come round to the fundamental 
dogma of modern.constitutionalism ; the legal sove- 
reignty of Parliament is subordinate to the political 
sovereignty of the nation. This the conclusion in 
reality established by the events of 1784. Pitt over- 
rode the customs, because he adhered to the principles, 
of the constitution. He broke through the received 
constitutional understandings without damage to his 
power or reputation ; he might in all probability have 
in case of necessity broken the law itself with im- 
punity. For had the Coalition pressed their legal 
rights to an extreme length, the new Parliament of 
1784 would in all likelihood have passed an Act of 
Indemnity for illegalities necessitated, or excused, by 

the attempt of an unpopular faction to drive from 
2G 

Chapter 

Part IL 

Sub- 
ordinate 
inquiries. 

Why has 
impeach- 
ment gone 
out,of use? 

450 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

power a Minister suppported by the Crown, by the 
Peers, and by the nation. However this may be, the 
celebrated conflict between Pitt and Fox lends no 
countenance to the idea that a House of Commons 
supported by the country would not enforce the 
morality of the constitution by placing before any 
Minister who defied its precepts the alternative of 
resignation or revolution." 

A clear perception of the true relation between the 
conventions of the constitution and the law of the 
land supplies an answer to more than one sub- 
ordinate question which has perplexed students and 
commentators. 

How is it that the ancient methods of enforcing 
Parliamentary authority, such as impeachment, the 
formal refusal of supplies, and the like, have fallen 
into disuse ? 

The answer is, that they are disused because ulti- 
mate obedience to the underlying principle of all 
modern constitutionalism, which is nothing else than 
the principle of obedience to the will of the nation as 
expressed through Parliament, is so closely bound up 
with the law of the land that it can hardly be violated 
without a breach of the ordinary law. Hence the 
extraordinary remedies, which were once necessary for 
enforcing the deliberate will of the nation, having 
become unnecessary, have fallen into desuetude. If 
they are not altogether abolished, the cause lies partly 
in the conservatism of the English people, and partly 

1 It is further not the case that the idea of refusing supplies is un- 
known to modern statesmen. In 1868 such refusal was threatened in 
order to force an early dissolution of Parliament; in 1886 the dis- 

solution took place before the supplies were fully granted, and the 
supplies granted were granted for only a limited period. 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 45 

in the valid consideration that crimes may still be 
occasionally committed for which the ordinary law of 
the land hardly affords due -punishment, and which 
therefore may well be dealt with by the High Court 
of Parliament. 

Why is it that the understandings of the constitu- 
tion have about them a singular element of vagueness 
and variability ? 

Why is it, to take definite instances of this uncer- 
tainty and changeableness, that no one can define 
with absolute precision the circumstances under which 
a Prime Minister ought to retire from office? Why is 
it that no one can fix the exact point at which resist- 
ance of the House of Lords to the will of the House 
of Commons becomes unconstitutional ? and how does 
it happen that the Peers could at one time arrest 
legislation in a way which now would be generally 
held to involve a distinct breach of constitutional 
morality? What is the reason why no one can 
describe with precision the limits to the influence on 
the conduct of public affairs which may rightly be 
exerted by the reigning monarch? and how does it 
happen that George the Third and even George the 
Fourth each made his personal will or caprice tell 
on the policy of the nation in a very different way 
and degree from that in which Queen Victoria ever 
attempted to exercise personal influence over matters 
of State ? 

The answer in general terms to these and the like 
inquiries is, that the one essential principle of the 
constitution is obedience by all persons to the deliber- 
ately expressed will of the House of Commons in the 
first instance, and ultimately to the will of the nation 

Why are 
constitu- 
tional 
under- 
standings 
variable ? 

452 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 
Soy’ sR RI Ne Aer eee ee 
Part Il. as expressed through Parliament. The conventional 
—— ode of political morality is, as already pointed out, 
merely a body of maxinis meant to secure respect for 
this principle. Of these maxims some indeed—such, 
for example, as the rule that Parliament must be con- 
voked at least once a year—are so closely connected 
with the respect due to Parliamentary or national 
authority, that they will never be neglected by any 
one who is not prepared to play the part of a revolu- 
tionist ; such rules have received the undoubted stamp 
of national approval, and their observance is secured 
by the fact that whoever breaks or aids in breaking 
them will almost immediately find himself involved in 
a breach of law. Other constitutional maxims stand 
in a very different position. Their maintenance up to 
a certain point tends to secure the supremacy of Par- 
liament, but they are themselves vague, and no one 
can say to what extent the will of Parliament or the 
nation requires their rigid observance; they there- 
fore obtain only a varying and indefinite amount of 
obedience. 
With- Thus the rule that a Ministry who have lost the 
draws °f confidence of the House of Commons should retire 

confidence 
Cree’! from office is plain enough, and any permanent neglect 
of the spirit of this rule would be absolutely incon- 
sistent with Parliamentary government, and would 
finally involve the Minister who broke the rule in 
acts of undoubted illegality. But when you come to 
inquire what are the signs by which you are to know 
that the House has withdrawn its confidence from a 
Ministry,—whether, for example, the defeat of an 
important Ministerial measure or the smallness of 
a Ministerial majority is a certain proof that a 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 453 

Ministry ought to retire,—you ask a question which 
admits of no absolute reply.’ All that can be said 
is, that a Cabinet ought not to continue in power 
(subject, of course, to the one exception on which I 
have before dwelt*) after the expression by the House 
of Commons of a wish for the Cabinet’s retirement. 
Of course, therefore, a Minister or a Ministry must 
resign if the House passes a vote of want of confi- 
dence. There are, however, a hundred signs of Par- 
hiamentary disapproval which, according to circum- 
stances, either may or may not be a sufficient notice 
that a Minister ought to give up office. The essential 
thing is that the Ministry should obey the House as 
representing the nation. But the question whether 
the House of Commons has or has not indirectly inti- 
mated its will that a Cabinet should give up office is 
not a matter as to which any definite principle can be 
laid down. The difficulty which now exists, in settling 
the point at which a Premier and his colleagues are 
bound to hold that they have lost the confidence of 
the House, is exactly analogous to the difficulty which 
often perplexed statesmen of the Jast century, of de- 
termining the point at which a Minister was bound to 
hold he had lost the then essential confidence of the 
King. The ridiculous efforts of the Duke of New- 
castle to remain at the head of the Treasury, in spite 
of the broadest hints from Lord Bute that the time 

1 See Hearn, Government of England, chap. ix., for an attempt to 
determine the circumstances under which a Ministry ought or ought 
not to keep office. See debate in House of Commons of 24th July 
1905, for consideration of, and reference to, precedents with regard to 
the duty of a Ministry to retire from office when they have lost the 
confidence of the House of Commons.—Parl, Deb. 4th ser. vol. 150, 
col. 50. 

2 See pp. 428-434, ante. 

454 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 
ree View SAS Wa: OG RPO re mnrs eines Oe Cet ee eres 
Part It. had come for resignation, are exactly analogous to the 
undignified persistency with which later Cabinets have 
occasionally clung to office in the face of intimations 
that the House desired a change of government. As 
long as a master does not directly dismiss a servant, 
the question whether the employer’s conduct betrays 
a wish that the servant should give notice must be an 
inquiry giving rise to doubt and discussion. And if 
there be sometimes a difficulty in determining what is 
the will of Parliament, it must often of necessity be 
still more difficult to determine what is the will of the 
nation, or, in other words, of the majority of the 
electors. 
when ‘The general rule that the House of Lords must 
loi” in matters of legislation ultimately give way to the 
vrtoe House of Commons is one of the best-established 
Commons. maxims of modern constitutional ethics. But if any 
inquirer asks how the point at which the Peers are to 
give way is to be determined, no answer which even 
approximates to the truth can be given, except the 
very vague reply that the Upper House must give 
way whenever it is clearly proved that the will of the. 
House of Commons represents the deliberate will of 
the nation. The nature of the proof differs under 
different circumstances. 

When once the true state of the case is perceived, . 
it is easy to understand a matter which, on any cut- 
and-dried theory of the constitution, can only with 
difficulty be explained, namely, the relation occupied 
by modern Cabinets towards the House of Lords. It 
is certain that for more than half a century Ministries 
have constantly existed which did not command the 
confidence of the Upper House, and that such Minis- 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 455 

tries have, without meeting much opposition on the 
part of the Peers, in the main carried out a policy of 
which the Peers did not approve. It is also certain 
that while the Peers have been forced to pass many 
bills which they disliked, they have often exercised 
large though very varying control over the course 
of legislation. Between 1834 and 1840 the Upper 
House, under the guidance of Lord Lyndhurst, re- 
peatedly and with success opposed Ministerial mea- 
sures which had passed the House of Commons. For 
many years Jews were kept out of Parliament simply 
because the Lords were not prepared to admit them. 
If you search for the real cause of this state of things, 
you will find that it was nothing else than the fact, 
constantly concealed under the misleading rhetoric of 
party warfare, that on the matters in question the 
electors were not prepared to support the Cabinet in 
taking the steps necessary to compel the submission 
of the House of Lords. On any matter upon which 
the electors are firmly resolved, a Premier, who is in 
effect the representative of the House of Commons, 
has the means of coercion, namely, by the creation of 
Peers. In a country indeed like England, things are 
rarely carried to this extreme length. The knowledge 
that a power can be exercised constantly prevents its 
being actually put in force. This is so even in private 
life; most men pay their debts without being driven 
into Court, but it were absurd to suppose that the 
possible compulsion of the Courts and the sheriff has 
not a good deal to do with regularity in the payment 
of debts. The acquiescence of the Peers in measures 
which the Peers do not approve arises at bottom from 
the fact that the nation, under the present constitution, 

Chapter 

456 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

Dy Sei PERLE 2 Mor Bile OS AS ARE SS 
possesses the power of enforcing, through very cum- 
bersome machinery, the submission of the Peers to the 
conventional rule that the wishes of the House of 
Lords must finally give way to the decisions of the 
House of Commons. But the rule itself is vague, and 
the degree of obedience which it obtains is varying, 
because the will of the nation is often not clearly 
expressed, and further, in this as in other matters, 
is itself liable to variation. If the smoothness with 
which the constitutional arrangements of modern 
England work should, as it often does, conceal from 
us the force by which the machinery of the constitu- 
tion is kept working, we may with advantage consult 
the experience of English colonies. No better example 
can be given of the methods by which a Representa- 
tive Chamber attempts in the last resort to compel the 
obedience of an Upper House than is afforded by the 
varying phases of the conflict which raged in Victoria 
during 1878 and 1879 between the two Houses of the 
Legislature. There the Lower House attempted to 
enforce upon the Council the passing of measures 
which the Upper House did not approve, by, in effect, 
inserting the substance of a rejected bill in the 
Appropriation Bill. The Council in turn threw out 
the Appropriation Bill. The Ministry thereupon dis- 
missed officials, magistrates, county court judges, and 
others, whom they had no longer the means to pay, 
and attempted to obtain payments out of the Treasury 
on the strength of resolutions passed solely by the 
Lower House. At this point, however, the Ministry 
came into conflict with an Act of Parliament, that is, 
with the law of the land. The contest continued 
under different forms until a change in public opinion 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 457 

finally led to the election of a Lower House which 
could act with the Council. With the result of the 
contest we are not concerned. Three points, however, 
should be noticed. The conflict was ultimately ter- 
minated in accordance with the expressed will of the 
electors; each party during its course put in force 
constitutional powers hardly ever in practice exerted 
in England ; as the Council was elective, the Ministry 
did not possess any means of producing harmony be- 
tween the two Houses by increasing the number of 
the Upper House. It is certain that if the Governor 
could have nominated members of the Council, the 
Upper House would have yielded to the will of the 
Lower, in the same way in which the Peers always 
in the last resort bow to the will of the House of 
Commons. 

How is it, again, that all the understandings 
which are supposed to regulate the personal relation 
of the Crown to the actual work of government are 
marked by the utmost vagueness and uncertainty ? 

The matter is, to a certain extent at any rate, 

Chapter 
XV. 

Why is the 
nal 

influence 
of the 
Crown un- 
certain ? 

explained by the same train of thought as that which | 

we have followed out in regard to the relation 
between the House of Lords and the Ministry. The 
revelations of political memoirs and the observation 
of modern public life make quite clear two points, 
both of which are curiously concealed under the mass 
of antiquated formulas which hide from view the real 
working of our institutions. The first is, that while 
every act of State is done in the name of the Crown, 
the real executive government of England is the 
Cabinet. The second is, that though the Crown 
has no real concern in a vast number of the trans- 

Part IL 

458 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

actions which take place under the Royal name, no 
one of the King’s predecessors, nor, it may be 
presumed, the King himself, has ever acted upon 
or affected to act upon the maxim originated by 
Thiers, that “the King reigns but does not govern.” 
George the Third took a leading part in the work 
of administration; his two sons, each in different 
degrees and in different ways, made their personal 
will and predilections tell on the government of the 
country. No one really supposes that there is not 
a sphere, though a vaguely defined sphere, in which 
the personal will of the King has under the consti- 
tution very considerable influence.- The strangeness 
of this state of things is, or rather would be to any one 
who had not been accustomed from his youth to the 
mystery and formalism of English constitutionalism, 
that the rules or customs which regulate the personal 
action of the Crown are utterly vague and undefined. 
The reason of this will, however, be obvious to any one 
who has followed these chapters. The personal in- 
fluence of the Crown exists, not because acts of State 

-are done formally in the Crown’s name, but because 

neither the legal sovereign power, namely Parliament, 
nor the political sovereign, namely the nation, wishes 
that the reigning monarch should be without personal 
weight in the government of the country. The 
customs or understandings which regulate or control 
the exercise of the King’s personal influence are 
vague and indefinite, both because statesmen feel that 
the matter is one hardly to be dealt with by precise 
rules, and because no human being knows how far 
and to what extent the nation wishes that the voice 
of the reigning monarch should command attention. 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 459 

All that can be asserted with certainty is, that on this Chapter 
matter the practice of the Crown and the wishes of _*”: 
the nation have from time to time varied. George 
the ‘Third made no use of the so-called veto which 
had been used by William the Third; but he more 
than once insisted upon his will being obeyed in 
matters of the highest importance. None of his 
successors have after the manner of George the 
Third made their personal will decisive as to general 
measures of policy. In small things as much as in 
great one can discern a tendency to transfer to the 
Cabinet powers once actually exercised by the King. 
The scene between Jeanie Deans and Queen Caroline 
is a true picture of a scene which might have taken 
place under George the Second; George the Third’s 
firmness secured the execution of Dr. Dodd. At 
the present day the right of pardon belongs in fact 
to the Home Secretary. A modern Jeanie Deans 
would be referred to the Home Office; the question 
whether a popular preacher should pay the penalty 
of his crimes would now, with no great advantage 
to the country, be answered, not by the King, but 
by the Cabinet. 
What, again, is the real effect produced by the The effet 
survival of prerogative powers ! ing pre- 
Here we must distinguish two different things, Spr 
namely, the way in which the existence of the 
prerogative affects the personal influence of the 
King, and the way in which it affects the power of 
the executive government. 
The fact that all important acts of State are done 
in the name of the King and in most cases with the 
cognisance of the King, and that many of these acts, 

460 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

cay TATE SAO eh Sa NS SS SR ae 
such, for example, as the appointment of judges or the 
creation of bishops, or the conduct of negotiations 
with foreign powers and the like, are exempt from 
the direct control or supervision of Parliament, gives 
the reigning monarch an opportunity for exercising 
great influence on the conduct of affairs; and 
Bagehot has marked out, with his usual subtlety, the 
mode in which the mere necessity under which 
Ministers are placed of consulting with and giving 
information to the King secures a wide sphere for the 
exercise of legitimate influence by a constitutional 
ruler. 

But though it were a great error to underrate the 
extent to which the formal authority of the Crown 
confers real power upon the King, the far more 
important matter is to notice the way in which the 
survival of the prerogative affects the position of the 
Cabinet. It leaves in the hands of the Premier and 
his colleagues, large powers which can be exercised, 
and constantly are exercised, free from Parliamentary 
control. This is especially the case in all foreign 
affairs. Parliament may censure a Ministry for mis- 
conduct in regard to the foreign policy of the country. 
But a treaty made by the Crown, or in fact by the 
Cabinet, is valid without the authority or sanction of 
Parliament ; and it is even open to question whether 
the treaty-making power of the executive might not 
in some cases override the law of the land. However 

} See the Parlement Belge, 4 P. D. 129; 5 P. D.(C. A.) 197, 
“Whether the power” [of the Crown to compel its subjects to obey 
the provisions of a treaty] “does exist in the case of treaties of peace, 
“‘and whether if so it exists equally in the case of treaties akin toa 
“treaty of peace, or whether in both or either of these cases inter- 
“ference with private righta can be authorised otherwise than by the 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 461 

this may be, it is not Parliament, but the Ministry, 
who direct the diplomacy of the nation, and virtually 
decide all questions of peace or war. The founders of 
the American Union showed their full appreciation of 
the latitude left to the executive government under 
the English constitution by one of the most remark- 
able of their innovations upon it. They lodged the 
treaty-making power in the hands, not of the 
President, but of the President and the Senate; and 
further gave to the Senate a right of veto on 
Presidential appointments to office. These arrange- 
ments supply a valuable illustration of the way in 
which restrictions on the prerogative become re- 
strictions on the discretionary authority of the 
executive. Were the House of Lords to have con- 
ferred upon it by statute the rights of the Senate, 
the change in our institutions would be described 
with technical correctness as the limitation of the 
prerogative of the Crown as regards the making of 
treaties and of official appointments. But the true 
effect of the constitutional innovation would be to 
place a legal check on the discretionary powers of 
the Cabinet. 

The survival of the prerogative, conferring as it 
does wide discretionary authority upon the Cabinet, 
involves a consequence which constantly escapes 
attention. It immensely increases the authority of 
the House of Commons, and ultimately of the con- 
stituencies by which that House is returned. Minis- 
ters must in the exercise of all discretionary powers 

“legislature, are grave questions upon which their Lordships do not 
“find it necessary to express an opinion.”—Walker v. Baird [1892], 
A. ©. 491, 497, judgment of P. C. 

Chapter 

Part OL 

462. LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

inevitably obey the predominant authority in the 
State. When the King was the chief member of 
the sovereign body, Ministers were in fact no less than 
in name the King’s servants. At periods of our 
history when the Peers were the most influential 
body in the country, the conduct of the Ministry 
represented with more or less fidelity the wishes of 
the Peerage. Now that the House of Commons 
has become by far the most important part of the 
sovereign body, the Ministry in all matters of dis- 
cretion carry out, or tend to carry out, the will of the 
House. When however the Cabinet cannot act except 
by means of legislation, other considerations come 
into play. A law requires the sanction of the House 
of Lords. No government can increase its statutory 
authority without obtaining the sanction of the Upper 
Chamber. ‘Thus an Act of Parliament when passed 
represents, not the absolute wishes of the House of 
Commons, but these wishes as modified by the in- 
fluence of the House of Lords. The Peers no doubt 
will in the long run conform to the wishes of the 
electorate. But the Peers may think that the electors 
will disapprove of, or at any rate be indifferent to, a 
bill which meets with the approval of the House of 
Commons. Hence while every action of the Cabinet 
which is done in virtue of the prerogative is in fact 
though not in name under the direct control of the 
representative chamber, all powers which can be 
exercised only in virtue of a statute are more or less 
controlled in their creation by the will of the House 
of Lords; they are further controlled in their exercise 
by the interference of the Courts. One example, 
taken from the history of recent years, illustrates 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 463 

the practical effect of this difference.’ In 1872 the 
Ministry of the day carried a bill through the House 
of Commons abolishing the system of purchase in the 
army. The bill was rejected by the Lords: the 
“Cabinet then discovered that purchase could be 
abolished by Royal warrant, ze. by something very 
like the exercise of the prerogative. The system 
was then and there abolished, The change, it will 
probably be conceded, met with the approval, not 
only of the Commons, but of the electors. But it will 
equally be conceded that had the alteration required 
statutory authority the system of purchase might 
have continued in force up to the present day. 
The existence of the prerogative enabled the Ministry 
in this particular instance to give immediate effect to 
the wishes of the electors, and this is the result which, 
under the circumstances of modern politics, the survival 
of the prerogative will in every instance produce. The 
prerogatives of the Crown have become the privileges 
of the people, and any one who wants to see how widely 
these privileges may conceivably be stretched as the 
House of Commons becomes more and more the direct 
representative of the true sovereign, should weigh well 
the words in which Bagehot describes the powers 
which can still legally be exercised by the Crown 
without consulting Parliament; and should remember 
that these powers can now be exercised by a Cabinet 
who are really servants, not of the Crown, but of a 

1 On this subject there are remarks worth noting in Stephen’s 
Life of Fawcett, pp. 271, 272. 

2 Purchase was not abolished by the prerogative in the ordinary 
legal sense of the term. A statute prohibited the sale of offices 
except in so far as might be authorised in the case of the army by 
Royal warrant. When therefore the warrant authorising the sale was 
cancelled the statute took effect. 

Part I. 

464 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 
ce PSA 6 is SiS ARR RS 
representative chamber which in its turn obeys the 
behests of the electors. 

‘‘T gaid in this book that it would very much sur- 
“ prise people if they were only told how many things 
“the Queen could do without consulting Parliament, 
‘and it certainly has so proved, for when the Queen 
“abolished purchase in the army by an act of pre- 
‘‘rogative (after the Lords had rejected the bill for 
‘‘ doing so), there was a great and general astonishment. 

“ But this is nothing to what the Queen can by law 
“do without consulting Parliament. Not to mention 
“other things, she could disband the army (by law 
“she cannot engage more than a certain number of 
‘men, but she is not obliged to engage any men) ; 
“she could dismiss all the officers, from the General 
“‘commanding-in-chief downwards; she could dis- 
“miss all the sailors too; she could sell off all our 
“‘ships-of-war and all our naval stores; she could 
‘‘make a peace by the sacrifice of Cornwall, and begin 
“a war for the conquest of Brittany. She could make 
‘“‘every citizen in the United Kingdom, male or 
“female, a peer; she could make every parish in 
“the United Kingdom a ‘university’; she could 
“dismiss most of the civil servants ; she could pardon 
“all offenders. In a word, the Queen could by 
‘prerogative upset all the action of civil govern- 
‘“‘ment within the government, could disgrace the 
“nation by a bad war or peace, and could, by dis- 
“banding our forces, whether land or sea, leave us 
‘‘defenceless against foreign nations.” } 

If government by Parliament is ever transformed 
into government by the House of Commons, the 

1 Bagehot, English Constitution, Introd. pp. xxxv. and xxxvi. 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 465 

transformation will, it may be conjectured, be 
effected by use of the prerogatives of the Crown. 

Let us cast back a glance for a moment at the 
results which we have obtained by surveying the 
English constitution from its legal side. 

The constitution when thus looked at ceases to 
appear a “sort of maze”; it is seen to consist of two 
different parts; the one part is made up of under- 
standings, customs, or conventions which, not being 
enforced by the Courts, are in no true sense of the word 
laws; the other part is made up of rules which are 
enforced by the Courts, and which, whether embodied 
in statutes or not, are laws in the strictest sense 
of the term, and make up the true law of the 
_ constitution. 

This law of the constitution is, we have further 
found, in spite of all appearances to the contrary, the 
true foundation on which the English polity rests, and 
it gives in truth even to the conventional element of 
constitutional law such force as it really possesses.’ 

The law of the constitution, again, is in all its 
branches the result of two guiding principles, which 
have been gradually worked out by the more or less 
conscious efforts of generations of English statesmen 
and lawyers. 

The first of these principles is the sovereignty of 
Parliament, which means in effect the gradual transfer 
of power from the Crown to a body which has come 
more and more to represent the nation.’ This curious 

1 See pp. 435-450, ante. ; 
2 A few words may be in place as to the method by which this 
transfer was accomplished. The leaders of the English people in, 
their contests with Royal power never attempted, except in periods 
Jo a 

Chapter 
XV. 

Conclusion. 

Part OT 

466 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

process, by which the personal authority of the King 
has been turned into the sovereignty of the King in 
Parliament, has had two effects: it has put an end to 
the arbitrary powers of the monarch ; it has preserved 
intact and undiminished the supreme authority of the 

State. 

The second of these principles is what I have 
called the “rule of law,” or the supremacy throughout 
all our institutions of the ordinary law of the land. 
This rule of law, which means at bottom the right of 
the Courts to punish any illegal act by whomsoever 
committed, is of the very essence of English institu- 
tions. If the sovereignty of Parliament gives the 
form, the supremacy of the law of the land determines 
the substance of our constitution. The English con- 

of revolutionary violence, to destroy or dissipate the authority of 
the Crown as head of the State. Their policy, continued through 
centuries, was to leave the power of the King untouched, but to 
bind down the action of the Crown to recognised modes of procedure 
which, if observed, would secure first the supremacy of the law, and 
ultimately the sovereignty of the nation. The King was acknowledged 
to be supreme judge, but it was early established that he could act 
judicially only in and through his Courts; the King was recognised 
as the only legislator, but he could enact no valid law except as King 
in Parliament ; the King held in his hands all the prerogatives of the 
executive government, but, as was after long struggles determined, he 
could legally exercise these prerogatives only through Ministers who 
were members of his Council, and incurred responsibility for his acta 
Thus the personal will of the King was gradually identified with and 
transformed into the lawful and legally expressed will of the Crown. 
This transformation was based upon the constant use of fictions. It 
bears on its face that it was the invention of lawyers. If proof of this 
were wanted, we should find it in the fact that the ‘‘ Parliaments” of 
France towards the end of the eighteenth century tried to use against 
the fully-developed despotism of the French monarchy, fictions 
recalling the arts by which, at a far earlier period, English constitu- 
tionalists had nominally checked the encroachmenta, while really 
diminishing the sphere, of the royal prerogative. Legal statesmanship 
bears everywhere the same character. See Rocquain, L’Esprit Révolu- 
tionnaire avant la Revolution. 

SANCTION OF CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 467 

stitution in short, which appears when looked at 
from one point of view to be a mere collection of 
practices or customs, turns out, when examined in 
its legal aspect, to be more truly than any other 
polity in the world, except the Constitution of the 
United States,’ based on the law of the land. 

When we see what are the principles which truly 
underlie the English polity, we also perceive how 
rarely they have been followed by foreign statesmen 
who more or less intended to copy the constitution of 
England. The sovereignty of Parliament is an idea 
fundamentally inconsistent with the notions which 
govern the inflexible or rigid constitutions existing in 
by far the most important of the countries which 
have adopted any scheme of representative govern- 
ment. The “rule of law” is a conception which in 
the United States indeed has received a development 
beyond that which it has reached in England; but 
it is an idea not so much unknown to as deliberately 
rejected by the constitution-makers of France, and 
of other continental countries which have followed 
French guidance. For the supremacy of the law of 
the land means in the last resort the right of the 
judges to control the executive government, whilst 
the séparation des pouvoirs means, as construed by 
Frenchmen, the right of the government to control 
the judges. The authority of the Courts of Law as 
understood in England can therefore hardly coexist 

1 It is well worth notice that the Constitution of the United 
States, as it actually exists, rests to a very considerable extent on 
judge-made law. Chief-Justice Marshall, as the “ Expounder of the 
Constitution,” may almost be reckoned among the builders if not the 
founders of the American polity. See for a collection of his judgments 
on constitutional questions, The Writings of John Marshall, late Chief- 
Justice of the United States, on the Federal Constitution. 

Chapter 

468 LAW AND CONVENTIONS OF CONSTITUTION 

with the system of droit administratif as it prevails 
in France. We may perhaps even go so far as to say 
that English legalism is hardly consistent with the 
existence of an official body which bears any true 
resemblance to what foreigners call “the administra- 
tion.” To say this is not to assert that foreign 
forms of government are necessarily inferior to the 
English. constitution, or unsuited for a civilised and 
free people. All that necessarily results from an 
analysis of our institutions, and a comparison of them 
with the institutions of foreign countries, is, that the 
English constitution is still marked, far more deeply 
than is generally supposed, by peculiar features, and 
that these peculiar characteristics may be summed up 
in the combination of Parliamentary Sovereignty with 
the Rule of Law. 

APPENDIX 

NOTE I 
RIGIDITY OF FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS 

TWELVE constitutions 1 have been framed by French constitution- 
makers since the meeting of the States General in 1789. 

A survey of the provisions (if any) contained in these con- 
stitutions for the revision thereof leads to some interesting 
results. 

First, With but two exceptions, every French constitution 
has been marked by the characteristic of “rigidity.” Frenchmen 
of all political schools have therefore agreed in the assumption, 
that the political foundations of the State must be placed beyond 
the reach of the ordinary legislature, and ought to be changed, 
if at all, only with considerable difficulty, and generally after 
such delay as may give the nation time for maturely reflecting 
over any proposed innovation. 

In this respect the Monarchical Constitution of 1791 is note- 
worthy. That Constitution formed a legislature consisting of 
one Assembly, but did not give this Assembly or Parliament any 
authority to revise the Constitution. The only body endowed 
with such authority was an Assembly of Revision (Assemblée de 
Révision), and the utmost pains were taken to hamper the con- 
vening and to limit the action of the Assembly of Revision. 

1 Viz. (1) The Monarchical Constitution of 1792; (2) the Republican Con- 
stitution of 1793; (8) the Republican Constitution: of 1795 (Directory), 5 
Fruct. An. III. ; (4) the Consular Constitution of the Year VIII. (1799); (5) 
the Imperial Constitution, 1804 ; (6) the Constitution proclaimed by the Senate 
and Provisional Government, 1814; (7) the Constitutional Charter, 1814 
(Restoration) ; (8) the Additional Act (Acte Addittonnel), 1815, remodelling the 
Imperial Constitution ; (9) the Constitutional Charter of 1880 (Louis Philippe) ; 
(10) the Republic of 1848 ; (11) the Second Imperial Constitution, 1852; (12) 
the present Republic, 1870-75. See generally Hélie, Les Constitutions de la 
France; and Duguit et Monnier, Les Constitutions de la France (Deuxiéme ed). 

It is possible either to lengthen or to shorten the list of French Constitutions 
according to the view which the person forming the list takes of the extent of 
the change in the arrangements of a state necessary to form a new constitution. 

469 

470 APPENDIX 

The provisions enacted with this object were in substance as 
follows :—An ordinary Legislative Assembly was elected for two 
years, No change in the Constitution could take place until 
three successive Legislative Assemblies should have expressed 
their wish for a change in some article of the Constitution. 
On a resolution in favour of such reform having been carried in 
three successive legislatures or Parliaments, the ensuing Legis- 
lative Assembly was to be increased by the addition of 249 
members, and this increased Legislature was to constitute an 
Assembly of Revision. 

This Assembly of Revision was tied down, as far as the end 
could be achieved by the words of the Constitution, to debate on 
those matters only which were submitted to the consideration of 
the Assembly by the resolution of the three preceding legislatures. 
The authority, therefore, of the Assembly was restricted to a 
partial revision of the Constitution. The moment this revision 
was finished the 249 additional members were to withdraw, and 
the Assembly of Revision was thereupon to sink back into the 
position of an ordinary legislature. If the Constitution of 1791 
had continued in existence, no change in its articles could, under 
any circumstances, have been effected in less than six years. 
But this drag upon hasty legislation was not, in the eyes of the 
authors of the Constitution, a sufficient guarantee against in- 
considerate innovations.! They specially provided that the two 
consecutive legislative bodies which were to meet after the pro- 
clamation of the Constitution, should have no authority even 
to propose the reform of any article contained therein. The 
intended consequence was that for at least ten years (1791-1801) 
the bases of the French government should remain unchanged 
and unchangeable.? 

The Republicans of 1793 agreed with the Constitutionalists 
of 1791 in placing the foundations of the State outside the 
limits of ordinary legislation, but adopted a different method of 
revision, Constitutional changes were under the Constitution of 
1793 made dependent, not on the action of the ordinary legisla- 
ture, but on the will of the people. Upon the demand of a 
tenth of the primary assemblies in more than half of the Depart- 
ments of the Republic, the legislature was bound to convoke all 
the primary assemblies, and submit to them the question of 
convening a national convention for the revision of the Con- 
stitution. The vote of these Assemblies thereupon decided for 

1 A resolution w ; 
Constitution! should the HR attoa ing pie at perioatet site Pesta! Mitioy re 

Constitutions de la France, p. 302. 
® See Constitution of 1791, Tit. vii. 

RIGIDITY OF FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS 471 

or against the meeting of a convention, and therefore whether a 
revision should take place. 

Assuming that they decided in favour of a revision, a con- 
vention, elected in the same manner as the ordinary legislature, 
was to be forthwith convened, and to occupy itself as regards 
the Constitution with those subjects only which should have 
caused (ont motivé) the convention to be assembled. On the 
expressed wish, in short, of the majority of the citizens, a 
legislature was to be convoked with a limited authority to 
reform certain articles of the Constitution.! 

The Republican and Directorial Constitution again, of 1795, 
rested, like its predecessors, on the assumption that it was of 
primary importance to make constitutional changes difficult, and 
also recognised the danger of again creating a despotic sovercign 
assembly like the famous, and hated, Convention. 

The devices by which it was sought to guard against both 
sudden innovations, and the tyranny of a constituent assembly, 
can be understood only by one who remembers that, under 
the Directorial Constitution, the legislature consisted of two 
bodies, namely, the Council of Ancients, and the Council of Five 
Hundred. A proposal for any change in the Constitution was 
necessarily to proceed from the Council of Ancients, and to be 
ratified by the Council of Five Hundred. After such a pro- 
posal had been duly made and ratified thrice in nine years, at 
periods distant from each other by at least three years, an 
Assembly of Revision was to be convoked. This Assembly 
constituted what the Americans now term a “constitutional 
convention.” It was a body elected ad hoc, whose meeting did 
not in any way suspend the authority of the ordinary legislature, 
or of the Executive. The authority of the Assembly of Revision 
was further confined to the revision of those articles submitted 
to its consideration by the legislature. It could in no case sit 
for more than three months, and had no other duty than to 
prepare a plan of reform (pryjet de reforme) for the consideration 
of the primary Assemblies of the Republic. When once this 
duty had been performed, the Assembly of Revision was ipso 
facto dissolved. The Constitution not only carefully provided 
that the Assembly of Revision should take no part in the 
government, or in ordinary legislation, but also enacted that until 
the changes proposed by the Assembly should have been accepted 
by the people the existing Constitution should remain in force. 

The Consular and Imperial Constitutions, all with more or less 

1 Constitution du 5 Fractidor, An. III., articles 336-350, Helie, pp. 4386, 
463, 464. 

472 APPENDIX 
© ol ers agen A alt IO neh ee 

directness, made changes in the Constitution depend, first, upon 
a senatus consultum or resolution of the Senate; and, next, on 
the ratification of the change by a popular vote or plebiscite.’ 
This may be considered the normal Napoleonic system of consti- 
tutional reform. It makes all changes dependent on the will of 
a body, in effect, appointed by the Executive, and makes them 
subject to the sanction of a popular vote taken in such a manner 
that the electors can at best only either reject or, as in fact they 
always have done, affirm the proposals submitted to them by the 
Executive. No opportunity is given for debate or for amendments 
of the proposed innovations. We may assume that even under 
the form of Parliamentary Imperialism sketched out in the Addi- 
tional Act of 23rd April 1815, the revision of the Constitution 
was intended to depend on the will of the Senate and the ratifi- 
cation of the people. The Additional Act is, however, in one 
respect very remarkable. It absolutely prohibits any proposal 
which should have for its object the Restoration of the Bourbons, 
the re-establishment of feudal rights, of tithes, or of an established 
Church (culte privilégié et dominant), or which should in any way 
revoke the sale of the national domains, or, in others words, should 
unsettle the title of French landowners. This attempt to place 
certain principles beyond the influence, not only of ordinary 
legislation but of constitutional change, recalls to the student of 
English history the Cromwellian Constitution of 1653, and the 
determination of the Protector that-certain principles should be 
regarded as “fundamentals” not to be touched by Parliament, 
nor, a8 far as would appear, by any other body in the State. 

The Republic of 1848 brought again into prominence the 
distinction between laws changeable by the legislature in its 
ordinary legislative capacity, and articles of the Constitution 
changeable only with special difficulty, and by an assembly 
specially elected for the purpose of revision. The process of 
change was elaborate. The ordinary legislative body was elected 
for three years. This body could not itself modify any constitu- 
tional article. It could however, in its third year, resolve that 
a total or partial revision of the Constitution was desirable ; such 
a resolution was invalid unless voted thrice at three sittings, 
each divided from the other by at least the period of a month, 
unless 500 members voted, and unless the resolution were 
affirmed by three-fourths of the votes given. 

On the resolution in favour of a constitutional change heing 
duly carried, there was to be elected an assembly of revision. 
This assembly, elected for three months only, and consisting of a 

? See Hélie, Les Constitutions de la France, pp. 696-688. 

RIGIDITY OF FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS 473 

larger number than the ordinary legislature, was bound to occupy 
itself with the revision for which it was convoked, but might, if 
necessary, pass ordinary laws’ It was therefore intended to be 
& constituent body superseding the ordinary legislature.} 

The second Empire revived, in substance, the legislative system 
of the first, and constitutional changes again became dependent 
upon a resolution of the Senate, and ratification by a popular vote.? 

The existing Republic is, in many respects, unlike any pre- 
ceding polity created by French statesmanship. The articles of 
the Constitution are to be found, not in one document, but in 
several constitutional laws enacted by the National Assembly 
which met in 1871. These laws however cannot be changed 
by the ordinary legislature—the Senate and the Chamber of 
Deputies—acting in ita ordinary legislative character. The two 
Chambers, in order to effect a change in the constitutional 
manner, must, in the first place, each separately resolve that a 
revision of the Constitution is desirable. When each have passed 
this resolution, the two Chambers meet together, and when 
thus assembled and voting together as a National Assembly, or 
Congress, have power to change any part, as they have in fact 
changed some parts, of the constitutional laws.* 

I have omitted to notice the constitutional Charter of 1814, 
granted by Louis XVIII., and the Charter of 1830, accepted by 
Louis Philippe. The omission is intentional. Neither of these 
documents contains any special enactments for its amendment. 
An Englishman would infer that the articles of the Charter 
could be abrogated or amended by the process of ordinary legis- 
lation. The inference may be correct. The constitutionalists of 
1814 and 1830 meant to found a constitutional monarchy of the 
English type, and therefore may have meant the Crown and the 
two Houses to be a sovereign Parliament. The inference how- 
ever, as already pointed out,‘ is by no means certain. Louis 
XVIII. may have meant that the articles of a constitution granted 
as a charter by the Crown, should be modifiable only at the will 
of the grantor. Louis Philippe may certainly have wished that 
the foundations of his system of government should be legally 
immutable. However this may have been, one thing is clear, 
namely, that French constitutionalists have, as a rule, held firmly 
to the view that the foundations of the Constitution ought not 
to be subject to sudden changes at the will of the ordinary 
legislature. 

1 See Constitution, 1848, art. 111. 

9 Ibid. 1852, arts. 31, 32; Hélie, p. 1170. 
3 See Constitutional Law, 1875, art. 8. 

4 See pp. 118-120, ante. 

474 APPENDIX 

Secondly, French statesmen have never fully recognised 
the inconveniences and the perils which may arise from the 
excessive rigidity of a constitution. They have hardly perceived 
that the power of a minority to place a veto for a period of many 
years on a reform desired by the nation provides an excuse or a 
reason for revolution. 

The authors of the existing Republic have, in this respect, 
learnt something from experience. They have indeed preserved 
the distinction between the Constitution and ordinary laws, but 
they have included but a small number of rules among constitu- 
tional articles, and have so facilitated the process of revision as 
to make the existing chambers all but a sovereign Parliament. 
Whether this is on the whole a gain or not, is a point on which 
it were most unwise to pronounce an opinion. All that is here 
insisted upon is that the present generation of Frenchmen have 
perceived that a constitution may be too rigid for use or for 
safety.) 

Thirdly, An English critic smiles at the labour wasted in 
France on the attempt to make immutable Constitutions which, 
on an average, have lasted about ten years apiece. The 
edifice, he reflects, erected by the genius of the first great 
National Assembly, could not, had it stood, have been legally 
altered till 1801—that is, till the date when, after three consti- 
tutions had broken down, Bonaparte was erecting a despotic 
Empire. The Directorial Republic of 1795 could not, if it had 
lasted, have been modified in the smallest particular till 1804, at 
which date the Empire was already in full vigour. 

But the irony of fate does not convict its victims of folly, and, 
if we look at the state of the world as it stood when France 
began her experiments in constitution-making, there was nothing 
ridiculous in the idea that the fundamental laws of a country 
ought to be changed but slowly, or in the anticipation that the 
institutions of France would not require frequent alteration. 
The framework of the English Constitution had, if we except the 
Union between England and Scotland, stood, as far as foreigners 
could observe, unaltered for a century, and if the English Parlia- 
ment was theoretically able to modify any institution whatever, 
the Parliaments of George III. were at least as little likely to 
change any law which could be considered constitutional as a 
modern Parliament to abolish the Crown. In fact it was not 
till nearly forty years after the meeting of the States General 

1 See as to the circumstances which explain the character of the existing Con- 
stitution of France, Lowell, Governments and Parties in Continental Europe, i 
pp. 7-14, and note that the present constitution has already lasted longer than 
any constitution which has existed in France since 1789. 

RIGIDITY OF FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS 475 
a6 a Se ees See 

(1829) that any serious modification was made in the form of the 
government of England. No one in France or in England could 
a century ago foresee the condition of pacific revolution to which 
modern Englishmen had become so accustomed as hardly to feel 
its strangeness. The newly-founded Constitution of the United 
States showed every sign of stability, and has lasted more than a 
century without undergoing any material change of form. It was 
reasonable enough therefore for the men of 1789 to consider that 
a well-built constitution might stand for a long time without 
the need of repair. 

Fourthly, The errors committed by French constitutionalists 
have been, if we may judge by the event, in the main, twofold. 
Frenchmen have always been blind to the fact that a constitu- 
tion may be undermined by the passing of laws which, without 
nominally changing its provisions, violate its principles. They 
have therefore failed to provide any adequate means, such as 
those adopted by the founders of the United States, for rendering 
unconstitutional legislation inoperative. They have in the next 
place, generally, though not invariably, underrated the dangers 
of convoking a constituent assembly, which, as its meeting sus- 
pends the authority of the established legislature and Executive, 
is likely to become a revolutionary convention. 

Fifthly, The Directorial Constitution of 1795 is, from a 
theoretical point of view, the most interesting among the French 
experiments in the art of constitution-making. Its authors knew 
by experience the risks to which revolutionary movements are 
exposed, and showed much ingenuity in their devices for mini- 
mising the perils involved in revisions of the Constitution. In 
entrusting the task of revision to an assembly elected ad hoc, 
which met for no other purpose, and which had no authority to 
interfere with or suspend the action of the established legislative 
bodies or of the Executive, they formed a true constitutional 
convention in the American sense of that term,! and, if we may 
judge by transatlantic experience, adopted by far the wisest method 
hitherto invented for introducing changes into a written and rigid 
constitution. The establishment, again, of the principle that all 
amendments voted by the Assembly of Revision must be referred 
to a popular vote, and could not come into force until accepted 
by the people, was an anticipation of the Referendum which has 
now taken firm root in Switzerland, and may, under one shape or 
another, become in the future a recognised part of all democratic 

1 See the word ‘‘ Convention” in the American Encyclopedia of American 
Science; and Bryce, American Commonwealth, i. (8rd ed.), App. on Constitutional 
Conventions, p. 667. 

476 APPENDIX 

SS 

polities. It is worth while to direct the reader's attention to the 
ingenuity dieplayed by the constitution-makers of 1795, both 
because their resourcefulness stands in marked contrast with the 
want of inventiveness which marks the work of most French 
constitutionalists, and because the incapacity of the Directorial 
Government, in the work of administration, has diverted atten- 
tion from the skill displayed by the founders of the Directorate 
in some parte of their constitutional creation. 

NOTE II 
DIVISION OF POWERS IN FEDERAL STATES 

A STUDENT who wishes to understand the principles which, 
under a given system of federalism, determine the division of 
authority between the nation or the central government on the 
one hand, and the States on the other, should examine the 
following points :—/irst, whether it is the National Government or 
the States to which belong only “definite” powers, t.¢ only the 
powers definitely assigned to it under the Constitution ; secondly, 
whether the enactments of the Federal legislature can be by any 
tribunal or other authority nullified or treated as void; thirdly, 
to what extent the Federal government can control the legisla- 
tion of the separate States; and fourthly, what is the nature 
of the body (if such there be) having authority to amend the 
Constitution. 

It is interesting to compare on these points the provisions of 
five different federal systems. 

A. The United States.—1. The powers conferred by the Con- 
stitution on the United States are strictly “definite” or defined ; 
the powers left to the separate States are “indefinite” or undefined. 
“The powers not delegated to the United States by the Con- 
“stitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to 
‘the States respectively, or to the people.”! The consequence 
is that the United States (that is, the National Government) 
can claim no power not conferred upon the United States either 
directly or impliedly by the Constitution. Every State in the 
Union can claim to exercise any power belonging to an inde- 
pendent nation which has not been directly or indirectly taken 
away from the States by the Constitution. 

? Constitution of United States, Amendment 10, 

DIVISION OF POWERS IN FEDERAL STATES 477 

2. Federal legislation is as much subject to the Constitution 
as the legislation of the States. An enactment, whether of 
Congress or of a State legislature, which is opposed to the Consti- 
tution, is void, and will be treated as such by the Courta. 

3. The Federal government has no power to annul or disallow 
State legislation. The State Constitutions do not owe their 
existence to the Federal government, nor do they require its 
sanction. The Constitution of the United States, however, 
guarantees to every State a Republican Government, and the 
Federal government has, it is submitted, the right to put down, 
or rather is under the duty of putting down, any State Con- 
stitution which is not “Republican,” whatever be the proper 
definition of that term. 

4. Changes in the Constitution require for their enactment 
the sanction of three-fourths of the States, and it would appear 
that constitutionally no State can be deprived of ite equal 
suffrage in the Senate without its consent.! 

B. The Swiss Confederation.—1. The authority of the national 
government or Federal power is definite, the authority of each 
of the Cantons is indefinite.* 

2. Federal legislation must be treated as valid by the Courts. 
But a law passed by the Federal Assembly must, on demand of 
either 30,000 citizens or of eight Cantons, be referred to a 
popular vote for approval or rejection. It would appear that 
the Federal Court can treat as invalid Cantonal laws which 
violate the Constitution. 

3. The Federal authorities have no power of disallowing or 
annulling a Cantonal law. But the Cantonal Constitutions, and 
amendments thereto, need the guarantee of the Confederacy. 
This guarantee will not be given to articles in a Cantonal 
Constitution which are repugnant to the Federal Constitution, and 
amendments to a Cantonal Constitution do not, I am informed, 
come into force until they receive the Federal guarantee. 

4. The Federal Constitution can be revised only by a com- 
bined majority of the Swiss people, and of the Swiss Cantons. 
No amendment of the Constitution can be constitutionally effected 
which is not approved of by a majority of the Cantons. 

C. The Canadian Dominion.—1. The authority of the Dominion, 
or Federal, government is indefinite or undefined ; the authority 
of the States or Provinces is definite or defined, and indeed 
defined within narrow limits.* 

1 Constitution of United States, art. 5. 
3 See Constitution Fédérale, art. 3. 
8 See British North America Act, 1867, ss. 91, 92. 

478 APPENDIX 

From a federal point of view this is the fundamental difference 
between the Constitution of the Dominion on the one hand, and the 
Constitution of the United States or of Switzerland on the other. 

The Dominion Parliament can legislate on all matters not 
exclusively assigned to the Provincial legislatures. The Pro- 
vincial or State Legislatures can legislate only on certain matters 
exclusively assigned to them. Congress, on the other hand, 
or the Swiss Federal Assembly, can legislate only on certain 
definite matters assigned to it by the Constitution ; the States 
or Cantons retain all powers exercised by legislation or other- 
wise not specially taken away from them by the Constitution. 

2. The legislation of the Federal, or Dominion, Parliament 
is as much subject to the Constitution (i¢ the British North 
America Act, 1867) as the legislation of the Provinces. Any 
Act passed, either by the Dominion Parliament or by a Pro- 
vincial Legislature, which is inconsistent with the Constitution is 
void, and will be treated as void by the Courts. 

3. The Dominion Government has authority to disallow the 
Act passed by a Provincial legislature. This disallowance may 
be exercised even in respect of Provincial Acts which are con- 
stitutional, ic. within the powers assigned to the Provincial 
legislatures under the Constitution.’ 

4. The Constitution of the Dominion depends on an Imperial 
statute; it can, therefore, except as provided by the statute 
itself, be changed only by an Act of the Imperial Parliament. The 
Parliament of the Dominion cannot, as such, change any part of 
the Canadian Constitution. It may however, to a limited extent, 
by its action when combined with that of a Provincial legislature, 
modify the Constitution for the purpose of producing uniformity 
of laws in the Provinces of the Dominion.” 

But a Provincial legislature can under the British North 
America Act, 1867, s, 92, subs. 1, amend the Constitution of 
the Province. The law, however, amending the Provincial Con- 
stitution is, in common with other Provincial legislation, subject 
to disallowance by the Dominion government. 

D. The Commonwealth of Australia.—l. The authority of the 
Federal government is definite; the authority of each of the 
States, vested in the Parliament thereof, is indefinite.® 

2. Federal legislation (i.¢. the legislation of the Commonwealth 
Parliament) is as much subject to the constitution as the legisla- 
tion of the State Parliaments. An enactment whether of the 

1 See British North America Act, 1867, s. 90; and Bourinot, Parliamenta: 
Practice and Procedure, pp. 76-81. ge tne Kf 

? British North America Act, 1867, s. 94. 

? Commonwealth Constitution Act, ss. 51, 52, 106, 107. 

DIVISION OF POWERS IN FEDERAL STATES 479 

Commonwealth Parliament or of a State legislature which is 
opposed to the Constitution of the Commonwealth, is void and 
will be treated as such by the Courts. 

3. The Federal or Commonwealth government has no power 
to annul or disallow either directly or indirectly the legislation 
of a State Parliament. 

4. Amendments of the Commonwealth Constitution may be 
effected by a bill passed by the Commonwealth Parliament, or 
under some circumstances by one only of the Houses of the 
Commonwealth Parliament, and approved of by a majority of the 
voting electors of the Commonwealth, and also by a majority of 
the States thereof.) 

Note however that (i) many provisions of the Constitution 
may under the Constitution be changed by an ordinary Act of 
the Commonwealth Parliament.? 

(ii.) The Commonwealth Constitution being an Act of the 
Imperial Parliament may be altered or abolished by an Act of 
the Imperial Parliament. 

E. The German Empire-—1. The authority under the Constitu- 
tion of the Imperial (Federal) power is apparently finite or 
defined, whilst the authority of the States making up the 
Federation is indefinite or undefined. 

This statement, however, must be understood subject to two 
limitations: first, the powers assigned to the Imperial govern- 
ment are very large ; secondly, the Imperial legislature can change 
the Constitution.’ 

2. Imperial legislation at any rate, if carried through in a 
proper form, cannot apparently be “unconstitutional,” * but it 
would appear that State legislation is void, if it conflicts with the 
Constitution, or with Imperial legislation.® 

3. Whether the Imperial government has any power of 
annulling a State law on the ground of unconstitutionality is not 
very clear, but as far as a foreigner can judge, no such power 
exists under the Imperial Constitution. The internal constitutional 
conflicts which may arise within any State may, under certain 
circumstances, be ultimately determined by Imperial authority.® 

4. The Constitution may be changed by the Imperial 
(Federal) legislature in the way of ordinary legislation. But no 

1 Constitution, s. 128, 2 Sec e.g. Constitution, ss. 7, 10. 

3 See Reichsverfassung, arts. 2 and 78. 

4 See on the moot question whether the Reichagericht and the Courts generally 
can treat a statute passed by the Diet (Reichstag) as unconstitutional, Lowell, 
Governments and Parties in Continental Europe, i. pp. 282-284. ‘ 

5 Reichaverfassung, art. 2; and Labaud, Staatsrecht des Deutschen Reiches, 
8. 10. © Reichaverfassung, art. 76. 

480 APPENDIX 
a a I le 

law amending the Constitution can be carried, if opposed by 
fourteen votes in the Federal Council (Bundesrath). This gives 
in effect a “veto” on constitutional changes to Prussia and to 
several combinations of other States. 

Certain rights, moreover, are reserved to several States which 
cannot be changed under the Constitution, except with the 
assent of the State possessing the right.’ 

NOTE III 

DISTINCTION BETWEEN A PARLIAMENTARY EXECUTIVE AND 
A NON-PARLIAMENTARY EXECUTIVE 

REPRESENTATIVE government, of one kind or another, exists at 
this moment in most European countries, as well as in all countries 
which come within the influence of European ideas ; there are few 
civilised states in which legislative power is not exercised by a 
wholly, or partially, elective body of a more or less popular or 
representative character. Representative government, however, 
does not mean everywhere one and the same thing. It exhibits 
or tends to exhibit two different forms, or types, which are 
discriminated from each. other by the difference of the relation 
between the executive and the legislature. Under the one form 
of representative government the legislature, or, it may be, the 
elective portion thereof, appoints and dismisses the executive 
which under these circumstances is, in general, chosen from 
among the members of the legislative body. Such an ‘executive 
may appropriately be termed a “parliamentary executive.” 
Under the other form of representative government the execn- 
tive, whether it be an Emperor and his Ministers, or a President 
and his Cabinet, is not appointed by the legislature. Such an 
executive may appropriately be termed a “non-parliamentary 
executive.” As to this distinction between the two forms 
of representative government, which, though noticed of recent 
times by authors of eminence, has hardly been given sufficient 
prominence in treatises on the theory or the practice of the 
English constitution, two or three points are worth attention. 
First, The distinction affords a new principle for the classi- 
fication of constitutions, and brings into light new points both 
of affinity and difference. Thus if the character of polities be 
tested by the nature of their executives, the constitutions of 

1 Reichsverfassung, art. 76. 

TWO FORMS OF EXECUTIVE 481 

England, of Belgium, of Italy, and of the existing French 
Republic, all, it will be found, belong substantially to one and the 
same class ; for under each of these constitutions there exists a 
parliamentary executive. The constitutions, on the other hand, 
of the United States and of the German Empire, as also the con- 
stitution of Franco in the time of the Second Republic, all belong 
to another and different class, since under each of these con- 
stitutions there is to be found a non-parliamentary executive. 
This method of grouping different forms of representative 
government is certainly not without its advantages. It is 
instructive to perceive that the Republican democracy of America 
and the Imperial government of Germany have at least one 
important feature in common, which distinguishes them no less 
from the constitutional monarchy of England than from the 
democratic Republic of France. 

Secondly, The practical power of a legislative body, or parlia- 
ment, greatly depends upon its ability to appoint and dismiss 
the executive ; the possession of this power is the source of at 
least half the authority which, at the present day, has accrued to 
the English House of Commons. The assertion, indeed, would be 
substantially true that parliamentary government, in the full 
sense of that term, does not exist, unless, and until, the members 
of the executive body hold office at the pleasure of parliament, 
and that, when their tenure of office does depend on the 
pleasure of parliament, parliamentary government has reached 
its full development and been transformed into government by 
parliament. But, though this is so, it is equally true that 
the distinction between a constitution with a parliamentary 
executive and a constitution with a non-parliamentary executive 
does not square with the distinction insisted upon in the body 
of this work, between a constitution in which there exists a 
sovereign parliament and a constitution in which there exists 
a non-sovereign parliament. The English Parliament, it is 
true, is a sovereign body, and the real English executive—the 
Cabinet—is in fact, though not in name, a parliamentary execu- 
tive. But the combination of parliamentary sovereignty with a 
parliamentary executive is not essential but accidental. The 
English Parliament has been a sovereign power for centuries, but 
down at any rate to the Revolution of 1689 the government of 
England was in the hands of a non-parliamentary executive. So 
again it is at least maintainable that in Germany the Federal 
Council (Bundesrath) and the Federal Diet (Reichstag) constitute 
together a sovereign legislature.! But no one with recent events 

1 See the Imperial Constitution, Arts. 2 and 78. 
21 

482 APPENDIX 

Pa a es et 

before his eyes can assert that the German Empire is governed 
by a parliamentary executive. In this matter, as in many others, 
instruction may be gained from a study of the history of parlia- 
mentary government in Ireland. In modern times both the 
critics and the admirers of the constitution popularly identified 
with the name of Grattan, which existed from 1782 to 1800, 
feel that there is something strange and perplexing in the 
position of the Irish Parliament. The peculiarity of the case, 
which it is far easier for us to perceive than it was for Grattan 
and his contemporaries, lies mainly in the fact that, while the 
Irish Parliament was from 1782 an admittedly sovereign legisla- 
ture, and whilst it was probably intended by all parties that the 
Irish Houses of Parliament should, in their legislation for Ireland, 
be as little checked by the royal veto as were the English Houses 
of Parliament, yet the Irish executive was as regards the Irish 
Parliament in no sense a parliamentary executive, for it was in 
reality appointed and dismissed by the English Ministry. It 
would be idle to suppose that mere defects in constitutional 
mechanism would in themselves have caused, or that the most 
ingenious of constitutional devices would of themselves have 
averted, the failure of Grattan’s attempt to secure the parlia- 
mentary independence of Ireland. But a critic of constitutions 
may, without absurdity, assert that in 1782 the combination of a 
sovereign parliament with a non-parliamentary executive made 
it all but certain that Grattan’s constitution must either be 
greatly modified or come to an end. For our present purpose, 
however, all that need be noted is that this combination, which 
to modern critics seems a strange one, did in fact exist during 
the whole period of Irish parliamentary independence. And 
as the existence of a sovereign parliament does not necessitate 
the existence of a parliamentary executive, so a parliamentary 
executive constantly coexists with a non-sovereign parliament. 
This is exemplified by the constitution of Belgium as of every 
English colony endowed with representative institutions and 
responsible government, 

The difference again between a parliamentary and a non- 
parliamentary executive, though it covers, does not correspond 
with a distinction, strongly insisted upon by Bagehot, between 
Cabinet Government and Presidential Government.! Cabinet 
Government, as that term is used by him and by most writers, 
is one form, and by far the most usual form, of a parliamentary 
executive, and the Presidential Government of America, which 
Bagehot had in his mind, is one form, though certainly not the 

? See Bagehot, English Constitution (ed. 1878), pp. 16 and following. 

TWO FORMS OF EXECUTIVE 483 

only form, of a non-parliamentary executive. But it would be 
easy to imagine a parliamentary executive which was not a 
Cabinet, and something of the sort, it may be suggested, actually 
existed in France during the period when Monsieur Thiers and 
Marshal MacMahon were each successively elected chief of the 
executive power by the French National Assembly,’ and there 
certainly may exist a non-parliamentary executive which cannot 
be identified with Presidential government. Such for example 
is at_ the present moment the executive of the German Empire. 
The Emperor is ita real head ; he is not a President ; neither he, 
nor the Ministers he appoints, are appointed or dismissible by 
the body which we may designate as the Federal Parliament. 

Thirdly, The English constitution as we now know it presenta 
here, as elsewhere, more than one paradox. The Cabinet is, in 
reality and in fact, a parliamentary executive, for it is in truth 
chosen, though by a very indirect process, and may be dismissed 
by the House of Commons, and its members are invariably 
selected from among the members of one or other House of 
Parliament. But, in appearance and in name, the Cabinet is 
now what it originally was, a non-parliamentary executive ; every 
Minister is the servant of the Crown, and is in form appointed 
and dismissible, not by the House of Commons, nor by the 
Houses of Parliament, but by the King. 

It is a matter of curious speculation, whether the English 
Cabinet may not at this moment be undergoing a gradual and, 
as yet, scarcely noticed change of character, under which it may 
be transformed from a parliamentary into a non-parliamentary 
executive. The possibility of such a change is suggested by the 
increasing authority of the electorate. Even as it is, a general 
election may be in effect, though not in name, a popular election 
of a particular statesman to the Premiership. It is at any rate 
conceivable that the time may come when, though all the forms 
of the English constitution remain unchanged, an English Prime 
Minister will be as truly elected to office by a popular vote as is 
an American President. It should never be forgotten that the 
American President is theoretically elected by electors who never 
exercise any personal choice whatever, and is in fact chosen by 
citizens who have according to the letter of the constitution 
no more right to elect a President than an English elector has 
to elect a Prime Minister. 

Fourthly, Each kind of executive possesses certain obvious 
merita and certain obvious defects. a 

A parliamentary executive, which for the sake of simplicity we 

1 See Hélie, Les Constitutions de la France, pp. 1860, 1397. 

484 APPENDIX 

may identify with a Cabinet, can hardly come into conflict with 
the legislature, or, at any rate, with that part of it by which 
the Cabinet is appointed and kept in power. Cabinet government 
has saved England from those conflicta between the executive and 
the legislative power which in the United States have impeded the 
proper conduct of public affairs, and in France, as in some other 
countries, have given rise to violence and revolution. A par- 
liamentary Cabinet must from the necessity of the case be 
intensely sensitive and amenable to the fluctuations of* parlia- 
mentary opinion, and be anxious, in matters of administration 
no less than in matters of legislation, to meet the wishes, and 
even the fancies, of the body to which the Ministry owes its 
existence. The “flexibility,” if not exactly of the constitution 
yet of our whole English system of government, depends, in 
practice, quite as much upon the nature of the Cabinet as upon 
the legal sovereignty of the English Parliament. But Cabinet 
government is inevitably marked by a defect which is nothing 
more than the wrong side, so to speak, of its merits. A parlia- 
mentary executive must by the law of its nature follow, or tend 
to follow, the lead of Parliament. Hence under a system of 
Cabinet government the administration of affairs is apt, in all 
its details, to reflect not only the permanent will, but also the 
temporary wishes, or transient passions and fancies, of a parlia- 
mentary majority, or of the electors from whose good will the 
majority derives its authority. A parliamentary executive, in 
short, is likely to become the creature of the parliament by which 
it is created, and to share, though in a modified form, the weak- 
nesses which are inherent in the rule of an elective assembly. 
The merits and defects of a non-parliamentary executive are 
the exact opposite of the merits and defects of a parliamentary 
executive. Each form of administration is strong where the 
other is weak, and weak where the other is strong. ‘The strong 
point of a non-parliamentary executive is its comparative inde- 
pendence. Wherever representative government exists, the head 
of the administration, be he an Emperor or a President, of course 
prefers to be on good terms with and to have the support of the 
legislative body. But the German Emperor need not pay any- 
thing like absolute deference to the wishes of the Diet; an 
American President can, if he chooses, run counter to the 
opinion of Congress. Either Emperor or President, if he be 
a man of strong will and decided opinions, can in many 
respects give effect as head of the executive to his own views 
of sound policy, even though he may, for the moment, offend 
not only the legislature but also the electors. Nor can it be 

TWO FORMS OF EXECUTIVE 485 

ye 

denied that the head of a non-patliamentary executive may, 
in virtue of his independence, occasionally confer great benefits 
on the nation. Many Germans would now admit that the King 
of Prussia and Prince Bismarck did, just because the Prussian 
executive was in fact, whatever the theory of the constitution, 
@ non-parliamentary executive, pursue a policy which, though 
steadily opposed by the Prussian House of Representatives, laid 
the foundation of German power. There was at least one 
occasion, and probably more existed, on which President Lincoln 
rendered an untold service to the United States by acting, in 
defiance of the sentiment of the moment, on his own conviction 
as to the course required by sound policy. But an executive 
which does not depend for its existence on parliamentary sup- 
port, clearly may, and sometimes will, come into conflict with 
parliament. The short history of the second French Republic 
is, from the election of Louis Napoleon to the Presidency down 
to the Coup d'Etat of the 2nd of December, little else than 
the story of the contest between the French executive and the 
French legislature. This struggle, it may be said, arose from 
the peculiar position of Louis Napoleon as being at once the 
President of the Republic and the representative of the Napole- 
onic dynasty. But the contest between Andrew Johnson and 
Congress, to give no other examples, proves that a conflict 
between a non-parliamentary executive and the legislature may 
arise where there is no question of claim to a throne, and among 
& people far more given to respect the law of the land than are 
the French. 

Fifthly, The founders of constitutions have more than once 
attempted to create a governing body which should combine the 
characteristics, and exhibit, as it was hoped, the merits without 
the defects both of a parliamentary and of a non-parliamentary 
executive. The means used for the attainment of this end have 
almost of necessity been the formation under one shape or 
another of an administration which, while created, should not be 
dismissible, by the legislature. These attempts to construct a 
semi-parliamentary executive repay careful study, but have not 
been crowned, in general, with success. 

The Directory which from 1795 to 1799 formed the govern- 
ment of the French Republic was, under a very complicated 
system of choice, elected by the two councils which constituted 
the legislature or parliament of the Republic. The Directors 
could not be dismissed by the Councils. Every year one Director 
at least was to retire from office. ‘The foresight,” it has 
been well said, ‘‘of [the Directorial] Constitution was infinite : 

486 APPENDIX 
ks ae eee 

“it prevented popular violence, the encroachments of power, and 
‘provided for all the perils which the different crises of the 
“Revolution had displayed. If any Constitution could have 
“become firmly established at that period [1795], it was the 
“directorial constitution.”! It lasted for four years. Within 
two years the majority of the Directory and the Councils were at 
open war. Victory was determined in favour of the Directors 
by a coup d'état, followed by the transportation of their opponents 
in the legislature. 

It may be said, and with truth, that the Directorial Consti- 
tution never had a fair trial, and that at a time when the forces 
of reaction and of revolution were contending for supremacy with 
alternating success and failure, nothing but the authority of 
a successful general could have given order, and no power what- 
ever could have given constitutional liberty, to France. In 1875 
France was again engaged in the construction of a Republican 
Constitution. The endeavour was again made to create an 
executive power which should neither be hostile to, nor yet 
absolutely dependent upon, the legislature. The outcome of 
these efforts was the system of Presidential government, which 
nominally still exists in France. The President of the Republic 
is elected by the National Assembly, that is, by the Chamber of 
Deputies and the Senate (or, as we should say in England, by 
the two Houses of Parliament) sitting together. He holds office 
for a fixed period of seven years, and is re-eligible ; he possesses, 
nominally at least, considerable powers ; he appoints the Ministry 
or Cabinet, in whose deliberations he, sometimes at least, takes 
part, and, with the concurrence of the Senate, can dissolve the 
Chamber of Deputies. The Third French Republic, as we all 
know, has now lasted for thirty-eight years, and the present 
Presidential Constitution has been in existence for thirty-three 
years. There is no reason, one may hope, why the Republic 
should not endure for an indefinite period ; but the interesting 
endeavour to form a semi-parliamentary executive may already be 
pronounced a failure. Of the threatened conflict between Marshal 
MacMahon and the Assembly, closed by his resignation, we 
need say nothing; it may in fairness be considered the last 
effort of reactionists to prevent the foundation of a Republican 
Commonwealth. The breakdown of the particular experiment 
with which we are concerned is due to the events which have 
taken place after MacMahon’s retirement from office. The 
government of France has gradually become a strictly parlia- 
mentary executive. Neither President Grévy nor President 

' Mignet, French Revolution (English translation), p. 303. 

TWO FORMS OF EXECUTIVE 487 

een tee ee SL SS 

Carnot attempted to be the real head of the administration. 
President Faure and President Loubet followed in their steps. 
Each of these Presidents filled, or tried to fill, the part, not 
of a President, in the American sense of the word, but of a 
constitutional King. Nor is this all. As long as the President’s 
tenure of office was in practice independent of the will of 
the Assembly, the expectation was reasonable that, whenever a 
statesman of vigour and reputation was called to the Presidency, the 
office might acquire a new character, and the President become, 
as were in a sense both Thiers and MacMahon, the real head of 
the Republic. But the circumstances of President Grévy’s fall, as 
also of President Casimir Périer’s retirement from office, show that 
the President, like his ministers, holds his office in the last resort by 
the favour of the Assembly. It may be, and no doubt is, a more 
difficult matter for the National Assembly to dismiss a President 
than to change a Ministry. Still the President is in reality 
dismissible by the legislature. Meanwhile the real executive 
is the Ministry, and a French Cabinet is, to judge from all 
appearances, more completely subject than is an English Cabinet 
to the control of an elective chamber. The plain truth is that 
the semi-parliamentary executive which the founders of the 
Republic meant to constitute has turned out a parliamentary 
executive of a very extreme type. 

The statesmen who in 1848 built up the fabric of the 
Swiss Confederation have, it would seem, succeeded in an 
achievement which has twice at least baffled the ingenuity of 
French statesmanship. The Federal Council! of Switzerland is 
a Cabinet or Ministry elected, but not dismissible, by each 
Federal Assembly. For the purpose of the election the Nutional 
Council and the Council of States sit together. The National 
Council continues in existence for three years. The Swiss 
Ministry being elected for three years by each Federal Assembly 
holds office from the time of its election until the first meeting 
of the next Federal Assembly. The working of this system is 
noteworthy. The Swiss Government is elective, but as it is 
chosen by each Assembly Switzerland thus escapes the turmoil 
of a presidential election, and each new Assembly begins its 
existence in harmony with the executive. The Council, it is 
true, cannot be dismissed by the legislature, and the legislature 
cannot be dissolved by the Council. But conflicts between the 
Government and the Assembly are unknown. Switzerland is 
the most democratic country in Europe, and democracies are 

1 As to the character of the Swiss Federal Council, see Lowell, Governments 
and Parties in Continental Europe, ii. pp. 191-208. 

488 APPENDIX 

supposed, not without reason, to be fickle; yet the Swiss 
executive power possesses a permanence and stability which 
does not characterise any parliamentary Cabinet. An English 
Ministry, to judge by modern experience, cannot often retain 
power for more than the duration of one parliament; the 
Cabinets of Louis Philippe lasted on an average for about three 
years; under the Republic the lifetime of a French administra- 
tion is measured by months. The members of the Swiss 
Ministry, if we may use the term, are elected only for three 
years; they are however re-eligible, and re-election is not the 
exception but the rule. The men who make up the administra- 
tion are rarely changed. You may, it is said, find among them 
statesmen who have sat in the Council for fifteen or sixteen 
years consecutively. This permanent tenure of office does not, 
it would seem, depend upon the possession by particular leaders 
of extraordinary personal popularity, or of immense political 
influence ; it arises from the fact that under the Swiss system 
there is no more reason why the Assembly should not re-elect 
a trusted administrator, than why in England a joint-stock 
company should not from time to time reappoint a chairman 
in whom they have confidence. The Swiss Council, indeed, is—as 
far as a stranger dare form an opinion on a matter of which 
none but Swiss citizens are competent judges—not a Ministry 
or a Cabinet in the English sense of the term. It may be 
described as a Board of Directors appointed to manage the 
concerns of the Confederation in accordance with the articles of 
the Constitution and in general deference to the wishes of the 
Federal Assembly. Theo business of politics is managed by men 
of business who transact national affairs, but are not statesmen 
who, like a Cabinet, are at once the servants and the leaders of a 
parliamentary majority. This system, one is told by observers 
who know Switzerland, may well come to an end. The 
reformers, or innovators, who desire a change in the mode of 
appointing the Council, wish to place the election thereof in the 
hands of the citizens. Such a revolution, should it ever be 
carried out, would, be it noted, create not a parliamentary but 
& non-parliamentary executive.) 

See Adams, Stoiss Confederation, ch. iv. 

THE RIGHT OF SELF-DEFENCE 489 
SSS el et era Lae 

NOTE IV 

THE RIGHT OF SELF-DEFENCE 

How far has an individual a right to defend his person, liberty, 
or property, against unlawful violence by force, or (if we use 
the word “self-defence” in a wider sense than that usually 
assigned to it) what are the principles which, under English law, 
govern the right of self-defence ? ! 

The answer to this inquiry is confessedly obscure and in- 
definite, and does not admit of being given with dogmatic 
certainty ; nor need this uncertainty excite surprise, for the rule 
which fixes the limit to the right of self-help must, from the 
nature of things, be a compromise between the necessity, on the 
one hand, of allowing every citizen to maintain his rights against 
wrongdoers, and the necessity, on the other hand, of suppressing 
private warfare. Discourage self-help, and loyal subjects become 
the slaves of ruffians. Over-stimulate self-assertion, and for the 
arbitrament of the Courts you substitute the decision of the 
sword or the revolver. 

Let it further be remarked that the right of natural self- 
defence, even when it is recognised by the law, “does not imply 
“a right of attacking, for instead of attacking one another for 
“‘injuries past or impending, men need only have recourse to the 
“proper tribunals of justice.” * 

A notion is current,’ for which some justification may be 
found in the loose dicta of lawyers, or the vague language of 
legal text-books, that a man may lawfully use any amount of 
force which is necessary, and not more than necessary, for the 
protection of his legal rights. This notion, however popular, is 
erroneous. If pushed to its fair consequences, it would at 
times justify the shooting of trespassers, and would make it legal 
for a schoolboy, say of nine years old, to stab a hulking bully 
of eighteen who attempted to pull the child’s ears. Some seventy 
years ago or more a worthy Captain Moir carried this doctrine 
out in practice to its extreme logical results. His grounds were 

1 Report of Crimina] Code Commiasion, 1879, pp. 43-46 [C. 2845], Notes A 
and B; Stephen, Oriminal Digest (6th ed.), art. 221; 1 East, P. C. 271-294; 
Foster, Discourse II, ss. 2, 3, pp. 270, 271. 

2 Stephen, Commentaries (8th ed.), iv. pp. 58, 54. 

* This doctrine is attributed by the Commissioners, who in 1879 reported on 
the Criminal Code Bill, to Lord St. Leonards. As 6 matter of criticism it is 
however open to doubt whether Lord St. Leonards held precisely the dogma 
ascribed to him. See Criminal Code Bill Commission, Report [C. 2345}, p. 
44, Note B. 

490 APPENDIX 

infested by trespassers. He gave notice that he should fire at 
any wrongdoer who persisted in the offence. He executed his 
threat, and, after fair warning, shot a trespasser in the arm. The 
wounded lad was carefully nursed at the captain’s expense. He 
unexpectedly died of the wound. The captain was put on his 
trial for murder; he was convicted by the jury, sentenced by 
the judge, and, on the following Monday, hanged by the hang- 
man. He was, it would seem, a well-meaning man, imbued with 
too rigid an idea of authority. He perished from ignorance of 
law. His fate is a warning to theorists who incline to the legal 
heresy that every right may lawfully be defended by the force 
necessary for its assertion. 

The maintainable theories as to the legitimate use of force 
necessary for the protection or assertion of a man’s rights, or in 
- other words the possible answers to our inquiry, are, it will be 
found, two, and two only. 

First Theory. In defence of a man’s liberty, person, or pro- 
perty, he may lawfully use any amount of force which is both 
“necessary ”—1t.e. not more than enough to attain its object— 
and “reasonable ” or “ proportionate ””—1.e. which does not inflict 
upon the wrongdoer mischief out of proportion to the injury 
or mischief which the force used is intended to prevent; and no 
man may use in defending his rights an amount of force which 
is either unnecessary or unreasonable. 

This doctrine of the “legitimacy of necessary and reasonable 
force” is adopted by the Criminal Code Bill Commissioners, It 
had better be given in their own words :-— 

“We take [they write] one great principle of the common law to 
be, that though it sanctions the defence of a man’s person, liberty, and 
property against illegal violence, and permits the use of force to pre- 
vent crimes, to preserve the public peace, and to bring offenders to 
justice, yet all this is subject to the restriction that the force used is 
necessary ; that ia, that the mischief sought to be prevented could not 
be prevented by less violent means; and that the mischief done by, or 
which might reasonably be anticipated from the force used is not dis- 
proportioned to the injury or mischief which it is intended to prevent. 
This last principle will explain and justify many of our suggestions. 
It does not seem to have been universally admitted; and we have 
therefore thought it advisable to give our reasons for thinking that it 

not only ought to be recognised as the law in future, but that it is the 
law at present,”! 

The use of the word “necessary” is, it should be noted, 
somewhat peculiar, since it includes the idea both of necessity 

1 C. C. B, Commission, Report, p. 11. 

THE RIGHT OF SELF-DEFENCE 491 
eee Dnirerre vet iether teinnrrrn ors 1 me ree 

and of reasonableness. When this is taken into account, the 
Commissioners’ view is, it is submitted, as already stated, that 
& man may lawfully use in defence of his rights such an amount 
of force as is needful for their protection and as does not inflict, 
or run the risk of inflicting, damage out of all proportion to the 
injury to be averted, or (if we look at the same thing from the 
other side) to the value of the right to be protected. This doc- 
trine is eminently rational. It comes to us recommended by the 
high authority of four most distinguished judges. It certainly 
represents the principle towards which the law of England tends 
to approximate. But there is at least some ground for the sugges- 
tion that a second and simpler view more accurately represents 
the result of our authorities. 

Second Theory. A man, in repelling an unlawful attack upon 
his person or liberty, is justified in using against his assailant so 
much force, even amounting to the infliction of death, as is 
necessary for repelling the attack—.e. as is needed for self- 
defence ; but the infliction upon a wrongdoer of grievous bodily 
harm, or death, is justified, speaking generally, only by the 
necessities of self-defence —i.e. the defence of life, limb, or 
permanent liberty.! 

This theory may be designated as the doctrine of “the 
legitimacy of force necessary for self-defence.” Its essence is 
that the right to inflict grievous bodily harm or death upon a 
wrongdoer originates in, and is limited by, the right of every 
loyal subject to use the means necessary for averting serious 
danger to life or limb, and serious interference with his personal 
liberty. 

The doctrine of the “legitimacy of necessary and reasonable 
force” and the doctrine of the “legitimacy of force necessary for 
self-defence” conduct in the main, and in most instances, to the 
same practical results. 

On either theory 4, when assaulted by X, and placed in peril 

1 See Stephen, Commentaries (14th ed.), i. p. 79; ili, p. 267; iv. pp. 42-46. 
‘In the case of justifiable self-defence the injured party may repel force with 
force in defence of his person, habitation, or property, against one who manifestly 
intendeth and endeavoureth with violence or surprise to commit a known felony 
upon either. In these cases he is not obliged to retreat, but may pursue his 
adversary 'till he findeth himself out of danger, and if in a conflict between them 
he happeneth to kill, such killing is justifiable. 

“Where a known felony is attempted upon the person, be it to rob or murder, 
here the party assaulted may repel force with force, and even his servant then 
attendant on him, or any other person present, may interpose for preventing 
mischief ; and if death ensueth, the party so interposing will be justified. In this 
case nature and social duty co-operate.”—Foster, Discourse IT. chap. hii. pp. 278, 

274. 

49a APPENDIX 

of his life, may, if he cannot otherwise repel or avoid the assault, 
strike X dead. On the one view, the force used by 4 is both 
necessary and reasonable ; on the other view, the force used by 
A is employed strictly in self-defence. According to either doc- 
trine 4 is not justified in shooting at X because X is wilfully 
trespassing on 4’s land. For the damage inflicted by 4 upon 
X—namely, the risk to X of losing his life—is unreasonable, that 
is, out of all proportion to the injury done to 4 by the trespass, 
and J in firing at a trespasser is clearly using force, not for the 
purpose of self-defence, but for the purpose of defending his pro- 
perty. Both theories, again, are consistent with the elaborate 
and admitted rules which limit a person’s right to wound or slay 
another even in defence of life or limb.1_ The gist of these rules 
is that no man must slay or severely injure another until he has 
done everything he possibly can to avoid the use of extreme 
force. A is struck by @ ruffian, X; 4 has a revolver in his 
pocket. He must not then and there fire upon X, but, to avoid 
crime, must first retreat as far as he can. X pursues; 4 is 
driven up against a wall. Then, and not till then, 4, if he has no 
other means of repelling attack, may justifiably fireat X. Grant 
that, as has been suggested, the minute provisos as to the cir- 
cumstances under which a man assaulted by a ruffian may turn 
upon his assailant, belong to a past state of society, and are more 
or less obsolete, the principle on which they rest is, nevertheless, 
clear and most important. It is, that a person attacked, even by 
a wrongdoer, may not in self-defence use force which is not 
“necessary,” and that violence is not necessary when the person 
attacked can avoid the need for it by retreat ; or, in other words, 
by the temporary surrender of his legal right to stand in a par- 
ticular place—e.g. in a particular-part of a public square, where 
he has a lawful right to stand.? Both theories, in short, have 
reference to the use of “necessary” force, and neither counte- 

1 See Stephen, Criminal Digest (6th ed.), art. 221, but compare Commentaries 
(8th ed.), iv. pp. 54-56 ; and 1 Hale, P. C. 479. The authorities are not precisely 
in agreement as to the right of A to wound X before he has retreated as far as he 
can. But the general principle seems pretty clear. The rule as to the necessity 
for retreat by the person attacked must be always taken in combination with the 
acknowledged right and duty of every man to stop the commission of a felony, 
and with the fact that defence of a man’s house seems to be looked upon by the 
law as nearly equivalent to the defence of his person. ‘‘Ifa thief assaults a true 
man, either abroad or in his house, to rob or kill him, the true man is not bound 
to give back, but may kill the assailant, and it is not felony.”—1 Hale, P. C. 
481. See as to defence of house, 1 East, P. C, 287. : 

2 Stephen, Commentaries (14th ed.), iv. pp. 42-46 ; compare 1 Hale, P. C. 481, 
482 ; Stephen, Criminal Digest, art. 222; Foster, Discourse IT. cap. iii. It should 
be noted that the rule enjoining that a man shall retreat from an assailant before 

he uses force, applies, it would appear, only to the use of such force as may inflict 
gtievous bodily harm or death. 

THE RIGHT OF SELF-DEFENCE 493 

a re ee ee ee 

nances the use of any force which is: more than is necessary for its 
purpose. 4 is assulted by X, he can on neither theory justify 
the slaying or wounding of X, if 4 can provide for his own 
safety simply by locking a door on X. Both theories equally 
well explain how it is that as the intensity of an unlawful assault 
increases, so the amount of force legitimately to be used in self- 
defence increases also, and how defence of the lawful possession 
of property, and especially of a man’s house, may easily turn into 
the lawful defence of a man’s person. ‘A justification of a 
“battery in defence of possession, though it arose in defence of 
“possession, yet in the end it is the defence of the person.” ! 
This sentence contains the gist of the whole matter, but must be 
read in the light of the caution insisted upon by Blackstone, that 
the right of self-protection cannot be used as a justification for 
attack.” 

Whether the two doctrines may not under conceivable circum- 
stances lead to different results, is an inquiry of great interest, 
but in the cases which generally come before the Courts, of no 
great importance. What usually requires determination is how 
far a man may lawfully use all the force necessary to repel an 
assault, and for this purpose it matters little whether the test of 
legitimate force be its “reasonableness” or its “self-defensive 
character.” If, however, it be necessary to choose between the 
two theories, the safest course for an English lawyer is to 
assume that the use of force which inflicts or may inflict griev- 
ous bodily harm or death—of what, in short, may be called 
“extreme” force—is justifiable only for the purpose of strict 
self-defence. 

This view of the right of self-defence, it may be objected, 
restricts too narrowly a citizen’s power to protect himself against 
wrong. 

The weight of this objection is diminished by two reflections. 

For the advancement of public justice, in the first place, every 
man is legally justified in using, and indeed is often bound to 
use, force, which may under some circumstances amount to the 
infliction of death. 

Hence a loyal citizen may lawfully interfere to put an end to 
a breach of the peace, which takes place in his presence, and use 
such force as is reasonably necessary for the purpose.’ Hence, 
too, any private person who is present when any felony is com- 
mitted, is bound by law to arrest the felon, on pain of fine and 

1 Rolle’s Ab. Trespass, g 8. 
2 Blacks. Comm. iv. pp. 183, 184. 
3 See Timothy v. Simpson, 1 C. M. & R. 757. 

494 APPENDIX 

imprisonment if he negligently permit him to escape.! me Where 
“a felony is committed and the felon flyeth from justice, or a 
‘dangerous wound is given, it is the duty of every man to use 
“his best endeavours for preventing an escape. And if in the 
“pursuit the party flying is killed, where he cannot otherwise be 
“overtaken, this will be deemed justifiable homicide. For the 
“pursuit was not barely warrantable; it is what the law 
“requireth, and will punish the wilful neglect of.”? No doubt 
the use of such extreme force is justifiable only in the case of 
felony, or for the hindrance of crimes of violence. But “such 
‘homicide as is committed for the prevention of any forcible and 
“ atrocious crime, is justifiable . . . by the law of England. . . 
“as it stands at the present day. If any person attempts the 
‘robbery or murder of another, or attempts to break open a house 
“in the night-time, and shall be killed in such attempt, either by 
“the party assaulted, or the owner of the house, or the servant 
‘attendant upon either, or by any other person, and interposing 
“to prevent mischief, the slayer shall be acquitted and discharged. 
“This reaches not to any crime unaccompanied with force—as, 
“for example, the picking of pockets; nor to the breaking open 
“of a house in the day-time, unless such entry carries with it an 
“attempt of robbery, arson, murder, or the like.”® Acts there- 
fore which would not be justifiable in protection of a person’s 
own property, may often be justified as the necessary means, 
either of stopping the commission of a crime, or of arresting a 
felon. Burglars rob 4’s house, they are escaping over his garden 
wall, carrying off 4’s jewels with them. 4 is in no peril of his 
life, but he pursues the gang, calls upon them to surrender, and 
having no other means of preventing their escape, knocks down one of 
them, X, who dies of the blow; 4, it would seem, if Foster's 
authority may be trusted, not only is innocent of guilt, but has 
also discharged a public duty.‘ 

Let it be added that where 4 may lawfully inflict grievous 
bodily harm upon X—+.g. in arresting him—X acts unlawfully 

u See Commentaries (14th ed.), iv. p. 309; Hawkins, P. C. book ii. 
cap. 12. 

® Foster, Discourse 11. of Homicide, pp. 271, 272, and compare pp. 273, 274. 

“The intentional infliction of death is not a crime when it is done by any 
peraon . . . in order to arrest a traitor, felon, or pirate, or keep in lawful custody 
a traitor, felon, or pirate, who has escaped, or is about to escape from such 
custody, although such traitor, felon, or pirate, offers no violence to any person.” 
—Stephen, Digest (6th ed.), art. 222. 

* Stephen, Commentaries (8th ed.), iv. pp. 49, 50, and compare 14th ed. p. 40. 

‘ A story told of that eminent man and very learned judge, Mr. Justice Willer, 
and related by an ear-witness, is to the following effect :—Mr. Justice Willes was 
asked: ‘‘If I look into my drawing-room, and see a burglar packing up the 
clock, and he cannot see me, what ought I todo?” Willes replied, as nearly as 

THE RIGHT OF SELF-DEFENCE 495 
Srna eee eee 

in resisting .4, and is responsible for the injury caused to 4 by 
«X’s resistance! 

Every man, in the second place, acts lawfully as long as he 
merely exercises his legal rights, and he may use such moderate 
force as in effect is employed simply in the exercise of such 
rights. 

A is walking along a public path on his way home, X tries 
to stop him ; 4 pushes X aside, X has a fall and is hurt. 4 has 
done no wrong; he has stood merely on the defensive and re- 
pelled an attempt to interfere with his right to go along a public 
way. X thereupon draws a sword and attacks 4 again. It is 
clear that if 4 can in no other way protect himself—eg. by 
running away from X, or by knocking X down—he may use 
any amount of force necessary for his self-defence. He may 
stun X, or fire at X. 

Here, however, comes into view the question of real diffi- 
culty. How far is 4 bound to give up the exercise of his rights, 
in this particular instance the right to walk along a particular 
path, rather than risk the maiming or the killing of X1 

Suppose, for example, that 4 knows perfectly well that X 
claims, though without any legal ground, a right to close the 
particular footpath, and also knows that, if 4 turns down 
another road which will also bring him home, though at the cost 
of a slightly longer walk, he will avoid all danger of an assault 
by xX, or of being driven, in so-called self-defence, to inflict 
grievous bodily harm upon X. 

Of course the case for .4’s right to use any force necessary 
for his purpose maybe put in this way. 4 has a right to push 
X aside. As X’s violence grows greater, 4 has a right to repel 
it. He may thus turn a scuffle over a right of way into a 
struggle for the defence of 4’s life, and so justify the infliction 
even of death upon X. But this manner of looking at the 
matter is unsound. Before 4 is justified in, say, firing at X or 
stabbing X, he must show distinctly that he comes within one 
at least of the two principles which justify the use of extreme 
force against an assailant. But if he can avoid X’s violence 
by going a few yards out of his way, he cannot justify his 
conduct under either of these principles. The firing at X is 

may be: “My advice to you, which I give as a man, as a lawyer, and as an 
English judge, is as follows: In the supposed circumstance this is what you have 
a right to do, and I am by no means sure that it is not your duty to do it. Take 
a double-barrelled gun, carefully load both barrels, and then, without attracting 
the burglar’s attention, aim steadily at his heart and shoot him dead.’’ See 
Saturday Review, Nov. 11, 1893, p. 634. 

1 Foster, Discourse II. p. 272. 

496 APPENDIX 

a et ee ee 

not “reasonable,” for the damage inflicted by 4 upon X in 
wounding him is out of all proportion to the mischief to 4 
which it is intended to prevent—namely, his being forced to 
go a few yards out of his way on his road home. The firing at 
X, again, is not done in strict self-defence, for 4 could have 
avoided all danger by turning into another path. 4 uses force, 
not for the defence of his life, but for the vindication of his 
right to walk along a particular pathway. That this is the true 
view of 4’s position is pretty clearly shown by the old rules 
enjoining a person assaulted to retreat as far as he can before he 
grievously wounds his assailant. 

Reg. v. Hewlett, a case tried as late as 1858, contains judicial 
doctrine pointing in the same direction. 4 was struck by X, 4 
thereupon drew a knife and stabbed X. The judge laid down 
that “unless the prisoner [4] apprehended robbery or some 
“similar offence, or danger to life, or serious bodily danger 
“(not simply being knocked down), he would not be justified 
“in using the knife in self-defence.”! The essence of this 
dictum is, that the force used by 4 was not justifiable, because, 
though it did ward off danger to 4d—namely, the peril of being 
knocked down—it was not necessary for the defence of 4’s life 
or limb, or property. The case is a particularly strong one, 
because .Y was not a person asserting a supposed right, but a 
simple wrongdoer. 

Let the last case be a little varied. Let X be not a ruffian 
but a policeman, who, acting under the orders of the Commissioner 
of Police, tries to prevent 4 from entering the Park at the Marble 
Arch. Let it further be supposed that the Commissioner has 
taken an erroneous view of his authority, and that therefore the 
attempt to hinder 4 from going into Hyde Park at the parti- 
cular entrance does not admit of legal justification. X, under 
these circumstances, is therefore legally in the wrong, and 4 
may, it would seem,? push by X. But is there any reason for 
saying that if 4 cannot simply push X aside he can lawfully use 
the force necessary—e.g. by stabbing X—to effect an entrance ? 
There clearly is none. The stabbing of X is neither a reason- 
able nor a self-defensive employment of force. 

_A dispute, in short, as to legal rights must be settled by legal 
tribunals, “for the King and his Courts are the vindices injuriarum, 

1 Foster & Finlason, 91, per Crowder J. 

? It is of course assumed in this imaginary case that Acts of Parliament are 
not in force empowering the Commissioner of Police to regulate the use of the 
right to enter into the Park. It is not my intention to discuss the effect of the 

Metropolitan Police Acts, or to intimate any opinion as to th 
Commiasioner of Police. : em ie ie 

THE RIGHT OF SELF-DEFENCE 497 

“and will give to the party wronged all the satisfaction he 
“deserves”; no one is allowed to vindicate the strength of 
his disputed rights by the force of his arm. Legal controversies 
are not to be settled by blows. A bishop who in the last cen- 
tury attempted, by means of riot and assault, to make good his 
claim to remove a deputy registrar, was admonished from the 
Bench that his view of the law was erroneous, and was saved 
from the condemnation of the jury only by the rhetoric and the 
fallacies of Erskine.? 

From whatever point therefore the matter be approached, we 
come round to the same conclusion. The only undoubted justi- 
fication for the use of extreme force in the assertion of a man’s 
rights is, subject to the exceptions or limitations already men- 
tioned, to be found in, as it is limited by, the necessities of strict 
self-defence. 

NOTE V 
QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THE RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 

Four important questions connected with the right of public 
meeting require consideration. 

These inquiries are: first, whether there exist any general 
right of meeting in public places? secondly, what is the meaning 
of the term “an unlawful assembly”? thirdly, what are the 
rights of the Crown or its servants in dealing with an unlawful 
assembly ? and fourthly, what are the rights possessed by the 
members of a lawful assembly when the meeting is interfered 
with or dispersed by force ? 

For the proper understanding of the matters under discussion, 
it is necessary to grasp firmly the truth and the bearing of two 
indisputable but often neglected observations. 

The first is that English law does not recognise any special 
right of public meeting either for a political or for any other 
purpose.® 

The right of assembling is nothing more than the result of 
the view taken by our Courts of individual liberty of person and 
individual liberty of speech. 

Interference therefore with a lawful meeting is not an invasion 

1 Stephen, Commentaries (14th ed.), iv. p. 44. 
2 The Bishop of Bangor’s Case, 26 St. Tr. 463. 
3 See chap. vii., ante. 

ge ee ae 

of a public right, but an attack upon the individual rights of 
A or B, and must generally resolve itself into a number of 
assaults upon definite persons, members of the meeting. A 
wrongdoer who disperses a crowd is not indicted or sued for 
breaking up a meeting, but is liable (if at all) to a prosecution 
or an action for assaulting .4, a definite member of the crowd? 
Hence further the answer to the question how far persons 
present at a lawful meeting may resist any attempt to disperse 
the assembly, depends at bottom on a determination of the 
methods prescribed by law to a given citizen 4, for punishing 
or repelling an assault. 

The second of these preliminary observations is that the 
most serious of the obscurities which beset the law of public 
meetings arise from the difficulty of determining how far a citizen 
is legally justified in using force for the protection of his person, 
liberty, or property, or, if we may use the word “self-defence ” 
in its widest sense, from uncertainty as to the true principles 
which govern the right of self-defence.? 

The close connection of these introductory remarks with the 
questions to be considered will become apparent as we proceed. 

I. Does there exist any general right of meeting in public places ? 

The answer is easy. No such right is known to the law of 
England. 

Englishmen, it is true, meet together for political as well as 
for other purposes, in parks, on commons, and in other open 
spaces accessible to all the world. It is also true that in England 
meetings held in the open air are not subject, as they are in other 
countries—for instance, Belgium—to special restrictions A 
crowd gathered together in a public place, whether they assemble 
for amusement or discussion, to see an acrobat perform his somer- 
saults or to hear a statesman explain his tergiversations, stand 
in the same position as a meeting held for the same purpose in a 
hall or a drawing-room. An assembly convened, in short, for a 
lawful object, assembled in a place which the meeting has a 
right to occupy, and acting in a peaceable manner which inspires 
no sensible person with fear, is a lawful assembly, whether it be 
held in Exeter Hall, in the grounds of Hatfield or Blenheim, or 
in the London parks. With such a meeting no man has a 
right to interfere, and for attending it no man incurs legal 
penalties. 

But the law which does not prohibit open-air meetings does 

1 Bee Redford v. Birley, 1 St. Tr. (n. s,) 1017. 
2 See Note IV., ante. 

QUESTIONS AS TO RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 499 

not, speaking generally, provide that there shall be spaces where 
the public can meet in the open air, either for political dis- 
cussion or for amusement. There may of course be, and indeed 
there are, special localities which by statute, by custom or other- 
Wise, are 80 dedicated to the use of the public as to be available 
for the purpose of public meetings. But speaking in general 
terms, the Courts do not recognise certain spaces as set aside for 
that end. In this respect, again, a crowd of a thousand people 
stand in the same position as an individual person. If 4 wants 
to deliver a lecture, to make a speech, or to exhibit a show, he 
must obtain some room or field which he can legally use for his 
purpose. He must not invade the rights of private property—i.e. 
commit a trespass. He must not interfere with the convenience 
of the public—t.e. create a nuisance. 

The notion that there is such a thing as a right of meeting 
in public places arises from more than one confusion or erroneous 
assumption. The right of public meeting—that is, the right of all 
men to come together in a place where they may lawfully assemble 
for any lawful purpose, and especially for political discussion—is 
confounded with the totally different and falsely alleged right of 
every man to use for the purpose of holding a meeting any place 
which in any sense is open to the public. The two rights, did they 
both exist, are essentially different, and in many countries are regu- 
lated by totally different rules. It is assumed again that squares, 
streets, or roads, which every man may lawfully use, are necessarily 
available for the holding of a meeting. The assumption is false. A 
crowd blocking up a highway will probably be a nuisance in the 
legal, no less than in the popular, sense of the term, for they 
interfere with the ordinary citizen’s right to use the locality in the 
way permitted to him by law. Highways, indeed, are dedicated 
to the public use, but they must be used for passing and going 
along them,! and the legal mode of use negatives the claim of 
politicians to use a highway as a forum, just as it excludes the 
claim of actors to turn it into an open-air theatre. The crowd 
who collect, and the persons who cause a crowd, for whatever 
purpose, to collect in a street, create a nuisance.” The claim on 
the part of persons so minded to assemble in any numbers and 
for so long a time as they please, to remain assembled “ to the 
“ detriment of others having equal rights, is in its nature irrecon- 
“cilable with the right of free passage, and there is, so far as we 
“have been able to ascertain, no authority whatever in favour of 

1 Dovaston v. Pa 2 Hy. Bl. 527. , 
SR RAL AY. Carlile, 8 C. & P. 628, 636; the Tramways Case, the Times, 7th 

September 1888. 

kao _ APPENDIX 
Se Ur ee a eS 

“it”. The general public cannot make out a right to hold meet- 
ings even on a common.’ The ground of popular delusions as to 
the right of public meeting in open places is at bottom the prevalent 
notion that the law favours meetings held for the sake of political 
discussion or agitation, combined with the tacit assumption that 
when the law allows a right it provides the means for its exercise. 
No.ideas can be more unfounded. English law no more favours 
or provides for the holding of political meetings than for the 
giving of public concerts, A man has a right to hear an orator 
as he has a right to hear a band, or to eat a bun. But each 
right must be exercised subject to the laws against trespass, 
against the creation of nuisances, against theft. 

The want of a so-called forum may, it will be said, prevent ten 
thousand worthy citizens from making a lawful demonstration of 
their political wishes. The remark is true, but, from a lawyer's 
point of view, irrelevant. Every man has a right to see a Punch 
show, but if Punch is exhibiting in a theatre for money, no man 
can see him who cannot provide the necessary shilling. Every man 
has a right to hear a band, but if there be no place where a band 
can perform without causing a nuisance, then thousands of excel- 
lent citizens must forgo their right to hear music. Every man has 
a right to worship God after his own fashion, but if all the land- 
owners of a parish refuse ground for the building of a Wesleyan 
chapel, parishioners must forgo attendance at a Methodist place 
of worship. 

II. What is the meaning of the term “an unlawful assembly” ? 

The expression “unlawful assembly” does not signify any 
meeting of which the purpose is unlawful. If, for example, five 
cheats meet in one room to concoct a fraud, to indite a libel, or 
to forge a bank-note, or to work out a scheme of perjury, they 
assemble for an unlawful purpose, but they can hardly be said to 
constitute an “unlawful assembly.” These words are, in English 
law, a term of art. This term has a more or less limited and 
definite signification, and has from time to time been defined by 
different authorities * with varying degrees of precision. The 

: Ex parte ets 21 Q. B. D. 191, 197 ; per Curiam. 
Batley v. Williamson, LL R. 8 Q. B. 118; De Af A ropolita: 

Board of Works, 5 Q. B. D. 155. mg ep SLs r 

3 See Hawkins, P. C. book i. cap. 65, sa, 9, 11; Blackstone, iv. p. 146; 
Stephen, Commentaries (14th od.), iv. p. 174 ; Stephen, Criminal Digest, art. 75; 
Criminal Code Bill Commission, Draft Code, sec. 84, p. 80; Rez v. Pinney, 
5C, & P. 254 . Rez v. Hunt, 1 St. Tr. (n.8.) 171; Redford v. Birley, thid. 1071 ; 
merge as: nee, "a BES ak 3 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 1037, 1082 ; Beatty 
v. nks, . B. D. : . v. M‘Naughton (Irish), 14 Cox, C. C. 576 : 
O'Kelly v. Harvey (Irish), 15 Cox, 0. C. 485, — pel a dpe 

QUESTIONS AS TO RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 501 

EE 

definitions vary, for the most part, rather in words than in 
substance. Such differences as exist have, however, a twofold 
importance. They show, in the first place, that the circumstances 
which may render a meeting an unlawful assembly have not been 
absolutely determined, and that some important questions with 
regard to the necessary characteristics of such an assembly are 
open to discussion. They show, in the second place, that the 
rules defining the right of public meeting are the result of 
judicial legislation, and that the law which has been created may 
be further developed by the judges, and hence that any lawyer 
bent’ on determining the character of a given meeting must 
consider carefully the tendency, as well as the words, of reported 
judgments. 

The general and prominent characteristic of an unlawful 
assembly (however defined) is, to any one who candidly studies 
the authorities, clear enough. It is a meeting of persons who 
either intend to commit or do commit, or who lead others to 
entertain a reasonable fear that the meeting will commit, a breach 
of the peace. This actual or threatened breach of the peace is, 
so to speak, the essential characteristic or “ property ” connoted 
by the térm “unlawful assembly.” A careful examination, 
however, of received -descriptions or definitions and of the 
authoritative statements contained in Sir James Stephen’s Digest 
and in the Draft Code drawn by the Criminal Code Commis- 
sioners, enables an inquirer to frame a more or less accurate 
definition of an “unlawful assembly.” 

It may (it is submitted) be defined as any meeting of three 
or more persons who 

(i.) Assemble to commit, or, when assembled do commit, a 

breach of the peace ; or 
(ii.) Assemble with intent to commit a crime by open 
force ; or 

(iii.) Assemble for any common purpose, whether lawful or 
unlawful, in such a manner as to give firm and 
courageous persons in the neighbourhood of the 
assembly reasonable cause to fear a breach of the 
peace, in consequence of the assembly ; or 

[(iv.) Assemble with intent to incite disaffection among the 
Crown’s subjecte, to bring the Constitution and 
Government of the realm, as by law established, into 
contempt, and generally to carry out, or prepare for 
carrying out, a public conspiracy.”] 

1 O'Kelly v. Ha (Irish), 15 Cox, C. C. 435. The portion of this definition 
contained Pe Leeks ost perhaps be considered as, in England, of doubtful 

502 APPENDIX 

The following points require notice :— 

1. A meeting is an unlawful assembly which either disturbs 
the peace, or inspires reasonable persons in its neighbourhood 
with a fear that it will cause a breach of the peace. 

Hence the state of public feeling under which a meeting is 
convened, the class and the number of the persons who come 
together, the mode in which they meet (whether, for instance, 
they do or do not carry arms), the place of their meeting (whether, 
for instance, they assemble on an open common or in the midst 
of a populous city), and various other circumstances, must all be 
taken into account in determining whether a given meeting is 
an unlawful assembly or not. 

2. A meeting need not be the less an unlawful assembly 
because it meets for a legal object. 

A crowd collected to petition for the release of a prisoner or 
to see an acrobatic performance, though meeting for a lawful 
object, may easily be, or turn into, an unlawful assembly. The 
lawfulness of the aim with which a hundred thousand people 
assemble may affect the reasonableness of fearing that a breach 
of the peace will ensue. But the lawfulness of their object does 
not of itself make the meeting lawful. 

3. A meeting for an unlawful purpose is not, as already 
pointed out, necessarily an unlawful assembly. 

The test of the character of the assembly is whether the 
meeting does or does not contemplate the use of unlawful force, 
or does or does not inspire others with reasonable fear that 
eae: force will be used—.e, that the King’s peace will be 

roken. 

4. There is some authority for the suggestion that a meeting 
for the purpose of spreading sedition, of exciting class against 
class, or of bringing the constitution of the country into contempt, 
is tpso facto an unlawful assembly,} and that a meeting to pro- 
mote an unlawful conspiracy of a public character, even though 
it does not directly menace a breach of the peace, is also an 
unlawful assembly. 

This is a matter on which it is prudent to speak with reserve 
and hesitation, and to maintain a suspended judgment until the 

authority (see, however, Reg. v. Ernest Jones, 6 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 788, 816, 817, 
summing up of Wilde, C. J., and Reg. v. Fussell, ibid. 728, 764, summing up of 
Wilde, C.J -), but would, it is conceived, certainly hold good if the circumstances 
of the time were such that the seditious proceedings at the meeting would be 
likely to endanger the public peace. 

1 See Redford v. Birley, 1 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 1071; Rex v. Hunt, ibid. 171; Rex 
V. Morris, ibid. 521; Reg. v. M‘Naughton (Irish), 14 Cox. C. C. 572; O'Kelly 
v. Harvey (Irish), 15 Cox, C. C. 485; Reg. v. Burns, 16 Cox, C. C. 855; Reg. v. 
Ernest Jones, 6 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 783 ; Reg. v. Fussell, ibid. 728. 

QUESTIONS AS TO RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 503 
ee 

point suggested has come fairly before the English Courts. The 
true rule (possibly) may be, that a meeting assembled for the 
promotion of a purpose which is not only criminal, but also if 
carried out will promote a breach of the peace, is iteelf an 
unlawful assembly. 

5. Two questions certainly remain open for decision. 

Is a meeting an unlawful assembly because, though the 
meeting itself is peaceable enough, it excites reasonable dread 
of future disturbance to the peace of the realm; as where 
political leaders address a meeting in terms which it is reason- 
ably supposed may, after the meeting has broken up, excite 
insurrection ? 

The answer to this inquiry is doubtful. 

Need again the breach of the peace, or fear thereof, which 
gives a meeting the character of illegality, be a breach caused by 
the members of the meeting ? 

To this inquiry an answer has already beon given in the body 
of this treatise.? 

The reply is, in general terms, that, on the one hand, a 
meeting which, as regards its object and the conduct of the 
members of it, is perfectly lawful, does not become an unlawful 
assembly from the mere fact that possibly or probably it may 
cause wrongdoers who dislike the meeting to break the peace,® 
but, on the other hand, a meeting which, though perhaps not in 
strictness an unlawful assembly, does from some illegality in its 
object, or in the conduct of its members, cause a breach of the 
peace by persons opposed to the meeting, may thereby become an 
unlawful assembly,‘ and a meeting which, though in every way 
perfectly lawful, if it in fact causes a breach of the peace on 
the part of wrongdoers who dislike the meeting may, if the peace 
can be restored by no other means, be required by the magistrates or 

1 gee Rex v. Hunt, 1 8t. Tr. (nm. 3.) 171; Rex. Dewhurst, wid, 530, 599. 
‘Upon the subject of terror, there may be cases in which, from the general 
“ appearance of the meeting, there could be no fear of immediate mischief pro- 
“duced before that assembly should disperse ; and I am rather disposed to think 
“that the probability or likelihood of immediate terror before the meeting should 
* disperse is necessary in order to fix the charge upon that second count to which I 
“have drawn your attention. But if the evidence satisfies you there was a present 
“fear produced of future rising, which future rising would be a terror and alarm 
“to the neighbourhood, I should then desire that you would Present that as your 
“ Gnding in the shape of what I should then take it to be, a special verdict”: pet 
Bailey, J. See also Reg. v. Ernest Jones, 6 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 783; Rey, w Psst, 
sid. 723. we 

2 Be tia F, Gilibanks, 9 Q. B. D. 808; Reg. v. Justices of Londonderry, 2 
L R Ir. 440, pp. 461, 462, judgment of Holmes, J. 

4 Wise v. Dunning [1902], 1 K. B. 187. 

504 APPENDIX 
Peg nek oe ee re 

other persons in authority to break up, and on the members of 
the meeting refusing to disperse, becomes an unlawful assembly. 

III. What are the rights of the Crown or its servants in dealing 
with an unlawful assembly ? ; 

1. Every person who takes part in an unlawful assembly is 
guilty of a misdemeanour, and the Crown may therefore prosecute 
every such person for his offence. : 

Whether a given man 4, who is present at a particular 
meeting, does thereby incur the guilt of “taking part” in an 
unlawful assembly, is in each case a question of fact. 

A, though present, may not be a member of the meeting ; he 
may be there accidentally ; he may know nothing of its character ; 
the crowd may originally have assembled for a lawful purpose ; 
the circumstances, ¢.g. the production of arms, or the outbreak 
of a riot, which render the meeting unlawful, may have taken 
place after it began, and in these transactions 4 may have taken 
no part. Hence the importance of an official notice, eg. by a 
Secretary of State, or by a magistrate, that a meeting is con- 
vened for a criminal object. A citizen after reading the notice 
or proclamation, goes to the meeting at his peril. If it turns out 
in fact an unlawful assembly, he cannot plead ignorance of its 
character as a defence against the charge of taking part in the 
meeting.” 

2. Magistrates, policemen, and all loyal citizens not only are 
entitled, but indeed are bound to disperse an unlawful assembly, 
and, if necessary, to do so by the use of force; and it is a gross 
error to suppose that they are bound to wait until a riot has 
occurred, or until the Riot Act has been read.* The prevalence 
of this delusion was the cause, during the Gordon Riots, of 
London being for days in the hands of the mob. The mode 
of dispersing a crowd when unlawfully assembled, and the 
extent of force which it is reasonable to use, differ according 
to the circumstances of each case. 

3. If any assembly becomes a riot—.e. has begun to act in a 
tumultuous manner to the disturbance of the peace—a magistrate 
on being informed that twelve or more persons are unlawfully, 
riotously, and tumultuously assembled together to the disturbance 
of the public peace, is bound to make the short statutable pro- 
clamation which is popularly known as “reading the Riot Act.” 4 

? On this point see especially Humphries v. Connor, 17 Ir. C. L. R. 1. 
2 Rex v, Fursey, 6 C. & P. 81; 3 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 543, 

* Reg. v. Neale, 9 C. & P. 431; Burdet v. Abbot, 4 Taunt. 401, 449. See 
pp. 285, 286, ante. 

* 1 Geo. I. stat. 2, cap. 5, s, 2. 

QUESTIONS AS TO RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 505 

The consequences are as follows: first, that any twelve 
rioters who do not disperse within an hour thereafter, are guilty 
of felony ; and, secondly, that the magistrate and those acting 
with him may, after such hour, arrest the rioters and disperse the 
meeting by the employment of any amount of force necessary for 
the purpose, and are protected from liability for hurt inflicted or 
death caused in dispersing the meeting. The magistrates are, in 
short, empowered by the Riot Act to read the proclamation before 
referred to, and thereupon, after waiting for an hour, to order 
troops and constables to fire upon the rioters, or charge them 
sword in hand.! It is particularly to be noticed that the powers 
given to magistrates for dealing with riots under the Riot Act 
in no way lessen the common law right of a magistrate, and 
indeed of every citizen, to put an end to a breach of the peace, 
and hence to disperse an unlawful assembly.? 

IV. What are the rights possessed by the members of a lawful 
assembly when the meeting is interfered with or dispersed by force? 

The Salvation Army assemble in a place where they have a 
right to meet, say an open piece of land placed at their disposal 
by the owner, and for a lawful purpose, namely, to hear a 
sermon. Certain persons who think the meeting either objection- 
able or illegal attempt to break it up, or do break it up, by force. 
What, under these circumstances, are the rights of the Salvationists 
who have come to listen toa preacher? This in a concrete form 
is the problem for consideration.® 

An attempt, whether successful or not, to disperse a lawful 
assembly involves assaults of more or- less violence upon the 
persons 4, B, and C who have met together. The wrong thus 
done by the assailants is, as already pointed out, a wrong done, 
not to the meeting—a body which has legally no collective 
rights—but to A, B, or C, an individual pushed, hustled, struck, 
or otherwise assaulted. 

Our problem is, then, in substance—What are the rights of 
A, the member of a meeting, when unlawfully assaulted? And 
this inquiry, in its turn, embraces two different questions, which, 
for clearness sake, ought to be carefully kept apart from each 
other. 

1 See Stephen, Hist. Crim. Law, i. 203; Criminal Code Bill Commission, 
Draft Code, ss. 88, 99. 

2 Rex v. Fursey, 6 C. & P. 81; 3 St. Tr. (n. 6.) 543. 

3 For the sake of convenience, I have taken a meeting of the Salvation Army 
as a typical instance of a lawful public meeting. It should, however, be con- 
stantly remembered that the rights of the Salvationists are neither more nor less 
than those of any other crowd lawfully collected together—e.g. to hear a band 
of music. 

506 APPENDIX 

First, What are the remedies of 4 for the wrong done to 
him by the assault ? 

The answer is easy. 4 has the right to take civil, or (subject 
to one reservation) criminal proceedings against any person, be 
he an officer, a soldier, a commissioner of police, a magistrate, a 
policeman, or a private ruffian, who is responsible for the assault 
upon 4. If, moreover, 4 be killed, the person or persons by 
whom his death has been caused may be indicted, according to 
. circumstances, for manslaughter or murder. 

This statement as to 4’s rights, or (what is, however, the 
same thing from another point of view) as to the liabilities of 
A’s assailants, is made subject to one reservation. There exists 
considerable doubt as to the degree and kind of liability of 
soldiers (or possibly of policemen) who, under the orders of a 
superior, do some act (¢.g. arrest 4 or fire at 4) which is not on 
the face of it unlawful, but which turns out to be unlawful 
because of some circumstance of which the subordinate was not 
in a position to judge, as, for example, because the meeting was not 
technically an unlawful assembly, or because the officer giving 
the order had in some way exceeded his authority. 

“I hope [says Willes, J.] I may never have to determine that 
difficult question, how far the orders of a superior officer are a 
justification. Were I compelled to determine that question, I should 
probably hold that the orders are an absolute justification in time of 
actual war—at all events, as regards enemies or foreigners—and, I 
should think, even with regard to English-born subjects of the Crown, 
unless the orders were such as could not legally be given. I believe 
that the better opinion ia, that an officer or soldier, acting under the 
orders of his superior—not being necessarily or manifestly illegal— 
would be justified by his orders.” } 

A critic were rash who questioned the suggestion of a jurist 
whose dicta are more weighty than most considered judgments. 
The words, moreover, of Mr. Justice Willes enounce a principle 
which is in itself pre-eminently reasonable. If its validity be 
not admitted, results follow as absurd as they are unjust : every 
soldier is called upon to determine on the spur of the moment 
legal subtleties which, after a lengthy consultation, might still 
perplex experienced lawyers, and the private ordered by his 
commanding officer to take part in the suppression of a riot runs 
the risk, if he disobeys, of being shot by order of a court-martial, 
and, if he obeys, of being hanged under the sentence of a judge. 

1 Keighly v. Bell, 4 F. & F. 763, 790, per Willes, J. See also Note VI. p. 
512, post, Duty of Soldiers called upon to disperse an Unlawful Assembly. 

QUESTIONS AS TO RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 507 

Let it further be carefully noted that the doctrine of Mr. Justice 
Willes, which is approved of by the Criminal Code Commissioners,! 
applies, it would seem, to criminal liability only. The soldier or 
policeman who, without full legal justification, assaults or arrests 
A incurs (it is sukmitted), even though acting under orders, full 
civil liability. 

Secondly, How far is 4 entitled to maintain by force against 
all assailants his right to take part in a lawful public meeting, 
or, in other words, his right to stand in a place where he 
lawfully may stand—e.g. ground opened to A by the owner, for 
& purpose which is in itself lawful—eg. the hearing of an 
address from a captain of the Salvation Army 1 

In order to obtain a correct answer to this inquiry we should 
bear in mind the principles which regulate the right of self- 
defence,? and should further consider what may be the different 
circumstances under which an attempt may be made without 
legal warrant to disperse a meeting of the Salvation Army. The 
attack upon the meeting, or in other words upon 4, may be made 
either by mere wrongdoers, or by persons who believe, however 
mistakenly, that they are acting in exercise of a legal right or in 
discharge of a legal duty. Let each of these cases be examined 
separately. 

Let us suppose, in the first place, that the Salvationists, and 
A among them, are attacked by the so-called Skeleton Army or 
other roughs, and let it further be supposed that the object of the 
assault is simply to break up the meeting, and that therefore, 
if A and others disperse, they are in no peril of damage to life 
or limb. 

A and his friends may legally, it would seem, stand their 
ground, and use such moderate force as amounts to simple 
assertion of the right to remain where they are. 4 and 
his companions may further give individual members of the 
Skeleton Army in charge for a breach of the peace. It 
may, however, happen that the roughs are in large numbers, 
and press upon the Salvationists so that they cannot keep 
their ground without the use of firearms or other weapons. 
The use of such force is in one sense necessary, for the Salva- 
tionists cannot hold their meeting without employing it. Is the 
use of such force legal? The strongest way of putting the case 
in favour of 4 and his friends is that, in firing upon their 
opponents, they are using force to put down a breach of the 
peace. On the whole, however, there can, it is submitted, be 

1 gee C, C. B, “Yommission, Draft Code, ss, 49-53. 
2 Ste Note IV. p. 489, ante, 

508 APPENDIX 
a ete eerie st 

no doubt that the use of firearms or other deadly weapons, to 
maintain their right of meeting, is under the circumstances not 
legally justifiable. ‘Ihe principle on which extreme acts of self- 
defence against a lawless assailant cannot be justified until the 
person assaulted has retreated as far as he can, 1s applicable to 
A, B, C, etc., just as it would be to 4 singly. Each of the 
Salvationists is defending, under the supposed circumstances, not 
his life, but his right to stand on a given plot of ground. 

Next, suppose that the attempt to disperse the Salvationists 
is made, not by the Skeleton Army, but by the police, who act 
under the order of magistrates who hold bond fide, though 
mistakenly,! that a notice from the Home Secretary forbidding 
the Army to meet, makes its meeting an unlawful assembly. 

Under these circumstances, the police are clearly in the 
wrong. A policeman who assaults 4, B, or C, does an act not 
admitting of legal justification. Nor is it easy to maintain that 
the mere fact of the police acting as servants of the Crown in 
supposed discharge of their duty makes it of itself incumbent 
upon 4 to leave the meeting. 

The position, however, of the police differs in two important 
respects from that of mere wrongdoers. Policeman X, when he 
tells 4 to move on, and compels him to do so, does not put 4 
in peril of life or limb, for 4 knows for certain that, if he leaves 
the meeting, he will not be further molested, or that if he allows 
himself to be peaceably arrested, he has nothing to dread but 
temporary imprisonment and appearance before a magistrate, 
who will deal with his rights in accordance with law. Policeman 
X, further, asserts bond fide a supposed legal right to make 4 
withdraw from a place where X believes 4 has no right to stand ; 
there is a dispute between 4 and X as toa matter of law. This 
being the state of affairs, it is at any rate fairly arguable that 
A, B, and C have a right to stand simply on the defensive,? and 

1 See Beatty v. Gillbanks, 9 Q. B. D. 308. 

* The legality, however, of even this amount of resistance to the police is 
doubtful. ‘Any man who advises a public assembly when the police come there 
to disperse them, to stand their ground shoulder by shoulder, if that means to 
resist the police, although it might not mean to resist by striking them ; yet if it 
meant to resist the police and not to disperse, that was illegal advice. If the 
police had interfored with them, they were not at liberty to resist in any such 
circumstances ; they ought to have dispersed by law, and have sought their 
remedy against any unjust interference afterwards. . . . This is a body of police 
acting under the responsibility of the law, acting under the orders of those who 
would be responsible for the orders which they gave, charged with the public 
peace, and who would have authority to disperse when they received those 
orders, leaving those who should give them a deep responsibility if they should 
improperly interfere with the exercise of any such public duties. . . . Gentlemen, 
the peaceable citizens are not in the performance of their duty if they stand 
shoulder to shoulder, and when the police come and order the assembly to dis- 

QUESTIONS AS TO RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING 509 

eee 

remain where they are as long as they can do so without inflict- 
-ing grievous bodily harm upon X and other policemen. Suppose, 
however, as is likely to be the fact, that, under the pressure of a 
large body of constables, the Salvationists cannot maintain their 
meeting without making use of arms—e.g., using bludgeons, 
swords, pistols, or the like. They have clearly no right to make 
use of this kind of force. 4 and his friends are not in peril of 
their lives, and to kill a policeman in order to secure 4 the 
right of standing in a particular place is to inflict a mischief out 
of all proportion to the importance of the mischief to 4 which 
he wishes to avert.! 4, therefore, if he stabs or stuns X, can 
on no theory plead the right of self-defence. 4 and X further 
are, as already pointed out, at variance on a question of legal 
rights. This is a matter to be determined not by arms, but 
by an action at law. 

Let it further be noted that the supposed case is the most 
unfavourable for the police which can be imagined. They may 
well, though engaged in hindering what turns out to be a lawful 
meeting, stand in a much better situation than that of assailants. 
The police may, under orders, have fully occupied and filled 
up the ground which the Salvationists intend to use. When 
the Salvationists begin arriving, they find there is no place 
where they can meet. Nothing but the use of force, and 
indeed of extreme force, can drive the police away. This force 
the Salvation Army cannot use ; if they did, they would be using 
violence not on any show of self-defence, but to obtain possession 
of a particular piece of land. Their only proper course is the 
vindication of their rights by proceedings in Court. 

Of the older cases, which deal with the question how far it is 
justifiable to resist by violence an arrest made by an officer of 
justice without due authority, it is difficult to make much use 
for the elucidation of the question under consideration,® for in 
these cases the matter discussed seems often to have been not 
whether .4’s resistance was justifiable, but whether it amounted 
to murder or only to manslaughter. There are, however, one or 
two more or less recent decisions which have a real bearing on 
the right of the members of a public meeting to resist by force 
attempts to disperse it. And these cases are, on the whole, 

perse, they do not disperse, but insist on remaining, they are not in the peaceable 
execution of any right or duty, but the contrary, and from that moment they 
become an illegal assembly.” Reg. v. Ernest Jones, 6 St. Tr. (nu. s.) 783, 811, 
summing up of Wilde, C. J. 

1 Rex v. Fursey, 6 C. & P. 81; 3 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 543. 

2 See, ¢.g., Dixon’s Case, 1 East, P. C. 313 ; Borthwick's Case, ibid. ; Wither's 
Case, 1 East, P. C. 233, 309 ; Tooley's Case, 2 Lord Raymond, 1296. 

510 APPENDIX 

when properly understood, not inconsistent with the inferences 
already drawn from general principles. The doctrine laid down 
in Reg. v. Hewlett, that 4 ought not to inflict grievous bodily 
harm even upon X a wrongdoer unless in the strictest self- 
defence, is of the highest importance. Rex v. Fursey,? a decision 
of 1833, has direct reference to the right of meeting. Ata 
public meeting held that year in London, 4 carried an American 
flag which was snatched from him by X, a policeman, whereupon 
A stabbed X. He was subsequently indicted under 9 Geo. L 
c. 31, 8. 12, and it appears to have been laid down by the judge 
that though, if the meeting was a legal one, X had no right to 
snatch away 4’s flag, still that even on the supposition that the 
meeting was a lawful assembly, 4, if X had died of his wound, 
would have been guilty either of manslaughter, or very possibly 
of murder. Quite in keeping with Rez v. Fursey is the recent 
case of Reg. v. Harrison Some of the expressions attributed, 
in a very compressed newspaper report, to the learned judge 
who tried the case, may be open to criticism, but the principle 
involved in the defendant’s conviction, namely, that a ruffian 
cannot assert his alleged right to walk down a particular street 
by stunning or braining a policeman, or a good citizen who is 
helping the policeman, is good law no less than good sense.‘ 

Nor does the claim to assert legal rights by recourse to 
pistols or bludgeons receive countenance from two decisions 
occasionally adduced in its support. 

The one is Beatty v. Gillbanks.° This case merely shows that 
a lawful meeting is not rendered an unlawful assembly simply 
because ruffians try to break it up, and, in short, that the breach 
of the peace which renders a meeting unlawful must, in general,® 
be a breach caused by the members of the meeting, and not by 
wrongdoers who wish to prevent its being held.” 

The second is M‘Clenaghan v. Waters.® The case may 
certainly be so explained as to lay down the doctrine that the 

11 F.& F. 91. 

+ BS Tr. (n. 8.) 548, and compare Criminal Code Commission Report, 
pp. 43, 44. 

8 The Times, 19th December 1887. 

* “Well, if any heads are broken before [after !] men are ordered [by the 
police] to disperse and refuse to disperse, those who break their heads will find 
their own heads in a very bad situation if they are brought into a court of law to 
answer for it. No jury would hesitate to convict, and no court would hesitate to 
punish.""—Reg. v. Krnest Jones, 6 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 783, 811, 812, summing up of 
Wilde, C. J. 

°9Q. B.D. 308. 

" © See p. 502, ante. 

7 As already pointed out, the principle maintained in Beatty v. Gillbanks is 
itself open to some criticism. 

8 The Times, 18th July 1882. 

QUESTIONS AS TO RIGHT OF PUBLIC MEETING Sir 

Se ee eee 

police when engaged under orders in dispersing a lawful meeting 
are not engaged in the “execution of their duty,” and that 
therefore the members of the meeting may persist in holding it 
in spite of the opposition of the police. Whether this doctrine 
be absolutely sound is open to debate. It does not necessarily, 
however, mean more than that a man may exercise a right, 
even though he has to use a moderate amount of force, against a 
person who attempts to hinder the exercise of the right. But 
M‘Clenaghan v. Waters certainly does not decide that the member 
of a lawful assembly may exercise whatever amount of force is 
necessary to prevent its being dispersed, and falls far short of 
justifying the proceedings of a Salvationist who brains a 
policeman rather than surrender the so-called right of public 
meeting. It is, however, doubtful whether M‘Clenaghan v. 
Waters really supports even the doctrine that moderate resist- 
ance to the police is justifiable in order to prevent the dispersing 
of a lawful assembly. The case purports to follow Beatty v. 
Gillbanks, and therefore the Court cannot be taken as intentionally 
going beyond the principle laid down in that case. The question 
for the opinion of the Court, moreover, in Jf{‘Clenaghan v. Waters 
was, “whether upon the facts stated the police at the time of 
“their being assaulted by the appellants (Salvationists) were 
“legally justified in interfering to prevent the procession from 
“taking place”; or, in other words, whether the meeting of the 
Salvationists was a lawful assembly? To this question, in the 
face of Beatty v. Gillbanks, but one reply was possible. This 
answer the Court gave: they determined “that in taking part 
“in a procession the appellants were doing only an act strictly 
“lawful, and the fact that that act was believed likely to cause 
“ others to commit such as were unlawful, was no justification for 
“interfering with them.” Whether the Court determined any- 
thing more is at least open to doubt, and if they did determine, 
as alleged, that the amount of the resistance offered to the 
police was lawful, this determination is, to say the least, not 
inconsistent with the stern punishment of acts like that com- 
mitted by the prisoner Harrison. 

No one, however, can dispute that the line between the 
forcible exercise of a right in the face of opposition, and an 
unjustifiable aseault on those who oppose its exercise, is a fine 
one, and that many nice problems concerning the degree of 
resistance which the members of a lawful meeting may offer to 
persons who wish to break it up are at present unsolved. The 
next patriot or ruffian who kills or maims a policeman rather 
than compromise the right of public meeting will try what, from 

$12 APPENDIX 
Bee nN ee ee ne a 

a speculative point of view, may be considered a valuable legal 
experiment which promises results most interesting to jurists. 
The experiment will, however, almost certainly be tried at the 
cost, according to the vigour of his proceedings, of either his 
freedom or his life. 

NOTE VI 

DUTY OF SOLDIERS CALLED UPON TO DISPERSE AN UNLAWFUL 
ASSEMBLY 

On 7th September 1893 Captain Barker and a small number of 
soldiers were placed in the Ackton Colliery, in order to defend it 
from the attack of a mob. A body of rioters armed with sticks 
and cudgels entered the colliery yard, and with threats demanded 
the withdrawal of the soldiers) The mob gradually increased, 
and broke the windows of the building in which the troops 
were stationed and threw stones at them. Attempts were 
made to burn the building, and timber was actually set on fire. 
The soldiers retreated, but were at last surrounded by a mob of 
2000 persons. The crowd was called upon to disperse, and the 
Riot Act read. More stones were hurled at the troops, and it 
was necessary to protect the colliery. At last, before an hour 
from the reading of the Riot Act, and on the crowd refusing to 
disperse, Captain Barker gave orders to fire. The mob dispersed, 
but one or two bystanders were killed who were not taking an 
active part in the riot. Commissioners, including Lord Justice 
Bowen, afterwards Lord Bowen, were appointed to report on 
the conduct of the troops. The following passage from the 
report is an almost judicial statement of the law as to the duty 
of soldiers when called upon to disperse a mob :— 

“We pass next to the consideration of the all-important question 
whether the conduct of the troops in firing on the crowd was 
justifiable ; and it becomes essential, for the sake of clearness, to 
state succinctly what the law is which bears upon the subject. By 

} The whole summing up of Wilde, C. J., in Reg. v. Ernest Jones, 6 St. Tr. 
(n. 8.) 783, 807-816, merits particular attention. His language is extremely strong, 
and if it be taken as @ perfectly correct exposition of the law, negatives the right 
to resist by force policemen who with the bond fide intention to discharge their 
duty, disperse an assembly which may ultimately turn out not to have been an 
unlawful assembly, 

SOLDIERS AND UNLAWFUL MEETING 513 
a ae 

the law of this country every one is bound to aid in the suppression 
of riotous assemblages. The degree of force, however, which may 
lawfully be used in their suppression depends on the nature of each 
riot, for the force used must always be moderated and proportioned 
to the circumstances of the case and to the end to be attained. 

“The taking of life can only be justified by the necessity for 
protecting persons or property against various forms of violent crime, 
or by the necessity of dispersing a riotous crowd which is dangerous 
unless dispersed, or in the case of persons whose conduct has become 
felonious through disobedience to the provisions of the Riot Act, and 
who resist the attempt to disperse or apprehend them. The riotous 
crowd at the Ackton Hall Colliery was one whose danger consisted in 
its manifest design violently to set fire and do serious damage to the 
colliery property, and in pursuit of that object to assault those upon 
the colliery premises. It was a crowd accordingly which threatened 
serious outrage, amounting to felony, to property and persons, and it 
became the duty of all peaceable subjects to assist in preventing this. 
The necessary prevention of such outrage on person and property 
justifies the guardians of the peace in the employment against a 
riotous crowd of even deadly weapons. 

‘“‘ Officers and soldiers are under no special privileges and subject 
to no special responsibilities as regards this principle of the law. A 
soldier for the purpose of establishing civil order is only a citizen 
armed in a particular manner. He cannot because he is a soldier 
excuse himself if without necessity he takes human life. The duty of 
magistrates and peace officers to summon or to abstain from summoning 
the assistance of the military depends in like manner on the necessities 
of the case. A soldier can only act by using his arma. The weapons 
he carries are deadly. They cannot be employed at all without 
danger to life and limb, and in these days of improved rifles and 
perfected ammunition, without some risk of injuring distant and 
possibly innocent bystanders. To call for assistance against rioters 
from those who can only interpose under such grave conditions ought, 
of course, to be the last expedient of the civil authorities. But when 
the call for help is made, and a necessity for assistance from the mili- 
tary has arisen, to refuse such assistance is in law a misdemeanour. 

“The whole action of the military when once called in ought, 
from first to last, to be based on the principle of doing, and doing 
without fear, that which is absolutely necessary to prevent serious 
crime, and of exercising all care and skill with regard to what is 
done. No set of rules exists which governs every instance or defines 
beforehand every contingency that may arise. One salutary practice 
is that a magistrate should accompany the troops. The presence of a 
magistrate on such occasions, although not a legal obligation, is a 
matter of the highest importance. The military come, it may be, 
from a distance. They know nothing, probably, of the locality, or of 
the special circumatances. They find themselves introduced suddenly 

2 L 

514 APPENDIX 

on a field of action, and they need the counsel of the local justice, who 
is presumably familiar with the details of the case. But, although 
the magistrate’s presence is of the highest value and moment, his 
absence does not alter the duty of the soldier, nor ought it to paralyse 
his conduct, but only to render him doubly careful as to the proper 
steps to be taken. No officer is justified by English law in standing 
by and allowing felonious outrage to be committed merely because of 
& magistrate’s absence. 

“The question whether, on any occasion, the moment has come for 
firing upon a mob of rioters, depends, as we have said, on the 
necessities of the case. Such firing, to be lawful, must, in the case of 
a riot like the present, be necessary to stop or prevent such serious 
and violent crime as we have alluded to; and it must be conducted 
without recklessness or negligence. When the need is clear, the 
soldier’s duty is to fire with all reasonable caution, so as to produce no 
further injury than what is absolutely wanted for the purpose of 
protecting person and property. An order from the magistrate who is 
present is required by military regulations, and wisdom and discretion 
are entirely in favour of the observance of such a practice. But the 
order of the magistrate has at law no legal effect. Its presence does 
not justify the firing if the magistrate is wrong. Its absence does not 
excuse the officer for declining to fire when the necessity exists 

“With the above doctrines of English law the Riot Act does not 
interfere. Its effect is only to make the failure of a crowd to disperse 
for a whole hour after the proclamation has been read a felony ; and 
on this ground to afford a statutory justification for dispersing a felonious 
assemblage, even at the risk of taking life. In the case of the Ackton 
Hall Colliery, an hour had not elapsed after what is popularly called 
the reading of the Riot Act, before the military fired. No justification 
for their firing can therefore be rested on the provisions of the Riot 
Act itself, the further consideration of which may indeed be here 
dismissed from the case. But the fact that an hour had not expired 
since its reading did not incapacitate the troops from acting when 
outrage had to be prevented. All their common law duty as citizens 
and soldiers remained in full force. The justification of Captain 
Barker and his men must stand or fall entirely by the common law. 
Was what they did necessary, and no more than was necessary, to put 
a stop to or prevent felonious crime? In doing it, did they exercise 
all ordinary skill and caution, so as to do no more harm than could 
be reasonably avoided ? 

“If these two conditions are made out, the fact that innocent people 
have suffered does not involve the troops in legal responsibility. A 
guilty ringleader who under such conditions is shot dead, dies by 
justifiable homicide. An innocent person killed under such conditions, 
where no negligence has occurred, dies by an accidental death. The 
legal reason is not that the innocent person has to thank himeelf for 
what has happened, for it is conceivable (though not often likely) that 

SOLDIERS AND UNLAWFUL MEETING 515 

he may have been unconscious of any danger and innocent of all 
imprudence. The reason is that the soldier who fired has done nothing 
except what was his strict legal duty. 

“In measuring with the aid of subsequent evidence the eract 
necessities of the case as they existed at the time at Ackton Hall 
Colliery, we have formed a clear view that the troops were in a position 
of great embarrassment. The withdrawal of half their original force to 
Nostell Colliery had reduced them to so small a number as to render 
it difficult for them to defend the colliery premises effectively at night- 
time. The crowd for some hours had been familiarised with their 
presence, and had grown defiant. All efforts at conciliation had failed. 
Darkness had meanwhile supervened, and it was difficult for Captain 
Barker to estimate the exact number of his assailants, or to what 
extent he was being surrounded and outflanked. Six or seven appeals 
had been made by the magistrate to the crowd. The Riot Act had 
been read without result. A charge had been made without avail 
Much valuable colliery property was already blazing, and the troops 
were with difficulty keeping at bay a mob armed with sticks and 
bludgeons, which was refusing to disperse, pressing where it could 
into the colliery premises, stoning the fire-engine on its arrival, and 
keeping up volleys of missiles. To prevent the colliery from being 
overrun and themselves surrounded, it was essential for them to remain 
as close as possible to the Green Lane entrance. Otherwise, the rioters 
would, under cover of the darkness, have been able to enter in force. 
To withdraw from their position was, as we have already intimated, 
to abondon the colliery offices in the rear to arson and violence, To 
hold the position was not possible, except at the risk of the men being 
seriously hurt and their force crippled. Assaulted by missiles on all 
sides, we think that, in the events which had happened, Captain 
Barker and his troops had no alternative left but to fire, and it seems 
to us that Mr, Hartley was bound to require them to do 80. 

‘‘It cannot be expected that this view should be adopted by many 
of the crowd in Green Lane who were taking no active part in the 
riotous proceedings. Such persons had not, at the time, the means of 
judging of the danger in which the troops and the colliery stood. But 
no sympathy felt by us for the injured bystanders, no sense which we 
entertain of regret that, owing to the smallness of the military force at 
Featherstone and the prolonged absence of a magistrate, matters had 
drifted to such a pasa, can blind us to the fact that, as things stood at 
the supreme moment when the soldiers fired, their action was necessary. 
We feel it right to express our sense of the steadiness and discipline of 
the soldiers in the circumstances, We can find no ground for any 
suggestion that the firing, if it was in fact necessary, was conducted 
with other than reasonable skill and care. The darkness rendered it 
impossible to take more precaution than had been already employed 
to discriminate between the lawless and the peaceable, and it is to be 
observed that even the first shots fired produced little or no effect upon 

516 APPENDIX 
a tether NA gre os ey ST 

the crowd in inducing them to withdraw. If our conclusions on these 
points be, as we believe them to be, correct, it follows that the action 
of the troops was justified in law.” } 

NOTE VII 
THE MEANING OF AN ‘“‘UNCONSTITUTIONAL” LAW 

THE expression “ unconstitutional” has, as applied to a law, 
at least three different meanings varying according to the nature 
of the constitution with reference to which it is used :— 

(i.) The expression, as applied to an English Act of Parlia- 
ment, means simply that the Act in question, as, for instance, the 
Irish Church Act, 1869, is, in the opinion of the speaker, opposed 
to the spirit of the English constitution; it cannot mean that 
the Act is either a breach of law or is void. 

(ii.) The expression, as applied to a law passed by the 
French Parliament, means that the law, eg. extending the 
length of the President’s tenure of office, is opposed to the 
articles of the constitution. The expression does not neces- 
sarily mean that the law in question is void, for it is by no 
means certain that any French Court will refuse to enforce a 
law because it is unconstitutional. The word would probably, 
though not of necessity, be, when employed by a Frenchman, a 
term of censure. 

(iii.) The expression, as applied to an Act of Congress, 
means simply that the Act is one beyond the power of Congress, 
and is therefore void. The word does not in this case necessarily 
import any censure whatever. An American might, without any 
inconsistency, say that an Act of Congress was a good law, that 
is, a law calculated in his opinion to benefit the country, but that 
unfortunately it was ‘‘ unconstitutional,” that is to say, ultra vires 
and void. 

1 Report of the committee appointed to inquire into the circumstances con- 
mec ee the disturbances at Featherstone on the 7th of September 1893 
~—7234 

SWISS FEDERALISM 517 
Pease hee ge 

NOTE VII 
SWISS FEDERALISM ! 

THE Swiss Federal Constitution may appear to a superficial 
observer to be a copy in miniature of the Constitution of the 
United States; and there is no doubt that the Swiss statesmen 
of 1848 did in one or two points, and notably in the formation 
of the Council of States or Senate, intentionally follow American 
precedents, But for all this, Swiss Federalism is the natural 
outgrowth of Swiss history, and bears a peculiar character of its 
own that well repays careful study. 

Three ideas underlie the institutions of modern Switzerland. 

The first is the uncontested and direct sovereignty of the 
nation. 

In Switzerland the will of the people, when expressed in the 
mode provided by the Constitution, is admittedly supreme. 
This supremacy is not disputed by any political party or by any 
section of the community. No one dreams of changing the 
democratic basis of the national institutions. There does not 
exist in Switzerland any faction which, like the reactionists in 
France, meditates the overthrow of the Republic. There does 
not exist any section of the community which, like the 
Bohemians in Austria, or like the French in Alsace, is, or may 
be supposed to be, disloyal to the central government. But in 
Switzerland not only the supremacy but the direct authority of 
the nation is, practically as well as theoretically, acknowledged. 
The old idea of the opposition between the government and the 
people has vanished. ll parts of the government, including in 
that term not only the Executive but also the Legislative 
bodies, are the recognised agents of the nation, and the people 
intervene directly in all important acts of legislation. In 
Switzerland, in short, the nation is sovereign in the sense in 
which a powerful king or queen was sovereign in the time when 
monarchy was a predominant power in European countries, and 
we shall best understand the attitude of the Swiss nation towards 
its representatives, whether in the Executive or in Parliament, 
by considering that the Swiss people occupies a position not 
unlike that held, for example, by Elizabeth of England. How- 
ever great the Queen’s authority, she was not a tyrant, but she 

1 See Lowell, Governments and Parties in Continental Europe, il., Switzerland, 
pp. 180-836; Orelli, Das Staaterecht der Schweizer ischen Eidgenossenschaft ; 
Marquardsen’s Handbuch des Oeffentlichen Rechts, iv. i. 2. 

518 APPENDIX 

really in the last resort governed the country, and her ministers 
were her servants and carried out her policy. The Queen did 
not directly legislate, but by her veto and by other means she 
controlled all important legislation. Such is, speaking roughly, 
the position of the Swiss people. The Federal Executive and 
the Federal Parliament pursue the lines of policy approved by 
the people. Under the name of the Referendum there is 
exercised a popular veto on laws passed by the Legislature, and 
of recent years, under the name of the Initiative, an attempt 
has been made at more or less direct legislation by the people. 
Whatever be the merits of Swiss institutions, the idea which 
governs them is obvious. The nation is monarch, the Executive 
and the members of the Legislature are the people’s agents or 
ministers. 

The second idea to which Swiss institutions give expression 
is that politics are a matter of business. The system of Swiss 
government is business-like. The affairs of the nation are 
transacted by men of capacity, who give effect to the will of the 
nation. 

The last and most original Swiss conception is one which it 
is not easy for foreigners bred up under other constitutional 
systems to grasp. It is that the existence of political parties 
does not necessitate the adoption of party government. 

These are the principles or conceptions embodied in Swiss 
institutions ; they are closely inter-connected, they pervade and 
to a great extent explain the operation of the different parts of 
the Swiss Constitution. Many of its features are of course common 
to all federal governments, but its special characteristics are due 
to the predominance of the three ideas to which the reader's 
attention has been directed. That this is so will be seen if 
we examine the different parts of the Swiss Constitution. 

I. The Federal Council_—This body, which we should in 
England call the Ministry, consists of seven persons elected at 
their first meeting by the two Chambers which make up the 
Swiss Federal Assembly or Congress, and for this purpose 
sit together. The Councillors hold office for three years, and 
being elected after the first meeting of the Assembly, which 
itself is elected for three years, keep their places till the next 
Federal Assembly meets, when a new election takes place. The 
Councillors need not be, but in fact are, elected from among the 
members of the Federal Assembly, and though they lose their 
seats on election, yet, as they can take part in the debates of 
each House, may for practical purposes be considered members 
of the Assembly or Parliament. The powers confided to the 

SWISS FEDERALISM 519 
eee 

Council are wide. The Council is the Executive of the Con- 
federacy and possesses the authority naturally belonging to the 
national government. It discharges also, strange as this may 
appear to Englishmen or Americans, many judicial functions. 
To the Council are in many cases referred questions of 
“administrative law,” and also certain classes of what English- 
men or Americans consider strictly legal questions. Thus the 
Council in effect determined some years ago what were the 
rights as to meeting in public of the Salvation Army, and 
whether and to what extent Cantonal legislation could prohibit 
or regulate their meetings. The Council again gives the required 
sanction to the Constitutions or to alterations in the Constitu- 
tions of the Cantons, and determines whether clauses in such 
Constitutions are, or are not, inconsistent with the articles of 
the Federal Constitution. The Council is in fact the centre of 
the whole Swiss Federal system; it is called upon to keep up 
good relations between the Cantons and the Federal or National 
government, and generally to provide for the preservation of 
order, and ultimately for the maintenance of the law throughout 
the whole country. All foreign affairs fall under the Council's 
supervision, and the conduct of foreign relations must, under 
the circumstances of Switzerland, always form a most important 
and difficult part of the duties of the government. 

Though the Councillors are elected they are not dismissible 
by the Assembly, and in so far the Council may be considered 
an independent body; but from another point of view the 
Council has no independence. It is expected to carry out, and 
does carry out, the policy of the Assembly, and ultimately the 
policy of the nation, just as a good man of business is expected 
to carry out the orders of his employer. Many matters which 
are practically determined by the Council might constitutionally 
be decided by the Assembly itself, which, however, as a rule 
leaves the transaction of affairs in the hands of the Council. 
But the Council makes reports to the Assembly, and were the 
Assembly to express a distinct resolution on any subject, effect 
would be given to it. Nor is it expected that either the 
Council or individual Councillors should go out of office because 
proposals or laws presented by them to the Assembly are 
rejected, or because a law passed, with the approval of the 
Council, by the Chambers, is vetoed on being referred to the 
people. The Council, further, though as the members thereof, 
being elected by the Federal Assembly, must in general agree 
with the sentiments of that body, does not represent a Parlia- 
mentary majority as does an English or a French Ministry. The 

520 APPENDIX 
tn Ts aes cle au Nae 

Councillors, though elected for a term of three years, are re- 
eligible, and as a rule are re-elected. The consequence is that 
a man may hold office for sixteen years or more, and that the 
character of the Council changes but slowly ; and there have, it 
is said, been cases in which the majority of the Parliament 
belonged to one party and the majority of the Council to another, 
and this want of harmony in general political views between the 
Parliament and the Government did not lead to inconvenience. 
In truth the Council is not a Cabinet but a Board for the 
management of business, of which Board the so-called President 
of the Confederation, who is annually elected from among the 
members of the Council, is merely the chairman. It may fairly 
be compared to a Board of Directors chosen by the members of 
a large joint-stock company. In one sense the Board has no 
independent power. The majority of the shareholders, did they 
choose to do so, could always control its action or reverse its 
policy. In another sense, as we all know, a Board is almost free 
from control. As long as things are well, or even tolerably, 
managed, the shareholders have neither the wish nor practically 
the power to interfere. They know that the directors possess 
knowledge and experience which the shareholders lack, and that 
to interfere with the Board’s management would imperil the 
welfare of the association. So it is with the Federal Council. 
Its dependence is the source of its strength. It does not come 
into conflict with the Assembly; it therefore is a permanent 
body, which carries on, and carries on with marked success, the 
administration of public affairs. It is a body of men of business 
who transact the business of the State. 

It is worth while to dwell at some length on the constitution 
and character of the Swiss Council or Board, because it gives us 
a kind of Executive differing both from the Cabinet government 
of England or France, and from the Presidential government of 
America. The Council does not, like an English Cabinet, repre- 
sent, at any rate directly and immediately, a predominant 
political party. It is not liable to be at any moment dismissed 
from office. Its members keep their seats for a period longer 
than the time during which either an English Ministry or an 
American President can hope to retain office. But the Council, 
though differing greatly from a Cabinet, is a Parliamentary 
or semi-Parliamentary Executive.! It has not, like an American 
President, an independent authority of its own which, being 
derived from popular election, may transcend, and even be 
opposed to, the authority of the Legislature. The constitutional 

1 See Note III. p. 480, ante, 

SWISS FEDERALISM 521 
a re 

history of Switzerland since 1848 has exhibited none of those 
conflicts between the Executive and the legislative body which 
have occurred more than once in the United States. The 
position of the Council may, if we seek for an historical parallel, 
be compared with that of the Council of State under the 
Cromwellian Instrument of Government, and indeed occupies very 
nearly the position which the Council of State would have held 
had the Instrument of Government been, in accordance with the 
wishes of the Parliamentary Opposition, so modified as to allow 
of the frequent re-election by Parliament of the members of the 
Council! If we desire a modern parallel we may perhaps find 
it in the English Civil Service. The members of the Council are, 
like the permanent heads of the English Government offices, 
officials who have a permanent tenure of office, who are in strict- 
ness the servants of the State, and who are expected to carry 
out, and do carry out, measures which they may not have 
framed, and the policies of which they may not approve. This 
comparison is the more instructive, because in the absence of an 
elaborate Civil Service the members of the Council do in effect 
discharge rather the duties of permanent civil servants than of 
ministers. 

Il. The Federal Assembly—This Parliament is certainly 
modelled to a certain extent on the American Congress. For 
several purposes, however, the two chambers of which it consists 
sit together. As already pointed out, when thus combined they 
elect the Federal Council or Ministry. The Assembly, moreover, 
is, unlike any representative assembly to which the English 
people are accustomed, on certain administrative matters a final 
Court of Appeal from the Council. The main function, however, 
of the Assembly is to receive reports from the Council and to 
legislate. It sits but for a short period each year, and confines 
itaelf pretty closely to the transaction of business. Laws passed 
by it may, when referred to the people, be vetoed. Its members 
are pretty constantly re-elected, and it is apparently one of the 
most orderly and business-like of Parliaments. 

The Assembly consists of two chambers or houses. 

The Council of States, or, as we may more conveniently call 
it, the Senate, represents the Cantons, each of which as a rule 
sends two members to it. 

The National Council, like the American House of Repre- 
sentatives, directly represents the citizens. It varies in numbers 

1 See the ‘Constitutional Bill of the First- Parliament of the Protectorate,” 
cap. 39 ; Gardiner, Constitutional Documents of the Puritan Revolution, pp. 366, 
867. 

$22 APPENDIX 

with the growth of the population, and each Canton is repre- 
sented in proportion to its population. 

In one important respect the Federal Assembly differs from 
the American Congress. In the United States the Senate has 
hitherto been the more influential of the two Houses. In 
Switzerland the Council of States was expected by the founders 
of the Constitution to wield the sort of authority which belongs 
to the American Senate. This expectation has been disappointed. 
The Council of States has played quite a secondary part in the 
working of the Constitution, and possesses much less power than 
the National Council. The reasons given for this are various. 
The members of the Council are paid by the Cantons which they 
represent. The time for which they hold office is regulated by 
each Canton, and has generally been short. The Council has 
no special functions such as has the American Senate, and the 
general result has been that leading statesmen have sought for 
seats not in the Council of State, but in the National Council. 
One cause of the failure on the part of the Council of States 
to fulfil the. expectations of its creators seems to have escaped 
Swiss attention. The position and functions of the Federal 
Council or Ministry, its permanence and its relation to the Federal 
Parliament, make it impossible for the chamber which represents 
the Cantons to fill the place which is occupied in America by 
the House which represents the States. The inferior position 
of the Swiss Council of States deserves notice. It is one of 
the parts of the Constitution which was suggested by the 
experience of a foreign country, and for this very reason has, 
it may be suspected, not fitted in with the native institutions 
of Switzerland. 

IIL The Federal Tribunal..—This Court was constituted by 
statesmen who knew the weight and authority which belongs to 
the Supreme Court of the United States; but the Federal 
Tribunal was from the beginning, and is still, a very different 
body from, and a much less powerful body than, the American 
Supreme Court. It is composed of fourteen judges, and as many 
substitutes elected for six years by the Federal Assembly, which 
also designates the President and the Vice-President of the 
Court for two years at a time. It possesses criminal jurisdiction 
in cases of high treason, and in regard to what we may term 
high crimes and misdemeanours, though its powers as a criminal 
Court aro rarely put into operation. It has ‘jurisdiction as 
regards suits between the Confederation and the Cantons, and 
between the Cantons themselves, and generally in all suits in 

1 Lowell, fi. p. 214; Orelli, pp. 88-44. 

SWISS FEDERALISM 523 
rr 

which the Confederation or a Canton is a party. It also 
determines all matters of public law, and has by degrees, in 
consequence of federal legislation, been made virtually a general 
Court of Appeal from the Cantonal tribunals in all cases arising 
under federal laws where the amount in dispute exceeds 3000 
francs. Add to this that the Court entertains complaints of the 
violation of the constitutional rights of citizens, and this whether 
the right alleged to be violated is guaranteed by a Federal or 
by a Cantonal constitution. The primary object for which the 
Court was constituted was the giving decisions, or rather the 
making of judicial declarations where points of public law are 
in dispute ; and its civil jurisdiction has, under the stress of 
circumstances, been increased beyond the limits within which the 
founders of the Swiss Constitution intended it to be restrained. 
But the Federal Tribunal, though possessed of a wide and some- 
what indefinite jurisdiction, wields nothing like the power 
possessed by the Supreme Court of the United States. It has 
no jurisdiction whatever in controversies with reference to 
“administrative law”; these are reserved for the Federal 
Council, and ultimately for the Federal Assembly,! and the term 
‘administrative controversies” has been given a very extensive 
signification, so that the Court has been excluded “from the 
consideration of a long list of subjects, such as the right to carry 
on a trade, commercial treaties, consumption taxes, game laws, 
certificates of professional capacity, factory acts, bank-notes, 
weights and measures, primary public schools, sanitary police, 
and the validity of cantonal elections,” * which would primé facie 
seem to fall within its competence. The Tribunal, moreover, 
though it can treat cantonal laws as unconstitutional, and there- 
fore invalid, is bound by the Constitution to treat all federal 
legislation as valid.® 

The judges of the Federal Tribunal are appointed by the 
Federal Assembly, and for short terms. The Tribunal stands 
alone, instead of being aot the head of a national judicial 
system. It has further no officials of its own for the enforce- 
ment of its judgments. They are executed primarily by the 
cantonal authorities, and ultimately, if the cantonal authorities 
fail in their duty, by the Federal Council. The control, more- 
over, exerted by the Federal Tribunal over the acts of Federal 
officials is incomplete Any citizen may sue an official, but, as 
already pointed out, administrative controversies are excluded 

1 See Swiss Constitution, Art. 85, s. 12, and Art. 113. 4 Lowell, p. 218. 

3 See Swiss Constitution, Art. 113; Brinton Coxe, Judicial Power and 
Unconstitutional Legislation, p. 86. 

4 See Adama, Siciss Confederation, pp. 74, 75. 

524 APPENDIX 

ae SS 

from the Court’s jurisdiction, and in case there is a conflict of 
jurisdiction between the Federal Council and the Federal 
Tribunal, it is decided not by the Court but by the Federal 
Assembly, which one would expect to support the authority of 
the Council. The Federal Tribunal, at any rate, cannot as 
regards such disputes fix the limits of its own competence.’ 
Under these circumstances it is not surprising that the Tribunal 
exercises less authority than the Supreme Court of the United 
States. What may excite some surprise is that, from the very 
nature of federalism the jurisdiction of the Federal Tribunal 
has, in spite of all disadvantages under which the Court suffers, 
year by year increased. Thus until 1893 questions relating to 
religious liberty, and the rights of different sects, were reserved 
for the decision of the Federal Assembly. Since that date they 
have been transferred to the jurisdiction of the Federal Tribunal. 
This very transfer, and the whole relation of the Tribunal, the 
Council, and the Assembly respectively, to questions which 
would in England or the United States be necessarily decided by 
a law court, serve to remind the reader of the imperfect recog- 
nition in Switzerland of the “rule of law,” as it is understood 
in England, and of the separation of powers as that doctrine is 
understood in many continental countries.® 

IV. The Referendum.2—If in the constitution of the Federal 
Tribunal and of the Council of States we can trace the influence 
of American examples, the referendum, as it exists in Switzerland, 
is an institution of native growth, which has received there a far 
more complete and extensive development than in any other 
country. If we omit al] details, and deal with the referendum as 
it in fact exists under the Swiss Federal Constitution, we may 
describe it as an arrangement by which no alteration or amend- 
ment in the Constitution, and no federal law which any large 
number of Swiss citizens think of importance, comes finally into 
force until it has been submitted to the vote of the citizens, and 
has been sanctioned by a majority of the citizens who actually 
vote. It may be added that a change in the Constitution thus 
referred to tho people for sanction cannot come into force unless 
it is approved of both by a majority of the citizens who vote, 
and by a majority of the Cantons. It must further be noted 
that the referendum in different forms exists in all but one of 

; See Lowell, p. 220. 2 Lowell, pp. 218, 219. 

See Lowell, ii. chap, xii.; Adams, Swiss Confederation, chap. vii The 
referendum, though not under that name, exists for many purposes in the 
different States of the American Union. There is no trace of it, or of any 
institution corresponding to it, in the Constitution of the United States. Com- 
pare Oberholtzer, Referendum in America. 

SWISS FEDERALISM §25 

the Swiss Cantons, and may therefore now be considered an 
essential feature of Swiss constitutionalism. The referendum is 
therefore in effect a nation’s veto. It gives to the citizens of 
Switzerland exactly that power of arresting legislation which is 
still in theory and was in the time, for example, of Elizabeth 
actually possessed by an English monarch. A bill could not 
finally become a law until it had obtained the consent of the 
Crown. In popular language, the Crown, in case the monarch 
dissented, might be said to veto the bill. A more accurate way 
of describing the Crown’s action is to say that the King threw 
out or rejected the bill just as did the House of Lords or the 
House of Commons when either body refused to pass a bill. 
This is in substance the position occupied by the citizens of 
Switzerland when a law passed by the Federal Assembly is 
submitted to them for their approbation or rejection. If they 
give their assent it becomes the law of the land; if they refuse 
their assent it is vetoed, or, speaking more accurately, the pro- 
posed law is not allowed to pass, i.e. to become in reality a law. 

The referendum has a purely negative effect. It is in many 
of the Cantonal Constitutions, and in the Federal Constitution 
to acertain extent, supplemented by what is called the Initiative 
—that is, a device by which a certain number of citizens can pro- 
pose a law and require a popular vote upon it in spite of the refusal 
of the legislature to adopt their views.! The Initiative has, under 
the Federal Constitution at any rate, received as yet but little 
trial. Whether it can be under any circumstances a successful 
mode of legislation may be doubted. All that need here be 
noted is that while the introduction of the Initiative is neither 
in theory nor in fact a necessary consequence of the maintenance 
of the referendum, both institutions are examples of the way 
in which in Switzerland the citizens take a direct part in 
legislation. 

The referendum, taken in combination with the other pro- 
visions of the Constitution, and with the general character of 
Swiss federalism, tends, it is conceived, to produce two effects. 

It alters, in the first place, the position both of the Legislature 
and of the Executive. The Assembly and the Federal Council 
become obviously the agents of the Swiss people. This state 
of things, while it decreases the power, may also increase the 
freedom of Swiss statesmen. A member of the Council, or the 
Council itself, proposes a law which is passed by the Legislature. 
It is, we will suppose, as has often happened, referred to the 
people for approval and then rejected. The Council and the 

1 Lowell, p. 280. 

526 APPENDIX 
PEI cei ldo arena Pe 2 

Assembly bow without any discredit to the popular decision. 
There is no reason why the members either of the Council or of 
the Legislature should resign their seats; it has frequently 
happened that the electors, whilst disapproving of certain laws 
submitted for their acceptance by the Federal Assembly, have 
re-elected the very men whose legislation they have refused to 
accept. Individual politicians, on the other hand, who advocate 
particular measures just because the failure to pass these measures 
into law does not involve resignation or expulsion from office, 
can openly express their political views even if these views 
differ from the opinions of the people. The referendum, in 
the second place, discourages the growth of party government. 
The electors do not feel it necessary that the Council, or even 
the Assembly, should strictly represent one party. Where the 
citizens themselves can veto legislation which they disapprove, it 
matters comparatively little that some of their representatives 
should entertain political opinions which do not at the moment 
commend themselves to the majority of the electorate. The 
habit, moreover, acquired of taking part in legislation must prob- 
ably accustom Swiss citizens to consider any proposed law more 
or less on its merits. They are at any rate less prone than are 
the voters of most countries to support a party programme which 
possibly does not as to every one of its provisions command the 
assent of any one voter. It may, of course, on the other hand, 
be maintained that it is the incomplete development of party 
government in Switzerland which favours the adoption of the 
referendum. However this may be, there can be little doubt 
that the existence of the most peculiar of Swiss institutions has 
a close connection with the condition of Swiss parties, 

Swiss Federalism has been, as we have already pointed out, 
considerably influenced by American Federalism, and it is almost 
impossible for an intelligent student not to compare the most 
successful federal and democratic government of the New World 
with the most successful federal and democratic government of 
Europe, for the history and the institutions of America and of 
Switzerland exhibit just that kind of likeness and unlikeness 
which excites comparison. 

The United States and Switzerland are both by nature 
federations; neither country could, it is pretty clear, prosper 
under any but a federal constitution ; both countries are, at the 
present day at any rate, by nature democracies. In each 
country the States or Cantons have existed before the federation. 
In each country state patriotism was originally a far stronger 
sentiment than the feeling of national unity. In America and 

SWISS FEDERALISM 527 

in Switzerland national unity has been the growth of necessity. 
It is also probable that the sentiment of national unity, now that 
it has been once evoked, will in the long run triumph over the 
feeling of State rights or State sovereignty. In a very rough 
manner, moreover, there is a certain likeness betwoen what may 
be called the federal history of both countries. In America and 
in Switzerland there existed for a long time causes which pre- 
vented and threatened finally to arrest the progress towards 
national unity. Slavery played in the United States a part 
which resembled at any rate the part played in Swiss history 
by religious divisions. In America and in Switzerland a less 
progressive, but united and warlike, minority of States held for 
along time in check the influence of the richer, the more 
civilised, and the less united States. Constant disputes as to the 
area of slavery bore at any rate an analogy to the disputes about 
the common territories which at one time divided the Catholic 
and Protestant Cantons. Secession was anticipated by the 
Sonderbund, and the triumph of Grant was not more complete 
than the triumph of Dufour. Nor is it at all certain that the 
military genius of the American was greater than the military 
genius of the Swiss general. The War of Secession and the War 
of the Sonderbund had this further quality in common. They 
each absolutely concluded the controversies out of which they 
had arisen; they each so ended that victors and vanquished 
alike soon became the loyal citizens of the same Republic. 
Each country, lastly, may attribute its prosperity with plausi- 
bility at least, to its institutions, and these institutions bear in 
their general features a marked similarity. 

The unlikeness, however, between American and Swiss 
Federalism is at least as remarkable as the likeness. America is 
the largest as Switzerland is the smallest of Confederations ; 
more than one American State exceeds in size and population 
the whole of the Swiss Confederacy. The American Union is 
from every point of view a modern state; the heroic age of 
Switzerland, as far as military glory is concerned, had closed 
before a single European had set foot in America, and the in- 
dependence of Switzerland was acknowledged by Europe more 
than a century before the United States began their political 
existence. American institutions are the direct outgrowth of 
English ideas, and in the main of the English ideas which pre- 
vailed in England during the democratic movement of the 
seventeenth century ; American society waa never under the 
influence of feudalism. The democracy of Switzerland is imbued 
in many respects with continental ideas of government, and till 

528 APPENDIX 
ga a A Sty ek 

the time of the great French Revolution, Swiss society was 
filled with inequalities originating in feudal ideas. The United 
States is made up of States which have always been used to 
representative institutions; the Cantons of Switzerland have 
been mainly accustomed to non-representative, aristocratic or 
democratic government. Under these circumstances, it is 
naturally to be expected that even institutions which possess a 
certain formal similarity should display an essentially different 
character in countries which differ so widely as the United 
States and Switzerland. 

These differences may be thus roughly summed up: American 
Federalism is strong where Swiss Federalism is weak; where 
American Federalism is weak, Swiss Federalism is strong. 

The Senate and the Judiciary of the United States have 
rightly oxcited more admiration than any other part of the 
American Constitution. They have each been, to a certain 
extent, imitated by the founders of the existing Swiss Republic. 
But in neither instance has the imitation been a complete 
success. The Council of States has not the authority of the 
Senate ; the Federal Tribunal, though its power appears to be 
on the increase, cannot stand comparison with the Supreme 
Court. The judicial arrangements of Switzerland would appear, 
at any rate to a foreign critic, to be the least satisfactory 
of Swiss institutions, and the exercise by the Federal Council 
and the Federal Assembly of judicial powers is not in unison 
with the best modern ideas as to the due administration of 
justice. 

The features in American institutions which receive very 
qualified approval, if not actual censure even from favourable 
critics, are the mode in which the President is appointed, the 
relation of the Executive Government to the Houses of Congress, 
the disastrous development of party organisation, and the waste 
or corruption which are the consequence of the predominance of 
party managers or wirepullers. 

The Federal Council, on the other hand, forms as good an 
Executive as is possessed by any country in the world. It 
would appear to a foreign observer (though on such a matter 
foreign critics are singularly liable to delusion) to combine in a 
rare degree the advantages of a Parliamentary and of a non- 
Parliamentary government. It acts in uniform harmony with 
the elected representatives of the people, but though appointed 
by the legislature, it enjoys a permanent tenure of office un- 
known to Parliamentary Cabinets or to elected Presidents. 
Though parties, again, exist, and party spirit occasionally runs 

SWISS FEDERALISM 529 
os eemnCoineereteerecre ea eee 

high in Switzerland, party government is not found there to be 
a necessity. The evils, at any rate, attributed to government 
by party are either greatly diminished or entirely averted. 
The Caucus and the “Machine” are all but unknown. The 
country is freed from the unwholesome excitement of a Presi- 
dential election, or even of a general election, which, as in England, 
determines which party shall have possession of the government. 
There is no notion of spoils, and no one apparently even hints at 
corruption. 

NOTE IX 
AUSTRALIAN FEDERALISM ! 

THE aim of Australian statesmen has been to combine in the 
Constitution of the Commonwealth ideas borrowed from the 
federal and republican constitutionalism of the United States, 
or, to a certain extent, of Switzerland, with ideas derived from 
the unitarian? and monarchical constitutionalism of England. 
They have also created for the Commonwealth itself, and retained 
for each of the several States thereof, the relation which has for 
years existed between England and the self-governing colonies 
of Australia. 

Hence the Commonwealth exhibits four main characteristics : 
Jirst, a Federal form of Government; secondly, a Parliamentary 
Executive ; thirdly, an effective Method for amending the Con- 
stitution ; fourthly, the maintenance of the Relation which exists 
between the United Kingdom and a self-governing colony. 

A. Federal Government 

The Commonwealth is in the strictest sense a federal 
government. It owes its birth to the desire for national unity 
which pervades the whole of Australia, combined® with the 
determination on the part of the several colonies to retain as 
States of the Commonwealth as large a measure of independence 

1 The Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, 63 & 64 Vict. c. 12. 
Quick and Garran, The Annotated Constitution of the Australian Common- 
wealth. Moore, The Commontoealth of Australia. Bryce, i. Studies in History 

and Jurisprudence, Essay VIII. 
4 See p. 135, ante. 3 Seo pp. 136-139, pe 

530 APPENDIX 

nes 

as may be found compatible with the recognition of Australian 
nationality. The creation of a true federal government has 
been achieved mainly by following, without however copying 
in any servile spirit, the fundamental principles of American 
federalism. As in the United States so in the Australian 
Commonwealth the Constitution is (subject of course to the 
sovereign power of the Imperial Parliament) the supreme law 
of the land ;! the Constitution itself in the Australian Common- 
wealth, as in the United States, fixes and limits the spheres of 
the federal or national government and of the States respect- 
ively, and morever defines these spheres in accordance with the 
principle that, while the powers of the national or federal 
government, including in the term government both the Executive 
and the Parliament of the Commonwealth, are, though wide, 
definite and limited, the powers of the separate States are 
indefinite, so that any power not assigned by the Constitution to 
the federal government remains vested in each of the several 
States, or, more accurately, in the Parliament of each State.? 
In this point Australian statesmen have followed the example, 
not of Canada, but of the United States and of Switzerland. 
The methods again for keeping the government of the Common- 
wealth on the one side, and the States on the other, within 
their proper spheres have been suggested in the main by 
American experience. The Parliament of the Commonwealth 
is 80 constituted as to guarantee within reasonable limits the 
maintenance of State rights. For whilst the House of Repre- 
sentatives represents numbers, the Senate represents the States 
of the Commonwealth, and each of the Original States is 
entitled, irrespective of its size and population, to an equal 
number of senators.2 The Constitution, further, is so framed as 
to secure respect for the Senate ; the longer term for which the 
Senators are elected and the scheme of retirement by rotation, 
which will, in general, protect the Senate from a dissolution, are 
intended to make the Senate a more permanent, and therefore 
& more experienced, body than the House of Representatives, 
which can under no circumstances exist for more than three 
years, and may very well be dissolved before that period has 
elapsed ; then too the senators will, as the Constitution now 
stands, represent the whole of the State for which they sit.‘ 
The States, again, retain a large amount of legislative inde- 

? Constitution, ss. 51, 108, 2 Jbid, ss. 106, 107. 

; 3 Ibid. 8.7. Such experience however as can be supplied by the events of 
eight years shows, it is said, that the Senate is absolutely hostile to the mainten- 
7 es ae Gee and far more so than the House of Representatives. 

id. 8. 7. 

AUSTRALIAN FEDERALISM 531 
ee ee eee 

pendence. Neither the Executive nor the Parliament of the 
Commonwealth can either directly or indirectly veto the legisls- 
tion, ¢.g., of the Victorian Parliament. Lastly, the law Courts, 
and especially the Federal Supreme Court, are, as in the United 
States, the guardians of the Constitution, for the Courts are 
called upon, in any case which comes before them for decision, 
to pass judgment, should the point be raised, upon the con- 
stitutionality, or, in other words, upon the validity under the 
Constitution of any Act passed either by the Parliament of the 
Commonwealth or by the Parliament of, ¢g., Victoria. That 
this duty is laid upon the Courts is not indeed expressly stated 
in the Constitution of the Commonwealth, any more than in 
the Constitution of the United States; but no English lawyer 
can doubt that the Courts, and ultimately the Federal Supreme 
Court, are intended to be the interpreters, and in this sense the 
protectors of the Constitution. They are, be it noted, in no 
way bound, as is the Swiss Federal tribunal, to assume the con- 
stitutionality of laws passed by the federal legislature. 

The founders, then, of the Commonwealth have, guided in 
the main by the example of the United States, created a true 
federal government ; but they have, we shall find, as far as is 
compatible with the existence of federalism, imported into the 
Constitution ideas borrowed, or rather inherited, from England. 
This is specially visible in 

B. The Parliamentary Executive 

The Executive of the Commonwealth is a parliamentary 
Cabinet, such as has long existed in England, and as exists in 
all the self-governing British colonies. The authors indeed 
of the Australian Constitution have, true to English pre- 
cedent, never made use of the word cabinet; they have not 
even in so many words enacted that the executive shall be a 
body of ministers responsible to the federal Parliament ; but no 
one who has the least acquaintance with the history of the 
English constitution, or of the working of the constitutions 
which have been conferred upon the self-governing colonies of 
Australia, can doubt that the federal executive is intended to 
be, as it in fact is, a parliamentary ministry, which, though 
nominally appointed by the Governor-General, will owe its 
power to the support of a parliamentary majority, and will 
therefore, speaking broadly, consist in general of the leaders of 
the most powerful parliamentary party of the day. This cabinet 
possesses the most peculiar among the attributes of an English 

532 APPENDIX 

ministry, namely, the power, in many cases at any rate, to 
dissolve Parliament, and thus appeal from the body by whom 
the ministry was created to the people, or in other words to the 
electors, of the Commonwealth. We should here also observe 
that the powers of the Australian executive exceed in one 
respect the authority of an English ministry; an English 
cabinet may often dissolve the House of Commons, but can 
never dissolve the House of Lords. But an Australian cabinet 
can under certain circumstances cause, indirectly at any rate, 
the dissolution of the Senate. In studying indeed the Constitu- 
tion of the Commonwealth great attention should be paid to 
this existence of the right or power to dissolve Parliament ; it 
is not possessed by the President of the United States or by the 
Executive Council of the Swiss Confederation, and it is granted 
under the constitution of the existing French Republic only in . 
a very limited degree to the French President; nor is there 
anything to make it certain that the President, even if being 
sure of the assent of the Senate he has the power to dissolve the 
Chamber of Deputies, will exert his authority at the request of 
the ministry.1 The point to be specially noted is that the 
Federalistas of Australia have almost as a matter of course 
placed the executive power in the hands of a parliamentary 
cabinet; they have neither adopted the American plan of an 
elected President, whereby the administration of affairs is placed 
in the hands of a non-parliamentary executive, or the Swiss 
scheme of creating a semi-parliamentary executive, which, while 
elected by the federal Parliament, cannot be dismissed by it. It 
is true that it might have been found difficult to adjust the 
relations between a non-parliamentary or a semi-parliamentary 
executive and the English cabinet or the Imperial Parliament. 
But the difficulty is not one which need necessarily be insuper- 
able. The true reason, it may be conjectured, why Australia has 
decisively adhered to the system of cabinet government is that 
a Parliamentary cabinet is the only form of executive to which 
the statesmen either of Australia or of England are accustomed. 
In one point, indeed, the executive of Australia may appear to 
bear an even more parliamentary character than does an English 
cabinet, for whilst, in theory at least, a statesman might be the 
member of an English ministry, though he were not a member 
of either House of Parliament, no Australian minister can hold 
office, #.¢. in effect be a member of the cabinet for more than 
three months, unless he becomes a Senator, or a member of the 
House of Representatives? But here Australian statesmanship 

1 Eamein, Droit Constitutionnel, pp. 555-568. 
2 Constitution, s. 64. 

AUSTRALIAN FEDERALISM 533 

has followed the conventions rather than the law of the English 
constitution, for in practice an English cabinet always consists 
of men who are members or will become members either of the 
House of Lords or of the House of Commons. Indeed it is 
worth remark that in several instances where the Australian 
Constitution deviates from that of England, the deviation is 
caused by the desire to follow the spirit of modern English 
constitutionalism. Thus the elaborate and ingenious plan for 
avoiding in case of disagreement between the two Houses a 
parliamentary deadlock! is simply an attempt to ensure by law 
that deference for the voice of the electorate which in England 
constitutional conventions enforce in the long run upon both 
Houses of the Imperial Parliament. 

C. Amendment of the Constitution 

A federal constitution must of necessity be a “rigid” con- 
stitution ; but the constitutions of each of the Australian self- 
governing colonies, eg. of Victoria, have been in substance 
“flexible” constitutions of which the colonial Parliament could 
change the articles as easily, or nearly as easily, as any other law. 
Now the people of Australia have, we may safely assume, no 
desire to forego the advantages of a flexible constitution or to 
adopt a federal polity which should lend itself as little to amend- 
ment as does the Constitution of the United States, or should, 
like the Constitution of the Canadian Dominion, be amendable 
only by the action of the Imperial Parliament. Hence Australian 
Federalists were forced to solve the problem of giving to the 
Constitution of the Commonwealth as much rigidity as is required 
by the nature of a federal government, and at the same time 
such flexibility as should secure to the people of Australia the 
free exercise of legislative authority, even as regards articles of 
the Constitution. 

Their solution of this problem is ingenious. 

The Constitution of the Commonwealth is, looked at as a 
whole, a rigid constitution, since it cannot be fundamentally 
altered by the ordinary method of parliamentary legislation. 

But this rigidity of the constitution is tempered in three 
different ways. 

First.—The Parliament of the Commonwealth is endowed 
with very wide legislative authority ; thus it can legislate on 
many topics which lie beyond the competence of the Congress 
of the United States, and on some topics which lie beyond the 

1 Constitution, s. 57. 

534 APPENDIX 

a ——e 

competence of the Parliament of the Canadian Dominion ;! and 
it is here worth notice that the extension of the powers of the 
Commonwealth Parliament is facilitated by the fact that on 
many topics the federal legislature and the State Parliaments 
have concurrent legislative authority, though of course where a 
law of the Commonwealth conflicts with the law of a State, the 
federal law, if within the competence of the Commonwealth 
Parliament, prevails.* 

Secondly.—A large number of the articles of the constitution 
remain in force only “until Parliament otherwise provides” ; 
they can therefore be changed like any other law by an Act of 
Parliament passed in the ordinary manner; in other words, the 
constitution is as to many of its provisions flexible.* 

Thirdly.—The constitution provides the means for its own 
alteration 4‘ and embodies the principle, though not the name, of 
the Swiss institution known as the referendum. The process 
of constitutional amendment is broadly and normally as fol- 
lows: A law changing the constitution must be passed by an 
absolute majority of each House of Parliament ; it must then be 
submitted to the electors of the Commonwealth for their 
approval ; if in a majority of the States a majority of the electors 
voting approve the law and also a majority of all the electors 
voting approve the law, it must be submitted to the Governor- 
General for the King’s assent, and on receiving the due assent 
becomes, like any other bill, an Act of Parliament. The principle 
of the whole proceeding is that the constitution can be changed 
by a vote of the federal Parliament, ratified by the approval 
both of the majority of the States and of the majority of the 
Commonwealth electorate. 

It should however be noted that under certain circumstances 
a law for changing the constitution which has been passed by 
an absolute majority of one House of Parliament only, and 
either is rejected by the other House or not passed by an 
absolute majority thereof, must be submitted to the electors for 
their approval, and if approved in the manner already stated, 
becomes, on the assent of the Crown being duly given, an Act 
of Parliament. 

Add to this that there are a few changes, e.g. an alteration 
diminishing the proportionate representation in any State in 
either House of Parliament, which cannot be carried through 

1 Compare Commonwealth Constitution, ss. 51 , 52, with Constitution of U. 8., 

ni pe ss. 1 and 8, and British North America Act, 1867 (30 & 81 Vict. c. 3), ss. 

2 See Constitution, s, 109. 

3 Jbid. s. 51, sub, s. xxxvi. compared e.g. with ss. 8, 29, 81. et 
4 Tbid, 8. 128. Peace Sie ety: 

— 

AUSTRALIAN FEDERALISM 535 
ee eer eee ee ey ee ee 

unless the majority of the electors voting in that State approve 
of the change.! 

What may be the working of new institutions no one will 
venture confidently to predict; but a critic of constitutions 
may entertain the hope that Australian statesmanship has 
accomplished the feat of framing a polity which shall have the 
merits both of a rigid and of a flexible constitution, which 
cannot hastily be changed, but yet admits of easy amendment, 
whenever alteration or reform is demanded by the deliberate 
voice of the nation. 

D. Maintenance of the Relation with the United Kingdom 

The founders of the Commonwealth have admittedly been 
influenced at once by a growing sense of Australian nationality, 
and by enduring, or even increasing loyalty to the mother- 
country. The one sentiment has been satisfied by the union 
of the Australian colonies under a federal government which 
secures to the people of Australia as complete power of self- 
government as is compatible with the position of a colony that 
desires to form part of the British Empire. The other sentiment 
has been satisfied by placing the Commonwealth itself as regards 
the mother-country in the position of a self-governing colony, 
and also by leaving the relation between each State of the 
Commonwealth and the United Kingdom as little disturbed as is 
compatible with the creation of the Australian Commonwealth. 
Each point is worth notice. 

The Commonwealth of Australia itself is, as regards the 
Crown and the Imperial Parliament, nothing but a large self- 
governing colony. Thus the Governor-General is appointed by 
the Crown, i.e. by the English ministry, and fills substantially 
the same position as, before the formation of the Commonwealth, 
was occupied by the Governor, ¢.g., of Victoria. A bill passed 
by the Parliament of the Commonwealth, whether it be an 
ordinary law or a law which, because it affects the constitution, 
has been submitted to the electors for their approval, requires in 
order that it may become an Act the assent of the Crown,? 
and the Crown can negative or veto bills passed by the 
Parliament of the Commonwealth just as it could, and still can, 
veto bills passed by the Parliament, ¢g. of Victoria. Tho 
Imperial Parliament, again, has the admitted right, though it is 
a right which, except at the wish of the Australian people, would 
most rarely be exercised, to legislate for Australia, or even to 

1 Constitution, s. 28. 
2 Constitution, as. 1, 58, 59, and 128. 

536 APPENDIX 

modify the constitution of the Australian Commonwealth. An 
appeal further lies on most subjects from the decisions of the 
federal Supreme Court to the English Privy Council, and even 
the limitations placed on such appeals when certain questions as 
to the Commonwealth constitution are raised are themselves 
subject to some qualifications! The broad result therefore is 
that as regards the Commonwealth the connection with the 
United Kingdom is retained, and the sovereignty of the Imperial 
Parliament is untouched. : 

The position of any State of the Commonwealth in regard to 
the United Kingdom remains pretty much what it was when the 
State, eg. Victoria, was still merely a self-governing colony. 
The Governor of Victoria is now, as then, appointed by the 
Crown, ie. by the English ministry. A bill passed by the 
Victorian Parliament still, in order that it may become an Act, 
requires the assent of the Crown. The Government of the 
Commonwealth possesses no power of putting a veto on bills 
passed by the Victorian Parliament. The right of appeal from 
a Court of Victoria to the English Privy Council stands, in most 
matters at any rate, substantially where it did before the passing 
of the Australian Commonwealth Act, except indeed that 
there is an alternative right of appeal to the High Court of 
Australia, for “the Constitution grants a new right of appeal 
“from the State Courts to the High Court, but does not take 
“away the existing right of appeal from the State Courts to 
“the Privy Council, which therefore remains unimpaired.” * 

The peculiarities of Australian federalism receive illustration 

1 See Constitution, ss. 71, 73, 74. 

? Quick and Garran, Annotated Constitution, p. 738. Thus an appeal lies 
from the Supreme Court of each of the States to the Privy Council from any 
decision of their Courts; as of right in circumstances defined in the several 
instruments constituting the Courts; by special leave from the Privy Council 
in all cases without exception. This rule applies to the exercise of any jurisdic- 
tion, whether State or federal, vested in the State Courts, but the State Courts 
have not full federal jurisdiction. From their power are excepted all cases 
involving the relation tnéer se of the States, and the States and the Common- 
wealth. 

Appeals lie also from the State Courts to the High Court of Australia in 
matters both of State and federal jurisdiction on terms detined in the Judicature 
Act, 1903, of the Commonwealth Parliament, The appellant has of course the 
choice of appeal. There is nothing to prevent an appeal from such Courts to 
decide whether any particular case falls under sec. 74 of the constitution or not. 
Nor is there any mode of preventing contradictory decisions on matters other than 
questions arising as to the limits inter se of the constitutional powers of the 
Commonwealth and those of any State or States, or to the limits inter se of the 
constitutional powers of any two or more States which cannot reach the Privy 
Council. The High Court further is not bound to accept the rulings of the Privy 
Council as superior to its own except in those cases where an actual appeal is 
successfully brought not from the Superior Court of a State, but from the High 
Court to the Privy Council. 

AUSTRALIAN FEDERALISM 537 
Feels en ee ee ee ee ea 

from & comparison between the constitution of the Canadian 
Dominion! and the constitution of the Australian Common- 
wealth. 

The Dominion is from one point of view more, and from 
another point of view less, directly subject to the control of the 
Imperial Parliament than is the Commonwealth. The Dominion 
is more completely subject than the Commonwealth, because the 
greater part of the Canadian constitution * can be amended only 
by an Act of the Imperial Parliament, whilst the Australian con- 
stitution can be amended by the people of the Commonwealth ; 
this distinction, it is well to add, sounds more important than it 
is in reality, since we may feel morally certain that the Imperial 
Parliament would introduce any amendment into the constitution 
of the Dominion which was deliberately desired by the majority 
at once of the people and of the Provinces of the Dominion. 
The Dominion of Canada, on the other hand, is less subject to 
the Imperial Parliament than is the Commonwealth, because the 
Provinces of the Dominion are in a sense less directly connected 
with the Imperial Government and Parliament than are the 
States of the Commonwealth. 

Here however we come across the most important distinction 
between Canadian federalism and Australian federalism, namely, . 
the difference of the relation of the federal power to the States, 
or, a8 in the case of Canada they are called, the Provinces, of 
the federation. The Dominion possesses all the residuary powers 
which are not under the Constitution conferred exclusively upon 
the Provinces ; the Commonwealth possesses only those powers 
which are conferred upon it by the Constitution, whilst all the 
residuary powers not conferred upon the Commonwealth belong 
to the States. 

The government of the Dominion, again, can exercise very 
considerable control over the legislation of the Provincial legis- 
latures and over the administration of the Provinces; the 
government of the Dominion can in all cases put a veto upon 
laws passed by the Provincial Parliaments; the government of 
the Dominion appoints the judges of the State Courts; the 
government of the Dominion, lastly, can appoint and dismiss 
the Lieutenant-Governor of any Province, who therefore is 
neither an Imperial official nor a Provincial official, but a 
Dominion official. 

1 See Munro, Constitution of Canada. f 

® But certain important though limited powers are under the constitution itself, 
é.e. the British North America Act, 1867, given to the Dominion Parliament and to 
the Provincial legislatures, enabling them from time to time to amend their con- 
stitutions (Munro, Constitution of Canada, p. 229). See eg. B.N.A. Act, 1867, 

ss. 85, 41, 45, 78, 83, 84. 

538 APPENDIX 

NOTE X 

MARTIAL LAW IN ENGLAND DURING TIME OF WAR 
OR INSURRECTION ! 

THE question for our consideration is, on what principle, and 
within what limits, does armed resistance to the suthority of 
the Crown, either on the part of an invading army, or on the 
part of rebels or rioters, afford a legal justification for acts done 
in England by the Crown, its servants, or loyal citizens, which, 
but for the existence of war or insurrection, would be breaches 
of law ? 

In considering this question two preliminary observations 
must be borne in mind. 

The first is that this note does not treat of several topics 
which are often brought within the vague term, martial law. 
It does not refer to Military Law, te. the rules contained in the 
Army Act and the Articles of War for the government of the 
Army and of all persons included within the term “persons 
subject to military law”; it has no reference to the laws that 
govern the action of an English General and his soldiers when 
carrying on war in a foreign country, or in their treatment of 
foreign invaders of England ; it has no reference to transactions 
taking place out of England, or to the law of any other country 
than England. It does not refer, ¢.g., to the law of Scotland or 
of Jersey. 

The second observation is that, in regard to the subject of 
this note, we, must constantly bear in mind the broad and 
fundamental principle of English law that a British subject must 
be presumed to possess at all times in England his ordinary 
common-law rights, and especially his right to personal freedom, 
unless it can be conclusively shown, as it often may, that he is 
under given circumstances deprived of them, either by Act of 
Parliament or by some well-established principle of law. This 

1 See Law Quarterly Review, xviii, Holdsworth, Martial Law Historically 
Considered, pp. 117-182; Richards, Martial Law, ibid. pp. 183-142; Pollock, 
What is Martial Law? ibid. pp. 152-158 ; Dodd, The Cuse of Marais, ibid. pp. 
143-151. The Case of Ship Money, 3 St. Tr. 826; Wall's Case, 28 St. Tr. 51; 
Ex parte D. F. Marais {1902}, A. C. 109; Forsyth, Cases and Opinions, ch. vi. 
p- 188 ; Clode, Military Forces of the Crown, ii. ch. xviii. 

£x parte Afilligan (Am.), 4 Wall. 2, and Thayer, Cases on Constitutional 
Lav, ii. p. 2376. This, and the other American cases on martial law, though 
not authorities in an English Court, contain an exposition of the common law in 
regard to martial law which deserves the most careful attention. 

See also Note IV., Right of Self-Defence ; Note V., Right of Public Meeting ; 
Note VI., Soldiers and Unlawful Meeting, ante. 

MARTIAL LAW 539 
ee ee ee ee eee 

presumption in favour of legality is an essential part of that rule 
of law' which is the leading feature of English institutions. 
Hence, if any one contends that the existence of a war in Eng- 
land deprives Englishmen of any of their common-law rights, ¢.g. 
by establishing a state of martial law, or by exempting military 
officers from the jurisdiction of the civil Courts, the burden of 
proof falls distinctly upon the person putting forward this con- 
tention. 

Our topic may be considered under three heads; first, the 
nature of martial law; secondly, the inferences which may be 
drawn from the nature of martial law ; thirdly, certain doctrines 
with regard to martial law which are inconsistent with the view 
propounded in this note. 

A. Nature of Martial Law 

“Martial law,” in the sense in which the expreasion is here 
used, means the power, right, or duty of the Crown and its 
servants, or, in other words, of the Government, to maintain 
public order, or, in technical language, the King’s peace, at what- 
ever cost of blood or property may be in strictness necessary 
for that purpose. Hence martial Jaw comes into existence in 
times of invasion or insurrection when, where, and in so far as 
the King’s peace cannot be maintained by ordinary means, and 
owes its existence to urgent and paramount necessity.? This 
power to maintain the peace by the exertion of any amount of 
force strictly necessary for the purpose is sometimes described 
as the prerogative of the Crown, but it may more correctly be 
considered, not only as a power necessarily possessed by the 
Crown, but also as the power, right, or duty possessed by, or 
incumbent upon, every loyal citizen of preserving or restoring 
the King’s peace in the case, whether of invasion or of rebellion 
or generally of armed opposition to the law, by the use of any 
amount of force whatever necessary to preserve or restore the 
peace. This power or right arises from the very nature of 
things. No man, whatever his opinions as to the limits of the 
prerogative, can question the duty of loyal subjects to aid, 
subject to the command of the Crown, in resistance, by all 
necessary means, to an invading army.® Nor can it be denied 

1 See chap. iv., ante. 

2 See Kent, Comm. i. p. 341, and opinion of Sir John Campbell and Sir R. M. 
Rolfe, Forsyth, Opinions on Constitutional Law, pp. 198, 199. 

8 See especially the Case of Ship Money, 3 St. Tr. 860, 905, 974, 975, 1011- 
1018, 1184, 1149, 1162, and 1214. 

540 APPENDIX 

that acta, otherwise tortious, are lawful when necessary for the 
resistance of invaders.! sok 

“ When enemies come against the realm to the sea coast, it is 
“lawful to come upon my land adjoining to the same coast, to 
“make trenches or bulwarks for the defence of the realm, for 
“every subject hath benefit by it. And, therefore, by the 
“common law, every man may come upon my land for the 
“defence of the realm, as appears 8 Ed. IV. 23. And in such 
‘‘ case or such extremity they may dig for gravel for the making 
“of bulwarks: for this is for the public, and every one hath 
“benefit by it. . . . And in this case the rule is true, Princeps 4 
 respublica ex justa causa possunt rem meam auferre.” * 

So to the same effect counsel for the defence in the Case of 
Ship Money. 

“My Lords, in these times of war I shall admit not only His 
‘‘ Majesty, but likewise every man that hath power in his hands, 
‘may take the goods of any within the realm, pull down their 
“ houses, or burn their corn, to cut off victuals from the enemy, 
‘and do all other things that conduce to the safety of the king- 
“dom, without respect had to any man’s property.” § 

And though these authorities refer, as is worth noticing, to 
interferences with rights of property and not to interferences 
with personal freedom, between which there exist considerable 
differences, it will not (it is submitted) be disputed that, in case 
of invasion, a general and his soldiers acting under the authority 
of the Crown may lawfully do acts which would otherwise be 
an interference with the personal liberty, or even, under con- 
ceivable circumstances, which may cause the death of British 
subjects, if these acts are a necessary part of military operations. 
The point to be borne in mind is that the power to oxercise 
martial law, which is not ill-described by an expression known 
to the American Courts, viz. the “ war power,” as it originates 
in, so it is limited by, the necessity of the case.‘ 

On this matter note the opinion of Sir J. Campbell and Sir 
R. M. Rolfe that “ martial law is merely a cessation from neces- 
“sity of all municipal law, and what necessity requires it 
“justifies” ;5 and this description of the circumstances which 
justify martial law also implies the limits within which it is 

1 See 1 Dyer, 368. 2 12 Rep. 12. 

? Case of Ship Money, 8 St. Tr. 826, 906. Compare especially the language 
of Holborne in the same case at p. 975, and langnage of Buller, J., in British 
Cast Plate Manufacturers v. Meredith, 4 T. R. at p. 797. 

ty ‘See especially opinion of Henley and Yorke, Forsyth, pp. 188, 189; 
opinion of Hargrave, thid. pp. 189, 190; opinion of Sir John Campbell and Sir 
R. M. Rolfe, ibid. pp. 198, 199. > Forsyth, p. 201. 

MARTIAL LAW 54t 

justifiable ; these have been stated with truth, if not with the 
precise accuracy of legal argument, by Sir James Mackintosh. 

“The only principle on which the law of England tolerates 
“ what is called Martial Law is necessity ; its introduction can 
“be justified only by necessity ; its continuance requires pre- 
“cisely the same justification of necessity ; and if it survives the 
“ necessity on which alone it rests for a single minute, it becomes 
“instantly a mere exercise of lawless violence. When foreign 
“invasion or Civil War renders it impossible for Courts of Law 
“to sit, or to enforce the execution of their judgments, it 
“becomes necessary to find some rude substitute for them, and 
“to employ for that purpose the Military, which is the only 
“remaining Force in the community. While the laws are silenced 
“by the noise of arms, the rulers of the Armed Force must 
‘punish, as equitably as they can, those crimes which threaten 
“their own safety and that of society ; but no longer.” } 

The existence of martial law thus understood, taken in com- 
bination with the rules of the common law as to the duty of 
loyal subjects, gives very wide authority in England to all 
persons, and of course above all to a general engaged in repelling 
an invasion. He holds the armed forces completely under his 
control; they are governed by military law;? 80 too are all 
citizens who, though not in strictness soldiers, are persons subject 
to military law; and in this connection it must be remembered 
that the King and his servants have a right to call for the help 
of every loyal subject in resisting an invasion,® whence it follows 
that the number of persons subject to military law may be 
greatly, indeed almost indefinitely, increased. A general again 
is clearly entitled to use or occupy any land which he requires 
for the purpose of military operations and may, if he see fit, 
erect fortifications thereon, and generally he has the right to use 
land or any other property which is required for the conduct of 
the war. It is again his right, and indeed his duty, when the 
necessity arises, to inflict instant punishment upon, and even, if 
need be, put to death, persons aiding and abetting the enemy or 
refusing such aid to the English army as can fairly be required 
of them. It is indeed difficult to picture to one’s self any 
legitimate warlike operation or measure which, while war is 
raging in England, a general cannot carry out without any breach 
of the law whatever. Let it too be noted that what is true of 
a general holds good of every loyal subject according to his 
situation and the authority which he derives from it, ¢g. of a 

1 Cited Clode, Military Forces of the Crown, ii. p. 486. 
2 See chaps. viii. and ix., ante. 
3 See Case of Ship Money, 3 St. Tr. 826, 975. 

eS SS ee ee, En ne a  ” e Mnaes | Sees Ss 

542 APPENDIX 
Oe a eee ee 

subordinate officer, of a magistrate, or even of a private citizen 
who is helping to resist an invader. Real obvious necessity in 
this case not only compels but justifies conduct which would 
otherwise be wrongful or criminal. To this add the considera 
tion, which has been strongly insisted upon by several able 
writers, that the conditions of modern warfare, such as the 
existence of the telegraph, whereby acts done, ¢.g., in London 
may affect military operations, ¢.g., in Northumberland, greatly 
extend the area of necessity, and may, conceivably at least, make 
it legally allowable, when war or armed insurrection exists in the 
north of England, to interfere summarily and without waiting for 
legal process with the freedom of persons residing in London or 
Bristol. However this may be, it is clear that the existence of 
the necessity which justifies the use of so-called martial law 
must depend on the circumstances of each case. 

The fact that necessity is the sole justification for martial 
law or, in other words, for a temporary suspension of the 
ordinary rights of English citizens during a period of war or 
insurrection, does however place a very real limit on the lawful 
exercise of force by the Crown or by its servants. The presence 
of a foreign army or the outbreak of an insurrection in the north 
of England, may conceivably so affect the state of the whole 
country as to justify measures of extra-legal force in every part 
of England, but neither war nor insurrection in one part of 
the country prima facie suspends the action of the law in other 
parts thereof. The fact that the Pretender’s army had advanced 
with unbroken success to Derby did not deprive the citizens of 
London of the ordinary rights of British subjects. No one has 
ever suggested that it would have justified the summary execu- 
tion at Tyburn of an Englishman there found guilty of treason 
by a court-martial. It is not easy to believe that, without a 
breach of the law of England, an Englishman imprisoned in 
London on a charge of high treason could have been taken to a 
part of the country where in 1745 war was raging, in order that 
he might there be tried and executed under the authority of a 
court-martial." Nor does the consideration that the summary 
execution of rebels, whose crimes could be punished by the 
ordinary course of law, may check the spread of treason, show 
that their execution is necessary or legal. We need not, more- 

1 If the language in the Charge of Blackburn, J., Reg. v. Eyre, p. 84, be cited 
in support of the possible legality of such a transaction, it must be remembered 
that Blackburn's hypothetical apology for Governor Eyre was based on certain 
statutes passed by the legislature of Jamaica, and that the whole tendency of the 
Charge of Cockburn, C. J., in Reg. v. Nelson, is to show that the execution of 
Gordon was illegal. 

MARTIAL LAW 543 

over, confine our observation to cases of punishment. It is easy to 
imagine circumstances under which the arrest and imprisonment 
_On suspicion of persons who are not guilty, or cannot be proved 
guilty of crime, may be salutary and expedient, but such arrest or 
imprisonment cannot be legally justified unless it be a matter of 
necessity.’ If it be urged, that the respect due in England to 
the ordinary law of the land places restrictions which may be 
inconvenient or even noxious on the exercise of the authority of 
the Crown and its servants, the truth of the observation may be 
admitted. The reply to it is twofold: first, that the mainten- 
ance of the legal rights of citizens is itself a matter of the 
highest expediency ; secondly, that whenever at a period of 
national danger a breach of law is demanded, if not by absolute 
necessity, yet by considerations of political expediency, the 
lawbreaker, whether he be a general, or any other servant of the 
Crown, who acts bond fide and solely with a view to the public 
interest, may confidently count on the protection of an Act of 
Indemnity. 

Nor is it irrelevant at this point to note the striking analogy 
between the right of an individual to exercise force, even to the 
extent of causing death, in self-defence, and the right of a 
general or other loyal citizen to exercise any force whatever 
necessary for the defence of the realm. In either case the right 
arises from necessity. An individual may use any amount of 
force necessary to avert death or grievous bodily harm at the 
hands of a wrongdoer,’ but, if he kills a ruffian, he must to justify 
his conduct show the necessity for the force employed in self- 
protection. So a general, who under martial law imprisons or 
kills British subjects in England, must, if he is to escape punish- 
ment, justify his conduct by proving its necessity. The analogy 
between the two cases is not absolutely complete, but it ia sug- 
gestive and full of instruction. 

Observe, further, that the principle which determines the 
limits of martial law is the principle which also determines the 
rights and duties of magistrates, of constables, and of loyal 
citizens generally when called upon to disperse or prevent 
unlawful assemblies or to suppress a riot. No doubt the degree 
and the area of the authority exercised by a general when 
resisting an invading army is far greater than the degree and the 
area of the authority exercised by a mayor, a magistrate, or a con- 
stable when called upon to restore the peace of a town disturbed 
by riot, but the authority though differing in degree has the 
same object and has the sume source. It is exercised for the 

1 See specially language of Holborne, Oxse of Ship Money, 3 St. Tr. p. 975. 
See App., Note IV., The Right of Self-Defence, p. 489, ante, 

544 APPENDIX 

maintenance of the King’s peace ; it is justified by necessity. So 
true is this, that, when you need to fix the limits of martial law, 
you are compelled to study the case of FR. v. Pinney,! which refers 
not to the power and authority of a general in command of 
soldiers, but to the duty of the Mayor of Bristol to suppress 
a riot. 

In every case in which the legal right or duty arises to maintain 
the King’s peace by the use of force, there will be found to exist 
two common features. The legal right, eg. of a general or of 
a mayor, to override the ordinary law of the land is, in the first 
place, always correlative to his legal duty to do so. Such legal 
right or duty, in the second place, always laste eo long, and so 
long only, as the circumstances exist which necessitate the 
use of force. Martial law exists only during time of war; 
the right of a mayor to use force in putting an end to a riot 
ceases when order is restored, just as it only begins when a 
breach of the peace is threatened or has actually taken place. 
The justification and the source of the exercise in England of 
extraordinary or, as it may be termed, extra-legal power, is 
always the necessity for the preservation or restoration of the 
King’s peace. 

B. Conclusions 

From the nature of martial law * follow four conclusions :— 

First.—Martial law cannot exist in time of peace. 

This is on all hands admitted.$ 

What, then, is the test for determining whether a state of peace 
exists at a given time, in a given part of England, say London ? 

The answer is that no unfailing test is to be found; the 
existence of a state of peace is a question of fact to be determined 
in any case before the Courts in the same way as any other such 
question.* 

According, indeed, to a number of old and respectable 
authorities, a state of war cannot exist, or, in other words, a 
state of peace always does exist when and where the ordinary 
Courts are open. But this rule cannot, it would seem, be laid 
down as anything like an absolute principle of law, for the fact 
that for some purposes some tribunals have been permitted to 

1 3 St. Tr. (n. 8.) 11, with which compare Blackburn's Charge in R. v. Eyre, 
pp. 58, 59. 

4 Cockburn’s Charge, Reg. v. Nelson, p. 85. 

> Compare Ez parte D. F. Marais [1902], A. C. 109; Ax parte Milligan, 4 
Wall. 2 (Am.). 

* Whether the Courts may not take judicial notice of the existence of a state 
ot war? 

MARTIAL LAW 545 

pursue their ordinary course in a district in which martial law 
has been proclaimed, is not conclusive proof that war is not there 
raging. Yet the old maxim, though not to be accepted as a 
rigid rule, suggests, it is submitted, a sound principle. At a 
time and place where the ordinary civil Courts are open, and 
fully and freely exercise their ordinary jurisdiction, there exists, 
presumably, a state of peace, and where there is peace there 
cannot be martial law. 

“If, in foreign invasion or civil war, the Courts are actually 
“closed, and it is impossible to administer criminal justice 
“according to law, then, on the theatre of active military 
“operations, where war really prevails, there is a necessity to 
“furnish a substitute for the civil authority, thus overthrown, to 
“preserve the safety of the army and society ; and as no power 
“is left but the military, it is allowed to govern by martial rule 
“until the laws can have their free course. As necessity creates 
“‘the rule, so it limits its duration; for, if this government is 
“continued after the Courts are reinstated, it is a gross usurpation 
“of power. Martial rule can never exist where the Courts are 
“open, and in the proper and unobstructed exercise of their 
‘jurisdiction. It is also confined to the locality of actual 
“war.” ? 

Secondly.—The existence of martial lato does not in any way 
depend upon the proclamation of martial law. 

The proclamation of martial law does not, unless under some 
statutory provision, add to the power or right inherent in the 
Government to use force for the repression of disorder, or for 
resistance to invasion. It does not confer upon the Government 
any power which the Government would not have possessed 
without it. The object and the effect of the proclamation can 
only be to give notice, to the inhabitants of the place with 
regard to which martial law is proclaimed, of the course which 
the Government is obliged to adopt for the purpose of defending 
the country, or of restoring tranquillity.® 

Thirdly.—The Courts have, at any rate in time of peace, jurisdic- 
tion in respect of acts which have been done by military authorities 
and others during a state of war.‘ 

“The justification of any particular act done in a state of war 

1 Re parte D. F. Marais [1902], A. C. 109. -_ 

2 Ke parte Milligan, 4 Wall. 2; Thayer, Cases on Constitutional Law, part 
iv. p. 2390. 

S00 opinion of Campbell and Rolfe, Forsyth, p. 198. 

4 See Cockburn’s Charge, Reg. v. Nelson ; Blackburn’s Charge, Reg. v. Hyre ; 
Ex parte Milligan, 4 Wall. 2; and compare Wall's Case, 28 St. Tr. 61. 
Wright v. Fitsgerald, 27 St. Tr. 759. ; 

N 

546 APPENDIX 

“ig ultimately examinable in the ordinary Courts, and the prior 
“question, whether there was a state of war at a given time and 
“place, is a question of fact.” 

The truth of this statement of the law is almost self-evident. 
A sues X in the High Court for assault and for false imprison- 
men ; X justifies the alleged assault on the ground that X was 
at the time of the act complained of the colonel of a regiment, 
and that the alleged assault was the arrest and imprisonment of 
A by X under the orders, say, of the Commander-in-Chief, 
during a time of war and after the proclamation of martial law. 
The defence may or may not be good, but it is certain that the 
Courts have, at any rate after the restoration of peace, jurisdic- 
tion to inquire into the facts of the case, and that one of the 
necessary inquiries is whether a state of war did exist at the time 
when 4 was arrested, though it is quite possible that the exist 
ence of a state of war may be a fact of which the Courts take 
judicial notice. Expressions, indeed, have been used in a recent 
case * which, if taken alone, might seem to assert that the ordinary 
Courts have no jurisdiction in respect of acts which have been 
done by military authorities in time of war. But the very width 
of the language used by the Privy Council in Ez parte D. F. 
Maravs warns us that it must be limited to the circumstances of 
the particular case. It does not necessarily assert more, and as 
regards transactions taking place in England, cannot be taken to 
mean more than that the Courts will not, as indeed they in 
strictness cannot, interfere with actual military operations, or, 
whilst war is actually raging, entertain proceedings against 
military men and others for acts done under so-called martial 
law. The judgment of the Privy Council, in short, whatever 
the application of its principles to England, asserts nothing as to 
the jurisdiction of the Courts when peace is restored in respect 
of acts done during time of war, and eminent lawyers have held 
that even in time of war the exercise of jurisdiction by the 
ordinary Courts is rather rendered impossible than superseded. 
“The question, how far martial law, when in force, super- 
“‘sedes the ordinary tribunals, can never... arise. Martial 
“law is stated by Lord Hale to be in truth no law, but some- 
‘thing rather indulged than allowed as a law, and it can only 
“be tolerated because, by reason of open rebellion, the enforcing 
“of any other law has become impossible. It cannot be said in 
“strictness to supersede the ordinary tribunals, inasmuch as it 

1 Sir F. Pollock, What is Martial Law? L.Q.R. xviii. pp. 156, 157. 

on a parte D. F. Marais [1902,] A. C. 109, 114, 115, judgment of Privy 
uncil, 

MARTIAL LAW $47 

“only exists by reason of those tribunals having been already 
“‘ practically superseded.” } 

Fourthly.—The protection of military men and others against 
actions or prosecutions in respect of unlawful acts done during a time 
of war, bond fide, and in the service of the country, is an Act of 
Indemnity.* 

An Act of Indemnity is a statute the object of which is to 
make legal transactions which, when they took place, were 
illegal, or to free individuals to whom the statute applies from 
liability for having broken the law. Statutes of this description 
have been invariably, or almost invariably, passed after the 
determination of a period of civil war or disturbance, ¢9. after 
the Rebellions of 1715 and of 1745,3 and their very object has 
been to protect officials and others who, in the interest of the 
country, have in a time of danger pursued an illegal course of 
conduct, ¢.g. have imprisoned citizens whom they had no legal 
authority to imprison. For our present purpose it is absolutely 
essential to appreciate the true character of an Act of Indemnity. 
Such a statute has no application to conduct which, however severe, 
is strictly lawful. A magistrate who, under proper circumstances, 
causes an unlawful assembly to be dispersed by force, or an 
officer who, under proper circumstances, orders his troops to 
fire on a mob and thereby, in dispersing the mob, wounds or 
kills some of the crowd, neither of them require to be indemni- 
fied. They are sufficiently protected by the common-law 
justification that in discharge of their duty they used the force, 
and no more than the force necessary to maintain the King’s 

. A general, an officer, a magistrate, or a constable, on 
the other hand, who, whether in time of war or in time of peace, 
does without distinct legal justification, any act which injures 
the property or interferes with the liberty of an Englishman, 
incurs the penalties to which every man is liable who commits a 
breach of the law. The law-breaker’s motives may be in the 
highest degree patriotic, his conduct may be politically sagacious, 
and may confer great benefit on the public, but all this will not, 
in the absence of legal justification, save him from liability to an 
action, or, it may be, to a prosecution; he needs for his pro- 
tection an Act of Indemnity. On this point note the words of 
a judge of the highest reputation, who was by no means inclined 
to minimise the authority of the Crown and its servants. 

“Where the inquiry is, whether an officer is guilty of 

1 Joint opinion of Sir J. Campbell and Sir R. M. Rolfe, cited Forsyth, p. 199. 

2 See pp. 47, 228, ante. 

3 See Clode, Military Forces of the Crown, ii. pp. 164, 165 ; 1 Geo. L. St. 2, 
«. 39, and 19 Geo. II. c. 20. 

548 APPENDIX 

“ misdemeanour from an excess beyond his duty, the principle 
“ig very much the same, or rather it is the complement of that 
‘laid down in the case of Rex v. Pinney. If the officer does 
“some act altogether beyond the power conferred upon him by 
« law, so that it could never under any state of circumstances have 
“been his duty to do it, he is responsible according to the 
“quality of that act; and even if the doing of that illegal act 
“was the salvation of the country, that, though it might be a 
“good ground for -the Legislature afterwards passing an Act of 
“Indemnity, would be no bar in law to a criminal prosecution ; 
“that is, if he has done something clearly beyond his power. 
“But if the act which he has done is one which, in a proper state 
“of circumstances, the officer was authorised to do, so that in 
“an extreme case, on the principle laid down in R. v. Pinney, 
“he might be criminally punished for failure of duty for not 
‘doing it, then the case becomes very different.” ! 

This passage from Blackburn’s charge suggests further the 
proper answer to an objection which is sometimes raised against 
the view of martial law maintained in this treatise. 

How, it is urged, can it be reasonable that a man should be 
liable to punishment, and therefore need an indemnity for having 
done an act (¢.g. having by the use of force dispersed the mob) 
which it was his duty to do, and for the omission to do which 
he might have incurred severe punishment 3 

The answer is, that the supposed difficulty or dilemma cannot 
in reality arise. The apparent or alleged unreasonableness of 
the law is created by the ambiguity of the word duty, and by 
confusing a man’s “legal duty” with his “moral duty.” Now, 
for the non-performance of a man’s legal duty, he may, of course, 
be punished, but for the performance of a legal duty he needs no 
Act of Indemnity. For the performance, on the other hand, of 
any moral duty, which is not a legal duty, a man may un- 
doubtedly, if he thereby infringes upon the rights of his fellow- 
citizens, expose himself to punishment of one kind or another, 
and may therefore need an Act of Indemnity to protect him 
from the consequences of having done what is legally wrong, 
though, under the peculiar circumstances of the case, morally 
right. But then, for the non-performance of a merely moral 
duty, he will not incur the risk of punishment, If the Mayor 
of Bristols omits, by the use of the necessary force, to put down 
a riot, this omission undoubtedly exposes him to punishment, 
since he neglecta to perform a legal duty ; but if he does perform 
his duty, and by the use of a proper amount of force puts down 

2 Blackburn’s Charge, Reg. v. Eyre, p. 58. 

MARTIAL LAW $49 
i 

the riot, he incurs no legal liability to punishment, and needs no 
Act of Indemnity for his protection. If, on the other hand, 
at a period of threatened invasion or rebellion, a magistrate, 
without any legal authority, arrests and imprisons on suspicion a 
number of persons whom he holds to be disloyal, he may be 
performing a moral duty, and, if his view of the state of things 
turns out right, may have rendered a great service to the 
country ; but he assuredly needs'an Aot of Indemnity to protect 
him from actions for false imprisonment. But, and this is the 
point to note, if our magistrate be a man of more prudence than 
energy, and omits to arrest men whom ex hypothesi he has no 
legal right to arrest, his conduct may incur the blame of patriots, 
but cannot bring him before the Courts. A man, in short, may 
be punished for having omitted to do an act which it is his legal 
duty to perform, but needs no Act of Indemnity for having done 
his legal duty. A man, on the other hand, who does a legal 
wrong, whilst performing a moral which is not a legal duty 
does require an Act of Indemnity for his protection, but then a 
man will never incur punishment for the simple omission to 
perform a merely moral duty. 

C. Other Doctrines with regard to Martial Law 

In opposition to the view of martial law upheld in this 
treatise, which may conveniently be termed the “doctrine of 
immediate necessity,” three other doctrines are, or have been 
maintained. Of these the first bases the use of martial law on 
the royal prerogative ; the second on the immunity of soldiers 
from liability to proceedings in the civil Courts as contrasted 
with the military Courts for any act bona fide done in the carrying 
out of military operations; and the third (which extends very 
widely the meaning of the term necessity) on political necessity 
or expediency. 

(1) The Doctrine of the Prerogative——It is sometimes alleged, 
or implied, that the Crown may, by virtue of the prerogative, in 
time of war proclaim martial law, and suspend or override the 
ordinary law of the land, and this view is supposed to derive 
support from the consideration that the Petition of Right does 
not condemn martial law in time of war. 

The fatal objection to this doctrine, in so far as it means any- 
thing more than the admitted right of the Crown and its 
servants to use any amount of force necessary for the mainten- 
ance of the peace or for repelling invasion, is that it utterly lacks 
legal authority, whilst to the inference suggested from the 
language of the Petition of Right no better reply can be given 

550 APPENDIX 

than that supplied by the words of Blackburn, namely, “It 
“would be an exceedingly wrong presumption to say that the 
“ Petition of Right, by not condemning martial law in time of 
‘‘ war, sanctioned it,” though, as he cautiously adda, “it did not 
“in terms condemn it.” ! Saal } 

(2) The Doctrine of Immuntty.2—This doctrine, it 18 conceived, 
may be thus stated. An officer in command of an army must of 
necessity, in carrying out military operations against an invader, 
override ordinary rights whether of property or of personal 
liberty. Decisive authorities may be produced * in support of 
the proposition that he may lawfully violate rights of property, 
e.g. can, without incurring any legal liability, do acts which 
amount to trespass. But all legal rights stand on the same level ; 
and if an officer can lawfully occupy an Englishman’s land, 
or destroy his property, he can also lawfully, whilst bona Jide 
carrying on war against a public enemy, imprison Englishmen, 
inflict punishment upon them, or even deprive them of life, and, 
in short, interfere with any of the rights of Englishmen in so far 
as is required for the carrying out of military operations. The 
soundness of this view is, it is urged, confirmed by the admitted 
inability of a civil Court to judge of the due discharge of 
military duties, and by the consideration that no Court would, 
or in fact could, during a period of warfare interfere with a 
general’s mode of conducting the war, or with any act done by 
him or by soldiers acting under his orders, whence, as it is 
alleged, it follows that acts bona fide done in the course of 
military operations fall outside the jurisdiction of the ordinary 
Courts, not only during war time, but also after the restoration 
of peace.‘ To put this doctrine of immunity in what appears to 
me to be its most plausible form, the outbreak of war is to be 
regarded as a suspension of the ordinary law of the land, as 
regards, at any rate, officers in command of troops and engaged 
in resisting invaders. On this view a general would occupy, 
during the conduct of war, a position analogous to that of a judge 
when engaged in the discharge of his judicial functions, and no 
action or other proceeding in the Courts of Common Law would 
lie against an officer for acts bona fide done as a part of a 
military operation, just as no action lies against a judge for acts 
done in discharge of his official duties. 

? Blackburn's Charge, R. v. Eyre, p. 73, with which should be read Ppp- 
69-73, which suggest the reasons why the authors of the Petition of Right may 
have omitted all reference to martial law in time of war. 

3 See for a very able statement of the theory here criticised, H. Erle Richards’ 
Martial Law, L.Q.R. xviii. p. 183. 

® Bee pp. 540, 541, ante. 

“ See L.Q.R. xviii. p. 140. 

MARTIAL LAW 551 
SS eee Toe A ads 

This doctrine of immunity is, however, open, it is submitted, 
to the very strongest objections. Most of the undoubted facts 
on which it rests, eg. the right of a general when resisting an 
invasion to use freely the land or other property of Englishmen, 
are merely applications of the principle that a loyal citizen may 
do any act necessary for the maintenance of the King’s peace, 
and especially for the defeat of an invading army. But for the 
broad inferences based on this fact and similar facts there appears 
to exist no sufficient ground. 

In support of the doctrine of immunity there can be produced 
no direct authority, whilst it appears to be absolutely incon- 
sistent, not only with the charge of Cockburn, C.J., in 2. v. 
Nelson, but also with the principles or assumptions which are laid 
down or made in the charge of Blackburn, J., in R. v. Eyre. The 
doctrine, further, is really inconsistent with the constant passing 
of Acts of Indemnity with a view to covering deeds done in the 
course of civil war or of rebellion. Nor is it easy to follow the 
line of reasoning by which it is assumed that if the Courts 
have no power to interfere with the acts of a general or his 
soldiers whilst war is raging, the Courts have no jurisdiction to 
entertain during peace proceedings in respect of acts done by a 
- general and his soldiers during a time of war. Here, at anyrate, 
we apparently come into contradiction with some of the best 
known facts of legal history. The Courts, not only of England, 
but also of the United States, have never entertained the least 
doubt of their jurisdiction to inquire into the character of any 
act done during war time which was prima facie a breach of 
law. 

(3) The Doctrine of Political Necessity or Ezxpediency.1—The 
existence of war or invasion justifies—it is maintained by eminent 
lawyers, whose opinion is entitled to the highest respect—the 
use of what is called martial law to this extent, namely, that, 
e.g. during an invasion, a general, a mayor, a magistrate, or 
indeed any loyal citizen, is legally justified in doing any act, 
even though prima facie a tort or a crime, as to which he can 
prove to the satisfaction of a jury that he did it for the public 
service in good faith, and for reasonable and probable cause. 
This doctrine, which for the sake of convenience I term the 
doctrine of political expediency, manifestly justifies from a legal 
point of view many acts not dictated by immediate necessity. 
The scope thereof may be best understood from an example 
which I give in the words of its ablest and very learned 
advocate, Sir Frederick Pollock :— 

1 See Pollock, What ts Martial Law! L.Q.R. xviii. p. 162. 

552 APPENDIX 

“An enemy’s army has landed in force in the north, and is 
“marching on York. The peace is kept in London and Bristol, 
“and the Courts are not closed. It is known that evil-disposed 
‘persons have agreed to land at several ports for the purpose 
“of joining the enemy, and giving him valuable aid and in- 
“formation. Bristol is one of the suspected porte. What shall 
“the Lord Mayor of Bristol dot I submit that it is his plain 
“moral duty as a good citizen (putting aside for a moment the 
‘question of strict law) to prevent suspected persons from land- 
“ing, or to arrest and detain them if found on shore; to assume 
“control of the railway traffic, and forbid undesirable passengers 
“to proceed northward, and to exercise a strict censorship and 
“inquisitorial power over letters and telegrams. All these things 
“are in themeelves trespasses (except, probably, forbidding an 
“alien to land); some of them may perhaps be justifiable under 
“the statutory powers of the Postmaster-General, but summary 
“restraint by way of prevention must be justified by a common 
“law power arising from necessity, if at all. Observe that I 
“gay nothing for the present about trial or punishment. The 
“popular (and sometimes official) notion that martial law neces- 
‘sarily means trial by court-martial has caused much confusion. 
‘Summary punishment may or may not be necessary. In that 
“respect the Mayor's authority would be like that of the master 
“of a ship. 

“Now, if the Lord Mayor of Bristol fails to do these things, 
“he will surely find himself in as much trouble as his predecessor 
“(Mr. Pinney] in the time of the Bristol riots. And I do not 
“think he will improve his defence by pleading that the peace 
“was still kept in Bristol, and the Courts were open, and there- 
“fore he thought he had no power to do anything beyond the 
“ordinary process of law. Nor yet will he mend matters if he 
“says that he was waiting for an Order in Council which was 
“never issued, or never came to his knowledge. At best it 
“will be a topic of slight mitigation.” ! 

The objections to a view which at bottom differs essentially 
from what I have termed “the doctrine of immediate necessity ” 
are these: The theory under consideration rests on little legal 
authority, except the case of R. v. Pinney ;* but that case, when 
ite circumstances are examined, does not justify the inferences 
apparently grounded upon it. The charge against Mr. Pinney 
was in substance that, being the magistrate specially respon- 
sible for the maintenance of order in the town of Bristol, he 

1 Pollock, What is Martial Law! L.Q.R. xviii. pp. 155, 156. 
2 3 St. Tr. (n.s.) 11. 

: : MARTIAL LAW 553 
sere cee te re 
neglected to take the proper steps to prevent the outbreak 
of a riot, and after the King’s peace had been openly violated 
by rioters, the prison broken open, and the Bishop’s Palace 
and other houses burned down, he did not take adequate 
steps to arrest offenders or to restore order. It is im- 
poesible to imagine a case under which there could exist a more 
urgent and stringent necessity for the use of force in the restora- 
tion of order. If the charges brought by the Crown could 
have been made out, Mr. Pinney would have been guilty of 
as patent a neglect of duty as could have been committed 
by any public official placed in a position of high authority. 
That he acted feebly can hardly be doubted; yet, in spite of 
this, he was, with the apparent approval of the Judge, held 
innocent of any crime. The point, however, specially to be 
noted is that, in Pinney’s Case, no question whatever was raised 
as to the poasible justification for acts which were prima facie 
tortious, but were done by a magistrate on reasonable grounds 
of public expediency, though lying quite outside the scope of his 
ordinary authority. How, in short, the case of Mr. Pinney, which 
at most establishes only that a magistrate who fails to make due 
efforts to maintain the peace is guilty of a crime, can be supposed 
to justify the action of the imaginary Mayor of Bristol, who 
because an invasion is taking place feels it to be his right or 
his duty to override, in a: town where peace prevails, all the 
ordinary rules of the common law, many lawyers will find it 
difficult to explain. Still harder will they find it to point out 
why a mayor, under the circumstances so graphically described 
by Sir Frederick Pollock, should fear that his failure to show 
despotic energy should expose him to the legal charges brought 
against Mr. Pinney. But if Pinney’s case does not go far enough 
to sustain the doctrine of political expediency, I know of no 
other case which can be produced in its support. 

This doctrine, however, is open to the further objection, of 
which its able advocate recognises the force, that it is inconsistent 
with the existence of Acts of Indemnity. ‘It may,” writes Sir 
Frederick Pollock, “ be objected that, if the view now propounded 
“is correct, Acte of Indemnity are superfluous. But this is not so. 
“ An Act of Indemnity is a measure of prudence and grace. Its 
“office is not to justify unlawful acts ex post facto, but to quiet 
‘doubts, to provide compensation for innocent persons in respect 
‘of damage inevitably caused by justifiable acts which would 
“not have supported a legal claim.” ? 

The attempt to meet this objection is ingenious, but the 

1 Pollock, What is Martial Law? L.Q.R. xviii. p. 157. 

554 APPENDIX 

endeavour rests on a very inadequate description of an Act of 
Indemnity. Such a statute may no doubt be in part a measure 
of prudence and grace, but it is usually far more than this. 
The Indemnity Acts, whatever their formal language, which for 
a century or so protected Nonconformists from penalties in- 
curred year by year through the deliberate breach of the Test 
and Corporation Acts, the Acts of Indemnity passed after the 
Rebellions of 1715 and of 1745, the Act of Indemnity passed 
by the Irish Parliament after the Rebellion of 1798 which was 
not wide enough to protect Mr. T. Judkin Fitzgerald! from 
actions for acts of cruelty done by him in the suppression of 
the Rebellion, the further Act finally passed which apparently 
was wide enough to place him beyond the reach of punishment, 
and the Act of the legislature of Jamaica which was successfully 
pleaded by the defendant in Phillips v. Eyre, were, it is sub- 
mitted, all of them enactments intended to protgct men from 
the consequences of a breach of the law. An Act of Indemnity 
in short is, as is insisted upon throughout this treatise, the 
legalisation of illegality, and is constantly intended to protect 
from legal penalties men who, though they have acted in the 
supposed, or even real discharge of a political duty, have broken 
the law of the land. This is a point on which it is necessary 
to insist strongly, for the determination of the question at issue 
between the supporters of the “doctrine of immediate necessity ” 
and the advocates of the “doctrine of political necessity,” turns 
upon the answer to the inquiry, What is the true nature of an 
Act of Indemnity? If such an Act is essentially the legalisation 
of illegality, the doctrine of political necessity or expediency 
falls, it is submitted, to the ground. 

Two circumstances give an apparent but merely apparent 
impressiveness to the doctrine of political expediency. The first 
is the paradox involved in the contention that action on behalf 
of the State which is morally right may be legally wrong, and, 
therefore, be the proper object of an Act of Indemnity. This 
paradox however is, as already pointed out, apparent only, and 
after all amounts merely to the assertion that a man’s ordinary 
duty is to keep within the limits of the law, and that, if he is 
at any moment compelled, on grounds of public interest, to trans- 
gress these limits, he muat obtain the condonation of the sovereign 
power, i.e. the King in Parliament. The second is the current 
idea that, at a great crisis, you cannot have too much energy. 
But this notion is a popular delusion. The fussy activity of a 
hundred mayors playing the part of public-spirited despots 

1 Wright v. Fitzgerald, 27 St. Tr. 759; Lecky, History of England in 
Kighteenth Century, viii. pp. 22-27. 

MARTIAL LAW 555 
Sena cee en tent tet i ta onda aemnaietcelemaasee 

would increase tenfold the miseries and the dangers imposed 
upon the country by an invasion. 

NOTE XI 
CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL DES CONFLITS' 

The Conflict Court consists of the following persons :— 

I. A President, the Minister of Justice (Garde des sceauz).® 
He rarely attends, though he may attend, preside, and vote. 

Il. Eight elected judges, namely :— 

(a) Three judges of the Court of Cassation (Conseillers 4 la 
Cour de Cassation) elected for three years by their colleagues, i.e. 
by the judges of the Court of Cassation. 

(6) Three members of the Council of State (Conseillers d'état 
en service ordinatre)® elected for three years by their colleagues 
(i.e. by the Conseillers d'état en service ordinaire). 

(c) Two other persons elected by the foregoing six judges of 
the Conflict Court, enumerated under heads (a) and (). 

These two other persons ought in strictness to be elected 
neither from the judges of the Court of Cassation nor from the 
members of the Council of State, but they are in general elected 
one from the Court of Cassation, the other from the Council 
of State. : 

These eight persons, who are re-eligible and usually re-elected, 
or, if we include the Minister of Justice, these nine persons, 
constitute the judges of the Conflict Court. 

Then there are two substitutes (suppleants) elected by the 
judges coming under the heads (a) and (5) who act only when 
one of the judges of the Conflict Court cannot act. 

There are further two so-called Commissioners of the Govern- 
ment (Commissaires du Gouvernement)* appointed for a year by 

1 See Berthélemy, Traité Elémentaire de Droit Administratif (5th ed.), pp. 880, 
881; Chardon, L’ Administration de la France, p. 411. 
2 A Vice-President, who generally presides, is elected by and from the eight 

elected judges of the Conflict Court. 

® Conseillers d’ tat en service ordinaire are permanent members of the Council 
of State. They are contrasted with Conseillers en service extraordinaire, who 
are temporary members of the Council, for the discharge of some special duty. 
See Berthélemy, p. 126. 

4 The name may be misleading. These commissioners are, it is said, absolutely 
free from pressure by the Government. They are representatives of the law, they 
are not strictly judges, the opinions which they express often disagree with the 
opinion of the representative of the Government, viz. the prefect, who has raised 
the conflict, ie. has brought before the Court the question whether a judicial 
court has exceeded its jurisdiction by dealing with a question of administrative law. 

556 APPENDIX 

the President of the Republic; the one for a year from the 
Masters of Requests (Mattres des requétes), who belong to the 
Council of State, the other from the class of public prosecutors, 
belonging to the Court of Cassation (avocats généraux 4 la Cour de 
Cassation). 

NOTE XII 
PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE CROWN 

Technically it is impossible under English law to bring an 
action against the Crown, and this impossibility is often said 
to be based on the principle that the Crown can do no wrong. 
Hence well-informed foreign critics, and perhaps some English- 
men also, often think that there is in reality no remedy against 
the Crown, or in other words, against the Government, for 
injuries done to individuals by either, 

(1) The breach of a contract made with the Crown, or with 
a Government department, or 

(2) A wrong committed by the Crown, or rather by its 
servants. 

This idea is however in substance erroneous. 

As to Breach of Contract 

For the breach of a contract made with a Government depart- 
ment on behalf of the Crown a Petition of Right will in general 
lie, which though in form a petition, and requiring the sanction 
of the Attorney-General (which is never refused), is in reality 
an action. 

Many Government departments, further, such for instance as 
the Commissioners of Works, who have the general charge of 
public buildings, are corporate bodies, and can be sued as such. 

Contracts made with Government departments or their 
representatives are made on the express or implied terms of 
payment out of monies to be provided by Parliament, but the 
risk of Parliament not providing the money is not one which 
any contractor takes into consideration. 

As to Wrongs 

Neither an action nor a Petition of Right lies against the 
Crown for a wrong committed by its servants. 

The remedy open to a person injured by a servant of the 

PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE CROWN 557 

Crown in the course of his service is an action against the 
person who has actually done or taken part in doing the wrong- 
ful act which has caused damage, But, speaking generally, no 
injustice results from this, for the Crown, te the Government, 
usually pays damages awarded against a servant of the State for 
& wrong done in the course of his service. Actions, for instance, 
have been constantly brought against officers of the Royal Navy 
for damage done by collisions with other ships caused by the 
negligence of such officers. The damage recovered against the 
officer is almost invariably paid by the Admiralty. 

It would be an amendment of the law to enact that a 
Petition of Right should lie against the Crown for torts 
committed by the servants of the Crown in the course of their 
service. But the technical immunity of the Crown in respect 
of such torts is not a subject of public complaint, and in practice 
works little, if any, injustice. 

It should be further remembered that much business which 
in foreign countries is carried on by persons who are servants 
of the State is in England transacted by corporate bodies, ¢.9. 
railway companies, municipal corporations, and the like, which 
are legally fully responsible for the contracts made on their 
behalf or wrongs committed by their officials or servants in 
the course of their service.! 

1 See Lowell, The Government of England, ii. pp. 490-494. 

tt omg 

_ oy opin rapt he 

al be. ‘w 

a ir) “M I hows * , a 
- 7 vf * ~, Sead 
Ane oom Sasi 
= ‘ is Pw TY in At. ve <a 3 ott be 

be} * es 1 healt aes 
n 

INDEX 

Act of Settlement, the, 27 ; the descent 
of the Crown under, 41, 42 

Acta, the Commonwealth of Australia 
Constitution Act, 113 note, 150 note, 
and Appendiz, Note IX., 529-537 ; 
Deceased Husband’s Brother Act, 
1900 (New Zealand), 115 note; Im- 
migrants’ Restriction Act, 1907 
(Transvaal), 116 note; of Congress, 
24th September 1789, 157; the 
Supreme Court of the United States 
and, 157, 159; the foundations of, 
160; instances of unconstitutional, 
161; British North America Act, 
1867, 161-163 and notes; Canadian 
Provincial, 163; the Extradition, 
position of foreign criminals under, 
220 and note; the Alien, of 1848, 
228 ; the Press Licensing Act, dis- 
continued, 257; the Mutiny, 1689, 

' 294, preamble of, 295; the Army 
Act, 1881, 295, 296 note, 298 note ; 
the Revenue under, 309; relating 
to Taxation, 310; the National Debt 
and Local Loans Act, 1887, 313; 
the Appropriation Act, 313 ; Public 
Authorities Protection Act, 1893, 
$84; the Merchant Shipping Act, 
1876, 392; the Alien, 408 ; Foreigu 
Enlistment, 408 ; Extradition, 408 ; 
Naturalization, 419 ; the Septennial, 
433 

Acts, Local and Private, 47 

Acts of Indemnity, objects of, 47, 51, 
547-549, 558, 554; in connection 
with the Habeas Corpus Suspension 
Act, 228, 231-233 

Acts of Parliament, rules of the Privy 
Council under, 50; as opposed to 
moral or international law, 59 ; power 
of Parliament in regard to preceding, 
61; Railway Companies subject to, 
91; practical importance of, 408 

Acts of Union, the (Great Britain), 
62; the fifth Article of, 64; as 
subject to repeal, 141 

Administrative Law, in England and 
France, 324, 325, 374; characteristics 
of, in France, 334 ef seg. ; foundations 
of, in France, laid by Napoleon, 346 

Alien Act of 1848, power of the 
Ministry under, 228, 408 

Aliens, case of arrest of, 206, 220; 
position of, in England, 220 and 
note; Act of 1848 relating to, 228 ; 
position of, in England, 407 

America, the Constitution of the United 
States of, 4; the Commentaries of 
Kent and Story on, 4 

American Commonwealth, The, Bryce, 
134 note 

American Union, the treaty - making 
power in the hands of the President 
and Senate, 461 

Anson, Sir William, Law and Custom 
of the Constitution referred to, 34 
note 

Ancien Régime, the, literature under, 
251 and note; Droit Administratif 
and, 331 

Appeal to precedent, frequency of, in 
English history, 18 

Appropriation Act, the, 313 ; payments 
under, 314 

Army, the, under the Rule of Law, 291; 
Mability of soldiers as citizens, 282, 
296 ; the forces of, 291; in relation 
to English law, 292; the Standing 
Army, 293; the soldier under civil 
and military law, 302, 303; the 
Territorial Force, 305-307 ; abolition 
of purchase in, 463 and note 

Army Act, the, 1881, 295, 296 note, 
298 note; in relation to the annual 
meeting of Parliament, 442-443 

Arrest, redress for, 204; instance in 
case of aliens, 206, 220; maxims 
relating to, 206; under the Habeas 
Corpus Suspension Act, 229 

Article 75 of the Constitution of the 
Year VIII., Toequeville on, 351- 
$352 ; abolition of, 355 

559 

560 

INDEX 

i 

Aucoc on Droit Administraty/, 828 
and note 

Austin, theory of Parliamentary sove- 
reignty, 68-70, 72 

Australian Commonwealth, powers of 
the Parliament in regard to changes 
in the Articles of the Constitution, 
106 note, 533-585; the Immigra- 
tion Act, 1901, 114 note; in relation 
to the Imperial Parliament, 117, 
535-537 ; an example of Federalism, 
184 note; its main characteristics, 
Appendiz, Note IX., 529-537 

Bacon, 16 ; on the attempt of a Parlia- 
ment to bind its successors, 62 note ; 
on the judges and the prerogative, 
366; introduction of the writ De 
non procedendo Rege inconsulto by, 
367 

Bagehot, 6; as a political theorist, 19 ; 
English Constitution by, 19; on 
powers legally exercised by the 
Crown, 463; on Cabinet and Presi- 
dential Governments, 482 

Belgium, Constitution of, in compari- 
son with the English, 4, 86, 122 
note, 124, 131; the Courts of, and 
Parliamentary enactments, 153 ; 
rights of individuals in, 192, 196; 
articles of the Constitution, 200; 
personal freedom under, 202; the 
law of, in relation to the liberty of 
the Press, 234, 248; rules of the 
Constitution as to right of public 

‘ meeting, 266; administrative law 
in, 335 note 

Bill of Rights, the, 27 

Blackburn on martial law, 547-548 

Blackstone, 5, 6; Constitutional law 
not defined by, 7; on the royal 
prerogative, 7 ; on moral law, 59 

Blackstone’s Commentaries, confusion 
of terms in, 7; misstatements in, 
9; quoted on the authority of 
Parliament, 39 

Board of Trade, the, under the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1876, 392, 
893 

Boutmy, Mons., division of the English 
constitutional law by, 6 note 

Bradlaugh, Charles, actions in connec- 
tion with, 32 

British North America Act, 1867, 161- 
163 and notes 

British Rule and Jurisdiction beyond 
the Seas, Sir H. Jenkyns, 51 note, 
100 note 

Bryce, Professor, 87 ; American Com- 
moniedth by, 134 note, 151 note 

Burke, on the necessity of the study of 
the English Constitution, 1, 3; on 
the House of Commons, 82; opposi- 
tion of, to Democracy, 481 

Bute, Lord, 453 

Cabinet, the English, 8 ; subject to the 
will of the House of Commons, 152 ; 
position of, as affected by the sur- 
vival of the Prerogative, 459; a 
parliamentary executive, 481, 482 ; 
merits and defects of, 483, 484 ; 
possibility of a change in character 
of, 483 

Cabinet Government and Presidential 
Government, forms of, 482 

Campbell, Sir J., on martial law, 540, 
546 

Canada, the Dominion of, 94 ; position 
of the Parliament in regard to 
changes in the Constitution, 106 
note; instances of Veto on Acts 
passed in, 114; in relation to the 
Imperial Parliament, 117; the 
Dominion of, an example of Federal- 
ism, 134, 148 mote; the British 
North America Act, 1867, 161-163 
and notes ; the Constitution of, 162 
and note, compared with that of the 
Australian Commonwealth, 537 ; 
power of Dominion Government, 
168, 164 

“Case-law" or “judge-made law,” 
869 ; rapid growth of, 378 

Censorship of the Press, absence of, in 
England, 244, 248; in France, 252, 
253, 261, 262, 264; under the Star 
Chamber, the Commonwealth, and 
the Restoration, 256; discontinuance 
of the Licensing Act, 257, 259; the 
contrast between England and France 
as to, 264, 265 

Censure, the Vote of, action of the 
Ministry under, 435, 445 

Channel Islands, the, and Acts of the 
Imperial Parliament, 51 note 

Charles I., 16; the personal and the 
legal will of the King, 16 

Charles II., Rhode Island under charter 
of, 161 

Chatham, Lord, attempt of, to legislate 
by Proclamation, 51, 430, 431 

Church, the, and the Act of Union, 
63; the Irish Church Act, 1869, 
64; position of the clergy with 
regard to the Courts, 306 note 

Citizens, duty of, in cases of riot, 284 

Clergy, the, as subject to the Courts, 
306 note 

Coalition, Pitt and the, 449 

INDEX 

561 

—_—e....?}?}.}>}>???—— aaa eee 

Coercion Act (Ireland), 1881, power of 
the Irish executive under, 227 

Coke, Sir Edward, 16, 18, 365, 366; 
on the power and jurisdiction of 
Parliament, 39; on private rights 
and parliamentary authority, 46 

Colonial Acts, the sanction of the 
Crown to, 99; limit to powers of, 
99 note, 117 

Colonial Bills, the right of Veto, as 
exercised by a Governor, 111 

“Colonial Laws Validity Act, 1865,” 
the text of, 101, 105 

Colonial legislatures, and the right of 
Veto, 109, 111 and notes, 112, 113 

Colonial Parliaments, limit to powers 
of, 99 and note; as “constituent 
bodies,” 105; authority of, in 
regard to changes in Articles of 
Constitutions, 106 nofe; controlled 
by the Imperial Parliament, 108 ; 
the liberty of, in relation to Imperial 
Sovereignty, 108; power of the 
Governor as to assent to Bills, 111 

Colonies, the, Act limiting right of 
Parliament to tax, 1778, 64, 78; 
power of, as to Treaties, 115 ; policy 
of the Imperial Government toward, 
115 

Colonies, Laws relating to, Tarring, 
104 note 

Commitinent for contempt, instance of 
Parliamentary, 54, 56 note 

Common, or “unwritten” law, 27 

Commons, the House of, resolutions of, 
not law, 52; Mr. Justice Stephen 
on, 53 ; powers of, 54 

Comptroller and Auditor General, posi- 
tion and powers of, 315 ; instance of 
the power in 1811, 317 

Confederation, the Articles of, 15 

Conflict Court, the, in France, 360, 
Appendix, Note XI., 556-557 

Congress, Acts of, 146; powers of, 
compared with powers of English 
railway companies, 147; limited 
power of, 148; Act of 24th Septem- 
ver 1789, 157 ; the Supreme Courts 
of the United States and, 157, 159 

Conseil d’ Etat, 331; the functions of, 
371; a real tribunal of Drvit Ad- 
ministratyf, 372 

Conservatisin, tendency of Federalism 
to, 169 

Consolidated Fund, the, 313 

Constitution, the, the division of, 
between history and law, 22 ; rights 
part of the law of, 25 ; rules belong- 
ing to the conventions of, 26; the 
law of the, three principles of the 

study of, 34 ; Federal States subject 
to, 140, 142 note; the fifth Article 
of the United States, 143; Federal 
Governments under, 143 and note; 
be legislature under, 145, 147, 

Constitution, the, the Law of, and the 
Conventions of, 413; the legal and 
the conventional elements in, 414; 
based on the law of the land, 466 

Constitution of Commonwealth of 
Australia, 135 note, 136 note, 148 
note, 150 note, and Appendiz, Note 
IX., 529-537 ; amendment of, 533 

Constitution of France, 118 ; Tocque- 
ville on, 118; rigidity of, 122; 
revolutionary instances in, 129; 
the existing, 129 

Constitution of the German Empire, 
143 note, 144 note 

Constitution of the United States, the 
Articles of, 4; in comparison with 
the English, 4, 184; Kent’s and 
Story’s work on, 5; preamble of, 
189; the judges in relation to, 
154; in comparison with the 
Canadian, 162 aud note 

Constitutional freedom, confusion as to 
the origin of, 17 

Constitutional historians, in contrast 
with legal constitutionalists, 15 

Constitutional history, research in, in 
relation to modern constitutional 
law, 14 

Constitutional Law, the true nature of, 
1; modern origin of the term, 6; 
Mons. Boutmy’s division of the 
English, 6 note; sources of work 
in, 6; as considered by Blackstone, 
7; study of the constitutional his- 
torians in connection with, 11; 
antiquarian study unn to 
the study of, 14; indefiniteness of, 
21; character of rules of, 23; rules 
of, as enforced, 23; rules as con- 
ventions, 23; the legal and con- 
ventional elements of, 27, 28; 
importance of, to the lawyer, 29; 
different character of rules of, 30; 
in general the result of ordinary 
laws, 191 

Constitutional laws, 84 ; no legal dis- 
tinction between, and other laws, 87 

Constitutional maxims, the observance 
of, 451 

Constitutional Monarchy, 
Philippe, 118 

Constitutional understandings, 414 ; 
Freeman's Growth of the English 
Constitution, quoted as to, 414; 

20 

of Louis 

562 

INDEX 

i 

examples of, 416; common charac- 
teristics of, 418; the aim of, 424; 
not rules enforced by the Courts, 
485; how disobeyed, 436; varia- 
bility of, 451 

Constitutionalism, difference between 
Eoglish and French, 121 note ; com- 
parison necessary to the study of, 201 

Constitutionalists, legal, in contrast 
with constitutional historians, 15 

Constitutions, Burke and Hallam on 
the study of the English, 1; past 
ideas and views of, 2; modern view 
and study of, $; difficulties in the 
study of, 4, 6; difference between 
the state of the government and the 
theory, 9 nole; of England, con- 
trasted with that of France, 4, 118, 
186 ; flexible, 122; rigid, 123, 124 
and note, 169; the formation of 
foreign, 192; of the United States, 
195 and note; main provisions of 
the English, 199; rigidity of the 
French, A ppendiz, Note I., 469-476 ; 
classification of, 480 

Constitutions, of Belgium, in compari- 
son with the English, 4; in contrast 
with the English, 86; flexible and 
rigid, 87, 123 note 

Constitutions, the Swiss and the “ guar- 
anteed”’ rights of, 150 

Contracts, law in relation to, 21 

Conventions of the Constitution, the 
lawyer in relation to, 29; and the 
Ministry, 30 ; Ministers under, 321 ; 
and Law of the Constitution, 413; 
nature of Conventions, 413; and 
exercises of the prerogative, 419; 
and Parliameutary privilege, 423 ; 
those strictly obeyed, 4387; how 
obedience ensured to, 440 ; obedience 
to, enforced by law, 441 

Corporations, as non-sovereign law- 
making bodies,90 ; Municipal, 147 note 

Courts, the, and Acts of Parliament, 
38 ; and Parliamentary resolutions, 
52; Mr. Justice Stephen on, 53; 
and Parliamentary authority, 58-61 ; 
and the electors, 71 ; and the bye- 
laws of Railway Companies, 92 ; and 
Colonial Acts, 104; under the 
Imperial Parliament and ander 
Federalism, 152; the authority of, 
153; the Belgian and French, 153 ; 
of the United States, 154, 155, 157; 
Canadian, 164; Swiss, 165; of the 
United States, 170, 171 note, 172; 
position of officials under, 189; as 
the foundation of the English Con- 
stitution, 193 ; and the Habeas Corpus 

Act, 212, 215, 218, 219, 224; and 
the Press, 246; and the right of 
public meeting, 271, 272, 274 note; 
and Courts-martial, 298; and mili- 
tary law, 303, 544-547; and State 
matters in France, 335, 359-361 ; 
and Droit Administratif, 347, 395, 
399; English Crown servants as 
subject to, 391, 392; and Parlia- 
ment, 405 and note 

Courts, Federal, 148 

Courts of Australia, as interpreters of 
the Constitution of the Common- 
wealth, 531 

Courts of India, the, and the Acts of 
the Legislative Council, 95, 97; 
power of, as to Acts passed by the 
Council, 98 

Courts of Justice, Blackstone's state- 
ment as to Royal power in connec- 
tion wi 

Courts-martial, and the Civil Courts, 
298, 308, 304 

Criticism, fair and libellous, 238 

Crown, the, theory of the prerogative 
of 1785, 9 note; unreality of expres- 
sions in connection with, 11; and 
responsibility of Ministers, 24; law 
regulating the descent of, 27; the 
descent of,tfixed under the Act of 
Settlement, 41; legislation by pro- 
clamations under, 48 ; in relation to 
proclamations, 51; sanction of, to 
Colonial Acts, 100; and the right 
of Veto, 110 and note; hereditary 
revenue of, 308; responsibility of 
Ministers as to Acts of, 321; pre- 
rogative of, as anterior to the power 
of the House of Commons, 421 ; 
position of, in case of a conflict be- 
tween the Lords and the Commons, 
427 ; the personal influence of, un- 
certain, 457; the survival of the 
prerogatives of, 459; Bagehot on 
powers legally exercised by, 463 ; 
proceedings against the, Appendix, 
Note XLI., 556-557 

eed servants in England, powers of, 

2 

Davis, 4 merican Constitutions, 173 note 

De Berry, Duchesse, and her attempt 
to raise civil war in La Vendée, 349 

De Blosseville, $26 

D'Eon, the Chevalier, 187 

De Lolme on the limit of English Par- 
liamentary power, 41, 83 

Declaration of the Rights of Man, free- 
dom of discussion and liberty of the 
press under, 234 

INDEX 

563 

eee 

“‘Declaration of the State of Siege,” 
the, 283; French law as to, 288; 
under the Republic of France, 289 

Dentists Act, the, 141 

Despotism, instances of, 188 and note 

Discussion, the Right to Freedom of, 
284; under foreign constitutions, 
234 ; under English law, 285, 242 
and note 

Dissolution of Parliament, the rules as 
to, 428; of 1784 and 1834, 429; 
right of, in relation to Parliamentary 
sovereignty, 433 ; the right of, as the 
right of appeal to the people, 434, 
452 

Documents, Public, necessary signa- 
tures to, 322 

Dodd, Dr., execution of, 459 

Droit Administratif/, contrasted with 
the Rule of Law, 324 ; the term, 326; 
Tocqueville on, 326, 327 and note, 
862, 853 note; detinition of, 328; 
position of officials and others under, 
$29, 337-844, 349-352, 354, 380; 
fundamental ideas permanent, 329 ; 
historical development, 330 ; leading 
principles, 332 ; Vivien on, 332 note ; 
characteristics, 334 ; foundations laid 
by Napoleon, 335-387 ; conflicts of 
jurisdiction, 339; protection of 
officials, 341, 342, 849 ; the Council 
of State under Napoleon, 344 ; during 
the Monarchical period (1830-1870), 
346, and the Third Republic, 355 ; 
decisions of the Council of State 
become judgments, 360 ; creation of 
independent Conflict-court, 360 ; 
evolution of, 362-364, 371; com- 
parison between, and the Rule of 
law, 364; not opposed to English 
ideas current in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, 364; “‘case- 
law” or “judge-made law,” 369, 
378; the Conseil d’Htat a real 
tribunal of, 372; felt by Frenchmen 
to be beneficial, 377 ; development 
of, between 1800 and 1908, 879; 
not to be identified with any part of 
the law of England, 880; not the 
law of the Civil Service, 380, 381 ; 
compared with the law of Equity, 
$381; rests upon ideas foreign to 
English law, 383; not in reality 
introduced into the law of England, 
383 ; no foothoJd in England, 386 ; 
its merits, 389, 393; its defects, 
389, 396 

Dubs, Dr., on the Swiss Federal Court, 
165 

Duguit, 

Manued de Droit Public 

Frangais, 50 note, 119 note; on the 
position of officials under Droit 
Administraty/, 399 note 

Edward VI., repeal of the Statute of 
Proclamations in the reign of, 49 

Electorate, the, as the political power 
of the State, 423, 424; in relation 
to dissolution of Parliament, 428 

Electors, position of, in the United 
States, 28; Parliamentary, position 
of, 57; the Courts and, 71; power 
of, politically, 73 

Ellenborough, Lord, on the Press in 
England, 244 

England, the King of, Blackstone on 
the power of, 7, 9 

England, Tocqueville on the respect for 
law in, as compared with Switzer- 
land in 1836, 180; the Press laws 
of, 286, 243, 247, 248; law of, as 
to right of public ineeting, 266 

English Cabinet, the, 8 

English Constitution, the, Burke and 
Hallam on the study of, 1; past 
views and ideas of, 2; modern view 
and study of, 3; difficulties con- 
nected with the study of, 4,6; Paley 
quoted, on actual state and theory 
of government, 9 nole; Tocqueville 
on, 21, 84; unwritten character of, 
86 ; idens of the Royal prerogative 
in the seventeenth century, 865 

English Constitutional law, 6; Mons. 
Boutmy’s division of, 6 note ; sources 
of work in, 6; as treated by Black- 
stone, 7, 141 

English Parliament, the, characteristic 
of, 402, 403 nole; the appointment 
of the Prime Minister, 404 

English Prime Minister, as head of the 
English Cabinet, 8, 404 

Enlistment, power of the Civil Courts 
as to, 303, 304 and notes; the 
Foreign Act, 408 

Equity, the law of, in England, 376, 
$78 ; compared with Droit Admints- 
tratif, 381 

Essays in Jurisprudence and Ethics, 
Pollock, 38 note 

Etudes de Droit Constitutionnel, Mons. 
Boutmy, 6 note 

Executive, distinction between a parlia- 
meutary and a non-parliainentary, 
Appendiz, Note III., 480-488 

Extradition Acts, foreign criminals 
under, 220 and note ; powers under, 
408 

Eyre, Governor, and the Jamaica re- 
bellion, 1866, 283, 542 note 

564 INDEX 

eee 

Factory legislation in England, 381 

Featherstone Commiasion, Report of, 
284 note, and Appendix, Note VL., 
512-516 

Federal Assemblies, the Swiss, 57 

Federal Constitution, legislature under, 
145, 147, 165 

Federal government, instances of, 134 ; 
aims of, 136; necessary conditions 
to the formation of, 136 and notes 

Federal States, division of Powers in, 
Appendiz, Note II., 476-480 

Federalism and Parliamentary sove- 
reignty, 134 and note; Swiss, 135 
note, and Appendiz, Note VII, 
465-467 ; the foundations of, 136 ; 
the sentiment of, 187; the aim of, 
189 ; of the United States, 139 ; the 

- leading characteristics of, 140; in 
relation to Constitution, 140; sove- 
reignty under, 144; distribution of 
powers under, 147; limitations 
under, 148 and note, 149; in com- 
parison with Unitarian government, 
151 and note; the Law Courts 
under, 152; the meaning of, 153 ; 
individual character of Swiss, 164 : 
in comparison with Parliamentary 
sovereignty, 167; weakness of Swiss, 
167 aud nole, 176; and Conserva- 
tism, 169 ; the legal spirit of, 170 ; 
success of, in the United States, 
175; Australian, Appendiz, Note 
IX., 529-537 ; distinction between 
Canadian and Australian, 537 

Field, J., on the right of public meeting, 
Zi 

Firth, Cromwell's Army, 293 note 

‘* Flexible” Constitutions, the English, 
an example of, 122, 123 note 

Foreign Enlistment Act, powers of the 
Ministry uuder, 408 

Foreign Legislatures, non-sovereign, 117 

Fox, support of Parliamentary sove- 
reignty by, 430 

France, Constitution of, in comparison 
with the English, 4; Tocqueville 
on the constitution of, 118; the Re- 
public of 1848, 120; the authority 
of the present Republic, 120; the 
Coup d’ Etat of 1851, 125, 485 ; the 
Revolutionary constitutions of, 129 ; 
the existing constitution of, 129; 
the Courts of, in relation to the 
National Assembly, 153; lawless- 
‘ness in past administrations, 187 
and note; the Press law of, 248 
note; literature under the Ancien 
Régime, 251, under the Revolution, 
252, under the First Empire and 

the Republic, 252, 254 note; the 
law of, as to the ** Declaration of the 
State of Siege,” 287, 288; Droit 
Administratif in, 324 e seg.; the 
‘¢ Separation of powers,” 333 ; limit 
of jurisdiction of law courts, 835; 
judicial and administrative courts 
constituted by Napoleon, 335, 336 
and note; acta of State, 841, 386 ; 
officials under Art. 75 of Constitution 
of Year VIII., 343, 851; Tribunal des 
Conflits, 359, Appendiz, Note XI., 
556-557 ; the Conseil d’ Etat, 371, 
372; the National Assembly, 405, 
486, 487; Directorial Constitution 
of, 485, 486; President of Republic, 
election and power of, 486, 487, in 
relation to National Assembly, 487 

Frederick the Great, 80 

Freeman, E. A., 6, 16; Grotth of the 
English Constitution, by, 12, quoted 
on constitutional understandings, 
414; on appeal to precedent, 18 

French Constitutions, Rigidity of, 
Appendiz, Note I., 469-476 

French National Assembly of 1871, 
76 

French Republic, the, officials under 
Art. 75, Year VILI., 348, 351 

Fundamental laws and constitutional 
laws, 85, 141 and note 

Gargon, Code Pénal, 343 note 

Gardiner, Mr., 16 ; on Bacon’s writ De 
non Rege inconsulto, 367 

George II., 459 

George III., 9; public expenses as 
charged in the reign of, 312; dis- 
solution of Parliament by, as a con- 
stitutional act, 429; view of Parlia- 
mentary sovereignty, 431; exercise 
of personal will in matters of policy, 
458 

German Emperor, real head of execu- 
tive, 483; independent action of, 
484 

German Empire, the, Constitution of, 
143 note, 144 note, 429 ; an example 
of federal government, 134; execu- 
tive of, 482, 483 

Gneist, 83 

Goldsmith's Citizen of the World, 2 note 

Gordon Riots, the, 1780, 286 

Government, position of publishers 
of libel on, 239; in relation to the 
Press, 243 ; and the right of public 
meeting, 277 

Grant, General, third candidature of, 
as President, 28 

Grattan’s Constitution, 482 

INDEX 

565 

a ae 

Gregoire quoted, 350 note 

Grenville, Lord, action of, in opposition 
to Parliament, 1811, 317 

Growth of the English Constitution, 
Freeman, in relation to constitutional 
law, 12; quoted, 17 

“*Guaranteed” rights of the Swiss 
Constitution, 150 

Habeas Corpus Acts, the, 27, 193, 195 ; 
suspension of, in comparison with 
foreign ‘‘ suspension of constitutional 
guarantees,” 197, 200; the Writ of, 
209 ; the issue of the Writ of, 211; 
power of the Courts as to, 212; the 
Acts of Charles II. and George III., 
212 ; rights of the individual under, 
213; provisions of, 214, 216; the 
authority of the judges under Writ 
of, 218; case of aliens under, 220, 
the suspension of, 224 and note; 
charge of High Treason under, 225 
and note; the Suspension Act, as an 
Annual! Act, 226; the Ministry and, 
226; and Act of Indemnity, 228, 
282 ; position of official under, 229 ; 
arrest under, 229 

Hallam, Middle Ages, 2 note 

Hallam, on the prosperity of England 
traceable to its laws, 1, 8, 6, 12; 
on the Septennial Act, 43 

Hamilton, opinions of, in relation to 
the constitutional articles of the 
United States, 15 

Hastings, Warren, 439 ' 

Hauriou, on the position of officials 
under Drott Administrati/, 400 and 
note 

Hearn, Professor, 6; Government of 
England by, referred to, 18, 25, 
427 note; as a political theorist, 
19 

Henry VIII., the Statute of Proclama- 
tions in the reign of, 48 

High Treason, charges of, under the 
Habeas Corpus Acts, 225 and note ; 
under the Coercion Act (Ireland), 
1881, 227 

Historians compared with lawyers, 16 

Holland's Jurisprudence, 22 note 

House of Commons, the, Burke on, 82 ; 
powers of, in relation to the Ministry, 
152, 429; and the Licensing Act, 
257; in relation to the House of 
Lords, 454 

House of Lords, in relation to the 
House of Commons, 427, 454; in- 
stances of opposition to the Commons, 
454, 455 

Hume on Sovereign power, 75 

Immigrauts Restriction Act, 1907 
(Transvaal), 116 note 

Impeachment, 438 ; disuse of, 450 

Imperial Government, the, right of, to 
veto Colonial Bills, 113; action of, 
toward the Colonies, 115 

Income Taz, the, Act as to, annual, 311 

Indemnity, Acts of, objects of, 47, 547- 
549, 553, 554; an instance of Parlia- 
mentary power, 51, and the Habeas 
Corpus Suspension Act, 228, 230, 
231 ; officials under the Act of 1801, 
a ; the Ministry under Act of, 
40. 

India, British, the Legislative Council 
subordinate to the British Parlia- 
ment, 95; the Acts of the Council 
and the Courts of India, 96, 97, 98 

Inland Revenue Office, the daily routine 
of, as to receipts, 312 

International law, Acts of Parliament 
and, 59 

Ireland, and the Act of Union relating 
to the United Church, 63; the 
Coercion Act of 1881, 227; the 
Prevention of Crime Act, 1882, 227 

Trish Church Act, 1869, the, 64, 170 

Irish Parliament of 1782, an admittedly 
sovereign legislature, 482 ; power of 
English ministry over executive, 482 

Jamaica, the rebellion of, 1866, 233 

James JI, as an instance of the limit 
of sovereign power, 76 

Jackson, President, 173 

Jenks’s Government of Victoria, 106 
nole 

Jenkyns, Sir H., British Rule and 
Jurisdiction beyond the Seas, 51 
note, 100 note 

“« Judge-made Jaw,” 369, 370 

Judges, English, in relation to the Im- 
perial Parliament, 152; Belgian and 
French, 153; of the United States 
in relation to the Constitution, 154, 
155, 174; and the Writ of Habeas 
Corpus, 218; position of, in the 
seventeenth century, 223, 224 note ; 
instance of the power of, in the case 
of Wolfe Tone, 289, 290 ; salaries of, 
under Goorge III., 312 ; position of, 
in France, as to matters of the State, 
$35 ; in relation to English Acts of 
Parliament, 408 ; in relation to the 
Houses of Parliament, 405; and 
Parliamentary laws, 409 

Kenny, Outlines of Criminal Law, 279 
note 
Kent, Commentaries of, on the Consti- 

566 

INDEX 

On ee 

tation of the United States, 4 ; lines 
of work, 5 

King, the, 8 ; Blackstone on the author- 
ity of, 7, 9’; ; ordinances and prociama- 
tions of, 48 ; and the ministry, 422, 
483; the personal will and influence 
of, 458, 459 

<s King in Parliament,’’ the, 37, 424 

Landesgemeinden of Uri, the, 14 

Law as the basis of English civilisation, 
18 

Law, constitutional, 21; rules of, 23; 
an “unconstitutional,” meaning of, 
Appendix, Note VII., 516 

Law of the Constitution, position of a 
Ministry in regard to, 30; the three 
principles of, 84; and Conventions 
of the Constitution, 413 

Law Courts, and the powers of the 
Premier, 20; and Acts of Parlia- 
ment, 38 

Law of the Press, Fisher and Strahan, 
236 note 

Laws, and contracts, 21 ; constitutional 
and fundamental, 85; fundamental, 
141 and note 

Lawyers, in comparison with historians, 
16; and the rules of constitutional 
law, 30 

Legal authority liable to prosecution in 
cases of excess, 33 

Legal constitutionalists in contrast with 
constitutional historians, 15 

Legal rules of constitutional law, 30 ; 
the Peers and Commons under, 80-31 

Legal sovereignty, limit of, 76; and 
political sovereignty, the distinction 
between, 425 

Legalism, Federalism as, 170 

Legislation, judicial, and the supremacy 
of Parliament, 58 ; safeguards against 
unconstitutional, 126 

Legislative authority, of Parliament, 
48, 67, 68 ; in France, 50 and note 

Legislative bodies, limited power of, in 
the United States, 132 

Legislatures, Foreign non-sovereign, 117 

Libel, the law of, 236 and note; posi- 
tion of individuals under, 236-239 ; 
as to Goverument, 239 ; blasphemy 
under, 240 ; in England, 241; under 
the Belgian Constitution, 243 

Liberty of individuals, in England, 1938, 
196 ; in Belgium, 193, 196 

Liberty of the Press, foreign and 
English ideas as to, 235; the law 
of libel, 236, 247 ; control of, under 
French Governments, 251 

Licensing Act, the, of the Press, 257 ; 

reasons for the discontinuance of, 
257, 264 

Limitations on right of Public Meeting, 
278; really limitations on individual 
freedom, 275 

Limitations on sovereignty of Parlia- 
ment, alleged, 58, 59 note, 68; in 
the Colonies, 64; Todd on, 65 and 
note; actual, 69, 74; external, 74, 
75, 79; internal, 77, 79; Leslie 
Stephen on, 78 

Limitations under Federalism, 147, 149 

Literature, in England and France, 
249, 250; penalties connected with 
the production of forbidden works, 
250; under the Ancten Régime, 251 
and note; under the Republic of 
1848, 258 ; license and punishment 
under the Star Chamber, 256 

Local and Private Acts, 47 

Louis XIV., an instance of the limit of 
sovereign power, 76, 78 

Louis XV., 187 

Louis XVI., 187 

Louis Philippe, the Constitutional mon- 
archy of, 118, 125, 347 

Louis Napoleon, 80, 125, 485 

Lyndhurst, Lord, in opposition to 
measures of the House of Commons, 
455 

Macaulay on the Press Licensing Act, 
257-258 

Macclesfield, Lord, 439 

Mackintosh, Sir James, on martial law, 
541 

Mansfield, jae on the liberty of the 

Press, 2 

Martial ae 32 note, 280 ; liability of 
soldiers as citizens, 282 ; and: the 
‘Declaration of the "State of Siege,”’ 
283; how recognised in England, 
284 ; the proclamation of, 287 ; trial 
of Wolfe Tone, 289, 290 ; in England 
during time of war or insurrection, 
Appendiz, Note XII., 538-555 

Maxims belonging to the Conventions 
of the Constitution, 25, 26 and note ; 
not “laws,” 26; constitutional, 452 

May, Sir Thomas, as a constitutional 
historian, 12 

Melville, Lord, 439 

Merchant Shipping Act, 1876, the, 
892, 393 

Mignet, French Revolution quoted, 486 

Militia, the, 291; in comparison with 
the standing army, 292 

Mill, quoted, on political institutions, 
191 

Ministers, responsibility of, under the 

INDEX 

567 

OO 

Rule of Law, 321; as subject to the 
Rule of Law, $23 

Ministry, the, position of, under defeat, 
30 ; power of, regarding the Habeas 
Corpus Act, 226 ; powers of, under 
the Alien Act, 1848, 228 ; action of, 
in case of tumult or invasion, 408 ; 
dismissal of, by the King, 429, 481 ; 
resignation of, under Vote of Cen- 
sure, 435, 445; and the Mutiny 
Act, 448; the withdrawal of confi- 
dence in, 452 

Montesquieu, Esprit des Lois referred 
to, 185, 333 

Moral law, Acts of Parliament in rela- 
tion to, 59; Blackstone on, 59 ; and 
libel, 240 

Moral Philosophy, Paley, quoted, 9 
note, 22 note 

Morley'’s Life of Diderot, 186 

Municipal corporations, 147 note 

Mutiny Act, the, 1689, preamble of, 
295 ; an annual Act, 305; in rela- 
tion to the annual meeting of Parlia- 
ment, 443 note 

Napoleon Bonaparte, the foundations 
of modern Droit Administratif \aid 
by, 380, 835-837; and ordinary 
judges, 337 ; Council of State under, 
344 

Napoleon, Louis, 80, 125, 485 

National Debt and Local Loans Act, 
1887, 818 ; the interest on, 313 

Nationa] Revenue, the, 309 

Naturalization Act, 1870, the, 419 

Newcastle, the Duke of, 453 

Newspapers, position of publishers and 
writers, 244; offences treated by 
the ordinary Courts, 246 and note ; 
under the First Empire, 252 ; under 
the Republic of 1848, 253 

New Zealand, the Supreme Court and 
the Foreign Offenders Apprehension 
Act, 1863, 100 note; the Deceased 
Husband's Brother Act, 1900, 115 
note 

New Zealand Parliament, 99 and note ; 
a non-sovereign legislating body, 
100 and note ; liable to the authority 
of the Courts and the Imperial Parlia- 
ment, 100; laws of, opposed to 
English common law, 103 and note ; 
valid and invalid acts, 103, 104; 
laws of, as affecting other colonies, 
104 ; authority of, to change Articles 
in the Constitution, 106 and note, 
168; power of the Governor to 
assent to Bills, 111, 112 

Non-sovereign law-making bodies, in 

contrast with legislative bodies, 83 ; 

¢ istics of, 87; meauing of 

the term, 88 and note; the Indian 

Council, 95; the New Zealand 

Parliament, 105-107 ; Foreign, 117 ; 

the French Chamber, 120, 121 
Nottingham, Lord, 376 

ap a Libel and Slander, quoted, 

Official Secrets Act, 1889, 391 

Officials, State, position of, under the 
Habeas Corpus Suspension Act, 229 ; 
protected by Act of Indemnity, 280- 
232; limited protection of, under 
the Act of 1801, 232; position of, 
under ordinary law, 281; position 
of, under Droit Administraty/, 329, 
337-844, 349-352, 354; powers of the 
English Crown, 382 ; appointment of 
the Prime Minister and the Cabinet of 
England, 404 

Ordinances, Royal, 48 

Paley’s Moral Philosophy, the actual 
state and theory of government con- 
sidered in, 9 note; quoted, 22 note 

Palmerston, Lord, action of, under vote 
of censure, 435 

Parliament, under the legal rules of 
constitutional law, 80; the constitu- 
tion of, 87 ; law-making power of, 
88; Acts of, and the Law Courts, 
88; unlimited legislative authority 
of, 39; De Lolme on the limit of 
power of, 41; the passing of the 
Septennial Act, 42; position of, in 
regard to private rights, 46; rules 
under Acts of, 50 and note; the 
Courts in relation to the Resolutions 
of, 52; the legislative authority of, 
58; and preceding Acts, 62; and 
the Acts of Union, 62; and the 
Colonies, 78; power of, to change 
avy law, 84; other bodies in rela- 
tion to, 87; the Legislative Council 
of India subject to, 95 ; the Colonial, 
of New Zealand, 99; powers of, 99 ; 
the sanction of the Crown in Acts of, 
100; the “Colonial Laws Validity 
Act, 1865," 101; valid and invalid 
Acts, 103; the legal supremacy of, 
as to Colonial legislation, 108; the 
Imperial, compared with the National 
Assembly of France, 120 ; the Courts 
in relation to, 152; the Ministry 
aubject to the will of the House of 
Commons, 152 ; rules as to the disso- 
lution of, 428; the dissolutions of 
1784 aud 1884, 429; non-assembly 

568 

of, a breach of constitutional practice, 
442; the Army Act in relation to the 
annual meeting of, 442; the refusal 
of supplies, 450 note ; the Victorian, 
conflict between the Upper and Lower 
Houses, 1878 and 1879, 456; a 
sovereign body, 481 

Parliamentary authority, instanced in 
the Septennial Act, 44, 45; and the 
power of the Courts, 59, 60 

Parliamentary executive and a non- 
parliamentary executive, distinction 
between, Appendix, Note III., 480- 
488 

Parliamentary power, exemplified by 
Acts of Indemnity, 51; in rela- 
tion to the Law Courts, 54 ; electors 
in connection with, 57 

Parliamentary privilege and constitu- 
tional conventions, 423 

Parliamentary procedure, as conven- 
tional law, 27 

Parliamentary sovereiguty, the nature 
of, 837 ; recognised by the law, 39; 
and the Act of Settlement, 41; the 
Septennial Act a proof of, 45, 73, 
433; and the Law Conrts, 58; limita- 
tions on, 58; the Irish Church Act, 
1869, 64 ; limitation of, in respect to 
the Colonies, 64, 65 and note ; Austin 
on, 68; political and legal sense of, 
70 ; external limit on exercise of, 
75, 79; internal limit on, 77, 79; 
the two limitations of, 81; character- 
istics of, 83, 85 ; Tocqueville on, 84, 
85; and Federalism, 134 and note ; 
in comparison with Federalism, 167 ; 
and the Rule of Law, 402, 406; 
George the Third’s view of, 430; 
relation of the right of dissolution to, 
433 

Peel and the Dissolution of 1834, 429 

Peers, the House of, resolutions of, not 
law, 52; powers of, 54; the creation 
of new, in case of conflict of the Lords 
and Commons, 427 

Personal Freedom, the Right to, 202; 
under the Belgian Constitution, 202 ; 
as secured in England, 202; redress 
for arrest, 204 ; wrongful imprison- 
ment, 208 ; the Habeas Corpus Acts, 
209 ; the securities for, 216 

Pitt and the Dissolution of 1784, 429 ; 
the Vote of Censure, 1788, 445; 
and the Coalition, 449-450 

Political Sovereignty and Legal Sove- 
reignty, the distinction between, 425 

Political theorists, Bagehot and Pro- 
ge Hearn as, 19; questions for, 

INDEX 

Pollock's Hssays in Jurisprudence and 
Ethics, 38 note; Science of Case 
Law referred to, 58 

Pollock, Sir F., on martial law, 546, 
552, 553 

Pope, the, in relation to reforms, 78 

ent, frequency of appeal to, in 
English history, 1 

Premier, the, and the Conrts of Law, 

20 

Prerogative of the Crown, 61; the 
term, 420 ; as anterior to the power 
of the House of Commona, 421 ; sur- 
vival of, 459; in relation to the 
Cabinet, 460; as increasing the 
authority of the Coinmons, 461 

President of the United States, the, 
election of, 28, 175, 431 ; position of 
the Federal Judiciary in connection 
with, 152; independent action of, 
484, 485 

President of French Republic, election 
and powers of, 486, 487 ; in relation 
to National Assembly, 487 

Presidential Government and Cabinet 
Government, forms of, 482; the 
former nominally still existing in 
France, 486 

Press, the, Prevention of Crime Act 
(Ireland), 1882, in relation to, 228 ; 
liberty of, under the Declaration of 
the Rights of Man, 234; Belgian 
law as to, 234; the law of libel, 
236 ; the Government in relation to, 
243 ; present position in England, 
243 ; absence of censorship in Eng- 
Jand, 244; the Courts and, 246; 
under the Commonwealth, 246 note ; 
the law of, in France, in comparison 
with that of England, 248 ; under 
the laws of France, 250; in England 
in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen- 
turies, 255 ; of England, under the 
Star Chamber, 256; law of Eng- 
land and of France in contrast, 
mek 259 ; end of the Licensing Act, 
25 

Prevention of Crime Act (Ireland), 
1882, 227; powers of the Irish 
Executive under, 227 

Priestley, opinion of, on the Septennial 
Act, 45 

Prime Minister, the, as head of the 
English Cabinet, 8 ; the appointment 
of, 404 

Printing-presses, the contro] of the 
Star Chamber over, 256; the Uni- 
versity, 256 

Private Rights, Parliament in regard 
to, 46; Coke on, 46 

INDEX 

EE ae 

569 

er 

Privy Council, the, power of, in relation 
to Acts of Purliament, 50 and note ; 
jurisdiction of, in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, 374, 375 

Proclamations, the Statute of, 48; re- 
peal of, 49; Royal, in relation to 
comnion law, 5], modern instances 
of, 51 and note 

Public Accounts Committee, the, 318 

Public Authorities Protection Act, 
1893, 384 note 

Public Documents, the formality of 
signing, 322 

Public Meeting, Right of, 32 nole; 
questions connected with, 32, 266; 
in Belgium and in England, 266; 
the Courts of England in relation to, 
267 ; unlawful assembly under, 268- 
269 ; decisions in cases of, 270-272 ; 
limitations on right of, 278-276; 
power of the Government as to, 277; 
conditions as to, 278-279 ; Appendix, 
Note V., 497-512 

Publishers of libel, position of, 238 ; 
on Government, 239 

Railway Companies, as non-sovereign 
law-making bodies, 90 ; power of, to 
make bye-laws, 91; functions of the 
Courts with regard to, 92 ; instances 
of illegal bye-laws, 93 

Reeves, author of History of English 
Law, trial of, 420 

Reform Bill, the, of 1832, 126 

Reform Riots, the, of 1831, 285 

Religion, the law of libel in relation to, 
240 

Representative government, causes lead- 
ing to the foundation of, 81; two 
different forms of, 480 

Republic, the, of France, 120 ; position 
of the President, 120; the existing 
constitutions of, 129 ; Art. 75 of the 
Year VIII., 351 

Republican electors, in the United 
States, 28 

Resignation of Ministry, how enforced, 
446 

Resolutions of Parliament, Mr. Justice 
Stephen on, 53 

Revenue, the, 308; source of the 
public, 308; hereditary, of the 
Crown, 809 ; under permanent and 
annual Acts, 810; the authority for 
expenditure, 811, 312; the ‘‘Con- 
solidated Fund,” 313; security for 
the proper expenditure of, 314, 315 ; 
position of the Comptroller General 
with regard to, 316; Lord Grenville 
in opposition to the Parliament in 

matter of, 1811, 317; the Public 
Accounts Committee, 318; main 
features of control and audit, 319 
note ; as governed by law, 320 

ice lene under charter of Charles 

+» 161 

Right of Public Meeting, the, questions 
connected with, Appendix, Note V., 
497-512 

Right of Self-defence, the, A az, 
Note IV., 489-497 ree ty 

“‘Rigid” Constitution, Belgium and 
France examples of, 123 and note, 
124, 142, 169 

Rigidity of French Constitutions, Ap- 
pendix, Note I., 469-476; of Con- 
stitution of Australian Common- 
wealth, 533 

Riot Act, the, substance of, 286 

Riots, duties of citizens in cases of, 
284 ; the Reform, of 1831, 285; the 
Gordon, 1780, 286 

Bore Sir R. M., on martial law, 540, 

46 

Royal Prerogative, ideas as to, in the 
seventeenth century, 365, 368 

Royal Proclamations, in relation to 
common law and Acts of Parliament, 
51; modern instances of, 51 and note 

Rule of Law, the nature and applications 
of, 179-201 ; Tocqueville’s compari- 
son of Switzerland and England 
under, 180; three meanings of, 183 ; 
personal security under, 188 ; Con- 
tinental authority under, 184, 185 
and note; as a characteristic of 
England, 189 ; England and France 
in contrast, 190; in the United 
States, 195; equality under, 198 ; 
and the leading provisions of Con- 
stitution, 199; Right to Personal 
Froedom, 202-233; Right to Free- 
dom of Discussion, 234-265; Right 
of Public Meeting, 266-279 ; Martial 
Law, 280-290; the Army, 291-307 ; 
the Revenue, 308-320 ; responsibility 
of Ministers, 321-323 ; Ministers as 
subject to, 323; in contrast with 
Droit Administraljf, 324-401; its 
merits, 389; defects, 390 ; relation 
between Parliamentary sovereignty 
and, 402-409; tendency of foreign 
assemblies to support, 405 

Rules, legal, of Constitutional law, 30 ; 
as enforced, 23 ; as conventions, 23, 25 

Scotch Universities in relation to the 
Act of Union, 63 

Seals necessary to the completion of 
Acta, 322 

570 

INDEX 

TR nn —————e 

Secretary of State, the, position of, 
under ordinary law, 281 

Self-defence, the Right of, Appendiz, 
Note IV., 489-497 

Septennial Act, the, 42; Hallam and 
Lord Stanhope on, 43; opinion of 
Priestley and others on, 45 ; a proof 
of Parliamentary sovereignty, 46, 73, 
433 

Sidgwick, Prof., Hlements of Politics, 
68 note, 171 note 

Slavery, the War of Secession in rela- 
tion to the abolition of, 79 

Soldiers, liability of, as citizens, 282 ; 
under the Mutiny Act, 294; rights 
of, as citizens, 295 ; civil Jiability of, 
297, 298; under charges for crime, 
298 and nofe; Mr. Justice Stephen 
on, in relation to their officers, 300 ; 
liabilities under military law, 802 ; 
duty of, when called upon to disperse 
unlawful assembly, Appendiz, Note 
VI., 512-516 

Sommersett, James, case of, referred 
to, 216 

Sovereign power, Hume on, 75 ; limits 
to, in the case of abeolute rulers, 75, 
77 ; illustrations of the limit of, 75 ; 
under Federalism, 145 

Sovereignty, the limit of legal, 76; 
legal, of the United States, 145; 
legal and political, the distinction 
between, 425 

Sovereignty of Parliament, 37-176, 58 
note; in relation to Colonial Acts, 
100-104, 113; 465 note 

Standing Army, the, of England, in 
comparison with the Militia, 292; 
the institution of, 292; legislation 
as to, 297 

Stanhope, Lord, on the Septennial Act, 
43 

Star Chamber, the, control of printing- 
presses held by, 256 ; abolition of, 
1641, 263, 375 

State officials, position of, under the 
Habeas Corpus Suspension Act, 229, 
230; under the Indemnity Act of 
1801, 231, 232 

peer pet Company, the, formation of, 

6 

Statute or ‘‘ written law,” 27 

Statute of Proclamations, legislation 
under, 48; repeal of, 49 

Stephen’s Commentaries, 8, 370 

Stephen, Mr. Justice, on the resolutions 
of the Commons and the judgment 
of the Courts, 53 ; on the relation of 
soldiers to their officers, 300 

Stephen, Leslie, on the limitations of 

Parliament, 78; Life of Fawcett, 
463 note 

Story, Commentaries of, on the Con- 
stitution of the Onited States, 4; 
lines of work, 5; i 

of 
Stubbs, Dr. (Bishop of Oxford), as a 
constitutional historian, 12, 16 
Supplies, the refusal of, 450 and 
note 

Supreme Court, the, of the United 
States, formation and power of, 154- 
158; case of Marbury v. Madison 
decided by, 161; as ‘‘ master of the 
Constitution,” 171 note; restraints 
on, 171 note; case of Munn v. 
TUinois, 173; alleged weakness of, 
178 ; source of power of, 174 

Swiss Confederation, the, 71 note; an 
example of Federalism, 134, 135 xole, 
164, 165; description of, 487, 488 

Swiss Constitution, the, 140, 148 node ; 
‘* guaranteed ” rights of, 150 ; serious 
flaw in, 166 

Swiss Federalism, A ppendiz, Note VIII., 
517-529 

Switzerland, the electorate of, 57; the 
Federal Assembly in relation to the 
Courts, 165, 172; weakness of 
Federalism, 167, 168, 176 ; Tocque- 
ville’s comparison of law of, with 
that of England in 1836,180; Federal 
Council of, 487 

Esc Lois de limitation referred to, 

378 

Tarring, Laws relating to the Colonies, 
104 note 

Taxation, how levied, 310; permanent 
and annual Acts of, 310; Income 
tax, 311 

Territorial Force, 305-307 

Thiers, M., 350 

Tocqueville, A. de, on the English 
Constitution, 21; on the English 
Parliament, 84, 85; on the Con- 
stitution of France, 118, 119 and 
note; on the influence of law in 
Switzerland and England, 176, 180 ; 
on Droit Administrattf and the 
institutions of the Union, 327 and 
note, 331 and note, 352, 353 note, 
387, 888; on Art. 75, Year VIII. of 
the Republic, 351-352 

Todd, on Parliamentary power, 65; 
on the passing of Colonial Bills, 112 

tt Wolfe, the trial of, 1798, 289, 

Trade, the Board of, under the Mer- 
chant Shipping Act, 1876, 392 

INDEX 

571 

a ne ee a oe 

Transvaal Legislature, Immigrants Re- 
striction Act, 1907, 116 note 

Serre power of the Colonies as to, 

Trial by Jury, 897 

Tribunal des Conflits, the, the functions 
of, 859, 360, Appendix, Note XI., 
556-557 

“ Unconstitutional” Law, meaning of 
an, Appendix, Note VII., 516 

Union, the Acts of, 42; the Scotch 
Universities and, 63; the fifth 
Article of (Ireland), 64, 433 

Union, the Act of, as subject to repeal 
(Scotland), 141 

Unitarian government, and Federalism, 
151 and note; the meaning of, 153 

Unitarianism in contrast with Federal- 
ism, 144 

United States, the, Constitution of, in 
comparison with the English, 4; 
Kent and Story’s Commentaries on, 
4; an instance of relationship of 
constitutional historians and legal 
constitutionalists, 15; law of the 
constitution and conventional rules 
in, 28; position of electors in, 28 ; 
Constitution of, 71 note; the aboli- 
tion of slavery, 79; limited power 
of legislative bodies in, 132; the 
Federalism of, 134 and note; the 
constitution in comparison with the 
English, 135 ; the union of ideas as 
to institutions in, and in England, 
136; preamble of the Constitution 
of, 189; the supremacy of the Con- 
stitution, 140; the War of Seces- 
sion, 142 and note; the fifth Article 
of the Constitution of, 143; the 
legal sovereignty of, 145; legisla- 
ture of, 146; Acts of Congress, 
146, 157; the President of, 148 ; 
the Federal Courts of, 148 ; limit of 
power in individual states, 149; the 
authority of the Courts of, 154, 170 ; 
the Supreme Court of, 155-158, 
172, 173; the Constitution of, in 
comparison with that of Canada, 
162; success of the Federal system 
in, 175; the Constitution of, 195 
and note; rule of law in, 196; in- 

stitutions of, in contrast with Droit 
Administrati/, 326; the President 
in relation to the Senate, 461; the 
Constitution of, 467 and note; the 
rule of law in, 467 

Universities, the, legislation of Parlia- 
ment as to, 170; establishment of 
printing-presses at, 256 

Unlawful assembly, 269, 272 note, 273, 
274; duty of soldiers when called 
upon to disperse, dppendiz, Note 
VI., 512-516 ; 

Veto, the meaning of, 25 note; the 
right of, in connection with the 
Crown and Colonial legislatures, 
110-118 and notes; instances of, in 
Canada and Australia, 114; non- 
existent in the French Chamber,120 

Victoria, Queen, 451 

Victorian (Colonial) Parliament, the, 
and Jaws altering the constitution, 
106 note; the struggle between the 
Upper and Lower Houses of, 1878 
and 1879, 456 

Vivien, on Droit Administrati/, 382 

* Voltaire, impressions of England, 180 ; 

imprisonment and exile of, 185, 186 
Vote of Censure, action of the Ministry 
under, 435, 445 

Walpole and the passing of the Sep- 
tennial Act, 45 

War of Secession, the, and the abolition 
of slavery, 79 ; the plea for, 142 

Washington, in connection with the 
constitutional articles of the United 
States, 15 

Wellington and the Dissolution of 
1834, 429 

Westlake’s Private International Law 
referred to, 370 

Wilkes, John, 32, 430 

William III., 459 

William IV. and the Dissolution of 
1834, 431 

Witenagemét, the,’ 14 

Writ of Habeas Corpus, the, 209, 210 
and note; the issue of, 210; in- 
stance of power under, 216; au- 
thority of the Judges under, 218 ; 
case of aliens under, 220 

THE END 

Printed by R. & R. Ciarx, LimiTep, Edinburgh. 

+ | tance a 
~ a “ ¢ a 
Lr +k seed 
. i ee, ae) | aie ee 
rf = tnd fe, wont 7 
+ od ee — or 

a Ald ae ap sre 
7 =o? a RO tee we 2 7 ‘eet > v oe 
<l) . Gqemepbos? Polemtaan Vel 
- pba eel wl 5 | i’ icone at wate tress 
: wth GA : P- 5 a: v8 Om, 4 
at igs ‘-s 4 
¢ “ 4 ~- 
r 
& a ie 0) 
a) yeh be aera | 
fam ace Fast wupcas 
in i eal 7 
Te oP a ine Pet” Le apy © 

a ise ‘, Assay’ 7 if Pree beat al sy 

Sepa 3 1 etd 2 ET eth 

- “ tawser. of oy fl 46 =, thes ( pte 
sown edt Se 19 aerial Oe 

es ttm. ad? «Ae <, State sod = ruby oaiiy - 

ot lp: ‘ - 
; 7 iia kad , ee Mi te mens ais, OAT yaal w 
; ; , 2a o ni Cire” ok | real dn = 
P —— = na hor P MY 
_ b ‘ - j 5 rs. a eto 
rscinAd. be na : wi Das . 
, Rt) Tica otiyierealt ay 
wh y —? 1a 
A ‘ays ane, _ 
tien iad ee Bie Y ofse ae 
i “Spine, cebherinengl 
be ait =| -, ‘ 7 
? + of Gat + La ares . 
. d ay em 7 
7 aa al e" 
a _ ir 
, a ’ ? « Se 
“J ¥ », ‘ a> » 
j % as J r’ ‘a - ~~ 
7] 4 Ae dt wa th ahd. a i we 
4 4 rn ™ - 
7 P -9 os 
é 
5 ve yu. 
a al ~~ 
ic odin a, “De 
7 vt _ ta 
> 6 ay 7 
. Piet i 
a 
* : . 
* 
= i 
a 
> 
a 
+ 

I AA 

81437 27964 

Printed in the United States ll 
140494LV00009B/17/A 

| 

Kessinger Publishing’s® Rare Reprints 
Thousands of Scarce and Hard-to-Find Books 

e Americana 

e Ancient Mysteries 

e Animals 

e Anthropology 

e Architecture 

e Arts 

e Astrology 

e Bibliographies 

e Biographies & Memoirs 
e Body, Mind & Spirit 

e Business & Investing 

e Children & Young Adult 
¢ Collectibles 

¢ Comparative Religions 
e Crafts & Hobbies 

e Earth Sciences 

e Education 

e Ephemera 

e Fiction 

e Folklore 

¢ Geography 

e Health & Diet 

e History 

¢ Hobbies & Leisure 

e Humor 

e Illustrated Books 

e Language & Culture 
e Law 

e Life Sciences 

e Literature 

e Medicine & Pharmacy 
¢ Metaphysical 

e Music 

e Mystery & Crime 

e Mythology 

e Natural History 

¢ Outdoor & Nature 

¢ Philosophy 

e Poetry 

¢ Political Science 

e Psychiatry & Psychology 
e Rare Books 

e Reference 

¢ Religion & Spiritualism 

e Rhetoric 

e Sacred Books 

e Science Fiction 

© Science & Technology 
¢ Self-Help 

e Social Sciences 

e Symbolism 

e Theatre & Drama 

e Theology 

e Travel & Explorations 
e War & Military 

¢ Women 

e Yoga 

Download a free catalog and search our titles at: www.kessinger.net 

| | | l| 
9 MMII
