The Life and Letters of Emily Dickinson (Emily Dickinson (Martha Dickinson Bianchi, ed.), 1924)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1924 Houghton Mifflin edition (https://archive.org/details/lifelettersofemi0d56zdick). The poet's niece's life-and-letters — family papers and correspondence illuminating the Amherst myth.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 
EMILY  DICKINSON 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/lifelettersofemi0d56zdick 


THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 

EMILY  DICKINSON 


BY  HER  NIECE 

MARTHA  DICKINSON  BIANCHI 


With  Illustrations 


BOSTON  AND  NEW  YORK 

HOUGHTON  MIFFLIN  COMPANY 
QtJje  SUberstoe  CamimbQe 


COPYRIGHT,  1924,  BY  MARTHA  DICKINSON  BIANCHI 


ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED 


SECOND  IMPRESSION,  MAY,  I924 
THIRD  IMPRESSION,  OCTOBER,  1924 
FOURTH  IMPRESSION,  AUGUST,  I925 


I93£9 

811 
A)  56 
z. 


QTfje  Bfttoergttje  $re£te 

CAMBRIDGE  •  MASSACHUSETTS 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.S.A. 


FOR  THEIR  ENTHUSIASM,  INTUITIVE  UNDER¬ 
STANDING,  AND  CRITICAL  ASSISTANCE,  MT 
GRATITUDE  TO  FERRIS  GREENSLET,  CURTIS 
HIDDEN  PAGE,  AND  ALFRED  LEETE  HAMPSON 

M.  D.  B. 


1932S 


“  A  Mystic  akin  only  to  Emerson  ”  A  discriminating  English 
critic  in  his  own  anthology  states  without  apology:  “ Among  the, 
American  poets  I  have  named  two  —  Poe  and  Emily  Dickinson.” 
And  it  was  another  Englishman ,  Martin  Armstrong,  writing  of 
her  poetry  in  the  London  “ Spectator  last  January  ( 1923 ),  who 
concluded:  “Mr.  Conrad  Aiken  in  his  recent  anthology  of  modern 
American  poets  calls  Emily  Dickinson’s  poetry  ‘ perhaps  the  finest 
by  a  woman  in  the  English  language I  quarrel  only  with  his 
‘perhaps.’” 

However  the  present  volume  may  lift  the  veil,  or  presume  to  lead 
her  shy  reality  into  the  light  of  mortal  dawns  again,  Emily  alone 
supplies  the  only  clue  to  herself ,  the  articles  of  her  Faith 

The  Soul’s  superior  instants 
Occur  to  Her  alone, 

When  friend  and  earth’s  occasion 
Have  infinite  withdrawn. 

Or  she,  Herself,  ascended 
To  too  remote  a  height. 

For  lower  recognition 
Than  Her  Omnipotent. 

This  mortal  abolition 
Is  seldom,  but  as  fair 
As  Apparition  —  subject 
To  autocratic  air. 

Eternity’s  disclosure 
To  favorites,  a  few. 

Of  the  Colossal  substance 
Of  immortality. 

The  essential  difficulty  in  presenting  a  Life  of  Emily  Dickinson 
has  been  enhanced  by  the  sacred  pact  observed  with  her  chosen  few, 
that  all  letters  should  be  burned  after  her  death.  This  excludes 
exactly  those  which  might  have  held  together  the  frail  external 
incidents  of  her  days,  which  seem  so  scantily  supplied  to  those 


ignorant  of  the  thronging  events  of  the  Spirit  which  eternally  pre¬ 
occupied  her. 

This  present  record  is  made  up  from  family  letters  hitherto 
withheld,  deathless  recollections,  and  many  sentences  overheard 
from  her  own  lips  and  scrupulously  set  down  as  too  unique  to 
he  squandered  upon  the  passing  moment.  The  Letters  formerly 
printed  have  now  been  chronologically  arranged,  and  as  far  as  of 
intrinsic  value ,  retained;  others  have  been  added  from  my  article 
in  the  “  Atlantic  Monthly ,”  and  “  The  Single  Hound,”  a  volume 
composed  entirely  of  poetic  flashes  sent  to  her  brother's  wife,  my 
mother,  on  every  gust  of  impulse. 

A  high  exigence  constrains  the  sole  survivor  of  her  family  to 
state  her  simply  and  truthfully,  in  view  of  a  public  which  has, 
doubtless  without  intention,  misunderstood  and  exaggerated  her 
seclusion  —  amassing  a  really  voluminous  stock  of  quite  lurid 
misinformation  of  irrelevant  personalities.  She  has  been  taught 
in  colleges  as  a  weird  recluse,  rehearsed  to  women's  clubs  as  a 
lovelorn  sentimentalist  —  even  betrayed  by  one  American  essayist 
of  repute  to  appear  a  fantastic  eccentric. 

On  the  other  hand,  she  has  been  named  i(the  Feminine  Walt 
Whitman  ”  in  at  least  one  of  the  great  universities;  in  another  — 

Of  the  Colossal  substance 
Of  immortality. 

Martha  Dickinson  Bianchi 


THE  EVERGREENS 
AMHERST  MASSACHUSETTS 


CONTENTS 


Part  I :  Life  1 

I.  Ancestry  3 

II.  Childhood  12 

III.  School  Days  22 

IV.  Social  Life  at  Amherst  Seventy  Years  Ago  33 

V.  “The  End  of  Peace”  43 

VI.  “A  Hedge  Away  ”  52 

VII.  Later  Years  with  Friends  and  Books  66 

VIII.  Her  Religion  38 

Part  II :  Letters  167 

Index  383 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Emily  Dickinson  Photogravure  frontispiece 

From  a  photograph  retouched  by  Laura  Coombs  Hills 

Edward  Dickinson  6 

Emily  Norcross  Dickinson  10 

Layinia  Dickinson  14 

The  Dickinson  House,  Amherst,  Massachusetts  18 

“A  LITTLE  PATH  JUST  WIDE  ENOUGH  FOR  TWO  WHO 

LOVE”  5  ^ 

Susan  Gilbert  Dickinson  64 

Judge  Lord  68 

Maria  Whitney  76 

Facsimile  of  a  Note  of  Emily  Dickinson’s  156 

Facsimile  of  a  Poem  240 

Samuel  Bowles  306 

Helen  Hunt  372 


PART  I 

THE  LIFE  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON 


1 


THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 

EMILY  DICKINSON 


CHAPTER  I 

ANCESTRY 

There  was  nothing  in  the  parentage  or  direct  heredity 
of  Emily  Dickinson  to  account  for  her  genius.  There  was 
equally  nothing  to  impede  its  course  or  contradict  its 
authority.  It  claimed  her  without  those  dissenting 
elements  of  being  which  came  to  her  from  her  ideally 
mated  but  completely  opposite  father  and  mother.  Her 
parents  did  not  interfere  with  her  actual  life  and  be¬ 
havior,  both  because  they  never  realized  her  preoccupa¬ 
tion  quite  fully,  and  because  they  had  no  will  to  destroy 
the  individuality  of  any  one  of  their  three  children. 

Nothing  could  have  been  more  alien  to  any  of  the 
Dickinsons  than  a  desire  to  be  peculiar  —  “queer”  they 
would  have  called  it  —  or  to  do  what  the  later  generation 
calls  pose.  Eccentricity  consciously  indulged  in  would 
have  merely  been  reprimanded  as  bad  manners.  Their 
dignity  was  of  the  stiff,  reserved  type  resenting  the  least 
encroachment  on  its  individuality  in  character  and  pri¬ 
vacy  in  habit  —  which  they  insured  by  conforming  hand¬ 
somely  to  the  sense  of  their  community,  the  laws  of  their 
state  and  country,  and  the  will  of  God  as  expounded  from 
pulpits  of  the  white  meeting-house  in  Hadley  and  later 
in  Amherst,  where  the  colonial  train  of  Emily  Dickin- 


4 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


son’s  ancestors  undeviatingly  worshipped.  There  was  no 
allowance  made  in  her  family  for  oddity  —  temperament 
had  not  been  discovered  yet.  There  was  no  exception  to 
what  was  expected  of  each  of  the  children  alike,  her 
sister  Lavinia,  her  brother  Austin,  and  herself.  What 
Emily  did  succeed  in  evading  and  eluding  and  imagining 
and  believing,  and  setting  down  for  those  who  came  after 
her  to  profit  by,  was  her  own  performance,  dictated  by 
her  own  need  for  the  solitude  in  which  to  write,  and  the 
time  necessary  for  thought.  She  was  spared  none  of  her 
share  in  the  household  duties,  nor  did  she  wish  to  be. 

Before  one  thinks  of  her  as  a  poet  and  philosopher  or 
mystic,  one  must  in  honesty  remember  her  as  an  adoring 
and  devoted  daughter,  a  sister  loyal  to  blows,  a  real  nun 
of  the  home,  without  affectation  or  ritual  beyond  that  of 
her  gentle  daily  task,  and  all  that  she  could  devise  of 
loving  addition  to  the  simple  sum.  To  one  who  loved  her 
it  is  unthinkable  that  she  could  ever  be  supposed  to  have 
consciously  secreted  herself,  or  self-consciously  indulged 
in  whim  or  extravaganza  in  living,  which  her  fine  breed¬ 
ing  would  have  been  the  first  to  discard  as  vulgar  and 
unworthy.  It  was  her  absorption  in  her  own  world  that 
made  her  unaware  often  of  the  more  visible  world  of  those 
who  never  see  beyond  it.  It  was  not  that  she  was  intro¬ 
spective,  egoistic,  and  selfish  —  rather  that  she  dwelt  so 
far  out  in  the  changing  beauty  of  Nature,  in  the  loves  and 
joys  and  sorrows  of  the  dear  ones  she  held  closest,  in  the 
simple  drama  of  the  neighborhood,  and  most  of  all  the 
stupendous  and  sometimes  revealing  wonder  of  life  and 
death  and  the  Almighty  God  thundered  at  her  from  the 
high  pulpit  on  Sundays  —  and  known  so  differently  in  her 
own  soul  the  other  days  of  the  week  —  that  she  never 


ANCESTRY 


5 


thought  of  Emily  Dickinson  at  all;  never  supposed  any 
one  watched  her  way  of  living  or  worshipping  or  acting. 
She  never  had  time  in  all  the  vivid,  thrilling,  incessant 
programme  of  night  and  day,  summer  and  winter,  bird 
and  flower,  the  terror  lest  evil  overtake  her  loved  ones, 
the  glory  in  their  least  success  —  never  stopped  in  her 
flying  wild  hours  of  inward  rapture  over  a  beauty  per¬ 
ceived  or  a  winged  word  caught  and  spun  into  the  fabric 
of  her  thought  —  to  wonder  or  to  care  if  no  one  knew  she 
was,  or  how  she  proceeded  in  the  behavior  of  her  own 
small  tremendous  affair  of  life. 

Her  heredity  is  distinctly  traced  for  nine  generations 
in  America.  Her  first  local  ancestor  settled  in  old  Hadley 
and  a  later  generation  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the 
church  and  town  of  Amherst.  There  were  Dickinsons 
mentioned  in  Hadley  among  the  first  letters  of  the 
original  Indian  grants  in  1659.  And  when  in  1714  the 
order  was  given  for  five  men  to  superintend  the  erection 
of  a  new  meeting-house  in  the  middle  of  two  streets,  one 
of  them  was  a  Dickinson.  There  was  also  an  ancestor  in 
the  famous  “Shays’s  Rebellion”  in  1786.  Before  that, 
in  England,  the  stock  from  which  she  came  was  clear 
for  thirteen  generations  more.  Further  than  that  her 
father’s  curiosity  or  pride  had  never  gone  in  research. 

Her  own  grandfather,  Samuel  Fowler  Dickinson,  was 
the  first  of  her  direct  line  in  Amherst.  His  connection 
with  the  establishment  of  Amherst  Academy,  from 
wrhich  the  College  later  sprang,  is  familiar  local  history. 
In  his  fervor  for  “the  in-bringing  of  the  Kingdom”  he 
foresaw  the  universal  education  of  ministers,  and  calcu¬ 
lated  the  millennium  in  the  near  future  of  “about  seven 
years.”  He  was  educated  at  Dartmouth  College,  a  man 


6 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


of  sincere  piety,  and  a  generosity  that  was  his  financial 
ruin.  In  a  letter  from  his  sister,  Emily’s  Aunt  Lucretia, 
to  his  son  Edward  at  Yale,  the  following  passage  occurs. 
It  is  dated  1821: 

Father  left  in  the  yellow  gig  for  the  Bay  Road  this  morning. 
He  has  gone  to  Boston  by  coach  to  see  about  getting  a  charter 
for  something  they  propose  to  call  Amherst  College.  He  looked 
so  fine  in  his  white  beaver  and  new  great  coat. 

Until  this  ardent  enthusiast,  almost  bigot,  lost  all  the 
money  he  had  not  previously  given  away  in  his  fanati¬ 
cism  for  education  and  religion,  the  family  throve  and 
were  favorably  known  for  this  world’s  prosperity  as  well 
as  in  matters  of  piety  and  attainment. 

His  oldest  son  Edward,  who  was  the  father  of  Emily, 
was  brought  up  strictly  and  with  a  regard  for  the  needs 
of  the  missionaries  first.  He  was  sent  to  Yale  College, 
driven  there,  too,  in  the  family  chaise  upon  at  least  one 
trip  mentioned  in  the  family  correspondence.  The 
family  letters  during  that  period  are  happily  at  hand  and 
throw  a  profound  and  touching  atmosphere  about  these 
earlier  days  of  education,  when  it  was  a  sacred  boon 
possible  to  the  few  through  fierce  sacrifice,  often,  on 
the  part  of  those  who  gave  it,  and  not  to  be  entered  into 
with  less  than  a  consecrated  spirit  of  trust  for  those  to 
whom  it  was  to  be  returned,  transformed  into  a  wisdom 
that  was  to  help  save  the  world. 

In  one  letter  from  Samuel,  who  was  a  deacon  for  forty 
years  in  the  First  Church  and  whose  zeal  was  sleepless, 
to  Edward,  his  son,  this  passage  strikes  its  own  contrast 
to  modern  fathers  and  sons. 

December  17,  1819,  he  writes: 

It  is  good  news  to  hear  of  your  good  health  and  conduct.  I 


EDWARD  DICKINSON 


ANCESTRY 


7 


rejoice  to  hear  that  the  government  of  the  college  pleases  you  — 
that  so  much  attention  is  paid  to  moral  and  religious  instruction. 
Learning  and  science  without  morality  and  religion  are  like  a 
man  without  a  soul.  They  probably  would  do  hurt  rather  than 
good.  No  man  is  a  neuter  in  the  world.  His  actions,  his 
example,  his  concepts,  his  motives  are  all  tending  either  to  that 
which  is  good  or  evil. 

He  concludes: 

Remember  the  importance  of  the  present  time  and  never  for¬ 
get  our  hereafter. 

Your  affectionate  parent 

Samuel  Fowler  Dickinson 

Again,  in  1819,  he  writes  enclosing  five  dollars  with 
which  to  discharge  all  obligations  Edward  may  have 
entered  into.  He  adds: 

Consider  the  importance  of  every  action  as  going  to  form 
character.  Always  be  manly  but  do  not  expend  more  than  you 
can  pay,  remembering  that  nothing  is  spent  without  sufficient 
cause.  There  are  necessary  uses  for  all  our  money. 

Again,  later  on: 

I  hear  the  religious  attention  continues  at  New  Haven.  If, 
Edward,  I  could  learn  that  you  were  among  the  number  who 
had  embraced  the  Saviour  how  joyful  the  news !  Pray  for  a  new 
heart.  Never  forget  your  morning  and  evening  supplication  for 
such  mercies  as  you  need,  and  most  of  all  for  your  great  sal¬ 
vation.  You  know  we  place  much  confidence  in  your  upright 
and  honourable  deportment  and  your  strict  attention  to  every 
religious  and  moral  duty. 

Edward  Dickinson  grew  up  to  be  a  rather  haughty, 
austere  man,  shy  and  gentle,  laconic  and  strict.  He 
dressed  in  broadcloth  at  all  times,  and  wore  a  black 
beaver  hat  glossy  beyond  compare  with  that  of  any  young 
beau,  and  carried  a  handsome  cane  to  and  from  his  law 
office  on  the  Main  Street  of  his  village.  About  his  neck 


8 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


was  wound  a  black  satin  stock  pinned  with  a  jet  and 
diamond  pin,  with  a  lock  of  his  wife’s  hair  at  the  back. 
His  hair  was  a  dark  auburn,  and  his  eyes  those  that 
Emily  repeated  in  time.  He  was  on  the  Governor’s  staff 
as  a  young  man  and  his  honorable  discharge  with 
flattering  mention  of  his  services  is  still  preserved. 

He  followed  the  family  profession  and  went  into  the 
law,  practising  in  Amherst,  pleading  at  the  Hampshire 
County  Bar,  settling  the  disputes  of  his  friends  and 
neighbors,  and  drawing  the  deeds  that  no  modern  court 
has  ever  been  able  to  set  aside  or  adjudge  not  binding.  He 
was  a  pillar  in  the  First  Church,  although  he  joined  it 
later  in  life  than  was  customary,  and  served  its  interests 
with  utter  fidelity.  A  gentleman  of  the  old  school  he  was, 
with  a  distinction  that  was  elegance,  and  many  a  laborer, 
among  the  aged  recalling  him  in  their  own  boyhood, 
spoke  with  respect  amounting  to  reverence  of  “The  Old 
Squire.  What  he  said  he  meant,”  was  deeply  burned 
into  his  legend. 

Only  one  of  his  daughter  Emily’s  sparks  of  reckless 
fire  flew  from  his  sedate  characteristics  —  his  nearest 
approach  to  self-indulgence  was  his  sly  liking  for  a  horse 
handsome  and  fleet.  “I  always  intend  to  have  the  best 
horse  in  town,”  he  said  more  than  once,  as  he  set  off  for  the 
court  in  the  shire  town  across  the  river.  And  his  lifelong 
next  neighbor,  Deacon  Luke  Sweetser,  made  this  no  easy 
ambition.  There  was  just  a  hint  of  the  daughter’s  later 
flashes  in  her  father’s  concession  to  this  love  of  speed  and 
shining  form. 

He  admitted  nothing  in  Emily  as  different  from  his 
other  children,  or  from  any  daughter.  He  made  no  al¬ 
lowances  for  her  — ever;  and  yet  their  unspoken  in- 


ANCESTRY 


9 


timacy  went  so  deep  it  never  came  to  the  surface  in 
words,  but  was  never  absent,  diminished,  or  lost,  or 
ceased  to  be  even  after  his  death  had  blasted  her  trust  in 
life  forever.  “If  Father  is  asleep  on  the  lounge  the  house 
is  full,”  she  often  exclaimed.  It  expressed  their  under¬ 
standing. 

That  the  Squire  was  a  proud  man  no  one  doubted,  but 
that  his  name  was  the  first  on  any  subscription  to  relieve 
want  or  disaster,  and  that  his  eyes  were  capable  of  suffus¬ 
ing  at  the  pain  of  an  animal  or  trouble  of  the  human  heart, 
related  him  to  Emily’s  fire  and  dew  quality. 

His  wife,  Emily’s  mother,  was  an  exquisite  little  lady 
of  the  old  school  long  passed  into  mythology.  She  was 
the  daughter  of  Alfred  Norcross,  of  Monson.  The  family 
were  well-to-do  and  she  was  educated  and  finished  off  at 
a  school  for  young  ladies  at  New  Haven,  very  much  in 
repute  in  her  day.  Upon  her  marriage,  no  railroad  then 
reaching  Amherst,  her  dower  was  brought  by  several 
yoke  of  brindle  oxen.  Her  mahogany  was  claw-footed 
and  pine-apple  cut;  her  silver  had  the  basket  of  flowers 
on  the  handles;  her  bandboxes  are  still  in  the  family 
possession  —  monstrous  gay  affairs,  with  scenes  of  Mount 
Vernon  on  one  side  and  Paris  on  the  other. 

Emily  Norcross  Dickinson  feared  and  honored  her 
husband  after  the  manner  of  the  Old  Testament.  She 
trembled  and  flushed,  obeyed  and  was  silent  before  him. 
He  was  to  her  Jehovah,  and  she  was  to  him  the  sole  be¬ 
ing  to  whom  he  entrusted  the  secrets  of  his  inmost 
heart.  His  letters  to  her  were  discreet,  respectful, 
“frosty  but  kindly”  —  ending  always  with  the  assurance 
of  his  remaining  her  “most  ob’t  servant,  Edward  Dickin¬ 


son. 


10  EMILY  DICKINSON 

On  one  occasion  lie  wrote  that  he  should  see  her  at 
Northampton,  being  with  the  Governor  as  aide-de-camp, 
“which  will,”  he  hopes,  “not  be  less  agreeable  to  her  than 
to  him.”  A  courtly  pair,  with  not  one  glimmer  of  their 
transgressing  Emily’s  future  escape  from  all  their  well- 
known  landmarks  of  thought  and  divination. 

The  society  of  their  village  was  also  stately,  and  they 
later  played  their  part  therein,  being  often  sought,  or, 
as  the  time-worn  little  notes  still  show,  “Solicited,  to  an 
evening  party”  by  this  or  that  prominent  household, 
as  “Self  and  Lady,”  a  form  shared  by  even  as  pompous  a 
host  as  Judge  Delano,  of  Northampton.  In  1821  Lucretia 
also  stated,  “There  have  been  some  splendid  parties  this 
Winter  in  town  —  one  at  the  Strong’s  to  which  there  were 
more  than  fifty  invited.”  The  lace  shawls  and  India 
shawls,  the  gold-banded  china  and  English  blue,  are 
mute  witness  to  the  social  importance  and  obligation  of 
the  family,  who  did  their  part,  whether  any  enjoyment 
was  wrested  from  their  conscientious  performance  or  not, 

m  keeping  up  the  county  standards  of  entertainment  and 
hospitality. 

It  is  impossible  to  derive  Emily  from  either  her  stately 
father  or  her  fluttering  little  mother,  always  timorous, 
always  anxious.  Treasured  among  the  daughter’s  most 
cherished  papers,  was  found  the  little  yellow  certificate 
of  her  mother’s  exemplary  conduct  as  a  girl  at  school: 

Miss  Emily  Norcross,  for  punctual  attendance,  close  applica¬ 
tion,  good  acquirements,  and  discreet  behavior  merits  the  ap¬ 
pro  bation  of  her  preceptress. 

E.  P.  Dutch 

The  aunts  seem  to  have  been  the  Greek  chorus  of  the 
family,  dire  in  their  fatal  appearances.  Her  Aunt 


EMILY  NORCROSS  DICKINSON 


ANCESTRY 


11 


Elizabeth,  Emily  pronounced  “the  only  male  relative  on 
the  female  side  of  my  family.”  They  were  all  married  at  a 
distance  and  imminent  hourly  for  prolonged  visitations. 
These  invasions  concluded  the  family  circle,  together 
with  the  uncles  who  were  less  disastrous  to  the  plans  of 
the  children  because  they  left  sooner  and  paid  less  atten¬ 
tion  to  them. 

And  out  of  this  human  stock  and  precision  of  living 
came  the  little  girl  whose  soul  flew  up  and  away  like  the 
smoke  from  the  high  chimneys  of  her  home  under  the  tall 
pines. 


CHAPTER  II 

CHILDHOOD 

Emily  Norcross  Dickinson,  named  for  her  mother,  was 
born  December  11,  1830,  in  Amherst,  Massachusetts,  in 
the  old  house  said  to  have  been  the  first  erected  of  brick 
in  Amherst. 

Her  brother  Austin  and  her  younger  sister  Lavinia 
were  the  other  children  of  the  home,  both  possessed  of 
marked  ability  and  varied  temperament. 

Austin  grew  up  to  manhood  with  much  of  Emily’s 
poetic  quality,  fiercely  suppressed  —  a  lover  of  trees  and 
beauty,  one  with  Nature  —  like  her,  a  hero-worshipper, 
a  partisan,  and  a  lover  of  all  the  rare  and  noble  books 
whose  faded  brown  Ticknor  and  Fields  first  editions  still 
stand  in  deserted  ranks  on  the  bookshelves  of  his  own 
library  in  his  former  home  at  Amherst.  He  graduated 
from  Amherst  College  in  1850,  and  in  1854  from  the 
Harvard  Law  School,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Hamp¬ 
shire  County  Bar.  When  he  was  about  to  leave  Amherst 
to  accept  a  legal  partnership  in  Detroit,  his  father,  over¬ 
come  by  the  impending  separation,  offered  to  build  him  a 
home  if  he  would  remain.  So  all  the  adventurous  hopes 
were  stifled,  and  immediately  upon  his  marriage  he  took 
up  the  practice  of  law  as  his  father’s  partner  in  the  old 
office,  since  burned,  which  held  many  treasures  of  local 
history  as  well  as  a  remarkably  fine  law  library  consulted 
far  and  wide  throughout  the  region. 

His  marriage  to  the  “Sister  Sue”  of  Emily’s  lifelong 
adoration  brought  an  outside  element  into  the  family. 


CHILDHOOD 


13 


which  bred  some  critical  hours.  Brought  up  by  a  Knicker¬ 
bocker  great-aunt  in  a  more  cosmopolitan  atmosphere, 
Susan  Gilbert’s  first  celebration  of  Christmas  in  Amherst 
with  wreaths  of  laurel  in  the  windows  almost  upset  the 
family  apple  cart,  and  Emily’s  brother  was  accused  by 
the  scandalized  Puritan  neighbors  of  having  married  a 
Catholic. 

But  in  all  and  for  all  his  father  was  on  her  side,  and 
came  regularly  all  his  life  each  Sabbath  morning  for  a 
surreptitious  cup  of  stronger  coffee  than  home  thought 
wise.  It  was  just  this  freer  aspect  of  life  in  “Sister  Sue  ” 
that  fascinated  Emily  and  cast  such  a  spell  over  her  from, 
the  first.  The  old  house  under  the  tall  pines,  rebuilt  in 
1813,  and  the  new  house  built  after  a  whim  of  Austin’s 
in  the  style  of  an  Italian  villa,  advertised  the  abyss  that 
lay  between  the  two  generations. 

The  sister,  Lavinia,  was  hardly  less  brilliant  than 
Emily,  but  upon  her,  very  early,  depended  the  real 
solidarity  of  the  family.  A  coquette  from  her  cradle,  very 
pretty,  with  a  piercing  wit  and  a  rather  bandit  tongue,  it 
became  her  lot  to  cover  Emily’s  delinquencies  and  support 
her  mother’s  gentle  reign,  increasingly  enfeebled  in  spite 
of  herself  by  the  dominating  daughter,  and  the  powerful 
family  maidservant  who  grew  old  along  with  them  for 
almost  forty  years  of  unbroken  service.  It  was  Lavinia 
who  knew  where  everything  was,  from  a  lost  quotation 
to  a  last  year’s  muffler.  It  was  she  who  remembered  to 
have  the  fruit  picked  for  canning,  or  the  seeds  kept  for 
next  year’s  planting,  or  the  perfunctory  letters  written 
to  the  aunts.  It  was  Lavinia  who  leaped  into  the  breach, 
when  those  unexpected  guests  drove  up  at  nightfall  — 
tearing  her  hair  over  a  discrepant  larder  behind  the  scenes, 


14 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


but  advancing  all  smiles  and  self-congratulation  to  re¬ 
ceive  the  unwelcome  invaders  as  they  came  up  the  double 
set  of  stone  steps  and  into  the  front  hall. 

If  Emily  had  been  less  Emily,  Lavinia  might  have  been 
more  Lavinia.  As  it  was,  Lavinia  carried  the  family 
honor  to  her  grave  as  a  sacred  but  rather  acrid  burden, 
and  a  few  angels  may  have  wept  over  her  load  when  she 
laid  it  down,  for  sake  of  the  self-renunciation  its  integrity 
implied.  It  was  Lavinia  who  was  thrown  to  the  lions  of 
every  phase  of  dreary  social  duty,  as  she  threw  herself 
to  those  same  beasts  of  anxious  household  routine. 
Always  a  brilliant  mimic,  a  wit  and  wag,  none  could 
surpass  her  in  her  representations  of  the  family  circle, 
and  in  imitating  the  bass  viol  of  the  country  choir  her 
skill  was  supreme.  She  was  said  to  be  able  to  make  her 
nose  turn  up  at  will,  if  her  caricature  demanded  it,  and 
when  nothing  aroused  her  animosity  there  was  no  one 
more  amusing  —  not  even  Emily  herself,  whose  body¬ 
guard  she  became  in  their  early  thirties.  Each  had  her 
own  inner  intimacies,  and  her  own  admirers  in  due  time, 
and  many  they  shared,  but  there  is  loving  tribute  due 
to  the  younger  sister  who  must  have  always  felt  Emily’s 
peculiar  genius  as  distinguishing  her  apart  and  above, 
and  who  proudly  stood  aside  for  her  while  many,  many 
sought  her  out.  They  were  so  vividly  Martha  and  Mary 
that  it  seems  trite  to  call  up  the  parallel:  Lavinia  with 
her  wearing  rectitude  in  household  affairs,  Emily  with 
her  sublime  disregard  of  all  detail ;  one  living  in  the  seen, 
the  other  in  the  unseen  and  scarcely  to  be  imagined;  both 
in  adoring  subjection  to  their  parents,  both  jealously 
involved  in  their  only  brother’s  success  and  happiness. 
And  among  them  an  outsider,  differing  in  tradition  and 


if* 


LAVINIA  DICKINSON 


CHILDHOOD  15 

upbringing,  Austin’s  wife,  with  her  broader  youth  and 
fulfilled  happiness. 

There  is  an  artless  painting  of  the  three  children,  done 
by  some  itinerant  painter,  that  gives  them  all  three,  at 
about  the  time  their  father’s  letters  began  to  mention 
them  by  name  as  little  individuals;  hoping  “Emily  took 
care  of  her  baby  sister”  —  a  hope  faintly  to  be  justified, 
perhaps  —  and  “that  Austin  filled  the  wood  box  as  he 
was  told.” 

In  the  portrait  Emily  holds  a  book,  but  if  her  gaze  was 
sibylline,  it  was  beyond  the  vagrant  artist’s  power  to 
portray,  and  she  stares  out  as  frankly  as  her  younger 
sister,  who  clutches  a  stiff  rose,  and  leans  against  her 
rather  indifferent  red-lipped  brother  with  his  jaunty  air 
of  superior  pleasure  in  being  the  boy  of  the  trio.  Just  the 
real  New  England  family,  one  sees  them,  a  young  father 
and  mother,  with  perhaps  a  degree  more  of  prosperity 
and  education  and  noble  ideals  to  bless  themselves  with 
than  the  majority  of  those  about  them,  and  an  endow¬ 
ment  of  native  refinement  deeply  engrained. 

The  children  went  to  the  public  schools  like  all  the 
other  children  of  their  time  in  New  England  towns. 
Helen  Fiske,  the  daughter  of  Professor  Fiske,  and  later 
to  be  known  as  “  H.  H.”  (“  Helen  Hunt”),  so  familiar  in 
American  literature,  was  their  favorite  playmate.  There 
is  a  note  still  extant  from  Mrs.  Fiske,  in  reply  to  one 
from  Emily’s  mother,  begging  that  Helen  may  play  with 
Emily  and  Vinnie  under  the  syringas.  It  reads: 

Professor  Fiske  will  lead  Helen  over  to  play  with  Emily  be¬ 
neath  the  syringas,  this  afternoon.  In  case  it  prove  not  con¬ 
venient  to  send  her  home,  he  will  call  for  her  in  the  chaise  to¬ 
ward  nightfall,  before  the  dew  falls. 


16 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


What  a  picture  of  innocent  pastime  it  leaves  —  little 
girls  playing  house  under  the  sweet  flowering  syringa,  to 
the  hum  of  the  bees,  and  safely  restored  to  the  family 
fold  before  the  dew  falls. 

They  went  berrying  and  chestnutting;  on  grand  oc¬ 
casions  they  drove  in  the  pompous  family  cabriolet,  lined 
with  cream-colored  broadcloth,  with  high  doors  and  oval 
windows  at  the  sides  and  back  and  framing  in  unexpected 
sections  of  horse  and  sky,  as  they  moved,  and  from  which 
the  old-fashioned  landscape  looked  formal  and  strange. 
Usually  it  was  to  spend  the  day  with  a  relative  at  some 
distance  or  to  attend  a  family  funeral.  There  is  no  record 
of  any  less  sedate  amusement,  but  the  child  Emily  got 
thrill  enough  out  of  the  orioles  nesting  in  the  cherry  tree, 
or  the  exploits  of  her  pets,  or  the  dark  excitement  of  the 
great  barn  where  in  the  afternoon  the  sunbeams  piercing 
through  a  crack  in  the  roof  observed  her  as  she  hunted 
for  the  eggs  hidden  so  skilfully  from  her  deep  eyes.  The 
robins  came  back  and  the  crows  in  the  tall  pines  called 
to  her  almost  by  name.  She  was  so  truly  one  of  Na¬ 
ture’s  children  herself  that  the  daffodils  dancing  imme¬ 
morial  under  the  apple  trees  on  the  eastern  slope  of  the 
dooryard  every  spring  were  as  her  own  little  guests  re¬ 
turning.  Except  for  her  quickened  sense  of  all  beings, 
all  creatures,  all  beauty,  she  differed  little  from  other 
little  girls  of  her  time  and  town. 

When  she  was  sixteen  the  girl  who  was  later  to  become 
her  “Sister  Sue”  came  to  visit  in  Amherst,  and  then 
began  the  life  that  never  ceased,  of  budding  poetry  and 
letters,  affection  and  art,  sympathy  and  love  that  sur¬ 
passed  the  love  real  sisterhood  often  carelessly  overlooks. 
Henceforth  in  all  their  girlish  banditry,  their  secret 


CHILDHOOD 


17 


frolics,  their  confidences,  tjieir  love-affairs,  their  griefs 
and  illnesses  and  disappointments,  it  was  she  of  whom 
Emily  always  spoke  as  “Sister  Sue,”  who  shared  the 
overflow  of  the  real  hidden  life  of  that  unique  genius  in 
her  stiff,  clean,  God-fearing  New  England  home.  When 
her  mother’s  astonishment  and  amazed  concern  summed 
itself  up  in  a  shrill  cry,  “Why,  Emily!  How  can  you  talk 
so!”  —  or  when  her  father  evidenced  displeasure  by  tak¬ 
ing  his  hat  and  cane  and  passing  out  the  door  in  silence, 
leaving  an  emptiness  indicative  of  reproof,  a  wordless 
censure  more  devastating  to  her  than  any  judgment  day 
—  it  was  to  Sister  Sue  she  fled  for  safety.  Her  timid  im¬ 
aginings  were  horrors  worse  than  any  actual  event  or 
punishment  could  ascribe. 

There  is  no  legend  in  the  family  that  her  father  ever 
reproved  her  or  called  her  to  account  in  her  various  mis¬ 
haps  with  duty.  Probably  his  habitual  dealing  with 
culprits  was  after  his  own  wisdom  of  criminals,  and  he 
knew  her  nature  well  enough  to  administer  only  his  stern 
silence  in  her  case. 

Up  to  the  time  of  her  going  away  to  school  she  was  of 
rather  precocious  mentality,  somewhat  sentimental  and 
given  to  girlish  outpourings  written  in  the  accepted  ver¬ 
bosity  of  the  style  of  the  mid-century  (1845).  Her  flowers 
already  claim  a  distinct  part  in  her  life.  It  is  interesting  to 
note  also  that  at  fourteen  she  announces  herself  as  a 
Whig.  She  is  interested  in  all  the  village  happenings  and 
when  her  father  gives  her  a  piano  her  life  becomes 
crowded.  She  goes  to  singing  school  quite  rapturously, 
and  makes  an  herbarium  of  great  variety  and  beauty, 
spending  many  afternoons  off  on  the  hillsides  for  her  wild 
specimens.  In  one  of  her  earliest  letters  preserved  she 


18 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


makes  fun  of  the  future,  saying,  “I  am  growing  hand¬ 
some.  I  expect  I  shall  be  the  belle  of  Amherst  when  I 
reach  my  seventeenth  year.  I  don’t  doubt  but  that  I  shall 
have  perfect  crowds  of  admirers  at  that  age  —  but  away 
with  my  nonsense.”  All  of  which  shows  her  a  natural, 
silly,  happy  girl. 

She  has  her  garden  and  her  house  plants  now  and  de¬ 
lights  in  her  first  real  music  lessons.  She  also  is  em¬ 
broidering  a  book  mark,  which  she  admires.  “It  is  an 
arrow  with  a  wreath  about  it  —  very  beautiful.  ”  She 
does  her  hair  up  now  and  admits  “it  makes  me  look 
different.”  The  pieces  she  learns  are  “  The  Grave  of 
Bonaparte,”  “Lancers  Quickstep,”  and  “Maiden,  Weep 
No  More.”  She  learns  to  make  bread  and  stays  out  of 
school,  as  she  is  not  strong,  and  needs  more  physical 
exercise.  The  winter  of  1846  finds  her  out  of  school,  but 
reciting  German,  “as  Mr.  C.,  has  a  large  class  and 
I  ather  thought  I  might  never  have  another  opportunity 
to  study  it.”  Her  Christmas  presents  interest  her  vividly 
and  she  describes  them  at  length  in  her  letters  to  her 
friends.  She  says: 

I  had  a  perfume  bag  and  a  bottle  of  attar  of  rose  to  go  with  it, 
a  sheet  of  music,  a  china  mug,  with  forget-me-not  on  it,  a  toilet 
cushion,  a  watch  case,  a  fortune  teller,  and  an  amaranthine 
stock  of  pin  cushions  and  needle  books  which  in  ingenuity  and 
art  would  rival  the  works  of  Scripture  Dorcas.  Also  an  abun¬ 
dance  of  candy. 

In  September  of  1846  she  made  her  first  visit  to  Boston, 
alone.  The  ride  in  the  cars  she  found  delightful  and  the 
visit  upon  her  aunt  full  of  excitement.  She  went  to 
Mount  Auburn,  Bunker  Hill,  the  Chinese  museum, 
attended  two  concerts  and  a  horticultural  exhibition; 


THE  DICKINSON  HOUSE,  AMHERST,  MASSACHUSETTS 


CHILDHOOD 


19 


was  taken,  as  slie  herself  declares,  “On  top  of  the  State 
House  and  almost  everywhere  else  you  can  imagine!” 

All  the  next  spring  she  was  fitting  to  go  to  South  Hadley 
Seminary,  studying  algebra,  Euclid,  ecclesiastical  history, 
and  reviewing  arithmetic.  She  was  always  in  love  with 
her  teachers  at  that  time,  quite  regardless  of  their  being 
men  or  women,  but  whatever  there  was  fanciful  or  ro¬ 
mantic  in  her  girl  imagination  she  was  surely  grounded 
as  firmly  in  the  uncompromising  fundamentals  of  educa¬ 
tion  as  her  Puritan  father  saw  fit  to  have  her.  Her  an¬ 
ticipations  were  boundless  and  she  only  feared  the  sky 
would  fall  before  the  plan  was  realized.  It  had  been  in 
her  dreams  for  a  long  time,  yet  she  felt  that  it  was  part 
of  her  own  nature  always  to  anticipate  more  than  to 
realize;  a  curious  instinct  in  one  so  entirely  normal  with 
life  just  opening  before  her. 

Her  brother  Austin  had  entered  Amherst  College  the 
year  before,  and  at  his  first  commencement  she  describes 
herself  as  “now  very  tall  and  wearing  long  dresses.”  One 
of  her  quaintest  sentences  slips  in  here  between  childhood 
and  girlhood:  “I  have  perfect  confidence  in  God  and  His 
promises  —  and  yet  I  know  not  why,  I  feel  the  world 
has  a  predominant  place  in  my  affections.” 

The  sweet  secluded  pleasures  she  shared  —  those 
pensive  yet  wistful  glances  at  fife,  with  shy  though  reso¬ 
lute  eyes  —  may  best  be  understood  from  one  of  her  let¬ 
ters  just  a  few  days  before  she  went  to  South  Hadley  in 

the  fall  of  1847.  A  picture  this,  scarcely  to  be  reproduced: 
£ 

Mattie  Gilbert  was  here  last  evening  and  we  sat  on  the  front 
door  steps  and  talked  about  life  and  love  and  whispered  our 
childish  fancies  about  such  blissful  things,  the  evening  was  gone 
so  soon  —  and  I  walked  home  with  Mattie  beneath  the  silent 


20 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


moon  and  wished  for  you  and  heaven.  You  did  not  come  dar¬ 
ling,  but  a  bit  of  heaven  did  —  or  so  it  seemed  to  me.  As  we 
walked  silently  side  by  side  and  wondered  if  that  great  blessed¬ 
ness  which  may  be  ours  sometime  is  granted  now  to  some. 
Those  unions,  dear  Susie,  by  which  two  are  one,  this  sweet 
and  strange  miracle. 

A  perfectly  normal  young  heart  responding  to  the  natural 
wondering  of  impending  maturity. 

She  is  perfectly  natural,  too,  in  her  religious  emotions, 
with  all  the  literal  childishness  about  heaven,  reminding 
her  Susie  enviously  in  another  letter,  that  while  she  has 
parents  and  a  sister  in  heaven,  Emily’s  are  on  earth, 
until,  carried  away  by  her  imagination,  she  exclaims  — 
“Oh,  I  wish  I  had  so  many  dear  friends  as  you  in  heaven !” 
—  a  naive  cry,  quickly  amended,  “I  could  not  spare  them 
now,  but  to  know  they  had  got  there  safely  and  should 
suffer  no  more!”  she  explains,  in  a  mood  that  was  always 
her  own  in  later  years,  longing  to  spare  those  she  loved. 

Of  course  at  this  stage  she  sentimentalizes  as  all  young 
girls  do  and  should,  and  pours  out  her  soul  to  her  girl 
friend: 

I  know  I  was  naughty  to  write  such  things,  and  I  know  I 
could  have  helped  it  if  I  had  tried  hard  enough,  but  I  thought 
my  heart  would  break  and  I  knew  of  nobody  here  that  cared 
anything  about  it  —  so  I  said  to  myself  —  we  will  tell  Susie. 
You  don’t  know  what  a  comfort  it  was.  Susie  can  count  the  big 
true  hearts  by  clusters  —  full  of  bloom  and  blossoms  amaran¬ 
thine,  because  eternal. 

At  the  close  she  adds: 

I  send  you  a  kiss  shyly  —  if  there’s  anybody  around,  don’t 
let  them  see. 

Yet  even  these  simplest  outpourings  have  each  some 
flash  redeeming  from  mere  commonplace  of  her  age. 


CHILDHOOD 


21 


One  such  glimpse  of  he;  variability  of  expression  oc¬ 
curs  in  the  following: 

I  have  thought  of  you  all  day  and  I  fear  of  but  little  else  and 
when  I  was  gone  to  Meeting  you  filled  up  my  mind  so  full  I 
coul dn  t  find  a  chink  to  put  the  worthy  pastor  in,  when  he  said 
“  Our  Heavenly  Father,”  I  said  “  O  darling  Sue !  ”  When  he  read 
the  One  Hundredth  psalm  I  kept  saying  your  precious  letter 
over  to  myself,  and  Susie,  when  they  sang  it  would  have  made 
you  laugh  to  hear  one  little  voice  piping  to  the  departed.  I 
made  up  words  and  kept  singing  how  I  loved  you  —  and  you 
had  gone  away  —  while  all  the  rest  of  the  choir  were  singing  the 
Halleluyah !  I  presume  nobody  heard  me  because  I  am  so  small, 
but  it  was  a  comfort  to  feel  I  might  put  them  all  out  singing  of 
you.  I  am  not  there  though  this  afternoon,  because  I  am  here, 
writing  this  letter  to  you. 

What  a  darling  vision  she  makes  of  herself,  shy  and  small 
and  heart-broken  for  her  idol,  singing  against  the  volume 
of  the  established  order  of  worship  at  the  top  of  her  little 
chirp,  intrepid  of  consequences  if  overheard.  Something 
of  the  later  dissenting  Emily  is  foreshadowed  in  every 
gesture  of  her  early  mind. 

The  daily  four-horse  stage  that  ran  between  Amherst 
and  Northampton  left  quite  early  in  the  morning,  and 
brought  up  with  much  cracking  of  the  whip  before  the 
post-office  at  exactly  five  in  the  afternoon.  There  were 
no  trains  or  trolleys  or  motors  in  those  days,  so  she  was 
driven  to  South  Hadley  in  state,  by  her  father,  and  left 
there  alone  for  the  first  time  in  her  life  out  in  the  strange, 
wide  world;  the  Holyoke  range  shutting  her  away  from 
all  the  geography  of  her  previous  existence  more  obdu¬ 
rately  than  any  remote  distance  of  modern  latitude  and 
longitude  could  devise. 


CHAPTER  III 

SCHOOL  DAYS 

In  the  fall  of  1847,  Emily  entered  South  Hadley  Female 
Seminary,  which  was  at  that  time  a  unique  establishment 
of  learning,  one  of  whose  avowed  objects  was  to  provide 
mates  for  the  missionaries  sent  out  to  the  foreign  field. 
It  was  in  advance  of  the  other  Young  Ladies’  Seminaries 
in  scope  and  grade,  and  had  been  founded  by  Mary  Lyon 
with  a  zeal  for  service  that  infected  all  the  fellowship  of 
her  co-workers.  Her  assistants  drove  over  the  hills  far 
and  near,  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,  collecting 
the  necessary  funds;  many  a  woman  still  living  remem¬ 
bers  the  words  of  her  mother  —  “Put  the  kettle  on,  Miss 
White  is  turning  in.  She  will  be  tired  out,  and  want  to 
spend  the  night  ;  for  Ashfield  supplied  one  of  the  most 
devoted  pillagers  of  the  neighborhood  treasuries,  and 
Great-Aunt  Hannah  White  was  known  and  served 
wherever  she  went  on  this  mission  of  endowment. 

At  first  Emily  was  desperately  homesick  and  thought 
she  should  not  live.  She  explained  it  touchingly  by  say¬ 
ing,  “You  see  I  have  such  a  very  dear  home.”  Owing  to 
the  long  list  of  applicants  Miss  Lyon  had  raised  the  stand¬ 
ards  of  admission;  the  examinations  were  severe  and  had 
to  be  done  in  a  specified  time  or  the  unfortunate  was  sent 
home.  The  nervous  strain  affected  Emily  with  her 
excitable  nature,  until  she  exclaims,  “I  am  sure  I  could 
never  endure  the  suspense  I  endured  during  those  three 
days  again  for  all  the  treasure  of  the  world!” 

There  were  three  hundred  girls,  and  she  found  the 


SCHOOL  DAYS 


23 


teachers  kind  and  attentive,  the  table  better  than  she 

y« 

supposed  possible  for  so  many,  the  atmosphere  pleasant 
and  happy.  “Things  seem  more  like  home  than  I  an¬ 
ticipated,”  was  her  feeling,  after  the  first  natural  strange¬ 
ness  wore  off.  Each  girl  was  required  by  the  curriculum 
to  do  her  share  of  the  domestic  work,  and  Emily  did  not 
find  hers  difficult,  which  was  “to  carry  the  knives  from 
the  first  tier  of  tables  at  morning  and  at  noon,  and  at 
night  to  wash  and  wipe  the  same  quantity  of  knives.” 
She  repeats  often  that  “Miss  Lyon  and  all  the  teachers 
try  to  do  all  they  can  for  the  comfort  and  happiness  of 
the  girls,”  and  she  foimd  the  girls  themselves  surprisingly 
anxious  to  make  each  other  happy  also  with  “an  ease 
and  grace  quite  unexpected.” 

She  wrote  out  for  her  family  the  following  list  of  her 
day’s  occupations,  which  seems  calculated  to  outwit 
Satan  of  idle  hours  to  fill! 

At  six  o’clock  we  all  rise.  We  breakfast  at  7.  Our  study  hour 
begins  at  8.  At  9  we  all  meet  at  Seminary  Hall  for  devotions. 
At  10.15  I  recite  a  review  of  Ancient  History  in  connection  with 
which  we  read  Goldsmith  and  Grimshaw.  At  11 1  recite  a  lesson 
on  Pope’s  Essay  on  Man,  which  is  merely  transposition.  At  12 
I  practise  calisthenics,  and  at  12.15  I  read  until  dinner  which  is 
at  12.30.  After  dinner  from  1.30  till  2,  I  sing  in  Seminary  Hall. 
From  2.45  till  3.45  I  practise  upon  the  piano.  At  3.45  I  go  to 
Sections,  where  we  give  all  our  accounts  for  the  day;  including 
absence,  tardiness,  communications,  breaking  silence,  study 
hours,  receiving  company  in  our  rooms  and  ten  thousand  other 
things  which  I  will  not  take  time  to  mention. 

At  half-past  four  they  all  went  into  the  Seminary  Hall 
and  received  advice  from  Miss  Lyon  in  lecture  form. 
They  had  supper  at  six  and  retired  at  eight  forty-five 
after  a  long  silent  study  period.  Enless  their  excuse  for 
failure  in  any  of  these  things  was  good  and  reasonable, 


24 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


they  received  a  black  mark,  which  they  very  much  dis¬ 
liked  against  their  names.  Emily’s  family  came  to  see 
her  and  filled  her  with  delight:  her  brother  Austin,  then 
a  sophomore  at  Amherst,  causing  quite  a  flutter  among 
the  girls  and  even  a  young  teacher  or  two,  but  she 
counted  the  days  until  Thanksgiving,  with  all  the  rest. 

This  first  Thanksgiving  at  home  and  her  drive  over 
the  mountain  with  her  brother  was  momentous  to  her. 
She  was  thrilled  by  the  “first  sight  of  the  spire  of  the 
venerable  meeting-house  rising  to  her  delighted  vision.” 
It  was  in  the  rain  and  the  wind  of  late  November,  but 
never  had  Amherst  looked  so  lovely  to  her.  All  were  at 
the  door  to  welcome  her,  “from  mother,  with  tears  in  her 
eyes,  to  Pussy  —  who  tried  to  look  as  gracious  as  was 
becoming  her  dignity.”  They  went  to  church  and  heard 
their  dear  Parson  Colton,  and  had  dinner  and  callers, 
and  four  invitations  out  for  the  evening!  Only  two 
could  be  accepted  —  to  her  great  sorrow.  At  seven  they 
all  went  to  a  delightful  evening  at  Professor  Warner’s, 
and  later  the  young  folk  went  down  to  the  home  of  an¬ 
other  friend,  where  they  played  games,  had  a  candy 
scrape,  and  enjoyed  themselves  “until  the  clock  pealed 
out  —  Remember  ten  o’clock,  my  dear,  remember  ten 
o’clock.”  After  they  returned,  her  father  wishing  to  hear 
the  piano,  she  “like  an  obedient  daughter  played  and 
sang  a  few  tunes,  to  his  apparent  gratification.” 

Monday  came  all  too  soon  to  drag  her  back,  but  she 
soon  lost  herself  in  her  studies  again.  Silliman’s  Chem¬ 
istry  and  Cutter’s  Physiology  were  first-term  studies; 
both  of  which  she  found  intensely  interesting,  and  with 
the  second  term  began  what  was  called  English  com¬ 
position.  In  this  her  work  differed  from  the  rest,  showing 


SCHOOL  DAYS 


25 


a  marked  originality  from  the  first.  The  last  half  of  the 
year  she  had  also  astronomy  and  rhetoric,  completing 
the  Junior  studies. 

After  her  return  the  little  minor  note,  later  so  charac¬ 
teristic,  comes  in  when  she  writes  her  brother  she  is  get¬ 
ting  along  nicely  in  her  studies  and  is  “happy,  quite,  for 
me.”  She  finished  her  examination  in  Euclid  without  a 
mistake.  Always  she  was  counting  the  weeks  —  “Only 
22  weeks  more!  between  her  and  home;  imagining  them 
there,  missing  herself  among  them.  December  11,  1847, 
she  writes  to  them  on  her  seventeenth  birthday,  but  it 
was  contrary  to  the  rules  to  allow  the  pupils  to  go  home 
during  the  term,  and  only  nine  weeks  before  her  release 
she  was  refused  by  a  teacher  who  seemed  stunned  by  her 
request  to  drive  the  eight  miles  over  the  mountain  with 
her  brother.  Cramped,  curbed,  repressed  in  every  natural 
desire  or  impulse,  her  youth  seems  to  us,  now,  responsible 
for  her  later  almost  wilful  love  of  solitude  and  the  habit 
of  repression,  but  at  the  time  it  was  a  universal  condition 
applying  no  less  to  all  her  young  companions  who  were 
more  stolidly  unconscious  of  any  counter-emotions. 

But  if  Thanksgiving  was  radiant,  Christmas  was  gloom 
in  comparison,  and  the  legend  of  Emily’s  insurrection  is 
one  of  the  best  in  the  family  archives.  It  was  only  a  day 
in  advance  that  Miss  Lyon  announced,  at  morning  de¬ 
votions,  that  Christmas  would  be  recognized  as  a  fast. 
The  girls  were  not  to  leave  their  rooms  through  long,  def¬ 
inite  hours  and  were  to  meditate  to  order.  After  laying 
down  this  unseductive  programme  she  added  that  the 
school  might  rise  in  token  of  responsive  observation. 
The  school  did  rise  —  all  except  Emily  and  her  room¬ 
mate.  The  school  sat  down  and  Miss  Lyon,  appalled  by 


26 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


such  flagrant  disregard  of  the  decent  required  pieties, 
enlarged  upon  her  programme.  At  the  end  of  which  she 
added  that  if  there  were  any  so  lost  to  a  sense  of  the 
meaning  of  the  day  as  to  wish  to  spend  it  otherwise,  they 
might  stand  that  the  whole  school  might  observe  them. 
And  be  it  said  to  her  eternal  glory,  of  the  two  terrified 
objects  of  her  anathema  Emily  stood  alone. 

The  derelict  took  the  afternoon  stage  home,  causing 
panic  in  her  family  by  such  a  spirit  of  1776,  but  the 
matter  was  finally  arranged,  and  she  was  allowed  to  be 
returned,  unconvinced  and  unrepentant. 

When  one  of  South  Hadley’s  ardent  lovers  asked  per¬ 
mission  in  recent  years  to  raise  a  tablet  to  her  memory 
there,  the  question  hovered  amusingly  as  to  her  heresy  of 
youth.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  what  Miss  Lyon 
thought  of  her  with  her  conflicting  elements  of  shyness 
and  fixed  certainty  of  right  and  wrong,  which  established 
her  own  code  regardless  of  her  superior’s  opinion. 

From  a  mere  child  Emily  had  been  a  newspaper  reader, 
and  heard  much  discussion  of  politics  and  world  affairs 
at  her  father’s  table.  She  missed  this  during  her  cloistered 
life  with  mere  femininity,  and  once  in  an  outburst  of 
smothered  intelligence  wrote  her  brother  Austin  —  in 
mock  despair  — 

Please  tell  me  who  the  candidate  for  President  is !  I  have  been 
trying  to  find  out  ever  since  your  last  visit,  and  have  not 
succeeded.  I  know  no  more  about  the  affairs  of  the  outside 
world  here  than  if  I  were  in  a  trance.  Was  the  Mexican  War 
terminated?  Is  any  nation  about  to  besiege  South  Hadley? 

Certainly  the  term  “feminist”  was  unheard  of  then,  but 
in  this  alert  young  mind  there  was  a  latent  tendency 
stirring  already  toward  indignation  at  being  counted  as 


SCHOOL  DAYS 


27 


non  compos  in  a  man’s  world  of  reality.  A  friend  who 
wrote  her  of  meeting  Daniel  Webster  at  this  time  pro¬ 
voked  the  retort,  “You  don’t  know  General  Briggs,  and 
I  do,  so  you  are  no  better  off  than  I.” 

In  an  echo  of  this  same  spirit  she  exclaimed  at  the  end 
of  a  letter  to  Susan  Gilbert  at  Baltimore,  the  year  before 
her  marriage  in  1856: 

P.S.  Why  can’t  I  be  a  delegate  to  the  great  Whig  Convention? 
Don’t  I  know  all  about  Daniel  Webster  and  the  Tariff  and  the 
Law?  Then,  Susie,  I  could  see  you  during  a  pause  in  the  session, 
but  I  don’t  like  this  country  at  all  and  I  shan’t  stay  here  any 
longer!  Delenda  est  America!  Massachusetts  and  all! 

From  another  letter  written  later  in  the  same  year: 

I  count  the  days.  I  do  long  for  the  time  when  I  can  count  the 
hours  —  without  incurring  the  charge  of  Femina  insania.  I 
made  up  the  Latin,  dear  Susie,  for  I  could  not  think  how  it  went 
in  Stoddard  and  Anderson! 

But  if  South  Hadley  in  the  forties  denied  political 
interest  to  women,  it  suppressed  any  idle  amatory  inclina¬ 
tion  with  an  equally  firm  hand,  though  not  altogether 
successfully.  The  sending  of  those  “foolish  notes  called 
Valentines”  was  forbidden  by  Miss  Lyon  under  penalty. 
But  according  to  Emily,  she  was  outwitted  by  an  elabo¬ 
rate  system  of  bribery  including  the  village  postmaster, 
and  some  hundred  and  fifty  were  received  in  that  Febru¬ 
ary  of  ’49  in  spite  of  the  prohibitory  edict. 

In  May,  owing  to  a  temporary  bad  cough  that  terrified 
her  father,  Emily  was  taken  home,  much  against  her  will, 
but  kept  up  with  her  studies  and  was  able  to  return  to 
South  Hadley  at  the  beginning  of  the  summer  term. 
Meantime  she  was  reading  every  sort  of  prose  and  poetry, 
mentioning  as  her  especial  favorites,  “Evangeline,” 


28 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


“The  Princess,”  “The  Maiden  Aunt,”  “The  Epicurean,” 
and  “The  Twins  and  Heart,”  by  Tupper. 

With  this  exception  she  was  always  well,  and  delighted 
in  nothing  more  than  long  wanderings  in  the  woods  with 
her  young  friends.  She  knew  exactly  wdiere  the  first 
faint  arbutus  clung  to  the  grey  rock  under  a  protecting 
bank  in  Pelham,  and  the  wet,  inaccessible  spot  the  rare 
yellow  violets  chose  as  their  home  in  the  South  Amherst 
swamp;  the  columbine  and  adder’s-tongues  had  their 
own  haunts  fixed  in  her  mind,  and  she  could  walk 
straight  to  the  trillium,  the  bloodroot,  even  the  pink 
lady’s-slipper,  as  if  their  homes  had  street  and  number. 
There  was  no  faint  frail  evidence  of  the  shy  New  England 
spring  that  was  not  rejoiced  over  by  this  flower-sister, 
hardly  less  a  creature  of  Nature  than  they. 

After  leaving  the  Seminary  for  good,  in  1848,  she 
reentered  the  Amherst  Academy:  as  the  wit  of  the  school, 
hecoming  humorist  of  the  comic  column  of  a  paper  edited 
by  the  girls  of  the  school,  called  “Forest  Leaves.”  Her 
life  was  stirred  by  all  the  mild  gaieties  of  Amherst,  the 
little  social  ripples  which  came  at  long  intervals  and 
which  she  anticipated  with  the  rest.  A  party  at  Professor 
Tyler’s,  or  the  rumor  of  one  to  come  at  Professor  Hazen’s, 
filled  them  all  with  girlish  zest,  and  Commencement 
always  threw  the  town  into  a  spasm.  “Everything  will 
soon  be  all  in  a  buzz,”  was  her  way  of  expressing  the 
universal  premonitory  excitement,  that  caught  her  like 
the  rest. 

One  letter  hitherto  unprinted  gives  her  mood  after 
coming  home  to  stay: 

Sunday  —  I  haven’t  any  paper,  dear,  but  faith  continues 
firm.  Presume  if  I  met  with  my  deserts  I  should  receive  nothing. 


SCHOOL  DAYS 


29 


Was  informed  to  that  effect  to-day  by  a  dear  Pastor.  What  a 
privilege  it  is  to  be  so  insignificant!  Thought  of  intimating 
that  the  Atonement  was  not  needed  for  such  atoms.  I  think 
you  went  on  Friday.  Some  time  is  longer  than  the  rest  and 
some  is  very  short.  Omit  to  classify.  Friday,  Saturday,  Sun¬ 
day!  Evenings  get  longer  with  the  Autumn,  that  is  nothing 
new.  The  asters  are  pretty  well.  How  are  the  other  blossoms? 
\  innie  and  I  are  pretty  well.  Carlo  comfortable,  terrifying  man 
and  beast  with  renewed  activity,  is  cuffed  some,  hurled  from 
piazza  frequently  where  he  has  the  patent  action,  as  I  have  long 
felt.  I  attended  church  early  in  the  day.  Professor  Warner 
preached;  subject  Little  Drops  of  Dew.  Estey  took  the  stump 
in  the  afternoon.  Aunt  Catherine  Sweetser’s  dress  would  have 
startled  Sheba.  Aunt  Bullard  was  not  out,  presume  she  stayed 
at  home  for  self-examination.  Accompanied  by  Father  they 
visited  the  grave  yard  after  service.  These  are  stirring  scenes ! 
V  ou  know  the  chink  your  dear  face  makes.  We  would  not  mind 
the  sun  dear,  if  it  did  not  set.  How  much  you  cost !  I  will  never 
sell  you  for  a  price  of  silver.  I’ll  buy  you  back  with  red  drops 
when  you  go  away.  I’ll  keep  you  in  a  casket.  I’ll  burn  you  in 
the  garden  and  keep  a  bird  to  watch  the  spot. 

Another  little  picture  of  their  earliest  girlhood  remains 
in  her  own  recording,  “Vinnie  sits  sewing  like  a  fictitious 
seamstress,”  and  Emily  is  imagining  a  Knight  at  the  door 
for  her;  they  talk  of  growing  old  and  Emily  naively  adds: 

Vinnie  thinks  twenty  must  be  a  fearful  position  for  one  to 
occupy.  I  tell  her  I  don’t  care  if  I  am  young  or  not.  I’d  as  lief 
be  thirty! 

Again  she  gives  a  domestic  interior  with  a  word. 

We  cleaned  house  —  Mother  and  Vinnie  did  —  and  I  scolded 
because  they  moved  my  things.  I  can’t  find  much  I  used  to 
wear.  You  will  conceive  I  am  surrounded  by  trial. 

Later  that  same  fall  she  writes: 

The  bells  are  ringing,  Susie,  North,  East  and  South  and  your 
own  village  bell  and  the  people  who  love  God  are  expecting  to  go 


30 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


to  meeting;  don’t  you  go  Susie,  not  to  their  meeting,  but  come 
with  me  this  morning  to  the  church  within  our  hearts,  where  the 
bells  are  always  ringing  and  the  preacher  whose  name  is  Love 
shall  intercede  for  us.  They  will  all  go  but  me  —  to  the  usual 
meeting  house,  to  hear  the  usual  sermon,  the  inclemency  of  a 
storm  so  kindly  detaining  me. 

But  life  had  other  diversions  than  church-going  that 
first  summer  after  Emily  left  South  Hadley,  and  even 
the  grim  funerals  of  the  remoter  branches  of  the  Dickin¬ 
sons  had  a  silver  lining  for  her  guilty  satisfaction.  One 
of  her  most  madcap  escapades  occurred  one  lovely  after¬ 
noon  when,  after  being  driven  decorously  to  the  burial 
of  some  unknown  kinswoman  in  old  Hadley,  Emily  ran 
from  the  open  grave  with  her  favorite  cousin,  a  rather 
dashing  young  beau  from  Worcester  —  connived  at  his 
taking  her  home  the  long  way  round  through  Sunderland, 
full  seven  miles  in  the  wrong  direction,  via  his  shining 
buggy  and  fast  black  horse,  so  fast,  in  fact,  that  when 
her  parents  and  retribution  caught  up  with  her,  she  had 
capped  her  infamy  by  being  securely  locked  in  her  own 
room  at  home.  Perhaps  to-day  it  does  not  sound  so  very 
rash  and  unforgivable  —  the  gay  young  cousin,  the  joy 
of  motion,  and  the  seductive  beguilement  of  the  sun¬ 
shine  beneath  the  lacy  elms  full  of  bird-songs  may  plead 
for  the  culprit  but  before  the  eyes  of  her  immediate 
connections  it  was  a  misdemeanor  at  a  scene  of  decent 
burial  quite  beyond  imagination,  and  leading  to  un¬ 
toward  fears  for  her  future  states  She  was  wept  over 
by  her  mother  and  ignored  quite  conspicuously  by  her 
father,  who  saw  doom  for  her  plainly ;  but  her  spirit  was 
about  as  easy  to  chasten  as  a  dawn.  As  well  correct  the 
bobolink  for  his  madrigal  or  the  meadow  grass  for  bowing 
in  the  breeze!  And  so  the  incident  was  closed  without 


SCHOOL  DAYS 


31 


much  evidence  of  its  instructive  value  against  like  dere¬ 
liction  under  equally  provocative  circumstances. 

In  December  she  wrote  to  Sue: 

There  is  a  tall  pale  snowstorm  stalking  through  the  fields  and 
bowing  at  my  window.  I  shan’t  let  the  fellow  in!  Went  to 
church  today  in  second  best  and  boots,  sermon  from  Dr.  D.  on 
unbelief.  "Another  Esau.”  Sermons  on  unbelief  ever  did  attract 
me. 

Her  shyness,  her  shrinking  from  anything  she  could 
not  explain  or  reason  with,  comes  out  in  her  droll  de¬ 
scription  of  going  to  church  alone  when  her  family  were 
called  to  an  obliging  funeral  which  gave  her  a  day  of  rare 
liberty.  She  says  she  went  in  circles  puzzling  Euclid: 

When  I  reached  the  steps  I  smiled  to  think  of  my  geometry 
during  the  journey  —  how  big  and  broad  the  aisle  looked,  — 
full  huge  enough  before,  —  as  I  quaked  along  up  and  reached 
my  usual  seat.  There  I  sat  and  sighed  and  wondered  I  was  so 
scared,  for  surely  there  was  nothing  I  need  fear  in  the  whole 
world,  —  yet  there  the  phantom  was,  though  I  kept  resolving  to 
be  brave  as  Turks  and  bold  as  Polar  bears,  it  would  not  help  me 
any.  After  the  opening  prayer  I  ventured  to  look  around.  Mr. 
Carter  immediately  looked  at  me.  Mr.  Sweetser  attempted  to 
do  so,  but  I  discovered  Nothing,  up  in  the  sky  somewhere,  and 
gazed  intensely  at  it  for  quite  a  half  an  hour  — 

How  I  did  wish  for  you  or  Vinnie  and  Goliath  or  Sampson  to 
pull  the  whole  church  down  —  requesting  Dr.  D.  to  step  into 
Miss  K.’s  until  the  worst  was  past.  Professor  Aaron  Warner  — 
Professor  of  Rhetoric  in  Amherst  College  —  preached  this  after¬ 
noon.  I  shall  be  disappointed  if  Horace  Walpole  does  not  address 
us  this  evening.  If  you  stay  away  another  Sabbath  the  Secre¬ 
tary  of  War  will  take  charge  of  the  Sabbath  School.  The  singing 
reminded  me  of  the  legend  of  Jack  and  Jill  allowing  the  bass  viol 
to  be  typified  by  Jill,  who  literally  tumbled  after,  while  Jack, 
i.e.,  the  Choir,  galloped  insanely  on. 

She  never  went  back  to  South  Hadley,  for  although 
the  cough  of  the  winter  before  had  entirely  succumbed 


32 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


under  the  merciless  family  dosing,  her  father  decided  to 
keep  her  at  home  for  a  year  under  his  own  supervision. 
Already  he  must  have  been  aware  of  her  brilliant  intellect 
and  the  powers  of  her  imagination  extraordinarily  evi¬ 
denced  in  all  she  said  or  did.  As  yet  there  was  no  hint 
of  her  later  reclusive  tendency,  and  she  sent  her  young 
friends  off  into  fits  of  laughter  over  her  impromptu 
stories,  while  her  familiarity  with  the  Bible  gave  her  an 
ease  at  apt  quotation  appalling  to  her  elders  in  its  secular 
application  —  and  jocular  yet  never  of  irreverent  intent. 
One  who  loved  her  said  of  her,  “Physically  timid  at  the 
least  approach  to  a  crisis  in  the  day’s  event,  her  mind 
dared  earth  and  heaven.  That  apocrypha  and  apocalypse 
met  in  her  explains  her  tendency  so  often  mistaken  for 
blasphemy  by  the  superficial  analyst.” 

Whatever  her  docile  mother  thought  about  this  most 
unique  offspring,  whatever  her  observant  father  hoped 
from  his  older  daughter,  it  was  summed  up  in  silence  by 
his  decision  that  Emily  should  remain  at  home. 

The  next  years  of  her  life  were  accordingly  passed  like 
those  of  the  other  young  people  of  Amherst  in  the  forties, 
as  far  as  the  external  went.  On  what  strange  adventures 
she  was  already  led  by  the  wings  and  fins  of  her  soaring 
and  diving  mind  even  she  could  not  and  would  not  have 
told. 


CHAPTER  IV 

SOCIAL  LIFE  AT  AMHERST  SEVENTY  YEARS  AGO 

1848  —  1853-54 

There  could  have  been  little  in  the  social  life  of  Amherst 
seventy  years  ago  to  thrill  a  being  like  Emily  Dickinson. 
Yet  from  eighteen  to  twenty -three  she  was  a  social  crea¬ 
ture  in  the  highest  sense,  though  she  complains  of  often 
wearying  of  their  house  crowded  daily  with  rich  and 
poor,  high  and  low,  who  came  —  and  so  rarely  went  — 
as  a  matter  of  course,  without  any  warning  or  invitation, 
after  the  manner  of  that  hospitable  period,  when  gig  or 
chariot  might  turn  in  at  the  great  gate  at  any  hour, 
depositing  guests  for  a  meal  or  the  night  or  a  long  visit 
as  it  might  happen.  One  of  her  contemporaries  has  left, 
in  what  Colonel  Higginson  once  called  “the  portfolio  lit¬ 
erature  of  New  England,”  a  sketch  of  it  all  which  gives, 
even  with  the  most  glowing  intention,  a  rather  scanty 
and  very  restricted  story,  lit  by  a  solitary  lantern  here 
and  there. 

There  were  for  Emily  the  elemental  of  all  girlhood, 
of  course.  She  evinces  interest  in  her  clothes,  speaks  of 
new  ones  in  which  she  presumes  she  shall  appear  like  an 
embarrassed  peacock;  complains  of  her  brother  Austin 
who  returns  from  a  trip  to  Baltimore  to  see  her  beloved 
Susie,  as  follows: 

Asked  what  you  wore  and  how  your  hair  was  fixed  and  what 
you  said  of  me  —  his  answers  were  quite  limited.  “You  looked 
as  you  always  did  ”...  Vinnie  enquired  with  promptness  if  you 
wore  a  basque  —  “No,  you  had  on  a  black  thing.”  Dear,  you 
must  train  him,  ’twill  take  many  moons  in  the  fashion  plates 


34  EMILY  DICKINSON 

before  lie  will  respect  and  speak  with  proper  deference  of  this 
majestic  garment. 

There  were  the  inevitable,  inescapable  family  visits, 
too,  already  mentioned,  when  any  hour  of  any  day  might 
behold  a  chaise  at  the  door  and  helplessness  within  the 
house  before  the  impending  calamity.  On  one  occasion 
\vhen  a  family  of  four  descended  upon  them  without 
warning,  Emily  expressed  her  feelings  as  to  the  sweet¬ 
ness  of  the  young  daughters,  and  the  tediousness  of  their 
father,  concluding: 

Cousin  P.  says  he  might  stay  round  a  month  visiting  old 
acquaintances  if  it  wasn’t  for  his  business.  Fortunate  indeed 
for  us  that  his  business  feels  the  need  of  him  or  I  think  he  would 
never  go.  He  is  a  kind  of  mixture  of  Deacon  Haskell,  Calvin 
Merill,  and  Morton  Dickinson;  you  can  easily  guess  how  much 
we  enjoy  his  society. 

It  was  one  autumn  evening,  when  the  Hollands  had 
driven  over  unexpectedly  to  pass  the  night,  that  her 
mother,  anxious  for  their  every  comfort,  offered  one  soli¬ 
citous  suggestion  after  another,  until  Emily,  always  ex¬ 
asperated  by  repetition,  cried  —  “O  Mrs.  Holland,  don’t 
you  want  to  hear  me  say  the  Lord’s  prayer?  Shouldn’t 
you  like  me  to  repeat  the  Declaration  of  Independence? 
Shan’t  I  recite  the  Ten  Commandments?” 

She  had  a  cousin  who  came  over  from  Sunderland  to 
spend  a  day  — “Father  and  Mother  being  on  a  little 
journey”  —  when  just  such  deviations  from  regularity 
were  apt  to  occur.  Her  friend  Vaughn  Evans,  the  South¬ 
erner  who  brought  a  warmer  note  into  her  life,  stayed 
on  after  Commencement,  and  they  had  many  long  talks; 
and  the  brilliant  young  Henry  Root  —  an  uncle  of  the 
present  President  of  Johns  Hopkins  University  —  whose 
charm  and  handsome  grace  was  a  fable  that  followed 


SOCIAL  LIFE  AT  AMHERST 


35 


him  down  the  century,  came  to  see  her  often.  She  says 
it  was  to  hear  Susie’s  letters,  and  insists,  she  admires 
him,  but  lets  him  come  only  to  give  him  this  pleasure.  It 
was  at  this  point  in  her  life  that  she  began  to  be  called 
down  to  entertain  callers,  and  she  confesses  she  went 
with  sorry  grace.  In  the  July  of  1851  she  heard  Jenny 
Lind  sing  at  Northampton  and  cared  more  for  her  than 
her  voice  or  manner  of  singing. 

Before  Emily  ceased  to  mingle  with  the  other  young 
people,  she  shared  the  lectures  upon  which  the  village 
throve.  The  professors  all  gave  of  their  best;  John  Lord, 
who  was  considered  a  wizard  of  style  and  manner,  per¬ 
suaded  to  any  conclusion  by  his  perennial  charm;  and 
Richard  Dana,  father  of  the  poet  Dana,  and  even  wise 
men  from  Europe  occasionally  appeared.  It  was  one  of 
the  pleasant  pastimes  of  the  young  ladies  of  that  day  to 
attend,  escorted  by  some  attractive  Senior,  before  whose 
class  they  were  always  given,  the  walk  and  escort  often 
blurring  in  the  young  brains  the  cloudy  values  of  infor¬ 
mation. 

The  sketch  of  “Society  in  Amherst  Sixty  Years  Ago,” 
to  which  allusion  has  been  made,  was  written  for  the 
family  remembrance  by  her  sister-in-law,  just  before  her 
own  death  in  1913.  In  this,  there  are  many  quaint  illu¬ 
minations  of  the  life  Emily  Dickinson  shared  with  the 
rest.  From  it  we  learn: 

The  social  life  at  Amherst  in  those  early  days  was  no  less 
unique  in  grace  and  simplicity  than  that  of  Northampton, 
though  differing  always  in  certain  social  habits  held  contraband 
by  piety  and  conscience  in  Amherst.  The  harmless  cards  and 
dancing  common  there  were  not  even  so  much  as  mentioned  at 
Amherst  as  suitable  or  even  possible  occupations  for  immortal 
beings,  until  a  quite  recent  date.  Yet  sixty  years  ago,  dear 


36 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


moderns,  one  could  have  discovered  in  the  small  circle  of 
Amherst  as  beautiful  girls,  or  “young  ladies,”  as  they  were  then 
called,  as  ever  graced  any  drawing  room.  There  were  as 
accomplished  and  well  poised  matrons,  as  chivalric  young  men, 
—  nay,  men  both  old  and  young,  as  full  of  high  purpose  and 
generous  achievement  as  could  be  found  in  any  town,  university 
or  commercial. 

Under  President  Humphrey  and  also  under  President 
Hitchcock,  Amherst  College  and  Amherst  were  one. 
The  village,  being  smaller  then,  was  fully  represented  at 
all  the  college  levees,  as  the  receptions  were  then  called, 
and  entered  warmly  into  all  college  affairs,  lectures,  and 
literary  occasions.  Emily  must  have  played  “blind-man’s 
buff”  with  the  rest,  in  the  first  President’s  house,  where 
the  high  mantel  in  the  kitchen  was  the  rather  perilous 
retreat  of  the  taller  boys,  since  they  were  safe  there  from 
the  nervous  clutches  of  the  girls,  when,  aware  of  great 
shrinkage  in  numbers,  they  pulled  up  their  blinders  to 
bring  the  culprits  down  to  justice.  The  Senior  Levee 
given  by  the  President  to  the  graduating  class  was  the 
event  of  the  year;  occurring  in  August  at  the  close  of  the 
term.  To  this  Emily  went  with  all  friends  of  the  Senior 
Class,  and  all  the  village  beside,  and  was  one  of  those 
strolling  couples,  no  doubt,  that,  wishing  to  escape  osten¬ 
sibly  the  modest  glare  of  the  astral  lamp  within,  wandered 
up  and  down  the  rural  sidewalks  in  front  of  the  house. 

The  sketch  referred  to  goes  on  in  more  sprightly  fash¬ 
ion: 

There  was  never  dancing,  never  vaudeville.  I  confess  there 
were  flirtations,  whatever  that  was  —  in  odd  corners,  especially 
under  the  stairs  in  the  front  hall,  where  a  Puritan-backed  sofa 
covered  in  horsehair,  guiltless  of  cushions,  was  converted  into  a 
rather  stiff  Arcadia.  There  was  music  always,  with  the  piano  — 
Miss  Jane  Gridley,  daughter  of  the  notable  Dr.  Gridley,  the 


SOCIAL  LIFE  AT  AMHERST 


37 


medical  genius  of  the  region,  sang  in  a  strikingly  clear  voice 
with  a  really  artistic  rendering “ Oh,  Summer  Night!”  And  in 
effective  contrast  to  her  metropolitan  culture  and  ease  the  sweet 
winsome  “Oh,  Wert  Thou  in  the  Cauld  Blast,”  would  follow, 
sung  by  Emily  Fowler,  granddaughter  of  Noah  Webster,  after¬ 
ward  Mrs.  Gordon  L.  Ford,  of  Brooklyn,  a  wizard  in  person  and 
power.  There  was  the  diversion  of  refreshments,  with  a  re¬ 
freshment-table,  as  it  was  called  then,  and  President  Hitchcock 
being  strongly  and  frankly  in  favour  of  early  hours,  only  in¬ 
truders  lingered  after  ten  o’clock  at  his  parties;  though  with  un¬ 
affected  hospitality  the  gentle  host  appeared  to  ignore  the  late 
mad  hour  as  it  approached. 

Weeks  before  this  climax  of  the  year  the  young  ladies  were  in 
a  modest  agitation  over  it;  arranging  becoming  gowns  with 
charming  refinement  and  economy.  As  the  Summer  was  so 
nearly  over,  to  these  same  young  ladies  at  least,  there  was  a  sort 
of  collapse  after  the  party  and  a  little  feeling  of  gloom  in  the 
earlier  drawing  in  of  evening  with  the  sad- voiced  crickets,  and  a 
rather  pensive  waiting  for  the  return  of  the  students.  But  never 
was  the  slightest  utterance  given  to  that  effect,  lest  maiden 
modesty  blush  for  such  dependence  upon  these  fascinating 
comrades.  For  many  years  the  dress  that  satisfied  feminine 
vanity  was  of  the  simplest.  Soft  merino  dresses  of  gentle  shades 
were  worn  entirely  for  all  ordinary  visiting,  black  silk  for 
stately  occasions  of  the  elders.  In  Summer  the  young  ladies 
wore  sprigged  muslins,  not  too  prudish  as  to  cut  at  the  throat. 
As  the  season  grew  chilly,  sashes  of  scarlet  ribbon  were  added, 
with  knots  of  red  berries  festooned  on  the  shoulders  and  droop¬ 
ing  gracefully  from  the  hair.  Often  quite  heavy  wreaths  of 
myrtle  leaves  were  bound  about  the  head,  giving  a  classic  touch, 
as  of  filleted  martyrs  or  Parnassian  victims!  No  one  smiled 
over  the  simplicity  of  these  toilets  or  coveted  richer  or  more 
elaborate  effects.  The  girls  were  so  pretty  and  winsome  they 
dominated  externals.  During  the  visit  of  some  world-famous 
savants  from  Europe,  the  stony-hearted  scientists  became 
enthusiastic  over  the  unusual  number  of  beautiful  and  attrac¬ 
tive  girls  they  met  there. 


President  Stearns’s  family  were  all  intimately  friendly 
with  the  Dickinson  family  and  their  entertaining  was  less 


38 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


general,  a  little  more  stately,  than  their  predecessors’. 

ith  their  administration  came  a  touch  of  the  worldly  in 
the  general  appearance  of  the  president’s  house,  always 
so  plain  and  simple  before.  Rich  odd  cabinets,  carved 
chairs  and  treasures  sent  home  from  a  son  in  India,  as 
well  as  inherited  silver  of  aristocratic  pattern,  lent  an  air 
of  elegance  agreeable  and  suitable.  Quoting  again : 

There  was  little  social  variety  sixty  years  ago;  never  dinners, 
a  rare  evening  party  perhaps,  and  sometimes  the  small  friendly 
suppers,  or  tea  parties.  The  parlors  of  Deacon  Luke  Sweetser 
set  the  standard  of  elegance  and  struck  the  grand  note  in  these 
affairs.  There  was  more  light,  more  inherited  silver,  a  certain 
pomposity  on  the  part  of  the  hostess,  who  always  received  in 
puiple  gloves,  and  with  along  dipping  backward  curtsy,  a  relic 
of  her  gay  education  at  boarding  school.  She  waved  aloft  a 
feather  fan  sent  her  from  a  thousand  miles  up  the  Nile  by  a 
missionary  friend,  and  after  supper  Syrian  relics  were  handed 
about,  musky  curios  of  Arab  and  Greek,  —  lentils,  from  the 
Holy  Land,  husks, —  such-as-the-  swine-d i d-eat ,  ’  ’ —  inlaid 
coffee  cups,  attar  of  rose  bottles,  sent  home  by  their  niece  the 
wife  of  the  Rev.  Daniel  Bliss,  founder  of  the  Protestant  College 
at  Beyrut,  Syria.  Later  came  music,  Lavinia  Dickinson  singing 
Are  we  almost  there?  said  the  dying  girl,”  “Coming  Through 
the  Rye,  —  and  a  local  Basso  of  a  profundity  beyond  all 
.own  musical  necessity  after  prolonged  urging  giving  “Rocked 
in  the  Cradle  of  the  Deep,”  with  such  sustained  power  that  the 
glasses  tinkled  in  the  cupboard  from  the  jar.  Later  everybody 
sang  “America”  and  “Auld  Lang  Syne,”  and  all  in  a  glow  the 
party  broke  up  with  the  host  standing  at  the  top  of  the  stone 
steps  holding  an  oil  lantern  in  the  air  for  his  guests’  safety,  — 
at  that  time  the  only  beacon  in  Amherst. 

The  diversions  of  these  days  were  pallid  and  calm, 
leading  almost  inevitably  back  to  the  religious  activities 
of  the  church.  There  was  an  occasional  lecture,  there  were 
the  Wednesday  evening  prayer  meetings,  and  the  Sewing 
Society  once  a  fortnight,  clergyman  and  husbands  coming 


SOCIAL  LIFE  AT  AMHERST  39 

in  for  tea.  In  mid-winter  there  were  usually  six  weeks  of 
protracted  meetings.  The  picture  deepens  while  one 
reads  on: 

As  the  snow  lay  two  or  three  feet  deep  on  the  level  those 
wintry  days,  Amherst  with  no  street  lights,  no  trolleys,  no  rail¬ 
roads,  telephone  and  movie  undreamed  of,  seemed  to  my  per¬ 
verse  young  mind,  animal  spirits  and  vigorous  happiness,  a 
staring,  lonely,  hopeless  place,  —  enough  to  make  angels  home- 
sick.  The  lugubrious  sound  of  the  church  bell  still  rings  in  my 
winter  dreams. 

Emily  always  declared  she  was  sure  the  Baptist  bell 
would  ring  in  the  Day  of  Judgment,  and  more  and  more 
she  turned  to  the  warmth  of  her  home  within,  and  the 
little  conservatory  where  her  ferns  and  yellow  jasmine 
and  purple  heliotrope  made  an  atmosphere  more  tropical 
for  the  dwelling  of  her  imagination.  The  scent  of  her  cape 
jasmines  and  daphne  oaora  is  forever  immortalized  to 
those  who  breathed  it,  transporting  them  back  to  the 
loveliness  of  her  immortal  atmosphere. 

The  Tyler  home  was  another  one  distinguished  for 
unstinted  hospitality.  The  stranger,  the  foreigner,  rich 
and  poor  were  "welcomed  there;  missionaries,  statesmen, 
scholars,  and  when  Charles  Sumner  was  in  Amherst  he 
found  with  them  the  only  welcome  afforded  an  abolition¬ 
ist— for  the  aristocratic  salvation  of  the  Nation,  as  it 
was  then  held,  lay  in  the  choice  of  the  old  Whig  Party. 
How  slowly  they  yielded,  those  handsome  stubborn  gen¬ 
tlemen  in  velvet  collars  and  beaver  hats,  to  the  emancipa¬ 
ting  chariots  of  the  God  of  battle  and  Abraham  Lincoln ! 

But  even  in  these  repressed  lives  stolen  pleasures  were 
sweet,  and  it  is  a  relief  to  be  told  that 

Emily  Fowler  had  what  she  called  P.O.M.  meetings  at  her 
house,  impromptu  dances,  —  if  our  floundering  attempts  to  get 


40  EMILY  DICKINSON 

through  a  Virginia  Reel,  or  Lancers  could  be  called  that  —  to 
the  sharp  voice  of  an  attenuated  piano!  It  was  great  fun  and 
seemed  real,  —  beside  it  was  contraband.  Just  across  the 
Connecticut  river  good  people  played  cards  and  loved  God, 
while  this  side  such  recreation  was  wicked  as  Juggernaut  or 
jdobd  For  secrecy’s  sake,  the  name  “Poetry  of  Motion  meet¬ 
ings,”  to  be  sure.  Once  only  were  they  surreptitiously  invited 
to  gather  at  the  home  of  the  dignified  pair  who  were  to  be  away 
for  the  night,  and  would  therefore  remain  in  blest  ignorance  of 
this  departure  on  the  part  of  their  young  people,  Emily  and 
Austin,  from  the  moral  code  of  those  days.  All  went  merry  as  a 
marriage  bell.  The  revellers  danced  late  and  with  quite  an 
abandon.  But  trifles  light  as  air  are  time  proven  betrayers,  — • 
the  slight  scarlet  thread  of  Jezebel,  Newton’s  apple,  Fulton’s 
tea-kettle,  “Great  oaks  from  little  acorns  grow!”  It  was  the 
lion’s  tail  on  the  hearth  rug  in  the  parlor  of  this  strict  home 
that  convulsed  domesticity  for  twenty-four  hours  and  led  to 
discovery  at  last.  Taken  up  to  relieve  the  dancing  toes  from 
clumsy  entanglement  in  the  fringe,  it  was  put  back  in  the 
flurry  of  righting  up  in  the  morning  before  the  parents’  return, 
regardless  of  the  lion’s  anatomy  and  jungle  grace.  He  was  a  big 
brown  fellow  set  off  by  a  vague  green  background  of  some 
appropriate  sort.  The  silly  half -frightened  young  folk  had  re¬ 
placed  him,  but  completely  reversed,  so  that  his  majestic  tail 
was  turned  up  where  it  should  have  turned  down,  and  all  his 
members  were  topsy-turvy  accordingly!  Only  too  soon  after 
the  return  the  maternal  shriek,  —  “  Why,  girls,  girls !  What  has 
happened?  The  lion  s  tail  is  upside  down!”  proved  the  fore¬ 
runner  of  a  little  private  judgment  day.  But  eventually  the 
mother  was  “managed”  and  recommended  “not  to  trouble 
Father  with  it”! 

One  can  hardly  realize  at  the  present  time  the  im¬ 
portance  of  the  two  great  events  of  the  year  in  Amherst 
mid-century.  These  were,  of  course.  Commencement 
Day  and  the  annual  Cattle  Show  in  October.  Both  took 
place  all  over  the  Village  Green. 

_  Cattle  Show  was  an  affair  of  bucolic  sweetness  and 
simplicity,  which  Emily  loved  afar;  especially  the  strains 


SOCIAL  LIFE  AT  AMHERST  41 

of  military  music  on  the  air,  at  intervals.  It  was  begun 
with  an  address  by  some  distinguished  person,  and  this 
was  followed  by  a  prayer  df  thanks  for  the  ingathering  of 
the  crops.  The  procession  then  formed  at  the  Amherst 
House,  an  inspiring  band  leading  the  way,  while  mounted 
escorts,  with  a  military  hint  in  dress  and  style,  cavorted 
hither  and  thither.  The  ploughing  match  was  of  intense 
interest,  held  just  west  of  the  church  on  the  Hadley  road. 
Draft  matches  were  held  on  the  west  side  of  the  green 
or  common.  The  exhibition  of  horses  included  the  entire 
space  of  the  common  and  down  the  Main  Street.  Deacon 
Luke  Sweetser,  Seth  Nims,  and  Emily’s  father,  Squire 
Dickinson,  were  invariably  owners  of  fine  horses,  and  they 
drove  about  on  these  occasions  sitting  very  straight  in  the 
backless  open  buggies,  reins  taut,  and  the  high  showy 
heads  of  their  steeds  refusing  the  senseless  check. 
People  turned  to  look  alter  them  —  and  in  these  latter 
days  one  might  not  irreverently  exclaim,  “Where  are 
the  horsemen  and  the  chariots  thereof?  ” 

From  early  morning  on  Commencement  Day,  the 
common  was  the  camping-ground  for  fakirs’  tents, 
peddlers’  carts,  every  imaginable  sort  of  vendor,  and 
most  delightful  of  all  girls  and  boys  in  the  Sunday  best 
from  Shutesbury  and  Pelham  and  all  the  region  about, 
hand  in  hand,  with  arms  entwined,  enjoying  the  outdoors 
part  of  the  show,  and  the  wonderful  if  to  them  meaning¬ 
less  array  in  the  old  village  church.  Everybody  was 
there  wonderful  young  men  declaiming  even  more 
wonderful  pieces  on  the  big  stage,  where  all  the  Trustees 
in  stiff  collars  and  stiffer  dignity  were  sitting  with  other 
important  men  of  the  Valley,  listening  to  the  eloquence 
displayed  and  sizing  up  the  orthodoxy.  The  most  con-* 


42 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


spicuous  places  always  were  deferentially  reserved  for  the 
returned  missionaries,  those  idolized  sons  of  the  college, 
for  whose  sacred  and  brave  ideals  the  institution  was 
prayed  into  being. 

Edward  Dickinson,  with  his  Trustee  tea  party,  held 
on  the  Wednesday  night  of  Commencement  Week  for 
forty  years,  was  too  pronounced  a  feature  of  those  days 
to  be  forgotten  or  omitted.  Friends  were  received  all 
over  the  house  and  grounds  from  six  to  eight.  A  supper 
was  handed  about  with  most  remarkable  tea  and  coffee. 
Here  one  could  always  find  Governors  and  Judges,  in¬ 
teresting  missionaries,  famous  professors  from  our  best 
colleges,  editors  of  high  repute,  fair  women  and  brave 
men.  This  became  such  a  time-honored  affair  that  one 
was  often  heard  to  say  in  the  hurried  good  comradeship 
of  the  week,  “Oh,  I  will  see  you  again  at  the  Dickinson 
tea  party.” 

The  social  functions  of  Commencement  Week  to-day 
seem  rather  lacking  in  high  effect  as  one  recalls  how  the 
Governor  and  his  staff  in  uniform,  with  spurs  clanking, 
blended  and  contrasted  with  the  sombre  black  all  about 
the  piazzas  and  under  the  old  pines  of  three  generations’ 
growth.  Governor  Banks  was  said  to  be  the  handsomest, 
most  martial  of  them  all.  Governor  Bullock  was  another 
memorable  figure,  with  high  fine  bearing,  rather  stiffly 
elegant,  and  always  complete  suaviter  in  modo,  as  he 
quoted  his  classics  on  any  small  mellow  justification. 
Later  on  in  her  life  Emily  Dickinson  forsook  her  usual 
seclusion  at  these  times,  and  radiant  as  a  flying  spirit, 
diaphanously  dressed  in  white,  always  with  a  flower  in 
her  hand,  measured  her  wit  and  poured  her  wine  amid 
much  excitement  and  applause  from  those  fortunate 
enough  to  get  near  her. 


CHAPTER  V 

“THE  END  OF  PEACE” 

1853-55 

While  Emily  was  passing  through  the  first  quiet  years 
between  her  school  days  and  her  momentous  visit  to 
Washington  and  Philadelphia,  there  were  passages  in 
several  letters  from  her  which  revealed  something  of  her 
inner  experience. 

It  was  just  before  her  twentieth  birthday  that  she 
wrote : 

You  and  I  have  been  strangely  silent  upon  one  topic,  Susie. 
V\  e  have  often  touched  upon  it  and  as  quickly  fled  away,  —  as 
children  shut  their  eyes  when  the  sun  is  too  bright  for  them.  I 
have  always  hoped  to  know  if  you  had  no  dear  fancy  illumining 
all  your  life,  no  one  of  whom  you  murmured  in  the  faithful  ear 
of  night,  and  at  whose  side  you  walked  in  fancy  the  livelong  day. 
How  dull  our  lives  must  seem  to  the  bride  and  the  plighted 
maiden,. —  whose  days  are  fed  with  gold  and  who  gather  pearls 
of  evening,  —  but  to  the  wife,  Susie,  —  sometimes  the  wife 
forgotten,  —  our  lives  perhaps  seem  dearer  than  all  others  in 
the  world.  You  have  seen  flowers  at  morning  satisfied  with 
dew,  and  these  same  sweet  blossoms  at  noon  with  their  heads 
bowed  in  anguish  before  the  mighty  sun,  —  think  you  that 
thirsty  blossoms  will  need  nought  but  dew?  No,  they  will  cry 
for  light  and  pine  for  the  burning  noon,  though  it  scorches  them, 
scathes  them;  they  have  got  through  with  peace.  They  know 
that  the  sun  of  noon  is  mightier  than  the  morning  and  their  life 
is  henceforth  for  him.  Oh,  Susie,  it  is  dangerous  and  it  is  all  too 
dear,  —  those  simple  trusting  spirits  and  the  spirits  mightier 
we  cannot  resist!  It  does  so  rend  me,  the  thought  of  it,  —  when 
it  comes,  that  I  tremble  lest  at  some  time  I  too  am  yielded  up. 
You  will  forgive  my  amatory  strain,  —  it  has  been  a  very  long 
one. 

She  writes  again  in  fun,  with  a  touch  of  the  same  fore- 


44 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


boding,  however,  “I  miss  the  grasshoppers  much  —  but 
suppose  it  is  all  for  the  best  —  I  should  become  too  much 
attached  to  a  trotting  world,”  betraying  a  poignant  cer¬ 
tainty  of  her  own  stifled  capacity  for  life  that  persists  like 
an  organ  note  held  down,  torturing  the  silence  with  its 
insistence.  Even  from  extreme  youth  her  unconscious 
philosophy  seems  to  have  been  one  of  renunciation  before 
the  temptation  was  presented;  the  fear  of  loving  what  she 
could  not  have  driving  her  to  self-imposed  abnegations. 
As  if  she  knew  by  intuition  all  the  possible  devastation  of 
love  as  well  as  all  the  loneliness  without  it  —  she  seems 
to  have  fled  within  herself  like  an  eremite  to  his  altar.  A 
premonition  of  the  beauty  and  mystery  and  power  of 
living  seems  to  have  grappled  with  her  —  another  angel 
wrestler  without  face  or  familiarity  —  and  all  but 
worsted  her,  before  she  was  confronted  by  her  own  actual 
ordeal. 

Every  fatal  possibility  seems  to  have  hovered  about 
her,  every  small  day  been  big  with  monstrous  approach- 
ings.  Her  intimate  letters  at  this  time,  too  sacred  for 
revealing,  show  her  as  one  who  fled  from  a  suspected 
wonder  lest  seeing  it  she  faint  to  possess  it  and  be  lost. 
She  knew  and  trembled  for  her  own  guess  at  life  —  was 
loath  to  admit  it,  lest  failing  it  she  lose  hold  on  all  there 
was  left.  She  put  so  much  of  her  own  supernatural  imagi¬ 
nation  into  a  person  or  event  or  just  the  ordinary  weather, 
that  few  if  any  other  minds  could  have  conceived  the  vol¬ 
tage  of  her  impressions  or  reactions.  To  her  the  death 
of  some  nameless  neighbor  opened  an  abyss  of  con¬ 
jecture;  a  sudden  fire,  though  it  might  be  only  a  small 
shed  burning  behind  a  yellow  barn,  set  the  elements  loose 
and  sent  her  off  into  the  Book  of  Revelation  and  the  Day 


THE  END  OF  PEACE 


45 


of  Judgment.  A  perfidy  always  distracted  her,  whether 
national  or  private  —  disloyalty  she  could  never  con¬ 
ceive  or  admit.  As  with  Keats  her  “ angel  nerves”  were 
ill  adapted  for  any  higher  vibrations  than  the  old  house 
afforded  with  its  safe  routine,  quite  electric  enough  for 
her  sensitive  transmission. 

Always,  when  a  circus  was  to  pass  her  window  in  the 
first  grey  dawn  on  its  hooded  way  from  town  to  town, 
she  sat  up  all  night  to  watch  for  it,  thrilled  by  its  wild 
vagrancy,  its  pathos,  its  utter  sophistication:  hungry 
for  sensation,  starving  for  a  world  she  later  shunned, 
with  a  vague  dread  of  its  haunting  power  over  her. 
Characteristic  of  her  shy  hidden  self  is  her  explanation: 

If  the  archangels  veil  their  faces  — 

Sacred  diffidence  my  own  attitude. 

And  again: 

Perhaps  there  is  never  quite  the  sorcery  that  it  is  to  surmise 
—  though  the  obligation  to  enchantment  is  always  binding. 

So  the  years  following  her  South  Hadley  experiences 
passed  externally  uneventful,  until  in  1853  Emily  spent 
a  winter  in  Washington  with  her  father,  who  was  in 
Congress  for  two  terms  to  serve  a  special  cause,  and  not 
from  personal  political  ambition.  He  took  his  family  and 
they  stayed  at  Willard’s,  where  Emily  was  at  once 
recognized  as  unique  by  men  much  her  senior.  Her 
father  had  misgivings  as  to  her  being  willing  to  go,  as 
already  she  shrank  peculiarly  from  being  away  from 
home,  but  his  wish  seems  to  have  inspired  her.  There  are 
many  tales  of  her  repartee  still  remembered. 

She  is  said  to  have  astonished  some  of  her  father’s 
friends  by  her  insight  into  men  and  affairs,  and  created 
quite  a  sensation  by  her  wit.  One  story  of  her,  handed 


46 


EMILY  DICKENSON 


down  in  the  family,  was  of  her  asking  a  prim  old  Chief 
Justice  of  the  Supremest  sort,  when  the  plum  pudding  on 
fire  was  offered  —  “Oh,  Sir,  may  one  eat  of  hell  fire  with 
impunity  here?”  To  Susan  at  home  she  writes,  “Would 
you  rather  I  would  write  you  what  I  am  doing  here,  or 
whom  I  am  loving  there?” 

She  was  charmed  by  the  sweet  softness  of  the  spring, 
soft  as  summer  there  —  the  darling  maple  trees  in  bloom 
and  grass  green  in  sunny  places  —  and  could  hardly  real¬ 
ize  it  was  winter  still  at  home.  It  makes  the  grass  spring 
in  her  heart,  she  writes,  and  the  linnet  sing  to  know  that 
one  she  loves  is  coming  there,  and  for  one  look  of  this 
friend  she  would  give  all  the  pomp,  the  court,  the  eti¬ 
quette  of  the  world.  She  becomes  perversely  fixed  in  her 
own  notion  that  those  who  are  of  the  earth  will  not  enter 
heaven.  The  jostle  and  turmoil  and  scramble  confuse 
her.  She  met  many  people,  and  after  the  fashion  of  the 
day  walked  a  long  time  up  and  down  in  the  hall  of  the 
hotel  with  some  of  them  in  the  evenings.  She  was  ex¬ 
cused  from  some  of  the  gaiety  on  the  plea  of  fatigue, 
but  at  that  was  far  gayer  than  she  had  ever  been  before 
in  her  life.  Her  passivity  to  her  father’s  wish  comes  out 
in  a  postscript  to  the  effect: 

.  We  think  we  shall  go  to  Philadelphia  next  week,  though 
Father  has  not  decided.  Eliza  writes  every  day  and  seems  im¬ 
patient  to  have  us.  I  don’t  know  how  long  we  shall  stay  there 
or  in  New  York.  Father  has  not  said. 

It  was  on  a  visit  to  this  same  Eliza,  in  Philadelphia, 
that  Emily  met  the  fate  she  had  instinctively  shunned. 
Even  now,  after  the  many  slow  years  she  has  been  re¬ 
moved  from  us  in  the  body,  her  spirit  hinders  the  baring 
of  that  chapter  in  her  life  which  has  been  so  universally 


47 


THE  END  OF  PEACE 

misunderstood,  so  stupidly  if  not  wantonly  misrepre¬ 
sented.  All  that  ever  was  told  was  a  confidence  to  her 
Sister  Sue,  sacredly  guafded  under  all  provocation  till 
death  united  them  —  the  confiding  and  the  listening  — 
in  one  abiding  silence. 

Certainly  in  that  first  witchery  of  an  undreamed 
Southern  springtime  Emily  was  overtaken  —  doomed 
once  and  forever  by  her  own  heart.  It  was  instantaneous, 
overwhelming,  impossible.  There  is  no  doubt  that  two 
predestined  souls  were  kept  apart  only  by  her  high  sense 
of  duty,  and  the  necessity  for  preserving  love  untarnished 
by  the  inevitable  destruction  of  another  woman’s  life. 

Without  stopping  to  look  back,  she  fled  to  her  own 
home  for  refuge  —  as  a  wild  thing  running  from  what¬ 
ever  it  may  be  that  pursues;  but  only  a  few  days  later 
Sister  Sue  looked  up  from  her  sewing  to  see  Lavinia, 
Palkd  and  breathless  from  running,  who  grasped  her 
wrist  with  hurrying  hand,  urging:  “Sue,  come!  That 
man  is  here!  —  Father  and  Mother  are  away,  and  I  am 
afraid  Emily  will  go  away  with  him!”  But  the  one  word 
he  implored,  Emily  would  not  say.  Unable  to  endure  his 
life  mider  the  old  conditions,  after  a  short  time  he  left 
his  profession  and  home  and  silently  withdrew  with  his 
wife  and  an  only  child  to  a  remote  city,  a  continent’s 
width  remote,  where  echo  at  least  could  not  mock  him 
with  its  vain  outcry:  dying  prematurely,  the  spell  un¬ 
broken. 

And  Emily  went  on  alone  in  the  old  house  under  the 
pines.  On  the  wall  of  her  own  room  hung  a  picture  in  a 
heavy  oval  frame  of  gold  —  unexplained.  That  was  all, 
to  the  visible  score.  Only  once  is  there  any  evidence  of 
her  breaking  a  silence  like  that  of  dead  lips,  when  she 


48 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


inexplicably  urges  a  friend  to  name  a  new  little  son  by 
the  name  never  like  any  other  to  her  ears.  And  a  little 
later  she  ends  a  note  to  the  same  mother,  “Love  for  the 
child  of  the  bravest  name  alive.”  Always  afterward  she 
called  him  so,  whether  the  family  adopted  the  suggestion 
or  not,  finding  a  strange  little  comfort,  perhaps,  in  the 
mere  naming  of  the  name. 

From  this  time  on  she  clung  more  intensely  to  the 
tender  shadows  of  her  father’s  house.  She  still  saw  her 
friends  and  neighbors  from  time  to  time,  but  even  then 
her  life  had  begun  to  go  on  in  hidden  ways.  “I  am  not 
at  home,”  she  often  said;  or,  “When  I  was  at  home”  — 
and  only  one  faithful  heart  understood  that  love  to  her 
had  been  home  for  an  instant,  and  that  she  lived  in  its 
remembrance,  while  her  little  form  flitted  tranquil 
through  the  sunny  small  industries  of  her  day,  until  night 
gave  her  the  right  to  watch  with  her  flowers  and  liberated 
fancies.  The  dead  of  night  and  the  closed  door  were  ever 
to  her  synonyms  of  release. 

Her  father  never  opposed  her  slightest  preference,  and 
there  was  never  the  least  recognition  in  the  family  of  any 
lasting  effect  from  the  much-envied  fatal  sally  into  the 
great  world  beyond  the  purple  rim  of  the  home  hori¬ 
zon.  Whatever  may  in  after  years  have  been  supposed 
or  surmised  was  but  the  idle  gossip  of  any  country  vil¬ 
lage  provoked  by  any  woman  unmarried  —  especially  a 
gifted  girl  like  Emily  Dickinson,  whose  family  were  so 
warmly  included  in  all  the  society  of  her  time.  It  was 
spoken  of  her  father  that  to  him  compromise  was  disloy¬ 
alty.  One  of  her  own  sentences  sums  it  all  up  for  his 
daughter,  “Alleviation  of  the  irreparable  degrades  it.” 
She  was  as  truly  a  nun  as  any  vowed  celibate,  but  the 


THE  END  OF  PEACE  49 

altar  she  served  was  veiled  from  every  eye  save  that  of 
God.  * 

Her  becalmed  days  in  the  years  immediately  following 
found  their  best  understanding  and  comfort  in  her 
brother’s  home  across  the  lawn.  To  her  Sister  Sue  she 
writes  at  this  time: 

I  rise  because  the  sun  shines  and  sleep  has  done  with  me.  I 
brush  my  hair  and  dress  and  wonder  what  I  am  and  who  made 
me  so,  —  and  then  I  help  wash  the  breakfast  cups,  and  —  anon 
wash  them  again,  and  then  ’tis  afternoon  and  ladies  call,  —  and 
evening  and  some  members  of  another  line  come  in  to  spend 
the  hours,  and  then  the  day  is  done.  And  prithee  what  is  life? 
The  supper  of  the  heart  is  when  the  guest  is  gone! 

Another  scrap  at  the  same  date  runs: 

The  definition  of  beauty  is  that  definition  is  none;  of  heaven 
easier,  since  heaven  and  He  are  One. 

Again : 

Susan  —  We  both  are  women  and  there  is  a  Will  of  God. 
Could  the  dying  confide  Death,  there  would  be  no  dead. 
Wedlock  is  shyer  than  death. 

Thank  you  for  tenderness. 

And  during  her  first  ecstasy  of  renunciation: 

Title  divine  is  mine 
The  Wife  without 
The  Sign. 

Acute  degree 
Conferred  on  me  — 

Empress  of  Calvary. 

Royal,  all  but  the 
Crown  — 

Betrothed,  without  the  Swoon 
God  gives  us  Women 
When  two  hold 
Garnet  to  garnet. 

Gold  to  gold  — 

Born  —  Bridalled  — 


50 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Shrouded  — 

In  a  day 
Tri-Victory  — 

“My  Husband” 

Women  say 
Stroking  the  melody. 

Is  this  the  way? 

Emily 

In  her  own  words,  Emily  had  “got  through  with 
peace.” 

And  since  there  is  no  portrait  of  her,  except  one  made 
from  her  child  face  in  the  group  mentioned,  and  another 
of  extreme  youth  rather  too  freely  restored  to  give 
much  idea  of  her,  perhaps  it  would  not  be  amiss  to  quote 
the  likeness  in  words  from  the  preface  to  the  volume  of 
her  verse  called  “The  Single  Hound”: 

It  has  been  told  often  of  her  that  she  wore  white  exclusively. 
She  had  said  herself  in  one  of  her  letters  to  an  inquisitive 
friend  who  had  never  yet  seen  her  and  importuned  for  a  hint  of 
her  outward  self,  —  that  her  eyes  were  the  color  of  the  sherry 
left  in  the  glass  by  him  to  whom  shewrote.  Her  hair  was  of  that 
same  warm  bronze-chestnut  hue  that  Titian  immortalized, 
and  she  wore  it  parted  on  her  brow  and  low  in  her  neck,  but  al¬ 
ways  half  covered  by  a  velvet  snood  of  the  same  tint,  —  such 
as  the  Venetian  painters  loved  to  add  as  a  final  grace  to  their 
portraits  of  their  most  beloved  and  beautiful  women.  Her 
cheek  was  like  the  petal  of  the  jasmine,  a  velvety  white  never 
touched  by  a  hint  of  color.  Her  red  lips  parted  over  regular 
little  teeth  like  a  squirrel’s,  and  it  was  the  rather  long  upper  lip 
that  gave  to  the  mouth  its  asceticism  and  betrayed  the  monas¬ 
tic  tendency  in  her,  that  austerity  of  the  senses  of  which  she 
was  probably  quite  unaware.  If  this  combines  nature  and  art 
and  mysticism  in  one,  too  bewilderingly  to  reproduce  any 
definite  impression,  it  is  the  fault  of  that  face  —  as  animate  in 
memory  as  it  is  still  in  dreams. 

She  had  a  dramatic  way  of  throwing  up  her  hands  at  the 


THE  END  OF  PEACE  5] 

climax  of  a  story,  or  one  of  her  own  flashes.  It  was  entirely 
spontaneous,  her  spirit  seemed  merely  playing  through  her 
body  as  the  aurora  borealis  through  the  darkness  of  a  Summer 
night. 


Fascination  was  her  element.  She  was  not  daily  bread,  she 
was  star  dust.  Her  solitude  made  her  and  was  part  of  her. 


CHAPTER  VI 

“A  HEDGE  AWAY” 

1856-62 

Emily’s  only  brother,  Austin,  was  married  on  July  1, 
1856,  and  from  that  time  she  was  part  of  every  incident 
in  his  household.  Her  first  little  note  to  his  wife,  with 
which  “The  Single  Hound”  is  prefaced,  expressed  her 
feeling  perfectly : 

One  sister  have  I  in  our  house 
And  one  a  hedge  away  — 

There’s  only  one  recorded 
But  both  belong  to  me. 

In  the  years  following  that  crucial  visit  to  Washington 
and  Philadelphia,  her  life  moved  on  without  external 
change,  except  that  she  imperceptibly  but  increasingly 
withdrew  from  outside  festivities  and  public  appearances 
and  became  less  accessible  to  all  save  her  chosen  few. 
But  her  brother’s  marriage  brought  a  thrilling  new  ele¬ 
ment  into  her  life,  and  she  continued  to  flit  across  the 
intervening  lawns  behind  the  bulwark  of  high  hemlock 
hedges  long  after  all  other  visits  had  definitely  ceased. 
The  narrow  path  “just  wide  enough  for  two  who  love” 
ran  luringly  between,  whether  her  light  flashed  across 
the  snow  to  them  under  a  polar  moon,  while  she  sat  up  to 
watch  over  her  flowers  and  keep  them  from  freezing,  or 
past  the  rosebushes  of  a  midsummer,  where  the  moths 
were  at  their  amorous  trafficking. 

Emily’s  own  conservatory  was  like  fairyland  at  all 
seasons,  especially  in  comparison  with  the  dreary  white 


“a  little  path  just  wide  enough  for  two  who 
love”  —  E.  d. 


53 


A  HEDGE  AWAY 

winter  cold  outside.  It  opened  from  the  dining-room,  a 
glass  room,  with  white  shelves  running  around  it 
on  which  were  grouped  the  loveliest  ferns,  rich  purple  heli¬ 
otrope,  the  yellow  jasmine,  and  one  giant  Daphne  odora 
with  its  orange-bloom  scent  astray  from  the  Riviera, 
and  two  majestic  cape  jasmines,  exotics  kin  to  her  alien 
soul.  She  tolerated  none  of  the  usual  variety  of  mongrel 
house  plants.  A  rare  scarlet  lily,  a  resurrection  calla,  per¬ 
haps— and  here  it  was  always  summer  with  the  oxalis 
dripping  from  hanging  baskets  like  humble  incense  upon 
the  heads  of  the  household  and  its  frequenters. 

When  her  brother’s  first  son  was  born,  named  for  his 
grandfather,  her  flying  little  greeting  to  him  —  delivered 
at  her  sister’s  pillow  —  was: 

Is  it  true,  dear  Sue? 

Are  there  Two? 

I  shouldn’t  like  to  come 
For  fear  of  joggling  Him! 

If  you  could  shut  him  up 
In  a  coffee  cup. 

Or  tie  Him  to  a  pin 
Till  I  got  in. 

Or  make  Him  fast 
To  Pussy’s  fist, 

Hist !  Whist ! 

I’d  come! 

Emily 

Later,  with  her  little  niece,  and  the  golden-haired 
arch-darling  of  both  houses  —  the  transitory  child, 
Gilbert,  who  only  came  and  flashed  a  mere  eight  years 
and  went  on  —  Emily  was  just  another  child  like  them, 
only  endowed  "with  subtle  powers  of  the  high  gods  to 
produce  unexpected  rewards  and  avert  disastrous  con¬ 
sequences.  No  treat  could  be  offered  any  one  of  the 


54 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


three  like  that  of  being  left  in  her  care  while  the  grown-up 
family  wandered.  As  they  grew  older,  she  made  com¬ 
panions  of  them,  talked  to  them  as  equals,  trusted  them 
with  her  choicest  interests.  To  them  her  increasing 
solitude  never  seemed  strange;  love  gave  them  under¬ 
standing.  Had  she  worn  wings  instead  of  her  simple 
white  frocks,  they  would  have  taken  it  quite  for  granted. 

Until  she  was  obliged  to  go  to  Boston  for  treatment  of 
her  eyes  in  1864  and  again  in  1865  the  events  in  Emily’s 
life  were  counted  as  with  Shakespeare’s  clock — “by 
heart-throbs,  not  by  hours.” 

As  her  brother’s  family  grew  up,  she  accepted  them 
one  by  one,  an  individual  relation  existing  between  each 
of  the  three  and  her  fairy  self.  When  her  little  niece  began 
her  first  attempts  to  write  her  own  fancies  in  verse, 
Emily’s  response  came  quickly  back,  “I  was  surprised, 
but  why?  Is  she  not  of  the  lineage  of  the  spirit?”  She 
always  alluded  to  the  youngest  son,  Gilbert,  as  “Thy 
Son,  our  Nephew.”  As  she  put  the  world  further  from  her 
their  triple  alliance  increased  in  intimacy.  She  hailed 
them  as  treading  where  she  dared  not  venture,  bade  them 
come  back  and  tell  her  their  adventures,  was  curious 
about  their  thoughts  and  tiny  events  which  gave  her 
escape  from  her  own  limited  environment,  which  she 
loved,  yet  endured. 

Though  she  dwelt  only  “a  hedge  away”  from  their 
home,  she  had  the  habit  of  sending  her  constant  thought 
to  them  in  her  tiny  notes  as  other  people  would  have 
spoken  them.  The  gambol  of  her  mind  on  paper  was  her 
pastime.  Sometimes  her  mood  was  one  of  sheer  ex¬ 
travaganza  —  like  this: 


A  HEDGE  AWAY 


55 


Friday  Noon 

Dear  Friend 

I  regret  to  inform  you  that  at  three  o’clock  yesterday  my 
mind  came  to  a  stand,  and  has  since  then  been  stationary  Ere 
this  intelligence  reaches  you  I  shall  probably  be  a  snail.  By  this 
untoward  Providence  a  mental  and  moral  being  has  been  swept 
ruthlessly  from  her  sphere.  But  we  should  not  repine —  “God 
moves  in  a  mysteribus  way  his  wonders  to  perform,”  and  if  it  be 
his  will  that  I  become  a  bear  and  bite  my  fellow  men,  it  will 
be  for  the  highest  good  of  this  fallen  and  famishing  world.  If 
the  gentleman  in  the  air  will  please  stop  throwing  snowballs,  I 
may  meet  you  again.  Otherwise  it  is  uncertain.  My  parents  are 
pretty  well.  General  Wolf  is  here.  We  are  looking  for  Major 
Pitcairn  in  the  afternoon  stage.  We  were  much  afflicted  yester¬ 
day  by  the  supposed  removal  of  our  cat  from  time  to  eternity. 
She  returned  however  last  evening,  having  been  detained  by 
the  storm  beyond  her  expectations. 

We  need  some  paths  up  our  way,  shan’t  you  be  out  with  the 
team? 

Yours  till  death 

Isaiah 

The  stately  old  bam  was  an  equine  palatial  structure, 
sheltering  horses,  cows,  pigs,  hens,  and  pigeons,  with 
wings  for  musty  carriage  houses,  and  leaning  ramparts  of 
loft  where  swallows  darted  and  doves  eternally  gurgled. 
The  animal  traffic  out  there  had  a  charm  for  Emily,  and 
her  wit  often  pranked  with  its  daily  round.  Wanting  her 
nephew  once  to  the  rescue  she  sends  this: 

Ned 

Dennis  was  happy  tonight  and  it  made  him  graceful.  I  saw 
him  waltzing  with  the  cow  and  suspected  his  status.  You  told 
me  he  had  not  tasted  liquor  since  his  wife’s  decease  —  then  she 
must  have  been  alive  at  six  this  evening.  I  fear  for  the  rectitude 
of  the  barn.  Love  for  the  Police. 

Emily 

Her  Christmas  offering  of  iced  plum  cake  and  candy 
was  once  sent  in  the  afternoon  and  with  it  this  apology: 


56 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Sister 

Please  excuse  Santa  Claus  for  calling  so  early,  but  gentlemen 
1882  years  old  are  a  little  fearful  of  the  evening  air. 

And  in  the  early  days  of  the  very  last  spring  of  her  life,  to 
Gib  the  characteristic  lines : 

Not  at  home  to  callers 
Says  the  naked  tree  — 

Jacket  due  in  April. 

Wishing  you  good  day. 

There  are  still  endless  little  notes  sent  in  every  possible 
phase  of  her  mood.  Comments  on  books  she  read,  cries 
of  the  heart,  dashes  of  wit;  and  when  her  habit  of  writing 
became  confirmed,  poems  for  suggestion,  or  criticism. 
From  the  time  Emily  had  taken  the  dare  of  thirty,  that 
“frightful  age”  spoken  of  with  bated  breath  in  their 
teens  by  her  sister  Lavinia,  the  notes  were  often  those 
same  poems  afterward  published,  sent  either  as  an  ex¬ 
pression  of  an  emotion  she  wished  to  share,  or  with  a  re¬ 
quest  for  criticism. 

In  an  article  upon  her  unpublished  letters  to  her 
brother’s  family,  which  appeared  in  the  “Atlantic 
Monthly,”  it  has  been  told  of  her  that  these  notes 

contained  numberless  phrases  of  universal  truth,  written  though 
they  were  by  this  shy  recluse  in  her  retired  New  England  home, 
intrenched  by  lilacs  and  guarded  by  bumble  bees.  .  .  .  She  had 
her  finger  on  the  pulse  of  events  and  noted  phenomena  un¬ 
erringly,  with  her  own  comment.  Whenever  stirred,  by  what¬ 
ever  cause,  she  trapped  her  mood,  then  waited  for  her  messen¬ 
ger,  as  vigilant  as  any  spider. . . .  Emily  Dickinson  differed 
from  all  the  women  letter-writers  of  France  and  England  in  her 
scorn  of  detail,  scarcely  hitting  the  paper  long  enough  to  make 
her  communication  intelligible. 

The  following  brief  note  is  quoted  from  the  same 
source: 


A  HEDGE  AWAY 


57 


Opinion  is  a  flitting  thing 
But  truth  outlasts  the  sun, 

If  then  we  caniiot  own  them  both. 

Possess  the  oldest  one. 

And  this  one: 

When  we  have  ceased  to  crave 
The  gift  is  given 
For  which  we  gave  the  earth 
And  mortgaged  heaven, 

But  so  declined  in  worth  — 

’Tis  ignominy  now  to  look  upon. 

Life  had  for  her  an  infinite  and  increasing  fascination. 
“Are  you  sure  we  are  making  the  most  of  it?  ”  she  wrote 
on  a  slip  of  paper  and  sent  over  by  hand  just  because 
she  was  quick  ’with  the  thrill  of  another  day.  Again  she 
sent  the  following: 

Dear  Stje  — 

A  fresh  morning  of  life  and  its  impregnable  chances  and  the 
dew  for  you! 

Emily 

Other  quotations  from  the  same  articles  show  her  re¬ 
sponse  to  every  appeal. 

To  the  faithful  absence  is  condensed  presence.  To  the  others, 
—  but  there  are  no  others. 

So  busy  missing  you  I  have  not  tasted  Spring.  Should  there 
be  other  Aprils  we  will  perhaps  dine. 

I  must  wait  a  few  days  before  seeing  you.  You  are  too  mo¬ 
mentous,  —  but  remember  dear,  it  is  idolatry,  not  indifference. 

Her  notes  to  the  three  children  were  their  keen  de¬ 
light,  and  preserved  by  them  beyond  all  their  other 
treasures.  No  one  but  their  Aunt  Emily  could  have 
written,  “Emily  knows  a  man  who  drives  a  coach  like  a 
thimble  and  turns  the  wheel  all  day  with  his  heel. 


58  EMILY  DICKINSON 

A  jt  * 

His  name  is  Bumble  Bee!”  At  the  close  of  a  letter  to 
her  older  nephew  away  on  a  visit  as  a  child,  she  writes: 

Dear  Ned-Bird  — 

It  will  be  good  to  hear  you  again.  Not  a  voice  in  the  woods  is 
so  sweet  as  yours.  The  robbins  have  gone,  all  but  a  few  infirm 
ones,  —  and  the  Cricket  and  I  keep  house  for  the  frost.  Good¬ 
night  little  brother.  I  would  love  to  stay  longer.  Vinnie  and 
Grandma  and  Maggie  all  give  their  love.  Pussy  her  striped 
respects. 

Ned’s  most  little  Aunt  Emily 

When  sending  him  a  tiny  pie: 

Dear  Ned: 

You  know  that  pie  you  stole?  Well,  this  is  that  pie’s  brother. 
Mother  told  me  when  I  was  a  boy,  that  I  must  turn  over  a  new 
leaf.  I  call  that  the  foliage  admonition.  Shall  I  commend  it  to 
you? 

Emily 

On  the  birthday  of  her  little  niece  she  sends  a  knot  of 
her  choicest  flowers  and  this  word  of  greeting  — 

Dear  Mattie  — 

I  am  glad  it  is  your  birthday.  It  is  this  little  bouquet’s  birth¬ 
day  too.  Its  Father  is  a  very  old  man  by  the  name  of  Nature, 
whom  you  never  saw.  Be  sure  to  live  in  vain,  dear.  I  wish  I  had. 

Emily 

The  following  chronicle  came  to  Gilbert’s  mother  after 
the  rescue  of  a  favorite  cat  by  his  Aunt  Lavinia: 

Memoirs  of  little  boys  that  Live 
“Weren’t  you  chasing  Pussy?”  said  Vinnie  to  Gilbert. 

“No,  she  was  chasing  herself.” 

“  But  wasn’t  she  running  pretty  fast?” 

“Well,  some  fast  and  some  slow,”  said  the  beguiling  villain. 
Pussy’s  Nemesis  quailed.  Talk  of  hoary  reprobates!  Your 
urchin  is  more  antique  in  wiles  than  the  Egyptian  sphinx.  Have 
you  noticed  Granville’s  letter  to  Lowell?  “Her  Majesty  has 
contemplated  you,  and  reserved  her  decision.” 


A  HEDGE  AWAY 


59 


It  was,  as  Colonel  Higginson  once  observed  later  on,  a 
pretty  rarefied  atmosphere  for  children,  but  they  re¬ 
garded  their  Aunt  Emily  as  a  magical  creature,  and  were 
brought  up  on  her  stabbing  wit,  her  condensed  forms  and 
subtle  epigram,  and  felt  a  lively  contempt  for  people  who 
said  they  could  not  understand  her  when  their  mother 
sometimes  read  out  sentences  or  poems  of  hers  to  the 
curious  who  begged  to  hear  something  she  had  written. 
They  felt  she  was  always  on  their  side,  a  nimble  as  well 
as  a  loving  ally.  She  never  dulled  their  sunshine  with 
grown-up  apprehensions  for  their  good,  or  hindered  their 
imagination,  but  rather  flew  before,  like  Aurora,  straight 
out  into  the  ether  of  the  impossible,  as  dear  to  her  as  to 
them. 

The  following  she  sent  to  Ned  after  some  reputed  in¬ 
discretion  reported  of  him  by  harder  hearts: 

The  cat  that  in  the  corner  sits 
Her  martial  time  forgot  — 

The  rat  but  a  tradition  now 
Of  her  desireless  lot, 

Another  class  reminds  me  of  — 

Who  neither  please  nor  play. 

But  —  “not  to  make  a  bit  of  noise” 

Adjure  each  little  boy! 

P.S.  Grandma  characteristically  hopes  Neddy  will  be  a 

good  boy.  Obtuse  ambition  of  Grandma’s ! 

6  17  Emily 

On  returning  a  photograph  of  a  child  in  Greenaway 
costume: 

That  is  the  little  girl  I  meant  to  be  and  wasn’t;  the  very  hat 
I  meant  to  wear  and  didn’t. 

One  verse  she  sent  them  that  particularly  hit  their  fancy 


60  EMILY  DICKINSON 

That  butterfly  in  honoured  dust 
Assuredly  will  lie. 

But  none  will  pass  his  catacomb 
So  chastened  as  the  fly. 

One  sent  at  Christmas  with  a  beautifully  iced  cake  was : 

The  Saviour  must  have  been  a  docile  Gentleman 
To  come  so  far,  so  cold  a  night 
For  little  fellow  men. 

The  road  to  Bethlehem  — 

Since  He  and  I  were  boys  — 

Has  levelled  —  but  for  that  ’twould  be 
A  rugged  billion  miles. 

To  Ned  after  being  severely  stung  by  a  hornet: 

Dear  Ned  — 

You  know  I  never  did  like  you  in  those  “yellow- jackets”! 

Emily 

To  Gilbert,  a  child  in  kindergarten  then,  she  sent  this, 
accompanied  with  a  dead  bee: 

The  Bumble  Bee’s  Religion 
For  Gib  to  carry  to  his  teacher  from  Emily 
His  little  hearse-like  figure 
Unto  itself  a  dirge, 

To  a  delusive  lilac 
The  vanity  divulge 
Of  industry  and  morals 
And  every  righteous  thing. 

For  the  divine  perdition 
Of  Idleness  and  Spring. 

“All  liars  shall  have  their  part.”  Jonathan  Edwards. 

“And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.”  Jesus. 

She  furthered  their  childish  love  of  mystery  and  in¬ 
nocent  intrigue  on  every  occasion,  purloining  for  them 
any  treat  from  the  family  supplies  she  could  lay  her  fond 
hands  upon. 


A  HEDGE  AWAY  61 

Once  with  sweets  smuggled  over  to  them  came  these 
laconic  instructions: 

Omit  to  return  box.  Omit  to  know  you  received  box. 

Brooks  of  Sheffield 

At  another  like  occasion: 

The  joys  of  theft  are  two;  first  theft;  second  superiority  to 
detection.  How  inspiring  to  the  clandestine  mind.  “We  thank 
thee,  Lord,  that  Thou  hast  hid  these  things!” 

She  did  a  deal  of  brilliant  trifling  apropos  of  local 
events.  On  the  death  of  the  wife  of  a  doctor  she  disliked 
she  writes: 

Dear  Sue  — 

I  should  think  she  would  rather  be  the  Bride  of  the  Lamb 
than  that  old  pill  box ! 

Emily 

With  a  cape  jasmine  sent  to  a  guest  of  her  niece  as  yet 
unknown  to  her  (Sara  Colton  Gillett)  she  writes : 

M.  will  put  this  little  flower  in  her  friend’s  hand.  Should  she 
ask  who  sent  it,  tell  her  —  as  Desdemona  did  when  they  asked 
who  slew  her  —  Nobody  —  Myself. 

After  the  death  of  a  strictly  dull  acquaintance  with  no 
vital  spark  visible  she  writes: 

Now  I  lay  thee  down  to  sleep, 

I  pray  the  Lord  thy  dust  to  keep, 

If  thou  should  live  before  thou  wake, 

I  pray  the  Lord  thy  soul  to  make! 

This  scrap  is  Emily  at  her  most  audacious: 

My  Maker,  let  me  be 
Enamoured  most  of  Thee  — 

But  nearer  this 
I  more  should  miss! 

In  a  panic  lest  some  cherished  plan  fall  through  she 
sent  this: 


62 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Boast  not  myself  of  to-morrow,  for  I  “knoweth  not”  what  a 
noon  may  bring  forth. 

This,  too,  is  Emily  to  the  core: 

Cherish  power  dear;  remember  that  it  stands  in  the  Bible  be¬ 
tween  the  kingdom  and  the  glory  because  it  is  wilder  than  either. 

The  instances  cited  are  characteristic  of  varying  moods. 
Her  passion  for  brevity  always  deducted  relentlessly. 
She  refuses  an  invitation  thus: 

Thanks,  Sue,  but  not  to-night.  Further  nights. 

Emily 

After  some  flashing  pleasure  given  her  she  replies: 

Don’t  do  such  things.  Your  Arabian  Nights  unfits  the  heart 
for  its  arithmetic. 

Emily  is  sorry  for  Susan’s  day.  To  be  singular  under  plu¬ 
ral  circumstances  is  a  becoming  heroism. 

Susan  knows  she  is  a  siren  and  at  a  word  from  her  Emily 
would  forfeit  righteousness. 

A  spell  cannot  be  tattered  and  mended  like  a  coat. 

No  message  is  the  utmost  message,  for  what  we  tell  is  done. 

To  lose  what  we  have  never  owned  might  seem  an  eccentric 
bereavement,  but  Presumption  has  its  own  affliction  as  well  as 
claim. 

The  things  of  which  we  want  the  proof  are  those  we  know  the 
best. 

Where  we  owe  but  little  we  pay.  Where  we  owe  so  much  it 
defies  money  we  are  blandly  insolvent. 

Has  All  a  codicil? 

In  a  life  that  stopped  guessing,  you  and  I  should  not  feel  at 
home. 

Tasting  the  honey  and  the  sting  should  have  ceased  with 
Eden.  Pang  is  the  past  of  peace. 

“To  multiply  the  harbors  does  not  reduce  the  sea,” 
defines  her  constancy. 


A  HEDGE  AWAY 


63 


“  Emblem  is  immeasurable,  that  is  why  it  is  better 
than  fulfillment,  which  qan  be  drained”  —  reveals  her 
elusive  quality. 

And  how  much  she  crowded  into  one  sparse  sentence 
when  she  said: 

Danger  is  not  at  first,  for  then  we  are  unconscious,  but  in  the 
slower  days. 

Her  letters  sent  when  her  family  were  really  at  a  dis¬ 
tance  are  never  like  those  of  any  one  else,  and  usually 
reflect  the  day  and  season  more  than  any  personal  hap¬ 
penings.  Across  one  runs  this  postscript: 

Father’s  sister  is  dead,  and  Mother  wears  a  black  ribbon  on 
her  bonnet. 

But  usually  they  were  more  like  this,  one  chosen  at 
random: 

Nothing  is  gone,  dear,  or  no  one  that  you  know.  The  forests 
are  at  home,  the  mountains  intimate  at  night  and  arrogant  at 
noon.  A  lonesome  fluency  abroad,  like  suspended  music. 

Further  on  in  the  same  letter: 

Come  home  and  see  your  weather;  the  hills  are  full  of  shawls. 
We  have  a  new  man  whose  name  is  Tim.  Father  calls  him 
“Timothy”  and  the  barn  sounds  like  the  Bible. 

Twilight  touches  Amherst  with  his  yellow  glove.  Miss  me 
sometimes,  dear,  not  on  most  occasion,  but  in  the  Sometimes  of 
the  mind. 

The  small  heart  cannot  break.  The  ecstasy  of  its  penalty 
solaces  the  large. 

Emerging  from  an  abyss  and  reentering  it,  that  is  Life,  dear, 
is  it  not? 

There  were  no  so  gay  hours  in  Emily’s  life  as  those 
spent  at  her  brother’s  home  when  there  were  guests  of 
their  own  inner  circle,  who  revelled  in  her  companionship. 
For  her  own  life  never  lacked  its  joy  in  comedy  nor  was 


64  EMILY  DICKINSON 

her  spirit  quenched  by  its  most  subduing  contact  with  the 
elemental  tragedy  that  was  constant  to  her  thought. 
When  Mrs.  Anthon,  of  London,  and  Samuel  Bowles,  of 
the  “Springfield  Republican,”  were  there  they  played 
wild  games  of  battledore  and  shuttlecock  in  the  long 
winter  evenings ;  Emily  convulsing  their  onlookers  by  her 
superfluous  antics  added  to  their  game.  She  improvised 
brilliantly  upon  the  piano  all  sorts  of  dramatic  perform¬ 
ances  of  her  own,  one  she  called  the  Devil  being  partic¬ 
ularly  applauded. 

It  was  on  one  of  these  winter  nights  of  revel  that  they 
forgot  the  hour  and  suddenly,  unwarned  by  the  approach¬ 
ing  beams  of  his  lantern  across  the  snow,  became  aware 
of  her  father’s  presence  in  their  midst,  to  enquire  the 
meaning  of  such  prolonged  hours.  Emily  is  said  to  have 
drooped  and  disappeared  before  him  like  the  dew,  without 
a  sound,  but  with  a  wicked  glance  or  gesture  to  assert 
her  unreconcilement  to  the  proceedings. 

Her  sister  Sue  recognized  her  genius  from  the  first,  and 
hoarded  every  scrap  Emily  sent  her  from  the  time  they 
were  both  girls  of  sixteen.  Their  love  never  faltered  or 
waned.  Emily  pietures  their  first  meeting  and  its  change¬ 
lessness: 

As  much  now  as  when  love  first  began  —  on  the  step  at  the 
front  door,  under  the  evergreens. 

One  of  her  very  last  pencilled  lines  was  this: 

With  the  exception  of  Shakespeare  you  have  told  me  more 
knowledge  than  any  one  living.  To  say  that  sincerely  is  strange 
praise. 

Emily 

Sometimes  Emily  addressed  her  as  “You  from  whom  I 
never  run  away”;  and  again  she  exclaims: 


SUSAN  GILBERT  DICKINSON 


A  HEDGE  AWAY 


65 


Susan !  I  would  have  come  out  of  Eden  to  open  the  door  for 
you  if  I  had  known  you  were  there.  You  must  knock  with 
a  trumpet  as  Gabriel  does,  whose  hands  are  small  as  yours.  I 
knew  he  knocked  and  went  away  —  I  did  not  dream  you  did! 

Emily 


And  again: 

To  see  you  unfits  for  stabler  meetings.  I  dare  not  risk  an  in¬ 
temperate  moment  before  a  banquet  of  bran. 

The  decision  to  publish  “The  Single  Hound,”  the 
poem  of  their  lifetime,  was  determined  by  a  faded  little 
note  of  her  early  twenties: 

Dear  Sue  —  I  like  your  praise  because  I  know  it  knows.  If  I 
could  make  you  and  Austin  proud  some  day,  a  long  way  off, 
’twould  give  me  taller  feet. 

Emily 

She  never  told  her  family  of  her  writing,  and  this  is  the 
only  mention  of  any  secret  ambition  to  have  her  work 
known  even  on  a  day  “  a  long  way  off.  The  first  poem 
dated,  that  she  sent  to  Sister  Sue,  was  in  1848,  and 
probably  the  last  word  she  ever  wrote  was  her  reply  to  a 
message  from  her  — 

My  answer  is  an  unmitigated  Yes,  Sue. 


Emily 


CHAPTER  VII 

LATER  YEARS  WITH  FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 

From  the  time  Emily  was  thirty  her  life  can  only  be  told 
by  the  development  of  herself.  Any  mere  chronicle  of 
events  would  leave  out  all  that  made  her  and  her  sur¬ 
viving  poems. 

Yet  if  there  were  few  startling  happenings  to  record, 
to  her  there  was  nothing  otherwise.  If  art  is  as  Merimee 
once  declared  “exaggeration  apropos”  —  she  was  an  in¬ 
comparable  artist  at  life.  To  her  there  was  a  prodigality 
of  excess  in  each  thrill  of  the  returning  common  day. 
Her  spirit  found  its  own  nectars  in  spite  of  her  loneliness 
for  all  her  brother’s  home  so  vividly  illustrated  —  in  spite 
of  the  dearth  of  music,  painting,  and  the  stimulus  others 
took  for  granted  as  necessary  for  any  lasting  accomplish¬ 
ment. 

A  brilliant  and  ardent  admirer  of  her  work  said  re¬ 
cently:  “The  truest  vision  I  ever  got  of  the  great  Napo¬ 
leon  was  in  hearing  a  great  artist  sing  the  ‘Two  Grena¬ 
diers.  That  is  the  only  way  possible  of  expressing  Emily 
Dickinson  by  indirections,  through  her  own  milieu, 
her  contacts  with  others,  and  the  impressions  she  set 
down  in  her  writings.”  There  is  hardly  a  soul  left  now 
who  knew  her  or  ever  saw  her,  and  only  one  of  her  own 
family  surviving  to  depict  her  as  not  only  a  poet  and 
mystic,  but  a  beloved  person,  moving  from  window  to 
window  to  watch  the  day’s  retreat  or  the  change  of  light 
on  Pelham  hills,  or  flitting  across  from  house  to  house,  a 
dear  familiar  spirit  of  delight  in  either. 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 


67 


As  early  as  1862  she  had  visibly  withdrawn  from  the 
outside  world,  even  humoring  her  moods  until  those  she 
professed  to  love  saw  her  dess  often  when  they  came  to 
the  house.  As  one  has  said  of  the  shortening  afternoons 
of  early  autumn,  “There  was  less  of  the  Toreador  spirit 
in  her  now”;  though  she  was  always  the  ecstatic,  dare¬ 
devil,  shy  paradox,  supreme  and  incomparable,  to  those 
who  found  her.  Once  she  seems  puzzled  by  some  slight 
coldness  on  the  part  of  a  friend  —  exclaiming,  “Odd  that 
I  who  run  from  so  many  cannot  brook  that  one  turn  from 
me!”  Yet  she  confessed  that  her  ideal  caller  —  like  ideal 
cat  —  was  always  just  going  out  of  sight! 

Her  books  and  friends  went  together  in  her  later  life; 
books  first,  perhaps.  But  it  was  her  own  work  done  in 
secret  and  often  at  midnight — “Death’s  and  Truth’s 
Unlocking  Time”  —  that  “kept  the  awe  away”  and  led 
her  on.  She  confessed  it  to  herself  and  hardly  another. 
Most  of  her  earliest  friends  remained  her  closest  friends 
to  the  end;  as  she  expressed  it,  “I  never  sowed  a  seed  in 
childhood  unless  it  was  perennial  —  that  is  why  my  gar¬ 
den  lasts.”  Those  girls  of  her  earliest  choosing,  Abby 
Wood,  Eliza  Coleman,  Abiah  Strong,  Martha  Gilbert, 
Emily  Fowler,  and  Helen  Fiske  —  all  married  and  gone 
away  from  her  —  she  cherished  and  was  true  to  as  the 
years  gave  her  also  Kate  Anthon,  Maria  Whitney,  Mrs. 
Bowles,  and  others  drawn  to  her  through  her  brother’s 
family. 

She  had  her  own  peculiar  exclusive  rights  in  the  family 
friends  also,  the  Hollands  of  Springfield,  the  Lords  of 
Salem,  her  father’s  friend  Mrs.  Eastman,  who  lived  abroad 
and  wrote  to  them  on  thin  paper  with  the  letterhead  of 
magical  foreign  places,  sealed  with  enormous  seals,  and 


68 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


made  them  incredible  presents  of  coral  and  mosaics  and 
those  cameos  so  coveted  by  that  generation,  when  she 
made  her  rare  visits  upon  them.  The  Hollands  were 
intimates  of  the  entire  family,  and  until  the  death  of  Dr. 
Holland  in  1881  the  families  visited  back  and  forth 
familiarly,  Emily  going  to  them  after  she  had  ceased  to 
accept  invitations  even  from  her  own  cousins  in  Boston. 
Dr.  Josiah  Gilbert  Holland  was  one  of  the  founders  of 
“Scribner’s  Magazine”  in  1870  and  became  one  of  its 
editors;  leaving  Springfield,  where  he  had  been  engaged 
on  the  “Republican”  for  many  years,  to  live  in  New 
York.  At  his  home,  “Bonnicastle,”  named  from  the 
hero  of  his  first  novel,  his  friends  were  constantly  enter¬ 
tained  and  a  sorry  gap  in  the  lives  of  the  entire  Dickinson 
family  was  made  by  the  change.  Dr.  Holland  —  who 
afterward  came  to  be  widely  known  as  J.  G.  Holland  — 
made  a  valuable  contribution  to  local  American  history 
in  his  two-volume  “  History  of  Western  Massachusetts.” 
He  also  wrote  a  number  of  novels,  “Arthur  Bonnicastle,” 
“The  Bay  Path”  —  a  colonial  tale,  one  of  his  first  — 
followed  by  the  “Titcomb  Letters,”  “Nicholas  Min- 
turn,”  “Sevenoaks,”  etc.,  and  several  volumes  of  poems, 
of  which  “Bitter-sweet,”  “Kathrina,”  and  “  The  Mistress 
of  the  Manse”  were  those  most  popular.  After  his  work 
called  him  to  New  York  to  live,  he  often  returned  to  the 
Dickinson  home  for  rest  and  refreshment  and  inspiration. 
Richard  Watson  Gilder,  later  editor  of  the  “Century 
Magazine,”  remembered  being  taken  there  by  him,  as  a 
lad,  but  “did  not  see  Miss  Emily,”  a  fact  he  bewailed  in 
later  years. 

Judge  Otis  P.  Lord,  of  Salem,  was  her  father’s  friend, 
but  into  his  childless  heart  of  rigorous  justice  Emily 


JUDGE  LORD 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 


69 


flashed  as  an  unconscious  aurora  on  a  polar  night  and 
their  friendship  was  of  thqmost  deep  and  lasting  quality. 
At  her  request  his  letters  and  the  little  souvenirs  he  had 
given  her  were  burned  at  her  death,  held  by  her  too  sacred 
for  other  fate.  Says  the  formal  biographer  appointed  to 
draw  up  the  resolutions  upon  his  death  for  the  Common¬ 
wealth  of  Massachusetts:  “In  him  the  people  lost  a  fear¬ 
less,  vigorous,  upright  magistrate  of  great  learning  and 
unquestioned  integrity  and  purity;  a  man  of  marked 
individuality  and  power.  His  fame  belongs  to  the  Com¬ 
monwealth.  For  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century  he  served 
it  as  a  judge  of  its  highest  tribunal  with  distinguished 
abilitv;  a  positive  force  in  the  administration  of  justice. 
Pompous  in  manner,  elegant  in  speech,  he  was  to  the 
younger  generation  the  embodiment  of  the  Supreme 
Court.  His  face  was  haughtily  handsome,  and  beneath 
his  slow,  awe-inspiring  reserve  of  manner  lay  a  sense  of 
humor  to  which  his  little  friend  Emily  pierced  unceas¬ 
ingly.  Her  approach  was  sure  on  the  high  themes  of 
Shakespeare,  his  favorite  author  re-read  and  known  by 
heart  by  them  both,  but  their  enjoyment  of  the  comedy 
of  every  day  was  also  broadly  akin.  They  saved  sciaps 
of  current  nonsense  for  each  other,  and  these  clippings 
flew  back  and  forth  between  the  grim  court-house  in 
Salem  and  the  little  desk  by  her  conservatory  window, 
where  Emily  oftenest  sat. 

There  was  a  certain  kind  of  wit  she  labelled  “the 
•Judge  Lord  brand.”  One  specimen  of  it  especially  rel¬ 
ished  by  both  remains  still  pinned  to  her  tiny  workbox. 
It  is  yellow  with  age,  in  a  type  quite  bygone  and  evidently 
cut  from  the  county  paper.  It  is  marked  in  her  own  hand¬ 
writing —  “Returned  by  Judge  Lord  with  approval! 


70 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


N0TICE!  . 

My  wife  Sophia  Pickles  having  left  my  bed  and  board  with- 

out  just  cause  or  provocation,  I  shall  not  be  responsible  for  bills 

of  her  contracting. 

Solomon  Pickles 

NOTICE!  .  , ,  ,  .  , 

I  take  this  means  of  saying  that  Solomon  Picldes  has  had  no 

bed  or  board  for  me  to  leave  for  the  last  two  months. 

Sophia  Pickles 

Another  story  which  they  repeated,  liking  its  porten¬ 
tous  inference  lacking  fact,  was  this;  the  Nurse  speaks 
first. 

“Nurse,”  says  he,  kind  of  high  and  haughty-like,  “what  is 

your  opinion?”  .  •  u 

“Doctor,”  says  I,  kind  of  low  and  deferential-like,  “I  am  of 

your  opinion.” 

“And  what  was  his  opinion?”  asked  the  listener. 

“Lord  bless  you,  my  dear,  he  hadn’t  any!” 

Her  brother’s  children  never  forgot  the  Sunday  when 
he  repeated  at  the  dinner  table  a  few  of  the  hymns  of  his 
upbringing,  their  teeth  chattering  at  his  rendition  of 

“My  thoughts  on  awful  subjects  roll  — 
Damnation  and  the  Dead!” 

Emily  had  about  this  time  quite  a  spicy  affair  with  a 
young  law  student  in  her  father’s  office,  an  habitue  of  the 
house  who  was  bewitched  with  her  and  certainly  added 
quite  an  amount  of  variety,  if  only  as  another  objective 
for  her  own  mental  sallies.  He  became  a  confirmed 
bachelor,  but  she  assailed  him  with  a  valentine  unique 
in  that  Saint’s  calendar,  and  he  brought  her  many  books, 
among  which  were  the  first  copies  of  the  Bronte  girls’ 
strange  stories,  from  “Jane  Eyre”  to  “Wuthering 
Heights”  and  the  “Tenant  of  Wildfell  Hall.” 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 


71 


The  Civil  War,  for  which  Amherst  furnished  a  proud 
quota,  must  have  crashed  in  on  the  seclusion  of  Emily’s 
thought,  thrilling  her  as  drum  and  fife  —  but  the  personal 
realization  of  it  did  not  come  to  her  until  Fraser  Stearns, 
son  of  President  Stearns,  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  New- 
bern  in  1862. 

This  was  her  first  intimate  reaction  to  the  universal 
tragedy,  and  she  wrote  poignantly  of  it  to  more  than  one 
friend;  also  of  trying  to  do  all  in  her  power  to  comfort  his 
family  —  especially  the  young  sister,  Ella  (afterward 
Mrs.  James  Lee,  of  Boston),  of  whom  she  was  always 
devotedly  fond. 

It  was  in  1862  also  that  her  literary  philandering  with 
Colonel  Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson  began  through  a 
stray  note  of  admiration  from  her  for  his  article  in  the 
“Atlantic  Monthly”  on  the  “Procession  of  the  Flowers,” 
sent  her  by  Sister  Sue.  Her  family  viewed  the  ensuing  cor¬ 
respondence  between  them  as  a  diverting  interlude  rather 
than  a  serious  instruction,  for,  though  she  addressed 
him  as  “Dear  Master”  with  an  outward  show  of  docile 
humility,  she  never  changed  one  line  to  please  him.  He 
heard  from  her  in  camp  during  the  Civil  W  ar,  which  he 
entered  in  a  volunteer  regiment  in  1863,  and  it  was  in  the 
September  of  that  same  year  that  her  eyes  necessitated 
her  going  to  Boston  for  serious  treatment,  which  ab¬ 
breviated  her  correspondence  almost  to  entire  elimina 
tion  for  some  time. 

From  the  close  of  the  war  until  1868  their  relations 
seem  to  have  remained  as  a  comedy  version  of  Browning  s 
“Statue  and  the  Bust.”  Their  letters  were  all  they  knew 
of  each  other.  For  one  reason  or  another  he  was  pre¬ 
vented  from  visiting  Amherst  and  she  was  disinclined  to 


72  EMILY  DICKINSON 

leave  home,  even  to  visit  her  relatives  in  Boston.  His 
letters  to  her,  and  there  were  many  of  them,  she  labelled 
to  be  burned  upon  her  death;  her  chivalry  outrunning  his 
publication  of  her  little  impulsive  notes  to  him,  published 
with  his  own  comment.  One  of  his  somehow  did  escape 
into  Sister  Sue’s  papers,  and  in  this,  dated  May,  1868,  he 
says  eagerly: 

Sometimes  I  take  out  your  letters  and  verses,  dear  friend,  and 
when  I  feel  their  strange  power,  it  is  not  strange  that  I  find  it 
hard  to  write  and  that  long  months  pass.  I  have  the  greatest 
desire  to  see  you,  always  feeling  that  perhaps  if  I  could  once 
take  you  by  the  hand  I  might  be  something  to  you;  but  till  then 
you  only  enshroud  yourself  in  this  fiery  mist  and  I  cannot  reach 
you,  but  only  rejoice  in  the  rare  sparkles  of  light.  Every  year  I 
think  I  will  go  to  Amherst  and  contrive  to  see  you  somehow,  but 
that  is  hard,  for  I  am  obliged  to  go  away  for  lecturing,  etc., 
often  and  rarely  can  go  for  pleasure.  I  would  gladly  go  to 
Boston  at  any  practicable  time  to  meet  you.  I  am  always  the 
same  toward  you,  and  never  relax  my  interest  in  what  you  send 
to  me.  I  should  like  to  hear  from  you  very  often,  but  feel  always 
timid  lest  what  I  write  should  be  badly  aimed  and  miss  that  fine 
edge  of  thought  which  you  bear.  It  would  be  so  easy  to  miss 
you.  Still  you  see  I  try.  I  think  if  I  could  once  see  you  and 
know  that  you  are  real  I  might  fare  better.  It  brought  you 
nearer  to  know  you  had  an  actual  uncle  —  though  I  can  hardly 
fancy  two  beings  less  alike.  I  have  not  seen  him  for  several 
years,  though  I  have  seen  a  lady  who  once  knew  you,  but 
could  not  tell  me  much.  It  is  hard  for  me  to  understand 
how  you  can  live  so  alone  —  with  thoughts  of  such  a  rar¬ 
ity  coming  up  in  you  and  even  the  companionship  of  your 
dog  withdrawn.  Yet  it  isolates  one  anywhere  to  think  beyond  a 
certain  point,  or  have  such  flashes  as  come  to  you  —  so  perhaps 
the  place  does  not  make  much  difference.  You  must  come  down 
to  Boston  sometimes?  All  ladies  do.  I  wonder  if  it  would  be 
possible  to  lure  you  to  the  meetings  on  the  thirtieth  of  every 
month  at  Mrs.  Sargent’s,  13  Chestnut  Street,  at  ten  a.m.,  where 
somebody  reads  a  paper  and  others  talk  or  listen.  Next  Mon¬ 
day  Mrs.  Emerson  reads  and  then  at  three  and  a  half  p.m.  there 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 


73 


is  a  meeting  of  the  Woman’s  Club  at  3  Tremont  Place,  where  I 
read  a  paper  on  the  Greek  Goddesses.  That  would  be  a  good 
time  for  you  to  come,  though  I  should  still  rather  have  you 
come  on  some  day  when  I  shall  not  be  so  much  taken  up,  for  my 
object  is  to  see  you,  more  than  to  entertain  you.  I  shall  be  in 
Boston  also  during  anniversary  week,  June  25th,  or  will  the 
Musical  Festival  in  June  tempt  you?  You  see  I  am  in  earnest. 
Or  don’t  you  need  sea  air  in  Summer?  Write  and  tell  me  some¬ 
thing  in  prose  or  verse,  and  I  will  be  less  fastidious  in  future  and 
willing  to  write  clumsy  things  rather  than  none. 

Ever  your  friend  — 

P.S.  There  is  an  extra  meeting  at  Mrs.  Sargent’s  that  day 
and  Mr.  Weiss  reads  an  essay.  I  have  a  right  to  invite  you  and 
you  can  merely  ring  and  walk  in. 

To  which  she  replied  in  a  letter  full  of  gratitude  and 
grace,  but  as  Shakespeare’s  Imogen  might  have  spoken, 
“I  do  not  cross  my  father’s  ground  to  any  house  or  town.” 
In  August  of  the  same  year  1870  he  went  to  see  her  at 
Amherst  instead.  After  this  until  her  death  their 
friendship  and  correspondence  continued  uninterrupted. 

Her  cousins  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross,  relatives  on 
her  mother’s  side,  were  her  beloved  always.  The  winters 
they  spent  at  the  Hotel  Berkeley  in  Boston,  when  she 
was  with  them  at  brief  intervals,  she  never  ceased  to  look 
back  upon  lovingly,  even  wistfully  and  they,  too,  were 
of  her  elect  from  whom  she  never  ran  away.  Her  Southern 
cousin,  Perez  Cowan,  a  Carolinian,  was  another  of  her 
favored  relatives,  for  whom  she  had  a  real  affection.  His 
softer  accent,  genial  manner  relieved  of  the  New  England 
stiffness,  loosened  her  shy  tongue  and  appealed  to  her 
eager  imagination.  His  coming  was  always  a  tropic, 
though  she  could  never  be  prevailed  upon  for  a  return 
visit  upon  any  of  the  family  “below  the  frost  line.” 

Her  correspondence  with  Mr.  C.  H.  Clarke,  whom  she 


74 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


met  but  once,  continued  until  just  before  death,  another 
evidence  of  the  inclusive  quality  of  her  human  sympathy. 

Emily’s  childhood  intimacy  with  Helen  Hunt  J ackson, 
later  the  author  of  “Mercy  Philbrick’s  Choice,”  “Ra¬ 
mona,”  etc.,  was  one  of  her  dearest  pleasures.  “H.  H.,” 
as  her  books  were  signed,  would  be  driven  into  town  with 
a  pair  of  smashing  grey  horses,  which  were  dramatically 
walked  up  and  down  before  the  house,  while  the  two 
charmers  visited  together  behind  the  closed  blinds.  From 
girlhood  Helen  looked  up  to  Emily  as  something  super¬ 
natural,  and  Emily  returned  her  adoration,  calling  Helen 
a  witch,  but  never  succumbing  to  her  repeated  requests 
for  material  for  publication.  Helen  Hunt  was  herself  a 
siren  who  enchanted  all  men’s  hearts  —  a  hopeless 
coquette  from  her  youth  up,  worldly  where  Emily  was 
secluded,  expressive  while  Emily  was  reserved,  a  charmer 
of  charmers,  who  never  let  go  her  hold  on  the  hand  of  the 
little  girl  she  played  wTith  under  the  syringas,  and  never 
lost  a  chance  to  come  back  and  warm  herself  at  the  fire  of 
that  deathless  altar. 

What  they  talked  of  none  can  ever  know,  for  the  door 
was  shut  upon  their  hours  together,  and  not  one  member 
of  the  family  ever  dared  invade.  Their  partings  over¬ 
heard  were  like  those  of  desperate  final  sundered  souls; 
but  both  were  dramatic  of  temperament  and  to  Emily  the 
darkness  was  denser  always  after  the  radiant  passage  of 
one  of  her  chosen.  Helen  always  preferred  Emily  in 
genius  and  power,  and  considered  herself  but  a  small 
spark  beside  her.  Her  generosity  of  appreciation  was 
boundless  and  wTell  groimded.  Her  letters  from  Emily,  as 
well  as  hers  to  Emily,  were  believed  to  have  been  burned 
at  last  in  accordance  with  their  own  agreement. 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 


75 


“Mercy  Philb rick’s  Choice”  in  the  No  Name  Series 
was  attributed  to  Emily,  but  denied  in  a  single  white 
glance  of  repudiation  from  Emily  that  such  could  be 
thought  possible.  One  poem  “H.  H.”  did  publish  at  her 
own  risk,  but  Emily  never  knew  it  until  the  book  ap¬ 
peared  called  “A  Masque  of  Poets.”  She  could  not  even 
dimly  understand  Helen’s  merry  protestation  that  it  was 
fun  to  make  people  wonder  and  keep  them  guessing.  She 
did  not  want  them  even  to  suspect  about  her  —  guessing 
was  the  last  of  her  inclinations  toward  herself.  Mr. 
Sweetser’s  looking  at  her  in  the  old  church  was  all  she 
wanted  of  publicity,  bless  her!  That  was  almost  more 
even  than  she  could  endure. 

Helen  out  in  the  world,  courted,  quoted,  envied,  a 
beauty  always,  full  of  social  ease  and  grace,  brought  the 
world,  like  an  attar  of  fantastic  blend,  to  her  little  white- 
robed  hostess,  who  gave  in  return  her  heart’s  devotion 
and  a  deeper  glance  at  life  and  trust  than  any  Society 
could  ever  teach  or  bestow.  “When  you  are  dead  you 
will  be  sorry  you  were  so  selfish!”  Helen  threw  back  at 
her  gaily,  when  she  had  again  refused  to  meet  some  other 
friend  proposed.  It  was  through  Helen  Hunt  that  her 
friendship  with  Mr.  Thomas  Niles  began,  after  her  poem 
“Success”  was  pirated,  and  though  she  wrote  to  him  and 
sent  him  a  poem  now  and  then  he  could  never  induce  her 
to  publish.  Emily  had  spirit  relations  with  her  living, 
actual  neighbors,  much  such  as  are  now  broadcasted 
through  the  air,  sending  her  notes  on  special  occasions, 
or  with  flowers  or  some  of  her  exquisite  cookery  in  return 
for  their  little  attentions  to  her  hidden  presence.  It  is 
impossible  to  cite  them  all;  the  Jenkinses,  the  Mathers, 
the  Bliss  family,  returned  from  Syria  for  the  education 


76 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


of  the  sons,  were  those  nearest.  Most  of  them  she 
seldom  saw;  they  hardly  expected  her  to  see  them. 
Royalty  was  never  more  intact,  though  her  methods 
were  so  simple,  her  spirit  guileless  of  it  as  guile.  Mrs. 
John  Anthon,  with  just  a  touch  of  Irish  blood  in  her 
veins,  was  a  gay  madcap  of  a  girl,  solemnized  by  cruel 
sorrow  later  in  life,  but  always  witty  and  of  blessed  sym¬ 
pathy  and  humor.  From  their  first  meeting,  when  as 
Kate  Scott  she  was  living  in  the  old  Fenimore  Cooper 
mansion  at  Cooperstown,  Emily’s  heart  “voted  for  her. 
Living  abroad  as  she  did,  she  brought  the  very  breath  of 
life  during  her  rare  visits,  and  was  one  of  the  dwindling 
few  Emily  never  refused  to  see,  going  over  to  her  brother’s 
home  when  she  was  there,  long  after  her  earlier  stages  of 
seclusion. 

Maria  Whitney  was  a  friend  of  her  maturer  years,  but 
another  sacredly  treasured  one.  Their  visits  were  also 
in  the  darkened  library,  hand  in  hand  on  the  little  sofa  by 
the  fire,  and  with  them,  two  intellects  met  as  equals. 
Miss  Whitney  was  the  sister  of  Professor  William  Whit¬ 
ney,  of  Yale,  and  another  brother  was  Professor  Josiah 
Whitney,  of  Harvard.  She  lived  at  Northampton  in  the 
original  Jonathan  Edwards  house,  under  the  majestic 
Jonathan  Edwards  elms,  and  was  in  many  ways  Emily’s 
antithesis  —  keen,  scientific,  agnostic,  schooled  in  Ger¬ 
man  criticism,  a  cool  thinker,  influenced  by  her  brother’s 
ideas,  saying  calmly:  “It  is  a  great  grief  to  me  that  I 
cannot  accept  the  Christian  faith”;  subjected  to  church 
admonishment  for  wearing  a  red  silk  petticoat  on  her 
return  from  years  of  study  in  Europe;  later  a  professor 
of  old  German  in  Smith  College,  a  woman  of  unusual 
attainments  and  profound  convictions,  rational,  calm. 


1 


/ 


MARIA  WHITNEY 


J 3 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 


77 


true  as  steel  to  friend  or  conviction,  who  turned  to  Emily 
to  probe  for  her  deeper  than  the  schools  had  been  able, 
and  out-soar  the  obstacles  that  hindered  her  own  mind. 

Grey-eyed,  pale,  keen,  crisp  of  tongue  from  the  habit 
of  clean  thought  and  the  study  of  languages  other  than 
her  own,  their  apparent  contrast  mated  unerringly,  and 
they  never  missed  a  chance  to  match  discoveries  or  com¬ 
pare  revelations.  In  those  days  a  free-thinker,  a  material¬ 
ist,  was  almost  a  felon.  For  a  woman  to  profess  such 
scepticism  was  daring  beyond  credibility.  The  sincerity 
of  the  troubled  inability  “to  believe”  was  undoubted  in 
this  case,  and  it  must  have  set  Emily  off  on  boundless 
conjecture,  encountered  at  such  close  and  resolute  range. 

But  after  all  her  faithful  devotion  to  her  friends  of 
girlhood  is  cited,  those  she  professed  profligate-hearted 
from  start  to  finish  of  her  solitary  life,  there  was  but  one 
to  whom  she  entrusted  the  secret  of  her  self.  Many 
instances  are  in  existence  still  of  her  referring  to  her  sister- 
in-law’s  judgment  in  all  literary  matters.  The  poem 
called  “A  Syllable”  in  the  published  collection  was  orig¬ 
inally  written  with  a  second  verse*. 

Could  any  mortal  lip  divine 
The  elemental  freight 
Of  undeveloped  syllable 
’Twould  crumble  with  the  weight, 

The  prey  of  unknown  zones, 

The  pillage  of  the  sea, 

These  tabernacles  of  the  mind 
That  told  the  news  to  me. 

The  poem  which  published  reads  “A  modest  lot,  a 
fame  petite,”  originally  had  a  first  verse  sent  with  it: 

A  little  bread,  a  crust,  a  crumb, 

A  little  trust,  a  demijohn, 


78 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Can  keep  the  soul  alive  — 

Not  portly,  mind! 

But  breathing,  warm, 

Conscious,  as  old  Napoleon 
The  night  before  the  crown! 

The  resemblance  of  these  first  four  lines  to  the  now 
popular  quatrain  of  Omar  Khayyam  is  noteworthy,  as 
Emily  so  far  as  can  be  proved  never  saw  the  translations 
of  Fitzgerald,  though  they  were  published  in  England  in 
1858.  Her  Sister  Sue  never  saw  them  until  the  Houghton 
Mifflin  &  Company  American  edition  in  1888,  two  years 
after  Emily’s  death;  nor  were  they  among  her  books. 

She  was  always  eager  to  respond  to  Susan’s  criticism, 
and  when  the  first  pencilled  copy  was  sent  over  of  the 
poem,  “Safe  in  their  alabaster  chambers,”  it  was  re¬ 
turned  with  profound  admiration,  but  this  comment, 
“The  second  verse  is  not  frosty  enough  yet.”  To  which 
Emily  replied  next  day: 

Perhaps  this  would  suit  you  better,  Sue? 

Grand  go  the  years  in  the  crescent  above  them. 

Worlds  scoop  their  arcs 
And  firmaments  bow, 

Diadems  drop  and  Doges  surrender 
Soundless  as  dots  on  a  disc  of  snow. 

Is  this  frostier? 

Springs  shake  their  sills 
But  the  echoes  stiffen. 

Hoar  is  the  window  and  numb  the  door, 

Tribes  of  Eclipse  in  tents  of  marble 
Staples  of  Ages  have  buckled  there. 

The  first  variant  was  chosen,  and  so  appears  as  a  third 
stanza,  in  Volume  One  of  the  published  poems.  “In  this 
Wondrous  Sea”  was  sent  to  Susan  in  1848  when  she  was 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS  79 

but  eighteen  signed  “Emilie”:  after  the  whim  of  her 
girlhood. 

The  poem  entitled  “The  Master,”  as  written  “To 
Sue,”  reads,  “He  fumbles  at  your  soul,”  line  first;  in  line 
first  of  the  second  stanza,  “Prepares  your  brittle  nature” ; 
adding  two  lines  at  the  end: 

When  winds  take  forests  in  their  paws, 

The  Universe  is  still. 

The  critical  estimate  of  Emily’s  thought  and  her 
ultimate  place  in  American  literature  must  be  left  to  one 
more  wise,  better  qualified,  and  less  near  her  actual 
bewildering  personality.  It  may  be  pardonable  to  hint 
at  her  sagacity  of  words,  in  a  few  instances,  since  George 
Meredith  says,  “WTe  are  in  truth  indebted  for  expression 
to  those  who  phrase  us.”  She  sorted  and  tested  them  as  a 
wine-taster  in  his  cellar.  They  came,  for  the  most  part, 
but  often  another  came  too;  they  came  tandem  and  in 
pairs,  shouting  at  her  to  be  chosen.  The  joy  of  mere  words 
was  to  her  like  red  and  yellow  balls  to  the  juggler.  The 
animate  web  for  the  inanimate  thing,  the  ludicrous  ad¬ 
jective  that  turned  a  sentence  mountebank  in  an  instant, 
the  stringing  of  her  meaning  like  a  taut  bow  with  just  the 
economy  of  verbiage  possible,  the  unusual  phrase  re¬ 
deemed  from  usage  by  her  single  selected  specimen  of  her 
vocabulary  —  all  this  was  part  of  her  zestful  pieoccupa- 
tion.  For  example: 

It  was  like  a  breath  from  Gibraltar  to  hear  your  voice  again. 
Sue.  Your  impregnable  syllables  need  no  prop  to  stand. 

I  dreamed  of  you  last  night  and  send  a  carnation  to  endorse 

it. 

Your  little  mental  gallantries  are  sweet  as  chivalry  which 
is  to  me  a  shining  word,  though  I  don’t  know  what  it  means. 


80 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


The  dictionary  was  no  mere  reference  book  to  her;  she 
read  it  as  a  priest  his  breviary  —  over  and  over,  page 
by  page,  with  utter  absorption.  Emile  Hennequin  said, 
“Words  are  visions,  visions  ecstatic,  visions  chimerical, 
without  models,  without  objects;  ideals  rather  than  im¬ 
ages,  desires  rather  than  reminiscences.”  And  Emily: 

Susan  — 

A  little  overflowing  word, 

That  any  hearing  had  inferred 
For  ardor  or  for  tears, 

Though  Generations  pass  away, 

Traditions  ripen  and  decay, 

As  eloquent  appears. 

Emily 


Although  she  never  went  to  live  in  it  except  in  spirit, 
the  world  was  Emily’s  real  neighborhood.  George 
Eliot’s  works  she  called  “that  lane  to  the  Indies  Columbus 
was  trying  to  find.”  Longfellow,  Tennyson,  the  Brown¬ 
ings,  Socrates,  Plato,  Poe,  and  the  Bible  sift  through  her 
conversation;  Keats  and  Holmes,  Ik  Marvel,  Haw¬ 
thorne  —  “  who  appals  and  entices”  —  Howells  and  Em¬ 
erson,  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  De  Quincey,  George  Sand, 
Lowell  —  whose  “Winter”  enthralled  her  for  days  at  a 
time  she  declared  —  and  perhaps  differently  from  all  the 
rest  the  Brontes,  all  three,  Charlotte,  Anne,  and  Emily ! 
Shakespeare  always  and  forever,  Othello  her  chosen 
villain,  with  Macbeth  familiar  as  the  neighbors  and  Lear 
driven  into  exile  as  vivid  as  if  occurring  on  the  hills  before 
her  door.  She  “watched  like  a  vulture  for  Cross’s  ‘Life’ 
of  his  wife,”  the  criticism  and  joy  of  literature  running 
through  her  letters  as  her  conversation. 

She  always  read  Frank  Sanborn’s  letters  in  the  columns 
of  the  “Springfield  Republican”  for  their  reflection  of  the 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 


81 


art  and  literature  of  his  period,  and  was  glad  a  friend 
heard  Rubinstein  for  her,  adding  “he  makes  me  think  of 
polar  nights.’’  She  mentioned  her  sister  as  Vinnie, 
spectacular  as  Disraeli  and  sincere  as  Gladstone,”  and 
alludes  to  “a  new  pussy  the  colour  of  Bramwell  Bronte’s 
hair.”  One  gets  her  feeling  for  Wordsworth  by  one  of 
these  oblique  slants  when  she  remembers  her  cousin’s 
sitting-room  at  the  Berkeley  “as  the  poets  thought  of 
Windymere.” 

“David  Copperfield”  was  published  when  she  was 
twenty-one,  and  Dickens  was  always  a  favorite  or  her 
father’s,  so  that  many  of  the  expressions  used  in  his 
stories  became  household  words.  “Donkeys,  Davy,” 
was  flung  back  over  Emily  s  shoulder  as  she  fled  fiom 
unwelcome  visitors.  The  drollery  of  Dickens  was  con¬ 
genial  to  her  sense  of  the  ludicrous,  and  Barkis  is 
willin’  ”  was  a  message  carried  more  than  once  by  the 
children  between  her  and  their  mother  without  any  real¬ 
ization  of  its  import. 

She  was  keenly  interested  in  the  Egyptian  campaign  o 
Arabi  Pasha  against  the  allied  French  and  English, 
alluding  to  his  defeat  at  Tel-el-Kebir,  after  the  bombard¬ 
ment  of  Alexandria,  with  a  grasp  of  European  affairs 
and  interest  in  their  great  statesmen  unique  among  the 
women  of  her  day,  who  chiefly  overheard  their  newspaper 
information  at  scattered  male  dictation.  “Will  you  have 
Theophilus  or  Junius?  ”  she  offers  Mr.  Bowles  for  a  birth¬ 
day  gift.  He  called  her  his  Rascal  —  with  a  gleam  in  his 
eyes  in  speaking  of  her  like  that  of  freshets  breaking 
loose.  “Part  angel,  part  demon,”  he  said  once,  when  she 
refused  to  see  him  after  he  had  driven  over  from  Spring- 
field  for  that  peculiar  pleasure.  It  was  his  custom  to  bring 


82 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


to  her  the  manuscripts  of  famous  writers,  before  pub¬ 
lication,  and  when  he  entertained  Canon  Kingsley,  Bret 
Harte,  Charles  Dickens,  or  any  other  author  of  note,  he 
would  share  his  impressions  of  them  first-hand  with  her; 
often  reading  her  notes  to  him  to  those  he  considered  able 
to  follow  her  meteoric  flights.  She  counted  him  among 
her  brightest  beacons,  and  when  his  Life  and  Letters  was 
about  to  be  published  in  1885  wrote  — 

Dear  Sue: 

It  seems  like  a  memoir  of  the  sun  when  the  Noon  is  gone !  You 
remember  his  swift  way  of  wringing  and  flinging  away  a  theme, 
and  others  picking  it  up  and  gazing  bewildered  after  him;  and 
the  prance  that  crossed  his  eyes  at  such  times  was  unrepeatable. 

Emily  was  a  fond  reader  of  Ik  Marvel.  On  receiving  a 
copy  of  “Dream  Life”  from  her  brother  she  wrote  back: 

It  is  not  nearly  so  great  a  book  as  “Reveries  of  a  Bachelor,” 
yet  I  think  it  full  of  the  very  sweetest  fancies,  and  more  exqui¬ 
site  language  I  defy  any  man  to  use.  On  the  whole  I  enjoyed  it 
very  much,  but  I  can’t  help  wishing  that  he  had  been  trans¬ 
lated  like  Enoch  of  old,  after  his  bachelor  reverie,  and  chariot 
of  fire  and  the  horsemen  thereof  were  all  that  had  been  seen  of 
him  ever  after. 

In  the  winter  of  1857,  Emerson  was  her  brother’s 
guest.  There  is  no  mention  of  their  having  met  —  inex¬ 
plicable  as  it  seems  —  but  in  a  note  to  her  Sister  Sue 
after  his  departure  she  says,  “It  must  have  been  as  if  he 
had  come  from  where  dreams  are  born!” 

She  wrote  to  Sister  Sue  as  if  it  were  perfectly  probable: 

Dreamed  of  your  meeting  Tennyson  at  Ticknor  and  Fields 
last  night.  Where  the  treasure  is  the  heart  is  also. 

When  Howells  first  appeared  in  the  magazine  of  which 
Dr.  Holland  was  editor,  Emily  wrote: 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 


83 


Doctor  — 

How  did  you  snare  Howells? 

* 


His  reply  came  back: 

Emily  — 

Money  did  it. 


Emily 


Holland 


Her  books  and  authors  were  a  vital  part  of  her  happi¬ 
ness.  On  the  walls  of  her  own  room  hung  framed  portraits 
of  Mrs.  Browning,  George  Eliot,  and  Carlyle.  If  only 
Emily  could  have  heard  the  question  an  old  family  re¬ 
tainer,  assisting  at  the  time  of  Emily’s  death,  asked 
diffidently,  after  some  hesitation,  if  they  were  “relatives 
on  the  Norcross  side  ” ;  adding  hastily,  “  I  know  they  can’t 
be  Dickinsons,  for  I  have  seen  all  of  them  and  they  are  all 
good-looking.” 

In  writing  her  letters  to  friends  at  a  distance,  she  seems 
to  show  an  accumulated  sadness  which  in  her  intercourse 
with  those  about  her  she  rarely  if  ever  permitted  ex¬ 
pression.  No  one  of  her  family  in  either  house  ever  as¬ 
sociated  her  with  sadness  or  any  tendency  toward  indulg¬ 
ence  of  heaviness  of  spirit,  though  solemnity  was  her 
normal  attitude  toward  life  and  like  those  golden  Floren¬ 
tines  “she  was  eternally  preoccupied  with  death.” 

When  her  father  died,  however,  in  June,  1874,  the 
very  foundations  of  life  trembled  under  her.  He  was 
stricken  in  the  House  of  Representatives  in  the  State 
House,  Boston,  where  he  had  gone  to  serve  the  local 
interests  of  his  town,  and  died  without  recovering  con¬ 
sciousness,  at  the  Tremont  House,  before  any  of  his 
family  could  reach  him.  Her  brother  Austin  had  to 
break  the  news  to  the  three  worshipping  women  of  the 


84 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


end  of  that  ideal  unbroken  family  life,  and  it  was 
for  the  effect  upon  Emily  that  the  task  was  especially 
dreaded. 

She  describes  it  afterward  in  a  line: 

We  were  eating  our  supper  when  Austin  came  in. . . .  He  had 
a  despatch  in  his  hand,  and  I  saw  by  his  face  that  we  were  all 
lost,  though  I  did  not  know  how. 

For  a  time  it  seemed  as  if  her  mind  could  not  sustain 
the  blow.  His  death  seemed  to  reverse  all  laws  of  nature 
or  mind  for  Emily.  No  one  who  heard  her  repeated  cry, 
“Where  is  he?  I  can’t  find  him!”  could  ever  forget  it,  or 
those  days  of  abyss  when  her  face  wore  a  stricken  ex¬ 
pression  of  surprise  that  the  world  and  stars  could  slip 
from  their  orbits  and  leave  such  confusion. 

She  never  quite  recovered  her  faith  in  life,  and  just  a 
year  later  her  mother  was  paralyzed.  All  through  the 
long,  tedious  invalidism  following,  Emily  ministered  to 
her  with  a  tenderness  as  to  one  also  bound  for  the  super¬ 
natural  and  to  be  cherished  as  a  temporary  guest  of  the 
heart,  already  half  an  angel.  Two  such  calamities  shook 
her  belief  in  stability  of  this  world  of  hers,  where  she  had 
been  the  child  of  parents  permanent  and  equal  to  all  her 
natural  demand  of  care  and  continuance.  “The  beginning 
of  always  is  more  dreadful  than  the  close  for  that  is 
sustained  by  flickering  identity,”  she  wrote  her  Sister  Sue. 

The  deaths  of  Samuel  Bowles  in  1878  and  Dr.  Holland 
in  1881  were  two  more  links  broken,  and  these  were 
followed  by  the  loss  of  Judge  Lord,  now  both  father 
and  friend. 

In  the  autumn  of  1883  her  youngest  nephew,  Gilbert, 
died  after  an  illness  of  only  three  days  and  shattered  the 
goldenest  intimacy  she  had  left.  He  was  a  precocious  and 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS 


85 


brilliant  child.  Emily  idolized  him  from  his  birth  and  only 
after  days  of  stricken  silence  recovered  from  the  blow 
sufficiently  to  write  his  mother: 

Dear  Sue  — 

The  vision  of  immortal  life  has  been  fulfilled.  How  simply  at 
last  the  fathom  comes!  The  passenger  and  not  the  sea  surprises 
us.  Gilbert  rejoiced  in  secrets.  His  life  was  panting  with  them. 
With  what  a  menace  of  light  he  cried,  “ Don’t  tell,  Aunt  Emily.” 
My  ascended  playmate  must  instruct  me  now.  Show  us, 
prattling  preceptor,  but  the  way  to  thee !  He  knew  no  niggard 
moment.  His  life  was  full  of  boon.  The  playthings  of  the 
Dervish  were  not  so  wild  as  his.  No  crescent  was  this  creature 
—  he  travelled  from  the  full.  Such  soar,  but  never  set.  I  see 
him  in  the  star  and  meet  his  sweet  velocity  in  everything  that 
flies. 

His  life  was  like  a  bugle 
That  winds  itself  away: 

His  elegy  an  echo, 

His  requiem  ecstasy. 

Dawn  and  meridian  in  one,  wherefore  should  he  wait,  wronged 
only  of  night,  which  he  left  for  us?  Pass  to  thy  rendezvous  of 
light  pangless  except  for  us  who  slowly  ford  the  mystery  which 
thou  hast  leapt  across! 

And  during  these  years  of  increasing  isolation  it  was 
to  her  work  she  turned  for  relief  and  renewal.  She  ad¬ 
mitted  she  was  besieged  for  poems,  but  held  her  peace, 
working  because  “it  kept  the  awe  away,”  though  in  other 
mood  she  confessed  it  “a  bleak  redeeming.” 

From  the  time  of  her  father’s  death  she  never  left  the 
house,  except  to  flit  about  the  porch  at  dusk  to  water  her 
frail  plants  —  set  just  outside  in  summer  —  looking  in 
her  white  dress  like  just  another  moth  fluttering  in  the 
twilights.  The  red  army  blanket  that  was  thrown  down 
on  the  dewy  grass  to  prevent  her  taking  cold  was  the  only 
bit  of  color  associated  with  her,  and  the  origin  of  the 


86  EMILY  DICKINSON 

many  fanciful  tales  of  a  red  carpet  spread  before  her 
when  she  went  beyond  the  door. 

It  is  at  this  time  she  wrote: 

There  is  no  first  or  last  in  Forever.  It  is  Centre  there  all  the 
time.  To  believe  is  enough  and  the  right  of  supposing. 

She  had  never  told  her  family  of  her  writing  and  they 
never  dared  ask.  She  never  showed  what  she  wrote  to 
them.  Her  timidity  awed  their  love  and  New  England 
reserve  completed  the  deadlock.  Once  and  only  once  her 
sister-in-law  published  a  poem  of  hers  incognita,  and 
when  she  showed  it  to  Emily,  in  the  darkest,  entiiest 
privacy,  was  terrified  for  the  result  of  her  experiment  — 
the  little  white  moth  being  almost  fluttered  to  death,  all 
a-tremble  and  ready  to  die  of  the  experience  and  be 
found  on  the  floor  next  morning  a  mere  hint  of  winged 
dust!  She  seemed  to  know  the  world  from  intuition,  but 
to  shrink  from  that  which  sends  the  soft  bright-eyed 
things  flying  from  us  in  the  forest.  All  the  while  she  was 
writing  and  selecting  and  tying  up  her  poems  in  slender 
packages  with  a  single  thread,  another  Lady  of  Shalott 
at  her  subtler  tapestries  that  were  to  amaze  her  readers 
when  her  little  boat  had  drifted  down  to  Camelot  forever. 

“There’s  substance  here”  might  have  been  truly  said 
of  her  mentality,  even  when  the  supernatural  began  to 
outweigh  the  actual  in  her  consideration.  This  was  no 
empty  yearning  after  a  lost  romance,  no  idle  acceptance 
of  passivity.  Up  to  the  last,  when  blow  after  blow  had 
stunned  her,  Emily  kept  her  vital  creative  force  intact. 
Watched  over  by  her  sister  and  what  Mr.  Henry  James 
once  called  “an  archaic  Irish  servant,”  she  was  with 
difficulty  kept  at  home  in  the  flesh  those  last  years;  seeing 
her  brother’s  family  at  rarer  intervals,  and  still  sending 


FRIENDS  AND  BOOKS  87 

her  pencilled  messages,  among  which  are  the  few  quoted 
at  random : 

* 

Great  hungers  feed  themselves  but  little  hungers  ail  in  vain. 

Never  mind,  dear,  trial  as  a  stimulus  far  exceeds  wine  though 
it  could  hardly  be  prohibited  as  a  beverage. 

A  promise  is  firmer  than  a  hope.  Hope  never  knew  horizon. 
Awe  is  the  first  hand  that  is  held  to  us.  Hopelessness  in  its  first 
film  had  not  life  to  last.  That  would  close  the  spirit,  and  no 
intercession  could  do  that.  Intimacy  with  mystery  after  great 
space  will  usurp  its  place.  Moving  on  in  the  dark  like  loaded 
boats  at  night,  though  there  is  no  course,  there  is  boundlessness. 
Expanse  cannot  be  lost. 

Morning  might  come  by  accident,  Sister, 

Night  comes  by  event  — 

To  believe  the  final  line  of  the  card 
Would  foreclose  Faith, 

Faith  is  doubt,  Sister. 

Show  me  Eternity,  and 
I  will  show  you  memory  — 

Both  in  one  package  lain 
And  lifted  back  again. 

Be  Sue  while  I  am  Emily, 

Be  next  what  you  have  ever  been  — 

Infinity. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

HEE  RELIGION 

The  village  church  in  the  forties  as  described  by  her 
Sister  Sue  must  have  bred  either  mysticism  or  madness 
in  a  soul  like  that  of  Emily  Dickinson. 

It  stood  on  the  hill  at  the  head  of  the  village  common,  swept 
by  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  Architecture  was  never  thought  of 
or  mentioned  in  those  days.  The  old  village  church  vith  its 
Grecian  pillars  was  late  in  its  life  a  target  for  any  lazy  wit,  but 
that  it  survived  beheading  once,  and  lived  bravely  on  in  spite  of 
jests,  and  stands  to-day  with  little  external  change  rather 
Grecian  in  effect  —  defying  its  malefactors,  bespeaks  its  in¬ 
tegrity  of  composition. 

The  original  interior  was  truly  an  odd  picture.  There 
were  high  pews  painted  white,  with  doors  fastened  se¬ 
curely  by  brass  buttons,  affording  something  of  a  sense  of 
tribal  ownership  and  comfort  in  the  owner’s  sentiment 
of  worship.  These  doors  were  too  often  carelessly 
slammed,  but  that  only  set  off  the  noise  made  by  the 
sexton  just  as  the  sermon  ended,  throwing  open  the  doors 
of  the  two  cast-iron  box  stoves  with  violence  and  hurling 
strange-looking  geometrical  wood,  called  felly  wood,  into 
their  vast  satanic  depths,  so  that  the  farmers  and  their 
families,  who  remained  for  afternoon  service  at  one 
o’clock,  might  warm  their  half-frozen  members  and  re¬ 
fill  their  foot  stoves.  During  the  noon  interval,  as  they 
sat  about  the  red-hot  stove  on  the  circular  seats,  neigh¬ 
borly  visiting  was  indulged  in,  with  low  sad  tones.  A 
meagre  lunch  was  drawn  from  the  large  yellow  muffs  to 
stay  them  up  for  the  long  later  service,  while  from  the 


HER  RELIGION 


89 


same  capacious  quarter  small  soapstones  were  drawn  to 
be  re-heated  for  the  cold  drive  home  in  the  early  winter 
dusk. 

The  light,  much  weather-stained  walls,  patched  and 
cracked,  were  brought  into  bold  relief  by  the  heavy 
mahogany  pulpit  and  the  really  immense  red  damask 
curtain  dropped  for  a  background.  Whoever  conceived 
and  executed  the  plan  of  that  end  of  the  meeting-house 
must  have  been  fresh  from  a  mince-pie  dream  of  Solo¬ 
mon’s  temple.  The  pulpit  was  so  high  the  minister  was 
obliged  to  infer  the  effect  of  his  sermon  chiefly  from  the 
tops  of  the  heads  and  bonnets  before  him,  to  the  exclusion 
of  more  normal  and  favorable  angles  for  sympathetic 
observation  of  human  expression.  Dr.  Dwight,  a  nephew 
of  President  Dwight,  of  Yale  College,  held  those  ramparts 
of  mahogany,  accepting  the  call  in  1850,  on  condition  of 
a  few  practical  changes  to  the  reverend  old  building. 

The  concessions  he  begged  were  that  the  tin  kettles 
hung  from  the  long  stovepipes  that  ran  from  the  stoves 
down  the  side  aisles  to  the  chimneys  in  the  opposite  walls 
— -  kettles  set  to  catch  the  black  creosote  that  dripped 
from  the  pipe  joints  —  might  be  abolished  by  some  in¬ 
genuity;  and  that  the  big  iron  catches  on  the  front  doors 
be  replaced  by  some  design  compelling  less  racket  in  the 
opening  and  closing.  Also  that  there  be  some  green  baize 
doors,  to  be  drawn  when  “the  house,”  as  everybody  called 
it,  was  filling.  Most  people  were  on  the  whole  not  dis¬ 
pleased  by  the  changes,  but  one  or  two  prominent  persons 
exclaimed  against  such  iconoclasms;  remarking  that  we 
“were  getting  too  refined.”  Dr.  Dwight  also  influenced 
the  congregation  to  remain  seated  during  the  last  hymn, 
instead  of  rising  and  facing  the  choir.  It  was  an  old  habit 


90  EMILY  DICKINSON 

that  died  hard,  and  there  was  smiling  among  the  young¬ 
sters  the  first  Sunday  it  was  tried,  when  one  lone  spinster 
spunkily  preserved  the  honored  custom. 

But  it  was  the  supplanting  of  the  bass  viol  by  the  organ 
that  was  most  sternly  resented  and  deplored.  “It  was  a 
step  toward  Romanism.”  It  was  a  wicked  outlay  of 
money.”  Deacon  Leland,  although  of  musical  repute, 
objected  stoutly  on  the  ground  that  it  made  his  wife  s 
head  ache.  And  worse  still  the  organist  was  a  young  and 
handsome  girl.  There  was  endless  opposition  to  the  new 
and  heavenly  aid  to  worship.  Deacon  Leland,  Deacon 
Sweetser,  and  Deacon  Muck,  who  did  not  dare  be  good 
and  graceful  too,  preserved  their  John  Calvin  sternness 
until  even  their  ice  cracked  under  the  new  force. 

There  were  sermons  of  mighty  power  preached  from 
that  tall  pulpit,  a  memorable  one  by  Dr.  Swift,  of  South 
Hadley,  “I  heard  Thy  voice  in  the  garden  and  was 
afraid,”  typical  of  the  prevailing  mood.  His  pronouncedly 
spiritual  physique  and  solemn  manner  added  to  the 
supernatural  awe  of  the  text.  Adam  s  apology,  not  then 
influenced  or  dissected  by  a  short  process  of  reductio  ad 
absurdum,  or  minute  German  scholarship,  became  a 
shrinking  experience  of  every  listening  soul  from  the 
white,  ineffable,  eternal  God.  At  the  close  there  was  left 
only  a  wide  cold  planetary  space,  void  of  all  save  sin  and 
its  consequence.  The  stillness  and  sobs  must  have  been 
proof  of  the  power  and  excitement  of  his  impassioned 
picture. 

What  the  shy  young  heart  of  Emily  Dickinson  felt  — 
whether  she  steeled  herself  not  to  think  or  no  no 
modern  mind  can  safely  conjecture.  That  she  had  a 
terror  of  God  on  the  Sabbath,  and  loved  his  creatures 


HER  RELIGION 


91 


and  his  sunshine  with  renewed  dearness  on  Monday,  is  a 
pretty  shrewd  guess.  The  awful  God  of  the  sanctuary, 
and  the  God  of  her  flowers,  or  the  wood,  or  her  friends 
was  a  reconcilement  easily  baffling  to  one  wiser  and  older 
than  she.  She  flouted  the  external  glooms  in  her  reaction¬ 
ary  moods,  made  fun  of  the  worthy  saints  of  local  fame, 
dashed  into  sacrilege  and  out  again  before  she  was  caught, 
all  the  while  dutifully  accompanying  her  family  with  due 
meekness  to  the  family  pew,  until  the  time  came  when  she 
gradually  was  allowed  to  set  up  her  own  church  within 
her  own  heart  at  home. 

The  form  and  substance  of  her  religion  were  hardly  on 
speaking  terms.  Her  letters  are  full  of  flashes  like  this 
called  forth  by  one  of  the  protracted  seasons  of  revival 
called  an  awakening — “I  know  of  no  choicer  ecstasy 
than  to  see  Mrs.  F  roll  out  in  crepe  every  morning,  I 
presume  to  intimidate  Antichrist.  She  scorned  hypoc¬ 
risy  and  writes  to  Sister  Sue: 

A  counterfeit,  a  plated  person  I  would  not  be. 

Whatever  strata  of 

Iniquity  my  nature  under-lie 

Truth  is  good,  health  and  safety  is  good  — 

And  the  sky. 

How  meagre  is  a  lie! 

And  vocal  when  we  die! 

Pecksniff 

To  her  nephew,  detained  from  church,  she  wrote: 

Sanctuary  privileges 
For  Ned,  as  he  is  unable  to  attend 

The  Bible  is  an  antique  volume 
Written  by  faded  men. 

At  the  suggestion  of  Holy  Spectres 

Subjects  —  Bethlehem 

Eden  —  the  ancient  Homestead 


92 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Ned  — 


Satan  —  the  Brigadier, 

Judas  —  the  great  Defaulter, 

David  —  the  Troubadour. 

Sin  —  a  distinguished  Precipice 
Others  must  resist. 

Boys  that  “believe” 

Are  very  lonesome  — 

Other  boys  are  “lost.” 

Had  but  the  tale  a  warbling  Teller 
All  the  boys  would  come  — 

Orpheus’  sermon  captivated, 

It  did  not  condemn. 

Emily 


The  Devil,  had  he  fidelity. 

Would  be  the  finest  friend  — 

Because  he  has  ability, 

But  Devils  cannot  mend. 

Perfidy  is  the  virtue 
That  would  he  but  resign,  — 

The  Devil,  so  amended. 

Were  durably  divine. 

Emily 


Often  and  often  her  best  quips  and  most  startling 
suggestions  come  in  her  allusions  to  the  Bible,  which  she 
uses  with  a  familiarity  unknown  to  her  time,  and  with  a 
spirit  of  equality  almost  jocular;  using  words  —  to 
others  of  her  same  conventional  training  —  unbelievably 
yoked.  “As  the  Bible  boyishly  says  —  new  every  morn¬ 
ing  and  fresh  every  evening”  —  is  one  of  her  adverbs 
forever  fresh  in  the  family  quotation. 

Paul  took  the  marine  walk  at  great  risk. 

“I  have  finished  the  faith,”  he  said;  we  rejoice  he  did  not 
say  discarded  it. 

Vinnie  is  picking  a  few  seeds,  for  if  a  pod  die,  shall  it  not  live 
again? 


HER  RELIGION 


93 


More  seriously  she  exclaims: 

Gethsemane  and  Cana  are  a  travelled  route  — 

So  loved  her  that  he  died  for  her,  says  the  explaining  Jesus. 

Could  character  be  more  shrewdly  epitomized  than  by 
this  terse  antithesis: 

To  do  a  magnanimous  thing  and  take  oneself  by  surprise,  if 
one  is  not  in  the  habit  of  it,  is  precisely  the  finest  of  joys.  Not 
to  do  a  magnanimous  thing,  notwithstanding  it  never  be 
known,  notwithstanding  it  cost  us  existence,  is  rapture  herself 
spurned. 

The  Church  dominated  all  life,  social  and  public,  in 
Amherst  in  the  mid-century,  but  the  religion  of  Emily 
Dickinson  was  not  a  blend  of  any  she  received  by  inherit¬ 
ance  or  instruction.  The  gentle  belief  of  her  mother  in  a 
God  who  would  hold  back  the  rain  until  after  the  hay  was 
in,  or  who  sent  the  undesirable  showers  to  prove  the  faith 
of  his  meek  followers  in  his  chastening  for  their  good,  or 
the  fear  of  God  that  sent  her  forth  in  her  best  shawl  of 
a  pleasant  afternoon  to  collect  the  annual  missionary 
money  for  her  church;  her  minute  abstinence  from  all 
labor  on  the  seventh  day,  her  punctilious  conscientious¬ 
ness  in  rectitude  and  mercy,  in  deeds  of  kindness  and 
faithfully  restrained  tongue,  was  too  limited,  too  earth- 
bound  for  Emily.  This  guileless  little  being,  timid,  yet 
one  of  the  most  persevering  of  saints,  gave  little  to  her 
daughter  which  explains  or  defines.  This  pattern  of  a 
good  and  amiable  housewife  and  mother  had  little  exhibi¬ 
tion  in  her  offspring,  except  for  the  gentleness  which  was 
always  a  predominant  characteristic,  the  supreme  gentle¬ 
ness  of  action  and  feeling. 

From  her  father  there  descended  upon  her  the  inward 
quality  of  her  own  outward  grace.  He  was  one  of  the 


94  EMILY  DICKINSON 

most  just,  loyal  and  reserved  souls  that  ever  avoided  cant 
or  religious  over-expression.  He  became  a  member  of  the 
village  church  rather  late  in  life,  having  served  its  parish 
in  almost  all  capacities.  His  confession  of  faith  was  a 
simply  expressed  desire  “to  be  a  better  man,  that  was 
touching  in  the  extreme  to  those  who  heard  his  clear  and 
crisp  statement  at  the  evening  meeting  of  his  friends  and 
neighbors.  He  was  a  man  of  sterling  purity  against  whom 
no  one  ever  had  taken  up  a  reproach,  a  friend  of  the  entire 
community,  a  notable  figure  of  the  County  Bar:  fulfilling 
nobly  his  ideal,  expressed  in  a  letter  to  his  wife  dated 
March  19, 1828,  a  few  weeks  before  their  marriage.  “  Let 
us  prepare  for  a  life  of  rational  happiness.  I  do  not  expect 
or  wish  for  a  life  of  pleasure!  May  we  be  happy  and  useful 
and  successful,  and  each  be  an  ornament  in  society  and 
gain  the  respect  and  confidence  of  all  with  whom  we  may 
be  connected.”  1 

Emily,  of  course,  attended  church  with  her  family  and 
heard  the  long  sermons  of  her  day  on  “foreordination 
whereby 5 5  —  etc.  The  incident  of  her  dear  friend  and 
parson,  Dr.  Dwight,  attempting  to  convert  her,  remains 
as  a  cherished  family  annal,  for  she  could  never  be  brought 
to  consider  God  as  an  enemy,  or  herself  as  hateful  in  his 

1  Springfield  Republican:  “  In  his  State,  and  particularly  in  its  western  section, 
he  has  long  ranked  among  the  few  ‘first  citizens,  honored  for  his  years  and 
public  services,  respected  for  his  sterling  good  sense  and  independence  of  char¬ 
acter,  revered  for  his  spotless  integrity  and  patriotic  self-sacrifice  to  public  duty, 
beloved  even  by  all  who  came  near  to  him  for  the  simple  truthfulness  and 
chivalric  tenderness  that  lay  deep  and  broad  in  the  base  of  his  nature.  He  has 
left  an  example  of  service  as  a  public-spirited  citizen  and  faithful  official  that 
both  in  quality  and  quantity  should  alone  make  him  an  historic  character  in 
Massachusetts.  He  was  indeed  a  New  England  Chevalier  Bayard,  without  fear 
and  without  reproach.  He  possessed  and  exhibited  that  rarest  and  yet  most 
needed  of  all  qualities  in  these  days  of  cowardly  conformity  and  base  com¬ 
plaisance,  —  the  courage  of  his  convictions.  This  was  the  essence  of  his  life.  This 
is  his  noblest  bequest  to  his  community  and  his  State.” 


HER  RELIGION 


95 


sight.  What  a  contrast  her  own  cry:  “Could  pathos 
compete  with  that  simple  statement,  —  ‘Not  that  we 
first  loved  Him,  but  that  He  first  loved  us’?”  But  the 
contribution  to  Faith  that  Emily  Dickinson  made  to  the 
world  will  some  day  be  definitely  recognized.  Her  way  of 
loving  God,  knowing  Him,  serving  Him,  was  as  ancient  as 
Brother  Lawrence,  as  modern  as  William  James.  Brother 
Lawrence  in  the  seventeenth  century  saying  the  smallest 
action  for  the  love  of  God  is  all,  and  Emily  saying,  “  The 
simplest  solace  with  a  loved  aim  has  a  heavenly  quality, 
are  really  more  than  paraphrase.  The  similarity  of  their 
source  of  power  parallels  in  his  letters  as  well  as  its  daily 
exhibition. 

She  had  the  soul  of  a  monk  of  the  Middle  Ages  bound 
up  in  the  flesh  of  Puritan  descent,  and,  from  Heaven 
only  knows  where,  all  the  fiery  quality  of  imagination  for 
which  genius  has  been  burned  at  the  stake  in  one  form  or 
another  since  the  beginning.  She  accepted  the  results  of 
her  training,  as  she  shows  in  her  attitude  that  if  He  be 
against  us  all  other  allies  are  useless!  Even  this  is  not  so 
much  resignation  of  the  true  brand  as  shrewd  observa¬ 
tion  in  result. 

One  of  the  students  of  her  poetry  —  himself  a  preacher 
of  brilliant  reputation  —  writes  of  her:  “Her  power  is 
really  the  unusual  degree  in  which  she  reflects  the  divine. 
...  If  her  genius  was  inspiration,  it  was  something  to 
which  every  soul  that  is  human  has  a  claim,  in  some 
humble  degree,  to  share;  and  the  way  in  which  she  lived 
deserved  study  for  the  light  it  may  throw  upon  what 
mankind  can  do  to  come  into  its  own  share  of  the  same 
gift.” 

She  was  not  a  pantheist,  though  she  saw  each  tree  and 


96 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


bush  “afire  with  God,”  and  each  revelation  of  twilight 
and  dawn  or  starry  sky  as  spread  forth  by  the  Eternal. 
Each  personality  had  a  dignity  that  lent  it  awe  to  her. 
She  was  respectful  to  every  mortal  as  to  every  worm  that 
crawls.  She  could  mock  or  epigramize  the  mean  or  out¬ 
rageous,  but  never  inflict  a  false  or  wounding  touch  or 
thought  upon  a  sincere  and  unspoiled  nature. 

Toward  her  family  and  her  daily  circle,  servants, 
friends,  chance  comers,  she  was  the  spirit  of  loveliness 
incarnate.  “Whatever  it  is,  Emily  will  get  it  for  you!” 
she  vowed  dramatically  to  her  weeping  children  adorers, 
who  fled  to  her  in  dismay  in  any  incredible  panic.  The 
fruit  of  her  religion  was  incessant  sweet  ministration; 
she  was  incarnate  devotion,  service;  wanting  nothing  for 
herself  except  to  give  to  some  one  else. 

There  must  have  been  the  most  lofty,  holy  inspiration, 
indeed,  to  perfect  such  fragrant  living.  Like  Saint 
Francis,  she  might  have  preached  to  the  birds,  and  in¬ 
cluded  not  only  “Sister  Lark,”  but  Bumble  Bee,  in  her 
sermon.  And  when  the  immortal  in  her  friends  began, 
and  when  she  approached  death  and  the  mystery  of  the 
superhuman,  who  shall  attempt  to  follow  her  except  by 
repetition  of  her  own  words,  those  phrases  she  brought 
back  from  her  perpetual  adorations  of  the  Unknown, 
from  her  adventures  in  the  dark  ways  of  thought  and 
spirit?  She  may  not  have  had  a  consciously  phrased 
conviction,  such  as  her  family  called  “creed”;  she  may 
not  have  connected  the  old  First  Church  with  what  she 
called  her  “Father’s  House”;  she  certainly  never  con¬ 
sidered  God  her  judge  or  her  enemy;  but  her  faith  was 
that  of  one  who  has  never  ceased  to  be  a  mortal.  She  was 
a  part  of  God,  and  God  was  in  her  so  truly  that  no  out- 


HER  RELIGION 


97 


ward  effort  was  necessary  nor  was  it  to  her  possible  to 
exaggerate  the  harmony  between  the  Creator  and  His 
created  child.  The  adjustment  was  never  broken.  She 
would  have  spoken  to  God  more  simply  than  to  her  hon¬ 
orable  parent  —  with  less  constraint;  would  have  been 
quite  capable  of  offering  God  her  sweetest  flower  or  her 
frailest  fern,  sure  of  His  acceptance.  j, 

While  to  her  family  religion  was  a  sad  and  solemn  duty, 
preparing  them  for  death  and  presided  over  by  a  dread 
and  awful  Majesty,  whose  wrath  was  to  be  appeased  by 
dreary  observance  and  repeated  incantations  to  remove 
the  curse  left  by  Adam  hanging  over  their  innocent  and 
timorous  heads  —  to  Emily  it  was  not  so  at  all.  They 
might  take  her  to  church  and  seat  her  decorously  where 
they  sat,  like  a  silent  shadow  or  an  inappropriate  sun¬ 
beam,  but  from  the  first  word  of  the  prayer  till  the  last 
word  of  the  benediction,  though  her  body  was  present, 
only  Emily  knew  where  her  soul  spent  those  hours  of 
motionless  pause.  Hiatus  was  an  art  with  her,  and  one 
she  fully  employed.  There  may  have  been  stepping- 
stones  in  the  sermon  that  caught  her  back,  in  her  daring 
the  wide  flood  of  her  own  fancy,  but  hardly  more  than 
that.  The  devil  was  her  favorite  character  in  the  drama 
of  piety,  and  she  invented  him  even  more  deliciously  than 
others  presented  him  to  her.  In  him  she  seemed  to 
recognize  an  artless  but  joyous  comrade  of  her  own  un¬ 
related  moments  of  wit.  An  untrammelled  twain  they 
two,  at  whom  God  winked,  in  true  Old  Testament  fashion. 

With  a  solemn  undercurrent  truly  tragic,  too  searching 
and  chill  to  contemplate  unmoved,  she  had  the  inhuman, 
elfin  strain  that  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  man¬ 
made  rites  or  professions.  There  was  a  side  of  her  that 


98 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


escaped,  as  a  retiring  sunbeam  to  its  native  sky,  leaving 
mere  chairs  and  tables  on  their  certain  spots  in  the  drab 
pattern  of  the  carpet  left  below. 

“With  reticence  before  and  mystery  behind,” 

as  Carman  puts  it,  like  the  wind  of  which  he  is  speak¬ 
ing,  she  passed  through  the  heroic  convulsions  of  that 
country  church,  unharmed  and  undetained. 

The  thought  persists,  though  put  aside  repeatedly,  of 
her  possible  reincarnation.  How  else  did  those  hanging 
gardens  of  Babylon  in  her  nature  get  themselves  im¬ 
planted?  Characteristics  of  Richelieu  —  craving  for  the 
sultry  Orient  —  how  came  these  in  the  nature  of  a  New 
England  Puritan,  nun  and  worshipper,  mystic  and  phi¬ 
losopher,  woman  and  eternal  child?  How  else  account  for 
her? 

Both  personal  memory  of  countless  hours  with  her, 
and  the  open-minded  re-reading  of  her  poems  and  family 
letters  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  awe  summed  up  her 
attitude  toward  religion  and  love  toward  life.  She  could 
write,  “To  die  before  one  fears  to  die  may  be  a  boon,” 
yet  in  one  hour  her  wondering  conclusion  could  be  swal¬ 
lowed  up  in  the  near  joy  of  a  little  exquisite  service  for  a 
dear  one.  To  those  with  whom  she  lived  and  her  brother’s 
family,  she  was  all  loveliness,  all  glimmering  whiteness, 
all  spirit  —  an  avenging  angel  with  a  fiery  sword  against 
whatever  evil  befell  them.  Christ  with  the  lashing  words 
of  contempt  for  the  money-changers  was  her  true  spiritual 
progenitor  then,  and  at  all  times  she  belonged  by  face 
and  mien  to  the  sweet  fields  of  Nazareth  and  Cana  of 
Galilee  as  truly  as  to  the  Egypt  of  Cleopatra  and  the 
generations  yet  unborn. 


HER  RELIGION 


99 


This  may  sound  like  a  wild  and  contradictory  claim, 
but  Emily  was  a  unique  and  universal  being;  all  times, 
all  sympathies,  all  hopes,  all  fears,  all  throbs  of  timeless 
hearts  beat  on  in  her.  Only  God  and  eternity  and  the 
dazzling  thought  of  immortality  were  worth  her  while, 
though  her  patient  little  hands  wrought  out  their  daily 
ministries  in  dumb  rectitude.  She  moved  about  with  a 
rapt  manner  at  her  simplest  duties,  making  the  bread 
her  father  loved  best  from  her  hands,  or  the  exquisite 
caramels  she  sent  to  her  favored  ones,  and  the  large  sunny 
kitchen,  with  its  windows  both  to  the  east  and  west,  saw 
her  often  standing  with  her  listening  manner,  of  Dom- 
remy,  sharing  “the  voices,”  perhaps,  of  a  less  troubled, 
less  martial  throng  of  phantoms;  apparitions  of  her  own 
thought  and  fancy.  This,  it  must  be  confessed,  led  some¬ 
times  to  catastrophe,  but  flight  was  ever  her  imminent 
salvation  and  mute  defense. 

Only  her  wit  flew  over  the  walls  that  hedged  her  in. 
A  nr]  this  even  beat  against  high  heaven  at  times,  but 
with  never  a  sacrilegious  intention  and  almost  a  cer¬ 
tainty  innate  that  even  her  Father  in  heaven  could  be 
trusted  to  enjoy  her  sally  into  the  uncharted  dark  where 
angels  dared  not  go.  She  had  a  confidence  in  her,  toward 
heaven,  unlike  any  ever  revealed.  Though  she  said  of 
Thomas  that  “his  faith  in  anatomy  was  stronger  than 
his  faith  in  faith,”  her  own  faith  in  faith  was  stronger 
than  any  expression  she  either  received  or  gave,  in  words. 

After  her  father’s  death  she  went  about  always  wonder¬ 
ing  where  he  could  be,  and  even  to  her  brother  s  childien 
saying  unforgettable  things  in  her  search  for  a  clue  to 
what,  and  where,  he  was,  and  “what  kind  he  had  be¬ 
come.  To  more  than  one  friend  she  wrote,  “Footlights 


100 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


cannot  improve  the  grave  —  only  immortality.”  And 
no  acting  of  tragedy  in  later  years  ever  effaced  the  mem¬ 
ory  of  her  husky  whisper,  “Where  is  he?  Emily  will  find 
him!” 

It  was  of  her  mother  after  her  death  that  she  wrote 
later  with  less  rebellion,  “  Like  a  flake  gathered  by  the 
wind  she  is  now  part  of  the  drift  called  Infinity.  We  don’t 
know  where  she  is,  though  so  many  tell  us,”  expressing 
her  maturing  doubt  of  the  infallibility  of  that  high  pulpit 
to  divulge  what  her  heart  cried  out  to  know.  There  was 
far  more,  then,  that  was  native  to  Emily’s  feeling  for  the 
Eternal  in  the  prayer  of  Saint  Augustine: 

“O  Truth  who  art  Eternity! 

And  Love  who  art  Truth! 

And  Eternity  who  art  Love! 

Thou  art  my  God,  to  Thee  do  I 
Sigh  night  and  day.” 

While  her  work  still  fascinated  her,  there  came  a  morn¬ 
ing  in  June,  1884,  when  without  warning  Emily  was 
smitten  as  her  father  before  her,  and  though  she  lived  for 
two  years  after, 

“The  green  world  went  on  a  sudden  blind,” 

and  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  write  more  than  an  oc¬ 
casional  pencilled  note.  She  wrote  her  Sister  Sue  at  this 
time,  “You  must  let  me  go  first,  Sue,  because  I  live  in  the 
sea  always  now,  and  know  the  road.” 

When  the  better  days  came,  she  still  took  out  her 
writing  and  made  her  last  corrections,  playing  with  her 
beloved  iridescent  words  to  the  last,  but,  in  her  own 
words,  reminiscent  of  an  oft-repeated  family  caution, 
“it  was  already  growing  damp”  —  “I  must  go  in,  the 
fog  is  rising,”  she  warned,  at  the  end  of  her  briefest  last 


HER  RELIGION 


101 


message.  Perhaps  she  was  too  elemental,  too  close  to  the 
very  basis  of  being,  to  belong  to  mere  humanity. 

It  was  on  May  16,  1886/  that  her  family  gave  her  back 
to  immortality  with  a  strange  relief,  as  of  setting  a  winged 
thing  free.  At  the  simple  funeral  in  the  old  house,  Colonel 
Higginson  read  a  poem  of  Emily  Bronte’s,  the  last  words 
she  ever  wrote,  prefacing  it  by  saying: 

“This  poem  on  Immortality  was  a  favorite  of  Emily 
Dickinson,  who  has  just  put  it  on  —  if  she  could  ever 
have  been  said  to  have  put  it  off.” 

“No  coward  soul  is  mine, 

No  trembler  in  the  world’s  storm-troubled  sphere: 
I  see  Heaven’s  glories  shine. 

And  faith  shines  equal,  arming  me  from  fear. 

“0  God  within  my  breast. 

Almighty,  ever-present  Deity! 

Life  —  that  in  me  has  rest. 

As  I  —  undying  Life  —  have  power  in  thee! 

“Vain  are  the  thousand  creeds 
That  move  men’s  hearts:  unutterably  vain; 
Worthless  as  withered  weeds. 

Or  idlest  froth  amid  the  boundless  main, 

“To  waken  doubt  in  one 
Holding  so  fast  by  thine  infinity; 

So  surely  anchored  on 

The  steadfast  rock  of  immortality. 

“With  wide-embracing  love 
Thy  spirit  animates  eternal  years. 

Pervades,  and  broods  above. 

Changes,  sustains,  creates,  and  rears. 

“Though  earth  and  man  were  gone. 

And  suns  and  universes  ceased  to  be. 


102 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


And  Thou  wert  left  alone, 

Every  existence  would  exist  in  Thee ! 

“There  is  not  room  for  Death, 

Nor  atom  that  his  might  could  render  void; 

Thou  —  Thou  art  Being  and  Breath, 

And  what  Thou  art  may  never  be  destroyed !  ” 

On  an  improvised  bier  of  pine  boughs,  entirely  cov= 
ered  by  a  pall  of  blue  sand-violets  which  fell  so  low  it 
swept  the  grass  on  either  side  as  they  passed,  she  was 
borne  in  a  soft  white  coffin  by  laborers,  who  had  all 
worked  upon  her  father’s  land  and  reverenced  her  almost 
as  the  Madonna,  across  the  few  intervening  fields  car¬ 
peted  with  the  young  summer  flowers,  followed  only  by 
those  closest  to  her,  to  the  old  cemetery  where  her  father 
and  mother  had  preceded  her.  A  singularly  lovely  and 
fitting  ending  of  her  visible  journey  into  the  mortal  world. 

In  her  own  room  stood  the  old  mahogany  bureau, 
filled  with  her  friend’s  letters  marked  to  be  burned  un¬ 
read,  and  her  own  manuscript  poems.  Her  sacred  wishes 
were  carried  out  by  her  family  to  the  utmost  until 
they  came  to  her  own  work.  It  seemed  to  them  too  much 
to  ask  of  them  to  destroy  this  wealth  of  her  inner  genius, 
with  its  gift  for  the  world  of  poets  and  kindred  natures 
throughout  all  time.  They  knew  that  Emily  Dickinson 
belonged  not  alone  to  them.  And  in  rescuing  her  work 
from  destruction  to  which  she  destined  it  in  her  naive 
panic  before  impending  discovery,  they  were  sure  their 
decision  would  have  been  justified  even  by  her  if  she 
could  have  foreseen  their  meaning  to  later  generations. 
Her  sister  Lavinia,  her  brother  Austin,  were  the  ones 
to  decide  —  technically  —  but  it  was  the  Sister  Sue  who 
realized  that  there  had  been  visions  of  her  own  continuing 


HER  RELIGION 


103 


in  this  world  through  her  written  words,  long  animating 
the  quiet  performance  of  daily  routine  by  the  white-robed 
little  poet-philosopher,  mystic,  flitting  about  the  old 
house  under  the  tall  pines.  That  the  verdict  of  the  world 
would  have  been  Treason,  had  they  acted  otherwise,  has 
been  abundantly  proved. 

They  have  all  gone  that  same  green  path  she  took,  now, 
and  it  remains  for  the  last  living  member  of  her  own  fam¬ 
ily  to  submit  Emily’s  work  to  the  final  judgment  of 
others,  and  her  life,  as  far  as  it  concerns  others,  as  a 
beautiful  inspiration.  For  which  may  her  shy  soul  pardon 
the  revelation;  may  it  never  be  a  betrayal  to  her  spirit, 
still  so  vivid  and  real  that  to  grieve  her  would  be  the 
supreme  act  of  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
truly  was  her  guest  on  this  earth.  Wherever  she  is,  what¬ 
ever  she  knows,  may  she  know  this! 

The  following  appreciation,  written  by  her  brother’s 
wife  at  the  time  of  Emily  Dickinson’s  death,  for  the 
“Springfield  Republican,”  was  requested  by  Colonel 
Higginson  for  the  introduction  to  the  first  volume  of  her 
poems,  but  was  withheld,  and  remains  to  be  the  last 
confirming  witness  of  a  contemporary. 

Miss  Emily  Dickinson  of  Amherst 

The  death  of  Miss  Emily  Dickinson,  daughter  of  the  late 
Edward  Dickinson,  at  Amherst  on  Saturday,  makes  another  sad 
inroad  on  the  small  circle  so  long  occupying  the  old  family  man¬ 
sion.  It  was  for  a  long  generation  overlooked  by  death,  and  one 
passing  in  and  out  there  thought  of  old-fashioned  times,  when 
parents  and  children  grew  up  and  passed  maturity  together, 
in  lives  of  singular  uneventful  ness  unmarked  by  sad  or  joyous 
crises.  Very  few  in  the  village,  except  among  older  inhabitants, 
knew  Miss  Emily  personally,  although  the  facts  of  her  seclusion 
and  her  intellectual  brilliancy  were  familiar  Amherst  traditions. 


104  EMILY  DICKINSON 

There  are  many  houses  among  all  classes,  into  which  her 
treasures  of  fruit  and  flowers  and  ambrosial  dishes  for  the  sick 
and  well  were  constantly  sent,  that  will  forever  miss  those 
evidences  of  her  unselfish  consideration,  and  mourn  afresh  that 
she  screened  herself  from  close  acquaintance.  As  she  passed  on 
in  life,  her  sensitive  nature  shrank  from  much  personal  contact 
with  the  world,  and  more  and  more  turned  to  her  own  large 
wealth  of  individual  resources  for  companionship,  sitting  hence¬ 
forth,  as  some  one  said  of  her,  “in  the  light  of  her  own  fire. 
Not  disappointed  with  the  world,  not  an  invalid  until  within  the 
past  two  years,  not  from  any  lack  of  sympathy,  not  because  she 
was  insufficient  for  any  mental  work  or  social  career  —  her 
endowments  being  so  exceptional  —  but  the  “mesh  of  her  soul, 
as  Browning  calls  the  body,  was  too  rare,  and  the  sacred  quiet 
of  her  own  home  proved  the  fit  atmosphere  for  her  worth  and 
work.  All  that  must  be  inviolate.  One  can  only  speak  of  duties 
beautifully  done”;  of  her  gentle  tillage  of  the  rare  flowers  filling 
her  conservatory,  into  which,  as  into  the  heavenly  Paradise, 
entered  nothing  that  could  defile,  and  which  was  ever  abloom  m 
frost  or  sunshine,  so  well  she  knew  her  subtle  chemistries;  of  her 
tenderness  to  all  in  the  home  circle;  her  gentlewoman’s  grace 
and  courtesy  to  all  who  served  in  house  and  grounds;  her  quick 
and  rich  response  to  all  who  rejoiced  or  suffered  at  home,  or 
among  her  wide  circle  of  friends  the  world  over.  This  side  of 
her  nature  was  to  her  the  real  entity  in  which  she  rested,  so 
simple  and  strong  was  her  instinct  that  a  woman’s  hearthstone 
is  her  shrine. 

Her  talk  and  her  writings  were  like  no  one’s  else,  and  although 
she  never  published  a  line,  now  and  then  some  enthusiastic 
literary  friend  would  turn  love  to  larceny,  and  cause  a  few 
verses  surreptitiously  obtained  to  be  printed.  Thus,  and 
through  other  natural  ways,  many  saw  and  admired  her  verses, 
and  in  consequence  frequently  notable  persons  paid  her  visits, 
hoping  to  overcome  the  protest  of  her  own  nature  and  gain  a 
promise  of  occasional  contributions,  at  least,  to  vaiious 
magazines.  She  withstood  even  the  fascinations  of  Mrs.  Helen 
Jackson,  who  earnestly  sought  her  cooperation  in  a  novel  of 
the  No  Name  series,  although  one  little  poem  somehow  strayed 
into  the  volume  of  verse  which  appeared  in  that  series.  Her 
pages  would  ill  have  fitted  even  so  attractive  a  story  as  “Mercy 


HER  RELIGION 


105 


Philbrick’s  Choice,”  unwilling  though  a  large  part  of  the 
literary  public  were  to  believe  that  she  had  no  part  in  it.  “Her 
wagon  was  hitched  to  a  star” —  and  who  could  ride  or  write 
with  such  a  voyager?  A  Damascus  blade  gleaming  and  glanc¬ 
ing  in  the  sun  was  her  wit.  Her  swift  poetic  rapture  was  like 
the  long  glistening  note  of  a  bird  one  hears  in  the  June  woods 
at  high  noon,  but  can  never  see.  Like  a  magician  she  caught  the 
shadowy  apparitions  of  her  brain  and  tossed  them  in  startling 
picturesqueness  to  her  friends,  who,  charmed  with  their 
simplicity  and  homeliness  as  well  as  profundity,  fretted  that  she 
had  so  easily  made  palpable  the  tantalizing  fancies  forever 
eluding  their  bungling,  fettered  grasp.  So  intimate  and  passion¬ 
ate  was  her  love  of  Nature,  she  seemed  herself  a  part  of  the  high 
March  sky,  the  summer  day  and  bird-call.  Keen  and  eclectic  in 
her  literary  tastes,  she  sifted  libraries  to  Shakespeare  and 
Browning;  quick  as  the  electric  spark  in  her  intuitions  and 
analyses,  she  seized  the  kernel  instantly,  almost  impatient  of 
the  fewest  words  by  which  she  must  make  her  revelation.  To 
her  life  was  rich,  and  all  aglow  with  God  and  immortality. 
With  no  creed,  no  formulated  faith,  hardly  knowing  the  names 
of  dogmas,  she  walked  this  life  with  the  gentleness  and  rever¬ 
ence  of  old  saints,  with  the  firm  step  of  martyrs  who  sing  while 
they  suffer.  How  better  note  the  flight  of  this  “soul  of  fire  in  a 
shell  of  pearl”  than  by  her  own  words? 

Morns  like  these,  we  parted; 

Noons  like  these,  she  rose; 

Fluttering  first,  then  firmer. 

To  her  fair  repose. 


S.  H.  D. 


PART  II 

LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON 
1845-1886 


LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON 

To  Mrs.  Strong 
[When  Emily  was  but  fourteen] 

Amherst,  Feb.  23,  1845 

Dear  A.,  —  After  receiving  the  smitings  of  conscience 
for  a  long  time,  I  have  at  length  succeeded  in  stifling  the 
voice  of  that  faithful  monitor  by  a  promise  of  a  long  letter 
to  you;  so  leave  everything  and  sit  down  prepared  for  a 
long  siege  in  the  shape  of  a  bundle  of  nonsense  from 
friend  E. 

...  I  keep  your  lock  of  hair  as  precious  as  gold  and  a 
great  deal  more  so.  I  often  look  at  it  when  I  go  to  my 
little  lot  of  treasures,  and  wish  the  owner  of  that  glossy 
lock  were  here.  Old  Time  wags  on  pretty  much  as  usual 
at  Amherst,  and  I  know  of  nothing  that  has  occurred  to 
break  the  silence;  however,  the  reduction  of  the  postage 
has  excited  my  risibles  somewhat.  Only  think!  We  can 
send  a  letter  before  long  for  five  little  coppers  only,  filled 
with  the  thoughts  and  advice  of  dear  friends.  But  I  will 
not  get  into  a  philosophizing  strain  just  yet.  Theie  is 
time  enough  for  that  upon  another  page  of  this  mammoth 

sheet _ Your  beau  ideal  D.  I  have  not  seen  lately.  I 

presume  he  was  changed  into  a  star  some  night  while 
gazing  at  them,  and  placed  in  the  constellation  Orion 
between  Bellatrix  and  Betelgeux.  I  doubt  not  if  he  was 
here  he  would  wish  to  be  kindly  remembered  to  you. 
What  delightful  weather  we  have  had  for  a  week !  .  .  . 

I  wish  you  would  come  and  make  me  a  long  visit.  If 
you  will,  I  will  entertain  you  to  the  best  of  my  abilities. 


110  EMILY  DICKINSON 

which  you  know  are  neither  few  nor  small.  Why  can’t 
you  persuade  your  father  and  mother  to  let  you  eome 
here  to  school  next  term,  and  keep  me  company,  as  I  am 

going?  Miss - ,  I  presume  you  can  guess  who  I  mean, 

is  going  to  finish  her  education  next  summer.  The  finish¬ 
ing  stroke  is  to  be  put  on  at  Newton.  She  will  then  have 
learned  all  that  we  poor  foot-travellers  are  toiling  up  the 
hill  of  knowledge  to  acquire.  Wonderful  thought!  Her 
horse  has  carried  her  along  so  swiftly  that  she  has  nearly 
gained  the  summit,  and  we  are  plodding  along  on  foot 
after  her.  Well  said  and  sufficient  this.  We’ll  finish  an 
education  sometime,  won’t  we?  You  may  then  be  Plato, 
and  I  will  be  Socrates,  provided  you  won’t  be  wiser  than 
I  am.  Lavinia  just  now  interrupted  my  flow  of  thought 
by  saying  give  my  love  to  A.  I  presume  you  will  be  glad 
to  have  some  one  break  off  this  epistle.  All  the  girls  send 
much  love  to  you.  And  please  accept  a  large  share  for 

yourself.  Prom  your  beloved 

Emily  E.  Dickinson 

Please  send  me  a  copy  of  that  Romance  you  were 
writing  at  Amherst.  I  am  in  a  fever  to  read  it.  I  ex¬ 
pect  it  will  be  against  my  Whig  feelings. 

To  the  same 

Amherst,  May  7,  1845 

Dear  A.,  —  It  seems  almost  an  age  since  I  have  seen  you, 
and  it  is  indeed  an  age  for  friends  to  be  separated.  I  was 
delighted  to  receive  a  paper  from  you,  and  I  also  was  much 
pleased  with  the  news  it  contained,  especially  that  you 
are  taking  lessons  on  the  “piny,  as  you  always  call  it. 
remember  not  to  get  on  ahead  of  me.  F ather  intends 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


111 


to  have  a  piano  very  soon.  How  happy  I  shall  be  when  I 
have  one  of  my  own !  Old  Father  Time  has  wrought  many 
changes  here  since  your  last  short  visit.  Miss  S.  T.  and 
Miss  N.  M.  have  both  taken  the  marriage  vows  upon 
themselves.  Dr.  Hitchcock  has  moved  into  his  new 
house,  and  Mr.  Tyler  across  the  way  from  our  house  has 
moved  into  President  Hitchcock’s  old  house.  Mr.  C.  is 
going  to  move  into  Mr.  T.’s  former  house,  but  the  worst 
thing  old  Time  has  done  here  is  he  has  walked  so  fast  as  to 
overtake  H.  M.  and  carry  her  to  Hartford  on  last  week 
Saturday.  I  was  so  vexed  with  him  for  it  that  I  ran  after 
him  and  made  out  to  get  near  enough  to  him  to  put  some 
salt  on  his  tail,  when  he  fled  and  left  me  to  run  home 
alone.  .  .  .  Viny  went  to  Boston  this  morning  with  father, 
to  be  gone  a  fortnight,  and  I  am  left  alone  in  all  my  glory. 
I  suppose  she  has  got  there  before  this  time,  and  is  prob¬ 
ably  staring  with  mouth  and  eyes  wide  open  at  the  won¬ 
ders  of  the  city.  I  have  been  to  walk  to-night,  and  got 
some  very  choice  wild  flowers.  I  wish  you  had  some  of 
them.  Viny  and  I  both  go  to  school  this  term.  V  e  have 
a  very  fine  school.  There  are  63  scholars.  I  have  four 
studies.  They  are  Mental  Philosophy,  Geology,  Latin, 
and  Botany.  How  large  they  sound,  don’t  they?  I  don  t 
believe  you  have  such  big  studies.  ...  My  plants  look 
finely  now.  I  am  going  to  send  you  a  little  geranium  leaf 
in  this  letter,  which  you  must  press  for  me.  Have  you 
made  you  an  herbarium  yet?  I  hope  you  will  if  you  have 
not,  it  would  be  such  a  treasure  to  you;  ’most  all  the  girls 
are  making  one.  If  you  do,  perhaps  I  can  make  some 
additions  to  it  from  flowers  growing  around  here.  HoW 
do  you  enjoy  your  school  this  term?  Are  the  teachers  as 
pleasant  as  our  old  school-teachers?  I  expect  you  have  a 


112 


EMILY  DICKENSON 


great  many  prim,  starched  up  young  ladies  there,  who,  I 
doubt  not,  are  perfect  models  of  propriety  and  good 
behavior.  If  they  are,  don’t  let  your  free  spirit  be  chained 
by  them.  I  don’t  know  as  there  [are]  any  in  school  of  this 
stamp.  But  there  ’most  always  are  a  few,  whom  the 
teachers  look  up  to  and  regard  as  their  satellites.  I  am 
growing  handsome  very  fast  indeed!  I  expect  I  shall  be 
the  belle  of  Amherst  when  I  reach  my  17th  year.  I  don’t 
doubt  that  I  shall  have  perfect  crowds  of  admirers  at 
that  age.  Then  how  I  shall  delight  to  make  them  await 
my  bidding,  and  with  what  delight  shall  I  witness  their 
suspense  while  I  make  my  final  decision.  But  away  with 
my  nonsense.  I  have  written  one  composition  this  term, 
and  I  need  not  assure  you  it  was  exceedingly  edifying  to 
myself  as  well  as  everybody  else.  Don’t  you  want  to  see  it? 
I  really  wish  you  could  have  a  chance.  We  are  obliged  to 
write  compositions  once  in  a  fortnight,  and  select  a  piece 
to  read  from  some  interesting  book  the  week  that  we 
don’t  write  compositions. 

We  really  have  some  most  charming  young  women 
in  school  this  term.  I  shan’t  call  them  anything  but 
women,  for  women  they  are  in  every  sense  of  the  word. 
I  must,  however,  describe  one,  and  while  I  describe  her 
I  wish  Imagination,  who  is  ever  present  with  you,  to 
make  a  little  picture  of  this  self-same  young  lady  in  your 
mind,  and  by  her  aid  see  if  you  cannot  conceive  how  she 
looks.  Well,  to  begin.  .  .  .  Then  just  imagine  her  as  she 
is,  and  a  huge  string  of  gold  beads  encircling  her  neck,  and 
don’t  she  present  a  lively  picture;  and  then  she  is  so 
bustling,  she  is  always  whizzing  about,  and  whenever  I 
come  in  contact  with  her  I  really  think  I  am  in  a  hornet’s 
nest.  I  can’t  help  thinking  every  time  I  see  this  singular 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


113 


piece  of  humanity  of  Shakespeare’s  description  of  a  temp¬ 
est  in  a  teapot.  But  I  must  not  laugh  about  her,  for  I 
verily  believe  she  has  a  good  heart,  and  that  is  the  princi¬ 
pal  thing  now-a-days.  Don’t  you  hope  I  shall  become 
wiser  in  the  company  of  such  virtuosos?  It  would  cer¬ 
tainly  be  desirable.  Have  you  noticed  how  beautifully 
the  trees  look  now?  They  seem  to  be  completely  covered 
with  fragrant  blossoms.  ...  I  had  so  many  things  to  do 
for  Viny,  as  she  was  going  away,  that  very  much  against 
my  wishes  I  deferred  writing  you  until  now,  but  forgive 
and  forget,  dear  A.,  and  I  will  promise  to  do  better  in 
future.  Do  write  me  soon,  and  let  it  be  a  long,  long 
letter;  and  when  you  can’t  get  time  to  write,  send  a  paper, 
so  as  to  let  me  know  you  think  of  me  still,  though  we  are 
separated  by  hill  and  stream.  All  the  girls  send  much 
love  to  you.  Don’t  forget  to  let  me  receive  a  letter  from 
you  soon.  I  can  say  no  more  now  as  my  paper  is  all  filled 
up. 

Your  affectionate  friend 

Emily  E.  Dickinson 

To  the  same 

[Written  in  1845;  postmarked  Amherst,  August  4] 

Sabbath  Eve 

Dear  A.,  —  I  have  now  sat  down  to  write  you  a  long, 
long  letter.  My  writing  apparatus  is  upon  a  stand  before 
me,  and  all  things  are  ready.  I  have  no  flowers  before  me 
as  you  had  to  inspire  you.  But  then  you  know  I  can  im¬ 
agine  myself  inspired  by  them,  and  perhaps  that  will  do  as 
well.  You  cannot  imagine  how  delighted  I  was  to  receive 
your  letter.  It  was  so  full,  and  everything  in  it  was  inter¬ 
esting  to  me  because  it  came  from  you.  I  presume  you 


114 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


did  not  doubt  my  gratitude  for  it,  on  account  of  my  delay¬ 
ing  so  long  to  answer  it,  for  you  know  I  have  bad  no 
leisure  for  anything.  When  I  tell  you  that  our  term  has 
been  eleven  weeks  long,  and  that  I  have  had  four  studies 
and  taken  music  lessons,  you  can  imagine  a  little  how  my 
time  has  been  taken  up  lately.  I  will  try  to  be  more 
punctual  in  such  matters  for  the  future.  How  are  you 
now?  I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  that  you  are  unable  to 
remain  in  your  school  on  account  of  your  health,  it  must 
be  such  a  disappointment  to  you.  But  I  presume  you 
are  enjoying  yourself  much  to  be  at  home  again.  You 
asked  me  in  your  last  letter  if  old  Father  Time  wagged 
on  in  Amherst  pretty  much  as  ever.  For  my  part,  I  see 
no  particular  change  in  his  movements  unless  it  be  that 
he  goes  on  a  swifter  pace  than  formerly,  and  that  he 
wields  his  sickle  more  sternly  than  ever.  How  do  you  like 
taking  music  lessons?  I  presume  you  are  delighted  with 

it.  I  am  taking  lessons  this  term  of  Aunt  S - ,  who  is 

spending  the  summer  with  us.  I  never  enjoyed  myself 
more  than  I  have  this  summer;  for  we  have  had  such  a 
delightful  school  and  such  pleasant  teachers,  and  besides 
I  have  had  a  piano  of  my  own.  Our  examination  is  to 
come  off  next  week  on  Monday.  I  wish  you  could  be  here 
at  that  time.  Why  can’t  you  come?  If  you  will,  you  can 
come  and  practise  on  my  piano  as  much  as  you  wish  to. 
I  am  already  gasping  in  view  of  our  examination;  and 
although  I  am  determined  not  to  dread  it  I  know  it  is  so 
foolish,  yet  in  spite  of  my  heroic  resolutions,  I  cannot 
avoid  a  few  misgivings  when  I  think  of  those  tall,  stern 
trustees,  and  when  I  know  that  I  shall  lose  my  character 
if  I  don’t  recite  as  precisely  as  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and 
Persians.  ...  You  gave  me  a  compliment  in  your  letter  in 


115 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 

regard  to  my  being  a  faithful  correspondent.  I  must  say  I 
think  I  deserve  it.  I  have  been  learning  several  beautiful 
pieces  lately.  The  4  Grave  pf  Bonaparte  is  one,  Lancers 
Quickstep,’  and  ‘Maiden,  weep  no  more,’  which  is  a 
sweet  little  song.  I  wish  much  to  see  you  and  hear  you 
play.  I  hope  you  will  come  to  A.  before  long.  Why  can’t 
you  pass  commencement  here?  I  do  wish  you  would.  .  .  . 
I  have  looked  my  letter  over,  and  find  I  have  written 

nothing  worth  reading.  .  .  . 

Accept  much  love  from  your  affectionate  friend, 

Emily  E.  D. 


To  the  same 

Thursday,  Sept.  26,  1845 

Dearest  A.,  —  As  I  just  glanced  at  the  clock  and  saw 
how  smoothly  the  little  hands  glide  over  the  surface,  I 
could  scarcely  believe  that  those  self-same  little  hands 
had  eloped  with  so  many  of  my  precious  moments  since 
I  received  your  affectionate  letter,  and  it  was  still  harder 
for  me  to  believe  that  I,  who  am  always  boasting  of  being 
so  faithful  a  correspondent,  should  have  been  guilty  of 
negligence  in  so  long  delaying  to  answer  it.  .  .  .  I  am  veiy 
glad  to  hear  that  you  are  better  than  you  have  been,  and 
I  hope  in  future  disease  will  not  be  as  neighborly  as  he 
has  been  heretofore  to  either  of  us.  I  long  to  see  you,  dear 
A.,  and  speak  with  you  face  to  face;  but  so  long  as  a  bodily 
interview  is  denied  us,  we  must  make  letters  answer, 
though  it  is  hard  for  friends  to  be  separated.  I  real  y 
believe  you  would  have  been  frightened  to  have  heard 
me  scold  when  Sabra  informed  me  that  you  had  decide 
not  to  visit  Amherst  this  fall.  But  as  I  could  find  no  one 
upon  whom  to  vent  my  spleen  for  your  decision,  1 


116  EMILY  DICKINSON 

thought  it  best  to  be  calm,  and  therefore  have  at  length 
resigned  myself  to  my  cruel  fate,  though  with  not  a  very 
good  grace.  I  think  you  do  well  to  inquire  whether  any¬ 
thing  has  been  heard  from  H.  I  really  don’t  know  what 
has  become  of  her,  unless  procrastination  has  carried 
her  off.  I  think  that  must  be  the  case.  I  think  you  have 
given  quite  a  novel  description  of  the  wedding.  Are  you 
quite  sure  Mr.  F.,  the  minister,  told  them  to  stand  up 
and  he  would  tie  them  in  a  great  bow-knot?  But  I  beg 
pardon  for  speaking  so  lightly  of  so  solemn  a  ceremony. 
You  asked  me  in  your  letter  if  I  did  not  think  you  partial 
in  your  admiration  of  Miss  Helen  H.,  ditto  Mrs.  P.  I 
answer.  Not  in  the  least.  She  was  universally  beloved  in 
Amherst.  She  made  us  quite  a  visit  in  June,  and  we  re¬ 
gretted  more  than  ever  that  she  was  going  where  we  could 
not  see  her  as  often  as  we  had  been  accustomed.  She 
seemed  very  happy  in  her  prospects,  and  seemed  to  think 
distance  nothing  in  comparison  to  a  home  with  the  one 
of  her  choice.  I  hope  she  will  be  happy,  and  of  course  she 
will.  I  wished  much  to  see  her  once  more,  but  was  denied 
the  privilege.  .  .  .  You  asked  me  if  I  was  attending  school 
now.  I  am  not.  Mother  thinks  me  not  able  to  confine 
myself  to  school  this  term.  She  had  rather  I  would  exer¬ 
cise,  and  I  can  assure  you  I  get  plenty  of  that  article  by 
staying  at  home.  I  am  going  to  learn  to  make  bread  to¬ 
morrow.  So  you  may  imagine  me  with  my  sleeves  rolled 
up,  mixing  flour,  milk,  saleratus,  etc.,  with  a  deal  of 
grace.  I  advise  you  if  you  don’t  know  how  to  make  the 
staff  of  life  to  learn  with  dispatch.  I  think  I  could  keep 
house  very  comfortably  if  I  knew  how  to  cook.  But  as 
long  as  I  don’t,  my  knowledge  of  housekeeping  is  about 
of  as  much  use  as  faith  without  works,  which  you  know 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


117 


we  are  told  is  dead.  Excuse  my  quoting  from  Scripture, 
dear  A.,  for  it  was  so  handy  in  this  case  I  couldn’t  get 
along  very  well  without  it '  Since  I  wrote  you  last,  the 
summer  is  past  and  gone,  and  autumn  with  the  sere  and 
yellow  leaf  is  already  upon  us.  I  never  knew  the  time 
to  pass  so  swiftly,  it  seems  to  me,  as  the  past  summer.  I 
really  think  some  one  must  have  oiled  his  chariot  wheels, 
for  I  don’t  recollect  of  hearing  him  pass,  and  I  am  sure  I 
should  if  something  had  not  prevented  his  chariot  wheels 
from  creaking  as  usual.  But  I  will  not  expatiate  upon 
him  any  longer,  for  I  know  it  is  wicked  to  trifle  with  so 
revered  a  personage,  and  I  fear  he  will  make  me  a  call 
in  person  to  inquire  as  to  the  remarks  which  I  have  made 
concerning  him.  Therefore  I  will  let  him  alone  for  the 
present.  .  .  .  How  are  you  getting  on  with  your  music? 
Well,  I  hope  and  trust.  I  am  taking  lessons  and  am  get¬ 
ting  along  very  well,  and  now  I  have  a  piano,  I  am 
very  happy.  I  feel  much  honored  at  having  even  a  doll 
named  for  me.  I  believe  I  shall  have  to  give  it  a  silver 
cup,  as  that  is  the  custom  among  old  ladies  when  a  child 
is  named  for  them.  .  .  .  Have  you  any  flowers  now?  I 
have  had  a  beautiful  flower-garden  this  summer;  but 
they  are  nearly  gone  now.  It  is  very  cold  to-night,  and  I 
mean  to  pick  the  prettiest  ones  before  I  go  to  bed,  and 
cheat  Jack  Frost  of  so  many  of  the  treasures  he  calculates 
to  rob  to-night.  Won’t  it  be  a  capital  idea  to  put  him  at 
defiance,  for  once  at  least,  if  no  more?  I  would  love  to 
send  you  a  bouquet  if  I  had  an  opportunity,  and  you 
could  press  it  and  write  under  it,  The  last  flowers  of 
summer.  Wouldn’t  it  be  poetical,  and  you  know  that  is 
what  young  ladies  aim  to  be  now-a-days.  ...  I  expect  I 
have  altered  a  good  deal  since  I  have  seen  you,  dear  A.  I 


118  EMILY  DICKINSON 

have  grown  tall  a  good  deal,  and  wear  my  golden  tresses 
done  up  in  a  net-cap.  Modesty,  you  know,  forbids  me  to 
mention  whether  my  personal  appearance  has  altered.  I 
leave  that  for  others  to  judge.  But  my  [word  omitted] 
has  not  changed,  nor  will  it  in  time  to  come.  I  shall  always 
remain  the  same  old  sixpence.  ...  I  can  say  no  more  now, 
as  it  is  after  ten,  and  everybody  has  gone  to  bed  but  me. 
Don’t  forget  your  affectionate  friend, 

Emily  E.  D. 


To  the  same 

January  12,  1846 

. .  .  Haven’t  we  had  delightful  weather  for  a  week  or 
two?  It  seems  as  if  Old  Winter  had  forgotten  himself. 
Don’t  you  believe  he  is  absent-minded?  It  has  been  bad 
weather  for  colds,  however.  I  have  had  a  severe  cold  for  a 
few  days,  and  can  sympathize  with  you,  though  I  have 
been  delivered  from  a  stiff  neck.  I  think  you  must  belong 
to  the  tribe  of  Israel,  for  you  know  in  the  Bible  the 
prophet  calls  them  a  stiff-necked  generation.  I  have 
lately  come  to  the  conclusion  that  I  am  Eve,  alias  Mrs. 
Adam.  You  know  there  is  no  account  of  her  death  in  the 
Bible,  and  why  am  not  I  Eve?  If  you  find  any  statements 
which  you  think  likely  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  case,  I 
wish  you  would  send  them  to  me  without  delay. 

Have  you  heard  a  word  from  H.  M.  or  S.  T.?  I  con¬ 
sider  them  lost  sheep.  I  send  them  a  paper  every  week  on 
Monday,  but  I  never  get  one  in  return.  I  am  almost  a 
mind  to  take  a  hand-car  and  go  around  to  hunt  them  up. 
I  can’t  think  that  they  have  forgotten  us,  and  I  know  of 
no  reason  unless  they  are  sick  why  they  should  delay  so 
long  to  show  any  signs  of  remembrance.  Do  write  me 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


119 


soon  a  very  long  letter,  and  tell  me  all  about  your  school 
and  yourself  too. 

Your  affectionate  friend 

Emily  E.  Dickinson 

To  the  savie 

Friday  Eve  [summer],  1846 

My  dear  A.,  —  Though  it  is  a  long  time  since  I  received 
your  affectionate  epistle,  yet  when  I  give  you  my  reasons 
for  my  long  delay,  I  know  you  will  freely  forgive  and  for¬ 
get  all  past  offences. 

It  seems  to  me  that  time  has  never  flown  so  swiftly 
with  me  as  it  has  the  last  spring.  I  have  been  busy  every 
minute,  and  not  only  so,  but  hurried  all  the  time.  So  you 
may  imagine  that  I  have  not  had  a  spare  moment,  much 
though  my  heart  has  longed  for  it,  to  commune  with  an 
absent  friend.  ...  I  presume  you  will  be  wondering  by 
this  time  what  I  am  doing  to  be  in  so  much  haste  as  I 
have  declared  myself  to  be.  Well,  I  will  tell  you.  I  am 
fitting  to  go  to  South  Hadley  Seminary,  and  expect  if  my 
health  is  good  to  enter  that  institution  a  year  from  next 
fall.  Are  you  not  astonished  to  hear  such  news?  You 
cannot  imagine  how  much  I  am  anticipating  in  enteiing 
there.  It  has  been  in  my  thought  by  day,  and  my  dreams 
by  night,  ever  since  I  heard  of  South  Hadley  Seminary. 
I  fear  I  am  anticipating  too  much,  and  that  some  freak 
of  fortune  may  overturn  all  my  airy  schemes  for  future 
happiness.  But  it  is  my  nature  always  to  anticipate  more 
than  I  realize.  . .  .  Have  you  not  heard  that  Miss  Adams 
—  dear  Miss  Adams  —  is  here  this  term?  Oh,  you  cannot 
imagine  how  natural  it  seems  to  see  her  happy  face  in 
school  once  more.  But  it  needs  Harriet,  Sarah,  and  y our 


120 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


own  dear  self  to  complete  the  ancient  picture.  I  hope  we 
shall  get  you  all  back  before  Miss  Adams  goes  away  again. 
Have  you  yet  heard  a  word  from  that  prodigal, 
H.?  . . .  Your  affectionate  friend 

Emily  E.  D. 


To  the  same 

September  8,  1846 

.  .  .  Does  it  seem  as  though  September  had  come? 
How  swiftly  summer  has  fled,  and  what  report  has  it 
borne  to  heaven  of  misspent  time  and  wasted  hours? 
Eternity  only  will  answer.  The  ceaseless  flight  of  the 
seasons  is  to  me  a  very  solemn  thought;  and  yet  why  do 
we  not  strive  to  make  a  better  improvement  of  them? 
With  how  much  emphasis  the  poet  has  said,  “  We  take  no 
note  of  time  but  from  its  loss.  ’Twere  wise  in  man  to 
give  it  then  a  tongue.  Pay  no  moment  but  in  just  purchase 
of  its  worth,  and  what  its  worth  ask  death-beds.  They 
can  tell.  Part  with  it  as  with  life  reluctantly.”  Then  we 
have  higher  authority  than  that  of  man  for  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  our  time.  For  God  has  said,  “Work  while  the 
day  lasts,  for  the  night  is  coming  in  the  which  no  man 
can  work.”  .  . . 


To  the  same 

Sabbath  Eve,  1846 

My  dear  A.,  —  When  I  last  wrote  you  I  was  in  Boston, 
where  I  spent  a  delightful  visit  of  four  weeks.  I  returned 
home  about  the  middle  of  September  in  very  good  health 
and  spirits,  for  which  it  seems  to  me  I  cannot  be  suffi¬ 
ciently  grateful  to  the  Giver  of  all  mercies.  I  expected  to 
go  into  the  Academy  upon  my  return  home,  but  as  I 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  HI 


stayed  longer  than  I  expected  to,  and  as  the  school  had 
already  commenced,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  remain  at 
home  during  the  fall  terrh  and  pursue  my  studies  the 
winter  term,  which  commences  a  week  after  Thanksgiv¬ 
ing.  I  kept  my  good  resolution  for  once  in  my  life,  and 
have  been  sewing,  practising  upon  the  piano,  and  assisting 
mother  in  household  affairs.  I  am  anticipating  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  next  term  with  a  great  deal  of  pleasure, 
for  I  have  been  an  exile  from  school  two  terms  on  account 
of  my  health,  and  you  know  what  it  is  to  “love  school.” 
Miss  Adams  is  with  us  now,  and  will  remain  through  the 
winter,  and  we  have  an  excellent  Principal  in  the  person 
of  Mr.  Leonard  Humphrey,  who  was  the  last  valedicto¬ 
rian.  We  now  have  a  fine  school.  I  thank  you  a  thousand 
times  for  your  long  and  affectionate  letter.  ...  I  found  a 
quantity  of  sewing  waiting  with  open  arms  to  embrace 
me,  or  rather  for  me  to  embrace  it,  and  I  could  hardly 
give  myself  up  to  “Nature’s  sweet  restorer,”  for  the 
ghosts  of  out-of-order  garments  crying  for  vengeance 
upon  my  defenceless  head.  However,  I  am  happy  to 
inform  you,  my  dear  friend,  that  I  have  nearly  finished 
my  sewing  for  winter,  and  will  answer  all  the  letters 
which  you  shall  deem  worthy  to  send  so  naughty  a  girl 
as  myself,  at  short  notice.  .  .  . 

Write  soon.  Your  affectionate 

Emily  E.  D. 

To  her  brother ,  William  Austin  Dickinson 
[South  Hadley,  Autumn,  1847] 

Thursday  Noon 

My  dear  Brother  Austin,  —  I  have  not  really  a  mo¬ 
ment  of  time  in  which  to  write  you,  and  am  taking  time 


122  EMILY  DICKINSON 

from  “silent  study  hours”;  but  I  am  determined  not  to 
break  my  promise  again,  and  I  generally  carry  my  resolu¬ 
tions  into  effect.  I  watched  you  until  you  were  out  of 
sight  Saturday  evening,  and  then  went  to  my  room  and 
looked  over  my  treasures;  and  surely  no  miser  ever 
counted  his  heaps  of  gold  with  more  satisfaction  than  I 
gazed  upon  the  presents  from  home. .  . . 

I  can’t  tell  you  now  how  much  good  your  visit  did  me. 
My  spirits  have  wonderfully  lightened  since  then.  I  had 
a  great  mind  to  be  homesick  after  you  went  home,  but  I 
concluded  not  to,  and  therefore  gave  up  all  homesick 
feelings.  Was  not  that  a  wise  determination?  .  .  . 

There  has  been  a  menagerie  here  this  week.  Miss  Lyon 
provided  “Daddy  Hawks”  as  a  beau  for  all  the  Seminary 
girls  who  wished  to  see  the  bears  and  monkeys,  and  your 
sister,  not  caring  to  go,  was  obliged  to  decline  the  gal¬ 
lantry  of  said  gentleman,  —  which  I  fear  I  may  never 
have  another  opportunity  to  avail  myself  of.  The  whole 
company  stopped  in  front  of  the  Seminary  and  played 
for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  for  the  purpose  of  get¬ 
ting  custom  in  the  afternoon,  I  opine.  Almost  all  the 
girls  went;  and  I  enjoyed  the  solitude  finely. 

I  want  to  know  when  you  are  coming  to  see  me  again, 
for  I  want  to  see  you  as  much  as  I  did  before.  I  went  to 

see  Miss  F.  in  her  room  yesterday - 1  love  her  very 

much,  and  think  I  shall  love  all  the  teachers  when  I 
become  better  acquainted  with  them  and  find  out  their 
ways,  which,  I  can  assure  you,  are  almost  “past  finding 
out.” 

I  had  almost  forgotten  to  tell  you  of  a  dream  which  I 
dreamed  last  night,  and  I  would  like  to  have  you  turn 
Daniel  and  interpret  it  to  me;  or  if  you  don’t  care  about 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  123 


going  through  all  the  perils  which  he  did,  I  will  allow  you 
to  interpret  it  without,  provided  you  will  try  to  tell  no 
lies  about  it.  Well,  I  dreaftied  a  dream,  and  lo !  father  had 
failed,  and  mother  said  that  “our  rye-field,  which  she  and 
I  planted,  was  mortaged  to  Seth  Nims.”  I  hope  it  is  not 
true;  but  do  write  soon  and  tell  me,  for  you  know  I 
should  expire  of  mortification  to  have  our  rye-field 
mortgaged,  to  say  nothing  of  its  falling  into  the  merciless 
hands  of  a  loco! 

Won’t  you  please  to  tell  me  when  you  answer  my  letter 
who  the  candidate  for  President  is?  I  have  been  trying  to 
find  out  ever  since  I  came  here,  and  have  not  yet  suc¬ 
ceeded.  I  don’t  know  anything  more  about  affairs  in  the 
world  than  if  I  were  in  a  trance,  and  you  must  imagine 
with  all  your  ‘‘Sophomoric  discernment'’  that  it  is  but 
little  and  very  faint.  Has  the  Mexican  War  terminated 
yet,  and  how?  Are  we  beaten?  Do  you  know  of  any  na¬ 
tion  about  to  besiege  South  Hadley ?  If  so,  do  inform  me 
of  it,  for  I  would  be  glad  of  a  chance  to  escape,  if  we  are 
to  be  stormed.  I  suppose  Miss  Lyon  would  furnish  us  all 
with  daggers  and  order  us  to  fight  for  our  lives  in  case 
such  perils  should  befall  us.  .  .  .  Miss  F.  told  me  if  I  was 
writing  to  Amherst  to  send  her  love.  Not  specifying  to 
whom,  you  may  deal  it  out  as  your  good  sense  and  dis¬ 
cretion  prompt.  Be  a  good  boy  and  mind  me! 

To  the  same 

[South  Hadley,  November  2,  1847] 

Tuesday  Noon 

My  dear  Brother  Austin,  — I  have  this  moment 
finished  my  recitation  in  history,  and  have  a  few  minutes 
which  I  shall  occupy  in  answering  your  short  but  wel- 


124  EMILY  DICKINSON 

come  letter.  You  probably  beard  that  I  was  alive  and 
well  yesterday,  unless  Mr.  E.  Dickinson  was  robbed  of  a 
note  wdiose  contents  were  to  that  effect.  But  as  robbers 
are  not  very  plenty  now-a-days,  I  will  have  no  foiebod- 
ings  on  that  score,  for  the  present.  How  do  you  get  along 
without  me  now,  and  does  “it  seem  any  more  like  a 
funeral”  than  it  did  before  your  visit  to  your  humble 
servant  in  this  place?  Answer  me!  I  want  much  to  see 
you  all  at  home,  and  expect  to  three  weeks  from  to¬ 
morrow  if  nothing  unusual,  like  a  famine  or  a  pestilence, 
occurs  to  prevent  my  going  home.  I  am  anticipating 
much  in  seeing  you  on  this  week  Saturday,  and  you  had 
better  not  disappoint  me!  for  if  you  do,  I  will  harness 
the  “furies,”  and  pursue  you  with  “a  whip  of  scorpions,” 
which  is  even  worse,  you  will  find,  than  the  “long  oat” 
which  you  may  remember.  ...  Tell  father  I  am  obliged 
to  him  much  for  his  offers  of  pecuniary  assistance,  but  do 
not  need  any.  We  are  furnished  with  an  account-book 
here,  and  obliged  to  put  down  every  mill  which  we  spend, 
and  what  we  spend  it  for,  and  show  it  to  Miss  Whitman 
every  Saturday;  so  you  perceive  your  sister  is  learning 
accounts  in  addition  to  the  other  branches  of  her  educa¬ 
tion.  I  am  getting  along  nicely  in  my  studies,  and  am 
happy  quite  for  me.  Do  write  a  long  letter  to 
Your  affectionate  sister 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  Strong 

Mount  Holyoke  Seminary 
Nov.  6,  1847 

My  dear  A.,  —  lam  really  at  Mount  Holyoke  Seminary 
and  this  is  to  be  my  home  for  a  long  year.  Your  affection- 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


125 


ate  letter  was  joyfully  received,  and  I  wish  that  this 
might  make  you  as  happy  as  yours  did  me.  It  has  been 
nearly  six  weeks  since  I  left  home,  and  that  is  a  longer 
time  than  I  was  ever  away  from  home  before  now.  I  was 
very  homesick  for  a  few  days,  and  it  seemed  to  me  I  could 
not  live  here.  But  I  am  now  contented  and  quite  happy, 
if  I  can  be  happy  when  absent  from  my  dear  home  and 
friends.  You  may  laugh  at  the  idea  that  I  cannot  be 
happy  when  away  from  home,  but  you  must  remember 
that  I  have  a  very  dear  home  and  that  this  is  my  first  trial 
in  the  way  of  absence  for  any  length  of  time  in  my  life.  As 
you  desire  it,  I  wall  give  you  a  full  account  of  myself  since 
I  first  left  the  paternal  roof.  I  came  to  South  Hadley  six 
weeks  ago  next  Thursday.  I  was  much  fatigued  with  the 
ride,  and  had  a  severe  cold  besides,  which  prevented  me 
from  commencing  my  examinations  until  the  next  day, 
when  I  began.  I  finished  them  in  three  days,  and  found 
them  about  what  I  had  anticipated,  though  the  old 
scholars  say  they  are  more  strict  than  they  ever  have 
been  before.  As  you  can  easily  imagine,  I  was  much  de¬ 
lighted  to  finish  without  failures,  and  I  came  to  the  con¬ 
clusion  then,  that  I  should  not  be  at  all  homesick,  but  the 
reaction  left  me  as  homesick  a  girl  as  it  is  not  usual  to  see. 
I  am  now  quite  contented  and  am  very  much  occupied 
in  reviewing  the  Junior  studies,  as  I  wish  to  enter  the 
middle  class.  The  school  is  very  large,  and  though  quite  a 
number  have  left,  on  account  of  finding  the  examinations 
more  difficult  than  they  anticipated,  yet  there  are  nearly 
300  now.  Perhaps  you  know  that  Miss  Lyon  is  raising  her 
standard  of  scholarship  a  good  deal,  on  account  of  the 
number  of  applicants  this  year,  and  she  makes  the  ex¬ 
aminations  more  severe  than  usual. 


120  EMILY  DICKINSON 

You  cannot  imagine  how  trying  they  are,  because  if  we 
cannot  go  through  them  all  in  a  specified  time,  we  are  sent 
home.  I  cannot  be  too  thankful  that  I  got  through  as 
soon  as  I  did,  and  I  am  sure  that  I  never  would  endure  the 
suspense  which  I  endured  during  those  three  days  again 
for  all  the  treasures  of  the  world. 

I  room  with  my  cousin  Emily,  who  is  a  Senior.  She  is 
an  excellent  room-mate,  and  does  all  in  her  power  to 
make  me  happy.  You  can  imagine  how  pleasant  a  good 
room-mate  is,  for  you  have  been  away  to  school  so  much. 
Everything  is  pleasant  and  happy  here,  and  I  think  I 
could  be  no  happier  at  any  other  school  away  from 
home.  Things  seem  much  more  like  home  than  I  an¬ 
ticipated,  and  the  teachers  are  all  very  kind  and  affec¬ 
tionate  to  us.  They  call  on  us  frequently  and  urge 
us  to  return  their  calls,  and  when  we  do,  we  always 
receive  a  cordial  welcome  from  them.  .  .  . 

You  have  probably  heard  many  reports  of  the  food 
here;  and  if  so,  I  can  tell  you  that  I  have  yet  seen  nothing 
corresponding  to  my  ideas  on  that  point  from  what  I 
have  heard.  Everything  is  wholesome  and  abundant  and 
much  nicer  than  I  should  imagine  could  be  provided  for 
almost  300  girls.  We  have  also  a  great  variety  upon  our 
tables  and  frequent  changes.  One  thing  is  certain,  and 
that  is,  that  Miss  Lyon  and  all  the  teachers  seem  to  con¬ 
sult  our  comfort  and  happiness  in  everything  they  do,  and 
you  know  that  is  pleasant.  When  I  left  home  I  did  not 
think  I  should  find  a  companion  or  a  dear  friend  in  all 
the  multitude.  I  expected  to  find  rough  and  uncultivated 
manners,  and,  to  be  sure,  I  have  found  some  of  that 
stamp,  but  on  the  whole,  there  is  an  ease  and  grace,  a 
desire  to  make  one  another  happy,  which  delights  and  at 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


127 

the  same  time  surprises  me  very  much.  I  find  no  Abby 
nor  Abiah  nor  Mary,  but  I  love  many  of  the  girls.  Austin 
came  to  see  me  when  I  had  been  here  about  two  weeks, 
and  brought  Viny  and  A.  I  need  not  tell  you  how  de¬ 
lighted  I  was  to  see  them  all,  nor  how  happy  it  made 
me  to  hear  them  say  that  “  they  were  so  lonely .”  It  is 
a  sweet  feeling  to  know  that  you  are  missed  and  that 
your  memory  is  precious  at  home.  This  week,  on 
Wednesday,  I  was  at  my  window,  when  I  happened  to 
look  towards  the  hotel  and  saw  father  and  mother,  walk¬ 
ing  over  here  as  dignified  as  you  please.  I  need  not 
tell  you  that  I  danced  and  clapped  my  hands,  and  flew 
to  meet  them,  for  you  can  imagine  how  I,  felt.  I  will 
only  ask  you,  do  you  love  your  parents?  They  wanted 
to  surprise  me,  and  for  that  reason  did  not  let  me  know 
they  were  coming.  I  could  not  bear  to  have  them  go, 
but  go  they  must,  and  so  I  submitted  in  sadness.  Only 
to  think  that  in  weeks  I  shall  be  at  my  own  dear 
home  again.  You  will  probably  go  home  at  Thanks¬ 
giving  time,  and  we  can  rejoice  with  each  other. 

You  don’t  [know]  how  I  laughed  at  your  description  of 
your  introduction  to  Daniel  Webster,  and  I  read  that  part 
of  your  letter  to  cousin  Emily.  You  must  feel  quite  proud 
of  the  acquaintance,  and  will  not,  I  hope,  be  vain  iL 
consequence.  However,  you  don’t  know  Governor  Briggs, 
and  I  do,  so  you  are  no  better  off  than  I.  ...  A.,  you 
must  write  me  often,  and  I  shall  write  you  as  often  as  I 
have  time.  .  .  . 

From  your  affectionate 


Emily  E.  D. 


128 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  her  brother  Austin 
[South  Hadley,  December  11,  1847] 

Saturday,  p.m. 

My  dear  Brother  Austin,  —  ...  I  finished  my  ex¬ 
amination  in  Euclid  last  evening,  and  without  a  failure 
at  any  time.  You  can  easily  imagine  how  glad  I  am  to 
get  through  with  four  books,  for  you  have  finished  the 
whole  forever.  .  .  .  How  are  you  all  at  home,  and  what  are 
you  doing  this  vacation?  You  are  reading  Arabian 
Nights,”  according  to  Viny’s  statement.  I  hope  you  have 
derived  much  benefit  from  their  perusal,  and  presume 
your  powers  of  imagining  will  vastly  increase  thereby. 
But  I  must  give  you  a  word  of  advice  too.  Cultivate  your 
other  powers  in  proportion  as  you  allow  imagination  to 
captivate  you.  Am  not  I  a  very  wise  young  lady? 

I  had  almost  forgotten  to  tell  you  what  my  studies  are 
now  —  “better  late  than  never.”  They  are  Chemistry, 
Physiology,  and  quarter  course  in  Algebra.  I  have  com¬ 
pleted  four  studies  already,  and  am  getting  along  well. 
Did  you  think  that  it  was  my  birthday  yesterday?  I  don’t 
believe  I  am  seventeen!  .  .  . 

From  your  affectionate  sister 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  Strong 

Jan.  17,  1848 

...  You  will  probably  think  me  foolish  thus  to  give 
you  an  inventory  of  my  time  while  at  home,  but  I  did 
enjoy  so  much  in  those  short  four  days  that  I  wanted  you 
to  know  and  enjoy  it  too.  Monday  came  so  soon,  and 
with  it  came  a  carriage  to  our  door,  and  amidst  tears 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


129 


falling  thick  and  fast  away  I  went  again.  Slowly  and 
sadly  dragged  a  few  of  the  days  after  my  return  to  the 
Seminary,  and  I  was  very  homesick,  but  “  after  a  storm 
there  comes  a  calm,”  and  so  it  was  in  my  case.  My  sor¬ 
rows  wTere  soon  lost  in  study,  and  I  again  felt  happy,  if 
happiness  there  can  be  away  from  “  home,  sweet  home.” 

Our  term  closes  this  week  on  Thursday,  and  Friday 
I  hope  to  see  home  and  friends  once  more.  I  have 
studied  hard  this  term,  and  aside  from  my  delight  at 
going  home,  there  is  a  sweetness  in  approaching  rest 
to  me.  This  term  is  the  longest  in  the  year,  and  I  wrould 
not  wish  to  live  it  over  again,  I  can  assure  you.  I  love 
this  Seminary,  and  all  the  teachers  are  bound  strongly  to 
my  heart  by  ties  of  affection.  There  are  many  sweet  girls 
here,  and  dearly  do  I  love  some  new  faces,  but  I  have  not 
yet  found  the  place  of  a  few  dear  ones  filled,  nor  would  I 
wish  it  to  be  here.  I  am  now  studying  Silliman’s  Chem¬ 
istry  and  Cutter’s  Physiology,  in  both  of  which  I  am 
much  interested.  We  finish  Physiology  before  this  term 
closes,  and  are  to  be  examined  in  it  at  the  spring  examina¬ 
tions,  about  five  weeks  after  the  commencement  of  the 
next  term.  I  already  begin  to  dread  that  time,  for  an  ex¬ 
amination  in  Mount  Holyoke  Seminary  is  rather  more 
public  than  in  our  old  academy,  and  a  failure  would  be 
more  disgraceful  then,  I  opine;  but  I  hope,  to  use  my 
father’s  own  words,  “  that  I  shall  not  disgrace  myself.” 
What  are  you  studying  now?  You  did  not  mention  that 
item  in  your  last  letters  to  me,  and  consequently  I  am 
quite  in  the  dark  as  regards  your  progress  in  those  affairs. 
All  I  can  say  is,  that  I  hope  you  will  not  leave  poor  me  far 
behind.  .  .  .  Your  affectionate  sister 

Emily  E.  Dickinson 


130 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  her  brother  Austin 
[South  Hadley,  about  February  14,  1848] 

Thursday  Mom 

My  dear  Austin,  —  You  will  perhaps  imagine  from  my 
date  that  I  am  quite  at  leisure,  and  can  do  what  I  please 
even  in  the  forenoon,  but  one  of  our  teachers,  who  is  en¬ 
gaged,  received  a  visit  from  her  intended  quite  unex¬ 
pectedly  yesterday  afternoon,  and  she  has  gone  to  her 
home  to  show  him,  I  opine,  and  will  be  absent  until 
Saturday.  As  I  happen  to  recite  to  her  in  one  of  my 
studies,  her  absence  gives  me  a  little  time  in  which  to 
write. 

Your  welcome  letter  found  me  all  engrossed  in  the 
study  of  sulphuric  acid !  I  deliberated  for  a  few  moments 
after  its  reception  on  the  propriety  of  carrying  it  to  Miss 
Whitman,  your  friend.  The  result  of  my  deliberation 
was  a  conclusion  to  open  it  with  moderation,  peruse  its 
contents  with  sobriety  becoming  my  station,  and  if  after 
a  close  investigation  of  its  contents  I  found  nothing  which 
savored  of  rebellion  or  an  unsubdued  will,  I  would  lay  it 
away  in  my  folio,  and  forget  I  had  received  it.  Are  you 
not  gratified  that  I  am  so  rapidly  gaining  correct  ideas  of 
female  propriety  and  sedate  deportment?  After  the 
proposed  examination,  finding  it  concealed  no  dangerous 
sentiments,  I  with  great  gravity  deposited  it  with  my 
other  letters,  and  the  impression  that  I  once  had  such  a 
letter  is  entirely  obliterated  by  the  waves  of  time. 

I  have  been  quite  lonely  since  I  came  back,  but  cheered 
by  the  thought  that  I  am  not  to  return  another  year,  I 
take  comfort,  and  still  hope  on.  My  visit  at  home  was 
happy,  very  happy  to  me;  and  had  the  idea  of  in  so  short 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  131 


a  time  returning  been  constantly  in  my  dreams  by  night 
and  day,  I  could  not  have  been  happier.  “  There  is  no 
rose  without  a  thorn  ”  to  me.  Home  was  always  dear  to 
me,  and  dearer  still  the  friends  around  it;  but  never  did 
it  seem  so  dear  as  now.  All,  all  are  kind  to  me,  but  their 
tones  fall  strangely  on  my  ear,  and  their  countenances 
meet  mine  not  like  home-faces,  I  can  assure  you  most 
sincerely.  Then  when  tempted  to  feel  sad,  I  think  of  the 
blazing  fire  and  the  cheerful  meal  and  the  chair  empty 
now  I  am  gone.  I  can  hear  the  cheerful  voices  and  the 
merry  laugh,  and  a  desolate  feeling  comes  home  to  my 
heart,  to  think  I  am  alone.  But  my  good  angel  only  waits 
to  see  the  tears  coming  and  then  whispers,  “  Only  this 
year !  only  twenty-two  weeks  more,  and  then  home  again 
you  will  be  to  stay.”  To  you,  all  busy  and  excited,  I  sup¬ 
pose  the  time  flies  faster;  but  to  me  slowly,  very  slowly, 
so  that  I  can  see  his  chariot  wheels  when  they  roll  along, 
and  himself  is  often  visible.  But  I  will  no  longer  imagine, 
for  vour  bram  is  full  of  A-Tttbian  Nights  fancies,  and 
it  will  not  do  to  pour  fuel  on  your  already  kindled 
imagination.  .  .  . 

I  suppose  you  have  written  a  few  and  received  a 
quantity  of  valentines  this  week.  Every  night  have  I 
looked,  and  yet  in  vain,  for  one  of  Cupid’s  messengers. 
Many  of  the  girls  have  received  very  beautiful  ones;  and 
I  have  not  quite  done  hoping  for  one.  Surely  my  friend 
Thomas  has  not  lost  all  his  former  affection  for  me!  I 
entreat  you  to  tell  him  I  am  pining  for  a  valentine.  I  am 
sure  I  shall  not  very  soon  forget  last  Valentine  week,  nor 
any  the  sooner  the  fun  I  had  at  that  time.  .  .  .  Monday 
afternoon  Mistress  Lyon  arose  in  the  hall,  and  forbade 
our  sending  “  any  of  those  foolish  notes  called  valentines.” 


132  EMILY  DICKINSON 

But  those  who  were  here  last  year,  knowing  her  opinions, 
were  sufficiently  cunning  to  write  and  give  them  into  the 
care  of  D.  during  the  vacation;  so  that  about  150  were 
despatched  on  Valentine  morn,  before  orders  should  be 
put  down  to  the  contrary  effect.  Hearing  of  this  act,  Miss 
Whitman,  by  and  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the 
other  teachers,  with  frowning  brow,  sallied  over  to  the 
Post  Office  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  the  number  of  the 
valentines,  and  worse  still,  the  names  of  the  offenders. 
Nothing  has  yet  been  heard  as  to  the  amount  of  her  in¬ 
formation,  but  as  D.  is  a  good  hand  to  help  the  girls,  and 
no  one  has  yet  received  sentence,  we  begin  to  think  her 
mission  unsuccessful.  I  have  not  written  one,  nor  do  I 
intend  to. 

Your  injunction  to  pile  on  the  wood  has  not  been  un¬ 
heeded,  for  we  have  been  obliged  to  obey  it  to  keep  from 
freezing  up.  .  .  .  We  cannot  have  much  more  cold  weather, 
I  am  sure,  for  spring  is  near.  .  .  .  Professor  Smith  preached 
here  last  Sabbath,  and  such  sermons  I  never  heard  in  my 
life.  We  were  all  charmed  with  him,  and  dreaded  to  have 
him  close.  .  .  . 

Your  affectionate  sister 

Emily 


To  the  same 

[South  Hadley,  late  May,  1848] 

Monday  Morn 

My  dear  Austin,  —  I  received  a  letter  from  home  on 

Saturday  by  Mr.  G - S - ,  and  father  wrote  in  it  that 

he  intended  to  send  for  cousin  Emily  and  myself  on 
Saturday  of  this  week  to  spend  the  Sabbath  at  home.  I 
went  to  Miss  Whitman,  after  receiving  the  letter,  and 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


133 


asked  her  if  we  could  go  if  you  decided  to  come  for  us. 
She  seemed  stunned  by  my  request,  and  could  not  find 
utterance  to  an  answer  for  s<5me  time.  At  length  she  said, 
“  Did  you  not  know  it  was  contrary  to  the  rules  of  the 
Seminary  to  ask  to  be  absent  on  the  Sabbath?”  I  told 
her  I  did  not.  She  then  took  a  Catalogue  from  her  table, 
and  showed  me  the  law  in  full  at  the  last  part  of  it.  She 
closed  by  saying  that  we  could  not  go,  and  I  returned  to 
my  room  without  farther  ado.  So  you  see  I  shall  be  de¬ 
prived  of  the  pleasure  of  a  visit  home,  and  you  that  of 
seeing  me,  if  I  may  have  the  presumption  to  call  it  a 
pleasure !  The  teachers  are  not  willing  to  let  the  girls  go 
home  this  term  as  it  is  the  last  one,  and  as  I  have  only 
nine  weeks  more  to  spend  here,  we  had  better  be  contented 
to  obey  the  commands.  We  shall  only  be  the  more  glad 
to  see  one  another  after  a  longer  absence,  that  will  be  all. 
I  was  highly  edified  with  your  imaginative  note  to  me,  and 
think  your  flights  of  fancy  indeed  wonderful  at  your  age ! 
When  are  you  coming  to  see  me  —  it  would  be  very  pleas¬ 
ant  to  us  to  receive  a  visit  from  your  highness  if  you  can 
be  absent  from  home  long  enough  for  such  a  purpose.  .  .  . 

To  Mrs.  Strong 

Mount  Holyoke  Female  Seminary 
May  16,  1848 

My  dear  A.,  —  You  must  forgive  me,  indeed  you  must, 
that  I  have  so  long  delayed  to  write  you,  and  I  doubt  not 
you  will  when  I  give  you  all  my  reasons  for  so  doing.  You 
know  it  is  customary  for  the  first  page  to  be  occupied  with 
apologies,  and  I  must  not  depart  from  the  beaten  track 
for  one  of  my  own  imagining.  ...  I  had  not  been  very 
well  all  winter,  but  had  not  written  home  about  it,  lest 


134  EMILY  DICKINSON 

the  folks  should  take  me  home.  During  the  week  follow¬ 
ing  examinations,  a  friend  from  Amherst  came  over  and 
spent  a  week  with  me,  and  when  that  friend  returned 
home,  father  and  mother  were  duly  notified  of  the  state 
of  my  health.  Have  you  so  treacherous  a  fiiend? 

Not  knowing  that  I  was  to  be  reported  at  home,  you 
can  imagine  my  amazement  and  consternation  when 
Saturday  of  the  same  week  Austin  arrived  in  full  sail, 
with  orders  from  head-quarters  to  bring  me  home  at  all 
events.  At  first  I  had  recourse  to  words,  and  a  desperate 
battle  with  those  weapons  was  waged  for  a  few  moments, 
between  my  Sophomore  brother  and  myself.  Finding 
words  of  no  avail,  I  next  resorted  to  tears.  But  woman’s 
tears  are  of  little  avail,  and  I  am  sure  mine  flowed  in  vain. 
As  you  can  imagine,  Austin  was  victorious,  and  poor, 
defeated  I  was  led  off  in  triumph.  You  must  not  imbibe 
the  idea  from  what  I  have  said  that  I  do  not  love  home  — 
far  from  it.  But  I  could  not  bear  to  leave  teachers  and 
companions  before  the  close  of  the  term  and  go  home  to 
be  dosed  and  receive  the  physician  daily,  and  take  warm 
drinks  and  be  condoled  with  on  the  state  of  health  in 
general  by  all  the  old  ladies  in  town. 

Haven’t  I  given  a  ludicrous  account  of  going  home 
sick  from  a  boarding-school?  Father  is  quite  a  hand  to 
give  medicine,  especially  if  it  is  not  desirable  to  the 
patient,  and  I  was  dosed  for  about  a  month  after  my 
return  home,  without  any  mercy,  till  at  last  out  of  mere 
pity  my  cough  went  away,  and  I  had  quite  a  season  of 
peace.  Thus  I  remained  at  home  until  the  close  of  the 
term,  comforting  my  parents  by  my  presence,  and  in¬ 
stilling  many  a  lesson  of  wisdom  into  the  budding  intellect 
of  my  only  sister.  I  had  almost  forgotten  to  tell  you  that 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


135 


I  went  on  with  my  studies  at  home,  and  kept  up  with  my 
class.  Last  Thursday  our  vacation  closed,  and  on  Friday 
morn,  midst  the  weeping  of  friends,  crowing  of  roosters, 
and  singing  of  birds,  I  again  took  my  departure  from 
home.  Five  days  have  now  passed  since  we  returned  to 
Holyoke,  and  they  have  passed  very  slowly.  Thoughts 
of  home  and  friends  “  come  crowding  thick  and  fast,  like 
lightnings  from  the  mountain  cloud,”  and  it  seems  very 
desolate. 

Father  has  decided  not  to  send  me  to  Holyoke  another 
year,  so  this  is  my  last  term.  Can  it  be  possible  that  I 
have  been  here  almost  a  year?  It  startles  me  when  I  really 
think  of  the  advantages  I  have  had,  and  I  fear  I  have  not 
improved  them  as  I  ought.  But  many  an  hour  has  fled 
with  its  report  to  heaven,  and  what  has  been  the  tale  of 
me?  .  .  .  How  glad  I  am  that  spring  has  come,  and  how  it 
calms  my  mind  when  wearied  with  study  to  walk  out  in 
the  green  fields  and  beside  the  pleasant  streams  in  which 
South  Hadley  is  rich!  There  are  not  many  wild  flowers 
near,  for  the  girls  have  driven  them  to  a  distance,  and  we 
are  obliged  to  walk  quite  a  distance  to  find  them,  but  they 
repay  us  by  their  sweet  smiles  and  fragrance. 

The  older  I  grow,  the  more  do  I  love  spring  and  spring 
flowers.  Is  it  so  with  you?  While  at  home  there  were  sev¬ 
eral  pleasure  parties  of  which  I  was  a  member,  and  in  our 
rambles  we  found  many  and  beautiful  children  of  spring, 
which  I  will  mention  and  see  if  you  have  found  them,  — 
the  trailing  arbutus,  adder’s  tongue,  yellow  violets,  liver- 
leaf,  blood-root,  and  many  other  smaller  flowers, 
i  What  are  you  reading  now?  I  have  little  time  to  read 
when  I  am  here,  but  while  at  home  I  had  a  feast  in  the 
reading  line,  I  can  assure  you.  Two  or  three  of  them  I 


136  EMILY  DICKINSON 

will  mention:  “Evangeline,”  The  Princess,  The 
Maiden  Aunt,”  “The  Epicurean,”  and  “The  Twins  and 
Heart,”  by  Tupper,  complete  the  list.  Am  not  I  a  pedant 
for  telling  you  what  I  have  been  reading?  Have  you 
forgotten  your  visit  at  Amherst  last  summer,  and  what 
delightful  times  we  had?  I  have  not,  and  I  hope  you  will 
come  and  make  another  and  a  longer,  when  I  get  home 
from  Holyoke.  Father  wishes  to  have  me  at  home  a  j  ear, 
and  he  will  probably  send  me  away  again,  where  I  know 
not. 

Ever  your  own  affectionate 

Emilie  E.  Dickinson 

To  Mr.  Bowdoin 

[Ou  returning  “  Jane  Eyre”  with  an  enclosure  of  fragrant  box  leaves] 

December,  1849 

Mr.  Bowdoin  — 

If  all  these  leaves  were  altars,  and  every  one  a  prayer 
that  Currer  Bell  might  be  saved,  and  you  were  God  — 
would  you  answer  it? 

To  Mrs.  Gordon  L.  Ford  ( Emily  Fowler  Ford ) 

Thursday  Morn 

Dear  Emily,  —  I  can’t  come  in  this  morning,  because 
I  am  so  cold,  but  you  will  know  I  am  here  ringing  the  big 
front  door-bell,  and  leaving  a  note  for  you. 

Oh,  I  want  to  come  in,  I  have  a  great  mind  now  to 
follow  little  Jane  into  your  warm  sitting-room;  are  you 
there,  dear  Emily? 

No,  I  resist  temptation  and  run  away  from  the  door 
just  as  fast  as  my  feet  will  carry  me,  lest  if  I  once  come  in 
I  shall  grow  so  happy  that  I  shall  stay  there  always  and 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


137 


never  go  home  at  all.  You  will  have  read  this  note  by  the 
time  I  reach  the  office,  and  you  can’t  think  how  fast  I  run. 

Affectionately 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  Strong 

Amherst,  Jan.  29,  1850 

Very  dear  A.,  —  The  folks  have  all  gone  away;  they 
thought  that  they  left  me  alone,  and  contrived  things  to 
amuse  me  should  they  stay  long,  and  I  be  lonely.  Lonely, 
indeed,  —  they  didn’t  look,  and  they  couldn’t  have  seen 
if  they  had,  who  should  bear  me  company.  Three  here, 
instead  of  one ,  wouldn’t  it  scare  them?  A  curious  trio, 
part  earthly  and  part  spiritual  two  of  us,  the  other,  all 
heaven,  and  no  earth.  God  is  sitting  here,  looking  into 
my  very  soul  to  see  if  I  think  right  thoughts.  Yet  I  am 
not  afraid,  for  I  try  to  be  right  and  good;  and  He  knows 
every  one  of  my  struggles.  He  looks  very  gloriously,  and 
everything  bright  seems  dull  beside  Him;  and  I  don’t 
dare  to  look  directly  at  Him  for  fear  I  shall  die.  Then 
you  are  here,  dressed  in  that  quiet  black  gown  and  cap,  — 
that  funny  little  cap  I  used  to  laugh  at  you  about,  —  and 
you  don’t  appear  to  be  thinking  about  anything  in  par¬ 
ticular,  —  not  in  one  of  your  breaking-dish  moods,  I  take 
it.  You  seem  aware  that  I’m  writing  you,  and  are 
amused,  I  should  think,  at  any  such  friendly  manifesta¬ 
tion  when  you  are  already  present.  Success,  however,  even 
in  making  a  fool  of  myself,  isn’t  to  be  despised;  so  I  shall 
persist  in  writing,  and  you  may  in  laughing  at  me,  —  if 
you  are  fully  aware  of  the  value  of  time  as  regards  your 
immortal  spirit.  I  can’t  say  that  I  advise  you  to  laugh; 
but  if  you  are  punished,  and  I  warned  you,  that  can  be  no 


138 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


business  of  mine.  So  I  fold  up  my  arms,  and  leave  you  to 
fate  —  may  it  deal  very  kindly  with  you !  The  trinity 
winds  up  with  me,  as  you  may  have  surmised,  and  I 
certainly  wouldn’t  be  at  the  fag-end  but  for  civility  to 
you.  This  self-sacrificing  spirit  will  be  the  ruin  of  me! 

I  am  occupied  principally  with  a  cold  just  now,  and  the 
dear  creature  will  have  so  much  attention  that  my  time 
slips  away  amazingly.  It  has  heard  so  much  of  New 
Englanders,  of  their  kind  attentions  to  strangers,  that 
it’s  come  all  the  way  from  the  Alps  to  determine  the  truth 
of  the  tale.  It  says  the  half  wasn’t  told  it,  and  I  begin  to 
be  afraid  it  wasn’t.  Only  think  —  came  all  the  way  from 
that  distant  Switzerland  to  find  what  was  the  truth! 
Neither  husband,  protector,  nor  friend  accompanied  it, 
and  so  utter  a  state  of  loneliness  gives  friends  if  nothing 
else.  You  are  dying  of  curiosity;  let  me  arrange  that 
pillow  to  make  your  exit  easier.  I  stayed  at  home  all 
Saturday  afternoon,  and  treated  some  disagreeable 
people  who  insisted  upon  calling  here  as  tolerably  as  I 
could;  when  evening  shades  began  to  fall,  I  turned  upon 
my  heel,  and  walked.  Attracted  by  the  gayety  visible  in 
the  street,  I  still  kept  walking  till  a  little  creature  pounced 
upon  a  thin  shawl  I  wore,  and  commenced  riding.  I 
stopped,  and  begged  the  creature  to  alight,  as  I  was 
fatigued  already,  and  quite  unable  to  assist  others.  It 
wouldn’t  get  down,  and  commenced  talking  to  itself: 
“Can’t  be  New  England  —  must  have  made  some  mis¬ 
take  —  disappointed  in  my  reception  —  don’t  agree  with 
accounts.  Oh,  what  a  world  of  deception  and  fraud! 
Marm,  will  you  tell  me  the  name  of  this  country  —  it’s 
Asia  Minor,  isn’t  it?  I  intended  to  stop  in  New  England.” 
By  this  time  I  was  so  completely  exhausted  that  I  made 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


139 


no  further  effort  to  rid  me  of  my  load,  and  travelled  home 
at  a  moderate  jog,  paying  no  attention  whatever  to  it, 
got  into  the  house,  threw  off  both  bonnet  and  shawl,  and 
out  flew  my  tormentor,  and  putting  both  arms  around 
my  neck,  began  to  kiss  me  immoderately,  and  express  so 
much  love  it  completely  bewildered  me.  Since  then  it  has 
slept  in  my  bed,  eaten  from  my  plate,  lived  with  me  every¬ 
where,  and  will  tag  me  through  life  for  all  I  know.  I 
think  I'll  wake  first,  and  get  out  of  bed,  and  leave  it;  but 
early  or  late,  it  is  dressed  before  me,  and  sits  on  the  side 
of  the  bed  looking  right  into  my  face  with  such  a  comical 
expression  it  almost  makes  me  laugh  in  spite  of  myself. 
I  can’t  call  it  interesting,  but  it  certainly  is  curious,  has 
two  peculiarities  which  would  quite  win  your  heart,  — 
a  huge  pocket-handkerchief  and  a  very  red  nose.  The 
first  seems  so  very  abundant,  it  gives  you  the  idea  of  in¬ 
dependence  and  prosperity  in  business.  The  last  brings 
up  the  “jovial  bowl,  my  boys,”  and  such  an  association’s 
worth  the  having.  If  it  ever  gets  tired  of  me,  I  will  forward 
it  to  you  —  you  would  love  it  for  my  sake,  if  not  for  its 
own;  it  will  tell  you  some  queer  stories  about  me,  —  how 
I  sneezed  so  loud  one  night  that  the  family  thought  the 
last  trump  was  sounding,  and  climbed  into  the  currant- 
bushes  to  get  out  of  the  way;  how  the  rest  of  the  people, 
arrayed  in  long  night-gowns,  folded  their  arms,  and  were 
waiting;  but  this  is  a  wicked  story,  —  it  can  tell  some 
better  ones.  Now,  my  dear  friend,  let  me  tell  you  that 
these  last  thoughts  are  fictions,  —  vain  imaginations  to 
lead  astray  foolish  young  women.  They  are  flowers  of 
speech;  they  both  make  and  tell  deliberate  falsehoods; 
avoid  them  as  the  snake,  and  turn  aside  as  from  the 
rattle-snake,  and  I  don’t  think  you  will  be  harmed. 


140 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Honestly,  though,  a  snake-bite  is  a  serious  matter,  and 
there  can’t  be  too  much  said  or  done  about  it.  The  big 
serpent  bites  the  deepest;  and  we  get  so  accustomed  to 
its  bites  that  we  don’t  mind  about  them.  “Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  fear  him .”  Won’t  you  read  some  work  upon 
snakes?  —  I  have  a  real  anxiety  for  you.  I  love  those 
little  green  ones  that  slide  around  by  your  shoes  in  the 
grass,  and  make  it  rustle  with  their  elbows;  they  are 
rather  my  favorites  on  the  whole;  but  I  wouldn’t  in¬ 
fluence  you  for  the  world.  There  is  an  air  of  misanthropy 
about  the  striped  snake  that  will  commend  itself  at  once 
to  your  taste,  —  there  is  no  monotony  about  it  but 
we  will  more  of  this  again.  Something  besides  severe 
colds  and  serpents,  and  we  will  try  to  find  that  something. 
It  can’t  be  a  garden,  can  it?  or  a  strawberry -bed,  which 
rather  belongs  to  a  garden;  nor  it  can’t  be  a  school-house, 
nor  an  attorney-at-law.  Oh,  dear!  I  don’t  know  what  it 
is.  Love  for  the  absent  don’t  sound  like  it;  but  try  it 
and  see  how  it  goes. 

I  miss  you  very  much  indeed;  think  of  you  at  night 
when  the  world’s  nodding,  nid,  nid,  nodding  —  think  of 
you  in  the  daytime  when  the  cares  of  the  world,  and  its 
continual  vexations  choke  up  the  love  for  friends  in  some 
of  our  hearts;  remember  your  warnings  sometimes  —  try 
to  do  as  you  told  me  sometimes  —  and  sometimes  con¬ 
clude  it’s  no  use  to  try;  then  my  heart  says  it  is,  and  new 
trial  is  followed  by  disappointment  again.  I  wondered, 
when  you  had  gone,  why  we  didn’t  talk  more,  —  it 
wasn’t  for  want  of  a  subject;  it  never  could  be  for  that. 
Too  many,  perhaps,  —  such  a  crowd  of  people  that  no¬ 
body  heard  the  speaker,  and  all  went  away  discontented. 
You  astonished  me  in  the  outset,  perplexed  me  in  the 


TO  MRS.  STRONG  141 

continuance,  and  wound  up  in  a  grand  snarl  I  shall  be 
all  my  pilgrimage  unravelling.  Rather  a  dismal  prospect 
certainly;  but  “it’s  always  the  darkest  the  hour  before 
day and  this  earlier  sunset  promises  an  earlier  rise  —  a 
sun  m  splendor  —and  glory,  flying  out  of  its  purple  nest. 
Wouldn’t  you  love  to  see  God’s  bird,  when  it  first  tries 
its  wings?  If  you  were  here  I  would  tell  you  something 
sev era!  somethings  which  have  happened  since  you 
went  away;  but  time  and  space,  as  usual,  oppose  them¬ 
selves,  and  I  put  my  treasures  away  till  “  we  two  meet 
again.  The  hope  that  I  shall  continue  in  love  towards 
you,  and  vice  versa,  will  sustain  me  till  then.  If  you  are 
thinking  soon  to  go  away,  and  to  show  your  face  no 
more,  just  inform  me,  will  you?  I  would  have  the  “  long, 
fingering  look,”  which  you  cast  behind,  —  it  would  be 
an  invaluable  addition  to  my  treasures,  and  “keep  your 
memory  green.  Lord,keep  all  our  memories  green,”  and 
help  on  our  affection,  and  tie  the  link  that  doth  us  bind  ” 
in  a  tight  bow-knot  that  will  keep  it  from  separation, 
and  stop  us  from  growing  old;  if  that  is  impossible,  make 
old  age  pleasant  to  us,  put  its  arms  around  us  kindly, 
and  when  we  go  home,  let  that  home  be  called  heaven. 

Tour  very  sincere  and  wicked  friend 

Emily  E.  Dickinson 

To  the  same 

Amherst,  May  7,  1850 

Dear  Remembered,  —  The  circumstances  under  which 
I  write  you  this  morning  are  at  once  glorious,  afflicting, 
and  beneficial,  glorious  in  ends,  afflicting  in  means , 
and  beneficial,  I  trust,  in  both.  Twin  loaves  of  bread  have 
just  been  born  into  the  world  under  my  auspices,  —  fine 


142  EMILY  DICKINSON 

children,  the  image  of  their  mother;  and  here,  my  dear 
friend,  is  the  glory. 

On  the  lounge,  asleep,  lies  my  sick  mother,  suffering 
intensely  from  acute  neuralgia,  except  at  a  moment  like 
this,  when  kind  sleep  draws  near,  and  beguiles  her, 
here  is  the  affliction. 

I  need  not  draw  the  beneficial  inference,  —  the  good 
I  myself  derive,  the  winning  the  spirit  of  patience,  the 
genial  housekeeping  influence  stealing  over  my  mind  and 
soul,  _  you  know  all  these  things  I  would  say,  and  will 
seem  to  suppose  they  are  written,  when  indeed  they  are 
only  thought. 

On  Sunday  my  mother  was  taken,  had  been  perfectly 
well  before,  and  could  remember  no  possible  imprudence 
which  should  have  induced  the  disease.  Everything  has 
been  done,  and  though  we  think  her  gradually  throwing 
it  off,  she  still  has  much  suffering.  I  have  always  neg¬ 
lected  the  culinary  arts,  but  attend  to  them  now  from 
necessity,  and  from  a  desire  to  make  everything  pleasant 
for  father  and  Austin.  Sickness  makes  desolation,  and  the 
day  is  dark  and  dreary;  but  health  will  come  back,  I 
hope,  and  light  hearts  and  smiling  faces.  We  are  sick 
hardly  ever  at  home,  and  don’t  know  what  to  do  when  it 
comes,  —  wrinkle  our  little  brows,  and  stamp  with  our 
little  feet,  and  our  tiny  souls  get  angry,  and  command 
it  to  go  away.  Mrs.  Brown  will  be  glad  to  see  it,  —  old 
ladies  expect  to  die;  “as  for  us,  the  young  and  active,  with 
all  longings  ‘for  the  strife,’  we  to  perish  by  the  roadside, 
weary  with  the  ‘  march  of  fife  no,  no,  my  dear 
‘Father  Mortality,’  get  out  of  the  way  if  you  please; 
we  will  call  if  we  ever  want  you.  Good-morning,  sir!  ah, 
good-morning!” 


TO  MRS.  STRONG 


143 


When  I  am  not  at  work,  I  sit  by  the  side  of  mother, 
provide  for  her  little  wants,  and  try  to  cheer  and  en¬ 
courage  her.  I  ought  to  be  glad  and  grateful  that  I  can 
do  anything  now,  but  I  do  feel  so  very  lonely,  and  so 
anxious  to  have  her  cured.  I  haven’t  repined  but  once, 
and  you  shall  know  all  the  why.  At  noon  ...  I  heard  a 
well-known  rap,  and  a  friend  I  love  so  dearly  came  and 
asked  me  to  ride  in  the  woods,  the  sweet,  still  woods,  — 
and  I  wanted  to  exceedingly.  I  told  him  I  could  not  go, 
and  he  said  he  was  disappointed,  he  wanted  me  very 
much.  Then  the  tears  came  into  my  eyes,  though  I 
tried  to  choke  them  back,  and  he  said  I  could  and 
should  go,  and  it  seemed  to  me  unjust.  Oh,  I  struggled 
with  great  temptation,  and  it  cost  me  much  of  denial; 
but  I  think  in  the  end  I  conquered,  —  not  a  glorious 
victory,  where  you  hear  the  rolling  drum,  but  a  kind  of 
a  helpless  victory,  where  triumph  would  come  of  itself, 
faintest  music,  weary  soldiers,  nor  a  waving  flag,  nor  a 
long,  loud  shout.  I  had  read  of  Christ’s  temptations,  and 
how  they  were  like  our  own,  only  he  didn’t  sin;  I  won¬ 
dered  if  one  was  like  mine,  and  whether  it  made  him 
angry.  I  couldn’t  make  up  my  mind;  do  you  think  he 
ever  did? 

I  went  cheerfully  round  my  work,  humming  a  little 
air  till  mother  had  gone  to  sleep,  then  cried  with  all  my 
might  —  seemed  to  think  I  was  much  abused  —  that 
this  wicked  world  was  unworthy  such  devoted  and 
terrible  suffering  —  and  came  to  my  various  senses  in 
great  dudgeon  at  life,  and  time,  and  love  for  affliction 
and  anguish. 

What  shall  we  do,  my  darling,  when  trial  grows  more 
and  more,  when  the  dim,  lone  light  expires,  and  it’s  dark, 


144 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


so  very  dark,  and  we  wander,  and  know  not  where,  and 
cannot  get  out  of  the  forest  —  whose  is  the  hand  to 
help  us,  and  to  lead,  and  forever  guide  us ;  they  talk  of  a 
“Jesus  of  Nazareth”  —  will  you  tell  me  if  it  be  he?  .  .  . 

It’s  Friday,  my  dear  A.,  and  that  in  another  week,  yet 
my  mission  is  unfulfilled  —  and  you  so  sadly  neglected, 
and  don’t  know  the  reason  why.  Where  do  you  think 
I’ve  strayed,  and  from  what  new  errand  returned?  I  have 
come  from  “  to  and  fro,  and  walking  up  and  down  ”  the 
same  place  that  Satan  hailed  from,  when  God  asked  him 
where  he’d  been;  but  not  to  illustrate  further,  I  tell  you 
I  have  been  dreaming,  dreaming  a  golden  dream,  with 
eyes  all  the  while  wide  open,  and  I  guess  it’s  almost 
morning;  and  besides,  I  have  been  at  work,  providing 
the  “  food  that  perisheth,”  scaring  the  timorous  dust,  and 
being  obedient  and  kind.  I  am  yet  the  Queen  of  the 
Court,  if  regalia  be  dust  and  dirt,  have  three  loyal  sub¬ 
jects,  whom  I’d  rather  relieve  from  service.  Mother  is 
still  an  invalid,  though  a  partially  restored  one;  father 
and  Austin  still  clamor  for  food ;  and  I,  like  a  martyr,  am 
feeding  them.  Wouldn’t  you  love  to  see  me  in  these  bonds 
of  great  despair,  looking  around  my  kitchen,  and  praying 
for  kind  deliverance,  and  declaring  by  “  Omai’s  beard  ” 
I  never  was  in  such  plight?  My  kitchen,  I  think  I  called 
it  —  God  forbid  that  it  was,  or  shall  be,  my  own  —  God 
keep  me  from  what  they  call  households,  except  that 
bright  one  of  “  faith  ”! 

Don’t  be  afraid  of  my  imprecations  —  they  never  did 
any  one  harm,  and  they  make  me  feel  so  cool,  and  so 
very  much  more  comfortable!  ...  I  presume  you  are 
loving  your  mother,  and  loving  the  stranger  and  wan¬ 
derer  —  visiting  the  poor  and  afflicted,  and  reaping  whole 


TO  MR.  BOWDOIN 


145 


fields  of  blessings  —  save  me  a  little  sheaf,  only  a  very 
little  one!  Remember  and  care  for  me  sometimes,  and 
scatter  a  fragrant  flower  in  this  wilderness  life  of  mine 
by  writing  me,  and  by  not  forgetting,  and  by  lingering 
longer  in  prayer,  that  the  Father  may  bless  one  more! 

Your  affectionate  friend 

Emily 


To  Mr.  Bowdoin 

Valentine  Week  [1850] 

Awake,  ye  muses  nine,  sing  me  a  strain  divine. 

Unwind  the  solemn  twine,  and  tie  my  Valentine. 


Oh  the  earth  was  made  for  lovers,  for  damsel,  and  hope¬ 
less  swain. 

For  sighing,  and  gentle  whispering,  and  unity  made  of 
twain. 

All  things  do  go  a  courting,  in  earth  or  sea,  or  air, 

God  hath  made  nothing  single  but  thee  in  His  world  so 
fair! 

The  bride  and  then  the  bridegroom,  the  two,  and  then  the 
one, 

Adam,  and  Eve,  his  consort,  the  moon  and  then  the  sun; 

The  life  doth  prove  the  precept,  who  obey  shall  happy  be, 

Who  will  not  serve  the  sovereign,  be  hanged  on  fatal  tree. 

The  high  do  seek  the  lowly,  the  great  do  seek  the  small, 

None  cannot  find  who  seeketh,  on  this  terrestrial  ball; 

The  bee  doth  court  the  flower,  the  flower  his  suit  receives. 

And  they  make  a  merry  wedding,  whose  guests  are 
hundred  leaves; 

The  wind  doth  woo  the  branches,  the  branches  they  are 
won, 

And  the  father  fond  demandeth  the  maiden  for  his  son. 


146  EMILY  DICKINSON 

The  storm  doth  walk  the  seashore  humming  a  mournful 
tune, 

The  wave  with  eye  so  pensive  looketh  to  see  the  moon, 
Their  spirits  meet  together,  they  make  them  solemn 
vows. 

No  more  he  singeth  mournful,  her  sadness  she  doth  lose. 
The  worm  doth  woo  the  mortal,  death  claims  a  living 
bride, 

Night  unto  day  is  married,  mom  unto  eventide; 

Earth  is  a  merry  damsel,  and  heaven  a  knight  so  true. 
And  Earth  is  quite  coquettish,  and  beseemeth  in  vain  to 
sue. 

Now  to  the  application,  to  the  reading  of  the  roll. 

To  bringing  thee  to  justice,  and  marshalling  thy  soul: 
Thou  art  a  human  solo,  a  being  cold,  and  lone, 

Wilt  have  no  kind  companion,  thou  reapest  what  thou 
hast  sown. 

Hast  never  silent  hours,  and  minutes  all  too  long, 

And  a  deal  of  sad  reflection,  and  wailing  instead  of  song? 
There’s  Sarah,  and  Eliza,  and  Emetine  so  fair. 

And  Harriet  and  Sabra,  and  she  with  curling  hair. 

Thine  eyes  are  sadly  blinded,  but  yet  thou  mayest  see 
Six  true  and  comely  maidens  sitting  upon  the  tree; 
Approach  that  tree  with  caution,  then  up  it  boldly  climb. 
And  seize  the  one  thou  lovest,  nor  care  for  space,  or  time. 
Then  bear  her  to  the  greenwTood,  and  build  for  her  a 
bower, 

And  give  her  what  she  asketh,  jewel,  or  bird,  or  flower  — 
And  bring  the  fife,  and  trumpet,  and  beat  upon  the 
drum  — 

And  bid  the  world  Goodmorrow,  and  go  to  glory  home ! 


A  VALENTINE 


147 


[A  valentine  written  by  Emily  in  1852  somehow  found  its  way  into 
“The  Republican.”  It  was  to  Mr.  William  Howland. ] 

[1852] 

f 

Sic  transit  gloria  mundi. 

How  doth  the  busy  bee  — 

Dum  vivimus  vivamus, 

I  stay  mine  enemy. 

Oh,  veni,  vidi,  vici, 

Oh,  caput,  cap-a-pie, 

And  oh,  memento  mori 
TV  hen  I  am  far  from  thee. 

Hurrah  for  Peter  Parley, 

Hurrah  for  Daniel  Boone, 

Three  cheers,  sir,  for  the  gentlemen 
Who  first  observed  the  moon. 

Peter  put  up  the  sunshine, 

Pattie  arrange  the  stars. 

Tell  Luna  tea  is  waiting. 

And  call  your  brother  Mars. 

Put  down  the  apple,  Adam, 

And  come  away  with  me; 

So  shall  thou  have  a  pippin 
From  off  my  father’s  tree. 

I  climb  the  hill  of  science, 

I  “  view  the  landscape  o’er,” 

Such  transcendental  prospect 
I  ne’er  beheld  before. 


148 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Unto  the  Legislature 
My  country  bids  me  go. 

I’ll  take  my  india-rubbers, 

In  case  the  wind  should  blow. 

During  my  education, 

It  was  announced  to  me 
That  gravitation,  stumbling, 

Fell  from  an  apple-tree. 

The  earth  upon  its  axis 
Was  once  supposed  to  turn, 

By  way  of  a  gymnastic 
In  honor  to  the  sun. 

It  was  the  brave  Columbus, 
A-sailing  on  the  tide. 

Who  notified  the  nations 
Of  where  I  would  reside. 

Mortality  is  fatal, 

Gentility  is  fine, 

Rascality  heroic. 

Insolvency  sublime. 

Our  fathers  being  weary 
Lay  down  on  Bunker  Hill, 

And  though  full  many  a  morning, 
Yet  they  are  sleeping  still. 

The  trumpet,  sir,  shall  wake  them, 
In  dream  I  see  them  rise. 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  149 

Each  with  a  solemn  musket 
A-marching  to  the  skies. 

r 

A  coward  will  remain,  sir. 

Until  the  fight  is  done, 

But  an  immortal  hero 
W  ill  take  his  hat  and  run. 

Good-by,  sir,  I  am  going  — 

My  country  calleth  me. 

Allow  me,  sir,  at  parting 
To  wipe  my  weeping  e’e. 

In  token  of  our  friendship 
Accept  this  Bonnie  Doon, 

And  when  the  hand  that  plucked  it 
Has  passed  beyond  the  moon, 

The  memory  of  my  ashes 
Will  consolation  be. 

Then  farewell,  Tuscarora, 

And  farewell,  sir,  to  thee. 

To  her  brother  Austin 
[Amherst,  early  in  1851] 

Sunday  Evening 

It  might  not  come  amiss,  dear  Austin,  to  have  a  tiding 
or  two  concerning  our  state  and  feelings,  particularly 
when  we  remember  that  “  Jamie  has  gone  awa’.” 

Our  state  is  pretty  comfortable,  and  our  feelings  are 
somewhat  solemn,  which  we  account  for  satisfactorily 
by  calling  to  mind  the  fact  that  it  is  the  Sabbath  day. 


150  EMILY  DICKINSON 

Whether  a  certain  passenger  in  a  certain  yesterday  s 
stage  has  any  sombre  effect  on  our  once  merry  household 
or  the  reverse,  “  I  dinna  choose  to  tell,”  but  be  the  case  as 
it  may,  we  are  rather  a  crestfallen  company,  to  make  the 
best  of  us,  and  what  with  the  sighing  wind,  the  sobbing 
rain,  and  the  whining  of  Nature  generally,  we  can  hardly 
contain  ourselves,  and  I  only  hope  and  trust  that  your 
this-evening’s-lot  is  cast  in  far  more  cheery  places  than 
the  ones  you  leave  behind. 

We  are  enjoying  this  evening  what  is  called  a  “  north¬ 
east  storm  ”  —  a  little  north  of  east  in  case  you  aie  pretty 
definite.  Father  thinks  it’s  “  amazin’  raw,”  and  I'm  half 
disposed  to  think  that  he’s  in  the  right  about  it,  though 
I  keep  pretty  dark  and  don’t  say  much  about  it  !  Vinnie 
is  at  the  instrument,  humming  a  pensive  air  concerning  a 
young  lady  who  thought  she  was  almost  there.  Vinnie 
seems  much  grieved,  and  I  really  suppose  I  ought  to 
betake  myself  to  weeping;  I’m  pretty  sure  that  I  shall  if 

she  don’t  abate  her  singing. 

Father’s  just  got  home  from  meeting  and  Mr.  Bolt- 
wood’s,  found  the  last  quite  comfortable  and  the  first  not 
quite  so  well.  .  .  .  There  has  been  not  much  stiiring 
since  when  you  went  away  I  should  venture  to  say 
prudently  that  matters  had  come  to  a  stand  —  unless 
something  new  “  turns  up,”  I  cannot  see  anything  to 
prevent  a  quiet  season.  Father  takes  care  of  the  doors 
and  mother  of  the  windows,  and  Vinnie  and  I  are  secure 
against  all  outward  attacks.  If  we  can  get  our  hearts 
“  under,”  I  dop’t  have  much  to  fear  —  I’ve  got  all  but 
three  feelings  down,  if  I  can  only  keep  them!  .  .  . 

I  shall  think  of  you  to-morrow  with  four  and  twenty 
Irish  boys  all  in  a  row.  I  miss  you  very  much  —  I  put 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  151 

on  my  bonnet  to-night,  opened  the  gate  very  desperately, 
and  for  a  little  while  the  suspense  was  terrible  —  I  think 
I  was  held  in  check  by  som,e  invisible  agent,  for  I  returned 
to  the  house  without  having  done  any  harm! 

If  I  hadn't  been  afraid  that  you  would  “  poke  fun  ”  at 
my  feelings,  I  had  written  a  sincere  letter,  but  since  “  the 
world  is  hollow,  and  dollie’s  stuffed  with  sawdust,”  I 
really  do  not  think  we  had  better  expose  our  feelings,  .  .  , 

To  the  same 
[Amherst,  1851] 

Sunday  Evening 

I  received  your  letter,  Austin,  permit  me  to  thank  you 
for  it  and  to  request  some  more  as  soon  as  it’s  conven¬ 
ient  permit  me  to  accord  with  your  discreet  opinion 
concerning  Swedish  Jennie,  and  to  commend  the  heart 
brave  enough  to  express  it  —  combating  the  opinion 
of  two  civilized  worlds  and  New  York  into  the  bargain 
must  need  considerable  daring  —  indeed,  it  had  never 
occurred  to  me  that  amidst  the  hallelujahs  one  tongue 
would  dare  be  dumb,  and  much  less,  I  assure  you,  that 
this  dissenting  one  should  be  my  romantic  brother!  For  I 
had  looked  for  delight  and  a  very  high  style  of  rapture  in 
such  a  youth  as  you.  .  .  . 

We  have  all  been  rather  piqued  at  Jennie’s  singing  so 
well,  and  this  first  calumnious  whisper  pleases  us  so  well, 
we  rejoice  that  we  didn’t  come  —  our  visit  is  yet  before 
us.  .  .  .  You  haven’t  told  us  yet  as  you  promised  about 
your  home  —  what  kind  of  people  they  are  —  whether 
you  find  them  pleasant  —  whether  those  timid  gentlemen 
have  yet  “  found  tongues  to  say.”  Do  you  find  the  life  and 
living  any  more  annoying  than  you  at  first  expected  —  do 


152  EMILY  DICKINSON 

you  light  upon  any  friends  to  help  the  time  away 
have  you  whipped  any  more  bad  boys  —  all  these  are 
solemn  questions,  pray  give  them  proper  heed! 

Two  weeks  of  your  time  are  gone;  I  can’t  help  wonder¬ 
ing  sometimes  if  you  would  love  to  see  us,  and  come  to 
this  still  home.  ...  A  Senior  levee  was  held  at  Professor 
and  Mrs.  Haven’s  on  Tuesday  of  last  week  —  Vinnie 
played  pretty  well.  There’s  another  at  the  President  s 
this  next  Friday  evening.  Clarum  ei  venerabile  Seniors! 

To  the  same 
[Amherst,  March,  1851] 

Sunday  Afternoon 

.  .  .  It’s  a  glorious  afternoon  —  the  sky  is  blue  and  warm 
—  the  wind  blows  just  enough  to  keep  the  clouds  sailing, 
and  the  sunshine —  oh  such  sunshine!  It  isn’t  like  gold, 
for  gold  is  dim  beside  it;  it  isn’t  like  anything  which  you 
or  I  have  seen!  It  seems  to  me  Ik  Alarvel  was  born  on 
such  a  day;  I  only  wish  you  were  here.  Such  days  were 
made  on  purpose  for  you  and  me;  then  wdiat  in  the  world 
are  you  gone  for?  Oh,  dear,  I  do  not  know,  but  this  I  do 
know,  that  if  wishing  would  bring  you  home,  you  were 
here  to-day.  Is  it  pleasant  in  Boston?  Of  coufse  it  isn  t, 
though.  I  might  have  known  more  than  to  make  such  an 
inquiry.  No  doubt  the  streets  are  muddy,  and  the  sky 
some  dingy  hue,  and  I  can  think  just  how  everything 
bangs  and  rattles,  and  goes  rumbling  along  through  stones 
and  plank  and  clay!  I  don’t  feel  as  if  I  could  have  you 
there,  possibly,  another  day.  I’m  afraid  you’ll  turn  into 
a  bank,  or  a  Pearl  Street  counting-room,  if  you  have  not 
already  assumed  some  monstrous  shape,  living  in  such  a 
place. 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  153 

Let  me  see  —  April;  three  weeks  until  April  —  the  very 
first  of  April  well,  perhaps  that  will  do,  only  be  sure  of 
the  week,  the  whole  weekend  nothing  but  the  week.  If 
they  make  new  arrangements,  give  my  respects  to  them, 
and  tell  them  old  arrangements  are  good  enough  for  you, 
and  you  will  have  them;  then  if  they  raise  the  wind,  why, 
let  it  blow  —  there’s  nothing  more  excellent  than  a  breeze 
now  and  then! 

What  a  time  we  shall  have  Fast  day,  after  we  get  home 
from  meeting  —  why,  it  makes  me  dance  to  think  of  it; 
and  Austin,  if  I  dance  so  many  days  beforehand,  what  will 
become  of  me  when  the  hour  really  arrives?  I  don’t  know, 
I  m  sure;  and  I  don’t  care,  much,  for  that  or  for  anything 
else  but  get  you  home.  .  .  .  Much  love  from  mother  and 
\  innie;  we  are  now  pret  cy  well,  and  our  hearts  are  set  on 
April,  the  very  first  of  April ! 

Emilie 


To  the  same 

[Amherst,  late  March,  1851] 

Thursday  Night 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  I  have  read  Ellen  Middleton.  I 
needn’t  tell  you  I  like  it,  nor  need  I  tell  you  more,  for  you 
know  already. 

I  thank  you  more  and  more  for  all  the  pleasures  you 
give  me  —  I  can  give  you  nothing,  Austin,  but  a  warm 
and  grateful  heart  that  is  yours  now  and  always.  Love 
from  all. 

Emilie 

Only  think,  you  are  coming  Saturday!  I  don’t  know 
why  it  is  that  it’s  always  Sunday  immediately  you  get 


154  EMILY  DICKINSON 

home.  I  will  arrange  it  differently.  If  it  wasn  t  twelve 
o’clock  I  would  stay  longer. 

To  the  same 
[Amherst,  June  16,  1851] 

Sunday  Evening 

...  I’m  glad  you  are  so  well  pleased,  I’m  glad  you  are  not 
delighted.  I  would  not  that  foreign  places  should  wear 
the  smile  of  home.  We  are  quite  alarmed  for  the  hoys  — 
hope  you  won’t  kill  or  pack  away  any  of  ’em  —  so  near 
Dr.  Webster’s  bones  ’tis  not  strange  you  have  had  temp¬ 
tations!  .  .  .  The  country’s  still  just  now,  and  the  severities 
alluded  to  will  have  a  salutary  influence  in  waking  the 
people  up.  Speaking  of  getting  up,  how  early  are  metro¬ 
politans  expected  to  wake  up,  especially  young  men  — 
more  especially  school-masters?  I  miss  my  “  department  ” 
mornings.  I  lay  it  quite  to  heart  that  I’ve  no  one  to  wake 
up.  Your  room  looks  lonely  enough,  I  do  not  love  to  go  in 
there;  whenever  I  pass  through  I  find  I  gin  to  whistle, 
as  we  read  that  little  boys  are  wont  to  do  in  the  grave¬ 
yard.  I  am  going  to  set  out  crickets  as  soon  as  I  find  time, 
that  they  by  their  shrill  singing  shall  help  disperse  the 
gloom;  will  they  grow  if  I  transplant  them? 

You  importune  me  for  news;  I  am  very  sorry  to  say 
“  Vanity  of  vanities  ”  there’s  no  such  thing  as  news  —  it 
is  almost  time  for  the  cholera,  and  then  things  will  take 
a  start! ...  All  of  the  folks  send  love. 

Your  affectionate 

Emilie 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  155 


To  the  same 
[July  5,  1851] 

Sunday  Afternoon 

I  have  just  come  in  from  church  very  hot  and  faded. 

.  .  .  Our  church  grows  interesting  —  Zion  lifts  her  head  — 
I  overhear  remarks  signifying  Jerusalem,  —  I  do  not  feel 
at  liberty  to  say  any  more  to-day ! 

...  I  wanted  to  write  you  Friday,  the  night  of  Jennie 
Lind,  but  reaching  home  past  midnight,  and  my  room 
sometime  after,  encountering  several  perils  starting  and 
on  the  way,  among  which  a  kicking  horse,  an  inexperi¬ 
enced  driver,  a  number  of  Jove’s  thunderbolts,  and  a  very 
terrible  rain,  are  worthy  to  have  record.  All  of  us  went 
just  four  - —  add  an  absent  individual  and  that  will  make 
full  five.  The  concert  commenced  at  eight,  but  knowing 
the  world  was  hollow  we  thought  we’d  start  at  six,  and 
come  up  with  everybody  that  meant  to  come  up  with  us ; 
we  had  proceeded  some  steps  when  one  of  the  beasts 
showed  symptoms;  and  just  by  the  blacksmith  s  shop 
exercises  commenced,  consisting  of  kicking  and  plunging 
on  the  part  of  the  horse,  and  whips  and  moral  suasion 
from  the  gentleman  who  drove  the  horse  refused  to 
proceed,  and  your  respected  family  with  much  chagrin 
dismounted,  advanced  to  the  hotel,  and  for  a  season 
halted;  another  horse  procured,  we  were  politely  invited 
to  take  our  seats,  and  proceed,  which  we  refused  to  do 
till  the  animal  was  warranted.  About  half  through  our 
journey  thunder  was  said  to  be  heard,  and  a  suspicious 
cloud  came  travelling  up  the  sky.  What  words  express 
our  horror  when  rain  began  to  fall,  in  drops,  sheets,  catar¬ 
acts  _  what  fancy  conceive  of  drippings  and  of  drench- 


156  EMILY  DICKINSON 

ings  which  we  met  on  the  way;  how  the  stage  and  its 
mourning  captives  drew  up  at  Warner  s  Hotel;  how  all 
of  us  alighted,  and  were  conducted  in,  —  how  the 
rain  did  not  abate,  —  how  we  walked  in  silence  to  the 
old  Edwards  church  1  and  took  our  seats  in  the  same 
how  Jennie  came  out  like  a  child  and  sang  and  sang  again 

—  how  bouquets  fell  in  showers,  and  the  roof  was  rent 
with  applause  —  how  it  thundered  outside,  and  inside 
with  the  thunder  of  God  and  of  men  —  judge  ye  which 
was  the  loudest;  how  we  all  loved  Jennie  Lind,  but  not 
accustomed  oft  to  her  manner  of  singing  didn't  fancy  that 
so  well  as  we  did  her.  No  doubt  it  was  very  fine,  but  take 
some  notes  from  her  Echo,  the  bird  sounds  from  the  Bird 
Song,  and  some  of  her  curious  trills,  and  I’d  rather  have 
a  Yankee. 

Herself  and  not  her  music  was  what  we  seemed  to  love 

—  she  has  an  air  of  exile  in  her  mild  blue  eyes,  and  a 
something  sweet  and  touching  in  her  native  accent  which 
charms  her  many  friends.  Give  me  my  thatched  cottage  as 
she  sang  she  grew  so  earnest  she  seemed  half  lost  in  song, 
and  for  a  transient  time  I  fancied  she  had  found  it  and 
would  be  seen  “na  mair”;  and  then  her  foreign  accent 
made  her  again  a  wanderer  —  we  will  talk  about  her 
sometime  when  you  come.  Father  sat  all  the  evening 
looking  mad,  and  yet  so  much  amused  you  would  have 
died  a-laughing.  ...  It  wasn’t  sarcasm  exactly,  nor  it 
wasn’t  disdain,  it  was  infinitely  funnier  than  either  of 
those  virtues,  as  if  old  Abraham  had  come  to  see  the  show, 
and  thought  it  was  all  very  well,  but  a  little  excess  of 
monkey!  She  took  $4,000  for  tickets  at  Northampton 
aside  from  all  expenses.  .  .  . 

1  Evidently  a  slip  of  the  pen,  as  Jenny  Lind  sang  in  the  old  First  Church 
at  Northampton  on  that  occasion. 


r^ 


? 


A  NOTE  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON’S  HEADED  BY  A  LITTLE  WOODCUT  AND 
SIGNED  WITH  THE  NAME  OF  THE  ENGRAVER  COLE 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  157 

About  our  coming  to  Boston  —  we  think  we  shall 
probably  come  —  we  want  to  see  our  friends,  yourself  and 
Aunt  L.’s  family.  We  don’t  care  a  fig  for  the  Museum, 
the  stillness,  or  Jennie  Lind-.  .  .  .  Love  from  us  all. 

Your  affectionate  sister 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[Late  July,  1851] 

Sunday  Evening 

.  .  .  Oh  how  I  wish  I  could  see  your  world  and  its  little 
kingdoms,  and  I  wish  I  could  see  the  king  Stranger ! 
he  was  my  brother!  I  fancy  little  boys  of  several  little 
sizes,  some  of  them  clothed  in  blue  cloth,  some  of  them 
clad  in  gray  —  I  seat  them  round  on  benches  in  the 
school-room  of  my  mind  —  then  I  set  them  all  to  shaking 
—  on  peril  of  their  lives  that  they  move  their  lips  or 
whisper  ;  then  I  clothe  you  with  authority  and  empower 
you  to  punish,  and  to  enforce  the  law,  I  call  you  Rabbi, 
Master,”  and  the  picture  is  complete!  It  would  seem 
very  funny,  say  for  \  innie  and  me  to  come  round  as 
Committee  —  we  should  enjoy  the  terrors  of  fifty  little 
boys,  and  any  specimens  of  discipline  in  your  way  would 
be  a  rare  treat  for  us.  I  should  love  to  know  how  you 
managed  —  whether  government  as  a  science  is  laid  down 
and  executed,  or  whether  you  cuff  and  thrash  as  the 
occasion  dictates;  whether  you  use  pure  law  as  in  the  case 
of  commanding,  or  whether  you  enforce  it  by  means  of 
sticks  and  stones  as  in  the  case  of  agents.  I  suppose  you 
have  authority  bounded  but  by  their  lives.  ...  I  should 
think  you’d  be  tired  of  school  and  teaching  and  such  hot 
weather.  I  really  wish  you  were  here,  and  the  Endicott 


158 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


school  where  you  found  it.  Whenever  we  go  to  ride  in  our 
beautiful  family  carriage  we  think  if  “  wishes  were  horses 
we  four  “  beggars  would  ride.”  We  shall  enjoy  brimful 
everything  now  but  half  full,  and  to  have  you  home  once 

more  will  be  like  living  again. 

We  are  having  a  pleasant  summer  —  without  one  of 
the  five  it  is  yet  a  lonely  one.  Vinnie  says  sometimes  — 
Didn’t  we  have  a  brother  —  it  seems  to  me  we  did,  his 
name  was  Austin  —  we  call  but  he  answers  not  again  — 
echo,  Where  is  Austin?  laughing,  “  Where  is  Austin?  ” 
...  I  wish  they  need  not  exhibit  just  for  once  in  the  year, 
and  give  you  up  on  Saturday  instead  of  the  next  week 
Wednesday;  but  keep  your  courage  up  and  show  forth 
those  Emerald  Isles  till  school  committees  and  mayors 
are  blinded  with  the  dazzling!  Wouldn’t  I  love  to  be 


there! ... 

Our  apples  are  ripening  fast.  I  am  fully  convinced  that 
with  your  approbation  they  will  not  only  pick  themseb  es, 
but  arrange  one  another  in  baskets  and  present  them¬ 
selves  to  be  eaten. 

Love  from  all 


Emilie 


To  the  same 
[August,  1851] 

Sunday  Afternoon 

At  my  old  stand  again,  dear  Austin,  and  happy  as  a  queen 
to  know  that  while  I  speak  those  whom  I  love  are  listen¬ 
ing,  and  I  am  happier  still  if  I  shall  make  them  happy. 

I  have  just  finished  reading  your  letter  which  was 
brought  in  since  church.  I  like  it  grandly  —  very  — 
because  it  is  so  long,  and  also  it’s  so  funny  —  we  have  all 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  159 

been  laughing  till  the  old  house  rung  again  at  your  deline¬ 
ation  of  men,  women,  and  things.  I  feel  quite  like  retiring 
in  presence  of  one  so  gr^nd,  and  casting  my  small  lot 
among  small  birds  and  fishes;  you  say  you  don’t  com¬ 
prehend  me,  you  want  a  simpler  style  —  gratitude  indeed 
for  all  my  fine  philosophy!  I  strove  to  be  exalted,  think¬ 
ing  I  might  reach  you,  and  while  I  pant  and  struggle  and 
climb  the  nearest  cloud,  you  walk  out  very  leisurely  in 
your  slippers  from  Empyrean,  and  without  the  slightest 
notice,  request  me  to  get  down!  As  simple  as  you  please, 
the  simplest  sort  of  simple  —  I’ll  be  a  little  ninny,  a  little 
pussy  catty,  a  little  Red  Riding  Hood;  I'll  wear  a  bee  in 
my  bonnet,  and  a  rose-bud  in  my  hair,  and  what  remains 
to  do  you  shall  be  told  hereafter. 

Your  letters  are  richest  treats,  send  them  always  just 
such  warm  days  —  they  are  worth  a  score  of  fans  and 
many  refrigerators  —  the  only  difficulty  they  are  so 
queer,  and  laughing  such  hot  weather  is  anything  but 
amusing.  A  little  more  of  earnest,  and  a  little  less  of  jest 
until  we  are  out  of  August,  and  then  you  may  joke  as 
freely  as  the  father  of  rogues  himself,  and  we  will  banish 
care,  and  daily  die  a-laughing! 

It  is  very  hot  here  now;  I  don’t  believe  it’s  any  hotter 
in  Boston  than  it  is  here.  .  .  .  Vinnie  suggests  that  she 
may  sometimes  occur  to  mind  when  you  would  like  more 
collars  made.  I  told  her  I  wouldn’t  tell  you  —  I  haven’t, 
however,  decided  whether  I  will  or  not. 

I  often  put  on  five  knives  and  forks,  and  another 
tumbler,  forgetting  for  the  moment  that  “we  are  not  all 
here.”  It  occurs  to  me,  however,  and  I  remove  the  extra, 
and  brush  a  tear  away  in  memory  of  my  brother. 

We  miss  you  now  and  always.  When  God  bestows 


160 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


but  three,  and  one  of  those  is  withdrawn,  the  others  are 
left  alone.  .  .  .  Father  is  as  uneasy  when  you  are  gone 
away  as  if  you  catch  a  trout  and  put  him  in  Sahara. 
When  you  first  went  away  he  came  home  very  frequently 
—  walked  gravely  towards  the  barn,  and  returned  looking 
very  stately  —  then  strode  away  down  street  as  if  the  foe 
was  coming;  now  he  is  more  resigned  —  contents  himself 
by  fancying  that  “  we  shall  hear  to-day,”  and  then  when 
we  do  not  hear,  he  wags  his  head  profound,  and  thinks 
without  a  doubt  there  will  be  news  “  to-morrow.”  “Once 
one  is  two,”  once  one  will  be  two  —  ah,  I  have  it  here! 

I  wish  you  could  have  some  cherries  —  if  there  was 
any  way  we  would  send  you  a  basket  of  them  —  they 
are  very  large  and  delicious,  and  are  just  ripening  now. 
Little  Austin  Grout  comes  every  day  to  pick  them,  and 
mother  takes  great  comfort  in  calling  him  by  name,  from 
vague  association  with  her  departed  boy.  Austin,  to  tell 
the  truth,  it  is  very  still  and  lonely  —  I  do  wish  you  were 
here.  . .  .  The  railroad  is  “a-workin’.”  My  love  to  all  my 
friends.  I  am  on  my  way  downstairs  to  put  the  tea-kettle 
boiling  —  writing  and  taking  tea  cannot  sympathize.  If 
you  forget  me  now,  your  right  hand  shall  its  cunning. 

Emilie 


To  the  same 

September,  1851 

. . .  Yinnie  and  I  came  safely,  and  met  with  no  mishap  — 
the  bouquet  was  not  withered  nor  was  the  bottle  cracked. 
It  was  fortunate  for  the  freight  car  that  Vinnie  and  I  were 
there,  ours  being  the  only  baggage  passing  along  the  line. 
The  folks  looked  very  funny  who  travelled  with  us  that 
day  —  they  were  dim  and  faded,  like  folks  passed  away 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  161 

—  the  conductor  seemed  so  grand  with  about  half  a 
dozen  tickets  which  he  dispersed  and  demanded  in  a  very 
small  space  of  time  —  I  judged  that  the  minority  were 
travelling  that  day,  and  couldn’t  hardly  help  smiling  at 
our  ticket  friend,  however  sorry  I  was  at  the  small  amount 
of  people  passing  along  his  way.  He  looked  as  if  he  wanted 
to  make  an  apology  for  not  having  more  travellers  to 
keep  him  company. 

The  route  and  the  cars  seemed  strangely  —  there  were 
no  boys  with  fruit,  there  were  no  boys  with  pamphlets; 
one  fearful  little  fellow  ventured  into  the  car  with  what 
appeared  to  be  publications  and  tracts;  he  offered  them 
to  no  one,  and  no  one  inquired  for  them,  and  he  seemed 
greatly  relieved  that  no  one  wanted  to  buy  them. . . . 
Mother  sends  much  love,  and  Vinnie. 

Tour  lonely  sister 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[Amherst,  Autumn,  1851] 

Saturday  Morn 

Dear  Austin,  —  I’ve  been  trying  to  think  this  morning 
how  many  weeks  it  was  since  you  went  away  —  I  fail 
in  calculations;  it  seems  so  long  to  me  since  you  went 
back  to  school  that  1  set  down  days  for  years,  and  weeks 
for  a  score  of  years  —  not  reckoning  time  by  minutes, 
I  don’t  know  what  to  think  of  such  great  discrepancies 
between  the  actual  hours  and  those  which  “seem  to  be.” 
It  may  seem  long  to  you  since  you  returned  to  Boston  — 
how  I  wish  you  would  stay  and  never  go  back  again.  .  .  . 

P.S.  —  ...  Mother  sends  her  love  and  your  waistcoat. 


162  EMILY  DICKINSON 

thinking  you’ll  like  the  one,  and  quite  likely  need  the 
other. 


To  the  same 


Oct.  2 


.  .  .  You  say  we  mustn’t  trouble  to  send  you  any  fruit, 
also  your  clothes  must  give  us  no  uneasiness.  I  don’t 
ever  want  to  have  you  say  any  more  such  things.  They 
make  me  feel  like  crying.  If  you’d  only  teased  us  for  it, 
and  declared  that  you  would  have  it,  I  shouldn’t  have 
cared  so  much  that  we  could  find  no  way  to  send  you  any, 
but  you  resign  so  cheerfully  your  birthright  of  purple 
grapes,  and  do  not  so  much  as  murmur  at  the  departing 
peaches,  that  I  hardly  can  taste  the  one  or  drink  the  juice 
of  the  other.  They  are  so  beautiful,  Austin,  —  we  have 
such  an  abundance  “  while  you  perish  with  hunger.” 

I  do  hope  some  one  will  make  up  a  mind  to  go  before 
our  peaches  are  quite  gone.  The  world  is  full  of  people 
travelling  everywhere,  until  it  occurs  to  you  that  you  will 
send  an  errand,  and  then  by  “  hook  or  crook  ”  you  can’t 
find  any  traveller  who,  for  money  or  love,  can  be  induced 
to  go  and  carry  the  opprobrious  package.  It’s  a  very 
selfish  age,  that  is  all  I  can  say  about  it.  Mr.  Storekeeper 

S - has  been  “  almost  persuaded  ”  to  go,  but  I  believe 

he  has  put  it  off  “  till  a  more  convenient  season,”  so  to 
show  my  disapprobation  I  sha’n’t  buy  any  more  gloves 

at  Mr.  S - ’s  store!  Don’t  you  think  it  will  seem  very 

cutting  to  see  me  pass  by  his  goods  and  purchase  at  Mr. 

K - ’s?  I  don’t  think  I  shall  retract  should  he  regret 

his  course  and  decide  to  go  to-morrow,  because  it  is  the 
principle  of  disappointing  people  which  I  disapprove !  .  .  . 

The  peaches  are  very  large  —  one  side  a  rosy  cheek. 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  163 


and  the  other  a  golden,  and  that  peculiar  coat  of  velvet 
and  of  down  which  makes  a  peach  so  beautiful.  The 
grapes,  too,  are  fine,  juicy ,?  and  such  a  purple  —  I  fancy 
the  robes  of  kings  are  not  a  tint  more  royal.  The  vine 
looks  like  a  kingdom,  with  ripe  round  grapes  for  kings, 
and  hungry  mouths  for  subjects  —  the  first  instance  on 
record  of  subjects  devouring  kings!  You  shall  have  some 
grapes,  dear  Austin,  if  I  have  to  come  on  foot  in  order  to 
bring  them  to  you. 

The  apples  are  very  fine  —  it  isn’t  quite  time  to  pick 
them  —  the  cider  is  almost  done  —  we  shall  have  some 
I  guess  by  Saturday,  at  any  rate  Sunday  noon.  The 
vegetables  are  not  gathered,  but  will  be  before  very  long. 
The  horse  is  doing  nicely;  he  travels  “like  a  bird”  to 
use  a  favorite  phrase  of  your  delighted  mother’s.  You 
ask  about  the  leaves  —  shall  I  say  they  are  falling?  They 
had  begun  to  fall  before  Vinnie  and  I  came  home,  and  we 
walked  up  the  steps  through  little  brown  ones  rustling.  .  .  . 

Vinnie  tells  me  she  has  detailed  the  news  —  she  re¬ 
served  the  deaths  for  me,  thinking  I  might  fall  short  of 
my  usual  letter  somewhere.  In  accordance  with  her 
wishes  I  acquaint  you  with  the  decease  of  your  aged 

friend  Deacon - .  He  had  no  disease  that  we  know  of, 

but  gradually  went  out.  .  .  .  Monday  evening  we  were 
all  startled  by  a  violent  church-bell  ringing,  and  thinking 
of  nothing  but  fire,  rushed  out  in  the  street  to  see.  The 
sky  was  a  beautiful  red,  bordering  on  a  crimson,  and  rays 
of  a  gold  pink  color  were  constantly  shooting  off  from  a 
kind  of  sun  in  the  centre.  People  were  alarmed  at  this 
beautiful  phenomenon,  supposing  that  fires  somewhere 
were  coloring  the  sky.  The  exhibition  lasted  for  nearly 
fifteen  minutes,  and  the  streets  were  full  of  people  won- 


1G4 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


dering  and  admiring.  Father  happened  to  see  it  among 
the  very  first,  and  rang  the  bell  himself  to  call  attention 
to  it.  You  will  have  a  full  account  from  the  pen  of  Mr. 
Trumbull,  who,  I  have  not  a  doubt,  was  seen  with  a  long 
lead  pencil  a-noting  down  the  sky  at  the  time  of  its  highest 
glory.  .  .  .  You  will  be  here  now  so  soon  we  are  im¬ 
patient  for  it  —  we  want  to  see  you,  Austin,  how  much  I 
cannot  say  here. 

Your  affectionate 

Emily 


To  the  same 

[Amherst,  early  October,  1851] 

Friday  Morning 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  I  would  not  spend  much  strength 
upon  those  little  school-boys  —  you  will  need  it  all  for 
something  better  and  braver  after  you  get  away.  It 
wTould  rejoice  my  heart  if  on  some  pleasant  morning  you’d 
turn  the  school-room  key  on  Irish  boys,  nurse  and  all, 
and  walk  away  to  freedom  and  the  sunshine  here  at 
home.  Father  says  all  Boston  wouldn’t  be  a  temptation 
to  you  another  year  —  I  wish  it  would  not  tempt  you  to 
stay  another  day.  Oh,  Austin,  it  is  wrong  to  tantalize 
you  so  while  you  are  braving  all  tilings  in  trying  to  fulfill 
duty.  Duty  is  black  and  brown  —  home  is  bright  and 
shining,  “  and  the  spirit  and  the  bride  say  come,  and  let 
him  that  ”  wandereth  come,  for  “  behold  all  things  are 
ready.”  We  are  having  such  lovely  weather  —  the  air 
is  as  sweet  and  still  —  now  and  then  a  gay  leaf  falling  — • 
the  crickets  sing  all  day  long  —  high  in  a  crimson  tree  a 
belated  bird  is  singing  —  a  thousand  little  painters  are 
tingeing  hill  and  dale.  I  admit  now,  Austin,  that  autumn 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  165 

is  most  beautiful,  and  spring  is  but  the  least,  yet  they 
“  differ  as  stars  ”  in  their  distinctive  glories.  How  happy 
if  you  wTere  here  to  share  .jtliese  pleasures  with  us  —  the 
fruit  should  be  more  sweet,  and  the  dying  day  more 
golden  —  merrier  the  falling  nut  if  with  you  we  gathered 
it  and  hid  it  down  deep  in  the  abyss  of  basket;  but  you 
complain  not,  wherefore  do  we? 

Tuesday  evening  we  had  a  beautiful  time  reading  and 
talking  of  the  good  times  of  last  summer,  and  we  an¬ 
ticipated  —  boasted  ourselves  of  to-morrow  —  of  the 
future  wTe  created,  and  all  of  us  went  to  ride  in  an  air- 
bubble  for  a  carriage.  We  cherish  all  the  past,  we  glide 
a-down  the  present,  awTake  yet  dreaming;  but  the  future 
of  ours  together  —  there  the  bird  sings  loudest,  and  the 
sun  shines  always  there.  .  .  . 

I  had  a  dissertation  from  E.  C.  a  day  or  two  ago  — 
don’t  know  which  was  the  author,  Plato  or  Socrates  — 
rather  think  Jove  had  a  finger  in  it.  .  .  .  They  all  send 
their  love.  Vinnie  sends  hers.  How  soon  you  will  be 
here!  Days,  flee  away  —  “  lest  with  a  whip  of  scorpions 
I  overtake  your  lingering.”  I  am  in  a  hurry  —  this  pen 
is  too  slow  for  me  —  “  it  hath  done  what  it  could.” 

Your  affectionate 

Emily 


To  the  same 

[Amherst,  before  “  Cattle  Show,”  1851] 

Friday  Morning 

.  .  .  The  breakfast  is  so  warm,  and  pussy  is  here  a-singing, 
and  the  tea-kettle  sings  too,  as  if  to  see  which  was  loudest, 
and  I  am  so  afraid  lest  kitty  should  be  beaten  —  yet  a 
shadow  falls  upon  my  morning  picture  —  where  is  the 


166 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


youth  so  bold,  the  bravest  of  our  fold  —  a  seat  is  empty 
here  —  spectres  sit  in  your  chair,  and  now  and  then 
nudge  father  with  their  long,  bony  elbows.  I  wish  you 
were  here,  dear  Austin  ;  the  dust  falls  on  the  bureau  in 
your  deserted  room,  and  gay,  frivolous  spiders  spin  away 
in  the  corners.  I  don’t  go  there  after  dark  whenever  I 
can  help  it,  for  the  twilight  seems  to  pause  there,  and  I 
am  half  afraid;  and  if  ever  I  have  to  go,  I  hurry  with  all 
my  might,  and  never  look  behind  me,  for  I  know  who  I 
should  see. 

Before  next  Tuesday  —  oh,  before  the  coming  stage, 
will  I  not  brighten  and  brush  it,  and  open  the  long-closed 
blinds,  and  with  a  sweeping  broom  will  I  not  bring  each 
spider  down  from  its  home  so  high,  and  tell  it  it  may  come 
back  again  when  master  has  gone  —  and  oh,  I  will  bid 
it  to  be  a  tardy  spider,  to  tarry  on  the  way;  and  I  will 
think  my  eye  is  fuller  than  sometimes,  though  why  I 
cannot  tell,  when  it  shall  rap  on  the  window  and  come  to 
live  again.  I  am  so  happy  when  I  know  how  soon  you 
are  coming  that  I  put  away  my  sewing  and  go  out  in  the 
yard  to  think.  I  have  tried  to  delay  the  frosts,  I  have 
coaxed  the  fading  flowers,  I  thought  I  could  detain  a  few 
of  the  crimson  leaves  until  you  had  smiled  upon  them; 
but  their  companions  call  them,  and  they  cannot  stay 
away. 

You  will  find  the  blue  hills,  Austin,  with  the  autumnal 
shadows  silently  sleeping  on  them,  and  there  will  be  a 
glory  lingering  round  the  day,  so  you’ll  know  autumn 
has  been  here;  and  the  setting  sun  will  tell  you,  if  you 
don’t  get  home  till  evening.  ...  I  thank  you  for  such  a 
long  letter,  and  yet  if  I  might  choose,  the  next  should  be 
a  longer.  I  think  a  letter  just  about  three  days  long  would 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  167 


make  me  happier  than  any  other  kind  of  one,  if  you 
please,  —  dated  at  Boston,  but  thanks  be  to  our  Father 
you  may  conclude  it  herq.  Everything  has  changed  since 
my  other  letter,  —  the  doors  are  shut  this  morning,  and 
all  the  kitchen  wall  is  covered  with  chilly  flies  who  are 
trying  to  warm  themselves,  —  poor  things,  they  do  not 
understand  that  there  are  no  summer  mornings  remaining 
to  them  and  me,  and  they  have  a  bewildered  air  which  is 
really  very  droll,  didn’t  one  feel  sorry  for  them.  You 
would  say  ’twas  a  gloomy  morning  if  you  were  sitting 
here,  —  the  frost  has  been  severe,  and  the  few  lingering 
leaves  seem  anxious  to  be  going,  and  wrap  their  faded 
cloaks  more  closely  about  them  as  if  to  shield  them  from 
the  chilly  northeast  wind.  The  earth  looks  like  some  poor 
old  lady  who  by  dint  of  pains  has  bloomed  e’en  till  now, 
yet  in  a  forgetful  moment  a  few  silver  hairs  from  out  her 
cap  come  stealing,  and  she  tucks  them  back  so  hastily 
and  thinks  nobody  sees.  The  cows  are  going  to  pasture, 
and  little  boys  with  their  hands  in  their  pockets  are 
whistling  to  try  to  keep  warm.  Don’t  think  that  the  sky 
wall  frown  so  the  day  when  you  come  home!  She  will 
smile  and  look  happy,  and  be  full  of  sunshine  then,  and 
even  should  she  frown  upon  her  child  returning,  there  is 
another  sky,  ever  serene  and  fair,  and  there  is  another 
sunshine,  though  it  be  darkness  there;  never  mind  faded 
forests,  Austin,  never  mind  silent  fields  —  here  is  a  little 
forest,  whose  leaf  is  ever  green ;  here  is  a  brighter  garden, 
where  not  a  frost  has  been ;  in  its  unfading  flowers  I  hear 
the  bright  bee  hum;  prithee,  my  brother,  into  my  garden 
come! 


Your  very  affectionate  sister 


168 


EMILY  DICKINSON 

To  the  same 
[November,  1851] 


Thursday  Evening 

Deak  Austin,  —  Something  seems  to  whisper  He  is 
thinking  of  home  this  evening,”  perhaps  because  it  rains, 
perhaps  because  it’s  evening  and  the  orchestra  of  winds 
perform  their  strange,  sad  music.  I  wouldn’t  wonder  if 
home  were  thinking  of  him;  and  it  seems  so  natural  for 
one  to  think  of  the  other,  perhaps  it  is  no  superstition  or 
omen  of  this  evening,  —  no  omen  at  all,  at  all,  as  Mrs. 
Mack  would  say. 

Father  is  staying  at  home  this  evening  it  is  so  incle¬ 
ment  —  Vinnie  diverts  his  mind  with  little  snatches  of 
music;  and  mother  mends  a  garment  to  make  it  snugger 
for  you  —  and  what  do  you  think  I  do  among  this  family 
circle?  I  am  thinking  of  you  with  all  my  might,  and  it 
just  occurs  to  me  to  note  a  few  of  my  thoughts  for  your 
own  inspection.  “  Keeping  a  diary  ”  is  not  familiar  to  me 
as  to  your  sister  Vinnie,  but  her  own  bright  example  is 
quite  a  comfort  to  me,  so  I’ll  try. 

I  waked  up  this  morning  thinking  for  all  the  world  I 
had  had  a  letter  from  you  —  just  as  the  seal  was  breaking, 
father  rapped  at  my  door.  I  was  sadly  disappointed  not 
to  go  on  and  read;  but  when  the  four  black  horses  came 
trotting  into  town,  and  their  load  was  none  the  heavier 
by  a  tiding  for  me  —  I  was  not  disappointed  then,  it  was 
harder  to  me  than  had  I  been  disappointed.  ...  I  found 
I  had  made  no  provision  for  any  such  time  as  that.  .  .  . 
Tire  weather  has  been  unpleasant  ever  since  you  went 
away  —  Monday  morning  we  waked  up  in  the  midst  of  a 
furious  snow-storm  —  the  snow  was  the  depth  of  an  inch; 
oh,  it  looked  so  wintry !  By-and-by  the  sun  came  out,  but 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  169 


the  wind  blew  violently  and  it  grew  so  cold  that  we 
gathered  all  the  quinces,  put  up  the  stove  in  the  sitting- 
room,  and  bade  the  woyld  good-by.  Kind  clouds  came 
over  at  evening;  still  the  sinking  thermometer  gave 
terrible  signs  of  what  would  be  on  the  morning.  At  last 
the  morning  came,  laden  with  mild  south  winds,  and  the 
winds  have  brought  the  rain,  so  here  we  are.  .  .  .  Your 
very  hasty  letter  just  at  your  return  rejoiced  us  —  that 
you  were  “better  —  happier  —  heartier.”  What  made 
you  think  of  such  beautiful  words  to  tell  us  how  you 
were,  and  how  cheerful  you  were  feeling?  It  did  us  a  world 
of  good.  How  little  the  scribe  thinks  of  the  value  of  his 
line  —  how  many  eager  eyes  will  search  its  every  mean¬ 
ing,  how  much  swifter  the  strokes  of  “the  little  mystic 
clock,  no  human  eye  hath  seen,  which  ticketh  on  and 
ticketh  on,  from  morning  until  e’en.”  If  it  were  not  that 
I  could  write  you,  you  could  not  go  away;  therefore  pen 
and  ink  are  very  excellent  things. 

We  had  new  brown  bread  for  tea  —  when  it  came 
smoking  on  and  we  sat  around  the  table,  how  I  did 
wish  a  slice  could  be  reserved  for  you!  You  shall  have  as 
many  loaves  as  we  have  eaten  slices  if  you  will  but  come 
home.  This  suggests  Thanksgiving,  you  will  soon  be 
here;  then  I  can’t  help  thinking  of  how,  when  we  rejoice, 
so  many  hearts  are  breaking  next  Thanksgiving  day. 
What  will  you  say,  Austin,  if  I  tell  you  that  Jennie  Grout 
and  merry  Martha  Kingman  will  spend  the  day  above? 
They  are  not  here  —  “  While  we  delayed  to  let  them  forth, 
angels  beyond  stayed  for  them.”  .  .  . 

Your  affectionate 


Emily 


170 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 

[Amherst,  November  17,  1851] 

Sunday  Afternoon 

Dear  Austin,  —  We  have  just  got  home  from  meeting  — • 
it  is  very  windy  and  cold  —  the  hills  from  our  kitchen 
window  are  just  crusted  with  snow,  which  with  their  blue 
mantillas  makes  them  seem  so  beautiful.  You  sat  just 
here  last  Sunday,  where  I  am  sitting  now;  and  our  voices 
were  nimbler  than  our  pens  can  be,  if  they  try  never  so 
hardly.  I  should  be  quite  sad  to-day,  thinking  about 
last  Sunday,  didn’t  another  Sabbath  smile  at  me  so 
pleasantly,  promising  me  on  its  word  to  present  you  here 
again  when  “  six  days’  work  is  done.” 

Father  and  mother  sit  in  state  in  the  sitting-room 
perusing  such  papers,  only,  as  they  are  well  assured,  have 
nothing  carnal  in  them;  Vinnie  is  eating  an  apple  which 
makes  me  think  of  gold,  and  accompanying  it  with  her 
favorite  Observer,  which,  if  you  recollect,  deprives  us 
many  a  time  of  her  sisterly  society.  Pussy  hasn’t  re¬ 
turned  from  the  afternoon  assembly,  so  you  have  us  all 
just  as  we  are  at  present.  We  were  very  glad  indeed  to 
hear  from  you  so  soon,  glad  that  a  cheerful  fire  met  you 
at  the  door.  I  do  well  remember  how  chilly  the  west  wind 
blew,  and  how  everything  shook  and  rattled  before  I  went 
to  sleep,  and  I  often  thought  of  you  in  the  midnight  car, 
and  hoped  you  were  not  lonely.  . .  .  We  are  thinking  most 
of  Thanksgiving  than  anything  else  just  now  —  how 
full  will  be  the  circle,  less  then  by  none  —  how  the  things 
will  smoke  —  how  the  board  will  groan  with  the  thou¬ 
sand  savory  viands  —  how  when  the  day  is  done,  lo,  the 
evening  cometh,  laden  with  merrie  laugh  and  happy  con- 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  171 


versation,  and  then  the  sleep  and  the  dream  each  of  a 
knight  or  “  Ladie  ”  —  how  I  love  to  see  them,  a  beautiful 
company  coming  down  the  hill  which  men  call  the  Future, 
with  their  hearts  full  of  joy  and  their  hands  of  gladness. 
Thanksgiving  indeed  to  a  family  united  once  more  to¬ 
gether  before  they  go  away.  .  .  .  Don’t  mind  the  days  — 
some  of  them  are  long  ones,  but  who  cares  for  length 
when  breadth  is  in  store  for  him?  Or  who  minds  the  cross 
who  knows  he'll  have  a  crown?  I  wish  I  could  imbue  you 
with  all  the  strength  and  courage  which  can  be  given  men 
—  I  wish  I  could  assure  you  of  the  constant  remembrance 
of  those  you  leave  at  home  —  I  wish  —  but  oh !  how 
vainly  —  that  I  could  bring  you  back  again  and  never 
more  to  stray.  You  are  tired  now,  dear  Austin,  with  my 
incessant  din,  but  I  can’t  help  saying  any  of  these  things. 

The  very  warmest  love  from  Vinnie  and  every  one  of 
us.  I  am  never  ready  to  go. 

Reluctant 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[December,  18511 

Monday  Morning 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  I  was  so  glad  to  get  your  letter.  I 
had  been  making  calls  all  Saturday  afternoon,  and  came 
home  very  tired,  and  a  little  disconsolate,  so  your  letter 
was  more  than  welcome.  .  .  .  Oh  Austin,  you  don  t  know 
how  we  all  wished  for  you  yesterday.  We  had  such  a 
splendid  sermon  from  Professor  Park  —  I  never  heard 
anything  like  it,  and  don’t  expect  to  again,  till  we  stand 
at  the  great  white  throne,  and  he  reads  from  the  Book, 
the  Lamb’s  Book.”  The  students  and  chapel  people  all 


172 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


came  to  our  church,  and  it  was  very  full,  and  still,  so  still 
the  buzzing  of  a  fly  would  have  boomed  like  a  cannon. 
And  when  it  was  all  over,  and  that  wonderful  man  sat 
down,  people  stared  at  each  other,  and  looked  as  wan  and 
wild  as  if  they  had  seen  a  spirit,  and  wondered  they  had 
not  died.  How  I  wish  you  had  heard  him  —  I  thought  of 
it  all  the  time. . . . 

Affectionately 

Emiljb 


To  the  same 
[Amherst,  January,  1852] 

Monday  Morning 

Did  you  think  I  was  tardy,  Austin?  For  two  Sunday 
afternoons  it  has  been  so  cold  and  cloudy  that  I  didn’t 
feel  in  my  very  happiest  mood,  and  so  I  did  not  write 
until  next  Monday  morning,  determining  in  my  heart 
never  to  write  to  you  in  any  but  cheerful  spirits. 

Even  this  morning,  Austin,  I  am  not  in  merry  case,  for 
it  snows  slowly  and  solemnly,  and  hardly  an  outdoor 
thing  can  be  seen  a-stirring  —  now  and  then  a  man  goes 
by  with  a  large  cloak  wrapped  around  him,  and  shivering 
at  that;  and  now  and  then  a  stray  kitten  out  on  some 
urgent  errand  creeps  through  the  flakes  and  crawls  so 
fast  as  may  crawl  half  frozen  away.  I  am  glad  for  the 
sake  of  your  body  that  you  are  not  here  this  morning,  for 
it  is  a  trying  time  for  fingers  and  toes  —  for  the  heart’s 
sake  I  would  verily  have  you  here.  You  know  there  are 
winter  mornings  when  the  cold  without  only  adds  to  the 
warm  within,  and  the  more  it  snows  and  the  harder  it 
blows  brighter  the  fires  blaze,  and  chirps  more  merrily 
the  “  cricket  on  the  hearth.”  It  is  hardly  cheery  enough 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  173 


for  such  a  scene  this  morning,  and  yet  methinks  it  would 
be  if  you  were  only  here.  The  future  full  of  sleigh-rides 
would  chase  the  gloom  fyom  our  minds  which  only  deep¬ 
ens  and  darkens  with  eyery  flake  that  falls. 

Black  Fanny  would  “  toe  the  mark”  if  you  should  be 
here  to-morrow;  but  as  the  prospects  are,  I  presume 
Black  Fanny’s  hoofs  will  not  attempt  to  fly.  Do  you 
have  any  snow  in  Boston?  Enough  for  a  ride,  I  hope, 
for  the  sake  of  “Auld  Lang  Syne.”  Perhaps  the  “  ladie  ” 
of  curls  would  not  object  to  a  drive.  .  .  .We  miss  you 
more  and  more,  we  do  not  become  accustomed  to  separa¬ 
tion  from  you.  I  almost  wish  sometimes  we  needn’t  miss 
you  so  much,  since  duty  claims  a  year  of  you  entirely  to 
herself ;  and  then  again  I  think  that  it  is  pleasant  to  miss 
you  if  you  must  go  away,  and  I  would  not  have  it  other¬ 
wise,  even  if  I  could.  In  every  pleasure  and  pain  you 
come  up  to  our  minds  so  wishfully  —  we  know  you’d 
enjoy  our  joy,  and  if  you  were  with  us,  Austin,  we  could 
bear  little  trials  more  cheerfully.  .  .  .  When  I  know  of 
anything  funny  I  am  just  as  apt  to  cry,  far  more  so  than 
to  laugh,  for  I  know  who  loves  jokes  best,  and  who  is  not 
here  to  enjoy  them.  We  don’t  have  many  jokes,  though, 
now,  it  is  pretty  much  all  sobriety;  and  we  do  not  have 
much  poetry,  father  having  made  up  his  mind  that  it’s 
pretty  much  all  real  life.  Father’s  real  life  and  mine 
sometimes  come  into  collision  but  as  yet  escape  unhurt. 
.  .  .  I  am  so  glad  you  are  well  and  in  such  happy  spirits  — • 
both  happy  and  well  is  a  great  comfort  to  us  when  you 
are  far  away. 


Emilie 


174 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 
[February  6,  1852] 

Friday  Morning 

. . .  Since  we  have  written  you  the  grand  railroad  decision 
is  made,  and  there  is  great  rejoicing  throughout  this 
town  and  the  neighboring;  that  is, Sunderland,  Montague, 
and  Belchertown.  Everybody  is  wide  awake,  everything 
is  stirring,  the  streets  are  full  of  people  walking  cheeringly, 
and  you  should  really  be  here  to  partake  of  the  jubilee. 
The  event  was  celebrated  by  D.  Warner  and  cannon;  and 
the  silent  satisfaction  in  the  hearts  of  all  is  its  crowning 
attestation. 

Father  is  really  sober  from  excessive  satisfaction,  and 
bears  his  honors  with  a  most  becoming  air.  Nobody 
believes  it  yet,  it  seems  like  a  fairy  tale,  a  most  miraculous 
event  in  the  lives  of  us  all.  The  men  begin  working  next 
week;  only  think  of  it,  Austin;  why,  I  verily  believe  we 
shall  fall  down  and  worship  the  first  “son  of  Erin”  that 
comes,  and  the  first  sod  he  turns  will  be  preserved  as 
an  emblem  of  the  struggle  and  victory  of  our  heroic 
fathers.  Such  old  fellows  as  Col.  S.  and  his  wife  fold  their 
arms  complacently  and  say,  “Well,  I  declare,  we  have 
got  it  after  all.”  Got  it,  you  good-for-nothings!  and  so 
we  have,  in  spite  of  sneers  and  pities  and  insults  from  all 
around;  and  we  will  keep  it  too,  in  spite  of  earth  and 
heaven !  How  I  wish  you  were  here  —  it  is  really  too  bad, 
Austin,  at  such  a  time  as  now.  I  miss  your  big  hurrahs, 
and  the  famous  stir  you  make  upon  all  such  occasions; 
but  it  is  a  comfort  to  know  that  you  are  here  —  that 
your  whole  soul  is  here,  and  though  apparently  absent, 
yet  present  in  the  highest  and  the  truest  sense.  .  .  .  Take 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  175 


good  care  of  yourself,  Austin,  and  think  much  of  us  all, 
for  we  do  so  of  you. 

t  Emilie 

To  the  same 
[March  24,  1852] 

Wednesday  Morn 

You  wouldn’t  think  it  was  spring,  Austin,  if  you  were  at 
home  this  morning,  for  we  had  a  great  snowstorm  yester¬ 
day,  and  things  are  all  white  this  morning.  It  sounds 
funny  enough  to  hear  birds  singing  and  sleigh-bells  at  a 
time.  But  it  won’t  last  long,  so  you  needn’t  think  ’twill 
be  winter  at  the  time  when  you  come  home. 

I  waited  a  day  or  two,  thinking  I  might  hear  from  you, 
but  you  will  be  looking  for  me,  and  wondering  where  I 
am,  so  I  sha’n’t  wait  any  longer.  We’re  rejoiced  that 
you’re  coming  home  —  the  first  thing  we  said  to  father 
when  he  got  out  of  the  stage  was  to  ask  if  you  were  com¬ 
ing.  I  was  sure  you  would  all  the  while,  for  father  said 
“of  course  you  would,”  he  should  “  consent  to  no  other 
arrangement,”  and  as  you  say,  Austin,  “  what  father 
says  he  means.”  How  very  soon  it  will  be  now  —  why, 
when  I  really  think  of  it,  how  near  and  how  happy  it  is ! 
My  heart  grows  light  so  fast  that  I  could  mount  a  grass¬ 
hopper  and  gallop  around  the  world,  and  not  fatigue  him 
any!  The  sugar  weather  holds  on,  and  I  do  believe  it 

will  stay  until  you  come - “  Mrs.  S.”  is  very  feeble; 

“  can’t  bear  allopathic  treatment,  can’t  have  homoeo¬ 
pathic,  don’t  want  hydropathic,”  oh,  what  a  pickle  she  is 
in !  Shouldn’t  think  she  would  deign  to  live,  it  is  so  decid¬ 
edly  vulgar!  They  have  not  yet  concluded  where  to  move 
—  Mrs.  W.  will  perhaps  obtain  board  in  the  celestial  city. 


176 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


but  I’m  sure  I  can’t  imagine  what  will  become  of  the 
rest.  .  .  .  Much  love  from  us  all. 

Emilie 


To  the  same 


[May  10,  1852] 

Monday  Morning,  5  o’c. 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  Vinnie  will  tell  you  all  the  news, 
so  I  will  take  a  little  place  to  describe  a  thunder-shower 
which  occurred  yesterday  afternoon,  —  the  very  first 
of  the  season.  Father  and  Vinnie  were  at  meeting, 
mother  asleep  in  her  room,  and  I  at  work  by  my  window 
on  a  “  Lyceum  lecture.”  The  air  was  really  scorching, 
the  sun  red  and  hot,  and  you  know  just  how  the  birds 
sing  before  a  thunder-storm,  a  sort  of  hurried  and  agitated 
song  —  pretty  soon  it  began  to  thunder,  and  the  great 
“  cream-colored  heads  ”  peeped  out  of  their  windows. 
Then  came  the  wind  and  rain,  and  I  hurried  around  the 
house  to  shut  all  the  doors  and  windows.  I  wish  you  had 
seen  it  come,  so  cool  and  so  refreshing  —  and  everything 
glistening  from  it  as  with  a  golden  dew  —  I  thought  of 
you  all  the  time.  This  morning  is  fair  and  delightful. 
You  will  awake  in  dust,  and  with  it  the  ceaseless  din  of 
the  untiring  city.  Wouldn’t  you  change  your  dwelling  for 
my  palace  in  the  dew?  Good-by  for  now.  I  shall  see  you 
so  soon. 

E. 


To  the  same 


[Amherst,  July  23,  1852] 

Sunday  Night 

.  .  .You’d  better  not  come  home;  I  say  the  law  will 
have  you,  a  pupil  of  the  law  o’ertaken  by  the  law,  and 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  177 


brought  to  condign  punishment,  —  scene  for  angels  and 
men,  or  rather  for  archangels,  who  being  a  little  higher 
would  seem  to  have  a  ’vantage  so  far  as  view’s  concerned. 
“  Are  you  pretty  comfortable,  though,”  —  and  are  you 
deaf  and  dumb  and  gone  to  the  asylum  where  such  af¬ 
flicted  persons  learn  to  hold  their  tongues? 

The  next  time  you  aren’t  going  to  write  me,  I’d  thank 
you  to  let  me  know  —  this  kind  of  'protracted  insult  is 
what  no  man  can  bear.  Fight  with  me  like  a  man  —  let 
me  have  fair  shot,  and  you  are  caput  mortuum  et  cap-a-pie, 
and  that  ends  the  business!  If  you  really  think  I  so 
deserve  this  silence,  tell  me  why  —  how  —  I'll  be  a 
thorough  scamp  or  else  I  won’t  be  any,  just  which  you 
prefer. 

T - of  S - ’s  class  went  to  Boston  yesterday;  it 

was  in  my  heart  to  send  an  apple  by  him  for  your 
private  use,  but  father  overheard  some  of  my  intentions, 
and  said  they  were  “  rather  small  ”  —  whether  this  re¬ 
mark  was  intended  for  the  apple,  or  for  my  noble  self  I 
did  not  think  to  ask  him;  I  rather  think  he  intended  to 
give  us  both  a  cut  —  however,  he  may  not! 

You  are  coming  home  on  Wednesday,  as  perhaps  you 
know,  and  I  am  very  happy  in  prospect  of  your  coming 
and  hope  you  want  to  see  us  as  much  as  we  do  you. 
Mother  makes  nicer  pies  with  reference  to  your  coming, 
I  arrange  my  thoughts  in  a  convenient  shape,  Vinnie 
grows  only  perter  and  more  pert  day  by  day. 

The  horse  is  looking  finely  —  better  than  in  his  life  — 
by  which  you  may  think  him  dead  unless  I  add  before. 
The  carriage  stands  in  state  all  covered  in  the  chaise- 
house  —  we  have  one  foundling  hen  into  whose  young 
mind  I  seek  to  instil  the  fact  that  “  Massa  is  a-comin!  ” 


178 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


The  garden  is  amazing  —  we  have  beets  and  beans, 
have  had  splendid  potatoes  for  three  weeks  now.  Old 
Amos  weeds  and  hoes  and  has  an  oversight  of  all  thought¬ 
less  vegetables.  The  apples  are  fine  and  large  in  spite  of 
my  impression  that  father  called  them  “small.” 

Yesterday  there  was  a  fire.  At  about  three  in  the  after¬ 
noon  Mr.  Kimberly’s  barn  was  discovered  to  be  on  fire; 
the  wind  was  blowing  a  gale  directly  from  the  west,  and 
having  had  no  rain,  the  roofs  [were]  as  dry  as  stubble. 
Mr.  Palmer’s  house  was  charred  —  the  little  house  of 
father’s  —  and  Mr.  Kimberly’s  also.  The  engine  was 
broken,  and  it  seemed  for  a  little  while  as  if  the  whole 
street  must  go;  the  Kimberlys’  barn  was  burnt  down, 
and  the  house  much  charred  and  injured,  though  not  at 
all  destroyed  —  Mr.  Palmer’s  barn  took  fire,  and  Deacon 
Leland’s  also,  but  were  extinguished  with  only  part 
burned  roofs.  We  all  feel  very  thankful  at  such  a  narrow 
escape.  Father  says  there  was  never  such  imminent 
danger,  and  such  miraculous  escape.  Father  and  Mr. 
Frink  took  charge  of  the  fire  —  or  rather  of  the  water, 
since  fire  usually  takes  care  of  itself.  The  men  all  worked 
like  heroes,  and  after  the  fire  was  out  father  gave  com¬ 
mands  to  have  them  march  to  Howe’s  where  an  enter¬ 
tainment  was  provided  for  them.  After  the  whole  was 
over  they  gave  “three  cheers  for  Edward  Dickinson,” 
and  three  more  for  the  insurance  company.  On  the  whole, 
it  is  very  wonderful  that  we  didn’t  all  burn  up,  and  we 
ought  to  hold  our  tongues  and  be  very  thankful.  If  there 
must  be  a  fire,  I’m  sorry  it  couldn’t  wait  until  you  had 
got  home,  because  you  seem  to  enjoy  such  things  so  very 
much. 

There  is  nothing  of  moment  now  which  I  can  find  tc 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  179 


tell  you,  except  a  case  of  measles  in  Hartford.  .  .  .  Good- 
by,  Sir.  Fare  you  well.  My  benison  to  your  school. 

fo  the  same 
[Amherst,  Spring,  1853] 

Tuesday  Noon 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  How  soon  now  you  are  coming, 
and  how  happy  we  are  in  the  thought  of  seeing  you!  I 
can’t  realize  that  you  will  come,  it  is  so  still  and  lonely 
it  doesn’t  seem  possible  it  can  be  otherwise;  but  we  shall 
see,  when  the  nails  hang  full  of  coats  again,  and  the  chairs 
hang  full  of  hats,  and  I  can  count  the  slippers  under  the 
chair.  Oh,  Austin,  how  we  miss  them  all,  and  more  than 
them,  somebody  who  used  to  hang  them  there,  and  get 
many  a  hint  ungentle  to  carry  them  away.  Those  times 
seem  far  off  now,  a  great  way,  as  things  we  did  when 
children.  I  wish  we  were  children  now  —  I  wish  we  were 
always  children,  how  to  grow  up  I  don’t  know.  .  .  . 
Cousin  J.  has  made  us  an  iEolian  harp  which  plays  beauti¬ 
fully  whenever  there  is  a  breeze. 

Austin,  you  mustn’t  care  if  your  letters  do  not  get 
here  just  when  you  think  they  will  —  they  are  always 
new  to  us,  and  delightful  always,  and  the  more  you  send 
us  the  happier  we  shall  be.  We  all  send  our  love  to  you, 
and  think  much  and  say  much  of  seeing  you  again  — 
keep  well  till  you  come,  and  if  knowing  that  we  all  love 
you  makes  you  happier,  then,  Austin,  you  may  sing  the 
whole  day  long! 


Affectionately 


Emilie 


180 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 

[Amherst,  March  18,  1853] 

Friday  Morning 

Dear  Austin,  —  I  presume  you  remember  a  story  that 
Vinnie  tells  of  a  breach  of  promise  case  where  the  cor¬ 
respondence  between  the  parties  consisted  of  a  reply 
from  the  girl  to  one  she  had  never  received  but  was  daily 
expecting.  Well,  I  am  writing  an  answer  to  the  letter  I 
haven’t  had,  so  you  will  see  the  force  of  the  accompanying 
anecdote.  I  have  been  looking  for  you  ever  since  des¬ 
patching  my  last,  but  this  is  a  fickle  world,  and  it’s  a 
great  source  of  complacency  that  ’twill  all  be  burned  up 
by  and  by.  I  should  be  pleased  with  a  line  when  you’ve 
published  your  work  to  father,  if  it’s  perfectly  convenient! 

Your  letters  are  very  funny  indeed  —  about  the  only 
jokes  we  have,  now  you  are  gone,  and  I  hope  you  will 
send  us  one  as  often  as  you  can.  Father  takes  great  delight 
in  your  remarks  to  him  —  puts  on  his  spectacles  and  reads 
them  o’er  and  o’er  as  if  it  was  a  blessing  to  have  an  only 
son.  He  reads  all  the  letters  you  write,  as  soon  as  he  gets 
them,  at  the  post-office,  no  matter  to  whom  addressed; 
then  he  makes  me  read  them  aloud  at  the  supper  table 
again,  and  when  he  gets  home  in  the  evening,  he  cracks  a 
few  walnuts,  puts  his  spectacles  on,  and  with  your  last 
in  his  hand,  sits  down  to  enjoy  the  evening.  ...  I  believe 
at  this  moment,  Austin,  that  there’s  nobody  living  for 
whom  father  has  such  respect  as  for  you.  But  my  paper  is 
getting  low,  and  I  must  hasten  to  tell  you  that  we  are 
very  happy  to  hear  good  news  from  you,  that  we  hope 
you’ll  have  pleasant  times  and  learn  a  great  deal  wdiile 
you’re  gone,  and  come  back  to  us  greater  and  happier  for 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  181 

the  life  lived  at  Cambridge.  We  miss  you  more  and  more. 
I  wish  that  we  could  see  you,  but  letters  come  the  next  — 
write  them  often,  and  tqll  us  everything. 

Affectionately 

Emilie 


To  the  same 
[June  14,  1853] 

...  We  have  been  free  from  company  by  the  “  Amherst 
and  Belchertown  Railroad  ”  since  J.  went  home,  though 
we  live  in  constant  fear  of  some  other  visitation.  “  Oh, 
would  some  power  the  gif  tie  gie”  folks  to  see  themselves 
as  we  see  them.  —  Burns. 

I  have  read  the  poems,  Austin,  and  am  going  to  read 
them  again.  They  please  me  very  much,  but  I  must  read 
them  again  before  I  know  just  what  I  think  of  “Alexander 
Smith.”  They  are  not  very  coherent,  but  there’s  a  good 
deal  of  exquisite  frenzy,  and  some  wonderful  figures  as 
ever  I  met  in  my  life.  We  will  talk  about  it  again.  The 
grove  looks  nicely,  Austin,  and  we  think  must  certainly 
grow.  We  love  to  go  there  —  it  is  a  charming  place. 
Everything  is  singing  now,  and  everything  is  beautiful 
that  can  be  in  its  life.  .  .  .  The  time  for  the  New  London 
trip  has  not  been  fixed  upon.  I  sincerely  wish  it  may 
wait  until  you  get  home  from  Cambridge  if  you  would 
like  to  go. 

The  cars  continue  thriving  —  a  good  many  passengers 
seem  to  arrive  from  somewhere,  though  nobody  knows 
from  where.  Father  expects  his  new  buggy  to  arrive  by 
the  cars  every  day  now,  and  that  will  help  a  little.  I 
expect  all  our  grandfathers  and  all  their  country  cousins 
will  come  here  to  spend  Commencement,  and  don’t 


182  EMILY  DICKINSON 

doubt  the  stock  will  rise  several  per  cent  that  week.  If 
we  children  could  obtain  board  for  the  week  in  some 
“  vast  wilderness/’  I  think  we  should  have  good 
times. . . . 


To  the  same 
[June  20,  1853] 

Monday  Morning 

My  dear  Austin,  —  ...  The  New  London  day  passed 
off  grandly,  so  all  the  people  said.  It  was  pretty  hot  and 
dusty,  but  nobody  cared  for  that.  Father  was,  as  usual, 
chief  marshal  of  the  day,  and  went  marching  around 
with  New  London  at  his  heels  like  some  old  Roman 
general  upon  a  triumph  day.  Mrs.  H.  got  a  capital  dinner, 
and  was  very  much  praised.  Carriages  flew  like  sparks, 
hither  and  thither  and  yon,  and  they  all  said  twas  fine. 
I  “spose”  it  was.  I  sat  in  Professor  Tyler’s  woods  and 
saw  the  train  move  off,  and  then  came  home  again  for 
fear  somebody  would  see  me,  or  ask  me  how  I  did.  Dr. 
Holland  was  here,  and  called  to  see  us  was  very 
pleasant  indeed,  inquired  for  you,  and  asked  mother  if 
Yinnie  and  I  might  come  and  see  them  in  Springfield. 
.  .  .  We  all  send  you  our  love. 

Emilie 


To  the  same 

[Postmarked,  July  2,  1853] 

Friday  Afternoon 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  Some  of  the  letters  you’ve  sent  us 
we  have  received,  and  thank  you  for  affectionately. 
Some  we  have  not  received,  but  thank  you  for  the  mem¬ 
ory,  of  which  the  emblem  perished.  Where  all  those  letters 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  183 

go,  yours  and  ours,  somebody  surely  knows,  but  we  do 
not.  There’s  a  new  postmaster  to-day,  but  we  don’t 
know  who’s  to  blame.  *You  never  wrote  me  a  letter, 
Austin,  which  I  liked  half  so  well  as  the  one  father  brought 
me.  We  think  of  your  coming  home  with  a  great  deal  of 
happiness,  and  are  glad  you  want  to  come. 

Father  said  he  never  saw  you  looking  in  better  health 
or  seeming  in  finer  spirits.  He  didn’t  say  a  word  about 
the  Hippodrome  or  the  Museum,  and  he  came  home  so 
stern  that  none  of  us  dared  to  ask  him,  and  besides  grand¬ 
mother  was  here,  and  you  certainly  don’t  think  I’d  allude 
to  a  Hippodrome  in  the  presence  of  that  lady!  I'd  as 
soon  think  of  popping  fire-crackers  in  the  presence  of 
Peter  the  Great.  But  you’ll  tell  us  when  you  get  home  — 
how  soon  —  how  soon! ...  I  admire  the  “Poems”  very 
much.  We  all  send  our  love  to  you  —  shall  write  you 
again  Sunday.  Emilie 


To  the  same 
[1853] 

I  have  had  some  things  from  you  to  which  I  perceive  no 
meaning.  They  either  were  very  vast,  or  they  didn’t 
mean  anything,  I  don’t  know  certainly  which.  What  did 
you  mean  by  a  note  you  sent  me  day  before  yesterday? 
Father  asked  me  what  you  wrote,  and  I  gave  it  to  him  to 
read.  He  looked  very  much  confused,  and  finally  put  on 
his  spectacles,  which  didn’t  seem  to  help  him  much  —  I 
don’t  think  a  telescope  would  have  assisted  him.  I  hope 
you  will  write  to  me  —  I  love  to  hear  from  you,  and  now 
Vinnie  is  gone  I  shall  feel  very  lonely.  .  .  .  Love  for  them 
all  if  there  are  those  to  love  and  think  of  me,  and  more 
and  most  for  you,  from  Emily 


184 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 
[About  1853] 

Friday  Evening 

Thank  you,  dear  Mrs.  Holland  —  Vinnie  and  I  will 
come,  if  you  would  like  to  have  us.  We  should  have 
written  before,  but  mother  has  not  been  well,  and  we 
hardly  knew  whether  we  could  leave  her,  but  she  is 
better  now,  and  I  write  quite  late  this  evening,  that  if 
you  still  desire  it,  Vinnie  and  I  will  come.  Then,  dear 
Mrs.  Holland,  if  agreeable  to  you,  we  will  take  the 
Amherst  train  on  Tuesday  morning,  for  Springfield,  and 
be  with  you  at  noon. 

The  cars  leave  here  at  nine  o’clock,  and  I  think  reach 
Springfield  at  twelve.  I  can  think  just  how  we  dined  with 
you  a  year  ago  from  now,  and  it  makes  my  heart  beat 
faster  to  think  perhaps  we’ll  see  you  so  little  while  from 
now. 

To  live  a  thousand  years  would  not  make  me  forget 
the  day  and  night  we  spent  there,  and  while  I  write  the 
words,  I  don’t  believe  I’m  coming,  so  sweet  it  seems  to 
me.  I  hope  we  shall  not  tire  you ;  with  all  your  other  cares, 
we  fear  we  should  not  come,  but  you  will  not  let  us  trouble 
you,  will  you,  dear  Mrs.  Holland? 

Father  and  mother  ask  a  very  warm  remembrance  to 
yourself  and  Dr.  Holland. 

We  were  happy  the  grapes  and  figs  seemed  acceptable 
to  you,  and  wished  there  were  many  more.  I  am  very 
sorry  to  hear  that  “Kate”  has  such  excellent  lungs. 
With  all  your  other  cares,  it  must  be  quite  a  trial  to 
you. 

It  is  also  a  source  of  pleasure  to  me  that  Annie  goes  to 


TO  DR.  AND  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND  185 

sleep,  on  account  of  the  “interregnum”  it  must  afford  to 
you. 

Three  days  and  we  aro  there  —  happy  —  very  happy ! 
To-morrow  I  will  sew,  but  I  shall  think  of  you,  and  Sun¬ 
day  sing  and  pray  —  yet  I  shall  not  forget  you,  and 
Monday’s  very  near,  and  here’s  to  me  on  Tuesday! 
Good-night,  dear  Mrs.  Holland  —  I  see  I’m  getting  wild 
—  you  will  forgive  me  all,  and  not  forget  me  all,  though? 
\  innie  is  fast  asleep,  or  her  love  would  be  here  —  though 
she  is,  it  is.  Once  more,  if  it  is  fair,  we  will  come  on 
Tuesday,  and  you  love  to  have  us,  but  if  not  convenient, 
please  surely  tell  us  so.  Affectionately 

Emilie 


To  Dr.  and  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 

Tuesday  Evening 

Dear  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Holland,  —  dear  Minnie  —  it  is 
cold  to-night,  but  the  thought  of  you  so  warm,  that  I  sit 
by  it  as  a  fireside,  and  am  never  cold  any  more.  I  love  to 
write  to  you  —  it  gives  my  heart  a  holiday  and  sets  the 
bells  to  ringing.  If  prayers  had  any  answers  to  them, 
you  were  all  here  to-night,  but  I  seek  and  I  don’t  find, 
and  knock  and  it  is  not  opened.  Wonder  if  God  is  just  — 
presume  He  is,  however,  and  ’twas  only  a  blunder  of 
Matthew’s. 

I  think  mine  is  the  case,  where  when  they  ask  an  egg, 
they  get  a  scorpion,  for  I  keep  wishing  for  you,  keep 
shutting  up  my  eyes  and  looking  toward  the  sky,  asking 
with  all  my  might  for  you,  and  yet  you  do  not  come.  I 
wrote  to  you  last  week,  but  thought  you  would  laugh  at 
me,  and  call  me  sentimental,  so  I  kept  my  lofty  letter  for 
“Adolphus  Hawkins,  Esq.” 


186 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


If  it  wasn’t  for  broad  daylight,  and  cooking-stoves,  and 
roosters.  I’m  afraid  you  would  have  occasion  to  smile  at 
my  letters  often,  but  so  sure  as  “this  mortal  essays 
immortality,  a  crow  from  a  neighboring  farm-yard  dissi¬ 
pates  the  illusion,  and  I  am  here  again. 

And  what  I  mean  is  this  —  that  I  thought  of  you  all 
last  week,  until  the  world  grew  rounder  than  it  some¬ 
times  is,  and  I  broke  several  dishes. 

Monday,  I  solemnly  resolved  I  would  be  sensible,  so  I 
wore  thick  shoes,  and  thought  of  Dr.  Humphrey,  and  the 
Moral  Law.  One  glimpse  of  “The  Republican”  makes 
me  break  things  again  —  I  read  in  it  every  night. 

Who  writes  those  funny  accidents,  where  railroads 
meet  each  other  unexpectedly,  and  gentlemen  in  factories 
get  their  heads  cut  off  quite  informally?  The  author,  too, 
relates  them  in  such  a  sprightly  way,  that  they  are  quite 
attractive.  Vinnie  was  disappointed  to-night,  that  there 
were  not  more  accidents  —  I  read  the  news  aloud,  while 
Vinnie  was  sewing.  “The  Republican ”  seems  to  us  like  a 
letter  from  you,  and  we  break  the  seal  and  read  it 
eagerly. .  .  . 

Vinnie  and  I  talked  of  you  as  we  sewed,  this  afternoon. 
I  said  —  “how  far  they  seem  from  us,”  but  Vinnie  an¬ 
swered  me  “only  a  little  way.”  ...  I’d  love  to  be  a  bird 
or  bee,  that  whether  hum  or  sing,  still  might  be  near  you. 

Heaven  is  large  —  is  it  not?  Life  is  short  too,  isn’t  it? 
Then  when  one  is  done,  is  there  not  another,  and  —  and 
—  then  if  God  is  willing,  we  are  neighbors  then.  Vinnie 
and  mother  send  their  love.  Mine  too  is  here.  My  letter 
as  a  bee,  goes  laden.  Please  love  us  and  remember  us. 
Please  write  us  very  soon,  and  tell  us  how  you  are.  .  . . 

Affectionately 


Emilie 


TO  DR.  AND  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND  187 


To  the  same 
[Lat^,  Autumn,  1853] 

Sabbath  Afternoon 

Dear  Friends,  —  I  thought  I  would  write  again.  I 
write  you  many  letters  with  pens  which  are  not  seen. 
Do  you  receive  them? 

I  think  of  you  all  to-day,  and  dreamed  of  you  last  night. 
When  father  rapped  on  my  door  to  wake  me  this  morn¬ 
ing,  I  was  walking  with  you  in  the  most  wonderful  garden, 
and  helping  you  pick  —  roses,  and  though  we  gathered 
with  all  our  might,  the  basket  was  never  full.  And  so  all 
day  I  pray  that  I  may  walk  with  you,  and  gather  roses 
again,  and  as  night  draws  on,  it  pleases  me,  and  I  count 
impatiently  the  hours  ’tween  me  and  the  darkness,  and 
the  dream  of  you  and  the  roses,  and  the  basket  never  full. 

God  grant  the  basket  fill  not,  till,  with  hands  purer  and 
whiter,  we  gather  flowers  of  gold  in  baskets  made  of  pearl; 
higher  —  higher !  It  seems  long  since  we  heard  from  you 

—  long,  since  how  little  Annie  was,  or  any  one  of  you  — • 
so  long  since  Cattle  Show,  when  Dr.  Holland  was  with  us. 
Oh,  it  always  seems  a  long  while  from  our  seeing  you,  and 
even  when  at  your  house,  the  nights  seemed  much  more 
long  than  they’re  wont  to  do,  because  separated  from  you. 
I  want  so  much  to  know  if  the  friends  are  all  well  in  that 
dear  cot  in  Springfield  —  and  if  well  whether  happy,  and 
happy  —  how  happy,  and  why,  and  what  bestows  the 
joy?  And  then  those  other  questions,  asked  again  and 
again,  whose  answers  are  so  sweet,  do  they  love  —  re¬ 
member  us  —  wish  sometimes  we  were  there?  Ah,  friends 

—  dear  friends  —  perhaps  my  queries  tire  you,  but  I  so 
long  to  know. 


188 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


The  minister  to-day,  not  our  own  minister,  preached 
about  death  and  judgment,  and  what  would  become  of 
those,  meaning  Austin  and  me,  who  behaved  improperly 
—  and  somehow  the  sermon  scared  me,  and  father  and 
Vinnie  looked  very  solemn  as  if  the  whole  was  true,  and  I 
would  not  for  worlds  have  them  know  that  it  troubled  me, 
but  I  longed  to  come  to  you,  and  tell  you  all  about  it,  and 
learn  how  to  be  better.  He  preached  such  an  awful 
sermon  though,  that  I  didn  t  much  think  I  should  ever 
see  you  again  until  the  Judgment  Day,  and  then  you 
would  not  speak  to  me,  according  to  his  story.  The  sub¬ 
ject  of  perdition  seemed  to  please  him,  somehow.  It 
seems  very  solemn  to  me.  I'll  tell  you  all  about  it,  when  I 
see  you  again. 

I  wonder  what  you  are  doing  to-day  —  if  you  have  been 
to  meeting?  To-day  has  been  a  fair  day,  very  still  and 
blue.  To-night  the  crimson  children  are  playing  in  the 
West,  and  to-morrow  will  be  colder.  How  sweet  if  I  could 
see  you,  and  talk  of  all  these  things!  Please  write  us  very 
soon.  The  days  with  you  last  September  seem  a  great 
way  off,  and  to  meet  you  again  delightful.  I  am  sure  it 
won’t  be  long  before  we  sit  together. 

Then  will  I  not  repine,  knowing  that  bird  of  mine, 
though  flown  —  learneth  beyond  the  sea,  melody  new  for 
me,  and  will  return.  Affectionately 

Emily 

[This  little  poem  was  enclosed  in  the  foregoing  letter] 

Truth  is  as  old  as  God, 

His  twin  identity  — 

And  will  endure  as  long  as  He, 

A  co-eternity, 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  189 


And  perish  on  the  day 
That  He  is  borne  away 
From  mansion  of  the  universe, 
A  lifeless  Deity. 


To  the  same 

[Enclosing  some  leaves,  1854] 


January  2 d 

May  it  come  to-day  ? 

Then  New  Year  the  sweetest,  and  long  life  the  merriest, 
and  the  Heaven  highest  —  by  and  by! 


Emilie 


To  her  brother  Austin 
[March  17,  1854] 

.  .  .  Since  you  went  back  to  Cambridge  the  weather  has 
been  wonderful,  —  the  thermometer  every  noon  between 
60  and  70  above  zero,  and  the  air  full  of  birds. 

To-day  has  not  seemed  like  a  day.  It  has  been  most  un¬ 
earthly,  —  so  mild,  so  bright,  so  still,  the  windows  open, 
and  fires  uncomfortable. 

Since  supper  it  lightens  frequently.  In  the  south  you 
can  see  the  lightning  —  in  the  north  the  northern  lights. 
Now  a  furious  wind  blows  just  from  the  north  and  west, 
and  winter  comes  back  again.  .  . . 

There  is  to  be  a  party  at  Professor  Haven’s  to-morrow 
night,  for  married  people  merely.  Celibacy  excludes  me 
and  my  sister.  Father  and  mother  are  invited.  Mother 
will  go.  .  .  .  Mother  and  Vinnie  send  love.  They  are  both 
getting  ready  for  Washington.  Take  care  of  yourself. 

Emilie 


190 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 
[Spring,  1854] 

Philadelphia 

Dear  Mrs.  Holland  and  Minnie,  and  Dr.  Holland  too 
—  I  have  stolen  away  from  company  to  write  a  note  to 
you;  and  to  say  that  I  love  you  still. 

I  am  not  at  home  —  I  have  been  away  just  five  weeks 
to-day,  and  shall  not  go  quite  yet  back  to  Massachusetts. 
Vinnie  is  with  me  here,  and  we  have  wandered  together 
into  many  new  ways. 

We  were  three  weeks  in  Washington,  while  father  was 
there,  and  have  been  two  in  Philadelphia.  We  have  had 
many  pleasant  times,  and  seen  much  that  is  fair,  and 
heard  much  that  is  wonderful  many  sweet  ladies  and 
noble  gentlemen  have  taken  us  by  the  hand  and  smiled 
upon  us  pleasantly  —  and  the  sun  shines  brighter  for  our 
way  thus  far. 

I  will  not  tell  you  what  I  saw  —  the  elegance,  the 
grandeur;  you  will  not  care  to  know  the  value  of  the 
diamonds  my  Lord  and  Lady  wore,  but  if  you  haven  t 
been  to  the  sweet  Mount  Vernon,  then  I  will  tell  you  how 
on  one  soft  spring  day  we  glided  down  the  Potomac  in  a 
painted  boat,  and  jumped  upon  the  shore  —  how  hand  in 
hand  we  stole  along  up  a  tangled  pathway  till  we  reached 
the  tomb  of  General  George  Washington,  how  we  paused 
beside  it,  and  no  one  spoke  a  word,  then  hand  in  hand, 
walked  on  again,  not  less  wise  or  sad  for  that  marble  story ; 
how  we  went  within  the  door  raised  the  latch  he  lifted 
when  he  last  went  home  —  thank  the  Ones  in  Light  that 
he’s  since  passed  in  through  a  brighter  wicket!  Oh,  I 
could  spend  a  long  day,  if  it  did  not  weary  you,  telling  of 


TO  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  191 


Mount  Vernon  —  and  I  will  sometime  if  we  live  and  meet 
again,  and  God  grant  we  shall! 

I  wonder  if  you  have  *11  forgotten  us,  we  have  stayed 
away  so  long.  I  hope  you  haven’t  —  I  tried  to  write  so 
hard  before  I  went  from  home,  but  the  moments  were  so 
busy,  and  then  they  flew  so.  I  was  sure  when  days  did 
come  in  "which  I  was  less  busy,  I  should  seek  your  forgive¬ 
ness,  and  it  did  not  occur  to  me  that  you  might  not  for¬ 
give  me.  Am  I  too  late  to-day?  Even  if  you  are  angry,  I 
shall  keep  praying  you,  till  from  very  weariness,  you  will 
take  me  in.  It  seems  to  me  many  a  day  since  we  were  in 
Springfield,  and  Minnie  and  the  dumb-bells  seem  as  vague 
—  as  vague;  and  sometimes  I  wonder  if  I  ever  dreamed  — 
then  if  I’m  dreaming  now,  then  if  I  always  dreamed,  and 
there  is  not  a  world,  and  not  these  darling  friends,  for 
whom  I  "would  not  count  my  life  too  great  a  sacrifice. 
Thank  God  there  is  a  world,  and  that  the  friends  we  love 
dwell  forever  and  ever  in  a  house  above.  I  fear  I  grow 
incongruous,  but  to  meet  my  friends  does  delight  me  so 
that  I  quite  forget  time  and  sense  and  so  forth. 

Now,  my  precious  friends,  if  you  won’t  forget  me  until 
I  get  home,  and  become  more  sensible,  I  will  write  again, 
and  more  properly.  Why  didn’t  I  ask  before,  if  you  were 
well  and  happy? 

Forgetful 

Emilie 


To  her  brother  Austin 
[Amherst,  May,  1854] 

Saturday  Morn 

Dear  Austin,  —  A  week  ago  we  were  all  here  —  to-day 
we  are  not  all  here  —  yet  the  bee  hums  just  as  merrily. 


192  EMILY  DICKINSON 

and  all  the  busy  things  work  on  as  if  the  same.  They  do 
not  miss  you,  child,  but  there  is  a  humming-bee  whose 
song  is  not  so  merry,  and  there  are  busy  ones  who  pause 
to  drop  a  tear.  Let  us  thank  God,  to-day,  Austin,  that 
we  can  love  our  friends,  our  brothers  and  our  sisters, 
and  weep  when  they  are  gone,  and  smile  at  their  re¬ 
turn.  It  is  indeed  a  joy  which  we  are  blest  to  know. 

To-day  is  very  beautiful  —  just  as  bright,  just  as  blue, 
just  as  green  and  as  white  and  as  crimson  as  the  cherry- 
trees  full  in  bloom,  and  the  half -opening  peach-blossoms, 
and  the  grass  just  waving,  and  sky  and  hill  and  cloud  can 
make  it,  if  they  try.  How  I  wish  you  were  here,  Austin; 
you  thought  last  Saturday  beautiful,  yet  to  this  golden 
day  ’twas  but  one  single  gem  to  whole  handfuls  of  jewels. 
You  will  ride  to-day,  I  hope,  or  take  a  long  walk  some¬ 
where,  and  recollect  us  all,  —  Vinnie  and  me  and  father 
and  mother  and  home.  Yes,  Austin,  every  one  of  us,  for 
we  all  think  of  you,  and  bring  you  to  recollection  many 
times  each  day  —  not  bring  you  to  recollection,  for  we 
never  put  you  away,  but  keep  recollecting  on.  .  .  . 

You  must  think  of  us  to-night  while  Mr.  Dwight  takes 
tea  here,  and  we  will  think  of  you  far  away  down  in 
Cambridge. 

Don’t  mind  the  can,  Austin,  if  it  is  rather  dry,  don’t 
mind  the  daily  road  though  it  is  rather  dusty,  but  re¬ 
member  the  brooks  and  the  hills,  and  remember  while 
you’re  but  one,  we  are  but  four  at  home ! 


Emilie 


TO  DR.  J.  G.  HOLLAND  193 

To  Dr.  J.  G.  Holland 
[November,  1854] 

Saturday  Eve 

f 

I  come  in  flakes,  dear  Dr.  Holland,  for  verily  it  snows,  and 
as  descending  swans,  here  a  pinion  and  there  a  pinion, 
and  anon  a  plume,  come  the  bright  inhabitants  of  the 
white  home. 

I  know  they  fall  in  Springfield;  perhaps  you  see  them 
now  —  and  therefore  I  look  out  again,  to  see  if  you  are 
looking. 

How  pleasant  it  seemed  to  hear  your  voice  —  so  said 
Yinnie  and  I,  as  we  as  individuals,  and  then  collectively, 
read  your  brief  note.  Why  didn’t  you  speak  to  us  before? 
We  thought  you  had  forgotten  us  —  we  concluded  that 
one  of  the  bright  things  had  gone  forever  more.  That  is  a 
sober  feeling,  and  it  mustn’t  come  too  often  in  such  a 
world  as  this.  A  violet  came  up  next  day,  and  blossomed 
in  our  garden,  and  were  it  not  for  these  same  flakes,  I 
would  go  in  the  dark  and  get  it,  so  to  send  to  you.  Thank 
Him  who  is  in  Heaven,  Katie  Holland  lives!  Kiss  her  on 
every  cheek  for  me  —  I  really  can’t  remember  how  many 
the  bairn  has  —  and  give  my  warmest  recollection  to  Mrs. 
Holland  and  Minnie,  whom  to  love,  this  Saturday  night, 
is  no  trifling  thing.  I’m  very  happy  that  you  are  happy  — 
and  that  you  cheat  the  angels  of  another  one. 

I  would  the  many  households  clad  in  dark  attire  had 
succeeded  so.  You  must  all  be  happy  and  strong  and  well. 
I  love  to  have  the  lamps  shine  on  your  evening  table.  I 
love  to  have  the  sun  shine  on  your  daily  walks. 

The  “new  house”!  God  bless  it!  You  will  leave  the 
“maiden  and  married  life  of  Mary  Powell”  behind. 

Love  and  remember  Emilie 


194 

EMILY  DICKINSON 

Dear  Sue: 

To  her  brother's  wife 
[1854] 

Adventure  most  unto  itself 

The  Soul  condemned  to  be; 

Attended  by  a  Single  Hound  — 

Its  own  Identity. 

Emily 

Dear  Sue: 

To  the  same 
[1854] 

The  Soul  that  hath  a  Guest, 

Doth  seldom  go  abroad, 

Diviner  Crowd  at  home 

Obliterate  the  need, 

And  courtesy  forbid 

A  Host’s  departure,  when 

Upon  Himself  be  visiting 

The  Emperor  of  Men ! 

Emily 

Dear  Sue: 

To  the  same 

[1854] 

The  right  to  perish  might  be  thought 
An  undisputed  right, 

Attempt  it,  and  the  Universe  upon  the  opposite 
Will  concentrate  its  officers  — 

You  cannot  even  die, 

But  Nature  and  Mankind  must  pause 
To  pay  you  scrutiny. 

Emily 


TO  MRS.  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  195 


To  the  same 
[1854] 

Sue:  * 

There  is  another  Loneliness 
That  many  die  without, 

Not  want  or  friend  occasions  it. 
Or  circumstances  or  lot. 


But  nature  sometimes,  sometimes  thought, 
And  whoso  it  befall 
Is  richer  than  could  be  divulged 
By  mortal  numeral. 

Emily 


Sue: 


To  the  same 
[1854] 

The  missing  All  prevented  me 
From  missing  minor  things. 

If  nothing  larger  than  a  World’s 
Departure  from  a  hinge, 

Or  Sun’s  extinction  be  observed, 

’Twas  not  so  large  that  I 

Could  lift  my  forehead  from  my  work 

For  curiosity. 

Emily 


To  the  same 


[1855] 

Sister  Sue: 

The  difference  between  despair 
And  fear,  is  like  the  one 


196 


EMILY  DICKINSON 

Between  the  instant  of  a  wreck, 
And  when  the  wreck  has  been. 


The  mind  is  smooth,  —  no  motion  — 

Contented  as  the  eye 

Upon  the  forehead  of  a  Bust, 

That  knows  it  cannot  see. 

Emily 


To  the  same 


[1855] 


Dear  Sue: 

There  is  a  solitude  of  space, 

A  solitude  of  sea, 

A  solitude  of  death,  but  these 
Society  shall  be, 

Compared  with  that  profounder  site, 

That  polar  privacy, 

A  Soul  admitted  to  Itself : 

Finite  Infinity. 

Emily 


Sue: 


To  the  same 
[1855] 

Two  lengths  has  every  day, 
Its  absolute  extent  — 

And  area  superior 
By  hope  or  heaven  lent. 
Eternity  will  be 
Velocity,  or  pause. 

At  fundamental  signals 
From  fundamental  laws. 


TO  MRS.  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON  197 


Sue: 

To  die,  is  not  to  go  — 

On  doom’s  consummate  chart 

No  territory  new  is  staked, 

Remain  thou  as  thou  art. 

Emily 

To  the  same 

[1855] 

Safe  Despair  it  is  that  raves. 

Agony  is  frugal, 

Puts  itself  severe  away 

For  its  own  perusal. 

Dear  Sue: 

Garrisoned  no  Soul  can  be 

In  the  front  of  Trouble, 

Love  is  one,  not  aggregate, 

Nor  is  Dying  double. 

Emily 

To  the  same 

[1855] 

The  Face  we  choose  to  miss, 

Be  it  but  for  a  day  — 

As  absent  as  a  hundred  years 

When  it  has  rode  away. 

Emily 

Sue: 

To  the  same 

[1855] 

Of  so  divine  a  loss 

We  enter  but  the  gain, 

198 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Indemnity  for  loneliness 
That  such  a  bliss  has  been. 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 
[1855] 

Your  voice  is  sweet,  dear  Mrs.  Holland.  I  wish  I  heard  it 
oftener.  One  of  the  mortal  musics  Jupiter  denies,  and 
when  indeed  its  gentle  measures  fall  upon  my  ear,  I  stop 
the  birds  to  listen.  Perhaps  you  think  I  have  no  bird 
and  this  is  rhetoric  —  pray,  Mr.  Whately,  what  is  that 
upon  the  cherry  tree?  Church  is  done,  and  the  winds 
blow,  and  Vinnie  is  in  that  pallid  land  the  simple  call 
“  sleep.”  They  will  be  wiser  by  and  by.  We  shall  all  be 
wiser!  While  I  sit  in  the  snows,  the  summer  day  on  which 
you  came  and  the  bees  and  the  south  wind,  seem  fabu¬ 
lous  as  heaven  seems  to  a  sinful  world  —  and  I  keep  re¬ 
membering  it  till  it  assumes  a  spectral  air,  and  nods  and 
winks  at  me,  and  then  all  of  you  turn  to  phantoms  and 
vanish  slow  away. 


To  the  same 
[Spring,  1856?] 

,  .  .  February  passed  like  a  skate  and  I  know  March. 
Here  is  the  “  light  ”  the  stranger  said  “  was  not  on  sea  or 
land.”  Myself  could  arrest  it,  but  will  not  chagrin  him. 

Cousin  Peter  told  me  the  Doctor  would  address 
Commencement  —  trusting  it  insure  you  both  for  papa’s 
fete  I  endowed  Peter.  We  do  not  always  know  the  source 
of  the  smile  that  flows  to  us  .  .  . 

My  flowers  are  near  and  foreign,  and  I  have  but  to  cross 
the  floor  to  stand  in  the  Spice  Isles. 


TO  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND  199 

The  wind  blows  gay  to-day  and  the  jays  bark  like  blue 
terriers. 

I  tell  you  what  I  see  — >the  landscape  of  the  spirit  re¬ 
quires  a  lung,  but  no  tongue.  I  hold  you  few  I  love,  till  my 
heart  is  red  as  February  and  purple  as  March. 

Hand  for  the  Doctor.  Emily 

To  the  same 
[Late  Summer,  1856] 

Sabbath  Night 

Don’t  tell,  dear  Mrs.  Holland,  but  wicked  as  I  am,  I  read 
my  Bible  sometimes,  and  in  it  as  I  read  to-day,  I  found  a 
verse  like  this,  where  friends  should  “go  no  more  out”; 
and  there  were  no  tears,  and  I  wished  as  I  sat  down  to¬ 
night  that  we  were  there  —  not  here  —  and  that  wonderful 
world  had  commenced,  which  makes  such  promises,  and 
rather  than  to  write  you,  I  were  by  your  side,  and  the 
hundied  and  forty  and  four  thousand”  were  chatting 
pleasantly,  yet  not  disturbing  us.  And  I’m  half  tempted 
to  take  my  seat  in  that  Paradise  of  which  the  good  man 
writes,  and  begin  forever  and  ever  now,  so  wondrous  does 
it  seem.  My  only  sketch,  profile,  of  Heaven  is  a  large, 
blue  sky,  bluer  and  larger  than  the  biggest  I  have  seen  in 
June,  and  in  it  are  my  friends  —  all  of  them  —  every  one 
of  them  —  those  who  are  with  me  now,  and  those  who 
were  parted  as  we  walked,  and  “  snatched  up  to 
Heaven.” 

If  roses  had  not  faded,  and  frosts  had  never  come,  and 
one  had  not  fallen  here  and  there  whom  I  could  not  waken, 
there  were  no  need  of  other  Heaven  than  the  one  below  — 
and  if  God  had  been  here  this  summer,  and  seen  the  things 
that  I  have  seen  —  I  guess  that  He  would  think  His 


200  EMILY  DICKINSON 

Paradise  superfluous.  Don’t  tell  Him,  for  the  world, 
though,  for  after  all  He’s  said  about  it,  I  should  like  to  see 
what  He  was  building  for  us,  with  no  hammer,  and  no 
stone,  and  no  journeyman  either.  Dear  Mrs.  Holland, 
love,  to-night  -  love  you  and  Dr.  Holland,  and  “  time  and 
sense  ”  —  and  fading  things,  and  things  that  do  not  fade. 

I’m  so  glad  you  are  not  a  blossom,  for  those  m  my 
garden  fade,  and  then  a  “  reaper  whose  name  is  Death  ” 
has  come  to  get  a  few  to  help  him  make  a  bouquet  for  him¬ 
self,  so  I’m  glad  you  are  not  a  rose  —  and  I’m  glad  you 
are  not  a  bee,  for  where  they  go  when  summer’s  done,  only 
the  thyme  knows,  and  even  were  you  a  robin,  when  the 
west  winds  came,  you  would  coolly  wink  at  me,  and  away, 
some  morning! 

As  “  little  Mrs.  Holland,”  then,  I  think  I  love  you  most, 
and  trust  that  tiny  lady  will  dwell  below  while  we  dwell, 
and  when  with  many  a  wonder  we  seek  the  new  Land,  her 
wistful  face,  with  ours,  shall  look  the  last  upon  the  hills, 

and  first  upon  —  well,  Home! 

Pardon  my  sanity,  Mrs.  Holland,  in  a  world  insane,  and 
love  me  if  you  will,  for  I  had  rather  be  loved  than  to  be 
called  a  king  in  earth,  or  a  lord  in  Heaven. 

Thank  you  for  your  sweet  note  —  the  clergy  are  very 
well.  Will  bring  such  fragments  from  them  as  shall  seem 
me  good.  I  kiss  my  paper  here  for  you  and  Dr.  Holland 
—  would  it  were  cheeks  instead. 

Dearly  Emilie 


P.S.  The  bobolinks  have  gone. 


TO  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND 


201 


To  the  same 
41857?] 

Dear  Sister,  —  After  you  went,  a  low  wind  warbled 
through  the  house  like  a  spacious  bird,  making  it  high  but 
lonely.  When  you  had  gone  the  love  came.  I  supposed  it 
would.  The  supper  of  the  heart  is  when  the  guest  has 
gone. 

Shame  is  so  intrinsic  in  a  strong  affection  we  must  all 
experience  Adam’s  reticence.  I  suppose  the  street  that 
the  lover  travels  is  thenceforth  divine,  incapable  of  turn¬ 
pike  aims. 

That  you  be  with  me  annuls  fear  and  I  await  Com¬ 
mencement  with  merry  resignation.  Smaller  than  David 
you  clothe  me  with  extreme  Goliath. 

Friday  I  tasted  life.  It  was  a  vast  morsel.  A  circus 
passed  the  house  —  still  I  feel  the  red  in  my  mind  though 
the  drums  are  out. 

The  book  you  mention,  I  have  not  met.  Thank  you  for 
tenderness. 

The  lawn  is  full  of  south  and  the  odors  tangle,  and  I 
hear  to-day  for  the  first  the  river  in  the  tree. 

You  mentioned  spring’s  delaying  —  I  blamed  her  for 
the  opposite.  I  would  eat  evanescence  slowly. 

Vinnie  is  deeply  afflicted  in  the  death  of  her  dappled 
cat,  though  I  convince  her  it  is  immortal  which  assists  her 
some.  Mother  resumes  lettuce,  involving  my  trans¬ 
gression  —  suggestive  of  yourself,  however,  which  en¬ 
dears  disgrace. 

“House”  is  being  “cleaned.”  I  prefer  pestilence.  That 
is  more  classic  and  less  fell. 

Yours  was  my  first  arbutus.  It  was  a  rosy  boast. 


202  EMILY  DICKINSON 

I  will  send  you  the  first  witch  hazel. 

A  woman  died  last  week,  young  and  in  hope  but  a  little 
while  —  at  the  end  of  our  garden.  I  thought  since  of  the 
power  of  Death,  not  upon  affection,  but  its  mortal  signal. 
It  is  to  us  the  Nile. 

You  refer  to  the  unpermitted  delight  to  be  with  those 
we  love.  I  suppose  that  to  be  the  license  not  granted  of 

God. 

Count  not  that  far  that  can  be  had, 

Though  sunset  lie  between  — 

Nor  that  adjacent,  that  beside. 

Is  further  than  the  sun. 

Love  for  your  embodiment  of  it. 

Emily 

To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 
[Late  August,  1858?] 

Amherst 

Dear  Mr.  Bowles,  —  I  got  the  little  pamphlet.  I  think 
you  sent  it  to  me,  though  unfamiliar  with  your  hand  —  I 
may  mistake. 

Thank  you,  if  I  am  right.  Thank  you,  if  not,  since  here 
I  find  bright  pretext  to  ask  you  how  you  are  to-night,  and 
for  the  health  of  four  more,  elder  and  minor  Mary,  Sallie 
and  Sam,  tenderly  to  inquire. 

I  hope  your  cups  are  full. 

I  hope  your  vintage  is  untouched.  In  such  a  porcelain 
life  one  likes  to  be  sure  that  all  is  well  lest  one  stumble 
upon  one’s  hopes  in  a  pile  of  broken  crockery. 

My  friends  are  my  estate.  Forgive  me  then  the  avarice 
to  hoard  them !  They  tell  me  those  were  poor  early  have 
different  views  of  gold.  I  don’t  know  how  that  is. 

God  is  not  so  wary  as  we,  else  He  would  give  us  no 


TO  MRS.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


203 


friends,  lest  we  forget  Him !  The  charms  of  the  heaven  in 
the  bush  are  superseded,  I  fear,  by  the  heaven  in  the 

hand,  occasionally.  t 

/ 

Summer  stopped  since  you  were  here.  Nobody  noticed 
her  —  that  is,  no  men  and  women.  Doubtless,  the  fields 
are  rent  by  petite  anguish,  and  “  mourners  go  about  ”  the 
woods.  But  this  is  not  for  us.  Business  enough  indeed, 
our  stately  resurrection !  A  special  courtesy,  I  judge,  from 
what  the  clergy  say!  To  the  “natural  man”  bumblebees 
would  seem  an  improvement,  and  a  spicing  of  birds,  but 
far  be  it  from  me  to  impugn  such  majestic  tastes! 

Our  pastor  says  we  are  a  “worm.”  How  is  that  recon¬ 
ciled?  “  Vain,  sinful  worm”  is  possibly  of  another  species. 

Do  you  think  we  shall  “see  God”?  Think  of  Abraham 
strolling  with  Him  in  genial  promenade ! 

The  men  are  mowing  the  second  hay.  The  cocks  are 
smaller  than  the  first,  and  spicier.  I  would  distil  a  cup, 
and  bear  to  all  my  friends,  drinking  to  her  no  more  astir, 
by  beck,  or  burn,  or  moor! 

Good-night,  Mr.  Bowles.  This  is  what  they  say  who 
come  back  in  the  morning;  also  the  closing  paragraph  on 
repealed  lips.  Confidence  in  daybreak  modifies  dusk. 

Blessings  for  Mrs.  Bowles,  and  kisses  for  the  bairns’ 
lips.  We  want  to  see  you,  Mr.  Bowles,  but  spare  you  the 
rehearsal  of  “familiar  truths.” 

Good-night  Emily 

To  Mrs.  Samuel  Bowles 
[Winter,  1858?] 

Monday  Eve 

Dear  Mrs.  Bowles,  —  You  send  sweet  messages.  Re¬ 
membrance  is  more  sweet  than  robins  in  May  orchards. 


204  EMILY  DICKINSON 

I  love  to  trust  that  round  bright  fires,  some,  braver  than 
I,  take  my  pilgrim  name.  How  are  papa,  mamma,  and 
the  little  people?  ... 

It  storms  in  Amherst  five  days  —  it  snows,  and  then  it 
rains,  and  then  soft  fogs  like  veils  hang  on  all  the  houses, 
and  then  the  days  turn  topaz,  like  a  lady’s  pin. 

Thank  you  for  bright  bouquet,  and  afterwards  verbena. 

I  made  a  plant  of  a  little  bough  of  yellow  heliotrope  which 
the  bouquet  bore  me,  and  call  it  Mary  Bowles.  It  is  many 
days  since  the  summer  day  when  you  came  with  Mr. 
Bowles,  and  before  another  summer  day  it  will  be  many 
days.  My  garden  is  a  little  knoll  with  faces  under  it,  and 
only  the  pines  sing  tunes,  now  the  birds  are  absent.  I  can¬ 
not  walk  to  the  distant  friends  on  nights  piercing  as  these, 
so  I  put  both  hands  on  the  window-pane,  and  try  to  think 
how  birds  fly,  and  imitate,  and  fail,  like  Mr.  Rasselas. 

I  could  make  a  balloon  of  a  dandelion,  but  the  fields  are 
gone,  and  only  “  Professor  Lowe’  remains  to  weep  with 
me.  If  I  built  my  house  I  should  like  to  call  you.  I  talk  of 
all  these  things  with  Carlo,  and  his  eyes  grow  meaning, 
and  his  shaggy  feet  keep  a  slower  pace.  Are  you  safe  to¬ 
night?  I  hope  you  may  be  glad.  I  ask  God  on  my  knee  to 
send  you  much  prosperity,  few  winter  days,  and  long  suns. 
I  have  a  childish  hope  to  gather  all  I  love  together  and 
sit  down  beside  and  smile.  .  .  . 

Will  you  come  to  Amherst?  The  streets  are  very  cold 
now,  but  we  will  make  you  warm.  But  if  you  never  came, 
perhaps  you  could  write  a  letter,  saying  how  much  you 
would  like  to,  if  it  were  “God’s  will.”  I  give  good-night, 
and  daily  love  to  you  and  Mr.  Bowles. 


Emilie 


TO  MRS.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


205 


To  the  same 
,  [1859] 

t 

Amherst 

1  should  like  to  thank  dear  Mrs.  Bowles  for  the  little  book, 
except  my  cheek  is  red  with  shame  because  I  write  so 
often.  Even  the  “lilies  of  the  field”  have  their  dignities. 

Why  did  you  bind  it  in  green  and  gold?  The  immortal 
colors.  I  take  it  for  an  emblem.  I  never  read  before  what 
Mr.  Parker  wrote. 

I  heard  that  he  was  “poison.”  Then  I  like  poison  very 
well.  Austin  stayed  from  service  yesterday  afternoon,  and 
I  .  .  .  found  him  reading  my  Christmas  gift.  ...  I  wish  the 
“  faith  of  the  fathers”  didn't  wear  brogans,  and  carry  blue 
umbrellas.  I  give  you  all  “  New  Year!”  I  think  you  kept 
gay  Christmas,  from  the  friend’s  account,  and  can  only 
sigh  with  one  not  present  at  “John  Gilpin,”  “  and  when 
he  next  doth  ride  a  race,”  etc.  You  picked  your  berries 
from  my  holly.  Grasping  Mrs.  Bowles! 

To-day  is  very  cold,  yet  have  I  much  bouquet  upon  the 
window-pane  of  moss  and  fern.  I  call  them  saints’  flowers, 
because  they  do  not  romp  as  other  flowers  do,  but  stand 
so  still  and  white. 

The  snow  is  very  tall,  .  .  .  which  makes  the  trees  so  low 
that  they  tumble  my  hair,  when  I  cross  the  bridge. 

I  think  there  will  be  no  spring  this  year,  the  flowers 
are  gone  so  far.  Let  us  have  spring  in  our  heart,  and 
never  mind  the  orchises!  .  .  .  Please  have  my  love, 
mother’s,  and  Vinnie’s.  Carlo  sends  a  brown  kiss,  and 
pussy  a  gray  and  white  one,  to  each  of  the  children. 

Please,  now  I  write  so  often,  make  lamplighter  of  me, 
then  I  shall  not  have  lived  in  vain. 


206 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Dear  Mrs.  Bowles,  dear  Mr.  Bowles,  dear  Sally 
Sam  and  Mamie,  now  all  shut  your  eyes,  while  I  do 


benediction ! 


Lovingly 


Emily 


To  Mrs.  Kate  Scott  Anthon 

Amherst  [1859] 

Sweet  at  my  door  this  March  night  another  candidate. 
Go  home!  We  don’t  like  Katies  here!  Stay!  My  heart 
votes  for  you,  and  what  am  I,  indeed,  to  dispute  her 

ballot!  .  , 

What  are  your  qualifications?  Dare  you  dwell  m  the 

East  where  we  dwell?  Are  you  afraid  of  the  sun?  When 
you  hear  the  new  violet  sucking  her  way  among  the 
sods,  shall  you  be  resolute?  All  we  are  strangers,  dear, 
the  world  is  not  acquainted  with  us,  because  we  are  not 
acquainted  with  her;  and  pilgrims.  Do  you  hesitate? 
And  soldiers,  oft  —  some  of  us  victors,  but  those  I  do 
not  see  to-night,  owing  to  the  smoke.  We  are  hungry, 
and  thirsty,  sometimes,  we  are  barefoot  and  cold  —  will 
you  still  come? 

Then,  bright  I  record  you  —  Kate,  gathered  in  March! 
It  is  a  small  bouquet,  dear,  but  what  it  lacks  in  size  it 
gains  in  fadelessness.  Many  can  boast  a  hollyhock,  but 
few  can  bear  a  rose!  And  should  new  flower  smile  at 
limited  associates,  pray  her  remember  were  there  many, 
they  were  not  worn  upon  the  breast,  but  tilled  in  the 
pasture.  So  I  rise  wearing  her  —  so  I  sleep  holding,, 
sleep  at  last  with  her  fast  in  my  hand,  and  wake  bearing 
my  flower. 


Emilie 


TO  MISS  LOUISE  NORCROSS 


207 


To  the  same 

There  are  twq  ripenings,  one  of  sight. 
Whose  forces  spheric  wind, 

Until  the  velvet  product 
Drops  spicy  to  the  ground. 

A  homelier  maturing, 

A  process  in  the  burr 

That  teeth  of  frosts  alone  disclose 

On  far  October  air. 

Emilie 


To  Mrs,  J.  G.  Holland 
[1859] 

God  bless  you,  dear  Mrs.  Holland!  I  read  it  in  the 
paper. 

I’m  so  glad  it’s  a  little  boy,  since  now  the  little  sisters 
have  some  one  to  draw  them  on  the  sled  and  if  a  grand 
old  lady  you  should  live  to  be,  there’s  something  sweet, 
they  say,  in  a  son’s  arm. 

I  pray  for  the  tenants  of  that  holy  chamber,  the 
wrestler,  and  the  wrestled  for.  I  pray  for  distant  fathei  s 
heart,  swollen,  happy  heart! 

Saviour  keep  them  all! 

Emily 

To  her  cousin  Miss  Louise  Nor  cross 
[January,  1859] 

Since  it  snows  this  morning,  dear  L - ,  too  fast  for  in¬ 

terruption,  put  your  brown  curls  in  a  basket,  and  come 
and  sit  with  me. 

I  am  sewing  for  Vinnie,  and  Vinnie  is  flying  through 
the  flakes  to  buy  herself  a  little  hood.  It’s  quite  a  fairy 


208  EMILY  DICKINSON 

morning,  and  I  often  lay  down  my  needle,  and  “  build  a 
castle  in  the  air  ”  which  seriously  impedes  the  sewing 
project.  What  if  I  pause  a  little  longer,  and  write  a  note 
to  you!  Who  will  be  the  wiser?  I  have  known  little  of 
you,  since  the  October  morning  when  our  families  went 
out  driving,  and  you  and  I  in  the  dining-room  decided 
to  be  distinguished.  It’s  a  great  thing  to  be  “  great,” 

L - ,  and  you  and  I  might  tug  for  a  life,  and  never 

accomplish  it,  but  no  one  can  stop  our  looking  on,  and 
you  know  some  cannot  sing,  but  the  orchard  is  full  of 
birds,  and  we  all  can  listen.  What  if  we  learn,  ourselves, 

some  day!  Who  indeed  knows?  - said  you  had  many 

little  cares;  I  hope  they  do  not  fatigue  you.  I  would  not 
like  to  think  of  L - as  weary,  now  and  then.  Some¬ 

times  I  get  tired,  and  I  would  rather  none  I  love  would 
understand  the  word.  ... 

Do  you  still  attend  Fanny  Kemble?  “Aaron  Burr” 
and  father  think  her  an  “animal,”  but  I  fear  zoology  has 
few  such  instances.  I  have  heard  many  notedly  bad 
readers,  and  a  fine  (me  would  be  almost  a  fairy  surprise. 

When  will  you  come  again,  L - ?  For  you  remember, 

dear,  you  are  one  of  the  ones  from  whom  I  do  not  run 
away!  I  keep  an  ottoman  in  my  heart  exclusively  for 
you.  My  love  for  your  father  and  F - . 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[March,  1859] 

The  little  “apple  of  my  eye”  is  not  dearer  than  L - ; 

she  knows  I  remember  her,  —  why  waste  an  instant  in 
defence  of  an  absurdity?  My  birds  fly  far  off,  nobody 
knows  where  they  go  to,  but  you  see  I  know  they  are 


TO  MISS  LOUISE  NORCROSS  209 

coming  back,  and  other  people  don’t,  that  makes  the 
difference. 

I’ve  had  a  curious  winder,  very  swift,  sometimes  sober, 
for  I  haven’t  felt  well,  much,  and  March  amazes  me!  I 
didn’t  think  of  it,  that’s  all!  Your  “hay”  don’t  look  so 
dim  as  it  did  at  one  time.  I  hayed  a  little  for  the  horse 
two  Sundays  ago,  and  mother  thought  it  was  summer, 
and  set  one  plant  outdoors  which  she  brought  from  the 
deluge,  but  it  snowed  since,  and  we  have  fine  sleighing, 
now,  on  one  side  of  the  road,  and  wheeling  on  the  other, 
a  kind  of  variegated  turnpike  quite  picturesque  to  see! 

You  are  to  have  Vinnie,  it  seems,  and  I  to  tear  my  hair, 
or  engage  in  any  other  vocation  that  seems  fitted  to  me. 
Well,  the  earth  is  round,  so  if  Vinnie  rolls  your  side  some¬ 
times,  ’tisn’t  strange;  I  wish  I  were  there  too,  but  the 
geraniums  felt  so  I  couldn’t  think  of  leaving  them,  and 
one  minute  carnation  pink  cried,  till  I  shut  her  up  —  see 
box! 

Now,  my  love,  robins,  for  both  of  you,  and  when  you 
and  Vinnie  sing  at  sunrise  on  the  apple  boughs,  just  cast 
your  eye  to  my  twig. 

Poor  Plover 


To  the  same 
[Early  Summer,  1859] 

Dear  L - ,  —  You  did  not  acknowledge  my  vegetable; 

perhaps  you  are  not  familiar  with  it.  I  was  reared  in  the 
garden,  you  know.  It  was  to  be  eaten  with  mustard! 
Bush  eighty  feet  high,  just  under  chamber  window  — 
much  used  at  this  season  when  other  vegetables  are  gone. 
You  should  snuff  the  hay  if  you  were  here  to-day,  infantile 
as  yet,  homely,  as  cubs  are  prone  to  be,  but  giving  brawny 


210 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


promise  of  hay-cocks  by  and  by.  “  Methinks  I  see  you,” 
as  school-girls  say,  perched  upon  a  cock  with  the  “latest 
work,”  and  confused  visions  of  bumblebees  tugging  at 
your  hat.  Not  so  far  off,  cousin,  as  it  used  to  be,  that 
vision  and  the  hat.  It  makes  me  feel  so  hurried,  I  run 
and  brush  my  hair  so  to  be  all  ready. 

I  enjoy  much  with  a  precious  fly,  during  sister’s 
absence,  not  one  of  your  blue  monsters,  but  a  timid 
creature,  that  hops  from  pane  to  pane  of  her  white  house, 
so  very  cheerfully,  and  hums  and  thrums,  a  sort  of  speck 
piano.  Tell  Vinnie  I’ll  kill  him  the  day  she  comes,  for  I 
sha’n’t  need  him  any  more,  and  she  don’t  mind  flies! 

Tell  F - and  papa  to  come  with  the  sweet-williams. 

Tell  Vinnie  I  counted  three  peony  noses,  red  as  Sammie 
Matthews’s,  just  out  of  the  ground,  and  get  her  to  make 
the  accompanying  face.  “By-Bye.” 

Emily 

To  Dr.  and  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 
[Autumn,  1859] 

Dear  Hollands,  —  Belong  to  me!  We  have  no  fires 
yet,  and  the  evenings  grow  cold.  To-morrow,  stoves  are 
set.  How  many  barefoot  shiver  I  trust  their  Father  knows 
who  saw  not  fit  to  give  them  shoes. 

Vinnie  is  sick  to-night,  which  gives  the  world  a  russet 
tinge,  usually  so  red.  It  is  only  a  headache,  but  when 
the  head  aches  next  to  you,  it  becomes  important.  When 
she  is  well,  time  leaps.  When  she  is  ill,  he  lags,  or  stops 
entirely. 

Sisters  are  brittle  things.  God  was  penurious  with  me, 
which  makes  me  shrewd  with  Him. 

One  is  a  dainty  sum!  One  bird,  one  cage,  one  flight; 


TO  DR.  AND  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND  211 

one  song  in  those  far  woods,  as  yet  suspected  by  faith 
only! 

This  is  September,  and^you  were  coming  in  September. 
Come!  Our  parting  is  too  long.  There  has  been  frost 
enough.  We  must  have  summer  now,  and  “whole  legions  ” 
of  daisies. 

The  gentian  is  a  greedy  flower,  and  overtakes  us  all. 
Indeed,  this  world  is  short,  and  I  wish,  until  I  tremble,  to 
touch  the  ones  I  love  before  the  hills  are  red  —  are  gray 
—  are  white  —  are  “born  again” !  If  we  knew  how  deep 
the  crocus  lay,  we  never  should  let  her  go.  Still,  crocuses 
stud  many  mounds  whose  gardeners  till  in  anguish  some 
tiny,  vanished  bulb. 

We  saw  you  that  Saturday  afternoon,  but  heedlessly 
forgot  to  ask  where  you  were  going,  so  did  not  know,  and 
could  not  write.  Yinnie  saw  Minnie  flying  by,  one  after¬ 
noon  at  Palmer.  She  supposed  you  were  all  there  on  your 
w^ay  from  the  sea,  and  untied  her  fancy !  To  say  that  her 
fancy  wheedled  her  is  superfluous. 

We  talk  of  you  together,  then  diverge  on  life,  then 
hide  in  you  again,  as  a  safe  fold.  Don  t  leave  us  long, 
dear  friends!  You  know  we  re  children  still,  and  clnldien 
fear  the  dark. 

Are  you  well  at  home?  Do  you  work  now?  Has  it 
altered  much  since  I  was  there?  Are  the  children  women, 
and  the  women  thinking  it  will  soon  be  afternoon?  We 
will  help  each  other  bear  our  unique  burdens. 

Is  Minnie  with  you  now?  Take  her  our  love,  if  she  is. 
Do  her  eyes  grieve  her  now?  Tell  her  she  may  have  half 
ours. 

Mother’s  favorite  sister  is  sick,  and  mother  will  have 
to  bid  her  good-night.  It  brings  mists  to  us  all;  — the 


212 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


aunt  whom  Vinnie  visits,  with  whom  she  spent,  I  fear, 
her  last  inland  Christmas.  Does  God  take  care  of  those 


at  sea?  My  aunt  is  such  a  timid  woman! 

Will  you  write  to  us?  I  bring  you  all  their  loves 

many. 

They  tire  me. 

Emilie 


To  Mrs.  Kate  Scott  Anthon 
[1860] 

The  prettiest  of  pleas,  dear,  but  with  a  lynx  like  me  quite 
unavailable.  Finding  is  slow,  facilities  for  losing  so  fre¬ 
quent,  in  a  world  like  this,  I  hold  with  extreme  caution. 
A  prudence  so  astute  may  seem  unnecessary,  but  plenty 
moves  those  most,  dear,  who  have  been  in  want,  and 
Saviour  tells  us,  Kate,  the  poor  are  always  with  us. 
Were  you  ever  poor?  I  have  been  a  beggar,  and  rich  to¬ 
night,  as  by  God’s  leave  I  believe  I  am,  the  lazzaroni  s 

faces  haunt,  pursue  me  still! 

You  do  not  yet  “  dislimn,”  Kate.  Distinctly  sweet  your 
face  stands  in  its  phantom  niche  —  I  touch  your  hand  — 
my  cheek  your  cheek  —  I  stroke  your  vanished  hair. 
Why  did  you  enter,  sister,  since  you  must  depart?  Had 
not  its  heart  been  torn  enough  but  you  must  send  your 
shred? 

Oh,  our  condor  Kate!  Come  from  your  crags  again! 
Oh,  dew  upon  the  bloom  fall  yet  again  a  summer  s  night! 
Of  such  have  been  the  frauds  which  have  vanquished 
faces,  sown  plant  of  flesh  the  churchyard  plats,  and 
occasioned  angels. 

There  is  a  subject,  dear,  on  which  we  never  touch. 
Ignorance  of  its  pageantries  does  not  deter  me.  I  too 


TO  LAVINIA  DICKINSON 


213 


went  out  to  meet  the  dust  early  in  the  morning.  I  too  in 
daisy  mounds  possess  hid  treasure,  therefore  I  guard  you 
more.  You  did  not  tell  me  you  had  once  been  a  “million¬ 
aire.”  Did  my  sister  think  that  opulence  could  be  mis¬ 
taken?  Some  trinket  will  remain,  some  babbling  plate  or 
jewel. 

I  write  you  from  the  summer.  The  murmuring  leaves 
fill  up  the  chinks  through  which  the  winter  red  shone 

when  Kate  was  here,  and  F - was  here,  and  frogs 

sincerer  than  our  own  splash  in  their  Maker  s  pools. 
It’s  but  a  little  past,  dear,  and  yet  how  far  from  here  it 
seems,  fled  with  the  snow!  So  through  the  snow  go  many 
loving  feet  parted  by  “Alps.”  How  brief,  from  vineyards 
and  the  sun ! 

Parents  and  Vinnie  request  love  to  be  given  girl. 

Emilie 


To  Mrs.  Holland 
[1860] 

How  is  your  little  Byron  ?  Hope  he  gains  his  foot  without 
losing  his  genius.  Have  heard  it  ably  argued  that  the 
poet’s  genius  lay  in  his  foot  —  as  the  bee’s  prong  and  his 
song  are  concomitant.  Are  you  stronger  than  these? 
To  assault  so  minute  a  creature  seems  to  me  malign, 
unworthy  of  Nature  —  but  the  frost  is  no  respecter  of 
persons. 


To  her  sister  Lavinia 
[April,  1860] 

Vinnie,  —  I  can’t  believe  it,  when  your  letters  come, 

saying  what  Aunt  L - said  “  just  before  she  died. 

Blessed  Aunt  L - now;  all  the  world  goes  out,  and  I 


214  EMILY  DICKINSON 

see  nothing  but  her  room,  and  angels  bearing  her  into 
those  great  countries  in  the  blue  sky  of  which  we  don  t 
know  anything. 

Then  I  sob  and  cry  till  I  can  hardly  see  my  way  ’round 
the  house  again;  and  then  sit  still  and  wonder  if  she  sees 
us  now,  if  she  sees  me,  who  said  that  she  “loved  Emily.” 
Oh!  Yinnie,  it  is  dark  and  strange  to  think  of  summer 
afterward!  How  she  loved  the  summer !  The  birds  keep 
singing  just  the  same.  Oh!  The  thoughtless  birds! 

Poor  little  L - !  Poor  F - !  You  must  comfort 

them! 

If  you  were  with  me,  Vinnie,  we  could  talk  about  her 
together. 

And  I  thought  she  would  live!  I  wanted  her  to  live  so, 

I  thought  she  could  not  die!  To  think  how  still  she  lay 
while  I  was  making  the  little  loaf,  and  fastening  her 
flowers!  Did  you  get  my  letter  in  time  to  tell  her  how 
happv  I  would  be  to  do  what  she  requested?  INIi.  Brady 
is  coming  to-morrow  to  bring  arbutus  for  her.  Dear  little 
aunt!  Will  she  look  down? 

You  must  tell  me  all  you  can  think  about  her.  Did  she 
carry  my  little  bouquet?  So  many  broken -heai  ted  people 
have  got  to  hear  the  birds  sing,  and  see  all  the  little  flowers 
grow,  just  the  same  as  if  the  sun  hadn  t  stopped  shining 
forever ! .  .  .  How  I  wish  I  could  comfort  you !  How  I 
wish  you  could  comfort  me,  who  weep  at  what  I  did  not 
see  and  never  can  believe.  I  will  try  and  share  you  a  little 
longer,  but  it  is  so  long,  Vinnie. 

We  didn’t  think,  that  morning  when  I  wept  that  you 
left  me,  and  you,  for  other  things,  that  we  should  weep 
more  bitterly  before  we  saw  each  other. 

Well,  she  is  safer  now  than  “we  know  or  even  think.” 


TO  MISS  LOUISA  NORCROSS 


215 


Tired  little  aunt,  sleeping  ne’er  so  peaceful!  Tuneful 
little  aunt,  singing,  as  we  trust,  hymns  than  which  the 
robins  have  no  sweeter  ofies. 

Good-night,  broken  hearts,  L - ,  and  F - ,  and 

Uncle  L - .  Vinnie,  remember 

Sister 

To  Miss  Louisa  Nor  cross 
[Autumn,  1860] 

Bravo,  L - ,  the  cape  is  a  beauty,  and  what  shall  I 

render  unto  F - ,  for  all  her  benefits?  I  will  take  my 

books  and  go  into  a  corner  and  give  thanks!  Do  you 
think  I  am  going  “upon  the  boards”  that  I  wish  so  smart 
attire?  Such  are  my  designs,  though.  I  beg  you  not  to 

disclose  them!  May  I  not  secure  L - for  drama,  and 

F - for  comedy?  You  are  a  brace  of  darlings,  and  it 

would  give  me  joy  to  see  you  both,  in  any  capacity.  .  .  . 
Will  treasure  all  till  I  see  you.  Never  fear  that  I  shall 
forget!  In  event  of  my  decease,  I  wTill  still  exclaim  “Dr. 
Thompson,”  and  he  will  reply  “Miss  Montague.”  My 
little  L-  -  pined  for  the  hay  in  her  last  communication. 
Not  to  be  saucy,  dear,  we  sha’n’t  have  any  more  before  the 
first  of  March,  Dick  having  hid  it  all  in  the  barn  in  a  most 
malicious  manner;  but  he  has  not  brought  the  sunset  in, 
so  there  is  still  an  inducement  to  my  little  girls.  We 
have  a  sky  or  two,  well  worth  consideration,  and  trees  so 
fashionable  they  make  us  all  passee. 

I  often  remember  you  both,  last  week.  I  thought  that 
flown  mamma  could  not,  as  was  her  wont,  shield  from 
crowd,  and  strangers,  and  was  glad  Eliza  was  there.  I 
knew  she  would  guard  my  children,  as  she  has  often 
guarded  me,  from  publicity,  and  help  to  fill  the  deep 


216  EMILY  DICKINSON 

place  never  to  be  full.  Dear  cousins,  I  know  you  both 
better  than  I  did,  and  love  you  both  better,  and  always 
I  have  a  chair  for  you  in  the  smallest  parlor  in  the  world, 
to  wit,  my  heart. 

This  world  is  just  a  little  place,  just  the  red  in  the  sky, 
before  the  sun  rises,  so  let  us  keep  fast  hold  of  hands,  that 
when  the  birds  begin,  none  of  us  be  missing. 

“Burnham”  must  think  F - a  scholastic  female. 

I  wouldn’t  be  in  her  place!  If  she  feels  delicate  about  it, 
she  can  tell  him  the  books  are  for  a  friend  in  the  East 
Indies. 

Won’t  F - give  my  respects  to  the  “Bell  and  Everett 

party”  if  she  passes  that  organization  on  her  way  to 
school?  I  hear  they  wish  to  make  me  Lieutenant- 
Governor’s  daughter.  Were  they  cats  I  would  pull  their 
tails,  but  as  they  are  only  patriots,  I  must  forego  the 
bliss.  .  .  . 

Love  to  papa. 

Emily 


To  her  cousins 
[Winter,  1860-61] 

Dear  Friends,  —  L - ’s  note  to  Miss  W  only 

stopped  to  dine.  It  went  out  with  a  beautiful  name 
on  its  face  in  the  evening  mail.  “  Is  there  nothing  else,” 
as  the  clerk  says?  So  pleased  to  enact  a  trifle  for  my  little 
sister.  It  is  little  sisters  you  are,  as  dear  F  says  in 
the  hallowed  note.  Could  mamma  read  it,  it  would  blur 
her  light  even  in  Paradise. 

It  was  pretty  to  lend  us  the  letters  from  the  new  friends. 
It  gets  us  acquainted.  We  will  preserve  them  carefully. 
...  I  regret  I  am  not  a  scholar  in  the  Friday  class.  I 


TO  DR.  AND  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND  217 

believe  the  love  of  God  may  be  taught  not  to  seem  like 
bears.  Happy  the  reprobates  under  that  loving  influence. 

I  have  one  new  bird  apd  several  trees  of  old  ones.  A 
snow  slide  from  the  roof,  dispelled  mother’s  “sweetbrier.” 
You  will  of  course  feel  for  her,  as  you  were  named  for 
him !  There  are  as  yet  no  streets,  though  the  sun  is  riper, 
and  these  small  bells  have  rung  so  long  I  think  it  “tea- 
time”  always. 

To  the  same 
[Spring,  1861] 

.  .  .  Send  a  sundown  for  L - ,  please,  and  a  crocus  for 

F - .  Shadow  had  no  stem,  so  they  could  not  pick  him. 


To  Dr.  and  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 


[1861] 

Friday 

Dear  Friends,  —  I  write  to  you.  I  receive  no  letter. 

I  say  “they  dignify  my  trust.”  I  do  not  disbelieve.  I 
go  again.  Cardinals  wouldn’t  do  it.  Cockneys  wouldn’t 
do  it,  but  I  can’t  stop  to  strut,  in  a  world  where  bells  toll. 
I  hear  through  visitor  in  town,  that  “Mrs.  Holland  is 
not  strong.”  The  little  peacock  in  me,  tells  me  not  to 
inquire  again.  Then  I  remember  my  tiny  friend  —  how 
brief  she  is  —  how  dear  she  is,  and  the  peacock  quite  dies 
away.  Now,  you  need  not  speak,  for  perhaps  you  are 
weary,  and  “Herod”  requires  all  your  thought,  but  if  you 
are  well  —  let  Annie  draw  me  a  little  picture  of  an 
erect  flower;  if  you  are  ill,  she  can  hang  the  flower  a  little 
on  one  side! 

Then,  I  shall  understand,  and  you  need  not  stop  to 
write  me  a  letter.  Perhaps  you  laugh  at  me!  Perhaps 


218  EMILY  DICKINSON 

the  whole  United  States  are  laughing  at  me  too!  I  can’t 
stop  for  that!  My  business  is  to  love.  I  found  a  bird, 
this  morning,  down  —  down  on  a  little  bush  at  the 
foot  of  the  garden,  and  wherefore  sing,  I  said,  since 
nobody  hears  ? 

One  sob  in  the  throat,  one  flutter  of  bosom  —  “ e  My 
business  is  to  sing”  —  and  away  she  rose!  How  do  I 
know  but  cherubim,  once,  themselves,  as  patient,  listened, 
and  applauded  her  unnoticed  hymn? 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  Samuel  Bowles 

Dear  Mary,  —  Can  you  leave  your  flower  long  enough 
just  to  look  at  mine? 

Which  is  the  prettiest?  I  shall  tell  you  myself,  some 
day.  I  used  to  come  to  comfort  you,  but  now  to  tell  you 
how  glad  I  am,  and  how  glad  we  all  are.  .  .  .  You  must  not 
stay  in  New  York  any  more  —  you  must  come  back  now, 
and  bring  the  blanket  to  Massachusetts  where  we  can  all 
look.  What  a  responsible  shepherd!  Four  lambs  in  one 
flock!  Shall  you  be  glad  to  see  us,  or  shall  we  seem  old- 
fashioned,  by  the  face  in  the  crib? 

Tell  him  I’ve  got  a  pussy  for  him,  with  a  spotted  gown; 
and  a  dog  with  ringlets. 

We  have  very  cold  days  since  you  went  away,  and  I 
think  you  hear  the  wind  blow  far  as  the  Brevoort  House, 
it  comes  from  so  far,  and  crawls  so.  Don’t  let  it  blow  baby 
away.  Will  you  call  him  Robert  for  me?  He  is  the  bravest 
man  alive,  but  his  boy  has  no  mamma.  That  makes  us  all 
weep,  don’t  it? 


Good-night,  Mary. 


Emily 


TO  MRS.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


219 


BABY 

Teach  him,  when  he  makes  the  names, 
Such  an  one  to'  say 
On  his  babbling,  berry  lips 
As  should  sound  to  me  — 

Were  my  ear  as  near  his  nest 
As  my  thought,  to-day  — 

As  should  sound  —  “forbid  us  not”  — 
Some  like  “Emily.” 


To  the  same 
[August,  1861] 

INLyry,  —  I  do  not  know  of  you,  a  long  while.  I  remember 
you  —  several  times.  I  wish  I  knew  if  you  kept  me?  The 
doubt,  like  the  mosquito,  buzzes  round  my  faith.  We  are 
all  human,  Mary,  until  we  are  divine,  and  to  some  of  us, 
that  is  far  off,  and  to  some  as  near  as  the  lady  ringing  at 
the  door;  perhaps  that’s  what  alarms.  I  say  I  will  go  my¬ 
self  —  I  cross  the  river,  and  climb  the  fence  —  now  I  am 
at  the  gate,  Mary  —  now  I  am  in  the  hall  —  now  I  am 
looking  your  heart  in  the  eye! 

Did  it  wait  for  me  —  did  it  go  with  the  company? 
Cruel  company,  who  have  the  stocks,  and  farms,  and 
creeds  —  and  it  has  just  its  heart!  I  hope  you  are  glad, 
Mary;  no  pebble  in  the  brook  to-day  —  no  film  on  noon. 

I  can  think  how  you  look;  you  can’t  think  how  I  look; 
I’ve  got  more  freckles,  since  you  saw  me,  playing  with  the 
school-boys;  then  I  pare  the  “  Juneating”  to  make  the 
pie,  and  get  my  fingers  “tanned.” 

Summer  went  very  fast  —  she  got  as  far  as  the  woman 
from  the  hill,  who  brings  the  blueberry,  and  that  is  a  long 


220  EMILY  DICKINSON 

way.  I  shall  have  no  winter  this  year,  on  account  of 
the  soldiers.  Since  I  cannot  weave  blankets  or  boots,  I 
thought  it  best  to  omit  the  season.  Shall  present  a 
“ memorial ”  to  God  when  the  maples  turn.  Can  I  rely 
on  your  “name”? 

How  is  your  garden,  Mary?  Are  the  pinks  true,  and  the 
sweet  williams  faithful?  I’ve  got  a  geranium  like  a  sul¬ 
tana,  and  when  the  humming-birds  come  down,  geranium 
and  I  shut  our  eyes,  and  go  far  away. 

Ask  “Mamie”  if  I  shall  catch  her  a  butterfly  with  a 
vest  like  a  Turk?  I  will,  if  she  will  build  him  a  house  in  her 
“morning-glory.” 

Vinnie  would  send  her  love,  but  she  put  on  a  white 
frock,  and  went  to  meet  to-morrow  —  a  few  minutes 
ago ;  mother  would  send  her  love,  but  she  is  in  the  eave 
spout,”  sweeping  up  a  leaf  that  blew  in  last  November; 
I  brought  my  own,  myself,  to  you  and  Mr.  Bowles. 

Please  remember  me,  because  I  remember  you 
always.  .  .  . 

Don’t  cry,  dear  Mary.  Let  us  do  that  for  you,  because 
you  are  too  tired  now.  We  don  t  know  how  dark  it  is,  but 
if  you  are  at  sea,  perhaps  when  we  say  that  we  are  there, 
you  won’t  be  as  afraid. 

The  waves  are  very  big,  but  every  one  that  covers  you, 
covers  us,  too. 

Dear  Mary,  you  can’t  see  us,  but  we  are  close  at  your 
side.  May  we  comfort  you? 


Lovingly 


Emily 


TO  MRS.  KATE  SCOTT  ANTHON  m 


To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 
[Autumn,  1861] 

Friend,  Sir,  —  I  did  not  see  you.  I  am  very  sorry.  Shall 
I  keep  the  wine  till  you  come  again,  or  send  it  in  by  Dick? 
It  is  now  behind  the  door  in  the  library,  also  an  unclaimed 
flower.  I  did  not  know  you  were  going  so  soon.  Oh!  my 
tardy  feet. 

Will  you  not  come  again? 

Friends  are  gems,  infrequent.  Potosi  is  a  care,  sir.  I 
guard  it  reverently,  for  I  could  not  afford  to  be  poor  now, 
after  affluence.  I  hope  the  hearts  in  Springfield  are  not  so 
heavy  as  they  were.  God  bless  the  hearts  in  Springfield. 

I  am  happy  you  have  a  horse.  I  hope  you  will  get 
stalwart,  and  come  and  see  us  many  years. 

I  have  but  two  acquaintance,  the  “quick  and  the  dead” 
—  and  would  like  more. 

I  write  you  frequently,  and  am  much  ashamed.  My 
voice  is  not  quite  loud  enough  to  cross  so  many  fields, 
which  will,  if  you  please,  apologize  for  my  pencil. 

Will  you  take  my  love  to  Mrs.  Bowles,  whom  I  re¬ 
member  every  day?  Emilie 

Vinnie  hallos  from  the  world  of  night-caps,  “don’t  for¬ 
get  her  love.” 


To  Mrs.  Kate  Scott  Anthon 
[1861?] 

Katie, —  Last  year  at  this  time  I  did  not  miss  you,  but 
positions  shifted,  until  I  hold  your  black  in  strong 
hallowed  remembrance,  and  trust  my  colors  are  to  you 
tints  slightly  beloved. 


222  EMILY  DICKINSON 

You  cease,  indeed,  to  talk,  which  is  a  custom  prevalent 
among  things  parted  and  torn,  but  shall  I  class  this,  dear, 
among  elect  exceptions,  and  bear  you  just  as  usual  unto 
the  kind  Lord? 

We  dignify  our  faith  when  we  can  cross  the  ocean  with 
it,  though  most  prefer  ships. 

How  do  you  do  this  year?  . .  .  How  many  years,  I 
wonder,  will  sow  the  moss  upon  them,  before  we  bind 
again,  a  little  altered,  it  may  be,  elder  a  little  it  will  be, 
and  yet  the  same,  as  suns  which  shine  between  our  lives 
and  loss,  and  violets  —  not  last  year’s,  but  having  the 
mother’s  eyes. 

Do  you  find  plenty  of  food  at  home?  Famine  is  un¬ 
pleasant. 

It  is  too  late  for  frogs  —  or  what  pleases  me  better, 
dear,  not  quite  early  enough!  The  pools  were  full  of  you 
for  a  brief  period,  but  that  brief  period  blew  away,  leaving 
me  with  many  stems,  and  but  a  few  foliage!  Gentlemen 
here  have  a  way  of  plucking  the  tops  of  the  trees,  and 
putting  the  fields  in  their  cellars  annually,  which  in  point 
of  taste  is  execrable,  and  would  they  please  omit,  I  should 
have  fine  vegetation  and  foliage  all  the  year  round,  and 
never  a  winter  month.  Insanity  to  the  sane  seems  so  un¬ 
necessary  —  but  I  am  only  one,  and  they  are  “four  and 
forty,”  which  little  affair  of  numbers  leaves  me  impotent. 
Aside  from  this,  dear  Katie,  inducements  to  visit  Amherst 
are  as  they  were  —  I  am  pleasantly  located  in  the  deep 
sea,  but  love  will  row  you  out,  if  her  hands  are  strong,  and 
don’t  wait  till  I  land,  for  I’m  going  ashore  on  the  other 
side. 


Emilie 


TO  LOUISE  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  223 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 

[1861] 

f 

.  .  . - fed  greedily  upon  “Harper’s  Magazine’s”  while 

here.  Suppose  he  is  restricted  to  Martm  Luther’s  works 
at  home.  It  is  a  criminal  thing  to  be  a  boy  in  a  godly 
village,  but  maybe  he  will  be  forgiven. 

.  .  .  The  seeing  pain  one  can’t  relieve  makes  a  demon  of 
one.  If  angels  have  the  heart  beneath  their  silver  jackets, 
I  think  such  things  could  make  them  weep,  but  Heaven  is 
so  cold!  It  will  never  look  kind  to  me  that  God,  who 
causes  all,  denies  such  little  wishes.  It  could  not  hurt 
His  glory,  unless  it  wTere  a  lonesome  kind.  I  ’most  con¬ 
clude  it  is. 

.  .  .  Thank  you  for  the  daisy.  With  nature  in  my  ruche 
I  shall  not  miss  the  spring.  What  would  become  of  us, 
dear,  but  for  love  to  reprieve  our  blunders? 

.  .  .  I’m  afraid  that  home  is  ’most  done,  but  do  not  say  I 
fear  so.  Perhaps  God  will  be  better.  They’re  happy,  you 
know.  That  makes  it  doubtful.  Heaven  hunts  round  for 
those  that  find  itself  below,  and  then  it  snatches. 

.  .  .  Think  Emily  lost  her  wits  —  but  she  found  ’em, 
likely.  Don’t  part  with  wits  long  in  this  neighborhood. 

.  .  .  Your  letters  are  all  real,  just  the  tangled  road 
children  walked  before  you,  some  of  them  to  the  end,  and 
others  but  a  little  way,  even  as  far  as  the  fork  in  the  road. 
That  Mrs.  Browning  fainted,  we  need  not  read  “Aurora 
Leigh”  to  know,  when  she  lived  with  her  English  aunt; 
and  George  Sand  “must  make  no  noise  in  her  grand¬ 
mother’s  bedroom.”  Poor  children!  Women,  now, 
queens,  now!  And  one  in  the  Eden  of  God.  I  guess  they 
both  forget  that  now,  so  who  knows  but  we,  little  stars 


224  EMILY  DICKINSON 

from  the  same  night,  stop  twinkling  at  last?  Take  heart, 
little  sister,  twilight  is  but  the  short  bridge,  and  the  moon 
stands  at  the  end.  If  we  can  only  get  to  her!  Yet,  if  she 
sees  us  fainting,  she  will  put  out  her  yellow  hands.  . .  . 

To  Louisa  Nor  cross 
[December,  1861] 

Dear  Peacock,  —  I  received  your  feather  with  profound 
emotion.  It  has  already  surmounted  a  work,  and  crossed 
the  Delaware.  Doubtless  you  are  moulting  a  la  canary 
bird  —  hope  you  will  not  suffer  from  the  reduction  of 
plumage  these  December  days.  The  latitude  is  quite  stiff 
for  a  few  nights,  and  gentlemen  and  ladies  who  go  bare¬ 
foot  in  our  large  cities  must  find  the  climate  uncomfort¬ 
able.  A  land  of  frosts  and  zeros  is  not  precisely  the  land 
for  me;  hope  you  find  it  congenial.  I  believe  it  is  sev¬ 
eral  hundred  years  since  I  met  you  and  F - ,  yet  I  am 

pleased  to  say,  you  do  not  become  dim;  I  think  you  rather 
brighten  as  the  hours  fly.  I  should  love  to  see  you  dearly, 
girls;  perhaps  I  may,  before  south  winds,  but  I  feel  rather 
confused  to-day,  and  the  future  looks  “higglety-pigglety.” 

You  seem  to  take  a  smiling  view  of  my  finery.  If  you 
knew  how  solemn  it  was  to  me,  you  might  be  induced  to 
curtail  your  jests.  My  sphere  is  doubtless  calicoes,  never¬ 
theless  I  thought  it  meet  to  sport  a  little  wool.  The  mirth 
it  has  occasioned  will  deter  me  from  further  exhibitions ! 
Won’t  you  tell  “the  public”  that  at  present  I  wear  a 
brown  dress  with  a  cape  if  possible  browner,  and  carry  a 
parasol  of  the  same!  We  have  at  present  one  cat,  and 
twenty-four  hens,  who  do  nothing  so  vulgar  as  lay  an  egg, 
which  checks  the  ice-cream  tendency. 

I  miss  the  grasshoppers  much,  but  suppose  it  is  all  for 


TO  LOUISA  NORCROSS  225 


the  best.  I  should  become  too  much  attached  to  a  trotting 
world. 

My  garden  is  all  covered  up  by  snow;  picked  gilliflower 
Tuesday,  now  gilliflowers  are  asleep.  The  hills  take  off 
their  purple  frocks,  and  dress  in  long  white  nightgowns. 

There  is  something  fine  and  something  sad  in  the  year’s 


toilet.  .  .  . 


We  often  talk  of  you  and  your  father  these  new  winter 
days.  Write,  dear,  when  you  feel  like  it. 

Lovingly 


Emily 


To  the  same 
[December  29,  1861] 

.  .  .  Your  letter  didn’t  surprise  me,  L - ;  I  brushed 

away  the  sleet  from  eyes  familiar  with  it  looked  again 
to  be  sure  I  read  it  right  —  and  then  took  up  my  work 
hemming  strings  for  mother’s  gown.  I  think  I  hemmed 
them  faster  for  knowing  you  weren’t  coming,  my  fingers 
had  nothing  else  to  do.  .  .  .  Odd,  that  I,  who  say  “no” 
so  much,  cannot  bear  it  from  others.  Odd,  that  I,  who 
run  from  so  many,  cannot  brook  that  one  turn  from 

me.  Come  when  you  will,  L - ,  the  hearts  are  never 

shut  here.  I  don’t  remember  Mhy.  Is  that  the  one 
that  stands  next  April?  And  is  that  the  month  for  the 
river-pink? 

Mrs.  Adams  had  news  of  the  death  of  her  boy  to¬ 
day,  from  a  wound  at  Annapolis.  Telegram  signed  by 
Frazer  Stearns.  You  remember  him.  Another  one  died 
in  October  —  from  fever  caught  in  the  camp.  Mrs.  Adams 
herself  has  not  risen  from  bed  since  then.  “Happy  new 

year”  step  softly  over  such  doors  as  these!  “Dead!  Both 


226 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


her  boys!  One  of  them  shot  by  the  sea  in  the  East,  and 
one  of  them  shot  in  the  West  by  the  sea.”  .  .  .  Christ  be 
merciful!  Frazer  Stearns  is  just  leaving  Annapolis.  His 
father  has  gone  to  see  him  to-day.  I  hope  that  ruddy  face 
won’t  be  brought  home  frozen.  Poor  little  widow’s  boy, 
riding  to-night  in  the  mad  wind,  back  to  the  village  bury- 
ing-ground  where  he  never  dreamed  of  sleeping!  Ah! 
the  dreamless  sleep!  .  .  . 

To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 
[January,  1862] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Are  you  willing?  I  am  so  far  from  land. 
To  offer  you  the  cup,  it  might  some  Sabbath  come  my 
turn.  Of  wine  how  solemn-full! 

Did  you  get  the  doubloons  —  did  you  vote  upon 
“Robert”?  You  said  you  would  come  in  February.  Only 
three  weeks  more  to  wait  at  the  gate! 

While  you  are  sick,  we  —  are  homesick.  Do  you  look 
out  to-night?  The  moon  rides  like  a  girl  through  a  topaz 
town.  I  don’t  think  we  shall  ever  be  merry  again  —  you 
are  ill  so  long.  When  did  the  dark  happen? 

I  skipped  a  page  to-night,  because  I  come  so  often,  now, 
I  might  have  tired  you. 

That  page  is  fullest,  though. 

Vinnie  sends  her  love.  I  think  father  and  mother  care  a 
great  deal  for  you,  and  hope  you  may  be  well.  When  you 
tire  with  pain,  to  know  that  eyes  would  cloud,  in  Amherst 
—  might  that  comfort,  some  ? 

Emily 


We  never  forget  Mary. 


TO  ME.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


227 


To  the  same 

Dear  Mr.  Bowles,  —  Thank  you. 

t 

Faith  is  a  fine  invention 
When  gentlemen  can  see! 

But  microscopes  are  prudent 
In  an  emergency! 

You  spoke  of  the  “East.”  I  have  thought  about  it  this 
winter. 

Don’t  you  think  you  and  I  should  be  shrewder  to  take 
the  mountain  road? 

That  bareheaded  life,  under  the  grass,  worries  one  like  a 
wasp. 

The  rose  is  for  Mary. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

The  zeros  taught  us  phosphorus  — 

We  learned  to  like  the  fire 
By  playing  glaciers  when  a  boy. 

And  tinder  guessed  by  power 

Of  opposite  to  balance  odd. 

If  white,  a  red  must  be ! 

Paralysis,  our  primer  dumb 
Unto  vitality. 

I  couldn’t  let  Austin’s  note  go,  without  a  word. 

Emily 


228 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Fannie  Norcross 
[February,  1862] 

Dear  F - ,  —  I  fear  you  are  getting  as  driven  as  Vinnie. 

We  consider  her  standard  for  superhuman  effort  errone¬ 
ously  applied.  Dear  L - remembers  the  basket  V innie 

“never  got  to.”  But  we  must  blame  with  lenience.  Poor 
Vinnie  has  been  very  sick,  and  so  have  we  all,  and  I  feared 
one  day  our  little  brothers  would  see  us  no  more,  but  God 
was  not  so  hard.  Now  health  looks  so  beautiful,  the 
tritest  “How  do  you  do”  is  living  with  meaning.  No 
doubt  you  “heard  a  bird,”  but  which  route  did  he  take? 
Hasn’t  reached  here  yet.  Are  you  sure  it  wasn’t  a  “  down 
brakes”?  Best  of  ears  will  blunder!  Unless  he  come  by 
the  first  of  April,  I  sha’n’t  countenance  him.  We  have  had 
fatal  weather  —  thermometer  two  below  zero  all  day, 
without  a  word  of  apology.  Summer  was  always  dear,  but 
such  a  kiss  as  she’ll  get  from  me  if  I  ever  see  her  again,  will 
make  her  cry,  I  know.  .  .  . 

To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 
[April,  1862] 

Dear  Children,  —  You  have  done  more  for  me  —  ’tis 
least  that  I  can  do,  to  tell  you  of  brave  Frazer  —  “killed 
at  Newbern,”  darlings.  His  big  heart  shot  away  by  a 
“Minie  ball.” 

I  had  read  of  those  —  I  didn’t  think  that  Frazer  would 
carry  one  to  Eden  with  him.  Just  as  he  fell,  in  his  soldier’s 
cap,  with  his  sword  at  his  side,  Frazer  rode  through 
Amherst.  Classmates  to  the  right  of  him,  and  classmates 
to  the  left  of  him,  to  guard  his  narrow  face!  He  fell  by  the 
side  of  Professor  Clark,  his  superior  officer  —  lived  ten 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  229 


minutes  in  a  soldier’s  arms,  asked  twice  for  water  — 
murmured  just,  “  My  God!”  and  passed!  Sanderson,  his 
classmate,  made  a  box  oij,  boards  in  the  night,  put  the 
brave  boy  in,  covered  with  a  blanket,  rowed  six  miles  to 
reach  the  boat,  —  so  poor  Frazer  came.  They  tell  that 
Colonel  Clark  cried  like  a  little  child  when  he  missed  his 
pet,  and  could  hardly  resume  his  post.  They  loved  each 
other  very  much.  Nobody  here  could  look  on  Frazer  — 
not  even  his  father.  The  doctors  would  not  allow  it. 

The  bed  on  which  he  came  was  enclosed  in  a  large 
casket  shut  entirely,  and  covered  from  head  to  foot  with 
the  sweetest  flowers.  He  went  to  sleep  from  the  village 
church.  Crowds  came  to  tell  him  good-night,  choirs  sang 
to  him,  pastors  told  how  brave  he  was  —  early-soldier 
heart.  And  the  family  bowed  their  heads,  as  the  reeds  the 
wind  shakes. 

So  our  part  in  Frazer  is  done,  but  you  must  come  next 
summer,  and  we  will  mind  ourselves  of  this  young  cru¬ 
sader  —  too  brave  that  he  could  fear  to  die.  We  will  play 
his  tunes  —  maybe  he  can  hear  them;  we  will  try  to  com¬ 
fort  his  broken-hearted  Ella,  who,  as  the  clergyman  said, 
“gave  him  peculiar  confidence.”  .  .  .Austin  is  stunned 
completely.  Let  us  love  better,  children,  it’s  most  that’s 
left  to  do. 

Love  from  Emily 

.  .  .  Sorrow  seems  more  general  than  it  did,  and  not  the 
estate  of  a  few  persons,  since  the  war  began;  and  if  the 
anguish  of  others  helped  one  with  one’s  own,  now  would 
be  many  medicines. 

’Tis  dangerous  to  value,  for  only  the  precious  can  alarm. 
I  noticed  that  Robert  Browning  had  made  another  poem. 


230  EMILY  DICKINSON 

and  was  astonished  —  till  I  remembered  that  I,  myself,  m 
my  smaller  way,  sang  off  charnel  steps.  Every  day  life 
feels  mightier,  and  what  we  have  the  power  to  be,  more 
stupendous. 

To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 
[March,  1862] 

Perhaps  you  thought  I  didn’t  care  —  because  I  stayed 
out,  yesterday.  I  did  care,  Mr.  Bowles.  I  pray  for  your 
sweet  health  to  Allah  every  morning,  but  something 
troubled  me,  and  I  knew  you  needed  light  and  air,  so  I 
didn’t  come.  Nor  have  I  the  conceit  that  you  noticed  me 
—  but  I  couldn’t  bear  that  you,  or  Mary,  so  gentle  to  me, 
should  think  me  forgetful. 

It’s  little  at  the  most,  we  can  do  for  ours,  and  we  must 
do  that  flying,  or  our  things  are  flown! 

Dear  friend,  I  wish  you  were  well. 

It  grieves  me  till  I  cannot  speak,  that  you  are  suffering. 
Won’t  you  come  back?  Can’t  I  bring  you  something?  My 
little  balm  might  be  o’erlooked  by  wiser  eyes,  you  know. 
Have  you  tried  the  breeze  that  swings  the  sign,  or  the  hoof 
of  the  dandelion?  I  own  ’em  —  wait  for  mine^  This  is  all 
I  have  to  say.  Kinsmen  need  say  nothing,  but  Swiveller 
may  be  sure  of  the 

“Marchioness” 

Love  for  Mary. 

To  the  same 

Dear  Friend,  —  .  .  .  Austin  is  disappointed  —  he  ex¬ 
pected  to  see  you  to-day.  He  is  sure  you  won’t  go  to  sea 
without  first  speaking  to  him.  I  presume  if  Emily  and 
Vinnie  knew  of  his  writing,  they  would  entreat  him  to  ask 
you  not. 


TO  MR.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


£31 


Austin  is  chilled  by  Frazer’s  murder.  He  says  his 
brain  keeps  saying  over  “Frazer  is  killed”  —  “Frazer  is 
killed  ,”  just  as  father  told  it  to  him.  Two  or  three  words 
of  lead,  that  dropped  so  deep  they  keep  weighing.  Tell 
Austin  how  to  get  over  them! 

He  is  very  sorry  you  are  not  better.  He  cares  for  you 
when  at  the  office,  and  afterwards,  too,  at  home;  and 
sometimes  wakes  at  night,  with  a  worry  for  you  he  didn’t 
finish  quite  by  day.  He  would  not  like  it  that  I  betrayed 
him,  so  you’ll  never  tell.  .  . 

Mary  sent  beautiful  flowers.  Did  she  tell  you? 

To  the  same 
[Spring,  1862] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  hearts  in  Amherst  ache  to-night 
—  you  could  not  know  how  hard.  They  thought  they 
could  not  wait,  last  night,  until  the  engine  sang  a  pleasant 
tune  that  time,  because  that  you  were  coming.  The 
flowers  waited,  in  the  vase,  and  love  got  peevish,  watch¬ 
ing.  A  railroad  person  rang,  to  bring  an  evening  paper  — 
Vinnie  tipped  pussy  over,  in  haste  to  let  you  in,  and  I,  for 
joy  and  dignity,  held  tight  in  my  chair.  My  hope  put  out 
a  petal. 

You  would  come,  to-day,  —  but  .  .  .  we  don’t  believe 
it,  now;  “Mr.  Bowles  not  coming!”  Wouldn’t  you,  to¬ 
morrow,  and  this  but  be  a  bad  dream,  gone  by  next 
morning? 

Please  do  not  take  our  spring  away,  since  you  blot 
summer  out!  We  cannot  count  our  tears  for  this,  because 
they  drop  so  fast.  .  .  . 

Dear  friend,  we  meant  to  make  you  brave,  but  moaned 
before  we  thought.  ...  If  you’ll  be  sure  and  get  well,  we’ll 


232  EMILY  DICKINSON 

try  to  bear  it.  If  we  could  only  care  the  less,  it  would  be 
so  much  easier.  Your  letter  troubled  my  throat.  It  gave 
that  little  scalding  we  could  not  know  the  reason  for  till 
we  grew  far  up. 

I  must  do  my  good-night  in  crayon  I  meant  to  in  red. 

Love  for  Mary. 

Emily 

After  Mr.  Bowles  had  sailed  for  Europe,  Emily  sent 
this  quaintly  consoling  note  to  Springfield. 

To  Mrs.  Samuel  Bowles 
[Early  summer,  1862] 

Dear  Mary,  —  When  the  best  is  gone,  I  know  that  other 
things  are  not  of  consequence.  The  heart  wants  what  it 
wants,  or  else  it  does  not  care. 

You  wonder  why  I  write  so.  Because  I  cannot  help.  I 
like  to  have  you  know  some  care  —  so  when  your  life  gets 
faint  for  its  other  life,  you  can  lean  on  us.  We  won  t  break, 
Mary.  We  look  very  small,  but  the  reed  can  carry  weight. 

Not  to  see  what  we  love  is  very  terrible,  and  talking 
doesn’t  ease  it,  and  nothing  does  but  just  itself.  The  eyes 
and  hair  we  chose  are  all  there  are  —  to  us.  Isn’t  it  so, 
Mary? 

I  often  wonder  how  the  love  of  Christ  is  done  when  that 
below  holds  so. 

I  hope  the  little  “Robert  ”  coos  away  the  pain.  Perhaps 
your  flowers  help,  some.  .  .  . 

The  frogs  sing  sweet  to-day  —  they  have  such  pretty, 
lazy  times  —  how  nice  to  be  a  frog!  .  .  . 

Mother  sends  her  love  to  you  —  she  has  a  sprained 
foot,  and  can  go  but  little  in  the  house,  and  not  abroad 
at  all. 


TO  MR.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


233 


Don’t  dishearten,  Mary,  we’ll  keep  thinking  of  you. 
Kisses  for  all. 


Emily 


To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 
[June,  1862] 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  go  away  —  and  where  you  go  we 
cannot  come  —  but  then  the  months  have  names  —  and 
each  one  comes  but  once  a  year  —  and  though  it  seems 
they  never  could,  they  sometimes  do,  go  by. 

We  hope  you  are  more  well  than  when  you  lived  in 
America,  and  that  those  foreign  people  are  kind,  and  true, 
to  you.  We  hope  you  recollect  each  life  you  left  behind, 
even  ours,  the  least. 

We  wish  we  knew  how  Amherst  looked,  in  your  mem¬ 
ory.  Smaller  than  it  did,  maybe,  and  yet  things  swell,  by 
leaving,  if  big  in  themselves. 

We  hope  you  will  not  alter,  but  be  the  same  we  grieved 
for  when  the  China  sailed. 

If  you  should  like  to  hear  the  news,  we  did  not  die 
here  —  we  did  not  change.  We  have  the  guests  we  did, 
except  yourself  —  and  the  roses  hang  on  the  same  stems 
as  before  you  went.  Vinnie  trains  the  honeysuckle,  and 
the  robins  steal  the  string  for  nests  —  quite,  quite  as  they 
used  to. 

I  have  the  errand  from  my  heart  —  I  might  forget  to 
tell  it.  Would  you  please  to  come  home?  The  long  life’s 
years  are  scant,  and  fly  away,  the  Bible  says,  like  a  told 
story  —  and  sparing  is  a  solemn  thing,  somehow,  it  seems 
to  me  —  and  I  grope  fast,  with  my  fingers,  for  all  out  of 
my  sight  I  own,  to  get  it  nearer. 

I  had  one  letter  from  Mary.  I  think  she  tries  to  be 


234  EMILY  DICKINSON 

patient  —  but  you  wouldn’t  want  her  to  succeed,  would 
you,  Mr.  Bowles? 

It’s  fragrant  news,  to  know  they  pine,  when  we  are 
out  of  sight. 

It  is  ’most  Commencement.  The  little  cousin  from 
Boston  has  come,  and  the  hearts  in  Pelham  have  an 
added  thrill.  We  shall  miss  you,  most,  dear  friend,  who 
annually  smiled  with  us,  at  the  gravities.  I  question  if 
even  Dr.  Yaill  have  his  wonted  applause. 

Should  anybody,  where  you  go,  talk  of  Mrs.  Browning, 
you  must  hear  for  us,  and  if  you  touch  her  grave,  put  one 
hand  on  the  head,  for  me  —  her  unmentioned  mourner. 

Father  and  mother,  and  Vinnie  and  Carlo,  send  their 
love  to  you,  and  warm  wish  for  your  health  —  and  I  am 
taking  lessons  in  prayer,  so  to  coax  God  to  keep  you  safe. 
Good-night,  dear  friend.  You  sleep  so  far,  how  can  I  know 
you  hear? 

Emily 


To  the  same 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  cannot  see  you.  You  will  not  less 
believe  me.  That  you  return  to  us  alive  is  better  than  a 
summer,  and  more  to  hear  your  voice  below  than  news  of 
any  bird. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[August,  1862] 

Dear  Mr.  Bowles,  —  Vinnie  is  trading  with  a  tin  ped¬ 
dler  —  buying  water-pots  for  me  to  sprinkle  geraniums 
with  when  you  get  home  next  winter,  and  she  has  gone  to 
the  war. 


TO  MR.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


235 


Summer  isn't  so  long  as  it  was,  when  we  stood  looking 
at  it  before  you  went  away;  and  when  I  finish  August, 
we'll  hop  the  autumn  very  soon,  and  then  ’twill  be  your¬ 
self. 

I  don’t  know  how  many  will  be  glad  to  see  you,  —  be¬ 
cause  I  never  saw  your  whole  friends,  but  I  have  heard 
that  in  large  cities  noted  persons  chose  you  —  though  how 
glad  those  I  know  will  be,  is  easier  told. 

I  tell  you,  Mr.  Bowles,  it  is  a  suffering  to  have  a  sea  — 
no  care  how  blue  —  between  your  soul  and  you. 

The  hills  you  used  to  love  wThen  you  were  in  Northamp¬ 
ton,  miss  their  old  lover,  could  they  speak;  and  the 
puzzled  look  deepens  in  Carlo’s  forehead  as  the  days  go  by 
and  you  never  come. 

I’ve  learned  to  read  the  steamer  place  in  newspapers 
now.  It’s  ’most  like  shaking  hands  with  you,  or  more  like 
your  ringing  at  the  door. 

We  reckon  your  coming  by  the  fruit.  When  the  grape 
gets  by,  and  the  pippin  and  the  chestnut  —  when  the  days 
are  a  little  short  by  the  clock,  and  a  little  long  by  the 
want  —  when  the  sky  has  new  red  gowns  and  a  purple 
bonnet  —  then  we  say  you  will  come.  I  am  glad  that  kind 
of  time  goes  by. 

It  is  easier  to  look  behind  at  a  pain,  than  to  see  it  coming. 

A  soldier  called,  a  morning  ago,  and  asked  for  a  nose¬ 
gay  to  take  to  battle.  I  suppose  he  thought  we  kept  an 
aquarium. 

How  sweet  it  must  be  to  one  to  come  home,  whose  home 
is  in  so  many  houses,  and  every  heart  a  “best  room.”  I 

mean  you,  Mr.  Bowles _ Have  not  the  clovers  names  to 

the  bees? 


Emily 


236 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 


Before  he  comes 
We  weigh  the  time, 

’Tis  heavy,  and  ’tis  light. 
When  he  departs 
An  emptiness 
Is  the  superior  freight. 

To  the  same 


Emily 


While  asters 
On  the  hill 

Their  everlasting  fashions  set, 

And  covenant  gentians  frill ! 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[Late  autumn,  1862] 

So  glad  we  are,  a  stranger’ d  deem 
’Twas  sorry  that  we  were; 

For  where  the  holiday  should  be 
There  publishes  a  tear; 

Nor  how  ourselves  be  justified, 
Since  grief  and  joy  are  done 
So  similar,  an  optizan 
Could  not  decide  between. 


To  the  same 
[Early  winter,  1862] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Had  we  the  art  like  you,  to  endow  so 
many,  by  just  recovering  our  health,  ’twould  give  us 
tender  pride,  nor  could  we  keep  the  news,  but  carry  it  to 
you,  who  seem  to  us  to  own  it  most. 


TO  MR.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


237 


So  few  that  live  have  life,  it  seems  of  quick  importance 
not  one  of  those  escape  by  death.  And  since  you  gave  us 
fear,  congratulate  us  for  ourselves  —  you  give  us  safer 
peace. 

How  extraordinary  that  life’s  large  population  contain 
so  few  of  power  to  us  —  and  those  a  vivid  species  who 
leave  no  mode,  like  Tyrian  dye. 

Remembering  these  minorities,  permit  our  gratitude 
for  you.  We  ask  that  you  be  cautious,  for  many  sakes, 
excelling  ours.  To  recapitulate  the  stars  were  useless  as 
supreme.  Yourself  is  yours,  dear  friend,  but  ceded,  is  it 
not,  to  here  and  there  a  minor  life?  Do  not  defraud  these, 
for  gold  may  be  bought,  and  purple  may  be  bought,  but 
the  sale  of  the  spirit  never  did  occur. 

Do  not  yet  work.  No  public  so  exorbitant  of  any  as  its 
friend,  and  we  can  wait  your  health.  Besides,  there  is  an 
idleness  more  tonic  than  toil. 

The  loss  of  sickness  —  was  it  loss? 

Or  that  ethereal  gain 

You  earned  by  measuring  the  grave. 

Then  measuring  the  sun. 

Be  sure,  dear  friend,  for  want  you  have  estates  of  lives. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[With  flowers] 

If  she  had  been  the  mistletoe. 
And  I  had  been  the  rose. 

How  gay  upon  your  table 
My  velvet  life  to  close! 


238 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Since  I  am  of  the  Druid, 

And  she  is  of  the  dew, 

I’ll  deck  tradition’s  buttonhole, 

And  send  the  rose  to  you. 

E. 


To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 
[April  16,  1862] 

Mr.  Higginson,  —  Are  you  too  deeply  occupied  to  say  if 
my  verse  is  alive? 

The  mind  is  so  near  itself  it  cannot  see  distinctly ,  and  I 
have  none  to  ask. 

Should  you  think  it  breathed,  and  had  you  the  leisure 
to  tell  me,  I  should  feel  quick  gratitude. 

If  I  make  the  mistake,  that  you  dared  to  tell  me  would 
give  me  sincerer  honor  toward  you. 

I  enclose  my  name,  asking  you,  if  you  please,  sir,  to  tell 

me  what  is  true? 

That  you  will  not  betray  me  it  is  needless  to  ask,  since 
honor  is  its  own  pawn. 


To  the  same 
[April  26,  1862] 

Mr.  Higginson,  —  Your  kindness  claimed  earlier  grati¬ 
tude,  but  I  was  ill,  and  write  to-day  from  my  pillow. 

Thank  you  for  the  surgery;  it  was  not  so  painful  as  I 
supposed.  I  bring  you  others,  as  you  ask,  though  they 
might  not  differ.  While  my  thought  is  undressed,  I  can 
make  the  distinction;  but  when  I  put  them  in  the  gown, 
they  look  alike  and  numb. 

You  asked  how  old  I  was?  I  made  no  verse,  but  one  or 
two,  until  this  winter,  sir. 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HIGGINSON 


239 


I  had  a  terror  since  September,  I  could  tell  to  none;  and 
so  I  sing,  as  the  boy  does  of  the  burying  ground,  because 
I  am  afraid.  f 

You  inquire  my  books.  For  poets,  I  have  Keats,  and 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Browning.  For  prose,  Mr.  Ruskin,  Sir 
Thomas  Browne,  and  the  “Revelations.”  I  went  to 
school,  but  in  your  manner  of  the  phrase  had  no  educa¬ 
tion.  When  a  little  girl,  I  had  a  friend  who  taught  me 
Immortality;  but  venturing  too  near,  himself,  he  never 
returned.  Soon  after  my  tutor  died,  and  for  several 
years  my  lexicon  was  my  only  companion.  Then  I 
found  one  more,  but  he  was  not  contented  I  be  his 
scholar,  so  he  left  the  land. 

You  ask  of  my  companions.  Hills,  sir,  and  the  sun¬ 
down,  and  a  dog  large  as  myself,  that  my  father  bought 
me.  They  are  better  than  beings  because  they  know,  but 
do  not  tell;  and  the  noise  in  the  pool  at  noon  excels  my 
piano. 

I  have  a  brother  and  sister;  my  mother  does  not  care 
for  thought,  and  father,  too  busy  with  his  briefs  to  notice 
what  we  do.  He  buys  me  many  books,  but  begs  me  not  to 
read  them,  because  he  fears  they  joggle  the  mind.  They 
are  religious,  except  me,  and  address  an  eclipse,  every 
morning,  whom  they  call  their  “Father.” 

But  I  fear  my  story  fatigues  you.  I  would  like  to  learn. 
Could  you  tell  me  how  to  grow,  or  is  it  unconveyed,  like 
melody  or  witchcraft? 

You  speak  of  Mr.  Whitman.  I  never  read  his  book,  but 
was  told  that  it  was  disgraceful. 

I  read  Miss  Prescott’s  “  Circumstance,”  but  it  followed 
me  in  the  dark,  so  I  avoided  her. 

Two  editors  of  journals  came  to  my  father’s  house  this 


240 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


winter,  and  asked  me  for  my  mind,  and  when  I  asked 
them  “why”  they  said  I  was  penurious,  and  they  would 
use  it  for  the  world. 

I  could  not  weigh  myself,  myself.  My  size  felt  small  to 
me.  I  read  your  chapters  in  the  “Atlantic,”  and  experi¬ 
enced  honor  for  you.  I  was  sure  you  would  not  reject  a 
confiding  question. 

Is  this,  sir,  what  you  asked  me  to  tell  you? 

Your  friend 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[June  8,  1862] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Your  letter  gave  no  drunkenness,  be¬ 
cause  I  tasted  rum  before.  Domingo  comes  but  once;  yet 
I  have  had  few  pleasures  so  deep  as  your  opinion,  and  if  I 
tried  to  thank  you,  my  tears  would  block  my  tongue. 

My  dying  tutor  told  me  that  he  would  like  to  live  till  I 
had  been  a  poet,  but  Death  was  much  of  mob  as  I  could 
master,  then.  And  when,  far  afterward,  a  sudden  light  on 
orchards,  or  a  new  fashion  in  the  wind  troubled  my  atten¬ 
tion,  I  felt  a  palsy,  here,  the  verses  just  relieve. 

Your  second  letter  surprised  me,  and  for  a  moment, 
swung.  I  had  not  supposed  it.  Your  first  gave  no  dis¬ 
honor,  because  the  true  are  not  ashamed.  I  thanked  you 
for  your  justice,  but  could  not  drop  the  bells  whose  jing¬ 
ling  cooled  my  tramp.  Perhaps  the  balm  seemed  better, 
because  you  bled  me  first.  I  smile  when  you  suggest  that 
I  delay  “to  publish,”  that  being  foreign  to  my  thought 
as  firmament  to  fin. 

If  fame  belonged  to  me,  I  could  not  escape  her;  if  she 
did  not,  the  longest  day  would  pass  me  on  the  chase,  and 


■  v; 


r.  v 


< 


e  ct  7-  e  / 
^ Ck  sc  f* 


'  V 

■;  ,  .  ns...  . 

/ 


/ 

fo 


y  /■ 


€  -y- 


y  y  e  e 
Cy  y  7  e  e 


y  *  » 

s*  '  Jl.  C"  S 


/ 


/ 


r 

Cc  ■f  y(  t  e>  '/i  C  OC 


^  ^  ->?  c?c"  ✓  c^  cT 


y~y 


v  As 


Cl  ■■?)  e€ 


cy 


•W^. 


(y  <y  ■>?  y  <>  a  y  c*.  oc 
/’  o  c,  y  7,0 

y  c 


y 


^  Cs  c-  ■*- 


<y 

Jy  <z 
?y  e 
y<u 

> 


&  •?-  t 


o  y 

See**  ^ c  c*  S 

y  z  c-  y  t  e  ■/■  ye*- 
ci  >  e  <u  -r  y 

s 

<'~y  yC  o  y  a  <y  '  <  €, 

e  e 

y  y  ,  ^ 


es  y  /,  <*  *  ^ 


A  POEM  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON’S  ADDRESSED  ON  THE  BACK  TO  “  NED  ” 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HIGGINSON 


241 


the  approbation  of  my  dog  would  forsake  me  then.  My 
barefoot  rank  is  better. 

You  think  my  gait  “spasmodic.”  I  am  in  danger,  sir. 
You  think  me  “uncontrolled.”  I  have  no  tribunal. 

Would  you  have  time  to  be  the  “friend”  you  should 
think  I  need?  I  have  a  little  shape:  it  would  not  crowd 
your  desk,  nor  make  much  racket  as  the  mouse  that  dents 
your  galleries. 

If  I  might  bring  you  what  I  do  —  not  so  frequent  to 
trouble  you  —  and  ask  you  if  I  told  it  clear,  ’twould  be 
control  to  me.  The  sailor  cannot  see  the  north,  but  knows 
the  needle  can.  The  “hand  you  stretch  me  in  the  dark”  I 
put  mine  in,  and  turn  away.  I  have  no  Saxon  now: 

As  if  I  asked  a  common  alms. 

And  in  my  wondering  hand 
A  stranger  pressed  a  kingdom. 

And  I,  bewildered,  stand; 

As  if  I  asked  the  Orient 
Had  it  for  me  a  mom. 

And  it  should  lift  its  purple  dikes 
And  shatter  me  with  dawn ! 

But,  will  you  be  my  preceptor,  Mr.  Higginson? 

To  the  same 

[In  reply  to  a  request  for  a  likeness  of  her] 

[July,  18G2] 

Could  you  believe  me  without?  I  had  no  portrait,  now, 
but  am  small,  like  the  wren;  and  my  hair  is  bold,  like  the 
chestnut  burr;  and  my  eyes,  like  the  sherry  in  the  glass 
that  the  guest  leaves.  Would  this  do  just  as  well? 

It  often  alarms  father.  He  says  death  might  occur,  and 


242  EMILY  DICKINSON 

he  has  moulds  of  all  the  rest,  but  has  no  mould  of  me;  but 
I  noticed  the  quick  wore  off  those  things  in  a  few  days,  and 
forestall  the  dishonor.  You  will  think  no  caprice  of  me. 

You  said  “  dark.”  I  know  the  butterfly,  and  the  lizard, 
and  the  orchis.  Are  not  those  your  countrymen? 

I  am  happy  to  be  your  scholar,  and  will  deserve  the 

kindness  I  cannot  repay. 

If  you  truly  consent,  I  recite  now.  Will  you  tell  me  my 
fault,  frankly,  as  to  yourself,  for  I  had  rather  wince  than 
die.  Men  do  not  call  the  surgeon  to  commend  the  bone, 
but  to  set  it,  sir,  and  fracture  within  is  more  critical. 
And  for  this,  preceptor,  I  shall  bring  you  obedience,  the 
blossom  from  my  garden,  and  every  gratitude  I  know. 

Perhaps  you  smile  at  me.  I  could  not  stop  for  that.  My 
business  is  circumference.  An  ignorance,  not  of  customs, 
but  if  caught  with  the  dawn,  or  the  sunset  see  me,  myself 
the  only  kangaroo  among  the  beauty,  sir,  if  you  please,  it 
afflicts  me,  and  I  thought  that  instruction  would  take  it 
away. 

Because  you  have  much  business,  beside  the  growth  of 
me,  you  will  appoint,  yourself,  how  often  I  shall  come 
without  your  inconvenience. 

And  if  at  any  time  you  regret  you  received  me,  or  I 
prove  a  different  fabric  to  that  you  supposed,  you  must 
banish  me. 

When  I  state  myself,  as  the  representative  of  the  verse, 
it  does  not  mean  me,  but  a  supposed  person. 

You  are  true  about  the  “perfection.”  To-day  makes 
yesterday  mean. 

You  spoke  of  “Pippa  Passes.”  I  never  heard  anybody 
speak  of  “Pippa  Passes”  before.  You  see  my  posture  is 
benighted. 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HXGGINSON 


243 


To  thank  you  baffles  me.  Are  you  perfectly  powerful? 
Had  I  a  pleasure  you  had  not,  I  could  delight  to  bring  it. 

Your  Scholar 

To  the  same 

Dear  Friexd,  —  Are  these  more  orderly?  I  thank  you 
for  the  truth. 

I  had  no  monarch  in  my  life,  and  cannot  rule  myself; 
and  when  I  try  to  organize,  my  little  force  explodes  and 
leaves  me  bare  and  charred. 

I  think  you  called  me  “wayward.”  Will  you  help  me 
improve? 

I  suppose  the  pride  that  stops  the  breath,  in  the  core  of 
woods,  is  not  of  ourself. 

You  say  I  confess  the  little  mistake,  and  omit  the  large. 
Because  I  can  see  orthography;  but  the  ignorance  out  of 
sight  is  my  preceptor’s  charge. 

Of  “shunning  men  and  women,”  —  they  talk  of 
hallowed  things,  aloud,  and  embarrass  my  dog.  He  and  I 
don’t  object  to  them,  if  they’ll  exist  their  side.  X  think 
Carlo  would  please  you.  He  is  dumb,  and  brave.  I  think 
you  would  like  the  chestnut-tree  I  met  in  my  walk.  It  hit 
my  notice  suddenly,  and  I  thought  the  skies  were  in 
blossom. 

Then  there’s  a  noiseless  noise  in  the  orchard  that  I  let 
persons  hear. 

You  told  me  in  one  letter  you  could  not  come  to  see  me 
“now,”  and  I  made  no  answer;  not  because  I  had  none, 
but  did  not  think  myself  the  price  that  you  should  come 
so  far. 

I  do  not  ask  so  large  a  pleasure,  lest  you  might  deny  me. 

You  say,  “Beyond  your  knowledge.”  You  would  not 


244  EMILY  DICKINSON 

jest  with  me,  because  I  believe  you;  but,  preceptor,  you 
cannot  mean  it? 

All  men  say  “What”  to  me,  but  I  thought  it  a  fashion. 

When  much  in  the  woods,  as  a  little  girl,  I  was  told  that 
the  snake  would  bite  me,  that  I  might  pick  a  poisonous 
flower,  or  goblins  kidnap  me;  but  I  went  along  and  met  no 
one  but  angels,  who  were  far  shyer  of  me  than  I  could  be 
of  them,  so  I  haven’t  that  confidence  in  fraud  which  many 
exercise. 

I  shall  observe  your  precept,  though  I  don’t  understand 
it,  always. 

I  marked  a  line  in  one  verse,  because  I  met  it  after  I 
made  it,  and  never  consciously  touch  a  paint  mixed  by  an¬ 
other  person.  I  do  not  let  go  it,  because  it  is  mine. 

Have  you  the  portrait  of  Mrs.  Browning?  Persons  sent 
me  three.  If  you  had  none,  will  you  have  mine? 

Your  Scholar 


To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 
[1862] 

Dear  Mr.  Bowles,  —  I  can’t  thank  you  any  more. 
You  are  thoughtful  so  many  times  you  grieve  me  always; 
now  the  old  words  are  numb,  and  there  aren’t  any  new 
ones. 

Brooks  are  useless  in  freshet  time.  When  you  come  to 
Amherst  —  please  God  it  were  to-day  —  I  will  tell  you 
about  the  picture  —  if  I  can,  I  will. 

Speech  is  a  prank  of  Parliament, 

Tears  a  trick  of  the  nerve,  — 

But  the  heart  with  the  heaviest  freight  on 
Doesn’t  always  swerve.  Emily 


TO  MR.  AND  MRS.  SAMUEL  BOWLES  245 


To  the  same 

Perhaps  you  think  me  stooping! 

I’m  not  ashamed  of  that! 

Christ  stooped  until  he  touched  the  grave! 
Do  those  at  sacrament 
Commemorate  dishonor  — 

Or  love,  annealed  of  love, 

Until  it  bend  as  low  as  death 
Re-royalized  above? 

The  juggler’s  hat  her  country  is, 

The  mountain  gorse  the  bee’s. 

I  stole  them  from  a  bee, 

Because  —  thee ! 

Sweet  plea  — 

He  pardoned  me ! 

Emily 


To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Samuel  Bowles 
[Summer,  1863] 

Dear  Friends,  —  I  am  sorry  you  came,  because  you 
went  away. 

Hereafter,  I  will  pick  no  rose,  lest  it  fade  or  prick  me. 
I  would  like  to  have  you  dwell  here. 

Though  it  is  almost  nine  o’clock,  the  skies  are  gay  and 
yellow,  and  there’s  a  purple  craft  or  so,  in  which  a  friend 
could  sail.  To-night  looks  like  “Jerusalem”!  ...  I  hope 
we  may  all  behave  so  as  to  reach  Jerusalem. 

How  are  your  hearts  to-day?  Ours  are  pretty  well.  I 
hope  your  tour  was  bright,  and  gladdened  Mrs.  Bowles. 


246 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Perhaps  the  retrospect  will  call  you  back  some  morning. 

You  shall  find  us  all  at  the  gate  if  you  come  in  a  hundred 
years,  just  as  we  stood  that  day.  If  it  become  of  ‘  jasper” 
previously,  you  will  not  object,  so  that  we  lean  there  still, 
looking  after  you. 

I  rode  with  Austin  this  morning.  He  showed  me 
mountains  that  touched  the  sky,  and  brooks  that  sang  like 
bobolinks.  Was  he  not  very  kind?  I  will  give  them  to 
you,  for  they  are  mine,  and  “all  things  are  mine,”  except¬ 
ing  “Cephas  and  Apollos,”  for  whom  I  have  no  taste. 
Vinnie’s  love  brims  mine. 

Take 

Emilie 


To  Mrs.  Samuel  Bowles 

Dear  Mrs.  Bowles,  —  Since  I  have  no  sweet  flower 
to  send  you,  I  enclose  my  heart.  A  little  one,  sunburnt, 
half  broken  sometimes,  yet  close  as  the  spaniel  to  its 
friends.  Your  flowers  come  from  heaven,  to  which,  if  I 
should  ever  go,  I  will  pluck  you  palms. 

My  words  are  far  away  when  I  attempt  to  thank  you, 
so  take  the  silver  tear  instead,  from  my  full  eye. 

You  have  often  remembered  me. 

I  have  little  dominion.  Are  there  not  wiser  than  I,  who, 
with  curious  treasure,  could  requite  your  gift? 

Angels  fill  the  hand  that  loaded 

Emily’s 


Nature  and  God,  I  neither  knew, 
Yet  both,  so  well  knew  me 
They  startled,  like  executors 
Of  an  identity. 


TO  MR.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


247 


Yet  neither  told,  that  I  could  learn; 

My  secret  as  secure 
As  Herschel’s  private  interest, 

Or  Mercury’s  •affair. 

To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 
[18631 

Dear  Friend,' — You  remember  the  little  “meeting” 
we  held  for  you  last  spring?  We  met  again,  Saturday. 

Twas  May  when  we  “adjourned,”  but  then  adjourns 
are  all.  The  meetings  were  alike,  Mr.  Bowles. 

The  topic  did  not  tire  us,  so  we  chose  no  new.  We  voted 
to  remember  you  so  long  as  both  should  live,  including 
immortality ;  to  coimt  you  as  ourselves,  except  sometimes 
more  tenderly,  as  now,  when  you  are  ill,  and  we,  the  haler 
of  the  two  —  and  so  I  bring  the  bond  we  sign  so  many 
times,  for  you  to  read  when  chaos  comes,  or  treason,  or 
decay,  still  witnessing  for  morning.  ...  We  hope  our  joy 
to  see  you  gave  of  its  own  degree  to  you.  We  pray  for 
your  new  health,  the  prayer  that  goes  not  down  when 
they  shut  the  church.  We  offer  you  our  cups  —  stintless, 
as  to  the  bee,  —  the  lily,  her  new  liquors. 

Would  you  like  summer?  Taste  of  ours. 

Spices?  Buy  here! 

Ill !  We  have  berries,  for  the  parching! 

Weary!  Furloughs  of  down! 

Perplexed!  Estates  of  violet  trouble  ne’er  looked  on! 

Captive!  We  bring  reprieve  of  roses! 

Fainting!  Flasks  of  air! 

Even  for  Death,  a  fairy  medicine. 

But,  which  is  it,  sir? 


Emily 


248 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 

I’ll  send  the  feather  from  my  hat! 

Who  knows  but  at  the  sight  of  that 
My  sovereign  will  relent? 

As  trinket,  worn  by  faded  child, 
Confronting  eyes  long  comforted 
Blisters  the  adamant! 

Emily 


To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 

[Sent  to  him  in  camp,  during  the  Civil  War,  postmarked  South 

Carolina] 

[1863] 

Amherst 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  did  not  deem  that  planetary  forces 
annulled,  but  suffered  an  exchange  of  territory,  or  world. 

I  should  have  liked  to  see  you  before  you  became  im¬ 
probable.  War  feels  to  me  an  oblique  place.  Should  there 
be  other  summers,  would  you  perhaps  come? 

I  found  you  were  gone,  by  accident,  as  I  find  systems 
are,  or  seasons  of  the  year,  and  obtain  no  cause,  but 
suppose  it  a  treason  of  progress  that  dissolves  as  it  goes. 
Carlo  still  remained,  and  I  told  him 

Best  gains  must  have  the  losses’  test, 

To  constitute  them  gains. 

My  shaggy  ally  assented. 

Perhaps  death  gave  me  awe  for  friends,  striking  sharp 
and  early,  for  I  held  them  since  in  a  brittle  love,  of  more 
alarm  than  peace.  I  trust  you  may  pass  the  limit  of  war; 
and  though  not  reared  to  prayer,  when  service  is  had  in 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  249 

church  for  our  arms,  I  include  yourself.  ...  I  was  thinking 
to-day,  as  I  noticed,  that  the  “supernatural”  was  only  the 
natural  disclosed. 

Not  “Revelation”  ’tis  that  waits, 

But  our  unfurnished  eyes. 

But  I  fear  I  detain  you.  Should  you,  before  this  reaches 
you,  experience  Immortality,  who  will  inform  me  of  the 
exchange?  Could  you,  with  honor,  avoid  death,  I  entreat 
you,  sir.  It  would  bereave 

Your  Gnome 

I  trust  the  “Procession  of  Flowers”  was  not  a  premo¬ 
nition. 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 
[May,  1863] 

. .  .  The  nights  turned  hot,  when  Vinnie  had  gone,  and  I 
must  keep  no  window  raised  for  fear  of  prowling  “booger,” 
and  I  must  shut  my  door  for  fear  front  door  slide  open  on 
me  at  the  “dead  of  night,”  and  I  must  keep  “gas”  burn¬ 
ing  to  light  the  danger  up,  so  I  could  distinguish  it  — 
these  gave  me  a  snarl  in  the  brain  which  don’t  unravel  yet, 
and  that  old  nail  in  my  breast  pricked  me;  these,  dear, 
were  my  cause.  Truth  is  so  best  of  all  I  wanted  you  to 
know.  Vinnie  will  tell  of  her  visit.  .  .  . 

About  Commencement,  children,  I  can  have  no  doubt, 
if  you  should  fail  me  then,  my  little  life  would  fail  of  itself. 
Could  you  only  lie  in  your  little  bed  and  smile  at  me,  that 
would  be  support.  Tell  the  doctor  I  am  inexorable,  be¬ 
sides  I  shall  heal  you  quicker  than  he.  You  need  the 
balsam  word.  And  who  is  to  cut  the  cake,  ask  F - ,  and 


250  EMILY  DICKINSON 

chirp  to  those  trustees?  Tell  me,  dears,  by  the  coming 
mail,  that  you  will  not  fail  me.  .  .  . 

Jennie  Hitchcock’s  mother  was  buried  yesterday,  so 
there  is  one  orphan  more,  and  her  father  is  very  sick  be¬ 
sides.  My  father  and  mother  went  to  the  service,  and 
mother  said  while  the  minister  prayed,  a  hen  with  her 
chickens  came  up,  and  tried  to  fly  into  the  window.  I 
suppose  the  dead  lady  used  to  feed  them,  and  they 
wanted  to  bid  her  good-by. 


Life  is  death  we’re  lengthy  at. 
Death  the  hinge  to  life. 

Love  from  all 


Emily 


To  the  same 
[Autumn,  1863] 

Wednesday 

Dear  Children,  —  Nothing  has  happened  but  loneli¬ 
ness,  perhaps  too  daily  to  relate.  Carlo  is  consistent,  has 
asked  for  nothing  to  eat  or  drink,  since  you  went  away. 
Mother  thinks  him  a  model  dog,  and  conjectures  what  he 
might  have  been,  had  not  Vinnie  “demoralized”  him. 
Margaret  objects  to  furnace  heat  on  account  of  bone 
decrepitudes,  so  I  dwell  in  my  bonnet  and  suffer  comfort¬ 
ably.  .  .  . 

Miss  'Kingman  called  last  evening  to  inspect  your 
garden;  I  gave  her  a  lan thorn,  and  she  went  out,  and 
thanks  you  very  much.  No  one  has  called  so  far,  but  one 
old  lady  to  look  at  a  house.  I  directed  her  to  the  cemetery 
to  spare  expense  of  moving. 

I  got  down  before  father  this  morning,  and  spent  a  few 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  251 


moments  profitably  with  the  South  Sea  rose.  Father 
detecting  me,  advised  wiser  employment,  and  read  at 
devotions  the  chapter  oMhe  gentleman  with  one  talent. 
I  think  he  thought  my  conscience  would  adjust  the 
gender. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[Autumn,  1863] 

.  .  .  I  should  be  wild  with  joy  to  see  my  little  lovers.  The 
writing  them  is  not  so  sweet  as  their  two  faces  that  seem 
so  small  way  off,  and  yet  have  been  two  weeks  from  me 
two  wishful,  wandering  weeks.  Now,  I  begin  to  doubt  if 
they  ever  came. 

I  bid  the  stiff  “good-night”  and  the  square  “good¬ 
morning”  to  the  lingering  guest,  I  finish  mamma’s  sack, 
all  but  the  overcasting  —  that  fatal  sack,  you  recollect.  I 
pick  up  tufts  of  mignonette,  and  sweet  alyssum  for  winter, 
dim  as  winter  seems  these  red,  and  gold,  and  ribbon  days. 

I  am  sure  I  feel  as  Noah  did,  docile,  but  somewhat 
sceptic,  under  the  satinet. 

No  frost  at  our  house  yet.  Thermometer  frost,  I  mean. 

L - goes  to  Sunderland,  Wednesday,  for  a  minute  or 

two;  leaves  here  at  half-past  six  —  what  a  fitting  hour  — 
and  will  breakfast  the  night  before;  such  a  smart  atmos¬ 
phere!  The  trees  stand  right  up  straight  when  they  hear 
her  boots,  and  will  bear  crockery  wares  instead  of  fruit,  I 
fear.  She  hasn’t  starched  the  geraniums  yet,  but  will  have 
ample  time,  unless  she  leaves  before  April.  Emily  is  very 
mean,  and  her  children  in  dark  mustn’t  remember  what 
she  says  about  damsel. 

Grateful  for  little  notes,  and  shall  ask  for  longer  when 


252  EMILY  DICKINSON 

my  birds  locate.  Would  it  were  here.  Three  sisters  are 
prettier  than  one.  .  .  .  Tabby  is  a  continual  shrine,  and 
her  jaunty  ribbons  put  me  in  mind  of  fingers  far  out  at 

sea.  F - »s  admonition  made  me  laugh  and  cry  too.  In 

the  hugest  haste,  and  the  engine  waiting. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

[After  the  death  of  their  father,  January,  1864] 

What  shall  I  tell  these  darlings  except  that  my  father 
and  mother  are  half  their  father  and  mother,  and  my 
home  half  theirs,  whenever,  and  for  as  long  as,  they  will. 
And  sometimes  a  dearer  thought  than  that  creeps  into  my 
mind,  but  it  is  not  for  to-night.  Wasn’t  dear  papa  so  tired 
always  after  mamma  went,  and  wasn  t  it  almost  sweet  to 
think  of  the  two  together  these  new  winter  nights?  The 
grief  is  our  side,  darlings,  and  the  glad  is  theirs.  Vinnie 
and  I  sit  down  to-night,  while  mother  tells  what  makes  us 
cry,  though  we  know  it  is  well  and  easy  with  uncle  and 
papa,  and  only  our  part  hurts.  Mother  tells  how  gently 
he  looked  on  all  who  looked  at  him  how  he  held  his 
bouquet  sweet,  as  he  were  a  guest  in  a  friend  s  parlor  and 
must  still  do  honor.  The  meek,  mild  gentleman  who 
thought  no  harm,  but  peace  toward  all. 

Vinnie  intended  to  go,  but  the  day  was  cold,  and  she 
wanted  to  keep  Uncle  L - as  she  talked  with  him,  al¬ 

ways,  instead  of  this  new  way.  She  thought  too,  for  the 
crowd,  she  could  not  see  you,  children,  and  she  would  be 
another  one  to  give  others  care.  IMother  said  Mr.  V  , 

yes,  dears,  even  Mr.  V - ,  at  whom  we  sometimes  smile, 

talked  about  “Lorin’  and  Laviny”  and  his  friendship 
towards  them,  to  your  father’s  guests.  We  won’t  smile  at 


253 


TO  MR.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 

him  any  more  now,  will  we?  Perhaps  he’ll  live  to  tell 
some  gentleness  of  us,  who  made  meny  of  him. 

But  never  mind  that  >now.  W  hen  you  have  strength, 
tell  us  how  it  is,  and  what  we  may  do  for  you,  of  comfort, 
or  of  service.  Be  sure  you  crowd  all  others  out,  precious 
little  cousins.  Good-night.  Let  Emily  sing  for  you  be¬ 
cause  she  cannot  pray: 

It  is  not  dying  hurts  us  so,  — 

’Tis  living  hurts  us  more; 

But  dying  is  a  different  way, 

A  kind,  behind  the  door, 

The  southern  custom  of  the  bird 
That  soon  as  frosts  are  due 
Adopts  a  better  latitude. 

W7e  are  the  birds  that  stay. 

The  shiverers  round  farmers’  doors, 

For  whose  reluctant  crumb 
W7e  stipulate,  till  pitying  snows 
Persuade  our  feathers  home. 

Emily 


To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 

Her  breast  is  fit  for  pearls, 
But  I  was  not  a  diver. 

Her  brow  is  fit  for  thrones, 
But  I  had  not  a  crest. 

Her  heart  is  fit  for  rest  — 
I,  a  sparrow,  build  there 
Sweet  of  twigs  and  twine. 
My  perennial  nest. 


254 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 
[1864?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  How  hard  to  thank  you  -  but  the 
large  heart  requites  itself.  Please  to  need  me.  I  wanted 
to  ask  you  to  receive  Mr.  Browning  from  me,  but  you 
denied  my  Bronte  —  so  I  did  not  dare. 

Is  it  too  late  now?  I  should  like  so  much  to  remind  you 
how  kind  you  had  been  to  me. 

You  could  choose  —  as  you  did  before  —  if  it  would 
not  be  obnoxious  —  except  where  you  “measured  by 
your  heart,”  you  should  measure  this  time  by  mine.  I 
wonder  which  would  be  biggest ! 

Austin  told,  Saturday  morning,  that  you  were  not  so 
well.  ’Twas  sundown,  all  day,  Saturday  and  Sunday 
such  a  long  bridge  no  news  of  you  could  cross! 

Teach  us  to  miss  you  less  because  the  fear  to  miss  you 
more  haunts  us  all  the  time.  We  didn  t  care  so  much, 
once.  I  wish  it  was  then,  now,  but  you  kept  tightening,  so 
it  can’t  be  stirred  to-day.  You  didn’t  mean  to  be  worse, 
did  you?  Wasn’t  it  a  mistake? 

Won’t  you  decide  soon  to  be  the  strong  man  we  first 
knew?  ’Twould  lighten  things  so  much  —  and  yet  that 
man  was  not  so  dear  —  I  guess  you’d  better  not. 

We  pray  for  you,  every  night.  A  homely  shrine  our 
knee,  but  Madonna  looks  at  the  heart  first. 

Dear  friend  —  don’t  discourage! 

Affectionately  Emily 

To  the  same 

No  wilderness  can  be 
Where  this  attendeth  thee  — 


TO  MR.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


255 


No  desert  noon, 

No  fear  of  frost  to  come 
Haunt  the>perennial  bloom, 

But  certain  June! 

Emily 

To  the  savie 

If  recollecting  were  forgetting 
Then  I  remember  not. 

And  if  forgetting,  recollecting, 

How  near  I  had  forgot! 

And  if  to  miss  were  merry. 

And  if  to  mourn  were  gay. 

How  very  blithe  the  fingers 
That  gathered  this,  to-day! 

Emilie 

To  the  same 

“  They  have  not  chosen  me,”  he  said, 

“But  I  have  chosen  them.” 

Brave,  broken-hearted  statement 
Uttered  in  Bethlehem! 

I  could  not  have  told  it, 

But  since  Jesus  dared. 

Sovereign !  know  a  daisy 

Thy  dishonor  shared.  Emily 

To  the  same 

Saturday 

Mother  never  asked  a  favor  of  Mr.  Bowles  before  —  that 
he  accept  from  her  the  little  barrel  of  apples. 


256 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


“  Sweet  apples,”  she  exhorts  me, 
Baldwin  for  Mary  and  the  squirrels. 


with  an  occasional 
Emily 


To  the  same 

Just  once  —  oh !  least  request ! 

Could  adamant  refuse 
So  small  a  grace, 

So  scanty  put, 

Such  agonizing  terms? 

Would  not  a  God  of  flint 
Be  conscious  of  a  sigh. 

As  down  his  heaven  dropt  remote, 

“Just  once,  sweet  Deity?” 

To  her  sister  Lavinia 
[1864] 

Boston 

Dear  Vinnie,  —  Many  write  that  they  do  not  write  be¬ 
cause  that  they  have  too  much  to  say,  I  that  I  have 
enough.  Do  you  remember  the  whippoorwill  that  sang 
one  night  on  the  orchard  fence,  and  then  drove  to  the 
south,  and  we  never  heard  of  him  afterward? 

He  will  go  home,  and  I  shall  go  home,  perhaps  in  the 
same  train.  It  is  a  very  sober  thing  to  keep  my  summer  in 
strange  towns  —  what,  I  have  not  told,  but  I  have  found 
friends  in  the  wilderness.  You  know  Elijah  did,  and  to 
see  the  “ravens”  mending  my  stockings  would  break  a 
heart  long  hard. 

Fanny  and  Lou  are  solid  gold,  and  Mrs.  B  and  her 
daughter  very  kind,  and  the  doctor  enthusiastic  about 


257 


TO  HER  SISTER  LAYINIA 

my  getting  well.  I  feel  no  gayness  yet  —  I  suppose  I  had 
been  discouraged  so  long. 

You  remember  the  prisoner  of  Chillon  did  not  know 
liberty  when  it  came,  and  asked  to  go  back  to  jail. 

C _ and  A - came  to  see  me  and  brought  beauti¬ 

ful  flowers.  Do  you  know  what  made  them  remember  me? 
Give  them  my  love  and  gratitude. 

They  told  me  about  the  day  at  Pelham,  you,  dressed  in 

daisies,  and  Mr.  McD - .  I  couldn’t  see  you,  Vinnie.  I 

am  glad  of  all  the  roses  you  find,  while  your  primrose  is 

gone.  How  kind  Mr.  C - grew.  Was  Mr.  D  dear? 

Emily  wants  to  be  well  —  if  any  one  alive  wants  to  get 

well  more,  I  would  let  him,  first. 

Give  my  love  to  father  and  mother  and  Austin.  Tell 
Margaret  I  remember  her,  and  hope  Richard  is  well.  . . . 

How  I  wish  I  could  rest  all  those  who  are  tired  for  me. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1865] 

Dear  Vinnie,  —  The  hood  is  far  under  way,  and  the  girls 
think  it  a  beauty.  ...  I  hope  the  chimneys  are  done,  and 
the  hemlocks  set,  and  the  two  teeth  filled  in  the  front 
yard.  How  astonishing  it  will  be  to  me!  ... 

The  pink  lily  you  gave  Lou  has  had  five  flowers  since  I 
came,  and  has  more  buds.  The  girls  think  it  my  influence. 
Lou  wishes  she  knew  father’s  view  of  Jeff  Davis’  capture 
—  thinks  no  one  but  him  can  do  it  justice.  She  wishes  to 
send  a  photograph  of  the  arrest  to  Austin,  including  the 
skirt  and  spurs,  but  fears  he  will  think  her  trifling  with 

him.  I  advised  her  not  to  be  rash. 

How  glad  I  should  be  to  see  you  all,  but  it  won’t  be  long, 


258  EMILY  DICKINSON 

Vinnie.  You  will  be  willing,  won’t  you,  for  a  little  while? 
It  lias  rained  and  been  very  hot,  and  mosquitoes,  as  in 
August.  I  hope  the  flowers  are  well.  The  tea-rose  I  gave 
Aunt  L - has  a  flower  now.  Is  the  lettuce  ripe?  Per¬ 

sons  wear  no  bonnets  here.  Fanny  has  a  blade  of  straw 

with  handle  of  ribbon. 

Affectionately 

Emily 


To  the  same 

.  .  .  Father  told  me  you  were  going.  I  wept  for  the  little 
plants,  but  rejoiced  for  you.  Had  I  loved  them  as  well  as  I 
did,  I  could  have  begged  you  to  stay  with  them,  but  they 
are  foreigners  now,  and  all,  a  foreigner.  I  have  been  sick 
so  long  I  do  not  know  the  sun.  I  hope  they  may  be  alive, 
for  home  would  be  strange  except  them,  now  the  world  is 
dead. 

A - N - lives  here  since  Saturday,  and  two  new 

people  more,  a  person  and  his  wife,  so  I  do  little  but  fly, 
yet  always  find  a  nest.  I  shall  go  home  in  two  weeks. 
You  will  get  me  at  Palmer? 

Love  for  E - and  Mr.  D - .  Sister 

To  the  same 

.  .  .  The  Doctor  will  let  me  go  Monday  of  Thanksgiving 
week.  He  wants  to  see  me  Sunday,  so  I  cannot  before. 

.  .  .  Love  for  the  Middletown  pearls.  Shall  write  E - 

after  Tuesday,  when  I  go  to  the  Doctor.  Thank  her  for 
sweet  note. 

The  drums  keep  on  for  the  still  man  —  but  Emily  must 
stop. 

Love  of  Fanny  and  Lou. 


Sister 


TO  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND 


259 


To  Mrs.  Gertrude  Vanderbilt 
[On  her  recovery  from  being  accidentally  shot] 

To  this  world  she  returned, 

But  with  a  tingle  of  that; 

A  compound  manner, 

As  a  sod 

Espoused  a  violet 
That  chiefer  to  the  skies 
Than  to  himself  allied, 

Dwelt,  hesitating, 

Half  of  dust, 

And  half  of  day,  the  bride. 

Emily 


Emily's  good-bye 

We’ll  pass  without  a  parting, 

So  to  spare 
Certificate  of  absence, 

Deeming  where 
I  left  her  I  could  find  her 
If  I  tried. 

This  way  I  keep  from  missing 
Those  who  died. 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 
[1864] 

.  .  I  winced  at  her  loss,  because  I  was  in  the  habit  of  her, 
and  even  a  new  rolling-pin  has  an  embarrassing  element, 
but  to  all  except  anguish,  the  mind  soon  adjusts. 

It  is  also  November.  The  noons  are  more  laconic  and 


260  EMILY  DICKINSON 

the  sundowns  sterner,  and  Gibraltar  lights  make  the 
village  foreign.  November  always  seemed  to  me  the  Nor¬ 
way  of  the  year.  - is  still  with  the  sister  who  put  her 

child  in  an  ice  nest  last  Monday  forenoon.  The  redoubt¬ 
able  God!  I  notice  where  Death  has  been  introduced,  he 
frequently  calls,  making  it  desirable  to  forestall  his  ad¬ 
vances. 

It  is  hard  to  be  told  by  the  papers  that  a  friend  is  failing, 
not  even  know  where  the  water  lies.  Incidentally,  only, 
that  he  comes  to  land.  Is  there  no  voice  for  these?  Where 
is  Love  to-day? 

Tell  the  dear  Doctor  we  mention  him  with  a  foreign 
accent,  party  already  to  transactions  spacious  and  un¬ 
told.  Nor  have  we  omitted  to  breathe  shorter  for  our 
little  sister.  Sharper  than  dying  is  the  death  for  the 
dying’s  sake. 

News  of  these  would  comfort,  when  convenient  or 
possible. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

Dear  Sister,  —  It  was  incredibly  sweet  that  Austin  had 
seen  you,  and  had  stood  in  the  dear  house  which  had  lost 
its  friend.  To  see  one  who  had  seen  you  was  a  strange 
assurance.  It  helped  dispel  the  fear  that  you  departed 
too,  for  notwithstanding  the  loved  notes  and  the  lovely 
gift,  there  lurked  a  dread  that  you  had  gone  or  would 
seek  to  go.  “Where  the  treasure  is,”  there  is  the  pro¬ 
spective. 

Austin  spoke  very  warmly  and  strongly  of  you,  and  we 
all  felt  firmer,  and  drew  a  vocal  portrait  of  Kate  at 
Vinnie’s  request,  so  vivid  that  we  saw  her.  .  .  . 


TO  MBS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND 


261 


Not  all  die  early,  dying  young, 
Maturity  of  fate 
Is  consummated  equally 
In  ages  or  a  night. 

A  hoary  boy  I’ve  known  to  drop 
Whole-statured,  by  the  side 
Of  junior  of  fourscore  —  ’twas  act, 
Not  period,  that  died. 


Will  some  one  lay 
pillow? 


this  little  flower  on  Mrs.  Holland’s 

Emilie 


Sent  to  the  Hollands  at  various  times 

Away  from  home  are  some  and  I, 
An  emigrant  to  be 
In  a  metropolis  of  homes 
Is  common  possibility. 

The  habit  of  a  foreign  sky 
We,  difficult,  acquire, 

As  children  who  remain  in  face. 
The  more  their  feet  retire. 

Though  my  destiny  be  fustian 
Hers  be  damask  fine  — 

Though  she  wear  a  silver  apron, 
I,  a  less  divine, 

Still,  my  little  gypsy  being, 

I  would  far  prefer, 

Still  my  little  sunburnt  bosom. 
To  her  rosier. 


262 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


For  when  frosts  their  punctual  fingers 
On  her  forehead  lay, 

You  and  I  and  Doctor  Holland 
Bloom  eternally, 

Boses  of  a  steadfast  summer 
In  a  steadfast  land, 

Where  no  autumn  lifts  her  pencil. 

And  no  reapers  stand. 

To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 
[Summer,  1864] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Are  you  in  danger?  I  did  not  know 
that  you  were  hurt.  Will  you  tell  me  more?  Mr.  Haw¬ 
thorne  died. 

I  was  ill  since  September,  and  since  April  in  Boston 
for  a  physician’s  care.  He  does  not  let  me  go,  yet  I  work 
in  my  prison,  and  make  guests  for  myself. 

Carlo  did  not  come,  because  that  he  would  die  in  jail; 
and  the  mountains  I  could  not  hold  now,  so  I  brought  but 
the  gods. 

I  wish  to  see  you  more  than  before  I  failed.  Will  you 
tell  me  your  health?  I  am  surprised  and  anxious  since 
receiving  your  note. 

The  only  news  I  know 
Is  bulletins  all  day 
From  Immortality. 

Can  you  render  my  pencil?  The  physician  has  taken 
away  my  pen.  I  enclose  the  address  from  a  letter,  lest 
my  figures  fail. 

Knowledge  of  your  recovery  would  excel  my  own. 

E.  Dickinson 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  263 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Nor  cross 
[1864] 

Be  sure  you  don't  doubt  about  the  sparrow. 

Poor - and - ,  in  their  genteel,  antique  way, 

express  their  sympathy,  mixing  admiring  anecdotes  of 
your  father  and  mother’s  youth,  when  they,  God  help 
them,  were  not  so  sere.  Besides  these  others,  children, 
shall  we  tell  them  who  else  cherishes,  every  day  the 
same,  the  bright  one  and  the  black  one  too?  Could  it  be 
Emily? 

Would  it  interest  the  children  to  know  that  crocuses 
come  up,  in  the  garden  off  the  dining-room,  and  a  fuchsia, 
that  pussy  partook,  mistaking  it  for  strawberries?  And 
that  we  have  primroses,  like  the  little  pattern  sent  in  last 
winter’s  note,  and  heliotrope  by  the  aprons  full  —  the 
mountain  colored  one  —  and  a  jasmine  bud,  you  know 
the  little  odor  like  Lubin  —  and  gilliflowers,  magenta, 
and  few  mignonette,  and  sweet  alyssum  bountiful,  and 
carnation  buds? 

Will  it  please  them  to  know  that  the  ice-house  is  filled, 
to  make  their  tumblers  cool  next  summer,  and  once  in  a 
while  a  cream? 

And  that  father  has  built  a  new  road  round  the  pile  of 

trees  between  our  house  and  Mr.  S - ’s,  where  they 

can  take  the  soldier’s  shirt  to  make,  or  a  sweet  poem, 
and  no  man  find  them  but  the  fly,  and  he  such  a  little 
man? 

Love,  dears,  from  us  all,  and  won’t  you  tell  us  how  you 
are? 

We  seem  to  hear  so  little. 


Emily 


264 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 
[January,  1865] 

.  .  .  I  am  glad  my  little  girl  is  at  peace.  Peace  is  a  deep 
place.  Some,  too  faint  to  push,  are  assisted  by  angels. 

I  have  more  to  say  to  you  all  than  March  has  to  the 
maples,  but  then  I  cannot  write  in  bed.  I  read  a  few 
words  since  I  came  home  —  John  Talbot  s  parting  with 
his  son,  and  Margaret’s  with  Suffolk.  I  read  them  in  the 

garret,  and  the  rafters  wept. 

Remember  me  to  your  company,  their  Bedouin  guest. 
Every  day  in  the  desert,  Ishmael  counts  his  tents. 
New  heart  makes  new  health,  dear. 

Happiness  is  haleness.  I  dreamed  last  night  I  heard 
bees  fight  for  pond-lily  stamens,  and  waked  with  a  fly  in 
my  room. 

Shall  you  be  strong  enough  to  lift  me  by  the  first  of 
April?  I  won’t  be  half  as  heavy  as  I  was  before.  I  will  be 
good  and  chase  my  spools. 

I  shall  think  of  my  little  Eve  going  away  from  Eden. 
Bring  me  a  jacinth  for  every  finger,  and  an  onyx  shoe. 

Emily 


To  Louisa  Nor  cross 
[February,  1865] 

All  that  my  eyes  will  let  me  shall  be  said  for  L - ,  dear 

little  solid  gold  girl.  I  am  glad  to  the  foot  of  my  heart 

that  you  will  go  to  M - .  It  will  make  you  warm. 

Touches  “from  home,”  tell  Gungl,  are  better  than 
“sounds.” 

You  persuade  me  to  speak  of  my  eyes,  which  I  shunned 
doing,  because  I  wanted  you  to  rest.  I  could  not  bear  a 


TO  LOUISA  NORCROSS 


265 


single  sigh  should  tarnish  your  vacation,  but,  lest  through 
me  one  bird  delay  a  change  of  latitude,  I  will  tell  you, 
dear.  r 

The  eyes  are  as  with  you,  sometimes  easy,  sometimes 
sad.  I  think  they  are  not  worse,  nor  do  I  think  them 
better  than  when  I  came  home. 

The  snow-light  offends  them,  and  the  house  is  bright; 
notwithstanding,  they  hope  some.  For  the  first  few  weeks 
I  did  nothing  but  comfort  my  plants,  till  now  their  small 
green  cheeks  are  covered  with  smiles.  .  .  .  Go,  little  girl, 
to  M - .  Life  is  so  fast  it  will  run  away,  notwithstand¬ 

ing  our  sweetest  whoa. 

Already  they  love  you.  Be  but  the  maid  you  are  to  me, 
and  they  will  love  you  more. 

Carry  your  heart  and  your  curls,  and  nothing  more  but 
your  fingers.  Mr.  D - will  ask  for  these  every  candle¬ 

light.  How  I  miss  ten  robins  that  never  flew  from  the 
rosewood  nest! 


To  the  same 

Dear  L - ,  —  This  is  my  letter  —  an  ill  and  peevish 

thing,  but  when  my  eyes  get  well  I’ll  send  you  thoughts 
like  daisies,  and  sentences  could  hold  the  bees.  .  .  . 


To  the  same 
[1865] 

Dear  Sister,  —  Brother  has  visited,  and  the  night  is 
falling,  so  I  must  close  with  a  little  hymn. 

I  had  hoped  to  express  more.  Love  more  I  never  can, 
sweet  D -  or  yourself. 


266 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


This  was  in  the  white  of  the  year, 

That  was  in  the  green. 

Drifts  were  as  difficult  then  to  think, 

As  daisies  now  to  be  seen. 

Looking  back  is  best  that  is  left, 

Or  if  it  be  before, 

Retrospection  is  prospect’s  half, 

Sometimes  almost  more. 

Emily 


To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 
[1865] 

Amherst 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  were  so  generous  to  me,  that  if 
possible  I  offended  you,  I  could  not  too  deeply  apologize. 

To  doubt  my  high  behavior  is  a  new  pain.  I  could  be 
honorable  no  more,  till  I  asked  you  about  it.  I  know 
not  what  to  deem  myself  —  yesterday  “your  scholar,” 
but  might  I  be  the  one  you  to-night  forgave,  ’tis  a  better 
honor.  Mine  is  but  just  the  thief’s  request. 

Please,  sir,  hear  “Barabbas” 


To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 
[With  a  bit  of  pine] 

A  feather  from  the  whippoorwill 
That  everlasting  sings ! 

Whose  galleries  are  sunrise, 

Whose  opera  the  springs, 

Whose  emerald  nest  the  ages  spin 
Of  mellow,  murmuring  thread, 

Whose  beryl  egg,  what  school-boys  hunt 
In  “  recess”  overhead! 


Emily 


TO  LOUISA  NORCROSS 


267 


We  part  with  the  river  at  the  flood  through  a  timid 
custom,  though  with  the  same  waters  we  have  often 
played.  t 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1865?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Vinnie  accidentally  mentions  that  you 
hesitated  between  the  “Theophilus”  and  the  “Junius.” 

Would  you  confer  so  sweet  a  favor  as  to  accept  that 
too,  when  you  come  again? 

I  went  to  the  room  as  soon  as  you  left,  to  confirm  your 
presence,  recalling  the  Psalmist’s  sonnet  to  God  begin¬ 
ning 

I  have  no  life  but  this  — 

To  lead  it  here, 

Nor  any  death  but  lest 
Dispelled  from  there. 

Nor  tie  to  earths  to  come, 

Nor  action  new, 

Except  through  this  extent  — 

The  love  of  you. 

It  is  strange  that  the  most  intangible  thing  is  the  most 
adhesive. 

Your  “rascal” 

I  washed  the  adjective. 

To  Louisa  Norcross 
[1866] 

Oh,  Xi - ,  why  were  the  children  sent  too  faint  to 

stand  alone?  .  .  .  Every  hour  is  anxious  now,  and  heaven 
protect  the  lamb  who  shared  her  fleece  with  a  timider, 
even  Emily. 


268 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 

The  possibility  to  pass 
Without  a  moment’s  bell 
Into  conjecture’s  presence, 

Is  like  a  face  of  steel 

That  suddenly  looks  into  ours 

With  a  metallic  grin; 

The  cordiality  of  Death 
Who  drills  his  welcome  in. 


To  the  same 


[1868] 

Amherst 

Dear  Friend,  —  Whom  my  dog  understood  could  not 
elude  others. 

I  should  be  so  glad  to  see  you,  but  think  it  an  appari- 
tional  pleasure,  not  to  be  fulfilled.  I  am  uncertain  of 
Boston. 

I  had  promised  to  visit  my  physician  for  a  few  days 
in  May,  but  father  objects  because  he  is  in  the  habit  of 
me. 

Is  it  more  far  to  Amherst? 

You  will  find  a  minute  host,  but  a  spacious  wel¬ 


come.  .  .  . 

If  I  still  entreat  you  to  teach  me,  are  you  much  dis¬ 
pleased?  I  will  be  patient,  constant,  never  reject  your 
knife,  and  should  my  slowness  goad  you,  you  knew  before 
myself  that 

Except  the  smaller  size 

No  lives  are  round. 

These  hurry  to  a  sphere 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  269 


And  show  and  end. 

The  larger  slower  grow 
And  lat^r  hang; 

The  summers  of  Hesperides 
Are  long. 

To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Nor  cross 
[1868] 

Dear  Children,  —  The  little  notes  shall  go  as  fast  as 
steam  can  take  them. 

Our  hearts  already  went.  Would  we  could  mail  our 
faces  for  your  dear  encouragement. 

Remember 

The  longest  day  that  God  appoints 
Will  finish  with  the  sun. 

Anguish  can  travel  to  its  stake, 

And  then  it  must  return. 

I  am  in  bed  to-day  —  a  curious  place  for  me,  and  cannot 
write  as  well  as  if  I  was  firmer,  but  love  as  well,  and  long 
more.  Tell  us  all  the  load.  Amherst  s  little  basket  is 
never  so  full  but  it  holds  more.  That  s  a  basket  s  cause. 
Not  a  flake  assaults  my  birds  but  it  freezes  me.  Comfort, 
little  creatures  —  whatever  befall  us,  this  world  is  but 
this  world.  Think  of  that  great  courageous  place  we  have 
never  seen! 

:  Write  at  once,  please,  I  am  so  full  of  grief  and  surprise 
and  physical  weakness.  I  cannot  speak  until  I  know. 

Lovingly 


Emily 


270 


EMILY  DICEINSON 


To  Colonel  T.  W.  Eigginson 
[1868] 

Amherst 

Dear  Friend,  —  A  letter  always  feels  to  me  like  Immor¬ 
tality  because  it  is  the  mind  alone  without  corporeal 
friend.  Indebted  in  our  talk  to  attitude  and  accent,  there 
seems  a  spectral  power  in  thought  that  walks  alone.  I 
would  like  to  thank  you  for  your  great  kindness,  but  never 
try  to  lift  the  words  which  I  cannot  hold. 

Should  you  come  to  Amherst,  I  might  then  succeed, 
though  gratitude  is  the  timid  wealth  of  those  who  ha\e 
nothing.  I  am  sure  that  you  speak  the  truth,  because  the 
noble  do,  but  your  letters  always  surprise  me. 

My  life  has  been  too  simple  and  stern  to  embarrass  any. 
“Seen  of  angels,”  scarcely  my  responsibility. 

It  is  difficult  not  to  be  fictitious  in  so  fair  a  place,  but 
tests’  severe  repairs  are  permitted  all. 

When  a  little  girl  I  remember  hearing  that  remarkable 
passage  and  preferring  the  “power,”  not  knowing  at  the 
time  that  “kingdom”  and  “glory”  were  included. 

You  noticed  my  dwelling  alone.  To  an  emigrant, 
country  is  idle  except  it  be  his  own.  You  speak  kindly  of 
seeing  me;  could  it  please  your  convenience  to  come  so  far 
as  Amherst,  I  should  be  very  glad,  but  I  do  not  cross  my 
father’s  ground  to  any  house  or  town. 

Of  our  greatest  acts  we  are  ignorant.  You  were  not 
aware  that  you  saved  my  life.  To  thank  you  in  person 
has  been  since  then  one  of  my  few  requests.  .  .  .  You  will 
excuse  each  that  I  say,  because  no  one  taught  me. 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  271 


To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 
[1868?] 

I  should  think  you  would  have  few  letters,  for  your  own 
are  so  noble  that  they  make  men  afraid.  And  sweet  as 
your  approbation  is,  it  is  had  in  fear,  lest  your  depth 
convict  us. 

You  compel  us  each  to  remember  that  when  water 
ceases  to  rise,  it  has  commenced  falling.  That  is  the  law 
of  flood. 

The  last  day  that  I  saw  you  was  the  newest  and  oldest 
of  my  life. 

Resurrection  can  come  but  once,  first,  to  the  same 
house.  Thank  you  for  leading  us  by  it. 

Come  always,  dear  friend,  but  refrain  from  going.  You 
spoke  of  not  liking  to  be  forgotten.  Could  you,  though 
you  would? 

Treason  never  knew  you.  Emily 

To  the  same 
[1869?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  have  the  most  triumphant  face 
out  of  Paradise,  probably  because  you  are  there  con¬ 
stantly,  instead  of  ultimately. 

Ourselves  we  do  inter  with  sweet  derision  the  channel 
of  the  dust;  who  once  achieves,  invalidates  the  balm  of 
that  religion,  that  doubts  as  fervently  as  it  believes. 

Emily 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Nor  cross 
[Spring,  1870] 

Dear  Children,  —  I  think  the  bluebirds  do  their  work 
exactly  like  me.  They  dart  around  just  so,  with  little 


<m  EMILY  DICKINSON 

dodging  feet,  and  look  so  agitated.  I  really  feel  for  them, 
they  seem  to  be  so  tried. 

The  mud  is  very  deep  —  up  to  the  wagons  stomachs 
—  arbutus  making  pink  clothes,  and  everything  alive. 

Even  the  hens  are  touched  with  the  things  of  Bourbon, 
and  make  republicans  like  me  feel  strangely  out  of  scene. 

Mother  went  rambling,  and  came  in  with  a  burdock  on 
her  shawl,  so  we  know  that  the  snow  has  perished  fiom 
the  earth.  Noah  would  have  liked  mother. 

I  am  glad  you  are  with  Eliza.  It  is  next  to  shade  to 
know  that  those  we  love  are  cool  on  a  parched  day.  .  .  . 

To  the  same 

Maggie  is  ironing,  and  a  cotton  and  linen  and  ruffle  heat 
makes  the  pussy’s  cheeks  red.  It  is  lonely  without  the 
birds  to-day,  for  it  rains  badly,  and  the  little  poets  have 
no  umbrellas.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Ely  from  Emily’s  window  for  L - .  Botanical 

name  unknown. 

[Enclosing  a  pressed  insect.] 

To  the  same 
[September,  1870] 

Little  Sisters,  —  I  wish  you  were  with  me,  not  pre¬ 
cisely  here,  but  in  those  sweet  mansions  the  mind  likes  to 
suppose.  Do  they  exist  or  nay?  We  believe  they  may, 
but  do  they,  how  know  we?  “  The  light  that  never  was  on 
sea  or  land”  might  just  as  soon  be  had  for  the  knocking. 

F - ’s  rustic  note  was  as  sweet  as  fern;  L - ’s  token 

also  tenderly  estimated.  Maggie  and  I  are  fighting  which 

shall  give  L - the  “plant,”  though  it  is  quite  a  pleasant 

war.  .  .  .  A - went  this  morning,  after  a  happy  egg  and 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  273 


toast  provided  by  Maggie,  whom  he  promised  to  leave  his 
sole  heir. 

The  “  pussum”  is  foiled.  “Two  dollars  reward”  would 
return  John  Franklin.  . . . 

Love  for  Aunt  0 - .  Tell  her  I  think  to  instruct 

flowers  will  be  her  labor  in  heaven.  .  .  . 

Nearly  October,  sisters !  No  one  can  keep  a  sumach  and 

keep  a  secret  too.  That  was  my  “pipe”  F - found  in 

the  woods.  Affectionately 

Modoc 


To  the  same 
[1870] 

Untieing  Little  Sistees,  —  What  will  I  ever  do  for  you, 
yet  have  done  the  most,  for  love  is  that  one  perfect  labor 
nought  can  supersede.  I  suppose  the  pain  is  still  there,  for 
pain  that  is  worthy  does  not  go  so  soon.  The  small  can 
crush  the  great,  however,  only  temporarily.  In  a  few  days 
we  examine,  muster  our  forces,  and  cast  it  away.  Put  it 
out  of  your  hearts,  children.  Faith  is  too  fair  to  taint  it 
so.  There  are  those  in  the  morgue  that  bewitch  us  with 
sweetness,  but  that  which  is  dead  must  go  with  the 
ground.  There  is  a  verse  in  the  Bible  that  says  there  are 
those  who  shall  not  see  death.  I  suppose  them  to  be  the 
faithful.  Love  will  not  expire.  There  was  never  the  in¬ 
stant  when  it  was  lifeless  in  the  world,  though  the 
quicker  deceit  dies,  the  better  for  the  truth,  who  is  in¬ 
deed  our  dear  friend. 

I  am  sure  you  will  gain,  even  from  this  wormwood.  The 
martyrs  may  not  choose  their  food. 

God  made  no  act  without  a  cause. 

Nor  heart  without  an  aim, 


274 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Our  inference  is  premature, 

Our  premises  to  blame. 

.  .  .  Sweetest  of  Christmas  to  you  both,  and  a  better 
year. 


To  the  same 

Dear  Children,  —  When  I  think  of  your  little  faces  I 
feel  as  the  band  does  before  it  makes  its  first  shout.  .  .  . 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1870] 

.  .  .  Mother  drives  with  Tim  to  carry  pears  to  settlers. 
Sugar  pears  with  hips  like  hams,  and  the  flesh  of  bonbons. 
Vinnie  fastens  flowers  from  the  frosts.  .  .  . 

Lifetime  is  for  two,  never  for  committee. 

I  saw  your  Mrs.  H - .  She  looks  a  little  tart,  but 

Vinnie  says  makes  excellent  pies  after  one  gets  acquainted. 

To  the  same 
[Spring,  1871] 

The  will  is  always  near,  dear,  though  the  feet  vary.  The 
terror  of  the  winter  has  made  a  little  creature  of  me,  who 
thought  myself  so  bold. 

Father  was  very  sick.  I  presumed  he  would  die,  and  the 
sight  of  his  lonesome  face  all  day  was  harder  than  personal 
trouble.  He  is  growing  better,  though  physically  reluc¬ 
tantly.  I  hope  I  am  mistaken,  but  I  think  his  physical 
life  don’t  want  to  live  any  longer.  You  know  he  never 
played,  and  the  straightest  engine  has  its  leaning  hour. 
Vinnie  was  not  here.  Now  we  will  turn  the  corner.  All 
this  while  I  was  with  you  all,  much  of  every  hour,  wishing 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HIGGINSON 


275 


we  were  near  enough  to  assist  each  other.  Would  you  have 
felt  more  at  home,  to  know  we  were  both  in  extremity? 
That  would  be  my  only  regret  that  I  had  not  told  you. 

As  regards  the  “pine”fand  the  “jay,”  it  is  a  long  tryst, 
but  I  think  they  are  able.  I  have  spoken  with  them. 

Of  the  “thorn,”  dear,  give  it  to  me,  for  I  am  strongest. 
Never  earry  what  I  can  carry,  for  though  I  think  I  bend, 
something  straightens  me.  Go  to  the  “wine-press,”  dear, 
and  come  back  and  say  has  the  number  altered.  I  descry 
but  one.  What  I  would  I  cannot  say  in  so  small  a  place. 

Interview  is  acres,  while  the  broadest  letter  feels  a 
bandaged  place.  .  .  . 

Tell  F - we  hold  her  tight.  Tell  L - love  is  oldest 

and  takes  care  of  us,  though  just  now  in  a  piercing  place. 

Emily 


To  Perez  Cowan 
[October,  1870] 

Home  is  the  definition  of  God. 


Emily 


To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 
[August,  1870] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  will  be  at  home  and  glad. 

I  think  you  said  the  15th.  The  incredible  never  sur¬ 
prises  us,  because  it  is  the  incredible. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 

Truth  is  such  a  rare  thing,  it  is  delightful  to  tell  it. 

I  find  ecstasy  in  living;  the  mere  sense  of  living  is  joy 
enough. 


276  EMILY  DICKINSON 

How  do  most  people  live  without  any  thoughts? 
There  are  many  people  in  the  world,  you  must  have 
noticed  them  in  the  street,  —  how  do  they  live?  How  do 
they  get  strength  to  put  on  their  clothes  in  the  morning? 

If  I  read  a  book  and  it  makes  my  whole  body  so  cold 
no  fire  can  ever  warm  me,  I  know  that  is  poetry .  If  I  feel 
physically  as  if  the  top  of  my  head  were  taken  off,  I  know 
that  is  poetry.  These  are  the  only  ways  I  know  it.  Is 
there  any  other  way? 


To  the  same 
[August,  1870] 

Enough  is  so  vast  a  sweetness,  I  suppose  it  never  occurs, 
only  pathetic  counterfeits. 

Fabulous  to  me  as  the  men  of  the  Revelations  who  shall 
not  hunger  any  more.”  Even  the  possible  has  its  insoluble 
particle. 

After  you  went,  I  took  Macbeth  and  turned  to  “Bir- 
nam  Wood.”  Came  twice  “to  Dunsinane.”  I  thought  and 
went  about  my  work.  .  .  . 

The  vein  cannot  thank  the  artery,  but  her  solemn  in¬ 
debtedness  to  him,  even  the  stolidest  admit,  and  so  of  me 
who  try,  whose  effort  leaves  no  sound. 

You  ask  great  questions  accidentally.  To  answer  them 
would  be  events.  I  trust  that  you  are  safe. 

I  ask  you  to  forgive  me  for  all  the  ignorance  I  had.  I 
find  no  nomination  sweet  as  your  low  opinion. 

Speak,  if  but  to  blame  your  obedient  child. 

You  told  me  of  Mrs.  Lowell’s  poems.  Would  you  tell 
me  where  I  could  find  them,  or  are  they  not  for  sight?  An 
article  of  yours,  too,  perhaps  the  only  one  you  wrote  that 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HIGGINSON 


277 


I  never  knew.  It  was  about  a  “Latch.”  Are  you  willing 
to  tell  me? 

If  I  ask  too  much,  you  could  please  refuse.  Shortness  to 
live  has  made  me  bold.  * 

Abroad  is  close  to-night  and  I  have  but  to  lift  my  hands 
to  touch  the  “Heights  of  Abraham.” 

Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[Winter,  1871] 

To  live  is  so  startling,  it  leaves  but  little  room  for  other 
occupations,  though  friends  are,  if  possible,  an  event 
more  fair. 

I  am  happy  you  have  the  travel  you  so  long  desire,  and 
chastened  that  my  master  met  neither  accident  nor 
Death. 

Our  own  possessions,  though  our  own,  ’tis  well  to  hoard 
anew,  remembering  the  dimensions  of  possibility.  I  often 
saw  your  name  in  illustrious  mention,  and  envied  an 
occasion  so  abstinent  to  me.  Thank  you  for  having  been 
to  Amherst.  Could  you  come  again  that  would  be  far 
better,  though  the  finest  wish  is  the  futile  one. 

When  I  saw  you  last,  it  was  mighty  summer  —  now  the 
grass  is  glass,  and  the  meadow  stucco,  and  still  waters 
in  the  pool  where  the  frog  drinks. 

These  behaviors  of  the  year  hurt  almost  like  music, 
shifting  when  it  ease  us  most.  Thank  you  for  the 
“lesson.” 

I  will  study  it,  though  hitherto,  — 

Menagerie  to  me 
My  neighbor  be. 


Your  Scholar 


278 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Perez  Cowan 

It  is  long  since  I  knew  of  you,  Peter,  and  much  may  have 
happened  to  both;  but  that  is  the  rarest  book,  which, 
opened  at  whatever  page,  equally  enchants  us. 

I  hope  that  you  have  power,  and  as  much  of  peace  as  in 
our  deep  existence  may  be  possible. 

To  multiply  the  harbors  does  not  reduce  the  sea. 

We  learn,  through  Cousin  Montague,  that  you  have 
lost  your  sister  through  that  sweeter  loss  which  we  call 
gain. 

I  am  glad  she  is  glad. 

Her  early  pain  had  seemed  to  me  peculiarly  cruel. 

Tell  her  how  tenderly  we  are  pleased. 

Recall  me  too  to  your  other  sisters,  who  though  they 
may  have  mislaid  me,  I  can  always  find;  and  include  me 
to  your  sweet  wife.  We  are  daily  reminded  of  you  by  the 
clergyman,  Mr.  Jenkins,  whom  you  strongly  resemble. 

Thank  you  for  the  paper.  It  is  homelike  to  know  where 
you  are. 

We  can  almost  hear  you  announce  the  text,  when  the 
air  is  clear;  and  how  social  if  you  should  preach  us  a  note 
some  Sunday  in  recess! 

Emily 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Nor  cross 
[March,  1872] 

Thank  you,  own  little  girls,  for  the  sweet  remembrance  — 
sweet  specifically.  Be  sure  it  was  pondered  with  loving 
thoughts  not  unmixed  with  palates. 

But  love,  like  literature,  is  “tits  exceeding  great  re¬ 
ward.”  ...  I  am  glad  you  heard  “Little  Em’ly.”  I  would 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  279 


go  far  to  hear  her,  except  I  have  lost  the  run  of  the  roads. 
.  .  .  Infinite  March  is  here,  and  I  “hered”  a  bluebird. 
Of  course  I  am  standing  on  my  head! 

Go  slow,  my  soul,  to  feed  thyself 
Upon  his  rare  approach. 

Go  rapid,  lest  competing  death 
Prevail  upon  the  coach. 

Go  timid,  should  his  testing  eye 
Determine  thee  amiss. 

Go  boldly,  for  thou  paidst  the  price, 
Redemption  for  a  kiss. 

Tabby  is  singing  “Old  Hundred,”  which,  by  the  way,  is 
her  maiden  name.  Would  they  address  and  mail  the  note 

to  their  friend  J - W - ? 

Tidings  of  a  book. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1872] 

I  like  to  thank  you,  dear,  for  the  annual  candy.  Though 
you  make  no  answer,  I  have  no  letter  from  the  dead,  yet 
daily  love  them  more.  No  part  of  mind  is  permanent. 
This  startles  the  happy,  but  it  assists  the  sad. 

This  is  a  mighty  morning.  I  trust  that  L - is  with  it, 

on  hill  or  pond  or  wheel.  Too  few  the  mornings  be,  too 
scant  the  nights.  No  lodging  can  be  had  for  the  delights 
that  come  to  earth  to  stay,  but  no  apartment  find  and 

ride  away.  F -  was  brave  and  dear,  and  helped  as 

much  by  counsel  as  by  actual  team.  Whether  we  missed 

L - we  will  let  her  guess;  riddles  are  healthful  food. 

Eliza  was  not  with  us,  but  it  was  owing  to  the  trains. 
We  know  she  meant  to  come. 


280  EMILY  DICKINSON 

Oh!  Cruel  Paradise!  We  have  a  chime  of  bells  given  for 
brave  Frazer.  You’ll  stop  and  hear  them,  won’t  you? 
“We  conquered,  but  Bozzaris  fell.”  That  sentence 

always  chokes  me. 

Emily 

To  MacGregor  Jenkins  and  his  sister  Mrs.  Squires 

[1872?] 

Happy  “Did”  and  Mac,  —  We  can  offer  you  nothing  so 
charming  as  your  own  hearts,  which  we  would  seek  to 
possess,  had  we  the  requisite  wiles. 

To  her  niece  and  Mrs.  Squires 
[In  childhood] 

Dear  Boys,  —  Please  never  grow  up,  which  is  “far 
better.”  Please  never  “improve”  —  you  are  perfect  now. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

Little  Women,  —Which  shall  it  be,  geraniums  or  tulips? 

The  butterfly  upon  the  sky,  who  doesn’t  know  its  name. 
And  hasn’t  any  tax  to  pay,  and  hasn’t  any  home. 

Is  just  as  high  as  you  and  I,  and  higher,  I  believe 
So  soar  away  and  never  sigh,  for  that’s  the  way  to  grieve. 

To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Nor  cross 
[Early  summer,  1872] 

Dear  Children,  —  We  received  the  news  of  your  loving 

kindness  through  Uncle  J - last  evening,  and  Vinnie  is 

negotiating  with  neighbor  Gray,  who  goes  to  a  wedding  in 
Boston  next  week,  for  the  procuring  of  the  nest.  Vinnie’s 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  281 


views  of  expressage  do  not  abate  with  time.  The  crocuses 
are  with  us  and  several  other  colored  friends.  Cousin 

H - broke  her  hip,  and  is  in  a  polite  bed,  surrounded  by 

mint  juleps.  I  think  she  will  hate  to  leave  it  as  badly  as 
Marian  Erie  did.  Vinnie  says  there  is  a  tree  in  Mr. 
Sweetser’s  woods  that  shivers.  I  am  afraid  it  is  cold.  I  am 
gomg  to  make  it  a  little  coat.  I  must  make  several,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  tall  as  the  barn,  and  put  them  on  as  the  circus 
men  stand  on  each  other’s  shoulders.  .  .  .  There  is  to  be  a 
“show”  next  week,  and  little  Maggie’s  bed  is  to  be  moved 
to  the  door  so  she  can  see  the  tents.  Folding  her  own  like 
the  Arabs  gives  her  no  apprehension.  While  I  write,  dear 
children,  the  colors  Eliza  loved  quiver  on  the  pastures, 
and  day  goes  gay  to  the  northwest,  innocent  as  she. 

Emily 

.  .  .  Thank  you  for  the  passage.  How  long  to  live  the 
truth  is!  A  word  is  dead  when  it  is  said,  some  say.  I  say 
it  just  begins  to  live  that  day.  .  .  . 

An  ill  heart,  like  a  body,  has  its  more  comfortable  days, 
and  then  its  days  of  pain,  its  long  relapse,  when  rallying 
requires  more  effort  than  to  dissolve  life,  and  death  looks 
choiceless. 

Of  Miss  P - I  know  but  this,  dear.  She  wrote  me  in 

October,  requesting  me  to  aid  the  world  by  my  chirrup 
more.  Perhaps  she  stated  it  as  my  duty,  I  don’t  distinctly 
remember,  and  always  burn  such  letters,  so  I  cannot 
obtain  it  now.  I  replied  declining.  She  did  not  write  to 
me  again  —  she  might  have  been  offended,  or  perhaps  is 
extricating  humanity  from  some  nopeless  ditch.  .  .  . 


282 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Louisa  Nor  cross 
[1872,  or  1873] 

Thank  yon,  dear,  for  the  love.  I  am  progressing  timidly. 

Experiment  has  a  stimulus  which  withers  its  fear. 

This  is  the  place  they  hoped  before. 

Where  I  am  hoping  now. 

The  seed  of  disappointment  grew 
Within  a  capsule  gay, 

Too  distant  to  arrest  the  feet 
That  walk  this  plank  of  balm  — 

Before  them  lies  escapeless  sea  — 

The  way  is  closed  they  came. 

Since  you  so  gently  ask,  I  have  had  but  one  serious  ad¬ 
venture  —  getting  a  nail  in  my  foot,  but  Maggie  pulled  it 
out.  It  only  kept  me  awake  one  night,  and  the  birds  in¬ 
sisted  on  sitting  up,  so  it  became  an  occasion  instead  of  a 
misfortune.  There  was  a  circus,  too,  and  I  watched  it 
away  at  half -past  three  that  morning.  They  said  “hoy, 
hoy”  to  their  horses. 

Glad  you  heard  Rubinstein.  Grieved  L - could  not 

hear  him.  He  makes  me  think  of  polar  nights  Captain 
Hall  could  tell.  Going  from  ice  to  ice !  What  an  exchange 
of  awe! 

I  am  troubled  for  L - ’s  eye.  Poor  little  girl!  Can  I 

help  her?  She  has  so  many  times  saved  me.  Do  take  her 
to  Arlington  Street.1  Xerxes  must  go  now  and  see  to  her 
worlds.  You  shall  “taste,”  dear. 


1  Her  physician. 


Lovingly 


TO  LOUISA  NORCROSS 


283 


To  the  same 
[Winter,  1873] 

.  .  .  I  know  I  love  my  friends  —  I  feel  it  far  in  here  where 
neither  blue  nor  black  eye  goes,  and  fingers  cannot  reach. 
I  know  ’tis  love  for  them  that  sets  the  blister  in  my  throat, 
many  a  time  a  day,  when  winds  go  sweeter  than  their 
wont,  or  a  different  cloud  puts  my  brain  from  home. 

I  cannot  see  my  soul,  but  know  ’tis  there. 

Nor  ever  saw  his  house  nor  furniture, 

Who  has  invited  me  with  him  to  dwell; 

But  a  confiding  guest  consult  as  well. 

What  raiment  honor  him  the  most, 

That  I  be  adequately  dressed, 

For  he  insures  to  none 
Lest  men  specifical  adorn 
Procuring  him  perpetual  drest 
By  dating  it  a  sudden  feast. 

Love  for  the  glad  if  you  know  them,  for  the  sad  if  they 
know  you. 


To  the  same 
[March,  1873] 

.  .  .  I  open  my  window,  and  it  fills  the  chamber  with  white 
dirt.  I  think  God  must  be  dusting;  and  the  wind  blows 
so  I  expect  to  read  in  “The  Republican  Cautionary 
signals  for  Amherst,”  or,  “No  ships  ventured  out  from 
Phoenix  Row.”  .  .  .  Life  is  so  rotatory  that  the  wilderness 
falls  to  each,  sometime.  It  is  safe  to  remember  that - 


284 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles 

Wednesday 

Dear  Mr.  Bowles’s  note,  of  itself  a  blossom,  came  only 
to-night. 

I  am  glad  it  lingered,  for  each  was  all  the  heart  could 
hold. 

Emily 

To  the  same 

Of  your  exquisite  act  there  can  be  no  acknowledgment, 
but  the  ignominy  that  grace  gives. 

Emily 


Could  mortal  lip  divine 
The  undeveloped  freight 
Of  a  delivered  syllable, 

’Twould  crumble  with  the  weight! 

To  the  same 
[1873] 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  was  so  delicious  to  see  you  —  a  peach 
before  the  time  —  it  makes  all  seasons  possible,  and  zones 
a  caprice. 

We,  who  arraign  the  “Arabian  Nights”  for  their  un¬ 
derstatement,  escape  the  stale  sagacity  of  supposing 
them  sham. 

We  miss  your  vivid  face,  and  the  besetting  accents  you 
bring  from  your  Numidian  haunts. 

Your  coming  welds  anew  that  strange  trinket  of  life 
which  each  of  us  wear  and  none  of  us  own;  and  the 
phosphorescence  of  yours  startles  us  for  its  permanence. 

Please  rest  the  life  so  many  own  —  for  gems  abscond. 


TO  MR.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


285 


In  your  own  beautiful  words  —  for  the  voice  is  the 
palace  of  all  of  us,  — 

“  Near,  but  remote.” 


Emily 


To  the  same 
[1874] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  paper  wanders  so  I  cannot  write 
my  name  on  it,  so  I  give  you  father’s  portrait  instead. 

As  summer  into  autumn  slips 

And  yet  we  sooner  say 

“The  summer”  than  “the  autumn,”  lest 

We  turn  the  sun  away, 


And  almost  count  it  an  affront 
The  presence  to  concede 
Of  one  however  lovely,  not 
The  one  that  we  have  loved,  — 


So  we  evade  the  charge  of  years, 

One,  one  attempting  shy 

The  circumvention  of  the  shaft 

Of  life’s  declivity.  Emily 

To  the  same 

If  we  die,  will  you  come  for  us,  as  you  do  for  father? 
“Not  born,”  yourself  “to  die,”  you  must  reverse  us  all. 

Last  to  adhere 

When  summers  swerve  away 

Elegy  of 

Integrity. 


286  EMILY  DICKINSON 

To  remember  our  own,  Mr.  Bowles,  is  all  we  can  do. 
With  grief  it  is  done,  so  warmly  and  long,  it  can  never  be 
new. 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  Edward  Tuclcerman 
[January,  1874] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  fear  my  congratulation,  like  repentance 
according  to  Calvin,  is  too  late  to  be  plausible,  but  might 
there  not  be  an  exception,  were  the  delight  or  the  peni¬ 
tence  found  to  be  durable? 

Emily 


Close  of  a  letter  to  her  cousins 

.  .  .  Have  thousands  of  things  to  say  as  also  ten  thousands 
but  must  abate  now. 

Lovingly 

Emily 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Nor  cross 
[1874] 

Dear  Children,  —  Father  is  ill  at  home.  I  think  it  is 
the  “Legislature”  reacting  on  an  otherwise  obliging 
constitution.  Maggie  is  ill  at  Tom’s  —  a  combination  of 
cold  and  superstition  of  fever  —  of  which  her  enemy  is  ill 
—  and  longing  for  the  promised  land,  of  which  there  is  no 
surplus.  “Apollyon ”  and  the  “ Devil”  fade  in  martial  lus¬ 
tre  beside  Lavinia  and  myself.  “As  thy  day  is  so  shall 
thy”  stem  “be.”  We  can  all  of  us  sympathize  with  the 
man  who  wanted  the  roan  horse  to  ride  to  execution,  be¬ 
cause  he  said  ’twas  a  nimble  hue,  and  ’twould  be  over 


sooner.  .  .  . 


TO  FANNIE  NORCROSS 


287 


Dear  L - ,  shall  I  enclose  the  slips,  or  delay  till 

father?  Vinnie  advises  the  latter.  I  usually  prefer  form¬ 
ers,  latters  seeming  to  me  like  Dickens’s  hero’s  dead 
mamma,  “too  some  weeks  off”  to  risk.  Do  you  remem¬ 
ber  the  “sometimes”  of  childhood,  which  invariably 
never  occurred?  .  .  . 

Be  pleased  you  have  no  cat  to  detain  from  justice. 
Ours  have  taken  meats,  and  the  wife  of  the  “general 
court”  is  trying  to  lay  them  out,  but  as  she  has  but  two 
wheels  and  they  have  four,  I  would  accept  their  chances. 
Kitties  eat  kindlings  now.  Vinnie  thinks  they  are 
“cribbers.”  I  wish  I  could  make  you  as  long  a  call  as 
De  Quincey  made  North,  but  that  morning  cannot  be 
advanced. 

Emily 


To  Fannie  Norcross 
[1874] 

.  .  .  I  was  sick,  little  sister,  and  write  you  the  first  that  I 
am  able.  The  loveliest  sermon  I  ever  heard  was  the 
disappointment  of  Jesus  in  Judas.  It  was  told  like  a 
mortal  story  of  intimate  young  men.  I  suppose  no  sur¬ 
prise  we  can  ever  have  will  be  so  sick  as  that.  The  last 
“I  never  knew  you”  may  resemble  it.  I  would  your 
hearts  could  have  rested  from  the  first  severity  before  you 
received  this  other  one,  but  “not  as  I  will.  I  suppose  the 
wild  flowers  encourage  themselves  in  the  dim  woods,  and 
the  bird  that  is  bruised  limps  to  his  house  in  silence,  but 
we  have  human  natures,  and  these  are  different.  It  is 

lovely  that  Mrs.  W - did  not  disappoint  you;  not  that 

I  thought  it  possible,  but  you  were  so  much  grieved.  .  .  . 
A  finite  life,  little  sister,  is  that  peculiar  garment  that 


288  EMILY  DICKINSON 

were  it  optional  with  us  we  might  decline  to  wear.  Tender 

words  to  L - ,  not  most,  I  trust,  in  need  of  them. 

Lovingly  Emily 


To  the  same 

.  .  .  How  short  it  takes  to  go,  dear,  but  afterward  to 
come  so  many  weary  years  —  and  yet  ’tis  done  as  cool 
as  a  general  trifle.  Affection  is  like  bread,  unnoticed  till 
we  starve,  and  then  we  dream  of  it,  and  sing  of  it,  and 
paint  it,  when  every  urchin  in  the  street  has  more  than  he 
can  eat.  We  turn  not  older  with  years,  but  newer  every 
day. 

Of  all  these  things  we  tried  to  talk,  but  the  time  re¬ 
fused  us.  Longing,  it  may  be,  is  the  gift  no  other  gift 
supplies.  Do  you  remember  what  you  said  the  night  you 
came  to  me?  I  secure  that  sentence.  If  I  should  see  your 
face  no  more  it  will  be  your  portrait,  and  if  I  should,  more 
vivid  than  your  mortal  face.  We  must  be  careful  what  we 
say.  No  bird  resumes  its  egg. 


A  word  left  careless  on  a  page 
May  consecrate  an  eye, 

When  folded  in  perpetual  seam 
The  wrinkled  author  lie. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

.  .  .  A  tone  from  the  old  bells,  perhaps,  might  wake  the 
children. 


We  send  the  wave  to  find  the  wave, 
An  errand  so  divine 
The  messenger  enamored  too, 
Forgetting  to  return, 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  289 

We  make  tlie  sage  decision  still 
Soever  made  in  vain, 

The  only  time  to  dam  the  sea 
Is  when  the  sea  is  gone. 

Emily,  with  love. 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 


Spring  is  a  happiness  so  beautiful,  so  unique,  so  un¬ 
expected,  that  I  don’t  know  what  to  do  with  my  heart. 
I  dare  not  take  it,  I  dare  not  leave  it  —  what  do  you 


advise? 

Life  is  a  spell  so  exquisite  that  everything  conspires  to 
break  it 

“What  do  I  think  of  ‘Middlemarch’?”  What  do  I 
think  of  glory  — except  that  in  a  few  instances  this 
“mortal  has  already  put  on  immortality.” 

George  Eliot  is  one.  The  mysteries  of  human  nature 
surpass  the  “mysteries  of  redemption,”  for  the  infinite 
we  only  suppose,  while  we  see  the  finite.  ...  I  launch 
Vinnie  on  Wednesday;  it  will  require  the  combined 
efforts  of  Maggie,  Providence  and  myself,  for  whatever 
advances  Vinnie  makes  in  nature  and  art,  she  has  not 


reduced  departure  to  a  science.  .  .  . 

Your  loving 


Emily 


To  the  same 
[Spring,  1874] 

Sisters,  —  I  hear  robins  a  great  way  off,  and  wagons  a 
great  way  off,  and  rivers  a  great  way  off,  and  all  appear 
to  be  hurrying  somewhere  undisclosed  to  me.  Remote¬ 
ness  is  the  founder  of  sweetness;  could  we  see  all  we  hope, 


290 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


or  hear  the  whole  we  fear  told  tranquil,  like  another  tale, 
there  would  be  madness  near.  Each  of  us  gives  or  takes 
heaven  in  corporeal  person,  for  each  of  us  has  the  skill  of 
life.  I  am  pleased  by  your  sweet  acquaintance.  It  is  not 
recorded  of  any  rose  that  it  failed  of  its  bee,  though  ob¬ 
tained  in  specific  instances  through  scarlet  experience. 
The  career  of  flowers  differs  from  ours  only  in  inaudible¬ 
ness.  I  feel  more  reverence  as  I  grow  for  these  mute 
creatures  whose  suspense  or  transport  may  surpass  my 
own.  Pussy  remembered  the  judgment,  and  remained 
with  Vinnie.  Maggie  preferred  her  home  to  “Miggles” 
and  “Oakhurst,”  so  with  a  few  spring  touches,  nature 
remains  unchanged. 

The  most  triumphant  bird 
I  ever  knew  or  met, 

Embarked  upon  a  twig  to-day,  — 

And  till  dominion  set 
I  perish  to  behold 
So  competent  a  sight  — 

And  sang  for  nothing  scrutable 
But  impudent  delight. 

Retired  and  resumed 
His  transitive  estate; 

To  what  delicious  accident 
Does  finest  glory  fit! 

Emily 


To  her  cousins 
[June,  1874] 

You  might  not  remember  me,  dears.  I  cannot  recall 
myself.  I  thought  I  was  strongly  built,  but  this  stronger 
has  undermined  me. 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HIGGINSON  291 

We  were  eating  our  supper  the  fifteenth  of  June,  and 
Austin  came  in.  He  had  a  despatch  in  his  hand,  and  I 
saw  bv  his  face  we  were  all  lost,  though  I  didn  t  know 
how.  He  said  that  fathej  was  very  sick,  and  he  and  Vinnie 
must  go.  The  train  had  already  gone.  While  horses  were 
dressing,  news  came  he  was  dead. 

Father  does  not  live  with  us  now  —  he  lives  in  a  new 
house.  Though  it  was  built  in  an  hour  it  is  better  than 
this.  He  hasn’t  any  garden  because  he  moved  after  gar¬ 
dens  were  made,  so  we  take  him  the  best  flowers,  and  if 
we  only  knew  he  knew,  perhaps  we  could  stop  crying.  .  .  . 
The  grass  begins  after  Pat  has  stopped  it. 

I  cannot  write  any  more,  dears.  Though  it  is  many 
nights,  my  mind  never  comes  home.  Thank  you  each  for 
the  love,  though  I  could  not  notice  it.  Almost  the  last 

tune  that  he  heard  was,  “Rest  from  thy  loved  employ.” 

Emily 


To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 
[July,  1874] 

The  last  afternoon  that  my  father  lived,  though  with  no 
premonition,  I  preferred  to  be  with  him,  and  invented  an 
absence  for  mother,  Vinnie  being  asleep.  He  seemed 
peculiarly  pleased,  as  I  oftenest  stayed  with  myself,  and 
remarked,  as  the  afternoon  withdrew,  he  “would  like  it 
to  not  end.” 

His  pleasure  almost  embarrassed  me,  and  my  brother 
coming,  I  suggested  they  walk.  Next  morning  I  woke  him 

for  the  train,  and  saw  him  no  more. 

His  heart  was  pure  and  terrible,  and  I  think  no  other 

like  it  exists. 

I  am  glad  there  is  Immortality,  but  would  have  tested 


292 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


it  myself,  before  intrusting  him.  Mr.  Bowles  was  with  us. 
With  that  exception,  I  saw  none.  I  have  wished  for  you, 
since  my  father  died,  and  had  you  an  hour  unengrossed, 
it  would  be  almost  priceless.  Thank  you  for  each  kind¬ 
ness.  .  .  .  Your  beautiful  hymn,  was  it  not  prophetic? 
It  has  assisted  that  pause  of  space  which  I  call  ‘  father.” 

To  the  same 
[August,  1874] 

When  I  think  of  my  father’s  lonely  life  and  lonelier  death, 
there  is  this  redress  — 

Take  all  away; 

The  only  thing  worth  larceny 
Is  left  —  the  Immortality. 

My  earliest  friend  wrote  me  the  week  before  he  died, 
“  If  I  live,  I  will  go  to  Amherst;  if  I  die,  I  certainly  will.” 
Is  your  house  deeper  off? 

Youe  Scholar 

To  the  same 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  find  you  with  dusk,  for  day  is  tired, 
and  lays  her  antediluvian  cheek  to  the  hill  like  a  child. 
Nature  confides  now. 

I  hope  you  are  joyful  frequently,  these  beloved  days, 
and  the  health  of  your  friend  bolder. 

I  remember  her  with  my  blossoms  and  wish  they  were 
hers 

Whose  pink  career  may  have  a  close 
Portentous  as  our  own,  who  knows? 

To  imitate  these  neighbors  fleet. 

In  awe  and  innocence,  were  meet. 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HIGGINSON 


293 


Summer  is  so  kind  I  had  hoped  you  might  come.  Since 
my  father’s  dying,  everything  sacred  enlarged  so  it  was 
dim  to  own.  When  a  few  years  old,  I  was  taken  to  a 
fimeral  which  I  now  kpow  was  of  peculiar  distress,  and 
the  clergyman  asked,  “Is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  short¬ 
ened,  that  it  cannot  save?” 

He  italicised  the  “  cannot.”  I  mistook  the  accent  for  a 
doubt  of  Immortality,  and  not  daring  to  ask,  it  besets  me 
still,  though  we  know  that  the  mind  of  the  heart  must 
live  if  its  clerical  part  do  not.  Would  you  explain  it  to 
me?  ...  It  comforts  an  instinct  if  another  have  felt  it  too. 
I  was  re-reading  your  “Decoration.”  You  may  have 
forgotten  it. 


To  the  same 
[June,  1875] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Mother  was  paralyzed  Tuesday,  a 
year  from  the  evening  father  died.  I  thought  perhaps  you 
would  care. 

Your  Scholar 

A  death-blow  is  a  life-blow  to  some 
Who,  till  they  died,  did  not  alive  become; 

Who,  had  they  lived,  had  died,  but  when 
They  died,  vitality  begun. 

To  the  same 
[1875] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  flower  was  jasmine.  I  am  glad 
if  it  pleased  your  friend.  It  is  next  dearest  to  daphne, 
except  wild-flowers  —  those  are  dearer. 

I  have  a  friend  in  Dresden,  who  thinks  the  love  of  the 


294 


EMILY  DICKINSON 

field  a  misplaced  affection  —  and  says  he  will  send  me  a 
meadow  that  is  better  than  summer’s.  If  he  does,  I  will 
send  it  to  you. 

I  have  read  nothing  of  Tourgueneff’s,  but  thank  you 
for  telling  me  —  and  will  seek  him  immediately.  I  did 
not  read  Mr.  Miller  because  I  could  not  care  about 
him. 

Mrs.  Hunt’s  poems  are  stronger  than  any  written  by 
women  since  Mrs.  Browning,  with  the  exception  of  Mrs. 
Lewes’s;  but  truth  like  ancestors’  brocades  can  stand 
alone.  You  speak  of  “Men  and  Women.’  That  is  a 
broad  book. 

“  Bells  and  Pomegranates”  I  never  saw,  but  have  Mrs. 
Browning’s  endorsement.  While  Shakespeare  remains, 
literature  is  firm. 

An  insect  cannot  run  away  with  Achilles’s  head. 
Thank  you  for  having  written  the  “Atlantic  Essays.” 
They  are  a  fine  joy,  though  to  possess  the  ingredient  for 
congratulation  renders  congratulation  superfluous. 

Dear  friend,  I  trust  you  as  you  ask.  If  I  exceed  per¬ 
mission,  excuse  the  bleak  simplicity  that  knew  no  tutor 
but  the  north.  Would  you  but  guide 

Dickinson? 

To  a  cousin  who  sent  a  wreath  for  her  father  s  grave 
[December,  1874] 

I  am  sure  you  must  have  remembered  that  father  had 
“become  as  little  children,”  or  you  would  never  have 
dared  send  him  a  Christmas  gift,  for  you  know  how  he 
frowned  upon  Santa  Claus,  and  all  such  prowling  gentle¬ 


men. 


TO  MRS.  J.  S.  COOPER 


295 


To  MacGregor  Jenkins 
[Christmas,  1874] 

.  . .  Atmospherically  it;was  the  most  beautiful  Christmas 
on  record.  The  hens  came  to  the  door  with  Santa  Claus, 
the  pussies  washed  themselves  in  the  open  air  without 
chilling  their  tongues,  and  Santa  Claus  —  sweet  old 
gentleman  —  was  even  gallanter  than  usual.  Visitors 
from  the  chimney  were  a  new  dismay,  but  all  of  them 
brought  their  hands  so  full  and  behaved  so  sweetly, 
only  a  churl  could  have  turned  them  away.  And  then 
the  ones  at  the  barn  were  so  happy!  Maggie  gave 
the  hens  a  check  for  potatoes,  each  of  the  cats  had  a 
gilt-edged  bone,  and  the  horse  had  new  blankets  from 
Boston. 

Do  you  remember  dark-eyed  Mr.  Dickinson  who  used 
to  shake  your  hand  when  it  was  so  little  it  had  hardly 
a  stem?  He,  too,  had  a  beautiful  gift  of  roses  from  a 
friend  away.  It  was  a  lovely  Christmas.  But  what  made 
you  remember  me?  Tell  me  with  a  kiss  —  or  is  it  a 
secret? 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  J.  S.  Cooper 
[Later  summer,  1874] 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  was  my  first  impulse  to  take  them 
to  my  father,  whom  I  cannot  resist  the  grief  to  expect. 
Thank  you. 


Vinnie’s  Sister 


296 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 

Should  it  be  possible  for  me  to  speak  of  my  father  before 
I  behold  him,  I  shall  try  to  do  so  to  you,  whom  he  always 


remembered. 


Emily 


To  the  same 
[January,  1875] 

Is  it  too  late  to  express  my  sorrow  for  my  grieved  fnend? 
Though  the  first  moment  of  loss  is  eternity,  other  eterni¬ 
ties  remain. 

Though  the  great  waters  sleep 
That  they  are  still  the  deep 
We  cannot  doubt. 

No  vacillating  God 
Ignited  this  abode 
To  put  it  out. 

To  Mrs.  Edward  Tuckerman 
[March,  1875] 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  was  so  long  my  custom  to  seek  you 
with  the  birds,  they  would  scarcely  feel  at  home  should  I 
do  otherwise,  though  as  home  itself  is  far  from  home  since 
my  father  died,  why  should  custom  tire? 

Emily 


To  the  same 

[With  yellow  flowers  during  a  torrential  rain] 

[May,  1875] 

I  send  you  inland  buttercups  as  out-door  flowers  are  still 
at  sea.  Emily 


TO  MRS.  STEARNS 


297 


To  the  same 

[With  her  own  rich  caramels  no  one  could  ever  duplicate] 
Vinnie  says  the  dear  friend  would  like  the  rule.  We  have 
no  statutes  here,  but  each  does  as  it  will,  which  is  the 
sweetest  jurisprudence. 

"With  it,  I  enclose  Love’s  “remainder  biscuit,”  some¬ 
what  scorched  perhaps  in  baking,  but  “Love’s  oven  is 
warm.”  Forgive  the  base  proportions. 

To  Mrs.  Stearns 

Dear  Friends,  —  I  hope  no  bolder  lover  brought  you 
the  first  pond  lilies.  The  water  is  deeper  than  the  land. 
The  swimmer  never  stagnates. 

I  shall  bring  you  a  handful  of  lotus  next,  but  do  not  tell 
the  Nile. 

He  is  a  jealous  brook.  Emily 

To  the  same 

“A  little  flower,  a  faded  flower,  the  gift  of  one  who 
cared  for  me.” 

Please  usurp  the  pronoun.  Emily 

To  the  same 
[1875] 

Dear  Friend,  —  That  a  pansy  is  transitive,  is  its  only 
pang. 

This,  precluding  that,  is  indeed  divine. 

Bringing  you  handfuls  in  prospective,  thank  you  for 
the  love.  Many  an  angel,  with  its  needle,  toils  beneath 
the  snow. 

With  tenderness  for  your  mate 


Emily 


298 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 
[April,  1875] 

I  have  only  a  buttercup  to  offer  for  the  centennial,  as  an 
“embattled  farmer”  has  but  little  time. 

Begging  you  not  to  smile  at  my  limited  meadows,  I  am 
modestly 

Yours 

To  the  same 
[Summer,  1875] 

Dear  Children,  —  I  decide  to  give  you  one  more  pack¬ 
age  of  lemon  drops,  as  they  only  come  once  a  year.  It  is 
fair  that  the  bonbons  should  change  hands,  you  have  so 
often  fed  me.  This  is  the  very  weather  that  I  lived  with 

you  those  amazing  years  that  I  had  a  father.  W.  D - ’s 

wife  came  in  last  week  for  a  day  and  a  night,  saying  her 

heart  drove  her.  I  am  glad  that  you  loved  Miss  W - 

on  knowing  her  nearer.  Charlotte  Bronte  said  “Life  is  so 
constructed  that  the  event  does  not,  cannot,  match  the 
expectation.” 

The  birds  that  father  rescued  are  trifling  in  his  trees. 
How  flippant  are  the  saved !  They  were  even  frolicking  at 
his  grave,  when  Vinnie  went  there  yesterday.  Nature 
must  be  too  young  to  feel,  or  many  years  too  old. 

Now  children,  when  you  are  cutting  the  loaf,  a  crumb, 
peradventure  a  crust,  of  love  for  the  sparrows’  table.  ,  .  . 

To  the  same 
[August,  1876] 

Dear  Cousins,  —  Mr.  S - had  spoken  with  pleasure 

of  you,  before  you  spoke  of  him.  Good  times  are  always 


TO  MRS.  STEARNS  299 

mutual;  that  is  what  makes  good  times.  I  am  glad  it 
cheered  you. 

We  have  had  no  rain  for  six  weeks  except  one  thunder 
shower,  and  that  so  terrible  that  we  locked  the  doors,  and 
the  clock  stopped  —  which  made  it  like  Judgment  day. 
The  heat  is  very  great,  and  the  grass  so  still  that  the  flies 

speck  it.  I  fear  L - will  despair.  The  notices  of  the  fall 

trade”  in  the  hurrying  dailies,  have  a  whiff  of  coolness. 

Vinnie  has  a  new  pussy  the  color  of  Branwell  Bronte’s 
hair.  She  thinks  it  a  little  “lower  than  the  angels,”  and  I 
concur  with  her.  A  ou  remember  my  ideal  cat  has  alwaj  s 
a  huge  rat  in  its  mouth,  just  going  out  of  sight  though 
going  out  of  sight  in  itself  has  a  peculiar  charm.  It  is  true 
that  the  unknown  is  the  largest  need  of  the  intellect, 
though  for  it,  no  one  thinks  to  thank  God.  .  .  .  Mbther  is 
worn  with  the  heat,  but  otherwise  not  altering.  I  dream 
about  father  every  night,  always  a  different  dream,  and 
forget  what  I  am  doing  daytimes,  wondering  where  he  is. 
Without  anybody,  I  keep  thinking.  What  kind  can  that 
be? 

Dr.  Stearns  died  homelike,  asked  Eliza  for  a  saucei  of 
strawberries,  which  she  brought  him,  but  he  had  no  hands. 
“In  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not”  means  something  when 
you  try  it. 

Lovingly  Emily 

To  Mrs.  Stearns 
[Easter,  1875] 

It  is  possible,  dear  friend,  that  the  rising  of  the  one  we 
lost  would  have  engrossed  me  to  the  exclusion  of  C lirist  s 
—  but  for  your  lovely  admonition. 

Sabbath  morning  was  peculiarly  dear  to  my  father,  and 


300  EMILY  DICKINSON 


his  unsuspecting  last  earthly  day  with  his  family  was  that 
heavenly  one. 

Vinnie  and  I  were  talking  of  you  as  we  went  to  sleep 
Saturday  night,  which  makes  your  beautiful  gift  of  to-day 
almost  apparitional. 

Please  believe  how  sweetly  I  thank  you. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1875] 

What  tenements  of  clover 
Are  fitting  for  the  bee, 
What  edifices  azure 
For  butterflies  and  me  — 


What  residences  nimble 
Arise  and  evanesce 
Without  a  rhythmic  rumor 
Or  an  assaulting  guess. 


With  love 


E.  Dickinson 


To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 
[1875] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  am  sorry  your  brother  is  dead.  I  fear 
he  was  dear  to  you.  I  should  be  glad  to  know  you  were 
painlessly  grieved. 

Of  Heaven  above  the  firmest  proof 
We  fundamental  know  — 

Except  for  its  marauding  hand 
It  had  been  heaven  below. 


Dickinson 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HIGGINSON 


301 


To  the  same 
[Early  in  1876] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Are  ypu  willing  to  tell  me  what  is  right? 
Mrs.  Jackson,  of  Colorado,  was  with  me  a  few  moments 
this  week,  and  wished  me  to  write  for  this.1  I  told  her  I 
was  unwilling,  and  she  asked  me  why?  I  said  I  was  in¬ 
capable,  and  she  seemed  not  to  believe  me  and  asked  me 
not  to  decide  for  a  few  days.  Meantime,  she  would  write 
to  me.  She  was  so  sweetly  noble,  I  would  regret  to 
estrange  her,  and  if  you  would  be  willing  to  give  me  a  note 
saying  you  disapproved  it  and  thought  me  unfit,  she 
would  believe  you.  I  am  sorry  to  flee  so  often  to  my  safest 
friend,  but  hope  he  permits  me. 

To  the  same 

[Acknowledging  a  photograph,  1876] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Except  your  coming  I  know  no  gift  so 
great,  and  in  one  extent  it  exceeds  that,  —  it  is  perma¬ 
nent. 

Your  face  is  more  joyful  when  you  speak,  and  I  miss  an 
almost  arrogant  look  that  at  times  haunts  you,  but  with 
that  exception,  it  is  so  real  I  could  think  it  you. 

Thank  you  with  delight,  and  please  to  thank  your  friend 
for  the  lovely  suggestion. 

I  hope  she  has  no  suffering  now. 

Was  it  Browning’s  flower  that  “ailed  till  evening”?  I 
shall  think  of  your  ‘  keeping  house”  at  night  when  I  close 
the  shutter  —  but  to  be  Mrs.  Higginson’s  guest  is  the 
boon  of  birds. 

Judge  Lord  was  with  us  a  few  days  since,  and  told  me 

1  A  circular  of  the  No  Name  Series  enclosed. 


302  EMILY  DICKINSON 

that  the  joy  we  most  revere  we  profane  in  taking.  I  wish 
that  was  wrong. 

Mrs.  Jackson  has  written.  It  was  not  stories  she  asked 
of  me.  But  may  I  tell  her  just  the  same  that  you  don’t 
prefer  it?  Thank  you  if  I  may,  for  it  almost  seems  sordid 

to  refuse  from  myself  again. 

My  brother  and  sister  speak  of  you,  and  covet  your  re¬ 
membrance,  and  perhaps  you  will  not  reject  my  own  to 
Mrs.  Higginson? 

Summer  laid  her  supple  glove 
In  its  sylvan  drawer  — 

Wheresoe’er,  or  was  she 
The  demand  of  awe? 

Your  Scholar 

To  the  same 
[March,  1876] 

.  .  .  But  two  had  mentioned  the  “spring”  to  me  —  your¬ 
self  and  the  “Revelations.”  “I,  Jesus,  have  sent  mine 
angel.” 

I  inferred  your  touch  in  the  papers  on  Lowell  and 
Emerson.  It  is  delicate  that  each  mind  is  itself,  like  a 
distinct  bird. 

I  was  lonely  there  was  an  “or”  in  that  beautiful  “I 
would  go  to  Amherst,”  though  grieved  for  its  cause.  I 
wish  your  friend  had  my  strength,  for  I  don’t  care  for 
roving  —  she  perhaps  might,  though  to  remain  with  you 
is  journey. 

To  abstain  from  “Daniel  Deronda”  is  hard  — you  are 
very  kind  to  be  willing.  ...  I  am  glad  Immortality 
pleased  you.  I  believed  it  would.  I  suppose  even  God 
Himself  could  not  withhold  that  now. 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HIGGINSON 


303 


To  disappear  enhances, 

The  man  that  runs  away 
Is  tinctured  for  an  instant 
With  Immortality. 

But  yesterday  a  vagrant, 

To-day  in  memory  lain 
With  superstitious  value  — 

We  tamper  with  again. 

But  “never”  far  as  honor 
Withdraws  the  worthless  thing. 

And  impotent  to  cherish 
We  hasten  to  adorn. 

Of  Death  the  sternest  function 
That  just  as  we  discern 
The  excellence  defies  us  — 

Securest  gathered  then 

The  fruit  perverse  to  plucking. 

But  leaning  to  the  sight 
With  the  ecstatic  limit 
Of  unobtained  delight. 

To  the  same 
[Autumn,  1876] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Thank  you  for  permission  to  write  Mrs. 
Higginson.  I  hope  I  have  not  fatigued  her  —  also  for 
thinking  of  my  brother,  who  is  slowly  better,  and  rides  for 
an  hour,  kind  days. 

I  am  glad  if  I  did  as  you  would  like.  The  degradation  to 
displease  you,  I  hope  I  may  never  incur. 


S04  EMILY  DICKINSON 

Often,  when  troubled  by  entreaty,  that  paragraph  of 
yours  has  saved  me  —  “  Such  being  the  majesty  of  the  art 
you  presume  to  practise,  you  can  at  least  take  time  before 
dishonoring  it,”  and  Enobarbus  said,  “Leave  that  which 
leaves  itself.” 

I  shall  look  with  joy  for  the  “little  book  because  it  is 
yours,  though  I  seek  you  in  vain  in  the  magazines  where 
you  once  wrote.  I  recently  found  two  papers  of  yours  that 
were  unknown  to  me,  and  wondered  anew  at  your  with¬ 
drawing  thought  so  sought  by  others. 

When  flowers  annually  died  and  I  was  a  child,  I  used  to 
read  Dr.  Hitchcock’s  book  on  the  “Flowers  of  North 
America.”  This  comforted  their  absence,  assuring  me 
they  lived. 

Your  Scholar 

To  the  same 
[1877] 

Thank  you,  dear  friend,  for  my  4  New  Tear,  but  did  you 
not  confer  it?  Had  your  scholar  permission  to  fashion 
yours,  it  were  perhaps  too  fair.  I  always  ran  home  to  awe 
when  a  child,  if  anything  befell  me.  He  was  an  awful 
mother,  but  I  liked  him  better  than  none. 

There  remained  this  shelter  after  you  left  me  the  other 
day. 

Of  your  flitting  coming  it  is  fair  to  think,  like  the  bee  s 
coupe,  vanishing  in  music. 

Would  you  with  the  bee  return. 

What  a  firm  of  noon ! 

Death  obtains  the  rose, 

But  the  news  of  dying  goes 
No  further  than  the  breeze. 


TO  COLONEL  T.  W.  HIGGINSON  305 

The  ear  is  the  last  face.  We  hear  after  we  see,  which  to 
tell  you  first  is  still  my  destiny. 

Meeting  a  bird  this  morning,  I  began  to  flee.  He  saw  it 
and  sung.  * 

Presuming  on  that  lone  result, 

His  infinite  disdain, 

But  vanquished  him  with  my  defeat  — 

’Twas  victory  was  slain. 

I  shall  read  the  book. 

Thank  you  for  telling  me. 

To  the  same 

[After  Colonel  Higginson  had  met  with  a  bereavement,  in  1877] 
Dear  Friend,  —  We  must  be  less  than  Death  to  be 
lessened  by  it,  for  nothing  is  irrevocable  but  ourselves. 

I  am  glad  you  are  better.  I  had  feared  to  follow  you, 
lest  you  would  rather  be  lonely,  which  is  the  will  of  sorrow; 
but  the  papers  had  spoken  of  you  with  affectionate 
deference,  and  to  know  you  were  deeply  remembered 
might  not  too  intrude. 

To  be  human  is  more  than  to  be  divine,  for  when  Christ 
was  divine  he  was  uncontented  till  he  had  been  human. 
I  remember  nothing  so  strong  as  to  see  you. . .  • 

To  the  same 
[1877] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  think  of  you  so  wholly  that  I  cannot 
resist  to  write  again,  to  ask  if  you  are  safe?  Danger  is  not 
at  first,  for  then  we  are  unconscious,  but  in  the  after, 
slower  days. 

Do  not  try  to  be  saved,  but  let  redemption  find  you,  as 


306 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


it  certainly  will.  Love  is  its  own  rescue,  for  we,  at  our 
supremest,  are  but  its  trembling  emblems. 

Your  Scholar 


To  the  same 

Must  I  lose  the  friend  that  saved  my  life  without  inquir¬ 
ing  why?  Affection  gropes  through  drifts  of  awe  for  his 
tropic  door. 

That  every  bliss  we  know  or  guess  hourly  befall  him,  is 
Lis  scholar’s  prayer. 


To  the  same 
[January,  1878] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  felt  it  shelter  to  speak  to  you. 

My  brother  and  sister  are  with  Mr.  Bowles,  who  is 
buried  this  afternoon. 

The  last  song  that  I  heard  —  that  was,  since  the  birds 
• — was,  “He  leadeth  me,  he  leadeth  me;  yea,  though  I 
walk”  —  then  the  voices  stooped,  the  arch  was  so  low. 

To  the  same 
[Summer,  1878] 

Dear  Friend,  —  When  you  wrote  you  would  come  in 
November,  it  would  please  me  it  were  November  then  — 
but  the  time  has  moved.  You  went  with  the  coming  of 
the  birds  —  they  will  go  with  your  coming,  but  to  see  you 
is  so  much  sweeter  than  birds,  I  could  excuse  the  spring. 

WTith  the  bloom  of  the  flower  your  friend  loved,  I  have 
wished  for  her,  but  God  cannot  discontinue  Himself. 

Mr.  Bowles  was  not  willing  to  die. 

When  you  have  lost  a  friend.  Master,  you  remember 
you  could  not  begin  again,  because  there  was  no  world.  I 


SAMUEL  BOWLES 


TO  DR.  AND  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND  307 

have  thought  of  you  often  since  the  darkness,  though  we 
cannot  assist  another’s  night. 

I  have  hoped  you  were  saved. 

That  those  have  immortality  with  whom  we  talked 
about  it,  makes  it  no  more  mighty  but  perhaps  more 
sudden.  .  .  . 

How  brittle  are  the  piers 
On  which  our  faith  doth  tread 
No  bridge  below  doth  totter  so, 

Yet  none  hath  such  a  crowd. 

It  is  as  old  as  God  — 

Indeed,  ’twas  built  by  Him  — 

He  sent  His  son  to  test  the  plank, 

And  he  pronounced  it  firm. 

I  hope  you  have  been  well.  I  hope  your  rambles  have 
been  sweet,  and  your  reveries  spacious. 

To  have  seen  Stratford  on  Avon,  and  the  Dresden 
Madonna,  must  be  almost  peace. 

And  perhaps  you  have  spoken  with  George  Eliot.  Will 
you  “  tell  me  about  it  ”  ?  Will  you  come  in  November,  and 
will  November  come,  or  is  this  the  hope  that  opens  and 
shuts,  like  the  eye  of  the  wax  doll? 

Your  Scholar 


To  Dr.  and  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 
[Autumn,  1876] 

Saturday  Eve 

Dear  Hollands,  —  Good-night !  I  can  t  stay  any  longer 
in  a  world  of  death.  Austin  is  ill  of  fever.  I  buried  my 
garden  last  week  —  our  man,  Dick,  lost  a  little  gill 
through  the  scarlet  fever.  I  thought  perhaps  that  you 


308  EMILY  DICKINSON 

were  dead,  and  not  knowing  the  sexton’s  address,  in¬ 
terrogate  the  daisies.  Ah!  dainty  — dainty  Death!  Ah! 
democratic  Death !  Grasping  the  proudest  zinnia  from  my 
purple  garden,  —  then  deep  to  his  bosom  calling  the 

serf’s  child! 

Say,  is  he  everywhere?  Where  shall  I  hide  my  things? 
Who  is  alive?  The  woods  are  dead.  Is  Mrs.  H.  alive? 
Annie  and  Katie  —  are  they  below,  or  received  to  no¬ 
where? 

I  shall  not  tell  how  short  time  is,  for  I  was  told  by  lips 
which  sealed  as  soon  as  it  was  said,  and  the  open  revere 
the  shut.  You  were  not  here  in  summer.  Summer ?  My 
memory  flutters  —  had  I  —  was  there  a  summer?  You 
should  have  seen  the  fields  go  gay  little  entomology ! 
Swift  little  ornithology!  Dancer,  and  floor,  and  cadence 
quite  gathered  away,  and  I,  a  phantom,  to  you  a  phantom, 
rehearse  the  story !  An  orator  of  feather  unto  an  audience 
of  fuzz,  —  and  pantomimic  plaudits.  “  Quite  as  good  as  a 
play,”  indeed!  Tell  Mrs.  Holland  she  is  mine. 

Ask  her  if  vice  versa?  Mine  is  but  just  the  thief  s  request 
—  “Remember  me  to-day.”  Such  are  the  bright  chirog- 
raphies  of  the  “Lamb’s  Book.”  Good-night!  My  ships 
are  in!  —  My  window  overlooks  the  wharf!  One  yacht, 
and  a  man-of-war;  two  brigs  and  a  schooner!  Down 
with  the  topmast!  Lay  her  a’  hold,  a’  hold!” 

Emilie 


To  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 
[Replying  to  a  letter  addressed  to  both  sisters] 

[1877] 

Sister,  —  A  mutual  plum  is  not  a  plum.  I  was  too  re¬ 
spectful  to  take  the  pulp  and  do  not  like  a  stone. 


TO  MRS.  W.  A.  STEARNS 


309 


Send  no  union  letters.  The  soul  must  go  by  Death 
alone,  so,  it  must  by  life,  if  it  is  a  soul. 

If  a  committee  —  no  matter. 

I  saw  the  sunrise  on  the  Alps  since  I  saw  you.  Travel 
why  to  Nature,  when  she  dwells  with  us?  Those  who  lift 
their  hats  shall  see  her,  as  devout  do  God. 

I  trust  you  are  merry  and  sound.  The  chances  are  all 
against  the  dear,  when  we  are  not  with  them,  though  paws 
of  principalities  cannot  affront  if  we  are  by. 

Dr.  Vaill  called  here  Monday  on  his  way  to  your  house 
to  get  the  Doctor  to  preach  for  him.  Shall  search  “The 
Republican”  for  a  brief  of  the  sermon.  To-day  is  very 
homely  and  awkward  as  the  homely  are  who  have  not 
mental  beauty. 


To  Mrs.  W.  A.  Stearns 
[Spring,  1876] 

Dear  Friends,  —  Might  these  be  among  the  fabrics 
which  the  Bible  designates  as  beyond  rubies? 

Certainly  they  are  more  accessible  to  the  fingers  of  your 
thief 

Emily 

When  President  Stearns  died,  this  stanza  came  to  Mrs. 
Stearns : 


[June  8,  1876] 

Love’s  stricken  “why” 

Is  all  that  love  can  speak  — 
Built  of  but  just  a  syllable 
The  hugest  hearts  that  break. 


Emily 


310 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  family  of  Professor  Snell  after  his  death  with  flowers 

[September,  1876] 

I  had  a  father  once. 

To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 
[November,  1876] 

.  Oh  that  beloved  witch-hazel  which  would  not  reach 
me  till  part  of  the  stems  were  a  gentle  brown,  though  one 
loved  stalk  as  hearty  as  if  just  placed  in  the  mail  by  the 
woods.  It  looked  like  tinsel  fringe  combined  with  staider 
fringes,  witch  and  witching  too,  to  my  joyful  mind. 

I  never  had  seen  it  but  once  before,  and  it  haunted  me 
like  childhood’s  Indian  pipe,  or  ecstatic  puff-balls,  or  that 
mysterious  apple  that  sometimes  comes  on  river-pinks; 
and  is  there  not  a  dim  suggestion  of  a  dandelion,  if  her 
hair  were  ravelled  and  she  grew  on  a  twig  instead  of  a 
tube,  —  though  this  is  timidly  submitted.  For  taking 
Nature’s  hand  to  lead  her  to  me,  I  am  softly  grateful  — 
was  she  willing  to  come?  Though  her  reluctances  are 
sweeter  than  other  ones  avowals. 

Trusty  as  the  stars 
Who  quit  their  shining  working 
Prompt  as  when  I  lit  them 
In  Genesis’  new  house, 

Durable  as  dawn 
Whose  antiquated  blossom 
Makes  a  world’s  suspense 
Perish  and  rejoice. 

Love  for  the  cousin  sisters,  and  the  lovely  alien.  .  .  . 

Lovingly  Emily 


311 


TO  MISS  MARIA  WHITNEY 

To  Miss  Maria  Whitney 
[1877] 

How  well  I  know  her  not 
Whom  not  to  know  has  been 
A  bounty  in  prospective,  now 
Next  door  to  mine  the  pain. 

Emily 

To  the  same 

.  .  .  To  relieve  the  irreparable  degrades  it. 

Brabantio’s  resignation  is  the  only  one —  “I  here  do 
give  thee  that  with  all  my  heart,  which  but  thou  hast  al¬ 
ready,  with  all  my  heart  I  would  keep  from  thee.” 

Emily 

To  the  same 
[1878] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  am  constantly  more  astonished  that 
the  body  contains  the  spirit  —  except  for  over-mastering 
work  it  could  not  be  borne. 

I  shall  miss  saying  to  Vinnie  when  we  hear  the  North¬ 
ampton  bell  —  as  in  subtle  states  of  the  west  we  do  — 
“Miss  Whitney  is  going  to  church,”  though  must  not 
everywhere  be  church  to  hearts  that  have,  or  have  had,  a 
friend? 

Could  that  sweet  darkness  where  they  dwell 
Be  once  disclosed  to  us, 

The  clamor  for  their  loveliness 
Would  burst  the  loneliness. 

I  trust  you  may  have  the  dearest  summer  possible  to  loss. 
One  sweet,  sweet  more,  one  liquid  more,  of  that  Arabian 
presence ! 


312  EMILY  DICKINSON 

You  spoke  very  sweetly  to  both  of  us,  and  your  sewing 
and  recollecting  is  a  haunting  picture,  a  sweet,  spectral 
protection.  Your  name  is  taken  as  tenderly  as  the  names 
of  our  birds,  or  the  flower,  for  some  mysterious  cause, 
sundered  from  its  dew.  .  .  . 

In  a  brief  memoir  of  Parepa,  in  which  she  was  likened  to 
a  rose,  —  “thornless  until  she  die,”  some  bereaved  one 
added.  To  miss  him  is  his  only  stab,  but  that  he  never 

gave! 

A  word  from  you  would  be  sacred. 

Emily 

.  .  .  The  crucifix  requires  no  glove. 

To  the  same 

Intrusiveness  of  flowers  is  brooked  by  even  troubled 
hearts. 

They  enter  and  then  knock  —  then  chide  their  ruthless 
sweetness,  and  then  remain  forgiven. 

May  these  molest  as  fondly ! 

Emily 

To  the  same 

Than  Heaven  more  remote, 

For  Heaven  is  the  root, 

But  these  the  flitted  seed, 

More  flown  indeed 
Than  ones  that  never  were. 

Or  those  that  hide,  and  are. 

What  madness,  by  their  side, 

A  vision  to  provide 
Of  future  days 
They  cannot  praise. 


TO  MRS.  EDWARD  TUCKERMAN  313 


My  soul,  to  find  them,  come. 

They  cannot  call,  they’re  dumb, 

Nor  prove,  nor  woo, 

But  that  they  have  abode 
Is  absolute  as  God, 

And  instant,  too. 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  Edward  Tuckerman 
[June,  1878] 

Is  it  that  words  are  suddenly  small,  or  that  we  are 
suddenly  large,  that  they  cease  to  suffice  us  to  thank  a 
friend? 

Perhaps  it  is  chiefly  both. 

To  the  same 
[July,  1878] 

Would  it  be  prudent  to  subject  an  apparitional  inter¬ 
view  to  a  grosser  test? 

The  Bible  portentously  says  “that  which  is  spirit  is 
spirit.” 

Go  not  too  near  a  house  of  rose. 

The  depredation  of  a  breeze 
Or  inundation  of  a  dew 
Alarm  its  walls  away; 

Nor  try  to  tie  the  butterfly, 

Nor  climb  the  bars  of  ecstasy. 

In  insecurity  to  lie 
Is  joy’s  insuring  quality. 


E.  Dickinson 


S14 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 
[August,  1878] 

To  see  is  perhaps  never  quite  the  sorcery  that  it  is  to 
surmise,  though  the  obligation  to  enchantment  is  always 
binding. 

It  is  sweet  to  recall  that  we  need  not  retrench,  as  magic 
is  our  most  frugal  meal. 

I  fear  you  have  much  happiness,  because  you  spend  so 
much. 

Would  adding  to  it  take  it  away,  or  is  that  a  penurious 
question? 

To  cherish  you  is  intuitive. 

As  we  take  Nature,  without  permission,  let  us  covet 
you. 


To  Mrs.  W.  A.  Stearns 
[1878] 

Dear  Friends,  —  The  seraphic  shame  generosity  causes 
is  perhaps  its  most  heavenly  result. 

To  make  even  Heaven  more  heavenly,  is  within  the  aim 
of  us  all. 


To  Mrs.  Samuel  Bowles 
[After  the  death  of  Mr.  Bowles] 

[January,  1878] 

I  hasten  to  you,  Mary,  because  no  moment  must  be  lost 
when  a  heart  is  breaking,  for  though  it  broke  so  long,  each 
time  is  newer  than  the  last,  if  it  broke  truly.  To  be  will¬ 
ing  that  I  should  speak  to  you  was  so  generous,  dear. 
Sorrow  almost  resents  love,  it  is  so  inflamed. 

I  am  glad  if  the  broken  words  helped  you.  I  had  not 


TO  MRS.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


315 


hoped  so  much,  I  felt  so  faint  in  uttering  them,  thinking  of 
your  great  pain.  Love  makes  us  “heavenly”  without  our 
trying  in  the  least.  ’Tis  easier  than  a  Saviour  —  it  does 
not  stay  on  high  and  call  us  to  its  distance;  its  low  Come 
unto  me”  begins  in  every  place.  It  makes  but  one  mis¬ 
take,  it  tells  us  it  is  “rest”  —  perhaps  its  toil  is  rest,  but 
what  we  have  not  known  we  shall  know  again,  that  divine 
again”  for  which  we  are  all  breathless. 

I  am  glad  you  “work.”  Work  is  a  bleak  redeemer,  but 
it  does  redeem;  it  tires  the  flesh  so  that  can’t  tease  the 
spirit. 

Dear  “Mr.  Sam”  is  very  near,  these  midwinter  days. 
When  purples  come  on  Pelham,  in  the  afternoon,  we  say 
“Mr.  Bowles’s  colors.”  I  spoke  to  him  once  of  his  Gem 
chapter,  and  the  beautiful  eyes  rose  till  they  were  out  of 
reach  of  mine,  in  some  hallowed  fathom. 

Not  that  he  goes  —  we  love  him  more  who  led  us  while 
he  stayed.  Beyond  earth’s  trafficking  frontier,  for  what 
he  moved,  he  made. 

Mother  is  timid  and  feeble,  but  we  keep  her  with  us. 
She  thanks  you  for  remembering  her,  and  never  forgets 
you.  .  .  .  Your  sweet  “and  left  me  all  alone,  consecrates 
your  lips. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[Spring,  1878] 

Had  you  never  spoken  to  any,  dear,  they  would  not  up¬ 
braid  you,  but  think  of  you  more  softly,  as  one  who  had 
suffered  too  much  to  speak.  To  forget  you  would  be  im¬ 
possible,  had  we  never  seen  you;  for  you  were  his  for 
whom  we  moan  while  consciousness  remains.  As  he  was 


316  EMILY  DICKINSON 


himself  Eden,  he  is  with  Eden,  for  we  cannot  become  what 


we  were  not. 

I  felt  it  sweet  that  you  needed  me  —  though  but  a 
simple  shelter  I  will  always  last.  I  hope  your  boys  and 
girls  assist  his  dreadful  absence,  for  sorrow  does  not  stand 
so  still  on  their  flying  hearts. 

How  fondly  we  hope  they  look  like  him  that  his 
beautiful  face  may  be  abroad. 

Was  not  his  countenance  on  earth  graphic  as  a  spirit’s? 
The  time  will  be  long  till  you  see  him,  dear,  but  it  will  be 
short,  for  have  we  not  each  our  heart  to  dress  —  heavenly 


as  his? 

He  is  without  doubt  with  my  father.  Thank  you  for 
thinking  of  him,  and  the  sweet,  last  respect  you  so  faith¬ 
fully  paid  him. 

Mother  is  growing  better,  though  she  cannot  stand,  and 
has  not  power  to  raise  her  head  for  a  glass  of  water.  She 
thanks  you  for  being  sorry,  and  speaks  of  you  with  love. 
.  .  .  Your  timid  “for  his  sake,”  recalls  that  sheltering 
passage,  “for  his  sake  who  loved  us,  and  gave  himself  to 
die  for  us.” 

Emily 


To  the  same 


[1879] 

How  lovely  to  remember !  How  tenderly  they  told  of  you ! 
Sweet  toil  for  smitten  hands  to  console  the  smitten1. 

Labors  as  endeared  may  engross  our  lost.  Buds  of  other 
days  quivered  in  remembrance.  Hearts  of  other  days  lent 
their  solemn  charm. 

Life  of  flowers  lain  in  flowers  —  what  a  home  of  dew! 
And  the  bough  of  ivy;  was  it  as  you  said?  Shall  I  plant  it 
softly? 


TO  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND 


317 


There  were  little  feet,  white  as  alabaster. 

Dare  I  chill  them  with  the  soil? 

Nature  is  our  eldest  mother,  she  will  do  no  harm. 

Let  the  phantom  love  that  enrolls  the  sparrow  shield 
you  softer  than  a  child. 


To  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 


[Spring,  1878] 


I  thought  that  “Birnam  Wood”  had  “come  to  Dunsi- 
nane.”  Where  did  you  pick  arbutus?  In  Broadway,  I 
suppose.  They  say  that  God  is  everywhere,  and  yet  we  al¬ 
ways  think  of  Him  as  somewhat  of  a  recluse.  ...  It  is  hard 
not  to  hear  again  that  vital  “Sam  is  coming”  —  though  if 
grief  is  a  test  of  a  priceless  life,  he  is  compensated.  He  was 
not  ambitious  for  redemption  —  that  was  why  it  is  his. 
“To  him  that  hath,  shall  be  given.”  Were  it  not  for  the 
eyes,  we  would  know  of  you  oftener.  Have  they  no  re¬ 
morse  for  their  selfishness?  “  This  tabernacle  ”  is  a  blissful 
trial,  but  the  bliss  predominates. 

I  suppose  you  will  play  in  the  water  at  Alexandria  Bay, 
as  the  baby  does  at  the  tub  in  the  drive.  .  .  .  Speak  to  us 
when  your  eyes  can  spare  you,  and  “keep  us,  at  home,  or 
by  the  way,”  as  the  clergyman  says,  when  he  folds  the 
church  till  another  Sabbath. 

Lovingly 


Emily 


To  the  same 
[August,  1879] 

Loved  and  Little  Sister,  —  Vinnie  brought  in  a  sweet 
pea  to-day,  which  had  a  pod  on  the  off  ’  side.  Startled 
by  the  omen,  I  hasten  to  you. 


318 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


An  unexpected  impediment  to  my  reply  to  your  dear 
last,  was  a  call  from  my  Aunt  Elizabeth  the  only  male 
relative  on  the  female  side,”  and  though  many  days  since, 
its  flavor  of  court-martial  still  sets  my  spirit  tingling. 

With  what  dismay  I  read  of  those  columns  of  kindred  in 
the  Bible  — the  Jacobites  and  the  Jebusites  and  the 
Hittites  and  the  Jacqueminots! 

I  am  sure  you  are  better,  for  no  rheumatism  in  its  senses 
would  stay  after  the  thermometer  struck  ninety ! 

We  are  revelling  in  a  gorgeous  drought. 

The  grass  is  painted  brown,  and  how  nature  would  look 
in  other  than  the  standard  colors,  we  can  all  infer.  ...  I 

bade - call  on  you,  but  Vinnie  said  you  were  “the 

other  side  of  the  globe,”  yet  \  innie  thinks  Vermont  is  in 
Asia,  so  I  don’t  intend  to  be  disheartened  by  trifles. 

Vinnie  has  a  new  pussy  that  catches  a  mouse  an  hour. 
We  call  her  the  “minute  hand.”  .  .  . 

To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 

[In  acknowledgment  of  his  Short  Studies  of  American  Authors,  18/9] 
Dear  Friend,  —  Brabantio’s  gift  was  not  more  fair  than 
yours,  though  I  trust  without  his  pathetic  inscription, 
“Which  but  thou  hast  already,  with  all  my  heart  I  would 
keep  from  thee.” 

Of  Poe,  I  know  too  little  to  think  —  Hawthorne  appalls 
—  entices. 

Mrs.  Jackson  soars  to  your  estimate  lawfully  as  a  bird, 
but  of  Howells  and  James  one  hesitates.  Your  relentless 
music  dooms  as  it  redeems. 

Remorse  for  the  brevity  of  a  book  is  a  rare  emotion, 
though  fair  as  Lowell’s  “sweet  despair”  in  the  “slipper 
hymn.” 


TO  MISS  MARIA  WHITNEY 


319 


One  thing  of  it  we  borrow 
And  promise  to  return, 

The  booty  and  the  sorrow 
Its  sweetness  to  have  known. 

One  thing  of  it  we  covet  — 

The  power  to  forget. 

The  anguish  of  the  avarice 
Defrays  the  dross  of  it. 

Had  I  tried  before  reading  your  gift  to  thank  you,  it  had 
perhaps  been  possible,  but  I  waited,  and  now  it  disables 
my  lips. 

Magic,  as  it  electrifies,  also  makes  decrepit.  Thank  you 
for  thinking  of  me. 

Your  Scholar 

To  Miss  Maria  Whitney 

The  face  in  evanescence  lain 
Is  more  distinct  than  ours. 

And  ours,  considered  for  its  sake. 

As  capsules  are  for  flowers. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1879] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Your  touching  suggestion  ...  is  a 
tender  permission.  .  .  . 

We  cannot  believe  for  each  other  thought  is  too 
sacred  a  despot,  but  I  hope  that  God,  in  whatever  form,  is 
true  to  our  friend.  .  .  .  Consciousness  is  the  only  home  of 
which  we  now  know.  That  sunny  adverb  had  been 
enough,  were  it  not  foreclosed. 


320  EMILY  DICKINSON 

When  not  inconvenient  to  your  heart,  please  remember 
us,  and  let  us  help  you  carry  it,  if  you  grow  tired.  Though 
we  are  each  unknown  to  ourself  and  each  other,  ’tis  not 
what  well  conferred  it,  the  dying  soldier  asks,  it  is  only 
the  water. 

We  knew  not  that  we  were  to  live, 

Nor  when  we  are  to  die 
Our  ignorance  our  cuirass  is; 

We  wear  mortality 
As  lightly  as  an  option  gown 
Till  asked  to  take  it  off. 

By  His  intrusion  God  is  known  — 

It  is  the  same  with  life. 

Emily 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Nor  cross 
[About  July  4,  1879] 

Dear  Cousins,  —  Did  you  know  there  had  been  a  fire 
here,  and  that  but  for  a  whim  of  the  wind  Austin  and 
Vinnie  and  Emily  would  have  all  been  homeless?  But 
perhaps  you  saw  “The  Republican.” 

We  were  waked  by  the  ticking  of  the  bells,  —  the  bells 
tick  in  Amherst  for  a  fire,  to  tell  the  firemen. 

I  sprang  to  the  window,  and  each  side  of  the  curtain 
saw  that  awful  sun.  The  moon  was  shining  high  at  the 
time,  and  the  birds  singing  like  trumpets. 

Vinnie  came  soft  as  a  moccasin,  “Don’t  be  afraid, 
Emily,  it  is  only  the  fourth  of  July.” 

I  did  not  tell  that  I  saw  it,  for  I  thought  if  she  felt  it 
best  to  deceive,  it  must  be  that  it  was. 

She  took  hold  of  my  hand  and  led  me  into  mother’s 
room.  Mother  had  not  waked,  and  Maggie  was  sitting  by 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  321 


her.  Vinnie  left  us  a  moment,  and  I  whispered  to  Maggie, 

and  asked  her  what  it  was. 

“Only  Stebbins’s  barn,  Emily;”  but  I  knew  that  the 
right  and  left  of  the  village  was  on  the  arm  of  Stebbins’s 
barn.  I  could  hear  buildings  falling,  and  oil  exploding,  and 
people  walking  and  talking  gayly,  and  cannon  soft  as 
velvet  from  parishes  that  did  not  know  that  we  were 
burning  up. 

And  so  much  lighter  than  day  was  it,  that  I  saw  a 
caterpillar  measure  a  leaf  far  down  in  the  orchard,  and 
Vinnie  kept  saying  bravely,  “  It’s  only  the  fourth  of  July. 

It  seemed  like  a  theatre,  or  a  night  in  London,  or  per¬ 
haps  like  chaos.  The  innocent  dew  falling  “as  if  it  thought 
no  evil,”  ...  and  sweet  frogs  prattling  in  the  pools  as  if 
there  were  no  earth. 

At  seven  people  came  to  tell  us  that  the  fire  was  stopped, 
stopped  by  throwing  sound  houses  in  as  one  fills  a  well. 

Mother  never  waked,  and  we  were  all  grateful;  we 
knew  she  would  never  buy  needle  and  thread  at  Air. 
Cutler’s  store,  and  if  it  were  Pompeii  nobody  could  tell 


The  post-office  is  in  the  old  meeting-house  where  L 

and  I  went  early  to  avoid  the  crowd,  and - fell  asleep 

with  the  bumble-bees  and  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah. 

Vinnie’s  “only  the  fourth  of  July”  I  shall  always  re¬ 
member.  I  think  she  wifi  tell  us  so  when  we  die,  to  keep 
us  from  being  afraid. 

Footlights  cannot  improve  the  grave,  only  immortality. 
Forgive  me  the  personality;  but  I  knew,  I  thought,  our 

peril  was  yours. 

Love  for  you  each. 


Emily 


322 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Mrs.  Henry  Hills 
[February,  1879] 

The  power  to  console  is  not  within  corporeal  reach 
though  its  attempt  is  precious. 

To  die  before  it  feared  to  die,  may  have  been  a  boon. 


To  the  same 
[March,  1879] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  only  balmless  wound  is  the  de¬ 
parted  human  life  we  had  learned  to  need. 

For  that,  even  Immortality  is  a  slow  solace.  All  other 
peace  has  many  roots  and  will  spring  again. 

With  cheer  from  one  who  knows. 

To  Mrs.  Samuel  Bowles 
[April,  1880] 

Dear  Mary,  —  The  last  April  that  father  lived,  lived  I 
mean  below,  there  were  several  snow-storms,  and  the 
birds  were  so  frightened  and  cold,  they  sat  by  the  kitchen 
door.  Father  went  to  the  barn  in  his  slippers  and  came 
back  with  a  breakfast  of  grain  for  each,  and  hid  himself 
while  he  scattered  it,  lest  it  embarrass  them.  Ignorant  of 
the  name  or  fate  of  their  benefactor,  their  descendants  are 
singing  this  afternoon. 

As  I  glanced  at  your  lovely  gift,  his  April  returned.  I 
am  powerless  toward  your  tenderness. 

Thanks  of  other  days  seem  abject  and  dim,  yet  an¬ 
tiquest  altars  are  the  fragrantest.  The  past  has  been  very 
near  this  week,  but  not  so  near  as  the  future  —  both  of 
them  pleading,  the  latter  priceless. 


323 


TO  MRS.  J.  S.  COOPER 

David’s  grieved  decision  haunted  me  when  a  little  girl. 
I  hope  he  has  found  Absalom. 

Immortality  as  a  guest  is  sacred,  but  when  it  becomes 
as  with  you  and  wTith  us,  a  member  of  the  family,  the  tie  is 
more  vivid.  .  .  . 

If  affection  can  reinforce,  you,  dear,  shall  not  fall. 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  J.  S.  Cooper 

Trusting  an  April  flower  may  not  curtail  your  February, 
that  month  of  fleetest  sweetness. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 


Dear  Fkiend,  —  Maggie  was  taking  you  a  flower  as  you 


were  going  out. 

Please  accept  the  design,  and  bewail  the  flower,  that 


sank  of  chagrin  last  evening. 


E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 

The  founders  of  honey  have  no  names. 

To  the  same 

My  family  of  apparitions  is  select,  though  dim. 

To  the  same 

Vinnie  suggests  these  little  friends. 

Would  they  be  too  grovelling?  And  I  add  a  face  from 

my  garden. 

Though  you  met  it  before,  it  might  not  be  charmless. 

E.  Dickinson 


324 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 
[1880] 

Is  sickness  pathos  or  infamy  ? 

While  you  forget  to  decide,  please  confirm  this  trifle. 

To  Louisa  Norcross 
[1880] 

Did  the  “stars  differ”  from  each  other  in  anything 
but  “glory,”  there  would  be  often  envy.  The  competi¬ 
tions  of  the  sky  corrodeless  ply. 

To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 
[1880] 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  were  once  so  kind  as  to  say  you 
would  advise  me.  Could  I  ask  it  now? 

I  have  promised  three  hymns  to  a  charity ,  but  without 
your  approval  could  not  give  them. 

They  are  short,  and  I  could  write  them  quite  plainly, 
and  if  you  felt  it  convenient  to  tell  me  if  they  were  faith¬ 
ful,  I  should  be  very  grateful,  though  if  public  cares  too 
far  fatigue  you,  please  deny 

Your  Scholar 


To  the  same 
[1880] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Thank  you  for  the  advice.  I  shall 
implicitly  follow  it. 

The  one  who  asked  me  for  the  lines  I  had  never  seen. 
He  spoke  of  “  a  charity.”  I  refused,  but  did  not  inquire. 
He  again  earnestly  urged,  on  the  ground  that  in  that  way 
I  might  “aid  unfortunate  children.”  The  name  of  “child” 


TO  PEREZ  COWAN 


325 


was  a  snare  to  me,  and  I  hesitated,  choosing  my  most 
rudimentary,  and  without  criterion. 

I  inquired  of  you.  You  can  scarcely  estimate  the  opin¬ 
ion  to  one  utterly  guideless.  Again  thank  you. 

Your  Scholar 


To  the  same 
[Early  summer,  1880] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  was  touchingly  reminded  of  [a  child 
who  had  died]  this  morning  by  an  Indian  woman  with  gay 
baskets  and  a  dazzling  baby,  at  the  kitchen  door.  Her 
little  boy  “once  died,”  she  said,  death  to  her  dispelling 
him.  I  asked  her  what  the  baby  liked,  and  she  said  “to 
step.”  The  prairie  before  the  door  was  gay  with  flowers 
of  hay,  and  I  led  her  in.  She  argued  with  the  birds,  she 
leaned  on  clover  walls  and  they  fell,  and  dropped  her. 
With  jargon  sweeter  than  a  bell,  she  grappled  buttercups, 
and  they  sank  together,  the  buttercups  the  heaviest. 
What  sweetest  use  of  days!  ’Twas  noting  some  such 
scene  made  Vaughan  humbly  say,  — 

“My  days  that  are  at  best  but  dim  and  hoary.” 

I  think  it  was  Vaughan. .  .  . 

To  Perez  Cowan 

[On  receiving  a  Life  of  his  little  daughter] 

[October,  1880] 

Dear  Cousin,  —  The  sweet  book  found  me  on  my  pillow, 
where  I  was  detained,  or  I  should  have  thanked  you 
immediately. 

The  little  creature  must  have  been  priceless  —  yours 
and  not  yours  —  how  hallowed ! 


326  EMILY  DICKINSON 

It  may  have  been  she  came  to  show  you  Immortality. 
Her  startling  little  flight  would  imply  she  did. 

May  I  remind  you  what  Paul  said,  or  do  you  think  of 
nothing  else,  these  October  nights,  without  her  crib  to 
visit? 

The  little  furniture  of  loss  has  lips  of  dirks  to  stab  us.  I 
hope  Heaven  is  warm,  there  are  so  many  barefoot  ones.  I 
hope  it  is  near  —  the  little  tourist  was  so  small.  I  hope 
it  is  not  so  unlike  earth  that  we  shall  miss  the  peculiar 
form  —  the  mould  of  the  bird.  “And  with  what  body 
do  they  come?”  Then  they  do  come!  Rejoice!  What 
door?  What  hour?  Run,  run,  my  soul!  Illuminate  the 
house ! 

“Body!”  then  real,  —  a  face  and  eyes,  to  know  that 
it  is  them!  Paul  knew  the  Mian  that  knew  the  news,  He 
passed  through  Bethlehem. 

With  love  for  you,  and  your  sweet  wife,  “whom  seeing 
not,  we”  trust. 

Cousin  Emily 

To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Nor  cross 
[1880] 

.  .  .  We  asked  Vinnie  to  say  in  the  rear  of  one  of  her  mental 
products  that  we  had  neuralgia,  but  evidently  her  theme 
or  her  time  did  not  admit  of  trifles.  ...  I  forget  no  part  of 
that  sweet,  smarting  visit,  not  even  the  nettle  that  stung 
my  rose. 

When  Macbeth  asked  the  physician  what  could  be  done 
for  his  wife,  he  made  the  mighty  answer,  “That  sort  must 
heal  itself”;  but,  sister,  that  was  guilt,  and  love,  you 
know,  is  God,  who  certainly  “  gave  the  love  to  reward  the 
love,”  even  were  there  no  Browning. 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  327 


.  .  .  The  slips  of  the  last  rose  of  summer  repose  in  kin¬ 
dred  soil  with  waning  bees  for  mates.  How  softly  sum¬ 
mer  shuts,  without  the  creaking  of  a  door,  abroad  for 
evermore. 

.  .  .  Vinnie  has  also  added  a  pilgrim  kitten  to  her  flock, 
which  besides  being  jet  black,  is,  I  think,  a  lineal  descend¬ 
ant  of  the  “beautiful  hearse  horse”  recommended  to 
Austin. 


To  the  same 
[December,  1880] 

.  .  .  The  look  of  the  words  [stating  the  death  of  George 
Eliot]  as  they  lay  in  the  print  I  shall  never  forget.  Not 
their  face  in  the  casket  would  have  had  the  eternity  to 
me.  Now,  my  George  Eliot.  The  gift  of  belief  which  her 
greatness  denied  her,  I  trust  she  receives  in  the  childhood 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  As  childhood  is  earth’s  confid¬ 
ing  time,  perhaps  having  no  childhood,  she  lost  her  way  to 
the  early  trust,  and  no  later  came.  Amazing  human  heart, 
a  syllable  can  make  to  quake  like  jostled  tree,  what 
infinite  for  thee?  .  .  . 


To  the  same 
[February,  1881] 

.  . .  God  is  rather  stern  with  his  “little  ones.”  “A  cup  of 
cold  water  in  my  name”  is  a  shivering  legacy  February 
mornings. 

.  .  .  Maggie’s  brother  is  killed  in  the  mine,  and  Maggie 
wants  to  die,  but  Death  goes  far  around  to  those  that 
want  to  see  him.  If  the  little  cousins  would  give  her  a 
note  —  she  does  not  know  I  ask  it  —  I  think  it  would  help 


328  EMILY  DICKINSON 

her  begin,  that  bleeding  beginning  that  every  mourner 
knows. 


To  the  same 
[Spring,  1881] 

The  divine  deposit  came  safely  in  the  little  bank.  We 
have  heard  of  the  “deeds  of  the  spirit,”  but  are  his  acts 
gamboge  and  pink?  A  morning  call  from  Gabriel  is  always 
a  surprise.  Were  we  more  fresh  from  Eden  we  were 
expecting  him  -  but  Genesis  is  a  “  far  journey.”  Thank 
you  for  the  loveliness. 

We  have  had  two  hurricanes  within  as  many  hours,  one 
of  which  came  near  enough  to  untie  my  apron  but  this 
moment  the  sun  shines,  Maggie’s  hens  are  warbling,  and  a 
man  of  anonymous  wits  is  making  a  garden  in  the  lane  to 
set  out  slips  of  bluebird.  The  moon  grows  from  the  seed. 

.  .  .  Vinnie’s  pussy  slept  in  grass  Wednesday  —  a  Sicilian 
symptom  — the  sails  are  set  for  summer.  East  India 
wharf.  Sage  and  saucy  ones  talk  of  an  equinoctial,  and 
are  trying  the  chimneys,  but  I  am  “short  of  hearing,^ 
as  the  deaf  say.  Blessed  are  they  that  play,  for  theirs  is 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Love  like  a  rose  from  each  one, 

and  Maggie’s  a  Burgundy  one  she  ardently  asks. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1881] 

My  Dear  Little  Cousins,  —  I  bring  you  a  robin  who  is 
eating  a  remnant  oat  on  the  sill  of  the  bam.  The  horse 
was  not  as  hungry  as  usual,  leaving  an  ample  meal  for  his 
dulcet  friend.  ... 

Maggie  was  charmed  with  her  donkeys,  and  has  long 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  329 

been  talking  of  writing,  but  has  not  quite  culminated. 
They  stand  on  the  dining-room  side-board,  by  the  side  of 
an  orange,  and  a  “  Springfield  Republican.  It  will  please 
you  to  know  that  the  clover  in  the  bill  of  the  brown  one  is 
fresh  as  at  first,  notwithstanding  the  time,  though  the 
only  “pastures”  I  know  gifted  with  that  duration,  are  far 
off  as  the  psalms. 

Mr.  C - called  with  a  twilight  of  you.  It  reminded 

me  of  a  supper  I  took,  with  the  pictures  on  Dresden 
china.  Vinnie  asked  him  “what  he  had  for  supper,”  and 
he  said  he  “could  easier  describe  the  nectar  of  the  gods.” 
. . .  We  read  in  a  tremendous  Book  about  “an  enemy,” 
and  armed  a  confidential  fort  to  scatter  him  away.  The 
time  has  passed,  and  years  have  come,  and  yet  not  any 
“Satan.”  I  think  he  must  be  making  war  upon  some 
other  nation. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1881] 

The  dear  ones  will  excuse  —  they  knew  there  was  a 
cause.  Emily  was  sick,  and  Vinnie  s  middle  name  re¬ 
strained  her  loving  pen. 

These  are  my  first  words  since  I  left  my  pillow  that 
will  make  them  faithful,  although  so  long  withheld.  We 
had  another  fire  —  it  was  in  Phoenix  Row,  Monday  a 
week  ago,  at  two  in  the  night.  The  horses  were  harnessed 
to  move  the  office  —  Austin  s  office,  I  mean.  After  a 
night  of  terror,  we  went  to  sleep  for  a  few  moments,  and 
I  could  not  rise.  The  others  bore  it  better.  The  brook 
from  Pelham  saved  the  town.  The  wind  was  blowing  so, 
it  carried  the  burning  shingles  as  far  as  Tom’s  piazza. 


330 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


We  are  weak  and  grateful.  The  fire-bells  are  oftener  now, 
almost,  than  the  church-bells.  Thoreau  would  wonder 
which  did  the  most  harm. 

The  little  gifts  came  sweetly.  The  bulbs  are  in  the  sod 
—  the  seeds  in  homes  of  paper  till  the  sun  calls  them.  It  is 
snowing  now.  .  .  .  “  Fine  sleighing  we  have  this  summer, 
says  Austin  with  a  scoff.  The  box  of  dainty  ones  I 
don’t  know  what  they  were,  buttons  of  spice  for  coats 
of  honey  —  pleased  the  weary  mother.  Thank  you  each 
for  all. 

The  beautiful  words  for  which  L - asked  were  that 

genius  is  the  ignition  of  affection  not  intellect,  as  is 
supposed,  —  the  exaltation  of  devotion,  and  in  proportion 
to  our  capacity  for  that,  is  our  experience  of  genius. 
Precisely  as  they  were  uttered  I  cannot  give  them,  they 
were  in  a  letter  that  I  do  not  find,  but  the  suggestion  was 
this. 

It  is  startling  to  think  that  the  lips,  which  are  keepers 
of  thoughts  so  magical,  yet  at  any  moment  are  subject  to 
the  seclusion  of  death. 

...  I  must  leave  you,  dear,  to  come  perhaps  again,  — 

We  never  know  we  go  —  when  we  are  going 
We  jest  and  shut  the  door  — 

Fate  following  behind  us  bolts  it 
And  we  accost  no  more. 

I  give  you  my  parting  love. 

Emily 


TO  MRS.  SAMUEL  BOWLES 


331 


To  Mrs.  Samuel  Bowles 
[September  6,  1881] 


Tuesday 


Dear  Mary,  —  I  give  you  only  a  word  this  mysterious 
morning  in  which  we  must  light  the  lamps  to  see  each 
other’s  faces,  thanking  you  for  the  trust  too  confiding  for 
speech. 

You  spoke  of  enclosing  the  face  of  your  child.  As  it 
was  not  there,  forgive  me  if  I  tell  you,  lest  even  the  copy 
of  sweetness  abscond;  and  may  I  trust  you  received  the 
flower  the  mail  promised  to  take  you,  my  foot  being  in¬ 
competent? 

The  timid  mistake  about  being  forgotten,  shall  I 
caress  or  reprove?  Mr.  Samuel’s  sparrow  does  not 
“fall”  without  the  fervent  “notice.” 

“Would  you  see  us,  would  Vinnie?”  Oh,  my  doubting 
Mary!  Were  you  and  your  brave  son  in  my  father’s 
house,  it  would  require  more  prowess  than  mine  to  resist 

seeing  you. 

Shall  I  still  hope  for  the  picture?  And  please  address 
to  my  full  name,  as  the  little  note  was  detained  and 
opened,  the  name  being  so  frequent  in  town,  though  not 
an  Emily  but  myself. 

Vinnie  says  “give  her  my  love,  and  tell  her  I  would 
delight  to  see  her;”  and  mother  combines. 

There  should  be  no  tear  on  your  cheek,  dear,  had  my 
hand  the  access  to  brush  it  away. 


Emily 


332 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 
[1881] 

Dear  Mary,  —  To  have  been  the  mother  of  the  beautiful 
face,  is  of  itself  fame,  and  the  look  of  Arabia  in  the  eyes  is 
like  Mr.  Samuel.  “Mr.  Samuel”  is  his  memorial  name. 
“Speak,  that  we  may  see  thee,”  and  Gabriel  no  more 
ideal  than  his  swift  eclipse.  Thank  you  for  the  beauty, 
which  I  reluctantly  return,  and  feel  like  committing  a 
“startling  fraud”  in  that  sweet  direction.  If  her  heart 
is  as  magical  as  her  face,  she  will  wreck  many  a  spirit, 
but  the  sea  is  ordained. 

Austin  looked  at  her  long  and  earnestly. 

“Yes,  it  is  Sam’s  child.”  His  Cashmere  confederate. 
It  is  best,  dear,  you  have  so  much  to  do.  Action  is  re¬ 
demption. 

“And  again  a  little  while  and  ye  shall  not  see  me,” 
Jesus  confesses  is  temporary. 

Thank  you  indeed.  Emily 


To  Mrs.  Edward  Tuckerman 
[1880] 

Love  is  done  when  love’s  begun. 

Sages  say. 

But  have  sages  known? 

Truth  adjourn  your  boon 
Without  day. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

[After  Professor  Root’s  death,  December,  1880] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  thought  of  you,  although  I  never 
saw  your  friend. 


TO  MRS.  GEORGE  MONTAGUE 


333 


Brother  of  Ophir, 

Bright  adieu, 

Honor  the  shortest 
Route  to  you. 

Emily 


To  the  Reverend  F.  F.  Emerson 
[1880] 

A  blossom,  perhaps,  is  an  introduction,  to  whom,  none 
can  infer. 

To  the  same 

Though  tendered  by  a  stranger,  the  fruit  will  be  for¬ 
given. 

Valor  in  the  dark  is  my  Maker’s  code. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Mrs.  Edward  Tuckerman 
[New  Year’s  Day,  1881] 

Saturday 

My  bird,  Mdio  is  “to-day”? 

“Yesterday”  was  a  year  ago,  and  yet 

The  stem  of  a  departed  flower 
Has  still  a  silent  rank, 

The  bearer  from  an  emerald  court 
Of  a  despatch  of  pink. 

Thank  you  for  the  lovely  love.  Emily 

To  Mrs.  George  Montague 

Dear  Cousin,  — The  “Golden  Rule”  is  so  lovely,  it 
needs  no  police  to  enforce  it. 


Cousin 


334 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 

To  have  “been  faithful  in  a  few  things”  was  the  delicate 
compliment  paid  one  by  God.  Could  I  not  commend  a 
rarer  candidate  for  his  approval  in  my  loyal  Cousin? 

To  the  same 
[December,  1881] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Vinnie  asked  me  if  I  had  any  message 
for  you,  and  while  I  was  picking  it,  you  ran  away. 

Not  seeing,  still  we  know. 

Not  knowing,  guess; 

Not  guessing,  smile  and  hide 
And  half  caress, 

And  quake  and  turn  away; 

Seraphic  fear! 

Is  Eden’s  innuendo 
“If  you  dare”? 

Emily 

To  Mrs.  J.  S.  Cooper 

How  strange  that  Nature  does  not  knock,  and  yet  does 
not  intrude! 

To  the  same 

“Give  me  thine  heart”  is  too  peremptory  a  courtship 
for  earth,  however  irresistible  in  Heaven. 

To  the  same 

Dear  Friend,  —  So  valiant  is  the  intimacy  between 
Nature  and  her  children,  she  addresses  them  as  “com¬ 
rades  in  arms.” 


E.  Dickinson 


TO  MRS.  W.  F.  STEARNS 


335 


To  the  same 

Dear.  Friend,  —  Nothing  inclusive  of  a  human  heart 
could  be  “trivial.”  That  appalling  boon  makes  all  things 
paltry  but  itself. 

To  the  same 

Give  us  half  the  thorn  —  then  it  will  tear  you  less.  To 
divulge  itself  is  sorrow’s  right,  never  its  presumption. 

Faithfully 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Mrs.  Henry  Hills 
[1881] 

With  a  kiss  and  a  flower,  one  of  which  will  endure,  I  am 
whom  you  infer. 


To  the  same 
[1882] 

Only  a  pond  lily  that  I  tilled  myself. 


To  the  same 

Dear  Friends,  —  Even  the  simplest  solace,  with  a  loved 
aim,  has  a  heavenly  quality. 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  W.  F.  Steams 
[October,  1882] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Affection  wants  you  to  know  it  is  here. 
Demand  it  to  the  utmost. 

Tenderly 


E.  Dickinson 


336 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 
[On  the  death  of  Dr.  Holland] 

[October,  1881] 

We  read  the  words,  but  know  them  not.  We  are  too 
frightened  with  sorrow.  If  that  dear,  tired  one  must 
sleep,  could  we  not  see  him  first? 

Heaven  is  but  a  little  way  to  one  who  gave  it,  here. 
“Inasmuch,”  to  him,  how  tenderly  fulfilled! 

Our  hearts  have  flown  to  you  before  —  our  breaking 
voices  follow.  How  can  we  wait  to  take  you  all  in  our 
sheltering  arms? 

Could  there  be  new  tenderness,  it  would  be  for  you,  but 
the  heart  is  full  —  another  throb  would  split  it  —  nor 
would  we  dare  to  speak  to  those  whom  such  a  grief  re¬ 
moves,  but  we  have  somewhere  heard  “A  little  child  shall 
lead  them.” 

Emily 


To  the  same 


Thursday 


After  a  while,  dear,  you  will  remember  that  there  is  a 
heaven  —  but  you  can’t  now.  Jesus  will  excuse  it.  He  will 
remember  his  shorn  lamb. 

The  lost  one  was  on  such  childlike  terms  with  the 
Father  in  Heaven.  He  has  passed  from  confiding  to 
comprehending  —  perhaps  but  a  step. 

The  safety  of  a  beloved  lost  is  the  first  anguish.  With 
you,  that  is  peace. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  Doctor’s  prayer,  my  first 
morning  with  you  —  so  simple,  so  believing.  That  God 
must  be  a  friend  —  that  was  a  different  God  —  and  I 


TO  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND  337 

almost  felt  warmer  myself,  in  the  midst  of  a  tie  so  sun¬ 
shiny. 

I  am  yearning  to  know  if  he  knew  he  was  fleeing  if  he 
spoke  to  you.  Dare  I  ask  if  he  suffered?  Some  one  will  tell 

me  a  very  little,  when  they  have  the  strength - Cling 

tight  to  the  hearts  that  will  not  let  you  fall. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

Panting  to  help  the  dear  ones  and  yet  not  knowing  how, 
lest  any  voice  bereave  them  but  that  loved  voice  that  will 
not  come,  if  I  can  rest  them,  here  is  down  —  or  rescue, 
here  is  power. 

One  who  only  said  “I  am  sorry”  helped  me  the  most 
when  father  ceased  —  it  was  too  soon  for  language. 

Fearing  to  tell  mother,  some  one  disclosed  it  unknown 
to  us.  Weeping  bitterly,  we  tried  to  console  her.  She  only 
replied  “I  loved  him  so.” 

Had  he  a  tenderer  eulogy  ? 

Emily 


To  the  same 

.  I  know  you  will  live  for  our  sake,  dear,  you  would 
not  be  willing  to  for  your  own.  That  is  the  duty  which 
saves.  While  we  are  trying  for  others,  power  of  life  comes 
back,  very  faint  at  first,  like  the  new  bird,  but  by  and  by 
it  has  wings. 

How  sweetly  you  have  comforted  me  — the  toil  to 
comfort  you,  I  hoped  never  would  come.  A  sorrow  on 
your  sunny  face  is  too  dark  a  miracle  —  but  how  sweet 
that  he  rose  in  the  morning  —  accompanied  by  dawn. 
How  lovely  that  he  spoke  with  you,  that  memorial  time! 


338 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


How  gentle  that  he  left  the  pang  he  had  not  time  to  feel! 
Bequest  of  darkness,  yet  of  light,  since  unborne  by  him. 
“Where  thou  goest,  we  will  go”  —  how  mutual,  how 
intimate!  No  solitude  receives  him,  but  neighborhood 
and  friend. 

Relieved  forever  of  the  loss  of  those  that  must  have 
fled,  but  for  his  sweet  haste.  Knowing  he  could  not  spare 
them,  he  hurried  like  a  boy  from  that  unhappened  sorrow . 
Death  has  mislaid  his  sting  —  the  grave  forgot  his  victory. 
Because  the  flake  fell  not  on  him,  we  will  accept  the  drift, 
and  wade  where  he  is  lain. 

Do  you  remember  the  clover  leaf?  The  little  hand  that 
plucked  it  will  keep  tight  hold  of  mine. 

Please  give  her  love  to  Annie,  and  Kate,  who  also  gave 
a  father. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

[On  the  marriage  of  her  daughter  Annie,  December  7,  1881] 
Sweet  Sistee,  —  We  were  much  relieved  to  know  that 
the  dear  event  had  occurred  without  overwhelming  any 
loved  one,  and  perhaps  it  is  sweeter  and  safer  so.  I  feared 
much  for  the  parting,  to  you,  to  whom  parting  has  come 
so  thickly  in  the  last  few  days.  I  knew  all  would  be 
beautiful,  and  rejoice  it  was.  Few  daughters  have  the 
immortality  of  a  father  for  a  bridal  gift.  Could  there  be 
one  more  costly? 

As  we  never  have  ceased  to  think  of  you,  we  will  more 
tenderly,  now.  Confide  our  happiness  to  Annie,  in  her 
happiness.  We  hope  the  unknown  balm  may  ease  the 
balm  withdrawn. 

You  and  Katie,  the  little  sisters,  lose  her,  yet  obtain 


339 


TO  MRS.  J.  G.  HOLLAND 

her,  for  each  new  width  of  love  largens  all  the  rest. 
Mother  and  Vinnie  think  and  speak.  Vinnie  hopes  to 
write.  Would  that  mother  could,  but  her  poor  hand  is 
idle.  Shall  I  return  to  you  your  last  and  sweetest  words  — 
“But  I  love  you  all”? 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[Christmas,  1881] 

Dare  we  wish  the  brave  sister  a  sweet  Christmas,  who 
remembered  us  punctually  in  sorrow  as  in  peace? 

The  broken  heart  is  broadest.  Had  it  come  all  the  way 
in  your  little  hand,  it  could  not  have  reached  us  perfecter, 
though  had  it,  we  should  have  clutched  the  hand  and 

forgot  the  rest. 

Fearing  the  day  had  associations  of  anguish  to  you,  I 
was  just  writing  when  your  token  came.  Then,  humbled 
with  wonder  at  your  self-forgetting,  I  delayed  till  now. 
Reminded  again  of  gigantic  Emily  Bronte,  of  whom  her 
Charlotte  said  “Full  of  ruth  for  others,  on  herself  she 
had  no  mercy.”  The  hearts  that  never  lean,  must  fall. 

To  moan  is  justified.  .  . 

To  thank  you  for  remembering  under  the  piercing 

circumstances  were  a  profanation. 

God  bless  the  hearts  that  suppose  they  are  beating 
and  are  not,  and  enfold  in  His  infinite  tenderness  those 
that  do  not  know  they  are  beating  and  are. 

Shall  we  wish  a  triumphant  Christmas  to  the  brother 

withdrawn?  Certainly  he  possesses  it. 

How  much  of  Source  escapes  with  thee 
How  chief  thy  sessions  be  — 


340 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


For  thou  hast  borne  a  universe 
Entirely  away. 

With  wondering  love 

Emily 


“Whom  seeing  not,  we”  clasp. 


Emily 


To  Mrs.  Edward  Tuckerman 
[March,  1880] 

The  robin  is  a  Gabriel 
In  humble  circumstances, 

His  dress  denotes  him  socially 
Of  transport’s  working  classes. 

He  has  the  punctuality 
Of  the  New  England  farmer  — 

The  same  oblique  integrity, 

A  vista  vastly  warmer. 

A  small  but  sturdy  residence, 

A  self-denying  household, 

The  guests  of  perspicacity 
Are  all  that  cross  his  threshold. 

As  covert  as  a  fugitive, 

Cajoling  consternation 
By  ditties  to  the  enemy. 

And  sylvan  punctuation. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

We  shall  find  the  cube  of  the  rainbow. 
Of  that  there  is  no  doubt; 


TO  PROFESSOR  J.  K.  CHICKERING  341 


But  the  arc  of  a  lover’s  conjecture 
Eludes  the  finding  out. 


Confidingly 


Emily 


To  Professor  J.  K.  Chickering 

How  charming  the  magnanimity  which  conferring  a 
favor  on  others,  by  some  mirage  of  valor  considers  itself 
receiving  one! 

Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  knights ! 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Mr.  Thomas  Niles 
[1880?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  bring  you  a  chill  gift  —  “My 
Cricket”  1  and  “The  Snow.”  2  A  base  return,  indeed, 
for  the  delightful  book  which  I  infer  from  you,  but  an 
earnest  one. 


To  Professor  J.  K.  Chickering 
[Autumn,  1882] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  do  not  know  the  depth  of  my  indebt¬ 
edness.  Sorrow,  benighted  with  fathoms,  cannot  find 
its  mind. 

Thank  you  for  assisting  us. 

We  were  timidly  grateful. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 

Dear  Friend,  —  Thank  you  for  being  willing  to  see  me, 
but  may  I  defer  so  rare  a  pleasure  till  you  come  again? 

1  Poems,  Second  Series,  page  167.  2  Poems,  Second  Series,  page  174. 


/ 


342  EMILY  DICKINSON 

Grief  is  a  sable  introduction,  but  a  vital  one,  and  I  deem 
that  I  knew  you  long  since  through  your  shielding 

thought. 

I  hope  you  may  have  an  electrical  absence,  as  lile  never 
loses  its  startlingness,  however  assailed.  “Seen  of  angels ” 
only,  an  enthralling  aim. 

Thank  you  for  the  kindness,  the  fervor  of  a  stranger 
the  latest  forgot. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  had  hoped  to  see  you,  but  have  no 
grace  to  talk,  and  my  own  words  so  chill  and  bum  me 
that  the  temperature  of  other  minds  is  too  new  an  awe. 

We  shun  it  ere  it  comes. 

Afraid  of  joy. 

Then  sue  it  to  delay. 

And  lest  it  fly 

Beguile  it  more  and  more. 

May  not  this  be. 

Old  suitor  Heaven, 

Like  our  dismay  at  thee? 

Earnestly 

E.  Dickinson 

To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles  Ji-th 
[August  2,  1882] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Our  friend  your  father  was  so  beauti¬ 
fully  and  intimately  recalled  to-day  that  it  seemed  im¬ 
possible  he  had  experienced  the  secret  of  death. 


TO  MR.  SAMUEL  BOWLES  4th 


343 


A  servant  who  had  been  with  us  a  long  time,  and  had 
often  opened  the  door  for  him,  asked  me  how  to  spell 
“genius”  yesterday.  I  told  her  and  she  said  no  more. 
To-day  she  asked  me  what  “genius”  meant.  I  told  her 
none  had  known. 

She  said  she  read  in  a  Catholic  paper  that  Mr.  Bowles 
was  “the  genius  of  Hampshire,”  and  thought  it  might 
be  that  past  gentleman.  His  look  could  not  be  extin¬ 
guished  to  any  who  had  seen  him,  for  “because  I  live, 
ye  shall  live  also,”  was  his  physiognomy. 

I  congratulate  you  upon  his  immortality,  which  is  a 
constant  stimulus  to  my  household,  and  upon  your  noble 
perpetuation  of  his  cherished  “Republican.” 

Please  remember  me  tenderly  to  your  mother. 

With  honor 

Emily  Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[1882] 

Dear  Friend,  —  A  tree  your  father  gave  me  bore  this 
priceless  flower. 

Would  you  accept  it  because  of  him  — 

WTo  abdicated  ambush 
And  went  the  way  of  dusk, 

And  now,  against  his  subtle  name. 

There  stands  an  asterisk 
As  confident  of  him  as  we; 

Impregnable  we  are  — 

The  whole  of  Immortality 
Secreted  in  a  star. 


E.  Dickinson 


344 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 
[1882] 

Dear  Friend,  —  My  mother  and  sister  hoped  to  see  you, 
and  I,  to  have  heard  the  voice  in  the  house  that  recalls 
the  strange  music  of  your  father’s.  A  little  bin  of  blossoms 
I  designed  for  your  breakfast  also  went  astray. 

I  hope  you  are  in  strength,  and  that  the  passengers  of 
peace  exalt,  not  rend,  your  memory.  Heaven  may  give 
them  rank,  it  could  not  give  them  grandeur,  for  that  they 

carried  with  themselves. 

With  fresh  remembrance 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Miss  Maria  Whitney 
[November,  1882] 


Tuesday 

Sweet  Friend,  —  Our  mother  ceased.  While  we  bear 
her  dear  form  through  the  wilderness,  I  am  sure  you  are 


with  us. 


Emily 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 
[November,  1882] 

Dear  Cousins,  — I  hoped  to  write  you  before,  but 
mother’s  dying  almost  stunned  my  spirit. 

I  have  answered  a  few  inquiries  of  love,  but  written 
little  intuitively.  She  was  scarcely  the  aunt  you  knew. 
The  great  mission  of  pain  had  been  ratified  —  cultivated 
to  tenderness  by  persistent  sorrow,  so  that  a  larger 
mother  died  than  had  she  died  before.  There  was  no 
earthly  parting.  She  slipped  from  our  fingers  like  a  flake 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  345 


gathered  by  the  wind,  and  is  now  part  of  the  drift  called 
“the  infinite.” 

We  don’t  know  where  she  is,  though  so  many  tell  us. 

I  believe  we  shall  in  some  manner  be  cherished  by  our 
Maker  —  that  the  One  who  gave  us  this  remarkable 
earth  has  the  power  still  farther  to  surprise  that  which 
He  has  caused.  Beyond  that  all  is  silence.  .  . . 

Mother  was  very  beautiful  when  she  had  died.  Seraphs 
are  solemn  artists.  The  illumination  that  comes  but 
once  paused  upon  her  features,  and  it  seemed  like  hiding 
a  picture  to  lay  her  in  the  grave;  but  the  grass  that 
received  my  father  will  suffice  his  guest,  the  one  he  asked 
at  the  altar  to  visit  him  all  his  life. 

I  cannot  tell  how  Eternity  seems.  It  sweeps  around 
me  like  a  sea.  . .  .  Thank  you  for  remembering  me. 
Remembrance  —  mighty  word. 

“Thou  gavest  it  to  me  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.” 


Lovingly 


Emily 


To  the  same 
[Spring,  1883] 

Thank  you,  dears,  for  the  sympathy.  I  hardly  dare  to 
know  that  I  have  lost  another  friend,  but  anguish  finds  it 
out. 

Each  that  we  lose  takes  part  of  us; 

A  crescent  still  abides, 

Which  like  the  moon,  some  turbid  night, 

Is  summoned  by  the  tides. 

...  I  work  to  drive  the  awe  away,  yet  awe  impels  the 
work. 


346  EMILY  DICKINSON 

I  almost  picked  the  crocuses,  you  told  them  so  sin¬ 
cerely.  Spring’s  first  conviction  is  a  wealth  beyond  its 
whole  experience. 

The  sweetest  way  I  think  of  you  is  when  the  day  is 

done,  and  L - sets  the  “sunset  tree”  for  the  little 

sisters.  Dear  F - has  had  many  stormy  mornings; 

...  I  hope  they  have  not  chilled  her  feet,  nor  dampened 
her  heart.  I  am  glad  the  little  visit  rested  you.  Rest  and 
water  are  most  we  want. 

I  know  each  moment  of  Miss  W - is  a  gleam  of 

boundlessness.  “Miles  and  miles  away,  said  Browning, 
“there’s  a  girl;”  but  “the  colored  end  of  evening  smiles” 
on  but  few  so  rare. 

Thank  you  once  more  for  being  sorry.  Till  the  first 
friend  dies,  we  think  ecstasy  impersonal,  but  then  dis¬ 
cover  that  he  was  the  cup  from  which  we  drank  it,  itself 
as  yet  unknown.  Sweetest  love  for  each,  and  a  kiss  be¬ 
sides  for  Miss  W - ’s  cheek,  should  you  again  meet  her. 

Emily 


To  Miss  Maria  Whitney 
[1883?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Has  the  journey  ceased,  or  is  it  still 
progressing,  and  has  Nature  won  you  away  from  us,  as 
we  feared  she  would? 

Othello  is  uneasy,  but  then  Othellos  always  are,  they 
hold  such  mighty  stakes. 

Austin  brought  me  the  picture  of  Salvini  when  he  was 
last  in  Boston. 

The  brow  is  that  of  Deity  —  the  eyes,  those  of  the  lost, 
but  the  power  lies  in  the  throat  pleading,  sovereign, 
savage  —  the  panther  and  the  dove ! 


TO  MR.  THOMAS  NILES 


347 


Each,  how  innocent! 

I  hope  you  found  the  mountains  cordial  —  followed 
your  meeting  with  the  lakes  with  affecting  sympathy. 
Changelessness  is  Nature’s  change. 

The  plants  went  into  camp  last  night,  their  tender 
armor  insufficient  for  the  crafty  nights. 

That  is  one  of  the  parting  acts  of  the  year,  and  has  an 
emerald  pathos  —  and  Austin  hangs  bouquets  of  corn 
in  the  piazza’s  ceiling,  also  an  omen,  for  Austin  believes. 

The  “golden  bowl”  breaks  soundlessly,  but  it  will  not 
be  whole  again  till  another  year. 

Did  you  read  Emily  Bronte’s  marvellous  verse? 

“  Though  earth  and  man  were  gone, 

And  suns  and  universes  ceased  to  be. 

And  Thou  wert  left  alone. 

Every  existence  would  exist  in  Thee.” 

To  Samuel  Bowles  &th 

[Upon  announcement  of  his  engagement  to  Miss  Hoar] 
[October,  1883] 

Dear  Friend,  — 

The  clock  strikes  one  that  just  struck  two  — 
Some  schism  in  the  sum; 

A  sorcerer  from  Genesis 
Has  wrecked  the  pendulum. 

With  warmest  congratulation 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Mr.  Thomas  Niles 
[1883?] 

Thank  you,  Mr.  Niles. 

I  am  very  grateful  for  the  mistake.  I  should  think  it 


348  EMILY  DICKINSON 

irreparable  deprivation  to  know  no  farther  of  her  here, 
with  the  impregnable  chances. 

The  kind  but  incredible  opinion  of  H.  H.  and  your¬ 
self  I  would  like  to  deserve. 

Would  you  accept  a  pebble  I  think  I  gave  to  her, 

though  I  am  not  sure. 

With  thanks  E.  Dickinson 

How  happy  is  the  little  stone 
That  rambles  in  the  road  alone, 

And  doesn’t  care  about  careers. 

And  exigencies  never  fears; 

Whose  coat  of  elemental  brown 
A  passing  universe  put  on; 

And  independent  as  the  sun, 

Associates,  or  glows  alone. 

Fulfilling  absolute  decree 
In  casual  simplicity. 

To  Mrs.  J.  G.  Holland 
[1883?] 

Concerning  the  little  sister,  not  to  assault,  not  to  adjure, 
but  to  obtain  those  constancies  which  exalt  friends,  we 
followed  her  to  St.  Augustine,  since  which  the  trail  was 
lost,  or  says  George  Stearns  of  his  alligator,  “there  was 
no  such  aspect.” 

The  beautiful  blossoms  waned  at  last,  the  charm  of  all 
who  knew  them,  resisting  the  effort  of  earth  or  air  to 
persuade  them  to  root,  as  the  great  florist  says  “The 
flower  that  never  will  in  other  climate  grow.” 

To  thank  you  for  its  fragrance  would  be  impossible, 
but  then  its  other  blissful  traits  are  more  than  can  be 


TO  MISS  MARIA  WHITNEY 


349 


numbered.  And  the  beloved  Christmas,  too,  for  which  I 
never  thanked  you.  I  hope  the  little  heart  is  well, ' 
big  would  have  been  the  width,  —  and  the  health  solaced; 
any  news  of  her  as  sweet  as  the  first  arbutus. 

Emily  and  Yinnie  give  the  love  greater  every  hour. 

To  Miss  Maria  Whitney 
[1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  guilt  of  having  sent  the  note  had 
so  much  oppressed  me  that  I  hardly  dared  to  read  the 
reply,  and  delayed  my  heart  almost  to  its  stifling,  sure 
you  would  never  receive  us  again.  To  come  unto  our 
own  and  our  own  fail  to  receive  us,  is  a  sere  response. 

I  hope  you  may  forgive  us. 

All  is  faint  indeed  without  our  vanished  mother,  who 
achieved  in  sweetness  what  she  lost  in  strength,  though 
grief  of  wonder  at  her  fate  made  the  winter  short,  and 
each  night  I  reach  finds  my  lungs  more  breathless,  seek¬ 
ing  what  it  means. 

To  the  bright  east  she  flies, 

Brothers  of  Paradise 
Remit  her  home, 

Without  a  change  of  wings, 

Or  Love’s  convenient  things, 

Enticed  to  come. 

Fashioning  what  she  is, 

Fathoming  what  she  was, 

We  deem  we  dream  — 

And  that  dissolves  the  days 
Through  which  existence  strays 
Homeless  at  home. 


350  EMILY  DICKINSON 

The  sunshine  almost  speaks,  this  morning,  redoubling 
the  division,  and  Paul’s  remark  grows  graphic,  “the 
weight  of  glory.” 

I  am  glad  you  have  an  hour  for  books,  those  enthralling 
friends,  the  immortalities,  perhaps,  each  may  pre-receive. 
“And  I  saw  the  Heavens  opened.” 

I  hope  that  nothing  pains  you  except  the  pang  of  life, 

sweeter  to  bear  than  to  omit. 

With  love  and  wonder 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1883?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Is  not  an  absent  friend  as  mysterious 
as  a  bulb  in  the  ground,  and  is  not  a  bulb  the  most  capti¬ 
vating  floral  form?  Must  it  not  have  enthralled  the 
Bible,  if  we  may  infer  from  its  selection?  “  The  lily  of  the 
field!” 

I  never  pass  one  without  being  chagrined  for  Solomon, 
and  so  in  love  with  “the  lily”  anew,  that  were  I  sure  no 
one  saw  me,  I  might  make  those  advances  of  which  in 
after  life  I  should  repent. 

The  apple-blossoms  were  slightly  disheartened,  yester¬ 
day,  by  a  snow-storm,  but  the  birds  encouraged  them  all 
that  they  could  —  and  how  fortunate  that  the  little  ones 
had  come  to  cheer  their  damask  brethren! 

You  spoke  of  coming  “with  the  apple-blossoms 
which  occasioned  our  solicitude. 

The  ravenousness  of  fondness  is  best  disclosed  by 

children.  .  .  . 

Is  there  not  a  sweet  wolf  within  us  that  demands  its 
food? 


TO  MISS  MARIA  WHITNEY  351 

I  can  easily  imagine  your  fondness  for  the  little  life  so 
mysteriously  committed  to  your  care.  The  bird  that 
asks  our  crumb  has  a  plaintive  distinction.  I  rejoice  that 
it  was  possible  for  you  to  be  with  it,  for  I  think  the  early 
spiritual  influences  about  a  child  are  more  hallowing  than 
we  know.  The  angel  begins  in  the  morning  in  every  human 
life.  How  small  the  furniture  of  bliss!  How  scant  the 
heavenly  fabric! 

No  ladder  needs  the  bird  but  skies 
To  situate  its  wings, 

Nor  any  leader’s  grim  baton 
Arraigns  it  as  it  sings. 

The  implements  of  bliss  are  few 
As  Jesus  says  of  Him, 

“Come  unto  me”  the  moiety 
That  wafts  the  cherubim. 

Emily 

To  the  same 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  are  like  God.  We  pray  to  Him, 
and  he  answers  “No.”  Then  we  pray  to  Him  to  rescind 
the  “no,”  and  He  don’t  answer  at  all,  yet  “Seek  and  ye 
shall  find”  is  the  boon  of  faith. 

You  failed  to  keep  your  appointment  with  the  apple- 
blossoms  —  the  japonica,  even,  bore  an  apple  to  elicit  you, 
but  that  must  be  a  silver  bell  which  calls  the  human  heart. 

I  still  hope  that  you  live,  and  in  lands  of  consciousness. 

It  is  Commencement  now.  Pathos  is  very  busy. 

The  past  is  not  a  package  one  can  lay  away.  I  see  my 
father’s  eyes,  and  those  of  Mr.  Bowles  those  isolated 
comets.  If  the  future  is  mighty  as  the  past,  what  may 
vista  be? 


352  EMILY  DICKINSON 

With  my  foot  in  a  sling  from  a  vicious  sprain,  and  re¬ 
minded  of  you  almost  to  tears  by  the  week  and  its  witness, 
I  send  this  sombre  word. 

The  vane  defines  the  wind. 

Where  we  thought  you  were,  Austin  says  you  are  not. 
How  strange  to  change  one’s  sky,  unless  one  s  star  go  with 
it,  but  yours  has  left  an  astral  wake. 

Vinnie  gives  her  hand. 

Always  with  love 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[1883?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Your  sweet  self-reprehension  makes  us 
look  within,  which  is  so  wild  a  place  we  are  soon  dismayed, 
but  the  seed  sown  in  the  lake  bears  the  liquid  flower,  and 
so  of  all  your  words. 

I  am  glad  you  accept  rest. 

Too  many  disdain  it.  I  am  glad  you  go  to  the  Adiron- 
dacks. 

To  me  the  name  is  homelike,  for  one  of  my  lost  went 
every  year  with  an  Indian  guide,  before  the  woods  were 
broken.  Had  you  been  here  it  would  be  sweet,  but  that, 
like  the  peach,  is  later.  With  a  to-morrow  in  its  cupboard, 
who  would  be  “an  hungered”  ? 

Thank  you  for  thinking  of  Dick.  He  is  now  the  horse  of 
association. 

Men  are  picking  the  grass  from  father’s  meadow  to  lay 
it  away  for  winter,  and  it  takes  them  a  long  time.  They 
bring  three  horses  of  their  own,  but  Dick,  ever  gallant, 
offers  to  help,  and  bears  a  little  machine  like  a  top,  which 
spins  the  grass  away. 


TO  MR.  J.  D.  CLARK 


353 


It  seems  very  much  like  a  gentleman  getting  his  own 
supper  —  for  what  is  his  supper  winter  nights  but  tumblers 
of  clover? 

You  speak  of  “disillusion.”  That  is  one  of  the  few 
subjects  on  which  I  am  an  infidel.  Life  is  so  strong  a  vision, 
not  one  of  it  shall  fail. 

Not  what  the  stars  have  done,  but  what  they  are  to  do, 
is  what  detains  the  sky. 

We  shall  watch  for  the  promised  words  from  the 
Adirondacks,  and  hope  the  recess  will  all  be  joy.  To  have 
been  made  alive  is  so  chief  a  thing,  all  else  inevitably  adds. 
Were  it  not  riddled  by  partings,  it  were  too  divine. 

I  was  never  certain  that  mother  had  died,  except  while 
the  students  were  singing.  The  voices  came  from  another 
life.  .  .  . 

Good-night,  dear.  Excuse  me  for  staying  so  long.  I  love 
to  come  to  you.  To  one  who  creates,  or  consoles,  thought, 
what  an  obligation!  Emily 

Her  friendship  with  Mr.  Clark  began  in  1882  through 
the  death  of  one  dear  to  them  both.  To  him  she  wrote  of 
the  man  always  living  in  her  deathless  memory,  proving 
her  own  statement  that  forgetting  was  a  guile  of  which 
she  was  incapable. 


To  Mr.  J.  D.  Clark 

[1882] 

.  . .  He  never  spoke  of  himself,  and  encroachment  I 
know  would  have  slain  him.  .  . .  He  was  a  dusk  gem,  born 
of  troubled  waters,  astray  in  any  crest  below.  Heaven 
might  give  him  peace,  it  could  not  give  him  grandeur,  for 
that  he  carried  with  himself  to  whatever  scene. .  . . 


354 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


Obtaining  but  bis  own  extent 
In  whatsoever  realm, 

’Twas  Christ’s  own  personal  expanse 
That  bore  him  from  the  tomb. 

To  the  same 
[Late  autumn,  1882] 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  pains  us  very  much  that  you  have 
been  more  ill.  We  hope  you  may  not  be  suffering  now. 
Thank  you  for  speaking  so  earnestly  when  our  mother 
died.  We  have  spoken  daily  of  writing  you,  but  have 
felt  unable.  The  great  attempt  to  save  her  life  had  it 
been  successful  would  have  been  fatigueless,  but  failing, 
strength  forsook  us. 

No  verse  in  the  Bible  has  frightened  me  so  much  from 
a  child  as  “from  him  that  hath  not,  shall  be  taken  even 
that  he  hath.”  Was  it  because  its  dark  menace  deep¬ 
ened  our  own  door?  You  speak  as  if  you  still  missed  your 
mother.  I  wish  we  might  speak  with  you.  As  we  bore 
her  dear  form  through  the  wilderness,  light  seemed  to 
have  stopped. 

Her  dying  feels  to  me  like  many  kinds  of  cold  —  at 
times  electric,  at  times  benumbing,  —  then  a  trackless 
waste  love  has  never  trod.  .  . . 

The  letter  from  the  f  kies,  which  accompanied  yours, 
was  indeed  a  boon.  A  letter  always  seemed  to  me  like  Im¬ 
mortality,  for  is  it  not  the  mind  alone,  without  corporeal 
friend? 

I  hope  you  may  tell  us  that  you  are  better. 

Thank  you  for  much  kindness.  The  friend  anguish 
reveals  is  the  slowest  forgot. 


E.  Dickinson 


TO  MR.  J.  D.  CLARK 


355 


To  the  same 
[March,  1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  In  these  few  weeks  of  ignorance  of  you, 
we  trust  that  you  are  growing  stronger,  and  drawing  near 
that  sweet  physician,  an  approaching  spring,  for  the  ear 
of  the  heart  hears  bluebirds  already,  those  enthralling 
signals.  .  .  .  The  great  confidences  of  life  are  first  disclosed 
by  their  departure,  and  I  feel  that  I  ceaselessly  ought  to 
thank  you.  .  .  .  Our  household  is  scarcely  larger  than 
yours  —  Vinnie  and  I  and  two  servants  composing  our 
simple  realm,  though  my  brother  is  with  us  often  each 
day.  I  wish  I  could  show  you  the  hyacinths  that  embar¬ 
rass  us  by  their  loveliness,  though  to  cower  before  a  flower 
is  perhaps  unwise,  but  beauty  is  often  timidity  perhaps 
oftener  pain. 

A  soft  “Where  is  she?”  is  all  that  is  left  of  our  loved 
mother,  and  thank  you  for  all  you  told  us  of  yours. .  . . 

Faithfully 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  To  thank  you  is  impossible,  because 
your  gifts  are  from  the  sky,  more  precious  than  the  birds, 
because  more  disembodied.  I  can  only  express  my  re¬ 
joiced  surprise  by  the  phrase  in  the  Scripture,  “And  I  saw 

the  Heavens  opened.”  .  .  . 

Fathoms  are  sudden  neighbors. 

Ignorant  till  your  note  that  our  President’s  dying  had 
defrauded  you,  we  are  grieved  anew,  and  hasten  to  offer 
you  our  sorrow. 


356  EMILY  DICKINSON 

We  shall  make  Mrs.  Chadbourne’s  acquaintance  in 
flowers  after  a  few  days.  “Displeasure”  would  be  a 
morose  word  toward  a  friend  so  earnest,  and  we  only  fear 
when  you  delay,  that  you  feel  more  ill.  Allow  us  to  hear 
the  birds  for  you,  should  they  indeed  come. 

E.D. 


To  Mr.  C.  H.  Clark 
[April  18,  1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Would  it  be  possible  you  would  excuse 
me  if  I  once  more  inquire  for  the  health  of  the  brother 
whom  association  has  made  sacred? 

With  the  trust  that  your  own  is  impairless,  and  that 
fear  for  your  brother  has  not  too  much  depressed  you, 
please  accept  the  solicitude  of  myself  and  my  sister. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[April  22,  1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  sorrowful  tidings  of  your  note  al¬ 
most  dissuade  reply,  lest  I  for  one  moment  take  you  from 
your  brother’s  bedside.  I  have  delayed  to  tell  my  sister 
till  I  hear  again,  fearing  to  newly  grieve  her,  and  hoping 
an  encouraging  word  by  another  mail. 

Please  be  sure  we  are  with  you  in  sorrowing  thought, 
and  take  your  brother’s  hand  for  me,  if  it  is  still  with  you. 
Perhaps  the  one  has  called  him  of  whom  we  have  so  often 
talked  during  this  grieved  year. 

With  sympathy 


E.  Dickinson 


TO  MR.  C.  H.  CLARK 


357 


To  the  same 
[May  1,  1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  temptation  to  inquire  every  morn¬ 
ing  for  your  sufferer  is  almost  irresistible,  but  our  own 
invalid  taught  us  that  a  sick-room  is  at  times  too  sacred  a 
place  for  a  friend’s  knock,  timid  as  that  is. 

I  trust  this  sweet  May  morning  is  not  without  its  peace 
to  your  brother  and  you,  though  the  richest  peace  is  of 
sorrow. 

With  constant  and  fervent  anxiousness,  and  the  hope  of 
an  early  word,  please  be  sure  we  share  your  suspense. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[May  21,  1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  We  have  much  fear,  both  for  your  own 
strength  and  the  health  of  your  brother,  having  heard 
nothing  since  we  last  asked,  many  days  ago.  Will  you  not, 
when  possible,  give  us  but  a  syllable,  even  a  cheering 
accent,  if  no  more  be  true?  We  think  of  you  and  your 
sufferer  with  intense  anxiety,  wishing  some  act  or  word  of 
ours  might  be  hope  or  help.  The  humming-birds  and 
orioles  fly  by  me  as  I  write,  and  I  long  to  guide  their 
enchanted  feet  to  your  brother’s  chamber. 

Excuse  me  for  knocking.  Please  also  excuse  me  for 
staying  so  long.  Spring  is  a  strange  land  when  our  friends 
are  ill. 

With  my  sister’s  ten  derest  alarm,  as  also  my  own 

E.  Dickinson 


358 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 
[June  7,  1883] 

I  had,  dear  friend,  the  deep  hope  that  I  might  see  your 
brother  before  he  passed  from  life,  or  rather  life  we  know, 
and  can  scarcely  express  the  pang  I  feel  at  its  last  denia  . 

His  rare  and  hallowed  kindness  had  strangely  endeare 
him,  and  I  cannot  be  comforted  not  to  thank  him  before 

he  went  so  far. 

I  never  had  met  your  brother  but  once.  An  unforgotten 
once  —  to  have  seen  him  but  once  more  would  have  been 
almost  like  an  interview  with  my  “Heavenly  Father 
whom  he  loved  and  knew.  I  hope  he  was  able  to  speak 
with  you  in  his  closing  moment.  One  accent  of  courage  as 
he  took  his  flight  would  assist  your  heart.  I  am  eager  to 
know  all  you  may  tell  me  of  those  final  days.  We  asked 
for  him  every  morning,  in  heart,  but  feared  to  disturb  you 
by  inquiry  aloud.  I  hope  you  are  not  too  far  exhausted 

from  your  “loved  employ.” 

To  know  of  you  when  possible  would  console  us  much, 

and  every  circumstance  of  him  we  had  hoped  to  see.  .  . . 

E.  D. 


To  the  same 
[June  16,  1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Thank  you  for  the  paper.  I  felt  it  al¬ 
most  a  bliss  of  sorrow  that  the  name  so  long  in  Heaven  on 

earth,  should  be  on  earth  in  Heaven. 

Do  you  know  if  either  of  his  sons  have  his  mysterious 

face  or  his  momentous  nature? 

The  stars  are  not  hereditary.  I  hope  your  brother  and 
himself  resumed  the  tie  above,  so  dear  to  each  below. 


TO  MR.  C.  H.  CLARK 


359 


Your  bond  to  your  brother  reminds  me  of  mine  to  my 
sister  —  early,  earnest,  indissoluble.  Without  her  life 
were  fear,  and  Paradise  a  cowardice,  except  for  her 
inciting  voice. 

Should  you  have  any  picture  of  your  brother,  I  should 
rejoice  to  see  it  at  some  convenient  hour  —  and  though 
we  cannot  know  the  last,  would  you  sometime  tell  me  as 
near  the  last  as  your  grieved  voice  is  able?  .  .  . 

Are  you  certain  there  is  another  life?  When  over¬ 
whelmed  to  know,  I  fear  that  few  are  sure. 

My  sister  gives  her  grief  with  mine.  Had  we  known  in 
time,  your  brother  would  have  borne  our  flowers  in  his 
mute  hand.  Wflth  tears, 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[July  9,  1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  WTiile  I  thank  you  immediately  for  the 
invaluable  gift,  I  cannot  express  the  bereavement  that  I 
am  no  more  to  behold  it.  Believing  that  we  are  to  have  no 
face  in  a  farther  life,  makes  the  look  of  a  friend  a  boon  al¬ 
most  too  precious. 

The  resemblance  is  faithful  —  the  scholarly  gentleness 
• —  the  noble  modesty  —  the  absence  of  every  dross,  quite 
there.  What  a  consoling  prize  to  you,  his  mate  through 
years  of  anguish  so  much  sharper  to  see  because  endured 
so  willingly. 

Chastening  would  seem  unneeded  by  so  supreme  a 
spirit. 

I  feel  great  grief  for  you  —  I  hope  his  memory  may  help 
you,  so  recently  a  life.  I  wish  I  might  say  one  liquid  word 
to  make  your  sorrow  less.  Is  not  the  devotion  that  you 


360  EMILY  DICKINSON 

gave  him  an  acute  balm?  Had  you  not  been  with  him 

how  solitary  the  will  of  God! 

Thank  you  for  every  word  of  his  pure  career.  I  hope  1 
is  nearer  us  than  we  are  aware.  Will  you  not  still  tell  us  o 
yourself  and  your  home  —  from  which  this  patient  guest 
has  flown?  I  am  glad  he  lies  near  us  —  and  thank  you  for 
the  tidings  of  our  other  fugitive,  whom  to  know  was  li  e. 
I  can  scarcely  tell  you  how  deeply  I  cherish  your  thought¬ 
fulness.  To  still  know  of  the  dead  is  a  great  permission, 
and  you  have  almost  enabled  that.  With  the  ceaseless 
sympathy  of  myself  and  my  sister,  and  the  trust  that  our 

sufferer  rests, 

T 7  I  \T/nrmGn\T 


To  the  same 
[January  4,  1884] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  have  been  very  iff  since  early  October, 
and  unable  to  thank  you  for  the  sacred  kindness,  but 
treasured  it  each  day,  and  hasten  with  my  first  steps,  and 

my  fullest  gratitude - I  never  can  thank  you  as  I  feel. 

That  would  be  impossible.  The  effort  ends  in  tears.  You 
seem,  by  some  deep  accident,  to  be  the  only  tie  between 
the  Heaven  that  evanesced,  and  the  Heaven  that  stays. 
I  hope  the  winged  days  that  bear  you  to  your  brother  are 
not  too  destitute  of  song,  and  wish  that  we  might  speak 
with  you  of  him  and  of  yourself,  and  of  the  third  member 
of  that  sundered  trio.  Perhaps  another  spring  would  call 
you  to  Northampton,  and  memory  might  invite  you 
here.  .  .  . 

With  a  deep  New  Year 

Your  friend 


E.  Dickinson 


TO  ME.  C.  H.  CLARK 


361 


To  the  same 

[Enclosing  pressed  flowers,  February  22,  1884] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  hoped  it  might  gratify  you  to  meet 
the  little  flower  which  was  my  final  ministry  to  your 
brother,  and  which  even  in  that  faint  hour,  I  trust  he 
recognized,  though  the  thronged  spirit  had  not  access  to 
words. 

These  are  my  first  out,  and  their  golden  trifles  are  too 
full  of  association  to  remain  unshared. 

With  faithful  thought  of  yourself  and  your  brother, 
brothers  in  bereavement  even  as  myself, 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[April  21,  1884] 

Never  unmindful  of  your  anxiety  for  your  father,  dear 
friend,  I  refrained  from  asking,  lest  even  the  moment 
engrossed  by  reply,  might  take  you  from  him. 

The  peril  of  a  parent  is  a  peculiar  pang,  and  one  which 
my  sister  and  myself  so  long  experienced,  —  oh,  would  it 
were  longer,  for  even  fear  for  them  were  dearer  than  their 
absence,  —  that  we  cannot  resist  to  offer  you  our  earnest 
sympathy.  I  most  sincerely  trust  that  the  sight  is  re¬ 
deemed,  so  precious  to  you  both,  more  than  vicariously  to 
you  —  even  filially  —  and  that  the  added  fear  has  not 
exhausted  you  beyond  the  art  of  spring  to  cheer. 

I  have  lost,  since  writing  you,  another  cherished  friend, 
a  word  of  whom  I  enclose  —  and  how  to  repair  my 
shattered  ranks  is  a  besetting  pain.  Be  sure  that  my  sister 
and  myself  never  forget  your  brother,  nor  his  bereaved 
comrade. 


362  EMILY  DICKINSON 

To  be  certain  we  were  to  meet  our  lost  would  be  a  vista 

of  reunion  who  of  us  could  bear?  .  .  . 

Faithfully 

E.  Dickinson 

To  the  same 
[April  22,  1884] 

Dear  Friend,  —  These  thoughts  disquiet  me,  and  the 
great  friend  is  gone  who  could  solace  them.  Do  they 
disturb  you? 

The  spirit  lasts,  but  in  what  mode 
Below,  the  body  speaks. 

But  as  the  spirit  furnishes  — 

Apart  it  never  talks. 

The  music  in  the  violin 

Does  not  emerge  alone 

But  arm  in  arm  with  touch,  yet  touch 

Alone  is  not  a  tune. 

The  spirit  lurks  within  the  flesh 
Like  tides  within  the  sea 
That  make  the  water  live;  estranged 
What  would  the  either  be? 

Does  that  know  now,  or  does  it  cease. 

That  which  to  this  is  done. 

Resuming  at  a  mutual  date 
With  every  future  one? 

Instinct  pursues  the  adamant 
Exacting  this  reply  — 

Adversity,  if  it  may  be, 

Or  wild  prosperity, 

The  rumor’s  gate  was  shut  so  tight 
Before  my  mind  was  sown, 


363 


TO  MR.  C.  H.  CLARK 

Not  even  a  prognostic’s  push 
Could  make  a  dent  thereon. 

With  the  trust  you  live 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[January  18,  1885] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Though  no  New  Year  be  old,  to  wish 
yourself  and  your  honored  father  a  new  and  happy  one  is 
involuntary,  and  I  am  sure  we  are  both  reminded  of  that 
sacred  past  which  has  forever  hallowed  us. 

I  trust  the  years  which  they  behold  are  also  new  and 
happy,  or  is  it  a  joyous  expanse  of  year,  without  bisecting 
months  —  untiring  Anno  Domini?  Had  we  but  one  as¬ 
suring  word,  but  a  letter  is  a  joy  of  earth  —  it  is  denied 
the  gods.  Vivid  in  our  immortal  group  we  still  behold 
vour  brother,  and  never  hear  Northampton  bells  without 

t/ 

saluting  him.  ... 

Have  you  blossoms  and  books,  those  solaces  of  sorrow. 
That,  I  would  also  love  to  know,  and  receive  for  yourself 
and  your  father  the  forgetless  sympathy  of 

Your  friend 

E.  Dickinson 


To  the  same 
[April  21,  1885] 

Dear  Friend,  — The  flower  for  which  your  brother 
cared  resumes  its  siren  circuit,  and  choosing  a  few  for  his 
name’s  sake,  I  enclose  them  to  you.  Perhaps  from  some 
far  site  he  overlooks  their  transit,  and  smiles  at  the 
beatitudes  so  recently  his  own.  Ephemeral,  eternal  heart! 


364 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


I  hope  you  are  in  health,  and  that  the  fragile  father  has 
every  peace  that  years  possess.  .  .  . 

We  think  of  your  small  mansion  with  unabated  warmth, 
though  is  not  any  mansion  vast  that  contains  a  father? 

That  this  beloved  spring  inspirit  both  yourself  and  him, 
is  our  exceeding  wish. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Miss  Maria  Whitney 
[Probably  1884] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  cannot  depict  a  friend  to  my  mind 
till  I  know  what  he  is  doing,  and  three  of  us  want  to 
depict  you.  I  inquire  your  avocation  of  Austin,  and  he 
says  you  are  “ engaged  in  a  great  work”!  That  is  mo¬ 
mentous  but  not  defining.  The  thought  of  you  in  the 
great  city  has  a  halo  of  wilderness. 

Console  us  by  dispelling  it.  .  .  . 

Vinnie  is  happy  with  her  duties,  her  pussies,  and  her 
posies,  for  the  little  garden  within,  though  tiny,  is 
triumphant. 

There  are  scarlet  carnations,  with  a  witching  sugges¬ 
tion,  and  hyacinths  covered  with  promises  which  I  know 
they  will  keep. 

How  precious  to  hear  you  ring  at  the  door,  and  Vinnie 
ushering  you  to  those  melodious  moments  of  which  friends 
are  composed. 

This  also  is  fiction. 

I  fear  we  shall  care  very  little  for  the  technical  resur¬ 
rection,  when  to  behold  the  one  face  that  to  us  comprised 
it  is  too  much  for  us,  and  I  dare  not  think  of  the 
voraciousness  of  that  only  gaze  and  its  only  return. 

Remembrance  is  the  great  tempter. 


Emily 


TO  MR.  THEODORE  HOLLAND 


365 


To  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.  P.  Field 
[Who  had  sent  flowers] 

,  [1884?] 

Expulsion  from  Eden  grows  indistinct  in  the  presence 
of  flowers  so  blissful,  and  with  no  disrespect  to  Genesis, 
Paradise  remains. 

Beaconsfield  says  “the  time  has  now  come  when  it 
must  be  decided  forever,  who  possesses  the  great  gates  to 
India.” 

I  think  it  must  be  my  neighbor. 

With  delicate  gratitude 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Miss  Louisa  Nor  cross 

I  send  a  violet,  for  L - .  I  should  have  sent  a  stem, 

but  was  overtaken  by  snow-drifts.  I  regret  deeply  not  to 
add  a  butterfly,  but  have  lost  my  hat,  which  precludes 
my  catching  one. 

To - ,  with  flowers 

With  the  leave  of  the  bluebirds,  without  whose  approval 
we  do  nothing. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Mr.  Theodore  Holland 
[1885] 

Dear  Sir, —  Your  request  to  “remain  sincerely”  mine 
demands  investigation,  and  if  after  synopsis  of  your  career 
all  should  seem  correct,  I  am  tersely  yours.  I  shall  try  to 
wear  the  unmerited  honor  with  becoming  volume. 

Commend  me  to  your  kindred,  for  whom,  although  a 
stranger,  I  entertain  esteem. 


366  EMILY  DICKINSON 

I  approve  the  paint  —  a  study  of  the  Soudan,  I  take 
it,  but  the  Scripture  assures  us  our  hearts  are  all  Dongola. 

E.  Dickinson 

To - 

[1885] 

...  If  you  saw  a  bullet  hit  a  bird,  and  he  told  you  he 
wasn’t  shot,  you  might  weep  at  his  courtesy,  but  you 
would  certainly  doubt  his  word.  Thomas  s  faith  in  anat¬ 
omy  was  stronger  than  his  faith  in  faith.  .  .  .  Vesuvius 
don’t  talk  —  iEtna  don’t.  One  of  them  said  a  syllable, 
a  thousand  years  ago,  and  Pompeii  heard  it  and  hid  for¬ 
ever.  She  couldn’t  look  the  world  in  the  face  afterward, 
I  suppose.  Bashful  Pompeii! .  .  . 

To - 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  thank  you  with  wonder.  Should  you 
ask  me  my  comprehension  of  a  starlight  night,  awe  were 
my  only  reply,  and  so  of  the  mighty  book.  It  stills,  incites, 
infatuates,  blesses  and  blames  in  one.  Like  human  affec¬ 
tion,  we  dare  not  touch  it,  yet  flee,  what  else  remains? 

But  excuse  me  —  I  know  but  little.  Please  tell  me  how 
it  might  seem  to  you. 

How  vast  is  the  chastisement  of  beauty,  given  us  by  our 
Maker !  A  word  is  inundation,  when  it  comes  from  the  sea. 

Peter  took  the  marine  walk  at  the  great  risk. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Colonel  T.  W.  Higginson 
[1884] 

Dear  Friend,  —  May  I  ask  the  delight  in  advance,  of 
sending  you  the  “  Life  of  Mrs.  Cross,”  by  her  husband, 
which  the  papers  promise  for  publication? 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  367 


I  feared  some  other  pupil  might  usurp  my  privilege. 
Emblem  is  immeasurable  —  that  is  why  it  is  better 
than  fulfilment,  which  can  be  drained. 

Emily 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 
[July,  1884] 

Dear  Cousins,  —  I  hope  you  heard  Mr.  Sanborn’s 
lecture.  My  “Republican  ”  was  borrowed  before  I  waked, 
to  read  till  my  own  dawn,  which  is  rather  tardy,  for  I 
have  been  quite  sick,  and  could  claim  the  immortal 
reprimand,  “Mr.  Lamb,  you  come  down  very  late  in  the 
morning.”  Eight  Saturday  noons  ago,  I  was  making  a 
loaf  of  cake  with  Maggie,  when  I  saw  a  great  darkness 
coming  and  knew  no  more  until  late  at  night.  I  woke  to 
find  Austin  and  Vinnie  and  a  strange  physician  bending 
over  me,  and  supposed  I  was  dying,  or  had  died,  all  was 
so  kind  and  hallowed.  I  had  fainted  and  lain  unconscious 
for  the  first  time  in  my  life.  Then  I  grew  very  sick  and 
gave  the  others  much  alarm,  but  am  now  staying.  The 
doctor  calls  it  “revenge  of  the  nerves;”  but  who  but 

Death  had  wronged  them?  F - ’s  dear  note  has  lain 

unanswered  for  this  long  season,  though  its  Good-night, 
my  dear,”  warmed  me  to  the  core.  I  have  all  to  say,  but 
little  strength  to  say  it;  so  we  must  talk  by  degrees.  I  do 

want  to  know  about  L - ,  what  pleases  her  most,  book 

or  tune  or  friend. 

I  am  glad  the  housekeeping  is  kinder;  it  is  a  prickly  art. 
Maggie  is  with  us  still,  warm  and  wild  and  mighty,  and 
we  have  a  gracious  boy  at  the  barn.  We  remember  you 
always,  and  one  or  the  other  often  comes  down  with  a 
“we  dreamed  of  F - and  L - last  night  ;  then  that 


368  EMILY  DICKINSON 

V 

day  we  think  we  shall  hear  from  you,  for  dreams  are 
couriers. 

The  little  boy  we  laid  away  never  fluctuates,  and  his 
dim  society  is  companion  still.  But  it  is  growing  damp 
and  I  must  go  in.  Memory’s  fog  is  rising. 

The  going  from  a  world  we  know 
To  one  a  wonder  still 
Is  like  the  child’s  adversity 
Whose  vista  is  a  hill. 

Behind  the  hill  is  sorcery 
And  everything  unknown, 

But  will  the  secret  compensate 
For  climbing  it  alone? 

Vinnie’s  love  and  Maggie’s,  and  mine  is  presupposed. 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[January  14,  1885] 

Had  we  less  to  say  to  those  we  love,  perhaps  we  should 
say  it  oftener,  but  the  attempt  comes,  then  the  inunda¬ 
tion,  then  it  is  all  over,  as  is  said  of  the  dead. 

Yinnie  dreamed  about  F - last  night,  and  designing 

for  days  to  write  dear  L - ,  —  dear,  both  of  you,  — 

indeed,  with  the  astounding  nearness  which  a  dream 
brings,  I  must  speak  this  morning.  I  do  hope  you  are 
well,  and  that  the  last  enchanting  days  have  refreshed 
your  spirits,  and  I  hope  the  poor  little  girl  is  better,  and 
the  sorrow  at  least  adjourned. 

L - asked  “what  books”  we  were  wooing  now  — 

watching  like  a  vulture  for  Walter  Cross’s  life  of  his  wife. 
A  friend  sent  me  “Called  Back.”  It  is  a  haunting  story, 


TO  MRS.  EDWARD  TUCKERMAN  369 

and  as  loved  Mr.  Bowles  used  to  say,  greatly  impressive 
to  me.”  Do  you  remember  the  little  picture  with  his 
deep  face  in  the  centre,  and  Governor  Bross  on  one  side, 
and  Colfax  on  the  other?  The  third  of  the  group  died 
yesterday,  so  somewhere  they  are  again  together.  . 

Moving  to  Cambridge  seems  to  me  like  moving  to 
Westminster  Abbey,  as  hallowed  and  as  unbelieved,  or 
moving  to  Ephesus  with  Paul  for  a  next-door  neighbor. 

Holmes’s  “Life  of  Emerson”  is  sweetly  commended, 
but  you,  I  know,  have  tasted  that.  . .  .  But  the  whistle 
calls  me  —  I  have  not  begun  —  so  with  a  moan,  and  a 
kiss,  and  a  promise  of  more,  and  love  from  Vinme  and 
Maggie,  and  the  half-blown  carnation,  and  the  western 

sky,  I  stop. 

That  we  are  permanent  temporarily,  it  is  warm  to 
know,  though  we  know  no  more. 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  Edward  Tuclcerman 
[January,  1884] 

Dear  Friend: 

To  try  to  speak,  and  miss  the  way, 
And  ask  it  of  the  tears, 

Is  gratitude’s  sweet  poverty, 

The  tatters  that  he  wears. 

A  better  coat,  if  he  possessed. 
Would  help  him  to  conceal, 

Not  subjugate,  the  mutineer 
Whose  title  is  “the  soul.” 


Emily,  with  love 


370 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  the  same 
[February,  1884] 

Do  “men  gather  grapes  of  thorns”? 

No,  but  they  do  of  roses,  and  even  the  classic  fox 
hushed  his  innuendo,  as  we  unclasped  the  little  box. 

Sherbets  untold,  and  recollection  more  sparkling  than 
sherbets! 

How  wondrous  is  a  friend,  the  gift  of  neither  Heaven 
nor  earth,  yet  coveted  of  both ! 

If  the  “archangels  veil  their  faces,”  is  not  the  sacred 
diffidence  on  this  sweet  behalf? 

Emily 


To  the  same 
[April,  1884] 

Be  encouraged,  sweet  friend!  How  cruel  we  did  not 
know !  But  the  battles  of  those  we  love  are  often  unseen. 

“If  Thou  hadst  been  here,”  Mary  said,  “our  brother 
had  not  died.”  Hanging  my  head  and  my  heart  with  it, 
that  you  sorrowed  alone, 

Late,  but  lovingly 

Emily 

To  the  same 
[April,  1885] 

Dear  Friend,  —  We  want  you  to  wake  —  Easter  has 
come  and  gone.  f 

Morning  without  you  is  a  dwindled  dawn. 

Quickened  toward  all  celestial  things  by  crows  I  heard 
this  morning,  accept  a  loving  caw  from  a 

Nameless  friend 

“Selah” 


TO  MRS.  JOSEPH  SWEETSER 


371 


To  the  same 
[May,  1885] 

We  trust  the  repairs  of  the  little  friend  are  progressing 
swiftly,  though  shall  we  love  her  as  well,  revamped? 
Anatomical  dishabille  is  sweet  to  those  who  prize  us. 
A  chastened  grace  is  twice  a  grace.  Nay,  ’tis  a  holmess. 
With  a  sweet  May  day 

Emily 


To  Mrs.  Joseph  Sweetser 
[November,  1884] 


Sweet  and  Gracious  Aunt  Katie,  —  The  beloved  lilies 
have  come,  and  my  heart  is  so  high  it  overflows,  as  this 
was  mother’s  week,  Easter  in  November. 

Father  rose  in  June,  and  a  little  more  than  a  year 
since,  those  fair  words  were  fulfilled,  “and  a  little  child 

shall  lead  them”  — but  boundlessness  forbids  me - 

It  is  very  wrong  that  you  were  ill,  and  whom  shall  I 
accuse?  The  enemy,  “eternal,  invisible,  and  full  of 
glory”  _but  He  declares  himself  a  friend!  It  is  sweet 

you  are  better.  , 

More  beating  that  brave  heart  has  to  do  before  the 

emerald  recess.  , 

With  sorrow  for  Emma’s  accident,  and  love  for  all  who 

cherish  you,  including  the  roses,  your  velvet  allies, 

Tenderly 


Emily 


Many  letters  missing  that  would  have  been  of  rare  in¬ 
terest  -  most  notably  those  to  the  Lords  and  Helen  Hunt 
—  were  supposed  to  have  been  burned  in  accordance  with 


372  EMILY  DICKINSON 

a  mutual  bond.  Their  loss  was  silently  accepted  on  this 
understanding. 


To  “27.  27.” 

[March,  1885] 

Dear  Friend,  —  To  reproach  my  own  foot  in  behalf  of 
yours  is  involuntary,  and  finding  meagre  solace  in 
“whom  He  loveth  He  chasteneth,”  your  valor  astounds 
me.  It  was  only  a  small  wasp,  said  the  French  physician, 
repairing  the  sting,  but  the  strength  to  perish  is  some¬ 
times  withheld  —  though  who  but  you  can  tell  a  foot. 

Take  all  away  from  me 
But  leave  me  ecstasy, 

And  I  am  richer  then 
Than  all  my  fellow-men. 

Is  it  becoming  me 
To  dwell  so  wealthily. 

When  at  my  very  door 
Are  those  possessing  more. 

In  abject  poverty? 

That  you  glance  at  Japan  as  you  breakfast,  not  in  the 
least  surprises  me,  thronged  only  with  music,  like  the 
decks  of  birds. 

Thank  you  for  hoping  I  am  well.  Who  could  be  ill  in 
March,  that  month  of  proclamation?  Sleighbells  and  jays 
contend  in  my  matinee,  and  the  north  surrenders  instead 
of  the  south,  a  reverse  of  bugles. 

Pity  me,  however,  I  have  finished  “Ramona.”  Would 
that  like  Shakespeare  it  were  just  published ! 

Knew  I  how  to  pray,  to  intercede  for  your  foot  were 
intuitive,  but  I  am  but  a  pagan. 


IiEEEN  HUNT 


TO 


373 


Of  God  we  ask  one  favor,  that  we  may  be  forgiven. 
For  what,  He  is  presumed  to  know.  The  crime,  from  us, 
is  hidden. 

Immured  the?  whole  of  life 
Within  a  magic  prison, 

We  reprimand  the  happiness 
That  too  competes  with  Heaven. 

May  I  once  more  know,  and  that  you  are  saved? 

Yours  E.  Dickinson 

After  Mrs.  Jackson’s  death,  August  12,  1885,  Emily 
wrote  of  her: 

Helen  of  Troy  will  die,  but  Helen  of  Colorado,  never. 
Dear  friend,  can  you  walk,  were  the  last  words  that  I 
wrote  her. 

Dear  friend,  I  can  fly  — 

Her  immortal  reply. 

To - 

Sweet  Feiends,  —  I  send  a  message  by  a  mouth  that 
cannot  speak. 

The  ecstasy  to  guess 
Were  a  receipted  bliss 
If  grace  could  talk. 

With  love 
To - 

.  .  .  What  a  hazard  an  accent  is!  When  I  think  of  the 
hearts  it  has  scuttled  or  sunk,  I  almost  fear  to  lift  my 
hand  to  so  much  as  a  punctuation. 


374 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Mr.  Samuel  Bowles  J^th  on  the  birth  of  a  son 
[August,  1885] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  did  not  know. 

God  bless  you  indeed! 

Extend  to  that  small  hand  my  own  “right  hand  of 
fellowship,”  and  guide  the  woman  of  your  heart  softly  to 
my  own. 

I  give  “his  angels  charge”  —  well-remembered  angels, 
whose  absence  only  dims  our  eyes.  The  magnanimity  I 
asked,  you  how  freely  gave! 

If  ever  of  any  act  of  mine  you  should  be  in  need,  let 
me  reply  with  the  laureate,  “Speak  that  I  live  to  hear.” 

Vitally 

E.  Dickinson 

To  Mrs.  E.  P.  Crowell 
[When  about  to  sail  for  Europe] 

[March  2,  1885] 

Is  it  too  late  to  touch  you,  dear? 

We  this  moment  knew. 

Love  marine  and  love  terrene, 

Love  celestial  too. 

I  give  his  angels  charge. 

Emily 

To  Miss  Eugenia  Hall 
[1885?] 

Let  me  thank  the  little  cousin  in  flowers,  which,  without 
lips,  have  language. 

Somewhat  cousin 


Emily 


TO  MRS.  J.  C.  GREENOUGH 


375 


To  the  same 

[With  a  wedding  gift,  October  20,  1885] 

Will  the  sweet  cousin  who  is  about  to  make  the  Etruscan 
experiment,  accept  a  smile  which  will  last  a  life,  if  ripened 
in  the  sun? 

Cousin  Emily 
To  Mrs.  J.  C.  Greenough 

The  flower  keeps  its  appointment  —  should  the  heart 
be  tardy? 

When  Memory  rings  her  bell,  let  all  the  thoughts 
run  in. 

Emily 


To  the  same 

[After  her  Mother’s  death,  October,  1885] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  had  the  luxury  of  a  mother  a  month 
longer  than  you,  for  my  own  mother  died  in  November, 
but  the  anguish  also  was  granted  me  to  see  the  first  snow 
upon  her  grave  the  following  day,  which,  dear  friend, 
you  were  spared. 

But  Remembrance  engulfs  me,  and  I  must  cease. 

I  wish  I  could  speak  a  word  of  courage,  though  that 
love  has  already  done.  Who  could  be  motherless  who  has 
a  mother’s  grave  within  confiding  reach? 

Let  me  enclose  the  tenderness  born  of  bereavement. 

To  have  had  a  mother  —  how  mighty ! 


Emily 


376 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Mrs.  Edward  TucJcerman 
[October,  1885] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  thought  of  you  on  your  lonely  jour¬ 
ney,  certain  the  hallowed  heroine  was  gratified,  though 
mute.  I  trust  you  return  in  safety  and  with  closer  clutch 
for  that  which  remains,  for  dying  whets  the  grasp. 

October  is  a  mighty  month,  for  in  it  little  Gilbert  died. 
“Open  the  door,”  was  his  last  cry,  “the  boys  are  waiting 
for  me.”  Quite  used  to  his  commandment,  his  little  aunt 
obeyed,  and  still  two  years  and  many  days,  and  he  does 


not  return. 

Where  makes  my  lark  his  nest? 

But  Corinthians’  bugle  obliterates  the  birds’,  so 
covering  your  loved  heart  to  keep  it  from  another  shot. 

Tenderly 


Emily 


To  Professor  J.  K.  Chickering 
[1885] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  Amherst  heart  is  plain  and  whole 
and  permanent  and  warm. 

In  childhood  I  never  sowed  a  seed  unless  it  was  peren¬ 
nial  —  and  that  is  why  my  garden  lasts. 

We  dare  not  trust  ourselves  to  know  that  you  indeed 
have  left  us. 

The  fiction  is  sufficient  pain.  To  know  you  better  as 
you  flee,  may  be  our  recompense. 

I  hope  that  you  are  well,  and  nothing  mars  your  peace 
but  its  divinity  —  for  ecstasy  is  peril. 

With  earnest  recollection 


E.  Dickinson 


TO  MR.  THOMAS  NILES 


377 


To  Mrs.  Hanson  Read 

[One  year  after  the  drowning  of  her  two  only  sons] 

My  dear  Mrs.  Read,  —  We  have  often  thought  of  you 
to-day,  and  almost  spoken  with  you,  but  thought  you 
might  like  to  be  alone  —  if  one  can  be  alone  with  so 
thronged  a  Heaven. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Mr.  Thomas  Niles 
[1885] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Thank  you  for  the  kindness.  I  am  glad 

if  the  bird  seemed  true  to  you. 

Please  efface  the  others,  and  receive  these  three,  which 
are  more  like  him  —  “A  Thunder  Storm,”  “A  Humming 
Bird,”  and  “A  Country  Burial.” 

The  life  of  Marian  Evans  had  much  I  never  knew  —  a 
doom  of  fruit  without  the  bloom,  like  the  Niger  fig. 

Her  losses  make  our  gains  ashamed 
She  bore  life’s  empty  pack 
As  gallantly  as  if  the  East 
Were  swinging  at  her  back. 

Life’s  empty  pack  is  heaviest, 

As  every  porter  knows 
In  vain  to  punish  honey, 

It  only  sweeter  grows. 

[Almost  the  only  record  of  her  giving  a  title  to  any 
poem.] 


378 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


To  Mrs.  Tuckerman 

[After  the  death  of  Professor  Tuckerman,  March  15,  1886] 
Dear  One,  —  “Eye  hath  not  seen  nor  ear  heard.” 
What  a  recompense!  The  enthusiasm  of  God  at  the 
reception  of  His  sons!  How  ecstatic!  How  infinite! 
Says  the  blissful  voice,  not  yet  a  voice,  but  a  vision,  I 
will  not  let  thee  go,  except  I  bless  thee.” 

Emily 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 
[March,  1886] 

I  scarcely  know  where  to  begin,  but  love  is  always  a  safe 
place.  I  have  twice  been  very  sick,  dears,  with  a  little 
recess  of  convalescence,  then  to  be  more  sick,  and  have 
lain  in  my  bed  since  November,  many  years,  for  me, 
stirring  as  the  arbutus  does,  a  pink  and  russet  hope;  but 
that  we  will  leave  with  our  pillow.  When  your  dear  hearts 
are  quite  convenient,  tell  us  of  their  contents,  the  fabric 
cared  for  most,  not  a  fondness  wanting. 

Do  you  keep  musk,  as  you  used  to,  like  Mrs.  Morene 
of  Mexico?  Or  cassia  carnations  so  big  they  split  their 
fringes  of  berry?  Was  your  winter  a  tender  shelter  — 
perhaps  like  Keats’s  bird,  “and  hops  and  hops  in  little 
journeys”? 

Are  you  reading  and  well,  and  the  W - s  near  and 

warm?  When  you  see  Mrs.  French  and  Dan  give  them  a 
tear  from  us. 

Vinnie  would  have  written,  but  could  not  leave  my 
side.  Maggie  gives  her  love.  Mine  more  sweetly  still. 

Emily 


TO  MRS.  CURRIER 


379 


To  Mr.  C.  H.  Clark 
[April  5,  1886] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Are  you  living  and  well,  and  your 

father  in  peace,  and  the  home  in - Street  without 

effacing  change?  I  received  your  very  kind  message,  I 
think  in  November,  since  which  I  have  been  very  ill,  and 
begin  to  roam  in  my  room  a  little,  an  hour  at  a  time. 
Do  you,  as  time  steals  on,  know  anything  of  the  W 

whom  Mr. - so  loved,  and  of  whom  he  said  with  a 

smile,  “Should  he  find  a  gold  watch  in  the  street  he 
would  not  pick  it  up,  so  unsullied  was  he  ?  .  .  . 

My  sister  gives  her  faithful  remembrance  to  youiself 
and  your  father,  the  brother  so  cherished  never  once 

forgot. 

You  will  recall  the  flower  sacred  to  your  brother. 

No  sloth  has  memory. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Mrs.  Currier 
[April  10,  1886] 

Mr.  Hunt  was  tinning  a  post  this  morning,  and  told 

us  l - didn’t  feel  quite  as  well  as  usual,  and  I  haven  t 

felt  quite  as  well  as  usual  since  the  chestnuts  were  ripe, 
though  it  wasn’t  the  chestnuts’  fault,  but  the  crocuses 
are  so  martial  and  the  daffodils  to  the  second  joint,  let  us 
join  hands  and  recover. 

“I  do  remember  an  apothecary,”  said  that  sweeter 
robin  than  Shakespeare,  was  a  loved  paragraph  which  has 
lain  on  my  pillow  all  winter,  but  perhaps  Shakespeare 
has  been  “up  street”  oftener  than  I  have,  this  winter. 

Would  father’s  youngest  sister  believe  that  in  the 


S80 


EMILY  DICKINSON 


“Shire  town”  where  he  and  Blackstone  went  to  school, 
a  man  was  hung  yesterday,  for  the  murder  of  a  man  by  the 

name  of  Dickinson,  and  that  Miss  M - was  poisoned 

by  a  strolling  juggler  to  be  tried  in  the  Supreme  Court 
next  week? 

Don’t  you  think  fumigation  ceased  when  father 
died? 

Poor,  romantic  Miss  M - !  But  perhaps  a  “Police 

Gazette”  was  better  for  you  than  an  essay. 

I  hope  you  are  both  stronger,  and  ask  a  word  of  gain 
with  these  ecstatic  days.  I  give  my  anxious  love,  and 
Vinnie’s  faithfulness  with  mine. 

Your  Emily 


To  Mr.  C.  H.  Clark 
[April  15,  1886] 

Thank  you,  dear  friend,  I  am  better.  The  velocity  of  the 
ill,  however,  is  like  that  of  the  snail.  I  am  glad  of  your 
father’s  tranquillity,  and  of  your  own  courage.  Fear 
makes  us  all  martial. 

I  could  hardly  have  thought  it  possible  that  the  schol¬ 
arly  stranger  to  whom  my  father  introduced  me,  could 
have  mentioned  my  friend,  almost  itself  a  vision,  or  have 
still  left  a  legend  to  relate  his  name.  With  the  exception 
of - .  . .  your  name  alone  remains. 

“Going  home,”  was  he  not  an  aborigine  of  the  sky? 

The  last  time  he  came  in  life  I  was  with  my  lilies  and 
heliotropes.  Said  my  sister  to  me,  “The  gentleman  with 
the  deep  voice  wants  to  see  you,  Emily”  —  hearing  him 
ask  of  the  servant. 

“  Where  did  you  come  from?  ”  I  said,  for  he  spoke  like 
an  apparition.  “I  stepped  from  my  pulpit  to  the  train,” 


TO  LOUISA  AND  FANNIE  NORCROSS  381 

was  his  simple  reply;  and,  when  I  asked,  “how  long?” 
“twenty  years,”  said  he,  with  inscrutable  roguery. 

But  the  loved  voice. has  ceased;  and  to  some  one  who 
heard  him  “going  home”  it  was  sweet  to  speak. .  .  . 
Thank  you  for  each  circumstance,  and  tell  me  all  you  love 
to  say. .  .  . 

Excuse  me  for  the  voice,  this  moment  immortal. 

E.  Dickinson 


To  Louisa  and  Fannie  Norcross 
[The  day  before  her  death.  May  15, 1886] 
Little  Cousins  —  Called  back. 


Emily 


THE  END 


INDEX 


Adams,  Miss,  one  of  Emily’s  teachers, 
119,  121. 

Adams,  Mrs.,  loses  two  sons  in  the 
Civil  War,  225,  226. 

Adirondacks,  the,  352. 

Affection,  like  bread,  unnoticed  till  we 
starve,  288. 

Amherst,  Massachusetts,  3,  5,  8;  social 
life  at,  33-42;  the  village  church  in, 
88-90;  all  life  in,  dominated  by  the 
Church,  93;  fires  in,  178,  320,  329. 

Amherst  Academy,  5,  28. 

Amherst  and  Belchertown  Railroad, 
174,  181. 

Amherst  College,  6,  12;  Commence¬ 
ments  at,  28,  41,  42;  levees,  36,  37. 

Anthon,  Mrs.  Kate  Scott,  64,  67,  76; 
letters  to,  206,  207,  212,  221. 

Arabi  Pasha,  81. 

Atlantic  Monthly,  The,  56,  57,  71. 

Augustine,  Saint,  prayer  of,  100. 

Aurora  Leigh,  223. 

Baby,  a  poem,  219. 

Banks,  Gov.  N.  P.,  42. 

Barabbas,  266. 

Beaconsfield,  Earl  of,  365. 

Bell,  Currer,  136. 

Bell  and  Everett  party,  the,  216. 

Black  Fanny,  173. 

Bowdoin,  E.  G„  letter  to,  136;  valen¬ 
tine  for,  145. 

Bowles,  Samuel,  64,  81,  82,  83,  292, 
306,  315,  316,  369;  “the  genius  of 
Hampshire,”  343;  letters  to,  202, 
221,  226,  227,  230,  231,  233-37,  244, 
245,  247,  248,  253-56,  266,  267,  271, 
284,  285. 

Bowles,  Mrs.  Samuel,  67;  letters  to, 
203,  205,  218,  219,  232,  246,  314-16, 
322,  331,  332. 

Bowles,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Samuel,  letter 
to,  245. 

Bowles,  Samuel,  4th,  letters  to,  342-44, 
347,  374.  ,  •_ 


Briggs,  Gov.  George  N.,  127. 

Bronte,  Branwell,  299. 

Bronte,  Charlotte,  298. 

Bronte,  Emily,  347;  poem  by,  read  at 
Emily  Dickinson’s  funeral,  101, 102. 
Bronte  sisters,  the,  70,  339. 

Bross,  William,  369. 

Browning,  Mrs.  E.  B.,  223,  234,  244. 
Browning,  Robert,  229. 

Bullock,  Gov.  Alexander  H.,  42. 

Bumble  Bee’s  Religion,  The,  60. 

Called  Bach,  368. 

Carlo,  Emily’s  dog,  204,  218,  235, 
239,  243,  248,  250,  262. 

Carman,  Bliss,  98. 

Cattle  Show,  in  Amherst,  40,  41. 
Chickering,  Prof.  J.  K.,  letters  to,  341, 
342,  376. 

Christmas,  Susan  Gilbert’s  celebration 
of,  in  Amherst,  13;  a  fast-day  at 
South  Hadley  Seminary,  25;  a  poem 
for,  60. 

Clark,  C.  H.,  73;  letters  to,  356-63, 
379,  380. 

Clark,  J.  D .,  358, 359 ;  letters  to,  353-55. 
Clark,  Prof.  W.  S.,  228,  229. 

Coleman,  Eliza,  67. 

Colfax,  Schuyler,  369. 

Colton,  Parson,  24. 

Commencements,  at  Amherst  College, 
28,  41,  42,  351. 

Cooper,  Mrs.  J.  S.,  letters  to,  295,  296, 
323,  324,  334,  335. 

Cowan,  Rev.  Perez  D.,  73;  letters  to, 
275,  278,  325. 

Crowell,  Mrs.  E.  P.,  letter  to,  374. 
Currier,  Mrs.,  letter  to,  379. 

Dana,  Richard  H.,  34. 

Daniel  Deronda,  302. 

Davis,  Jefferson,  capture  of,  257. 
Devil,  the,  in  the  drama  of  piety,  97. 
Dickens,  Charles,  81. 

Dickinson,  [William]  Austin,  Emily  s 


384 


INDEX 


brother,  4, 19,  26,  83,  40,  83,  84, 102, 
231 ;  became  his  father’s  law  partner, 
12;  marriage,  52;  Emily’s  devotion 
to  his  children,  53-61,  84,  85,  91,  92, 
96;  sent  to  South  Hadley  for  Emily, 
134;  letters  to,  121-24,  128,  130-33, 
149-83,  189,  191. 

Dickinson,  Mrs.  Austin,  12,  13,  15; 
marriage,  52;  peculiar  intimacy  with 
Emily,  64,  77,  78,  86,  102;  letters  to 
(and  extracts),  19-21,  27,  29,  31,  33, 
43,  49,  64,  65,  77,  78,  82,  85,  87,  91; 
letters  in  verse,  53,  80,  194-97. 

Dickinson,  Edward,  Emily’s  father, 
178,  274,  286;  sent  to  Yale  College, 
6;  characteristics,  7;  practised  law  in 
Amherst,  8;  liked  a  fast  horse,  8,  41; 
his  attitude  toward  Emily,  8,  9;  his 
Trustee  tea  party,  42;  member  of 
Congress,  45;  death  of,  83,  84,  291; 
religious  life,  93,  94;  tribute  in 
Springfield  Republican,  94  re.;  his 
appreciation  of  his  son,  180;  frowned 
upon  Santa  Claus,  294. 

Dickinson,  Mrs.  Edward,  Emily’s 
mother,  9,  10,  315,  316;  paralyzed, 
84;  her  religious  belief,  93;  suffers 
from  neuralgia,  14 2-44 ;  death  of,  344 . 

Dickinson,  Emily  Norcross,  ancestry, 
3-11;  her  genius  not  accounted  for 
by  direct  heredity,  3,  4,  10;  devoted 
to  her  family,  4,  125,  127;  not  egois¬ 
tic,  4,  5;  intimate  with  her  father,  8, 
9;  her  birth,  12;  contrast  with  her 
sister,  14;  early  portrait,  15,  50; 
early  friendships,  15-17,  34,  67 ;  her 
first  visit  to  Boston,  18, 19;  early  re¬ 
ligious  emotions,  20;  at  South  Had¬ 
ley  Female  Seminary,  22-28;  an  in¬ 
stinctive  feminist,  26,  27;  her  read¬ 
ing,  27,  28,  67,  80-83,  136,  239,  294, 
318,  368;  delighted  in  flowers,  17, 28, 
39,  52,  53,  111,  117,  135,  263,  310, 
350;  at  Amherst  Academy,  28;  a 
madcap  escapade,  30;  interested  in 
clothes,  33,  224;  social  life,  35-40; 
her  ideal  of  love,  43,  44;  spends  a 
winter  in  Washington,  45, 46;  an  un¬ 
told  love,  46-48,  353;  a  pen  portrait, 
50,  51,  241;  gradually  withdraws 


from  social  life,  52,  67,  85;  her  de¬ 
light  in  her  brother’s  children,  53- 
61,  84,  85,  91,  92,  96;  brilliant  tri¬ 
fling  on  local  events,  61,  62;  her  pas¬ 
sion  for  brevity,  62,  63,  79;  gay 
hours  at  her  brother’s,  63,  64 ;  pecu¬ 
liar  intimacy  with  “Sister  Sue,”  64, 
77,  78,  86;  never  told  her  family  of 
her  writing,  65,  86;  has  an  “affair” 
with  a  law  student,  70;  has  trouble 
with  her  eyes,  71,  264,  265,  317; 
friendship  with  Col.  Higginson,  71- 
73;  with  Helen  Hunt  Jackson,  74, 
75,  301,  302;  her  joy  in  mere  words, 
79,  80;  overwhelmed  by  her  father’s 
death,  83-85;  her  religion,  88-105; 
form  and  substance  of  it  hardly  on 
speaking  terms,  91 ;  allusions  to  the 
Bible,  92,  93, 118, 122, 164, 185, 199, 
246,  255,  273,  287,  323,  326,  354, 
370;  her  contribution  to  Faith,  95; 
her  feeling  about  the  devil,  97;  a 
possible  reincarnation,  98;  a  unique 
and  universal  being,  99;  her  faith  in 
faith,  99;  wonderings  about  the 
other  world,  99,  100;  smitten  down, 
100;  dies,  101;  her  funeral,  101, 102; 
appreciation  written  by  her  broth¬ 
er’s  wife,  103-05. 

Writes  about  her  studies,  110,  111, 
114,  128,  129;  the  belle  of  Amherst, 
112;  gets  a  piano,  114,  117;  has  to 
leave  school,  116, 121, 134;  imagines 
herself  Eve,  118;  her  idea  of  God, 
137,  199,  202;  describes  taking  cold, 
138;  dislikes  housework,  144;  her  de¬ 
light  in  fruit,  162,  163;  visits  Mount 
Vernon,  190,  191;  her  idea  of 
Heaven,  199;  sends  poems  to  Col. 
Higginson  for  criticism,  238,  241, 
243;  suffers  “  revenge  of  the  nerves,” 
367 ;  many  of  her  letters  burned,  371. 

Dickinson,  Gilbert,  Emily’s  nephew, 
53,  54,  84,  376. 

Dickinson,  Lavinia,  Emily’s  sister,  4, 
12, 13.  38, 102;  a  brilliant  mimic,  14; 
visits  Boston  with  her  father.  111; 
letters  to,  213,  256-58. 

Dickinson,  Lucretia,  Emily’s  aunt,  6, 

10. 


INDEX 


385 


Dickinson,  Samuel  Fowler,  Emily’s 
grandfather,  5-7. 

Disraeli,  Benjamin,  365. 

Dutch,  E.  P.,  10.  | 

Dwight,  Rev.  Dr.,  Emily’s  minister, 
89,  90,  94. 

Eastman,  Mrs.,  67. 

Eliot,  George,  289,  327. 

Ellen  Middleton,  153. 

Emerson,  Rev.  F.  F.,  letters  to,  333. 
Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo,  82. 

Estey,  Professor,  29. 

Evans,  Vaughn,  34. 

Eve,  no  account  of  death  of,  118. 

Field,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.  P.,  letter  to, 
365. 

Fiske,  Helen  (“H.  H.”),  a  favorite 
playmate  of  Emily’s,  15,  16,  67 
Ford,  Mrs.  Gordon  L.,  letter  to,  136. 
Fowler,  Emily  (afterward  Mrs.  Gor¬ 
don  L.  Ford),  37,  39,  67. 

Francis,  Saint,  96. 

Gilbert,  Martha,  19,  20,  67. 

Gilbert,  Susan  (afterward  Mrs.  Austin 
Dickinson),  12,  13,  16,  17. 

Gilder,  Richard  Watson,  68. 

Gillett,  Sara  Colton,  61. 

Greenough,  Mrs.  J.  C.,  letters  to,  375. 
Gridley,  Jane,  36. 

Grout,  Austin,  160. 

Grout,  Jennie,  169. 


Hadley,  Massachusetts,  3,  5. 

Hall,  Eugenia,  letters  to,  374,  375 

Higginson,  Col.  T.  W.,  33,  59,  103;  be¬ 
ginning  of  Emily’s  friendship  with, 
71;  letter  to  her,  72;  goes  to  Am¬ 
herst  to  see  her,  73;  reads  a  poem  of 
Emilv  Bronte’s  at  Emily  Dickin- 
son’s'funeral,  101 ;  letters  to,  238-43, 
248,  262,  266,  268,  270,  275-77,  291- 
94,  300-07,  318,  324,  325,  366. 

Hills,  Mrs.  Henry,  letters  to,  322,  335. 

Hitchcock,  Jennie,  250. 

Holland,  Dr.  J.  G.,  82,  83, 182,  336;  his 
books,  68;  his  death,  84 ;  letterto,193. 

Holland,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  34;  letters  to,  184, 


190,  198,  199-201,  207,  213,  259, 
260,  308,  317,  336-39,  348. 

Holland,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  J.  G.,  letters  to, 
185,  187,  189,  210,  217,  307;  poems 
sent  to,  261,  262. 

Holland,  Theodore,  letter  to,  365. 
Housecleaning,  worse  than  pestilence, 
201. 

Howells,  William  Dean,  82. 

Howland,  William,  valentine  to,  147, 
Humphrey,  Pres.  Heman,  186. 
Humphrey,  Leonard,  121. 

Jackson,  Helen  Hunt  (“H.  H.”),  one 
of  Emily’s  closest  friends,  74,  75, 
104,  301,  302;  letter  to,  372;  death 
of,  373. 

James,  Henry,  86. 

James,  William,  95. 

Jane  Eyre,  136. 

Jenkins,  Rev.  J.  L.,  278. 

Jenkins,  MacGregor,  letters  to,  280, 
295. 

|  Kemble,  Fanny  (Mrs.  Frances  Anne 
Kemble),  208. 

Kingman,  Martha,  169. 

Lawrence,  Brother,  95. 

Lee,  Mrs.  James  (Ella  Steams),  71. 
Lind,  Jenny,  35,  151,  155,  156. 

Lord,  Prof.  John,  34. 

Lord,  Judge  Otis  P.,  68-70,  84,  301. 
Lowell,  Maria,  276. 

Lyon,  Mary,  22,  23,  25,  27,  122,  125, 
126,  131. 


Masque  of  Poets,  A,  75. 

Mercy  Philbrick’s  Choice,  attributed  to 
Emily,  75,  105. 

Meredith,  George,  79. 

Merimee,  Prosper,  66. 

Middlemarch,  289. 

Mitchell,  Donald  G.  (“  IkMarvel”),  82. 
Montague,  Mrs.  George,  letters  to, 
333,  334. 

Mount  Vernon,  a  visit  to,  190,  191. 

Niles,  Thomas,  urges  Emily  to  pub¬ 
lish,  75;  letters  to,  341,  347,  377. 


386 


INDEX 


Nims,  Seth,  123. 

Norcross,  Alfred,  9. 

Norcross,  Emily,  see  Dickinson,  Mrs. 
Edward. 

Norcross,  Fannie,  73;  letters  to,  228, 
287,  288. 

Norcross,  Louisa,  73;  letters  to,  207, 
208,  209,  215,  224,  225,  264,  265, 
267,  282,  283,  324,  365. 

Norcross,  Louisa  and  Fannie,  letters 
to,  216,  217,  223,  228,  249-52,  263, 
264,  269,  271-74,  278,  279,  280,  286, 
289,  290,  298,  310,  320,  326-30,  344, 
345,  367,  368,  378,  381. 

Park,  Prof.  E.  A.,  preaches  a  splendid 
sermon,  171. 

Parker,  Theodore,  called  “poison,” 
205. 

Peter,  the  Apostle,  366. 

Pippa  Passes,  242. 

Poetry,  how  known,  276. 

Poetry  of  Motion  meetings,  39,  40. 

Pompeii,  bashful,  366. 

Postage,  reduction  of  (in  1845),  109. 

Ramona,  372. 

Read,  Mrs.  Hanson,  letter  to,  377. 

Root,  Henry,  34. 

Salvini,  Tommaso,  346. 

Sanborn,  Franklin  B.,  80,  367. 

Sand,  George,  223. 

Shakespeare,  William,  64,  69,  80,  276, 
294,  311,  326. 

Shays’s  Rebellion,  5. 

Single  Hound,  The,  51,  52,  65. 

“Sister  Sue,”  see  Dickinson,  Mrs.  Aus¬ 
tin. 

Smith,  Alexander,  181. 

Snakes,  140. 

Snell,  Prof.  E.  S.,  310. 

South  Hadley  Female  Seminary,  22;  a 
day’s  occupations  at,  23;  letters 
from,  121-36;  pupils  taught  to  keep 
account-books,  124. 

Springfield  Republican,  the,  94,  103, 
186,  309,  320,  329,  343,  367. 

Stearns,  Frazer,  225,  226,  280;  killed  in 
battle,  71,  228,  231;  his  funeral,  229. 


Stearns,  George,  348. 

Stearns,  President  William  A.,  299,309. 

Stearns,  Mrs.  William  A.,  letters  to, 
297,  299,  300,  309,  314. 

Stearns,  Mrs.  W.  F.,  335. 

Strong,  Abiah,  67. 

Strong,  Mrs.  Annie  P„  letters  to,  109- 
21,  124,  128,  133,  137,  141. 

Sumner,  Charles,  39. 

Sweetser,  Mrs.  Joseph,  29,  371. 

Sweetser,  Deacon  Luke,  8,  38,  41,  75, 
90. 

Swift,  Rev.  Dr.,  of  South  Hadley, 
preaches  a  memorable  sermon,  90. 

Taking  cold,  138,  139. 

Temptations,  Christ’s  and  ours,  143. 

Thomas,  the  Apostle,  his  faith  in  anat¬ 
omy,  366. 

Thunder-showers,  155,  176,  299. 

Tuckerman,  Mrs.  Edward,  letters  to, 
286,  296,  297,  313,  314,  332,  333, 
340,  369-71,  376,  378. 

Two  Grenadiers,  The,  66. 

Vaill,  Dr.  Joseph,  234,  309. 

Valentines,  “foolish  notes,”  27,  70, 
131;  an  original  one  sent  to  E.  G. 
Bowdoin,  145;  and  one  to  William 
Howland,  147. 

Vanderbilt,  Mrs.  Gertrude,  letter  to, 
259. 

Vaughan,  Henry,  325. 

Warner,  Prof.  Aaron,  29. 

Washington,  George,  tomb  of,  190. 

Webster,  Daniel,  127. 

White,  Great-Aunt  Hannah,  22. 

Wrhitman,  Miss,  one  of  the  teachers  at 
South  Hadley,  124,  130,  132. 

Whitman,  Walt,  reputed  disgraceful, 
239. 

Whitney,  Maria,  67;  Emily’s  antithe¬ 
sis,  76,  77;  letters  to,  311,  312,  319, 
344,  346,  349-52,  364. 

Wood,  Abby,  67. 

Yale  College,  6,  7. 

Young,  Edward,  Night  Thoughts 
quoted,  120. 


I 


Date  Due 


LQAZ9. 


FEB  ]  3  192% 

9Z61  00  AON 

m;  8  x 

Ja  s  a  * 
juni  rsi 


0ct24’3\ 

Mo’33 

Jut\2Q’34 
JunS  s% 

®*y2?48 


17  4  / 


iurj9;'49 

Maj'lS’So 

Ma)29’56 

r"'.‘27'62 

Iun.7’63 
JAN  2  4  1975 

iAR  1  a  197? 

(A^»’32 


311 

ZDsuz. 


13 'bH'3