THE LIBRARY OF HISTORY OF DIODORUS THE SICILIAN
Vol. II (Books XI-XX)
Made English by G. Booth
London: Printed by Edw. Jones for Awnsham and John Churchill [1814]

[Transcribed from sarata.com's presentation of the 1814 Booth translation. Raw text, not proofread. Public domain: published 1814; translator unidentified (G. Booth of Chester). Books VI-X are lost.]




THE LIBRARY OF HISTORY OF DIODORUS THE SICILIAN
Vol. II (Books XI-XX)
Made English by G. Booth
London: Printed by Edw. Jones for Awnsham and John Churchill [1814]

[Transcribed from sarata.com's presentation of the 1814 Booth translation. Raw text, not proofread. Public domain: published 1814; translator unidentified (G. Booth of Chester). Books VI-X are lost.]




Page 215

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK XI.

The PREFACE.

THE Book next before this, being the Tenth in the whole Composure of our History, ends with things done in the Tear immediately before the Descent of Xerxes into Europe, and with those Debates in the General Assemblies of the Grecians at Corinth, concerning the admission of Gelo into the Grecian Confederacy.

In this to proceed (as things were done) in a continued Series of the History, we shall begin with Xerxes's Expedition into Greece, and end the Year immediately before the Army of the Athenians, under Cymon their General, invaded Cyprus.

CHAP. I.

Of Xerxes his Expedition into Greece, and the Battel of Thermopyle, and the Sea Fight at Salamis.

CAllias being Archon or chief Magistrate of Athens, Spurius Cassius, and Proclus Virginius Tricostus, Consuls at Rome, in the Seventy Fifth Olympiad, celebrated at Elis, (in which Asylus the Syracusian was Victor) Xerxes (for the reason after mention'd) rais'd an Army against the Grecians.Mardonius the Persian was Cousin German, and by Marriage likewise nearly related to Xerxes, of great esteem among the Persians for his Valour and Prudence. This Man prompted forward by the greatness of his Spirit, and the heat of his Youth, burned with Ambition, to be General of so great an Army as that Expedition requir'd; and therefore persuaded Xerxes that he would bend all his power to subdue the Grecians, those implacable Enemies of the Persians.

Being brought over to close with this Advice, he determin'd utterly to destroy and root them up: And to that end sent Embassadors to Carthage, to treat with them concerning the joining of their Forces together: Whereupon it was thus


Page 216

agreed between them, That Xerxes should Land his Forces in Greece, and that the Carthaginians at the same time should with a great Army invade the Greeks in Italy and Sicily.

According to which Compact the Carthaginians raised a great sum of Money, and hired many Soldiers out of the Provinces of Liguria in ItalyGallia and Iberia; and raised Men of their own throughout all Lybia, and out of Carthage it-self. In which preparations were spent Three Years, and an Army of Three Hundred Thousand Men were mustered, and Two Hundred Ships fitted out.

On the other part Xerxes stirr'd up by the Industry of the Carthaginians, (by way of Emulation) as far exceeded them in Warlike Preparations, as he did in Dominion and Empire. He commanded Ships to be built every where upon the Sea-Coasts within his Dominions, as Egypt, Phaenicia, and Cyprus, and likewise through Cilicia, Pamphilia, Pisidia, Licia, Caria, Misia, Troas, the Cities of the Hellespont, Pontus and Bithynia, and in Three Years time (as the Carthaginians had done) set forth above Twelve Hundred Gallies. And this was the better accomplished by means of the Preparations of those great Forces rais'd by Darius his Father in his Life time. For Datis, Darius his General, being not long before overcome by the Athenians in the Battel of Marathon, Darius ever afterwards bore an implacable hatred against them: But just as he was ready to pass over into Greece, he was prevented by Death.

Xerxes, therefore incourag'd both by his Father's Assistance, and the Advice of Mardonius (as is before related) resolved to invade the Grecians.

When all things were prepared, he commanded the Officers of his Navy to randezvouze his Fleet as * Cyme, and Phocea. And he himself with the whole Army, both of Horse and Foot, rais'd out of every Province of his Dominion, marched from Susa; and advancing to Sardis, forthwith sent Heralds, into Greece, commanding them to go to all the Cities and demand in the Name of the King Earth and Water.

There dividing his Army, part he sent (sufficient as was conceiv'd) to make a Bridge over the Hell

•spant,

 and another part to cut a Way through the Mountain Athos, both judging it safe for his Soldiers to have so short a Cut for their March, and hoping likewise by such an extraordinary Work upon the first Attempt, to strike a Terror into the Grecians. They therefore that were sent, having so great a multitude of Hands at work, speedily dispatcht the Business.

But the Grecians being now alarum'd with the vast Army of the Persians, sent Ten Thousand Men at Arms into Thessaly, to possess themselves of the Passages or Posts of Tempe. The General of the Lacedemonians was Synetus, and of the Athenians Themistocles: These sent Messengers to all the Cities, to require them to raise Soldiers for the defence of the Passages at the common Charge; for they made it their Business with all Expedition to interest all the Cities of Greece in the War, that so the Persians might be opposed by the combin'd Force of all Greece together.

But when they heard that the greatest part of the Thessalians, and those that inhabited the Straits, had submitted unto the Kings Delegates or Commissioners, they return'd home, despairing to make any effectual Defence at Tempe.

And here it will not be from the purpose to declare what part of Greece assisted the Barbarians, that (deservingly branding them with disgrace) Traitors to the Common Liberty of their Country may out of a sense of shame and Dishonour be deterr'd from the like practice. We say therefore, that the Dolopians, Aenians, Milesians, Perrhaebians, and * Magnesians, sided with the Barbarians; and even while the Guards were in Tempe, the Achaeans, Phthiotians, Locreans, and Thessalians joyn'd with them; and after they were withdrawn, most of the Beotians, went over to the Persians. Hereupon the Grecians, in a common Assembly at the Istmos, decreed, that if they should be victorious, those Grecians that sided with the Persians, should be sacrificed to the Gods every Tenth Man. And they order'd Embassadors to be sent to such as at present stood neuter, to stir them up forthwith to take up Arms for the Common Liberty.


Page 217

Of these, some without delay, heartily joyn'd themselves to the common Interest; others promis'd to do it in due time, though in truth by delay they were willing to have some prospect of the Issue of the War before they hazarded themselves. They of Argos by their Embassadors in the Common Council, declared that they were ready to join in Arms with the rest of Greece, if they might have some share of the supream Command in the Army: To whom Answer was given by the Council, that if they thought it a greater Grievance to Fight under a Grecian General for the Common Liberty, than to be Slaves to a Barbarian, they do wisely to forbear to take up Arms: But if through their Ambition they aspire to the Command of Greece, it were just that they should first signalize themselves by such noble Actions, as might justly deserve so great an Honour. After this the Grecian Cities, generally gave Answer to the King's Embassadors (that went through Greece) in such a manner as plainly demonstrated at how high a Rate they prized the common Liberty of the Country.

When Xerxes understood that the Bridge over the Hellespont was finished, and a Passage made through the Mountain Athos, he forthwith marched from Sardis, determining to make his Way to the Hellespont. And when he came to Abidos, he pass'd his Army over the Bridge into Europe; then marching through Thrace, he increased his Army by the Thracians and other Borderers. When he came to Doriscus, he commanded his Fleet should sail thither, that his Forces both by Sea and Land might joyn.

There he numbred his Army, in which it is reported there were inroll'd above Eight Hundred Thousand Foot, more than Twelve Hundred Gallies, Three Hundred and Twenty of which were Greek Ships. The Ships themselves were provided at the Charge of the King, but furnished with Soldiers and Mariners by the Grecians within his Dominions. All the rest were Ships fitted out by the Barbarians. Of these, Two Hundred were built and man'd by the Egyptians; Three Hundred by the Phaenicians; the Cilicians, Fourscore; the Pamphilians Forty; and the Licians as many: Besides, the Carians Fourscore; and from Cyprus an Hundred and Fifty. As to those from the Grecians, the Doreans inhabiting about Caria, together with them of Rhodes and Coos, sent Forty; the Ionians with them of Samos and Chius, an Hundred; the Eolians with Lesbos and Tenedos, Forty: They of the Hellespont, with them that inhabited about Pontus, Fourscore: The Islanders Fifty. For the King had secured to himself all the Islands between Cyaneas, Triopion and Sunium.

Such was the number of the Men of War in the Navy besides Eight Hundred and Fifty prepared for transporting of Horses, and Three Thousand Ships of Burden of Thirty Oars a-piece. Thus Xerxes was imploy'd at Doriscus in numbring his Army; but the General Council of Greece, being informed that the Forces of the Persians did approach; it was ordered that the Grecian Fleet, should forthwith sail to Artemesium in Eubaea, judging that to be the most convenient place to oppose the Enemy: And a Guard of Men at Arms are sent to Thermopile, sufficient (as was conceived) to secure the Straits and Passages, and repel the Barbarians: For it was determined with all haste and speed to defend on every side all those that took part with the Grecians, and with their Forces every way to preserve their Confederates. Euribiades a Lacedemonian, was Admiral of the whole Fleet; Leonidas General of Sparta, commanded the Forces sent to Thermopile, a brave Man and an excellent Soldier.

Leonidas taking upon him the Command, chose only a Thousand Men out of the Army to follow him in this Expedition. But the Ephori or Common Council advising him to take a greater number against so powerful an Enemy, yea, commanding him so to do, he in an intricate and perplexed Speech made Answer, That in truth that number was too few to keep the Pass against the Barbarians, but that he needed no more to accomplish that Design which they were going about to effect. Receiving this dark Answer, they asked him whether he led out the Army upon any slight and inconsiderable Attempt? He return'd in Answer, that in Words and Talk he was to lead them to defend the Passages: But in truth and in the Event to dye for the Common Liberty. Therefore if these Thousand which he had chosen might go along with him, the Fame of Sparta would be advanced even by their Destruction: But if all the Lacedemonians should


Page 218

go thither, the very Lacedemonian Name would be utterly extinct, they being Men never used to fly to save themselves.

Upon this there were allotted to him a Thousand Lacedemonians, Three Hundred Spartans, and Three Thousand out of the rest of the Army: So that he marcht away with Four Thousand Soldiers to Thermopile. But the Locrians who inhabited near the Passages, had given Earth and Water to the Persians, and had promis'd to seize the Passes.

But when they perceiv'd Leonidas to advance to Thermopile, they revolted and joined themselves to the Greciau Army; and so a Thousand Locrians, as many Milesians, and near a Thousand Phocians marched with him to Thermopile; besides Four Hundred Thebans, of a different Faction sided now with Greece: For the Thebans that were in Confederacy with the Persians were divided amongst themselves.

This then is the utmost number of the Army which under Leonidas their General came to Thermopile, and there prepared themselves to bear the brunt of the whole strength of the Persians.

Xerxes having now numbred his Forces, march'd away with his whole Army to the City Acanthus, his Fleet sailing near at hand over against him; thence his Navy pass'd through the Ditch or Sluce cut through the Istmos, and by that means he pass'd his Fleet into the other Sea by a short and safe Cut.

When he came to the Bay of Melus, he was inform'd that all the Passages were possessed by the Enemy: Upon which he again increas'd his Forces, and join'd to them little less than Two Hundred Thousand Men more, which he had raised as his Confederates out of Europe. So that besides his Naval Forces, his Land Army consisted of no less than a Hundred Myriads. And the rest that were in his Fleet (what in his Men of War, and what in his Transport Ships and Shipping for other Necessaries) were judged to be no way inferior for number to his Land Forces. Therefore what we find reported concerning the Number he brought with him is not to be wondred at.

For it's said, that great Rivers were drunk up by that multitude, and that the Sea it self was even cover'd over by the spreading forth of the Sails of the Ships: So that the Forces of Xerxes have been by all reputed the greatest that ever any History made mention of.

The Persian Army now incamping at the River Sperchius, Xerxes sent Messengers to Thermopyle, both to find out with what Resolution he was likely to be oppos'd, and likewise to declare that the King commanded them to lay down their Arms, and return in safety to their own Countries, and become Friends and Confederates to the Persians; which if they yielded to, then he faithfully promis'd that he would bestow upon them both larger and richer Countries than those they did then inhabit.

This Message being heard, those with Leonidas returned this Answer; that they were in a better Posture to be the Kings Confederates being arm'd, than if they were disarm'd; and if it happen'd that they must fight, then they could more gallantly and couragiously venture their Lives for their Liberties. As for the Countries which the King promis'd them, they bid them tell him, that it was not the manner of the Grecians, by any base and dishonourable means to plant themselves in any Country, or to gain Lands and Estates but by Virtue and Valour, and being so gain'd by the same Valour to defend them.

Xerxes having receiv'd this Answer, presently sent for Demaratus the Spartan (who was banished from his Country, and fled to him) and in a scoffing manner ask'd the Laconian, whether the Grecians could run faster than his Horses? or whether they durst ingage with so great an Army? Demaratus is reported to have answer'd the King thus: You are not O King, unacquainted with the Valour of the Grecians, forasmuch as your Majesty ever made use of them to reduce your Rebellious Subjects upon all occasions: And do not think that these, who have done more than the Persians in the Defence of your Majesty's Sovereignty, will approve themselves with less Valour, for the preservation of their own Liberties against the Persians.


Page 219

At which words, Xerxes laughing him to scorn, commanded him to follow him, that he might presently see the Lacedemonians taking to their Heels.

And now Xerxes dislodging his Army, marched to the Straights of Thermopyle, placing the Medes in the Front of the Battel, either because they were esteem'd Men of greatest Courage, or that he desir'd to have them all cut off, for they were still proud and haughty in regard the Sovereign Power not long before was wrested from their Ancestors, and many there were likewise in the Army whose Kindred perish'd in the Battel of Marathon. Xerxes therefore orders the Brothers and Children of those that were slain in that Battel, to be plac'd in a Body in view of the Medes, conceiving this would be a means to exasperate 'em to a fiercer Revenge upon the Grecians.

The Medes therefore being put in the Front (as before said) made a fierce Charge upon the Thermopylean Guards. But Leonidas (being well prepar'd) had plac'd his Men in a close Body, in the straightest part of the Passages: Now both sides are hotly engaged, for the Barbarians having their King both the Spectator and Witness of their Valour on the one hand, and the thoughts of danger of losing of Liberty, together with the Commands of the General firing the Grecians on the other, the Fight was amazing. And now setting Foot to Foot, fighting close at hand, and being lockt together, Wounds were given on both sides, insomuch as the Battel was doubtful a long time, till at length the Grecians through their Resolution, and the greatness of their Shields getting ground, the Medes with much ado fell off, and began to flag, a great part of them being kill'd, and many others wounded. The Medes thus baffled, the Caesii and Sachae (counted excellent Soldiers) continu'd the Fight; and although they were fresh Men and untouched, against Men almost tired out, yet they were hew'd down and quickly put to flight, and many kill'd by Leonidas his Soldiers: For the Barbarians being guarded with short Shields and Bucklers, were fitter for Fight in the open Field, (where they could by reason of the lightness of their Arms move as they pleas'd,) than in narrow Passages, where they could not well touch the Bodies of their Enemies standing so close together, and being likewise defended with large Shields. On the other hand, the Barbarians being but lightly arm'd, lay the more open to all the Darts and Blows of the Assailants.

Xerxes now seeing the Passages strowed with the Carcases of his Soldiers, and that the Barbarians were not able to withstand the Grecian Valour, sent against them the chiefest of the Persians, such as were call'd Immortal and Invulnerable, Men of far stronger Bodies than any of the rest of the Army. Of these the Grecians made a quick dispatch, for they fled presently, and Night now coming on, gave a present Cessation of Arms, with a great Slaughter of the Barbarians, few being lost on the Grecians side.

Xerxes fretting at the late Misfortune of his Arms, so cross to his hopes and expectations, the next day chose out of all his Regiments, such as were most approved for Strength and Valour; and after many earnest Entreaties, he told them that if they broke in upon the Grecians, and drove them out of the Passages, he would remunerate them with large Rewards; but that Death should be the Wages of them that fled. Upon which, they made a fierce and violent Charge in one Body upon the Army of the Grecians. The Soldiers of Leonidas on the other hand closing together in a Body like a strong Wall, with great resolution resisted the furious shock of their Adversaries, and were so earnest in Fight, that they would not suffer the usual fresh Aids to succeed to their Assistance; but overcoming all difficulties by Resolution, they beat down and destroy'd most of the choicest of the Barbarians; every one striving who should spend most of the day in signalizing his own Valour: For the Courage of the Young Men, put on the Old and Experienc'd Soldiers to a higher strain of Valour than ordinary; and the Glory formerly gain'd by the Old, stirr'd up the Young Men to Emulation of Honour.

At length this brave and choice Army of the Barbarians was routed and put to flight: In their flight they were stop'd by a strong Body of Men appointed for that purpose, who drove them back upon the Enemy, and so forced them to renew the Fight. But the King being astonished and in great fear, conceiving none durst make any further Attempt upon the Grecians, one Trachinius an Inhabitant of the Country (to whom all the secret and by-ways in the Mountains were by


Page 220

use very well known) came to Xerxes, and promis'd him to lead the Persians through a certain straight and difficult Pass, that the Troops sent along with him might come upon the Backs of Leonidas his Soldiers, and by this means the Grecians being fought both behind and before, might easily be cut off.

At the hearing of this, the King greatly rejoyc'd, and amply rewarded the Trachinian, and forthwith sent along with him in the Night Twenty Thousand Men. But one Tyrastiades of Cuma in the Persian Army, an upright Man of honest Principles, in the Night privately convey'd himself from the Watch or Centinels of the Persians, and came to Leonidas, and discover'd what the Trachinian had contriv'd; which being known, a Council of War was call'd at Midnight, where they advised together what was to be done in the present imminent danger and state of Affairs. There were some that were of Opinion, That it was best forthwith to leave the Passages, and to return to the rest of their Associates while it was yet well with them, for that there was no hopes of safety if they continu'd there.

But Leonidas the Lacedemonian General minding to appropriate Immortal Honour to himself and his Spartans, commanded all the rest to depart, and reserve themselves for better Times, and for further help to the Greeks hereafter; enjoyning only the Lacedemonians to stay, and not to desert the defence of the Straights, for that it became the Generals and Commanders of Greece resolvedly to be victorious, or to dye valiantly upon the Spot.

The Council then breaking up, all the rest presently march'd away: And Leonidas being now left upon the Place only with his Citizens, was resolved with them to perform wonderful and Heroical Actions: For the Lacedemonians being but very few (for he kept the Thespians only with him, so that all of them together did not exceed Five Hundred Men) he prepar'd himself bravely to dye for the Liberty and Glory of Greece.

In the mean time, they that were sent with Trachinius, led about through the steep Passes, had beset those with Leonidas on every side: But the Grecians who had before cast off all Thoughts of Deliverance, and had preferr'd Honour before Life, with one Voice desir'd their General that he would lead them out against the Enemy before it were known to the Persians that they were surrounded.

Leonidas hereupon commending the Courage of his Soldiers, commanded them that they would with all speed go to their Dinners with that chearfulness as those that must be with the Gods at Supper: And he himself presently commanded Meat to be brought to him, and fell to eating: For by this means he said they would be more able to endure, and longer to abide the Dangers and Toyls of such an Ingagement.

After they had all refresh'd themselves, and were ready attending upon their General, he commanded them to follow him, and break into the Enemies Camp to kill all that they met, and make to the King's Pavilion: At which word of Command, in one Body in the Night under their General Leonidas, they should rush into the Camp of the Persians.

The Barbarians being amaz'd at so suddain and unexpected an Alarum, every where run out of their Tents in great disorder and confusion. And supposing that all those that were sent with the Trachinian were cut off, and that all the Grecian Forces were amongst them, they were every where seiz'd with fear and astonishment: A great Slaughter therefore was made amongst them by the Soldiers of Leonidas, but much more by the Persians among themselves, they not knowing who was Friend or Foe: The Mistake likewise being advanced by the Darkness of the Night, in which none could be distinguish'd, dread and horrour prevail'd all over the Camp, so that it was no wonder that a terrible Slaughter was made among them: For they killed one another, since now there was neither Time nor Place to be at any certainty, for that none knew whose Commands, or what Captain to follow, or what Colours or Ensigns to hasten to: But their Minds were in a continual Distraction. And if the King had then been in his Pavilion, he had been easily destroy'd amongst the rest by the Grecians, and in that moment had an end been put to so great a War: But Xerxes presently at the beginning of the Tumult, hasten'd, and speedily got out of harms way. The Grecians


Page 221

breaking into his Pavilion, cut off the Heads almost of all they found there, and diligently sought for Xerxes (while the Night favour'd them) in all parts of the Camp.

But when the Day brake, and Light began to make a Discovery, the Persians then perceiving the Grecians to be very few, began to despise them, but durst not make strait upon them, being terrify'd by their amazing Courage.

Therefore they compass'd them round, and gauling them every way, both in the Flank and Rear, they were all destroy'd with Darts and Arrows. And this was the end of those sent with Leonidas to guard the Passes in Thermopyle, whose Valour who can sufficiently admire? who were also unanimous not to desert their Post assigned them, but undauntedly sacrific'd their Lives for the common safety of Greece, and chose rather to dye valiantly and in Honour, than to live as Slaves and in Disgrace.

On the other hand, this Terror and Amazement of the Persians, cannot but be very probable; for which of the Barbarians could ever suspect so incredible an Attempt? Who could have imagin'd, that Five Hundred should have that Confidence, as without Fear to set upon a Hundred Myriads? So that we may conclude that Posterity cannot but fix upon these Men as a Pattern and Example of Valour for ever; who though compassed about with inextricable Dangers, and wearied out in their Bodies with overcoming, yet in their Minds were unconquerable. These therefore are the only Men (we read of) that became more famous by their being overcome, than others by their most glorious Victories; for we ought not to make a Judgment of Mens Virtues by the Event, but by their solid and well-grounded Resolutions: For Fortune is the Mistress of the First, but every Man's Reason is the Advocate for the other.

For who can judge there were ever braver Men than these? who though they were not the Thousandth part of their Enemies, yet were acted with such brave Spirits, as to dare to try their Courage with an incredible Multitude; not that they had the least hope or expectation of overcoming upon so unequal Terms, but resolving with undaunted Resolutions and noble Souls to surpass all that ever was done in former Ages. They knew indeed they were then to fight with Barbarians: But yet they concluded, that thereby they should be sharers in Fame and Glory with all that ever were before them. For they were the only Men (since the Memory of Man) that chose rather to defend the Laws of their Country, than to preserve their own Lives, even with a Contempt of Dangers that were insuperable; judging it more desirable for Men of Valour so to signalize themselves.

To these the common Liberty of Greece ows more than to those that afterwards overcame Xerxes in following Battels; for the Barbarians being astonished with such an extraordinary and unheard of Attempt, were afterwards much discourag'd, and had little heart to Fight. The Spirits of the Grecians on the other side, were inflamed with the desire of gaining the like honour with their Countrymen. To conclude, these alone seem'd to have born away with them the immortal Memory of an unparallell'd Valour, above all before them: And therefore their Praises have been set forth not only by Historians, but by many Poets, amongst whom, that famous Milean Poet Simonides has described this noble Action, with high Strains of Commendation worthy of their Valour, thus—

At fam'd Thermopyle these brave Souls got,

An honourable Death, and Noble Lot;

Their Tomb an Altar bears, which doth record

Their Ancestors; and Death doth Life afford

Ʋnto their Fame, nor Rust, nor Times Teeth shall

Devour the Trophies of their Funeral,

The Praise of Grecian Heroes to maintain,

Their Countrys Freedom that were Slain,

This Chappel doth contain.

Leonidas above the rest,

The Spartan King will this attest;

Who gave proof to Posterity,

That real Valour cannot dye.


Page 222

Having now said enough of these Gallant Men, we shall return where we broke off. Xerxes thus possess'd of the Passes, obtain'd (according to the Proverb) only in a Cadmean Victory, lost a great number of his Soldiers, with the Destruction of a very few of his Enemies in comparison. And having now gain'd the Straights, and made his way open, he determin'd to try his Fortune in a Sea-Fight: To that purpose he forthwith sent for Megabates the Admiral of his Navy, and commanded him to make up to the Grecian Fleet, and with the whole strength of his Navy to join Battel with them; who without delay obeys the King's Command, and looses from Pydna in Macedonia with the whole Fleet, and sails to the utmost Coasts or Promontory of Magnesia call'd Sepias, where meeting with a violent Storm and Tempest, he lost Three Hundred of his Ships of War, and a great number of his Transport Ships. When the Storm was over, he made away, and arrived at Aphetas, a City of Magnesia. From thence he sent forth Three Hundred Sail, and commanded the Officers that they should sail about, and make to the Right Hand of the Island Eubea, and so surround the Enemy. The Grecians in the mean time lay at Anchor at Artemesia in Eubea, whose Navy was at the most not above Two Hundred and Fourscore Sail, whereof an Hundred and Forty were fitted out by the Athenians, and the rest by the other Grecians. Euribiades, a Spartan, was Admiral of the Fleet; and Themistocles the Athenian took care of all other things relating to it. This Man by reason of his singular Prudence and Military Experience, was not only in great Reputation and Authority with the Grecians in the Fleet, but even with Euribiades himself; and all were ready at his Command. When the Sea-Officers were in Consultation where was the most commodious Place to join Battel; whilst all the rest were for abiding where they were, and to receive the Enemy as they then lay; only Themistocles was of a contrary Opinion, and declared, that that Party ever had the advantage, who in good order made the first Onset upon the Enemy: For if they then in a Body fell upon the Enemy, who was at that time in Disorder and Confusion, by coming out of several Ports, and at a great distance one from another, the Attack would probably be successful and prosperous.

The Counsel and Advice of Themistocles prevailing, the whole Grecian Fleet in order of Battel, set sail against the Persians, who coming out of their several Ports, as they were dispers'd and out of order, were met by the Navy of Themistocles, who sunk many of 'em, and forc'd as many more upon the Shoar.

In the mean time, the Fleets of both Parties now come together, and Battel join'd, some parts of the Fleets prevail'd here and there on both sides, without absolute Victory on either, till Night put an end to the Contest. Presently follow'd a most dreadful Tempest, whereby many Ships of the Persian Fleet were forc'd out of their Harbours, and lost. So as God dimself seem'd to fight for the Grecians, by reducing the Barbarians to a less number, that the Grecians might be an equal Match for them, and better able to bear the brunt of a Sea-Fight. Hence it was, that the Grecians grew more and more confident and couragious: And on the other Hand, the Barbarians ever more fearful in all Attempts.

But after the Storm was over, having again brought together their Navy, they made down upon the Enemy with their whole Fleet: The Grecians inforc'd with Fifty Athenian Ships, made ready, and undauntedly receiv'd the Barbarians. And here the manner of the Fight was almost like that at Thermopyle, for the Persians endeavour'd to charge through the midst of the Grecians, and so to pass into Euripus: But the Grecians, with the help of their Confederates in Eubea, defended the Straights; upon which, there was again a fierce Engagement, and both sides lost many of their Men of War: But Night drawing on again, both Parties were forc'd into their Harbours. It's reported that the Athenians on the Grecian side, and the Zidonians on the other, bravely behav'd themselves in both Battels.

The Grecians afterwards hearing of the Defeat and Slaughter made at Thermopyle, and being certainly informed, that the Persians were marching towards Athens, were in great consternation, and therefore sailing back to Salamis, they there lay. And now the Athenians seeing the extream Hazard all were in, who remain'd in Athens, put on Board their Wives and Children, and all Necessaries, and whatever else they could, and transported 'em into Salamis. Then the Admiral of the Persian Fleet, understanding that the Enemy was withdrawn from


Page 223

their former station, presently with his whole Fleet made for Eubaea, and there first takes the City Istiea by Storm, and raz'd it, and then wasts and destroys the whole Country before him.

In the mean time Xerxes marches from Thermopyle through the Consines of Phocia, razes all the Towns far and near, and wasts and spoils all before him.

That part of the Phocians who sided with the Grecians, not being able to Contest with so great a Multitude, forsook their Towns, and with all their Inhabitants betook themselves to the difficult Passages and Defences of the Mountain Parnassus.

Afterwards the King entring the Country of the Doreans, forbore from Pillage and Spoil, and commanded that no Injury should be done there, because they were his Friends and Associates. But part of his Forces left there, he commanded to invade Delphos, and to burn the Temple of Apollo, and to rob and carry away all that they found there; and he himself in the mean time, led the rest of his Army into Beotia, and there incamp'd.

When those that were sent to spoil the Delphian God, were advanc'd as far as the Temple of Pallas, there arose a sudden and incredible Tempest, and Storm of Hail and Wind, with dreadful Thunder and Lightning, wherewith great Rocks were rent asunder, and fell upon the Heads of the Persians, and destroy'd them by Heaps. The rest that surviv'd, being terrify'd with this Portent of the Immortal Gods, ran away with all haste and speed. And thus by Divine Providence, the Oracle of Delphos was preserv'd from Ruin and Robbery. They of Delphos, that they might continue the Memory of this wonderful Appearance of the Gods to Posterity for ever, erected a great Trophy or Monument near the Temple of Pallas, on which they engraved this Elogy—

A grateful Gift to Jove, the Delphians Me

Have rais'd, proud Monument of Victory.

By Phoebus help, who Medean Bands confound,

Peserv'd the Temple that with Brass was Crown'd.

Xerxes passing through Beotia, wasted the Country of the Thespians, and burnt Platea, forsaken before of its Inhabitants. For the People of these Parts, with their Families and all their Concerns, had withdrawn themselves into Peloponesus: From thence he passed into Attica, continuing still his Devastation and Ruin of all things: And Athens it self he razes to the Ground, and burns the Temples.

Whilst Xerxes was thus imploy'd, his Fleet (having first spoil'd Eubaea and the Coasts of Attica) loos'd from Eubaea, and came to Attica. About the same time the Corcyreans lay about Peloponesus, with Threescore Gallies, because they could not (as they pretended) recover the Cape or Promontory of Malea. But other Writers say, that this was rather done out of Policy, that they might observe how the issue of the War was like to succeed, and submit to the Persians if they were Victors; and that the Grecians, if they were Conquerors, might believe they came so far in order to assist them.

But when News was brought to the Athenians that were at Salamis, that their Country was burnt up, and the Temple of Pallas laid in Rubbish, they were extreamly griev'd and dejected. An exceeding fear likewise seiz'd the other Grecians, seeing themselves besieged (as it were) by the Enemy on every side, coopt up together within Peloponesus. And therefore it was determin'd that the Leaders and Officers should consult and give their Opinion what place was fittest and most convenient wherein to try their Fortune in a Sea-Fight. Many and various Opinions were proposed and bandied to and fro in this matter: The Peloponesians, as those who only minded their own security, advised that the Fight might be near the Isthmus: For Fortifying the Isthmus with a strong Wall, if things did not succeed, they might presently withdraw themselves into Peloponesus, as into a Place of greatest Safety and Defence: But if they should be penned up in the little Island Salamis, they should run into Mischiefs inextricable.

But Themistocles advised to fight at Salamis, for that within the Straights they were sure to have the Advantage, where they might fight with a few Ships against many. On the other hand, he made it out, that to fight near the Isthmus, would be great disadvantage to them, for they must fight in the open Sea, where


Page 224

the Enemy would have room to make use of the whole Fleet, by which a few Vessels (as they were) would soon be destroyed by such a Multitude.

These Reasons, and many others to the same purpose in reference to the Business in Hand, being seasonably and wisely offer'd by Themistocles, brought over all the rest to his Opinion.

It being now therefore determin'd in this General Council, to Fight within the Straights of Salamis, the Grecian Captains with all speed prepared themselves for Battel against the Persians: Euribiades therefore, together with Themistocles, began to encourage the People against the Danger approaching: But they were struck with such Terror and Fear of the great Power of the Persians, that they regarded not the Advice or Commands of their Leaders and Officers; but every one to save himself, hasted with all speed to pass over from Salamis to Peloponesus.

Neither were the Grecian Forces by Land, seized with less Fear and Terror, by reason of the great Power of the Enemy, being likewise much dejected by the Slaughter of those valiant Men at Thermopile: And then the misery of the Atheniaus, was ever before their Eyes, which amazed them, and put a damp upon all their Hopes.

Upon which the General Council discerning the Tumult and distracting Fears among the People, made an Order for the Inclosing of the Isthmus with a Wall; and thereupon many Hearts and Hands joining together, the Work was compleated: And so the Peloponesians, defended themselves by a Wall drawn out along from Lecheum to Cenchrea Forty Furlongs.

But now the Fleet at Salamis, was in a Mutiny, and in that degree of Fear, that none would obey their Officers. Themistocles therefore perceiving that Euribiades, the Admiral of the Fleet, was not regarded, and that the Violence of the Furious Popularity could not be restrained; and considering likewise that the Straits and Difficulties of the Places at Salamis were of great Advantage in order to obtain the Victory, resolved upon this Project: He commanded one chosen out for that purpose, to go privately as a Deserter to the King, to let him know that the Grecians had resolved to pass over with all their Fleet from Salamis into the Isthmus. Xerxes gives credit to what was related, as a thing very probable, and therefore resolved with all haste and diligence, to prevent the Land and Sea-Forces of the Grecians from joining; and to that purpose commanded the Ships he had from Egypt, forthwith to possess themselves of the Straits and narrow Seas between Salamis and Megaris, and orders the rest of his Navy to make for Salamis, and there without delay to Fight the Enemy. The King's Gallies were drawn up distinctly, according to their several Natiòns, that being all of one and the same Language, they might more readily aid and assist one another.

The Fleet setting forth in this Order, the Phaenicians were in the Right Wing, and the Grecians joyn'd with the Persians were plac'd in the Left. In the mean time, the Officers of the Ionians sent with great Secrecy a certain Samian unto the Grecians, to acquaint them what the King determined, and in what Method and order all things were hastning forward, and that they themselves (as soon as the Battel was join'd) were resolved to desert the Barbarians.

All which, when the Samian had thus privily discover'd to Euribiades, Themistocles (his Matters succeeding according to his Hearts desire, and as he had contrived,) with great Joy encourag'd the Navy to Fight. The Grecians recovering their Spirits at the Message sent by the Ionians, and (stirred up with fresh hope by the present Circumstances of Affairs to Fight) against their former Determinations, loosed from Salamis with great Resolution. And now the Fleet being disposed in order of Battel by Euribiades and Themistocles, the Left Wing was committed to the Lacedemonians and Athenians against the Phenicians, the Enemy's Right Wing.

The Phenicians were at that time in great Reputation for Maritime Affairs, as well by reason of the multitude of their Shipping, as for their singular and ancient Skill in Navigation. The Aegineans, and those of Megara, were plac'd in the Left Wing, for these were conceived (next to the Athenians) to be the best Seamen; and it was concluded that they would fight with the greatest Obstinacy and Resolution, in regard they had no where to fly with the rest of the


Page 225

Grecians for Security, if they were put to the worst. The middle Battel was supplied by the rest of the Grecians.

Things being thus order'd and prepar'd, they forthwith set sail and possess'd themselves of the Straits and Passages between Salamis and Heraclea.

As for the King, he commanded the Admiral of his Fleet, that without any stop or delay, he should set upon the Enemy: And he plac'd himself upon an Eminence over against the Island of Salamis, from whence he might see all the Passages of the Battel.

The Persians, indeed at the First, while they could sail in the open Seas, every one kept his station: But when they began to enter the Straits, many of the Ships were Forc'd out of their Order, which occasion'd a great Tumult, and Confusion amongst the rest. Then the Admiral, who led the Van, fell in First with great Valour upon the Enemy, and was sunk at the First Charge, upon which, a great Terror seized the whole Fleet; for upon the Death of the Admiral many took upon e'm to command, and gave out several and different Orders; so that they durst not proceed further but tackt about and made to Sea.

The Athenians perceiving the Terror and Confusion of the Barbarians, fiercely pursu'd them; some of their Ships they struck through with the Beaks of their Vessels, and brusht off the Oars of others: And many of the Barbarians Gallies in the Flight, lying open with their Broad-sides to the Beaks of the Grecian Ships, by multitude of strokes were pierc'd through and through; So that now, not having time to turn the Heads of their Gallies, they fled as well as they could with their Oars revers'd.

The Phenicians, and Cyprian Ships being now dispersed by the Athenians, and forc'd to Fly, the Cilicians, Pamphylians, and Lycians, who were next to them, fought indeed at the First very obstinately; but when they saw the best and stoutest of the Ships routed, and making away, they hasted also out of the Danger.

In the other Wing, the Fight was for some small time doubtful, the Contest being vigorous on both sides; but the Phenicians and Cyprians being driven a-shoar, and the Athenians making Head upon the other, the Barbarians not able to bear the Shock, fled, and lost many of their Ships in the Flight. And thus the noble Grecians got a glorious Victory at Sea over the Barbarians.

In this Battel, Forty Ships of the Grecian Fleet were lost; but above Two Hundred Gallies of the other were sunk, besides those that were taken with their Ships and Men.

The King being thus unexpectedly overcome, in a Rage slew the Phenicians, as the first that fled; threatning the rest, that in due time he would measure out Punishments for them proportionable to their Demerits; who terrify'd with the King's Threats, forthwith made for Attica, but the Night following they sailed into Asia.

And now Themistocles, justly esteem'd the Author of this Victory at Sea, contrives another Stratagem not inferior to the former; for the Grecians being terrified, and not daring to fight at Land against so many Thousands of Men, he thus diminishes the Forces of the Enemy.

He sends his Childrens School-master to the King, with Instructions to acquaint him, that the Grecians were hasting with their Fleet to the Bridge, in order to pull it down.

This Message thè King believ'd, as very probable, and thereupon was in a terrible Fright, lest the Grecians, who had then the whole Command of the Seas, should block up his Passage into Asia, so that he could not return; he resolv'd therefore to be gone with all speed, and to leave Mardonius behind him, with an Army both of Horse and Foot, consisting of no less than Four Hundred Thousand Men. These Two pieces of Military Policy contriv'd by Themistocles, crown'd the Grecians with the renown of Two glorious Victories: And thus stood the Affairs of Greece. But now having declared sufficient for the present, the things that were transacted in Europe, we shall go on to those done elsewhere in Foreign Parts.


Page 226

CHAP. II.

How the Carthaginians invaded Sicily, and were routed by Gelon.

THE Carthaginians (as it was before agreed between them and the Persians, that they should at the same time set upon the Greeks in Sicily) had made great preparation for War: And now all things being in readiness, they chose Amil

••r

 General of their Army, a Man of great Authority amongst the Citizens; who being furnish'd both with Sea and Land Forces, looses from Carthage. The Land Army was no less than Three Hundred Thousand, and his Fleet above Two Thousand Sail, besides Transport Ships for the carrying of Provision, which were above Three Thousand.

But Sailing through the Libian Sea, by the violence of a Storm, he lost his Ships, wherein the Horses and Chariots were on Board: And when he came to Pannormus, the Port of Sicily, he was heard to say, that there was now an end of the War; for he was much afraid, that the Sicilians by the favour of the Sea, had escaped the Danger. There he lay for the space of Three Days, refreshing his Army, and repairing his Ships; and then marched by Land against Himera, his Fleet sailing over against him near the Shoar.

When he came to the City, he plac'd his Army in Two Camps, in the one his Land, and in the other his Naval Forces. Under all his Long Ships or Gallies, he caus'd deep Trenches to be drawn, and to be barracado'd round with Timber. His Land Forces he encamped in Front, over against the City, Extending the Fortifications from the Barracado of his other Camp to the Hills that overtopt the City. When he had thus blockt up the Place on the West side, he unladed all the Ships of Burden, of the Meat and Provision, and sent away what Ships he had left, for Corn, and what other Provision and Victuals they could buy, to be brought to him from Africa and Sardinia: But he himself march'd towards the City with a choice part of the Army, and routed the Himerians that came sorth to oppose him, by which the struck a great Terror into the Besieg'd.

Hereupon Theron Prince of the Agrigentines, though he had aid sufficient with him for the Defence of Himera; yet being now in a great Fright, sent with all speed to Syracuse to Gelon for Succours; who being prepared with his Forces beforehand, and understanding the fear the Himerians were in, without delay, marched out of Syracuse, with no less than Fifty Thousand Foot, and Five Thousand Horse, and with a swift March came to Himera. Upon which, he reviv'd the Spirits of the Himerians, and freed them from all Fear of the Carthaginian Army; for he encamped near the City, and fortified himself both with a Wall and deep Trench, and then sent forth all his Horse to seek out the Enemy, who were at that time dispersed, forraging all over the Country. These Horse setting upon the Carthaginians roving and disorderly dispers'd, took as many Prisoners as each of them could carry back; for above Ten Thousand were brought into the City. By which Exploit, the Authority and Glory of Gelon was much advanc'd; and now the Himertans began to contemn their Adversaries.

Afterwards (with no less courage) he perform'd other things; for all the Gates that Thero before (for fear of the Enemy) had built, he on the other Hand (in contempt of the Carthaginians) caused to be pull'd down, and furnish'd the Place with others that were of absolute necessity. To sum up all, Gelon being an expert Soldier, and prudent in Management, set his Head at work how he might by some Stratagem deceive the Barbarians, and destroy their Forces without any Danger to himself or his Army: Which Device of his was much forwarded by an Accident that then happen'd, for as things then stood, resolving upon burning the Enemy's Fleet, it fortun'd Amilcar being then in the Camp with his Navy, preparing for a great Festival Day to Neptune, some of the Horse-men brought to Gelon a C

••

rier taken in the Fields, who brought Letters from the Selim

••t

•

ans,

 in which was written, that they would send the Horse-men to him at the Day that he had appointed; which was the Day whereon he had determin'd the Sacrifice Upon the same Day therefore Gelon sends Horse-men of his own, commanding them, that conveying themselves privately in the Night to Places nearest


Page 227

and most convenient, as soon as it was Day, they should go to the Enemy's Naval Camp, as if they were the Selinutian Confederates; and being receiv'd within the Wall and Fortification, should first kill Amilcar, and then set Fire to the Ships.

He gave moreover in Charge to those that were as Spies upon the next Hills, that as soon as the Horsemen were admitted into the Fortification, they should give notice of it by lifting up the Sign. And he himself at Break of Day (with his Army drawn up) waited when the Sign would be given.

The Horse being come to the Carthaginians Camp about Sun-Rising, they were admitted by the Watch for Confederates; being entered, without delay they make up with a fierce Charge to Amilcar, who was then Sacrificing, and both killed him, and fired the Ships. And presently the Sign being given by the Spies, Gelo with all his Forces in Battalia, fell into the Camp of the Carthaginians. Whereupon the Officers presently drew forth all their Forces out of the Camp to encounter the Sicilians, and with Ensigns advanc'd, fought with great obstinacy. And now the Trumpets in both Armies sounded a Charge, and in Emulation each endeavour'd to exceed the other in Noise and Clamour. In conclusion, great was the Slaughter on both sides, with little or no advantage to either; when presently the Flame mounting up from the Ships, and News brought of the Death of the General, the Grecians (now encouraged) doubled their Shouts, in certain hope, and confidence of Victory; but the Carthaginians altogether discouraged and in Despair, betook themselves to Flight. And because Gelo had commanded that no Prisoners should be taken, the Slaughter in the Pursuit was very grievous; at last no less than an Hundred and Fifty Thousand were Slain. The rest gain'd a Place by Nature Fortify'd, and this gave the first stop to the Fury of the Pursuers: But because they wanted Water (through Extremity of Thirst) they were forced to deliver up themselves to the Conqueror's Mercy.

Gelo's Name was now renown'd upon the account of so great a Victory obtain'd meerly by his own prudent Contrivance; and his Praise was advanc'd to the very Heavens, not only by the Sicilians, but by all others. For I may truly say, that we have no History of any General, that ever before him put in Execution, so prudent and remarkable a Stratagem; or ever slew more of the Barbarians in one Battel, or took so many Prisoners. And therefore some Writers account this Battel nothing inferior to the Fight by the Grecians at Patea, and equal this Project of Gelo to the Contrivances and Intreagues of Themistocles. But the highest Commendations (because they were both so remarkable and eminent) are by some attributed to this, and by others to that. For whereas both the Greeks and Sicilians before Fighting, were terrify'd with the multitude of the Barbarians, the News of Gelo's Victory, (the Sicilians first prevailing) inspired the Grecians with greater Courage. But the Fortune of the Generals on either side was much different; for it's most certain, that the Persian King with many Thousands more escaped; but not only the Generals of the Carthaginians, but even all the whole Army were so slaughtered and destroyed, that (as it is reported) not one escaped to Carthage to carry the News of the Defeat. Add moreover, that the most Noble of the Grecian Commanders, Pausanius and Themistocles, were most unworthily dealt with, even by their own Countrymen; the one for his Covetousness and Treason, was killed by his Fellow Citizens, and the other (Banished Greece) was forc'd to fly to his greatest Enemy Xerxes, and there live in Exile. Gelo, on the contrary (after his Success, advanced to more Honour by the Love and Favour of the Syracusians,) reigned till he was old, and died admired and honoured of all. And such was the Esteem and grateful Remembrance the Citizens had of him, that the entire Government was continued in his Family Three Descents. Those therefore who have thus highly merited, challenge from us likewise their due Honour and Praise. But to return where we left. The same Day that Gelo routed the Carthaginians, Leonidas at Thermopyle with his Grecians, broke into the Camp of Xerxes with more than ordinary Valour; as if the Gods on purpose had contrived and effected at one and the same moment of time, a glorious Victory in one Place, and an honourable Death of the Grecians in another.


Page 228

After the Fight at Himera, Twenty Long Ships, which Amilcar had drawn out, occasionally for necessary Services, made their Escape, and only they of the whole Army, made an Attempt to return to their own Country, the rest being either Kill'd or Taken. But being overloaded with the Multitude of them that fled, and meeting with cross Winds and Tempests, they were all Shipwrackt and lost, save only a few that escaped in a small Boat, and arriv'd at Carthage; and there with a doleful Cry, declared how all the Army that was carry'd over into Sicily, was destroy'd.

The Carthaginians were so terrify'd with the unexpected Slaughter of their Men, that they all watcht Night and Day, for the Guard of the City, as if Gelo had been just then ready to enter into Carthage with his whole Army. The number of those that were Slain, affected the whole City with Lamentations; and private Houses and Families were full of Tears and Complaints; while some enquired after their Children, others after their Brothers: A great number of Orphans now bereft of their Parents, with miserable Cries, bewailed both their Deaths, and their own Misery, who were now left naked and destitute of those that should take care of them.

The Carthaginians therefore fearing lest Gelo should hasten into Africa, sent unto him Plenipotentiaries, Men both of great Eloquence and Discretion.

In the mean time, he honourably rewarded the Horsemen that destroy'd Amilcar, and upon all others that had done any remarkable Service, he bestow'd the Marks of his Favour. The chiefest of the Spoils, he kept himself, with an intent to Dedicate them as Ornaments to the Temples at Syracuse: Many of the rest he gave to be set up in the Temples of the Himereans: What remain'd, together with the Captives, he distributed amongst his Souldiers, proportionably to every one's Merit. And those Captives that fell to the share of the Cities, were in all those Places (with their Legs shackl'd) imploy'd in publick Works for the Common Good. They of Agrigentum having gotten many Captives for their share, enriched both their City and Country round about with their Labours; for they had so many Prisoners, that many of the private Citizens had Five Hundred a-piece.

And the Multitude of their Captives and Slaves was advanced, not only because they sent great Assistance to the War, but likewise by reason many of the Barbarians, when their Army was routed, fled up into the Mid-land and Borders of Agrigentum, who being all taken alive, fill'd the City with Prisoners. The greatest part were set apart for the Publick Service, and appointed to cut and hew Stone; of which, they not only built the greatest of their Temples, but made Water-courses or Sinks under-ground, to convey Water from the City, so great and wide, that though the Work it self was contemptible, yet when done and seen, was worthy of Admiration. The Overseer and Master of the Work, was one Pheax, an excellent Artificer, from whom these Conduits were called Pheaces. The Agrigentines likewise sunk a Fish-Pond, with great Costs and Expences, Seven Furlongs in Compass, and Twenty Cubits in Depth.

Into this, Water was brought both from Fountains and Rivers, and by that means sufficiently supplied with Fish of all sorts, both for Food and Pleasure. And upon this Pond, fell and rested great Multitudes of Swans, which gave a most pleasant and delightful prospect to the Eye; but by neglect of succeeding Ages, it grew up with Mud, and at last through length of Time, turned wholly into dry Ground. But the Soil there being very fat and rich, they have planted it with Vines, and replenished it with all sorts of Trees, which yields to them of Agrigentum, a very great Revenue.

When Gelo had dismiss'd his Confederates, he marched back with his Army to Syracuse.

And for his notable Victory he was not only had in great Honour and Esteem by his own Citizens, but even by all the Sicilians. For he got so many Prisoners and Slaves, that the Island seem'd to have all Africa under her Dominion.

Ambassadors came continually from all the Cities and Princes of the Adverse Party, begging Pardon for their Error, and promising Observance to all his Commands for the future. But as for Gelo, he carry'd himself with great Complacency


Page 229

towards all, and enter'd into a League with them; and in the time of his Prosperity, behav'd himself with great Modesty and Humanity; not only towards the Sicilians, but even towards his most implacable Enemies, the Carthaginians.

For when Embassadours came from Carthage, with many Tears begging his Favour, he receiv'd them very Courteously, and made Peace with them, upon Condition that they should pay Two Thousand Talents of Silver for the Expences of the War: And that they should build Two Temples, where the Articles of the League might be kept as Sacred. The Carthaginians being thus safe beyond their hopes, freely consented to the Demands, and promised a Crown of Gold to Damareta, the Wife of Gelo: For by making their Addresses unto her, she was chiefly instrumental for the procuring of the Peace. And after she receiv'd the Crown from the Carthaginians, which was of the value of an Hundred Talents of Gold, Gelo coin'd it into Money, and call'd it from her, Damaret

••um,

 every Piece worth Ten Attick Drachmas, called likewise of the Sicilians, Pentecontralitrons, from their being Fifty Pounds in weight.

Gelo carry'd himself thus graciously to all, chiefly prompted thereunto by his own generous Disposition, yet not without some Design to engage all by Kindness. For he had a purpose to pass with his Army over into Greece, and to joyn with them against the Persians: But when he was ready to transport his Fleet, Messengers from Corinth brought him the News of the Victory by the Grecians at Salamis, and that Xerxes with a great part of his Army had left Europe. Upon which News he altered his Resolution, and commending the forwardness of his Souldiers, called a General Assembly, with a Command that all should meet Arm'd: He himself when the Assembly was met, came in amongst them, not only without any Arms, but without a Tunick, covered only with a Cloak or Mantle, and in a Speech set forth the whole Course of his Life and Actions to the Syracusians; the People giving evident Testimony of their Approbation to every Word that he said, and admiring that he should so expose himself amongst Armed Men, to the Will of every Person that might have a Design against his Life; every one was so far from offering him any Violence, as a Tyrant, that had oppressed them,. that all with one Voice proclaim'd him their Benefactor, their King, and the Deliverer of their Country.

After these things, he built Two Magnificent Temples, one to Ceres, and another to Proserpina out of the Spoils: And caused a Tripode to be made of Sixteen Talents of Gold, which he dedicated as a Token of his Gratitude to Apollo at Delphos. He afterwards determin'd to build a Temple to Ceres in Mount Etna, which so far proceeded, as that the Image of the Deity was placed in her Shrine; but by Death he was interrupted in his Design, and the Work left imperfect. About this time, Pindar the Lyrick Poet flourished. And these are all the things that were done this Year worthy of any Remark.


Page 230

CHAP. III.

The Victory of the Greeks over Mardonius at Platea.

XAnthippus being Archon of Athens, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, and Serrius Cornelius Cossus, Roman Consuls, the Persian Fleet (all but the Phaenicians) after the Battel at Salamis, lay about Cuma: And there continuing all Winter, at the Spring passed over to Samos to guard the Coasts of Ionia: The Fleet consisted of Four Hundred Sail; and because they were jealous of the Ionians, they kept a strict Eye upon the Cities there.

In Greece, upon the great Success of Salamis, which was chiefly owing to the Valour and Conduct of the Athenians, all were of Opinion that the Athenians (bering lifted up) would now contend with the Lacedemonians for the Dominion of the Seas: And this the Lacedemonians foresaw, and therefore used all their Arts and Endeavours to keep them under. And for that reason when they were to take notice of the Noble Actions in that Fight, and to distribute Rewards accordingly, the Lacedemonians prevailed by their Interest, that the Honour of the Day should be given to them of Aegina, and among the Athenians to Amynias, the Brother of Aesculus the Poet; because that he being General of the Gallies, first charg'd the Admiral of the Persians, and sunk both him and his Ship together.

But when the Athenians shewed their Resentment that they were so undeservedly slighted, the Lacedemonians were afraid, lest Themistocles (being provoked with the Indignity) should contrive some considerable Mischief against them and the rest of the Grecians: Therefore to stop his Mouth, they rewarded him doubly above all the rest. But when the People of Athens understood that he had accepted what was given him, they were much incens'd, and remov'd him from his Place as General, and put Xanthippus, of the Family of Ariphron, into his stead.

And now the Distaste given by the Grecians to the Athenians being spread Abroad, Embassadors came to Athens, both from the Persians and the Grecians. The Persian Embassadors spoke to this effect:
 

That if the Athenians would side with the Persians; they should have what part of Greece they would chuse; that Mardonius the Persian General would rebuild their Walls and their Temples; and that the City should have and enjoy its former Laws and Liberties. On the other Hand, the Lacedemonian Embassadors earnestly intreated them, that they would not make any League with the Barbarians, but preserve their ancient Amity with the Grecians, being so near one with them, both in Nation and Language.

To the Barbarians the Athenians gave this Return,
 

That the Persian had no Country so rich, nor Gold so heavy, which could tempt them to forsake their Confederates the Grecians in their necessity. And to the Lacedemonians they commanded Answer to be given, That as heretofore their care had been to preserve Greece, so for the future to their utmost Endeavour they would defend it. And in the mean time, desired that they would forthwith with all their Forces pass into Attica, in regard it was very apparent, that Mardonius when he came to understand the Athenians to be so Resolved against him, would invade Athens with all his Force

: And so it came to pass; for Mardonius Encamping in Beotia, first endeavour'd to draw the Cities of Peleponesus to a Defection, by sending Monies here and there to the Governors and Chief Men. And after when he received the Answer return'd him by the Athenians, he rag'd like a Mad Man, and forthwith marched with all his Army into Attica: For besides those which Xerxes left with him, he rais'd many out of Thrace and Macedonia, and other Confederate Cities, to the number of Two Hundred Thousand Men and upwards.


Page 231

And now Attica being invaded by so great a Multitude, the Athenians sent Messengers to the Spartans, and desired their Aid, who were so slow that the Enemy violently broke in upon the Country, so that the Athenians were reduced to great Streights, and now a Second time, with their Wives and Children, and all other things that they could in that Distraction and Hurry carry away, left their Country, and fled to Salamis.

Mardonius greatly inrag'd, destroy'd and wasted all the Country, levelling the City to the Ground, and utterly demolished all the Temples that were left untouch'd in the former Desolation.

Upon his returning thus to Athens with his Forces, it was determined in the general Assembly of the Grecians, that they would all join with the Athenians, and march to Platea, and there join Battel with the Persians for the Liberty of their Country. And made Solemn Vows to the Gods, that if they became Victors, they would celebrate and set apart a Festival Day, and institute Sports to the Goddess Libertas at Platea.

At the General Rendezvous in Peleponesus, they took an Oath to oblige one another to the Prosecution of the War, to the end their League might be inviolably observ'd, and that all Difficulties might be undergone with undaunted Courage. The Form of the Oath was thus,—I will not prefer Life before Liberty.I will not desert my Officers, whether they live or dye, but that I will bury my Fellow-Souldiers that shall fall in the War, how many soever they may be. If I be victorious in this War, I will not destroy or spoil any City of my Confederates. I will not rebuild any of the Temples that are burnt or ruin'd, but leave them as Monuments of the Impiety of the Barbarians to Posterity.

When they had thus sworn, they march'd over the Mountain Citharon into Beotia, and incamp'd at the Foot of the Hill, near the City Erythra. Aristides was the Commander of the Athenians, and Pausanias the Tutor of Leonidas (who was under Age) was General of the whole Army.

When Mardonius understood that the Enemy was enter'd Beotia, he march'd from Thebes, and pitcht his Tents at the River Aesopus, and fortify'd himself with a deep Trench, inclosing his Camp round with a Wall of Timber. The Grecians were an Hundred Thousand, but the Persians were Five Hundred Thousand. The Barbarians began the Fight, who all the Night long, roving up and down with all their Cavalry, set upon the Grecians in their Camp: The first that felt the Brunt were the Athenians, who forthwith in good order valiantly oppos'd them; so that the Fight was very hot. At length the rest of the Grecians put all to Flight that made the Onset on them; only the Magareans, who had to deal with the General and best of the Persian Horse, were over-press'd, yet gave no ground, but sent with all speed to the Athenians and the Lacedemonians for Succors. When Aristides understood their Distress, he forthwith sent the chief of such Athenians as were then about him, to their aid; who joyning with the other, made such a Charge upon the Barbarians, that they soon freed the Magareans from their Dangers, killing the General of the Persian Horse, with many others, and put the rest to flight.

This happy success at the beginning of the War, fill'd the Grecians with hope of absolute Victory in the Conclusion. Afterwards they remov'd their Camp out of the Plain, next under the Foot of the Mountain, into another Place more convenient for obtaining a perfect Victory. For on their Right Hand was an high Hill, and on their Left the River Asopus for their Defence: Between these Two they encamp'd, thus guarded by a natural Fortification. The straitness of the Place thus chosen by the Grecians, was of great advantage, and did much conduce to the Victory: For the Persians could not enlarge their Front as otherways they might, by reason whereof so many Thousands of the Barbarians became useless and unprofitable. The Generals, Pausanias and Aristides having now so fair an Opportunity, drew out their Forces, and advanced in Battalia as the Ground would give them leave.

Mardonius on the other Hand, being forc'd to march up in a close Body, drew up his Men to the best advantage he could devise, and with a great Shout meets the Grecians, and with the choicest of his Men, who were his Life-Guard, makes the first Charge upon the Lacedemonians, who were plac'd in Front to receive


Page 232

him. He fought with an high Resolution, and made great Slaughter amongst the Greeks; but the Lacedemonians stoutly stood their Ground, contemning all Danger, and destroy'd likewise Multitudes of the Barbarians, who (as long as Mardonius was in the Head of the Army) bore the Brunt with great Courage; but as soon as he fell (valiantly behaving himself) and that they discern'd the choice of the Army with him, were all either kill'd or wounded, their Hearts fail'd, and they betook themselves to Flight, and were as hotly pursu'd by the Grecians; however the most of them got within the Timber Wall. The rest (being Grecians that sided with Mardonius) fled to, and shelter'd themselves within the Walls of Thebes. The Remainder of the Army, to the number of Forty Thousand and upwards, fled another way, with Artabazus (a Man of great account amongst the Persians) who came with them back by a shorter Cut into Phocis.

This Dispersion of the Persians caus'd the Forces of the Grecians likewise to be scatter'd, and divided into several Parties; for the Athenians, Plateans and Thespians fiercely pursued those that fled to Thebes. The Corinthians, Sicyonians and Philasians, and some few others, follow'd close upon the back of those that fled with Artabazus. The Lacedemonians with the rest of the Army, besieged and assaulted those that were forc'd within the Wall. The Thebans receiving those that fled, issu'd forth, and join'd with them against the Athenians their Pursuers; upon which there was a fierce and bloody Fight before the City Walls, the Thebans bravely standing to it, so that many were kill'd on both sides. But at length the Athenian Courage drave the Thebans back into the City.

Then the Athenians march'd back to the Lacedemonian Camp, and join'd with them in assaulting the Persians within the Wall; where the Fight was maintain'd with great Obstinacy on both sides; the Barbarians on the one Hand, within a place of Strength defending themselves with great Courage, and the Grecians on the other, with all their Might, endeavouring to force the Wall, the Fight was pursu'd without regard or fear of Death; so that many were wounded, and great numbers, with Showers of Darts were there Slain. But neither the Wall, though strongly Fortify'd, nor the number of the Barbarians could withstand the fierce Assault of the Grecians, but whatever was in their way, they bore down all before them. The Grecian Generals, the Lacedemonians and Athenians out of Emulation and desire of Glory, strove to exceed each other, encouraged both by their former Victories, and prickt forward by their own natural Valour. At length the Persians Camp was entred and taken by Storm; and though the Barbarians cried for Quarter, yet they found no Mercy. For Pausanias consider'd the great number of the Enemy, insomuch as he was afraid lest through their Number (which far exceeded the Grecians) some unexpected and suddain Mischief should happen, and therefore commanded that they should take no Prisoners. Whereupon an incredible Slaughter was made in a short time, and was scarce ended, when more than an Hundred Thousand were already put to the Sword.

When the Battel was ended, the Grecians apply'd themselves to the Burying of their Dead, which were above Ten Thousand. Then they divided the Spoil amongst the Souldiers, and appointed Judgment to be given concerning every thing that was done with more than ordinary Valour and Courage in that War. By the Decree of Charitides, amongst the Cities, the greatest Honour was attributed to Sparta; and amongst the Men to Pausanias.

In the mean time Artabazus with swift Marches pass'd through Phocis into Macedonia, with those Forty Thousand Persians that fled with him, and brought them all over safe into Asia. The Grecians dedicated a Tenth of the Spoils, and made thereof a Tripode of Gold, and placed it in the Temple of Delphos, and engraved upon it this Elogy;

The stout Defenders of Great Greece this gave,

From Bondage when its Cities they did save.

And another was Engraven by the common Consent of all, to the Honour of those Lacedemonians who died at Thermopyle, in these Words—


Page 233

Of Pelops Country one Four Thousand brave

Men, to Two Millions base repulse once gave.

And another by a Private Hand thus,—

Good Stranger tell the Spartans here we lye,

Stoutly their Laws while we maintaining dye.

After the same manner did the People of Athens adorn the Sepulchers of those that fell in the Persian War; and then were first instituted the Funeral Games, and a Law was then made, that the Valorous Exploits of those that were buried at the Publick Charge of the City, should be thenceforth set out by the best of their Orators.

Afterwards Pausanias the General, causing all his Army to return to their several Colours, marched against the Thebans, and required the first Authors of the Defection to the Persians, to be delivered up to Justice. The Thebans being discouraged both with the Multitude and Valour of their Enemies, the chief Authors of the Confederacy with the Persians, yielded themselves up to Mercy, and were all put to the Sword by Pausanias.

CHAP. IV.

Of the Fight with the Persians by the Grecians in Ionia at Mycale.

THE same day that the Battel was fought at Platea, there was another great Fight with the Persians in Ionia, which I shall relate from the beginning.

Leotychidas the Lacedemonian, and Xanthippus the Athenian Admirals of the Navy, after the Battel at Salamis, came with their Fleet to Aegina, where staying some few Days, they fail'd thence to Delos with Two Hundred and Fifty Gallies. While they staid there, Ambassadors came to them from Samos, entreating that they would be assistant to the Inhabitants of Asia, to regain their Liberty.

Leotychidas hereupon calling a Council of War, it was there determined to assist them; and to that end, with all speed they loos'd from Delos. The Officers of the Persian Fleet being then in Samos, hearing of the Expedition the Grecians intended against them, departed from Samos with their whole Fleet, and came to Mycale in Ionia, and judging themselves not strong enough to encounter the Grecians, they hal'd all their Ships ashore, and compass'd 'em in both with a Wall and a deep Trench. And in the mean time, they sent with all speed for Land-Forces from Sardis, and other Neighbouring Places, so that an Hundred Thousand Men were presently Mustered together, and they procur'd all other things necessary for the War, as far as was possible, being jealous that the Ionians were ready to revolt.

Leotychidas with his whole Fleet well provided, sail'd with a straight Course against the Barbarians at Mycale, and sent before him a Ship, with an Herald or Cryer in it, one of greater Voice than any of the rest of his Army, and gave him in charge, that when he approached the Enemy, he should proclaim with a loud Voice, That the Grecians that had routed the Persians at Platea, were now at Hand, resolv'd to restore the Greek Cities in Asia to their Liberty; which was done by those with Leotychidas, because they conceiv'd that upon the News, the Grecians in the Army of the Persians would revolt, and great Tumult, and Disorder would be made amongst them; which happened accordingly.

As soon as the Cryer came up to the Persian Fleet, and had executed his Commands, the Persians grew jealous of the Grecians, and the Grecians began to consult together of a Revolt. The Officers of the Grecian Fleet having well debated


Page 234

and considered all things relating to the present Affair, landed their Forces. The next Day, when all things were ready for the Onset, a Rumor was on a suddain spread in the Army, that the Grecians had overcome the Persians at Platea. Upon which, Leotychidas and his Collegues drew up the Army in a Body, incouraging them to fight, making use of several Arguments to that purpose, and withall singing among them Songs of the Victory at Platea, thereby the more to stir up and inflame their Spirits to the present Encounter. But the Circumstances of Affairs were then very remarkable; for it's certain both Armies fought on one and the same Day; the one at Mycale, and the other at Platea. Therefore since Leotychidas could not then know any thing of the Victory at Platea, we may conclude that this Report was a Stratagem invented by him on purpose; especially considering the great distance of Places, the News could not possibly arrive in so short a time. But the Persians, now no longer confiding in the Grecians, took away their Arms, and deliver'd them to their Confederates, and encouraged their Souldiers, telling them, that Xerxes was at hand with a great Army for their Assistance, whereby they rais'd up their Spirits.

Both Armies being now drawn up in Batalia, and advancing one towards the other, when the Persians saw the inconsiderable Number of the Grecians, they despised them, and forthwith charged upon them with a great shout. In the mean time the Samians and Milesians, determin'd to assist the Grecians, with all the strength they could make, and to that end with a swift March made towards the Enemy. And the Ionians conceiv'd that when they came in sight of the Grecians, they would be thereby more incouraged, which fell out otherwise; for those with Leotychidas being seis'd with a pannick Fear, upon the apprehension and suspition that Xerxes, was at hand with all his Forces from Sardis, there was nothing but Confusion and Distraction, through various Surmises and Opinions amongst them. Some were for retiring forthwith to their Ships, others were for standing their Ground, and fighting valiantly to the last Man. Whilst they were in this Terror Disorder and Confusion, the Persian Army advanced in order of Battel, and in a terrible manner with great shouts fell in upon the Grecians, who were forc'd to receive the Charge, having now no time left for further Consultations. The Battel being now join'd, great Courage, and Resolution was shewn on all hands, and a long time the Fortune of the Day was doubtful, and many fell on both sides. But as soon as the Samian and Milesian Armies appear'd, the Courage of the Grecians was reviv'd, and the Persians so flag'd and fail'd that they forthwith fled, and were pursu'd with a very great Slaughter; for the Souldiers of Leotychidas and Xanthippus follow'd them close at their Heels, to their very Tents. In the mean time the Aeolians and many other of the Inhabitants of Asia, came in to the assistance of the Grecians though then almost Conquerours: For a general and ardent desire of Liberty possess'd all the Asian Cities, and therefore many neither regarded Leagues made, or Hostages given, but together with the other Grecians with the same Rage hew'd down and slew the flying Persians. And thus the Persians, were routed and dispers'd with the slaughter of Forty Thousand Men; of the rest some of them escap'd to their Camp, and others fled to Sardis.

Xerxes being inform'd both of the Slaughter of his Men at Platea, and of the routing of his Army at Mycale, leaving part of his Forces to carry on the War, in a great Fright fled with the rest to Ecbatana.

When all was over, Leotychidas and Xanthippus sail'd back to Samos, and then receiv'd the Ionians and Aeolians as their Confederates in the War. And some time after used many persuasive Arguments to them, to leave Asia, and come over into Europe, promising them to bestow upon them the Estates of all those that had confederated themselves with the Persians. For if they continued in Asia, they would be in continual Alarms by Enemies that far excell'd them in strength, and that were near to them; and that their Friends by reason of the distance by Sea, could not be assistant to them so opportunely, and at such Seasons as their Necessity might require. Upon which Promises the Ionians, and Aeolians were persuaded, and in observance of the Grecians Desires, prepar'd themselves to take Shipping for Europe. But the Athenians afterwards changing their Minds, now persuaded them to remain where they were, and faithfully promis'd that though now if the rest of Greece should assist them, yet that they would from time to time, send them aid, as being they who were only oblig'd so to do, by reason


Page 235

of their Kindred and Relation to them. For the Athenians were jealous that if the Ionians settled in new Habitations, by the common concurrence of the Grecians, they would not for the future own Athens as their Metropolitan City and place of their Original. Whereupon the Ionians upon second thoughts determin'd not to remove out of Asia.

Things thus accomplished, the Grecian Army divided: The Lacedemonians sail'd back into Laconia; the Athenians with the Ionians and Islanders, made for Sestos; which Xanthippus the General took at the first Assault; and after he had put a Garrison into it, and discharg'd his Confederates, he return'd with his Citizens to Athens. And this was the event and issue of the Medean War (as it was call'd) after it had continu'd for the space of Two Years.

Herodotus the Historian began his History with some things before the War of Troy, and relates in Nine Books, whatever happen'd of Moment almost in all parts of the World; and concludes his History with the Fight at Micale, and the Siege, and taking of Sestos. During these Transactions, the Romans had great Wars, and shed much Blood amongst the Volsians. Spurius Cassius the Year before Consul, being convicted of Treason, for aspiring to the Supream Government, was put to Death. And these were the things done this Year.

CHAP. V.

The Death and Commendation of Gelo King of Syracuse; and the Rebuilding of Athens by the Policy of Themistocles.

TImosthenes being Archon or Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Cesus Fabius, and Lucius Aemilius Mamerchus Roman Consuls, there was a setled Peace throughout all Sicily; for the strength of the Carthaginians was utterly broken, and Gelo govern'd the Sicilians with that Justice and Equity, that the Laws flourished in every City, and Plenty every where abounded. The Syracusians making a Law against extravagant Pomps of Funerals, and not only taking away those usual vast Expences upon the Dead, but forbidding all manner of Curiosity upon that account; Gelo willing in all things to confirm what the People agreed upon, confirm'd this new Law by his own Example; for falling sick, and lying upon his Death-bed, he gave up the Kingdom to Hiere his eldest Brother, and commanded that the Law should be strictly kept in reference to his Funeral. After his Death, his Successor in burying of him, observ'd his Commands. His Body was laid in his Wife's Inheritance, within the Nine Towers (as they were call'd) Places of great and sumptuous Workmanship.

The whole City accompany'd the Body to the Place, which was about Two Hundred Stages distant: And the Citizens erected a stately Monument over him, and commanded he should for ever after be honour'd with the Honours due to the Ancient Heroes.

This Monument was in after-times destroy'd by the Carthagians in their War against the Syracusians: And the Places call'd the Nine Towers (through Envy) were demolished by Agathocles. But yet neither the Hatred of the Carthaginians, nor the Envy of Agathocles, nor the Force nor Fraud of any other Person, was able to eclipse the Glory of Gelo. For History has justly preserv'd his Fame, and will for ever hand it down to Posterity. For as it is just, and tending much to correct the Irregularities of Humane Conversation, to fix a Brand and Mark of Disgrace upon those that have used their Power wickedly and mischievously, so on the other hand, it is as just to perpetuate the Memory of those who have rul'd justly and honourably to the good of others. For this will be an Inducement to Men to behave themselves so, as to merit Commendation


Page 236

from those that come after them. Gelo reign'd only Six Years: Hiero his Brother and Heir, Eleven Years and Eight Months.

After the Victory at Platea, the Athenians brought back their Wives and Children from Troezen and Salamis to Athens, and forthwith set upon the Repairing of their Walls, and spared neither Cost nor Pains in that, nor in any other thing necessary for their Defence.

But the Lacedemonians considering that the Athenians had much advanced their Reputation by their Strength at Sea, fearing lest they should grow too strong, determin'd to forbid the building of their Walls; and therefore sent Embassadors with all speed to Athens, to let them know, that it was not for the common good and interest of Greece, that Athens should be walled; for if Xerxes should make upon them a Second Invasion with fresh and greater Forces, if he should gain Cities out of Peloponesus ready wall'd, he might from thence, as out of Forts and Castles, make suddain Incursions upon them, and thereby with ease subdue the Grecians. But when the Embassadors were not much regarded, they imperiously commanded the Carpenters and Smiths to cease from the Work. Whereupon the Athenians not knowing what to resolve upon, Themistocles (who was then in great Favour and Authority) advis'd them, that they should not at present make any Noise or Stir about the matter. For if they should contend, the Lacedemonians would easily hinder them in the Work, by making an Inrode upon them with the Forces of Peloponesus. But he intimated to the Senate privately, that he (with such others, as they should appoint) would go as Embassadors to the Lacedemonians, and there argue the Case with them concerning the Fortification of the City. And he gave in charge to the Magistrates, that if any Embassadors came from Lacedemon, they should detain them till his return from thence; and in the mean time they should with the assistance of the whole City go on with the Work, and that was the very way (he told them) to effect their Design.

The Athenians all approv'd of his Advice, and Themistocles with those join'd in Embassy with him, set forth for Sparta. In the mean time the People of Athens set upon the Work with might and main, sparing neither House nor Sepulchre for Materials: Women and Children, Strangers and Servants were all imploy'd, and none permitted to be idle. The Work went on beyond expectation, and through the multitude of Hands, and diligence of those imploy'd, advanc'd to Admiration; which being nois'd abroad, the Lacedemonians were very hot with Themistocles concerning the Fortifying of the City. But he denied all, and wish'd them not rashly to believe every little Story spread Abroad, but rather to send some faithful Messengers, who might bring them a certain account of the truth, how Matters went; and for further Assurance, he deliver'd up himself and his Associats as Hostages to the Spartans.

The Lacedemonians at present pacify'd and perswaded by what Themistocles had said, took him and his Associates into Custody, and forthwith sent some of the chief of the Citizens to Athens, to make strict inquiry and observation how Affairs were. In the mean time, the Athenians in a short space, advanc'd their Walls to their just height. The Spartan Embassadors as soon as they entred into Athens, being very turbulent, and sharply threatning the Athenians for what they had done, they committed them all to Prison, declaring they should not be set at Liberty, till Themistocles and the rest of their Embassadors were sent Home. By this Trick the Laconians being deluded, were forc'd to redeem their own Embassadors by the discharge of the Athenians. And this Policy of Themistocles in procuring the walling of the City, both with effectual speed and safety, purchased the great Love and Honour of the Citizens.

Whilst these things were acting in Greece, the Romans made War upon the Tuscans, and got a great Victory, with the Slaughter of many of their Enemies, and afterwards took Tusculum by Storm, and reduced the City of the Esculaneans.


Page 237

CHAP. VI.

The inlarging of the Haven at Athens by Themistocles. The Treason of Pausanias, and the Justice of Aristides.

AT the end of the Year, Adimantus was chosen Archon of Athens, and Fabius Vibulanus, and L. Valerius were Consuls of Rome. At this time Themistocles for his excellent Government and ingenuity in state Policy, was in great esteem, not only at Athens, but over all Greece. Being hereby encouraged, he made it his Business (by further and greater Services) to enlarge the Bounds and Sovereignty of his Country: For confidering that there was no Haven at the Pyreum, and the Athenians were forced to make use of Phaleron for their Port, which was strait and incommodious, he contriv'd to turn that into an Harbour, which would require the least Charge, and yet would be the most beautiful and spacious Haven in all Greece, which being accomplished, he hop'd would conduce to the making the Athenians Masters of the Seas; who then had a great Fleet, and were famous for their many Victories at Sea.

By this means he hop'd the Ionians (being defcended from the same Ancestors) would be brought over to them, and so by their Assistance he should be able to restore all the Grecians in Asia to their Liberty, and thereby for ever oblige them to be Friends to the Athenians.

Moreover he concluded that the Islanders mov'd with the Athenians strength at Sea, would presently join with them, who were judg'd Persons that might be of great advantage or prejudice to them. And he very well understood that the Lacedemonians were very considerable at Land, but understood little of Sea-Affairs; but yet he kept all private to himself, being assured that the Lacedemonians would never suffer it to be done.

Therefore in a Publick Assembly, he told the Citizens that he had found out something of very great moment and advantage to the Commonwealth; but that it was not at present expedient to make it publick; being of that nature, that the fewer that were acquainted, the better; and therefore wished the People to chuse Two whom they could best trust, to whom he would discover the whole Design.

The People hereupon chose Two, Aristides and Xanthippus, not only because they were Men of Integrity and honest Principles, but that they emulated Themistocles, and secretly envy'd him for the Glory and Reputation he had amongst the People. When they had privately heard what he had design'd, and his Reasons, they made report unto the Assembly, that what Themistocles had contriv'd, was not only great, but of extraordinary advantage to the Commonwealth, and with ease to be effected. The People were presently taken with great admiration of the Man; and yet as soon struck with a suspition, lest by these Inventions and great Designs, he aim'd at the Sovereignty. Therefore they commanded he should forthwith discover his Purposes. But he told them again and again, that it was not for the publick good openly to reveal them.

The People now more admiring the Courage and Constancy of the Man, commanded him to reveal the business to the Senate privately; and if the Senate did judge that it was a matter feasible, and of certain advantage to the Publick, then whatever was necessary for the Execution of his Design should be granted to him. Upon which, when he had informed the Senate of the particulars, and when upon the Relation, all was judg'd both easie, and of highest Concern and Advantage to the Commonwealth, every thing at length was granted to him which he desired (in order to the effecting of his Design) with the approbation and consent of the People.

The Assembly then broke up with great admiration of Themistocles, every one expecting what would be the issue of their Counsels. And now being furnished with all things necessary, both as to Men and Money, he contriv'd how to delude the Lacedemonians a Second time; for he was assur'd, that as they had


Page 238

oppos'd the repairing of the Walls, so they would with all their power and might obstruct the making of the Port.

He sent therefore Embassadors to Sparta, who should let them know how much it tended to the advantage of Greece, in case of future Invasions by the Grecians, to have in some Place or other a commodions Haven. By this Contrivance giving a check and stop to any hasty opposition by the Lacedemonians, he forthwith sets upon the Work. And all Hands being imployed in the business, the Port was finished upon a suddain, and beyond all expectation. Then he advis'd the People that they would add Twenty Gallies more every Year to the Fleet they had, and that they would priviledge with freedom from all Impositions all Strangers and Artificers, that by that means both the City might become Populous, and store of Workmen and Tradesmen might be had with little pains; for he conceiv'd both necessary, not only for the increase, but the support of their power at Sea: And thus the Athenians were imploy'd.

The Lacedemonians now commanded Pausanias who was their General at Platea, to free the Greek Cities from the Persian Garrisons which still remain'd amongst them; whereupon he sail'd from Peloponesus (with Fifty Gallies, and from Athens with Thirty, of which Aristides was Admiral) to Cyprus, and there deliver'd the Cities from the Garrisons that were fixt amongst them. Thence sailing back to the Hellespont, he took Byzantium, then under the Persian Yoke, and freed the City; some of the Barbarians being put to the Sword, and others taken Prisoners; amongst whom, some of the Persians of great Quality were taken and deliver'd to the care and custody of Gongylus of Eretria, under pretence to reserve them for Punishment, but in truth to return them safe to Xerxes: For he had contracted a private Confederacy with the King, and was to marry the King's Daughter for his Reward, in undertaking to betray Greece. All these Matters were transacted by Messengers and Interpreters between him and Artabazus the Persian General, who secretly fed Pansanias with Money, with which he corrupted such Grecians as were for his Purpose.

But the Treason was discover'd, and the Author fell under just Punishment in this manner: Giving himself up to Persian Luxury and Excess, and carrying it with great Insolency and Tyranny towards those that were committed to his Charge, all highly resented his Pride and Haughtiness, especially those that had born any Office and place of Magistracy in the Commonwealth. The Souldiers therefore every where murmuring, and in all their Meetings, complaining one to another of these things, and of the Pride and Tyranny of Pausanias, the Peloponesians at length deserted him, and return'd into their own Country, and sent Messengers to Sparta, to accuse him.

But Aristides the Athenian making use of the present occasion in all publick Meetings and Assemblies, stirr'd up the Cities, and by fair and smooth Words so far wrought, as to prevail with them to put themselves under the Protection of the Athenians. And that which help'd forward the matter to the advantage of the Athenians was this that follows. Pausanias had agreed with Artabazus, that he should not suffer any to return that brought him Letters from himself, lest their Intreagues should be discovered: Whereupon all such Messengers were kill'd to prevent their Return; which being taken notice of, and suspected by one imploy'd in that Affair, he open'd the Letters deliver'd to him, and by the Contents being now confirm'd in his former Opinion of the Destruction of the other Letter-Carriers, he deliver'd the Letters to the Ephori; who not being fully satisfied of the truth by those Letters which were very dark; but insisting upon further and clearer Evidence, the Messenger told them he would find out a way how they might convict him of his Treason, by Testimony out of his own Mouth.

Whereupon the Messenger forthwith went to Tenarus, to pay his Devotion in the Temple of Neptune, where he wrought a double Tent, one within another, within one of which were conceal'd some of the Ephori and other Spartans. Pausanias hastens


Page 239

thither, and inquires of him, what was the ground and cause of his Earnestness in his Addresses; who complain'd, that he by his Letters had determin'd his Death notwithstanding his Innocency. Upon which, Pausanias declar'd he was very sorry for what he had done, and begg'd his Pardon, and entreated him to conceal the matter, and promised he would bountifully reward him: And so they parted.

But the Ephori and those with them took little notice at that time of the business; but a while after, the Lacedemonians with the authority of the Ephori, consulted together to seize him, and bring him to his Tryal; which he foreseeing, fled to the Temple of Minerva Chalcidica.

The Lacedemonians being at a stand, whether it were lawful for them to force him out of the Temple, it's said his Mother went thither, and plac'd a Tile she brought with her before the Gate of the Temple, and without doing or saying any other thing, return'd to her own House; which when the Lacedemonians understood (according to the Mother's Sentence) they made up the Gate of the Temple, and by this means he was famish'd to Death. His Body indeed was deliver'd to his Friends to be bury'd; but the Deity was highly incens'd for the Violation of the Sanctuary: For when the Spartans went to enquire at the Oracle of Delphos, concerning some other matters, they were commanded to restore the Suppliant to the Goddess: Which Command being impossible for them to observe, there were many and great Consultations among 'em what was best to be done. At length they came to this Resolve, to set up and dedicate Two Brazen Statues of Pausanias in the Temple of Minerva, which was done accordingly.

And now according to our usual manner, through the whole Course of our History, as we have used to advance the just Praises of them that were vertuous and deserving, and on the other hand, to perpetuate the dishonourable Actions (after their Deaths) of such as acted wickedly, so we shall not let pass the detestable Malice and Treason of Pausanias, without Censure. For who could not but admire the madness of this Man? who after his Victory obtain'd at Platea, and by other noble Actions, being grown so deservedly famous and popular among the the Grecians, did not only neglect to preserve what honour and authority he had gain'd, but in a sordid manner (thirsting after the Riches and effeminate Delights of the Persians,) wickedly stain'd all his former Glory by Treason. Grown proud by success, he grew weary of the plain Laconian way of Living, and gave himself up to the Luxury, Voluptuousness, and softness of the Persians, whom it less became of all other Men to imitate. For he knew (not by relation from others) but by his own Experience, how much the severe Discipline of his own Country did exceed the soft Manners of the other, as to the advancement of Vertue and Courage: And therefore his Treason not only brought upon himself just punishment, but likewise was the occasion that all his fellow Citizens were deprived of the Admiralty at Sea.

For the great care and integrity of Aristides in the management of Martial Affairs being taken notice of, as likewise his Courtesie and Moderation towards all that were under his Command (and that managed with an apparent demonstration of all manner of Virtuons Qualities) all with one consent chose to subject themselves to the Athenians. The Captains and Officers therefore sent from Sparta, no longer regarding Pausanias, but all admiring Aristides, submitted in every thing to him, by which means he got the Sovereignty of the Sea without Blows.

Aristides therefore forthwith propounds to his Confederates, That it might be decreed by the general Consent of the People in their Publick Assemblies, that from thenceforth a common Fond or Treasury should be appointed at Delos, where all the Money collected for publick Service should be kept. In pursuance of which Counsel, for the better managing of the War against the Persians (wherewith they were then threatned) all the Cities were commanded to contribute according to their several Abilities; which was so liberally done, as the Sum amounted to no less than Five Hundred and Sixty Talents; which he so equally and justly disposed of (being made Lord Treasurer) that he gain'd the entire consent and approbation of all the Cities to whatsoever he thought fit to be done.


Page 240

And now having accomplished that, which above all other things seemed to be most difficult; for his Justice and Integrity, he got the Name of Aristides the Just. And so the very same time that Pausanias by his Wickedness depriv'd his Citizens of the chief Command at Sea, Aristides by his Virtue gain'd for the Athenians that Sovereignty which they never had before. And these were the Actions of this Year.

CHAP. VII.

Hiero King of Sicily prepares to besiege Agrigentum; discovers the Treason of them of Himera to Thero their Prince. Expells the Cateneans and Naxians.

WHen Phedon was Archon of Athens, the Seventy Sixth Olympiad was perform'd, in which Scamander of Mitylene was Victor; the Consuls of Rome were Cesus Fabius and Spur. Furius Medullinus. About this time died Leotichidas King of Sparta, in the Two and Twentieth Year of his Reign, to whom succeeded Archilaus, who reign'd Two and Forty Years. At the same time died Anaxilaus King of Rhegium, and Zancles after he had governed Eighteen Years, and Micychus (a faithful Trustee) was admitted into the Government, upon Condition that he should restore all to the Children of the deceased King when they came of Age.

Hiero King of Syracuse, after the Death of Gelo, had a jealous Eye towards his Brother Polyzelus, because of his great Interest and Esteem among the People; and therefore contriv'd how to take him out of the way; to which end, he imploys all Mercenaries and Strangers about him for his Guard, judging that to be the surest way for the keeping Possession of the Kingdom.

And when the Sybarites were besieged by the Crotonites, and desir'd assistance from him, he rais'd a great Army, and committed the charge of the War to Polyzelus, with a purpose that he might fall in the Battel. But Polyzelus suspecting the Design, refused the Command; at which the King fell into a great Rage against his Brother, who fled to Thero King of Agrigentum; whereupon Hiero makes all preparation and speed to besiege them both.

In the mean time, Thrasideus the Son of Thero being Governor of Himera, by his harsh and severe Government, quite lost the Hearts of the People. But they not daring to complain to his Father, (not looking upon him as an impartial Judge) sent Embassadors to Hiero, with great Accusations against Thrasideus, and offer both to deliver up their City, and to assist him against Thero. But Hiero (judging it better for his purpose to deal with Thero in a calm and peaceable manner) secretly betrays the Himerians and their Plots against him. All things being made apparent and plain, Thero is not only reconcil'd to Hiero, but likewise restores Polyzelus to his Brother's former Love and Favour, and puts to death many of the Traitors of Himera.

About the same time Hiero expelled the Cataneans and Naxians from their own Country, and planted the Cities with new Colonies of Five Thousand Men out of Peloponesus, and as many from Syracuse, and call'd Catana Aetna; and distributed not only the Country of Catana, but many large Tracts adjoyning, by Lot amongst the Citizens, which were Ten Thousand. And this he did, both to have Succors at hand upon any Pressing occasion, and likewise that he might be honoured after his Death, as the Founder of so great a City, (wherein were contained Ten Thousand Inhabitants. The Cataneans and Naxians he transplanted into the City of the Leontines, commanding them to abide there in common freedom with the rest of the Inhabitants.


Page 241

Thero in like manner considering how Himera was in a great measure depopulated, planted the Doreans there, and ordered that whosoever would, should be inroll'd Citizens of that Place. These govern'd the Commonwealth with great Commendation for the space of Fifty Eight Years: Not long after which time, the Carthaginians raz'd the City to the Ground, which hath continu'd ruin'd and in its Rubbish to this Day.

CHAP. VIII.

The Lacedemonians quarrel with the Athenians for the Dominion of the Sea.

WHen Dromoclides was Archon of Athens, and Marcus Fabius, and Caius Manlius Consuls of Rome, the Lacedemonians were highly concern'd for their loss of the Sovereignty of the Sea, and therefore being greatly exasperated against the Grecians, who had deserted them, they breath'd out Revenge, with just Indignation against them. A General Council therefore being call'd, they advis'd together concerning War to be proclaim'd against the Athenians, in order to the Recovery of their Dominion at Sea: And in several other Assemblies of the People, most of them (especially the Young Men) were very hot and eager for the War, vaunting every where how rich they should be if they succeeded in their Design, and how all would be encouraged in the Service of their Country, when every private Family hath had such advantages and occasions to enrich and advance themselves.

And they call'd to mind an old Prophesie from the Oracle, which bid them beware of having but an half Empire, which could signifie nothing else (as they alledg'd) but the present Circumstances they were in. For being there were Two Sovereignties, the one at Land, and the other at Sea, if they lost the one, they must needs be Masters but of a Lame Government.

The whole City almost being of the Opinion for a War, the matter was again referr'd to the Senate, supposing none would dare to contradict the general Sense of the Citizens. But one of the Senators, of the Family of Hercules, call'd Hetaemaridas, (a Man of great Esteem among the Citizens for his Virtue) advised quite otherwise, and declar'd his Opinion that they should suffer the Athenians quietly to enjoy the Dominion of the Sea, for that it was not the Custom of the Commonwealth of Sparta, to contend about that Sovereignty. And urging many Reasons for the confirmation of his Opinion (which was not at first very grateful) he at length prevail'd both with the Senate and People to wave the War. And so it was concluded, according to his Advice, as most advantagious to desist.

The Athenians at the first were in great fear of a bloody War with the Spartans about this Command at Sea, and therefore they built many Gallies for that purpose, and provided a great Mass of Treasure, and sought to gain all their Neighbours and Confederates with the greatest Demonstrations of kindness and courtesie imaginable. But hearing of what was resolv'd and determin'd by the Lacedemonians, all fear of War being now vanish'd, they wholly bent their Minds to advance the power and greatness of their City.


Page 242

CHAP. IX.

Hiero breaks the power of the Hetruscans by Sea.

WHen Acestoridas was Archon of Athens, and Cesus Fabius, and T. Virginius Consuls of Rome, at that time Hiero King of Syracuse (at the Request of the Citizens of Cuma in Italy by their Ambassadors who were greatly annoy'd by the Hetruscans) sent a considerable Fleet to their Assistance, who joyning Battel with the Hetruscans of Tyrenia, in a Sea-Fight sunk several of their Ships, and obtain'd a compleat Victory, and so the power of the Hetruscans being broken, they return'd to Syracuse.

CHAP. X.

The War between the Tarentines and the Japigians.

MEnon being Archon of Athens, L. Aemilius Mamercus, and C. Cornelius L

•ntulus,

 Consuls of Rome, broke out a War between the Tarentines and the Japiges, concerning the Limits of their Lands. At the first there were but little Skirmishes, and taking Booties one from another: But the Enmity increasing by degrees, and in the mean time Slaughters being committed far and near on both sides, at length it broke out into open War. The Japiges, of their Citizens and Confederates, bring into the Field above Twenty Thousand Men. The Tarentines understanding the great Preparation made against them, both with their own Citizens and Confederates of Rhegium, likewise take the Field. A bloody Battel was fought, and after many kill'd on both sides, at length the Japiges became absolute Victors; and in the Pursuit, the Tarentines were scattered, and broken into Two Parties, whereof one fled back towards Tarentum, the other were furiously driven towards Rhegium. The Japiges likewise divided themselves into Two Parties, of which, the one pursu'd close upon the back of the Tarentines; and in regard the distance of Place was but very small, there was a very great Slaughter made. The other Party so hotly pursu'd them of Rhegium, that they fell in pell-mell with them into the City, and so took and possessed it.


Page 243

CHAP. XI.

The Death of Thero Prince of Agrigentum, and the Tyranny of his Son Thrasydeus, who Abdicated the Government, and kill'd himself. Three Hundred of the Family of the Fabii slain at one time.

THE next Year, Chares was Archon at Athens, and at Rome, Titus Memius, and Caius Horatius were Consuls. Then were celebrated the Olympian Games at Elis, being the Seventy. Seventh Olympiad, in which Dancles of Argos was Victor. About this time, Thero King of Agrigentum died, in the Sixteenth Year of his Reign, and Thrasydeus his Son succeeded.

Thero governed with great Moderation and Justice, and therefore was greatly loved and honoured by his Subjects: And at his Death was reverenced as a Divine Heroe; but his Son even in his Father's Life-time, appeared to be of a violent and bloody Disposition.

And after his Father's Death, throwing aside all restraint of the Laws, he rul'd arbitrarily and tyrannically: For which reason his Subjects combin'd against him, as one not fit to be intrusted with the Government, and perfectly hated by all. And therefore within a little time after he came to an end suitable to his Deserts.

For after the Death of his Father, he rais'd a great Army of Mercenaries, and of his own Subjects of Agrigentum and Himera, to the number of above Twenty Thousand Horse and Foot, and with these went against the Syracusians. But Hiero furnish'd with a considerable Army, wasted the Borders of Agrigentum, and after join'd Battel with the Enemy, in which most of the Grecians on both sides being drawn up one against another, were slain. But the Syracusians got the Day, with the loss of Two Thousand Men; of the other side were kill'd above Four Thousand.

Thrasideus by this ill Success, perplexed in his Mind, Abdicated his Government, and fled to the Megarians call'd Miseans, and being there condemn'd to Dye, slew himself. The Agrigentines after they had restor'd and setled their Democratical Government, sent an Embassador to Hiero, to strike up a Peace. At the same time in Italy, the Romans had War with the Veians, and in a great Battel at Cremera were routed; and amongst others, Three Hundred of the Fabii, all of one Family, were slain every Man. And these were the Affairs and Events of this Year.


Page 244

CHAP. XII.

The Malice of the Lacedemonians against Themistocles, and his Banishment. His Praise.

THE next Year Praxiergus being Archon of Athens, Aulus Virgilius Tricostus, and C. Servilius, Roman Consuls; the Eleans who before lived dispers'd in several little Villages, now imbody'd themselves into one City, call'd Elis. The Lacedemonians observing how Sparta was contemn'd and evil spoken of by reason of the Treachery of Pausanias, and how the Name of Athens grew famous for their Loyalty and Faithfulness one to another, endeavour'd all they could to stain the Athenians with the same Blot of Ignominy. And therefore for as much as Themistocles was a Man of great Repute and Esteem amongst the Athenians, they accuse him of Treason, as if he consulted with Pausanias how to betray Greece to Xerxes. And the more to provoke the Enemies of Themistocles, and to stir them up to accuse him, they made use both of Bribes and false Insinuations, affirming that Pausanias discover'd his Treasonable Design of betraying Greece unto Themistocles, and solicited him to join with him both in Counsel and aid other ways: But though Themistocles would not then agree to do that, yet he did not look upon himself obliged to discover his Friend. However (notwithstanding the Potency of his Adversaries) Themistocles was clearly acquitted, and his Name grew more famous amongst the Athenians, for he was greatly beloved by the Citizens for the former eminent Services he had done the Commonwealth. But afterwards (when by reason of his Popularity, he became suspected by some, and envy'd by others) unmindful of his former Deserts) they determin'd both to weaken his Authority, and to bring down the height of his Spirit. In the first place therefore, they Banish'd him the City, by the Judgment of Ostracism. This Law was instituted at Athens, after the Tyrants were expell'd out of the City by Pisistratus: And the Law was thus; Every Citizen writ the Name of him in a Shell, whom they most suspected to be in a capacity. (by reason of his Power and Interest) to overturn the Popular Government; and he whose Name was writ in most of the Shells, was forthwith Banished for the space of Five Years. And this Law was used at Athens, not so much as a punishment for any particular Offence, as to humble the Spirits of proud and aspiring Men, and by their Banishment to reduce them to more Moderation and Submission.

Themistocles thus banish'd from his Country, went to Argos; which when known by the Lacedemonians (supposing now they had a fair opportunity to ruin him,) they sent again Embassadors to Athens, to accuse him as being in Conspiracy with Pausanias in his Treason; alledging that those Injuries which did concern all Greece in general, should not be determin'd by the Athenians only, but by a Common Council of Greece, which was wont upon such occasions to be assembled at Sparta. Themistocles considering that the Lacedemonians were resolv'd to expose the Athenians to Shame and Contempt, and that they of Athens were as ready to oppose them, in defending their Country against the Crime objected, he concluded that the matter concerning him, would be agreed to be heard in a Common and General Assembly of the Grecians at Sparta: And he had had experience, that the Lacedemonians were guided more by Interest and Favour, than by the Rules of Justice, as by a late Experiment was apparent in a Judgment they lately gave, in a Cause between them of Argos and Athens: For they that were Judges in that Assembly, were so envious against the Athenians, that though the Athenians provided more Ships for the late War, than all the Grecians beside; yet they judg'd them worthy of no more Honour than any of the rest of the Greeks: For these Reasons he judg'd it not advisable to trust to that Assembly at Sparta; for from his late defence made at Athens, they took occasion to renew their Accusation; for in his Justification he had confess'd he had received Letters from Pausanias, to perswade him to joyn with him in his Treason, conceiving this would be a strong Argument for the support of his Innocency; in


Page 245

Hardiness of the Thebans, or their skill in Martial Affairs, (for in these the Athenians were inferior to none) as by their number, and being better Arm'd and appointed, and far exceeding the other in Order and manner of Battle. For the Athenians had very few Darters amongst them, whereas the Thebans had thrice as many, besides Slingers and Archers from the Thessalians, who were us'd to be exercis'd in that way of Fighting from their Childhood, and by that means were always very serviceable in all Encounters.

The Athenians therefore, what with being Gaul'd by the Light Arm'd Men, and over-power'd by the Horse, were forc'd to fly. Yet because they fled out from the Wings, they easily repair'd the Damage they sustain'd, for they broke not into their own Foot in their flight, but falling in with some Eubeans, and some other Mercenaries, that were sent out before to take in some Hills near the place, (with whom they had a sharp Engagement) they put every Man of them to the Sword. For the Theban Horse did not pursue them that fled, but Charg'd in upon the Enemies Foot with a design to break through 'em: upon which, the Dispute was very hot and sharp; but at length the Athenians fled outright: But the Colonel of the Aelean Horse who was in the Rear-guard of the Army) succour'd them; and cuting off many of the Boetians, renew'd the Fight. And thus was the Rout in the Athenians Left Wing in a great measure repair'd by the Aelean Horsemen. In the Engagement by the Horse in the other Wing, the success was doubtful a little while. But within a short time the Mantineans were put to the Rout by the multitude and strength of the Boeotian and Thessalian Horsemen, and with great Loss were forc'd to fly for shelter to their own Battalion of Foot. And this was the issue of the Engagement between the Horse. The Foot as soon as they Engag'd fought with wonderful heat and resolution. Never was there greater Armies in the Field in any Battle between Grecians and Grecians; nor more brave and excellent Commanders, or that ever approv'd themselves with more Valour and Courage. For the Boeotians and Lacedemonians who were in that Age counted the best Land Soldiers in the World, fronted one another, and began the Onset with that Fury as if they valu'd not their Lives in the least. They first began with their Lances, which being for the most part broken in pieces by the violence and heat of the Charge, they fell to their Swords. Then setting Foot to Foot all sorts of Wounds, curable and Mortal, slight and deadly, were given and receiv'd without remitting any thing of their first Heat or Resolution; And they continu'd in this sharp Engagement with that Valour, and so long a time (neither side giving the least ground) that Victory seem'd to hover over both (uncertain where it would fall) For every one slighted and contemn'd Danger, and (desiring nothing more than to make himself remarkable by some Glorious piece of Service for his Country) with a brave Gallantry of Mind coveted to exchange Life for Honour. After the Battle had continu'd long, and none were able to judge who would be the Conquerors; Epaminondas (conceiving the present state of the Parties engag'd requir'd his assistance) resolv'd to decide the Matter with the hazard of his own Life. To that end taking a choice Band of the most able Men he had with him, and drawing them up in close Order, he forthwith Charg'd at the head of them, and was the first that cast his Javelin and kill'd the Lacedemonian General, and then broke into the midst of his Enemies; then others presently following (beating down all before him) he clave asunder the Enemies Battle. For the Fame of Epaminondas, and the strength of that Body he then had with him, struck such a Terror into the Lacedemonians, that they turn'd their backs, and began to make away: Upon which the Boeotians pursu'd close, and kill'd all that were in the Rear, so that heaps of Carkasses cover'd the Ground. At length when the Lacedemonians perceiv'd that the fierceness and heat of Epaminondas had precipitated him too far, they all in a Body made up upon him, throwing infinite number of Darts at him, of which he put by some, and receiv'd others upon his Target, and pluckt others out of his Body with his own hands, and threw them back into the face of the Enemy. At last whilst he was most Heroically bestirring himself to gain the Victory for his Country, he receiv'd a Mortal wound in his Breast by a Dart thrown with such a force, as that the Wood broke, and the Iron with the Trunchion remain'd in his Body, so that by the greatness of the wound he suddenly fell to the ground. And now the Contest grew very sharp and hot for the recovery of his Body, and after a great slaughter made, the Thebans being of much stronger Bodies than the Lacedemonians, at length put their Enemies to flight. The Boeotians pursu'd them a little way, but presently return'd, as looking upon it absolutely necessary to have the power of the Bodies. The Trumpets therefore sounding a Retreat, both Armies drew off; and each party erected a Trophy, both pretending to the Victory. For the Athenians possess'd the Bodies of all those Eubeans and Mercenaries that were slain at the Hill: On the other side the Boeotians


Page 246

that had routed the Lacedemonians, and were Masters of the dead, challeng'd the Victory. And for some time neither side sent any Trumpets to Treat for burying the Dead, lest they that were first should be thought to yield the day. Yet at last the Lacedemonians first sent a Trumpet to procure Liberty to bury their Men: Whereupon all were buried that were slain on both sides.

But Epaminondas (yet living) was brought back into the Camp; and when the Physitians that were sent for, told him that he would certainly Die as soon as the Dart was drawn out of his Body, he was not at all daunted: But first call'd for his Armour-bearer, and ask'd whether his Shield was safe? When he answer'd it was, and shew'd it to him; then he enquir'd whether side had got the day. The Youth making return that the Boeotians were Victors: Why then, saith he, Now is the time to die: And forthwith order'd the Dart to be drawn out. And when all his Friends round about him cry'd out, and one with great Lamentation express'd himself thus; And what, O Epaminondas, Dost thou die Childless? No, by Jupiter (said he,) But I leave behind me Two Daughters, whereof the one is Victory at Leuctra, and the other at Mantinea. And so upon drawing out the head of the Dart, he quietly breath'd out his last, without any shew of Trouble, or Disorder of Mind.

And because it was our usual Method to give an Honourable Testimony of Worthy and Deserving Men after their Deaths, we think we might be justly blam'd if we should omit so brave a Man, without a peculiar remark. For he seems to me to be not only the most skilful General, and of the most Just and Generous Disposition of any of his own time, (among whom the most famous were Pelopidas the Theban, Timotheus, Conon, Chabrias, Iphicrates, Athenians, and Agesilaus the Spartan (who was a little before him) but likewise of any that liv'd before him in the time of the Medes and Persians, as Solon, Themistocles, Miltiades, Cimon, Mironides, Pericles, and some other Athenians; and Gelo the Son of Dinomenes in Sicily, and some others, whose several Excellencies if any will compare with the Military Art, and the Glory of the Arms of Epaminondas, he shall soon find him to exceed them in many degrees. For among them some one peculiar Excellency was only remarkable in each particular Person; but in him a Constellation of Virtues were Hous'd together. For in Strength and Comliness of Body, Volubility of Tongue, Gallantness of Spirit, Contempt of Wealth, and impartial Justice (and that which was far before all the rest) in Valour and Skill in Martial Affairs (absolutely necessary for a General) he far excell'd 'em all. When alive, he gain'd the Sovereign Power for his Country; but by his Death they lost it again, and their Affairs declin'd to the worse ever afterwards; and at length by the Sloth and Ignorance of their Commanders they were utterly ruin'd, and reduc'd to perfect Slavery. And this was the end of Epaminondas, a Man honoured, and esteemed of all.

After this Battle, the Grecians being tir'd out with continual Wars, and contented now to draw stakes, put an end to the War, and entred into a general League Offensive and Defensive, in which the Messineans were included. But the Lacedemonians (by reason of the implacable Hatred they bore the Messineans) would not subscribe the Articles of Peace: And therefore they of all the Grecians were the only Men that swore not to the League. As to the Writers in this year; Xenophon the Athenian concludes his History of the Wars of Greece with the death of Epaminondas. Anaximenes likewise of Lampsacus writ the First Part of his History of the Grecian Affairs from the Origin of the Gods, and the First Being of Mankind to the Battle of Mantinea, and the death of Epaminondas, containing almost all the Affairs both of the Grecians and Barbarians in Twelve Volumes. Lastly Philistus, who writ the History of Dionysius the younger in Two Books, ends them here.


Page 247

CHAP. XIII.

Cymon the Athenian General, gains many Places for the Athenians; routs the Persians by a Stratagem at Eurymedentum.

DEmotion or Dromodides being Archon at Athens, the Romans chose P. ValeriusPublicola, and Naulius Rufus Consuls.

During the Government of Demotion, the Athenians chose Cymon, the Son of Miltiades, to be their General, and with a great Army commanded him to pass over into Asia, to aid the Confederate Cities, and to free them that were as yet garrison'd by the Persians. He came with a Fleet to Bizantium, and took the City Eion from the Persians; and forced Scyrus, where the Pelasgi and Delopes inhabited; and appointing one amongst the Athenians to see the Repair of it, he divided the Country by Lot.

From hence (with his Mind and Thoughts full of great Projects) he sail'd back to the Pyreum, and being furnished with more Ships and sufficient Provision, he puts forth again with a Navy of two hundred Sail.

At length with the Ionians, and other Confederates, he got together a Fleet of three hundred Sail, and made for Caria. And when he came there, all the Grecian Cities upon the Sea-Coast, immediately revolted from the Persians. The rest (which were filled with the natural Inhabitants, and with Persian Garrisons) Cymon took by Storm. All being thus brought under his Power in Caria, Lycia wholly submitted and came under his Protection. By those that came in to the Athenians the Fleet was greatly encreased. Hereupon the Persians prepared Land-Forces of their own Country, but their Seamen were of Phenicia and Cilicia: Tithraustes, Xerexs his Bastard Son, was General of the Persian Army.

Cymon having Intelligence, that the Persian Fleet lay at Cyprus, makes straight thither, and joyns Battle with his Two hundred and fifty Ships, against Three hundred and forty of the Persians. It was fought stoutly and bravely on both sides; at length the Victory fell to the Athenians, who (besides many that were sunk and destroyed) took above a Hundred Ships with their Men. The rest flying to Cyprus, the Souldiers left their Ships and ran ashore, and the empty Vessels afterwards came into the Hands of the Enemy.

Cymon being not yet satisfied with this Victory, forthwith sail'd away with his whole Fleet, with a Design to fall upon the Land-Army of the Persians, who were then encamp'd at Eurymedon, contriving to delude them by a Stratagem; he fill'd the Ships he had taken with the stoutest of his Men, with Turbans and other Ornaments attired like the Persians, who deceiv'd by the Make and Furniture of the Persian Ships, took them for a fresh Supply, and received the Athenians as Friends.

Cymon when Night came, landed his Men, and being taken as a Friend, he rushed into the Camp of the Barbarians, now fill'd with Confusion and Terror, (his Soldiers killing all before 'em, and amongst the rest, Pheredates in his Tent, the King's Nephew on his Brother's side, another General of the Persians Army.) At length the whole Army through the sudden and unexpected Assault, were totally routed and put to flight; and such a Fear and Consternation surprized the Persians, that many of 'em knew not by whom they were broken; for they could not in the least imagine, that they were assaulted by the Grecians, who had no Land-Army as they were verily perswaded; but thought that the Pisideans their Neighbours, who had been a little before provoked, had risen in Arms against them. Supposing therefore this Impression upon them, to be made from the Land, they fled to their Ships as to their Friends; and because the Night was very dark, the Mistake was the greater, and more mischievous, none knowing certainly what to do. When the Persians in this Confusion were slaughtered on every side, Cymon having before directed his Soldiers, that as soon as he should lift up a burning Torch, they should all repair thither, gave the Sign near to the Fleet, fearing some Disaster might happen by his Men being scatter'd and dispers'd in seeking after the Pillage of the Field; at the Sight of the Torch they left off pillaging, and all return'd to their Ships.


Page 248

The next day they set up a Trophy near the place, and sail'd back to Cyprus, fraught with two glorious Victories, the one at Sea, and the other at Land. For it was never before known, that such great Things both by Sea and Land were ever done by one and the same Army. From this time Cymon for the great Atchievments he had bravely and wisely perform'd, both by his Valour and Policy, was highly advanc'd in Reputation, not only amongst his Fellow-Citizens, but all the rest of the Grecians: For he took Three hundred and forty Ships, Twenty thousand Prisoners, and a vast Sum of Money. The Persians greatly perplexed with this dreadful Blow, fell a Building a greater Number of Ships than they had before; for the great Successes of the Athenians after this struck them with Fear and Terror; and from this time, the City increas'd both in Wealth and Power, and became famous abroad for the Glory of their Arms. The Athenians dedicated the Tenths of the Spoil to their Gods, with this Epigram;

Since Seas from Europe, Asia did divide,

And Mars first rag'd with bloody Hand,

Among Mankind the Sun hath not espy'd

So sad a Fight from Sea or Land.

From the Phenician Fleet when strongly man'd,

An Hundred Ships were took, these slew

Thousands of Medes, made Asia sighing stand

Sad, and oppress'd with th' Armed Crew.

These were the things done this Year.

CHAP. XIV.

A great Earthquake in Sparta; the War upon them by the Helots and Missenians.

PHedon was now Archon of Athens, and Lucius Furius Medullinus and Marcus Manlius Vulso Consuls of Rome, when a most sad and unexpected Calamity happened to the Spartans; for by an Earthquake there, not only the Houses were wholly overturn'd, but above Twenty thousand Souls buried in the Rubbish. The City shak'd for a long time together, and many by the violent Fall of the Walls of the Houses miserably perished; and the Houshold-goods and Riches of all sorts were by this dreadful Shake swallow'd up.

Thus were they punished as by some angry Deity taking Vengeance upon their Crimes. And were afterwards brought under many other Calamities, by the Hands of Men upon the Accounts following.

The Helots and Missenians (inraged not long before against the Lacedemonians) bridled their Anger for a time, whilst they fear'd the Power and Grandeur of the City of Sparta. But when they observ'd that the greatest part of the City and Inhabitants were destroyed by the late Earthquake (setting light by them that were left) they enter'd into a League, and with joint Force made War upon the Spartans. But Archidamus King of Sparta by his Prudence had preserv'd many of the Citizens from the late Ruin, and with these resolutely goes forth against the Enemy. For while the City was in the height of this terrible Convulsion, Archidamus suddenly headed his Army, and hasten'd into the open Field, and commanded the rest to follow him; by which means this remnant was preserv'd. Having then marshal'd his Men, he prepared for Battle.

The Helots with the Missenians in their first Heat, with great Confidence march'd against Sparta, supposing there was none to make any Defence. But when they understood that Archidamus was ready with the Citizens that were left, to defend the City and Country, they desisted from their Design. Afterwards from a Fort they had in Missenia they made daily inrodes into Laconia.

The Spartans send to the Athenians for Aid, who furnish'd them with Supplies: And at length, by their Diligence in procuring Assistance from the rest


Page 249

of their Confederates, they got together an Army equal to their Enemies: Nay, at the beginning of the War, they were far superior; but afterwards they dismis'd the Athenians, in truth, suspecting that they favour'd the Messenians, but pretending that the Forces of the other Confederates were sufficient for the present Service. The Athenians looking upon it as a Slight and an Affront, departed grumbling, full of Indignation, with their Hearts boyling with Revenge against the Lacedemonians; which Hatred increased every day more and more; and this was the first Cause of the Enmity between the Athenians and the Lacedemonians, which afterwards broke out into open Hostility, and fill'd the Cities with Cruelty and Bloodshed, and all Greece with Misery and Calamity: But we shall write of these things distinctly in their due place.

After this the Lacedemonians, with the Forces of their Confederates, besieged Ithome. In the mean time all the Helots revolted from the Lacedemonians, and join'd with the Messenians. And now though the War had continued ten Years compleat, wasting one another with various Successes, yet they could not decide the Controversy.

CHAP. XV.

The War between the Argives and the Mycenians.

WHen Theaginidas was Archon of Athens, and Lucius Emilius Mamercus and Lucius Vopiscus Julius, Consuls of Rome, began the Seventy Eighth Olympiad, wherein Parmenidas Possidoniates was Victor. At that time the War broke out between the Argives and the Mycenians upon the following Occasion. The Mycenians by reason of the ancient Renown and Glory of their Country, would never submit to the Government of the Argives, as all the rest of the Cities in the Territory of Argos did, but were still governed by their own Laws distinct from them of Argos. They contended likewise with the Argives, concerning the Holy Rights of the Temple of Juno, and to have the sole Management of the Nemean Games. Besides, when the Argives made a Law, that none should aid the Lacedemonians at Thermophyle, unless the Spartans would relinquish and give up part of their Country to them of Argos, they of Mycena only of all the other Cities in the Territories of Argos join'd with the Lacedemonians. And lastly, they of Argos were jealous, lest by the Growth of their Power, their ancient Courage should so revive as to contend with them for the Sovereignty. For these Reasons they had an evil Eye to the Mycenians, and some time not long before had a longing Desire to ruin their City. And now they thought a fit Occasion and Opportunity was offer'd them, to accomplish what they before design'd, in regard the Spartans seemed not to be in a Condition, by reason of their late Calamity, to aid and assist them. To this end they marched against 'em with a great Army both from Argos and their Confederates; and having routed 'em, drove 'em within the Walls, and besieg'd their City. The Mycenians made a stout Defence for a time, but wearied out and wasted by Famine, (the Laccdemonians partly thro' Wars of their own, and partly thro' the late Ruins by the Earthquake unable to assist 'em, and the help of the other Confederates failing) they became a Prey to the Conquerors. The Argives made all the Citizens Captives, and consecrated a Tenth of the Spoil to God, and laid the City even with the Ground. Such was the End of Mycena, a City in former times flourishing in all Prosperity, that had bred and brought up Men famous in their Generations, that had been glorious in the World by brave and noble Actions, and now lies wast and forsaken unto this day. These were the Affairs of this Year.


Page 250

CHAP. XVI.

The Death of Hiero.

LYsiatus being Governour or Archon of Athens, the Romans chose Lucius Pinarius Mamercinus, and Lucius Furius Fusus their Consuls. At this time Hiero King of Syracuse invited to him with many rich Presents the Sons of Anaxalius, Prince of Zancles, now Messina in Sicily, and put them in mind how kind Gelon had been to their Father, and advis'd 'em now they were come to Mens Estate, to call Micythus their Tutor to account, and to take the Sovereign Power and Government into their own Hands. Being return'd to Rhegium, they forthwith demanded an Account of Micythus of his Administration; who, being a just and honest Man, call'd together all the Friends of the two young Men, and gave so full and clear Account of his Trust, that all then present admir'd his Justice and Faithfulness. The Youths now sorry for what they had done, desir'd him to take upon him again the Government, and as their Father, to order and dispose of all Affairs as he thought fit. But Micythus utterly refus'd to be any longer concern'd; but giving up all, ship'd his Goods, and sail'd forth from Rhegium, with the general Love and Favour of the People, and made for Greece, where he lived the rest of his Time in great Repute at Tegea in Arcadia. Hiero dyed at Catena, a City repeopled by him, and was there buried with great Pomp and Solemnity after he had reigned Eleven Years. He left his Kingdom to Thrasybulus his Brother, who reigned only one Year.

CHAP. XVII.

Thrasybulus King of Syracuse depos'd by Force of Arms for his Tyranny.

NOw was Lysanias Archon of Athens, and Appius Claudius, and Titus QuintusCapitolinus, Roman Consuls, during whose Governments, Thrasybulus lost the Kingdom of Syracuse: Concerning whom, inasmuch as it is our purpose particularly and distinctly to write, it is necessary to look a little back, that so things may be more clearly understood from the beginning. Gelo, the Son of Dinome, a Man for Valour and Military Discipline excelling all the rest, by a notable Stratagem (as you have heard) routed the Carthaginians. And using his Victory with all Moderation towards them he had subdued, and dealing kindly and courteously with all his Neighbours, was greatly honoured among the Sicilians; and for the Sweetness of his Disposition, liv'd belov'd of all in Peace and Quietness to the end of his days.

Hiero the eldest of his Brothers succeeded him in the Kingdom, but far unlike him in his Government. For he was covetous, cruel and altogether a Stranger to the Candor and Sincerity of his Brother, by reason whereof many were inclin'd to a Defection and Revolt; but the Memory of Gelo's Generosity and general Kindness to all the Sicilians, restrain'd them from outward Force and Violence. But when Hiero was dead, Thrasybulus his Brother advancing to the Crown, exceeded his Predecessor in all Vice and Wickedness: For being more cruel and bloody in his Nature, he slaughtered the Citizens against all Law and Justice; and by false Accusations banished many others, and consiscated their Estates. At last hating his People, and the People on the other hand, hating him for the Injuries they had suffer'd, he rais'd a Standing Army, to defend himself against the fear'd Revolt of his Subjects. And now growing every day more and more into the Hatred of his People, abusing some, taking away the


Page 251

Lives of many others; the People not able longer to endure his Cruelties, made a general Defection, and rose up in Arms, to procure their Liberty by the Sword, and shake off that Yoke of Slavery and Tyranny they were under. Thrasibulus seeing the whole City of Syracuse in Arms against him, first endeavour'd to cool them by fair words; but when he saw they were so incens'd, that there was no opposing them, he rais'd Forces from Catana, a Colony not long before plac'd there by Hiero, and by other Confederates and Mercenaries, he got together an Army of Fifteen Thousand Men, and possessed himself of that part of the City call'd Acridina, and the Island which was strongly Fortify'd, from whence he made many Sallies and Incursions upon the Enemy.

The Syracusians at first kept that part of the City call'd Ithica, and from thence annoy'd Thrasibulus: And sent Embassadors to Gela, Agrigentum, Selenunte and Himera, and to the rest of the Cities in the Heart of Sicily, desiring aid and assistance for the recovering of their Liberty. These readily answered their Request, and sent them seasonable Supplies, some Regiments of Foot, others Troops of Horse, others Ships furnished with all necessaries for War: Thus in a short time having a considerable Force both of a Fleet at Sea, and an Army by Land, the Siracusians offer'd Battel to the Enemy, both by Sea and Land. But Thrasibulus being forsaken of his Confederates, and having now none to trust unto but his Mercenaries, betook himself only to Acridina, and the Island, and left the rest of the City wholly to the power of the Syracusians. Afterwards he fought with them at Sea, and was beaten, losing many of his Ships, and fled with those that escaped into the Island. Presently after he drew out his Men from Acridina, and joined Battel with them in the Suburbs of the City, where he was again routed, with the loss of many of his Men, and retreated a Second time within his Post in Acridina.

At length being out of all hope to regain his Sovereignty, he sent to the Syracusians, and came to terms of Agreement with them, and so departed into Locros. The Syracusians thus freed from Slavery, suffered the Mercenaries to march away peaceably. They freed likewise the rest of the Cities from such Garrisons as were put upon them, and restored to every place the Democracy. From thenceforth the Syracusians lived in great Peace and Prosperity, and injoy'd a popular Government for the space of Threescore Years, till the Reign of Dionysius. This Thrasibulus receiv'd a well order'd and constituted Kingdom, but basely lost it by his wickedness; and spent the rest of his Days at Locris as a private Man. While these things were done in Sicily, Rome first created Four to be Tribunes of the People, Caius Sicinius, Lucius Numitorius, Marcus Duillius, and Spurius Aquilius.

CHAP. XVIII.

The Murder of Xerxes by Artabanus.

AT the end of this Year, Lysitheus was made Chief Governor of Athens, and Lucius Valerius Publicola, and Titus Aemilius Mamercus, Consuls of Rome. In their times Artabanus of Hircania, in great esteem with Xerxes, and Captain of his Guard, contriv'd to gain the Kingdom by the Murder of the King. He reveals his Design to Mithridates the Eunuch, one of the King's Chamberlains (whom he most consided in, as being his near Kinsman, and whom he had oblig'd by many instances of his Favour.) Mithridates presently complies with him, and brings Artabanus privately in the Night into the Bed-Chamber, and being entred, without delay murthers the King: And in the heat of the Fact runs to the King's Sons, Two of whom, Darius the Eldest, and Artaxerxes, were then at Court: Hytaspes the Third at that time, was Governor of Bactria. Artabanus in the dead of the Night, hastens to Artaxerxes, and tells him that Darius had murther'd his Father to come to the Crown: And therefore perswades Artaxerxes that he should not slothfully suffer his Brother to settle himself on the Throne,


Page 252

but revenge his Father's Death, and take upon himself the Sovereignty. For the effecting whereof, he promis'd him to bring in the King's Guards for his Assistance. Artaxerxes was easily persuaded, and with the Assistance of the Guards kills his Brother. Artabanus seeing his Treachery to succeed according to his hearts Desire, now boasts before all his Sons that the time was come for his advancement to the Kingdom, and forthwith came to Artaxerxes with his Sword drawn, and Wounds him. The King not being much hurt, bravely Defends himself, and kills Artabanus upon the place. Having thus not only preserv'd himself, but reveng'd the Murther of his Father, he was established in the Throne of Persia. This was the end of Xerxes after he had reign'd Twenty Years. But his Successor continued Forty Four.

CHAP. XIX.

The War between the Athenians and the Aegineans.

THE following Year wherein Archimedes was Archon of Athens, Aulus Virgilius, and Titus Numitius, Roman Consuls; was the first Year of the Seventy Ninth Olympiad, at which Xenophon the Corinthian won the Prize: At this time the Thrasians revolted from the Athenians, through the Differences arising concerning the Mines, but were reduc'd by force to their Obedience. The Aegineans likewise rebell'd, and being subdued, the Athenians besieg'd their City, which was grown proud, not only through their great Successes and Victories at Sea, but their Riches at Land, and having a brave and well furnished Navy, were ever Enemies to the Athenians; who therefore entred the Island with an Army, laid waste the Country, and resolv'd to raze the City Aegina to the Ground: Hereupon now grown great in power, they carried not themselves with that Humanity and Courtesie towards their Confederates as they were used to do, but domineer'd every where with a proud and high Hand. This imperious way of theirs, caus'd many of their Confederates to enter into Consultations for a general Defection, and some particular Places determin'd it of their own accord, without flagging for, or expecting the results of a General Assembly. While these things were acting, the Athenians (being now every where Masters at Sea) sent a Colony of Ten Thousand Men to Amphipolis (chosen partly out of the Citizens, partly from among the Confederates) and divided the Country by Lot: For sometime they kept under the Thrasians that bordered upon them; but when they attempted to proceed further into the heart of the Country, those that enter'd Thrace were wholly cut off by the Edones.

CHAP. XX.

The Egyptians revolt from the Persians. New Troubles in Sicily:

TLepolemus being Governor of Athens, the Roman Consuls were Titus Quintius, and Quintus Arbilius Structus. Artaxerxes now newly come to the Throne of Persia, first put to Death all those that had an Hand in the Murther of his Father, and then setled Affairs so as he thought most conducing to the interest of the Government: For he remov'd those Governors of the Provinces whom he most suspected, and plac'd others whom he most confided in, in their room. He took care to store up all manner of Provisions, and to furnish his Army with all things necessary; and ruling with all Justice and Equity, he grew into high Esteem among the Persians. In the


Page 253

mean time the Egyptians hearing of the Death of Xerxes, and the Troubles in Persia occasion'd thereby, fell a plotting how to recover their Liberty; and to that end on a sudden rose against the Persians, and drave the Questors or Persian Treasurers out of Egypt.

Then they set up one Inarus to be their King; who first had an Army of the natural Inhabitants, and afterwards increas'd his Forces by Mercenary Foreigners. He sent likewise Embassadors to Athens, desiring their aid, with Promises that if they regain'd their Liberty, the whole Kingdom should be for their Service and Advantage as well as his; and he should be ever and in every thing grateful to them. The Athenians conceiving it to be much to their advantage, if by what force they could make, they might drain the Persians of their Money, and gain likewise the Egyptians to their interest, to be ready to serve them upon all occasions, determin'd to send to their Assistance a Navy of Three Hundred Sail; and to that end, all Hands were at work to make ready a Fleet. Artaxerxes receiving the News of the Revolt of the Egyptians, resolved to exceed them both in number of Men, and Provisions of War; and for that purpose forthwith rais'd Souldiers out of all the Provinces of the Kingdom, rigg'd out his Fleet, and omitted nothing necessary in the present Juncture. And thus stood the Affairs of Asia and Egypt at this time.

In Sicily after they had cast off the Kingly Government, and restored all the Cities to liberty, the whole Island greatly flourished; for having a rich and fertile Soyl, and Peace on every side, they grew very rich in a short time, the Land abounding in Labourers, Cattel, and all other Conveniences, for the comfort and happiness of Man's Life, much being now laid up, and nothing expended in Wars. But they continu'd not long thus, but again broke forth into Wars and Seditions upon the account following. Thrasibulus being deposed, they call'd a General Assembly, to consult about the manner of a Popular Government, and there it was unanimously decreed, that a Statue should be erected to Jove the Deliverer, as high as a Colossus, and that there should be Yearly upon the Day that they were rid of the Tyrant, and regain'd their Liberty, Sacrifices offered, and Solemn Games celebrated: At which Solemnities they likewise vow'd to sacrifice Four Hundred and Fifty Oxen, and therewith to feast all the People, and that all the Magistrates (according to the ancient Custom) should be chosen out of the chiefest Citizens; and that none of the Strangers who were made Denizens by Gelon, should be admitted to these Honours, looking upon them either as unworthy, or fearing lest they (being always inur'd to Monarchy) should endeavour a change of Government, which was no vain conception, as the Event after made evident. For Gelon had infranchis'd above Ten Thousand Mercenaries, of whom, above Seven Thousand remain'd at that time.

These being inraged thus to be excluded, and made incapable of being chosen Magistrates, began to plot, and at length joining together, seiz'd upon Acridina, a part of the City, and the forementioned Island, both of which Places were strongly wall'd and fortify'd.

On the other side in this Confusion, the Syracusians possessed themselves of another part of the City, especially towards the Epipole, defending themselves with a Wall and strong Guards. The Seditious were so penn'd up, that they grew scant in their Provisions. And though they were far less in number than the Citizens, yet they were much better Souldiers; and therefore when ever they made any Sallies, in every Skirmish they went off with Success. But being so close shut up, they were nigh famished. And this was the state of Sicily at this time.

This Year Conon was Archon of Athens, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, and TiberiusAemilius Mamercus were Roman Consuls. At this time Artaxerxes King of Persia, made Archemenes the Son of Darius his great Uncle, General of his Army intended against Egypt, which consisted of above Three Hundred Thousand Horse and Foot: With these he march'd into Egypt, and incamp'd near the River Nile, and as soon as he had refresh'd his Army, prepar'd for Battel. The Egyptian Forces were made up of Africans and Egyptians, and waited in expectation of further Aid from the Athenians; who at length arrived with a Fleet of Two Hundred Sail, and joining with the Egyptians, the Battel began with great Resolution on both sides. The Persians indeed were far more in number; but the Athenians with great Valour and Courage breaking in upon that Wing of


Page 254

the Persians that was plac'd against them, and killing and destroying many of them, the rest of the Barbarians fled, and in the pursuit, most of the Army was cut off, and the rest fled to a place call'd the White Wall. The Athenians by whose Valour the Victory was obtain'd, follow'd close after them to the place, and Besieged it. But Artaxerxes having intelligence of the Overthrow of his Army, sent some he could most confide in, to the Lacedemonians, with a great Sum of Money, to induce the Spartans to make War upon the Athenians, thinking by that means to force them back, for the necessary defence of their own Country. But the Lacedemonians would neither accept of the Money, nor hearken to any other Proposals of the Persians. Being thus without hopes of Aid from the Lacedemonians, Artaxerxes prepar'd a new Army, and made Artabazus and Megabysus, both very Valiant Men, Generals, and sent them against the Egyptians.

CHAP. XXI.

The Persians Expedition into Aegypt. Wars in Sicily.

AT Athens, Euippas was Archon, and Quintus Servilius and Spurius PosthumusAlbus, Consuls at Rome. At which time Artabasus and Megabyzus appointed Generals for the Aegyptian War, marched away for Aegypt with above Three hundred thousand Horse and Foot. When they came to Cilicia and Phenicia, they refresh'd the Army, and commanded the Cyprians, Phenicians and Cilicians to set forth a Fleet, who furnished out Three hundred Sail fitted both with Men, Provisions and all other things convenient and necessary for a Sea-Fight. In Preparations for the War, training of the Souldiers, and imploying themselves in other Acts of Military Discipline, they spent almost a whole Year. The Athenians in the mean time closely besieg'd the Persians at the White Wall, which was valiantly defended and not likely to be taken after a Years Siege. In Sicily the Syracusians at War with the before-named Revolters daily assaulted Acridina with the adjoyning Island; and tho' they overcame the Rebels at Sea, yet they could not drive them out of the City, they were so fortify'd. But afterwards when both Armies were drawn out into the open Field, the Fight being obstinate, many were killed on both sides, but the Victory was at length gain'd by the Syracusians. After the Battle the Syracusians crown'd Six hundred Men who were most active in the Fight, and gave to every one a * Mina in Money, as a Reward of his Valour. During these Combustions, Deucetius General of the Sicilians, began a War against the Inhabitants of Catana, for withholding the Lands of the Sicilians, in which the Syracusians likewise ingaged against Catana.

The Cataneans had these Lands divided to them by Lot, when they were first plac'd a Colony there by Hiero the late King. And therefore defended their Right with all the Force and Power they could. But being overcome in several Battles, they were forced at length to leave Catana, and possessed themselves of the City Etna, formerly call'd Eunetia; and the ancient Inhabitants of Catana after a long time of Banishment, return'd to their own Country, and former Habitations. After this, all others that were driven out of their own proper Cities in the times of Hiero, with the Assistance of their Neighbours, were forthwith restored, and the Usurpers were every where ejected, as the Gelones, Acragentines and Himereans. The Rhegians and Zancleans likewise threw off the regal Power of the Sons of Anaxilas, and asserted the Liberty of their Country. After this the Gelones seating themselves at Camerina, again divided the Land by Lots. At length almost all the Cities determining to root up all those they took for their Enemies, confederated together (by virtue of a public Edict) against all the Foreigners, and restored those that had been banished, to their ancient Cities; transplanting all the Strangers (that had before usurped) to Messena. In this manner all the Seditions and Tumults through the Cities of Sicily were appeased,


Page 255

and almost all were forced from the Power of Foreigners, and reduced to the ancient Form of a Common-wealth, and all the public Lands divided by Lot to the Citizens. 

Now Phasiclides was Governour of Athens, and the Eightieth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Tharillus the Thessalian was Victor. And at Rome were chosen Quintus Fabius, and Titus Quintius Capitolinus, Consuls. In Asia, the Persian Commanders now in Cilicia had got together a Fleet of Three hundred Sail, well man'd and furnish'd in every respect for the War, and march'd with the Land-Army through Syria and Phenicia, and came at length to Memphis, (the Fleet sailing all along by the sides of them, near the Shoar) where they forthwith rais'd the Siege at the White Wall; both the Aegyptians and Athenians being amaz'd at the Approach of such an Enemy: Hereupon the Persians presently call a Council of War, and prudently resolved to decline fighting, but rather to endeavour to make an end of the War by some politick Stratagem. And to that end knowing that the Athenian Fleet lay at Anchor at an Island call'd Prosopitis, they diverted the Course of the River (which encompassed the Island) by deep Trenches made in the adjoyning Continent, and by that means joyn'd the Island to Main-land. The Aegyptians as soon as they discern'd all the Ships, stood upon dry Land, struck with Amazement, forsook the Athenians, and submitted themselves to the Persians. The Athenians thus forsaken, and seeing the Fleet made useless, set Fire to all the Ships, that they might not come into the Power of the Enemy. And nothing terrify'd with their present Circumstances, they encourag'd and advis'd one another, that they should not do any thing that should be a blemish and disgrace to the Courage and Valour they had before shewn in former Encounters.

Soaring therefore above the Valour of those that lost their Lives at Thermopole, for the safety of Greece they resolv'd to fight. But the Commanders of the Persians, Artabazus and Megabizus seeing the Courage of the Athenians, and considering their former Losses of so many thousand Men, they made Peace with the Athenians upon this Condition, That they should depart out of Aegypt without Hurt or Prejudice. The Athenians thus preserv'd (thro' their own Valour) leave Aegypt, and marching thro' Africk to Cyrene, from thence they all came safe (beyond their hopes) unto their own Country. During these things, Ephialtes Son of Simonidas, Tribune of the People at Athens, stir'd up the Rabble against the Areopagites to take away the Power from the Senate in Mars Hill, and to overturn the ancient and laudable Laws of the Country. But such wicked Designs went not unpunish'd, for he was kill'd in the Night, not known by whom, and so ended his days in Dishonour.

CHAP. XXII.

The War between the Epidaurians and the Athenians.

THE former Year ended, Philocles governed Athens the next, and at Rome, Aulus Posthumius were Consuls: In their times was begun the War by the Corinthians and Epidaurians against the Athenians, who in a sharp Battel, overcame the other, and with a great Fleet made out against the Halienses, and invaded Peloponesus, where they slaughter'd and destroy'd many of their Enemies. The Peloponesians make Head again, and with a great Army sight them at Cerryphalia, where the Athenians again rout them. Grown now consident with these Successes, and observing the Aegineans (puffed up with the Victories that they had obtain'd) to carry it as Enemies towards them, they determin'd to make War upon them; and in Execution thereof, sent forth against them a great Fleet: They of Aegina on the other hand, trusting to their Skill and former Successes at Sea, despised the great Forces of the Athenians, and with a small Navy, and some few other Ships lately built, venture a Sea-Fight,


Page 256

but were beaten, with the loss of Seventy of their Vessels; so that now they were wholly discouraged and dejected, and therefore were forced to submit themselves to the Athenians. These things were done by Leocrates, the Athenian Admiral, in the space of Nine Months War with the Aeginetes. In the mean time, Deucetius King of Sicily (very Rich, and of a Noble Family) built Menenum, and divided by Lot the adjacent Lands, amongst them of the Colony brought thither. Then he Besieged the Famous City Morgantina, and was highly honour'd by all his Countrymen.

CHAP. XXIII.

The War between the Corinthians and Megareans.

THE next year Bion was Archon at Athens, and Publius Servilius Structus, and Lutius Aebutius Eliuas, Roman Consuls. During their Government, broke out the War between the Corinthians and Megareans about the Limits of their Country. At the first they made inroads into one anothers Country, and then proceeded with little Skirmishes. At length the difference growing higher and hotter, the Megarians (suspecting their own weakness) made a League with the Athenians, by which means they ballanced their Enemies in Strength and Power. And when the Corinthians sent a considerable Army from Peloponesus against Magera, the Athenians sent Aids to the Magerians under Myromides their General, a very Valiant Man. The Armies presently ingag'd, and great Valour and Obstinacy was shew'd on both sides, insomuch as the Success was very doubtful a long time; till at length the Athenians got the day, with the Slaughter of Multitudes of the Enemy. And a few Days after, the Athenians were Victors in another Battel fought at Cimolia, where they likewise kill'd many. Within a few Days after, a Third Battel was fought.—Here something seems to be wanting in the Greek Copy.

The Phoceans made War against the Doreans, who were originally Lacedemonians, and inhabited Three Cities lying under Mount Parnassus,Cytinium, Boium and Erineus. At the first, the Doreans, (being overcome) lost their Cities to the other. But the Lacedemonians being of the same Blood, afterwards sent them aid under Nicomedes, formerly General of Cleomedes, who led forth an Army of Fifteen Hundred Lacedemonians, and rais'd as many more out of Peloponesus as made up Ten Thousand; with these he march'd to the Defence of the Dores, he being Tutor and Governor of Pleistonactis their King, who was then a Child. Having conquered the Phoceans, and recover'd the Cities, he put an end to the War, upon Articles of Peace between the Two Nations.

When the Athenians understood that the Lacedemonians had made an end of the Phocean War, and were ready to return home, they consulted how to cut them off in their Passage by the way. To this end, having resolv'd upon the attempt, they took to their aid and assistance the Argives and Thessalians, and so making out against them with a Fleet of Fifty Sail, man'd with above Fourteen Thousand Souldiers, they stopt the Passages through Geranea. The Lacedemonians hearing of the Contrivances of the Athenians, turn'd out of the way towards Tanagra in Beotia: But the Athenians march'd swiftly after them, and at length the Two Armies join'd Battel; and although the Thessalians (in the very heat of the Fight) deserted the Athenians, and joyn'd with the Spartans, yet they and the Argives stood manfully to it, and after many were kill'd on both sides, the Night put an end to the Dispute. After this, there being sent much Provision out of Attica to the Athenians, which was understood by the Thessalians, they conceiving this to be now a fit opportunity to do some notable Service, (having refreshed themselves) in the Night marched out to meet the Carriages: And being that the Guard that attended them, never suspected any Design, but admitted the Thessalians as Friends, the Contest grew hot whether should get or lose


Page 257

all. For the Thessalians (being at first thus admitted) kill'd all they met, and being well prepared, and the other taken at unawares, made a great Slaughter. The Athenians that were encamp'd, hearing of what mischief the Thessalians had done, hasten'd to the Relief of their Countrymen, and fell with great Rage upon the Thessalians, and routed them at the first Charge with a great Slaughter. In the mean time, the Lacedemonians came in to the and of the Thessalians, and both Armies being now drawn up in Battalia, it came to a general Battel, which was fought with great Resolution, and many kill'd on both sides. The issue and event being doubtful, both the one side and the other suspected the loss of the Day; but Night growing on, and the Victory still remaining doubtful, Messengers were dispatch'd one to another, and a Truce at length agreed upon for Four Months.

CHAP. XXIV.

The War between the Athenians and the Beotians.

THIS Year ended, Mnesitheides was chosen Archon of Athens, and LuciusLucretius, and Titus Viturius Cicurinus were Roman Consuls. In the time of their Governments, the Thebans being brought low by reason of their League with Xerxes, endeavour'd by all the Artifices they could, to regain their former Power and Sovereignty; for being greatly despis'd by all the Beotians who had shaken off their Authority, they apply'd themselves to the Lacedemonians, to assist them in recovering the Government of Beotia: And for this Kindness they promis'd that they would be at all the Charge of the War then begun against them by the Athenians, and that the Spartans should not need to bring any Land-Forces out of Peloponesus.

The Lacedemonians judging it to be much to their advantage, to gratifie the Thebans in their Request, conceiving that if they were thus strengthen'd and supported, they would become a Bulwark against the Athenians, especially the Thebans having at that time a great and well disciplin'd Army at Tanagra, they enlarg'd the Bounds and Circuit of the City of Thebes, and compell'd all the Beotians to the subjection of the Thebans.

The Athenians to obviate the Designs of the Lacedemonians, rais'd a considerable Army, and made Myronides the Son of Callias, General. Having chosen a competent number of the Citizens, he told them the Day wherein he intended to march out of the City. When the Day came, many of the Souldiers (notwithstanding the Command given) did not appear; yet with those he had, he made for Beotia. Some of his Friends and Officers of the Army, persuaded him to stay, till the rest of the Souldiers came up to them. But Myronides being both a Prudent and Valiant Commander, answer'd, That it did not become a General to Loyter, for it was a shrew'd Sign, that they who were slow and dilatory in their March towards their Enemy, would be Cowards in the Fight, and would prefer their own safety before the good of their Country. For they (said he) that readily appear'd at the Day appointed, gave an evident Testimony of their Valour, that they were resolv'd not to shrink in the Day of Battel. Which by the Sequel did appear; for he march'd against the Thebans with an Army far less in number of Men, but much excelling in Prowess and Valour, and by the brave Resolution of his Souldiers, utterly routed the Enemy; which Victory was not inferiour to any that were ever obtain'd by the Athenians in former Times. For neither that at Marathon, nor at Platea against the Persians, nor any other Exploit of the Athenians, did exceed this of Myronides against the Thebans. For the former, some of them were obtain'd against Barbarians, others by the help of their Confederates. But this was gain'd by the Athenians themselves alone, against the most Valiant of the Greeks. For the Beotians were ever accounted for stoutness and hardyness, not inferior to any in Greece; which in after-times was confirm'd; for at Leuctra and Mantinea, the Thebans alone fought both with the Lacedemonians


Page 258

and their Confederates, and purchas'd to themselves great Renown, and became reputed (and that not unworthily) the best Commanders of all Greece.

Although this Battel was one of the most Famous, yet no Author has writ any thing of the manner or order of it. However by this glorious Victory over the Beotians, Myronides has equaliz'd his Memory with those illustrious Generals, Themistocles, Miltiades and Cimon. Immediately after the Fight, he took Tanagra by Storm, and demolisht it. And running over all Beotia, wasted all before him, and divided the Spoil and Riches of the Country amongst his Souldiers.

The Beotians inraged with the wasting and destroying of their Country, came together from all Parts, and with a great Army march'd against their Enemies. The Fight began amongst the Vineyards of Beotia, and both sides being fully resolved, the heat of the Battel continued a whole Day, but at length with great difficulty the Valour of the Athenians prevail'd.

Myronides shortly wan all the Cities of Beotia, except Thebes. Then he rais'd his Camp, and march'd with his Army against the Locrians (call'd Opuntians) routed them at the first Onset, and upon their submission took Hostages, and then broke into Pharsalia, and with as much ease overcame the Phoceans, as he did the Locrians, and receiving Hostages, marched for Thessaly, and charging them with Treason, commanded them to recall those they had Banished.

But the Pharsalians refusing to obey, he besieged the City, which (after a long and stout Defence) he was not able to take by Force, and therefore raised his Siege, and return'd to Athens; where he was receiv'd with great Acclamations of Praise, for the noble Acts he had in so short a time accomplish'd. These were the Remarks of this Year.

CHAP. XXV.

The Athenians invade the Spartans by Tolmides.

THE Eighty First Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, wherein PolymnastusCyreneus was Victor, at the time when Callias was Archon of Athens, and Servius Sulpitius and Publius Volumnius Amintinus were Roman Consuls. Then Tolmides the Admiral of the Athenian Fleet out of Emulation to the glory of Myronides, made it his Business to do something more than ordinary remarkable. And therefore for as much as none before had ever attempted to invade Laconia, he advis'd the People of Athens to make an Inroad into the Country of the Spartans, undertaking that if he might have but a Thousand Armed Men Aboard his Ships, he would waste Laconia, and bring an Eclipse upon the Spartans Glory. Having got the Consent of the People, and designing privately to get more Men than he at first required, he conceiv'd this Project: All were of opinion that a choice should be made of the strongest, young and most spriteful Men in the Army. But Tolmides designing far more than the Thousand yielded to him for his intended Enterprize: He goes to every one of the ablest Men, and tells 'em each singly, that he intended to chuse him for the War, and that it was far more for their Credit and Reputation, to offer themselves of their own accord, than being chosen to be compell'd to the Service. When by this means he had persuaded above Three Thousand to give in their Names of their own accord, and discern'd the rest to be backward, he then proceeded to the choice of the Thousand granted to him by the Consent of the People. And when all things were ready for the Expedition, he set Sail with Fifty Ships, and Four Thousand Souldiers, and arriving at Methon in Laconia, took it; but by reason of the speedy Succour sent by the Spartans, he was forc'd to quit the Place, and made for Gythium, a Port Town of the Lacedemonians, which he likewise took, and there burnt and destroy'd all the Shipping and Naval Provisions, wasting the Country round about. Thence he bent his Course for Zacynthus in Cephalania, and possess'd himself of that City, and after he had brought all the Towns in Cephalania to a submission, he sail'd with the whole Fleet to Naupactus, on the


Page 259

opposite Shore, which he gain'd at the first Assault, and there plac'd a Colony of the Noblest Families of the Messenians, who had been before (upon Agreement) dismis'd by the Lacedemonians. For about this time in a War against the Messenians and the Helots, the Lacedemonians had reduced most of them to their former Subjection. And them of Ithomea they discharg'd upon Articles of Submission, as is before said: And as for the Helots, those of them that were the Authors and Ringleaders of the Defection, they had put to Death, and made the rest Slaves.

Sosistratus now Pretor of Athens, the Romans chose for Consuls, Publius ValeleriusPublicola, and Caius Clodius Rhegillanus. During their Government, Tolmides continued in Beotia. But the Athenians made Pericles the Son of Xanthes General of a select number of Men, and committed to him Fifty Ships, and a Thousand Souldiers, with a Command to invade Peloponesus. Hereupon he wasted a great part of it, and passed into Acarnania, near the Island Oeniades, and there brought all the Cities to a Submission. So that during this Year, the Athenians gain'd many Cities, and became famous for their Military Discipline, and many glorious Successes in their Wars.

CHAP. XXVI.

The War in Sicily between the Aegestines and the Lilybeans. The Custom of writing upon an Olive-Leaf the Names of such as were to be banish'd in Sicily, call'd Petalism.

IN this Year Ariston was Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus and Lucius Cornelius Curetinus, Consuls of Rome. In the time of their Government, a Peace was made between the Athenians and the Peloponesians for Five Years, by the mediation of Cimon the Athenian.

In Sicily a War broke out between the Aegestines and the Lilybeans concerning some Lands near to the River Mazarus: After a sharp Battel fought, and many kill'd on both sides, they began to cool for some time; but after an account of the Citizens was taken in every City, and a new division of the Lands was made by Lot, and that every one was to take his share as it fell, the shares fell so confus'd, that the Cities broke out again into Civil Discords and Dissentions, by which Mischiefs the Syracusians greatly smarted. For one call'd Tyndarides, a rash conceited Fellow, who protecting and feeding many poor People, by that means sought to make a Party to further his Design in obtaining of the Principality: But when it was evident, that he aim'd at the Sovereign power, he was brought to his Trial and condemn'd to dye. And when they were bringing him back to the Goal, he was by the Party he had before prepared, as aforesaid, by Force rescu'd out of the Hands of the Officers. This rais'd a Tumult through the whole City, and caus'd the chief and soberest part of the Citizens to join together against them; who presently apprehended the Innovators, and put them, together with Tyndarides to death. When several Attempts were made of this kind, and many were infected with this itch of Dominion, the Syracusians were at length forc'd after the Example of the Athenians, to make a Law not much differing from that of Ostracism at Athens: For there every Citizen was to write in a Shell the Name of him whom they conceiv'd to be most powerful to possess himself of Sovereignty. So the Syracusians were to write the Name of him who was thought to be most potent upon an Olive-Leaf; and when the Leaves were counted, he whose Name was upon most of the Leaves, was Banish'd for Five Years.

By this means they conceiv'd they should bring down the aspiring Minds of the great ones to some moderation; for they did not hereby intend the punishment of any Crime that was committed, but the prevention of Mischief, by impairing the Estates, and weakning the interest of them that might be ambitious.


Page 260

That therefore which the Athenians call'd Ostracism, from the nature of the thing, the Syracusians call'd Petalism.

This continu'd long amongst the Athenians, but was abolished within a short time after by the Syracusians, for these Reasons: For when several of the chief and best deserving Men were by this Law banish'd the City, the rest who were beloved by the Citizens, and were Men of great use in the Service of their Country, withdrew themselves from all publick business, and out of fear of the Law, betook themselves to private Lives: But minding thus their own private Concerns, at length they fell into all manner of Profuseness and Luxury. In the mean time, the basest of the Citizens taking upon them the Government, stirr'd up the Common People to Innovations and Disturbances in the Commonwealth; and so all things ran a Second time into Sedition and Confusion, and a continual and mighty Storm of Trouble and Disorder shook the City. For there arose many Ringleaders and Seducers of the People, especially Young Conceited Men, who thought none spoke like themselves, nor no Wisdom like theirs. In Sum, many instead of the Principles of the ancient Justice and Honesty, instill'd nothing into the People, but wicked Notions, both in Manners and Practice. In time of Peace, it was their only business to heap together Riches, but had no regard at all to Amity and Justice amongst Men. The Decree therefore of Petalism, upon more mature Consideration, was repeal'd within a short time after it was put in execution. And thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at this time.

CHAP. XXVII.

Pericles makes an Inrode into Peloponesus. Besieg'd Scycion. Phaylus in Sicily made Admiral against the Tyrrhenian Pirats; is corrupted and banish'd. The Original of the Palici: And the Stories of the Temple, and Wonders of the Craters in Sicily.

WHen Lysicrates was Governor of Athens, Caius Nausius Rutillius, and LuciusMinutius Augurinus, were celebrated Consuls at Rome. During their times, Pericles the Athenian General made an Inrode into Peloponesus, and wasted the Country of the Scycions. The Scycions march'd out with a great Army against him, and Battel being join'd, Pericles routed them, and kill'd many in the Pursuit, and having driven the rest within the Walls of the City, laid Siege to the Place. But after he had made a valiant Assault, and saw he could not win the Place, in regard the Lacedemonians had sent Aid to the Besieg'd, he withdrew his Army from Scycion, and march'd into Acarnania, there wasting the Country of the Oeniades; and having loaded himself with Booties and Plunder, left Acarnania. After this, he march'd into Chersonesus, and divided the Country by Lot amongst a Thousand Citizens. And in the mean time Tolmides the other General made a Descent into Eubea, and divided the Country of the Naxians amongst another Thousand of the Citizens.

As for Sicily, the Tyrrhenians infesting the Sea with Pyracies, the Syracusians chose one Phaylus to be Admiral of the Fleet, and commanded him to make a Descent upon Tyrhenia. Being furnish'd with a Fleet well provided, upon the first attempt, he wasts the Island of Aethalia; but being corrupted by the Hetruscans with Money, he return'd into Sicily, without doing any thing memorable. But the Syracusians banish'd him for his Treason, and chose another call'd Apelles, and sent him with Threescore Ships against the Tyrrhenians. Upon which he wasts the Sea-coasts of Tyrhenia, and sails to Corsica, then subject to the Hetruscians, and harrased and destroy'd a great part of the Island; and having wholly subdued Aethalia, return'd to Syracuse, with a multitude of Prisoners and much spoil.


Page 261

After this, Ducetius Prince of the Siculi, reduced all the Cities of the same Nation (except Hybla) into one Society and Community. This Man being both Wise and Valiant, bent his Mind for the accomplishing of something great and unusual; for having a rich Treasury, he remov'd the City Neas, the Place of his Birth, into a plain Champain Ground, and built a famous City near the Temple of the Palici (as they are call'd) from whom he call'd the City Palicon. And because those Deities now fall in our way, it's not fit we should altogether pass by the strange and indeed incredible Stories that are related concerning this Temple, and especially that great wonder there call'd the Craters. For they say, that this Temple is to be preferr'd before all others, both for Antiquity and Religious Worship, especially for the strange and wonderful things done there.

And first in this Temple, there are hollows in the Earth, call'd Craters, not very large in compass, but of incredible depth, from whence break out great sparks of Fire and Water, like as from boiling Pots or Caldrons. The Water cast forth, resembles so many Streams of Fire; but there's no certainty what it is, for none hitherto ever durst approach it: For the violent irruption of the Fiery Matter is so wonderful, that it seems to be the immediate effect of some divine Power. It smells like Brimstone, as most predominant, and the bottomless Gulf roars and makes a most dreadful and horrible noise. And that which is far more to be admir'd is this, That this River of Fire neither flows nor makes any stay upon the Land, but in a continual motion, with an amazing force, hurls it self up into the Air. This Place therefore by these wonderful instances of some Divine Presence, being accounted Sacred, the most Solemn and Sacred Oaths were used here to be taken, and due Punishments were without delay executed by the Deity, upon the Perjur'd Person; For it hath been observ'd, that many such have been struck blind as they have gone out of the Temple. And the great Veneration that Persons have had for the Place, has often been the occasion that matters of great Controversy (where Might was likely to overcome Right) have been decided by an Oath in this Place. This Temple likewise at some times, is a Place of Refuge, and a special help for injured Servants to protect them against the cruelty of their Severe Masters. For they who fly thither, cannot be drawn thence, but continue safe there, till by the Mediation of Friends they are reconcil'd to their Masters, and mutual Oaths taken for the faithful Performance of what is promis'd on both sides. And it was never known, that ever any broke his Faith with his Servant in such a case, such an awe (through the fear of the Gods) was upon them. This Temple is situated in a most pleasant Plain, adorn'd with beautiful Porches, Galleries and other stately Buildings, becoming the dignity of the Gods. But of this sufficient is said. And now we return to what we were before relating.

Deucetius after he had wall'd in his new City Palicon, divided the Country adjacent among the Inhabitants. They grew wonderfully rich in a short time, both by reason of the fruitfulness of the Soil, and the multitude of the People. But this Sun-shine lasted not long, for destroy'd it was, and lies waste and desolate to this Day. The reason of which shall be declared in its proper Place.

In Italy, after the Sacking of Sibaris by the Crotonians, one Thessalus, about Eight and Fifty Years after getting together the remnant of the Sibarites, rebuilt Sibaris, situated between two Rivers, Sybaris and Crathis. But the Sibarites growing rich suddenly by reason of the fruitfulness of the Soil, possess'd the City only Six Years, and were again ejected; which we intend to relate more fully in the following Book.


Page 262

CHAP. XXVIII.

The Contests between Deucetius and the Agrigentines. His strange Submission to the Syracusians, who sent him to Corinth, with promise to supply him with Necessaries.

WHen Antidotus was Governor of Athens, the Romans chose Lucius Publius Posthumus, and Marcus Horatius Consuls. In their time, Deucetius the General of the Siculi took Aetna, whose Prince was kill'd by Treachery. Afterwards he led his Army into the Country of the Agrigentines, and besieg'd Motyum, a Garrison of the Agrigentines. They of Agrigentum sent aid to them of Motyum, but his Army fought and routed them, and took the Place. The Winter approaching, all return'd to their several Cities. The Syracusians put to Death Bilco, the General of the Army, the Author (as was supposed) of that ruin that was brought upon them in this Battel, and who was judg'd to have had secret Correspondence with Deucetius. At the Return of the Year, they made another General, committing to him an Army well appointed in all respects, with strict Orders to ruin and destroy Deucetius. To which end he led forth the Army, and found Deucetius encamp'd near Nomae, where a Battel was fought, and after many kill'd on both sides, the Siculi after a valiant Resistance at last fled, but a great slaughter was made of 'em, in the Pursuit. Many of those that escap'd, fled to the Forts and Strong Holds, for few had Hearts and Courage enough to run the same Fortune with Deucetius.

Whilst these things were thus acting, the Agrigentines retook the Castle of Motyum by force, wherein at that time was a Garrison of Deucetius; then they march'd to the Victorious Syracusians, and both encamp'd together: But Deucetius having lost all his Treasure in the last Battel, was brought near to the utmost extremity, partly through the Treachery of some, and partly through the Cowardize of others of his Souldiers who deserted him.

At length seeing matters brought to so desperate a Condition, that his Friends who were yet about him were ready to lay violent Hands upon him, to prevent the execution of their Treacheries, he fled with all speed in the Night to Syracuse, and whilst it was yet dark, came into the Market-place, and fell down before the Altars, and as an humble Suppliant, gave up both himself and his Country into the Hands of the Syracusians. The strangeness of the thing brought a great Concourse of People together into the Market-place. Upon which, a General Assembly of the Magistrates was call'd, and there it was debated what was to be done in this matter. Some who were used and lov'd to speak much to the People, persuaded them to take him as an Enemy, and for his many Acts of Hostility against them, to punish him accordingly. But the Wiser sort of the Senators who were then present, declar'd that the Suppliant was to be preserved, and that a reverend regard was to be had to the Providence of God; and that they should not have respect so much to what Deucetius deserved, as seriously to consider what was fit and just for them to do in such a case. To kill one whom Providence had laid as a Suppliant at their Feet, was unjust, but to preserve and keep to the Rules of Piety towards God, and Humanity towards Men that submit to Mercy, greatly became the Generosity of the Syracusians. Hereupon the People unanimously cried out, Let the Suppliant be safe. Deucetius thus deliver'd, the Syracusians sent him back to Corinth, and commanded him there to continue the rest of his Days, with a Promise to supply him with all things necessary for his comfortable support. And now having perform'd our Promise in setting forth those things that happened the Year next before the Athenian Expedition into Cyprus under Cymon their General, we conclude this Book.


Page 263

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK XII.

The PREFACE.

HE who seriously considers the incertainty and instability of Humane Affairs, must needs be struck with great admiration; for he'll find that nothing which amongst Men is accounted Good, is purely such; nor any thing that is esteemed Bad, is perfectly or absolutely evil, without some ingredient of Profit and Advantage: Which Lesson we may learn from what is before Related, if we ponder and digest things well. For the Expedition of Xerxes the King of Persia into Greece by reason of his vast Army, terrify'd the Grecians to the highest degree, who were by that War in great danger to be brought into absolute Slavery, and might justly fear that Greece was likely to fall into the same condition with the Greek Cities in Asia, who were not long before brought under the power of the Persians. But beyond all expectation, the event of this War, was wonderful, for the Grecians were not only deliver'd from this threatning Storm, but by that occasion gain'd an everlasting Renown, and every City in Greece thereby abounded with so much Wealth, that their suddain Turn of Fortune into such a height of Prosperity was admir'd by all: For Fifty Years together from that time, Greece flourished in all Felicity; in which time, by the Wealth that abounded amongst them, all good Arts were highly improv'd, and excellent Artists are recorded to have flourished in this Age; amongst whom was Phidias that famous Statuary; and several other Arts and Sciencesthen advanced to an extraordinary degree. But the great honour of Greece was Philosophy and Oratory, and chiefly among the Athenians, Those that were eminent for Philosophy, were Socrates, Plato and Aristotle: For Oratory, Pericles, Isocrates and his Scholars. There were others no less famous for Military Discipline and excellent Commanders, as Miltiades, Themistocles, Aristides, Cimon, Mironides, and many others, of whom it would be too tedious to give a particular account. For the Athenian Name was highly honoured almost through all parts of the World; for they so enlarged


Page 264

their Dominion that by their own strength without the help of the Lacedemonians, and them of Peloponesus, they routed the mighty Armies of the Persians, both by Sea and Land; and did so weaken that great Empire, that they compell'd it upon Treaties to set free all the Grecian Cities in Asia: The particulars whereof are distinctly and at large related in the former Book, and in this we have at present in hand. And now we are come to the Matters design'd to be treated of, endeavouring (as near as we can) to fix the time when things were done. We began the Book next before this with the Passage of Xerxes into Greece, and continued it with an account of affairs every where happening from that time to the Year next before the Expedition of the Athenians against Cyprus under Cymon their General. In this we shall begin with that Expedition, and proceed to the VVar decreed by the Athenians against the Syracusians.

CHAP. I.

Cymon the Athenian Admiral. his Expedition into Cyprus. Peace concluded between the Persians and Athenians. Cymon dyes in Cyprus.

EƲthydemus being chief Governor of Athens, Lucius Quintus Cinnatius and Marcus Fabius Vibulanus Roman Consuls, Fortune frown'd upon the Athenians; for in assisting the Egyptians against the Persians, they lost all their Ships in the Island Prosopis; but not long after a new War was Determin'd against the Persians for the Liberties of the Grecian Cities in Asia.

For this purpose the Athenians rigg'd out a Navy of Two Hundred Gallies, and made Cymon the Son of Miltiades Admiral, and order'd him to make streight for Cyprus, and there invade the Persians. Accordingly he forthwith Sail'd thither with a brave Fleet, well'd Man'd and Victual'd, and in all other things in every respect sufficiently provided. Artabasus was then Admiral of the Persian Fleet, and lay with Three Hundred Ships at Cyprus: And Megabyzus was General of the Persian Land Forces, and incamp'd with an Army of Three Hundred Thousand Men in Cilicia.

Cymon being Master at Sea, landed his Men at Cyprus, and forc'd Citium and Malus, but used his Victory with great Moderation and Humanity; having receiv'd Intelligence that Fleets were come from Phenicia and Celicia to the assistance of the Islanders, he hois'd up Sail, Fought with them, sunk many of their Vessels, and took an Hundred, together with their Men, and pursued the rest even to Phenicia. The Persians with the remnant of the Fleet that was left fled to Megabyzus, where he lay incamp'd. But the Athenians without delay pursued them, and landed their Men and set upon the Enemy, but lost in this Fight Anaxicrates, Vice Admiral of the Athenian Fleet, who Fought with much Gallantry, and there fell with Honour. However the Athenians got the Day, and after they had made a great Slaughter of their Enemies, return'd to their Ships, and Sail'd back to Cyprus. These were the things done in the first Year of the Cyprian War.

After this, when Pedieus was Archon of Athens, the Romans bestow'd the Consular Dignity upon Marcus Valerius Lactuca and Sporius Virginius Tricostus. In the time of their Government Cymon continuing Master at Sea, brought most of the Cities of Cyprus under the power of the Athenians: But Salamis the Metropolis was a very strong Persian Garrison, well stor'd with Arms, Ammunition and Provision of all sorts; therefore he judg'd it of mighty consequence and Advantage if he could gain this Place; for he conceiv'd if this were done that the whole Island would easily fall into his Hands, and the Persians would be altogether discourag'd, and not being able to relieve Salamis (the Athenians being Masters at Sea) would be deserted and despised by all their Confederats. Lastly, he concluded,


Page 265

that if the whole Island of Cyprus were by force of Arms subdu'd, the chief ends of the War were obtain'd; and so it happend: For the Athenians laying close Siege to the City, Assaulted and Batter'd it every day. But the Garrison being well furnish'd with Arms and all other necessaries, easily defended themselves from the Walls against all the strength of their Enemies.

In the mean time Artaxerxes the King of Persia, hearing of the defeating of his Armies in Cyprus, call'd together a Council of War, where it was determin'd that it was most for the Public Good to make Peace with the Grecians: Whereupon Expresses were sent to the Generals and Officers of the Persians to make Peace with them upon any Terms. Artabasus and Megabyzus forthwith dispatch'd Embassadors to Athens, to treat of Peace, whose Conditions being accepted by the Athenians, they sent likewise Plenipotentiaries, the chief of whom was Callias the Son of Hipponicus.

And these were the Articles of Peace between the Persians and the Athenians and their Confederats, to wit, that all the Greek Cities in Asia should be free and govern'd by their own Laws. That none of the Persian Commanders with any Force should come within three Days Journey of the Sea. That they should not Sail in any Man of War between Phaselis and Cyane. When these were confirm'd by the King and the Officers of his Army, the Athenians on the other side agreed and engaged not to invade any of the Provinces of Artaxes. Peace thus concluded, the Athenians withdrew their Forces from Cyprus Triumphing in the glory of their Victories, and in the advantages of the Peace. But whilst the Army stay'd in Cyprus, Cymon fell Sick and there Dyed. Afterwards, Philiscus being chief Ruler at Athens, the Romans chusing Titus Romilius Vaticanus and Caius Veturius Cicurinus Consuls, was Celebrated the Eighty Third Olympiad, in which Crison of Himera carried the Victory. At this time the Megarians revolted from the Athenians, and by their Embassadors sent to Sparta, made a League with them; with which Treachery the Athenians inrag'd sent their Forces into their Country, who rob'd and spoil'd every where, and so loaden with Plunder return'd home. The Citizens indeed issued out of the Town for the Defence of the Country, and ingag'd, but were beaten and driven within their Walls.

CHAP. II.

The Megarians revolt from the Athenians, and are beaten. The Athenians routed at Cheronea by the Beotians. Many Cities revolt. A Peace is Concluded.

AFter these things, when Tymarchides was chief Governor of Athens, Sporius Tarpeius and Aulus Asterius Fontinus being created Roman Consuls, the Lacedemonians made an Irruption into Attica, and wasted and destroy'd the Country far and near; and after they had taken several Forts and Castles return'd into Peloponesus. However Tolmedes the Athenian General took Cheronea; but the Beotians joyning together supriz'd him, upon which a Bloody Battel was Fought at Cheronea, in which Tolmedes was kill'd, though Fighting with great Resolution, and the rest of the Athenians were all kill'd or taken. By this remarkable Slaughter the Athenians were compell'd for the redeeming of the Captives, to restore all the Cities of Beotia under their dominion unto their ancient Liberties. Afterwards, at the time when Calimachus was Archon of Athens and SextusQuintilius Tergeminus Roman Consuls; In Greece many Cities revolted from the Athenians, who were grown very low by reason of the late defeat at Cheronea, especially the Inhabitants of Eubea were plotting and contriving some dangerous Designs. Pericles, therefore being made General, makes for Eubea with a great Army, and assaulted and took the City of the Hestieans, and all the Citizens Captives, and transplanted them, and by this so terrified the rest that


Page 266

they all submitted unto the Athenian Government. And a Peace was concluded for Thirty Years, and the Articles were Sign'd and Seal'd by Callias and Chares.

CHAP. III.

The War between the Agrigentines and Syracusians in Sicily. The War between them of Crotona and the Siberites. Sibaris raz'd. The Building of Thurium. Charondas his good Laws in Thurium. His remarkable Death. The Laws of Zaleucus of Locris.

IN Sicily Wars arose between them of Syracuse and of Agrigentum for these Reasons. After the Syracusians had broken the Power of Ducetius Prince of the Siculi, upon his submission to the People for Mercy, they pardon'd him, but commanded him to lead a private Life at Corinth: But he continued not long there before he broke all his Engagements and Agreements, and pretending that he was commanded by the Oracle to People the pleasant Sea Coast in Sicily, he arriv'd in the Island with a great Number of Men, as Colonies to Plant there. Some of the Siculi join'd him, and amongst them one Archonides, Prince of Erbita: While he was intent upon his Colony, the Agrigentines partly out of envy to the Syracusians, and likewise because they had spar'd Deucetius their common Enemy, without their Consent, make War upon the Syracusians. Upon this the Cities of the Siculi then divided; some joyn'd with the Agrigentines, others with the Syracusians, and great Armies are rais'd on both sides, and the Cities are pressed to the War with great Importunity. At length emcamping one over against the other, at the River Himera, they came to a Battle, and the Syracusians got the day, and kill'd a Thousand of the Agrigentines upon the Place. But presently after the Fight, the Agrigentines sent Embassadors to Syracuse to make Peace, which was agreed unto upon Conditions. Whilst things were thus acting in Sicily the City Thurium was Built in Italy: And this was the occasion;

The Grecians sometime before having Built Sybaris, in a short time the City grew very Rich by reason of the fruitfulness of the Soil. For being Situated between two Rivers, Crathis and Sybaris (from whence it took it's Name) and the Inhabitants having a large and rich Country to Till, they grew Rich on a suddain, and taking in many into the Freedom of the City, flourish'd to such a degree as that they seem'd to exceed all the Inhabitants of Italy. For they were so populous that this one City had in it three hundred thousand Inhabitants. There was at that time in the City one call'd Telys, who had great Influence over the People. This Man by raising Scandals amongst the the Citizens against those who were the Richest, so far at length prevail'd with the Sybarites, that they Banish'd Five Hundred of the most wealthy Citizens, and confiscated their Estates to the public Use.

These Banish'd Men went to Crotona, and there (after the manner of suppliants) fled to the Altars erected in the Forum. Hereupon Telys sent Embassadors to the Crotonians, either to deliver up the banish'd Men, or expect War. A Council was call'd, and put to the question, whether they should deliver up the Suppliants to the Sybarites or ingage in a War with an Enemy more powerful than themselves. The Senate and People made some doubt, and the People first inclin'd to deliver them up rather than endure the War. But afterwards Pythagoras advising them to protect the Suppliants they chang'd their Opinion, and determin'd to Fight in their Defence.

Hereupon the Sybarites took the Field with an Army of three hundred Thousand Men. The Crotonians had but an hundred Thousand, which were commanded by Milo the Wrestler, who at the first Onset put to flight that Wing of the Army which was opposite to him; for he was of invincible Strength, and had Courage answerable to his Strength, and had been six times Victor at the Olympick Games; when he began his Fight he was Crown'd with Olmpick


Page 267

Wealths, wearing (like Hercules) a Lion's Skin and a Club; at last he gain'd an absolute Victory, and thereupon was much admir'd by his Country-Men. Upon the rout the Crotonians gave no Quarter, but Kill'd all they took, so that most of the Army was destroyed, the City was sackt and miserably laid wast and desolate. But within fifty eight Years after the Thessalians arriv'd in order to Plant there, and within less than five Years after they had rebuilt the City, they were likewise ejected by the Crotonians. For when Calimachus was Archon of Athens, this City began to be Inhabited: But shortly after it had chang'd both it's Name and Place, being Built elsewhere by Lampo and Xenocrates, which was upon this occasion. The Sybarites driven out of their Country a second time, sent Embassadors into Greece, and desir'd aid from the Lacedemonians and Athenians to assist them in restoring them to their Country, and likewise desiring that they would send a Colony to partake with them. The Lacedemonians rejected their Address; but the Athenians resolved to assist them, and sent ten Ships with Soldiers to the Sybarites, of which Lampo and Xenocrates were Generals: And Proclamation was made through all the Cities of Peloponesus by the Athenian Heralds, that it should be lawful for any that would, to Plant with them in their intended new Colony. Many comply'd, especially being mov'd thereunto by the Oracle of Apollo, who advis'd them to Build a City there where there was little Water, and yet Bread without Measure.

Setting Sail therefore for Italy, they at length arriv'd at Sybaris; and there made diligent search for the Place commended to them by the Deity. And finding a Fountain or Spring (not far from Sybaris) which was call'd Thuria, issuing it's Waters through a brazen Pipe, call'd Medymnum, which signifies a Bushel (judging this to be the Place foretold by the Oracle) they compass'd it in with a Wall, and there Built the City, calling it from the Name of the Spring Thurium.

The City in length contain'd four Streets: The first they call'd Heraclea, the second Aphrodisiade, the third Olympiad, the fourth Dionysiad. The bredth was divided into three Streets; the first call'd Heroa, the other Thuria, and the last Thurina. When all these Streets were fill'd with Houses, the City appear'd very compact and beautiful. But the Thurians continued not long at Peace amongst themselves, for a grievous Sedition (and not without some cause) began to disturb their Common-wealth. For the Sybarites, the ancient Inhabitants, shar'd all the chief Places of the Magistracy amongst themselves, and left only the inferior Offices to the new Colonies. And the Wives of the antient Citizens were first admitted to Sacrifice before those that were lately brought into the Freedom of the City. And besides, they ingross'd all the Land next to the City, and divided it among themselves, and left that which was far off to the new Comers. This Fire of Dissention broke out into a devouring Flame, insomuch that the new Colony (then more powerful than the other) destroy'd almost all the ancient Inhabitants, and brought the whole City into their own Power. But the Country being very Rich, and more than was sufficient for them that remain'd, they sent for many out of Greece to till and improve the Land, amongst whom they divided both the Houses in the City that were destitute of Inhabitants, and the Land in the Country. The Inhabitants grew very Rich in a short time, and entring into League with the Crotonians, govern'd their Common-wealth from thenceforth with great Commendation; and having setled a Democracy, divided the Citizens into ten Tribes, and gave them Names according to their several Countries: Three that came out of Peloponesus they call'd the Arcadian, Achaian and Elean. The same Number of them that came from other more remote Parts of Greece, they nam'd the Beotian, Amphyctonidae, and Doridae, according to their several Tribes. The four residue from other Countries of Greece they call'd the Jadans, Athenaidae, Enboedae and Islanders. Out of the most learned and best accomplish'd Citizens they chose for their Legislator Charonidas, who examin'd the Laws of every Country, and pickt out of every one what he judged to be the best, and digested them all into one Body or Systeme: But he added many himself of his own Contrivance: To rehearse some of which it will not be unprofitable to the Reader. And first he institued, That whoever


Page 268

Married a second Wife, and brought a Stepmother amongst his Children, should be remov'd from the Senate and Common Assemblies, for he judg'd that Man could never advise his Country well who was so imprudent in his own Family: For they that were once well Marry'd ought to rest satisfied with such a Happiness; and such as are unfortunate in their first Match, and yet against their own experience commit a second Fault in the same kind, justly deserve to be noted for Fools. To False Accusers he appointed this Punishment, That they should be led through the City Crown'd with the Shrub-Tamarisk, that it might appear to all, that the Offender was guilty of the highest Wickedness. And it is reported that some Convicted of this Offence, to avoid the disgrace have kill'd themselves. By the severity of this Law false Informers (the Plague of the Common-wealth) were driven out of the City, and the Citizens lived in great prosperity. Charonidas made likewise a new Law (never before instituted by any former Legislator) concerning keeping bad Company. For he found by Experience, That both the Manners and Judgments of good and honest Men were often depraved by the society and familiarity of wicked Men, and drawn aside from the Paths of Virtue to the filthiness of Vice; and that such Company like an infectious Disease seised the Minds of the very best with it's Contagion and Corruption: For the way to Vice is down the Hill with a very easy descent; by reason whereof many of more than ordinary Integrity, (insnar'd with the inticing Charms of Pleasure) have fallen into the highest degree of Wickedness; desiring therefore to prevent this mischief he severly forbad the keeping company and familiarity with lewd Men: And fram'd a Process against ill Society, and impos'd a severe Fine upon such as should be found Guilty. And he made moreover another Law more excellent than this, past by, by all the ancient Lawmakers: That is, That all the Children of the Citizens should learn to Write, and the City should pay the Master Wages. For he knew that they who were poor were not able to be at the Charge, and by consequence must lose the advantage of Instruction for their Children: For he prefer'd (and not without Cause) the knowledge of Writing to be learnt in the first place before all other Arts; For by the help of this many things conducing to the publice Good are preserv'd to Posterity; as Suffrages, Decrees, Epistles, Wills Laws and other things necessary for Instruction. Who can sufficiently set forth the praises this Art? By this the Memory of the Dead is preserv'd amongst the living; by these Messengers, they that are at the greatest distance, far absent, may be Convers'd with as present. These preserve the Opinions of the wisest Men, the Answers of the Gods, the Learning of Philosophers, all the Sciences of the World, and hand them down to Posterity for ever. Life is due to Nature, but how to live well we ow to the Books of the Learned, so that by this good Law (at the public Care and Charge) those who were illiterate before (wholly depriv'd of those great Blessings) were now improv'd by more happy Education; so that (we may say) he far exceeded those former Lawmakers who appointed Phisicians for the curing of private Mens Distempers at the charge of the Public; for they provided cures for Mens Bodies; but he for Ignorance and disease of Mens Souls. And we never desire to have need of a Phisician, but are always unwilling to part with a learned Man: Many Poets have Celebrated these Laws concerning evil Company; among others are these.—

If one Herd with bad Company

I ask not what he is, but, see,

Such as his Friends are such is he. 

Of his Law concerning Stepmothers mention is made thus, The lawgiver (say they) Charonidas, amongst others made this Law.—

Let him have no repute but of a Fool

That sets a Stepdame o're his House to Rule:

Nor let him for a civil Office sue,

Who to an old Plague dares to add a new:


Page 269

If good luck in a Wife thou hast had, then

Stick at a good hand; if bad, as most Men,

Th'art Mad if thou seekst to be curs'd again.

In truth he who miscarries twice in one and the same thing may justly be accounted a Fool. For what Philemon the Comick Poet says of them that have often escap'd Shipwrack, some have apply'd to this Case.

I wonder not that one the Sea should enter

And Sail, but that he made the second venture.

It's no wonder to see a Man Marry; but to see him twice Marry. For it's safer and more advisable for a Man to expose himself twice to the dangers of the Sea, than to the hazards of a second Wife. For most sad and cruel discords often arise in Families between Parents and Children by the tricks and devices of Stepmothers. Hence we have the frequent and horrid pieces of Villany of this kind represented upon the Stage by the Tragedians.

Charonidas fram'd another very good Law concerning the Guardianship of Orphans. Upon the first view there seems to be little in it worthy taking notice of; but Examining it more closely, we may discern much in it Wisdom and excellent Contrivance. Their Estates he commited to the care and Guardianship of next of Kin on their Fathers side, but their Education and the custody of their Persons to them of the Mothers. At first here seems nothing of any great weight in this Law, but upon more serious Consideration, it will evidently appear to be a most excellent Constitution: For if the Cause be seriously pry'd into why he order'd the care of the Estate to one, and the Education of the Person to another, the Wisdom and Prudence of the Lawmaker will be very evident: For they on the Mother's side would never contrive any thing of prejudice to the Person whose Estate could never come and descend to them; and the mischief was prevented as to the Kindred of the Father's side, because the Person was not committed to their Custody. On the other hand, in regard the Estate of the Orphan was to fall to the Father's Kindred in case of his Death, it was to be presum'd they would take care to preserve and improve it, upon the prospect of the possibility of it's coming unto themselves. Another Law he made against those that ran away from their Colours or refus'd to take up Arms for the Defence of their Country: For whereas former Lawgivers made it Death, his Edict was, That such Men should sit three days in the Forum cloth'd in Womans Apparel; which Constitution as it was more moderate than those in other places, so the greatness of the disgrace did work more upon ingenious Spirits to deterr them from softness and effeminatness; judging it far better to dye than to undergo so much disgrace in their own Country. By this way he destroy'd not those that were Guilty, but reserv'd them for the future Service of the City as occasion should be; who in all likelyhood after such disgrace would carry themselves better, and endeavour to wipe off the stain of their former reproach by doing something more than ordinary for the time to come. The Severity and Strictness likewise of his Laws gave a perpetual vigor to them; For it was absolutly forbidden to depart in the least from the Letter of the Law tho' it were never so severe or inconvenient. But if any were fit to be repealed or amended, he gave power for that purpose. For he judg'd it fit and just for every Man to Stoop to the Authority of the Lawgiver, but to suffer the Cavils and Exceptions of every private Man to prevail (nay though they seem'd to tend to the Public good) was most absurd. And by this means he restrain'd those that would in giving of of Judgment for criminal Matters bring in their own Glosses and Expositions against the express Words of the Law, lest by their Cavils the Authority of the Laws should come to nothing. And hereupon it is reported that some Prosecutors against Criminals said to the Judges, that either the Law or the Malefactor must of necessity be preserv'd, Charonidas therefore appointed something more than usual concerning the amendment of the Laws. For whereas he saw that there were many in diverse Cities who rashly, and hand over head going about to correct and amend the Laws, did nothing else but (by corrupting them) involve the common People in Seditions; he publish'd this most excellent Law (differing from all that were before) That any Person who would have any Law to be


Page 270

altered or amended, a Council should be call'd, and he who would have an alteration, should have a Rope put about his Neck, and so continue while the Votes of the People-concerning the change of the Law were in taking; and if the Assembly did approve of the new Law, then the Author should be discharg'd; but if it were rejected, then he should be forthwith hang'd. By this so severe a Caution to prevent Innovation, new Law-makers disappear'd, and none durst so much as whisper any thing concerning the amendment or alteration of the Laws.

From that time forward, there were at Thurium only Three (forc'd by urgent Provocations) that appear'd and stood up to persuade the People to Abrogation of some Laws. For there was a Law, that he who struck out the Eye of another, should have his own Eye pluckt out. It happened that one who had only one Eye (by the injury of another) lost that also, so that he was altogether blind. In this case although the Offender was to lose his Eye for the injury done to the other, yet the punishment was not thought equivalent to the nature of the Offence; for he who made his Fellow Citizen wholly blind, although by losing one of his Eyes, he satisfied the letter of the Law, yet the loss and prejudice was not equal; and therefore it was conceiv'd to be most equitable and just, that he who depriv'd another of his sight wholly, should lose both his Eyes, if the punishment were proportion'd to the Offence. This blind Man therefore (mov'd and heated with the pain and indignity of the thing) complain'd to the People of his sad Condition, and made his Address to them for amendment of the Law. At length having the Rope about his Neck, he prevail'd, and the Law was abolish'd, and another made more effectual in its place, and so he escap'd hanging. Another Law likewise was moderated, whereby power was given to the Wife in some cases, to leave her Husband, and marry whom else she thought fit. For one grown old (being forsaken by his young Wife) proposed to the People for an amendment of the Law to have this further Addition, That it might be lawful for any Wife that had a desire to leave her Husband, to marry any other Man, provided he were no younger than her former Husband; and that he who cast off his Wife, should marry none younger than the Wife he rejected. And he succeeded so well in his Proposal, that by having the Law amended, he not only escap'd the Rope, but by this means, his Wife that had a Mind to a young Fellow, was forc'd to return to him again. 

The Third Law (which Solon likewise had made) which was amended, was that concerning Virgins and Orphans. The Law was, that where there was an Heiress left, the next of Kin might demand her in Marriage; and so on the other hand, a young Woman an Orphan, might demand him that was of her next Kindred in Marriage, and he should be forc'd to marry her; or if she were poor, give her Five Hundred Drachma's for her Portion. There was an Orphan of this kind left of a good Family, but yet extream Poor; she by reason of her Poverty in no likelihood to get a Husband, made her application to the People, and with many Tears bemoaned her desolate condition, and despicable state of Life, and desir'd an amendment of the Law to this purpose, That in lieu of the Five Hundred Drachma's, the next of Kin whom by the Law the Orphan might demand in Marriage, should be forc'd to marry her. The People commiserating her Condition, chang'd the Law, and so she was delivered from the Rope, and the rich Kinsman was forc'd to marry the poor Maid without any Dowry.

Now it remains we should speak of the Death of Charonidas, concerning which, there happened something remarkable and wonderful; for when he was gone forth against some Robbers that made inroads into the Country, before he return'd, there happened a Tumult to be rais'd by the People in one of their Common Assemblies. Determining therefore to make diligent Enquiry into the Cause and Authors of the Sedition, he came hastily in amongst them, with his Sword girt at his side; and a Law he had made, that none should come arm'd into the Senate-house; but had forgotten his Sword then at his Side, and so rushed into the Assembly, and thereby gave an occasion to them that maligned him, to accuse him: Upon which, one cries out, You break the Law which you your self made. No, says he, but I will confirm it; and forthwith ran himself through. Some Writers ascribe this Fact to Diocles the Law-maker of Syracuse.


Page 271

But having spoken enough of Charonidas, we shall now relate something in short of Zaleuchus the Law-maker, because they were much alike in their Consultations, and bent their Minds and Thoughts to the same things, and flourished in Cities near adjoyning one to another. Zaleuchus was an Italian born at Locris, of a noble Family, of great Learning, and Scholar to Pythagoras. He was of great esteem and account in his Country, and chosen by the People to be their Law-maker. He began his Laws first with the Worship of the Gods. In the Preface he requires the Inhabitants,
 

That in the First place, and above all, they should be fully perswaded, and undoubtedly believe that there were Gods; and that devoutly looking up to Heaven, and viewing the Beauty and admirable Harmony and Order thereof, they should judge and certainly conclude, that that great Work was not of Men, or came there by chance: And therefore he ordain'd, they should adore and worship the Gods, from whom all that is good descends upon Men. And to that end, that they ought to have their Minds pure and unspotted, inasmuch as the Gods are better pleas'd with the just and honest Actions of Righteous Men, than with all their costly Sacrifices.

 Having made this Preface or Introduction, he then subjoyns his Precepts. First, 

That none should be implacable one against another, but that all should so manage their Animosities; as to keep a reserve in a short time to be reconcil'd, and in full Friendship with their Adversaries; and if any did otherwise, such a Man should be reputed of a fierce and inhumane Disposition. Secondly, He commanded the Magistrates that they should not be Proud and Domineering; that they should not give Judgment in any matter, either for Love or Hatred.

 And in other particulars, he devised many things with great Wisdom, Prudence and Ingenuity. 3. Whereas in all other Countries, by the excess and extravagance of Women much Silver was spent and wasted, by a witty and ingenious kind of Punishment, he restrain'd their Excess, for he ordered, 

That no Woman that was Free of the City should be attended Abroad with any more than one Servant, unless she were Drunk. That none should walk abroad in the Night, except it were with an intent to play the Who

•

e, nor wear golden Ornaments or Garments embroider'd with Gold, unless with the same intent: Nor that any Man should wear a Gold Ring, of a Milesian Garment, unless he were guilty of Fornication or Adultery.

 By these dishonourable Exceptions and Conditions of Indempnity (which were Punishments in themselves) he easily restrain'd the Citizens from Luxury and Excess, for none were willing to expose themselves as laughing-stocks to their Fellow Citizens, by owning themselves guilty of such foul Offences. Many other Laws concerning Contracts and other Differences which might arise, were with great Judgment made by him, which would be too tedious particularly to relate, and beside the scope and intent of our History: We shall therefore return whence we made a digression. 

Lysimachides was chief Ruler of Athens, when the Romans conferr'd the Consular dignity upon Titus Menenius, and Poplius Sestius Capitolinus. In their time the Sybarites that had escap'd in the late Sedition, seated themselves at the River Tarentum, where they continu'd for some time, but at length were rooted out, and utterly destroy'd by the Brutii. In Greece in the mean time, the Athenians having recovered Eubea, drave the Hestians out of the City; and sending thither a Colony of a Thousand Citizens of their own, they divided the City and Land adjacent amongst them by Lot.


Page 272

CHAP. IV.

Of the Decemviri in Rome, chosen to make Laws. The War between the Thurians and Tarentines. The sad Story of the Daughter of one Lucius Virginius in Rome, which caus'd a disturbance and great Sedition. The Law of the Twelve Tables. Peace all over the World.

WHen Praxitiles was Governor of Athens, the Eighty Fourth Olympiad was celebrated (in which Crison of Himera was Victor) and at Rome, Ten Persons (call'd the Decem-viri) were chosen to compose new Laws. Publius Claudius Regillanus, TitusMinutius, Sporius Viturius, Caius Julius,Caius Sulpitius, Publius Sestius,Romilius, Sporius Posthumius,Culbinius and Publius Horatius. By these Persons were Laws made. In their time a War broke out between the Thurians and them of Tarentum; in which War the Countries were wasted on both sides by Inroads by Land, and Invasions from Sea; many small Battels and Skirmishes were fought, but nothing done of any moment.

Lysanias being chief Ruler at Athens, the Romans again chose Ten Men for making of Laws. Appius Claudius, Marcus Cornelius, Lucius Minutius, Caius Sergius, Quintus Pitilius, Marcus Rabuleius, T. Antonius Meranda, Q. Fabius Vibulanus, C. Duilius, and Sp. Oppius. But these could not perfect the Business wherein they were imploy'd; for one of them fell in Love with a beautiful Virgin, but of small Fortune, whom he endeavour'd to debauch by Money. But when he saw he could not gain his Design by those means, he subborn'd a Fellow fit for his purpose to claim her for his Bondslave, and to bring her before the Decem-viri, and demand Judgment against her as his Slave; which was easily obtain'd from a corrupt Judge, the Author of the Villany. She being delivered to him, the Sycophant Knave carry'd her away as his Bond-maid. In the mean time, the Father of the Young Woman, mov'd with Grief and Rage at the indignity offer'd, hasten'd to the Court, where seeing no hopes of redress, he follow'd his Daughter close behind her, and spying a Knife in a Butcher's Shop, as he pass'd by, he snatcht it up, and forthwith stabb'd his Daughter to Death, to avoid the indignity and disgrace of such a condition, and forthwith without delay, hastening out of the City, made to the Army that was then encamp'd at Algidum, and with many Tears declar'd his miserable Condition, and implor'd their Assistance; which on the suddain affected them all with Commiseration, and great sorrow at his Calamity; upon which (being all stirr'd up with a resolution to relieve the distressed Father) in the Night they rush into Rome, and possess themselves of the Aventine Mount. As soon as the Day brake, the Decem-viri, being inform'd of the Rage of the Soldiers against the wickedness of the Fact (by force of Arms resolving to defend their Collegue) got together a multitude of Young Men to dispute the matter with their Adversaries by the Sword. And now a great and bloody Fight seem'd to be at hand, when some of the Citizens of the best Quality, foreseeing the danger, interpos'd by Messengers to both Parties, in order to compose the Difference; intreating and earnestly beseeching them, that they would forbear, and not involve their Country in Blood and Destruction. At length the matter was agreed upon these Conditions, That there should be Ten call'd Tribunes of the People chosen, who should have Sovereign Power and Authority over all the rest of the Magistrates of the City, and who might protect the common Liberty of the People: And that one of the Consuls every Year should be chosen out of the Senators, and the other out of the Common People. Yea, further, that they should have Power to chuse both Consuls out from among themselves if they thought fit. And this Law was then made to be a Check to the exorbitant power of the Patricians; for they under colour of their great and high Birth, and the glory of their Families, with insufferable Pride engross'd to themselves all the power and authority of


Page 273

the City. Amongst the Conditions it was further added, That the Tribunes of the People, at the end of every Year, should appoint as many new ones in their room to succeed, and if they did neglect it, they should be burnt alive. And though the Tribunes could not agree in their Choice, yet they should continue still in their Offices in the mean time. And this was the end of the great Commotion at Rome.

Diphilus being Archon of Athens, the Romans created Marcüs Horatius, and Lucius Valerius Potitus Consuls, who perfected the Laws which suffered an irruption by the Sedition. For there were then Ten of the Twelve Tables (as they were call'd) only finished, the other Two were added by these Consuls. The Roman Laws thus perfected, the Consuls ordered them to be engraven upon Twelve Tables of Brass, and fix'd them to the Pleaders Desk in the face of the Court. And these Laws thus written briefly and plainly without any flourish of Words remain unto this Day.

About the time these things were done, most Nations through the World were at Peace; for the Persians made a double League with the Grecians, and with the Athenians and their Confederates, whereby Liberty was restor'd to all the Greek Cities of Asia. The other afterwards was with the Lacedemonians, by which it was agreed quite contrary, that the Greek Cities in Asia, should remain under the power of the Persians. In like manner, the Grecians were at Peace among themselves, the Athenians and Spartans having entred into a League for Thirty Years. And all was likewise quiet in Sicily, the Carthaginians having made Peace with Gelon, and all the Grecian Cities submitted to them of Syracuse. And the Agrigentines after the Slaughter at Himera, accepted of Terms of Peace. And all the People of Italy, France, Spain, and most Parts of the World, were at perfect Concord one with another. Therefore we have no account in History of any thing memorable done in War during this time; but all were every where at rest, solacing themselves with Sports and Sacred Festivals, and other Jollities, the common Attendants of a prosperous State and Condition.

CHAP. V.

The War between the Samians and the Melesians. A Sedition in Samos, which revolts from the Athenians. The War in Sicily by the Syracusians against the Trinacrians.

TImocles was now chief Governour of Athens, and Larius Herminius, and Titus Virginius Tricostus, Roman Consuls. In their time the Samians break forth into War against the Milesians concerning Priene; and discerning the Athenians more to favour the Milesians, they revolted from them. Hereupon the Athenians sent Pericles (made Admiral some time before) with Forty Sail against the Samians, who approached their City, easily reduced it, and there established a Democracy. And having impos'd a Mulct of Eighty Talents upon them, and receiv'd as many Youths for Hostages, he committed them to the care and custody of the Lemnians; and so having in a short time finish'd with good success all for which he was sent, he return'd to Athens.

After this, a grievous Sedition happen'd in Samos, some being for the Democracy, others endeavouring to set up an Aristocracy, whereby the City was in a mighty popular Tumult. They who were against the Democracy went over to Sardis in Asia to Pissuthines the Persian Governor to desire aid, who lends them Seven Hundred Soldiers, hoping by this means to bring Samos under his power. The Samians with this aid, loosing from Asia in the Night, stole secretly upon


Page 274

the City, and by the help of their Accomplices, enter'd and surpriz'd it; and being thus easily possess'd, forthwith eject all of the contrary Faction. Then having stollen and carry'd away the Hostages out of Lemnos, and strengthen'd Samos with Garrisons, they declare themselves open Enemies against the Athenians; who again send against them Pericles with Sixty Sail; who overcame them in a Sea Fight though they had Seventy Sail. Upon this (with the help of Twenty Five Ships, which join'd him from Chios and Mitylene) he besieg'd Samos; and some few Days after, leaving part of his Forces to maintain the Siege, with the rest he made against the Phenician Fleet, which the Persians sent to the aid of the Samians. The Samians taking advantage of the opportunity of his departure, suddenly set upon the rest of his Fleet and routed them; with which success they grew very proud and haughty. But Pericles hearing of the ruin of his Fleet left behind, return'd without delay, and got together a strong and numerous Navy, fully resolving utterly to ruin the Enemy's Fleet; And being speedily supplied by the Athenians with Threescore Ships, and with Thirty from Chios and Mitylene, he renew'd the Siege both by Sea and Land, wearying the City with continual Assaults. He was the first that made use of those warlike Engines call'd Battering Rams, and Scorpions, by the assistance and ingenuity of Artemon the Lacedemonian. And by his fierce and violent Assaults, battering down the Walls with his Engines, the City fell into his Hands. And after he had put to Death the Authors of the defection, he caus'd the Samians to pay Two Hundred Talents in Compensation for the charge of the War. He carry'd away likewise all their Ships, and demolish'd the Walls; and when he had restored the Democracy, return'd into his own Country. To this time the Thirty Years Truce between the Athenians and the Lacedemonians continued unviolated. And with these things was this Year remarkable.

When Myrichides govern'd the state of Athens, Lucius Julius, and Marcus Geganius were Roman Consuls. The Eleans then celebrated the Eighty Fifth Olympiad, in which Crisus of Himera was the Second Victor. In these times in Sicily, Ducetius formerly Prince of the Siculi, planted the Country of the Callatines, and having setled there many Colonies, began at length to take upon him the Sovereign power over the Siculi: But falling sick, both his Life and his Designs vanish'd together.

The Syracusians now being Lords of all the Cities of Sicily (except Trinacria) resolv'd to gain that likewise by force of Arms; for they were exceedingly jealous of the Trinacrians, because they were very rich, lest they should at any time after gain the Sovereignty of the Siculi, to whom they were related as Kindred. This City both then and ever, had many valiant Men amongst them, and upon that account was ever esteem'd the principal City of the Siculi, for it was full of good Commanders, Men of brave and daring Spirits. The Syracusians therefore gathered together all their Forces both from Syracuse, and from among their Confederates, and march'd against the Trinacrians; who being destitute of all assistance, by reason the rest of the Cities were subject to Syracuse, were in a bloody Battel hard put to it; and after a resolute and valiant opposition, all gallantly dy'd upon the spot. For those that were wounded, rather than to undergo the disgrace of being Captives, dispatched themselves. They of Syracuse having obtain'd this Victory over a People never before subdu'd, made all the Inhabitants Captives, and raz'd the City to the Ground. The richest of the Spoils they sent to Delphos as a grateful Offering to the Gods.


Page 275

CHAP. VI.

The Corinthian War against Corcyra. Potidea revolts from the Athenians. Quarrels in Thurium. Meton's Year. Heraclea in Italy built. Potidea besieg'd by Phormio.

GLaucides the Chief Magistrate of Athens, Titus Quintus, and Agrippa Furius, Consuls of Rome: The Syracusians (being Victorious as is before related) fell a building of Ships of Three Oars upon a Bank, and doubling the number of their Horse, busi'd themselves in raising a Land-Army. And that they might. raise, and get together a great Treasure and Fond of Money, they exacted larger Contributions from their Subjects; and this they did with a Design to subject all Sicily by degrees to their Dominion.

Whilst these things were in doing, the Corinthian War (as it's call'd) broke forth upon the following occasion. The Epidamnians, the Inhabitants of the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea, being Colonies brought from Corcyra and Corinth, were greatly distress'd with Tumults and Seditions amongst themselves, where the stronger Party cast many of the contrary Faction out of the City; whereupon the Exiles join'd together, and calling the Illyrians to their Assistance and Confederacy, they made against Epidamnum with a great Fleet: And being the Barbarians were very strong, they easily possess'd themselves of the Country, and besieged the City. They of Epidamnum not able to resist so great a Force, sent to Corcyra for aid, who were of the same Stock and Kindred; but being disregarded by them, they made their Application to the Corinthians, owning that City to be their only Metropolis, and desired a Supply of more Citizens in the room of those that were ejected. The Corinthians partly out of pity to them of Epidamnum, and partly out of an old grudge they bore them of Corcyra (for that they only of all the Colonies, brought from them thither, neglected to send to them as their Metropolis, the usual Offerings) decreed Aid to be sent to them of Epidamnum. And accordingly they sent both a new Supply of Citizens, and a Guard of Souldiers sufficient for the defence of the City. The Corcyreans much inrag'd at this, fitted out a Fleet of Fifty Sail against them. The Admiral of which Fleet after his arrival commanded them of Epidamnum, to receive the Exiles: And then by Ambassadors propos'd to the Corinthian Garrison, That the matter relating to the Colony, might rather be ended in an orderly Course of Justice, than by force of Arms. But the Corinthians refusing, it came at length to a War; and Fleets were prepared, and Associations and Confederacies made on both sides: And these were the Causes of that Corinthian War. In the mean time, the Romans made War against the Volsci. At first they began with light and small Skirmishes; but at length in a formal Battel the Romans became Victorious, and slew most of their Enemies upon the Field.

When Theodorus govern'd Athens, and the Romans constituted Marcus Genusius, and Agrippa Curtius Chelon, Consuls; in Italy the Nation of the Campanians began to flourish; so call'd from the Fruitfulness of the Country round about them. In Asia the Archaeanactidae had now held the Kingdom of the Cimmerian Bosphorus for the space of Two and Forty Years; to whom then succeeded Spartacus, who reign'd Seven Years. In Greece the Corinthians and Corcyreans were preparing on both sides Navies for Fights at Sea: And presently the Corinthians made towards the Enemy with Seventy Gallies bravely sitted out; and the Corcyreans met them with Fourscore, routed them, and took Epidamnum by Storm, and made all the Corinthians their Prisoners, but put all the rest to the Sword. The Corinthians by this overthrow, wholly discouraged, return'd into Peloponesus. The Corcyreans now become Masters of this part of the Sea, invaded the Confederates of the Corinthians, and wasted their Country.


Page 276

This Year ended, Euthymenis entred upon the Government of Athens, and at Rome Three Military Tribunes were appointed Magistrates with Consular dignity, Aulus Sempronius, Lucius Atilius, and Titus Celius. At that time the Corinthians, not long before overcome at Sea, determined to put forth another Navy more glorious than the former. And to that end getting together Materials from all Parts, and hiring Ship-Carpenters out of the Cities, they built Ships with all care and earnestness, and prepared all manner of Arms and Weapons, and every thing necessary for War; some Ships they built new, others they repaired, and some they borrow'd of their Confederates. Nor were they of Corcyra idle, for they were nothing inferior to their Enemies in care and diligence; whence it was apparent how dreadful a War was like to ensue. In the mean time, the Athenians sent a Colony to Amphipolis, chosen partly out of their own City, and partly out of the neighbouring Forts and Castles.

Nausimachus being chief Ruler of Athens, Titus Quintus, and Marcus Geganius Macerinus were chosen Roman Consuls. At that time, the Eleans celebrated the Eighty Sixth Olympiad, in which Theopompus of Thessaly carry'd away the Prize. The Corcyreans hearing of the great Preparations that were making against them, sent Ambassadors to Athens, to desire their Assistance, which was done likewise by the Corinthians. The Assemblies being called, and audience given to the Embassadors on both sides, it was determin'd to joyn with them of Corcyra. And without delay, they sent them Ten Ships of Three Oars in a Seat, well Man'd and provided, promising to send them more, as there should be occasion.

The Corinthians (now abandoned by the Athenians) having Ninety Ships of their own, borrow'd Sixty more of their Confederates, and so made up a Fleet of an Hundred and Fifty Sail, and furnished it with choice Commanders, and forthwith made out against the Corcyreans, to fight them upon the first opportunity. As soon as the Corcyreans heard that their Enemies Fleet was near at Hand, they made forth against them with a Navy of an Hundred and Twenty Sail, accounting those of Athens.

The Fleets engaged, and fought with great Resolution; the Corinthians at the first had the Advantage, but a Fleet of Twenty Sail from Athens just then appearing (sent in pursuance of a second Address made to them) the Corcyreans got the Day. The next Day the Corcyreans appear'd with their whole Strength in a Line of Battel, daring the Corinthians to Fight; but they kept within their Harbours, and so avoided further Fighting.

Antilochides now Archon of Athens, at Rome Marcus Fabius, and Posthumius AebutiusAulicus were made Consuls: In their times the Corinthians greatly resented the Confederacy of the Athenians with them of Corcyra, especially for that the Victory obtain'd, was chiefly by their means. And therefore being inrag'd, and seeking by all the means they could to be reveng'd, they stirr'd up their Colony at Potidea to revolt. In like manner Perdicas the King of Macedonia, not long before incens'd against the Athenians, prevail'd with them of Chalcidica to revolt, and leave the Cities upon the Sea Coast, and withdraw only into one called Olynthus.

The Athenians hearing of the defection of Potidea, sent forth a Fleet of Thirty Sail, with Command both to destroy the Country of the Rebels, and storm the City. They according to order, bent their Course for Macedonia, and likewise besieg'd the City. The Corinthians sent Two Thousand Men to assist the Besieged, and the Athenians sent as many to strengthen it. Hereupon a great Battel was fought in the Isthmus near Pallene, where the Athenians were Victors, and kill'd above Three Hundred of the Enemy. And then straiter Siege was laid to Potidea. In the mean time, the Athenians built a new City in Propontis, which they call'd Letoanum.

In Italy the Romans sent new Colonies into Ardea, and divided the Country amongst them by Lot.

Now Charetes executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans made Quintus Furius Fusus, and Manius Papyrius Crassus Consuls. In Italy the Inhabitants of Thurium (being composed of People gathered from several Places) began to quarrel and disagree concerning what City chiefly Thurium, should be reputed a Colony of, and who should be acknowledg'd the Founder. For first they


Page 277

of Athens challeng'd it, affirming most of the Inhabitants came from thence. Next they of Peloponesus (because many Cities sent Colonies from thence) claim'd the right of being accounted Founders of the City. In this manner (there being many Persons of Quality Members of the Colony, who had done much towards its Advancement,) there arose great Dissentions, every one challenging the dignity and honour as due to himself. At length they of Thurium sent to Delphos to consult there who should be esteemed and taken to be their Founder. The Oracle answered, That he himself should be so taken. And thus the great doubt being resolv'd, the Thurians declar'd Apollo their Founder: And so this Difference being remov'd, the People lived in Peace as formerly. In Greece, Archidamus King of Lacedemon died, having reign'd Forty Two Years, and Agis succeeded, who reign'd Seven and Forty Years.

At the time when Apseudes was chief Governor of Athens, and Titus Minenius, and Proculus Geganius Macerinus, Roman Consuls, Spartacus King of Bosphorus died, after he had Reigned Seventeen Years; whom Seleucus succeeding, Reign'd only Four Years. At Athens flourished that famous Astrologer Meton the Son of Pausanias, who then published his Table of the Cycle of the Moon called Enneadeceterides, beginning from the Thirteenth of the Attick Month Scirrophorion: For in the space of Nineteen Years the Stars return to the same State and Place, and compleat as it were a great Year. And therefore by some it is called Meton's Year. This Man in this Discovery, seems to be exactly true to a wonder, for the Motions and Aspects of the Stars, fully agree with this Description. And therefore most of the Grecians following the Rule of this Table, have never err'd to this Day. In Italy they of Tarentum, drave out the Inhabitants of Siris, and bringing a new Colony thither, built a City call'd Heraclea.

When Pythodorus govern'd Athens, and Titus Quintius, and Titus Menenius Agrippa, were Roman Consuls, the Eleans celebrated the Eighty Seventh Olympiad, in which was Victor Sophron of of Amphracion. At this time SpuriusManius affecting Sovereignty at Rome, was kill'd. In the mean time, the Athenians in a Signal Battel at Potidea (wherein they were Conquerors) lost their General Callias. Phormio was advanced to his Place, who as soon as he came to the Army, renew'd the Siege, and press'd hard upon it with continual Assaults: But by reason of the Valour and Obstinacy of the Defendants, the Siege continued long.

Here Thucydides the Athenian begins his History, and then proceeds to relate the War between the Athenians and the Lacedemonians, call'd the Peloponesian War. It continued Seven and Twenty Years, but Thucydides writes only of the first Two and Twenty Years, in Eight Books, others say Nine.


Page 278

CHAP. VII.

The Peloponesian War. Potidea Revolts; Besieg'd by the Athenians, and is surrendred upon Articles. Nicias made the Athenian Admiral. Gorgias an excellent Orator sent from Leontine in Sicily to Athens. A Peace concluded after the War had continu'd Ten Years.

WHen Euthydemus govern'd at Athens, the Romans created Three Military Tribunes, invested with Consular Power; Manius Emilius Mamercus, Caius Julius, and Lucius Quintius. At this time broke forth that War between the Athenians and the Lacedemonians, call'd the Peloponesian War, of longest continuance of any we read of in History.

According to the Design of our History, it is convenient in the first Place, to declare the Causes of this War. The Athenians now endeavouring to have the Dominion of the Sea, brought over to Athens all the Money they had laid-up at Delos, which they had gathered together from the Cities of Greece, almost to the value of Eight Thousand Talents, and made Pericles Treasurer. He was of a very noble Family, and in Eloquence far exceeded others of his Fellow Citizens: But not long after, having spent a great part of the Money (intrusted with him) upon his private occasions, and being call'd by the People to give an account, through grief of his incapacity to discharge himself, he fell Sick: And being thus disturb'd in his Mind, in regard he was not able to make satisfaction, Alcibiades his Nephew (who was then under Age, and under his Care and Guardianship) directed him into a way how to extricate himself out of the present trouble

•

. For seeing his Uncle so disturb'd, he ask'd the Reason; who answered, I am studying how I shall give an Account to the People for the Moneys committed to my Care and Custody. He replied, That it were better for him to consider and advise how he might give no account at all. Pericles hereupon following the Advice of the Young Man, contriv'd by all the ways imaginable how he might involve the Athenians in some great War. For by this means he foresaw he should avoid the Account, inasmuch as the City would be so distracted with Cares and Fears in such a conjuncture. To forward this Design, an Accident fell out very opportunely upon the following occasion. Phidias had made the Statue of Minerva, and Pericles the Son of Xantippe, was imploy'd to see the Work done: But some of Phidias's Workmen and Servants fell out, and stir'd up by the Enemies of Pericles, they fled to the Altars of the Gods. And being commanded to declare the Reason of a thing so unusual, they said, that they could make it out, that Phidias, with the connivance and help of Pericles, had imbezilled a great Sum of Money belonging to the Goddess. Whereupon an Assembly was call'd, at which the Enemies of Pericles mov'd the People to apprehend Phidias, and charge Pericles with the Sacrilege. They accus'd likewise Anaxagoras the Sophist, the Master of Pericles, for his impious Opinions concerning the Gods; with the same Calumnies they loaded likewise Pericles, chiefly designing to stain the glory, and weaken the interest of so brave a Man. But Pericles being well acquainted with the Disposition of the People, as knowing that they highly valued Men of worth, in times when they were threatned with War, (the present Circumstances of Affairs making it at such times of absolute necessity:) And on the contrary, that in times of Peace (when they had nothing to do but giving the Reins to Envy and Malice) blackned the same Men with all manner of Calumny; therefore judg'd it advantagious for his Affairs, if he could engage the City in some considerable War, that thereby having occasion to make use of them, they should be deaf to all Acccusations against him, and should have no time or leisure to call him to an Account. To help on this his Design, it was lately decreed at Athens, that they of Megara, should have no Traffick with the Athenians either by Sea or Land: The Megareans therefore made their Address for Relief to the Spartans, who agreed to their Requests, and by the


Page 279

unanimous Assent of all the Assembly, they sent Ambassadors to the Athenians, with order to require them to rescind the Decree against them of Megara; And that if they refus'd, then that their Embassadors should denounce War against them in the name both of them and their Confederates. Upon hearing of the Embassadors, an Assembly was call'd to debate this matter; where Pericles, (that far surpass'd all the rest in Eloquence and strength of Reason) gave his Reasons against the abrogating of the Decree. He alledged it was a step to Bondage and Slavery, and against the common good to yield to the Demands of the Lacedemonians; but advis'd them rather that they should draw all their Goods and Concerns out of the Country into the City; and being now Masters at Sea, to enter into a War with the Lacedemonians. And hereupon making an accurate Discourse of the War, he told them what a Multitude of Confederats they had, what a brave and well man'd Fleet they were Masters of, what a vast Treasure they were possessed of, brought from Delos, gather'd from the common Contribution of the Cities, amounting to Ten Thousand Talents; and though Four Thousand of it were spent in the building of the Propyle, or Citadel, and in the Siege at Potidea, yet every Year Four Hundred and Sixty Talents were rais'd by Tribute from their Confederates. And besides all this, that the Adornments belonging to the Shows, and the Persian Spoils amouned to Five Hundred Talents more. And that in the Temples and other publick Works of the City, there were great Riches, so that the very Image of Minerva it self alone was worth Fifty Talents of Gold; whose Ornaments were so plac'd, that they might be taken off; and all of them when necessity requir'd might be borrow'd from the Goddess, so that they be faithfully restor'd in time of Peace. And as to the Estate of the Citizens, he told them, through the Enjoyment of a long Peace the City was grown exceeding Rich; he added moreover, that they had Twelve Thousand Armed Men, besides their Confederates, and what were in their Garrisons. And those in their Garrisons, together with their Colonies, were more than Seventeen Thousand; and that they had ready a Fleet of Three Hundred Sail. On the contrary, the Spartans were Poor, and far inferior to the Athenians in Naval Forces. Having fired the Citizens with these Discourses, he vehemently pressed the People not to give ear to the imperious Demands of the Lacedemonians: And by the earnestness of his Speech, he easily prevail'd; for which reason he was called Olympius. Aristophanes the Comick Poet, who flourished in the time of Pericles, mentions these things in the Verses following—

Ye Poor and Country Swains, consider well,

The Words I speak; if you would know, they'll tell

Your Country how destroy'd; a Spark but small,

Brought from Megara's Law, blown up with all

By him, hath rais'd such Smoak of War, Blood, Fears,

As draws from Eyes of Greece continual Tears.

And likewise the Comick Poet Eupolis, in other Verses, says of Pericles, whom they call Olympius.

Thunder and Lightening he rais'd in Greece,

Of Eloquence who was the Masterpiece;

Only among the Orators, his Darts

Were left fast fixed in the Hearers Hearts.

And these were the causes of the Peloponesian War, as they are related by Ephorus.

The principal Grecian Cities thus provoked to War, the Lacedemonians (in a general Convention with them of Peloponesus) declar'd War against the Athenians, and forthwith sent their Embassadors to the King of Persia, to enter into a League offensive with them. Embassadors were likewise sent, to desire Two Hundred Ships of their Confederates in Sicily and Italy.


Page 280

And now being join'd with the Peloponesians, and having rais'd a Land-Army from several Parts, and prepared with all things necessary for War, they first begin. At that time in Beotia the City Platea was a free City, in league with the Athenians: But some of the Citizens designing to enslave the Place, in contrivance with the Beotians promis'd to bring the City under their Power if they would but send them a Guard of Souldiers. The Beotians therefore sent Three Hundred Souldiers in the Night to Platea, who being let into the Gates, the Traytors deliver'd up the City into their Hands. But the Plateans willing to approve their Faithfulness to the Athenians (at first thinking that the whole Army of the Thebans were entr'd) sent Embassadors to them to treat and make Terms: But when Day appear'd, and they of Platea understood how small a Number the Enemy was, they all as one Man came upon them, and Fought with great resolution for their Common Liberty. But because the Fight was in the Streets, the Thebans being better Souldiers at the first destroy'd many of the Plateans: But afterwards they in the Houses, even the very Boys and Children by throwing down Tyles from the Roofs so sorely gall'd the Thebans that they were forc'd to fly; that part of them who got out of the City clearly escap'd, but another part that fled for shelter to a little House, at length were compell'd to give up themselves to the will of the Enemy.

The Thebans being inform'd by them that had escap'd, of this misfortune, with all their force hasten'd to the City: By reason of which suddain incursion many of them who liv'd in the Country, and those abroad being taken at unawares, were kill'd and many Prisoners taken; the whole Country being fill'd with Fears Devastations and Robberies. In the mean time the Plateans sent to the Thebans to intreat them to depart out of their Coasts, promising they would release the Prisoners. Upon which conditions the Matter was Compos'd; and the Thebans receiv'd the Captives and restor'd the Plunder to them of Platea, and so return'd home. The Plateans had sometime before sent to Athens for Aid, and had brought much of their Goods out of the Country into the City: The Athenians hearing of their Distress hastned away to them a competent Number of Souldiers, who tho' they March'd with all expedition, yet they could not prevent the Thebans: But what was left in the Country they brought into the Town: The Women and Children and those that were infirm, they got together in a Body, and convey'd them to Athens.

Hereupon the Lacedemonians judging the Athenians had broke the League, gather'd Forces together from all parts both from Sparta and from the rest of the Peloponesians. The Confederats of the Lacedemonians were the Peloponesians wholly, except the Argives, for they then stood Neuters. Those out of Peloponesus were the Megareans, Ambraciots, Leucadians, Phocians, Beotians, many of the Locrians over against Eubea, and the rest those of Amphissa. Those that sided with the Athenians were the Inhabitants of the Sea-Coasts of Asia, the Carians, Dorians, Ionians, them of the Hellespont, and all the Islanders, except the Inhabitants of Melus and Thera. The Thracians likewise were their Confederats, except those of Calcidica and Potidea. Besides these there join'd with the Athenians the Messenians in Naupactus, and the Corcyreans. All the rest sent Land-Forces. These Confederats stood firm on both sides.

The Lacedemonians having at length rais'd a great Army, made Archidamus their King, General, who made an Irruption into Attica, besieg'd their Castles, and wasted a great part of the Country. The Athenians inflamed with desire of Revenge for this Destruction of their Country, were eager to be out to Fight their Enemies; but Pericles the General advis'd the hot Youths to forbear a while, telling them that he would drive the Spartans out without Fighting. To this end he fitted out an hundred Gallies well Man'd, and gave the command of the Fleet to Carcinus and some other Officers, with order to make a descent into Peloponesus. Accordingly they laid wast a great part of the Sea-Coasts, took several Castles, and struck the Lacedemonians with great Consternation. So that without delay they withdrew their Forces out of Attica, and made it their chief care now to defend Peloponesus. The Athenians now freed by this ingenious Contrivance from their Enemies, highly Honour'd Pericles as a wise Commander and one able to carry on the War against the Lacedemonians.


Page 281

Apolodorus now Archon at Athens, the Romans chose MarcusGenarius and Lucius Sergius Consuls. In the mean time the Athenian General ceas'd not to wast and plunder the Sea-Coast of Peloponesus, and destroy their Castles. And being join'd with Fifty Gallies of Three Tire of Oars from Corsyra, he made a more dreadful incursion into Peloponesus, and especially on the Sea-Coast, and up further into the Land, burning all the Towns before him. Then he made for Methone, a City of Laconia, wasting and plundering the Country in his way, and attempted the taking of the City it self. There Brasidas a Spartan (a young Man, but of great Strength and Valour) seeing Methone likely to be lost, with some other Spartans joining with him, made his way through the midst of the Enemy, who were dispers'd here and there in their several Posts, and with the slaughter of many of them got safe into the Castle. After the Athenians had made several Assaults (in which Brasidas behav'd himself with great bravery in the midst of dangers) and saw no hopes of gaining the Place, they return'd to their Ships. But Brasidas who had preserv'd Methone by his valour and resolute Defence, was highly honour'd amongst the Spartans. And being incourag'd by this Success in several Encounters, afterwards he behav'd himself with that Valour that he gain'd a great Name and Reputation.

The Athenians roul'd about to Elis, wasted the Country, and besieg'd Pheras, a Castle of the Eleans; to which they sent relief, but were beaten by the Athenians, who took Pheras by Storm. Yet within a while after the Eleans coming upon them with all their Strength, they were forc'd to their Ships, and Sail'd back to Cephalenia; where they made a league with the Inhabitants, and then return'd to Athens.

Afterwards Cleopompus, made by the Athenians Admiral of a Fleet of thirty Sail, was commanded into Eubea, both to defend the Island, and to make War upon the Locrians. He invaded and spoil'd all the Sea-tract of Locris, and took the City Thronium, and afterwards routed the Locrians in a Land-Fight at Aelopes. He then Fortisied the Island Atalante, near Locris, that it might be both a Defence against the Locrians, and that from thence he might with more ease make incursions upon them.

About the same time the Athenians cast all the Inhabitants out of Aegina, for favouring the Lacedemonians (as they were accused) and brought new Colonies thither, and divided the City and Country amongst them by Lot. The Lacedemonians appointed Thyre to the ejected Aeginites for their habitation; and on the other side, the Athenians forthwith alloted Naupactus for a receptacle for the Messenians, formerly ejected by the Lacedemonians. At the same time the Athenians sent Pericles with an Army against them of Megara, who after he had harras'd the Country and taken much Spoil and Plunder, return'd to Athens.

Shortly after the Lacedemonians with their Confederats broke a second time into Attica, and cut down the Trees, burnt the Towns and most miserably destroy'd almost the whole Country, except Tetrapolis, which they spar'd by reason of their former kindness in receiving of their Ancestors and subduing (by Arms from thence) Euristheus. For they conceiv'd it just and equal to shew kindness to them who had deserv'd so well from their Predecessors. The Athenians during this incursion durst not come into the Field, but kept close withim the Walls of their City, by reason whereof a great Plague raged amongst them. For a Multitude of all sorts of People being throng'd together, it may be reasonably concluded that through the straitness of the Place the Air was corrupted, and caused the Infection. By this means they were so weakn'd that they were not able to drive the Enemy out of the Country, but sent out Pericles again with a Fleet into Peloponesus; who wasting the Sea-Coasts, and taking some Cities, caus'd the Lacedemonians at length to leave Attica.

The Athenians by reason of the wast and spoil made in the Country, and the great destruction of the People by the Plague in the City, fell into great discontent and vexation, and were enrag'd, at Pericles, whom they look'd upon as the great Incendiary and occasion of the War, and therefore depriv'd him of the Magistracy, and upon slight and frivolous Surmizes laid a Mulct upon him of Thirty Talents. Then they sent Embassadors to Sparta to treat of Peace; but being slighted by the Lacedemonians (who would admit of no reasonable Terms,) they were reduced to a necessity to chuse Pericles General again. And these were the Actions of this Year.


Page 282

Epaminondas this Year was chief Ruler of Athens, and Lucius Papyrius Crassus and Marcus ComeliusMacerinus Roman Consuls: At which time Pericles the General Died at Athens. A Man in Nobility of Birth, greatness of Estate, in Eloquence, Arts and Stratagems of War far beyond all the rest of the Citizens. About the same time the Athenians were very hot and earnest to recover Potidea by force, and to that end sent Hagno thither with the Army formerly commanded by Pericles. Hagno thereupon Sail'd thither with the whole Fleet, and made all the preparation for the Siege imaginable, viz. Engines of all Sorts for an Assault, Arms and Darts, and sufficient Provision for the whole Army. However though he continually batter'd the Walls of the City in many places, yet he spent much time to no purpose. For the fear of being taken by Storm added courage to the Defendants, and the hight of the Walls commanding the Port, made them very resolute: Besides, a Disease hapn'd among the Besiegers which destroy'd many of them, so that they were greatly discourag'd. Notwithstanding Hagno knowing that the Athenians had been at the charge of a Thousand Talents to carry on the Siege, and that they were highly incens'd against them of Potidea (because they were the first that made a Defection) durst not leave the Siege: But with all his might persisted, and stir'd up the Souldiers even above their Strength to force the City. But at length considering that many of the Citizens were lost both in the Assaults and by the infection of the Disease, leaving a part of the Army to maintain the Siege, he return'd with the rest to Athens, having lost above a Thousand Men. After he was gone, they of Potidea (being brought to the utmost extremity for want of Provision) sent to the Besiegers to treat with them upon Terms of Peace; which was readily accepted and imbrac'd with both Arms (as they say) by the Athenians, and Peace was made upon the Terms following, to wit, That all the Inhabitants should draw out of the City, and take nothing away with them but every Man one Suit of Apparel, and every Woman two.

Matters being thus compos'd, the Potideans with their Wives and Children (according to the Articles) left the City and setled themselves among the Calcideans in Thrace; after which the Athenians sent a Colony of a Thousand Persons, and divided both the City and Country adjacent amongst them by Lot.

Phormio being now made Admiral at Athens, with Twenty Ships sail'd round Peloponesus and arriv'd at Naupactum, where possessing himself of the Greek Criseus, he stopt the Passages against the Lacedemonians so as that their Ships could not come forth. But their King Archidamus with a great Army began a new expedition, and march'd into Beotia, and when he came to Platea (ready and prepar'd to wast and destroy the Country) he first solicited that City to revolt: But not being able to prevail, he fell a robbing and spoiling the Country all along as he went. Afterwards he Besieg'd the City, in hopes to weary them out for want of Provision: He incessantly likewise Batter'd the Walls with his Engines, and made frequent Assaults. But with all his Attempts not being able to gain the Place, he left a part of the Army to carry on the Siege, and with the rest march'd back into Peloponesus.

About this time the Athenians made Xenophon and Phanomachus Generals, and commanded them with a Thousand Men to go into Thrace. When they came as far as Pactolus in Beotia, they burnt spoil'd and rob'd the Country all before them, and destroy'd the very standing Corn. But they of Olynthus join'd with the Beotians, fell upon the Athenians and slew most of them, together with their Generals. 

In the mean time the Lacedemonians by the advice of the Ambraciots with a Thousand Men and a few Ships under Cnemus their Captain, made for Acarnania and being inforc'd by a considerable Number of their Confederates, Cnemus arriv'd there and incamp'd near the City Stratos. But the Acarnanians in a Body came suddainly upon him, surpriz'd him with the loss of many of his Men and drove him into the Country of Oeniades. About the same time Phormio the Athenian Commander with his twenty Ships met with the Lacedemonian Fleet of Forty Seven Sail, and Fought them, sunk the Admiral and disabl'd many others, took Twelve with the Men in them, and pursu'd the rest to the Continent. The Lacedemonians thus unexpectedly beaten, with the remaining part of their Fleet got into Patrae in Achaia. This Battel was at a Place call'd Rhium. Hereupon the Athenians erected a Trophy, and Dedicated a Ship in the Isthmos to Neptune, and


Page 283

so return'd to their Confederat City Naupactus. But the Lacedemonians sent other Ships to join the remainder of their Fleet that were at Patra. And all of them rendezvouz'd at Rhium, whither likewise the Lacedemonians Land-Army March'd, and there encamp'd near to their Fleet.

Phormio encourag'd by the late Victory, set upon the Enemy though they far exceeded him Number, and destroy'd many of their Ships; but not without some loss of his own, so that he went off but half Conqueror; but being enforc'd with Twenty more Ships from Athens, tlie Lacedemonians made off for Corinth, and durst never attempt any more to Fight at Sea. And these are the things reported to be done this Year.

Diotinus executing the place of chief Magistrate at Athens, the Romans created CaiusJunius and Proculus Virginius Tricostus Consuls: And they of Elis celebrated the eighty eighth Olympiad, in which Simmachus of Messina in Sicily carry'd away the Prize. About this time Cnemus the Lacedemonian Admiral while he lay at Corinth contriv'd how to surprize the Pyreum. For he understood by his Spies that no Shipping lay there, nor any Guard was appointed to defend the Place; and that the Athenians were secure, and therefore Negligent, conceiving none durst be so bold as to come up thither to attempt any thing of that Nature.

To this end having brought Forty Ships a little before to Megaris, with these well Man'd he set Sail from thence in the Night, and past over to Salamis, where he surpriz'd and took the Castle Budorium, and seiz'd their Ships and harras'd the rest of the Country. They of Salamis firing their Beacons, the Athenians suspected that the Pyreum was taken, and ran all with great fear and confusion to their Arms for the defence of the Place: But being better inform'd made away for Salamis. The Lacedemonians thus frustrated in their Design, left Salamis and return'd home. After their departure the Athenians had a more watchful Eye upon Salamis, and plac'd there a strong Garrison; and fortifi'd the Pyreum with Walls, and sufficient Guards for it's Defence.

About this time Sitalces King of Thrace, though he had but a Small Kingdom, yet by his Valour and Prudence greatly enlarg'd his Dominions; being a Man both Just and Kind to his Subjects, and Valiant and Diligent in time of War. He made his chief care to preserve and increase his Stores, by which means he grew so very Rich that he gain'd larger Territories than ever any King of Thrace had done before him. For that part which lay by the Sea Coast ran along from the Borders of the Abderites to the River Ister. And that from the Sea, up into the main Land, was of as great extent as a swift Footman could Travel over in Thirteen Days.

This Prince was possess'd of so large a Country, that his yearly Revenue amounted to above a Thousand Talents. During his Reign a War broke forth, upon which occasion he rais'd out of Thrace more than an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Foot, and Fifty Thousand Horse. But it's necessary that we declare the Causes of this War, that so the following account may be better understood.

Sitacles had entr'd into a League with the Athenians, and one of the Articles was, That he should faithfully Assist them in the War wherein they were engag'd in Thrace. To this end he rais'd a powerful Army, with a design to join with the Athenians to take Calcidea by Force: And likewise for the hatred he had to Perdiccas, King of Macedonia, he resolv'd to restore Amyntas the Son of Philip, to his Father's Kingdom. For these Causes he was necessitated to raise a very great Army. When all things were in readyness he Marc'hd all his Forces out of Thrace, and entr d Macedonia: But the Macedonians struck with terror at the multitude of their Enemies dar'd not to oppose them, but getting in all their Fruits and Goods they could within their Garrisons, they kept close within their Forts and Walls. The Thracians brought Amyntas along with them as King, and first treated the Cities by Messengers and fair Speeches; but when none would hearken to them, he Assaulted the first Castle in his way, and took it by Storm. Upon which many of the Cities and Garrisons (through fear) surrender'd of their own accord. After they had run through all Macedonia, loaded with Rich Booty, they made against the Greek Cities of the Calcideans.


Page 284

Whilst Sitalces was thus imploy'd, the Thessalians, Achaians, Magnesians, and all the other Grecians inhabiting within Macedon and Thermopyle, confederated and rais'd a mighty Army; for they were afraid lest the Thracians who were so powerful, should make an inroad into their Country, and bring them under the Thracian Yoke: And the Calcideans did the like. Sitalces hereupon being inform'd of the great Armies rais'd against him by the Grecians, and knowing his Army was not able to indure the sharpness of the approaching Winter, struck up a Peace with Perdiccas, and in confirmation thereof, contracted a Marriage with him, and so march'd his Army back into Thrace.

In the mean time, whilst these things were on foot, the Lacedemonians with their Confederates made another irruption out of Peloponesus into Attica, under their King Archidamus, who had the Sovereign Command of the Army; and after they had destroy'd all the standing Corn when it was near ripe, and made havock and spoil all over the Country, they return'd to their respective Habitations. The Athenians on the other hand, were not in heart to oppose them, but were under sore Calamities by Plague and Famine, and therefore altogether despair'd of any good issue and event of the War. And these were the things observable this Year.

Euclides was Ruler of Athens, when the Romans chose Three Military Tribunes in the room of Consuls, MarcusMannius, Quintus Su'pitius Pretextatus, and Servitius Cornelius Cossus. At this time in Sicily, the Syracusians made War upon them of Leontum, a Colony brought thither from the Calcideans, originally Athenians, who being overpress'd by the power of the Syracusians, and in great danger to lose their City, sent Embassadors to Athens for speedy and seasonable aid, to deliver them from their present Exigency. The chief among them that were sent, was Gorgias the Orator, the most Eloquent Man of his time. He was the first that taught the Rules of Rhetorick, and was so famous for his wise and learned Orations, that all his Scholars as a Gratuity, gave him an Hundred Mina's apiece.

When he came to Athens, and had Audience, he made an Oration to the People concerning the League desired; and by his new and ingenious way of speaking, the Athenians were so taken (who were otherwise Men of great Wisdom and Eloquence) that they were struck with admiration. For he adorn'd his Speech with most excellent Figures, and artificial composures of Words and Sentences, as by Opposites, Paranomacisms, equal Periods like Terminations, and the like gingling strains of Rhetorical Wit, to allure and intice his Auditors, which at that time for its novelty, was much admired. But now it's lookt upon to savour too much of affectation, and to be ridiculous, especially when by frequency and often repetition it becomes fulsome and tedious. Gorgias having perswaded the Athenians to enter into a League with the Leontines, return'd to Leontinum with great Reputation for his Eloquence. 

The Athenians for some time before, had an hankering Mind after Sicily, by reason of the richness of the Soyl, and therefore were now more willingly perswaded by Gorgias, and decreed to send Aid as was desir'd. The pretence was to assist them who were their own Countrymen, and were brought into great straits, but in truth their chief Design was to gain the Island; for not many Years before, when the War broke forth between the Corinthians and them of Corcyra, and both address'd themselves to the Athenians for Aid, to make them their Confederates, the People of Athens resolv'd to side with the Corcyreans, because Corcyra was so situated, that it was a very ready and convenient Pass over from thence into Sicily. In short, the Athenians being now Masters at Sea, and every where successful, had many Confederates, and were richly furnished, both with Men and Money, had many Cities under their power, were possess'd of a mighty Treasure in ready Money brought from Delos, gathered from the Inhabitants of Greece to the value of above Ten Thousand Talents.

Moreover, they had likewise many excellent Officers, and expert Commanders; by these Advantages, the Athenians were grown very confident that they should both overcome the Spartans, (and having subdu'd all Greece) win also the


Page 285

whole Island of Sicily. These were the Reasons induced them to resolve to assist the Leontines, and to that end sent them an Hundred Sail of Ships, under the command of Lachetes and Chabrias. With these they arriv'd at Rhegium, and from their Colonies there and at Calcidea, they had an Hundred Ships more, which join'd with the former; from thence they loos'd, and came first to the Lipare Islands, where they ravag'd the Country, because they were Confederates of the Syracusians. Then they made to Locris, and took Five Ships belonging to the Locrians, and besieg'd one of their Castles. The Siculi bordering upon the Myleans coming to their aid, the Armies engag'd, and the Athenians were Conquerors, and kill'd above a Thousand of their Enemies, and took no fewer than Six Hundred Prisoners: And presently after they took the Castle by Storm. In the mean time, Forty Ships more were sent to the Fleet by the Athenians, to carry on the War with more Vigour, under the command of Eurymedon and Sophocles. And when they were all join'd, they made up a Fleet of Two Hundred and Fifty Sail. But while the War was carrying on, the Leontines by their Embassadors, struck up a Peace with them of Syracuse: Upon which, the Athenian Fleet, return'd Home. But the Syracusians receiv'd all the Leontines into the City, and made them all free of Syracuse, and from that time appointed the City Leontium to be a Fort or Garrison of the Syracusians. And this was the Condition of Sicily at this time.

In Greece, they of the Island Lesbos revolted from the Athenians: And the Reason was, because all the Inhabitants of the Cities throughout Lesbos, were by order and decree of the Athenians, remov'd and brought into Mitylene. For this Reason also they entred into a League with the Lacedemonians, and advis'd them how they might become Masters at Sea. To accomplish which Design, they promis'd them a great number of Ships: The Spartans gave a very quick ear to this, and whilst they were preparing a Navy, the Athenians were before them, and commanded Clinippides with Forty Sail, forthwith to waft over an Army into Lesbos; who being joyn'd with other Confederates, made for Mitylene; and in a Sea-Fight routed the Mityleans, and then besieged them.

Hereupon the Lacedemonians resolved to assist them of Mitylene, and to that end prepared a brave Navy; but the Athenians enforc'd their Army with a Thousand Men more sent into Lesbos, before the Lacedemonians arriv'd. Paches, the Son of Epiderus, was General of this Expedition, who when he arriv'd at Mitylene (joining with the former Army) laid a more strait Siege to the Place; and contiually assaulted the City both by Sea and Land. The Lacedemonians in the mean time, sent Five and Forty Ships, under the Command of Alcidas, to assist the Mitylenes; and again invaded Attica, with the assistance of their Confederates; who fell upon those Places that were before untouch'd, and after they had most shamefully pillaged and wasted the Country, they return'd Home. But the Mitylenes, oppress'd with Famine, the Sword, and seditious Tumults, upon Conditions surrender the City. After which a Council was held at Athens what they should do with them of Mitylene: There was one Cleon an Orator, a cruel and violent spirited Man, stir'd up the People to kill all the Mitylenes, that were Men grown up, and to sell all the Women and Children for Slaves. The Athenians voted it to be so as Cleon had perswaded them, and sent Messengers to Mitylene, to acquaint the Governor with the Decree. When Paches had read it, another to the contrary presently came to his Hand; upon which, Paches understanding the Athenians had chang'd their Minds, with great joy call'd the Mitylenes together, and both remitted their faults, and likewise freed them from their fears. But the Athenians demolished the Walls of Mitylene, and divided the whole Island of Lesbos by Lot, except the Lands belonging to Methymna. And this was the issue of the Lesbean defection from Athens.

About the same time, the Lacedemonians (still carrying on the Siege at Platea) drew a Wall round the City, and fortify'd it with several Forts and strong Guards for its Defence. The Siege continuing long, and no Relief coming from Athens, the Besieg'd were greatly press'd both with want of Provision, and the loss of many of the Citizens who were cut off in the frequent Assaults. All therefore being doubtful what the issue might be, a Council was call'd to advise what was fit to be done in order to their Preservation. Many thought it most advisable to capitulate; but there were others, to the number of Two Hundred,


Page 286

that were for breaking through the Guards in the Night, and so fly to Athens. In pursuance whereof, observing the darkness of the Night, those that were for Capitulating, were prevail'd with to assault a remote part of the Enemy's Wall; by which means, they who intended to break through the Guards (whilst their Enemies were busied in assisting their Fellows that were assaulted) scaled another part of the Wall (having got Ladders for that purpose) and kill'd the Guards, and so escap'd to Athens.

The next Day, the Lacedemonians were in great vexation at the escape of them out of the City, and brought their Forces close to the Walls, and bent all their Minds and Strength with all expedition to force the Place: Upon which, the Plateans being terrify'd, gave up both themselves and their City to the mercy of their Enemies. 

But the Lacedemonian Commanders put this Question to every one that they sent for from among the Plateans, What good Offices or Services they had ever done to the Lacedemonians? And when one by one confessed they knew of none; they asked them again, Whether they had ever done the Spartans any harm? And when none deny'd that, they order'd them all to be slain; so that all that remain'd in the City, were put to the Sword, and the Town it self was raz'd to the Ground, and the Lands belonging to it let to farm. And thus the Inhabitants of Platea for their faithfulness to the Athenians, became involv'd in great Misery, and undeservedly perished.

Whilst these things were in doing, a great Sedition and civil Discord arose in Corcyra upon the following occasion: In the Battel at Epidamnum, many of the Corcyreans were taken Prisoners; and while they were in custody, they promis'd the Corinthians, that if they might be releas'd, they would undertake to deliver up Corcyra into their Hands. This was a very welcome and grateful Offer to the Corinthians. A considerable Number of Talents therefore being colourably procur'd from their Friends for their Redemption, they were all discharg'd.

As soon as they return'd into their Country, minding the performance of their Contract, they First seised upon the chief of the Citizens, (and especially those who could most influence the People,) and afterwards cut their Throats, and so quite dissolved the Democracy. But the Corcyreans were presently assisted by the Athenians, and recoverd their Liberty, and were resolved to execute Justice upon the Ringleaders of the Defection. But they (through fear of punishment) fled for refuge to the Altars of the Gods, and as Suppliants begg'd Pardon both of the Gods and the People.

Euthydemus was Governor of Athens, when Three Military Tribunes invested with Consular Power were again chosen at Rome, Marcus Fabius, Phalinius, and Lucius Sereulius. In their time the Plague broke out afresh, when they were freed from this Contagion but very lately before: It rag'd so exceedingly, that they lost Four Thousand Foot Soldiers, and Four Hundred Horse; and of others, Freemen and Servants, above Ten Thousand. And now because the Course of the History may require a Declaration of the Causes of this violent Distemper, it is necessary for us in this place to set them forth.

Abundance of Rain had fallen in the Winter, by reason whereof, the Earth being over-wet in many Places (especially in low and hollow Grounds) the Water lay like standing Pools; and those being corrupted and putrify'd by the heat of the Summer, thence proceeded a Mist of gross and stinking Vapours, which corrupted the Air, as it often happens about filthy Marishes. And besides, the want of good Food, much advanc'd the progress of the Disease, for the Year before, the Fruits by too much Rain were crude and unwholsom.

There was likewise a Third cause of this Distemper, which was this; the Etesian Winds this Summer blew not, by whose gentle Breezes, the violent heat of the Air was constantly allay'd before at other times; so that the Heat being now excessive, and the Air as it were inflam'd, Mens Bodies now wanting the usual Refreshment, contracted an evil Habit; from whence arose (through the vehement and immoderate heat) all sorts of burning Distempers. And hence it was, that many seiz'd with this Disease, to free themselves from the burning heat that was in their Bodies, cast themselves into Pits and Wells. But the Athenians judg'd that so grievous a Distemper was from God, and therefore according to the charge given them by the Oracle, they purg'd the Island Delos (which was formerly dedicated


Page 287

to Apollo) now polluted (as they conceiv'd) by burying many dead Bodies there. Therefore all the Graves of the Dead were dug up, and the Urns were transported into the next Island to Delos, call'd Rhene; and a Law was made, that it should not be lawful for any for the time to come, either to bury, or to bear any Child in Delos. They then likewise reviv'd the Panegyrick Festival in Delos, now for a long time disus'd. While the Athenians were thus religiously imploy'd, the Lacedemonians with their Confederates in Peloponesus, incamp'd in the Isthmos, and there consulted together concerning the invading of Attica again. But there then happening such terrible Earthquakes in several parts of Greece, that it so terrify'd and possess'd them with fear and awe of the Gods, that they all return'd to their respective Countries. For the horrible Concussions of the Earth were so great, that many Cities near the Sea were sunk and drown'd. And whereas that Tract of Land near Locris was before a Peninsula, by the violence of the Earthquake, a Channel was made through the Isthmos, and the Place turn'd into an Island now call'd Atalante.

While these things were doing, the Lacedemonians sent new Colonies into Trachin, and changed its Name into Heraclea. The Reason was, for that the Trachinians having had Wars with the Oeteans many Years, had lost most of their Citizens. And therefore being almost depopulated, they addressed themselves to the Lacedemonians (whose Colonies they were) to repeople their City. The Lacedemonians in regard they were their Countrymen, and Hercules their Ancestor in times long past, had resided at Trachin, resolved to make it a large and beautiful City: And to this end, they sent a Colony thither, out of their own City, and out of others in Peloponesus, to the number of Four Thousand; and out of the rest of Greece, as many as pleased, were receiv'd as Members of the Cololony. The whole number was little less than Six Thousand. To conclude, Trachin was at length so far inlarged, that it contain'd Ten Thousand Men; and when they had divided the Land adjoining by Lot, they call'd the City Heraclea.

Stratocles being Archon of Athens, the Consular dignity was conferr'd upon the Three Military Tribunes at Rome, Lucius FuriusMetellus,Lucius Pinarius, and S. Posthumius Albus. In the time of their Government, Demosthenes made Admiral of the Fleet by the Athenians, with Thirty Ships well man'd, join'd with Fifteen more from Corcyra, and other Aids from the Cephaleans, Acarnanians and Messenians inhabiting Naupactus, and so set sail for Leucas, and when he had harrased and wasted the Country of Leucadia, he bent his Course for Aetolia, and there burnt and destroy'd many of their Villages; but the Aetolians making head against them, routed the Athenians, who fled to Naupactus. The Aetolians incouraged with this Victory, with the aid of Three Thousand Lacedemonians, march'd against Naupactus (which the Messeneans then inhabited) but were repulsed. From thence they made an Expedition against Molycria, and took the City.

The Athenian General Demosthenes, fearing lest they should attack Naupactus, sent a Thousand Men out of Arcarnania to strengthen the Garrison. He himself continu'd in Acarnania, and fell upon a Thousand Ambraciots in their March, and cut them almost all off. Upon this the whole Strength of the City came out against him, and he destroy'd most of them likewise, so that the City was almost made desolate. Hereupon he entred into a Consultation of assaulting Ambracia, hoping it might be easily won by reason there were few left to defend it: But the Acarnanians fearing that if the Athenians were Masters of the Town, they should have more troublesome Neighbours than the Ambraciots were, refused to follow Demosthenes: Upon this Mutiny the Acarnanians became Friends with the Ambraciots, and entred into a League of Peace and Amity for an Hundred Years. Demosthenes thus deserted by the Acarnanians, returns with Twenty Sail to Athens. Presently after the Ambraciots (having lately smarted so much, and in great fear of the Athenians) desir'd a Garrison from the Lacedemonians.


Page 288

Demosthenes afterwards marching with an Army to Pylus in Peloponesus, determin'd to draw a Wall round the Place; which was naturally Fortify'd, and Four Hundred Stadia's from Messena: And being well furnished with Multitudes of Men, in Twenty Days space he finished the Work. But the Lacedemonians hearing of the Fortifying of Pylus, prepar'd great Forces, both by Land and Sea, and with a Fleet of Forty Five Sail well man'd and provided, and with Twelve Thousand Land Soldiers, made against Pylus. For it seem'd to them a thing dishonourable, to suffer them who durst not come into the Field to defend Attica from Devastations, now to nestle themselves, and to make Fortifications in Peloponesus. They incamp'd therefore with their Army, under the command of Thrasymedes near to Pylus, and were resolv'd to undergo all hardships and hazards, in order to subdue the Place. To this end they stood with their Fleet in the very Mouth of the Port, to block up all the Passage and Entrance from the Enemy. And by their Forces at Land, they assaulted the Walls with one Body after another by turns, pressing on with wonderful Obstinacy and Resolution.

They put likewise some of the choice of their Souldiers, both of the Lacedemonians and their Confederates, into the Island Sphacteria, which was near at hand, and ran out at length over-against the Port, by which the Harbour was the safer and securer from Storms. And this they did to prevent the Athenians, it being a Place very commodious, and useful for the carrying on of the Siege. They likewise continu'd the Assaults every Day, without intermission, and receiv'd Wounds upon Wounds, from the Towers and Bulwarks upon the Walls, and yet remitted nothing of their Heat and Resolution; so that Multitudes were kill'd, and many wounded, in striving to storm a Place most strongly Fortify'd. For the Athenians being possess'd of a Town of natural Strength, and abundantly furnish'd with Arms and all things necessary for a Defence, most vigorously repell'd their Enemies. For they hop'd, that if they frustrated this Design, Peloponesus would be the Seat of the whole War; and that they should by degrees wast and destroy their Country.

In the mean time, whilst these things were managed at the Siege with the greatest heat imaginable on both sides, and the Spartans exercis'd all their Force and Power, (amongst many others that purchas'd Honour by their Gallantry) Brasidas mounted to the highest step of Glory; for when the other Captains and Commanders in the Fleet durst not make up to the Shoar with the Ships, by reason of sharp Rocks, and the difficulty of the Place, he acting the part of an Admiral, with a loud Voice commanded, and incessantly urged the Pilot of his own Vessel, without any regard to the Ship, to force it ashore: For he said it was a base thing for the Spartans, if they resolving (as they pretended to be victorious) should be more sparing of their Ships than their Lives; and in the mean time suffer the Athenians to Lord it in Laconia. Hereupon the Pilot was forc'd to run the Ship ashore, and forthwith Brasidas (resolvedly fixing himself upon the Hatches) encountered with a whole Troop of Athenians that made up in a Body upon him, and kill'd many of them that first assaulted him; but Darts flying thick about him, and receiving many Wounds, at length (through the loss of much Blood) he fell down as dead; and his Arm slipping off Board, and hanging out of the Ship, his Buckler catcht by the Waves, dropt out of his Left Hand into the Sea, and was seiz'd presently by the Enemy; and he himself lying half Dead amongst the Heaps of those he had kill'd, was taken up and carry'd out of the Ship by his own Men; Thus far excelling others in Valour, that when others have been put to death because they basely threw away their Shields, he by the loss of his, gain'd the highest Honour and Reputation. However the Lacedemonians obstinately persisted in the Siege at Pylus, with great loss of their Men.

Here any one may justly admire at the wonderful and various turns and changes of Fortune at Pylus: For the Athenians drave the Spartans out of Laconia; and they who were usually Victors at Land (now forc'd from Land) over-power the Athenians at Sea; and they who were before Masters at Sea, now repel their Enemies at Land. But the Siege continuing very long, they who were in the Island were in great hazard to be famish'd, because the Athenian Fleet now commanding


Page 289

at Sea, stop'd all Provision that way. The Lacedemonians therefore now fearing what would become of them that were block'd up in the Island, sent to Athens to treat upon Terms of Peace: But when nothing of Peace would be hearkened unto, they desired that they would accept of an Exchange, and receive as many Prisoners of their own Men, as they were that were in the Island. But when this was refus'd, the Lacedemonian Ambassadors very freely and sharply even in Athens it self, told them, that by their refusing to exchange one equal number for another, they own'd that the Lacedemonians were of more worth and value than the Athenians. Being reduc'd to these straits and necessities, they in the Island Sphacteria, were forc'd to submit, and the Athenians took them all Prisoners. The number of those that were Spartans (who then delivered up themselves) were an Hundred and Twenty; of those that were their Confederates, an Hundred and Fourscore. Cleon the Admiral of the Fleet, brought them all bound to Athens, where it was decreed by the People, that if the Lacedemonians would make an end of the War, they should all be preserved; but if they persisted, they should all be put to Death. After this, the Athenians sent for the best Soldiers of the Messenians that inhabited Naupactus, and join'd some of their Confederates with them for the defence of Pylus, judging the Messenians, for the inveterate hatred they had towards the Spartans, would be very eager to spoil Laconia by Sallies from so strong a Fortification: And in this condition were things at Pylus.

In the mean time Artaxerxes, King of Persia died, having reign'd Forty Years: Xerxes succeeded him, and reign'd only one Year. In Italy the Aequi rebell'd against the Romanś; to suppress whom, the Romans created Aulus Posthumius Dictator, and Lucius Julius, Master of the Horse; who made an inrode with a brave Army into their Country: Upon which the Aequi presently Fought them, and were routed. A great Slaughter was made, and many taken Prisoners, and the Romans carry'd away great Spoil. After this Slaughter, the Aequi submitted to the mercy of the Romans. Posthumius having thus bravely manag'd the War (according to Custom) triumph'd. A thing something incredible is reported to be done by this Posthumius; to wit, that he put his own Son to Death, for that in the Battel, out of a spritely heat of Youth, pressing on upon the Enemy, he left his Post assign'd him by his Father.

This Year ended, Isarchus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and at Rome, Titus Quintius, and Caius Julius were Consuls; at which time, the Eighty Ninth Olympiad was celebrated at Elis; in which Symmachus was again Victor. At this time the Athenians made Nicias Admiral of their Fleet, who with Threescore Sail, and Three Thousand Men at Arms, under his Command, was ordered to invade the Lacedemonian Confederates. Whereupon he forthwith made up to the Island Melus, spoil'd the Country, and besieged the City many days. For this only of all the Islands of the Cyclades stood firm and constant to the Lacedemonians, because they were a Colony from Sparta. Nicias knowing he was not in a condition able to storm the Place (which made a resolute Defence) pass'd to Oropus in Beotia, and leaving his Fleet there, march'd with his Forces into Tanagria, where he was join'd with new Supplies from Athens, under the Command of Hipponicus the Son of Callias: Both these together proceeded in wasting and spoiling the Country. Hereupon the Thebans came out against them, and fought them; but the Athenians routed them with a great Slaughter. When all was over, Hipponicus with his Forces return'd to Athens, and Nicias to the Fleet; who sailing along the Coasts of Locris, wasts and destroys many Places upon the Sea-shoar. Here Forty Ships came up to him from the Confederates, which (with those he had before) made up a Navy of an Hundred Sail; he had likewise a brave Army of Land Soldiers, with which he made for Corinth, and landing his Men, engaged with the Army of the Corinthians, beat them twice, and after the Slaughter of many of his Enemies, erected a Trophy. In this Fight there were kill'd only Eight of the Athenians, but Three Hundred of the Corinthians. Thence he sail'd toward Cremmion, spoil'd the Country, and took the Castle by Assault. Presently after, he marches back, Fortifying the Castle in Methone by the way, and having put in a strong Garrison, wasted the Country adjoining, and at length (spoiling and harrasing all along upon the Sea-Coast) return'd to Athens. Not long after, the Athenians sent forth Threescore Sail,


Page 290

and Two Thousand Men at Arms against Cythera, under the command of Nicias and some others. When he had landed his Men in the Island, the City after a short Siege surrendred, and leaving there a good Garrison for the defence of the Island, he passed over to Peloponesus, and spoil'd the Country upon the Sea-Coasts, and took Thyre (situated between the Consines of Laconia and Argos) by Assault, and demolish'd the Walls, and made all the Inhabitants Captives. But the Aeginetes who inhabited there, and Tantalus the Governor of the Castle, he sent Prisoners to Athens, where they were detain'd with other Prisoners.

Whilst these things were acting, the Megareans now tir'd out with the War they had both with the Athenians and their Exiles (after many Messages backwards and forwards between the two Cities,) some of the Citizens of Megara (incens'd against the Exiles) promis'd the Athenian Commanders to betray the City. To that end, Hippocrates and Demosthenes the Athenian Generals (by Compact with them of Megara) sent in the Night Six Hundred Souldiers to the City, whom the Traitors let in within the Walls: But the Treachery being discover'd, the People were divided into Two Factions, one sided with the Athenians, and the other with the Lacedemonians. In the mean time, one of his own accord made Proclamation, that whosoever would, might join with the Megareans and Athethenians. The Lacedemonians thus deserted by them of Megara, the Watch which was all along upon the Walls, left their station, and fled into the Arsinal call'd Nicea, where the Megareans kept all their Naval Stores and Provisions. But the Athenians intrench'd round and besieg'd the Castle; and a little time after, sending for Workmen from Athens, compass'd in Nicea with a Wall. Upon this, the Peloponesians fearing they should all be put to the Sword, if the Place were taken by Storm, delivered up Nicea upon Conditions to the Athenians. Thus stood the Affairs of Megara at this time.

But Brasidas with a great Army rais'd in Sparta and other Parts of Peloponesus, marcht to Megara, and drave the Athenians (surprized with this suddain and unexpected approach) out of Nicea, and reduc'd the City to its former obedience to the Lacedemonians. Then he marched through Thessaly, and came to Dion in Macedonia. Thence going on to Acanthus, he assisted the Chalcedeans, and partly by Threats, and partly by fair and plausible Arguments, wrought upon the chief City of the Acanthians to desert the Athenians. Afterwards he brought over many other of the Thracians to join as Confederates with the Lacedemonians; and henceforward desiring to carry on the War with more Vigour, sent for Soldiers out of Lacedemon to strengthen his Army.

The Spartans hereupon sent to him a Thousand of the best Souldiers amongst the Helots, whom they had long before design'd to root out, hoping most of them would be cut off in the War: And there was another vile act of cruelty committed by them, by which they determin'd utterly to destroy all the Helots. For they made a Proclamation that whosoever of the Helots had done any service for Sparta, should be made Free, and to that end they should send in their Names: When Two Thousand had writ their Names, they order'd the most powerful and chief of the Citizens to cut all the Helots Throats in their several Houses: For they were in great dread of them, lest when they saw an opportunity they should join with their Enemies and so be instrumental to the ruin of Sparta. However, when these Helots, with some other supplies from their Confederates join'd with Brasidas, his Army was very Strong. And thus strengthen'd he March'd his Forces to Amphipolis. Aristogoras the Milesian, was the first that brought Colonies into the City; when he fled from Darius the King of Persia. But after Aristogoras his Death, the Inhabitants were ejected by the Thracians call'd Edones. Two and Thirty Years after the Athenians sent thither a Colony of Ten Thousand Men. But these being destroy'd by the Thracians at Drabiscum two Years after, the Thracians recover'd the City under Apion, their General. This City subject to so frequent changes of War, Brasidas made it his business to subdue. To this end marching thither with a great Army, he encamp'd at the Bridge near to the City, and presently possess'd himself of the Suburbs. The next day they of Amphipolis being greatly terrify'd, surrendred the Place, upon conditions that all


Page 291

that would, might leave the City, and take their effects with them. And soon after he took in many other neighbouring Cities, amongst which, the chief were Sime and Galepsus, both Colonies of the Thracians, and Myrcinus a Town of the Edones.

He likewise fell a building new Ships at the River Strymon, and sent for fresh Supplies from Lacedemonia and other Confederates. He also caus'd great store of Arms to be made, by which he arm'd the new rais'd Men, and furnish'd himself with Darts, Weapons and all other Provisions. And being thus compleatly provided, he march'd from Amphipolis, and encamp'd at a Place call'd Acte. Here were Five of the Towns partly inhabited by Grecians of Andros, and partly by a mixt multitude of Barbarians, descended from the Bissalte, People of a double Tongue. Having brought these under his Power, he fell upon Toron, built by the Chalcideans, but then in the power of the Athenians. Here by the Treachery of some of the Inhabitants, in the Night he was let into the Town, and so won Toron. And thus far the Expedition of Brasidas prosper'd this Year.

In the mean time there was a Battel fought by the Athenians at Delium in Beotia, with the Beotians upon the accounts following: The then present Government in Beotia was displeasing to some, who desir'd to set up a Democracy in the Cities. These Malecontents discovered their Designs to the Athenian Generals, Hippocrates and Demosthenes, and engaged to deliver up the Cities in Beotia. This was a very welcome Overture to the Commanders: And that the Business might the better be effected, they divided the Army, and Demosthenes with the greater part made an incursion into Beotia: But the Beotians being well prepared, having had notice of the Treachery, he marcht back without doing any thing. Hippocrates in the mean time invaded Delium, possessed himself of the Place; and to prevent the March of the Beotians that way, fortify'd Delium with a Wall; which lies near to Oropia, and the Borders of Beotia lying towards the Mountains. But Pantoedas the Beotian General, gathered out of all the Cities of Beotia, the best and choicest Souldiers, and with a great Army and a swift March made for Delium; for he had with him little less than Twenty Thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse. The Athenians on the other side were more in number, but not so well arm'd; for coming hastily and suddenly out of the City, many were ill furnished, both as to Arms and other Necessaries. This was the condition of both Armies, yet very hot and eager on both sides to fight. In the Army of the Beotians, the Thebans were in the Right Wing, the Orchomeans in the Left, and the Beotians in the main Body. Those that were call'd Heniochans and Paraebates, that is, the Charioteers, or those that fought in Chariots, were plac'd in the Front; these were the best Souldiers, in number Three Hundred. The Athenians were forc'd to join Battel, before they were perfectly drawn up in Battalia; but it was fought with great Courage and Resolution on both sides. The Athenian Horse charg'd with that Bravery, that in the beginning they put the Enemies Horse to flight. Then the Foot engaged, and that part of the Athenian Army that opposed the Thebans, by the violence of the Enemy's Charge were quite broken in pieces and routed. But the rest of the Athenians chas'd all the other Beotians, and pursu'd them a long way, with a great Slaughter. On the other side, the Thebans (being strong Bodied Men) left the chase of their Enemies, and fell upon the other Pursuers, hew'd them down, dispers'd and utterly routed them; and thus the Thebans highly advanc'd their Reputation by this signal Victory. As for the Athenians, some of them fled to Oropus, others to Delium; some made to their Ships, and the rest fled every way, as their Lot and Fortune led them, till Night put an end to the Pursuit. There were not above Five Hundred of the Beotians kill'd, but many more of the Athenians, and if Night had not come on, most of them had been cut off; but that sav'd them, and gave a check to the fury of the Conquerors. Yet the number of the Slain was so great, that with the Price of the Spoils the Thebans built a great Walk or Gallery in the Forum, and adorn'd it with many Statues of Brass; and even cover'd over the Temples with Brass, and the publick Buildings in the Market Place, with the Arms and Shields of their Enemies. And with the Riches got in this Fight, they set up Sports and Shews at Delium.


Page 292

After this Victory, the Beotians assaulted Delium with that fury, that the greater part of the Garrison were kill'd in defending the Place. Two Hundred only were taken, the rest escaped to their Ships, and with other Inhabitants came to Athens. Into this Disaster fell the Athenians by their crafty Designs against the Beotians.

In Asia, Xerxes the Persian King died, after he had reigned one Year, some say only Two Months. To him succeeded Sogdianus for the space only of Seven Months; who being kill'd, Darius injoy'd the Kingdom Nineteen Years. With this Year Antiochus of Syracuse, the noble Writer of the Affairs of Sicily ends his History, beginning at King Cocalus, and consisting of Nine Books.

When Amyntas was chief Magistrate of Athens, Caius Papirius, and LuciusJulius were Roman Consuls. In their time the Scioneans now slighting the Athenians, by reason of the late Defeat given them, made a defection to the Lacedemonians, and gave up their City into the protection of Brasidas, then General of the Army in Thrace. And those who escap'd out of Lesbos, after the taking of Mitylene by the Athenians (who were no small Number) (some time before contriving how to return into their Country) join'd together, and possess'd themselves of Antandrus; from whence taking their opportunity, they issued forth and set upon the Garrison at Mitylene: At which the Athenians being incens'd, command was given to Aristides and Symmachus, to lead the Army against them; who having passed over the Forces into Lesbos, after some few Assaults, took Antandrus, and put part of the Exiles to the Sword, and expelled the rest out of the City: And after they had strenghned the Place with a Garrison, they departed from Lesbos. After this Lamachus, with Ten Ships under his Command, Sail'd for Pontus, and lay with his Fleet at Heraclea, and near the River Cacheta, lost all his Ships. For abundance of Rain falling, the Rain by the violence of the Stream, dash'd in Pieces all the Vessels against the Rocks lying upon the Shoar. Hereupon the Athenians made a Truce with the Lacedemonians for a Year, upon these Conditions, that all that was then under the Power and Government of each other, should so remain on both sides. And after several Debates and Consultations, it was Judged to be the wisest course to put an end to the War, and those destructive Contentions between themselves for ever after. That which chiefly mov'd the Lacedemonians was the earnest desire they had to release those who were taken in the Island Sphacteria. Thus far the Truce went on; but they could not agree concerning Scione, though all other things were consented to on both sides. The Contention was so hot, that all further overtures of Peace were at an end, and the War was still carry'd on upon the Account of Scione.

About this time the City Menda fell off to the Lacedemonians, which caused a greater heat and resolution for the keeping of Scione. To this end Brasidas remov'd all the Women and Children, and their best Goods out of Scione and Menda, and put strong Garrisons into them. The Athenians were so enraged at this, that they made a Decree to put all the Sciones to the Sword, when ever they took the City.

To that end they sent Nicias and Nicostrates with Fifty Sail against them: They first set upon Menda, which they took by the Treachery of some within. Then they Besieg'd Scione, compassing it round with a Wall, and press'd upon it with continual Assaults. But the Garrison in Scione being very strong, and well provided with all things necessary, easily defended themselves, and from the top of the Walls greatly gall'd the Besiegers. And these were the things done this Year.

The Year following, Alceus governing at Athens, and Opicter Lucretius, and Lucius SergiusFideniates, Roman Consuls, the Athenians cast the Delians out of the Island, and took the City into their own Hands, because they kept secret correspondence (as they alledg'd) with the Lacedemonians. Being thus expuls'd, Pharnaces the Persian Lord Lieutenant gave them the City Adramyttium to inhabit. The Athenians at the same time, sent forth Cleon, with a great Body of Foot unto the Coasts of Thrace; who arriving at Scione, shipt part of them that lay before the Town, and sail'd with them to Torona. For he had intelligence that Brasidas was gone from those Parts, and had left but few Soldiers at Torona. To which Place, he approached as close as he could, and besieged it both by Sea and Land; at length he took it by Storm, and made the Women


Page 293

and Children Captives; the Souldiers he bound in Chains, and sent them to Athens; having left at Torona a small Garrison, he march'd with the rest of his Forces to the River Strymon in Thrace, and thence to the City Scione (which is distant Thirty Stages from the City Amphipolis) which he fiercely assaulted. But here having intelligence that Brasidas incamp'd with his Army at Amphipolis, he makes against him with a swift March; who being inform'd of the approach of the Enemy, sets forth in Battalia to meet the Athenians; whereupon they presently join'd Battel, the Victory continuing very doubtful for some time where it would fall, both sides bravely behaving themselves: In the mean time the Generals fought with that Resolution, as if each would gain the Victory with his own Hands; and the Officers themselves, with undaunted Courage rush'd into the heat of the Battel, insomuch as many brave Men on both sides breathed out their last. At length Brasidas fell in the Bed of Honour, amongst Heaps of his Enemies slain by his own Hand. Cleon likewise was slain in the thickest of the Combatants: And now both Armies were at a stand, and in a Consternation at the loss of their Generals; but at length the Lacedemonians got the day, and set up a Trophy. And the Athenians upon a Truce made, bury'd their Dead, and sail'd back to Athens. When some who return'd to Lacedemon gave an account of the Victory and Death of Brasidas, it is reported that his Mother asked how he behaved himself in the Battel. To whom Answer was made, That he went beyond all the Lacedemonians. Upon which, she replied, Her Son Brasidas was an Honest and Good Man, but much inferiour to many other Spartans in Valour. What she said being nois'd through the City, the Ephori decreed her publick Honours, because she prefer'd the Glory of her Country, before the particular praise of her Son. After this Battel, the Athenians determin'd to make Peace with the Lacedemonians for Fifty Years, and did so upon these Conditions, that the Prisoners on both sides should be discharg'd, and that the Cities taken in the War should be restored. And so the Peloponesian War that had now continu'd Ten Years, was in this manner ended at this time.

CHAP. VIII.

The continuance of the Peloponesian War. The War by the Romans against the Fidinates for putting their Ambassadors to death. The Quarrels between the Aegistines and the Seluntines in Sicily. The Expedition of the Athenians against Sicily under Nicias, being the Sixteenth Year of the Peloponesian War.

ARiston was Archon at Athens, when the Romans committed the Consulship to Titus Quintius, and Aulus Cornelius Cossus. The Peloponesian War was scarcely ended, when new Commotions and Dissentions broke out afresh, occasion'd as follows. The Athenians and Spartans, with the common Consent of all their Confederates, had enter'd into Terms of Truce and Peace. But in the mean time they privately confederated in a League Offensive and Defensive, without taking in the Cities that had sided with either Party; which rais'd a suspicion as if there was a Design laid by this secret Association to inslave all Greece: And therefore the chiefest Cities in Greece sent one to another, and enter'd into mutual Leagues to join together against the Lacedemonians and Athenians. The most potent Grecian Cities in this Confederacy were Four, Argos, Thebes, Corinth and Elis. And indeed there was some reason to suspect these Two Cities had some Design against Greece; for that in the Articles of the League, there was a Clause superjoyn'd, that it should be lawful for the Athenians and Lacedemonians at any time when they thought fit, either to add to, or take any thing from that which was before solemnly agreed to. Besides, the Athenians had created Ten Magistrates, who were invested with full power to manage all Affairs relating to the City. And whereas the Lacedemonians did


Page 294

the same thing, it was very evident at what the insatiable Ambition of the Two Cities pointed. Many therefore of the Cities now resolv'd to defend the common Liberty, and to that end considering the power of Athens to be low, by their late overthrow at Delium, and the honour and glory of Sparta, much diminished upon the account of so many Captives of the noblest of their Citizens taken in the Island Sphacteria, they conspir'd against them, and committed the Sovereign power and management of the War to the City Argos. For the ancient noble Actions done by that City, challeng'd above all others that preeminence and prerogative; for long before, and to the very time of the * migration of the Heraclidae into Peloponesus, the greatest Kings of Greece came out of Argos; and besides, by the advantage of a long Peace, it was grown very rich and populous.

Argos now concluding that the chief Command was lodg'd in themselves, pickt out a Thousand of the strongest young Men, and best ability for Estates, whom they freed from all publick Affairs, and maintain'd at the common Charge. These were continually by daily Exercise, to inure themselves to Martial Discipline: And by the help of a plentiful allowance, and constant care and diligence, in a short time they became most expert Souldiers. But when the Lacedemonians perceiv'd all Peloponesus had conspir'd against them, and foreseeing the greatness and danger of the War, they made preparation for defence of the Government, as far as was possible. To that end, in the first place, they manumitted a Thousand of the Helots that were with Brasidas: And afterwards they restored the Citizens to their former Priviledges that had been taken Prisoners in Sphacteria, whom they had before degraded by reason of the disgrace they had brought upon their Country. Moreover they brought in many who had formerly done great Service in the Wars, by crying them up, and feeding them by Rewards, to incourage them to shew the like instances of their Valour in the hazards of the approaching War. They carried themselves likewise with more kindness towards their Confederates, and strove to gain and win by courtesie and civility, those they had disoblig'd and alienated from them. But the Athenians went a quite contrary way; for conceiving that those whom they suspected to be false, were to be discourag'd by fear of Punishment, they put them in mind of that severe Revenge taken in the business of Scione; for there when the City was taken, they put all the Men to the Sword, and carry'd away all the Women and Children as Captives, and planted the Island with the Plateans, who were banish'd their Country for their faithfulness to the Athenians.

About the same time, the Campanians in Italy march'd against Cuma with a great Army, and routed and destroy'd most of the Cumeans. Then they besieg'd the City, and after several Assaults, at length took it by force, and having plunder'd it, and carry'd away all the Inhabitants that were left as Slaves, they repeopled it with Colonies sent out of their own City.

The chief of the Senate at Athens, was Aristophilus, Lucius Quintius, and Aulus Sempronius, Roman Consuls, when they of Elis celebrated the Ninetieth Olympiad, in which Hiperbius the Syracusian was crown'd with Victory. And at that time, the Athenians by command of the Oracle, restor'd the Island Delos to the Deleans; and they that inhabited Attramitium in Delium, return'd to their own Country. And now because Pylus was not given up, and restor'd to the Lacedemonians, the War began to break out afresh between the Two Cities, which being understood by them of Argos, they enter'd into League with the Athenians. And the breach growing wider and wider, the Lacedemonians perswaded the Corinthians, that leaving their Association with the Confederate Cities, they would join with them. In this condition and confusion of Affairs stood Peloponesus.

As to other Places out of the Bounds of Peloponesus, the Aenians, Dolopeans and Melcans, confederated together, and set upon Heraclea in Trachinia. The Heracleans march'd against them with great Forces, wherewith they bravely fought the Enemy, but were totally routed, with the loss of a great part of their Army; the rest by Flight got within their Walls. Then they sent to the Beotians for aid, who sent them a Thousand of heavy arm'd Men from Thebes; by which assistance they repell'd their Enemies. In the mean time, the Olyntheans.


Page 295

made an Expedition against the City Micyberna, then a Garrison of the Athenians, and having forc'd out the Guards there, possess'd themselves of the Place.

Archias was Archon of Athens, and Lucius Papyrius Mugillanus, and Caius ServiliusStructus, were Consuls at Rome, when the Argives proclaim'd War against the Lacedemonians, because they neglected to offer the usual Frankincense to Apollo Pythius. At the same time Alcibiades the Athenian General came with his Army into the Country of Argos, by whom the Argives being Forc'd, invaded Troezena, which was Confederated with Sparta, and after they had wasted and spoil'd the Country, and burnt many of their Towns, at length they return'd. The Lacedemonians being greatly inrag'd at the Injuries done against all Law and Justice to them of Troezena, denounce War against Argos; in prosecution whereof, they rais'd an Army, and thereof made Agis their King, General, who march'd with all speed against the Argives, and after he had made spoil and havock in the Country, made up close to the City, and offer'd them Battel. Hereupon the Argives being join'd with Three Thousand of the Eleans, and as many of the Mantineans, march'd out of the City; and just when they were ready to joyn Battel, the Generals on both sides by their Ambassadors, made a Truce for Four Months; so both Armies return'd, without doing any thing: But both the Cities were incens'd at the Authors of the Truce, insomuch as they of Argos cast Stones at the Officers of the Army, and had order'd them all to be put to death; which had been executed if by great intercession their Lives had not been spared; but their Goods were confiscated, and their Houses pull'd down.

The Lucedemonians also intended to have put Agis to Death; but upon his promise to wipe off the stain of the late miscarriage by his future Services, with much adoe he was spar'd. However for the future, they join'd with him Ten Persons, approv'd for their Wisdom and Prudence, without whose Advice he was strictly charg'd not to do any thing for the time to come.

After this, when the Athenians had sent forth a Thousand well-arm'd Men, and Two Hundred Horse by Sea to them of Argos, under the command of Nichetes and Nichostratus (to whom Alcibiades join'd himself (though then in no command) for the great love and kindness he bore towards the Mantineans and Eleans,) the Argives in a common Assembly decreed, that notwithstanding the former Agreement, they should make it their business to carry on the War with all their Power. To that end all the Officers incouraged every one their own Souldiers; who readily and heartily follow'd their Leaders, and encamp'd out of the Walls of the City. There it was concluded to be most advisable to begin first with an Expedition against Orchomenia in Arcadia. To that purpose, having advanced into Arcadia, they besieg'd the City, and wearled it out with daily Assaults; and having taken the Town, they march'd to Tegea, determining to force that likewise. The Tegeans desiring speedy aid from the Lacedemonians, they with the strength of their whole City, and of their Confederates, made for Mantinea, conceiving that by Besieging of that, a stop would be easily put to the Siege of Tegea. But the Mantineans (being inforc'd by the Assistance of their Confederates) march'd out with the Youth of their City, and had an Army in the Field ready to oppose the Lacedemonians. Presently hereupon Battel was joyn'd, and a select Band of the Argives (consisting of a Thousand well disciplin'd and expert Souldiers) were the first that put the Enemy to flight, and made a great Slaughter in the Pursuit. But the Lacedemonians returning from the Pursuit and Slaughter of those they had routed in another part of the Army, fell upon the Conquering Argives, and surrounding them, made no question but to cut them off every Man: And whereas these brave Men, although far inferior in number, prevail'd in a great measure against their Enemies, the Lacedemonian King (being earnest to perform his Promise to the Citizens, and to wipe off the stain of his former disgrace by some great and remarkable Action) in the Head of his Army, ran through all sorts of Difficulties in the Fight, and had kill'd them all upon the spot, if he had not been prevented; for Pharax (one of the Ten, join'd with the King as his Council, a Man of great authority in Lacedemon) commanded the Souldiers to open a way for the Arcadians, lest fighting with Men in a desperate condition, they came to experience what Valour can do when it's driven to a necessity. The King restrain'd by his Command, a Passage was made for the Enemy to break through, as Pharax had ordered.


Page 296

And in this manner; these Thousand Men got off, and the Lacedemonians having gain'd an eminent Victory, set up a Trophy, and return'd Home.

The former Year ended, Antopha was chief Governour at Athens, and Four Military Tribunes, Caius Furius,Quintilius,Marcus Posthumus, and Aulus Cornelius, bore the Office of Consuls at Rome. At that time the Argives and Lacedemonians had several Meetings and Messages to and fro, about entring into a League one with another, which was effected accordingly. Upon this, the Mantineans (now deserted by the Garrison put in there by the Argives) were forc'd to come under the power of the Lacedemonians. About the same time, the Thousand choice Men before spoken of, in the City of Argos, conspir'd to overthrow the Democracy, and set up an Aristocracy from among themselves: And having many Associates and Abettors in this Affair, of the wealthiest and most couragious Men of the City, they forthwith seiz'd upon the Tribunes of the People, and the Heads and chief of those that were for Popular Government, and cut their Throats. The rest being terrified, repealed all the ancient Laws, and began to order all Affairs in the Commonwealth, according to the Will and Pleasure of these Men. And after they had thus govern'd for the space of Eight Months, they were by an insurrection of the People depos'd, and the Democracy restor'd.

Another Disturbance likewise arose in Greece; for upon a Difference happening between the Phoceans and the Locrians, the matter came to a decision by the Sword. The Phoceans were Conquerors, and kill'd above a Thousand of the Locrians. In the mean time, the Athenians under the Command of Niceas, took Two Cities, Cithera and Nicea, and in Melus, (which was taken by Storm) they put all (but Women and Children) to the Sword, and them they made Captives.

In Italy the Fidenates put the Roman Ambassadors to Death upon a light occasion. At which base act of Injustice, the People of Rome were highly incens'd, and decreed to revenge it by a War. To this end they made Manius Aemilius Dictator, and according to the Custom, join'd with him Aulus Cornelius, the Master of the Horse. When all things were in readiness, he marcht against the Fidenates with all expedition, who drew out, and met him; upon which there was a sharp Ingagement, and so continu'd for a long time; and after many were cut off on both sides, they parted at length upon equal Terms.

At this time Euphemus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and the Military Tribunes Lucius Furius, Lucius Quinctius, and Aulus Sempronius again executed the Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time the Lacedemonians inforc'd by the Aid of their Confederates, made an incursion into Argaia, and took the small Town of of Argias, kill'd the Inhabitants, and raz'd the Castle. Then hearing that they of Argos had enlarged their Walls out as far as to the Sea, they marched thither, and pull'd them down, and return'd Home. The Athenians made Alcibiades General, who with Twenty Ships under his Command, was order'd to do the utmost he could to restore the Argives to their former Government; for there was such Confusion and Disorder there, that great Multitudes of them were for the advancing of the Aristocracy. Alcibiades therefore as soon as he came to Argos, call'd an Assembly of those that were for the Popular Government, and caus'd those who seem'd to side with the Lacedemonians to be banished out of the City, and having setled the Democracy, return'd to Athens. At the end of the Year, the Lacedemonians invaded Argaia with a great Army, and making waste and spoil in many Places of the Country, plac'd the Exiles of Argos in Orneas, and Fortified and walled the Place round, in regard it lay in Argaia; and having put in there a strong Garrison, they order'd them to waste the Country of Argos with continual Excursions. When the Lacedemonians were march'd back, the Athenians sent Forty Ships, and Twelve Hundred Souldiers to the Assistance of the Argives. With this Aid they march'd against Orneas, and took it by Storm, and putting part of the Garrison and the Exiles to the Sword, they expelled the rest out of the City. And these were the things done in the Fifteenth Year of the Peloponesian War.


Page 297

In the Sixteenth Year, when Aristomnestes was Archon at Athens, and Titus ClaudiusSpurius, Nautius Lucius Sergius, and Sextus Julius, Military Tribunes, executed the Office of Consuls at Rome, the Ninety First Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, wherein Exaneus of Acragentum was Victor. At that time the Bysantines and Chalcedeans joining with the Thracians, pass'd over with a great Army into Bithynia, and wasted and spoil'd the Country; and after they had taken several small Towns by force, they executed most horrid cruelty. For after they had gathered together a great multitude of Prisoners, of Men, Women and Children, they cut all their Throats.

About the same time, the Aegistines and Seluntines in Sicily went to Blows, upon the Differences between them concerning the Bounds of their Country. For though the River divided the Territories of the several Cities that were at variance, yet the Seluntines pass'd over to the other side, and seiz'd upon the Lands lying next to the River; and incroaching still by little and little, they gain'd the next to them, and laugh'd and jeer'd at those they thus abus'd. Provoked with these Indignities, the Aegistines at first thought to win them by fair Words, and dissuaded them all they could from seizing of other Mens Estates. But when they saw they turn'd a deaf Ear, the Proprietors rose up in Arms, and drove them out of the Country, and so recontinued their ancient Possessions. Upon this, a great Fire of Strife and Contention was kindled, and Armies were rais'd on both sides, to decide the Controversie by the Sword. Both Armies being drawn into the Field, a sharp Battel was fought, in which the Seluntines got the Day, and kill'd a great number of the Aegistines.

The power of the Aegistines being very much weakened by this Slaughter, and so unable of themselves to oppose their Enemy, they First sought Aid and Assistance from them of Acragentum and Syracuse: But these failing them, they sent Ambassadors to Carthage for relief; and they likewise refus'd. Upon which they sought to get Confederates beyond the Seas: And this prov'd successful; for whereas the Leontines had been driven both out of their City and Country by the Syracusians, those that were remaining of these Exiles consulted together and determin'd to enter into a League with the Athenians, from whom they were descended. The matter was debated and decreed in a Common Assembly of all their Allies, that Embassadors should be sent to Athens, to desire their Assistance for the Relief of the oppressed Cities, and withal to promise that they would do their utmost endeavour to serve the Athenians in all their Concerns in Sicily.

When the Ambassadors came to Athens, the Leontines pleaded their Kindred and ancient Allyances; but the Aegistines promis'd a great Sum of Money for the carrying on the War, and with all their power to oppose the Syracusians. Upon this the Athenians thought fit First to send some prudent Citizens to Sicily, better to understand the State and Condition both of the Island and of the Aegistines. When they came to Aegista, the Aegistines with great Ostentation and Vanity, shew'd them a great mass of Treasure, in part their own, and part borrow'd. When the Ambassadors were return'd, and the great Riches of the Aegistines was nois'd Abroad, an Assembly of the People was call'd, where the War to be made in Sicily was propos'd, and where Niceas the Son of Niceratus, a Man of great account amongst the People, argued with great prudence against the War, alledging it impossible both to contend with the Lacedemonians, and likewise to send so great a Force as they must needs do, into parts beyond the Seas. And alledg'd, that when they were not able hitherto to subdue Greece, it was in vain to think to bring the greatest Island of the World under their power. He added moreover, when Carthage, that was of so large an Empire, and had often attempted Sicily, was not able to conquer it, could they suppose that the Athenians, who were far inferior in Strength and Power, could subdue an Island the most potent in Arms of all others in the World? After he had spoken this and much more, suitable to the present Occasion, Alcibiades one of the chief of the Nobility of Athens, persuaded the People to prosecute the War. This Man was the most Eloquent Speaker of all amongst the Citizens, and for the Nobleness of his Birth, and greatness of his Estate, and Skill in Martial Affairs, far exceeded the rest. The People upon his persuasion, without delay rigg'd out a Fleet of


Page 298

Thirty Sail from their Confederates, and an Hundred of their own. In these compleatly furnish'd with all Provisions and Necessaries, they put Five Thousand Men well Arm'd, and appointed Three Generals, Alcibiades, Nicias, and Lamachus for this Expedition; and thus were the Athenians then imploy'd. And now being come to the War between the Athenians and Syracusians, according to our design'd Method at the beginning, we shall pursue the things that follow'd in the next Book.


Page 299

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK XIII.

The PREFACE.

IF we should imitate others in the compiling of their Histories, we shouldfirst in the Preface of every Book, observe some things pertinent to the Occasion and Subject in Hand, and then descend to the continuation of our Discourse, upon the Actions and Affairs that follow next in order: For by some small intermission from writing, we gain a breathing fit; the fruit and advantage by Prefaces. But in as much as we have promis'd to endeavour in a few Books, not only to relate things that have been done, but likewise to comprehend in that Relation, the time of above Eleven Hundred Years, it's necessary to avoid Prefaces, and come presently to the matters in Hand. Only promising this to inform the Reader, that in the Six former Books, are contain'd the things done in all Parts of the World, from the Trojan War, to the time the Athenians decreed the War against the Syracusians, to which from the Destruction of Troy, is Seven Hundred and Threescore Years: And that we shall begin this Book with that Expedition against the Syracusians, and end it at the beginning of the Second Carthaginian War against Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse.


Page 300

CHAP. I.

The Athenian Fleet rigg'd out for Sicily. Alcibiades accus'd; Flies; Is Condemned; Goes to Sparta out of Italy. The Syracusians send for Aid to Lacedemon. Gylippus is sent to them. The Battel at Syracuse.

WHen Cabrias bore the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans invested Lucius Sergius, Marcus Servilius, and Marcus Papyrius, Three Military Tribunes, with Consular dignity, the Athenians having decreed War against the Syracusians, rigg'd out a Fleet, rais'd Money, and prepar'd with great diligence all other things necessary for the Expedition. To this end they commission'd Three Generals, Alcibiades, Nicias, and Lamachus, to whom they committed the management of the whole War. The richer sort to ingratiate themselves with the People, some of them supply'd the Fleet with Arms, others promis'd to advance Money towards the Victualling the Navy, and providing Pay for the Souldiers. Many likewise of the People, both Citizens and Strangers, freely offer'd themselves to the Generals, to be listed and inroll'd: And all were so confident, that they were ready to divide the Country of Sicily amongst themselves by Lot.

And now the Navy was ready to set sail; when on the sudden in one Night, all the Statues of the Goddess Minerva through the City (which were very many) had their Heads struck off. The Populacy conceiv'd this not to be done by any of the meaner sort, but by some in authority, with a design to destory the Democracy, and therefore they were highly incens'd at the wickedness of the fact, and promis'd great Rewards to find out the Authors. In the mean time, one of the Citizens came to the Senate, and told them, that in the new Moon about Midnight, he saw several Persons go into the House of a Foreigner, amongst whom Alcibiades was one. And when the Senate askt him how he could know him at such a time of the Night? He answered, he discerned him by the light of the Moon: By which Contradiction he detected his own Falshood, and never after could the least Discovery be made of that Fact by any Person whatsoever.

However notwithstanding this Accident, an Hundred and Forty Gallies were rigg'd out, besides Ships of Burden and other Ships, for transporting of Horses, Provisions and other Necessaries, whereof there was a very great number. In this Expedition there went forth with them above Seven Thousand Men at Arms, and Slingers, and Horsemen sent from their Confederates, besides those belonging to their Fleet.

During this time, the Officers had a private Consult with the Senate, concerning the Administration of Affairs in Sicily, in case they should conquer the Island. Where at length it was determined, that they of Selinuntium and Syracuse should be carry'd away as Captives and Slaves, and that the rest should have only a Yearly Tribute impos'd upon them. The next day the Officers with the Army, march'd down into the Piraeum, and were follow'd with a great Multitude, both of Citizens and Strangers throughout the whole City; every one making it his business to take leave of his Friend or Relation. The Ships lay on every side of the Harbour with their Fore-decks adorn'd with Flags and Streamers erect, and shining with the splendor of the Arms. The Shoar round the Harbour was fill'd with Altars of Incense, and Silver Bowls, out of which were poured out into Golden Cups, Drink-Offerings to the Gods, by them who worshipped the Deity, and earnestly pray'd for the happy Success of the Expedition.

At length they set sail from the Pyraeum, and sailing round the Coasts of Peloponesus, arriv'd at Corcyra: For here they were commanded to stay, till they were join'd by some others of their Neighbour Confederates. Being all come up to them, passing through the Ionian Sea, they came to the Promontory of Japygia; hence sailing along the Coasts of Italy, they were refused by the Tarrentines;


Page 301

and passing by the likewise of Metapontum and Heraclea, they came to the Thurians, by whom they were courteously received: Loosing from thence, they made for Crotona, and there bought some Provisions: And sailing by the Temple of Juno Lacinia, pass'd under the Promontory call'd Dioscurias. After this, leaving Tesasletius (as it is call'd) and Locris behind them, they anchor'd near Rhegium and invited the Rhegians to join with them; who answered, that they must first advise with the other Italians.

As soon as the Syracusians heard that the Athenians were within their Seas, they made Three Generals, invested with Absoute Power, Hermocrates, Sicanus and Heraclides, who rais'd Souldiers and sent Messengers through all the Cities of Sicily, to press them with all earnestness to join with them in Arms for the common safety of their Country; For that the Athenians (under Colour of a War against the Syracusians) had no other Design but to subdue the whole Island. To which the Acragentines and Naxians, answered, that they were resolv'd to abide firm in their League with the Athenians. The Camarians and Messenians, declared they were for Peace, and refused to return any Answer to what was propos'd. The Himereans and Seluntians, with them of Gela and Catanea, promis'd their Assistance. The Cities of the Siculi (though they favoured the Syracusians) yet desired to be at ease, and not knowing what to resolve, judg'd it most advisable to consider a while of the business, that they might be better able to discern what was like to be the issue of so great a War.

The Aegistines plainly declaring they could not contribute to the Athenians above Thirty Talents, the Athenian Generals accused them of Treachery; and setting Sail from Rhegium with their whole Fleet, arriv'd at Naxus in Sicily, where they were friendly and courteously received by the Citizens; and from thence they made to Catana. But they of Catana refus'd entrance to the Souldiers, yet admitted the Generals, and call'd a common Assembly; where the Athenian Generals treated with them concerning the entring into a mutual League offensive and defensive; but whilst Alcibiades was making an Harangue to court the People, the Souldiers broke through a little Gate into the City, by which means the Cataneans were forc'd to join with the Athenians in the War against the Syracusians.

Whilst these things were acting Abroad, they who were Enemies to Alcibiades, (through private Peaks and Grudges) at Athens took Occasion, from the maiming and spoiling of the Images, and accused him in the Common Assemblies of a Conspiracy against the Democracy; which Accusation was much supported and further'd by what had then lately happen'd at Argos: For some of the chief of the City, conspiring with others of their Dependents, to overturn the Democracy in Argos, were all destroy'd by the Citizens. This Attempt of innovation there, caus'd the Accusation at Athens to be more readily believed, and therefore the People being with all earnestness stir'd up by the Orators, sent a Ship from Salamis to Sicily, to recall Alcibiades, in order to abide his Trial.

As soon as it arriv'd at Catana, Alcibiades was made acquainted by the Messengers, what Order they had from the People; upon which, he (with those who were accused with him) went on Ship-board into his own Gally, and together with that from Salamis set Sail from Catana. As soon as he arriv'd at Thurium, either through Consciousness of the Guilt of his Impiety, or through the fear of the greatness of the Danger, he and all those accused with him made their Escape. Those who were on Board the Salamian Vessel, made great inquiry after Alcibiades; but when he could not be found, they Sail'd back to Athens, and there gave an Account what had happen'd.

Upon which, the Athenians gave Judgment of Death upon Alcibiades, and all his Fellow Fugitives, (their Names being only put up to the Court) without being further heard.

But Alcibiades fled out of Italy to Sparta, and there perswaded the Lacedemonians to invade the Athenians: But the Generals that remain'd in Sicily, sail'd with their Forces to Aegista, and took Hyccara, a small Town of the Siculi; out of whose Spoils they rais'd an Hundred Talents. And having receiv'd Thirty Talents more from the Aegistines, they sail'd back to Catana; where having consulted how to posses themselves of a Place near to the chief Port of Syracuse, with-little or no hazard, they sent thither a Trusty Fellow of Catana, not


Page 302

suspected by the Syracusian Officers, with Orders to acquaint them that some of the Cataneans had plotted upon a sudden to set upon the Athenian Souldiers in the Night, when they had laid aside their Arms, and to burn all their Shipping in their Harbour: And that this might be the better effected, they desir'd the Commanders to appear with their Army, that the Design might not be defeated. As soon as the Catanean came to Syracuse, he delivered his Message. The Generals believing what he said, appointed a Night when they would march out with their Forces, and sent back the Man to Catana. At the Night appointed, the Syracusians led forth their Men towards Catana; and the Athenians (with great Silence) made out with their Fleet to the great Port of Syracuse; and seizing upon Olympius; and all the Places bordering round about, they there fortify'd their Camp. But the Syracusians understanding the Treachery, return'd with a swift March, and set upon their Enemies Camp. They on the other side issued forth, and Battel was join'd, in which the Athenians kill'd Four Hundred of their Enemies, and put the rest to flight: But the Athenian Generals discerning that the Enemy exceeded them in the number of their Horse (that they might be the better provided for the Siege,) sail'd back to Catana.

Messengers likewise were sent to Athens, with Letters to the Democracy to desire more Horse and Moneys, because the Siege they were about to begin, would be long and tedious. Upon which, it was decreed, that Three Hundred Talents and some Troops of Horse should be sent into Sicily.

During these things, Diagoras surnamed the Atheist, accused for his Impiety, for fear of the People, fled out of Attica; and a Talent of Silver was promis'd as a Reward by the Voice of the common Cryer, to any that should kill him. In Italy the Romans had War with the Aequi, and took Lavinium by Assault: And these were the Actions produc'd this Year.

Pisander now executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans created Four Military Tribunes as Consuls, Publius Lucretius, Caius Servilius, Agrippa Memenius, and Spurius Veturius. At this time the Syracusians sent Embassadors to Corinth and Lacedemon, to desire Aid, and earnestly intreated that they would not suffer them to be reduc'd to the utmost extremity. The Lacedemonians stirr'd up by Alcibiades, determin'd to assist the Syracusians, and made Gylippus General. The Corinthians sent only Two Gallies under Pythes to go along with Gylippus into Sicily for the present, while they were preparing a greater Fleet to be sent after them. Nicias and Lamachus the Athenian Generals at Catana, having receiv'd Three Hundred Talents, and re-inforc'd with Two Hundred and Fifty Horse from Athens, set Sail for Syracuse, and arriving there in the Night unsuspected by them of Syracuse, possess themselves of Epipole; which they of Syracuse perceiving, made a Sally with all speed to drive them thence, but were forc'd back within their Walls, with the loss of Three Hundred Men.

After this, there came to the Athenians Three Hundred Horse from Aegina, and Two Hundred and Fifty from the Sicilians, which made up a Body of above Eight Hundred Horse: Being inforc'd, they drew a Trench round Labdalus, and blockt up the City Syracuse on every side with a Wall. At which the Syracusians were greatly terrify'd, and to prevent the building of the Wall, they sally'd out; but after a Skirmish with Horse on both sides, the Syracusians were beaten back with great loss. Then the Athenians with a part of their Army possess'd themselves of a Place call'd Polichna, commanding the Port, and drew a Wall about it, wherein they included the Temple of Jupiter: So that now Syracuse was Besieg'd on both sides. With these many Misfortunes, the Syracusians were greatly discouraged; but when they heard that Gylippus was arriv'd at Himera, and raising Men, they began to take Heart. For Gylippus as soon as he came to Himera, with Four Gallies only, after he had secur'd his Ships, brought in them of Himera to join with the Syracusians; and from them and the Geleans, Selinuntians and Sicanians, he rais'd and listed Men, who when they were all mustered, made up a Body of Three Thousand Foot, and Two Hundred Horse; with which he march'd through the midst of the Country, and entred into Syracuse: And after a few Days, led forth his Forces, with those


Page 303

of the Syracusians, against the Enemy. Whereupon a sharp Battel was fought, wherein Lamachus the Athenian General was kill'd. But at length (after many kill'd on both sides) the Athenians got the Day.

After this Fight, came in Thirteen Gallies from Corinth, whereupon Gylippus having drawn the Souldiers out of these Ships, with them, and the Syracusians set upon the Enemies Camp, and assaulted the Epipole: And though the Athenians made a Sally, yet after a sharp Dispute, and many of them kill'd, they were routed by the Syracusians; who presently demolish'd the Walls and Fortifications through all the Epipole. The Athenians having lost this Place, led away their Army to another Post.

These things thus perform'd, the Syracusians sent Embassadors a Second time to Corinth and Lacedemon for further Supplies. To whom were sent a Thousand Men from Corinth, Beotia and Sicyon; and from Sparta Six Hundred. In the mean time, Gylippus traversing the Country about from Town to Town in several Parts of Sicily, brought in many to join with him in the War; and being reinforc'd with Three Thousand Men from the Himereans and Sicanians, he march'd his Army through the Heart of the Country: But the Athenians having intelligence of their coming, cut off one half of them by an Ambush; the rest came safe to Syracuse.

And now they of Syracuse being incouraged with fresh Supplies, determin'd to try their Fortune in a Sea-Fight: What Shipping they had left, they set forth, and built others, which they made use and trial of in the little Harbour.

Nicias the Athenian General, acquainted the People of Athens by Letters, that the Syracusians were much inforc'd, and that they were putting forth a great Fleet, with an intent to come to a Sea-Fight; and therefore desir'd more Shipping and Moneys to be sent him, and a Collegue to bear part of the Burden and Care of the War. For Alcibiades being fled, and Lamachus kill'd, he only remain'd, and that very infirm and unhealthful. Upon this the Athenians sent into Sicily about the Summer Solstice, Ten Gallies, under the Command of Eurymedon, with an Hundred and Forty Talents of Silver: But withal preparing and designing to send a greater Fleet at the Spring. And to that end, they rais'd Men and Money in every Place from among their Confederates. In Peloponesus the Lacedemonians by the instigation of Alcibiades, broke the League they had made with the Athenians, and the heat of this War continu'd for the space of Twelve Years.

CHAP. II.

The Lacedemonians invade Attica. The Fight at Sea between the Syracusians and Athenians. Eurymedon and Demosthenes arrive in Sicily. A Plague in the Athenian Camp. Another Fight between the Syracusians and Athenians. The latter routed at Sea. The Athenians ruin'd in Sicily. Nicholaus's long Oration. Gylippus his Answer.

THis Year ended, Cleocritus governed in chief at Athens, and at Rome Four Military Tribunes executed the Authority of Consuls; that is to say, Aulus Sempronius, Marcus Papyrius, Quintus Fabius, and Spurius Nautius. At this time the Lacedemonians invaded Attica under Agis their General, and Alcibiades the Athenian. They seize upon Decelia, a Place very strong and fit for a Garrison, and there they built a Fort; from whence this War was call'd the Decelian War. On the other side, the Athenians sent Charides with Thirty Sail into Laconia, and decreed Fourscore Gallies, and Five Thousand Souldiers to be sent into Sicily.


Page 304

In the mean time the Syracusians in order to a Sea-Fight before determin'd, made out with a Fleet of Fourscore Sail well Mann'd, against the Enemy; whom the Athenians met with a Fleet of Sixty Sail, whereupon began a fierce Fight: And now the Athenians came running to the Sea-side from every Quarter, from their Posts and Forts, some out of Curiosity to see the Engagement, others to be assistant to their Countrymen in their Flight, in case they should be worsted. The Syracusian Officers foreseeing the Athenians were likely to do, as now they did, had before given secret Orders to those that were left as a Guard for the City, to Assault the Forts of the Athenians which were full of Money, Naval Preparations, and other Provisions. The Syracusians therefore easily possess'd themselves of the Forts, which were slightly guarded, and made a great Slaughter of them that came from the Sea-shoar in aid of their Fellows. Hereupon a great Noise and Clamour being made about the Forts, and in the Camp, the Athenians Souldiers now engag'd at Sea, were struck with great Terrour, and gave back, and at length betook themselves to the defence of the Forts and Fortresses that were left; whom the Syracusians pursu'd, without observing any order. Whereupon the Athenians discerning there was no hope nor way left of escaping at Land, (for that the Syracusians had possess'd themselves of Two of their Forts) tackt about, and were forc'd to renew the Fight: Upon which, with their whole Fleet, in a Line of Battel, they fell upon the Syracusians (who were separated one from another, and had their Line broken and disordered by the Pursuit) and sunk Eleven of their Ships, pursuing the rest to the Island. After the Fight, both sides set up a Trophy, the Athenians for their Victory at Sea, and the Syracusians for their Success at Land. The Fight at Sea having this Issue, and the Victory so hardly obtain'd, the Athenians (understanding that Demosthenes within a few Days would be with them with a Fleet, were resolved not to attempt any thing further, till those Forces arriv'd. The Syracusians on the contrary resolv'd to lay all at stake, and try the utmost by force of Arms, before the Army of Demosthenes came up. And to that end, they fac'd the Athenian Fleet, and did all they could every Day to provoke them to a Battel.

About that time Aristo a Corinthian Commander of a Vessel, advis'd the Syracusians to make the Fore-Castles of their Ships shorter and lower, which was of great advantage to them in Fights at Sea afterwards: For the Fore-Castles of the Athenian Gallies were both very slender and high built, by reason whereof their Beaks made no impression, but where they met with those equal in height; and therefore the Enemy receiv'd no great Prejudice by them. But the Vessels of the Syracusians (having their Fore-Decks low and strong built,) often at the first Stroke sunk the Athenian Gallies.

The Syracusians (as is before related) many Days dar'd the Athenians to Fight both by Sea and Land, but all to no purpose; for they kept close, and would not be drawn forth by any means. But afterwards (some of the Officers of the Fleet not being able longer to indure the Insolencies of the Syracusians) part of the Navy set upon them in the great Haven, which at length engag'd the whole Fleet. The Athenians indeed excell'd the other in the swiftness of their Gallies, and in the expertness and diligence of the Sea-men: But because the fight was in a strait and narrow Place, this advantage was of no use to them.

The Syracusians therefore being confusedly mixt with their Enemies, and giving them no respite or time to withdraw, they drove them from off their Decks and their Fore-Castles, with Stones and Spears. And when they had with the Beaks of their Ships pierc'd through many of the Enemy's Gallies, they boarded them, and the Fight seem'd within the Ships, just like a Battel at Land. All things thus going to rack on the Athenians side, they fled outright with great precipitation; whom the Syracusians pursu'd close, and sunk Seven of their Gallies, and disabled many more.

The Syracusians being now grown confident, by their late Victories both at Sea and Land, presently arrives Eurimedon and Demosthenes, with a great Army from Athens, and with many Auxiliaries from Thurium and


Page 305

Messapia which join'd them in their Passage. These Generals brought with them more than Three Hundred and Ten Gallies, and Five Thousand Men, besides Seamen: But Arms, Moneys, Engines for a Siege and other Provisions were on board other Transport Ships. Upon this the Syracusians were again discourag'd, judging they were never able for the future to cope with so potent an Enemy.

Demosthenes having now persuaded his Collegues to seise upon the Epipole, (for

•

 otherwise he could never straiten the City on every side) set upon the Syracusians in the night with Ten Thousand heavy Arm'd Men, and as many light Arm'd; and the Assault being unexpected they took some Forts, and entring within the Fortifications, demolish'd part of the Wall. But the Syracusians running together from all parts to the Place assaulted, and Hermocrates with a choice Band of lusty Young Men hasting in with aid and assistance; the Athenians were driven out, and through the darkness of the Night and ignorance of the Passages were dispers'd and scatter'd far from one another, so that the Syracusians with their Auxiliaries with a close persuit kill'd Two Thousand Five Hundred of them, and wounded many that got off, and possess'd themselves of a great Number of Arms.

After this encounter, the Syracusians sent Sicanus one of the Officers with twelve Gallies to the rest of the Cities both to inform them of the Victory and likewise to desire further Aid.

The Athenians (their affairs now declining so much to the worse, and the Plague breaking forth in the Army by reason of a stinking marsh Ground near adjoyning) consulted what was sit to be done in the present exigency. Demosthenes was of Opinion without delay to return to Athens, saying it was far more commendable to venture their Lives for their Country against the Lacedemonians than to lie still in Sicily doing nothing. But Nicias said it was base and dishonourable to leave the Siege when they were so plentifully supply'd, both with Shipping Men and Money. And moreover, that they should be involv'd in great Danger by those whose common practice it was, to asperse the Generals, if they should make Peace with the Syracusians, and return to their Country without the order and command of the People. Among those that were then present at the Consult some approv'd of the Advice of Demosthenes for returning; others agreed with Nicias. But nothing being determin'd, they lay idle without any Action.

In the mean time, great Aids and Supplies came to them of Syracuse from the Siculi, Selenuntians, Geleans, Himereans and Camarineans, which encourag'd them as much as it discourag'd the Athenians. And besides the Plague so rag'd and increas'd that a great part of the Army Perish'd, which caus'd them all now to repent that they had not return'd before. The Athenian Army therefore being in a tumult, and hasting to their Shipping, Nicias himself was forc'd to a Compliance. And now both the Generals agreeing in Opinion, the Souldiers Shipt their Baggage and Lumber, and having all Aboard their Ships, hoist up Sail. And the Generals caus'd it to be Proclaim'd that upon a Sign given all should be ready, and if any loytred they should be left behind. But the Night before they intended to set Sail, the Moon was Ecclips'd, which occasion'd Nicias (who was naturally Superstitious, and then in great uneasiness by reason of the Plague) to advise with the Sooth-sayers. By whom Answer was given, that they must not by any means Sail of three Days: Into which Opinion Demosthenes and those of his party likewise were led through their Superstition. The Syracusians understanding by Deserters the cause of the stay, Man'd all their Gallies, to the Number of Seventy Four. And drawing out their Land-Forces, set upon the Athenians both by Sea and Land. On the other side the Athenians Man'd Fourscore and Six Gallies and gave the Command of the Right Wing to Eurymedon, against whom was oppos'd Agatharcus the Syracusian General. In the left Wing they plac'd Euthydemus, in opposition to Sicanus, who Commanded for the Syracusians. Menander Commanded the middle Battle on the Athenians side, and Pithes the Corinthian for the Syracusians. And altho' the Athenians Line of Battel stretch'd out further in length than the Syracusians because their Ships were more; yet that which seem'd to be their advantage prov'd to be their ruin in the Issue.


Page 306

For Eurymedon striving to surround the Wing opposite to him (by that means being sever'd from the rest of the Fleet) was driven by the Syracusians (who bore down upon him) into the Creek Dascones, before possess'd by other Syracusians; where being hemm'd in within the Straits, and forc'd upon the Shoar, (upon a mortal Wound given) he fell down Dead, and there seven of his Ships were destroy'd. In the heat of the Fight, the report spread abroad that the General was kill'd, and many of his Ships lost; upon which the chiefest of the Gallies which were next in place and order to the Vessels lost, began to give back, and thereupon the Syracusians press'd forward and (heated by their late success) fell with great fury upon the Athenians and forc'd them to an absolute Flight, and driving them into the Shallows of the Haven, many of the Vessels were stranded among the Shelvs and Sands. Upon which Sicanus the Syracusian Admiral fill'd a Ship with Fagots, Fire-brands and Pitch, and set it on Fire among the Ships floating upon the Shallows. On the other hand the Athenians with all expedition extinguish'd the Flames, and when they saw there was no other way left to escape, they valiantly grappled with their Enemies, and threw them overboard. In the mean time the Land-forces of the Athenians were ready upon the Shoar to Aid them that fled that way, and bestirring themselves with extraordinary Valour and contempt of all Dangers routed the Syracusians at Land. But they being Victors at Sea return'd into the City, having not lost many Men in the Sea-Fight. But the Athenians lost no less than Two Thousand Men and Eighty Gallies.

The Syracusians now conceiving that their City was safe, and that their business remaining was to break into the Enemies Camp and ruin their Army, block'd up the Mouth of their Haven with Ships join'd, and fastned together, to hinder the Flight of the Athenians by Sea. To which end they made a Bridge with Boats, Gallies, and other Sihps fixt with Anchors, compacted and fastned together with Iron Chains. The Athenians perceiving that they were penn'd up on every side, and no way of escape remaining, consulted and resolv'd to sill what Ships they had remaing with the best of their Souldiers, that with the multitude of their Shipping, and resoulteness of their Souldiers (now ready to Fight as Men in a desperate condition) they might strike a Terror into the Syracusians. Hereupon the chiefest of the Officers and best and most expert Souldiers Imbark'd and Man'd an Hundred and Fifteen Gallies. The rest of the Army they plac'd in order upon the Shoar. On the other side the Syracusians (being furnish'd with Land-Souldiers for the Defence of their Walls) fitted out Seventy Four Gallies, attended by many of the young Boys of the City, (not yet of full Age) in other Ships as Auxiliaries to be ready to aid and assist their Parents. The Walls of the Harbour and every high Place within the City were fill'd with Multitudes of Spectators. For both Women and Children and all others unfit to bear Arms (with great concern and trembling of Heart) stood to view the Fight in in order to judge how things were like to go with them. At the same time Nicias, the Athenian General, viewing the Fleet, and seriously considering the greatness of the danger, left his Post upon the Shoar, and went on board a Vessel, and sail'd round the Athenian Fleet, and call'd to the Commanders and Captains of every Gally, earnestly intreating them with his Hands lift up to Heaven, that every one would strive to out-do another, and improve to the utmost the present opportunity, being the last ground of hope they were ever like to injoy, for in their valour in the Sea-Fight now approaching, lay the safety and preservation both of them and of their Country. Those that were Fathers he put in mind of their Children: Those that were nobly born he earnestly press'd and exhorted that they would be careful to avoid what ever would stain the Honor and Glory of their Families: Those that had been advanc'd by the People for their former good Services, he advis'd now to approve themselves worthy of those marks of Honor they then bore. Lastly, he put them in mind of the Trophies at Salamis, earnestly adjuring them that they would not prostitute the Glory of their Country, and become Slaves to the Syracusians. After this Speech, Nicias return'd to the Army at Land. When they in the Fleet had Sung the Paean, they made out with a Design to break the Blockade at the Mouth of the Harbour. But the Syracusians sail'd up in order of Battle against them, with that speed that they drove them off the


Page 307

Bomb and forc'd them to Fight. In this confusion some Sail'd towards the Shoar, others made into the middle of the Harbour, and others towards the Fortifications; and thus their Lines being broke, the Fleet was presently separated and dispers'd, by which means the Athenians, in this manner disappointed, were forc'd to Fight here and there, up and down in the Harbour it little Squadrons and small Parties: However the Fight was obstinate on both sides. The Athenians exceeding in Number of Ships, seeing no other hopes of safety, undauntedly despis'd all Dangers, and resolv'd to die Valiantly. On the other hand, the Syracusians knowing their Parents and Children were observing them, put themselves forth to the utmost, every one striving to improve his Valour, to gain the Victory for his Country. Many there were, that when their Ships were pierced through by the violent Assault of the Enemy, leapt into the Ships that pierc'd them, and fought bravely upon their Fore-castles in the midst of their Enemies. Others with grappling Irons, so join'd the Ships together, that they forc'd their Enemy to fight on Board, as if they had been at Land. And there were not a few that when their own Ships were disabled, boarded their Adversaries, and kill'd and threw them overboard, and so possess'd themselves of their Vessels. And now the crashing of Ships one against another, and the Cries and Shouts of the Combatants and Dying Men, was heard in every Place throughout the whole Harbour: For sometimes one single Vessel was surrounded, and struck through with the Beaks of many, and so the Water forcing in at the Breaches, the Ship with all the Men in it, sunk together. And many (after their Ships were sunk) endeavour'd to save themselves by Swimming, but were struck through with Darts, and wounded with Spears, and so miserably perish'd. In the mean time, the Masters of the Ships were amazed, to see the Confusion and Disorder of the Fight, seeing nothing but tumult and horror about them, one Ship often set upon by many, and what was commanded, not regarded, and the Advice to one, disagreeable to the Circumstances of another; and after all, none attending to what was said. For what by Storms of Darts, crashing of Ships, brushing off of Oars, increase of Noise and Clamour of them that were engag'd, and loud Shouts of the Army upon the Shoar, incouraging them upon the Sea, none heard what Orders were given: For the Shoar was full of Souldiers, the Syracusians in one part, and the Athenians in another. By which means, they that were driven in the Fight near to the Land, were sometimes succour'd by them upon the Shoar. The Spectators upon the Walls, gave great Shouts when they discerned any advantage gain'd by their Friends; but when they were in danger to be overcome, they fill'd the Air with doleful Groans and Lamentations, calling upon their Gods for deliverance. Sometimes some of the Gallies of the Syracusians were destroy'd under the very Walls, and their Kindred and Relations Butcher'd before their Faces; so that Parents were the Eye-Witnesses of the Death of their Children, Wives of the miserable end of their Husbands, and Brothers of their Brothers.

And after the Fight had lasted long (with much Slaughter on both sides) yet the Battel was still carry'd on, for none (never so greatly press'd) durst fly to Land. For the Athenians ask'd them which made towards the Shoar, whether they intended to Sail to Athens by Land? So the Syracusians on the Shoar, demanded of them that fled towards them, 

Why they were now ready to betray their Country, who would not suffer them that staid on Shoar to imbarque with them? Did they shut up the Mouth of the Harbour, as if they would prevent the Escape of the Enemy, to the end that they themselves might have the better Excuse to fly to the Shoar? And being that every Man must of necessity die, what more honourable Death could they desire, than that for their Country, which is now a witness of the Engagement, and whom they basely and sordidly desert?

 With these and the like Reproaches did they who fled to Land, meet with from the Souldiers plac'd on the Shoar: Whereupon they return'd to the Battel, though greatly disabled in their Shipping, and their Bodies so wounded, that they were scarce able to defend themselves. At length the Athenians nearest to the City were forc'd to fly. Presently after, they that were next gave back, till at length the whole Fleet made away. Whereupon the Syracusians pursu'd with a great Shout. Those of the Athenians that escap'd (being driven upon the Shelves and Sands) leap'd out of their broken and shatter'd


Page 308

Vessels, and fled to the Land Army. The Harbour was now full of Arms and Wrecks of Ships every where. Threescore of the Athenian Ships were absolutely destroy'd, of the Syracusians Eight were lost, and Eleven disabled.

The Syracusians tow'd as many of their Gallies to the Shoar as they could, and took out the Dead Bodies of their Citizens and Confederates, and gave them an Honourable Burial. The Athenians throng'd together to the Generals Tents, desiring them not so much to regard the Ships, as the preservation both of themselves and the Souldiers. Thereupon Demostbenes declar'd that more Ships were forthwith to be man'd, in order to force the Blockade, which if done presently, they might all easily escape.

Nicias was of a contrary Opinion, and advis'd the leaving the Ships, and to march up into the heart of the Country to the Cities of their Confederates; whose Opinion all embrac'd: And having burnt some of their Ships, they forthwith made it their business to march away. Their Design of Decamping in the Night being known to the Enemy, Hermocrates advis'd the Syracusians to draw out all their Forces in the Night, and stop all the Passes on the High-Ways. But the Officers not approving of this, because many of the Souldiers were wounded, and all wearied and tir'd out by the late Engagement, sent some Horsemen to the Athenians Camp, to inform them that the Syracusians had laid all the Ways with Souldiers to intrap them in their March. The Horse coming in late in the Night, (the Athenians believing they were sent out of kindness to them from the Leontines) were in a great perplexity, and thereupon stay'd at present where they were; though they might have pass'd with great safety, if they had not been thus deluded. The Syracusians therefore as soon as it was light, sent out Souldiers, and secur'd all the narrow Passes on the Road. The Athenians divided the Army into Two Parts, their Sick Men and Carriages they plac'd in the middle; those that were strong and able to fight, were in the Front and Rear: Demosthenes led these, and Nicias the other, and so they march'd towards Catana. In the mean time, the Syracusians drew Fifty Gallies left behind, with Ropes into the City, and ordered all their Sea-men and Souldiers out of the Gallies, and arm'd them, and so pursu'd after the Athenians with all their Forces, and continually vexed, galled, and even tir'd out the Rear. Pressing thus upon their Backs for Three Days together, and possessing all the Passes before them, the Way to Catana was quite blockt up. At length being chas'd through the Helorine Way, to the River Assinarus, where there was no going forward, they were absolutely coup'd up, and there the Syracusians kill'd Eighteen Thousand of them, and took Seven Thousand Prisoners, among whom were Demosthenes and Nicias the Generals. The rest were given as a Prey to the Souldiers; for the Athenians (no Way being left to escape) were forc'd to deliver up, not only their Arms but themselves, as Captives to their Enemy's Mercy.

Upon this happy Success, the Syracusians erected Two Trophies, and fixt to them the Arms of the Generals, and then return'd to the City. Hereupon the whole City gave publick Thanks unto the Gods. The next Day an Assembly was call'd, to consider what was to be done with the Prisoners. There Diocles, one of the highest Esteem among the People, deliver'd his Opinion, 

That the Athenian Generals should be first Scourg'd, and then put Death, and that the rest of the Prisoners should be sent to the Quarries. And that they that had any ways assisted the Athenians, should be sold under the Spear; and that no more than Two Cotyles of Corn a Day, should be allow'd to every Prisoner.

 When the Decree was read, Hermocrates then in the Assembly began to speak, and say, That it was more commendable to use a Victory with Moderation and Humanity, than to overcome.

The People murmuring and grumbling at this, as not pleasing to them, one Nicholaus, who had lost Two Sons in this War, ascends the Desk, supported by his Servants, by reason of his Age. At which the People ceas'd their Murmuing, supposing he would be sharp against the Prisoners. Silence being made, the Old Man began thus, 

Ye Inhabitants of Syracuse, I my self have born no small part of the Calamities of this War; for being the Father of Two Sons, I readily sent them forth to venture their Lives for the defence of their Country;


Page 309

and for them were sent a Messenger, who inform'd 
〈…〉
e of the Death of them both; and though I am every Day desiring they were alive, yet considering the manner of their Deaths, I cannot but judge them happy, and bewail my own Life, and count my self most miserable: For they by losing of their Lives, (which as a Debt to Nature, they must of necessity some time or other have parted with) for the safety of their Country, have left an immortal Honour behind them. But I now in the end of my Days, being depriv'd of the helps of my old Age, am doubly afflicted, whilst I have both lost my Children, and likewise all hopes of Posterity. For the more glorious their ends 

 were, the more grateful and desirable is their Memory; therefore the very Name of the 
Athenians
 is most deservedly hateful to me, whom you see led and supported by the Hands of my Servants, and not of my Children. Ye 
Syracusians,
 if I had discerned that this present Assembly had been appointed to consult and advise something in favour of the 
Athenians,
 I should (as Justly I might) for the many Slaughters and Calamities brought by them upon the Country, and for my own particular Miseries, most bitterly inveigh against them. But seeing we are here debating about shewing Compassion to the Afflicted, and how to spread Abroad through all the World, the Honour and Glory of the People of 
Syracuse,
 I now desire with all 

 Lenity and Gentleness, to propose what I conceive may be every way for the advantage of the Commonweath. The 
Athenians
 indeed have justly deserved to undergo all manner of Punishments for their Madness and Folly: In the first place for their Impiety towards the Gods, and next for their great injury done to us. God is certainly good in this, in bringing those into Misery and Distress, who not contented with their own abundance, fall by an unjust War upon others. Who would ever have thought that the 
Athenians,
 who had brought over Ten Thousand Talents from 
Delos,
 and invaded 
Sicily
 with a Fleet of Two Hundred Sail, and with an Army of Forty Thousand Men, should have 

 been brought so low, into such Calamities as now they are? For after so so great a Preparation, neither Ship nor Man return'd to bring the News of their destruction. And now, O ye 
Syracusians,
 since ye see by experience, that the Proud and Ambitious are hateful both to God and Man, (adoring the Deity) take heed of doing any thing cruel and inhumane. For what Honour is it, to destroy him that lies prostrate at our Feet? What glory to be sierce and cruel in taking Revenge? For he that is Implacable towards Men 

 in Distress, is injurious to the common frailty and weakness of Mankind. No Man is so subtil as to be able to baffle Fate; who as it were sporting her self in Mens Miseries, oftentimes on a sudden draws a black Cloud over their Prosperity. And here perhaps some may say, The 
Athenians
 have most unjustly committed many Slaughters among us, and now we have power to take full revenge. Have not the 
Athenians
 suffered already above the degree and measure of their Offence? Have ye not sufficiently punished the Prisoners? Consider when they deliver'd up themselves with their Arms into your Hands, they did it relying upon the mercy of the Conquerors. Therefore it would be a base thing, to deceive them in the good Opinion and Hope they had of your Humanity. Certainly they that are implacable and obstinate in their Hatred, will sight it out to the last; but these instead of Enemies, gave up themselves to you as Suppliants. For they that render their Bodies to the Enemy 

 in time of the Battel, undoubtedly do it in hopes of Preservation; but if they are hurried to Execution (though they were perswaded to the contrary) they indeed fall into an unexpected Calamity; but they who act so Cruelly, may justly be termed 

 raging Fools: But it becomes those who would rule others, to recommend themselves rather by Mercy and Clemency, than to seek to establish their Grandeur by Force and Power. For they who are driven to Obedience through Fear, are ready to execute their Hatred, when they see their opportunity to Rebel. But they love those that rule them with gentleness and moderation, and do all they can to advance and strengthen their interest. What overthrew the Empire of the 
Medes,
 but then cruelty to their Subjects? For as soon as the 
Persians
 made a defection, most of the Nations together with them rebell'd. How did 
Cyrus
 who was but a Private Man, gain the Sovereignty of all 
Asia,
 but by his Courtesie and Kindness to those he had subdu'd? He did not only forbear to execute cruelty upon King


Page 310

Cresus, but heap'd many Favours upon him. And such was his Practice towards other Kings and People: His Mercy and Lenity being thereupon published in every Place, all the Inhabitants of Asia flock'd together to him, and strove to be his Confederates. But why do I speak of Times and Places so far remote, when in this very City of ours, Gelon from an ordinary Man, became Prince of all Sicily; all the Cities giving up themselves freely to his Government? The Courtesie and winning Behaviour of the Man, gain'd upon every Person, especially his tenderness towards them that were in Distress. Therefore guided by this Example (at a time when this our City rul'd over all Sicily) let us not slight that which was so commendable in our Ancestors, nor behave our selves like Beasts, fierce and inexorable towards Men in Misery. It will ill become us to give occasion to those that envy us, to say that we us'd our Success and Prosperity unworthily. How desirable a thing is it when we are in Affliction, to have some to sympathize with us, and when we are in Prosperity, to have others to rejoyce with us! Victory is many times gain'd by Fortune and Chance, but Humanity and Mercy in a time of Success, are clear instances of the Virtue of the Conqueror.

Wherefore envy not your Country this Honour, whereby they will be Famous all the World over, when it shall be said that it did not only overcome the Athenians by Arms, but by Mercy and Humanity. And hence it will appear that they who ingross to themselves all the praise and commendation due to Mercy and Generosity, are far out-done by your Lenity and Compassion. And that they who first dedicated an Altar to Mercy, may find the very same in the City of Syracuse. And it will be a convincing Argument to all Mankind, that they were most justly cut off, and we most deservedly crown'd with Success; because they so unjustly fell upon those who afterwards shew'd Mercy to such implacable Enemies; and that we overcame such a sort of Men as most unjustly made War upon them who learnt to shew Mercy even by the Cruelty and Injustice of their Enemies. And hence will follow that the Athenians shall not only undergo the Censures of others, but will likewise condemn themselves, that they should endeavour by an unjust War to destroy such Men. It is certainly a most comenable thing, to lay the first Foundation of Friendship, and extinguish Dissentions, by shewing of Mercy. A good understanding amongst Friends, is to be everlasting, but Enmity with Adversaries ought to be but temporary. By this means the number of Friends would increase, and Enemies would be the fewer. But to continue Hatred and Discord for ever, and intail them to Posterity, is neither just nor safe. For sometimes it falls out that they who now seem to be more potent than the other, in a moment are brought lower than those they formerly overcame; which is clearly evinced to us by the event of the present War. They who even now besieg'd our City, and to that purpose hemm'd us in with a Wall, by a turn of Fortune are now become our Prisoners, as you all see: It's therefore our great Prudence in the Miseries of others, to shew Compassion, if we expect to find the same our selves in their Condition. This present Life is full of Paradoxes and Mutations, as Seditions, Robberies, Wars, among which Humane Nature can scarce avoid loss and prejudice: Therefore if we shut up all Bowels of Mercy towards the Distressed and Vanquished, we establish a bloody Law for ever against our selves. For it's impossible that they who are cruel towards others, should find Mercy afterwards themselves; and that they that act barbarously should be gently used; or that those who destroy so many Men against the common custom of the Greeks, when a change of Fortune comes, should obtain the common Rights and Privileges of all other Men. For which of the Grecians ever put to Death those that submitted and delivered up themselves upon hopes and belief of Mercy from the Conquerors? Or who ever prefer'd Cruelty before Mercy? or Precipitation and Rashness before Prudence? All Mankind indeed agree in this, to destroy an Enemy in Fight by all ways imaginable; but yet to spare those who submit and yield up themselves. For in the one case Obstinacy is corrected, and in the other Mercy is exercised. For our Rage is naturally cool'd, when we see him that was an Enemy, upon change of his Fortune, now lye at our Foot, submitting himself to the will and pleasure of the Conqueror: Especially Men of mild and good Tempers are toucht with a Sense of Compassion, through Affection to the same Common Nature with themselves. Even


Page 311

the Athenians in the Peloponesian War, when they took many of the Lacedemonians in the Illand Sphacteria, yet restor'd them to the Spartans upon Ransom. The Lacedemonians likewise when many of the Athenians and their Confederates fell into their Hands, used the like Clemency; and it was Honourably done of them both: For Grecians should lay aside their Enmity after Conquest, and forbear Punishment after the Enemy is subdu'd. He that revenges himself upon the Conquered, after he hath submitted to Mercy, punishes not an Enemy, but rather wickedly insults over the weakness of Mankind. Concerning this severity one made use of these Savings of the ancient Philosophers, O man! be not overwise. Know thy self. Consider Fortune commands all things. What I beseech you was the Reason that all the Grecians in former Ages, after their Victories, did not make their Trophies of Stone, but of ordinary Wood? Was it not that as they continu'd but a short time, so the Memory of former Feuds and Differences should in a little time vanish? If you are resolv'd to perpetuate your Hatred and Animosities, then learn first to slight the inconstancy of Humane Affairs. Many times a small occasion, and a little turn of Fortune, has given a check to the Insolencies of the Proudest of Men. And if you purpose at any time to put an end to the War (which is probable) how can you have a better opportunity than this, in which by your Mercy and Clemency towards the Conquered, you lay the Foundations of Peace and Amity? Do you think the Athenians by this loss in Sicily, have no more Forces left, who are Lords almost of all the Islands of Greece, and of the Sea-Coasts of Europe and Asia? For not long ago, though they lost Three Hundred Gallies in Egypt, yet they compell'd the King (who seem'd to be the Conqueror) to make Peace with them upon Terms on his Part dishonourable. And heretofore though Xerxes had destroy'd their City, yet not long after they overcame him, and became Masters of all Greece. This noble City thrives in the midst of the greatest Calamities, and nothing small and mean is the subject of any of its Consultations. And therefore it is both honourable and profitable, that we should rather (by sparing the Captives) enter into a League of Friendship with them, than to widen the breach by destroying of them. For if we put them to Death, we only gratify our Rage with a little unprofitable Pleasure for the present; but if we preserve them, they (whom we use so well) will be for ever grateful, and from all Mankind, we shall reap eternal Praise and Honour. Yea, but may some say, some of the Grecians have kill'd their Prisoners. What then? if they have been prais'd and honour'd for this Cruelty, let us then imitate them who have been so careful to preserve their Honour; but if the best and chiefest among us justly condemn them, let not us do the same things with them, who did apparently so wickedly. As long as these Men who have yielded up themselves to our Mercy, suffer nothing sad and doleful from us, all the Nations will blame the Athenians: But when they hear that you have destroy'd the Prisoners against the Law of Nations, all the Shame and Disgrace will fall upon your selves. And if there be any regard to desert, we may consider that the glory of the City of Athens is such, that all acknowledge themselves bound to be grateful for the Benesits and Advantages reapt from thence. These are they who first enobled Greece with civil Education; for when by the special bounty of the Gods, it was only among them, they freely imparted it to all others. These fram'd Laws, by means whereof, Men that before lived like Beasts, were brought into orderly Society to live together according to the Rules of Justice: These were they who first of all protected those in Distress that fled to them, and caused the Laws for the receiving and defending of Suppliants in such case, to be inviolably observ'd amongst all other Nations; and it were a most unworthy thing now to deny the benefit of those Laws to them who were the Authors of them. And thus much in general to all. And now I shall hint something particularly to some of you, concerning the Duties incumbent upon such as should have regard to the welfare and happiness of Mankind. You that are the Orators and Men of Learning of this City, You I say have Compassion on them, whose Country is the Nursery of all Learning, and honourable Education. All you who are initiated into the Holy Mysteries, spare and save those by whom ye were instructed. You who have reaped any advantage by ingenious Education, now be grateful for that advantage. You who hereafter hope for improvement


Page 312

thence, debar not your selves by your Cruelty now. For where shall Strangers be instructed in the liberal Arts, if Athens be destroy'd? Some short Resentment indeed they do deserve for the present Offence, but their many good Acts may justly challenge Returns of kindess and good-will. Besides this merit of the City, if any do but consider the private Circumstances of the Prisoners, there will be just cause and ground found to shew them Mercy. For the Confederates being under the command of their Superiors, are forc'd to be ingag'd in the same War with them. Wherefore though it may be thought just to execute Revenge upon them that were the chief Authors of the Injuries, yet certainly it's very fit and commendable to pardon such as are Offenders against their Wills. What shall I say of Nicias? who from the beginning (favouring the Syracusians) dissuaded the Athenians from this Expedition against Sicily; and was always kind and courteous to all the Syracusians that ever came thither. How base and unworthy then would it be to put Nicias to Death, who was our Advocate in the Senate at Athens, and that he (finding no mercy for all his kindnesses) should undergo a rigorous and implacable Revenge for his Obedience to his Governors? So that though Alcibiades (who was the great promoter of this War) avoided by his flight, Revenge both from us and the Athenians, yet he who was the most courteous of all the Athenians, cannot be thought worthy of common favour. Considering therefore the Catastrophies of this present Life, I cannot but compassionate so, unfortunate a condition. For not long ago, he was esteem'd one of the bravest Men of Greece, and most applauded for the integrity of his Life and Conversation; and the Eyes and well-Wishes of all the City every where follow'd him: But now with his Arms Pinion'd in Chains of Captivity, of a deform'd Countenance, suffering under the miserable condition of a Slave, as if Fortune in this Man's Life, glory'd to shew the greatness of her power, under whose bountiful indulgence towards us, we ought to carry it (as becomes the state and condition of Men) with Humanity and Moderation, and not to insult with barbarous Cruelty, over them who are of the same Stock and Original with our selves.

Nicholaus having thus spoken to the Syracusians, ended his Oration, and much affected his Auditors with Pity and Compassion.

But Gylippus the Laconian burning with implacable Hatred against the Athenians, ascends the Tribunal, and speaks thus; 

I am in great admiration, O ye Syracusians, to see you led aside by inticing Words, even while you are under the smart of your miserable Butcheries you really groan under. If in the very height of Danger you are so cool in your Revenge towards them who came hither on purpose to ruin your Country, why do we contend when we are not at all injur'd? I intreat you by the Gods, O ye Syracusians, to give me leave, while I freely declare to you my Opinion: For being a Spartan, I must be forc'd to speak after the manner of the Spartans: And in the first place, some may inquire, how comes it to pass, that Nicholaus professes himself to bear so much Compassion towards the Athenians, who have made his Old Age the more miserable by the Loss of his Sons? And now appears in the Assembly in a mournful Habit, and with the shedding of many Tears, pleads for mercy for them who have murthered his own Children? Certainly he is no good Man, that so far forgets the Death of his nearest Relations, as to, judge it fit and just to spare them who were their most bitter and implacable Enemies. How many are here present now in this great Assembly, who are lamenting for the death of their Children? At which Words, when many of the Assembly sent forth loud Groans, he added, I discern (says he) that those Sighs are the Witnesses of the Miseries suffered. How many Brothers, Kindred and Friends lost in this War, do ye now in vain desire?

 At which, when many more manifested their Sorrow; 

Seest thou not, (says Gylippus) O Nicholaus! how many the Athenians have made Miserable? All these without any cause, have they depriv'd of their dearest and nearest Relations, who ought so much the more to hate the name of the Athenians, by how much they bore the greater love to their Relations, Kindred and Friends. How absurd and unjust a thing is it, O ye Syracusians, for Men voluntarily to sacrifice their Lives for you, and you not to revenge their Bloods upon their inveterate Enemies? Nay, being so far from praising those who have lost their


Page 313

lives in defence of the common liberty, as to prefer the Safety of the Enemies, before the Honour of those that have deserved so well. You have made a Law, that the Sepulchers of your Countrymen shall be adorned and beautify'd: What greater Ornament can ye invent, than to destroy their Murderers? Unless it be (if the Gods permit) that by making these Enemies Free-men of the City, you determine to set them up as living Trophies for the remembrance of your Dead Friends. But now the Denomination of Enemies is changed into that of Suppliants. From whence arises this Tenderness? For they who first compiled Laws concerning these matters, decreed Mercy to the Distressed, but Punishment to them that acted Wickedly. And now under which of these Denominations shall we account the Prisoners? As Distressed and Afflicted? But what evil Spirit was it that compell'd them to make War against the Syracusians without any Provocation? and breaking all the Bonds of Peace (which is so desirable amongst all) to plot and contrive the destruction of your City? Therefore as they began an unjust War, let them with Courage or without, suffer and undergo the events of War: For if they had been Conquerors, we should have felt their inexorable Cruelty; but now being subdu'd, they seek to avoid the Punishment in the most low and humble posture of Distressed Suppliants. What if they should be answered, that their Covetousness and wicked Ambition has hurl'd them into these Calamities? Let them not therefore accuse Fortune, nor challenge to themselves the name of Suppliants; for this is only due to them who are fallen into Misfortunes, and yet have preserv'd their Innocency and Integrity: But they who make it the business of their Lives to act all manner of Injustice, shut up all the Doors and Passages of Mercy against themselves. What is it that is most base which they will not devise? What Wickedness will they not commit? It's the special property of Covetousness, not to be content with its present Condition, but violently to lust after things remote, and what is not our own; which is most notoriously done by these Men: For though they were the most happy and prosperous of all the Grecians, yet not being able to bear the weight of their own greatness, they thirsted after Sicily (though separated from them by so large a Sea) to divide it by Lot amongst themselves. A most horrid and wicked thing it is to make War upon them, who never gave any occasion or provocation: And this these Men have done. These are they who not long agoe entred into a League with us of Peace and Friendship, and then on a sudden begirt our City with their Forces. Certainly it's a great piece of Pride and Presumption, to forejudge the Events of a War, and to order and determine the Punishment of an Enemy, before the Conquest: And this they did not omit; for before they came into Sicily, it was enacted in their common Assemblies, That the Syracusians and Selinuntians should be made Slaves, and all the rest brought under Tribute. And now when so many complicated Vices center in these Men, as insatiable Covetousness, Fraud and Treachery, insufferable Pride and Insolency, what Man in his Wits can shew them Mercy? especially when it is so well known how they dealt with them of Mitylene: For after they had subdu'd them, although they had committed no Offence, but only desir'd to preserve their Liberty, yet they commanded them all to be put to the Sword; a most cruel and barbarous Act, and this against Grecians, against Confederates, and against those that had merited better things at their Hands. And therefore let them not think it grievous to suffer that themselves, which they have executed upon others: For it's but just that he who makes a Law to bind others, should be subject to the same himself. But why do I speak of this? when they took Melus, they most miserably destroy'd all the Youth of the City. And the Scioneans of the Colony of the Meleans underwent the same Fate. So that these Two sorts of People, when they fell into the cruel Hands of the Athenians, were so totally destroy'd, that there was none left to bury the Dead. They who acted these things, are not Scythians; but a People who boast of Humanity and Mercy above all other. These are they that by Publick Edict, utterly destroy'd these Cities. Now can ye imagin how they would have dealth with the City of Syracuse, if they had taken it? Certainly, they who are so cruel towards their own Confederates, would have invented something more vile and horrid to have executed upon Strangers. By all the Rules of Law and Justice therefore,


Page 314

there's no Mercy remains for these Men, who have debarr'd themselves of all Pity and Compassion in their present Calamities. For whether can they fly? To the Gods? whose Worship according to the Laws of the Country, they endeavoured to root up? To Men? whom with all their might they were studying and contriving to make Slaves? Will they make their Addresses to Ceres and Proserpina, when they came hither to spoil and lay waste the Island dedicated to them? So it is. But say some, the People of Athens are in no fault, but Alcibiades who advis'd, and persuaded to this War. What then? We know that they who advise, for the most part frame their Speeches that way which they conceive is most agreeable to the Humour of their Auditors: And he that is to give his Vote, often trusts to the Orator what he would have to be urged. For the Orator commands not the People, but the People order the Orator to propose what is advisable, and then determine what they think fit. Besides, if we pardon the Malefactors upon their casting the fault upon their Advisers, we furnish every wicked Fellow with a ready Excuse for the clearing of himself. To speak plainly, it would be the unjustest thing in the World, to give thanks to the People for all the good and advantage we at any time reap, and execute Revenge upon the Orators for all the Injuries we suffer. It's to be admir'd to see some so far besotted, as to judge it fit that Alcibiades now out of our reach should be punish'd, and yet the Prisoners now justly brought to judgment should be discharged; that thereby it might be evident to all, that the Syracusians are so sottish, as not to have any sense of that which is ill: but admit the truth be so, that the Advisers were the Cause of the War, then let the People accuse them because they have led them into such a Disaster. In the mean time do you (as in Justice you ought) revenge your selves upon the Multitude, by whom you have most injuriously suffered. The Sum of all is this, If knowingly and advisedly they have thus wronged you, they deserve to suffer upon that account; if they came upon you rashly and inconsiderately, they are not to be spar'd for that Reason, lest they make it a Practice to injure others others, under pretence of unadvisedness and inconsideration. For it's not just the Syracusians should be ruin'd by the rashness and ignorance of the Athenians, nor where the Damage is irrepairable, to admit of an excuse for the Offenders. Yea, by Jupiter! But Niceas (say some) pleaded the Cause of the Syracusians, and was the only Person dissuaded the People from the War. What he said there, indeed we heard, and what he has acted here, we have now seen. For he who there argu'd against the Expedition, was there General of an Army against us; and he who was then the Syracusian Advocate, but even now besieg'd and wall'd in their City. He who was then so well affected towards you, lately commanded the continuance both of the War and the Siege, when Demosthenes and all the rest would have drawn off and return'd. I judge therefore you will not have more regard to Words than things, to Promises than Experiences, to things dark and uncertain, than to those that are seen and apparent. Yet by Jupiter, I confess, it's a very wicked thing to perpetuate Enmities and differences. But is not the due punishment of those that violate the peace, the most natural way to put an end to Hostilities? It's certainly most unjust, when it's apparent if they had been Conquerors, they would have made the conquered all Slaves, to spare them now they are conquered, as if they had done nothing amiss: For thus getting their Necks out of the Halter, they'll speak you fair for a time, and perhaps remember the kindness so long as it is for their advantage, but no longer. One thing more I have to say, If you follow this Advice, besides many other Mischiefs, you disoblige the Lacedemonians, who readily undertook this War for your sakes, and sent hither Aids and Supplies as your Confederates, when they might have been quiet, and suffered Sicily to have been wasted and destroyed. And therefore if you release the Prisoners, and enter into a new League with the Athenians, it will evidently appear that you betray your Confederates; and whereas it's now in your power to ruin and destroy the common Enemies, by discharging of those who are the best of their Souldiers, you put them in a better condition for a Second Encounter. I can never be persuaded that the Athenians who bear such an inveterate Hatred, will ever continue long to be your Friends. Whilst they cannot hurt you, so long they'l make a shew of Kindness,


Page 315

but when they think they have Power enough, then they'l execute what before they long designed. To conclude, I earnestly beseech thee, O Jupiter! and all the Gods, that the Enemies be not spar'd, that the Confederacy be not deserted, and that another danger of Ruin be not brought upon the Country. And to you, O ye Syracusians, I say if any Mischief happen to you by releasing the Enemy, you leave no colour of Excuse for your selves.

Thus spoke the Laconian; upon which the People chang'd their Minds, and confirm'd the Advice of Diocles, and without delay the Generals with all their Confederates were put to Death. But the Citizens of Athens were adjudg'd, and thrust down into the Quarries. But some of them that had been well bred and instructed in several useful Arts, were by the young Men loos'd from their Fetters and discharg'd. All the rest almost dy'd miserably through ill usage in their Imprisonment.

CHAP. III.

Diocles instituted Laws for Sicily; suffer'd by one of his own Laws. Three Hundred appointed to govern in Athens. The Athenians beaten at Sea by the Lacedemonians at Oropus. Alcibiades recall'd from Banishment.

THE War now ended, Diocles prescrib'd Laws for the Syracusians. But one thing very remarkable happened concerning this Man: For being of an inexorable Nature, and rigid and severe against the Offenders, amongst other Laws which he made, one was this; That if any Man came arm'd into the Court, he should be put to Death, without any exception of Ignorance, or of any other Circumstance of the Fact whatsoever. It happened that some Enemies made a sudden Incursion into the Borders of the Syracusians, and he was to go forth against them. In the mean time, a Seditious Tumult arose near the Court; upon which he hasten'd thither with his Sword by his Side; which being taken notice of by a Private Man, who cry'd out, that he violated the Laws he himself had made. No by Jove (says he) I'll confirm them: And so drawing his Sword, ran himself through. These were the Actions of this Year.

After this, when Callias govern'd in chief at Athens, the Romans chose Four Military Tribunes to execute the Office of Consuls, Publius Cornelius, Caius Valerius, Cneius Fabius Vibulanus, and Quintius Cincinnatus. At the same time the Ninety Second Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, where Exaenetus of Agrigentum was Victor. At this time the Athenians began to be in contempt by reason of their Misfortunes in Sicily. For soon after the Chians, Samians, Byzantines and a great part of their Confederates, fell off to the Lacedemonians. The People of Athens being upon this Account in great perplexity, laid aside the Democratical Government, and chose Four Hundred to manage the Affairs of the Commonwealth. The Sovereign Power being now devolv'd upon a few, they built more Gallies, and rigg'd out a Fleet of Forty Sail. After some Disagreement amongst the Officers, they sail'd to Oropus, where the Enemies Gallies lay at Anchor: Hereupon a Battel was fought, and the Lacedemonians prevail'd, and took Two and Twenty Sail.

As for the Syracusians, when the War was ended with the Athenians, they rewarded the Lacedemonians their Confederates (of whom Gylippus was General) with the Spoils taken in the War, and sent with them Five and Thirty Gallies to assist them against the Athenians, of which Hermocrates, a great Man among the Citizens, was Admiral. Then all the Booty and Prey was brought together, and out of the Spoils they adorn'd the Temples, and rewarded every Souldier according to his Demerit.


Page 316

After these things, Diocles a Man of great Authority amongst the People, prevail'd to have the Administration of the Government altered, by chusing the Magistrates by Lot, and ordered that there should be Law-makers appointed both to settle the Commonwealth, and to make new Laws for the future Government. The Syracusians therefore chose such from among the Citizens as they judg'd most prudent, of whom the chiefest was Diocles: He was a Man of such excellent Parts, and of so great Reputation, that the Laws (though made with the joint help of others) were call'd from him the Dioclean Laws. And he was not only admir'd by the Syracusians whilst he liv'd, but when he was dead, they honour'd him as an Hero, and built a Temple to his Memory, which Dionysius afterwards pull'd down when he built the new Wall. All the rest likewise of the Siculi highly valu'd this Man: And upon that account many of the Cities through Sicily used the same Laws that he had instituted, till such time as the Romans brought all Sicily under the power of Rome. And though in times long after Diocles, Cephalus in the time of the Government of Timoleon and Polydorus, when Hiero reign'd, instituted Laws for the Syracusians, yet neither of them were ever call'd Lawmakers, but Interpreters of the Law-maker; because the former Laws being written in old and obsolete Language, were scarce to be understood. And whereas there are many things in these Laws very remarkable, yet the great Hatred against Knavery and Dishonesty appears chiefly from this, That the bitterest and severest Punishments are levell'd against all those that violate Justice. His great dexterity in Civil Affairs is evident hence, That he appointed a certain Mulct or Fine almost for every Offence or Cause Private or Publick, proportionable to the nature of the thing. He's very concise in his Expressions, leaving much to the disquisition of the Learned Reader. The sad manner of his Death is a sufficient Testimony of the Virtuous Resolution of his Mind. I am the rather desirous to speak more than ordinary of these things, in regard most Authors heretofore mention very little concerning him.

But to return to the Athenians, when they heard of the ruin of their Army in Sicily, they took it most grievously, yet slackt nothing in their Contests with the Lacedemonians about the Sovereignty, but prepar'd a greater Fleet, and let their Money fly Abroad amongst all their Confederates that were resolved to stick by them to the utmost extremity, to gain and keep the Sovereign Power. And to that end they gave full Authority to Four Hundred Persons chosen out of the Citizens to rule and govern the Commonwealth: For in their present circumstances, they preferr'd an Oligarchy before their former Democracy. But the thing did not in the least answer their Expectations; for they were much more unsuccessful afterwards, for they sent forth Two Generals that were at Dissention between themselves, with a Fleet of Forty Sail against the Enemy. And although the present distressed Condition, and bad state of Affairs with the Athenians call'd aloud for Peace and Concord amongst themselves, yet the Generals did all they could to widen the breach, and cherish the Enmities and Animosities they bore one against another. At length sailing to Oropus, unawares and unprepared, they fought with the Peloponesians, where through their carelesness at the beginning, and their sloath and inadvertency in the heat of the Fight, they lost Two and Twenty Ships, and brought the rest with great difficulty into Eretria.

Upon this the Confederates of the Athenians (considering the Overthrow in Sicily, and the late ill Management of the Two Commanders) join'd with the Lacedemonians. Darius likewise the King of Persia, sought earnestly to enter into a League with the Lacedemonians: And to that end, Pharnabazus his Lieutenant upon the Sea-Coasts supply'd the Lacedemonians with Money, and sent for Three Hundred Ships from Phenicia, which he had before ordered to be sent to them to Beotia. And now when the Athenians were involv'd in so many Mischiefs at one time, all Men thought the War at an end. For none had the least hopes that the Athenians could make any further opposition, not for the least moment of time. But the thing had a far different issue from that which was commonly suppos'd; for such was the brave Spirit of the Athenians, that the event was quite contrary, which happened upon this occasion. Alcibiades being Banished from Athens, aided the Lacedemonians for some time in the War, and was very useful to them, being an eloquent Orator, daring and bold, of the most


Page 317

noble Family, and the greatest Estate of any of the Citizens, and therefore esteemed the chief Man of Athens. This Man having a great desire to be re-call'd from his Banishment, did all he could to ingratiate himself into the People of Athens, by doing them some remarkable Service, at such a time as when they seem'd to be in the lowest ebb of Fortune. And therefore having a great interest in Pharnabazus, Darius's Lieutenant, and understanding that he design'd to send Three Hundred Ships to aid the Lacedemonians, prevail'd with him to alter his Resolution. For he suggested to him that it was not safe for the King to make the Lacedemonians too strong, nor for the advantage of the Persians: And that it was much more their interest to keep the Ballance equal, that so the Two Commonwealths might be in continual War one with another.

Pharnabazus conceiving Alcibiades had given him sound and wholsome Advice, sends back the Fleet to Phenicia: And thus the Aid intended for the Lacedemonians, was prevented by Alcibiades. A little time after, he was recall'd, and made General of the Army, and overcame the Lacedemonians in several Battels, and rais'd up his Country from their low Estate, to their former height of glory. But of these matters we shall speak more fully hereafter, lest we should transgress the due order of an History by too much Anticipation.

CHAP. IV.

The Government by Four Hundred abrogated in Athens. The Victory by the Athenians over the Lacedemonians at Sea, between Sestus and Abydus. The Persian Garrison driven out of Antandris by the help of the Lacedemonians. Twenty Two Years of the Peloponesian War ended. Here Thucydides ends his History.

AFter this Year was ended, Theopompus govern'd Athens, and the Romans invested Four Military Tribunes with Consular Dignity, Tiberius Posthumius, Caius Cornelius, Caius Valerius, and Caeso Fabius. At this time the Athenians abrogated the authority of the Four Hundred, and restor'd the Democracy. Theramenes was the Author of this Change (a sober and prudent Man) who was the only Person that advis'd the recalling of Alcibiades (by whom they recover'd their Strength) and by many other good Offices perform'd by Theramenes, to the advantage of the Publick, he gain'd great Authority and Favour with the People. But not long after, the following things happened.

At this time, in order to carry on the War, Two Generals were chosen by the Athenians, Thrasyllus and Thrasybulus, who randevouz'd a Fleet at Samos, and there train'd and exercis'd the Souldiers every Day to inure them to Fighting at Sea. Mindarus the Lacedemonian Admiral, in the mean while lay for some time at Miletus, expecting the Aids from Pharnabazus, and hearing that Three Hundred Gallies were arriv'd from Phenicia, was confident now he should be able with so great Supplies, utterly to ruin the Athenian State. But presently after having intelligence that the Fleet was return'd to Phenicia, through the persuasions of Alcibiades (being now out of all hopes of any assistance from him) he furnish'd some Ships he had with him, from Peloponesus, and from other Foreign Confederates, and sends Dorieus with Thirteen Sail, (which some of the Grecians had lately sent him out of Italy) to Rhodes: For he had heard that some innovations were contriving there; with the rest of the Fleet (to the number of Eighty Three) he made to the Hellespont, because he heard that the Athenian Navy lay at Samos. When the Athenian Commanders saw them pass by, they hasted after them with Threescore Sail. But the Lacedemonians arriving at Chios, the Athenians determined to sail to Lesbos, to be supplied with


Page 318

more Ships from their Confederates, lest they should be overpower'd by Number. 

While the Athenians were thus busied, Mindarus with the Lacedemonian Fleet in the Night, with all speed makes for the Hellespont, and the next Day arriv'd at Sigeum. The Athenians hearing that they were sail'd off from Chios, having receiv'd from their Confederates at the present only Three Gallies, made after the Lacedemonians; but when they came to Sigeum, they found the Lacedemonians were sail'd from thence, save only Three Gallies, which fell forthwith into their Hands. Loosing from thence, they came to Eleuntis, where they prepar'd themselves for a Sea-Fight. On the other side the Lacedemonians when they saw their Enemies were fitting themselves for a Conflict, they likewise for Five Days together imploy'd themselves in exercising and trying their Rowers, and then order'd their Fleet, which consisted of Eighty Eight Sail, into a Line of Battel, and stood towards the Asian Shoar. The Athenians on the other side, drew out theirs all along the Tract lying upon the Borders of Europe; they were indeed fewer in number, but far more skilful in Sea-Affairs. The Lacedemonians plac'd the Syracusians in the Right Wing, commanded by Hermocrates; the Peloponesians in the Left, under the Command of Mindarus. On the part of the Athenians, Thrasyllus commanded the Right, and Thrasybulus the Left Wing. At the first the great Contest was for the Tide, each striving to gain that. For a long time therefore they sail'd round one another; at length being in a narrow Sea, they fought for a commodious Station. For the Battel being between Sestus and Abydus, the Tide in those Streights was a great disadvantage to that side it forc'd upon. But the Athenian Pilots far excelling the other, by that means did notable Service, in many respects for the obtaining of the Victory.

For although the Peloponesians exceeded the other in Number of their Ships, and Valour of the Assailants, yet the Skill and Diligence of the Athenian Pilots over-ballanc'd all this, and made it of no effect; for when the Peloponesians with all their Force strove to pierce them, the Athenian Ships were plac'd in such excellent order, that no part of their Ships could be toucht, save only the very end of their Beaks. Upon which, Mindarus considering that they assaulted them in vain, commanded that a few Ships, singly by themselves should cope with the Enemy: But neither in this case was the diligence of the Pilots wanting; for with a little motion they easily declin'd the strokes of the Beaks of their Enemies Ships, and so pierced them in their broad-sides, that they disabled many. At length the Dispute waxing very hot, they not only pierc'd one another's Ships with their Beaks, but the Souldiers on the Decks Fought Hand to Hand: But neither side as yet could prevail. And now in the very heat of the Battel, there appear'd beyond a Promontory Five and Twenty Sail sent from Athens. Upon which the Peloponesians being in a Consternation at this suddain reinforcement, tackt about for Abydus, and were closely and eagerly pursu'd by the Athenians. And thus ended the Battel, in which all the Ships of the Syracusians, Palleneans and Leucadians, Eight of the Chians, Five of the Corinthians, and Eleven of the Ambraciats were taken by the Athenians, who on the other side lost Five, which were sunk. After this, the Army under Thrasybulus, erected a Trophy in the Promontory, where stands the Monument of Hecuba; and Messengers were sent to Athens, to give intelligence of the Victory; and he himself sail'd with the whole Fleet to Cyzion: For this City a little before the Battel, had revolted to Pharnabazus, Governour under Darius, and to Clearchus the Lacedemonian General. This Place not being fortify'd, was presently surrender'd, and after the Tribute agreed upon, was paid by them of Cyzium, the Fleet return'd to Sestus.

In the mean time, Mindarus the Laoedemonian Admiral, who fled to Abydus, resits the Shipping, and orders Epicles the Spartan to Eubea, to bring to him Gallies from thence; who hastens thither, and gets together Fifty Sail, and fothwith made to Sea; but in passing under Mount Athos, was overtaken with such a violent Tempest, that all the Fleet was lost, and not a Man escap'd, save only Twelve. In memory of this, there is an Inscription on a Monument at Coronea, as Ephorus observes in these Words.


Page 319

Out of the Fifty Gallies of Three Oars,

But poor Twelve Men on Rocks were thrown,

Of Athos Mount and sav'd. With Wind Sea roars,

Rest of the Men or Ships spares none.

About the same time Alcibiades with Thirteen Gallies, sail'd to them that lay at Anchor at Samos. The Athenians had before been inform'd, that (through the Persuasions of Alcibiades) Pharnabazus would not send the Three Hundred Ships (as he intended) in aid of the Lacedemonians. Being therefore courteously receiv'd by them that lay at Samos, he made some Proposals for his Return, and made many Promises to serve his Country to the utmost of his power, absolutely denying the Crimes laid to his Charge, and complain'd of his hard Fortune that he was compell'd (through the crafty Designs of the Enemies) to make use of his Arms against his Country. His Speech was highly applauded by the common Souldiers, and by Messengers reported at Athens; upon which he was absolv'd and created one of their Generals; for considering his Valour and great Interest every where amongst the Grecians, they hop'd it would be much for their advantage if they again receiv'd him into his favour. And besides, Theramenes one of the greatest authority in the Commonwealth, a Man eminent for Wisdom and Prudence as ever any before him, advis'd the recalling of Alcibiades. When the Messengers return'd to Samos with this account, Alcibiades joining Nine Ships more to these Thirteen he brought with him, sail'd to Halicarnassus, and there forc'd the City to pay him a great Sum of Money. And then making great devastations in Meropides, he returns with much Spoil to Samos; and there divides the Spoil as a common Booty, not only amongst his own Souldiers, but amongst them in Samos, and by that means gains them all over to his interest.

About this time, Antandros with the assistance of the Lacedemonians, drove the Garrison out of their City, and so restor'd their Country to their Liberty: For the Spartans being angry at Pharnabazus, for sending the Three Hundred Ships into Phenicia, entred into League with the Antandrians.

Here Thucydides breaks off his History, containing in Eight Books (which some divide into Nine) the Affairs of Two and Twenty Years. Xenophon and Theopompus begin theirs, where Thucydides ends. Xenophon continues his History for the term of Forty Eight Years; but Theopompus goes on with the Affairs of Greece Seventeen Years, and ends his History at the Sea-Fight at Cnidus, compriz'd in Twelve Books. Thus stood the state of Affairs in Greece and Asia at this time. In the mean time the Romans were in War with the Aequi, and entred their Country with a great Army, and besieg'd their City call'd Bolasus, and took it.


Page 320

CHAP. V.

Commotions in Sicily. The Carthaginians invited thither by the Aegistines. A Sea-Fight at Darclanum between the Athenians and Lacedemonians. A Sedition in Corcyra. The Sea-Fight at Cyzicum; and at Cleros by Land, wherein the Athenians were Victors.

THE former Year ended, Glaucippus was created Archon at Athens, and at Rome, Marcus Cornelius, and Lucius Furius were again chosen Consuls. About this time the Aegistines (who had confederated with the Athenians) after the War was ended in Sicily against the Syracusians) were in great fear (as they had just cause) lest the Siculi should revenge themselves upon them for the many acts of Hostility they committed against them. And therefore when the Selinuntines made War upon them concerning some Boundaries that were in Dispute, they submitted, lest the Syracusians should take that occasion to join with the Selinuntines, and so hazard the loss of their Country. But when they encroached farther upon their Territories than was agreed upon, the Aegistines desir'd aid of the Carthaginians, and freely offer'd their City to their Protection. When the Embassadors came to Carthage, and had deliver'd their Message to the Senate, the Carthaginians were much perplexed what to resolve: The desire of so convenient a City strongly inclin'd them upon one hand, and the fear of the Syracusians who had lately destroy'd so powerful an Army of the Athenians, discourag'd them on the other. But at length their Ambition to gain the City previal'd. The Answer therefore to the Embassadors was, that they would send them aid. For the management of this Affair (in case it should break out into a War) they made Hannibal General, who was then according to their Law chief Magistrate of Carthage. He was the Grandchild of Amilcar (who was kill'd at Himera at the Battel fought with Gelon) and Son of Ges

•on,

 who for killing of his Father, was Banish'd, and liv'd at Selinunta. Hannibal therefore in regard he bore a natural Hatred against the Grecians, and desired by his own Valour to wipe off the stain of his Family, was very earnest to make himself remarkable by some eminent Service for the advantage of his Country. Therefore when he understood that the Selinuntines were not satisfy'd with that part of Land which was yielded to them, he together with the Aegistines sends Embassadors to the Syracusians, referring the Controversie to their Determination; in Words seeming to propose all things fair and just; but in Truth with hopes that if the Selinuntines should decline the Arbitration, the Syracusians would cast off their Confederacy and League with them. But when the Selinuntines (who sent likewise their Embassadors) refused to stand to their Decision, and strongly opposed both the Carthaginean and Aegistean Embassadors, the Syracusians were at length resolved both to be at peace with the Carthaginians, and likewise to stand to their League with the Selinuntines. Upon which, when the Embassadors were return'd, the Carthaginians sent to the Aegistines Five Thousand Men from Africa, and Eight Hundred from Campania. These were formerly hired by the Calcideans for the assistance of the Athenians against the Syracusians, but after their overthrow sailing back, they knew not under whom to serve. The Carthaginians therefore bought them all Horses, and giving them large Pay, plac'd them in a Garrison at Aegista. But the Selinuntines who were then both Rich and Populous, valu'd not the Aegistines one jot.

At the first with a well form'd Army, they spoil'd the Country next adjoining to them; at length in regard they far exceeded the Aegistines in number, they despis'd them, and dispers'd themselves, ravaging all over the Country. The Aegistean Commanders watching their opportunity, with the help of the Carthagineans and Campanians, set upon them unawares: And the Assault being sudden and unexpected, they easily routed and put them to flight. They kill'd a Thousand, and took all their Baggage. After this Fight, both sides sent forth their Embassadors, the Selinuntines to the Syracusians, and the Aegistines


Page 321

to the Carthaginians for Aid; which being readily promis'd on both sides, this was the beginning of the Carthaginian War. The Carthaginians foreseeing the greatness of the War, committed the whole management thereof to Hannibal, giving him power to raise what Forces he thought sit, they themselves in the mean time providing all things necessary. Hannibal all that Summer, and the next Winter, raises many Mercenary Souldiers in Spain, and lists a great number of his own Citizens; and besides these, raises Men in every City throughout all Africa, and equips out a Fleet, intending the next Spring to pass over all his Forces into Sicily. In this Condition were the Affairs of Sicily at that time.

In the mean time Dorieus the Rhodean Admiral of the Italian Gallies, as soon as he had quieted the Tumult in Rhodes, passed over to the Hellespont, with a purpose to join Mindarus, who then lay at Abydus, getting together from all Parts, what Vessels he could from the Peloponesian Confederates. When Dorieus
was come as far as Sigeum of Troas, the Athenians (who then lay at Anchor at Sestos) having intelligence of his Course, made out against him with their whole Fleet of Seventy Four Sail. Dorieus altogether ignorant of the Preparations against him, sails on securely: But when he understood what a powerful Navy was making towards him, he was in great Consternation, and seeing no other means left to escape, fled to Dardanum, where he landed his Men; and placing a Garrison in the City, he forthwith furnish'd the Place with abundance of Arms, and plac'd his Souldiers, some upon the Foredecks of his Vessels, and others all along upon the Shoar. But the Athenians making up suddenly upon them; endeavour'd to hale off the Ships from the Shoar; and by pressing upon the Enemy in so many Places at once, they almost wearied them out. Mindarus the Peloponesian Admiral, hearing the Distress Dorieus was in, forthwith set Sail from Abidos with his whole Fleet, and made for the Promontory of 

•Dardanum,

 with Fourscore and Four Sail to assist him. The Land Forces likewise of Pharnabazus were near at Hand, to support the Lacedemonian Fleet. When the Navies came near one to another, both sides prepar'd to Fight. Mindarus commanding a Fleet of Ninety Seven Sail, plac'd the Syracusians in the Left Wing, and he himself commanded the Right. On the Athenians, Thrasybulus led the Right, and Thrasyllus the Left Wing. The Lines of Battel being thus disposed on both sides, and the Sign given by the Admirals, the Trumpets all at once sounded a Charge. And now the Rowers neglecting nothing on their part, and the Pilots every where minding with all diligence their several Helms, a Bloody Fight began. For as often as the Ships forc'd forwards to pierce one another, so often did the Pilots at the same instant of time carefully move and turn the Ship, that the Stroaks only fell upon the Beaks of the Vessels. The Souldiers upon the Decks when at first they saw their Broad-sides lye open to the Assaults of the Enemy, began to be discourag'd, but then again presently when they discern'd that the Charge made by the Enemy upon them was eluded by the Art of the Pilot, their Spirits and Courage reviv'd. Neither were they less active, who fought upon the Decks, for they who were at a distance, ply'd the Enemy continually with Darts, so that the Place where they fell, seem'd to be covered over. They who fought at Hand, threw their Launces one at another, sometimes piercing through the Bodies of their Opposers, and sometimes the Bodies of the Pilots themselves. If the Ships fell fowl upon one another, then they disputed it with their Spears: And many times when they came close, they would board one another, and fight it out with their Swords. What with the doleful Complaints of them that were hastening in to the Succour of those that were worsted, and the triumphing Shouts of them that were Conquerors, every Place was full of Noise and Confusion. The Fight continu'd a long time with great obstinacy on both sides, till on a sudden Alcibiades (who was meerly by chance sailing from Samos to the Hellespont with Twenty Ships) came in view. Before he came near, both sides hop'd to have Succour from them. And both being confident, they fought with more Resolution on both sides. When he drew near (the Lacedemonians being still in the dark) he presently set up a Purple Flag from his own Ship as a Sign to the Athenians, as it was before order'd and agreed. Upon which, the Lacedemonians in a great Fright forthwith fled. But the Athenians incouraged with this happy success, pursu'd them with all their might, and presently


Page 322

took Ten of their Ships; but afterwards a great Storm arose, which much obstructed them in the Pursuit: For the Sea was so raging, that the Pilots were not able to manage the Helm, nor could they make any impression with the Beaks of their Ships upon the Enemy, because the Ships aim'd at, were born back by the violence of the Waves.

At length the Lacedemonians came safe to Shoar, and March'd to the Land-Army of Pharnabazus: The Athenians in the mean time endeavour'd to gain the Empty Ships, and press'd on with great Valour and Confidence through many hazards and difficulties; but being kept off by the Persian Army, they were forc'd to return to Sestus. Pharnabazus was the more earnest in opposing the Athenians, to the end he might convince the Lacedemonians that he had no ill Design against them, when he sent back the Three Hundred Gallies to Phenicia: For he told them he did it, because at that time the King of Egypt and Arabia had some Designs upon Phenicia. After this issue of the Fight at Sea, the Athenian Fleet arriv'd at Sestus in the Night: And as soon as it was Day, and all their Fleet was got up together, they set up another Trophy near to the former. Mindarus arriv'd at Abydus about the First watch of the Night, and falls a repairing his shatter'd and disabled Ships, and sends to the Lacedemonians for Supplies both of Land and Sea-Forces. For whilst his Fleet was repairing, he determin'd with his Land Souldiers to join with Pharnabazus, and to besiege the Confederate Cities of the Athenians in Asia: The Calcideans, and almost all the Eubeans had deserted the Athenians, and therefore were now in great fear (in regard they inhabited an Island) lest the Athenians being Masters at Sea, would invade them; they solicited therefore the Beotians to assist them to stop up Euripus, by which Eubea might be annexed to the Continent of Beotia. To which the Beotians agreed, beause by this means Eubea would be but as the Continent to them, and an Island to others. Hereupon all the Cities set upon the Work, and every one strove with all diligence to perfect it. And Orders were sent forth not only to the Citizens, but all Foreigners and Strangers, to attend upon the Business; and all Hands were to be at Work, that it might be with all speed effected. The Mould began at Calcis in Eubea on the one side, and at Aulis in Beotia on the other: For here it was the narrowest. In these straits the Sea was very boisterous and rugged, but after this Work much more unquiet and raging, the Passage being made so very strait and narrow: For there was left only room for one Ship to pass. There were Forts built on both sides upon the extremities of the Mould, and Wooden Bridges made over the Current for Communication.

Theramenes, indeed at the first being sent thither with Thirty Sail, endeavour'd to hinder the Project, but being over-power'd with the Number of those that defended them that were imploy'd, he gave over his Design, and made away towards the Islands. And purposing to relieve the Confederate Cities who were under the burden of Contributions, he wasted and spoiled the Enemies Country, and return'd loaden with much Spoil and Plunder. He went likewise to some of the Confederate Cities, and impos'd upon them great Mulcts and Fines, because he understood that they were secretly contriving some Changes and Innovations. Thence he sail'd to Paros, and freeing the People from the Oligarchy there, he restor'd the Democracy, and exacted a great Sum of Money from them who set up the Oligarchy.

About the same time, a cruel and bloody Sedition arose in Corcyra, which is said to be occasion'd through private Grudges and Animosities, as much as any other Cause. In no City of that time, were ever such horrid Murthers of the Citizens committed, nor ever was more Rage to the destruction of Mankind heard of: For once before this, in their quarrelling one with another, there were Fifteen Hundred Slaughter'd, and all of them the chiefest of the Citizens. But these Murders following were much more miserable, the Sparks of old Discords being blown up into a devouring Flame: For they in authority at Corcyra, aspiring to an Oligarchy, sided with the Lacedemonians, but the People favour'd the Athenians.

These Two People contending for the Sovereignty, took different measures: The Lacedemonians set up an Oligarchy in the Cities of their Confederates; but the Athenians establish'd every where in theirs, a Democracy.


Page 323

The Corcyrians therefore discerning that the great Men of their City intended to betray them into the Hands of the Lacedemonians, sent to Athens for a Garrison, for the defence of their City; upon which, Conon the Athenian Admiral, sails to Corcyra, and leaves there Six Hundred Messenians drawn out from Naupactus; and passing from thence with the Fleet, anchor'd at Juno's Temple.

In the mean time, Six Hundred of them that were for the Democracy, rush'd into the Forum, and forthwith set upon them that sided with the Lacedemonians, casting some into Prisons, killing others, and driving above a Thousand out of the City. And because they feared the number and strength of the Exiles, they manumitted all the Slaves, and infranchiz'd all the Strangers. The Exiles presently fly into the Continent to Epirus, lying over against them. A few Days after, some of the People who favour'd them that were ejected, enter'd the Forum in Arms, and sending for the Exiles into the City, laid all at stake, and fought it out. When Night parted them, Proposals were made for a Pacification, which taking effect, they all continu'd in their Country with equal Priviledges. And this was the issue of the flight of the Exiles from Corcyra.

At the same time Archelaus King of Macedonia march'd against the Pydneans, who had revolted, and besieg'd their City with a great Army; to whose assistance Theramenes came with some Ships; but the Siege continuing longer than he expected, he return'd to Thrace to Thrasybulus the Admiral of the whole Fleet. But Archelaus at length takes Pydnea after a strait Siege, and removes the Inhabitants Twenty Furlongs further from the Sea.

The Winter now near an end, Mindarus randezouzes his Shipping from all Quarters; for many came both from Peloponesus, and other Confederates. The Athenian Generals who lay at Sestus, hearing of the great Preparations of their Enemies, were in no small fear lest if they should be set upon with their whole Fleet at once, they should lose all their Navy; and therefore hailing down those Ships they had laid up at Sestus, they sail'd round Chersonesus, and Anchor'd at Cardia, and thence sent to Thrace to Thrasibulus and Theramenes to come to them with the whole Fleet with all speed: Alcibiades likewise they re-call'd from Lesbos. So that now the Fleet was brought together with that Expedition, that the Admirals long'd to fight, and put all to the hazard of a Battel.

In the mean time Mindarus the Lacedemonian Admiral sails in a direct Course for Cyzicum, and there lands all his Forces, and besieges the City. Pharnabazus joins him with a great Army, and by his Assistance takes the Place by Storm. Upon which the Athenian Admirals were resolv'd to make for Cyzicum; and to that end they advanced with their whole Fleet, and sailing round Chersonesus, arriv'd at Eleuntis. Then they contriv'd all they could to pass by Abydus in the Night, lest the Enemy should have intelligence of the number of their Ships: Sailing thence to Preconnesus, they there lay at Anchor all Night. The next day they landed their Men in the Territories at Cyzicum, with a command to Chareas (who led the Army) to march strait to Cyzicum. The Fleet was divided into Three Squadrons, one under the Command of Alcibiades, another under Theramenes, and the Third commanded by Thrasybulus. Alcibiades made out with his Squadron far from the rest, and dar'd the Lacedemonians to Fight. Theramenes and Thrasybulus us'd their utmost endeavour to close in the Enemy, so as to prevent their Sailing back to the City. When Mindarus saw only that part of the Fleet which was with Alcibiades, (having no intelligence of the rest) he despised them, and with Fourscore Sail (in great Confidence) attacks them. When he came near to Alcibiades, the Athenians (as they were commanded) counterfeited a Flight: Whereupon the Peloponesians with great joy hotly pursu'd them as Conquerors: But when Alcibiades saw that he had decoy'd and drawn them far off from the City, he lifts up his Sign from his Ship. At which, all his Squadron at one instant tackt about full in front upon the Enemy: Theramenes and Thrasybuls in the mean time making to the City, left them no way to return. Upon this, they that were with Mindarus, considering the strength of their Enemies, and perceiving how they were outwitted, were in a great Consternation. At length the Athenians appearing on every side, and the return of the Peloponesians to the City intercepted, Mindarus was forc'd to fly to a Place upon that Coast call'd Cleros, where Pharnabazus was encamp'd with his Army. But Alcibiades making a hot Pursuit after them, sunk and took many


Page 324

of their Ships, and forcing the rest upon the Shoar, endeavour'd to hale them thence with grapling Irons. Upon this, there was a greater Slaughter among the Athenians, in regard the Army upon the Shoar assisted the Peloponesians. And indeed the Athenians (lifted up with their Victory) evidenc'd more Valour than Prudence; for the Peloponesians far exceeded them in number; and the Army of Pharnabazus assisted the Lacedemonians with great resolution, and fighting from Land, had the advantage of a certain and fixt station. But when Thrasybulus saw the aid that was given to the Enemy from the Land, he landed the rest of his Men with all speed, in order to succour Alcibiades; and commanded Theramenes, that with all expedition he should join the Foot under the Command of Chares, and fight the Enemy at Land. Whilst these Orders were in executing, Mindarus the Lacedemonian General, bore all the brunt in preserving of the Ships Alcibiades had laid hold on. Clearchus the Spartan, with the Peloponesians and Mercenary Persians fought with Thrasybulus, who for some considerable time, with his Seamen and Archers bore up with great Valour against the Enemy, killing many of them, but not without great loss of his own: And just when the Athenians were inclos'd round with the Souldiers of Pharnabazus, on a sudden falls in Theramenes with his own and Chares his Foot. Upon this, those with Thrasybulus, who were before almost spent, and quite out of Heart, gather'd Courage; so the Fight was renew'd, and continu'd very hot and sharp a long time after; till the first that gave ground were the Persians, and by little and little their whole Body began to break in pieces. At length the Peloponesians with Clearchus being forsaken of their Fellows (after many Wounds given and receiv'd, and Slaughters on both sides) were forc'd likewise to give Ground. These being thus broken and dispers'd, Theramenes hasted to assist Alcibiades, who was sorely press'd in another part. And though now all the Athenian Forces were join'd together, yet Mindarus was not at all startled at the approach of Theramenes, but divides the Peloponesians into Two Bodies, and commands the one to ingage the fresh Supply, and keeping the other with himself, earnestly adjures them that they would not stain the honour of the Spartan Name; especially when the business was now to be disputed with Alcibiades by a Fight at Land. And now the Battel for the safety of the Ships was renew'd with great Gallantry; and Mindarus in the Head of his Men, exposing himself to all manner of Dangers, beats down many of his Enemies; but at length was kill'd by the Souldiers of Alcibiades, though he fought with that Valour as was agreeable to the fame and glory of his Country. Upon his Death the Peloponesians and their consederates all as one Man fled with great consternation. The Athenians pursu'd them for a while, but understanding that Pharnabazus was hastning after them with a great Party of Horse, they return'd to their Ships; and having regain'd the * City, they set up Two Trophies, one for their Victory at Sea near the Island Polydorus, as it is call'd, the other for that at Land, where the Enemy first began to fly. The Peloponesians who were left to guard the City, with those that escap'd out of the Battel, march'd away to Pharnabazus his Camp. The Athenians being now possess'd of all the Ships, and of a great number of Prisoners, were loaden with abundance of Spoil, the Fruits of the Conquest of Two Potent Armies.

When the News of this Victory was brought to Athens, the Success was so unexpected after all their former Losses, that the People were surpriz'd with Joy at such a happy turn of Fortune, and offered Sacrifices to the Gods, and instituted Festivals: And upon this was rais'd a Thousand-Foot, and a Hundred Horse of the most Valiant of the Citizens for the carrying on of the War. The City likewise sent to Alcibiades a Supply of Thirty Sail, to incourage him with greater Confidence (especially now when they were Masters at Sea) to set upon the Cities who sided with the Lacedemonians.


Page 325

CHAP. VI.

The Spartans seek for Peace. The Speech of Endius. The Athenians refuse.

THe Lacedemonians receiving certain intelligence of their rout at Cyzicum, sent Embassadors to Athens to treat of Peace, the chief of whom was Endius. When he was admitted Audience, he came in, and spoke in the Laconick manner, in a short and pithy Stile; whose Oration I judge not fitting to omit.

The Oration of Endius.

WE have determin'd to make Proposals of Peace to you, O ye Athenians, upon these Conditions, That the Cities gain'd on either side be retain'd: That the Garrisons every where be dismiss'd: That all Prisoners be releas'd, one Athenian for one Laconian: For we are not ignorant that the War is very mischievous to us both, but much more to you, which I shall make apparent from the things themselves, if you hearken a while to what I say. For our use all Peloponesus is improv'd and sow'd, but of Attica which is not so large, you have but a part in Tillage. This War has brought over many Confederates to the Laconians; on the contrary, the Athenians have lost as many as we have gain'd. The richest King of the World maintains our Armies, but you force the charge of the War from the poorest of the Nations. Our Souldiers therefore being so well paid, fight chearfully, but yours (being forc'd every one to bear their own Charges) seek to avoid both the Toyl and the Expence. Moreover, when our Fleet is out at Sea, we are more in want of Ships than Men; but the greatest part of your Men are in your Ships. And that which is most considerable, although we are inferior to you at Sea, yet by the Agreement of all we are your Superiors at Land; for the Spartan knows not how to fly in a Battel at Land. On the other hand you fight at Sea, not with any hopes to gain the Sovereignty at Land, but to preserve your selves from utter Destruction. Now it remains that I give you satisfaction, why when we thus far excel you in feats of Arms, we should seek to you for Peace. In truth, though I cannot say, that Sparta has gain'd any thing by this War, yet I dare affirm their Damage has not been so great as that of the Athenians. But it's the height of folly, to take pleasure in common Calamities, because our Enemies are Fellow Sufferers; whereas it had been much better neither of us had had the Experience. Neither does the content and satisfaction by the destruction of thine Enemy, ballance the sorrow that is conceiv'd at the loss of thy Friend. But it is not for these Reasons only that we desire to put an end to the War, but we are prompted hereunto by the Custom of our Country; for when we saw by these Wars so many horrid Murthers, and so much Blood lamentably shed, we conceiv'd it our duty to make it manifest both to the Gods and Men, that we are the least concern'd in the causing of it.

When the Laconian had spoke this and some other things to the like effect, the more moderate of the Athenians were inclin'd to Peace; but those who were accustom'd to sow the Seeds of Dissention, and to make a private gain of the publick Disorders, were for War. Of this Opinion was Cleopho, a Man of great interest among the People, who coming into the Assembly after he had said many things pertinent to the business in hand, he chiefly incourag'd the People, by magnifying the greatness of their late Successes, and urging all in such a manner as if Fortune (contrary to her usual Custom) had now forgot to dispose and order the Successes of War, by turns and mutual Changes to each


Page 326

side. But the Athenians at length ru'd this mischievous Advice which was so little to their advantage; for being thus deceiv'd with flattering Discourses fram'd only to please, they were brought so low, that they could never after recover their former Strength and Grandeur; but these things shall be hereafter related in their due Place. The Athenians therefore (being thus puff'd up with their Victories, and being very confident because Alcibiades was their General) concluded they should recover their former Esteem and Reputation in a short time.

CHAP. VII.

Hannibal the Carthaginian invades Sicily. The miserable destruction of Selinunte. The ruin likewise of Himera. The Acts of Hermocrates in Sicily.

THE Affairs of this Year thus ended, Diocles was chosen Magistrate of Athens, and at Rome, Quintus Fabius and Caius Furius were Consuls. At that time Hannibal the Carthaginian General musters an Army out of Spain and Africa, and puts them on Borad Threescore long Gallies, and provides Fifteen Hundred Transport Ships, to convey Provision, Engines, Weapons, and all other things necessary for a Siege. Passing over the African Sea with his Navy, he arriv'd at Lilibeum, a Promontory in Sicily over against Africa. About the same time, some Selinuntine Horsemen being in those Parts, when they saw so great a Fleet make towards them, speeded away in all haste, to give intelligence to their Countrymen of the Approach of the Enemy. Upon which, the Selinuntines dispatch'd Messengers to Syracuse, to desire Aid. In the mean time Hannibal landed his Army, and markt out his Camp, beginning at a Pond call'd at that time Lilibeum; but many Years after, it gave name to a Town built in that Place.

Hannibal's whole Army (as Ephorus relates) consisted of Two Hundred Thousand Foot, and Four Thousand Horse. Timeus says, they were not much above an Hundred Thousand. He drew up all his Ships into the Creek near Motys, intending the Syracusians should hereby be assur'd, that he invaded not Sicily with a design to make War upon them either by Sea or Land. Then being join'd by the Aegestines and other Confederates, he rais'd his Camp from Lilibeum, and march'd towards Selinunte. When he came to the River Mazarus, he takes Emporium at the first Assault. Approaching afterwards nearer to the City, he divides his Army into Two Parts, and encamping round the City, raises his Engines and Batteries, and begins to assault the Town with great Vigour: For he built Six high Towers, and brought as many Battering Rams to the Walls, and with the multitude of his Darters and Slingers forc'd the Citizens from the Forts and Bulwarks. The Selinuntines had been now a long time disus'd from Sieges; and in regard they were the only People of Sicily that sided with the Carthaginians against Gelon, they little expected they should have been brought into such Dangers by them whom they had so far engag'd; and therefore were in great Consternation and Amazement, seeing the abundance of Engines, the greatness of the Army and imminent Danger wherewith they were inviron'd. Yet they were not altogether without hope; but expecting speedy Aid from Syracuse and other Confederate Cities, all the People as one Man join'd together, and drove the Enemy from the Walls. The Young Men couragiously slighted all Hazards: The Old Men ran from Place to Place upon the Walls to furnish the other from time to time with all things necessary for the defence, beseeching them not to suffer the Enemy to enter. The Women and Children brought Meat and Weapons to them who were fightfor their Country, not regarding that Modesty and Sobriety which in times


Page 327

of Peace they were commendable for: The Fear was so great, that even Women were regardless of the Dangers.

Hannibal promis'd the Plunder of the Town to his Souldiers, applies his Engines to the Walls, and with the best of his Souldiers (whom he reliev'd from time to time with fresh Supplies) begins the Assault. At the first Word of Command, at one instant the Trumpets sounded to Battel, and the whole Army with a great Shout ran up to their several Posts; the Walls were batter'd by the Rams, and the Souldiers from the High Towers, gall'd the Selinuntines with their Darts: For the Selinuntines injoying a long Peace, their Hands were not inur'd to Action, and therefore were easily driven from thence, the Wooden Towers being far higher than they. In the mean time, part of the Wall being batter'd down, the Campanians willing to make themselves remarkable, on a sudden, rush'd into the City, and at the first greatly terrify'd those that were in that part of it; but presently many coming in to assist them, the Enemy was repuls'd with great Loss: For the Rubbish lying in the way where they enter'd, when they were driven back to the Breach, they were so cumber'd, that many were cut off. Night approaching, the Carthaginians drew off.

In the mean time the Selinuntines sent forth some Horsemen in the Night to Agrigentum, Gela and Syracuse, to desire aid with all speed; for that they were not able any longer to stand it out against so great an Army. The Geleans and Agrigentines thought it best to wait for the Aids from Syracuse, that with conjoin'd Forces they might set upon the Carthaginians. But the Syracusians having certain intelligence that Selinunte was Besieg'd, without delay struck a Peace with the Chalcideans (with whom they were then in War) and gather'd all their Forces together from every Place. But because they suppos'd that the City was only Besieg'd, and not in any danger to be suddenly taken, they protracted the time to make the greater Preparation. In the mean time, Hannibal as soon as it was light, renew'd the Assault on every side of the Town, and presently possess'd himself of that part of the Wall where the Breach was made, and of another Breach made in another part near adjoining; and when he had remov'd the Rubbish, with the choicest of his fresh Men he sets upon the Selinuntines, and forces them by degrees to give Ground, but was not able quite to break them, who now had all at stake. Many fell on both sides. The Carthaginians were still supply'd with fresh Men, but the Selinuntines had none to reinforce them. And thus the Assault was renew'd every Day, for the space of Nine Days, with great Resolution and Courage, and much loss on both sides. At length when the Iberians began to enter at the Breaches, the Women from the tops of the Houses, fill'd all Places with Cries and Lamentations. And the Selinuntines now judging the Town to be lost, endeavour'd to block up all the nar̄row Passages and Streets, and by that means the Contest continu'd a long time. But while the Carthaginians were making their way by force, the Women and Children from the Tops of the Houses mawl'd them with Tiles and Stones; so that the Carthaginians for a long time were sorely gall'd, not being able to come up together in those narrow Passages, the Walls on both sides being strongly man'd; and besides being so vex'd with those that cast down Stones upon the Tops of the Houses. This throwing down of Darts and other things from the Roofs of the Houses, continu'd till Evening: But the Carthaginians still renewing the Fight, by pouring fresh Men into the City, the other were tir'd out, their number decreasing, and their Enemies still increasing, so that the Selinuntines were at last forc'd to desert the Straits.

The City thus taken, nothing was to be seen but weeping and wailing among the Grecians; and on the other side among the Barbarians, exultation and shouts of Victory: Those were terrify'd with the greatness of their Misery every where before their Eyes; These now Victorious, commanded to kill and destroy where and whom they pleas'd: At length the Selinuntines got in a Body together in the Market-Place, and there fought it out to the last Man. The Barbarians raging in all Parts of the City, rifled all the Houses: The Persons they found there, they either burnt them and their Houses together, or dragging them into the Streets, without any respect to Age or Sex, whether they were Women or Children, Young or old, without the least pity or commiseration, they put them all to the Sword, and after the barbarous manner of their


Page 328

Country, they mangled their Carcases; some carry'd about multitudes of Hands tied round their Bodies; others in Ostentation, bore about the Heads of the Slain upon the Points of their Swords and Spears. They only spar'd Wives who fled with their Children to the Temples; and to these only was Favour shew'd, not out of any Compassion to the Miserable, but out of a fear they had lest the Women being desperate, without any hopes of Mercy, should burn the Temples, and by that means they should lose the Riches and Treasures that were laid up in those Places. For these Barbarians so far exceed all other Men in Impiety, that whereas others (lest they should offend the Deity) always spare them who fly to their Temples, the Carthaginians on the contrary moderate their Cruelty towards their Enemies, for that very end and purpose that they may have a better opportunity sacrilegiously to rob the Temples. The razing and ruining of the City continu'd till late in the Night; all the Houses were burnt or pull'd down; every Place was full of Blood and dead Bodies, Sixteen Thousand being there put to the Sword, and more than Five Thousand carry'd away Captives. The Grecians who sided with the Carthaginians, seeing the inconstancy of the things of this Life, greatly commiserated the condition of these miserable People; for the Matrons in want of Food and Sustenance amongst the Flouts and Jeers of an insulting Enemy, pass'd all that Night in sorrow and sadness. Some of them were forc'd to be Eye-Witnesses of the sufferings of their Daughters in such a kind as is shameful to relate; for the cruel Lust of the Barbarians sparing neither Girls nor Virgins grown up, afflicted these poor People with unspeakable Misery. The Mothers while they considered the Slavery they were to undergo in Lybia, and how they and their Children were subjected in great Contempt and Disgrace to the brutish Lusts of domineering Masters (whose Language they understood not, and whose Actions were altogether Beastly) were in Grief and Sorrow even to see their Children alive; for every Injury and Disgrace offer'd to them, affected them, as if a Dagger had pierc'd their own Hearts, when they were not able to yield them any other Relief but Groans and Lamentations; in so much as they accounted their Parents and Kindred that had lost their Lives in the defence of their Country, to be happy, whose Eyes saw not those Brutish and Beastly acts of Barbarous Cruelty. There were notwithstanding, Two Thousand Six Hundred that escap'd and fled to Agrigentum, where they were received with all manner of Humanity and Tenderness; for the Agrigentines distributed to every Family, Corn out of the Publick Stores, and desir'd every private Person (who yet were very ready on their own accord) liberally to supply them with all necessaries for their Sustenance.

While these things were doing, Three Thousand of the best Souldiers sent from Syracuse to assist the Selinuntines, came to Agrigentum. But when they heard that the City was taken, they sent Embassadors to Hannibal, to demand the Redemption of the Prisoners, and that he would forbear robbing of the Temples of the Gods. They return'd with this Answer from Hannibal, that in regard the Selinuntines were not able to preserve their own Liberty, they were now justly brought into the condition of Slaves. That the Gods were angry at the Inhabitants, and therefore had forsaken Selinunte. But when they sent Empediones Embassador a Second time, Hannibal restor'd to him all his Estate, because he always favour'd the Carthaginians, and sometime before the City was taken, had advised the Citizens not to withstand: He pardon'd likewise all those Prisoners that were of his Kindred, and permitted those that fled to Agrigentum to repeople the City, and till the Lands, upon paying Tribute to the Carthaginians. Thus was this City taken, Two Hundred and Fifty Two Years after the Building of it.

After Hannibal had demolish'd it, he march'd away with all his Army toward Himera, with a longing desire to ruin this City. For this Town occasion'd the Banishment of his Father; and here it was that his Grandfather Amilcar was routed by Gelon, who kill'd an Hundred and Fifty Thousand of the Carthaginians, and took almost as many Prisoners. In revenge whereof, Hannibal speeds away with Forty Thousand Men, and incamps upon an Hill at some distance from the City, and with the rest of his Army (to whom join'd the Sicilians and Sicanians, to the number of Twenty Thousand Men) he Besieges


Page 329

the Place, and Batters the Walls with his Engines in several Places at once; and with fresh Succours even wearies out the Besieg'd; to the effecting of which, the forwardness of his Men (through the late Successes) was of no small advantage. Whilst he was undermining the Walls, he supported them with great Pieces of Timber, and then setting them on Fire, a great part of the Walls on a sudden tumbled down; upon which there was a sharp Conflict: These striving to enter by force, the other in dread of undergoing the same fate and destruction with them of Selinunte; so that the Besieged endeavouring with all their might, to defend their Parents, Children and Country, beat the Barbarians off, and with all speed repair'd the Wall. For there had before come to their assistance Four Thousand Syracusians, and some other Confederates from Agrigentum, under the Command of Diocles the Syracusian. Then Night coming on, it gave a check to the Fury of the Besiegers, and so there was an intermission of the Assault.

But as soon as it was Day, the Besieged resolving not to be pen'd up as the Selinuntines were (through Sloathfulness) plac'd the Guards upon the Walls, and with the rest of their own, and the Forces of their Confederates, to the number of Ten Thousand, made a Sally, and broke in on a suddain upon the Enemy. Whereupon the Barbarians were struck with Terror and Amazement, conceiving that all the Confederates of the Besieg'd were come to their Relief. The Salliants therefore being far more daring and skilful in their Weapons, and especially the last hope of their safety lying in the good Success of the present Engagement, they cut off all those that first opposed them. And though the whole force of the Barbarians in great disorder and confusion fell upon them (for they never suspected that the Besiegd durst ever have attempted any such thing) yet they were under no small disadvantages; for Fourscore Thousand Men running in Confusion together, beat down one another, and more incommodated themselves than their Enemies. The Himereans in the mean time being in sight of their Parents, Children, and all their Friends and Relations upon the Walls, exposed themselves without fear, to all dangers for the common safety. The Barbarians therefore astonish'd with the Valour of the Enemy, and unexpectedness of the Onset, turn'd their Backs, and fled in great precipitation to their Fellows incampt upon the Hill, whom the Himereans pursu'd, calling one to another not to give any Quarter. In this Encounter there were kill'd of the Carthaginians above Six Thousand (as Timeus relates) but Ephorus says Twenty Thousand. Hannibal when he saw his Souldiers so distressed, drew out those that were encamped, and came to the Relief of his shattered Troops, setting upon the Himereans now in disorder by the Pursuit: Upon which, there began another sharp Dispute, in which, at length the Himereans were put to flight; but Three Thousand of them stood their Ground, and bore the brunt of the whole Carthaginian Army; and after they had signaliz'd their Valour, all died upon the Spot.

After this Fight, Five and Twenty Gallies which were sometime before sent to the aid of the Lacedemonians from the Siculi, now returning Home, arriv'd at Himera; but a Rumour spread through the City, that the Syracusians with all their Forces and Confederates were come to the Relief of the Himereans. Hannibal in the mean time imbarques many of his best Souldiers in his Gallies which lay at Motys, in order to Sail for Syracuse, to surprize the City now that it wanted sufficient 

•

trength to defend it as he suppos'd. And therefore Diocles, Commander in chief of them who were sent in aid of the Himereans, advis'd the Captains of the Vessels to sail with all speed to Syracuse, lest when they had lost the best of their Souldiers, in the next Fight, their own City should be taken by force. To which end it was thought advisable to leave the City for a while, and to imbarque one half of Diocles's Forces to go along with the Fleet till they were past the Coasts of Himera, and to leave the other half for the defence of the City till the Gallies return'd. The Himereans took this grievously, but being it was not in their power to do otherwise, Gallies were fill'd in the Night, with Women and Children, and other things to be transported to Messena.

Then Diocles with those under his Command, prepar'd for his Journey back into his own Country, leaving the Bodies of them that were slain unbury'd. And so many of the Himereans with their Wives and Children went along with him,


Page 330

as could not be otherwise transported for want of Shipping. But they that were left for the defence of the City, watcht every Night in Arms upon the Bulwarks. And although the Carthaginiaus constantly upon the approach of Day made frequent Assaults in every Place found the City, yet they upon the Walls indefatigably bore the brunt, believing the Ships would return speedily; to which very Day they held it out couragiously: But the next Day after that the Fleet was in sight far off, at that instant the Wall was batter'd down by the Engines, and the Spanish Regiment in a full Body, rusht into the City, part of the Barbarians forcing the Guard from the Walls, and another part that possessing the Breaches, made way for the rest of the Army to enter. At length the City was enter'd, and the Barbarians with all Savage Cruelty, kill'd all in their way, till by the Command of Hannibal they forbore their Butcheries: In the mean time, the Souldiers plunder'd all the Houses of all things valuable. Here Hannibal robb'd and spoil'd all the Temples, and after he had taken out those that fled thither for Refuge, he set them on Fire, and raz'd the City to the Ground, Two Hundred and Forty Years after the setling of the Inhabitants there. Among the Prisoners, the Women and Children he commanded to be kept safe; but the Men, to the number of Three Thousand, he caus'd to be brought to a rising Ground there near at Hand, where Amilcar his Grandfather perish'd by the Army of Gelon, and there with all sorts of Taunts, and marks of Disgrace, put them all to the Sword. Afterwards he disbanded many of his Forces, among the rest, he sent the Sicilians, who sided with him, to their several Countries, and with them the Campanians, who made great complaint of the Injustice of the Carthaginians, for that they contributing so much to their Successes, had not rewarded them proportionably to the Services they had done them in the War.

However Hannibal ship'd his Army, leaving a small Guard with his Confederates, and with his Transport Ships and Gallies loos'd from Sicily, and arriv'd at Carthage, loaden with abundance of Prey. The whole City came out to meet him, and receiv'd him with loud and joyful Acclamations, as a General that had performed greater things by far in so short a time than ever any before him.

At this time Hermocrates the Syracusian returned into Sicily. He was in great Esteem among the Syracusians, because in the War against the Athenians, he was remarkably serviceable to his Country. He was afterwards sent as Admiral with Thirty Five Sail to the aid of the Lacedemonians; but by a contrary Faction at Home, being condemn'd to Banishment, he deliver'd up the Command of the Fleet in Peloponesus, to those who were deputed by the Government. Afterwards having receiv'd a considerable Sum of Money from Pharnabazus, whose Favourite he was, he sail'd to Messina, and there built Five Gallies, and hir'd a Thousand Souldiers with his own Money; and taking likewise with him a Thousand of those that were forc'd from Himera, he attempted with the help of his Friends to return to Syracuse: But being prevented in this Design, he march'd up into the Country to Selinunte, and took in part of the City with a Wall, and got together as many of the Selinuntines as surviv'd the late Destruction, and with them and many others which he receiv'd into the Place, he made up a Body of Six Thousand choice Men. From thence he made an Excursion, and spoil'd the Country of the Moty

•ans,

 overcame them that issu'd out of the City against them, and kill'd many of them, driving the rest within their Walls. Presently after, he broke into the Borders of the Panormitans, and carry'd away abundance of Plunder. He kill'd likewise Five Hundred of the Citizens that stood in Battalia before their City to oppose him, and shut up the rest within their Walls, and wasted and spoil'd likewise all the other Countries that were subject to the Carthaginians, for which he was in high Esteem among the Sicilians. Hereupon the Syracusians likewise presently began to repent, when they saw that they had Banisht one whose Valour merited so much to the contrary: So that when he was often nam'd and discours'd of in Publick Assemblies, the People gave many hints and signs of their desire to have him recall'd. Hermocrates therefore understanding that his Name was up among the Syracusians, us'd his utmost endeavour to return, knowing that his Enemies and Rivals would oppose it with all their Might: And thus stood things in Sicily at this time.


Page 331

CHAP. VIII.

Thrasybulus assaults Ephesus. The Lacedemonians besiege Pylus; surrender Chalcedon, besieg'd by Theramenes; and afterward Byzantium, which was betray'd to Alcibiades.

IN Greece, Thrasybulus sent from Athens with a Fleet of Thirty Sail well man'd, and with a great Army of Foot, and an Hundred Horse, sail'd to Ephesus; where landing his Men in two places, he assaulted the City; but the Townsmen making a brisk Sally, there began a sharp Engagement; in which four hundred of the Athenians were kill'd, for the whole Strength of the City fell upon them, the rest getting to their Ships. Thrasybulus loos'd from thence to Lesbos. But the Athenian Generals, who lay at Cyzicum, pass'd over to Chalcedon, and built a Fort call'd Chrysopolis, putting into it a sufficient Garrison; and commanded the Governors to exact the Tenth part of all Shipping, that pass'd that way from Pontus. Afterwards the Forces were divided, and Theramenes was left with fifty Sail to besiege Chalcedon and Byzantium. But Thrasybulus was sent into Thrace, and brought the Cities of that Country, under the Power of the Athenians. Alcibiades having sent away Thrasybulus with thirty Sail with the rest of the Fleet, arriv'd at the Province of Pharnabasus. There they wasted and spoil'd all that large Tract, and fill'd the Souldiers with Plunder, and the Generals themselves got together a great sum of Mony, by the Sale of the Spoils, with a Design to case the People of the burden of their Contributions.

The Lacedemonians understanding that the Athenian Forces were still about the Hellespont, sent Forces against Pylus, where the Messenians were in Garrison. At Sea indeed they had Eleven Ships, of which Five were of Sicily, man'd with Spartans; but their Land Army was but small. With these they besieg'd the Fort, both by Land and Sea. But when Intelligence was brought of this, the Athenians sent out Thirty Sail, under the Command of Anytus, the Son of Anthemion, to the Relief of the Besieg'd. In his Passing thither, a great Storm arose, so that not being able to recover Malea, he return'd to Athens. Upon which the People of Athens were so incens'd, that they condemn'd him to die as a Traitor: Anytus brought into this imminent Danger, redeem'd his Life with a Sum of Money; who is reported to be the First Athenian that ever revers'd a Sentence for Money. In the mean time, the Besieg'd Messenians in Pylus, stood it out against all Assaults for a time, in hopes of Relief from Athens: But being press'd by fresh and renew'd Succors from the Assailants, by the Loss of Men on the one hand, and through want of Provision on the other, they were forc'd to surrender upon Terms. Thus Pylus was reduc'd, and brought into the Hands of the Lacedemonians; the Athenians having had Possession of it Fifteen Years, from the time it was fortify'd by Demosthenes.

During these Affairs, the Megareans took Nisea, then belonging to the Athenians. Upon which the Athenians sent against them Leotrophides and Timarchus, with a Thousand Foot, and four Hundred Horse. Against whom all the Megareans, with the Assistance of some from Sicily, marched out, and drew up in Battalia, upon the Hills call'd the Horns. There the Athenians fought with that Valour, that they put the Enemy to Flight, tho' far more in number than themselves. In this Battle, great Slaughter was made amongst the Megareans; but there were only Twenty kill'd of the Lacedemonians: For the Athenians, taking the Loss of Nicea very grievously, wav'd the Lacedemonians, and bent all the Heat of their Pursuit after the Megareans, and in a great Rage cut down multitudes of them. About this time, the Lacedemonians made Cratesipidas Admiral, and man'd five and twenty Sail, with Supplies sent from their Confederates, and Commanded him to succour their Allies; who spent a long time about Ionia, doing nothing Considerable. Afterwards, being furnish'd with Mony, by the Exiles of Chius, he both restor'd them, and took the Citadel of the Chians.

When the Exiles were 

•

eturn'd, they expell'd those that Banish'd them, to the Number of six Hundred, who possess'd Themselves of a place call'd Atarneus,


Page 332

opposite upon the Continent, naturally fortify'd; from whence afterwards (growing Strong) they they weary'd the Chians with frequent Invasions. During these things, Alcibiades and Thrasybulus, having fortify'd Labsacus, left there a sufficient Garrison; and then sail'd with the whole Army to Theramenes, who was then besieging Chalcedon, having a Fleet of Seventy Sail, and five Thousand Men under his Command. The Generals, drawing up the whole Army together in a Body, Block't up the City by a Wall of Timber, drawn from Sea to Sea. Upon which Hippocrates, made Governor there by the Lacedemonians (whom the Laconians call Harmostis) made a Sally both with the Lacedemonians, and all the Chalcedonians: And joyning Battle with Alcibiades (whose Souldiers fought with great Resolution) Hippocrates was slain, and many more kill'd and wounded, and the rest fled back into the City. Afterwards Alcibiades pass'd over into the Hellespont, and Chersonesus, with a Design to raise Monies. But Theramenes came to Terms with the Chalcedonians, and agreed that they should pay the same Tribute that they did before; and so drew off his Forces, and came before Byzantium, designing to block up that place.

In the mean time, Alcibiades having got together a vast Sum of Mony, procured many of the Thracians to joyn with him; and then making a League and Association with all them of Chersonesus, he loosed from thence with his whole Amy, and gain'd Selymbria by Surrender, from whence he exacted a great Sum of Mony; and placing there a Garrison, hasten'd away to Theramenes at Byzantium, where they joyntly assault the Town with their whole Strength: For they were to subdue a City that was very large, and full of Resolute Men; for besides the Byzantines, who were very numerous, Clearchus Harmostes the Lacedemonian, had with him in the City a Strong Garrison, both of Peloponesians and of Mercenaries; insomuch that (tho' they violently assaulted it) for a long time they were not able to make any considerable Impression upon the Besieg'd. But the Governor of the City, being gone to Pharnabazus for Mony, some of the Byzantines, who had taken a Distaste at his Government (For Clearchus was sharp and rigid) betray'd the City into the Hands of Alcibiades, in this Manner: The Besiegers made as if they would raise the Siege, and Ship off their Army into Ionia; and to that purpose, in the Evening, they Sail'd away with their whole Fleet, and drew off their Land-Forces at some Distance from the Town; but at Midnight the Army march'd back close to the City; and having before sent back their Gallies with Orders, that they should hale the Ships of the Byzantines out of the Harbour, and set up a great Shout, as if all the Army were there present, they themselves with the Land-Forces kept ready drawn up in a Body, close to the Walls, in Expectation of the Sign. In the Execution of these Commands, whilst some of the Ships were broken in pieces by the Beaks of the Ships of the Athenians, and others by Grappling-Irons were hal'd forth, and a great and terrible Shout was made, the Peloponesians in the City, ignorant of the Treachery, sally'd out to the Harbour, for the Defence of the City. In the mean time the Traitors gave the Sign from the Walls, and by Ladders took in the Souldiers of Alcibiades, while they of the Garrison were out at the Port. But the Peloponesians being inform'd of the Treachery, left half the Forces in the Port, and with the rest, ran with all Speed to guard the Walls, of which the Enemy was now disposess'd. And altho' the whole Athenian Army was broke in, yet the Besieg'd were not in the least discourag'd for a long time; but with the help of the Byzantines so couragiously oppos'd the Athenians, that the City had never come into their Hands, if Alcibiades had not made Proclamation that none of the Byzantines should be injur'd; which was a thing very seasonably advis'd: upon which the Townsmen turn'd their Arms upon the Lacedemonians, so that many of them (fighting it out with great Gallantry) were kill'd. The rest, to the number of five Hundred, fled, as Suppliants; to the Altars of the Gods. The Athenians restor'd the City to the Byzantines, and renew'd the League and Confederacy. The Suppliants likewise were receiv'd upon Terms, that they should deliver up their Arms, and that their Persons should be Transported to Athens, there to be dispos'd of, as the People should think fit.


Page 333

CHAP. IX.

Theremenes and Alcibiades return to Athens; are admir'd by the People. Lysander made General by the Lacedemonians. Antiochus, one of the Athenian Generals, beaten at Ephesus, in a Sea-Fight. Agis surprizes part of the Walls of Athens; but was beaten off. Alcibiades accus'd for Assaulting Cuma, a Confederate City. Conon made Admiral in his place.

AFTER the End of the Year, Euctemones was made Archon of Athens, and the Romans constituted Marcus Papyrius, and Spurius Nautius Consuls. Then was celebrated the Ninety-third Olympiad, in which Eubatus of Cyrene got the Victory. At this time the Athenian Generals (now possess'd of Byzantium) gain'd all the Cities of the Hellespont, except Abydus. Then they left Diodorus and Mantitheus, with sufficient Forces, Governours in the Hellespont; and they themselves (after they had perform'd many Famous Exploits, for the Honour and Safety of their Country) return'd with the Fleet, loaden with Spoils to Athens. When they drew near, all the People throng'd out with great Joy to meet them, and a great number of Strangers, both Women and Children ran together into the Pyreum; the Arrival of the Generals filling all Persons with Admiration. For they brought along with them no less than two hundred Ships, which they had taken, and a multitude of Prisoners, with much Spoil; and their own Ships were gloriously adorn'd with Arms, Rich Spoils, and Golden Crowns, and such like. Every Body throng'd one upon another to see Alcibiades, so as the City was even left without an Inhabitant, whilst both Bond and Free long'd to have a View of Him. For he was so highly Admir'd at that time, that none of the former Athenians were judg'd comparable to this Man, who so openly and confidently had stood it out against the People. They who were Poor, and under Mulcts and Fines, now hop'd they had an Excellent Advocate, who by raising Tumults and Disturbances in the City, could free them from their Penuries and pressing Necessities. He was a Man daring above all others, and an Excellent Speaker: In times of War a Brave Souldier, and as Skilful a Commander; ready in undertaking any Desperate Enterprize, of a very Comly and Bautiful Countenance, of a Noble Spirit, and Aspiring Mind. All were so fill'd with Expectation from him, that they concluded his Return, and the Prosperity of the City, were coupl'd together. For, as the Lacedemoniuns were Successful and Victorious whilst he Assisted them, so they hop'd that by his Return, their Affairs would change to the Better.

As soon as the Fleet entred into the Harbour, all Eyes were fix'd upon Alcibiades's Ship; and upon his Landing, they receiv'd him with great Acclamations, and Congratulated his Return and Victories. After he had with all Courteous Behaviour Saluted the People, he call'd an Assembly, where having made a long Defeence for the Clearing of his Innocency, he so insinuated himself into the Good-will of the People, that all cast the Blame of the Dooms and Judgments against him upon the City it self: And therefore they restor'd all his Estate, not long before Consiscated, and threw the Records of his Condemnation into the Sea; and Revers'd all other things that were Decreed against him: And a Decree was made, That the Eumolpides should take away, and absolve him from that Curse they had pronounc'd against him, when he was suppos'd to have been guilty of Prophaning the Sacred Mysteries. At last they made him General, and gave him full Power, both by Sea and Land; and committed all their Forces to his Command; upon which he Constituted. other Generals, as he thought fit: That is to say, Adimantus and Thrasybulus; and He Himself, with an Hundred Sail, pass'd over to Andros, and there possess'd Himself of the Fort Gaurium, and took it in with a Wall. But the Andrians, with the whole Strenth of the City, and the Succours, sent to them from Peloponesus, sally'd out against them, whereupon a sharp Engagement follow'd, in which the Athenians were Conquerors; a great part of them that came out of the Town, being cum off. Of those that escap'd, some were scatter'd abroad in the Fields, others got within the Walls. After he had several times attempted to take the City by Assault, and saw he could not he prevail, left a sufficient Garrison in the Fort (by him


Page 334

before fortify'd) under the Command of Thrasybulus, and he Himself sail'd away with the rest of the Army, and wasted and spoil'd, Coos, and Rhodes, and there got a great deal of provision for his Souldiers. As for the Lacedemonians, although they had lost most of their Fleet, and the Command of the Sea, together with their General Mindarus; yet they were not discourag'd, but created Lysander Admiral of their Navy; a most Expert Souldier, Bold and Daring, and ready to undertake any thing, through all Hazards whatsoever. As soon as he enter'd upon his Command, he rais'd no small number of Souldiers, throughout all Pelopenesus, and furnish'd the Eleet with Seamen, as well as in the present Circumstances he was able; and presently arriving at Rhodes, he got together as many Ships from thence and the rest of the Towns, as he could, and then sail'd away with what Ships hehad, to Ephesus and Miletus; where being further supply'd from these Cities, and with others from Chios, he set forth from Ephesus with a Fleet of Seventy Sail. But when he understood that Cyrus; the Son of Darius, was sent from his Father, with Orders to assist the Lacedemonians in the War, he made a Journy to him to Sardis; and after several Arguments made to encourage the Young Man, to prosecute the War against the Athenians, he forthwith receiv'd from him Ten thousand Daricans for Pay of his Souldiers, with Command from Cyrus to proceed, without doubting his Assistance; for that he was commanded by his Father to spare no Costs for the Supply of the Lacedemonians, in whatsoever they should undertake.

From thence he return'd to Ephesus, and sent for the Principal Men of every Neighbouring Town; and having enter'd into a League and Confederacy with them, promis'd if the War succeeded, he would make every one of them a Prince in his own City. Upon this each strove to exceed another, and supply'd him with more than was requir'd; in so much as they abundantly furnish'd Lysander with all things Necessary for the War, sooner than could in reason be imagin'd.

When Alcibiades understood that Lysander was preparing a Fleet at Ephesus, he made away with his whole Navy thither; where he enter'd the Port without Opposition, and Anchor'd with many of his Vessels near Notium, and gave the Command to Antiochus, the Captain of his own Vessel, with strict Charge not to Fight till he return'd. In the mean time, He Himself sail'd with several Men of War to Clazomenes; which City (yet standing firm to the Athenians) was greatly oppress'd by the Devastations made by some Exiles. But Antiochus, naturally Rash and Hasty, earnestly desirous to perform something Remarkable by his own Contrivance, without any Regard to the Command of Alcibiades, Mans Ten of the Best Gallies, and Commands the Captains and Officers of the Fleet, to be ready and prepar'd, with the rest of the Ships, to fall in where there should be Occasion: Upon this he makes up to the Enemy, and dares 'em to Battle. Lysander, being inform'd by some Deserters, that Alcibiades, with the Best of the Men of War, were gone off, now conceiv'd he had a sit Opportunity put into his Hands, to do something worthy of the Spartan Name: In Order thereunto, he makes forth the whole Fleet against Antiochus; and one of the Ten (which sail'd before the rest, and in which Antiochus was) he presently sinks, and puts all the rest to Flight, and pursues them till the Athenian Officers in the other Vessels, in great Confusion, came up to their Assistance. And now the Fleets on both sides were wholly engag'd, not far off from the Land: In short, the Athenians (by reason of the Disorder they were in) were beaten, with the Loss of two and twenty of their Ships. Some few of the Men were taken, but the rest swam to Shore. As soon as Alcibiades heard of the Defeat, he sail'd back with all Speed to Notium; and having sufficiently Man'd, and Refitted his Gallies, he sail'd into the Enemies Port; but Lysander, not daring to Engage, it was determin'd to sail away for Samos.

While these things were done, Thrasybulus the Athenian General, with fifteen Gallies came up to Thasus, where he routed the Citizens, and kill'd about two hundred of them; and then so straitly besieg'd them, that at length they were inforc'd to receive again those that favour'd the Athenians, into the City, and to take in a Garrison, and renew their Confederacy with the Athenians. Thence he sail'd to Abdera, the most Potent City of Thrace, and brought them over to the Athenians. These were the things done by the Athenian Generals from the time they left Athens.


Page 335

About this time Agis, the Lacedemonian King, lay incamp'd with his Army at Deoelea; where having Intelligence, that the Flower and Strength of the Athenians were gone away with Alcibiades, he march'd up to Athens silently in a dark Night, having with him eight and twenty thousand Foot, half of which were Old Souldiers, very well arm'd; the other half were but Raw, and Lightly Arm'd: Besides these, there follow'd him twelve hundred Horse, nine of which were Beotians, and the rest from Peloponesus. He was not discern'd by the Watch, till he was close at hand; and so fell upon them unawares, and slew some, and forc'd the rest within the Walls. Hereupon the Athenians, both Young and Old, were commanded generally to betake themselves to Arms, to oppose the Enemy; upon which, the Walls round the City were presently fill'd with them that ran thither from all Quarters. As soon as it was Light, and the Athenian Commanders saw the Army of the Enemy drawn up into a Body, four in Depth, and eight Furlongs or Stages in Front; they were at first not little terrify'd, especially two parts of the Walls being now possess'd by the Enemy.

But after some time, they sent out a Body of Horse, equal in number to the Lacedemonians: Upon which the Horse on both sides engag'd, in the face of them upon the Walls: and the Contest was sharp for a considerable time: For the Foot drawn up, as is said before, were as yet five Stages from the Walls; and the Horse fought close under them. On the one side the Beotians, who had formerly routed the Athenians at Delium, look'd upon it as a Dishonourable thing, to be worsted by them, whom they had before Conquer'd. On the other, the Athenians in regard they were known by all them upon the Walls, who were then Eye-witnesses either of their Valour, or Cowardize, resolv'd, through all difficulties whatsoever, to be Conquerours: Accordingly at length they routed the Lacedemonians, and made a great Slaughter, and pursu'd those that fled, even close up to the Body of their Foot; who making up to them, the Horse return'd into the City. Hereupon Agis (not conceiving it now a fit time to besiege the City) incamp'd in Academia. The next Day, when the Athenians erected a Trophy, he drew out his Army in Battalia, and Challeng'd them to Battel. Upon which the Athenians march'd out, and drew up in a Body under the Walls. The Lacedemonians gave the Onset; but by reason of the showers of Darts, wherewith they were gall'd from the Walls, they were forc'd to draw off from the City. And, after great Devastations made in the rest of Attica, they return'd to Peloponesus.

As for Alcibiades, he sails with his whole Fleet, from Samos to Cuma, where under colour and pretence of feign'd Crimes, lay'd to the Charge of the Inhabitants, he wasts and spoils the Country. And at the first takes a great multitude of Prisoners, and forces them away to his Ships; but the Cumeans, with the whole Power of the City, made out against him, for the Defence and Rescue of their Country-men: Alcibiades for a while bore the Brunt, but being overcome by fresh Supplies, both out of the City, and from the Country, the Army was forc'd to fly to their Ships, and leave their Captives behind them.

Alcibiades, being much troubled to be thus baffled, sent for the Regiments from Mitylene, and drew up his Army against the City, challenging the Cumeans to a Battle. But none coming, forth, after many Devastations, he return'd to Mitylene: But the Cumeans sent to Athens, and put in their Bill against Alcibiades, in form of Law, for that he had wasted and spoiled, a Confederated City and Country, which had not in the least done them any Injury; and many other Accusations they brought against him: For some of the Garrison in Samos (bearing him a Grudge) pass'd over to Athens, and accus'd him in the Publick Assembly, that he was a secret Friend to the Lacedemonians, and kept a close and intimate Correspondence with Pharnabasus, for this very purpose; that when the War was ended, he might gain the Sovereignty of Athens. These Calumnies being easily credited by the Common People, the Glory of Alcibiades began to wain; and the rather by reason of his late Ill-success at Sea, and his Miscarriages at Cuma.

Henceforward the People of Athens began to be jealous of Alcibiades, and created ten other Commanders, Conon, Lysanias, Diomedon, Pericles, Erasmides, Aristocrates,Archestratus, Protomachus, Thrasybulus, and Aristogenes. From among these they chose out Conon to be Admiral; and forthwith sent him to Alcibiades, to demand the Fleet from him, who gave up his Charge accordingly; but not daring to return to Athens, sail'd only with one Ship to Padyen in Thrace. For, besides the Rage


Page 336

of the Common People, he was afraid many Crimes would be laid to his charge; many (now he lay under the hatches) contriving how to load him with Accusations, and to upbraid him with his former Faults; the greatest of which was that concerning the Horses, for which there was set upon him a Mulct of Fifty Talents. For when Diomedes his Friend, lent him a Chariot with four Horses, to go along with him, to Olympia, when he subscrib'd his Name (as the Custom was) he affirm'd the Horses to be his own; and when he was Victor by that Chariot and Horses, he not only carry'd away the Glory, but detain'd the Horses from him that so friendly and kindly repos'd a Trust in him. Revolving therefore all these things in his Mind, he was afraid the Athenians, now they had an Advantage against him, would rip up all his former Miscarriages, and lay the greater load upon him. Therefore he banish'd himself.

CHAP. X.

Hermocrates kill'd at Syracuse, attempting to surprize it.

IN this Olympiad, the Synouris was added to the Olympian Games. And Plistonax, King of the Lacedemonians, died, when he had reign'd Fifty Years. To whom succeeded Pausanias, who Govern'd fourteen Years. The Inhabitants of Rhodes, out of Ialysus, Lindus and Camirus, Incorporated themselves into one City, now call'd Rhodes. Hermocrates the Syracusian, march'd out of Selinunte with his Forces to Himera, and Encamp'd in the Suburbs of that late ruin'd City. Where after he had by diligent Enquiry, found out in what place the Syracusians had their Post, he gather'd up the dead Bodies of the Syracusians, and put them in Chariots richly adorn'd, and sent them to Syracuse; and he himself accompany'd them, as far as it was lawful for a Banish'd Man to go, who was not to set a Foot within the Confines of the Country; and there he committed the Care of Conveying them to Syracuse to others. He did this to bring an Odium upon Diocles (who oppos'd his Return) for his Neglect in not Burying the Dead; and to regain the Good-will of the People to himself, for his Humanity.

When the Bodies were brought to the City, there arose a Dissention amongst the People. Diocles oppos'd the Burial of them, but the People were unanimously against him. At length it was resolv'd, That they should be bury'd, and the whole City grac'd the Solemnity with their Presence, and Diocles was Banish'd. However Hermocrates was never the nearer being Restor'd; for they were very jealous of him, that if ever he came into Authority, he would usurp the Sovereignty. When therefore he understood that for the present, it was to no purpose to strive against the Stream, he return'd to Selinunte: But not long after, being sent to some of his Faction, he hastens away with three thousand Armed Men, and marching through Geloa in the Night, comes to the Place before appointed, where all his Souldiers could not readily follow him; so that with a few he comes up to the Gate in Acridana; where he finds some of his Friends, who had before possess'd themselves of the Places; there he stay'd for the rest of his Men, who came slowly on, and at length joyn'd him. But the Design being discover'd, the Syracusians ran Arm'd into the Forum; where (a great multitude of People being got together) they kill'd Hermocrates, and the most of his Accomplices. The rest that escap'd (after they had cited them to Appear, in order for their several Tryals) they condemn'd to Banishment. Some therefore that were ill wounded, were by their Friends reported to be dead, to avoid the present Fury of the People. Amongst whom was Dionysius, who usurpt the Tyranny.


Page 337

CHAP. XI.

The Acts of Callicratides, the Lacedemonian General. The Fight at Sea in the Harbour at Mitylene, between Conon and Callicratides.

THUS things pass'd for this Year, at the close of which Antigenes was chosen Magistrate of Athens; and Manius Aemilius, and Caius Valerius, Roman Consuls. About this time Conon the Athenian Admiral, made up a Fleet of those Ships that lay at Samos, and sent for others from the Confederates; and having now got together a considerable Navy, he hasted away to fight the Enemy.

The Lacedemonians appointed Callicratides Admiral; Lysander being discharg'd of that Command for some time. This Callicratides was a very Young Man, of a Plain and Honest Mind, and an Innocent Conversation; not as yet tainted with the Vices and ill Manners of other Nations, and was highly esteem'd among the Spartans, for his Justice and Integrity; and every Man own'd, that he never swerv'd from the Rules of Justice, either in Publick or Private Affairs: But on the contrary, if at any time any offer'd to corrupt him with Bribes, he highly resented it, and punish'd them accordingly. Having now receiv'd his Commission, he sails to Ephesus, and there had the Fleet deliver'd up to him by Lysander; which with the rest that he got together from other parts, made up a Navy of an hundred and forty Sail. The Athenians then lay at Anchor at Delphinum in Chios: Against whom he made with his whole Fleet, and in his way besieg'd a Fort of the Athenians; the Garrison there, being about five hundred, were terrify'd at the greatness of the Navy, and surrender'd the Place upon Articles of Safe Conduct. Then Callicratides demolish'd the Fort, and sail'd against Teios; and surprizing the Place in the Night, got within the Walls, and sack'd the City. Passing thence to Lesbos, he lay with his Army before Methymna, wherein was an Athenian Garrison. At first he prevail'd little, tho' he press'd hard upon it with daily Assaults: But not long after, being let in by the Treachery of some within, he sack'd the City, but put none to the Sword, and restor'd the Place to the Methymneans. Things thus prosperously succeeding, he hasten'd to Mitylene, and committing the Heavy-Armed Men, to Thorax the Lacedemonian, commanded him to march with all speed with the Land-Army, whilst he himself made with the Fleet, to the Shoar. In the mean time Conon, the Athenian Admiral, so prepar'd his Fleet, (which consisted of seventy Sail) for a Sea-fight, that he excell'd all the Admirals that were ever before him. With these he came to the Aid of Methymna; but when he found it was taken, he lay with his Fleet at an Island, one of those call'd the Hundred Islands. About Break of day next Morning, when he discern'd the Enemy's Fleet making up to him, conceiving it not advisable to fight with a Fleet that was more than double his number, he resolv'd to sail off; and having snapt up some of the Enemy's Gallies by the way, determin'd to fight rather at Mitylene; concluding that if he were Conqueror, he could there pursue them with greater Advantage; and if he were Conquer'd, he had the Port near at hand, wherein to shelter himself. Upon this he Embarks all his Souldiers, and commands the Rowers to row but gently and slowly, that the Enemy might come up nearer to him. The Lacedemonians, the nearer they came, were more eager to press on, in confidence that they should overtake and destroy those that were behind in the Rear. But Conon, by degrees falling down behind the rest, the Commanders of the best of the Peloponesian Ships, pursu'd with all Eagerness. By this Means, the Rowers now wax'd faint, and were drawn away far from the rest of the Fleet: which Advantage being observ'd by Conon, and that they now approch'd near to Mitylene, he set up the Purple Flag from his own Ship, which was a Sign to the Officers to joyn Battle. Upon which the Athenians all at one time tack't suddenly about, and made upon the Enemy; and the whole Fleet, reiterated the Pean, and the Trumpets sounded a Charge.

Upon this sudden Change, the Peloponesians were amaz'd, and made what hast they could in this Extremity, to put themselves into a Line of Battle; but having so little time to tack about, they were in great Confusion; especially in regard the Ships, where their proper place was, which they had deserted, were so far behind. Conon therefore, improving the Opportunity put into his Hands, makes straight upon them; and before they could put themselves in Order of Battle, pierces some of their Ships through, and brushes off the Oars of others. But not one of those Ships that engag'd


Page 338

on that Wing against Conon, stirr'd; but with their Oars revers'd, bravely kept still in one place, till their whole Fleet came up. But the left Wing of the Athenian Fleet put them (with whom they were engag'd) to flight, and hotly pursu'd them a long time. But when all the Peloponesian Fleet came up together, Conon considering the multitude of his Enemies, drew off, and with forty Ships return'd to Mitylene. In the mean time the whole Peloponesian Fleet, which had spread themselves every way, greatly amaz'd the Athenians (who had before pursu'd them that fled) and lying in their way to prevent their Return to the City, forc'd them upon Shoar; whither being closely pursu'd by the Peloponesians, the Athenians (seeing no other Remedy) forsook their Ships, and got to Land, and so fled to Mitylene.

Callicratides having thus possess'd himself of thirty Ships, and seeing that the Enemy's Fleet was now broken, concluded that for the future he was to fight upon Land; and therefore sail'd straight to the City. Upon which Conon expecting the City would be besieg'd, made what Preparation he could to block up the Mouth of the Haven. For in that part where it was shallow, he sunk small Vessels, loaden with Stones; where it was deep, he fill'd great Ships of burden with Stones, and sixt them with Anchors. The Athenians, and a great number of Mitylenes, out of the Country, flockt into the City through fear of the War, and forthwith prepar'd all things necessary for their Defence in the Siege.

And now Callicratides commanded his Men to Land, and incamp'd near the City, and there erects a Trophy for his Naval Victory. The next Day, with some of his best Ships, he made towards the City, with a Design both to enter the Port, and to break the Enemy's Boom; giving strict Command that none of them should be far from his own Ship. Conon on the other hand Mans the Smaller Gallies, with some of his Souldiers, and places them in the Mouth of the Haven in Front, against the Enemy, and puts on Board the longer Vessels the other part of his Army. Some likewise were order'd to guard the Shallows, that so the Port might be defended on every side, both by Sea and by Land: And he himself with his own Squadron, fought in that part which was open into the Harbour. They that were in the great Ships, pelted the Enemies with Stones from the Main-Yard: Those that were plac'd near the Shoar, oppos'd them that endeavour'd to Land. The Peloponesians all this while were nothing Inferior to their Enemies, in Courage and Resolution; for, Charging with their Ships in a full Body, and with the Best of thir Men upon the Decks, it resembled both a Fight at Sea and Land together: And they fell on with such Fury, that they even Dar'd to hurl themselves upon the Fore-Castles of the Athenian Ships; judging that they whom they had so lately beaten, were not able to stand the Shock. On the other hand, the Athenians and Mitylenes concluding there was no other hopes for Safety left but in Victory, resolv'd to die rather than to desert their Posts. This Obstinacy on both sides continu'd the Fight a long time; whilst every one, without the least Fear, expos'd himself to all manner of Dangers: Many upon the Decks, were sorely gall'd by showers of Darts on every hand: Some mortally wounded, fell from the Decks into the Sea; those that were yet untouch'd, or at least unsensible of their Wounds, were resolv'd notwithstanding to stand it out to the last. Many were kill'd by Stones cast down upon them from the Main-yards, which being both very big, and thrown from an high place, fell with the greater force and violence, At length, after the Fight had continu'd a long time, and many fell on both sides, Callicratides commanded a Retreat to be sounded, in order to refresh his Men: But not long after he puts them on board again, and renews the Fight. And after a long Conflict, by the multitude of his Ships (which overpower'd the Athenians) and Valour of those upon the Decks, he so far prevail'd, that he drave the Athenians from their Post: Upon which they fled into the inner part of the Harbour; and now the Passage being open, Callicratides casts Ancho

•

 close to Mitylene: For, gaining the Place about which the Contest was, he was possess'd of the whole Harbour, which yet was out of the Walls of the City. For the Old City is a little Island, but that which is added of latter tim

••

, lies straight beyond into the Land: Between those two runs a certain Euripus, or Current of the Sea, by which the City is more strong and defensible. Callicratides therefore, having landed his Men, besieg the City, and begirt it on every side. And this was the Condition of Mitylene at this time.


Page 339

CHAP. XII.

Therma built in Sicily by the Carthaginians. They raise Forces to invade Italy. The noble Temple at Agrigentum. The ancient Grandeur of that City. The Riches of Gellias a Citizen there, and some others. Agrigentum besieg'd. The Syracusians under Daphneus rout the Carthaginians near Agrigentum. Imilcar seizes the Syracusian Fleet, and takes all the Provision going to Agrigentum, which was afterwards quit by the Inhabitants: Their miserable Condition. The Phalarian Bull.

IN Sicily the Syracusians sent Embassadors to Carthage, to complain of the late War made upon them, and to persuade them to Peace for the time to come. To which the Carthaginians return'd a doubtful Answer. In the mean time they raise again a numerous Army, and were unanimously resolv'd to do their utmost to subdue all the Cities of Sicily: But before they transported their Armies, having got together out of Carthage, and other Cities in Africa many that were willing to transplant themselves, they built a new City call'd Therma, near the hot Baths in Sicily.

The Affairs of this Year concluded; at Athens Callias was made chief Magistrate, and at Rome, Lucius Furius, and Cneius Pompeius were created Consuls. At this time the Carthaginians pusst up with their Successes in Sicily, and coveting the gaining of the whole Island, determin'd to that end, to raise a great Army; and thereof made Hannibal General (the same that had raz'd Selinunte and Himera) and invested him with full power for the management of the War. But because he endeavour'd to excuse himself by reason of his Age, they join'd Imilco in Commission with him, the Son of Hanno, one of the same Family. These Generals consulted together, and sent some eminent Carthaginians with great Sums of Money, to raise Souldiers both out of Spain and the Baleary Islands. They rais'd likewise throughout Lybia, Carthaginians and Africans, and out of every City such as were most able for War. There came likewise to them from the Nations and Princes of their Confederates Abroad, both Mauritanians and Numidians, and some from the Parts near to Cyrene. Besides these, there were transported into Africa, Campanians hired out of Italy. These Campanians they had experienc'd to be very useful to them, when those whom they had left in Sicily, by reason of some old Grudge they bore the Carthaginians, were suspected to be ready to side with the Sicilians. At length, when all the Forces together were mustered at Carthage, Timeus reports they were not much above an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Men; but Ephorns affirms that they were Three Hundred Thousand.

The Carthaginians now prepare all things necessary for the Transporting of the Army; they equipt out all their Men of War, and brought together no less than a Thousand Transport Ships. Forty of their Gallies were sent before into Sicily, which were presently encounter'd with as many by the Syracusians at Eryx, where after a long and sharp Dispute, Fifteen of the Carthaginian Ships were sunk, the rest by the advantage of Night fled clear away. When the News of this Defeat was brought to Carthage, Hannibal the General sail'd away with Fifty Gallies, contriving both to make the Enemy's Victory fruitless, and the better likewise to secure the transport of his Army. When the coming of Hannibal was nois'd through the Island, all were of Opinion that he intended forthwith to transport all his Forces thither: Upon which, all the Cities (hearing of the greatness of his Preparations, and that they were now like to lay all at stake) were struck with fear and amazement. The Syracusians therefore sent Embassadors both to the Grecians in Italy, and to the Lacedemonians, to desire aid and assistance. They sent Letters likewise to all the Magistrates of the Cities up and down, to intreat them that they would stir up the People to join every where in Arms for the common Defence of the Liberty of their Country. The Agrigentines considering the greatness of the Carthaginian


Page 340

Army, concluded (as the thing was in truth) that they were likeliest first to feel and undergo the pressure and weight of the War; and therefore determin'd that all the Corn and other Fruits of the Field, and every thing else that was valuable, should be brought out of the Country into the City: For at that time both the City and Country of the Agrigentines were very rich; of which it will not be inconvenient to say something here more largely. Their Vineyards were large and very pleasant, and most part of the Country abounded with Olives, so much as that they were transported and sold at Carthage. For inasmuch as Africa at that time was not planted with this sort of Fruit, the Agrigentines grew very rich by their Trading with the Lybians. Many Marks of their great Wealth remain to this very Day; to speak a little of which, I conceive will not be a digression from the present Subject.

And First, The stately. Buildings and Ornaments of their Temples, especially the Temple of Jupiter, do sufficiently witness the Grandeur and Riches of the Men of that Age. The rest of the Sacred Buildings, are either burnt or destroy'd by the frequent Stormings of that City. When the Temple of Jupiter Olympus was near to the laying on the Roof, a stop was put to the Building by the War; and the City being afterwards sackt, the Agrigentines were never able (from that time to this Day) to finish it. This Temple at Agrigentum was Three Hundred and Forty Foot in length, Threescore in breadth, and in height (besides the Foundation,) an Hundred and Twenty. It's the greatest in the Island, and for the largeness of its Foundation, may compare with any other elsewhere: For though the Design was never finished, yet the ancient Platform is still visible; for whereas some build up their Temples only with Walls, or compass them round with Pillars, this is built both with the one and the other; for together with the Walls, there rise lofty Pillars round on the outside of the Wall, and Foursquare within. The Compass of every one of these Pillars on the outside, are Twenty Foot, and so far distant one from another, as that a Man may well stand between each; within they are of the compass of Twelve Foot. The largeness and height of the Portico's are wonderful; on the East Side of which, is carv'd the Giants War; of exquisite and incomparable Workmanship. On the West Side is carv'd the Destruction of Troy, where may be seen all the brave Heroes and Commanders in their proper Habits, most admirably represented. In those former times likewise there was a Pond out of the Walls of the City cut by Art, Seven Furlongs in Compass and Twenty Cubits in depth: Into this, with wonderful Art, were drawn Currents of Water, by which they were abundantly supply'd with all sorts of Fish ready for their use, at all publick Entertainments. Upon this Pond likewise fell Multitudes of Swans and other Fowl which entertain'd the Spectators with great Delight.

The Grandeur of the City was likewise apparent, by the stateliness of the Sepulchers, some of which were adorn'd with the charging Horses of the Heroes there interr'd; others with those little Birds that the Children, both Girls and Boys fed and bred up in their Parents Houses. All which, Timeus affirms he saw in his time. In the Ninety Second Olympiad there were no less than Three Hundred Chariots of Agrigentum all with white Horses, that attended upon Exenetus, the Victor at the Olypmick Games, and brought him mounted in a stately Chariot with great Pomp into the City. Their nice and delicate way of Living (till it came to their very Children) both as to their Food and Raiment, was to that degree, that they wore Garments of Cloth of Gold, and had their Water-Pots and Boxes of Ointment, of Gold and Silver. There was one Gellias the Richest Man of all the Agrigentines, at that time, who built several Rooms for publick Entertainment in his own House, and plac'd Porters at his Gates, charging them to invite all Strangers that pass'd by, to come in to be his Guests. Many others of the Agrigentines imitated his Example, who made it their business (after the ancient manner) to converse freely and courteously with them they thus invited. And therefore Empedocles says thus of them—

Hospitibus sancti portus, sine labe malorum.


Page 341

It happen'd once, that Five Hundred Gelonian Horsemen came to his House in Winter-time; whom he liberally entertain'd, and furnish'd every one of 'em out of his Wardrobe with Cloaks and Coats. Polyclitus in his History declares, that when he was a Souldier in Agrigentum, he saw a Wine-Cellar in his House, in which were contain'd Three Hundred great Vessels cut out of one and the same Rock, each of which receiv'd an Hundred Hogsheads. And that near to these was plac'd a Cistern of pure white temper'd Mortar, containing a Thousand Hogsheads, out of which the Liquor ran into the Vessels. It's said that this Gellias was of a very mean Presence, but of admirable Parts and Ingenuity. Being once sent an Embassador to the Centuripines; when he enter'd into the Assembly, all the People fell a Laughing, seeing the mean Aspect of the Man, so disagreeable to his great Fame and Reputation in the World. Upon which, he made this sharp Retort, That what they saw in him was not to be wonder'd at, because the Agrigentines always send the comliest and handsomest Men to the noblest Cities, but to those that were mean and of little note such as himself.

And not only Gellias, but likewise many other Agrigentines were very rich. Antisthenes surnam'd Rhodes, at the Marriage of his Daughter, feasted all the Citizens through every Street, and procur'd above Eight Hundred Chariots to attend upon the Bride: And not only Horsemen out of the City, but many who were invited out of the Country, went before the new Marry'd Lady in great Pomp and Splendour. To add to the Solemnity of the Day, there were great Preparations for Illuminations in the City; for he order'd that as soon as they saw a Flame of Fire upon the top of the Castle, the Altars in all the Temples, and the Piles of Wood in all the Streets, and the Fewel he had prepar'd and provided in the Taverns, should be kindled together all at the same moment: Whose Command being observ'd at the very same instant, when the Bride was led forth by a Multitude that bore Torches before her, the whole City was as it were in a Flame, and the common Streets and Ways of the City were not able to contain those that attended at this Solemnity; all were so zealous to further and incourage the Gallantry and Magnificence of the Man. At that time there were more than Twenty Thousand Citizens of Agrigentum; but taking in Strangers with them, they were no less than Two Hundred Thousand.

It is reported of Antisthenes, when he saw his Son pressing upon a poor Man his Neighbour, and would force him to sell a little Spot of Land to him, he chid his Son, and advis'd him to forbear a while; but his covetous Desire encreasing the more, he told him he should not strive to make his Neighbour Poor, but rather desire he should become Rich; for being Rich, he would covet a greater piece of Land, which when he was not able to pay for lack of ready Money, he would be content to raise Money by the Sail of that which he then had.

In short, the Excess and Luxury of the Agrigentines, by reason of their Riches was such, that not long after, in the very height of the Siege, which ended in the Sacking of the City, a Decree was made, that none of them that were upon the Guard in the Night, should have above a Bed, a Tent, a Woollen Mantle and Two Pillows. When this seem'd a hard Law, and disturbance to their Ease and Repose, we may easily judge how soft and luxurious they were in all other things. As we were not willing to let these things pass altogether, so we shall now break off, lest we omit things more useful and necessary.

The Carthaginians having landed their Forces in Sicily, marcht straight against the Agrigentines, and divided their Army into Two Parts, and incamp'd in Two several Places; one Camp was upon certain Hills, where were plac'd Forty Thousand Spaniards and Africans; the other was near the City, fortify'd with a deep Trench and a Wall. At the first they sent Embassadors to the Agrigentines, to invite them to join with them as Confederates, and if they did not approve of that, then that they would be neuters, and enter into League of Peace and Amity with the Carthaginians. When both Offers were rejected, they forthwith press'd on the Siege with all Vigour. Upon this, the Agrigentines listed all that were able to bear Arms, and marshall'd them, some of which they plac'd upon the Walls, and others were appointed as Reserves to relieve


Page 342

their Fellows as occasion offered. Dexippus the Lacedemonian was the Man that directed them in all things, who was lately come to their Assistance with Five Hundred Souldiers from Gela: For he liv'd about that time (as Timeus relates) at Gela, in great Esteem for the sake of his Country: And therefore Application was made to him by them of Agragentum, that he would hire as many Souldiers as possibly he could, and come to their Relief: Besides these, they hir'd Eight Hundred Campanians who had formerly serv'd under Imilcar. These kept the Hill Athenea which lay over, and commanded the City, a very commodious Post.

Imilcar and Hannibal the Carthaginian Generals having view'd the Walls, and found out a Place where it was most easie to enter, brought Two Towers of incredible bigness against the City: The first Day out of these they made an Assault, and after they had kill'd and cut off many of the Citizens, sounded a Retreat. The next Night the Besieg'd made a Sally and burnt the Engines: But Hannibal intending to assault the Town in several Places at once, commanded his Souldiers to pull down all the Monuments and Tombs, and with the Rubbish to raise Mounts as high as the Walls, which was presently done, forwarded by so great a Multitude. But then a sudden Pang of Religion seiz'd upon the Army; for Thero's Monument (a large and stately Structure) was beaten down by a Thunderbolt, which by the advice of some of the Soothsayers then present, put a stop to the perfecting of the Design, and forthwith the Plague broke out in the Army, by which many were destroyed in a short time, and not a few seiz'd with tormenting and miserable Pains, among whom Hannibal himself perish'd. Some that were upon the Watch, reported they saw in the Night, the Apparitions of them that were dead. Upon this, Imilcar seeing the Souldiers were possess'd with the fear and awe of the Gods, first forbore to demolish the Sepulchers: Afterwards he made (according to the Custom of his Country) Supplications to the Deities, and sacrific'd a Boy to Saturn, and threw a Company of Priests into the Sea, as a Sacrifice to Neptune. Notwithstanding all this, Imilcar forsook not the Siege, but choaking up the River with Rubbish close to the Walls, brought up his Engines, and renew'd his Assaults every Day.

In the mean time, the Syracusians weighing the Condition of the Agrigentines, and fearing lest they should undergo the same Fate with them of Himera and Selinunte, were desirous to send them aid; And to that end having encreas'd their Army by the Forces of their Confederates from Italy and Messina, they made Daphneus General, and having mustered the Army, they set forwards, and in their March were join'd by the Camarineans, Geleans, and some others out of the heart of the Country, and all marcht strait for Agrigentum, having a Fleet of Thirty Gallies, which sail'd all along over against them near the Shoar. Daphneus had with him above Thirty Thousand Foot, and no less than Five Thousand Horse. Imilcar upon intelligence of the approach of the Enemy, sent forth against them the Iberians and Campanians, and no less than Forty Thousand out of the rest of the Army. When the Syracusians had pass'd the River Himera, they were met by the Barbarians: Upon which, Battel was join'd, and after the Dispute had continu'd a long time, at length the Syracusians got the Day, who routed the whole Army, with the Slaughter of above Six Thousand Men, and pursu'd the rest to the very City. But the Syracusian General perceiving his Men to be in disorder and confusion by their Pursuit, began to fear lest Imilcar breaking in upon them with the rest of his Army should recover the Day; for he remembred how Himereus had formerly lost all by such an Oversight. The Barbarians flying into that part of the Camp which lay nearest to Agrigentum, the Besieged concluded they were beaten and fled, and therefore earnestly desir'd their Commanders that they would lead them forth, crying out, Now was the time come for the utter ruin and destruction of their Enemies. But the Officers (whether corrupted by Money (as it was reported) or possess'd with fear lest Imilcar should slip into the Town when the Souldiers were gone forth) would not stir, but commanded the Souldiers to abide within the Town; by which means they that fled, came safe into the Camp. But Daphneus march'd forward, and incamp'd in the place where the Enemy before lay; to whom flockt presently the Souldiers out of the Town with Dexippus, and forthwith a Council of War was held, where all shew'd themselves very uneasie and discontented,


Page 343

that the opportunity was neglected in taking full. Revenge of the Conquer'd Barbarians, and that their Officers when they might have so easily destroy'd them by a Sally out of the Town, had suffer'd so many Ten Thousands clearly to escape. Hereupon a Tumult arising in the Assembly with a great noise and clamour, one Menes a Camarinean, one of the Officers, stood up, and accused the Commanders of Agrigentum to such a degree, that he so exasperated the whole Assembly, that they that were accus'd, could not be heard to speak for themselves; but Four of them were out of hand ston'd by the inraged Multitude. The Fifth call'd Argeus, in favour of his Youth, was discharged. Dexippus likewise the Lacedemonian was ill spoken of, that he who was General of so considerable a Body of Men, and ever esteem'd a Man more expert in Martial Affairs than most others, should carry it so basely and treacherously. After the Council was broke up, Daphneus endeavour'd to force the Carthaginians Camp; but discerning it to be excellently well Fortify'd, drew off. Then he blockt up all the Passages with his Horse, intercepted the Forragers, and prevented all Provision being brought in to the Enemy, whereby they were reduc'd to great straits and necessities; for not daring to ingage, and yet in the mean time starving for want of Bread, their Misery was the greater, and many were famish'd to Death.

Upon this, the Campanians, and almost all the rest of the Mercenaries in a Body came to Imilcar's Tent, to demand their allowance of Bread, and threatned to fall off to the Enemy if they had it not. But Imilcar being inform'd that the Syracusians had loaded their Ships with abundance of Corn for Agrigentum (upon which he rely'd as his last shift) persuaded the Souldiers to be patient a few Days, and in the mean time, pawn'd to them the drinking Vessels of the Carthaginian Souldiers: Hereupon he sent for Forty Gallies from Panormus and Motya, and lay in wait for the Ships that brought the Provision. For the Syracusians never suspected the Carthaginians durst appear at Sea, being now Winter, and who had some time before lost their Power and Dominion there. Therefore sailing on with great assurance, they were on a sudden attack'd by Imilcar, with Forty Sail; who presently sunk Eight of their Ships, and drave the rest upon the Shoar: All which being thus taken, the Scene of Affairs was so chang'd on both sides, that the Campanians that were with the Agrigentines (perceiving the desperate Condition of the Grecians) corrupted with Fifteen Talents, fell away to the Carthaginians. Besides, the Agrigentines at the beginning of the Siege, when things went ill with the Carthaginians, were very profuse and prodigal, both in their Corn and other things, and therefore when the Affairs of the Barbarians were much alter'd to their advantage, the Besieg'd (being so many Thousands penn'd up together) were insensibly and by degrees brought into great want. It's reported that Dexippus the Lacedemonian also was brib'd with Fifteen Talents; for he on a sudden told the Italian Commanders, that it was better to withdraw, and carry on the War in some other Place, for here they were likely to be starv'd. The Officers therefore considering of what he had said, march'd away with the Army to the Sea, as if now the time limited by their Commissions had been determin'd.

After their departure, the Generals with the other Officers met in a Council of War, and ordered that an Account should be taken what Provision was left in the City; and when a Return was made of the Scarcity, they saw it was absolutely necessary to quit the Place; whereupon they commanded all to be ready to be gone the next Night. Upon this, there was a lamentable outcry in every House throughout the whole City, of Men, Women and Children, being in a distraction through fear and dread of the Enemy on the one hand, and care of their Goods and Estates on the other, which now they must be forc'd in a great measure to leave to the Rapine of the Barbarians, and as an aggravation, being those very things wherein a little before they plac'd their happiness. However, at length, seeing that Fortune had stript them of all their Riches, they judg'd it was wisdom to do what they could to save their Lives. Then might be seen not only the mighty wealth of a flourishing City forsaken, but also a multitude of miserable People left behind; for those that were sick and infirm, were disregarded by them of their own Family, whilst every one sought to preserve himself; and those that through Old Age could


Page 344

not remove, were in the like condition. Many that preferr'd Death before the leaving of their Country, kill'd themselves, chusing rather to dye in their own Houses. But that multitude of People that did go forth, were guarded by the Souldiers to Gela, so that all the Ways and Country towards Gela, swarm'd with a promiscuous multitude of Women and Children; amongst whom, were young Ladies, who though they had now chang'd their former soft and delicate way of Living, into the fatigues and sorrows of tedious Journeys, yet being quickned and stirr'd up by fear, bore all Difficulties with eminent Patience. They all came at length safe to Gela; and afterwards Leontium was given to them by the Syracusians to inhabit.

Imilcar entring the City with his Army, not without some fear and jealousie, kill'd almost all he found in it, not sparing those that fled into the Temples for refuge, but haling of them from the Altars, slew them with great cruelty. There (its said) Gellias, who was so eminent above the rest of his Countrymen, in the greatness of his Wealth, and integrity of his Conversation, ended his Life with the Loss of his Country: For he with some others fled to the Temple of Minerva, hoping the Carthaginians would not commit any outrages against the Gods: But when he perceiv'd the cursed Impiety of the Men, he set Fire to the Temple, and together with the Wealth that was there (consecrated to the Gods) burnt himself; by one act preventing Three Evils as he conceiv'd; the Impiety of the Enemy against the Gods, the Rapine and Plunder of the vast Treasure that was there, and (that which was the greatest) the abuse of his own Body.

Imilcar having spoil'd and plunder'd all Places both Religious and Prophane, got together from the Spoil so much Riches as a City that had been inhabited by Two Hundred Thousand Men, and never taken before since it was built; and that was the richest of all the Grecian Cities, might by an easie Computation in that time heap together; especially since the Citizens made it their business to be stately and magnificent in a wonderful manner in every thing they undertook: For many curious Pictures drawn with admirable Art, and an infinite number of Statues of all sorts, cut and wrought with singular ingenuity, were found here by the Conqueror. The best and choicest things (among which was the Phalarian Bull) he sent to Carthage; the rest of the Spoil he caus'd to be sold under the Spear. Timeus in his History, with great earnestness denies that there ever was any such Bull, when as Fortune since has disprov'd him; for Scipio Africanus Two Hundred and Threescore Years after this destruction when Carthage was raz'd, amongst other things which were then at Carthage, restor'd that famous Bull to the Agrigentines, which remains at Agrigentum now at the time of the writing of this History; of which I have been the more desirous to speak, because Timeus with much bitterness inveighs against the Historians that were before him as altogether unpardonable; and yet he himself in those things wherein he most pretends an earnest and diligent search after Truth, does nothing but meerly trifle; for in my Opinion we ought to have a favourable regard and respect to those Authors we differ from, because they are but Men, and the truth of things that are long before past, are not easie to be discover'd. On the other Hand, those Writers that are careless and negligent in their Inquiries, are justly to be censur'd; and those especially may be well judg'd regardless of Truth, who make it their Business to flatter some, and out of Envy to cast Dirt upon others.


Page 345

CHAP. XIII.

The Syracusian Officers accus'd. Dionysius made General of the Syracusians. He moves to have the Exiles recall'd. He's invested with the sole Command. At length by several Artifices gains the Sovereignty.

IMilcar having gain'd the City after Eight Months Siege, a little before the Winter Solstice, did not presently sack it, to the end the Souldiers might quarter there all the Winter. When the ruin of Agrigentum was nois'd Abroad, the whole Island was struck with such Terror, that some of the Sicylians fled to Syracuse, and others transported themselves, their Wives, Children and Moveables into Italy. When the Agrigentines that had escap'd, came to Syracuse, they accus'd the Commanders, affirming that they had betrayed their Country into the Enemies Hand; but the Syracusians cast the blame upon the other Sicilians, because they chose such a sort of Officers who endanger'd the loss of all Sicily by their Treachery.

But when a Senate was call'd at Syracuse, they were in such a Consternation as none durst move or advise any thing concerning the War. And being all thus at a stand Dionysius the Son of Hermocrates renew'd the Accusation against the Officers, That they had Betrayed Agrigentum to the Carthaginians, and stirred up the People forthwith to take Revenge, and not to wait for Formalities of Law in execution of Justice. But Dionysius being Fin'd according to Law by the Magistrates as a disturber of the publick Peace, Philistus (who afterwards writ a History, a very rich Man) paid the Fine for him, and bid him speak his Mind freely, and promis'd him to pay whatever was impos'd upon him, if they fin'd him all the Day long.

Dionysius being thus encouraged, he stirr'd up the People, and fill'd the Assembly with Tumult by his Criminations, charging the Commanders, that for Bribes they had drawn off and forsaken the Agrigentines. He accus'd likewise many others of the best of the Citizens, traducing them that they aim'd to introduce an Oligarchy; and told the Senate, That Commanders were not to be chosen according to their greatness in Power, but according to the Good Will and Regard they bore towards the People: For the Great Ones Lording it over them, had them in Contempt, and inrich'd themselves by the Losses of their Country; but Men of Low Fortunes never attempt any thing of such a nature, knowing their own disability.

When he had spoken what he had design'd, and so agreeable to the Humour of the People, he set all the Assembly on a Flame; for the People before bore a secret Hatred to the Commanders, because they were suspected to have dealt falsly in the management of the War, and now being the more exasperated by the Speech of Dionysius, they forthwith depriv'd them of their Commands, and chose others in their room, amongst whom was Dionysius, a Man of great Esteem and Reputation with the Syracusians, for his approved Valour in several Battles against the Carthaginians.

Having gain'd this step of Preferment, he contriv'd all ways imaginable how to advance to the Sovereign Power over his Country; for after he was invested with the Command, he never associated with the other Commanders, nor join'd with them in any Council of War. In the mean time he caus'd Rumours to be spread Abroad, that they kept secret Correspondence with the Enemy, hoping thereby to get them laid aside, and so to have the sole Command of the Army lodg'd in himself. While he was executing these Projects, the most prudent Citizens suspected him, and every Assembly gave very hard and ill Words. On the other hand, the common People ignorant of his Deceit and Fraud, prais'd every thing he did, and published every where, that now at length they had got a faithful and constant Guardian and Defender of the City.


Page 346

The Consults concerning Preparations for War being very frequent, and Dionysius discerning that the Syracusians were in a great Fright, he advised to recall the Exiles: For he said it was a very absurd thing to receive Aids of Strangers from Italy and Peloponesus, and yet to be backward in making use of their own Countrymen to withstand the common Danger, who are solicited by the Enemy with great Promises of Reward to join with them, and yet are content to wander up and down amongst Strangers, and dye rather than do any thing prejudical to their Country. For though they were Banish'd for stirring up Sedition in the City, yet such kindness shew'd 'em, would in gratitude oblige them to fight chearfully for their Country. When he had spoken many things to this purpose, he at length procur'd the Suffrages of the People; for none of his Collegues durst contradict him, for that they both fear'd the Rage of the People, and likewise plainly saw, that nothing would redound thence, but hatred to themselves, and more love and favour to him.

Dionysius did this, for that he look'd upon the Exiles to be Men fit for his purpose, such as were given to change, and therefore ready Tools to make use of to serve his Ambition; who would delight to see their Enemies Throats cut, their Goods and Estates confiscate, and themselves restor'd. The Decree therefore for the recalling the Banish'd being publish'd, they presently return'd.

And now Letters coming from Gela, to desire Assistance to be speedily sent them, Dionysius made use of this fair opportunity for the carrying on his Design; for he forthwith marched to Gela with Two Thousand Foot, and Four Hundred Horse, where Dexippus the Lacedemonian was Governor, with a strong Garrison: When he found the City in a Seditious Uproar rais'd by some against the People, he condemns them that were accus'd in a Publick Assembly, puts them to Death, and confiscates their Estates, and with part of the Mony paid the Souldiers, that were in Garrison under Dexippus, all their old Arrears, and the rest he distributed amongst the Souldiers that came with him from Syracuse, declaring their Pay order'd by the City should be double. By this means he wan both the Hearts of the Souldiers at Gela, and of those that went with him thither. The Geleans likewise cry'd him up to the Skies, as one that had freed them from Slavery: So that out of Envy to the great Men of the City, they decreed the Supream Power to Dionysius: Upon which, they sent Ambassadors to Syracuse to publish there his Praises, and likewise to shew the Decrees of the City, by which they had honour'd him with many marks of respect.

In the mean time Dionysius endeavour'd to bring over Dexippus into his Councils, but not being able to prevail, he determin'd to return to Syracuse with all his Forces. But the Geleans hearing that the Carthaginians had determin'd to set upon their City with their whole Power before any other, earnestly intreated Dionysius that he would not leave them, nor suffer their City to undergo the same Calamity with them of Agrigentum. To whom he promis'd to return in a short time with greater Forces; and so left Gela.

Afterwards when the People came from the Theater from the Plays, Dionysius at that very Hour return'd into Syracuse; whereupon the Citizens came thronging about him, and inquir'd what News he brought concerning the Carthaginians: To whom he answer'd,
 

That he had nothing to say of them, in regard their own Officers and Governors were more mischievous to the Commonwealth than the Enemies themselves; for whilst the Citizens led away by their Flatteries, were diverted with Sports and Plays, they themselves impoverished the Commonwealth, and defrauded the Souldiers of their Pay. And now, that the Enemy at this very time, is making incredible Preparation for War, and are even upon the Borders of Syracuse, with a mighty Army, yet it is not at all by them regarded. To what end they acted thus, he suspected long since, but now he saw clearly their Drift. For Imilcar (he said) had sent by an Herald to him, pretending to redeem some Captives, but in truth secretly to persuade him not to use that Authority he had, to pry too narrowly into things that were in doing, or at least not to obstruct them, if he was not willing to join in the Execution. Therefore he declar'd he was not willing any longer to be General, but


Page 347

was ready to lay down his Commission. For it was altogether intollerable that he only should hazard the loss of all he had with the rest of the Citizens, whilst others made Merchandize of their Country: Yea, by this means, he should become Partaker with them in their Treachery.

 The People being inrag'd by what he had said, and his Words divulg'd through the whole Army, every one went to his own House, in great fear and perplexity.

The next Day an Assembly was called, where he loaded his Fellow Commanders with many Accusations; and by stirring up the People against them, greatly advanced his own Reputation. At length some in the Assembly cry'd out, to make him Generalissimo; and not to have the thing to be done when the Enemy was even Battering the Walls; alledging that the greatness of the War requir'd a General that was able to do eminent Service for the Commonwealth. And for the Traitors, it was better to inquire of them in another Assembly hereafter; being now it was not so agreeable to the present posture of Affairs. It was also remembred, that heretofore, when Gelon had sole the Command, they had overcome Three Hundred Thousand Carthaginians.

Upon this, the People (who are always apt to close with the worst Advice) suddenly made Dionysius General with sole and absolute Power.

After things thus succeeded according to his Hearts Desire, he sign'd an Order, that the Souldiers should receive double Pay; alledging, that hereby they would be encouraged to fight more readily and chearfully; and bid the Syracusians not trouble or disturb themselves about Money, for there would be ways readily found out to bring in sufficient Supplies. But when the Assembly was broken up, there were many of the Syracusians that condemn'd what was done, as if they had had no hand in confirming it: For after they had more seriously considered the thing, they foresaw Tyranny would follow. Thus while they sought after Freedom, they most imprudently plac'd a Tyrant over their Country.

Dionysius therefore to prevent the change of the Peoples Minds, began to contrive how he might procure a Guard for his Person: If he could gain this point, he concluded he could easily fix himself in the Sovereignty. Upon this, he commanded all that were able to bear Arms, not above Forty Years of Age, with Thirty Days Provision and their Arms, to march to the City Leontium: For this City was a Garrison belonging to the Syracusians, full of Strangers and Exiles; whom he hop'd would be assistant to him, being Men given to Innovations; and to this he was the more encouraged, for that he knew but few of the Syracusians would be there. For the better effecting of this Design, he encamp'd all Night in the Field; and as he lay there, he feign'd a Plot against his own Person, and caus'd a great Noise and Clamour to be made by his Servants and Attendants, upon which he fled to the Castle: Where after he had kindled several Fires, he sent for a strong Guard, and so pass'd that Night.

As soon as it was Day, and the Multitude were got together into the City, he used many probable Arguments suted to the matter in Hand, and brought over the People to give him liberty to chuse Six Hundred Men, such as he thought best for his Guard. And herein Dionysius is said to imitate Pisistratus the Athenian, for he wilfully wounding himself (as if he had been assaulted by Treachery) came forthwith into the Assembly, and by that means (as it's reported) got a Guard from the Citizens, by whose help he gain'd the Supream Authority.

By the same Fraud, Dionysius cheating the People, became absolute Lord and Master over his Country; for he presently chose above a Thousand Men, such as were strong in Body, and low in Purse, and put them in Arms, and encouraged them with many large and glorious Promises. Then he brought all the Mercenary Souldiers to an intire Observance, and Obedience to him, by his winning and courteous Speeches. He made an alteration likewise in the Regiments, giving Commissions to them that he could most trust. Then he sent away Dexippus the Lacedemonian into Greece, for he suspected him, lest he should become an Head to the Syracusians, in case they should take an occasion


Page 348

to seek to recover their Liberty. And now he sends for the Mercenaries from Gela, and gets together from every Place, all the Exiles and Lewd Fellows, not doubting but by the help of these to establish himself in the Kingdom.

After his Return to Syracuse, when he had lodg'd his Forces in the Arsenal, he openly declar'd himself King: The Syracusians took this grievously, but were necessitated to be silent, because it was not in their power to do any thing else: For the whole City was full of Strangers that were in Arms, and all were in fear of the Carthaginians, who had a vast Army near at Hand.

Dionysius now presently marries the Daughter of Hermocrates (he who had routed the Athenians in Sicily) and gave his own Sister in Marriage to Polyxenus, Hermocrates his Brother in Law. This he did to strengthen himself, by matching into an Honourable Family. After this, he summon'd a General Council, and contrived all ways imaginable, how to be rid of Daphneus and Demarchus, the most powerful of all his Adversaries.

Thus Dionysius from a Scrivener, and a Man of poor and mean Abstract, got the Sovereignty of the greatest City among the Grecians, and maintain'd his Dominion all the Days of his Life for the space of Thirty Eight Years. What things he afterwards did, and how he inlarged his Dominion, we shall relate in its proper Place: For very probably he gain'd the largest Dominion, and of the longest continuance of any that ever hath been compass'd by Usurpation.

After the Taking of the City Agrigentum, the Carthaginians transported to Carthage all the dedicated things laid up in the Temples, the Statues and Things of greatest value; and having burnt all the Temples to Ashes, and plunder'd the City, they quarter'd there all Winter: And in the mean time furnish'd themselves with Engines and all sorts of Weapons, with a Design to Besiege Gela, the first thing they did the next Spring.

CHAP. XIV.

The Famous Battle of Arginuse at Sea, wherein the Athenians, were Victors. The Officers accus'd for not Burying the Dead. The Speech of Diomedon. The Death of Sophocles.

THE Athenians weaken'd with continual Losses, made all Strangers and Foreigners Free of their City that would engage with them in the War. When a great multitude were Incorporated into the City, the Commanders Listed all that were fit for War, Equip'd out of a Fleet of Sixty Sail, with which (every way well provided) they sail'd to Samos, where they found other Commanders, who had brought together Fourscore more Gallies from other Islands; and having procured ten more from the Samians, they weighed Anchor, and made with their whole Fleet (consisting of an Hundred and Fifty Sail) to the Islands Arginuse, with a Design to raise the Siege at Mitylene. But Callicratides, the Lacedemonian General, having Intelligence of the Approach of the Enemy, left Etonicus with a great Force, to maintain the Siege, and sail'd himself with all Speed, with a Fleet of one Hundred and forty Sail, well Man'd, to Arginuse. These Islands were then inhabited, and had a little Town in them Peopl'd by the Eolians. They lye between Mitylene and Cuma, near to the Continent and the Promontory Catanides. The Athenians, in regard their Navy, lay not far from thence, heard time enough of the Advance of the Enemy's Fleet: yet because the Wind was very high, they wav'd fighting that day, and prepar'd to engage the next. The like did the Lacedemonians; for the Augures on both sides disswaded each from fighting. For the Head of the Lacedemonians Sacrifice, being laid upon the Shore, was suddainly wash'd away by the violence of the Waves. Upon


Page 349

which the Priest foretold the death of the Admiral: To which it is reported Callicratides made Answer, That the Glory of Sparta would not be obscur'd by his Death. Thrasybulus likewise, the Athenians Admiral, who had the Chief Command that Day, had this Dream; the Night before, he dreamt that he, and six other Commanders, in a full Theater at Athens, acted the Tragedy of Euripides, call'd Phenissa, and that the Enemies acted that call'd The Suppliants; and that at length he obtain'd a Cadmean Victory, and all of them were kill'd, like those at the Siege of Thebes: which when the Sooth-sayer heard, he interpreted it, That seven of the Chief Commanders should fall in the Fight. But in regard that the Intrails portended Victory, they commanded nothing should be said of their Deaths, but only to their Friends; but that they should publish abroad to the whole Army, that Victory was certainly promis'd by the View of the Sacrifices.

Then Callicratides calling the Souldiers together, made a Speech to them suited to the Occasion; and further added, 

I am so chearful and ready to undergo all hazards for the sake of my Country, that altho' the Augur has foretold my Death, by the Portents of the Sacrifice; yet inasmuch as he has also pronounc'd assured Victory to You, I am impatient of delay, and ready and willing presently to die. And that the Army may not be disturb'd, and in confusion by the Death of their Admiral, I now appoint another, who may succeed me, in case I fall; and that is Clearchus, a Man known to be an experienc'd good Souldier.

Callicratides stirr'd up many with these words, to imitate his Valour, and to hasten the Battle. The Lacedemonians now encouraging one another, imbarqu'd; so likewise the Athenians (hearten'd by their Officers) went aboard, and every one plac'd themselves according to their Squadrons. Thrasybulus and Pericles commanded the Right Wing, (this was Pericles the Son of that Pericles, the Famous Orator, whose Surname was Olympus.) But the Command of part of this Wing he deliver'd to Theramenes, who was at first but a Common Souldier, but afterwards at several times, commanded considerable Forces: the rest of the Officers he plac'd in their Order throughout the whole Fleet; and compassing the Islands call'd Arginuse, he drew out his Fleet in a Line, as long as possibly he could. On the other side, Callicratides advancing into the open Sea, commanded the Right Wing: The Beotians were in the Left, commanded by Thrasonidas the Theban. But when they saw that they could not reach to equal the Line of the Enemy, because the Islands stretcht out so far, he divided his Navy into two parts, and fought in two places. This amaz'd the Beholders from all parts, as if four Fleets, with no less than three hundred Sail, close together, were hotly engag'd. For this was the greatest Sea-Fight that ever was fought, by Grecians against Grecians, that any History commemorates. And now at one instant all the Trumpets were commanded by the Admirals to sound a Charge, and the Armies on both sides set up great Shouts in their turns, one against another, and plying their Oars with great heat and earnestness, every one strove who should be the first in making the Onset. For there were many, that by reason of the long continuance of the War, were well instructed for Fights at Sea; and the Battle was very hot and obstinate on both sides, in regard the Best and Stoutest Men were got together to fight, in order to get or lose all at once: For none doubted but this Battle would put an end to the War, which side soever got the Victory. But Callicratides, knowing by the Predictions of the Augurs, that he was to die, endeavour'd to make his Death Honourable and Glorious. Therefore he made up fiercely upon the Gallies of Nausias, the Vice-Admiral, whom he sunk, with those next to him, at the first Charge; others he disabled, striking them through with the Beaks of his Ships, and others he made useless for Fight, by brushing off their Oars. At length he struck the Ship of Pericles with such violence, that he tore off one great part from another. But the Fore-part of his own Ship was so fix'd by the Fierceness of the Stroak in the Prow of his Enemies Ship, that he could not clear himself off: Upon which Pericles cast Grappling-Irons into Callicratides his Vessel, and so forc'd him up close side to side; and thereupon the Athenians in a great Body, boarded him, and put all in the Ship to the Sword. Here it is reported, that Callicratides (after he had behav'd himself with great Gallantry a long time, and receiv'd many Wounds in all parts of his Body) at length weary'd out, fell down dead: The Report of his Death, running through the Fleet, the Peloponesians struck with a Pannick Fear, began presently to fly: But tho' the Right Wing fled, yet the Beotians in the Left, stuck to it, and fought stoutly for some time; for they of Eubea (being in the same common Danger) were very Faithful to them, and all those


Page 350

that had revolted from the Athenians, were afraid lest they (if they recover'd their former Power) would revenge themselves upon them that had deserted 'em. But when the Beotians saw that the greatest part of the Fleet was routed and broken in pieces, and that they were more and more press'd upon by multitudes that made up upon them, they fled outright. Some of the Peloponesians fled to Chius, others to Cumea. But the Athenians pursu'd 'em very far, and fill'd all the Sea-Coasts with Carcasses of the Dead, and Wrecks of Ships. After this, some of the Commanders advis'd, that the Bodies of those that were slain, should be taken up, because the Athenians us'd severely to punish them, who neglected that last Office. Others were rather for sailing back forthwith to Mitylene, and in the first place to raise the Siege: But presently arose a most violent Tempest, by which the Ships were greatly shatter'd and broken; so that by this, and the toil of the late Engagement, the Spirits of the Souldiers were very low, so that the taking up the Bodies of the Dead was defer'd. Atlength, the Storm rag'd and increas'd to that degree, that they could neither gain Mitylene, nor perform what they ought for the Dead: So that being driven back by the Storm, they arriv'd with the Fleet at Arginuse. In this Fight the Athenians lost five and twenty of their Ships, and most of their Men in them. But the Peloponesians seventy seven. There were so many Ships and Men destroy'd, that all the Sea-Coasts of Cumea and Phocea, seem'd to be fill'd with Carcasses and Wrecks.

Eleonicus, who was besieging Mitylene, having certain Intelligence of the Defeat of the Peloponesians, sent away all the Shipping to Chios; he himself march'd away with the Land-Army, to a Confederate City of the Tyrrenians, being afraid, lest, by a Sally out of the Town, when the Athenian Fleet came up, his whole Army should be cut off. When the Athenians arriv'd at Mitylene, they took thence Conon along with them, with forty Sail, and pass'd over to Samos, and there wasted and spoil'd all their Enemy's Country.

After these thing, the Lacedemonians in Eolis and Ionia, and the dispers'd Islands, met in a Common Council at Ephesus; and after many Bandings and Discourses, pro and con, they at length resolv'd to send an Ambassador to Sparta, to desire that Lysander might be constituted Admiral of the Navy: For that he approv'd himself with great Commendation, when he was in Command, and was judg'd to be the most Shilful General.

But because the Lacedemonians would not alter the Ancient Custom of their Country, they made Aratus Admiral; and sent Lysander with him, as a Private Man, to be his Assistant; with this strict Command, That the General should always follow his Advice and Councel. Thus being sent forth to manage the Command of the Fleet, they got togetherfrom Peloponesus and their Confederates, as many Gallies as possibly they could.

The Athenians when they receiv'd the happy Tydings of their Success at Arginuse, highly applauded the Commanders for the Victory; but were very angry that they neglected to bury those, who had lost their Lives in the Defence of the Government.

Theramenes and Thrasybulus, coming before the rest to Athens, the other Officers suspecting they would accuse 'em to the People for their Neglect, in not Burying the Dead, sent Letters against them, whereby they signify'd, that the Care of Interring them that were slain, was committed to them, which was the Chief Cause of all the Mischief that afterwards fell upon the other Officers. For whereas they might before have easily made Theramenes, and the rest of his Party, their Patrons and Advocats in the Accusations laid against them, being Men that were excellent Speakers, and of great Interest; and that which was most considerable, were best acquainted with every thing that was done in the Battle; Now on the contrary, they had so far disoblig'd 'em, that they became their most bitter Enemies and Prosecutors. For when the Letters were read to the People, they were presently all on fire against Theramenes: But he having clear'd himself, their Rage was all turn'd again upon the other Officers. The People therefore assign'd 'em a Day to be heard, and order'd the Forces to be deliver'd over to Conon, whom they exempted from this Bill; all the rest they commanded by an Absolute Decree forthwith to return: Among whom Aristogenes and Protomachus, fearing the Rage of the People, fled: But Thrasyllus, Calliades, Lysias, Pericles, and Aristocrates, return'd to Athens, with agreat number of Ships, upon this Confidence, that by the Mediation of those they had brought along with them, who were very many, they should be acquit. But after the Assembly came together, the People yielded a quick Ear to the Accusations, and whatever the Demagogues said, it was well taken; but when the Accus'd began to speak, a Tumult arose, and


Page 351

they could not be heard in their own Defence. And besides, the Relations of them that were kill'd, did no little further their Ruin; who came weeping and wailing into the Senate, earnestly desiring that the Commanders might suffer for their Neglect, in not Burying them, who had valiantly lost their Lives for their Country. At length, the Friends of the Dead, and those that prosecuted with Theramenes (of whom many were then present) prevail'd. And thereupon the Commanders were condemn'd to die, and their Estates to be conficate. Sentence being thus given, just as they were leading to Execution by the Lictors, Diomedon, one of them, an Excellent Souldier, and reputed a Just Man, and Eminent in all other Virtuous Qualifications, stood up, and Silence being made through the whole Assembly, thus began:—

Ye Men of Athens, we heartily wish that the Sentence now pronounc'd against us, may issue in the Prosperity and Happiness of this City: But since Fortune has prevented us from paying our Vows, and giving Thanks to the Gods, for the Victory, 'tis most just and fit You should perform it: See therefore that Ye do it to Jove, to Apollo, and the Glorious Goddesses; for by Prayers to them, we have overcome the Enemy.

 When he had said this, he was hurry'd away with the rest to Execution; many of the Best of the Citizens bemoaning his Fate with Tears, For he who now went to suffer, never in the least complain'd of the Hardness of his Case, but only advis'd his Countrymen: (who then acted so wickedly) to make their Addresses to the Gods; which was a clear Indication of a Man of a Pious and Generous Spirit, little deserving such base and unworthy Usage. In short, the Eleven Commanders were all put to Death, by the Officers appointed by Law, tho' they had never done the City the least Injury; but on the contrary, benefited their Country, by a Victory gain'd in a Sea-Fight, the Greatest that was ever fought, by Grecians against Grecians; and besides were Men whose Valour had been remarkable, in several Battles, and who had had Statues before erected in Memory of their Victories. The People were then so desperately mad and enrag'd by the Orators, beyond all Bounds of Justice, that they gratify'd their Anger and Revenge, upon Men that were not only Innocent, but deserv'd rather Honour and Rewards.

But not long after, both the Accusers that stir'd up the People, and the People themselves, who gave Credit to their Criminations, sorely Repented of what was done, as if God himself had taken Revenge of them for the Fact: For they that were so willing to be deluded by these Malicious Instigations, not long after receiv'd the Reward of their Folly; when not One, but thirty Domineering Masters were by force set over them. Then was Callixeus (he that gave Sentence of Death against the Accus'd) upon this Change of the People, charg'd as one that had deceiv'd them, and without being admitted to any Defence, was Committed, and carry'd to the Common-Goal; but by the help of some Friends, breaking through the Walls, he fled to the Enemy at Deoelea; so that by the Avoiding of Death at this time, he was pointed at, as it were, by the Finger, for his Notorious Wickedness, not only at Athens, but amongst all the other Grecians abroad, all the Days of his Life after.

These are almost all the Things that are reported to be done this Year. Amongst the Writers, Philistus concludes the First Part of the Affairs of Sicily with this Year, and with the Taking of Agrigentum; comprehending in seven Volumes; the History of above Eight hundred Years. He begins the other Part where the former ended, and proceeds in his Relations contain'd in four Books. About this Time died Sophocles, the Tragedian, the Son of Theophilus, ninety Years of Age. He gain'd eighteen Victories upon the Stage: It's reported of him, That when he Acted his last Tragedy, and came off Conqueror, he fell into so violent a Laughter, that he fell down dead. Appollodorus, a Writer of Chronicles, reports that Euripides likewise died this Year. But others relate, That being entertain'd with Archelaus, King of Macedonia, once walking abroad into the Fields, some Dogs met him, by whom he was torn in pieces; and so miserably perish'd, a little before this Year.


Page 352

CHAP. XV.

Lysander made Sole Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet. He takes Caramium. The Ruin of the Athenian Fleet at Aegos Potamos. Athens taken by Lysander. The End of the Peloponesian War.

THE Year next before being ended, Alexias was made Archon of Athens this Year; and at Rome three Military Tribunes again executed the Places of Consuls, Caius Julius, Publius Cornelius, and Caius Servilius. During their Magistracy, after the Commanders were put to Death, the Athenians made Philocles General of the Army; and delivering the Fleet to him, sent him away to Conon, Commissioning them with a Joynt-Power, in the Management of the War. When he came to Conon at Samos, he Man'd all the Ships to the number of an hundred seventy three. Twenty of these he left there, and with the rest he and Conon set Sail for the Hellespont.

Lysander, in the mean time, High-Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet, with 35 Sail, which he had got together from Peloponesus, and their Confederates, next adjoyning, pass'd over to Ephesus; and fitted out a Fleet, which he sent for from Chios. Then he goes to Cyrus, the Son of Darius, and receives from him a great Sum of Mony, for Payment of the Army. Cyrus being sent for by his Father into Persia, intrusts the Management of the Affairs of his Provinces to Lysander; and commands all the Tribute to be pay'd to him: who being now fully supply'd with all things necessary for the War, returns to Ephesus. At this Time some in Miletus, that favour'd an Oligarchy, by the help of the Lacedemonians, abolish'd the Democracy. And to that End, in the beginning of the Sedition, when the Dionysian Festivals were celebrated, forty that were the Greatest Enemies against their Faction, were surpriz'd in their Houses, and murther'd. Afterwards, observing their Opportunity, when the Forum was full of People, they cut off the Heads of 300 of the Richest of the Citizens. In the mean time, above 1000 of the most Considerable Persons of Quality, who were for the Democracy, afraid of the Present imminent Danger, fled to Pharnabasus, the Persian Lord-Lieutenant, who receiv'd them very courteously, and bestow'd upon every one a Stater of Gold, and order'd Clauda, a Castle of Claudia for their Residence.

Lysander, with a great Navy, making for Thasus, a City of Caria, in League with the Athenians, takes it by Storm, and puts all the Men to the number of 800 to the Sword, and sold all the Women and Children for Slaves, and raz'd the City to the Ground. After this he sail'd to Attica, and many other Places; but did nothing memorable. Therefore we have nothing to write further concerning these Matters. The Sum of all is, having taken Lampsatus, he dismiss'd the Athenian Garrison there, and sent them Home; and after he had plunder'd the City, restor'd it to the Inhabitants.

The Athenian Admirals, having Intelligence that the Lacedemonians had besieg'd Lampsacus with all their Forces, got together all their Fleet from every place, and with all speed made for Lampsacus, with an hundred and fourscore Sail; but hearing that it was taken, they Anchor'd at Aegos Potamos, and there lay. Not long after they weigh'd Anchor, and made out against the Enemy, and dar'd them every Day to a Battle; but when the Peloponesians would not stir, the Athenians began to consider what was best to be done, for that they could not stay long there with the Fleet. Hereupon Alcibiades came to them, and assur'd them that Medocus and Seuthes, Kings of the Thracians, who were his special Friends, had offer'd him a great Army, if he would fight against the Lacedemonians; and therefore, if he might have some share in the Command, he ingag'd either to force the Lacedemonians to sight at Sea, or to fight them at Land, by an Army out of Thrace. This Alcibiades did to evidence how great his desire was to procure some Eminent Advantage to his Country, and by fresh Service, to regain their former good Opinion of him. But the Athenian Commanders concluded, that if matters fell out ill, all the Blame would be laid upon them; and if well, Alcibiades would reap all the Honour of the Victory. Therefore they order'd him to withdraw, and not to come near the Army for the future.


Page 353

The Enemy still avoiding a Fight, and Provision growing scarce in the Army Philocles, who commanded that day, order'd the rest of the Officers of the Fleet, to ship their Men, and follow him, who having thirty Sail in readiness, forthwith loos'd out of the Harbour. Lysander having Intelligence of this, by some Deserters, makes out to Sea with his whole Navy, puts Philocles to Flight, and sails up to the rest of the Athenian Fleet. Hereupon the Athenians which lay there (in regard they had but few of their Men on Board) were all in a great Fear, and Consternation, through the unexpected Approach of the Enemy. Lysander therefore, understanding the Confusion and Disorder of his Enemy's Fleet, commanded Etonicus on Shoar with the Land-Army, who forthwith being now landed, judg'd it highly necessary to improve the present Opportunity; and therefore suddainly forces into part of the Enemy's Camp: And Lysander himself coming up with all his Fleet, well Man'd and provided, hal'd as many of the Athenian Vessels as there were in the Harbour, with Grappling-Irons, to the Shoar. Upon this the Athenians were so amaz'd, and struck with such a suddain astonishment, (not having time either to make out to Sea with their Ships, or to form themselves into a Body at Land) so that after a short Resistance, they turn'd their Backs. Hereupon some forsook their Ships, others fled out of the Camp; every one seeking where he could best preserve himself. Scarce ten of all the Commanders and Officers of the Fleet escap'd; amongst whom was Conon, who not daring to return to Athens, out of fear of the People, fled to Evagoras, Prince of Cyprus, his special góod Friend. Many of the Souldiers fled by Land to Sestos. Lysander possess'd himself of all the rest of the Fleet, and took Philocles, one of the Generals, prisoner, and carry'd him to Lampsacus, where he put him to death. Then he commanded Messengers to Lacedemon to carry the News of the Victory; and order'd one of the Best of the Gallies to transport 'em, magnificently, adorning it with the Arms and Spoils taken from the Enemy.

Next, he march'd with his whole Army to Sestos, in pursuit of those that fled thither, took the City, and dismiss'd the Athenians upon Terms. From thence he sail'd with all speed to Samos, and forthwith prepares to besiege the City; but sent away Gylippus (he who so eminently assisted the Syracusians at Sea) to Sparta, with fifteen hundred Talents of Silver, besides the Spoils. The Mony was made up in little Bags, and to every Bag was fix'd a Seytale, upon which was written the Sum of Mony therein contain'd. Gylippus, being ignorant of what was done, unties the Bags, and takes out three hundred Talents; but his Theft being discover'd to the Ephori, by the Scytales, he fled, and thereupon was condem

•

'd to die. Clearchus, the Father of Gylippus, in former times, for his having receiv'd Mony of Pericles, not to invade Attica, likewise fled, and was adjudg'd to die, and liv'd all his Days a Banish'd Man among the Thurians in Italy. These two Men, who were otherwise Virtuous; yet by these sordid Acts, stain'd and blemish'd all the Worthy Actions of the rest of their Lives.

When the Athenians were fully satisfy'd that they were totally ruin'd, they determin'd to strive no longer to be Masters at Sea; but now employ'd all their Care to repair their Walls; and block't up the Haven, expecting nothing more certain than a Siege, which happen'd accordingly; for presently both Agis and Pausanias, the Lacedemonian Generals, broke into Attica with great Forces, and incamp'd under the very Walls of Athens. And Lysander entred the Pyraeum, with above two hundred Sail. The Athenians, tho' they were press'd on every side with so many Mischiefs, yet stood out, and easily defended the City for some time. But the Peloponesians resolv'd in Council, in regard it would be very difficult to force the Place, to withdraw their Forces out of Attica, and by their Navy, to hinder all Provision from being brought into the City: Which being put in Execution, the Athenians were reduc'd into extream Want of all things, especially of Food; which was us'd to be imported to them by Sea.

Want pressing upon them every day more and more, the City was fill'd with the Dead. Upon which, those that surviv'd sent forth Ambassadors, and procur'd the Terms and Conditions following; viz. That the Long Fortifications of the Piraeum, and their Walls should be demolish'd: That they should never have above ten Long Ships: That they should leave all the Cities, and be Subject to the Lacedemonians. And thus ended the Peloponesian War, after it had continu'd Seven and twenty Years; a War of the longest Duration of any come to our Knowledge.


Page 354

CHAP. XVI.

Agrigentum sackt by Imilcar the Carthaginian. The Carthaginians besiege Gela. Dionysius goes to the aid of Gela. The Skirmishes before Gela. Camarina deserted by the Order of Dionysius. The Souldiers inrag'd at Dionysius, he hastens to Syracuse. Imilcar makes Peace with Dionysius, and returns to Carthage. The end of the first Carthaginian War with Dionysius.

A Little while after. Darius King of Asia died, having reigned Nineteen Years; Artaxerxes his Eldest Son succeeded him in the Kingdom, and reign'd 43 Years. About this time Apollodorus the Athenian reports, that Antimachus the Poet flourish'd. Imilcar the Carthaginian General, at the return of the Spring, sack'd the City Agrigentum in Sicily, and carry'd away the Carv'd Work, and richest Furniture out of all those Temples that were not utterly consum'd by the Fire. From hence he made an inroad with his whole Army into the Country of Geloa. From whence, and from the Camarineans (having made great Devastations,) he fill'd his Camp with all sorts of Plunder. Then marching for Gela, he incampt at a River of the same Name. There was a brazen Statue of Apollo, of a wonderful bigness at Gela in the Suburbs of the City, which the Carthaginians took and sent away to Tyre. The Geleans had dedicated it by the Command of the Oracle of Apollo. But the Tyrians some time after, when they were Besieg'd by Alexander the Macedonian, reproach'd the Image, as if it sided with the Enemy. But after that Alexander had taken the City, the very same Day of the Week, and the very Hour (as Timeus reports) that the Carthaginians committed the Sacriledge against Apollo at Gela, the Grecians honour'd the God with many magnificent Gifts and costly Sacrifices, as he by whose help they had won the City. Though these things happen'd in times far distant one from another, yet because the thing was very remarkable, I thought it no digression to compare one Event with the other in this Place.

The Carthaginians when they had cut down all the Trees about Gela, fortify'd themselves by a Wall and deep Trench drawn round their Camp; for they expected that Dionysius would come to the aid of the Besieg'd with a great Army. They of Gela had at the beginning of the Siege to avoid Danger, determin'd to send away their Wives and Children to Syracuse; but when the Women all ran together to the Altars in the Forum, earnestly praying that they might undergo the same Fate with their Husbands, they were suffered to stay. After this, the Souldiers in the Town dividing themselves into several Squadrons, sent out part Abroad; who being well acquainted with all the Ways and Passages, fell upon the Enemy that were straggling here and there, and not only brought in Prisoners every Day, but kill'd many. And when the Carthaginians had batter'd down part of the Walls with their Rams, the Besieg'd stoutly defended them, and what was beaten down in the Day, both Women and Children join'd with the rest and repair'd in the Night: For they that were young and able, were continually in Arms, and ingag'd with the Enemy; the rest were diligently imploy'd in working and other necessary Services. To conclude, they bore the brunt with that Valour and Resolution, that though their City was unfortify'd, and they receiv'd no Aid from their Confederates, and their Walls were broke down in many Places, yet Fear did not at all abate their Courage.

In the mean time Dionysius Tyrant of Syracuse, sent for the Grecian Succours in Italy, and Aids from his Confederates, and imploy'd every one almost that was able to bear Arms in Syracuse, and join'd the Army of the Mercenaries with the rest. The whole amounted not to above Fifty (as some report) but (as Timeus relates) not above Thirty Thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse, with Fifty Sail of Ships. With these Forces he hastens to the Aid of Gela. When he arriv'd at the City, he encamp'd near the Sea: This he did that his Forces might not be divided, but might fall upon the Enemy both by Sea and Land at once; for by skirmishing with his light Arm'd Men, he prevented their Foraging. And by his Horse, and the help of his Shipping, he endeavour'd to intercept all Provisions that should be brought to the Carthaginians from any part of their Dominions. However he effected nothing, after he had continu'd there Twenty Days. After this, he divided his Foot into Three


Page 355

Bodies; one he deliver'd into the Hands of the Sicilians, with a Command that having the City on the Left, they should fall upon the Trenches and Fortifications of the Enemy: Another Body made up of Succours from the Confederates, he order'd should leave the City on the Right, and march to the Shoar. He himself with the Mercenaries design'd to pass through the City, to the Place where the Carthaginian Engines were plac'd; and commanded the Horse, that as soon as a Sign was given by the Foot, they should pass the River, and disperse themselves over the Fields; and if they discern'd that their own Party prevail'd, they should join 'em, and if worsted, should succour them. He commanded likewise the Officers of the Fleet, that as soon as the Italian Bands came up, they should sail near to the Enemies Camp. While every one was executing the Orders given him in charge, the Carthaginians oppos'd the Enemies landing, and made it their business to defend that part of their Camp towards the Shoar where it was not fortify'd. At the very same instant, the Italians coming in near the Shoar, set upon the Carthaginians Camp, and there intercepted many that had issu'd out to prevent the Landing: And when they had put them to flight that were left to guard that part, they assaulted the whole Camp. Upon which the Carthaginians with the greatest part of their Army (now return'd) hotly ingag'd them, and with much ado drave them back beyond the Trenches which they had gain'd, and pass'd. The Italians being overpowr'd with the multitude of the Barbarians, were forc'd to retreat, and fell into a straight and narrow Pass within the Lines, none of their Fellows advancing to support them; for the Siculi who were far off, came not up in convenient time; and Dionysius's Mercenaries because they could not march swift enough through the Streets of the City, could not succour them. Indeed the Gel

••ns

 for a little way made a Sally to relieve the Italians, but fearing the Walls would be left naked, they halted and return'd; so that the Iberians and Campanians, with the Carthaginian Auxiliaries, fell very sharply upon the Greeks of Italy, and kill'd above a Thousand of them; but the Pursuers being driven back by Darts and other Shot from the Ships, the rest came safe into the Town. In the mean time the Siculi being ingag'd with the Carthaginians in another part, kill'd many of them, and pursu'd the rest up to their very Camp. But both the Iberians, Campanians and Carthaginians coming to the aid of the Africans, the Siculi having lost Six Hundred Men, return'd into the City. The Horse likewise when they saw all was lost, made to the City, especially for that the Enemy was pressing upon them on every side. Dionysius having passed through the City with his Mercenaries with great difficulty, when he understood that his Army was broken, marcht back, and shelter'd himself within the Walls of the Town: Then calling a Senate of those that were Friends, they consulted concerning the present state of the War; where it was concluded by all, that (because the Enemy was so strong) that was now no Place to put all to hazard. Dionysius therefore sent forth a Trumpet in the Evening, to gain a Cessation of Arms for the burying of the Dead till the next Day. Then about the first Watch of the Night, he sent a Multitude of People out of the Town, and he himself about Midnight march'd forth with the Army, leaving behind him 2000 light Arm'd Men, commanding them to make Fires all the Night long, and set up continual Shouts that the Enemy might believe that the whole Army was still in the Town; but as soon as it began to be light, those left behind with a swift March follow'd Dionysius's Army. When the Carthaginians understood the Cheat, they led the Army into the City, and made a Prey of whatever was left in the Houses.

When Dionysius came to Camarina, he caus'd all the Citizens, with their Wives and Children to remove to Syracuse; and because Fear would not admit of any delay, some carry'd what Gold and Silver they were able; others with their Parents and little Children hasten'd away, without the least regard to their Estates. Some who were old and sick, were left behind by their Friends and Relations, every one thinking that the Carthaginians were at his Heels: For the late ruin and destruction of Sclinunte, Himera and Agrigentum struck all with such a terrour, and fill'd every one with such an apprehension of the Beastly cruelty of the Barbarians, as if it had been then present before their Eyes; for they put all the Captives to the Sword, shew'd no Compassion to any; some they crucify'd, and others they tormented with intolerable Scoffs and Reproaches. The Souldiers of Dionysius seeing Men, Women and Children driven in Droves from Two several Cities in one and the same Country, were much incens'd, pitying the sad Condition of the miserable People: For when they saw young Gentlemen and Ladies in marriagable Estate, unbecoming their State and Age, tumultuously and regardlesly to be driven, led and drag'd in Droves


Page 356

through the High-ways, the time not allowing any regard or respect either to old and grave Men, or young and tender Women, they were not a little affected: And especially it greatly griev'd them, to see decrepit old People forc'd beyond the strength of nature, to go as fast as those that were young. These were the things that enflam'd the Souldiers with Rage against Dionysius; for they suspected that he did this on purpose, that he might gain the Sovereignty over the rest of the Cities, through their fear of the Carthaginians: For they mutter'd among themselves, how small a time he gave his Assistance; that none of his Mercenary Souldiers were kill'd; that he fled so hastily when he had suffer'd so little Loss, and especially when no Enemy pursu'd. Therefore all those who had long wisht for an opportunity to revolt, now did their utmost to shake off the Yoke of his Tyranny, prompted thereunto as it were by the instinct of a Divine Providence. So that all the Italians forthwith left his Camp, and marcht homewards through the Heart of the Country. The Syracusian Horsemen likewise watch'd for an opportunity how they might readily kill the Tyrant on the Road: But observing the Mercenaries constantly to attend close to his Person (unanimously with one consent) they set Spurs to their Horses, and rode away to Syracuse, where they enter'd into the Arsenal without any opposition; the Guard being altogether ignorant of what was done at Gela. Upon their coming there, they forthwith rifled Dionysius's Palace, and carry'd away all his Gold, Silver and rich Furniture out of his House, and most cruelly and filthily abus'd his Wife, to vex and molest the Tyrant the more, and that this sort of Revenge might be a clear Evidence to him, of the Conspiracy against him.

Dionysius suspecting upon his March what was done, hastens to the City with all the Horse and Foot he could confide in, with all possible speed; for he concluded he had no better course to take to disappoint the Horsemen that were gone, than to prevent all intelligence, judging his Design would be more easily accomplish'd, if he were sooner at Syracuse than they could believe; which happen'd accordingly: For the Horsemen thought that Dionysius durst neither stay with, nor be far from his Army. And therefore now as confident that they had gain'd their purpose, they nois'd Abroad that Dionysius pretended to fly from Gela for fear of the Carthaginians, but in truth he fled from the Syracusians. In the mean time Dionysius having marcht without stop almost 400 Furlongs, came about Midnight to the Gates of Acradine, with 100 Horse, and 500 Foot, and finding them shut against him, caused Reeds there ready gather'd out of the Fenns (with which the Syracusians used to burn Lime) to be put to the Gates: While the Gates were on Fire, those that marcht flower came up to him: And when they were burnt down, he forthwith entred through Acradine with all the Forces with him. Upon which, those Horsemen (who were very few) that were of the Noblest Birth, and greatest Wealth (without staying for the Peoples help) got together in the Market-Place to oppose the Enemy; but were presently surrounded with the Mercenaries, and every Man kill'd with Darts and Pikes. Then Dionysius scouring the Streets of the City, put all to the Sword he met that were running here and there to aid their Fellows; and not only so, but enter'd likewise into the Houses of those he took to be his Enemies, of whom, he cut the Throats of some, and banish'd others. The rest of the Horsemen escap'd out of the Walls to that part of the City call'd Acradine. About break of Day the next Morning, all the rest of the Mercenaries, and the whole Sicilian Army came to Syracuse; but the Geleans and Camarineans incens'd against Dionysius, turn'd off to Leontium.

Imilcar at length forc'd by the Circumstances of his Affairs, sends an Herald to Syracuse, to offer Terms of Peace to the Conquer'd: This was very acceptable News to Dionysius, and thereupon Peace was made upon these Conditions, That besides the ancient Colonies the Sicanians, Selinuntes, Agrigentines and the Himereans, should be under the Power of the Carthaginians: That they of Gela and Camerine should be suffer'dto inhabit in their own Cities, yet without Walls, and be Tributary for the future to the Carthaginians: That the Leontines, Messenians and all the Sicilians should be free, and injoy all their own Laws and Liberties, save that the Syracusians should be subject to Dionysius. When all these Articles were ratify'd, the Carthaginians past over to Lybia, after they had lost above one half of their Army by the Plague, which afterwards raging through Lybia, Multitudes perish'd both of the Carthaginians and their Confederates.

And now we are come to the end of the Wars; of the Peloponosian War in Greece, and of the first Carthaginian War with Dionysius in Sicily: And so having finished what we hitherto design'd, we shall treat in the next Book of those Affairs thar fell out afterwards.


Page 357

BOOK XIV.

IT's Common and Natural to every Man to be touch'd to the Quick, to hear himselfEvil spoken of. For even they that are so notoriously Wicked that they cannot escape Reproaches, yet if they be told of their Faults, are presently in a Rage, and do all they can to palliate and cover their Crimes with finespun Excuses. Every one therefore ought to be very careful to avoid the doing of that which is of bad report, especially those that are in high Place and Power, and advanc'd above others in Dignity. For their actions, by reason of their eminency in the World, being more conspicuous than others, their Faults and Miscarriages likewise are more obvious. Therefore, let none in such places of Power and Authority, think to avoid Censures and Reproaches, if they are Corrupt and Unjust in their Administration. For should they escape Infamy and Disgrace during their Lives, yet let them be assur'd, that after-times will publish that Truth (to the stain of their Memory) which was stifled and smother'd some time before. Let this therefore startle wicked Men to consider, that they leave behind them an ugly Representation of themselves, to the view of Posterity for ever.

For though those things that follow after Death do nothing at all concern us, (as some Philosophers have spread abroad among the Common People) yet a wicked Course of Life is far the worse, inasmuch as the remembrance of it is hateful to all Posterity. Of which truth, he who seriously considers things related in this Book, may find ready at hand most clear and evident Examples. For the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, who by their Covetousness and Ambition involv'd their Country in dreadful Calamities, thereby in a short time not only lost their Authority, but left behind them an immortal stain and dishonour to their Names. And the Lacedaemonians, who had undoubtedly gain'd the Sovereignty of all Greece, lost what they gain'd, when they began to oppress their Associates and Confederates:
 
For the Thrones of Princes are supported by Justice and Mercy, but are overturn'd by Cruelty and Oppression of their Subjects.

 As we may see in the Example of Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, who though he had the smiles of Fortune above all the other Princes before him, yet Plots were to intrap him all his Life long; so that for fear of being Assassinated he was necessitated to wear an Iron Breast-plate upon his Coat, and after his Death, became an Instance and Example of the Peoples hatred to all succeeding Generations. But we shall speak of these thingsin their proper Places.

And now we come to those Affairs that have a Coherence with them before related, only distinguish'd by difference of Times. For in the foregoing Books we have treated of Things that were done from the sacking of Troy, to the End of the Peloponnesian War, and the Athenian Dynasty; which comprehends the space of Seven hundred Seventy nine Years. In this we shall add what next follows in order, and begin with the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, and from thence come down to the Taking of Rome by the Gauls, wherein is contain'd the History of Eighteen Years.


Page 358

CHAP. I.

A Peace between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. The Athenians disagree about the Manner of their Government. The Government by Thirty. The Cruelty of the Thirty Tyrants, and especially towards Theramenes.

BY the Dissolution of the Government at Athens (which happen'd the Seven hundred and Eightieth year current from the Destruction of Troy) the City was involv'd in an Anarchy; at that time werefour Military Tribunes appointed at Rome to execute the Consular Dignity, Caius Furius, Caius Servilius, Caius Valerius, and Numerius Fabius. And this Year was celebrated the Ninety Fourth Olympiad, in which Cocynas of Larissa was Victor. About this time the Athenians (their Power being broken) obtain'd a Peace with the Lacedaemonians, and liberty to govern according to their own Laws, upon Condition they demolish'd their Walls, which they pull'd down accordingly, but could not agree among themselves about the Form of their Government. For they that were for an Oligarchy gave their Votes for the restoring that ancient Government. But the greatest part who stood up for the Democracy, preferr'd the Government by the Senators, declaring that to be the truest Democracy.

When this banding one against another had continu'd some days; they for the Oligarchy sent to Lysander the Spartan, hoping thereby to gain the Point, in regard he was order'd (now the War was at an End) to settle the Government of the Cities, and in every Place he set up an Oligarchy. To this end they sail'd to him to Samos, where he then was, having lately taken the City. When they arriv'd and had crav'd his assistance he promis'd them his Aid; and thereupon (after he had made Thorax Governor of Samos) pass'd over to the Pireum with an hundred Sail. Then calling a General Assembly, he advis'd them to chuse Thirty Men, who should Govern the Common-wealth, and Manage all the Affairs of the City. Theramenes oppos'd this Proposal, repeating the Articles of the Peace, whereby it was agreed, That they should be govern'd according to the Laws of their own Country; and declar'd it would be a most intolerable piece of Injustice, if (against the Sacred Ties of an Oath) their Liberties must be thus ravish'd from them. Lysander answer'd, That the Athenians had first broken the League themselves, because they did not pull down their Walls within the time agreed, and grievously threaten'd Theramenes, and told him, That unless he desisted from his Oppositions against the Lacedaemonians, he would put him to Death.

Upon this, both Theramenes and the People, being in a great Fright, were forc'd by a general suffrage to abolish the Democracy: and Thirty Men were forthwith chosen to be Governors of the Common-Wealth, in Name call'd Fit Magistrates, but in Deed and in Truth nothing but Tyrants. But because the Justice and Moderation of Theramene was evidently discern'd by the People, they judg'd he would be a Bridle to the Covetousness of the rest of those plac'd over them, and thefore chose him to be one of the Thirty.

The Duty and Office of these Men was to chuse the Members of the Senate; to create Magistrates, and to make Laws for the Government of the City. But they forbore to make any Laws upon many specious pretences. Yet they fill'd the Senate and all the Places in the Magistracy with their own Creatures; who were call'd Pretors, but in truth, were meerly the Tyrants Tools.

At first they executed Justice upon Malefactors with great Severity, to the putting of them to Death: So that as yet they were well spoken of, and commended by every honest Citizen. But not long after, when they resolv'd to be Lawless, and set up an Arbitrary Power: they sent for a Garison from the Lacedaemonians, upon pretence that they would mould all things in the Government to the advantage of their Interest. For they knew very well that without a Foreign Force, they could not execute those Slaughters and Butcheries they design'd, for that all would as one Man rise up against them in their own defence.

When the Garison from Lacedaemon was come, they presently gain'd the Governor Callibius, with Bribes and other fawning and flattering Addresses. Then they singled out some of the richest Citizens, such as they thought fit, and charging them as Innovators, and Plotters against the Government, put them to Death, and consiscated their Estates. But when Theramenes oppos'd his Collegues, and others (who were Zealous for the Common-Wealth) stood up for the Defence of their Liberties; the Thirty call'd a Senate, in


Page 359

which Critias, the President, loads Theramenes with many grievous Crimes, and chiefly, that he betray'd that Government, in the Administration of which he himself voluntarily accepted a share with the rest. Theramenes, in Answer to what he said, so clear'd himself of every particular laid to his Charge, that he gain'd the good Opinion of the whole Senate. Upon which, Critias, with the rest of his Faction, (being afraid lest this Man should overturn the Oligarchy) surrounded him by the Soldiers, with their Swords drawn, with an intent forthwith to seize him.

But Theramenes foreseeing their purpose, rushes through, and flies to the Altar in the Senate-house, crying out, That he fled to the Gods, not that he hop'd thereby to save his Life, but that the Impiety of his Murtherers might be the more aggravated, by the violation of the Sacreds of their Religion: But though he was thence violently hal'd by the Lictors, yet bore all with an undaunted Spirit, being well principled in the Precepts of Philosophy, by his late Master Socrates. The People generally lamented his sad Misfortune, and unworthy Usage; but none durst rescue him by reason of the Soldiers that clos'd him round. But Socrates the Philosopher, and two of his Servants ran in, and endeavour'd to hinder the Lictors. But Theramenes intreated them they would forbear, declaring he could not but honour their Love and Courage shew'd on his behalf, but that it would be his greatest Misery if he should be the Cause of the Death of those who so greatly lov'd him. Socrates therefore, and the rest, (when they saw none to come in to their assistance, and that the stronger Faction more and more increas'd) let fall their design. Theramenes thus forc'd from the Altars, was led through the Market-place to Execution by the Officers, who had him in charge. But the common People (affrighted with the arm'd Men) while they bewail'd the Condition of this miserable Man (as one most unjustly condemn'd) at the same time likewise deplor'd their own Bondage and Slavery. For every poor Man seeing the Virtue of Theramenes so despis'd and trampled under foot, foresaw that they by reason of their mean and low Condition, would be valu'd no more than things set behind the Door.

After they had executed him, the Thirty, upon false Accusations, put to death several others of the rich Men whom they had written down in a List, and when they were dead, seiz'd upon all they had: Among whom was Niceratus, the Son of Nicias the General, who was formerly sent against the Syracusians. He was a Man civil and courteous to all, and almost the Richest and of greatest Interest of any Man in Athens; there was not therefore a Family but it lamented his Death, the Memory of his kind and sweet Disposition forcing Tears from every one. yet the Tyrants did not in the least remit any thing of their acts of Injustice and Violence, but growing still rather worse and worse in all manner of Villanies, they cut the Throats of Threescore of the richest Men in the City, that they might rowl in their Estates. The miserable Citizens being thus Slaughtered and Butchered, every day, almost all that had any thing to lose fled out of the City.

Then they put to death Autolicus, a most excellent and fluent Orator. And at length, every Man that was in any respect Eminent or Remarkable, they sacrific'd to their raging Lusts. By these Cruelties they so wasted and destroy'd the City, that above one half of its Inhabitants ran away and left it.

And although the Lacedaemonians saw the City thus spoil'd and ruin'd, yet they laugh'd in their Sleeves, having no desire it should ever recover its strength any more, as was very evident by many convincing arguments. For they made a Decree, that all the Fugitives from Athens in every part of Greece, should be carry'd back bound to the Tyrants; and whosoever did oppose the Execution of this Decree, should be fin'd Five Talents.

This was in truth look'd upon as a very cruel and inhumane Edict, but the other Cities stood so much in awe of the Power of the Spartans, that it was every where obey'd. But the Argives were the first that shew'd their Abhorrence of the Lacedaemonian cruelty, and pitying the miserable Condition of the Exiles, receiv'd them with all tenderness of Compassion. The Thebans likewise decreed a Mulct to be impos'd upon him that did not to his power assist any Fugitive whom he saw to be carry'd away by Force. To this pass were brought the Affairs of Athens.


Page 360

CHAP. II.

Dionysius his Projects to strengthen himself in the Sovereignty of Sicily. The Syracusians Revolt. They are dispersed.

IN the mean time Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily having made Peace with the Carthaginians, bent all his Care to strengthen himself in the Sovereignty. For he judg'd that the Syracusians, now brought under by the War, had nothing to do but to seek after the recovery of their Liberty. Perceiving therefore the Island belonging to the City (which was naturally fortify'd) would be easily defended by a small Garrison, he divided it from the rest of the City by a strong Wall, in which he built many high Towers, near one to another, and under it Guard-houses and Lodgings, which would contain great numbers of Men: He built likewise there at great expence a Castle which commanded the City, that it might be a shelter ready to fly to upon any suddain commotion; with the same Wall he took in the Arsenal near to the little Port call'd Laccius capable to receive Threescore Sail, and had a Gate through which only one Ship at a time could enter. Then he mark'd out the best pieces of Land, and gave them to his Friends and Officers: the rest he equally distributed amongst the Citizens, and in the number of Citizens he accounted Manumitted Slaves, and call'd them Neopolites, New Citizens. He bestowed likewise Houses every where upon the common People (except those Houses that were in the Island) and those he gave as a Reward to his Friends and Mercenaries.

Having now firmly fix'd himself in the Throne (as he conceiv'd) he march'd out with an Army against the Sicilians, with a design to being them into Slavery, who as yet were free, especially those who had lately assisted the Carthaginians. To this end he lay before the City of Herbessus, and furnish'd himself with every thing necessary for the Siege. They of Syracuse that were listed upon this Expedition, having got Arms into their hands, met together in private Cabals, and blam'd one another for that they did not assist the Horsmen in deposing of the Tyrant. It happen'd at that time, that one of Dionysius's Captains threatning a Soldier for his saucy Language, and presently offering to beat him upon his sharp Retorts, the Soldiers were so enrag'd, that they kill'd the Officer, whose Name was Doricus; and calling out with a loud voice to the Citizens to stand up for their Liberty, they sent for the Horse from Aetna; for they at the beginning of the Tyranny left the Tyrant and possess'd themselves of that Castle. Dionysius being now terrify'd with the defection of the Syracusians, broke up the Siege, and hasts away with all speed to Syracuse, and to possess himself of the City before any of his Enemies. Upon his flight thither the Fomenters of the Rebellion created them their Captains and Leaders, who had kill'd the Officer, and being join'd with the Horse from Aetna, they encampt in the Epipoli (as they are call'd) lying over against the Tyrant, blocking up his passage into the open Field. These Revolters likewise continually sent Messengers to Messina and Rhegium to sollicit their aid at Sea for the recovery of their Liberty. For these Cities at that time commonly set forth no less than Fourscore Gallies well Mann'd which they then sent to the Syracusians to assist them. Besides all this, they in the Epipoli promis'd by the Common Cryer a great reward to him that should kill the Tyrant; and, that they would Enfranchize all Foreigners that would come over to them. And now having provided Engines for the battering down of the Wall, they Assaulted the Island every day, and kindly receiv'd all Strangers that came to them. Upon this, Dionysius seeing himself forsaken of the Mercenaries, and that he was so straitly penn'd up, call'd his Friends together to consult what was best to be done in the present Exigency. For he so far despair'd of keeping the Sovereignty, that he did not so much as seek how he might subdue the Syracusians, but by what kind of Death he might put an end to his Life; lest he should be forc'd to a shameful Abdication of the Government. Heloris one of his Friends, (but others say the Poet his Father) told him, that the memory of his being a King, would be the Glorious Ornament of his Sepulcher; and Polyxenus his Father-inlaw advis'd him to break through upon the swiftest Horse he had, and get away to those parts under the power of the Carthaginians, and crave help of the Campanians, whom Imilcar had left to defend his Conquests in Sicily. But Philistus (who afterwards writ the History) gainsaid Polyxenus, and said, Dionysius, it doth not become thee by the swiftness of thy Horse to fly away from thy Principality, but rather with thy whole strength to hold it fast within thy very Thighs. Dionysius clos'd with this Advice, and resolv'd


Page 361

to suffer any thing rather than voluntarily lay down the Power he had gain'd. Whereupupon he sent Commissioners to them in Rebellion to desire liberty for himself and those with him to depart out of the City; and in the mean time a Messenger was secretly sent to the Campanians to promise them as much Money as they should demand, if they would come and raise the Siege. Matters being agreed upon, the Syracusians consented that the Tyrant should have liberty to be gone with Five Ships only. After this, things began to cool; and a part of them that lay at the Siege, were discharg'd and drawn off as useless; and many of the Foot rov'd about in the Fields, as if the Tyranny had now been altogether at an end. In the mean time the Campanians encourag'd by such generous Promises, first march'd to Aegyrus, and there leaving their Baggage with Aegyris the Prince of the Place, with Twelve hundred Light Horse speeded to Syracuse; where suddainly arriving, they surpriz'd the Syracusians, and killing many of them, they broke through into the Fort to Dionysius. About the same time Three hundred Mercenaries arriv'd, and came in to the assistance of the Tyrant; so that now he began to pluck up his Spirits. But the Syracusians when they perceiv'd that the Tyrant began to gather strength again, were divided into Parties, some were for continuing the Siege, others were for disbanding the Army, and leaving the City. As soon as Dionysius came to understand this, he Sallies out with what he had, and coming upon them when they were in a distraction, easily put them to flight, and pursu'd them to the place call'd the New City: Yet he kill'd not many there; for riding amongst his Men, he commanded them not to kill those that fled. The Syracusians were now suddenly scatter'd all over the Fields; and a while after above Seven thousand in a body came up to the Horsemen, and surrendred themselves. After the Burial of the Syracusians that were kill'd, Dionysius sent Messengers to Aetna to invite the Exiles there to lay aside their animosities, and to return to their Country, faithfully promising them that he would pardon and forget all that was past. Upon this, some who had left Wives and Children behind them (through the irresistible force of natural Affection) comply'd with the invitation. The rest (when the Messengers cry'd up his Humanity in burying of the Dead) answer'd, That Dionysius himself deserv'd no other Courtesie, and pray'd to the Gods that he might presently meet with it. So that these at Aetna could not by any means be wrought upon to trust the Tyrant's Word, but continu'd at Aetna, waiting for a fit opportunity to pull him down.

Dionysius carry'd himself with all the Respect and Tenderness imaginable towards those that return'd, to encourage the rest to come back to their Country. Then he discharg'd the Campanians with great Rewards, for he durst not trust their fickle and unconstant Humour. When they came to Entella they prevail'd with the Citizens to receive them into the Town, and to infranchise them as natural Inhabitants: but in the Night they treacherously fell upon the Townsmen and cut all their Throats, and Marrying their Wives, possest themselves of the City.

CHAP. III.

The Lacedemonians establish an Oligarchy in every City; Dionysius disarms the Syracusians. Alcibiades kill'd; the manner of his death. Clearchus his Tyranny in Bizantium. The Battle of Porus by him against his Country-men the Lacedemonians. Lysander projects to out the Heraclides of the Sovereign Power.

IN Greece, after the end of the Peloponnesian War, the Lacedemonians, by the general consent of all, had the Sovereign Command both at Sea and Land. Whereupon they Created Lysander again High Admiral, with Power to establish the Hermoste (as they call'd them) in every City where-ever he came. For because the Democratiste were Enemies to the Lacedemonians, they order'd an Oligarchy to be setled in every City, and impos'd a Tribute upon all they subdu'd. And althô they made no use of Money at any time before, yet now they Treasur'd up from the Tributes paid in by the Cities a Thousand Talents every Year.

When they had setled the Affairs of Greece, as they thought best for the support of their Authority, they sent Aristus, a Noble Person to Syracuse, under colour to abrogate the Tyranny, but in truth and underhand to confirm it. For they concluded, that if they


Page 362

were instrumental to fix him in his new got Empire, they should ever oblige him to be a Friend to them. Aristus after he came to Syracuse had private Conference with Dionysius concerning these Matters; and yet in the mean time encourag'd the People with fair promises to restore them to their former Liberties: But instead of that he betraid Nicoteles, the General of the Syracusians, and others who trusted in his Fidelity, and caus'd them all to be put to death, by which he strengthn'd the Tyrant, and by so base an Act stain'd his own Reputation, and dishonour'd his Country.

After this, when the People of Syracuse had left the City in the time of Harvest, to gather the Fruits, Dionysius enters into every one of their Houses, and takes away all the Arms he could find: and presently after draws another Wall about the Castle, builds Shipping, and takes into Pay a great number of Strangers, and prepares whatever was necessary for the supporting of his Dominion; having experienc'd that the Syracusians would endure any thing rather than Slavery.

While these things were acting here and there, Pharnabazus, Darius's Lord-Lieutenant, to gratifie the Lacedemonians, surpriz'd Alcibiades and kill'd him. But in regard Ephorus gives an account of other things to be the causes of his death; I conceive it may not be altogether unprofitable if we relate what this Author hath recorded concerning the manner how Alcibiades lost his Life.

In his Seventeenth Book he says, that Cyrus secretly compacted with the Lacedemonians to make War against Artaxerxes, which coming to the Ears of Alcibiades, he forthwith hasts away to Pharnabazus, and informs him of the Intrigue, and desires from him a Passport to go to Artaxerxes, judging it fittest for him to give the first information of the Conspiracy to the King. But that when Pharnabazus heard this, he was resolv'd to be the first discoverer himself, and therefore forthwith sent a Messenger in whom he could most confide, and by him laid all open before the King. That when Alcibiades saw that Pharnabazus would not furnish him with Letters to make way for him to the King's Palace, he made a Journey to the Lieutenant and Governor of Paphlagonia, and desir'd his assistance to get to the King: And that Pharnabazus fearing lest the King should come to understand the Truth, sent some to lie in wait for Alcibiades in the way, and to murther him: and that these finding him in his Inn in Phrygia, rais'd up a Pile of Wood round his Lodging in the Night, and set it on fire; and that Alcibiades endeavouring to save himself in the midst of the Flames, partly by the Fire, and partly by Darts cast at him by his Enemies, there perish'd.

About the same time Democrates the Philosopher died, being Ninety Years of Age. And Lasthenes the Theban who wan the Prize this Olympiad, is said to run a Race on foot with a Running Horse, from Coronea to the Walls of Thebes, and won the Match. In Italy the Volsci set upon the Roman Garrison at Verugine, took the City it self, and kill'd many of the Garison-Soldiers,

After the Affairs of this Year thus past, Euclides became Chief Magistrate of Athens. And Four Military Tribunes bore the Consular Dignity at Rome, Publius Cornelius, Numerius Fabius, Lucius Valerius, and Terentius Maximus. During the time of their Governments, the Affairs of Byzantium were but in an ill posture, by reason of their intestine Seditions, and their Wars with the Thracians their Neighbours. Not being able to put an end to their Civil Discords, they desir'd a Governor from the Lacedemonians; to which end Clearchus was sent to them, who after the whole Power was put into his hands, got together a great number of Mercenaries, and acted more like a Tyrant than a Governor. For First, having invited the Magistrates of the City to a Feast, after a publick Sacrifice he caus'd them all to be put to Death. Presently after when there was none left to Govern the City, he strangled Thirty of the Chief Men of Byzantium, and seiz'd upon all their Goods to his own use. He likewise put to death some of the richest of the Citizens under colour of pretended Crimes, and others he banish'd. Having thus enrich'd himself, he Listed vast numbers of Foreign Troops, and confirm'd and strengthen'd himself in the Sovereignty. When the Cruelty and Power of the Tyrant was spread abroad; the Lacdemonians at the first sent Messengers to him to advise him to lay down his Government: But when he flatly refus'd, they sent an Army against him under the Command of Panthedas; but when Clearchus heard of his coming, he march'd away with his Forces to Selymbria, of which he had before possess'd himself. For by reason of his Cruelty in Byzantium he foresaw, that not only the Lacedemonians, but the Citizens would be his Enemies; and therefore concluding that he could with more safety march out against his Enemies from Selymbria, he brought all his Money together with his Army thither. When he came there and heard of the approach of the Lacedemonians he withdrew out to meet them, and at a place call'd Porus they engag'd. The Battle was doubtful à long


Page 363

time, but at length the valiant Spartans prevail'd, and the Tyrants Army was miserably destroy'd. Clearchus with a few escap'd to Selymbria, and was there a while besieg'd, but afterwards in a great fright he fled out of the Town in the night, and sail'd over to Jonia, where becoming familiar with Cyrus the King of Persia's Brother, he was made General of his Army. For Cyrus being made Chief of all the Princes and Governors of the Sea Coasts, and being of an high and aspiring Spirit, determin'd to make War against his Brother Artaxerxes; Looking therefore upon Clearchus to be a fellow of a bold and daring Spirit ready for any adventure, furnish'd him with Money, and order'd him to raise an Army of as many Foreigners as he could, hoping he had new got fit a Companion to assist him in the execution of those bold Attempts he had taken in hand. As for Lysander the Spartan, after he had setled all the Cities subject to the Lacedaemonians, according to the Orders and Directions of the Ephori, some to be govern'd by a Decemvirate, others by an Oligarchy, became of great Note and Reputation at Sparta: For by his Conduct he had put an end to the Peloponnesian War, and thereby had gain'd for his Country the Sovereign Command both at Sea and Land without controul. Being puft up with this Success, he design'd to put an end to the Reign of the Heraclidae, and to that end endeavour'd so to contrive the matter, as to procure a Decree, That any Spartan whatsoever should be capable of being elected King. Thereby he hop'd that the Regal Power would presently be devolv'd upon himself, for the Great and Noble Services that he had done. But considering that the Lacedaemonians were led much by the Answers given by the Oracle, he resolv'd to bribe the Prophetess of Delphos with a large Sum of Money: For he concluded, that if he were favour'd by the Oracle, his Business was done according to his Heart's desire. But when he saw that by his repeated and continual Promises of Reward, day by day, he could not prevail, he address'd himself upon the same account to the Priest of the Oracle at Dodona, by one Pherecrates of the Family of Apolloniatus, who was familiarly acquainted with the Officers of that Temple.

But being disappointed here likewise, he took a Journey to Cerene, under colour to pay a Vow to Jupiter Hammon, but in truth to no other purpose than to bribe that Oracle: To that end he carry'd with him a great Sum of Money to bring over the Priests of that Temple to his Interest: For Lybis, the King of that Country, had been his Father's Guest, and for the great Love and Friendship that there was between them, the Brother of Lysander, was call'd Lybis. But notwithstanding all his hopes to prevail, by his Interest in the King and the Fulness of his Purse, he was not only frustrated of his Hope there, but the Priests of the Oracle sent Ambassadors to Sparta, and accus'd Lysander for his offering of Bribes to corrupt the Oracle. Upon which, when he was return'd to Lacedaemon, he was call'd to answer to the Charge: But he so subtilly manag'd his Cause, that he came off clear; and nothing was discern'd concerning his Prospect to abolish the Government of the Heraclidae. But, a little after his death, when some Notes of Accounts were sought for in his House, there was found a Speech eloquently penn'd, which he had fram'd to persuade the People, That the King's might be chosen out of any of the Families of Sparta.


Page 364

CHAP. IV.

Dionysius his Actions in Sicily. The Oropians subdu'd by the Thebans. The Lacedaemonians quarrel with the Eleans. Dionysius fortifies the Epipodae.

AS soon as Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, after his Peace made with the Carthaginians, had quieted all at home, he prepar'd to bring all the Towns and Cities of the Chalcideans into his Power; that is to say, Naxus, Catana, and Leontiúm. And he was the more earnest to gain these, because they lay near unto Syracuse, and would much facilitate the Enlargement of his Dominions. To this end he marches with his Forces to Enna, and takes the Castle, the Exiles there not being able to resist so great an Army.

Thence he goes against the Leontines, and encamps at the River Tyria, not far from the City, where he presently draws out his Army, and sends a Trumpet to the Town, commanding them to surrender the Place, supposing that out of Fear they would submit. But when he perceiv'd the Leontines slighted his Commands, and prepar'd to furnish themselves with all things necessary for a Siege; having not then with him his Engines of Battery, he drew off for the present, and wasted and spoil'd the Country round about.

Thence he march'd against the Siculi, pretending these were the People he chiefly aim'd at in the War, thereby to make the Naxians and Cataneans the more secure. When he lay near to Enna, he persuaded Acimnestus of Enna to take upon him the Sovereignty, promising to assist him. This Acimnestus accomplish'd. But when he would not receive Dionysius into the City, he began to storm, and change his Measures, and stirr'd up the Enneans to throw off his Authority. Upon this, toregain their Liberty, they suddenly ran together arm'd into the Market place; and now the City was full of Tumult and Confusion; at which instant Dionysius hearing of the Sedition, and getting together his trustiest Friends, he advanc'd to a Place where was no Guard, and there on a sudden rushing into the City, takes Acimnestus, and delivers him up to the Wills of the Enneans, and return'd without doing any hurt to the Place. Not that he did this either out of Love to Justice, or to them; but that he might be trusted for the future by the rest of the Cities.

Removing from thence, he besieg'd the City of Erbita; but not succeeding there, he made Peace with them, and led away his Army against Catana; for Arcesilaus the Governor had promis'd to betray it: And in accomplishment of his Treachery, about midnight let him in within the Walls, and so he gain'd the City. Then he disarm'd all the Citizens, and plac'd there a sufficient Garison. Afterwards Procles the General of the Naxians (won over by Promises of great Rewards) betray'd the City to Dionysius. When he had rewarded the Traitor, and set all his Kindred at liberty, he raz'd the City, and gave the Spoil thereof to his Soldiers, and carry'd away all the rest of the Citizens as Slaves. He dealt not better with the Inhabitants of Catana, whom he sold for Slaves to the Syracusians. The Country of the Naxians he gave to the neighbouring Sicilians, but the City of Catana he bestow'd upon the Campanians for an Habitation.

From thence he again mov'd to Leontum and besieg'd it with all his Forces, and by his Messengers requir'd them to submit to his Government, and join themselves as one Body to the City of Syracuse. The Leontines seeing no hope of Relief, and considering the ruine of the Naxians and Cataneans, were seiz'd with great terror, lest they themselves should be swallow'd up in the like destruction, therefore they concluded it most advisable to yield to the present time, and so submitted to the Conditions offered, and left their Country, and went to Syracuse.

Archonide, Prince of the Erbitans (after the People of Erbita had made peace with Dionysius determin'd to build a new City, for he had many Mercenaries, and a mixt multitude of Strangers who fled thither for fear of the War by Dionysius; and many likewise of Erbita freely gave up their Names to follow him to this new intended Colony. With this multitude he possess'd himself of a little Hill, Eight Stages or Furlongs from the Sea, and there laid the foundation of the City Alesa: But because there were other Cities in Sicily that bore that name, he added to it, as it were, a Sirname, and call'd it from himself Alesa Archonidis. In process of time when the City abounded in wealth, partly by reason of its Traffick by Sea, and Priviledges granted to it by the Romans:

〈1 page missing〉


Page 366

a great desire to finish this Fortification, with all speed he gets together a great multitude from all parts of the Country, out of which he chose Threescore thousand that were Free-Men and fit for his purpose, and proportion'd the several parts of the Work amongst them. To every Furlong he order'd an Overseer or Master-Workman, and to every Plethrum a Mason, and Two hundred Labourers. Besides these, a great number were imploy'd in cutting out of the Quarries rough and unwrought Stone.

He had likewise Six thousand yoke of Oxen appointed in several places for carrying on of the Work. The multitude of the Workmen wrought great admiration in the Spectators, whilst every one was diligent to perfect that which was allotted to his share. For Dionysius to encourage 'em, promis'd great Rewards here to the Architects, there to the Carpenters, and here again to the Labourers; and he himself with his Friends, would often oversee the Work, whole Days together, going every where from one place to another, taking care to ease and relieve them that were tir'd out. At length laying aside all State and Majesty, he wrought like a private person, and would be the first that should set upon Works of the greatest difficulty, and endure as much hardship as the meanest Labourer; by which means every one striv'd who should do most, insomuch, as besides their daily Labours they wrought some part of the Night; so great was the Ambition of the very common People to finish the Work; so that (beyond what could have been believ'd or imagin'd) the Wall was finish'd in the space of Twenty Days, Thirty Furlongs in length, and so proportionable in height; that for its strength it seem'd to slight the force of any Assailant. For it had many high Towers that stood at convenient distances one from another, and it was built of hewen Stone most artificially jointed and compacted, every Stone Four Foot square.

CHAP. V.

The War beeween Cyrus and his Brother Artaxerxes King of Persia. Cyrus routed. The Grecian Forces in straits; their brave Behaviour; and long and troublesome March out of Persia into Greece.

AT the end of the Year Exenetus was made Archon or Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Six Military Tribunes, Publius Cornelius, Cesus Fabius, Spurius Nausius, Caius Valerius, Marcus Sergius, and Junius Lucullus executed the Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time Cyrus Chief of all the Lord-Lieutenants of the Maritine Provinces, now determins to prosecute that War against Artaxerxes his Brother, which he had long before been ruminating in his Mind: for this young Man was of a very high Spirit, and much addicted to Martial Affairs. To this end he Musters a great Army of strangers, and furnishes himself with all things necessary for the Expedition; but did not as yet discover to his Army what he intended, but gave out that he rais'd an Army to go against some Tyrants in Cilicia who had rebell'd against the King. He sent moreover an Ambassador to the Lacedemonians to put them in mind of the Services he had done 'em in the War against Athens, and to desire their Aid in the design he had now on foot. Upon this, the Lacedemonians conceiving this War would be their advantage, forthwith decreed Aid to be sent to Cyrus, and presently sent Orders to Samus the Admiral, of their Fleet, to observe whatever was commanded him by Cyrus. Hereupon Samus having then Five and twenty Gallies of three Tire of Oars under his Command, with these passed over to Ephesus to Cyrus's Admiral, offering his Assistance in every thing he should be Commanded. The Lacedemonians sent over likewise under the Command of Chricosophus, Eight hundred Corseteers. One Tamos was Admiral of the Barbarian Fleet, and had under his Command Fifty Gallies well equipp'd. As soon as the Spartan Fleet arriv'd, both Fleets set Sail, as if they intended for Cilicia.

When Cyrus had got together at Sardis the choicest Soldiers of Asia, and Thirteen thousand Mercenaries, he made those Persians that were of his kindred, Governors of Lydia and Phrygia, but the Chief Command of Jonia and Eolia he bestow'd upon his trusty Friend Tamon of Memphis. Having settled these Matters, he then presently march'd with his Army towards Cilicia and Pisidia, a Rumor being spread abroad that some of those Nations had made a Defection. He had out of Asia Seventy thousand Men, of which Three thousand were Horse: Out of Peloponnesus and other parts of Greece Thirteen thousand Mercenaries. Clearchus the Lacedemonian was General of all the Peloponnesians, except the Acheans: Proxenus of the Beotians; Socrates of the Acheans; and Meno commanded


Page 367

the Thessalians. The Persians led the Barbarians every one in their proper Companies and Regiments, and Cyrus was Generalissimo; who had now discover'd the design of this Expedition to his Officers, but wisely conceal'd it from the Common Soldiers, lest by the greatness of the Attempt they should be discourag'd, and so desert him. And further, considering the great Journey they were to march, he took special care of the Soldiers, was very familiar with every one, and made plentiful Provision for them in every place.

At length, having pass'd through Lybia and Phrygia, and the Countries bordering upon Cilicia, they came to the Borders and Gates leading into Cilicia. The Passage there is very straight and rugged for the space of Twenty Furlongs, hemm'd in on either side with vast and very high and inaccessible Mountains. From these Mountains on both sides a Wall was drawn cross the Passage to defend it, in which were those Gates before mentiond. When his Forces had pass'd through this way, he entred into a Champain Country, inferior to none in Asia for sweetness and pleasantness: Through these pleasant Fields he march'd to Tarsus, the largest City of Cilicia, which he easily forc'd to submit.

When Syennesis, King of Cilicia, heard of this great Army, he was greatly perplex'd what to do, because he saw he was in no condition to cope with so great a Force. But being sent for by Cyrus with promises of safe Conduct, he came to him, and being acquainted with the Design, promis'd his assistance against Artaxerxes, and straitway join'd Cyrus with a small Party, under the Command of one of his Sons: But being a crafty Man, and preparing for the Worst, he sent the other secretly to the King to inform him of the great Forces that were coming against him; and that though he himself (much against his Will) was forc'd to join with Cyrus, yet he was still Loyal and Faithful to the King, and would fall off and return to the King's Standard when he had opportunity.

In the mean time, Cyrus spent Twenty days in refreshing his Army, and Listing of more Soldiers. Then breaking up his Camp, he acquainted all the Common Soldiers, that this Expedition was intended against Artaxerxes. Upon this every one weighing the thing seriously with himself, and considering the vast length of the Way they were to march, and how many Enemies Nations they were to pass through, took the Matter very grievously. For a Rumour was spread abroad that it was four Months march to Bactria, and that the King had an Army of Four hundred thousand Men. Upon which the Soldiers were so transported with Fear and Rage, that they resolv'd to kill all their Officers as Traytors. But when Cyrus (not without many Intreaties) interpos'd his Authority, and assur'd them that he not did intend to lead them against the King, but against a certain Governor in Syria, the Mutiny ceas'd: And upon the Increase of their Pay, they all return'd to their former Love and Esteem of their General.

Having now march'd almost through all Cilicia, he took Shipping and arriv'd at last by Sea at Issus, the utmost City of that Country near the Sea-side. At the same time, the Lacedaemonian Fleet arriv'd there, and landed their Men, assuring him of the Friendship of the Spartans, where they deliver'd to Cyrus Eight hundred Foot, under the Command of Chirosophus: They pretended that these were sent privately to Cyrus, by his Friends, when in truth, all was done by the Decree and Order of the Ephori. For the Lacedaemonians had not as yet proclaim'd open War against the King, but kept their Counsels secret till they spy'd a fit Opportunity, and how things were like to go.

Decamping from thence, Cyrus moves towards Syria, and order'd the Admirals to sail along near unto the Shore, and attend upon him as he march'd by Land. When he came to the Pile (as they are call'd) and found the Entrance without any Guard, he was much pleas'd; for he was full of Fear lest some had seiz'd the Passes before him. For the Place is naturally very streight, and defended by Craggy Rocks on every side, so that it may be kept by a very few Men. For there are two Mountains that rise up on either side near one to another, the one mounting up with sharp Rocks of a prodigious height, and the other call'd Libanus, beginning at the very Entrance into the only Passage that leads through those Places, and runs out as far as to Phenicia. The space lying between these two Mountains is about Three Furlongs wide, strongly fortify'd, shut up with streight and narrow Gates. When Cyrus had pass'd through here, he discharg'd the Fleet, and sent it back to Ephesus; for he had no occasion to use it, being now to march through the Heart of the Country.

After twenty Days march he came to Thapsacus, near to the River Euphrates. After he had continu'd here Five days, and had gain'd the Hearts of the Soldiers by plenty of Provision, and rich Spoils and Booties, he call'd a Council, and discover'd to 'em his whole design. But perceiving that the Army was very uneasy upon what he said, he earnestly intreated all of them, that they would not now Desert him, and endeavour'd to


Page 368

pacify them, by promising (besides other Rewards) a Mina apiece to every Man, as soon as he came to Babylon: Upon which, being thus encourag'd, and having their Expectations rais'd high, they at length consented. Hereupon, Cyrus pass'd his Army over Euphrates, and went forward without making any Halt; and as soon as he came to the Borders of Babylon he gave leave to his Army to refresh themselves.

Artaxerxes the King, had some time before notice given him by Pharnabazus, of the secret Preparations of Cyrus against him, but now having certain Intelligence of his March, he call'd all his Forces together from every place to Ecbatana in Media; and with what Force he then had march'd against Cyrus, not being willing to stay for the Aids from India and other Nations, who he perceiv'd would be too long in coming up to him by reason of the great Distances of the several Places from whence they came. His Army (as Ephorus relates) amounted to no less then Four hundred thousand Horse and Foot.

When he came within the Borders of Babylon, he Encamp'd at Euphrates, purposing there to leave his heavy Baggage: For he knew the Enemy was not far off, and therefore had just Cause to fear their desperate and daring Attempt: He drew therefore a Trench Threescore Foot in breadth and Ten in depth, and Barricaded it with Carts and Carriages as with a Wall; here he left his Baggage and those that were Sick and Weak with but a slender Guard, but he himself with a swift March made towards the Enemy who were then near at hand.

When Cyrus saw the King's Army advancing, he forthwith commanded all his Army to their Arms. The Lacedaemonians and some Mercenaries were in the Right Wing, stretch'd out to the River Euphrates, under the Command of Clearchus the Macedonian, with whom were join'd above a Thousand Paphlagonian Horse. The Lest Wing was commanded by Arideus, consisting of Phrygians and Lydians, and in this were about a Thousand Horse more. In the middle Battel was Cyrus himself, with a Guard for his Person consisting of the best Persian Soldiers and other Barbarians, to the number of Ten thousand Men; before whom march'd as a Vaunt-guard a Thousand Horse gallantly accoutred, with Grecian Swords and Coats of Mail. On the other side, Artaxerxes plac'd a great number of hook'd Chariots in front of his whole Army, and committing the two Wings to the Command of Persian Officers, he himself remain'd with the Main Body, guarded with no less then Fifty thousand choice Men.

When the Armies came within Three Furlongs one of another, the Grecians sang the Pean, and then silently led the Van; and as soon as they came within the Cast of a Dart they ran in upon the Enemy with great Fury; for so Clearchus had ordered them, conceiving, that if they fought at a great Distance, their whole Bodies would be Marks for their Enemies, during all the time of the Fight; whereas if they engag'd close at Hand, they would be less subject to the Darts and Arrows of the Persians. As soon as the Main Body with Cyrus came up to the King's, a Shower of Darts and Arrows like a Tempest, fell upon them, as great as can be imagin'd might be discharg'd by a Body of Fifty thousand Men. But after they had fought a while with their Darts at a distance, at length they fell to it hand to hand. The Lacedaemonians and Mercenaries at the first Charge routed that Part of the Army that oppos'd them, far exceeding the Barbarians both in dexterity of Fight and the resplendant brightness of their Arms. For all the Barbarians were but lightly arm'd, and many of the Regiments were of the meanest Soldiers, and the greatest part but raw and unexpert in War. The Grecians on the contrary, by so long and continual exercise of their Arms in the late Peloponnesian War, were grown very skilful and excellent Soldiers; so that they put their Adversaries presently to flight, and made a great slaughter of the Barbarians. It so happen'd that both the Generals (who were contending for the Kingdom) being in the main Battel on either side, and weighing how fatal the issue would be, made one against the other, purposing to decide the Controversie by their own hands; and Destiny seem'd now to engage these two Brothers in a Duel, as if it had been in imitation of that ancient and stout Combat between Eteocles and Polynices, so memoriz'd by Poets in their Tragedies. Here Cyrus made the Onset, and at a distance threw his Javelin with all his force at the King, and brought him down to the Ground, who was presently taken up as dead, and carry'd out of the Fight by them that were about him. Upon this Tissaphernes, a Noble Persian, steps into the King's place, encourages the Soldiers and sights valiantly himself; endeavouring to revenge the suppos'd Death of the King, flew about into every Place with the choicest of the Troops, and made a dreadful Slaughter where-ever he came, insomuch as his Heat and extraordinary Courage was taken notice of by them that were at a great distance.

Cyrus likewise lifted up with the Success of his Arms, siercely rushes into the midst of the Battel, and signaliz'd his Courage with the slaughter of many of his Enemies. But


Page 369

rashly, running himself into eminent Dangers, he at length receiv'd a mortal Wound from a common Soldier of the Persians, and there fell down dead: Upon whose fall the Spirits of the Royalists reviv'd and renew'd the Fight, and at last by the Number of their Forces, and Confidence of success, weary'd out their opposers.

Arideus, Cyrus's General and Commander in the other part of the Army, at the first valiantly receiv'd the Charge of the Barbarians: But afterwards (the Wing of the Enemy stretching in length far beyond him, and the Rumour of the Death of Cyrus coming to him, as a further Discouragement) he retreated with those under his Command to a Post very commodious for that purpose. Clearchus perceiving the main Body of their Army to be routed, and the rest ready to fly, stopp'd his own Men in their pursuit; for he fear'd that if the whole Army of the Barbarians should fall upon the Grecians, they would be all utterly cut off. In the mean time, the Body where the Persian King immediately commanded, having routed the Party that engag'd them, rifled Cyrus's Camp. Afterwards (it now growing towards Night) in one Body they made against the Greeks, who valiantly (like Men of brave and generous Spirits) receiv'd the Charge; the Barbarians did not long stand their ground, but being worsted by the Valour and Dexterity of the Grecians were presently put to flight.

Clearchus, after he had made a great slaughter among them, (it being now dark) erected a Trophy, and then retir'd to his Camp about the time of the second Watch. The Battel thus ended, an account was taken of those that were slain on the King's side, which amounted to above Fifteen thousand, the greatest part of whom were kill'd by the Lacedaemonians and Mercenaries, under the Command of Clearchus. On the other side, of Cyrus his Army were slain Three thousand. No account is given of any of the Grecians that were slain, but only a few wounded.

The next day, Arideus, who retir'd to his former Post (as we have before related) sent to Clearchus to desire him to join their Forces, that so they might better secure themselves by the advantage of Places near to the Sea side. For Cyrus being dead, and the King's Forces now Victors, a Terror seiz'd the whole Army, and every one repented himself of his bold and rash attempt to Depose Artaxerxes.

Hereupon Clearchus call'd a Council of War of all the Captains and Officers of the Army, to advise what was to be done in the present Exigent of Affairs. While they were in Consult, there came to them Messengers from the King, the Chief of whom was one Philenus, a Grecian, of the Island Zacyn

〈…〉s.

 When they were introduc'd, they declar'd their Message in this manner: Thus saith King Artaxerxes; In as much as Cyrus is kill'd, and I am now Conqueror, lay down your Arms, make haste to my Gates, and consider how to appease me, that ye may find some favour. Upon these words all the Officers answered as Leonidas had done in time past when Xerxes sent to the Guard at Thermopyle to give up their Arms, which was to this purpose, That if at any time after they should become Xerxes's Friends, they should be more able to do him service with their Arms than without them; and if they were forc'd to be his Enemies they could better defend themselves in fighting against him. After Clearchus had return'd this Answer to the same effect, Proxenus the Theban, said thus: We have now lost almost all we have, only our Hearts and our Arms are still our own, and as long as we keep these we doubt not but by our Courage we may be able to better our Condition; But when we part with our Arms our Valour is Useless and Unprofitable: And therefore bid them tell the King, That if he design'd any Attack upon them, they were ready with their Arms to oppose him. Sophilus likewise, one of the Commanders, is reported to have said, That he wonder'd at the King's demands; For, says he, if the King thinks himself stronger than the Grecians, let him draw down his Army upon us, and take our Arms by Force: But if he means only to persuade us, and intends to give us thanks for the favour, let him first say so. To this Socrates the Achean added, The King, said he, deals with us without Sense or Reason; for that which he would have to be taken from us, he demands forthwith to be delivered to him, and that which we are to expect in return, we must seek for after as Suppliants, by Petition and Entreaty. To conclude, If he be so ignorant how things stand, as that he thinks fit to Command the Conquerors, as if they were Conquered, that he may learn the better to judge whether side carries away the Victory, let him set upon us with his innumerable Army. But if he very well knows that weare Conquerors, and yet seeks deceitfully with a Lie to circumvent us, how can we rely upon his Promises for things to come? The Messengers were dismiss'd with these Answers, and so departed.

Clearchus afterwards marched with his Squadron, to the Place where the rest of the Army that escap'd out of the Battel were posted; and when all the Forces were got together they enter'd into a Council of War concerning their marching back to the Sea-side, and so from thence how to go on. In this Consult it was judg'd most adviseable, not to return


Page 370

the same way they came; for that a great Part of it was Desert and Barren, and the more Hazardous, because the Enemy would be pressing continually upon their Heels: At length it was resolv'd, with a swift March to lead the Army towards Paphlagonia, yet not so fast but that they might furnish themselves with Provision in the way. But the King, as soon as he begun to be heal'd of his Wounds, and heard of the Enemy's being retir'd, supposing that they fled, hasten'd after them with all speed; and because they mov'd but slowly, at last he overtook them, and Night drawing on Encamp'd near at hand. About break of day next Morning the Grecians drew up in Battalia; upon which he sent Messengers to them, and for that time granted to them a Truce for three Days: within which it was agreed that the King should suffer them to pass quietly through his Country, and that he should allow them Guides to the Sea-side, and furnish them with Provision in their march for their Money. And that all the Mercenaries under the Command of Clearchus and Arideus should pass peaceably through all places, provided they committed no outrages. Upon which, they set upon their Journey, and the King march'd back with his Army to Babylon, and there rewarded them that had behaved themselves couragiously in the Battle; amongst whom Tissaphernes was judg'd the bravest Man, and therefore he honour'd him with many Rich and Princely Gifts, and bestow'd his Daughter upon him in Marriage, using him ever after as his fast and faithful Friend. He made him likewise Governor and Lord-Lieutenant of all the Provinces that had been under the Command of Cyrus, upon the Sea-Coasts. But Tissaphernes perceiving that the King was irreconcileably incens'd against the Grecians, promis'd to destroy 'em all if he would furnish him with an Army, and be reconcil'd to Arideus: for through him, he said, he should be able to circumvent all the Grecians in their Journey.

This Advice was very acceptable to the King, and therefore he suffer'd him to chuse the best of the Soldiers, and as many as he thought fit out of the whole Army, With these in all haste he pursu'd the Grecians, and at length encamp'd not far off from them, and sent Messengers to them to desire that Clearchus and the rest of the Commanders would come to him and hear what he had to say to them. Upon which, almost all the Colonels and Captains (as became them) went along with Clearchus to Tissaphernes; and about Two hundred Soldiers follow'd after to buy Provision. Tissaphernes call'd all the Colonels and Chief Officers into his Tent, but the Captains and other inferior Officers stood without. In a short time after upon the putting forth of a Purple Flag from the top of his Pavilion, the Commanders within were 

〈◊〉

 seiz'd, and others (appointed for that purpose) kill'd all the rest that stood without; and the other Soldiers that came to buy Victuals were kill'd in every place here and there as they were found; only one made his escape to the Camp, and there related the Slaughter. Upon the hearing of this bloody Fact the Soldiers in great Consternation ran in confusion to their Arms, having neither General, Colonel, or almost any other Officer.

When none was willing to undertake the Charge, they chose several Officers from amongst themselves, and fix'd upon one of those to be the General, which was Cheirisophus the Lacedemonian. The Army hereupon being Marshall'd by these Officers into that Order which was judg'd best, set forward towards Paphlagonia. Tissaphernes in the mean time sends the General and the other Commanders bound in Chains to Artaxerxes, who put them all to death, but only Menon whom he releas'd: for he was suppos'd to have been willing to have deliver'd up the Grecians, because he was angry with them for not surrendring themselves. After this horrid Act, Tissaphernes with his Forces pursu'd the Greeks, and pick'd up stragglers here and there, but durst never face their whole Army, because he was afraid of the rage and valour of Men in a desperate condition. And therefore setting upon them now and then only in such places as he judg'd most for his advantage, he made no great slaughter of them, but with small and inconsiderable loss on the Grecians part, pursu'd them as far as the Country of the Carducians. But then perceiving he was not likely to gain any advantage by attacking the Enemy thus in the Rear, he marches away with his Army towards Jonia.

But the Grecians spent seven days in passing over the Mountains of the Carducians, and in that time suffer'd very much from the Inhabitants being a Warlike People, and well acquainted with the Passes in those parts. They were a free People, and Enemies to the King, and very good Soldiers, especially skilful and experienc'd in Hurling great Stones out of Slings, and shooting in Bows of a vast bigness, and more than ordinary strength. These People gall'd the Grecians from the rising Grounds, killing, and miserably wounding many of them; for their Arrows being above Two Cubits long, pierc'd both their Shields and Breast-plates, so that no Armour could repel their force. And it's said that these sort of weapons were so extraordinary big, that the Grecians us'd to cast these as Saunians instead of their Thong-Darts.


Page 371

When they had pass'd this Country with great difficulty, they came to the River Centrites, and pass'd over here into Armenia, which was then under the Government of Teribazus, Lord-Lieutenant to the King of Persia, with whom they made a League, and so passed quietly as friends through his Province. But as they march'd over the Mountains of Armenia, the Snow was so very deep, they were in danger every Man to be lost. For at the first when the Wind begins to rise, the Snow falls but leisurely and by degrees, so that it occasions no great molestation or trouble to the Travellers: But then presently the Wind increasing, the Snow falls so tempestuously, and on a suddain covers the ground so thick and deep that none can possibly see before them, nor know where they are. Hence Fear and Terror seiz'd upon the whole Army, seeing nothing but certain Destruction was behind 'em if they return'd, and no possibility to advance forward by reason of the depth of the Snow; besides, Winter was then very sharp and coming on apace, and such a Tempest of Wind, with a storm of Hail arose, and blew like a Whirlwind into their very Faces, that the whole Army was forc'd to stand still. For none being able to endure so sad and lamentable a March, every Man was necessitated to abide in the place where the Storm found him: And thô all were in extream want, yet they patiently endur'd that whole Night and Day the sharpness of the Winter's Cold, attended with all manner of uncomfortable circumstances. For all their Arms were cover'd with Snow which fell continually in great abundance. Their Bodies were stiff and benum'd with Ice (which became more sharp and biting, after the Air was calm and still) and so grievous were the pressures they lay under, that they took no Rest all the Night long. Some indeed cherish'd themselves with a little Fire they had kindled; others had their Bodies so benum'd with Cold, that little hopes of Life remain'd, having all their Fingers and Toes perish'd. When the Night was over, they found most of their Carriage-Horses and Cattle Lame and Useless, many Men dead, and not a few there were, who tho' they had some Life remaining, yet through the sharpness of the Cold their Bodies were immoveable; and some were as if they were stricken blind by the whiteness of the Snow, and every Man had certainly perish'd if they had not by going a little further found some small Villages, where there was plenty of Supplies for their necessities: Here the People went down under-ground by steps, and the Cattle by other passages made through the Earth; and in these little Cells were stor'd both Hay for the Cattle, and great plenty of all things necessary for the support and sustenance of Man's Life. After they had staid here Eight Days, they came at length to the River Phasis.

There they abode Four Days, and then pass'd through the Country of the Chaoniti and Phasians, where being fall'n upon by the Inhabitants in their march, they made a great slaughter among 'em, and possess'd themselves of their Towns, which were full of Provision and other rich booty, and there they rested Fifteen Days. Thence marching through the Country of the Chalcideans, in the space of Seven Days they arriv'd at the River call'd Harpasus Four Plethra broad. From thence they march'd through the Plains of the Tascutians, where they had plenty of all things, and spent three Days in refreshing themselves. In four Days after they came to the great City call'd Gymnasia. Here the Prince of the Country entred into a League with them, and allow'd 'em Guides as far as to the Sea: After Fifteen days journey they came to the Mountain Chenius, where they that were in the Van, as soon as they discern'd the Sea afar off, were transported with exceeding Joy, and gave up so great a shout, as they that were in the Rear suddainly put themselves in a posture of Defence, supposing some Enemy had broke in upon them; But as soon as they all came to the top of the Hill, from whence they might have a prospect of the Sea, they lift up their hands and gave Thanks to the Gods as if now they were past all danger for the future. There they got together great heaps of Stones, and of them rais'd up high Altars, upon which they fix'd the spoils taken from the Barbarians as Eternal Monuments of their Expedition. They bestow'd a Silver Cup and a Persian Garment upon the Guide; who pointing to them the way to the Macrones, took his leave.

After the Grecians entred the Country of the Macrones, they made a League with them; in confirmation of which the Grecians received a Spear from the Barbarians, and gave another to them: for this was a certain pledge of the faithful observance of their Leagues (receiv'd from their forefathers) as the Barbarians alledg'd: When they had pass'd the Mountains in these parts, they came down into the Country of the Colchians, where a great body of the Inhabitants came forth against them, whom the Grecians routed, and kill'd vast numbers of them: Then possessing themselves of a Hill, naturally desencible, thence they wasted the Country, and bringing all the spoil thither, they plentifully refresh'd themselves. In these places were multitudes of Bees-hives, from whence


Page 372

might be had large Honey-combs: But a mischief to admiration happen'd to them that tasted of them; for as many as eat never so little went presently Mad, and lay upon the ground as if they were dead. And because many fed themselves with these Combs, a great multitude lay up and down here and there as if they had been slain in a Field-Battle. This was a very sad day to the whole Army, being amaz'd with the strangeness of the thing, and the number of those that lay groveling upon the ground. But the next day about the same hour all came to themselves again, and rose up of sound and perfect Mind, and found themselves in no other condition than as if Health and Strength had been restored 'em by drinking of a Medicinal potion. Being thus recover'd, three days after they came to Trapezon a Greek City. This is a Colony of Sinopians, and belonging to the Colchians: Here they continu'd Thirty Days, being bountifully entertain'd by the Citizens, and there sacrific'd to Hercules and to Jupiter Soter, and celebrated the Gymnick Games. It's the common Fame that the Ship Argos with Jason and his companions arriv'd here. Hence Cheirisophus the General was sent to Byzantium to procure Shipping to convey them thither; for he and Anaxibius the Bizantian Admiral were accounted intimate and special friends; thither therefore he speedily sails. The Grecians in the mean time being furnish'd with two small Vessels by the Trapezons, made incursions both by Sea and Land upon the neighbouring Barbarians. Thirty days they had waited for the return of Cheirisophus: but he staying longer than they expected, and their Provision now growing scant, they departed from thence, and after three days reacht unto * Gerasunta, which is likewise a Grecian City, built by the Sinopians, After they had staid here a few days they march'd into the Country of the Mesynecans, but here they were assail'd by the Inhabitants in great Bodies, and in an Engagement kill'd a great number; those that escap'd fled to a Town they inhabited, defended with wooden Towers, Seven Stories of Chambers one above another. This Town the Grecians assaulted, and at length took it by Storm. This Place was the Metropolis and chiefest Fort of the Country, and in the highest part stood the King's Palace. It is the Law of the Country here, that the King must continue in this Palace during his Life, and thence issue out all his Edicts to the People. The Grecians related that they pass'd through no Nation more barbarous than this: for the Men stick not to have carnal knowledge of the Women in open view; and the better and richer sort fatten their Children with boil'd Walnuts. and are stigmatiz'd with divers marks burnt into their Flesh, both upon their Backs and Breasts. The Grecians march'd through this Country in Eight days, and through the next call'd Tibaris in Three. Thence they pass'd to Gotyora a Greek City and Colony of the Sinopians, where they abode Fifty days, wasting and spoiling the barbarous Nations bordering upon Paphlagonia. Here the Heraclians and Sinopians furnish'd them with Shipping, in which both they and their Cargo were convey'd into their own Country.

Sinope was built by the Milesians, situated within the Confines of Paphlagonia; of the greatest account and Authority of any in those parts. Here Mithridates (so famous in our Age by his Wars against the Romans) kept his Court. Cheirisophus (who was sent away for Shipping, but all in vain) return'd to the Army. But the other Sinopians having entertain'd them with all the demonstrations of Kindness and Humanity, took care to convey them to Heraclea, a City of the Megarensians. From thence the whole Fleet arriv'd at a Peninsula call'd Acherusia, where Hercules (as the Fable is) drew Cerberus out of Hell. Thence they march'd by Land through Bithynia, where they fell into great hazards and hardships by the Attacks of the Inhabitants, who assaulted them in every place as they pass'd. However, at last (with great difficulty) they came to Chrysopolis, a City of Chalcedonia Three thousand eight hundred being only left of Ten thousand. From hence some of 'em with ease and safety return'd every Man into his own Country; the rest join'd in a Body at Chersonesus, and besieg'd a City bordering upon Thrace. And this was the issue of Cyrus his Expedition against his Brother Artaxerxes.


Page 373

CHAP. VI.

Thrasybulus opposes the Thirty Tyrants. The Cruelty of Psammiticus King of Aegypt, towards his old Friend Tamos that fled to him for succour from the Persians. Dercyllidas sent General against the Persians into Asia. Conon made Admiral of the Persian Fleet.

IN the mean time, the Usurping Tyrants at Athens every day were banishing or putting to Death some or other. At which Cruelty while the Thebans were much Incens'd, and courteously entertain'd the Exiles, Thrasybulus, Sirnam'd Tyrius, (but a Citizen of Athens, and forc'd to fly to avoid the Rage of the Thirty Usurpers) by the aid of the Thebans, underhand posses'd himself of a Place in Attica call'd Phila. It was a very strong Castle, an Hundred Stages distant from Athens: By which means an easie Passage might be had at all times to invade Attica.

As soon as the Tyrants had Intelligence of what was done, they led forth their Forces in order to Besiege the Place; but as soon as they were set down before it, there fell a great Snow: Whereupon, while some were very busie in removing their Tents, the Common Soldiers concluded that some of their Army was put to flight by an Enemy at hand, that had broke in suddenly upon them; upon which, being struck with a * Panick Fear, they drew off and Encamp'd in another Place. The Thirty, when they saw the Citizens of Athens (those that had no share in the Administration of the Commonwealth with the Three thousand) to be hot and earnest to Dissolve the Government, Encamp'd in the Pireum, and over-aw'd the City with Foreign Soldiers; and in the mean time put to Death some of Elusina and Salamis, for joining in a Conspiracy with the Exiles.

Whilst these things were acting, great numbers of the Fugitives flock'd to the Camp of Thrasybulus,and at the same time there came to him Ambassadors from the Thirty, under colour to treat concerning some Prisoners, but in truth privately to advise him to dismiss the Fugitives, and to share with them in the Covernment of the City in the room of Theramenes, and that he should have liberty to restore any Ten of the Exiles to their Country, such as he thought fit to chuse. To which Thrasybulus answer'd, That he look'd upon his Banishment to be far more honourable than the whole Power and Dominion of the Thirty, and that he would never put up his Sword till all the Citizens from every Place were receiv'd, and the People restor'd to their former Liberties, descended to them from their Ancestors.

When the Tyrants perceiv'd the Defection increas'd (through hatred of their Tyranny) and that the Number of the Exiles increased, they sent their Ambassadors to Sparta to desire aid; and they themselves in the mean time got together what Forces they could, and Encamp'd at a Place call'd Acarnas. Thrasybulus leaving but a small Guard in the Castle, marches out against them with Twelve hundred of the Exiles, and setting upon them in the Night at unawares, kills many of them, and the rest (being terrify'd with the Tumult and Confusion occasion'd by the Surprize) he forces in great precipitation to fly into the City. And presently after the success of this attack, he marches against the Pireum, and possesses himself of Munychia, a barren Hill, but strong and well fortify'd. Upon this the Tyrants brought all their Forces into the Pireum, and assaulted Munychia by Critias their General; whereupon was a sharp Encounter a long time. For the Tyrants had the advantage of Number, and the Exiles of the strength of the Place. At length the Forces of the Thirty (being discouraged and Critias slain) retir'd, but the Exiles judg'd it not advisable to pursue them.

Frequent Assaults were afterwards made upon the Exiles; at length the Army of Thrasybulus broke in on a sudden with great violence upon the Enemy, and not only routed them, but gain'd possession of the Pireum.

A great Multitude who hated the Tyranny, continually flock'd out of the City into the Pireum, and all the Exiles from every place (hearing of the Success of Thrasybulus) hasted thither to him, so that at length the number of the Exiles exceeded the other; upon which Encouragement they began to besiege the City. But they within, to the end a Peace might be concluded upon fair terms, cast off the Thirty, and sent them out of the City, and Established a Decemvirate with Sovereign Power. But as soon as these Ten were setled in the Magistracy (instead of minding any thing relating to the Peace) they turn'd absolute Tyrants, and sent to Lacedaemon for Forty Ships and a Thousand Soldiers,


Page 374

under the Command of Lysander. Pausanias then King of Lacedaemon, both out of Envy to Lysander, and for that he understood the rest of the Greeks had an evil Eye against Sparta, march'd with a great Army to Athens, and reconcil'd the Exiles and the Citizens. Thus at length the Athenians were restor'd to their Country, and now began to govern according to their own ancient Laws. Those that were afraid lest they should suffer due Punishment for their former Wickedness, had Liberty to remove themselves to Elusina.

About this time they of Elis fearing the Power of the Lacedaemonians, made Peace with them upon these Terms, That they should deliver their Ships to the Lacedaemonians, and suffer the neighbouring Cities to govern according to their own Laws. And now Lacedaemon being at leisure and at Peace with all her Neighbours, prepares for War against them of Messina. Some of them then held a Castle in Cephalenia, others inhabited in Naupachus (within the Country of the Locrians (call'd Hesperians) formerly given to them by the Athenians. But they cast them out of both, and restored the Castle to the Cephalenians, and the other to the Locrians. The miserable Messinians (through the ancient hatred of the Lacedaemonians) were expell'd every where, and were forced to leave Greece marching away with their Arms; some sail'd to Sicily, and Listed themselves Soldiers under Dionysius; others to the number of Three thousand made to Cyrene, and join'd with other Exiles there: For at that time a great Sedition was among the Cyrenians after Aristo with some others had possess'd themselves of the City, by whom Five hundred of the principal Men of the City on a sudden were slain; upon which, all the Persons of Quality fled out of the Town. Hereupon, the Exiles of Cyrene join'd with the Messinians, and march'd in a Body against them who kept the City: The Parties engag'd, and in the Fight a great slaughter was made of the Cyrenians, and almost all the Messinians were cut off. After the Fight, Messengers were sent to and fro, and the matter at length was compos'd by the Cyrenians among themselves, who engag'd by solemn Oath one to another, That all Injuries should be afterwards for ever forgotten; so that they liv'd together from that time peaceably in the Government of their Common wealth. About this time the Romans sent Colonies to them call'd Ventras.

The Year ended, Laches was made Lord-Chancellor of Athens. At Rome the Consular Dignity was given again to Military Tribunes, Manlius Claudius,Marcus Quintius, Lucius Julius, Marcus Furius, and Lucius Valerius. Then was celebrated the Ninety Fifth Olympiad, in which Minos the Athenian was Victor. At the same time Artaxerxes King of Asia, after the Defeat of Cyrus, sent Tissaphernes to take into his Care and Charge all the Governments on the Sea Coasts; upon which the Provinces and Cities which had sided with Cyrus were greatly terrify'd, lest they should be punish'd for what they had done against the King: And therefore sought to qualify Tissaphernes by their Messengers; and every one to the utmost of his Power endeavour'd to procure his Favour. But Tamos, the Chiefest of them, (Lord-Lieutenant of Ionia) put his Wealth and all his Children on board, (except one call'd Gaus, who was afterwards the King of Persia's General) out of fear of Tissaphernes, and sail'd into Aegypt for Protection, to Psmammiticus the King, (Descended from the ancient Psammiticus) whom he had formerly oblig'd by several good Offices, and therefore hop'd he should find there shelter and safe Harbour, to secure him from the impending Storm of the King's Wrath. But Psammiticus neither valuing former Benefits, nor regarding the Law of Nations to them in distress, (out of Covetousness to gain the Money and the Ships) cut the Throat of his Friend and Suppliant, and of all his Children. 

In the mean time, the Graecian Cities throughout Asia, hearing of the Descent of Tissaphernes, sent Ambassadors to the Lacedaemonians, and earnestly intreated them, that they would not suffer them to be utterly destroy'd by the Barharians. Upon this they promis'd forthwith to send them Aid, and by their Ambassadors sollicited Tissaphernos, that he would not invade the Graecian Cities with his Army. However, regardless of their Ambassadors, he set upon the Cumeans in the first place, and wasted and spoil'd the Country round about, and took a vast Number of Prisoners: And afterwards besieged the City; but by reason of Winter coming on, he could not take it, and therefore (after he had receiv'd a great Sum of Money for the Redemption of the Captives) he rais'd his Siege. 

The Lacedaemonians in defence of the Greek Cities, made Thimbro General in the War against the King, and gave him the Command of a Thousand Spartans, with Orders to raise as many Men more from among their Confederates, as he thought fit for the present Service.


Page 375

Upon which, Thimbro goes to Corinth, and mustering the Aid he had got together from several places, he passes over to Ephesus, with no more than Five thousand Men: After he had raised Two thousand more from the Confederate Cities and other places (having with him not above Seven thousand Men) he march'd an Hundred and twenty Stages, and took Magnesia at the first Assault, a City within the Government of Tissaphernes. Then he came to Trallis, a Town in Ionia, and determin'd to Besiege it; but not being able to effect any thing to purpose there, by reason of the strength of the place, he return'd to Magnesia. This place was then unwall'd, therefore (fearing lest. Tissaphernes should retake it after he was gone;) he remov'd it higher to the next Hill, call'd Thorax. From whence he made several incursions upon the Enemy, and loaded his Soldiers with variety of Plunder.

But hearing that Tissaphernes was near at hand with a great Body of Horse, he forthwith retir'd to Ephesus.

About this time part of those Soldiers that went along with Cyrus against his Brother, return'd into Greece, every one to their own Country. Others, (the greater part of them that were always accustomed to Military Employment) to the number almost of Five thousand, chose Xenophon for their General, who with those Forces made an Expedition against the Thracians. who inhabited Salmidessus. This is a long Creek lying shooting out along the Left side of Pontus, well known for the many Ship-wracks that have been there: by reason whereof the Thracians near those parts use to seize upon the Merchants that have escap'd to Shore, and carry them away as Captives. Xenophon therefore with his Forces breaks into their Country, overcomes them in Battle, and burns many of their Towns and Villages. From hence they are sent for by Thimbro, with promise of being well paid, upon which they march'd to him, being very eager to assist the Lacedemonians against the Persians.

During these Actions, Dionysius in Sicily, builds a Town at the foot of Aetna, and from a certain famous Temple, calls it Adranus. In Macedonia, King Archilaus when he was Hunting was kill'd by Craterus (whom he dearly lov'd) after he had Reign'd Seven years; and his Son Orestes (yet a Child) succeeded him. After the death of Archelaus Aetropus, the Tutor and Guardian of Orestes Govern'd the Kingdom for the space of Six years. At the same time in Athens, Socrates the Philosopher accus'd by Anytus and Melitus of Atheism, and corrupting the Youth, was condemn' to dye, and after executed by drinking of a Cup of Poison. Of which wicked Action the People in a short time after repented, when in vain they could have wish'd that Excellent and worthy Man alive again: therefore they turn'd all their Fury upon his Accusers, and kill'd them, without staying for any Formalities of Law.

When the Year was ended, Aristocrates bore the Office of Archon at Athens for the Year ensuing: And at Rome, Six Military Tribunes were invested with Consular Dignity, Caius Servilius, Lucius Virginius, Quintus Sulpitius, AulusManlius, † Capitus,Clodius, and Marcus Ancus. During their Magistracy, the Lacedaemonians understanding that the Affairs of the War were ill managed by Thimbro, sent Dercyllidas General into Asia. Upon his arrival, he forthwith march'd with the Forces against the Cities of Troas, and in a trice took Arisba, Hamaxitus, and Colone, afterwards Ilium, Cebrene, and all the rest of the Cities in the Territory of Troas, some by Tricks and Surprize, and others by Storm.

After this, he and Pharnabazus agreed upon a Truce for eight Months; and in the mean time he fell upon the Thracians in Bythinia, and wasted their Country, and then drew his Army into Winter-Quarters.

At that time a great Sedition broke out in Heraclea in Thrachinia, and thereupon the Lacedaemonians sent Eripidas to compose the Differences, who when he came there, procur'd a Council to be call'd, and having beset the Senate round with arm'd Men, seiz'd the Authors, and put all to death, to the number of Five hundred Men. He likewise march'd with an Army against the Inhabitants of Oetas, who had made a Defection; and after many Hardships he had reduc'd them unto, he forc'd them out of those Places, and the greatest part of them, with their Wives and Children, fled into Thessaly, and five Years after were transplanted into Boeotia.

During these Affairs the Thracians in great Bodies made an Irruption into the Chersonese of Thrace, wasting and ravaging the Country every where, where they possess'd themselves of all the fenced Cities. Upon this, they of the Chersonese sent for Dercyllidas the Lacedaemonian out of Asia, who transported his Army thither, and drave the Thracians out of the Country; and drawing a Wall cross from one Sea to the other, fortify'd the Chersonese so as that by this means he prevented the Incursions of the Thracians for the


Page 376

time to come, and so he return'd with his Forces into Asia, after he had been bountifully rewarded for his Services. During the time of the Truce, Pharnabozus went up to the King, and he and others persuaded him to equip a Navy, and make Conon the Athenian Admiral, for he was a very skilful and expert Soldier, the best that was then in Cyprus, with King Evagorus. Pharnabazus having wrought upon the King, and receiv'd Five hundred Talents for that purpose, forthwith made it his business to set forth a Fleet, and after he had sounded Conon, concerning his acceptance of Chief Command at Sea, he created him Admiral, making him many great and fair Promises in the King's Name. Hereupon Conon accepts the Place, in hopes not only to recover the Sovereignty of the Seas for his Country, by subduing the Lacedemonians, but to advance his own Reputation by the success of his Arms. But in regard the whole Fleet was not as yet ready, he sailed away only with Forty Sail into Cilicia, and there prepared himself for the War.

Pharnabazus likewise, and Tissaphernes having rais'd Men out of their several Provinces,. march'd forth, and made their way towards Ephesus, because the Enemies Forces lay there. There were with them under their Command Twenty thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse. Dereyllidas the Lacedemonian hearing of the Enemies march, drew forth his Army, having no more than Seven thousand Men; but when the Armies drew near one to another, a Truce was agreed upon, and a certain time prefixt, within which, Pharnabazus might send the Articles to the King to know his pleasure, whether he would have Peace or War, and that Dereyllidas might inform the Spartans how Affairs stood in the mean time. And upon these terms the Armies drew off into their several Quarters.

CHAP. VII.

The War between the Rhegians and Dionysius: He prepares to make War upon the Carthaginians. Most of the Cities submit to Dionysius. He returns to the Siege of Motya. It's taken. Forces sent from Carthage against Dionysius. A Sea-fight between the Carthaginians and the Sicilians. Syracuse Besieg'd. The Speech of Theodorus against Dionysius. A grievous Plague in the Carthaginian Army. A great destruction of the Carthaginian Fleet in the Harbour of Syracuse. The miserable condition of Imilco in his own Country. The Troubles of the Carthaginians.

THE Rhegians, formerly a Colony of the Chalcideans, were now uneasie under the growing Power of Dionysius, for he had enslav'd the Naxians and Gataneans, who were of their own Blood and Nation; and the Rhegians seeing that they themselves were in the same common danger with those already express'd, were in a great Consternation, lest they should all be brought under the same Calamity. Therefore they judg'd it most advisable, and highly to concern them, to make War upon him, while they had an opportunity, before the Tyrant grew too strong. Those that were banish'd from Syracuse by Dionysius join'd in this War, being furnish'd with all things necessary for that purpose by the Rhegians: for there was a great multitude of them at that time at Rhegium, who (being press'd by the Rhegians, with the necessity and advantage they were likely to reap by the War) resolv'd to make use of the first opportunity. To that end Officers were at length chosen, and with them they sent Six thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse, with Fifty Crabyes, when they were landed they sollicited the Messenian Commanders to join with them, telling them it would be a most dishonourable thing if they should suffer a Grecian City, and next to them, to be utterly destroy'd by a Tyrant. The Officers being thus persuaded, led forth the Soldiers without the order of the State. The number was Four thousand Foot, and Four hundred Horse, and with them Thirty Gallies. Before they had march'd to the utmost borders of Messina, there was rais'd a great Mutiny among the Soldiers, by a Speech made to them by Laomedon a Messinian; For he advis'd 'em not to be the Agressors upon Dionysius, who had not hitherto offer'd them any injury. Upon which the Soldiers of Messina (because the People had not by their Suffrage order'd this War (presently follow'd his Advice, and forsaking their Captains return'd home. Whereupon the Rhegians considering themselves not able to carry on the


Page 377

War alone, now the forces of Messina were fallen off, return'd likewise to their own City. As for Dionysius, he had (upon the first notice of the Design upon him) drawn out his Forces to the utmost Confines of Syracuse, expecting the Enemy; but hearing by his Spies that they were march'd back, he likewise return'd with his to Syracuse.

After this, when they of Rhegium and Messina sent Ambassadors to him to treat upon Terms of Peace (he conceiving it much to the advantage of his Affairs to prevent all other Hostilities and Disturbances from these Cities) made Peace with them. He likewise observ'd, that many of the Grecians ran into the Carthaginian Garisons, not only bringing along with them their Goods and Estates, but the Laws and Customs of their several Cities; and therefore concluded, that as long as the Peace continu'd with the Carthaginians, those that were yet his Subjects would from time to time be sheltring themselves under their Protection; to remedy which, he conceiv'd that if he renew'd the War against Carthage, all those that were fled to them being oppress'd by the Carthaginians would return to him. And he was the more encourag'd, for that he heard that in Africa a Plague then rag'd, and swept away many of the Carthaginians. Having now therefore a fit opportunity to declare War against them, as he conceiv'd, he determin'd to make it his chief Care to prepare Necessaries for so great an Expedition, being to engage with the most Potent Nation that then had any footing in Europe; and judging (as he very well might) that it was likely to be a great War, and of long continuance. To this end he forthwith gets together all sorts of Artificers, some out of the Towns and Cities of his own Dominions, and others hir'd with more than ordinary Wages out of Italy and Greece. For he resolv'd to make a vast number of all sorts of Arms and Weapons; likewise Gallies, both of three Oars on a Bank, and of Five, which last were never us'd before. For this purpose a great multitude of all sorts of Workmen were brought together, to every one of whom he order'd their proper Work according to their several Trades, and appointed some of the best and most substantial of the Citizens to be Overseers, promising great Rewards for the encouragement of the diligent. He himself directed the Form and Fashion of every sort of Weapon, because Mercenary Soldiers came flocking in to him out of many different Countries: for he purpos'd that every one should use such Arms (both Offensive and Defensive) as they were accustom'd unto in their own Nations; for he concluded, that as it would strike a greater Terror into his Enemies, so his Soldiers would Fight much the better with those Arms that they had most commonly us'd.

The Syracusians did all they could to forward him in his design; so that every one strove who could most advance the Work. For not only the Porches and back parts of the Temples, but the publick Schools and Walks, and Galleries about the Forum, and every place up and down were full of Workmen; and besides these publick places, Arms were made in great number in every large House belonging to any Citizen. The Art of making Engines to hurl great Stones was now first known at Syracuse, for that at this time the most excellent Artificers were met together from all parts. For the great Wages and large Promises of Rewards to the perfecting of the Work, made the Tradesmen and Artificers very intent and industrious. And besides all this, Dionysius himself came every day to oversee the Workmen, speaking kindly and courteously to them, and when he saw any more than ordinarily diligent, and quick of dispatch, that Man would be sure to receive some Reward or Honour as a mark of his Favour, and sometimes for further encouragement he would invite such to Dine or Sup with him. The Artificers thus encourag'd, wrought with all diligence (striving to out-vie one another) so that there were made a vast number of strange Weapons, and Warlike Engines for Battery. He built likewise Gallies with their Boats, both of Three and Five Oars on a Bank, of which last he was the first Inventer. For when he understood the first Galley of Three Oars was made at Corinth, he was desirous a Colony from thence (as the Syracusians were) should be the first that should enlarge the number. Having therefore provided plenty of Materials to be brought over from Italy, he sent away one half of the Workmen to Mount Aetna (where in those days were abundance of Firr and Pitch Trees) the rest he commanded to sail to Italy, and order'd them Carts to convey the Timber to the Sea side, and Ships and Seamen there to receive them, and thence without delay to transport them to Syracuse.

When Dionysius had got together Materials sufficient for his purpose, he forthwith set about building above Two hundred Gallies, and to resit an Hundred and Ten. Besides, he built several Holds round the Harbor for the receiving of the Ships, to the number of an Hundred and sixty; of which, many would receive two Ships apiece. He likewise repair'd and cover'd over with new Planks, and Hundred and fifty old and useless Vessels: This


Page 378

great preparation struck the Beholders with admiration, to see so vast a number of Ships and all belonging to them, built together in one place. For indeed the preparation was such, that if a Man did cast his Eies upon the Ships, and consider the great Costs and Expences in fitting them out, he would presently conclude, that all the Power and Riches, of Sicily were there imploy'd. And then to turn and look upon the Army and Engines, he would judge that there was no Art or Trade, but what there had shew'd the height of their skill, to the utmost of what could possibly be done in that kind. And tho' he had perform'd all these with so much Cost and Care, that nothing seem'd to be wanting, or could be added to make them Magnificent and Glorious; yet for further State and Grace to the preparation he made, an hundred and forty thousand Bucklers, or Targets, as many Swords and Helmets, and caus'd to be forg'd Fourteen thousand Corssets, of all sorts of excellent Workmanship: These he appointed and order'd to the Horse, and to the Colonels and Captains of the Foot, and to the Mercenaries who were of his Life-Guard. He prepar'd likewise Engines of Battery of all fashions, and a vast number of Darts. The City of Syracuse provided one half of the long Ships, with Masters, Pilots, and Rowers of their own Citizens. For the rest Dionysius hir'd Foreigners. After all the Ships and Arms were ready and compleat, he then began to call his Army together: for he thought it not advisable to do it before, to the end to avoid Charge and Expence. About this time Astydamus the Writer of Tragedies began to open his School; he liv'd Sixty years: And this year the Romans as they were besieging the Veians, by a Sally out of the City were totally routed, and shamefully put to flight.

After the former Year expir'd, Ithycles was made Lord Chancelor of Athens, and at Rome Six Military Tribunes bore the Consular Dignity; Lucius Julius, Marcus Furius,Emilius MarcusCaius Cornelius, Cesus Fabius, and Paulus Sextus. This Year Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse when he had finish'd his preparation of Ships and Arms (as is before Declar'd) began to muster his Forces. To this end he chose out of the City Companies, such as he thought fittest for his purpose, and sent for such as he thought most serviceable from those Towns that favour'd his Interest: He hir'd likewise Soldiers out of Greece, and especially from the Lacedemonians: For from them (to whom he ow'd the growth and increase of his Power) he receiv'd as many Soldiers as he would for the compleating of his Army: For designing to raise a numerousArmy of Strangers, and to this end offering large Pay, he had multitudes came in to him; and because he had determin'd upon a War which would be very great, he carry'd himself with all the camplacency imaginable to all the Cities through the Island, with a purpose thereby to gain their good Will and Approbation. Knowing likewise that they of Rhegium and Messina who border'd upon the Sea, were able to bring great Forces into the Field, he began to fear lest they should join with the Carthaginians when they return'd into the Island, for he concluded that no small advantage would accrue to that side to which those two Cities inclin'd. Being in this perplexity, he gave to the Messinians a large part of the Country next adjoining to them, thereby the more to oblige them to his Interest. He dispatcht likewise Ambassadors to Rhegium, to desire that they would contract affinity with him, and to that end bestow upon him a Virgin of their own City to be his Wife; in grateful remembrance of which he would give them a large portion of Land next adjoining to their Territories, and that he would endeavour to advance and increase the Wealth and Prosperity of the City, to the utmost of his Power. For after he had lost his former Wife, the Daughter of Hermocrates, who was kill'd in the late defection of the Horsemen, he desir'd Issue by another, supposing he should firmly settle himself in his Sovereignty by the kindness and obliging demeanor of his Children towards the People. But a Council being call'd at Rhegium to consider of the Proposal, after great banding on both sides it was resolv'd not to enter into any such Affinity.

Dionysius being disappointed in this Project, sends Ambassadors to Locris upon the same Embassy: They embrac'd the Motion: Upon which he Marrys Dorides, the Daughter of Xenetus, at that time the most eminent Citizen of that place. A few days before the Marriage he sends to Locris a Gally of Five Oars on a Bank (a piece of new and rare Workmanship) adorn'd with Gold and Silver Flags, and Streamers to convey her over, and receives the Lady upon her Landing at Syracuse, into the Castle. He Marry'd likewise a Noble Lady of Syracuse, call'd Aristomacha, whom he brought to his Palace in a Chariot drawn with four white Horses. Upon his celebrating this double Marriage at one and the same time, he often Feasted both the Soldiers and most of the Citizens. For now he laid aside his Cruelty as a Tyrant, and minding the distribution of Justice, carry'd himself more courteously and favourably towards his Subjects, forbearing his former bloody Slaughters and Proscriptions.


Page 379

Some few days after his Marriage he call'd a Senate, and there stirr'd up the People of Syracuse to a War against the Carthaginians, urging that they were the most implacable Enemies of the Grecians in the World, and especially, were continually plotting and contriving how to ruin the Sicilians. The reason, saith he, that they are now at present quiet, is because the Plague rages so violently amongst them, and hath swept away great numbers of the Africans; but you'll presently see that as soon as they are free, and have recover'd their strength they'l invade Si

•ily

 with all their Power, which Island they have for a long time most greedily gap'd after. Therefore, said he, it is much safer and better to fall upon them now they are weak, than to stay till they have recover'd themselves. He added moreover, that it would be a most unjust and dishonourable thing to suffer Barbarians to enslave the Cities, who the more they coveted their Freedom, and the fonder they were of their Liberties, would be certainly more ready to engage in the common Cause with their Country-men.

Having debated this Matter in a long Discourse, he easily gain'd upon the Syracusians for their consent, for they were as desirous of the War as Dionysius himself: and especially they hated the Carthaginians, because by their means they had been brought under the power of the Tyrant: and then they hop'd that out of fear of the Enemy abroad, and Plots by them that had been oppress'd at home, Dionysius would be more moderate than he had been in former times. And that which weigh'd more than all was, that they hop'd if they were Conquerors in this War (and Fortune favour'd them) they should recover their ancient Liberties.

When the Assembly was dissolv'd, he granted License to the People of Syracuse, to seize upon all the Goods and Estates of the Carthaginians; for there were many of them in Syracuse that were very rich; and many Merchants had Ships then lay loaden with rich Goods and Merchandize in the Harbor. The Syracusians therefore on a suddain flew upon the Prey. Other Cities likewise in Sicily drave out the Carthaginians that inhabited amongst them, and took and carry'd away all their Estates. For tho' they all hated the Tyranny of Dionysius, yet it was a delight to them to join in the War against the Carthaginians, by reason of the barbarous and beastly cruelty of the Men. And therefore those Grecians that inhabited the Cities within the power and jurisdiction of the Carthaginians, when they saw that now open War was Declar'd against them by Dionysius, gave instances likewise of their hatred against the Africans: for they not only seiz'd upon all their Estates, but likewise their Persons, and executed all manner of Cruelty and Disgraces upon the Bodies of these miserable wretches in memory and retribution of those that they themselves before suffer'd when their Cities were destroy'd by them, And they went on and continu'd this sharp Revenge upon them, to the end they might learn for the future by this example of Retaliation, not to execute such barbarous Cruelties upon them, they should afterwards subdue. For hereby they would be taught (having learnt by experience) that in the events of War, and common Turns of Fortune, the Party subdu'd, must expect to suffer that which they themselves before executed, upon those they had conquered,

Dionysius having now prepar'd all things necessary for the War, determin'd to send Messengers to Carthage to denounce War against them, in the name of the People of Syracuse, unless they restor'd all the Greek Cities they had subdu'd to their Ancient Laws and Liberties. Thus were the Thoughts of Dionysius at this time employ'd. With this year Ctesias ends his History of the Persians brought down from Ninus and Semiramis. At this time flourish'd the famous Poets for Dithyrambick Verse, Philoxenus, Cythereus, Timotheus, Philesius, Telestes of Selinunte, and Bolyeidus an excellent Limner and Musician.

Upon the expiration of the former Year Lisiades entred upon the Chief Magistracy at Athens. And six Military Tribunes were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome, viz. Publius Mellius, Marnius Spurius, Furius Lucius, and three others. At that time the Syracusian Tyrant (being furnish'd with all things necessary for the War, according to his Hearts desire) sends an Herald with a Letter to the Senate at Carthage, in which was written, That the People of Syracuse had Decreed to make War upon the Carthaginians, unless they quitted all the Grecian Cities in Sicily. The Herald, according to Order, Sails over into Africa, and delivers the Letter to the Senate, which being read first in the House, and then to the People, it occasion'd no small disturbance and perplexity to the Carthaginians, through fear of the War coming so suddainly upon them, for the Plague had destroy'd an infinite number of People, and they were altogether unprovided of every thing necessary. Therefore they had now nothing to do but to observe how far the Designs of the Syracusians would proceed, and whither they would tend, and in the mean time, to send some of the Senate, with a considerable Sum of Money to raise Soldiers out of Europe.


Page 380

Dionysius now marches out of Syracuse towards Aeryx with Syracusians, Mercenaries and Confederate Auxiliaries. Not far from this Hill stood the City Motia, a Colony of Carthage, which was a strong Castle and in-let into Sicily: By reducing of this they hop'd they should gain no small advantage, and prevent the Enemy. To this end he stirr'd up the People every where to Arms, and Auxiliaries from all the Greek Cities came in to him all along in his March. For they were eager and hot for the War, both because they hated the Slavery they suffer'd under the Carthaginians, and were likewise prick'd forward with the ardent Desire and Hopes they had at length to recover their Liberties. First the Camerineans join'd him: then the Geloans and Acragentines. Then he sent to them of Himera, who inhabited further off in another part of Sicily: With these and the Selinuntines who join'd with him in his March, he came to Motya; His Army consisted of Fourscore thousand Foot, and above three thousand Horse. In his Fleet he had little less than Two hundred long Gallies, or Men of War, and to attend these, there were at least Five hundred Ships of burden, full of Warlike Engines, and all manner of Provision.

When they of Eryx saw the wonderful Preparation that was made, and being terrify'd with the greatness of the Army, and withal hating the Carthaginians, they sided with Dionysius. But they of Motya, in expectation of Aid and Relief from Carthage, were not affrighted at the Greatness of Dionysius's Army, but were resolv'd to abide a Siege. For they knew very well that the Syracusians would besiege them in the first place, because they were so wholly devoted to the Interest of Carthage. This City is situated in an Island about half a League from the Shore of Sicily, large and beautifully Built, and the Inhabitants very Rich. A straight and narrow Way had been made by Art from the Island to the Shore; which they of Motya at that time ruin'd, to prevent so ready an access for the Enemy. Dionysius after he had taken a View of the Situation of the City with his Architects, began to fill up the Place between the Island and the Shore with Rubbish, and brought his Gallies into the Mouth of the Harbour, and lay at Anchor with his Ships of Burden near to the Shore. This done, he leaves Leptinus the Admiral of his Fleet to carry on the Siege, and he himself with the Land Army sets upon the Cities that were Confederated with the Carthaginians.

All the Cities of Sicily terrify'd with the greatness of his Army, presently submit to him, except only Five, viz. Ancyra, Solas, Egista, Panormus, and Entella: Upon which he Spoils and Wastes the Territories of the Solantines, Panormitans, and Ancyreans, and cuts down all their Trees: But besieges the City of the Egistines and Entellans, and by fierce and continual Assaults, uses his utmost Endeavour to take them by Storm. And thus now stood the Affairs of Dionysius.

In the mean time, Imilco, the Carthaginian General, was busie in Raising of Men from all Parts; and making other Preparations, but forthwith sends away the Admiral with ten Gallies, with a Command secretly to weigh Anchor and make straight for Syracuse, and in the Night to destroy the Ships that he should then find in the Harbour. His Project was by this means to divide the Enemies Forces, constraining Dionysius to send away part of his Fleet to defend Syracuse. The Admiral without delay observes his Orders, and entring the Harbour of Syracuse in the Night privately (not discern'd of any) breaks in pieces, sinks and destroys almost all the Ships that were then in the Port, and sails back towards Carthage.

Dionysius having wasted and spoil'd the Fields and Territories of all them that were under the Protection of the Carthaginians, and driven the Enemy every where within their Walls, returns with his whole Army to Motya; supposing that when he had reduc'd this the rest would all presently surrender. And now setting more hands at work he speedily fills up the Channel with heaps of Stone and Rubbish, and by that means makes his approaches with his Batteries nearer to the Town. But,

About this very time, Imilco the Carthaginian General, hearing that Dionysius had brought his Ships into the Harbour, forthwith Mann'd an Hundred of his best Gallies, supposing that by a sudden and unexpected Attack, he should easily possess himself of the Fleet as they lay in the Harbour, (none being out at Sea to obstruct his Design) which if it succeeded he should raise the Siege at Motya, and carry the War to Syracuse.

To this End, he looses from Carthage with an Hundred Sail, and arrived in the Night upon the Coasts of Selinunte, and so sailing round the Promontory of Lilybeum, about break of Day reaches Motya; where surprizing the Enemy he breaks some of their Ships to pieces, and burns others, Dionysius not being able then to afford any assistance. Then he enters into the Port, and so orders and places his Ships, as if he design'd to set upon the Fleet as they lay. Upon this, Dionysius commands his Army to march down to the Mouth of the Harbour: But seeing that the Enemy had possessed themselves of the Passage, he


Page 381

durst not bring his Ships out of the Port; for he knew that the Mouth being very narrow and straight, a few Ships were able to Fight with many above their Number, and to Advantage. And therefore, having many Soldiers, he easily drew the Ships over the Land into the Sea, at a further distance from the Harbour, and so preserv'd them.

In the mean time, Imilco pressing upon those Gallies that lay foremost and next to him, was by multitude of Darts repuls'd; for many Darters and Slingers were plac'd upon the Decks. The Syracusians likewise from Land kill'd great numbers of the Enemy, by their sharp Arrows shot out of their Engines of Battery. And in truth these sort of Darts struck great terror into the Enemy, being the first time that they were us'd and found out. When the Carthaginian saw he could not accomplish his design, he drew off and sail'd back for Africk, judging it in nowise prudent to Engage in a Sea-fight with an Enemy double his number.

When Dionysius, by the help of many Workmen had perfected the Bank or Rampier, he applied all sorts of Engines of Battery to the Walls, battering the Towers with the Rams, and driving the Defendants from the Bulwarks with the shot from the Engines. He approach'd likewise to the Walls with six floor'd Towers which mov'd upon Wheels, and were as high as any House.

However, the Citizens of Motya, although they were now in imminent Danger, and destitute of all aid from their Consederates, yet fear'd not all the Force and Power of Dionysius, but bravely opposing the Assailants, they first plac'd Soldiers cloath'd in Coats of Mail upon the Masts of their Ships, who hoisting up their Main-yards threw burning Firebrands and Sticks dipp'd in Pitch, down upon the Engines, which set them presently on Fire; upon which the Sicilians ran in, and having quench'd the Flame, so ply'd their work, that with the frequent and Repeated Batteries by the Rams, a great part of the Wall fell down. Upon which both sides rushing into the Breach with great Fury, there was a sharp Engagement: For the Sicilians thinking the Town now had been their own, endur'd any thing out of the insatiable desire they had to revenge themselves upon the Carthaginians, for the many Injuries they had suffer'd by them. On the other hand, the Besieg'd to avoid the misery of Bondage and Slavery, and seeing no hopes to escape either by Sea or Land, resolved valiantly to Die. At length despairing to defend the Walls any longer, they stopt up all the Sally Ports and betook themselves to the Hold and Buildings at the Foot of the Walls, which were perfectly built as another strong Wall. From hence the Soldiers of Dionysius were put harder to it than they were before; for when they had got within the Walls (thronging in one upon another) and thought they had now gain'd the Town, they were presently most miserably gall'd by them that were on the Tops and Roofs of these Buildings. However, with all the speed they could by the help of their wooden Towers, they advanc'd their Scaling-Ladders to the Houses that were next to them; and now they sought hand to hand from the Towers and the Tops of the Houses which equall'd one another in height: And here the Motyans stood to it, and fought with undaunted Resolution, having their Wives and Children in their Eyes, and possess'd with the sense of the imminent danger of the Ruine and Destruction both of them and theirs: For some mov'd with the earnest Prayers of their poor Parents then present, intreating them not to suffer them to be made a scoff and scorn to their Enemies, renew'd their Courage, and without any regard to their Lives rush'd into the midst of the Assailants: Others hearing the Cries and Complaints of their Wives and Children, made the more haste rather to die valiantly, than to see the Captivity and Slavery of their dearest Relations. There was no way left to escape or fly out of the City, for they were hemm'd in by the Sea, which was commanded by their Enemies. The Cruelty of the Graecians which they had already executed upon their Prisoners, and in all likelihood would execute upon them, was that which chiefly terrify'd the Carthaginians and made them desperate. And therefore nothing remain'd but either to Conquer or Die.

This Obstinacy of the Besieged, occasion'd great Toil and Hardship to the Sicilians: For they were lamentably hurl'd off the Scaffolds which they had made; and besides, the straitness of the Place (by which they were greatly prejudiced) they fought with Men that were Desperate and prodigal of their Lives.

Thus therefore being Engag'd, some giving and receiving Wounds fell on the one hand, others repuls'd by the Motyans, were thrown down Headlong from the Scaffolds and House Tops, and so miserably perish'd on the other. At length the Assault having continu'd on this manner several whole days together, and every Evening Dionysius by a Trumpet sounding a Retreat to his Men, the Motyans were inur'd now to this way of Fighting: After therefore both sides were drawn off, Dionysius sent forth Archylus the Thurian, with some of the best Regiments, who on a sudden in the dead of Night by Scaling-Ladders go

•


Page 382

over the shatter'd Houses, and having possessed himself of a convenient Pass, presently the rest (which were sent to his assistance by Dionysius) came in to him. But when the Motyans perceiv'd it, with great Courage and Resolution they set upon them to beat them back, and though they had not tim'd it right, yet their Valour was not in the least impair'd: So that there was now begun a fierce Encounter: Upon which (many more likewise mounting over) the Sicilians with much ado (over-powering them by their multitude) at length drave them from the Post; and presently by the Mould and Bank that was rais'd Dionysius his whole Army broke into the City, and now every place was strew'd with dead Bodies. For the Sicilians resolving to revenge themselves upon the Carthaginians for their former Cruelties, without any regard either to Age or Sex, slew all before them, putting Man, Woman, and Child to the Sword. But Dionysius having a mind to sell all the Citizens for Slaves, thereby to raise Money, commanded the Soldiers to forbear killing the Prisoners: But when he saw that none regarded him, but that the Sicilians rag'd like wild Beasts, he order'd a Cryer by publick Proclamation to declare, That he would have the Motyans to fly for refuge to the Graecian Temples. Upon which the Common Soldiers stopp'd their hands, but forthwith sell a plundering and spoiling all through the City, and carried away abundance of Silver and Gold, rich Garments, and all sorts of other Wealth and Treasure. For Dionysius for the Encouragement of his Soldiers for the time to come, had given them the Plunder of the City.

After all was over, he rewarded Archylus who first mounted the Wall, with an Hundred Minas, and all the rest every one according to his Merit. As many of the Motyans as were left alive he sold for Slaves: But Daimenes and some other Greeks who join'd with the Carthaginians and were taken Prisoners, he commanded to be Crucify'd. After this he put a Garison into Motya, and made Bito the Syracusian Governor; the greater part of the Garison were Sicilians. Then he order'd Leptinus the Admiral with an Hundred and Twenty sail, to watch the Carthaginians at Sea; and likewise to make Incursions (as he had before design'd) upon Egista and Entella. He himself return'd with the Army to Syracuse, Summer now drawing near to an End. At this time Sophocles the Son of Sophocles, began to make Tragedies at Athens, and came off Twelve times a Conqueror. 

When this Year was ended, Phormio entred upon the chief Magistracy at Athens; and at Rome six Military Tribunes executed the Consular Authority; Cncius Genusius, LuciusAtilius, Marcus Pomponius, Gains Duilius, Marcus Veturius, and Valerius Publius. At this time was celebrated the Ninety Sixth Olympiad, in which Eupolis of Elis was Victor.

In the time of their Governments, Dionysius, Lord of Syracuse, marched from thence with his Army, and invaded the Territories of the Carthaginians. When he was wasting and spoiling the Country, the Halicyans out of Fear of him sent. Ambassadors to his Camp, and became Confederates. But they of Egesta made a sudden and unexpected Sally upon the Guards of the Besiegers and burnt their Tents, which caus'd a great Consternation and Tumult through the Camp, For the Flame catching and running along at a great distance was not easily quench'd, so that some of the Soldiers in quenching of the Fire were destroy'd, and many Horses were burnt and the Tents together: But Dionysius went on spoiling and wasting the Country without any Opposition.

In the mean time, Leptinas the Admiral, who lay then with the Fleet at Motya, was very intent in observing the Enemy at Sea. And the Carthaginians having certain Intelligence of the strength of Dionysius, resolv'd to exceed him in all warlike Provision and Preparation whatsoever. To which end (according to their Laws) they made Imilco their King, and rais'd Forces out of all parts of Africa and Spain, of which some were their own Confederates, and others Mercenaries: At length they got together an Army of above Three hundred thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, besides Chariots to the number of Four hundred. They had likewise a Fleet to the number of Three hundred long Gallies, for Men of War, and Six hundred Ships of Burden (as Ephorus relates) to Tran

•

port all manner of Provision, Engines of Battery, and all other Necessaries for the War. But Timeus affirms, that not above a Hundred thousand were transported from Africa into Sicily, with which Three thousand of the Sicilians join'd when they came over. Imilco deliver'd Commissions seal'd up to every one of the Officers, with a Command they should not open them till they were out at Sea, and then to Execute their Orders. He did this, that the Spies which might be amongst them, might not be able to inform Dionysius of the Design of the Fleet. The Orders were, That they should make straight to Panormus; Upon this they all set sail with a fair Wind: The Transport Ships made directly in to the open Sea, but the Gallies sail'd along the Coast of Africa.


Page 383

When the Transport Ships and Ships of Burden with a fresh Gale came within sight of Sicily, Dionysius sent out Leptines with Thirty Sail against them, with Order to Sink and Destory as many as he could, who forthwith made up to them, and fought those he first met with, and sunk several with all the Men in them. The rest (though they were heavy loaden) by the help of the Wind fortunately veering about, easily escap'd; but about Fifty were sunk down right, in which were lost Five thousand Soldiers, and Two hundred Chariots.

In the mean time, Imilco arriv'd at Panormus, and landing his Men march'd directly against the Enemy, Comanding the Fleet to sail along upon the Coast near to him. In his march he entred Eryx by Treachery; and thence hasten'd with all speed to Motya: And because Dionysius was then busie in besieging of Egista, Imilco had the Opportunity to take Motya by Storm.

Although the Sicilians were very earnest and desirous to fight the Enemy, yet Dionysius judg'd it more advisable for him to draw off to some other Place, because he was both far off from his Confederates, and his Provisions too began to grow very low. Determining therefore to be gone, he advis'd the Sicilians for the present to quit their Cities, and join themselves to the Army, promising to plant them in a richer, and in no less a Country than their own, and telling them that when the War was ended, as many as would, might return to their former Habitations: upon this, some few of them embrac'd the Offer, lest if they refus'd they should have been plunder'd by the Soldiers: The rest deserted, together with the Haliceans, who sent Ambassadors to the Carthaginians, and renew'd their League with them. Dionysius therefore made with all speed to Syracuse, spoiling and wasting the Country all along as he march'd. But Imilco seeing all things succeed according to his Hearts desire, march'd with his Army against Messina, earnest to possess himself of that City, by reason of its fit and convenient situation; for the Haven there was very commodious, capable to receive his whole Fleet, which consisted of about Six hundred Sail; and by that means having the Command of the Sea in those parts, he judg'd he should be able to intercept all the Shipping that should be sent both from Italy and Peloponnesus; to aid them of Syracuse, While he was musing and considering of these things, he made Peace with them of Hymera, and the Inhabitants of Cephalaedium. And taking in the City of Lipara, he impos'd a Mulct of Thirty Talents upon the Islanders. Then he march'd straight away with his Forces for Messina (his Fleet sailing near at hand over against him) and in a short time encamp'd at Pelorides, not above a Hundred Stages from thence. When they of the City-heard of the approach of the Enemy, they began to disagree about the concerns of the War. For some of them understanding the great strength of the Carthaginian Army, and seeing how they deserted by their Confederates, and that they wanted their Horse which were then at Syracuse, were of Opinion that the City could not be defended. Besides, to their further discouragement, their Walls were down in many places, and they had now no time to make necessary Preparations for their Defence. Therefore they sent away their Wives and Children, and all their choicest Goods, and the richest of their Treasures to the neighbouring Cities. Others there were who remembred an old Prophesie, whereby it was foretold by the Oracle, That the Carthaginians should be carriers of Water in that City: which was commonly interpreted in that Sense, as might portend most advantage to themselves, as if the Carthaginians should be Slaves in Messina. From hence they were very confident, and by this means greatly encourag'd others, so that they resolv'd to undergo the utmost extremity in defence of their common Liberty.

They sent out therefore presently a select number of their briskest young Men to Pelorides to prevent the Enemies Inroads into the Country; who did according to Order: Upon which, Imilco seeing the Messinians dispers'd and scatter'd, in order to oppose his Descent, he commanded Two hundred Ships to make towards the City; For he hop'd (as he might easily conjecture) that the whole Garrison of Messina would be so earnest in opposing his breaking into their Borders, that the City would be left unguarded, so that it would be easie for his Fleet to enter; and at that time the North Wind blew fresh, by which means the Ships were carry'd with a full Gale straight into the Harbor; and though the Guard sent to Pilorides hasten'd back with all speed, yet the Enemies Fleet was in before they return'd. And now the Carthaginian Army coming in on every side, speedily batter'd down the Walls, entred and took the City Messina. As many of the Messinions as engag'd with the Enemy died valiantly upon the spot; the rest fled to the next Cities: many of the common People fled to the Mountains near at hand, and were dispers'd and scatter'd into several Garrisons in the Country: Some were taken by the Enemy, others that were got into narrow Creeks about the Harbour, flung themselves


Page 384

into the Sea, thinking they should be able to swim over to Land on the other side; but of Two hundred scarce Fifty recover'd the Shoar of Italy. Afterwards Imilco entred Messina with his whole Army; and the first thing he set upon, was the Besieging the Castles and Forts near to the City, but being very strong and bravely defended by them that had fled thither, when he saw he could not win them by force, he return'd to the City; And having refresh'd and recruited his Army, resolv'd to march against Syracuse.

The Sicilians bearing an inveterate hatred to Dionysius, having now a fair opportunity all of them (except the Assarines) fell to the Carthaginians. Dionysius therefore, to the end he might be supply'd with Men, sets free all the Slaves and Servants of the Syracusians, and with them sufficiently Mann'd Threescore Gallies: he was furnish'd likewise with a Thousand Mercenaries from the Lacedemonians: Passing likewise from place to place through the Country, he fortify'd all the Castles and strong Holds, and furnish'd them with Provision. But his greatest care was to fortifie the Castles of the Leontines, and to that end laid up Stores and Magazines there, brought in from all parts. He likewise persuaded the Campanians, who at that time inhabited in Catana, to remove and reside at the City Aetna, because it was a place of great strength.

After things thus setled Dionysius led forth his Army an hundred and sixty Stages from Syracuse, and encamp'd near to a place call'd Taurus. He then had with him Thirty thousand Foot, and something above Three thousand Horse: His Navy consisted of a Hundred and fourscore Ships, of which there were but few that had Three Oars on a Bank. In the mean time Imilco demolish'd Messina, and commanded his Soldiers to pull down the Houses to the ground, so as not one stick should be left standing, or one Stone upon another; which was effectually executed by burning some and pulling down others. For by so many hands the business was done in a trice: and such was the ruine and desolation of the City, that that place which was so lately full of Inhabitants, could now scarce be known where it stood. For Imilco considering how remote it was from the Confederate Cities, and yet the best Port and Situation in all Sioily, judg'd it absolutely necessary either to ruine it as he had done, or at least so far to destroy it, as that it could not be repair'd in a long time, And thus Imilco, having sufficiently discover'd his implacable hatred to the Grecians, commanded Mago the Admiral to sail with the whole Fleet to the Promontory of Taurus. Here the Sicilians inhabited in great numbers, but without any Head or certain Commander. Dionysius had heretofore given the Country of the Naxians to these Sicilians; but they induc'd by the Promises of Imilco then dwelt upon this Hill (which was naturally fortisy'd) and there at that time they were, and so continu'd after the War, in a City strongly Wall'd, call'd Tauromenium, from its situation upon Taurus.

Imilco himself by swift marches came with his Army to the before mention'd place of Naxia, Mago sailing all along near to the Coast: But because Mount Aeina had a little before vomited out Fire as far as to the Shoar; the Army at land could not march so as to have the Fleet near at hand to attend them. For the passages by the Sea-Shoar were so spoil'd and choak'd up by Rivers and Streams of Fire from Aetna, that the Army was forc'd to take a Compass and march round the Mountain. Therefore Imilco commanded Mago to sail towards Catana, and he himself with the Army hasten'd thro the heart of the Country to join again with the Fleet at that City.

For he was afraid lest when the Forces were divided and far asunder, the Sicilians should set upon Mago by Sea; which happen'd accordingly. For Dionysius having intelligence that Mugo sail'd very slowly, and that the Land Army was engag'd in along and difficult March, hasten'd with all speed to Catana, that he might fight Mago by Sea before Imilco's Army came up. For he hop'd that being upon the Shoar near at hand with his Land Forces, it would much encourage his own, and discourage the Enemy: And that which was the most considerable was, That if his Fleet were worsted, both Ships and Men had a place ready to retreat unto for their safety 

Things thus order'd, he sent forth Leptines with the whole Fleet against the Enemy, commanding him to engage in close Order, and not to break his Line upon any account, unless he were over press'd with multitude. There were in Mago's Fleet Ships of burden and Gallies with brazen Beaks, to the number of Five hundred. The Carthaginian's, as soon as they saw the Coasts full of Ships, and the Grecian Navy making out straight upon them, were greatly amaz'd, and began to tack about and make into the Shoar But presently recollecting themselves, they consider'd the insuperable hazard they should run themselves into, if they should fight, both with the Soldiers at Land and them in the Ships at one time, therefore they resolv'd to try it out at Sea, and so putting themselves


Page 385

into a Line of Battel, waited to receive the Enemy, Leptines eagerly forcing on with Thirty of the best Gallies in the Van (with more Valour than Prudence) began the Fight, and presently falling in upon the first Squadron, sunk several of their Ships: But when Mago with his Fleet all join'd together, they surrounded the Thirty Sail, the first exceeding in Number, and the other in Valour.

And now was begun a sharp Engagement, which look't like a Fight upon Land, the Ships grapling close one to another, for there was no distance left for them to strike with their Beaks, but they fought hand to hand with their Forecastles close in front together: Some, while they were attempting to board their Adversary, were hurl'd over-board; others effecting what they design'd, fought valiantly aboard in the midst of their Enemies Ships. At length Leptines over-power'd with number, was forc'd to hoise up Sail, and fly; the rest of the Fleet coming on upon the Enemy, who were in disorder, were easily routed by the Carthaginians; for the Flight of the Admiral encourag'd them, and greatly discourag'd and distracted the Sicilians.

The Fight thus ended, the Carthaginians made a very hot pursuit, and sunk and destroy'd, above a Hundred Vessels; and they that were in the Transport-Ships that lay along the shoar, kill'd the Seamen as they saw them swimming to get to the Forces that were upon the Land; so that many being kill'd near the Land, the Shoar was full of Carcasses and Wrecks: the Dionisians being not able in the least to help them. Many were kill'd on the Carthaginians side; but there were above a Hundred Gallies of the Sicilians sunk and taken, and more than Twenty thousand Men kill'd.

After the Fight, the Carthaginian Navy anchor'd at Catana, whither they brought along with them the Ships they had taken, and drawing them up to the shoar, refitted them, that the Eves as well as the Ears of the Carthaginians might be entertain'd with the Greatness of their Victory.

Upon this Misfortune, the Sicslians judging that by returning to Syracuse they should suffer much, and be brought into great Straits by being suddenly besieg'd, persuaded Dionysius rather to fight Imilco; alledging, That by an unexpected Onset, the Barbarians would be terrify'd, and by that means they might in great probability repair their late Overthrow. Dionysius inclining to this Advice, and preparing to march against the Ene¦my, some of his Friends told him he ran a great hazard, and had reason to fear lest Imilco would invade Syracuse with his whole Fleet, and so he should lose the City. Upon this he alter'd his Resolution, knowing that Messina was lately lost by such an Oversight; hereupon he hastned to Syracuse, not thinking it safe for that Place to be without a strong Garison. Many of the Sicilians upon this were much displeas'd, and therefore some return'd to their own Habitations, and others dispers'd themselves into several Castles and Forts near at hand.

Imilco in two days march came to Catana, and caus'd the Ships that were there to be drawn up into the Harbour, by reason of the present Wind and Storm: Here he staid some days and refresh'd his Army, and from thence sent Ambassadors to the Campanians at Aetna to court them to a Defection from Dionysius, promising to bestow on them large Possessions, and that they should be equal Sharers in the Spoils of the War. He likewise acquainted them, that the Campanians of Entella had sided with the Carthaginians, and had supply'd them with Aids against the Sicilians. In sum, he told them that the Greoians bore an inveterate Hatred to all other Nations whatsoever. But the Campanians having given Hostages to Dionysius, and sent the best of their Soldiers to Syracuse, were forc'd to stick to the League they had made with him, tho' they had a desire rather to fall to the other side.

After these Misfortunes, Dionysius being now afraid of the Power of the Carthaginians, sends Polyxenus, his Father-in-Law, Ambassador to the Greoians in Italy, Lacedaemon; and Corinth, to desire their Assistance, and that they would not stand by, and see the Greek Cities in Sicily to be utterly destroy'd. He sent likewise several Paymasters into Reloponnesus, with great Sums of Money to raise what Men they could, not sparing any Cost.

But Imilco now enters with his Navy, richly adorn'd with his Enemies Spoils, into the great Haven of Syracuse; this fill'd the Citizens with Terror and Amazement; for a Navy of Two hundred and eighty Sail of Men of War, in excellent order, enter'd the Port; and after them came in above a Thousand Transport-Ships, wherein were above Five hundred Soldiers: So that the Ships were near Two thousand Sail; insomuch as the whole Haven (tho' it were large) was so fill'd with Shipping, that it was almost covered over. When the Navy had cast Anchor in the Harbour, presently appear'd the Land▪ Army on the other side, consisting (as some report) of Three hundred thousand


Page 386

Foot, and Three thousand Horse, besides Two hundred Long-Ships. Imilco the General pitch'd his Tent in the Temple of Jupiter; the rest of the Army encamp'd round him, about 12 Stages distant from the City.

A while after, Imilco draws out his whole Army in Battalia under the Walls of Syracuse, daring the Syracusians to Battel; and at the same time ordered a Hundred of his best Ships to enter into all the rest of the Harbors, the more to terrifie the Syracusians, and to convince them that the Carthaginians were Masters at Sea; but when he saw none durst come out against him, he march'd back to the Camp.

After this, he most shamefully, for the space of Thirty days, wasted and spoil'd all the Country round about, to the end to gratifie his Soldiers on the one hand, and to discourage his Enemies on the other. He wan also the Suburbs of Achradina, and plunder'd the Temples of Ceres and Proserpina. But he paid for his Sacrilege within a short time after; for his Fortune began to change, and things to go worse and worse with him every day. And whenever Dionysius took Courage and skirmish'd with the Enemy, the Syracusians came off Conquerors. Such Terror sometimes seiz'd the Carthaginians in the Camp, that in the Night they would run with great Terror and Confusion to their Arms, as if an Enemy had broken in upon them. Besides, a Disease at length seiz'd upon them, which was the cause of all the Mischiefs which afterwards overtook them, of which we shall speak hereafter, that we may observe due course and order of Time in the Relation.

Imilco now eager to block up the City, demolishes almost all the Sepulchres, amongst which were the Monuments of Gelo and his Wife Demareta, of rich and excellent Workmanship. He rais'd likewise three Forts near the Sea, one at Plenmynium, another about the middle of the Port, and the third near the Temple of Jupiter.

In these he laid up Stores of Meat and Drink, and all other Necessaries, believing the Siege would continue long. He sent away likewise the Transport-Ships to Sardinia and Africa, to bring from thence Corn and all other Provisions.

About this time Polyxenus, Dionysius's Father-in-Law (being return'd from Italy and Peloponnesus) brought with him Thirty Galleys (Men of War) from the Confederates, under the Command of Pharacidas the Lacedaemonian. After this, Dionysius and Leptines made out to Sea with some Galleys to endeavour to get some Provision into the Town; and while they were cruising about, the Syracusians from the City espy'd a Ship loaden with Provision coming up to Imilco's Army; upon which, they made out with Five Sail upon it, and took it and brought it into the Town. As they were sailing away with their Prize, Forty Sail of the Carthaginians pursu'd them; upon which, the whole Syracusian Fleet presently hoisted up Sail, and engag'd, took the Admiral, and sunk and destroy'd Twenty Ships more: The rest they put to flight, and pursu'd the Carthaginians to their main Fleet, and dar'd them to Battel; but they amus'd with this sudden Disaster, stirr'd not. Then the Syracusians fastned the Gallies they had taken to the Poops of their own Ships, and brought them into the City.

Being now puff'd up with this good Success, they proudly vaunted, That Dionysius was often overcome by the Carthaginians, but that now when they had not him with them, they triumph'd, and were return'd Conquerors. And in their Cabals here and there they would frequently discourse, and ask one another, why they should suffer themselves to be made Slaves by Dionysius, especially when they had now so fair an Opportunity to depose him? For till of late they said they were disarm'd, but now by occasion of the present War, they had again got Arms into their Hands.

While these things were thus whisper'd up and down, Dionysius lands at the Port, and presently after calls an Assembly, and in an Harangue highly praises the Syracusians, wishing them; That as they had done, so they would still continue to shew their Valour and Courage for the time to come, promising them, that in a short time he would put an end to the War. When the Assembly was ready to break up, Theodorus a Syracusian, a Man of great Authority among the Nobility, and one that had done remarkable Service for his Conntry, stood up, and boldly made this Speech concerning their Liberties.

The Speech of Theodorus.

ALthough Dionysius has interlac'd his Discourse with many Lyes, yet what he said in the close of his Harangue, That he would make a speedy dispatch of the War, he may truly perform, if he himself (who has always been beaten) be not the General, but forthwith restore us to our own Laws and Liberties: For there are none of us that can freely and chearfully venture our Lives in the Field, when there's not a Pin to


Page 387

chuse whether we be conquer'd by the Carthaginians, or being Conquerors become Slaves at home to Dionysius: For whilst Conquerors or Conquer'd, we are sure either to serve the Carthaginians on the one hand, or a more severe and tyrannical Master on the other. If the Carthaginians prevail, by paying of Tribute we shall enjoy our Laws, but this Tyrant robs our Temples, seizes our Estates, takes away our Lives, and deprives Masters of their Servants to fill up the number of his Mercenaries. And he that has acted as great cruelties in a time of Peace, as any that have been executed upon the storm¦ing of Cities in a time of War, now promises to put an end to the Carthaginian War. But it as highly concerns us (Oh fellow Citizens) to be rid of the Tyrant within our Walls, as to put an end to the War without. For the Castle which is now Garison'd by our own Slaves, is built as a Fort against the City it self, and the Mercenary Soldiers are kept in Pay to keep the Syracusians in Slavery, and he himself Lords it over the City, not as a good Magistrate for the execution of Justice; but as sole and absolute Lord, to Rule according to the Dictates of his own insatiable Desires. The Enemy now enjoys but a small part of the Country, but Dionysius has bestow'd all that he has conquer'd upon them that have given assistance to the advancement of his Tyranny: Why are we content so long tamely to suffer these base Abuses? such, as a generous Spirit would rather chuse to Die, than to be brought into a hazard and danger to suffer and undergo. We (to say the Truth) courageously endure the extreamest hardships in fighting against the Carthaginians; but we are so poor-spirited, that we dare not speak a word for the Laws and Liberties of our Country against a most cruel Tyrant. We that dare bravely Charge so many thousands of our Enemies, are dastardly afraid of one Tyrant, that has not the Courage of a generous. Slave: No Man ever presum'd to compare or equal Dionysius with Gelo, for he (through the innate goodness of his Disposition) with the assistance of the Syracusians and other Sicilians restor'd all Sicily to their Liberty: But this vile Man when he found the Cities free, either exposed them to the Will of the Enemy, or he himself made them perfect Slaves. The other, after he had fought many Battels in the Cause of Sicily, was so successful that an Enemy was not to be seen: But this Tyrant running away from Motya through the whole Island, at length penn'd himself up, not daring to look his Enemy in the Face, yet fierce and cruel enough towards the Citizens. The other for his Valour and remarkable Services done for his Country, had the Sovereignty freely and willingly bestow'd on him, not only by the Syracusians, but by all the Sicilians. But this Man who has usurp'd the Sovereign Power, to the ruine of the Confederates, and slavery of the Citizens; Why should he not be hated by all, who is not only unworthy of the Supream Power, but deserves a thousand Deaths besides? Through him Gela and Camerina are spoil'd, Messina raz'd and laid in rubbish, and Twenty thousand of our Confederates destroy'd. And things are now brought to that pass, that all the Greek Cities throughout Sicily are ruin'd, and we are all coop'd up into one. Among other Mischiefs and Miseries Naxus and Catana are by him sold for nought; many of the best situated and Confederate Cities raz'd to the ground. He fought twice with the Carthaginians, and was beaten in both. As soon as ever the Sovereign Power was given into his hand, he forthwith depriv'd the Citizens of their Liberties, putting to death all those that stood up for the Laws of their Country, and banishing those that were Rich to gain their Estates; giving their Wives in Marriage to their Servants, and to the lowest of the People, and putting Arms into the hands of Strangers and Barbarians. All these wickednesses, Oh, Jupiter, and all the Gods! has this hangman and base mean fellow committed. Where is now the love of the Laws and Liberties among the Syracusians? Where are the noble Actions of our Ancestors? by whom were destroy'd at Himera Three hundred thousand Carthaginians; not to say any thing of the Tyrants depos'd by Gelo. But that which is to be most admir'd is, that tho' your Fathers, even but yesterday, did rout so great an Army of the Athenians that came against Syracuse, and that in such a manner, as that they left not one to be a Messenger of their destruction; though (I say) you have so fresh an Example of your Fathers Valour, yet that you should bow your Necks to the Yoke of Dionysius, and at this instant time when you have Arms in your hands, is most strange. Certainly some good providence of the Gods has brought you now hither together in Arms, that you may have an opportunity to regain your Liberty. Now is the day come wherein you may shew your selves Men of Courage, and unanimously rescue your selves from so base and shameful a Slavery. It was an easie matter when we had no assistance, and the City was full of Mercenary Soldiers to keep us under, but now that we are Arm'd, now that we have Confederates to assist us, and stand by us as Spectators of our Valour, let us not yield an Inch, but make it manifest to all, that it


Page 388

was not Cowardize but want of opportunity that made us seem to be willing and content to be Slaves. May we not be asham'd to have an Enemy to be our General, one who has Sacrilegiously robb'd all the Temples in the City; to entrust one in matters of the greatest publick concern, that none (in his wits) would trust with his own private Estate. And when we see that all Men generally are more than ordinarily Religious in times of War and imminent Dangers; Can we hope that such a notorious Atheist as this should be instrumental to put an happy issue to this War? And if any Man will but seriously consider, he may easily conclude, that Dionysius is more afraid of Peace than War. For he knows that the Syracusians (through fear of the bad consequences of commotions at this present) dare not attempt any thing against him: But he foresees that if the Carthaginians be conquer'd, the Syracusians being then in Arms, and encourag'd with the success will seek to redeem themselves, and regain their Liberty. And this was the cause (as I conceive) that in the former War he most treacherously depopulated Gela and Camerina, and stript 'em of all their Inhabitants; and likewise agreed as part of the Articles of the League; That many of the Greek Cities should never after be inhabited by the Grecians. This was likewise the Cause, that afterwards in a time of Peace, And against the Conditions agreed on, he enslav'd Naxus and Catana, raz'd the one down to the ground, and gave away the other to the Campanians, a Colony out of Italy. and when he perceiv'd that after the Cities were thus ruin'd, the rest were continually plotting how to rescue themselves from this Tyranny, he then for a diversion began this Second War against the Carthaginians. For the Sacred Bonds of an Oath did not so much awe him to the keeping of his League, as the fear of these Sicilians that remain'd did torment him, whose destruction he continually watch'd all opportunities to effect. When the Enemy, lately weak and weather-beaten, landed at Panormus, tho' he might easily then have fallen upon them with his whole Army, yet was very far from doing any such service for his Country. Afterwards he suffer'd Messina (that large City and commodious Port) for want of Relief, to be laid wast, not only because there were many Sicilians by that means cut off, but likewise that all Aids by Shipping from Italy and Peloponnesus might be intercepted by the Carthaginians. Then at last he fought upon the Coasts near to Catana, even close to the City, that the Enemy if they were beaten might have ready shelter in the Port of their own Allies. After this, and the Fight was over, a Storm arose, by reason whereof the Carthaginians were forc'd to draw up their Ships into the Harbour, at which time we had a fair opportunity of ruining them, their Land-Army not being then come up, and their Ships, many of them thrown upon the Shoar by the violence of the Storm. If we then had set upon them with our Land-Army, they must all necessarily have either fallen into our hands, if they had come to Land, or by the violence and rage of the Sea the Shoar had been fill'd with wrecks. But I know I need not spend many words in accusing Dionysius among the Syracusians: For if the incurable Injuries and Wrongs themselves will not raise the Spirits of the Sufferers, How can words prevail to take revenge of this Miscreant? When besides all that they have suffer'd they may clearly see, That he's the most impious wretch of the Citizens, the cruelest Tyrant, and most slothful and careless General: For as often as we fight the Enemy under his Conduct, so often are we beaten: But now when we lately Engag'd our selves without him, we routed the Enemies whole Fleet with a few Gallies. We ought therefore to provide a new General, lest while we make use of one who has Sacrilegiously robb'd the Temples, we fight against God himself. For the Deity apparently opposes them who make such an Atheist their Head and Governor. For to see all our Forces in the height of their strength dispers'd and scatter'd when he is with them, and yet a small part of our Army Conquerors when he is absent, What does it but evidence to all the special and remarkable Presence of the Gods? Therefore, Oh ye Syracusians, if he will freely Abdicate his Covernment, let us as freely consent that he may depart out of the City with all that belongs to him: But if he refuses so to do, now we have an opportunity to regain our Liberty. We are now here all together, we have Arms in our hands, and those that will assist us both out of Italy and Peloponnesus are near at hand. And by the Law the Chief Gommand in the Army ought either to be given to some of the Citizens, or to some of the Corinthians, who are the natural Inhabitants, or to the Spartans who now Command all Greece.

When Theodorus had thus spoken, the Syracusians (much perplex'd in their Minds) and doubtful what to do) look'd back upon their Confederates, Upon which, Pharacides the Lacedemonian Admiral of the Fleet (lately sent to their assistance) ascended the Tribunal; and every Man now hop'd he would be very earnest in persuading of them to


Page 389

stand up for their Liberties. But he being Dionysius his Guest, and then one of his Family, told them that he was sent by the Lacedemonians to assist the Syracusians and Dionysius against the Carthaginians, and not to deprive him of his Kingdom: and while he was (contrary to all Mens expectations) opposing what had been said, the Mercenary Soldiers all flock'd about Dionysius, but the Syracusians, no little amaz'd, sate still; but rag'd in their Minds against the Spartans: For not long before, Aretas the Lacedemonian had betraid 'em under the Covert and Pretence of being sent to free them from their Slavery; and now Pharacides obstructed the Syracusians in their endeavours to free themselves. However, Dionysius was now in a great fright, and forthwith Dissolv'd the Assembly; and afterwards courted the People with very fair and smooth words, presenting some with large Gifts, and inviting others to his Feasts and Banquets. But as to the Carthaginians, after they had ruin'd the Suburbs, and rifled and plunder'd the Temples of Ceres and Proserpina, a Plague seiz'd upon their Army, and the more to increase and sharpen the Vengeance of the Gods upon them, both the time of the year and the multitudes of Men thronging together, greatly contributed to the inhancement and aggravation of their Misery: For the Summer was hotter than ordinary, and the place it self was the great occasion that the distemper rag'd above all bounds. For the Athenians in the very same place, not long before, were in multitudes swept away by the Plague, for that because it was a marshy and spungy Ground. In the beginning of the Distemper, before the Sun arose, through the coldness of the Air that came off from the Water, their Bodies would fall a shaking and trembling; but about Noon, being so close pent up together, they were choak'd with the heat. The Infection was brought in among them by the South Wind, which swept them away in heaps, and for a while they bury'd them: but the number of the Dead increasing to that degree, that those that attended the Sick were likewise cut off, none durst come near to the infected, and (besides the want of attendance) the Distemper seem'd to be incurable. For first, Catarrhs and Swellings of the Throat were caused by the stench of the Bodies that lay unbury'd, and the putrifaction of the Soil. Then follow'd Feavers, Pains in the Back, Heaviness of the Loins, Dysenteries, Botches and Biles over the whole Body. Thus were many tormented by this Plague; others were struck Mad, and ran about the Camp like Wild Beasts, and beat every one they met. All the help of Physicians was in vain, both by reason of the violence of the Distemper, and the suddain dispatch it made of many: For in the midst of great Pains and horrible Torments, they died commonly the Fifth or at the most the Sixth Day; so that they who died by the War, were accounted happy by all. And it was further observable, That all that attended upon the Sick, dy'd of the same Distemper: And that which aggravated the Misery was, that none were willing to come near to the Distress'd and Languishing Persons in order to administer to them any sort of help. For not only Strangers, but even Brothers, and dear and familiar Friends and Acquaintance, were forc'd out of fear of the Infection, to avoid and forsake one another. Dionysius therefore hearing of the miserable condition of the Carthaginians, mann'd Fourscore Sail, and order'd Pharacides and Leptines the Admirals at spring of Day to fall upon the Enemies Fleet. And he himself before the Moon was up in the Night, got his Army together, and marching to the Temple of Cyanes, came up without being discover'd to the Enemies Camp about break of day: He had sent the Horse, and a Thousand Foot of the Mercenaries before him, to fall upon that part of the Enemies Camp that lay up further into the Land. These Mercenaries hated Dionysius more than any other that were about him, and were often making disturbance, and mutining upon all occasions; Therefore Dionysius order'd the Horse, as soon as they were engag'd with the Enemy, to fly and leave the Mercenaries to be cut off, which was accordingly observ'd, and they were all kill'd upon the spot. Dionysius himself determin'd to assault the Camp and the Castles both at once. The Barbarians upon this suddain and unexpected incursion of the Enemy, running in great consusion and disorder to their Arms, gave him an opportunity to take the Castle, call'd Polictma by Storm. On the other side, in the mean time, the Horse, with some Gallies made to the Fort near Dascon, and took it; And forthwith came up the whole Fleet, and the Army Assaulted the rest of the Forts with a mighty Shout, which struck the Barbarians with great terror and amazement; For at the first they all ran to defend their Camp, but now seeing the Enemies whole Fleet come up, they bestirr'd themselves as much to preserve their Navy that then lay at Anchor: But all their Care was to little purpose, for they were prevented by the suddainness of the surrprize. For while they were ascending the Decks, and hasting on board, the Enemies Ships came up with that fierceness upon them, and so pierc'd their Broad sides, that some were sunk down right at the first shock; others by repeated and frequent Assaults were broken in pieces, so that the


Page 390

Carthaginians were fill'd with dread and horror. And while the best and greatest of their Ships were up and down pierc'd through and through, the Air resounded with a terrible noise by the crashing of the Vessels, broken by the Beaks of the Gallies, and the Shoar over against them was presently fill'd with dead Bodies. The Syracusians still more and more encourag'd by their Success, while each strove who should first leap into their Enemies Ships, in every place killed and dispersed and scattered Barbarians, astonish'd and amaz'd with the fear of the present destruction. Neither was the Land Army wanting in their Assistance, in which Dionysius then was (by chance) having rid to Dascon some time before. For finding there Forty Ships of Fifty Oars apiece, besides Ships of Burden that lay near to them, and some Gallies, they threw Fire amongst them; upon which the Flame mounting up, and spreading it self far and wide, set all the Ships on fire, and neither Merchants nor Mariners were able to stop the violence of the Flame, which (the Wind being then high) ran along from the Ships at Anchor and catcht upon the Transport Ships which lay near to them; And the Men to avoid the Fire, leaping out of the Ships into the Sea, and the Cables snapping asunder, the Ships fell foul one upon another, by reason whereof some broke in pieces, many were burnt, and others by the violence of the Winds scatter'd and dispers'd here and there, so that all one way or other were destroy'd. And here a Show, as upon a Theatre was represented to the Citizens while the Fire ran through the Transport Ships from one to another, and the Flame mounted the Masts, and consum'd the Main Yards, and the ruine of the Barbarians seem'd like the overthrow of such as were destroy'd for some notorious Impiety by Thunder and Lightning from Heaven. Upon these Successes both young and old that were able took Boats and pass'd over to the Harbour, to rifle those Ships that were almost consum'd by the Fire, and to save such as might be refitted, and those that were yet sound and untouch'd, to tow them by their Boats to the City. Yea, such was the exceeding Joy and Emulation of all to share in the Honour of the Victory, that those whom Age might well have excus'd from intermedling with matters of War, yet now beyond their Age and natural Strength made themselves remarkable, And now the Victory spread swiftly through the City, upon which the Women and Children and whole Families left their Houses and ran to the Walls and fill'd them with Spectators, of whom some lift up their Hands to Heaven, and gave thanks to the Gods, others cry'd out that the Barbarians were justly punish'd for their prophaneness in rissing and plundering of the Temples. For indeed it seem'd as if the Gods themselves were engag'd in the Fight, where so many Ships were on fire with the Flame mounting into the Air, above the Masts, and the Grecians only standing by (with joyful Acclamations) as Eye-witnesses of every happy Event. And on the contrary, the Barbarians amaz'd and astonish'd with the dreadful misfortune (in great Confusion, and with mournful Cries) bewailing themselves. But Night put an end to the Battle, and Dionysius encamp'd near to the Barbarians at the Temple of Jupiter.

The Carthaginians being thus routed both by Sea and Land, sent Ambassadors privately to Dionysius to offer him Three hundred Talents, which they had then ready in their Camp, if he would permit the remainder of their Army to transport themselves into Africa. To this Dionysius answer'd, that he could not suffer all to be gone, but he was content that those who were Citizens of Carthage might depart privately in the Night, but no other. For he knew well enough that neither the Syracusians nor his Confederates would ever suffer him to grant to them any such liberty. But he did this because he was unwilling utterly to destroy the Carthaginians, that the Syracusians (through fear of them) might find no opportunity or leisure by disturbing of him, to seek after the regaining of their Liberty. Having therefore agreed with the Carthaginians that they should be gone the fourth Night next after, he draws his whole Army into the City. Upon which, Imilco deliver'd the Three hundred Talents to some appointed for that purpose, who convey'd them secretly in the night into the Castle; When the time appointed was come, Imilco fill'd Forty Gallies with Citizens of Carthage, with an intent to be gone, leaving the rest of the Army behind him. And he was no sooner entred into the Port, but some Corinthians discerning that Dionysius trifled away the time in getting the Soldiers and Officers together, were impatient, and forthwith made after them. And by rowing hard, at length got up to the Carthaginian Ships that were in the Rear, which they sunk, by piercing them through with the Beaks of their Ships. Afterwards Dionysius drew out his Army; but the Sicilians, who sided with the Carthaginians, were almost all fled through the heart of the Country, and escap'd to their several Cities, before the Syracusians could reach up to them. In the mean time when Dionysius had plac'd Guards at several Passes to intercept them that fled, he march'd with his Army in the Night to the


Page 391

Enemies Camp: Upon which, all the Barbarians now betraid both by their General and the Carthaginians, and likewise by the Sicilians, fled away in great fear and amazement, of whom part were taken falling in among their Enemies Guards, that way-laid them; others, and the greatest part, threw away their Arms, and cry'd for Quarter. But the Spaniards with their Arms got into a Body, and sent a Trumpet to Dionysius to offer themselves to him as Confederates: Upon which, he made a League with them, and join'd them to the Regiments of his Mercenaries. The rest of the common Soldiers he took, and whatever was left of the Bag and Baggage he gave for Plunder to the Soldiers. And thus was the suddain change and turn of the Carthaginian Affairs; From whence all Men may learn, That whoever they be that above measure exalt themselves, may come in short time to be convinc'd how weak and inconsiderable creatures they are, They, who a little before were possest of all the Cities of Sicily but Syracuse (which they accounted themselves likewise sure of) were presently brought into such a strait, as to be afraid lest they should lose their own Country: And they who lately destroy'd the Sepulchres of the Syracusians, were now Eye-witnesses of a Hundred and fifty thousand Carcasses of their own Men that perish'd by the Plague, lying rotting upon the ground without the Honour of Burial. They who had before burnt up all before them belonging to the Syracusians, by a sudden change of Fortune now, saw their whole Fleet wrapt up, and consum'd in Flames. They who not long ago in great Pride and Ostentation entred into the Port of Syracuse, boasting of their Successes, little thought that within a while after they should be forc'd to fly away in the night, and treacherously leave their Confederates to the Mercy of their Enemies. The General himself, who had pitch'd his Tent in the Temple of Jupiter, and had robb'd the Temples of the Riches laid up in them, shamefully fled away with a few to Carthage, and tho' he escap'd with Life, yet he could not fly from the Vengeance of the Gods for his Impiety; but liv'd all his Days in disgrace in his own Country, reproach'd and scorn'd by all. Nay, he was reduc'd to that extremity of Misery, that he wander'd about round all the Temples of the City in Rags, convinc'd of his own Impiety, and doing Penance for his notorious Wickedness; and and at length Murther'd himself, and Dy'd in extream Want and Poverty; by his example leaving behind him an awe of the Gods among the Citizens. For presently after, many other calamities of War overtook them: For this overthrow being spread all over Africk, their Consederates who hated them before, now for their treacherous deserting of the Soldiers at Syracuse, abhorr'd the Carthaginians much more than they did before. And therefore stirr'd up by Rage on the one hand, and encourag'd to contemn the Carthaginians by reason of their late misfortune on the other, they resolv'd to stand up for their Liberty. And having sent Ambassadors into all parts, they rais'd an Army, and at length encamp'd themselves in the Field. Upon which, there presently came in to them, not only Free Men but Slaves, so that in a small time they made up a Body of Two hundred thousand Men.

In the first place they took Tunis, not far from Carthage from thence they march'd in a body, fought and beat the Carthaginians, and drove them within their Walls. At length the Carthaginians (against whom the Gods thus apparently fought) with faint and trembling Hearts, assembled themselves together to supplicate the Deity to be appeas'd and to put an end to his Wrath and Indignation against them. And presently a Spirit of Devotion (join'd with Fear) possess'd the whole City, whilst every one expected to become miserable Slaves. Therefore all were of Opinion that the Gods who were offended, should by all means in the first place be atton'd. And altho' they never before Sacrific'd to Proserpina or Ceres, yet now the chiefest of the Citizens were consecrated to be Priests for this Service. And having set forth the Statues of the Gods with all Pomp and Solemnity, they order'd the Sacrifices for the future to be made according to the Grecian Rites and Ceremonies. And they carefully made use of those Grecians that were with them, and who were best acquainted with the Rites of their Religion, to officiate in the Sacrifices. But after this they prepar'd another Navy, and all other things necessary for the carrying on of the War.

In the mean time the Rebels, tho' they were a vast number of Men, yet they wanted good and expert Officers; and that which was worst of all, they wanted sufficient Provision for such a multitude, which the Carthaginians were supply'd with, having enough brought to them by Sea from Sardinia. And besides all this, the Revolters fell a quarrelling among themselves about the Supream Command of the Army; and some, bribed with Money by the Carthaginians, fell off and deserted the common Cause. And hence it came to pass, that (through want of Provision, and Treachery of some of their Associates) this great Rabble broke in pieces, and were dispers'd here and there, every one


Page 392

to their own Country, and Places of Habitation, and so freed Carthage from the great Fright they were lately in. And this was the State of Affairs in Africa at this time.

As for Dionysius, he discerning that the Mercenaries bore him no Good Will, and therefore, lest they should depose him, seiz'd upon Aristotle their General, upon which the common Soldiers ran to their Arms, and in great Rage demanded their Pay. But he, to appease them, told them, That he would send Aristotle to Lacedemon to be try'd there by the Democracy, and gave them (who were about Ten thousand) the City and Country of Leontum for their Pay, which they readily accepted for the sweetness and pleasantness of the Place, and divided the Land amongst themselves by Lot. Then he rais'd other Mercenaries, to whom, and to those that were Freemen of his own Family, he committed the Care and Protection of his Government.

After the Overthrow of the Carthaginians, all those that remain'd of them that belong'd to the Cities that were taken by the Carthaginians throughout Sicily, got together, and being restor'd to their several Countries, began to get Strength again. And Dionysius repeopled Messina with a Thousand Lecrians, Four thousand Medimneans, and Six hundred Melesians of Peloponnesus, who were Exiles from Zacynthus and Naupactus. But when he discern'd that he had offended the Lacedemonians, by planting the Messinians (whom they had driven out) in so eminent and considerable a City, he remov'd them into another Place in the Province of Abacena, near the Sea, limiting them within certain Bounds. The Messinians call'd this City Tyndarides, and living peaceably among themselves, and receiving many into the Freedom of their City, they increas'd in a short time to above the Number of Five thousand. After many Expeditions and Incursions into the Territories of the Sicilians, they took Smenteum and Morgantium, and enter'd into League with Agyris the King of the Agyroneans, and Damon the Petty Prince of the Centorrippineans, likewise with the Erbiteans and Astorines. Cephaledium, Selunta, and Enua, were also brought under their Power and Government by Treachery. And they made Peace with them of Erbissa, and so stood the Affairs of Sicily at that time.

CHAP. VIII.

Agesilaus made General against the Persians by the Lacedemonians; goes to Ephesus. They send to the King of Egypt for Assistance. The Persians routed at Sipylus by Agesilaus. Tissaphernes's Head cut off in a Bath at Larissa. The War between the Phoceans and Baeotians.

IN Greece, when the Lacedemonians foresaw the great War they were likely to have with the Persians, they made Agesilaus, one of their two Kings, their General, who raising Six thousand Men, and chusing Thirty of the most eminent Citizens to be Members of the Senate, pass'd over out of Europe to Ephesus. There he rais'd Four thousand more, and so march'd into the Field with an Army of Ten thousand Foot, and Four Hundred Horse.

After the Camp follow'd a Rabble, (for the sake of Pillage and Plunder,) not inferior in Number to the Army it self. He ran through the Plains of the Caystrions, and wasted and spoil'd all that belong to the Persians as far as to Cumae. Moving from thence, he spent the greatest part of the Summer in spoiling and wasting Phrygia, the Country next adjoyning; and having loaded his Army with Pillage and Spoil, about the latter end of Autumn return'd with his Army to Ephesus.

While these Things were acting, the Lacedemonians sent Ambassadors to Nephreus King of Egypt, in order to procure his Assistance in the War; who sent to the Spartans Tackle and Furniture for a Hundred Gallies, and Five hundred thousand Bushels of Wheat instead of Soldiers. Pharax therefore, the Lacedemonian Admiral, loosing from Rhodes with a Hundred and twenty Sail, arriv'd at Cassandra a Castle of Caria, distant a Hundred and fifty Stages from Caunus. Setting sail from thence, he besieg'd Caunus and Conon the Persian Admiral, who then lay there with a Fleet of Forty Sail. But Artaphernes and Pharnabazus approaching to the Relief of Caunus with a great Army, Pharax rais'd his Siege, and return'd with his Fleet to Rhodes.


Page 393

After this, Canon got together Fourscore Gallies, and with these sails over the Chersones. In the mean time, the Inhabitants of Rhodes refuse to suffer the Peloponnesian Fleet to enter their Harbour, and Revoit from the Lacedemonians, and receive Conon with his Navy into their Port and City. And presently after, they who brought Corn out of Egypt, (design'd for the Lacedemonians,) not knowing any thing of the Defection of the Rhodians, sail'd boldly to the Island. Upon which, Conon the Persian Admiral, with the help of the Rhodians, brought them and their Loading into the Port, and stor'd the City with Corn. And there came likewise other Ships to Conon, Ten from Silicia, and Fourscore from Phenicia, under the Command of the Lord Lieutenant of the Province of S

•don.

But afterwards Agesilaus drawing out his Army into the Plain of Caystrus, and the Places near to Sipylus, plunder'd and spoil'd the Inhabitants. Upon which, Tissaphernes, with an Army of Ten Thousand Horse, and Fifty Thousand Foot, came upon the Backs of the Lacedemonians, and kill'd all the Stragglers as they were forraging and ranging about the Country. But Agesilaus, with a Phalanx (drawn up in a Square) possess'd himself of the rising Grounds at Sipylus, watching his opportunity to set upon the Enemy: and from thence over-ran all the Country as far as to Sardis, and amongst others wasted and destroy'd a Garden belonging to Tissaphernes, set with all sorts of Trees, and other Things for Delight, and Divertisement in time of Peace, beautifi'd with very great Art and Cost. Marching thence, when he came half way between Sardis and Thyberne, he sent Xenocles the Spartan in the Night with Fourteen hundred Men into a Wood to lie in Ambush, in order to intercept the Enemy, he himself (about spring of Day) marching forward with the Army: As soon as he had passd the Ambuscade, the Barbarians in great Fury on the sudden set upon his Rear; upon which he forthwith wheel'd about, and when they were hotly engag'd, he lift up a Sign to them in Ambush, who forthwith with a great Shout came in and fell upon the Enemy, who seeing themselves surrounded, (in great Fear and Terror) betook themselves to their Heels, of whom Six thousand were kill'd in the Pursuit, and a great number of Prisoners taken, and the Lacedemonians seiz'd the Enemies Camp, which was very rich. Tissaphernes himself amaz'd at the Valour of the Spartans, in a great Fright fled out of the Battel to Sardis. Agesilaus was mov'd to march up higher into the other Provinces, but because the Sacrifices did not point out to him any good Success, he return'd with his Army to the Sea-side,

Artaxerxes King of Asia hearing of the routing of his Army, was both Afraid and Angry; Afraid of the Lacedemonians, and Angry at Tissaphernes, who was the occasion of the War. And Parysatis the Queen-Mother had not long before pray'd Artaxerxes, even upon her Knees, to take Revenge upon Tissaphernes; for she bare him a mortal Hatred, because he was instrumental to frustrate the Expedition of her Son against his Brother, Artaxerxes therefore makes Tithraustes General, and commanded him to seize Tissaphernes, giving him likewise Letters directed to all the Cities and Governors of the Provinces, ordering them to observe his Commands. As soon as Tithraustes came to Colosse in Phrygia, by the help of the Governor of Larissa he seiz'd Tissaphernes in a Bath, and cut off his Head and sent it to the King. After which, he made a Truce with Agesilaus for Six Months.

While Affairs went thus in Asia, the Phoceans made War upon the Boeotians, and pray'd Aid and Assistance from the Lacedemonians. Upon which, Lysander was sent thither with a few Soldiers, who rais'd more after he came to Phocis; but not long after, Pausanias King of Sparta was sent to Phocis with Six thousand, whereupon the Boeotians drew out their Forces, and being join'd by the Athenians their Confederates, found Haliartus besieg'd by Lysander and the Phoceans. Whereupon a Battel was fought, in which Lysander, and many of the Lacedemonians with their Confederates, were kill'd. The Boeotians pursu'd not far, but Two hundred Thebans lost their Lives, by falling down some steep Precipices through their own Carelesness. This was afterwards call'd the Boeotian War. But Pausanias hearing of the Defeat of the Lacedemonians, enter'd into a Truce with the Boeotians, and return'd with his Army into Peloponnesus.

In the mean time, Conon the Persian Admiral committed the Care of the Fleet to Hieronymus and Nicodamus, two Athenians, and he himself hasten'd away to the King sailing to Silicia, and from thence passing to Thapsacus in Syria, he put himself in a Barge, and sail'd down the River Euphrates to Babylon. Here being admitted to the King, he promis'd, That if the King would but furnish him with Money and other Necessaries as he should think fit, he would undertake to ruin the Lacedemonian Fleet. The King was much pleas'd, and highly Commended and Rewarded him, and order'd a Paymaster to attend him, and pay him as much Money as he should from time to time require He gave him likewise liberty to chuse what Persian he would to be his Collegue and Assistant in the


Page 394

Command; and he thereupon chose Pharnabazus, and after he had taken Order for all Things, (according to the utmost of his Power,) he went down to Sea.

CHAP. IX.

The Confederate War by the Argives and others against the Lacedemonians. The Battel at Aricas. The Fight at Nemea. Pisander the Lacedemonian Admiral routed in a Sea-Fight at Cnidus by the Persian Fleet, commanded by Conon the Athenian. The Corinthian War against the Lacedemonians, and the great Sedition there.

AT the end of the year Diophantus was made Lord Chancellor at Athens, and at Rome Six Military Tribunes were invested with the Consular Authority; that is to say, Lucius Valerius, Marcus Furius, Quintus Servilius, Quintus Sulpitius,ClaudiusOgron, and Marius Appius. In the time of their Governments, the Boeotians and Athenians, the Corinthians and the Argives, Confederated: For they conceiv'd, that if they (being the most considerable and largest Cities of Greece) did but stick close one to another, they might easily overcome the Lordly Power of the Lacedemonians, and the rather for that they were hated of their Confederates for their Tyrannical Government. To this end they first order'd a General Assembly of Members from the several Cities to meet at Corinth, where being met, they order'd all Things necessary concerning the War. Afterwards they sent Messengers from City to City, and by that means took off many from siding with the Lacedemonians. And presently there join'd with them all Eubea generally, the Leucadians, Acarnanians, Ambraciots, and Chalcideans of Thrace. They then endeavour'd to bring into the Confederacy the Inhabitants of Peloponnesus; but none of them would hearken to them: For Sparta lying close to the sides of Peloponnesus, was as a Castle or Bulwark for the Defence of the Country. Medius, the Prince of Larissa in Thessaly, was about that time engag'd in a War with Lycophrone Tyrant of the Phereans, to whom upon his Request this General Assembly sent in Aid Two thousand Men, who being furnish'd with these Aides, takes Pharsalus, (a Lacedemonian Garison,) and sells all the Inhabitants for Slaves. After this, the Boeotians, with them of Argos, separating themselves from Medius, took Heraclea in Trachinia, being let within the Walls in the night, and there they put all the Lacedemonians to the Sword; but suffer'd the Peloponnesians to depart with all that belong'd to them. Then they recall'd the Trachinians to inhabit the City, whom the Lacedemonians had forc'd to till the Land, though they were the ancient Inhabitants of the Country.

And not long after, Istmenias the General of the Boeotians leaving the Argives to guard the City, caus'd the Eneans and Achamaneans to desert the Lacedemonians, and having rais'd among them and other Confederates many Soldiers, he march'd with an Army of no less than Six thousand Men against the Phoceans. Not long after he encamp'd near Aricas, a City of Locris, (the Birth-place of Ajax, as 'tis said,) where the Phoceans, under the Conduct of Lacisthenes a Laconian, came out against him and fought him: The Dispute was very sharp for a long time, but at length the Boeotians got the Day, and pursu'd the Enemy till it grew dark, of whom they kill'd above a Thousand, and lost Five hundred of their own. After this Battel, both Sides disbanded their Armies, and the Phoceans returned to their own Country, and the other to Corinth; where having call'd a Senate, and encourag'd by this good Success, (as they conceiv'd of it,) they muster'd at Corinth (rais'd out of all the Cities far and near) to the Number of about Fifteen thousand Foot, and Five hundred Horse.

The Lacedemonians seeing that the greatest Cities of Greece had confederated against them, determin'd to send for Agesilaus, and the Army he had with him, out of Asia. Yet in the mean time they march'd out against the Enemy with Three and twenty thousand Foot, and Five hundred Horse, which they had rais'd out of their own City, and from among their Confederates. And not long after a Battel was fought at the River Nemea, which continu'd till Night parted them, wherein part of the Army on both sides prevail'd one against the other. There fell of the Lacedemonians and their Confederates, Eleven hundred; but of the Boeotians and their Confederates, were slain Two thousand Eight hundred.


Page 395

As soon as Agesilaus had landed his Army in Europe, he was encountred by a great Body of Thracians, whom he routed, and kill'd the greatest part of them. Thence he march'd through Macedonia, on purpose to pass that way Xerxes had formerly done, when he came with a powerful Army into Greece. Having therefore pass'd through Macedon and Thessaly, he went on forward to the Straits of Thermopylae, and pass'd through that way.

In the mean time Conon and Pharnabazus, the Persian Admirals lay at Doryma in the Chersonese with a Fleet of more than Ninety Men of War; and being inform'd that the Enemies Navy lay at Cnidus, they prepared for a Sea-Fight. Periarchus the Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet weighing Anchor from Cnidus, arrived at Physeus in Chersonesus with Eighty five Gallies; and loosing from thence, fell upon the King's Fleet, and had the advantage against those Ships he first attack'd: But upon the Persian Gallies coming up in a full Body to rescue their Fellows, his Confederates fled, and made to the Shoar; but he judging it a base and dishonourable thing for a Spartan to turn his Back, tack'd about to front the Enemy, and fighting with great Gallantry, (after he had destroy'd many of the Persians in the heat of the Fight) was at length kill'd, and so fell with Honour worthy of his Country. Then they with Conon pursuing the Lacedemonians to the Shoar, took Fifty of their Gallies, but the most part of the Men swam to Land and escap'd, only Five hundred were taken Prisoners; and the rest of the Gallies came to Gnidus.

But Agesilaus being strengthen'd with Forces from Peloponnesus, entred with an Army into Boeotia, where the Boeotians and their Confederates forthwith met him at Coronea, and engag'd, in which Battel the Boeotians put that Wing of the Lacedemonians to slight that oppos'd them, and pursu'd them to their Camp; but the rest, after a small Resistance, were routed by Agesilaus and his Party. Whereupon the Lacedemonians looking upon themselves as Conquerors, in token of Victory erected a Trophy, and gave Leave to the Enemy to bury their Dead. For there were kill'd of the Boeotians and their Confederates above Six hundred; and of the Lacedemonians and their Associates above Three hundred and fifty; Agesilaus himself being sorely wounded, and carry'd to Delphos to be cur'd.

After the late Sea-fight, Pharnabazus and Conon invaded the Confederates of the Lacedemonians with their whole Fleet; and first forc'd them of Coos to a Defection, from the Lacedemonians, then those of Nisea, and Tios or Teium. Afterward the Chians (forcing out the Garison there) revolted to Conon.

The Mitylenes, Ephesians, and Erythreans likewise follow'd the Examples of the former. And thus all the Cities on a sudden revolted, some of which (casting out the Lacedemonian Garisons) took the opportunity absolutely to free themselves; others from that time gave themselves up into Conon's Hands, and from that time forward the Lacedemonians lost the Sovereignty of the Sea.

Conon determining to sail for Attica with his whole Fleet, weighs Anchor, and by the way beinging over the Islands of the Cyclades to his side, he makes straight for Cythera, which he gain'd upon the first Approach, and taking Hostages of the Cythereans for their Fidelity, he sent them away to Laconia; and when he had put a strong Garison into the City, he sail'd for Corinth, where he had Audience of the Senate; and then entring into a League, and leaving Money with them for the carrying on of the War, he return'd into Asia. About this time Eropus King of Macedonia dy'd, after he had reign'd Six Years; his Son Pausanias succeeded him, and reign'd only One Year. Theopompus of Chius ends his History with this Year, and with the Sea-fight at Cnidus, containing the Relation of the Grecian Affairs in Twelve Books; begun at the Sea-fight at Cynossema, where Thucydides ends, comprehending Seventeen Years. 

After the end of the last Year, Eubulides was made Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Six Military Tribunes executed the Consular Dignity at Rome, (Lucius Sergius, Aulus Posthumius, Publius Cornelius, Sextus Centius, Quintus Manlius, and Anitius Camillus.) At that time Conon the Persian Admiral arrived in the Pireum at Athens with Fourscore Sail, and promis'd the Citizens to rebuild the Walls of the City. For the Walls and long Thighs of the Pyream were demolish'd by the Lacedemonians, according to the Articles of the Peace when the Athenians were brought very low, and their Power broken by the Peloponn

•sian

 War. To this end Conon hir'd many Workmen, and order'd several out of the Fleet to be assisting to the carrying on of the Work, so that the greatest part of the Wall was finish'd in a short time. For the Thebans sent in Five hundred Carpenters and Masons, and several other Cities gave their Assistance. But Teribazus, General of the Land Forces in Asia envying Conon's Successes, contriv'd falsly to charge him, as if he


Page 396

only made use of the King's Soldiers to get Towns and Cities for the Athenians; therefore sending for him to Sardis, upon his appearance he seiz'd him and threw him into Prison.

But now at Corinth some that had thirsted after the chief Rule and Command in the Government, entred into a Conspiracy, and at the time of the publick Plays kill'd many in the Play-house, and fill'd the City with Tumult and Sedition. And being assisted by the Argives they cut the Throats of a Hundred and Twenty Citizens, and Banish'd Five hundred more. The Lacedaemonians raised Forces in order to reduce these Murderers by Force of Arms: But the Athenians and Beotians came with an Army to their assistance, but with an Eye to bring the City into their Subjection. But the Exiles with the Lacedaemonians and other Confederates, in the Night came up to the Lecheum and Arsenal, and took it by Storm. The next day the Townsmen drew out their Forces under the Command of Iphicrates, but were routed by the Lacedaemonians, who slew a great number of them. After this, the Beotians and Athenians together with the Argives and Corinthians, march'd down with their Forces to the Lecheum, and at first (after a short Resistance) forced their way into the Castle. But the Lacedaemonians and Exiles (Valiantly renewing the Fight,) drove out the Beotians, and all with them, who were forced to return into the City, with the loss of about a Thousand Men.

And now the time of Celebrating the Isthmian Games approached, and a Contest fell out amongst them concerning the Ordering and Management of the Sports: And after much wrangling, the Lacedaemonians prevail'd, and gave to the Exiles the Authority of ordering that Affair: And because almost all the Skirmishes and Encounters in this War happen'd near to Corinth, it was call'd the Corinthian War, and lasted Eight Years.

CHAP. X.

The Quarrel between the Rhegians and Dionysius. Mago the Carthaginian settles Affairs in Sicily. Routed at Abacena by Dionysius. Rhegium near surpriz'd by Dionysius. The Acts of Iphicrates at Corinth, Phlias, and Sicyon. Amyntas lost his Kingdom of Macedonia, but was restor'd. The Romans take Veii; Dedicate a Golden Cup to Apollo. Their Ambassadors are taken by the Pirates of the Lipari-Islands, but discharg'd by Timasitheus.

MOreover, about this time they of Rhegium quarrelled with Dionysius in Sicily, because he had fortify'd Messina, as if he intended thereby some Mischief against them. Upon which they receiv'd into their Protection all that were driven out by Dionysius, and all others that hated his Government. Then they gave Mylas to the late Inhabitants of Naxus and Catana to be inhabited by them; and sent Heloris with an Army to besiege Messina; and while he in the first place besieg'd the Castle, the Townsmen with the Mercenaries of Dionysius drew out and fell upon him, routed him, and kill'd above Five hundred of his Followers. Then they presently set upon Mylas and took it, and and discharg'd all the Naxians that were there upon terms of mutual Friendship, who went to the Sicilian and Grecian Cities, some to one place and some to another.

Dionysius now having made a League with the Cities that lay upon the Sea-Coasts, determin'd to pass over with an Army against Rhegium: But for the present his Design was retarded by the Sicilians at Tauromenum, whom therefore he resolv'd in the first place to reduce; to which end he marched thither with all his Forces, and Encamp'd on that side towards Naxos, and continu'd his Siege all Winter, in hopes that the Sicilians would leave the Hill, because they had not been long there. But they having heard their Fathers declare that the ancient Sicilians (the former Inhabitants of that Place) were expuls'd thence by the Grecians when they arriv'd there, and built Naxus, they therefore concluded they had just cause both to defend their own Country, and to revenge the Injury done to their Ancestors by the Greeks, and so they defended the Place with great Resolution.

In the mean time, while the Dispute was hot on both sides, the Winter Solstice drew near at hand, and Winter coming on apace all the Places near the Castle were full of Snow; and Dionysius conceiving that the Sicilians by reason of the strength of the Place and height of the Walls, kept but a slender Guard in the Castle, he ascends those high and steep Places in a dark and tempestuous Night, and with much difficulty (by reason of the steepness


Page 397

of the Rock, and depth of the Snow) at length with a scarr'd Face and half blind with Cold and Snow; possess'd himself of one part of the Castle: Then presently forcing into another, he laid open a Passage for his Army into the City: Upon which the whole Power and Strength of the Sicilians ran together, and drove the Dionystans out of the City and Castle; and he himself (by a blow upon his Brigandine) in the pursuit was knock'd down, and was very near falling alive into the hands of his Enemies. And in regard the Sicilians had the advantage of high Ground (from whence they gall'd the other) above Six hundred of Dionysius's his Men were kill'd, and many lost their Arms, Dionysius himself sav'd only his Corslet. After this Misfortune, they of Agrigentum and Messina (those that sided with Dionysius being at a great distance) were altogether intent upon regaining their Liberty, and therefore sent back Dionysius's Ambassador, who was order'd to them to renew and continue the Confederacy and League that then was between them and the Ty

•

ant.

About this time Pausanias, King of Sparta, fled out of his Country, by reason of some hainous Crimes laid to his charge by the Citizens when he had reign'd Fourteen Years: Agistpolis his Soft succeeded him, and continu'd as many years more? Then likewise dy'd Pausania

•;

 King of Macedon, whom Amyntas treacherously murther'd after he had reign'd only one Year. Amyntas, who thus thus got the Kingdom, held it Four and twenty Years.

At the End of the Year, Demostratus was chosen Archon of Athens, and six Military Tribunes, Lucius Titinius, Publius Licinius, Publius Melius, QuintusMallius, Gneius Genutius, and Lucius Attilius, govern'd as Consuls at Rome. In their time Mago, the Carthaginian General was busie in Sicily, endeavouring to settle the Affairs of Carthage there, which were then but in an ill Condition, since the last slaughter and ruin of their Army. To this end he carry'd himself with all Mildness and Humanity towards all the Cities within his Government, and receiv'd all others into his Protection that were Enemies to Dionysius, and enter'd into Leagues with many of the Sicilians. At length he rais'd an Army, and march'd against Messina, and when he had wasted the Country he return'd with rich Booty, and Encamp'd near Abacena, a City of his Confederates. But Dionysius with his Army march'd up to him, and upon his approach both Armies were drawn out in order of Battel, upon which there was a sharp and hot Engagement, in which the Carthaginians were routed and fled to the City, with the loss of above Eight hundred Men: And Dionysius return'd to Syracuse. But within a few days after he made an Expedition against Rhegium with an hundred Sail well Mann'd; and coming upon them on a sudden in the Night, he set the Gates on Fire, and rear'd Scaling-Ladders to the Walls. A few only of the Rhegians at first ran to repulse the Enemy, and busied themselves in extinguishing the Fire; but by the advice of Heloris the Governor, they left the Fire, and fell with all their force upon the Enemy, and by that means sav'd their City. For if they had continu'd still in quenching the Flames, so small a number could not have kept out the Dionysians till the rest of the Citizens had come in to their assistance. For by throwing of Timber and other combustible matter from the Tops of the Houses next adjoining, they rather increas'd the Fire. Dionysius being thus disappointed in his design, wastes and destroys all the Country round about with Fire and Sword; but afterwards made a Truce with them for one Year, and so return'd to Syracuse.

In the mean time, the Grecians in Italy perceiving that Dionysius his Covetousness and Ambition extended as far as to their Countries, enter'd into a general League, and appointed a publick Place for their Common Assemblies. By this means they hop'd that they should both be able to oppose Dionysius, and likewise have an Army always ready to fight the Lucanians, who were ever and anon making inroads upon them.

While these things were doing, the Exiles that were in the Lecheum at Corinth, being let into the City in the Night, endeavour'd to possess themselves of the Walls, but were driven out again by Iphicratis, and forc'd to fly to the Arsenal, with the loss of Three hundred Men. Within a few days after, part of the Spartan Army march'd through the Territories of Corinth, and were suddenly fallen upon by Iphicrates and some other Confederates, who out off the greatest part of them. And marching from thence with his Light-arm'd Men against Phlias, he engag'd with them that came out of the Town, and kill'd above Three hundred of them. Hence he made against Sicyon, who drew out under the Walls and fought him, but were beaten and forc'd into the City, with the loss of Five hundred Citizens.


Page 398

After these things, the Argives with all their Forces came against Corinth, and took both the Castle and City, and join'd that Territory to their own. Iphicrates the Athenian had had a design to be Master of that Territory, as a Place conducing much to the gaining and keeping the Principality of Greece. But the People opposing it, he Abdicated the Government, and the Athenians ordered Cabrias to Corinth in his room.

In Macedonia Amyntas, the Father of Philip, was ejected out of his City by the Illyrians, who made an inroad into his Country, and despairing to keep his Kingdom, he gave the Olynthians the Territory next adjoining to them. However, though he lost his Kingdom at this time, yet soon after he recover'd it by the help of the Thessalians, and reign'd afterwards Four and twenty Years. Yet there are some that write, that after the Expulsion of Amyntas, Argeus reign'd in Macedonia for the space of Two years, and then Amyntas was restor'd. About the same time Satyrus, the Son of Sparticus, King of Bospherus, dy'd, after he had reign'd Fourteen years, and Leuco his Son succeeded him for the space of Forty years.

In Italy, after Eleven years Siege of the Veians, the Romans created Marcus Furius, Dictator, and Publius Cornelius, General of the Horse. Having rais'd an Army they storm'd Veii by undermining the Castle, raz'd the City and sold the Inhabitants for Slaves; after which the Dictator triumph'd, and the People of Rome dedicated a Golden Cup to the Oracle at Delphos, out of the Tenth of the Spoils. But they that carry'd the Offering were fallen upon by * Thieves or Pirates belonging to the Isles of Lapari, and were carry'd thither. Yet when Timasatheus who was then chief Magistrate of * Lisopara, heard of it, he not only protected the Messengers from all Injuries, but caus'd the Cup to be restor'd, and suffer'd them to pass safely to Delphos: Who, when they had deliver'd the Cup into the Treasury of the Messinians, return'd to Rome. And when the Romans understood how nobly Timasatheus had dealt with the Ambassadors, they presently so far honour'd him, as to enter into a League of Alliance and Friendship with him; and an Hundred thirty and seven years after, when they took Lipara from the Carthaginians, they order'd all the Posterity of Timasatheus to be quit of Tribute, and free in all other respects.

CHAP. XI.

The Acts of Thrasybulus the Athenian General. The Carthaginians under Mago begin a new War in Sicily against Dionysius. A Peace concluded. Rhodes falls off from the Athenians. Evagoras becomes King of Salamis in Cyprus. Makes War against the Persians. The Acts of Thimbro, the Lacedemonian General in Asia.

WHen the Year was ended, Philocles was made Lord-Chancellor of Athens, and six Military Tribunes Publius Sextus, Publius CorneliusCrassus, Ceso Fabius, Lucius Furius, Quintus Servilius, and Marcus Valerius executed the Office of Consuls at Rome. At this time was celebrated the Ninety Seventh Olympiad, in which Terites was Victor. And then the Athenians order'd forth their General Thrasybulus with Forty sail of Men of War, who hasten'd to Ionia, and there being furnish'd with Money from the Confederates, he weigh'd Anchor from thence and arriv'd at Chersonesus, where he staid a while and procur'd Medocus and Seuthes, Princes of Thrace, to become Confederates. Presently after, he pass'd over to Lesbos, and anchor'd with his Fleet near to Eressus: But by a violent Storm Three and Twenty of his Ships were then lost. However, with those that were left he endeavour'd to reduce the Cities of Lesbos to their Obedience, for all had made a Defection, except Mitylene; and first he sets upon Methymna, and fought with the Citizens led by Therimacus, a Spartan, whom he kill'd, with many of the Methymnians his followers, and drove the rest within their Walls; and after he had made great Spoil and Havock in the Country, Eressus and Antissa were surrendered to him: Then (being furnish'd with Shipping from Chius and Mitylene,) he fail'd to Rhodes.

And now the Carthaginians having (after the Slaughter at Syracuse) at length recover'd their Strength, resolv'd to renew their Attempts for the bettering their Affairs in Sicily; and because they determin'd to try their Fortune by a Battel at Land, they pass'd over but with a few long Ships; but raised Soldiers out of Africa, Sardinia, and from among the Barbarians in Italy, and arm'd them all compleatly at their own Charge, and with these


Page 399

they Landed in Sicily to the number of Fourscore thousand, under their General Mago; who marching through the Territories of the Sicilians, caused many Cities to desert and fall off from Dionysius, and at length Encamp'd at the River Chrysa in the Country of the Argyrineans, near the Road leading to Morgantinum: But when he could not bring over the Argyrineans to join with him either by fair means or foul, he made an Halt, and especially because he heard an Army was upon their march against him from Syracuse. For Dionysius having intelligence of the Motion of the Carthaginians through the Heart of the Country, without delay, got together what Forces he could, both Syracusians and Mercernaries, and march'd against the Enemy with no fewer than Twenty thousand Men. And when he came near to the Enemy's Camp, he sent Ambassadors to Agyris, Prince of the Agyreans, who at that time was the greatest and most Powerful Prince of Sicily next to Dionysius: For he had almost all the Castles and Strong holds lying round about, under his Power and Government, and the City of the Agyreans, which he commanded, was at that time very Populous, having in it no less than Twenty thousand Citizens. Besides, it was sufficiently provided with all sorts of Victuals, and a vast Treasure was laid up in the Castle, which Agyris had hoarded up from the Confiscations of the Richest of the Citizens whom he had put to Death. Dionysius therefore entring with a few into the City, gain'd Agyris to join with him, promising to bestow on him a large Territory next adjoining to him if he succeeded in the War.

Agyris then Freely and Liberally furnish'd Dionysius's Army with Bread and all other Provision, and afterwards drew out all his Forces, and join'd with him in the War against the Carthaginians.

But Mago being in an Enemies Country (and every day more and more pinch'd with want of every thing that was necessary) was very uneasie. For the Argyreans being well acquainted with all the Ways and Passes, often surpriz'd his Men and intercepted all Provision. The Syracusions were for fighting with all speed; but Dionysius would not yield to that, affirming, That Time and Want would ruin the Carthaginians without Fighting. Upon this delay the Syracusians were so enrag'd that they deserted his Camp: Hereupon he was in a great Fright, and forthwith made free all the Slaves. Yet afterwards the Carthaginians sending Ambassadors to treat upon Terms of Peace, he made Peace with them and forthwith restor'd the Servants and Slaves to their Masters.

The Conditions were like the former, but something fuller in this, That the Sicilians should be Subject to Dionysius, and that he should have Tauromenium.

When the Articles were Sign'd and Confirmed, Mago left Sicily, and Dionysius after his taking possession of Tauromenium, banish'd thence most of the Sicilians; and plac'd in their room the Choicest of his Mercenaries. Thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at this time. And in Italy the Romans took Falerum, a City of the Falisci by storm.

After the End of the Former, this Year Nicoteles executed the Office of chief Magistrate at Athens, and three Military Tribunes, Marcus Furius, Caius Aemilius, and Catlus Berus were vested with the Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time they of Rhodes that sided with the Lacedaemonians, expell'd all the Citizens that favour'd the Athenians; and when they got together in Arms to defend their Interest, the Lacedaemonian Confederates routed them with the slaughter of many, and proscrib'd all the rest that made their Escape. And because they were afraid lest the Citizens should be contriving some Innovations, they sent for Aid from Lacedaemon. Upon this, the Lacedaemonians setting out seven Gallies, sent away Eudocimus, Philodicus, and Diphila, to manage Affairs there; who arriving at Samos, caus'd the City to fall off from the Athenians. Then coming to Rhodes, they busy'd themselves in settling and composing Matters there. And now the Lacedaemonians seeing their Affairs to succeed and prosper, they resolved again to recover the Dominion of the Sea, and to that end prepar'd a Fleet, and by degrees brought in more and more Confederates to join with them. And for the same purpose they fail'd to Samos, Rhodes, and Cnidus, and getting together Shipping from all Parts, they Listed from thence the best Seamen they could get, and at length bravely Equipped a Fleet of Twenty seven Gallies. 

At that time Agesilaus, King of Lacedaemon, hearing that the Argives lay Encamp'd at the Siege of Corinth, made an Incursion into the Territories of Argos with all the Forces of Sparta, except one Regiment, and having Plunder'd and Spoil'd the People of their Goods and Cattel, and cutting down the Trees all along through the Country, he returned to Sparta.


Page 400

In Cyprus Evagoras of Salamis, a Man of a Noble Family, (for he was descended from the Founders of that City) who was then sometime before expuls'd the City by a Sedition, (but return'd not long after) with a small number of Men his Consederates drave Abdemon the Tyrrian, Petit-Prince of Salamis (a Friend and Allie of the King of Persia) out of the City, and so at first became King only of Salamis, the Greatest and Richest City of Cyprus, but in a short time after, growing Rich, he raised an Army and purpos'd to bring the whole Island under his Dominion. To which end he gain'd some Cities by Force, and others he wan by fair Promises. But the Amathusians, Solians, and Citians, (resolving to stand it out) sent Ambassadors to Artaxerxes for aid, and charg'd Evagoras with the Killing of Agyris, the Persians Confederate, and promis'd to be assistant to the King in getting the Island into his Hands. The King therefore both to clip the Wings of Evagoras that he might not grow too strong, and for that he consider'd the commodious Situation of the Place for the supply and provision of the Shipping, whereby he might defend Asia, gave order to send Aid to the Islanders.

Dismissing therefore the Ambassadors, he sent Letters to all the Sea-Port-Towns and their Governors, to build with all speed what Ships they could, and to furnish them with Tackle, and all things necessary for the Use of the Navy. He commanded likewise Hecatomnus, Lord-Lieutenant of Caria, to make War upon Evagoras: And he himself (going through the Cities of the Upper Asia) sail'd thence with a great Army to Cyprus. And such were the Affairs of Asia at this time.

In Italy the Romans, after they had made Peace with the Falisci, began the Fourth War against the Equi; and took Sutrium by Storm, but lost the Town of Verrugo.

When this Year ended, Demostratus was chosen Archon, or Lord-Chancellor of Athens; and Lucius Lucretius, and Servilius Cossus, were Roman Consuls. At this time Artaxerxes declar'd Strutha his General, and sent him down with an Army to the Sea-Coasts against the Lacedaemonians; and they hearing of his March sent Thimbro their General into Asia against him, who possess'd himself of the Castle Jonda, and of the high and steep Mountain Corossus, about Forty Stages distant from Ephesus. From thence he wasted and spoiled the King's Provinces with Eight thousand Men that he had rais'd in Asia. But Struthas (who with a great Body of Horse, and Five thousand Heavy-arm'd Men, and with above Twenty thousand Light-arm'd, Encamp'd near to the Lacedaemonians) at length, when Thimbro was out with a Party, and had loaded himself with Plunder, on a sudden and by surprise, fell upon him and kill'd him, and took and kill'd many of his Soldiers, and the rest (being but few) escap'd to the Castle Cnidiniam.

At the same time, Thrasybulus the Athenian General, loosing from Lesbos, arriv'd with his Fleet at Aspendus, and Anchor'd at the River Eurymedon, and thô he receiv'd Contributions from them of Aspendus, yet some of his Soldiers Ravag'd and Plunder'd the Country, which highly provok'd the Aspendians, in so much, that in the Night, they set upon the Athenians, and kill'd many of them, together with Thrasybulus himself; which struck such a Terror into the Captains and Officers of the Fleet, that they forthwith return'd to their Ships, and sail'd to Rhodes, where finding that the City had deserted them, they join'd with the Exiles, that posess'd themselves of a certain Castle, and put themselves in Array against the City. But as soon as the Athenians heard of the Death of Thrasybulus, they dispatch'd away Argyrius to be General in his room. Thus stood the Affairs of Asia at that time.


Page 401

CHAP. XII.

Dionysius his Expedition against Rhegium. The War between the Lucanians and Thurians in Italy. The Thurians cut off by their own rashness. Leptines generously sav'd those that swam to his Ships, though he was a Friend to their Enemies. Dionysius his second Expedition into Italy, Besieges Caulonia and routs Heloris. Makes Peace with the Rhegians. Razes Caulonia to the Ground, and transplants the Inhabitants to Syracuse. Watches an Occasion to be reveng'd on them of Rhegium. Besieges it. He sends rich Chariots to the Olympick Games. His Poetry ridicul'd.

IN Sicily Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, though he had a Design, and did what he could to bring all Sicily and the Neighbouring Greeks in Italy under his Power, yet deferr'd the Expedition against them to some other time, as we said before. Having therefore in the mean time, consider'd how greatly it would advance his Affairs if he could gain Rhegium (the Key of Italy) he now drew out his Army into the Field. He had then under his Command Twenty thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse, and a Hundred and Twenty Gallies. With these he pass'd over to the Borders of Locris, and thence marching through the Heart of the Country he wasted and spoiled all the Territories of Rhegium with Fire and Sword: His Fleet attending over against him he at length Encamp'd with all his Forces near the Sea. But the Italians hearing of the Arrival of Dionysius, and his Design upon Rhegium, with all speed put forth sixty Sail from Crotona for the aid of the Rhegians. Whereupon, Dionysius made forth against them with fifty Gallies, and though they made to the Shore to avoid him, yet he pursu'd them so close that he threw Grappling-Irons into them, to draw them off from Land; and all the Sixty Sail had cettainly fallen into his hand, if the whole Body of the Rhegians had not with showers of Darts forc'd him from the Shore, and by the Advantage of a Storm (that then arose) hal'd up the Ships to Land. And thô Dionysius fought very Valiantly, yet he lost seven Gallies, and no less than Fifteen hundred Men on the Rhegian Shore; and both Ships and Men being thrown upon the Shore by the Storm, many of the Seamen were taken Prisoners by the Citizens. The Tyrant himself flying in a Vessel of Five Oars escaped drowning very narrowly, and landed at length with much difficulty, about Midnight at the Port of Messina. And because Winter now drew on, having made a League with the Lucanians, he return'd with his Army to Syracuse.

After this, the Lucanians made an Incursion into the Territories of the Thurians, upon which they sent forthwith to their Confederates for assistance: For the Greek Cities throughout all Italy had agreed together, That if the Lucanians fell upon any one of them, all the rest should come into the help of them that were so oppress'd. And if any City should not have their Forces ready to defend them, the Chief Commanders should be put to Death.

As soon therefore as the Cities had notice by the Posts of the march of the Enemy, the Thurians all unanimously prepar'd for the Encounter, and hastily and unadvisedly in an imprudent Heat, (not waiting for their Confederates) with above Fourteen thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse, march'd against the Enemy.

The Lucanians hearing of their approach, suffer'd them to enter into their Country: Upon which they pierc'd into Lucania with great Violence, and at the first were so successful as that they took a Castle, and carry'd away thence much Plunder, which was in truth but as a Bait laid in their way for their Destruction. For while they were puff'd up and grown high-crested with this Success, they contemned the Enemy, so far as that they daringly ventured through straight and craggy Passages (through the heat of Ambition and Covetousness) eager to possess themselves of a City and Country so bless'd with the Fulness of all things as that was: But as soon as they came into the Plain surrounded with high and steep Hills on every side, the Lucanians coming in with their Forces from all Parts intercepted all the Passages, leaving them no hopes of return any ways. And shewing themselves on every side from the tops of the Hills, the Grecians were struck with great Fear and Terror, both with the Greatness of their Army, and the Difficulty of the Places: For the Lucanians were no fewer than Thirty thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse. While the Graecians were in this perplexity, unexpectedly surrounded with


Page 402

insuperable danger, the Barbarians march'd down into the Plain, and Battle being join'd' the Italians were over-power'd by multitude, and above Ten thousand of them kill'd upon the spot; (for the Lucanians gave no Quarter, as they were before order'd) the rest fled to a Hill near the Sea side, from whence espying some long Ships sailing towards them, hoping that they came from Rhegium (out of eagerness to save themselves) they leap'd into the Sea, and some of 'em by swimming got to the Ships. But this Fleet proy'd to be Ships sent by Dionysius to the assistance of the Lucanians, under the Command of Leptines his Brother, who very generously receiv'd them that swam into his Ships, and set them all on Shoar (being about a Thousand) and prevail'd with the Lucanians to accept a Mina for every Man for their Ransom, and he himself engag'd for the payment, and so order'd Matters among them, that the Lucanians and Italians made peace one with another. 

From this time Leptines was in great favour and much esteem with the Italians, having made an end of the War, more to his own, than to the advantage of Dionysius; who was in hopes that by means of the differences between the Lucanians and the Greeks of Italy, he should be able with much ease to accomplish his Designs there: but if he should make Peace, he judg'd his Conquest would be difficult. Therefore he discarded Leptines, and created Thearides his other Brother Admiral of the Fleet. During these Transactions the Romans divided the Country of the Veians; distributing to every one Four Plethra of Land, but as others say Eight and Twenty. At the same time they made War upon the Aequi, and took Liflus by Storm. They sent Forces likewise against the Veliternines who had revolted. Satricum likewise made a Defection; and a Colony was sent forth into * Certium.

At the close of the year Antipater was chosen Chief Governor of Athens, and Lucius Valerius, and Aulus Manlius were Roman Consuls. Now Dionysius King of Syracuse Declar'd openly his Design of a Descent upon Italy, and to that end loos'd from Syracuse with a numerous Army: For he had with him above Twenty thousand Foot and Three thousand Horse, a Navy of Forty long Ships, or Men of War, besides Three hundred Transport Ships for carrying of Corn and Provision. He arriv'd at Messina the Fifth day, and there refresh'd his Army; from thence he sent away Thearides his Brother with Forty Sail to the Lipari Islands, for it was reported that Ten Ships of Rhegium lay there; Thearides therefore hastning thither found out the Ships in a place fit for his purpose, and possessing himself of them, with all their Men on board, he forthwith return'd to Messina to Dionysius, who deliver'd the Prisoners bound in Chains to the custody of the Messinians. Then he Transported his Forces to Caulonia, and laid close Siege to the City on every side, and batter'd it with his Engines.

But the Greeks in Italy as soon as they heard of the Landing of Dionysius's Forces, rais'd Men and got together an Army from all parts. Crotona at that time was very populous, and many that fled and that were forc'd out of Syracuse inhabited there. The Chief Command and management therefore of the War was committed to them, and Heloris the Syracusian was made General of all the Forces. He was a valiant Man, and they concluded he would be faithful, because he hated the Tyrant, who had banish'd him out of his Country. When he had muster'd all the Confederate Army at Crotona, and order'd all things as he thought fit, he hasted away with a swift March towards Caulonia, hoping by coming upon them suddainly and unexpectedly, he should not only raise the Siege, but likewise rout them with ease, being harass'd and tyr'd out with their continual toil and labour in assaulting the Town. His Army consisted of Twenty thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse. Having marched the greatest part of his way, he encamp'd at the River Heloris; thereupon Dionysius drew off from the City to meet the Italians: Upon which, Heloris at the head of Five hundred of the choicest Men in the Army march'd before the rest. Dionysius encamping about Forty Stages from the Enemy, understood by his Spies that the Italians drew near, upon which he forthwith very early in the Morning, rouz'd his Soldiers from Sleep, and commanded them to march forward, and about break of day fell upon the Helorians, with his Army in good order of Battle, giving the Enemy no time to get into a Body: so that Heloris was in a great strait, and with those he had with him, bore the brunt of the Enemies whole Force; but in the mean time he sent away some Friends to the Camp to bring up the rest of the Army with all speed, who diligently executed their Orders; Upon which, the Italians hearing in what hazard their General was, ran in a great hurry to his assistance. But Dionysius with a well-order'd Body of Men, doing execution in every place, cut off Heloris and almost all his Party, tho' they fought with great Resolution and Gallantry. For the Italians coming in to their help, but scattering, and by parties, 

〈◊〉 Sicilians

 (keeping orderly together) easily


Page 403

overcame them. However, the Crecians for some time despis'd danger, and suffer'd much, tho' they saw great numbers of their fellows lie dead upon the spot. But when they heard of the death of their General (in great confusion) they trode down and kill'd one another, and at last, being totally discourag'd and out of heart, they fled out-right: Upon which many were kill'd up and down in the fields, and the rest betook themselves to a Mount sufficiently fortify'd and very defensible, save that it wanted Water. Dionysius block'd up the place with his Army, and closely guarded it all that day, and the following night: The next day they that were in the Hill (being much incommoded by the heat, and by lack of Water) sent a Trumpet to Dionysius, that they might have liberty to ransom themselves:) Who at length (growing moderate in the height of his good Fortune) sent them word that they should lay down their Arms, and surrender themselves upon discretion. Upon return of these harsh and hard Terms, they held out longer for some short time: But being grievously press'd by the necessity of Nature, and almost Starv'd, they surrendred themselves about the Eight Hour. Dionysius hereupon numbred them as they came down, by striking the ground with a Staff, and they amounted to above Ten thousand. They were all afraid he would have been as cruel as a wild Beast; but he then approv'd himself the mildest of all Men living. For he discharg'd all the prisoners without Ransom, and made Peace with them, and suffer'd the Cities to Govern according to their own Laws. For which great Grace and Favour he was highly Honour'd, and his Name was so great that they presented him with Golden Crowns. And this was the most worthy Action that ever he did almost throughout his whole Life.

From hence he march'd with his Forces against Rhegium, with a design to besiege it. to be reveng'd for their slight of him, in denying him a Wise from some of their own City. The Rhegians were greatly terrify'd at his approach, for they had neither Confederates nor Forces of their own sufficient to cope with him; besides, they foresaw that there was no Mercy to be expected, if the City were taken: Therefore they sent an Ambassador to him to intreat him to shew them Favour, and to use them like Men. Upon which he demanded a Tribute of Three hundred Talents, and that they should deliver into his hands all their Fleet (which were Seventy in number) and send out to him an Hundred Hostages, all which terms were agreed unto.

Whereupon he mov'd towards Caulonia, and transported all the Inhabitants of that place to Syracuse, and incorporated them into the City, and granted to them freedom from the publick Taxes for the space of Five Years. As for Caulonia it self, he raz'd it to the Ground, but gave the Territory to the Locrians. About the same time, the Romans (after the taking of the City Lifaeca from the Aequi,) celebrated the stately Plays which the Consuls had vow'd to Jupiter.

After the end of the year, Pyrrhio executed the Office of Lord Chancelor of Athens the next, and Four Military Tribunes, Lucius Lucretius, Servius Sulpitius, Caius Aemilius, and Caius Rufus, were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome. Then was acted the Ninety eighth Olympiad, wherein Sosippus the Athenian carry'd away the Prize. About the same time Dionysius the Prince of Syracuse entred Hipponium with his Army, and Transported all the Citizens to Syracuse, and when he had raz'd the Town, he gave the Lands to the Locreans; for he was always very desirous to oblige them, because they so readily comply'd with him in the business of his Marriage. On the other hand he studied Revenge upon the Rhegians for their denial. For when he sent an Ambassador to them to Treat with them to send him a Virgin of some of their Citizens to be his Wife: It's said the Rhegians answer'd his Ambassadors, that he should have none from them except it were the Hangman's Daughter. Being highly incens'd at this gross abuse (as he took it to be,) he continually studied how to be reveng'd. For he made not peace with them the year before out of any design of Kindness or Friendship with them, but only out of a desire he had to possess himself of their Fleet of Seventy Sail. For he knew he could easily take the City, when they could have no aid or assistance by Sea. To this end he made several Halts, and delayd as much as he could his drawing his Forces out of Italy, waiting for some colourable pretence or occasion to break his League with the Rhegians, without any refleicton upon his Honour. Drawing therefore his Forces down to the Sea side, he prepares all things necessary for his passage; and then desires that the Rhegians wou'd furnish him with Provision for his Army, and he would send them as much back again from Syracuse. His design in this was, that if they refus'd to supply him, he thought he might have a just ground to raze their City; and if they readily answer'd his Request, then, after their Corn and Provision was spent (upon laying Siege to the Town) he might with more ease (through their scarcity of Food) possess himself of the


Page 404

place. The Rhegians, not suspecting any thing, for some few days furnish'd him liberally. But when he delaid and trifled away the time, sometimes pretending himself sick, other times framing other excuses; they at length smelt his design, and therefore forbore sending any further Provision to his Camp. Upon which, Dionysius seeming to be much enrag'd at this affront, return'd to them all the Hostages, and beg

〈…〉

ing the Town round with his Forces, assaulted it every day; and with a great number of Engines (of an incredible bigness) so batter'd the Walls, as if they had been shaken by a Storm and Tempest, so earnest was he to gain the City. The Rhegians on the other hand, (having made Phile their General) order'd all that were of Age and Strength to take up Arms, and to keep strict Guards; and spying a fit opportunity, they made a vigorous Sally; and burnt the Enemies Engines; and often skirmish'd out of the Walls with that Valour, and Resolution (to the exasperating of the Enemy) that they both lost many of their own, and kill'd no few of the Sicilians: Nay, Dionysius himself was so wounded with a Lance about the Privy Parts, that he was very near losing his Life, it being a long time before he recover'd. Notwithstanding, tho' the Siege was tedious, and the Rhegians resolv'd to defend their Liberty, yet he imploy'd his Soldiers in continual Assaults, not in the least receding from his former design and purpose. The Olympick Games in the mean time drawing on, he sent to that Solemnity many Chariots drawn with Four Horses apiece, and exceeding swift; and likewise Tents glistering with Gold, and adorn'd with rich and various Embroideries of admirable Workmanship; and with these he sent likewise the most skilful Singers to advance his own praise by the reciting of Poems compos'd by himself; For he was (even to madness) given to Poetry, and he committed the care and oversight of all these things to his Brother Thearides, (who when he came to the ground (by the multitude of the Chariots, and richness and splendor of the Tents and Pavilions) attracted the Eyes of all the Beholders. And when the Singers began to recite the Poems of Dionysius, the People at first ran together, and greatly admir'd the sweet and pleasant Airs of the Stage-Players. But as soon as they perceiv'd how bad and Ballad like the the Verses were, they ridicul'd Dionysius, and despis'd him to that degree, that they rist'd the Tents. Lystas likewise the Orator then at Olympid, advis'd the People that they should not admit any of those Procurators sent by so wicked a Tyrant to have any thing to do with those Sacred Sports. At which time he made the Speech styl'd by him The Olympick Oration. And how the Race began, and it so happen'd, that the Chariots of Dionysius were some of 'em driven out of the Line, others were broken in pieces by dashing one upon another. Neither did the Ship prosper better which convey'd the Procurators: For in their return from the Games to Sicily, they were forc'd by violence of a Tempest to Tarentum, a City in Italy. And it is reported that when they came to Syracuse they spread it abroad, That the badness of Dionysius's Verses had not only disgrac'd the Singers, but prejudic'd both the Chariots and the Ship. However, tho' he knew that his Verses were hiss'd at, yet still he addicted himself to Poetry, being told by his Flatterers, that those thrt envy'd every thing that was Noble and Brave, would at length admire what they then despis'd. At that time the Romans slew a great number of the Volsci in the Battel at Gurasum.

CHAP. XIII.

The Peace of Antalcidas. The War by the Persians against Evagoras in Cyprus The miserable Condition of Rhegium: It's Surrender'd. The cruel usage of Philo the Governor of Rhegium, and of his Son. The Expedition of the Galls against Italy. The Romans routed by the Galls at the River Allia. Rome taken by the Galls. The Romans Besieg'd in the Capitol. The Volsci Revolt from the Romans. The Galls routed by Marcus Furius in their return. All cut off afterwards in the Plains of Trausium.

WIth these Actions the year ended, and now Theodotus was made Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Six Military Tribunes executed the Consular Authority at Rome: Quintus Caesus, Sulpitius Aenos, Caesus Fabius, Quintus CerviliusPublius Cornelius, and Marcus Claudius. At this time the Lacedemonians tir'd out with the War both against the Greeks and Persians, order'd their Admiral Antalcidas to go to Artaxerxes to strike up a Peace. When he had deliver'd his Ambassage to the King, he answer'd, that he would


Page 405

make Peace with the Grecians, upon condition, that all the Greek Cities in Asia should return to their Obedience, and that the rest of the Grecians should all Govern their Cities, according to their own Laws; and that if any should stand out and not submit to these Conditions, it should be lawful for him to make War upon them, by them that did agree. These Terms were allow'd, and so the Lacedemonians rested from War. But the Athenians and Thebans, with some others were much vex'd, and highly concern'd to see the Cities of Asia thus betray'd, but not being able to contend with Persia by their own strength they were forc'd to embrace Peace upon the same Terms.

And now the King being free from the long and tedious War with the Grecians; he prepar'd and made ready an Army for the Cyprian War. For Evagoras had rais'd a vast Army almost throughout all Cyprus, taking advantage of Artaxerxes his being engag'd in a War with the Greeks.

In the mean time Dionysius having continu'd the Siege of Rhegium now for the space of Eleven Months, and obstructed all ways and means of Relief, he brought the Besieg'd to the utmost extremity, through want of all things necessary, For it's reported that at that time a Bushel of Wheat was sold for Five Minas: and the Famine was so great that they first eat up their Horses, and then all other Beasts of Burden, and at length fed upon boild Skins and Leather. And at the last they came out of the Town, and like Cattle began to eat the Grass that grew under the Walls: so that to supply Nature they were forc'd to feed upon those things proper to the Beasts of the Field for want of Man's ordinary Food. When Dionysius heard what the Rhegians did, he was so far from commiserating them who were sunk in Misery, below the common condition of Mankind, that he added to their Affliction, and put in his Carriage Horses, and other Draught Cattle to Graze there where they us'd to feed, and so eat up all that poor Provision which was only left for them. The Citizens being thus overcome by extream Famine (no longer to be born) were forc'd to deliver up themselves and their City to the Tyrant's Mercy. When he entred he found heaps of Carkasses lying in the Streets who perish'd for want of Bread: and those that were alive were like walking Ghosts, lean, and almost pin'd away by Famine: However, he got together above Six thousand Prisoners, and sent them to Syracuse, with Orders, that whoever paid a Mina might be redeem'd: and for those that were not able, he sold them all for Slaves. Phyto the Governour he bound in Chains, and caus'd his Son to be hurl'd into the Sea, and fastned Phyto himself to the top of one of his highest Engines, that the severity of his punishment might be taken notice of by all, and sent one of his Guard to tell him that his Son was drown'd the day before; to whom Phito answer'd, that his Son was by one day more happy than his Father. After this he order'd him to be whip'd through the City, and to be scoff'd and scorn'd, and undergo all sorts of Cruelty; A Cryer the mean time making Proclamation; That the Raseal was so severely dealt with, because he stirr'd up the City to the War. But Phito (who had all along thro the Siege approv'd himself a valiant Commander, and during his whole Life was Esteem'd and Honour'd) was not then the least discourag'd at Death, but with an undaunted Courage cry'd out That he thus suffer'd because he would not betray the City to Dionysius; However, God would revenge him of the Tyrant in a short time. This admirable Courage and brave Spirit of the Man began to work compassion in some of Dionysius's Soldiers; so that they began to murmur: Upon which, Dionysius (being afraid lest Phito should be rescu'd) left off tormenting him, and order'd the miserable Man with all his Kindred to be drown'd in the Sea. Thus suffer'd this worthy Man, who deserv'd much better than to undergo so heavy and dreadful a punishment. And many Grecians there were who griev'd for his sad misfortune, and several Poets in after times made Elegies upon his mournful and lamentable end.

At the same time when Dionysius lay at the Siege of Rhegium, the Gauls who lay beyond the Alps pass'd over those straits with a numerous Army, and possest themselves of all the Country lying between the Apenine Hills and the Alps, driving thence the Tyrrhenians the natural Inhabitants. Some say they were Colonies sent thither from Twelve Cities in Tyrrhenia; Others say they were Pelasgians, who before the Trojan War fled out of Thessaly at the time of Deucalion's Flood, and setled themselves in these parts. As for the Gauls they were a People that were divided into several Tribes, and dwelt in several Countries. Those call'd the Senones inhabited the Mountain furthest from the Sea of all the other Mountains, and because the Heat was excessive and troublesome to them, they resolv'd to seek for themselves some more commodious Habitations. To this end they sent forth the ablest of their young Men well Arm'd, to find out some other Seats, who making an irruption into Tyrrhenia with Thirty thousand Men, wasted and spoil'd the Territories of the Caulonians.


Page 406

About this time the Romans sent Ambassadors into Tyrrhenia to gain intelligence what this Expedition of the Gauls meant: Who when they came to Clusium, and saw the Armies on both sides drawn up in Battalia ready to engage, with more Valour than Prudence, they join'd with them of Clusium, and sought with the Enemy. And one of the Ambassadors by good fortune kill'd one of the Noblest Commanders of the Gauls; who when they heard of it, sent Ambassadors to Rome, to require the Ambassador who had kill'd the Gaul to be deliver'd up to them, as one that had begun an unjust War. Upon which, the Senate would have persuaded the Ambassadors to have accepted Money in satisfaction of the injury; But when they refusd it, it was Decreed that the Person should be deliver'd. Upon this, the Father of him who was to be given up into the Enemies hands (being then of Consular Dignity, and one of the Military Tribunes, and being likewise very rich, and of great Interest and Account with the Commonalty) referr'd the decision of the matter to the People, and so easily procur'd the Judgment and Decree of the Senate to be repeal'd. From this time the People began to rescind the Decrees of the Senate, tho' ever before they always submitted to them. 

But the Ambassadors of the Gauls return'd to their Camp, and Declar'd what Answer was given them by the Romans: Upon which they were in a great Rage, and increas'd their Army with new rais'd Forces out of their own Country, and forthwith march'd towards Rome with above Seventy thousand Men.

When the news came to Rome, the Military Tribunes commanded all that were able to bear Arms, to List themselves, who marching out of the City pass'd over Tyber, and came with all their Forces unto a River Fourscore Furlongs from Rome; where when they understood that the Enemy was near at hand, drew up their Army in this manner; Their best Soldiers, to the number of Four and twenty thousand, they posted all along from the River to the Hills adjoining, the rest were plac'd upon the rising Grounds. On the other hand the Enemy out winging the Romans, their strongest and ablest Soldiers (whether on purpose or by chance is uncertain) fronted those weaker and unexperienc'd Soldiers on the Hills. And now the Trumpets on both sides sounded a Charge. Whereupon the Armies ran one upon another with a great shout. And those Gauls that set upon them that were upon the Hills, presently clear'd the place of them, who fled in great confusion to their own Men into the Plain; so that by their flight, and the hot pursuit of the Gauls, they broke and disorder'd their own Army, and put them likewise to the Run. And while the greatest part of them made to the River, and in great precipitation and confusion, trode down one another, the Enemy without intermission kill'd all still that were in the Rear, so that the whole Field was cover'd with dead Bodies. Some of the stoutest of those that fled to the River, swam over with their Arms, prizing them as much as their Lives: But many of them, (through the violence of the Stream, and the weight of their Arms) were drown'd. Some with great difficulty (after they had fled a long way, and in by paths, with much a do) escap'd. However, many (still pursu'd close by the Enemy, who made a great slaughter among them upon the Bank of the River,) threw away their Arms and swam over Tiber. And tho' the Gauls had cut off so many upon the Shoar, yet such was their continu'd Rage, that they cast their Darts and Javelins after them that took the Water. And many Darts being hurl'd amongst shoals of them that were swimming, no small execution was done, so that some were kill'd forthwith, and others so wounded, that through loss of Blood, and strength of the Current, they were spent and carry'd away by the Stream.

The greatest number of those that escap'd from this sad Overthrow of the Romans, took into Ve

••

 lately ruin'd by them, and fortifying the Place as well as they could, receiv'd the rest that fled thither. Those few who swam the River, and return'd unarm'd into Rome, related how the whole Army was destroy'd, which sad News greatly amaz'd all those that were left in the City: For the Strength and Flower of the Citizens being now cut off, they look'd upon themselves unable in the least to resist. And besides, to aggravate their Misery, it seem'd to them impossible to fly with their Wives and Children, without the greatest Hazard imaginable, the Enemy being so near: Therefore many of the ordinary sort remov'd with their whole Families to the neighbouring Towns and Villages. But the City-Magistrates encouraging the People, order'd that Victuals and all other Necessaries should be brought into the Capitol; by which means, both the Castle and Capitol was fill'd not only with Meat and Provision, but with Silver and Gold, and all sorts of rich Garments and Attire, Goods of all kinds throughout the whole City being heap'd together in this one Place; for they had but three Days time to remove what was moveable, and to fortifie the Place: For the Gauls spent the first Day (according to the Custom of their Country) in cutting off the Heads of those


Page 407

that were slain; the other two Days they lay quiet in their Camp, now close to the City. For when they discern'd that the Walls were left bare and undefended, and yet heard a confus'd Noise (occasion'd by the bringing in of Houshold-Goods and other Things useful into the Capitol) they suspected some Stratagem was designing against them. But the fourth Day, when they came to understand the Truth, they broke down the Gates, and laid all the City in rubbish, except a few Houses upon Mount Pallatine: And tho' afterwards they press'd upon them in the Capitol with continual Assaults, yet they within suffer'd little by it, but many of the Gauls perish'd. However, they stuck close to the Siege, hoping tho' they could not gain the Place by force, yet at least in time, when all the Provision and Victuals was spent, they might possess themselves of the Fort.

While the Roman Affairs were thus perplex'd, the Tuscans their Neighbours made an Incursion with a great Army into their Territories, and wasted and destroy'd all before them. But when they had got many Prisoners and much Spoil and Plunder into their hands, the Romans that had fled to Veii set upon them on the sudden, and put them to flight, and not only recover'd all the Spoil, but likewise possess'd themselves of all their Tents: And by this means being furnish'd with a great number of Arms, they arm'd their Fellow-Soldiers, who hitherto were unarm'd since the late Defeat, and got together a Company of Country-Fellows from several Parts, and likewise arm'd them: For they had a design to raise the Siege of the Capitol, but were most perplex'd and concern'd how to give notice of their Purpose to the Besieg'd, in regard the Gauls so straitly block'd it up. Upon this, one Pontius Caminius undertook to get into the Capitol; to which end he pass'd on himself alone, and privately in the night swam over the River, and ascending a steep Rock of the Capitol with great difficulty, drew himself up, and so came to the Besieg'd, and acquainted them that they of Veii were in a Body, and that they intended to fall upon the Gauls upon the first Opportunity; and having deliver'd his Message, he return'd to Veii the same way he came. But when the Gauls perceiv'd, by the Impressions of a Man's Feet, that some Person had lately pass'd that way into the Castle, they determin'd to attempt to make an Entry by climbing the Rock in that part: And to that end, about midnight (the Guards being careless, trusting to the Strength of the Place) some of the Gauls got up to the top, but were not taken notice of by the Watch, but the Geese, dedicated to Juno, that fed there (seeing them appear above the Walls) presently made a great gagling and noise, which so alarm'd the Watch, that they all ran to the Place; upon which, the Gauls now betray'd and afrighted, durst not proceed any further.

In the mean time, that famous Man Marcus Manlius hasting to the Defence of the Place, cut off the Hand of a Gaul, as he was raising himself to recover the Wall, and by a thrust in his Breast with the Boss of his Buckler, cast him down headlong from the top of the Rock; and another being destroy'd after the same manner, the rest in all haste retir'd; and because the Rock was very steep (being in a great terror and amazement) they all miserably perish'd. The Romans hereupon sending Ambassadors to 'em to treat upon Terms of Peace, obtain'd it upon these Conditions: That upon receiving a Thousand pound weight of Gold, they would leave the City, and depart out of the Roman Territories.

After this, because the Houses were destroy'd, and many of the Citizens kill'd, the Romans gave leave to every one that would to build, and roof'd and cover'd all the Houses at the Publick Charge, which were therefore ever after to this day call'd the Publick Houses. And because every Man built according to his own Humour where he pleas'd, the Streets were made very narrow and crooked, which (notwithstanding the Riches of the City) in succeeding Times could never be reform'd. Some have reported, that the Roman Matrons gave all their golden Ornaments for the redeeming of their Country; for which they have this Honour allow'd them, That they may at any time be carry'd in Chariots through the City.

The Romans being thus impoverish'd and brought low by the late Calamity, the Volsci took the advantage, and rais'd Arms against them. Upon which, the Consular Tribunes got their Forces together, and march'd out into the Campus Martius (as 'tis call'd) and encamp'd about Two hundred Stages from the City. The Volsci far exceeded the Romans in number, and set upon their Camp: Upon which, the Senate, much concern'd for them in the Field, made Marcus Furius Dictator, who ordered the young Men in the City to take up Arms, with whom he march'd out in the night, and came upon the backs of the Volsci (when they were very busie and intent in assaulting the Romans) and easily put them to flight: Upon which, they within the Camp sallying out, the Volsci by this means


Page 408

were hemm'd in on every side, and almost all cut off. And thus this Nation, who were before a strong and potent People, by this Overthrow were brought extream low and weaker than any of the Nations round about them.

The Dictator afterwards hearing that Bola was besieg'd by the Aequi, march'd thither, and kill'd most of the Besiegers. Thence he mov'd to Sutrinum, a Colony of the Romans, but then possess'd by the Aequi, and falling upon them on the sudden, he made a great Slaughter among them, and restor'd the City to them of Sutrinum.

About this time the Gauls in their march from Rome besieg'd Veascus, a Confederate City of the Romans; upon which, the Dictator march'd against them, fought and routed them, and seiz'd their Bag and Baggage, amongst which was the Gold weigh'd at Rome, and recover'd almost all the Prey and Plunder they had gain'd in taking of the City. And though he had perform'd all this good Service, yet the Tribunes of the People through Envy deny'd him a Triumph. Yet some relate, that he did Triumph in a Chariot drawn with four white Horses for the Victory against the Thuscans, and within two Days after was fin'd by the People in a great Sum of Money, which we shall mention hereafter in its proper place.

Those Gauls that went to Japygium, design'd to return through the Roman Territories; but the Cerii laid an Ambush for them in the Night, and cut them all off in the Plains of Trausium.

Callisthenes the Historian began his Grecian Memoirs from this Year, wherein the Peace was made between the Graecians and Artaxerxes, and ended them with the Year the Temple of Delphos was taken and rifled by Philomelus the Phocian, comprehending an Account of Affairs for the space of Thirty Years in Ten Books. And now being come to the Peace between Artaxerxes and the Greeks, and the Danger threatned to Rome by the Gauls, according to our purpose at the beginning, we shall put an end to this Book.


Page 409

BOOK XV.

HAving throughout the whole Work us'd the Common and accustom'd Liberty

of an Historian, we have both prais'd the Good, and condemn'd the Bad as they have fallen in our way, to the end that those whose Genius and Inclination prompts them to Virtue, may be the more encourag'd to Noble Actions, in hopes of having the Glory of their Names continu'd to all succeeding Generations; and on the other hand, that they that are bent to Wickedness may be curb'd and restrain'd from the Heat, at least, of their Impiety, by those marks of Dishonour and Disgrace fix'd upon them.

Since therefore we have brought down our History to the times wherein the
 Lacedaemonians 
fell by the sudden and unexpected Slaughter at
 Leuctra, 
and the like again not long after at
 Mantinea, 
whereby they lost the Sovereignty of
 Greece; 
We judge it part of our Province to keep close to the former Course and Method of Writing, (and therefore by the way in the first place to blame and reprehend the
 Lacedaemonians 
who justly deserve it: For who cannot but judge them worthy of Censure, and that justly, who having a well-settled Empire and Government descended to them from their Ancestors, and by their Valour supported and defended for the space of above Five hundred Years, should now in a Moment ruine it by their own Folly and Imprudence? For they that were before them, preserv'd the Grandeur and Glory of their Conquests, by their Lenity and Tenderness towards their Subjects, but these their Posterity by their Cruelty to their Confederates, and Pride and Ambition in making War upon the
 Grecians, 
most deservedly lost all by their Rashness and Inconsideratness. For those that hated them for the Injuries they had before suffer'd, greedily took the advantage now they were low, to revenge themselves on them as their Enemies. And they whose Forefathers were never before Conquer'd, were so much the more despis'd, by how much they deserv'd the greater Contempt, who by their Vices had stain'd the Virtue and Glory of their Ancestors.

The
 Thebans 
therefore (who for many Ages before were forc'd to stoop to them as their Superiors; having now (beyond all Mens expectations) conquer'd the
 Lacedaemonians) 
were made Chief Commanders of
 Greece: 
But the
 Lacedaemonians, 
after they had once lost their hold, could never after recover their ancient Glory and Dignity. But enough of this, we shall now return to the Course of our History.

The preceding Book, the Fourteenth in Order, ends with the Ruine of
 Rhegium 
by
 Dionysius, 
and the Taking of
 Rome 
by the
 Gauls, 
which happen'd the Year next before the Expedition of the
 Persians 
into
 Cyprus 
against
 Evagoras. 
We shall her begin this Book with that War, and end it with the Year next preceding the Reign of
 Philip 
the Son of
 Amyntas.


Page 410

CHAP. I.

Artaxerxes's Expedition against Evagoras in Cyprus. The Actions there at Sea and Land. The Lacedaemonians begin new Quarrels in Greece. As first with Mantinea. Dionysius gives himself to Poetry. Peace concluded with Evagoras by Orontes the Persian General. Terabazus brought to his Tryal. Judgment upon corrupt Judges. Terabazus acquitted.

IN Athens Mystichides was Archon, and at Rome three Tribunes were invested with Consular Authority; Marcus Furius, Caius and Aemilius, when Artaxerxes King of Persia, began his Expedition against Evagoras King of Cyprus The King had spent much time in preparation for the War, and rais'd a great Number of Forces both for Sea and Land from all Parts. For his Land-Army consisted of Three hundred thousand Horse and Foot; and he Equipp'd a Fleet of above Three hundred Gallies Orontes was made General of the Land-Army, and Terabazus a Man highly honour'd among the Persians, Admiral of the Fleet. These headed their Armies at Phocea and Cuma, and descended to Cilicia, and from thence pass'd over to Cyprus, where they very vigorously bestirr'd themselves for the carrying on of the War.

In the mean time, Evagoras entred into a League with Acoris King of Aegypt, who supply'd him with a great Number of Men, being himself then in War with the Persians. He was likewise privately furnish'd with Money by Hecatomnus, the Governor of Caria, to help him to hire Foreigners. And several other Enemies of Persia, some secretly, others openly, confederated with him in the War. He had likewise many Cities of Cyprus under his Command, with whom join'd Tyre in Phenicia and other Places. Moreover, he had a Navy of Ninety Sail, of which Twenty were from Tyre, and the rest of Cyprus. His Land-Army consisted of Six thousand of his own Subjects, but those from his Confederates were many more: Besides, being richly supplied by them with Monies he hir'd abundance of Mercenaries. And the King of Arabia and other Princes, who were jealous of the King of Persia, sent him great Forces. Being thus supported he applied himself to the War with great Courage and Resolution.

And in the first place with his Privateers (of which he had many) he intercepted the Enemies Transport-Ships loaden with Victuals and Provision, and sunk some, disabled others, and took several besides; so that there began to be great Scarcity and Want of Corn in the Persian Camp, in regard the Merchants durst not sail to Cyprus, where that great Army and Body of Men were got together: And this occasion'd a great Mutiny its the Army, for the Mercenaries for want of Bread knock'd some of their Officers on the Head, and fill'd the Camp with Mutiny and Tumult to such a degree, that the Persian Colonels, and Admiral of the Fleet called Gaos could scarcely quell it. The Fleet therefore sent to Cilicia for Provision, which return'd with a great Quantity of Corn from thence, by which the Camp was ever after plentifully supply'd. But as to Evagoras, Acoris sent to him out of Aegypt Money, Corn, and all other things necessary, sufficient for his Occasions. 

Evagoras finding that his Navy was far too weak for the Enemy, furnish'd out Threescore Ships more, and sent for Fifty besides from Acoris, so that now he had a Fleet of Two hundred Sail. And having his Navy thus bravely Furnish'd and Equipp'd ready for a Battel (after he had some time Train'd and Exercis'd his Men not without terror to his Enemies) he prepar'd for a Fight at Sea. But it happen'd, that as the King's Fleet passed by towards Citium, falling suddenly upon them in an orderly Line of Battel, he gain'd by far the Advantage, fighting in good order with Ships in Confusion and Separated, (and with Premeditation engaging with Men surpriz'd and taken at unawares) he presently at the first onset routed them: For charging in a Body together, upon Ships dispers'd and in confusion, they sunk and took several of them. But afterwards when the Persian Admiral and other Officers gather'd up their Spirits, they bravely received the Enemies Charge, so that the Engagement grew very sharp, in which Evagoras at the beginning had the better, but Gaos with great Courage bearing in upon him with his whole Fleet, the Evagrians fled with the loss of many of their Gallies.


Page 411

The Persians having gain'd this Victory, muster'd both their Land and Sea-Forces at Citium, where furnishing themselves with all things necessary, they went jointly to besiege Salamis, and block'd it up both by Sea and Land. But Terabazus, after the Sea-Fight put over to Cilicia, and went to the King to bring him the News of the Victory, from whom he brought back Two thousand Talents for the carrying on of the War.

Evagoras before the Fight at Sea had routed part of the Enemy's Army at Land, which much encourag'd him to further Attempts: But after his sad Misfortune at Sea, and that thereupon he was straightly besieg'd, his Spirits grew very low: However, conceiving it necessary to continue the War he put the Supream Power into the hands of his Son Pythagoras, and left him to defend the City, and he himself privately in the Night undiscorn'd by the Enemy, with Ten Gallies loos'd from Salamis, and sail'd into Aegypt; where having Audience of the King, he endeavour'd to persuade him to make War upon the King of Persia with all the Power he had.

While these things were on foot in Asia, the Lacedaemonians (without any regard to the League made) decreed to march with an Army against Mantinea, for the Reasons following. There was now Peace all over Greece; by the Negotiation of Antalcidas, by virtue whereof all the Cities were freed from Garisons, and govern'd according to their own Laws. But the Spartans (naturally Ambitious, and a long time contriving how to begin a War) look'd upon the Peace as a heavy Burden, and (coveting to gain their ancient Dominion) began to endeavour Innovations. To this end by their Tools and Creatures, they stirr'd up Seditions in the Cities, and thence took occasion to disturb the present State of Affairs. For they who were Freed and set at Liberty to govern according to the Laws of their own Country, call'd them to an account who acted as Magistrates under the Lacedaemonians, and being somewhat severe and sharp (through the fresh Resentment of the late Injuries suffer'd) they banish'd many; upon this the Lacedaemonians protected those who were depress'd by the contrary Faction, and restor'd them by force of Arms, and by that means first impos'd upon the weaker Cities, and brought them into Slavery: But afterwards they gave Laws to Cities and Places of great Account, not having kept the League two years together. And now because Mantinea was near to them, and full of Valiant Men, and by the Peace grown very Rich, they were jealous of it, and resolved to bring down the Lordly Spirits of those Inhabitants: In the first Place therefore, they sent Ambassadors to them to require them to demolish their Walls, and to settle themselves again in those Five Villages from whence they anciently remov'd to Mantinea: But their demands being slighted, they forthwith marched thither with their Forces and besieg'd the City.

Upon this, the Mantineans, sent Ambassadors to Athens for Aid, but the Athenians would by no means do any thing that might be constru'd a Breach of the Publick League, so that they valiantly Defended the Place, and oppos'd the Enemy with their own Forces. And thus Greece now began again to be embroil'd in new Wars.

In Sicily Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse being steed from the War with the Carthaginians, Reign'd a long time in Peace and Prosperity; and with great intention of Mind employ'd himself in writing of Verses, and sent for Poets far and near, whom he had in high Esteem, and made his Familiars, to whose Judgments and Opinions he referr'd the Censure of his Poems. Being flatter'd by these in Panegyricks of Praise for their own Interest, he grew highly conceited of himself, and was Prouder of his Poems than of his Conquests. Philoxenus, a Composer of Dithyrambicks, and one Familiar with him, a very excellent Poet in his kind, when at a Feast some of the Foolish Verses of the Tyrant were recited, he was ask'd how he approved of them, who answering something too Freely and Plainly, incurr'd the Tyrants displeasure: Who looking upon himself abus'd (through Envy) commanded his Guard to carry him away to work as a Slave in the Quarries. But the next Day, through the Mediation of Friends he was reconciled to him. And afterwards, at a Feast to which he had again Invited the same Persons, when he was in his Cups he highly extoll'd his own Poems, and Singing some of them (which he thought none could Excel) He ask'd what he thought of those? To which he answer'd not a Word, but call'd for Dionysius his Guards and wish'd them to carry him away to the Quarries Dionysius at that time for the Jest sake put it off with a Laughter, thereby (as he thought) taking off the Edge of the Reproof. But not long after, when both Dionysius and the rest of the Poets wish'd him to forbear that unseasonable Freedom of Censuring, Philoxenus made a Promise that seem'd to be a Paradox, That for the future, He would both speak the Truth, and also please Dionysius himself; and he perform'd his Word: For when the Tyrant afterwards recited some Verses which set forth some sad and mournful Passages, He ask'd


Page 412

him how he approved of them? He answer'd, Miserable! therein performing what he had promis'd by the ambiguity of the Word. For Dionysius understood it as if he meant the subject Matter of the Verses was very Sad and Miserable; and set forth very pathetically, which sort of Poesie was rarely attain'd unto but by those who were of the higher form of Poets; and therefore he look'd upon himself highly applauded by him; but others interpreted what he said with more truth, that that word Miserable denoted the Badness of his Verse.

Not far unlike to this, was that which happen'd to Plato the Philosopher, whom Dionysius sent for, because he was a Man eminent in Philosophy, and for some time at the first he greatly honour'd him. But taking offence at something he said to him, he hated him to that degree, that he order'd him to be brought into the Common Market-place, and there sold as a Slave for Five Minas: But the Philosophers (who consulted together upon the matter) after redeem'd him, and sent him back to Greece, with this Friendly Advice, That a Philosopher should very rarely Converse with Tyrants; and when he did; he should be of a Gaining Behaviour.

However, Dionysius went on with his Study of Poetry, and sent Stage-players that could sing excellently well, to the Olympick Games, there to sing his Verses, who indeed at the first catch'd the Auditors by the Ears with the sweetness of their Voices; but when they consider'd further of the Matter and Composure of the Poems, they went away, and set up a great Laughter. When he heard how his Verses were Despis'd and Hiss'd off the the Stage, he fell into a great Fit of Melancholly, which growing upon him Day by Day, he rag'd at length like a Madman, and cry'd out, That every one Envy'd him, and were Plotting to take away his Life, till it came to his very intimate Friends and Relations. In this temper he arrived at last to that height of Madness and Melancholy, that he put many of his Friends to Death upon False Accusations, and Banish'd several others amongst whom were Leptines, his Brother, and Philistus, Men of Valour and undaunted Courage, who had done remarkable Service for him in the War. They fled to the Thurians in Italy, and were there in great Esteem among them: But afterwards they were restor'd to the Tyrant's favour by his own seeking, and were not only brought back to Syracuse, but regain'd his former good Opinion, and enjoy'd their Places of Power and Authority as they did before. And Leptines marry'd Dionysius his Daughter. And these were the Transactions of this Year. 

When Dexitheus bore the Office of Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Lucius Lucretius, and Servitius Sulpitius, were Roman Consuls, Evagoras, King of Salamis, return'd out of Aegypt into Cyprus, where when he found the City closely besieg'd, and all his Confederates to have Deserted him, he was forc'd to send Ambassadors to seek for terms of Peace. Terabazus, who had the Sovereign Power and Command, return'd him answer, That he would make Peace with him, upon Condition he would quit all the Cities of Cyprus, and be content only with Salamis, and yield a yearly Tribute to the King, and be observant to all his Commands, as a Servant to his Master: To which terms, though they were very hard, he submitted, excepting that one, That he should be obedient in all things as a Servant to his Master. But he said he would agree to be Subject to him as one King to another: Which Terabazus would not consent unto; upon this, the other General, Orontes, who envy'd Terabazus, sent Letters privately to Artaxerxes to accuse him; as first, That whereas it was in his Power to take Salamis by force he wav'd it, and had treated with the Enemy, in order to bring about some Innovations for the common Advantage of them both: That he had entred into a private League with the Lacedemonians: That he had sent Messengers to the Oracle at Delphos, to consult about making War upon the King: And as a matter of the greatest concern that he might gain all the Officers of the Army to be his Creatures; he had Brib'd them with Gifts, Preferments, and many large Promises. When the King had read these Letters (believing all to be true) he writ back to Orontes to seize upon Terabazus, and to send him forthwith to him: Whereupon he executed the Command, and when Terabazus came before the King, he desir'd he might be brought to his Legal Trial; upon which he was committed into Custody: But the Trial was long deserr'd, because the King presently after was engag'd in the War against the Carducians.

In the mean time, Orontes now Chief Commander of the Army in Cyprus, seeing Evagoras courageously defend the Place, and perceiving his own Soldiers discontented with the seizing of Terabazus and to slight his Commands, and fall off from the Siege, fearing some sudden Misfortune, sent to Evagoras, and a Peace was concluded upon the same Terms he would have agreed with Teribazus. And thus Evagoras (beyond his own Expectation)


Page 413

freed from absolute Slavery, enter'd into a League, upon Conditions that he should pay a Yearly Tribute to the King, and be Sovereign Lord of Salamis, and Subject to the King no otherwise than as one King to another. And thus ended the Cyprian War which was spun out near Ten years, though most of that time was only spent in Preparation, and not above two Years of it in actual War.

But Gaius, the Vice-Admiral of the Fleet, who had marry'd the Daughter of Terabazus, was in great pain lest he should suffer something or other out of suspicion of his being Familiar and Conversant with Terabazus: Therefore he resolv'd to be before hand with the King, and to that end being well furnish'd with a brave Navy, and having the Love of the Sea-Captains and Officers, he began to advise and consider of a Defection; and forthwith without any further stop enter'd into a League with Acoris, King of Aegypt, against the great King of Persia. He stirr'd up likewise the Lacedaemonians by his Letters, and amongst other large and glorious Promises, he engag'd he would assist them in settling their Affairs in Greece, and maintaining and supporting their Sovereignty. And in truth the Spartans had sometime before been contriving how to recover the Sovereign Power over the Graecians, and at that time had given clear indications (by their disturbances) of their design to Enslave the Cities. And that which further'd the Matter was, they repented of the Peace made with Artaxerxes, because they were Charg'd and Accus'd to have betray'd all the Graecians in Asia by that League with the King, therefore they were very ready to catch at an Opportunity to renew the War; and to that end very chearfully made a League with Gaius.

After Artaxerxes had ended the War with the Cadusians, he brought Terabazus to his Trial, and referr'd the Cognisance of his Cause to Three Honourable Persons. Near this time some Corrupt Judges were flead alive, and their Skins spread round the Judgment-Seats, that those that sate there might always have an Example before their Eyes of the Punishment due to Injustice, to deterr them from the like.

The Accusers therefore of Terabazus produced against him the Letters of Orontes, earnestly pressing them as sufficient Evidence to convict him. On the other hand, Terabazus, that he might make it evidently appear that the Accusation was a meer Scandal, contriv'd between Orontes and Evagoras, produc'd the Agreement between them, whereby Evagoras was to obey the King as a King himself, and no otherwise; and that the Terms upon which Terabazus would have made Peace, were, That Evagoras should be observant to the King as a Servant to his Master. And as to the Oracle, he brought all those Graecians that were at that time present, to testify, That the God return'd not any Answer relating to the Death of any Person. And as to the good Correspondence between him and the Lacedaemonians, he declar'd that he enter'd into a League with them not for any private Advantge of his own, but for the Profit and Advantage of the King. For by this means (he told them) the Graecians in Asia being divided from the Lacedaemonians were made better Subjects and more Obedient; and going on with his Defence, he put the Judges in mind of his former remarkable Services to the Crown.

Amongst those which clearly manifested his Faith and Loyalty to the King, and which deserv'd the greatest Commendation, and chiefly (as was said) wan the King's Heart, was this, That when the King was one day in his Chariot a Hunting, two Lions ran fiercely upon him, and tearing the two Chariot-Horses in pieces, they made at him, at which instant Therabazus came fortunately in, kill'd both the Lions, and so rescu'd the King. It's likewise reported of him, that he was a Person of extraordinary Valour, and of so sound and solid a Judgment in Council, that the King never miscarry'd when he follow'd his Advice.

When Terabazus had ended what he had to say in his own defence, all the Judges with one Voice acquitted him, and pronouc'd him Innocent of all the Crimes and Offences laid to his Charge. But the King afterwards sent for the Judges to him severally, and examined every one by himself, upon what Grounds of Law they pronounc'd the Accus'd, Innocent. To whom the first answer'd, That the Matter of the Accusation was Uncertain and Dubious, but his good Services were Clear, Apparent and Manifest to all. Another said, That thô those things objected against him were true, yet that all his Faults were over-ballanced by his Deserts. The Third justify'd his Vote to discharge him, by declaring, That he had no regard to his Merits, because the King had rewarded them above their Deserts, but upon strict Examining the Nature of every particular Charge, it did not appear to him that the Party accus'd was guilty of any of them. Upon which the King commended the Judges, as Just and Upright Men, and advanc'd Terabazus to the highest Places of Honour. But as to Orontes, he discarded him as a False Accuser, and noted him with all the Marks of Ignominy and Disgrace. And thus stood Affairs in Asia at this time.


Page 414

CHAP. II.

Mantinea Besieg'd by the Lacedmonians. Dionysius aims to gain the Islands of the Adriatick Sea. The Parii built Pharos. Dionysius his Expedition into Hetruria Prepares for War against the Carthaginians. The Sicilians routed at Cronion. The quarrel between the Clazomenians and them of Cuma, about Leuce. The War between Amyntas and the Olynthians. The Lacedemonians seize the Citadel Cadmea at Thebes. Eudamidas breaks into the Olynthians Country.

IN Greece the Lacedemonians press'd on the Siege of Mantinea; and the Mantineans bravely defended the place all that Summer. For they were reputed the most valiant Men of all the Arcadians, and therefore the Spartans in former times were us'd to account these their fastest and truest Friends in all Fights and Engagements. But when Winter drew on, and the River running under the Town swell'd high by the Rains, the Lacedemonians dam'd up the River with Earth and Rubbish, and turn'd the Current into the City, so that all the place round about was like to a standing Pool; by reason whereof the Houses fell down, which amaz'd them of Mantinea, that they were forc'd to deliver up the City: Which being thus taken, the Citizens suffer'd no other hardships from the Lacedemonians, save only that they were order'd to return to those Ancient Villages from whence at first they came: they were forc'd therefore to leave their Country, and settle themselves and their Families in the Villages.

About this time Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse had a design to gain the Cities lying upon the Adriatick Sea, and that which chiefly mov'd him to it, was because he covered to be Master of the Jonian Sea (as they call it) to the end he might have a free and open passage to Epirus, and to have Towns and places for his Ships ready to touch at. For he was every day making preparation to Transport great number of Forces into Epirus, and to rifle and plunder the rich Temple at Delphos. To this end he made a League with the Illyrians by the help of Alcetas the Molossian, who was then an Exile at Syracuse And the Illyrians being then engag'd in a War, he sent them Two thousand Soldiers, and Five hundred Grecian Arms: the Arms they distributed amongst the strongest and stoutest of their Men, and the Auxiliaries they mixt here and there in several of their own Companies and Regiments. The Illyrians having now rais'd a great Army; made an irruption into Epirus, in order to restore Alcetas to his Kingdom, and wasted and spoil'd the Country without opposition or controul. Afterwards a sharp Battle was fought between them and the Molossians, in which the Illyrians were Victors, and kill'd above Fifteen thousand of the Molossians, which Slaughter of the Epirots being made known to the Lacedemonians, they sent them aid to curb and bridle the fierceness and cruelty of the Barbarians.

During the transaction of these Affairs, the Parii by the encouragement of an old Prophecy, sent forth a Colony to the Adriatick Coast, where they built Pharos by the help of Dionysius, in an Island so call'd. For not many years before he had sent a Colony thither, and built the City Lyssus: by the advantage of which place (when he had little else to do) he rais'd an Arsenal for Two hundred Gallies, and Wall'd the Town in so large a Circuit, that it exceeded in compass all the Cities of Greece. He likewise built stately Schools and Colledges on the on the side of the River Anapus, with Temples and other beautiful Fabricks to advance the Glory and Greatness of the City.

And now ended the Year: when Diotrephes, for the next was Archon of Athens; and Lucius Valerius, and Aulus Manlius were Roman Consuls. At Aelis was solemniz'd the Ninety ninth Olympiad, in which Dicon the Syracusian wan the Prize. At this time the Pharii (who were now seated in the Island Pharos) Wall'd in the City they had built near the Sea side, not in the least injuring the Barbarians, the Ancient Inhabitants of the Island; but allotted them a place very strong, and excellently well fortify'd. But this nestling of the Greeks was a great Eye-sore to the natural Inhabitants; therefore they sent for the Illyrians bordering upon the Continent over against them, who pass'd over to Pharos in many small Vessels, to the number of Ten thousand Men and upwards, and fell upon the Greeks and kill'd many of them. But he who was made Governor of Lyssus


Page 415

by Dionysius, with a great Fleet, set upon the Shipping of the Illyrians; and took and sunk all of them, kill'd Five thousand of their Men, and took Two thousand prisoners.

Dionysius being now in great want of Money, began an Expedition with Threescore Gallies into Hetruria, under colour to scour the Seas of Pyrats, but in truth to rob a famous Temple in those parts, which was very full of rich Gifts and Donations. It stood in the Suburbs of Agylla, a City of Hetruria, where was the Arsenal which they call the Towers. He landed in the Night, and forcing in at break of day, accomplish'd his Design. For there being but a small Guard in the Castle, he easily over-power'd them, rifled the Temple, and took out above a Thousand Talents.

And tho' they of Agylla sally'd out to repel the Enemy, yet he routed 'em, took many prisoners, and after he had wasted and spoil'd the Country, sailed back to Syracuse, where he rais'd no less than Five hundred Talents by the sale of the Spoils. Having thus fill'd his Coffers he rais'd Soldiers from all parts, and got together a great Army, so that it was evident (to the apprehension of all) that he design'd War against the Carthaginians. And these were the things done this year.

Afterwards the Dignity of Archon was conferr'd upon Phanostratus at Athens. And the Romans made Four Military Tribunes Consuls, Lucius Lucretius, Servius Sulpitius,Lucius Emilius, and Lucius Furius. At this time Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse being prepar'd for the War against Carthage, watch'd for a fair occasion to colour and countenance his Design. Discerning therefore that the Cities subject to the Carthaginians were inclin'd to a Revolt, he receiv'd into his Protection as many as would come to him, and enter'd into a League with them, carrying himself with great complacency and winning behaviour. Upon this, the Carthaginians first sent Ambassadors to him, and demanded the restitution of the Cities, which being deny'd, was the occasion of a new War.

The Carthaginians therefore entred into Confederacies with their Neighbours, and all join'd together in the War against the Tyrant. And because they prudently foresaw the greatness of the War, they Listed Soldiers out of the choicest of the Citizens, and laid up great Sums of Money wherewith they hir'd a vast number of Foreigners: And having made Mago their General (who at that time bore the Title of King) they Transported many Thousands of Soldiers both into Italy and Sicily, for they had decreed to make War upon them both at once. Dionysius likewise himself divided his Forces, some against the Italiots and others against the Carthaginians: Whereupon many light skirmishes pass'd between Parties here and there every day, but nothing was as yet done of any moment. But there afterwards hapned Two great Battles that were especially famous and remarkable, in one of which, at a place call'd Cabala, Dionysius made himself noted for his Valour, and routed the Enemy, killing above Ten thousand of them, and taking Five thousand prisoners, forc'd the rest to fly to a Hill that was fortify'd, but altogether without Water. In this Fight Mago their General was kill'd, behaving himself with great Gallantry and Resolution. The Carthaginians terrify'd with the greatness of this Slaughter, sent forthwith Ambassadors to make Peace with Dionysius; but he return'd them Answer, that there was only one way left for them to make peace with him, and that was forthwith to quit all the Cities of Sicily, and to reimburse all the charge of the War. This Answer was lookt upon as harsh and proud. Therefore they betook themselves to their old Arts of Fraud and Deceit. For they seem'd as if they allow'd of his terms, but pretended that it was not in their power to deliver up the Cities to him, therefore they desired a Truce for some few days that they might consult with the Magistrates concerning this Affair, which he agreed unto. He was much transported at the Truce, having now a prospect presently (as he conceiv'd) to be Lord of all Sicily. In the mean time the Carthaginians bury'd Mago their King with great Pomp and State, putting his Son into the same place, who tho' he was very young, yet there were marks and appearances in him of more than ordinary Wisdom and Valour. This new General spent all the time of the Truce in Training and Disciplining of his Soldiers, so that, what with his daily Diligence, exact Directions, and frequent exercise of their Arms, he had an Army both readily subject to Command, and hardy and strong for Service. And now the time of the Cessation expir'd, and the Armies on both sides came hastily into the Field; and at Cronion was a sharp Engagement, where God gave the Carthaginians the Victory to make amends for their former slaughter. For they who were grown proud, and boasting by their Victory a little before, were now as low and poor spirited. On the other hand, they who were altogether dejected, and in despair, by reason of their overthrow, had their Spirits on a sudden rais'd by their great and unexpected success.


Page 416

For Leptines who commanded one of the Wings, a valiant Man, signaliz'd himself, and there sell in the Bed of Honour, after he made a great slaughter amongst his Enemies. After whose Fall, the Carthaginians pluckt up their Spirits, and at length put their Enemies to flight. Dionysius with those choice Men he had with him, at the first worsted those that charg'd him; but when the death of Leptines was known, and the other Wing was discern'd to be broken and dispers'd, that part of the Army with Dionysius fled likewise: Upon which, the whole Body betaking themselves to their heels, the Carthaginians made a hot pursuit, and gave Orders that no Quarter should be given, so that all being kill'd that came to hand, every place for a long way together was strow'd and cover'd with dead Bodies. The Carthaginians in revenge of their former loss had made so great a slaughter, that when the slain came to be bury'd, they were found to amount to above Fourteen thousand Sicilians; and it was by the advantage of Night only, that the rest escap'd. The Carthaginians having now gain'd so great and remarkable a Victory, return'd to Panormas: However, (as it became Men) they us'd their Prosperity with great Moderation, and sent Ambassadors to Dionysius to offer him Terms of Peace, which he readily embrac'd; And all was concluded upon these conditions, That both sides should keep what they had before the War, save only that the Carthaginians should have the City and Territory of Selinuntia, and part of the Country of Agrigemum, as far as to the River Alycum, and that Dionysius should pay a Thousand Talents to the Carthaginians. And thus stood Affairs in Sicily at that time.

In Asia, Gaius, Admiral of the Persian Fleet, who had rebell'd against the King, after he had engag'd the Lacedemonians and Aegyptians to his Interest, was Murther'd secretly by some body unknown, and so fall'd of his Designs. After whose Death Tachos pursuing the same Design, got an Army together and built a City upon an high Rock joining to the Sea, call'd Leuca, where he built a Chappel to Apollo: but he dy'd likewise a little after; upon whose death the Clazomenians, and they of Cuma fell at strife and variance for the Town, which at first they went about to decide by force of Arms: But afterwards by the advice of some Person consulting the Oracle of Delphos, to know to which of the Cities Leuca should belong, The Prophetess Answer'd, That it should be theirs who should first sacrifice at Leuca; but that both should set forth from their Cities at the rising of the Sun, upon one and the same day, as they themselves should agree upon. Accordingly the day was set, the Cumeans in the mean time lookt upon themselves to have the advantage, because their City was nearer than the other. But the Clazomenians, tho' they were more remote, yet contriv'd this project to gain their end. They sent some of their Citizens chosen by Lot to a Colony of theirs not far from Leuca, and from thence at Sun rising they began their Journey, and so finish'd their Sacrifices before them of Cuma. Having gain'd Leuca by this trick, in memory thereof they appointed a yearly Festival, which they call'd Prophthasia, from this their coming first to Leuca. These things thus done, all Rebellions in Asia were at an end; and the Lacedemonians now after the death of Gaius and Tachos would have no more to do with Asia; but set their Heads at work how to advance their power in Greece. And having persuaded some of the Cities, and forc'd others to receive their Exiles, they possess'd themselves of the Sovereighty of the whole, manifestly against the League amongst all the Grecians made by Antalcydas, by the help of the King of Persia.

In Macedonia King Amyntas (after he was overcome by the Illyrians, in despair of being able to help himself) bestow'd a large Tract of Land upon the Olynthians, which lay near to them, as never thinking to be restor'd again to his Kingdom. The Olynthians enjoy'd this Peace for some time, but when the King recover'd strength, and was re-instated into his former Dignity, he demanded restitution of the Land, which the Olynthians deny'd. Upon which, Amyntas rais'd both an Army of his own, and enter'd into a League with the Lacedemonians, and prevail'd with them to send a General with a great Army against the Olynthians. The Lacedemonians resolving to fix in those parts of Thrace, rais'd an Army out of their own Citizens and Confederates, to the number of Ten thousand Men, over which they made Phoebidas, that Spartan, General, and commanded him to join with Amyntas and make War upon the Olynthians. They sent out another Body against the Phaeuntians, whom they subdu'd, and forc'd to submit to their Government.

About this time the Two Lacedemonian Kings having different Sentiments disagreed one with another. For Agesipolis was a lover of Peace, and a Just and Wise Man, and therefore Declar'd against oppressing the Greeks. For he said that Sparta would become infamous amongst all the People, if after they had been instrumental in making the Grecians in Asia Slaves to the Persians, they should now enslave all the Cities of Greece to


Page 417

themselves, whose Liberties they had sworn in the common League to preserve inviolable. On the other hand Agesilaus being naturally Turbulent and inclin'd to War, thirsted after Dominion over the Grecians.

Afterwards when Menander was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and six Military Tribunes, Quintus Sulpitius, Caius Fabius,Cornelius Servilius, Quintus Servilius, Sextus Annius, and Caius Marcius bore the Consular Dignity at Rome, the Lacedemonians seiz'd upon Cadmea, the Citadel of Thebes, for the Reasons following. They had for some time before consider'd how Boetia was full of Towns and Cities, and that the Inhabitants were Men both of stout Hearts, and strong Bodies; and especially that Thebes which continu'd to that Day in its ancient State and Grandeur, was even the Guard and Bulwark of all Beotia; therefore they were afraid lest at some fit opportunity or other, they should become Lords of Greece: For this Reason they gave private Instruction to their Commanders, to seize upon Cadmea as soon as they could spy out an opportunity. Phoebidas the Spartan General in his March against the Olynthians (remembring his Instructions) Surpriz'd Cadmea, which so enrag'd the Thebans, that they rose in Arms, but were beaten, and he Banish'd three hundred of the most eminent Citizens, and put all the rest into a great fright; and leaving there a strong Garrison, March'd away in pursuance of the business he had chiefly in hand.

All the Grecians every where complain'd of the Lacedemonians for this unworthy Act. And they indeed themselves Fin'd Phaebidas for it, but could not be brought to withdraw the Garrison. And thus the Thebans were Robb'd of their Liberty, and brought under the pow'r of the Lacedemonians. But the Olynthians resolutely persisting in the War against Amyntas King of Macedon, Phaebidas was order'd to lay down his Commission, and Eudamidas his Brother was made General, and sent away with Three thousand heavy arm'd Men to carry on the War against the Olynthians, who breaking into the Olynthians Coun¦try, joyntly with Amyntas fell upon them; but the Olynthians being good Soldiers, and overpowring the other in Number, beat them both. Upon this the Lacedemonians rais'd a great Army, and made Teleutias, King Agislaus his Brother General, who was a Man of high Esteem among the Citizens for his Valour, who as soon as he entr'd to the Borders of Olynthus, was join'd with the Forces of Eudamidas; and now being strong enough to fight the Enemy, he first Spoil'd and Wasted the Country, and Divided the Prey (which he had got together in abundance) amongst the Soldiers. Afterwards the Olynthians march'd out with their own, and the Forces of their Confederates. Upon which the Armies Engaged and at the beginning, the Battle was doubtful; but afterwards the Fight was renew'd with that extraordinary Courage and Resolution, that Teleutias bravely acquitting himself, and above Twelve hundred Lacedemontans more, were there kill'd upon the Place. The Spartans being nettl'd at this Success of the Olynthians, made greater Preparations in order to repair their Loss: So on the other hand, the Olynthians suspecting that the Lacedemonians would bring down greater Forces upon them, and that the War might continue long, furnish'd themselves with store of Corn and Provision, and Aids from their Confederates.

Demophilus was now Archon at Athens, and Publius Cornelius, Lucius Verginius, LuciusPapurius,Marcus Furius, Valerius Aulius, Manlius * Lucius, and Posthumius Quintus, Military Tribunes, were Consuls at Rome when the Lacedemonians decreed War against the Olynthians, and made their King Agesipolis General over an Army of Force sufficient for the Expedition. As soon as he entr'd the Enemies Country, he join'd with those that were Encamp'd there, and forthwith fell to Action. The Olynthians this Year fought no considerable Battle; but kept the Kings Army in play (whom they were afraid to Encounter) with continual pickeering, and light and frequent skirmishes.


Page 418

CHAP. III.

Polypidas sent General by the Lacedemonians against the Olynthians. A great Plague in Carthage. The Beotian War. Cadmea retaken. A Confederacy of the Cities against the Lacedemonians. Cleombrotus attempts to Surprize the Pireum at Athens. The Athenians Seize Actea in Eubea. Agesilaus enters Beotia. The Sea-fight at Naxus.

AFter the end of the Year, Pytheas was Created Chief Magistrate of Athens; and six Military Tribunes bore the consular Authority at Rome, Titus Quintius, Lucius Servilius, Lucius Julius, AquiliusDecius, Lucretius Anchius, and Servius Sulpitius. At that time was Solemnized the Hundred Olympiad at Elis; in which Dionysiodorus the Tarentine bore away the Prize. In the mean time Agestpolis King of Lacedemon died in the fourteenth Year of his Reign; and his Brother Cleombrotus succeeding him, Reign'd Nine Years. But the Lacedemonians Constituted Polybidas General, and sent him forth against the Olynthians. He swore all his Souldiers to be true and faithful to him, and gain'd many Victories, managing the War with the Valour and Conduct that became a good General. At length improving his good Fortune and frequent Sucesses, he drove the Olynthians within their Walls, and pinning them up, so Terrifi'd them, that he forc'd them to Submit to the Lacedemonians as their Sovereign Lords. As soon as the Olynthians were Enroll'd among the Confederates of the Spartans, many other Cities sought to come under the same Protection. And now the Power of the Lacedemonians was in its greatest Strength, as being Lords of all Greece, both by Sea and Land; For the Thebans were overaw'd by a Garrison; the Corinthians and Argives were tyr'd out with Wars one with another; the Athenians for their Covetousness and Cruelty exercis'd among those they had Subdu'd, were despis'd by all the Grecians. On the other hand all were afraid of the Lacedemonians, because they were very Populous, expert Soldiers, and unweari'd in their Attempts: Insomuch that the greatest of the Princes in those times (I mean the King of Persia, and Dyonysius the Tyrant of Sicily) Courted the Spartans and were ambitious of their Alliance.

Afterward when Nico govern'd at Athens, and Six Military Tribunes were Created Consuls at Rome; Lucius Papyrius, Caius Cornelius, Lucius Manlius, Caius Servilius, Valerius Aulius, and Quintius Fabius, the Carthaginians enter'd with an Army into Italy, and Restor'd the Hipponiats to their City, whence they had been Expuls'd, and kindly receiv'd all the Exiles that came in to them from all Parts.

Not long after a great Plague happen'd in Carthage, which Raging more and more, swept away abundance of the Inhabitants; insomuch that they were in great danger to have lost their Sovereignty. For the Africans slighted and deserted them, the Inhabitant; of Sardinia (supposing they had now a fit opportunity) Revolted, and rose up in Arms against them. Moreover, a Remarkable Judgment of God fell upon Carthage at this time, for the City was all on a sudden in an uproar, fill'd with Tumult, Fear, and Horrour; and many running Arm'd out of their Houses (as if an Enemy had entr'd the Place) Fought, Wounded and Killd one another in the Streets. At length the Gods being Appeas'd by Sacrifices; and they deliver'd out of their sad Afflictions, they presently Subdu'd the Africans, and Recover'd Sardinia.

After these things, when Nausinicus chief Governor of Athens, and four Military Tribunes, Marcus Cornelius, Servilius Quinctius, Marcus Furius and Lucius Quinctius were Cloth'd with the Consular dignity at Rome, the Beotian War (so call'd) broke out, between the Beotians and the Lacedemonians upon the Accounts following. The Lacedemonians against all Law and Justice forcibly detain'd the Citadel of Cadmea, and had forc'd many Persons of Quality to fly out of their own Countrey: The Exiles therefore upon a private Consult among themselves (by the help of the Athenians) return'd in the Night into their City, and in the first place kill'd all those they judg'd sided with the Lacedemonians, surprizing them in their Houses, when they were asleep; then they stirr'd up all the Common People to appear for their Liberties, upon which the whole City of Thebes readily came in to their assistance; and getting into a Body, clapt about Cadmea at break of Day. In the mean time the Lacedemonian Garrison that was in the Citadel, which consisted of no fewer than Fifteen hundred Men, sent a Messenger to Sparta to inform them of the Insurrection in Thebes, and to desire Aid with all speed. However


Page 419

they from the Bastions in the Citadel beat off the Besiegers, killing and wounding many. Upon this the Thebans concluding that great Forces would be brought out of Greece to the assistance of the Lacedemonians, sent Ambassadors to Athens, to put them in mind how they had been assisted by the Thebans at that time when they rescu'd their Commonwealth from the Slavery they suffer'd under the Thirty Tyrants, and therefore that they should press them that they would hasten with all the force they had to help them to Reduce Cadmea, before any Aid came from Sparta.

The People of Athens, as soon as they heard what was desir'd by the Thebans, decreed that without delay, a Strong and Considerable Army should be sent to help them to regain their Liberty, both to demonstrate their Gratitude for their former Services, and likewise hoping thereby so to oblige the Thebans as that they should ever find them fast and constant Friends to assist them at all times, against the growing and boundless power of the Lacedemonians. For the Thebans were lookt upon not to be Inferior to any in Greece, for number or valour of Men. In conclusion, the Athenians made Demophoon General over Five thousand Foot, and Five hundred Horse, who drew out before Day next Morning, and hasted away with a swift March, that he might be before the Lacedemonians; however the People of Athens were ready and prepar'd to March out with all their Forces into Beotia, if the Thebans had occasion for them. Demophoon with great expedition (beyond expectation) appear'd in view of them of Thebes; and Souldiers came together with the like Zeal and Earnestness from other Cities of Beotia, so that the Thebans had now a numerous Army, consisting of no less than Twelve thousand Foot, and about Two thousand Horse; and all Chearfully and Readily bestirr'd themselves to Besiege the Citadel. The Army divided themselves into parties, and assaulted the Place by turns, persisting without any Cessation Night and Day. In the mean time, they in the Castle (incourag'd by their Officers) bore the Brunt with great Courage; hoping to receive speedy Succours from the Lacedemonians: And indeed they Valiantly stood it out while they had any Victuals left, killing and wounding many of the Assailants, having the advantage of the strength of the Fort. But when their Provision grew low, and the Lacedemonians lingr'd in sending Relief, the Garrison began to Mutiny.

For the Lacedemonians were for the standing of it out to the last Man; but the Auxiliaries from the Confederate Cities (who were the greater number) were for delivering it up; so the Spartans, who were but few, were forc'd to Surrender the Citadel, and being dismiss'd according to Articles, return'd to Peleponnesus. At length the Lacedemonians came with their Army to Thebes, but having lost their opportunity through the slowness of their March, all was to no purpose. But they Try'd three of the Officers of the Garrison by a Council of War, and Condemn'd two of them to Die, and impos'd so great a Mulct and Fine upon the Third, as that he was never able to pay it. Afterwards the Athenians return'd into their own Country, and the Thebans spent much time in vain in the Siege of Thespis. During these affairs the Romans sent a Colony of Five hundred Citizens into Sardinia upon Terms of being free from Tribute.

Afterwards, when Callias was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and four Military Tribunes, Lucius Papyrius, MarcusPublius,TitusCornelius, and Quintus Lucius were honour'd with the Consular Dignity at Rome (after the Lacedemonians had miscarried at Thebes) The Beotians took Courage, and entring into Associations, rais'd a great Army, because they foresaw that the Lacedemonians would presently enter with a strong Body into Beotia.

The Athenians likewise sent Persons of the greatest Quality amongst them to persuade the Cities subject to the Lacedemonians, not to neglect the present Opportunity now offer'd to recover their Liberties. For indeed the Lacedemonians were grown to that height, that they Lorded it with great Pride and Oppression over their Subjects: Therefore many of them were inclin'd to comply with the Athenians. The first that made a defection were they of Chios and Byzantium, after them Rhodes and Mitylene, and some other Islands. And now the Commotions and Disturbances of the Cities of Greece more and more increasing, many of them join'd with Athens: Upon which the People of Athens encourag'd by this Confederacy, Decreed a general Diet or Senate of some chosen out of every City, from among all their Allies, to Consult of the present state of affairs. And it was agreed by common Consent, that the Senate should sit at Athens, and that every City, whether great or small, should send only one Representative, and every one should be govern'd by their own Laws, but under the Conduct and Administration of the Athenians.


Page 420

However the Lacedemonians tho' they saw the Current and Tide so strong as that they were not able to Stem it, yet they endeavour'd all they could by fair Words; and many specious promises, to Court the Deserters to return to their Obedience; not neglecting in the mean time to prepare for the War, in as much as they discern'd, it would be Great and of long Continuance, in regard the Athenians and other Grecicans, (met together in that publick Assembly) all joyn'd with the Thebans.

Whilst these things were acting in Greece, Acoris King of Egypt, for some time before bearing a grudge to the Persian King, rais'd a great Army of Foreigners from all parts. For giving large Pay, and being otherwise very Bountiful, he got together a great number of Grecians in a short time; who listed themselves into his Service. But wanting a skilful General, he sent for Chabrias the Athenians an excellent Commander, and one highly honour'd for his Valour, who undertook the Employment, but without the consent of the People, and so prepar'd himself with all diligence for the War against the Persians. But Pharnabazus declar'd Commander in Chief by the King, having made great preparations of Mony for the War, sent Messengers to Athens to complain against Chabrias, letting them know that by his accepting of the chief Command under the King of Aegypt, he had greatly Alienated the King of Persia from the People of Athens. Then he demanded that they would send to him Iphicrates, to assist him in the Command of the Army. Upon this the Athenians (who made it their great Concern to stand right in the Kings good Opinion and to keep Pharnabazus firm to their Interest) without delay recall'd Chabrias out of Aegypt, and commanded Iphicrates to assist the Persians.

The Lacedemonians and Athenians some years before had struck up a Peace amongst themselves, which continu'd to this very time. But after that Sphodriades was made General by the Spartans, (a Man of a proud and haughty Spirit, rash and headstrong) Cleombrotus the Lacedemonian King egg'd him on to surprize the Pireum at Athens without the assent of the Ephori. To this end being furnish'd with Ten thousand heavy Arm'd Men, he attempts to enter the Pireum in the Night; but the Treachery being detected by the Athenians, his project came to nought, and he return'd as he came: And tho' he was brought before the Senate at Sparta, for this rash and inconsiderate Action, yet being Patroniz'd by the Kings, he was against all Law and Justice discharg'd. The Athenians being incens'd with this apparent abuse, publish'd a Decree, That in as much as the Lacedemonians had openly violated the League, that War should be made upon them for the repair of the Injury. To this end therefore Timotheus, Chabrias, and Calliffratus (Men of great Account in the City, who were made Generals for this Expedition) were Commission'd to raise Twenty thousand Foot of Corsleteers, and five hundred Horse, and to Equip a Fleet of Two hundred Sail.

The Athenians likewise brought the Thebans as Members into the publick Senate, upon the same Terms and Conditions with the rest. It was also Enacted by the suffrage of the Senate, That the Lands which had been divided by Lot, should be restor'd to the ancient Proprietors; and that no Athenian should challenge any Right to any Lands that lay out of Attica. By this fair dealing the Athenians regain'd the love of the Grecians, and again strengthen'd themselves in their Government. And this was the cause which mov'd many other Cities of Greece to side with the Athenians. The chiefest Cities of Eubea (except Actia) with great Heat and Zeal enter'd into an Association with Athens. But in regard they of Actia had receiv'd many kindnesses from the Lacedemonians, and on the other hand, had been grievously oppress'd and harrass'd by the Athenians, they bore an implacable hatred towards the one, and stuck close and firm in their Alliance to the other. In sum, there were seventy Cities that entred into this Confederacy and Association, all which had Voices upon the same Terms and Conditions in the Senate. So that the Forces of the Athenians increasing every Day, and those of Sparta decreasing, these two Cities began now again to lie in equal Ballance.

The Athenians therefore (who saw all things go forward according to their own hearts desire) transport'd Forces into Eubea both to fix their Confederates, and to suppress their Foes. In this Island one Neogenes a little before these times, with the assistance of Jason of Pherus, with a Band of Men had seiz'd upon the Citadel of Actea, and declar'd himself King of those Parts, and of the City Oropus. But governing proudly and Tyrannically, the Lacedemonians sent Therippidas against him, who at the first would have perswaded him by fair means to leave the Castle; but when he could not be so wrought upon, he stirr'd up the Inhabitants near adjoining to recover their Liberty, and took the Castle by storm, and restor'd the Oropians to their former freedom. For this reason the Hestrieans always lov'd the Lacedemonians, and kept a firm League of Friendship


Page 421

with them. But Chabrias the General, with the Forces sent from Athens, wasted and spoil'd the Country of the Hestreians, and wall'd Metropolis (as 'tis call'd) situated upon a Hill naturally fortify'd, and left there a Garison; and he himself sail'd to the Cyclade Islands, and reduc'd Peparethus and Sciathus, and others Subject to the Lacedaemonians:

When the Lacedaemonians saw that they could not put a stop to the Defection of their Confederates, they laid aside their Severity, and took other Measures to win the Cities by more gentle Methods: And by this means they gain'd upon those of their Confederates that were yet left. And because they discern'd that the War was coming on apace, and that great care was requir'd for the management of their Affairs, among other Preparations they diligently apply'd themselves to put their Army into a better posture, and more aptly to dispose of their Troops and Regiments, and to have their Forts and Garisons more faithfully kept and secur'd: For they divided their Cities and Soldiers, rais'd there for the present War, into Ten parts: The first were Lacedaemonians; the second and third, Arcadians; the fourth, Eleans; the fifth, Acheans; the sixth, Corinthians and Megareans; the seventh, Sicyons, Phliasians, and Acteans; the eighth, Acarnanians; the ninth, Phocians and Locrians; the last, Olinthians and Confederates of Thrace. The manner and way of their Order and Marshalling was thus: One Corsleteer, or heavy-arm'd Soldier, was accounted equal to two lightly arm'd; and one Horseman to four heavy-arm'd Footmen. The Army thus dispos'd, King Agesilaus was made Generalissimo; for he was famous both for his Valour and Prudence, and never had been worsted in any Encounter to that very time: For as he was highly admir'd in other Wars, so in the War by the Lacedaemonians against the Persians, he routed Armies far greater than his own, and bore down all before him, wasting and spoiling a great part of Asia; and if the Spartans had not call'd him home (through the Urgency of Affairs in his own Country) he had not been far from ruining the whole Kingdom of Persia: For he was a Man very brisk and daring, and yet withal prudent, addicting himself to Great and Noble Actions; and therefore the Spartans (when the greatness of the War requir'd a Skilful Commander) chose him to be General above all others.

Upon which, Agesilaus enter'd Boeotia with above Eighteen thousand Foot, amongst whom were five Regiments of Lacedaemonians, every Regiment consisting of Five hundred. The Lacedaemonian Band call'd the Scirite, join'd not with the rest of the Army; but kept their proper Post round about the King, and always were ready to succour that part that was most prest upon. And because it was made up of the best Soldiers, it was of the greatest Esteem of any part of the Army, and most commonly instrumental to the gaining of every Victory. Besides the Foot before mention'd, Agesilaus had with him Fifteen hundred Horse. As soon as he came to Thespis (a Lacedaemonian Garison) he encamp'd near the City, to refresh his Army after their long March.

When the Athenians heard that the Lacedaemonians had enter'd into Baectia, they forthwith sent Five thousand Foot and Two hundred Horse to the Aid of Thebes. The Thebans having muster'd and rendezvous'd their Forces, possess'd themselves of a Hill which ran out a great length, distant twenty Stages from the City, and posted themselves there for the advantage of the Ground (being difficult of access) and there waited for the Enemy: For the great Reputation of Agesilaus did so terrifie them, that they durst not engage with him upon equal Terms in the open Field. Agesilaus now advances with his Forces against the Boeotians; as soon as he came near the Enemy (to make trial whether they had a mind to fight) he sent out against them some light-arm'd Men, which were soon beaten back by the Thebans from the higher Ground: Upon which (to strike them with the more Terror) he drew out his whole Army in Battalia upon them. Whereupon Chabrias the Athenian, Commander of the Mercenaries, order'd the Soldiers to appear in a posture of Defiance to the Lacedaemonians; and to that end to stand in their Ranks and Orders, with their Shields laid down at their Feet, and with their Spears advanced, so to present themselves to the view of the Enemy, which they obey'd at the first Word of Command. Agesilaus admiring their excellent Order, and their Contempt of their Enemies, thought it not safe to attempt to force up those steep Places. and to try their Valour at such Disadvantages, having experienc'd, that by violent pressing upon them, they would be necessitated to stand it out to the utmost extremity. Therefore he did all he could to provoke them to descend into the Plain; but when he could not get them to stir, he sent out a Phalanx of Foot, and a Party of light Horse, and wasted and spoiled the Country without controul, and got together abundance of Prey and Plunder. But those that were order'd to attend upon Agesilaus as his Council, and the Colonels and Captains of the Regiments wondering that he being ever accounted a valiant Man, and a good Soldier, and now furnish'd with an Army far stronger than the


Page 422

Enemy, should notwithstanding wave an Engagement. Agesilaus gave them this Answer, That now the Lacedaemonians were Conquerors without fighting, since the Thebans durst not move out of their place to give a stop to the spoiling of their Country; and if he should force them to fight after they had willingly yielded the Victory, the uncertain Fortune of War might be such as might on a sudden ruin the Lacedaemonians. The Man by this Conception of his seem'd modestly to foretel the Event; for that which follow'd after did clearly evince, That what he said was the Oracle of God, and not the meer Voice of a Man. For the Lacedaemonians within a short time after, when they set upon the Thebans with a numerous Army, and forc'd them to fight for their Liberties, involv'd themselves in unspeakable Calamities: For in the first place, when they were routed at the Battle of Leuctra, a great number of their Citizens were cut off, amongst whom was their King Cleombrtus. And afterwards at the Battel of Mantinea, they were utterly ruin'd, and (beyond all Men's thoughts of any such thing) quite lost the Sove raignty of Greece:

For in this Fight (especially) Fortune made it her Business to bring swift Destruction upon the Proud and Haughty, and to teach Men not to aspire beyond the Bounds of Moderation and Modesty.

 So that Agesilaus acted prudently in being content in his former good Success, and preserving his Army entire without loss or prejudice.

Some time after, Agesilaus march'd back with his Army into Peloponnesus; but the Thebans, now deliver'd from the Danger they were in by the Conduct of Chabrias, highly admir'd his witty Stratagem; who though he had perform'd many Noble Exploits in the Wars yet he glory'd more in this than in all others before, and by the favour of the People procur'd Statues to be erected in memory of the Project, representing the thing as it was done.

The Thebans, after the departure of Agesilaus, set upon Thespiae, and kill'd the Guard, which consisted of Two hundred Men; but making several Assaults upon the City, tho' all in vain, they drew off, in order to their return with their Forces to Thebes. Upon which, Phebidas the Lacedaemonian, the Governour of Thespiae (who kept the Place with a strong Garison) made a Sally upon the Thebans in their retreat, and through his pressing on too rashly (after many Wounds receiv'd, and signalizing his Valour) he lost his own Life, and the Lives of above Five hundred of his Fellows. 

Not long after, the Lacedaemonians march'd against Thebes with the same Army: And then again the Thebans possest themselves of some other Places that were of difficult access, by which means they did indeed hinder the wasting and spoiling the Country, but dar'd not at first to engage with the Enemy in the Plain. But upon the appearance of Agesilaus in the Van of the Army, they began to march slowly towards him, and after long time the Armies at length engag'd with great Heat and Fury. At the first Agesilaus had the advantage; but when he discern'd the whole City of Thebes to sally out upon him, he sounded a Retreat: Whereupon the Thebans judging themselves nothing inferior to the Lacedaemonians, erected a Trophy, and never after stuck to engage with the Spartans. And this was the issue of the Fights at Land.

But about the same time there was a great Fight at Sea between Naxus and Paros, upon this occasion: Pollis the Lacedaemonian Admiral, had intelligence of a great quantity of Corn that was passing by Sea to Athens; upon which, he made it his Business to lie in wait to surprize the Transport-Ships. The Athenians (being inform'd of the Design) sent out a Fleet to guard the Ships loaden with the Provision, and brought them all into the Pireum.

After this, Chabrias the Athenian Admiral sail'd with the whole Fleet to Naxus, and besieg'd it, and battering it with his Engines, us'd his utmost endeavour to take it by storm: But while he was earnest in prosecuting his Design, Pollis the Lacedaemonian Admiral, came up with his Fleet to the Assistance of the Naxians; upon which, the Fleets engag'd charging one another in a Line of Battel. Pollis had a Navy of Sixty five Sail, and Chabrias Eighty three. Pollis in the Right Wing valiantly charg'd the Athenians in the Left, Commanded by Cedon the Athenian, whom he kill'd, and sunk his Vessel. He fell likewise upon others, and broke some of them in pieces with the Beaks of his Ships, and put the rest to flight. Which Chabrias discerning, he ordered some Ships near him to the Relief of those that were overpower'd, and so rescu'd them: He himself, with the greatest part of the Fleet under his Command, with great Valour broke in pieces and took many of his Enemy's Gallies. But however, tho' he obtain'd the Victory, and put the Enemy's whole Fleet to flight, yet he would not pursue, remembring the Battel at Arginusa, where tho' the Athenians were Victorious, yet the People instead of a Reward, put the Officers to death, only because they did not bury their Parents who were kill'd in that Fight. Fearing therefore the like Fate, he wav'd the Pursuit, and took up the Citizens swimming and floating here and there, and so preserv'd those that were alive, and order'd


Page 423

the Dead to be bury'd. In this Battel the Athenians lost Eighteen Gallies, and the Lacedaemonians Four and twenty; and Eight were taken with all the Men.

Chabrias crown'd with this glorious Victory, return'd with great and rich Spoils to the Pireum, and was receiv'd by the Citizens with great Honour and Acclamation. This was the First Victory at Sea gain'd by the Athenians since the Peloponnesian War; for at Cnidus they prevail'd not by the Strength of their own Forces, but by the Assistance of the King of Persia.

While these things were acted in Greece, Marcus Manlius was put to death at Rome for aspiring to the Monarchy.

CHAP. IV.

The Treballians make Incursions into Thrace. Chabrias the Athenian General Assassinated. The Thebans rout the Spartans at Orchomena. Artaxerxes seeks to make Peace among the Graecians. Peace concluded. The Thebans only disagreed. The Commendation of Epaminondas. Seditions in several Cities of Greece.

WHEN Chariander was Archon at Athens, and Servius Sulpitius, Lucius Papyrius,Cornelius Titus, and Marcus Quintius, Four Military Tribunes, were in Consular Authority at Rome, the Hundred and First Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, and Damon of Thurium bore away the Prize. At that time the Treballians in Thrace (being in great Scarcity of Corn) made an Incursion with Thirty thousand arm'd Men, into their Neighbours Territories to get Provision. To that end they enter'd the Borders of the Abderites in another part of Thrace, and wasted and spoiled the Country without any Opposition; and having loaden themselves with abundance of Plunder, they return'd so carelesly and disorderly, as that the whole City of Abderita falling upon them when they were scatter'd and dispers'd, kill'd above Two thousand of them. To revenge which, the Exasperated Barbarians made a second Inroad into the Abderites Country. But they being encourag'd by the late Victory, and strengthen'd with the assistance of their Neighbour Thracians, drew up in Battalia against the Barbarians. The Armies furiously engag'd, when on a sudden the Thracians drew off and left the Abderites to themselves: Who were presently hemm'd in by the Barbarians, and almost every Man cut off.

As soon as this grievous Slaughter of the Abderites was nois'd abroad, and they were now ready to be besieg'd, in comes Chabrias the Athenian with his Army, and not only delivers the Abderites, but drives the Barbarians out of the Country. And after he had strengthen'd the City with a strong Garison, he was basely assassinated, the Person by whom not known. Upon this, Timotheus was made Admiral of the Athenian Fleet, and sailing to Cephallenia he block'd up the City with his Navy, and wrought upon the Cities of Acarnania to side with the Athenians. Presently after he enter'd into League with Acetas, King of the Molossians; and now having in his power all the Countries subject to the Cities in those Parts, he routed the Lacedaemonians in a Sea Fight at Leucades; and all this he did in a very short time, and with much Ease, partly by fair Words, and partly by force of Arms and his excellent Conduct: so that he not only gain'd Esteem and Reputation amongst his own Fellow Citizens, but likewise amongst all the Graecians. And thus was it with Timotheus at this time.

During these Transactions, the Thebans (with Five hundred the Valiantest Men of their City) march'd against Orchomena, and perform'd an Exploit worthy of Memory. The Spartans kept this City with a strong Garison, and making a Sally upon the Thebans there was a sharp Encounter, in which they routed the Lacedaemonians though they were double in number, which never happen'd to them before in any age; but the thing might have been born well enough if they had been few and had been conquer'd by the far greater number. Henceforth the Courage of the Thebans encreas'd, and they grew every day famous for their Valour: And now it was apparent, that they were likely to gain the Sovereignty of all Greece. As to the Writers of this time. Hermeas of Methymna ends his History of the Affairs of Sicily with this Year, comprehended in Ten, but as others divide them, in Twelve Books.


Page 424

The Year following, when Hippodamus was Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Four Military Tribunes, viz.Lucius Valerius,Crispus Manlius, FabiusServilius, and Sulpitius Lucretius were Roman Consuls. Artaxerxes used his utmost Endeavour to quiet all things in Greece, that he might raise the more Mercenaries for the Carrying on the War against the Aegyptians: For by this means he hop'd the Graecians being freed from Domestick Broils would be in a Condition to assist him abroad. To this end, he sent Ambassadors into Greece to Negotiate in this Affair amongst all the Cities. And this Embassy was very welcome to the Graecians, who were near tyr'd out with continual Wars; so that a General Peace was concluded upon these Conditions: That all the Cities should for the future be govern'd by their own Laws, and all the Garisons be withdrawn. And there were certain Grecians appointed as Commissioners to see the Garisons drawn out; who accordingly went to every City where there was any Soldiers, and order'd them to leave the Place.

In the mean time, the Thebans only through every Town disagreed to these Terms, and exempted all Beotia as Tributary only to themselves: But the Athenians oppos'd this with all earnestness, and this Affair was banded in the Common Assembly of the Greeks, by Callistratus a Tribune of the People, on the behalf of the Athenians, and by Epaminondas on the behalf of the Thebans, after which, all the rest of the Grecians persisted in their resolution to stand to the League, leaving out the Thebans, who (relying upon the Wisdom and Prudence of Epaminondas) boldly oppos'd the Decree made by the General Assembly.

For being that the Lacedaemonians and Athenians had been all along hitherto contesting for the Sovereign Command of Greece, and at length had agreed upon these Terms, That the Lacedaemonians should have the Command at Land, and the Athenians at Sea, they were very uneasie to think that now a Third should carry away the Sovereignty from them both, for which reason they would not allow the Cities of Beotia to be under the Power of the Thebans. But the Thebans (who were Men of strong Bodies and stout Hearts, and had lately beaten the Laredaemonians in several Fights) bore themselves very high, and were in hopes to gain the Sovereign Command at Land. Neither were they frustrated in their design for the Reasons before mentioned, and likewise for that they had at that time many Excellent Officers and Valiant Commanders; amongst whom the most Famous were Pelopidas, Gorgias, and Epaminondas; which last was not only the Best and most Expert Commander of any of his own Country, but even of all the Grecians; and was likewise a Man of great Learning in the Liberal Sciences, and especially in the Pythagorean Philosophy: Being besides of excellent Natural Parts, and Mother-Wit, it was no wonder if he exceeded others in performing those things that were more than ordinarily remarkable. For with a small Body of Men he Engag'd with the whole Power of the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates, and so routed those (formerly unconquerable) Warriors, that he kill'd their King Cleombrotus, and cut off almost the whole Army of the Spartans. And by the advantage of his singular Wisdom, and Virtuous and Liberal Education, such things were perform'd by him as were admirable beyond all Expectation. Of which we shall speak more fully hereafter when we come to treat particularly of those Things.

But now to return to the Course of our History; It was agreed, That every City should govern according to their own Laws; but presently after, all the Cities were again involv'd in great Tumults and Seditions, especially those in Peloponnesus. Some few of these had been Enslav'd in the late Domineering time, and being now restor'd to their Democratical Government, they made but an all Improvement of it, for they banish'd many Honest Citizens that were falsly Accus'd, and as unjustly Condemn'd; and by the prevailing Power of the Seditious, nothing was more frequent than Banishment and Confiscation of Goods; and those chiefly were the Sufferers that had been Magistrates in the time of the Lacedaemonian Government; for because in those time they carry'd it something imperiously towards the People, not with that regard to Justice as they ought, now that the Commonalty were restor'd to their Liberty they too much resented their former Injuries.

The Exiles therefore of Phialea, were the first that Consulted and Join'd together, and seiz'd upon Herea, a strong and well-fortify'd Castle; and from thence made frequent Incursions into the Territories of Phialea. And at the time when the Feasts of Bacchus were celebrated, (upon the sudden) they rush'd upon the People in the Theatre, and cut many of their Throats, having before persuaded a considerable Number to join with them in this wicked Confederacy, and afterwards they return'd to Sparta. Then the Exiles of Corinth, who were in great numbers at Argos, determin'd to force their own return. In order hereunto some of their Servants and Friends were receiv'd into the City; but the thing being discover'd to the Magistrates, they could not lie long conceal'd, but being just ready to be seiz'd (through fear of Punishment) they kill'd one another. But the


Page 425

Corinthians, upon suspicion that many of the Citizens were concern'd in the Plot, put several to Death, and Banish'd others.

In the City Megara likewise some were contriving how to overturn the Government, who being convict of the Treason, many were put to Death, and not a few Banish'd So at Sioyon many were Executed upon a full Conviction, for endeavouring to bring in Innovations. At length, many of the Philasian Exiles having seiz'd upon a Castle in that Territory, got together a great Army of Mercenaries, and fought with the Townsmen, and got the Day, having kill'd above Three hundred of the Philasians. But not long after, the Exiles were betray'd by their Guard, and routed by them of Philasia, with the loss of Six hundred Men, and the rest being forced out of the Country, fled to Argos. And such was the miserable Condition of Peloponnesus at that time.

CHAP. V.

The Persians send an Army into Aegypt to reduce the Revolters. Iphicrates a skilful Commander. Sedition at Zacynthus. Platea raz'd by the Thebans. The Lacedaemonians seize upon the Island Corcyra, reliev'd by the Athenians under Ctesides. Evagoras murther'd in Cyprus by an Eunuch. Dreadful Earthquakes and Innundations in Peloponnesus. A great Comet seen in Greece.

SOcratides the ensuing Year was Archon at Athens, and QuintusCrassus, Servilius Cornelius,Sporius Papyrius, and Fabius Albus, four Military Tribunes, executed the Office of Consuls at Rome. At that time the King of Persia march'd against the Aegyptians (who had revolted some time before) the Army was commanded by Pharnabazus, and Iphicrates the Athenian; the Barbarians by Pharnabazus, and Twenty thousand Mercenaries by Iphicrates, who was in so much favour with the King for his excellent Conduct, that he intrusted him with that Command. Pharnabazus had spent many years in preparation for this War.

Iphicrates therefore, knowing the readiness of his Tongue, and the slowness of his Actions, one Day accosted him in this manner. That he wonder'd that one who was so voluble in his Speech, should be so slow in Execution. To which Pharnabazus answer'd, That he was Master of his Words, but the King of his Actions. When the King's Forces came to Aces in Syria, and were there muster'd, there were found Two hundred thousand Barbarians to be under the Conduct of Pharnabazus, and Twenty thousand Grecians under the Command of Iphicrates. The Number of the Navy was Three hundred Gallies of three Tire of Oars on a Bank, and Two hundred of Thirty Oars a-piece: And a vast number of Transport Ships to carry Provision, and other things necessary for the Army.

About the beginning of the Spring, the Officers with all the Forces both at Sea and Land made for Aegypt: When they came near to the River Nile, they found the Aegyptians ready and prepar'd for Battel; for Pharnabazus had been very tedious in this Expedition, and given the Enemy time enough to prepare for their Defence. For it's the constant practice of the Persian Generals (in regard they have no absolute power) upon every special occasion to send to the King to know his Pleasure, and to stay till they receive his particular direction.

In the mean time, Nectanabis, the King of Aegypt, had perfect knowledge of the Strength of the Persian Forces; but he plac'd his greatest Confidence in the Strength of his Country, the Entrance into Aegypt being very difficult on every side, and the Passage block'd both by Sea and Land by the seven Mouths of Nilus. For at every Mouth where Nile falls into the Sea, was a City built with large Forts or Castles on either side the River, join'd together by a Bridge of Timber, which commanded all Ships that sail'd that way, and of all these he had most strongly fortify'd Pelusium; for being the next Frontier Town towards Syria, they conceiv'd the Enemy would first attempt to enter in to the Country that way: Therefore they drew a Trench round the City, and where there was any place, whereat any Vessels might in any probability enter, there they rais'd Walls to obstruct the Passage. And where there were any Fords by which the way lay open into Aegypt by Land, he brought the Water over them; and where any Ship might pass he fill'd up those Places with Stones and Rubbish. By which means it was very difficult, and scarce possible, either for Ships to sail, or Horse or Foot to march. Pharnabazus


Page 426

his Officers therefore seeing Pelusium so strongly and wonderfully Fortify'd and well Mann'd, thought it most adviseable to forbear to attempt to enter by Force, and rather to sail to some other Mouth of the River, and endeavour a Passage for the Fleet there. Whereupon they put off to Sea again, and being out of Kenning, that they might not be discern'd by the Enemy they steer'd their Course for Mendesium, another Mouth of Nile, where the Shore runs a great way out from the Main Land. Here they Landed Three thousand Men, and Pharnabazus and Iphicrates assaulted a Fort built upon the very Mouth of the River; but the Aegyptians came down with Three thousand Horse and Foot to the Relief of the Place; Upon which there was a sharp Engagement, in which the Aegyptians being over-power'd with Multitude, (for more came in running to them from their Ships) were hemm'd in, and a great Slaughter made amongst them, but very few being taken Prisoners; the rest were forc'd to fly into a little Town hard by. But the Soldiers of Iphicrates enter'd pell mell with them of the Garison into the Place, and having thus taken it by Force they demolish'd it, and carry'd away the Inhabitants as Captives.

After this, there arose a Difference between the Generals, which brought all to nought. Iphicrates learnt from the Captives, that there was a Garison call'd Memphis, which Place was of the greatest Consequence of any throughout all Aegypt; therefore he advis'd that they should sail with the Fleet thither before the rest of the Aegyptians's Army got together; but Pharnabazus and all his Forces were for staying till all the Persian and Land Forces came up, and so there would be less danger in the Expedition. But Iphicrates then offer'd to undertake the Reduction of the City with those Mercenaries that were then with him, if he might have but Liberty. Upon which, Pharnabazus grew Envious at the Valour and Confidence of the Man, and began to be Jealous lest all Aegypt should be conquer'd only by his Arms, and therefore deny'd his request. hereupon, Iphicrates made a Solemn Protestation against them, declaring that all this Expedition would be Fruitless and Vain, through their Neglect, if they let slip the present Opportunity. But Pharnabazus envy'd him the more, and very undeservedly gave him opprobrious Language.

In the mean while, the Aegyptians (having now gain'd more time) put a strong Garison into Memphis, and march'd with all their Army to the little Town before demolished; and prevailing in sundry skirmishes against the Persians, they never let them rest, but growing still stronger and stronger, made a great Slaughter of them, and grew every day more obstinate. But the Persian Army having now staid a long time about this Castle, the River Nile (by force of the Etesian Winds) beginning to overflow, insomuch as all the Land was cover'd with Water (whereby Aegypt was now more inaccessable, and by that means as it were Fortify'd) the Commanders (for that Nature seem'd to Fight against them) resolv'd forthwith to leave Aegypt.

As soon therefore as they return'd into Asia, Pharnabazus renew'd the Quarrel with Iphicrates: Upon which, Iphicrates (fearing he should be laid by the Heels as Conon formerly had been) consulted how to withdraw himself privately from the Camp. To this end, (having prepar'd a Vessel for his purpose) he went on board in the Night, and so sail'd to Athens: But Pharnabazus sent Ambassadors after him, and accus'd him as being the occasion of the Miscarriage of the Design relating to the Reducing of Aegypt. To whom the Athenians answer'd, That if he were Guilty they would punish him according to his Desert: But in a very short time after they made him Admiral of their whole Fleet.

In this place we think it not much beside our purpose if we say something concerning what is reported of the Valour of Iphicrates. He is said to be a very Skilful Commander, and of a quick and ready Wit in contriving any useful Project and Stratagem: Having therefore gain'd large Experience and Judgment in Martial Discipline, by his long and continual Exercise in the Wars of Persia, he found out many things of great advantage in matters of War, especially he employ'd himself in contriving the making of New sorts of Arms.

It was hitherto a Custom among the Graecians to carry great and heavy Shields: But because these by their Weight much hinder'd the Soldiers in their March, he chang'd the Form of them, and order'd Targets of a moderate Size in their room: In which alteration he had a respect to two things, one that their Bodies should be sufficiently defended, and by the other, that by their Lightness they might be the more easily manag'd. Experience presently approv'd the Invention, and they who from their Heavy Arms were before call'd Hopliti, Heavy arm'd Men, were from these New Targets call'd Peltasti, Targateers. He chang'd likewise the Fashion of their Spears and Swords. The Spears he caus'd to be made half as long again as they were before, and the Swords longer almost by two Parts. This Alteration was likewise presently approv'd by Use and Experience, and the Reputation of the General was highly advanc'd by the Usefulness of his Ingenious


Page 427

inventions. Lastly, he altered the very Soldiers Shoes that they might both be easier to march with and sooner, and more readily cast off; and therefore they are call'd at tjos very day Iphicraticks. He invented many other things belonging to Martial Affairs, which would be too tedious here to relate. But thus all that large preparation for an Expedition into Aegypt came to nothing.

During these Affairs the new frame of Government throughout all Greece fill'd the Cities with Tumult and Commotions; and because of the Anarchy in most places, Sedi¦tions abounded. They who were for an Oligarchy, had the Lacedemonians to Patronize them; Those that appear'd for a Democracy were protected by the Athenians. For both the Cities for a while kept the League made between them inviolable. But upon their siding with the Cities (as they were inclin'd to the one or the other) without any regard to the former Articles of the Peace; they presently broke out into War.

At that time the Inhabitants of Zacynthus being enrag'd against their Magistrates (encourag'd thereunto under the protection of the Lacedemonians, and provoked with the memory of their former Injuries) drave them all out of the City; who fled to Timotheus the Athenian Admiral, and were receiv'd into the Fleet, and join'd with him in the War. He patroniz'd their Cause, and transported them into the Island (where they seiz'd upon a strong Castle call'd Arcadia) and by the assistance of Timotheus, very much molested and damnify'd the Townsmen. They of Zacynthus desir'd aid from the Lacedemonians, who first (before they would begin a War) sent to the People of Athens, and by their Ambassadors accus'd Timotheus: But when they discern'd that they inclin'd to favour the Exiles, they bestirr'd themselves to Equip out a Fleet; and having Mann'd Thirty five Gallies, they sent them to the aid of the Zacynthians, under the Command of Aristocrates.

Whilst these things were in doing, some in Corcyra that favour'd the Lacedemonians, appear'd against the People, and sent to Sparta to be assisted with all speed with some Shipping, promising to deliver up Corcyra into their hands. Upon which, they (knowing very well the importance of that Island for the recovery of the Dominion at Sea) hasten'd away to get possession. And to that end commanded Alcydas to pass over to Corcyra with Two and twenty Sail; they giving out, that this Fleet was to go for Sicily, but in truth with a design (under colour of being Friends to the Corcyreans) by the help of the Exiles to seize upon the City. But the Inhabitants coming to understand the Fraud and intended Cheat of the Lacedemonians, strongly fortify'd the place, and kept diligent Watch and Ward, and sent Ambassadors to Athens for assistance. Upon which, the People decreed to send Succours forthwith, both to the Corcyreans and to them of Zacynthus; Upon which, Ctesecles was presently sent to Zacynthus to command the Exiles: but the Fleet to be sent to Corcyra was but then in fitting out. In the mean time they of Platea having enter'd into a League with the Athenians, and decreed to deliver up their City into their protection, sent for a Garison from Athens. At which the Governors of Boeotia being exceedingly offended (to prevent the Athenians) forthwith led out a great Army against the Plateans, and having entred the Confines of Platea (by this sudden and unexpected Irruption) they found many of the Citizens stragling in the Fields, who were presently snapt up by the Horsemen; the rest fled into the City, and having no Confederates to assist them, were forc'd to deliver up themselves, upon such Terms and Conditions as the Enemy was pleas'd to allow 'em: For they were to leave the City, and take away with them only their Houshold Goods, and never more set foot in Baeotia. After this the Thebans raz'd Platea, and took Thespia (that sided against them) by assault. The Plateans fled to Athens with their Wives and Children, and were there kindly receiv'd into the Franchises and Liberties of the City. And in this condition stood the Affairs of Baeotia all that time. The Lacedemonians had now sent Mnasippus with a Fleet of Sixty five Sail, and Fifteen hundred Men under his Command to Corcyra, which after he arriv'd at the Island, and had taken the Exiles on board, he sail'd into the Haven, and presently possess'd himself of Four of their Gallies, and forc'd the rest upon Land, which they of Corcyra burnt, to prevent their falling into the Enemies hands: he routed them likewise in a Land Fight, (tho' they had advantageously possessed themselves of a Hill,) insomuch as all the Corcyrians every where were in fear and amazement. The Athenians had some time before sent Timotheus the Son of Conon, to the aid of the Corcyreans, with a Navy of Sixty Sail; but before he came in to succour them, he sail'd into Thrace, and brought over many of the Cities there to the Athenian Interest, and enlarg'd his Fleet with Thirty Sail: But because he came too late to the assistance of them of Corcyra, the people of Athens were very angry at him, and took away his Commission; yet when he return'd to Athens with a great number of Ambassadors, that


Page 428

came along with him to confirm the Leagues with the Athenians, and besides, brought in the Fleet in good Order, being more than they were by Thirty Sail; the People rescinded the former Decree, and restor'd him to his Command. Before this they had likewise prepar'd Forty Gallies more, (so that their whole Fleet was Fourscore;) and had made also plentiful Provision of Corn, Arms and all other things necessary for the War: But for the present they sent Five hundred Men to the aid of them of Corcyra, under the Command of Ctesides, who enter'd privately in the Night into * Corcyra, where he found the Townsmen in bad circumstances by their Sedition, and ill management of Affairs relating to the War: But forthwith quieting all Parties, he made it his business to put all things in a posture of Defence, and by this means put Heart and Courage into the Besieg'd. In the first place he made a Sally and cut off Two hundred of the Enemy. Presently after in a sharp Engagement he kill'd Mnasippus and many of his Army: And now when the War was almost at an end in Corcyra, arriv'd Timotheus and Iphicrates with the Athenian Fleet; who coming too late, did nothing worth remembring, save that they took Nine Gallies, Men and all, sent by Dionysius out of Stcily to the assistance of the Lacedemonians, under the Command of Cassidas and Crinippus; and by the Sale of the Captives rais'd Threescore Talents, with which they paid off the Soldiers.

While these things were acting, Nicocles an Eunuch in Cyprus, treacherously murther'd King Evagoras, and made himself King of Salamis. In Italy the Romans fought with the Prenestines, and routed and kill'd many of them.

Afterwards when Asteius was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Six Military Tribunes, vizMarcus Furius, Lucius Furius, Aulus Posthumus, Lucius Lucretius, Marcus Fabius, and Lucius Posthumus executed the Office of Consuls at Rome, there hapned such dreadful Earthquakes and Inundations in Peloponnesus (throughout all the Cities, and over all the Country.) that are incredible to relate. For never in any former Ages did the like Calamity fall upon the Grecian Cities, which were now swallow'd up together with their Inhabitants; and certainly some Divine Power contriv'd and executed this remarkable ruine and destruction of Mankind: Nay, the time when it was done aggravated the greatness of the calamity. For the Earthquake hapned not in the day (when the distressed might have found out some way or other to have help'd themselves) but in the night; when the Houses by the violence of the shake fell down in confused heaps; so that (by the darkness of the Night, and the suddenness of the ruine) Men were in that perplexity, that they knew not which way to turn themselves for security; insomuch as the greatest part of the Inhabitants, (buried in the rubbish of the Houses) miserably perish'd. But as soon as it was Day some came running out of the Houses, and thinking they had escap'd the danger, fell into a far greater and unexpected mischief; for the Sea rag'd to that degree, and broke in with that violence, that it swallow'd up them and their Houses together.

Two Cities of Achaia, one call'd Helica, and the other Bura, chiefly suffer'd by this sad accident: of which two, Helica was of the greatest account of any of the Cities of Achaia.

There was a very hot dispute concerning the cause of this Evil. Indeed the Natural Philosophers do generally ascribe all such Events to Natural Causes, and necessary Circumstances, and not to any Divine Hand; But they who have more reverend Thoughts and Sentiments of a Deity, give a very probable account of this Matter, that this Destruction was the effect of the Anger of the Gods, for the impious violation of the Rights of Religion, of which we shall give a more particular account. The Three Cities of Jonia were accustom'd to have a general Assembly of all the Jonians at Mycale, and thereabouts, where in a certain solitary place (according to Ancient Rites) they offer'd many costly Sacrifices to Neptune: which Panionion Festivals, the Ionians not being able to solemnize at that place, by reason of the frequent Wars and Disturbances, they remov'd those Assemblies to a more secure place not far from Ephesus. But sending to Delphos to consult there with the Oracle, they were commanded to take Images from the most Ancient Altars of their Forefathers (meaning from Helica, a City of the Country formerly call'd Ionia, but now Achaia.) Upon this they declar'd in the publick Assembly of the Achaians, the occasion of their Embassy, and desir'd them to grant their Request. But they of Helica had an Ancient Prophecie, That then they would he in the greatest danger, when the Ionians sacrific'd upon the Altar of Neptune; remembring therefore this, they would not suffer the Ionians to take the Images, alledging that that Temple was not common to all the Achaians, but peculiar to themselves only. The same Addresses were made to them of Bura, who were of the same Mind with them of Helica. However


Page 429

the Ionians by publick Edict of the Achaians, (that the Prophecy might be fulfill'd) offer'd Sacrifices upon the Altar of Neptune. Upon this they of Helica seiz'd upon all the Goods of the Ionians, and committed the Ambassadors to Prison, and so carried it very impiously towards the Deity: Therefore they say that Neptune being angry, to revenge himself upon their Impiety, (by this Earthquake and Inundation of the Sea) brought this grievous calamity upon those Cities. And that it was done by him they use this for an Argument, That it is generally believ'd that this God hath the power of Inundations and Earthquakes in his own hand; and that Peloponnesus had been ever reputed the Habitation of Neptune, and the Country Dedicated to him, and that all the Peloponnesian Cities worship'd this God above all others. Besides this, they give a further reason of this sad Accident. There are (as they say) in Peloponnesus great Cavities under-ground, which by the Sea flowing here and there through the Earth, are turn'd into great Ponds and Lakes of Water. And indeed it is very certain that there are Two Rivers in that Peninsula, which apparently fall into the Caverns of the Earth. For the Rivers which run by Pheneum in former Ages sunk in one place into the Earth, and became invisible, being swallow'd up in these Caverns under ground. Another was lost at a great opening of the Earth at Stymphius, and ran unseen under ground for the space of Two hundred Stages, and rose up again near the City Argos. To what is related is further added, That none suffer'd but only they who were guilty of the Impiety before-mention'd. And this shall suffice to be said of the Earthquakes and Inundations in Peloponnesus. Afterward;

When Alcisthenes was Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Eight Military Tribunes, viz.LuciusValerius, Publius Ancius, Caius Terentius, Lacius Menenius, Caius Sulpitius, Titus Papyrius, Lucius Aemilius, and Fabius Marcus bore the Consular Authority at Rome, the Hundred and second Olympiad was celebrated at Aelis, wherein Damon the Thurian was Victor. At that time God (by some Signs and Prodigies) foretold the Fall of the Lacedemonian Sovereignty over Greece, after they had enjoy'd it near Five hundred Years: For a great Comet (which from its shape was call'd the Fiery Beam) was seen in the Heavens several Nights. And not long after, the Lacedemonians being overcome in a great Battle, suddenly (beyond all Mens imagination) lost their Dominion. Some among the Natural Philosophers ascribe the Original of this Comet to proceed from Natural Causes, and say that these sort of Meteors at some stated times do happen of necessity. And that the Eminent Chaldeans in Babylon, and other Astrologers have certainly and exactly foretold the appearance of these Comets. And that it's not to be admir'd tho' such things do happen accordingly, but that it would be a greater wonder if they should not; being that all things have their proper Courses, and turns, and at length by incessant Motions are brought into Act in fixed and stated Times and Seasons. It's related that this Comet was so very light, that it cast a shadow upon the Earth like the Moon.

CHAP. VI.

Artaxerxes sends again to make Peace among the Grecians. All compli'd but the Thebans. The Spartans raise an Army against the Thebans. Epaminondas made the Theban General. The famous Battle of Leuctra. The terrible Seditions and Cruelties in Argos. Jason of Pherae stirs up the Thessalonians to gain the Sovereignty of Greece. Pollydore Prince of Pherea in Greece poison'd by his Brother Alexander. Plot to depose Alexander. King of Macedonia Treated with, to that purpose.

ABout this time Artaxerxes King of Persia hearing that Greece was fallen into new Broils, sent Ambassadors again to exhort them to live in peace one with another, according to the late Establishment. The Grecians readily compli'd with the Advice, and and all made Peace again among themselves, except the Thebans. For they were not admitted into the League because they challeng'd all Beotia to be under their own Government. And it was Decreed that all the Cities should be bound by Oath to observe the League. Being therefore excluded (as they were before) they kept Beotia under


Page 430

the sole Jurisdiction of their own City. Upon which the Lacedemonians being inrag'd, resolv'd to make War upon them as the common Enemies of Greece. For their growing Pow'r began to be suspected, lest (being Masters of all Baeotia) they should some time or other catch an opportunity to deprive Sparta of the Sovereign Command. Especially for that they were a Warlike Nation, Inferior to none in Greece, and by their daily Exercise in the publick Schools, their Bodies became far stronger; and besides had many valiant Commanders, and especially three, Epaminondas, Gorgias,: and Pelopidas. And to this may be added, That the Thebans by reason of the Nobility of their Ancestors (who were famous in the Heroick times) were of Proud and Lordly Spirits, and ever aspiring to great matters. Upon this account the Lacedemonians this Year rais'd an Army, compos'd of their own Cities and of their Confederates, and prepar'd themselves for War. So that

When Phrasichides was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and the Romans appointed Eight Military Tribunes to execute the Office of Consuls, viz. Publius Manlius, Caius Erenucius,Caius Sextius, Tiberius Julius,LuciusLabinius, Publius Fibonius, Caius Manlius, and Lucius Antistius, The Thebans excluded from the common League, were forc'd by their own strength alone, to bear the brunt of the War against the Lacedemonians; for by the Articles of the Peace (Ratifi'd and confirm'd by all) none of the Cities were to send them any Aid or Relief. Therefore the Lacedemonians (now that the Thebans were wholly desert'd) decreed a War against them, and were resolv'd to subject Thebes to the Lacedemonian State. And forasmuch as all observ'd that the Lacedemonians made extraordinary preparations, and that the Thebans on the other hand had none to stand by them, every body was of opinion that they would be easily Conquer'd by the Spartans. And therefore all that wish'd them well were much troubl'd and concern'd for them, to see their inevitable Ruin approaching. But their Enemies on the contrary rejoyc'd, a, if the Thebans were even already subdu'd.

When the Lacedemonians had rais'd their Army, they Created Cléombrotus General. And in the first Place sent Ambassadors to Thebes to demand that all the Cities of Beotia should be allow'd to Govern themselves according to their own Laws, and that Platea and Thespiae should be Rebuilt, and that those Territories should be restor'd to the Ancient Proprietors. To which the Thebans answer'd, That as they did not concern themselves with the matters of Laconia, so the Lacedemonians ought not to meddle with the Affairs of Beotia. Upon receiving of this answer, the Lacedemonians (without any further delay) order'd Cleombrotus to March with the Army against Thebes. And the Lacedemonian Confederates were very ready to join in this War, hoping that the Beotians would be subdu'd with little or no fighting, and without any great Labour or Pains.

Marching on therefore, they Encomp'd at Cheronea, and there waited for their Confederates, who came in but slowly. In the mean time the Thebans hearing of the Enemies March, sent their Wives and Children for security to Athens. Then they made Epaminondas General of the Army, and intrusted him with the management of the whole War, joining with him six Beotians and Governors of Beotia as his Council. He listed whoever was of Age able and fit to bear Arms among the Thebans, and likewise among the other Beotians, and having now an Army not above Six thousand, with these he March'd out of Thebes; at which Instant of time some Prodigies were seen, which boded no good Success. For as they were going out at the Gates, there met them an Herald that (according to ancient Custom) led a blind Man (that had ran away) and cry'd aloud, Bring him not out of Thebes, nor put him to Death, but carry him back again and save his Life. The old Men took this Cry of the Herald for an evil sign: But the young Men held their peace, lest by their Timorousness they should seem to have a desire to diswade Epaminondas from the Expedition, he had undertaken. To those that were pressing upon him first to consider well of these Presages, he answer'd in this Verse,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

. 

It is a happy sign to fight for his Country.

Such a frank resolution had no sooner dash'd and caus'd those that were Timorous to Blush, but another Prodigy more frightful happen'd. For a Secretary went before carrying a Javelin, to which a Scroll was annex'd, to signify that the Army was to obey the Orders and Commands of their Generals. It fell out that a high Wind blew off this Scroll, and fix'd it upon a Pillar of a Tomb, in which very place some Lacedemonians and Peloponnesians, that formerly follow'd Agesilaus were bury'd, and had been there slain:


Page 431

Upon which the ancient Men again with protestations dissuaded him from going any 

further with the Army, seeing the Gods so evidently oppos'd the design. But the General return'd them no answer, but cheerfully March'd on preferring at that time the Honesty and Justice of his Cause, before uncertain Observations and Conclusions upon Signs and Prodigies.

 And tho' Epaminondas who was a great Philosopher manag'd all this Affair with great Prudence and Discretion, yet in the mean time he incurr'd the Censure of many. But not long after when success of the Action evinc'd the Excellency of his Military Conduct, we see him instrumental in performing many things to the great Advantage and Service of his Country. For he March'd away directly, and gain'd the Streights near Coronea, and Encamp'd there. Cleombrotus, when he heard that the Enemy had possess'd themselves of that Pass, not looking upon it Feazible to regain it, turn'd aside another way by Phocis, and March'd along by the Sea-shore, where tho' the way was very rugged and difficult, yet at length he came without any prejudice to the Confines of Beotia: But in his passage he took in some small Towns, and gain'd some Gallies. At last he arriv'd at Leuctra, and there Encamp'd, and refresh'd his Army.

In the mean time the Beotians Marching forward, drew near to the Enemy; and as soon as they recover'd the Hills, and saw the greatness of the Lacedemonian Army, Covering the Plains of Leuctra, they were not a little amaz'd. Hereupon the Booetarchs call'd a Council of War to Consider whether it were advisable to go on, and Fight upon such unequal Terms, or else to March Back, and Engage with the Enemy in some more commodious Place. It happen'd that upon this Consult, the Votes were equal: For there being Six of these Boeotarchs or Governors of Boeotia, Three were for going Back, and the other Three for abiding where they were, and to try their Fortune by a Battle, of which last Number Epaminondas was one. While the matter stood thus doubtful, and nothing could be determin'd, the Seventh Boeotarch at length came in, and Epaminondas persuaded him to give his Vote on his side, and so he carry'd it. And thus it was determin'd to lay all at Stake and try it out by a Battle. Epaminondas then perceiving that the Soldiers were still superstitiously possess'd with the former ominous Signs, and Prodigies, endeavour'd by all the Art and Industry possibly he could to remove these Opinions and Suspicions of his Soldiers. To this end, upon some Persons coming newly into the Camp, from Thebe's, he caus'd a Report to be spread abroad, that all the Arms that hung up in Hercules Temple were on a sudden gone and not to be found, and that it was commonly nois'd in Thebes, That the Ancient Heroes had taken them away, and were gone out to the assistance of the Thebans. He Suborn'd likewise another to say, he lately came up out of Trophonius his Cell, and he affirm'd that the Oracle there Commanded him to tell them that when they had gain'd the Victory at Leuctra, they should institute the Coronet Festivals to Jupiter. From whence arose that Custom of keeping a yearly Solemnity by the Boeotians at Lebadia. And besides this Skill and Prudence of the General, Leandras the Spartan (who was Banish'd from Lacedemon, and then in Arms with the Thebans) was not little serviceable in this Affair. For being call'd into the Assembly, he affirm'd that the Spartans had an ancient Prophecy, That when they were beaten by the Thebans at Leuctra, they should lose their Principality. At length some of the Inhabitants of the Country who undertook to Interpret the Oracles came to Epaminondas, and declar'd that it was decreed by the Gods, That a great slaughter should be made of the Lacedemonians at the Tombs of the Daughters of Leuctrus and Schedasus, for the Reasons herein after related. Leuotrus was he from whom the Field was so call'd. And his Daughters, and the Daughters of one Schedasus, Virgins, in the Flow'r of their Age, were Deflowr'd by the Spartan Ambassadors; the young Women not able to endure that great Dishonour and Disgrace, (with many Imprecations against that Nation who sent such wicked Ambassadors) laid violent hands on themselves. When these and other such like things were alledg'd, Epaminondas call'd the Soldiers together, and in an Oration fitted for the purpose, encourag'd them to the Battle: Upon which the Soldiers (being now freed from their Superstitious conceits) chang'd their minds, and long'd to be Engag'd with the Enemy.

About this time came some Auxiliary Forces to the Thebans from Thessaly, Fifteen hundred Foot, and Five hundred Horse, under the Command of Jason. This Man advis'd both the Thebans and the Lacedemonians (upon consideration of the uncertainty of the Events of War) to agree upon terms of Peace; which took its effect. And now Cleombrotus withdrew his Forces out of Beotia, and in his March a great Army from the Lacedemonians and their Confederates under the Command of Archidamus the Son of Agesilaus met him For the Spartans seeing the Courage and Resolution of the Beotians, and not judging it advisable to slight Men that seem'd to be resolv'd, and to run upon the Pikes at


Page 432

all adventures, had sent forth his other Army (by their multitude at least) to give a check to the Insolency of the Enemy. Drawing up therefore in a Body together (and looking upon it a base and mean thing, below the Dignity of the Spartans so much as to think the Valour of the Beotians worthy of any regard,) without any respect had to the late League, they rashly and precipitately return'd to Leuctra: Where they found the Beotians (with great earnestness) expecting and desiring a Battle. Upon this, the Armies on both sides were drawn up in Battalia in this manner, on the part of the Lacedemonians, Cleombrotus and Archidamus the Son of Agesilaus (both descended from Hercules) Commanded the two Wings: On the other side Epaminondas Marshall'd his Army after a new and peculiar manner, by which excellent Stratagem he gain'd that glorious Victory never to be forgotten. For he chose out of the whole Army the best and strongest of the Soldiers, and plac'd them in that Wing where he himself would Command. In the other he plac'd his weaker Men, with a Command not to abide the Enemies Charge, but by a soft and slow retreat to avoid the shock. Having therefore thus order'd an oblique Phalanx, he resolv'd to try the Fortune of the Day with the other Wing under his Command. And now the Trumpets Sounded a Charge on both sides, and on first onset the Armies set up a great shout: The Lacedemonians came on with both their Wings in fashion of an half Moon: On the other hand the Beotians Retreated with one of their Wings, and charg'd fiercely on the Enemy with the other. When they came to the swords point, both Fought very desperately, and at first the Victory was very doubtful, but at length they with Epaminondas by their Valour and close Order, broke in upon the Peleponnesians, and made a great slaughter amongst them; For they were not able any longer to bear the weight of the Shock wherewith they were press'd, but some were slain downright upon the Spot, others mortally Wounded bravely receiving all their wounds upon their Breasts. As long as Cleombrotus the Lacedemonian King was alive, it was uncertain whether side would carry away the Victory, because he had a strong Body of Targateers with him, who fought resolutely in his defence. But as soon as he fell down dead, (after many wounds receiv'd and much Valour shewn on his part, tho' all ineffectual) they throng'd together about his Body where they hewn down in heaps one upon another. And now this Wing being without a leader, the Epaminondians charg'd the Lacedemonians with that fierceness that they forc'd them by degrees into disorder. However the Lacedemonians fought so bravely for the Body of their King, that at length they possess'd themselves of it, tho' they were not able to gain the Day. For those choice Bands with Epaminondas standing to it as unconquerable (encourag'd likewise both by the words and example of their Leader) the Lacedemonians at length (with much ado) began to give ground. And indeed at first they did not (to appearance) break their Order of Battle in their Retreat; but when the slaughter increas'd, and they had now no Commander to give necessary Orders, the whole Army fled outright. The Epaminondians pursu'd them close, and with the slaughter of a multitude of their Enemies gain'd a glorious Victory. For by their engaging with the most famous Warriours of Greece, and becoming Victorious with an Army far short in Number of their Enemies, they highly advanc'd the reputation of their Valour. But Epaminondas the General was judg'd worthy of the greatest Honour and Esteem, because chiefly by his Valour and Prudence he had routed those Commanders of Greece, who were never before Conquer'd. The Lacedemonians lost in this Battle no fewer then four thousand Men: Of the Beotians were kill'd about Three hundred. Afterwards they made a Truce for the burying of the Dead, and the return of the Lacedemonians into Peloponnesus. And this was the Issue of the Battel of Leuctra.

The Year following, when Dysnicetus was Praetor of Athens, and four Military Tribunes, Quintus Servilius, Lucius Furius, Caius Licinnius and Publius Clelius Executed the Consular Dignity at Rome, the Thebans march'd with a great Army against Orchomenum, with a full purpose utterly to ruin that City. But they were advis'd by Epaminondas, in regard they sought to gain the Principality of Greece, that it was their Interest to use their Victory with Moderation. Whereupon they left off their design, and receiv'd the Orchomenians as their Consederates: Afterwards they made a League with the Phoceans and Atolians, and so return'd into Beotia.

At that time Jason Prince of Pherae (whose power grew every Day) invaded Locris with a great Army, and raz'd Heraclea in Trachinia after it was betray'd into his hands, and bestow'd their Territories on the Octeans and Melieans. Thence Marching into Perrhebia, he courted some of the Cities into submission, and gain'd others by force of Arms.


Page 433

The Thessalians seeing him mount up so fast, and in so short time, began to be jealous of the growth of his Power, and the heat of his Ambition.

But in the mean time there arose such a Sedition, follow'd with such Butcheries in Argos, that the like had never been before in any of the Cities of Greece: Which new and unheard of Cruelty was call'd by the GreciansScytalism, from the manner of the slaughter Committed. And the Cause of the Tumult was this: Argos was Govern'd by a Democracy; The Orators, and those that affected Popularity, stirr'd up the Mob against the great Men of the City; which caus'd them for their own preservation, (and to free themselves from the false accusations that were prosecuted against them) to Plot and Contrive how to overturn the Democratical Government. And when some who were suspected were call'd in question, others fearing they should be put to the Rack, Murder'd themselves. For One in the height of his Torments Confess'd, and Accus'd Thirty of the greatest Men of the City to be in the Conspiracy; upon which the People (without any further Trial,) Knockt them all on the Head, and Confiscated their Estates. And whereas there were many others seiz'd upon suspition of the Plot (and the false Accusations manag'd against them by the Orators, with all the aggravation▪ imaginable) the People were so enrag'd, that whoever were accus'd (of whom there was a vast number, and all very Rich) were Condemn'd to Death; so that there were Executed above Sixteen hundred of the greatest and most powerful Men of the City: Neither were the Orators themselves spar'd; for when they slack'd in the Prosecution of the Calumnies (because they were afraid left some sudden mischief would overtake them by reason of the extraordinary Cruelties that were Committed) the People concluded that they had deserted their Cause, which put them into such a ferment of Rage and Fury, that they kill'd all the Orators that were then in the City; which seem'd to be Executed upon them by the Hand of some revenging Deity, as a reward of their Villanies. After the Tumult was ceas'd, the People return'd to their former quiet, and paeceable dispositions.

About this time Lycomedes of Tegeata perswaded the Arcadians to join together in one Body of a Commonwealth and to Constitute a General Council, consisting of Ten thousand Men, who should have absolute power to Determine all matters relating both to War and Peace. But a Tumult hapning among the Arcadians, the controversie was decided by the Sword; many being kill'd, and above Fourteen hundred Banish'd, some to Sparta, others to Pallantium. Those that fled to the Pallantines were by them deliver'd up into the hands of their Enemies, who cut all their Throats. The other put on the Lacademonians to make an Inroad into Arcadia: Upon which, Agesilaus King of Sparta with an Army made up of the Citizens and Exiles, broke into the Territories of Tageata, because they were look't upon to be the Fomenters of all the Broils and Banishments amongst the Arcadians, and wasted and spoil'd the Country, which together with a strait Siege laid to the City, greatly terrifi'd the Arcadians.

While these things were acting, Jason who rul'd at Phercae (a Man excellently well vers'd in Military Affairs) who had now many of the Neighbouring Countries for his Confederates, perswaded the Thessalians to end eavour to gain the Sovereignty of Greece to themselves. For he alledg'd that whoever would Fight for it, might now gain it as a reward of their Valour. For that it was evident that the Lacedemonians were miserably Ruin'd at Leuctra; and the Athenians were only Masters at Sea, and the Thebans far unworthy of such a Dignity; and in Conclusion, that the Argives had weaken'd themselves with their own Civil Dissentions, and bloody Broils. Upon this, the Thessalians made Jason General of all their Forces, and Committed to him the whole Management of the War, who having now receiv'd the Supream Command, March'd into some of the neighbouring Countries, and enter'd into a League with Amyntas King of Macedonia.

This Year there happen'd what was very remarkable; For Three great Princes Di'd near one and the same time, Amyntas the Son of Tharrhaleus (after he had Reign'd in Macedon Four and twenty Years) dy'd, leaving behind him three Sons, Alexander, Perdiccas and Philip. Alexander Succeeded, but Reign'd but one Year. Then Agesipolis King of Lacedemon after one Year's Reign dy'd likewise: His Brother Cleomenes succeeded him, and sat at the Helm Four and thirty Years. At last Jason of Pherae, whom the Thessalians had lately made their General (tho' he Govern'd with great Moderation and Kindness towards his Subjects) was Assassinated by Seven young Men, as Ephorus says, who (in hopes of Praise and Commendation) had Conspir'd for that purpose: But others write that he was Murther'd by his Brother Polydore, who Reign'd not above one Year after him. Here Durius the Samian begins his History of the Affairs of Greece. And these were the things done this Year.


Page 434

Afterwards, when Lysistratus Govern'd in Chief at Athens, a great Sedition arose in Rome, for some were for making of Consuls, others were for Creating Military Tribunes in their room: And by reason of this dissention there was an Anarchy for some time. But at length, Six Military Tribunes were chosen, which were Lucius Amilius, CaiusVerginius, Serulius Sulpitius, Lucius Quintius, Caius Cornelius, and Caius Valerius. About the same time, Polydore the Pherean Prince of Thessaly (when he was drunk) was poysoned by a deadly Potion given him by his Brother Alexander, who Succeeded him, and Reign'd eleven Years. And as he got into the Throne by wickedness and injustice, so he rul'd (as he ever design'd) with Tyranny and Oppression: And whereas all those before him by their Moderation and Kindness to their Subjects, gain'd the Love and Good-will of all, he by his severe and tyrannical Government, became the Object of all Mens hatred. Therefore some of Larissa who from their high Birth were sirnam'd Alevadari, (fearing what might be the Effect of his Wickedness) Conspir'd to Dethrone him. To this end they made a Journey into Macedonia, and Treated with Alexander the King, in order to Assist them in Deposing of the Tyrant. While they were Negociating this Affair, Alexander the Pharean (having Intelligence of the preparations making against him) rais'd a considerable Army, designing to Engage with the Enemy in Macedonia; but the King of Macedon being join'd with the Deserters, brought his Forces presently to Larissa, and so prevented him: When he came there, the Citizens open'd the Gates to him, and so he became Master of all but the Castle, which he afterwards took by Force. The The City Cranon likewise surrendr'd to him, and he promis'd to restore all the Cities to the Thessalians. But afterwards (not valuing his Word or Honour) he Garrison'd them, and detain'd them all in his own hands. But Alexander the Pherean in a great Fright Fled to the City Pherea. And this was then the Condition of Thessaly.

CHAP. VII.

The Lacedaemonians send Polytropus into Arcadia; who is Slain, and his Party Routed by Lycomedes. An Invasion by Epaminondas and Pelopidas into Peloponnesus. Sparta Besieg'd. The Antiquity and History of Messina in Greece. Pallane taken by the Arcadians. A Wall drawn between Cenchrea and Lecheum to hinder the Thebans Inroad into Peloponnesus. Epaminondas breaks through into Peloponnesus; Assaults Corinth.

IN Peloponnesus, in the mean time, the Lacedemonians sent a Thousand heavy Arm'd Men of their own Citizens, and Five hundred Deserters from Argos and Beotia, into Arcadia, under the Command of Polytropus, who when he came to Orchomenon in Arcadia, put a Garrison into it, being a City that favour'd the Spartans. But Lycomedes of Mantinea (then Commander in Chief of the Arcadians) with a Body of Men, to the number of Five thousand, March'd against Orchomenon, and upon their arrival the Lacedemonians drew out their Forces, where happen'd a sharp Engagement, in which the Lacedemonian General was slain, and two hundred more with him: The rest by the hot Pursuit of the Enemy were forc'd back into the City. However, tho' the Arcadians then got the Victory, yet they so far fear'd the power of Sparta, that they durst not depend upon their own strength in Contending with the Lacedemonians, and therefore taking into their Confederacy the Argives and the Eleans, they first sent Ambassadours to Athens to desire them to be their Consederates, which being deny'd, they then Address'd themselves to the Thebans for the same purpose. Upon which the Beotians (together with the Phocians and Locrians their Confederates) drew out their Forces, and March'd directly into Peloponnesus, under the Command of Epaminondas and Pelopidas. For all the other Beotarchs had willingly given up the sole and absolute Command of the Army to those two, being Men eminent for Prudence and Valour. 

When they entred into the Confines of Arcadia, they were met by all the Arcadians, Eleans, Argives, and the rest of their Confederates. And now they had an Army of above Fifty thousand Men, and after a Council of War had, the Generals resolv'd to March forthwith to Sparta, and to Wast and Spoil all the Country of Laconia. But the Lacedemonians having lost the Flower and strength of their young Men in the Battle at Leuctra, and many in several other Fights here and there, were thereby reduc'd to a very


Page 435

small number of Fighting Men of their own Citizens: And whereas some of their Confederates deserted, and others were brought low by the same means as those before, they knew not which way to turn themselves. So that they were forc'd to seek for Aid and Assistance from them, (I mean the Athenians) upon whom they had some time before Impos'd Thirty Tyrants, and whose Walls they had Demolish'd, and whose City they had decreed to Raze even to the Ground, and lay it Open and Common with the rest of the Country, for the grazing of Flocks and Herds. But necessity has no Law, and the Turns of Fortune are invincible, through which the Lacedemonians were brought into that strait, as to become Suppliants to their most Implacable Enemies for Relief. However, they were not deceiv'd in their hopes; for such was the Brave and generous Spirits of the Athenians, that they fear'd not the Power of the Thebans, but decreed to Assist the Lacedemonians to the utmost they were able, tho' they were now ready even to be swallow'd up and made perfect Slaves. To this end they listed in one Day Twelve thousand lusty young Men, and forthwith order'd Iphicrates the General to March away to the assistance of the Spartans. Accordingly, having Men that were very forward, he hasts away with a swift March. Neither were the Lacedemonians less active or forward; but now even when the Enemy were Encamp'd in the Borders of Laconia, they March'd out of Sparta, with all the Strength they could make, which was but small, yet with the same Courage, and Valour as they had formerly done.

In the mean time, Epaminondas his Army conceiving it very difficult to enter into the Enemies Country; and therefore judging it was not convenient to attempt it with the whole Army together, they resolv'd to divide their Forces into four Bodies, and so to make the Attack in several Places at once. The first March'd to the City Sellatia, and and drew off the Inhabitants of that Territory from the Lacedemonians. The Argives, who were in another Body, upon their entrance into the Borders of Tageata, Engag'd with a Guard that kept that pass, and kill'd the Chief Officer, Alexander a Spartan, and Two hundred more of his Men; amongst whom there were some Beotian Exiles. The third Body, in which were the Arcadians, and most in number, broke into the Country call'd Sciritis, where Iscolas, a Man of great Valour and Prudence, kept Guard with a considerable Body of Men. This brave and gallant Commander perform'd an heroick Action, worthy to be Recorded to all Posterity. When he foresaw that both he, and all those with him, were sure every Man to be cut off by their Engaging with so great and unequal a number; in the first place he lookt upon it as a dishonour to the Spartan Name to desert the Post assign'd him, and yet judg'd it to be much for the Service and Advantage of his Country if he could preserve the Soldiers. To the admiration therefore of his Valour he contriv'd a way how to answer the ends of both; wherein he bravely Imitated the gallant Spirit of King Leonidas in former times at Thermopile. For he sent away to Sparta the choicest of his Soldiers that were young and lusty, to the end they might be helpful to their Country in Fighting, now all lay at Stake: And he himself, with those that were Old, kept close together, and in a brave defence, slaughter'd multitudes of their Enemies, but at length being surrounded, and hem'd in by the Arcadians, they were every Man of them cut off.

The fourth body of the Eleans having all places more clear and open before them, arriv'd at length at Sellacia: For it was order'd that all the Forces should meet together at that place, where being all now join'd, they march'd towards Sparta, and wasted the Country all before them with Fire and Sword. And now the Lacedaemonians seeing their ancient Country Liconia (that had never known what Waste and Spoil meant for the space of Five hundred years before) to be thus cruelly harass'd and destroy'd, could no longer forbear, but were ready to run upon their Enemy as it were with open mouth. But being by some Magistrates that came from the City, commanded not to hasten away too far out of the Bounds of their Country (lest some other should make an inroad into it in the mean time) and being likewise advis'd to recollect themselves, and think seriously of defending the City; with much ado they submitted to the Advice.

In the mean time, Epaminondas having pass'd his Army over the Mountain Taygetus, and arriv'd at the River Eu

•ota

 (which was then very high, being Winter-time) he endeavour'd all he could to get over. The Lacedaemonians perceiving how his Troops were disorder'd and dispers'd through the difficulty of the Passage, laid hold upon this fit occasion to fall upon them. Leaving therefore their Wives, Children, and Old Men as a Guard for the City, they made out against the Enemy in good Order with all the Young and Strong Men of the Town, and by a sudden and hot Charge cut off a great number in their passing the River: But the Boeotians and Arcadians valiantly standing their Ground,


Page 436

surrounded their Enemies. However, the Spartans, after they had kill'd a great number of the Boeotians, at length broke through, and return'd to the City, leaving behind them remarkable Instances of their Valour.

Presently after, when Epaminondas came up with his whole Army (to the Terror of the Inhabitants) to the City, the Spartans, by the advantage of the Strength of the Places, kill'd great numbers of them. And now all hands were at work, and very earnest to gain the City, insomuch as that they seem'd to be in a fair way to take Sparta by storm. But the Assailants (through their Over-heat and Violence) being many of them kill'd and others wounded, Epaminondas caus'd a Trumpet to sound a Retreat, and so call'd them off. Presently after, the Thebans made their approach to the City, and challeng'd the Spartans to come forth and fight with them, or else to acknowledge themselves Inferior, and not able to contend with them. To whom they answer'd, that when they saw their opportunity they would be sure not to decline Fighting, though they laid all at Stake. The Army therefore now drew off from the Siege, and having wasted and spoil'd all Laconia, and loaden themselves with rich Prey and Plunder, return'd into Arcadia. Afterwards the Athenians (who came too late, and did nothing worth taking notice of) March'd back into Attica.

In the mean while Four thousand Men came in to the Assistance of the Lacedemonians from their Consederates. To these they added a Thousand Helots newly Manumitted and set Free, and Two hundred Beotian Fugitives, and many more from the neighbouring Towns and Villages; so that now they were strong enough to Cope with the Enemy. And these Forces being kept together and daily Exercis'd, grew more and more daring, and fit for publick Service in the Field. 

But Epaminondas being Naturally inclin'd to things that were Great, and ambitious to Eternize his own praise and Honour, perswaded the Arcadians and the other Allies to re-edifie and replenish Messina with new Inhabitants (which had been destroy'd by the Lacedaemonians, and lay Wast and Desolate many Years,) for that it was most commodiously Situated for the Invading of Sparta at any time; having procur'd their Consent, he enquir'd after all the ancient Inhabitants that were living in any Place: And enfranchizing many others that were willing to settle themselves there, he Repair'd Messina, and made it very Populous, and divided the Land belonging to the City by Lot amongst the new Inhabitants, and fill'd the Country about with stately Seats and beautiful Buildings, and so rais'd up a noble Grecian City out of its Ruins, to its former State and Grandeur, for which he was highly Honour'd.

I conceive it will not be amiss in this place, in regard Messina has been so often taken and Ruin'd, If I say something in short of this City from its beginning. Anciently the Family of Neleus and Nestor to the time of the Trojan War possess'd it: Afterwards Orestes the Son of Agamemnon and his Posterity enjoy'd it, till the Return of the Heraclidae. Then Cresphontes chose Messina for his share, and his Posterity Reign'd there for some time; but they being Ejected, it came into the power of the Lacedemonians, who became Lords thereof. For after that Teleclytus King of the Lacedemonians was slain in a Battle, the Messinians at length were subdu'd by the Spartans. This War is said to have continu'd Twenty Years; and that the Lacedemonians had taken a solemn Oath that they would never return to Sparta, till they had taken Messina. At that time were Born those call'd the Partheniae, who afterwards enjoy'd the City Tarentum. The Messinians in after-times being oppress'd by the Lacedemonians,Aristomenes stirr'd them up to Revolt, and destroy'd many of the Spartans. At which time Tyrreus the Poet was sent by the Athenians to the Spartans to be their General. But there are others that say, that Aristomenes flourish'd in the time of the Twenty years War. The last War made upon them was after that terrible Earthquake, which almost Ruin'd Sparta, and destroy'd all its Inhabitants. At that time those that remain'd of the Messinians (together with the Helots, who Revolted with them,) Inhabited Ithon, because Messina had lain Wast many Years together before that time. But being unfortunate in every Encounter, they were at length utterly Ruin'd, and driven out of their Country; and settl'd themselves in Naupachus, which was given them to Inhabit, by the Athenians: And from thence some remov'd to Cephalenia, and others into Sicily, where they built the City Messina, so call'd from them. And now the Thebans in the last place by the Advice of Epaminondas (who Invited the Messinians from all Places where they were) Rebuilt Messina, and restor'd to the new Inhabitants all the ancient Territories formerly belonging to the City. And thus Great and Various were the Changes and Turns of Messina.


Page 437

The Thebans having dispatch'd all these things in the space of Eighty five Days, leaving a strong Garrison for the defence of Messina, return'd to their own Country. And the Lacedemonians having now unexpectedly rid themselves of the Enemy, sent some of the greatest men of their City to Athens, and upon a Treaty concerning the Principality, it was agreed that the Athenians should be Masters at Sea, and the Lacedemonians have the chief Command at Land. But afterwards both Cities executed the Sovereignty in Common.

About the same time, the Arcadians Created Lycomedes General, and sent him away with five thousand strong and lusty young Men to Besiege Pallene, in Laconia; who took it by Storm, and put above Three hundred Lacedemonians there in Garrison, to the Sword: And having plunder'd the City, and wasted and spoil'd the Country, return'd home before the Lacedemonians could send them any Relief.

The Beotians (likewise being desir'd by the Thessalians to Free them from the Tyranny of Alexander the Pherean, then but feeble, and almost broken) sent Pelopidas with a strong Army into Thessaly, with Orders to Manage affairs there to the advantage of the Beotians. When he came to Larissa, he possessed himself of the Castle then Garrison'd by Alexander; thence he March'd into Macedonia, and made a League with King Alexander, and receiv'd Philip his Brother as an Hostage, and sent him to Thebes. And having perfected whatever he thought might be for the Service of the Beotians, he return'd into his own Country.

Things standing thus, the Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans unanimously agreed to make War upon the Lacedaemonians, and to that end, to send Ambassadors to the Beotians, to persuade them to join with them in the War. They accordingly Consented, and sent forth an Army of Seven thousand Foot, and Five hundred Horse, under the Command of Epaminondas, and the other Beotarchs. The Athenians hearing of the preparations of the Beotians against Peloponnesus, sent an Army against them, under the Command of Chabrias their General, who when he arriv'd at Corinth, rais'd Men out of Megera, Pellene and Corinth, and made up an Army of Ten thousand Men; who being join'd with the Lacedaemonians and other Confederates at Corinth, their whole Forces were no less than Twenty thousand. They made it first their Business to guard all the Passages, and to do all they could to prevent the Beotians from breaking into Peloponnesus: To this end they drew a Wall with a deep Trench from * Cenchrea to * Lechaeum, to block up the entrance that Way. The thing was done with that quickness and expedition, (through multitude of Hands and diligence of those Employ'd) that the Place was Fortifi'd before the Beotians could reach thither.

As soon as Epaminondas came up to the Place, upon diligent view of the Fortification, he discern'd that that part kept by the Lacedaemonians was the Weakest, and therefore did all he could to draw them out to a fair Field Battle, tho' they were almost three times his Number. But when he saw they would not stir, but kept themselves within their Fortifications and Trenches, he made a fierce Assault upon them, Storming them in every Part: But the Action was Hottest and Sharpest on both sides, where the Lacedemonians were Posted, for there the place was of easiest Entrance, and most difficult to be kept. But Epaminondas having with him the flower of Thebes, with much ado beat off the Lacedaemonians, and so clearing the Way, broke in with his Forces, and laid the passage plainly open into Peloponnesus, which was an Action nothing Inferior to any he had done before. Hereupon, he forthwith March'd to Trezene and Epidaurus, and Wasted and Harrass'd the Country round about, but could not take the Cities, being very strongly Garrison'd; but Sicyon,Pheunte, and some others submitted to him. Then he March'd with his Army against Corinth: And having routed the Townsmen in an Encounter, he pursu'd them to the very Walls: Where some of the Beotians puffed up with their good Success, Rashly broke through the Gates into the City; upon which the Corinthians in a great Fright shut themselves up in their Houses. But Chabrias the Athenian General, both Cordially and Faithfully, made Head against the Beotians, and Drove some of them out of the City, making a great slaughter of the rest. In the heat of this Action the Beotians approach'd to Corinth with their whole Army in Battalia, to the great Terror of the Inhabitants: Upon which, Chabrias with his Athenians, forthwith made a Sally out of the City, and having possessed himself of the Hills Adjoyning, there bore the brunt of the Enemies Charge. On the other side the Beotians encourag'd, being strong of Body, and of long experience in Feats of Arms, doubted not, but to Rout the Athenians. But the Chabrians (by the advantage of the higer Ground, and continual Succours coming in to them out of the City (so defended themselves, that


Page 438

they Kill'd, and grievously Gall'd their Assailants, and beat them off: So that the Beotians after the Loss of a great Number of their Men, not being able to do any thing, drew off their Forces. But Chabrias having thus Baffl'd the Enemy, for his Valour, Faithfulness, and Military Conduct, was Cry'd up, and greatly Admir'd.

CHAP. VIII.

Dionysius sends Gauls and Spaniards to the assistance of the Lacedemonians. Pelopidas and Istmenias clapt up by Alexander, Tyrant of Pherea, The Boeotians pursu'd by the Phereans: brought off by Epaminondas then a private Soldier. The Fight between the Arcadians and Lacedemonians. Dionysius falls upon the Carthaginian Territories in Sicily. Dionysius dyes. The cause of his death. The cruelty of Alexander the Pherean at Scotusa. Epaminondas breaks again into Peloponnesus. Coos Peopled and Wall'd. The end of the Laconick and Beotick War by the Mediation of the Persian King.

ABout this time arriv'd at Corinth Two thousand Gauls and Spaniards, sent by Dionysius the Tyrant to the Lacedemonians from Sicily, who had Five Months Pay advance. The Grecians to try their Valour drew them out against the Enemy; who so far approv'd themselves stout and valiant Men, as that they routed and kill'd many of the Beotians and their Confederates. And after they had been very useful in the War, and purchas'd to themselves Praise and Esteem both for their Courage and Service, and had been rewarded according to their Merits by the Lacedemonians, they were sent back into Sicily at the end of the Summer.

After these things Philiscus Ambassador from Artaxerxes King of Persia came into Greece to persuade the Grecians to be at Peace among themselves; to which all willingly comply'd except the Thebans, who were so obstinate that they refus'd the Conditions, having before brought all Beotia in subjection to their own Government. There being therefore no hopes of Peace, Philiscus return'd into Asia, leaving behind him Two thousand-Mercenaries, who receiv'd their Pay for the Service of the Lacedemonians.

Whilst these things were doing, Euphron of Sicyon (a bold and rash Fellow, not inferior to any in that kind) with the assistance of the Argives, plotted to gain the Sovereignty; and to that end, Fortune favour'd him so far, that forthwith he banish'd Forty of the Citizens, and confiscated their Goods and Estates, by which he rais'd a vast sum of Money, wherewith he hir'd a Guard of Foreigners, and so possess'd himself of the Command of the City.

Nausigenes being Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Four Military Tribunes, viz. Lucius Papyrius, Lucius Menenius, Servius Cornelius, and Servius Sulpitius, executing the Consular Authority at Rome, the Hundred and Third Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, in which, Pythostratus the Athenian carry'd away the Prize, This Year Ptolemy Alorites, the Son of Amyntas, treacherously Murther'd his Brother Alexander, and Govern'd the Kingdom of Macedonia for the space of Three Years. At the same time Pelopidas in Beotia emulating the Glory of Epaminondas, and perceiving what great Service he had done in Peloponnesus for the Common-wealth of Beotia, made it his business to advance his own Reputation, by enlarging the Power and Sovereignty of the Thebans in other parts out of Peloponnesus. To that end, and joining with Ismenia (his special Friend, and a Man of great Esteem for his Valour) he took a journey into Thessaly, where, upon Discourse with Alexander, Tyrant of Pherea (when he never expected any such thing) he and Istmenias were both seizd, and clapt up in prison. This Fact highly incens'd the Thebans, upon which they sent Eight thousand heavy Arm'd Men, and Six hundred Horse into Thessaly. At whose coming Alexander was in a great fright, and sent Ambassadors to Athens to Treat with them for their assistance. Upon this, the People of Athens forthwith dispatch'd away Thirty Sail, and a Thousand Men under the Command of Autocles: But while he sail'd round Eubea, the Thebans entred Thessaly. And tho' Alexander was well furnish'd with Foot, and exceeded the Beotians in Horse, yet the Beotians at the first concluded they should put an end to the War by one Fight, especially being enforc'd


Page 439

by the Thessalians: But being deserted by them, and Alexander assisted by the Athenians and other Confederates, and Meat and Drink and all other Provision being scarce, the Baeotarchs were resolv'd to return home, and accordingly drew off; and in their march through the Plain they were fallen upon in the Rear by Alexander's Horse, who kill'd and wounded many of the Beotians. At length, not being able either to keep their Ground or go forward, they knew not which way to turn themselves, or what to do; and to aggravate the perplexity they were in, they were in want of Food. In this desperate condition Epaminondas (who was then but a private Soldier) was chosen General by the Army; who presently plac'd the best and choicest of the Light Arm'd Men, and the Horse in the Rear; with these he repuls'd the Enemy that press'd upon the backs of the Beotians, and by frequent skirmishes, (making head as occasion serv'd,) and keeping his Troops in good Order, he brought off the Army safe. Thenceforth more and more advancing his own Reputation by his Noble Actions, he wan Praise and Renown both amongst his Citizens, and all their Confederates. But

The Magistrates of Beotia set great Fines upon the Officers and Leaders in this late Expedition, and so rais'd a great deal of Money; But in regard the Question may be very well ask'd, How it came to pass that so great a Man was plac'd in so low a Post as a Common Soldier in that Expedition into Thessaly? It's fit a Reason should be given in justification of Epaminondas. When he had in the Fight at Corinth beaten off the Lacedemonians, who guarded the Fortification, he might have kill'd a great number of them; but resting satisfy'd that he had gain'd the Pass, he forbore all further pursuit. Being therefore suspected that he spar'd the Lacedemonians out of a design to ingratiate himself into their Favour; those that envy'd his Glory, watch'd an opportunity to accuse him of Treason. Upon which, the People were so exasperated, that they depriv'd him of his Command, and order'd him to serve as a Common Soldier. But having by his Noble Actions wip'd off those stains of Dishonour cast upon him, he was restor'd by the People to his former Dignity.

Not long after, a sharp Battel was fought between the Lacedemonians and the Arcadians, in which the former obtain'd a famous Victory; and was the first Fight since that at Leuctra, wherein they had any considerable success. There were above Ten thousand of the Arcadians slain, and not one Man lost of the Lacedemonians. The Priests at Dodona had before foretold, That this War should end without any Mourning on the Lacedemonians part. After this Battle the Arcadians were in that fear of the Lacedemonians, that they built the City call'd Megalopolis, in a place commodiously situated for their security, and brought into it the Menalians, and Parrhasians, out of Twenty Villages in Arcadia. And this was the state of Greece at that time.

In Sicily Dionysius the Tyrant having rais'd a great Army, resolved to take advantage of the present Opportunity, and to fall upon the Carthaginians, who were then but in a very ill Condition, by reason of the Plague that rag'd amongst them, and their being deserted by many of the Africans. And because he had not the least colour and ground for the War, he pretended that the Carthaginians Incroach'd and made Incursions into his Country. Having therefore an Army of Thirty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, besides a Navy of Three hundred Sail, with these he Invades the Carthaginian Territory, and presently wan Salinunte and Entella, and wastes and harrasses all the Country round about: Then taking Aeryx, he at length besieg'd Lilybeum: But the strength of the Garison presently forc'd him to raise his Siege Afterwards, being inform'd that the Arsenals belonging to the Carthaginians were burnt down, and therefore conceiving their whole Fleet was destroy'd he grew secure and despis'd the Enemy; so that he laid up Thirty of his best Gallies in the Haven at Eryx, and sent all the rest back to Syracuse. But the Carthaginians forthwith Mann'd out Two hundred Sail, and entring the Port at Eryx, unexpectedly on a sudden came up to the Ships there, and carry'd away most of them out of the Harbour: But Winter drawing on, both sides made a Truce, and return'd with their Armies to Winter Quarters. And not long after, Dionysius fell Sick, and Died, having reign'd Thirty Eight years; whose Son Dionysius succeeded him, and govern'd Twelve years.

Here it will not be a matter foreign to the design of our History, if we relate the Cause of his Death, and what hapned to this Prince a little before that time.

When he had caus'd a Tragedy of his, call'd the Leneians, to be acted at Athens, and was proclaim'd Victor: one of the Singers or Musitians in the Chorus, hop'd to gain an Honourable Reward by bringing him the first News of his Victory: To that end he Sail'd to Corinth, and thence took Shipping for Sicily, and with a fair Wind arriv'd at Syracuse, and presently gives the Tyrant an account of his Victory: Upon which


Page 440

he was so Transported with Joy, that he bountifully Rewarded the Man, and that he might give thanks to the Gods by costly Sacrifices, for such an happy piece of News, he made splendid Entertainments, in Feasting and Drinking. But in this sumptuous Reception of his Friends, drinking to Excess, and overcharging Nature, he fell into a most violent Distemper, which kill'd him. He had been formerly forewarn'd by an Oracle, That he should then die, when he should overcome those who were better than himself. This doubtful Prophecy he appli'd to the Carthaginians, looking upon them to be more powerful than he himself. And upon that account (tho' he was often Fighting with them) it was his Custom to wave the Victory, and own himself to be overcome. However he was not able to avoid his Desteny. For tho' he was but an ill Poet, yet by the Judgment of the Athenians, he carry'd away the Victory against those that far excell'd him in that Art: So that his Victory over them, and the time of his death, very well agreed to the sense of the Oracle. Dionysius the younger, as soon as he came to the Crown, call'd a Senate, and there courted the People, and desir'd them to continue the same good will and respect to him, that they had born to his Father. Afterwards having first Solemniz'd his Fathers Funeral with great Pomp and State at the King's Gates in the Castle, he order'd the Affairs of his Kingdom so as to set himself fast in the Throne.

At this time Polyzelus was Archon at Athens: and at Rome (through intestine Broils and Seditions) was nothing but an Anarchy. In Greece, Alexander Tyrant of Pherea bearing a grudge to them of Scotusa in Thessaly, call'd them to a Common Assembly, and when they appear'd, he encompass'd them with his Guard, and put 'em every one to the Sword, and threw their Carkasses into the Ditches over the Walls, and plundred the City.

At the same time Epaminondas the Theban with all his Forces, broke into Peloponnesus, with whom join'd the Achaians, and several other Confederates, and restor'd Dymon,Naupachus and Calydon to their ancient Liberties, and then made another Expedition into Thessaly; in which they freed Pelopidas out of the hands of Alexander the Tyrant of Pherea. The Phliasians were about the same time besieg'd by the Argives: But Chares sent from Athens in Aid of the Phliasians, rais'd the Siege, having Routed the Argives in two Battles, and so return'd to Athens.

At the end of this Year Cephisodorus was Created chief Governour of Athens, and Four Military Tribunes clothed with Consular Dignity, govern'd at Rome, viz. Lucius Furius, Paulus Manlius, Servitius Sulpitius, and Servius Cornelius. At that time Themesio the Prince of Eretria took Oropus, belonging to the Athenians; but lost it again on a sudden. For the Athenians coming upon him with far greater Forces than he was able to Cope with, he appli'd himself to the Thebans for Assistance, and deliver'd the City into their hands (as a pledge) which they never after would Restore.

While these things were Acting, they of Coos seated themselves in the City they now enjoy, and put it into that State and Grandeur it now has. For it was made very Populous, and a large Wall drawn round about it, with great Costs and Expence, and furnish'd with an excellent Harbour. From this time forward, it grew more and more both in its publick Revenues, and private Wealth and Riches of its Inhabitants, in so much as it vy'd with the chiefest and most famous Cities. 

During these Transactions, the King of Persia sent Ambassadours to perswade the Graecians to agree and lay aside their Animosities one against another. Upon which the Laconick and Baeotick War (as they call it) which from the time of the Battle at Leuctra had continu'd above Five Years, was now at length ended. About these times Flourish'd several famous Men, worthy for their Learning to be for ever remembred. As Isocrates the Orator, and his Schollars, Aristotle the Philosopher, and Anaximenes of Lampsacus, and especially Plato the Athenian, and the last of the Pythagorean Philosophers. Besides these, Xenophon the Historian, (now very old) for he makes mention of the Death of Epaminondas, which hapned shortly after this time. Aristippus, and Antisthenes, and Echines of Sphetus (one of the Schollars of Socrates) were living at this time.


Page 441

CHAP. IX.

New stirs in Greece. The Battle between the Eleans and Arcadians near Lassion. The Quarrel between the Pisate and them of Elis about the Olympick Games. A Fight at the Time and Place of the Games. The Thebans prepare a Fleet in Order to gain the Dominion at Sea. Rhodes, Chios, and Byzantium brought into the Thebans by Epaminondas. The Thebans make War upon Orchomenon: The Reason. Orchomenon raz'd. The Thessalians War with Alexander the Pheraeen. Pelopidas Kill'd; his Praises.

THIS Year Chion was chief Governour at Athens, and these Military Tribunes Executed the Consular Authority at Rome, viz. QuintusServius, Caius Veturius, Aulus Cornelius, Marcus Cornelius, and Marcus Fabius. In their time, while all Greece was at Peace, on a sudden new Stirs and Preparations for War began to break out, between some of the Cities. For the Exiles of Arcadia made an Excursion out of Elis, and Seiz'd upon the strong Castle of Triphilia, call'd Lassion. The Archadians and Eleans, had been quarrelling a long time about Triphilia: And upon several Turns of Fortune, first one, and then the other got the Possession; which being at this time in the hands of the Arcadians, the Eleans under the Shelter and Colour of the Arcadian Fugitives dispossessed the Arcadians. They, (Enrag'd at this Affront and Injury,) by their Ambassadors, first demanded the Redelivery of the Place, but their demand was slighted, thereupon they procur'd the Athenians to joyn with them in the War, and Besieg'd Lassion. But the Eleans came presently into the Assistance of the Exiles. Upon which a Battle was Fought near Lassion: In which the Eleans were Routed, being overpowr'd by number, and lost above two hundred Men. The Seeds of War being now Sown, the Controversie between the Eleans and the Arcadians grew hotter every Day: For the Arcadians pufft up with the late Victory, presently March'd their Army into the Country of Elis, and took the Cities Marganus, Cronion, Cyparissia, and Coryphasion.

In the mean time Ptolomaeus Alorites, in Macedonia was treacherously Murther'd by his Brother Perdiccas after he had Reign'd three Years; Perdiccas succeeded him, and enjoy'd the Kingdom five Years.

At this time Timocrates was Archon at Athens, and three Military Tribunes invested with Consular Authority rul'd at Rome, viz. Titus Quintius, Servilius Cornelius, and Servius Sulpitius. The Hundred and fourth Olympiad was now Celebrated by the Pisate and the Arcadians, where Phocides the Athenian was Victor.

About this time it happn'd that the Pisaeans (upon the account of some old Fables and Stories they had amongst them) to regain the ancient Honour and Dignity of their Country, challeng'd it as their Right to Convene and Manage the Olympick Games. Judging it therefore now a fit time to dispute this matter, they took in the Arcadians (the Enemies of the Eleans) as their Confederates in the War: With whose Aid and Assistance they March'd against the Eleans, who had then appointed the Games. Whereupon the Eleans with all their Forces made out against them, upon which there was a very sharp Encounter. The Grecians who were then come together to this Solemnity, stood as Spectators with Crowns upon their Heads (out of reach of all danger) and at every brave Action of either Party gave up great shouts. The Pisaeans at length being Conquerors manag'd the Sports; but the Eleans never accounted this Olympiad in their Annals, because they lookt upon it to be acted by Force, and against Law.

During these Transactions of Affairs, Epaminondas the Theban (who was in great Esteem among the People) made a Speech to the Citizens, in which he stirr'd them up to gain the Dominion of the Sea. In this Oration (which he had premeditated long before) he shew'd them that the thing was easily done, as it was advantageous and profitable for the Commonwealth, and amongst other things he likewise told them, that being Sovereigns at Land, they might be easily Masters at Sea. For altho' the Athenions in the War against Xerxes had a Navy of Two hundred Sail well Equipp'd and Furnish'd; yet they were under the Command of the Lacedemonians, who had but Ten. When he had spoken what he had to say sutable to the occasion, he brought the Thebans to a Compliance.

It was therefore forthwith Decreed by the People that a Hundred Gallies, and as many Docks should be built, and that application should be made to the Rhodians, Chians,


Page 442

and Bizantians for their Assistance to forward the Work. Epaminondas himself being sent away with some Forces to the aforemention'd Cities, so terrifi'd Lachetes the Athenian General (who was sent with a Strong and well Furnish'd Fleet to obstruct the Designs of the Thebans) that he forc'd him to Sail back, and reduc'd those Cities to the Obedience of Thebes: And no doubt but if this Man had liv'd some time longer, he had gain'd for the Thebans the Sovereign Command both at Sea and Land. But not long after being kill'd at the Battle at Mantenea (where he obtain'd a famous Victory for his Country by his own fall) all the prosperity of the Thebans presently dy'd (as it were) with him. But we shall Treat of these things more particularly and distinctly shortly hereafter.

About the same time likewise, the Thebans resolv'd to Invade Orchomenon, for the Reasons following. Some of the Theban Fugitives had a purpose to change the Government of Thebes into an Aristocracy, and to that purpose, join'd in Confederacy with Three hundred Horsemen of Orchomenon. These Horses were us'd to Rendezvouz at a certain Day appointed and ordered by the Thebans, and therefore they contriv'd that at that very Day (when ever it should be) they would fall upon the City. And being there were many others that were engag'd to be assisting in effecting this Design, they took a fit opportunity at length to meet together. Then some of the chief Conspirators (who began to repent of the Treason) discovered all to the Beotians, and by betraying their fellows, sav'd their own Lives: Upon this all the Horsemen by Command of the Magistrates were seiz'd, and being afterwards brought before the Senate, they were all Judg'd to be put to Death, and that the Inhabitants of Orchomenon should be sold for Slaves, and their City raz'd to the Ground. The Thebans had born an old grudge towards them of Orchomenon for many Generations, because that in the times of the Heroes, they forc'd them to pay Tribute, till Hercules set them free. Having therefore now got an opportunity, and a good colour (as they conceiv'd) to revenge themselves, they Marcht with their Forces against Orchomenon. And presently making themselves Masters of the City, they put all the Men to the Sword, and sold the Women and Children for Slaves.

At this same time, the Thessalians made War upon Alexander the Prince of Pherea, but being often beaten, and having lost many Men, they solicited the Thebans to send Aid to them, under the Command of Pelopidas. For they knew he was a brave spirited Man, and an excellent Commander, and an inveterate Enemy of Alexander, upon the account of his late Imprisonment. The Beotians hereupon call'd a general Council, and gave Audience to the Ambassadors; and having heard their Message, they readily comply'd in all things to their request, and forthwith order'd Pelopidas to their assistance, with Seven thousand Men, who presently Obey'd, and just as he was Marching out with the Army, the Sun was Ecclips'd; which prodigie perplex'd many: for there were some of the Soothsayers who declar'd, that by this Marching out of the Army, the Sun of the City should be Ecclips'd, meaning nothing else but the death of Pelopidas. However Pelopidas (nothing mov'd with what was said, but led on by his inevitable destiny) March'd forward. When he came into Thessaly, he found that Alexander with above Twenty thousand Men had possess'd himself of the higer Grounds: Upon this he Encamp'd in the Face of the Enemy, and being afterwards join'd with the Thessalians, he Fought the Phereans. But Alexander prevailing by the advantage of the Ground, Pelopidas (desiring to put an end to the dispute by his own personal Valour) Charges up to Alexander himself, who with those select Bands that were about him, valiantly stood his Ground; upon which the Battle grew very hot, in which Pelopidas acting the part both of a good Soldier and skilful Commander, cover'd the Place with the Bodies of his Enemies. At length he put the Enemy to flight, and gain'd the Victory, but he himself (through many Wounds he had receiv'd) fell down Dead, and so Heroically ended his Days. And now Alexander being Conquer'd in another Battle, and thereby having all his Forces broken in pieces, he was forc'd upon Terms of Peace to restore to the Thessalians all the Towns he had before taken: And to deliver Magnetes and Phithiodis Cities of Achaia, to the Beotians and be their Confederates, and for the future, to be content only with Pherea. However, tho' the Thebans gain'd a glorious Victory, yet they declar'd every where, that they were Conquer'd, because of the death of Pelopidas. For they lookt upon the Victory not to Compensate the loss of so brave a Man. For he had often done many great and worthy Services for the advantage of his Country, and much enlarg'd the Bounds and Territories of the Theban Commonwealth: As in freeing the City by the Exiles when they recover'd the Citadel of Cadmea, all generally ascrib'd that noble Action to Pelopidas; which was the chief cause of all the advantages, and happy success


Page 443

that hapned to the Thebans afterwards. Then at the Fight of Tegea, Pelopidas was the only Man of the Boeotarchs that overcame the Lacedemonians, the most potent People of all the Grecians. Which was the first time the Thebans erected a Trophy (for the greatness of the Victory) over the Lacedemonians. Afterwards at the Battle at Leuctra, he was Colonel of the sacred Band, and was the first that broke in upon the Lacedemonians, and so became the immediate Author and Instrument of the Victory. Besides in the Expeditions against the Lacedemonians (being General of Seventy thousand Men) he erected a Trophy for his Victory over them in the very Face of Sparta, who never knew before what it meant to be Besieg'd. Being sent Ambassador to the King of Persia to Negotiate the affair of the common Pacification he gain'd in that Treaty, Messena for his own Country: Which the Thebans rebuilt after it had lain desolate Three hundred Years. And now at last (in the Battle against Alexander) notwithstanding he far exceeded him in the number of his Forces) he not only obtain'd a glorious Victory, but became famous for his extraordinary Valour, tho' with the loss of his Life. And during these Wars he was in that reputation among the People, that from the return of the Exiles, to the time of his Death he was always one of the Boeotarchs: Never none before being ever thought worthy of so great an honour. In as much therefore as Pelopidas was thus highly Esteem'd, and gain'd the reputation of all, for his Courage and Conduct, its fit he should have his due Commendation from us likewise, in this our History.

About the same time Clearchus of the City of Heraclea aspir'd to the Sovereignty of Pontus: and prevailing in his Enterprize, made it his whole business to imitate Dionysius the Tyrant, and govern'd the Heracleans in great Splendor, for the space of Twelve Years.

During these Affairs, Timotheus the Athenian General, having with him both Sea and Land Forces, Besieg'd Torone, and Potidea, and took them by Storm, and Rais'd the Siege of Cyzicum.

CHAP. X.

The War between the Tegeans and Mantineans. The Beotians side with the Tegeans. Epaminondas made General. The Battle of Mantinea, where Epaminondas was kill'd; but the Lacedemonians routed. The commendation of Epaminondas.

AT the end of the Yea Chariclides was created Lord Chancelor of Athens; and Lucius Aemilius Mamercus, and Lucius Sextius Lateranus, Roman Consuls. At which time the Arcadians and Piseans (by compact joining together) celebrated the Olympian Games at Olympia, and possess'd themselves both of the Temple, and all the Riches that were there. And because the Mantineans carry'd away and converted to prophane uses many of the Dedicated things, these Sacrilegious Persons made it their business to promote and carry on the War against the Eleans, lest if Peace were made they should be call'd to account for their ill gotten Goods. And therefore when the rest of the Arcadians would have compromiz'd Matters, they stirr'd up Sedition against their own Countrymen. Being therefore divided into Two Factions, one headed by the Tegeans, the other by the Mantineans, the Feud grew to that height, that at last they came to decide the Controversie by force of Arms; and they of Tegea sent an Ambassador to the Beotians to desire their assistance: Whereupon the Beotians, without delay, made Epaminondas General, and sent him with a strong Army to the aid of the Tegeans. But the Mantineans (being terrify'd with the Beotian Army, and the Great Name of Epaminondas) sent their Ambassadors to the Capital Enemies of the Beotians, (the Athenians and Lacedemonians) to sollicite them to join with the Mantineans in the War. Great Forces therefore being rais'd on both sides, many great Battles were fought in Peloponnesus; And the Lacedemonians (as soon as they could) broke into Arcadia, lying next to them. About the same time Epaminondas was marching forward with his Army, and being come near to Mantinea, he heard that the Lacedemonians with all their Forces were wasting and spoiling the Territories of Tegea; Conceiving therefore that Sparta was left naked, he undertook a weighty Affair, but Fortune favour'd not his Enterprize. For he march'd with his Army in the night against Sparta: But Agis King of Lacedemon (suspecting the Craft


Page 444

and Subtilty of Epaminondas) prudently conjectur'd what possibly might be design'd therefore to prevent Epaminondas, he dispatch'd away some Cretian Couriers to Sparta, to acquaint them that the Boectians were just then upon their march in order to surprize the City; and that he himself would make all the hast possibly he could to relieve them: and therefore charg'd them to look to the Place, and not in the least to be afraid, for he would be presently with 'em. The Cretians observ'd their Orders with all Expedition by which the Lacedemonians (strangely, and on a suddain) prevented the ruine of their Country. For if the stratagem had not been discover'd, Epaminondas had certainly surprizd Sparta. So that the Policy and contrivance of both the Generals justly challenge their due praise; yet the prudent Care of a skilful Commander must here especially be attributed to the Lacedemonian. Epaminondas having now march'd all the Night long, at break of day came up to Sparta But Agesilaus who was left to guard the City, (having had intelligence but a little before,) did what he could to put the City into a posture of Defence. To this end he commanded the Boys that were of any considerable bigness, and the Old Men to the roofs of the Houses, that they might be in a capacity to drive back the Enemy from thence: Then placing all the strong and lusty Men in the several difficult Passes that led into the City, and blocking up all other places, where possibly an entrance might be made, he waited for the coming of the Enemy.

Epaminondas having divided his Army into Three parts, made an Assault round the Town at one and the same time, but when he discern'd in what order the Spartans were plac'd to oppose him, he presently understood that his Design was discover'd: However, tho' he was much obstructed by the strait and narrow Passages, and forc'd to fight in small Parties with great Bodies of Men at once, and many were kill'd on both sides, yet he would not draw off till the Lacedemonian Army came up near unto Sparta. The Spartans therefore being now enforc'd with so great a strength, and Night coming on, he left off the Assault. 

Then he was inform'd by some Prisoners, that the Mantineans with all the Power of the City were hastning towards him to the assistance of the Lacedemonians: Upon which he march'd away and encamp'd not far from the City. But presently commanding his Soldiers to eat their Suppers, and leaving there a Body of Horse, whom he commanded to kindle Fires all the Night, he march'd away with the rest of the Army, with a design on a sudden to cut off all them that were left in Mantinea. The next day (having march'd a long way) he unexpectedly Assaulted them of Mattinea, but fail'd in his Design; and tho' he had (as a diligent Commander) provided all things that were necessary yet Fortune now oppos'd him, and so he lost the Prize. For as soon as he came near the City, that was then naked, and without any Defence, Six thousand Athenian Auxiliaries entred into Mantinea at the other end of the Town under the Command of Hegelocus, a person of good Esteem among the Citizens; who having put a sufficient Garison into the City, with the rest stood in Battalia ready to engage. And presently appear'd the Armies, both of the Lacedemonians and the Mantineans. And now every one prepar'd to put all to the hazard of a Battle, and therefore sent for their Allies out of all parts; The Aeleans, Lacedemonians, Athenians, and some others sided with the Mantineans: their Forces amounted to above Twenty thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse. The most considerable persons of Arcadia for Riches and Valour, together with the Acheans, Boeotians, Argives, and some of the Peloponnesians, and other Confederates join'd with the Tegeans, in the whole, to the number of above Thirty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse.

And now the Armies on both sides took the Field in order to decide the Matter; and drew up in Battalia: and the Sooth-sayers from the view of the Sacrifices (offer'd here and there) Declar'd Victory to their several Parties. The Mantineans and the rest of the Arcadians (because the War was in their own Country) were in the Right Wing, supported by the Lacedemonians, drawn up next to them. Next to the Lacedemonians were plac'd the Aeleans and Achoeans, and some others of the weaker part of the Army compleated that Wing. The Left Wing consisted of the Athenians: On the other side the Thebans plac'd themselves in the Left Wing, opposite to the Arcadians: And the Argives held the Right. The rest of the Army Aeubeans, Locrians, Sicyons, Messineans, Maleans and Aeneans, and the other Confederates made up the main Battle. The Horse on each side were plac'd on both Flanks. The Armies being thus drawn up, while they stood facing one another for some time, the Trumpets at length sounded a Charge, and the Armies set up so great a shout, as if both sides were assur'd of the Victory. The Horse from the Wings first Charg'd one another, with the greatest Fury imaginable: The Athenian Horse Charged the Thebans, but were worsted, not so much by the Valour and


Page 477

BOOK XVI.

IT's the Duty of all Writers of History, whether they Treat of the Actions of Kings,or of particular Cities, to relate the Whole from the Beginning to the Conclusion. For we conceive that hereby the History is both better remembred, and more clearly Understood. For imperfect Relations, without Knowledge of the Issue of what is begun, gives an unpleasant Check to the Diligent Reader's eager Expectation. But where the Matter is drawn down by a continu'd Thred to the end of the Narration; such Writings make the History compleat in all its Parts, but more especially, if the Nature of things done, do lead the Writer, as it were, by the Hand: This Course is by no means to be neglected.

Since therefore we are now come to the Affairs of Philip, Son of Amyntas, we according to the former Rule shall endeavour to comprehend in this Book all the Actions of this King. For he reign'd as King of Macedon Two and Twenty Years, who making use at the first but of small means, at length advanc'd his Kingdom to be the Greatest in Europe; and made Macedon (which at the time of his coming to the Crown was under the servile Yoke of the Illyrians) Mistress of many potent Cities and Countries. And through his Valour the Grecian Cities voluntarily submitted themselves to him, and made him General of all Greece. And having subduedthose that Robb'd and Spoil'd the Temple at Delphos, coming in aid of the God there, he was made a Member of the Senate of the Amphictyons; and for a Reward of his Zeal to the Gods, the Right of Voting in theSenate which belonged to the Phocians (whom he had overcome) was allotted to him.

After he had overcome the Illyrians, Paeones, Thracians, Scythians, and the Countries adjoyning to them, his Thoughts were wholly imploy'd how to destroy the Persian Monarchy: But after he had set free all the Grecian Cities; and was promised Forces to be raised for the Expedition into Asia, in the midst of all his preparations he was prevented by Death: But he left those, and so many more Forces behind him, that his Son, Alexander, had no occasion to make use of the Assistance of his Confederates in the Overturning of the Persian Empire. And all those things he did not so much by the Favour of Fortune, as by the Greatness of his own Valour. For this King excell'd most in the Art of a General, Stoutness of Spirit, and Clearness of Judgment and Apprehension. But that we may not in a Preface set forth his Actions before hand, we shall proceed to the orderly Course of the History, making first some short Remarks of the Times that went before.

CHAP. I.

Philip, an Hostage at Thebes, makes his Escape; Beats the Athenians; After makes Peace with them: Subdues the Paeones, and routs the Illyrians and makes Peace with them.

WHEN Callimedes was Archon at Athens, in the Hundred and Fifth Olympiad (in which Porus the Cyrenian was Victor) Cneius Genucius, and Lucius Aemilius, Roman Consuls, Philip the Son of Amyntas, and Father of Alexander, (who conquer'd the Persians) came to the Crown in the manner following.

Amyntas being brought under by the Illyrians, was forced to pay Tribute to the Conquerors; who having taken his youngest Son Philip as an Hostage, deliver'd him to be kept by the Thebans; who committed the young Youth to the Care of the Father of Epaminondas, with order to look to his Charge with all Diligence, and honourably to Educate and Instruct him.


Page 478

A Pythagorean Philosopher was at that time Tutor to Epaminondas, with whom Philip being brought up, he improv'd more than ordinary in the Pythagorean Philosophy. And both these Scholars imploying the utmost of their Parts and Diligence in the Prosecution of their Studies, both by that means became Famous for their virtuous Qualifications. Epaminondas (it's known to all) having run through many Hazards and Difficulties, beyond all expectation gain'd the Sovereignty of all Greece for his Country: And Philip having the same Advantages, shew'd himself nothing inferior to Epaminondas in glorious Atchievements: For after the Death of Amyntas, his Eldest Son Alexander succeeded him in the Kingdom; but Ptolemy Alorites murder'd him and Usurp'd the Government; and he himself was serv'd with the same Sauce by Perdiccas; who being afterwards overcome in a great Battel by the Illyrians, and kill'd in the very time when there was most need of a King, Philip, the Brother, made his escape and took Possession of the Kingdom now in a very shatter'd Condition: For there were above Four Thousand Macedonians kill'd in the Fight, and those that surviv'd were in such Consternation and Fear of the Illyrians, that they had no heart left for the Prosecuting of the War. 

About the same time the Paeones, Neighbours to the Macedonians, (in contempt of them) wasted their Country; and the Illyrians rais'd again great Forces, and design'd another Expedition against the Macedonians. And to aggravate the matter, one Pausanias, of the Royal Family, by the assistance of the King of Thrace, endeavour'd to Invade the Kingdom of Macedon, The Athenians likewise (Enemies to Philip) endeavour'd to restore Argaeus to the Kingdom of his Ancestors, and to this purpose had sent away their General Mantias, with Three Thousand well-arm'd Men, and a most excellent well provided Navy. Hereupon the Macedonians, by reason of the late Defeat and the Storm that then threatned them, were in great Fear and Perplexity: However, notwithstanding all the Difficulties and Fear of those things that were at hand, Philip nothing discourag'd with those dreadful Clouds of Mischief that seem'd to hang over his Head, by his Speeches in the daily Assemblies, retain'd the Macedonians in their Duty; and by his Eloquence (wherein he excell'd) stirring them up to be courageous, reviv'd their drooping Spirits. Then setting upon Reforming the Military Discipline, he compleatly arm'd his Men and Train'd them every Day, teaching them how to handle their Arms, and other Postures of War. He likewise instituted the new way of Drawing up into a close Body, imitating the Heroes at Troy in locking their Shields one within another; so that he was the first that found out the Macedonian Phalange.

He was very Courteous and Gaining in his Converse, and wan the Peoples Hearts both by his Bounty at present, and his generous Promises of future Rewards; very Politickly likewise (as it were by so many Engines) defending himself against the many and various Mischiefs that were pressing upon him. For when he discern'd that the Athenians made it their great business to recover Amphipolis, and that Argaeus was endeavour'd to be restor'd to his Kingdom for that end, he left the City of his own accord, suffering them to govern themselves according to their own Laws.

He sent likewise an Ambassador to the Paeones, and some of them he corrupted with Bribes; others he ensnar'd with fair and winning Promises, and for the Present made Peace with them, He prevented likewise Pausanias from being restor'd, by bribing the King that was ready to assist him for that purpose.

In the mean time Manthias the Athenian Admiral being arriv'd at Methone, there lay; but sent Aegaeus before with a Body of Mercenaries to Aegae. Coming to the City, he endeavour'd to perswade the Aegaeans to allow of his Return, and to appear the first for his Restauration to the Kingdom; but none consenting, he went back to Methone.

Presently after, Philip advancing with a well appointed Army, set upon them, and cut off many of the Mercenaries; the rest, who had fled to a Hill near at hand (having first delivered up to him the Fugitives) he dismiss'd by Agreement.

Philip being now Conqueror in this first Battel, greatly encourag'd the Macedonians, and made them hearty and eager to undergo further Toils and Difficulties.

Whilst these things were acting, the Thracians planted a Colony at Crenides, as it was heretofore call'd, which the King afterwards call'd Philippi, after his own Name, and fill'd it with Inhabitants. From this Time Theopompus of Chi

•s

 begins his History of Philip, and continues it in Fifty eight Books, of which Five are controverted.

Afterwards Eucharist us was Archon of Athens, and Quintus Servilius and Lucius Genucius were Consuls at Rome, when Philip sent Ambassadors to Athens with Proposals of Peace, and prevail'd with the People upon the account that he was content to quit all his Right in Amphipolis.


Page 479

Being therefore thus freed from the War with the Athenians, and hearing that Agis King of the Paeones was dead, he judg'd that a fair Opportunity was offer'd him to invade the Paeones: And to that end he enter'd their Country with a considerable Army, overcame them in Battel, and forc'd them to stoop to the Macedonian Yoke.

But still the Illyrians remain'd an Eye-sore to him, whom his Heart and all his Thoughts were continually at work to bring under. To that end he call'd a General Council, and by a Speech (fitted for the Occasion) having spirited the Soldiers to the War, he led an Army into the Illyrians Country of no less than Ten thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse.

Bardylis King of the Illyrians hearing of his coming, first sent Ambassadors to Philip to renew the League between them upon these Terms, That both of them should keep those Towns that they then had. To which Philip answer'd, That he was very desirous of Peace; but resolv'd not to admit of it, before that the Illyrians had quitted all the Towns belonging to the Kingdom of Macedon.

The Ambassadors therefore being return'd without effecting any thing, Bardylis (confiding in the Valour of his Soldiers, and encourag'd by his former Victories) march'd forth against his Enemies with a strong Army, having with him Ten thousand choice Foot, and Five hundred Horse.

When the Armies drew near one to another, they suddenly set up a great Shout, and so fell to it. Philip being in the Right Wing with a strong Body of Macedonians, commanded his Horse to wheel about, to the end to charge the Enemy in the Flank; and he himself charged the Front; upon which there was an hot Engagement.

On the other side, the Illyrians drew up in a foursquare Body, and valiantly join'd Battel.

The Valour of the Armies on both sides was such, that the issue of the Battel was doubtful a long time; many fell, but many more were wounded; and the Advantage was now here, and then there, according as the Valour and Resolution of the Combatants gave Vigour and Life to the Business.

At length, when the Horse charg'd both upon the Flank and the Rear, and Philip with his stoutest Soldiers fought like a Hero in the Front, the whole Body of the Illyrians were routed, and forc'd to fly outright, whom the Macedonians pursu'd a long way. After many were kill'd in the pursuit, Philip at length gave the Signal to his Men to retire, and erected a Trophy, and bury'd the Dead.

Then the Illyrians sent another Embassie, and procur'd a Peace, having first quitted all the Cities belonging to Macedon. There were slain of the Illyrians in this Battel above Seven thousand Men. Having thus given an account of things done in Macedonia and Illyrium, we shall now relate the Affairs of other Nations.

CHAP. II.

The Actions of Dionysius the Tounger in Sicily, and other Parts. Dion's Flight to Corinth, and his Return to Sicily. Andromachus Peoples Tauromenum. The Civil Wars in Euboea. The Social War between the Athenians and other Nations. Philip takes Amphipolis and other Cities. His Policy to gain the Olynthians and other Places in Greece.

IN Sicily, Dionysius the Younger, Tyrant of Syracuse, who came some time before to the Kingdom (being of an unactive Spirit, and much inferiour to his Father) under the Veil of a peaceful and gentle Disposition, endeavour'd to cover his Sloth and Cowardize; and therefore tho' the War with the Carthaginians descended upon him as well as the Kingdom, yet he made Peace with them.

In a careless manner likewise he made War for some time upon the Lucanians; and tho' he had the Advantage in some of the last Fights, yet he was very fond of the Terms and Conditions offer'd for the putting an end to the War.

He built two Cities in Apulia, the better to secure the Passage of his Shipping through the Ionian Sea: For the Barbarians dwelling on the Sea-Coasts, had a great number of Pirates roving up-and-down, whereby the Adriatick Sea was greatly infested and made troublesome to the Merchants.

Afterwards giving himself up to his Ease, he wholly neglected all Warlike Exercises; and tho' he was Lord of the Greatest Kingdom in Europe, and had a Dominion bound


Page 480

fast with a Diamond (as his Father was us'd to boast) yet through his effeminate Sloth and Idleness, he lost it on a sudden. How it was taken from him, and how he carry'd himself in every Particular, we shall endeavour now to declare.

At this time Cephisodorus was Lord Chancellor at Athens, and Caius Licinius and Caius Sulpitius were Consuls at Rome, when Dion the Brother of Hipparinus, one of the most Noble Persons among the Syracusians, fled out of Sicily; and afterwards by the Braveness of his Spirit, and excellent Accomplishments, restor'd not only the Syracusians, but other Sicilians to their ancient Liberties: Which was occasion'd thus:

Dionysius the Elder had Issue by both his Wives: By the second Wife, the Daughter of Hipparians (who was in great Esteem among the Syracusians) he had two Sons, Hipparinus and Narsaeus. Dion was the Brother of this second Wife; a Man well skill'd in Philosophy, and the most expert Soldier in his Time of all the Syracusians. The Nobleness of his Birth and Greatness of his Spirit, made him suspected by the Tyrant, because upon that account he seem'd to be a fit Instrument to overturn the Tyranny. Dionysius therefore fearing him, determin'd to send him further off from him, and so to put him to death. Dion foreseeing what was design'd, at first discover'd it to some of his Friends: Afterwards he fled out of Sicily to Peloponnesus, taking along with him Megacles his Brother, and Cariclides the General of the Army under the Tyrant. When he arriv'd at Corinth, he solicited the Corinthians to assist him in the Recovery of the Syracusians Liberty: And presently got together a Band of Mercenaries, and employ'd himself in procuring of Arms: Upon which many Voluntiers coming in to him with all sorts of Arms, he muster'd a considerable Force of Mercenary Soldiers. Then having hind two Ships, he put his Men and Arms on board; and with these only pass'd over from Zacynthus (near adjoining to Cephalenia) to Sicily; and commanded Chariclides to follow him presently after to Syracuse, with some few Gallies, and other Ships of Burden.

While these things were acting, Andromachus of Tauromenum, the Father of Timoeus the Historian, a Man eminent both for his Riches and Wisdom, brought together from all Parts all the Exiles of Naxus (which Dionysius had raz'd) and gave them the Hill call'd Taurus, lying above Naxus. And because he and his Family had continu'd there a long time, he call'd it Tauromenium, from their Residence in Taurus. The Inhabitants afterwards grew very rich, and the City became famous by its prosperous Increases in worldly Blessings. But in our Age the Tauromenians were remov'd out of their Country by Caesar, and the City receiv'd a Roman Colony.

In the mean time, the Inhabitants of Euboea fell a quarrelling one with another, and one Party sought to the Boeotians for Aid, and the other to the Athenians; and so a War broke out throughout all Euboea. But tho' there were many light Skirmishes amongst them, sometimes the Thebans prevailing and at other times the Athenians; yet they never fought any great Battel.

At length the Island being wasted by this Civil War, and many Men destroy'd all over the Land, with much ado (being made more wise by their own Slaughters) they came to an Agreement, and so concluded a Peace: And the Boeotians returning home, laid down their Arms.

The Athenians now fell into a War call'd The Social War (which continu'd three Years) upon the account of the Defection of the Chians, Rhodians, them of Coos, and the Byzantines: To which War Chares and Chabrias were sent with an Army, as Generals: Making against Chius, they found the Chians assisted by the Byzantines, Rhodians, Choians, and Mausolus the petty King of Cana. These Generals dividing their Forces, besieg'd the City both by Sea and Land. Chares commanded the Land-Forces, and assaulted the Walls, and fought with them of the Garrison in the open Field, who made Sallies upon him. But Chabrias was engag'd in a sharp Fight at Sea in the very Harbour; and his Ship being pierc'd through with the Beaks of the Enemy's, he was greatly distress'd: And those who were in the other Ships, thought fit to comply with the Time, and so fairly ran away. But the Admiral chusing rather to die gloriously, than give up all dishonourably, in defending of his Ship receiv'd a Wound, which put an end to his Life.

About the same time, Philip King of Macedon, after his Victory over the Illyrians in that great Battel, having subdu'd all them that dwelt as far as to the Marishes of Lychnitides, and made with them an Honourable Peace, return'd into Macedonia. And having thus by his Valour rais'd up and supported the tottering State and Condition of the Macedonians, his Name became great and famous among them. Afterwards being provok'd by the many Injuries of them of Amphipolis, he march'd against them with a great Army, and applying his Engines of Battery to the Walls, made fierce and continual Assaults,


Page 481

and by the Battering Rams threw down part of the Wall, and entred into the City through the Ruins, with the slaughter of many that oppos'd him; and forthwith banish'd those that were his chiefest Enemies, and graciously spar'd all the rest.

This City, by reason of its commodious Situation in Thrace, and Neighbourhood to other Places, was of great advantage to Philip: For he presently after took Pydna; but made a League with the Olynthians, and promis'd to give up to them Potidaea, which they had a long time before much coveted. For in regard the City of the Olynthians was both Rich, Potent, and Populous, and upon that account was a Place of great advantage in time of War, therefore those that were ambitious to enlarge their Dominion, strove always to gain it: So that both the Athenians and Philip earnestly contended which of them should prevail to have them for their Confederates. But however, Philip having taken Potidaea, drew out the Athenian Garrison, and us'd them with great Civility, and suffer'd them to return to Athens: For he bore a great Respect to the People of Athens, because that City was eminent and famous for its Power and Grandeur.

He deliver'd up likewise Pydna (which he had subdu'd) to the Olynthians, and gave them all the Grounds and Territories belonging to it. Thence he march'd to Crenidas, which he enlarg'd, and made more populous, and call'd it after his own Name Philippi. Besides, he so improv'd the Gold-Mines that were in those Parts (which before were but inconsiderable and obscure) that by building of Work-houses he advanc'd them to bring in a yearly Revenue of above a Thousand Talents. So that heaping up abundance of Riches, in a short time, by the confluence of his Wealth, he advanced the Kingdom of Macedonia to a higher Degree of Majesty and Glory, than ever it was before: For he coin'd Pieces of Gold (call'd of him Philippicks) and by the help thereof, rais'd a great Army of Mercenaries, and brib'd many of the Grecians to betray their Country. Of all which, a particular Account shall be given hereafter, in the Course of the History. And now we shall bend our Discourse to what follows.

CHAP. III.

Dion's March and Entry into Syracuse. Dionysius comes to the Island, part of Syracuse: Assaults the Wall erected from Sea to Sea: Is beaten by Dion. Alexander of Phaerea murdered by his Wife and his Two Brothers. Philip relieves the Thessalians from the two Brothers.

A Gathocles was Archon at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Caius Publius, or Poetelius, were Consuls at Rome, when Dion the Son of Hipparinus landed in Sicily, to pull down the Tyranny of Dionysius. This Dion to admiration overturn'd the greatest Dominion in Europe, with the most inconsiderable Force that ever any did before him: For who would ever believe, that a Man who landed only with Two Ships of Burden, should overcome a King who was furnish'd with Four hundred Gallies; had an Army of an Hundred thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse; and was provided with Arms, Money, and Provision, suitable and sufficient to supply so many and great Forces as we have related? And who (over and besides all that we have said) was possess'd of the Greatest of all the Greek Cities; so many Ports and Arsenals, Castles so strongly fortify'd and unexpugnable, and such a number of potent Auxiliaries? But that which much forwarded the Successes of Dion, was his great Spirit and valorous Resolution, and the Good will and Kindness the People, whom he came to set free, bare towards him. And that which was more than all these, the Sloth and Esseminateness of the Tyrant, and the Hatred of his Subjects. All these things concentring in one Moment of Time, they produc'd incredible Effects, not to have been imagin'd: But to leave off Prefacing, we shall now come to relate Affairs more particularly.

Dion therefore loosing from Zazynthus, near to Cephalenia, arriv'd at Minoa (as it's call'd) in the Territory of Agrigentum. This City was built by Minos, formerly King of Crete, at such time as he was entertain'd by Cocales, King of the Sicanians, in his seeking after Daedalus.

At this time this City was in the hands of the Carthaginians, whose Governour Paralus, Dion's Friend, was chearfully receiv'd by him. Upon this Encouragement he unloaded his Ships of Five thousand Arms, and intrusted them with Paralus, desiring him to furnish him with Carriages to convey them to Syracuse: And he himself, with a thousand Mercenaries


Page 482

that had join'd him, makes to the same Place. In his March he prevail'd with the Agrigentines, Geloans, some of the Sicanians, and the Sicilians that inhabited the midland, the Camarineans likewise and Madinaeans, to join with him in freeing the Syracusians from their Slavery; and with these he march'd forward to give a Check to the Tyrant. In his March arm'd Men flocking in to him from all Parts, in a short time he had an Army of above Twenty thousand Men. And besides these, many Grecians and Messenians were sent for out of Italy, and all with great chearfulness came readily to him.

As soon as Dion came to the Borders of the Syracusian Territories, a Multitude of unarm'd Men, both out of the City and Country, met him: For Dionysius, out of Fear and Jealousie of the Syracusians, had disarm'd many.

He was by chance at that time at the Cities he had lately built in Adria with a great Army: In the mean time, the Officers that were left to guard the City, endeavour'd, in the first place, to retain the Citizens in their Duty, and to prevent their Defection; but when they saw they could not, by all the means they could use, bridle the impetuous Rage of the People, they got together all the foreign Soldiers, and all others within the City that favour'd the Tyrant's Party; and having compleated their Regiments, resolv'd to fall upon the Rebels. Then Dion distributed the 5000 Arms among the Syracusians that were unarm'd, and the rest he furnish'd as well as he could, as Arms came to his hands. He then call'd them all together to a Publick Assembly, and told them that he was come to restore the Sicilians to their Liberty; and to that end commanded such Officers to be created, as were fittest to be made use of for that purpose, and for the utter ruin of the Tyranny. Upon which, they all cry'd out with one unanimous Voice, That Dion and his Brother Megacles should be chosen Generals, and invested with absolute Power and Command. And so without delay, from the Assembly (having first dispos'd the Army in order of Battel) he march'd streight to the City; and none appearing in the open Field to oppose him, he confidently entred within the Walls, and through Achradina march'd on into the Forum, and there encamp'd, none daring to oppose him: For there were no fewer with Dion in his Army than Fifty thousand Men. And all these with Coronets upon their Heads entred into the City, led by Dion, Megacles, and Thirty Syracusians, who alone of all the Exiles in Peloponnesus were willing to run the same common Fate with their Fellow-Citizens.

At this time the whole City exchang'd Slavery for Liberty, and Fortune turn'd Sorrow, the Companion of Tyranny, into pompous Mirth and Jollity: And every House was full of Sacrifices and rejoicing; and Men burnt Incense every one upon his own Altar, thanking the Gods for what at present they enjoy'd, and putting up Prayers for an happy Issue of Affairs for the time to come. Then were heard many Shouts of Joy by the Women all over the City, for their sudden and unexpected Happiness, and the People rejoicing through all Corners of the Town. There was then neither Freeman, or Servant, or any Stranger, but all were earnest to see Dion, who for his Valour and Courage was cry'd up by all above what was fitting for a Man. Yet was it not altogether without some Reason, the Change was so great and so unexpected: For having liv'd Fifty Years as Slaves, through so long a time they had almost forgotten what Liberty meant, and now by the Valour of one Man they were on a sudden deliver'd from their Calamity.

About that time Dionysius staid at Caulonia in Italy; but sent to Philistus his Admiral, who was then with the Fleet about the Adriatick Coasts, and commanded him to sail away streight for Syracuse. And both of them speeding away to the same Place, Dionysius came to Syracuse the seventh Day after the return of Dion: And now thinking to put a Trick upon the Syracusians, he sent Ambassadors to treat of Peace, by whom he made use of many Devices, to persuade them that he would restore the Democracy, if he might but have some remarkable Honours conferr'd upon him by the Government. He desir'd therefore that Ambassadors might be sent to him, with whom calling together a Senate, he might put an end to the War.

The Syracusians having their Expectations rais'd to so high a Pitch, sent some of the Chief of their Citizens to him as Ambassadors, who had Guards presently put upon them, and Dionysius one day after another put off their Audience. In the mean time, perceiving that the Syracusians in hopes of Peace neglected their Guards, and were unprepar'd for an Encounter, he opens the Gates of the Acropolis in the Island, and suddenly Sallies out with a strong well appointed Party.

The Syracusians had there drawn a Wall from Sea to Sea, which the Dionysians terribly assaulted with a great Shout. And having entred it with the Slaughter of many of the Guard, they engag'd with the rest that came in to defend it. Dion therefore being thus


Page 483

deluded, (against the Articles of the Truce) comes down with a stout Party to oppose the Enemy, engages them, and makes a great Slaughter within a small Compass of Ground: For although the Fight was but a small distance from the Walls within the Town, yet a vast Number of Men were got together within this little spot; so that the stoutest Men on both sides were hotly Engag'd. The large Promises egg'd on the Dionysians on one side, and hopes of Liberty stirr'd up the Syracusians with a Resolution for Victory on the other: The Obstinacy therefore on both sides being equal, the Fight was a long time doubtful: Many fell, and as many were wounded, receiving all their Wounds upon their Breasts: For those that first led on courageously, died to preserve those that follow'd; those that were next, cover'd the Heads of them that were tir'd out with their Shields, and valiantly underwent all manner of Dangers, and endur'd the Utmost that could befall them, out of their Heat and Zeal to come off Conquerors. But Dion resolving to do something remarkable in this Engagement, and that by his own Valour he might gain the Day, broke violently into the thickest of his Enemies; and laying about him Herolike hew'd down multitudes, and wholly broke in pieces the Body of the Mercenaries, and was left alone standing in the midst of his Enemies Troops; and though he was pelted with abundance of Darts receiv'd upon his Buckler and Helmet, yet by the Strength and Goodness of his Arms he avoided the Danger; but receiving a Wound upon his Right Arm (through the Greatness and Extremity of the Pain) he began to faint, and was not far from falling into the Hands of the Enemy, but that the Syracusians (highly concern'd for the Preservation of their General) charg'd in a full Body upon the Dionysians, and rescuing Dion (now almost spent) put the Enemy to flight. And the Citizens prevailing at another part of the Wall, the Foreign Forces of the Tyrant were forced to fly into the Castle in the Island.

The Syracusians now having gain'd a glorious Victory, and confirm'd their Liberty by Conquest, set up a Trophy in defiance of the Tyrant, who being thus beaten, and now perceiving that all was lost, and an End put to his Sovereignty, fortify'd the Castle with a strong Garison; then being permitted to carry off the dead Bodies of those that were slain, to the number of Eight hundred, he buried them honourably, crowning them with Crowns of Gold, and richly clothing them in Purple Robes: By this extrarordinary Honour and Respect shewn to the Dead, he hop'd to draw in others more readily and Chearfully to venture their Lives for the support of his Principality. Then he bountifully rewarded them that had valiantly behav'd themselves in the late Engagement: And sent some to the Syracusians to Treat upon Terms of Peace. But Dion study'd excuses to delay the Business; And in the mean time finish'd the rest of the Wall without any interruption.

Thus having deceiv'd the Enemy with an Expectation of Peace, as they had done him before, he admitted the Ambassadors to Audience; Upon which they making proposals for Peace, Dion answer'd, that there was only one way left for the obtaining of a Peace; and that was for Dionysius to lay down his Government, and be contented only with some Honours to be conferr'd upon him. Which answer the Tyrant taking in disdain, as Haughty and Peremptory, he call'd a Council of War to consult with his Officers how he might be reveng'd of the Syracusians.

He abounded with all things except Corn, and was likewise Master at Sea: Therefore he infested the Country with Depredations, and by Foraging for some time got Provisions, but with great difficulty; at length he sent forth Transport Ships and Money to buy Corn and other Provisions: But the Syracusians tho' they had but few Gallies, yet at fit Times and Places they surpriz'd the Merchants, and a great Part of the Corn that they imported. And thus stood the Affairs of Syracuse at this time.

But in Greece, Alexander the Tyrant of Phaerea, was murder'd by his Wife, a Theban, and his two Brothers, Lycophrones and Tisiphonus. They were at first in great repute for killing of the Tyrant; but afterwards growing Ambitious, and having hir'd many Foreign Soldiers, they set up for themselves; and put to death many that were averse from their Designs; and having got together a strong Party, they kept the Soverejgnty by force of Arms.

But the Aleuadae (as they are call'd) Persons famous for the Nobleness of their Birth, conspir'd to oppose the Tyrants: But not being able to perfect so great a Business of themselves, they procur'd the Assistance of Philip King of Macedon, who return'd into Thessaly, and subdu'd the Tyrants, and restor'd the Cities to their Liberty, and carried himself with the greatest demonstrations of Kindness imaginable towards the Thessalians; so that ever after in all his Wars, not only he but his Son Alexander had them to be their constant Friends and Confederates.


Page 484

Among the Writers Demophilus, the Son of Ephorus the Historian (who continu'd the History of the Sacred War, left imperfect by his Father) began at the time when the Temple of Delphos was seiz'd and robb'd by Philomele the Phocian.

That War continu'd Eleven Years, till such time as the Sacrilegious Robbers of that Temple were miserably destroy'd.

Calisthenes likewise comprehended in ten Books the Affairs of the Graecians, bringing down his History in a continual Thred, to the Spoiling of the Temple by the Wickedness of Philomele: And Dyillus the Athenian, begins his History from this Sacrilege, and gives an Account of the Affairs of Greece and Sicily in those Times, in Seventeen Books.

CHAP. IV.

The first Rise of the Brutii in Italy. Dionysius his Admiral invades the Leontines. A Fight at Sea between Heraclides and Philistus, Admirals; one of Dionysius, the other of Dion. A Faction in Syracuse. Dion leaves the Syracusians. Their sad Condition. Reliev'd by Dion.

WHen Elpinus bore the Chief Magistracy of Athens, and Marcus Popilius Laenos, and Cneius Manlius Imperiosus were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome, the Hundred and Sixth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Porus of Malia was crown'd with Victory.

In Italy a promiscuous Multitude got together about Lucania * from several parts of the Country, most of them Servants that had run away from their Masters. At first they employed themselves in Robbing and Stealing, presently by a common Practice of skulking in the Fields, and making Incursions, they learnt the Use and Exercise of Martial Discipline and Feats of War. And prevailing in several Encounters against the Inhabitants, they increas'd to a vast Body and Number of Men.

In the first Place they took and plunder'd the City Trojana; then seizing upon Arponius and Thurium, and many other Cities, they formed themselves into a Common-wealth; and because they had many of them been Servants, they assum'd the Name of * Brutii. And thus the Nation of the* Brutii grew up in Italy.

At this time in Sicily, Philistus, Dionysius his General, Sailed to Rhegium, and transported above Five hundred Horse to Syracuse: And joining to these a greater Body of Horse, and Two Thousand Foot, he invaded the Leontines, who had fallen from Dionysius.

〈…〉

 Surprizing therefore the Walls secretly in the Night, he possess'd himself of part of the City; upon which follow'd an Hot Engagement, and by the help of the Syracusians, who came into the Aid of the Leontines, Philistus over-power'd with number, was forc'd out again.

In the mean time, Heraclides, Dion's Admiral, being left in Peloponnesus, and hinder'd by Storms and contrary Winds, (so that he could not arrive at Sicily time enough to be assistant to Dion in his return into his Countrey, and to be helpful in rescuing the Syracusians from Slavery) arriv'd at length with Twenty Sail of Galleys and Fifteen hundred Soldiers: Who being a Man of Noble Birth and of great Esteem, and judg'd worthy of so great a Trust, he was declar'd Admiral by the Syracusians, and he and Dion joining Head and Hand together, manag'd the War against Dionysius.

About the same time Philistus being made Lord High-Admiral by Dionysius, and having a Fleet of Sixty Sail well provided, entred the Lists in a Sea-fight with the Syracusians, who had a Navy not fewer in number than the Dionysians. Whereupon there was a sharp Fight, in which the Valour of Philistus at the first prevail'd: But at length being surrounded by the Enemy, the Syracustans from all parts making it their great business to take him alive, he to avoid the Disgrace and Miseries usually attending upon a State of Captivity, kill'd himself, after he had serv'd the Tyrant to the utmost of his Power, and had signaliz'd his Faithfulness above all the rest, and chiefest of his Friends. The Syracusians being Victors drew the mangled Body of Philistus through the whole City, and at length cast it out to the open Air without Burial.

Dionysius having now lost the most Valiant of all his Friends, and knowing not where to find another fit for the Place, sent Ambassadors to Dion, with an Offer at first of half the Kingdom; and presently after consented to give up the Whole. But when Dion answer'd, That it was but just he should surrender the Castle to the Syracusians, upon having only some Money, and some marks of Honour conferred upon him: The Tyrant hereupon said, He was ready to deliver up the Castle to the People, upon Condition that he and


Page 485

the Mercenaries, with all the Treasure they had got, might pass over to Italy. Dion's Advice was, That the Terms should be accepted: But the People being wrought over to a contrary Opinion by the importunate Orators, opposed Dion, for that they doubted not but to take the Castle by Storm. Dionysius hereupon committed the Custody of the Castle to the Stoutest of the Mercenaries; but he himself having brought aboard all his Treasures and Houshold-Goods, without being discover'd, set sail and Landed in Italy.

In the mean time the Syracusians were divided into Factions, while some were for Heraclides to have the Chief Command in the Army, and likewise the Sovereign Power, because he was judg'd a Person that was not ambitious of the Tyranny: But others were for intrusting the Chief Power and Authority in the Hands of Dion. Moreover, there were great Arrears due to the Soldiers that came out of Peloponnesus to the Assistance of the Syracusians: The City therefore being very low in Money, and the Soldiers defrauded of their Pay, they gather'd themselves into a Body, being Three thousand valiant Men, all old and expert Soldiers, far excelling the Syracusians in Courage: These mov'd Dion to go along with them, and leave the Syracusians, that they might be revenged of them in due time as a Common Enemy: Which he at first deny'd; but the present Exigency of Affairs requiring it, he at length took upon him the Command of the Foreigners, and joining himself to them, marched to the Leontines: But the Syracusians getting into a Body, pursu'd the Mercenaries, and engag'd them in their march, but were forc'd to retire with the loss of a great Number of their Fellow Citizens.

But Dion, thô he had obtain'd a great Victory, yet he was willing to forget the Injuries offer'd him by the Syracusians. For when they sent a Trumpet to him to have Liberty to carry off the Bodies of the Dead, he not only agreed to that, but freely discharg'd many Prisoners without Ransom. For many when they were ready to be knock'd on the Head in the Pursuit, declar'd they were Favourers of Dion's Party; and by that means escaped present Death.

Afterwards Dionysius sent Nypsius, a Citizen of Naples, a Valiant and expert Soldier, as his General, and with him Transport-Ships loaden with Corn and other Provision, who loosing from Locris, made straight for Syracuse.

In the mean time, the Garison-Soldiers of the Tyrant in the Castle, tho' they were driven then to the utmost Extremity for want of Bread, yet endur'd Famine for some time with great Resolution. But at length Nature stooping to Necessity, and having no prospect of Relief any other way, they call'd a Council of War in the Night, and resolv'd to surrender the Castle and themselves to the Syracusians the next Day. Night therefore being now ended, the Mercenaries sent Trumpets to the Townsmen to treat of Peace, which was no sooner done, but presently Nypsius at spring of day arrives with the Fleet, and anchor'd in the Port of Arethusa. Whereupon, on a Sudden their present Necessities were turn'd into large and plentiful Supplies of all sorts of Provision. Then the General having landed his Men, call'd a Council of War, and in an Oration, fitted for the present Occasion, so spoke to 'em, that he wrought 'em to a Resolution chearfully to undergo all future Hardships to the utmost Extremity. And thus the Acropolis ready to be deliver'd into the Hands of the Syracusians, was unexpectedly preserv'd. Hereupon, the Syracusians with all speed Mann'd out as many Gallies as they had at hand, and on a sudden fell upon the Enemy, while they were discharging their Vessels of their Corn and Provision: And although this Incursion was Sudden and Unexpected, and that the Garison in the Castle oppos'd the Enemies Galleys in a tumultuous and disorderly Manner, yet it came to a formal Sea-fight, in which the Syracusians got the Victory, and sunk some of the Enemy's Ships, took others, and forc'd the rest to the Shore. Being encourag'd with this Success, they offer'd to the Gods abundance of Sacrifices for the Victory: But giving themselves in the mean time to Quaffing and Drinking, and likewise Slighting and Despising them in the Castle as a beaten Enemy, they were careless in their Guards: So that Nypsius desirous to repair his late Loss by a new Engagement, orders a select Body of his Men in the Night, and on the sudden assaults the Wall lately built; and finding the Guard, through overmuch Confidence, and their Surfeiting and Drunkenness, fallen fast asleep, set Scaling-Ladders (made for the purpose) to the Walls: By which means some of the stoutest Fellows of the Garison mounted the Wall, kill'd the Centinels, and open'd the Gates. This sudden Assault being made upon the City, the Syracusian Commanders not yet recover'd of their drunken Fit, endeavour'd to help their Fellows as well as they could. But through their Wine not knowing how to use their Hands, some were knock'd on the Head, others took to their Heels. And now the City being taken, and almost all the Soldiers issu'd out of the Castle and entred within the Walls, and the Citizens by reason of this sudden and unexpected Surprize, and the Confusion that was amongst them,


Page 486

being even at their Wits end, all places were fill'd with Slaughter and Destruction: For the Tyrant's Soldiers being above Ten thousand Men, and in good Order and Discipline, none were able to withstand them, but through Fear and Confusion, and the Disorder of an ungovernable Multitude, through want of Officers, all went to wrack. When they came into the Forum, being now Conquerors, they presently rush'd into the Houses, and Ransack'd and Plunder'd all to a vast Value of Wealth, and made Captive a great Multitude of Women, Children and Servants. In the straight and narrow Passages and some other Places, the Syracusians made Resistance, and never ceas'd fighting; Multitudes being kill'd and as many wounded. And even all the Night long they kill'd one another as they fortun'd to meet in the Dark; and there was no place in the City but what was cover'd and strew'd with Dead Carcasses.

As soon as it was Day, the Light discover'd the Greatness of the Calamity and Misery. The Citizens having now no means left to be deliver'd, but by the Aid and Assistance of Dion, sent forth some Horsemen with all speed to the City of the Leontines, earnestly to intreat him, that he would not suffer the Country to be a Prey to the Enemy, but that he would pardon their former Miscarriages, and commiserate them in their present Distress, and relieve and raise up their Country from that low and despicable Condition wherein they then were.

Dion who was a Man of a brave Spirit, and had a Soul well principled with the Rudiments of Philosophy, and so was mild and easie to be Persuaded, remember'd not the former Injuries of the Citizens, but hir'd his Soldiers to march away to the Expedition, and with these he made a swift March to Syracuse, and came to the Hexapylae. There he drew up his Army, and march'd forward with all speed; and there met him above Ten thousand Women and Children, and old People, who fled out of the City; who all prostrated themselves at his Feet, and beseech'd him with Tears that he would rescue them from their wretched and miserable Condition. The Soldiers of the Castle having now accomplish'd what they aim'd at, after they had plunder'd all the Houses about the Forum, set them on fire, and then breaking into the fest made a Prey of all they found in them, at which very nick of time in the very height of their Rapines, Dion forcing into the City in many places at once, sets upon the Enemy now eager in plundering, and kill'd all he met as they were carrying away all sorts of Houshold-Goods bundled upon their Shoulders. For coming upon them on the sudden, as they were Scatter'd and Dispers'd here and there bringing away their Prey, they were all easily knock'd on the Head. After Four thousand and upwards were slain, some in the Houses and others in the Streets and High-ways, the rest fled into the Castle and clapt the Gates upon them, and so escap'd.

Dion, when he had perform'd this Exploit (the most Glorious of any ever before) quench'd the Fire, and so preserv'd the Houses that were all on a Flame, and firmly repair'd the Wall that fronted the Castle; and so by one and the same piece of Work, he both defended the City and strengthned the Garison within the Acropolis. Then he cleans'd the Town of the Dead Bodies, erected a Trophy, and Sacrific'd to the Gods for the Deliverance of his Country.

On the other hand, the People to testifie their Gratitude to Dion, call'd a General Assembly, and by an unanimous Vote made him chief Governor, with full and absolute Power, and conferr'd upon him the Honours due to a Demy-god.

Afterwards, agreeable to the Glory of his other Actions, he freely pardon'd all that had maliciously injur'd him, and by his frequent Admonitions brought the People to mutual Peace and Concord: For all the Citizens of all Ranks and Degrees highly honour'd and applauded him, as their great Benefactor, and as the only Saviour of their Countrey.


Page 487

CHAP. V.

The Continuance of the Social War. Iphicrates and Timotheus join'd Admirals with Chares, by the Athenians. Iphicrates and Timotheus accus'd by Chares, and fin'd and remov'd. Chares joins with Pharnabasus, and routs the Persians. The End of the Social War. Philip subdues the Confederates.

IN Greece the Social War growing on apace, wherein the Chians, Rhodians, Coons, and Byzantines join'd together against the Athenians, great Preparations were made on both sides, to make a Decision of the Quarrel by a Sea-Fight. The Athenians, tho' they had rigg'd out a Fleet of Sixty Sail, under the Command of Chares; yet they sent out others for the further strengthening of them that were employ'd before, under the Commands of Two of the most Eminent of their Citizens, Iphicrates and Timotheus, who were invested in equal Power of Command with Chares, to carry on the War against their rebellious Confederates.

On the other side, the Chians, Rhodians, and Byzantines, being furnish'd with an Hundred Sail from their Confederates, waste and spoil the Islands Imbrus and Lemnos, belonging to the Athenians: Thence they made for Samos with a great Army, and harass'd the Country, and besieg'd the City both by Sea and Land. Many other Islands likewise under the Government of the Athenians they wasted and spoil'd, and by that means got together a Treasure for the carrying on of the War.

The Athenian Generals therefore joining their Forces, resolv'd in the first place to besiege Byzantium: But the Chians and their Confederates raising their Siege at Samos, and preparing to relieve Byzantium, the Fleets on both sides met in the Hellespont. And now just as they were ready to join Battel, there arose suddenly a violent Tempest which prevented their Design. However, Chares was resolv'd to fight, tho' Nature herself, with the Wind and Seas, conspir'd against him; but Iphicrates and Timotheus, by reason of the Storm, refus'd. Chares (attesting the Faithfulness of the Soldiers) accus'd his Colleagues of Treason, and wrote Letters to the People of Athens, whereby he inform'd them that they wav'd fighting purposely out of Design. At which the People were so incens'd, that they condemn'd them both; and having fin'd them in many Talents, revok'd their Commissions.

Chares now having the sole Command of the Fleet, designing to free the Athenians from Charge and Expence, did a very rash Act: Pharnabasus had revolted from the King, and was now ready to engage with a very small Force the Persian Lord-Lieutenants, who had in their Army Seventy thousand Men: Chares joins this Man with all his Forces, so that they totally routed the King's; and Pharnabasus in Gratitude for the Service, gave him as much Money as was sufficient to pay all his Soldiers. This Act of Chares was at first very grateful and acceptable to the Athenians; but after that the King, by his Ambassadors, complain'd of the Injurie done him by Chares, they altogether chang'd their Notes, and were as far the other way: For a Rumor was spread abroad, that the King had promis'd Three hundred Sail for the Aid and Assistance of the Athenians Enemies: Upon which the People were so terrify'd, that they decreed to agree Matters with the Revolters; and finding them as willing to embrace Terms of Peace as themselves, the Business was easily compos'd. And this was the end of the Social War, after it had continu'd four Years.

In the mean time, in Macedonia Three Kings; that is to say, of Thrace, the Paeones, and Illyrians, confederated against Philip. These Princes, being Borderers upon the Macedonians, could not brook without Envy his growing Power: And though they had had Experience that they were not his equal Match singly (being not long before conquer'd by him) yet by joining their Forces together, they confidently concluded, that they should be able to deal with him. But Philip coming suddenly upon them while they were raising their Forces, and as yet without any form'd Troops being in readiness; in this Surprize he broke them in pieces, and forc'd them to stoop to the Yoak of the Macedonian Kingdom.


Page 488

CHAP. VI.

The Beginning of the Sacred or Phocian War. Philomelus seizes the Temple at Delphos, after he had routed the Locrians. How the Oracle at Delphos was first discover'd; and the Beginning of the Tripode. The Athenians and others join with Philomelus.

AFter Callistratus was created Archon at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Caius Plotius Consuls of Rome, the War call'd The Sacred War broke forth, which continu'd Nine Years: For Philomelus the Phocian (inferior to none in Impudence and Wickedness) having seiz'd the Temple at Delphos, occasion'd the Sacred War, on the Account following.

After the Lacedaemonians were routed by the Thebans at the Battel of Leuctra, the Thebans made great Complaints against them in the Court of the Amphictyons, for their seizing of Cadmea: Upon which, they were adjudg'd to pay to them a great Sum of Money. The Phocians likewise were accus'd, and condemn'd by the same Court to pay many Talents to the Use of the Oracle at Delphos, because they had intruded into a large Piece of Land, call'd Cirrhaea, belonging to the Oracle, and had till'd and plough'd it.

But the Mu

•

ct being neglected to be paid, the Hieromemones accus'd the Phocians in the Senate of the Amphictyons, and pray'd them if the Money were not paid, that the Lands of the sacrilegious Persons might be confiscated, and devoted to the Deity. They requird likewise, that the rest that were condemn'd (among whom were the Lacedaemonians) should pay what was due upon that account; and pray'd, That if they did not observe what was so order'd, that then they should be prosecuted as hateful Enemies by all the Grecians. This Decree of the Amphictyons being ratify'd and approv'd of by all the Greeks, the Country of the Phocians was upon the point of being devoted to those Sacred Uses. Philomelus, who was in greatest Esteem at that time amongst them, told the People, That the Fine was so excessive, that it could not possibly be paid; and to suffer their Country to be sacrific'd, it would not only argue them to be cowardly and poor spirited, but be dangerous to that degree, that it would tend to the utter Ruin of them and their Families: And he did all he could to make it out, that the Decree of the Amphictyons was most unjust, and highly injurious, inasmuch as for a little and inconsiderate Spot of Land, they had impos'd a Mulct far exceeding the Proportion and Merit of the Offence; and therefore advis'd them to rescind the Decree, and that there were Reasons sufficient to justifie their so doing: And among others he alledg'd, That heretofore the Oracle was under their Power and Protection; and cited the Verses of Homer, the most ancient and famous of all the Poets, as a Witness of the Truth of what he said, who speaks to this effect:

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Epistrophus and Schedius did command

(Iphitus valiant Sons) the Phocian Band,

Who Cypariss and Pitho till'd—Ogilb.

Therefore the Contest is to be for the Custody and Patronage of the Temple, which he said belong'd to the Ancestors of the Phocians; and that if they would commit to him the absolute Power, as Chief Commander in this Affair, he promis'd to manage it with the utmost Care and Dexterity.

Upon which, the Phocians (out of fear of the Mulct impos'd upon them) created Philomelus sole and absolute General. Hereupon Philomelus diligently pursu'd the Performance of his Promise; and to that end presently made a Journey to Sparta, and had private Conference concerning the Business with Archidomus, King of the Lacedaemonians, alledging, That it was as much the Interest and Concern of Archidomus, as his, to have the Decrees of the Amphictyons rescinded; for that the Amphictyons had injur'd likewise the Lacedaemonians unjustly, by giving Judgment against them. He thereupon discover'd to him his Design of seizing upon the Temple at Delphos; and that if he prevail'd inbringing the Oracle under his Care and Patronage, he would make void all the Decrees of the Amphictyons.


Page 489

Archidomus approv'd well of what he said; but for the present would not appear openly to be aiding in the matter, but assur'd him that he would join in all things privately, in supplying him with Money and mercenary Soldiers. Philomelus then having receiv'd from him Fifteen Talents, and adding as many more to them of his own, rais'd Soldiers from all Parts: A thousand he listed from among the Phocians, whom he call'd Peltastates. And after he had got together a considerable Force, he set upon the Temple: Some of the Delphians call'd Thracidae oppos'd him; but those he slew, and gave up all they had to the Plunder of the Soldiers. He commanded the rest (whom he perceiv'd to be in no small Fright) to be of good Courage, for they should suffer no prejudice.

And now the Report of seizing the Temple was spread far and near; upon which, the Locrians, who were next Borderers, march'd against Philomelus with a considerable Army, and fought him near Delphos, but were routed; and after a great Slaughter made amongst them, fled, and made back to their own Country. 

Philomelus puff'd up with this Victory, cut the Decrees of the Amphictyons out of the Pillars, and destroy'd all the Records concerning them that were condemn'd. In the mean time, he caus'd Reports to be spread abroad in every place, that he neither design'd to rob the Temple, nor commit any other Mischief, but only to recover an ancient Right descended to them from their Ancestors; and to that end had a desire to make void the unjust Decrees of the Amphictyons, and so to defend the ancient Laws of the Phocians. But the Boeotians assembled in Council made a Decree to relieve the Temple, and forthwith rais'd an Army.

Philomelus in the mean time drew a Wall round the Temple, and rais'd many Soldiers, and added to their Pay half as much more as their Due amounted unto; and making choice of the best Soldiers among the Phocians, he enroll'd them; and in a short time got together so great an Army, as amounted to no less than Five thousand Men: So that possessing himself of all the Passages to Delphos, he became formidable to his Enemies. Then marching into the Territories of the Locrians, he wasted a great part of the Country; and at length encamp'd near a River that ran close by a very strong Fort, which he besieg'd; but after some Assaults, not being able to take it, he rais'd the Siege, and engag'd with the Locrians, in which he lost Twenty of his Men; whose Bodies not being capable to recover by Force, he sent a Trumpeter to have them deliver'd.

The Locrians deny'd the Bodies, and made answer, That there was a general Law among all the Grecians, that sacrilegious Persons should be cast forth, and not allow'd any Burial. Highly provok'd with this Repulse, he fought again with the Locrians, and with great Valour and Resolution slaughter'd some of his Enemies, and possess'd himself of their Bodies; and so forc'd the Locrians in exchange to deliver the Dead.

And now being Master of the Field, he rang'd up and down, and wasted the Country of Locris; and loading his Soldiers with Plunder, return'd to Delphos.

Afterwards desiring to know from the Oracle what would be the Issue of the War, he forc'd Pythia the Prophetess to ascend the Tripode, and give him an Answer. Since that mention is here made of the Tripode, I conceive it not unseasonable to give an account of what has been handed down to us concerning it from ancient Times. It is reported, that this Oracle was first discover'd by some Goats; for which reason such Creatures are most commonly sacrific'd by the Delphians, when they come to enquire of the Oracle. The Discovery is related in this manner: There was an Opening or Gulf in the Earth in that Place, now call'd the Adytum of the Temple; about this the Goats straggled as they were feeding: For at that time they of Delphos had no Religious Regard to the Place. It often happen'd, that when any Goat came near the Gulf, and look'd down, it would fall a leaping and dancing in a wonderful manner, and make an unusual Noise, far different from that at other times. A Shepherd wondring at the Novelty of the thing, drew towards the Place to learn what was the Cause; and looking down, he acted the same Part with the Goats: For as they were moved and acted as by some Enthusiasm, so he likewise was inspir'd with a Spirit of Prophecy. The News presently spreading abroad among the Inhabitants, how wonderfully they were affected that look'd down into the Chasm, many flock'd to the place, and out of Curiosity made Experiments; and as many as came near, were always acted with a Spirit of Divination. For these Reasons, the Place was counted the Residence of some Oracle: For some time therefore it was a practice, that those who had a desire to know Future Events, would approach to this Denn, and there return Answers of things that were to come one to another. But whereas many through an Excess and Transport of Mind would leap into the Gulf, and so were never seen more; it was judg'd adviseable by the Inhabitants (to avoid the like danger for the future) that some one Woman should be consecrated Prophetess, and that by her the


Page 490

Answer of the Oracle should be deliver'd; and that an Engine should be made for her whereon she might sit; and by that means be inspir'd without any danger, and give Answers to them that consulted with her concerning Future Events.

This Machine had three Feet, from whence it was call'd the Tripode, whose Figure and Shape almost all the Tripodes of Brass made to this day do imitate. But sufficient, we conceive, is said concerning the manner of finding out the Seat of the Oracle, and for what Reasons the Tripode was made,

It's reported, That at the first, Virgins were assign'd to this Office, because that in their Nature they are more pure and harmless, and of the same Sex with Diana: And besides, for that they were judg'd fittest to keep the Secrets of the Oracle. But it's said, that of latter time, one Thessalus Echecrates coming to the Oracle, upon sight of the Virgin-Prophetess, for her admirable Beauty, fell in love with her, and ravish'd her: Which wicked Fact caus'd the Delphians to make a Law, That no young Virgin, for the future, but a grave Woman of fifty Years of Age (in a Virgin's Dress, to keep up the Memory of the ancient Mode in Divination) should preside, and return the Answers. These are the old fabulous Stories that are told concerning the first discovery of the Oracle.

But to return to the Acts of Philomelus; who being now Lord of the Temple; commanded Pythia to answer him from the Tripods, according to the ancient Rite and Custom of the Country. When the Prophetess answer'd him, saying, This is the Custom of the Country; he commanded her with Threats to ascend the Tripode: Whereupon she submitting by force to the Authority of the Imposer, answer'd him, That it was lawful for him to do what he list. At which he was very jocund, and said he had receiv'd an Answer fit for his Purpose: And thereupon presently caus'd the Answer to be recorded, and expos'd to be read; that so it might be evident to all, that the God had given him liberty to do what he pleas'd. Then he call'd a General Assembly, and rehears'd to them the Divine Oracle, and bid them all to be constant and courageous; and then betook himself again to the Business of the War. Moreover, a Prodigy appear'd to him in the Temple of Apollo; for an Eagle hovering over it, and at length casting her self down to the ground, pursu'd the Pigeons (that were fed and kept in the Temple) from place to place, so that she snatch'd away some even from the Altars themselves. Those that were vers'd in interpreting things of this Nature, declar'd that this portended that Philomelus and the Phocians should possess themselves of all the Treasures of the Temple. Being greatly puff'd up with this Encouragement, he singles out the choicest of his Friends to send as Messengers abroad, some to Athens, others to Lacedaemon, and others to Thebes, and other most remarkable Cities of Greece, with this Apology: That he had seiz'd upon Delphos, not with any design to commit any Sacrilege, but to regain the Patronage of the Temple for his Country; and declar'd that he was ready to give an exact account to all the Greeks of the Money, and all the dedicated Gifts there, both for weight and number, whoever should require the same. At length he desir'd, that if any, out of Envy or Malice, should make War upon the Phocians, that they would rather join with him against such, or at least stand Neuters. The Ambassadors quitting themselves with all diligence in this matter, the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and some others, entred into the Confederacy, and promis'd them assistance: But the Boeotians, with the Locrians, and some others, were of a contrary Mind, who took up Arms in defence of the Oracle against the Phocians. These were the things done in the Course of this Year.

CHAP. VII.

The Battel at Phaedra between Philomelus and the Locrians. The Parties engag'd in the Phocian War. The Battel between the Boeotians and Phocians. Philomelus kill'd. Onomarchus made General: His Dreams, Successes and Death.

NOW Diotinus executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and Cneius Manlius, and Caius Martius of Consuls at Rome; when Philomelus having a prospect of the Storm of War that was rushing in upon him, hir'd a great number of Soldiers, with whom he join'd the most expert and choicest of the Phocians. But tho' he was in want of Money, yet he still forbore to meddle with the Sacred Treasures; but got sufficient to pay the Mercenaries out of the Estates of the greatest men among the Delphians. When he had rais'd a considerable Army, he march'd into the Field, that all might take notice that he was


Page 491

ready to fight with any Enemy that appear'd against the Phocians. Upon this the Locrians made out against him, and fought with him at a Place call'd, The Rocks of Phaedra, whom he routed; and kill'd multitudes of them, and took many Prisoners, and forc'd some of them to cast themselves down headlong from the Top of the Rock.

After this Battle, the Phocians grew very high crested upon the account of their prosperous Success. The Misfortune on the other hand, greatly discourag'd the Locrians; they sent therefore an Ambassador to Thebes, to desire them to afford their assistance both to them and the Oracle. The Baeotians both out of their Piety towards the Gods, and for Confirmation of the Decrees of the Amphictyons (wherein they were greatly concern'd) solicited by their Ambassadors, the Thessalians, and others of the Amphictyons to join with them in the War against the Phocians. Upon which (after that the Amphictyons had decreed War to be made upon the Phocians) there arose great Uproars and Factions throughout all Greece. Some were for assisting the Oracle, and for prosecuting the Phocians with Revenge as Sacrilegers; others were for defending them. And while both the Cities and Countries were thus distracted in their Councils, the Baeotians, Locrians, Thessalians, Perrhabeans, the Doreans, Delopians, Athamanes, Achaians, Phthiots, Magnesians, Aenianeans, and some others, resolv'd to assist the God. The Athenians and Lacedemonians, and some other of the Peloponnesians, join'd as Confederates with the Phocians. The Lacedemonians, with some others, readily join'd for these Reasons, viz. When the Thebans had overcome them in the Battel at Leuctra, they prosecuted the Spartans in the high Court of the Amphictyons, because Phaebidas the Spartan had seiz'd upon Cadmea, and demanded Five hundred Talents in compensation of the Injury; but the Lacedemonians being fin'd so much, and not paying the Mulct impos'd, at the time limited by the Law, the Thebans exhibited a new Complaint against them for the double Injury.

The Lacedemonians therefore being condemn'd by the Amphictyons in a Thousand Talents, and being much indebted and behind-hand, made use of the same Pretence the Phocians did before, (that is) That the Amphictyons had pronounc'd an unjust Sentence against them. And therefore (though it was for the Publick Good) yet they forbore to undertake the War of themselves upon the Quarrel of the Condemnation; but judg'd that it might carry a better Face, if they could avoid the Decree of the Amphictyons, under the Covert of the Phocians. For these Reasons they were very forward to Patronize their Cause; and in the mean time contriv'd to gain the Tutelary Right of the Temple to themselves.

And now upon certain Information, that the Thebans had prepar'd a very great Army against the Phocians, Philomelus resolv'd to strengthen his Forces with more Mercenaries: But in regard more Money was requisite for carrying on of the War, he was necessitated to make use of the Sacred Treasures, and therefore rifl'd the Temple. And because he promis'd half as much more as their ordinary Pay to the Mercenaries, a vast Number of Men flock'd in to him, and for the sake of the Largeness of the Pay, multitudes listed themselves: But no moderate and sober Man gave up his Name to be inroll'd in the Lists of the Army, out of a Pious and Religious respect to the Oracle. In the mean time every base Fellow, that for the sake of Gain valu'd not the Gods a pin, but flock'd eagerly to Philomelus: And so in a short time he got together a strong Body of Men, greedy to share in the Sacred Treasures of the Temple. And thus abundance of Wealth was the Means whereby Philomelus presently form'd a compleat Army; and without delay march'd into the Country of Locris, with above Ten thousand Horse and Foot. The Locrians being join'd with the Baeotians, met him; whereupon there hapned a Fight with the Horse on both sides, in which the Phocians were Conquerors.

Not long after, the Thessalians, with the Assistance of them that border'd upon them, to the Number of Six thousand, march'd into Locris, and engag'd with the Phocians at an Hill call'd Argola, and were worsted. Afterwards the Baeotians coming in to their assistance with Thirteen thousand Men, and the Actaeans out of Peloponnesus, in assistance of the Phocians with Fifteen hundred, both Armies near unto one and the same place, Encamp'd one over against the other. It then happen'd that a great number of the Mercenaries as they were foraging, fell into the Hands of the Baeotians, and all of them being brought before the Walls of the City, they commanded a Proclamation to be made, that those Men who had join'd in Arms with the Sacrilegers, were adjudg'd by the Amphictyons to be put to Death, and it was no sooner said but the thing was executed, and all were run through with Spears and Darts. This so exasperated the Mercenaries of the Phocians, that they earnestly press'd Philomelus that the Enemy might be dealt with in the same kind, and would not suffer him by their restless Importunities to be quiet, and presently they took many of the Enemy, as they were dispers'd in the Fields, and brought them


Page 492

alive to the General, who deliver'd them up all to the Soldiers to be Darted to Death. By this Retaliation it came to pass, that the Enemy left off this Insulting and Cruel kind of Execution.

Afterwards, both the Armies moving into another part of the Country, and in their march passing through Woods and rough Places, on a sudden, and unexpectedly, the Forelorn-Hopes of both met one another, upon which they at first Skirmish'd, and at length it came to a fierce and bloody Battel, in which the Baeotians over-pow

〈…〉

ing the Phocians in number, totally routed them; and multitudes both of the Phocians and Mercenaries were slain in the pursuit, by reason of the rough and difficult Passes out of the Woods. Philomelus, in these Streights and Exigencies, behav'd himself with great Courage and Resolution, and after many Wounds receiv'd, was forc'd to an high Precipice; and seeing no possible way and means how to escape, and fearing the Punishment and Torments Prisoners used to undergo, cast himself down headlong from the Rock; and thus (meeting with the due Reward of his Sacrilege) he ended his days: But his Collegue, Onomarcus, taking upon him the Command of the Army, marched back with those that had escap'd the Slaughter, and receiv'd those that fled as they came stragling in to him.

In the mean time, while these things were doing, Philip of Macedon took Methone, pillag'd it, and laid it equal with the Ground; and forc'd all the Villages and Countries to submit to the Macedonian Yoke.

In Pontus, Leucon, King of Bosphorus, dy'd after he had Reign'd forty years: And Spartacus his Son succeeded him, and Reign'd five years. And in the mean time, the War began between the Romans and the Falisci, in which there was nothing done worth taking notice of, but only harrassing the Country of the Falisci by Incursions.

In Sicily, Dion, the General of the Army, was Murder'd by the Mercenaries of Zacynthus; and Callippus, who instigated them to the Fact, was made Chief Commander in his place, and enjoy'd it for the space of Thirteen Months.

When Eudemus executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans intrusted the Consular Dignity with Marcus Fabius and Marcus Popilius, the Baeotians, after the Victory gained over the Phocians, return'd with their Forces into their own Country, supposing that Philomelus, the Author and Ring-leader of the Sacrilege (being justly punish'd both by the Gods and Men) by his remarkable End, would deter others from the like piece of Wickedness. But the Phocians having at present some respite from War, went again to Delphos, and calling together a General Council of all their Confederates, they consulted concerning the Renewing of the War. Those that were Lovers of Justice were for Peace; but the Prophane and Impious, and such as minded only their Gain and Advantage were for War, and us'd their utmost Endeavours to find out some or other that would Patronize their wicked Designs.

Onomarchus therefore, in a premeditated Speech (the chief End of which was to advise them to stick to what they had before resolv'd) stirr'd up the People to renew the War; not so much for the Advancement of the Publick Good, as to promote his own private Advantage. For he had many Mulcts as well as others, impos'd upon him by the Amphictyons; which not being able to pay, and therefore judging that War was more desirable than Peace as to his Circumstances, by a plausible Speech he incited the Phocians to persist in what Philomelus had begun. Upon which, being then created General, he inforc'd himself with many Foreign Soldiers, and recruited his broken Troops; and having augmented his Army with a Multitude of Foreign Mercenaries, he made great preparation to strengthen himself with Confederates, and other things necessary for the carrying on the War. And he was the more encourag'd in his Design by a Dream which he had, which did presage (as he thought) his future Greatness and Advancement: In his sleep it appear'd to him as if the Brazen Colossus, Dedicated by the Amphictyons, and standing in the Temple of Apollo, had by his own Hands been made Higher and much Bigger than it was before. Hence he fancy'd, that the Gods portended that he was to become famous in the World for his Martial Exploits. But it fell out quite otherwise, for on the contrary it signify'd, That the Mulct impos'd by the Amphictyons upon the Phocians, for their Sacrilege and Violating the Treasures of the Temple, would be much Enlarg'd and Advanc'd to a greater Sum by the Hands of Onomarchus; which at length came to pass.

Onomarchus therefore, after he was created General, caus'd a great Number of Arms, both of Iron and Brass to be made; and Coin'd Money both of Gold and Silver, which he sent abroad here and there to the Consederate Cities; especially he sought to gain the Magistrates by these Baits and Largesses.


Page 493

Moreover he corrupted many of the Enemy, drawing some into the Confederacy, and working upon others to sit still in the mean time. And all this he easily effected, through the Covetousness of those he wrought upon. For by his Bribes he prevailed with the Thessalians, the most considerable of the Confederates on the other side, to stand Neuter. Those among the Phocians that opposed him, he clapt up in Prison, and put them to Death, and expos'd their Goods to publick Sale; He then march'd into the Enemies Country, and took Thronius by Assault, and sold all the Inhabitants for Slaves. The Amphissenians likewise being greatly terrified, he forced to a Submission, and possessed himself also of the Cities of the Doreans, and wasted and spoiled the Country. Thence, he marched into Boeotia, and took Orchomenus, and when he was even ready to sit down before Chaeronea, he was worsted by the Thebans, and so returned into his own Country.

About this time Artabazus, who had rebelled against the King, still continued his War with those Lord Lieutenants of the Provinces that were ordered out against him. At the first, while Chares the Athenian General assisted him, he vallantly stood it out against the Enemy. But when he left him, wanting aid, he made his Application to the Thebans for Relief; who thereupon sent Pammenim General with Five thousand Men over into Asia; who joining with Artabazus, routed the Royalists in two great Fights, and thereby advanced both his own Reputation, and the Glory and Honour of his Country. For it was the Admiration of all Men, That the Boeotians, at the very time when they were deserted by the Thessalians, and in eminent Danger by the Phocian War, which then threaten'd them, should transport Forces into Asia, and be Conquerors in all their Engagements.

In the mean time a War broke out between the Argives and the Lacedemonians, who beat the other at Orneas, and took the Town, and then returned to Sparta. Chares likewise, the Athenian General, with his Fleet entred the Hellespont, and took Sestos, the most considerable Town upon that Coast, and put all the young Men that were able to bear Arms, to the Sword, and carried away, the rest as Slaves.

About the same time, Cersobleptes the Brother of Cotys, Enemy to Philip, but in League with the Athenians, delivered up all the Cities in Chersonesus, (except Cardia) to the Athenians, who sent Colonies thither to inhabit the Towns, which were to be divided amongst them by Lot.

Philip therefore discerning that the Methoneans designed to deliver up their City, (which was of great moment in the War) to his Enemy, laid close Siege to it, which the Citizens defended for some time; but being too weak to cope with him, they were forced to surrender it upon these Conditions, That all the Citizens should depart out of Methon with all their Clothes.

Being possess'd of the Place, he raz'd the City to the Ground, and divided the Territory among the Macedonians. During this Siege, Philip lost one of his Eyes by the stroke of a Dart.

Afterwards being sent unto by the Thessalians, he marched with his Army into Thessaly. And in the first place, in Aid of the Thessalians, he fought with Lycophron, Tyrant of Pheraea.

Lycophron then made Application to the Phocians for Assistance, who thereupon sent to him Phayllus, the Brother of Onomarchus, with Seven thousand Men: But Philip routed the Troops of the Phocians, and drave them out of Thessaly. Upon which, Onomarchus thinking to be Lord of all Thessaly, came to the Assistance of Lycophron with his whole Army.

Philip opposed him, both with his own and the Forces of the Thessalians, but Onamarchus overpowering him by Number, routed him in two several Battels, and killed many of the Macedonians; in so much as Philip was brought into very great Streights.

His Soldiers were hereupon so dejected, that they were ready to desert him; but with much ado, and many Perswasions, he at length brought them over to a due Obedience, and within a short time after returned into Macedonia. But Onomarchus made an Expedition into Boeotia, and fought and routed the Boeotians, and possessed himself of Coronea.

In the mean time Philip marches again with his Army out of Macedon into Thessaly, and incamps against Lycophron the Tyrant of Pherea, who being too weak for him, sent for Aid to the Phocians, promising to use his utmost Endeavour to order and dispose of all Things throughout Thessaly for their Advantage. Whereupon Onomarchus came to his Assistance by Land with above Twenty thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse.

Philip having persuaded the Thessalians to join with him, raised above Twenty thousand Foot and Three thousand Horse.


Page 494

Forthwith a bloody Battel was fought, in which Philip by the Advantage and Valour of the Thessalian▪ Horse got the Day, and Onomarchus and his Men 

••

ed towards the Sea.

It happened that Chares the Athenian Admiral passed by with a great Navy, at the same instant as a cruel Slaughter was made among the Phocians, and therefore those that fled cast away their Arms, and endeavoured to swim to the Galleys, amongst whom was Onomarchus.

In conclusion, there were slain of the Phocians and Mercenaries above Six thousand, amongst whom was the General himself; and there were taken Prisoners no less than Three thousand.

Philip hanged Onomarchus, and the rest as Sacrilegers he caused to be thrown into the Sea.

Onomarchus thus coming to his End, Phayllus his Brother was created General of the Phocians: And he, to repair the Damage sustained, raised great Numbers of Foreign Mercenaries, doubling the former and usual Pay, and further strengthened himself with Addition of his Confederates; he made likewise a great Number of Arms, and coined both Gold and Silver.

About the same time Mausolus, a Petty King of Caria, died, after he had reigned Four and twenty Years. To whom succeeded Artemesia, (who was both his Sister and Wife,) for the space of Two Years.

At that time likewise Clearchus, Tyrant of Heraclea, when he was going to the Feasts of Bacchus, was Assassinated, in the Twelfth Year of his Reign. Timotheus, his Son, succeeded him, and reigned Fifteen Years.

In the mean time the Thuscans, at War with the Romans, harrass'd and wasted a great part of their Enemies Territory, making Incursions as far as to the River Tiber, and then returned to their own Country.

The Friends of Dion raised a Sedition at Syracuse against Callippus, but being dispersed and worsted, they fled to the Leontines. Not long after, Hipparinus the Brother of Dionysius arrived with a Navy at Syracuse, and fought with Callipppus and beat him; upon which he was driven out of the City, and Hipparinus recovered his Father's Kingdom, and enjoyed it Two Years.

CHAP. VIII.

Phayllus continues the Phocian War. Aryca raz'd. Phayllus dies of a Consumption. War between the Lacedaemonians and Megapolitans. Chaeronea taken by Phalaecus. War between the Persians, Aegyptians, and Phaenicians. Salamis in Cyprus besieged. The Cruelty of Artaxerxes Ochus towards the Sidonians. The Calamity of Sidon.

WHEN Aristodamus was Archon at Athens, and Caius Sulpitius bore the Consulship at Rome, the Hundred and seventh Olympiad was celebrated, wherein Smicrinus the Tarrentine was Victor. Then Phayllus the Phocian General, after the Death of his Brother, began to repair the Affairs of the Phocians, now almost at the last Gasp, through the late Rout and Slaughter of the Soldiers. For being possessed of a vast Treasure, he raised a great Army of Mercenaries, and wrought over many to join with him in the War: And being very free of his Purse, he not only brought over private Men to his Party, but prevailed with famous Cities to be his Confederates: For the Lacedaemonians sent him a Thousand Soldiers, the Acheans Two thousand; but the Athenians Five thousand Foot, and Four hundred Horse, under the Command of Naustcles.

Lycophron and Pitholaus, Tyrants of Pherea, after the Death of Onomarchus, being destitute of Succours, delivered up Phera into the Hands of Philip; and though they were discharged, upon their Oaths to be quiet, yet they got together Two thousand Mercenaries, and went over to Phayllus to assist the Phocians: And not a few of the smaller Cities assisted them by their bountiful Contributions of their Money towards the Soldiers Pay. For Gold feeding and enkindling Mens Covetousness, from a Prospect of Gain push'd them forward to grasp at their own Advantage. Upon these Encouragements, Phayllus marches with his Army into Boeotia, but is overcome at Orchomenon, and lost many of his Men.


Page 495

Afterwards there was another Battel at the River Cephisus, wherein the Boeotians had the better, and killed Four hundred, and took Five hundred Prisoners. A few Days after a third Fight was at Coronea, where the Boeotians had again the Advantage, and killed Fifty of the Phocians, and took an Hundred and thirty Prisoners.

But having done at present with the Affairs of the Boeotians and Phocians, we return to Philip, who when he had overcome Onomarchus in so signal a Battel, freed the Pheraeans from the Yoke of Tyranny, and restored the City to its Liberty. And having settled all other Matters in Thessaly, he marched towards Pylas, to fight with the Phocians: But being denied Passage by the Athenians, he returned into Macedonia, which Kingdom he had enlarged both by the help of his Sword, and likewise by his Piety towards the Gods.

In the mean time Phayllus marched with his Army against the Locrians, called Epi

•nemidii,

 and assaulted and took by force some Cities; but one called Aryca he gained in the Night by Treachery, but was presently repulsed and beaten out, with the Loss of Two hundred of his Men. Afterwards encamping at a Town called Abas, the Boeotians surprized the Phocians in the Night, and killed a great Number of them▪ Upon which Success they were so incouraged, that they made Incursions into the Phocians Territories, and harrassing and spoiling the Country round about, heaped together abundance of Plunder. But in their return, coming to relieve Aryca, (which was then besieged,) Phayllus sell suddenly and unexpectedly upon them, and routed them; and then taking the City by Storm, plunder'd it, and raz'd it to the Ground. But at length he fell into a lingering Distemper, and continued a long time, and after great Torments in his Body, (as he justly deserved,) he died, leaving Phalecus the Son of Onomarchus (Incendiary of the Sacred War) to be General of the Phocians, who being as yet but a very raw Youth, he appointed Mnaseas, one of his Friends, to be his Tutor and Governor.

Some time after the Boeotians attack'd the Phocians in the Night, and killed Mnaseas the General, and Two hundred of his Soldiers. Not long after, in an Engagement between a Party of Horse at Chaeronea, Phalecus being worsted, lost many of his Men.

During these Transactions, there were great Commotions in Peloponnesus upon these Occasions. The Lacedaemonians fell out with them of Megalopolis; and therefore Archadamus their General made Incursions into their Borders: With which, the Megalopolitans being highly incensed, and not being able to contend by their own Strength, sought for Relief from their Confederates. Upon which, the Argives, Sicyons, and Messenians, assisted them with all the Force they could make. After them, the Thebans came in to their Assistance with Four thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse, under the Command of Cephisiones. Being thus strengthened, the Megalopolitans made an Expedition, and encamped at the Fountains of Aphaeus. On the other side, the Lacedaemonians were joined with Three thousand Foot from the Phocians, and with an Hundred and fifty Horse from Lycophron and Pitholaus, who were lately deposed from their Government over the Pheraeans. And having got together a considerable Army, they encamped at Mantinea. But marching hence to Orneas, a City belonging to the Argives, they took it before the Enemy could come up to them; for this Place was in League with the Megalopolitans: And though the Argives broke forth upon them, yet they were overcome in the Engagement, and lost above Two hundred Men.

Then the Thebans, double to the Lacedaemonians in Number, but much inferior to them in their Order of Discipline, came upon them; upon which there was a sharp Engagement, and even while the Victory was doubtful, the Argives flag'd, and made away with all their Confederates to their Cities. But the Lacedaemonians entred into Arcadia, and took Elisunta by Storm, and after they had plunder'd the Town, returned to Sparta.

Not long after, the Thebans with their Confederates routed the Enemy at Telphusa, and with the Slaughter of many of them, took Anaxandrus the General, and several others, to the Number of Sixty, Prisoners. Presently after they became Conquerors likewise in two other Battels, and cut off many of their Enemies. At length, after a remarkable Victory gained by the Lacedaemonians, the Armies on both Sides returned to their several Cities; and the Lacedaemonians and Megalopolitans entring into a Truce, the Thebans returned into Boeotia.

In the mean time Phalaecus continuing still in Boeotia, took Charonaea; but upon the Thebans coming into its Relief, he was forced to quit it again. Afterwards the Boeotians entred Phocis with a great Army, and wasted and spoiled a great part of it, and harrass'd all the Country round about, and plunder'd and destroyed every thing that was in their way. They took also some little Towns, and loading themselves with abundance of Plunder, returned into Boeotia.


Page 496

When Thessalus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Titus Quintius executed the Consulship at Rome, the Thebans wearied out with the Toils of the Phocian War, and brought very low in their Treasure, sent Ambassadors to the King of Persia to sollicit that King to supply them with a Sum of Money; to which Artaxerxes readily consented, and without delay furnished them with Three hundred Talents. However there was little or nothing done this Year worth taking notice of between the Boeotians and Phocians, save some Skirmishes, and harrassing one anothers Countries.

In Asia, the Persian King having invaded Aegypt some Years before with a numerous Army; but miscarrying in his Design, at this time renewed the War against the Aegyptians, and after many worthy Actions performed by his Valour and Diligence, he recovered Aegypt, Phaenicia, and Cyprus. But that the History may be made more plain and evident, we shall first declare the Causes and Grounds of the War, looking back a little to the Times proper for the Occasion.

The Aegyptians having heretofore rebelled against the Persians; Artaxerxes, Sirnamed Ochus, notwithstanding sate still and quiet, being no ways addicted to Arms. And though Armies under the Command of several Captains were set forth, yet through the Treachery and Unskilfulness of the Generals, many times he was Unfortunate and Unsuccessful. Upon which Account, though he was greatly contemned by the Aegyptians, yet his Love to his Ease and Pleasure had that Ascendent over him, as to inforce him patiently to bear the Disgrace. But now when the Phaenicians and Kings of Cyprus, in imitation of this Disloyalty of the Aegyptians, and in Contempt of him, were all running into Rebellion, the King was at length rouz'd, and determin'd to make War upon them. But he judged it not Advisable or Prudent to manage the War by his Deputies and Generals, but resolved to go himself, and try his own Fortune and Conduct in the Defence and Preservation of his Kingdom. To that end he made great Preparation of Arms, Darts, Provision and Forces; and raised Three hundred thousand Foot, and Thirty thousand Horse; and rigg'd out a Fleet of Three hundred Galleys, besides Six hundred Ships of Burden, and other Transport Ships for all sorts of Provision. The War in Phaenicia first broke out upon these Occasions.

In Phaenicia there is a famous City called Tripolis, its Name agreeing with the Nature of the Place; for three Cities are contained within its Bounds, a Furlong distant one from each other, one called the City of the Aradians, the other of the Sidonians, and the third of the Tyrians. It's the most eminent of all the Cities of Phaenicia, being that where the General Senate of all the Phaenicians do usually meet and consult about the weighty Affairs of the Nation. The Kings, Lords Lieutenants and Generals then in Sidon, carrying themselves by their severe Edicts rigorously and haughtily towards the Sidonians, the Citizens being so abused, and not being able longer to brook it, studied how to revolt from the Persians. Upon which, the rest of the Phaenicians being wrought upon by the other to vindicate their Liberty, sent Messengers to Nectanetus the King of Aegypt, then at War with the Persians, to receive them as Confederates, and so the whole Nation prepared for War. And being that Sidon then exceeded all the rest in Wealth, and even private Men by the advantage of Trade were grown very Rich, they built a great Number of Ships, and raised a potent Army of Mercenaries; and both Arms, Darts and Provision, and all other Things necessary for War, were prepared. And that they might appear first in the War, they spoil'd and ruin'd the Kings Garden, cutting down all the Trees where the Persian Kings used to Recreate and Divert themselves. Then they burnt all the Hay which the Lord Lieutenants had laid up for the use of the Horses, At last they seized upon the Persians, who had so insulted over them, and haled them to Punishment. And in this manner began the War of the Persians with the Phaenicians. For the King being informed what the Rebels had so impudently acted, threatned to Revenge it upon all the Inhabitants of Phaenicia, especially upon the Sidonians. To this end he Rendevous'd all his Army, both Horse and Foot, at Babylon, and presently march'd away against the Phaenicians. In the mean time, while the King was upon his March, the Governor of Syria, and Mazaeus Lord Lieutenant of Caelicia, joined together against the Phaenicans: On the other side, Tennes King of Sidon procured for their assistance Four thousand Greek Mercenaries from the Aegyptians, under the Command of Mentor the Rhodian; with these, and a Body of the Citizens, he engaged with the Lord Lieutenants, and got the Day, and expelled them out of Phaenicia.

While these Things were acted in Phaenicia, the War in Cyprus began at the same time, the one depending much upon the other. There were Nine great Cities in this Island, under whose Jurisdiction were all the other smaller Towns. Every one had its several King, who managed all publick Affairs; yet subject to the King of Persia.


Page 497

These all enter'd into a Confederacy, and, after the Example of the Phaenicians, shook off the Yoak; and having made all necessary Preparations for the War, took upon them the Absolute Power and Soveraignty in their own several Dominions. 

Artaxerxes being enrag'd at this Insolence, writ to Idrieus Prince of Caria (then lately come to the Throne, a Friend and Confederate of the Persians, as all his Ancestors were before him) to raise him both Land and Sea-Forces, for his Assistance against the Kings of Cyprus. Upon which, he forthwith rigg'd out a Fleet of Forty Sail, and sent on board Eight thousand Mercenaries for Cyprus, under the Command of Phocion the Athenian, and Evagoras, who had been for some Years before King of the Island. As soon as they lander in Cyprus, they march'd then streight to Salamina, the greatest of the Cities, where they cast up a Trench, and fortify'd themselves, and so straitly besieg'd the City both by Sea and Land. The Island had continu'd a long time in peace and quietness, and therefore was grown very Rich; so that the Soldiers who had now the Power to range over the Country, had got together great Booties: Which Plenty and Confluence being nois'd abroad, many sn the opposite Continent, in hope of Gain, came slocking out of Syria and Silisia to the Persian Camp. The Army of Phocion and Evagoras being increas'd to double the number, the Petty Kings were brought into great Straits, and much terrify'd: And in this Condition was Cyprus at that time.

About this time the King of Persia march'd with his Army from Babylon, and made towards Phaenicia: But Mentor, General of the Sidonians, when he heard how great an Army was approaching, and considering how unequal in number the Rebels were, he privately consulted his own Safety: To that end he secretly dispatch'd away from Sidon a faithful Servant of his own, call'd Thessalion, to Artaxerxes, promising to betray Sidon to him; and that he would effectually assist him in subduing of Egypt; he being in that respect more especially able to serve him, for that he was well acquainted with all the Places in Egypt, and knew exactly the most convenient places over the River Nile. The King was wonderfully pleas'd when he heard what Thessalion said, and promis'd he would not only pardon Mentor for what he had done, but would bountifully reward him, if he perform'd what he had promis'd. But Thessalion further added, that Mentor would expect that the King should confirm his Word by giving out his Right Hand. Upon which the King was so incens'd (as being distrusted) that he gave up Thessalion into the hands of the Officers, with Command to cut off his Head. When he was led to Execution, he only said thus: Thou, O King, dost what thou pleasest; but Mentor, who is able to accomplish all I have said, will perform nothing that is promis'd, because thou refusest to give him Assurance on thy part. Upon hearing of which, the King alter'd his Mind, and commanded the Officers to discharge the Man; and so he put forth his Right Hand to the Thessalion, which is a most sure and certain Earnest among the Persians of performance of what is promis'd. Then he return'd to Sidon, and secretly imparted to Mentor what he had done.

In the mean time, the King counting it his greatest Happiness if he could subdue Egypt (which he had before attempted in vain) sent Ambassadors to the chiefest Cities of Greece, to solicit for some Auxiliary Forces from them. The Athenians and Lacedaemonians return'd Answer, That they would continue still Friends to the Persians; but that they could not supply them with Forces. But the Thebans commanded a thousand heavy-arm'd Men to be sent to the Assistance of the King, under the Command of Locrates. The Argives likewise furnish'd him with Three thousand Men; but sent no Captain with them, because the King had expresly by Name appointed Nicostratus to Command them, and they were unwilling to contradict him. He was a Man of great Account, both as to Councel and Execution, having both Valour and Prudence assistant one to another. And because he was of vast Strength of Body, imitating Hercules in his Arms, he carry'd both a Club and a Lion's Skin in every Battel. Neither were the Grecians, who inhabited upon the Sea Coasts of Asia, wanting on their parts, but sent out Six thousand Men: So that all the Auxiliary Forces from the Grecians, amounted to Ten thousand. But before these came up, the King had pass'd through Syria, and enter'd Phaenicia, and encamp'd not far from Sidon.

In the mean time, while the King spent a considerable time in making preparation, the Sidonians had been very active and diligent in furnishing themselves with Arms and Provisions; and besides, had drawn a treble deep and broad Trench, and an high Wall round the City. They had likewise a brave Body of tall, handsom and stout Men of the Citizens, well exercis'd and train'd up in martial Discipline out of the Schools: And this City went far beyond all the rest of the Cities of Phaenicia for Wealth, and all other sumptuous Ornaments, both for State and Grandeur: And that which was not the least


Page 498

among the rest, they were furnish'd with a hundred Gallies, of three and five Oars on a Bank.

And now Tennes became a Party with Mentor (who Commanded the Mercenaries out of Egypt) in the Treachery; and left Mentor to keep a certain Quarter of the City, in order to help forward the Execution of the Treason; and himself went out with Five hundred Soldiers, upon pretence to go to the Common Assembly of the Phaenicians: For he had in his Company a Hundred of the Best Quality of the Citizens to be Senators, as was pretended: But these he caus'd to be seiz'd and deliver'd up into the hands of Ariaxerxes, as soon as they came near where the King was, who receiv'd him as his Friend, but order'd the Hundred Noblemen, as Authors of the Rebellion, to be darted to death.

Presently after, when Five hundred more of the Chiefest of the Sidonians came to him with all the Badges of Submission imaginable, he call'd Tennes back, and ask'd him whether he was able to deliver the City into his Hands (for he earnestly desir'd to possess himself of the Place upon any Terms whatsoever, rather than upon Treaty, to the end that the utter Ruin of the Citizens might be a Terror unto the rest) when Tennes assur'd him he was able to effect it, the King being still implacable, caus'd all the Five hundred (who carry'd Olive-Branches before them as Suppliants for Mercy, and as Tokens of Submission) to be shot to death with Darts. Afterwards Tennes readily perswades the Egyptian Mercenaries to receive him and the King within the Walls; and so by this treacherous Contrivance, Sidon came again into the Hauds of the Persians. Then the King judging that Tennes could do him no further Service, caus'd his Throat to be cut likewise.

In the mean time, the Sidonians had burnt all their Shipping before the King came, lest any of the Inhabitants, consulting their own particular Safety, should get away by Sea. At length, when the Sidonians saw that the Enemy was entred, and many Thousands of Men ranging here and there, and dispers'd all over the City, they shut themselves up with their Wives and Children in their Houses, and set them on fire, and so all consum'd together. It's said there were above Forty thousand (with Houshold-Servants) that perish'd in these Flames.

After this Destruction of the Sidonians, by which the whole City and Inhabitants were consum'd to Ashes, the King sold the Rubbish and Relicts of the Fire for many Talents: For being the City was very Rich, there was found a vast Quantity of Gold and Silver melted down by the Flames. Thus sad was the Calamity under which the Sidonians suffer'd. The rest of the Cities being terrify'd with this Destruction, Presently surrender'd themselves to the Persians. A little before this, Artemesia the Princess of Caria died, having govern'd Two Years: Idreius her Brother succeeded in the Principality, and reign'd Seven Years.

In Italy the Romans made a Truce with the Prenestines, and entred into a League with the Samnites; and cut off the Heads of Two hundred and sixty in the Forum, of those that sided with the Tarquins.

In Sicily Leptines and Callipus the Syracusians being furnish'd with a considerable Army, besieg'd Rhegium, which was still held by a Garison of Dionysius the Younger; and having forc'd out the Garison, they restor'd the Rhegians to their own ancient Government.


Page 499

CHAP. IX.

Evagoras beheaded in Cyprus. Artaxerxes marches against Aegypt, and gains all Aegypt by the Policy of Mentor. Lost many of his Men at the Lake of Sorbon. Mentor advanc'd Mentor's Stratagem to subdue Hemias, Prince of Aterne. Zena raz'd by Philip. The King of Aegypt Abdicates his Kingdom, and flies to Aethiopia.

AFterward,, Apollodorus being Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Marcus Valerius and Caius Sulpitius, Roman Consuls, all the Cities of Cyprus surrender'd themselves to the Persians, excepting Salamis, which was then besieg'd by Evagoras and Phocian, and which Protogoras, King of Salamis, stoutly defended.

In the mean time, Evagoras endeavour'd to regain the Kingdom of his Ancestors, and contriv'd to be restor'd to his Ancient Right by the help of the Persian King. But being afterwards accus'd before Artaxerxes (who thereupon reliev'd Protogoras) he laid aside all hopes of being restor'd, and having afterwards clear'd himself of all that was laid to his Charge, he was intrusted with the Government of a larger Province in Asia, which he so misgovern'd, that he was forc'd to fly again into Cyprus, where being seiz'd he had his Head struck off. But Protogoras voluntarily submitting himself to the Persian King, kept the Kingdom of Salamis without any Rival for the time to come.

In the mean time, the King of Persia, after the Ruine of Sidon, being join'd with the Forces that came from Argos, Thebes, and the ancient Cities, march'd with his whole Army against Aegypt. When he came to the Great Lough or Lake, through ignorance of the Places, he lost part of his Army in the Boggs there, call'd Barrathra. But in regard we have before in the First Book, spoken of the Nature of this Lake, and the strange Things there happening, we shall now forbear to repeat them.

Having pass'd these Gulphs he came to Pelusium, the first Mouth of the River Nile, where it enters into the Sea. Here the Graecians lay close to the City, but the Persians Encamp'd forty Furlongs off.

In the mean while, the Aegyptians (in regard the Persians had given them a long time to prepare all things necessary for the War) had made strong Defences and Fortifications at all the Mouths of Nile, especially at Pelusium, because it was the First and most conveniently situated; where Five thousand Men were in Garison, under the Command of Philophoron. The Thebans, above all the Graecians, had a Desire to evidence their Valour, and to that end they first of all valiantly attempted to force the Trench, which was both Straight and Deep, and carried it; but as soon as they had gain'd it, those of the Garison made a Sally, upon which there was a sharp Engagement; insomuch as the Dispute was very hot on both sides, and continu'd all the Day, the Night scarcely putting an end to the Contest.

The next day the King divided the Greeks into three Brigades; every one had a Greek Commander, with whom was join'd a Persian Officer, such as was most esteem'd for Valour and Loyalty.

The First Brigade was of the Baeotians, under the Command of Lacrates, a Theban, and Rosaces, a Persian. This Rosaces was descended from some of those seven Persians who depos'd the Magi, and was Governor of Ionia and Lydia; He led a great Body both of Horse and Foot, all of Barbarians.

The Second Brigade was of the Argives, Commanded by Nicostratus, with whom was Aristazanes, a Persian, who was employ'd as an Envoy in all the King's special Affairs, and next to Bagoas, the Trustiest and Chiefest of his Friends: He had Five thousand Soldiers, and Fourscore Galleys under his Command.

The Third Brigade was led by Mentor, he who betray'd Sidon, who formerly commanded the Mercenaries: His Collegue was Bagoas, a bold Fellow, and none more ready in of executing any Villany, in whom the King put great Confidence. He commanded the Greeks that were the King's Subjects, and a great Body of Barbarians, besides a considerable Navy. The King kept the rest of the Army with himself, and was very careful in Managing and Overseeing the whole Concern of the War.

The Army of the Persians thus divided, Nectabanus the King of Aegypt, (though he was far short in Number) neither valu'd the Multitude, nor the Division of the Persian Troops: For he had in his Army Twenty thousand Graecian Mercenaries, as many Africans, and Threescore thousand Aegyptians, by them call'd Warriors; and besides these,


Page 500

was furnish'd with an incredible Number of River-Boats, fitted to fight in the River Nile. Moreover, he had defended that side of the River towards Arabia, with many Castles and Garisons, exactly fortify'd with Trenches and Strong Walls; and was prepar'd with Plenty of all other things necessary for the War. But through Imprudence and want of good Advice he lost all. The chief Cause of the Miscarriage was his Ignorance how to manage Warlike Affairs, and his security, upon the account he had before beaten the Persians; for at that time of his Success, having had most expert Commanders, Diaphantus the Athenian, and Lanius the Spartan, who were both Valiant and Experienc'd Soldiers, all things succeeded according to his Heart's desire. But being now conceited of his own Sufficiency and Ability, to Command and Order the Army, he would admit of no other Assistant; and therefore through want of Skill and Experience, nothing was manag'd to advantage, as became an Expert-Commander.

Having therefore strongly Garison'd the Towns, he himself, with Thirty thousand Aegyptians, Five thousand Graecians, and half of the Lybians, kept the Passages which lay most open and easie to Invasions.

Things thus ordered on both sides, Nicostratus, who Commanded the Argives (having got some Aegyptian Guides, (whose Wives and Children the Persians kept as Hostages) through a certain Cut or Ditch, pass'd over with his Fleet to a Place as far out of fight as he could, and having landed his Men there, Encamp'd. Those who kept the Neighbouring Aegyptian Garisons, as soon as they came to know where the Enemy were thus Encamp'd, speedily made out against them with no less than Seven thousand Men, under the Command of Cleinius of the Isle of Coos, who drew up his Men in Battalia, in order to fight them: On the other side, those lately Landed, likewise put themselves into a Posture of Defence. Whereupon was a sharp Engagement, in which the Grecians on the Persians side so gallantly behav'd themselves, that they kill'd Cleinius the General, and above Five thousand of the rest of his Army.

Upon hearing of this Defeat, Nectabanus was in a terrible Fright, for that he believ'd the rest of the Persian Troops would easily pass over the River. Being therefore afraid lest the Enemy would bend all his force against Memphis the Seat-Royal, he made his chief Care and Concern to secure this Place, and thereupon march'd away with the Army he had to Memphis, to prevent the Besieging of it. 

In the mean time, Lacrates, the Theban, the Commander of the First Brigade, pushes on the Siege of Pelusium; and having drain'd the Water out of the Trench, and turn'd it another way, he rais'd a Mount, and there plac'd his Engines of Battery against the City. And after a great Part of the Walls were batter'd down, the Pelusians rais'd up others in their stead, and speedily made high Wooden Towers.

These Conflicts upon the Walls continu'd for some days, during which time the Graecians that defended the Place, stoutly oppos'd the Assailants. But as soon as they heard of the King's departure to Memphis, they were so afrighted that they sent Messengers to Treat upon Terms of Surrender. Whereupon, Lacrates agreeing with them upon the Sacred Tye of an Oath, That upon delivery up of Pelusium, they should return to Greece with whatever they brought with them out of the Town, they surrender'd the Place. Then Artaxerxes sent Bagoas with a Garison of Persians to take Possession of Pelusium, whose Soldiers as soon as they enter'd the Town, took away from the Grecians as they were going out, many of those things that they brought along with them.

Being thus abus'd they took it hainously, and with great Complaints call'd upon the Gods, as Witnesses and Revengers of Perjury and Breach of Faith.

Lacrates being stirr'd up to just Indignation by this base Dealing, fell upon the Barbarians, and kill'd some of them, and put the rest to flight, and so protected the Greeks thus injur'd, contrary to the Agreement confirm'd by Oath. And though Bagoas, who fled amongst the rest, and return'd to the King, accus'd Lacrates, for what he had done, yet the King adjudg'd, that Bagoas his Soldiers were dealt with according to their desert, and punish'd those Persians that were Authors of the Rapine. And in this manner came Pelusium into the Hands of the Persians.

But Mentor, Commander of the Third Brigade, recover'd Bubastus, and many other Cities, to the Obedience of the Persian King by his own Stratagem. For whereas all these Cities were Garison'd by two sorts of People, Grecians and Aegyptians, Mentor caus'd a Report to be spread abroad, That Artaxerxes would receive all those most graciously, and pardon them, that of their own accord should give up their Cities into the King's Hands; and on the other Hand, That all those that he should take by force, should fare no better than Sidon. He commanded also, That all the Gates should be open'd, and that all that would should be permitted to go away. So that all the Aegyptian Captives


Page 501

in the Camp being gone without any Opposition, the Report was in a short time spread abroad through all the Cities of Aegypt. Whereupon all the Towns were presently fill'd with Seditions through Quarrels, and Dissentions between the Aegyptians and the Foreign Auxiliaries. For all Parties strove who should be most Active and Forward in betraying their several Garisons, every one aiming at his own Advantage, by an Interest in the favour of the Conqueror. And the first that began was Bubastus. For as soon as Mentor and Bagoas Encamp'd before the City, the Aegyptians, unknown to the Graecians, promis'd to Bagoas (by one of their own Country sent to him) to Surrender the City, if they might be all Pardon'd. This being smelt out by the Greeks they pursu'd and seiz'd upon him that was sent, and by Threatning and Affrighting him got out the whole from him, as the Thing in truth was. Upon which, being highly enrag'd, they fell violently upon the Aegyptians, kill'd some, wounded others, and drove the rest into a narrow Corner of the City.

They that were thus assaulted, gave intelligence to Bagoas of what was done, and intreated him, tha

•

 without delay he would take Possession of the City, which should be by them deliver'd up to him upon his approach.

In the mean time, the Graecians sent an Herald to Mentor, who secretly advis'd them, to set upon the Barbarians as soon as Bagoas had entred the Town. Bagoas therefore being entred with his Persians, but without the Consent of the Greeks, as soon as part of the Soldiers were let in, the Graecians presently shut up the Gates, and fell on a sudden on the Barbarians, and kill'd 'em every Man, and took Bagcas himself Prisoner, who coming to understand that there was no means left for his Deliverance but by Mentor, he earnestly intreated him to interpose for his Preservation, promising that for the Future he would never undertake any thing without his Advice. Mentor prevail'd with the Graecians to Discharge him, and to Surrender the City, so that the whole Success and Glory of the Action was attributed to him.

Bagoas being thus freed by his means, entred into a Solemn Covenant of Friendship upon Oath with Mentor, and faithfully kept it to the Time of his Death; so that these two always concurring and agreeing, were able to do more with the King, than all his other Friends, or any of his Kindred. For Mentor being made Artaxerxes's Lord-Lieutenant of all the Asiatick Shore, was greatly Serviceable to the King, by procuring Soldeers out of Greece, and by his Faithful and Diligent Administration of the Government.

Bagoas commanding all as Viceroy in the higher Parts of Asia, grew to that degree of Power through his Consultation with Mentor, upon all Occasions, that he had the Kingdom at Command, neither did Artaxerxes any thing without his Consent. And after the King's Death his Power was such, That the Successors were ever Nominated and Appointed by him, and all Affairs of the Kingdom were so wholly manag'd by him, that he wanted nothing but the Name of a King. But we shall speak of these things in their proper Place.

After the Surrender of Bubastus, the rest of the Cities out of fear submitted and deliver'd up themselves upon Articles, into the Hands of the Persians.

In the mean while, Nectabanus, who was now at Memphis, seeing the swift Motions of the Enemy, durst not venture a Battel in defence of his Sovereignty, but abdicating his Kingdom, pack'd up a great deal of Treasure, and fled into Aethiopia. And so Artaxerxes possess'd himself of all Aegypt, and demolished the Walls of all the Cities, especially those that were the Greatest and of most account; and heap'd together an infinite Mass of Gold and Silver, by spoiling of the Temples: He carry'd away likewise all the Records and Writings out of the most ancient Temples; Which Bagoas a while after suffer'd the Priests to redeem for a great Sum of Money. Then he sent home the Greek Auxiliaries with ample Rewards to every one according to their Deserts, for their Services; and intrusting Pherendatus with the Government of Aegypt, he return'd with his Army loaden with Spoil, triumphing in the Glory of his Victory to Babylon.

At the time when Callimachus was Lord-Chancellor at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Publius Valerius were Roman Consuls, Artaxerxes advanc'd Mentor for the good Services he had done him, especially in the Aegyptian War, above all his Ariends; and that he might put a Mark upon his Valour by a Reward more than ordinary, he bestow'd upon him an Hundred Talents of Silver, and rich Furniture for his House. He made him likewise Prefact of all the Asiatick Shore, and General of his Army, with absolute Power to suppress all Rebellions in those Parts.

Mentor being in near Alliance and Kindred with Actabazus and Memnon (who had not long before made War upon the Persians, and were now fled 

•

at of Asia to Philip in Macedonia) by his Interest with the King procur'd their Pardon, and thereupon sent for them


Page 502

both to come to him, with their Families: For Artabazus had by Mentor and Memnon's Sister, Eleven Sons and Ten Daughters; with which numerous Progeny Mentor was greatly delighted, and advanc'd the young Men as they grew up, to high Places of Command in the Army.

The first Expedition which Mentor made was against Hennias, Prince or Tyrant of Atarne, who had rebell'd against Artaxerxes, and was possess'd of many strong Cities and Castles; upon promise made him to procure the King's Pardon he brought him to a Parley; and upon that occasion having surpris'd him, he clapt him up, and possessing himself of his Seal-Ring, he writ Letters in his Name to the several Cities, signifying that through Mentor he was restor'd to the King's Favour; and sent away likewise with those that carry'd the Letters, such as should take Possession for the King of all the Forts and Castles. The Governors of the Cities giving credit to the Letters, and being likewise very desirous of Peace, deliver'd up all the Towns and Forts to the King in every place through the Country.

All the Revolted Cities being gain'd by this Trick of Mentor, without any Hazard or Fatigue, the King was highly pleas'd with him, as having acted the Part of a Brave and Prudent General.

And with no less success, partly by Policy, and partly by force of Arms, he reduc'd in a short time the other Captains that were in Rebellion. And thus stood Affairs in Asia at this time.

In Europe, Philip, King of Macedon, made an Expedition against the * Calcidean Cities, and took Zeira, and raz'd it to the Ground, and brought other Towns (out of Fear) likewise to submit. He set again likewise upon Phaeca, and threw out its Prince Pitholaus. About that time Sparticus, King of Pontus, dy'd, having reign'd Five Years. Parysades his Brother suceeded him, and govern'd Eight and Thirty years.

CHAP. X.

Philip takes Olynthus, and other Cities in the Hellespont. The Athenians jealous of Philip, and instigated by Demosthenes. Philip's Policies. The Value of the Riches taken out of the Temple at Delphos. Dionysius sent Presents to Delphos, which were taken by the Athenians. His Letter to the Athenians. The Temple burnt. The End of the Phocian War. The Punishments decreed by the Amphictyons against the Phocians. The Miseries of the Sacrilegers. Timoleon sent to Syracuse.

AFter the End of this Year, Theophilus rul'd as Archon at Athens, and Caius Sulpitius and Caius Quintius executed the Consular-Dignity at Rome, at which time was celebrated the Hundred and Eighth Olmypiad, in which Polycles of Cyrene bore away the Crown of Victory. At the same time Philip made an Expedition against the Cities of the Hellespont, of which Micaberna and Torone were betray'd into his hands. Then he made against Olynthus (the greatest City of those Parts) with a very numerous Army, and having first routed the Olynthians in two Battels, he laid Siege to the Town; upon which he made many Assaults, and lost a great number of his Men in their approaches to the Walls. At length by bribing Euthycrates and Lasthenes, the Chief Magistrates of Olynthus, he entred the City by Treachery, and Plunder'd it, and Sold all the Citizens for Slaves, and expos'd to sale all the Prey and Plunder under the Spear. Whereby he furnished himself with abundance of Money for the carrying on of the War, and put all the rest of the Cities into a terrible Fright.

Then he bountifully rewarded such as had behav'd themselves with Courage and Valour, and having exacted vast Sums of Money from the Richest of the Citizens of the Cities round about, he made use of it to corrupt many to betray their Country; so that he himself often boasted that he had enlarg'd his Dominion more by his Gold than by his Sword.

In the mean time, the Athenians being jealous of the growing Greatness of Philip, ever after sent Aid to them whom he invaded by his Arms, and dispatch'd Ambassadors to all the Cities to look to their Liberties, and to put to death such of their Citizens as should be discover'd to go about to betray them, promising withal to join with them upon all Occasions. At length they proclaim'd open War against Philip.


Page 503

Demosthenes the Orator (at that time the most Eminent in Politicks and Eloquence of all the Grecians) was the chief Instrument that incited the Athenians to take upon them the Defence of all Greece: But the City could not cure that itch of Treason that infected many of the Citizens; such a shoal of Traitors there was at that time all over Greece. And therefore it is reported, that Philip having an earnest desire to gain that once strong and eminent City, and one of the Place telling him it could never be taken by Force; he ask'd him whether it were not possible that Gold might mount the Walls; for he had learn'd by Experience, That they that could not be subdu'd by Force, were easily overcome by Gold. To this end he had by his Bribes procur'd Traitors in every City; and such as would receive Money, he call'd his Friends and Guests: And thus with Evil Communication he corrupted Men's Manners.

After the taking of Clynthus, he celebrated Olympick Games to the Gods, in Commemoration of his Victory, and offer'd most splendid Sacrifices; and in regard there were a vast number of People got together, he set forth specious Sports and recreating Plays, and invited a great number of Strangers to his Feasts: And in the midst of his Cups would talk courteously and familiarly with them, and drink to many, and reach over the Cup to them with his own Hands. To many he gave rich Gifts, and made large and liberal Promises to all, to the end his Kindness and Generosity might be bruited abroad by them that had had the Experience. During the time of his Feasting, observing Satyrus the Stage-player to look four and knit his Brows, he ask'd him, why heonly would not accept of the Fruits of his Bounty and Generosity? To which he answer'd, That he would very willingly receive a certain Gift from him; but he was afraid if he should ask it openly, he would deny him. Upon which the King fell a laughing, and bid him ask what he would, and he would freely bestow it upon him. Upon which he desir'd that two young Maids, in the flower of their Age, the Daughters of one that was his Host might be given to him from among the Captives, whose Liberties he crav'd not to make any Gain or Advantage of them himself, but really to give them Portions out of his own Estate, and procure them Husbands, and likewise to prevent their being injur'd by any unworthy Attempt. Whose Request the King so approv'd, as that he not only forthwith order'd the Virgins to be deliver'd to Satyrus without Ransom, but bestow'd upon him likewise many other rich Gifts and Presents, as special Marks of his Favour and Bounty; so that many, excited with the Hopes of Reward, strove which should serve Philip most, and be the first that should betray their Country into his Hands.

The next Year Themistocles was Archon at Athens, and Caius Cornelius and Marcus PopiliusRoman Consuls, at which time the Boeotians over-ran the Country of the Phocians with Depredations, and beat the Enemy at Hyampolis, killing about Seventy of them. But not long after, engaging with the Phocians in another Battel, they were routed at Coro

•ea,

 and lost many of their Men. And whereas the Phocians were possess'd of some small Towns in Boeotia, the Boeotians made an Inroad upon them, and shamefully spoil'd and destroy'd all their standing Corn; but in their Return were beaten.

While these things were acting, Phalecus the General of the Phocians, being convicted of Sacrilege, in converting the Sacred Treasure of the Temple to his own use, was depriv'd of his Commission; and three others were created in his room, viz. Democrates, Callias, and Sophanes, who manag'd the Business and Trial concerning the Sacred Treasure, at such time as the Phocians demanded an Account of them that had the disposing of it. The greatest part of the Money was found to be intrusted in the hands of Philon; who not being able to give a clear Account, was condemn'd; and being put upon the Rack, by order of the Generals, he nam'd many of his Accomplices. At length, being tortur'd to the utmost extremity, he died upon the Rack, and so came to an end worthy his Impiety.

The Robbers indeed restor'd the rest of the Monies that were left, but they themselves were put to death as Sacrilegers. The first of the former Generals, Philomelus, forbore to meddle with the Sacred Treasures; but his Brother and Successor Onomarchus, converted much of those Treasures to the use of the War. The third General Phayllus, Brother of Onomarchus, while he executed that Command, made use of many of the consecrated Things of the Temple, for the paying off the foreign Soldiers: For he melted down and coin'd into Money the Hundred and twenty Golden Tiles, dedicated by Croesus King of Lydia. In the same manner he dealt with the 300 Golden Bowls (or Viols) every one weighing Two Minas; and likewise the Lion and Woman of Gold, all which weigh'd 30 Talents of Gold, so that all the Gold according to the value of Silver would amount to Four thousand Talents. And besides these, there were Things in Silver dedicated by Croesus, and others, carry'd away by all the Generals in their several Times, above the value of


Page 504

Six thousand Talents; so that the whole Sum, both in Gold and Silver, amounted to above Ten thousand Talents.

There are some Authors that say, that there was as much Treasure sacrilegiously taken away, as Alexander afterwards found in the Treasury of the Persians. Phalecus likewise, with the Officers of the Army, went about to dig up the Pavement of the Temple, because some Person told him that a vast Treasure of Gold and Silver lay under it: For confirmation of the truth of it, he brought in the Testimony of that most ancient and famous Poet Homer, where he says thus: 

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

. Hom. Iliad. lib. 9. fol. 453.

Or all the Gold in Phoebus Marble Fane,

Which Pytho's Rocky Treasuries contain.

And just as the Soldiers began to dig near to the Tripode, a sudden Earthquake terrify'd the Phocians; so that the Gods seeming by such manifest Tokens to threaten Vengeance upon the Sacrilegers, they desisted. But the first Author of that Impiety, Philo (of whom we spoke before) in a short time after felt the just Vengeance of the Deity. But notwithstanding the whole Guilt of this impious Sacrilege be imputed to the Phocians, yet both the Athenians and Lacedaemonians who assisted the Phocians, were Partners in the Offence, for they had more Money paid to them than was proportionable to the number of the Soldiers which they sent: For indeed at that very time the Athenians carry'd it but impiously towards the Oracle; for but a little before this Robbery at Delphos, when Iphicrates lay with the Fleet before Corcyra, and Dionysius Prince of Syracuse had sent some Statues of Gold and Ivory to Olympus and Delphos, he by chance intercepting the Vessels which transported them; and having now possession of the dedicated Goods, sent to Athens to know how he must dispose of them; the Athenians bid him never scrupulously examine or make enquiry after those things that were said to belong to the Gods, but to consider how to provide for the maintaining of the Army. In Obedience to which Decree of his Country, he expos'd the Sacred Ornaments of the Gods to sale under the Spear. Upon which, the Prince being highly incens'd against the Athenians, wrote to them in this manner:

Dionysius to the Senate and People of Athens.

It is not fit that I should say Health to you, since ye have been so sacrilogious against the Gods both by Sea and Land; and having intercepted the Images which we had sent, in order to bedevoted to the Gods, you have converted them into Money, and so have prophanely abus'd the Mightiest of the Gods, Apollo at Delphos, and Jupiter at Olympus.

This Affront against the Gods, the Athenians never stuck at, who yet were us'd to boast and glory, that the God Apollo was their Ancestor. The Lacedaemonians also, though they were famous amongst all Nations for the Oracle of Delphos, and in the most weighty Affairs do consult there at this very day; yet they never scrupled to join in the Sacrilege with these impious Robbers of the Temple.

But now the Phocians, who had three Towns strongly fortify'd in Boeotia, made an Inroad into Boeotia; and being join'd with great numbers of Mercenaries, wasted and spoil'd the Enemy's Country; and in several Incursions and Skirmishes got the better, and so return'd. The Boeotians therefore being overpress'd with the Burden of the War, and having lost many of their Soldiers, and besides being in great want of Money, sent Ambassadors unto Philip to crave his Assistance. This was very welcome News to the King to see that they were brought low, having long desir'd to have their Leuctra Courage curb'd and tam'd: However, he sent them a great number of Men meerly upon this account, lest he should be thought to be careless in the matter concerning the spoiling of the Temple. Then the Phocians built a Castle at a Town call'd Abas, near the Temple of Apollo; at which time being attack'd by the Boeotians, some of them presently fled scatteringly into the Neighbouring Cities; others, to the number of 500, got into the Temple, and there perish'd. Many other things happen'd to the Phocians at that time, as by a Divine Hand; but that which is most remarkable was this; They that fled into the Temple, thought themselves safe under the Care and Protection of the Gods; but it fell out quite contrary; for Divine Providence brought condign Punishment upon the Sacrilegers: There


Page 505

were many Straw-Beds round about the Temple, and it happen'd that the Fire left in the Tents of those that fled, caught hold of some of them; upon which the Flame so mounted on a sudden, that it consum'd the Temple, with all those that fled into it: For it seems God would not spare the Sacrilegers, notwithstanding all their Supplications.

Archias was then Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Marcus Aemilius and Titus Quinctius were invested with the Consulship at Rome, when the Phocian War (which had continu'd Ten Years) was ended in the manner following: When both the Boeotians and Phocians were brought low with the continual Fatigues of the War, the Phocians, by their Ambassadors, crav'd Aid of the Lacedaemonians, who sent them a Thousand heavy-arm'd Men, under the Command of Archidamus the King of Sparta. In like manner the Boeotians pray'd Assistance from Philip; who thereupon being join'd with the Thessalians, entred Locris with a great Army, where finding Phalecus (restor'd again to his Command) with a considerable Body of Mercenaries, he prepar'd to fight him. Phalecus was then at Nicea, who finding himself not able to engage with Philip, sent Ambassadors to him to treat. Thereupon a Peace was concluded upon these Conditions: That Phalecus, with all those then with him, might march away whither they thought fit. Whereupon Phalecus (after Ratification on both sides) without any further delay, departed with those Forces he had with him, to the number of Eight thousand, into Peloponnesus. And the Phocians now hopeless, gave up themselves into the Power of Philip.

The King having without Fighting unexpectedly put an end to the Sacred War, join'd in a Senate with the Thessalians and Boeotians; in which it was decreed, That the Great Council of the Amphictyons should be assembled, to whose Decision all Matters should be wholly referr'd.

By them afterwards it was decreed, That Philip and his Posterity should be receiv'd as Members into the Council of the Amphictyons, and should have the Privilege of a double Voice, as the Phocians (whom he conquer'd) had before: That the Walls of Three Cities in Phocis should be demolish'd: And, That the Phocians should never after have any thing to do with the Temple, or be Members of the Court of the Amphictyons: That they should never be possess'd of Horse or Arms, until they had made Restitution to the Oracle of the Moneys they had sacrilegiously taken away. Moreover, That the Exiles of Phocis, and whoever they were that were Partners with them in the Sacrilege, should be accounted accurs'd, and driven out of every Place. Likewise, That all the Cities of the Phocians should be ras'd to the Ground, and turn'd into Villages, every one of them not to contain above Fifty Houses, and not to be under one Furlong distant one from another; yet that the Phocians should keep their Lands, but should pay a Tribute to the Oracle every Year of Sixty Talents, 'till they had paid the Sum enter'd in the Registers at the time of the Sacrilege committed: That Philip, with the Boeotians and Thessalians should set forth the Phythian Games, because the Corinthians were Partners in the Impiety with the Phocians: That the Amphictyons, together with Philip, should break in pieces upon the Rocks all the Arms of the Phocians and Mercenaries, and then burn the Remains: And lastly, That they should deliver up all the Horse.

When they had dispatch'd this, they made Laws and Orders for the restoring of the Oracle to its former state, and all other matters relating to Religion and the Publick Peace, and advancing of Amity and Concord amongst the Grecians. All these Decrees of the Amphictyons were allow'd and confirm'd by Philip, who carry'd himself towards them with great Respect in all things, and then march'd back with his Army into Macedonia; and not only purchas'd Honour by his Piety and martial Conduct, but made many Advances towards the future Enlargement of his Dominions: For he had long coveted to gain the Sovereign Command of all Greece, and to make War upon the Persians, which indeed at length happen'd. But of these things we shall hereafter give a particular Account in their due time.

Let us now therefore return to what properly is an Appendant, and in course annex'd to the precedent History: Yet we judge it our Duty first to relate the Judgments inflicted by the Gods upon the Sacrilegious Robbers of the Oracle; for Vengeance overtook all of them in general, not only those who were the chief Ringleaders, but even them that had the least hand in the Sacrilege.

Philomelus, the First and Chief Contriver of seizing the Temple, by a certain Fate of War was brought into such a strait, as that he cast himself headlong from the top a of Rock.

His Brother Onomarchus having taken upon him the Command of the heartless and discourag'd Army, was afterwards, with his Phocians and Mercenaries, totally routed in Thessaly, and he himself taken and crucify'd.


Page 506

Phayllus, the Third, who spoil'd the Oracle of the greatest part of its Sacred Treasures, that he might not altogether escape Punishment, consum'd away by a lingring Disease.

Phalecus, the last of them, having robb'd the Temple of all that was left, wander'd up and down in great Terror, and in divers Hazards and Troubles, for a long time together; not in any Favour to him more than the rest of his Confederates in Wickedness, but that he might be longer tormented, and that the Vengeance executed might be more remarkable to all where-ever he went. After his Flight, whereby he escap'd being a Prisoner, at the first he remain'd with his Mercenaries about Peloponnesus, and maintain'd his Soldiers with the Money he had sacrilegiously got into his hand from the Temple. Afterwards he hir'd some great Transport-Ships at Corinth, and having Four other small Vessels of his own, he prepar'd for a Voyage into Italy and Sicily, hoping either to possess himself of some Citie in those Parts, or that he and his Men should be employ'd by some or other as Mercenaries.

There was at that time a War broken out between the Lucanians and Tarrentines; he pretended to the Soldiers that went along with him, that he was sent for by the Sicilians and Italians: But when he came into the open Sea, some of the Soldiers who were on board in the largest Vessel with Phalecus, discours'd among themselves, and declar'd their Suspicions one to another, That it was but a Pretence, and that none had sent for them: For they saw no Commanders go along with him, that were sent from any that desir'd their Assistance; and they perceiv'd that the Voyage undertaken was long and tedious, and full of Hazards: And therefore concluding that Phalecus was no longer to be credited (dreading the Expedition beyond-sea) they conspir'd, especially the Officers of the Mercenaries, and with their drawn Swords so threatned both Phalecus and the Pilot, that they compell'd them to tack about, and return: The like being done in the other Ships, they all came back, and arriv'd in Peloponnesus. And being rendezvous'd at Malea, a Promontory of Laconia, they there found the Gnosian Ambassadors, who accidently were come hither to list some foreign Soldiers. After some Discourse had past between them and Phalecus and the other Officers, the Pay in hand was so large, that all of them sail'd away with them to Crete; and having landed at Gnosus, they presently took the City Lyctus at first Assault. But unexpected Assistance came in suddenly to the expuls'd Lyctians; for the Tarrentines being at that time engag'd in a War with the Lucanians, sent Ambassadors to the Lacedaemonians, from whom they were descended, to supply them with Auxiliaries; upon which the Spartans, upon the account of their Kindred, were ready to assist them; and to that end had both Naval and Land▪ Forces ready, under the Command of Archidamus the King of Sparta. And being now ready to set sail for Italy, at that very time came some from the Lyctians, earnestly desiring that they would help them in the first place. The Lacedaemonians agreed to it, and pass'd over to Crete, where they routed Phalecus and his Mercenaries, and recover'd the Country for the Lyctians.

Then Archidamus made for Italy, and there assisted the Tarrentines, and was kill'd in Fight, behaving himself with great Valour and Resolution. He was an excellent Commander, and of good Reputation in other respects; but ill spoken of, by reason of his joining with the Phocians, as the principal Promoter and Author of the seizing of the Temple and City of Delphos. He was King of Lacedaemon Three and twenty Years, and his Son Agis succeeded him, and continu'd Fifteen Years.

Afterwards all the Mercenaries under Archidamus, and who were concern'd in the robbing of the Oracle, were killed by the Lucanians. But Phalecus being driven out of Lyctus, besieged Sidon; and while he was preparing his Engines to batter the Walls, and making his Approaches to the City, the Engines were set on fire, and consumed by a Thunderbolt from Heaven, and a great number of the Soldiers who endeavoured to save them, were consumed by Fire from Heaven, amongst whom was Phalecus himself: Though there be some who report, That he was run through the Body by one of his own Soldiers whom he had provoked. Those Soldiers that were left, were hired by the Elean Exiles, and transported into Peloponnesus, who assisted them against their own Countrymen. But the Arcadians, who assisted the Eleans, routed them, and killed a great Number of the Mercenaries, and took Four thousand Prisoners; which the Arcadians and Eleans divided amongst themselves, and the Arcadians sold those under the Spear that fell to their Share: But the Eleans put all theirs to the Sword, for their Impiety in robbing of the Oracle. And in this manner all the Sacrilegers, and those that took part with them, met with their due Punishment for their Wickedness. Likewise the most famous Cities that shared with them in their Impiety, being afterwards conquered by Antipater, lost both their Authority and Liberty at once. Moreover, the Wives of the most principal


Page 507

Men of Phocis, who had deck'd themselves with Necklaces of Gold robb'd from Delphos, met with the deserved Punishment of their Impiety. For one that wore the Chain of Helen turning Whore, stain'd all the Glory of her Beauty, by prostituting her self to every filthy Wretch. Another who adorn'd her self with the Ornaments of Eriphyles, in a Fury of Madness and Rage had her House set on fire by her eldest Son, and she and her Habitation consumed together. In this manner (as we said before) those that dared thus to despise and contemn the Deity, were overtaken by Divine Vengeance. On the contrary, Philip, who appeared in defence of the Oracle, ever prospering from that time, for his Piety, was at last declared Supream Governor of all Greece, and gained the largest Kingdom in Europe. And now having given an Account of the Sacred War so far forth as we judged necessary, we shall return to Things of another Nature.

In Sicily the Syracusians labouring under Intestine Seditions, and inslaved under the Tyranny of many that Lorded over them, sent Ambassadors to Corinth to desire a General to be dispatched to them, who might take Charge of the City, and give a Check to the Ambition of such as sought to Tyrannize. Upon which, it seemed very just and reasonable to the Corinthians to help those who were originally descended from them; and therefore they Decreed to send them Timoleon the Son of Timenetus, who was accounted the most valiant and expert Commander among them; in short, he was a Person every way Virtuous: But there was one Thing remarkable happen'd to him, which much forwarded his being chosen General.

Timophanes his Brother, the richest and most daring Man among the Corinthians, had some time before given evident Signs of his Ambition to aspire to the Sovereignty. For about that time having armed and got together a Company of lewd Fellows, and such as were in Debt, and Needy, went up and down the Market-place, seeming not to have the least Thoughts of the Principality, but in truth acting in the mean time as an absolute Tyrant. But Timoleon, who abhorr'd Monarchy, at the first advised his Brother to forbear, and lay aside such Projects and Designs: But he being not only regardless of what was said to him, but rather growing every day more Audacious and Peremptory; Timoleon, because he could not work upon him by Words, killed him in the Market-place. Upon which a great Tumult was raised, and the Citizens upon the Commission of so horrid a Fact running in and flocking together, the Matter came to a Faction and Sedition in the City. For some declared, That Timoleon, who had imbrewed his Hands in the Blood of a Citizen, should undergo the Punishment due for his Offence by the Law. But others were of a contrary Opinion, and that he deserved rather to be commended, as one that had dispatched a Tyrant out of the way.

A Senate therefore was called, and the Matter brought before the Court, where his Enemies most bitterly inveigh'd against him; but those who were more moderate and favourable, consulted together to preserve him. And while the Business remained in Debate, not yet decided, the Ambassadors from Syracuse arrived, and imparting their Embassy to the Court, they very seasonably desired a General to be sent them: Upon which, the Senate determined to send Timoleon, and that he might the better behave himself, a most strange Proposal was offered him, to chuse as he pleased: For they let him know, That if he carried himself well towards the Syracusians in his Command, then they would judge him to be one that had killed a Tyrant; but if he were Covetous and Oppressive, he should be condemned as a Murderer of his Brother.

Timoleon therefore, not so much out of Fear of what was threaten'd by the Senate, as excited by the Principles of his own innate Virtue, managed Affairs in Sicily with great Honour and Reputation to himself, and Advantage to the Sicilians. For he subdued the Carthaginians, rebuilt the Grecian Cities which were destroyed by the Barbarians, and restored all Sicily to its Liberty. Lastly, having gained Syracuse, and the Greek desolated Cities, he filled them all with Inhabitants, and made them very Populous. But we shall treat of these Matters in their proper Place, and come to that part which is coherent to the History.


Page 508

CHAP. XI.

Timoleon's Expedition into Sicily. The Carthaginians Army in Sicily. Dionysius returns into Syracuse, is beaten by Hicetas; Hicetas gains Syracuse. Timoleon's Escape from Rhegium. Timoleon routs Hicetas, and gains Syracuse. Philip invades the Illyrians. Dionysius expell'd. Timoleon makes good Laws. Philip invades Thrace.

NOW Eubulus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Serulius Sulpitius were Consuls at Rome; at this time Timoleon the Corinthian, advanced by the Syracusians to the Sovereign Command of all their Forces, prepared for his Voyage into Sicily, and loosed from Corinth with Four Gallies, mann'd with Seven hundred Mercenaries, and attended with Three Skiffs. In his Passage he was joined by Three Vessels more from the Leucadians and Corcyrians, and so with Ten Sail passed over the Ionian Sea. In this Voyage an unusual and remarkable Thing happened to Timoleon, the Providence of the Gods seeming to favour his Undertaking, and thereby to point out the future Fame and Glory of his Actions. For all the Night, a Light like a burning Torch in the Heavens went before him, till the Fleet came to the Coasts of Italy. For he was before told at Corinth by the Priests of Ceres and Proserpina, that in the Night the Goddesses appeared to them, and told them, that they would sail along with Timoleon to the Island that was peculiarly Consecrated to them. Timoleon therefore, and all those with him, were very chearful, upon the Apprehension that the Gods favoured their Enterprize; and thereupon Timoleon dedicated one of the best of his Ships to the Goddesses, and ordered that it should be call'd the Sacred Ship of Ceres and Proserpina. And now when the Fleet came safe as far as Metapontum in Italy, there arrived a Galley which had the Carthaginian Ambassadors on board; who upon a Conference with Timoleon, charged him upon his Peril not to begin any War, or so much as set his Foot upon Sicily. But he being incouraged by them of Rhegium, who promised to join with him, loosed with all hast from Metapontum, designing by his speed to prevent the Report of his Coming. For he was in a great Fear, left the Carthaginians, who were much stronger at Sea, should block up his Passage into Sicily. Therefore he made away with all speed to Rhegium.

The Carthaginians having a little before received Intelligence, that a great War was likely to break out through all Sicily, carried themselves with all Civility towards the Confederate Cities; and putting an end to all Quarrels, entred into Leagues of Amity and Friendship with the Princes of the Island, especially with Hicetas General of the Syracusians, who was the most Potent. At length the Carthaginians having raised great number of Forces both by Sea and Land, transported them into Sicily under the Command of Hanno their General. They had with them a Hundred and fifty Sail of Long Ships, a Land Army of Fifty thousand Men, Three hundred Chariots, and Two thousand Carts or Carriages drawn by two Horses apiece; and besides these, a great number of Arms of all sorts, and Engines of Battery, and an infinite Store of Corn, Provision, and all other Things necessary for War. The first City they set upon, was Entella; and having wasted and spoiled the Lands round about, they shut up the Inhabitants by a close Siege. The Campanians possessed the City at that time, and being terrified with the Multitude of their Enemies, sent for Aid to the other Cities, who hated the Carthaginians; but none of them came in to them, except them of Galeria, who sent them a Thousand Armed Men; who were intercepted by the Carthaginians, and cut off every Man. The Campanians, who inhabited Aetna, at first prepared to help them of Entella, upon the account of their Consanguinity; but hearing of the Slaughter of the Galerians, they judged it more Adviseable to sit still. Dionysius at that time had regained his former Sovereignty over the Syracusians. Hicetas therefore led a great Army thither, and encamped at Olympus, fortifying himself with a Breast-work and a Trench, and drew up against Dionysius, then playing the Tyrant in the City. But he protracted the Siege for some time through want of Provision, and marched away to Leontum, from whence he first moved. But Dionysius pursued him, and fell upon his Rear, which occasioned the whole Army to ingage. For Hircetas wheeled about, fought and routed him, killing Three thousand of his Mercenaries upon the Spot, and put the rest to Flight; and pursuing them so hotly, that he fell pell-mell with him into the City, and so possessed himself of the whole City of Syracuse, except the Island. And thus went Matters between Hicetas and Dionysius at that time.


Page 509

But Timoleon arriving at Rhegium the third Day after the taking of Syracuse, lay with his Fleet in the Port next to the City. At that time came into Port Twenty Carthaginian Gallies: The Rhegians favouring Timoleon, called an Assembly, and proposed Terms of Compounding Matters; so that the Carthaginians supposing Timoleon would be persuaded to return home; were not careful to place sufficient Guards, Timoleon therefore himself (not giving the least Ground to suspect his Flight) kept close to the Court, but ordered, that Nine of his Ships should set Sail, and make away with all the hast they could. In the mean time, while the Thoughts of the Carthaginians were intent upon the Speeches of the Rhegians, which were lengthen'd out of Purpose and Design, Timoleon privately withdraws himself, and makes to the Ship that was left, and hoises up Sail and away he goes. The Carthaginians thus deluded, endeavoured to pursue him; but because he was got too far off, and Night approached; Timoleon with his whole Fleet arrived safe at Tauromenum. Andromachus the Prince of that City, (who always was a Friend to the Syracusians,) courteously received the Refugees, and was greatly serviceable to them in their avoiding of the Pursuers. Hicetas afterwards with an Army of Five thousand Men came against Adriana, and encamped near the City. But Timoleon drawing some Regiments out of Tauromenum, marched from thence, having with him at the most but a Thousand Men. And going out of the Town in the Twilight, he reached Adriana the next Day; there he set up the Hicetians at the very time they happened to be at Meat, and broke in upon their Camp, and killed Three hundred, and took Six hundred Prisoners, and possessed himself of the Camp. To this Stratagem he added another, for he made straight away with all speed to Syracuse, and dispatching his March with all speed, he broke into the City on a sudden, and by the swiftness of his March came there before those that fled. And these were the Transactions of this Year.

Lycisco executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and Marcus Valerius and Marcus Popilius were created Roman Consuls when the Hundred and Ninth Olympiad was celebrated, wherein Aristolocus the Athenian won the Course. This was likewise the first time that the Romans entred into a League with the Carthaginians. In Caria, Idreius Prince of the Carians died, after he had reigned Seven Years, whom Ada (both his Wife and Sister) succeeded, and governed Four Years.

In Sicily, Timoleon being strengthened with the Confederacy of them of Adranita and Tynderita, greatly increased his Army. In the mean time there were great Confusions in Syracuse, by reason that Dionysius had got Possession of the Island Hicetas, Achradina, and the new City, and Timoleon the rest of the City; and lastly, the Carthaginians had entred the great Harbour with a Fleet of an Hundred and fifty Sail, and lay near, encamped with an Army of Fifty thousand Men. And now Timoleon was in great Perplexity, being invironed by so many Enemies; when on a sudden the Tables were turned. First Marcus, Prince of Catana, with a great Army came in to the Assistance of Timoleon. Afterwards many of the Forts and Castles (out of love of Liberty) sided with him, and presently the Corinthians sent Ten Gallies full of Soldiers, and Pay for them, to Syracuse.

By these Supplies Timoleon took Heart, and the Carthaginians were so discouraged and affrighted, that very imprudently they sailed out of the Harbour, and drew off their whole Army, and marched away into their own Territories. Hicetas being thus stripp'd of all Assistance, Timoleon, now stronger than the Citizens, possessed himself of all Syracuse. Presently after he received Messina (who had sided with the Carthaginians) into his Protection. And this was the State of Sicily at the time.

In Macedonia, Philip, who bore an Hereditary Hatred against the Illyrians, and had with them an everlasting Controversy, invaded their Country with a powerful Army, and wasted and spoiled their Lands, and after the taking of many Towns, returned with rich, Booty into Macedonia. Afterwards making an Expedition into Thessaly, he cast all the Tyrants out of the Cities; and by this means gained the Hearts of the Thessalians: For by gaining them to be his Allies, he hoped easily to procure an Interest in all Greece; and by the Issue it appeared so afterwards. For the bordering Grecians presently, in imitation of the Thessalians, very readily entred into a League with Philip.

Pythodorus was now Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Caius Plautius and Titus Manlius executed the Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time Dionysius being brought into extremity of Danger, and in a terrible Fright, was wrought upon by Timoleon to surrender the Castle, and upon Condition of Abdicating the Government, had Liberty safely to depart to Peloponnesus, with all his Goods and Movables.

And thus he, through Sloth and Cowardise, lost this so eminent and famous a Principality, bound fast (as they used to term it (with an Adamant, and spent the rest of


Page 510

his Days in a poor and mean Condition. Whose change of Fortune, and course of Life, exhibit a clear Example to those, who like Fools boast in the Times of Prosperity, For he, who a little before had Four hundred Gallies at Command, not long after in a small Skiff was conveyed to Corinth, and became a Spectacle to Admiration of a wonderful Change. Timoleon having possessed himself of the Island and Castles lately held by Dionysius, demolished all the Forts and Palaces of the Tyrants through the Island, and freed all the Towns from the Garisons. And continually employed himself in framing of Laws, and instituted such as were most proper for the Administration of the Democracy. And in his making such as related to private Contracts, he had a special Regard to Equality and mutual Recompence. Moreover he appointed a chief Magistrate to be Yearly chosen, whom the Syracusians call the Amphipolus of Jupiter Olympus, and the first Amphipolus was Callimenes. From hence arose the Custom amongst the Syracusians, to note their Years with the respective Governments of these Magistrates, which continues to this very time of writing this History, and though the Frame of the Government be now chang'd. For since the Romans imparted the Laws of their City to the Sicilians, the Office of the Amphipolus has still continued, being now grown old, having been executed above Three hundred Years. And thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at that time.

In Macedonia, Philip having persuaded all the Greek Cities in Thrace to Concord amongst themselves, made an Expedition against the Thracians. For Cersobleptes the Thracian King was continually destroying the Greek Cities in the Hellespont, and harrassing and spoiling the Country. Therefore Philip, to put a Check to the Designs and Progress of the Barbarians, invaded them with a great Army, and was so Victorious, that he forced them to pay a Tenth, as a Tribute to the Kingdom of Macedonia. And by building of strong Towns in convenient Places, he curb'd the Insolency of the Thracians. The Greek Cities therefore being freed from their Fears, with great Eagerness enter'd into a League of Confederacy with Philip.

As to Writers, Theopompus of Chius composed an History of the Acts of Philip, in Three Books, in which are interwoven the Affairs of Sicily. For beginning with the Sovereignty of Dionysius the Elder, he comprehended an Account of the Transactions of Fifty Years, and ended with the Expulsion of Dionysius the Younger. These Three Books are from the Forty first to the Forty third Year of the Fifty Years.

CHAP. XII.

The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The Preparations of the Carthaginians against Timoleon. The remarkable Siege of Perinthus by Philip. Pexodorus expells his Brother Adam from the Principality in Caria. Byzantium be

•

ieged by Philip.

WHEN the chief Magistracy of Athens was in the Hands of Sosigenes, and Marcus Valerius and Marcus Publius executed the Office of Consuls at Rome, Arymbas King of the Molossians died, after he had reigned Ten Years, leaving his Son Aeacidas the Father of Pyrrbus: But by the Help of Philip of Macedon, Alexander the Brother of Olympias succeeded Arymbas.

In Sicily, Timoleon marched against the Leontines, (to whom Hicetas had joined himself with a great Army,) and in the first place besieged the new City (as it was called). But the Garison being very strong, they easily repulsed the Assailants, and thereupon he raised his Siege without effecting any thing. Then he made for Engya, (at that time under the Tyranny of Leptines,) and ply'd it with continual Assaults, being very earnest and intent to set them free by the Expulsion of Leptines.

While Timoleon was thus employ'd, Hicetas marches away from Leontium with all his Forces, and besieg'd Syracuse; but having lost there a great part of his Army, he hasted back to Leontium. Timoleon at length so terrifi'd Leptines, that under the Terms of safe Conduct, he was sent away to Peloponnesus, and by these Banishments Timoleon expos'd to the Graecians the Trophies of his Victory over the Tyrants. And forasmuch as the Apolloniates were likewise under the Power of Leptines, he receiv'd Apollonia into his Protection, and restor'd them, as well as the Engyans, to their Liberty. But being in great want of Money, so that he knew not how to pay the Soldiers, he order'd a Thousand Arm'd Men, commanded by Expert Officers, to make Incursions into the Carthaginian Territories. These


Page 511

harrass'd the Country far and near, and got together abundance of rich Plunder and Spoil, and brought it to Timoleon, who expos'd all to publick Sale, and rais'd a vast Sum of Money, whereby they paid the Soldiers for a long time before-hand. Presently after he possess'd himself of Entella, and put to Death Fifteen of the Citizens, who adher'd to the Carthaginians, and restor'd the rest to their Liberties. Timoleon growing every Day in Reputation for his Valour and Conduct, all the Greek Cities through Sicily readily submitted to him, and he as readily set them at Liberty to govern by their own Laws. Many Cities likewise of the Sicani, Sicilians, and other Countries subject to the Carthaginians, sent presently their Ambassadors to him, in order to be receiv'd into a League, and be his Confederates.

But the Senate and People of Carthage perceiving, that their Officers were sluggish and unactive in the Management of the War, determin'd to send over others with a considerable Additional Force. And to that end, with all Dispatch, they rais'd out of their own City, and from among the Africans, all such as they judg'd able to bear Arms for this Expedition. And besides, they took care to be provided with a sufficient Stock of Money, and listed Mercenaries out of Spain, Gaul, and Ligurla. They fitted out likewise a great Navy, both of Long Ships and others, for carrying Provision, and in all other Respects were so careful and diligent, that nothing was wanting that was necessary.

At the time when Nichomachus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Caius Martius and Titus Manlius Torquatus were Roman Consuls, Phocion the Athenian subdu'd and expuls'd Clitarchus Prince of * Eretria, whom Philip had set over that City.

In Caria, Pexodorus, the youngest Brother, expell'd Adam out of the Principality, and reign'd Five Years, to the time of Alexander's Expedition into Asia. But the Power of Philip still encreasing, he march'd with an Army against Perinthus, which favour'd the Athenians, and much obstructed him in his Designs. He push'd on the Siege therefore with all Eagerness, and to that end incessantly batter'd the Walls with his Engines, from time to time relieving those that were tir'd with fresh Men: He made likewise Approaches with Towers of Fourscore Cubits high, mounting much above the Walls, whereby he greatly annoy'd the Besieg'd, being so high above them: He so ply'd them likewise with his Battering Rams, and undermin'd the Foundations of the Walls to that degree, that a great part of them tumbled down. But the Perinthians defended themselves with that Valour, that they speedily rais'd up a new Wall, upon which there were such Disputes and Fighting, the one to gain, and the other to defend the Wall, that it was to be admir'd.

In the mean time, while they were thus eagerly contending on both Sides, Philip being well furnished with Shot, mightily gall'd them upon the Wall. But the Perinthians, though they lost many Men every Day, were reinforc'd with Supplies of Men, Darts, and Shot, from Byzantium; so that hereby becoming of equal Force with the Enemy, they took Courage, and valiantly stood to it for the Preservation of their Country.

However the King remitted nothing of his former Heat and Diligence; and dividing his Army into several Battalions, girt the City round, and relieving his Men by Turns, assaulted the Walls continually Night and Day. He had an Army of Thirty thousand Men, and a vast Multitude of Darts and Engines, both for Battery and other Purposes; so that the Besieged were very sorely press'd. The Siege having now continued long, and many of the Townsmen killed and wounded, and Provision growing scanty, the Town was upon the Point of being surrender'd; when Fortune favouring the Distress'd, handed to them an unexpected Deliverance. For the growing Power of the King being nois'd abroad throughout Asia, the King of Persia, who now began to suspect the Greatness of Philip, commanded by his Letters the Lords Lieutenants of the Sea-Coasts to assist the Perinthians with what Forces they could. Upon which, they all unanimously sent to Perinthus a great Number of Mercenary Soldiers, Plenty of Coin, sufficient Provision, Weapons, and all other Things necessary for War. The Bizantians likewise sent thither a Commander, and the best of their Soldiers. The Forces now equal on both sides, and the War reviv'd, there was now again so sharp an Encounter, both to gain and defend the City, as that none could possibly exceed: For Philip, by the continual Batteries of the Rams, brought down part of the Wall, and by his Shot forc'd the Besieg'd from the Bu

•

warks, so that he made his way with a strong Body of Men through the Ruins of the Wall, and scal'd the Bulwarks that were before clear'd of them that should have defended them. The matter being disputed hand to hand at the Swords point, Death and Wounds follow'd, inasmuch as the Rewards of Victory put Life into the Valour of both Parties: For the Macedonians being assur'd they should have the Plunder of a rich City, and likewise be honourably rewarded by Philip, were resolv'd valiantly to undergo all Hardships whatsoever. The Besieged, on the other hand, having as it were before their Eyes the


Page 512

Miseries attending a Place taken by Storm, with generous and undaunted Resolutions, shunn'd nothing of Hazard, for their own and the Preservation of their Country. The Situation of the Place contributed much all along to the Besieged for the Batteling the Enemy: For Perinthus is situated on the Sea-side, upon a rising Neck of Land, in a Peninsula stretch'd out a Furlong in length: The Houses are close together, and very high; for one stands above another, according to the Ascent of the Hill; and the Form of the City represents, as it were, a Theatre. And therefore though a large Breach was made in the Walls, yet they within were but little prejudic'd thereby; for the strait and narrow Passage being barricado'd, the higher Houses were instead, and as advantageous as a Wall. Philip therefore having gain'd the Wall, after much Toil and Hazard, found another far stronger made by the Situation of the Houses: And besides all these Disadvantages, he saw that every thing necessary for War was readily and in great abundance sent to them from Byzantium; therefore he divided his Army into two Bodies; the one half he left with the best of his Commanders to carry on the Siege, and with the rest he marches speedily away to Byzantium, and lays close Siege to it on a sudden. Upon whick, the Townsmen were put into great fear and perplexity, having before sent away their Soldiers, Arms, and other things necessary for War, to the Perinthians. These were the things done at Perinthus and Byzantium at that time. Here Ephorus, one of the Writers, ends his History with the Siege of Perinthus. In his Memoirs he comprehends the Affairs both of the Greeks and Barbarians, from the return of the Heraclide, for the space of almost Seven hundred and fifty Years; and divides his History into Thirty Books, to every one of which he adjoins a Preface. Diyllus the Athenian continues this History of Ephorus, treating of the Actions of the Grecians and Barbarians to the Death of Philip.

CHAP. XIII.

The Athenians aid Byzantium. Philip raises the Siege. The Carthaginians transport Forces into Sicily. The remarkable Victory of Timoleon over the Carthaginians. The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The Works of Hiero in Sicily.

WHen Theophrastus was Lord Cancellor at Athens, and Marcus Valerius and Aulus Cornelius Roman Consuls, The hundred and tenth Olympiad began, in which Anticles the Athenian was Victor. Philip then besieging Byzantium, the Athenians judging he had broken the Peace they had made with him, forthwith fitted out a great Fleet against him in aid of the Byzantians; whose Example they of Chius, Coos, and Rhodes, and other Gracians follow'd, and sent Auxiliaries to the same Place. Whereupon Philip being startled at the Forces of the Grecians, rais'd both his Sieges, and made Peace with the Athenians and the rest of the Grecians that were in Arms against him.

In the mean time, the Carthaginians, after their great Preparations, transport their Forces into Sicily, which with those that were before in the Island, amounted to Seventy thousand Foot; and Horse, Chariots, and Waggons, no fewer than Ten thousand. They had also a Navy of Two hundred Men of War; and Transport-Ships for the conveying of Horses, Arms, and Provision above a Thousand. Timoleon, though he was inform'd of this great Preparation, yet was not at all afrighted with the Barbarians, tho' his Army was but small. He was at this time engag'd still in War with Hicetas, but at length agreed the matter, and by the accession of his Forces greatly increas'd his Army. And now he judg'd it most for his advantage to transfer the War with the Carthaginians into their own Territory; by this means to preserve the Country of his Confederates, and, on the other side, by Waste and Spoil to weaken the Enemy: To this end he forthwith muster'd his Army, consisting of Syracusians, Mercenaries, and other Confederates; and in a General Assembly, by a pithy Oration, advis'd them to be Courageous, for that all now lay at stake: Which was receiv'd with general Acclamation, and all prest him without delay to be led forth against the Enemy. Whereupon he advanc'd, not having with him above Twelve thousand Men: But as soon as he came into the Confines of Agrigentum, there arose a sudden Mutiny in his Camp; for a Mercenary Soldier, call'd Thracius, a bold and impudent Fellow, none exceeding him in that respect (lately a Companion of those Phocians who robb'd the Temple of Delphos) committed a Fact agreeable to his former Villanies: For whereas most of them who had an hand in that Sacrilege were overtaken by Divine Vengeance (as before related) this only Fellow seem'd to have


Page 513

escap'd; and at that time endeavour'd to persuade the Mercenaries to a Defection: For he bawl'd it out that Timoleon was craz'd and distracted, and that he was leading the Soldiers to certain and unavoidable Destruction: The Number of the Carthaginian Army (he said) was six times more than they; and so well furnish'd with all things necessary for War, that none could compare with them; and yet he assur'd them of Victory, playing away the Lives of the Soldiers, as it were, at Dice, because he was not able to pay them their Arrears, which had been advancing for a long time together: He persuaded them therefore to return to Syracuse, and demand their Pay, and not follow Timoleon in that desperate Expedition.

This Discourse was not unpleasant to the Mercenaries; and while they were just ready to revolt, Timoleon, by Intreaties and large Promises, at length prevail'd, and put an end to the Mutiny. However, a Thousand Men follow'd Thracius, whose Punishment was deferr'd for the present. And in the mean time Timoleon writ to his Friends at Syracuse to receive the Deserters courteously, and pay the Mercenaries their Wages; and so by this means he altogether extinguish'd the Fire of Sedition; but excluded those obstinate Mutineers from the Glory of a famous Victory.

In the mean time, having with fair Words reduc'd the rest to their former Obedience, he march'd towards the Enemy, which lay encamp'd not far off. Then he call'd the Army together, and encourag'd them to the Battel, by setting forth and aggravating the Sloth and Cowardize of the Carthaginians, and putting them in mind of the Successes of Gelon. And when all with one Voice cry'd out for Fighting without delay with the Barbarians, at that very time pass'd by some Carriage-Horses loaden with Bundles of Persley to strew in the Tents. Timoleon thereupon declar'd, that it was an Omen of Victory; for (as he said) the Crown at the Istmian Games was made up of the same Herb. Hereupon the Soldiers, by the Command of Timoleon, made themselves Crowns of Parsley; and with these round their Heads, with great Joy march'd against the Enemy, as if the Gods had assur'd them of certain Victory; as by the Issue it appear'd so to be: For beyond all expectation they overcame their Adversaries, not only by their own Valour, but by the special Help and Assistance of the Gods. For Timoleon, with a well-appointed Body of Men, march'd down from the Tops of certain Hills to the River; and upon a sudden, being himself in the middle of the Battel, attack'd Ten thousand of the Barbarians that were but newly pass'd over. Upon which, there was a very sharp Engagement, in which the Valour and Activity of the Greeks so far prevail'd, that a mighty Slaughter was made among the Barbarians. Whilst those that first pass'd over took their Heels and fled, the whole Carthaginian Army came over the River, in order to repair their Loss. Hereupon the Battel was renew'd; and while the Carthaginians were with their Multitude hemming in the Grecians round, on a sudden there arose such a violent Storm of Hail, Thunder, and Lightning, with a raging Tempest of furious Winds, which beat upon the Backs of the Grecians, but fell foul upon the Face of the Barbarians: So that Timoleon's Army with ease endur'd this tempestuous Shock; but the Carthaginians not able to bear the pressure of so many Adversaries, being at the same time hewn down by the Grecians, quit the Field and fled: And the whole Body made to the River, where both Foot, Horse, and Chariots were in that confusion mix'd one amongst another, and trodden under-foot one by another, and pierc'd through their Bodies by one another's Swords and Spears, as that a miserable Slaughterwas made without all possibility of Relief. Others being forc'd in heaps into the River by the Enemy's Horse, and pursu'd close at their backs, after receiving many Wounds, there perish'd. And many, though they were never toutch'd by the Enemy's Sword; yet through Fear, and the Throng and Difficulties of passage over the River, being press'd, in heaps one upon another, there breath'd out their last. And that which contributed no little to the common Destruction, the River was swollen to that excessive heighth, that many (especially such as attempted to swim over the Water with their Arms) were drown'd. In conclusion, Two thousand and five hundred, who made up the Sacred Brigade of the Carthaginians, and for Valour and the Glory of their Arms, and greatness of their Estates, excell'd all the rest, fought valiantly, and were cut off every Man. Of the rest of the common Soldiers there were slain at least Ten thousand, and above Fifteen thousand taken Prisoners. Many of the Chariots being broken in pieces in the Fight, only Two hundred fell into the hands of the Grecians; but all the Bag and Baggage. The greatest part of the Arms were lost in the River: But a Thousand
Brigandines and Ten thousand Shields were brought into the Tent of Timoleon; of which some were hung up in the Temples at Syracuse, and others distributed among the Confederates; others were sent to Corinth, and order'd to be dedicated to Neptune. And although very rich Spoils were taken (for that the Carthaginians abounded in Gold and Silver, Plate, and other Furniture of great value, according to


Page 514

the Grandeur and Riches of their Country) yet he gave all to the Soldiers, as the Reward of their Valour. The Carthaginians that escap'd, with much ado got to Lilibeum, in such Fear and Consternation, that they durst not go on board their Ships, in order to return to Africa; as if through the Anger of the Gods, they should be swallow'd up by the Libean Sea.

As soon as the News of this Overthrow was brought to Carthage, their Spirits were mightily broken, and they expected that Timoleon would invade them with his Army upon the first Opportunity: Therefore they forthwith recall'd Gescon, the Brother of Hanno, from his Banishment, and being a stout Man, and an experienc'd Soldier, created him General. But looking upon it not Adviseable for the future to venture the Lives of the Citizens, they resolv'd to hire Soldiers out of other Nations, and especially from among the Graecians, not doubting but that many would List themselves, by reason of the large Pay promis'd by the rich Carthaginians. They sent likewise Ambassadors into Sicily, with Orders to strike up a Peace upon any Terms whatsoever.

After the end of this Year Lysimachides was created chief Governor of Athens, and Quintus Servilius and Marcus Rutilius bore the Office of Consuls at Rome. Then Timoleon, as soon as he return'd to Syracuse, in the first place expell'd those as Traytors out of the City, who had deserted him through the Instigation of Thracius. These being transported into Italy, they seiz'd upon a Sea-Port Town of the Brettians, and plunder'd it. Upon which the Brutians were so enrag'd, that they forthwith came against them with a great Army, took the Town by Storm, and put every Man of them to the Sword. And such was the miserable End of these Deserters of Timoleon, as the just Punishment of their former Villany.

Afterwards he took Posthumius the Tyrant, and put him to Death, who had infested the Seas with his Piracies, and came at that time into the Port of Syracuse as a Friend. He receiv'd likewise with all Demonstrations of Kindness Five thousand Persons, whom the Corinthians had sent over to plant new Colonies. The Carthaginians now by their Ambassadors having earnestly su'd to him for Peace, he granted it to them upon these Terms; That all the Greek Cities should be set free; That the River Lycus should be the Bound between the Territories of both Parties; and, That the Carthaginians should not for the future assist any of the Tyrants against the Syracusians. Having afterwards subdu'd Hicetas, he order'd him an Honourable Burial; and took Aetna by Storm, and put all the Campanians to the Sword. And he so terrifi'd Nichodemus the Tyrant of the Centorippians, that he fled out of the City. Then he forc'd Apoilonides, who Lorded it over them of Agyra, to Abdicate the Government, and the Inhabitants thus freed, he inroll'd them as Citizens of Syracuse. To conclude, having rooted up all the Tyrants throughout the whole Island, and freed the Cities from their Oppression, he receiv'd them all into his Protection, and they became his Confederates. Then he caus'd Proclamation to be made throughout all Greece, That the Senate and People of Syracuse offer'd Houses and Lands to all who were willing to be Members of the Commonwealth of Syracuse: Upon which, many came flocking over as to the Possession of a new Inheritance. At length Forty Thousand new Planters had their Shares by Lot in those Lands that yet remained undivided within the Territories of Syracuse; and Ten thousand were allotted to Agyra, being a very large and pleasant Country.

Not long after, he caus'd all the ancient Laws of Diocles for the Government of the Syracusians, to be review'd, and amended. Such part of them as concern'd private Commerce and Inheritances he alter'd not; but those that related to the Administration of the Publick Government, and the Commonwealth, he amended as he thought most expedient. Cephalus a Corinthian, a Learned and Prudent Man, was chiefly concerned in this Emendation and Correction of the Laws. When this Business was finish'd, he translated the Leontines into Syracuse, and greatly enlarg'd Camarina with Multitudes of Inhabitants. And to sum up all, he brought Things to that pass throughout all Sicily, (now through his Care in perfect Peace and Tranquility,) as that the Cities in a very short time abounded in Wealth, and all Earthly Blessings. For through the Seditions and Intestine Wars, (which Sicily labour'd under for a long time together,) and the many Tyrants that set up for themselves, it was brought to that miserable Condition, that the Cities were depopulated, and the Lands lay wast and untill'd, and no Crops to be had for the Supply of Daily Food. But now that there were many Plantations of Colonies bless'd with a constant Peace, and the Land was every where manur'd and improv'd by the Labour of the Husbandman, it began to yield all sorts of Fruits, which being vented (with great Advantage) to the Merchants, the Inhabitants grew exceeding rich in a very short time. And this abundance of Wealth occasion'd in that Age many stately


Page 515

Structures to be erected up and down in Honour of the Gods. As one among the rest near to the Island of Syracuse, called The House of Sixty Beds, built by Agathocles, for Greatness and Beauty excelling all the Works in Sicily; and because (as it were in Contempt) it overtop'd all the Temples of the Gods, (as a manifest Indication of their Anger,) it was beaten down by a Thunderbolt. At the lesser Haven likewise there were Towers built of Outlandish Stone, in which were Inscriptions cut, and the Name of Agathocles, who rais'd them. Besides these, not long after were built by Hiero the King an Olympus in the Market-place, and an Altar near the Theatre a Furlong in length, and in height and breadth proportionably.

In the lesser Cities likewise, as in Agyra, (which by reason of the Richness of the Soil as aforesaid received new Colonies,) he built a Theatre, (the most Glorious of any in Sicily next to that at Syracuse,) and erected Temples to the Gods, built a Court, a Market-place, and stately Towers, and rais'd over the Tombs and Monuments many large Pyramids of admirable Workmanship.

CHAP. XIV.

Elatea taken by Philip. Great Consternations in Athens for fear of Philip. The Boeotians join with the Athenians through the Sollicitation of Demosthenes. Python, a famous Orator. The Battel at Cheronaea between Philip and the Athenians. Lycides the Athenian General put to Death. Philip rebuk'd by Demades, made General of Greece. Timoleon dies.

WHEN Charondas executed the Office of Lord Chancellor of Athens, and LuciusAemilius and Caius Plotius were Roman Consuls, Philip King of Macedon being in Amity with many of the Graecians, made it his chief Business to bring under the Athenians, thereby with more ease to gain the Sovereignty of Greece. To that end, he presently possess'd himself of Elatea, and brought all his Forces thither, with a Design to fall upon the Athenians, hoping easily to overcome them, in regard they were not (as he conceiv'd) prepar'd for War, by reason of the Peace lately made with them; which fell out accordingly. For after the taking of Elatea, some hasted in the Night to Athens, informing them, that Elatea was taken by the Macedonians, and that Philip was designing to invade Attica with all his Forces. The Athenian Commanders surpriz'd with the Suddenness of the Thing, sent for all the Trumpeters, and commanded an Alarm to be sounded all Night: Upon which, the Report flew through all the Parts of the City, and Fear rouz'd up the Courage of the Citizens. As soon as Day appear'd, the People, without any Summons from the Magistrate, (as the Custom was) all flock'd to the Theatre. To which Place, as soon as the Commanders came, with the Messenger that brought the News, and had declar'd to them the Business, Fear and Silence fill'd the Theatre, and none who were us'd to influence the People, had a Heart to give any Advice. And although a Crier call'd out to such as ought to declare their Minds, what was to be done in order to their Common Security, yet none appear'd who offer'd any thing of Advice in the present Exigency. The People therefore in great Terror and Amazement cast their Eyes upon Demosthenes, who stood up and bid them be Couragious, and advis'd them forthwith to send Ambassadors to Thebes, to Treat with the Boeotians to join with them in Defence of the Common Liberty; for the shortness of Time (he said) would not admit of an Embassy of Aid from the other Confederates, for that the King would probably invade Attica within Two Days; and being that he must march through Boeotia, the main and only Assistance was to be expected from them. And it was not to be doubted, but that Philip, who was in League with the Boeotians, would in his March sollicit them to make War upon the Athenians. The People approv'd of his Advice, and a Decree was forthwith Recorded, that an Embassy should be dispatch'd as Demosthenes had advis'd. But then it was debated, who was the most Eloquent Person, and so most fit to undertake this Affair. Whereupon Demosthenes being pitch'd upon to be the Man, he readily comply'd; forthwith hasted away, prevails with the Boeotians, and returns to Athens. The Athenians therefore having now doubled their Forces by the Accession of the Boeotians, began again to be in good Heart; and presently made Charetes and Physicles Generals, with Command to march with the whole Army into Boeotia. All the Youth readily offer'd themselves to be Listed, and therefore the Army with a swift


Page 516

March came suddenly to Cheronaea in Boeotia. The Boeotians wondred at the quickness of their Approach, and were thereupon as diligent themselves, and hasting to their Arms, march'd away to meet the Athenians, and being joined, they there expected the Enemy.

Philip indeed had first sent Ambassadors to the Council of the Boeotians, amongst whom the most famous was Python; for he was so Eminent for Eloquence, that in the Senate he was set up to encounter Demosthenes in the Business relating to the Confederacy, excelling indeed the rest by far, but judged inferior to Demosthenes. Demosthenes himself, in one of his Orations, glories (as if he had done some mighty Thing) in a Speech of his against this Orator, in these Words:
 
Then I yielded not a jot to Python, strutting in his Confidence, as if he would have overwhelm'd me with

•

a Torrent of Words.

 However, though Philip could not prevail with the Boeotians to be his Confederates, yet he resolv'd to fight with them both. To this end, (after a stay for some time for those Forces that were to join him,) he march'd into Boeotia with an Army of at least Thirty thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse. Both Armies were now ready to ingage, for Courage and Valour neither giving Place to the other; but as to Number of Men, and Skill in Martial Affairs, the King was far Superior. For having fought very many Battels, and for the most part coming off a Conqueror, he had gain'd much Experience in Matters of War; on the other hand, Iphicrates, Chabrius, and Timotheus, (the Athenians best Commanders) were now dead; and Chares, the chief of them that were left, differ'd but little from a common Soldier, as to the Wisdom and Conduct of a General. About Sun-rising the Armies on both Sides drew up in Battalia. The King order'd his Son Alexander (who was then newly come to Man's Estate; and had even at that time given evident Demonstrations of his Valour, and the Sprightliness of his Spirit in managing Affairs) to Command one Wing, joining with him some of the best of his Commanders. He himself with a choice Body of Men commanded the other Wing, and plac'd and dispos'd the Regiments and Brigades in such Posts and Stations as the present Occasion requir'd. The Athenians marshall'd their Army according to the several Nations, and committed one Part to the Boeotians, and commanded the rest themselves. At length the Armies engag'd, and a fierce and bloody Battel was fought, which continu'd a long time with great Slaughter on both sides, uncertain which way Victory would incline, until Alexander earnest to give an Indication of his Valour to his Father, charg'd with a more than ordinary Heat and Vigour, and being assisted with many stout and brave Men, was the first that broke through the main Body of the Enemy next to him, with the slaughter of many, and bore down all before him: And when those that seconded him did the like, then the Regiments next to the Former were broke to pieces. At length, the Earth being strew'd with heaps of Dead Carkasses, those with Alexander first put the Wing oppos'd to them to flight. The King himself likewise in the Head of this Regiment, fought with no less Courage and Resolution; and that the Glory of the Victory might not be attributed to his Son, he forc'd the Enemy, oppos'd to him, to give ground, and at length put them to a total Rout, and so was the chief Instrument of the Victory. There were above a Thousand Athenians killed in this Battel, and no fewer than Two thousand taken Prisoners. A great Number likewise of the Boeotians were slain, and many fell into the Hands of the Enemy

After the Battel Philip set up a Trophy, and having given Liberty for the burying of the Dead, he Sacrific'd to the Gods for the Victory, and distributed Rewards to the Soldiers, who had signaliz'd their Valour according as every one had deserv'd.

Some report, that Philip having appointed a Wanton and Luxurious Banquet with his Friends, in Ostentation of his Victory, in his Cups passing through the Throng of the Prisoners, most contumeliously taunted the miserable Wretches with their Misfortune. Whereupon Demades the Orator, one of the Captives, spoke boldly to him, and fram'd a Discourse in order to curb the Pride and Petulancy of the King, in Words to this effect: 

Since Fortune, O King, has represented thee like Agamemnon, art thou not asham'd to act a part of Thersites?

 With this sharp Reproof, they say, Philip was so startled, that he wholly chang'd his former Course, and not only laid aside the Coronets, and all other Badges of Pride and Wantonness that attended his Festivals, but with Admiration releas'd the Man that had reprehended him, and advanc'd him to Places of Honour. In conclusion, he became so far Complaisant, and moulded into the Civilities of Athens through his Converse with Demades, that he releas'd all the Captives without Ransom. And remitting his Pride and Haughtiness, (the constant Attendant upon Victory,) he sent Ambassadors to Athens, and renew'd the Peace with them: And placing a Garison in Thebes, made Peace likewise with the Boeotians. After this Overthrow, the Athenians put to Death Lysides, the General of the Army, upon the Accusation of Lycurgus, who was the most


Page 517

highly preferr'd of any of the Orators of that Age; he had executed the Office of Lord-Treasurer of the City, (with great Commendation) for the space of Twelve years, and all his Life long had been in great Reputation for his Virtue and Honesty: But a most bitter Accuser. The Excellency and Sharpness of whose Speech, if any desire to know, he may best judge by his words us'd against Lycides, which follow.

O Lycides, thou wast the General of the Army; and tho' a Thousand Citizens are slain, two Thousand taken Prisoners, a Trophy erected to the Dishonour of this City, and all Greece inslav'd, and all this done thou being Captain and General, yet dar'st Live and view the Light of the Sun, and blushest not to shew thy Face in the Forum, thou who art born the Monument of thy Country's Shame and Dishonour.

A thing very remarkable hapned at this time. For when this Battel was fought at Cheronea, the same Day and Hour another was fought in Italy between the Tarentines and Lycanians, in which Archidamus the King of Lacedaemon was slain, who had reign'd Three and twenty years. Agis his Son succeeded him, and Govern'd nine years. About that time likewise dy'd Timotheus, Prince of Heraclea in Pontus, in the Fifteenth year of his Principality, whose Brother Dionysius succeeded, and reign'd Two and thirty years.

Phrynichus bore the Office of chief Magistrate of Athens, and Titus Manlius Torquatus, and Publius Decius were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome; when Philip bearing his Crest high upon the account of his Victory at Cheronea, and having struck a Terror into the most Eminent Cities of Greece, made it his great Business to be chosen Generalissimo of all Greece. It being therefore nois'd abroad, that he would make War upon the Persians, for the Advantage of the Graecians, and that he would revenge the Impiety by them committed against the Sacreds of the Gods, he presently wan the Hearts of the Graecians.

He was very Liberal and Courteous likewise to all, both private Men and Communities; and publish'd to the Cities, that he had a Desire to Consult with them concerning Matters relating to the Publick Good. Whereupon, a General Council was call'd, and held at Corinth, where he declar'd his Design to make War upon the Persians, and what probable grounds there were of Success, and therefore desir'd the Council to join with him, as Confederates in the War.

At length he was created General of all Greece, with absolute Power, and thereupon he made mighty preparation for that Expedition, and having order'd what Quota of Men every City should send forth, he return'd into Macedonia. And thus stood the Affairs and Concerns of Philip.

In Sicily, Timoleon, after he had settl'd all things in right and due Order in Syracuse, dy'd, having govern'd Eight years. The Syracusians who highly honour'd him for the many great Services done to their Country, bury'd him in great State and Pomp, and when the Body was to be brought forth, great multitudes were got together, and the Syracusians publish'd a Decree, that Two hundred Mina's should be expended upon the Charge of his Funeral, and that his Memory should be honour'd yearly for ever with Musick, Horse-Coursing, and Gymnick Sports, for that he had subdu'd the Barbarians, planted Colonies in the greatest Greek City in Sicily, and rescu'd the Sicilians from Slavery.

About this time Ariorarxanes dy'd in the Twenty sixth year of his Reign, and was succeeded by Methridates, who Reign'd Five and thirty Years. At the same time, the Romans fought with the Latins and Campanians, near the City Suessa, and routed them, and confiscated part of their Lands. And Manlius the Consul, who gain'd the Day, triumph'd for the Victory.

CHAP. XV.

Philip consults the Oracle at Delphos. Marries his Daughter Cleopatra, to the King of Epirus. Encourag'd to the Persian War by Neoptolemus his Verses. Philip's Pride. His Murther. The Cause of it, and how it was done, and by whom.

WHen Pythodorus was chief Governor of Athens, and Quintus Publius and TiberiusAemilius Mamercus were Roman Consuls, the Hundred and Eleventh Olympiad was celebrated, wherein Cleomentis Cletorius wan the Prize. In this Year Philip began the


Page 518

War against the Persians, and forthwith sent A ta

•us

 and Parmenio before into Asia to free the Greek Cities there from Slavery. He himself intending to have the Concurrence of the Gods, consulted the Oracle at Delphos, whether or no he should be victorious over the King of Persia. The Answer was thus,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

The Ox is crown'd when's end is near at hand,

To offer him, a Man doth ready stand.

This doubtful Answer, Philip constru'd to his own advantage, as if the Oracle had expresly foretold, that he should lead away the Persian King as a Victim to the Sacrifice. But in truth, it fell out quite otherwise, and by the effect it appear'd, that it had a contrary Signification, to wit, that Philip in a Throng, at the time of a Sacred Festival was to be knock'd on the Head like a Bullock crown'd with a Garland, for Sacrifice.

In the mean time, he was very jocund, as if he had conquer'd Asia already, and concluded the Gods were engag'd with him in the Expedition. Without delay therefore he offer'd most costly and magnificent Sacrifices, and at the same time, solemnized the Marriage of his Daughter, Cleopatra, by Olympias: He Marry'd her to Alexander, King of Epirus, Brother of Olympias. Having therefore a desire of a considerable Appearance of the Graecians at this Nuptial Festivity, conjoin'd with his Religious Sacrifices, he made most pompous Preparation for the Entertainment of his Friends and Guests, both with Musick, Dancing, and Feasting.

To this End, he Invited those that were his special Friends and Familiars, all over Greece, and commanded his Servants and Attendants that they should invite as many Strangers from all Places as were of their own Acquaintance. And his main design in all this, was, that he might assure all the Graecians of his Kindness towards them, and testify his Gratitude by these Friendly Entertainments, for the Honours conferr'd upon him. A vast Concourse of People therefore were got together from all Places, to the Solemnity of these Nuptials, which were magnificently Solemniz'd at Aeges in Macedonia, with all sorts of Sports and Plays; so that not only Noblemen and Persons of Quality, but even many great Cities presented Philip with Crowns of Gold. Among the Cities, Athens made one; and when the Common Cryer with a loud Voice presented the Crown sent from them to Philip, he clos'd with this, That if any Plotter of Treason against Philip, should hereafter slee to Athens for shelter, he should be forthwith deliver'd up. By this accidental Publication of this Cryer, it seem'd to be intimated (as it were by some Divine Providence) that some piece of Treachery was near at hand to be executed.

There were several other the like Words (as by a Divine Instigation) uttered, which portended the King's Death. There was then at the Festival, Neoptolemus the Tragedian, remarkable above all others for the Loudness of his Voice, and Famous and Eminent in other respects. He had commanded him to repeat some Verses which he was ordered to compose, especially relating to the Persian Expedition. Whereupon, he began to recite a Witty Poem, proper (as he thought) to Philip's intended Passage into Asia, wherein he set forth the Glory and Greatness of the Persian King; and though he was so Famous all the World over, yet that Fortune would some time or other bring him down. The Poem was thus,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

Y're Minds are Higher than the Sky o'er-grown,

The greatest part of Earth you wish y're own;

Houses to Houses join; Fools without end,

You would y're Lives as well as Lands extend.

But doleful Death, alas! Although ye do

Creep towards, it will gallop unto you,

Of long Hopes very shortly cut the Clue.


Page 519

He added likewise other to the same Sense with these. But Philip resting wholly upon these recited, his Thoughts were altogether, full of his Conquering the King of Persia. And he much revolv'd in his Mind the Answer given him by the Oracle, which agreed in all Points with the Words of the Tragedian.

After the Feast for that time was ended, and the Sports were to be renew'd the next Day, a great number of People in the Night-time flock'd into the Theatre. And whereas twelve Images of the Gods (amongst other sumptuous Preparations) most curiously wrought and richly adorn'd, were brought forth in pompous Procession, the Image of Philip cloth'd like the Gods in every respect, made the Thirteenth, hereby arrogating to himself a Place, as if he would be inthron'd among the Gods. The Theatre being now full; he himself came forth cloathed in a white Robe, his Life-Guard following him at a great Distance, designing thereby to evidence it to all, that he judg'd himself secure in the Hearts and Affections of the Grecians, and therefore stood not in need of the Guard of his Halberteers. While he was thus with, loud and joyful Acclamations cry'd up (as it were) to the Stars, and the whole Multitude resounded his Praise, upon a sudden, and beyond all Mens expectation, he was treacherously murther'd.

But for the Clearer and more distinct Understanding of the History in this matter, we shall first relate the Causes and Grounds of this Assassination.

There was one Pausanias, a Macedonian, of the City call'd Oristis, one of the King's Esquires of the Body, and for his Beauty dearly belov'd of him. This Man taking notice how much another young Youth of the same Name was doted on by Philip, fell upon him with very foul and opprobrious Language, telling him he was an Hermaphradite, for that he prostituted himself to the Lust of every one that would. He resented this Disgrace very ill, but conceal'd it for a while. Afterwards consulting with Attalus what was to be done for the future, he determin'd presently after, in an unusual manner, to put an end to his own Life. For within a while after, in a Battel wherein Philip was engag'd against Plurias, King of the Illyrians, Pausanias in the heat of the Fight interpos'd himself between the King and the Enemy, and receiv'd all the Darts upon his own Body that were cast at him, and so dy'd upon the Spot. The manner of his Death being nois'd abroad, Attalus one of the Courtiers, and in great esteem with the King, invited the other Pausianas to a Feast, and after he had made him drunk, expos'd his Body, thus over-charg'd with Wine, to be abus'd by the Filthy Lusts of a Company of base Sordid Fellows. When he was Sober, he was highly enrag'd at the abominable Abuse, and complain'd against Attalus to the King; who though he was much offended at the Wickedness of the Fact, yet by reason of his Relation to him, and that he had present occasion to make use of him in his Service, he would not punish him. For he was Uncle to Cleopatra, whom the King had marry'd as his Second Wife, and was design'd General of the Army sent before into Asia, being a very stout and valiant Man. To pacify therefore Pausanias, whose Spirit was highly Exasperated for the intolerable Injury offer'd him, he bestow'd on him many rich Gifts, and advanc'd him to a more Honourable Post in his Guards. But Pausanias's Anger was implacable, and therefore determin'd not only to revenge himself upon the Author of this Abuse, but upon him that wav'd doing him Justice by the inflicting of Punishment. And Hermocrates, the Sophist, greatly confirm'd him in this his Resolution. For Pausanias conversing with him, and in Discourse asking him, by what means a Man might make himself most famous? The Philosopher answer'd, by killing him that has done the greatest things; for whenever he is nam'd, then he likewise that kill'd him will be sure to be remember'd. Pausanias making use of this Answer, as an incentive to his Rage, the Restlessness of his disturb'd Spirit would admit of no further delay, but laid his Design in the time of the Festivals in this manner. He first plac'd Horses at the Gates of the City, then he himself return'd and stood at the Entrance into the Theatre, with a Gallick Sword hid secretly under his Coat. Philip commanded his Friends that came along with him, to go before him into the Theatre, and his Guard were at a considerable distance from him. Whereupon, the Traytor perceiving that the King was alone, ran him into the side through the Body, and laid him dead at his Feet, and forthwith fled to the Horses that were prepar'd for him at the Gates. Hereupon presently some of the Life-Guard ran in to the Body, others pursu'd the Assassinate, amongst whom were Leonnatus, Perdiccas and Attalus. Pausanias made so swiftly away, and nimbly mounted his Horse, that he had certainly escap'd, but that a Branch of a Vine caught hold of the Heel of his Shoe, and so entangl'd him that down he fell: Upon which Perdiccas with his Fellows fell upon him as he was endeavouring to rise, and after many Wounds


Page 520

given him, there slew him. And thus Philip, (the most Potent of all the Kings in Europe in that Age, and who for the Greatness of his Dominion associated himself for Majesty into the number of the Twelve Gods) came to his end, after he had Reign'd about Four and twenty Years.

This King from very small Beginnings, gain'd the largest Dominion in Greece; and is judg'd to have enlarg'd the Bounds of his Kingdom, not so much by Arms, as by his fair Tongue, and his complaisant and courteous Demeanour towards all he had to deal with: For it is reported, That Philip himself would often boast more of his Military Art and Policy, and of the gaining of his Enemies by fair Words, than in the Strength and Valour of his Soldiers. For he was us'd to say, That the Honour of winning of Battels was common and due to the rest of the Army with himself; but the Praise and Commendation due to Affability and a pleasant Converse, was peculiar to himself alone.

And thus being now come to the Death of Philip, we shall end this Book, as we at first design'd. The following we shall begin with the Succession of Alexander into his Father's Kingdom, and endeavour to comprehend all his Actions in one Book.


Page 521

BOOK XVII.

THE former Book being the Sixteenth of our History, began with theReign of Philip the Son of Amyntas, and comprehended not only the Things done by him to the very Day of his Death, but the Actions and Affairs of other Kings, Cities, and Countries during the space of Four and twenty Years. Being now in this to declare what follow'd, we shall begin with the Reign of Alexander; and in treating of the Actions of this Prince, from the Beginning to the End, we shall take along with us the most remarkable Things done through all Parts of the World.

And the Relations (we conceive) will be the better remembred, if Things be methodically digested, as it were, into distinct Heads, so as that the Beginning and End may, as by one Thread, be knit one to the other: For this King did great Things in a very short time, and excell'd all the Princes that ever were before him in his wonderful Atchievements, effected by his own Valour and Policy. For he Conquer'd a great Part of Europe, and almost all Asia, within the space of Twelve Years: So that his Fame was (deservedly) advanc'd to that degree, that in Glory he surmounted all the Heroes and Semigods.

But we need not (we judge) in a Preface anticipate any of the worthy Actions of this King; for the particular Relations themselves will sufficiently evidence his Greatness, and the Fame and Glory of his Name. Alexander therefore descended from Hercules on the Father's side, and from Achilles on the Mother's, seem'd to derive his Valo

•r as well as his Person from such Famous Ancestors.

The Time thus stated for this present Relation, we return to the Course of our History.

CHAP. I.

Conspiracies of the Cities against Alexander. The Athenians send Ambassadors to Alexander to beg Pardon. He's made General by the Amphictyons. Attalus kill'd by Alexander's Command. The Wickedness of Bagoas. Darius commended. Raises Forces. A Description of Mount Ida. Alexander invades the Illyrians, and others. Thebes besieg'd by Alexander, and raz'd. The Miseries of Thebes. Prodigies. Alexander demands Demosthenes and others to be deliver'd up to him by the Athenians: Their Answer. He returns into Macedonia; and Feasts his Soldiers.

WHEN Evaenetus was Lord Chancellor in Athens, and Lucius Furius and CaiusManlius were Roman Consuls, Alexander ascended the Throne, and in the first place executed Justice upon the Murtherers of his Father: And when he had with great care celebrated his Funerals, he set in order the Concerns of the Kingdom much better than most expected: For being very young, and upon that account despis'd, he sought first to win the Common People by fair Words and courteous Addresses: Amongst others, he told them that the Name of the King was only chang'd, but that the Government should not be manag'd a jot worse than it was when his Father was alive. He courteously likewise gave Audience to the Ambassadors, and desir'd the Grecians that they would have the same Kindness for him that they had for his Father, which he so esteem'd, as that he look'd upon it as part of his Inheritance. Then he employ'd himself in the frequent Trainings of the Soldiers, and in Martial Exercises, and brought the Army readily to submit to his Commands. Attalus, the Uncle of Cleopatra, Philip's other Wife, conspir'd to gain the Kingdom; and therefore he


Page 522

resolv'd to take him out of the way, For Cleopatra was brought to bed of a Son a few Days before the Death of Philip, and Attalus was sent a little before as General with Parmenio his Colleague, with an Army into Asia, where by his Bribes and fair Tongue he so gain'd the Hearts of the Soldiers, that the Army was wholly at his Devotion: Therefore the King conceiv'd he had just cause to be jealous of him, lest if he should side with the Grecians (who he knew were his Enemies) he should by that means gain the Kingdom to himself. Therefore he made choice of Heccateus, one of his Friends, and sent him with a considerable Army into Asia, with Command to bring over Attalus alive if he could; and if he could not effect that, to take the first Opportunity to kill him. When he came into Asia, he join'd his Forces with Attalus and Parmenio, and watch'd a fit Opportunity to execute what he was commanded.

In the mean time, Alexander being inform'd that many of the Greciani were hatching some Mischief, in order to new Commotions, his Thoughts were greatly perplex'd and disturb'd. For the Athenians (Demosthenes stirring them up against the Macedonians) rejoyc'd at the News of Philip's Death, and resolv'd that the Macedonians should no longer domineer over Greece. To this end they sent over Ambassadors to Attalus, and privately consulted with him concerning the Management of the whole Affair, and stirr'd up many of the Cities to assert their Liberties. The Etolians made a Decree to recall the Exiles of Acarnania, whom Philip had driven out of their Country. The Ambrociots, by the Persuasion of Aristarchus, drave outthe Garison that was there, and restor'd the Democracy. The Thebans likewise decreed to cast out the Garison that was in the Citadel of Cadmea, and that Alexander should never with their Consent have Command in Greece. The Arcadians also, as they were the only People that refus'd to give their Consent that Philip should be General of Greece, so they now rejected Alexander. The rest of the Peloponnesians, as the Argives, Eleans, Lacedaemonians, and some others were with all their might for their own Government. To conclude, many of the Nations beyond Macedonia waited for an Opportunity to rebell, and great Commotions there were among the Barbarians in those Parts.

Notwithstanding all which, and the Fears that were every where in the Kingdom, and though he was but a Youth, yet in a short time (beyond all expectation) he overcame all those Difficulties, and made all plain and clear before him, reducing some to their Duty by fair and smooth Words, and others through fear and dread of Punishments; and the rest he compell'd by force to stoop to his Sovereignty.

In the first place, he so far gain'd upon the Thessalians, both by Promises of large Rewards, and by his smooth and courteous Language (telling them how near of kin he was to them by his Descent from Hercules) that they by a Publick Decree declar'd him General of Greece, as that which descended to him from his Father. Having gain'd this Point, he brought over the bordering Nations to the same Good Opinion of him; Then he went to Pyle; and in the Senate of the Amphictyons he so manag'd his Matters, that by the General Consent of all, he was created Generalissimo of all Greece. He assur'd the Ambrociots, in a kind and smooth Oration made to them, That he had that Kindness for them, that he would presently restore them to that Liberty which they so lately sought to recover. But to strike the greater Terror into those that regarded not his Words, he came with a swift March with an Army of Macedonians in an hostile manner into Baeotia, and encamping near Cadmea, struck a Terror into the City of the Thebans.

About the same time the Athenians hearing of the King's coming into Boeotia, slighted him no longer: For the Quickness of the Youth, and his diligent dispatch of Business, greatly terrify'd the Revolters. Hereupon the Athenians order'd every thing they had in the Country to be brought into the City, and the Walls to be repair'd and guarded as well as they could; and sent Ambassadors to Alexander to beg pardon that they had no sooner own'd his Sovereignty; and order'd Demosthenes to accompany the Ambassadors: But he came not with the other to Alexander, but return'd from Citherone to Athens; either because he was afraid upon the account of the Speeches he had publickly made against the Macedonians, or that he was not willing to displease the Persian King. For it is reported that he had receiv'd great Sums of Money from the Persians, to beat down the Interest of the Macedonians by his Orations. Which was hinted (they say) by Eschines; in one of his Speeches; wherein he upbraids Demosthenes for taking of Bribes in these Words: Now the King's Gold plentifully bears all his Charges: But this will not serve his turn long; forCovetousness is never satisfy'd with Abundance.

But to proceed; Alexander return'd a very courteous Answer to the Ambassadors, which freed the Athenians from their Fears, and he order'd all the Ambassadors and Members of the Council to meet him at Corinth; where when those who were usually Members


Page 523

of the General Council were come, the King by a gracious Speech so prevail'd with the Grecians, that they created him General of all Greece, and decreed him Aid and Assistance against the Persians, in order to revenge the many Injuries the Greeks had receiv'd from them. Having gain'd the Honour he thus sought for, he march'd back with his Army into Macedonia.

Having now given an Account of the Affairs of Greece, we shall relate next what things were done in Asia: For Attalus presently upon the death of Philip, began to set up for himself; and to that end made a League with the Athenians, in order by their joint Concurrence to oppose Alexander. But afterwards he chang'd his Mind, and fent a Letter (written to him by Demosthenes) to Alexander, and in many smooth and flattering Expressions, endeavour'd to clear himself of all those Crimes and Miscarriages that were laid to his charge. However, he was afterwards kill'd by Hecateus, according to the King's Command; upon which, the Macedonian Army in Asia laid aside all Thoughts of a Defection, for that Attalus was now gone, and Parmenio greatly lov'd Alexander.

But being we are now about to write of the Kingdom of Persia, it's necessary that we begin our Relation a little higher.

Lately in the Reign of Philip,Ochus rul'd over the Persians, hated by all for his Ill Nature and Cruelty towards his Subjects. Bagoas therefore, a Colonel in the Army, and an Eunuch, but a wicked and beastly Fellow, poison'd the King by the help of his Physician, and plac'd the King's youngest Son Arses upon the Throne. He likewise murder'd the New King's Brothers (who were yet very young) that being thus bereft of his Relations, he might be more observant to himself.

But the Young Man abhorring the Wickedness of this Wretch, and plainly by many Tokens discovering his Design to punish him, Bagoas smelling it out, murther'd Arses and all his Children, in the Third Year of his Reign.

The Royal Family being thus extinct, and none of that Race left who could make any Title to the Crown, he advanc'd one of his Friends, call'd Darius, to the Kingdom. He was the Son of Arsanus, the Brother of Artaxerxes King of Persia. But the Fate of Bagoas was very remarkable; for having habituated himself to Cruelty, he resolv'd likewise to poison Darius in a medicinal Potion: But this Treason being discover'd, the King sent friendly to speak with him; and when he came deliver'd to him the Cup, and forc'd him to drink it off. And indeed Darius was judg'd worthy to enjoy the Kingdom, being look'd upon as the most Valiant Man among the Persians: For heretofore when Artaxerxes was engag'd in a Battel against the Cadusians, one of the Enemy, of a strong Body and couragious Spirit, challeng'd any of the Persians there present to a single Combat; which when none would dare to undertake, this Darius enter'd the List, and kill'd the Cadusian. For which he was highly rewarded by the King, and gain'd the chiefest Reputation for Valour among the Persians. And for this reason also he was accounted worthy of the Crown of Persia, and began to Reign about the same time that Philip dy'd, and Alexander succeeded in the Kingdom.

The Valour therefore of Alexander meeting with such a Man as this for his Adversary to cope with, was the occasion so many Battels were fought for the Empire with that Resolution as they were. But these Matters will appear more clear hereafter, when things come to be distinctly and particularly related: For the present we shall return to the orderly course of the History.

Darius being advanc'd to the Throne of Persia, a little before the Death of Philip, he was contriving how to avert the War threatned, and bring it over to Macedonia it self: But when he was dead, and so the King freed from that Fear, he slighted and despis'd the Youth of Alexander: But being for his Valour, and Activeness of Spirit in dispatch of Business, at length created General of all Greece, the Fame and Valour of the Young Man was in every Man's mouth.

And Darius now began to look about him, and employ'd his chief Care to raise Forces, and fitted out a great Fleet, and made choice of the best Officers he could procure to Command his Army, which was now very great and numerous; among whom Memnon the Rhodian was one, a Brave man, both for Valour and Discipline: Him the King Commanded to march to Cyzicus with Five thousand men, and to endeavour to take in that City: Who in order thereto, march'd his Army over the Mountain Ida. Some fabulously report, that this Mountain was so call'd from Ida of Meliseus.


Page 524

It is the highest Mountain of any about the Hellespont. In the middle is a Cave, as if it were made of purpose to entertain the Gods, in which it is reported, That Alexander gave Judgment concerning the Goddesses.

Here it's said, the Idei Dactyli were born, who were the first that were taught to work in Iron by the Mother of the Gods.

A thing also very Wonderful and Remarkable is ascrib'd to this Place: For at the rising of the Dog-Star there is such a Serenity and Calmness of the Air upon the Top of the Mount, as if it were there above all Storms and Winds; and then even at Midnight the Sun seems to rise, so as that its Rays appear not in a Circular Form, but casts abroad Flames of Fire here and there at a great distance, so that it seems as if Flakes of Fire in several Places overspread the Earth; which within a little while after are contracted into one Body till they come to the quantity of Three Plethras. At length when the Day is at hand, there appears as it were the compleat Body of the Sun inlightning the Air as it uses to do at other times.

But to proceed; Memnon having pass'd over this Mountain, assaults Cyzicum on a sudden, and was very near surprizing of it. But failing in his Design, he harrass'd the Country, and return'd loaden with a rich Booty.

In the mean time, Parmenio took Grynnius by Storm, and sold all the Inhabitants for Slaves. Then he besieg'd Pitane; but Memnon approaching, the Macedonians in a Fright quitted the Siege.

Afterwards Callas, with a Body of Macedonians and other Mercenaries, fought with the Persians in the Country of Troas, and being overpower'd with Number, was beaten, and forc'd to retire to Rhetium. And in this Condition was Asia at that time.

Alexander having quieted all the Commotions in Greece, march'd with his Army into Thrace, which struck such Terror into those People that had caus'd Tumults and Disorders there, that he forc'd them to submit to his Government. Then he invaded Peonia and Illyria, and the People bordering upon them, and having subdu'd those that had Revolted, he likewise brought under his Dominion the Barbarians next adjoyning. While he was engag'd in these Wars, he receiv'd Intelligence, that many of the Graecians were about to Revolt, and that a considerable Number of the Greek Cities, particularly Thebes, had already actually rejected his Sovereignty. He was hereupon in a great Rage, and return'd into Macedonia, with a Design to hasten into Greece to quiet the Tumults and Disturbances there.

In the mean time, the Thebans were intent upon driving the Macedonian Garison out of Cadmea, and to that end besieg'd the Citadel; and had no sooner done so, but Alexander was presently at the City Walls, and lay before it with his whole Army. The Thebans, before Alexander's Approach, had so begirt Cadmea with a deep Trench, and a strong Baracado of Timber, that neither Relief nor Provision could be brought in to them. They had sent likewise to the Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans, for their Assistance; and sollicited the Athenians by their Ambassadors to join with them, and had receiv'd a great Number of Arms freely given to them by Demosthenes, with which they arm'd those that had none.

Among those, to whom the Thebans address'd themselves for Assistance, the Peloponnesians had sent Forces as far as to the Isthmus, and there order's them to make an Halt till the King came, who was then expected. The Athenians, though they had decreed Aid to the Thebans; yet they sent no Forces thither, minding first to observe how Matters were like to go.

The Governor likewise of the Castle Cadmea taking Notice what great Preparation the Thebans were making for the Siege, was very diligent to strengthen and fortify the Walls, and had furnish'd the Garison with all sorts of Weapons.

But after that Alexander was come unexpectedly, and on a sudden, with his whole Army out of Thrace, and that it was uncertain whether any Assistance would come in to the Thebans, the Forces of the Enemy far exceeding them of Thebes, the Officers call'd a Council of War to consult what to determine, and there it was unanimously agreed to stand it out in Defence of the Liberties of their Country: Which Resolution being approv'd of by all the Citizens, all earnestly set themselves to the carrying on of the War.


Page 525

But the King forbore Force for some time, to the end they might have space to recollect themselves, not thinking that one only City would engage with so great an Army. For Alexander had with him above Thirty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, all old Experienc'd Soldiers, (Conquerors almost in every Battel under Philip,) in whose Valour he so far confided, that he doubted not but by them to put an End to the Persian Monarchy. However, if the Thebans had yielded to the present Difficulty of the Time, and had sent Ambassadors to the Macedonians with Terms of Peace, he had no doubt comply'd with them, and granted whatever they would have desir'd. For he wish'd greatly to have all Quiet in Greece, and to be Free and Undisturb'd in his War against the Persians. But when he saw that he was slighted by the Thebans, he resolv'd to destroy the City, and by that means to terrify all others that for the future should dare to Rebel. And now when the Army was drawn out in Battalia ready to engage, the King caus'd Proclamation to be made, that any of the Thebans should have Liberty to come in to him, and whosoever did, should enjoy the Common Liberty of Greece. On the other side, the Thebans, to shew themselves as forward in their Ambition as the Enemy; by the Voice of a Crier from an high Tower made another Proclamation, That whosoever had a Desire to join with the great King and the Thebans, to defend the Liberties of the Graecians, and kill the Tyrant of Greece, should be receiv'd by them. This touch'd him to the Quick, and he was thereupon so inrag'd, that he vow'd all sorts of Death to the Thebans, and so commanded the Engines to be prepar'd in order to an Assault, and other Things to be made ready for an Engagement.

In the mean time, the Greeks considering the utter Ruin that seem'd to hang over the Heads of the Thebans, were greatly affected with the Miseries wherewith they were like to be overwhelm'd, yet none durst appear to Relieve the City, for that they had rashly and inconsiderately brought apparent Destruction upon themselves: However, the Thebans were very forward and resolute to venture all to the utmost Extremity, though they were a little startled with some Prophecies and Prodigies from the Gods. The most Remarkable was, that in the Temple of Ceres, a slender Spider's Web was observ'd to spread out it self as broad as a Cloak, and to represent the Rainbow in an Arch'd Circumference. Concerning which, the Oracle at Delphos gave them this Answer:

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

The God to all by this Sign gives a Call:

To the Boeotia first; and Neighbours all.

And the Oracle in their own Country return'd them this other:

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

This Web for one works Bane,

And for another Gain.

This Prodigy happen'd about Three Months before the King came against Thebes. About the time of the King's Arrival, the Statues plac'd in the Forum seem'd to sweat to that degree, that great Drops in every part stood upon them. Moreover the Magistrates were inform'd, that in the Lake of Onchestus were heard Voices like roaring and bellowing of Oxen. And that the Waters in Dirce were to the view as if they had been all turn'd into Blood. There were others from Delphos that reported, that the Roof of the Temple, built by the Thebans out of the Spoils of the Phocians, appear'd to be besmear'd over with Blood.

Those who addicted themselves to the Interpretation of Prodigies, said, That the Web portended the Departure of the Gods from the City; by the Colour of the Rainbow, was signify'd various Troubles and Turmoils; by the appearance of Sweat, extream Miseries; and by the Blood, Slaughters and Destructions in the City.

Therefore they advis'd the Thebans, that insomuch as the Gods plainly pointed at the Ruin of the City, That they should not engage in Fight with the Enemy, but rather seek to agree Matters some other way, which was much more safe.

But the Thebans abated nothing of their Courage, but on the contrary push'd forward by the Heat of their Spirits, encourag'd one another with the Remembrance of their famous Victory at the Battel of Leuctra, and other Successes gain'd by their former Valour.


Page 526

So that trusting more to the Valour of their Arms, than making use of Prudent Councils, they ran headlong to the Ruin of themselves and their Country.

In the mean time, the King, within the space of Three Days, put all Things in order, both for assaulting the City, and marshalling of his Army for Battel. His Army he divided into Three Parts: One Part he order'd to assault the Out wall; another to fight the Thebans Army; and the third he kept for Reserves to relieve his Men, and renew the Fight as there should be occasion. But the Thebans plac'd their Horse within the Ramparts. Their Slaves that were manumitted, the Exiles and the Strangers that were Inhabitants, were order'd to defend the Walls: And the Thebans themselves (though they were far inferiour in Number) were resolv'd to fight those Macedonians commanded by the King, that were ready to make the Assault.

And now all the Women and Children ran to the Temples, to make Supplication to the Gods to deliver them from the Ruin that threaten'd them. When the Macedonians drew near, the Trumpets sounded a Charge, upon which both Armies set up a great Shout, and every one charg'd that Battalion to which he was appointed. By Day-break the Darts flew one at another, and those being quickly spent, they fell to it with their Swords Hand to Hand, so that the Fight presently was very sharp and bloody. For the Macedonians, through their Number (far exceeding the other) and the fierceness of their Charge, put the Enemy hard to it. On the other side, the Thebans heing stronger body'd Men, and us'd to Martial Discipline by their continual Exercises in the Schools, and more resolv'd than the other, resolutely went through all Difficulties whatsoever, so that many were wounded, and multitudes kill'd on both Sides. In the Heat of the Battel, a Man might have heard Shouts for Victory and Groans of Dying Men at one and the same time, and the Macedonians often calling out one to another, not to stain the Glory of their former Victories by any base Act of Cowardise in the present Engagement; and the Thebans pressing theirs not to suffer their Parents, Wives and Children, to be miserable Captives, and all their Families expos'd to the rageful Lust of the Macedonians, but that they would remember the Battels at Leuctra and Mantinea, and the noble Actions for which they were famous all the World over. So that the obstinate Resolution of both Parties occasion'd the Issue of the Battel to be very doubtful a long time.

Alexander perceiving how the Love of Liberty inflam'd the Courage of the Thebans, and that the Macedonians began to faint, commanded the Reserves to relieve them that were ingag'd. Upon which, the Macedonians coming with a fierce and sudden Charge upon the Thebans, now even tir'd out, bore them down and kill'd multitudes of them. However the Thebans would not yield the Enemy the Day, but stood to it with that Obstinacy, that they slighted all Misfortunes, and their Valour so strengthen'd their Resolution, that they cry'd out, That the Macedonians must own themselves worsted by the Thebans. And this is to be observ'd of them, That when all others (being still press'd upon by their Enemies with fresh Supplies one after another) are wont to flag, they only are the more Couragious, even when their weary'd Enemy is reliev'd by fresh Reserves.

While the Armies were thus resolutely engag'd, the King spy'd a Portal without any Guard, and sends away Perdiccas with some Regiments in order to possess himself of the Place, and so to break into the City. Perdiccas having presently executed the King's Command, the Macedonians through this little Gate forthwith rush'd into the City. And though the Thebans had a good while before worsted the Enemy's first Battalion, and were now ingag'd with the second, and full of Hopes of a perfect Victory, yet when they understood that the Enemy had possess'd themselves of part of the City, they forthwith retir'd within the Walls. And then both the Horse and Foot hasted back with all speed into the City, and trod many of their Fellow-Citizens under Foot, who there perish'd; and while they made into the City in this Trepidation and Confusion, many were kill'd by running upon their own Weapons in the strait and narrow Passages, and by falling into the Trenches. And in the midst of this Distraction, the Garison out of the Castle of Cadmea issu'd forth like a rapid Torrent upon the Backs of the Thebans, and fell upon them as they were in this Disorder and Confusion, and cut them down in Heaps. The City being thus taken, multitudes of all sorts of Cruelties were acted within the Walls. For the Macedonians, by reason of that Insolency of the Common Crier, were inrag'd against the Thebans beyond what the Law of Arms would allow, and with many Threats in their Mouths, flew upon the miserable People, and without all Pity or Compassion put all to the Sword that were in their way. However, among all these Calamities, the Courage of the Thebans and their Love to their Liberty was such, that they were so far from minding the Preservation of their Lives, as that when they met any of their Enemies, they would provoke them of their own accord to kill them. For after the


Page 527

City was taken, not a Theban ask'd any Quarter from a Macedonian, not a Man that sordidly bow'd down at the Feet of the Conqueror. Neither had the Enemy any Pitv, notwithstanding the Valour of the miserable People; nay, the whole Day (though it was long) was judg'd too short to satiate their most cruel Revenge. The whole City was plunder'd, poor Children, Boys and Girls, were dragg'd up and down, calling upon their Mothers by their Names with most lamentable Outcries. And to comprehend all in a few Words, whole Families, with all their Kindred, were hurried away, and the whole Body of the People brought under miserable Slavery. The Bodies of some of the Thebans, as they lay wounded upon the Ground, though they were upon the point of Expiring, yet clasping their Enemy in their Arms, breath'd out their Last with a sort of Joy and Content that their Enemy dy'd with them. Others, though they had but a meer Trunk of a Spear to lean upon, yet sought with whomsoever they met; and so by that last Attempt made it evident, how far they preferr'd their Liberty before their Lives. And though there was so great a Slaughter made, that every part of the City was fill'd with dead Carkasses, yet none that saw the miserable Condition of these poor Wretches pitied them. For even the Grecians, as the Thespians, Plateans, Orchomenians, and some others who hated the Thebans, (and who then bore Arms under the King,) broke in with others into the City, and amongst these dreadful Slaughters executed their Malice upon them. So that many sad Spectacles of most inhumane Cruelty might be seen throughout the whole City. Graecians butchering Graecians without all Compassion, and those of the same Language, Blood, and Nation, without any Regard to any of these Obligations, knock'd on the Head one by another. At length when Night came, the Houses were pillag'd, Women young and old were dragg'd out of the Temples, (whither they had sled,) and most vilely and filthily abus'd. There were kill'd of the Thebans above Six Thousand, and Three thousand made Captives, and a vast Treasure carry'd away. Above Five hundred Macedonians were slain, whom the King took care to bury. Presently after, the King caus'd the General Senate of Greece to meet, and referr'd it to their Determination how Thebes should be dealt with. When the Matter came to be debated, some who hated the Thebans were for putting them all to the Sword; and made it appear how they had join'd with the Barbarians against the Greeks. For in the time of Xerxes, they join'd as Confederates with the Persians against Greece; and were the only Graecians that were honour'd as Friends by the Persian King, and their Ambassadors plac'd and preferr'd before Kings. These, and such-like, being remember'd and inforc'd, they so incited the Senators against the Thebans, that they Decreed, That theCity should be raz'd to the Ground, and the Captives sold for Slaves; That all the Fugitives of Thebes should be driven out of all Parts of Greece, and no Theban should be entertain'd by any Graecian. Hereupon the King according to the Decree raz'd the City, which struck a Terror into all the Graecians that had revolted. By the Sale of the Captives, he rais'd Four hundred and forty Talents of Silver.

After this, he sent to Athens to demand Ten of the Orators to be deliver'd up to him, (amongst whom Demosthenes and Lycurgus were the chief,) because they had stirr'd up the People against him. Upon which a General Assembly was call'd, and when the Ambassadors were introduc'd, and had deliver'd their Message, the People were greatly troubled and perplex'd, desiring on the one hand to preserve the Honour and Dignity of the City, and on the other hand to consult their own Safety, considering the Destruction of Thebes, and that some eminent Mischief might befal themselves; and thus they were made more cautious by their Neighbours Misfortunes. At length, after many Speeches made in the Assembly upon this Account, Phocio, that good Man, who differ'd from Demosthenes in his Politicks, stood up and said, That it would very well become those who were demanded to imitate the Daughters of Leo and the Hyacinthides, by offering up their Lives of their own accord to prevent the Ruin of their Country. And told them, That it was Baseness and Cowardise to refuse to dye for the Preservation of the City.

At this Motion the People were highly incens'd, and in a popular Tumult threw Phocio out of the Senate. Then the People (by a studied Speech made by Demosthenes) being mov'd to Compassion, declar'd, That they would defend the Men to the utmost. At length Demades, wrought upon (as is reported) by the Friends of Demosthenes, for Five Talents of Silver, gave his Opinion for the securing and preserving of the Orators; and read the Decree, which was drawn by himself with great Cunning and Artifice.


Page 528

In which was contain'd an Apology for the Orators, and a Promise, That if they were guilty, they themselves would punish them according to the Laws.

The People approv'd and ratify'd what Demades had read, and sent him with some others to the King with Order, That he should intercede likewise on the behalf of the Theban Exiles, that the People of Athens might lawfully receive and entertain them.

Demades wisely manag'd his Embassy, and by his Eloquence prevail'd with the King in every respect. For Alexander both pardon'd the Orators, and granted all other Things the Athenians desir'd.

Then the King march'd back with his Army into Macedonia, and call'd a General Council of his Officers and chief Friends, and when they were met together, he ask'd their Opinion, what they thought of an Expedition into Asia? When it was fit to begin the War? And how it was to be manag'd? The Counsel, indeed, of Antipater and Parmenio was, That he should first Marry and have Issue to succeed him, and then set upon matters that were of so great Weight and Concernment. But the King, who was natuturally fierce, and could not endure stops and delays in Business, rejected their Advice. For he said, it was a Mean and Unworthy thing for him who was created General of all Greece, and had the Command of an Army, that never knew what it was to be conquer'd, to stay at home meerly to Marry and beget Children. Wherefore, after he had set before them the Advantages of the War, and had encourag'd them to undertake it, he offer'd most magnificent Sacrifices to the Gods at Dium in Macedonia, and exhibited the Sports and Plays which his Ancestor Archilaus had instituted to Jupiter and the Muses. This Solemnity continu'd Nine days, according to the Number of the Muses, a Day for every Muse. He provided likewise a Pavilion which would contain an Hundred Beds, where he Feasted, and entertain'd all his Friends and Commanders of his Army, and Ambassadors of Cities.

After these Sumptuous Feasts were over (in which he not only kindly entertain'd a vast number of People, but likewise distributed parts of the Sacrifices, and other things fuitable to the Magnificence of the Festival amongst his Soldiers) he Rendezvous'd all his Forces from all parts.

CHAP. II.

Alexander lands his Army in Asia. The Battel at Granicum. The Forces of the Persians and of Alexander. Alexander kills Spithrobates; near being kill'd by Rosaces. Miletus besieg'd and taken. Ada, Queen of Caria, meets Alexander. Halicarnassus besieg'd, taken, and sack'd. The strange Act of the Marmarians.

CTesides was Lord-Chancellor of Athens, and Caius Sulpitius and Lucius Papirius, Consuls at Rome, when Alexander at the Hellespont pass'd over his Army out of Europe into Asia. Being arrived at Troas with sixty Sail of Long Ships, he was the first of the Macedonians that cast a Spear out of the Ship, which fixt in the Earth upon the Shore, and then leapt out of the Vessel, signifying, that by the help of the Gods he had taken Possession of Asia, which was conquer'd by his Spear.

Then he Sacrific'd to the Ghosts of Achilles and Ajax, performing all other Rites and Ceremonies proper to the Veneration of those Heroes. When that was done, he took an exact account of the Number of those Forces he had transported, which were found to amount unto Thirteen thousand Macedonian Foot, Seven thousand Confederates, and Five thousand Mercenaries. Parmenio had the chief Command of all these. Besides these, there were the Odrise, Treballians and Illyrians, to the Number of Five thousand, and a Thousand Darters, call'd Agrians; so that in the whole there were Thirty thousand Foot. For Horse there were Eighteen hundred rais'd out of Macedonia, under the Command of Philotas, the Son of Parmenio. As many out of Thrace, Commanded by Callas, the Son of Harpalus. From the rest of Greece Six hundred led by Eurygius. Besides these, there were Nine hundred Thracians and Peonians in the Van, whose Commander was Cassander. The whole Body of Horse was Four thousand five hundred. And this is the Number of them that Landed in Asia with Alexander.

In the mean time, he left under the Command of Antipater, in Europe, Twelve thousand Foot and Eleven thousand five hundred Horse.


Page 529

When he departed from Troas, and came to the Temple of Minerva, the Priest, call'd Alexander, seeing the Statue of Ariobarzanes (that had been Lord-Lieutenant of Phrygia) lie prostrate upon the Ground before the Temple, and observing several other good Omens, came to the King, and told him, that he would be Conqueror in a considerable Horse Engagement, especially if he fought in Phrygia, and that he should kill a great Commander of the Enemy's with his own Hand. And these things, he said, were foretold him by the Gods, and especially by Minerva, who would be assistant to him in obtaining of his Victories.

Alexander much taken with this Prophecy, and relying upon it, offer'd to Minerva a most Splendid Sacrifice, and dedicated his Arms to her, and took away others (that had been laid up there) in their stead, which he made use of in the first Fight afterwards, and gain'd a most glorious Victory by his own peculiar Valour. But this happen'd some few days after.

In the mean time, the Persian Lord-Lieutenants and Commanders (who through their sloath were not able to put a stop to the Progress of the Macedonians) met together to consult how to manage the War against Alexander. Memnon the Rhodian, one there amongst them (a very skilful General) was not for fighting, but to give a Check to the Macedonians, by destroying the Country all before them, that so they might not be able to march forward for want of Provision: And was for bringing over both Land and Sea Forces into Macedonia, by that means to make that the Seat of the War. Although this was sound Advice (as the Event made it afterwards evident) yet the rest of the Commanders would not hearken to it, looking upon it as a thing Dishonourable, and much reflecting upon the Valour of the Persians.

All being therefore resolv'd upon a Battel, Forces were brought together from all parts, and the Lord-Lieutenants being now much Superior in number, march'd towards the Hellespont in Phrygia, and Encamp'd close by the River Granicus, having the River for a Defence between them and the Macedonians.

Alexander having intelligence of the Forces of the Barbarians, made a swift march, and came up so close to the Enemy, that the River only separated both Armies.

In the mean time, the Barbarians stood in Battallia at the Foot of the Hill, judging it would do their business effectually, and that they should be sure of the Victory, by falling upon them in their Passage over the River, and by that means breaking in pieces the Macedonian Battallion. But Alexander prevented the Enemy, and with great Courage pass'd over his Army about break of Day, and drew up his Men in order of Battel. The Barbarians drew up the whole Body of their Horse against the Macedonians, for they had before resolv'd to begin the Fight with them. Memnon the Rhodian, and Arsamenes the Lord Lieutenant, with their several Regiments of Horse, were in the Left Wing, supported by Arsites, who commanded the Paphlagonian Horse; and next to him Spithrobates, Lord-Lieutenant of Ionia, with them of Hyrcania. In the Left Wing were Two thousand Median Horse, under the Conduct of Arrheomithres, and the like number from Bactria. In the main Body was a vast Number of Horse of other Nations, of the best and most Experienc'd Soldiers; the whole amounted to above Ten thousand Horse.

The Persian Foot were at least a Hundred thousand Men, who stood drawn up behind the Horse, without moving a Foot, because they concluded, that the Horse themselves would serve the turn to rout the Macedonians.

And now the Horse charg'd with great Resolution on both sides, especially the Thessalians in the Left Wing, under the Command of Parmenio, bore the brunt of a brisk Charge with undaunted Courage.

Alexander with the choicest Body of Horse in the Left Wing, setting Spurs to his Horse, was the first that charg'd, and rushing into the Thickest of his Enemies, made great slaughter amongst 'em. The Barbarians fought valiantly striving to outdo the Macedonians, and Fortune at this time brought together the Persons of the greatest Quality into the Place. For Spithrobates the chief Governor of the Province of Ionia, a Persian, and Son in Law to Darius, a very Valiant Man, charg'd the Macedonians with a great Body of Horse, seconded by Forty of his Guard, all of his Kindred, and inferior to none for Valour and Courage; with these he put the Enemy hard to it, and lays about him with great Resolution, killing some and wounding others. And when none were able to deal with him, Alexander rid up to the Barbarian, and fought with him hand to hand.

Hereupon, the Persian concluding, that the Gods of their special favour to him, had given him the opportunity of an Happy Combate, (especially, if by his Valour he should free all Asia from their Fears, and by his own hands give a Check to these audacious Attempts of Alexander that rung so all the World over, and prevent the Dishonor of the


Page 530

Persians) was the first that cast his Javelin at Alexander, and with such Force and Violence, that it pierc'd through his Buckler and Breast-plate into his right Shoulder-blade. The King plucking out the Dart with his own Hand, threw it away, and setting Spurs to his Horse flew upon the Persian Lord-Lieutenant with that Fierceness and Violence, that he fix'd his Spear in the middle of his Breast. Upon which the Battalions of both Armies there near at hand, in admiration of such a piece of singular Valour, set up a great shout. But the Point breaking in the Breast-plate, so that the Spear pierc'd no further, the Persian made at Alexander with his drawn Sword, who having got another Lance threw it directly into his Face, and pierc'd him through the Head; at which instance, Rosaces, Brother to him that was kill'd, came swiftly riding in, and reach'd the King such a Blow, that he cut through his Helmet, and gave him a slight wound upon the Head, and just as he was ready to second his stroke, Clitus, Sirnam'd Niger, posts up and cuts off the Hand of the Barbarian.

The Kinsmen of the two Brothers (now both fallen) came round about them, and at the first ply'd Alexander with their Darts, and then fell to it hand to hand, and ran through all hazards, that they might kill Alexander. And though he was inviron'd with imminent Hazards and Dangers of his Life, yet the throng of his Enemies did not at all daunt him. For though he had receiv'd three strokes through his Breast plate, and one Cut upon his Helmet, and had his Buckler, which he brought from the Temple of Minerva, thrice pierc'd through, yet he stirr'd not a Foot, but stood his ground against all Hazards and Difficulties with undaunted Resolution.

In the mean time, other brave Commanders fell round about him, among whom the most remarkable were Artyaxes, and Pharnaces, the Brother of Darius, and Mithrobarzanes the Commander of the Cappadocians; so that many great Officers being kill'd, and all the Troops of the Persians routed and broken by the Valour of the Macedonians, the first that fell in upon Alexander were forc'd to take to their Heels. And after them all the rest. In this Battel, by the Confession of all, the Valour of Alexander was cry'd up above all others; and he reputed the chief Instrument of the Victory. The Thessalian Horse manag'd their Troops with that Dexterity, and fought with that brave Resolution, that next to the King, they were most highly applauded, and gain'd exceeding Honour and Reputation.

After the Horse was routed and fled, the Foot running one in upon another in confusion fought a while, but amaz'd and dejected with the flight of their Horse, they likewise turn'd their Backs and made away.

There were kill'd in the Persian Army above Ten thousand Foot, and at least Two thousand Horse, and above Twenty thousand taken Prisoners.

After the Battel, the King buried those of his that were slain, with great Solemnity, by these Honours to encourage his Soldiers to fight the more readily. When he had refresh'd his Army, he march'd forward through Lydia, and came to Sardis, which with the Cittadel, and all the Provision and Treasure therein, were voluntarily surrender'd to him by Mithrinnes the Governor.

In the mean time, those Persians that had escap'd out of the Battel, fled, together with their General, Memnon, to Miletus, before which the King afterwards came, and assaulted it continually for several days together, still relieving his Men from time to time with fresh Supplies. The Besieged at first easily defended themselves from the Walls, in regard the City was full of Soldiers, and plentifully furnish'd with Weapons and all other things necessary for the enduring of a Siege. But as soon as the King began fiercely to batter the Walls with his Engines, and violently to push on the Siege both by Sea and Land, and the Macedonians had forc'd their way through a Breach of the Walls, putting their Enemies to flight in that part; the Milesians forthwith prostrated themselves as suppliants at the King's Feet, and gave up themselves and the City to his Mercy. Some of the Barbarians were kill'd by the Macedonians, others fled out of the City, and the rest were all taken. He dealt kindly and mercifully with the Milesians, but for others, he sold them all for Slaves.

And now having no further use for his Navy, and being likewise chargeable to maintain, he dismiss'd his Fleet, except a few Ships which he detain'd for the Conveying of his Engines of Battery, and other Instruments useful for the Besieging of Towns. Among which were Twenty Vessels from Athens.

There are some who say, that this Discharging of the Fleet was a prudent part of a General in Alexander. For Darius being on his march, and therefore very likely that a great Battel was to be fought, he conceiv'd that the Macedonians would fight with more Resolution, when they saw there was no possibility of flight. And the very same Project he


Page 531

contriv'd at the Battel of Granicum, where he so order'd the matter, that the River should be at his Soldiers back, to the end, that none might have a Thought of flying, since the River threatned certain destruction to them that attempted it.

In following times Agathocles, King of Syracuse, follow'd this Example of Alexander, and so gain'd a glorious Victory. For having transported a small Army into Africa, he set all his Ships on fire, to take away all hope from his Soldiers of escaping by flight, by which means being forc'd of necessity to stand to it courageously, he overcame many thousands of the Carthaginians drawn up against him.

After the taking of Miletus, both Persians and Mercenaries with their chiefest Commanders, came flocking to Halicarnassus. This was then the greatest City in Caria, in which was a Palace of the Kings, adorn'd with most curious, Turrets and Cittadels.

About the same time, Memnon sent away his Wife and Children to Darius, as well for their security, as to induce the King, having such considerable Hostages in his hands to intrust him with more confidence in the Management of the War. Which happen'd accordingly; for Darius presently sent Letters to all the Inhabitants of the Sea Coasts of Asia, to be observant in every thing to all the Commands of Memnon. Being made therefore General of the whole Army, he provided all things necessary for the Defence of Halicarnassus against a Siege.

In the mean time the King sent away his Engines of Battery, and Corn and Provision by Sea, to Halicarnassus, and he himself with his whole Army march'd into Caria, and where ever he came he gain'd upon the Cities by his smooth Tongue, and courteous Behaviour. The Greek Cities especially tasted of his Grace and Favour, for he gave all Liberty to govern according to their own Laws, and order'd they should be free from Tribute, declaring, that he had undertaken a War against the Persians for the Rights and Liberties of the Grecians.

When he was upon his March, he was met by a Noble Woman call'd Ada, of the Lineage of the King of Caria, who upon discourse with him, concerning the Right of her Ancestors, intreated him to restore her to the Kingdom of her Grandfather, which he gave up to her, and bid, her take it as her own; by which bounty to the Woman, he gain'd the Hearts of the Grecians, and all the Cities sent their Ambassadors to him, presenting him with Crowns of Gold, promis'd and offer'd to serve him in all things to the utmost of their Power.

Alexander now Encamps near to the City, and forthwith assaults the Town in a furious and terrible Manner.: For at the very Beginning; his Soldiers by turns storm'd the Walls without any intermission, so that the Conflict continu'd whole days together. Afterwards he brought up all sorts of Engines to the Walls, and fill'd up the Trenches, before the City, by the help of three Machines call'd Snails, and then with his Rams batter'd down the Towers and Walls that ran along between them. Part being thus beaten down, he engag'd in the Breach with the Enemy, and endeavour'd to force his way into the City over the Rubbish. But Memnon easily repuls'd the Macedonians (who first assaulted the Wall) there being many Men within the City; and in the Night, when the Engines were brought up he made a Sally with a great Body of Men, and fir'd them: Upon which there were many sharp Conflicts before the Walls, in which the Macedonians far excell'd the other for Valour, but the Persians them for number of Men and all Warlike Provisions. But those upon the Walls were of great advantage to the Persians that were engag'd in the Sally, by galling their Enemies with their Darts and Arrows, attended with Death and Wounds; shouting of Men and sounding of Trumpets, every where eccho'd in the Air, while the Soldiers on both sides with loud Acclamations, applauded the noble Actions of their several Parties.

And now some endeavour'd to extinguish the mounting Flames of the Engines, and others engaging with the Enemy, made grievous slaughters among their Adversaries. Those within rais'd up other Walls much stronger, instead of them that were batter'd down. The Commanders with Memnon being in the Front, encourag'd their Men to stand to it, offering great Rewards to such as valiantly behav'd themselves. So that it was incredible with what Heat and Spirit every one was push'd on forward to win the Day. Then might be seen some carry'd out of the Army so wounded, that they were breathing out their last; others gather'd in a round about the Bodies of the Dead, and sharply engag'd in striving to carry off the Bodies, in order to their Burial. Others but even now tyr'd out with Wounds, and Blows, presently (through the Encouragement of the Officers) recovering their Spirits, fell to it briskly again.


Page 532

Some of the Macedonians (among whom was Neoptolimus, an honourable Person) were slain, even under the City Gates. And now Towers and two Flanks were batter'd down; upon which, some Drunken Soldiers of Perdiccas rashly in the Night mounted the Walls of the Cittadel: But Memnon understanding in what plight they were in, made a Sally, and being much Superior in number repuls'd the Macedonians, and kill'd many of them, which being nois'd abroad, the Macedonians came flocking in to the aid of their Fellows; upon which there was a brisk Encounter. At length, when those with Alexander appear'd and join'd with the rest, the Persians flag'd and were beaten back into the City. Then the King sent a Trumpeter to make a Truce, in order to carry off those Macedonians that were slain before the Walls: But Ephialtes and Thrasybulus, both Athenians, and then in Arms for the Persians, gave advice not to suffer the Dead to be bury'd. However, Memnon granted what the King desir'd.

Afterwards Ephialtes in a Council of War declar'd his Opinion, That it was not advisable for them to stay till the City was taken, and so all to be made Prisoners, but for all the Officers with the Mercenaries to venture their Lives for the Safety and Security of the rest, and to sally upon the Enemy out of the City. Hereupon Memnon perceiving Ephialtes to be prompted to Action by an extraordinary Impulse of Valour, and placing great Confidence in him by reason of his Courage and the strength of his Body, agreed to what he had advis'd. In order to which, he appointed Two thousand Mercenaries, of the best Soldiers he could pick out, to sally with him, one half of whom were commanded to carry along with them light Firebrands, and the other to fall in upon the Enemy. About break of Day the Gates were suddenly flung open, and the Regiments issue out, and cast their Fire brands among the Engines, upon which a great Flame presently appear'd. He himself at the Head of others form'd into a deep Phalanx charg'd upon the Macedonians, who were hasting to preserve and defend the Engines. The King, quick in discerning what was to be done, places the chief of the Macedonians in the Front, and some of the chiefest Soldiers next, in order to support them, and to these he adds a third Battalion, for Valour excelling all the rest; The whole Body he led up himself, and fell upon the Enemy, who seem'd (through their firm and close Order) to be impenetrable; not to be broken by any Force whatsoever.

In the mean time, he commands others to go to defend the Engines, and quench the Fire. Noise and Clamour fill'd the Camps, and the Trumpet giving the Alarm to Battel, they fell to it, fighting with more than ordinary Valour, ambitious to purchase Honour and Renown. The Macedonians easily quench'd the Fire, but in the Conflict, those with Ephialtes got the better. For with whomsoever he engag'd, (being of a far stronger Body than any of them,) he certainly kill'd, and those that were upon the new Wall slew many with their Darts. For upon this Wall there was a Wooden Tower erected an Hundred Cubits high, full of Engines for shooting of Darts and Arrows.

Many therefore of the Macedonians being kill'd, and the rest retreating by reason of the multitude of Darts, and Memnon coming in to the Assistance of the Persians with a far greater Number, the King himself knew not well what to do. While they that issu'd out of the Town thus prevail'd, on a sudden the Tables were turn'd: For the old Macedonians (who by reason of their Age were to this time dispens'd with, and not call'd to Fight, though formerly Victorious in many Battels under King Philip,) now at this very instant were stirr'd up to their anient Courage and Resolution. And being both Valiant and Expert Soldiers, (far beyond all the rest,) they upbraided the Cowardice of the Freshwater Soldiers, who turn'd their Back, with most bitter Taunts and Reproaches: These presently getting into a Body, and clapping their Bucklers one into another, fell in upon the Enemy, (now confident of an assured Victory,) and having killed Ephialtes and many others, forc'd the rest into the City; and the Macedonians being mix'd with the other in the Night-time, enter'd pell-mell with them within the Walls; but the King order'd a Retreat to be sounded, and so they return'd into the Camp. After this, Memnon and the rest of the Commanders consulted together, and determin'd to leave the City. In execution of which Resolve, they left the best of the Soldiers to keep the Cittadel with sufficient Provision and all other Things necessary, and transported themselves with the rest of the Citizens, and all their Wealth, into Coos.

Alexander about spring of Day understanding what was done, cast a Trench, and built a Rampart upon it round about the Castle; and raz'd the City it self to the Ground. Then he order'd part of his Army to march further up into the Country in order to force other Provinces to his Obedience; these Forces valiantly brought under the Power of Alexander all the Nations as far as to the Borders of the Greater Phrygia, and forc'd them to find Provision for their Army.


Page 533

Alexander himself subdu'd all the Sea Coast of Asia to Cilicia, gaining many Cities by Surrender, and taking several Forts and Castles by Storm; amongst which, there was one that was taken after a wonderful manner, which by reason of the Rarity of the Thing is not to be pass'd over.

In the utmost Borders of Lycia, the Marmarensians, who inhabited upon a great Rock, and well fortifi'd, set upon the Rear of Alexander's Amy in their March thither, and slew many of the Macedonians, and carry'd away a great number of Prisoners and Carriage-Horses. At which, the King was so inrag'd, that he resolv'd to besiege the Place, and us'd his utmost Endeavour to gain it. But the Marmarensians trusting to their own Valour and the Strength of the Place, manfully endur'd the Siege; for they were assaulted two Days together without any intermission, and were assur'd, that the King would not stir thence till he had taken the Rock. The ancient Men therefore at the first advis'd the Younger to forbear standing it out with such Violence, and to make Peace with the King upon as good Conditions as they could; which when they deny'd, and all resolv'd to part with their Lives and the Liberties of their Country together; the graver Men then advis'd them to kill all the old Men, Women, and Children, and that those that were strong and able to defend themselves should break through their Enemies Camp in the Night, and flee to the next Mountains. The young Men approv'd of the Councel, and thereupon an Edict was made, That every one should go to his own House, and Eat and Drink plentifully with his Wife, Children and Relations, and then expect the Execution of the Decree. But some of the young Men who were more considerate than the rest, (who were about Six hundred in the whole,) judg'd it more Advisable to forbear killing their own Kindred and Relations with their own Hands, but rather set the Houses on fire, and then to sally out at the Gates, and make to the Mountains for their Security. This was presently taken to, and the Thing put in execution, and so every Man's House became his Sepulchre. And the young Men themselves broke through the midst of their Enemies, and fled to the Hills near at hand. And these were the chief Things done this Year.

CHAP. III.

Mytelen taken by Memnon, Darius his General. His Successes. He dies. Charidemus the Athenian unjustly put to Death by Darius. Alexander falls sick, recover'd by Philippus. Alexander seizes Alexander of Lyncestas, upon his Mother's Letters. Alexander takes Issus. The memorable Battel at Issus, where the Mother, Wife, Two Daughters, and Son of Darius, were taken. Alexander's noble Carriage towards them. Darius's Letters and Offers to Alexander. Darius prepares another Army.

BUT in the following Year, wherein Nicocrates was chief Governor of Athens, and Cesus Valerius and Lucius Papirius succeeded in the Consular Dignity at Rome. Darius sent a great Sum of Money to Memnon, and declar'd him General of all his Forces. Hereupon he rais'd great Numbers of Men from all Parts, and fitting out a Navy of Three hundred Sail, set himself with all diligence to the prosecution of the War. To that end, he brought in Chius to join with him. Then he sail'd to Lesbos, and presently took Antissa, Mythimnus, Pyrrhus, and Erissus. But for Mitylene, and Lesbos, because it was much larger, and strongly Garison'd and well provided, he gain'd it not without many Assaults, and the Loss of many of his Men, though he took it at length with much ado. The Fame of this Action being presently nois'd abroad, many of the Cyclade Islands sent Ambassadors to him to make Leagues with him. Then there was a Report spread abroad, that Memnon with his whole Fleet was intending to invade Eabaea, which put all the Cities into a great Consternation. And some of the Graecians being come into the Confederacy of the Persians, were hearten'd in hopes of a change of their Affairs for the better. Besides, Memnon had corrupted many of the Greeks with Money to sail in the same Bottom with the Persians. But Fortune put a stop to the Progress of this Man's Success; for he fell sick of a mortal Distemper, and dv'd; and by his Death, the Affaris of Darius went backward: For the King hop'd to have transferr'd the whole Weight of the War out of Asia into Europe.


Page 534

But when he heard of the Death of Memnon, he call'd his Friends together, and ask'd their Advice, Whether he should send a General with the Army, or go himself in Person, and try his Fortune with the Macedonians. Some were of Opinion for the King to go himself, for that they said, the Persians would then with more chearfulness venture their Lives. But Charidemus the Athenian, who was in great Esteem for his Valour and Prudence as a General, (for under Philip he gain'd a great Reputation, and was his chief and principal Adviser in all his weighty Affairs,) advis'd Darius not to lay the Kingdom rashly at stake, but still to continue Lord of Asia, and keep the Government in his own Hand, and to appoint an Experienc'd General to manage the Concerns of the War. And he told him, that an Hundred thousand Men, of which Number a Third Part to be Mercenaries out of Greece, were sufficient for the Expedition, and engag'd that he would see the Thing accomplish'd. The King at the first agreed to what he said: But his Friends peremptorily rejected this Advice; suspecting that Charidemus sought for the chief Command, out of design to give up all into the Power of the Macedonians. Hereupon Charidemus was in such a Rage, as that he call'd them all Cowards: With which Words, the King was much more offended than before; and whereas Anger never suffers a Man to consider wisely before hand, Darius orders him to be bound in a Belt, (which is the manner of the Persians,) and delivers him to his Guard to be put to Death: Who when he was leading to Execution, cry'd out, That the King would in a short time repent of what he had done in this Matter, and would be punish'd for that unjust Judgment against him by the loss of his Kingdom. Thus fell Charidemus from the top of all his Hopes and Expectations through the unseasonable Liberty of his Tongue. But the King, as soon as his Anger was over, presently repented of what he had done, and accus'd himself as guilty of a most horrid Crime: But the Power of a King could not undo that which was past Remedy. Considering therefore how valiant the Macedonians were, and musing upon the Courage of Alexander, he enquir'd where he might have a fit Person to succeed Memnon in the chief Command of the Army, and when none could be found, he was forc'd to run the Hazard himself for the saving of his Kingdom. He forthwith therefore order'd all his Forces to be call'd together from all Parts, and to Rendevouz at Babylon. Then he made choice of such of his Kindred and Friends as he thought fit, and to some he gave Commands in the Army according to their several Qualities, and others he appointed to attend upon his Person as his Life-Guard. As soon as the time before fix'd upon for the Expedition was come, they all Rendevouz'd at Babylon, to the Number of Four hundred thousand Foot, and an Hundred thousand Horse; Hence he march'd away with this vast Number of Men towards Cilicia, taking along with him his Mother, Wife and Children; that is to say, a Son and two Daughters.

In the mean time, Alexander (while Memnon was living, hearing how Chius and the Cities of Lesbos were surrender'd into the Hands of Memnon, and that Mitylene was taken by Storm, and that he was ready to invade Macedonia with a Navy of Three hundred Sail, and that many of the Graecians were upon the Point of Revolting) was very much perplex'd and discontented. But as soon as he heard of Memnon's Death, his Mind was more at rest. But within a short time after he fell desperately sick, and growing worse and worse, sent for Physicians, who coming to him, were all afraid to administer any thing, looking upon him as irrecoverable: Saving that there was one Philip of Acarnania, (whose Practice it was commonly to make use of desperate Medicines,) promis'd to cure him by a Potion; the King hereupon readily comply'd with him, especially because he heard Darius was on his march from Babylon. Then the Physician deliver'd the Potion, which through the Art and Skill of Philip, and the Advantage of the Natural Strength of the Patient, presently cur'd the King: Who being thus beyond all Hope recover'd, bountifully Rewarded the Physician, and receiv'd him into the Number of his most faithful Friends.

About the same time Alexander receiv'd Letters from his Mother, wherein (among other Things which she thought fit to advise him of) she wish'd him to have a care of Alexander of Lyncestas, who was a very valiant Man, and of a generous Disposition, and not inferior to any for his Faithfulness to Alexander. But many things concurring that seem'd to fortify the Accusation, he was seiz'd and committed to Custody, in order to his Legal Trial. But Alexander having Intelligence that Darius was within a few Days march, sent Parmenio before with the Army to gain the Passes and the Gates, as they were call'd; who marching away with all speed, possess'd himself of them, beating off the Barbarians, who were there before him. Darius, that he might march with more ease, had left all his heavy Baggage and Rabble behind him at Damascus, a City of Syria. Hence he march'd with all the speed he could, hearing that Alexander had preposfess'd


Page 535

himself of all the difficult Passes and Places, as not daring to fight in the Plain and open Field, as he suppos'd. The Inhabitants of all the Places through which Alexander came, slighting the inconsiderable Number of the Macedonians, and frighted with the approach of the vast Army of the Persians, without any regard to Alexander sided with Darius, and readily supply'd the Persians with Provisions and all other Necessaries, and by the Rule of their own Opinions adjudg'd the Victory before hand to the Barbarians.

In the mean time Alexander had possess'd himself of Issus, (surpriz'd with the Fear of his Army,) a considerable City of Cilicia; and understanding by his Spies that Darius was not distant above Thirty Furlongs, and that he was even now approaching with his Army so provided, and in that order, as to make them terrible to all, he judg'd the Gods highly favour'd him in putting such an Opportunity into his Hands, as that by the gaining of one Victory he should ruin the whole Empire of Persia. Hereupon he stirr'd up the Spirits of his Soldiers, (by a Speech for the Occasion,) encouraging them to fight Manfully, now all lay at Stake. His Regiments of Foot, and Squadrons of Horse, he posted so, as the Place and Ground would best allow: The Horse was plac'd before the whole Body of the Foot, which were order'd behind to support and relieve the Horse. Being in the Right Wing himself, he march'd on towards the Enemy with the choicest of the Horse. The Thessalian Horse were in the Left, for Valour and Skill sar excelling all the rest. And now the Armies came within the cast of a Dart one of another, upon which there flew such a shower of Darts from the Barbarians against them with Alexander, that through their Multitude they so brush'd in their flight one upon another, that their Force was much abated, and did little harm. Then presently the Trumpets on both Sides sounded a Charge, and the Macedonians were the first that set up a great Shout, which being answer'd by the Barbarians, all the Hills and Mountains there near at hand eccho'd and rang again with the Noise. But the Shout of the Barbarians far exceeded the other, being made by Five hundred thousand Men at once.

Then Alexander look'd every where round about to spy out Darius, whom having found, he made at him (with those Horse that were with him) with all the speed imaginable, desiring not so much to conquer the Persians, as to gain the present Victory by his own Personal Valour. In the mean time the whole Body of Horse engag'd, great Slaughters being made on both Sides; but the Valour of those engag'd caus'd the Victory to hang in Suspence a long time, appearing sometimes here and sometimes there, by Changes and Turns. No Dart cast, or Stroak given by any was in vain, but did some Execution, for in such a Multitude the Mark was sure to be hit. So that great Numbers were wounded, and others fighting to their last Breath, chose rather to lose their Lives, than part with their Honour, And the Officers at the Head of their Regiment so bravely behav'd themselves, that they put Life and Courage into the Common Soldiers. There might then be seen all sorts of Wounds, and as various and sharp Contests for Victory Oxathres a Persian, and Brother of Darius, a very valiant Man, as soon as he saw Alexander make so fiercely at Darius, was resolv'd to undergo the same Fortune with his Brother, and therefore charges Alexander's Body with the best of the Horse he could make choice of out of his own Troops, and knowing that his Love to his Brother would advance his Fame and Reputation above all other things among the Persians, he fought close by his Chariot, and with that Courage and Dexterity, that he laid many dead at his Feet; and inasmuch as the Macedonians were as resolute on the other Side not to move a Foot, the dead Bodies rose up in heaps of Carkasses round about the Chariot of Darius. And being that every one strove to lay hold on the King, both Sides fought with great Obstinacy, without any regard of their Lives. In this Conflict many of the Persian Nobility were slain, amongst whom were Antixyus and Rheomitus, and Tasiaces the Lord Lieutenant of Egypt. And many of the Macedonians likewise; and Alexander himself (compass'd round by the Enemy) was wounded in the Thigh. The Chariot-Horses of Darius receiving many Wounds, and frighted with the multitude of Carkasses that lay round in Heaps about them, grew so unruly, that they had hurri'd Darius into the midst of his Enemies, if he had not in this Extremity catch'd hold of the Reins himself, being forc'd thus to make bold with the Laws of the Persians, in debasing the Majesty of the Persian Kings. In the mean time his Servants brought to him another Chariot, and a great hurly burly there was while he was ascending this, insomuch as Darius himself (by the Enemy pressing hard upon him) was in a great Terror and Consternation; Which when some of the Persians discern'd, they began first to fly, the Horse that were next following the Example of their Fellows, and at length all made away as fast as they could. The Places being narrow and strait, in their hast they trod down one another, and many


Page 536

perish'd without a Stroke of the Enemy; for they lay on Heaps, some with their Arms, others without them; some held their naked Swords as long in their Hands, as that their Fellow-Soldiers ran themselves upon them, and so were slain. But many got away into the open Plain, and by the swiftness of their Horses, escap'd to the several Cities of the Allies.

During this time, the Macedonian Phalanx and the Persian Foot fought a while; for the Flight of the Horse was the Preludium to the Victory. The Barbarians therefore taking to their Heels, and so many Thousands making away through the same Straits, all Places thereabouts were in a short time cover'd with dead Carcasses: But the Persians, by the advantage of the Night, got away here and there into several Places of shelter.

The Macedonians therefore left off the Pursuit, and betook themselves to the rifling of the Camp, especially the King's Pavillion, because there were the richest Booties; so that there was found and carry'd thence vast Sums of Gold and Silver, and exceeding rich Garments and Furniture; an abundance likewise of Treasure belonging to his Friends and Kindred, and the Commanders of his Army: For the Wives not only from the King's Houshold, but from the Families of his Kindred and Attendants, mounted in Chariots glittering with Gold (according to the Custom of the Persians) accompany'd the Camp in their march from place to place. And every one of these (through their Luxury and Delicateness, to which they had commonly inur'd themselves) carry'd with them abundance of rich Furniture, and a multitude of beautiful Women. But the captive Ladies were then in a most miserable Condition: For they who before, by reason of their Nicety, could scarcely be plac'd in their stately Chariots so as to please them, and had their Bodies so attir'd, as that no Air might touch them, now rent their Garments in pieces, and scarce with one simple Veil to cover their Nakedness, threw themselves shrieking out of their Chariots, and with their Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven, cast themselves down at the Feet of the Conquerors. Some with their trembling Hands pull'd off all their Jewels and Ornaments from their own Bodies, and ran up steep Rocks and craggy Places, with their Hair flying about their Ears; and thus meeting in Throngs together, some call'd for Help from those who wanted the Relief of others as much as themselves: Some were dragg'd along by the Hair of their Heads, others were stripp'd naked, and then kill'd, and sometimes cudgell'd to death with the heavy end of the Soldiers Lances. Nay, even all manner of Disgrace and Contempt was pour'd upon the Glory of the Persians, so famous and honourable heretofore all the World over.

But the more sober and moderate of the Macedonians seeing that strange Turn of Fortune, much pity'd the Condition of those miserable Creatures, who had lost every thing that was near and dear to them in this World, and were now environ'd with nothing but Strangers and Enemies, and fallen into miserable and dishonourable Captivity. But the Mother of Darius, and his Wife, and two Daughters, now Marriageable (and his little Son especially) drew Tears from the Eyes of the Beholders: For their sad change of Fortune, and the greatness of their sudden and unexpected Calamity (presented thus to their view) could not but move them to a compassionate Resentment of their present Condition: For as yet it was not known whether Darius was alive or dead. And in the mean time they perceiv'd his Tent pillag'd and rifled by arm'd Men, who knew no difference of Persons, and therefore committed many indecent and unworthy Actions, and saw likewise all Asia brought under the Power of a Conquering Sword as well as themselves. The Wives of the Governors of the Provinces that fell at their Feet to beg Protection, were so far from finding Relief, that they themselves earnestly pray'd them to rescue them out of their present Calamity.

Alexander's Servants having possess'd themselves of Darius his Tents, prepar'd the Tables and Baths which were us'd by Darius himself, and lighted up many Lamps in expectation of the King, that in his return from the pursuit he might take possession of all the Furniture of Darius, as an earnest of the Empire and Government of all Asia. Of the Barbarians there fell in this Battel above an Hundred and twenty thousand Foot, and no fewer than Ten thousand Horse. Of the Macedonians, Three hunded Foot, and an Hundred and fifty Horse. And this was the Issue of the Battel at Issus.

But to return to the Kings themselves: Darius with all his Army being thus routed, fled, and by changing from time to time one Horse after another the best he had, he made away with all speed to escape out of the Hands of Alexander, and to get to the Governors of the Upper Provinces. But Alexander, with the best of his Horse and chiefest of his Friends, pursu'd him close at the very Heels, earnestly longing to be Lord of Darius. But after he had rid Two hundred Furlongs, he return'd at midnight into the


Page 537

Camp; and having refresh'd his weary Body in the Baths, went to Supper, and then to his rest.

In the mean time, one came to the Mother of Darius, and told her that Alexander was return'd from the pursuit of Darius, and had possess'd himself of all the rich Spoils of his Tent. Upon which, there was given up a great Shriek and Lamentation amongst the Women, and from the multitude of the Captives lamenting with the Queen at the sad News, all places were fill'd with Cries and Lamentations. The King understanding what Sorrow there was among the Women, sent Leonatus, one his of Courtiers to them, to put an end to their Fears; and to let Sisygambres, the Mother of Darius, know, that her Son was alive, and that Alexander would have respect to their former Dignity; and that to confirm the Promise of his Generosity by his Actions, he would come and discourse with them the Day following. Whereupon the Captives were so surpriz'd with the sudden and happy Turn of their Fortunes, that they honour'd Alexander as a God; and their Fears were turn'd into Exultations of Joy.

The King, as soon as it was light (with Hephestion, one of the trustiest of his Friends) went to visit the Queens. When they entred, in regard they were both habited alike, Sisygambres taking Hephestion for the King (because he was the more comely and taller Man) fell prostrate at his Feet; but the Attendants, by the Nods of their Heads, and Pointing of their Fingers, directed her to Alexander; whereupon being much asham'd, and out of Countenance by reason of Mistake, she salutes Alexander in the same manner she had done before the other. Upon which, he lift her up, and said, Mother, trouble not, nor perplex your self; for that Man also is Alexander. By which courteous and obliging Title of Mother, to a grave and honourable Matron, he gave a clear Demonstration of the Respects and Civilities he intended towards them all.

Having therefore own'd her for a Second Mother, he presently confirm'd his Words by his Actions: For he order'd her to be cloath'd in her Royal Robes, and restor'd her to all the Honours becoming her former State and Dignity. For he gave her all her Attendants and Houshold Servants and Furniture allow'd her by Darius, and added also as much more of his own Bounty. He promis'd likewise to dispose of the young Ladies in Marriage far better than if their Father had provided Husbands for them; and that he would educate the King's little Son as carefully and honourably as if he were his own. Then he call'd him to him, and kiss'd him; and taking notice that he was not at all dash'd, nor seem'd to be in the least afrighted, turning to Hephestion and those about him, This Youth, but Six Years of Age (says he) carries in his Countenance Marks of a stcut and brave Spirit above his Age, and is better than his Father. He further declar'd, That he would take care of the Wife of Darius; that nothing should be wanting to her; in order to the support and maintenance of her Royal State and former Prosperity. Many other kind and gaining Expressions he us'd, insomuch as the Ladies fell a weeping in Showers of Tears, out of Transports of Joy, upon account of the Greatness of their unexpected Felicity. After all, he at length put forth to them his Right Hand to kiss, upon which not only they who were immediately honour'd with those Kindnesses, set forth his Prai

•

e, but even the whole Army cry'd up his incomparable Grace and Clemency. And indeed, I conceive, that amongst the many Brave and Noble Acts of Alexander, none of them were greater than this, nor more worthy by History, to be handed down to Posterity. For storming and taking of Cities, gaining of Battels, and other Successes in War, are many times the Events of Fortune, more than the Effects of Valour and Virtue; but to be compassionate to the miserable, and those that lie at the Feet of the Conqueror, must be the Fruit only of Wisdom and Prudence. For many by Prosperity grow high-crested, and are so far swell'd with Pride, by the favourable Blasts of Fortune, that they are careless and forgetful of the Common Miseries of Mankind; so that 'tis common to see many to sink under the weight of their prosperous Successes, as an heavy Burden they are not able to bear.

Therefore though Alexander was many Ages before us who are now living, yet the remembrance of his Virtue, justly challenges Honour and Praise from all those that succeed him in future Generations.

As for Darius, being now got to Babylon, he musters up his broken Troops that were escap'd from the Battel of Issus; and though he had receiv'd so great an Overthrow, yet he was not at all discourag'd, but writ Letters to Alexander, whereby he advis'd him to use his Good Fortune and Success moderately, and offer'd him a great Sum of Money for the Ransom of the Captives: He promis'd likewise to give up to him all that part of Asia, with the Cities which lay on that side, within the Course of the River Halys, if he were willing to be his Friend.


Page 538

Whereupon Alexander call'd a Council of War, and laid before them such Letters as he judg'd most for his own Advantage, but conceal'd the true ones: By which Contrivance the Ambassadors were dismiss'd, without any effect of their Embassie.

Darius therefore concluding that Things were not to be compos'd by Letters, sets himself wholly to make preparation for War. To which end, he arm'd those Soldiers that had loft their Arms in the late unfortunate Battel, and rais'd others, and form'd them into Regiments. He sent likewise for those Forces he had through Haste left behind him in the Upper Provinces, when he first began his Expedition. To conclude, he was so earnest and diligent in recruiting his Army, that they were now twice as many as they were at Issus; for they made up a Body of Eight hundred thousand Foot, and Two hundred thousand Horse, besides a vast multitude of hook'd Chariots. These considerable Actions were the Events of this Year.

CHAP. IV.

Alexander marches towards Egypt: Besieges Tyre. Prodigies of Tyre. The Tyrians bind Apollo with Golden Chains. The Inventions of the Tyrians to defend themselves. The Advancement of Ballominus, a poor Man, to be King of Tyre. The Acts of Agis and Amyntas: Amyntas kill'd, and all his Soldiers. Alexander takes Gaza by Storm: Is presented by the Grecians.

NIceratus was Chief Governor of Athens, and Marcus Atilius and Marcus Valerius were Consuls at Rome, when the Hundred and Twelfth Olympiad was celebrated, wherein Grylus of Chalcidon was Victor.

Alexander, after the Battel of Issus, caus'd both his own, and those likewise of the Enemies that were of greatest Repute for Valour, to be bury'd. After he had sacrific'd and given Thanks to the Gods, he bountifully rewarded all such as had valiantly behav'd themselves, every one according to his Merit. After which, he gave liberty to his Soldiers for some days to recreate and refresh themselves. Thence marching with his Army towards Egypt, as he came into Phoenicia, other Cities readily submitted to him, and were receiv'd into his Protection. But Tyre was the only City that obstinately deny'd him entrance, when he desir'd it, in order to Sacrifice to Hercules Tyrius; at which Alexander was so enrag'd, that he threatned to storm and take it by force of Arms. But the Tyrians resolv'd to stand it out, because they thought thereby to ingratiate themselves with Darius; and that for their Faithfulness and Loyalty to him, they concluded he would bountifully reward them; who by that means gain'd him more time to recruit his Army, while Alexander was detain'd in a troublesome and dangerous Siege. And besides, they plac'd their Confidence in the Strength of the Island, and their plentiful Provision of all Things necessary, and in the Carthaginians, from whom they were descended.

The King therefore, though he foresaw that it would be a very difficult matter to carry on the Siege by reason of the Sea, and that they were so well provided with all Things for the defence of the Walls, and had a strong Navy, and that the City was separated from the Continent; so that nothing could be effectually put in execution: Yet he judg'd it more for his Honour to undergo all sorts of Hazards, than for the Macedonians to be baffled with one City, and that too not altogether so difficult to be gain'd.

He forthwith therefore demolish'd Old Tyre, as it was then call'd, and by the Stones carry'd by many Thousands of Men, rais'd a Mole Two hundred Foot in breadth, which by the Help of the Inhabitants of the Neighbouring Cities (who were all call'd in for that purpose) was presently dispatch'd. The Tyrians, in the mean time, from their Ships laugh'd and jeer'd at the King, and ask'd him whether he suppos'd himself stronger than Neptune. Afterwards, when they perceiv'd (beyond whatever they thought could be done) that the Mole still increas'd, and was in likelihood to be finish'd, they decreed to transport their Wives, Children, and Old People to Carthage; and those that were Young Men were kept some of them to guard the Walls, and others for Sea-Service; for they had a Fleet of Fourscore Sail. At length they sent away part of their Wives and Children, in order to sail by the Enemy for Carthage; but being prevented by the multitude of them that were at work, and not in a fit posture to fight at Sea, they were all forc'd to return, and abide the Siege. And tho' they were plentifully supply'd with


Page 539

Engines to shoot Arrows, Darts, and Stones, and all other Machines and Instruments, fit and necessary for the defence of the Walls against any Assault; yet they readily furnish'd themselves as they had occasion with many more, for that Tyre was full of Gunsmiths, and Artificers of all sorts. So that being supply'd by these Workmen, with many new invented Engines, every place round the Walls was fill'd with them, especially towards that side where the Mole was rais'd.

And now the Work was brought by the Macedonians within the Cast of a Dart, when presently a Prodigy from the Gods appear'd to them who were thus threatned; for the working of the Sea cast a Whale of an incredible bigness to the side of the Mole; and there it lay without doing any Harm, but remain'd there a good while, leaning one side of its Body to the Work, which struck the Beholders with much Terror and Amazement. After it was gone, and return'd into the Sea, both Parties went to their Divinations, and each (severally concluding as they would desire to have it) made this Construction, That by this Sign was portended, that Neptune would aid and assist them.

There was another Prodigy likewise happen'd, which greatly amaz'd the Common People: For when the Macedonians were at Meat, the Faces of those that broke the Bread seem'd to be all over bloudy; and one of Tyre affirm'd, that he saw a Vision, by which Apollo told him that he would forsake the City. And because the Common People suspected that he spoke this in favour of Alexander's Party, the Young Men had ston'd him to death, but that he was rescu'd by the Magistrates, and fled into Hercules his Temple; and so through his pious Supplication he escap'd so imminent a Danger.

Upon this, the Tyrians, to prevent Apollo's leaving the City, fastned his Image to the Pedestal with golden Chains. But the Citizens being put into a great Fright through the increase of the Mole, loaded many little Boats with Engines to shoot Arrows and Darts, and with Slingers and Archers; who setting upon them that were at work, wounded and kill'd many of them: For Showers of Arrows and Darts being discharg'd upon Throngs of naked Men, none miss'd their Mark, in regard all lay open and expos'd to every Shot without any defence; for they were not only wounded with Darts before, but (through the narrowness of the Mole) likewise gall'd at their Backs, being not possible for any one to guard both sides at once.

Alexander therefore, that he might repair the sudden and unexpected Loss, with all the speed he could mann'd as many Ships as he had, and went on board as Admiral himself, and made it his Business to get into the Haven of Tyre, in order to intercept the Phoenicians in their return. Hereupon the Barbarians fearing if he gain'd the Haven he would take the City it self (those who should defend it being now out) made all the haste they could to return to the City. And indeed both sides ply'd their Oars with all their might to prevent one another. But the Macedonians just entring the Port before the other, all the Phoenicians were every Man upon the point like to be cut off; but forcing their way through their Enemies, they return'd into the City, with the loss of some of those Vessels that lagg'd behind. However, though the King mist of his Design, yet he eagerly set to his Work again for the finishing of the Mole, and by a considerable number of Vessels guarded the Work for the future.

The Work being brought near to the City, and the Town now in a probability of being taken, on a sudden a violent Storm of Wind arose, and tore away part of the Mole; which so perplex'd Alexander, that he repented that he ever began the Siege. But however, being prick'd forward with an unquenchable Thirst after Glory, he caus'd Trees of an incredible magnitude to be cut down in the Mountains, and brought thither, and with them Booths, Branches, and Earth pil'd together, gave a check to the Violence of the Stream.

Having therefore presently repair'd the Breach that was made, the Mole by the help of many Hands was brought again within the Cast of a Dart, and by Engines mounted upon it, he batter'd down the Walls, and by shot with Darts and Arrows out of Engines, beat off the Enemy from the Bulwarks: With these likewise both Archers and Slingers ply'd the Besieg'd, and grievously wounded and gall'd many of the Townsmen upon the Walls. But the Tyrians being accustom'd to the Sea, and having many Artificers and Contrivers of Engines, us'd many Arts and ingenious Contrivances to preserve themselves: For against the Shot they contriv'd Wheels with many Spoaks, which being whirl'd about with an Engine, shatter'd in pieces some of the Darts and Arrows, and turn'd off others, and broke the Force of all the rest. And to give a check to the Violence of the Stones that were shot out of the Ballasts, they prepar'd Wooll-packs and other things that were soft and pliant to receive them.


Page 540

But the King not contented to assault the City only from the Mole, girt the Town round with his whole Fleet, and diligently view'd all parts of the Walls, as if he resolv'd to besiege the Place both by Sea and Land. The Tyrians not daring to engage him at Sea, he destroy'd three Ships, that were then by chance in the Mouth of the Harbour, and then return'd to his Camp. But the Tyrians, that they might make their Walls as strong again as they were before, rais'd another Wall ten Cubits broad, and five Cubits distant from the former, and fill'd the empty space between the two Walls with Earth and Stones.

Alexander likewise made a Battery, by joining many of his Ships together, and planted upon them all sorts of Rams and Battering Engines, whereby he beat down an hundred Foot of the Wall, and attempted to break into the City over the Ruines: Upon which, the Tyrians discharg'd a shower of Darts and Arrows, and with much ado repuls'd the Enemy, and the Night following repair'd that part of the Wall that had been batter'd down.

But after that the Passage to the City, by the joining of the Mole close to the Walls, was made, as if it had been a Peninsula, there were many and sharp Contests both to get and defend the Walls. For though they had imminent Destruction before their Eyes, and the Miseries that attend upon a Town's being taken by Storm, yet they so resolv'd to go through all Dangers, that they despis'd Death it self. For when the Macedonians approach'd with Towers of that height that they equall'd the Battlements, and cast out Planks, whereof one of the ends lay upon the Top of the Ramparts, and so by a Bridge mounted the Walls; the Tyrians by the ingenuity of the Artificers, were supply'd with many sorts of Engines and Weapons for their effectual Defence. As amongst others they had very great three Fork'd Hooks, which they cast close at hand, and therewith wounded them in the Towers (to which were fastned Cords, one end whereof they held themselves) and by these fixing in their Enemies Targets they pluck'd them out of their hands: For to this Necessity and Streight the Macedonians were brought, that they must either stand naked, and expos'd (without defensive Arms) to a multitude of Darts and Arrows, and so be wounded to Death, or else out of a point of Honour stick to their Arms, and so perish, by being pluck'd headlong out of the Towers. Others threw Fishing Nets upon them that were engag'd upon the Bridges laid to the Walls, and so intangled their Hands, that they drew them off and tumbled them headlong to the Ground.

Another wonderful invention they found out against the Macedonians, whereby they grievously plagu'd the chiefest of their Enemies, which was this, they fill'd their Iron and Brazen Shields with Sand, and heated them so long in the Fire till the Sand was scorching hot, which by an Engine they threw upon them that were chiefly engag'd, whereby they were cruelly tormented; for the Sand getting within their Breast-plates and Coats of Mail, and grievously scorching their Flesh, no Remedy could be apply'd for the curing of the Malady. So that (though they made most bitter Complaints as Men upon the Rack) yet none there were who were able to help them, insomuch, as they grew mad in the Extremity of the Torture, and dy'd in the height of unexpressible Torments.

In the mean time, the Phaenicians never ceas'd casting Fire-darts and Stones at their Enemies, so that they were scarce able to endure, the Multitude was so excessive. Moreover, with long Poles with sharp Hooks at the end, they cut the Cords of the Battering-Rams in pieces, (which forc'd them forwards) whereby the Force of the Engine was lost; and shot out of Machines for the Purpose, great massy pieces of red hot Iron into the midst of great multitudes of the Assailants, which by reason of the number of them, against whom they were discharg'd, were sure to do Execution. They pluck'd likewise Men in Armour from off the Rampiers with Iron Instruments, call'd Crows, and others shap'd like Mens Hands. And having many Hands at work, they eluded all the Enemies Engines, and kill'd multitudes of them. And although the Service was so amazing, and the Conflict so sharp, that it was scarce to be endur'd, yet the Macedonians remitted nothing of their ancient Valour, but made their way over the Bodies of those that were slain, not at all discouraged by the Misfortunes of others. In the mean time, Alexander batter'd the Walls with massy Stones shot out of his Engines, and grievously gall'd the Defendants with Arrows and Darts, and all sorts of shot from the Wooden Towers. To prevent which mischief, the Tyrians plac'd Marble Wheels before the Walls, which were turn'd round by certain Engines, and with these they either broke the Darts in pieces, or so threw them off that they were ineffectual. And to allay the Force of the Stones shot against the Wall, they sow'd together Hides and Skins oil'd over to receive them, which meeting with what was soft and pliant, their Force was thereby much abated.


Page 541

To conclude, the Tyrians were not short in any thing, whereby their Valour might be made to appear for the Defence of the Place. And being sufficiently supported with fresh aid, they were the more Couragious, and to that degree, that they left the Walls and Towers, and leap'd out upon the Bridges to oppose the Assailants, and Hand to Hand fought it out smartly in the Defence of their Country. There were some, that with Axes cut off whole Limbs at once of all that were in their way. For among the rest, there was one Admetus, a Macedonian Captain, a strong and valiant Man, in the heat of his Contest with the Tyrians, had his Head cloven in the midst with an Ax, and so Perish'd.

Alexander seeing that the Tyrians had the better on't, and Night approaching, sounded a Retreat. And indeed, at first he had thoughts to raise his Siege, and to go on with his Expedition into Aegypt, But he presently chang'd his Mind, looking upon it as Base and Dishonourable to give up all the Glory to the Tyrians. And therefore set himself again to carry on the Siege, though he had only one of his Friends call'd Amyntas, the Brother of Andromenes, who approv'd of his Resolution.

Having therefore encourag'd the Macedonians to stick to him, and furnish'd his Fleet with all things necessary, he besieg'd the City both by Sea and Land. And observing that part of the Wall near the Arsenal, was weaker than the rest, he brought all his Gallies, (which carry'd his best Engines) chain'd fast together, to that Place. There he attempted an Act which the Beholders scarcely believ'd, though they saw it with their Eyes. For he cast a Plank from a Wooden Tower, with one end upon the Battlements of the Walls, as a Bridge, and by this himself alone mounted the Rampire, not regarding any Danger, nor in the least affrighted with the violent Assaults of the Tyrians; but in the View of that Army which had conquer'd the Persians, he shew'd his own Personal Valour, and call'd to the Macedonians to follow him, and was the first that came to handy strokes with the Enemy; and killing some with his Spear, others with his Sword, and tumbling down many with the Bosies of his Buckler, he thus allay'd the Courage of his Adversaries.

In the mean time, the Rams batter'd down a great Part of the Wall in another Place. And now the Macedonians enter'd through the Breach on one side, and Alexander with his Party pass'd over the Wall in another, so that the City was now taken; yet the Tyrians valiantly bestirr'd themselves, and encouraging one another, Guarded and block'd up all the Narrow Passes, and fought it out to the last Man, insomuch as above Seven thousand were cut in pieces upon the Place; the King made all the Women and Children Slaves, and hung up all the young Men that were left, to the number of Two thousand. And there were found so great a Number of Captives, that though the greatest Part of the Inhabitants were transported to Carthage, yet the remainder amounted to Thirteen thousand. Into so great Miseries fell the Tyrians, after they had endur'd a Siege of seven Months with more Obstinacy than Prudence.

Then the King took away the Golden Chains from the Image of Apollo, and caus'd this God to be call'd Apollo Philaxandrus. When he had offer'd splendid Sacrifices to Hercules, and rewarded those who had signaliz'd their Valour, he honourably buried the Dead, and made one Ballonymus King of Tyre. But it would be a thing justly to be condemn'd to neglect to give a further and larger Account of this Man, whose Advancement and wonderful change of Condition, was so extraordinary.

After Alexander had gain'd the City, Strato the former Prince, by reason of his Faithfulness to Dari

•s,

 was depriv'd of the Command; upon which the King gave Power and Liberty to Hephestion, to bestow the Kingdom of Tyre upon which of his Friends he pleas'd. Hephestion hereupon, minding to gratify one where he had been courteously entertain'd, resolv'd to Invest him with the Principality of Tyre; but he though he was very Rich and Honourable above the rest of his Fellow Citizens, yet (because he was not of the Lineage of the Kings) refus'd it. Then Hephestion wish'd him to name some one that was of the Royal Blood; He thereupon told him of one who was a very prudent and good Man, but extream Poor. Hephestion hereupon, forthwith grants the Principality to him, and the Officer assign'd for this Purpose hastens away with the Royal Robes, and finds him in an Orchard in Rags, drawing of Water for his Hire. Having inform'd him of the Change and Alteration of his Condition, he cloath'd him with the Robe and other Ornaments becoming his State and Dignity, and then introduc'd him into the Forum, and there declar'd him King of Tyre. Which unexpected and wonderful Occurrence, was very grateful and acceptable to the People.


Page 542

Thus he obtain'd the Kingdom, and was ever after a most faithful Friend to Alexander, and an Example to all that are unacquainted with the sudden and various Turns of Fortune in this World. Having now related the Acts of Alexander, we shall turn to affairs elsewhere.

In Europe, Agis King of Lacedaemon, having listed Eight thousand Mercenaries, who escap'd from the Battel at Issus, began some new disturbances in favour of Darius. For having receiv'd from him a great Sum of Money and a Fleet, he sail'd into Creet, and reducing many Towns there, he forc'd them to side with the Persians. Amyntas likewise, an Exile of Macedonia, who had fled to Darius, and sided with the Persians in Cilicia, escaping with Four thousand Mercenaries out of the Battel of Issus, pass'd over to Tripolis in Phenicia before Alexander's arrival; and there made choice only of so many of the Navy as would transport his Soldiers, and burnt the rest. With these he sail'd to Cyprus, and from thence, being well furnish'd with Soldiers and Shipping, he pass'd over to Pelusium, and having entred the City, he pretended that Darius sent him to be their General, because the late Governor of Aegypt was kill'd in the Battel in Cilicia. Thence he sail'd to Memphis, and routed the Inhabitants in a Field-fight near to the City; who not long after set upon the Soldiers, stragling out of the Town, and plundering the Country, as they were in that disorder, carrying away what they could get, cut off Amyntas and every Man with him. 

In this manner, Amyntas, as he was projecting great Matters, was suddenly disappointed, and lost his Life. So likewise, other Officers and Captains of the Army that surviv'd the Battel of Issus, still cleav'd to the Persian Interest. For some secur'd convenient Cities and Garisons for Darius, and others procur'd several Provinces to raise Soldiers for him, and provide other things necessary, as the present Exigency of affairs required.

In the mean time, the General Senate of Greece made a Decree, to send Fifteen Ambassadors to present a Golden Crown to Alexander, in Congratulation of his Victory at Issus, who was at that time besieging Gaza, a Garison of the Persians, which he took by Assault, after a two Months siege.

CHAP. V.

Alexander makes a Journey to the Temple of Jupiter-Hammon. He's presented by the Cyreneans. The Description of the Place about the Temple. The wonderful Properties of the Fountain Solis. The Building of Alexandria. Alexander's Answer to Darius his Ambassadors. Alexander passes over the River Tygris with great hazard. The Preparations on both sides for Battel. The Persians routed at that Famous Battel at Arbela.

ARistophanes was now chief Governor of Athens, and Spurius Posthumius, and TitusViturius, were invested with the Dignity of Consuls at Rome, when Alexander, after the taking of Gaza, sent Amyntas with Ten Sail into Macedonia, with Orders to List the Stoutest of the young Men for Soldiers. And in the mean time, he himself march'd forward with the whole Army towards Aegypt, and coming there, all the Cities submitted to him without fighting. For because the Persians had wickedly violated their Holy Rites, and domineer'd imperiously over them, they most willingly receiv'd the Macedonians.

Having setled his Affairs in Aegypt, he undertook a Journey to the Temple of Hammon, to consult with the Oracle there. When he was in the midst of his Journey, he was met by the Ambassadors of Cyrene, presenting him with a Crown and other rich Gifts, among which were Three hundred War-Horses, and Five of the best Chariots, drawn with four Horses a piece. These he accepted, and made a League of Peace and Amity with them; and then with those that attended him went on forward in his Journey to the Temple. When they came to the parch'd and dry Deserts, (for they had taken Water along with them) they passed through a Region which was nothing but heaps of Sand. After the fourth Day their Water was spent, so that they were in extremity of Distress; while they were in this great perplexity, and knew not what to resolve, a sudden and unexpected shower of Rain then falling, supply'd all their present Necessities; which unexpected Preservation they imputed to the Kindness and Providence of the Gods.

Having furnish'd themselves out of a Valley with so much Water as was sufficient for four days; in that time they pass'd over this Dire and scorching Desart; But in regard there was no visible Path, by reason of the great Heaps of Sand, those who led the way,


Page 543

told the King, that there were Crows, which by their Croking at the Right Hand, directed them the way to the Temple; which the King taking as an happy Omen, and thereupon concluded, that his coming was grateful and acceptable to the Gods, he went forward on his Journey with more chearfulness. The next Place he came to, was call'd the BitterPond; Having travell'd thence a Hundred Furlongs, he pass'd by the Cities of Hammon, and in one days Journey more came to the Grove of the God.

The Site of the Temple is surrounded with a vast Dry and Sandy Desart, Wast and Untill'd; but it self is Fifty furlongs Broad, and as many Long, full of pleasant Fountains, and watered with running Streams, richly planted with all sorts of Trees, most of them bearing Fruit.

The Temperature of the Air is a constant Spring. And though all the Places round it are Dry and Scorching, yet to all that live there, the Heavens afford a most healthful Climate. It's reported, that this Temple was built by Danaus the Aegyptian.

Towards the East and West part of this Sacred Ground the Aethiopians inhabit; towards the North the Numinidians, a People of Africa; and towards the South the Nasomeneans. The Hammonians, the Inhabitants of the Sacred Grove, live in Villages. In the middle of the Grove is a Castle fortify'd with a Treble Wall; within the first stands the Palace of the ancient Kings; within the other was the Gynecaeum, where were the Apartments for the Wives, Children, and Kindred of the Prince, and stood as a common Fortress and Guard to the whole Place; and lastly, the Temple it self, and the Sacred Laver, wherein they wash'd the Sacrifices. Within the Third, were the Lodgings of the Archers and Darters, and Guard-houses of those who attend as Guards upon the Prince when he walks abroad. Not far from the Castle, out of the Walls, stands another Temple of Hammon, shaded round with many Fruit Trees, next to which is a Fountain, call'd Solis, from the Natural Effects of it. For the Water differs in its temper, according to the several Hours of the Day. For about Sun rising it's Lukewarm; afterwards as the Day comes on, it grows colder and colder, every Hour till Noon, at which time it's at the Coldest. And thenceforward till Evening the Cold abates by degrees; and when Night approaches it waxes hot again, and encreases by little and little till Midnight, at which time it boils through intensiveness of Heat. From that time it cools by degrees, till Sun-rising, and then is Lukewarm again, as it was before.

The Image of the God is adorn'd in every part with Emeralds and other precious Stones, and delivers his Oracles in a singular and unusual Way: For he's carry'd about in a Golden Ship by fourscore Priests, who make to that Place, whither the God with a Nod of his Head directs them.

There follows a great Multitude of Matrons and young Virgins, singing Paeans all the way as they go, and setting forth the Praises of the Idol, in Songs compos'd after the Custom of their own Country.

When Alexander was introduc'd by the Priests into the Temple, and saw the God, one of the Old Prophets address'd himself to him, and said, God save thee my Son, and this Title take along with thee from the God himself. To whom he made Answer, I accept it, my Father, and if you'll make me Lord of the whole World, your Son I'll ever be call'd. Upon which, the Priest approach'd near the Altar; and when the Men (who according to Custom lift up the Image) at the uttering some Words as Signs for that Purpose, mov'd forward, the Priest answer'd, That the God would certainly bestow upon him what he had desir'd. This was very acceptable to Alexander.

But then he further said, I intreat thee, O God, that thou wouldst let me know what I have yet to enquire, and that is, Whether I have executed Justice upon all my Father's Murderers? Or whether any have escap'd? At which the Oracle cry'd out, Express thy self better, for no Mortal can kill thy Father, but all the Murderers of Philip have suffer'd just Punishment.

He added further, That his wonderful Successes and Prosperous Atchievements, were Evidences of his Divine Birth: For as he was never yet overcome by any, so he should be ever Victorious for the time to come.

Alexander being greatly pleas'd with these Answers, after he had bestow'd many rich and stately Gifts upon the Oracle, return'd back on his way for Egypt, where he intended to build a great City. In order whereunto, when he came there, he directed the Overseers of this Work to build it between the Marishes and the Sea, and measur'd out the Ground himself, and mark'd out the Streets, and call'd it Alexandria, after his own Name. It had a very commodious Situation, being near unto the Haven of Pharos. He order'd and contriv'd the Streets with that Prudence, as that the Etesean Winds should, with their comfortable Gales, refresh all parts of the City: For these so cool the Air by their


Page 544

Breezes from the Great Sea, as that the Inhabitants, by so welcome and delightful Temperature of the Heat, are very healthful. He likewise drew a large and wonderful strong Wall round the City; and inasmuch as it lay between a large Pond on the one side, and the Sea on the other, there were but two narrow Ways and Passes by Land to it; so that it was easie to be defended by a small Guard. The City was in form like unto a Soldier's Coat, one large and beautifully built Street running almost through the middle of the Town; in length from Gate to Gate forty Furlongs, in breadth an hundred Foot, adorn'd with most stately Structures, both of Temples and private Houses. Alexander likewise built a large and stately Palace of most admirable Workmanship: And not only Alexander, but all the succeeding Kings of Egypt from time to time, to our present Age, have enlarg'd this Palace with most costly and sumptuous Buildings. The City likewise it self has been enlarg'd in after-times; so that by many it is reputed to be one of the Greatest and most Noble Cities in the World; for Beauty, rich Revenues, and plentiful Provision of all things for the comfortable Support of Man's Life, far excelling all others; and far more populous than any other: For when I was in Egypt, I was inform'd by them that kept the Rolls of the Inhabitants, That there were above Three hundred thousand Freemen that inhabited there, and that the King receiv'd above Six thousand Talents out of the yearly Revenues of Egypt. But when the King had appointed some of his Friends to oversee and take care of the Building of Alexandria, and had setled all the Affairs of Egypt, he return'd with his Army into Syria.

As soon as Darius had intelligence of his coming, he got all his Forces together, and prepar'd all things necessary in order to fight him: For he order'd the Swords and Lances to be made much longer, thinking by that advantage Alexander gain'd the Victory in Cilicia. He provided likewise two hundred hook'd Chariots, drawn with four Horses a piece, so contriv'd as to strike Terror into the Hearts of his Enemies. For in every one of them on both sides, the Horses which drew the Chariot by Iron Chains, were fix'd in the Yoak-Darts of three Spans long, with their Points full in the Faces of the Enemy. Upon the lower Parts of the Axle-trees, were two others fastned directly as those before, pointing into the Enemies Faces, but longer and broader; and at the top of them were fix'd sharp Hooks. Having compleatly furnish'd and set forth his Army with glittering Arms and stout Commanders, he march'd from Babylon with Eight hundred thousand Foot, and no less than Two hundred thousand Horse. In his march, Tygris was on his right, and Euphrates on his left Hand; where he past through a very rich Country, abounding in Forage for his Horse, and supplying sufficient Provision of all Things for his Soldiers. 

He made all the haste he could to reach Niniveh, there to fight the Enemy, because it was a large and Champain Country, convenient for the drawing up of so great an Army. When he came to a Village call'd Arbela, he there encamp'd, and every day drew up his Army in Battalia, and train'd and exercis'd them; for he was much afraid lest amongst so many Nations differing in Language one from another, there should be nothing but Tumult and Confusion in the heat of the Fight. He had indeed but lately before sent Ambassadors to Alexander to treat upon Terms of Peace, and had offer'd to him all the Countries lying within the Liver Halys, and Two thousand Talents of Silver; and now sent others to him, much commending him for his generous and honourable Usage of his Mother and the rest of the Captives, and desir'd to make Peace with him, and offer'd all the Lands lying within the River Euphrates, with Three thousand Talents of Silver, and one of his Daughters in Marriage: And further promis'd, That if he would be content to be his Son-in-Law, he should be joint Partner with him in the Kingdom.

Alexander imparted all these Proposals, offer'd to him by Darius, to his Friends, whom he call'd together for that purpose, and wish'd them freely to deliver their Opinions in this matter. When none durst speak their Minds in a Business of so high a Concernment, Parmenio stood up and said, If I were Alexander, I would accept of the Terms offer'd, and make Peace. To whom Alexander reply'd, And if I were Parmenio, I would do the same. And so uttering several other Words manifesting a Greatness and Nobleness of Mind, he rejected the Conditions offer'd by the Persians; and preferring Honour before Profit or other Advantage, he spoke to the Ambassadors in this manner: As two Suns in the Heaven would disorder the Course of the Universe, so two Kings Reigning together upon Earth, would turn all into Tumult and Confusion. Therefore he commanded them to tell Darius, That if he affected the Superiority, then to come and try it out with him for the whole Empire by the Sword; but if he preferr'd Wealth and Ease before Honour, that then he should submit to Alexander, and so he might Reign over others as a King; but yet receive his Kingdom at the hands of Alexander as a Fruit of his Bounty.


Page 545

Having said this, he presently after broke up the Assembly, and march'd with his Army towards the Enemy's Camp. In the mean time, the Wife of Darius dy'd, and Alexander bury'd her honourably according to her Quality. When Darius receiv'd Alexander's Answer, he was out of all hopes of putting an end to the War by Letters and Messages, and therefore he train'd his Soldiers every day, thereby making them more ready and willing to observe all Words of Command whenever they should engage.

In the mean while he sent Mazeus, one of his Faithfull Friends, with a Battalion of stout Men to guard the Passage over the River Tygris, and secure the Ford. Others he commanded to burn up all the Country through which the Enemy was to pass: For he reresolv'd to make use of the River as a Defence and Bulwark against the Enemy's approach.

But Mazeus observing that the River was not passable, both by reason of its depth, and swiftness of its Stream, wav'd the guarding of it, and employ'd himself in wasting and destroying of the Country; concluding, that when that was done, the Enemy could not pass that way through want of Provision.

Alexander, when he came to the River Tygris (being inform'd by the Inhabitants where the Ford lay) pass'd his Army over, but with very great Toil and extream Hazard; for the Water came up above their Breasts, and several were taken off their Feet, and hurry'd away by the violence of the Stream; many others likewise were born away, and perish'd through the rapid Course of the Water, involving it self within their Arms. Alexander, to withstand the Violence of the Water, order'd his Men to stand close in a Body together, like a Rampire against the Stream: By this means they got safe over; and after so much danger and difficulty, he permitted them to refresh themselves for one day. The next day he march'd in Battalia against the Enemy, and at length encamp'd near to them. But while he revolv'd in his Mind the vast number of the Persian Army, and what great Difficulties he was to cope with, and that now all lay at stake, he spent all that Night in anxious Thoughts concerning the Event. But he fell into so deep a Sleep about the Morning-Watch, that though the Sun was now up, yet he could not be awak'd. His Friends at the first were very glad of it, as judging the longer he rested the more lively he would be, and so more able to bear the Fatigues of the Day. But Time drawing far on, and the King still fast asleep, Parmenio, the Oldest of the Commanders, gave Command through the Army to prepare for an Engagement. The King sleeping still, some of his Friends stept in to him, and had much ado to awake him. While all wonder'd at a thing so unusual, and expected to hear the Cause from himself, Now, says Alexander, I am free from all Fear and Care as concerning Darius, who has brought his whole Strength together into one Place; for by one Day's Battel for the Trial of all, I shall be quit and discharg'd of all my Hazards and Toils for the time to come. Upon which, without any delay he made a Speech to encourage his Officers to pluck up their Spirits, and with Courageous Hearts to▪ 

〈◊〉

 all the Dangers that were before them. Upon which he march'd in Battalia against the Barbarians, with the Horse in the Front of his Army. The Right Wing was Commanded by Clitus, surnam'd Niger, wherein were other special Friends under the Command of Philotas the Son of Parmenio, supported by seven other Regiments of Horse under the same Commander. After them were plac'd the Battalion of Foot call'd Argyraspides, glittering in their Arms (most excellent Soldiers) led by Nicanor the Son of Parmenio; to support them, he plac'd next the Squadrons of Elimia, whose Leader was Cenus. In the next Squadron stood the Oresteans and Lyncestians, whose Captain was Perdiccas; next to these was Meleager with his Squadron; and after him Polysphercon commanded the Stympheans; and next to him Philip the Son of Balacrus commanded another Squadron; and after him Craterus. To the Squadrons of Horse before-mention'd were 

•

oin'd, as Auxiliaries, those from Peloponnesus and Achaia, together with the Phthiots, Malieans, Locrians, and Phocians, commanded by Erigyrus of Mitylene. After these were plac'd the Thessalians (for Valour and Horsemanship far beyond all the rest) whose Commander was Philip. Next to these he drew up the Archers from Crete, and the Mercenaries from Achaia.

Both Wings were drawn up into the Form of an half-moon, that the Macedonians might not be hemm'd in by the multitude of the Persians. The King provided against the hook'd Chariots, that they might not break in upon them, by this Contrivance: he commanded the Foot, that when the Chariots advanc'd near in their Career, they should strike with their Javelins upon their Shields lock'd one into another, that the horses, frighted with the noise, might start back; but that if they still press'd forward, in order to force their way, that then they should open, that so they might shun them without any prejudice.


Page 546

He himself took upon him the Command of the Right Wing, and drawing up in an oblique Line, resolv'd to venture himself wherever there was any Danger.

Darius drew up his Army according to the distinction of the several Nations, and advanc'd against the Enemy in that Wing opposite to Alexander. And now both Armies drew near one to another, and the Trumpets on both Sides gave the Signal to Battel, and the Soldiers made at one another with a great shout, and forthwith the hook'd Chariots rushing forward with a mighty force, greatly amaz'd and terrifi'd the Macedonians. For Mazeus the General of the Horse charging with a great Body close after the Chariots, caus'd them to be more terrible. In the midst of the Action, a mighty Crash and dreadful Noise was made on a sudden by the Foot's striking with their Jav

•

lins upon their Bucklers, as the King had commanded; upon which many of the Chariots (through the fright of the Horses) were turn'd aside, and the Horses being altogether ungovernable, made away back again into the Persian Army; Most of the rest of the Chariots breaking in among the Foot, by opening to make way, were either quite destroy'd by Darts and Arrows, or diverted. Some indeed forc'd their way with that Violence, that with their Hooks they bore down all before them, and many perish'd by several sorts of deadly Wounds. For such was the Force and Violence, together with the Sharpness of the hook'd Sithes contriv'd for Destruction, that many had their Arms with their Shields in their Hands cut off; and not a few had their Heads so suddenly shear'd off, that they tumbled to the Ground with their Eyes open, and their Countenance in the same Posture as they were when alive. Some were so mortally gash'd, and cut through their Sides, that they forthwith fell down dead.

When the Armies came closer together, and all their Darts and Arrows both from their Bows and Slings, and those cast by the Hand, were spent, they fell to it hand to hand. The first Charge was by the Horse, the Macedonians being in the Right Wing opposite to Darius, who commanded the Left of the Persians, in which were his Kindred and near Relations. For there was a Regiment of a Thousand Horse, compos'd only of such as were in greatest Reputation and Account for their Valour and special Love to the King. These having him a Spectator of their Valour, readily and chearfully receiv'd all the Darts that were cast at the King. They were seconded by the Melephorians, who were numerous and stout Men, and with them were join'd the Mardians and Cisseans, Men admir'd for their Courage, and the Bulk of their Bodies. Besides these, there were those of the King's Houshold, and some of the stoutest of the Indians. All these made a fierce Charge with a great Shout upon the Macedonians, who were put very hard to it by reason of their Multitude. Mazeus likewise in the Right Wing, with a brave Body of Horse charg'd with that briskness, that he laid many at his Feet at the first onset. Then he order'd Two thousand Cadusian Horse, and a Thousand more of the Scythians, to take a compass round the Enemies Wings, and to break in upon the Trenches that defended their Carriages; who presently thereupon put in execution what they were commanded. Thus having forc'd into the Macedonians Camp, some of the Prisoners catch'd up Arms and join'd with the Scythians, and rifled the Carriages. Upon which, through the suddenness of the Surprize, a great Noise and Clamour arose throughout the whole Camp. Then other Prisoners ran in to the Barbarians. But Sisygambris the Mother of Darius would not stir, though she was mov'd to it, but with a kind of an affectionate Regard to her Condition, continu'd in the same place, not trusting to the uncertain Turns of Fortune, nor judging it fit and honourable to manifest so much Ingratitude towards Alexander. The Scythians having at length rifled most of the Carriages, return'd to Mazeus, and gave him an Account of the happy Success. With the like good Fortune that Body of Horse with Darius put the Macedonians (overpower'd with Number) to flight. While the Victory seem'd thus to incline to the Persians by this second Success, Alexander making it his only Business with all the speed possible to rally his broken Forces, and to repair his Losses, charg'd Darius with his own Brigade, and some others of the bravest Horse in the Army; The Persian King receiv'd the Enemy's Charge with great Resolution, and fighting mounted upon his Chariot, dispatch'd many with Darts that assaulted him; neither were they few that defended him. And while both Kings were eager to destroy one another, Alexander in throwing a Dart at Darius miss'd him, but kill'd his Chariot-driver. Upon which, those about the King that were at some distance set up a great Cry, believing that the King was kill'd; and forthwith betook themselves to their Heels, and then the next to them follow'd. Presently the Troops next to Darius himself gave ground by degrees, till such time as he was left naked on one side; and then he himself in a great Consternation made away with all speed. The Persians being thus dispers'd, the Horse in their flight rais'd so great a Cloud of Dust, that Alexander and his Men, who pursu'd close at the


Page 547

Heels of the Enemy, could not see which way Darius fled: Nothing was heard but the Groans of dying Men, the trampling of Horses, and continual Noise and Lashing of Whips. In the mean time, Mazeus in the Right Wing having the bravest and stoutest Horse of any of the Persians, press'd grievously upon those Troops with whom he was engag'd. So that though Parmenio with the Thessalian Horse, and others join'd with them, were greatly distress'd, yet he bore the Brunt for some time, and at first through his own Valour, and the Bravery of the Thessalian Horse, worsted the Persians; but the Horse with Mazeus by their Number bearing down the other, that Wing of the Macedonians was quite routed, so that a great Slaughter was made, and there was now no standing before the Barbarians. Parmenio therefore sent Horsemen after Alexander to intreat his Assistance with all speed, who hasted away to execute the Orders and Command given: But when they heard that a great part of the Army was fled, they return'd without going further. However Parmenio bestirring himself, and rallying his Troops as well as he could, with the help of the Thessalian Horse hew'd down many of his Enemies, and at length with much ado put the Barbarians to flight, who were in Amaze and Consternation upon hearing that Darius was fled.

Darius in the mean time being an expert General, and help'd by the thick Cloud of Dust, took not his Course strait forward like the rest, but turn'd a different way; and so being not discern'd, (by reason the Dust rose so high,) escap'd clear away, and brought all those that went along with him safe into the Towns and Villages that lay at the Backs of the Macedonians.

At length all the Barbarians taking to their Heels, and the Macedonians killing all that were in the Rear, in a short time all that large Plain was cover'd over with dead Carkasses. There were kill'd in this Battel, of the Barbarians, Horse and Foot, above Ninety thousand; of the Macedonians, Five hundred only, but great Multitudes wounded. Amongst whom, Hephestion, one of the bravest of Alexander's Commanders, and Captain of his Guard, was shot through the Arm with a Dart. Perdiccas, Cenas, Menidas, and some others likewise were wounded. And this was the Issue of the Battel at Arbela.

CHAP. VI.

The Graecians conspire to Revolt. Memnon rebells in Thrace. Antipater marches against him. The Lacedaemonians raise an Army; are routed by Antipater, and Agis their King kill'd.

ARistophon was at that time Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Cneius Domitius and AulusCornelius were created Roman Consuls, when many of the Cities of Greece, upon the News of the Victory at Arbela, began to bestir themselves to defend their ancient Liberties, whilst the Persians had any Power left to assist them; and therefore resolv'd to assist Darius with Monies to raise Foreign Soldiers from all Parts. For they concluded, that Alexander durst not divide his Army lest he should disturb them; but if they should suffer the Persians to be destroy'd, they were not able of themselves to defend their Liberties. And an Insurrection in Thrace encourag'd them the more to Revolt: For Memnon being sent General into Thrace, having both Courage and Force sufficient, at the Instigation of the Barbarians rebell'd, and with a great Army now appear'd in open War. Upon which, Antipater gather'd all his Forces together, and march'd through Macedonia into Thrace against Memnon. Things thus falling out, the Lacedaemonians judging that now a fair Opportunity was offer'd them to prepare for War, sollicited the Graecians to Confederate together for their remaining Liberties. But the Athenians, in regard they had receiv'd many Kindnesses and Marks of Honour from Alexander beyond all the rest of the Cities, continu'd quiet and firm in their Duty. But many of the Peloponnesians, and some others, entred into the League, and inroll'd their Names as Soldiers for the Army; so as according as every City was able, they sent forth the choicest of their Youth, and rais'd an Army of Twenty thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse. The Management of the whole War was left to the Lacedaemonians, who were resolv'd to lay all at Stake, and made Agis General. Antipater hearing of the Defection of the Greeks, compos'd all Matters relating to the War in Thrace as well as he could, and march'd with all his Forces into Greece, having no less than Forty thousand Greek Auxiliaries as Confederates. Hereupon


Page 548

a great Battel was fought, wherein Agis (though he behav'd himself with great Valour and Resolution) was kill'd, and at length the Lacedaemonians (having stood to it stoutly for a long time) upon their Confederates giving Ground, likewise retreated towards Sparta. There fell of the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates in this Battel above Five thousand and Three hundred: Of those with Antipater, Three thousand and Five hundred.

There was one Thing very Remarkable concerning the Death of Agis. Having fought with great Gallantry and Resolution, and receiv'd many Wounds, he was carry'd off by the Soldiers in order to be brought back to his own Country, but being surrounded by the Enemy, and finding no likelihood to escape, he charg'd his Soldiers forthwith to be gone, and preserve themselves for the further Service of their Country. He himself remain'd, and with his Sword in his Hand fought it out upon his Knees, and kill'd several of the Assailants, till at length being shot through the Body with a Dart, he there dy'd, after he had reign'd Nine Years. Thus far for Europe, we shall now return again to the Affairs of Asia.

CHAP. VII.

Alexander comes to Babylon. The Wealth found there. Views his Troops at Sitacana. The Riches there. Thence goes into the Country of the Uxians. Marches towards Persepolis. A Company of maim'd Greeks met Alexander: His Bounty to them. He takes Persepolis; gives it up to the Plunder of the Soldiers. The Riches of the Cittadel of Persepolis. Alexander's Feast at Persepolis. Persepolis burnt at the Instigation of Thais. Darius murder'd.

DArius being routed at Arabela, fled towards the higher Provinces, to the end that he might both by the distance of the Place recruit himself, and likewise have more time to raise a new Army. He came first to Ecbatane, where he stay'd for some time, and there receiv'd his broken Troops that came in to him, and arm'd again such as had lost their Arms. He sent likewise for the Militia out of the Neighbouring Provinces, and dispatch'd Messengers to the Lord-Lieutenants and Commanders in Bactria and the upper Praefectures, wishing them to abide firm to him in their Faith and Loyalty. 

In the mean time, Alexander (after he had buri'd those that were kill'd in the Battel) enter'd Arbela, where he found abundance of rich Furniture of the Kings, and vast Treasures of the Barbarians, amounting to Three thousand Talents of Silver. But because he judg'd that the Air thereabouts must needs be infected through the Stench of the Bodies that lay there slain, he presently remov'd his Camp, and came with all his Forces to Babylon, where he was chearfully receiv'd by the Inhabitants, and splendid Entertainment afforded to the Macedonians. And there his Army was refresh'd after the many Toils and Difficulties they had undergone. And thus in the Confluence of all Things desirable, and free and noble Entertainment of the Citizens, he continu'd in the City above Thirty Days. Then he made Agatho of Pydna Governor of the Castle, with a Garison of Seven Hundred Macedonians. To Apollodorus of Amphipolis, and Menetes of Pelea, he gave the Government of Babylon, and of all the Prefectures as far as to Cilicia, and order'd them to raise what Forces they could; and gave them a Thousand Talents for that purpose. He made Mithrinas, who betray'd the Castle of Sardis, Lord Lieutenant of Armenia. Of the Monies that he found in Babylon, he gave to every Horseman Six Minas; to every Auxiliary, Five; to each of the Macedonian Phalanx, Two; and to every Foreign Mercenary, Two Months Pay.

The King removing from Babylon, as he was in his March there came to him Recruits from Antipater, Five hundred Macedonian Horse, and Six thousand Foot; Six hundred Thracian Horse, and Three thousand Five hundred Trallians: From Peloponnesus Four thousand Foot, and almost a Thousand Horse. Among these were sent Fifty of the Sons of the King's special Friends from Macedonia, design'd by their Fathers to be of the King's Life-Guard. Having receiv'd these, he march'd forward, and came, after Six Decampments, into the Province of Sitacina. And here he stay'd several Days, in regard the Country abounded in all Things necessary for the Life of Man, and for that he had a mind his Soldiers should refresh themselves after their tedious March. And had a Purpose


Page 549

likewise to take a more exact View and Account of his Troops, and to inlarge the Commands and Governments of his Captains and Commanders, and so to strengthen his Army, both by the Number of Soldiers, and Valour of their Officers. All which he forthwith put in Execution; and making choice of the most Deserving with the utmost Care possible, he advanc'd many from very considerable Places of Trust and Authority to much higher Preferments, by which means he both promoted his Officers, and gain'd their Hearts and Affections at the same time. He took care also for the better Government of the Common Soldiers, and by many new Inventions put every thing into a better Order and Posture than they were before. To conclude, when he had so manag'd every thing as that he had gain'd the Love of the whole Army, and made them in all Points observant to his Commands, and was assur'd for Valour they would give Ground to none, he march'd forward, in order to finish by fighting what further remain'd. When he came to the Province of Susiana, he presently without any difficulty gain'd the Possession of Susa, the Royal City, the most beautiful Palace of the Universe, which was voluntarily surrender'd to him by Abuletes the Lord Lieutenant of the Province. But some Writers have said, That this was done by order from Darius himself, to them that otherwise would have been both Loyal and Faithful to his Interest; and that this was done by the Persian King for this end, that Alexander being taken up with Matters of such great Moment, as taking Possession of famous and noble Cities, and loading himself with vast Treasures, Darius might gain more time for the raising of fresh Forces for the carrying on of the War.

Alexander therefore having possess'd himself of the City and the King's Treasures, found there above Forty thousand Talents of uncoin'd Gold and Silver. The Kings had preserv'd this Treasure untouch'd for many Ages, that it might be ready to resort to in case of some sudden and unexpected Turn of Fortune. Besides this, there was likewise Nine thousand Talents in coin'd Money call'd Daricks. While Alexander was taking an Account of this Wealth, there happen'd something that was very Remarkable. The Throne whereon he sate being too high for him, so that his Feet could not touch the Footstool, one of the King's Boys observing it, brought Darius his Table and plac'd it under his Feet, with which the King was very well pleas'd, and commended his Care. But one of the Eunuchs standing at the side of the Throne, much concern'd and griev'd at such a change of Fortune, burst out into Tears: Which Alexander perceiving; What Ill dost thou see (says he) that thou weepest so? To whom he answer'd, I was once Darius his Servant,now I am yours; but because I cannot but love my natural Lord and Master, I am not able without extream Sorrow to see that Table put to so base and mean a Use, which by him was so lately grao'd and honour'd. The King, upon this Answer, reflecting upon the strange Change of the Persian Monarchy, began to consider that he had acted the part of a Proud and Insulting Enemy, not becoming that Humanity and Clemency which ought to be shewn towards Captives; and therefore he commanded him who plac'd the Table there, to take it away: But Philotas standing near to him, said, It is not Pride or Insolency, O King! being done without your Command, but it falls out to be so through the Providence and Pleasure of some good Genius. Upon which, the King order'd the Table to remain where it was, looking upon it as some happy Omen.

After this, he order'd some Masters to attend upon Darius his Mother, his Daughters and Son, to instruct them in the Greek Tongue, and left them at Susa. And he himself march'd away with the whole Army, and after four Decampments came to the River Tigris, which rising out of the Uxian Mountains, runs first through a rough and craggy Country, full of large and wide Channels for the space of a Thousand Furlongs; thence it passes through a Champion Country with a more gentle Current, and having made its way for the space of Six hundred Furlongs, it empties it self into the Persian Sea.

Alexander having pass'd the River, march'd towards the most fruitful Country of the Uxians: For being water'd in every part, it plentifully produces Fruits of all sorts and kinds; of which, being in their proper Season dri'd in the Time of Autumn, they make all sorts of Sweetmeats, Sauces, and other Compositions, both for necessary Use and Pleasure, and the Merchants convey them down the River Tygris to Babylon. He found all the Passes strongly guarded by Madates, who was near related in Kindred to Darius, and had with him a strong and well-disciplin'd Army. Whilst Alexander was viewing the Strength of the Places, and could find out no Passage through those steep Rocks; an Inhabitant of the Country, who was well acquainted with those Ways, promis'd Alexander, that he would lead his Soldiers through such a strait and difficult Path-way, as that they should stand at length over the Heads of their Enemies: Hereupon the King order'd a small Party to go along with him. He himself in the mean time us'd his utmost Endeavour


Page 550

to force his Way, and for that purpose set upon the Guards, and while they were hotly engag'd. (fresh Men still supplying the Room of them that were weary,) and the Barbarians disorderd, and running here annothere in the Engagement, on a sudden the Soldiers that were sent away appear'd over the Heads of the Guards that kept the Passages; upon which they were so amaz'd, that they forthwith fled, and so the King gain'd the Pass; and presently all the Cities throughout all Uxiana were brought into Subjection. Thence he decamp'd and march'd towards Persia, and the Fifth Day came to a Place call'd: he Susian R

•cks,

 which were before possess'd by Ariobarzanes, with Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Three hundred Horse. The King concluding, that he must gain the Pass by force, led his Troops through some of the strait and craggy Places without any Resistance; the Barbarians never offer'd to disturb him till he came the mid-way, and then on a sudden they bestirr'd themselves, and threw down great Numbers of massy Stones upon the Heads of the Macedonians, and destroy'd Multitudes of them. Many cast their Darts from the Rocks above upon them, which fail'd not to do Execution, falling among such a Throng of Men together: Others with Hand-stones repuls'd the Macedonians that were forcing to break in upon them; so that by reason of the Difficulty of the Places, the Barbarians so far prevail'd, as to kill Multitudes, and wound as many. Alexander not being able to prevent this sad and miserable Slaughter, and perceiving that not one of the Enemy fell, or was so much as hurt, and that many of his own Men were slain, and almost all that led the Van were wounded, he sounded a Retreat; and march'd back Three hundred Furlongs, and then encamp'd. Then he enquir'd of the Inhabitants, whether there was any other Way to pass, who all answer'd, That there was none, but that he must go round many Days Journey. But the King looking upon it as a Dishonourable Thing to leave the Bodies of them that were slain unbury'd; and as disgraceful, and even owning himself to be conquer'd by treating for Liberty to bury the Dead, he commanded the Captives, as many as were there at hand, to be brought to him. Among these, there was one that understood both the Persian and Greek Tongue, who declar'd, that he was a Lycian and sometime ago made a Prisoner at War, and that for several Years last past he had exercis'd the calling of a Shepherd in those Neighbouring Mountains, and by that means had perfect knowledge of the Country, and told the King, that he could lead the Army through the Woods, and bring them directly upon the Backs of them that guarded the Passes; Hearing this, the King promis'd the Man a large Reward, who thereupon so conducted him, that in the Night with great Labour and Toil he got to the top of the Mountains, for he drail'd through abundance of Snow, and past through a Country full of steep Rocks, deep Gulphs, and many Vallies. Having march'd through this Tract, as soon as he came in sight of the Guards, he presently kill'd the first, and took those Prisoners that were plac'd in the next Pass. The third Guard presently fled, and so he gain'd all into his own Power, and cut off the greatest part of Ariobarzanes his Army. Thence he march'd towards Persepolis, and in his way receiv'd Letters from Teridates Governor of the City, whereby he signify'd to him, That if he hasted away, and prevented those that were coming to relieve Persepolis, he would deliver the City into his Hand. Upon which he made a swift March, and pass'd his Army over the River Araxis, by a Bridge then laid for that purpose. As the King was on his March, a most sad Spectacle presented it self, which stirr'd up just Hatred against the Author, Pity and Compassion for the irreparable Loss of those that suffer'd; and Grief and Sorrow in all the Beholders. For there met him certain Greeks, whom the former Kings of Persia had made Captives and Slaves, and fell down at his Feet; they were near Eight hundred, most of them then old Men, and all maim'd, some having their Hands, others their Hands, others their Feet, some their Ears, and others their Noses, cut off. If any were expert in any Art, and had made a considerable Progress therein, all his outward Members were cut off, but such only as were necessary for the Management of his Art. So that all that beheld their Venerable old Age, and the sad mangling of their Bodies, greatly pity'd the miserable Condition of these poor Creatures: Especially Alexander so piti'd their sad Condition, that he could not re

•

rain from Weeping. These all with one Voice cry'd out, and intreated him, That he would Succour and Relieve them in these their Calamities. Upon which, the King call'd the chiefest of them to him, and told them, that he would take special Care of him, and promis'd he would see them sent honourably to their own Country, as became the Dignity of his Person. Upon which they consulted together, and at length concluded, That it was better for them to remain where they were, than to return into their own Country: For when they were return'd, they should be scatter'd here and there, and all the Days of their Lives be Mock'd and Despis'd by reason of their sad Misfortunes. But if they continu'd together as Fellows in their Misery, the Calamity of their Fellow-Sufferers would


Page 551

be an Allay, and some Comfort to every one of them in their own Adversities. Upon this, they made a second Address to the King, and declar'd to him what they had resolv'd upon, and desir'd him he would afford such Relief to them as was most agreable to their present Circumstances. The King consented to what they had determin'd, and order'd to each of them Three thousand Drachmas, Five Suits of Rayment to every Man, and as many to each Woman; and to every one of them Two Yoke of Oxen, Fifty Sheep, and as many Medimnas of Wheat. And commanded they should be free from all Taxes and Tribute, and gave strict Charge to the Officers employ'd, that none should offer them any Injury. And thus Alexander, according to his natural Goodness and innate Generosity, comforted these poor miserable People. He then call'd the Macedonians together, and told them, That Persepolis, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Persia, of all the Cities of Asia had done most Mischief to the Graecians, and therefore he gave it up to the Plunder and Spoil of the Soldiers, except the King's Palace. This was the richest City of any under the Sun, and for many Ages all the private Houses were full of all sorts of Wealth, and what ever was desirable.

The Macedonians therefore forcing into the City, put all the Men to the Sword, and rifl'd and carry'd away every Man's Goods and Estate, amongst which was abundance of rich and costly Furniture and Ornaments of all sorts. In this Place was hurri'd away here and there vast Quantities of Silver, and no less of Gold, great Numbers of rich Garments, some of Purple, others embroider'd with Gold, all which became a plentiful Prey to the ravenous Soldiers: And thus the great Seat Royal of the Persians, once famous all the World over, was now expos'd to Scorn and Contempt, and rifl'd from top to bottom. For though every Place was full of rich Spoil, yet the Covetousness of the Macedonians was insatiable, still thirsting after more. And they were so eager in Plundering, that they fought one with another with drawn Swords, and many who were conceiv'd to have got a greater Share than the rest, were kill'd in the Quarrel. Some Things that were of extraordinary Value they divided with their Swords, and each took a Share; Others in Rage cut off the Hands of such as laid hold upon a Thing that was in Dispute. They first ravish'd the Women as they were in their Jewels and rich Attire, and then sold them for Slaves. So that by how much Persepolis excell'd all the other Cities in Glory and Worldly Felicity, by so much more was the Measure of their Misery and Calamity. Then Alexander seiz'd upon all the Treasures in the Cittadel, which was a vast Quantity of Gold and Silver of the Publick Revenues that had been heaping up, and laid there, from the time of Cyrus the first King of Persia, to that Day. For there was there found an Hundred and twenty thousand Talents, reckoning the Gold after the Rate of the Silver.

Part of this Treasure he took for the Use of the War, and order'd another Part of it to be treasur'd up at Susa. To this purpose, he order'd that a multitude of Mules both for Draught and Carriage, and Three thousand Camels with Pack-saddles, should be brought out of Babylon, Mesopotamia, and Susa; and with these he convey'd all the Treasure to the several Places he had appointed. For because he extreamly hated the Inhabitants, he was resolv'd not to trust them with any Thing, but utterly to ruin and destroy Persepolis: Of whose Palace, in regard of its stately Structure, we conceive it will not be impertinent if we say something. This stately Fabrick, or Cittadel, was surrounded with a treble Wall: The first was Sixteen Cubits high, adorn'd with many sumptuous Buildings and aspiring Turrets. The second was like to the first, but as high again as the other. The third was drawn like a Quadrant foursquare, Sixty Cubits high, all of the hardest Marble, and so cemented, as to continue for ever. On the four Sides are brazen Gates, near to which are Gallowes's of Brass twenty Cubits high, these rais'd to terrify the Beholders, and the other for the better strengthening and fortifying of the Place. On the East-side of the Cittadel, about Four hundred Foot distant, stood a Mount call'd the Royal Mount, for here are all the Sepulchres of the Kings, many Apartments and little Cells, being cut into the midst of the Rock; into which Cells there's made no direct Passage, but the Coffins with the dead Bodies are by Instruments hoist up, and so let down into these Vaults. In this Citadel were many stately Lodgings, both for the King and his Soldiers, of excellent Workmanship, and Treasury Chambers most commodiously contriv'd for the laying up of Money.

Here Alexander made a sumptuous Feast for the Entertainment of his Friends in Commemoration of his Victory, and offer'd magnificent Sacrifices to the Gods. At this Feast were entertain'd Whores, who prostituted their Bodies for Hire, where the Cups went so high, and the Reins so let loose to Drunkenness and Debauchery, that many were both drunk and mad. Among the rest, at that time there was a Curtesan call'd Thais, an


Page 552

Athenian, that said, Alexander would perform the most glorious Act of any that ever he did, if while he was Feasting with them, he would burn the Palace, and so the Glory and Renown of Persia might be said to be brought to nothing in a moment, by the Hands of Women. This spreading abroad and coming to the Ears of the young Men (who commonly make little use of Reason when Drink is in their Heads) presently one crys out, Come on, bring us Fire-brands, and so incites the rest to Fire the Citadel to revenge that Impiety the Persians had committed, in destroying the Temples of the Grecians. At this, others with joy set up a shout, but said, That so brave an Exploit belong'd only to Alexander to perform.

The King stirr'd up at these Words, embrac'd the Motion, upon which, as many as were present left their Cups and leap'd from the Table, and said, That they would now celebrate a victorious Festival to Bacchus. Hereupon, multitudes of Firebrands were presently got together, and all the Women that play'd on Musical Instruments, which were at the Feast, were call'd for, and then the King, with Songs, Pipes, and Flutes bravely led the way to this noble Expedition, contriv'd and manag'd by this Whore, Thais, who next after the King, threw the first Firebrand into the Palace. This President was presently follow'd by the rest, so that in a very short time, the whole Fabrick by the Violence of the Fire, was consum'd to Ashes. 

It's very observable, and not without just admiration, that the Sacrilege and Impiety of Xerxes, King of Persia, (exercised in his destroying the Citadel of Athens) should so many years after be reveng'd in the same kind, by one Curtesan only of that City that was so injur'd.

After these things thus done, Alexander marches against the rest of the Persian Cities, and having taken in some by Force, and others surrender'd upon the Fame and Report of his L

•

nity and Moderation, he made after Darius, who had begun to raise Forces out of Bactria, and other Provinces; but being prevented by the March of the Enemy, he made away with all speed out of Bactria with Thirty thousand Persians and Mercenary Greeks, and in his return was treacherously Murther'd by Bessus, the Lord-Lieutenant of Bactria. He was scarce dead, when Alexander with a Party of Light Horse, came up to the Place where he lay, and there finding him, caus'd him to be honourably interr'd.

But some do report, that Alexander finding him yet alive, Darius complain'd of his sad Misfortune, and desir'd him that he would see his Death reveng'd, which Alexander faithfully promis'd. He forthwith indeed, pursu'd Bessus, but he being a long way before him, escap'd into Bactria, so that considering it was not possible to overtake him he march'd back. This was the State of Affairs in Asia.

In Europe, the Lacedaemonians being routed in a great Battel by Antipater, were forc'd to send Ambassadors to him; who put them off till the meeting of the General Assembly of Greece; which afterwards met at Corinth, where, after many things were Banded and Disputed on both sides, the Matter was at length left to the Decision of Alexander. Hereupon, Antipater receiv'd the chiefest of the Nobility of Sparta as Hostages; and the Lacedaemonians sent Ambassadors into Asia, to beg Pardon for their late Revolt.

CHAP. VIII.

Bessus stirs up the Bactrians. Alexander discharges the Greek Auxiliaries with Rewards. The River Stiboetes. He enters Hircania; Its Richness. Enters the Mardis Country. Loses his brave Horse, but is restor'd. Thalestris the Amazon Queen meets him. He falls into the Effeminacy of the Persians. Enters Drangina. A Plot against Alexander. Philotas and others put to Death. Marches against the Arimispi. Subdues Arachosia.

WHen this Year ended, Cephisophon executed the Office of Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Caius Valerius, and Marcus Claudius were created Roman Consuls. At that time, Bessus, with Na

•arzanes

 and Barxaentes, and many others, after the Death of Darius, having escap'd the hands of Alexander, came into Bactria. And in regard he was appointed Lord-Lieutenant of this Country by Darius, and upon that account was well known by the Inhabitants, he persuaded the People to stand up for their Liberty, and told them, That the Situation and Condition of their Country was such, being full of


Page 553

difficult Passes, and very Populous, that they had an extraordinary advantage to succeed in the Attempt, and promised that he himself would take upon him the whole Management of the War.

Hereupon, he so far prevail'd, that he got a considerable Number to join with him, and to own him for King. Then he Listed Men, prepar'd Arms, and procur'd whatever was necessary for the present State of his Affairs.

In the mean time, Alexander perceiving that the Macedonians had a design to end the War with the Death of Darius, and to return to their own Country, he call'd them together; and so courted them by an Oration fitted for the purpose, that he prevail'd with them readily to go on with the Expeditions that then yet remain'd. Then he call'd together all the Greek Auxiliaries, and having highly commended them for their Valour, bestow'd upon every Horseman as a Reward a Talent, and every Footman Ten Minas, and discharg'd them from further Service in the Army. And over and besides he paid to every one of them what was due to them for their common Pay, and gave them likewise sufficient Provision to carry them into their own Country; and to every one that was willing still to continue in the Army, he gave Three Talents. He gave indeed large Rewards to the Soldiers, being naturally of a generous Disposition, and besides, in pursuing Darius had possess'd himself of a vast Treasure: For he had receiv'd Eight thousand Talents out of the Treasures; and besides what he gave to the Soldiers, he rais'd Thirteen thousand Talents by sale of the Cups, Flaggons, and Furniture. And it was believ'd, that what was stollen and taken away by force was much more.

Having done this, he march'd with his Army towards Hircania, and the third day came near the City Hecatompylon, and there encamp'd. Here he continu'd some Days to refresh his Army, because the Country was exceeding Rich, and abounded with every thing for Man's Use. Thence he mov'd forward an Hundred and fifty Furlongs, and encamp'd near a very high Rock, at the foot of which is a Cave not unbecoming the Gods, from whence (as the Spring-head) issues the great River Stiboetes. Thence it runs with a fierce and violent Stream for the space of Three Furlongs, 'till it dash it self upon a great Rock in shape like a Woman's Pap, under which is a vast Gulph, or opening of the Earth, into which, being now divided into two Channels, it falls down with a mighty Noise, turn'd all into Froth and Spume, and there runs under-ground Three hundred Furlongs; and then appears again, as if that we e its Spring-head. Having entred Hircania with his Army, he gain'd all the Town, and Cities as far as the Caspian Sea, which some call likewise the Hircanian Sea. It's reported, that in that Sea are many Serpents of an extraordinary Bigness, and Fish of all sorts, much differing in Colour from those in our Parts. When he entred further into Hircania, he came to Towns call'd the Fortunate Towns, which are so in Deed, as well as in Name For this Country excels all the rest in fertility of Soil; for every Vine, they say, affords a Metrete of Wine: And that some Fig-trees are so very fruitful, that they'll bear Ten Medimnas of dried Figs; and that what are left upon the Tree after Harvest, fall upon the Ground, and spring up again of themselves, and bring forth abundance of Fruit to perfection. There's a Tree in that Country much like to an Oak, which distills Honey from its Leaves; and this the Inhabitants gather in great plenty for their own use. There's likewise a little Insect in this Tract call'd an Anthredon, less than a Bee, but very remarkable; it gets its living in the Mountains, sucking the Flowers that grow here and there in those places. It works its Combs within hollow Rocks, or Trees shatter'd or made hollow by the Thunder-bolts, and there makes a Liquor not inferiour to any for sweetness.

In the mean time, Alexander, while he was on his March through Hircania, and the bordering Countries, gain'd great Reputation, and was highly honour'd for his Clemency, in carrying himself with so much Humanity towards all those Commanders who fled away with Darius, and afterwards submitted themselves to him: So that Fifteen hundred brave and valiant Grecians (who sided with Darius) forthwith came unto him, and laid themselves at his Feet, whom he readily pardon'd, and plac'd them in several of his Regiments, and allow'd them the same Pay with the rest.

Having run through the Sea-Coasts of Hircania, he entred the Country of the Mardi; who being a Warlike Nation, slighted the growing Power of the King, and shew'd him not the least Respect, either by sending Ambassadors, or otherwise; but having possess'd themselves of the strait Passes of the Mountains with Eight thousand Men, stood there, waiting for the coming of the Macedonians. Hereupon the King sets upon them, kills many, and drives the rest within the Straits. But while he was burning up the Country all before him, it fell out that (some of the King's Boys who led his Horses, being at some distance from the rest of the Army) his best Horse, by a sudden Incursion of the


Page 554

Barbarians, was carry'd away. This Horse was given him by Damarotus the Corinthian, and the King had made use of him in all his Battels in Asia. When he was bare-back'd, he would admit only his Tender to mount him; but when he had the King's War-Saddle, and the rest of his brave Trappings upon him, he would not suffer his former Rider to get upon his Back, nor any other Person but Alexander; and to him he would down upon his Knees for the King to get into the Saddle. Because of these excellent Properties of the Horse, the King was the more griev'd and troubled; and therefore he order'd all the Trees in all parts of the Country as he went to be hewn down, and caus'd a Proclamation to be made in their own natural Tongue, That unless his Horse were restor'd, he would waste and destroy all before him with Fire and Sword; which he began presently to put in execution. Upon which, the Barbarians were so terrify'd, that they not only restor'd the Horse, but brought along with them many rich Presents for the King, and by Fifty Ambassadors begg'd his Pardon. Upon which, the King accepted some of the most Honourable among them for Hostages.

When he came back into Hircania, Thalestris Queen of the Amazons met him, whose Dominions lay between Phasis and Taermodon; of an admirable Beauty, and strong Body, greatly honour'd in her own Country for here Brave and Manly Spirit. She presented herself to the King, with Three hundred Amazons in their Warlike Habit, having left the rest of her Forces on the Borders of Hircania. The King being struck with admiration at the sudden and unexpected approach of the Queen, and the graceful appearance of the Women, ask'd Thalestris, what was the Reason of her Journey thither? Who answer'd him, That she came there to have Issue by him; for she look'd upon him to transcend all other Men for Great and Noble Actions; and she her self to exceed all other Women both in Body and Mind, as to the Strength of the one, and Courage of the other: And therefore there was good ground to hope that the Issue of such Parents, would excell all other Men in Valour. The King was greatly pleas'd with what she said, and gratisy'd her Request; and after he had convers'd with her for the space of Thirteen Days, he presented her with honourable Gifts, and suffer'd her to return to her own Kingdom.

Alexander conceiving that he had now effected all that he design'd, and that there was no Competitor with him for the Empire, began to indulge the soft and effeminate Manners of the Persians, and to imitate the Luxury of the Asian Kings: And therefore in the first place he order'd all the Officers of the Court to be Asiaticks, and the Nobility of Asia to be * 'Squires of the Body, amongst whom Oxathres, the Brother of Darius, was one. He put likewise the Persian Diadem upon his Head, and wore the White Cassock and Belt, after the manner of the Persian Kings, and all the rest, except the Persian Hose and Vestment, call'd the Candys. He bestow'd likewise Purple Gowns upon his Friends, and cloath'd all his Horsemen in the Persian Habit. He began likewise to carry his Concubines along with him from place to place as Darius us'd to do, who had almost as many as the Days in the Year, and were the greatest Beauties that could be found throughout all Asia. These stood round the King's Bed every Night, that he might take his choice of whom he pleas'd to lie with him. However, for the most part he follow'd the ancient Customs of his Ancestors, and us'd the other but seldom, lest he should offend the Macedonians; and when some notwithstanding complain'd of the King, he stopp'd their Mouths with Gifts and Bribes.

About this time, Intelligence was brought him that Satibarzanes, one of Darius his Lord Lieutenants, had kill'd all the Soldiers he had committed to his Charge, and was join'd in Conspiracy with Bessus to make War upon the Macedonians; whereupon he march'd out against him.

Satibarzanes had got all his Forces together into Chrotacana, a most Noble City in those Parts, and naturally fortify'd; but as soon as the King came in sight, being terrify'd with the Greatness of the King's Army, and the Valour of the Macedonians, (which was now cry'd up all the World over) he hasted away with Two thousand Horse to Bessus, to procure help from him with all speed. The rest of his Forces he ordered to make to a Mountain near at hand, which was full of straight Passes; and where they might lye close and secure when they durst not Engage with the Enemy in the open Field. Upon this, the King was so intent and diligent (as he always was) that though they had shelter'd themselves in a large Rock, and naturally strong, yet he reduc'd the Besieg'd to those streights, as that he forc'd them to Surrender themselves.

Afterwards, having reduc'd all the Cities in this Province, in the space of Thirty days, he left Hircania, and came to the Royal City of * Drangina, where he Encamp'd and refresh'd his Army.


Page 555

About t

•

is time a most wicked Plot was laid against Alexander, very unworthy the Goodness of his Disposition. For one of the King's Friends, call'd Dimnus, blaming the King for something he had done, and thereupon become Enrag'd at him, contriv'd to Assassinate him. This Man had a Catamite, call'd Nicomachus, whom he dearly lov'd; him he went about to persuade to join with him in this Wicked Design: But being a very young Youth, he discover'd the whole Business to his Brother Cebalinus, who (fearing lest some other should be before him in the Discovery) resolv'd to make the first Discovery to the King.

Thereupon he goes to the Court, and first meets Philotas, and acquaints him with what he had heard, and intreats him to inform the King what was hatching out of hand.

Philocas, whether through Covetousness, or that he was one of the Conspirators, (it's not certain) minded not to make the Discovery of what had been imparted to him: For though he went in to the King, and had a long Discourse with him of divers matters, yet he told him nothing of what Cebalinus had related to him. But when he came out, told Cebalinus, that he had not had as yet a fit Opportunity for opening of the Matter to the King; but that the next Day he would take him aside by himself, and discover all that Cebalinus had made known to him. Philotas neglecting the Business the next Day also; Cebalinus was afraid, lest if it should be discover'd by some other Person, and so he himself should be in great danger; Therefore he wav'd Philotas, and goes to one of the King's Pages, and tells him the whole Plot, wishing him forthwith to acquaint the King; and then withdraws himself into the Armory, and there lay private. The Page took the Opportunity when the King was in the Bath, and related to him the whole Matter told him by Cebalinus, and that he then lay hid and secret in the Armory. At this the King was greatly sta

•

tled, and forthwith order'd Dimnus to be seiz'd; and now fully inform'd of the Conspiracy, sent for Cebalinus and Philotas. When every thing after strict Examination was fully discover'd, Dimnus stabb'd himself. Philotas confess'd his Neglect in not making the Discovery, but utterly deny'd that he had any hand in the Conspiracy. The King hereupon committed the Examination of the Business to the Judgment of the Macedonians, who after many Arguments and Debates, Pro and Con, condemn'd Philotas and the rest of the Conspirators to die, amongst whom was Parmenio; who was ever thought to have been one of the King's most faithful Friends. And though he was not then present himself, yet it was suspected that he manag'd the Business by his Son Philotas.

Philotas therefore being put upon the Rack, confess'd the whole Plot; and so he and the other Conspirators were put to Death, according to the manner of their own Country. Alexander Lyncestes also (who was before accus'd of a Conspiracy against the King) suffer'd in the same manner. He had been now three years in custody, but his Trial was deferr'd to that time for the sake of Antigonus, who had a great kindness for him, and between whom there was a particular Friendship and Familiarity. But being then brought before the Macedonian Senate, and having nothing by way of Plea to say for himself, he was Executed with the rest.

Then Alexander dispatch'd some away upon Dromadary Camels, to prevent the Report of Philotas his Punishment, and by that means caus'd Parmenio, the Father of Philotas, to be seiz'd unawares, and put to Death; he was then Governor of Media, and was intrusted with the King's Treasures in Ecbatana, which amounted to an Hundred and Fourscore thousand Talents. About the same time he sever'd from the rest of his Army all such as had given out harsh Expressions against him, and grumbl'd at the Death of Parmenio, and all those who had written false and scandalous Letters to their Friends in Macedonia, relating to the King's Affairs: All these he cast into one Company or Regiment which he call'd the Unruly Company, lest by their unseasonable Jangling and Prating, they should corrupt the rest of the Macedonians.

After these things thus done, and that he had settl'd his Affairs in Drangina, he march'd against the Arimaspi, (as they were anciently call'd) but now Evergetae, which Name was given them upon the following account; Cyrus (who was the first that translated the Empire from the Medes to the Persians) in a certain Expedition he had undertaken, being brought into great Extremity in a barren Country for want of Provision, insomuch as the Soldiers to satisfy their Hunger, were forc'd to eat the Flesh one of another; the Arimispi at that time brought to his Army Thirty thousand Carts and Wagons, loaden with Provision. And therefore the King being thus unexpectedly Reliev'd and Preserv'd, not only quitted the People from paying of Tribute for the future; but bestow'd upon them many other Privileges and bountiful Rewards, and chang'd their old Name into Everget

•.


Page 556

And now when Alexander came into their Country, they receiv'd him with all the Demonstrations of Love and Kindness, and he rewarded them with marks of his Grace and Favour, suitable to his State and Dignity. And return'd the like Favour to the Gedrosians their Neighbours, who had entertain'd him likewise with the same Respect: And over these two Nations he made Teridates Governor.

In the mean time while he staid in these Parts, some brought him Intelligence that Satibarzmes with a great Body of Horse out of Bactria, had enter'd the Country of the Arians, and had withdrawn the Inhabitants from their Allegiance. Upon which the King sent him part of the Army, under the Command of Erigyus and Stasanor. He himself in the mean time, in a few days subdu'd Arachosia, and caus'd them to submit to his Government.

CHAP. IX.

Alexander marches against the Paromisades. His troublesome March. Comes to Mount Caucasus. A Battel in Area by Alexander's Officers against Satibarzanes, who is kill'd in a single Combat by Erigius. Bessus brought to Alexander; His Punishment. Alexander kills some Barbarians unexpectedly, after they had surrender'd their City. He marches to the River Indus. Mophis his remarkable delivery up of himself and his Army.

AT the End of this Year Euthycritus was created Chief Governor of Athens, LuciusPlotius, and Lucius Papyrius executing the Office of Roman Consuls; At this time was celebrated the Hundred and thirteenth Olympiad. Then Alexander led his Army against the Paropamisades. This Country lies very far North, and is covered over with Snow, and by reason of the Sharpness of the Cold, People cannot endure to come into their Country. The greatest Part of it is open and plain, without any Trees, and has in it many Towns scatter'd here and there. The Roofs of their Houses are cover'd with Tyles, running up in shape like a Spire, in the Middle is a Hole to let in Light, and to evaporate the Smoke: And the Walls of their Houses are so close jointed and cemented, that the Inhabitants are sufficiently guarded against the Cold. By reason of the great Driffs of Snow, they keep within their Houses most part of the Year, where they have every thing necessary for their Provision laid up in store. They cover their Vines and Fruit-Trees all the Winter with Earth, and uncover them again when the Spring approaches. The Nature of all this Tract is such, that nothing that is Green or Pleasant is seen in any Part of it. But Snow glittering with Ice covers all Places. No sorts of Fowl or Birds breed here; no Wild Beasts feed in the Woods or Forests; Insomuch, as that there's neither Entertainment for any Stranger, nor Hospitality one with another throughout the whole Country. Notwithstanding all these Difficulties, yet the King, encourag'd by the Hardness of the Macedonians, and put on forward by his own daring Resolution, overcame all the Disadvantages of the Place. But yet some of the Soldiers, and others that straggl'd and kept not up to the rest, were so tyr'd, that they were left behind. Others by the Brightness and Sharpness of the Snow, and reflection thereof upon their Eyes, were destroy'd. Nothing could be seen at a distance, save only the smoke that discover'd the Villages; which was a sign to the Macedonians that there were Inhabitants not far off. The Towns being thus discover'd and gain'd, the Soldiers after their great hardships, refresh'd themselves with the Plentiful store of Provision they found in the Houses, and in a short time all the Inhabitants submitted.

After this, he march'd forward, and came near to Caucasus, where he Encamp'd. That Mountain by some is call'd Paropamisus: Having pass'd over the Breadth of the Mountain in sixteen days march, he built a City, call'd Alexandria, near the Foot of the Mount, at a Pass which opens a Way into Media. In the middle of Caucasus is a Rock ten Furlongs in Compass, and four in Height, wherein the Inhabitants pretend to shew. * Promotheus his Cave, the Fabulous Vulture's Nest, and the Chains and Fetters. He built likewise other Cities, each distant a days Journey from Alexandria. In these he planted Seven thousand of the Barbarians, Three thousand of those that follow'd the Camp, and as many of the Mercenary Soldiers as would.


Page 557

Hence he march'd into Bactria; for he heard that Bessus had Usurp'd the Crown, and had rais'd a Numerous Army These were the things then done by Alexander.

In the mean time, the Commanders that were sent into Area, there found the Ring-leaders of the Rebellion, with a strong Army under the Command of Satibarzanes, an Experienc'd and Valiant General. The Armies Encamp'd near to one another, and sometimes would engage in considerable Bodies, and at others in light Skirmishes, by a few on either side. At length it came to a General Battel, and in the midst of the Fight, (wherein the Valour of the Barbarians was such, that the Issue was very doubtful) Satibarzanes himself (to discover who he was) pluck'd off his Helmet with his own Hand, and challenges any of his Enemies Commanders, to fight with him Hand to Hand. Upon which, Erigyus makes up to him, and a stout Combat there was, in which Erigyus was the Victor. The Barbarians upon the Death of their General were so disheartned, that upon Quarter, they gave up themselves to the King.

In the mean while, Bessus had taken upon him the Name of King, and having Sacrific'd to the Gods, invited his Friends to Feast with him. In the midst of his Cups, he began to Quarrel with one of his Companions, call'd Bagodoras, and the Contest growing higher, he fell at length into such a Rage, as that he resolv'd to kill him, but chang'd his Mind through the Persuasion of his Friends. Bagodoras thus narrowly escaping with his Life, fled in the Night to Alexander. The Chief of the Commanders (mov'd by the Consideration of his Escape, and stirr'd up by hopes of Rewards) conspir'd together and seiz'd upon Bessus, and brought him to Alexander, for which the King bountifully rewarded them. As for Bessus, he gave him up into the Hands of Darius his Brother, and the rest of his Kindred, to punish him in such manner as they thought fit, who after they had put him to all manner of Torments, and us'd him with all the Despite and Disgrace imaginable, they cut his Body into small pieces, and hurl'd every part here and there away out of their Slings.—

[Here the History is broken off and lost, viz. 1. Alexander's March through a dry Country. 2. The Defection of the Sogdians, Bactrians. 3. The Hunting in Bahastis.

Peace being made upon these Conditions, and ratify'd by mutual Oaths, the Queen mightily admir'd the Brave and Noble Spirit of Alexander, and sent to him most rich Presents, promising to do whatever he was pleas'd to Command.—

[Here the History is likewise lost. 4. The Impiety against Bacchus. 5. The Death of Clitus and Calisthenes. 6. Wars with the Nauticae. 7. His Marriage with Roxana. 8. of Nysia. These are wanting may be supply'd out of Archian. Lib. 4. and Q. Curtius, Lib. 7, 8.

Then the Mercenaries, as they had agreed, forthwith left the City, and having march'd Eight hundred Furlongs Encamp'd without any Disturbance, not in the least suspecting any thing of that which afterwards happen'd: For Alexander hating them implacably pursu'd them with a considerable Body of Men, and fell upon the Barbarians on the sudden, and cut off Multitudes of them. Upon which the Mercenaries first cry'd out, that he had violated his Oath, in falling upon them in that Hostile manner, and call'd upon the Gods to revenge that Impious Cruelty executed upon them. But the King, with a loud Voice answer'd, That he indeed did agree, that they should quit the City, but not that they should ever be accounted as Friends to the Macedonians. Hereupon, the Barbarians not at all terrify'd with the desperate Condition they were in, drew up in a Body in a round Ring; placing their Wives, Children, and Women in the middle, that they might receive the Enemy on every side with less Hazard and Prejudice. Being therefore Desperate and of daring Spirits, encourag'd by their Successes in former Conflicts, they bravely receiv'd the Enemy. The Macedonians on the other hand resolving to be in nothing inferior to them, the Engagement was very sharp and terrible. For fighting close hand to Hand, Man to Man, various kinds of Death and Wounds appear'd every where: For the Macedonians by their Sarissas pierc'd through the short Shields of the Barbarians with that violence, that the Points ran into their very Bodies The Mercenaries likewise on their part threw their Lances amongst the Thickest of their Enemies, upon whom (being so near) they were sure not to fail in doing Execution. When a great Number of them were wounded and as many kill'd, the Women took up the Arms of those that were slain, and join'd with the Men in the Engagement. For the Desperateness of their Condition, and the Greatness of the Work in hand, forc'd them to the most resolute Resistance for the Defence of themselves. Some of them therefore getting Arms, defended their Husbands


Page 558

with Shields; others that had no Arms rush'd in upon the Enemy, and caught hold of their Bucklers, so as they could scarce do any thing. At length all the Men, together with their Wives (who valiantly fought to the last) being overpower'd by Multitude, died upon the place, preferring an honourable Death, before a Life with Slavery and Disgrace. The useless and unarm'd Rabble, together with the Women that were left, he gave to his Horsemen. He took likewise several other Cities, putting them to the Sword that oppos'd him.

 Hence he mov'd forward to the Rock call'd Aornon; for here those Inhabitants that surviv'd shelter'd themselves, being a very strong Place. It is reported, that the ancient Hercules attempted the taking this Place, but was forc'd to quit the Siege, by reason of terrible Earthquakes, and other Prodigies of the Gods, that happen'd there at that time; which coming to the Ears of Alexander, it made him far more eager to assault the Place, as if he glory'd to be the Gods Corival both in Might and Power. The Rock was an hundred Furlongs round, and sixteen high, and seem'd to be even and steep, and every where round. At the foot of the Rock towards the South runs Indus, the greatest River of India; other Parts are inviron'd with unaccessible Rocks and dreadful Precipices. Alexander upon view of the Place, concluding that it was not possible for him to take it by force; at that instant there came to him an Old Man with his two Sons, who had a long time liv'd in those Places, in a very poor and low Condition: He had there a little Cell cut into the Rock, wherein were three Beds: He and his Sons lodging together in this place, he was very well acquainted with all the Avenues and Passages round about. When he came therefore to the King, he told him his Condition, and promis'd to lead the King through the Straits and craggy By-ways, to such a Post where he might assault the Barbarians upon the Rock. Hereupon Alexander promis'd him a large Reward, made use of his Conduct, and in the first place possess'd himself of the only Passage that led up to the top of the Rock: And because there was no other way to pass, he so block'd up the Besieg'd, that there was no Relief to be expected. Then by the help of many hands, he rais'd up a Mount from the bottom and foot of the Rock; and advanc'd so close up to the Enemy, that by that means he made a very sharp and vigorous Assault, which continu'd without any interruption Night and Day, for the space of seven Days and Nights. At the beginning the Barbarians, by advantage of the heighth of the Fort, prevail'd, and cut off many that too rashly forc'd in upon them: But when the Battery was rais'd up to its due heighth, and the Engines for shooting of Darts and other Warlike Instruments were brought up, and that the Resolution of the King not to leave the Assault was discern'd, the Besieg'd were in a great Consternation. But Alexander wisely foreseeing what would be the Issue, commanded the Guard that he had left at the Passage to withdraw, that so the Enemy might have free liberty to be gone, if they had a mind to it.

Upon which, the Barbarians, affrighted by the Valour of the Macedonians, and the King's brave Resolution, in the Night left the Fort. The Indians being thus frighted with a Scarecrow, the King gain'd the Rock without any considerable loss: And then having rewarded his Guide, march'd away with his Forces to other places.

About that time there was one Aphrices, an Indian, that lay in those parts with an Army of Twenty thousand Men, and Fifteen Elephants: Him the Indians kill'd, and brought his Head to Alexander, and by that means gain'd his Favour. He possess'd himself likewise of all the Elephants in that Tract, and receiv'd the Indians into his Protection. Thence he mov'd to the River Indus, where being furnish'd with some Ships of Thirty Oars a piece, with them he made a Bridge over the River, and continu'd in that place for thirty days space to refresh his Army, and there offer'd magnificent Sacrifices to the Gods.

After he had pass'd over his Forces, there hapned something unusual and remarkable: One Taxilis, who formerly reign'd in that Country, being lately dead, his Son Mophis succeeded him; this Mophis some time before had sent an Ambassador to Alexander, when he was in Sogdiana, to offer him his Assistance against the Indians that were then preparing to oppose him; and likewise promis'd to deliver up his Kingdom into the King's hands. When the King was Thirty Furlongs distant, Mophis and his Friends march'd towards him with a well-appointed Army, and Elephants adorn'd and fitted for Battel. When Alexander saw so numerous an Army advance, he believ'd the Indian had made a Cloak of his Promises to cover his Fraud, by that means to surprize the Macedonians at unawares; therefore he commanded the Trumpets to give the Sign of Battel, and drew up his Army in Battalia, and advanc'd towards the Indians. But Mophis being inform'd of the sudden Commotion that was amongst the Macedonians, easily judging what was the


Page 561

occasion, commanded his Army to make an halt, and he himself with a few in his Company, posts away, and presently undeceives the Macedonians, by delivering up himself and his Army (which was the Strength of the Kingdom) into the Power of the King; who was so well pleas'd with what the Barbarian had done, that he restor'd him to his Kingdom, and ever after found Taxiles (for so he was call'd) his constant and faithful Friend and Associate. And these were the Transactions of this Year.

CHAP. X.

Alexander overcomes Porus. How Apes are taken, Strange Serpents for Venem. Large Trees. Marches against the Andrastians, Catheri, and against Sophithes. The Custom of them under Sophithes. Indian Dogs. Entertain'd by Phigeus. The Macedonians refuse to march against the Gandarides. Alexander leaves Monuments behind him at the River Hyphasis. Nicea built, and Bucephalis. The Ibori present Alexander. Routs the Agalassians. In danger in the River Indas by Whirlpools. Marches against the Oxidracans and Mallians. The King leaps off the Wall into the Town. A Duel between Coragus and Dioxippus. The Sambestae submit to Alexander; and the Sodrans and Massanians. Subdues Musicanus, Porticanus, and Sambus. Poison'd Weapons. The King's Dream. Comes into the main Ocean. Comes into Gedrosia. The Savageness of the People. His Army near perishing in Gedrosia. Comes into Carmania. Punishes the Bormcial Goremours, Nearchus returns. Islands cover'd at high Tides. The strange Death of Calanus. Alexander marrieth Statira. Harpalus his Luxury. He seizes with his own Hand them that mutiny'd.

AT the time when Chremes was Lord Chancellor at Athens, and Publius Cornelius and Aulus Posthumius executed the Consulship at Rome; Alexander, after he had refresh'd his Army in the Province of Taxilis, march'd against Porus Prince of the Neighbouring Indians, who had in his Army above Fifty thousand Foot, Three thousand Horse, above a Thousand Chariots, and an Hundred and thirty Elephants, and was confederated with another Neighbouring King, call'd Embisarus, not inferior in Power to Porus.Alexander understanding that he was not above 400 Furlongs distant from Porus, advanc'd with a Resolution to fight him, before the other join'd him. Porus perceiving him to approach, drew up his Horse in two Wings: His Elephants, so accountred as to terrifie his Enemies, he plac'd at equal distances one from another in the Front, and lin'd them with his arm'd Men, who were commanded to guard and defend them from Darts and Arrows in the Flank. The whole Army drawn up thus in Battalia, seem'd like a City: For the Elephants stood like so many Towers, and the Soldiers plac'd among them resembled the Walls. Alexander, on the other hand (observing how his Enemies were drawn up) so dispos'd and order'd his own Men, as the present Circumstances of his Affairs then requir'd.

The Horse engag'd in the first place, and thereupon almost all the Indians Chariots were presently broken in pieces: Afterwards the Elephants being made use of (by the mighty Bulk of their Bodies and their great Strength) bore down and trod underfoot many of the Macedonians; others were catch'd up in their Trunks, and toss'd into the Air, and then fell down again with great violence upon the Earth, and so miserably perish'd: Many likewise were so rent and torn by their Teeth, that they died forthwith. However, the Macedonians with invincible Courage indur'd all the Hardships wherewith they were press'd, and with their Sarissas kill'd the Soldiers that guarded the Elephants: So that now they fought upon equal Terms; and not long after, the Beasts being ply'd with Darts on every side, and not being able longer to endure the many Wounds they receiv'd, their Riders were not able to rule them, insomuch as they furiously rush'd backwards, and broke in upon their own Regiments, and trode many of them underfoot, which caus'd great disturbance and consusion. Upon which, Porus mounted upon the Bravest Elephant (seeing how things were like to be) commanded Forty of those that were not as yet startled and affrighted, to be plac'd round about him. And with these


Page 562

he made so desperate and sierce a Charge, that he made a sad Slaughter amongst the Macedonians; especially being a Man of the strongest Body of all those that were with him; for he was five Cubits high, and in bulk proportionable; so that his Breast-plate was twice as big as any of the rest of the most strongest Men amongst them; and he threw a Dart with as great force as if it had been shot out of an Engine. But this extraordinary Strength of Porus did not at all terrifie the Macedonians, that were plac'd in the front against him: Alexander therefore commanded the Archers and light-arm'd Men, with all their Darts and Arrows to make at Porus himself; who did as they were commanded. So that such a multitude of Archers were got in one Body together, and such Showers of Darts and Arrows pour'd out upon him, that they could not possibly miss their Mark. Porus at length (having fought with great Valour and Resolution) by multitude of Wounds lost so much Blood, as that his Spirits fail'd him, and he fell down from his Beast to the Ground. Upon which it being presently spread abroad that the King was dead, the rest of the Indians fled, and thereupon a great Slaughter was made amongst 'em.

Thus Alexander having gain'd this glorious Victory, at length commanded his Trumpets to sound a Retreat. But there were kill'd in this Battel above Twelve thousand Indians; amongst whom were Two Sons of Porus, the Generals of his Army, and the Chiefest of his Commanders. There were taken above Nine thousand Prisoners, and Fourscore Elephants. As for Porus, he was not yet quite dead, and therefore Alexander recommended him to the Care of the Indians themselves for the dressing of his Wounds. There fell of the Macedonians, Two hundred and fourscore Horse, and above Seven hundred Foot, whom the King took care to be decently bury'd, and rewarded those that surviv'd who had merited by their Valour. He sacrific'd likewise to the Sun, through whose Favour and Assistance he had conquer'd the East. The neighbouring Mountains being cloth'd with great Numbers of Firr-Trees, Cedars, and the Pitch-Tree, the Place affords plentiful Materials for the Building of Ships; and therefore he built as many here as he had occasion for. For he design'd when he came to the utmost Bounds of India, after he had subdu'd those Nations that lay in his way, to pass along through the River into the Ocean.

In the mean time, he built Two Cities in those Parts, one upon the further side of the River where he pass'd over; the other where he overcame Porus; and both were presently perfected, having many hands at work.

Porus being recover'd, he restor'd him to the Possession of his Kingdom; and being there was plenty of all sorts of Provision, he suffer'd his Army to lie still and refresh themselves for the space of thirty Days.

There are some things very remarkable, and worth observing, in the Mountains near where they encamp'd: For besides the Materials for Shipping, this Tract abounds with Serpents of a vast Bigness, 16 Cubits in length, and breeds a sort of Apes, to be admir'd both for their number and greatness of their Bodies. The nature of the Beast has instructed the Hunter how to take her; for she's apt to imitate every Action she sees; but because of her Strength and natural Sagacity, it's very difficult to take her by force. Therefore some of the Hunters anoint their Eyes with Honey, and others put on Shoes in the sight of the Apes; and some there are that clap upon their Heads Looking-glasses: Then they leave some Shoes behind them, with Bands fixt to them, and instead of Honey lay Birdlime, and within the Glasses are Ropes to run on Nooses: When they are gone, the poor Beasts begin presently to imitate what they saw done, and so are deluded; for their Eye-lids are glew'd together, their Feet are fast bound, and their whole Bodies held by the Snares; and so they become an easie Prey to the Hunter.

Afterwards Alexander forces Embisarus (who had been so slow in assisting Porus, and now in a Consternation) to a Submission; and then passes the River with his Forces, and makes his way through a most fruitful Country: For here are strange sorts of Trees seventy Cubits high, and of that thickness that four Men can scarcely fathom 'em, and cast a Shade 300 foot distance.

There are likewise in this Tract multitudes of Serpents of small Bodies; but for their various Colour most remarkable: For some lie like Rods yellow as Brass; others have very rough and hairy Breasts, and whoever is bitten by them, falls down dead immediately. If any be stung by them, he's most horridly tormented, and a bloody Sweat issues out at all the Pores of his Body. The Macedonians, to secure themselves from these Mischiefs, hung up their Beds on the Limbs of these Trees, watching the greatest part of the Night: But at length, by some of the Inhabitants, they were directed to a Root, which was an Antidote against the Poison.


Page 563

After the King had mov'd from thence, he was inform'd that Porus, a neighbouring Prince, Nephew of Porus lately vanquish'd, was fled out of his Kingdom, and run to the Gangarides. At which Alexander was not a little troubled, and thereupon sent Hephestion with a considerable Body of Men into his Dominion, and order'd him to reduce it into the nature of a Province, and to deliver it into the hands of his Friend Porus. He himself march'd into the Country of the Andrastians, and gain'd some of their Cities by assault, and others by surrender.

Thence he came into the Country of the Catheri, where by the Law the living Wives are burnt together with their dead Husbands; and the Wickedness and Treachery of one Woman, who poison'd her Husband, was the occasion of this Law. There the King burnt down to the Ground the greatest and strongest Town of all others in those Parts after he had with great difficulty and hazard taken it by assault. The Inhabitants of another Town, which he was ready to assault, came forth, and humbly submitted themselves to him, upon which he spar'd them.

Thence he led his Army to the Cities belonging to Sophithes, which were govern'd by most excellent Laws; amongst the rest they strictly observe this, To value their Beauty andand comely Proportion above all other Things; and therefore they carefully examine every part of the Child when it is in the Cradle, and such as are sound and perfect in every Limb and Member, and likely to be strong and comely, they nurse and bring up; but such as are lame and deficient, and of a weak Habit of Body, they kill, as not worth the rearing. They have the same regard to their Marriages; for without any respect to Portion, or any other Advantages, they only mind the Beauty of the Person, and the Health and Strength of their Bodies. Hence it is, that those who live in those Cities, are for the most part more Beautiful and Comely than others. But Sophithes the King surpass'd all the rest of his Subjects for admirable Beauty and stately Proportion; for he was above four Cubits high: He came forth of his Royal City, and gave up himself and Kingdom into the hands of Alexander; and from the Bounty of the Victor forthwith receiv'd it back again; and thereupon he nobly feasted Alexander and all his Army for several Days together. And after many rich Presents made to him, he presented him with an hundred and fifty Dogs of a wonderful Strength and Bigness, and of other most remarkable Properties. It was said they were brought forth by Tygars, who had coupled with Dogs. Alexander minding by an Experiment to try their Strength and Courage, caus'd an exceeding great Lion to be brought into the Circus, and then loos'd at him two of the weakest of the Dogs; which proving too weak, he let go other two. The Lion being now surrounded by four, and over-power'd, Sophithes sent one with a Sword, who began to cut off the right Thigh of one of the Dogs: Upon which, the King call'd out, and thereupon the Squires of his Body ran to the Indian, and held his Hand: But Sophithes wish'd 'em to let him alone, and promis'd to give three for that one. The Huntsman theresore laid hold again on the Dog's Thigh, and cut it off by little and little; and all that while the Dog neither how

•

'd nor made the least noise; but held fast his Hold till he fell down dead upon the Lion.

In the mean time Hephestion return'd with those Troops before sent along with him, having subdu'd a great part of India where-ever he came, and was hereupon honour'd by the King with all deserv'd Praises.

Next Alexander march'd into the Kingdom of Phigeus, where all the Macedonians were welcom'd by the Inhabitants, and Phigeus himself meeting him with Gifts and Presents, willing to receive from him his Kingdom as a Gift of his Bounty; which Alexander accordingly restor'd to him: And both he and his Army being entertain'd by Phigeus for two days, he then mov'd forward to the River Hyphasis, which is seven Furlongs over, and six Fathoms deep, of a very fierce Stream, and difficult to pass. He had learn'd from Phigeus, that beyond Indus there was a vast Desart of twelve Days Journey; and at the farthest Borders thereof ran the Ganges Two and twenty Furlongs broad, and the deepest of all the Rivers in India: And that beyond this River, there dwelt the Tabresians, the Gandarides, whose King's Name was Xandrames, who had an Army of Twenty thousand Horse, and Two hundred thousand Foot, Two thousand Chariots, and Foursand Elephants. The King could not believe this to be true, and therefore sent for Porus, and enquir'd of him whether it were so or not. He told him all was certainly true; but that the present King of the Gandarides was but of a mean and obscure Extract, accounted to be a Barber's Son. For his Father being a very beautiful and handsome Man, the Queen fell in love with him, and then murther'd her Husband; and so the Kingdom devolv'd upon the present King.


Page 564

Alexander however, though he perceiv'd that the Expedition against the Gandarides would be very difficult; yet through a desire he still had to gain further Glory, would not wave it; but confiding in the Valour of the Macedonians, and the Answers he had receiv'd from the Oracles, hop'd to conquer all the Barbarians where-ever he went: For he remembred that at Delphos he was call'd by the Oracle Invincible, and that the Empire of the whole World was promis'd to him by Jupiter Hammon. But discerning that his Soldiers were even tired out with continual Marches (for they had now toil'd themselves with extream Hazards for Eight Years together) he judg'd it necessary to make a Speech to his Army, to perswade them to undertake with him this Expedition against the Gandarides. For now he had lost many Soldiers, and no hopes or prospect remain'd of ending the War: Nay, their very Horse-Hoofs were worn away by their continual Marches, and many of their Arms wasted and become useless. And besides, all their Grecian Habits and Clothes were worn out, and they were forc'd to make use of the Barbarians Stuff, and cut the Indian Plads in pieces to make themselves Clothes. And it happen'd likewise about that time, that there pour'd down from Heaven fearful Storms of Rain, with terrible Thunder and Lightning, which continu'd for seventy Days together. All which, though they happen'd cross to his Designs, as he conceiv'd, yet he judg'd there was one way still left for him to accomplish what he so much desir'd, and that was by Bounty and Liberality to gain the Hearts of his Soldiers. To that end he gave free liberty to the Soldiers to ravage and plunder all over the Enemies Country, which was rich and abounding in all good Things.

While the Army was thus employ'd in spoiling and plundering, he call'd together the Soldiers Wives and all their Children; and among the Wives he order'd Corn to be distributed every Month; and commanded so much Money to be paid to the Children, as their Fathers Pay amounted unto. When the Soldiers return'd to the Camp, loaded with abundance of rich Prey, he call'd them all together, and there made a handsom study'd Speech to them, to persuade them to march along with him against the Gandarides; but being not able upon any Terms to prevail with the Macedonians, he left off that Design. And now determining there to put an end to all his Expeditions, in the first place he erected Twelve Altars to the Twelve Gods, every one fifty Cubits high. Then he drew a Trench round his Camp thrice as large as the former, and made it fifty Foot broad, and forty deep; and by the Earth out of the Trench, cast up a strong Mud-wall on the inner side. He commanded likewise every Foot-Soldier to provide two Beds in his Tent of five Cubits high; and every Horse-man (besides two Beds of the same quantity) to make Mangers twice as big as any other; and that every thing they left behind them should be enlarg'd to the same proportion. And this he did partly to leave behind him Monuments of his Heroick Actions, and partly to make the World believe, that those with him were Men of mighty Stature, and stronger than any other. When this was done, he march'd back with all the Army the same way he came to the River Acisines, where he found some Ships in building, which he order'd to be perfected, and built several others.

About that time came to him Supplies out of Greece, both of Auxiliaries and Mercenaries, to the number of about Thirty thousand Foot, and almost Six thousand Horse. There were likewise brought to him at the same time Arms for Five and twenty thousand Men most curiously wrought, and an hundred Talents weight of all sorts of Medicines and Physical Preparations; and all these he distributed amongst the Soldiers. His Ships now with all their Tackle and Furniture were compleatly Rigg'd, of which there were Two hundred open Vessels, and Eight hundred Transport-Ships for all manner of Service. The two Cities he had built near the River, the one he call'd Nicea, from a Victory there gain'd, and the other Bucephalis, from his Horse that was there kill'd in the Battel against Porus.

Then he, together with his Friends, went aboard, and sail'd down the River, with an intent to fall down to the Southern Ocean; but a great part of the Army march'd along the River's Bank, under the Command of Craterus and Hephestion. He came now to that place where the River Hydaspes and Ascisines meet together. Here he landed his Soldiers, and march'd to the Borders of the Ibori; these are said to be descended from them who besieg'd the Rock Aornon with Hercules; and after that they were defeated in that Design, were planted in this Country by that Hero. Here he encamp'd near an eminent City of greatest Command in those parts: The Citizens went out to the King, and were admitted to converse with him; and there they renew'd the Memory of their ancient Kindred, and promis'd to perform all Offices of Respect and Kindness, as became so near Relations; and seal'd and confirm'd what they said with extraordinary rich Presents.


Page 565

It was certainly an imprudent Act in him to fight with a Macedonian, but far more Folly in him to destroy himself: Therefore many who blam'd him for this piece of Madness, added this to his further Disgrace: That a great Body and a great Wit seldom meet together. When the King read the Letter, he was exceedingly troubled at his Death, and would often commend him for his Valour: And he who undervalu'd him when he was alive, now in vain wish'd for him when he was dead; and came perfectly to understand the Honesty of the Man, by the Knavery of his Accusers and Slanderers.

And now the King order'd his Army to march along the Bank of the River, over against his Fleet, and began again to sail down into the Ocean, and in his Passage arriv'd at the Country of the Sambestans. These People for Number and Courage are nothing inferior to any of the Indians, and their Cities are Democratical in their Government.

Having intelligence of the approach of the Macedonians, they brought into the Field Threescore thousand Foot, Six thousand Horse, and Five hundred Chariots. But when the Fleet drew near, they were so terrify'd with the strangeness of the Sight, and the Fame and Glory of the Macedonians which was nois'd abroad in all Places, that the Old Men among them dissuaded them from vent'ring a Battel; whereupon they sent Fifty of the best Qua

•

ity, as Ambassadors to Alexander to pray his Favour. The King (upon the Address made to him) granted them Peace as they desir'd, and receiv'd large and honourable Presents (becoming a Demy-god) from the Inhabitants. Then he receiv'd the Submission of the Sodrans and Massanians, who border'd on both sides the River. Here Alexander built another City call'd Alexandria, near the River, and furnish'd it with a Thousand Inhabitants. Afterwards he arriv'd at the Kingdom of Musicanus, whom he took and kill'd, and subdu'd his Country. Then he came to the Territory of Porticanus, and took two Cities upon the first Assault, and gave the Spoil of them to his Soldiers, and then burnt them. Porticanus who had fled for shelter into the Castle, was kill'd fighting in his own Defence. Then he took all the Cities within his Dominion by Assault; and raz'd them to the Ground, which struck a great Terror into the Neighbouring Inhabitants. Next he wasted the Territories of Sambus, razing many of the Cities, and selling the Citizens for Slaves, and put to the Sword above Fourscore thousand Barbarians. These were the Plagues the Brachmans suffer'd. All the rest who submitted (except such as were the Authors and Ring-leaders of the Defection) he Pardon'd. In the mean time, King Sambus got away with Thirty Elephants, into the furthest Parts beyond the River Indus, and so escap'd.

Amongst the Brachmans the last City attempted was Harmatelia, which greatly confided in the Valour of its Inhabitants, and the Strength of its Situation. Here the King commanded some few of his Party to go up near to the Place, and provoke the Citizens to fall upon them, and then to make as if they fled; thereupon Five hundred approach'd to the very Walls, who for their inconsiderable Number were contemn'd by the Enemy: Three thousand therefore made a Sally out of the Town upon them; whhreupon they took to their Heels as if they had been in a great Fright. But the King with some few of his Troops, fell upon the Backs of the Pursuers, upon which there was a smart Engagement, and many of the Barbarians were kill'd and taken. But a great number of those that were kill'd and wounded on the King's side, were in a desperate Condition; for the Barbarians had poyson'd the Heads of their Weapons with a deadly Poyson, which made them more Courageous and forward to Engage with the King. This strong Poyson is made of certain Serpents taken by Hunting, which after they are kill'd, they lay out and expose to the Heat of the Sun; where the Heat does so fry their Flesh as if it were melting away, from which distills a sweaty Moisture, wherein the Poyson of the Beast is convey'd, and may be discern'd. The Working of this Poyson is such, that a Benumm'dness and Stupidity presently seizes upon the Body of him that is wounded; and in a short time after follows most tormenting Pains, Convulsions and Trembling, wrecking every Member of the Body. The Skin grows excessive Cold and Black, and the Party vomits black Choler: Moreover, a black frothy Matter flows from the Wound, which causes Putrefaction, and presently spreads all over the principal Parts of the Body, and so the Party dies in a most Miserable manner. And hence it was, that he that was never so slightly touch'd, was as much tormented, as he that had the greatest Wounds. After all that were thus wounded were dead, the King griev'd for none so much, as he did for the Misfortune of Ptolemy (who Reign'd afterwards) and whom at that time he dearly lov'd. There happen'd at this time something extraordinary remarkable in reference to Ptolemy, which some ascribe to the special Providence of God. He was a Man that was belov'd of all, both for his Valour and his wonderful obliging Carriage to every one, and therefore met with a Cureworthy his kind and gracious Disposition. The King dreamt


Page 567

speed they should meet him upon the Border of Carmania, with Dromedary Camels, and other Beasts of Burden, loaden with Bread, and all other necessary Provisions; who hasted away as they were commanded, and procur'd the Governors of the Provinces to dispatch abundance of Provision to the Place appointed. By this extream Scarcity Alexander lost many of his Men, and this was the first Mischief he met with in this Expedition. Afterwards, as they were marching, some of the Mountaineers fell upon Leonatus his Squadron and cut off many of them, and then made back to their Countrymen, and this was another Loss.

When they had at length, with very great Difficulties and Hardships past through this Desart, they came into a Rich and Populous Country ; Here he randezvous'd his whole Army, and after they had refresh'd themselves celebrated a Feast to Bacchus, and dress'd up to make a shew like a Pageant, he led the Darice before his Army (who march'd likewise in great Pomp and State) for the space of Seven days together, spending all that time in Revelling and Drunkenness all along the way as he went.

When this was over, hearing that many of his Officers and Governors of Provinces had abus'd their Power, to the Oppression and Injury of many, he punish'd them according to their Demerits. Which Severity of the King's being spread abroad, many who were conscious of being guilty of the same Crimes, began to fear the same Punishment, and therefore some who commanded the Mercenaries, made a Defection; others pick'd up what Moneys they could, and fled: Of which the King receiving intelligence, he writ to all the Governors and Lord-Lieutenants of Asia, that as soon as they had read his Letters they should without further delay disband all the Mercenaries.

About the same time, while the King was at Salmuntes, a Sea port Town, busie in making Stage Plays: Those who were sent to examine all the Sea Coasts, arriv'd with the Fleet, who forthwith went into the Theatre and address'd themselves to the King; and after they had made their Obeysance, they acquainted him with what they had done. The Macedonians so rejoic'd at their Return, that as a Testimony of their joy they set up a great Acclamation, and fill'd the whole Theatre with Exultations. Those that return'd from the Voyage, told him, There were wonderful Tides of Ebbing and Flowing in the Ocean, and that at low Water in the furthest Parts of the Sea Coasts there appear'd very many great Islands, which at the return of the Tide are all again laid under Water, while a most Fierce and violent Wind comes off from them to the Continent, and causes the Water to be all over on a Foam: And as the greatest Wonder of all, they declar'd they met with Whales of an incredible Magnitude; which at the first so terrify'd them, that they look'd upon themselves as lost, and that they and all their Ships must in a Moment perish together: But all of them at once setting up a great shout, and making a Noise by striking upon their Arms, and sounding of Trumpets, the monstrous Creatures were so terrify'd with a thing so unusual, that they made to the Bottom of the Deep.

After the King had heard the Relation, he order'd the Sea Officers to sail with the Fleet to Euphrates, And he himself in the mean time, marching through many Countries with his Army, came at last to the Borders of Susiana. At which time Calanus, an Indian, a great Philosopher, and much honour'd by the King, ended his days in a wonderful manner. Having now liv'd to be Seventy three years old; and during all that time never knew what Sickness or the least Distemper meant, he purpos'd to put an end to his own Life; supposing that now both Nature and Fortune had brought him to the utmost Bounds of his Felicity and well-being in the World. Being seiz'd upon therefore with Sickness, which grew upon him more and more every day, he desir'd the King that he would order a great Funeral Pile to be made, and that when he had plac'd himself upon it, some of his Servants should set it on fire. The King at first endeavour'd to dissuade him from this Purpose; but when he saw he would not be mov'd, he promis'd it should be done as he had desir'd.

The thing presently spread abroad, and when the Pile was finish'd, multitudes of People flock'd to see this strange Sight: And there Calanus (according to the Rules and Dictates of his own Opinion) with great Courage ascended the Pile, and both he and it were consum'd together. Some that were present judg'd this Act to be an effect of Madness, others nothing else but a piece of Vain-glory: Though some there were that admir'd his Noble Spirit, and Contempt of Death; And the King caus'd him to be honourably bury'd.

When Alexander came to Susa, he marry'd Statira, Darius his Eldest Daughter. Drypetis, the Younger, he marry'd to Hephestion: He gave also Wives to the Chiefest of his Friends, and marry'd them to the Noblest Ladies of Persia.


Page 568

that he saw a Serpent with an Herb in his Mouth, which told him the Nature and Efficacy of the Plant, and where it grew: When he awoke, he presently search'd for the Herb and found it, and when he had bruis'd it made a Pultice of it, and apply'd it to Ptolemy's Body, and gave him a Potion of the Juice of the Plant, and so restor'd him to perfect Health. Others also, when they came to know the Sovereign Use of the Herb, were cur'd by the same means. But when Alexander now began to apply himself to the Siege of Harmotelia, a strong and well fenc'd City, the Inhabitants came all forth to him and begg'd his Pardon, and deliver'd up themselves and their City into his Hands, and so escap'd Punishment.

Then sailing with his familiar Friends into the Main Ocean, he found two Islands, where he offer'd most magnificent Sacrifices, and threw many Golden Cups of a great Value, together with the Drink-Offerings into the Sea. At length, having rear'd up Altars to the Honour of Tethys and Oceanus, (supposing now he had finish'd the Voyage he intended) he return'd with the Fleet up his River, and arriv'd at the famous City Hyala. This City is under the same form of Government with that of Lacedaemon: For there were two Kings of two several Families, succeeding in a time, who had the Management and Administration of their Wars. But the chief Authority in Civil Affairs resided in the Senate. Here Alexander burnt all the Ships that were Leaky and Defective, and deliver'd the rest of his Fleet into the Hands of Nearchus and some other of his Friends, with a Command to sail all along the Sea-coast, and diligently observe every Place, till they came to the Entrance into the River Euphrates. He himself rais'd his Camp, and march'd a long way into the Country, subduing all that oppos'd him, and using them kindly that submitted to him: For the Inhabitants of Abitra and Gedrosia he brought to Submission, without any Hazard or Difficulty.

Afterwards, marching through many Tracts of Land destitute of Water, and as many Desarts, he came to the Borders of Neoridis. There he divided his Army into three Brigades; the one he gave to Ptolemy, the other to Leonatus; the former he comanded to harrass the Sea Coasts, and the other the Midland and Champian part of the Country. He himself wasted and spoiled the Hill Country and Mountanous Parts, and the Places thereunto adjoyning: So that many Countries being Invaded all at one and the same time all Places were fill'd with Rapine, Fire, and Sword; whence the Soldiers were loaded with rich Booty, and many Thousands perish'd by the Sword.

The bordering Nations being terrify'd by this Destruction of People, all deliver'd themselves up into the Power of the King . Here the King having a desire to build a City near to the Sea, and having found a safe Harbour, and a convenient Place near to it, built one accordingly, and call'd it Alexandria. Then he entred through ways made by his Pioneers, into the Country of the Neoritans, and presently forc'd them all to submit.

These People are like all the rest of the Indians, both for Laws and Manners, except in one thing, which is almost Incredible: For the Kindred and Relations of those that are Dead (all stark Naked with their Lances in their Hands) carry forth the Dead Bodies into some Wood or other belonging to the Country, and there strip the Dead of all his burying Clothes and other Ornaments, and leave the Body to be Food for the Wild Beasts: Then they divide his Garments, and Sacrifice to the Subterraneous Heroes, and Feast all their Friends.

Alexander afterwards marched into Gedrosia, all along the Sea Coast, and came at length among a most rude and savage People. From their very Birth to their old Age they never cut their Nails, but suffer them still to grow; and the Hair of their Heads all grow in Locks, never comb'd out. They're of a swarthy Complexion, (through the parching Heat of the Sun) and cloath themselves with the Skins of Wild Beasts. They feed upon the Flesh of Whales cast up by the Sea. In building of their Houses and Cottages, they raise up their Walls as is usual, but the Roofs are laid with the Rib-bones of Whales, of which they have Summers and Beams eighteen Cubits in length, and for Tiles they use the Whales Scales.

When Alexander with great Toil had march'd through this Country, he came into a desolate Wilderness, where nothing at all was to be had for the support of Man's Life. So that many dying for want of Food, the whole Army was not only altogether discourag'd, but the King himself was then over-whelm'd with unusual Sorrow and Anxiety of Mind: For he look'd upon it as a most Miserable thing that those who by the Valour of their Arms, had conquer'd all where ever they came, should now ingloriously Perish for want of Bread in a Barren Wilderness. Therefore he sent away the swiftest Courriers he could find into Parthia, Drangina, Aria, and other bordering Countries, with order, that with all


Page 569

CHAP. XI.

Alexander mixes Twenty thousand Persian Darters with his Army. Marches from Susa. Bagistames breeds abundance of Horses. Hephestion dies at Ecbatane. The Lamian War. He invades the Cosseans. Marches towards Babylon. The Caldean Astrologers dissuade him from coming thither. He enters Babylon.

AFterwards when Anticles was chief Magistrate of Athens, and Lucius Cornelius and Quintius Publius were Consuls at Rome, Alexander supply'd the Room of those he had discharg'd with Persians, and chose a Thousand of them to be Squires of the Body, conceiving he might altogether as safely trust them as the Macedonians.

About this time Peucestes came with Twenty thousand Persian Darters and Slingers, these Alexander intermix'd amongst his other Soldiers, by which means the whole Army was brought into that due Constitution, as that they were readily obedient to his Command. There were some of the Macedonians that had Sons by the Captives, whom upon diligent Enquiry he found to be Ten thousand, and appointed them Masters to instruct them in all sorts of Learning, and allow'd sufficient Stipends for their Liberal Education.

Then he Rendevouz'd his Army, and march'd away from Susa, and passing the River Tigris, came to the Villages call'd Carrae, and there encamp'd. Thence in Four Days March he pass'd through Sitta, and came to Sambea. Here he rested Seven Days, and refresh'd his Army. Thence in Three Days he march'd to the Towns call'd Celonae: In which Place the Posterity of the Boeotians settl'd themselves in the time of Xerxes his Expedition, and there remain unto this Day, having not altogether forgot the Laws of their Country: For they use a double Language, one learnt from the Natural Inhabitants, and in the other they preserve much of the Greek Tongue; and observe some of their Laws and Customs. Thence, when it grew towards Evening, he decamp'd, and turn'd aside and march'd to Bagistames to view the Country. This Country abounds in all manner of Fruit-Trees, and whatever else conduces either to the Profit or Pleasure of Mankind; so as that it seems to be a Place of Delight both for Gods and Men. Afterwards he came into a Country that breeds and pastures an innumerable Company of Horses; for they say, That there had been here an Hundred and sixty thousand Horses that ran at Pasture up and down in the Country; but at the coming of Alexander there were only Sixty thousand. He encamp'd herefor the space of Thirty Days: Thence in seven Encampments he came to Echatana in Media. This City is Two hundred and fifty Furlongs in compass, and is the Metropolis of all Media, where abundance of Treasure was laid up. Here he staid some time, and refresh'd his Army, and spent his time in Feasting, Drinking, and Stage-Plays; at which time Hephestion (one that he lov'd above all others) fell sick of a Surfeit, and died: Whose death the King bore very grievously, and committed his Body to Perdiccas to be carry'd to Babylon, because he intended to bury him with great Pomp and State.

While these things were acting in Asia, Greece was full of Tumults and Seditions, whence broke out the War call'd the Lamian War, upon this occasion: After the King's Order to the Lords Lieutenants of the Provinces to disband all Mercenary Soldiers, and the execution of those Commands, many Foreiguers that were cashier'd, went stragling over all Asia, and for want of Subsistence, robb'd and spoil'd the Country till they all came into one Body, at Tenarus in Laconia: So likewise all the Governors and Commanders of the Persians that were left, got together what Men and Money they could, and came all to Tenarus, and there join'd their Forces together: There they created Leostenes an Athenian (a brave Spirited Man) General of the Army; who then call'd a Council of War; and after Consultation had concerning the Management of the War, dispos'd of Fifty Talents to pay the Mercenaries, and provided Arms sufficient for the present occasion. He sent likewise Ambassadors to the Aetolians (who were disaffected to the King) to join with them in Arms. And thus Leostenes was altogether taken up in necessary Preparations for a War, of the greatness of which, he had then a clear and evident Prospect.

Alexander now march'd against the Cosseans, who refus'd to submit to his Government. This People are a very Warlike Nation, and inhabit the hilly and mountainous Parts of Media; and therefore confiding in their own Valour, and the Fastnesses of their Coun-Country, never would be brought of admit to any foreign Prince to reign over them;


Page 570

and were never subdu'd, during all the time of the Persian Empire. And at that time they were so very high, that they slighted the Valour of the Macedonians.

The King first gain'd the Passes, and then wasted a great part of the Country of Cosea; and getting the better in every Engagement, kill'd many of the Barbarians, and took many more Prisoners. At length, the Cosseans being worsted and beaten in every place, and greatly concern'd at the multitude of the Captives, were forc'd to redeem their Country by the loss of their own Liberty; and so giving up themselves to the Will of the Conqueror, they obtain'd Peace, upon condition they should be Loyal and Obedient for the time to come. Thus Alexander conquer'd this Nation in the space of forty Days; and after he hadbuilt some Cities atthe most difficult Passes in the Country, he march'd away.

Socicles was now Archon at Athens, and Cornelius Lentulus and QuintusPopilius Roman Consuls, when Alexander, after the Conquest of the Cosseans, march'd thence towards Babylon: He always rested a while between every Decampment; and to ease his Army, mov'd very slowly. When he was about Three hundred Furlongs from Babylon, the Caldeans (as they are call'd) who were famous for Astrology, and us'd to prognosticate future Events by the Observation of the Stars (and by that means knew that the King would die presently after he enter'd into Babylon) pick'd out some of the most ancient and expert of those of their Profession, and order'd them to signifie the Danger to the King, and with all the Arguments they could use to dissuade him from entring into the City; and to let him know that he might avoid the Danger, if he would rebuild the Sepulchre of Belus, which the Persians had destroy'd, and alter his Purpose, and pass by the City.

Belephentes was the leading Man of the Caldeans that were sent away; but he was afraid to address himself to the King, and therefore privately imparted all to Nearchus (one of the King's familiar Friends) and desir'd him that with all speed he would acquaint the King with the whole Business. Alexander was much concern'd when Nearchus told him what the Caldeans had prognosticated; and more and more considering and pondering in his Thoughts the Skill and Reputation of the Man, was in no small Consternation. At length he sent away many of his Friends to the City, but he himself turn'd aside another way, and pass'd by Babylon; and encamping Two hundred Furlongs distant from the place, he there rested. At this all were in admiration; whereupon many Philosophers came to him, as well those that were Followers of Anaxagoras as other Grecians. When they came to understand the cause of his Fear, they earnestly oppos'd what was said, with many Philosophical Arguments; by which he was so convinc'd and chang'd, that he contemn'd all sorts of Divination whatsoever, and especially that of the Caldeans, that was every where so famous. Therefore now, as if his Spirit before wounded had been cur'd by the Arguments of Philosophers, he entred Babylon with his Army, where (as before) the Soldiers were kindly entertain'd by the Citizens; and the Plenty of Provision was such, that all gave up themselves to Ease and Voluptuousness. And these were the things acted this Year.

CHAP. XII.

Ambassadors come to Alexander from all Parts. He buries Hephestion with great State. The Prodigies before Alexander's Death. His Death. Darius's Mother starves her self.

AGesias was now Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Caius Poetelius and Lucius Papirius Consuls at Rome, when the Hundred and fourteenth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Micinas of Rhodes was Victor. At this time Ambassadors came to Alexander almost from all Parts of the World; some to congratulate his Victories; others to tender him Crowns; others to make Leagues and Alliances with him; and many brought him very Rich and Noble Presents. And some there were that came to clear themselves from false Accusations: For besides those sent from the Cities, States, and Princes of Asia, many Ambassadors addrest themselves to the King from Europe and Africa. Out of Africa the Carthaginians and the Phoenicians of Lybia, and all bordering upon the Sea Coasts as far as


Page 571

Hercules-Pillars. Out of Europe, the Grecian Cities: The Macedonians: The Illyrians; many inhabiting Adria: The Thracians; and the Galatians, a People that then first began to be known to the Grecians. These all sent their Ambassadors; of whom the King having a Catalogue in writing, he appointed in what Order they should be severally admitted to their Audience. And in the first place those were introduc'd that came about Matters of Religion; then those who brought Presents; next, they that were at variance with the People bordering upon them: Then those were admitted, in the fourth place, who came to treat upon Concerns relating to their own Country: And lastly, those whose Instructions were to oppose the Restauration of the Exiles. And among the Religious, he first heard them of Elis; after them the Hammonians, Delphians, and Corinthians; the Epidaurians likewise, and others; giving to them the Preheminence out of Reverence and Veneration to the Temples. He made it his great Business to return such grateful Answers to all the Ambassadors, as that he might gain the Good-will and Affection of every one of them.

When all this was over, he apply'd himself to the celebrating the Funerals of Hephestion; and contriv'd (all that possibly he could) so far to grace it with Funeral Pomp, as that it should not only exceed all that were before it, but likewise that it should never be exceeded by any that was to come: For he most dearly lov'd him (as much as the dearest Friends that we have heard of ever lov'd one another) when he was alive, and honour'd him beyond compare when he was dead. He honour'd him more than any of his Friends while he liv'd, altho' Craterus seem'd to vie with him for Alexander's Affection: For when one of the Servants said, that Craterus lov'd Alexander as well as Hephestion did; Alexander answer'd, That Craterus was theKing's Friend, and Hephestion Alexander's. And at that time, when the Mother of Darius (through a mistake upon the first view of the King) prostrated her self at the Feet of Hephestion, and coming to discern her Errour, was much out of Countenance: Be not troubled, Mother (says Alexander) for even he is another Alexander. To conclude, Hephestion had such Interest in Alexander, and such free access and liberty of Converse, that when Olympias (who envy'd him) accus'd him and threatned him by her Letters, he writ to her back again with severe Checks; and added these Expressions: Forbear your Slanders against me, and bridle your Anger, and surcease your Threats: But if you will not, I value them not of a pin; for you are not ignorant that Alexander must be Judge of all.

The King therefore taken up with the Preparations for the Funeral, commanded the neighbouring Cities to assist as much as possibly they could towards its Pomp and Splendor; and commanded all the People of Asia, that the Fire which the Persians call the Holy Fire should be put out, till the Exequies of this Funeral were fully finish'd, as was us'd to be done in the Funerals of the King's of Persia; which was taken to be an ill Omen to the King himself, and that the Gods did thereby portend his Death. There were likewise other Prodigies happen'd that did clearly point out that Alexander's Life was near at an end; which we shall presently give an account of, when we have finish'd our Relation of the Funeral. In order to this Funeral, all his Chief Commanders and Noblemen (in compliance to the King's Pleasure) made Medals of Hephestion graven in Ivory, and cast in Gold and other rich Metals. Alexander himself call'd together a great number of the most exquisit Workmen that could be had, and brake down the Wall of Babylon ten Furlongs in length, and took away the Brick of it; and then levelling the place where the Funeral Pile was to be rais'd, built thereon a Foursquare Pile, each Square taking a Furlong in length: The Platform he divided into Thirty Apartments, and cover'd the Rooss with the Trunks of Palm-Trees. The whole Structure represented a Quadrangle: Afterwards he beautify'd it round with curious Adornments: The lower part was fill'd up with Two hundred and forty Prowes of Gallies of five Tire of Oars burnish'd with Gold; upon whose Rafters stood two Darters, one on each side the Beaks, of four Cubits high, kneeling upon one Knee; and Statues of Men in Arms five Cubits high: All the Divisions and open Parts were vail'd with Hangings of Purple. That part next above this was set with Torches, of fifteen Cubits high, in the middle part of every one of which (where they were us'd to be held) were plac'd Crowns of Gold; at the top whence the Flame ascended, were fix'd Eagles with their Wings display'd, and their Heads stooping downwards. At the bottom of the Torches were Serpents, facing and looking up at the Eagles. In the third Range were expos'd all sorts of wild Beasts hunted: In the fourth Centaurs all in Gold combating one with another: The fifth presented alternately to the view Lions and Bulls in massie Gold. In that part above these were plac'd the Arms both of the Macedonians and Barbarians; the one signifying the Victories over the Conquer'd Nations, and the other the Valour of the Conqueror. In the highest and last part


Page 572

of all, stood Sirenes, contriv'd hollow, wherein secretly were plac'd those who sang the Mourning Song to the Dead. The heighth of the whole Structure mounted up above a hundred and thirty Cubits. To conclude, both Commanders and Common Soldiers; Ambassadors and the natural Inhabitants, so strove to outvy one another in contributing to this stately Funeral, that the Charge and Cost amounted to above Twelve thousand Talents. And to grace it more, and make it more splendid, he con

•

err'd several other Honours upon these Exequies. At length he commanded all to sacrifice to him as a Tutelar God: For it hapned that Philip, one of his Nobility, at that time return'd from the Temple of Haminon, and brought word from the Oracle there, That Hephestion might be sacrific'd unto as a Demi-God: Whereat Alexander was wonderfully glad, hearing that the Oracle it self was an Approver of his Opinion; and thereupon he himself was the first that offer'd, sacrificing Ten thousand Beasts of all kinds, and making a magnificent Feast for all the Multitude.

When all the Solemnity was over, Alexander gave up himself to Ease and a Revelling Course of Life: And now when he seem'd to be at the Heighth of Worldly Greatness and Prosperity; that Time and Space of Life which he might have run through by the Course of Nature, was cut short by the Determination of Fate; and God himself, by many Signs and Prodigies shewn in several Places, foreshew'd his Death. For when he was anointing himself, and his Royal Robes and Crown that while laid upon the Throne, the Fetters of one of the Natural Inhabitants, that was then in Chains, fell off, and unloos'd of their own accord, and the Person not being discern'd by any of the Watch, pass'd through the Court-Gates without any Opposition, and made streight to the Throne, and put on the Royal Robes and Crown upon his Head, and sate upon the Throne without any disturbance. Which Fact being nois'd abroad, the King was amaz'd at the strangeness of the Thing, and went to the place, and without any Rebuke, calmly ask'd the Man, Who he was, and who advis'd him to do so? Who plainly and simply answer'd, He knew nothing at all. This strange Accident was referr'd to the Consideration of the Augurs; by whose Advice the poor Wretch was put to death, that the Evil portended (if any were) might fall upon his own Head.

The King having now got his Robes again, sacrific'd to the Gods his Protectors: But however he continu'd much disturb'd and perplex'd in his Mind; and then began to reflect upon what the Caldeans had foretold; and fretted against those Philosophers that persuaded him to enter into Babylon; but admir'd the Art and profound Wisdom of the Caldeans. To conclude, he curst those, who by subtil Arguments, had disputed against the Necessity of Fate.

Not long after, God shew'd another Prodigy concerning the Change of the Kingdom: The King had a desire to see the Haven at Babylon; and being come there, they went on board with some of his Nobles that attended him; and while they were sailing, the King's Ship was separated from the rest, and tossed to and fro for several Days together, so as that he wholly despair'd of his Life; and being at length carry'd through a narrow Creek, where Bushes and Trees grew thick upon both sides, his Turbant or Diadem, by one of the Boughs was pluck'd off from his Head, and hurl'd into the Water; which one of the Mariners spying, swam to it; and for the better securing of it, clapt it upon his own Head, and swam back to the Ship. After he had wander'd up and down three Days and three Nights, he return'd at length safe with his Diadem to his Friends, and again consulted the Soothsayers concerning this Prodigy; who advis'd him immediately, with all diligence, to offer splendid Sacrifices to the Gods.

But at the time of these Sacrifices, he was invited by one Medius a Thessalian, one of his Friends, to a Banquet; where when he was in his Cups, and even drunk with Wine, he quaft off the Great Bowl call'd Hercules his Cup: Whereupon, as if he had been struck with a Thunder-bolt, he fetch'd a deep Sigh, and was then presently led out by his Nobles, and so left the place. Those who had him in their Charge forthwith laid him upon his Bed, and there diligently attended him. His Distemper increasing, his Physicians were call'd in; but they were not able to administer any thing for his Relief.

At length, his Sickness was so violent, and his Pains so great, that he himself despair'd of Life, and in that Condition drew off his Ring from his Finger, and deliver'd it to Perdiccas. His Commanders then ask'd him, To whom, Sir, do you leave the Kingdom? He answer'd, To the most Deserving. And when he utter'd his last Words, he told them, That the Chiefest of his Friends and Commanders would solemnize his Funeral, when he was gone, with Blood and Contention. And thus died Alexander, when he had reign'd Twelve Years and Seven Months, having perform'd such Mighty Acts, as no King ever did before him, nor any since to this day.


Page 573

But because some Writers differ as to the Cause and Manner of his Death, affirming that he was poison'd by a deadly Potion given him; it's necessary to relate what they have reported concerning this matter. They say that Antipater, whom Alexander had made his Viceroy in Europe, fell out with Olympias the King's Mother, of which at first no great matter was made, because the King would not hear any of the Accusations against him. But afterwards the Quarrels and Heart-burnings growing higher and higher, the King, out of his Piety and Awe to the Gods, conceiv'd it his Duty to gratifie his Mother; whereupon he gave many apparent Signs and Tokens of the Alienation of his Affections from Antipater. And as further Fuel to the Flame, the putting to death Parmenio and Philotas, did not a little terrifie and afright the Nobility. And therefore it's said he order'd his Son, who was Alexander's Cupbearer, to put Poison into his Wine: But because he was a Man of great Power in Europe after the Death of Alexander, and that Cassander his Son succeeded him in the Kingdom, many Historians durst not say any thing in their Writings of Poison. However, it's very apparent that Cassander was a great Enemy to the Concerns of Alexander: For he suffer'd the Body of Olympias, after she was murder'd, to lie with Disdain unbury'd; and he made it his great Business to re-edifie Thebes, which Alexander had raz'd to the Ground.

When the King was dead, Sisigambris, the Mother of Darius, with abundance of Tears bewail'd the Death of Alexander, and her own desolate Condition upon that account; insomuch, as to the last Minute, she would neither eat, nor see the Light; and so the Fifth Day after died of Hunger in extream Sorrow, but with as much Glory and Reputation.

Having now brought down our History to the Death of Alexander, as we design'd in the Beginning of this, we shall proceed to give an Account of the Acts of his Successors in the following Books.


Page 574

BOOK XVIII.

PYthagoras the Samian, and some others of the ancient Natural Philosophers, held that the Souls of Men were immortal; and that to foretell future Events at the very point of Death, when the Soul is even parting with the Body, is the Effect and Consequent of this Truth. To which Homer witnesses, when he brings in Hector, when he was even breathing his last, telling Achilles that he should die within a very short time afterwards. The same is attested of many others of later Times, and confirm'd especially by the Death of Alexander the Macedonian, who dying at Babylon, and being ask'd by his Commanders and those about him, at the time he was giving up his last Breath, Who should succeed him? he answer'd The most Worthy ; For I foresee, says he, that great and grievous Quarrels amongst my Friends, will be the Sacrifices to me after my Funeral. Which hapend accordingly; for the Chiefest of his Commanders fell together by the Ears about the Principality; and great Wars, after the Death of Alexander, broke forth amongst them: Whose Actions are contain'd in this Book; which will clearly evidence, to the studious Reader, the Truth of what is now said:

The former comprehended all the things done by Alexander, to the time of his Death. This present Book, relating the Actions of those who succeeded, ends with the Year next before the Reign of Agathocles, which makes an History of Seven Years.

CHAP. I.

Quarrels about a Successor to Alexander. Arideus made King. The Provinces divided amongst the Chief Commanders. Matters contain'd in Alexander's Note-Books. Meleager executed by Perdiccas. The Grecians revolt. A Description of Asia. Pithon sent against the revolting Grecians, who were all cut off. The Lamian War; The cause of it. Alexander's Epistle to the Exiles. Leosthenes the Athenian General. Lamia besieg'd. Leosthenes kill'd: Antiphilus plac'd in his room.

WHen Cephisodorus was Chief Magistrate of Athens, the Romans created Lucius Furius and Decius Jovius Consuls: About which time, Alexander being now dead without Issue, and so the Government without a Head, there arose great Dissentions and Differences about the Empire. For the Foot were for setting up of Arideus the Son of Philip, a weak-spirited Man, labouring under many natural Infirmities: But the Chiefest of the Nobility and Esquires of the Body met together in Council; and being join'd with the Squadron of Horse call'd the Social, they resolv'd to try it out with the Macedonian Phalanx.

Therefore they sent the most eminent Commanders (among whom Meleager was the Chief, to the Foot, to require them to observe Commands. But Meleager (who was the most Eminent Man of the Phalanx) as soon as he came to the Battalion which was of the greatest Account and Esteem in the Army, he said nothing at all of the Business for which they were sent; but, on the contrary, highly commended them for their Choice, and stirr'd them up against the Opposers. Whereupon the Macedonians created Meleager their Captain, and with their Arms made out against the contrary Party. Those of the King's Life-guard and Esquires of the Body, march'd likewise out of Babylon in order to fight; but the most Interested and Popular Men amongst them, endeavour'd all they could to make Peace on both sides. Upon which it was presently agreed, that Arideus the Son of Philip should be made King, and call'd Philip, and that Perdiccas, to whom the late King, when he was upon the point of death, deliver'd his Ring, should be invested with the Executive Power of the Kingdom; and order'd that the Esquires of the Body and the Chief Commanders should govern the Provinces, and all be observant to the Commands of the King and Perdiccas.


Page 575

Arideus being thus made King, he call'd together a General Council of the chief Commanders; and to Ptolomeus Lagus he committed the Government of Aegypt; to Laomedon of Mitylene, Syria; to Philotas, Cilicia; to Python, Media; to Eumenes, Cappadocia and Paphlagonia, and the bordering Countries which were never entred by Alexander all the time of his Wars with Darius, through want of convenient Opportunity. To Antigonus he assign'd the Command of Lycia, and the greater Phrygia; to Cassander, Caria; to Meleager, Lydia; to Leonatus, Phrygia all along the Coast of the Hellespont: And in this manner were the Provinces divided. In Europe, Thrace, with the Nations bordering upon the Sea of Pontus, were committed to Lysimachus; and Macedonia with those bordering upon it to Antipater: As for the rest of the Asian Provinces, it was thought most adviseable not to alter but to leave them under the Government of the former Lord Lieutenants. The Province next adjoining was intrusted with Taxilis, and the Kings bordering upon him: But the Province adjoining to Mount Caucasus (call'd Parapamisus) was assign'd to Oxiertes, King of the Bactrians, whose Daughter Rhoxana, Alexander had marry'd. Arachesia and Gedrosia to Sybirtius: Ariana and Drangina to Stasanoris of Solos: Bactriana and Sardiana were allotted to Philip; Parthia and Hyrcania to Phrataphernes; Persia to Peucestes; Carmania to Tlepolemus; Media to Atrapas. The Province of Babylon to Archon; and Mesopotamia to Arcesilaus. Seleucus he created General of the brave Brigade of the Social Horse. Hephestion was the first Commander of that Brigade, then Perdiccas, and the third was this Seleucus. He order'd that Taxiles and Porus should enjoy the absolute Authority within their own Kingdoms, as Alexander himself had before appointed. The care of the Funeral, and of preparing a Chariot to convey the King's Body to Hammon, was committed to Arideus.

But as for Craterus, the most Noble of Alexander's Captains, he was some time before sent by Alexander with Ten thousand of the old Soldiers that were discharg'd from further Service in the Persian War, into Cilicia, to put in Execution some Instructions in writing given him by the King; which after the King's Death, his Successors determin'd should be no further proceeded in: For Perdiccas finding in the King's Commentaries not only the vast Sums of Money intended to be expended in the Funeral of Hephestion, but likewise many other things of extraordinary Cost and Charge design'd by the King, he judg'd it far more advisable to let them alone: But lest he should seem to take too much upon him, and by his private Judgment to detract from Alexander's Wisdom and Discretion, he referr'd all these Matters to the determination of a General Council of the Macedonians. The Chief and the most considerable Heads of the King's purposes contain'd in his Books of Remembrance were these, That a Thousand long Ships, larger than those of three Tire of Oars, should be built in Phaenicia, Syria, Cilicia, and Cyprus, in order to an Invasion upon the Carthaginians, and others inhabiting the Sea Coasts of Africa and Spain, with all Islands adjoyning as far as Sicily. 2. That a Plain and Easie way should be made straight along through the Sea Coasts of Africa to Hercules his Pillars. 3. That Six magnificent Temples should be built, and that Fifteen hundred Talents should be expended in the Cost of each of them. 4. That Arsenals and Ports should be made in Places convenient and fit for the Reception of so great a Navy. 5. That the new Cities should be planted with Colonies, and that People should be transplanted out of Asia into Europe, and others out of Europe into Asia, to the end, that by Intermarriages and mutual Affinities he might establish Peace and Concord between the two main Continents of the World.

Some of the Temples before-mention'd were to be built in Delos, Delphos, and Dodona; Some in Macedonia, as the Temple of Jupiter in Dio; Diana's Temple in Amphipolis; another to Minerva in Cyrnus: To which Goddess he design'd likewise to build a Temple in Ilium, inferior to none, for Splendor and Magnificence. Lastly, To adorn his Father Philip's Sepulchre, he design'd to erect a Monument equal to the biggest Pyramid in Aegypt, seven of which were by some accounted the most stately and greatest Works in the World.

These things being laid before them, the Macedonians, though they highly commended and approved of Alexander's designs, yet because they seem'd things beyond all measure impracticable, they decreed all to be laid aside. Then Perdiccas caus'd those Soldiers that were Turbulent, and exceeding Inveterate against him, to the number of Thirty, to be put to Death: Afterwards, out of a private Grudge he executed Meleager, (who betray'd his Embassy, and carry'd on the Mutiny) as one that sought to undermine him.

About this time the Grecians in the upper Provinces revolted, and got together a great Army: Against whom he sent Pithon one of the chiefest Commanders. But we conceive it much conducing to the better Understanding of the History of things that were afterwards done, if in the first Place we declare the Cause of the Revolt, and the Situation


Page 576

of Asia, and the Nature and Extent of the Provinces: For by this means laying before the Eyes of the Readers a Map of the Countries, and the Distances of Places one from another, the Relation will be more Plain and Easie.

From Taurus therefore in Cilicia, to Caucasus and the Eastern Ocean, a ridge of Mountains stretch forth in a straight and continued Line throughout all Asia: As distinguished by several Peaks and Risings of the Hills from them; Mount Taurus has gain'd particular Names. By this means, Asia being divided into two parts, one rises towards the North, the other descends towards the South; and according to these several Climates the Rivers run contrary ways; some take their Course into the Caspian Sea, others into the Euxine, and some into the Northern Ocean. These Rivers lying thus opposite one to another, part empty themselves into the Indian Sea, and another Part into the Ocean adjoyning to this Continent; some likewise fall into the Red Sea. In this manner likewise are the Provinces divided. For some lye towards the North, and others bend to the South. The first towards the North borders upon the River Tanais, that is to say, Sogdiana with Bactria, and next to them Area and Parthea. This Province surrounds the Hyrcanian Sea, which lies within its Limits and Bounds. The next is Media, call'd by many Names from the Places included in it, and is the greatest of all the Provinces. Then follows Armenia, Lycaonia, and Cappadocia, all of a very sharp and cold Air. Bordering upon these in a direct Line are Phrygia, both the Greater, and that lying to the Hellespont: In an oblique Line lie Lydia and Caria. Pisidia stretches sorth it self in length; and in a Parrallel Line equal with Phrygia on the right Hand; and to the side of Pisidia lies Lycia. The Greek Cities are situated upon the Sea Coasts of these Provinces; whose Names it is not necessary for our purpose here to recite.

Thus situated (as we have related) are the Northern Provinces. As to the Southern, the first is India, under Mount Caucosus, a very large and populous Kingdom; for it's inhabited by many Indian Nations; the greatest of which is that of the Gandarides, against whom Alexander made no attempt by reason of the Multitude of their Elephants. This Territory is divided from the further India, by the greatest River in those parts, being thirty Furlongs broad. The rest of India (conquer'd by Alexander) a rich and fruitful Country, and watered with many Rivers, borders upon this of the Gandarides: Within this Part, besides many other Kingdoms, were the Dominions of Porus and Taxilis. The River Indus (from which the Country takes its Name) runs through it. Separated from the Province of India next to it was Arachosia, Gedrosia, and Carmania, and with these was join'd Persia, wherein are situated the Provinces of Susiana and Sittacina. Next follows the Province of Babylon, extending it self as far as to Arabia the Desart. On the other side, where begins the Descent, you have Mesopotamia lying between two Rivers, Euphrates and Tigris, from whence it had its Name.

The higher Syria, and the Countries upon the Sea Coasts adjoyning to it, as Cilicia, Pamphilia,Syria Cava, within which is Phaenicia, lie close to the Province of Babylon. Upon the Borders of Syria Cava, and the Desart next adjoining to it, (through which runs the River Nile, and so divides between Syria and Aegypt) appears Aegypt it self, the Best and Richest of all the Provinces. All these Countries are scorching hot; for the Southern Climate is contrary in its nature to the Northern. These Provinces (conquer'd by Alexander) which we have thus describ'd, were divided amongst the Chiefest of his Commanders.

But the Grecians that inhabited the Upper Provinces, who (through fear while Alexander was alive) endur'd their being cast forth into the utmost Corner of the Kingdom; now when he was dead, being touch'd with a Desire to return into their own Country, Revolted, and to that end unanimously chose Philo, an Enean born, to be their Captain, and had got together a considerable Army of above Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, all old expert Soldiers, and Brave and Valiant Men.

Intelligence being brought of this Revolt, Perdiccas chose by lot out of the Macedonian Squadrons, Three thousand Foot and Eight hundred Horse. Pitho, one of the Squires of the Body to Alexander, a Man of a high Spirit, and a skiiful Commander, was chose General by the Army, and to him Perdiccas deliver'd the Soldiers chosen, as is before declar'd, and Letters likewise to the Lord-Lieutenants, whereby they were order'd to furnish him with Ten thousand Foot and Eight thousand Horse, against the Rebels. Pitho being a Man of am ambitious Spirit, was very ready to undertake this Expedition: For he purpos'd to gain by all fair means possible these revolting Greeks, and by joining their Forces to his own to set up for himself, and reduce all those upper Provinces under his own Subjection. But Perdiccas smelling out his Design, gave him express Order, That having overcome those Rebels he should put them all to the Sword, and divide the Spoil


Page 577

amongst the Soldiers. Pithon therefore march'd away with these Men thus deliver'd, and when he had receiv'd those that were to join him from the Lord Lieutenants, he made towards the Rebels with the whole Army. And having by a certain Enean corrupted Lipodorus, who commanded a Brigade of Three thousand Men among the Rebels, he routed them all. For in the height of the Engagement when the Victory was doubtful, the Traytor withdrew from the rest of his fellow Soldiers, and with his Three thousand Men march'd up to the top of a rising Ground, whereupon the rest (thinking that he had fled) broke all their Ranks, and took to their Heels. Pithon being thus Victor, sent a Trumpet to the Rebels, ordering them to lay down their Arms, and upon Capitulation licensed them to repair every Man to his own home. It was no small joy to Pithon to see things brought to such a pass as suited directly to his designs; for he had now all confirm'd by Oath, and the Grecians intermixt among the Macedonians. But the Macedonians remembring the Orders Perdiccas had given, making nothing of their Oaths, broke Faith with the Grecians. For on a sudden, they fell unexpectedly upon them, and put every Man of them to the Sword, and seiz'd upon all they had: And so Pithon being defeated in his design, return'd with the Macedonians to Perdiccas. And this was the state of Affairs in Asia at that time.

In the mean time, in Europe the Rhodians cast out the Garison of the Macedonians, and freed their City. And the Athenians began a War against Antipater, which was call'd the Lamian War. It's in the first place necessary to declare the Causes of this War, that the Progress of it may be the better understood.

Alexander, a little before his Death, had order'd all the Exiles and Out-law'd Persons of the Greek Cities to be recall'd, as well to advance his own Honour and Esteem, as to gain the Hearts of many in every City by his Clemency, who might stand up for his Interest against the Innovations and Defections of the Grecians. At the approach therefore of the time of Celebrating the Olympiads, he sent away Nicanor, a Native of the City Stagira, with a Letter concerning the Restitution of the Bandities of Greece, and commanded it to be proclaim'd by the Common Cryer, who declar'd him that was Victor, who executed the Command, and read the Letter in these Words,—

King Alexander to the Banditties of the Grecian Cities.

WE were not the Cause of your Banishment, but will be of the Return of you all into your own Country, excepting such as are Banish'd for outrageous Crimes: of which things we have written to Antipater, requiring him to proceed by Force, against all such as shall oppose your Restitution.

When these Orders were proclaim'd, the People set up a great Shout, testifying their approbation: For those of them that were present at the Solemnity, readily laid hold on the King's Mercy, and return'd their Thanks with Expressions of their Joy, and applauses of his Grace and Favour: For all the Banish'd Men were then got together at the Olympiads, above the Number of Twenty thousand. Many there were who approv'd of their Restitution as a prudent Act; but the Aeolians and Athenians were much offended at it, for the Aeolians expected that the Oenians who were banish'd out from among them, should have undergone due punishment for their Crimes. For the King had made a great Noise with his Threats, that he would not only punish the Children of the Oenians, but that he himself would execute Justice upon the Authors themselves. Whereupon, the Athenians would not yield by any means to part with Samos, which they had divided by lot. But because they were not at present able to cope with Alexander, they judg'd it more adviseable to sit still, and watch till they found a convenient Opportunity, which Fortune presently offer'd them: For Alexander dying in a short time afterwards, and leaving no Children to succeed him, they grew confident that they should be able not only to regain their Liberty, but likewise the Sovereignty of all Greece.

The vast Treasure left by Harpalus, (of which we have particularly spoken in the preceding Book) and the Soldiers that were disbanded by the Lord-Lieutenants of Asia, were great Supports and Encouragements for the carrying on of this War; for there were Eight thousand of them then about Tenarus in Peloponensus: They sent therefore privately to Leosthenes. the Athenian, wishing him that without taking notice of any Order by them, of his own accord so to dispose of matters, as to have those Soldiers in readiness when occasion serv'd. Antipater likewise so contemn'd Leosthenes, that he was Careless and Negligent in preparing for the War, and so gave time to the Athenians to provide all things necessary for that Affair.


Page 578

Hereupon, Leosthenes very privately Listed these Soldiers, and (beyond all expectation) had ready a brave Army: For having been a long time in the Wars in Asia, and often engag'd in many great Battles, they were become very expert Soldiers. These things were contriv'd when the Death of Alexander was not generally known: But when a Messenger came from Babylon, who was an Eye witness of his Death, the People of Athens declar'd open War, and sent part of the Money left by Harpalus, with a great number of Arms to Leosthenes, charging him no longer to conceal or palliate the Matrer, but to do what was most conducible to the Service of the Common-wealth. Whereupon, having distributed the Money among the Soldiers as he was commanded, and arm'd those that wanted, he went into Aetolia, in order to carry on the War with the joint Assistance of both Nations. The Aetolians join'd very readily, and deliver'd to him for the service Seven thousand Soldiers. Then he stirr'd up his Messengers, the Locrians and Phocians, and other neighbouring Nations, to stand up for their Liberties, and to free Greece from the Macedonian Yoke. But in the mean time, the Wealthy Men among the Athenians dissuaded them from the War, but the Rabble were for carrying it on with all the Vigour imaginable: Whence it came to pass, that they who were for War, and had nothing to live upon but their Pay, were far the greater Number: To which sort of Men Philip was us'd to say, War was as Peace, and Peace as War. Forthwith therefore, the Orators (who were in a Body together, and clos'd with the Humours of the People) wrote down the Decree, That the Athenians should take upon them the Care and Defence of the Common Liberty of Greece, and should free all the Greek Cities from their several Garisons; and that they should rig out a Fleet of Forty Gallies of Three Tire of Oars, and Two hundred of Four Tire of Oars; and that all Athenians under Forty years of Age should take up Arms; That Three of the Tribes should keep Watch and Ward in Athens, and the other Seven should be always ready to march abroad: Moreover, Ambassadors were sent to all the Cities of Greece to inform them, That the People of Athens in the first place look'd upon all Greece to be the common Country of every Grecian, and that they had heretofore repuls'd the Barbarians at Sea, who invaded them with a Design to Inslave Greece, and that now they had determin'd to oppose the Macedonians for the common Good, with their Navies, Lives and Fortunes.

The Wiser sort of the Grecians judg'd the Athenians more forward than prudent in passing this Decree, and what they had design'd seem'd to carry an honourable Aspect, but nothing of Profit and Advantage to the State: For that they made a stir and bustle unseasonably, and began a War against mighty and victorious Armies when there was no necessity for it; and though they had the repute of a prudent People, yet they consider'd not the notorious Ruine and Destruction of Thebes.

However, notwithstanding the Ambassadors came to the Cities, and by their usual florid way of address had heated and egg'd them on to the War, yet many confederated in the League; some in the Names of their several Cities; and others in the Names of whole Countries. As for the rest of the Grecians, some sided with the Macedonians, and others stood Neuter. But all the Aetolians generally (as is before said) enter'd into the Confederacy; and after them all the Thessalians, except them of Pellena. Likewise the Oetaeans, except the Heracleans. The Phthiotians amongst the Acheans, except the Thebans. The Elians, except the Maleans. Then generally all the Doreans, Locrians, and Phocians join'd in the League: Also the Enians, Clyzeans, and Dolopeans. To these join'd likewise the Athamanes, Leucadians, and Molossians, under the Command of Arypteus: But this Man play'd the Impostor in the Confederacy, and afterwards underhand treacherously aided the Macedonians.

A small Part likewise of the Illyrians and Thracians (out of hatred to the Macedonians) came into the League together, with the Carystines out of Euboea; and at length out of Peloponnesus the Argives, Sicyonians, Eleans, Messenians, and those that Inhabited Acta. All these before nam'd, confederated with the Grecians.

The People of Athens also sent Auxiliaries to Leosthenes, out of the Cities Five thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse, and Two thousand Mercenaries; who were oppos'd by the Boetians in their march through Boetia, for the Reasons following.

Alexander, when he raz'd Thebes, granted the Territories of the City to the neighbouring Boetians; who divided the Lands of those miserable People amongst themselves by Lot, and thereby gain'd large Possessions; who understanding that the Athenians (if they prevail'd) design'd to restore the Country and Lands to the Thebans, sided with the Macedonians; and while the Boetians were Encamp'd at Platea, Leosthenes came with part of his Forces into Boetia, and drawing up the Athenians into Battalia, fell upon the Inhabitants, routed them, and set up a Trophy, and then return'd to Pylas. Here (after he


Page 579

had block'd up all the Passages) he Encamp'd for some time, expecting the Macedonian Army.

But Antipater, who was left Viceroy of Europe by Alexander, as soon as he heard of his Death at Babylon, and of the Divisions of the Provinces sent to Craterus in Cilicia, to come to him with all the Force he had for his Assistance. For he being sent away some time before into Cilicia, had ready Thirty thousand Macedonians, who were dismiss'd from the Service in Asia, with which he was returning into Macedonia. He likewise solicited Philotas (who had the Province of Phrygia near the Hellespont under his Command) to assist him, and promis'd to him one of his Daughters in Marriage. For as soon as he heard of the Insurrection of the Grecians against him, he left Sippas with a considerable Body of Men, General in Macedonia, with Orders to raise many more; and he himself march'd out of Macedonia into Thessaly with Thirteen thousand Foot and Six hundred Horse: (For at that time there was great scarcity of Soldiers in Macedonia, by reason of the Recruits sent into Asia;) With these Forces sail'd along the whole Fleet near at hand, which Alexander had sent into Macedonia with a vast Treasure out of the King's Treasuries.

The Navy consisted of an Hundred and ten Gallies of three Tire of Oars. The Thessalians indeed at the beginning joining with Antipater, had sent to him many brave Horses; but afterwards, being brought over by the Athenians into the contrary Interest, they turn'd off with their Horse to Leosthenes, and join'd with the Athenians for the recovery of the Liberty of Greece.

The Athenians therefore growing very strong by many flocking thus in to them, the Grecians over power'd the Macedonians and overcame them in a Battel. Antipater being routed, not daring to abide in the Field, nor judging it safe to return into Macedonia, fled to Lamia, where he drew in his Army into the City, repair'd the Walls, furnish'd himself with Arms Offensive and Defensive, and with Corn and Provision, waiting for supplies out of Asia.

Leosthenes with all his Forces coming up close to Lamia, fortify'd his Camp with a deep Trench and Rampire: And first he drew up his Army in the face of the City, to provoke the Macedonians to fight; But they not daring to Engage, he daily assaulted the Walls with fresh Men succeeding one another. But the Macedonians made a stout Defence, and many of the Grecians through their Rashness and Imprudence were cut off: For having a strong Body of Men in the City, and well furnish'd with all sorts of Weapons, and the Walls of the City with great Expence being strong and well built, the Besieg'd easily repuls'd the Enemy.

Leosthenes therefore perceiving he could not gain the Town by force of Arms, block'd it up, to hinder all supplies of Provision, supposing the Besieg'd would be presently subdu'd by Famine, and want of Bread. To this end he rais'd a Wall, and drew a deep Trench round about it, and so penn'd them up. Afterwards, the Aetolians (being call'd away upon the occasion of some Publick concerns) got leave of Leosthenes to return home, and so all of them march'd back into Aetolia.

But while Antipater with his Army was in these desperate Straights, and the City near lost for want of Provision, Fortune on a sudden turn'd the Scale to the Advantage of the Macedonians. For Antipater made a Sally upon them that were busy'd in opening the Trenches; where Leosthenes coming in to their Relief, receiv'd a Blow upon the Head with a Stone, which fell'd him to the Ground, and so was carry'd off half dead into the Camp, and died the Third day after; and was honourably Bury'd upon the account of the Noble Service he had perform'd in the War. The Athenians commanded Hyperides to set forth his Praise in a Funeral Oration, who was esteem'd the Chiefest of the Orators at that time, both for his Eloquence, and particular hatred of the Macedonians: For Demosthenes the most famous Orator was then fled, being condemn'd as if he had receiv'd Bribes from Harpalus. Antiphilus, a Prudent and Valiant Commander, was created General in the room of Leosthenes. And this was the State of Europe at that time.


Page 580

CHAP. II.

Ptolemy gains Aegypt. Leagues with Antipater. Lysimachus enters Thrace. Leonatus comes to relieve Antipater, and is routed. The Grecians beaten at Sea. Perdiccas conquers Ariarathes Prince of Cappadocia; Crucifies him; Delivers the Province to Eumenes. The Grecians quite routed by Craterus and Antipater The Athenians at length submit after all the rest but the Aetolians. The End of the Lamian War. The War in Cyrene by Thimbro. Ophellas routs Thimbro. Cyrene gain'd by Ptolemy. Larinda Sack'd. The Destruction of the Isaurians by themselves. Perdiccas affects the Kingdom of Macedon; is oppos'd by Antigonus. The Aetolians block'd up by Craterus and Antipater. Antigonus discovers Perdiccas his Design. Peace made with the Aetolians. Perdiccas marches against Ptolemy into Aegypt.

IN Asia, Ptolemy, one of them that had a share in the Division of the Provinces, without any difficulty possess'd himself of Aegypt, and carry'd himself with great Mildness and winning Behaviour towards the People; and having a Treasure of Eight thousand Talents, rais'd an Army of Mercenaries: And many out of love flock'd to him upon the account of the Goodness of his Disposition.

He enter'd into League with Antipater, when he was assur'd that Perdiccas design'd to dispossess him of Aegypt.

At that time Lysmachus broke into some parts of Thrace, and found Seuthas, the King, Encamp'd with Twenty thousand Foot, and Eight thousand Horse. But Lysimachus (though he had not above Four thousand Foot, and only Two thousand Horse) was not affrighted with the Multitude of the Enemy: And though he was so much inferior in number, yet his Valour was such, that he enter'd into a hot and sharp Engagement, and after the loss of a great number of his Men (but many more of the Enemy's) he return'd to his Camp almost Victorious. Upon which, both Armies drew off the Field, and each made greater Preparations, in order to decide the Controversie by the Sword.

As for Leonatus, he promis'd speedy Aid to Antipater and the Macedonians, being sollicited by Hecateus, who was sent to him for that purpose. Landing therefore in Europe, as soon as he came into Macedonia, he rais'd a great number of Soldiers there, and having got together an Army of above Twenty thousand Foot, and Two thousand and Five hundred Horse, he march'd through Thessaly against the Enemy.

Hereupon, the Grecians drew off from the Siege and burnt their Tents, and sent away all their sick Men and heavy Baggage to Melitea: And with the rest of the Army (ready and prepar'd for Battel) march'd straight away, and met Leonatus his forces before Antipater had join'd him, and their two Armies were come up together. The Grecians in the whole were Two and twenty thousand Foot, (for the Aeolians were return'd home some time before, and many other of the Grecians were gone into their own Country) and as to their Horse (which were above Three thousand Five hundred) they fought together in one Body; amongst whom were Two thousand Thessalians, (Brave and Valiant Men) upon whom they most rely'd for the obtaining of the Victory. The Horse on both sides fought stoutly a long time, where the Thessalians by their extraordinary Valour at length prevailing, Leonatus, (though he fought with great Courage and Resolution) was driven and penn'd up within a Morass, and over-loaden with his Arms (after he had receiv'd many wounds) was there slain, and carry'd off dead by his own Men to the Carriages. The Greeks having now gain'd so famous a Victory (in which Menon the Thessalian commanded the Horse) the Macedonian Phalanx to avoid the Horse, withdrew out of the plain and open Field, and betook themselves to the steep and rocky Hills, and by the strength of the Places there, defended themselves.

However, the Thessalian Horse attempted to break in upon them, but through the Disadvantage of the Places, were not able to do any thing. The Grecians therefore being Masters of the Field, set up a Trophy, and left off all further pursuit. The next day, as soon as Antipater came up with his Troops, he join'd himself to the broken Army, and so all the Macedonians making one Camp, he took upon him the Management of the whole.


Page 581

But perceiving that the Thessalians were too strong for him in Horse, he judg'd it most advisable to be quiet for the present, hot daring to attempt to force his Way by the Sword. And therefore he march'd off over Hills, and other craggy Places, not easie to be pursu'd. Antiphilus the Graecian General (who gain'd this glorious Victory over the Macedonians) continu'd with his Army in Thessaly, observing the Motions of the Enemy: And this was the happy Success at that time of the Graecians.

But because the Macedonians were Masters at Sea, the Athenians built so many Ships more as to make up their Fleet an Hundred and seventy Sail: But the Macedonian Fleet consisted of Two hundred and forty, under the Command of Clitus their Admiral, who engag'd in two Sea Fights at the Echinade Islands with Eeton the Athenian Admiral, and beat him in both, sinking many of his Enemies Ships.

About this time Perdiccas (having with him King Philip and the King's Army) undertook an Expedition against Ariarathes Prince of Cappadocia, who though he submitted not to the Empire of the Macedonians, yet Alexander being busi'd in his Wars with Darius, pass'd him by, so that he enjoy'd the Principality of Cappadocia a long time without any Disturbance; and in the mean time he laid up a vast Sum of Money out of the Publick Revenues, and rais'd an Army both from Foreigners, and from among his own People: And claiming the Kingdom as his own just Right, he prepar'd to try it out with Perdiccas, having an Army of Thirty thousand Foot, and Fifteen thousand Horse: At length it came to a Battel, in which Perdiccas was Victor, who kill'd Four thousand upon the spot, and took Six thousand Prisoners, amongst whom was Ariarathes himself, whom together with all his Kindred he first scourg'd, and then crucifi'd. Then he pardon'd all the rest, and after he had settl'd Affairs in Cappadocia, deliver'd up the Province to Eumenes of Cardia, to be govern'd by him as his Share, according to the Allotment in the first Agreement. 

About the same time Craterus arriv'd in Macedonia out of Cilicia in order to assist Antipater, and to repair the Losses of the Macedonians. He brought along with him Six thousand Foot which Alexander had taken over with him at first into Asia, and Four thousand of those that he had listed in the way as he march'd, besides a Thousand Persian Darters and Slingers, and Fifteen hundred Horse. As soon as he came into Thessaly, he join'd his Forces at the River Peneius to Antipater's, yielding the chief Command of the Army to him. The whole Army, together with those that came with Leonnatus, amounted to above Forty thousand Foot, Three thousand Darters and Slingers, and Five thousand Horse. The Graecians at that time encamp'd over-against them, being much inferior in Number to the Enemy: For many, by reason of the late Victory, slighted the Macedonians, and were return'd to their several Countries to look after their own private Affairs. For which cause, there were many left in the Camp that observ'd no due Order or Discipline: They were in the whole Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand five hundred Horse, in whom they plac'd great Confidence of Victory, by reason of the Valour of the Men, and the plain Champain Country that lay before them. At length Antipater drew out his Forces every day into the Field to provoke the Graecians to fight; who after they had waited some considerable time for the return of their Soldiers out of the Cities through the urgency of their present Circumstances, were forc'd to venture all and ingage the Enemy.

Drawing up therefore into Battalia, and designing to decide the Matter by the Horse, they plac'd them in the Van before the Foot; whereupon the Horse on both Sides presently fell to it: And while they were thus hotly engag'd, (and the Thessalian Horse had the better of the Day,) Antipater broke in with his Battalion upon the Foot, and made a great Slaughter among them; so that the Graecians not being able to stand the Enemy's Shock, (who bore them down with their Multitudes pouring in upon them,) they retreated in all hast (but in good order) to the Fastnesses and difficult Passes near at hand. And so having gain'd the higher Ground by that Advantage they easily repuls'd the Macedonians. In the mean time the Graecian Horse (though they had the better) yet perceiving that their Foot was gone, forthwith made after them. And by this means the Horse (leaving off the Fight) were so broken and dispers'd, that the Macedonians got the Day. There were slain of the Graecians in this Battel above Five hundred, of the Macedonians an Hundred and thirty.

The next day Memnon and Antiphalus call'd a Council of War, where it was debated, whether they should expect Aid from the Cities, and wait to see if soldiers sufficient could be rais'd, and so try it out to the last; or yielding to the Time, and bearing their present Disasters, they should send away Agents to treat upon Terms of Peace. At length they concluded to send Heralds to treat accordingly; who executing their Orders,


Page 582

Antipater answer'd them, That he expected that every City should treat severally by its own Ambassadors; and that he would not upon any Terms make a General Peace. But the Graecians would not admit of any Treaty with the several Cities apart, therefore Antipater and Craterus besieg'd the Cities of Thessaly, and took them by Storm, the Graecians not being able to relieve them. This so terrifi'd all the rest, that they transacted the Affairs of their several Cities by their own Ambassadors; towards whom he carry'd himself with all Demonstrations of Courtesy and gaining Behaviour, and made Peace with every one of them. Every City therefore being desirous to provide for its own safety, all of them by that means obtain'd Peace. But the Aetolians and Athenians, (the implacable Enemies of the Macedonians,) though they were thus deserted by their Confederates, consulted with their Commanders about carrying on of the War. But Antipater having by this Artifice thus broken the Confederacy, led his whole Army against the Athenians; upon which the People (being forsaken of their Confederates) were greatly terrifi'd, and knew not which way to turn themselves; and all having their Eyes upon Demades, cry'd out, That he should be sent Ambassador to Antipater to treat for Peace in their behalf. But he refus'd to come into the Senate: For he had been thrice condemn'd for violating the Laws, and so become infamous, and disabled by the Law to sit in Council: But being restor'd by the People to his former Credit and Reputation, he forthwith (together with Phocion, and others join'd with him in Commission) undertook the Embassy. When Antipater had heard what they had to say, he told them, That he would make Peace with the Athenians upon no other Terms, but upon giving up all they had into his Hands: For the same Answer the Athenians gave to Antipater when he sent Ambassadors to them at the time he was shut up in Lamia. Hereupon the People being not able to resist, were brought to a necessity to give up all the Power and Government of the City into the dispose of Antipater; who with great Humanity and Generosity granted their City their Estates and all other Things to them back again. But he dissolv'd the Government by a Democracy, and order'd that the Value of every Person's Estate should be the Rule for the chusing of Magistrates; as that those who were worth above Two thousand Drachma's might be capable of being Magistrates, and giving of Votes for chusing of them. As for those that were not of such Estates, he remov'd them as Turbulent and Factious, not suffering them to have any thing to do in any publick Business; and granted new Seats and Estates in Thessaly to any that would remove thither. Upon which, above Two and twenty thousand of that sort of Citizens were transplanted out of their own Country. The Government of the City, and Country belonging to it, was given to the rest who had the Estates before limited and appointed, of whom there were about Nine thousand. And these govern'd the State for the future according to the Laws of Solon. And all their Estates were left to them intire, and untouch'd. But they were forc'd to receive a Garison under Menyllus the Governor to keep them in aw, and prevent new Stirs and Disturbances. As for the Matter of Samos, it was referr'd to the Decision of the Kings. And thus the Athenians (beyond their Expectation) were kindly us'd, and were at Peace. And for the future, (Governing the Commonwealth without Tumults and Seditions, and quietly following their Husbandry,) they grew very rich in a short time.

Antipater being return'd into Macedonia, honourably and bountifully rewarded Craterus according to his Desert, and gave him Phila his eldest Daughter in Marriage, and then Craterus return'd into Asia. Antipater carry'd himself with the same Moderation and winning Behaviour towards all the Cities of Greece, well ordering and reforming their Governments, whereby he wan Praise and Renown in every Place.

As for Perdiccas, he restor'd the City and Territory of Samos to the Samians, and caus'd all those that had been Exiles above Three and forty Years, to return into their Country. Having now gone through the Occurrents in the Lamian War, we shall pass to the War in Cyrene, lest we should straggle too far into Times far distant from the continu'd Course and Connexion of the History. But to make Things more clear and evident, we must have recourse to Matters done a little before.

After Harpalus had left Asia, and at length arriv'd with his Mercenaries in Creet, as in the Book next before this is related; Thimbro, one of his special Friends, (as he thought him to be) having assassinated Harpalus, possess'd himself both of the Monies, and Soldiers, to the Number of Seven thousand Men. He got likewise the Navy into his Hands, and putting the Soldiers aboard, sail'd to the Country of the Cyrenians; where joining with the Cyrenian Exiles, he made use of their Conduct for the prosecuting of his Designs, because they were well acquainted with the Ways, and Passes in the Country. Upon the approach of the Cyrenians, Thimbro fought them, and routed them, killing many upon the spot, and taking many Prisoners. Then he possess'd himself of the Port,


Page 583

and forc'd the conquer'd Cyreneans (now in a great Fright) into a Composition, and to buy their Peace at the Price of Five thousand Talents of Silver, and that they should deliver to him one half of all their Chariots ready and fitted for any warlike Expedition. He sent likewise Ambassadors to other Cities, soliciting them to join with him, as if he purpos'd to conquer all the Lower Africa. He seiz'd likewise upon all the Merchants Goods in the Haven, and gave them for Plunder to his Soldiers, the more to encourage them to stick to him in the War.

But in the height of his Prosperity, a sudden Blast of Fortune brought him very low upon the following occasion. Mnasiclus, one of his Captains, a Cretian born, an expert Commander, began to quarrel with him about the Division of the Spoil; and being of a bold and turbulent Spirit, he thereupon Deserted, and went over to the Cyrenians; where making great Complaints of Thimbro's Cruelty and Breach of Faith, he persuaded them to dissolve the League and assert their Liberty. Thereupon they stopt their hands, and would pay no more of the Talents of Silver agreed upon, having only paid Sixty.

Thimbro hereupon accus'd them of Treachery and breach of Faith, and seiz'd upon Eight hundred of the Cyrenians that were in the Port, and laid close Siege to Cyrene; but not being able to prevail he drew off, and return'd to the Port. The Barceans and Hesperitans sided with Thimbro: Whereupon the Cyrenians drew out part of their Forces out of the City, and with them wasted and spoil'd the neighbouring Territories; to whose assistance Thimbro (whose aid was desir'd) march'd out with what Soldiers he had then ready at hand. The Cretian taking advantage of that opportunity when he conceiv'd few were left in the Port, advis'd them that were left in Cyrene to set upon the Port, who readily comply'd with him, and he himself was the Principal Actor in the Attempt, which was easily accomplish'd by reason of Thimbro's absence, so that whatever Merchandize was left in the Port he restor'd to the Merchants, and fortify'd the Haven with all the Care and Diligence imaginable.

This first Disaster greatly discourag'd Thimbro, having both lost so convenient a Post, and likewise his Carriages. But afterwards plucking up his Spirits, and taking of Taricha by Assault, his Hopes reviv'd. However, not long after he again sustain'd a mighty Loss: For the Soldiers belonging to the Fleet by being excluded the Harbour, were in great want of Provision, and therefore every day rov'd up and down the Fields to get what they could for the supply of their Necessities. Thereupon, the Africans lying in Ambush, fell upon them as they were roving all over the Country, and kill'd multitudes of them, and took many Prisoners: The rest escap'd to their Ships, and sail'd away towards the Confederate Cities; but were overtaken with so violent a Storm, that many of their Ships were swallow'd up by the Sea, and of the rest, some were driven to Cyprus, and others to the Coasts of Aegypt. Notwithstanding which distresses, Thimbro went on still with the War: For he sent some of his Friends into Peloponnesus, to list Soldiers of those Strangers that were then still at Tenarus: For there were then many Disbanded, wandring up and down, seeking to be Listed by any that would employ them, to the number of Two thousand and Five hundred and upwards. Those that were sent took these into Pay, and set sail with them straight towards Cyrene: Before whose arrival the Cyrenians hearten'd by their Successes, had fought with Thimbro, and had cut off great numbers of his Men; By reason of which losses Thimbro gave up all for gone, as to the War against Cyrene; but the unexpected arrival of the Soldiers from Tenarus, so strengthen'd his Army that he took fresh Courage, and resum'd his former Hopes of Victory.

The Cyrenians perceiving that the War was renew'd, crav'd supplies from the neighbouring Africans and Carthaginians; and having rais'd an Army compos'd of their own Citizens and others, to the number of Thirty thousand men, they resolv'd to lay all at stake, and try it out in a Battel. A very sharp Battel therefore was fought, in which Thimbro was Victor, with the slaughter of a Multitude of his Enemies; which chear'd up his Spirits to that degree, as if he should be presently be Master of all the neighbouring Cities. The Cyrenians after this Fight, having lost all their Commanders, join'd Mnasiclus the Cretian, with some others, in the chief Command of the Army. But Thimbro lifted up with his Victory, besieg'd the Haven of Cyrene, and assaulted the City every day: The Siege continuing long, the Cyrenians for lack of Bread sell out one with another; and the Rabble (being the greatest in number) thrust sorth the Rich out of the City; some of whom fled to Thimbro, others into Aegypt. Those in Aegypt address'd themselves to Ptolemy for assistance, to help them in their return, and prevail'd so far as that they went back with great Forces both for Sea and Land, under the Command of Ophellas their Governor. When their Return was nois'd abroad, those Exiles who were with Thimbro contriv'd to steal away in the Night, and join'd with those that were arriv'd; but being detected they were all knock'd on the Head.


Page 584

The Ringleaders of the Sedition in Cyrene being terrify'd with the return of the Exiles, made Peace with Thimbro, and resolv'd to join with him against Ophellas. But Ophellas routed Thimbro, and took him Prisoner, and recover'd all the Towns, and deliver'd the Cities with their Territories into the Hands of Ptolemy. And thus the Cyrenians and the neighbouring Cities lost their former Liberty, and became subject to Ptolemy.

Perdiccas and King Philip having overcome Ariarathes, and deliver'd the Province to Eumenes, and so departed out of Cappadocia. When they came into Pisidia, they determin'd to raze those two Cities, one of the Larandians, the other of the Isaurians: For in the life time of Alexander they had killed Balacrus the Son of Nicanor, who was appointed to be their General, and Governor of the Province. Laranda therefore they took upon the first Assault, and put all that were able to bear Arms to the Sword, and sold all the rest for Slaves, and laid the City equal with the Ground. As for the City of the Isaurians, it was large and well fortify'd, and mann'd with resolute and stout Men, and therefore after they had assaulted it two Days together, and had lost a great number of Men, they were forc'd to draw off. For the Inhabitants, being plentifully furnish'd with Weapons, and all other Things necessary for the enduring of a Siege, were resolute to undergo all Hazards, and readily sold their Lives for the Defence of their Liberty. But upon the third Day having lost many of their Citizens, insomuch as they were not able sufficiently to man their Walls for lack of Men, they put in execution a most Heroical Piece of Resolution, worthy for ever to be remembred. For perceiving that they were destin'd to inevitable Destruction, and had not Force sufficient for their Defence, they judg'd it not advisable to deliver up the City, and all that they had, to the Will of the Enemy, insomuch as their certain Ruin with the most barbarous Usage was obvious before their Eyes. Therefore they all unanimously resolv'd to die honourably together; to that end in the Night they shut up their Wives, Children and Parents in their Houses, and set them on fire, making Choice by that means to perish and be bury'd together. When the Flame mounted up into the Air, the Isamians threw all their Wealth, and every thing that was Valuable, or that might be of any advantage to the Enemy, into the Fire. The Besiegers were stricken with Admiration at the Sight, and ran here and there, seeking where to break into the City; but those that remain'd upon the Walls for their Defence, threw many of the Macedonians down headlong from the Battlements. At which Perdiccas much more admir'd, and enquir'd what was the Reason, that having set all their Houses and every thing besides on fire, they were so diligent and careful to defend the Walls. At length when Perdiccas with his Macedonians were drawn off from the City, the rest of the Isaurians cast themselves headlong into the Fire, and so every one's House became a common Sepulchre for himself and all his Relations. Perdiccas the next day gave the Ransacking of the City to the Soldiers, who (when the Fire was extinguish'd) found much Silver and Gold in the Rubbish; the City having been Rich and Prosperous a long time together.

After this Destruction, Perdiccas marry'd two Wives, Nicea the Daughter of Antipater, to whom he was contracted; and Cleopatra, Alexander's half Sister, the Daughter of Philip by Amyntas. Perdiccas indeed had entred into League with Antipater before he was establish'd in his Government, and upon that account the Marriage was consummate: But after he had gain'd the King's Forces, and was possess'd of the Superintendency and Administration of the Affairs of the Kingdom, he chang'd his mind: For affecting the Kingdom, his Design was to marry Cleopatra, concluding that for her sake, and by her Authority, the Sovereign Power would be yielded up to him by the Macedonians. But because he had no mind as yet to discover his Intentions, (to comply with the present Circumstances of Affairs) he marry'd Nicea, lest Antipater should oppose him in his Projects. But Antigonus smelling out what he was contriving, (and being one that had a great kindness for Antipater, and the most active Man of all the Commanders,) Perdiccas resolv'd to dispatch him, and take him out of the way.

Loading him therefore with false Accusations, and unjust Aspersions, his Design appear'd plainly to take away his Life. But Antigonus being a crafty Man, and of a bold Spirit, made as if he would defend himself against those Things that were laid to his Charge: But in the mean time he secretly prepar'd for his flight, and in the Night with his Servants and his Son Demetrius went aboard some Ships that belong'd to Athens, and sail'd into Europe, on purpose to confederate with Antipater. About that time Antipater and Craterus were in the Field against the Aetolians with Thirty thousand Foot, and Two thousand five hundred Horse: For they only remain'd unconquer'd of those that were engag'd in the Lamian War. But the Aetolians, though they were press'd upon by such mighty Forces, yet were not at all discourag'd; but having got together Ten thousand


Page 585

brave, sprightly Men, betook themselves to the difficult Passes in the Mountains, where they had before dispos'd and lodg'd much of their Wealth, and all their Wives, Children, and Old People. And though they had quitted the Cities that was not Tenable, yet they plac'd strong Garisons in those that were fortisied; and so undauntedly waited for the approach of the Enemy.

Antipater and Craterus therefore having entered Aetolia, when they saw all the Cities that were weak and untenable forsaken of their Inhabitants, made towards them that were posted in the Fastnesses of the Mountains. At the first Assault they made upon those dreadful and unaccessable Precipices, they lost Multitudes of their Men; for the Valour of the Aetolians being supported and confirm'd by the Strength of the Places, easily repuls'd the Enemy that ran themselves, upon Difficulties that were insuperable. But afterwards, when Craterus his Soldiers in the Winter had secur'd themselves, by Huts and warm Tents, the Aetolians were forc'd to abide (in the depth of Winter) in Places cover'd over with Snow, where they remain'd in great lack of Provision; so that they were reduc'd to a most desperate Condition: For they were brought to that strait, that they must of necessity either leave the Mountains, and fight with an Army far superiour in number to themselves, and with Commanders who were every-where famous for their Conduct, or if they staid longer, certainly to perish with Hunger and Cold.

And now all hopes of Deliverance being despair'd of, suddenly and unexpectedly appear'd a Release at hand from all their Miseries, as if some God in a special manner had had Compassion of such Brave and Noble Souls: For Antigonus, who fled out of Asia, and was now come into the Camp, inform'd them what Perdiccas was inhatching and contriving; and that having marry'd Cleopatra, he was ready as King to come over with his Army into Macedonia, to wrest the Kingdom out of their hands. At which strange and unexpected News, Antipater and Craterus, and all those with them were so affrighted, that they call'd a Council of War, where, upon Consultation, it was resolv'd, that Matters should be ended and compounded with the Aetolians as well as they could; and that Forces should be forthwith transported into Asia; and that Craterus should be General in Asia, and Antipater have the Chief Command in Europe; that Ambassadors should likewise be dispatch'd to Ptolemy (who was Perdiccas's Enemy, and their Friend, and design'd to be cut off as well as they) to move him to join with them as a Confederate. Hereupon they forthwith struck up a Peace with the Aetolians, intending notwithstanding in due time afterwards, to root them up and all their Families, and to send them into some remote and desart Corner of the World far from Asia. The Pacification according to the Terms before agreed upon, being put into writing, and sign'd, they prepar'd themselves for the Expedition.

Perdiccas, on the other side, calling together his Friends and General Officers, consulted with them whether he should transport his Army into Macedonia, or march first against Ptolemy. All agreeing that Ptolemy was first to be conquer'd, lest he should obstruct his Expedition into Macedonia, he sent away Eumenes before with a considerable Army, to secure the Passes at the Hellespont, to prevent all passage that way: And he himself march'd out of Pisiclia with all his Forces towards Egypt. And these were the things done this Year.


Page 586

CHAP. III.

The Description of Alexander's Funeral Chariot. Ptolemy honour'd in Egypt. Perdiccas prepares for Egypt against Ptolemy. Eumenes beats Neoptolemus, who deserted. The Battel between Eumenes and Craterus, who was kill'd with Neoptolemus. Combate between Neoptolemus and Eumenes. Perdiccas comes into Egypt: Assaults the Fort call'd the Camel's Wall; His miserable Loss in the River Nile; is kill'd. Ptolemy makes Arrideus and Pytho Protectors of the Kings. Eumenes condemn'd to die. The Etolians invade Thessaly. Polyspherchon routs the Etolians. The Provinces again divided by Arrideus. Antigonus routs Eumenes, who flies to Nora. Antigonus besieges Nora. Eumenes his Invention to exercise the Horse. Ptolemy gains Syria and Phoenicia by Nicanor.

WHen Philocles was Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Caius Sulpitius and Quintus Aulius were created Roman Consuls, Arrideus (to whom was committed the Care of conveying away Alexander's Body to his Sepulchre, having now the Chariot ready upon which he was to be carry'd) prepar'd himself for the Journey. But forasmuch as the whole Business and Concern was manag'd as became the Majesty of Alexander, and upon that account did not only exceed all others in respect of Expence, State, and Pomp, (for the Charges amounted to many Talents) but also in respect of Curiosity of Workmanship, we conceive it fit to recommend something to Posterity in writing concerning it. And first was provided a Coffin of beaten Gold, so wrought by the Hammer as to answer to the Proportion of the Body; it was half fill'd with Aromatick Spices, which serv'd as well to delight the Sense as to preserve the Body from Putrefaction. Over the Coffin was a Cover of Gold, so exactly fitted, as to answer the higher part every way: Over this was thrown a curious Purple Coat embroider'd with Gold, near to which were plac'd the Arms of the Deceas'd, that the whole might represent the Acts of his Life. Then was provided the Chariot, in which the Body was to be convey'd, upon the top of which was rais'd a Triumphant Arch of Gold, set thick and studded over with precious Stones eight Cubits in breadth, and twelve in length: Under this Roof was plac'd a Throne of Gold, join'd to the whole Work, foursquare, on which were carv'd the Heads of Goat-Harts, and to these were fastned Golden Rings of two Hands breadth in the diameter; at which hung, for Show and Pomp, little Coronets of various beautiful Colours, which, like so many Flowers, gave a pleasant Prospect to the Eye. Upon the top of the Arch was a Fringe of Network, where hung large Bells, to the end the Sound of them might be heard at a great distance. On both sides the Arch at the Corners stood an Image of Victory in Gold, bearing a Trophy: A Peristthylium of Gold supported the Archwork, the Chapiters of whose Pillars were of Ionian Workmanship: Within the Peristthylium, by a Network of Gold of a finger's thickness in the Workmanship, hung four Tables one by another equal to the Dimensions of the Wall, whereupon were portray'd all sorts of living Creatures: The first Table represented a Chariot curiously wrought, wherein Alexander sate with a Royal Scepter in his Hand: About the King stood his Life-Guard compleat in their Arms; the Macedonians on one side, and the Persians that bore Battle-Axes on the other; and before them stood the Armor-Bearers: In the second, Elephants adorn'd in their Warlike Habiliaments follow'd them of the Guard, on which sate Indians before, and Macedonians behind, arm'd according to the Customs of their several Countries. In the third might be seen Squadrons of Horse drawn up in Battalia: In the fourth appeared a Fleet order'd in a Line of Battel. At the entrance into the Arch stood Lions in Gold, with their Faces towards them that approach'd to enter. From the middle of every Pillar an Achanthus in Gold, sprouted up in Branches spiring in slender Threads to the very Chapiters: Over the Arch about the middle of the Roof on the outside was spread 
Purple Carpet in the open Air, on which was plac'd a vast Golden Crown, in form of an Olive Coronet, which by the reflection of the Sun-Beams darted such an amazing Splendor and Brightness, that at a distance it appear'd as a Flash of Lightning. Under the Seats or Bottom of the whole Work ran two Axle-trees, about which mov'd four Persian Wheels, whose Spokes and Nathes were over-laid with Gold, but the Felloes were shod with Iron: The Ends and Out-parts of the Axes were of Gold, representing the Heads of Lions, every one holding a Dart in in his Mouth. In the very Centre of


Page 587

the Arch, about the midway in the length, was artificially fix'd a Pole, by the help whereof the Arch might (in rough places, and where it was apt to be shaken) be preserv'd from being over-turn'd. There were four Draught-Trees, to every of which were fix'd four Courses of Yoaks, and to every Course were bound four Mules, so that the Mules were sixty four in number, the choicest for Strength and Largeness that could be got: Every Mule was adorn'd with a Crown of Gold, and Bells of Gold on either side their Heads; and on their Necks were fitted Rich Collars set and beautified with precious Stones.

And in this manner was the Charriot set forth, the Sight of which was more stately and pompous than the Report; so that the Fame of it brought together Multitudes of Spectators: For the People out of every City where-ever it was coming met it, and ran back again before it, never satisfy'd with the Delight they took in viewing and gazing. And suitable to so stately a Show, a vast Company of Workmen and Pioneers (that plain'd the Ways for its passage) attended it.

And thus Arrideus (who had spent two Years in Preparations) brought the King's Body from Babylon to Aegypt. Ptolemy, in Honour of the King met the Corps with his Army as far as Syria, where he receiv'd it, and accompanyd it with great Care and Observance: For he had resolv'd not as yet to conduct it to the Temple of Hammon, but to keep the Body in the City which Alexander himself had built, the most Famous almost of any City in the World. To this end he built a Temple in Honour of Alexander, in Greatness and Stateliness of Structure becoming the Glory and Majesty of that King; and in this Repository he laid the Body, and honour'd the Exequies of the Dead with Sacrifices and magnificent Shows, agreeable to the State of a Demi God. Upon which account he was deservedly Honour'd, not only by Men, but by the Gods Themselves: For by his Bounty and Generosity he so gain'd upon Men, as they flock'd from all Parts to Alexandria, and chearfully listed themselves into his Service, notwithstanding the King's Army was then preparing War against him: And though he was then in imminent Danger, yet all readily ventur'd their Lives to preserve him. And the Gods Themselves, for his Virtue, and kind and obliging Temper towards all, rescu'd him out of all his Hazards and Difficulties that seem'd insuperable: For Perdiccas, who before suspected the increase of his Power, had resolv'd (bringing the Kings along with him) of an Exepedition into Egypt with the Strength of his Army: To that end he had deliver'd to Eumenes a considerable Body of Men, with sufficient number of brave Officers, with Command to march to the Hellespont, to stop the Passage of Antipater and Craterus over into Asia. Amongst the Commanders the most Illustrious were Alcetas his Brother, and Neoptolemus: But these he order'd in all things to be observant to Eumenes, because he was both a skilful and prudent General, and a constant and faithful Friend. Eumenes therefore, with the Forces deliver'd him, came to the Hellespont, and compleated his Army with Horse (rais'd out of his own Province lately gain'd) in which his Troops were before only deficient.

But after that Antipater and Craterus had transported their Army out of Europe, Neoptolemus, out of Envy to Eumenes (having a considerable Army of Macedonians under his Command) secretly sent Messengers to Antipater, and colleaguing with him, contriv'd how to intrap Eumenes; but his Treachery being discover'd, he was forc'd to fight, and in the Battel lost almost all his Men, and was very near being cut off himself. Eumenes being thus Conqueror (after this great Slaughter) join'd the rest of those that were left, to his own Army; and so did not only by this Victory increase his Forces, but strengthen'd himself with a great number of Macedonians that were excellent Soldiers. Neoptolemus fled off the Field with three hundred Horse, and went over to Antipater. Whereupon a Consultation was had between them, in reference to the Concerns of the War; in which it was determin'd to divide the Army into two Bodies; one to march under Antipater into Cilicia to fight with Perdiccas, and the other with Craterus to fall upon Eumenes; and when he was routed, then Craterus to return to Antipater; that so the whole Army being join'd together in one Body, and having Ptolemy their Confederate, they might be better able to deal with the King's Army.

Eumenes having Intelligence of the Enemy's march, gather'd Forces together from all Parts, especially Horse; for because he had not Foot able to cope with the Macedonian Phalanx, he rais'd a great Body of Horse, by whose assistance he hop'd to be in a Condition to overcome the Enemy.

And now at length the Armies drew near one to another; whereupon Craterus drew up his Men together, in order, by a set Speech to encourage them to fight; in which Harangue he promis'd, That if they were Conquerors, they should have all the Pillage of


Page 588

the Field, and all the Bag and Baggage as a Prey to their own use: All being thus encourag'd, he drew up his Army in Battalia; the Right Wing he commanded himself, the Left he gave to Neoptolemus: His Army in the whole consisted of Twenty thousand Foot, most of them Macedonians, Men famous for their Valour, in whom he plac'd the Confidence of his Victory; with these, there march'd along with him above Two thousand Horse. Eumenes likewise had Twenty thousand Foot of divers Nations, and Five thousand Horse, on whole Valour chiefly he had resolv'd to venture, and lay all the Stake in this Battel.

The Horse on both sides moving forward in two Wings a great distance before the Foot, Craterus with a Body of choice Men made a brave Charge upon the Enemy, but his Horse stumbling, he was thrown out of the Saddle to the Ground, and not being known, was by the confus'd throng of Horse trampl'd under Foot, and so unfortunately lost his Life; upon whose Fall the Enemy was so encourag'd, that dispersing themselves up and down, they made a terrible Slaughter. The Right Wing being thus distress'd, and at length totally routed, was forc'd to retreat to the Foot. But in the left Wing commanded by Neoptolemus, oppos'd to Eumenes, there was a very sharp Engagement, the two Generals singling out one another: For being known to each other by their Horses, and other special Marks, they fought hand to hand, and by combating thus singly, they put a Remark upon the Victory; for after they had try'd it out by their Swords, they presently began an admirable and new sort of Encounter, Anger and Revenge mutually stirring up each other: For letting their Bridles fall upon their Horses Necks, they catch'd hold with their left hands one upon another, and so grappling together, their Horses (violently pressing forward) ran from under them, leaving them both tumbling on the Ground together. And though it was a difficult matter for either of them, after so violent a Fall, to rise again, and besides being press'd down by the weight of their Arms, yet Eumenes (rising first) wounded Neoptolemus in the Ham (with so great a Gash and Cut), that he lay Hamstrung groveling upon the Ground, and by reason of the grievousness of the Wound, was not able to raise himself upon his Feet: But the Stoutness and Courage of his Mind overcoming the Weakness of his Body, he got upon his Knees, and gave his Adversary three Wounds upon his Arm and Thigh; but none of them being mortal, (while they were yet warm) Eumenes gave Neoptolemus a second Blow upon his Neck, and kill'd him outright.

In the mean time great Slaughter was made among the rest of the Horse on both sides; so that while some were kill'd and others wounded, the Fortune of the Day at the first was very uncertain: But as soon as it was nois'd abroad that Neoptolemus was slain, and both Wings broken, the whole Body fled, and made away to the Phalanx as to a strong Wall of Defence. But Eumenes (content with keeping of his Ground, and the Possession of the Bodies of both the Generals) sounded a Retreat to his Soldiers. Then he set up a Trophy, and after he had bury'd the Slain, he sent to the Phalanx, and to them that were thus routed, to let them know, That whoever would, should have liberty to take up Arms with him, or to go their way wherever they pleas'd. The Macedonians accepted of these Terms of Peace, and upon Oath of Fidelity given, they had liberty to march away to the next Towns to supply themselves with Provision. But they dealt treacherously with Eumenes; for recollecting their Forces, and furnishing themselves with Provision, in the Night they stole away and went to Antipater. Eumenes indeed did all he could to revenge this Breach of their Oaths, and to that end forthwith endeavour'd to pursue the Phalanx; but by reason of the Strength of the Enemy, and his own Indisposition, (through the Wounds he had receiv'd,) he was not able to do any thing effectually, and therefore he judg'd it better to forbear from further Pursuit. Having therefore gain'd so glorious a Victory, and cut off two eminent Commanders, his Name grew very famous. Antipater having receiv'd those that had escap'd, after they were refresh'd hasted away to Cilicia, and to aid Ptolemy. But Perdiccas hearing of the Victory gain'd by Eumenes, prosecuted his Expedition into Aegypt with much more Assurance. When he came near to the River Nile, he encamp'd not far off Pelusium; and while he was cleansing an old Sluce, Nile so overflow'd, that it defeated all his Design, and spoil'd his Works, and many of his Friends deserted the Camp, and went over to Ptolomy. For he inclin'd to Cruelty, and having remov'd the rest of the Captains from the Sovereign Command, he made it his only Business to be sole Monarch, and absolute Tyrant.

Ptolemy on the contrary was courteous and mild, and gave free Liberty to the rest of the Captains to advise him in all his Enterprizes. Besides, he had put strong Garisons into all the convenient Places of Aegypt, and had furnish'd them with all sorts of Weapons, and other Things that were necessary. By which means he succeeded in every


Page 589

thing for the most part that he undertook, while many that lov'd the Man chearfully expos'd themselves to undergo all Hazards for his sake. But Perdiccas, to repair his Losses, call'd together the Commanders, and having regain'd some by Gifts, and others by large Promises, and all by smooth Words, he hearten'd himself so as to bear up against the Hazards and Difficulties that were coming apace upon him. And when he had order'd them all to be ready for a March, about Evening he mov'd from thence with his whole Army. Not acquainting any whither he would lead them, he march'd all Night with a swift March, and at length encamp'd upon the Banks of the Nile, not far from a Castle call'd the Camel's Wall.

When it was Day he pass'd his Army over, the Elephants leading the Way, and next to them the Targateers, with those that carry'd the Sealing Ladders, and other things he had occasion to use in a Siege: His best Horse at length brought up the Rear, with whom he intended to attack the Ptolemeans, if it happen'd that they appear'd. In the middle of their March Ptolemy's Horse shew'd themselves, making forward in a swift Career for the Defence of the Town; who though they hasted away to enter the Fort, and by sounding of Trumpets and shouts of Men gave sufficient notice to all of their Approach, yet Perdiccas was not at all amus'd, but boldly led up his Army close to the Fort; and forthwith the Targateers with their Ladders mounted the Wall; and those that rid the Elephants threw down the Fortifications, and demolish'd the Bulwarks. Whereupon Ptolemy, with those of his own Guard about him, to encourage the rest of his Officers and Friends manfully to behave themselves, catch'd hold of a Sarissa and mounted the Bulwark, and so being on the higher Ground, struck out the Eyes of the foremost Elephant, and wounded the Indian that sate upon him. And as for those that seal'd the Walls. he hurl'd them down shamefully cut and wounded (together with their Arms) into the River. After his Example Ptolemy's Friends valiantly bestirr'd themselves, and by killing the Indian that govern'd the next Elephant, the Beast became unserviceable. The Assault continuing long, Perdiccas his Soldiers assaulted the Wall by turns, striving with all the Vigour imaginable to gain the Fort by Storm. On the other hand Ptolemy calling to his Friends now to approve their Faithfulness and Loyalty to him by their Courage, fought like a Hero, and gave an Example of Valour to all the rest. In this sharp Dispute, many fell on both Sides. The Ptolemeans had the advantage in the Height of the Place, and the Perdicceans in Greatness of their Number, which far exceeded the other. At length the whole Day being spent in the Assault, Perdiccas rais'd his Siege, and march'd back to his Camp, and in the Night decamp'd, and with a quiet and silent March came into a part of the Country over-against Memphis, where Nile (dividing it self into two Parts) made an Island sufficient to receive and encamp the greatest Army. Into this Place therefore he pass'd over part of his Army, though the Passage was very difficult through the depth of the River; for the Water reaching up to the Chin, the Soldiers could not stand upon their Legs, and were likewise cumber'd with their Arms. Perdicca, therefore discerning the Unruliness of the River, plac'd the Elephants on the Left, to break the force of the Stream. The Horse went on the Right, by whose Help he took up them that were hurry'd down by the Current, and set them safe on the Shoar on the other side. But there happen'd in this Passage that which was strange and unusual: For when the first were gotten over, those that follow'd were in very great Hazard. For the River rose on a sudden, without any apparent Cause, and swept away whole Sholes of Bodies at a time, which put all into a Consternation. The Cause of this Inundation could not be found out, though it was enquir'd into. Some imputed it to a Dyke or Sluce in the higher Grounds, whose Banks might be broken down, and so all its Water ran into Nile, by which means the Ford was so much the higher. Others conceiv'd it was great Rains that fell in the Lands above that increas'd the Waters of the River. But it was neither of these. But the true Cause why the Passage at first was without danger, was because the Sand then was firm and unmov'd; but afterwards when by the treading of the Horses and Elephants, and the Passage of the Army, the Sand was stirr'd and carry'd away by the Force of the River, the Ford by this means was, as it were, dug into, and made into Holes, and so the Passage was deeper in the middle of the River. Perdiccas therefore not being able to pass the rest of his Army over, fell into a great strait, being those that were got to the other side were very unequal to the force of the Enemy, and those on this side the River were not able to succour them. Hereupon he commanded all those that were landed in the Island, to return. The Army thus forc'd to repass the River, those that could swim, and were strong-bodied Men, with great difficulty recover'd the other side of the Nile; but most of them lost their Arms. The rest who were not so skilful, some of them were drown'd, and others were carry'd down the Stream, and


Page 590

fell into the Hands of the Enemy. Very many for a long time toss'd and tumbled hither and thither, were at length devour'd by Crocodiles. Above Two thousand having perish'd in this manner, (among whom were some eminent Commanders,) the Hearts of the Soldiers were much turn'd against Perdiccas. But Ptolemy caus'd all those Bodies to be burnt that were brought dead down the River to him, and having perform'd all Funeral Obsequies and Observances due to the Dead, he sent their Ashes and Bones to their Kindred and Friends.

This far more inrag'd the Spirits of the Macedonians against Perdiccas, and knit their Hearts in affection to Ptolemy. When the Night came on, the Camp was full of Cries and Lamentations, that so many Men should miserably perish without a Stroke stricken, amongst whom there were no fewer than a Thousand, who were swallow'd by the monstrous Crocodiles.

Hereupon many of the Commanders rail'd against Perdiccas; and the whole Phalanx of Foot being totally disaffected, discover'd their Hatred by their Murmurings and Threats: And a Hundred of the chief Commanders deserted him; of whom, the chiefest of them was Pithon, who had conquer'd the Rebellious Greeks, not inferiour in Valour and Reputation to any of Alexander's Commanders. Afterwards some of the Horse enter'd into a Conspiracy, and made to his Tent, and in a Body fell upon him, and kill'd him.

The next day, when the Soldiers were in a Consult, Ptolemy came to them, and saluted the Macedonians, and made an Apology for what he had done. And seeing that they wanted Provision, he furnish'd the Army with abundance of Bread, and supply'd the Camp with all other Things that were necessary. But though he was upon this account in great Grace and Favour with the Soldiers, and so able easily to gain the Protectorship of the Kings, yet he demanded it not, but bestowed the chief Command upon Python and Arrhideus, to whom in Gratitude he was much oblig'd. For when the Macedonians appointed a Consult concerning that honourable Trust and high Command, by the Advice of Ptolemy they all unanimously created Python and Arrhideus (who convey'd the the King's Body) to be Protectors of the Kings, investing them with Sovereign Authority. And in this manner Perdiccas, after he had enjoy'd the Sovereign Command for the space of Three Years, lost both it and his Life together. After his Death, News was brought, that Eumenes had won the Day in Cappadocia, and that Craeterus and Neoptolemus were both slain. Which News, if it had arriv'd the Day before Perdiccas his Death, that prosperous Success would have been a Protection to his Person, so as none durst have lifted up their Hands against him.

But the Macedonians now hearing how Eumenes had succeeded, condemn'd him and all his Adherents (to the number of Fifty Noble Lords, amongst whom was Alcetas the Brother of Perdiccas,) to die. And at that very time they put to Death those that were Perdiccas his chiefest Friends, then in their Hands, with his Sister Atalanta, the Wife of Attalus the Admiral of the Fleet. For at and after the Death of Perdiccas, Attalus the Admiral lay with the Fleet before Pelusium; and when News was brought him of the Death of Perdiccas and his Wife, he loos'd from thence, and arriv'd at Tyre; where Archelaus, a Macedonian Governor of the City, kindly receiv'd him, and deliver'd up to him the City, and faithfully restor'd to him the Money intrusted in his Hands by Perdiccas, to the Value of Eight hundred Talents. And thus Attalus abiding at Tyre, receiv'd all Perdiccas's Friends that fled to him from the Camp at Memphis.

After Antipater was gone over into Asia, the Aetolians, in pursuance of their League made with Perdiccas, mach'd into Thessaly with a Design to divide Antipater's Army. They had Twelve thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, commanded as General by Alexander an Aetolian.

In their March they besieg'd the Locrians in Amphissa, and harrass'd their Country, and took some of the neighbouring Towns and Villages. They routed likewise Polycles, Antipater's General, and kill'd him, with a great number of his Men. Of the Prisoners they took, some were sold for Slaves, and others were ransom'd. Afterwards they broke into Thessaly, and brought over many there to join with them in the War against Antipater, insomuch as they made up in the whole a Body of Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Fifteen hundred Horse; while they were taking in the Cities, the Acarnanians bearing a Grudge to the Aetolians, invaded Aetolia, wasted and spoil'd the Country, and besieg'd the Cities. When the Aetolians heard what Danger their Country was in, they left the rest of their Forces in Thessaly under the Command of Menon of Pharsalis, and they themselves speedily march'd back with their own Soldiers into Aetolia, and struck such a Terror into the Acarnanians, that they presen

•

 reliev'd their Country. While


Page 591

they were thus employ'd, Polyspherchon, who was left General in Macedonia, came into Thessaly with a brave Army, and fought and routed the Enemy, killing Menon the General, and cutting off most of his Army, and so recover'd Thessaly.

As for the Affairs of Asia, Arrhideus and Pytho, Protectors of the Kings, leaving the River Nile, came with the Kings, and the whole Army to Triparadisus in Higher Syria. There Euridice the Queen taking upon her to intermeddle and pry too curiously into Matters that concern'd her not, and to controul the Protectors; Pytho and his Friends hereby became much disgusted, and perceiving that the Macedonians were more observant to her Commands than to theirs, they call'd a Council, and gave up the Protectorship Whereupon the Macedonians chose Antipater Protector, with absolute Authority. A few days after Antipater going to Triparadisus, found Eurydice stiring up the Macedonians to a Sedition against him; whereupon there arose no small Mutiny in the Army. Antipater hereupon call'd a General Council, and so argu'd and canvass'd the Business with them, that he allay'd the Spirit of the People, and brought Eurydice (through fear of him) into a better Temper.

After these Things were over, Antipater made a second Division of the Provinces, and allotted to Ptolemy that whereof he was then in Possession. For it was not Practicable to remove him, because it appear'd Ptolemy had gain'd Aegypt as a Conqueror. Syria he gave to Laomedon of Mitylene; and Cilicia to Philoxenus. Of the other Provinces, he assign'd Mesopotamia and Arbelitis to Amphimachus; the Province of Babylon to Seleucus, and Susiana to Antigonus, because he was the first that set the Wheel a going in order to overthrow Perdiccas. To Peucestas he granted Persia; to Tlepolemus, Carmania; to Pithon, Media; and to Philip, Parthia. Aria and Drangana he allotted to Stasandrus the Cyprian; Bactriana and Sogdiana to Stasanorus of Solium, born in the same Island; Parapamisada, to Oxyartas the Father of Rhoxana, whom Alexander marry'd; and India, bordering upon Parapamisada, to Pithon the Son of Agenor. Of the Kingdoms next adjoyning, that which border'd upon the River Indus, continu'd under the Power of Porus; that which lay to Hydaspes, remain'd with Taxilis. For these Kings were not to be Dispossess'd, but with the Royal Army, and a skilful and expert General. As to the Northern Provinces, he gave the Government of Cappadocia to Nicanor, and the Greater Phrygia and Cilicia to Antigonus, to hold them as he did before. Lastly, to Cassander he assign'd Caria; to Clitus,Lycia; and to Arrhideus, Phrygia at the Hellespont. Antigonus he appointed General of the Royal Army, and commanded him to pursue and destroy Eumenes. To Antigonus he also join'd Cassander and Clearchus, that if he secretly projected any thing, he might be discover'd. He himself march'd with the Kings and his Troops towards Macedonia, that he might conduct the Kings back into their own Country.

Antigonus therefore being declar'd absolute Commander of Asia, drew out the Forces out of their Winter-Quarters to fight with Eumenes, and to that end furnishing himself with all necessary Preparations for the War, he march'd towards Eumenes, who then lay in Cappadocia; where one call'd Perdiccas, one of his chief Commanders, had deserted him, and lay encamp'd with Three thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse (that follow'd him) about three days March distant. But Eumenes sent out Phenices of Tenedos with Four thousand good Foot and a Thousand Horse against him; who, with a swift March, fell upon the Rebels on a sudden in the Night when they were asleep, and took Perdiccas and all his Army Prisoners, about the second Watch of the Night. Eumenes put to Death the chief Ringleaders of the Defection, and spar'd the rest of the Soldiers, and mix'd them amongst his own, and by this means gain'd all their Affections. After this, Antigonus, by a Correspondence with one Apollonides, General of the Horse on Eumenes his side, by large Promises so effected the Business, that he prevail'd with him to betray Eumenes, and come over to him in the heat of the Fight. Eumenes was then encamp'd in Cappadocia, in Places very convenient for Engagement with Horse. Antigonus therefore made thither with his whole Army, and possess'd himself of the higher Ground under the Foot of the Mountains: He had at that time above Ten thousand Foot, (of whom most were Macedonians, brave and valiant Men,) and Two thousand Horse, and Thirty Elephants. Eumenes had no less than Twenty thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse. Presently a sharp and bloody Battel was fought, in which Antigonus (through the sudden and unexpected Desertion of Apollonides with his Horse, and going over to the other side,) got the Day, killing Eight thousand Men of the Enemy upon the place, and possessing himself of all their Bag and Baggage, so that the Eumeneans (through the Slaughter that was made) were in a Consternation, and by the loss of all their Carriages, were brought to an utter Desperation. Hereupon Eumenes design'd to fly into Armenia, to perswade some of the Inhabitants to join with him in Arms; but being prevented by a swift Pursuit, and


Page 592

perceiving his Men to run away from him to Antigonus, he possess'd himself of a strong Fort call'd Nora. It was indeed very small, not above Two Furlongs in compass, but in Strength impregnable. For the Houses were built upon a very high Rock, and it was wonderfully fortisy'd both by Nature and Art. Besides, there was there laid up great store of Corn, Fuel, and other Things of that kind, so that all that fled for shelter thither, might be abundantly supply'd with all Things necessary for many Years together. Those that were his fast Friends, accompany'd him in his Flight, and resolv'd at the last and utmost Extremity to die with him. They were in Number, both Horse and Foot, about Six hundred.

Antigonus being now strengthen'd with the Forces of Eumenes, and the Revenues of his Provinces, and having gotten together a great Mass of Treasure, began to aspire to Matters of higher Concern; for none of the Asian Commanders were as yet so Potent, as to dare to contend with him for the Sovereign Command. For the present, indeed he bore a fair outside towards Antipater, but secretly had resolv'd, that when he had firmly settl'd his Affairs, he would neither regard him nor the Kings. And in the first place, he block'd up them in the Fort with a double Wall, and with deep Trenches and Works of Earth of a wonderful height. Then he enter'd into Parley with Eumenes, willing him to renew their ancient Friendship, and endeavour'd to perswade him to join with him as an Associate in all his Affairs. But Eumenes foreseeing a change of Fortune at hand, insisted upon Terms, and that degree of Favour that seem'd very unequal and unfit to be granted to one in his present Circumstances: For he requir'd, as of Right, to be restor'd to all his Provinces, and to be fully acquitted and discharged of all pretended Offences whatsoever. Antigonus promis'd to acquaint Antipater with his Demands, and leaving sufficient Strength for continuing the Siege, he march'd against the Generals, (that were moving towards him with all their Forces,) viz. Alcetas the Brother of Perdiccas, and Attalus the Admiral of the Fleet. Some time after, Eumenes sent Ambassadors to Antipater to treat upon Terms of Peace, (amongst whom was Hieronymus a Colonel, who wrote the History of the Successors.) In the mean time he himself having experienc'd many Changes and Turns of Fortune, was not at all discourag'd, knowing very well what quick and sudden Alterations had happen'd on both Sides. For he saw that the Macedonian Kings were but only vain and insignificant Shadows of Princes, and those many valiant Commanders that were with them, so manag'd their Commands one after another, as to seek only the Advancement of their own private Interests. Therefore he hop'd, (as the Truth fell out afterwards to be,) that many would desire his Help and Assistance, both upon the account of his Skill im Martial Affairs, as of his Constancy and Faithfulness.

But when he saw that the Horse could not be Exercis'd in a Place so strait and craggy, and so were unserviceable for Horse-Engagements, he ingeniously found out a new and unusual way for the Exercise of them: For he ty'd up their Heads by Chains to a Post or strong Stake, and drew them up so high, as that they should stand upon their hinder Feet, and but just touch the Ground with the Ends of their fore Feet. Whereupon the Horse presently striving to get his fore Feet to the Ground, did so curvet and caper, that Legs, Thighs, and every Member was in action, and by this Motion the Horse was all on a Foam; and thus they were all Exercis'd to the highest degree. He himself fed of the meanest Food with the rest of the Soldiers, and by this eating with them in common, not only gain'd to himself the Love of all his Fellow-Soldiers, but caus'd them to be at perfect Peace and Concord one with another. In the mean time Ptolemy in Aegypt (Perdiccas with all the King's Army being broken in pieces) enjoy'd that Country as a Conqueror: And casting his Eye upon Phoenicia and Celo-Syria, (as lying very commodiously to Aegypt,) he us'd his utmost Endeavour to possess himself of the Cities of those Countries. To that end he created Nicanor, one of his Friends, General, and sent him into those Parts with a considerable Army, who coming into Syria, took Laomedon, the Governor of that Province, Prisoner, and brought all Syria under his own Power. He gain'd also all the Cities of Phoenicia, and put Garisons into them, and having in a short time finish'd a troublesom Expedition, return'd into Aegypt.


Page 593

CHAP. IV.

Antigonus routs Alcetas in Pisidia, and takes Attalus. Alcetas receiv'd into Termessus, and there protected. He's murder'd there treacherously, his Body inhumanly us'd by Antigonus. Antipater's Death. Antipater put Demeas, one of the Athenian Ambassadors, to Death. Polysperchon made Chief in Macedonia. Cassander conspires to out him. Antigonus his Plots to be Sovereign of all. Arrideus secures himself in Phrygia, besieges Cyzicum. Antigonus goes to raise it. Eumenes got out of Nora by Antigonus his Order. Antigonus his further Acts. The various Fortunes of Eumenes. A Council in Macedonia call'd by Polysperchon against Cassander. The Decree of the Council. Polysperchon invites Olpmpias out of Epyrus into Macedonia. Writes to Eumenes to join with the Kings.

AFterwards when Apollodorus executed the Office of Lord-Chancellor at Athens, and Quintus Publius and Quintus Poplias Consuls at Rome, Antigonus, after the Defeat of Eumenes, determin'd to march against Alcetas and Attalus. For those only remain'd of all Perdiccas his Friends and Kindred who were skilful Commanders, and had Forces sufficient to cope with him for the Sovereign Power. To this end he march'd away with his whole Army out of Cappadocia, and made for Pisidia, where Alcetas then lay, and came with a swist March suddenly and unexpectedly to Critopolis, (as it was call'd,) having march'd Two thousand five hundred Furlongs in 7 Days and 7 Nights time, and by that means was upon them before they were aware; and there he first possess'd himself of certain Hills, and other difficult Passes in the Country. When Alcetas his Party had intelligence of the Enemy's approach, they presently drew up a Phalanx in order of Battel, and by a fierce Charge endeavour'd to drive the Horse down the Hills, who had now gain'd the Tops of the Mountains. Hereupon began a sharp Engagement, in which many falling on both sides, Antigonus with a Body of Six thousand Horse bore down with all his Might upon the Enemy, endeavouring to cut off all ways and means of Retreat to Alcetas; this done, those upon the Tops of the Mountains, by the Advantage of the steepness and difficulty of the Places, easily put the Phalanx to flight. Hereupon Alcetas his Men being surrounded with the Multitude of their Enemies, and all Passes block'd up between them and their Foot, they look'd upon themselves all as dead Men. Therefore seeing no other Remedy or Means left to escape, Alcetas (with the Loss of Multitudes of his Men) at length with much ado broke through his Enemies, and got to the Foot. Hereupon Antigonus marching down from the Hills with his whole Army, and his Elephants, the Enemy (who were far inferior in Number) were mightily terrify'd: For all the Confederates were not above Sixteen thousand Foot, and Nine hundred Horse; whereas the Forces of Antigonus (besides Elephants) were above Forty thousand Foot, and Seven thousand Horse. Those therefore, with Alcetas, (considering that they should meet with Elephants in the Front, and be surrounded with Multitudes of Horse, and forc'd to engage with Foot far exceeding them, both in Number of Men, and in the Skilfulness of their Arms, and besides had the Advantage of the higher Ground,) fell into Confusion and Amazement; nay, the Enemy hasted and came upon them so fast, that they were not able to draw up their Men in due order of Battel; so that the whole Army was presently broken in pieces, and Attalus Docimus and Polemo, and many other Commanders, were taken Prisoners. But Alcetas, with his Life-Guard, his Children, and those Pisidians that sided with him, got into Termessus, a City of Pisidia. Then Antigonus came to an Agreement with the Captains, his Prisoners, and the rest he dispos'd of among his own Troops, using them with all Humanity, and by this means greatly encreas'd his Army. But about Six thousand Pisidians (valiant Men) resolv'd to stick to Alcetas, and promis'd they would never desert him upon any Terms whatsoever: For they lov'd him intirely for the Reasons following. For,

When Alcetas, after the Death of Perdiccas, had no Confederates in Asia, he determin'd by some acts of Kindness or other to engage the Pisidians; because he knew he should thereby gain a Warlike People, that had a Country very difficult to enter, and full of strong Forts, to be his Confederates. Therefore in every Expedition he always bestow'd special Marks of Honour upon them above all the rest of his Confederates. For he so divided the Spoil of his Enemies, that the Half was ever allotted to them. Moreover, by


Page 594

his Familiarity and Freedom in Converse, daily Invitations of the most eminent Persons amongst them to his Table, and by his Bounty and Liberality in bestowing upon them many large Gifts and Rewards, he ingross'd to himself the Love of all: So that now (having anchor'd all his Hopes, and plac'd his chiefest Confidence in them,) he was not frustrated in his Expectation. For when Antigonus encamp'd with his whole Army before Termessus, and demanded Alcetas to be deliver'd up to him, (and the Elders of the City had determin'd to give him up,) all the young Men got together, and resolv'd to run all Hazards, and the utmost Extremity, for his Preservation. The Elders indeed at first endeavour'd to disswade the young Men, and draw them off from their former Resolve, wishing them not to involve their Country in War for the sake of one Macedonian. But when they saw that they could not allay the Heat of the young Men, they secretly consulted together, and in the Night sent away a Messenger to Antigonus, and by him faithfully promis'd, That they would deliver Alcetas up to him, either dead or alive. To this end they desir'd him, That by assaulting the City for some Days, he would decoy the young Men to sally out, and while he was skirmishing with them, to feign a Flight; by this means, when the young Men were out of the City, and busy in Pursuit, they should have an Opportunity to accomplish their Design. Antigonus assented hereunto, and drew off from the City at a further Distance, and so egg'd on the young Men to Skirmishes, and light Pickeerings. The Elders now discerning Alcetas left alone, they employ'd the faithfullest of their Servants, and the most active Men of the City, (that were not engag'd with him,) and with them (in the Absence of the young Men) set upon him; but could not take him, for he kill'd himself with his own Hand, lest he should fall alive into the Power of the Enemy: But they laid his Body upon a Bier, casting over it a course Cloth, and carry'd it out of the Gates, and, unknown to them that were skirmishing, deliver'd it to Antigonus. By this Device they freed their Country, and prevented a War; but they could not avoid the Fury of the young Men. For when they return'd, and understood what was done, (through that ardent Love and Affection they bore Alcetas,) they were so enrag'd at their Governors, that they first possess'd themselves of a part of the City, and resolv'd to set the Houses on fire, and after to issue out with their Arms, and betake themselves to the Mountains, and wast and destroy all the Country round belonging to Antigonus. But afterwards they alter'd their Purpose as to the burning of the City, and began, by robbing and spoiling miserably, to lay waste a great part of the Enemy's Country. In the mean time, Antigonus having receiv'd the Body of Alcetas, us'd it with all the Disgrace and Contumely imaginable for the space of three Days together, and then beginning to putrify, contemptuously cast it out without any Burial, and so march'd out of Pisidia.

But the young Men of Termessus bearing still a Love and Respect to the abus'd Body of the Dead, took it up, and decently bury'd it. He was of so kind and obliging a Nature, that there was something singular in him of Love and Respect to all those that deserv'd well, and therefore he was ever towards such unchangeable in his Love and Affection.

Antigonus having left Pisidia, made towards Phrygia with his whole Army. When he came to the City of the Cretiens, Aristodemus the Milesian brought him the News of Antipater's Death, and that the chief Command, together with the Protectorship of the Kings, was devolv'd upon Polysperchon the Macedonian. He was pleas'd with the News, and now his Hopes were exalted, for he made it his Business to Rule and Govern all the Affairs of Asia, and to gain the Absolute and Sovereign Command there without stooping to any. And thus stood the Affairs of Antigonus at this time.

In Macedonia, while Antipater was seiz'd with a grievous Sickness, (and old Age making way for his Dissolution,) the Athenians sent Demades (who was look'd upon as one that had manag'd Things with the Macedonians with a great deal of Honesty and Integrity) Ambassador to Antipater, to desire him to draw out the Garison from Munichia, as it was at first Articl'd and Agreed. Antipater at the first was very kind to Demades; but after the Death of Perdiccas, when some Letters of Demades (amongst others) were found amongst the King's Papers, wherein he press'd Perdiccas to hasten with all speed into Europe against Antipater; though he suppress'd his Resentment for a time, yet in truth he bore him a Grudge. Therefore when Demades had deliver'd his Message, (as he was Commanded,) and had something sharply debated the Matter concerning the Garison; Antipater, without giving any Answer, committed his Son Demeas (who was joint Ambassador with his Father) to the Executioners, who presently carry'd him away to the Prison, and for the Reasons before-mention'd cut off his Head.


Page 595

Afterwards, Antipater, when he was very near his End, appointed Polysperchon, the Eldest almost of all Alexander's Captains, and one in great Honour and Reputation with the Macedonians, to be Protector of the Kings, with chief and absolute Authority. And his Son Cassander he created Chiliarch, next in Power and Authority to Polysperchon. This Office was first made a Place of Honour and Credit by the Persian Kings, and afterwards by Alexander, when he grew great, and began to imitate this and other the Customs of the Persians. But Cassander relish'd not his Father's ordering of Matters, and judg'd it very dishonourable to his Family to have one that was nothing related, either in Blood or Affinity, to succeed in the Sovereign Command, when there was a Son who in Macedonia gave apparent and pregnant Evidences, both of Valour and Parts, sufficient to Govern the Affairs of the State in the room of his Father.

In the first place therefore he took a Journey into the Country with some of his Friends, where having both leisure and opportunity, he discours'd with them about the Chief Command, and dealt with every one of them privately apart by themselves, to contrive Ways and Means for him to gain the Principality, and by large Promises prevail'd with them to join together in their Assistance, for the accomplishment of what he desir'd. He likewise privately sent Ambassadors to Ptolemy, to renew the League, and pray his Assistance; and that he would to that purpose help him with Shipping out of Phaenicia, and send them with all speed to the Hellespont. In like manner he sent Ambassadors to the rest of the Cities and Captains, to sollicit them to join with them in Arms. But the better to conceal his Design, and that he might not be suspected, he spent his time for many days together in Hunting.

But Polyspherchon having gain'd the Guardianship of the Kings, call'd together a General Council of his Friends, and by their advice sent for Olympias, wishing that she would take into her Care Alexander's Son, who was then but a Child, and reside for the future as Queen Regent in Macedonia: For by reason of the Quarrels and Heart-burnings between her and Antipater, she had withdrawn herself into Epirus.

When the Death of Antipater was nois'd abroad in Asia, Stirs and Commotions began to change the face of Affairs there, while they that were in Power and Authority made it their Business, and sought every one how to advance his own particular Interest. The chief of whom was Antigonus, who (upon the account of his having conquer'd Eumenes in Cappadocia, and was join'd with his Forces, and Alcetas and Attalus in Pisidia, and besides was appointed by Antipater Viceroy of Asia, and had the Command of a great Army) bore himself very high, and swell'd with Pride in the Imagination of his own Greatness. And being now possess'd already (in his own Conceit) of the Sovereignty, he resolv'd neither to regard the Kings nor their Guardians: For in regard he had a greater Army, he was confident he could possess himself of all the Treasures laid up in Asia, being there was none able to oppose him. He had then in his Army Threescore thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse, and Thirty Elephants. And besides these, he doubted not but to raise more, whenever he had occasion; for that there was Money enough in Asia for the listing of Soldiers abroad in any place where he pleas'd.

Pondering these things in his Head, he sent for Hieronymus the Historian, Eumenes the Cardian's special Friend and Fellow-Citizen (he who fled to Nora) and having brought him to him by many rich Gifts and Presents, he sent him as an Agent to Eumenes, with Instructions to desire him to forget the Battel in Cappadocia, and to be his Friend and Confederate in the War; and that he should have a far larger Province, and much more Wealth than ever he enjoy'd before: And to let him know, That he should be Chiefest of his Friends, and share with him in the Advantages and Successes of all his Designs.

Then without any further delay he call'd his Friends together, and imparted to them his whole Design; and to those who were of greatest account among them, to some he allotted Provinces, to others Commands in the Army; and by raising the Hopes and Expectations of every one of them, he made them all very forward to assist him in carrying on his Intrigues: For he determin'd to pass through all Asia, and to remove all the Governours of the Provinces, and bestow them upon his Friends.

While he was in execution of these Projects, Arrideus the Governour of Phrygia

〈◊〉

 the Hellespont, understanding what he was contriving, resolv'd to secure his own Province, and to that end put sufficient Garisons into the principal Cities, and march'd against Cyzicum, being the greatest and most important City of all others for his purpose. He had with him above Ten thousand Foot of Mercenaries, a Thousand Macedonians. Five hundred Persian Darters and Slingers, and Eight hundred Horse, together with all sorts of Engines for Battery, both for shooting of Darts and casting of Stones, and all other things necessary for the carrying on of a Siege. He came upon the City on a sudden, and having surpriz'd most of the People when they were abroad in the open fields, he prest on


Page 596

the Siege, and endeavour'd to force the Inhabitants (who were in a very great fright) to receive a Garison. The Cyzians, though they were thus surpriz'd, and that many were shut out that were in the Fields, and those that remain'd were altogether unable to defend the Place, looking upon it as their Duty to assert their Liberty, cowardly sent forth Ambassadors to treat concerning the raising of the Siege; and to let Arrideus know, That the City was ready to submit to any thing he thought fit, except the receiving of a Garison: But in the mean time they secretly arm'd all their young Men, and Slaves, that were fit for Service, and so lin'd the Walls round with Men for the Defence of the Town. But Arrideus still pressing the matter for the receiving of a Garison, the Ambassadors answer'd, That they would acquaint the Citizens with his Demands; which he consented unto, and so discharg'd them: and being thus freed, they spent all that Day, and the Night next following, in Preparations for the holding out of the Siege. Being thus deluded, he lost the Opportunity of accomplishing what he design'd: For the Cyzians, in regard the City was very strong, and well guarded on the Land side (for it was a Peninsula) and being Masters likewise at Sea, they easily repuls'd the Enemy. Moreover, they sent to them of Byzantium for Soldiers, and Darts, and all other Things that were necessary and useful against an Assault. All which were speedily and readily sent to them; whereby their Hopes were so reviv'd, that they were the more encourag'd to stand it out to the utmost. They presently likewise put forth their Long Ships to Sea, and fail'd along the Coast, and took in those that were in the Fields, and brought them back to the City. Having therefore thus increas'd the number of their Soldiers (after the killing a great many of the Besiegers) they forc'd the Enemy to raise the Siege; whereupon Arrideus (cheated by this Stratagem of the Cyzians) after a fruitless attempt, return'd into his own Province.

In the mean time, Antigonus lying at Celena, was inform'd of the Siege at Cyzicum, and therefore resolv'd to lay an Obligation upon that City (then in danger to be ruin'd) to favour him in his future Designs. To that end he detach'd out of his whole Army Twenty thousand of his best Foot, and Three thousand Horse, and with these march'd away with all speed to the Aid of the Cyzians; but came thither a little too late: And so though he made a show of a great Kindness to the City, yet he was wholly frustrated in his Design. But he sent Ambassadors to Arrideus, to expostulate Matters with him; first, Why he dar'd to besiege a Greek Confederate City without any Provocation: Then, to charge him with open Rebellion, and with a Purpose to make himself absolute Lord and Sovereign of the Province. Lastly, To command him to depart out of the Province, and thence-forward to live a private Life, and content himself with one only City for his Subsistence.

Arrideus hearing these Demands of the Ambassadors (and charging them with Insolency) told them he would not leave the Province; but that he would Garrison all his Cities, and was resolv'd to decide the matter with him by the Sword.

In pursuance of what he had said (having every where fortified his Towns and Cities) he sent away a General with part of his Army, commanding him to join with Eumenes, and to free the Fort from the Siege, and Eumenes from the Straits and Difficulties wherein he then was, and to persuade him to be his Confederate in the War.

Antigonus, in the mean time, eager to be reveng'd on Arrideus, sent away some of his Forces against him; and he himself march'd with a numerous Army towards Lydia, with a Purpose to depose Clitus the Lord-Lieutenant of that Province; who having before intelligence of his march, Garison'd all his principal Cities, and he himself sail'd over into Macedonia, to inform the Kings and Polysperchon of the Revolt and Impudence of Antigonus, and to crave their Aid and Assistance.

Antigonus at his first approach had Ephesus deliver'd up to him by the Assistance of some in the City: Afterwards, when Aesculus the Rhodian arriv'd at Ephesus with four Ships, wherein were Six hundred Talents of Silver sent out of Cilicia to the Kings in Macedonia, he seiz'd upon the Money, alledging he had occasion to use it for the raising and listing Soldiers: By which Act he sufficiently declar'd to the World, That he was altogether designing his own Interest, and was an apparent Enemy to the Kings. After this, he besieg'd those Cities that stood out, some of which he took by Assault, and others he gain'd by fair Words and Promises.

Having now related the Acts of Antigonus, we shall pass over to those Things that happen'd to Eumenes. This Man had the frequent Experience of sudden Turns and Changes of Fortune, being sometimes in low, and other times again (beyond all Expectation) in very prosperous Circumstances.


Page 597

In former times, when he assisted Perdiccas and the Kings, he gain'd the Province of Cappadocia, and those Places that as Members belong'd to it, where he liv'd in the height of Prosperity, commanding both Men and Money at his Pleasure: For he conquer'd Craterus and Neoptolemus, two famous Captains, who then Commanded the before-unconquer'd Troops of the Macedonians, and kill'd them both in the Fight: So that now he seem'd to be invincible, when on a sudden his Fortune was so chang'd, that he was routed by Antigonus in a great Battel, and forc'd to fly with a few Friends to a very little Fort for shelter. Being then shut up, and hemm'd in with a double Wall, he had no Friend left that could help him in his Distress; but after he had been coop'd up a Year together, now utterly despairing of Deliverance, unexpectedly and on a sudden appear'd an opportunity of Freedom from all his Troubles: For Antigonus, who a little before had straitly besieg'd him, and earnestly sought to take away his Life (the Scene being chang'd) now seeks to him to be a Partner with him in his Concerns; and so (upon a mutual Stipulation upon Oath between them) he was freed from the Pressures and Hardships of the Siege. And thus after a long time being unexpectedly deliver'd, he continu'd a while in Cappadocia, where he again got together his old Friends, and his former Fellow-Soldiers that were dispers'd and scatter'd up and down in the Country; and was so wonderfully belov'd, that many of his Associates and Companions in the same Hopes and Expectations, presently flock'd to him, ready to join in Arms, and be observent to all his Commands. To conclude, within a very few days he had got together above Two thousand Soldiers, who chearfully listed themselves, besides those five hundred Friends, who indur'd the Siege with him in the Fort: And, by the Assistance of Fortune, he was at length rais'd to that height, that he gain'd the Kings Forces, and defended the Interest of the Kings against all that dar'd to deprive them of their Sovereign Authority. But we shall give a more exact account of these Matters shortly hereafter, in their proper time and place. And so having now in short related the Affairs of Asia, we shall pass to Things done in Europe.

Cassander, though he was excluded from the Chief Command of Macedonia, yet was not at all discourag'd, but resolv'd to gain it; for he look'd upon it as a base and dishonourable thing, that the Sovereign Authority enjoy'd by his Father, shou'd now be manag'd by others. But discerning that the Macedonians favour'd Polysphercon, he privately discours'd with some of his Friends, and then sent them (that nothing might be suspected) to the Hellespont: He himself in the mean time continuing for some days together in the Country, and spending his time in Hunting, made every one believe that he had no Thoughts or Designs of aspiring to the Sovereign Command. But when he got all things ready for his Journey, he secretly slipt out of Macedonia, and made to the Chersonesus, and thence forward to the Hellespont; where passing over, he went to Antigonus in Asia, craving his Assistance, and told him that Ptolemy would join with him. Antigonus readily embrac'd the Offer, and made him large Promises of Assistance, and engag'd forthwith to supply him with Forces both for Land and Sea-Service. But all this was nothing but Dissimulation, pretending as if he join'd with him upon the account of the Love and Kindness he always bore towards Antipater; whereas in truth he design'd to divert Polysperchon with fierce and bloody Wars, to the end he might with more ease subdue Asia in the mean time; and so without any hazard, gain the Sovereign Command of all at last.

While these things were in acting, Polysperchon, the Kings Protector, having a prospect of a great War he was like to have with Cassander (and conceiving that it was not fit to undertake any thing, without consulting first with his Friends) assembled all his Captains, and all those that were of Chief Authority among the Macedonians. And forasmuch as it was apparent, that Cassander was strengthen'd with the Forces of Antigonus, to gain all the Cities of Greece; and that some of them were Garison'd with his Father's Forces, and others were govern'd by an Oligarchy, influenc'd chiefly by the Friends and Favourites of Antipater: And besides all this, that Ptolemy, who had the Power in Aegypt, and Antigonus, who had openly and apparently deserted the Kings, were Confederates with Cassander; and that both were richly stor'd with Men and Money, and had the Command of many Potent Cities and Provinces: For these Reasons he appointed a Consultation to consider how the War should be manag'd against them. After the matter was banded to and fro with variety of Opinions, it was at length resolv'd that the Cities of Greece should be restor'd to their Liberties, and the Oligarchy every where abolish'd: For by this means they conceiv'd they should weaken the Interest of Cassander; and much advance their own Reputation, and gain strong and powerful Confederates. Hereupon they that were present, forthwith sent to the Ambassadors of the Cities; and wishing them to be Courageous, promis'd to restore them to their several Democracies; and deliver'd to the


Page 598

Ambassadors the Decree in Writing, that every one of them (when they return'd into their Countries) might the better inform the People of the Kindness of the Kings and Captains to the Grecians. The Decree was in this form:

SInce it has ever been the Practice of our Ancestors, to express their Acts of Grace in the manyInstances of their Bounty towards the Grecians, Our selves are likewise desirous to preserve and keep on foot what they determin'd; and are willing to evidence to the World the Kindness and Good-will we shall ever be careful to preserve towards the Greeks: And whereas it's well known that even in the Life-time of Alexander, and before the Kingdom devolv'd upon Us, we were of Opinion, That all ought to be restor'd to that Peace and Form of Government which was order'd and appointed by our Father Philip, and writ to all the Cities at that time concerning that Affair: Yet afterwards it so fell out, that some unadvisedly, when we were far remote from Greece, made War upon the Macedonians; which unruly Persons being supprest and subdu'd, by the Help and Conduct of our Captains, many Cities were thereby involved in great Troubles, and brought under the Smart and Sense of many Inconveniencies: Impute therefore the Cause of all those Sufferings (as justly you may) to those Commanders. But now in Reverence and due Regard to that ancient Constitution, we grant to you our Peace, and the same Kinds of Government which you enjoy'd under Philip and Alexander, and full Power and Authority to manage all other things, according to the several Rules and Orders by them prescrib'd. We likewise recall all them who have either voluntarily withdrawn themselves, or have been forc'd away by the Command of our Captains, from the time that Alexander first landed in Asia. It is likewise our Pleasure, That all those thus re-call'd by us, enjoy their Estates without quarrelling or remembrance of former Injuries, and that they be restor'd to the Franchises and Liberties of their several Cities; and whatever Decree is made against them, let it be abrogated, except such as are banish'd, by due course of Law, for Murther or Sacrilege. But we do not hereby intend to re-call the Exiles of Megalopolis, nor Polyenerus, who are condemn'd for Treason; nor the Amphisseans, nor the Tricceans, nor the Pharcadonians, nor the Heracleots. But as for all others, let them return before the 30th Day of the Month Xanthicus. But if there be any Laws or Orders made by Philip or Alexander against them, let them be brought to us, that such course may be taken therein, as may be most for the Service and Advnatage of us and of the Cities. Let the Athenians enjoy all other things as they did in the time of Philip and Alexander; and the Oropians hold Oropus as now they do. Yet we restore Samos to the Athenians, because our Father Philip before gave it to them. Let all the Grecians make a Law, That none take up Arms or act any thing against us; otherwise, That such be banish'd, and forfeit all their Goods. And we have order'd that Polysperchon shall manage these and all other Matters: And let all be observant to him, in what we have before written to you; for those that do contrary to what we have prescribed, we shall not in the least pardon.

This Decree being transmitted to all the Cities, Polysperchon writ to Argos, and the rest of their Cities, commanding them, That all that were in any Command in the Commonwealth under Antipater, should be forthwith banish'd; and that some should be put to death, and their Estates confiscated; that being reduc'd to extremity, they might be in no capacity to assist Cassander. He sent Letters likewise to Olympias, Alexander's Mother, who was then in Epirus for fear of Cassander, to intreat her to return with all speed into Macedonia, and take care and charge of Alexander's little Son, till he was of age, and capable to take upon him the sole Management of Affairs. He writ moreover to Eumenes, that he would stick to the Interest of the Kings, and not League by any means with Antigonus; but make his choice, either to come over into Macedonia, in order to join with him in the Protectorship of the Kings, or abide in Asia, and to receive both Men and Money from them to make War upon Antigonus, who had now openly declar'd himself a Rebel against the Kings, who would be sure to restore him the Province which Antigonus had forc'd from him, and likewise all other Privileges and Advantages which he ever at any time before enjoy'd in Asia. And besides, he alledged, that it became Eumenes above all other Men to protect the Royal Family, as consonant to all those Demonstrations of his Loyalty, in his late appearances on the behalf of the Kings; and if he stood in need of Forces, he himself, together with the Kings, would come over into Asia with the whole Army. These were the Transactions of this Year.


Page 599

CHAP. V.

Polysperchon courts Eumenes to assist the Kings. Eumenes his Prudence amongst the Macedonian Captains. Ptolemy sends to the Captains and others not to assist Eumenes. Antigonus contrives to kill Eumenes; who marches into Phoenicia. Nicanor deceives the Athenians, and still keeps Munychia, and subtilly gets the Pyreum. Order'd by Olympias to deliver the Pyreum and Munychia to the Athenians; but he shifts it off. Alexander, Son of Polysperchon, enters Attica; secretly corresponds with Nicanor, and displeases the Athenians. Phocion's hard Usage at his Trial in Athens, is condemn'd, and executed. Cassander arrives at the Pyreum. Polysperchon comes against him, but returns. Besieges Megalopolis, but is there much damnify'd, his Elephants spoil'd by a Stratagem. A Sea-Fight between Clitus and Nicanor. Nicanor beaten. Clitus afterwards routed by Nicanor, is kill'd in his Flight to Macedonia. Antigonus goes after Eumenes. Eumenes near losing his Army by the Breach of a Dyke in Babylonia. The Greek Cities revolt to Cassander. The Athenians make Peace with him. He kills Nicanor.

ARchippus being chief Magistrate of Athens, and Quintus Aelius and Lucius. PapiriusRoman Consuls, the Letters from Polysperchon were deliver'd to Eumenes presently after his Release out of the Fort; in which were contain'd, besides what was before declar'd, That the Kings had bestow'd of their Bounty upon him, Five hundred Talents to repair his Losses he had lately sustain'd, and had sent Letters to the Governors and Treasurers of Cilicia to pay to him the said Five hundred Talents, and what other Monies he should have occasion for, either for raising of Soldiers, or any other necessary Uses. And that they had order'd a Thousand MacedonianArgyraspides, with their Officers, to be observant to him, and readily and chearfully to serve him upon all Occasions, as he that was appointed General with full and absolute Power and Authority over all Asia. There came likewise Letters to him from Olympias, by which she earnestly intreated him to be Assistant both to her and the Kings; for that he only remain'd the most Faithful of all the Friends they had, who was able to relieve the desolate State and Condition of the King's Family. She likewise desir'd him to advise her, Whether it was better for her to remain still in Epirus, (and not trust him who claim'd the Guardianship of the Kings, but in truth sought the Kingdom,) or to return? Hereupon Eumenes forthwith writ to her back again, That he conceiv'd it most Advisable for her at the present to continue in Epirus till the War was ended: That he himself was resolv'd to be ever Faithful and Constant in his Love and Duty towards the Kings, and not in the least to adhere to Antigonus, who was aspiring to gain the Kingdom: And because Alexander's Son, by reason of the Tenderness of his Age, and the Covetousness of the Captains, stood in need of Help, he look'd upon it as his Duty to expose himself to the utmost Hazards for the Preservation of the Kings. Hereupon he forthwith commanded all his Soldiers to decamp, and so march'd out of Cappadocia, having with him about Five hundred Horse, and above Two Thousand Foot: For he had no Time to wait upon the slow March of them, who had promis'd to join with him; because a great Army of Antigonus (under the Command of Menander) was near at hand, and it was now no staying for him in Cappadocia, being a declar'd Enemy of Antigonus: But though this Army came three Days too late, (and so lost their Opportunity,) yet they resolv'd to pursue the Troops with Eumenes; but not being able to reach him, they return'd into Cappadocia. For Eumenes making long Marches, presently recover'd Mount Taurus, and so got into Cilicia: Here Antigenes and Tautamus, the Captains of the Argyraspides, with their Friends, (in Obedience to the Kings Letters,) met Eumenes, after a long and tedious March, and joyfully Congratulated him for his unexpected Deliverance out of his great Troubles, promising to be ready on all Occasions at his Command. There met him likewise about Three thousand Argyraspides out of Macedonia, with great Demonstrations of Love and Affection. This sudden and almost incredible Change was the Subject of every Body's Admiration; when they consider'd how the Kings and Macedonians (a little before) had condemn'd Eumenes and all his Fellows to Die, and now having forgot that Sentence denounc'd against him, not only pardon'd him, but promoted him to the highest Place of Command in the whole Kingdom. And it was not without just


Page 600

Cause, that they who consider'd the wonderful Changes that attended Eumenes should be taus affected: For who that does but observe the different Accidents in the course of Man's Life, would not be amaz'd at the various Turns and Changes of Fortune to and fro, first on one side, then on another? Or who, trusting in the present Supports of a prosperous Fortune, would upon that account be so far transported, as to forget the Infirmity of Human Nature? For every Man's Life (as dispes'd and order'd by the Providence of some one of the Gods) has been chequer'd (as it were) with the reciprocal Turns of Good and Evil in all Ages of the World. So that it is a Wonder, that not only what is strange and unaccountable, but that even every thing that falls out should be surprizing and unexpected. Therefore who can sufficiently value History? For by the variety and change of Affairs, (there represented,) a Check is given to the Pride of the Fortunate, and allays the Grief and Misery of the Unprosperous. Which Things Eumenes then wisely considering, and weighing beforehand the Instability of Fortune, he manag'd his Affairs with the more Caution and Prudence. For thinking with himself that he was but a Stranger, and had no Right to Kingly Power and Authority, and that the Macedonians (who were now under his Command) not long before judg'd him to Die; and that the Commanders and Captains were all inflam'd with the Heat of ambitious Designs, he conceiv'd that in a short time he should be despis'd and envy'd, and at length be brought into danger of his Life. For none are willing to submit to the Commands of those that they look upon to be their Inferiors, nor be Lorded over by them, who ought rather to be under the Commands of others themselves. Seriously therefore pondering these Things with himself, in the first place he refus'd to accept of his Five hundred Talents order'd him by the King's Letters for the Repair of his former Losses, and Refitting of himself with Necessaries: For he said, He needed not so large a Sum, seeing he pretended to no Principality there; and that which he now enjoy'd was not of his own Choice, but was forc'd by the Kings to undertake the present Service. To conclude, he said, That by reason of the continual Fatigues of War he was so worn out, that he was not able to endure those Hardships, and runnings from Place to Place, any longer, especially being that a Stranger had no Right to Command; and by Law was excluded from the Authority due to be executed by such as were of the same Nation with the Macedonians: For he said, There was represented to him a wonderful Apparition in his Dream, which he judg'd very necessary to discover to them all, for that it might (as he conceiv'd) conduce much to the promoting of Peace and Concord, and the Publick Good. He declar'd, That in his Sleep Alexander, the late King, seem'd to appear to him (as he was when living) adorn'd in his Royal Robes, and sitting on his Throne giving out Orders to his Captains, and (as in his Health) disposing and managing all the Affairs and Concerns of the Kingdom.
 
Therefore (says he) I am of Opinion, That a Throne of Gold should be made at the Charge of the King's Treasury, in which should be plac'd the Diadem, Scepter and Crown, and all the other Ensigns of Royalty; and that at spring of Day all his Captains should offer to him Sacrifices; and standing together near the Throne, should receive Commands in the King's Name, as if he were alive at the Helm of the Government.

 All were very well pleas'd with what he said; and thereupon every thing was presently prepared for the purpose, for the King's Treasury was very rich; and that stately Work was forthwith finish'd, and the Throne was set up; whereon were plac'd the Diadem, Scepter, and the Arms he us'd to wear. Then was plac'd an Altar with Fire upon it, upon which all the Captains one after another cast Frankincense, (taken out of a Golden Casket,) and other costly sweet Odours, and ador'd Alexander as a God. After this were order'd a great number of Seats, upon which the Captains and great Commanders sate together, and there consulted and debated all the weighty and important Affairs. Eumenes in the mean time carrying himself with an equal Respect and Deference in all publick Meetings towards all the Captains, and suppling them with fair and courteous Language, not only avoided the Strokes of Envy, but thereby gain'd all their Hearts. By the same Artifice (through the Prevalency of Superstition relating to the King) he so elevated the Hopes and Expectations of the whole Army, as if some God were to be their General. In like manner he behav'd himself towards the Argyraspides, and thereby so gain'd their Favour, that they counted him highly worthy to be the Protector of the Kings.

Then he pick'd out the fittest Persons from among his Friends, and furnish'd them with great Sums of Money, and employ'd them to hire Soldiers up and down upon large Pay. Whereupon some of them forthwith went into Pisidia and Lycia, and the bordering Countries, and diligently put in execution what they were commanded. Others went into Cilicia, and some into Coelo-Syria and Phoenicia, and others sail'd to the Cities in Cyprus. This Listing of Soldiers being nois'd abroad, and reported what large Pay was


Page 601

offer'd, many came flocking in from the Cities of Greece, and enroll'd their Names for this Service; so that in a short time they had rais'd above Ten thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse, besides the Argyraspides, and those who came along with him.

The Forces of Eumenes being thus on a sudden increas'd to an incredible Number, Ptolemy arriv'd with the Fleet at Zaphyrium in Cilicia, and sent away some Commanders to sollicit the Argyraspides not to side with Eumenes, whom all the Macedonians had condemn'd to die. He sent likewise to the Governors of the Garison in Quindi, desiring them not to help Eumenes with any Money, and he would bear them out: But no Man regarded what he said, because the Kings and their Protector Polysperchon, and Olympias the Mother of Alexander, had written to them to be obedient in all things to Eumenes as to the Commander in Chief, and General of the Kingdom.

But of all others, Antigonus was most displeas'd and uneasie at the Growth and Advancement of Eumenes; for he look'd upon him as the most powerful Enemy he had set up against him by Polysperchon, because he had deserted the Kings: Therefore he resolv'd by some Stratagem to cut him off; to which end he employ'd one of his Friends, Philotas, and deliver'd to him Letters to the Argyraspides, and the rest of the Macedonians, (that sided with Eumenes,) and sent along with him Thirty Macedonians (who were crafty and fair-spoken Men) with Orders to deal with Antigenes and Tautamus, the Captains of the Argyraspides, privately and apart by themselves, to destroy Eumenes, promising them great Rewards, and larger Provinces; and that they should likewise apply themselves to their Fellow-Citizens and Acquaintance amongst the Argyraspides, and by Bribes draw them to cut off Eumenes: But they were not able to prevail with any, except Tautamus, one of the Captains of the Argyraspides, who being corrupted by Bribes, promis'd not only for himself, but undertook to draw over his Collegue Antigenes to this foul Design: But Antigenes being a prudent and faithful Man, not only refus'd, but prevail'd with him that was before corrupted to alter his Purpose: For he told him, That it was more expedient that Eumenes should live than Antigonus; for he being already grown Great, when he became more Powerful would thrust them all out of their Governments, and give to them which of his Friends he pleas'd: But as for Eumenes, being but a Stranger, he durst not attempt to gain the Sovereign Authority, but would be content with his present Command, and to gain their Favour, would secure to them their Provinces, and perhaps add more to them. And in this manner were all the Projects against Eumenes frustrated and brought to nought. In the mean time Philotas delivering a Letter of Antigonus to the Commanders, writ to all the Captains and Soldiers in general; the Argyraspides and other Macedonians got together by themselves unknown to Eumenes, and commanded it to be read openly to them: In which were Accusations against Eumenes, and Advice to the Macedonians forthwith to seize upon him and put him to Death, and if they did not, that he would come presently and fall upon them with his whole Army, and do exemplary Justice on them for their Disobedience. Upon the hearing the Contents of these Letters, the Macedonians and their Captains were greatly terrify'd: For one of these two was unavoidable, either to fall under the revengeful Displeasure of Antigonus by adhering to the Kings, or to be punish'd by Polysperchon and the Kings for observing the Commands of Antigonus. While all the Soldiers were in these distracted Thoughts, Eumenes comes in amongst them, and hearing the Letters read, advis'd them to obey the Orders of the Kings, and not to give any regard to an open declar'd Rebel; and having spoken many things pertinent to the present Occasion, he not only avoided the present imminent Danger, but inclin'd all the Soldiers to him in a firmer Bond of Duty and Affection than ever they were before. And thus this Man, who was again on a sudden even involv'd in insuperable Dangers, yet was so wonderfully Fortunate, as thereby to strengthen himself the more. Ordering therefore his Army to march, he made for Phoenicia, and endeavour'd to get Shipping from all Sea-Towns along as he went, in order to make up a strong Navy, that by having a Fleet in Phoenicia, he might be Master of the Sea, and have what Forces he pleas'd, and be able to transport Polysperchon at any time with safety out of Macedonia into Asia against Antigonus. To this purpose there he continu'd in Phoenicia.

While these Things were acting, Nicanor (who held Munychia) hearing that Cassander had left Macedonia, and was gone to Antigonus, and that Polysperchon was suddenly expected with an Army in Attica, earnestly sollicited the Athenians to stand firm in their Affections to Cassander. But when none would consent to what was desir'd, but all were rather for the Garison to march away with all speed; at first he over-perswaded the People with fair Words to forbear a few days, and that he would afterwards do what should be most for the Good of the City. But after the Athenians had been quiet for some days,


Page 602

secretly in the Night he brought Soldiers by little and little into Munychia, so that now he had got in strength sufficient to defend the place, and to oppose those that design'd a Siege.

Hereupon the Athenians perceiving Nicanor meant nothing in what he did, for the advantage and safety of the City, they sent a Messenger to the King and Polysperchon, desiring their assistance according to the Purport of their Letters, whereby they restor'd the Grecians to their Liberties: Then they had frequent Assemblies and Consultations among themselves, how to manage the War against Nicanor: And while they were busying their Heads about these Affairs, he drew out many of his Mercenaries secretly in the Night, possess'd himself of the Walls of the Pireum, and the Mouth of the Harbour. The Athenians hereupon, were vex'd to the Heart, to see how they were gull'd and cheated as to Munychia, and had carelesly lost the Pireum. They sent therefore some of the greatest Persons of Quality, and such who were Nicanor's special Friends (that is to say) Phocion the Son of Phocus, Conon the Son of Timotheus, and Clearchus the Son of Nausicles, as Agents to Nicanor, to debate the late transactions they had with him, and requiring him to permit them to enjoy their Laws and Liberties, according to the late Edict in that behalf. To whom he answer'd, That they must go to Cassander, for he had his Commission to be Governor of the Garison from him, and had no power to treat of himself.

About this time came a Letter from Olympias to Nicanor, commanding him to deliver Munychia and the Pyreum to the Athenians: He understanding that the Kings and Polysperchon had recall'd Olympias into Macedonia, and committed the young Son of Alexander to her Care and Tuition; and had restor'd her to her former Royal State and Dignity, (the same that she enjoy'd when Alexander was living) meerly out of fear promis'd to re-deliver them, but always contriv'd some colourable excuse or another, and so protracted the Business. The Athenians in former times had ever a great esteem for Olympias, and now purposing (in the Reality of their Affections) to celebrate those publick Honours which were decreed to her, (and hoping that the Liberties of the City would be by her perfectly restor'd to them, and put out of the reach of all future danger) were very jocund and exceedingly pleas'd.

In the mean time the Promises of Nicanor not being perform'd, Alexander, the Son of Polysperchon, came with an Army into Attica: The Athenians indeed thought that he came to restore to them Munychia and the Pyreum; but the Event prov'd the contrary, for he seiz'd upon both for the Service of the War: For some who had been Antipater's Friends, (and among them Phocius) fearing some Punishment from the Laws, met Alexander, and advising him what to do, persuaded him to retain the Forts in his own Hands, and not restore them to the Athenians till the War was ended with Cassander: Hereupon, Alexander Encamp'd at the Pyreum, and would not permit the Athenians to treat with Nicanor; but by his separate Treatise with him, and secret and private Transactions of Affairs between them, he gave manifest Indications of the Injury design'd the Athenians. The People therefore met together in a Common Assembly, and Depos'd the present Magistrates; and set up such as most favour'd the Democracy, and condemn'd them that were of the Oligarchy; Some to Death, and others to Banishment and Confiscation of Goods: Amongst whom Phocton was one who had the Chief Command in the time of Antipater.

These being all forc'd out of the City, fled to Alexander the Son of Polysperchon, and endeavour'd to engage his help for their Preservation: Alexander kindly receiv'd them, and writ on their behalf to his Father, to protect Phocion and his Friends, as those that favour'd his Interest, and engag'd readily to afford their assistance in all his Concerns: The Athenians likewise sent an Embassy to Polysperchon to accuse Phocion, and to sollicite for the restitution of Munychia, and restoring them to their ancient Laws and Liberties. Polysperchon indeed had a very great desire to retain the Pircum, because that Port might be of weighty concern and importance in the carrying of the War, but was asham'd to act contrary to the Edict divulg'd by himself; and fearing lest the Grecians should desert him, if he dealt so basely with that City, which was the Metropolis, he chang'd his Mind: Having therefore heard the Ambassadors, he courteously dismist those from the Athenians with a Gracious Answer; but seiz'd upon Phocion and all his Followers, and sent them bound to Athens, granting Power to the People, either to Pardon them, or put them to death: Whereupon a General Assembly being call'd in Athens, Judgment of Death was resolv'd upon Phocion and the rest that were accus'd: This was carry'd on by those who had been banish'd under Antipater, and others that favour'd not that Government, both these strongly urg'd to have them put to death.


Page 603

The sum of the Accusation was this; That after the Lamian War they endeavour'd for the most part to Inslave their Country, and to abolish the Democracy, and the Ancient Laws: Time being allotted to the Accus'd to plead their Cause, Phocion began to speak for himself; but the People tumultuously cry'd out against all that he said, and rejected his Defence, so that the Accus'd knew not what Course to take: When the Tumult ceas'd, Phocion began again to speak, whereupon the whole Multitude set up a shout on purpose, that what he said should not be heard: For the Common People (being not long before excluded from having any share in the Administration of the Government, and now newly restor'd beyond all expectation to their Right) bore an inveterate Hatred against those who depriv'd the Citizens of their Laws and Liberties.

While Phocion was thus overborn, and even in a desperate Condition strugling to preserve his Life; those that were next to him, understood the Justice and Equity of his Cause; but those at a distance could hear nothing for the Noise and Clamour that was made by the tumultuous Rabble, but only discern'd the various trembling motions of his Body, through the inevitable danger that seem'd to threaten him. At length Phocion in despair of his own Life, cry'd out aloud, desiring them to condemn him to Die, but to spare the rest.

But the Common People being Fierce and Inexorable; some of Phocion's Friends stood up to make his Defence. Hereupon the People were quiet for a while, and heard what they said at first; but when they proceeded so far as to press Arguments for the clearing of his Innocency, they were cast out with tumultuous and contradicting Clamours: At length being all condemn'd by the unanimous Voice of the People: they were carry'd away to the Gaol there to be executed, and were follow'd by many Honest and Sober Men, who bewail'd their Condition, and the greatness of their Misery: For upon serious Consideration of the inconstancy of every Man's Fortune, it affrighted many to see that Magistrates and Persons of eminent Quality, and Men that had shew'd many acts of kindness in the course of their Lives, should neither have Liberty to plead for themselves, nor otherways enjoy the Benefit of Law. But many of the Rabble being incens'd against Phocion unmercifully, even rent his Heart in pieces with Scoffs and Scorns, and bitterly upbraided him with the Misery of his present Condition. For Hatred smother'd towards Men while in Prosperity, when it breaks forth with Anger against them in time of their Adversity, becomes altogether Savage and Implacable. Being therefore all put to Death (according to the Custom of the Country) by drinking a Potion of Hemlock, all their Bodies were cast forth unburied, out of the Bounds and Limits of Attica: And this was the end of Phocion, with others that suffer'd with him in the same Calamity.

After this, Cassander having got Five and thirty long Ships, and Four thousand Men, Sail'd into the Pireum, and being receiv'd by Nicanor, Governor of the Fort, possess'd himself of the Pireum and the Harbour: But Munychia Nicanor kept himself, with a Force sufficient to defend the Place. At this time Polysperchon and the Kings lay in Phocis; where being inform'd of Cassander's being landed at the Pireum, Polysperchon marched into Attica, and Encamp'd near the Pireum: He had with him Twenty thousand Macedonian Foot, and Four thousand Confederates, a Thousand Horse, and Sixty five Elephants; he resolv'd therefore to besiege Cassander: But because Provision was scant, and the Siege was likely to be long and tedious, he was forc'd to leave so many of the Soldiers in Attica as the Country was able to maintain, under the Command of Alexander, and he himself marched into Peloponnesus with the greater part of the Army, to reduce the Megalopolitans to the Obedience of the Kings; for they being for an Oligarchy sided with Cassander. While Polysperchon was busied in these Affairs, Cassander sail'd with his Fleet to the Aegeans, and brought them in to join with him; but the Salaminians (who were disaffected) he closely besieg'd, and being well furnish'd both with Men and Arms, he assaulted them several days together, and reduc'd them to very great Extremities: But when the City was near being taken by Storm, Polysperchon sent a considerable Force both by Sea and Land to attack the Besiegers; at whose approach Cassander being affrighted, he rais'd the Siege, and sail'd back to Pireum. Then Polysperchon pass'd over to Peloponnesus, to settle Matters there for the Service and Advantage of the Kings. Coming there he call'd a Senate, and spoke to them concerning their joining with him as Confederates in the War; he sent likewise Commissioners to the Cities, with Orders to put to Death them that were created Magistrates in the Oligarchy by Antipater, and to restore the People to their ancient Laws.

Many obey'd the Order, so that while Slaughters and Banishments fill'd the Cities, they that favour'd Antipater's Party were ruin'd and destroy'd; and the Democratital Governments being restor'd to their ancient Laws, all join'd with Polysperchon: The Megalopolitans


Page 604

only kept close to Cassander, therefore he determin'd to besiege their City. The Megalopolitans hearing what was design'd by Polysperchon, order'd by a publick Decree tobring in every thing into the Town that was in the Fields: Then taking an account of their strength they found that in ancient Citizens, Strangers and Servants, they were in number Fifteen thousand who were able to bear Arms; They forthwith therefore form'd some into Regiments; others they appointed to work in the Fortifications; and to some were allotted the care and charge of Guarding of the Walls; so that at one and the same time, some were employ'd in drawing a deep Trench round the City, some carrying Earth out of the Fields, and others repairing and making up the Breaches in the Walls, others hammering of Arms, and others were busy in making of Darts and Artillery: So that the Dangers which threatned, and the forwardness of the Inhabitants put the whole City in action: For the Greatness of the Kings Army, and the wonderful strength of the Elephants that attended them, was nois'd abroad in every place. And now all things were ready and prepar'd, when Polysperchon approach'd with his Army, and Encamp'd near the City, dividing his Forces into two Camps, one of Macedonians, and another of Confederates; and then brings to the Walls wooden Towers of that height as to overtop them; and upon the Towers Men placed with all sorts of Weapons, and with these he drave them off, who were placed upon the Rampiers. 

In the mean time, the Walls being Undermin'd, and the Props and Supporters set on fire, three of the largest Towers were overwhelm'd and tumbled down, with the ruin of the like number of Turrets plac'd between them. This great and sudden Destruction caus'd the Macedonians to set up a shout, and the strangeness of the thing amaz'd the Besieg'd: And now the Macedonians rush through the Breach into the City, and the Megalopolitans before in parties, now all together (having the advantage of the Difficulty of the Place occasion'd by the Rubbish) made up to one part, and bravely bore the Brunt of the Enemies attack, and beat them off: Then they cast up another Work of Earth to guard the Breach; and working Night and Day without any intermission, rais'd another Wall between them and the Enemy; which was presently compleated; for being they were furnish'd with every thing that was necessary, and had many Hands at work, the Megalopolitans quickly repair'd the damage sustain'd. As for those that assaulted them from their Wooden Towers, they ply'd them with their Engines of Artillery, and with Darts and Stones out of Bows and Slings, gall'd and wounded many of their Enemies. After many were kill'd and wounded on both sides, till Night approaching, Polysperchon sounded a Retreat, and drew off his Men into the Camp.

The next day he remov'd the Rubbish before the Breach, to make way and passage for the Elephants, for he thought by the strength of these Creatures to break through into the City: But the Megalopolitans by the help and conduct of Damides (who in the Wars under Alexander, experimentally knew the Nature and Use of the Elephants) altogether baffl'd the Enemy: For he making use of his own Reason and Industry against the Beasts Strength and Violence, made their strong Bodies Useless and Unserviceable; for in a great number of Planks he drave sharp Spikes, and then strew'd them here and there in deep Trenches cover'd with Earth, so as that the Points of the Spikes might not be seen, and thus over these he left the Passage into the City: But he suffer'd none of the Soldiers to stand in the Front, but plac'd a great number of Darters and Archers, and Engines of Artillery in the Flank.

Polysperchon therefore having clear'd the Place, and now approaching with the throng of his Elephants, an unexpected misfortune befell them: For none appearing in Front to oppose them, the Indians press'd them forward to make their way into the City, who by the great weight of their Bodies press'd down upon the Spikes, so that their Feet being wounded, and even pierc'd through, they were so founder'd, that they were neither able to go forward, or return back: And besides, showers of all sorts of Darts and Arrows being poured upon them from the Flankers, some of the Indians were kill'd, and others so wounded, that they were not able to do any further service.

In the mean time, the Elephants (through the multitude of Darts, and the strange and unusual Wounds by the Spikes) were so cruelly tormented, that they forc'd back through their own Men, and trode down many under foot: At length the strongest and most formidable amongst them fell down, others became altogether Unserviceable, and some kill'd many of their own Men.

Upon this Success the Megalopolitans were greatly encourag'd; but Polysperchon wish'd he had never undertaken the Siege; and because he could stay no longer there, he left part of the Army to carry it on, and betook himself to matters of more necessary consequence. Then he sent away Clitus the Admiral with the Fleet, Commanding him to


Page 605

lie upon the Coasts of the Hellespont, to stop the Passage of the Forces out of Asia into Europe, and to join with Arrhideus, who had fled to the City of the Ganians, being Enemy to Antigonus. After he had pass'd over the Hellespont, and taken in the Cities of the Propontis, he strengthen'd his Army with the Forces of Arrhideus. Nicanor the Governor of Munychia, on the other side, being sent away with the whole Fleet by Cassander, sail'd to those Parts where Clitus lay: He join'd likewise with the Navy of Antigonus, so that he had a Fleet of above a Hundred Sail.

Hereupon there was a Fight at Sea near Byzantium, wherein Clitus was Conqueror, and sunk Seventeen of the Enemy's Ships, and took no fewer than Forty, together with all their Men. The rest got into the Haven of Chalcedon. Clitus being thus successful, suppos'd the Enemy by reason of this great loss durst never engage more at Sea.

But Antigonus having intelligence of this Defeat of the Fleet, by his Industry and admirable Conduct, presently repair'd it: For having sent for several Transport Ships in the Night from the Byzantians, on these he put on board Darters, Slingers, and other light-arm'd Men, sufficient for the present design, and in the Night transported them to the other side; who before Day setting upon the Enemy at Land (who had left their Ships and were there Encamp'd) put Clitus and his Men into great Terror and Confusion; who in that sudden Fear and Amazement leap'd into their Vessels; so that through the cumber of their Luggage, and multitude of Prisoners, the Tumult and Disorder exceeded.

In the mean time, Antigonus had fitted out some Long Ships, and Mann'd them with many of his stoutest Foot Soldiers, and bid them boldly attack the Enemy, for they were sure to be Conquerors. Hereupon they came up with Nicanor in the Night, and about break of Day fell in suddenly upon the Enemy still in confusion, and presently upon the very first Charge put them to flight; some of the Enemy's Ships they broke in pieces with the Beaks of their own, and brush'd off the Oars of divers; some they gain'd without fighting; being deliver'd up by the Men themselves that were on board. At length all the rest (except the Admiral's Ship) fell into their Hands. Clitus forsook his Ship and got ashore, and design'd to have preserv'd himself by getting into Macedonia; but in his way falling amongst some of Lysimachus his Soldiers, he was slain.

Antigonus his Reputation for Skill and Prudence in the management of Martial Affairs, was much advanc'd by this remarkable Victory. Hereupon he was very earnest and intent to be Master at Sea, and (without the least doubt of the matter) to gain the Sovereignty of Asia. To this end he pick'd out of his whole Army, Twenty thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, that were the briskest and most active Men, and march'd towards Cilicia to break Eumenes before he grew too strong. But Eumenes understanding the hot Temper of Antigonus, march'd away into Phaenicia to regain it for the Kings, then unjustly detain'd from them by Ptolemy: But not having an opportunity to do what he design'd, he remov'd out of Phaenicia, and march'd with his Army through Caelo-Syria, to get into the higher Provinces. Afterwards he lost some of his Men at the River Tigris, by an attack upon him in the Night by some of the Inhabitants. In the like manner he was fallen upon in the Province of Babylon, by Seleucus, near the River Euphrates, and was in great danger to have lost all his Army; where by the Breach of a Dyke his whole Camp was very near being over-flow'd and drown'd. But setting his Wits at work he fled to a high Bank of Earth, and diverting the Water another way, preserv'd both himself and his Army.

And so beyond his expectation he escap'd Seleucus, and got into Persia with Fifteen thousand Foot, and Thirteen hundred Horse. Having refresh'd his Soldiers after all their Toils and Labours, he sent to the Governors and Captains of the higher Provinces to fur¦nish him with more Men and Money. And in this State were the Affairs of Asia this Year.

But as for Europe, after the Losses and Misfortunes of Polysperchon at Megalopolis, many of the Greek Cities revolted from the Kings to Cassander. And because the Athenians could not get rid of the Garison either by the help of Polysperchon or Olympias, one of the most eminent Citizens made bold to say in the publick Assembly, That it was for the Interest of the City to close with Cassander. At the first there was a great Hurly-burly, some being for and others against what was said: But the advantage being more calmly debated and consider'd, by common consent it was at length decreed, That Peace should be made with Cassander, upon such Conditions as could be obtain'd by their Ambassadors. In pursuance whereof, (after some Meetings) these were the Terms of Peace agreed upon, That the Athenians should quietly enjoy the City, the Territory and all the Profits, together with the Shipping and all other things, and should for the future be


Page 606

Friends, and Confederates with Cassander; but that Cassander should for the present hold Munichia till the War was ended with the Kings: And that the Common-wealth should pay a Tribute of Ten Minas; and that an Athenian should be constituted Protector and Guardian of the City, whom-ever Cassander pleas'd. Whereupon Demetrius the Phalerian was chosen; who being invested with the Office, kept the City in perfect Peace, and carry'd himself very obligingly towards all the Citizens.

After this Nicanor brought his Fleet into the Pireum, adorn'd with the Beaks of Ships gain'd in the late Victory: Upon the account of which success he was at the first highly honour'd by Cassander, but afterwards perceiving that he grew Proud and Haughty, and still detain'd the Fort of Munichia with his own Soldiers, he had a jealousie of him that he intended to revolt, and therefore laid a Trap for him and cut him off. Then he march'd into Macedonia, where many of the Inhabitants revolted to him; many likewise of the Greek Cities were inclin'd to join with Cassander. For Polysperchon seem'd to be slothful and careless in managing the Affairs both of the Kingdom and the Allies. Cassander on the other hand, behaved himself with great Candor towards all, and approv'd himself industrious in the Management of Publick Affairs, so that he gain'd many who countenanc'd him in his seeking to obtain the Supream Authority.

But now because Agathocles the Year next following became Tyrant of Syracuse, we shall, as we design'd at the beginning, put an end to this Book, and begin the next with Agathocles his advance to the Throne, and go on with the Affairs proper and pertinent to our History.


Page 607

BOOK XIX.

IT's an old Saying, (brought down to us by Tradition) That none overturn Democracies, but Men that overtop others in Power and Interest. For which reason some Cities are always jealous of such of their Fellow Citizens as grow Great and Powerful; and therefore do what they can to depress them. For when Men are in Power, the next Step is to domineer over their Country; and for those that (through the Greatness of their Interest above others) have Grounds to expect the Sovereign Authority, 'tis very difficult to be free from an Itch of Monarchy. For 'tis very natural for them that are ambitious, when they have much, to thirst after more, and never set Bounds to their insatiable Ambition.

The Athenians therefore, upon this very account, made a Law, which they call'd Ostracism, for the banishing such as grew Great amongst them; not so much to punish them for any Fault they had committed, but to prevent the Mischief and Prejudice to their Country, which by their Power and Interest they were in a Capacity to bring upon them: For they remembred (as it were an Oracle) what Solon had formerly said, who foretelling the Tyranny of Pisistratus, compos'd this Elegiack:

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

A City by Great Persons is o'erthrown;

And Fools beneath a Monarchy do groan.

Of all other Places, Sicily was most infected with this Itch of Monarchy, before the Romans reduc'd it into the Form of a Province. For the Cities, deceiv'd by the Flatteries of the Orators, advanc'd inconsiderable Men to that height, till they became absolute Lords over the deluded Multitude.

But the Advancement of Agathocles to be Prince of Syracuse, is above all othersthe most singular and remarkable: For he began at first in very mean and unlikely Circumstances; but at last he involv'd not only Syracuse, but all Sicily and Lybia it self in Blood and Slaughter. He was so mean and low in the World in his Original, that he follow'd the Trade of a Potter; from whence he rose to that height of Power and Cruelty, that he Lorded over the greatest and richest Island in the World; and for some time gain'd the greatest part of Africa, and some Parts of Italy, and fill'd the Cities of Sicily with Butcheries and Oppressions. None of the Tyrants that ever were before him committed the like Villany, or exercis'd such barbarous Cruelty upon their Subjects. For as for his own Kindred, he put them all to Death, Root and Branch; and so plagu'd the Cities, that he sometimes butcher'd all that were at Men and Women's estate; and would would cut the Throats of Multitudes of poor Innocents for the Faults of a few, without any difference or distinction; and then presently would murder whole Cities, Men, Women, and Children.

But because this Book, with others that follow, comprehend the Tyranny of Agathocles, omitting any further Preface relating thereunto, we shall now connex things coherent with those that were before related, first allotting to everything we treat of its due and proper time.

In the preceding Eighteen Books, we have endeavour'd to set forth whatever was done in the known Parts of the World, from the beginning of Time, to the Year next before theReign of Agathocles, to which time, from the Taking of Troy, are computed Eight hundred sixty six Years.

In this Book, beginning with the first of his Reign, we shall end with the Battelfought by Agathocles with the Carthaginians, containing an account of Affairs for the space of Seven Years.


Page 608

CHAP. I.

Agathocles his Parentage and Education: His Rise: His Stratagems: His bloody Massacre at Syracuse. He gains the Sovereign Power. The Affairs of Italy. Olympias returns into Macedonia by Polysperchon's means. The Armies revolt to her. Her Cruelties. She murders Euridice, and Arrideus her Husband. Affairs in Asia. Eumenes and Seleucus. Eumenes join'd by many of the Captains. The number of their Forces. He comes to Susa. Attalus and others imprison'd by Antigonus in a strong Castle, seeking to escape, are afterwards besieg'd, and taken.

IN the Rule of Demogenes Chief Magistrate of Athens, and when Lucius Plotius and Manius Fulvius were Roman Consuls, Agathocles became Tyrant of Syracuse. That things as they were severally done may be more clearly and distinctly understood, we shall premise a few things concerning the foremention'd Prince.

Carsinus of Rhegium being banish'd from his Country, dwelt at Thermis in Sicily, which City was then in the hands of the Carthaginians: This Man married a Woman of that Place, who when she was big with Child, us'd often to be troubled with strange Dreams. Being therefore much perpiex'd in his Mind concerning this Embrio, he intrusted this Affair with some devout Carthaginians, who were then going to Delphos, and desir'd them to enquire of the Oracle concerning this Child; who faithfully performing what they were enjoyn'd, the Oracle gave this Answer, That that Child would bring dreadful Calamities upon the Carthaginians and all Sicily. The Father being terrify'd with this Prediction, expos'd the Child in the open Fields, and left it with some to watch to observe its end. After several days it still continu'd alive, and the Guard upon it growing remiss and careless, the Mother in the mean time stole the Child away in the Night, but durst not bring it back to her own House for fear of her Husband; but intrusted it with her Brother Heraclides, and call'd it Agathocles, after the Name of her own Father.

Where being brought up, he grew very Beautiful, and of Strength of Body above what was usual at his Age. When he came to be seven years old, Carsinus was invited by Heraclides to Sacrifice, and there seeing Agathocles playing with other Children about the same Age, he greatly admir'd both his Strength and Beauty; and when his Wife told him, That the Child which he so expos'd, if he had been brought up, would have prov'd as Manly a Child as that he then saw; he answer'd, that he was sorry for what he had done, and then fell a weeping: Whereupon the Woman perceiving that what she had done would be very pleasing and agreeable to her Husband, she discover'd to him the Truth of the whole matter; whereat he was mightily pleas'd, and took away his Son; and out of fear of the Carthaginians, remov'd with all his Family to Syracuse: but being but a poor Man, he taught his Son, then a Child, the Potter's Trade; at which time Timaleon the Corinthian having routed the Carthaginians at the River Cremissus, made all free of the City that would come in to him, amongst whom Carsinus (with Agathocles) were inroll'd as Citizens; and Carsinus died a little time after.

The Mother of Agathocles had in a certain place set up her Son's Statue in Stone, upon which a Swarm of Bees fastned, and began to make their Wax-Combs upon the Hips of the Statue; which remarkable Passage being related to those who apply themselves to Studies of that kind, all unanimously agreed, That when he came to be a Man, he would be famous; which happen'd accordingly: For Demas, a Nobleman of Syracuse, falling in love with Agathocles, first supply'd him liberally with every thing he had occasion for; so that he began in some measure to taste of Plenty; afterwards being created General of the Agragentines, he advanc'd him to be a Colonel in the room of one that was then lately dead. He was indeed very remarkable and of great Esteem before he was an Officer, upon the account of the Strength of his Body; for in the time of Training and Military Exercise, he bore so great a weight of Armour, and carry'd such mighty Weapons, that no other Man was able to bear. But now since he was made a Military Tribune, his Fame spread abroad much more than it did before; for he was eager to fight, daring in Action, and bold, nay, impudent in his Harangues to the People. Demas afterwards fell sick, and died; and having left all his Estate to his Wife, Agathocles marry'd her, and so was esteem'd one of the richest of the Citizens.


Page 609

Afterwards the Crotonians being besieg'd by the Brutians, the Syracusians sent a great Army to their relief, under the Command of Antander, the Brother of Agathocles and others: But the Sovereign Command and chief Management of the Affair was committed to Heraclides and Sosistratus, Men that employ'd themselves all their Lives long in Assassinations, Murders, and all kinds of Wickedness and Debauchery. Which the Book next preceding this hath particularly set forth. With those in this Expedition (by a Decree of the People) was join'd Agathocles, who was then a Colonel; and though he had remarkably approv'd his Valour against the Barbarians, yet he was so envy'd by Sosistratus, that he altogether disregarded him, not allowing him the Honour due to his Deme rits: At which he was so exasperated, that he accus'd Sosistratus and his Followers to the People, as having designs to advance him to the Monarchy. But the Syracusians giving no regard to those Accusations, Sosistratus, after his return from Crotona, became Supream and Absolute Lord of his Country.

Agathocles being incens'd against him, first (with those that sided with him) remain'd in Italy, and endeavour'd to possess himself of Crotona, but failing in his design, with some few along with him, he escap'd to Tarentum; by whom he was entertain'd and taken into Pay; but committing many rash and inconsiderate Acts, he began to be suspected of some intended Innovation; and thereupon his Commission was taken from him; upon which he got together the Exiles of Italy, and reliev'd them of Rhegium, who were then besieg'd by Heraclides and Sosistratus. Afterwards, when the Monarchy was abrogated at Syracuse, and Sosistratus was expell'd out of the City, he return'd into his Country. And in regard at that time, many of the Nobility who were for an Oligarchy (to the number of Six hundred of the greatest Persons of Quality) were together with the Magistrates thrust out of the City, a War broke out between the Exiles, and those that were for a Democracy; and the Carthaginians sided with Sosistratus and his Exiles: Hereupon, there were daily Skirmishes and Drawing-up of Armies one against another; in which Agathocles acting sometimes as a Private Soldier, and at others as a Commander, gain'd the Reputation both of Valour and Policy; for always upon every opportunity, he invented some stratagem or other which prov'd advantageous to his Party; amongst which there was one thing especially to be remember'd.

The Syracusians had Encamp'd near to Gela, and at that time in the Night he broke into the City with a Thousand Men at Arms, who were presently met by Sosistratus, with a strong and well-order'd Party, who forc'd them that had entred, back, and kill'd Three hundred of them: The rest looking upon themselves all as lost, endeavour'd to get out at a Sally-port, and were beyond all Hope and Expectation, freed from their present imminent danger by Agathocles: For he fought with great Valour and Resolution at the Head of his Men, and receiv'd seven Wounds; and when he was even ready to faint (through loss of Blood) and the Enemy bearing down upon him, he commanded the Trumpeters to sound a Charge at both parts of the Walls; which being presently done, those who came to force out them that were entred, could not discern the truth of the thing, because of the Darkness of the Night, and therefore believing that another Party of the Syracusians had broken in at both Places, they made an Halt and pursu'd no further. And so being divided into two Parts, at the Sound of the Trumpets, they forthwith ran together to defend the Walls. In the mean time, Agathocles with his Soldiers, having thus made room for themselves, got safe to the Trenches; and thus having deluded the Enemy, he not only wonderfully preserv'd his own Men that first entred, but seven hundred more that came in to his assistance.

After this, Acestorides the Corinthian being created General at Syracuse; Agathocles was thought to aspire to the Monarchy for his good Service, but he avoided the Danger that hung over his Head upon that account: For Acestorides (not willing to cut him off for fear of a Tumult) commanded him to depart the City, and ordered some to kill him in the Night as he was making away. But Agathocles conceiving what the General was plotting against him, pick'd out one of the young Men that was very like himself, both in Stature and Feature; and delivered to him his Horse, Arms, and Garments, and by this means subtilly deceiv'd them who were sent out to be his Murderers; but he himself slink'd away in By-paths in a poor ragged Coat; and they by the Arms and other signs, conjecturing that the other was Agathocles, (the Darkness of the Night not permitting a perfect Discovery) perpetrated indeed the Murder, but miss'd the Person.

Afterwards the Syracusians having re-admitted the Exiles that were driven out of the City with Sosistratus, and having made Peace with the Carthaginians; Agathocles himself now an Exile, rais'd an Army of his own in the Heart of the Country; at which not only the Citizens but the Carthaginians were much affrighted; and therefore he was courted


Page 610

to return into his own Country; and when he came, being conducted into the Temple of Ceres by the Citizens, he there swore that he would do nothing to the Prejudice of the Democracy.

Putting on therefore a Cloak of Dissimulation, as if he would protect the Democracy, and having caught the People by divers Tricks and Devices, he was made General and Conservator of the Peace, till all Matters should be appeas'd amongst the Exiles that were return'd to the City. For every Company and Fraternity were divided into many Factions, and very great Heart-burnings there were between private and particular Persons: But the Senate of Six hundred that was appointed to govern the City after an Oligarchy, was most fierce against Agathocles's Party; for the Members of this Assembly were such as were the Richest and of the best Quality among the Syracusians.

However, Agathocles, who now affected the Sovereignity, gain'd many opportunities for the accomplishing of his Designs: For he had not only a Command of an Army as General, but News being brought that there was an Insurrection in the Bowels of the Country at Erbita, he gain'd a further opportunity to increase his Army, and raise what Men he pleased without suspicion. Under colour therefore of his Expedition to Erbita, he rais'd Men out of Morgantina and other Cities, in the Heart of the Country, together with those that had formerly serv'd him in the Wars against the Carthaginians; for all these had a great respect for Agathocles, upon the account of the many instances of his kindness towards them, throughout the whole War. On the other hand they hated the Six hundred who had been a part of the Oligarchy in Syracuse, and no less abhorr'd the People who forced them into Obedience. There were Three thousand of them that were thus very ready with Heart and Hand to overturn the Democracy: To these he join'd some of the Citizens, who by reason of their Poverty envy'd the Power and Pomp of the great Ones.

When every thing was ready, he order'd the Soldiers to meet him at spring of Day, in a Body at Timoleontium; and he himself in the mean time sent for Pisarchus and Decles, (who seem'd to be the most leading Men among the Six hundred) pretending to discourse with them concerning some Matters relating to the Publick Good: When they came to him, accompany'd with forty of their Friends, he pretended he was to be betray'd by them, and thereupon seiz'd them all, and accus'd them to the Soldiers, declaring, that for his love to the People, he was likely to be hurried away to destruction by the Six hundred, and sadly bewail'd his Miserable State and Condition; at which all the Soldiers were so enrag'd that they cry'd out, that Revenge should be presently taken without any further delay, upon the Authors of such Injustice: Upon which he commanded the Trumpets to sound a Charge, and order'd his Soldiers to kill those that were the Ring-leaders of the Mischief, and spoil and plunder the Six hundred, and all those that sided with them, of all their Goods and Estates. Hereupon all being now eagerly set upon Ravage and Spoil, the whole City was fill'd with Horror and Confusion; for the most Innocent of the Citizens not dreaming of any Massacre design'd against them, ran out of their Houses into the Streets, to see what the Ground was of the Uproar; whereupon, the Soldiers, partly through their Covetousness to enrich themselves, and partly through Madness and Rage, fell upon the Naked People that (through Ignorance) had no Arms to defend themselves, and put them all to the Sword. For the Soldiers having secur'd all the Narrow Lanes and Passes in the City, the Citizens were inhumanly Murder'd, some in their Houses. and others in the Streets, and many (altogether Innocent, not accus'd of the least Fault) were knock'd on the Head while they were asking the reason why they were to be kill'd. For the common Soldiers (having now all in their Hands) made no difference betwixt Friend and Foe; but he was sure to be reputed an Enemy where most was to be gotten by his Fall; so that then you might see the whole City fill'd with Violence, Murders, Slaughters, and all kinds of Wickedness: For some out of former grudges spar'd not to load those they before hated with all sorts of Disgrace, having now full sway to do whatever they pleas'd; others judging it an act of Prudence to enrich themselves by the Butcheries of them that were rich; spar'd no means, nor omitted any contrivance to destroy them. For some broke down the Gates of the Out-Courts, others by Ladders ascended the House Tops, and some fought with them that defended themselves from the Roofs of the Houses. Nay, there was no safety even to them who fled to the Temples under the shelter of the Gods; but Piety towards the Gods was crusht and born down by the Cruelty of Men: And these things Greeks against Greeks in their own Country, and Kindred against Kindred in a time of Peace, without any regard either to the Laws of Nature, or Leagues or Reverence to the Gods, dar'd thus audaciously to commit: Upon which account not only Friends, but even Enemies themselves, and every sober Man, could not but pity the miserable Condition of these distressed


Page 611

People. All the Gates were shut up, and above Four thousand were kill'd in one day, for no other fault but that they were in greater esteem than others: Of those that endeavour'd to fly, some in running to get out of the Gates were laid hold on, others who cast themselves over the Walls escap'd to the next Towns. Some through Fear and Inconsiderateness leap'd off the Walls and broke their Necks. After all, there were thrust out of the City as Exiles, above Six thousand, of whom the greatest part fled to Agrigentum, where they were receiv'd and entertain'd with that Humanity as was agreeable to their present Condition. But those of Agathocles his Faction, (who spent the whole day in Butchering of the Citizens) were not sparing in committing their Rage and Villanies upon the Women, but thought they should be reveng'd upon them that escap'd Death, if they could but abuse their Kindred and Relations, in the most Vile and Beastly manner imaginable: For that it was very reasonable to think, that it would be more bitter than Death it self to Husbands and Parents to think of the Abuses of their Wives, and the Ravishings of their Daughters: But from hence we must forbear composing a Tragedy as is very usual with other Writers, especially to stir up compassion towards them that are involv'd in such horrible Sufferings; because none will expect an express account of every Particular, when the whole is so ready and clear to be understood. For they that durst impudently at Mid-day murder Innocents in the open Streets and Market place, have no need of a Writer to set forth what they did in the Houses in the Night, and how they behav'd themselves towards Wives and young Maids then in the power of their Enemies, without any guard or defence to protect them.

But Agathocles, after he had glutted himself with the slaughter of the Citizens two whole Days, brought together all the Prisoners, and releas'd Dimocrates, upon the account of an old Friendship between them: But as to the rest, such as were his greatest Enemies, he put to Death, and banish'd the other. Then calling a common Assembly, he accus'd the Six hundred, and those who had favour'd the Oligarchy, declaring that he would purge the City of all those that affected a Monarchy; and restore the People to perfect Liberty, and that he would henceforth stand upon equal ground with them all, and live a private Life, free from further Cares and Toils. Upon saying of which he threw away his Generals Coat, and put on a Jacket, and so went his way, making a shew of himself as but one of the Common People. He did this dissemblingly to act the Part of a Commoner; being in the mean time very well assur'd, that there were many in the Assembly that were Brethren in Iniquity with himself, who would never suffer the Generalship to be devolv'd upon any other.

Hereupon, those that had robb'd the oppress'd People of their Goods, immediately cry'd out, and with a loud Voice wish'd him not to desert them, but to take upon him the intire and absolute Management of all Affairs. At first he seem'd to be very shy; but being afterwards more earnestly prest by the Multitude, he told them he was willing to accept of the chief Command as General, provided he should not be join'd with any other Collegue, for he should never be content to be accountable (as the Law then was) for the Miscarriages and Irregularities of those that should be join'd with him in Commission. Hereupon, the People having agreed, that the whole Power should be in him alone, they voted him General, with full and absolute Authority; so that for the future he plainly acted the Part of a Monarch, and manag'd the Affairs of the whole City.

The Syracusians as yet Tame and Quiet, some curb'd by Fear, and others kept down by Force, durst not discover (as a thing vain and to no purpose) the Heart-burnings that were among them.

But many of the Poorer sort, and those that were in Debt, were much pleas'd with this Revolution: For Agathocles had promis'd in the Senate, that all former Debts should be remitted and made Void, and that Lands should be allotted and shar'd out to the Poor.

After he had finish'd these things, he order'd that none for the future should be kill'd or otherwise abus'd. But on the contrary, changing his former course, he carry'd himself with a great deal of mildness towards the People, encouraging many with Rewards, and not a few with large Promises, and courting all with smooth words, he no little winded himself into the favour and good Opinion of the People: And though he was advanc'd to so high a pitch of Honour, yet he put not on a Diadem, nor suffer'd the Attendance of a Life-Guard, nor admitted any difficulty of access to his Person, which is the common practice almost of all Tyrants: But he made it his business chiefly to look after the Publick Revenue, and the making and providing all sorts of Weapons and Arms: He built likewise other long Ships to encrease and strengthen his Fleet: And lastly, brought many of the Cities and Towns in the Heart of the Country to stoop to his Authority. And thus then stood the Affairs of Sicily.


Page 612

In Italy this was the Ninth year of the War of the Romans with the Samnites; before which time there had been very sharp Battels and Engagements between them; but then (except some Incursions into the Enemies Country) there was little or nothing done worth taking notice of; only some Forts were taken, and the Country harrass'd. But in Apulia they wasted and spoil'd all Daunia, and having conquer'd the Canutii, receiv'd of them Hostages. There were added likewise two other Tribes to the former, the one of Falernia, and the other of Ufentina.

While these things were acting, the Crotonians made Peace with the Brutians; but the War being continu

•

d another year with the Exiles, (who were expell'd by the People for their conspiring with Heraclides and Sosistratus, of which we have given a particular Account in the former Book) they created Parones and Menedemus their Generals. In the mean time the Exiles went to Thurium, and there listed Three hundred Mercenaries, and endeavour'd in the Night to have broke into the City: But being repuls'd by the Crotonians, they Encamp'd in the Confines of the Brutians; but within a short time after they were every Man cut off by a much stronger Party, who sallied out of the City against them.

And now having given an account how things went in Sicily and Italy, we shall pass to the things done in other Parts of Europe.

Eurydice being Queen-Regent in Macedonia, as soon as she heard that Olympias was preparing for her return, sent an Express to Cassander, then in Peloponnesus, wishing him to hasten to her Aid and Assistance; and in the mean time, by her Bribes and Promises, she brought over the most active and stirring Men among the Macedonians, to favour her in her designs.

But Polysperchon got an Army together, and being join'd with Aeacides of Epirus, he brought back Olympias, with Alexander's Son into the Kingdom. And hearing that Eurydice was at Evia in Macedonia with an Army, aiming to make an end of all by one Battel, he makes swiftly after; and presently as soon as the Armies Encamp'd one over against the other, on a sudden the Macedonians (in reverence to Olympias, and calling to mind the many Advantages and Kindnesses they had receiv'd at the hands of Alexander) turn'd about; whereupon, King Philip with all his Servants were presently taken. Eurydice likewise, together with Polycles (one of her Counsellors) were afterwards taken; being before return'd to Amphipolis.

Olympias having thus gain'd the custody of both the Kings, and likewise the Kingdom, without Blood; us'd not her good Fortune with that Humanity as she ought to have done: But at the very first imprisoning both Eurydice and Philip her Husband, she us'd them very cruelly: For she coop'd them both up in a very straight and narrow Place, where through a little narrow Hole every thing for their necessary use was deliver'd in to them. And for many days together, she thus (against all Law and Conscience) exercis'd her Rage and Revenge upon these miserable Princes.

But when she perceiv'd that the Macedonians spoke ill of her, out of Pity and Commiseration towards those that were thus miserably dealt with, she deliver'd Philip to certain Thracians, (after he had reign'd Six Years and Four Months) to be stabb'd with Ponyards. But Eurydice she order'd to be more severely dealt with; because she was to free of her Tongue, that she was still blabbing it out, that she was fitter to rule the Kingdom than Olympias: And therefore she sent to her a Sword, a Rope, and a Cup of Poison, bidding her chuse which she would to dispatch her self with, neither valuing the former State and Dignity of the Injur'd Lady, nor commiserating the common lot of Mankind: And therefore she came at length to experience the same turns of Fortune her self, and came to an end, every way worthy her Cruelty. For Eurydice in the presence of the Person that brought her the Instruments of her Death, pray'd the Gods that she might have the like Present sent to her; and then having bound up the Wounds of her Husband, as well as the shortness of time would permit, she wrapp'd him up, and so without any Womanish Complaints, or any base dejection of Spirit, through the greatness of her Misery, she strangled her self in her own Garter.

Having made an end of these two, she kill'd Nicanor, the Brother of Cassander: Then she pick'd out a Hundred Macedonians of Cassander's Friends, and put them all to Death. Having gratify'd her Revenge by these Cruel Acts, many of the Macedonians were incited to hate her mortally for her Cruelty: For they all remember'd the Words of Antipater, who, like an Oracle, a little before his Death, had given strict charge not to admit this Woman to govern the Kingdom. Olympias therefore managing things after this rate in Macedonia, it clearly pointed out a Revolution in the State.


Page 613

In Asia, Eumenes having with him the Argyraspides under their Captain Antigenes, winter'd in the Province of Babylon, in the Towns call'd Carrhe; thence he sent Ambassadors to Seleucus and Pitho, requiring them to assist the Kings, and that they would join with him in the War against Antigonus. Pitho was appointed Lord-Lieutenant of Media, and the other of the Province of Babylon, when the second Division of the Provinces was made in Triparadisus. Seleucus answer'd, That he, and those with him, would supply the Kings with what ever they wanted, but that he would never observe any of the Commands of Eumenes, who was adjudg'd to die by the common Suffrage of the Macedonians. After many Disputes relating to this Resolution, they sollicited Antigenes and the Argyraspides by their Agent to cast off Eumenes.

But the Macedonians rejecting what they requir'd, Eumenes commended them for their Fidelity and march'd away, and came to the River Tigris, and there encamp'd Three hundred Furlongs from Babylon: For he design'd to march to Susa, because he intended to raise Forces out of the higher Provinces, and to make use of the King's Treasures as there should be occasion. But he was forc'd to pass the River, because that part on this side was eaten up by Forraging and Depredations, and the Country on the other side was yet untouch'd, and afforded plenty of Forrage and other Provision for his Army. While he was getting Vessels together, in order to his passing over the River, Seleucus and Pitho sail'd up the River with two Galleys of three Tire of Oars, and many other little Vessels, being part of those that Alexander built at Babylon.

As soon as they arriv'd at the place where the Passage was intended, they renew'd their Sollicitation to the Macedonians to perswade them to cast off Eumenes, and not to abet and encourage a Fellow against them who was but a Stranger, and had destroy'd Multitudes of the Macedonians. But when Antigenes could not be prevail'd with upon any Terms whatsoever, the Seleucians sail'd to an old Sluce, and broke down the Head of it, where it was grown up through length of Time: Upon which the Macedonian Camp was surrounded with Water, and all the Tract of Ground overflow'd, so that the whole Army was in great danger to be utterly lost. All that day therefore they rested, considering and advising what was best to be done in such an Exigent. The next day, without any Disturbance from the Enemy, they transported the greatest part of the Army in Flatbottom'd Boats, to the number of Thirty, forc'd forward with long Poles: For Seleucus had only Horse with him, and those far inferiour in Number to the Enemy. And now Night approach'd, when Eumenes (in great Pain for his Carriages left behind) caus'd all the Macedonians to repass the River; and then, by Direction of one of the Natural Inhabitants, he set upon cleansing another such-like place, by which the Water might be easily diverted, and the Ground all round about drain'd dry. Which when Seleucus perceiv'd, (minding to be rid of them out of his Province with what speed he could) he sent Ambassadors to them to make a Truce, and so permitted them to pass over the River: But forthwith sent Expresses to Antigonus in Mesopotamia, to desire him with all speed to come down with his Army, before the Governors of the Provinces came in with their Forces.

Eumenes having now passed the River Tigris, as soon as he came into Susiana, he divided his Army into three Bodies, by reason of the Scarcity of Provision; and thus marching through the Country three several Ways, he was in great want of Bread Corn, therefore distributed Rice, Millet and Dates (with which that Country abounded) amongst the Soldiers.

Although he had before taken care to send away the Kings Letters to the Lords Lieutenants of the Upper Provinces, yet he then again sent Expresses, to desire them all to meet him with their Forces in Susiana. At which time it so happen'd, that they had their Forces then in the Field, and were got together for some other Reasons. Of which, it's necessary here to say something before we proceed further.

Pitho was Lord Lieutenant of Media, and General of all the higher Satrapies, by Nation a Parthian, who had kill'd Philotas the former General, and had plac'd Eudamus his own Brother in his Room. Upon which, all the other Provinces join'd together, lest they should be serv'd the same Sawce, because Pitho was of a restless Spirit, and had engag'd himself in Matters of high Importance. Having therefore overcome him in Battel, and cut off most of his Army, they drove the Man himself out of Parthia; who first sought for shelter in Media, and in a short time after he went to Babylon, and prayed Assistance from Seleucus, and that they might join together in one common Interest. The Governours therefore for these Causes having drawn their Forces together, Eumenes his Messengers came to the Armies when they were ready, and prepar'd in the Field. Peucestes was the most Renown'd Captain of them all, and was made General by an


Page 614

unanimous Assent. He was formerly Squire of the Body to Alexander, and advanc'd by the King for his Valour. He was Lord Lieutenant of the greatest part of Persia, and in great Esteem among the Natives. And for this Reason, he of all the Macedonians was allow'd by Alexander to wear a Persian Gown, because he thought thereby to ingratiate himself with the Persians, and engage them to be more observant to all his Commands. He then had with him Ten thousand Persian Archers and Slingers, and of other Nations (taken into the Rank of Macedonians) Three thousand, with Six hundred Horse of Greeks and Thracians, and of Persian Horse Four hundred. Polemon a Macedonian, Governor of Carmania, had Fifteen hundred Foot, and Seven hundred Horse. Sibyrtius, Governor of Arachosia, had a Thousand Foot, and Six hundred and ten Horse. Androbazus likewise was sent from Parapamysus (of which Province Oxyartes was Governor) with Twelve hundred Foot, and Four hundred Horse. Stasander, Governor of Aria and Dranginas, being join'd with the Bactrians, had with him Fifteen hundred Foot, and a Thousand Horse. Out of India came Eudamus with Five hundred Horse, and Three thousand Foot, and a Hundred and twenty Elephants, which he got after Alexander's Death, when he treacherously slew Porus. There were in the whole, with the Governors of the Provinces, above Eighteen thousand and Seven hundred Foot, and Four thousand and Six hundred Horse.

When all these came into the Province of Susiana, and join'd with Eumenes, a publick Assembly was call'd, where was a hot Dispute concerning the Choice of a General. Peucestes, upon the account of his bringing in most Men into the Field, and his eminent Post under Alexander, conceiv'd he had most Right to challenge the chief Command. Antigenes, Captain of the Silver Targateers, insisted upon it, That the whole Power of Election ought to be committed to his Macedonians, who under Alexander had conquer'd Asia, and by their Valour had so signaliz'd themselves, as to gain the Reputation of being Unconquerable. But Eumenes fearing lest by their Divisions they should become an easy Prey to Antigonus, advis'd that they should not make only one General; but that all who were before chosen Captains, and Commanders, should meet every day in the King's Pavilion, and there consult of all the publick Affairs. For a Tent had been before erected to Alexander, and his Throne plac'd therein, to which they us'd to resort, (offering Incense as to a God) and there debate all Matters of Weight, and special Concern. This Advice being Approv'd and Applauded by all, they met there every day, as in a City govern'd by a Democracy. Afterwards being come to Susa, there Eumenes was supply'd with what Monies he had occasion for out of the King's Exchequer. For the Kings by their Letters had order'd the Treasures, that they should issue to Eumenes alone so much Money as he at any time requir'd. Hereupon he gave the Macedonians Six Months Pay before-hand, and to Eudamus (who brought the Elephants out of India) he paid Two hundred Talents, under colour to defray the Charge and Expence of the Elephants, but in truth the more to engage him to his Interest. For if Contests should arise, that Party would have the greatest Advantage with whom he sided, by reason of the Terror occasion'd by the use of these Beasts. The rest of the Governors, every one maintain'd their own Soldiers they brought with them. This done, Eumenes continu'd for some time in Susa, and there refresh'd his Army.

In the mean time Antigonus, who Winter'd in Mesopotamia, resolv'd forthwith to set upon Eumenes before he grew too strong: But when he heard, that the Provincial Governors with their Forces, together with the Macedonians, were join'd with him, he let his Soldiers rest, and made it his Business to raise more. For he saw that he had need of a great Army, and reason to make more than ordinary Preparations for the War.

In the midst of these Preparations, Attalus, Polemo, Docimus, Antipater, and Philotas, who before were Commanders in Alcetas his Army, and were taken Prisoners, and now kept close Prisoners in an extraordinary strong Castle, hearing of Antigonus his intended Expedition into the higher Provinces, (conceiving now they had gain'd a fair opportunity,) hir'd some of their Keepers to suffer them to escape. Having therefore gotten Arms, about Midnight they set upon the Guard: They themselves were but Eight in Number, (surrounded with Four hundred Men,) yet Valiant and Expert Soldiers through their Experience in the War with Alexander. Xenopithes, the Governor of the Castle, they threw off from the Walls headlong down a steep Rock, a Furlong high; and as to the rest, some they kill'd upon the place, and others they hurl'd down, and then set the Houses on fire. Hereupon they took into the Castle Five hundred Men that were without expecting the Issue: It was indeed very well stor'd with Provision, and all other Things necessary: But they consulted together, whether it was better to stay there, and trust to the Strength of the Place, waiting for Relief from Eumenes, or to get away,


Page 615

and wander about in the Country, making use of a Change and Turn of Fortune when it might happen. Much Canvassing and Disputing there was on both sides: Docimus was for leaving the Place; but Attalus declar'd, he was not able to endure Labour, by reason of the Hardship of his late Imprisonment.

Whilst they were thus at Difference amongst themselves, above Five hundred Foot and Four hundred Horse were drawn out of the Neighbouring Garisons, and got together in a Body, besides Three thousand of the natural Inhabitants and upwards gather'd from all Parts of the Country; these created one from among themselves to be their General, and laid close Siege to the Castle.

Being therefore thus unexpectedly again coop'd up, Docimus acquainted with a Passage under-ground, where no Guard was set, by a private Messenger kept Correspondence with Stratonice the Wife of Antigonus, who was not far distant from the Place: And afterwards he, with one other in his Company, through this Pass slipt out to her; but, contrary to her Promise, he was seiz'd and secur'd. And he that came out with him; undertook to conduct the Enemy into the Castle, and accordingly brought in a great Number, and with them gain'd one of the highest Rocks within the Fort.

And although Attalus, and all those with him, were far inferiour in Number, yet they defended the Place couragiously, fighting valiantly every day, till at length they fell into the Enemies hands after a Siege of Sixteen Months.

CHAP. II.

Antigonus marches after Eumenes to Tigris. Eumenes cuts off many of his Men at Pasitigris. Antigonus goes into Media. Eumenes comes to Persepolis. The Description of Persia. Peucestes his great Feast. Eumenes his Policy. His Tale of the Lion. A Battel in Pareteceni, between Antigonus and Eumenes. Antigonus returns into Media. The Story of Ceteus his two Wives striving which should be burnt. Eumenes marches to Galiene; Cassander to Macedonia. Olympias goes to Pydna; is there besieg'd. The Epirots forsake their King, and join with Cassander. Antigonus designs to surprize Eumenes, who stops his March by a Stratagem. The last Battel between them in Gabiene. Eumenes basely deliver'd up. Antigonus returns to Media. The dreadful Earthquakes in the Country of Rhages.

AFterwards Democlides was chief Governor at Athens, and Caius, Junius and QuiniusEmilius were Consuls at Rome. At that time was celebrated the Hundred and sixteenth Olympiad, at which time Deinomenes the Laconian gain'd the Victory. About this time Antigonus march'd out of Mesopotamia and came to Babylon, and made a League with Seleucus and Pitho, and having strengthen'd himself with Forces receiv'd from them, made a Bridge of Boats over the River Tigris, and pass'd over his Army, and hasted away with a swift March after the Enemy. Of which, Eumenes having Intelligence, he sent to Xenophilus, Governor of the Citadel at Susa, not to give any Money to Antigonus, nor by any means to come out to Parly with him.

He himself march'd with the Army to Tigris, a day's Journey distant from Susa, where he came into the Country of the Uxians, a free People. The River is in some Places three, and in others four Furlongs broad. The depth in the middle of the Channel was equal with the height of the Elephants. It runs in a Current from the Mountains Seven hundred Furlongs, and empties it self into the Red Sea. There are many Sea Fish and Whales in this River, which appear chiefly at the Rising of the Dog-Star.

The Eumeneans had the River before them for a Defence, and mann'd the Bank all along from the Head of the River to the Sea, with Forts every where built upon the Bank, and there waited for the Enemies approach. But because those Forts requir'd a great number of Men to keep them, in regard they stretch'd out a great length, Eumenes and Antigenes sollicited Peucestes to send for Ten thousand Archers more out of Persia; who at first refus'd, complaining how he was deny'd to be General of the Army. But afterwards upon mature Deliberation with himself he comply'd, concluding that if Antigonus prevail'd, he should lose both his Province, and be in danger of losing his Life


Page 616

besides; careful therefore to preserve his own Interest, and hoping thereby with more ease to gain the chief Command by having more Men than any of the rest, he brought Ten thousand Archers more into the Camp according to their Desire. 

And though some of the Persians were distant one from another Thirty days March, yet they had plac'd their Guards with that Art and Exactness, that they all heard the Word of Command in one and the same day; the Reason of which is worthy Remark

: For Persia is full of long and narrow Valleys, and has many high Watch-Towers, upon which were plac'd some of the Inhabitants that were Men of loud and strong Voices: When the Voice was heard by those in the next Division, they imparted it in the same manner to the other, and they again to the rest, one after another till what was Commanded came at length to the end of the Province.

While Eumenes and Peucestes were busy about these Affairs, Antigonus came with his Army to the King's Palace in Susa, and made Seleucus Lord-Lieutenant of the Province, and leaving with him a sufficient Army, order'd him to besiege the Cittadel, Xenophilus the Treasurer refusing to obey his Commands; but he himself march'd away with his Army against the Enemy, through a hot scalding Country, very dangerous for Foreign Armies to pass. Therefore they were forc'd to march in the night, and encamp near the River before Sun-rising: However he could not secure himself from all the Inconveniencies and Mischiefs of that Country: For though he did all that was possible for him to do, yet through the excessive Heat of the Season, (being about the rising of the Dog-Star,) he lost a great Multitude of his Men. Coming at length to the River Coprates, he prepar'd what was necessary for the passing over of his Men. This River issues from a Mountainous Country, and runs into Tigris, and is Four Acres broad, and was Fourscore Furlongs distant from Eumenes his Camp. The Stream is so rapid and swift, that there's no passing over without Boats, or a Bridge. Having therefore got together a few Flat bottom'd Boats, in them he put over some of his Foot, ordering them to draw a Trench and cast up Works to defend it, and there to attend the coming over of the rest.

Eumenes having Intelligence by his Scouts of the Enemies Designs, pass'd over the Bridge of Tigris with Four thousand Foot and Thirteen hundred Horse, and found above Three thousand Foot and Three hundred Horse of Antigonus his Army got over ; and no less than Six thousand who were forraging up and down the Country: These he suddenly set upon and routed them, and presently put the rest to flight. As for the Macedonians (who stood their Ground) being overpower'd with Number, he forc'd them all to the River, where running headlong into their Boats, and overcharging them, they sunk down: Upon which many of them endeavouring to swim, some few of them escap'd, but the rest were all drown'd. Others that could not swim, (judging it more advisable to fall into the Enemies hand, than certainly to lose their Lives in the River,) were taken Prisoners, to the number of Four thousand. Antigonus, for want of Boats, was not able to help them, though he saw such Multitudes perish. Conceiving therefore that it was impossible to pass the River, he march'd back to the City Badaca, seated upon the River Ulaie. By reason of the vehement Heat, this March was very sweltering and troublesome, and many of the Army were tir'd out, so that they were Heartless, and even at their Wits end: But when he came to the City before-mention'd, staying there some days, he refresh'd his Army. Thence he judg'd it advisable to march to Ecbatane in Media, and making that the Seat of War, to take in all the higher Provinces.

There were two Ways that led to Media, and both were difficult; that over the Mountains was pleasant, and the High-way; but scorching hot, and very long, almost Forty Days Journey. That through the Country of the Cosseans was strait, narrow, and steep, leading through the Enemies Borders, and barren and scant of Provision, but a short Cut, and more cool; yet it was not easie for an Army to march this way, unless Agreement were made with the Barbarians, who inhabit the Mountains.

 They have been a Free People time out of Mind, and inhabit in Caves, and feed upon Acorns and Mushrooms, and the salted Flesh of wild Beasts. But he look'd upon it as a dishonourable thing for him who commanded so great an Army, to court these Barbarous People with smooth Words, or gain them by rich Gifts. He pick'd out therefore the choicest of his Targateers, and divided the Archers and Slingers, and such like light-arm'd Men into two Bodies, and deliver'd them to Nearchus, with command to go before him, and first secure the Streights, and difficult Passes. These being posted all along in the Way, he himself led the Phalanx, and Pitho commanded the Rear.


Page 617

They that were sent with Nearchus, had endeavour'd to possess themselves of a few Watch Towers; but being hindred and prevented of many, and the most Necessary and Commodious Places, they lost many of their Soldiers, and being set upon on every side by the Barbarians, they had much ado to make their way through them. And as for those that follow'd Antigonus, (having enter'd the Streights) they fell into dangers that were inextricable: For the Natives being well acquainted with the Places, and having before possess'd themselves of the Steep and Craggy Rocks, cast down massy Stones upon the Soldiers Heads as they passed by; and besides making use of showers of Arrows, they so gall'd them, that they were neither able (through the inconveniency of the Place) to annoy their Enemies, nor avoid their shot: And in regard the Passage was very craggy and difficult, the Elephants, Horses, and heavy arm'd Men, were involv'd both in Toils and Hazards at one and the same time, and in no capacity to help themselves.

Antigonus being brought into these streights; now repented that he did not follow the Counsel of Pitho, who had advis'd him to have bought his Passage by Money. But after the loss of many of his Men, and the rest still in imminent hazard, after nine Days troublesome march, he came at length to the Inhabited Parts of Media.

One Mischief on the Neck of another thus falling upon the Army, the intolerable Distresses they were brought unto, stirr'd up the Soldiers to cry out against Antigonus, insomuch as they gave him very harsh and bitter Words.

For in Forty Days time, they had three several times been miserably slaughter'd; but by fair Words, and plentiful Provision of all things necessary, he at length quieted them. Then he commanded Pitho to go over all Media, to get together Horsemen and Horses and Carriages, which he easily perform'd, the Country abounding with Horses and Cattle. For Pitho return'd, bringing along with him Two thousand Horsemen and a Thousand Horses, ready furnish'd, and so many loads of Munition as that the whole Army might be compleatly arm'd, together with Five hundred Talents out of the King's Treasury.

Antigonus form'd the Horse into Regiments, and distributed the Horses among those that had lost their own, and gave the Draught-Beasts freely among those that wanted them, whereby he regain'd the former Love of the Soldiers.

In the mean time, the Governors of the Provinces, and Captains of the Forces with Eumenes, when they heard that the Enemy was in Media, were in various Opinions what to resolve upon: For Eumenes, Antigenes, and the rest who came up from the Sea-Coasts, were for returning thither again. But those who came from the higher Provinces (upon the account of their Friends and Relations that were left at home) were for defending those Parts. The Contest waxing hot, Eumenes considering that one part of the Army (which was now divided into two) was not strong enough to cope with the Enemy, comply'd with the Governors of the Upper Provinces. Decamping therefore from Pasitigris, he mov'd towards Persia, and came to the Regal Seat of the Kingdom, Persepolis, at the end of Four and twenty days march.

The Country in the first Entrance into it, and as far as the Ladders (as they are call'd) is Flat and Low, exceeding Hot, and barren of Provision; but the rest is higher, of a wholesome Air, and very Fruitful: Wherein are many shady Valleys, variety of Pleasant Gardens, natural Walks bounded on either side with all sorts of Trees, and water'd with refreshing Springs. So that those that pass this Way, many times stop here and solace themselves in these pleasant Places with great delight.

Here the Inhabitants brought in to Peucestes abundance of all kinds of Prey and Booty, which he largely distributed among the Soldiers, to gain their Favour and Good will. In this Tract inhabit the most Warlike of the Persians, being all Archers and Slingers, and is far more populous than any of the other Provinces.

When they came to Persepolis, the King's Palace, Peucestes the Governor, and General of the Province, order'd a magnificent Sacrifice to the Gods, and to Alexander and Philip, and to that end sending almost over all Persia for Beasts to be sacrific'd, and abundance of all other Provisions, necessary for a Festival and publick Solemnity, he Feasted the whole Army.

In this Festival the Guests were placed in four Rounds, including one within another, the greatest surrounding all the rest, which was ten furlongs in Compass, and was fill'd with Mercenaries and Confederates.

The second Round was eight Furlongs, in which were plac'd the Macedonian Silver Targateers, and the rest of Alexander's Fellow-Soldiers. The other Circle was of four Furlongs, and fill'd with inferior Officers, special Friends, Commanders, and Horse-men.


Page 618

That in the midst of all was two Furlongs, wherein the Generals, Masters of the Horse, and the Nobility of Persia, had their several Tents allotted them, and in the midst of them were plac'd the Altars of the Gods, and of Alexander and Philip.

The Tents were made of green Booths of Trees, cover'd with Arras, and all sorts of Tapestry Hangings; Persia plentifully affording every thing for Pleasure and Delight.

The Rounds were at that convenient distance one from another, as that the Guests found nothing of trouble or uneasiness, but every thing that was prepar'd was near at hand. All being thus gracefully manag'd, with the general applause of the common Soldiers, thereby expressing how great Peucestes was in their Favour and Esteem, he was suspected by Eumenes, conceiving that Peucestes did this to ingratiate himself with the Army, and thereby to gain the Sovereign Command; he therefore forg'd a Letter, by which he rais'd up the Spirits of the Soldiers, and made them more Courageous, and brought down the haughty Spirit and Pride of Peucestes; but advanc'd his own Reputation with the Army, with the hopes of good Success for the future. The Contents of the Letter were these: That Olympias with Alexander's Son (having kill'd Cassander) had fully recover'd the Kingdom of Macedon, and that Polysperchon with the main Power of the King's Army and his Elephants, had put over into Asia against Antigonus, and was then in Capadocia. This Letter was writ in Syriack Characters, in the Name of Orontes, Governor of Armenia, an intimate Friend of Peucestes. These Letters going for current, because of the continual Correspondence between him and the Lord-Lieutenants; Eumenes order'd them to be carry'd about, and shew'd to the Captains and most of the Soldiers. Hereupon, the whole Army chang'd their Mind, and all Eyes were upon Eumenes as the chief Favourite, and therefore resolv'd to depend upon him, as he whose Interest in the Kings would be able to advance whom he pleas'd, and to punish whom he thought fit.

When the Feasting was ended, Eumenes the more to terrify them that were regardless of his Orders, and that affected the Sovereign Command, call'd in Question in due form of Law, Sibertius the Governor of Aracosia, Peucestes his special Friend. For Peucestes sending away some Horse into Aracosia, had secretly commanded Sibertius to intercept the Carriages coming from thence. Whereupon, Eumenes brought him into that eminent Danger, that unless he had privately withdrawn himself he had been knock'd on the Head by the Soldiers. By this piece of Policy, having terrify'd others, and advanc'd his own Honour and Reputation, he put on a new Face again; and so gain'd upon Peucestes with smooth Words and large Promises, that he became both kind and courteous to him, and chearful and ready to afford Aid and Assistance to the Kings. Desiring likewise to be assur'd of the rest of the Governors and Captains by some Pledges, which might engage them not to forsake him, he pretended to want Money, and desir'd them to contribute every one according to his Ability to the Kings.

Hereupon, receiving Four hundred Talents from among so many of the Captains and Generals as he thought fit, those whom he before suspected of Treachery or Desertion, became most Faithful Attendants and Guards to his Person, and stuck close to him in all Encounters.

While he thus prudently manag'd Affairs, and was providing for the Future, News was brought by some who came out of Media, that Antigonus was marching with his Army into Persia: Whereupon he mov'd forward, with a design to meet and engage the Enemy.

The second Day of their march he sacrific'd to the Gods, and plentifully feasted the Army, wishing them to continue Firm and Faithful to him: But minding to comply with the humour of his Guests, who lov'd to drink freely, he fell into a Distemper, which caus'd him to lye by it, and so hinder'd his March for some Days.

In the mean time the Army was greatly dejected, to consider, that the most Expert and Bravest Commander of all the Generals, should be now Sick at the very time (as they thought) they were even ready to fight the Enemy.

But his Distemper abating, and after a little time having recover'd himself, he pursu'd his March, Peucestes and Antigenes leading the Van; and he himself in a Litter follow'd after with the Elephants, to prevent disturbance by the Croud, and the Inconveniency by the straightness of the Places they were to pass.

And now the two Armies were within a days march one of another, when the Scouts on both sides brought an account of their approach, and what numbers they were, and ways they took. Whereupon, each Party prepar'd for Battel: But at length they parted without fighting; for there was a River and a deep Trench between the two Armies. Both indeed were drawn forth in Battalia, but by reason of the Badness of the Ground they could not come to fight: Wherefore, drawing off one from another three Furlongs space, they


Page 619

spent four Days in light Skirmishes, and foraging the Country thereabouts, being pinched with want of all things necessary. The fifth day Antigonus, by his Agents, again sollicited the Governors of the Provinces and the Macedonians, to desert Eumenes, and commit themselves to his Protection. For he promis'd that he would leave to every one of them their own several Provinces, and would bestow large Territories upon the rest, and others he would send into their own Country, loaden with Honours and great Rewards; and as for those that were willing still to bear Arms, he would give them Places and Posts in the Army suitable to their several Circumstances: But the Macedonians would not harken to any thing of these Terms, but sent away the Messengers with great Indignation and Threats: Upon which Eumenes came amongst them, and gave them Thanks, with Commendations of their Fidelity, and told them an old Story, but very pat to the present Occasion; That a Lion falling in Love with a young Lady, treated with her Father to bestow her upon him in Marriage; who answer'd, That he was very willing to give the young Woman to be his Wife, but that he was afraid of his Claws and Teeth, lest when he was marry'd, according to the Nature of his Kind, he would devour the poor Girl. Hereupon, the Lion beat out his Teeth, and tore off his Claws: Upon which the Father perceiving that now he had lost whatever before made him formidable, fell upon him and easily cudgell'd him to Death. And that now Antigonus was acting a Part not much unlike to this: For he courted them with fair Promises, till such time as he can get the Army into his Power, and then he'll be sure to cut the Throats of the Commanders. This fine Story thus handsomely told, was highly applauded by the Army; and hereupon he dismiss'd them.

The next Night some Deserters from Antigonus came in, and gave Intelligence, that he had order'd his Army to march at the second Watch. Hereupon, Eumenes upon serious Thoughts, and musing of what his Designs might be, at length hit upon the truth of the Matter, that the Enemy's purpose was to march to Gabene, which was a Country three days march distant, then untouch'd, abounding in Corn and Forage, sufficient to supply the greatest Army plentifully with all sorts of Provision; and besides, was a Place of great advantage, full of Rivers and deep Gutters that were unpassable. Contriving therefore to prevent the Enemy, he put in execution the like project; and sent away some of the Mercenaries (whom he hir'd for Money) under colour of Run-aways, with order to inform Antigonus that Eumenes would fall upon his Camp that Night. But Eumenes himself sent away the Carriages before, and commanded the Soldiers with all speed to eat their Suppers and march: All which was presently dispatch'd.

In the mean time, Antigonus, upon the Intelligence receiv'd from the Deserters, resolv'd to fight the Enemy that Night, and therefore put a stop to his march, and plac'd his Army in order of Battel.

During which hurry of Antigonus, and while he was preparing to meet his Enemy, Eumenes stole away with his Army and made towards Gabene before. Antigonus for some time waited with his Soldiers at their Arms, but receiving Intelligence by his Scouts, that Eumenes his Army was gone, he perceiv'd a Trick was put upon him. However, he went on with what he before design'd; and to that end, giving the Word of Command to his Army to march, he posted away with that haste and speed, as if he had been in a Pursuit.

But when he understood that Eumenes was got six Hours march before him, and so perceiving he was not able at so great a distance to overtake him with his whole Army, he contriv'd as follows; he deliver'd the rest of the Army to Pitho, willing him to come softly after him; and he himself posted away with the Horse: About spring of Day he came up even with the Rear of the Enemy's Army, as they were marching down a Hill; upon the Top of the Mountain he made a Halt, and presented himself to the View of the Enemy

Eumenes, at a convenient Distance, seeing the Enemy's Horse, conceiv'd the whole Army was near at hand, and therefore made a Stand; and drew up his Men in order of Battel, as if they should forthwith Engage. In this manner these two Generals put Tricks one upon another, as if they were striving which should out-wit one the other; hereby shewing, that all their hopes of Victory lay and were grounded upon their own Stratagems.

By this means therefore, Antigonus put a stop to the Enemy's march, and gain'd time for his Army to come up to him; which at length joining with him he drew up in Battalia, and in that order march'd down the Hill in a terrible manner upon the Enemy. The whole Army, (with those brought in by Pitho and Selencus) amounted to above Eight and Twenty thousand Foot, Eight thousand and Five hundred Horse, and Sixty


Page 620

five Elephants. Both the Generals rang'd their Armies in an Array that was strange and unusual, as if they strove which should excell each other even in this piece of Art also. In the Left Wing Eumenes plac'd Eudamus the Captain of the Elephants from India, who had with him a Body of an Hundred and fifty Horse: In Front of these were drawn up Two Squadrons of choice Horse arm'd with Launces, Fifty deep; and were all join'd to them who were plac'd upon the rising Ground near the Foot of the Mountain. Next to them was drawn up Stafandrus, with Nine hundred and fifty of his own Horse. After these, he order'd Amph

•machus

 Lord-Lieutenant of Mesopotamia, who had under his Command Six hundred Horse. Next to them were drawn up the Horse from Arachosia, lately commanded by Sibycitus, but by reason he was then fled, the Command was given to Cephalus. Close to these were Five hundred Horse from Paropamisada, and as many Thracians from the upper Colonies. In the Van of all these stood Five and forty Elephants, drawn up in a Half-Moon, lin'd with so many Archers and Slingers as was thought fit.

Then he drew up his main Body of Foot in a Phalanx in this manner: At the farthest Point were plac'd above Six thousand Foreign Soldiers, then five Thousand out of several Countries arm'd after the manner of the Macedonians; after these were drawn up no more than Three thousand Argyraspides, but Men never conquer'd, and for their Valour dreaded by the Enemy. And lastly, after all Three thousand Targateers of the Life-Guard; which, together with the Argyraspides, were commanded by Antigenes and Tautamus. And in the Van of this Phalanx stood Forty Elephants, lin'd with light-arm'd Men. Next to the Phalanx in the Right Wing he drew up Eight hundred of Carmanian Horse, under the Command of Tlepolimus the Governor of that Province; and after them Nine hundred who were call'd Companions. Then the Squadron of Antigines and Peucestes, being Three hundred Men in one Troop. In the utmost part of the Wing was plac'd Eumenes his own Regiment, consisting of as many Horse; and before these was a Forlorn-Hope made up of Eumenes his Servants, plac'd in two Bodies, consisting of Fifty Horse apiece. There were likewise Two hundred Horse drawn up into Four Squadrons, and plac'd in the Flank at a distance from the main Wing, to be a Guard to that part. And besides all these, he plac'd Three hundred Horse, cull'd out of all the Provinces for strength and speed, to be a Guard to the Rear of his Squadron: And in the Van of this Wing thus array'd, were plac'd Forty Elephants, for the better Defence of the whole. Eumenes his whole Army amounted to Five and thirty thousand Foot, Six thousand and one hundred Horse, and One hundred and fourteen Elephants.

Antigonus observing from the Top of the Hills how the Army of the Enemy was drawn up, drew up his likewise so as might be most convenient to the present Circumstances. For taking notice that his Enemy's Right Wing was very strongly guarded with Horse and Elephants, he fronted them with the choicest of his own Horse, who being in small Parties at a considerable distance one from another, might Charge in manner of a Running Fight, wheeling off one after another, and so still renew the Fight by fresh Men. And by this means, the Strength of that part of the Enemy's Army, wherein they plac'd their greatest Confidence, was wholly eluded. For in this Phalanx he had plac'd about a Thousand Archers and Launceteers on Horseback out of Media and Armenia, who had ever been us'd to this way of Charging by Turns. Next to them were drawn up Two thousand and Two hundred Tarentines, who came up with him from the Sea Coasts, who were Men very expert in laying Ambuscades, and contriving other Stratagems of War, and had a great Respect and Kindness for him: A Thousand likewise out of Phrygia and Lydia; Fifteen hundred under the Command of Pitho; and Four hundred Spear-Men led by Lysanias. After all these follow'd those call'd the Anthippi, and them out of the higher Provinces, to the number of Eight hundred. And of this Body of Horse was the Left Wing compleated and made up, all under the Command of Pitho. In the main Battel, of Foot were plac'd in the Front Nine thousand Foreigners; next to them Three thousand Lycians and Pamphilians, and above Eight thousand out of divers Nations, Arm'd after the Macedonian manner; and in the Rear were the Macedonians, to the number of Eight thousand, which Antipater had formerly sent as Recruits when he took upon him the Government of the Kingdom. In the Right Wing of Horse, close to the Right of the Phalanx of Foot, were first plac'd Five hundred Mercena

•

ies; next to them a Thousand Thracians, and as many Confederates; and close after them were a Thousand call'd Companions. These were all commanded by Demetrius the Son of Antigonus, which was the first time he appear'd in Arms to assist his Father: In the utmost part of the Wing were plac'd Three hundred Horse, with which Antigonus himself engag'd. This Squadron consisted of Three Troops of his Servants, and as many of


Page 621

thers, drawn up in equal Distances one from another, supported by a Hundred Tarentines. Round this Wing were plac'd Thirty of the strongest of his Elephants in form of an Half-Moon, interlin'd with light-arm'd Men: Many of the other Elephants he plac'd in the Front of the Phalanx of Foot, and a few with some Horse in the Flank on the Left. The Army array'd in this manner, he march'd down upon the Enemy in an oblique Battel: For he order'd the Right Wing to be stretch'd out far in length, and the Left to be much contracted, designing with this to make a Running Fight, and to Engage Hand to Hand with the other.

And now the Armies drew near one to the other, and Signal of Battel being given on both sides, Shouts eccho'd one to another, and the Trumpets sounded a Charge. And first the Horse with Pitho fellon, although they had no Forlorn either of Men or Elephants for a firm Defence, yet overpowering the Enemy in Number and Swiftness, made use of that Advantage: But looking upon it not safe to encounter the Elephants in the Front, they wheel'd about, and pour'd in showers of Shot upon the Enemy in the Flank, and with little or no Prejudice to themselves, by reason of their speed, and nimbleness of their Horses, for they forely gall'd the Enemy, who were neither able to fall upon the Assailants by reason of the Weight of their Arms, nor in a Capacity to avoid them as Occasion requir'd. Hereupon Eumenes seeing how the Right Wing was distressed by Multitudes of Archers on Horseback, sent for some of the swiftest Horse from Eudamus, who commanded the Left Wing; and by this Body of Horse brought in from the other Wing, (though it were but small) he made so fierce a Charge upon the Enemy, being seconded by his Elephants, that he easily put the Pithonians to flight, and pursued them as far as to the Foot of the Mountains.

In the mean while the Foot fought stoutly a long time together; at length, after many falling on both sides, the Eumenians routed them by the Valour of the Silver Shields. For though they were now very old, yet by frequent use of their Arms in many Battels, they so excell'd all others, both as to Courage and Skill in their Weapons, that none were able to stand before them. And therefore at this very time, though they were only Three thousand, yet they were the very Strength and Support of the whole Army.

When Antigonus perceiv'd that his Left Wing was routed, and the whole Phalanx put to flight, though he was advis'd (being that part of the Army with him was yet intire) to retreat to the Mountains, and receive in again those that were fled, yet he would not hear of it; but prudently making use of the present Opportunity, both sav'd his own Men, and gain'd likewise the Advantage.

For the Argyraspides, with Eumenes and the rest of the Foot, having put the Enemy to flight, continu'd their Pursuit to the Foot of the Mountains: Upon which, Antigonus, through an open Passage made into the Enemies main Body, with a Party of Horse fell upon the Flank of Eudamus his Regiments which were in the Left Wing and by his sudden and unexpected Charge put them to flight, and after the slaughter of Multitudes, sent away some of the swiftest of his Horse to recall his own Men that were before fled, and so caus'd them to rally at the Foot of the Mountains. And Eumenes also perceiving the flight of his Men, hasten'd to the Relief of Eudamus, and recall'd by sound of Trumpet those of his that fled. And now the Stars began to appear, when the Generals having recall'd their flying Men on both sides, prepar'd for Fight afresh; such was the Heat and Vigour both of the Officers and Common Soldiers. The Night was very clear and serene, and the Moon at Full; and the Armies being about Four Acres distant one over-against another, the clattering of Arms, and the neighing of Horses, seem'd on both sides as if they had been in the midst of one another. It was now Midnight when they had drawn off about Thirty Furlongs from the Place of Battel where the Dead lay, and by reason of the Troublesomness of the March, and the Toils and Grievances of the Fight, with the want likewise of Provision, both sides were but in an ill Condition: Therefore they were forc'd to leave off fighting, and encamp. Eumenes had a design to have march'd back to the Slain in order to have bury'd them, as a sign of his being absolute Victor: But the Army refus'd, and all were instant with loud Cries to return to their Carriages, which were then at a great distance from them, so that he was forc'd to submit. For being there were so many that affected the chief Command, he had no Power to move the Army by Threats, nor saw at that time any convenient opportunity to gain upon them that were Obstinate by Arguments and Intreaties. But Antigonus on the contrary was an Absolute General, without any dependance upon the Popularity, and therefore forc'd the Soldiers to encamp near the Dead Bodies; and so gaining


Page 622

the Priviledge of burying the Dead, he rais'd a Doubt who was Victorious, saying, That he who had Power to bury his Dead, was ever to be esteem'd Conqueror of the Field.

In this Battel, there were kill'd on Antigonus his side Three thousand and Seven hundred Foot, and Fifty four Horse, and above Four thousand wounded. On Eumenes his Party were slain Five hundred and Forty Foot, but very few Horse, and above Nine hundred hurt.

Antigonus, after the Battel was over, perceiving that the Spirits of his Soldiers were very low, resolv'd with all the hast he could, to remove far off from the Enemies Camp, and that his Forces might march the more readily, he sent away the wounded Men and heavy Baggage to a Town near at hand. Then having bury'd the Dead, about Break of Day, (detaining with him the Herald that was sent to him by the Enemy to beg the Bodies of the Dead,) even at that very Hour he commanded his Soldiers to dine. At Night he discharg'd the Herald, and gave Leave to come and bury the Dead the next day. He himself presently at the first Watch of the night mov'd with his whole Army, and by continu'd and long Marches, got a long way off from the Enemy to a Country untouch'd, where he had plenty of Provision for the refreshing of his Army: For he march'd as far as to Gamarga in Media, a Country under the Command of Pitho, abounding in all Things for the maintaining of the greatest Armies. Eumenes having Intelligence by his Scouts that Antigonus was gone, would not follow after him, both because his Army was in want of Provision, and in other ill Circumstances, as likewise for that he had a great desire to inter his Dead in the most solemn manner he possibly could.

Upon which occasion, here sell out a strange Accident at this time, very unusual and dissonant from the Laws of the Grecians: For there was one Ceteus, who commanded them that came out of India, and fought with great Resolution, but di'd in this Battel: He left two Wives behind him, who follow'd him all along during the Campagne: One he had but lately marry'd, the other had been his Wife for some years before; and both lov'd their Husband exceedingly. It had been an ancient Custom in India, for Men and Women to marry themselves with their own mutual Liking, without consulting the Advice of their Parents. And in regard that in those former times young People would rashly marry one another, and often repent afterwards, as being deceiv'd in their Choice; many Wives were corrupted, and through their inordinate Lusts fell in Love with other Men; and because they could not with their Credit and Reputation leave them they first chose, they would often poison their Husbands; to the more ready effecting of which, the Country did not a little contribute, by bearing many and divers sorts of Poisonous Plants, some of which never so little bruis'd either in Meat or Drink, do certainly kill the Party. This wicked Art growing still more and more to Perfection, and many being destroy'd by this Means, and though several were punish'd for these Pieces of Villany, yet other would not be reclaim'd, nor restrain'd from the like Practices; another Law therefore was made, That Wives should be burnt together with their dead Husbands, except they were with Child, or had born Children; and that she who would not observe the Common Law of the Land, should remain a Widow, and, as one convicted of that Impiety, should be excluded from all sacred Rites, and all other Benefit and Privilege of the Laws. This being thus establish'd, hence-forward this Wickedness of the Wives was chang'd into a contrary Practice. For being that every Wife, to avoid that insufferable Disgrace, was voluntarily to Die, they became not only careful to preserve the Health, and provide for the Well-being of their Husbands, as that which was likewise their own Preservation; but the Wives strove one with another, as who should gain the highest pitch of Honour and Reputation. An Example of which sell out at this time. For although by the Law one only was to be burnt with the Husband, yet at the Funeral of Cetius, both strove which should die, as for some Honourable Reward of their Virtue: Whereupon the Matter was brought before the Generals for their Decision. The Younger declar'd, That the other was with Child, and therefore her Death could not satisfy the Law: The Elder pleaded, That it was a greater Piece of Justice, that she who was before the other in Years, should be preferr'd before her in Honour: For in all other Cases, the constant Rule is to yield more Honour and Respect to the Elder, than to the Younger. The Captains being inform'd by the Midwives, that the Elder was with Child, preferr'd the Younger before the other: Upon which, she lost her Cause, went out weeping and wailing, renting her Vail in pieces, and tearing her Hair, as if some sad and dreadful News had been told her: The other rejoicing in the Victory, made forthwith to the Funeral Pile crown'd by the Women of her House with Attires call'd Mitres, and by her Kindred brought forth


Page 623

most richly adorn'd, as to some Nuptial Festival, setting forth her Praises all along as they went, in Songs fitted for that occasion.

As soon as she came to the Pile she threw off her Attire, and distributed them amongst her Servants and Friends, leaving these behind her, as tokens of Remembrances for them that loved her. Her Attire was multitudes of Rings upon her Fingers, set with all manner of precious Stones of divers Colours. Upon her Head were a great number of little Golden Stars, between which were plac'd sparkling Stones of all sorts. About her Neck she wore abundance of Jewels, some small, others large; increasing by degrees in bigness as they were put on one after another. At length she took leave of all her Family and Servants, and then her Brother plac'd her upon the Pile, and to the great Admiration of the People (who flock'd thither to see the Sight) with an Heroick Courage she there ended her Life.

The whole Army solemnly in their Arms march'd thrice round the Pile before it was kindled: She in the mean time (disposing of her self towards her Husband's Body,) discover'd not by any Screeks or otherwise, that she was at all daunted at the Noise of the Crackling Flames, so that the Spectators were affected some with Pity, and others with Admiration, and extraordinary Commendation of her Resolution. However, there are some who condemn this Law as Cruel and Inhumane.

After the Funeral was over, Eumenes march'd from Patetacine to Gabiene, which being yet untouch'd, was in a condition to supply the Army with all Things necessary, which was distant from Antigonus his Army (going through the Countries inhabited) Five and twenty Days Journey; but passing through the Desarts, (where there's no Water,) 'tis but Nine Days Journey: Being thus far distant one from another, he there winter'd, and so gave his Army time to refresh themselves.

As for the Affairs of Europe, Cassander, while he lay at the Siege of Tegea, hearing of the return of Olympias into Macedonia, and of the Death of Eurydice and King Philip, and what was done to the Sepulchre of Jollas his Brother, agreed with the Taegeans, and march'd with his Army into Macedonia, leaving his Consederates in great Trouble and Perplexity. For Alexander the Son of Polysperchon was then entred Peloponnesus, and ready to set upon the Cities with a great Army. And the Aetolians to ingratiate themselves with Olympias and Polsyperchon, seiz'd upon the straight Passes at Pylas, and block'd up the Passage to stop Cassander in his march: But he perceiving that it was very difficult for him to force his way through those narrow Streights, by the help of some Ships and several Boats out of Eubea and Locris, pass'd over into Thessaly. And hearing that Polysperchon lay with his Army in Perrhabea, he order'd away Callas his General, with some Forces to fight him. In the mean time, Dinias being sent away to secure the Streights, possess'd himself of those Passes before the Forces of Olympias could reach them.

As soon as Olympias heard that Cassander was entring Macedonia with a great Army, she created Aristonous General, and commanded him to fight Cassander. She her self (taking along with her the Son of Alexander and Roxana his Mother, and Thessalonica the Daughter of Philip the Son of Amyntas, Deidamia the Daughter of Eacides King of Epirus, and Sister of Pyrrhus (who afterwards made War upon the Romans) and the Daughters of Attalus, and other Kindred and eminent Relations) enter'd into Pydna, so that a great throng of People, Useless and Unserviceable for War, attended upon her: Neither was there Provision in that Place sufficient for such a Multitude, to hold out any long Siege. All which disadvantages, though they were clear Evidences of the greatness of the Danger, yet she was resolv'd to stay here, expecting many Greeks and Macedonians to come in to her assistance by Sea.

There were with her some Horse from Ambracia, and many of the Troops of the Houshould; and the rest of Polysperchon's Elephants: The other had been before taken by Cassander at his former irruption into Macedonia; who now having recover'd the Passes at Perrhebea, so as that he had his way open to Pydna, begirt the Town round with a Mud-wall from Sea to Sea; and sent for Shipping and all sorts of Weapons and Engines of Battery from his Confederates, with a design to block up Olympius both by Sea and Land.

But when he had Intelligence that Eacides, King of Epirus, was coming with a strong Army to the Relief of Olympias, he deliver'd some Forces to the Command of Atarchias, with Orders to meet the Epirots, who presently executing what he was commanded, possess'd himself of the Passes into Epirus, so that Eacides was wholly deseated in his Design.

For the Epirots were forc'd against their Wills to the Expedi

•

ion into Macedonia, and therefore mutiny'd in the Camp: However, Eacides, desirous by any way possible to R

•

heve Olympias, cashier'd all those that favour'd not his Design; taking in those who were


Page 624

willing to run the same risk with himself; he was indeed very forward to Engage, but had not yet force enough; for the Party that stuck to him was very small.

In the mean time, the Epirots that were sent away into their own Country, revolted from the King, and his People, by a common Decree of the State, Banish'd him the Kingdom, and Consederated with Cassander; like to which never before hapned in Epirus from the time that Neoptolimus, the Son of Achilles, reign'd there. For the Kingdom ever descended from the Father, by Right of Succession to the Son, till this time.

When Cassander was thus supported by the Confederacy of the Epirots, and had sent Lyciseus both as General and Viceroy into Epirus, they in Macedonta, who before were at a stand, whether they should Confederate with Olympias or not, now (seeing no hopes remaining for the retrieving her Affairs) join'd with Cassander. So that now the only Prop remaining to rely upon for Relief was Polysperchon, and this was presently in a strange manner shatter'd and broken in Pieces; for when Callas, who was sent as Geneneral by Cassander, sate down with his Army near to Polysperchon in Perrebia, he so corrupted most of his Soldiers with large Bribes, that very few remain'd, especially of those that were look'd upon to be most Faithful: And thus low were the Affairs of Olympias sunk in a very short time.

As for the Affairs of Asia at this time; Antigonus then Wint'ring in Gadamalis, otherwise Gaderlis, looking upon his Army too weak for the Enemy, contriv'd how to fall upon them unawares, and to Out wit them. Eumenes his Soldiers were so scatter'd and dispers'd in their Winter-quarters, that some of them were six days march distant one from another. But Antigonus judg'd it not adviseable to march through the Countries that were Inhabited, both in regard the Journey would be very long and tedious, and likewise presently known to the Enemy, but conceiv'd it much more for his advantage to lead his Army through the dry and barren Desarts, though it were far more troublesome, for that it was much the shorter Cut; and by that means his march would be secret, and so he might fall upon the Enemy suddenly and unexpectedly, as they lay dispers'd and scatter'd in their Quarters, never dreaming of any such thing.

Upon these Considerations he commanded his Soldiers to be ready for a March, and to prepare for themselves Ten Days Victuals such as need not the Fire. He himself gave it out, that he would march through Armenia: But on a sudden, contrary to the Expectation of his whole Army, in the Depth of Winter, he march'd towards the Desarts. In their march he order'd Fires to be made in the Day, but to be put out in the Night, left that any seeing them far off from the Mountains, might discover his approach to the Enemy: For the Desart was almost all wholly Plain and Champaign, surrounded with many high Hills, from whence it was easie a long way off to discover the Fires. But when the Army had spent Five days in this tedious Journey, the Soldiers for very Cold, as for other necessary Uses, fell to making of Fires by Night as well as by Day; which some of the Inhabitants of the Wilderness espying, they presently the very same day sent away Messengers upon Dromedaries to give Intelligence thereof to Eumenes and Peucestes. This Beast will commonly run Fifteen hundred Furlongs a Day. 

Peucestes being inform'd, that the Enemy's Army was seen half way of their march, began to think of running away as far as he could, being afraid the Enemy would be upon him before he could get the Forces together, from every Quarter where they then lay dispers'd. Eumenes perceiving the Fright he was in, bid him be of good Heart, and continue upon the Edge of the Wilderness, for he had found out a way that Antigonus should not come into those Parts in three or four days. And having done that, they should be able within that time easily to get all their Forces together; and so the Enemy being tir'd out, and starv'd for want of Provision, would all fall into their hands. All wonder'd at this strange Undertaking, and every one was earnest to learn what it was that should give a stop to the Enemy. Eumenes hereupon commanded all the Captains and Soldiers that were then at hand, to follow him with a great number of Urns full of Fire, and then chose out some of the Highest Ground in the Country, which look'd every way towards the Wilderness, and there mark'd out several Places within the Compass of Seventy Furlongs, and allo

•

ted to every Captain a Post distant about Twenty Cubits one from another, with Command to kindle a Fire in the Night in every Place; and at the first Watch to make the greater Fires, as if they were then still upon the Guard, and going to Supper and refreshing themselves; at the Second, that the Fires should be less; and the Third to be left near Out and Extinct, that so at a Distance it might seem as if the Army were certainly there Encamp'd together.

The Soldiers observing the Order given them, some of the Inhabitants of the Mountains over against them (Friends to Pitho the Governor of Media) perceiv'd the Fire,


Page 625

and supposing the Army was really there Encamp'd, ran down into the Plain, and inform'd both Pitho and Antigonus; who being amaz'd, (and as it were Thunder-struck at this strange and unexpected News) made an Halt, and Consulted with those that brought them the News what Course was best to be taken. For Men that were tyr'd out, and in want of every thing that was necessary, to Engage with an Enemy prepar'd, and furnish'd with plenty of all sorts of Provision, was alledg'd to be a desperate and hazardous Adventure. Concluding therefore that they were betray'd, and that the Enemies Forces were drawn together, (upon Intelligence given them of what was design'd) it was resolv'd not to march forward, but turn aside to the Right; and so the Army mov'd into both parts of the Countries inhabited, to the end the Soldiers might refresh themselves after their toilsom March.

In the mean time, Eumenes having by this Stratagem thus deluded the Enemy, got all his Army together from all Parts where they were in their Winter-Quarters, and fortifying his Camp with a Rampire and a deep Trench, he there receiv'd his Confederates as come in to him, and plentifully furnish'd his Camp with all things necessary.

But Antigonus, after he had march'd through the Desert, receiving Intelligence from the Inhabitants, that the rest of Eumenes his Forces were almost all come to him; but that his Elephants coming out of their Winter-Stations, were not far off with a very slender Guard, sent out Two thousand Horse-Lanceliers, Two hundred Tarentines, and all his light-arm'd Foot to intercept them: For setting upon them as they were without a sufficient Guard, he hop'd he might easily make himself Master of 'em; and so deprive the Enemy of the main Strength of his Army. But Eumenes fearing the worst that might happen upon that account, sent away (for a further Guard) Five hundred of his best Horse, and Three thousand light-arm'd Foot.

As soon as Antigonus his Soldiers came in sight, the Commanders of the Elephants drew them into a square in the form of a Tile, and plac'd the Carriages in the middle, and so march'd on. They were supported in the Reer with no more than four hundred Horse. The Enemy then pouring in all their Force upon them, and pushing on still with great Violence, the Horse in the Reer being over-power'd, made away. The Masters of the Elephants stood for some time, gall'd with Darts and Arrows on every side, not able to endamage or touch the Enemy: And just now when they were ready to give up all, in comes unexpectedly the Eumeneans, who Extricate them out of all their Dangers. A few Days after, the Armies Encamp'd within forty Furlongs one of another; and now being about to lay all at stake, both sides prepar'd for Battel.

Antigonus drew up his Horse into two Wings, and committed the Left to Pitho, and the Right to his Son Demetrius, where he himself intended to Charge; the Foot was in the middle Battel, and all the Elephants he plac'd in the Front of the whole Army, interlin'd with Light-arm'd Men. His whole Army was Two and twenty thousand Foot, and Nine thousand Horse, besides those that were listed in Media; and Elephants Sixty five.

When Eumenes understood, that Antigonus had plac'd himself in the Right Wing with the best of his Horse, he himself fronted him with the Choicest of his own, in the Left; for here he plac'd most of the Governors of the Provinces, with the Best of that Horse which they themselves brought into the Field, and with these he ventur'd himself.

In this Wing likewise was Mithridates, Son of Ariobarzanes, descended from one of those seven Persians, who slew Smerdis, one of the Magi, a Man of exemplary Valour, and brought up in the Feats of War from his very youth. In the Front of this Wing he plac'd Threescore of the best of his Elephants, drawn up in form of an Half-Moon, interlin'd with Light-arm'd Men.

As to the Foot, the Targateers were plac'd in the Front; then the Argyraspides; and in the Rear all the Foreigners, and those that were arm'd after the manner of the Macedonians, and so many Elephants and Light-arm'd Men were plac'd in the Front of the main Battel of the Foot, as was thought sufficient. In the Right Wing were drawn up such Horse and Elephants as were judg'd the most Weak and Feeble of all the rest, and over these was appointed Philip as Commander, who was order'd to retire leisurely as he fought, and diligently to observe the Event of the other side.

Eumenes his Army amounted to Thirty six thousand and seven hundred Foot, Six thousand and fifty Horse, and a Hundred and fourteen Elephants.

A little before the Battel, Antigenes, General of the Argyraspides, had sent a Macedonian Horseman to the Enemy's Phalanx, with Command to ride up as close to them as possibly he could, and proclaim with a loud Voice what he had order'd him. Hereupon, when he was come up within hearing of that Part of the Army where Antigonus his


Page 626

Macedonian Phalanx was drawn up, he cry'd out with a loud Voice thus, Oh ye Villains! Ye fight against your Fathers, who ventur'd their Lives, and perform'd all those Noble Acts with Philip and Alexander, whom you shall shortly experience to be Men worthy those Kings and those former Conquests! The Youngest of the Argyraspiaes at that time were at least Threescore years of Age; but most of the rest were Seventy, and some older; all of them for Strength and Skill in their Weapons unconquerable: For continual Practice of their Arms had made them Expert and Daring.

Proclamation being made, as we have before said, there were many harsh Words and discontented Speeches cast out in Amigonus his Army. That they should be forc'd to fight against their own Countrymen, and with those that were so much older than themselves. In Eumenes his Army on the other hand, they were continually crying out while the Army was drawing up, to be led out against the Enemy: Eumenes seeing the Alacrity of the Soldiers, lift up the Ensign of Battel, upon which forthwith the Trumpets sounded a Charge, and the whole Army set up a shout for the Onset. The Elephants in the first place fought one with another; then the Horse Charg'd on both sides. The Field was very Large, Sandy, and Waste, so that so much Dust was rais'd by the Trampling of the Horses, as that a Man could not see what was done, though but at a small distance from him: Which Antigonus observing, sent forthwith away some Median Horse, and a Body of Tarentines, to set upon the Baggage of the Enemy.

For he hop'd by reason of the Dust that was rais'd (as the thing in truth prov'd) that they would not be discern'd, and that if he got possession of the Carriages, he should easily bring the whole Army into his power. Hereupon, those that were sent forth secretly slipping by the Enemies Wing, set upon the Pages, Scullion Boys, and others that were with the Baggage, and about five Furlongs distant from the Place of Battel.

There they found a Multitude of Useless and Unserviceable Rabble, and a very small Guard in the Place, so that they were presently put to flight, and the rest all fell into the Enemies hands. In the mean time, Antigonus charging the Enemy with a strong Body of Horse, so terrify'd Peucestes, Governor of Persia, that he with his Horse got out of the Dust, and drew Fifteen hundred more after him. But Eumenes, though he was left but with a very few in the out Skirts of the Wing where he was, yet counted it base to flag or fly; judging it more honourable to be Faithful to his word, in the Quarrel of the Kings, and to die in an honest and just Cause with Resolution, made a fierce Charge upon Antigonus; so that now there was a sharp Dispute between the Horse; where the Eumeneans excell'd the other in Heat and Resolution, but the Antigontans them in Num. and Multitude; and many fell on both sides. At which time, the Elephants fighting one with another, the Leader on Eumenes his side, engaging with one of the Stoutest of the other, was there slain. Hereupon, Eumenes perceiving his Horse to be worsted on every hand, withdrew with the rest of the Horse out of the Fight, and pass'd over to the other Wing, and join'd himself to those with Philip, whom he had order'd to make a leisurely Retreat. And thus ended the Engagement between the Horse.

But as to the Foot, the Argyraspides (or Silver Shields) in a full Body flew with that Violence upon the Enemy, that some they kill'd upon the spot, and they rest they put to flight: For they were not to be withstood; who though they engag'd with the Enemy's main Battel, yet they signaliz'd both their Valour and Dexterity to that degree, that they kill'd above Five thousand without the loss of one Man, and put the whole Foot to flight, though they were far more in number than themselves.

When Eumenes understood, that all the Carriages were taken; and that Peucestes was not far off with the Horse, he endeavour'd to get all to rally in a Body together again, and to try their Fortune in a second Engagement with Antigonus: For he concluded, if he prevail'd he should not only recover his own Carriages, but likewise possess himself of the Enemy's: But Peucestes would not hear of fighting any more, but got further off, so that Eumenes was forc'd to yield the Day.

Then Antigonus dividing his Horse into two Bodies, he himself with one sought how to intrap Eumenes, observing which way he made; the other he delivered to Pitho, with Orders to fall upon the Argyraspides, who then were forsaken by their Horse; who forthwith setting upon them, as he was commanded, the Macedonians drew up in form of a Square, and got safe to the River, exclaiming against Peucestes, as the Cause of the routing of the Horse.

When Eumenes came up to them in the Evening, they consulted together what was then fittest to be done. The Governors of the Provinces were for returning with all speed into the Higher Provinces; but Eumenes was for staying where they were and fighting, and in regard the Enemies main Battel was broken and cut off, and that they were


Page 627

then equal in Horse on both sides. But the Macedonians seeing that they had lost their Carriages, Wives, and Children, and whatever was dear to them, declar'd they would neither do the one or the other. And so at that time, without agreeing in any thing, they parted. But afterwards, the Macedonians secretly corresponding with Antigonus seiz'd upon Eumenes, and deliver'd him up into his Hands. And having receiv'd their Carriages, and Faith taken for security, they all march'd away together: Whose Example the Governors of the Provinces and most of the other Captains and Soldiers follow'd, forsaking their General, chiefly consulting their own Safety and Preservation.

Antigonus having thus strangely and unexpectedly possess'd himself both of Eumenes and his whole Army, seiz'd upon Antigenes, Captain of the Argyraspides, and put him alive into a Coffin, and burnt him to Ashes. He put to death likewise Eudamus, who brought the Elephants out of India, and Celbanus and some others: Who upon all occasions appear'd against him. But for Eumenes, he put him in Prison, and took time to consider how to dispose of him. For he had in truth an earnest desire to have gain'd so good a General to his own Interest, and to have oblig'd him upon that account; but because of the great Kindness and strict Correspondency which pass'd between him and Olympias, and the Kings, he durst not absolutely rely upon him; for but a while before, though he had deliver'd him out of the straits he was in at Nora in Phrygia, yet he presently upon it fell in and sided with the Kings; and therefore, upon the pressing Importunity of the Macedonians he put him to Death. But in respect of his former Familiarity with him, he caus'd his Body to be burnt, and his Bones to be put into an Urn, and deliver'd to his nearest Friends. Amongst those that were Wounded and Prisoners, was Hieronymus of Cardia, Historiographer, who having been ever in great Esteem with Eumenes during his Life, after his Death found great Favour also with Antigonus.

Antigonus returning into Media with his whole Army, spent the rest of the Winter in a Town not far from Ecbatane, where stood the Palace-Royal of that Province. He distributed his Army here and there all over that Province, and especially in the Country of Rhages; so call'd from the Calamities it had miserably suffer'd in former times. For being heretofore full of Rich and populous Cities, there hapned such terrible Earthquakes in those Parts, that both Cities and Inhabitants were swallow'd up altogether, not one left, and the very Face of the Country was so chang'd, that new Rivers and Ponds appear'd in the room of the Old.

CHAP. III.

The Innundations at Rhodes. Antigonus kills Pitho, getting him into his power by Dissimulation. Then marches into Persia. Revolters from Antigonus cut off in Media. He divides the Asian Provinces, and contrives to destroy all the Argyraspides. Gets great Treasure in Susa. Cassander besieges Olympias in Pydna; The great Distress to which it was reduc'd. Amphipolis surrender'd to Cassander. He kills Olympias. Marries Thessalonices; Builds Cassandra. Imprisons Rhoxana and her Son Alexander. His Expedition into Peloponnesus against Alexander, the Son of Polysperchon: The History of Thebes. Cassander rebuilds Thebes.

ABout this time hapned a Flood near the City of Rhodes, which destroy'd many of the Inhabitants. The first Flood did little prejudice, because the City was but then newly built, and far larger in Compass: But the second was more Mischievous, and destroy'd Multitudes. The last fell out at the Beginning of the Spring, accompany'd with violent Storms of Rain, and Hail-stones of an incredible Bigness; for they were a Mina in weight, and sometime more, so that they not only beat down Houses, but kill'd many Men. And in regard Rhodes was built in Form of a Theatre, and that the Water ran for the most part into one Place, the lower Parts of the City were presently fill'd with Water, (for that the Winter being now look'd upon to be over) no care was taken to cleanse the Channels and Aqueducts; and the Pipes likewise in the Walls were choked up; so that the Waters flowing in altogether on a sudden, all the Ground about the Deigma, (as it is call'd) and the Temple of B

•cchuss

 was fill'd with Water; and now it rising up like a standing Pond to the Temple of Esculapius, all were in a Consternation,


Page 628

and could not agree together what should be done, in order to their Preservation. Some were for making to the Ships, and others for hasting to the Theatre. Some now almost surrounded with the Evil that threaten'd them, in great Terror and Amazement climb'd up to the top of the highest Altars, and others to the top of the Pedestals of the Statues. The City being in this Danger to be overwhelm'd and ruin'd, with all its Inhabitants, on a sudden they were unexpectedly deliver'd: For the Wall burst asunder in a large Breach, and the Water that stood on an Heap made its way through, and ran with a violent Current into the Sea, and so every one presently had free passage to his own House.

It was of great advantage to these distressed People, that this Inundation was in the day time: For most of the Citizens ran to the highest parts of the City for shelter. And another advantage was, that the Houses were not built of Tile, but of Stone; so that they who got to the House-tops escap'd without any great Damage: However, there perish'd in this common Calamity above Five hundred Souls; and some of the Houses were born down to the Ground, and others very ill torn and shaken. And in this danger was Rhodes.

Antigonus, while he Winter'd in Media, discover'd Pitho plotting to draw over the Soldiers then in their Winter-Quarters, partly by Bribes, and partly by fair Promises to his own Interest, and to make a Turn and Defection in the Army. But Antigonus cover'd and conceal'd his Design, and made show as if he gave no Credit to the Informers, but chid them as those that contriv'd only to set him and Pitho together by the ears. In the mean while, he caus'd it to be nois'd abroad, That he intended to leave Pitho, with a considerable Army for his Defence, Lord-Lieutenant of the higher Provinces; and he wrote likewise to him, and desired him to hasten to him with all speed, that after they had consulted together of some weighty Affairs, they might forthwith march away into the Lesser Asia. Thus he manag'd his Business, whereby to remove all ground of Suspicion, and to get the poor Man into his hands, upon an expectation and hopes to be left Governor of those Provinces: For it was a difficult matter to take one by force who was in so great Repute with Alexander, and for his Valour advanc'd by him to Places of Honour; and who being then Governor of Media, was a help and support to the whole Army.

Pitho was at that time in the furthest Parts of all Media in his Winter-Quarters, and had now corrupted many, who had promis'd to join with him in the Defection. His Friends likewise acquainting him by their Letters with Antigonus his Purpose, possess'd him with an Expectation of mighty Things: And thus guil'd, to Antigonus he went; who having now seiz'd his Prey, brought him before a Council of War even of his own Confederates, where he was easily convicted, and forthwith had his Head chopp'd off.

Hereupon Antigonus gathering all his Army together, committed the Government of Media to Orontobates a Median born; but made Hippostratus General of the Army, who had Three thousand 500 foreign Foot-Soldiers under his Command. He himself taking with him the Body of his Army, went to Ecbatana, where receiving Five thousand Talents of massie Silver, he march'd into Persia; and it cost him twenty days march before he arriv'd at the Capital City Persepolis.

In the mean time, while Antigonus was on his march, Pitho's Friends, who were concern'd with him in the Conspiracy (the chief of whom was Meleager and Menoetas) and other Well-willers of Eumenes and Pitho, who were scatter'd abroad into Corners, met together, to the number of Eight hundred Horse; and in the first place wasted the Territories of the Medes who refus'd to join with them. Then receiving Intelligence where Hippestratus and Orontobates lay encamp'd, they broke in upon them in the night, and were not far off from effecting what they design'd; but being overpower'd by number, and having only entic'd some of the Soldiers to run the same course with them, they were forc'd to retreat; yet some of the nimblest of them (all being Horse-men) made many sudden Incursions upon the Country, and caus'd a great Consternation and Hubbub amongst them; but were atlast inclos'd in a place compass'd about with Rocks, and were there all kill'd or taken. But Meleager and Cranes the Median, and some of the better sort of them stood it out to the last, and died with their Swords in their hands. And this was the Condition of the Conspirators in Media.

As for Antigonus, as soon as he came into Persia, the People honour'd him as a King, as he that was now undoubtedly absolute Lord of all Asia: There calling together a Council of his Nobility, he propounded to them the matter concerning the Government of the Provinces: In which Consultation they left Carmania to Tlepolemus, and Bactria to Stasanor; for it was no easie matter to expel them, having gain'd the Hearts of the People by their fair Deportment, and likewise were associated with potent Confederates.


Page 629

Eritus he sent into Aria; who dying shortly after, was succeeded by Evagoras, a Man of wonderful Valour and Prudence. Oxyatres likewise, the Father of Roxana, was permitted to enjoy the Province of Parapamisus, as he did before: For neither could he eject him without a long expence of Time and a very great Army.

But he sent for Sibyritus, a Well-willer of his, out of Arachosia, and bestow'd upon him the Government of that Province, and gave him the most turbulent of the Silver Shields, under colour of serving him in the War, but in truth with a design to have them all cut off; for he gave him private Instructions to employ them in such Services as that by degrees they might all be destroy'd. Amongst these were those that betray'd Eumenes, that Vengeance might in a short time after overtake these perfidious Villans for their Treachery against their General. For Princes, by reason of their great Power, may reap advantage by the wicked Acts of others; but private Men who are the Actors, for the most part are by those means brought into miserable Disasters.

Antigonus moreover finding that Peucestes was much belov'd in Persia, made it one of his first Works to strip him of that Government. At which all the Natives greatly repin'd; and a Chief Man amongst them call'd Thespias spake openly against it, and said, That the Persians would be govern'd by no other Man but Peucestes; whereupon he flew Thespias, and made Asclepiodorus Governor of Persia, and committed to him a considerable Army; and held on Peucestes with vain Hopes of preferring him with higher Preferments elsewhere, until he had drawn him quite out of the Country.

While Antigonus was on his way to Susa, Xenophilus, who had the keeping of the King's Treasure there, being sent by Seleucus, went and met him at Pasitigris, and offer'd him his Service in whatsoever he pleas'd to command him. Antigonus receiv'd him very graciously, and seem'd as if he honour'd him above all the Friends he had, fearing left he might alter his Mind, and keep him out when he came thither. But when he came into the Castle of Susa, he possess'd himself of it, and there seiz'd upon the Golden Vine, and store of other such Rarieties, to the value of Fifteen thousand Talents: All which he turn'd into ready Money, besides what he made of Crowns of Gold, and other Presents and Spoils taken from the Enemy, amounting to Five thousand Talents more, and a like quantity collected out of Media, besides the Treasure had from Susa; so that in the whole he heap'd together Five and twenty thousand Talents. And thus stood the Affairs of Antigonus at that time.

Since we have handled the Affairs of Asia, we shall now pass over into Europe, and relate what was done there concurring and cotemporary with the former. Cassander having shut up Olympias in Pydna in Macedonia, could not assault the Walls by reason of the Winter Season; but he block'd up the City with his Forces on every side, and drew a Mud-wall from Sea to Sea; and to prevent all Relief by Sea as well as by Land, he guarded the Mouth of the Harbour with his own Shipping. Insomuch as their Provisions being near spent, the Besieg'd were reduc'd to that Extremity of Want, that they were near starv'd. For they were brought to that strait, that every Soldier was allow'd but Five Choenices of Bread-Corn every Month, and the Elephants were fed with Sawdust. At last they kill'd the Draught-Beasts and Horses for Meat.

While the City was in this State, and Olympias earnestly expecting Foreign Aid, the Elephants pin'd away for want of Food. And the Horse-men that were Foreigners almost all dy'd, having no proportion of Bread allotted them, and many of the other Soldiers far'd no better. Some of the Barbarians (Hunger overcoming what Nature would have otherwise dreaded and abhorr'd) fed upon the Carkasses of the Dead.

The Town being now fill'd with dead Bodies, the Colonels and Captains of the King's Guards buri'd some, and threw others over the Walls; insomuch as not only the Queens, (who were bred up deliciously all their Days,) but even the Soldiers, who were always inur'd to Hardship, could not indure the Sight, nor Stink of the Carkasses.

And now the Spring came on, and the Famine increas'd every day, whereupon most of the Soldiers came up in a Body, and intreated Olympias to suffer them to leave the Place because of the Scarcity, who (not being able to supply them with Bread, nor in a condition to raise the Siege) let them go; and they were all kindly received by Cassander, and dispos'd of into several Towns and Cities round about. For he hop'd, that the Macedonians coming to understand by them how weak Olympias was, would conclude her Affairs Desperate and Remediless. And he did not miss the Mark in his Conjecture; for they who were just now sending Relief to the Besieged, presently alter'd their Purpose, and sided with Cassander. Only Aristonous and Monimus of all the Macedonians continu'd firm and faithful to Olympias, of whom Aristonous was Governor of Amphipolis, and the other of Pella. At length Olympias perceiving that many went over to Cassander, and those who were her Friends were not able to help her; without further delay got ready a Galley of


Page 630

Five Oars on a Bank, with a design to rescue her and all her Kindred out of the present Danger: But being discover'd to the Enemy by some of the Deserters, Cassander sail'd to the Place, and seiz'd the Vessel. Whereupon Olympias looking upon her self in a desperate Condition, sent an Herald to Cassander to treat upon Terms of Pacification; but he insisting upon the delivering up of her self to his Mercy, with much ado she at length prevail'd only for the preservation of her Person: Being therefore now possess'd of the City, he sent some away to summon Pella and Amphipolis.

Monimus the Governor of Pella hearing how Things went with Olympias, presently surrender'd: But Aristonous at first resolv'd to hold out and maintain the Cause of the Kings, in regard he had a strong Garison, and had been then lately Prosperous and Successful. For a few days before, he had fought with Crateuas, one of Cassander's Captains, and cut off many of the Enemy, and drave Crateuas himself, with Two thousand of his Men, into the City Bedys in Bisaltia, and there besieg'd him, took him and disarm'd him, and then upon mutual Pledges of Faith given and taken, discharg'd him. Being encourag'd upon this account, and knowing nothing but that Eumenes was still living, and concluding he should be sure of Aid and Relief from Alexander and Polysperchon, he refus'd to surrender Amphipolis.

But as soon as he receiv'd Letters from Olympias, (whereby she commanded him upon the Faith of his former Engagement to restore the City,) he observ'd her Commands, and deliver'd it up, upon assurance of his own Preservation. But Cassander perceiving that he was a Man of great Interest by reason of the Honours conferr'd upon him by Alexander, and minding to take all such out of the way as might be in a Capacity to make any Disturbance, by the help of Crateuas his Kindred he put him also to Death. Then he incited the Relations of such as were put to Death by Olympias, to prosecute her in the General Assembly of the Macedonians, who thereupon very readily comply'd with what they were put on to do; and though she her self was not then present, nor had any Person there to plead her Cause, yet the Macedonians condemn'd her to Die. Cassander thereupon sent some of his Friends to Olympias, and advis'd her to get out of the way, and promis'd to procure for her a Ship, and cause her to be convey'd safe to Athens. And this he did not as any ways minding her Preservation, but as one conscious of her own Guilt by her flight, it might be judg'd a just Vengeance upon her if she perish'd and was cut off, as she was in her Voyage. For he was afraid as well of the Fickleness of the Macedonians, as of the Dignity of her Person. But Olympias refus'd to fly, but said, She was ready to defend her Cause before all the Macedonians.

Cassander therefore fearing lest the People calling to mind the worthy Acts and Kindnesses of Philip and Alexander towards the whole Nation should change their Minds, and so take upon them to defend the Queen, sent to her a Band of Two hundred Soldiers well Arm'd and Accouter'd, with Orders to dispatch her forthwith; who rushing on a sudden into the Palace, as soon as they saw her, (in Reverence to her Person,) drew back, without executing what they were commanded. But the Kindred of those she had put to Death, both to ingratiate themselves with Cassander, and likewise to gratify their own Revenge for the Death of their Relations, cut her Throat, she not in the least crying out in any Womanish Terror or Fear to spare her. In this manner died Olympias, the greatest and most honourable Woman in the Age wherein she liv'd, Daughter of Neoptolimus King of Epirus; Sister of Alexander, who made the Expedition into Italy; Wife of Philip, the greatest and most victorious Prince of all that ever were before in Europe; and lastly, the Mother of Alexander, who never was exceeded by any for the many great and wonderful Things that were done by him.

Cassander now seeing all Things go on according to his Heart's Desire, in his Hopes and Expectations was already possess'd of the Kingdom of Macedon: He therefore now marries Thessalonices Daughter of Philip, and Sister of Alexander by the same Father, ambitious to be related in Affinity, and esteem'd as one of the Royal Family. He built likewise Cassandria (calling it after his own Name) in Pallene, and Peopled it by Inhabitants drawn out of the Cities of the Chersonesus, and out of Potidea and many other neighbouring Cities, and plac'd there likewise those Olynthians that were left, of whom there were still a considerable Number. To this City he laid a large and rich Territory, and made it his earnest Care to advance the Glory and Splendour of this Place; so that it grew up in a short time to that degree of Power, as to excell all the Cities of Macedonia.

Cassander likewise minding to cut off all the Posterity of Alexander, (that there might be none of his Line left to succeed in the Kingdom,) purpos'd to kill the Son of Alexander, and Roxana his Mother. But for the present being willing first to observe what People's


Page 631

Discourses were concerning the cutting off of Olympias, and having as yet no certain Account how Things went with Antigonus, he committed Roxana and her Son close Prisoners to the Castle at Amphipolis under the Charge of Glaucias, then by him made Governor, and one of his Friends, in whom he plac'd great Confidence. He likewise took away from the young King those Children that were bred up with him as his Companions, and order'd that he should be no longer attended as a King, nor regarded otherwise than as a private Person.

And now Ruling the Kingdom in all Things as King, he Royally and Sumptuously Interr'd at Aegis, Eurydice and Philip, the late King and Queen; and Cinna, whom Alcetas had put to Death, gracing the Dead with the Solemnity of Funeral Sports and Plays.

Then he rais'd Soldiers out of Macedonia for the Expedition resolv'd upon into Peloponnesus. While he was employ'd in these Affairs, Polysperchon, who was then besieg'd in Naxius in Perrebea, when he heard of the Death of Olympias, in despair of retrieving of his Affairs in Macedonia, with a few in his Company broke out of the City, and pass'd through Thessaly, together with Aeacides, and came into Aetolia, where he judg'd he might safely abide, and observe how Things went, for that there was a good Understanding between him and this Nation.

But Cassander having now rais'd a considerable Army, marches out of Macedonia with an intent to drive Alexander the Son of Polysperchon out of Peloponnesus: For he with his Army was the only Enemy left, and had possess'd himself of many convenient Posts and Towns there. Through Thessaly he march'd without any opposition; but found the Pass at Pylas guarded by the Etolians, whom having with much difficulty beaten off, he came into Boeotia, where getting all the Thebans together that were remaining from all Parts, he set upon repeopling of Thebes, conceiving now he had a fair opportunity put into his hands for the rebuilding of that City, famous both for its renowned Actions, and the ancient Stories concerning it. And by so good a Work, he concluded he should reap the Fruit of an Immortal Fame and Glory.

This City had felt very many Changes and Turns of Fortune, and those to the utmost Extremity, being sometimes in danger of being raz'd to the Ground. Of which, to say something briefly will not be any foreign Digression.

After Deucolion's Flood, when Cadmus had built the Cittadel, call'd Cadmea after his own Name, the People call'd Spartans or Sparsans flock'd thither in droves, call'd so by some, because they flock'd together from all Places; others call'd them Thebigens, because the Natives of Thebes were forc'd away by the Flood, and dispers'd here and there up and down in the Country. When these were again return'd, they were afterwards expell'd by force of Arms by the Ench

•lensians,

 and then even Cadmus himself was forc'd to fly to the Illyrians. After this, when Amphion and Zethus rul'd, and there first built the City, (as the Poet says,)

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Who first Thebes Walls with Seven Gates did raise. 

The Inhabitants were again expuls'd, when Polydorus the Son of Cadmus return'd into the Kingdom, where all Things were then carelesly manag'd, by reason of the sad Condition of Amphion for the Loss of all his Children.

Then again in the time of the Reign of his Posterity, (when all the Country was call'd Boeotia, from one Boeotus the Son of Melanippes and Neptune, who reign'd there,) the Thebans were expell'd the third time by the Epigoni of Argos, when they took the City by force. Those that escap'd of those that were expell'd, fled to Alalcomenia and the Mountain Tilphosius; but after the Death of these Argives, they return'd into their own Country.

 In the time of the Trojan War, when the Thebans were in Asia, those who stay'd at home, together with other Boeotians, were expell'd by the Pelasgians: and after they had endur'd many and various Calamities in the course of near four Generations, (according to the Oracle relating to the Crows,) they return'd, and inhabited Thebes.

From this time this City continu'd in a State of Prosperity near Eight hundred Years. And the Thebans at the beginning had the chief Command over all the rest of their Country.


Page 632

Afterwards when they attempted to be Sovereign Lords of all Greece, Alexander the Son of Philip took it by Storm, and raz'd it to the Ground. In the Twentieth Year next after, Cassander, to make himself Famous, and advance his own Reputation, he so far prevai

•

d with the Boeotians for their Concurrence, as that he rebuilt the City, and restor'd it to those Thebans that were then remaining of the old Stock. Many of the Greek Cities afforded their Assistance to the rebuilding of this Place, out of Compassion to the distressed Condition of the Thebans, and the ancient Fame and Glory of the City. The Athenians built the greatest part of the Walls, and others assisted according to their several Abilities; and Contributions were sent not only from all Parts of Greece, but from some both in Sicily and Italy. And thus the Thebans came to be restor'd to the ancient Seat of their Ancestors. Then Cassander mov'd with his Army towards Peloponnesus; and when he found that Alexander the Son of Polysperchon had fortify'd the Isthmus with strong Guards, he turn'd aside to Megara; and there he fitted out some Boats, and in them transported his Elephants to Epidaurus, and the rest of his Army in other Ships. Thence coming to Argos, he forc'd them to quit their Confederacy with Alexander and join with him. Afterwards he brought over to him all the Cities and Towns, with the Territories of Messina, except Ithom; and Hermonides he took in upon Articles of Agreement: But upon Alexander's marching down to fight, he left Two thousand Men at Geraneia, near the Istmos, under the Command of Molycus, and and return'd into Macedonia.

CHAP. IV.

Antigonus his Army feasted by Seleucus in Babylon. Falls out with Seleucus, who flies to Ptolemy, and is kindly receiv'd. Ptolemy, Seleucus, Cassander, and Lysimachus, join against Antigonus, They send Ambassadors to him, who Winters in Cilicia He goes into Phoenicia, and there builds Ships; besieges Tyre. The Praise of Phyla, Wife of Demetrius. Aristodemus raises Forces for Antigonus in Peloponnesus. The Acts of Ptolemy, one of Antigonus his Captains. Antigonus his Policy. Tyre deliver'd. The Agreement of Ptolemy's Captains and the rest at Cyprus. The Acts of Seleucus. A Fleet comes to Antigonus from the Hellespont and Rhodes. Things done in Peloponnesus. Cassander's Acts there, and in Greece. The great Victory by Sea and Land obtain'd by Polyclitus Seleucus, his Lieutenant: He's rewarded by Ptolemy. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. The Romans War with the Samnites.

AT the end of the former Year, Praxibulus was created chief Magistrate at Athens, and Spurius Nautius and Marcus Popilius bore the Office of Consuls at Rome; at which time Antigonus left one Aspisa a Native, Governor of Susiana. He himself resolving to carry away with him all the Monies, prepar'd Carriages and Camels for that purpose to bring it down to the Sea-side, and so having it along with him, march'd with his Army towards Babylon, which he reach'd in Two and twenty days March; where Seleucus the Governor of the Provinces received him with Royal Presents, and feasted the whole Army. But when Antigonus demanded an Account of the Revenue, he told them, He was not bound to give any Account of that Province which the Macedonians had bestow'd upon him as a Reward of his Service in Alexander's Life-time. The Difference growing wider and wider every day, Seleucus remembring Pitho's fall, was thereupon the more afraid, lest Antigonus should catch an Opportunity to put him also to Death. For he seem'd to have a Design to cut off (as soon as possible he could) all Men in Power, and such as were in a Capacity to struggle for the chief Command: Whereupon, for fear of the worst, he forthwith made away with Fifty Horse only in his Company, intending to go into Egypt to Ptolemy. For his Kindess and courteous Behaviour towards all that came to him for Protection and Shelter, was cry'd up in every Place. When Antigonus came to understand this, he rejoic'd exceedingly, in that he was not forc'd to destroy his Friend and potent Confederate, but that Seleucus by his own voluntary Banishment had seem'd to deliver up the Province of his own accord, without a Stroke struck.

Afterwards the Caldeans came to him, and foretold, That if Seleucus got absolutely away, he should be Lord of all Asia, and that in a Battel between them Antigonus himself


Page 633

should be kill'd. Whereupon being sorry that he had let him go, he sent some away to pursue him; but having follow'd him some little way, they return'd as they went. Antigonus was wont to slight these kind of Divinations in other Men, but at this time he was so amaz'd and affrighted with the high Esteem and Reputation of these Men, that he was very much disturb'd in his Thoughts: For they were judg'd to be Men very expert and skilful through their exact and diligent Observation of the Stars: And they affirm, that they and their Predecessors have study'd this Art of Astrology for above Twenty thousand Years. And what they had foretold concerning Alexander's Death, if he enter'd into Babylon; was found true by late Experience. And in truth, as those Predictions concerning Alexander came afterwards to pass, so what they now said relating to Seleucus were likewise in due time accomplish'd. Of which we shall treat particularly when we come to the Times proper for that purpose.

Seleucus, when he was got safe into Egypt, was entertain'd by Ptolemy with all the Expressions of Kindness and Affection that might be; where he bitterly complain'd against Antigonus, affirming that his Design was to expel all Persons of eminent Quality out of their Provinces, and especially such as were in Service under Alexander; which he back'd with Arguments from Pitho's being put to Death, and Peucestes being depriv'd of the Government of Persia, and from the Usage he himself had lately met with; and all these, though they had never done any thing to deserve it, but rather upon all Occasions perform'd all the Acts of Kindness and Service to him that was in their Power, and this was the Reward of all they reap'd from their Service. He reckon'd up likewise the Strength of his Forces, his great Treasure, and his late Successes, which so puff'd him up, that he was in hopes to gain the Sovereign Command over all the Macedonians.

Having by these Arguments stirr'd up Ptolemy to make War against him, he sent some of his Friends over into Europe, to prevail with Cassander and Lysimachus with the like Arguments to appear in Arms against Antigonus. Which Orders being forthwith executed, Foundations were laid for a mighty War, which afterwards follow'd.

Antigonus upon many probable Conjectures, conceiving what was Seleucus his design, sent Ambassadors to Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus, to desire them, that the ancient Friendship might be preserv'd and maintain'd amongst them. And then having made Pithon, who came out of India, Lord-Lieutenant of the Province of Babylon, he broke up his Camp, and march'd towards Cilicia. As soon as he came to Mallos, he distributed his Army into Winter-Quarters, about the Month of November: And he receiv'd out of the Treasury in the City of Quindi Ten thousand Talents, and Eleven thousand Talents out of the yearly Revenues of that Province. So that he was very formidable both in respect of his great Forces and the vastness of his Treasure. And now being remov'd into the Upper Syria, Ambassadors came to him from Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus, who being introduc'd as he sate in Council, demanded all Cappadocia and Lycia, to be be deliver'd up to Cassander; Phrygia, bordering upon the Hellespont, to Lystmachus; all Syria to Ptolemy; and the Province of Babylon to Seleucus; and all the common Stock of Moneys which he had incroach'd upon since the Battel with Eumenes, to be shar'd equally amongst them; which if he refus'd, then they were to let him know, that their Masters intended with their joint Forces to make War upon him. Whereunto he answer'd roughly, That he was now making a War upon Ptolemy; and thereupon, the Ambassadors return'd, without any effect of their Embassy: And upon this Answer, Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus entred into a League amongst themselves, and gathered their Forces together, and made it their business to provide Arms, and all other things necessary for the War.

And now Antigonus perceiving how many great and potent Adversaries had confederated against him, and what a Storm was ready to fall upon him, sought the Alliance and Confederacy of other Cities, Nations, and Princes; and to this purpose dispatch'd away Agisilaus to the King of Cyprus, Idomineus and Moschion to Rhodes, and one Ptolemy, his own Brother's Son, with an Army to raise the Siege of Amisus in Cappadocia, and to drive out those that were sent thither by Cassander. He commanded him likewise to go to the Hellespont, and fall upon Cassander, if he attempted to pass over out of Europe into Asia. He sent away likewise Aristodemus the Milesian, with a thousand Talents, with Orders to enter into a League of Amity with Alexander and Polysperchon, and to hire Soldiers, and make War upon Cassander: And he himself dispos'd Becons and Courriers throughout all Asia, which was wholly at his Command, hereby to give and get Knowledge of all things that pass'd, and to manage his Affairs with the greater Expedition.


Page 634

Having taken this Order, he marches into Phaenicia to provide a Fleet: For at that time the Enemy had the Command of the Sea, being furnish'd with abundance of Shipping, when he himself had not one. Encamping near to Tyre, with design to Besiege it, he sent for the petty Kings of Phaenicia, and Governors of Syria, and dealt with them to join with him in the Building of Ships, because all the Ships that belong'd to Phaenicia were then with Ptolemy in Aegypt. He gave them likewise Order to bring him with all speed Four Millions and Five hundred thousand Bushels of Wheat; for to so much came the yearly Expence of his Army. Then he got together Hewers of Timber, Sawers, and Ship Carpenters, from all Parts, and caus'd Timber to be brought down from Mount Lebanon to the Sea-side, employing therein Eight thousand Men to Work, and a Thou-Beasts for Carriage This Mount runs through Tripolis, Byblia, and Sidonia, and abounds in most beautiful tall Cedars and Cypress Trees. He appointed three Arsenals in Phaenicia, one at Tripolis, another at Byblia, and the Third at Sidon; a Fourth he had in Cilicia, whither Timber was brought from Mount Taurus; and a Fifth in Rhodes, where the Inhabitants suffer'd him to build Ships of Timber, convey'd thither at his own Charge.

While Antigonus was thus employ'd and lay Encamp'd by the Sea side, Seleucus came with a Fleet of an Hundred Sail out of Aegypt, quick Sailers, and Royally furnish'd, and in a scornful manner skirr'd under the Noses of them; which not a little troubled the Minds of his new Associates, and those that join'd with him in the carrying on of the Work. For it was very apparent, that the Enemy now being Master at Sea, would be sure to waste and spoil those who out of kindness to Antigonus had join'd with their Adversaries.

But Antigonus bid them be of good chear, for before the end of Summer, he said, he would be at Sea with a Fleet of Five hundred Sail.

Agesilaus, in the mean while, return'd with his Embassy out of Cyprus, and brought word, that Nicocreon, and the most potent Kings of that Island had already confederated with Ptolemy; Nevertheless, that Citticus, Lapitbius, Marius, and Cyrenites, would join with him: Whereupon, he left Three thousand Men under the Command of Andronicus, to maintain the Siege against Tyre, and he himself march'd with the rest of the Army against Gaza and Joppe, which stood out against him, and took them by force; and such of Ptolemy's Men as he found there, he took and distributed them among his own Regiments, and plac'd Garisons in both those Cities to keep them in Obedience. Which done, he return'd to his standing Camp about Tyre, and prepar'd all necessaries for a Siege against it. At the same time, Aristo, who was intrusted by Eumenes to carry Craterus his Bones, delivered them to Phila to be buried, who was marry'd first to Craterus, and at that time to Demetrius the Son of Antigonus, who was a Woman of excellent Parts and Prudence; for by her prudent Behaviour and Carriage towards every Soldier in the Army, she was able to qualify and moderate those that were most Turbulent, and she put forth the Daughters and Sisters of those that were Poor, at her own Charge; and prevented the Ruine of many that were falsly accus'd. Its reported, that Antipater her Father, (who was the most prudent Prince that Govern'd in this Age) was us'd to consult with Phila his Daughter, in the most weighty Affairs, while she was but yet a Girl. But the Prudence of this Woman will more fully appear in the following Narration, and when things tended to a Revolution, and the fatal Period of Demetrius his Kingdom. And thus stood the Affairs of Antigonus and Phila at this time.

Amongst the Captains sent away by Antigonus, Aristodemus pass'd over to Laconia, and having got leave of the Spartans to raise Soldiers, got together Eight thousand out of Peloponnesus; and upon Conference with Polysperchon and Alexander, join'd them both in a firm League of Amity with Antigonus, and made Polysperchon General over the Forces in Peloponnesus; but prevail'd with Alexander to pass over into Asia to Antigonus.

Ptolomeus, another of his Captains, going into Cappadocia with an Army, and there finding the City of Amisus besieg'd by Asclepidorus, a Captain of Cassander's, rais'd the Siege and secur'd the Place; and so having sent away Asclepidorus packing upon certain Conditions, recover'd that whole Province to Antigonus; and marching thence through Bithynia, came upon the back of Zibytes King of the Bithynians, whilst he was busie in besieging of two Cities at once, that of the Assarenians, and the other of the Calcedonians, and forc'd him to raise his Siege from both; and then falling to Capitulations both with him and the Cities that were besieg'd, after Hostages receiv'd, remov'd thence towards Ionia and Lydia; for that Antigonus had written to him to secure that Coast with all possible speed, having intelligence that Seleucus was going into those Parts with his Fleet; whither indeed he came and besieg'd Erythras: But hearing of the Enemies approach left it, and went away as he came. Mean while, Alexander the Son of Polysperchon,


Page 635

came to Antigonus, who made a League with him; and then calling a general Council of the Army and the Strangers there resident, declar'd unto them how Cassander had murder'd Olympias, and how villainously he had dealt with Roxana and the young King, and that he had forc'd Thessalonices to marry him, and that it was very clear and evident that he aspir'd to the Kingdom of Macedonia. Moreover, that he had planted the Olynthians, the most bitter Enemies of the Macedonians, in the City call'd after his own Name; That he had rebuilt Thebes that was raz'd by the Macedonians: Having thus incens'd the Army, he made and wrote an Edict, That Cassander should be taken as an open Enemy, unless he raz'd the two Cities, releas'd the King and Roxana his Mother, and return'd them safe to the Macedonians: And lastly, Unless he submitted to Antigonus, as General and sole Protector of the Kingdom; and free all the Greek Cities, and withdraw all the Garisons out of them.

When the Army had approv'd of this Edict by their Suffrages, he sent Courriers away to publish it in all places: For he hop'd, that by this Means all the Grecians, in expectation of having their Liberties restor'd, would be his Consederates, and readily assist him in the War, and that all the Governors of the Higher Provinces, who before suspected him, as if he design'd to deprive the Posterity of Alexander of the Kingdom, (now that it clearly appear'd that he took up Arms in their behalf) would observe all his Commands of their own accord.

Having dispatch'd all these Matters, he sent back Alexander with Five hundred Talents into Peloponnesus, with his hopes rais'd in expectation of mighty Matters: And he himself with Shipping had from Rhodes, and others he had lately built, set sail for Tyre; where being now Master at Sea, he so block'd it up for thirteen Months together, that no supply of Victuals could be brought thither, and thereby reduc'd the Inhabitants into so great distress, that at length (upon suffering the Soldiers to march away with some small things that were their own) the City was surrender'd to him upon Terms; and he plac'd a Garison in it for its Defence.

In the mean time, Ptolemy hearing what a Declaration Antigonus with the Macedonians had made, concerning the Liberty of the Grecians, made the like himself, as desirous that all the World should take notice, that he was no less zealous for the Liberty of Greece than Antigonus was: For both of them well considering of how great moment it was to their Affairs to gain the good Will of the Grecians, strove one with another which should oblige them most by Acts of Grace. Then he join'd to his Party the Governor of Caria, who was a Man of great Power, and had many great Cities under his Command. And thô he had before sent Three thousand Soldiers to the Kings in Cyprus, yet he hastned away many more, to reduce those who had there sided against him. Those sent were Ten thousand, under the Command of Myrmidon, an Athenian born, and an Hundred sail of Ships, Commanded by Polyclitus: And the General over all he made his Brother Menelaus.

These coming into Cyprus, join'd then with Seleucus and his Fleet, and in a Council of War advis'd what course was fit to be taken. The Result of which was, that Polyclitus with Fifty sail should pass into Peloponnesus, and there should make War upon Aristodemus, Polysperchon, and his Son Alexander: That Myrmidon should go with an Army of Foreigners into Caria, there to help Cassander against Ptolemy, a Captain of Antigonus, who pressed hard upon him; and that Seleucus and Menelaus staying in Cyprus, should bear up Nicocreon the King, and the rest of their Confederates, against their Enemies.

Having thus therefore divided their Forces, Seleucus went and took Cyrinia and Lapithus; and having drawn over Stasiecus, King of the Malenses, to his Party, he forc'd the Prince of the Amathusians to give him Hostages for his Fealty for the time to come. As for the City Citium (seeing it would come to no Agreement with him) he fell to besiege it with his whole Army.

About the same time came Forty Ships out of the Hellespont and Rhodes, under the Command of one Themison, their Admiral, to Antigonus; and after them came Dioscorides with Fourscore more; though Antigonus had already a Navy of his own, new built in Phenicia, to the Number of an Hundred and twenty Ships, with those that he left at Tyre; so that he had in the whole Two hundred and forty Men of War, of which there were Ninety of four Tire of Oars; Ten of Five, Three of Nine; Ten of Ten; and Thirty open Gallies.

Antigonus dividing this Navy into Squadrons, sent Fifty of them into Peloponnesus, and the rest he committed to Dioscorides, his own Brother's Son, with this Charge, That he should guard the Seas, and help his Friends as their occasion requir'd, and that he should gain unto his Party such of the Islands as hitherto stood out against him. And in this Posture stood the Affairs of Antigonus.


Page 636

And now, having related the things done throughout all Asia, we shall give a particular Account of the Affairs of Europe.

Apolenides being made Commander of the Argives by Cassander, in the Night broke into Arcadia, and surpriz'd the City of the Stymphalions. And while he was absent, some of the Argives (Enemies to Cassander) corresponded with Alexander the Son of Polysperchon, and promis'd to deliver up the City into his Hands. But Alexander being too slow, Apolonides comes to Argos before him; and surpriz'd Five hundred of the Conspirators that were in a Senate in the Prytaneum, and kept them in, and burnt them there alive; most of the rest he banish'd, and some few more he took and put to Death.

Cassander having intelligence, that Aristodemus was arriv'd in Peloponnesus, and that he had listed there great numbers of Soldiers, in the first place sought to draw off Polysperchon from Antigonus; but not being able to prevail, he march'd with an Army through Thessaly and came into Boeotia; where having assisted the Thebans in raising of their Walls, he pass'd into Peloponnesus, and first having taken Cencrea, he Spoil'd and Harrass'd all the Territory of Corinth. Then he took two Castles by Storm, and upon future Faith and Allegiance, dismiss'd all the Garison Soldiers that were plac'd there by Alexander. Afterwards he besieg'd Orchomenon, and being let into the Town by Alexander's Enemies, he put a Garison into the City; Those that sided with Alexander took Sanctuary in Diana's Temple, whom he gave up to the Citizens to do with them as they thought fit; whereupon the Orchomenians drew them all out of the Temple by Force, and against the common Laws of Greece put them all to Death.

Cassander went thence into Messenia, but finding the City strongly Garison'd by Polysperchon, he thought not fit for the present to besiege it, but march'd into Arcadia, where he left Damides Governor of the City, and return'd to Argolides, and there celebrated the Nem'an Games, and return'd into Macedonia. When he was gone, Alexander with Aristodemus lay before the Cities in Peloponnesus, to expell the Garisons of Cassander, and endeavour'd all he could to restore the Cities to their Liberties: Which coming to the Ears of Cassander, he sent to him Prepelaus to work upon him to desert Antigonus, and enter into a League of Friendship and Amity with himself; promising, that if he would do so, he would give him the Sovereign Command of all Peloponnesus, and create him General of the Army, and would advance him to high Places of Honour and Preferment. Alexander seeing he was now like to attain that for which from the beginning he made War upon Cassander, enters into a League with him, and so is made General of all the Forces in Peloponnesus.

In the mean while, Polyclitus, Secleucus his Lieutenant, sailing from Cyprus came to Cencrea; where hearing of the Defection of Alexander, and finding no Enemy there to Encounter, he chang'd his Course and set sail for Pamphylia; and from thence arriving at Aphrodisiades in Cilicia, he there understood that Theodotus, Admiral of Antigonus his Navy, pass'd by from Patara, a Port in Lycia, with the Rhodian Fleet, furnish'd with Mariners out of Caria; and that Perilaus with a Land-Army coasted along by the Shore, for the defence of the Fleet if need should be: In this case he out-witted them both; for he Landed his Men in a Place out of view, where the Land-Army must of necessity pass, and himself with the Fleet went and lay behind a Foreland, waiting for the coming of the Énemy; there the Enemy's Foot fell into an Ambush, and Perilaus himself being taken Prisoner, and his Men all either kill'd or taken. The Fleet at Sea seeing the Land-Army engag'd, hasted to their Relief; but then Polyclitus coming upon them in this Confusion, with his Ships drawn up in a Line of Battel, put them easily to flight; so that Polyclitus took all their Ships and most part of the Men in them, and amongst the rest Theodotus himself their Admiral, sorely martyr'd with Wounds, of which he shortly after died.

Polyclitus having sped so well on all hands, sail'd back first to Cyprus, and then to Pelusium, where Ptolemy richly rewarded him for so great a Service, and withal promoted him to a far higher Dignity and Place of Honour than he was in before, as the Author of so great a Victory: But releas'd Perilaus and some other Prisoners, which Antigonus desir'd by a Messenger sent to him for that purpose. And then himself going to a Place call'd Ecregma, came to a Parly with Antigonus, but Antigonus refusing to grant him what he demanded, he left him and return'd.

Having now given an account of the Affairs of the European Greeks, both in Greece and Macedonia, we shall run over to the Parts lying towards the West.

Agathocles, Prince of Syracuse, having possess'd himself of a Castle belonging to the Messenians, promis'd to restore it upon receiving of Thirty Talents of Silver: Which when the Messenians had paid, he not only broke his Faith, but endeavour'd to have seiz'd upon Messina it self. For being inform'd that part of the Walls were fallen down, he


Page 637

sent a Party of Horse by Land from Syracuse, and he himself in some Ships call'd Hemiolias, went by Sea, and arriv'd in the Night close under the Walls of the City: But they coming to understand his Design before-hand, wholly defeated him in what he had contriv'd. However, He came to Mylas, and upon laying Siege to the Castle, had it deliver'd up to him; and then return'd to Syracuse. In Harvest-time he made a second attempt upon Messina, and Encamping near the City, made continual Assaults, but was not able to effect any thing considerable: For many Exiles were flock'd into this Place from Syracuse, who both for the sake of their own Preservation, and out of Hatred to the Tyrant, fought most Courageously.

About this time came Ambassadors from Carthage, arguing the Case with Agathocles, and complaining of the Breach of Articles; and making Peace with the Messenians, they forc'd the Tyrant to restore the Castle, and then sail'd back into Africa.

After which Agathocles went to Abecenus, one of his Confederate Cities, and there he put to Death Forty, whom he look'd upon to be his Enemies.

In these times the Romans were at War with the Samnites, and took Ferentum by Storm; and the Inhabitants of Nuceria (call'd Alphatema) were, by the Persuasions of some Persons, prevail'd with to desert the Romans, and join in League with the Samnites.

CHAP. V.

The Acts of Aristodemus, Antigonus his General in Peloponnesus. The Dimeans in Achaia seek to free themselves from Cassander's Garison: They take the Cittadel. Alexander, Son of Polysperchon, Assassinated. The praise of Cratesipolis his Wife. The Acts of Cassander in Etolia, and other Parts of Greece. The Cruelty of the Etolians. Cassander sends an Army into Caria; and Aristotle with a Fleet to Lemnos. The Acts of Cassander's Army in Caria. Antigonus Leaves his Son Demetrius in Syria to watch Ptolemy. His troublesome March into Asia. The Affairs of Sicily. Acrotatus his Misgovernment and Cruelties in Sicily. The Acts of Agathocles. The Affairs of Italy.

WHEN the former year was ended, Nichodorus was created Archon at Athens, and Lucius Papirius chosen the Fourth, and Quintus Publius the second time Consul at Rome. At that time Aristodemus, made General by Antigonus, hearing of the Defection of Alexander the Son of Polysperchon, after he had open'd the Justice of the Cause before the Senate of the Etolians, sollicited them to be assistant to the Affairs of Antigonus. Then passing into Peloponnesus with the Mercenaries, found Alexander with the Eleans besieging Cyllene, and coming in nick of time rais'd the Siege; and then leaving a Garison to defend the Place, he mov'd towards Actria, and frees Patras from the Garison of Cassander; but Egeum he took by Force, and being possess'd of the Place, was ready to restore the Egeans to their Liberty, according to the former Decree, but that he was prevented by this Accident. The Soldiers began to Plunder; and upon that occasion many of the Citizens were kill'd, and the greatest part of the Town was burnt down to the Ground.

After which he sail'd back into Etolia; the Dymeans, who were aw'd by a Garison of Cassander's in the Castle, separated their City from the Cittadel by a Wall drawn round it, and encouraging one another to stand up for their Liberties, besieg'd the Castle, and infested it with continual Assaults. Of which Alexander receiving Intelligence, he came upon them with his Army on a sudden, and drave them within their Walls, and enter'd pell-mell with them into the City, and took it: Some of the Dymeans he put to the Sword, others he Imprison'd, and many of them he Banish'd. After Alexander went away, the rest of them were quiet for a little while, being both terrify'd with the greatness of the late Calamity, and likewise wanting the Assistance of their Confederates. But some time after, they made application to Aristodemus his Mercenaries, who march'd to them from Egeum. Whereupon, they again assaulted the Cittadel, and took it, and freed the City, and put many of the Garison to the Sword, and put to Death such of their own Citizens as favour'd Alexander's Party.


Page 638

Amongst these Turns and Changes of Fortune, while Alexander with his Army was marching from Sycion, he was kill'd by Alexion, a Sycionian, and some others, who pretended themselves to be his Friends. His Wife, Cratesipolis, after his Death, took upon her the Management of Affairs, and kept the Army in due Obedience: Her obliging Carriage and Bounty was such, as that she was greatly belov'd of the Soldiers; for she was continually affording all the help she could to them that were in Distress, and relieving and supporting many that were in Want: Besides, she was a Woman of admirable Prudence in managing Affairs, and of Courage beyond the natural Temper of her Sex. For when the Sycionians in contempt of her, (after the Death of her Husband) rose up in Arms for the Recovery of their Liberty, she executed her Revenge by cutting off Multitudes of them in a Field-battel; and crucify'd Thirty of those she had taken Prisoners; and so having settled the Affairs of the City, she reign'd over the Sycionians, having under her Command multitudes of Soldiers ready upon all occasions for any Undertaking, though never so hazardous. And this was then the State and Condition of Peloponnesus.

Cassander perceiving that the Etolians assisted Antigonus, and were then likewise engag'd in a War with their Neighbours the Acarnanians, judg'd that the most probable way to bring down the Etolians, was for him to join with the Acarnanians. To this end, he march'd out of Macedonia with a great Army, and came into Etolia, and Encamp'd near the River Campylus. Here he invited the Acarnanians to a common Consult, where he set forth how they had been vex'd for many Generations past, by War from their unruly and troublesome Neighbours; and therefore advis'd them, that they should leave their little Forts and Castles, (though they were fortify'd) and betake themselves to a few Cities, lest being so dispers'd and scatter'd in their Habitations, they should not be able to get together to assist one another, when the Enemy at any time should suddenly and unexpectedly break in upon them. The Acarnanians follow'd his Advice, and the most of them remov'd to Stratopolis, which was the strongest and largest of their Cities. The Oeniades and some others, went to Saurion; the Doreans with the rest to Agrinium.

Cassander hereupon, left Lyciscus his General in those Parts, with a considerable Body of Men, with Orders to assist the Acarnanians; and he himself march'd with his Army to the City Leueades, and by Treaty gain'd them for Consederates. Then with a swift March he came suddenly into Adria, and took in Apollonia his first approach. Thence marching into Illyria, he pass'd over the River Hebrus, and fought with Glaucius the Illyrian King, and routed his Army; after which he made Peace with him, upon Condition, that he should not make War upon any of his Confederates. Then he took in Epidamnum, and placing there a Garison return'd into Macedonia.

After Cassander had left Etolia, the Etolians joining together, to the Number of Three thousand besieg'd Agrinium, girting it round with a Trench and a Breast-work. But the Inhabitants that came before out of the Country, treated and agreed with the Enemy, That upon delivery up of the City their Persons should be secure, and they should have liberty to depart and leave the Place. Whereupon, after Faith given for their security, they went out, and when they were in their way, the Etolians Falsly and Treacherously, when the other never suspected any thing, pursu'd 'em, and kill'd 'em almost every Man.

Cassander being return'd into Macedonia, as soon as he heard how the Cities in Caria (that had Confederated with Ptolemy and Seleucus) were infested by the War, put over an Army into Caria, both to help the Confederates, as also in time to divert Antigonus, that he might have no leisure to come into Europe. He commanded also by his Letters Demetrius, Phalerius, and Dionysius Governor of the Fort of Munychia, to fit out forthwith Twenty Ships for Lemnos. Who thereupon, presently dispatch'd away the Ships, under the Command of Aristotle, their Admiral, and he arriving at Lemnos, and being there join'd with Seleucus and his Fleet, he prevail'd with them of Lemnos to desert Antigonus. But they afterwards retracted what they had before engag'd to, and thereupon he wasted and harrass'd the Country, and drew a Trench round the City and besieg'd it.

About this time Seleucus arriv'd at Coos; whose coming there being nois'd abroad, Dioscorides, Admiral of Antigonus his Fleet, sail'd to Lemnos, and drave Aristotle out of the Island, and took many of his Ships, together with all their Men on board.

One Cassander and Prepalaus were Commanders of the Forces sent into Caria by Cassander; who hearing that Ptolemy, Antigonus his General in those Parts, had distributed his Army into their Winter-Quarters, and that he himself was busie in the burying of his Father, sent away Eupolemus with Eight thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse, to a Place call'd Caprima, in Caria, to lie in Ambushment for him there: But Ptolemy getting


Page 639

notice thereof by some that fled over to him, got together out of the next Winter-Quarters Eight thousand and Three hundred Foot, and Six hundred Horse, and falling about Midnight into the Enemies Trenches, and finding them near all fast asleep, took Eupolemus Prisoner, and forc'd all his Men to submit to discretion. And this was then the Condition of those sent by Cassander into Asia.

But Antigonus perceiving that Cassander aim'd at the Sovereignty of Asia, left his Son Demetrius in Syria, with instructions to intercept Ptolemy's Men, whom he suspected were then coming with an Army further up into Syria; and to that purpose left with him Ten thousand Foot of other Nations, Two thousand Macedonians, Five hundred out of Lycia and Pamphilia, Persian Archers and Slingers Four hundred, and Five thousand Horse, and above Forty Elephants; and four Men for his Counsellors, Nearchon, Pitho Son of Agenor, who came lately from Babylon, Andromicus of Olynthus, and Philippus; all Men of mature Age and Judgment, and such as had attended upon Alexander in all his Wars: For Demetrius himself was but a young Man, not above Two and twenty years of Age. Upon Antigonus himself, while he past with the rest of his Army over Mount Taurus, there fell a mighty Snow, wherein he lost many of his Men. Whereupon, he return'd back into Cilicia, where he advis'd himself of a better Way to pass that Mountain, and with little damage to his Army; and so coming to Celenae in Phrygia, he there put his Army into their Winter-Quarters. Then he sent for the Fleet out of Phenicia, of which Medius was Admiral, who by meer chance in his way met with a Fleet of Thirty six Sail belonging to the City of Pydna, and defeated them, and brought the Ships with all their Men under his Subjection. In this Posture stood the Affairs both of Greece and Asia at this time.

In the mean time in Sicily the Exiles of Syracuse, who were then in Agrigentum, stirr'd up the great Men of the City not to suffer Agathocles in that manner to make a Prey of the Cities; alledging that it was better to set upon the Tyrant before he grew too strong, than to loiter till he was in greater power, and then to be forc'd to Contend with him when it was more hazardous: Whereupon the Agrigentines approving of his Advice, decreed by their suffrages War against him; and joining in Confederacy with the Geloans and Messenians, they sent some of the Exiles to the Lacedemonians with Orders to procure a General to be sent to them from thence. For they suspected that some of their own Citizens were too much inclin'd to Tyranny themselves, but judg'd that Foreigners if they remembred the Government of Timolion the Corinthian, would better manage the publick affairs. When they arriv'd therefore in Laconia they found Acrotatus, the Son of King Claomenes, much hated by many of the young Noblemen at home, and therefore very desirous to be imploy'd abroad. For when the Lacedemonians after the Fight with Antipater had acquitted those that escap'd in that Battel from all Censures of Disgrace, he only oppos'd the Decree; so that many were offended at him, especially those that were liable to the penalty of the Laws. And upon that account they had lain in wait for him, and beaten him, and were constantly seeking to intrap him: Being therefore for this reason desirous of a foreign Command, he very freely comply'd with the Agragentines; and thereupon without the Order of the Ephori (resolving upon the Voyage) he set Sail with a few Ships for Agrigentum: But being driven back by a Storm into Adria, he arriv'd in the Territory of the Apolloniates; where finding the City besieg'd by Glocias, King of the Illyrians, he perswaded the King to raise the siege, and enter into a League of Friendship with the Apolloniates. Then he sail'd to Tarentum, and there Solicited the People to join with him in procuring the Restoration of the Syracusians to their Ancient Liberties, and so far prevail'd, that they Decreed to assist them with Twenty Sail of Ships. For on the account of his Kindred and the nobleness of his Family, his words were of great Weight and Credit. While the Tarentines were making preparations, he himself sail'd to Agrigentum, and there took upon him the Command of the Army; whereupon the People were in high expectations, in so much as that all concluded that an end would be presently put to the Tyranny: But in a short time it plainly appear'd that he did nothing worthy, either the Nobility of his Birth, or the reputation of his Country. But on the contrary became more cruel and bloody than the very Tyrants themselves, and so fell into the Hatred of the People: He degenerated likewise from the custom of his Country in his manner of living; and so indulg'd himself in voluptuousness, that he seem'd more like a Persian, than a Spartan. After he had lavish'd away the greatest part of the publick Revenues, partly by his misgovernment, and partly by robbing of the Treasury; in the Conclusion he invited Sosistratus (the most eminent person among the Exiles, and one who had been a General of Armies) to Supper, and treacherously kill'd him, having not anything in the least to lay to his charge, but only that he might take out of the way


Page 640

a stout and valiant man, and one that was able to discern and discover his Miscarriages: Which wicked fact being presently nois'd abroad, the Exiles in a Body came upon him, and every body else forsoook him, and in the first place they depos'd him, and presently after attempted to stone him to death; to avoid therefore the rage of the People he stole away in the night and landed privatly in Laconia: After his departure the Tarentines recall their Fleet they had before sent into Sicily.

Hereupon the Agrigentines Geloans and Messenians by the mediation of Amilcar the Carthaginian General, make peace with Agathocles; the Conditions of which were as follow; that Heraclea Selinum and Himera, part of the Greek Cities, should belong unto the Carthaginians, as they did before; all the rest under the power of the Syracusians should be free to be govern'd after their own Laws. But afterwards Agathocles, when he saw the coast clear, and Sicily free and clear'd from all appearance of an Enemy, he fell upon the Cities, and without any difficulty brought them under his subjection; and gaining many in a very short time, strongly fixt himself in the Principality. For in the multitude of his Confederates, the greatness of his Yearly Revenues, and the power of a mighty Army, he grew very strong. For besides his Confederates and those rais'd from among the Syracusians, he had of mercenaries Ten thousand Foot and Three thousand and fifty Horse; he furnish'd himself likewise with all sorts of Arms, foreseeing that the Carthaginians (who had smartly rebuk't Amilcar for making the Peace) would in a short time make War upon him. And such was the estate of Sicily at this time.

In Italy the Samnites having now been in Wars with the Romans for many Years last past, took Plistia, wherein was a strong Roman Garrison; and prevail'd with the Soranions to massacre all the Romans that were there, and to confederate with the Samnites.

Afterwards while the Romans were besieging of Satricula, they came upon them with a strong Army resolving to raise the siege; upon which follow'd a sharp Engagment, and after many kill'd on both sides the Romans carry'd the day; and then presently after they took the Town, and gain'd several other neighbouring Towns and Castles. And now the War was brought over amongst the Cities of Apulia; whereupon the Samnites Listed all that were of Age to bear Arms, and march'd out and Incampt close to the Enemy, being now resolv'd to win or lose all. The People of Rome therefore to prevent the worst, sent thither a great number of Souldiers: And because they were accustom'd in perilous times to choose one of the most Noble and Eminent Persons to be their General, with full and absolute power and Authority; they therefore pitch'd upon Quintus Fabius and Quintus Aulius, Master of the Horse, for that honourable imployment. These Generals afterwards fought the Samnites at Lautulas, where they sustain'd great loss of their men; and the whole Army fled outright, only Aulius (being asham'd of the dishonour) oppos'd the whole Body of the Enemy, not out of any hopes or expectation of gaining the Victory, but to have it manifest and apparent to all from his own valour, that his Country was unconquerable. Not sharing therefore with the rest of the Citizens in the Dishonour of the flight, he dy'd there a glorious and honourable death.

The Romans now fearing lest they should lose all Apulia, sent Colonies into Luceria, the most famous City of all those parts; and this prov'd of great advantage to them by the frequent Eruptions made upon the Samnites. For by the help and advantage of this City they became Conquerors, not only in this war, but several times afterwards; and even to our own present Age they have constantly made use of this City as a strong Fort and Citadel of War against all the neighbouring Nations.


Page 641

CHAP. VI.

Several Cities revolt, Lysimachus comes against them. Philip, Cassander's General, Routs the Epirots and Etolians. Cassander agrees with Antigonus. Antigonus gaines the Cities in Caria. Cassander's Acts in Greece. The Samnites Routed by the Romans. Polemon sent by Antigonus into Greece, to set the Cities at liberty. The Acts of Antigonus and Cassander. Polemon's Acts in Greece for Antigonus. Ptolemy goes against Cyrene and Cyprus; Then against Demetrius. The Battle with Demetrius at Gaza. Ptolemy takes Tyre. The Acts of Antigonus his Commanders in Greece. The Epirots make Alcetas King, who is beaten by Lyciscus, Cassander's General, and he's beaten again by the other. Cassander goes against the Apolloniats. Seleucus recovers Babylon with a small Army. Demetrius Routs Cilles, Ptolemy's General. Ptolemy returns to Egypt, first wasts Samaria, Gaza, Joppa, &c. Athaneus sent against the Nabatheans by Antigonus. The Customs of the Arabians. Atharieus kill'd, with most of his Men! Demetrius sent against them. Description of the Asphaltes, or Lake of Sodom. Demetrius sent against Seleucus in Babylon. The Wars between the Romans and Samnites in Italy. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily.

THE Affairs of this Year being brought to this Conclusion, Theophrastus became chief Magistrate of Athens, and Marcus Petilius and Caius Sulpitius were invested with the Consular dignity at Rome. Then the Callentinians, the Inhabitants residing in the parts on the left hand of Pontus, cast out the Garrison put upon them by Lysimachus, and recover'd their liberty. In the same manner the Istrians freed their City, and Confederated with the neighbouring inhabitants to joyn together in a War against their Prince. The Thracians and Scythians likewise joyn'd with their Neighbours; so that all the Forces together were of that strength, that they were able to cope with the most potent Army.

Lysimachus hearing what was done, march'd with his Army against the Rebels, and passing through Thrace, when he had got over Mount Emus, Incampt near Odessus, which (upon blocking it up) the Inhabitants in a great Consternation deliver'd up to him: Reducing likewise the Istrians in the same manner, he marcht thence against the Callantians; about which time the Thracians and Scythians came in with a great Army to the assistance of their Confederates: Upon which Lysimachus advancing forwards, fac'd them, and forthwith lifting up his Ensigns for Battle, the Thracians were so terrifi'd that they marcht off and went their way. But the Scythians he Ingag'd, and Routed them, killing a great number, and driving the rest out of the Country. Then he laid close Siege to the City of the Callentinians, setting all his wit at work, and making it his main and only business how he might be reveng'd on the Authors of the defection. While he was busying himself in this concern, News was brought him that Antigonus had sent two Armies to the assistance of the Callentinians, one by Land and another by Sea; and that Lyco the Admiral was with the Navy in Pontus, and that Pausanias was Incampt with a great Land Army at Hieron. At this News Lysimachus was much concern'd, and thereupon leaving a considerable Body to maintain the Siege, he speedily march'd away with the main strength of the Army designing to ingage the Enemy; and being ready to pass over Emus, he found Seuthes King of Thrace (who had revolted to Antigonus) obstructing his passage with a great Body of Men; upon which they ingag'd and he forc'd his way through the Barbarians with the loss of a great number of his own men, but many more of the Enemies.

Then he fell upon the Pausanians, finding them in the Streights, whither they had fled. These he gain'd by force, and having kill'd Pausanias, he discharg'd some of the Soldiers upon Ransom, and others that took up Arms with him he distributed amongst his own Troops. And thus stood the affairs of Lysimachus. But when this Enterprise succeeded not, Antigonus sent Telesphorus into Peloponnesus with a Fleet of Fifty Sail, and a considerable number of Soldiers, with Orders to free all the Cities that they might live according to their own ancient Laws. This he did, hoping by this means to gain credit amongst the Grecians as one that really intended the procurement and preservation of


Page 642

their Liberties; and by this method he concluded he should find out how things stood with Cassander.

Telosphorus therefore as soon as he arriv'd in Peloponnesus, went to Alexander's Garrisons, and set them all free, except Sicyon and Corinth. For in these Polysperchon had plac'd great numbers of Souldiers, trusting to them and the strength of the places.

In the mean time Philip being sent by Cassander as General to make War upon the Etolians; as soon as he came with his Army into Acarnania, the first thing he did was to harrass and spoil Etolia; but not long after hearing that Eacides King of Epirus (who was now Restor'd to his Kingdom) had rais'd a strong Army, he made against him with all speed: For he endeavor'd all he could to Fight him before the Etolians had joyn'd him. And finding the Epirots ready prepar'd to fight, he forthwith engag'd, and kill'd multitudes of them, and took many Prisoners; amongst whom it happn'd that there were about Fifty of the Faction that were the instruments to restore Eacides whom he sent away bound to Cassander. Afterwards the broken Troops of Eacides Rallying again, joyn'd with the Etolians, and Philip set upon e'm and Routed e'm a second time with the slaughter of many, amongst whom was Eacides himself.

Having effected such great matters in so short a time, the Etolians were so terrifi'd that they forsook their unfortifi'd Cities, and fled with their Wives and Children unto the fastnesses of the Mountains, where it was very difficult to come at them: And this conclusion had the affairs of Greece at that time.

As for Asia Cassander, though he was chief Governour there yet overpress'd with the weight of the War, he agreed with Antigonus upon these terms; that he should deliver all the Soldiers into the hands of Antigonus, and should grant Liberty to all the Greek Cities there to Govern according to their own Laws; and that he should keep the Province he formerly possess'd as by grant from him, and should be ever after Antigonus his firm friend.

And for the true performance of these Conditions he deliver'd to him his Brother Agathonas as Hostage; but within a while after he repented of what he had done, and got his Brother out of their clutches that had him in custody, and sent an Ambassador to Ptolemy and Seleucus, to desire them to send him Aid with all speed: At which Antigonus was highly incens'd and sent away Forces both by Sea and Land with Orders to free all the Cities, and Created Medius Admiral of the Fleet, and Docimus General of the Forces at Land.

These Commanders coming to Miletum dealt with the Inhabitants to stand for their Liberties, and took the Cittadel with the Garrison therein, and restor'd the ancient Laws to the Cities.

In the mean time Antigonus took Tralles; and then lay before the City Caunus, and sending for his Fleet took that likewise, except only the Castle; about which he cast a Trench and made continual assaults upon it in those parts where there was any hopes of Entry: He had sent Ptolemy to the City Jassus with a considerable Army, but he was fain to come back and joyn again with Antigonus; and so all those Cities in Caria came at that time into his hands.

Within a few days after came Ambassadors from the Etolians and Beotians with whom Antigonus entred into a League of Confederacy; but going to Cassander to the Hellespont to Treat with him upon terms of Peace, he return'd without effecting any thing, for they could not hit it upon any score: Whereupon Cassander casting aside all hopes of any accommodation, resolv'd again to pursue the settlement of his Affairs in Greece. To that end he sail'd away with a Fleet of Thirty Sail and laid close Siege to the City Oreum, which he so fiercly assaulted that he took it by Storm; presently upon this came in Telesphorus from Peloponnesus with Twenty Ships, and a Thousand Soldiers, and Medius out of Asia with a Hundred Sail to the relief of Oreum; who spying Cassander's Ships then at Anchor in the Harbour, burnt four of them, and disabled almost all the rest. But the Athenians coming in to their relief, Cassander in scorn and contempt of the Enemy falls upon them afresh, and in the Ingagement sinks one, and takes three, together with all their Men: And thus were Affairs then manag'd in Greece.

In Italy the Samnites wasted and spoil'd the Towns and Country round about that sided with their Enemies: But the Roman Consuls march'd into those Parts with an Army, in order to succour their Confederates; and there encamping near Cinna in the face of the Enemy, they allay'd the Fears of the City. A few days after, the Armies on both sides drew up in Battalia, and fought a bloody Battel, wherein multitudes fell on both sides; but at length the Romans breaking through the main Body of their Enemies, totally routed them, and pursu'd them a long way, and kill'd above Ten thousand.


Page 643

In the mean time, the Campanians (not knowing of this Battel) in contempt of the Romans, rebell'd: Whereupon the People of Rome forthwith sent out a strong Army against them, under the Command of Caius Menius, as General, with absolute and unlimitted Power, with whom was join'd, according to the Custom of the Romans, Marcus Follius, Master of the Horse. These Consuls sitting down with their Army near Capua, the Campanians at first resolv'd to fight them; but afterwards hearing of the Rout and Slaughter of the Samnites, thinking the Romans would fall upon them with their whole Forces, they made Peace with them: For they gave up the Ringleaders of the Defection who after they were examin'd, prevented the Sentence of Condemnation by murder ing themselves. But the Cities were pardon'd, and so return'd to their former Allegiance.

The former Year being ended, Polemus executed the Place of the Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Lucius Papirius the Fifth, and Caius Junius the Second Consulate at Rome, in which Year was celebrated the Hundred and seventeenth Olympiad, in which Parmenio of Mitylene carry'd away the Prize. At this time Antigonus sent Polemon into Greece, to set at liberty all the Grecian Cities, and with him a Hundred and fifty Long Ships, under the Command of Medius his Admiral; on board of which Vessels were Five thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse. Having made a League with the Rhodians, he receiv'd likewise Ten Ships of War more from them, to help forward the restoring of the Greek Cities to their Liberties. About the same time Ptolemy arriv'd in the Harbour of Boeotia (call'd the Deep) with the whole Fleet, and receiv'd from the Boeotians Two thousand and Two hundred Foot, and Thirteen hundred Horse. He sent likewise for Shipping from Oreum, and wall'd Sagonea, and there rendezvous'd his whole Army; for he was in good hopes that the Chalcideans would confederate with him, who were the only Eubeans that were Garison'd by the Enemy. But Cassander was jealous of Chalcis, and therefore rais'd his Siege before Oreus, and sent for his Forces thither.

Antigonus being inform'd that the Armies lay encamp'd one over-against another in Eubea, recall'd Medius with the Fleet into Asia; and forthwith got his Forces together, and with a swift March made for the Hellespont, with a purpose to pass over into Macedonia, that he might either seize upon it while Cassander was busie in Eubea, and the Country void of sufficient defence; or that by forcing him to come in with Aid for the defence of the Kingdom, he might thereby divert him from prosecuting the War in Greece, and necessitate him to endeavour the preservation of his Concerns nearer at home.

But Cassander coming to understand what he design'd, left Plistarchus to guard Chalcis, and he himself march'd away wtth the whole Army, and took Oropus by Assault, and brought over the Thebans to be his Consederates, and enter'd into a Truce with the rest of the Boeotians; and having so done, he left Eupolemus to defend Greece, and return'd into Macedonia with his Head full of Care, concerning the Enemy's March into that Country.

When Antigonus came to the Propontis, he solicited the Byzantines by his Ambassadors to join with him as his Consederates; but it prov'd that there were there at the same time Agents from Lysimachus, treating with them not to engage in any thing either against him or Cassander. Whereupon the Byzantines resolv'd to sit quiet at home, and stand upon even Terms of Peace and Amity with both sides.

This unlucky Accident giving a stop to Antigonus his further Progress in this Affair, together with the approach of the Winter, he distributed his Soldiers in the Towns round about into their Winter-Quarters.

In the mean time, the Corcyreans assisted the Apolloniates and them of Epidamnus, and upon Terms of Agreement sent away Cassander's Soldiers; and thereupon restor'd Apollonia to their ancient Liberties, and Epidamnus they deliver'd up to Glaucias, King of the Illyrians.

But Ptolemy, Antigonus his General, upon Cassander's return into Macedonia, and the Consternation Chalchis was in, had the City deliver'd up to him, and so freed the Chalcidains from receiving any further Garison; to the end every one might take notice, that Antigonus was sincere, and did really design to restore all the Greek Cities to their Liberties: For it was a City of eery great Moment and Concern to such as were ambitious of gaining the Sovereignty of Greece, and valued a Place of Strength for that purpose.

Palemon likewise took Oropus, and deliver'd it up to the Boeotians, and made all Cassander's Soldiers Prisoners at War; and after he had brought in the Eretrians and Carystians to


Page 644

join as Confederates, he led his Army into Attica, Demetrius Phalerius being then Chief Magistrate of the City. For those Athenians that desir'd to be restor'd to their ancient Laws, had not long before sent some privately to Antigonus to treat with him upon that account; and now being more resolv'd and encourag'd upon Ptolemy's drawing near to the City, they forc'd Demetrius to make a Truce, and send an Agent to Antigonus, in order to treat of a League with him.

Out of Attica he march'd into Boeotia, and took the Citadel Cadmea, and freed the Thebans from that Garison. Thence he went forward into Phocis, and reducing several Cities there, he cast out the Garisons of Cassander in every Place where-ever he came. Then he invaded Locris; and because the Opuntians join'd with Cassander, he besieg'd them, and prest upon the Place with continual Assaults.

About the same time the Cyrenians revolted from Ptolemy King of Aegypt, and besieg'd the Castle there so fiercely, as if they would presently have taken it; and when Messengers came from Alexandria, persuading them to desist, they struck off their Heads, and fell to work against the Castle more fiercely than ever they did before. Ptolemy being exceedingly mov'd hereat, sent one Agis, a Captain of his, thither with an Army, and withal a Navy to assist him by Sea, under the Command of Epenetus. Agis vigorously pursuing the War against those Rebels, took Cyrene by Storm, and committed the Authors of this Sedition to Prison, and then sent them bound to Alexandria, and disarm'd the rest: And so having set things in order there (as he saw cause) return'd into Aegypt.

Ptolemy having had this good Success at Cyrene, took Shipping, and with his Fleet pass'd over out of Aegypt into Cyprus, against those who rebell'd against their Kings; and having gotten Pygmalion (whom he found Corresponding with Antigonus) he put him to death. Then he took Praxippus King of the Lapithi and Prince of Cerynnia, who was suspected of a Revolt, and laid them fast: He took likewise Stasiecus, a petty King of the Malieans, and destroying their City, remov'd the Inhabitants from thence to Paphos; which done, he made Nicocreon Commander over all Cyprus, and gave him the Cities, together with the Revenues of all the Kings which he had cast out of their Dominions, and then went with his Army into the Upper Syria, and sack'd the Cities Posideum and Potamos of the Carians. That done, he went with a flying Army into Celicia, and took Mallus, and sold all the Inhabitants for Slaves, and wasted all the Region thereabouts; and having stor'd all his Army with rich Plunder, sail'd back again to Cyprus. He so shar'd with his Soldiers in all Hazards and Dangers, that he stirr'd them up by his Example chearfully and readily to undergo all manner of Difficulties.

Mean while, Demetrius, the Son of Antigonus, kept in Coelo-Syria, expecting the coming of the Egyptians; but when he heard of the taking of so many Cities, he left Pithon to Command in those Parts, leaving his Corseletiers and Elephants with him, and he with his Horse and Companies of light-arm'd Soldiers hasted away with all speed toward Cilicia, to aid them that were in distress there; but coming too late, and finding the Enemies all gone, he return'd speedily to his Camp again, spoiling many of his Horse by the way; for in six days time he made away from Mallus Four and twenty days Journey by their ordinary Stages; so that through their immoderate Travel, none of their † Servants or Horse-boys were able to keep them company.

Ptolemy therefore seeing all go every where as we would have it, for the present return'd into Aegypt. But not long after, being put on by Seleucus (for the hatred that he bore unto Antigonus) he resolv'd to march into Coelo-Syria, and there to try it out with Demetrius: Wherefore gathering all his Army together, he march'd from Alexandria to Pelusium, having with him Eighteen thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, whereof some were Macedonians, and some hired Soldiers: As for the Egyptians, some serv'd to carry their Darts and Weapons, and other Luggage of the Army, and some for Soldiers; and having pass'd the Desart from Pelusium, he encamp'd near the Old City of Gaza in Syria, not far from the Enemy.

Demetrius, on the other side, call'd all his Army out of their Winter-Quarters, and appointed them to Rendezvous at Gaza, there to attend the Enemy's approach. His Friends indeed advis'd him not to sight with so Great a General, who had the advantage of a far more numerous Army; but he rejected their Council, and confidently prepar'd himself for Battel; tho' he was then but a mere Boy, and was to undertake so hazardous an Engagement without his Father. Calling therefore now the Soldiers as they stood at their Arms, he mounted an Ascent rais'd by Earth, and there stood as if he were in Amaze and Astonishment: Upon which, all the Soldiers cry'd out with one Voice, Be Courageous; and presently there was a deep silence before the Herald could command it:


Page 645

For being that he had but newly taken upon him the Sovereign Command, none took any Offence at his Deportment, in relation either to Civil or Military Affairs, which is frequently the Lot of Old Captains, who have many times all their Faults ript up together at one time. For the Common People are not long pleas'd with the same Things; and whatever grows stale in the Use, has a pleasant Gust in the Change and Alteration. And besides the expectation of his coming to the Kingdom (his Father being now old) conjoin'd in his Succession both the Supreme Command and the Good-will of the People together. Moreover, he was a very proper and comely Person, and being clad in Royal Armour, appear'd in that Majesty as possess'd the Beholders with Awe and Reverence, and rais'd up the Spirits of the Army with high Expectations of Great Things to come. He was likewise of a mild Disposition, becoming a new Prince and General, by which he wan the Love of all, insomuch as even those as were not as yet reduc'd into Orderly Regiments, flock'd to him to receive his Commands, being much concern'd upon the account of his Youth, and the hazardous Battel that was presently to be fought. For he was not only to try the Fortune of War against a greater number of Men, but against the most Eminent and Expert Commanders of the Age, Ptolemy and Seleucus, who had been Captains under Alexander in all his Wars, and had been often Generals of their own Armies, never conquer'd to that day.

Demetrius therefore, after he had with winning and obliging Expressions courted the Soldiers, and promis'd Rewards suitable to every Man's Merit, drew up the Army in Battalia. In the Left Wing (where himself intended to be) he plac'd first Two hundred choice Horse, amongst whom, with other of the Nobility, was Pitho, who had serv'd under Alexander, and had been made General of all the Forces by Antigonus, and Fellow-Partner with him in all his Concerns. In the Front he plac'd Three Regiments of Horse, and as many Flankers to support them: At a distance out from the Wing were Three other Regiments of Tarentines, to the end that Five hundred Horsemen with Lances, and a Hundred Tarentines, might be ready at hand as the King's Lifeguard. Next he plac'd Eight hundred Horse, which were call'd Associates; and after them Fifteen hundred out of several Nations; and before the whole Wing stood as a Guard Thirty Elephants, lin'd with light-arm'd Men, of whom a thousand were Darters and Archers, and Five hundred Persian Slingers. And in this manner was the Left Wing drawn up, with which he intended to make the Onset: Then was rang'd the main Battel, consisting of Eleven thousand Foot, of whom Two thousand were Macedonians, and a Thousand Lycians and Pamphylians, and Eight thousand hir'd Soldiers.

In the Right Wing he drew up the rest of the Horse, to the number of Fifteen hundred, under the Command of Andronicus, who had Orders to keep in an oblique Line, and make a running Fight of it, still observing how it went with Demetrius. The rest of the Elephants, to the number of Thirteen, he plac'd before the main Battel of the Foot lining them with as many light-arm'd Men as were sufficient. And in this manner Demetrius drew up his Army.

As for Ptolemy and Seleucus, at the first they made it their Business to place their greatest Strength in their Left Wing, not knowing what the Enemy design'd: But being afterwards inform'd by their Scouts what was done, they forthwith so drew up, as that the greatest Strength being in their Right Wing, they might be the better able to engage with Demetrius in the Left; and therefore in that Wing were drawn up Three thousand of the best Horse, amongst whom they themselves intended to charge. Before these were plac'd those who bore an artificial Palisado before them, sharp-pointed with Iron, and fasten'd together with Chains, prepar'd against the Shock of the Elephants; for this being drawn out in length, it was an easie matter by this means to put a stop to their further Career. In the Front of this Wing were plac'd light-arm'd Soldiers, who were commanded to ply the Elephants and their Riders with Darts and Arrows as they came on. The Right Wing being thus drawn up, and the rest of the Army so dispos'd as the present Occasion at that time most requir'd, they led forth the Army with a great Shout towards the Enemy; who, on the other side, drawing down upon them, the Fight was begun by the Horse in the Fronts of both Wings, where the Demetrians had much the better; but within a little time after the Ptolemeans and Seleucians (having surrounded the Wing) made a fierce Charge with their whole Body; upon which (through the Resolution of both Parties) there follow'd a very sharp Engagement. Upon the first Onset they fought with their Lances, where many were kill'd, and as many wounded on both sides. Then they fell to it with their Swords, and there thronging together, thrust one another through, and fell in heaps together.


Page 646

The Generals exposing themselves to the utmost Hazard, led on their Men, and encourag'd their Troops to stick to it like valiant Men. The Horse that were plac'd to guard the Wings, were all Brave and Gallant Men, and having their Commanders (who fought together with them) Eye-witnesses of their Valour, strove to outvie one another. And now the Fight between the Horse had been for a long time doubtful, when the Elephants (forc'd on by the Indians) made so terrible an Onset, as if it had been impossible for any to have stood before them: But when they came up to the Palisado, the Archers and Darters sorely gall'd both the Beasts and their Riders; and being still forc'd on forward and whipt up by the Indians, some of them stuck upon the sharp Points of the Palisado, with which (together with the multitude of Darts and Arrows that gall'd them) they were in that Pain and Torment, that they caus'd an horrible Tumult and Confusion. For these Creatures in plain and even Places bear down all before them, but in those that are Rough and Craggy, they are of no use or service, because of the tenderness of their Feet. Ptolemy therefore wisely foreseeing of what advantage this Palisado would be, by that means frustrated the Rage and Fury of the Beasts. At length, most of the Indians that rid them being kill'd, all the Elephants were taken; upon which the greatest part of Demetrius his Horse were in such a Consternation that they forthwith fled; and he himself was left with a very few that attended him; but not being able with all the Arguments he could make, to persuade his Men to stand their Ground and not forsake him, he was forc'd likewise to retreat. A great part of the Horse that follow'd the other, retir'd in good Order, and kept themselves unbroken till they came to Gaza, so as that none of the Pursuers durst hastily fall upon them. For the Field being a large even Plain, they had the more Liberty to draw off in order and retreat in a form'd Body. Some likewise of the Foot, (who judg'd it the best course to forsake their Colours and look to themselves) cast away their Arms, and follow'd the Horse.

About Sun-setting he pass'd by Gaza; but some of the Horse left him and enter'd the City, to fetch out some Luggage. The Gates therefore being open, and the Streets full of Sumpter Horses, and all busie in leading and carrying out their Goods, there was such Disorder and Thronging at the Gates, that upon the approach of the Ptolimeans, none could get up to them to shut them to prevent their Entry; so that the Enemy breaking in, the City thus fell into the hands of Ptolemy. And this was the Issue of this Battel.

Demetrius, without stop or stay, about Midnight came to Azotus, having from the Place of Battel rid above Thirty Mile. Thence he sent a Trumpet to beg the Bodies of the Dead, being very earnest to perform the last Office of right due to them that were slain. Many of his Nobility were there slain, amongst whom, the most eminent was Pitho, join'd in equal Commission with himself, and Beotus who had long liv'd with Antigonus the Father, and was ever privy to all his Designs, and partaker of all his Councils. There were slain in this Battel on Demetrius his side, above Five hundred, of whom the greatest part was Horse, and the Chief of his Nobility; and Eight thousand and upward were taken Prisoners.

Ptolemy and Seleucus, not only granted him the dead Bodies, but sent him back his own Pavillion, with all the Furniture belonging to it, and all such Prisoners as were of his Houshold, free and without Ransom; withal letting him know, that they fought not with Antigonus for these things, but because he had not restor'd those Provinces to the Governors that were conquer'd by their joint Arms in the War first against Perdictas, and then against Eumenes; and for that after he had renew'd his League of Friendship with Seleucus, he had most Unjustly, and against all Right depriv'd him of the Province of Babylon. Other Prisoners Ptolemy sent into Egypt, with Orders to distribute them amongst the several Regiments in his Fleet.

After Ptolemy had with great Pomp and Solemnity bury'd those that were slain in the Battel, he march'd with his Army against the Cities of Phenicia, besieging some, and persuading others to yield. Demetrius in the mean time (being no longer able to hold out) dispatch'd away a Messenger with Letters to his Father, to pray him to come away speedily to his help; and he himself coming to Tripoli in Phenicia, sent for the Soldiers that were in Cilicia and elsewhere in Garisons remote and far distant from the Enemy's Quarters, to come to him. But Ptolemy keeping with his Army still in the open Field, march'd into the Coasts of Sidon, and Encamping near Tyre, sent to Andronicus, Governor of the Garison there, to render up the City to him, making him large Promises both of Wealth and Honour. But he not only answer'd, That he would never betray the Trust which Antigonus and Demetrius had put in him, but also us'd many reviling Speeches against Ptolemy; but a little while after he was surpriz'd by a Mutiny of his own Soldiers, and fell into his Hands; and thereupon expected nothing but Death for his refusal to deliver up


Page 647

the City, and for his reviling Language: But Ptolemy not only forgot the Injury, but highly rewarded him, and took him into the number of his Friends, and honourably preferr'd him. For this Prince was of a most affable and gentle Disposition, and very Kind and Generous, which much contributed to the Increase of his Power, and the Advancement of his Honour and Reputation, and induc'd many upon that account to join with him, as his Allies and Confederates. For he honourably receiv'd Seleucus when he was cast out of Babylon, and made him and the rest of his Friends partners with him in that Plenty, and state of Prosperity that he himself enjoy'd: And therefore, when Seleucus desir'd some Forces from him to go along with him to Babylon, he very readily granted them, and withal promis'd he would assist him in every thing to his Power, till he had recover'd his former Government. In this Condition stood the Affairs of Asia at that time.

In Europe, Telesphorus, Antigonus his Admiral, who then lay with the Fleet at Corinth, seeing how Ptolemy was preferr'd before him, and that all the Concerns of Greece were intrusted in his hands, accus'd Antigonus upon this Account, and deliver'd up to him those Ships he had with him. Then picking out so many of his Soldiers as were willing to join with him in his designs, he began to play his own Pranks. For pretending to be at one with Antigonus, he enter'd Elis, and fortify'd the Citadel, and enslav'd the City. He robb'd likewise the Temple at Olympus, and took thence above Fifty Talents of Silver, wherewith he rais'd and hir'd Foreign Soldiers. And thus Telesphorus, out of Envy to the Advancement of Ptolemy, became a Traytor to Antigonus.

But Ptolemy, Antigonus his General in Greece, (as soon as he heard of the Defection of Telesphorus, and that he had seiz'd upon the City of the Elians, and robb'd the Temple at Olympus) march'd with an Army into Peloponnesus: And coming to Elis, raz'd the Citadel to the Ground, restor'd the Elians to their Liberty, and the Money to the Temple.

Afterwards, he so far wrought upon Telesphorus, that he regain'd Cyllene, wherein Telesphorus had put a Garison, and restor'd it to the Elians.

In the mean time, while these things were in acting, the Epirots (Eacides their King being dead) deliver'd up the Kingdom to Alcetas, who had been before him banish'd by his Father Arybilus. This Alcetas was an inveterate Enemy to Cassander, and therefore Lyciscus, Cassander's General in Acarnania, march'd with an Army into Epirus, hoping he should easily depose him, the Affairs of the Kingdom being then scarce well settled.

Lyciscus to this end Encamping at Cassopia, Alcetas sent his Sons, Alexander and Teucrus, to all the Cities, to raise as many Soldiers as possibly they could; and he himself march'd forward with what Forces he had, and when he came near the Enemy, made an Halt, waiting for the coming up of his Sons.

But Lyciscus, who far exceeded him in number, pressing upon him, the Epirots, in a great Terror and Amazement, ran over to the Enemy: Whereupon, Alcetas being thus forsaken, fled to Eurymenas, a City in Epirus; while he was closely besieg'd in this Place, in comes Alexander with an Aid to the Relief of his Father; upon which follow'd a sharp Engagement, in which many of Lyciscus his Men were cut off, amongst whom (besides other Persons of great account) were Micythus, a great Captain, and Lysander the Athethenian, Cassander's Lord-Lieutenant of Leucadia.

Afterwards, Dinias coming in to the Assistance of those thus worsted, there hapned a second Engagement, in which Alexander and Teucer being routed, they, together with their Father, fled to a strong Castle thereabout for shelter. Lyciscus presently took Eurymenas, plunder'd it, and raz'd it to the Ground. 

Cassander at this time hearing of the Defeat of his Forces, (but having no intelligence of the Success which follow'd) hasted away into Epirus to succour Lyciscus: But when he came to understand how well things had succeeded on his side, he made Peace, and enter'd into a League of Friendship with Alcetas. Then with part of his Army he march'd into Adria, in order to besiege the Apolloniates, who had cast out his Garison, and join'd with the Illyrians. But the Inhabitants were not at all affrighted, but having sent for aids from others that were their Confederates, they drew up in Battalia before their Walls: Upon which, there was a sharp Dispute for a long time together; but the Apolloniates over-powering the other in number put their Enemies to flight. Cassander therefore having lost many of his Men, and wanting Forces sufficient, and perceiving the Winter to draw on a pace, return'd into Macedonia.

After his departure, the Leucadians, assisted by the Corcyrians, drave out the Garison of Caessander. As for the Epirots, they were quiet under the Royal Government of Alcetas for a time; but when he grew more Severe and Tyranical, they Murder'd both him and his two Sons, Hesioneas and Nisus, who were but then young Children.


Page 648

In Asia, Sele

•ous,

 after the routing of Demetrius at Gaza in Syria, (receiving from Ptolemy no more than Eight hundred Foot, and Two hundred Horse) march'd towards Babylon with that Confidence as to believe, that though he had no Forces at all with him, yet he should be able to go up into the Higher Provinces, only with his own particular Friends and Servants; being verily persuaded, that the Babylonians (for the former Love and Affection they bare him) would readily come in and side with him; and that now he had a fair Opportunity to accomplish his Design, Antigonus being with his Army at a great distance from the Place.

However, though he went on with such assuredness of Mind, yet his Friends that were with him, (seeing the inconsiderable Number of his Soldiers, and on the other hand the great Strength of his Enemies against whom he was marching, and the fulness of Provision, and number of the Confederates wherewith they were supply'd and furnish'd) were greatly discourag'd: Which Seleucus taking notice of, spoke to them to this effect: It becomes not the Captains and Fellow. Soldiers of Alexander, in the Expeditions of War, to confide only in the strength of Arms and confluence of Wealth, but in their Military Art and Prudence, through which he accomplish'd great and wonderful Things, by all for ever to be admir'd: But it is our Duty rather to believe the Gods who have assur'd us, that this Expedition shall be Prosperous and Successful. For he told them, That in Consulting the Oracle at Branchides, some considerable time before the God call'd him King; and that Alexander stood by him in his Sleep, and clearly discover'd to him the Royal Dignity, to which in due time he should be advanc'd; and further declar'd, That whatever was Great and Glorious amongst Men, was always to be attained by Hazards and Toil. And withal, carrying himself Fairly and Amicably to all his Soldiers he was honour'd by every body, and all were willing to run with him the Hazard of this desperate Enterprize.

On then he march'd, and coming with them into Mesopotamia he there dealt with such Macedonians as he found dwelling in Carran, and some of them by Persuasions, and some of them by plain Force he drew to go along with him in this Expedition. As soon as he enter'd into Babylon, the Inhabitants came in flocking to him, and offer'd him their Service; for he had before carry'd himself in the most obliging manner to all for the space of Four years together when he was Governor of the Province, thereby to gain the good will of the People, and to secure an Interest for himself, if at any time afterwards he should have an Occasion to contend for the Sovereign Command. Polyarchus also came in to him, who bare some kind of Office among them, with above a Thousand Men compleatly arm'd. But they who stood for Antigonus, when they perceiv'd the general and irresistable Inclination of the Multitude towards him, fled all to the Castle, which was commanded by Diphilus; and Seleucus fell presently to besiege it, and having taken it by Force, deliver'd such Children and Friends of his as Antigonus (when Seleucus for fear fled away from Babylon into Aegypt) had there committed to Prison. This done, he fell to raising of Soldiers in the Country, and having bought Horses, distributed them among such as were fit to ride them. And withal, carrying himself with all Fairness and Affability towards all sorts; made them all ready to run any hazard with him, and so in a trice recover'd all his Government of Babylon. But afterwards, Nicanor, whom Antigonus had made Governor of the Province of Media, march'd against him with Ten thousand Foot, and Seven thousand Horse; and Seleucus without delay went out to meet him: Having with him in all a little above Three thousand Foot and Four hundred Horse; and passing the River Tigris, when he heard that the Enemy was not far off, he hid his Men in the Fens there near at hand, purposing to set upon Nicanor at unawares; who when he came to the Bank of Tigris, and found no Enemy there, went and Encamp'd near to a Post-house of the Kings, little thinking the Enemy had been so near. But the Night following (through a careless Regard and Contempt of the Enemy) not keeping a due Watch Seleucus fell upon him, and rais'd a great Tumult in his Army: For the Persisians putting themselves forward to fight, Evager their General, with sundry others of their Commanders were slain. After which Broil, the greater part of Nicanor's Army, what for the present Danger they were in, and what for the Disgust they had to Antigonus his Government, left him and came to the Service of Seleucus. Whereupon, Nicanor fearing lest at the next bout his Soldiers would deliver him up to Seleucus, fairly stole away with some few of his friends, and fled through the Desart. Seleucus having by this means gotten a potent Army about him, and continu'd his fair Carriage to all Men as before, easily procur'd the Provinces of Media and Susa, and other Countries bordering thereupon, to come under his Subjection; and sent Ptolemy word how he had sped, having now gotten a full Royal Power and Majesty into his hands.


Page 649

Ptolemy continu'd still in Coelo-Syria after the great Victory gain'd over Demetrius, whom he heard was return'd out of Cilicia, and lay encamp'd in the Upper Syria; whereupon, he sent one of his Nobility about him, call'd Celles (a Macedonian Born) with a great Army, Commanding him either to drive him out of every part of Syria, or to coop him up and tread him to dirt where he lay. While he was upon his March, Demetrius understanding by his Scouts, that Celles lay carelesly with his Army at Myus, leaving his Carriages behind him, March'd away with a Company of Light-footed Lads, who travell'd all Night, and a little before Day fell in upon Celles his Camp, took it Without a stroke struck, and Celles himself pris'ner; by which Victory (it was judg'd) he was quit with them for the former Loss he had sustain'd. Yet because he thought Ptolemy himself was coming after with all his Army, he therefore pitcht his Camp in a place where he had a Bog on the one hand, and a Lough on the other. Demetrius writ Letters of this his good Success to his Father Antigonus, wishing him either to send an Army speedily, or to come himself in Person into Syria. Antigonus was then at Cellnas in Phrygia, and having read the Letter, was wonderfully pleas'd with the News, both because the Victory was gotten by his own Son's Conduct (who was so young) and for that he had shewn himself a Man worthy to wear a Crown hereafter. Upon this News, he himself with his Army march'd out of Phrygia, and having pass'd over Mount Taurus in a few days time he joyn'd with Demetrius.

Ptolemy hearing of the coming of Antigonus, call'd a Council of War, to advise whether it was better to stay where he was, and there to try it out with him in Syria, or to return into Egypt and Fight with him from thence, as he had done before with Perdiccas? The result of the Council was, That he should not hazard himself by ingaging with an Army far more numerous than his own, and where there were such multitudes of Elephants, and all under the Command of a General never yet Conquer'd; and that it was much safer for him to fight in Egypt, where he would be better supply'd with Provision, then the Enemy could be, and had places of Strength wherein he might confide. Determining therefore to leave Syria, before he went, he laid wast, and destroy'd the Principal Cities he held there at that time in his Possession, as Achon in Syrophenicia, Joppa, and Samaria; and Gaza in Syria. Then taking along with him out of the Country, whatever he could drive or carry (loaden with Wealth) he return'd into Egypt.

Antigonus, when he had without stroke stricken recover'd all Syria and Phenicia, took a Jouney into the Country of the Arabians, call'd the * Nabatheans; for thinking that they never much favour'd his proceedings, he appointed one of his Nobility, call'd Atheneus, with Four thousand Foot, and Six hundred light Horse to fall in upon them, and to bring away what spoil he could out of their Country.

It's worth our pains here to relate the Manners and Customs of these Arabians, for the information of them that are ignorant; by the use of which Customs they have hitherto secur'd themselves and preserv'd their Liberty. They live in the plain and open Fields, calling that Desert their Country, wherein are neither Inhabitants, Rivers or Springs, whereby any Enemys Army can be reliev'd. It's a Law amongst them, neither to Sow, Plant, Build Houses, or Drink any Wine; and he that is discover'd to do any of these, is sure to Die for it. And the reason of this Law is, because they conceive that those who are possess'd of such things, are easily (for fear of losing of what they have, or in hopes of gaining more,) forc'd to comply with the Will and Humour of those that are more powerful. Some of them breed up Camels; others imploy themselves in feeding of Sheep, roving to and fro in the Wilderness for that purpose. There are no few, indeed, of the Arabians, that though they give themselves to the Pasturage of Cattel in the Deserts, yet are far richer then the rest, but exceed not in number above Ten thousand. For many of them use to carry Frankincense, Mirrh, and other rich Perfumes down to the Sea side, which they traffick for, and receive from them that bring them from Arabia the Happy. They highly prize and value their Liberty, and when any strong Armies invade them, they presently fly into the Wilderness, as to a strong Fort and Castle for refuge; for being no Water is there to be had, none can follow them through these Deserts: But as to themselves, they have a sure and safe Retreat, by the help of Earthen Pots and Vessels hid in the Earth prepar'd before hand. For the Soil is a fat Clay, under which lies a soft Stone, in which they dig great Caves very narrow at the entrance, but enlarging by degrees as they grow in depth, till they come at length to that bigness, as to be a hundred Foot Square; these Caves they fill up to the Mouths with these Vessels fill'd with Rain-Water; then they lay all even with the rest of the Ground, and leave certain Marks where to find the place known to none but themselves. For the Cattel (driven away along with them) they take so much Water as


Page 650

may serve them for Three Days, lest while they are in their flight in dry and parch'd places, they should be ever and anon put to a stop by the continual watering of their Cattle.

Their Food is Flesh, Milk and Roots. For Drink they have abundance of wild Honey, and a kind of Pepper growing upon some Trees, both which they mix together in Water for that purpose.

There are likewise other kinds of Arabians, some of whom imploy themselves in Husbandry, Selling of Corn, with other Provisions, and agree with the Syrians in all other things, except dwelling in Houses. And such were then the Customs of these Arabians.

Near at hand there was a Publick Meeting of these Arabians, whither all bordering Nations us'd to come, as to a common Mart to sell off to them their Commodities, and to buy from them the Merchandize of their Country. To this Mart the Nabatheans now went, leaving their Wealth and Old Men with their Wives and Children upon the top of a Rock. The place was very strong, but Un-Wall'd, and distant Two Days Journey from the Countrey that was inhabited. Atheneus watching his opportunity, march'd speedily to this Rock; and having march'd out of the Province of Edom the space of Two thousand and two hundred Furlongs in Three Days and Three Nights, late at Midnight (the Arabians knowing nothing of his coming) possess'd himself of the Place; of the Soldiers there sound, some he put to the Sword, and others he made Prisoners, and such as were wounded he there left behind him; and carry'd away the greatest part of their Mirrh and Frankincense, with Five hundred Talents of Silver, and staying there * not past Three Hours, for fear of the Countreys coming in upon him, return'd presently again. And now he and his Soldiers having gone Two hundred Furlongs, could go no further for very weariness, and therefore rested there, keeping neither Watch nor Ward, as presuming that the Country People could not reach thither in Two or Three Days after. But the Arabians receiving intelligence by some that saw the Army, presently got together, left the Fair and return'd to the Rock; where being more fully inform'd by the wounded Men, of what was done, they incontinently pursu'd the Greeks with Might and Main. And because Atheneus his Men kept no Watch, and after their long Journey lay weary and fast asleep, some of the Prisoners stole away from them; from whom, when their Country-men (whom they met) had learnt how the Enemies Camp lay, they hasted to the place, and coming upon them at Three of the Clock in the Morning, fell into their Trenches, to the number of Eight Thousand of them, and cut the Throats of some snorting in their Cabins; others that made resistance they slew. To make short, they utterly destroy'd all their Foot, only Fifty of their Horse got away, and they wounded too for the most part. And thus Atheneus, tho' he began well, yet through his own imprudence lost all in the close. And therefore some, not without Cause, are of Opinion, that it's easier to improve Misfortunes to the best advantage, than to carry it with Prudence under extraordinary Successes. For the first through Fear of what further mischief may afterwards follow, puts a Man on to a more exact and careful management of his Concerns; but by prosperous Adventures Men are many times flatter'd into gross negligence and security.

The Nabatheans having thus reveng'd themselves of their Enemies, and recover'd their Goods again, return'd to the Rock; and by a Letter of theirs, written to Antigonus in Syriac Characters, complain'd of Atheneus, and the wrong he had done them, and excus'd themselves. To whom Antigonus wrote back again cunningly, telling them, that Atheneus was well enough serv'd by them; blaming him for what he had done, and assuring them he had given him no such Orders. This he did to cover what he was really designing against them, and to make them the more secure, that thereby he might with more ease effectually accomplish what he was in contriving. For without some Stratagem it was no easie matter to overcome Men that wander'd up and down continually here and there, and had the Wilderness for an inaccessible Shelter and Refuge at the last.

The Arabians upon the receit of the Letter rejoyc'd that they seem'd at present to be free'd from their great fears; but yet they did not wholly rely upon his Letter; But being between Hope and Fear, plac'd Spies upon Watch-Towers and other high places, whence they might easily see afar off, when any Enemy made an incursion into Arabia; and they themselves put all things in readiness, waiting for the issue and event.


Page 651

But Antigonus having for a time carry'd himself as a Friend towards these Barbarians, now judg'd he had a fair opportunity to set upon them, having brought them, as it were, to his bait. To this end therefore he chose out of all his Army, Four thousand Foot light Arm'd, and the swiftest of Foot he could find, and added to them Four thousand Horse, willing them to take with them as many Days Victuals as they could well carry, and such as needed no Cooking; and assigning Demetrius his Son to Command them, he sent them away about the first Watch of the Night with this Charge, that he should by all means be reveng'd of them. He therefore Travell'd Three Days Journey through the Desert, hastning to fall upon them at unawares. But their Scouts perceiving the first approach of the Enemy towards their Borders, immediately gave notice of their coming to the Country: whereupon they presently got them to their Rock, where there was but one way up, and that made by Art, and there laid all their Baggage, and left a sufficient Guard to keep it; and the rest went and drove away their Cattle, some to one place and some to another in the Desert. Demetrius when he came to the Rock and saw all the Cattle driven away, presently went to Besiege it: but they that were within manfully defending it, by the advantage of the place, had all the day long the better of it; so that Demetrius was forc'd at last to draw off. The next Day when he approach'd again with his Forces to the Rock, one of the Barbarians cry'd out: What would'st thou have, O King, DEMETRIUS? or what has provok'd thee to make War upon us who inhabit the Wilderness, and in places where there's neither Water, Corn nor Wine, nor any thing else which you cannot be without. But as for us, who can upon no terms endure to be Slaves, we betake our Selves to a Country destitute of all things that are of absolute necessity to all other Men; and we chuse to live a solitary Life altogether, like the Beasts of the Field, without doing the least harm to any of you. Therefore we intreat you Demetrius, and your Father, that you injure not us, but that you would accept of some Presents, and march away with the Army from us, and receive the Nabatheans into the number of your Friends for the time to come.

Neither can you possibly stay here many days (though you had never so great a mind to do it) for want of Water and all other necessaries; neither can you ever force us to change our course of Life, tho' perhaps you may take some poor dispirited Pris'ners who will never endure to be brought under the Power of other Laws and Rules of Living

After this was said, Demetrius drew off his Army, and wish'd them to send Ambassadors to him to Treat of these Matters. Hereupon the Arabians sent their oldest Men, who (using the same Arguments with those before related) perswaded Demetrius to accept of such Gifts as were of greatest Esteem and Value among them, and so put an end to the War. Upon Hostages therefore given him, and such Gifts as were agreed upon between them, he drew off from the Rock, and so removing with his Army Three hundred Furlongs off, he encamp'd near to the Lake Asphaltes; the nature of which it's not fit to pass over without giving some account of it.

It lies in the midst of the Province of Edom; and stretches forth in length Five hundred Furlongs: but in breadth it is but Threescore. The Water is very bitter and stinking, so that neither Fish, nor any other thing us'd to the Water can live in it. And though many remarkable Rivers of very sweet Water empty themselves into it, yet it remains as corrupt and unsavory, both as to Tast and Smell as ever it did before. Every Year rises out of the middle of it great massy pieces of Bitumen and Pitch, sometimes bigger then Three Plethras, and sometimes a little less then one. And upon that account the Barbarous Inhabitants call the larger pieces Bulls, and the less Calves. These pieces of Pitch and Brimstone floating upon the Water, seem at a distance to be as so many Islands: There are evident Signs that sorgoe and give notice of the casting up of this Bituminous Matter, at least Twenty Days before. For a horrid smell of Brimstone and Pitch infects the Air round about the Lake at many Furlongs distance; and all Metals, whether of Gold, Silver or Copper near the place, change their natural Colour, which presently returns again as soon as the Brimstone is exhal'd. The places bordering upon it are so burning hot (by reason of the Sulphur and Brimstone under ground) and cast forth such an horrible stench, that the Inhabitants are very unhealthy, and short liv'd: yet the Country thereabouts being water'd with many pleasant Rivers and refreshing Springs, bears abundance of Palm-Trees; and in a certain Vale near to this place grows that they call Balm, from which they raise a great Revenue; inasmuch as this Plant grows in no other part of the World beside; and is of excellent use amongst Physitians for the healing and curing of Wounds, and other Distempers. The Inhabitants on both sides this Lake, are so earnest to carry away this Brimstone, that they fight one with nother; and they bring it off in a strange manner without Shipping. For they cast


Page 652

in huge Bundles of Butrushes fastned close together, upon which Three or more of them place themselves, two of which ply the Oars that are fastn'd to the Bulrushes, and the third carrys a Bow and Arrows to defend themselves against such as attempt to make up upon them from the other side, or that offer them any violence. Assoon as they come to the Brimstone they get upon it, and hew it in pieces with Axes, as pieces of stone out of a soft Rock, and so loading the Bulrish Boat, they row back. If any fall into the Water through the deficiency of the Boat, yet he never sinks as in other waters, tho' he knows not how to swim, but lies upon the water as if he were the best swimmer in the World. For this Lake naturally bears any thing that has either a vegetative or an animal Life, except such things as are solid, and seem to be without Pores, as Silver, Gold, Lead, or the like; and these likewise are much longer and slower in sinking than when they are cast into other waters. And this profit and advantage the Barbarians reap from it; they Transport this Pitch into Egypt and there sell it for the use of embalming of the Dead; for if they do not mix this with other Aromatick Spices, the Bodies cannot be preserv'd long from putrefaction.

Antigonus at the Reign of Demetrius having heard the Relation of his Voiage blam'd him for his making Peace with the Nabatheans, saying that those barbarous people having so escapt would thereupon grow more insolent than before, concluding that they were not favour'd out of love or compassion of the Conqueror, but in dispair of the Conquest; but he commended him for discovering the Lake Asphaltes, seeing that from thence he might raise some yearly Revenue to himself, and made Hieronimus Cardianus the Historian his Treasurer for that Revenue, and commanded him to build Ships and gather together all the Bitumen, or liquid Brimstone that could be gotten out of that Lake: But Antigonus in the event was frustrated of his hope; for the Arabians coming together to the number of Six thousand Men set upon them as they were in their Ships, gathering this Brimstone, and shot them almost all to death with their Arrows; whereby Antigonus lost all hopes of making any standing Revenue that way, and forbore all further prosecution of that design both upon the account of the miscarriage already, and likewise for that he had matters of greater weight and concern then in his head.

For about that time a Courrier came, and brought Letters to him from Nicanor, Governor of Media, and others, how Seleucus was return'd and prosper'd in those parts: Whereupon Antigonus being much concern'd for the upper Provinces, sent his Son Demetrius with Five thousand Macedonian Foot, and Ten thousand Mercenaries, and Four thousand Horse with charge that he should march to the very Walls of Babylon, and having recover'd that Province should from thence march down to the Sea. Demetrius hereupon departed from Damascus in Syria, and went vigorously on to fulfil his Fathers Command. But Patrocles, whom Celeucus had made President of Babylon, so soon as he heard that Demetrius was falling into Mesopotamia, not daring to stay his coming (because he had but a smal power about him) commanded the rest to leave the City, and that passing the Euphrates they should flee some into the Deseart, others over the Tigris into the Province of Susa, and to the Persian Sea; and he himself with a company which he had about him trusting in the Barrs of the Rivers and Dikes of the Country thereabouts, instead of so many Fortresses and Bulwarks for his defence, kept himself still within the Bounds of his own Government, and cast about how to intrap his Enemy, sending ever and anon Tidings to Seleucus in Media how how things went with him, and desiring aid to be speedily sent to him.

Demetrius when he came to Babylon and found the City it self void of Inhabitants, fell presently to besiege the Forts and Castles that were therein,; and having taken one of them, gave the spoil thereof to his Soldiers: But having besieg'd the other for some days together, in hast, he departed, leaving Archelaus, one of his trusty friends, to maintain the Siege with Five thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse; and himself, seeing the time run out, which his Father had appointed him to finish his work in; return'd with the rest of the Army into the lesser Asia.

While those things were acting, the Wars between the Romans and the Samnites continu'd still in Italy, wherein there were daily excursions into one anothers Territories, Besieging of Cities and Incamping of Armies on both sides: For the Contest between the most warlike Nations of Italy was, which should gain the Empire and Sovereign Command of the whole, upon which account many great Battles were fought.

At length the Consuls of Rome with a part of their Forces Incampt in the face of the Enemy, watching for a fit opportunity to fall upon them, by which means they preserv'd their Consederate Cities from annoyance and disturbance from the Enemy. With


Page 653

the rest of the Army Quintus Fabius the Dictator took Fretomanum, and carri'd away the persons of greatest quality that were Enemies, to the Romans, to the number of Two hundred and upwards, and brought them to Rome, and expos'd them as a publick Spectacle in the Forum; and when he had scourg'd them, according to the Roman Custom, cut off their Heads. He made likewise an inroad into the Enemies Territories, and took Celia and the Cittadel of Nota, with abundance of Spoil, and divided a great part of the Country by Lot among the Soldiers; the Romans hereupon incourag'd with these successes which fell out according to their hearts desire, sent a Colony into the Island call'd Pontia.

As for Sicily, after that Agathocles had made Peace with all the Sicilians, except the Messenians the Refugees of Syracuse, all flockt to Messina, because they saw that to be the only City that stood out against him. Agathocles therefore with all speed made it his business to break their Confederacy, and to that end sent away Pasiphilus his General with an Army to Messina, with private instructions to do what he thought fit, and most agreeable to the circumstances of Affairs as he should find them; hereupon he enter'd the Country on a suddain, and after he had taken many Prisoners, and got much spoil, he Solicited the Messenians to Peace and Amity, and that they would not suffer themselves so to be led aside as to join with the implacable Enemies of Agathocles.

Upon which the Messenians hoping to extricate themselves out of the War without Blows, cast out all the Syracusians Fugitives, and receiv'd Agathocles with his Army into the City; who at the first carri'd himself very courteously and obligingly towards all, and courted them to admit those Exiles that were in his Army, (and had been by them according to Law formerly banish'd) into the Freedom and Liberties of the City.

But afterwards he sent for such out of Tauromenium and Messina as formerly had oppos'd his Government, and put them all to death, to the number of Six hundred; for intending to make War upon the Carthaginians, he resolv'd to rid himself of every thing that lookt like an Enemy in Sicily: The Messenians therefore seeing their chief Citizens cut off that oppos'd the Tyrant, and that they themselves had driven those strangers out of the City that wish'd them so well, and that would have been their main strength against him, and had been forc't to receive those that had been formerly condemn'd for their notorious Crimes, much repented themselves of what they had done; but out of fear of the power of the Conqueror they were forc'd to stoop.

Thence he mov'd in the first place towards Agrigentum, with design to make a prey also of this City: But because the Carthaginians were there lately arriv'd with a Fleet of Sixty Sail, he desisted and left off that project, but wasted and harrass'd the Territories of the Carthaginians, and took some of their Forts and Castles by Storm, and gain'd others by surrender.

Among these Turmoiles Dinocrates, Captain of the Syracusian Exiles, sent to desire Aid of the Carthaginians before Agathocles had brought all Sicily under his own Power and Soveraign Command; he himself receiv'd all those Exiles which the Messenians had banish'd the City, and having now a very great Army, sent Nymphodorus one of his Trusty Friends with part of the Army to the City of the Centorippians: For this place being a Garrison of Agathocles, some of the Citizens had undertaken to betray it, upon condition they should be suffer'd to govern according to their own Laws. Upon this incouragement therefore breaking into the City in the night, the chief Commanders of the Garrison presently took the Alarum, and kill'd both Nymphodorus and all the rest that had enter'd within the Walls. Agathocles made use of this as an occasion and ground to accuse the Centorippians of Contrivances against his Government, and cut the Throats of all those that he look'd upon to be the Ringleaders of the Defection.

While he was thus imploy'd the Carthaginians enter'd the Port at Syracuse with a Fleet of Fifty Sail, but all that they did there was the sinking of two Transport Ships (one of which belonged to the Athenians) and cut off the Hands of all those that were on board: Which was lookt upon as a piece of extream Cruelty towards those that never offer'd them the least Injury; and this God made presently to appear; For soon after some Ships that were forc'd from the rest of the Fleet about Brutta, fell into the hands of Agathocles, where those Carthaginians that were taken were serv'd the same sawce with those that were by them taken Prisoners before.

But Dinocrates Commander of the Exiles having with him above Three thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse, seiz'd upon Galaria (as it is call'd) invited thither by the Inhabitants, and cast out those that sided with Agathocles, and then Encamp'd before the Walls of the City.


Page 654

Agathecles presently sent against him Pasiphilus and Demophilus with Five thousand Men, who fought with the Refugees; whose Captains were Dinocrates and Philonides, who commanded separately in the two Wings. The Battel was doubtful for a long time together, while both Armies obstinately stood to it Tooth and Nail: But Philonides, one of the Captains, being slain, that Wing fled, and Dinocrates was thereupon forc'd likewise to give Ground, and Pasiphilus kill'd many of them in the Pursuit, and recover'd Galaria, and put to Death the Authors of the Defection.

Agathocles receiving Intelligence of what was done, resolv'd to fall upon the Carthaginians with his whole Army, who had then possess'd themselves of the Hill in Geloa, call'd E

•••mes.

 To that end, without any further Delay he made up to them, and as soon as he came near, offer'd them Battel, being puff'd up with the Success of his late Victory. But the Barbarians durst not engage, and thereupon (supposing he was absolute Master of the Field without sighting) he return'd to Syracuse, and adorn'd the chiefest Temples there with the Spoils. And these were the Actions of this Year as far forth as is needful for us to give an Account.

CHAP. VII.

Cassander, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus, make Peace with Antigonus. Cassander murders Rhoxana and her Son. The Governors take the Stile of Kings upon them. The Carthaginians raise Forces against Agathocles. Four thousand Geloans murder'd by Agathocles. The Battel between Agathocles and Amilcar the Carthaginian at Himera. Agathocles routed. Several Cities revolt from Agathocles.

WHen Simonides was Lord-Chancellor of Athens, and the Romans had created MarcusValerius and Publius Decius Consuls, Cassander, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus, made Peace with Antigonus, the Form of which was put into Writing, and contain'd the Terms following: That Cassander should be the Sovereign Lord of all in Europe, till Alexander the Son of Rhoxana came of full Age: That Lysimachus should have the chief Command in Thrace: Ptolemy should enjoy the Sovereign Power in Egypt, and the bordering Cities in Arabia and Africa: That Antigonus should be Lord of all Asia; And the Greeks should Govern according to their own Laws. But these Conditions they observ'd not long; but every one took one Occasion or other to incroach upon more than his Part came to.

Cassander seeing that Alexander the Son of Rhoxana now grew up towards Man's Estate, and hearing how it was the Discourse of some throughout all Macedonia, That it was now fit the young Man should be freed from his Prison, and assume the Government of his Father's Kingdom into his own hands; out of fear of being supplanted, commanded Glaucias the Keeper to murder both Rhoxana and the King, and to hide their Bodies when he had done, and by all means possible conceal their Deaths. This he effectually executed, and so by this means Cassander, Lysimachus, Ptolemy, and Antigonus himself, were freed from all Grounds of Fear upon the account of the King. For now all the Seed Royal being extinct, and no Successor remaining, every one of the Captains that had possess'd themselves of Provinces or Cities, took upon themselves the Titles and Stiles of Kings; and every one claim'd the Province, of which he was Governor, as a Conquer'd Kingdom. And thus stood the Affairs in Asia, Europe, Greece, and Macedonia.

In Italy, the Romans march'd with a great Body of Horse and Foot against Pollitium, a City of the Marucci; where they remov'd part of the Citizens, and made them a new Colony, giving them Interamna (as it's call'd) to inhabit. 

In Sicily, the Power of Agathocles increas'd every day, his Forces growing stronger and stronger: Whereupon the Carthaginians being inform'd, that he had gain'd almost all the Towns and Cities through the Island, and that their Captains and Commanders there were not able to deal with him, they resolv'd to pursue the War with more Vigour. To this end they forthwith provided a Fleet of a Hundred and thirty Sail of Men of War, and made Amilcar (a Person of eminent Quality) General. and deliver'd to him Two thousand Soldiers rais'd out of the City, amongst whom, many were Men of Note: Out of Afric

•,

 Ten thousand; from Tyrrhenia, a Thousand Mercenaries and Two


Page 655

hundred Charioteers, and a Thousand Slingers from the Baleary Islands. They provided likewise a great Treasure, all sorts of Weapons, store of Corn, and all other Things necessary for carrying on the War, as they had occasion to use. And now when the whole Fleet had hois'd up Sail and were come into the open Sea, on a sudden a violent Storm arose, which sunk Sixty of the Gallies, and broke in pieces Two hundred of the Ships loaden with Corn and Provision. The rest of the Fleet, after much Hardship at Sea, with much ado got into Sicily. Many of the most eminent Men of Carthage were lost at this time, which occasion'd a publick Lamentation in that City. For when any Misfortune happens to that Place greater than ordinary, their Custom is to cover the Walls with black Cassocks or Cloaks.

Amilcar the General, after he was landed, muster'd those that were sav'd from the Storm; and to supply those that were lost, listed Foreign Mercenaries, and rais'd others from among the Confederates throughout all Sicily, whom he join'd with the rest of the Forces that were there before; and carefully providing every thing that was necessary for the War, he kept the Army in the Field, having under his Command about Forty thousand Foot, and near Five thousand Horse. Having therefore in a short time recruited himself, (and being accounted a Man of great Reputation for Honesty and Integrity,) he both reviv'd the Courage of the Confederates, and in no small measure struck a Terror into the Hearts of his Enemies.

On the other side, Agathocles perceiving that he was far overpower'd by the Carthaginians in Number of their Forces, concluded, that many of the Forts and Castles, and those Cities and Towns that bore him a Grudge, would revolt to the Enemy; especially he fear'd the City of the Geloans, because he heard all the Enemies Forces were encamp'd in their Territories: And besides, no small Detriment befel him at this time in his Fleet, for about Twenty Sail then at Sea together, with their Men, all fell into the Hands of the Carthaginians. However, he conceiv'd it fit to put a Garison into the Place for its Security, but durst not bring any Forces openly into the City lest the Geloans should prevent him, who had not then at any time before any Occasion offered them to rebel: And so by that means he might come to lose a Town that had been very useful and serviceable to him. Therefore (to prevent Suspicion) he sent into the City Soldiers by degrees, a few at a time, (as if they had come there for other Purposes,) till he had got so many into the Town as far exceeded the Citizens in Number. And then a while after he came thither himself, and charg'd the Geloans with a traiterous design to revolt: However, whether this were true or not, or that they were falsly accus'd by the Exiles, or that his Design was to scrape and get together what Money he could; he put to Death above Four thousand of the Geloans, and confiscated all their Estates; and threaten'd all the rest with Death that did not bring forth all their Money, whether Silver or Gold, coin'd or uncoin'd. Whereupon all (out of fear of this thundring Edict) forthwith obey'd his Command; whereby he heap'd together a vast Treasure, and became a Terror to all his Subjects. And though he was judg'd to deal too severely and cruelly with the Geloans, yet he order'd them to be decently buri'd without the Walls; and then leaving the City with a strong Garison, encamp'd with his Army over-against the Enemy. The Carthaginians possess'd the Hill Ecnomen, where formerly stood the Castle of Phaleris, as is reported, where they say the Tyrant had the Brazen Bull contriv'd to torment Offenders, by putting Fire under it, thereby causing it to grow scorching hot by degrees. And therefore, by reason of this horrid Cruelty executed upon poor miserable Creatures, the Hill was call'd Ecnomen. Agathocles possess'd himself of another Castle of Phaleris over-against them, which he call'd Phalerius: Between both Armies lay a River, which was as a Defence and Bulwark to both sides. There was an ancient Prophecy, That a great Battel should be fought, and Multitudes of Men destroy'd about this Place; and being that it was uncertain on which side the Slaughter should mainly fall, out of a superstitious Awe of the Gods, the Armies were more backward and slow to ingage; and therefore neither Party for a long time durst pass the River with their whole Forces, till a sudden and unexpected Occasion forc'd them to fight. For the Africans making a sudden Incursion upon the Enemy, stirr'd up Agathocles to do the same: For when the Greeks were driving away their Cattel, and some Carriage. Horses and other Beasts out of the Camp, some sally'd out from among the Carthaginians to pursue them. But Agathocles foreseeing what the Enemy would do, had before laid an Ambuscado of stout and resolute Men near the River, who, as soon as the Carthaginians had pass'd the River, and were in pursuit of those that were driving away the Cattel, rose out of the Ambush, and fell upon them as they were then in Disorder, and easily routed them and put them to flight. While the Barbarians were thus hew'd down, and flying to their Camp, Agathocles looking upon it now


Page 656

as a sit time to ingage, led forth his whole Army against the Enemy; and falling upon them on a sudden, presently fill'd up a part of their Trench and cut through their Breast-work, and so forc'd their Camp. The Carthaginians amaz'd with this sudden Attack, having no time to put themselves in order of Battel, fell in as Fortune led them, and ingag'd the Enemy in the best manner they could: And in regard the hotest Work was near the Trench, the Ground all thereabout was strew'd with dead Carkasses; for the chiefest of the Carthaginians made to the Defence of that Place where they saw the Camp enter'd. 

On the other hand, the Agathocleans incourag'd by the happy Success of their Attempt, and supposing they should put an end to the War by this one Battel, press'd resolutely upon the Barbarians: Amilcar therefore perceiving that his Men were too weak, and that the Grecians were continually pouring in more Men into the Camp, brings up a Thousand Slingers of the Baliary Islands, who wounded many by multitude of great Stones out of their Slings, and kill'd many that were forcing into the Camp, and broke in pieces the Shields and Armour of many of their Assailants. For these Men being us'd to cast Stones of Three Pound Weight, were always very serviceable, and contributed much in several Battels to the gaining of the Victory, as being those that were diligently taught and well exercis'd in the Art of Slinging from their very Childhood. And now at this time they gain'd the Point, driving the Grecians back again beyond the Out-works of the Camp. But Agathocles broke into it in other places; and just as the Camp was forc'd, unexpectedly arriv'd Succours from Carthage, which again reviv'd the Spirits of the Carthaginians, and those in the Camp fought the Enemy in the Front, and the new Supplies hem'd the Greeks in the Rear, and hew'd them down, so as the Fortune of the Day turn'd suddenly and unexpectedly. For the Grecians fled outright, some to the River Himera, and others to their own Camp, which was Forty Furlongs distant; and being a Plain and Champain Country, they were pursu'd with no fewer than Five thousand of the Barbarian Horse, so that the Plain all along was cover'd with dead Bodies, the River contributing much to the Destruction of the Greeks. For the pursuit being about Noon, and in the Dog-Days, many of them that fled were so parch'd with Thirst, by the Heat of the Weather and the Fatigue of their Flight, that they greedily swill'd themselves with salt Water, insomuch that as many (that had not the least Hurt) were found dead near the River as were kill'd by the Sword in the Pursuit. There were kill'd of the Barbarians in this Battel about Five hundred, but no fewer than Seven thousand of the Greeks.

Agathocles being thus grievously defeated, after he had receiv'd all those that had escap'd, burnt his Camp and went to Gela. But he had caus'd it to be rumour'd abroad, that he was gone strait away for Syracuse. It happen'd that Three hundred African Horse then in the Country fell in among some of Agathocles his Soldiers, who told them, that Agathocles was gone back to Syracuse, and thereupon the Horsemen enter'd Gela as Friends: But being thus deluded, they were all shot to Death by Darts: Yet Agathocles shut not himself up in Gela, because he could not get safe to Syracuse, but that he might divert the Carthaginians from Syracuse to the Besieging of Gela, that so by that means the Syracusians might have leisure enough to get in their Harvest, while he protracted the time at Gela. Amilcar indeed at the first intended to have besieg'd Gela; but hearing that there was there a strong Body of Men to oppose him, and that Agathocles was furnish'd with plenty of all things necessary, he laid aside that design, and made his approaches to the Forts and Castles, and had them all surrender'd to him; and to gain the good Opinion of the Sicilians, he carry'd himself Courteously and Obligingly towards all. The Camareans, Leontines, Cataneans and Tauromeneans, sent continually Ambassadors, and made their Applications to the Carthaginians. And a little time after, the Messenian. and Abacenians, and many other Cities who before were at variance amongst themselves, all went over to Amilcar; such was the Zeal of the Common People after the late Defeat, through the Hatred they bore against the Tyrant.

But Agathocles led away all the Forces that were yet left him, to Syracuse, and there repair'd the ruinous Parts of the Walls, and got in all the Corn and Fruits out of the Fields; and now contriv'd to leave a strong Garison for the Defence of the City, and to transport the Power and Strength of the Army into Africa, with an intent to draw the War out of the Island into the Continent. We shall therefore, as we at first design'd, begin the following Book with the passing of Agathocles into Africa.


Page 657

BOOK XX.

THose who stuff their Histories with long and tedious Harangues, or are everand anon setting forth their Matter with Rhetorical Orations; are, not without just Cause to be blam'd. For besides, that it interrupts and cuts off the natural Course of the History, by an unseasonable Introduction of set and contriv'd Speeches, it likewise gives an unpleasant Check to the earnest Expectation of such as are eager to know the Issue of the Matters of Fact. Yet it's no ways to be disapprov'd for such as desire to be cry'd up for Eloquent Orators, to compose publick Orations and Speeches made by Ambassadors, and Panegyricks of Praise and Dispraise, and such like. For they that manage both Parts well and distinctly in a modest Stile, are justly to be prais'd and commended in both kinds of the Discourse. But there are some who so over-abound in Rhetorical Flourishes, that they make their whole History but as an Appendix (as it were to the other). For such tedious manner of Writing, is not only troublesome, but in this respect likewise is to be condemn'd, That although the Writer seem in other things to have hit the Mark, yet by this kind of Writing he seems to straggle and wander from the due Course both of Time and Place: And therefore they who read such sort of Writings, partly pass over such artificial and fram'd Discourses, though they are never so pat and fit to the Purpose; and partly tir'd out with the tedious and unseasonable artificial Digression of the Author, leave off reading altogether. For the Nature of History is simple, and in every part agreeable to it self, like to the Body of a living Creature, where the Cutting off of one Member is the Deformity of the whole. On the other side, that which is duly and orderly Compos'd, keeps within its proper Bounds, and the Coherence of the Whole, affords a clear and pleasant View and Understanding of the Matter in the Reading.

However, we do not altogether abandon Rhetorick and Oratorical Flourishes out of History: For because it ought to be adorn'd with Variety, its absolutely necessary in some Places to insert these Speeches and Orations. And I my self would not be depriv'd of making use of them upon such Occasions; and therefore when the Circumstances of the Matter related are such as that the Speech of an Ambassador, or the Harangue of a popular Senator, or the like, fall in naturally and easily, he that does not then put himself forth to the utmost in this kind, deserves justly to be Censur'd and Condemn'd.

A Man may be able to give many Reasons why Rhetorical Adornments are often to be made use of. For amongst quaint and eloquent Discourses, such asare worthy remark, and bring Profit and Advantage along with them together with the History, are by no means negligently to be pass'd over: Or when the Subject treated of is high and lofty, of things Famous and Remarkable, then it's very unbecoming, and not in the least to be endur'd, that the manner of Expression should sink meanly below the greatness of the Acts related. It may be likewise necessary when some extraordinary Event happens, so as that we are forc'd to make use of words adapted to the Occasion, in order to clear up and make plain the dark and intricate Grounds and Reasons of such an Accident. But what we have said of these things shall suffice, and we shall now proceed to the Relation of those Affairs we before design'd, first observing the Time, where we are now fallen in the Course of our History. In the former Books we have treated of the Affairs both of the Greeks and Barbarians from the most ancient Times, till the Tear next preceding the Expedition of Agathocles into Africa: From the Sacking of Troy to which time, arerun up Eight hundred fourscore and three Years, and something more. In this Book we shall go on with things next in Course, and coherent with the former Relation, and begin with the Descent of Agathocles into Africa, and end with that year wherein the Kings agreed to join together in a Common War against Antigonus, the Son of Philip, comprehending the Transactions of Nine years.


Page 658

CHAP. I.

Agathocles designs to invade Africa. His Cruelty; Pursu'd in his Voyage. An Eclipse of the Sun very great. Lands in Africa. Burns his Ships. His successes in Africa. Hanno and Bomilcar made Generals in Africa. Battel between them and Agathocles, who routs them, Kills Hanno. His stratagem by Owls. The Cruel Superstition of the Carthaginians in sacrificing their Children. The Actions at Syracuse. Actions of Agathocles in Africa. The Acts of Cassander in Macedonia. Polysperchon seeks to restore Hercules Alexander's Son. The miserable Destruction of Nichocles and his Family in Cyprus. The Wars of Parysidas his Sons, King of the Cimerean Bosphorus. The Valour of Satyrus, one of the Sons; His Death. The sad Death of Eumelus, another Son.

IN the Chancellorship of Hieromnemones at Athens, and the Consulship of Caius Julius and Quintus Aemilius at Rome; Agathocles being routed at Himera in Sicily by the Carthaginians, and having lost the greatest and best Part of his Army, fled to Syracuse; where perceiving that he was for saken of all his Consederates, and that the Barbarians had got into their hands almost all Sicily (except Syracuse) and that they far over-power'd him by their Forces both by Sea and Land, undertook a very Rash and desperate Adventure. For when all were of Opinion that it was not adviseable for him in the least to endeavour to contend with the Carthaginians, he even then resolv'd to leave a strong Garison in the City, and with the Choicest of the rest of his Forces to make a Descent into Africa; and by that means he hop'd by his Old and and experienc'd Soldiers, easily to vanquish the Carthaginians, who (through a long Peace) were grown Soft and Delicate, and unexpert in their Arms; and besides, hereby he thought that their Confederates, who had been for a long time very uneasie under the Yoke of their Government, would take an occasion to Revolt. And which most induc'd him was, That by this sudden and unexpected Invasion, he should load himself with the Spoils of a Country that was never before harrass'd, and that abounded in the Confluence of all forts of Worldly Blessings. And to sum up all, That he should by this Course draw the Barbarians, not only out of his own Country, but out of all Sicily, and transfer the War entirely over into Africa, which happen'd accordingly.

For without advising with any of his Friends he made Antandrus, his Brother, Governor of the City, leaving with him a considerable Garrison; he himself Listed what Soldiers he thought fit for his purpose, ordering the Foot to be ready with Arms at the first Call, and commanded the Horsemen, that besides Arms they should every one carry along with them a Saddle and Bridle, that when ever he could get Horses he might have have those ready to mount them who were furnish'd with all things encessary for that purpose.

For in the late Battle most of his Foot were cut off: but most of his Horse escap'd; but their Horses he could not transport into Africa.

And to prevent all stirrs and commotions (in order to a defection) in Syracuse in his absence, he divided Kindred and Relations one from another, especially Brothers from Brothers, and Parents from Children, taking some along with him and leaving others behind: And he acted in this very wisely; for certain it was, that those who remain'd in Syracuse, although they hated the Tyrant, yet would attempt nothing to his prejudice, by reason of their natural Love and Affection to their Children, and near Relations and Kindred. And because he was in great want of Money, he took the Estates of Infants out of the hands of their Guardians; declaring, That he would have a far greater Care of them than they had, and be more faithful in giving them an Account, and making restitution when they came to full Age. He borrow'd likewise much from the Merchants, and converted to his own use some of the Sacred Treasures of the Temples; and took the Jewels and Ornaments from the Womens Backs.

Whereupon, discerning that the Richer sort were highly displeas'd and incens'd at this Usage, and for that reason hated him, he call'd a General Assembly, in which he greatly lamented the late Overthrow, and the dreadful Calamities that from thence seem'd to hang over their Heads. He told them, that he indeed that was inur'd to Hardships, could easily endure the Miseries of a Siege; but that he should greatly pity the Citizens, if they should be block

•

d up, and forc'd to undergo the like. Therefore he order'd those


Page 659

that were not willing to suffer what might be their Fortune and Lot, to provide for the safety of themselves and their Estates. Upon which, the most wealthy Citizens (who bore a most implacable hatred against him) forthwith left the City: But he presently sent out some of his Mercenaries after them, and cut all their Throats, and consiscated their Estates. And thus, when by one and the same Act he had both enrich'd himself, and likewise purg'd the City of those that were his Enemies, he manumitted all the Slaves and Servants that were fit to bear Arms: And now having all things in readiness, and furnish'd with a Fleet of Sixty Sail, he only waited for a fair Wind. His Design being not commonly known, some reported that he intended an Expedition into Italy; others that he purposed to waste and destroy that part of Sicily that belong'd to the Carthaginians; to conclude, every body gave them (who were ready to Sail) all up for lost Men, and condemn'd the folly and madness of the Prince. The Enemy at that time had a Fleet far exceeding him in number in the Harbour, therefore he was forc'd for some days at the first, to lye still with his Men on Board, because he had not an opportunity to set Sail. Afterwards some Transport Ships loaden with Corn, making with full Sail toward the City, the Carthaginians pursu'd them with their whole Fleet: Whereupon Agathocles (almost before in despair to accomplish his Design,) as soon as he saw the Mouth of the Harbor open, causing the Rowers to ply their Oars with all the quickness imaginable, he broke out of the Harbour.

The Carthaginians being now come up near to the Transport Ships, and seeing a Fleet of their Enemies Ships sailing out of the Harbor, thought at first that they came to secure and defend the Corn Ships; Whereupon they tack'd about, and prepar'd to Fight: But when they saw that they made their Course straight forward, and were far before them, they pursu'd them with all the Sail they could; and while these were striving to Out-sail each other, the Transport Ships unexpectedly escap'd the danger, and plentifully supply'd the City that was before in great streights for want of Corn and Provision. Agathocles also, tho' closely pursu'd by the Enemy, by the advantage of the Night coming on (beyond all hope) got safe off from them. The next day there was such an Eclipse of the Sun, that the Stars appear'd every where in the Firmament, and the Day was turn'd into Night: Upon which Agathocles his Soldiers (conceiving that God thereby did foretel their Destruction,) fell into great Perplexities and Discontents concerning what was like to befal them. Having therefore sail'd Six Days and Six Nights, early in the Morning they suddenly spy'd the Carthaginian Fleet making up close upon them: Upon which, all set themselves to it with might and main to ply their Oars: The Carthaginians concluding, that together with the Ships they should not only take all the Syracusians prisoners, but should deliver their Country from present imminent danger: The Grecians on the other hand saw apparent destruction to themselves before their Eyes, and intolerable Bondage and Slavery to all their Kindred and Relations they had left at home, if they did not recover the Shore before the Enemy. And now Africa was in view when all the Sailers and Rowers call'd out earnestly one to another to bestir themselves, so that the strife and pains to get to Land was incredible. The Barbarians indeed were more swift Sailors, because they were more accustom'd to the Sea than the others; but the Grecian Ships kept still a considerable distance before them: Making therefore away with all the Expedition imaginable, when they came near the Shoar, they leap'd out of their Ships in throngs upon the Strand, as if they had been contending for the Mastery at the Gymnastick Games: For the first Squadron of the Carthaginians Ships were come up within a Darts cast of those in the Rear of the Grecian Fleet. After therefore some Contest for a while with their Bows and Slings (a few of the Barbarians Ships only being come up) Agathocles (overpow'ring the other by number) gain'd the advantage; whereupon the Carthaginians tackt about and stood off a little above the Cast of a Dart. Hereupon Agathocles presently landed his Men at a place call'd the Quarries, and drew a Breast work for the security of his Shipping all along from Sea to Sea: And after he had effected this bold and daring attempt, he set upon another far more dangerous: For taking to him such of his Captains and Commanders as were wholly at his Devotion, he first Sacrificed to Ceres and Proserpina, and then call'd a Council of War; where coming into the Assembly to make his Harangue, splendidly clothed in Royal Robes, and with his Crown upon his Head (after a few things premis'd, to make an introduction to what he had further to say) he told them, That at the time they were pursu'd by the Carthaginians he had made a Vow to the Goddesses Ceres and Proserpina, the Protectoresses of Sicily, that he would Consecrate all the Ships in the Fleet to them, by burning them all into so many burning Lamps; and therefore, since they were now safe and were deliver'd, it was just and fit that they should pay their Vows; and he promis'd


Page 660

that if they fought couragiously, he would return them far more than those Ships they then had: For the Gods by the Sacrifices, did foretel that they should be Conquerors throughout the whole War: While he was speaking, one of his Servants brought him a lighted Firebrand, which catching hold of, and commanding the like to be deliver'd to the rest of the Captains, he invocated the Goddesses, and was the first that made to the Admiral's Vessel, and standing upon the Stern, commanded the rest to follow his Example: Whereupon, all the Captains of the Vessels set fire to their Ships, and forthwith the Flame mounted alost, the Trumpets sounded a Charge, and the whole Army set up a shout, and all as one Man offer'd up their joynt Prayers to the Gods, for their safe return to their own Country. And all this was done by Agathocles, that he might necessitate his Soldiers to fight, without ever thinking of turning their Backs. For it was plain, that having no Shipping left for their last Refuge, they could not have the least hope of safety in any thing but by being absolute Conquerors. Then he consider'd, that having but a small Army, if he would guard his Fleet he must be forc'd to divide it, and so should not be strong enough to venture a Battle; and if he left the Ships without any Guard, they would 

〈◊〉

 fall into the hands of the Carthaginians. However, while the whole Navy was on fire, and the Flame spread it self round at a great distance, the Hearts of the Sicilians quak'd: For at first, being deluded by the jugling Tricks of Agathocles, and the the quickness of Execution, giving them no time to consider, they all consented to what was done: But when they had leisure distinctly to weigh every particular, they repented themselves of what they had done; and pondering in their Minds, the vastness of the Sea by which they were separated from their own Country, they utterly despair'd of their Safety and Preservation. Agathocles therefore minding as soon as possibly he could, to cure this Pusilanimity in his Soldiers, led his Army to the great City (as it's call'd) within the Dominion of the Carthaginians. The whole Country through which they march'd, was beautify'd with Gardens, Planted with all sorts of Fruit-Trees, and Sluces, and Canals were cut all along for the convenience of Water, by which that whole Tract was every where abundantly water'd. This part of the Country was likewise full of Towns and Villages, adorn'd with stately Houses, whose Roofs were curiously wrought all setting forth the Wealth and Riches of their Owners. The Houses were full of all manner of Provision of every thing that was needful, for the Inhabitants (through a long Peace) had stor'd up their Treasures in great plenty and abundance. The Country is planted partly with Vines, and partly with Olive-Trees, and furnish'd likewise with many other Fruit-Trees: In another part, the Fields are pastur'd with Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Cows and Oxen; and in the neighbouring Fens run great numbers of breeding Mares. And what shall I say more? Those places abounded with plenty of all things for the use of Man, and the rather for that they were the Possessions of the Nobility of Carthage, who laid out much of their Estates and Wealth with more then ordinary Curiosity to improve them for their Delight and Pleasure; so that the fertility and sweetness of the Country, was the admiration of the Sicilians, and rouz'd up their drooping Spirits in the view they had of those Rewards, and rich Returns, which they judg'd were well worthy the hazards to be run by the Conquerors to obtain them. Agathocles therefore perceiving that his Soldiers were now recover'd out of their dumps, and former melancholy apprehensions, makes a suddain Assault upon the Walls of the City; which being so surprizing and unexpected, and the Citizens unskilful in their Arms, after a short resistance he took the City by Storm; and gave the plunder of the Town to the Soldiers, which both encourag'd 'em and enrich'd 'em at once. Thence he forthwith mov'd with his Army to Tunis, and gain'd that City, which is Two thousand Furlongs from Carthage. The Soldiers would willingly have Garison'd these Two Cities, having Stor'd and laid up in them the Plunder they had got. But Agathocles weighing what was most expedient in his present circumstances; therefore after he had convinc'd the Soldiers, that it was by no means convenient to leave any place to fly to for shelter, till they had conquer'd the Enemy by down-right blows, he raz'd the Citys to the ground, and incamp'd in the open Field. In the mean time the Carthaginians that lay near to the Sicilians Fleet, at first greatly rejoyc'd when they saw their Ships all in a Flame, supposing they were constrain'd to burn their Navy out of fear of their Enemies: But after they perceiv'd them to march forward up into the Country with their whole Army, and imagining what they intended to do, they then concluded, that the burning of the Ships was a design'd mischief to them: Whereupon they spread Leathern Hides upon the Fore-Castles of all their Ships, which is their constant manner when ever any misfortune seems to threaten the Carthaginian Common-wealth; Moreover, they took into their own Gallies the Iron Beaks out of Agathocles's Ships, and sent Expresses to Carthage


Page 661

to give them a particular Account of every thing that had hapned. But before these Messengers reach'd the City, some out of the Country who had discern'd Agathocles his Fleet to be near at hand, presently ran to Carthage to give them an Account, who were thereupon so amaz'd with the surprizing news of such an unexpected accident, that they forthwith concluded that their Armies in Sicily were utterly cut off and destroy'd; for that it could not be that Agathocles, unless he were Victorious, would dare to leave Syracuse naked without any Garison, or pass over his Army when at the same time his Enemy was Master at Sea. The City therefore was in a great hurly burly, terror and confusion, and the People throng'd into the Market-place, and the Senate met together to consult what was fit to be done in the present Exigency: for they had no Army at hand wherewith to fight the Enemy; besides, the common Citizens being raw and ignorant in matters of War, were altogether heartless, and every body thought the Enemy was then just at their Walls. Some therefore were for sending Ambassadors to Agathocles to propose terms of Peace, who might likewise at the same time discover the posture of the Enemy. Others were for staying and expecting till they should have perfect intelligence of every thing that was done.

While the City was in this hurry and perplexity, arriv'd those that were sent from the Admiral of the Fleet, and declar'd to them all that was done: Whereupon, their Courage reviv'd; and the Senate blam'd all the Officers of the Fleet, that being Masters at Sea, they should be so careless as to suffer the Enemies Forces to make a Descent upon Africa; and they created Hanno and Bomilcar Generals of their Army, notwithstanding they were at private feuds between themselves, and that ancient grudges had been in their Families one towards another. For they thought that these private Quarrels would much tend to the common advantage of the City: But they were very much mistaken, For Bomilcar had for a long time been ambitious of the Monarchy, but never yet had an opportunity fitted for his purpose to put his Designs in execution, and therefore he greedily imbrac'd the offer of such a Command as was exactly agreeable to what he was aiming at: And the chief cause of these Plots and Contrivances of his, was the severity and cruelty of the Carthaginians: For they advance the most eminent Persons to be Generals in their Wars, because they conclude they'l fight with more Resolution then others, when all lies at stake: But after the Wars are ended and Peace concluded, then they bring false Accusations against them, and most unjustly, through Envy, put them to death: And therefore some Generals out of fear of those unjust Sentences, either give up their Commissions, or seek to be absolute Monarchs; as Bomilcar one of the Carthaginian Generals then did; of whom we shall speak by and by.

The Carthaginian Generals therefore seeing now that delays were dangerous, waited not for Soldiers to be rais'd out of the Country, and from the Cities of their Confederates, but led out the Citizens themselves into the Field, having under their Command no less than Forty thousand Foot, a thousand Horse, and Two thousand Chariots; and possessing themselves of a Hill not far from the Enemy, drew up in Batalia: Hanno commanded the Right Wing supported by them of the Sacred Brigade: Bomilcar the Lest, making his Phalanx very deep, because the nature of the place would not allow him to extend his wing further in front: The Chariots and Horsemen he plac'd in the Van, to the end, that with these at the first Charge they might try the Courage of the Greeks. Agathocles on the other side, viewing how the Barbarians had drawn up their Army, committed the Right Wing to Archagathus his Son, delivering to him Two thousand and five hundred Foot. Then he drew up about Three thousand and five hundred Syracusians: Next to them Three thousand Mercenaries out of Greece; and Lastly, Three thousand Samnites Tyrrhenians and Celts. He himself with the Troops of the Houshold, and a Thousand heavy Arm'd Men commanded in the Left Wing, opposite to the Carthaginians Sacred Brigade. The Archers and Slingers, to the number of Five hundred he mix'd here and there in the two Wings. The Truth was, his Soldiers were scarce all Arm'd; And therefore when he saw some of those that were naked and without Arms; he took the Covers and Cases of the Shields and stretcht them out upon Sticks in the round shape of a Shield, and so deliver'd 'em to them; however in truth useless, yet so contriv'd by him, to the end that those that were at a distance (and knew nothing of the Stratagem) should look upon them to be Arm'd Men.

Perceiving likewise, that the Spirits of his Soldiers were very low, and much discourag'd, by reason of the great numbers of their Enemies, especially of their Horse, he let out several Owls (which he had before prepar'd for the purpose) into divers parts of the Camp here and there, to rid them of their fears; which Birds flying up and down through the Army, and lighting ever and anon upon their Shields and Bucklers, chear'd


Page 662

up the spirits of the Soldiers, all taking it for a very happy Omen because that creature is sacred to Minerva: These sorts of tricks and devices altho' they may seem to some to be foolish and vain, yet they have many times been the causes of extraordinary success. As it fell out likewise at this time; for the soldiers by this means growing more bold and couragious, and it being generally nois'd abroad that the Goddess plainly soretold that they should be victorious, they more resolutely underwent all dangers and difficulties: For when the Chariots charg'd fiercely upon them, some they pierc'd through with their Darts and Arrows, others they avoided and suffer'd to pass by, and most of them they drave back into the midst of their own Foot. In the same manner they receiv'd the Charge of their Horse, wounding many and putting them all at last to flight.

When they had thus gallantly behav'd themselves in the first Charge, the Barbarians began to fall upon them with their whole Body of Foot at once; upon which there was a very sharp Engagment, wherein Hanno with that Body of Men call'd the Sacred Brigade (striving to win the day by his own Valour) makes a fierce Charge upon the Grecians, and hews down many of them: And tho' he was even overwhelm'd with showers of Darts and Arrows, yet he fell not; but receiving one Wound after another, on he still goes, till being overprest and altogether tir'd out, down he fell and gave up his last Breath. On the other hand Agathocles his Soldiers were so lifed up with expectations of Victory that they were still more and more couragious; which when the other General Bomilcar came to understand, conceiving that the Gods had put an opportunity into his hand to gain the Tyranny, he reason'd with himself, That if the Army of Agathocles were destroy'd, he could not mount the Throne because the City would be too strong for him; but if Agathocles were Conqueror, and by that means broke the Spirits of the Carthaginians, then (when they were brought low) he should be able to lead them which way he would; and as for Agathocles he concluded he should be able to subdue him when ever he pleas'd. Revolving these things in his mind, he began to face about and Retreat, willing the Enemy should take notice of what they were about to do; then telling his Soldiers that Hanno was slain, order'd them to keep their ranks and get to a rising ground there near at hand; for that was now the last course for them to take. But the Retreat looking like a down-right flight, the Enemy prest so close upon them, that the Africans who were in the Rear, supposing that those in the Front of the Battle were Routed, took to their Heels likewise.

In the mean time those in the Sacred Brigade fought bravely for a while after the death of Hanno, and resolutely prest forward upon the Enemy over the Carkases of their fellow-soldiers; but when they perceiv'd that most of their Army was fled, and that the Enemy was surrounding them at their backs, they were forc'd likewise to give way and be gone.

The whole Carthaginian Army being thus put to flight, the Barbarians made toward, Carthage; whom Agathocles pursu'd but a little way, and then return'd, and took the Pillage of the field; In this Battle were slain Two hundred Grecians, and not above a Thousand Carthaginians, though some have written above Six Thousand: Amongst other rich spoiles there were found many Chariots in the Carthaginians Camp, in which were carri'd above Twenty thousand pair of Fetters and Manacles. For concluding that they would easily overcome the Greeks, they agreed together to take as many Prisoners as they could, and threw them into the Dungeons setter'd hand and foot; but God (I conceive) purposely sets himself by meer contrary Events to cross the expectations of such, who proudly before hand resolve what shall absolutely be done.

Agathocles having now Routed the Carthaginians both beyond their, and even his own expectation, blockt them up within their Walls; and thus we see Fortune whose common Course it is to make Chequer-work of good and bad success, of Routs and Victories in their several turns, now humbled the Conquerors as well as those that were before conquered. For the Carthaginians after they had beaten Agathocles in Sicily in a great Battle, besieg'd Syracuse; and now Agathocles having Routed them in Africa, Besieges Carthage: And that which was most to be admir'd was that this Prince was beaten by the Barbarians in the Island when all his Forces were with him whole and intire: but now is Victorious in the Continent over the Conquerors with a piece of a broken and shatter'd Army. The Carthaginians therefore concluding that this miserable misfortune was brought upon them by the Gods, they all betook themselves to Prayers and Supplications to the Deity; especially thinking that Hercules, the Tutelar god of their Country, was angry at them, they sent a vast sum of Mony, and many other rich Gifts to Tyre. For in as much as they were a Colony which came out from them, they us'd in former Ages to send the Tenth part of all their Revenues as an Offering to that God:


Page 663

But after that they grew wealthy, and their Revenues very great, they began to flack in in their Devotion, and sent thither but a small pittance to their God. Being therefore brought to repentance by this remarkable Slaughter, they remembred all the Gods in Tyre; they sent likewise out of their Temples to the Images of Golden Shrines in order to Supplications, supposing they should prevail the more in averting the Anger of the God by sending sacred gifts to pacifie him. They gave just cause likewise to their God Saturn to be their Enemy, for that in former times they us'd to sacrifice to this god the sons of the most eminent persons, but of later times they secretly bought and bred up Children for that purpose. And upon strict search made, there were found amongst them that were to be sacrific'd some Children that were chang'd and put in the place and room of others. Weighing these things in their Minds, and now seeing that the Enemy lay before their Walls, they were seiz'd with such a pang of Superstition, as if they had utterly forsaken the Religion of their Fathers. That they might therefore without delay reform what what was amiss, they offer'd as a publick sacrifice Two hundred of the Sons of the Nobility; and no fewer than Three hundred more (that were liable to censure) voluntarily offered up themselves; for among the Carthaginians there was a Brazen Statue of Saturn putting forth the Palms of his Hands so bending towards the Earth, as that the Boy that was laid upon them in order to be sacrific'd, should slip off and so fall down headlong into a deep fiery Furnace. Hence it's probable that Euripides took what he fabulously relates concerning the sacrifice in Taurus, where he introduces Iphigenia asking Orestes this Question—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

But what Sepulchre will me dead receive,

Shall th' Gulf of Sacred Fire then me have?

The ancient Fable likewise that is common among the Grecians, that Saturn devour'd his own Children, seems to be confirm'd by this Law among the Carthaginians.

But after this change of affairs in Africa the Carthaginians sent to Amilcar into Sicily to hasten over to their assistance with all speed, and order'd that all the Beaks of Agathocles his Ships should be carri'd to him. When the Messengers arriv'd, he commanded them not to say any thing of the Routing of their Forces, but to noise it abroad among the Soldiers, that Agathocles his Fleet and Land Army were both utterly destroy'd. And he himself sent away some (that were newly come from Carthage) to Syracuse, together with the Iron Beaks, to demand the delivery up of the City, and to tell them that all their Forces were cut off by the Carthaginians, and their whole Navy burnt; and that if they would not believe them, the Beaks of their Vessels (there shew'd) were a sufficient evidence of the truth of what they related. when they that were in the City heard of this overthrow of Agathocles, many believ'd it: But the leading men of the City, minding to keep private a matter that was yet uncertain, and to prevent Tumults, forthwith dismist the Messengers, and sent them away. They cast out of the City likewise the Kindred and friends of the Exiles, and Eight thousand at least of others that seem'd to be uneasie under the Government; whereupon when so great a Number on a suddain were forc'd to leave the place of their Birth, the City was full of Confusion, Lamentation and crying of Women running up and down in the Streets; neither was there any House at this time that had not its share of weeping and mourning. For they who favour'd the Tyrant bewail'd the Ruin of Agathocles, and the loss of their Sons; others wept for those of their friends who they suppos'd were all cut off in Africa; others griev'd and mourn'd for them that were compell'd to forsake their Houses, and the Gods of their Fore-fathers; and who were neither suffer'd to stay, nor could get well out of the City by reason of the Siege. And besides these most grievous and bitter sufferings (which they labour'd under) they were forc't to fly with their Wives, and drag along with them their little young Children; But Amilcar courteously receiv'd and secur'd the Exiles, and march'd to Syracuse with his Army, as if he should forthwith possess himself of the City, upon the account of the place being destitute of Inhabitants, and the misery those were in (as he heard) who were left behind: However he sent Messengers before, and promis'd pardon to Antandrus, and all those that sided with him if he would deliver up the City into his hands. Upon which there was a Council of War call'd of those Captains that were in the greatest Authority; where after many bandings and debates pro and con, Antander (who was naturally a poor spirited Man, and of a weak head, and much below the courage and resolution of his Brother) was for delivering up of the Town: But Eurymnon the Etolian (whom Agathocles had left to assist his Brother in


Page 664

Advice and Counsel) was of another Opinion, and prevail'd with them all to hold out till they had certain Intelligence of the Truth. Whereupon, Amilcar coming to understand the resolution of the Townsmen, prepar'd all his Engines with a full Resolution to batter down the Walls

Agathocles, after the late Battel, built two Ships of Thirty Oares a piece; and in one of them put on board the best of his Rowers, with Nearchus, one of the most faithful Friends he then had with him, and sent them away to Syracuse, to give an account of his Victory. Having therefore the Wind fair, the Fifth day (in the Night) they arriv'd in the Harbour of Syracuse, and at break of Day, Crown'd with Garlands and singing the Pean all along as they sail'd, they made for the City; which being perceived by the Carthaginian Guard-Ships, they pursu'd them with all their might, and the other being not far before them, there was great striving among the Rowers on both sides. While the Sea-men were thus contending, both Besiegers and Besieg'd understanding the Matter, ran down to the Port, and each fearful of the event, call'd out and encourag'd every one their own Men. And now the Ship was upon the point of falling into the hands of the Pursuers, upon which the Barbarians gave a shout: but the Citizens not being able otherwise to assist, pray'd to their Gods for the Preservation of their Men on board. The Pursuers being now ready to board her not far from Land, she got within a Darts cast of the Shore, and by the help of the Syracusians, who came in to her relief, narrowly escap'd the Danger. Amilcar perceiving that the Citizens, (upon the account of the late Contest, and the sudden arrival of the Intelligence expected) were all flock'd down to the Port; and thereupon conceiving part of the Walls were left Naked, order'd the stoutest of his Soldiers to rear up Scaling-Ladders; who finding there no Guards, mounted the Walls without being discern'd; and had almost possess'd themselves of an entire Part lying between two Towers, when they that us'd to go the Round, came just then to the Place, and so discover'd them. Upon which, they fell to it, and the Citizens came flocking in, before any Relief could be brought to the Assailants, so that some were kill'd outright, and others were thrown down Headlong over the Walls. At which Amilcar was so mortify'd, that he drew off his Forces from the City, and sent away Five thousand Men to the Relief of Carthage.

While these things were in action in Sicily, Agathocles being now Master of the Field, took some Forts and Castles near to Carthage by Storm; and other Cities, some out Fear, and some through hatred of the Carthaginians, voluntarily surrender'd themselves. Having fortify'd his Camp near Tunis, he left there a sufficient Guard, and mov'd towards the Towns lying upon the Sea-Coasts: And first he took by Storm the New City, but dealt very favourably with the Inhabitants: Thence he march'd to Adrymetes, and besieg'd it, and Confederated with Elymas King of Lybia. News whereof being brought to the Carthaginians, they bent all their Arms against Tunis; and possessed themselves of Agathocles his Camp; and with their Battering Rams press'd upon the City with continual Assaults. Agathocles receiving Intelligence of the slaughter of his Men, leaving the greatest part of his Army to carry on the Siege, and taking with him his Life-guard, and a small Body of Men, secretly march'd up to the Top of a Mountain, whence he might view both the Country of the Adrymetines, and likewise the Carthaginians that besieg'd Tunis. In the Night he commanded his Soldiers to kindle Fires, and with them to take up a large Tract of Ground, to the end the Carthaginians might think he was making towards them with a strong Army, and that the Besieg'd might conclude, that fresh Forces in vast numbers were come up to him for his Assistance; both being deceiv'd by this Stratagem were suddenly caught in the Snare; for they who besieg'd Tunis, fled, and left their Engines behind them; and the Adrymetines surpriz'd with Fear surrender'd the City, which was gain'd, upon certain Terms agreed upon, but Thapsus he afterwards took by Storm: And several other Cities he took in this Tract, some by Force, and others upon Conditions. Having at length gain'd in the whole above Two hundred Towns and Cities, he resolv'd upon an Expedition into the Higher Libya: To that end he rais'd his Camp, and march'd on many days Journey.

Then the Carthaginians march'd out with those Forces (besides others) which were sent out of Sicily, and besieg'd Tunis a second time, and recover'd a great part of the Country that was then in the Hands of the Enemy. When Couriers came from Tunis, and gave an account what the Carthaginians had done, Agathocles forthwith return'd: Being come within Two hundred Furlongs of the Enemy, he Encamp'd, and commanded his Soldiers not to kindle any Fires: Then making a sudden March in the Night, about spring of Day he fell upon those as were Wasting and Harrassing the Country, and disorderly roving up and down, and kill'd above Two thousand of them, and took many Prisoners, which was a great Step to his many Successes afterwards: For the Carthaginians being reinforc'd by their


Page 665

Aids from Sicily, and strengthned by their Confederates in Africa, thought they had been too strong for Agathocles: But after this Misfortune, the Hearts of the Barbarians were quite down; for he had overcome Elymas the King of Libya, (who had deserted him) and kill'd likewise the General, with a great number of the Barbarians. And thus stood Affairs in Sicily and Africa at this time.

In Macedonia, Cassander came in to the Assistance of Autoleontes King of the Peonians, who was then in War with the Autariats, and rescu'd him out of the Streights and Dangers he was in at that time, and transplanted the Autariats together with their Wives and Children, that were then with them, to the Number of Twenty thousand, and plac'd them near the Mountain Orbitaus.

While he was thus employ'd, Ptolemy, Antigonus his General in Peloponnesus, who was intrusted by him with an Army in these Parts, (took a Pique against Antigonus, thinking he was not rewarded according to what he might justly expect) revolted and join'd with Cassander. He had left one Phaenix, (one of his Confederates) President of the Province adjoining to the Hellespont, and sent over some Soldiers to him, wishing him to take care of the Castles and Cities there, and for the future not regard any Orders that came from Antigonus.

It was generally agreed by Alexander's Captains, (as part of their Articles among themselves) that the Greek Cities should be all restor'd to their ancient Liberties. Therefore Ptolemy, King of Egypt, (charging Antigonus that he had put Garisons into several Greek Towns and Cities) prepar'd to make War upon him: And sent Leonides, a Captain of his own, into Cilicia Aspera, and there possess'd himself of certain Cities and Places belonging to Antigonus; and moreover, sent his Agent to some Cities appertaining to Cassander and Lysimachus, that they would follow his Advice, and not suffer Antigonus to grow too fast in Power.

And as for Antigonus, he sent his younger Son Philip to make War upon Phaenix, and others, who had revolted from him in Hellespont; but his Son Demetrius he sent into Cilicia, who putting in Execution what he had in Command, routed the Captains of Ptolemy that were there, and recover'd the Cities.

While these things were doing, Polysperchon, (then residing in Peloponnesus) still affecting the Government of Macedon, cry'd out against Cassander, and sent for Hercules, a Son of Alexander, (begotten upon Barfine) out of Pergamus, (now of the Age of Seventeen years) and sent up and down to those who were his own Friends, and Enemies to Cassander, to help to set this young Man unto his Father's Kingdom. He sollicited likewise by his Letters the Aetolians, to assist him in his present Design; promising, that they should find more Grace and Favour at his hands than at any time before, if they would help him to restore the young Lad to his Father's Throne.

All things going on according to his Heart's desire, (and the Aetolians complying with his request) many others came flocking in to restore the New King, so that there were got together above Twenty thousand Foot, and no less than a Thousand Horse. And thus setting himself with all his might to the Work, he rais'd what Money he could, and sent some to sollicit his Friends in Macedonia to assist him.

In the mean time, Ptolemy of Aegypt having all Cyprus under his Command, and finding that Nicocles, the King of Paphos, held Correspondence under-hand with Antigonus, sent two Confidents of his own, Argaus and Callicrates, with Instructions to make away Nicocles; for he was much afraid lest some others also should fall off, as he had perceiv'd many others had done before. Wherefore, passing into Cyprus, and taking with them a certain Number of Soldiers from Menelaus, who commanded the Army there, they beset the House of Nicocles; and then telling him what the King's Pleasure was, advis'd him to dispose of himself for another World. He at first went to clear himself of what was laid to his Charge, but when he saw that no Man hearkned to what he said, drew his Sword and slew himself. Axiothea his Wife, hearing of her Husband's Death, took her Daughters, who were all Young and Virgins, and cut their Throats, that they might not fall into any of the Enemy's hands, and was earnest with the Wives of Nicocles his Brothers to accompany her in her own Death; whereas Ptolemy had given no order concerning any of them, save only to preserve them. The King's Palace therefore thus fill'd with the sudden and unexpected Slaughters and dreadful Spectacles, so affected the Brothers of Nicocles, that they shut every Man his own Door upon him, and set fire on their Houses, and slew themselves, so the whole Race of the Kings of Paphos came to a Tragick and Lamentable End. Having given an Account of those Affairs we before promis'd, we shall now proceed to those that follow next in order.


Page 666

About this time in Pontus, after the Death of Parysadas, King of the Cimmerian Bosphorus, his Sons Eumelus, Satyrus, and Prytanis, contended one with another for the Kingdom: Satyrus, the Eldest was appointed Successor by his Father, who reign'd Eight and Thirty Years.

Eumelus compacting with some of the Natives adjoining, rais'd an Army, and laid claim to the Kingdom against his Elder Brother; of which Satyrus being inform'd, went against him with a great Army, and passing the River Thapsus, when he came near his Camp with his Carts and Wagons, wherein he had brought an infinite quantity of Provision; and ranging afterwards his Army in the Field, (after the manner of the Scythian Kings) he led the main Battel himself. He had not in his Army above Two thousand Greeks, and as many Thracians; all the rest were Scythians, which came to assist him, to the number of Twenty thousand, and no less than Ten thousand Horse. Eumelus was assisted by Ariophames, King of Thrace, with Twenty thousand Horse, and Two and twenty thousand Foot. Between these Forces a bloody Battel was fought, wherein Satyrus (who had with him a choice Party of brave Horse) encountred first with Ariopharnes in a Skirmish of Horse; who likewise commanded the middle Battel opposite to Satyrus; many fell on both sides; at length he forc'd his way through, and put the Barbarian King to flight, and being the first in the pursuit put every Man to the Sword that was in his way. But when he heard, that his Brother Eumelus in the right Wing, had routed the Mercenaries, he left off the Pursuit, and made up to the Succor of those that fled, and regain'd the day, and utterly broke and routed the whole Army, putting them all to flight; so that he gave a clear Testimony that he justly deserv'd to Wear the Crown, as well upon the Account of his Valour, as upon the Privilege of his Birth.

Ariopharnes and Eumelus thus beaten, fled into the King's Palace, which was inviron'd with the River Thasis, of an exceeding depth, so that the Place was of difficult approach; it was surrounded likewise with steep Rocks and thick Woods, into which there were only two Entrances made by Art: One leading straight to the Palace, defended with high Towers and Bulwarks; the other on the other side, was made in the Fens, guarded with Forts and Towers of Timber, rais'd upon Pillars over the Water. The Place being very strong, Satyrus first wasted the Enemy's Country, and burnt their Towns, whence he carry'd a vast Number of Prisoners, and abundance of Spoil. Afterwards he attempted to force his way through the Passes, but losing many of his Men at the Bulwarks and Towers, he was forc'd to Retreat. But making an Attack upon that side towards the Fenns, he took the Timber-Forts which he demolish'd, and then pass'd the River. Upon which he began to fell a Wood, through which he must needs pass to the Palace; and while these attempts were carrying on in great Earnestness, King Ariopharnes fearing lest the Castle should be taken by Storm, valiantly fell upon them, perceiving there were no hopes of safety remaining but in an absolute Victory. He plac'd likewise Archers on both sides the Passage, by whom he sore gall'd the Fellers of the Wood, because they could neither see the Arrows before they pierc'd them, nor come at the Archers, nor return the like upon them, by reason of the thick and close standing of the Trees. However, Satyrus his Soldiers continu'd falling the Wood, and opening a Way to the Palace, for three Days together, though with great Toil and Hazard; the Fourth day they came under the Wall. But being worsted through showers of Arrows and straightness of the Places, they sustain'd very great loss: For Meniscus (who led the Mercenary Companies) having got in at a Passage (though he Fought very manfully) was nevertheless (being over-laid with the Multitude within) forc'd to retreat: Whom Satyrus seeing in such imminent Danger, came up to him with seasonable Relief, and bearing up against the Enemy's Charge, was run through the Arm with a Spear, which was so sore, that it forc'd him to retire to his Camp, and the next Night died of the Wound, having reign'd scarce nine Months after the Death of Parasydas his Father. Hereupon, Meniscus, Captain of the Mercenaries, breaking up the Siege drew off the Army to a City call'd Gargaza, and from thence carry'd the King's Body down the River, to a City call'd Pantacapeum, to his Brother Prytanis, who having magnificently bury'd it, and laid up the Reliques in the King's Sepulchre, went presently to Gargaza, and there took into his hands the Army, together with the Kingdom

Hereupon, came the Agents of Eumelus to him to treat concerning the parting of the Kingdom between them two, which he would not hearken to: Leaving therefore a strong Garison at Gargara, he return'd to Pantacapeum, there to settle the Affairs of his Kingdom. But a while after, Eumelus, by the help of some Babarians, possess'd himself of Gargara, and sundry other Towns and Castles. Whereupon, Prytanis march'd with an Army against him, but was overthrown in a Battel by his Brother; and being shut up


Page 667

within a Neck of Land, near the Lough of Meotis, was forc'd to render himself upon Conditions, which were to give up all his Army and depart the Kingdom.

Nevertheless, when Prytanis return'd to Pantacapeum, which is the Place where the Kings of Bosphorus keep the standing Court, he there endeavour'd again to recover his Kingdom; but being foil'd there again, he fled to a Place call'd the Gardens, and was there slain.

Eumelus, after the Death of his Brother, to confirm himself in the Kingdom, put to Death all the Friends, Wives and Children of both his Brothers, Satyrus and Prytanis; only Parisades, Satyrus his Son, being but a very Youth, escap'd his Hands; for by the benefit of a swift Horse he got away out of the City to Agarus King of the Scythians. But when Eumelus saw that the People repin'd at the loss of their Friends whom he had murder'd, he call'd them all together, and there excus'd himself, and restor'd to them their ancient form of Government, and to the Citizens of Pantacapeum their former Immunities, and promis'd to discharge them of all kind of Tributes, sparing for no fair words which might reconcile the Hearts of the People to him; by which means, having regain'd their good Opinions, he held a just and moderate Hand over them, and grew afterwards into no small admiration for all kind of Virtue among them. For he omitted not to oblige the Byzantians and Sinopians, and the rest of the Grecian Inhabitants of Pontus by all the demonstrations of Kindness imaginable. For when the Collantians were besieg'd by Lysimachus, and were brought to great distress through want of Provision, he entertain'd a Thousand of them who left the Place for want of Bread, and not only granted them a safe Protection, but allotted them Habitations within the City. And divided likewise a Place call'd Psoa, with the Territory thereunto belonging, among them by Lot. And for the Benefit of the Merchants that Traded to Pontus, he made War upon the Barbarous piratical Heniochians, and them of Taurus, with the Acheans, and scowr'd and cleans'd the Seas of them. So that his Name was advanc'd to the Skies, (as the Fruit of his Generosity) not only in his own Kingdom, but almost all the World over, while the Merchants every where publish'd the Greatness and Braveness of his Spirit. Moreover, he much enlarg'd his Dominion, by the addition of a considerable Part of the Barbarians Country bordering upon him, and advanc'd the Fame and Reputation of his Kingdom, above whatever it was before.

In conclusion, he had a Design to have brought under all the neighbouring Nations, and had certainly effected in short time what he had so design'd, if he had not been prevented by Death: For after he had reign'd five Years and as many Months, he ended his days by a sudden and unusual Accident: For returning home out of Scythia, with a great desire to be present at a certain Sacrifice, and making towards his Palace in a Chariot with four Horses, cover'd over with a Canopy; the Horses took a Fright at the Canopy, and violently ran away with him, the Coachman not being able to stop them in their Carreer: Upon which, Eumelus fearing lest he should be born away headlong down some steep Rock, threw himself out, but his Sword entangling in one of the Wheels, he was hurry'd away with the violent Motion of the Chariot, and kill'd forthwith.

It's reported there were some Predictions concerning the Death of Eumelus and his Brother Satyrus, though something Foolish and Vain, yet credited by the Inhabitants. For they say, that the Oracle warn'd Satyrus to be aware of one Musculus, lest he should kill him, and that for that reason he would not suffer any of that name, whether Bond or Free, to abide within his Dominions; and that upon that account he was afraid both of House and Field- Mice, and continually charg'd the Children to kill 'em, and stop up their Holes. At length, when he had done all that possibly he could to avoid his Fate, he was at last kill'd by a Wound in the Muscle of his Arm. And as for Eumelus, that he was charg'd by the Oracle to take heed of a Moving House; and therefore that he durst not go into his House before his Servants had made a diligent Search to see that both the Roof and Foundation were sound. But after that they came to understand that the Canopy plac'd upon the Chariot was the Occasion of his Death, every one concluded that the Prophecy was fulfill'd. But this shall suffice, concerning the Affairs of the Bosphorus.

In Italy the Roman Consuls enter'd the Country of the Samnites with an Army, and routed them in a Battel at Talius. But the routed Party afterwards possessing themselves of an Hill, and the Night drawing on, the Romans retreated to their Camp; but the next day the Fight was renew'd, and great numbers of the Samnites were slain, and above Two thousand and Two hundred were taken Prisoners. The Romans being thus successful, now quietly enjoy'd whatever they had in the open Field, and brought under all the revolting Cities, and plac'd Garisons in Cataracta and Ceraunia, Places they had taken by Assault, and others they reduc'd upon Terms and Conditions.


Page 668

CHAP. II.

The Acts of Ptolemy in Cilicia, and elsewhere. Polysperchon murders Hercules, Alexander's Son, by Instigation of Cassander. Amilcar taken, and put to Death by the Syracusians. His Head sent to Agathocles in Africa. The Transactions in Sicily. Archagathus Agathocles's Son, kills Lysiscus; he and his Son in in great Danger by the Army. Affairs in Italy. The Works of Appius Claudius; the Appian Way. Ptolemy comes to Corinth; his Acts there. Cleopatra, Alexander's Sister, kill'd by the Governor of Sardis. The further Acts of Agathocles in Africa. Ophellas decoy'd, and cut off by Agathocles. Ophellas his troublesome March to Agathocles. Lamias's Cruelty, and the Story of her. Bomilcar seeks to be Prince of Carthage, but is put to Death by the Citizens. Agathocles sends the Spoils of the Cyrenians to Syracuse; most lost in a Storm, Affairs in Italy.

WHen Demetrius Phalerius was Lord Chancellor of Athens, Quintus Fabius (the second time) and Caius Martius were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome. At that time Ptolemy King of Egypt hearing that his Captains had lost all the Cities again in Cilicia, put over with his Fleet to Phaselis, and took that City by Force, and from thence passing into Lycia, took Xanthus by Assault, and the Garison of Antigonus that was therein. Then sailing to Caunus, took the City by Surrender, and then set upon the Citadels and Forts that were in it, and took them by Assaults.

As for Heracleum, he utterly destroy'd it; and the City Persicum came into his Hands by the Surrender of the Soldiers that were put to keep it. Then sailing to Coos, he sent for Ptolemy the Captain, who was Antigonus his Brother's Son, and had an Army committed to him by Antigonus: But now forsaking his Uncle, he clave to Ptolemy, and join'd with him in all his Affairs. Putting therefore from Cholcis, and arriving at Coos, Ptolemy the King at first receiv'd him very courteously; yet after a while, when he saw the Insolency of his Carriage, and how he went to allure the Officers by Gifts, and held secret Cabals with them, for fear of the worst he clap'd him up in Prison, and there poison'd him with a Draught of Hemlock: As for the Soldiers that came with him, he made them his own by large Promises, and distributed them by small Parcels among his Army. Whilst these Things were acting, Polysperchon having rais'd a great Army, restor'd Hercules the Son of Alexander, begotten upon Barsinoe, to his Father's Kingdom. And while he lay encamp'd at Stymphalia, Cassander came up with his Army, and both encamp'd near one to another: Neither did the Macedonians grudge to see the Restoration of their King.

Cassander therefore fearing, lest the Macedonians (who are naturally Inconstant) should Revolt to Hercules, sent an Agent to Polysperchon, chiefly to advise him concerning the Business of the King. If the King was restor'd, he told him, he must be sure to be under the Commands of others; but if he would assist him, and kill the young Man, he should enjoy the same Privileges and Honours in Macedonia that ever he had before. And besides, that he should have the Command of an Army; that he should be declar'd Generalissimo of Peloponnesus; and that he should share in the Principality, and be in equal Honour with Cassander. At length he so caught and ensnar'd Polysperchon with many large Promises, that they enter'd into a secret Combination, and Polysperchon undertook to murder the young King, which he accordingly effected; upon which Polysperchon openly join'd with Cassander in all his Concerns, and was advanced in Macedonia, and receiv'd (according to the Compact) Four thousand Macedonian Foot, and Five hundred Thessalian Horse; and having listed several other Voluntiers, he attempted to pass through Boeotia into Peloponnesus: But being oppos'd by the Boeotians and the Peloponnesians, he was forc'd to retire, and march into Locris, where he took up his Winter-Quarters.

During these Transactions, Lysimachus built a City in Chersonesus, and call'd it after his own Name, Lysimachia. Cleomenes King of Lacedaemon now dy'd, when he had reign'd Threescore Years and Ten Months; and was succeeded by Aretas his Son, who Rul'd Forty Four Years.


Page 669

About this time Amilcar, General of the Forces in Sicily, having reduc'd the rest of that Island, marches with his Army to Syracuse, as if he would presently gain that City by force of Arms; and to that end hindred all Provision from the Town, having been a long time Master at Sea; and having wasted and destroy'd all the Corn, and other Fruits of the Field, attempted to possess himself of all the Places about Olympias lying before the Town. Then he resolv'd forthwith to assault the Walls, being incourag'd thereunto by the Augur, who by viewing of the Intrals of the Sacrifice, foretold that he should certainly sup the next day in Syracuse. But the Townsmen smelling out the Enemies Design, sent out in the night Three thousand Foot, and about Four hundred Horse, with Orders to possess themselves of Euryclus, who presently effected what they were commanded to do. The Carthaginians thinking to surprize the Enemy, fell on about midnight. Amilcar commanded the whole Body, and led them up, having always a strong Party near to support him. Dinocrates, Master of the Horse, follow'd him. The Army was divided into two Battalions, one of Barbarians, and the other of Grecian Confederates. A Rabble likewise of divers other Nations follow'd, to get what Plunder they could; which sort of People, as they are of no use in an Army, so they are many times the cause of sudden Alarms, and vain and needless Fears, which often occasions great Mischief and Prejudice. And at that time the Passes being strait and rough, the Drivers of the Carriages, and other Servants and Attendants of the Army that were not of any form'd Companies, quarrell'd one with another for the Way, and not being able to move forward by reason of the Throng, some fell to down-right Blows; so that many on each side coming in to help their several Parties, a great Tumult, Noise and Clamour, ran through the whole Army. Upon which, the Syracusians, who were posted at Euryclus, understanding the approach of the Barbarians by their tumultuous March, and having the higher Ground, fell in upon the Enemy. Some from the high Places where they were posted, gall'd them as they came on with their Darts and Arrows, and some prevented them by gaining the necessary Passes, and so block'd up their Way. Others drave those that fled Headlong down the Rocks; for by reason of the Darkness of the Night, and want of Intelligence, they thought the Enemy was coming upon them with a mighty Army; so that the Carthaginians. by reason of the Disturbance and Tumult amongst their own Men, their Ignorance of the Ways, and straitness of the Passages, were at a stand, and confounded, and at last fled outright: And because there was no room to give way, great numbers of them were trodden under Foot by their own Horse; and part of the Army fought one with another, as if they had been Enemies, led into the Error by the Darkness of the Night. Amilcar indeed at the first receiv'd the Enemy's Charge with great Resolution, and call'd out to the Colonels and Commanders to stand to it, and valiantly bear the Brunt with the rest. But afterwards being deserted by his Soldiers, through the Consternation that was amongst them, (having much ado to save his Life) he fell into the hands of the Syracusians.

Here a Man may justly observe the Inconstancy of Fortune, and the surprizing Events Men are overtaken with, contrary to what they expected. For Agathocles not inferiour to any for Valour, and who had the Command of a great Army in the Battel at Himera, was not only beaten by the Barbarians, but lost the best and greatest part of his Army. But those that were left, and penn'd up within the Walls of Syracuse, with a small handful of Men, that had been before beaten, not only routed the Army of the Carthaginians, by whom they were besieg'd, but took Amilcar the General, one of the noblest of the Citizens of Carthage, Prisoner: And that most to be admir'd is, that a small Body of Men by an Ambuscado, and the Advantage of the Place, should utterly rout an Army of an Hundred and twenty thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse. So that it's very true what's in every Body's Mouth, Many things are vain and to no purpose inWar.

After this Flight, the Carthaginians scatter'd and dispers'd far one from another, scarce got together the next day. But the Syracusians returning to the City with much Spoil, deliver'd Amilcar to them that were resolv'd to revenge themselves of him: They remembred what was foretold by the Augur, That he should Sup in Syracuse the next day; the Truth of which, the Deity now confirm'd by the Event. The Kindred therefore of them that were slain, led Amilcar bound through all Parts of the City, and after they had most horridly tormented him, kill'd him with the greatest Scorn and Contempt imaginable. Then the principal Men of the City sent his Head to Agathocles, with an Express to give him an Account of the late Victory.

But the Army of the Carthaginians after their Defeat, though they came to understand what was the Cause of such great Calamities and Misfortunes, yet were scarce after all


Page 670

freed from their Fears: And because they wanted a General, Quarrels arose between the Barbarians and the Grecians. The Exiles therefore, and the rest of the Greeks, made Dinocrates General over themselves: And the Carthaginians intrusted the supream Command with those that were next in Dignity to the late General At this time, when the Agrigentines perceiv'd that Sicily was now in that Condition, as that it might be easily gain'd, they began to seek after the Sovereign Command of the Island themselves. For they suppos'd, that the Carthaginians were not able to deal with Agathocles in the War; and that Dinocrates, who had none but a company of Fugitives about him, might be easily vanquish'd; and that the Syracusians, who were grievously press'd for want of Provisions, would not so much as attempt to gain the Sovereign Command. And lastly, that which was of greatest weight was, That inasmuch as they took up Arms to free all the Greek Cities, they concluded, that all would readily concur, both upon the account of the Hatred they bore against the Barbarians, and the Natural Love and Regard they all had to the Laws of their own Country. They created therefore Xenodicus General, and sent him forth to the War with a considerable Army, who forthwith makes to Gela, and by some of his own Friends, was in the Night let into the City; and so gain'd both the Town more Forces, and a great deal of Money, at one and the same time. The Geloans having thus recover'd their Liberty, join'd in the War with the whole Strength and Power of the City, and most readily put to their helping Hands for the restoring all the Cities to their ancient Laws.

This Attempt of the Agrigentines being nois'd abroad throughout the whole Island, a sudden itch of Liberty spread over all the Cities: And first, the Enneans sent Agents, and deliver'd up their City to the Agrigentines, who freeing this City, march'd on to Erbessus, a Garison of the Carthaginians: Here was a sharp Engagement; but the Citizens coming in to the Assistance of the Agrigentines, the Garison was expuls'd, and many of the Barbarians kill'd, and Five hundred laid down their Arms and gave up themselves.

While the Agrigentines were busi'd in these Affairs, some of Agathocles his Soldiers in Syracuse having taken Echetla, wasted and harrass'd the Country of the Leontines and Camareans. This Calamity grievously afflicted the Cities, because the Country was laid wast, and all the Corn and Fruits destroy'd: Whereupon Xenodicus the General march'd into those Parts, and drave the Enemy out of the Country of the Leontines and Camarenians, and then retaking Echetla, which was a very strong Fort, he restor'd the Democratical Government to the City, and struck a Terror into the Syracusians. To conclude, he march'd up and down to the several Garisons and Cities, and freed them from the Carthaginian Government. 

In the mean time, the Syracusians being in great Straits and Perplexity for want of Provision, when they understood that some Ships were coming with Corn, fitted out Twenty Gallies; and understanding that the Barbarians kept but a slight Guard where they lay, they slipt by undiscern'd, and got as far as to the Megareans, and there waited for the Merchants. But Thirty Carthaginian Gallies making up to them, they prepar'd themselves at first to fight: But being presently driven ashore, they left their Ships and swam out, and so escap'd to a certain Temple of Juno, upon which there was a sharp Dispute about the Ships; the Carthaginians threw in Grappling-Irons, and hal'd them with Force off from the Land, and so took Ten of them; the rest were sav'd by some Help that came in out of the City. And this was the Condition of Sicily at that time.

In Africa, after that they who brought the Head of Amilcar were arriv'd there; Agathocles, as soon as he had receiv'd it, rid up so near to the Enemy's Camp as that his Voice might be heard, and shewing them the Head, told them how all their Forces in Sicily were destroy'd, which presently caus'd most bitter Mourning and Lamentation among the Carthaginians, who bowed down themselves in Adoration of the Head of their King, (according to the Custom of their Country,) and looking upon his Death to be their own Calamity, had no Hearts further to prosecute the War. Agathocles on the other side, (lifted up with his Successes in Africa, and with such Confluence of Prosperity,) bore himself high in mighty Hopes and Expectations for the future, as if he had been now out of the reach of all Dangers. But Fortune did not think it fit to suffer Things to run on in the same course of Prosperity, but brought him under most imminent Hazards and Difficulties from his own Soldiers. For one Lysiscus, one of his Colonels, being invited by Agathocles to Supper, when he was heated with Wine, and in his Cups fell a railing against him with most bitter Imprecations. But 

〈◊〉

, because he had a great Esteem for the Man upon the account of his Valour, pass'd by all with a left: But Archagathus his Son on the contrary being enrag'd at him, 

••

torted upon him with bitter Reproaches and Threats. When Supper was ended, and every one was return'd to his Tent, Lysiscus


Page 671

contemptuously charg'd Archagathus as an incestuous Adulterer with his own Step-mother: For he was judg'd to be too familiar with Alcia, his Father's Wife. Whereupon Archagathus, stirr'd up to a higher degree of Madness and Rage, snatch'd a Lance out of the Hands of one of the Guard and ran him through the Side, who falling down dead, immediately was carry'd into his Tent by those that attended him. As soon as it was day, the Friends of him that was slain, and many others of the Soldiers, ran up and down, and (inrag'd at the Fact that was committed) fill'd the Camp with Tumult and Confusion. Many likewise of the Captains, who were subject to be call'd in Question for their Crimes, fearing what might ensue, made use of the present Occasion, and stirr'd up the Soldiers to a terrible Mutiny: So that the whole Army inflam'd with the Hatred of his Cruelty, ran to their Arms to execute condign Punishment upon the Murderer. At length they resolv'd to put Archagathus to Death; and that if Agathocles did not deliver up his Son, he should Die in his Room: Besides, they demanded of him their Arrears, and chose new Officers and Captains to Command the Army. At length they possess'd themselves of the Walls of Tunis, and hemm'd in the Princes round with their Guards. This Mutiny coming to the Ears of the Enemy, the Carthaginians sent some of their own Men, to persuade the Soldiers to a Revolt, promising them larger Pay, and ample Rewards: Whereupon many of the Captains promis'd to bring over the Army to them. But Agathocles, when he saw he was in the utmost extremity of Danger, and fearing lest if he were given up to the Enemy, he should end his Days with Disgrace and Dishonour, concluded that it was much better if he must Suffer, to be kill'd by the Soldiers: Whereupon he laid aside his Purple Robe, and put on a poor Country-fellow's Habit, and came into the midst of them; at which strange Sight there was a deep Silence, and many came in from every Quarter flocking about him; where he made a Speech to them fitted for the present Occasion, wherein he set forth the Acts he had done to that time, and told them, He was now ready to Die, if they (his Fellow-Soldiers) thought fit it should be so. For he was resolv'd never (like a Coward) to make exchange of his Honour for his Life, of which (he said) they should be then Eye-witnesses, and thereupon drew out his Sword as if he would run himself through: And just as he was ready to thrust it into his Body, the whole Army call'd out aloud to him to Forbear, and all gave their Voices generally, That he should be Acquitted and Discharg'd from all further Accusation. The Soldiers then wishing him to put on his Royal Robes, he return'd them many Thanks, shedding many Tears, and then Cloath's himself again as became his State and Dignity, and the People with chearful Countenances congratulated the Reassumption of his former Power. In the mean time, the Carthaginians expected every hour that the Greeks would come over to them.

But Agathocles, that he might not lose the Advantage of the present Occasion, led the Army out against them; for the Carthaginians expecting continually a Revolt and a Desertion from the Enemies Camp, never in the least dream'd of what was really in Agitation. But Agathocles, as soon as he approach'd the Enemies Camp, presently commanded his Men to sound a Charge, and so forthwith fell in upon them, and hew'd them down before him. The Carthaginians being surpriz'd by this sudden Attack, after the Loss of many of their Men, fled to their Camp. And thus Agathocles, who was near losing of his Life through the Rashness of his Son, by his own Valour not only extricated himself out of the Snare, but utterly routed his Enemies: But they who were the Heads and Ringleaders of the Mutiny, and as many others as bore a Grudge to the Prince, to the Number of Two hundred and upwards, vilely deserted, and went over to the Carthaginians.

Having now gone through the Affairs of Africa and Sicily, we shall next take notice of what was done in Italy. For there the Hetruscans came with a great Army against Sutrium, a Roman Colony: To whose Defence the Consuls march'd out with great Forces and fought and routed the Hetruscans, and pursu'd them to their very Camp. About' the same time the Samnites (when the Roman Army was abroad at a great distance without the least fear of an Enemy) besieg'd the Japyges, Allies to the Romans: Therefore the Consuls were forc'd to divide their Forces. Fabius continu'd in Hetruria; but Marcius march'd against the Samnites, and took the City of Allita by Storm, and freed their Allies from the Siege of Japyges. But Fabius, while the Hetrurians flock'd in great multitudes to besiege Sutrium, slipt secretly by the Enemy through the bordering Country, and made an Incursion into the Higher Hetruria, which had for a long time been free from all manner of Inroads and Invasions; where breaking in upon the sudden, he wasted and harass'd the Country up and down, and routed those of the Inhabitants that made head against him, and kill'd many of them, and took a great number of Prisoners. Afterwards he


Page 672

overcame and kill'd many of them in another Battel at a Place call'd Perusia, and put that People into a great Consternation. He was the first of the Romans that ever enter'd with an Army into those Parts. But he made Peace with the Arretines and Crotoneans, and them of Perusina; and taking the City call'd Castula, he forc'd the Hetrurians to raise their Siege before Sutrium.

This Year there were two Censors created at Rome; the one of whom was Appius Claudius, who with the concurrence of his Collegue, Caius Plautius, abrogated many of the ancient Laws: For to gratifie the People, he made no account of the Senate. He brought Water (which was from him call'd Appia) into Rome from Places fourscore Furlongs distant, and expended a vast Sum of Money in this Work, receiv'd out of the Treasury by Consent of the Senate. Then he laid a Causey of hard Stone the greatest part of that way, which is from him call'd Appia, extending from Rome to Capua, a Thousand Furlongs and upwards; and with great Costs and Expence levell'd all the rising Grounds, and fill'd up all the Holes and hollow Places, making all even and plain; but hereby drain'd the Treasury almost of all the Money that was in it. And by this his laying out of himself in promoting the Publick Good, he left behind him an immortal Memorial. He also made up the Senate not only of the Nobility (as the ancient Custom was) but likewise of the Libertines, by chusing many of them, and mixing them with the other, which the Patritians took very heinously. Moreover, he gave liberty to the Citizens to incorporate themselves into what Tribe they thought fit, and to be tax'd in what Rank soever they pleas'd.

At length, perceiving how greatly he was envy'd by the Nobility, he avoided the Storm by insinuating himself into the favour of the Common People, and making use of them as a Bulwark against the Envy of the Patricians. In must' ring of the Horse, he never took any Mans Horse from him; neither ever remov'd any Person never so mean out of the Senate (that was once chosen) when he took an account of the Senators, which the Censors us'd to do. But the Consuls, both out of Envy, and to gratifie the Nobility, conven'd a Senate of such as were inroll'd by the former Censors, and not those that were allow'd by him: But the People oppos'd them, and sided with Appius; and that he might confirm the Advancement of such as were but of mean and obscure Birth, he preferr'd one Cains Flavius, the Son of a Libertine, to the Office of Aedilis, and to the highest Place in that Office. And this was the first Roman born of a Libertine, that ever before was advanc'd to that Honourable Station. Appius at length being remov'd out of his Office, out of fear of the Senate's Malice, kept his House, under pretence of being blind.

Now Charinus was Chief Governor at Athens, and the Romans created Publius Decius and Quintus Fabius Consuls. And at Elis was celebrated the Hundred and eighteenth Olympiad, in which Apollonides of Tegeata bore away the Prize: At which time Ptolemy sailing from Myndus along the Islands which lay in his way, came to Andros, and putting out the Garison that was there, restor'd it to her former Liberty: Thence he sail'd to the Isthmus, and receiv'd Sicyon and Corinth from Cratesipolis. But for what reasons, and upon what account he took these eminent Cities into his hands, we have related in the former Books, and therefore we shall forbear repetition. He design'd also to restore the rest of the Greek Cities to their Liberties, judging that by gaining the Hearts of the Grecians, he should very much promote his own Interest. But when the Peloponnesians were order'd to provide Money and Victuals, but perform'd nothing of what they had agreed to, he was so incens'd, that he made Peace with Cassander, upon this Condition, That each of them should retain those Cities they had then in their hands. Then having put Garisons into Sicyon and Corinth, he return'd into Aegypt.

In the mean time, Cleopatra being incens'd against Antigonus, of her own accord inclin'd to Ptolemy, and left Sardis to go to him: She was Sister of Alexander, the Conqueror of the Persians, the Daughter of Philip Son of Amyntas, and the Wise of Alexander, who undertook an Expedition into Italy. And therefore upon the account of the Nobleness of her Birth, Cassander, Lysunachus, Antigonus, and Ptolemy, and even the Chiefest of Alexander's Captains after his death, were every one ambitious to marry her: For every one hop'd by this Marriage to draw all the the Macedonians after them; and therefore each coveted to be related to the Royal Family, looking upon that as the way to gain the Sovereign Power and Command over all the rest. But the Governour of Sardis (whom Antigonus had commanded to retain Cleopatra) stopt her Journey; and afterwards by Order from Antigonus, with the help of some Women, privily murther'd her. But Antigonus, who would no ways be thought guilty of her death, struck off the Heads of some of those Women, for having a hand in her Murder, and bury'd her with all the Magnificence


Page 673

that might be. And such was the end of Cleopatra, before any Solemnization of Marriage; who was earnestly coveted as a Wife by all the most Noble Captains and Generals of the Army.

Having now gone through the Affairs of Asia and Greece, we shall pass over to other Parts of the World.

In Africa the Carthaginians sent an Army against the Numidians (who had revolted from them) in order to reduce them. Upon which, Agathocles left his Son Archagathus with part of the Army at Tunis; and he himself, with Eight thousand Foot, and Eight hundred Horse of the most Valiant Men of his Army, and Fifty African Carriages, made after the Enemy with all speed possible. In the mean time the Carthaginians being come among the Numidians, call'd Suphons, caus'd many of the Inhabitants to join with them; and reduc'd likewise some of the Revolters to their former Alliance and Confederacy with them; but when they heard of the Enemies approach they Incamp'd upon an high piece of ground lying on the other side of a deep and unpassable River, to secure themselves against all suddain Attacks and incursions of the Enemy; and commanded the most active Numidians to hinder the march of the Grecians by vexing them ever and anon with continual Attacks in the Rear; who accordingly executing their Commands, Agathocles sent out the Archers and Slingers against them; and he himself with the rest of the Army made towards the Enemies Camp. But the Carthaginians understanding his design drew the Army out of the Camp, and stood rang'd in Battle array, ready and prepar'd for fight: As soon as they saw Agathocles his Soldiers pass the River, they fell upon them in a full Body, and made a great slaughter at that part of the River where it was so difficult to pass; and in this indeavour to force their way through the River, the Greeks as far excell'd the Barbarians in valour as they did them in number and multitude; while both sides stood stoutly to it for a long time, the Numidians in each Army left off fighting expecting the issue of the Ingagement, with a design to rifle the Carriages of that party that was Routed. At length Agathocles with those brave and valiant men he had about him, broke through that part of the Enemies Battalion, that was oppos'd to him, and put them to flight, and the rest presently follow'd them; only the Grecian Horse that sided with the Carthaginians under the Command of Clino bore the shock of the Agathocleans, who prest very sore upon them; upon which there was a very sharp Ingagement, and many fighting couragiously di'd upon the spot, the rest by good fortune escaping: Then Agathocles leaving off the pusuit, bent all his strength against them who had fled back into the Camp; but endeavouring to break in at places strongly fortifi'd and of difficult approach, he sustain'd as much loss as the Carthaginians; however he remitted nothing of his resolution, but being lifted up with his Victory still prest upon the Enemy, confidently concluding he could force the Camp. In the mean time the Numidians were very intent in observing how things were like to go, but could not fall upon the Bag and Baggage of the Carthaginians because both Armies were so near the Camp. When therefore they saw that Agathocles was at a great distance, and the Guards but small in the Grecians Camp, they broke in there, and easily kill'd those that withstood them, and took many Prisoners, and possess'd themselves of other prey and plunder. Which as soon as Agathocles
came to understand, he hasted thither with his Forces, and recover'd some of the spoil: but the Numidians carri'd most away with them, and in the night got a long way off from the place. Then the Prince erected a Trophy, and divided all the Booty amongst the Soldiers that none might repine at the losses they had sustain'd. The Greeks likewise that sided with the Carthaginians, he committed Prisoners to a Castle, who fearing the Prince would revenge himself of them in the Night fell upon the Guard in the Castle; but being worsted, they got into a Fort and shelter'd themselves there to the Number of a Thousand at least, amongst whom were above Five hundred Syracusians. As soon as Agathocles came to know what was done he march'd with his Army thither, where after Terms and Articles agreed upon, those Complotters came forth of the Hould, but he put them all to the sword. Being crown'd with this Victory, and having done all that he could possibly contrive for the subduing of the Carthaginians, he sent Ortho the Syracusian to Cyrene as his Ambassador to Ophellas, who was one of Alexander's Captains all along in the late Wars, and was then possess'd of Cyrene with the neighbouring Cities, and had the Command of a great Army, and was contriving how to inlarge his Dominion, and while he was beating his brains with these ambitious projects, Agathocles his Agent just then arriv'd, to solicite him to join with him in affording his assistance to subdue the Carthaginians. In return of which piece of service Agathocles promis'd him he would yield up to him the Soveragin Command of all Africa, and


Page 674

that he himself would be content with Sicily, where being freed from all fear of future dangers and troubles from the Carthaginians he should be able with ease and safety to reduce the whole Island to his Obedience. And if he should have a desire to inlarge his Dominion, he said that Italy was near at hand, where he might gratifie his Ambition in that respect. That Africa was far from him, separated by a large Sea, and that he came not into it of choice, but was driven thither of necessity. This therefore coming in the way so heightned him in his former hopes that he readily hearkn'd to him, and sent his Agent to Athens to pray their Aid and Association in this War. For he had marri'd from thence Eurydice the Daughter of Miltiades, who was General of the Conquerors at the Battle of Marathon; and therefore upon the account of this Marriage, and other acts of kindness he was receiv'd into the Franchises of the City; many of the Athenians readily hearkned to this motion, and not a few likewise of the other Grecians willingly join'd in this Expedition, hoping thereby to have the sharing of the richest parts of all Africa with all the wealth of Carthage amongst themselves: For the State of Affairs of Greece by season of the continual Wars, and Quarrels of the Princes among themselves was but in a very weak and low condition, therefore they concluded they should not only reap much advantage, but be freed likewise from those pressing evils which at that time lay heavy upon them.

Ophellas at length (when he had made plentiful provision of all things necessary for the Expedition in hand) led forth his Army, having with him above Ten thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse, and a Hundred Chariots, and above Three hundred Men-drivers and Soldiers to manage them, besides Extraordinaries and followers of the Camp to the number o

•

 Ten thousand more; many of which drew their Wives and Children with their stuff and Baggage along with them, so that they looked like to a Colony going to be planted. Having therefore march'd Eighteen days journey, and in them gone Three thousand Furlongs, they came to a City call'd Automolus, and there Encamp'd; thence marching forward, they came to a mountain shelving down on both sides with steep and sharp Rocks, having a deep Valley in the midst, out of which rose a soft stone spiring up like unto a sharp Rock, at the Foot of which was a wide Cave overshadow'd with Ivy and Leaves of the Yew tree, in which is reported, Queen Lamia, a Lady of admirable Beauty formerly dwelt; but for her Cruelty, they say her face was afterwards transform'd into the shape of a Beast; for it's reported that being bereav'd of all her Children, she took it so grievously, that she envy'd all other women that had Children, and commanded the poor Infants to be pluck't out of their mothers Arms, and forthwith murther'd. And therefore even to this day the Tale of this woman is fresh among Children, and with the Name of Lamia they are presently put into a very great fright. Moreover, being given much to Drunkeness, she let every one do what they pleas'd, without any inquiry after men's manners; and because she never seriously minded what was done in her Province, it was believ'd that she was blind. And therefore there's a Fable told by some that she put her Eyes into a little purse, excusing her drunken Sottishness by such an invented Tale, as if that was the reason she saw nothing. That she was in Africa one brings in Euripides for a witness, for so he says

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

To whom is that most hateful Name unknown?

Or of th' African Lamia the spawn?

But Ophellas removing again. Travel'd with great toil and labour through a dry and thirsty Country full of wild Beasts; for they did not only want Water, but Bread and other Provision, so that the whole Army was in danger to perish. These Sandy Deserts near the Syrtes were pester'd with noisom Serpents and all sorts of hurtful beasts, and it being for the most part deadly to be bitten by these venomous creatures, many were brought into a sad condition; out of the reach both of friends help, and remedy from Medicines. For some of the Serpents were of the same colour with the Earth, so that none could see them before they were hurt, so that many treading upon them were stung to death. At last after two months miserable travel with much ado they carne to Agathocles his Camp, where they pitcht their Camps at a small distance one from another; on the other hand the Carthaginians hearing that they were come up to him, were in a great Consternation, seeing the great forces that were making against them.


Page 675

Agathocles hearing of his approach, went to meet him, and advis'd him by all means to have a care of his Army after so tedious and hard a Journey, and to see them well refresh'd. He himself lay quiet a few days, observing every thing that was done in the neighbouring Camp, at length taking his opportunity when the greater part of Ophellas his Army were gone a forraging into the Country, and taking notice that Ophellas never suspected any thing of what he was in contriving, he suddainly call'd his Army together, and before them accus'd Ophellas, for that being call'd for as an Assistant, in this War, he went about to betray him; and having incens'd the multitude, drew out his whole Army in Battalion against him and his Cyrenians. Ophellas growing amaz'd at this unexpected alteration, put nevertheless himself and the men he had with him, in a posture of defence: but the Enemy being too quick for him, and he too weak for them, he was there slain upon the place. Agathocles persuaded the rest that were left, to lay down their Arms; then telling them what great things he would do for them, he got the whole Army to himself. And thus Ophellas by indulging his Ambition, and being over credulous came to this fatal Catastrophe: In the mean time Bomilcar at Carthage was waiting for an opportunity to put in execution what he had a long time been hammering in his brain in order to gain the Soveraign power and authority. And although he had several times fit occasions offer'd him for that purpose, yet always some light and inconsiderable cause or other intervening, put a stop to his design. For some superstitious persons many times are preparing to act great and remarkable pieces of Wickedness, and yet always chuse rather to delay, than act, to put off, than execute the thing; which even then came to pass. For concluding he had a fair opportunity offer'd him, the better to effect his purpose, he sent away the most eminent Persons of the Citizens that were about him, in an Expedition against the Numidians, that he might have none of the Nobility at hand to oppose him; but then checkt by his own Fears, he durst not reveal to any his design of gaining the Principality, and so he let the matter fall again. At length it fell out that he attempted to set up himself at the very same time that Ophellas was cut off by Agathocles; and neither of them knew what was done in one another's Camp. For Agathocles knew nothing of the Ambition of the other, or of the Tumult and Disorder that was in the City, which he might at that time have easily subdu'd: For if Bomilcar had been surpriz'd and taken in the very Fact, he would have chosen rather to have join'd with Agathocles, than to have given up himself to be punish'd by the Citizens: Neither did the Carthaginians know any thing of Agathocles his falling upon Ophellas; for they might easily have overcome him by joining with Ophellas. But I suppose both sides were well enough content to be ignorant, although they were things of great weight and concern, and contrived by them that were near one to another.

For Agathocles being plotting to cut off a Person that was his Friend and Associate, minded not to enquire after any thing that was in doing with the Enemy: And Bomilcar on the other side, contriving how to overturn the Liberties of his Country, cared not what was in agitation in Agathocles his Camp, whose purpose was now not so much to conquer an Enemy, as to subdue his own Fellow-Citizens. Matters being thus, here some may find fault with History, seeing many things of divers Natures falling out at one and the same time, and that Writers are forc'd to break in with new Matter of another nature, and to divide between things done at the same instant, that the Truths related may delight the more. But to Answer this, the History that is deny'd this liberty; although it afterwards represents the things done, yet it Postpones the true pleasure of the thing at too great a distance from the first Relation.

Bomilcar therefore picking out a select number of Men in the New City (as it's call'd) not far distant from the Old Carthage, dismist all the rest; then having call'd togther Five hundred of the Citizens, who were privy to his Design, and about a Thousand Mercenary Soldiers, he declar'd himself sole Monarch of the Carthaginians. Then he divided his Troops into Five Bodies, and set upon the City, killing all that he met in the High-ways; upon which, an incredible Terror and Amazement possest the whole City; At first, the Carthaginians suspected that the Town was betray'd, and that the Enemy had broke in by that means. But when the Truth was known, the young Men Marshall'd themselves, and made against the Tyrant; who hasten'd into the Forum, killing all he met in the Streets, and slaughtering great numbers of naked and unarm'd Citizens. But the Carthaginians mounting the tops of the Houses that were round about 

〈◊〉

Market-place, cast down showers of Darts from thence, so that the Conspirators (the place being altogether expos'd to the Shot) were gall'd most grievously. Whereupon in a 

〈◊〉

 Body they forc'd their way through the narrow Passes, and got into the New City, being ply'd and wounded with Darts and Arrows all along as they came under the Houses.


Page 676

Then possessing themselves of a Hill, (the whole City being now in Arms) the Carthaginians drew up their Camp in the face of the Rebels. At length they sent some of the Ancientest and Gravest of their Citizens to them, and remitted what was past, and so all things were peaceably compos'd. Towards all the rest indeed they perform'd their Articles, and (because of the Cloud that hung over the City,) pass'd by the Crimes committed; but without any regard had to their Oaths, they most ignominiously tormented Bomilcar, and put him to death. And thus the Carthaginians, when their Common-wealth was near upon the point of expiring, recover'd their Ancient Form of Government.

In the mean time Agathocles loaded all his Transport-Ships with Spoils, and such of the Cyreneans as he found not fit and serviceable for the War, he put on board, and sent them to Syracuse: But a fierce Tempest overtook them, in which some of the Ships were lost, and others were cast upon the Pithecusian Islands bordering upon Italy, so that very few arriv'd at Syracuse.

In Italy the Roman Consuls assisted the Marsilians (who were sorely prest by the Samnites,) and were Conquerors, killing great numbers of the Enemy upon the place. Then they march'd through the Country of the Umbri, and invaded Hetruria, then in War with them, and took a Castle call'd Caprium by Storm. But the Inhabitants sending their Ambassadors to Treat upon Terms of Peace, they made Peace with the Tarquinians for Forty Years: But with the rest of the Hetrurians only for one Year.

CHAP. III.

Demetrius frees all the Grecian Cities; takes the Pireum at Athens. Demetrius Phalerius flies to Ptolemy. Honours given to Demetrius in Athens. He sails to Cyprus; his Acts there; Besieges Salamis. His great Engines. Ptolemy sails to Cyprus. Sea Fight between Ptolemy and Demetrius, wherein Ptolemy is routed. Antigonus takes the Title of King, and the like do several other Captains. Agathocles his Acts at Utica in Africk: Ty'd pris'ners to a great Engine. The sorts of People in Africa. Xenodocus routed in Sicily by Agathocles his Captains. Agathocles his Acts in Sicily. What was done by Archagathus in Africa. Maschala inhabited by some Greeks that came from Troy. Apes, their Custom among the Pithecusce. The Carthaginians draw out Thirty thousand Men out of Carthage Misfortunes to Agathocles his Captains in Africa. The Army block'd up and almost starv'd: Agathocles beats the Carthaginians at Sea near Syracuse. His Captain Leptines harasses the Agrigentines. Agathocles Feasts the Syracusians. His jocund Temper. His Cruelty. Routed in Africa. Carthaginian Camp burnt. The misfortune afterward to both Armies by one Cause. Agathocles in Chains by his own Men. Steals out of Africa. The Soldiers kill his Two Sons. They make Peace with the Carthaginians. Agathocles his exceeding Cruelty at Aegista; and afterwards at Syracuse.

AT the end of the Year, Anaxicrates was Created Chief Governor of Athens, and Appius Claudius, and Lucius Volutius Consuls at Rome. At this time Demetrius the Son of Antigonus being furnish'd with Two strong Armies, one by Land, and the other by Sea, and provided of Weapons and all other necessaries for the War, set forth from Ephesus with full Orders and Instructions to set all the Grecian Cities at liberty, and in the first place to free Athens, that was then held by a Garison of Cassander's. To this purpose he arriv'd at the Pireum with his Fleet; and upon his first arrival caus'd the Edict to be proclaim'd, and then assaulted the Pyreum on every side. But Dionysius the Governor of the Fort, Mynichia, and Demetrius Phalerius, whom Cassander had made President of the City, with a strong Body of Men beat off the Enemy from the Walls; But some of Antigonus's Men forc'd their way near the Shoar, and scal'd and got over the Walls; whereupon many within came in to them as their Assistants, and in this manner was the Pyrcum taken. Dionysius the Governor fled into Mynichia, and Demetrius Phalerius into the City. The next day he with some others was sent by the City to Demetrius, and


Page 677

after he had treated with him concerning the Liberty of the City, and his own preservation, he prevail'd so far as to be dismiss'd with a safe Conduct, and so without any further Care or Concern for Athens, he fled to Thebes, and thence to Ptolemy into Egypt, And thus he who had Govern'd the City for the space of Ten Years, was in this manner thrust out of his Country. The People of Athens being hereupon restor'd to their Liberty, decreed publick Honours to them that were the Authors of their Deliverance. Demetrius forthwith brings up his Engines and Battering Rams, and Besieges Munychia both by Sea and Land. But the Dionysians made a stout resistance, and by the advantage and difficulty of the heighth of the places to be Assaulted, beat off the Demetrians (for Munychia is not only strong by Nature, but by Art also, defended by high Walls) though Demetrius indeed far exceeded the other in number of Men, and Warlike preparations, At length, after the Assault had continu'd for the space of Two Days together, many of those within being wounded and kill'd by the Shot from the Engines, so as that there were not Men enough left to defend the Place, the Garison Soldiers began to Flag. In the mean time the Demetrians who Assaulted by turns, and mutually reliev'd one another with fresh Supplies, having clear'd the Wall by their Shot, broke into Munychia, and so forcing the Soldiers within to lay down their Arms, they took the Governor prisoner. Having dispatcht this Business in a few Days time, Demetrius demolish'd Munychia, and entirely restor'd the People to their Liberty, and entred with them into a League of Peace and Amity. The Athenians therefore made a Decree (which was written by Stratocles) that Golden Statues of Antigonus and Demetrius should be set up and mounted upon a Chariot, next to Harmodius and Aristogiton; and that they should be both Adorn'd with Crowns of Gold of Two hundred Talents weight apiece; and that an Altar should be erected in Honour of them, call'd the Saviour's Altar; And in further Honour to them, to the Ten Tribes of Athens they added Two more, call'd the Antigonian and Demetrian. And thus the People of Athens, after they had been stripp'd out of all their Liberties by the Lamian War, after Fifteen Years were restor'd to their Ancient Laws and Government. Magera was still under the curb of a Garison; but Demetrius likewise took this City, and restor'd the People to their former Privileges; therefore he was highly Honour'd and richly presented by the Inhabitants upon this Account. Moreover, when the Athenian Ambassador, who was sent to Antigonus, presented to him the Decree, he understanding that they both wanted Corn for necessary Provision, and Timber for building of Ships, sent them a hundred and fifty Medimna's of Wheat, and as much Timber as would build a hundred Ships. Then he withdrew the Garison out of Imbrus, and restor'd the City to the Inhabitants. Afterwards he writ to his Son Demetrius, and order'd him to call a Senate of Members chosen out of all the Confederate Citys, in order to Consult concerning what might be most conducing to the publick Good of all Greece: And that he himself with all speed should transport Forces into Cyprus, and there fight Ptolemy's Captains. In Obedience to his Father's Commands, without any further delay, he put over first into Caria, and mov'd the Rhodians to make War against Ptolemy, who were slack and slow in the matter, willing rather to be Neuters, and keep in with all sides; hence first grew the Heart-burnings between them and Antigonus. Thence he sail'd into Cilicia, and furnishing himself there with Shipping and Men, he pass'd over into Cyprus with Fifteen thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse, and a Fleet consisting of an Hundred and ten Ships of Three tire of Oars apiece, of singular swiftness, and Fifty three not so swift as the other, but men of War as they were; besides Transport Ships of all sorts, answer able to so great a multitude of Men and Horses; Being landed, he first encamp'd near the Shoar not far from Carpasia, and drawing up his Ships to land, fenc'd them with a deep Trench and Ramparts; and then he set upon the Cities next at hand, and took Urania and Carpasia by Storm; and leaving a sufficient Guard to defend his Trenches about the Fleet, he march'd to Salamis.

Menelaus, appointed by Ptolemy chief Commander of the Isle, being then at Salamis, and seeing the Enemy within forty Furlongs of the City, drew out of the Garisons adjoining, to the Number of Twelve thousand Foot, and Eight hundred Horse, and went out to meet him; and fought a while; but not being able to endure the Enemy's Charge, fled, and Demetrius pursuing him even to the Gates of the City, took to the Number of Three thousand of his Men, and kill'd a Thousand upon the Place. The Prisoners he Pardon'd, and distributed them among his own Men: But finding they were ever ready to fly over again to Menelaus, because their Wealth was in Ptolemy's hands in Aegypt, he Shipp'd them all away to Antigonus his Father.


Page 678

Antigonus at that time was building a City in the Upper Syria near the River Orontes, call'd by his own name Antigonia, laying out great Sums of Money upon it, and taking in within the Walls seventy Furlongs of Ground. For the Place it self was very opportune to lie as a Yoke both upon Babylon and the Upper Provinces, and likewise upon the Lower, with the other Provinces, as far down as to Aegypt. But this City continu'd not long; for Seleucus raz'd it, and transplanted the Inhabitants to another, built by himself, call'd Seleucia, after his own Name. But we shall give an Account of these things when we come to the Time proper for them.

But Menelaus, after he was thus routed in Cyprus, drew in all his Engines within the Walls, and lin'd all the Bulwarks and Battlements with Soldiers, and prepar'd for Fighting, observing at the same time that Demetrius was doing the like. He dispatch'd likewise a Messenger to Ptolemy, to tell him what had happen'd, and to desire more help, in regard the Affairs of Cyprus were in a very low and dangerous Condition.

Demetrius seeing the City was in no contemptible Condition, and that it was furnish'd with a great Number of Soldiers for its Defence, was resolv'd to prepare Engines of an Extraordinary Bigness, and all sorts of Battering Rams, and other Instruments of War, that might in any sort terrify the Besieg'd. He sent likewise for Workmen out of Asia, and for Iron, Timber, and every thing else that was necessary to be made use of in the Works he design'd. And now every thing being ready at hand, he built an Engine, which he call'd Helepotis, from taking of Cities, Forty five Cubits broad on every side, and Ninety in height, drawn with four strong Wheels, Eight Cubits high; he made likewise two exceeding great Battering Rams, and Galleries to support them. He put several great shot of Massy-Stones in the lowest Story of the Helepolis, the greatest of which weighed three Talents; In the middle were plac'd very great Machines to shoot Darts and Arrows; In the highest Part were those that were less, and a great store of Stone-shot, and above Two hundred Men, who knew the manner of managing all these Devices to the best advantage.

Bringing up therefore his Engines to the Walls of the City, by showers of shot, he there swept off the Turrets and Battlements; and batter'd down the Walls by his Rams: But the Besieg'd made such obstinate Resistance, and opposing Engines to Engines, that the Issue for some days was very doubtful, and Toil, Labour, and Wounds were the mutual Lot and Portion of each Party. At length the Wall tumbled down, and the City was even upon the Point of being taken by Storm: But Night coming on, both sides drew off. Then Menelaus having a diligent Eye for the Security of the City, lest it should be taken by some fresh Stratagem, got a great deal of dry Stuff and Matter together, and cast it in the Night from off the Walls upon the Engines, together with many light Firebrands, and burnt the Principal of them. Upon the mounting up of the Flame the Demetrians came in to quench the Fire; but it was so quick and furious, that the Engines were totally Consum'd, and most of the Men that were in them.

However, Demetrius, though he was for the present disappointed in his Design, yet desisted not in the least, but urg'd on the Siege still both by Sea and Land, supposing that Time at last would Crown him with Victory.

But Ptolemy having receiv'd Intelligence how his Forces were routed, sets Sail from Aegypt, with an Army well furnish'd both for Sea Land; and arriving at Paphos in Cyprus, took Boats and went to Citium, Two hundred Furlongs from Salamis. His whole Fleet consisted of an Hundred and forty Long Ships, the biggest whereof was of Five Tire of Oars, and the least of Four; and these were attended with Two hundred Ships of Burden, carrying no less than Ten thousand Soldiers. From thence Ptolemy dispatch'd away by Land, some Messengers to Menelaus, to bid him with all speed to send him (if possibly he could) those Ships that were then in the Port of Salamis, which were Sixty Sail. For he was in hopes, that with this Addition, having made his Navy Two hundred Sail, (if he should come to a Sea Fight) he should be Victorious. But Demetrius foreseeing what might be in contriving, left part of his Army to carry on the Siege, and Mans all his Vessels with the best of his Soldiers; and places his Engines to shoot Stones, Arrows, and Darts of three Spans in length, upon the Forecastles of his Ships. Then with his Fleet, Top and Top-Gallant, ready prepar'd for Battel, he sail'd about to the City, and cast Anchor about a Dart's Cast from the Mouth of the Harbour, and there lay all Night, both to prevent that Fleet in the Port from joining with the other, and likewise waiting the coming up of the Enemy, being himself then prepar'd to fight him.

On the other hand, Potlemy sets sail for Salamis; and in regard he had with him in his Fleet a great Number of Tenders, his Navy seem'd to be exceeding great: Demetrius hearing of the Enemy's approach, left Antisthenes, the Admiral, with Ten Ships of Five


Page 679

Tire of Oars, to keep in the Fleet that was in the Harbour. And commanded the Horse to keep near the Sea-side, to be ready to relieve those that should swim to Land, in case any Misfortune should happen. He himself drew up his Fleet in a Line of Battel, and made towards the Enemy, having not above a Hundred and Eight Sail, with those taken in the Forts that were Deserted. The greatest of which Ships were of Seven Tire of Oars, but the most of them were of Five. In the Left Wing were Seven Phaenician Gallies of Seven Tire of Oars, and Thirty Athenian Vessels of Four Tire of Oars, commanded by Medius as Admiral. To support these, he drew up Ten Gallies of Six Tire of Oars, and as many of Five, conceiving it Prudence chiefly to guard that Wing where he himself intended to Engage. In the middle Battel he plac'd the Least Ships, under the Command of Themisus, the Samian, and Marsyas, the Writer of the Affairs of Macedon. The Right Wing was commanded by Hegesippus of Halicarnassus, and Pleisthias of Coos, who was Lord High Admiral of the whole Fleet.

Ptolemy at the first, made with all the Sail he could in the Night time towards Salamis, in hopes to enter the Port before the Enemy: But at break of Day spying the Enemy's Fleet not far off ready Drawn-up, he likewise forthwith prepar'd for Battel: And for this purpose ordered his Transport-Ships to lie off at Sea, at a great distance, and drew up the rest in a Line: He himself commanded in the Left Wing, where were the greatest of his Ships ready to defend him. The Fleets being thus drawn up, both sides (according to ancient Custom) call'd (by their Priests) upon their Gods, and the whole Army follow'd the Noise and Cry of them that first began. But the Princes seeing now all (both Lives and Fortunes) ready to be laid at Stake, were both in no small concern. Demetrius now not a Quarter of a League distant from the Enemy, gave the Sign of Battel which was before agreed upon, and that was the lifting up of a Golden Target visible to the whole Fleet, one part after another. Ptolemy doing the same, presently the Fleets join'd, and the Trumpets sounded a Charge, and both Armies setting up a great shout, to it they went in a dreadful and terrible Manner. At first they made use of Bows, and Engines to shoot Arrows, Stones, and Darts, by which many on both sides were grievously gall'd and wounded.

When the Ships came side to side, and fell foul with great Violence one upon another; those upon the Decks fell to it with their Launces and Spears, and the Rowers (encourag'd by them that call'd out to them) ply'd their Oars with extraordinary eagerness. And now the Vessels, with the Fierceness and Violence of the Charge, were so press'd upon each side, that some brush'd off the Oars one of another, so that they could neither Fly nor Pursue; and by this means disabled the Soldiers on board from making a vigorous Defence, by putting a Check to the Force wherewith they might otherwise have born down upon their Enemy; others so forc'd with the Beaks of their Ships upon one another's Poops, that they Row'd a-Stern from time to time to repeat their strokes. In the mean time, they upon the Hatches mutually wounded one another, every one having his Mark near and plain before him. Some of the Captains of the Vessels struck the Broad-sides of their Adversaries Ships with that Violence, that the Beaks stuck fast in them, whereupon they boarded the Enemy's Ships, giving and receiving Wounds and Blows on either side: Some catching hold upon the sides of Ships, when they miss'd Footing, in their attempts to board the other, tumbled Headlong into the Sea, and were forthwith run thrô with the Lances of them that were next at hand Some who prevail'd in the boarding of their Enemy, kill'd some upon their first Entrance, and drave all the rest in rucks one upon another, and flung them over-board. In fine, various and sudden were the Turns and Changes of Fortune in this Battel; while they that were worsted now, were presently after Conquerors by the height of their Ships over-topping their Adversaries; and then the Conquerors again brought into Streights, by being driven into ill Stations, and by other unaccountable Accidents, which frequently happen in these Cases. For in Land-Fights Valour apparently carries the Day, when no unusual Misfortune intervenes: But in Sea-Fights there are many and various Accidents often fall out, which sometimes on a sudden ruine them, whose Valour otherwise would certainly and most justly have brought them off Victorious. Of all the rest, Demetrius placing himself upon the Stern of his Gally of Seven Tire of Oars, behav'd himself with most Gallantry: For when he was surrounded with Throngs of Enemies on every side, he so bestirr'd himself, that he strew'd the Decks with them; some by Darts at a Distance, and others by his Lance Hand to Hand: Showers of Darts and other Weapons it's true were cast at him, but some he nimbly declin'd, and others he receiv'd on his Target and other defensive Arms that he then wore. In this Conflict there were Three that stuck close to him as his Assistants, whereof one was run through and Slain with a Lance, and the other two were both wounded.


Page 680

But at length, Demetrius repuls'd his Enemies, and put the Right Wing to a total Rout, and forthwith those that were next to them.

On the other hand, Ptolemy who had with him the greatest Ships, and the best Soldiers, easily broke that Party that oppos'd him, and put them to flight, sinking some of their Ships, and taking others with the Men in them, and then returning from the Pursuit, thought to have done the like with the rest: But when he came, he found his Left Wing totally routed by Demetrius, and him in hot pursuit of them; upon which he made back to Citium. But Demetrius now being Conqueror, committed his Men of War to Neon and Burichus, with Orders to pursue the Enemy, and to take up such as they found Swimming for their Lives. He himself with his own Ships richly adorn'd, and those that were taken of the Enemies, tow'd along after small Skiffs, return'd to his own Camp and Port whence he set out.

Mean while, about the very time of the Fight at Sea, Menelaus, Governor of Salamis, sent out to the Aid of Ptolemy the Sixty Ships compleatly Man'd and Arm'd, under the Command of Menetius, who Engaging with those Ships in the Mouth of the Harbour, that were set to keep him in, Charg'd through them; whereupon they fled for Safety to the Army that was at Land. But when the Menetians were in open Sea, and perceiv'd that they came too late, they return'd back to Salamis. This being the Issue of this Fight there were taken above a Hundred Transport Ships, wherein there were almost Eight Thousand Soldiers: Of Ships of War he took Forty, with the Men in them, and of those that were bilg'd in the Fight, about Fourscore; which being almost full of Water in the Hold, they hawl'd to Land under the Camp near the City. Demetrius had Twenty of his own Ships much damnify'd in this Fight, which yet being Refitted and Rigg'd up again, prov'd Serviceable as before.

Afterwards, Ptolemy seeing no good to be done in Cyprus, return'd in Aegypt. But Demetrius having taken in all the Towns and Cities of the Island, distributed the Garison Soldiers among his own Companies, to the Number of Sixteen thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse: And put Messengers on board the Greatest Ship in the Fleet, and sent them to his Father, with an Account of the Victory he had gain'd.

As soon as Antigonus receiv'd the News, he was so transported with the greatness of the Victory, as that he put a Diadem upon his Head, and from that time assum'd the Stile and Title of a King, and allow'd Demetrius to do the same. And Ptolemy also, not at all willing to hang the Head at his late ill Success, took the Crown and Title of a King to himself likewise, and in all his Letters from that time forward wrote himself King: And by their Example, other Governors of Provinces, as Seleucus, who had lately subdu'd the Upper Provinces; and Lysimachus and Cassander, who held the Provinces first allotted them, all proclaim'd themselves Kings.

Having now spoken sufficient concerning these Affairs, we shall proceed to give a distinct Account of things further done in Africa and Sicily.

Agathocles, when he heard that the Governors of the Provinces before-mentioned had taken upon them the Dignity of Crown'd Heads, judging himself no way inferior to them, either as to the Strength and Power of their Arms, Largeness of his Dominions, or Memorable Actions, took upon him likewise the Name and Title of a King: But yet did not think fit to wear a Diadem: For from the very time of his first aspiring to the Principality he wore a Crown after the manner of a Priest, which he never laid aside all the time he was in Contest for the Tyranny.

Some say, that he always wore this, because he wanted Hair. And now he made it his business to do something worthy of the honourable Title he had assum'd, and therefore he led his Army against the Rebellious Uticans, and surprising them on the sudden took Three hundred of them as they were abroad in the Fields. At the first he pardon'd them; and requir'd the Surrender of the City: But those within refusing so to do; he built an Engine, and hang'd up all the Prisoners upon it, living as they were, and so brought it up to the Walls. The Uticans, though they pity'd the miserable Creatures, yet they valu'd more their Common Liberty, and therefore lin'd the Walls, and resolv'd to abide a Siege. Whereupon, Agathocles furnish'd his Engine with shot, Slingers and Darters; and plying them with shot from his Machine, began the Siege, and so terrify'd them, that he even cauteriz'd the Spirits of the Besieg'd. Those that were upon the Walls at first, scrupled to use their Darts and Arrows, having their own Citizens plac'd before them as their Marks, amongst whom were some of the Chief Nobility: But the Enemy still pressing on with more violence, they were forc'd to endeavour to beat off them, that were plac'd in the Engine: And here it happen'd that the Uticans fell


Page 681

into a suddain and unexpected misfortune through an inevitable necessity. For the Greeks exposing the Prisoners they took abroad in the Fields, to be Marks to their own fellow Citizens, they were constrain'd either to fall into the Enemies hands, by sparing their Townsmen, or unmercifully to kill a great number of miserable Creatures in defending of the City; as in truth it happen'd. For while they repuls'd the Enemy with all sorts of Darts and Arrows, and other Weapons, the same time as they wounded and gall'd them that manag'd the Engine, at the same time they wounded the Citizens that hung at it, shooting some through, and fastning others with their Darts and Arrows as with Nails, to that part of the Machine towards which the Body happen'd to move, so that their Ignominy and Misfortune resembled that of the Cross. And thus some suffer'd (as Fortune order'd it) by the hands of their near Relations and Friends; Extremity and Necessity not allowing any Consideration of natural Relation.

Agathocles perceiving the Townsmen to defie all danger, and throw off all Regard and Affection to their Countrymen, begirt the City round, and made a violent Assault upon a part of the Wall where it was weakest, and there broke through into the City; upon which, some fled into their Houses, and others into the Temples: Agathocles being enrag'd, fill'd all places with Blood and Slaughter: Some were kill'd in heat of Fight, others that were taken pris'ners were hang'd up afterwards; and those that fled to the Temples and Altars were altogether frustrated of their hopes. After he had rifl'd and plunder'd the Town, he left a Garrison in it, and march'd to the Cittadel call'd the Horse-Castle, naturally defended by a Lough adjoyning to it: But he took it by Storm after a close Siege, and a sharp Fight with the Inhabitants upon the Water with his Gallies. Thus having subu'd the Cities, he brought most of the Sea Coasts, and those that inhabited in the heart of the Country, under his own Power; except the Numidians, part of whom made Peace with him, and the rest were in continual expectation to fight it out to the last.

Africa was at that time divided into four sorts of Inhabitants, That is to say, The Poeni, who inhabited Carthage. The Libyan Poeni who had many Cities upon the Tracts lying to the Sea Shoar; who being conjoyn'd in Affinity by Marriages with the Carthaginians, were call'd by this Name that imported the Denomination of both People. The most Ancient Inhabitants, and most numerous of all the rest were call'd Africans, who hated the Carthaginians to the death, by reason of the severity of their Government. The last are the Numidians, who hold a vast Tract of Lybia as far as to the very Desarts.

But Agathocles, tho' he was now, by the help of his Confederates, and the Valour of his own Army, Conqueror over the Carthaginians, yet being much concern'd for the Affairs of Sicily, he built some open Vessels, and Skiffs, row'd with Fifty Oars apiece, and put on board Two thousand Soldiers, and loos'd from Africa with his whole Fleet towards Sicily, leaving his Son Archagathus Chief Commander and Governor of Lybia.

While these things were acting Xenodocus General of the Agrigentines having freed many of the Cities, and rais'd the hopes of the Sicilians that they should all be restor'd to their Ancient Liberties throughout the whole Island, led out his Forces against Agathocles his Captains, having with him above Ten thousand Foot, and almost a Thousand Horse. Leptines and Demophilus on the other hand, having got together as great an Army as possibly they could out of Syracuse, and the neighbouring Garrisons, encamp'd against him with Eight thousand and Two hundred Foot, and Twelve hundred Horse. At length there was a sharp Engagement between the two Armies, in which Xenodocus was routed, and lost Fifteen hundred of his Men, and was forc'd to fly to Agrigentum. The Agrigentines weaken'd by this loss, left off their Honourable Design, and frustrated the hopes wherewith they had fill'd the Hearts of the Confederates. Presently after the Battle, Agathocles landed at Selinunt in Sicily, and shortly forc'd the Heracleots, who had regain'd their Liberty, to stoop again to his Government: Thence marching into another part of the Island he brought under the Thermites, (whose City was held by a Carthaginian Garrison) and receiv'd Hostages of them. Then he took Cephaloedium, and made Leptines Governor. Then marching up into the heart of the Country, he attempted to have enter'd Centorippa in the night by the help of a Faction he had in the City: But the Treachery being discover'd the Garrison Soldiers fell in upon him and drave him out of the Town, with the loss of above Five hundred of his Men. After this, some of the Apolloniats sent to him, and promis'd to deliver up their City; whereupon he forthwith made thither. But the Traitors being apprehended and punished, he made nothing of it the first Day; but the next, after many hardships, and the loss of many of his Men, he at length with much ado gain'd the place; and putting multitudes of the Apelloniats to the


Page 682

Sword, he gave the Town up to the plunder of his Soldiers. While Agathocles was thus imploy'd, Dinocrates the Captain of the Exiles reviv'd the prosecution of the former design of the Agrigentines, and declar'd himself Protector of the Common Liberty, and got together great numbers who came flocking in to him from all parts. Some out of a natural love of Liberty, and others out of fear of Agathocles, were at his Devotion. Having therefore now an Army of Twenty thousand Foot, and Fifteen hundred Horse (who were all accustom'd to the hadships and toils of Exiles) he took the Field, and dar'd Agathocles to a Battel. But Agathocles being much inferior in number, made a running Fight of it; but Dinocrates still pressing close at his heels, often gain'd several advantages without any difficulty. From this time forward things began to go backwards with Agathocles, not only in Sicily, but also in Africa. For Archagathus left General there, after his Father was gone, sent a part of the Army into the Upper Countries under the Command of Eumachus, and at first was successful; for Eumachus took the great City Tocas, and subdu'd many of the neighbouring Numidians. Then he took another Town call'd Phellina, and subdu'd the bordering Inhabitants call'd Asphodelodians, who are as black as the Aethiopians. He gain'd likewise Maschala, an exceeding large City, anciently inhabited by the Greeks, that planted there in their return from Troy, as we have before related in the Third Book. Afterwards he brought under the Citadel call'd the Horse-Castle, formerly taken by Agathocles: The last Town he gain'd was Acris, a Free City, the Plunder of which he gave to his Soldiers, and sold the Inhabitants for Slaves; and so loaden with spoil return'd to Archagathus to the Camp.

His Name being now up for a brave and valiant Man, he undertook another Expedition into the Higher Africa; and passing by the places he had before lately taken, he inconsiderately broke into the City call'd Mittines: But the Barbarians coming upon him in a full Body in the Streets, they so far prevail'd, that unexpectedly they drave him out of the Town again, with the loss of a great number of his Men. Thence he march'd away over an high Mountain, Two hundred Furlongs in length, full of Wild Cats; there no kind of Birds bred, either in Trees, Holes, or elsewhere, because of the greedy nature of these Beasts. Having pass'd over these Mountains, he enter'd into a Country abounding with Apes, and came to Three Cities in the Greek Language call'd Pithecusae: But their Customs are far different from ours; for these Apes are as familiar in the Houses as the Inhabitants themselves, and are worshipt as Gods, as the Aegyptians do Dogs. These Creatures come and take Meat out of the Cellars and Butteries, when ever they are hungry, without any disturbance; and Parents use to name their Children after these Apes, as we do after the Gods; whoever kills any of them he's sure to die as a notorious Atheist: And therefore it's a common Proverb amongst some of them, If a Man carry himself haughtily and proudly, to say, Thou hast drunk the Blood of an Ape. Eumachus took one of these Cities by Storm, and raz'd it to the ground; the other two submitted: But receiving Intelligence that the bordering Barbarians were coming against him with a great Army, he hasted away as fast as he could towards the Sea Coasts.

To this very time all things succeeded in Lybia according to Archagathus his hearts desire. But afterwards the Senate of Carthage upon more mature deliberation order'd their Forces to be divided into Three Bodies, and to march out of the City, one to the Towns upon the Sea Coasts, another into the heart of the Country, and the third into the upper Africa. For by this means they suppos'd they should free the City both from the Siege and the inconveniencies through scarcity of Provision at one and the same time. For being that all had flockt to Carthage from every place round, the City was in very great want, having now spent and eaten up all their Provision, so that they had nothing left to subsist upon; they knew likewise that there was no danger that the City should be taken by force, because it lay so close to the Sea, and was so well guarded by the strength of the Walls, so that it was then even unaccessible: besides, they concluded that if they had considerable Armies in the Field ready to assist their Confederats upon occasion they would remain firm and constant in their Alliance. And that which was of more weight than all the rest, they hop't that by this means the Enemy would be forc'd to divide their Forces, and be gone to other places far distant from Carthage. All which good Councel was afterwards crown'd with success in all these particulars. For sending Thirty thousand Soldiers out of the City, there was not only Provision sufficient for the Merchants that were left, but a glut and overplus more than they had occasion to use; and those Consederats who before out of fear were forc'd to join with the Enemy, now recollecting themselves, return'd to them as their old friends and Allies. Hereupon Archagathus perceiving that the Carthaginians Armies were now in every corner of Africa,


Page 683

divided likewise his Army; part of which he sent to the Sea Coasts, half of the rest he deliver'd to Eschrion, and the other half he led himself, leaving a sufficient Garrison at Tunis. While great Armies were thus marching to and fro all over the Country, and every one expecting a suddain Revolution at hand, all were in a fear and amazment in expectation of what would be the Event. 

Hanno who commanded that part of the Forces that march'd up into the heart of the Country, laid an Ambuscado for Eschrion, and surprizing him on the suddain, cut off above Four thousand of his Foot and Two hundred of his Horse, amongst whom was the General himself. Of the rest part of them were taken Prisoners, and the remainder escap'd to Archagathus who was Five hundred Furlongs from the place. Imilcon General in the Higher Africa first posses'd himself of a City near to Eumachus, whose Army was over-loaden with spoils taken out of several Cities. But the Grecians notwithstanding drew up in Battalia, and offer'd the Carthaginian General Battle; whereupon he left a part of the Army ready drawn up in the Town, with this Order, that as soon as they saw him fly, they should sally out upon the pursuers. Marching therefore out with half of the Army, he ingag'd the Enemy almost close under their Camp, and presently fled as if he had been in a great fright; whereupon Eumachus his men, proud of their Victory, pursu'd them in disorder, and in that confusion follow'd them close at the heels; and presently on a suddain issu'd out from another part of the City, the Body before drawn up in the Town, and at one word of Command set up a great shout, which struck the pursuers in amaze and astonishment; and being the Barbarians fell upon the other that were in disorder, and surpris'd beside, the Grecians presently fled: but the Enemy having blockt up the passage to their Camp, the Eumachians were forc'd to turn aside to the next Hill, where they wanted Water; which being set round by the Carthaginians, they almost all there perish'd, some by Thirst and others by the Sword; for of Eight thousand Foot, Thirty only escap'd, and of Eight hundred Horse only Forty.

Archagathus therefore being thus distress'd, left Tunis, and recall'd the rest of the Soldiers (he had sent abroad) from all parts; and sent Messengers into Sicily to give an account to his Father of what had happen'd, and to intreat him to hasten over with assistance with all speed. Besides these misfortunes other inconveniences and mischiefs overtook the Grecians; for all their Confederates (except a very few) forsook them: And all their Enemies join'd together, and Incampt just in their teeth and were ready to swallow them up. For Imilco had blockt up all the Passes and secur'd the Country from all inroads of the Enemy for a Hundred Furlongs distant; and on the other side Atarbas had plac'd his Camp Forty Furlongs from Tunis; so that the Greeks hem'd in both by Sea and Land were near starv'd for want of Provision; and nothing but Terror and Amazment fill'd every place. While they were in this sad and dreadful condition, Agathocles receiving intelligence of the destruction of his Men in Africa, had prepar'd Seventeen Men of War for the assistance of Archagathus. But his Affairs in Sicily growing every day worse and worse, and the Number of the Exiles with Dinocrates increasing more and more, he left the managment of the War in the Island to Leptines and his Captains; and he himself having Mann'd his Ships, waited only for an opportunity how to get out, for that Thirty Carthaginian Ships lay in the mouth of the Harbour-But at a time after when Eighteen Ships came in to his assistance from Hetruria, who had pass'd by the Carthaginians in the night into the Harbour, he took that occasion, and by a stratagem deluded the Enemy; for he charg'd part of his Fleet to lie still for some time, while he by making out of the Port should draw off the Carthaginians to pursue him. But therefore he goes with seventeen Sail with all the wind he could make, whom the Enemies Fleet forthwith pursu'd: But Agathocles as soon as he saw that the Hetrurians were got out of the Harbour, presently Tackt about and fell upon the Barbarians; upon which the Carthaginians surpriz'd with the unexpectedness of the thing, and now surrounded with their Enemies Gallies, in a great terror made away and sled; the Grecians then took Five of their Ships together with the Men in them; and the Carthaginian Admiral (seeing the Ship he was in was upon the point of being taken) kill'd himself, preferring death before Captivity, which then (as he thought) was just at hand. But he took no right measures at that time; for the Ship Thy the help of a happy Gale of Wind got off with the loss of the little Trinket Sail. hus Agathocles who never in the least hop'd to overcome the Carthaginians at Sea, unexpectedly beat them in a Sea fight, and being thenceforth Master of the Port, he secur'd the Passage for the benefit of the Merchants; so that the Syracusians having Provision brought in from all parts, instead of their former scarcity of every thing necessary, presently abounded in the plenty of all things.


Page 684

Agathocles lifted up with this success, sent Leptimes away to spoll and harrass the Enemies Countries, and especially the Agrigentines: For Xenodocus was in disgrace amongst his fellow Citizens, and blacken'd by his Adversaries upon the account of his late overthrow, so that he was troubl'd with Mutinies and Seditions: Therefore he commanded Leptines to make it his business to draw him out to fight, if he could possibly; for that it was a very easie thing to vanquish an Army that was in Divisions and Mutinies among themselves, and that had been beaten but a little before; which afterwards hapned accordingly. For Leptines making an inroad into the Territories of the Agrigentines harrass'd and spoil'd all before them: Xenodocus looking upon himself too weak, lay quiet and still at first; but being call'd a Coward by the Citizens, he march'd out with an Army near as many as the Enemy, but far inferior to them for Courage and Resolution; because the Citizens had liv'd altogether in ease and idleness, and the other had been us'd to lie in the open field, and continually inur'd to all manner of hardships. A Battle therefore being fought between them, those with Leptines presently put the Agrigentines to flight, and pursu'd them even to the Walls of Agrigentum: There were kill'd of those thus Routed about Five hundred Foot and Fifty Horse. The Agrigentines being grievously incens'd with these losses one after another, summon'd Xenodocus to his Trial, as the occasion of Two Overthrows and slaughters of the Citizens; who fearing the severity of the Sentence he was like to fall under, fled to Gela.

Agathocles having conquer'd his Enemies both at Sea and Land in a few days time, sacrific'd to the Gods and entertain'd his friends with sumptuous Feasts, and Royal Banquettings. In the time of his feasting and quaffing he laid aside all his Ensigns of Royalty, and Majesty, and appear'd as one of the meanest among them; and this he did in the first place to gain upon the good will of the People, which he sought thus to purchase: And in the second, that by giving every Man free liberty in their Cups to say what they pleas'd of him, he might the better learn how every one stood affected towards him. For by the force of Wine Truth often appears from behind the Hanging. He was naturally of a jocund and jesting Temper, and would not sometimes lose his Jest even in publick Assemblies, but would jeer the very Senators, and mock some of them by his Apish imitations, in so much as he would often set the People a laughing, as if they had seen some Jugler or Stageplaier. For he would go alone to the publick Assemblies, attended only by the common People, much differing from the practice of Dionysius the Tyrant; for he was so fearful of every body, that he would let the Hair of his Head and Beard grow to excess, that the principal parts of his Body might not be at the mercy of a Razor: And when ever he wanted shaving, or polling, he burnt off the Hair; every one may hereby see, that the only guard for Tyranny is Diffidence. Moreover, at this time of Revelling Agathocles took up a great Golden Bowl, and vaunted that he never left off the Potters Trade, before he had made Cups and Bowls exactly of that shape. For he did not deny, but rather glory in his Trade, as a Foil that set off with more lustre that high state and dignity to which his own Valour had advanc'd him from a mean and contemptible Calling.

Once when he besieg'd one of the Considerable Cities, the Soldiers from the Walls call'd out to him, O Potter!Sweep-Chimney! When wilt thou pay thy Soldiers? To whom he answer'd, When I have taken and raz'd this Place.

When he had found out by the Craft of his carousing and festival Jollity who were his Enemies, he invited them another time by themselves, together with Five hundred other Syracusians, who were Men of brave and undaunted Spirits; and when they were together, he surrounded them with his mercenary Soldiers, and murther'd them every Man: For he was terribly afraid, lest when he was gone into Africa, they should recall Dinocrates and the Refugees, and abrogate his Government.

Having thus settled Affairs, in order to the establishing himself in the Principality, he looses from Syracuse: When he landed in Africa, he found there in the Camp nothing but Want and Desperation; therefore judging it most for his Advantage to fight, he made it his Business to encourage the Soldiers to engage the Enemy, and thereupon draws them ail out in Battalia, and offers the Barbarians Battel. The remainder of the Foot then with him were at the most not above Six thousand Grecians, and as many Celts, Samnites, and Hetrurians, and almost Ten thousand Africans of those that stay'd with him: These Africans are a treacherous sort of Men, ever upon any Occasion running over from one Party to another. Besides these, there were with him Fifteen hundred Horse, and above Six thousand African Carriages: But the Carthaginians though they had the Advantage of a high Ground, and of difficult access, yet they were not willing to venture all at once with Men that were desperate, but by lying still in their Camp (where


Page 685

they had plenty of Provision) and by protracting of Time, they hop'd to starve the Enemy, and so be Masters of their Camp without fighting.

Agathocles therefore not being able to draw the Enemy forth to a Battel in the open Field, and being necessitated by his present Circumstances to attempt something, and enter upon some desperate Action, marches up with his whole Army close to the Enemy's Camp: Thereupon the Carthaginians make out against him; and though they had the advantage of Ground, and far exceeded him in number of Men, yet Agathocles (prest hard on every side) for some time resolutely bore up against them: But his Mercenaries and some others at length giving Ground, he was forc'd to retreat to his Camp. The Barbarians pursu'd them close; but to gain the Good-will and Favour of the Africans, they past by them without doing any execution: But the Greeks (whom they knew by their Arms) they kill'd all along till they had driven the rest into their Camp. There were slain of Agathocles his Men at that time Three thousand.

The next night a sudden and unexpected Disaster fell upon both the Armies: For the Carthaginians, when they were sacrificing the most eminent and considerable Persons among their Prisoners, in Gratitude to their Gods for the Victory they had gain'd, the Flame rising high that enwrapt the Bodies of the sacrific'd Captives, a fierce Wind on a sudden carry'd the Flame to the Sacred Tabernacle near the Altar, where it catch'd and burnt it down to the Ground; thence it proceeded to the General's Pavilion, and the Officers Tents next adjoining: Upon which arose a mighty Consternation, and Astonishment fill'd the whole Camp, while some endeavouring to quench the Fire, others striving to carry away Arms and rich Furniture, were consumed by the Flames. The Tents were made of Reeds and Straw; and therefore the Fire (through the height of the Wind) rag'd the more; so that that by its quickness, it prevented all help and assistance that the Soldiers could any ways contribute. The whole Camp being presently in a Flame, many in strait and narrow Passes were intercepted by the Fire, and burnt to death. And thus they presently paid for their Cruelty to the Captives, suffering the like Punishment as a Retaliation of their Impiety. And others who tumultuously with woful Cries got out of the Camp, were pursu'd with another and greater Misfortune: For those Africans that were in Agathocles his Army, to the number of Five thousand, deserted the Grecians, and were flying to the Barbarians. When those that went out to scout, saw those Deserters make towards the Carthaginians Camp, thinking the whole Grecian Army were at hand ready to fall upon them, they forthwith gave Intelligence to their own Party, that the Enemy's whole Army approach'd: Which being nois'd abroad, Confusion and Dread of the Enemy's being just in the midst of them, ran through the whole Camp: Whereupon every one plac'd his own Safety in the Swiftness of his Heels; and in regard no Word of Command was given by any of the Officers, nor any Order kept among the Soldiers, the Run-aways fell down one upon another; and some of them through the Darkness of the Night, and others out of excess of Fear, fell a fighting with their own Men, not knowing who they were. The Mistake still continuing and encreasing, a great Slaughter was made; and some were kill'd hand to hand, and others running away with the loss of their Arms, in the height of a surprizing Fear, in their hast, fell down steep and craggy Rocks, and were broken in pieces; about Five thousand of them being destroy'd, the rest at length got to Carthage. The Citizens within the Town (deceiv'd by the Report of their own Men,) believ'd they were routed, and that the greatest part of the Army was cut off; in this fright they open'd the Gates, and receiv'd them with great Terror and Amazement into the Town, fearing lest the Enemy should likewise break in at the Heels of them. And though when it was full Day, they came to understand the Truth of the matter, yet they could scarce allay the Fears they had been in, as if the Evils were still even at their Doors.

About the same time, (through a vain Fear and foolish Imagination) Agathocles fell into a Misfortune something of the same kind For the African Deserters, after the burning of the Carthaginian Camp, and the Hurly-burly and Uproar that follow'd thereupon, durst not march forward, but made their way back to the place from whence they came; whom some of the Greeks espying to make towards them, they took them to be the Carthaginian Army, and thereupon gave Intelligence to Agathocles, that the Enemy was near at hand. Upon which, by the King's Order, they cry'd out, Arms! Arms! and forthwith the Soldiers came pouring out in great Tumult and Confusion out of the Camp: And besides all this, when they saw the Flame in the Enemy's Camp to mount up into the Air, and heard the Shouts and Cries of the Carthaginians, they were the more confirm'd in their Opinion, that the Barbarians were making towards them with their whole Army.


Page 686

But Excess of Fear leaving no room for due and serious Consideration, Horror and Amazement fill'd the whole Camp, and all of them took to their Heels: And the Africans being presently mix'd among them, (the Night causing the Mistake) every one oppos'd him that he met, as an Enemy, and being all the Night long dispers'd here and there, and wandering up and down in a Panick Fear, there perish'd of them above Four thousand: The rest (with much ado at length coming to understand the Mistake) return'd safe to their Camp. And in this manner both Armies deceiv'd by the Vanity of War, (as the common Proverb is) fell into miserable Disasters. After which Missortune, being now deserted by the Africans, and having not sufficient Forces lest to contend with the Carthaginians, he resolv'd to leave Africa: But he thought it impossible to transport the Soldiers with him, because he both wanted Shipping, and heard that the Carthaginians were Masters at Sea, and lay to intercept his Passage: And he concluded, the Barbarians (whose Forces far exceeded his) would never make Peace with him; but rather cut off every Man of them that first set footing upon Africa, to deterr all others for the future from the like Attempt. He determin'd therefore to slip away privately with a few, and take along with him his younger Son Heraclides; for he fear'd lest his Son Archagathus, being a daring Man, and one that had been too familiar with his Stepmother, would plot something against his Life: But Archagathus smelling out his Design, resolv'd to discover the Matter to those Captains and Officers as should be able to defeat him in his Contivance, and to that purpose strictly observ'd his Motions: For he look'd upon it as a base and unworthy Thing, that he who had undergone a good part of the Toils and Hazards of the War for the sake of his Father and Brother, should be now left alone as a Prey to the Enemy, without all Hopes of Deliverance. He inform'd therefore some of the Captains and most considerable Officers of the intended Departure of Agathocles and his Companions the next night: Whereupon all the Body forthwith made up to him, and not on

•

y put a stop to his Voyage, but acquainted the common Soldiers how the Plot was laid; who being both griev'd and enrag'd together, laid hold on him and bound him, and so committed him to custody. An Anarchy following hereupon, there was nothing but Tumult and Confusion throughout all the Camp: And when Night came on, a Rumour was spread over the Camp, that the Enemy was just falling in amongst them: Upon which, all were so possess'd with a Panick Fear, that having none to Command them, every one was preparing to get away; at which very time, they that had the Custody of the Prince, (in as great a Consternation as the rest,) thought that some or other call'd them forth; who thereupon came out with Agathocles in his Chains along with them; at which fight, the whole Army were so affected with Pity and Compassion, that they cry'd out, Unloose him, let him go.

Being freed from his Chains, he presently after with a small Attendance stole away, and took Shipping about the beginning of October, in the Night in Winter-time, and away he got. And thus to preserve himself, forsook his Children; whom the Soldiers presently, upon the News of their Father's Flight, knock'd on the Head; and then chose Captains from among themselves, and made Peace with the Carthaginians upon these Conditions, viz.

That the Greeks should receive Three hundred Talents, and should restore all the Towns they then held, and that all that would, might take up Arms with the Carthaginians, and receive the usual Pay. That the rest should be transported to Sicily, and should have Selinunt for their Habitation.

 The greatest part of the Soldiers, who were faithful to what they had agreed, had all as faithfully perform'd to them: But those Cities and Towns that held out in Hopes and Expectations of Relief from Agathocles, were all taken by force of Arms; whose several Governors the Carthaginians crucifi'd, and the rest they bound in Chains, and employ'd them to Till, and Repair by their own Labours, those Parts of the Country that they had before wasted and destroy'd. And thus the Carthaginians, after they had been harrass'd and vext with a Four Years War, recover'd their former Peace and Liberty. 

In this Expedition of Agathocles into Africa, any one may observe most remarkable Accidents, and the Divine Providence in the Punishment inflicted upon his Sons. For being routed in Sicily, he lost the greatest part of his Army: A little time after he overcame the Conquerors with a very inconsiderable Body of Men in Africa. In Sicily, being thrown out of all the Cities, he was coop'd up by a close Siege within the Walls of Syracuse: In Africa, he gain'd all the Towns, except Carthage, and closely besieg'd the Carthaginians in that City; by which, Fortune seem'd to make it her Business, to let every one see what Power she had to retrieve those Things that seem'd to be in a desperate Condition. But after that Agathocles, in the height of his Prosperity, had murder'd Opellas, against all the Laws of Friendship and Hospitality; God made it manifestly apparent


Page 687

that for that piece of Wickedness acted upon that Man, whatever happen'd to him afterwards was order'd and dispens'd by his own hand. For the very Month and Day of the Month that he kill'd Ophellas, and brought over to him all his Army, the very same Day and Month he again lost both his Sons and his Army. And that which is more especially to be observ'd, was, That God, as a just Law-giver, inflicted on him a double Punishment; for he who had most wickedly destroy'd his Friend, was depriv'd of two Sons together, even by the Hands of those that came along with Ophellas. This Remark ought not to offend those, who slight and despise such Providences.

As for Agathocles, as soon as he landed in Sicily, by a hasty flight out of Africa, he sent for part of his Forces, and march'd to the Consederate City of the Aegestines: And being in want of Money, exacted the greatest part of the Estates of those that were rich, in which Place were Ten thousand Inhabitants. This many of them took very heinously, and met together in private Cabals: But he finding out, that the 

〈◊〉

 were plotting against him, he brought most dreadful Calamity upon the City: For drawing out all the Poor out of the Town, he cut all their Throats upon the Bank of the River Scamander: And all those who seem'd to be richer than the rest, he put to several Tortures, to force them to confess how much Money they had: For some he broke upon the Wheel; others he bound to his Engines of Battery, and shot them away like Stones. And of others, he cut out the Ankle-bones of their Feet, and by his cruel and unmerciful Dealing, put them to most horrible Torments. He invented likewise another sort of Punishment not much unlike the Phalerian Bull; for he made a Bed of Br

••s

 exactly after the shape of a Man, wherein were several Openings and hollow Places on every side: Those that he intended to torment, he put into this Bed, and then put fire under it, and burnt them to Death. In this only this Engine differ'd from the Bull. That those that perish'd, and were consum'd in those strait and narrow Holes, were expos'd to the view of every one. He would likewise break in pieces the Ankle-Bones of some of the rich Women with Iron Pincers, and cut off the Breasts of others; and would sometimes lay a weight of Tiles upon the Loins of Women with Child, till he forc'd the Child to leap, as it were, forcibly out of the Womb. While the Tyrant was in this manner endeavouring to find out all the Wealth every Body had, and the whole City was in Terror and Astonishment, some burnt themselves and their Houses together, and others hang'd themselves. And thus Aegesta, in one black and doleful Day, had the Prime and Flower of her Youth cut off. But the young Women and Children the Tyrant transported into Italy, and sold them to the Brutii: And that the very Name of the Place should be extinguish'd and forgotten, he call'd it Dic

〈…〉lis,

 and granted it for an Habitation to such Runagates as came over to him.

When he heard of the Murder of his Sons, he was so enrag'd at them he had left behind him in Africa, that he sent some of his Friends to his Brother Antandrus at Syracuse, with Oders, that he should cut the Throats of all the Kindred and Relations of those that went over in the Carthaginian Expedition: Who thereupon executing what he was commanded, committed such Slaughters and Murders, as were never at any time before: For he not only hurried away to Destruction young Men in the prime of their Age, as Brothers, Fathers, and Children; but even Grandfathers and Great-Grandfathers, if they happen'd then to be living, tho' they had one Foot even in the Grave, and could neither see nor hear through extremity of old Age: Nay, even Infants carri'd in Arms, that were not sensible of any Harm design'd them before they felt it: They dragg'd away likewise to Execution, Women, whether they were Servants or Kindred to them in Africa, and whoever else that (by their Death) might be occasion of Grief and Sorrow to them: So that while a vast number of Persons of all Ages and Sexes were hal'd away to Execution at the Sea-shore, where the Butchers stood ready for them, Tears, earnest Intreaties upon their Knees, and wo

〈…〉

 Lamentations appear'd every where, both from them that were butcher'd, and from others; who so far compassionated the sad Condition of their Neighbours, that their Hearts were as full of Grief, as theirs who were just ready to die. And that which was the most grievous of all was, That after so great a Slaughrer, and that the 

〈…〉

lses lay cast forth upon the Shoar, neither Kinsman nor Friend durst bury them, lest any of them should be thought Related to them that were dead. The Multitude of them that were murder'd upon the Shoar was such, that the Sea was did with 

〈…〉

od a long way off, which presented to the Eye at a great distance the Horridness of that barbarous Cruelty.


Page 688

CHAP. IV.

Antigonus his March into Egypt. A Tempest near Raphia, where he lost some of his Ships. He returns into Syria. Dinocrates prevails in Sicily. Agathocles is willing to resign his Government; but Dinocrates stands off. What was done in Italy. Antigonus his War with the Rhodians. Rhodes besieg'd by Demetrius. Agathocles routs Dinocrates his great Army with a few Men. His Cruelty to those that submitted upon Terms, where he butchers Seven thousand. Dinocrates in Favour with Agathocles, and betrays all the Confederates. What was done in Italy.

THE Year following Corybus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Quintus Martius and Publius Cornelius were created Consuls at Rome. About that time King Antigonus buri'd his youngest Son with Royal Pomp and Splendour; and calling home Demetrius out of Cyprus, commanded his whole Army to meet at his new City Antigonia, for he purpos'd to march from thence into Aegypt: Wherefore leading the Foot himself, he pass'd through Coelo-Syria, having an Army of Fourscore thousand Foot, and above Eight thousand Horse, and Fourscore and three Elephants: He made Demetrius Admiral of his Fleet, giving him order to keep close to the Shoar in sight of the Land-Army, having in all a Hundred and fifty fighting Ships, and a Hundred more of Burden, wherein was an infinite store of Arms of all sorts: And when the Pilots told him, That they were to stay till the setting of the Seven Stars, which would be the Eighth Day from thence, he condemn'd them for being too Timorous. Coming to Gaza, and purposing to fall upon Ptolemy before he was provided for him, he commanded his Soldiers to take with them Ten Days Victual; and getting together Camels out of Arabia, he loaded on them a Hundred and thirty thousand Bushels of Wheat, and infinite store of Hay upon other Beasts of Carriage; and carrying his Munition on Carts, went through the Desart, not without some Trouble to the Army; for that they met with sundry Fens and dirty Places by the way, especially about the Place call'd Barathra. Demetrius loosing from Gaza in the dead of Night, was for many Days together becalm'd; so that the lighter Ships were fain to tow the Ships of Burden after them with Ropes. But after this, and as soon as the Seven Stars were set, a Northerly Wind arose, and fell upon them, with which many of the Ships with four Tire of Oars apiece were driven on shoar near to the City Rhaphia, where was no commodious Landing for them: But of those which carry'd the Artillery, some of them were sunk, and the rest recover'd Gaza again. Yet some of the best of them bare up, and came under the Promontory of Cassius: That Foreland is not far distant from the River Nile, but is no place fit for Shipping; especially if any Tempest be, there is no coming near it: Wherefore every Ship dropping two Anchors apiece, two Furlongs off from Land, were fain to ride it out in a huge Sea in the midst of a Thousand Dangers; for the Fury of the Waves was such, that the great Danger was, lest both Men and Ships should sink down together; and because there was no fit Landing place, and likewise for that the Shoar was guarded by the Enemy, the Vessels could neither make to Land, nor any swim out without extream Hazard: But that which was most grievous, was, That they had spent all their fresh Water, and were Reduc'd to that extremity of Want, that had the Tempest lasted but one day longer, they must all necessarily have perish'd for very Thirst. But in this great Extremity of theirs, and when they expected nothing but Death, the Storm ceas'd; Antigonus with his Army coming to the place, there encamp'd, and the weather-beaten Men came ashoar and refresh'd themselves in the Camp, and waited for the Ships that were separated from them by the Storm. Nevertheless there were lost in this Tempest Three Ships of Five Tires of Oars apiece, out of which some Men escap'd alive to Land. For hence Antigonus remov'd, and sate down with his Army Two Furlongs off from the River Nile. But Ptolemy having Mann'd all the Bank of the River with strong Garisons, sent some in River-Boats, with Commands, that going as near the further Bank as safely they could, they should there proclaim, That if any of Antigonus his Army would come to him, he would give him, if a common Soldier Two Minas, if a Captain a Talent. No sooner was this Proclamation made, but a Multitude of Antigonus his Men, which serv'd him for Pay, grew very desirous to be gone; yea, and some of his Captains too, for that and some other Reasons, had a mind to go also. But when Antigonus perceiv'd, that a multitude of his Men were flying away from him,


Page 689

he dispos'd Archers and Slingers, and other Engines of War upon the Shore, to keep them from flying over the Water in Boats; and some he lighted on that ran away, and those he put to horrible Torments, to deter others from the like.

Antigonus gathering together his Ships that came in after the Tempest, though late to him, went to a Place call'd Pseudostomon, thinking there to have Landed some of his Men: But he found a strong Garison, and was beaten off with Bows and Slings, and other Engines of War: The Night therefore drawing on, he went his way, giving Order to the Masters of every Ship, to follow the Admiral's Lanthorn, and to make to the Mouth of the River Nile, which is called Phagneticum: But the next Morning, finding that many of his Ships had lost their way, he was forc'd to come to Anchor there, and to send away the swiftest Ships he had to seek them out.

The time thus spent and protracted, Ptolemy being advertis'd of the approach of the Enemy, came in speedily to the Relief of his Men, and rang'd his Army all along the Shore. Whereupon, Demetrius finding no possibility of Landing here neither, and being inform'd that the Country adjoining was naturally fenc'd with Fens and Moorish Grounds, set sail and return'd. But as he was going, the Wind struck up to the North, and with a mighty Tempest drove three of his Ships of Four Tire of Oars, and some others of his Transport Ships upon the Shore, all which came into Ptolemy's hand; the rest with much ado recover'd Antigonus his Camp. Now Ptolemy had plac'd strong Garisons at every one of the Mouths of the River Nile, and had an infinite Number of River-Boats every where ready, stor'd with Darts and Slings, and Men which knew well how to use them, which greatly vex'd and troubled Antigonus: For the Mouth of the River at Pelusium being strongly guarded by Ptolemy, he could make no use of his Ships at all; and for the Land Forces, they were not able to do any thing, because of the height of the River; and that which was worse, with his long Lying, both Food for Men, and Fodder for Cattle began to grow low. Wherefore Antigonus seeing his Army to hang the Head, call'd them all together, and propounded it to the Captains, Whether of the two were best, to stay and Fight it out now, or to return into Syria for the present, and to return again better provided, and when the Waters should be lower? And when every Man's Voice was to be gone, he had his Soldiers truss up their Trinkets, and so with his Navy keeping still along the Shore by them, he return'd into Syria.

Ptolemy growing glad at heart that the Enemy was thus gone, offer'd Sacrifice to his Gods for this great Deliverance; and made withal a most magnificent Feast for his Nobles, and wrote away Letters to Seleucus, Lysimachus, and Cassander, of his prosperous Success, informing them likewise, how a Multitude of Antigonus his Men had fled over to him. And now having rescu'd as it were Aegypt a second time, and gotten it by his Sword, judging therefore he might lawfully reckon it as his own, he return'd to Alexandria.

While these things thus pass'd in Aegypt,Dionysius, the Tyrant of Heraclca in Pontus, dy'd, having reign'd Thirty two Years: And his Sons Zathras and Clearchus succeeding him reign'd Seventeen years.

In the mean time, Agathocles visited all the Cities in Sicily that were under his Command, filling them with Garisons, and poling them for Money: For the Man was in a terrible Fright, lest when he should fall under a Cloud, they should recover their Liberty by Force of Arms.

About that time, Pasiphilus, the General, hearing of the Death of Agathocles his Sons, and the rout of his Forces in Lybia, had the Tyrant in Contempt: And falling off to Dinocrates, join'd in Confederacy with him; and being possess'd of the Cities which were before committed to his Care and Trust, he entic'd and drew off the Army (then under his Command) from the Tyrant, by fair Promises, and hopes of mighty things.

Agathocles therefore being now every where disappointed and frustrated of his Hopes, was so far dejected, that he sent an Agent to Dinocrates, and offer'd to make Peace with him upon these Conditions, viz. That he would lay down his Sovereignty, and restore Syracuse to the Citizens; and that Dinocrates should be no longer in Exile, so that he would deliver up two Castles, Tharma and Cepaloedium, together with their adjoining Territories, to Agathocles. Here some may justly admire how it came to pass, that Agathocles, who was at all other times, and in all other things Resolute and Obstinate, and never in the least discourag'd when his Condition was most Desperate, should be now so dastardly, as to be willing to give up all into the Enemy's hands, without striking a stroke for the obtaining and compassing of which he had fought so many and great Battels: And that which is the strangest of all, was, that he who was yet Lord of Syracuse, and of many other Cities, and had a considerable Navy at Sea, and an Army at Land, should become so Weakheaded, as not to remember any thing of that which hapned to Dionysius; for when he


Page 690

was reduc'd to most miserable Streights, and to that degree of fear of those Mischiefs that hung over his Head, as that he was altogether hopeless of retaining his Principality, and was upon the very Point of mounting his Horse, and 

•

lying away from Syracuse; Heloris, one of the ancientest of his Noblemen (to put a stop to his Carreer) said to him, The Sepulchre of a King is honourable. And the like to this is what his Father-in-Law, Megacles, said to him, that He who is depriv'd of a Kingdom, should part with it so, as if forc'd from between his very Thighs, and not as one making a voluntary Abdication. By which serious admonitions, Dionysius was so encourag'd, that he went through all courageously, though they seem'd never so terrible; and afterwards mightily enlarg'd his Dominion; and continu'd in this height of Prosperity till he was old, leaving the greatest Principality in Europe to his Children.

But Agathocles not in the least incourag'd by any of these Considerations, nor considering the vanity of Humane Confidence and Expectations by what he had learnt by his own Experience, set to Sale so great a Principality for a trifle: But yet the Proposals took no effect; for though Agathocles would willingly have had them confirm'd, yet the Ambition of Dinocrates rejected them; for he affected an absolute Monarchy, and therefore hated the Syracusian Democracy, and was better pleas'd with the Command (as General of the Army) which he then enjoy'd: For he had at that time under his Command above Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, and many of the largest and chiefest Cities; so, that though he was call'd only General of the Exiles, yet in truth he had the Majesty and Authority of a King; the chief and absolute Power of every thing being in his hands; for if he return'd to Syracuse, he concluded he must of necessity be no more than a private Man, and be reputed but one of the many (for Liberty loves Equality) and subject to be undermin'd and degraded by the suffrage of every Demagogue in the publick Assemblies; for the common People are ever Enemies to those that are rising Men, and speak their Minds most freely. And therefore a Man may justly say, that Agathocles voluntarily Lower'd his Sails; and that Dinocrates was the only cause of what ever Good was done by this Prince at any time afterwards. For Agathecles often sent Agents to him to Sollicite and Treat about the Conditions of Peace, still insisting upon having the Two Castles for his Subsistence, and he as often contriv'd some specious pretence or another, to dash and break all in pieces; sometimes requiring that he should depart wholly out of Sicily, and at others, that he should give up his Children as Hostages.

Agathocles therefore smelling out his Design, sent Agents to the Exiles to accuse Dinocrates of the Project he was carrying on, to obstruct the Restitution of their ancient Liberties. He sent likewise an Ambassador to the Carthaginians, and made Peace with them upon the following Conditions, viz. That all the Cities the Carthaginians formerly enjoy'd, should be forthwith surrender'd to them: For which he receiv'd of the Carthaginians Three hundred Talents of Gold, according to the Account and Value of Silver: But as Timaeus says, a Hundred and Fifty Talents, and Two hundred Thousand Medimnas of Wheat. Thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at that time.

In Italy the Samnites took Sora and Atia, (two Confederate Cities of the Romans) by Storm, and sold all the Captives for Slaves: Upon which, the Consuls broke in with mighty Forces into Japygia, and sate down before the City Sylvia, a Garison of the Samnites, which the Romans took by Assault after a few days Siege, and carry'd away above Five thousand Prisoners, and abundance of rich Spoil and Booty. Then they harrass'd the Country of the Samnites, cutting down all the Trees, and making havock and spoil where-ever they came. For Rome having for many years been in contest with this Nation for the supream Command, hop'd at length, that the Enemy being strip'd out of all they had all over the Country, would be forc

•

d to sloop to the Stronger; and to that end they continu'd Spoiling and Wasting the Country Five Months together, within which time they burnt down to the Ground almost all the Towns, and rooted up every Plant and Tree, and whatever other thing that might yield any Fruit for Daily Food. After this the Aeginetes proclaim'd War for the Injuries done them, and took Fr

〈…〉

 by Assault, and Sold the Territories belonging to it.

After the End of this Year, Xenippus Govern'd at Athens, and Lucius Posthumius, and Tiberius Minucius, bore the Office of Consuls at Rome. About this time the Rhedians were at War with Antigonus upon the accounts following. The City of Rhodes was very strong in Shipping, and the best Govern'd of any City among the Greeks, and therefore all the Kings and Petty Princes strove which should gain the greatest Interest in the Citizens, every one endeavouring to have her for their Confederate. But foreseeing afar off, what would be most for her Advantage, she secretly made Peace with all, but would not meddle


Page 691

with any of the Wars wherein the Princes were ingag'd one against another; so that she was courted and richly presented by every one of them, and grew exceeding rich by the injoyment of a long Peace. For she became so potent, that in the Pyrattick War. undertaken for the Common good of all Greece, she scowr'd the Seas and freed them from Pyrats at her own charge.

Alexander the most potent Prince of any that is recorded, honour'd this City above all others; for there he laid up his last Will concerning the disposal of his whole Kingdom, and honouring her in other respects, advanc'd her to the state of a Royal City. The Rhodians thus in amity with all the Princes, kept themselves (with all the Art they could) from giving any just offence by outward appearance; though in their hearts they most favour'd Ptolemy: for they were most inricht by the Merchants which traded thence into Aegypt; and the whole City was maintain'd and supported by the Wealth of that Kingdom: which being understood by Antigonus, he did all he could to draw them off from siding with Ptolemy: And therefore at first when he was ingag'd in a War against Ptolemy for the Island of Cyprus, he sent Ambassadors thither to sollicit them them to send Aid and shipping to Demetrius; which they denying, he commanded one his Admirals to sail away with his Fleet against them, and intercept and rifle all the Ships that made out of the Port at Rhodes for Aegypt. But the Rhodians beating the Admiral, he charg'd them to be the Aggressors and beginners of an unjust War, and threatn'd to besiege their City with the strength of his whole Army: upon which the Rhodians decreed him great Honours; and sent Ambassadors to him to intreat him that he would not force them to ingage in a War against Ptolemy, contrary to the League they had made with him: But the King hereat growing more inrag'd, sent Demetrius with the Army and all manner of Engines, for a Siege against them, who were thereupon so terrifi'd with the mighty power of the King, that at first they signifi'd to Demetrius by their Ambassadors that they would assist Antigonus against Ptolemy: But afterwards when he requir'd a Hundred of the Nobility for Hostages, and that his Fleet might be admitted into the Harbour; they concluded that he design'd to surprize the City, and therefore they prepar'd for War.

Demetrius on the other hand Rendesvouz'd all his Fleet in the Port at Elorymna, and put all in readiness for an Expedition to Rhodes. He had with him Two hundred Men of War of several dimensions; a Hundred and seventy Ships of burthen, in which were carri'd about Forty thousand Soldiers, together with Horse and Auxiliaries from the Pirats, Besides there were on Board abundance of all sorts of Darts, Arrows, and other Engines, fit for the carrying on of an Assault. And along with all these there follow'd almost a Thousand Vessels, belonging to private Men, full of Wares and Merchandize. And whereas the Country of the Rhodians had been free from all devastations for many years together, a vast multitude of men that had inricht themselves by the losses of others in the War, flockt thither from all places. Demetrius therefore drawing up his Fleet in a line of Battle, as ready prepar'd for a Sea sight, commanded his Men of War (which carri'd Engines upon their Fore Castles to cast Darts and Arrows of three spans long) to sail before: and the Transport Ships and such as had Horses on board, they that row'd in lesser Vessels tow'd after them by Cable Ropes. In the Rear came the Pirats Vessels, and a numerous Company (as is before said) of Merchants Ships loaden with Corn and other Provisions; so that all the Sea between them and the Island and opposite shoar seem'd to be cover'd over with Ships, which struck a great Terror and Amazement into those that had the prospect from the City. For the Rhodian Soldiers who were plac'd upon the Walls there, waited for the Enemies approach: the old Men and Women likewise had a prospect of them from the tops of their Houses; (for the City was in its situation like a Theater) and all being amaz'd and terrifi'd with the greatness of the Fleet, and glittering of the Arms, were in no small perplexity; for all they had in this World was now lying at stake.

Demetrius now at last arriv'd at the Island, and Landed his Men, and then encampt near the City, but not within the Cast of a Dart: which done he forthwith sent out some of the Pirats, and others fit for the purpose to spoil and pillage all before them, both by Sea and Land. He cut down also all the Trees of the Country next adjoining, and raz'd the Towns; and with the Timber and materials from thence he fortifi'd his Camp, drawing round it a treble Trench, and many great and strong Ramparts; so that by the misery and losses of the Enemy he effectually provided for his Armies security. Then by the labour of his whole Army and the Seamen that came along with him, in a few daies he took in with a Rampart of Earth all that part of Ground lying between


Page 692

his Landing place and the City, and inlarg'd the Haven for the more commodious riding of his Ships.

In the mean time the Rhodians sent Ambassadors to him, intreating him he would not do any thing that might be irreparable: But when they perceiv'd he would not hearken to any Terms (laying aside all hopes of composing matters) they sent Messengers to Ptolemy Lysimachus, and Cassander praying their assistance, because that War was made upon them upon their account. Both Inhabitants (that were not Free of the City) and Foreigners (lately come in) were admitted to take up Arms, if they thought fit, for defence of the place; the rest of the Rabble tha were useless they put forth out of the City, both to prevent scarcity of Provision, and lest any uneasie under the present Circumstances they were in, should betray the Town. Then taking an account of the number of them in Arms, they found there were of the Citizens Six thousand; of Inhabitants and strangers One thousand. They made likewise a Decree, that all Servants that had approv'd themselves honest and faithful in all hazards and dangers, should be bought off from their Masters and set free, and inroll'd into the number of the Citizens: Then a Proclamation was made, that whosoever di'd in the War should be buri'd at the publick charge, and that his Parents and Children should be maintain'd out of the City Treasury; that Portions should be given to the Daughters out of the publick stock, and that the Sons when they were grown up should be crown'd, and adorn'd in the Theater at the time of the Festivals of Bacchus with all sorts of Arms and Armour. With these promises all were presently excited to stand to it to the last and indure the utmost extremity; and then they made it their business (as far as it was possible) to provide all other things that were necessary; for all being unanimous, the Rich brought in their Money, and the Smiths and other workmen earnestly set themselves to the making of Arms, and all were so intent upon their business, that every one strove to exceed each other. Some therefore imploi'd themselves in making Engines, to cast Darts, and shoot stones, and others in making and preparing other things; same repair'd the Walls where they were defective; and many loaded men with stones to carry to the Walls. They sent out likewise Three swift sailing Vessels against the Enemy, and the Merchants that brought them in Provision: These setting on them upon a sudden sunk many of the Merchant Ships, who were gone ashore to rob and spoil the Country, and burnt no few that were driven up to land; and what they receiv'd for the Redemption of Captives they brought with them back into the City: For the Rhodians had agreed with Demetrius what the value of Redemption on both sides should be; that is, for every Freeman a Thousand Drachma's, and for every Servant and Bondman, Five hundred. Demetrius being furnish'd with plenty of all things necessary for the making of Engines, began to make two, call'd Testudo's; the one against the Engines that cast stones, and the other against those that shot Darts and Arrows; these they plac'd upon the Foredecks of two Transport Ships, which mov'd from place to place and were chain'd close together: He likewise made two Towers four stories high apiece, higher than those Turrets belonging to the Town in the Harbour; both which likewise were plac'd upon two Ships of equal height and joyn'd one to another, that both might be equally ballast when they were forc'd forward. He built likewise a Rampart upon a Fore footed piece of Timber nail'd together, to float upon the Water, in order to beat off the Enemy in any Attack they might make upon the Ships where the Engins were plac'd. At the same time while he was making these, he got together a Number of the strongest Water Boats and fenc'd them with Boards and Planks round; and made Loop-holes in the sides (to shut at pleasure) and in these he plac'd Engines (to shoot Darts and Arrows of three spans long at a great distance) together with such Soldiers as knew very well how to make use of them, and with them some Cretian Archers. Coming up therefore with his Ships within the Cast of a Dart, he sorely gall'd the Townsmen with his Darts and Arrows, being the Engines in the Ships were higher, than the Walls next to the Harbour. The Rhodians on the other hand understanding that Demetrius made it his main business to gain the Port, were as earnest in providing all things necessary for its defence: To this end they mounted two Engines upon a Rampart, and put on Board Three others upon two Transport Ships, and lay with them at the mouth of the little Harbour; and in these they put great Numbers of Engins for the shooting of Stones, Darts and Arrows of all sizes, that by the help of these they might repulse the Enemy, if he either attempted to land Men, or make up with his Engines. Besides all this they had contriv'd convenient places and apartments in the Transport Ships which then lay in the Harbour, wherein to place their Engines and Darts as they had occasion. Both sides being now thus ready prepar'd, and Demetrius just upon the point of moving into


Page 693

the Harbours with his Machines was prevented by a fierce and violent Storm that then arose. But being calm all the night afterwards, he Sails up secretly, and seises upon the highest Rampart of the great Harbour, and forthwith draws a Mud-wall about it, and fences it with stones and planks of Timber: Then he landed Four hundred of his Men, and plac'd them there with all sorts of Darts and Weapons; the Fort was * Five Plethras distant from the Walls. As soon as it was light they came up with the Engines into the Port, with shouting and sound of Trumpet, then with their small shot which did execution at a great distance, they beat off those that were building the Wall in the Port, and with their battering Engines broke in pieces the Enemies Machines, and shak'd the the Wall near the Rampart in one part, and batter'd it down in another. For it was but low and weak at that time; the Citizens stoutly defended themselves, and spent all that day in wounding and receiving wounds from their Enemies: but night drawing on, Demetrius tow'd his Ships Cables ti'd to smaller Vessels and got oft his Engines out of the reach of the Enemies Artillery. But the Rhodians took fire along with them, and in Boats fill'd with combustible matter pursu'd their Enemies, and coming up with the Engines put fire to the matter in the Boats; but being presently beaten off by Darts and Arrows from the floating Rampart, they were forc'd to Tack about and so retire; but the Flame rag'd to that degree, that some few only having extinguish'd the fire return'd in the Boats; and the greatest part of them having had their Vessels burnt down to the Water, by swimming only sav'd their lives.

The next day Demetrius in the same manner made his Attack from the Sea, and ordered an Assault with shouting and sound of Trumpet should be made on every side from the Land, that he might strike the greater Terror into the Rhodians, while innumerable dangers, surrounded and distracted them on every hand; he continu'd thus assaulting the Town for the space of Eight daies together, shooting from his Engines upon the Rampart, stones of the weight of a Talent, and batter'd down the middle walls between the Towers, together with the Towers themselves: the Souldiers likewise possess'd themselves of part of the wall that fac'd the Harbours. Upon which the Rhodians all flockt to that place, and there they sharply fell to it, and ingag'd the Enemy; and over-powering them in number, with the slaughter of some of them, forc'd the rest to draw off. The uneasie rough and uneven passage to the place (by reason of many heaps of great and massy stones which were laid before the walls on the outside) was of great advantage to the besieg'd: many of the Enemies Vessels (in the midst of this hurly burly) mann'd with Soldiers comming up, the Rhodians presently tore off the Beaks of the Ships, and by combustible matter and Firebrands thrown in among them, burnt the Ships themselves. While the besieg'd were thus hurri'd and distracted in defending themselves; the Demetrians coming in with their Vessels on every side, set Scaling Ladders to the Walls, and prest on with the greater resolution, being assisted in all parts by the Soldiers at Land; who together with them in the Ships mutually repeated their shouts and acclamations. And now many boldly and resolutely in contempt of danger press'd forward, and in great Bodies mounted the Walls; upon which follow'd a sharp Ingagement, the assailant's forcing on with great resolution from without, and the besieg'd with as much courage flocking together to defend themselves within. At length the Rhodians after a brave Resistance beat off the Assailants, killing some, and taking others Prisoners that were wounded, amongst whom were some of the chiefest Commanders. The Besiegers being thus baffl'd, Demetrius draws off his Engines into his own Port, and then sets upon repairing both them and his Ships.

In the mean time the Rhodians bury their dead, and dedicated to their Gods their Enemies Arms and the Beaks of their Ships, and repair'd those parts of their walls, as were beaten down by the Engines.

Demetrius however, after seven days time spent in refitting his battering Engines, and repairing his Shipping, having now all things in readiness, enters the Harbor again. For he made it his main business to be absolute Lord of this, and to intercept all Provision that might be brought in to the relief of the City; when he came within the cast of a Dart, he threw Firebrands (of which he had a great number) into the Rhodians Ships which lay scatter'd here and there, and shook and batter'd the Walls with his Engines, and wounded and gall'd with his Darts and Arrows whoever appear'd in view. The Assault thus continuing to the great terror and amazement of the Inhabitants, the Rhodian Pilots (in great fear and concern for the Shipping) extinguish'd the Firebrands; and the Magistrates of the City (whom they call Prytanes) seeing that the Port was now even upon the point of being taken, earnestly intreated all the Citizens, both high and


Page 694

low without distinction, resolutely to put to their helping hands for the common preservation and security of the whole City. Whereupon, many readily came in, and mann'd three of their strongest Vessels with the best of their Men, giving them Orders to do the utmost they could with the Beaks of their Ships to sink the Enemies Vessels that carry'd their Engines: Those thus sent out (though they were ply'd with showers of Darts and Arrows) yet by the violence of their Charge broke in pieces the Rampart that was fenc'd with 

〈◊〉

, and so shatter'd their Ships with one stroke after another, that they fill'd them with Water, and dismounted two of their Engines; Whereupon the Demetrians towing back the Third with Cables, the Rhodians encourag'd by their Success, prest on still with more Boldness than Prudence; and therefore being pierc'd and shatter'd by the Beaks of many great Ships that surrounded them, Execestus the Admiral, and the Captain of the Gallies, and some others (being ill wounded) were taken prisoners; the rest by 

〈…〉

ing got to their own Men; only one Ship was taken by the Demetrians, and the rest escap'd the danger. After this conflict, Demetrius made another Engine, which was thrice as big as the former, both in height and breadth. And now being just upon 

〈…〉

ing into Port, arose a violent South Wind, which burst out of a Cloud on the suddain, and sun

•

 the Ships which were advancing, and overturn'd the Engine. Upon which, the R

〈…〉

 taking the advantage of the present opportunity, at the very nick of time flung op

•

n their Gates, and made a Sally upon them that enter'd the Port: upon which there was a sharp Dispute for a long time together, and being that Demetrians could not come up to the assistance of his Men, by reason of the Storm, the Rhodians still fell upon 'em with fresh Parties one after another, so that the Demetrians, to the number of Four hundred, were forc'd to throw down their Arms and submit. After this Victory gain'd by the Rhodians, there arriv'd to their aid and assistance a Hundred and fifty G

〈…〉,

 and Five hundred Men sent by Ptolemy, amongst whom were some Rhodians that were Soldiers under the King's Pay. And thus stood matters in the Siege at Rhodes at that time.

In S

〈…〉

〈◊〉

 not being able to compose Matters with Dinocrates and the Exiles, march'd one with what Forces he had against them, looking upon it absolutely necessary to hazard his Person, and resolutely to fight it out, and gain all or lose all: He had not with him above Five thousand Foot and Eight hundred Horse.

Dinocrates with the Exiles seeing the Enemy to come boldly on, went out with as much earnestness and resolution to fight them, for that he was far superior to the Agathocleans in number; being above Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse. Both Armies fate down one against another at a place call'd Gorgius: At length they drew up in Battalia, and fell to it; and the Fight was very sharp for a while, by reason of the heat and resolution of both parties: But after a little time some deserted Dinocrates (to the number of Two thousand,) and went over to the Tyrant, which was the ruine of the Exiles. For the Agathocleans were thereupon much more encourag'd and hearten'd; but those with Dinocrates were as much amaz'd and dejected, and thinking there were many more went off than did, they all took to their heels. Agathocles pursu'd them a little way, but then call'd off his Men from the Slaughter; and sent to the broken Troops proposals, that all differences being at length laid aside, every one should have free liberty to return into their own Country: For they found by experience, that they were never able to overcome him by force of Arms, being even now routed when they had an Army far Superior to his in number: The Horse indeed all escap'd to the Castle of Ambicas; and some of the Foot the Night following got away: The greatest part possess'd themselves of a Hill, but despairing to prevail by force of Arms, (and desirous to return to their Kindred, Friends, Estates and Country,) made Peace with Agathocles. Having therefore plighted his Faith to them, and thereupon all of them being come down from the Hill (which was a natural Fortification) he first disarm'd them, then hemm'd them in with his Forces, and put them every Man to the Sword, to the number of Seven thousand (as Timaeus says,) but as others have writ, Four thousand. For this Tyrant never in the least valu'd either his Word or Oath, and increas'd his Power not so much by the greatness of his Forces, as by the weakness of his Subjects, fearing more his Confederates than his Enemies. Having thus cut off his Enemy's Army, he receiv'd the rest of the Exiles into his Protection, and receiving Dinocrates into Grace and Favour, made him General of part of the Army, and intrusted him ever after in his most weighty Affairs. At which every Man may justly wonder, that he who was so jealous and suspicious of every one, as that he would never confide in any, should to the last maintain a firm friendship only with Dinocrates, who having thus betray'd his Confederates, seiz'd upon Pasiphilus at Gela, and there murther'd him, and deliver'd up all the


Page 695

Castles and Cities to Agathocles, bringing all his Enemies under his Feet in Two years time.

In Italy the Romans subdu'd the Palinians, and took their Country from 'em, and some that were Students at Rome they made free of the City. Afterwards the Consuls march'd out against the Samnites, who had wasted and harrass'd Phaleria, and in a Battel routed them; wherein they took Twenty Standards, and Two thousand Prisoners: And after they had taken the City Bola by Assault, presently appears Caius Gellius General of the Samnites with Six thousand Men; upon which there was then another sharp engagement, in which Gellius himself was taken, and many of the other Samnites slain and taken prisoners. The Consuls being thus successful, recover'd Sora Harpina and Serenia, Cities of their Allies, which had been before taken from them.

CHAP, V.

The Siege of Rhodes continu'd: The Acts of the Sea Captains of the Rhodians. Peace made with the Rhodians. The Acts of Agathocles in the Lipari Islands. The Acts of Demetrius in Greece. The War between the Tarentines and Lucanians. The Acts of Cleonymus the Spartan. Cassander sends to Antigonus to make Peace, who refuses. Lysimachus joins with Cassander, and so does Ptolemy and Seleucus against Antigonus: He marches against Lysimachus. Demetrius's further Acts in Greece. The Armies of Cassander and Demetrius. Demetrius leaves Greece and goes with his Army to his Father in Asia, after Peace made with Cassander. The misfortunes of Pleistarchus at Sea. Ptolemy besieges Sidon, but returns to Aegypt upon a false Report. Seleucus marches from Babylon with a great Army.

AFter the former Year had run its course, Pherecles was made chief Governor of Athens, and Publius Sempronius and Publius Sulpicius were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome: At the same time was solemniz'd the Hundred and nineteenth Olympiad, in which Andromenes the Corinthian bore away the Prize. About this time Demetrius, who lay still before Rhodes, seeing things did not succeed as to his attempts made at Sea, resolv'd to Assault the City by Land. To that end he made preparation of Plenty of all sort of Timber, and fram'd the Engine call'd Helepolis, far bigger than any of the former. Its Basis was four square; every side was almost in length Fifty Cubits, made up of four square pieces of Timber, bound together by Plates of Iron. In the middle part he plac'd strong Planks of Timber a Cubit distance one from another, for those that forc'd the Engine forward, to stand upon. The whole was mov'd upon Eight strong and large Wheels; whose Felloes were Two Cubit thick, cover'd with strong Iron Plates: Thwart over the Spokes were contriv'd Antist

••pta's

 to turn about the Engine in a trice when ever they pleas'd. At every corner of the Machine were Pillars rais'd, little less than a hundred Cubits high, every one of an equal length, so compacted together, as that the whole Machine was Nine Stories high. In the first were Three and forty Beds, and in the highest Nine: The three sides of the Engine were lin'd on the outside with Iron Plates fastn'd with Nails, to prevent all damage from Fire that might be shot or cast from the City. In every Story at the Front were made Loop-holes, proportionable, and in shape, to the nature of the Artillery that was thence to be discharged. To these were Shutters (fastn'd to the Engine) to draw up, for the better defence of them within that threw the Darts; for they were lin'd with Skins stuff'd with Wooll to deaden the force of the Stone-shot. Every Story was furnish'd with two large Ladders, that whatever was necessary might be brought in to them, at one and the same time by one, while others were going down upon other occasions by the other, that so every thing might be dispatcht without tumult and confusion. There were chosen out of the whole Army the strongest Men (to the number of Three thousand and four hundred) to move the Engine forward; of whom some from within, and others plac'd behind, so forc'd it forward, that Art and Strength together much facilitated the motion. He mad also Testudo's, by some to fill up Trenches and Ditches, and with others to bring up Battering Rams: He made likewise Galleries, through which they that were imploy'd might pass and repass with safety at their pleasure. By the help and assistance likewise


Page 696

of the Seamen, he plain'd and laid even all the way along which the Engines were to be brought up, to the space of Four Furlongs, so that the breadth of the Work fac'd as much of the City-Wall as consisted of Six Divisions between the Turrets, and of Seven of the Turrets themselves The multitude of Artificers and Workmen that were got together, were no less than Thirty thousand Men. Every thing therefore (through multitude of hands) being perfected and compleated sooner than could be imagin'd, Demetrius became a Terror to the Rhodians; for not only the greatness of the Engines, and the multitude of Men, but the Valour and Diligence of the King in carrying on of Sieges amaz'd them: for he was extraordinary ingenious in invention, and contriv'd many things beyond all the Art and Industry of the Artificers; whence he got the Name of Poliorches: for he was so fierce and violent in his Assaults, that no Wall seem'd to be so strong as to be a sufficient Defence to the Besieg'd against him. And besides, he was so Tall and Beautiful, that he look'd like a Demy God; insomuch as those who came to him but as Guests and Strangers, and saw his Gracely Meen cloath'd with Royal Majesty, they were struck with Admiration, and would often attend upon him in his Expeditions, meerly to have the satisfaction in looking at him. Moreover, he was of an high and noble Spirit, that scorn'd not only to stoop to the common sort, but even to Princes themselves. And that which was most strange and peculiar only to himself was, in times of Peace he was given to Drukenness and Banqueting, to Dancing and Rioting; and would imitate even the Manners of Bacchus himself, such (as is fabulously reported) he us'd to practise when he was upon Earth: But in times of War he was very active and serious, insomuch as he went beyond all the rest, both as to his Head and Hand, when any thing was to be done. For in his time, and by his contrivance, were made the greatest Darts, and such sort of Engines as far exceeded all other Nations in the World: And after this Siege and his Father's Death, he launch'd forth the greatest Ships that ever were before seen. In the mean time the Rhodians perceiving how the Enemy's Works went on, built another Wall within, answerable to that which was now presently to be Assaulted; and to this purpose they us'd the Stones that Wall'd in the Theater, and pull'd down some neighbouring Houses, and some Temples for the same purpose, vowing to the Gods to build larger and fairer, if the City were preserv'd. They sent out likewise Nine Ships, and commanded the Captains that infesting every part, and surprizing what Ships they could, they should sink some of those they took, and bring in others into the City Harbour. These Captains divided their Squadron into three parts; Damophilus with the Ships which the Rhodians call'd Phalacidae sail'd to Carpathus, were surprizing many of Demetrius's Fleet, he sunk some, and burnt others that were drawn up upon the Shoar, making choice of such Prisoners as might be most useful and serviceable; and many Ships that were carrying Corn and other Fruits out of the Island, he brought away with him into his own Country.

Menedemus who commanded three small Gallies betwixt two and three Tire of Oars, made for Patara and Lycia, and there found a Ship at Anchor, and burnt her; all her Men being before gone off to Land: He took likewise many of the Enemies Transport Ships which carry'd Provisions to their Camp, and sent them to Rhodes: He took also a Ship of Four Tire of Oars coming out of Cilicia, which carry'd a Royal Robe, and other rich Furniture which Phila Demetrius his Wife had curiously wrought, and had sent as a Present to her Husband. He order'd the Garments to be convey'd into Egypt, for they were Purple Robes fit for none to wear but Kings; but the Ship he took away with him, and sold all the Seamen he had taken both out of the Galley of four Tire of Oars, and other Vessels. Amyntas who commanded the other Ships sailed to the Islands, and falling in with some of the Enemy, that were conveying away something of use for the Engines, he sunk some of the Ships, and brought in others to the City; in which were taken Eleven famous Artificers, most expert Artists in making of Darts and Engines.

After this was call'd a General Assembly, wherein it was propos'd that the Statues of Antigonus and Demetrius should be pull'd down; affirming, that it was a thing intolerable that Enemies and Besiegers of the City should have the same Honours as those that were Friends and Benefactors: But the People were much incens'd at this motion, and and check'd them that propos'd it as those that did ill: and would not suffer any thing in diminution to the Honour of Antigonus, thereby, wisely consulting both their own Reputation and Advantage: For this greatness of Mind, and soundness of Judgment in a Democratical Government redounded amongst all to the praise of the Besieged, and softned and melted the Spirits of the Besiegers: For they that had set at liberty the Greek Cities, who had testify'd nothing of their good Will towards them as their Benefactors, now seem'd to go about to enslave that City, who had given a clear and evident Demonstration of the firmness and constancy of their Gratitude. This Resolution likewise might reasonably


Page 697

be concluded to be of singular Advantage to them in the worst of Fortune; for if the City were taken, the remembrance of their Kindness might plead and prevail for their Pardon: It's clear therefore that the Rhodians manifested singular Prudence in the Management of this Affair.

Demetrius had even now undermin'd the City, when a Deserter very opportunely came in and inform'd the City, that the Miners were approach'd almost within the Walls: Upon which, the Rhodians drew a deep Trench all along the Wall that was now ready to be tumbled down, and forthwith fell to Countermining; and at length met the Enemy under Ground, and so prevented the Mine from proceeding any further: And while both Parties guarded the Mines, some of Demetrius his Soldiers with Money brib'd Athenagoras, the Captain of the Guard for the Rhodians: He was a Milesian, sent thither by Ptolemy, and Captain of the Mercenaries, who having promis'd to betray the City, appointed a Day on which Demetrius should send some one of the chiefest of his Commanders, who should enter in the Night through the Mines into the City, and find out a Place fit and convenient to receive the Soldiers. Athenagoras having now rais'd up the Hopes and Expectations of the Demetrians, discovers the whole Intrigue to the Senate. The King, according to the Compact, sends one of his Noblemen, Alexander a Macedonian: But the Rhodians seiz'd him as soon as he peep'd up out of the Mine; but crown'd Athenagoras with a Crown of Gold, and for a Reward, gave him Five Talents of Silver; and then made it their Business to engage the rest of the Mercenaties and Strangers to be faithful to the People all the ways they could. However,

Demetrius having now finish'd all his Engines, and plain'd and laid even every place under the Walls, brought up his Helepolis in the middle, and so order'd his Testudoes for filling up of Trenches and Ditches, (which were Eight in Number,) that he plac'd Four on each side of the Helepolis. To each of these was adjoin'd a Gallery, that they who went in and out might execute what was commanded without any Danger. He had likewise two other Testudoes that bore Battering Rams, far larger than the rest; for both of them were a Hundred and twenty Cubits long, strongly arm'd with Iron, and their Heads resembled the Beak of a Ship, and were easily mov'd forward by the help of Wheels; but to do effectual Execution, they were forc'd on by a Thousand Men at least.

Being ready to bring up his Engines to the Walls, he fill'd every Story in the Helepolis with as many Engines for shooting of Stones, Arrows, and Darts, as each would hold. Then he sent his Sea-Forces to the Haven and the Places adjoining, and order'd his Land-Army to the rest of the Wall where any approach could possibly be made. At length, at one Signal and Word of Command all set up a shout together, and with great Violence storm'd the City on every side: And at the very time that the Walls were shaking and trembling with the Strokes of the Battering Rams, and Stones shot from the Engines, in came Ambassadors from Cnidus, and intreated him to forbear all further Proceedings by force of Arms, and promis'd, that they would persuade the Rhodians to submit (as far as it was possible) to his Commands. The King hereupon remitted his Heat, and Ambassadors were sent from both sides, who banded Matters to and fro, but could not come to any Agreement. Whereupon he resolutely renew'd the Assault, and batter'd down one of the strongest Towers built of Four-square Stone, and so shook the whole space between the Towers, that the Besieg'd could not pass that way to the Bulwarks.

But at this time, King Ptolemy sent a great Fleet with Provision to the Rhodians; in which were Three hundred thousand Artabans of Corn, Beans, and Pease: These making a straight course for Rhodes, Demetrius sent Shipping after them, in order to seize the Provision for the use of his own Camp: But the Ptolemeans, (hoising up all their Sails,) by the favour of a fair Gale of Wind arriv'd safe at their Port, and so those that were sent after them by Demetrius, return'd as they went. Cassander likewise sent Ten thousand Medimnas of Barly to the Rhodians, and Lysimachus Forty thousand of Wheat, and as much of Barly.

The Town thus supply'd with Plenty of Provision, their languishing Spirits now reviv'd; and thereupon judging it much to their Advantage if they could ruine the Enemies Engines, they got together abundance of Fire-balls, and other Engines for shooting of Fire, and plac'd them and all their other Artillery upon the Walls; and the next Night, about the second Watch, on a sudden they play'd continually upon the Enemies Guard with their Shot of Arrows, Darts, Stones, and other Weapons; and making use also of all sorts of Fire-Engines, they grievously wounded and galled all that came flocking into that Part: Hereupon the Demetrians (who were altogether surpriz'd by so sudden and unexpected an Attack) being mightily concern'd for their Engines and their other Works,


Page 698

ran all in a Body together to defend them. The Night being very dark, no Moon appearing, Firebrands flying about with great violence, gave Light to the Night; and Darts and Stones from the Catapults and Ballistas (not discern'd when they were shot) wounded and gall'd many of the Combatants, who could not see how to avoid them. And now at this very time some of the Iron Plates fell off from the great Engine, and the Firebrands had the good Fortune to fall upon that part that was bare: Upon which Demetrius was in a great Fright lest the Engine should be totally consum'd as the Fire encreas'd; and therefore endeavour'd to prevent it with all the speed possible, and to quench the raging Flame by the Water before prepar'd, and ready in the Apartments of the Engine for such Accidents. At length he call'd together by sound of Trumpet those that were to move the Engines, and by their Help, brought them off out of the reach of the Darts. When it was day, he order'd the Boys and Pages in the Army to gather all the Darts and Arrows shot by the Rhodians; because he had a desire by numbering of these, to make a Conjecture how the Citizens were furnish'd and provided. These Boys performing what they were commanded, there were in number of Fire-brands and other Vehicles for Fire of several sizes, above Eight Hundred, of Darts no fewer than Fifteen hundred This vast number of Darts, Arrows, Firebrands, and Balls, shot in in so little a portion of the Night, caus'd him to admire the Store and Provision of the City in their Ammunition; and likewise their great Charge and Expence in providing them. Then he set about repairing of his Engines, burying the Dead, and curing those that were Wounded: During which time, the Citizens (having a Respite from the Assaults and Batteries of the Engines) built a third Wall in the shape of an Half-Moon, which compass'd in all that part of the Wall that lay most open and obnoxious to the Enemies Batteries: And besides this, they drew a deep Trench round that part of the Wall which was ready to fall, that the King might not enter on a sudden at the first Push. They sent out likewise some Ships (that were swift Sailers) under the Command of Amyntas; who made over to the Continent in Asia, and there set upon some Privateers that were Commission'd by Demetrius: They had three open Vessels, and were reputed the stoutest Men the King had in his Fleet. After a short Fight, the Rhodians took both the Ships and Men together, among whom were Timocles, the chief of the Pirates: They fell likewise upon some Merchant Ships, and took some light Vessels loaden with Corn, and with these and the Pirates open Vessels they secretly pass'd by the Enemy, and got into Rhodes.

Demetrius having repair'd his Machines, brings them up again to the Walls, and with showers of Darts and Arrows forc'd the Besieg'd off from the Bulwarks, and battering the Place adjoining with his Rams, beat down two Spaces between the Towers. In the heat of this Action the Besieg'd with all their Might defended the middle Tower, and were continually press'd upon with strong Parties of fresh Men one after another, so that Aminias their chief Commander (couragiously behaving himself) was there slain, with many other of the common Soldiers.

While these Things were doing, King Ptolemy sent to the Rhodians as much Corn and other Provision as he had done before; and Fifteen Hundred Soldiers besides, under the Command of Antigonus a Macedonian. About the same time there came to Demetrius above Fifty Ambassadors from Athens, and other Cities of Greece, all solliciting the King to compose Matters, and strike up a Peace with the Rhodians: Whereupon there was a Cessation of Arms, and many Harangues were now made to the People, and then again to Demetrius, but they could not agree upon any Terms; and therefore the Ambassadors went away without effecting any thing.

Demetrius afterwards was contriving to make an Attack upon the City in the Night, at that part of the Wall that was fallen down; to this end he pick'd out the best of his Soldiers, and some others fit for the Purpose, in all to the number of Fifteen Hundred, whom he commanded to approach the Walls secretly about the second Watch. He himself stood ready with the rest of the Army, and gave Orders to the Officers of every Regiment, upon a Signal given to set up a Shout, and forthwith to make an Assault upon the City both by Sea and Land; who all executed his Commands accordingly; and presently one Party made to the Ruines, and killing the Watch at the Trench, broke into the City, and possess'd themselves of all the Places round the Theatre. The Rhodians seeing all the City in an Uproar upon the knowledge of what had happen'd, commanded them that guarded the Port and the Walls, every one to keep their several Posts, and endeavour to beat off the Enemy that attempted to enter. They in the Town with the stoutest of the Citizens, and those Soldiers then lately come from Alexandria, set upon them that were broke in within the Walls: But as soon as it was Day, Demetrius lifted up


Page 699

the Signal, at which both they that had made an Attack upon the Port, and those round the Walls, set up a Shout all together, to encourage their Men that had enter'd, and were about the Theatre. The poor Women and Children throughout the whole City were in terrible Frights and Lamentations, as if the Town had been then certainly taken by Storm.

However, a sharp Encounter there was between them that had enter'd within the Walls and the Rhodians; and though many fell on both sides, yet neither of them at first gave the least Ground: But after a while, when many more of the Rhodians came flocking in, resolv'd to endure the greatest Extremity, as now to fight for their Country, and for all that was dear to them in the World, the King's Party were overborn; and Alcimus and Mantias, the Commanders of the Party, (after many Wounds receiv'd,) were there slain; most of the rest were either kill'd upon the Spot, or taken Prisoners; but some few made their escape, and got to the King. Many likewise of the Rhodians were slain at the same time, amongst whom was Damotetis, President of the Council, a Man most Renown'd for his Valour. Demetrius (although he judg'd, that Fortune had, as it were, wrung the City out of his Hands, yet) prepar'd for another Assault; But his Father writing to him to make Peace with the Rhodians upon such Terms and Conditions as he could get, he watch'd for the most convenient opportunity, which might afford him a colourable Pretence for an Agreement and Composure of Matters between them. Ptolemy likewise, though he had before writ to the Rhodians to acquaint them that he intended to send them a great quantity of Corn, and Three thousand Men, yet afterwards advising them to Treat and Agree with Antigonus upon any reasonable Conditions, they all inclin'd to Peace. At the same time likewise the Aetolian Commonwealth sent Ambassadors to Negociate a Pacification. The Rhodians therefore at length struck up a Peace with Demetrius upon the Conditions following; viz.

That the City should Govern according to their own Laws, and should be without a Garison: That they should Enjoy their own Estates and Revenues: That they should join with Antigonus in his Wars against all Persons, except Ptolemy: And that they should deliver a Hundred Citizens for Hostages, such as Demetrius should make Choice of, except such as were Magistrates.

 And thus the Rhodians (after a whole Year's Siege) put an end to the War, honouring those with just Rewards, who had approv'd themselves honest and faithful to their Country; and such Slaves as had behav'd themselves stoutly and valiantly, they set free, and enroll'd them as Members of the City: They set up likewise the Statues of the Kings, Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus, and of some others inferiour to them, yet who had contributed much to the Preservation of the Place. But that they might express their Gratitude and Thankfulness to Ptolemy above all the rest, they sent some of their Priests to consult the Oracles of Ammon, whether they should worship Ptolemy as a God, or no: And being answer'd, That they should; they consecrated to him a Four-square Grove in their City; building on every side thereof a Gallery of a Furlong in length, and call'd it Ptolemeum, or Ptolemy's Gallery. They repair'd also the Theatre, and the Parts of the Walls that were thrown down, and made them, and all the other Places that had been ruin'd, far more Beautiful and Glorious than they were before.

Demetrius having ratifi'd the Peace with the Rhodians, (according to his Father's Commands,) loos'd from thence with his whole Army, and passing by the Islands, he arriv'd at Aulis in Boeotia, minding with all speed to set the Grecians at Liberty; for Cassander and Polysperchon grown bold through the absence of the Enemy, had not long before wasted and harrass'd many Parts of Greece. And first of all he freed the City of the Calcideans from a Garison of the Boeotians, and forc'd the Boeotians (out of fear of him) to fall off from their League with Cassander. Afterwards confederating with the Aetolians, he prepar'd to make War upon Polysperchon and Cassander.

During these Transactions, Eumelus, the King of Bospherus Cimmerius, having now reign'd Six Years, ended his Days; after whom succeeded Sparticus his Son, who reign'd Twenty Years.

Having now given an Account of the Affairs of Greece and Asia, we shall pass over to other Parts of the World.

In Sicily, Agathocles on a sudden, and without any Provocation, invaded the Inhabitants of the Lipari Islands, being then in full and perfect Peace and Security, and exacted from them Fifty Talents of Silver. At which time, many thought that 'twas then spoken from a Divine Spirit, when 'twas said, That God would remarkably pursue him for his Wickedness: The Liparians then desir'd him, that he would give some time to make up the Money that was short, declaring that to that time they never made use of the Dedicated Treasure:


Page 700

But Agathocles forc'd him to give him the Money that was in the Sacred Treasury. Upon some of which was stamp'd the Image of Aeolus, and upon others Vulcan; and when he had got it, he set sail and away he went: But there arose a Storm that broke in pieces Eleven of the Ships that carry'd the Money: Which gave occasion to many to conclude, that Aeolus (who is said to have Command of the Winds in those Parts) executed Vengeance upon him at his first setting forth. And that Vulcan at his latter end punish'd the Tyrant in his own Country, according to the just Desert of his Wickedness, burning him alive with hot Coals: For it was one and the same Justice and Divine Will that forbore and pass'd over those that sav'd and preserv'd their Parents at the Foot of Mount Aetna; and that exerted his Power in punishing those that had impiously prophan'd the Deity. But what is now said concerning the Return and Misfortunes of Agathocles, shall be further confirm'd when we come to the Time proper for that Relation; but now we must apply our selves to what was done in those Parts of Italy that lay bordering one upon another.

The Romans and Samnites, after a War of Two and twenty Years and Six Months continuance, by their mutual Ambassadors at length made Peace one with another. But Sempronius, one of the Consuls, broke into the Country of the Aequi, and took Forty Towns in Forty Days time at the most; and bringing the whole Country into absolute Subjection to the Roman Yoke, return'd home, and most worthily and gloriously triumph'd. But the Romans enter into a League with the Marsi, Peligni, and Marrycini.

When the former Year was ended, Leostratus was chosen Chief Magistrate of Athens for this succeeding, and Servius Cornelius and Lucius Genucius were created consuls at Rome. In the time of whose Governments, Demetrius resolv'd to make War upon Cassander, and to restore Liberty to the Grecians; and above all other Concerns, to put the Affairs of Greece into a good and happy Condition; because he hop'd by the Liberty granted, thereby both to advance his own Reputation, as also to break those Captains of Cassander's as were join'd with Prepalaus, and that by falling upon Cassander, he should gain the Sovereign Power to himself. The City of Sicyon was then held by a Garison of Ptolemy the King, of which, Philip, a brave and gallant Man, was Governor; upon this Place Demetrius made a sudden Attack in the Night, and broke in within the Walls; whereupon the Garison Soldiers presently hurri'd into the Castle. Demetrius being now possess'd of the Town, posted himself between the Houses and the Cittadel; and being just upon the point of bringing up his Engines, they within were so terrify'd, that they surrender'd upon Terms, and then sail'd away into Aegypt. Afterwards having prevail'd with the Sicyons to remove and settle themselves within the Castle, he laid that part of the City that adjoin'd to the Haven even to the Ground, which was a Place before every way strongly fortify'd: Then joining with the Inhabitants, and helping them to build Houses, and restoring them to their former Liberty, he was honour'd by these he had thus oblig'd as a Demi-God; for they call'd the City Demetriades, and appointed Sacrifices, Festivals and Sports, with other Honours, to be Yearly celebrated and offer'd in Memory of him as the Builder of their City. But Time and Turns of Fortune put an end to these Solemnities.

The Sicyons therefore being fix'd in a far better Place than they were before, have continu'd there from that very time to this day: For the Site of the Citadel is large and Plain, compass'd in on every side with inaccessible Rocks, so as no Engine can possibly approach or come near it: It's furnish'd likewise with plenty of Water, by which the Inhabitants greatly inrich their Gardens and Orchards: And therefore all approv'd the Wisdom and ingenious Contrivance of the King, that had provided for them every thing conducing to their Pleasure in time of Peace, and to their Protection and Security in time of War. Having settled all Things at Sicyon, he march'd thence with his whole Army to Corinth, which Prepalaus, Cassander's General, then held with a strong Garison; where being presently let in by the Citizens in the Night, (through a little Sally-Port.) he gain'd the City, together with the Havens-The Soldiers in Garison hereupon fled, some of them into the Sisyphium, (as it's call'd,) others into the Cittadel: Whereupon the Engines being brought up to the Fortifications, after much much Toil and Labour he took Sisyphium by Storm: The Besieg'd had (before he enter'd) all fled to them that were in the Cittadel; but he so terrify'd them also, that he forc'd them to surrender; for this King in Assaults was not to be resisted; and in inventing of Engines for the assaulting of Places, was extraordinary Ingenious.


Page 701

And now altho' he restor'd the Corinthians to their Liberty, yet he put a Garison into the Citadel; because the Citizens desir'd to continue under the King's Protection, until he had subdu'd Cassander: And so Prepelaus having thus poorly lost Corinth, went to Cassander.

Then Demetrius march'd into Achaia, and took Buta by Assault; and within a few days after, he had Scyrus deliver'd up to him, and expell'd the Garison thence: Moving forward, he freed all the rest of the Cities of Achaia. Then encamping at Aegeum, he lay with his Army round the Walls; and upon a Parly with Strombichus the Governour, demanded the Surrender of the Town: But he not only refus'd, but rail'd against Demetrius from the Walls, and gave him base Language; whereupon the King brought up the Engines, batter'd down the Wall, and took the City by Storm; and there crucify'd Strombicus (who was plac'd there as Governour by Polysperchon) and about Fourscore more that were his inveterate Enemies) before the Walls of the Town. And from among the Prisoners he pickt out 2000 Mercenaries, and intermixt them amongst his own Regiments.

After the taking of this City, they who held the neighbouring Forts and Castles, thought it to no purpose to oppose the King; and therefore all surrendred their Garisons. And all the Governours of Cities (seeing that Cassander and Polysperchon sent them no Assistance, and that Demetrius with a potent Army, and with Engines (the greatest that ever came into the Field) was ready to fall upon them, surrender'd all up to him. And thus stood the Affairs of Demetrius.

In Italy the Tarentines (being at War with the Lucanians and the Romans) sent Ambassadors to Sparta desiring Aid, and that Cleonymus might be sent them for their General. The Lacedaemonians readily granted the General that was desir'd; and the Tarentines sent Ships and Money, wherewith Cleonymus rais'd Five thousand Men, and muster'd them at Tenarus in Laconia; and thence by a short Cut sail'd to Tarentum, where he hir'd as many Mercenaries as the former, and listed some of the Citizens: In the whole he rais'd above Twenty thousand Foot and two thousand Horse. He join'd to his Army likewise many Greeks of Italy, together with the Messapians; whereupon the Lucanians being terrify'd with the greatness of his Army, made Peace with the Tarentines: Only the Metapontians stood off; and therefore he requir'd the Lucanians to join with him in spoiling and harassing their Country; and accordingly making use of a fit Opportunity, he broke in upon them, and put them into a terrible fright: And tho' he enter'dinto the City as a Friend, yet he trapann'd the Citizens out of Six thousand Talents of Silver, and upwards, and took away Two hundred young Ladies of the best Quality for Hostages; not so much to secure the Performance of the League, as to gratifie his own brutish Lusts; for he threw off his Laconick Habit, and gave up himself to all manner of Voluptuousness; and brought them into Bondage and Slavery, who had committed themselves to his Care and Protection. For tho' he had so great an Army, and so well provided, yet he did noting worthy the Name of a Spartan. He determin'd indeed to make an Expedition into Sicily, under colour to overturn the Tyranny of Agathocles, and to restore the Sicilians to their ancient Laws and Liberties; but omitting that for the present, he sail'd to Corcyra, and having taken the City, got there a vast Treasure, and Garison'd the Place, designing to make use of that as a Town and Citadel of War, and thence to manage all the Affairs of Greece. Forthwith Ambassadors came to him from Demetrius, Poliorches, and Cassander severally, to sollicit him to join with them as Confederates; but he join'd with neither.

Afterwards, hearing that the Tarentines and some others had deserted him, and revolted, he left a sufficient Garison at Corcyra, and with the rest of his Forces sail'd in a great Heat into Italy, with a Resolution to execute exemplary Punishment upon those that had rebell'd. Arriving at the very Place where the Barbarians kept Guard, he took the City, and after he had sold the Men for Slaves, he spoil'd and harass'd all the Country. He took also a Town call'd Triopius by Assault, and carry'd thence Three thousand Captives: But about this time the Barbarians got into a Body, and set upon his Camp in the night, and kill'd above two hundred of his Soldiers, and took about a Thousand Prisoners; and together with this Misfortune, at the very same time arose a violent Storm, and broke in pieces 20 of his Ships, as they lay at Anchor near to his Camp.

Being plagu'd with these Losses and Misfortunes falling one upon the neck of another, Cleonymus sail'd back with his Forces to Corcyra.

The former Year being now past, this Year Nicocles executed the Office of Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Marcus Livius and Marcus Aemilius succeeded Consuls at Rome: At which time Cassander King of Macedon seeing the Armies of his Enemies to increase, and that the Storm was impending and ready to fall with all its weight upon him, was in a great Consternation concerning the Issue and Event: He sent therefore Ambassadors into Asia to Antigonus, to intreat him to be reconcil'd and strike up a Peace with him;


Page 702

who fiercely and roughly answer'd, That he would own no Peace that should be made with him, unless Cassander would deliver up all into his hands. At which Answer he was greatly terrify'd; and sent for Lysimachus out of Thrace, to venture all in a Common Lot both together: For ever in his greatest Straits his manner was to have recourse to him for Relief, both upon the account of his Valour, and for that his Kingdom border'd upon Macedonia. These two Kings therefore (consulting together how to manage their Affairs to the best Advantage of them both) sent Ambassadors to Ptolemy King of Aegypt, and to Seleucus Prince of the Higher Provinces, giving them an account of the proud Answer of Antigonus; telling them, That they were all in equal Danger by this War; for if Antigonus gain'd Macedonia, he would presently swallow up the rest; and that he had upon several occasions given a clear Discovery of his Covetousness and Ambition; and that he would have none to be Sharers with him in any Part of the Empire; and therefore that it was very fit and expedient, that they should all join together against him. 

Ptolemy and Seleucus (judging what was said to be certainly true) readily came into the League, and rais'd numerous Forces to be assistant in the War. However, Cassander judged it not prudent to suffer the Enemy first to break in upon him, but that it was rather for his Advantage to be before-hand with them, and fall first upon them: To that end he deliver'd part of the Army to Lysimachus, and sent a General along with them; and he himself march'd with the rest into Thessaly, to fight with Demetrius and the other Grecians.

Lysimachus with his Army pass'd over out of Europe into Asia, and set free the Inhabitants of Lampsacus and Paros, who had sided with him upon their own accord: But taking Sigaeum by Assault, he put a Garison into it; and then committed Six thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse to the Charge of Prepelaus, and sent him to take in the Cities in Aeolia and Ionia: But he himself in the first place design'd to besiege Abydos, and carry'd along with him Darts, Battering Rams, and other Engines for that purpose. But a great number of Soldiers being sent by Sea from Demetrius for the defence of the City, he left off his Design; and having taken in Hellespont and Phrygia, he went on and besieg'd the City Synada, where the King's Magazine lay, and at the same time drew over Docimus, a Commander of Antigonus his Party, to stand for the Common Cause; and by his help took both Synada and other Forts where the King's Treasures were laid up.

In the mean time, Prepelaus, who was sent to make War upon Aeolia and Ionia, by the way took Adramittium, and besieg'd Ephesus; and so terrify'd the Inhabitants, that they submitted; and finding there the Hostages which the Rhodians had given, he sent them all home again to their Friends, and did no hurt to any of the Ephesians in their Persons; but set on fire all the Ships which he found in their Harbour, because the Enemy Commanded as yet all at Sea, and for that the Issue of the War was hitherto uncertain. Afterthis, he join'd to him the Teians and Coplohonians. But as for Erythrae and Clazomene, they had Succour sent unto them by Sea, and therefore he could not take them; but having wasted their Territories, he departed and went for Sardis; and there he drew over by fair Words Phoenix and Docimus, two of Antigonus his Captains, and took the City it self, all but the Castle into his Protection. As for the Castle, Philippus (a Friend of Antigonus's) kept, and would not betray the Trust which he had repos'd in him. Antigonus was at that time wholly taken up in making Sports and Feasts at Antigonia, and had proclaim'd great Prizes for such as would put in for them, and huge Wages to all cunning Artificers that could be gotten.

But when he heard how Lysimachus was come into Asia, and by what Multitudes his Soldiers revolted to him, he brake off his Sports, and yet disburs'd among the Wrestlers and Artificers no less than Two hundred Talents; and then taking his Army with him, march'd away out of Syria, and by long Journies hastned to meet the Enemy. As soon as he came to Tarsus in Cilicia, he there, out of the Monies which he took with him out of the City of Quindi, gave his Army Three Months Pay before-hand; and besides this, brought Three thousand Talents along with him, to the end he might not be to seek for Money, if need should be. Then passing the Taurus, he hasted into Cappadoci, and reduc'd such as in the Upper Phrygia and Lacaonia had revolted from him; and so these serv'd him in the Wars as they did before.

Then Lysimachus hearing of the Enemy's approach, fell to consult with his Council in this imminent Danger, what was fittest to be done; and their Advice was, by no means to hazard a Battel till Seleucus came down from the Upper Provinces; but to possess himself of the surest Places, and to Intrench himself in the strongest manner that possibly he could, with Ramparts, Palissadoes, and Stakes, and there expect the coming of the Enemy. Lysimachus having heard this Advice, put it seriously in Execution: And Antigonus, on the other side, as soon as he came near his Camp, drew out in Battalia, and provok'd 

〈…〉

 to fight;


Page 703

but seeing he would not, he went and kept all the Passages by which any Victual might come unto the Camp: Whereupon, Lysimachus fearing lest he should fall into the hands of the Enemy forwant of Provision, remov'd by Night, and having march'd Four hundred Furlongs came to Doryleum, and there Encamp'd; for that in those Parts there was sto

•

e of Corn, and other Provisions in abundance, having a River at the back of him as a Defence to his Camp. Wherefore having rais'd a Work, and inclos'd it with an exceeding deep Trench, and Pallisado'd it with three Rows of Stakes, he made all, as he thought, sure: But Antigonus finding the Enemy gone, pursu'd after him with all speed; and coming near to the Place where he lay, entrench'd, and seeing no disposition in him to fight, he presently fell to work, and drew another Trench round about his Camp to besiege him there; and to that purpose caus'd Darts, Arrows, and Catapults, to be brought thither to him: And though many Skirmishes were made about the Trenches, because Lysimachus his Men endeavour'd by their Darts and Arrows to drive the Enemy from their Works, yet Antigonus his Party had still the better of it in every Encounter. For in time, Antigonus his Works came to be almost finish'd; but Lysimachus his Provision began to fail; who therefore taking the Advantage of a tempestuous Night, made away with his Army, and through Mountainous Countries came to his Winter-Quarters. But when Antigonus the next Morning saw that the Enemy was gone, he also march'd after him through the Champain Country; but by reason there fell great store of Rain and the Ways were Foul and Deep, he lost many of his Carriages, and some of his Men also in that Journey; and the whole Army was in great distress: Wherefore both to spare his Army, and because the Winter Quarter came on, he gave off his pursuit; and casting about for the fittest Places, he distributed his Army into Winter-Quarters: But receiving intelligence that Seleucus was marching down from the Higher Provinces with a numerous Army, he sent one of his Friends into Greece to Demetrius, Commanding him with all speed to come to him with his Forces. For he was in an extraordinary Fright, lest all the Kings joining together should force him to fight (and so lay all at stake) before the Forces out of Europe could join him.

Lysimachus in the like manner sent his Army to be quartered in the Country of Salmonia, having made large Provision for them out of Heraclea, for that he had alliance with them of that City: For he had marry'd Amestris, the Daughter of Oxyartes, Niece to the late King Darius (whom Alexander gave to Craterus to be his Wife) and now at this time Governess of the City. And thus stood the Affairs of Asia at that time.

But as to the Affairs of Greece, Demetrius being at Athens, greatly desir'd to be initiated into the Sacred Mysteries of Ceres at Eleusina: But in regard the time appointed by the Law, and commonly spent by the Athenians in performing the Ceremonies of this Solemnity, was very long and tedious, he intreated the People that (in return of his former kindness to them) they would alter their ancient Custom, which they agreed unto: Whereupon, he committed his Person unarm'd into the Hands of the Priests; and so being initiated before the Legal Day, he departed from Athens; and then rendezvous'd both his Fleet and Land-Army at Chalcis in Baeotia; but hearing that Cassander had block'd up all the Passes, he look'd upon it not feasible to go by Land into Thessaly, and therefore sail'd with the Army into the Haven of Larissa, and there landed his Men, upon which the City was forthwith surrender'd to him; but the Citadel he took by Force of Arms, and bound all the Soldiers of the Garison in Chains, and so committed them close Prisoners, and restor'd the Larisseans to their ancient Laws and Liberties: Then he took in Prona and Pteleum. Cassander had commanded the Inhabitants of Dion and Orchomenon to remove and settle at Thebes; but Demetrius put a stop to this Transplanting of the Cities. Cassander, when he saw that every thing went as Demetrius would have it, strengthned the Garisons in Phera and Thebes; and rendezvous'd his Forces in the Face of the Demetrians: His whole Army consisted of Nine and twenty thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse. Those who follow'd Demetrius amounted to Fifteen hundred Horse, at least Eight thousand Macedonian Foot, and Fifteen thousand Mercenaries; and out of the Cities of Greece Five and twenty thousand; besides several Regiments of Light-arm'd Men, and a disorderly Rabble of fordid Fellows out of all Nations, to the Number of Eight thousand at the least, such as are us'd to follow Camps, only to Rob and Plunder where-ever they come: So that the whole Land-Army consisted of Six and Fifty thousand Men.

The Armies had now lay'n one over against the other many days, and though they were drawn up in Battalia on both sides, yet neither attempted to sight, solicitously expecting to hear how things went in Asia. At that time, Demetrius enter'd with part of his Army into the City of Pherea, being invited thither by the Inhabitants; and took the Citadel, and dismiss'd all Cassander's Soldiers, upon the Terms agreed upon, and restor'd the Phereans to their former Liberties. While these Things were acting in T

〈…〉,


Page 704

the Messengers from Antigonus came to Demetrius, who deliver'd his Father's Commands, and order'd him to transport his Forces over into Asia, with all the speed imaginable.

Whereupon, he looking upon it as a thing of absolute Necessity to obey his Father, forthwith struck up a Peace with Cassander, upon Condition, that his Father would approve of it; not in the least doubting, but that he would make all void, who he knew had resolv'd to put an end to the War, by no other ways than by force of Arms. However he was willing to manage his Business so, as that his leaving of Greece should look with a fair Face, and not resemble a Flight: For among other things, he took care to have it inserted into the Articles of Peace, That all the Greek Cities, both in Greece and Asia, should enjoy their ancient Laws and Liberties. At length, having got Ships together to transport his Army and the Carriages, he set sail with his whole Fleet, and steering a right Course through the Islands, (of the Aegean Sea) came to Ephesus, and there landing his Army, Encamp'd before it, and reduc'd it to its former Obedience, and suffer'd the Garison which Prepalaus had put there, safely to depart: Then putting a strong Garison of his own into the Castle there, march'd away with the rest of his Army as far as the Hellespont, where he reduc'd the Lampsacenians and Parians, and other revolted Cities to his Subjection: And from thence going to the Mouth of Pentus, Encamp'd near the Temple of the Chalcedentans, and there fortisy'd; which done, he left there Three thousand Foot, and Thirty Sail of good Ships to keep the Port, and sent the rest of his Army to Quarter for that Winter in several Places thereabouts.

About this time, Mithridates, who was subject to Antigonus, being suspected of favouring Cassander's Party, was slain at Cius, in the Country of Mysia; of which, and of Arthinas he had been Prince Thirty five years. His Son, call'd also Mithridates, succeeded him in his Principality, and added to his Dominions Cappadocia and Paphlagonia, and held them Thirty six years.

In these days Cassander, after the departure of Demetrius, recover'd all the Cities lying upon the Sea Coasts, and sent Pleistarchus into Asia, with an Army of Twelve thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse to assist Lysimachus. But Pleistarchus coming to the Mouth of Pontus, found that Streight kept by the Enemy: And thereupon, despairing of any Passage that way, went to Odessus, which lies between Apollonia and Galatia, over against Heraclea, where a Part of Lysimachus his Army lay: But having not Shipping enough for the Transportation of all his Forces at that Place, he divided his Army into three Parts: The first part that set out, landed safely at Heraclea: The second was defeated by the Enemy's Ships which lay to keep the Streight at Pontus: The third, wherein Pleistarchus himself was, was so overset by a violent Tempest, that the greatest part of the Ships, and Men in them perish'd: And among the rest the Ship wherein he was, being a Vessel of Six Tire of Oars; and of all the Men in her, which could not be less than Five hundred, only Three and thirty escap'd, of whom Pleistarchus himself was one, who getting upon a Plank of the Ship when it split, was cast on Shore half dead; yet being a little recover'd, was carry'd to Heraclea, and there growing strong again, went to Lysunachus in his Winter Quarters, having lost the greatest part of his Army by the way.

About the same time, Ptolemy coming with an excellently well-appointed Army out of Aegypt, reduc'd all the Cities of Caelosyria to his Obedience; but when he lay in Siege before Sidon, there came a false Rumour to his Ear, that a Battel had been sought, wherein Lysimachus and Seleucus were routed and fled to Heraclea, and that Antigonus thereupon was hasting into Syria with his Victorious Army.

Ptolemy giving overlight credit to this Report, made a Truce with the Sidonians for five Months, and putting Garisons into other Cities which he had taken in those Parts, return'd into Aegypt.

While these things thus pass'd, Two thousand Autariats, and about Eight hundred Lycians and Pamphilians of Lysunachus his Soldiers, fled over to Antigonus out of their Winter-Quarters, and Antigonus entertain'd them very courteously, furnishing them with such Pay, as they said Lysimachus ow'd them, and gave them also for a Reward large Sums of Money over and above.

About the same time also, Seleucus, with a great Army came down out of the Upper Provinces into Cappadocia, and Winter'd his Army in Tents which he brought ready made for them. His Army consisted of Twenty thousand Foot, and about Twelve thousand Horse, (reck'ning in with them his Archers on Horseback) and Four hundred and fourscore Elephants, and an Hundred Iron Chariots: Thus these Kings join'd their Forces, resolving the next Summer to decide the Controversie by the Sword. But we shall give an Account of the Wars among these Princes in the Beginning of the next Book, according as we first design'd.

FINIS.


Page 707

THE FRAGMENTS OF Diodorus Siculus. OUT OF Some of his BOOKS that are Lost.

To the READER.

THE last Twenty Books of Diodorus Siculus are entirely lost, (except some Ecclogues or Fragments in Photius his Bibliotheca and others, recover'd by Hoes Chelius, and published by Laurentius Rhodomannus,) which contain'd an Account of Affairs for the space of 244 Years, or there abouts; i. e. from the End of the 119th Olympiad, (when Antigonus and Demetrius Poliorcetes were routed by Ptolemeus Lagus and the other Confederates, An. M. 3650.) to the End of the 180th Olympiad, at which time Julius Caesar made his first Expedition into Britain, which was in the 693d Year of the City, as Eutropius accounts, Lib. 6.

The Reader is desired to observe, That these being but Fragments, or Pieces of Diodorus, recover'd out of the Rubbish (as it were) of Antiquity, the Relations are often broken, and new Matter sometimes begun that has no Coherence with what went before. Where they are broken, they are Noted generally thus,—The new Matter is easily discern'd by Observation.

A Fragment out of the Sixth Book of the Bibliotheca of Diodorus Siculus, taken out of Eusebius Pamphilus, Book II. Evang. Preparation.

THese therefore are the most remarkable Things that are recorded among the Atlantides concerning the Gods; and they say, the Grecians use the same Rites and Ceremonies. The same things Diodorus says in the 3d Book of his History: And the same Diodorus confirms the same Theology in his 6th Book, from the History of Euemerus the Messenian, where these are his words—The Ancients therefore held two Opinions (which are brought down to Posterity) concerning the Gods: Some they say are Immortal and Incorruptible, as the Sun, Moon, and rest of the Stars; and likewise the Winds, and other Things of the like Nature, for none of these have either Beginning, or End. But there are others, they say, that are Earthly Gods, but for their good Deeds to the benefit of Mankind, have attain'd to the highest pitch of Honour and Glory; and such were Hercules, Dionysius or Bacchus Aristaeus, and such like. Of these Terrestrial Gods, many and various Stories are related by Historians, and Mythologists. Among the Historians, Euemerus has compos'd a Sacred History, and written peculiarly of these Deities. Among the Mythologists or Poets, Homer, Hesiod, Orpheus, and others of that kind, have seign'd most prodigious Stories of the Gods. We shall endeavour in short to run over what has been writ by both, observing a Mean. Euemerus, a special Friend of King Cassander, being forc'd to undertake some great and weighty Affairs, and long and tedious Voyages for the King, they say, was driven far away through the Ocean, Southward; and loosing from Arabia Faelix, after many days sail, arriv'd at certain Islands situated in the midst of the Ocean; the greatest of which was one call'd Panchaia, in which he saw the Panchaians very zealous and eminent for Religion, who ador'd the Gods with magnificent and pompous Sacrifices, and rich Gifts both of Gold and Silver. They say moreover, that the Island is consecrated to the Gods, and that there were many other Things in it that were admirable, both for their Antiquity and Excellency of Workmanship; of which, we have given a particular Account in the precedent Books. That there is likewise in it, upon the top of an high Mountain, a Temple dedicated to Jupiter Tryphylius, built by him when he convers'd here with Men, and govern'd the whole World; in which Temple there is a Golden Pillar, whereon are distinctly describ'd in Panchaian Letters, the Acts of Ʋranus, Saturn, and Jupiter. Afterwards he says, That the first King was Ʋranus, a just and good Man, and very skilful in Astrology: And that he was the first that ador'd the Heavenly Gods, and therefore was call'd Ʋranus: And that he begat on his Wife Vesta two Sons, Pan and Saturn, and two Daughters, Rhea and Ceres. He says moreover, that Saturn reign'd after Ʋranus, and marry'd Rhea, and begat Jupiter, Juno, and Neptune; and that Jupiter succeeding Saturn, marry'd Juno, Ceres, and Themis: Of the first of which he begat the Curetes, Proserpina of the second, and Minerva


Page 708

of the third; and that afterwards coming to Babylon, he was Belus his Guest. And that from thence arriving at the Island Panchaia, he erected an Altar to Ʋranus his Grandfather; and then passing through Syria, he came to Prince Cassius, from whom the Mountain was call'd Mount Cassius. Then travelling into Cilicia, he overcame Cilix, the Lord of the Country; and having at last pass'd through several other Nations, was highly honour'd by all, and stil'd a God. When he had deliver'd these and such-like Things concerning the Gods, as of mortal Men, he subjoins this; 

Let this therefore suffice in reference to Euemerus, who writ the Sacred History.

 And as to what the Greeks sabulously report concerning the Gods, we shall endeavour to give as succinct an Account as we can, tracing the Steps of Homer, Hesiod, and Orpheus.

George Monachus, or the Monk, who writ in Greek a Chronical History: Out of the History of Diodorus, concerning the Corinthian Kingdom.

HAving given an Account of these Things, it remains we should now speak of Corinth and Sicyon, how they were planted and inhabited by the Doreans; for almost all the Nations in Peloponnesus, except the Arcadians, were removed from their ancient Seats at the time of the return of the Heraclidae; who leaving out Corinth in the Division, sent Messengers to Aletes, and gave him the said Province, together with the neighbouring Territory. This Man became very famous, and enlarg'd Corinth, where he reign'd 38 years. After his Death, the eldest and next of Kin ever succeeded in the Kingdom, down to the Reign of Cypsellus, 427 years after the return of the Heraclidae. The first that reign'd at Corinth after Aletes was Ixion, who held the Kingdom 38 years. After whom, Agesilaus reign'd 37 years; and after them, Prumnes 35 years, and his Son Bacches as long, who was the most famous and renown'd of any of his Ancestors, so that those that reign'd after him were not call'd Heraclidae, but Bacchidae. After Bacches, Agelas enjoy'd the Throne 30 years; Eudamus 25; Aristomedes 35, who after his Death left behind him a Son call'd Telestes, a little Child, who was depriv'd of his Father's Kingdom by Agemon, his Uncle and Guardian, who reign'd 16 years: After him, Alexander came to the Crown, and enjoy'd it 25 years, and was then kill'd by Telestes, who had been before depriv'd of the Kingdom of his Ancestors, which he now regain'd, and possess'd it 12 years, and then was murder'd by some of his own Kindred, and Automenes reign'd in his stead One year; after which, the Bacchidae, the Posterity of Hercules, enjoy'd the Kingdom for above 200 years, and all govern'd together with equal Authority; but every year they created one among themselves Prytanis, who had the Power of a Monarch for 90 years, till the time of the Reign of Cypsellus, who put an end to that sort of Government. These therefore are the Kings of Corinth. Bacches reign'd 35 years.

The same George of the Original of the Romans; A Fragment out of the 7th Book of Diodorus Siculus.

SOme Writers have erroniously held, that Romulus, who built Rome, was the Son of Aeneas: But this cannot possibly be true, since there were many Kings that reign'd in course between Aeneas and Romulus; the City being built the 2d Year of the 7th Olympiad, which was above 430 years after the Trojan War. For Aeneas gain'd the Kingdom of the Latines 3 years after the Destruction of Troy, and reign'd only 3 years, and after his Death was ador'd as a God. Ascanius, his Son, succeeded him, and built Alba, call'd at this day Longa. He gave the City this Name from the River which was then call'd Alba, and now Tiber: But Fabius, who writ an History of the Roman Affairs, speaks otherwise of the naming of this City. For he tells a Story, how Aeneas was foretold by the Oracle, that a Four-footed Beast should shew him the way to the Place where a new City should be built; which came thus to pass: Being about to sacrifice a White Sow then big with Young, made her escape, and ran away to a Hill, whither she was pursu'd, and there she brought forth 30 Pigs. Aeneas wondring at the Accident, and calling to mind the Answer of the Oracle, forthwith went about to settle Inhabitants in the Place; but being warn'd by a Vision in the Night to desist, and not to build till after 30 years then next ensuing, he left off his Design till the number of Years was compleated.


Page 709

The Eclogs or Fragments of Diodorus Siculus, out of the 21
st
, 22
d
, 23
d
, 24
th
, 25
th
, and 26
th
 Books that are now lost.

Out of the 21st Book.

1. ALL Vice is to be avoided by every Wise Man, but especially Covetousness. For this (through hopes and desire of Gain) prompts many to acts of Injustice, and so becomes the occasion of the greatest Mischiefs to Mankind. For being in the very highest Sphere of Wickedness, it involves not only mean Men, but even Kings themselves in extream Calamities, For Antigonus King of Asia, as an Example of this Truth, out of his insatiable desire, beginning a War against Four other Kings (who join'd against him) viz. Ptolemy Lagus King of Aegypt, Seleucus King of Babylon, Lysimachus of Thrace, and Cassander the Son of Antipater King of Macedonia, perish'd in Battle being shot through the Body with Multitudes of Darts and Arrows, (tho' afterwards Bury'd in a Royal manner) and his Son Demetrius, with his Mother Stratonice (who were then in Cilicia) were forc'd to sail away with all the Wealth they had to Salamis in Cyprus, that remaining still in the hands of Demetrius.

2. Agathocles King of Sicily, burnt all the Macedonian Fleet, and so freed Corcyra when it was Besieg'd by Cassander, both by Sea and Land, and very near and likely to be taken. Oh the many uncertainties of War! For Folly and Fraud many times effect as great things as true Valour and Courage.

3. Agathocles being return'd to the rest of his Army from Corcyra, when he heard that the Ligurians and Tyrrhenians (who were his Mercenary Soldiers) had assisted those who kill'd his Son Archagathus in his absence, put them all to the Sword, to the number of Two thousand: Upon which Account the Brutii deserting him, he resolv'd to Besiege their City call'd Aethas. But the Barbarians in great numbers falling upon him suddainly in the Night, cut off Four thousand of his Men, and so he return'd to Syracuse.

4. Agathocles rigg'd out a great Fleet, and sail'd into Italy; and having a design to march his Army to Crotona, he sent a Messenger before to Menedemus, King of Crotona (who was his particular Friend) not to be afraid of his Motion; which was meerly to deceive him; and purposing to Besiege the Place, he gave out that he was sending away his Daughter Lanassa with a Royal Fleet to Epirus to Marry her: And by this Fraud he came upon them when they were unprovided, and never suspected him. Thereupon, applying himself with all earnestness to the Siege, he block'd up the Place by a Wall drawn from Sea to Sea. And having by his Mines and Batteries ruin'd the greatest House of the Town, the Crotoneans out of fear open'd their Gates and receiv'd his Army into the City, who breaking in like a Flood, first rifl'd all the Houses, and then put all the Men to the Sword. He likewise made a League with the neighbouring Barbarians, the Japygians, and Peucetians, furnishing them with Ships for Piracy, and shar'd with them in the Robbery. At length having p

•

t a Garison into Crotona, he sail'd back to Syracuse.

5. Diallus the Athenian Writer compos'd a General History in Twenty six Books. And Psaon of Platea anoth

•

r in Thirty Books.

6. In the War against the Hetruscians, Gauls and Samnites, and their Confederates, the Romans destroy'd (w

•

en Fabius was Consul) an Hundred thousand Men, as Daris relates.

7. Antipater out of Envy, kill'd his own Mother. Alexander his Brother was likewise kill'd by Demetrius, whom Alexander had sent for to his assistance. Antipater the Murtherer of his Mother was a

•

so serv'd the same Sauce by Demetrius, unwilling to have a partner in the Kingdom.

8. Agathocles rais'd an Army and sail'd over into Italy with 30000 Foot and 2000 Horse. And 

•

ving the Command of the Fleet to Stilpo, he order'd him to wast and spoil the C

•

untry of the Brutii: While he was harassing the Sea-coasts, he lost many of his Ships in a Storm. But Agathocles, by the help of his battering Engines took the City Hipponium: which so terrify'd the Brutii, that they sent Ambassadors to treat with him upon ter

••

 of Peace: Upon which he put in a Garrison and carry'd away with 

•

im Six hundred 

•

ostages, and return'd to Syracuse. But the Brutii made slight of their


Page 710

Oath, and with the whole power of the City, fell upon the Garison and flew every Man, and afterwards recover'd their Hostages, and freed themselves from the Yoke of Agathocles. Lenity is to be prefer'd before Revenge.

9. Most Generals of Armies when they are brought into Straits and Difficulties, (out of Fear) do generally humour the Multitude.

10. When the Thebans made a Second defection, Demetrius batter'd down their Walls, and took the City by Storm, and put only Ten Men to Death, who were the Ring-leaders of the Rebellion.

11. Agathocles sent his Son Agathocles to Demetrius to enter into a League with him, Offensive and Defensive. The King kindly receiv'd the young Man, and bestow'd on him a Royal Robe, and many other Rich and Princely gifts: And sent along with him Oxythemes his special Friend, under colour to confirm the League, but in truth to be a Spy in Sicily.

12. King Agathocles after a long Peace between him and the Carthaginians, at length Rigg'd out a great Fleet. For he design'd to transport an Army into Lybia, and with his Navy to hinder the Exportation of all Corn and Provision, from Sardinia, and Sicily to the Carthaginians, who by the last War had gain'd the Dominion of the Sea, and thereby had secur'd their Countrey from Invasions. And tho' Agathocles had a well furnish'd Fleet, to the number of Two hundred Gallies of four and six Tire of Oars, yet he fail'd in his design, by reason of what shortly happen'd. For there was one Menon an Agestone, a beautiful Captive then Servant to the King, who for some time conform'd himself to a strict compliance to the Kings humour, so that he was taken into the number of his beloved and intimate Friends. But because of the ruin of his Country and the dishonourable abuse of his own Person, he bore a secret hatred to the King, and watch'd an opportunity to be reveng'd. The King because he was old, intrusted Archagathus with the Command of the Army: he was the Son of Archagathus who was kill'd in Lybia, and so was King Agathocles's Granchild, he was a Man of a strong Body, and of a brave and generous Spirit, far above all the rest of his Family. When he was Encamp'd with the Army near Aetna, the King had a desire to promote his Son Agathocles to be his Successor in the Kingdom, and to that end recommended the young Man to the Syracusians, and declar'd his purpose and design to have him Succeed. Afterwards he sent him to the Camp, with Letters to Archagathus, which order'd him to deliver up the Command of all the Forces both by Sea and Land to his Son; Upon which Archagathus perceiving that the Kingdom was design'd for another, contriv'd the destruction of them both: And to that end sent a Messenger to Menon of Aegista, who perswaded him to poyson the King: He himself celebrating a Sacrifice in a certain Island, where Agathocles then lay with the Fleet, Invited him to the Festival; and in the Night (when he was dead drunk) cut his throat, and threw his Body into the Sea, which being afterward cast up by the Violence of the Waves, was known by the Inhabitants, and carry'd to Syracuse. And whereas it was the King's Custom always after Supper to pick his Teeth with a Quill, now rising from the Table, he call'd to Menon for his Toothpicker: Who having dipt the end of it in Poyson, deliver'd it to the King; who never suspecting any thing, ply'd all his Teeth with that care and earnestness, that none of his Guns scap'd the touch of the Poyson. Upon ths the Kingbegan by little and little to be very ill, which was succeeded by violent Torments in his Body every Day. Then an incurable putrefaction and rottenness cover'd hs Gums and Teeth, and now drawing near to his end, he call'd a Senate, where he complain'd of the wickedness of Archagathus, and incited the People to take revenge of him for his Villanies, declaring that he would forthwith restore them to their Democracy. Afterwards when he was in the very height of his Extremity, Oxythemes (that had been there a little before, sent by King Demetrius) hurri'd him to the Funeral Pile, and 

•

urnt him while he was yet alive, and not able to speak by reason of the foulness and filthness of his Mouth through the Poyson. And thus Agathocles for the many Slaughters and Murders of his Reign, and Cruelties towards his own Subjects, and Impieties against the 

•

ods came to an end, such as he justly deserv'd for his former wickednesses, after he hd Reign'd Twenty eight Years, and liv'd Seventy two, as Timeus the Syracusian relates, and Callias another Syracusian (who writ Two and twenty Books) and Antander likewise the Brother of Agathocles an Historian. The Syracusians having now Regain'd ther Democratical Government Consiscated all the Goods and Estate of Agathocles, and boke down all his Statues. Menon in the mean time (who had Plotted and Executed the T

•

ason) was at the Camp with Archagathus, having fled thither from Syracuse: And now beginning to look very big upon it (as being the Man that had ruin'd the Monarchy) 

•

e secretly Murthers Archagathus,


Page 711

and with fair Words, and winning Carriage brought over the Army to his Interest, and determined to force Syracuse to Obedience, and gain the Principality. Hereupon the Syracusians created Hicetas General against Menon, he continu'd the War for some time: Menon all along seeking to avoid Fighting, and could by no means be brought to ingage. But when the Carthaginians join'd with Menon (by which he became far stronger than the Syracusians) they were forc'd to agree with the Carthaginians, and deliver Four hundred Hostages for further Security of the Peace, and to restore all the Exiles. However, when the Mercenary Soldiers were deny'd their right to give their Votes for the choosing of the Magistrates, the City was presently in an uproar: And both Syracusians and Mercenaries ran to their Arms: But some of the better sort interpos'd, and by much Intercession prevail'd with both parties to agree upon this Condition, That the Soldiers should depart out of Sicily by such a time, and take all their Goods along with them: Hereupon the Foreign Soldiers March'd away from Syracuse, and came to Messina, where they were receiv'd into the City as Friends and Confederates, and being kindly entertain'd in their Houses, in the Night they Massacred all their Hosts, and Marrying their Wives, Seiz'd upon the City, which they call'd Mamertina from Mars, which in their own Country Language they call Mamers.

13. For they that are not Members of the Democratical Government, are not admitted by the Tribune of the People to give their Suffrage amongst them that are.

14. It's a commendable thing to be ever Terrible to an Enemy, and always kind and courteous to a Friend.

15. Since that at that time, when you knew not what was best or fittest to be done, you were catcht with fair and enticeing Words: And now when you see Calamity upon the Country indeed, you are taught another Lesson. For to be Ignorant sometimes of things that may fall out in this Life, is natural to Mankind: But to be deceiv'd twice in the same thing, argues a Man to be a Fool. And the oftner we are so deceiv'd, the greater punishment we deserve. Some of the Citizens are grown to that height of Covetousness that they would fain raise up the glory of their Families by the ruin of their Country. For they that have so wickedly acted in assisting others, pray! how have they been us'd by them.

16. Offences are to be forgiven, and Peace to be kept for the time to come.

17. Not they that offend; but they that repent not of their offences, ought to be severely punish'd.

18. Mercy and Kindness amongst Men, is more Ancient than Wrath and Revenge.

19. It's a commendable and desireable thing to lay aside all Animosities. and instead thereof to return to Friendship and Amity. For when a Man is reduc'd to Poverty and Straits, he presently (at the first Nod as it were) runs to his Friends.

20. Covetousness being naturally Ingrafted into Men, no Man can be wholly free from this Vice. Pride, and a Tyrant's Robes ought to be left at home. For he that enters into a free City, ought to conform himself to the Laws of the Place. He that is of a Princely Family, and comes to a Kingdom by Hereditary descent, is desirous likewise to succeed in the Glory and Reputation of his Ancestors. For it's a Base and Dishonourable thing to carry the Name of Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles, and yet in Actions to imitate Thersites. For the more honour and reputation any Person has gain'd, so much the more the regard and respect will he have for them who were the Instruments of his Advancement and happy Successes. Therefore what may be honourably and deservedly obtain'd, should not be us'd unjustly and disgracefully, when it is enjoy'd. It is therefore (Gentlemen) a commendable thing, by the example of other Mens Harms and Mistakes, Wisely to provide for our own Security.

21. It does not become any Man to have more regard to Strangers, than his own kindred, and to be more fearful to exasperate an Enemy, than careful to preserve the good Will and Opinion of his Allies.

Out of the 22d Book.

1. IT'S the natural Property of the Epirots not only to fight for their Country, but to run all hazards likewise for the Defence of their Friends and Allies.

2. Decius the Roman Tribune Governor of Rhegium, to revenge his Country of King Pyrrhus, kill'd all the Inhabitants save the Women, whom he sold for Slaves, and seized upon all the Goods and Estates of them that were slain. These were Campanians,


Page 712

who acted the same Cruelty here as the Mamertines did when they Massacred all the Messinians. Afterwards, because he made not an equal distribution of the Prey, and Plunder taken from those miserable People, he was Banish'd Rhegium by his own Country men the Campanians. The Mamertines themselves assisted in this Butchery: And with the Money that was left hir'd him to be their Captain, and Chief Commander. Afterwards a distemper falling into his Eyes, he advis'd with a skilful Physitian, who to revenge the Injuries and Cruelties done to his Country, prescrib'd an application of Cantharides which wholly depriv'd him of his sight: And the Physitian himself took Care to withdraw from Messina. In Sicily, in the mean time there were these Princes, Hicetas at Syracuse, Phintias at Agrigentam, Tyndarus at Tauromenium, and some others in the lesser Cities. Phintias and Hicetas were at War one with another, and sought a Battle at Hibleum in which Hicetas was Conqueror. Afterwards making several Incursions one upon another, and Robbing and Spoiling every where, the Country by this means lay untill'd. Hicetas puff'd up with his Victory, ingag'd with the Carthaginians at the River Teria, where he was beaten with the loss of a great number of his Men. At that time Phintias built Phintia, and planted there the Geleons who were driven out of their Country. It is Scituated at the Sea-side: For both the Houses and Walls of Gela being utterly demolish'd; after he had wall'd Phintia and made a stately Market place, and built Temples for the Service of the Gods, he Transplanted the People of Gela thither. When he had committed the Murther, he was hated by all the Cities under his Government, who drave out all the Garisons, among whom the first were the Agyrineans.

3. King Ptolemy was Kill'd by the Gaus, and the whole Macedonian Army utterly destroy'd and cut off.

4. A Cadmean Victory is a Proverb, meant when the Conquerors have lost abundance of Men, and the Conquer'd are little the worse, because of the largeness of their Empire.

5. Phintias the Builder of Phintia, and Tyrant of Agrigentum, in a Dream had a representation pointing out to him his own Death. He thought he saw, as he was Hunting the Bore, that a Sow fiercely made up upon him, and struck him on the side with her Teeth, which so pierc'd him that he Dy'd.

6. Hicetas after he had Reign'd nine Years at Syracuse, was depriv'd of his Kingdom by Thynion the Son of Mameus.

7. Thynion and Softratus the Successors of Hicetas, sent again for King Pyrrus into Sicily.

8. The Mamertines who treacherously Murder'd the Messinians, having entred into a League with the Carthaginians, in a Senate decreed to hinder Pyrrhus from Landing in Sicily. But Tyndarion, Tyrant of Tauromenia sided with him, and was ready to receive into the City those Forces that joyn'd with him.

9. The Carthaginians entred into a League with the Romans, and took a-board 500 Men into their own Ships, and Sail'd over to Rhegium, and began to assault the Place, but at length rais'd their Siege, and having set on fire all the Timber and other Materials, there prepar'd for Shipping, they made to Sea, and there lay to observe the motion of Pyrrhus.

When Thynio had the Command of the * Island, and Sostratus lorded it over the Syracusians, having each an Army of 10000 Men, they broke out into War one against another, but being tyr'd out, they both sent Ambassadors to Pyrrhus.

11. Pyrrhus Warr'd in Italy 2 Years and 4 Months, and whilst he was preparing for his departure, the Carthaginians closely besieg'd the Syracusians both by Sea and Land. They had a Fleet of 100 Sail that lay in the great Haven; and a Land Army of 50000 Men that Encamp'd near the Walls, and with these they penn'd up the Syracusians, within the City, and Wasting and Harrassing the Country round about, they even turn'd it into a desolate Wilderness. The Syracusians therefore wearied out with the War, depended only upon Pyrrhus, in regard he had Marry'd Lanassa the Daughter of Agathocles, of whom he had begotten Alexander: Upon which account they sent every Day one Messenger after another to him; whereupon Shipping his Men, Elephants and other Provisions, he loos'd from Tarentum, and arriv'd the 10th Day at Locris: Thence he Sail'd after his Landing in S

••lly,

 to Tauromenium; and there being joyn'd with Tyndario Prince of that City, and Inforc'd by him with more Soldiers, he made from thence and came to Catana, where being Magnificently receiv'd by the Inhabitants, and loaden with golden Crowns, he landed his Men, with which he March'd straight towards Syracuse: His Fleet ready prepar'd for an Engagement, Sailing with him all along upon the Coast. When he came near to Syracuse the Carthaginians (because they had sent away 30 of their Vessels for necessary Provisions) durst not venture a Battle with those that remain'd, so that Pyrrhus came to Syracuse without any opposition: The Island being kept by Thynio and the rest of the City by the Syracusians and Sosistrates. For he had under his


Page 713

Command Agrigentum, and many other Cities, and above 10000 Soldiers. And having then reconcil'd Thynio and Sosistratas, and the Syracusians, and brought them all to a right understanding among themselves, he was thereupon highly Esteem'd and Applauded. The King receiv'd Weapons, Engines, and other Furniture and Provisions which was in the City, and 120 Deck'd Ships, and 20 open Vessels * But the Palace belonged to Enneres. The whole Navy therefore (with those he brought along with him) consisted of 200 Sail. Whilst he was thus imploy'd, Ambassadors came from the Leontines (sent to him from Heraclidas the Governor) with promise to deliver up the City into his hands, with the Garisons and 4000 Foot, and 500 Horse. There were then many others at Syracuse, who promis'd to deliver up their Cities to Pyrrhus, and to join with him in the War: He receiv'd them all Graciously, and sent them back to their several Countries, hoping now shortly to be Lord of Lybia.

12 The Port of Corinth is call'd Lechoeum.

13. Brennus King of the Gauls made an inroad into Macedonia with an Hundred and forty thousand Targateers, and Ten thousand Horse, and with a great multitude of other foreign Rabble, and many Merchants, together with Two thousand Carts and Carriages. He made great havock and slaughter with a design to ruine them utterly; at last he broke into Greece, and fully propos'd to rifle the Temple at Delphos. By frequent Engagements he lost Myriads of his Men, and he himself receiv'd Three desperate wounds. Being near his end, he call'd his Army together, and made a Speech to the Gauls, and advis'd them to kill both him and all the rest of the wounded Men, and to burn all their Carriages, and return home with all speed, and make Cichorius their King. Brennus at length after he had swill'd down abundance of Wine, ran himself through the Body. Cichorius (as soon as he had buried Brennus) knock'd all the wounded Men on the Head, that were like to be starv'd with Hunger, and perish by the Cold, to the number of Twenty thousand, and return'd with the rest the same way they came: But the Grecians that lay in ambush in the strait and narrow passages, cut off all their Rear, and took all their Bag and Baggage; marching forward to Thermopilae, they left there behind them Twenty thousand more for want of Food: at length as they were passing through the Country of the Dardanians, they all perish'd, and not one Man return'd to his own Country.

14. But Pyrrhus when he had settled all things in Syracuse and Leontinum, march'd with his Army towards Agrigentum, and while he was in his March, he was told by some that came off Shipboard, that they had driven out the Carthaginian Garison, that Phintias might not Govern them, and promis'd they would deliver the City into his hands, and join with him as Confederates in the War. Having therefore receiv'd the Forces, he marcht straight to Agrigentum, and receiv'd the City and Soldiers from Sosistratus, to the number of 8000 Foot and 800 Horse, nothing inferior to the Epirots. And now he took into his protection 30 Cities which were under the Command of Sosistratus. Afterwards he sent to Syracuse for the Engines of Battery, and all the Arms and Darts, and when they were brought to him, he marched into the Territories of the Carthaginians, having an Army with him of 30000 Foot and 1500 Horse, and some Elephants. And First he took in Heraclea a Carthaginian Garison: Then Azones, after they of Selinunte came in to the King, with the Halicyens Aegestines, and many other Cities. Aeryx at that time had in it a very strong Carthaginian Garison, and was beside naturally fortify'd and difficult to approach. Pyrrhus was resolv'd to storm this place, and to that end brought his battering Rams to the Walls: After a strong defence made for a long time, the King desirous to make his Name Famous (in imitation of Hercules) was the first that entred within the Walls, and fought with that Courage and Resolution, that he dispatcht all those Carthaginians that came within his reach; at length Succours coming in to him, he took the Town by Storm; then leaving there a strong Carrison he march'd to Eginera, a very strong place, and pleasantly situated near Panormus. They of Eginera surrendred the City; and thence he forthwith made for Panormus, which had the best Harbor of any City in Sicily, from whence this City was so call'd; He took it likewise by Storm. Then taking in the Fort at Ercte, he gain'd all that belong'd to the Carthaginians, except Lilibeum. This City was built by the Carthaginians after Dionysius the Tyrant had ruin'd Motya. For those that were left alive after that slaughter, the Carthaginians setled in Lilibeum. Just as Pyrrhus was ready to besiege this place, a great Army landed there out of Africa, having the advantage of being Masters at Sea, and brought with them abundance of Corn, and an innumerable number of Engines and Weapons of War. And because the greatest part of the City lay near to the Sea, they were most careful to guard that part towards the main Land, and to that end rais'd many Bulwarks and high Towers, and drew a large Trench to prevent an approach on that side. Then they sent Ambassadors


Page 714

to the King to treat upon terms of Peace, and to offer him a great sum of Money; But the King refusing the Money, they desir'd that he would permit the Carthaginians to keep only Lilybeum. But the Confederates that were then assembled in Senate, and the Representatives of the several Cities, sent to him, and earnestly intreated him, he would not upon any terms whatsoever permit the Barbarians to have any footing in Sicily, but drive the Carthaginians wholly out of the Island; and limit their Power at Sea. Upon this the King encampt near the Walls; and at first made several Assaults one upon the neck of another; But the Carthaginians being well furnish'd both with Men and other necessaries, beat him off. For they had so vast a number of Engines that cast Darts and Stones, that the Wall could scarcely contain them: which being all ply'd against the Assailants, they were so gall'd and cut off, that Pyrrhus was forc'd to draw off his Men. Then he began to contrive other Engines (besides those he had from Syracuse) and did all he could to undermine the Walls. But the Carthaginians making a stout resistance, and the place being all of Rock, he was now out of all hopes to take it by force, and therefore (after Two Months lying before it) he rais'd his Siege. And now he design'd to bend his Force elsewhere, and to that end to furnish himself with a great Fleet, in order to be Master of the Sea. and to Transport a great Army into Africa.

15. When the Mamertines in Messina grew strong, they fortify'd many Castles, and put Garrisons into them. And came presently with an Army (they had order'd to be in readiness) to the relief of Messina. But Hiero leaving the Enemies Country took Myla by Storm, and brought under his Command 1500 Soldiers, and then march'd towards Amesalus (which lies between the Centoripines and the Agyreans) and tho' it was a strong Place and had many Soldiers in it, yet he took it by Assault and raz'd it to the ground, but he pardon'd all the Garrison'd Soldiers, and joyn'd them to his own Army. The Territory he gave to the Centorippines and the Agyreans. Afterwards Hiero (having a great Army) march'd against the Mamertines, and wan Alesa; and being readily receiv'd of the Abacaenes and Tyndarites, he gain'd their Cities also; and so penn'd up the Mamertines into a strait and narrow corner. For on that side towards the Sicilian Sea, he was Lord of Tauromenium a City near Messina, and towards the Hetrurian Sea, he commanded the Tyndarites. And now making an incursion into the Territories of Messina, he encamp'd at the River Lotanus, having with him in his Army 10000 Foot and 1500 Horse. The Mamertines encamp'd over against him with 8000 Foot and but 40. Horse, under the Command of Cios, who call'd the Augures together to consult the issue of the Battle by the view of the Sacrifices; who answer'd, That by the Intralls the Gods foretold that he must lodge that Night in the Enemies Camp: Upon this he was Transported with Joy to think he should be Master of the King's Camp. Hereupon he forthwith attempted to pass the River with his Forces drawn up in Battalia. Hiero on the other side, Commands 200 Exiles of Messina (who were stout and noted Men for their Valour, with whom he join'd 400 others of his best Soldiers) to compass an Hill call'd Thorax there near at hand, and so to come round upon the back of the Enemy, and he himself in order of Battle met them in the Front. Whereupon the Armies Engag'd both Horse and Foot (the King having gain'd a Rising Ground near the River much to his advantage) The issue was doubtful for some time: but they that were order'd to the Hill, on a sudden fell upon the Mamertines, who (being but raw Men and tir'd out) were easily vanquish'd. At length, being hemm'd in on every side, they took to their Heels: But the Syracusians pursu'd them so close with their whole Army, that they cut them off every Man, save the General, who fighting with great Valour, at length fainted by the many wounds he receiv'd, and was taken prisoner, and brought half dead into the King's Camp, and committed to the care of the Chirurgeons; thus being brought to spend the Night according to the prediction of the Augures in the Enemies Camp. When the King was very earnest to have Cion being Cur'd, some came to the King with Horses they had taken in the Fight; Upon which, when Cion saw his Son's Horse among the rest, he concluded he was kill'd; whereupon he was so Transported with Passion, that he tore in pieces all the Bands and Ligatures of his Wounds, that by his own death he might Honour his Sons. The Mamertines hearing that both their General Cion and their whole Army was destroy'd, resolv'd to go and humble themselves to the King, as Suppliants. However, Fortune suffer'd not the Mamertines to be altogether lost and undone. For it hapned that at that time Hannibal the Carthaginian General lay at the Island Lipara, who as soon as he heard of this slaughter, went to the King with all speed, seemingly to congratulate his Victory, but in truth by some stratagem to circumvent him. And the King trusting to the Carthaginian's word, lay still. But Hannibal going to Messina, and finding


Page 715

the Mamertines ready to deliver up their City he diswaded them, and making a League with them, put 40 Soldiers more into the City. Thus the Mamertines (even now in despair by reason of their great slaughter) were by this means secur'd from present danger. As for Hiero (being thus cheated by the Carthaginian General, and so discourag'd from besieging of Messina) he return'd to Syracuse after his many Successes. Afterwards when the Carthaginians as well as Hiero had thus lost Messina, they had an interview, and upon second thoughts entred into a Confederacy, to besiege the City with their joint Forces.

Out of the 23d BOOK.

Fragm. 1. SIcily is one of the bravest Islands in the World, conducing much by its power to the gaining and increase of a larger Dominion.

2. Hanno the Son of Hannibal, as soon as he arriv'd in Sicily, Rendezvouz'd his Forces at Lilibeum, and thence March'd as far as Selinunte, where he left his Army Encamp'd near the City; but he himself went forward to Agrigentum, and fortifi'd the Citadel. Then he brought over the People to the Interest of the Carthaginians, and so engag'd them to be their Confederates. After he return'd to his Camp, Ambassadors came to him from Hiero, to consult concerning the publick Good of Sicily: for they had made a League and Agreement one with another to make War upon the Romans, if they would not forthwith withdraw all their Forces out of Sicily. In execution of which they both March'd with their Armies to Messina: Where Hiero Encamp'd in the Hill call'd Chalchidicus: The Carthaginians lay with theirs near the * Monuments, and possess'd themselves of the Arsenal call'd Pelotias, and both presently laid close Siege to Messina. As soon as the News was brought to Rome, they sent away Appias Cladius, one of the Consuls, with a great Army, who came to Rhegium with all speed; and from thence sent Ambassadors to Hiero and the Carthaginians to raise their Siege, and promis'd in a general Assembly not to make any Incursion into the Territories of Hiero. To which Hiero answer'd that the Mamertines for their razing and ruining of Gela and Camarina, and their cruelty and wickedness in getting the possession of Messina were most justly Besieg'd: And that it did not become the Romans who are so cry'd up in every place for their Justice and Faithfulness, to protect such bloody Villains, who had contemptuously broken all the Tyes and Bonds of Faith and Truth amongst Men. And if notwithstanding, they begin a War in the defence of such notoriously wicked Men, it will be evident and apparent to all Man-kind, That succour to them that are in destress, is but a meer pretence to cover their Covetousness, whereas in truth their Aim is to gain Sicily.

3. The Romans at first bore four square shields, but afterwards, when they observ'd the Tyrrheneans to carry brazen shields, they got the like, and Conquer'd them.

4. When the Consul Landed at Messina; Hiero suspecting that the Carthaginians had made way for him, fled himself to Syracuse. The Carthaginians being at length subdu'd, the Consul besieg'd Aegista, and after the loss of a great number of his Men return'd to Messina.

5. When both Consuls arriv'd in Sicily, they besieg'd the City Adranita, and took it by storm. And while they were besieging the * Centorippians, and lay Encamp'd at the brazen Halls or Palaces; first Ambassadors came from them of Laessina: Afterwards other Cities that were terrify'd with the Roman Armies, sent Ambassadors for terms of Peace, with promise to deliver up all their Towns into the hands of the Romans to the number of 67. From all which places they March'd to Syracuse to besiege Hiero, who seeing the uneasiness of the Syracusians at this preparation against them, sent Ambassadors to the Consuls to Negotiate for Peace. Who readily agreed to the Conditions, designing chiefly the War against the Carthaginians. A Peace therefore was concluded for 14 Years: And the Romans were to receive 140000 * Drachmas. And after he had releas'd all the Prisoners to them, they agreed that Syracuse and all the Cities under his Jurisdiction, viz. Aera, Leontinum, Megara, Aelora, Neatina, and Tauromenum should remain in the hands of Hiero In the mean time Hannibal was come as far as Xiphonia to the Aid of the King; but hearing what was done, March'd back.

6. The Romans after they had besieg'd the Towns call'd Adrones, and Macella for a long time together, at length rais'd their Sieges without effecting any thing.


Page 716

7. The Aegestines who were the first brought under the power of the Carthaginians, revolted to the Romans. The Alieneans did the like. But they took H

•larius Tyrit

•

us

 and Ascelu

•

 by force. The Tyndar

〈…〉s

 seeing themselves deserted (through Fear) design'd to deliver up themselves as the rest had done: but the Carthaginians suspecting their design, took the chiefest of the Citizens for Hostages, and carry'd them and the Corn and Wine, and all the rest of the Provision that was in the Town to Lilibeum.

‖ Philemon the Comedian writ 97 Comedies; he liv'd 99. ‖. The Romans that besieg'd Agrigentum, and that made the Trenches, and cast up the Works, were 100000. At length, after a stout resistance the Carthaginians deliver'd up Agrigentum to the Romans.

8. After the siege of Agrigentum, Hanno the Elder brought over a great Army out of Africa into Sicily, of 50000 Foot, and 6000 Horse, and 60 Elephants. Philinus the Historian of Agrigentum sets forth this Expedition. Hanno with all these Forces March'd from Lilybeum to Heraclea. About this time some came and offered to deliver up Erbesus. H

•nno

 in Prosecution of the War lost in two Battles 3000 Foot, and 200 Horse, and 4000.—that were taken Prisoners. In the mean time, 30 of his Elephants dy'd, and 3 were wounded.

9. There was likewise the City Entellina—Hanno therefore by his prudent management by one Stratagem, cut off both his open and secret Enemies at onetime. And after they had lain thus before it for the space of 6 Months, Agrigentum was at length deliver'd up to them; and they carry'd away above 24000 as Slaves. But the Romans lost 30000 Foot, and 540 Horse. But the Carthaginians Fin'd Hanno in 6000 Pieces of Gold, and took away his Commission, and sent Amilcar General into Sicily, in his Room. The Romans then Besieg'd Mystratus, and for that purpose devis'd many Engines: But after 7 Months time they rais'd their Siege, with the loss of a great number of their Men. But Amilcar fought with the Romans at Thermas, and routed them, killing 6000 upon the place; and it was not far from, but the whole Army—The Castle Mazaron was likewise taken by the Romans. Then Camarina was betray'd into the hands of Amilcar the Carthaginian, and not long after Enna in the same manner. There he Wall'd in Drapanum, and made it a Town of defence, and after he had Transplanted the Inhabitants of Eryx thither, he raz'd the City to the Ground, except that part which surrounded the Temple. But the Romans took Mystratus, now Besieg'd the 3d time, and levell'd it to the Ground, and sold the Inhabitants for Slaves. The Consul afterwards March'd to Camarina, and laid Siege to it, but could not reduce it. But at length by the help of some Engines of Battery and other Instruments of War, sent to him from Hiero, he wan the Place, and sold most of the Camarineans for Slaves. Presently after, he became Master of Enna by Treachery, where he put the Garison to the Sword, save some that made their escape out of the Town and fled to their Confederates. Thence he March'd to Satana, and took it by Storm. Then placing Garisons in other Cities, he made for 

〈…〉cus,

 a Castle belonging to the Agrigentines, which was also betray'd and deliver'd up to him, and there he plac'd a Garison. About this time Erbesus was deserted by its Inhabitants.—But the River Alycus, and the last of all the other.—

10. A prudent Man ought either to resolve to Conquer, or else to submit to those that are Stronger than he.

11. All men in time of Adversity are apt to be more Religious, and more frequent in Devotion than at other times: But in times of Prosperity and Success, they make slight of the Gods as so many Fables and Romances. And when they are again brought into Troubles, then they run again to their natural Shelter.—

12. It's much more easie to get the advantage of an Enemy when a Man will be advis'd, and be willing upon all occasions to rectifie his own mistakes. And it often happens that they who are carry'd away to the same—

Many are stirr'd up to Virtue through the Credit and Reputation that attend upon them, that employ themselves in good and commendable studies, and exercises.—

For not being able to bear, as an over heavy burden the Successes of Fortune heap'd upon him, he depriv'd himself of most of the glory of his Actions, and involv'd his Country in great Calamities—Moreover, when the Romans had Transported a great Army into Africa, under the Command of Attilias the Consul, they at first prevail'd over the Carthaginians, and took many of their Towns and Castles, and destroy'd great numbers of their Soldiers: But as soon as Panthippus the Spartan (whom they had hir'd to be their General) came out of Greece, the Carthaginians totally routed the Romans, and destroy'd a numerous Army. Afterwards they Fought several Sea-Fights, wherein the Romans lost many Ships, and abundance of Men, to the number of 100000.—The honour he had gain'd before, highly aggravated the disgrace and contempt; and by


Page 717

his own Example, he instructed others to carry humbly and modestly when they are in the greatest Power and Authority. And that which stung him most, was that he was made the Scorn, and brought into the power of those whom he had before proudly trampled upon in disdain: And now had depriv'd himself of all Pity and Commiseration, commonly shew'd to Men in Misery and Distress.—

For those that before were Conquerors in all, he now altogether Conquer'd: And those that before (through the slaughter made amongst them) expected nothing but utter Destruction. Now, (by the greatness of the Victory by them on the other hand obtain'd) he caus'd to slight and contemn their Enemies.—For its no wonder if the Prudence and Experience of a General effect those things which seem to others impossible: for all things are easie and possible to Ingenuity and Diligence, supported by skill, acquir'd by Experience.—For as the Body is the servant of the Soul, so great Armies are govern'd by the Prudence of their Generals.—The Senate ordering all things for the publick good.—Philistus then writ his History.—But the Romans who had pass'd over into Africa, and fought with the Carthaginians a Battle at Sea, and beaten them, and taken 24 of their Ships, after they had taken aboard those Romans that were left of the Land Army, (as they were Sailing to Sicily) were all Shipwrackt near Camerina, and lost 340 Men of War, besides Vessels for Transporting of Horses, and other Transport Ships to the number of 300: So that all the Coasts from Camerina to Pachynum, were fill'd with the Carcasses of Men and Horses, and Wrecks of Ships. Hiero courteously entertain'd those that escap'd, and supplying them with Meat and Drink, Cloaths and other necessaries, convey'd them safe to Messina. Carthalo the Carthaginian after the Shipwrack, of the Romans, Besieg'd Agrigentum, took it and burnt the Town, and demolish'd the Walls; and those that were left, fled to Olympius. The Romans after the Shipwarck Equipp'd out another Fleet of 250 Sail, and came to Cephaledium, which was deliver'd up to them by Treachery. Thence they March'd to Drapanus, and began to Besiege it, but upon Succours brought in by Carthalo, they drew off, and Sail'd to Panormus: There they cast Anchor in the Harbour even under the Walls, and landed their Army, and then drew a Wall and Trench round the City. And the Country being very wooddy, even up to the City Gates, they had the advantage to raise Mounts and Bulwarks all along from Sea to Sea. Then the Romans by continual assaults and batteries beat down the Walls, and entring the outward Forts, put many to the Sword, the rest fled into the old City, and sent out Commissioners to the Consul to treat for the sparing of their lives. The Conditions were agreed unto; That every Person that paid 2 Minas for his head, should be free: Hereupon the Romans entred, and 40000 were set free for the Ransom agreed upon, the rest to the number of 30000 were sold for Slaves, together with the Spoils. But they of Jetina, drave out the Carthaginian Garison and deliver'd up the Town to the Romans: The like did the Seluntines, Petrineans, Enaterineans and Tyndarites. Then the Consuls leaving a Garison in Panormus March'd away to Messina. The Year following the Romans design'd another Descent into Lybia, but being prevented from landing by the Carthaginians they return'd to Panormus. Thence in their return to R

••e,

 by another Tempest they lost 150 Ships of War, besides Transport Ships with all their Loading and Provision. About this time the Governour of Therme being abroad about some necessary occasions, was taken Prisoner by the Roman Army: and during his Confinement he Treated by Messengers with the General to open the Gates of the City to him in the Night if he might be releas'd: The time was agreed upon, and he was order'd to be discharg'd, and 1000 Men were sent thither in the Night, who came there at the time appointed, whereupon he open'd the Gates, and the chiefest Persons of Quality only entred, giving a strict charge to the Guard, to shut the Gates and suffer none other to enter; and this they did to the end that none but themselves might have the plunder and pillage of the City; but they were all presently knock'd on the Head, a just reward for their Covetousness. But at another time Therme and Lipara were given up into the hands of the Romans. Yet they fail'd of their purpose at the Castle of Er

〈…〉,

 tho' they besieg'd it with 40000 Foot, and 1000 Horse.—

Asdrubal the Carthaginian General being ill spoken of by his Soldiers for not sighting, March'd away with the whole Army, and came to Panormus through the straits of Selinuntia, and passing over the River near the Town, he Encamp'd close to the Walls without Fortifying himself, in Contempt of the Enemy. And now again plenty of Wine being brought into the Camp by the Merchants, the Celte made themselves drunk, and while they were roaring and tearing and filling all places with disorder and confusion, Caecilius the Consul broke in upon them, and totally routed them, and sent 60 Elephants then taken in the Fight, to Rome, which were the admiration of the Romans.


Page 718

Out of the 24th BOOK.

Eclog. 1. THE Carthaginians, after they had raz'd the City Selinunte, transplanted the Citizens to Lilybeum. But the R

•mans

 sail'd with 240 long Gallies, and 60 round Vessels, and all other sorts of Shipping to Panormus, and thence to Lilybeum, which now they began to besiege; and fortify'd themselves by a Trench drawn all along from Sea to Sea. Then they prepar'd them Engines to cast Stones, battering Rams and Engines not only to batter, but pluck the Stones by violence out of the Walls, and all other things necessary for the raising of Mounts and Bulwarks. Then they fill'd 15 of their round Vessels with Stones, and cast them into the Mouth of the Harbour to choak it up. The Roman Army amounted to the number of 110000 Men, of whom 60000 Foot and 700 Horse were order'd to carry on the Siege. But 4000 Men with Corn and Provision were sent from Carthage to the Besieged, which greatly heartned them and Atarbus their Governor. When the Romans understood that Relief was got into the City, they fill'd up the Mouth of the Harbour a second time, and made a Bomb with Anchors and great Pieces of Timber; but the Wind which then blew high, and the violent Surges of the Sea, broke all asunder. The Romans likewise made another Engine to cast mighty Stones; but the Carthaginians rais'd another Wall within, and the Romans fill'd up the City Trench with Earth, which was 60 Cubits broad, and 40 deep. And whilst a Skirmish was fought on that side of the Walls towards the Sea, the R

•mans

 plac'd an Ambush on the other side, and the Soldiers within making Sallies out of the Town to help them that were engag'd at the Sea-side, those that lay in Ambush (having Scaling-Ladders ready mounted) gain'd the first Wall; which being known, the Carthaginian Commander fell furiously upon them, and kill'd 10000 upon the Place, and put the rest to flight, and burnt all the Roman Engines, battering Rams, Instruments to cast Stones, and all their Works and Fortifications. After this, the Carthaginians seeing that their Horse was of no use to them in the strait and narrow Passages, sent them away to Drapanum. Then presently came in strong Recruits to the Carthaginians; but the Romans (by the burning of their Engines, and through want of Provision, and the breaking out of the Plague amongst them,) were reduc'd to great Straits, (for only the Romans and their Confederates eat Flesh,) and so a great Distemper seiz'd them, that in a very few days there dy'd 10000, so that they were very earnest to breast up the Siege; but Hiero, King of Syracuse, sent them a great quantity of Corn, which again encourag'd them to continue. Afterwards the Romans chose another Consul, and gave the Command of the Army to Claudius the Consul, the Son of Appius, who taking charge of the Army, stop'd up the Mouth of the Port as his Predecessor had done, but the Sea bore down and carry'd all away again. Moreover Claudius thinking himself able to do great Things, furnish'd out 210 of the best Ships, and arriv'd at Drapanum, and there engag'd with the Carthaginians in a Sea-fight, and was beaten, and lost 117 of his Ships, and 20000 Men. There never happen'd so great a Fight at Sea, and so absolute a Victory, either among the Carthaginians, or any other about these times; and that which was more to be admir'd was, That tho' the Carthaginians were in so great Danger, and had only 90 Sail, yet they lost not one Man, and had but a very few wounded.—With 30 Sail, which intercepted the Corn and Provision belonging to the Romans, and carry'd it to Drapanum, and taking thence what remain'd that was useful, they came to Lilybeum, and loaded the Besieg'd with all kind of Provision. And now Carthalo the General came from Carthage with 70 long Ships or Men of War, and as many loaden with Corn, who also set upon the Romans and sunk some of their Vessels, and carry'd off four others that lay at Anchor. But after he heard that the Roman Fleet was set forth from Syracuse, having call'd a Council of War, he went out to Sea against them with 220 Sail of the best Ships he had. When the Fleets came in sight one of another near the Coasts of Gela, the Romans (struck with a Pannick Fear) attack'd about and hasted to Phintiades, leaving all their Transport Ships loaden with Provision, and other Vessels, behind them. But the Carthaginians making a swift Pursuit after them, there happened a fierce Engagement; In which, the Carthaginians sunk 50 of their great Men of War, and 60 other long Gallies, and disabled 13. After the Fight, the Carthaginians sail'd to the River Alycus, and there took care of their wounded Men. In the mean time, Junius the Consul not knowing what was done, loos'd from Messina with 36 long Gallies and many Ships of Burden, and having pass'd Pachynus, and gain'd the Port of Phintiades, upon Intelligence of what had happen'd he was amaz'd; and the Carthaginians making up upon him with their whole Navy, he burnt 12 of the most useless of his own Ships, and sail'd with the rest towards


Page 719

Syracuse, hoping to be secur'd by Hiero. But near Camarina a Storm arose, which drave him upon the Shallows and Rocks, the Winds being very fierce and boistrous: But the Carthaginians having recover'd Pachynus, anchor'd in a safe and secure Harbour. The Romans being thus distress'd, lost all their Transport Sips of Corn and Provision, and 105 long Gallies, so that there were only two that escap'd, and most of their Men perish'd. Junius with those two, and those Men that were preserv'd, came to the Camp at Lilybeum: He surpriz'd Erix in the night, and wall'd Aegothalus, which is now call'd Acellus, and put in there a Garrison of 800 Men. But when Carthalo had intelligence, that the Places about Eryx were possess'd by the Enemy, he wasted thither a considerable Body of Men in the night, and assaulted the Garrison of Agothalus and took the Castle, and so succeeding in his Design; some he put to the Sword, and the rest fled to Eryx, where was a Garrison of 3000 Men. In the first Sea-fight the Romans lost 35000 Men, and as many were taken Prisoners.

11. In the Territory of Catana there was a Castle call'd Italium, which was assaulted by Barcas the Carthaginian.—For the Counsels and Stratagems of the Commanders being communicated to their Friends, were discover'd by some Deserters to the Enemy, which terrifi'd the Soldiers, and possess'd them with an expectation of some imminent Danger. But Barcas arriving there in the night, landed his Men, and was the first that led them to Eryx (which was 30 Stages distant) and took the City, and put most of them to the Sword, and those that surviv'd he remov'd to Drapanum.—Always and in every Concern it's known by Experience, that the Observance of good Rule and Order has produc'd many good and great Effects.—

12. But Calatinus the Consul sail'd into Sicily with 300 long Gallies, and other Shipping, to the number of 1000 in the whole, and cast Anchor at the Mart-Town of the Eryceans. Hanno likewise arriv'd in the Sacred Island from Carthage with 250 long Gallies, and other Ships of Burden; thence he came to Eryx.—The Romans fell on, and a sharp and obstinate Engagement there was on both sides, in which the Carthaginians lost 117 Ships, and among those 20 with all their Men. But the Romans—80, 30 for their own Charge and Expence, and 50 to divide for Spoil, and 6000 Prisoners, (as Philinus reports,) but as others 4040; the rest of the Fleet got safe with a fair Wind to Carthage.—For Valour signifi'd nothing, when the Fleet was so dispers'd, that it had no body to fly unto, but was by the Sea (as it were) deliver'd up into the hands of the Enemy. So that after the War had continu'd between the Romans and the Carthaginians for the space of 24 years, and Lilybeum had been besieg'd 10 years, a Peace was concluded. 

Out of the 25th BOOK.

1. EPicurus the Philosopher, in his Book call'd Maximus, saith, That a Righteous Life is void of all Trouble and Disturbance; but an Unrighteous, nothing but Trouble and Sorrow. It contains much Matter in brief and certain Sentences, tending greatly to the Reformation of the Manners and Lives of Men: For Injustice is the greatest of all Evils, involving not only private Men, but (that we may sum up all at once) Nations, Kings and Kingdoms, in most miserable Calamities.—For the Spaniards gall them of the Baleary Islands, Africans, Carthaginians, and Ligureans, join'd with them of Carthage. And the Slaves, whose Parents were Grecians, on one side, who also rebell'd.—Then it was perfectly learnt by Experience, how far the Diligence of an expert Commander excell'd the blind and heady Vulgar, and the rash and ignorant Conduct of a rude Common Soldier.—So excellent a thing is Modesty in Commanding, that it enjoins nothing beyond the Power of Men.—But after their departure out of Sicily, the Carthaginian Mercenaries rose up in Arms against them for these Reasons.—They were unreasonable and excessive in their Demands for the Horses and Men which they had lost in Sicily.—And they were in War one with another 4 Years, and as many Months. But at length they were put to Death by Barcas the General, who had likewise perform'd notable Service in Sicily against the Romans.

2. But Amilcar the Carthaginian General in a short time enlarg'd the Bounds of his Country; for he advanc'd with his Fleet as far as to the Pillars of Hercules and the Gades. This City is a Colony of the Phenicians, lying in the farthest Corner of the Earth on the Sea side, and hath an Haven. Having subdu'd the Iberians and the Tartesians with Istolotius


Page 720

the General of the Celtae, and his Brother, he put most of them to the Sword, amongst whom were the Two Brothers, and several other Honourable Persons: And he receiv'd into his own Army 3000 of them that were prisoners. But Endort

•s

 got again together 50000 Men, but fled before he engag'd, and betook himself to an high Hill: where being beset and blockt up by Amilcar, he fled away again in the night, and most of his Army were cut off. Indortes himself at length fell into the Enemies hands, and Amilcar put out his Eies, and then with many Scoffs and Scorns Crucify'd him. But he discharg'd above 10000 other prisoners, and took in many Cities, some by f

•

ir Promises and persuasions: and others by force. Then Asdrubal the Son of Amilcar being sent by his Father-in-law to Carthage against the Numidians (who had rebell'd against the Carthaginians) kill'd 8000, and took 2000 prisoners: The rest were subdu'd and brought under Tribute. In the mean time Amilcar having gain'd many Cities in Spain, built a very large Town, which from its situation he call'd Acra Leuca; having afterwards besieg'd the City Helice, he sent away the greatest part of his Army, and Elephants into their Winter Quarters to the City he had lately built, and continu'd with the rest at the Siege. But Orisso the King (under pretence of coming in as a Friend to join with Amilcar) sucour'd the Besieg'd, and forc'd Amilcar to fly and raise his Siege; his Sons and Friends he order'd for their safety, to take one way by themselves, and he himself pass'd another, and being hotly pursu'd by the King, in taking a great River he was forc'd off his Horse by the violence of the Stream, and so drowned: But Hanniball and Asdruball his Sons got safe to Acra Leuca, or the White Citadell,——And tho' Amilcar dy'd many Ages before our time, yet History has left an Epitaph and Commemoration of his due praise. But Asdrubal his Son-in-law as soon as he heard of his Fatherin law's death, forthwith marched away, and came to Acra with above 100 Elephants. Being chosen General by the Army, and the Carthaginians, he pickt out 50000 Foot of old experienc'd Soldiers, 6000 Horse, and 200 Elephants. In the first place he ruin'd and broke in pieces King Orisso, then he put to the Sword all that were the occasion of Amilcar's flight, and got possession of Twelve Cities: and at length all the Cities of Spain. And having now celebrated a new Marriage, and taken the Daughter of the King of Spain to Wife, he was invested with full Power in the Government, by all the Spaniards. He afterwards built a City by the Sea-side which he call'd Carthage, and after this another, and aspir'd to exceed Amilcar in Power and Greatness. He had in his Army 60000 Foot, 8000 Horse, and 200 Elephants. But at length he was assassinated by one of his own Houshold, having been General Nine Years.

3. The Celtae with the Gauls entring into a War against the Romans, rais'd an Army of 200000 Men; and in the First Battle were victorious; and likewise in the Second, wherein one of the Roman Consuls were kill'd: tho' the Romans had an Army of 70000 Foot and 7000 Horse. However, tho' they were worsted in the Two First Battles, yet in the Third they gain'd a signal Victory, killing 40000 upon the place, and taking the rest prisoners—So that the greatest of their Kings cut his own Throat: but the other was taken alive. After this brave Exploit, Aemilius being made Consul, wasted the Country of the Gauls and Celtae, and took in many Cities and Castles, and filled the City of Rome with Spoils.

4. Hiero King of Syracuse supply'd the Romans with Corn in the Celtick War, and was paid for it when the War was ended.

5. The Army wanting a General after Asdrubal was slain, the Charthaginians unanimously chose Hannibal the Eldest Son of Amilcar to be their General—While the City Seguntum was Besieg'd by Hanniball, the Citizens got together all the Riches in the Temples, and all the Silver and Gold in the Houses, nay, till it came to the Jewels in the Womens Ears, and laid them on an heap, and melted them down, mixing Brass and Lead with the Gold and Silver to make them useless and invaluable: and having so done, they all valiantly made a Sally, and fought it out to the last Man, and all dy'd upon the place, not without a great slaughter first made of their Enemies. The Mothers likewise first kill'd their own Children, and then stifled themselves by the smoak of the Furnaces. And so Hanniball gain'd the Town without any benefit of Plunder: whom when the Romans demanded to be brought to Trial for his breach of the League, and could not prevail, they began the War call'd the Hannibal War.


Page 721

Out of the 26th BOOK.

Eclog. 1. THere was never any Poet or Historian, or any Learned Man of what Science soever, that could please all their Readers in every thing. Neither can any thing that is mortal, tho' it attain its end and design, gain the general approbation of all, so as to be wholly free from Exception and Censure. For neither * Phidias who was so admir'd for his Ivory Images: Nor * Praxiles that excellent Stone-cutter: Nor Appelles or Parrasius, who attain'd to the highest pitch of Art and Skill in Limning and Painting, could ever reach to that degree of Happiness, as to exhibit any piece of their several Arts, that was not in some respect capable of Censure. For who was a more Famous Poet than Homer; or an Orator than Demosthenes? Who more Just than Aristides and Solon? yet join'd as a Flaw to all their Excellencies there is an Oration that carps at them, and makes them as if they were all ignorant Fellows. For indeed being but Men, altho' they attained to eminent Perfection in their several Accomplishments, yet through Human Frailty, they fail'd and mistook in many things. However, some Men there are who discover both their Envy and Folly, who wilfully omit to give an account of what is commendable and praise-worthy; but where they have any colour to find fault, there they fix, and are unwilling ever to leave it, endeavouring by blackning another, to set forth the more their own Worth and Excellencies; not considering that every Art and peculiar Accomplishment is more to be judg'd of by enquiry into the thing it self, than by making conclusions from the partial and peevish Passion of another, But any would admire this industrious Folly of Detraction, whereby a person by blackening another, in truth loses his own Reputation.—There are some things that by a blind instinct, are naturally hurtful, as Frost, and Snow burn and blast the fairest and most pleasant Fruits; and the resplendent Whiteness of the Snow so dazles the Eyes, that it almost deprives them of their Sight: and so some Men that have neither Wit nor Will to do any thing that is commendable themselves, yet have Malice and Folly enough naturally, to judge and condemn the Actions of others: But it is the part of a prudent and understanding Man, always to attribute due praise to them, who by their Industry have prosecuted virtuous Designs: And where any have not been so successful as they desir'd, not to taunt at the infirmity of Humane Nature; But so much of these envious Men.

2. For as a brave Champion after he has spent much time in anointing himself, at length descends into the Lists—Having gain'd great Experience and an Habit.

3. Menodotus the Corinthian writ the Affairs of Greece in 14 Books. And Sosilus the Ilian the Acts of Hannibal in Seven.

4. Among the Romans a Legion consists of 5000 Men.

5. Men naturally flock to them that are in prosperity, but insult over those that are brought into Distress.—For the Soul presently to undergo a meer contrary Change, which is in its own nature unchangeable.

6. The City of Rhodes being ruin'd by a great Earthquake, Hiero the Syracusian bestow'd Six Talents of Silver towards the repairing of the Walls, and Silver Cauldrons of great value, besides Money: And let them have Corn to Transport free from Custom.

7. That which is now call'd Philopolis, was heretofore call'd Phiotis of Thebes, over all Thessaly.

8, For sost Beds, constant delicate Fare, and the use of all sorts of precious Ointments, unfitted them for toil and hardship.—For both their Bodies and Minds were habituated to Effeminacy and Luxuriousness.—For Men naturally can hardly brook Toil and Pains, and low Diet; but delight in Idleness and Luxury. For Hannibal with much Toil and Care gain'd Cities both from the Romans and Brutians, and took Crotona, and Besieg'd Rhegium. For from Hercules Pillars in the West to Crotona, he over-ran all the Roman Territories.


Page 722

Fragments out of the Books of Diodorus the Sicilian [that are lost] as they are in Photius his Bibliotheca.

Out of the 31st BOOK.

1. VVHile these things were doing, Ambassadors came to Rome from Rhodes, to beg pardon for what they had done. For in the War against Perseus they had seem'd to favour the King, and to break their League with the Romans. But not being able to accomplish any thing for which they were sent, they were greatly dejected, and solicited with Tears the great and principal Men of the City: Whereupon being introduc'd into the Senate by Antonius, one of the Tribunes of the People, Philophron was the first that open'd the matter, and business of their Embassy. And after him Astimedes; when they had made many Arguments and apt Discourses to prevail with the Senate, and at last according to the Proverb, had with the Swan concluded their mournful Ditty, they receiv'd an answer which presently freed from their fears: However they were sharply reprov'd, and fin'd for their Offences. So that it is evident how the most noble among the Romans (by whom the greatest Affairs are manag'd) strive which shall be most generous, and upon that account gain most Honour and Reputation. For in the Administration of publick Affairs elsewhere, one envies another. But the Romans praise and commend one another. So that while all endeavour to advance the publick Good, great and glorious things are Atchiev'd: but as to others, while they aim only at their own vain Glory, and envy the Successes one of another, they ruin their Country.

2. At length Aemilius took Perseus the last King of Macedonia, who had often enter'd into a League with the Romans, and as often appear'd in the Field with great Armies against them. And after the Victory Aemilius Triumph'd gloriously. And tho' Perseus was brought into so great miseries and calamities, as that the ruins and destructions which he suffer'd, can scarce be parallel'd by any Romance, yet was he not willing to part with his Life. For before the Senate had determin'd any thing relating to his punishment, one of the chief Officers of the City cast both him and his Children into the Goal Albinus. This Prison is a deep Dungeon of the bigness of a Chamber, capable of 9 Beds at the most: Dark and full of all sorts of filth and nastiness, by reason of the multitude of Men Condemn'd for capital Offences, that from time to time were thrust down there; and generally most of such Malefactors were put into this Place. So that many being shut up together in so strait a place, those miserable Creatures were even turn'd into Beasts: And in regard the Meat, Drink, and other necessaries which were brought them, were jumbled together into one Chaos and heap of Confusion, there arose thence such a stench that none that came near, were able to endure. In a most miserable Condition Perseus continu'd here for the space of 7 Days, insomuch that he begg'd relief, and some share of the Food of those strangers in Prison, who had only a stinted allowance. They out of compassion to this miserable Man, with great humanity and tears in their Eyes, gave him part of that small pittance they had, and withall offer'd him a Sword and a Rope, to use which of them he would at his pleasure, for the putting an end to his Life, Yet nothing seems so sweet as Life, even to the miserable; tho' they suffer what is equivalent to death it self in the mean time. To conclude, he had certainly ended his days in this extream misery, if Marcus Aemilius President of the Court (out of respect to the dignity of his Person, mov'd by the natural and innate humanity of the Romans) had not with some indignation mov'd the Senate on his behalf, putting them in mind, that tho' they fear'd not Men, yet they should bear some awe and reverence to Nemesis, who will take vengeance on them that use their power with Pride and Insolency. Upon this he was committed to a more moderate Confinement, and while he was seeding himself with fresh hopes, he ended his days agreeable to the former misfortunes of his Life: for after he had liv'd 2 Years in this fond love of Life, having displeas'd his barbarous Keepers they would not suffer him to sleep, and so he dy'd.

3. The Kings of Cappadocia say that they came from Cyrus King of Persia. They affirm likewise that they are descended from one of those Seven Persians that kill'd Magus. And they drew down their Pedegree from Cyrus thus: That Atossa was the Sister of Cambyses, and Daughter of Cyrus: That Gallus was the Son of Atossa and Pharnaces King of Cappadocia, Smerdis the Son of Gallus, and Artames the Son of Smerdis, and Artames had issue Anaphas (a brave and valian: Man) who was the Father of one of th

• Seven Persians. In this manner therefore


Page 723

do they make out their Consanguinity both to Cyrus and to Anaphas, who it's said was of so stout a Spirit, that before he would pay Tribute to the Persians, he abdicated his Government of Capadocia. After his death Anaphas his Son Reign'd in his stead, who dying, left his two Sons, Ditamus and Arimneus, and that Ditamus took upon him the Government, (a Warlike Prince, and in all respects accomplish'd for the Kingdom) who joining Battle with the Persians, and behaving himself with great Gallantry and Resolution, was kill'd in the Fight, and his Son Ariamnes succeeded him in the Kingdom. To whom were born two Sons, Ariarathes and Holophernes: And after he had Reign'd 50 Years, he dyed having done nothing memorable, and the Elder of his Sons Ariarathes succeeded him, who it's said bore so great and tender a Love to his Brother, that he advanc'd him to the highest degree of Honour and Preferment. And sent him to join with the Persians in the War against the Aegyptians, who after return'd loaden with many and large marks of Honour conferr'd upon him by Ochus, for his Valour, and dy'd in his own Country, leaving behind him two Sons, Ariarathes and Arysses. And that his Brother the King of Cappadocia ( having no legal Issue) adopted Ariarathes his Brother's Eldest Son. About this time Alexander the Macedonian King ruin'd the Persian Empire, and presently after dy'd. But Perdiccas who had the chief Command, sent Eumenes as General into Cappadocia, who subdu'd and kill'd Ariarathes and brought Cappadocia and all the bordering Territories into the the power of the Macedonians. But Ariarathes, the adopted Son of the former King, despairing for the present to regain the Kingdom, with a few followers fled into Armenia. But Eumenes and Berdiccas both dying not long after, and Antigonus and Seleucus imbroil'd in War one with another, Ariarathes with the help of Arcloathus King of Armenia (who furnish'd him with forces) routed and kill'd Amyntas the Macedonian General, and presently drave all the Macedonians out of the Country, and recover'd his Kingdom. He had 3 Sons, the Eldest of which, Ariamnes succeeded him, who join'd in affinity with Antiochus Theos, and Married his Eldest Son Ariarathes to Stratonice, Antiochus his Daughter. And for the great love he had to him above all his Children, 

•

e set the Diadem upon his Head, and made him Co-parther with him in the Kingdom: and after the death of his Father he reign'd alone. Then he dying, Ariarathes his Son, of a very tender Age, succeeded. He Marry'd Antiochide (the Daughter of Antiochus the great) a very subtile Woman: Who because she bore no Children, to make up that defect, contriv'd (unknown to her Husband) a suppositious Birth, as if she had Born two Sons, which were call'd Ariarathes and Holofernes. But not long after, she conceiv'd in reality, and unexpectedly was deliver'd of two Daughters and one Son call'd Mithridates. Upon this she acquainted her Husband with the Imposture, and so wrought with him that she prevail'd with him to send away the Eldest of the two Sons with a small Sum of Money to Rome, and the other into Ionia, lest they should challenge the Kingdom from him that was lawful Heir to the Crown; who after he came to Man's Estate (its said) was call'd Ariarathes, and was Educated in all the learning of Greece, and was a Person accomplish'd with all manner of Virtuous Endowments. That the Father (who was wonderfully belov'd by the Son) strove all he could to repay his Son's love again: And their mutual endear'd affections one towards another went so far, that the Father would have given up the whole Kingdom into the Hands of the Son, but the Son on the other side told him, he could not possibly accept of so great an advantage from living Parents. After therefore his Father dy'd he succeeded, spending the rest of his life very virtuously and in the study of Philosophy: So that Cappadocia which was before little known to the Grecians, was now a desireable place of Residence for all learned Men: He renew'd the League of Peace and Friendship with the Romans. And in this manner is the Pedegree of those that have hitherto reign'd in Cappadocia, brought down from Cyrus.

4. For Statues are made of such Romans as are of noble Families, in near resemblance of the Persons, and according to the whole proportion of their Bodies. For all their life long, they have some, who observe their Mien and Deportment, and the special remarks of every part exactly. Likewise every Mans Ancestor stands in that Habit, and in those Ornaments, (and is so clearly represented) that every one knows the Person as soon as he looks upon him, and to what degree of Honour every one was advanc'd, and what Share and Interest they had in the Commonwealth.

5. Memmius was sent General with an Army into Spain. But the Lusitanians just upon his Landing, fell upon him, and routed him, and cut off most of his Army. When this success of the Iberians was nois'd abroad, the Araucians (who look'd upon themselves to be far better Soldiers than the Iberians) slighted and contemn'd the Enemy, and upon this ground and confidence, chiefly it was that in their general Council they determined to make War upon the Romans.


Page 724

Out of the 32d. BOOK.

Fragment 1. ALexander fled out of the Fight with 500 Men to a City in Arabia, call'd Abas, to Diocles the Prince there; with whom he had before entrusted his Son Antiochus, a Child of very tender Age. Afterwards the Chief Commanders who were about Heliades (and had been with Alexander) plotting to assassinate Alexander, sent away some Messengers privately from among themselves, promising secretly to Murder him. Demetrius consenting to what they propos'd, they became both Traitors and Murderers of their Prince. We might be justly condemn'd if we should pass in silence that which happen'd before the death of Alexander, tho' for the strangeness of the thing it be scarce credible. King Alexander a little before these times, consulted with the Oracle in Silicia, where they say is the Temple of Apollo of Sarpedon: and it is reported that the Oracle made Answer, that he should take heed of that place which should bring forth a God of two shapes. This Divine Hint was then taken for a Riddle: but after the King was dead, the Truth was discover'd in this manner. For in Abas a City of Arabia dwelt one Diophantus a Macedonian. This Man Marry'd an Arabian Woman, by whom he had a Son, call'd after his own Name, and a Daughter call'd Heraides: His Son dy'd while he was young: But he gave a Portion to his Daughter when she was grown up, and Marry'd her to one Semiades, who, after he had liv'd with his Bride one year, undertook a long Journey: In the mean time (it is reported) that Heraides fell into a strange and wonderful distemper, such as is scarce credible. For she had a vehement Inflammation, and a great Swelling at the bottom of her Belly, which increas'd to that degree, that it brought her into a violent Feaver. The Physitians conceiv'd that it was an Ulcer about the neck of the Matrix; Refrigerating Medicines and Plaisters therefore were apply'd to bring down and cool those hot burning Tumors; upon the Seventh day the Humour burst, and out started from the Privy Parts of Heraides, a Man's Yard with the Testicles compleat. This hapned when neither Physitian nor any other Stranger was present, but only the Mother and Two Servants: who with the strangeness of the thing, were struck into a Maze. However, they made it their Care and Business to cure her, and kept all private to themselves. And when she was recover'd, she still wore a Womans Habit, and manag'd the Affairs of the House as Wives use to do. But those who were privy to what had hapned, suspected her to be an Hermaphrodite. And so, tho' formerly in carnal Embraces with her Husband, there might be no natural copulation, yet she had been seen frequently to have the carnal knowledge of Women. In the mean time while all things were kept secret, Semiades returns and demands his Wife, (as was very fit and reasonable.) And being continually urgent and pressing for the society of his Wife, the Father refus'd, and yet was asham'd to declare the reason, which occasion'd great dissention, so far as that the Husband resolv'd to sue the Father for his Wife: So that this wonder was expos'd to the publick view, like a Play upon the Stage, by the means of a criminal Accusation. The Person contended for was present in Court when the Matter was Banded to and fro, on either parties behalf; Upon which, the Judges were in doubt whether the Power and Authority of the Husband over the Wife, should be preferr'd before that of the Father over the Daughter. At length, when they were ready to give Sentence that the Wife should abide with her Husband, she discover'd the truth of the whole matter, and with great boldness and assurance of Mind threw off her feign'd Habit, and discover'd her self to be a Man to all that were there present, and in a surly manner utter'd these words. Can any compel one Man to Marry another? Upon which all were amaz'd, and set up a shout of Admiration at the strangeness of the thing. Heraides being now discover'd, afterwards (as is reported) chang'd her Womans Attire and put on the Habit of a young Man. And it's likewise said, that the Physitians when they saw those parts of the Woman, judg'd that the nature of the Male lay hid in the Womb of the Female (in a place in shape like an Egg) and that in the thin skarf or skin, that wrap'd about the Yard, was an unusual hole, through which the Urine pass'd. And that therefore they declar'd that the place first being pierc'd and made like an hollow pipe, should be turn'd into a green Wound, and at length brought to a Scab, and when the Yard was reduc'd to it's proper shape, that sutable Remedies should be apply'd for the cure of the Patient. Heraides was afterwards call'd Diophantus, and serv'd in the King's Camp in a Regiment of Horse, and then resided with the King at Abas. At that time therefore was the meaning of the Oracle understood, which was before dark and obscure; when the


Page 725

King came to Abbas, where this Hermaphrodite was Born. It's reported that Semiades at length (through love he bore to her) upon the account of their former familiarity (and through shame of his unnatural Marriage) was able to bear up no longer, but after he had left all his Goods to Diophantus, and made him his Heir, broke his Heart and died. So she that had been a Woman, carry'd it with the courage of a Man, and he that was ever a Man, appear'd to be more pusillanimous than any Woman. The like to this fell out about 30 Years after in the City of Epidaurus. There was a young Maid in Epidaurus (as the report goes) an Orphan, whose name was Callo. This Maid had no passage in her privy parts, but about the Pecten there was a place like an issue through which the Urine pass'd ever from the time of her Birth. When she came to a mature Age, she was Married to one of the Citizens with whom she liv'd two Years, and tho' she was not capable of natural Embraces as a Woman, yet she was forc'd to endure those that were preternatural, or besides nature. But afterwards a Tumor arose near the Pecten which put her to exceeding torment, so that many Physitians were sent for to consult together, and all despair'd of Curing her: But an Apothecary undertook the Cure, and made an incision in the place, whence came forth a Mans Yard with Testicles, but solid without any passage. And when all were amaz'd at the strangeness of the thing, the Apothecary suppli'd the parts with what was deficient. First he made an incision into the end of the Yard, and pierc'd it even to the Uretor, and thrusting down a small silver Instrument, brought away the Urin and other excrementitious humours: But the place where the Issue was, he first turn'd into a green Wound, and then heal'd it up. Having perform'd this extraordinary Cure, he demanded a double reward; For he said he had undertaken to Cure a sick Woman, and had now set right a young Man. Callo hereupon laid aside her Wheel and other effeminate Imployments, and took upon her the Name of Callon, adding only the last Letter N to her former Name. Some say, that before her Transformation, she was the Priestess of Ceres, and because she shew'd to Men those things that were not to be seen, this judgment fell upon her for her Prophaness. They report that at Naples and several other places the like hath happen'd; not that the two Sexes of Man and Woman are really form'd by Nature in two several shapes (for that is impossible) but that Nature is deceiv'd in fashioning the Members of the Body to the amazement and deceit of—the beholders. We have therefore judg'd these strange Events which are brought down to us both by Writings and Traditions, worthy to be taken notice of, in respect both of their pleasure and profit to the readers. For many looking upon such things as these, as Monsters in Nature, are thereby infected with a kind of Superstition: Not only private Men but whole Cities and Nations. For it's reported that a little before the beginning of the Martian War, there dwelt an Italian near Rome, who having Marry'd such a one (as is before describ'd) complain'd to the Senate, upon which, they out of a fond Superstition, and perswaded thereunto by the Truscan Augures, order'd the Hermaphrodite to be burnt. And thus (they say) this poor Creature was most unjustly doom'd to destruction; and was ignorantly judg'd a Monster, because she had some resemblance of both Sexes. And not long after there happen'd the like at Athens; where the thing not being understood, (they say) the Man was burnt alive. Some there are that tell idle stories how that there are Hyaene
(for so they call such as are both Men and Women) who have Carnal copulation one with another, according to each Sex by turns every other Year: When in truth there is no such thing. For although both Sexes have a peculiar and distinct nature without participation one with another, yet by a false formation the inconsiderate spectator may be impos'd upon. For to the Female (which is naturally such) is join'd something like unto a Mans Yard, and so on the other hand to the natural Male, something like to the privy parts of a Woman. The same reason holds in all kind of living Creatures, there being many and various sorts of prodigious Births; but such as never receive any nourishment, nor can ever come to any perfection. But what hath been said, may suffice for the reforming this superstition.

Frag. 2. They say that the Walls of Carthage were 40 Cubits high, and 22 broad But tho' they were so, yet the Roman Valour and Engines were too strong for all their Defences and Fortifications, for the City was taken and raz'd to the ground.

Frag. 3. Manasses (called Masinissa by the Latines) who Reign'd in Africk, and was always a Friend to the Roman, lived Ninety years in strength, and firm health, and left Ten Sons behind him when he dy'd, whom he committed to the Care and Guardianship of the Romans. He was of a strong Body, and from a Child inur'd to hardship: in what ever business he was engag'd, he would keep close to it all the day immoveable; he would never rise from his seat till night, spending the whole day in laborious Projects


Page 726

and Contrivances. When he was once on Horseback he would ride continually night and day, and never be weary. A great instance of the health and strength of his Body, was, That when he was almost 90 years of age, he had a Son but 4 years old, yet of a very strong Body. He was so extraordinarily given to Husbandry, that he left to every one of his Sons 10000 Plethras of Land, Adorn'd with all manner of delightful Improvements, and Instruments necessary for that purpose. He Reign'd with great commendation 60 years.

Fragment 4, Nicomedes after he had routed his Father Prusias, and forc'd him to fly to the Temple of Jupiter for shelter, there kill'd him, and by that wicked and bloody Murther got possession of the Kingdom of Bythinia.

Fragment 5, The Lusitanians at first not having an expert General, were easily vanquish'd by the Romans; but after Viriathus became their General, they did them much mischief. He was of them that inhabited the Sea-coasts, a Shepheard upon the Mountains from his Childhood; By nature of an healthful Constitution, in strength and agility of Body far exceeding all the Iberians. For he had inur'd himself to a sparing Diet, much Labour and Toil, and to no more sleep than was absolutely necessary. He likewise continually carry'd Iron weapons, and was famous for his Conflicts both with wild Beasts and Robbers, and at length was made General; upon which a whole drove of Thieves and Rogues on the sudden flock'd about him. Being very successful in many Battles, he was not only admir'd for his other Excellencies, but likewise for his Military Conduct. Besides, in distribution of the spoils he was very just, allotting to every Man proportionable to his Merits and Deserts. Still proceeding and prospering he approv'd himself to be a Prince, rather than a Thief and a Robber. He fought several Battles with the Romans and came off Conqueror, insomuch as he routed Vitilius the Roman General, broke his Army and took him prisoner, and then put him to death. And many other brave Exploits he perform'd, till Fabius was appointed to go out as General against him, and from that time he began to decline. But not long after rallying his Men, and bravely managing the matter against Fabius, he forc'd him to Terms dishonourable to the Roman Name, But Coepio who was afterwards General against Viriathus, slighted all the former Conditions as of no effect, and often routed Viriathus, whom (now being reduc'd to those straits, as that he su'd for terms of Peace) he caus'd to be treacherously assassinated by some of his own Servants: and striking a Terror into Tantalus his Successor, and all his Army, he impos'd what Terms and Conditions he pleas'd upon them, and in the conclusion gave them the City and Land about for their Habitation.

Out of the 34th. Book.

Fragm. 1. KIng * Antiochus Besieg'd Jerusalem. But the Jews stood it out for some time: But when all their Provision was spent, they were forc'd to send Ambassadors to him, to treat upon Terms. Many of his Friends perswaded him to Storm the City, and to root out the whole Nation of the Jews; For that they only of all People, hated to Converse with any of another Nation, and treated them all as Enemies: And they suggested to him that their Ancestors were driven out of Aegypt, as impious and hateful to the Gods: For their Bodies being overspread, and infected with the Itch and Leprosie, (by way of expiation) they got them together, and as prophane and wicked wretches, expell'd them out of their Coasts: And that those who were thus expell'd, seated themselves about Jerusalem, and being after imbodyed into one Nation (call'd the Nation of the Jews) their hatred of all other Men descended with their Blood to Posterity. And therefore they made strange Laws, and quite different from other People: Never will Eat or Drink with any of another Nation, or wish them any prosperity. For said they, Antiochus surnam'd Epiphanes having subdu'd the Jews, entred into the Temple of God, into which none was to enter by their Law but the Priest; in which when he found the Image of a Man with a long Beard, carv'd in Stone sitting upon an Ass, he took it to be Moses who built Jerusalem, and settled the Nation, and establish'd by Law all their wicked Customs and Practices, abounding in hatred and enmity to all other Men. Antiochus therefore abhorring this their contrariety to all other People, us'd his utmost endeavour to abrogate their Laws. To that end he sacrific'd a great Swine at the Image of Moses, and at the Altar of God that stood in the outward Court, and sprinkled them with the blood of the Sacrifice. He commanded likewise that the Sacred Books, whereby they were taught to hate all other Nations, should be besprinkled with the Broth made of the Swines flesh: And he put out the Lamp (call'd by them Immortal) which was ever burning


Page 727

in the Temple. Lastly he forc'd the high Priest and the other Jews to eat Swines flesh When Antiochus his Friends had debated and considered of these things, they were very earnest with him to root out the whole Nation, or at least that he would abrogate their Laws, and compel them to change their former manner of living and conversation. But the King being of a generous Spirit, and mild disposition receiv'd Hostages, and pardon'd the Jews: But demolish'd the Walls of Jerusalem, and took the Tribute that was due.

2. The Affairs of Sicily after the overthrow of—Carthage—having continu'd succesful and prosperous for the space of 60 Years; at length broke out the servile War upon the following occasions. The Sicilians (through the enjoyment of a long Peace) being grown very Rich, brought up abundance of Slaves; who being driven in Droves like so many Herds of Cattle from the several places where they were Bred and brought up, were stigmatiz'd with certain Marks burnt into their Bodies: Those that were Young, they us'd for Shepherds, others for such services as they had occasion. But their Masters were very rigid and severe with them, and took no care to provide either necessary food, or raiment for them, insomuch as that most of them were forc'd to Rob and Steal, to get necessaries: So that all places were full of slaughters and murders, as if an Army of Thieves and Robbers had been dispers'd all over the Island. The Governours of the Provinces (to say the truth) did what they could to suppress them: But because they durst not punish them, in regard their Masters (who had the sole Command and Power over their Servants) were Rich, and Men in Authority, every Governor in his several Province was forc'd to connive at the thefts and rapines that were committed. For many of the Masters being Roman Knights, and Judges of the accusations (brought before the Praetors) were a Terror even to the Governors themselves. The Slaves therefore being in this distress, and vilely beaten and scourg'd beyond all reason, were now resolv'd not to bear any longer. Therefore meeting together from time to time as they had opportunity, they consulted how to free themselves from the Yoke of Servitude they lay under, till at length they really executed what they had before agreed upon. There was a Syrian a Servant of Antigenes of Enna, born in the City of * Apanea a Magitian and Conjurer: He pretended to tell future Events (or Fortunes) discover'd to him as he said by the Gods in his Dreams, and impos'd upon many by this kind of practice. Then he proceeded further, and not only foretold things to come, reveal'd to him in Dreams, but pretended that he saw the Gods when he was awake, and they declar'd to him what was to come to pass. And tho' he thus juggled, and play'd the fool, yet by chance many things afterwards prov'd true. And whereas those things which never happen'd, were by none censur'd, but those which did come to pass were every where applauded, he grew more and more into esteem. At length by some trick of Art or other, he would breath flames of Fire out at his Mouth as from a burning Lamp, and so would prophecy as if he had been at that time inspir'd by Apollo. For he put Fire with some combustible marter to feed it, into a Nut-shell or some such thing bor'd through on both sides, then putting it into his Mouth, and forcing his Breath, upon it there would issue out both sparks and flames of Fire. Before the defection, this Juggler boasted that the Goddess Syria had appear'd to him, and told him that he should Reign, and this he declar'd not only to others but often to his own Master. The thing being become a common jest and subject of laughter, Antigenes was so taken with this jest, and ridiculous conceit of the Man, he took Eunus (for so he was call'd) with him to Feasts and Repasts, and several questions being put to him concerning the Kingdom, he was ask'd how he would deal with every one that was there present at the Table: He readily went on with his story, and told them that he would be very kind to his Masters, and like a Conjurer using many monstrous Magical terms, and expressions, he set all the Guests a laughing, upon which some of them as a reward gave him large Messes from the Table, desiring him to remember their kindness when he came to his Kingdom: But all this jesting came at length really to end in the advancing of him to the Kingdom; and all those who at the Feasts by way of ridicule had been kind to him, he rewarded in earnest.

But the beginning of the defection was in this manner, There was one Damophilus of Enna, a Man by reason of his Wealth, of a great Spirit, but of a proud and haughty disposition. This Man above all measure was cruel and severe to his Servants; and his Wife Megallis strove to exceed her Husband in all kind of cruelty and inhumanity towards the Slaves. Upon this, they that had been thus cruelly us'd, were inrag'd like wild Beasts, and plotted together to rise in Arms and cut the Throats of their Masters. To this end they appli'd themselves to Eunus, and desir'd to know of him whether the Gods would succeed them in their design. He incouraging them declar'd that they should prosper in what they had in hand, using (according to his former manner) Conjuring


Page 728

words and expressions, and charging them to be speedy in their Execution. Whereupon they forthwith rais'd a Body of 400 Slaves, and upon the first opportunity (oh a sudden) broke in Arm'd into the City Enna, led by their Captain Eunus, by his juggling tricks, flaming out Fire at his Mouth. Then entring the Houses, they made so great a slaughter, as that they spar'd not even the sucking Children, but pluckt them violently from their Mothers Breasts and dash'd them against the Ground: It cannot be express'd how vilely and filthily (for the satisfying of their Lusts) they us'd Mens Wives in the very presence of their Husbands. With these Villains join'd a multitude of Slaves that were in the City, and first executed their rage and cruelty upon their Masters, and then fell a murdering others.

In the mean time Eunus heard that Damophilus and his Wife were in some Orchards near the City, he sent therefore some of his rabble thither, who brought them with their Hands ty'd upon their Backs, loading them all along the Way as they past with scoffs and scorns; only they declar'd that they would be kind in every respect to his Daughter, for her pity and compassion towards the Servants, and her readiness always to be helpful to them. They that were sent for Damophilus and Megallis his Wife to the City, brought them into the Theatre, whither all the Rabble that made a defection flockt. There Damophilus pleading earnestly for his Life, and moving many with what he said, Hermias and Zexis loaded him with many bitter accusations, and call'd him a Cheat and Dissembler; and not waiting what would be determin'd by the People concerning him, the one ran him through with a Sword, and the other cut of his Head with an Ax. Then they made Eunus King, not for his Valour or Skill in Martial affairs, but upon the account of his extraordinary Art in Juggling, and that he was the Head and Author of the Defection, and for that his Name seem'd to portend and to be a good Omen, that he would be kind to his Subjects. Being therefore made General (with absolute Power) to order and dispose of all things as he pleas'd, an Assembly was call'd, and he put all the Prisoners to death except such as were skilful in making of Arms, whom he forth with set on Work; as for Megallis he delivered her up to the will of the Women Slaves, to take their revenge of her as they thought fit: Who after they had whipp'd and tormented her, threw her down a steep precipice. And Eunus himself kill'd his own Master Antigenes and Pytho. At length putting the Crown upon his Head, and grac'd with all the Ensigns of Royalty, he caus'd his Wife (who was a Syrian, and of the same City) to be own'd as Queen, and chose such as he judg'd to be most prudent to be of his privy Council. Amongst whom was one Achaeus by Name, and an Achaean by Nation, a wise Man and a good Soldier: Having therefore got together in the space of Three days above 6000 Men, Arm'd with what they could by any ways or means lay their Hands upon, and being join'd with others, who were all surnish'd either with Axes, Hatchets, Slings, Bills, or Stakes sharppen'd and burnt at one End, or with Spits, he ravag'd and made spioil all over the Country. And being at length join'd with an infinite number of Slaves, they grew to that height and boldness as to engage in a War with the Roman Generals: And often in several Battles got the Victory, by overpowr'ing them with Number; having now with him above 10000 Men.

In the mean time, one Cleon a Cilicean was the Author of another desection of the Slaves, and now all were in hopes that this unruly Rabble would fall together by the Ears one with another, and so Sicily would be rid of them through the mutual slaughters and destructions amongst themselves. But contrary to all Mens hopes and expectations, they join'd Forces together; and Cleon was observant in every thing to the Commands of Eunus, and serv'd General under him as his Prince, having 5000 Men of his own Soldiers. Thirty days were now expir'd since the first beginning of this Rebellion: And presently after a Battle was fought with Lucius Hypsius (who coming from Rome Commanded 8000 Sicilians) in which Fight the Rebels got the day, who were then 20000, and in a very short time after, their Army increas'd to 200000 Men. And although they fought with the Romans themselves, yet they often came off Conquerors, and were very seldom beaten. This being nois'd abroad, a defection began at Rome by 150 Slaves that conspir'd against the Government. The like in Attica by 1000, the like at Delos and many other Places. But those in the several Places (who had intrusted their Concerns in their Hands) to prevent the mischief from growing further, made a quick dispatch, and fell upon them on the sudden, and put them all to death, and so those that remain'd and were ready to break out into Rebellion, were reduc'd to more sound and sober thoughts.

But in Sicily the disorders more and more increas'd: For Cities were taken, and their Inhabitants made Slaves, and many Armies were cut off by the Rebells, until


Page 729

such time as Rupilius the Roman General recover'd Tauromenium, after the Besieg'd had been reduc'd to that extremity of Famine (by a sharp and close Siege) as that they began to eat their own Children, and the Men their Wives; and at length Butcher'd one another for Food. There he took Comanus the Brother of Cleon, who was endeavouring to escape out of the City while it was besieg'd. At last Sarapion a Syrian, having betray'd the Cittadel, all the Fugitives fell into his hands, whom having first scourg'd, he afterwards crucified. Thence he march'd to Enna, and by a long Siege reduc'd them into such straits, as that there was no hopes left to escape. Afterwards having slain Cleon their General (who had made a Sally out of the City and fought lik a Hero) he expos'd his Body to open view; and not long after this City likewise was betray'd into his Hands, which otherwise could never have been taken by force, by reason of the natural Strength of the Place. And as for Eunus, he like a Coward fled with 600 of his Guards to the tops of certain high Rocks, where those that were with him (foreseeing their inevitabe ruin, for Rupilius pursued them close) cut one anothers Throats. But Eunus the juggling King (out of fear) hid himself in some Caves, he had found out for that purpose; whence he was pluckt out with four others of his Gang, viz. his Cook, his Barber, he that rubb'd him in the Bath, and he that in the midst of his Cups was his Jester. To conclude he was thrown into the Goal, and there eaten up of Lice, and so ended his days at * Morgantina by a death worthy the former wickedness of his Life. Rupilius afterwards with a small body of Men, (marching all over Sicily) presently clear'd the Country of Theeves and Robbers. This Eunus King of the Robbers call'd himself Antiochus, and all his followers Syrians.

Out of the 36th. BOOK.

ABout the time that Marius in a great Battle routed Bocchus and Jugurtha, the African Kings, and slew many thousands of the Africans, and afterwards took Jugurtha himself (deliver'd up to him by Bocchus, to gain favour and pardon from the Romans for his making War upon them,) the Romans themselves were in great perplexity by reason of the many losses they had sustain'd by the Cimbrians, who then ravag'd and harrass'd all the Countrey of Gall. And in further aggravation of what they suffer'd, at the very same time came some out of Sicily, who gave an account of many thousand Slaves that were there risen up in Arms. Whereupon the whole Roman Commonwealth was in such straits, that they knew not which way to turn themselves, having lost 60000 Men in Gall, in the War against the Cimbrians, and they had not then Soldiers sufficient for a new Expedition. And besides, (before the Rebellion of the Slaves in Sicily) there were Defections that disturb'd—the State in Italy; but they were short and inconsiderable, as if God had appointed these for Omens and Presages of the great Rebellion in Sicily. The first rising was at Nusiaeria, where 30. Servants entred into a Conspiracy, but they were presently executed. The second was at Capua where 200 were got up in Arms, but they were likewise in a short time supprest. The third hapned after a strange manner, which was thus, there was one Titus Minutius a Roman Knight, who had a very rich Man to his Father, he chanc'd to fall in Love with another Man's Servant who was very beautiful, and having enjoy'd her, he was the more wonderfully inflam'd, and even to Madness, insomuch as he would needs buy her of her Master; who being with much ado prevail'd with to part with her, the Lover at length bought her for Seven * Attick Talents, and li¦mited a certain time for the payment of the Money, to which time the greatness of his Fathers Estate procur'd him Credit: But now, when the day of payment was come, he had not the Money then ready, but pray'd forbearance for 30 days longer. That time being run up, the Creditor demanded then his Money, but the Lover knew not how to perform his Word, and yet his Love continu'd still as hot as ever. At length a wicked design came into his Head, which put him on to lay a trap for them that demanded the Money, and to that end to take upon him the state and dignity of a Monarch. To which purpose he bought 500 Arms of all sorts, and appointed a day for payment; and being trusted, withdrawing himself privately into a certain Field, he stirr'd up his own Slaves to a defection to the number of 400; and putting on the Diadem and Purple, and assuming all the other Badges and Ensigns of Royalty, declar'd himself King, the deliverer of the Slaves. In the first place he caus'd all those who demanded the Money he had given for the young Woman to be scourg'd, and then cut off their Heads. Then he entred the


Page 730

next Towns with his arm'd Slaves, and those that came readily to join with him, he furnish'd with Arms, and kill'd all that oppos'd him. Having in a short time got together above 700, he divided them into Companies; and then Fortifying and Intrenching himself, he receiv'd all the Slaves that ran away from their Masters. The Rebellion being nois'd at Rome, the Senate (by the help of prudent advice) gave a stop to the mischief, and happily supprest it.

The care and management of the business for the reducing and punishing of the fugitive Slaves was committed to Lucius Lucullus, who was the only General that was then in the City, who rais'd 600 Men in Rome, and with them the same day march'd to Capua, where he listed 4000 Foot, and 400 Horse. When Minutius heard with what speed Lucullus was making towards him, he possess'd himself of a strong Hill, having with him 3500 Men. In the first Engagement the Fugitives by the advantage of the higher Ground got the better, afterwards Lucullus brib'd Apollonius Minutius his General, to betray his Confederates; withall promising him upon the security of the publick Faith, that he should have his pardon. Whereupon he set upon the Work, and seizing of Minutius, he (to avoid the punishment he fear'd for his Rebellion) ran himself through the Body; the rest were all presently cut off except Apellonius: And these were Prologues to that great Defection in Sicily, whose beginning was thus occasion'd: In the expedition of Marius against the Cimbrians, the Senate had given a Commission to raise Men out of the Countries beyond the Seas; to which end Marius sent Ambassadors to Nicomedes King of Bithynia to help him with some Men. But he return'd answer that most of the Bithynians were violently taken away for Slaves by the Publicans, and were dispers'd here and there through the Provinces. Upon which the Senate decreed, That no Freeman belonging to any of the Roman Allies should in any Province be forc'd to be Servants or Slaves, and that the Proconsuls should take care to see them all set free. In pursuance of this Order Licinius Nerva then Praetor in Sicily (having first consulted with the Judges) manumitted so many, as that in a few days above 800 were set at Liberty. So that all the Slaves in Sicily were hereby presently incourag'd, and grew high Crested in hopes of liberty. The Magistrates therefore address'd themselves to the Praetor or Proconsul, and desir'd him to forbear making any more free. Hereupon he (whether brib'd or to curry favour) laid aside the former determination of the Judges, and with checks and foul words, sent them that came to him to be made free back to their Masters. Upon this the Servants enter'd into a Conspiracy; and after they came from Syracuse, and were got together at the grove of Palicum, they consulted concerning their intended Rebellion. This boldness of the Slaves began to make a noise in many places of the Island: Amongst others 30 Servants of two rich Brothers in the Countrey of the Anycillians were the first that appear'd for their liberty, whose Leader was one Varius. These in the first place kill'd their Masters, when they were asleep in their Beds. Then away they went to the next Towns, and stirr'd up all the Servants and Slaves there to appear for the gaining of their liberty, of whom came in flocking to them in that one Night, to the number of 120 and upwards. Upon this they possess'd themselves of a place naturally strong of it self, which they endeavour'd to make stronger by art and labour, where 80 more well armed came in to them. Licinius Nerva hastens out against them with a purpose to put a stop to their Ravages, but all his labour was in vain. Seeing therefore that the Place was not to be taken by force, he sought how to gain it by Treachery: For he had private Correspondence with one Caius Titinius sirnam'd Gadaeus, whom he wrought upon to be the Instrument of accomplishing his design, promising him safety and protection. This Man had been condemn'd to dye two Years before, but had made an escape, and had Robb'd and Murther'd many Freemen in that Province, but never in the least injur'd any Servant. Titinius with a great Body of Slaves came to this Fort where the Rebels had posted themselves, as if he design'd to join with them in making War upon the Romans: Who being willingly and kindly receiv'd by them, and for his Valour made their General, he at length betray'd the Fort, upon which some of the Rebels were kill'd in Fight, and the lest out of fear of what they should suffer, if they were taken Prisoners, threw themselves down headlong from the top of the Rock. And in this manner was the first rising of the Slaves supprest.

But the Soldiers were no sooner got to their Quarters, but news was brought that about 80 Slaves had caus'd a Tumult to be rais'd, and had cut the Throat of Publius Cloni¦us a Roman Knight, and that now their number was much increas'd. And to aggravate the matter the Praetor being ill advis'd, had disbanded most of his Army, by reason whereof he was so slow, that he gave time to the Rebels the more to strengthen themselves. However he march'd out against them, with those he then had. As soon as


Page 731

he pass'd the River Alba he turn'd aside from the Fugitives, who were then lodg'd upon Mount Caprianus, and arrived at Heraclea. Upon this, a Report being spread of the Cowardice of the General as if he durst not attack them, very many Slaves were encouraged to join in the Defection: Many therefore flocking in (furnishing themselves as well as they could for a Battel) there were above 800 in Seven days time that took up Arms. And presently after they amounted to 2000. But the General at Heraclea being inform'd that their number was increasing, sent Marcus Titinius as chief Commander against them, inforcing him with 600 Men out of the Forts at Enna. This Titinius fought the Rebels, who (having the advantage both of Place and Number) routed him and kill'd many of his Men, and the rest threw away their Arms, and with much difficulty saved themselves by flight. By this means the Runagades on a sudden got such a great number of Arms, that they were more firmly resolved to persist in their Rebellion, so that now most of the Slaves were in Arms. The Defection every day increasing, the Number amounted in a short time so high, as none ever suspected it could, insomuch that within a few Days they were above 6000; who having now call'd a Council of War, and debated Matters in reference to the Management of Affairs, in the first place they chose a King call'd Salvius, a Fortune-teller, and one that in the Womens Sports and Shews with his Pipes, acted the Part of a Fool and Madman. But having now gain'd a Kingdom, he wav'd living in Cities, as being the Nurseries of Sloth and Effeminateness. After, he divided the Army into three Bodies; over each of which he appointed a Captain, and order'd them to make Inroads up and down in the Country, and at a certain Time and Place all to join again in one Body. By these Depredations they were so full of Horses and other Cattel, that in a short time they had above 2000 Horse, and no less than 20000 Foot, but Men very Raw and Ignorant in Martial Affairs. Among other attempts they fell upon Morgantina with great Fury (which was a strong and well-fortify'd City) and made many fierce and continual Assaults upon it.

The Roman General marching out in the Night as if he would relieve the City (having with him about 10000 Men out of Italy and Sicily) surpriz'd the Rebels (busily employ'd in the Siege) on a sudden; and breaking into their Camp, found but slender Guards but a great number of Prisoners, and abundance of Plunder of all sorts, and with great ease made himself Master of all, and when he had rifled the Camp he march'd away towards Morgantina: But the Rebels turning back upon him with great Fury, and having the advantage of the higher Ground, soon routed him, and put all his Army to flight. Whereupon the Rebells King commanded Proclamation to be made, That none should be kill'd who threw away their Arms: Upon which most cast them away and fled. By this means Salvius both recover'd what he had lost in his Camp, and gain'd a glorious Victory and much Spoil; but there were not kill'd of the Italians and Sicilians above 600 (which was occasion'd by the Moderation of the King) but 4000 were taken Prisoners. Upon this Victory many coming in flocking to Salvius, his Army became double to what it was before, and he was now absolute Master of the Field, so that he again sat down before Morgantina, and proclaim'd Liberty to all the Servants that were there. But their Masters promising the same to them, if they would be Faithful and join with them in the Defence of the Place, they chose rather to accept of what was offer'd by their Masters, and fought with that Resolution, that they forced the Enemy to raise their Siege. But the General afterwards making void all that was promised (as to manumitting of the Servants) occasion'd many to run away to the Rebels. After this all the Slaves and Servants in the Territories of Aegista Lilybaeum were likewise infected with this Itch of Rebellion, whose Leader was one Athenio, a Valiant Man and a Cilicean. This Man having the Charge and Management of the Concerns of two rich Brothers, and being an Excellent Astrologer; He first wrought upon those to join with him, over whom he had some sort of Command, to the Number of 200; afterwards those that were bordering round about, so that in Five days time there were got together above 1000 who made him King, and plac'd the Diadem upon his Head. This Man resolv'd to order Matters and Affairs so as never any did before him: For he receiv'd not all promiscuously that came in to him, but only such as were of strong and healthful Bodies to bear Arms; the rest he forc'd to continue in the Stations they were in, and every one in his place diligently to apply himself to the Duty incumbent upon him. By which means those that were with him had plentiful Provision. He pretended that by the Stars the Gods foretold, That he should gain the whole Kingdom of Sicily: And therefore he was to spare spoiling of the Country, destruction of the Cattel and Fruits of the Earth, as being all his own. At length having now got together above 10000 Men, he was so daring as to besiege Lilybeum, a City for strength look'd upon to be impregnable. But finding it a vain thing to proceed, he desisted


Page 732

from his Design, pretending he did it by Command from the Gods, by whom he was told, That if they continu'd the Siege, they would certainly fall into some sudden Misfortune.

Accordingly, while he was preparing to draw off from the City, a Fleet of Moors entred the Harbour, who were sent to the Assistance of them of Lilybeum, under the Command of one call'd Gomon, who in the Night surprizing Athenio's Army, (now marching off and leaving the Siege) kill'd a great number of them, and wounded as many, and so got into the Town. This was the occasion that his former Prediction was highly admir'd and cry'd up by the Rebells.

At the same time great Disorders, and all sorts of Calamities overspread all Sicily. For not only Servants but Freemen that were reduc'd to Poverty, committed all sorts of Rapines and acts of Wickedness: For they shamefully kill'd all before them, whether Bond or Free, that none might be left to tell Tales; so that they that were in the Cities scarce enjoy'd any thing that was their own, though it were with them within the Walls: But as for that which was without, all was swallow'd up and violently seiz'd on, as a Prey taken from a Common Enemy. Many other things against all the Laws of Humanity were impudently committed by many throughout all Sicily.

Salvius likewise, he who had besieg'd Morgantina, after he had harrass'd all the Country, as far as to the Territories of Leontium, there mustered his Army, consisting of above 30000 Fighting Men. Then Sacrificing to the Heroes of Italy, he Dedicated one of the Royal Purple Robes, in gratitude for his Victories. And now he caus'd himself to be proclaim'd King, and was call'd by the Rebells Tryphon; having a design to possess himself of Tricala, and there to build a Palace, he sent to Athenio, and as King commanded him as General to repair to him. Every Man then thought that Athenio would endeavour to gain the Sovereignty for himself, and by that means the Rebels would be divided, and so a speedy period would be put to the War. But Fortune so order'd the Matter, that the Armies of the Fugitives being thus increas'd, the two Generals were Unanimous, and agreed very well one with another. For Tryphon march'd speedily with his Army to Tricala, and Athenio came thither to him with 3000 Men, in every thing observing the Commands of Tryphon as his King. Athenio had sent the rest abroad to harrass and spoil the Country, and to bring over as many as they could to join with them in the Defection. But not long after, Tryphon suspected that Athenio had a design to supplant him, and therefore he caus'd him to be seiz'd betime. The Castle that was well fortify'd before, he made more strong, and adorn'd it likewise with many stately Buildings. After which (they say) it was call'd Tricala, because it was Remarkable and Famous for three things, First for Springs of excellent sweet Water. Secondly for Vineyards, and Olive yards, and rich Lands for Tillage. And Thirdly, That it was a Place impregnable, built upon an high and inaccessible Rock. After he had drawn a Line of eight Stages round about it for the building of a City, and had compass'd it in with a deep Trench, he made it the Seat-Royal, being a Place abounding in Plenty and Fatness of all things necessary for Man's Life. He likewise built there a stately Palace and a Market-place, capable to receive a vast Number of Men. He chose likewise a competent Number of the most prudent Men to be of his Council, and made use of them for Administration of Justice. Moreover, whenever he sate in the Courts of Justice, he put on a long Gown edg'd with Purple, and a Coat pouder'd with large Studds of Purple. Lastly, He appointed Lictors with Rods and Axes to go before him, and took care that all other Ensigns and Badges of Royalty should be observed.

At length Lucius Licinius Lucullus was chosen General by the Senate at Rome to go against the Rebels, who had with him 14000 Romans and Italians, 1800 Bithynians, Thessalians, and Acharnans; and out of Lucania 600 under the Command of one Cleptius, an Expert and Valiant Soldier, and 600 from other Places, in the whole amounting to 17000. With this Army he entred Sicily. Upon this Tryphon releas'd Athenio, and advis'd with him how to manage the War against the Romans. Tryphon was of Opinion, that it was the safest way to continue in Tricala, and there expect the Enemy: But Athenio advis'd rather to draw out and fight in the open Field, than to suffer themselves to be besieg'd; whose Counsel prevailing, they march'd out and Encamp'd near Scirthaea, with no fewer than 40000 Men, twelve Furlongs distant from the Roman Camp. At first the Armies employ'd themselves every day in light Skirmishes; but at length they Engag'd, and while Victory seem'd to incline sometime to one side, and sometime to another, and many fell on both sides. Athenio came on with 200 choice Horse, and cover'd the Ground round about him with the Bodies of his Enemies. But being wounded in both his Knees, and


Page 733

then receiving a Third, he was wholly disabled for Fight, which so discouraged the Rebels, that they fled outright. Athenio lay conceal'd, as if he were Dead, and feign'd himself so till Night came, and then stole away. The Romans having now gain'd a glorious Victory, forc'd Tryphoh himself to take to his heels, and in the pursuit kill'd at least 20000 Men. The rest by the advantage of the Night got to Tricala, though the General might easily have cut them all off, if he would have continu'd the Pursuit. Upon this rout they were now all so discourag'd, that it was mov'd amongst them that they should return to their Masters, and submit themselves wholly to their Power and Pleasure: But those who advis'd to stand it out to the last, and not to give up their Lives to the Lusts of their Enemies, prevail'd above the other.

Nine days after the Roman General besieg'd Tricala, but after several slaughters on both sides he was forc'd to draw off and leave the Place. Upon this the Rebels got heart, and the General on the other side (either through Sloath and Negligence, or Corrupted by Bribes) minded nothing to the Discharge of his Duty, for which afterwards he gave an account to the Romans. Neither did Caius Servilius, who succeeded Lucullus, do any thing worth remembring, and therefore he was brought to Judgment (as Lucullus was before) and banish'd. In the mean time Tryphon dy'd, and Athenio enjoy'd the Kingdom. And what with taking of Cities, and wasting and spoiling the Country (without Controul or any Opposition from Servilius) he got together a great deal of rich Booty and Plunder. But the year after Caius Marius being chosen at Rome the Fifth time Consul, and with him Caius Aquillius; Aquillius was made General against the Rebels, and his Valour so far advanc'd his Success, that he wholly overcame them in a great Battel: And like an Heroe fought Hand to Hand with Athenio the King of the Rebels, and kill'd him, but receiv'd himself a wound in the Head. And now he resolv'd to prosecute the War against the rest that remain'd who were about 10000, who though they fled to their Defences, (as not being able to stand before him) yet Aquillius slacken'd not his Resolution in the least, but pursu'd his design till he had wholly broke them. There remain'd now only 1000 led by Satyrus, whom at first he determin'd to reduce by Force: But when they made their Submission by their Commissioners, for the present he remitted their Faults, but after they were brought Prisoners to Rome he order'd them to fight with wild Beasts, where it's reported that they ended their Lives with great gallantry and nobleness of Mind, for they scorn'd to fight with Beasts, but thrust one another through at the publick Altars: And after all were dead, Satyrus being the last, with an Heroick Spirit kill'd himself. And this was the Tragical End of the Servants War, after it had continu'd almost Four years.

Out of the same BOOK.

Eclog. 2. ONE Battaces, Priest of the Goddess Rhea (they say) came to Rome from Pesinunte a City of Phrygia; who declar'd he came thither by the Com¦mand of the Goddess; and told the Magistrates and Senate, that their Temple was prophan'd, and that a publick Expiation ought to be made in the name of the Romans. His Habit and other Ornaments of his Body was very strange, and altogether unusual at Rome; for he wore a Crown or Mitre of a vast Bigness, and a Flower'd Gown imbroider'd with Gold, representing the State and Dignity of a King. After he had spoken to the People from the Bench, and instructed them in the Matters of Religion, he was honour'd with publick Entertainments, and large Gifts and Presents: But he was forbid to wear a Crown by Aulus Pompeius a Tribune of the People. However, being brought by another Tribune to the Desk, and being ask'd how the Expiatory Sacrifices should be made; his Answers were stuff'd with nothing but Superstitious Rites and Ceremonies. At length things were so manag'd that he was driven out by Pompeius his Faction, with many Scorns and Affronts; upon which he went to his Inn and never after appear'd abroad: But only told them, that not only he was disgrac'd, but the Goddess was reproach'd and dishonour'd. Presently after Pompeius fell into an high Feaver, and then a Quinsie which took away his Speech, and he dy'd the Third day. Upon which it was the common Discourse and Sentiment amongst the ordinary sort, that he was thus punish'd by a Divine Hand, for his prophane and impious abuse of the Goddess and her Priest. For the Romans are addicted to Superstition much above many other Nations: And therefore Battaces being honour'd with many Presents, and Liberty granted to him to wear his Sacred Vestments, with all their Ornaments, the day he had design'd for his departure, he was conducted by multitudes both of Men and Women out of the City.


Page 734

Out of the same Book.

Eclog. 3. IT was a Custom amongst the Roman Soldiers, That if any Commander of an Army fought a Battle and kill'd above 6000 of the Enemy, he was term'd Emperor, which is the same with King among the Grecians.

Fragment, Lib. 37. Ecloga Prima.

THE Marsian War took its name from the Authors of the Defection, tho' the Italians generally made this War upon the Romans. It's said the first occasion of this arose from the profuseness and luxury the Romans were fall'n into, who were formerly frugal and sparing in their way of living. This alteration caus'd great Heart-burnings between the Commonalty and the Senate. For when the Senate prevail'd with the Italians to supply the City with Provisions, and upon their frequent Addresses had promis'd to enfranchise them, and make them Freemen of Rome, and to ratify it by a Law, and the Italians saw nothing perform'd that was promis'd; these were the sparks that at length broke forth into a flame at the time when Lucius Martius, Philippus and Sextus Julius were Consuls in the 117th Olympiad.

Many were the Slaughters, Sieges, and Sacking of Towns on both sides during this War, Victory hovering sometimes here and sometimes there, as uncertain where to fall, giving no assurance to either party, which of them she favour'd. But at length after the shedding of much Blood, the Romans (with much ado) got the better, and regain'd their former Power and Sovereignty. There were engag'd against them in this War the Samnites, the Asculans, Lucanans, Picentians, them of Nola, and other Cities and Nations. Amongst which was Cortinum a large and famous City greatly frequented, in which the Italians had a little before planted a Colony. Here were all things necessary for the support and defence of so great a City, and the maintenance of the Government; particularly a large Market-place and Court-House, with a vast Treasure, and plentiful Provisions of all sorts. They had likewise a Senate consisting of 500 Men. Out of which were chosen those reputed fit to execute the highest places of Magistracy, and to manage the weighty Affairs of the Commonwealth. These therefore they entrusted with the management of the War, and put the absolute power of the disposing of all their concerns into the hands of the Senators, who made a Law that Two Consuls should be chosen every year, and Twelve Generals. At which time Quintus Pompoedius Silo a Marsian, (a Man of chiefest quality in his Country,) and Caius Aponius Motulus (famous for his noble Acts above the rest of his own Nation.) were chosen Consuls. They divided all Italy into Two Parts, and took either of their equal shares for the executing of their Consular Authority. They allotted the Region or Tract from the Cercoli (so call'd) to the Adriatick Sea, which lay to the North and West to Pompaedius, to six of the Generals. The rest which lay to the South and East the Italians assign'd to Motulus, with as many more of the Military Officers. Having put all things into this good Order, and (to sum up all) having order'd all things according to the ancient Model of the Roman Government, they set themselves more intently and earnestly to the prosecuting of the War, and call'd the City it self Italy. And they were so successful, that they came off Conquerors for the most part, till Cneius Pompeius was made Consul and General, who with Sylla (deputed by Cato the other Consul) often routed them, and reduc'd them to those straits, that at length their Power was broken in pieces. However they still continu'd the War, but were often worsted by Caius Cossinius General in * Japygia. Being therefore distress'd and harass'd with so many and great mischiefs one upon the neck of another (and the Marsians and other Nations falling to the Romans) they forsook their new City, and transplanted themselves to Aesernia a City of the Samnites, under the conduct of Five Generals; of whom they made Quintus Pompoedius Chief, for his Valour and prudent management of the War, who with the consent of all the other Captains, rais'd a great Army, which with the old Soldiers amounted to the number of 30000. And besides, he got together at least 20000 Foot, and 1000 Horse of manumitted Slaves, and Arm'd them as well as the time would allow. And coming to an Engagement with the Romans, whose General was Mamercus; he kill'd a few of them, but lost above 6000 of his own Men.


Page 735

About the same time Metellus took the famous City Venusia in Apulia, which had in it a great number of Soldiers, and carry'd away above 3000 prisoners. And now the Romans prevail'd every day more and more against their Enemies: So that the Italians sent Ambassadors to Mithridates King of Pontus (who had then a brave and well appointed Army) to intreat him to march into Italy with his Army to oppose the Romans, by which means (they told him) that their Power would be easily broken: Mithridates answer'd, that he would march into Italy as soon as he had subdu'd Asia, in order to which he was then engag'd. The Rebels therefore being now frustrated in their hopes of Assistance, and of supplies of Money, were greatly discourag'd. For there were but a few of the Samnites remaining: and the Sabellians kept themselves close within Nola, and the like did Lamponius and Cleptius, who commanded those that were left of the Lucanians.

The Marsian War being now almost at an end, there arose again a great Sedition in Rome, by reason of the contentious Ambition of many of the Roman Nobility, every one striving which should be General in the Expedition against Mithridates, stirr'd up thereunto with the Greatness of the Rewards and Riches to be reap'd by that War. For Caius Julius, and Caius Marius who had been Six times Consul, oppos'd one another, and the People on that occasion were divided, some for one and some for the other. There were likewise other disturbances about the same time. For Sylla the Consul went from Rome to the Forces that lay near unto Nola, and so terrify'd many of the bordering Territories, with their Cities, that he forc'd them to the obedience of the Romans. But when Sylla was engag'd in the War in Asia against Mithridates, and Rome was fill'd with slaughters and intestine broils, Marcus Aponius and Tiberius Cleptius Generals of those Italians that were left continuing in Brutia (not being able to take the strong City Aesias, after a long time they had lain before it) left part of their Army to maintain the Siege, and with the rest fiercely assaulted Rhegium, in hopes that if they gain'd this place, they might with ease transport their Army into Sicily, and so become Masters of the richest Island under the Sun. But Caius Urbanus the Governor of Rhegium so terrify'd the Italiots with the greatness of his Army, and his vast preparations, that they drew off from the Siege, and so the Rhegians were delivered. And afterwards when the Civil Wars broke forth between Marius and Sylla, part of them sided with Marius and the rest with Scylla, and most of them were kill'd in the War, and those that surviv'd all joyn'd with the Conqueror Scylla. And thus ended the Marsian War, and the greatest home-bred Sedition of any that was ever before among the Romans.

Eclog. 2. And now that the Marsian War was at an end, a Second great Sedition was rais'd in Rome, stirr'd up by Sylla, and Caius Marius a young Man, the Son of Marius who had been Seven times Consul. In this Commotion many thousands of Men perish'd: At length Sylla prevail'd, and being created Dictator, he call'd himself Epaphroditus; which vain glorious Title did not altogether deceive him, for he prosper'd all his life long, and dy'd a natural death after all his Victories. But Marius, altho' he behav'd himself with great Gallantry in the War against Sylla, being at length routed, fled with 15000 Men to Proeneste, where he was Besieg'd a long time; at length all having forsaken him, and seeing no way how to escape, he earnestly intreated one of his faithful Servants to afford him his helping hand for the extricating him out of the present dangers and mischiefs that surrounded him. After much persuasion the Servant at one stroke put an end to his Masters Life, and then immediately kill'd himself. And so at length ended this Civil War. However, some relicks of it still gave Scylla disturbance for some time till those that pursu'd it, with some others, were suppress'd.

But after these were all ruin'd and destroy'd, there broke out such a flame of Discord between Julius Caesar and Pompey who (for the great and eminent Services he had done for the Romans, partly by the Conduct of Sylla, and partly by his own Valour) was sirnam'd the Great, that the Romans were again involv'd in intestine Slaughters and Butcheries. And as soon as Pompey had lost all his Army in a great Battle, he himself was afterwards Murther'd near Alexandria: and the unbounded power of the Consuls, being at length restrain'd and limited, fell wholly into the hands of Caesar himself, and so ended the Sedition.

But when he was murther'd, another Civil War broke forth against Brutus and Cassius his Murtherers, which was manag'd by the Consuls Lepidus Antonius, and Octavius Augustus. When this War was ended by dint of Sword, and the deaths of Cassius and Brutus, not long after the secret and private grudges and quarrels between Augustus and Anthony for the Supream Power, broke out into an open War: And after much Blood spilt on


Page 736

both sides, Augustus gain'd the Empire, which he held during his Life, having now wav'd his Consular Power and Dignity.

Out of the 38th. BOOK.

CINNA and Marius, calling together a Council of the Chiefest of the Officers consulted what ways and methods were best to take for the better settling and confirming of the Peace. At length they resolv'd to put to death the greatest persons of quality that were their Enemies, and who were most capable to make a disturbance and overturn all their Affairs, that so the Factious Party being purg'd out from among them, they and their Friends might Govern all things for the future with more security, according to their own Will and Pleasure. Upon this forthwith all regard to former Leagues and Articles were wholly laid aside: Persons were proscrib'd and butcher'd in every place, without being heard. At that time Quintus Lutatus Catullus who had had a glorious Triumph for his Victory over the Cimbri, and had more than an ordinary share in the Affections of the People, was accus'd by a Tribune of the People for a Capital Offence, who fearing the imminent hazard of the Calumny, made his application to Marius, to intreat him to interpose for his deliverance (for he had been his Friend formerly, but through some suspicion he then had of him he was become his Enemy;) But he answer'd him thus, Dy you must. Upon this, Catullus perceiving there was no hopes of his preservation, studied how to dye without disgrace; to which end he destroy'd himself by a strange and unusual way: For he shut himself up in a House new plaister'd, and caus'd a Fire to be kindled, by the smoak of which, and the moist vapours from the Lime, he was there stifled to death.

Out of the 40th BOOK.

WE being about to write of the War against the Jews, we take it to be part of our Province, before we proceed further; First, in short to Declare the Original of this Nation, and their Laws. In Ancient times there hapned a great Plague in Aegypt, and many ascrib'd the cause of it to GOD, who was offended with them. For there being multitudes of Strangers of several Nations who inhabited there, who us'd their Foreign Rites and Ceremonies in the Administration of the Publick Sacrifices, the Ancient manner of worshipping of the Gods, us'd by the Ancestors of the Aegyptians, was quite lost and forgotten. Hence it was that the natural Inhabitants concluded, that unless all the Strangers were driven out, they should never be freed from their Miseries. Upon which they were all expell'd, and the most Valiant and Noble among them, under the Conduct of skilful Commanders (as some relate) after many great hardships came into Greece and other places, of whom amongst other Leaders, the most famous and remarkable were Danaus and Cadinus. But the greatest part of the People came into that Country, which is now call'd Judea, not far from Aegypt, and at that time altogether Desart and uninhabited. The Leader of this Colony was one Moses, a very wise and valiant Man, who after he had possess'd himself of the Country, amongst other Cities built that now most Famous City Jerusalem; and the Temple there, which is so greatly Reverenc'd among them. He then instituted the manner of GOD's Worship, and the Holy Rites and Ceremonies: and made Laws for the Government of the Common-wealth, and reduc'd them into a methodical Order. He divided the People into Twelve Tribes, as the most perfect number, as he conceiv'd; because answering the Twelve Months, which make up the whole Year: But he made no Representation or Image of the Gods, because he judg'd nothing of an Human Shape was applicable to GOD: But that this Heaven, which compass'd the Earth round, only was GOD, and that all things were in its power. But he so order'd the Rites and Ceremonies of the Sacrifices, and the manner and Rule of their Conversations, as that they should be wholly different from all other Nations. For (by reason of the Expulsion of his People) he commanded a most inhumane and unsociable Conversation. He pickt out likewise the greatest Persons of quality who were best able to Rule and Govern the People (then embodied into one Nation,) and them he created Priests; whose Duty and Office was continually to attend the Temple, and employ themselves in the publick Worship and


Page 737

Service of God. He constituted them likewise to be Judges for the decision of the most weighty Causes, and committed to their Care the keeping and preservation of the Laws. Therefore they say that the Jews never had any King: but that the Care and Authority of Governing the People was always given to him, who excell'd the rest of the Priests in Prudence and Virtue, whom they call the Chief Priest: and him they always took to be the Messenger, and Interpreter to them of the Mind and Commands of GOD. And they say that he in all their Publick Assemblies and other Meetings, declares what he has in Command, and that upon that account the Jews are so observant, that forthwith they prostrate themselves upon the ground, and Adore him as the High Priest, and Interpreter to them of the Oracles of GOD. But in the close of the Laws this is subjoin'd, Moses theMessenger of God thus saith to the Jews. This Law-giver likewise laid down many prudent and excellent Rules and Instructions for Martial Affairs, and inur'd the Youth to endure hardship and difficulties, and to exercise Patience in all Miseries and Distresses. Moreover, he undertook many Wars against the neighbouring Nations, and gain'd many large Territories by force of Arms, and gave them as an Inheritance to his Countrymen, in such manner, as that every one shar'd alike, saving the Priests who had a larger proportion than the rest, that having more, they might continualy attend upon the publick Worship of GOD without distraction. Neither was it lawful for any Man to sell his Inheritance allotted him, lest by the Covetousness of them that buy, others should become poor, and so the Nation should be depopulated. He order'd likewise the Inhabitants to be careful in the Educating of their Children, who are brought up with very little Cost and Charge, and by that means the Jewish Nation was always populous. Lastly, as to their Marriages and Funerals, he appointed them Laws much different from all other People. But under the Empires that have risen up in these latter Ages, especially in the Fourth Monarchy of the Persians, and in the time of the Macedonian Empire, which overturn'd the former: (through mixture with Foreign Nations) many of the Ancient Laws and Customs among the Jews, have been chang'd and grown obsolete.

 

 

Henry Valesius HIS FRAGMENTS OUT OF The 6
th
, 21
st
, 22
d
, 23
d
, 24
th
, 25
th
, 26
th
, 34
th
, 36
th
, and 37
th
 lost Books OF Diodorus Siculus, By him Published in the Year MDCXXXIV.

Now Translated, and Compar'd with the Greek.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for A. and J. Churchill at the Black-Swan in Pater-Noster-Row: 1699.


Page 741

To the READER.

THese Fragments of Diodorus the Sicilian, were first Collected by Constantine the Seventh, one of the Eastern Emperors, the Son of Leo the Sixth. He began to Reign about the Year of our Lord 911. He got together from all parts, Books of all sorts of Learning, in order to make up a compleat Library. Out of the several Authors he Collected such Observations as were most remarkable, and Marshall'd each of them that concern'd one and the same subject, under their several and proper Heads. The Heads or common Places of his Historical Collections were Fifty three in Number; and made up a Hundred and Six Volumns. For every Head, he divided into two Books; in the first of which was contain'd what was said of that particular subject by the most Ancient Authors, or such as writ Universal Histories from the begining of Time: In the second are Collections out of those Authors that writ of the Acts and Affairs past, in the time of the Caesars. That common Place wherein are these Fragments of Diodorus, is one of the Fifty three, and is Titled thus, viz. Of Virtues and Vices. It was brought out of Cyprus to Paris by Nicholas Fabricius, not long before the Fragments were Publish'd by Valesius, as appears in his Epistle dedicated to Fabricius himself, and in that to the Reader. The rest of the Fifty three Heads of this Emperor, are lost, save only one, which is Intituled thus, viz. Of Embassies, divided into two Volumns. The first publish'd by Fulvius Ursinus, where Collections are again made out of Diodorus the Sicilian, and the other by David Hoeschelius. This account of the preservation of these Fragments, and how they came to light, I conceiv'd was needful to satisfie the Reader, to the end he may be assur'd, he is not impos'd upon by any thing in this Kind that is Fictitious and Spurious.

Fragments out of the History of Diodorus the Sicilian, publish'd by Henry Valesius.

The 6th Book.

CAstor and Pollux, who were also call'd Dioscuri, are said to be Eminent above others for Valour, and remarkable in their Assistance in the Expedition with the Argonauts, and afforded considerable help to them that were but otherwise very weak; and to speak all in sum, they gain'd in all places exceeding honour and reputation for their Valour, Justice, Piety and Martial skill and discipline, and were ready in all hazards with them that were most forward, and therefore for the eminency of their Valour, were reputed the Sons of Jupiter, and after their deaths, were honour'd with Divine honours.

Epopeus King of Sicyon, challenging the Gods to a Combat, to that end destroy'd their Temples and Altars.

3 Sicyphus is said for craft and subtilty to excel all others, and by looking into the intrals of Beasts, declar'd future Events.

4 Salmoneus was Proud and Prophane, contemn'd the Gods, and preferr'd his own, above the acts of Jupiter himself, and therefore out of an Engine which sent forth a mighty sound, he us'd to Thunder, and never offer'd any Sacrifices, or observ'd any solemn Festivals to the Gods.

5 Tyro (they say) was Salmeneus his Daughter, who was so call'd from her Beauty and Comeliness of her Person.

6 Admetus for his Justice and Piety, was so approv'd and belov'd of the Gods, that when Apollo fell into the displeasure of Jupiter, he was order'd to be a Servant to Admetus. They say likewise, that Alcestes the Daughter of Pelias, who was the only Daughter that was Innocent, as to the Murther of her Father, for her Piety was Marry'd to Admetus.

7 Melampus was belov'd by Apollo, for his eminent Virtues and Piety.


Page 742

8. When Troy was entred and taken, Aeneas with some other of the Citizens possessed himself of part of the City, and defended it bravely and valiantly against the assaults of the Enemy. When the Greeks upon the terms made, agreed that each of them should carry away with them as much of their Goods as they could, all of them but Aeneas, took away Gold and Silver, and what ever else of such kind was esteem'd pretious and valuable; but he carry'd away only his old Father upon his shoulders: At which the Grecians did so admire, that they gave him liberty to make choice of what part of his Wealth, and his houshold Goods he pleas'd; upon which, taking only his houshold Gods; the Virtue and Piety of the Man caus'd them to admire much more than before; for they perceiv'd that in the height of his dangers and troubles, his chiefest care was to discharge his duty to his Father, and his due and pious regards to the Gods: And therefore they say that both he, and the rest of the Trojans that remain'd, had liberty given them, with all assurance of safe passage to go from Troy, to what place soever they pleas'd.

9. Romulus Silvius was exceeding Proud all the days of his Life, and a contemner of the Gods. When Jupiter thundred, he us'd to Command his Soldiers upon a sign given, all at once to strike upon their shields with their Swords, and vaunted that it was a greater noise than the other, and therefore he was struck dead with a Thunder-bolt.

10. About this time, one Malachus became King of the City Cuma, by ingratiating himself with the common People, and accusing and calumniating great Men: For afterwards putting to death, the richest of the Citizens, he seiz'd their Estates, and with the Wealth thus got, hir'd strong Guards, and struck a Dread and Terror into all the Cumeans.

11. Such was the eminent Virtue of Lycurgus, that once when he came to Delphos, the Oracle saluted him with these Verses. Seek in the Fragments of Sentences.

While the Lacedemonians observ'd the Laws of Lycurgus, from a mean and low condition, they grew very Potent, and held the Sovereignty of Greece for above 400 Years: But when by degrees they slighted and disregarded one Law after another, and fell to Sloath and Voluptuousness, and began to heap up Money and Wealth, they lost their sovereign Authority.

12. Whereas the Eleans were full of strong and youthful Men, and had a well govern'd Commonwealth, the Lacedemonians jealous of the increase of their power, endeavour'd all they: could to make them Sacred, that so being at Peace, they might gain no experience in matters of War; to that end, with the consent of all the Grecians they devoted them to Jupiter, and therefore neither when Xerxes broke into Greece, were they compell'd to raise any Soldiers, but as the Priests of Jupiter, and overseers of the Games were free: Nor in the Civil Wars of the Greeks did any molest them, all endeavouring to preserve their Country as a City Sacred and Inviolable: But in after times, the Eleans betook themselves to Arms of their own accord.

The two Brothers, Romulus and Remus being thus expos'd in a Cradle, when they grew up to Mens Estate, far excell'd their equals in strength and comeliness of their Persons; and secur'd all the Shepherds and their flocks, by freeing them from the Theeves, that us'd to make a prey of them, killing some in their attempts upon the flocks, and taking others alive: And besides the honour they wan by their Valour, they were greatly belov'd by the neighbouring Shepherds, both for their familiar converse, and their civil and courteous behaviour to all that made their addresses to them. The security therefore of them all, being lodg'd in them, most submitted to them of their own accord, and were observant to their Commands, and went wheresoever they were ordered by them.

Polychares the Messenian, a Man of noble Birth, and very rich, entred into a strict band of familiarity and friendship with Eucephnus the Spartan, who taking upon him the care and protection of the Flocks and Shepherds, began to covet what they had, but his treachery was soon discovered; for having sold some Oxen together with the Herdsmen themselves, to foreign Merchants, and pretending that Robbers carry'd them away by force, it came to pass that the Merchants Sailing by the Coasts of Pelopponnesus towards Sicily, by a sudden Storm, were cast upon the Land. Hereupon the Herdsmen taking advantage of the Night, got off Shipboard, and being well acquainted with the Place, fled and made their escapes, and when they came to Messena, declar'd the whole business to their Master, whereupon Polychares hid the Herdsmen, and sent for Eucephnus from L

〈…〉demon;

 who, when he came, swore, and impudently stood to it, that the Shepherds and be

•

dsmen were some of them forcibly carried away by Robbers, and the rest were kill'd, upon which Polychares forthwith brought forth the Herdsmen: At which Eucephnus was amaz'd, and thus plainly convicted of falshood, presently began to beg pardon,


Page 743

and promis'd to restore all the Cattle, and us'd many words to regain his Favour. Polychares therefore out of regard to the Sacred ties of Friendship, conceal'd the Fact, and sent his Son with Eucephnus to Lacedaemon to recover the Cattle: But Eucephnus disregardful of his Promises, murther'd the Young man that was sent along with him to Sparta. Polychares enrag'd at this bloody Act, requir'd the Spartans to deliver up the Murtherer But the Lacedaemonians, not willing to comply with his Demands, sent the Son of Eucephnus with Letters to Messena, wherein Polychares was order'd to come to Sparta, and there to abide the Judgment of the Ephori and the Kings, concerning the Matters whereof he complain'd; but Polychares by way of Retaliation, kill'd the Son of Eucephnus, and drove away a Prey of Cattle out of the Countrey of Sparta.

15. Archias the Corinthian falling in Love with Actaeon, first courted the Youth with Presents and fair Promises; but being not able to prevail by reason of the Honesty of the Boy's Father, and the Sobriety and Modesty of the Young man himself, he got a Company of his Friends together, resolved to do that by Force which he could not obtain by Intreaty and fair Means: Having therefore made himself drunk with those he had brought along with him, he was hurried on to that degree by his Love-passion, that he broke forceably into the House of Melissus, and took away the Boy by force; but his Father with his Houshold Servants laying hold of his Son to detain him, and both parties earnestly striving to get him one from the other, the poor Child among them was pull'd in pieces, so that the sufferings of the Child, and the manner of it, occasion'd both Grief and Admiration, at one and the same time: For the Youth came to the like end with him that bore the same Name, both of them being destroy'd much in the same manner by those that came in to their assistance.

16. Agathocles to whom was committed the care of building of a Temple to Minerva, laid out the Money out of his own Purse; but he pick'd out the best and largest of the Stones, and built for himself a sumptuous and stately House: But the Power of the Goddess made it self evident, in destroying Agathocles with a Thunderbolt, and burning his House; and the Geomorians confiscated his Goods, although his Heirs made it clear and evident that he had not imbezill'd any of the Sacred Treasure. They consecrated likewise the Carcass of his House, and made it a Place inaccessable, which is now call'd Embrontaeum.

17. Pompilius King of Rome, liv'd peaceably all his Days, and some say he was a hearer of Pythagoras, and that he had his Laws concerning Religion from him, and many other things which much advanc'd his Reputation, and therefore though he was a Stranger, he was sent for to take upon him the Crown.

18. Deioces King of the Medes, when all sorts of Wickedness abounded, was eminent for Justice and all other Virtues.

19. The Sybarites were addicted to Gluttony and Voluptuousness, and such was their strife and study to be Luxurious, that they lov'd the Ionians and Thuscans above all other Strangers, because those among the Greeks, and these among the Barbarians, were most Luxurious and Effeminate. It's said; that Mindyrides was the most Voluptuous of any of the Sybarites; for when Clisthenes King of Sicyon was Victor in the Race with Chariots drawn with four Horses, and had proclaim'd by the Cryer, That whosoever would Marry his Daughter (a most beautiful Lady) should come to Sicyon at a certain Day appointed, this Mindyrides loos'd from Sibaris in a Vessel of above Fifty Oars on a side, and furnish'd it with Rowers out of his own Family, of whom some were Fishermen, and the rest were Fowlers; and when he came into the Haven at Sicyon, that he not only far surpass'd all his Rivals for State and Grandeur, but likewise the King himself, although the whole City for Vain-glory most profusely contributed their Wealth to Clisthenes: And being after his arrival presently entertain'd at Supper, and ask'd by one who should sit next to him, by the Voice of an Herald he caus'd it to be proclaim'd, That he would sit next to the Bride, or by himself alone.

20. Hippomenes, Archon of Athens, when his *Daughter had play'd the Whore, punish'd her after a most cruel and inhumane Manner; for he shut her up in a Stable with a Horse for some days kept without Meat, which through want of Food at length eat up the miserable and unfortunate Lady.

21. Arcesilaus King of Cyrene being grievously afflicted with many pressing Calamities, consulted the Oracle at Delphos; to whom Apollo answer'd, That the Gods were angry for that none of the succeeding Kings since Battus govern'd so Justly and Righteously as he did, for he reign'd mildly and gently, content only with the Name of a King; and that which was most commendable of all was that he carefully kept and maintain'd the Worship of the Gods; but his Successors always (ever since have reign'd Tyrannically, and


Page 744

converted the publick Treasure to their own private Use, and neglected the Service of the Gods.

22. Demonax of Mantinea, was the Arbitrator to allay the Sedition among the Cyrenians, a Person in great Honour and Esteem for his Wisdom and Justice. When he arriv'd at Cyrene all their differences were referr'd to him, and he reconcil'd the Cities one to another: upon these Terms and Conditions—

23. Lucius Tarquinius King of the Romans, being carefully educated from a Child, and much addicted to the Liberal Sciences, was much admir'd for his virtuous Qualifications by all; and therefore when he attain'd to Man's Estate, he was in great favour and much esteem with Ancus Martius then King of Rome, and together with the King, order'd and manag'd many of the weighty Affairs of the Kingdom. Being very Rich himself he liberally supply'd the wants of others, and was Courteous and Obliging to all, and therefore cry'd up greatly for his Wisdom.

24. Solon was the Son of Execestides; heb was an Athenian, and his Ancestors Inhabitants of the Island Salamis, for Wisdom and Learning he far excell'd all of his time; being Virtuously inclin'd from his Youth, he apply'd himself to the Study of the best Arts and Sciences: And having long inur'd himself to all sorts of Learning, he became the Great Master and Champion of every Virtue. For being under the care of the best Tutors from a Child, when he grew up to Man's estate he associated with such as were esteem'd the greatest Philosophers; upon the account of which Converse, he was esteem'd one of the Seven Wise Men, and was not only preferr'd before all the rest, but likewise before all others that were Eminent for their Wisdom. He was in great honour for making of Laws, and admir'd by all for his singular Prndence in his private Discourses and Answers, and giving of Counsel and Advice. When the Athenians grew Ionians in their Manners, and became in a high degree Luxurious and Effeminate, Solon by degrees gain'd them to the love of Virtue and Honourable Actions: For Hermodus and Aristogo, principled and instructed by his Laws and Discipline, overturn'd the Tyranny of Pisistratus.

25. There was one Myso of Malea living i a Town call'd Chenae, who lay most commonly in the Fields, obscure, unknown almost to every body, upon the Expelling of Periander the Corinthian for his Tyranny and Cruelty, was taken into the Society of one of the Seven Wise Men.

26. Chilo liv'd according to his Doctrine, which is a thing rare to be found: For we may see many Philosophers in our Age, who talk at a great rate, yet their Manners and Course of Life are Filthy and Abominable, who look and speak like grave and wise Men, yet by their actions give themselves the Lye. But Chilo, besides his virtuous Life all his Days, conceiv'd and utter'd many excellent things worthy of Remark.

27. Pittacus of Mytelene was a Man not only to be admired for his Wisdom, but was such a Citizen as Lesbos never before produc'd the like, nor ever like to be (as I think) any such after him▪ till it produce plenty of sweet Wine. For he was an excellent Law-maker, and Civil and Courteous towards all his Fellow-Citizens in all their Meetings and publick Assemblies, and freed his Country from three most grievous Calamities, Tyranny, Sedition, and War. He was a most prudent and courteous Man, ever ready to excuse other Men's faults; and therefore seem'd to be a Person perfectly Virtuous in every respect; for in making of Laws he was Prudent and Politick, Faithful to his Word, Valiant in War, and one that scorn'd corrupt Lucre and Gain.

28. The Prieneans say, That Bias having redeem'd from the hands of Robbers some Captive Messenian Virgins, Persons of considerable Quality, he took them into his own House, and honourably entertain'd them as his own Daughters: And when their Relations and Kinsdolk came to Perene to seek after them, he restor'd them to their Friends without taking any thing either for their Dyet or Redemption, but on the contrary presented them with many Gifts out of his own Estate: And therefore the Ladies lov'd him as their own Father both for his noble Entertainment, and the largeness of his Bounty; so that when they return'd home they were still mindful of his Kindness to them: And therefore when the Fishermen of Messenac drew up with their Nets nothing but a Brazen Tripode, whereon was inscrib'd these Words. To the Wisest, they procur'd it to be given to Bias. He was the most Rhetorical and Eloquent Man in his time; but far different from all others in the use he made of his Eloquence; for he was not Mercenary, or aim'd at Gain, but us'd it for the Relief of Men indistress, which is rare now to be found.

29. Cyrus the Son of Cambysis and Mandana Nephew to Astyagis King of the Medes, for Valour, Prudence, and other Virtues, excell'd all others in the age wherein he liv'd: for his Father gave him Royal Education, encouraging him to every thing that was high and brave: And even while he was a Boy he gave evident Tokens of his attempting great


Page 745

things at one time or other; his Virtue and Valour appearing now before hand so evidently while he was but a Child.

30. Astyages King of the Medes, being beaten in a Battle, and forc'd to a dishonourable Flight, was enrag'd at his Soldiers, and disbanded all his Officers, and plac'd others in their rooms; but as for those that were the occasion of the flight, he pickt 'em out of all his Troops, and put 'em to death, thinking by this Example to make the rest more careful in the discharge of their Duty when they came to fight. For he was naturally cruel and implacable: but his Soldiers were so far from being terrify'd by his Severity, that in hatred of his Cruelty and Inhumanity, every one of them were ready to revolt, and to that end began to meet together in great companies, and talk Treason, stirring up one another to revenge the deaths of their fellow Soldiers.

31. Cyrus (they say) was not only valiant against an Enemy, but mild and gentle towards his Subjects, therefore the Persians call him their Father.

32. One Adrastus a Phrygian by casting a Dart at a Boar in Hunting, accidentally kill'd Atys the Son of Croesus the King of Lydia, and tho' he slew him against his Will, yet he said that he himself who kill'd him was not worthy to live, and therefore intreated Croesus not to spare him, but forthwith to cut his Throat at his Son's Sepulchre. Craesus indeed at the first was in a rage at Adrastus for the death of his Son, and threatned to burn him alive: but when he perceiv'd that the young Man did not seek to avoid punishment, but rather voluntarily offer'd his Life as a Sacrifice to the dead; his Anger was appeas'd, and he pardon'd him, complaining of his own misfortune, and not of any purpose or design in the young Man: However, Adrastus went privately to Atys his Sepulchre and there kill'd himself.

33. Croesus King of Lydia pretending to send Eurybatus the Ephesian to Delphos, sent him in truth with a great Sum of Money into Peloponnesus to hire Soldiers; but Eurybatus fled to Cyrus King of Persia, and discover'd to him all Craesus his designs: and therefore this Treachery of Eurybatus was so remarkable among the Grecians, that when they would upbraid any Man with a base Action, they call him Eurybatus.

34. Cyrus believing that Croesus was a Religious Man, because a sudden storm of Rain from Heaven extinguish'd the Fire in the Pile whereon he was burnt, and calling to mind the saying of Solon; carry'd Croesus along with him, using him with all Honour and Respect, and made him one of his Privy Council, conceiving him to be a prudent Man, who had familiarly convers'd with so many and such eminent Persons for Wisdom.

35. Servius Tullius King of Rome Reign'd 44 years, and out of his own virtuous disposition order'd many things for the good of the Commonwealth.

36. When Thericles was chief Magistrate at Athens in the 61 Olympiad, Pythagoras the Philosopher flourish'd, having attain'd to the highest pitch of Wisdom; a Man worthy to have his Memory Eterniz'd, if ever any other Philosopher deserv'd it; he was born a Samos, tho' some say at Tyrrhenum. His Speeches were utter'd with so much Grace, and force of persuasion that almost the whole City daily gaz'd upon him, as if some God had been before them, and a great concourse of People came from all parts to hear him. And he was not only eminently eloquent, but very sober and grave, and was a wonderful Example for young Men to imitate in the course of their Lives in that respect: and all that he convers'd with he dissuaded from vain Pomp and Luxury; all the Inhabitants of that Country (through plenty and fulness of all things among them) being given to effeminacy and filthiness both of Body and Mind.

This Pythagoras when he heard that Pherycides, once his Master, was very sick in the Island Delos, he forthwith sail'd out of Italy thither, where after he had for some time cherish'd the Old Man, and had us'd his utmost endeavour to restore him to health, at length, through Old Age and the violence of his distemper he dy'd, and Pythagoras carefully bury'd him; and so having perform'd the Office and Duty of a Son, as to a Father, he return'd into Italy.

37. The Pythagoreans (if any of their Society fall into decay) divide and contribute proportions of their Goods to him that is so in want, as if he were their Brother; and this they do, not only as to them that are daily conversant with them, but likewise to all others of the same Sect and Profession wherever they be. And therefore one Clineas of Tarentum when he understood that Prorus a Cyrenian and a Pythagorean, by some misfortune or other had lost all his Estate, and was become exceeding poor, he past over out of Italy to Cyrene with a considerable sum of Money, and made up the loss of his Patrimony, tho' he had never seen him before, but only understood by hear-say, that he was a Pythagorian. And it's reported that many others have done the like And they have not only supply'd their Companions with Monies in their wants, but have hazarded their


Page 746

Persons with them in the most dangerous times. For in the Reign of Dionysius the Tyrant it's reported that one Phintias a Pythagorean, when by the contrivance of the Tyrant he was to be led to execution, desir'd of Dionysius but a few days to settle his Houshould Affairs, and promis'd that in the mean time he would leave one of his friends to suffer in his stead, if he return'd not. Dionysius hereupon wondring whether any such friend could be found, who would be willing to be cast into Goal for his friend, Phintias presently call'd for one of his Scholars call'd Damon a Pythagorean, who forthwith without any budging became his Hostage to dye in his room.

Many there were that commended this singular demonstration of Love and Kindness to his Friend, others condemn'd it as a foolish and rash Act. But at the day appointed all the People flock'd together very earnest to see whether he that left his pledge would perform his word. But the day drawing near to an end, every body began to despair, and Damon was led forth to execution, and then on a sudden at the very last moment of the day, Phintias came running in. This wonderful Friendship and Kindness one for another was admir'd by all; and Dionysius pardon'd the condemn'd Person, and desir'd that he himself might be taken into the Society.

38. The Pythagoreans had a great Art in improving their Memories, and to that end employ'd their utmost Care and Diligence. For the first thing they did constantly after they rose out of their Beds in a Morning, was to recollect and call to mind every thing they had done the day before from the Morning to the Evening, and if they had time and leisure they would go back to examine the Actions of the Second, Third and Fourth day, and sometimes further, conceiving it very helpful and advantagious for the improving of Memory, and increase of Knowledge.

39. These Philosophers inur'd themselves to abstinence by this means. They prepare all sorts of Delicacies and Rarities, such as Tables are furnish'd with at Solemn Feasts, after they have gaz'd upon them for a considerable time, on purpose to whet their Appetite, which naturally desires in such cases to be gratify'd, on a sudden the Table is order'd to be whip'd-away, and they themselves thereupon withdrew without tasting any of the Dainties.

40. Pythagoras commanded his Disciples to forbear taking an Oath as much as they could, but when they had once taken it, to be careful to keep it. Having likewise regard to what was convenient, even in the Acts of Venus, he advis'd to abstain from Women in Summer time, and to be moderate and sparing in Winter: for he look'd upon all carnal Copulation to be hurtful; but if it were frequent (he said) it impair'd the strength and was destructive.

He advis'd likewise, that the Sacrificers should not make their Addresses to the Gods in rich and gaudy Habits, but only in white and clean Robes, and should not only bring before them Bodies free from gross and outward wickednesses, but pure and undefiled Souls. Commanding these and many such like things, and stirring Men up to Sobriety, Valour and Constancy, and all other Virtues, he was Ador'd by the Crotonians as if he had been a God.

41. One Cylo of Crotonia, the most wealthy and eminent Man of all the Citizens, desiring to be receiv'd into the Society of the Pythagoreans, was rejected, because he was naturally a fierce and stubborn Man, Seditious and Ambitious. At which he was so enrag'd, that he gat together a number of Factious Persons against the Pythagoreans, and began to rail and do all the mischief he could against them.

42 Lysis the Pythagorean going to Thebes in Baeotia, became Tutor to Epaminondas, and instructed him in all the ways of Virtue, and by reason of his excellent Endowments adopted him to be his Son; And Epaminondas from those sparks of Knowledge, he had gain'd from the Pythagorean Philosophy, excell'd not only the Thebans, but all the rest of the Grecians of his time in Patience, Frugality, and all other Virtues.

43. To write the Lives of Persons in former Ages is indeed a difficult and troublesome task to the Historians, but very profitable to others for their direction in the course of their Lives. For this kind of History, by recording good and bad Actions, doth grace the Memory of the Good, and fix a Stain upon the name of the Wicked, by sharing out Praise and Disgrace to each of them according as they do deserve it. For Praise is as a certain Reward of Virtue without Cost; and Disgrace is the punishment of Vice without a Wound. And therefore it's very fit all should understand, that according to the course of Life Men lead here, such will be the account and remembrance of them afterward; when they are dead, so that they need not employ all their Thoughts upon Marble Mo

••ments,

 which are set up only in a little corner, and decay'd and gone in process of


Page 747

time; but rather apply their Minds to Learning, and other virtuous Qualifications, which would make their Names famous over all the World.

For time, which consumes all other things, preserves these to perpetual Generations, and the elder they grow, the more fresh and flourishing it presents them: for they that are gone long ago, are still in every Man's Mouth, as if they were now at this very day alive.

44. Cambyses was naturally furious and even a Mad-man, and the more fierce and insolent upon the account of his large Dominion.

Cambyses the Persian puft up with the success of his Arms, after the taking of Memphis and Pelusium, insolently demolish'd the Sepulchre of Amasis, an Ancient King of Aegypt; and finding his Body embalm'd with odoriferous Spices, basely and inhumanly cudgel'd it and abus'd it with all manner of Contempt, and after order'd it to be burnt to Ashes. For being the Aegyptians never burn their dead Bodies, he thought by this means he reveng'd himself sufficiently of the Man that was dead long before.

Cambyses when he prepar'd for his Expedition against the Aethiopians, sent part of his Army against the Ammonians; and commanded his Officers to rob the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, and set it on fire, and make all the Inhabitants round Captives.

45. Certain Lydians flying away to avoid the Tyrannical Government of Oroetes, the Governor of the Province fled to Samus with a vast Treasure of Gold, and humbly Address'd themselves to Polycrates for relief: who at first courteously Entertain'd them; but not long after cut all their Throats, and robb'd them of their Money.

46 Thessalus the Son of Pisistratus a Wise and Prudent Man, voluntarily abdicated the Sovereignty, and acted only as a private Man, contented only to share in the common Rights and Liberties with the rest of the Citizens, for which he was in high Esteem and Reputation.

But his Brothers Hipparchus and Hippias, being rigid and cruel, Rul'd Tyrannically over their Citizens. After they had for some time grievously opprest the Athenians, Hipparchus falling in Love with a beautiful Boy, plung'd himself into perilous circumstances. For Harmodius and Aristogiton join'd in a Conspiracy against the Tyrant, in order to free their Country from Slavery; but Aristogiton was the chief Man for a brave and resolute Spirit, in induring all sorts of Torments with patience and constancy, who in the most perilous times, carefully preserv'd two things especially, Faithfulness to his to his Friends, and just Revenge for his Enemies.

47 Zeno of Elis, being seiz'd upon for a Conspiracy against Nearchus, who tyrannically opprest the Country, was put upon the Rack. When the Tyrant askt him, who were his fellow Conspirators; I would to God (said he) I had as much Command of the rest of my Body, as I have of my Tongue.

Hereupon the Tyrant scruing him up, and tormenting him the more, Zeno for some time couragiously endur'd the tormenting Rack, but afterwards to free himself, and be reveng'd on the Tyrant, he had this contrivance. The Rack being extended to the utmost, he feign'd as if he could no longer bear it, and therefore cry'd out to release him, and he would discover all, the Rack being thereupon loos'd, he desir'd the Tyrant would come to him himself, for he had many things to discover, which requir'd Secresie: Upon which he came readily to him, and put his Face close to Zeno's Ear, upon which he took fast hold of the Tyrants Ear with his Teeth; whereupon the Guard came running in, and racking him to the utmost they could to force him to leave his hold, he fastned his Teeth the more fiercely, so that the Guard not being able to baffle the resolution of the Man, they were forc'd to intreat him to let go; and by this trick, he was releas'd from his torments, with a revenge upon the Tyrant.

48. Sextus the Son of Lucinius Tarquinius, King of the Romans, took a Journey to the City Coilatia, and there Lodg'd at the House of Lucius Tarquinius the King's Nephew, whose Wife was call'd Lucretia, a most beautiful Lady and renown'd for her Chastity. Sextus rose up in the Night and broke down her Chamber Door, when she was in Bed, and attempted to force her, (her Husband at that time being in the Camp at Ardea) and with his drawn Sword in his Hand, threatn'd to kill her, unless she yielded, and told her he had a Slave ready, whom he would lay naked in Bed with her, and kill them both, that it might be said, she was justly kill'd in the act of Adultery, and that he had done it in revenge of the injury done to his Kinsman. And therefore it was better for her quietly to gratifie him in what he desir'd, promising her likewise many great and rich rewards, and to Marry her, and so from a private Condition, she should be advanc'd to the State and Dignity of a Queen. Lucretia amaz'd with the strangeness and suddenness of the thing, and fearful lest it should be thought she was kill'd really for an act of Adultery,


Page 748

was quiet at that time. The next day when Sextus was gone, she presently sent for all her Servants and Houshold, and desir'd they would not suffer the Wickedness of the Man to go unpunish'd, who had violated all the Laws of Friendship and Hospitality: And that for her self (she said) it was not Honourable longer to survive the violation of her Chastity: and having said this, she stabb'd her self into the Breast with a Dagger, and so breath'd her last.

49. Hippocrates King of Gela, after his Victory over the Syracusians, when he Encampt near the Temple of Jupiter, took the Chief Priests, and some of the principal Citizens of Syracuse, who had spoil'd the Temple of the Consecrated golden Vessels, and carry'd away other things, especially Jupiter's Cloak, which was made of Massy and Solid Gold, sharply rebuk'd them as sacrilegious Persons, and commanded them forthwith to return to the City. He himself toucht none of the things devoted, both to buoy up the Credit and Reputation of his own Name, as likewise judging it unfit for him, who had undertaken so great a War, to act so high a piece of Impiety against the Gods. Besides, he conceiv'd by this means he should stir up the People against the Governors of Syracuse, who rul'd the Commonwealth with rigour, beyond all bounds of moderation and Equity.

50. Thero of Arge

••um,

 for Wealth and Nobility of Birth, and his courteous Carriage, towards the meanest Man, was not only highly honour'd among the Citizens, but even among all the Sicilians.

51. Cimon the Son of Miltiades, when his Father dy'd in the Common Goal, because he was not able to pay the Fine impos'd upon him, gave up himself into Custody, to abide in Prison for his Fathers Mulct, that he might have the Body of his Parent to bury it.

52. Cimen was very Eminent, when he was a Civil Magistrate, and afterwards became a famous General in the Wars and perform'd such Actions by his Valour, as are worthy of an everlasting Remembrance.

53. Those at Thermopyle dy'd fighting couragiously, whose Valour, &c.—Which are publish'd in the 11th Book of Diodorus his History, P. 9. What after follows in the Manuscript, because they are extant in Diodorus his History, I have purposely omitted, 12 Folio's.

Out of the 21st Book.

1. Antigonus, from a private Man advanc'd to the State and Dignity of a King, was the most potent Prince of any in his time, but not contented with his Condition, without the least colour of Right, was prompted by his Ambition to grasp at the Dominions of other Princes, and by that means both lost his own, and his Life together.

2. When Agathocles heard how the Ligurians and Tyrrhenians had mutinously fallen upon his Son Agatharchus, in his absence, for their Pay, he put them all to the Sword, to the number almost of 2000.

3. The Thracians who had taken in a Battle Agathocles, the Son of King Lysimachus, sent him back to his Father with several gifts; by this means hoping, in case of misfortunes, to shelter themselves under his protection, and hereby likewise to induce him freely to restore their Territory, which he then possest. For they were out of all hopes of Victory, seeing so many potent Kings, Confederates with Lysimachus.

4. Dromichoetes King of Thrace, having taken Lysimachus Prisoner, us'd him with all kind of Civility; and kissed and embrac'd him, calling him his Father, and brought him with his Children into the City Helis. And when the Thracians came in a Body together, and crying out demanded, that the Captive King should be brought forth, and put to death, for that it was but just and equal that they that had adventur'd their lives, should dispose as they thought fit of the Captives; Dromichoetes making a Speech against putting the King to death, told the Soldiers that it was for the publick good to preserve the King: For if they kill'd him forthwith, some others would take possession of his Kingdom, who perhaps might become more formidable to them, than Lysimachus: But on the other Hand, if they preserv'd him, that favour might work so much, as in gratitude to gain a favourable respect to the Thracians, and to procure without running any hazard a Restitution of all those Forts and Castles, that formerly belong'd to the Thracians.

The Army then agreeing to what he said; he brought forth all the Friends and Servants of Lysimachus, that he could find amongst the Captives, and deliver'd them to him. Afterwards


Page 749

when he offer'd a solemn Sacrifice to the Gods, he invited Lysimachus and all his Friends, with the Chief Officers and Commanders of the Thracians to Supper: And having prepar'd Two Apartments, he cover'd the Beds whereon Lysimachus and his Friends were to sit, with rich Carpets, part of the spoils taken in the Battle; but for himself and the rest of the Thracians, the Coverings were but poor and mean. He prepar'd likewise Two sorts of Suppers; That for Lysimachus and his Friends, consist'd of all sorts of Rarities and noble Dishes, set upon Silver Tables: But for the Thracians he order'd Herbs and Flesh meanly Drest, to be set upon a Table uncover'd, in wooden Platters. To conclude, the first were serv'd with Wine in Gold and Silver Bowls: But for himself and his Thracians, he order'd Cups of Wood and Horn, after the manner of the Getes: Afterwards in the height of the Feast, he fill'd up the greatest Horn with Wine, and calling Lysimachus Father, askt him whether of the two seem'd to him more Princely, a Thracian, or a Macedonian Supper? When Lysimachus answer'd a Macedonian—See the rest in the Fragments of Sentences.

5. King Demetrius, after he had forc'd the rest of the Cities to a submission, carri'd himself nobly towards the Baetians: For besides the 14 Persons that were the Heads of the defection, he pardon'd all the rest.

6. Agatharcus was Valorous and Couragious, above his Age For he was very young.

7 Timaeus was a bitter Censurer of former Historians, yet in other parts of his History, very careful to declare the Truth, but his hatred of Agathocles was such, that he forg'd many things in relation to his actions; for being Banish'd by Agathocles out of the Island, he could not be reveng'd of the Tyrant while he liv'd: but after his death he loaded him with Reproaches in his History, to make his Memory odious to all Posterity. For besides the Vices this King was really guilty of, he imputed many others to him, invented of his own Head, and always lessen'd his prosperous successes, and aggravated his misfortunes which were really casual, and turn'd them upon himself, as the cause of them through his own miscarriages. For whereas all know that Agathocles was a prudent and expert Soldier and Commander, and was Bold and Couragious in the greatest Difficulties, he all along in his History is continually calling him a weak headed Coward. And yet who is there that is ignorant, that none were ever under meaner Circumstances, that afterwards attain'd to such a Degree of Sovereignty and Dominion? For his Poverty and mean Birth was such, that from his Childhood he was but a mean Artificer: But afterwards by his Valour, he not only gain'd the Sovereign Power over all Sicily, but Conquer'd a great part of Italy and Africa. And any one may justly wonder at the Vanity of Timaeus, who almost in every Page extols the Valour of the Syracusians, and yet affirms him, who Conquer'd them, to be the greatest Coward of any Man living. From these contradictions and inconsistencies it's clear and manifest that out of a private Pique and Disgust he betray'd the Trust of a faithful Historian: And therefore his last five Books, wherein are set forth the acts of Agathocles, for very good reason, were never approv'd by any.

8. Callias likewise the Syracusian deserves as much to be Censur'd as the other, who being inrich'd and advanc'd by Agathocles, never leaves off praising him far above his desert, and so dishonouring History, which should be the Herauld of Truth. For whereas Agathocles in many things violated both the Laws of God and Man, he cryes him up as the most Pious and Righteous Man in the World. To conclude, as Agathocles by force took away the Citizens Goods, and most injuriously bestow'd them upon this Writer; so this admirable Historiographer in way of requital, loads him in his History with Praises of all sorts and sizes. But in my opinion it were no difficult Task, by way of grateful Return, to repay favours receiv'd from Princes, by moderate and due Praises and Commendations.

9. After the * Mercenary Soldiers had agreed with the Syracusians, they Marched away, and were receiv'd by the Messenians, as Friends and Confederates: and being thus kindly entertain'd by the Citizens, in the Night they Murther'd all their Landlords, and took their Wives as their own, and possessed themselves of the City.

10 When Demetrius was a Prisoner at Pella, Lysimachus sent an Ambassador to Seleucus to Caution him, not to suffer him upon any Terms to get out of his Hands, being (as he said) an insatiably ambitious Man, and one continually plotting against all the Kings; and promis'd he would give him 2000 Talents, if he would put Demetrius to death: But Seleucus the King, sharply rebuk'd the Ambassadors, for perswading him not only to violate his Faith, but to commit so horrid a piece of Wickedness against one so near related to him: But he writ a Letter to his Son Antiochus, who was then in Media, to ask his Advice what should be done with Demetrius; for he had resolv'd


Page 750

to release him and restore him hononourably to his Kingdom; but was willing likewise to have the Favour acknowledg'd by his Son Antiochus, who had marry'd Stratonices the Daughter of Demetrius, and had several Children by her.

Out of the 22d BOOK.

1. WHen a Garrison was put into Rhegium by the Romans, Decius a Campanian, a covetous and impudent Fellow, acted the Base and Treacherous Part of the Mamertines; for as they were receiv'd as Friends by the Messenians, and seiz'd upon their City, and cut the Throats of all the Messenians their Landlords, in their own Houses, and marry'd their Wives, and possess'd themselves of the Estates of them they had murder'd; so the Campanian Soldiers to whom with Decius the Garrison of Rhegium was committed by the Romans, with the like Perfidiousness kill'd all the Rhegians, and dividing their Goods amongst themselves, possess'd themselves of the City. But Decius the Governor after he had sold the Goods of these miserable People, and shared the Money he had treacherously rais'd, was expell'd from Rhegium by the Campanians, his Co-partners in this wicked Fact. But every one of these perfidious Villains at length met with their just Reward: For Decius being seiz'd with a grievous pain in his Eyes sent for an Eminent Physitian of Rhegium, who to revenge the Wrong done to his Country, anointed Decius his Eyes with Cantharides, and by this means having made him stark blind, forthwith fled out of Messena.

2. Phintias having tyrannically oppressed his Citizens, and put to death many of the Wealthy Men of the City, began to be hated by his Subjects for his Cruelty; and therefore all being upon the point ready for a General Defection, and he himself reduc'd to great streights, on a sudden chang'd his former Course, and ruling more moderately, kept his Subjects within the bounds of their Duty and Obedience.

3. Ptolomy King of Macedonia, being indeed very Young, and altogether unexpert in Military Affairs, and naturally Rash and weak Headed, made no provision for any thing as he ought: And therefore when he was advis'd by his Friends to stay for the Auxiliary Forces who were not as yet come up to him, he disregarded their Council.

4. Apollodorus affecting the Sovereign Power, and minding to confirm the Conspirators in whhat they had undertaken, sent for a young Man, one of his Friends, under colour of coming to Sacrifice, and when he came he offer'd him up to the Gods, and gave his Intrails to be eaten by the Conspirators, and drunk to them in his Blood mixed with Wine.

5. The same Apollodorus arm'd some Gauls, and engag'd them with large Gifts, and made use of them for his Life-Guard, because they were naturally Cruel, and ready to execute any Villany. He rais'd likewise a great Sum of Money, by Confiscating and exposing to publick Sale the Goods of the Wealthy Citizens. He grew very potent in a short time, by increasing the Soldiers Pay, and distributing Money among the Poorer sort.

Being wholly given up to Cruelty and Covetousness, he squeez'd Money from the Citizens, and forc'd both Men and Women with Racks and Torments to bring forth all their Gold and Silver; for he made use of one Calliphon a Sicilian for his adviser, an Arts master in Tyranny, who had been long bred up a Courtier among many of the Tyrants in Sicily.

6. When Pyrrhus had plunder'd Aegeas, the Seat-Royal of the Kings of Macedonia, he left there a Garrison of Gauls, who being inform'd by some that there were great Treasures (according to ancient Custom) hid in the Sepulchres of the Kings, dug up all the Tombs, and divided the Wealth amongst themselves, but scattered abroad the Bones and Ashes of the Dead.

However, Pyrrhus though he was rail'd at for this piece of Inhumanity, yet he punish'd not the Barbarians, because he made use of their assistance in his Wars.


Page 751

Out of the 23d BOOK.

1. I Look upon it the Duty of an Historian diligently to observe the Stratagems and Management of Affairs by Generals on both sides: For by laying open and taxing of other Mens Faults the like Miscarriage may be prevented in them that come after, and on the other side, by commending of things that are done well, others are stirr'd up to Virtuous actions. For who can but utterly condemn the Pride, Folly, Madness and Insolency of Attilius? Who not able to bear the weight of his prosperous Fortune, both lost his own Reputation, and brought many great Mischiefs and Calamities upon his Country. For when he might have struck up a Peace with the Carthaginians, Honourable and Advantageous to the Romans, but Base and Dishonourable to the other, and his Name might have been for ever renown'd amongst all Men for his Clemency and Humanity, he had no regard to any of these things: But proudly insulting over the Distresses of the Afflicted, stood upon such Terms as both provok'd the Gods to Anger, and forc'd the Conquered by reason of those unreasonable Conditions, to stand it out resolutely to the utmost Extremity; so that the face of Affairs was chang'd on a sudden, insomuch as the Carthaginians who but a little before were in great Terror and Amazement, by reason of their late Rout, and despair'd of all Relief, gather'd Courage, and routed and cut off their Enemies Army; and upon this Misfortune, such was the Distress and Amazement of the City of Rome, that they who were before look'd upon to be the best Soldiers at Land in the World, durst not engage the Enemy in that kind any more; and therefore this was the longest War of any we read of in former times, and the matter was now to be decided by Sea Fights, in which a vast Number of Ships both of the Romans and their Confederates were destroy'd, and 100000 Men perish'd with those that were kill'd in Fights at Sea: And it's easie to believe how vast a Treasure must be expended, sufficient to maintain so great a Fleet for the continuance of a War for Fifteen Years. But he that was the Author and Occasion of so many Miseries, had himself no small share in the Calamity, since his present Dishonour and Disgrace did far over-ballance his former Glory and Reputation; and by his Misfortune others are taught not to be proud in Prosperity. And that which was most cutting and grievous was, that he was now forced to endure the Scoffs and Scorns of those over whom he had before insulted in the time of their Calamity; having justly debarred himself from that Pity and Commiseration which is wont to be shew'd towards them that are in affliction. But as for Xanthippus he not only delivered the Carthaginians from the present Evils that hung over them, but altogether chang'd the Scene of Affairs; for he utterly routed the Romans who were but even now Conquerors, and after a sad slaughter lifted up the Carthaginians to such a height of Prosperity, (who were expecting their last doom) that for the future they slighted and contemn'd their Enemy.

The noise of this famous Action being spread almost all the World over, every one admir'd the Valour of this General. For it look'd like a Wonder to every body, that there should be such a sudden change of Affairs, by one Man only joining with the Carthaginians, and that they who were but lately closely besieg'd, should on a sudden besiege the Enemy: And that they who by their Valour were a little before Lords both of Sea and Land, should be now coop'd up in a small Town, expecting every day to be a Prey to their Enemies; but it's not to be wonder'd at, since the Prudence and Wisdom of the General overcame all difficulties.

2. Hamilear the Carthaginian, call'd Barca, and Hannibal his Son the great Carthaginian Generals, are reputed the greatest Captains of any that ever were either before or after them, and by their Victories greatly enlarg'd the Dominion of the Carthaginians.

Out of the 24th BOOK.

CLodius coming into Sicily, as soon as he had receiv'd the Charge of the Army, who then straitly besieg'd Lilybaeum, call'd the Soldiers together, began bitterly to inveigh against the Consuls from whom he receiv'd the Legions, declaring they had negligently manag'd the War, giving themselves up to Wine, Luxury, and Voluptuousness, and that they were more really besieg'd than the Enemy: But this Man being naturally Hot and


Page 752

Fiery, and something Crack-brain'd, acted many things Rashly and like a Mad-man. For in the first Place, imitating the indiscreet Actions of those he had before censur'd, he attempted to raise up a Mole in the Sea and block up the Haven, with so much the more Imprudence, as the Fault is the greater not to learn to do better, by seeing before the Mistakes and Miscarriages of another, than to run into an Error upon the first Attempt. Being likewise naturally Cruel and Severe in inflicting Punishment, after the manner of his Ancestors he was inexorable in punishing the Soldiers, and scourg'd the Roman Confederates with Rods. To conclude, He was so swell'd with Pride upon the account of the Nobility of his Birth, and the Renown of his Ancestors, that he despis'd every body else.

2. Hamilcar before he was chosen General was noted to be a Man of a magnanimous Spirit, and after he was advanc'd to that Honour he deceiv'd not their Expectation, but behav'd himself as a Noble Carthaginian, in every thing aiming at Fame and Renown and despising Dangers. He was both Prudent, Valiant, and Industrious, the Best King and the most Valiant General.

3. Hanno was naturally of an aspiring Spirit and thirsting after Glory, and having a great Army that lay idle, hop'd by this Expedition both to Train and Exercise the Soldiers, and likewise to maintain them, and by that means to ease the City of a great Charge, and over and besides, to perform some considerable Service that might prove both Honourable and Profitable to the Common-wealth.

4. When Hanno had taken Hecatompylus, and the Elders of the City address'd themselves to him, and begg'd and intreated him to shew them Pity and Compassion, being something Vain-glorious at this time he preferr'd Mercy before Severity, and took 3000 Hostages, and preserv'd the City and the Estates of the Citizens entire and untouch'd, for which he was highly honour'd by the poor People, and the Soldiers were splendidly and liberally Entertain'd by the Inhabitants with all manner of rich Provision.

5. But the * Mother of the Young Men grievously laid to heart the Death of her Husband, and conceiving that through their Carlesness and Neglect he had lost his Life, she stirr'd up her Sons to use the Captives most Cruelly and Inhumanely, for they were thrust into a little close Room, and by reason of the straitness of the Place were forced to throng one upon another like Beasts, and after they had been kept without Meat for five Days * Bostar through vexation of Mind and Famine together dy'd. But Hamilcar being a Man of a great Spirit held out still, though he saw no hopes of Relief. But told her how careful he had been of her Husband, and intreated her with Tears to Compassion; but she was so far from being touch'd with the least sense of Humanity, that this cruel Woman shut up the Carkass with him for five Days together in that close Hole, and gave him meat only to keep him alive, that he might be the longer sensible of his miserable Condition. Hamilcar therefore now despiaring by intreating or begging to move her to Pity, began to call upon Jupiter, and cry out to the rest of the Gods, who took care of Mankind, to revenge him upon the Woman, and repay her with just and due Punishment.

However, in the midst of all these Torments he was kept alive, till through the Mercy of the Gods, or some good Fortune, he was wonderfully and unexpectedly delivered. For even when he was upon the Point of Death, through the stench of the dead Body, and other Miseries he lay under, some of the meaner Servants belonging to the House told it some others abroad, who in indignation to such a piece of Cruelty and Wickedness, forthwith inform'd the Tribunes of the People of this horrid Fact. Whereupon, when it was discover'd, the Magistrates sent for the Attillii, who for branding the Roman Name with such a dishonourable Mark of barbarous Cruelty, escap'd very narrowly being put to Death; but the Magistrates threatned the Attillii severely to punish them if they did not for the future use their Prisoners civilly, and take due care of them. They imputed most that was done to their Mother, and burning the Body of Bostar, sent the Ashes back to his own Country, and freed Amilcar from the Distress and Calamity he had groan'd under.

Out of the 25th BOOK.

THE Carthaginians who had been at War with the Romans for the possession of Sicily, now Four and Twenty Years, suffer'd not so much by that War as they did by their Mercenary Soldiers whom they had injur'd: For designing to defraud them of


Page 753

their Pay, they were in a fair way of losing both their Sovereign Authority and their Country together, for the Mercenaries resented the Injury to that degree, that they forthwith revolted, and brought the Carthaginians into miserable Distresses.

2. The Carthaginians sent a Trumpet to the Revolters, to desire liberty to bury them that were slain in the Battel. But Spondius, and the rest of the Captains of the Revolters, with barbarous Cruelty, not only deny'd that, but warn'd them upon their Peril not to send any more Messengers to them upon any account whatsoever, for if they did, they should suffer the same Punishment. And they then made an Order, that every Carthaginian they took Prisoner should be put to Death in the same manner as they before mentioned were, and that their Confederates which should be taken should have their Hands cut off, and so sent back to Carthage. This Cruelty of Spondius was the reason that Hamilcar was forc'd to cast off his former Lenity, and retaliate the same Cruelty upon the Prisoners taken by the Carthaginians: And therefore after he had first Rack'd and Tormented the Captives, he then cast them to the Elephants, who trod and trampled them under-foot, so as they dy'd most miserably.

3. The Hippacrineans and Uticans revolted from the Carthaginians, and kill'd the Carthaginian Garrison, and threw them over the Walls, and would not suffer them to be bury'd, though it was desir'd by the Carthaginians.

Hamilcar, Sirnam'd Barca, perform'd many great and excellent Services to the advantage of his Country, both against the Romans in Sicily, and in Africa against the Mercenaries and the Lybians, who revolted from the Carthaginians, and streightly besieg'd Carthage it self. For in both these Wars he perform'd noble Actions with great Valour and Prudence, and therefore was highly honour'd by all the Citizens. But after the War was ended in Africa, he got together a Body of Lewd Fellow; and having enrich'd himself with the Spoils of his Enemies, and by his Actions gain'd a great Interest and the Love of the People, he prevail'd so far as that he was created Generalissimo of all Lybia for a little time.

Out of the 26th BOOK.

1. HAnnibal was naturally of a warlike Spirit, and Train'd up in Martial Affairs from a Child; and having been for many years together in several Expeditions with the greatest Captains, he learnt a great deal of Experience in matters of War, so that being by Nature prompt to Feats of Arms, and improv'd likewise by daily Exercise for a long time in the Wars, he look'd very big upon it, in expectation of doing great things.

2. Minucius being overcome by Hannibal, it was evident by the Event that he ruin'd all by his Imprudence and Unskilfulness; but Fabius by his Valour and Policy preserv'd the Common-wealth.

3. Dorimarchus the Provincial Governor of the Aetolians committed a most impious Fact; for he robb'd the Famous Temple of Jupiter Dodonaeus, and afterwards burnt the whole except the Treasury.

4. Hannibal's Army having for a long time together glutted themselves with the Riches and Pleasures of Campania, became wholly degenerated; for their Luxury, Soft Beds, Ointments, and all sorts of delicate Fare, took away their Courage, and made them unfit to endure hardship, and caus'd both their Bodies and Souls to degenerate into Effeminacy.

5. When Hannibal had spoken much against the cruelty and malice of the Romans, or rather their pride and arrogancy, he put to the Sword the Senators Sons, and their Relations (which he pickt out of the rest of the Captives,) in this manner revenging himself upon the Senate.

6. Hannibal being possess'd with an implacable Hatred against the Romans, pickt out from amongst the Captives such as he thought fittest for single Combat, and matcht them one with another, and commanded them to fight Brothers with Brothers, Fathers with Children, and Kinsmen with Kinsmen. In this barbarous Injunction, who cannot but justly abhor the cruelty of the Carthaginians, and admire the Piety, Patience and Constancy of the Romans, in the midst of their most grievous Sufferings! For tho' they were tormented with Fire-Goads and cruel stripes, yet none would be brought to lift up their hands against their Friends and Relations, but all unmovable dy'd in the Anguish of their Sufferings, keeping themselves pure and unspotted from the Guilt of destroying one another.


Page 754

7. When Gelo and Hiero Kings of Sicily were dead in Syracuse, and Hieronymus, who was very raw and young, succeeded, the Kingdom was but ill supply'd with a Governour; for being flatter'd and sooth'd up by his Friends, he fell into Luxury, Debauchery, and Tyrannical Cruelty. For he Ravish'd many Men's Wives, Murther'd his Friends that advis'd him; confiscated the Goods of many without hearing them, and gave their Estates to the flattering Informers; which first stirr'd up the hatred of the People against him, then put them upon Plotting, which broke out at last and ended in his destruction; the common Lot of Tyrants in such cases.

8. When Hiero was kill'd, the Syracusians call'd a Senate, where it was decreed that all the Kindred of the Tyrant should be put to death, both Man and Woman, and that none of his Race or Family should be left alive.

9. When the dead Body of Semprenius Gracchus was sent by Mago to Hannibal, the Soldiers seeing it lie upon the ground, cry'd out to have it cut in pieces, and to be hurl'd away piece by piece out of Slings. But Hannibal having an Object before his Eyes to instruct him in the uncertainty and unconstancy of Fortune, and honouring and admiring likewise the Valour of the Man, said it was an unworthy thing to wreak a Man's Anger upon a speechless Carcass; and afterwards celebrated his Funeral with all the marks of Honour and Respect, and civilly sent his Bones and Ashes in an Urn to the Roman Camp.

9. When Syracuse was taken, all the Citizens went forth to meet Marcellus with Olive-branches in their hands; and he told them he would spare all the Lives of those that were Freemen of the City, but all their Goods should be a prey for his Soldiers.

10. The Carthaginians after they had made an end of the Libyck War, severely punish'd the Micatanian Numidians, with their Wives and Children; for they crucify'd all their Captives, insomuch as their posterity ever since remembring the Cruelty executed upon their Forefathers, are most implacable Enemies to the Carthaginians.

11. But the Valour of Hasdruball is not to be passed over in silence. For he was the Son of Amilcar Barca, the bravest Captain of his Age, who in the Sicilian War was the only General that often overcame the Romans, and having put an happy end to the Civil War, was the first that past over with an Army into Spain; and this Hasdrubal approv'd himself a Son not unworthy the Honour and Dignity of such a Father. For he was generally own'd to be the best Soldier, (next to Hannibal his Brother) of all the Carthaginian Commanders, and therefore he was left General of all the Forces in Spain by Hannibal, where he fought many Battles, and freeing his Army many times from the Straits they were in, he often ran himself into many great Dangers: and being at 

•

ength forc'd up into the heart of the Country, far from the Sea, upon the account of his Valour he got together a mighty Army, and at last came unexpectedly into Italy.

12. Nabis King of Lacedemon Murthered P

•l

•

ps,

 the Son of 

••curg

••

 the former King, when he was but a very Child; for he was afraid when he was grown up to Man's Estate, he would seek to free and rescue his Country, upon the account of his being of the Blood-Royal. And for this reason he put to death the Nobility of Sparta, and hir'd the basest and most abject Fellows, wherever he could find 'em, to be his Life guard, and protect him in his Dominion: So that Robbers of Temples, Thieves, Highway-men, and Condemn'd Persons flock'd from all places to Sparta. For stepping up into the Throne by wickedness, he had no hopes to keep what he had so wickedly got, but only by the help of such Prophane and Impious Fellows.

13. The Cretians Rigg'd out Seven Ships for Piracy, and robb'd many Passengers at Sea, whereupon the Merchants being altogether discourag'd, the Rhodians looking upon it to belong to them to redress this Mischief, proclaim'd War against the Cretians.

14. Pleminius was left Governor of Locris by Scipio; and being a p

•

ofliga

••

 wretch, he forc'd open the Treasury of Proserpina, and carry'd away all the Sacred Treasure. The Locrians enrag'd at the Fact, Address'd themselves to the People of Rome, and intreated their Relief according to their usual Faith; whereupon, Two Military Tribunes seem much offended with the Impious Fact committed, and sharply rebuk'd Pleminius; not that they were really angry at what was done, but because they themselves had no part of the Money. But in a short time after, the Goddess paid them all home for their Impiety. For this was reported to be the most Famous Temple of all that were in Italy, and in all Ages before that time (through the care of the Inhabitants) had remain'd safe and unviolated. For at the time when Pyrrhus transported his Forces out of Sicily to Locris, and his Soldiers were pressing upon him for Pay, he was forc'd to make use of this Sacred Treasure: but in returning back (they say) he suffred much, his whole Fleet being dispers'd, shatter'd and torn in pieces by a 

•

ierce and violent Tempest, and


Page 755

therefore Pyrrhus himself, out of a Religious Reverence to the Goddess, endeavour'd to pacify her, and restor'd every penny of the Money before he left the Country. But the Tribunes before mentioned pretending to abhorr the Sacrilege, sided with the Locrians, and rebuking Pleminius for his Crime, threatned severely to punish him. The Quarrel growing hotter and hotter, it came at length to blows, and the Tribunes threw Pliminius upon the ground, and bit off his Ears and Nose, and slic'd off both his Lips; but afterwards Pliminius caus'd the Tribunes to be seiz'd, and whipp'd them to death with Rods. In the mean time the Senate and People of Rome, through a Religious awe of the Gods, were in great concern about this Sacrilegious Act; and upon this occasion the Enemies of Publius Scipio having got an opportunity to cast Durt upon him, accus'd him as if he had been the Adviser of Pliminius, and that he had done all by his Order and Command. Whereupon by a Decree of the Senate, two Tribunes of the People and an Aedilis were sent into Sicily with Orders to bring Scipio forthwith to Rome, if they found that the Sacrilege was committed by his Command or Connivance; but if they could not discover any such thing, that then they should suffer him to Transport the Forces over into Africa. While they were upon their Journey Scipio sent for Pliminius and cast him into Goal; and every day with great care and diligence exercis'd the Soldiers; at which the Tribunes of the People did so admire, that they highly commended him. But Pliminius being brought bound to Rome, the Senate forthwith committed him to prison, and a short time after he dy'd there in custody. His Goods were all Devoted to Proserpina, and what they fell short to make satisfaction, was decreed by the Senate to be supply'd out of the publick Treasury, and that it should be death for any Soldier not to restore what Goods or Money soever he had in his hand, that were taken out of the Treasury of Proserpina's Temple, and further decreed that the Locrians should be free.

15. Scipio when he saw Syphax among other prisoners led up to him in Chains, at the first fell a weeping, to consider the former Royal State and Dignity of the Person; resolving therefore to use his fortunate success with moderation and humanity, Commanded that Syphax should be freed from his Chains, and gave up his Tent to him for the reception of him and his Royal Family; and keeping him as a prisoner (yet with all the liberty imaginable) often courteously convers'd with him, and entertain'd him at his Table.

16. Sophonisba (who was first the Wife of Masinissa, and afterwards of Syphax, but being taken prisoner was gain'd again by Masinissa) was a Woman of an admirable Beauty, and by her cunning tricks and charming devices could obtain whatever she pleas'd: and being confederated with the Carthaginians her Countrymen, ply'd her Husband every day to fall off from the Romans; which when Syphax was assur'd of, he acquainted Scipio with the design, and caution'd him to have a special care of that Woman; all which being confirm'd likewise by Laelius, Scipio commanded the Lady to be brought to him, which Masinissa refusing, he threatned him severely; at which Masinissa was so concern'd, that he order'd that some should be sent from Scipio to fetch her away: but in the mean time he went into his Tent, and forc'd Sophonisba to drink off a Cup of Poison.

17. Scipio through his Clemency and Compassion towards all the prisoners he took, for ever after was secure of Masinissa as a faithful and constant Confederate.

18. Hannibal call'd together his Confederates, and told them that he must of necessity pass over into Africa, and that he had provided shipping for all those that were willing to go along with him; Some agreed to the thing; but as to those that chose rather to continue in Italy, he compass'd round with his Army, and gave his Soldiers liberty to pick out as many of them as they pleas'd, to be their Captives; and the rest, to the number of Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse he put to the Sword, together with a vast number of Cattle.

19 Four thousand Horse of those that went over to Masinissa after the Rout of Syphax, deserted him and came in to Hannibal: But he enrag'd at them, encompass'd them round with his Army, and shot them all to death with Darts and Arrows, and divided their Horses amongst his Soldiers.

20. Scipio sent Ambassadors to Carthage, but the common People were on the point to have knock'd them all on the head: But the sober Men of the City preserv'd them from that imminent danger, and got 'em a Ship-board, in order to send them back to Scipio's Camp: But those that were popular, and sided with the People in Carthage, order'd the Master of the Vessel, that when the Ship wherein the Ambassadors were, began to Sail, he should throw all over-board, which he perform'd accordingly.

However, the Ambassadors swam to land and got safe to Scipio; But the Gods within a short time after, by a remarkable Instance; evidenc'd their Power to punish those that


Page 756

design'd so wicked a Fact. For it happn'd about that time the Carthaginian Ambassadors were returning from Rome, and were driven by a Storm into the midst of the Roman Fleet, and brought to Scipio; and when all cry'd out to retaliate the wickdness of the other upon the Heads of the Ambassadors that were then taken, Scipio utterly refus'd, saying, That they themselves ought not to do that, for which they blam'd the Carthaginians. They were therefore all discharg'd, and came safe to Carthage, and highly extoll'd the Piety of the Romans.

21. Philip King of Macedon persuaded Dicaeardus the Aetolian, a daring Man, to act the Pirate at Sea, and to that end deliver'd to him Twenty Ships, with order to exact Tribute from the Islands, and assist the Cretians against Rhodes; Hereupon, according to his Orders, he robb'd and spoil'd the Merchants, and wasting the Islands, screw'd abundance of Money from them.

22. Philip the Macedonian King had with him one Heraclides a Tarrentine a wicked fellow, that in private was always buzzing him in the Ears with Calumnies and false Accusations against Philip's best Friends, and egg'd him on at length to that height of Impiety, that he put to death five of the Senators; so that King Philip's Affairs by degrees declin'd and went worse and worse: For undertaking Wars frivolously and unnecessarily, he was in danger to have lost his whole Kingdom to the Romans: for none of his Friends durst speak any more freely to him, or advise him, all fearing his stubborn and haughty Humour. He made War likewise upon the Dardanians without the least provocation given him, and kill'd 10000 of them in a Battle.

23. This Philip King of Macedon, besides his rooted Covetousness, was so lifted up with his prosperous Successes, that he put his friends to death without any legal Trial or just Cause, and robb'd and spoil'd the Temples and Sepulchres. In like manner Antiochus attempting to rob the Temple of Jupiter in Aelymais there receiv'd a just Overthrow with the loss of his Life and Ruine of his whole Army; And both of them conceiting their Armies were Unconquerable, lost all in one Battle, and were forc'd to receive Laws impos'd upon them by others; and imputed their Misfortunes to their own Miscarriages, and acknowledg'd themselves beholding to the Humanity and Generosity of the Victors, for the pardon of their Offences; and according to the desert of their own wicked Actions, they saw their Kingdoms, through the Anger of the Gods, grievously plagu'd and aflicted. But the Romans then, and ever after, beginning no Wars but upon just and Honourable Terms, and having a Sacred Regard to their Leagues and Oaths, were always deservedly assisted in all their Councils and Designs by the Gods.

24. The same Philip being in extream want of Provision, continually wasted and spoil'd the Country of Attalus, up to the very Gates of of Pergamena. He ruin'd likewise the Temples in the Suburbs of Pergamus, especially Nicephorus that was exceeding Rich. Besides several other sumptuous Fabricks; for out of hatred against Attalus, because he could not catch him, he executed his Rage upon these places.

25. Philip entring into Attica encamp'd at Cynosarges, and afterwards burnt Acadamia, demolisht the Sepulchres, and robb'd the Temples of the Gods, and gratifying his Rage and Fury, as if he had been only incens'd against the People of Athens, and not against the Gods themselves, as he was spoke ill of before, so he was now hated of all, and in a short time he was overtaken by the Vengeance of the Gods, for he was near being ruin'd by his own imprudence, but preserv'd by the Clemency of the Romans.

26. Philip discerning he was hated by almost all the Macedonians, for his kindness to Heraclides, put him in Prison. This Heraclides was a Tarrentine, a notorious wicked fellow, who from a mild and gentle Prince, chang'd Philip into a fierce and cruel Tyrant, and therefore * he was exceedingly hated by all the Grecians, as well as the Macedonians.

27. The Name and Fame of Hannibal, was nois'd over all the World, and therefore in every City and Town where ever he came, they came in great Multitudes to look at him. 

28. Ptolemy King of Aegypt, for some time Reign'd with great Commendation: But afterwards corrupted by Parasites, he began to have an evil Eye towards his Tutor Aristomenes, for his freedom in telling him of his faults, who had all along manag'd every thing with great prudence, and whose advice Philip had before follow'd as his Father; but at length he sent him out of the World, by forcing him to drink off a Cup of Poyson. From that time growing more and more fierce, and raging, making use of Tyrannical cruelty, and not of Regal Authority, he was hated by the Aegyptians, and not far off from the loss of his Kingdom.

29. Ther's a Temple not far off from Chalcis, call'd. Delium; * where a considerable


Page 757

number of Roman Soldiers, that were securely walking up and down, to satisfie their Curiosity, were on a sudden cut off by Antiochus, in a time of Peace, and before any War was Proclaim'd.

 For which the King was greatly condemn'd and censur'd by the Grecians, as occasioning by this wicked Fact, a War with the Romans. And therefore Titus Flaminius who was then at Corinth, call'd Gods and Men to Witness, that the King was the first that began the War.

30. Antiochus Winter'd at Demetrias, where he laid aside all care of Warlike Affairs, being then above Fifty Years of Age: But he fell in Love with a young Lady, and Married her, and set forth most magnificent Shews, and publick Games; by which means he not only weakned his own Body, and effeminated his Mind, but infeebled the Courage of his Army; and therefore his Soldiers, who had passed the Winter in Luxury and Voluptuousness, after they were drawn out of their Winter Quarters, could neither endure hunger nor thirst, or any other hardship, but some of them fell Sick, and others straggled about here and there far from their Colours.

31. King Antiochus seeing the Cities of Thessaly inclining to the Romans, and the slow Motion of the Forces he expected out of Asia, and the carelesness and sloath of the Aetolians, continually framing and and pretending one excuse after another, was in great strait, and very uneasie; so that he was highly incens'd at those that advis'd him to begin the War, when he was unprepar'd, and had no Confederates, but only the Aetolians: But he greatly admir'd Hannibal for his Prudence; who diswaded him to the contrary, and therefore now repos'd all his Confidence in him; and whereas before he suspected him, 

•

e now made use of him as his most trusty Friend and Councellor.

32. Antiochus wholly discourag'd by his late Rout, determin'd to leave Europe, and only be on the Defensive part in Asia, and order'd all the Lysimachians to forsake the City, and pass over into Asia: For which every Body censur'd him as for a very imprudent Act, whereby without a stroak struck, he gave up into the Enemies hands, a City so advantageously scituated, as might have given a Stop to the Enemies passage out of Europe into Asia, as afterwards by experience was found true; for Scipio seizing upon Lysimachia thus deserted, made great advantage of it for the transporting of his Army.

33. Marcus Fulvius the Praetor, was deservedly punish'd for his abuse of the Roman Confederates in Liguria: For he disarm'd the Cinomani, who receiv'd him as a Friend, and an Allie, although he could find nothing against them; which thing coming to the Consul's Ears, he ordered him to restore their Arms, and impos'd a Mulct upon him.

34. King Antiochus being in want of Money, and hearing there were vast Treasures of Gold and Silver and other precious Jewels, of offerings made in the Temple of Jupiter Belus, in Elymais, resolv'd to rifle it. Coming therefore into the Province of Elymais, and pretending that the Inhabitants of that Place had rais'd a War against him; he robb'd the Temple, and got together a great Sum of Money, but in a short time after, the Gods executed vengeance upon him for his Sacrilege.

35. Philopemenes Governour of Achaia, was both an excellent Soldier and a Statesman, who all his Life long was of a blameless Conversation, and had been frequently Praetor; and having govern'd the Commonwealth for Forty Years together, much advanc▪d the affairs of Achaia, and was always affable and courteous to the meanest, and for his virtue was admir'd both by the Grècians and Romans, and yet came at last to an unfortunate End: but by a Divine Providence his unhappy Exit was recompens'd after his death with Divine Honours, for besides what was publickly decreed by the Achaians in honour of him, the Citizens built a Temple in remembrance of him, and appointed a Bull for a yearly Sacrifice to him, and ordered young Men to sing Hymns in praise and commendation of his noble Acts.

36. Hannibal was the most expert General, and perform'd the greatest Enterprizes of any of the Carthaginians; he was never troubl'd with any Mutinies in his Army, but by his prudent Conduct, kept them in their duty and orderly discipline, tho' they differ'd as much one from another in their several humours, as they did in their various Languages.

For whereas those of his own Nation were us'd commonly upon every slight occasion, to desert and fly to the Enemy, none under him durst ever attempt any such thing.

And tho' he March'd from place to place with very great Armies, yet he never wanted either Money or Provision. And that which is most remarkable is, that the Foreigners and Mercenary Soldiers lov'd him as well, if not more, than they did who were his own Country Men. Keeping therefore his Army in exact discipline, he perform'd the greater and more renown'd Actions. For he made War upon the most potent Nations, and wasted and harrass'd almost all Italy, for the space of Seventeen years.


Page 758

He was, so Victorious in every Battle he Fought, and made such terrible Slaughters among them that were reputed the Lords of the World, that by reason of the Multitudes that were cut off by him, none durst look him in the Face, to Engage him in Battle.

He laid likewise many Cities in Ashes, which he took by Storm, and almost depopulated Italy that was before full of People: all which as they were accomplish'd by the Strength and Wealth of his own fellow Citizens, so likewise by great numbers of Foreign Auxiliaries and Confederates, those that by their Unanimousness were unconquerable, he overcame by Policy and Warlike Stratagems; and so made it evident, that as the Soal governs the Actions of the Body, so a General rules and directs all to a right end, in an Army.

37. P. Scipio, when he was but very young, perform'd great and wonderful things in Spain, beyond all Mens expectations, and having beaten the Carthaginians, deliver'd his Country from imminent Perils, and compell'd Hannibal, who was not to be overcome by force of Arms, to leave Italy without fighting a stroke, and at last by his Valour and Military Conduct overcame Hannibal in a great Battle, and brought Carthage to stoop to the Roman Yoke.

38. Leocritus General of King Pharnaces, after he had often assaulted the City Pius, at length forc'd the Mercenary Soldiers who defended the place, to surrender the Town upon Condition, That they should be safely conducted to what place soever they pleas'd to go; who when they were march'd out of the City, and brought on their way according to the Capitulation, Leocritus (who was ordered by Pharnaces to put them all to the Sword, because they had formerly incens'd him) against the Faith of the Articles, as they were upon their march, fell upon them, and with Darts slew them every Man.

39. Seleucus having rais'd a great Army, and on his march to assist Pharnaces, was now ready to pass over Mount Taurus, but recollecting and calling to mind the League the Romans had made with his Father, by which it was not lawful—

40. But they who had committed such a notorious Wicked Fact, and had Murder'd Demetrius, escap'd not Divine Vengeance. For those who contriv'd the false Accusations from Rome, within a while after incurred the Displeasure of the King, and were put to Death; and for Philip himself, he was restless all the days of his Life, and so much troubled in Conscience for the Murder of so hopeful a Son, that he liv'd not two years after, but pin'd away with extremity of Grief. And Perseus, the Author and Contriver of the whole, being conquer'd by the Romans, and flying to Samothracia, by reason of the wickedness of the Fact executed by him in the Murder of his Brother, could find no sanctuary in that holy Temple.

41. Tiberius Gracchus being sent Lieutenant General into Spain, vigorously manag'd the War: for tho' he was very young, yet for Valour and Prudence he excell'd his equals in age, and gave such evident signs of doing great things, that he was admir'd by all.

42. Paulus Aemilius, the Consul and Patron of the Macedonians, was a Man Eminent for Nobleness of Birth, Prudence and Comliness of Person, and therefore all Marks of Honour were conferr'd upon him by the Romans his Countreymen. Every one eccho'd forth his Praise while he was alive, and after his Death his Fame and Renown, together with Profit and Advantage by his Valour procur'd to the Commonwealth, surviv'd him.

43. Antiochus now newly advanc'd to the Throne of Syria, began a new Course of Life unusual with other Kings and Princes. For first he would privately steal out of his Palace unknown to any of his Attendants, and walk up and down in the City, calling one or another to him where he came as he thought fit; Then he took a Pride in being Familiar and drinking with Ordinary Fellows and Mean and Poor Travellers and Strangers; and if perchance he discern'd any young Men were met together at a set time to celebrate a Festival, he would presently clap himself down amongst them with his Cup in his Hand, and be one of the Quire; so that many were often so startled with the strangeness of the thing that they would run away, and others through fear struck into amaze, not able to say a Word. Lastly, he would lay aside his Royal Robes, and put on a Roman Gown; and in imitation of the Candidates at Rome that were seeking for Preferments, would salute and hug every Ordinary Fellow he met in the Street, and sometime desiring they would make choice of him to be Aedile, and other times to be a Tribune of the People.

Having at length obtain'd the Office he desir'd, he would seat himself upon an Ivory Tribunal, and after the Roman manner hear Causes, and was so earnest and diligent in the Decision of Controversies, both between Foreigners and Citizens, that the most


Page 759

Prudent and Serious amongst them knew not what to think of him, what he aim'd at or design'd; for some gave a favourable Construction of it, others accounted it Folly, and some no other than downright Madness.

44. After Eumenes was way-laid, and news came to Pergamus that he was dead; Attalus something too rashly, hand over head, on a sudden Marry'd the Queen; but Eumenes returning a little time after, took no notice of it, but embrac'd his Brother, and carried with the same Respect towards him, as he did before.

45. Cotys, King of Thrace, was Valiant in War, and Prudent in his Counsels, and highly to be commended for his Care and Diligence in all other Respects; besides all which he was of singular Temperance and Sobriety; and that which was most remarkable for his Honour and Commendation was, That he was altogether free from the Natural Vices of the Thracians.

46. Perseus having taken Chalestrus by Storm, put all that were able to bear Arms to the Sword; and whereas Five hundred of the Garrison Soldiers got into a Fort, and Treated for their Lives, the King upon laying down their Arms gave them Quarter, and liberty to be gone. But when they were out of the Town, and on their way, ac¦cording to the Terms granted them, the Macedonians (whether of their own heads, or by order from the King is uncertain) pursued them and flew them every Man.

47. Charopus the Epiros and Son of that Charopus who in the War against Philip, sent a Guide to Titus Flaminius to direct him through the Strait and difficult Passes in the Mountains, by which means the Romans unexpectedly passing those places, possessed themselves of the Straits; this Charopus I say being bred up at Rome, upon the account of the good Services of his Grandfather to the Romans, had great Interest with the most Eminent Persons of Quality, and being a fellow of extraordinary Malice and Impudence, was ever and anon at Rome accusing and slandering the chiefest Persons of Quality in Epirus, so that by terrifying all that were in a Capacity to oppose him, he became as it were absolute Lord and Master of all Epirus.Cephalus therefore, and others that were oppressed by his Calumnies, were forc'd to Confederate with Perseus, and to that end, sent Messengers to him into Macedonia, and by them promis'd to deliver up Epirus into his hands.

48. King Eumenes being out of all hopes of taking Abdera which he he had then besieg'd, dealt under-hand with one Pytho, a chief Man among the Abderites, who by his Servants and Freemen, to the number of 200, Guarded the strongest part of the City; this Man being corrupted with Bribes, and won with fair promises, let him in at the Gates, and so Eumenes gain'd the City. But Pytho receiving but a poor and mean Reward for his Treason, and seeing before his Eyes the utter Ruin and Destruction of his Country, repented of what he had done, and pin'd away for Grief.

49. When an Opportunity was put into the hand of Perseus, to cut off the whole Army, he loyter'd not far off, about Dius in Macedonia, careless and negligent in the very nick of time, wherein only by a Shout and sound of Trumpet, he might have surpriz'd and taken all the Enemies Forces, who were then shut up and inclos'd within steep and craggy Rocks: And as the King was Negligent, so the Macedonian Guards that were plac'd upon the tops of the Mountains, were in like manner as Careless in their Watch, in their several Posts.

50. Perseus looking upon all to be lost, and altogether discourag'd, commanded Nico his Lord Treasurer, to throw all the Money and Treasure at Phacis into the Sea.

He sent away likewise Andronicus the Squire of his Body to Thessalonica, with orders forthwith to burn his whole Fleet; who came accordingly to Thessalonica, but with a purpose to Act more prudently; for he forbore to execute his Orders, hoping by preserving the Shipping, to ingratiate himself with the Romans.

51. Perseus in the mean time pulling down all the golden Statues at Dion, ordered all the Inhabitants with their Wives and Children to remove along with him to Pydna, than which (a Man may justly say) nothing was more Imprudently done by Perseus, during this War.

52. At this time the Cydoniates committed a most Impious Fact against all the Laws and Customs of Greece; for being receiv'd by the Apolloniats into the City, as Friends in time of Peace, they seiz'd upon the Place, and put all the Men to the Sword, and divided their Wives and Children among themselves, and took possession of the whole Territory.


Page 760

53. King Antiochus, when he had routed the Aegyptians, and might have cut them off every Man, rid about and call'd out to his Men to forbear killing them, but rather to take them Prisoners; from which Councel he reap'd considerable Advantage in a short time; for upon the account of this Humanity, he presently gain'd Pelusium, and not long after all Aegypt.

54. But we cannot (observing the method we have propos'd to our selves) pass by the Cowardice of Ptolemy, for who can but judge him of a most effeminate Spirit, that would without a stroke struck, give up so great and rich a Kingdom, when there was not the least danger at hand, and the Enemy at so great a distance from him. Which Effeminateness if it had been Natural, would perhaps have been more excusable: But being it was apparent from the things he afterwards did, that he was a Prince inferior to none for Industry and Resolution, this Sloath must needs be imputed to his Education under the Euuuch, who breeding him up from his Childhood in Pleasures, and Womanish Recreations, Emasculated the vigour of his Spirit.

55. King Antiochus seem'd to all to be a prudent and active Prince, and worthy of the Kindom in every respect, excepting that one miscarriage at Pelusium.

56. When Perseus understood that a choice Body of Gauls had pass'd the River Ister, in order to assist him, he greatly rejoyc'd, and sent Messengers into Maedica to hasten their March with all speed. But the General of the Galls demanded present Pay, according to the Agreement, to the value of about 500 Talents, which Perseus through his natural Covetousness, refusing to pay, tho' he had before promis'd it, the Gauls return'd back into their own Country.

57. Paulus Aemilius, as soon as he had receiv'd the Legions, call'd them together, and put Life and Spirit into the Hearts of his Soldiers; for he was now above 60 Years of Age, and a Man of great Repute and Authority among the Romans, for his noble Services to the State: And he had invented many new and subtil Stratagems in that War, and by his Valour and Policy, had overcome the Macedonians.

58. Perseus desirous to have many to go along with him, when he fled by Sea, brought out to them Money and rich Furniture, to the value of 60 Talents, to take and carry away with them. Afterwards when he arriv'd at Galepsus, he told his Companions that some of those things that he had suffer'd them to carry away, were formerly the Goods of Alexander, and desir'd they would forthwith restore them to them, and he would repay them to the value in Money: To which all readily consented, and he receiv'd every thing back again, but never made good his promise.

59. Alexander was of a far different temper from Perseus, for the former was of a brave and noble Spirit, and gain'd an Empire like to the greatness of his Mind. On the contrary, the other through his sordid Covetousness, lost the Assistance of the Galls, and by such like gross miscarriages, utterly ruin'd an Ancient flourishing Kingdom.

60. After the flight of Perseus, Lucius Aemilius began to seek for his younger Son PubliusAfricanas, who was the natural Son of Aemilius, but the adopted Son of Scipio, who overcame Hannibal. At that time he was a youth about Seventeen years of Age, and under the Care and Tutorage of his Father, in that great and perilous War, so that afterwards he became as famous a General as his Father. Being at length found out, and brought safe into the Camp, the Consul was at rest, and freed from that anxiety of Mind he labour'd under; for he lov'd him with a more than a Paternal Affection.

61. Aemilius by his Civil and Courteous usage of Perseus, entertaining him at his Table, and receiving him into all publick Councils, gave evident Demonstrations, that as he was a terrour to his Enemies in the open Field, so he was Mild and Merciful to them that were Subdu'd: Which course being follow'd by others, Rome became Mistress of the World, without Envy, and so continu'd as long as it made use of such noble Generals.

62. For in former times when the Romans had overcome those two potent Kings Antiochus and Philip, they not only forbore inflicting punishment, but restor'd them to their Kingdoms, and took them into the number of their Allies. And in these later times, after many Battles sought with Perseus, and overcoming many great hazards and difficulties, and after they had possess'd themselves of all Macedonia, beyond all Mens hopes and expectations, they proclaim'd liberty to all the Cities; which favour neither the Macedonians nor any Body else could ever expect should have been granted by the Romans, because they were very Conscious to themselves how much they had injur'd the Roman State. For they judg'd (and that most justly) that there was no room left for mercy, being that they had before been pardon'd former Wrongs and Injuries.


Page 761

But the Senate forgot all that was past, and carry'd themselves towards them with great Clemency and Generosity. For they suffer'd Perseus to go at large, only with a keeper; a punishment less than his demerit, who against the Faith of his League, and the Obligation of his Kindred and Alliance to the Romans, had most unjustly made War upon them; and they set Free all the People of Macedonia, (whom by the Law of Arms they might have made perpetual Slaves,) and with that readiness and nobleness of Mind, beyond all that the Conquer'd themselves could have desir'd. The Illyrians likewise whom they had Subdu'd, they suffer'd to use their own Laws; for they made it more their concern to do what became the Majesty and Grandeur of the Romans, in carrying it Nobly towards others, without Pride and Insolency in Prosperity, than that they look'd upon the Barbarians any way worthy of such Favour.

63. The Senate decreed the Macedonians and Illyrians to be free, and that they should pay but half of that Tribute to Romans, which they paid to their own Kings.

64. Perseus thus thrown into the Goal, miserably ended his days in such sad and uncomfortable Circumstances.

The rest is to be found in the Fragments, Book 31. in Photius his Bibliotheca, at the end of Diodorus Siculus. Fragm. 2.

65. The General of the Gauls being return'd from the pursuit of the Enemy, gather'd the Captives together, and committed a most horrid piece of Wickedness; for he pickt out the Choicest and Strongest young Men amongst them, and Sacrific'd them to the Gods, as if the Immortal Dieties are pleas'd with such Sacrifices. The rest he shot to death with Darts, (most of whom of Ancient acquaintance) he well knew; however former Friendship was no Argument to spare a Man of them. Thus are Barbarians puft up with prosperous Successes.

66. Eumenes far different from Perseus, not only paid his Soldiers what was their due Pay, but bestow'd on them several Gifts besides, with promises of more afterwards, whereby he gain'd all their Hearts, and held them fast to his Interest. But Perseus when 20000 Galls were near at hand ready to assist him, through his niggardliness refus'd their aid and assistance; but Aeumenes, tho' he was nothing near so rich as the other, oblig'd his Mercenaries and all others that might be helpful to him by his Bounty and Liberality And therefore Perseus sinking below the Generosity of a King, and enslaving himself to a covetous and sordid Parsimony, liv'd to see all the Wealth he had heap'd up together, with his whole Kingdom fall into the hands of the Conqueror. But the other, preferring Victory before any thing else, not only freed his own Kingdom from the imminent dangers it labour'd under, but brought the whole Nation of the Gauls into subjection.

67. Some of the Councils and Acts of Antiochus were both Princely, and admirable, others so poor and mean, that they were justly despis'd and ridicul'd. For when he celebrated publick Games, he first acted contrary to the manner and practice of all other Kings: for they when they were strengthening themselves all they could with Men and Money, it was their greatest care to keep all private and secret, out of fear of the Roman Greatness: But he on the contrary invited to his Sports the most eminent Persons from all parts of the World, and most Magnificently Adorn'd every part of his Palace; and thus bringing together all the Riches of his Kingdom into one place to be expos'd, as it wereupon a Stage, to the view of all, he occasion'd every thing he did to be known and blaz'd abroad.

68. And in the State, Grandeur, and variety of those famous Games, Antiochus far excell'd all the Princes that ever were before him: But that part which he himself acted in those Maygames, was very despicable and contemptible. For he would ride up and down among all that Solemn Assembly upon a little Nag, meanly accoutred, bidding some go on, others to stop, and Commanding this and that, as best pleas'd his own fancy; so that if his Diadem had been off, none would have believ'd him to have been a King, who scarce represented the Garb and Meen of a common Officer. All the time of the publick Entertainment he stood at the Door, and introduc'd some, and order'd others to sit down, and Usher'd in the Servants that brought in the Dishes. Some times also he would go to some one of the Guests, and sit down by him, and at othertimes lay himself along on the floor; and then would start up on a sudden and hop up and down, sometimes placing dishes of Meat upon the Table, and other times washing the drinking Cups, and diligently observing every thing round the Room, would pledge those that drank to him standing, sporting and jesting with those that were merrily dispos'd. When it drew towards Evening, and most were gone, he was wrapt up in Linen and brought in by the Anticks and laid upon the ground; and presently after (as if he were call'd) he started up on a sudden naked, and in a jocund Humour, danced


Page 762

in most ridiculous Gestures with the Mimicks and Stage-Players; insomuch as all being dasht out of countenance through shame withdrew and left the place. Every one indeed that came to the Solemnity, as often as they cast their Eyes upon the sumptuous Furniture, and the Stately and Magnificent Order and Disposal of the whole, in the Celebration of the Sports and Games, admir'd both the King and the Riches of his Kingdom; but when they lookt upon the King himself, and his Irregular Actions, they scarce believ'd it was possible there could so many Vices and Virtues be found to Concenter in one and the same Person.

69. When the Solemnity was ended Tiberius Gracchus arriv'd as an Ambassador sent to inspect into the Affairs of Syria, whom the King receiv'd and entertain'd with so much Kindness and Civility, that Gracchus did not in the least suspect any ill Designs in the King, nor discern'd that he took any thing amiss in relation to what was done in Aegypt. But Antiochus in truth was far from such a Temper, but was altogether a Mortal Enemy to the Romans.

70 Ptolemy being driven out of his Kingdom, and on his Journey to Rome by land, it was made known to Demetrius the Son of Seleucus, who surpriz'd with his misfortune, gave an instance of his Royal and Generous disposition. For forthwith, attended with his Servants, and taking with him a Royal Robe, a Diadem, and a Horse Adorn'd with Trappings of Gold, he went to meet Ptolemy, and came up to him at the * 26th. Stone distant from the City, whom (after he had courteously embrac'd him) he advis'd to put on the Royal Robes, and to make use of the other Ensigns of Royalty, and so enter into the City as became the Dignity of his Person, left he should be despis'd: Ptolemy was much taken with him for his extraordinary Kindness; but was so far from accepting what was offer'd, that he intreated Demetrius he might rather stop, and take up his Lodgings at some small Village in the way.

71. Antipater having breathed out his last in the midst of these Torments, they bring Asclepiades Governor of the City, crying out that Timotheus was the Contriver of the whole Scene of this mischief, and that it was through his persuasions that the young Man so impiously and unjustly put his Brother to death. Hereupon when all the Great Men and Commanders began to smell out the whole Design and Contrivance, and to commiserate the sad condition of those that suffered such cruel Torments; Timotheus was in a great fright, and loos'd the rest that were condemn'd from their Torments, and afterwards put them privately to death.

72. Philopater sirnam'd Ariarathes being now come to the Crown after the death of his Father, the first thing he did was the Celebrating his Father's Funeral in great Pomp and State; afterwards caressing his Friends, Great Officers and Commanders, and the rest of his Subjects, he gain'd the good Will of all sorts.

73. When Ariarathes had restor'd Mithrobuzanes to his Father's Kingdom, Artaxias King of Armenia still infected with his old vice of Covetousness, sent an Ambassador to Ariarathes to sollicit him to join with him and kill one of the Brothers that were then in his hands, and divide Sophene between them. But Ariarathes greatly abhorr'd such a piece of Cruelty and Treachery, and smartly rebuk'd the Ambassadors, and writ a Letter to Artaxias, wherein he advis'd him to forbear such wicked practices; which Carriage of Ariarathes much advanc'd his Fame and Reputation; and Mithrobuzanes through the faithfulness and integrity of him to whom he fled for shelter, regain'd his Father's Kingdom.

74. Lucius Aemilius who conquer'd Perseus, and was a Consul and Censor, and the bravest Man of his Age of all the Romans, dy'd about this time; whose death when it was generally known, especially at the time of his Funeral, caus'd such a general Sorrow and Lamentation, that not only Artificers and other sorts of common People flock'd together, but the Senate and all the Magistrates of the City prepar'd every thing that was necessary for the Gracing of his Funeral. And all Persons of the Free Towns and Cities bordering upon Rome, that could posibly attend at the day, came in flocking together, both to see and honour the Solemnity.

75. Such as Aemilius was reported for his Wealth while he liv'd, such he appear'd to be when he was dead. For tho' he was the only Person in his time that enricht the Treasury at Rome with plenty of Gold, brought with him out of Spain, and had the Command of all the Riches of Macedonia, and was cloath'd with absolute Authority in all those places; yet he was so far from converting any thing to his private use, that when his two adopted Sons, after his death, possess'd themselves of his Estate; out of all his Goods they were not able to raise so much as would be sufficient to satisfie his Wife her just Dowry, without selling some of his Land,; and therefore some have preferr'd him for his Abstemiousness


Page 763

and freedom from Covetousness before Aristides and Epaminondas that were so famous and eminent among the Grecians upon that account. For they only refus'd Money that was offer'd them by such as thereby design'd and aim'd at their own advantage; but this Man medled not with any thing where he had possession of all, and might have taken to his use as much as he pleas'd.

And if any look upon this as a thing incredible, let such consider that they must not judge of the Sobriety and Moderation of the Ancient Romans, by the griping Covetousness of those at this day. For in truth in this our Age the Romans exceed all other Nations in their Insatiableness after Riches. But since we now revive the memory of so excellent a Person, we shall briefly say something of Scipio his Son, he that afterwards raz'd Numantia, lest ignorance of his Care and Diligence in the Study of the most excellent, and commendable Arts and Sciences, should occasion Incredulity, that he should attain to such an Eminency in all virtuous Qualifications. Publius Scipio therefore was the natural Son of Lucius Aemilius who conquer'd Perseus, as we have before declar'd; but was the Adopted Son of Scipio that conquer'd Hannibal, and the Carthaginians, and so by Adoption Scipio Africanus the most Eminent of all the Romans that ever were before him, was his Grandfather.

Scipio thus Nobly descended and taken into so famous a Family, approv'd himself not the least unworthy the Glory and Renown of his Ancestors. For he was brought up and instructed from his Childhood in the Learning of the Greeks; and when he was 18 years of age, apply'd himself to the study of Philosophy under the Inspection of Polybius of Megalopolis the Historian his Tutor, with whom he continu'd a considerable time; and increasing in all manner of Virtue, he not only excell'd his equals in years, but those far elder than himself, in Sobriety, Affableness, Generosity, and all other virtnous qualifications. But before he fell to the study of Philosophy, it was every bodies Opinion that he was but dull and blockish, very unworthy to be Heir to so great a Family. In the first place he made it his chief Care and Business to be Sober, as conducing much to the commendation of his youthful age, which was then at his years a very difficult Task. For the Youth at that time were hurried away by filthy Lusts, and an Excess of intemperance, with an impetuous Current, some to Sodomy, others to Whores, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like Luxurious and Voluptuous Courses: For the Romans presently learnt the Effeminate Manners of the Greeks in this kind, through the long continuance of the Persian War; and besides, having gain'd abundance of Wealth, they were plentifully supply'd with Fuel to seed their Luxury.

76. But Scipio following another course of Life, and combating with all his natural corrupt Lusts, as with so many wild Beasts, within the space of Five years attain'd to a fix'd and habitual state of Sobriety and Temperance. To which all giving their Testimony, and generally crying him up upon that account, he then put forth himself in acts of Bounty, Generosity, and Liberality in distributing his Money for the good of others: For which sort of Virtue he had an Example in his Father Aemilius, under whose instruction he was long bred up, and now exhibited, as it were, a perfect Copy of his Virtue: But Fortune likewise presented him an Eminent occasion of expressing his Liberality. For when Aemilia the Wife of Great Scipio, the Sister of Aemilius who conquer'd Perseus, dy'd, and left a great Estate behind her, of which Scipio was Heir; he first gave an instance of his generous disposition upon this occasion. For his Mother Papiria being cast off long before the death of his Father, had liv'd a considerable time separate from her Husband, in a far meaner condition than became one of her Noble Birth: But Aemilia the Mother of his adopted Father leaving behind her a great Inheritance, besides other Riches, had a rich Robe and Womans Gown, together with a splendid Retinue of Houshold-Servants, as being the Wife of the Great Scipio, and so Sharer with him in his Estate and Fortune: All these Scipio Nobly bestow'd upon his Mother; in which stately Habit, when she appear'd in publick amongst the Ladies of Quality, the Bounty and Generosity of the young Man, and his Piety towards his Mother was highly applauded, First among the Women, and then among all Companies and Societies of Men, throughout the whole City. This piece of Liberality was lookt upon by the whole City, not only as a thing commendable, but even wonderful, especially at Rome, in which City none easily parts with any thing they have to another. After this, there being a great sum of Money owing to the Daughters of the Great Scipio, as their Dowries; and whereas by the Roman Laws the Party that was to pay such Portions, had liberty to pay them in Three years time, by a certain proportion every year, he paid the whole down at once. Afterwards when his natural Father Aemilius was dead, and he and his Brother Fabius were constituted joint Heirs of his Estate, Scipio did another Honourable Act, well


Page 764

worthy to be remembred. For when he knew that his Brother had far less than himself, he freely bestow'd upon him his own share of the Inheritance, amounting to above Sixty Talents, and so made his Brother as rich as himself; which Act being generally cry'd up, he did that which was further remarkable: For when Fabius was resolv'd to exhibit single Combats by Gladiators at the Funeral of his Father, yet was not well able to bear the great Charge it would require, Scipio bore half of the Cost and Expence out of his own Purse. A little time after, when his Mother died, he was so far from taking again what he had before bestow'd on her, that he gave not only them, but all the rest of his Mother's Inheritance to his Sisters, altho' no part of her Estate by the Laws, belong'd to them. Thus Scipio being cry'd up by the unanimous Consent of all Persons, for his generosity, he grew every day more and more famous and renown'd, which he attain'd unto, not so much by greatness of Expence, as by choice of fit opportunities to express his Kindnesses, and an Art in Conferring of his Gifts and Benefits, upon proper Objects.

He gain'd likewise a just Reputation for his Chastity without any Cost or Charge, but only by his Moderation and Sobriety, from whence likewise he reapt the great Benefit of Health and Strength of Body, and following this Course all his life long, he injoy'd a Reward of his Temperance with great pleasure and delight. And as for all the parts of Valour, which is a Virtue absolutely necessary every where, especially among the Romans, he was not in the least wanting or negligent, in that respect Fortune affording him a special opportunity to approve himself; for the Macedonian Kings being much given to Hunting, Scipio by far surpass'd them all.

77. After that the Romans had Conquer'd Perseus, they put some of them to death who had sided with the Macedonians, and others they sent to Rome. But Charopus being cloth'd with an absolute Power and Authority in Epirus, because he seem'd to be a great favourer of the Romans, at first dealt with the Epirots something gently and mildly, but afterwards growing every day more proud and insolent, he turn'd every thing in Epirus upside down. For by false Accusations against the richest Men he banish'd some, put others to death and Confiscated their Goods: And he not only squeez'd Money from Men, but from Women, by the help of his Mother Philota; who was more than a Woman in Cruelty and Wickedness. Many likewise who were accus'd to be plotting against the Romans, he gave up into the Hands of the People, who were all Condemn'd to die.

78. Orofernes having depos'd his Brother Ariarathes, when he ought to have manag'd his Affairs with the greatest prudence imaginable, and ingratiated himself into the Hearts of his People by Kindness and Acts of Grace and Favour, intended no such Matter: But being wholly intent on scraping up Money together, he wickedly put many to death; he gave to Timotheus Fifty, and King Demetrius Seventy Talents, and promis'd in a short time to pay other 400 Talents, and besides to add to them 600 more: At which, discerning that the Cappadocians were greatly incens'd, he began to Rob and Spoil every Body, and Confiscate the Goods of the Nobility; and having Treasur'd up a vast Sum of Money, he intrusted 400 Talents with the Pirenians, to serve him at a Turn, and Change of Fortune, which were afterwards faithfully repaid him.

79. Ptolemy the Elder, having presently by the multitude of his Forces penn'd up his Brother, by a close Siege, and reduc'd them to the utmost Extremity, yet pardon'd him; induc'd thereunto, both by his natural Clemency, and the nearness of Relation, and his awe and fear of the Romans: And he did not only pardon him, but entred into a League with him, according to which, he was to be content as the younger Brother with Cyrene, and with a certain proportion of Wheat every Year. And thus a War between Brothers, which had wholly alienated their Affections one from another, and was continu'd to the utmost hazard of them both, was on a sudden ended upon moderate Terms and Conditions.

80. When Orofernes discern'd that his Affairs declin'd much to the worse, he resolv'd to satisfie his Mercenary Soldiers as soon as he could, lest they should Mutiny, for want of their Pay: But being at present straitn'd through scarcity of Money, he was necessitated to rifle Jupiter's Temple, scituated at the Foot of Mount Ariadne, which before had been ever preserv'd Sacred and Inviolable, and by this means he paid his Soldiers all their Arrears.

81. Prusias King of Bithynia, being altogether disappointed in his Design of taking Attalus, destroy'd and laid waste the Sacred Grove call'd Nicheporius, which lay under the Walls of the City, and rifled the Temple it self, and took away the Statues, and the Images of the Gods, and among the rest, the famous Statue of Aesculapius, said to


Page 765

be one of the curious Pieces of Phipomachus, and robb'd the Place of all its sacred and consecrated Goods and Treasure. For which sacrilege, the Gods in a short time after, inflicted upon him deserv'd punishment: For most of his Land Army perish'd by the Bloody Flux; and the like Calamity hapned to his Naval Forces, for by a sudden Storm in the Propontis, most of his Ships with their Soldiers and Rowers together were Sunk; and some few were cast upon the Land, and Shipwrackt. And these were the first punishments inflicted upon Prusias for his Impiety.

82. The Cretians arriving at Siphnus, besieg'd the City, and the Inhabitants partly through fear, and partly through feign'd and and deceitful promises admitted them into the City; the Cretians first promising that none of the Inhabitants should receive the least prejudice; but when they were enter'd, according to the usual Treachery and Perfidiousness of the Cretians, they both carri'd them all away Captives, and rifled and robb'd all the Temples of the Gods, and so loaded with spoil hois'd up Sail, and made back for Crete. But in a short time after, they paid Dear for this Treachery, the Gods presently executing Vengeance upon them for their Impiety; for out of fear of some Enemies that overpowr'd them in Shipping, they were forc'd to loose out of Harbour in the Night, and most of their Ships by a sudden Storm were sunk at Sea, and others were cast upon Land, and dasht in pieces upon the Rocks, where all in them miserably perished; some few that consented not to this perfidious dealing escap'd.

83. Philip the Son of Amyntas, coming to a Kingdom then Subject and Tributary to the Illyrians by his Arms and skill in Martial Affairs, restor'd it to its former Liberty, and by his mild and gentle Usage of those he subdu'd, he enlarg'd his Kingdom above any that was in Europe. For having beaten the Athenians in a great Battle (who contended with him for the Principality of Greece,) he buried all their dead that fell in the Fight, whom they had left in the open Field, and sent back above 2000 Prisoners to their own Country, without any Redemption: So that they who before had contended with him, hearing of his generous Usage of their fellow Citizens, voluntarily yielded up to him the Sovereignty of Greece, and so what he could not accomplish by so many Battles and Hazards, meerly by his Mildness and Humanity he obtain'd with the free and unanimous Consent of his Enemies. But what he had got, he afterwards maintain'd, by striking a Fear and Terrour into the Hearts of his Enemies, for he raz'd the Populous City of Olynthus to the Ground. In the same manner his Son Alexander, by the Ruine of Thebes, deterr'd the Lacedemonians and Athenians (who were plotting against him) from their design'd Revolt. And his Civil and generous Usage of the Prisoners in the Persian War, was such, that he gain'd the Hearts of the Asiaticks, not so much by his Valour, as his Mildness and Humanity. But in later times, the Romans thirsting after a Universal Monarchy, in a great measure obtain'd their ends, by the force of their Arms, but their Clemency towards such as they had Conquer'd, added much to the increase and inlargement of their Conquests. For they were so far from Cruelty, or being Rigorous in executing punishment upon those they had Subdu'd, that they seem'd to carry it towards them rather as Friends, than as Enemies. For when the Conquer'd expected the utmost severity of Revenge from the Conquerors, they left no room for any others to exceed them in Humanity, and Clemency: For some they made Free of the City, with others they join'd in Affinity by Marriages, others they set Free to Govern according to their own Laws; and to sum up all, none underwent any severity by being Conquer'd, farther than what was fit. And therefore upon the account of this extraordinary Clemency, Kings, Cities and Countreys, generally sheltred themselves under the Protection of the Romans. But when they were Lords almost of the whole World. then they strengthen'd and confirm'd themselves in their Dominions, by severity, and razing of Towns and Cities, to strike a Terrour into their Enemies. For they utterly destroy'd Corinth in Achaiah, Carthage in Africa, Numantia in Spain, and rooted up the Kingdom of Macedonia, in the Ruine of Perseus, and became a Terror to many.

84. The Romans make it their great Care, that the Wars they begin, be upon just grounds, and therefore never resolve upon any thing rashly, or inconsiderately.

85. Publius Scipio (who was afterwards sirnamed Africanus, and was then a Tribune, when almost all the rest of the Romans made light of their Terms and Articles made with their Enemies, tho' confirm'd by solemn Oaths;) most Religiously observ'd and kept his promises with the Besieg'd, and us'd them with all Humanity and Clemency when they fell into his hands. His Faith and Integrity therefore being nois'd abroad all over Africa, none surrendred up themselves into the hands of the Romans, unless Scipio, join'd in signing of the Articles.


Page 766

86. When there were only three Romans kill'd in the Skirmish, and were left lying upon the Ground unbury'd, all were very much troubled and concerned at it. But Scipio with the Consent of the Consul writ a Letter to Hasdrubal, to desire him to bury those Romans; who presently order'd the thing to be done, and when all was perform'd sent their Ashes to the Consul, which added much to the Honour of Scipio, as one whose Authority was prevalent even with the Enemies themselves.

87. The Counterfeit Philip, having beaten the Romans in a great Battle, became Proud, Cruel and Tyrannical; there was not a Wealthy Person which he put not most wickedly to death, upon false Accusations: He spar'd not his own intimate Friends, but dispatch'd many of them out of the Way; for he was naturally Fierce and Cruel, Proud and Haughty in all his Familiar intercourses, and at last deeply ingag'd in Covetousness, and all manner of Vice.

88. The Romans had such a kindness for Publius Scipio, that tho' neither his Age nor the Laws did qualifie him, yet they endeavour'd with all their might to Elect him Consul.

89. Calpurnius the Consul, after he had some Towns deliver'd up to him upon Articles, contrary to the Terms agreed upon, and against his Faith and Ingagements, raz'd them to the ground, and therefore in all his Designs and Contrivances afterwards, he was disappointed as a Faithless and Treacherous Person, as if some Deity set himself against him; for he attempted many things, but was never able to effect any thing,

90. King Prusias being both of an ugly Visage, and a mean and effeminate Presence, was mortally hated by the Bythinians.

91. After the taking of Carthage, Scipio gave Liberty to the Sicilian Ambassadors to search among the Spoils, and order'd every one to carry back into their several Cities such things as had formerly been taken away from them by the Carthaginians: Upon which were found many Statues and Pictures of famous Men, of exquisite Workmanship, besides many things Devoted and Consecrated to the Gods, some of Silver and others of Gold; among which, was the famous Phalarian Bull of Agrigentum, made by Perilaus, for the Tyrant Phalaris, who caus'd the Artificer himself to make the first experiment of his own Art, by executing that sort of punishment upon him, which he had invented for the Torturing of others.

92. In our time Caius Julius Cesar, sirnamed for the greatness of his Actions Divus, when almost a hundred Years after he saw the Ruins and Rubbish of Corinth, was so compassionately Affected, and withal desirous to make himself glorious, that he put forth himself to the utmost to rebuild the City. And therefore it is but just that the Humanity and Clemency that was eminently in this Man, should be allow'd its just and due praises, and that his Virtues should be Recorded in History, for an everlasting remembrance to his eternal Praise and Honour. For when his Ancestors were Extreme in their severity against this City, he rectified their Excesses by his own Lenity and Moderation, preferring Mercy before Cruelty. Besides, he far excell'd all that were ever before him in the Greatness of his Actions, and upon the account of his Virtuous Qualifications, was sirnamed Divus. To conclude, this Man was the most Famous and Renown'd for Eminency of Birth, Fluency of Tongue, the Art of War, and Contempt of Riches, of any whatsoever that was in his Age.

93. Viriathus of Lusitania, the Captain of the Robbers, was just and exact in distributing the Spoil, and those who had valiantly behaved themselves in Battle, he would liberally reward according to their several Merits, and he never converted any of the publick Moneys to his own private use, and therefore the Lusitanians never shrunk or drew back from any hazardous undertaking, when he Commanded them, and was their Leader, honouring him as the Common Benefactor and Saviour of their Country.

94. Plautius the Roman Praetor greatly misgovern'd his Province, being therefore Condemn'd by the People, because he had dishonour'd his Government, he fled from Rome.

95. In Syria, King Alexander, being far unfit for so high a Station, by reason of his Sloath and Meanness of Spirit, gave up the Government of Antioch to Hierax and Diodotus.Ush. An. 470. Before Ch. 140.


Page 767

96. The Kingdom of Syria, being now brought low, and Demetrius being only the surviving Branch of the Royal Stock, believing himself to be out of all Danger, disregarded the Deportment of the former Kings, who studied to ingratiate themselves into the good Opinion of their People, by their affable and courteous Behaviour: But he growing every day more and more unsufferable, fell at length to downright Cruelty, and all sorts of hainous Enormities. The cause of all which is not only to be attributed to his own corrupt Disposition, but to one of his Friends, who had the Management of all the Affairs of the Kingdom: For being a Wicked and Rash Fellow, he incited by his Flattery, the young Man to all manner of Wickedness. At first therefore, he put to death all that had sided against him in the War, with unusual sorts of Punishments. Afterwards, when the Antiochians Taunted and Jear'd at him, as they were wont to do, he got together a Company of Mercenary Soldiers against them, and commanded that they should be disarm'd, but the Antiochians refusing to deliver them; some he kill'd as they fell into his hands, others he Murdered in their own Houses, together with their Wives and Children; upon which a great Uproar being rais'd in the City, he burnt down most of the Town to the Ground, and many that were accus'd to be Heads of this Commotion, were put to death, and their Estates Confiscated, and brought into the Kings Exchequer: And therefore many of the Citizens, both out of Fear and Hatred of Demetrius, Fled out of the City, and wander'd up and down all Syria, watching for a fit time and opportunity to be reveng'd. In the mean time, Demetrius hated of every Body, rag'd notwithstanding in Slaughters, Banishments, and Confiscations, far exceeding his Father in Cruelty: For he was far from Royal Clemency and Kindness, but exercising a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Power, oppress'd his Subjects with most grievous and unsufferable Calamities, in somuch as the Kings of this Family, for their oppressions, were hated by all, and those of the other, as much belov'd for their Moderation and Clemency; so that thro' the mutual Plots and circumventing Contrivances of the Heads of both these Families, one against another, Syria was continually full of Stirs and Commotions: and the common People themselves, through the Flattery and fair Promises of those Kings that sought to succeed the other, were so led aside, as that they still delighted in Change.

97. The Aradians growing high Crested and Insolent, abus'd the Marathenian Ambassadors, who crying out against their Impiety, challeng'd the Sacred regard that ought to be had to Suppliants, and the Security and Protection due to Ambassadors, upon which, some of the audacious young Fellows, presently knockt them on the Head. Then these Murderers and their Co-partners got together in a general Assembly, and adding one piece of Wickedness to another, contriv'd an Impious and Vile design against the Marathenians; for taking the Rings off the Fingers of them that were Murder'd, they writ Letters to the Marathenians, as from the Ambassadors, by which they inform'd them, that the Aradians would within a short time send them Aid, to the end that the Marathenians might receive the Aradian Soldiers into their City, and so be Surpriz'd, thinking they were really, and without Fraud, sent to them as Auxiliaries. But the Aradians fail'd in their wicked Design, for when they had laid an Embargo upon all the Ships, that none might discover their Treachery to the Marathenians, a certain Seamen, a Neigbour to the Marathenians commiserating their Condition, and being acustom'd to Sail in the Neighbouring Sea, took a Ship, and in the Night pass'd over that narrow Cut, about Eight Furlongs in Breadth, and discover'd the Fraud of the Aradians, to the Marathenians; the Aradians therefore, when they understood their Plot was discover'd, forbore sending the Letters.

98. Ptolemy Physcon, the Brother of Philometer, began his Reign most wickedly; for charging many with Plots against his Life, he put them all to death, with most cruel Torments, others for pretended Crimes invented by himself, he Banish'd and Confiscated their Estates: by which cruelties, in a short time, his Subjects were so inrag'd, that they all hated him Mortally; however he Reign'd Fifteen Years.

99. Viriathus, when at his Marriage many Gold and Silver Cups, and all sorts of rich Carpets of exquisite Workmanship, were set forth to grace the Solemnity, he held them all upon the point of a Lance, not with admiration of such rich and splendid Furniture, but rather in scorn and contempt. After, when he had upon this occasion spoken many things, with much Wisdom and Prudence, he concluded with many Emphatical expressions, and with this one, very remarkable for by this saying, he signifi'd, that it was the greatest Imprudence imaginable, to trust in Goods of Fortune, which are so uncertain; especially, since it was then apparent, that all those highly esteem'd riches of his Father in Law, were liable to be a prey to him, that might carry them away upon his Spears point; further he added, that his Father in Law ought rather to thank him,


Page 768

for that nothing of his own was given by his Father in Law, to him who was Lord and owner of all. Virathus therefore at that time, neither washt nor sat down, altho' he was earnestly intreated so to do. And whereas the Table was plentifully furnish'd with rich Dishes of Meat, he only distributed some Bread and Flesh amongst them that came along with him. After he had a little more than tasted the Meat himself, he order'd his Bride to be brought to him, and having Sacrific'd after the manner of the Spaniards, he mounted her on Horseback, and forthwith carry'd her away to his Appartments in the Mountains: For he accounted Sobriety and Temperance the greatest Riches, and the Liberty of his Country gain'd by Valour, the surest Possession. In his Leagues and Treaties he was very careful and exactly faithful to his Word, and spoke plainly and sincerely what he intended, instructed therein (without any other Arts) by his own natural Principles of honesty and fair dealing.

100. Demetrius, while he staid at Laodicea, spent his time in Banquetting, and such like Luxury; and yet exercis'd his Tyranny upon many in the mean time, not at all better'd by his Afflictions.

101. The Cnotians contended for the Sovereignty of the Island, which they alledg'd, belong'd to them, both upon the account of the Ancient Dignity of the City, and the Glory and Renown of their Ancestors in the Heroick times. For some say that Jupiter was brought up amongst them, and that Minos, who had the Dominion of the Seas, was bred up by Jupiter, at Cnossius, and excell'd all other Men in Virtuous Accomplishments.

102. But in Egypt, King Ptolemy for his Cruelty, was hated of all his Subjects: For his Manners were not to be compar'd with his Brother Philometer's; for he was of a mild and gentle Nature, but the other fierce and cruel; and therefore the People long'd for a Change, and earnestly waited for a fit opportunity to Revolt.

103. At the time when Ptolemy (after the Solemn manner of the Aegyptians) was Inthron'd at Memphis, his Queen Cleopatra was deliver'd of a Son, at which he exceedingly rejoic'd, and call'd him Memphites, because he was Born in the City Memphis, at the time of his Solemn Inauguration. But while he was Celebrating his Son's Birth day, he forgot not his usual Cruelty, for he order'd some of Cyrene (who had brought him into Aegypt) to be put to death, because they rebuk'd him something too freely, upon the account of the Strumpet Irene.

104. After Diegylis King of Thrace, came to the Throne, he was so puft up with his prosperity, that he began to Rule over his People not as his Subjects and Friends, but to Domineer over them, as so many Slaves and Bondmen: For he put many good and honest Thracians by Tortures to death, and abus'd with the highest marks of disgracemany others: For he spar'd neither Woman nor Boy that were handsom and beautiful, and stuck not at stripping Men out of all they had, by force and and strong hand, but fill'd all his Dominions with Rapine and Violence. He plunder'd and spoil'd likewise the Cities of Greece that border'd upon him, and abus'd some of the Captives, and put others to death with exquisite Torments. After he had taken the City Lysimachia (which belonged to Attalus) he burnt it down to the Ground, and pickt out the greatest Persons of Quality from amongst the Captives, and put them to death with strange and unheard of Tortures: For he cut off the Heads, Hands, and Feet of their Children, and hung them about their Parents Necks, and exchang'd the Members of Men and Women one from another. Of some he cut off their Hands, and clove them down the small of the Back, and sometimes would cause the Members to be carry'd about upon the top of their Spears, so that he far exceeded Phalaris himself, and Apollodorus the Tyrant of the Cassandrians. His Barbarity is more evident in this one Instance following. When he was celebrating his Nuptials, after the Ancient manner of the Thracians, he catcht up Two young Men of Greece that were Travelling, who were Subjects to Attalus, and were Brothers, both very beautiful. The one was fully attain'd to Mans Estate, and the other was near bordering upon it; Diegylis caus'd them both to be introduc'd Crown'd with Garlands, after the manner of the Victims: The younger being laid along and extended at length by the Officer, as one ready to cut him off at the Middle, the Tyrant cry'd out, that Kings and private Men, were not to offer the like Sacrifices; hereupon the Elder making great lamentation, out of endear'd Love to his Brother, interpos'd himself between him and the Sword, upon which Diegylis commanded he should be likewise laid along, and then doubling his Cruelty, at one stroak dispatch'd them both, the Spectators all applauding so noble a piece of Dexterity. Many such like wicked acts were committed by him.

105. When Attalus understood that Diegylis was hated by all his Subjects for his Cruelty and Covetousness, he took a quite contrary Course: And therefore when he had


Page 769

taken many Thracian Prisoners Captive, and freely Releas'd them all, there were many that spread abroad his Fame for his Generosity and Clemency: And when many of the Thracian Nobility out of hatred to Diegulis, fled to him, and were kindly receiv'd, and the thing came to be known, Diegulis tortur'd the Hostages of them that were fled with most grievous Torments. Many of whom that were very Young, and of tender Age, he pull'd in pieces, Limb from Limb, and of others he cut of their Hands, Feet and Heads; some he crucified and others he hung upon Trees, many Women likewise who were Persons of Quality) he stigmatiz'd before they were put to death, and prostituted them to the Lust of every vile Fellow, in a most Barbarous manner giving up himself to all manner of Filthiness. Which as it clearly evidenc'd his unparall'ld Cruelty, so it mov'd many of the Spectators, who had but the least sense of Humanity, with pity and commiseration.

106. When Pompey was preparing to Besiege the City Lagnus, the Numantines willing to assist their Countrymen, sent to them in the Night 400 Soldiers; whom the Lagnetians at first readily receiv'd, and bountifully rewarded as their Saviours. But in a few days after, dreading a Siege, they Treated with Pompey, to deliver up the Town upon Terms, insisting only upon sparing their Lives. But when Pompey would admit of no Conditions, unless the Numantians were deliver'd up to him, the Lagnetians at first shrunk at the thoughts of such a wicked Act against their Benefactors, and therefore resolv'd to stand it out to the utmost: But being afterwards reduc'd to the utmost extremity, they sent to Pompey to acquaint him they were ready to Redeem their own Lives by the Destruction of their Confederates; which the Numantians coming to understand, they set upon the Citizens unexpectedly in the Night, and made a grievous Slaughter amongst 'em. Pompey having Intelligence of this Tumult and Bustle in the Town, forthwith set scaling Ladders to the Walls, and took the City, and put all the Lagnetians to the Sword, but generously discharg'd all the Numantian Auxiliaries, to the Number of 100; both pitying the Men that were so unworthily brought into such extremity and distress, as likewise hereby designing to to gain the Goodwill and opinion of the Numantians towards the Romans. Afterwards he Raz'd the City to the Ground.

107. Arsases King of the Parthians being a Mild and Gracious Prince, was exceeding prosperous and successful, and greatly enlarg'd the bounds of his Empire; for he Conquer'd all before him, as far as to India (where Porus Reign'd formerly) with a great deal of ease: And tho' he was advanc'd to that degree of Power and Authority, yet he inclin'd not in the least to Pride and Luxury, as is common with Princes in such cases, but was Kind to his Subjects, and Valiant in the Field against his Enemies: and having subdu'd several Nations, gathered together a System out of the best of their Laws, and imparted them to his Parthians.

108. Viriathus was Bury'd by the Lusitanians with great Pomp and State; for Two hundred Gladiators were matcht singly with as many more, and sought Duels at his Sepulchre, in honour of the remarkable Valour of this Man. For he was (as is agreed by all) Valiant in Dangers, Prudent and Careful in providing whatever was necessary, and that which was most of all considerable was, that whilst he Commanded he was more belov'd than ever any was before him: For in dividing the spoil he never serv'd himself with any thing above any of the rest; and of those things which fell to his share, he often rewarded them that had behav'd themselves valiantly, and reliev'd those Soldiers that were most in want. He was likewise of incredible Sobriety and Vigilancy, not sparing any Labour, or drawing back from any hazard, not to be overcome in the least by Ease or Pleasures. The Arguments of his virtuous Qualifications are evident and demonstrable: For being General of the Lusitanians for the space of Eleven years, during all that time his Soldiers were not only peaceable without any Mutinies, but remain'd unconquerable: But after his death the Forces of the Lusitanians in a short time after were broken and dispers'd, being depriv'd of such a General.

109. Ptolemy for his Cruelty, Murthers, filthy Lusts, and deform'd Body (whence he was call'd Physco) was hated by all. But Hierax his General being an expert Soldier, and Popular in all General Assemblies, and a Man of a great Spirit, took upon him the Government: For when Ptolemy wanted Money, and the Soldiers for want of Pay were ready to Revolt to Galaestes, he put a stop to their Mutiny by paying off their Arrears out of his own Purse.

110. The Aegyptians altogether contemn'd Ptolemy when they saw him so childish in his Speeches, drown'd in filthy Lusts, and his Body Emasculated by his Intemperance.

111. Aemilius the Consul being of an heavy and unweildy Body, by reason of his bulk, and too much pampering of himself, was very unfit for Martial Affairs.


Page 770

Out of the 34th BOOK.

1. ABout this time there arose so great a Mutiny and Sedition of the Slaves in Sicily, as no Age before could ever parallel, in which many Cities suffer'd, were miserably ransackt, and innumerable multitudes both of Men, Women and Children fell into most grievous Calamities; and the whole Island was now upon the point of falling into the hands of the Slaves, who design'd no other bounds should be put to their exorbitant Power, than the absolute Destruction of their Masters.

And these things fell out when none in the least suspected them; but those who were accustomed to pierce deep into the Grounds and Causes of all Events, concluded that this was not a thing that happen'd meerly by chance. For the Inhabitants of this rich Island growing wanton with too much plenty, fell into Luxury and Voluptuousness, and then into Pride and Insolence. For those reasons the Cruelty of the Masters towards their Servants, and the Hatred of the Servants to their Masters raging and increasing more and more every day, at length (a fit opportunity offering it self) their Hatred broke forth, and many Thousand Slaves on a suddain (without any sign or appearance of any such thing before) got in a Body together to cut the Throats of their Masters.

And the same thing happen'd in Asia, almost about the same time. For when Aristonicus, without any colour of Right, sought to gain the Kingdom of Asia, all the Slaves, by reason of the Cruelty of their Masters, join'd with him, and fill'd many Towns and Cities with Blood and Slaughter.

2. In like manner those that had large Possessions in Sicily bought up whole Goals to till their Lands—Some they shackled, others they overcharg'd with hard Labour, and branded and stigmatiz'd every one of them: So that such a multitude of Slaves, even like a Deluge, overflow'd all Sicily, that the excessive number may seem incredible to all that hear of it; for all the rich Men of Sicily vied with the Italians for Pride, Covetousness, and vicious Practices; For many of the Italians who had great numbers of Servants, accustom'd their Shepherds to that degree of Rapine and Licentiousness, as that they suffered them to Rob and Steal for want of necessary subsistence from them themselves. Which Liberty being once Granted to those Men who had strength of Body, sufficient to enable 'em readily to execute any Villany, together with Time and Leisure, and through want of Subsistence were reduc'd to the utmost Extremity of attempting any thing for their Supply; these unruly Fellows in a short time were ripe and compleat in wickedness. At first they us'd to Murder Travellers upon the High-way, when only One or Two were together: Afterwards they would in Bodies enter into little Villages, in the Night, and pillage poor Mens Houses, and forcibly carry away whatever they found, and kill all that oppos'd them. At length growing every day more and more Audacious, there was neither Security in the Roads in Sicily for Travellers in the Night, nor Safety in their Houses for them that dwelt in the Country, but all places were full of Rapine, Robberies and Murthers. And because the Shepherds and Herdsmen were furnish'd with Arms, and inur'd to lie Night and Day in the open Fields, they every Day grew bold and daring: For carrying Clubs and Lances and long Staves, and cover'd with the Skins of Wolves and Wild Boars, they lookt with a most dreadful and terrible Aspect as the Children of Mars. Besides, every one had a Guard of great Mastiff Dogs to attend them, and guzling down Milk, and glutting themselves with Flesh, and all sorts of other Food and Provision, they resembled Beasts both in Souls and Bodies. So that the whole Island seem'd as if it had been full of Soldiers roving up and down in every place, or as if all the daring Slaves were let loose by their Masters to act the parts of raging Mad men. It's true indeed that the Roman Praetors and Governors did what they could to suppress this Insolency of the Slaves; but because they durst not punish them, by reason of the Potency of their Masters, they were forc'd to suffer the Country to be infested with Robberies; for whereas most of their Masters were Roman Knights, who had Judicial Authority at Rome, and were us'd to chuse Judges out of the Aequestrian Order in the Causes of the Praetors and the Proconsuls, who were summon'd to appear before them after their Provincial Authority was determin'd, the Magistrates were upon good grounds afraid of them.

3. The Italians, who had large Possessions in Sicily, and therefore bought many Slaves, every one of whom they stigmatiz'd with marks on their Cheeks, and opprest them with hard Labour, and yet defrauded them of their Wages and Subsistence.

4. There was one Damophilus of Aenna a wealthy Man, but very proud and arrogant;


Page 771

this Man Till'd a large compass of Land, and had a vast Stock of Cattle, initiated the Luxury and Cruelty of the Italians towards their Slaves. For being carry'd in a Coach drawn with stately Horses, he travers'd the Country up and down, guarded with a company of Arm'd Slaves; he carry'd likewise about with him continually many beautiful Boys, Flatterers and Parasites; and in the City and Villages had his Silver Vessels curiously wrought, and all sorts of Purple Carpets of very great value; and made Magnificent Feasts and Entertainments, after the State and Grandeur of a King, in Pomp and Expence far surpassing the Persian Luxury, and as much as all other Men in Pride and Arrogancy. For being rude, and never bred up with Learning, or any liberal Education, and having heap'd up a great deal of Wealth, and himself left to a licentious Liberty, without controul; he first from fulness and plenty became insolent, and at last was a plague to himself, and occasion of bringing many Miseries and Calamities upon the Country. For having bought many Slaves, he abus'd them in the highest degree; And those that were Free born in their own Country, and taken Captives in War, he stigmatiz'd in their Cheeks with the sharp points of Iron Pins, some of which he sent bound in Fetters to the Goals, and to others that were order'd to look after the Cattle in the Fields, he neither allow'd Cloaths, nor Food sufficient to satisfie Nature.

5. The Barbarity and Cruelty of this Damophilus was such, that never a day pass'd wherein he scourg'd not his Slaves, without the least cause or occasion. And his Wife Megallis was as cruel as himself, towards the Maid-Servants, and other Slaves that fell into her Hands. The Slaves therefore being thus provok'd by the cruelty of their Master and Mistriss, concluding they could not be brought into a worse condition than they then were, rose up all on a sudden.

6. In Sicily Demophilus had a young Daughter of a very gentle and courteous Disposition, who made it her business to relieve and heal those Slaves that had been abus'd and scourg'd by her Parents, and to bring Meat to them that were in prison; so that she was wonderfully belov'd by all the Servants, insomuch, as in remembrance of her former Kindness, all had compassion of her, and were so far from offering any violence or injury to the young Maid, that every one of them made it their business to preserve her Chastity unviolated; and chose some out of their own company, the most expeditious amongst them to conduct her to Catana to some of her Friends.

7. After Eunus was declar'd King, he put many to death, and spar'd only those that for the sake of his Prophecies commended him at their Feasts, to which his Master Antigenes us'd to bring him to make sport; those likewise that were so kind as in a jest to give him part of the Dainties with them, he preserv'd; so that the strange turn of Fortune was to be admir'd, and that Kindness shew'd to such mean and inconsiderable Persons should occasion so great Favour and Respect, at a time when it was so welcome and seasonable.

8. About the same time broke out another Rebellion of the Slaves; one Cleon a Sicilian near Mount Taurus inur'd to Robberies from a Boy, being appointed to look to the Horses in their Pastures in Sicily, beset the High Ways, and committed hainous Murders up and down the Country. This Fellow hearing of the good Fortune of Eunus and his Followers, having persuaded some of the neighbouring Slaves to join with him, on a sudden Revolted, Wasted and Spoil'd the City Agrigentum, and all the neighbouring Country round about.

9. In Asia, Attalus being newly come to the Crown, began to manage Affairs in a way far different from all the former Kings; for they by their Clemency and Kindness to their Subjects, Reign'd prosperously and Happily themselves, and were a Blessing to the Kingdom; but this Prince being of a Cruel and Bloody Disposition, oppress'd his Subjects with many Slaughters, and grievous Calamities: Suspecting that some of his own Relations that were Potent, and Men of Interest, were Plotting against him, he resolv'd to rid himself of them; to that end he pickt out some of the most Covetous and Bloody Fellows from among his Barbarian Mercenary Soldiers, and hid them in certain Vaults in the Palace; and then sending for such of his Friends and Kindred as he was most jealous of, when he had them there, he cut all their Throats by those bloody Executioners of his Cruelty, and forthwith ordered their Wives and Children to be put to death after the same manner.

The rest of his Father's Friends that either had Command in the Army, or were Governors of Cities, he either caus'd to be treacherously Assassinated, or seizing them, Murther'd them and their Families together. Being therefore hated not only by his Subjects, but by all the neighbouring Nations, all within his Dominions, endeavour'd as much as they could to bring about a Revolution and Change of Government.


Page 772

10. Tiberius Gracchus was the Son of Tiberius who had been twice Consul, and a Man very famous, both as to the Sword and Gown. He was likewise the Grandchild of Publius Scipio by his Daughter, that Scipio who conquer'd Hannibal and the Carthaginians. Being Nobly Born on both sides, he excell'd all his equals in Age, in sound Judgment and Elocution, and indeed in all manner of Learning, so that he was not afraid to enter the Lists with any that dar'd to oppose him.

11. The Syrian Slaves cut off the Hands of those they took prisoners, not at the Wrists, but Hands and Arms together.

12. The Senate dreading the Anger of the Gods, consulted the Sibyl's Books, and sent Ambassadors into Sicily, who passed through the whole Island, erected Altars to Jupiter Aetneus, and offered solemn Sacrifices to him, inclosing the Altars round with Stone Walls to exclude all but those of the several Cities, who, after the Customs of their own Country, were us'd to offer Sacrifices to him.

13. Gorgus was of * Morgantium sirnamed Cambalus, a Principal Man for Wealth and Authority in the City. Going abroad to Hunt, and falling in amongst a company of Robbers, he took to his Heels to get into the Town, who being by chance met by Gorgus his Father on Horseback, the Father forthwith leapt off his Horse, and desir'd his Son to Mount, and make away with all speed into the City; but as the Son was not willing to prefer his own preservation before that of his Father's, so the Father could not bear the death of his Son by avoiding the Danger himself. And thus while they were with Tears intreating one another, and striving to exceed each other in endearing natural Affections, the Love of the Father in contest with the Love of the Son, they were overtaken by the Thieves, and both kill'd upon the place.

14. Zibelmius the Son of Diegylis following his Father's steps in Cruelty, enrag'd at what the Thracians had done, proceeded to that degree of implacable Severity, and height of Wickedness, that he put to death all that had displeased him, with their whole Families, and upon most slight and frivolous occasions cut some in pieces Limb from Limb, Crucify'd others, and Saw'd several asunder. He kill'd likewise little Children before their Parents Faces, and Infants at their Mothers Breasts, and having cut them in pieces, disht up their Members as Curiosities for their Kindred to Feast upon, reviving as it were those Antient Repasts and Entertainments of Tereus and Thyestes. At length the Thracians seiz'd upon his Person; but it was scarce possible to punish him according to his Deserts. For how could one body suffer the punishment justly due for the Cruelties and Injuries committed against a whole Nation? However to the utmost of their Power they repaid him with all the Scorn and Contempt, and extremity of Torture upon his Body, they could invent.

15. Ptolemy Physcon when he saw his Sister Cleopatra was so great an Enemy to him, and could not revenge himself otherwise upon her, contriv'd a most notorious piece of Villany for that purpose. For he imitated the Cruelty of Medea, Murdering her Son Memphites, Begotten by himself, who was then in Cyprus, and a very young Boy: And not content with this, he committed a far more wicked Act: For cutting off the Child's Limbs, he put them in a Chest, and deliver'd them to one of his Guard to be convey'd to Alexandria; and whereas Cleopatra's Birth-day was then near at hand, he commanded that in the Night next before that day, he should set down the Chest at the Palace Gates; which being accordingly executed, Cleopatra made great lamentation, and all the People were in a great Rage against Ptolemy.

16. Atheneus Antiochus his General in a short time met with a just and due Reward for his Insolencies and Abuses in all places wherever he Quarter'd in his March: For being the first that fled, and forsook Antiochus in the heat of the Fight, coming to some of the Towns where he had abus'd his Quarters, all shut their Doors upon him, and every one refus'd to help him, either with Meat or Drink, so that he wander'd up and down the Country, till at length he was famish'd to death.

17. Hegelochus General of Ptolemy Physco sent against Marsyas the Alexandrian General, took him prisoner, and cut off all his Army. When Marsyas was brought before the King, and all concluded that he would forthwith put him to some cruel death, Ptolemy pardon'd him beyond all Mens expectation: For now he began to repent of his former Cruelties, and endeavour'd to regain the Peoples Love and Favour by acts of Clemency.


Page 773

18. Euemerus King of Parthia Born in Hyrcania, exceeding all other Princes in Cruelty, omitted no sorts of Torments he could invent. For many of the Babylonians, upon slight grounds, with their whole Families, he made Slaves and sent them into Media to be Sold. He burnt likewise to the ground the Market-place, and some of the Temples in Babylon, and raz'd the fairest and most beautiful parts of the City.

19. Alexander sirnam'd Zabinas, when those Renown'd Captains Antipater, Ponius, and Aeropus Revolted from him, and seiz'd upon Laodicea; he at length took the City: However, he Generously spar'd them all. For he was of a mild and gentle Disposition, and pleasing Temper, and of a wonderful Affability in his Converse or Discourse, and was therefore greatly Belov'd of every Body.

20. When Caius Sextius had Taken the City of the Gauls, and Sold the Inhabitants for Slaves, One Crato who was led in Chains with the rest, came up to the Consul, as he sate upon the Tribunal, and told him, He had ever been a Friend to the Romans, and for that reason had suffer'd many Injuries, and had undergone many Stripes and Scourgings from his fellow Citizens: Upon which, Sextius forthwith, with all the demonstration of Kindness, as of a Kinsman, Released him from his Bonds, and Restor'd him his Goods; And for his Good Will to the Romans, gave him Power to set free 900 of the Citizens, such as he himself thought fit. For the Consul was more Generous and Bountiful to Crato than he expected, to the end the Gauls might see how exactly Just the Romans were, both in their Punishments and Rewards.

21. Alexander not being very confident of the multitude, both in regard of their Rawness in Martial Affairs, and their natural Inconstancy, and hankring after Innovations would not adventure upon a pitcht Field; but having got together as much Money as he could, out of the Publick Treasuries, and pillag'd the Temples, resolv'd by Night to steal away into Greece. But whilst he attempted, by the help of some of his Barbarians, to plunder Jupiter's Temple, he was seiz'd upon, and himself and whole Army had like to have been cut off: but he soon escap'd out of their hands and made towards Seleucia: But the Seleucians having heard before-hand, the Brute of his Sacriledge shut their Gates against him; Failing there of his purpose he went to Pisidium, and never after departed from the Sea-Coast.

22. After Caius Gracchus was kill'd by the hands of his own Servant, LuciusVitellius who had been one of his particular Friends, was the first that got his Body; and was so far from being troubl'd at his death, that he cut off his Head, and carry'd it to his own House, thereby giving a remarkable Instance of his Cruelty and Covetousness. For when LuciusOpinius the Consul by Proclamation promis'd to Reward him that should bring to him Gracchus his Head, with the weight of it in Gold, Vitellius bor'd a hole in the Neck, and drawing out the Brains, poured in melted Lead in the room. Then he brought the Head to Opinius, and return'd with the promis'd Reward, but was afterwards hated by all to the day of his death, as a Betrayer of his Friend. The Flacci were also all put to death.

23. In Lybia the two Kings drew up their Armies one against another, and Jugurtha routed the Numidians in a great Battle, slaying many of them; whereupon Adherbal his Brother fled to Cirta, where being straitly Besieg'd he sent Ambassadors to Rome to intreat them not to suffer a King that was their Friend and Ally to be utterly ruin'd: Whereupon the Senate forthwith sent Messengers into Numidia with Orders to Jugurtha to raise his Siege: which he disregarding, they sent another Embassy vested with Power and Authority; but that was as fruitless as the other; and at length Jugurtha straitly blocking up the City round, through extremity of Famine forc'd it to a Surrender, and most unnaturally slew his Brother as he was going out of the City with his Children, and leaving the Kingdom, beseeching him only to spare his Life, neither regarding the Laws of Nature and Consanguinity, nor of Arms, in sparing those that beg for Quarter: He likewise scourg'd all the Italians to death that sided with his Brother.

24. Publius Scipio Nasica the Consul, was a Man renown'd both for his Virtue and Nobleness of Birth; for he was of the same Family with Africanus, and Hispanicus; of whom the first Conquer'd Africa, the other Asia, and the third Spain; and from thence gain'd the several Sirnames before mention'd: And besides the Eminency of his Birth, his Father and Grandfather were the most Eminent Men of the City; for both of them were Presidents of the Senate; and the first that gave their Votes, and delivered their Opinions in all publick Matters, to the time of their Deaths. His Grandfather upon an Occasion was judg'd by the Senate the Best Man of all the Roman Citizens. For it being found written in the Sibyls Books, That the Romans should build a Temple in honour of the great Mother of the Gods, and should bring her Image from Pessinunt in Asia, and


Page 774

meet it out of the City with all the Orders and Degrees of the Citizens in solemn Pomp and State, and that the Best Man should lead the Men, and the Best Woman be at the head of the Women, when they receiv'd the Image of the Goddess: The Senate performing all that was prescrib'd by the Sibyls writings, judg'd Publius Nasica to be the Best Man, and Valeria the Best Woman. For he was not only eminent for his Piety towards the Gods, but of singular Prudence in governing and ordering matters of State, and of a piercing Judgment. For when Marcus Cato who was Sirnam'd Demosthenes, in delivering his Opinion in the Senate, was ever and anon affirming, That Carthage must be raz'd, though nothing was in debate concerning it, but the Senate was consulting of other Matters; Publius Nasica was ever of a contrary Opinion, that Carthage was to be preserv'd; In which difference of Opinions it seem'd a matter of great Difficulty to the Senate which of the Two was most adviseable; but those that were accounted the best Statesmen amongst them, preferr'd the Opinion of Nasica. For they conceiv'd, that the Power and Grandeur of the Romans was not to be judg'd of by the Ruine and Destruction of other Cities, but rather by its Sovereign Power and Authority over such as are accounted the most Potent. Besides, if Carthage stood, out of fear of that City the Romans would be kept within the bounds of their Duty, and in Peace and Concord among themselves, and the Common-wealth would be forced to carry it towards their Subjects with more Moderation and Clemency; which things usually strengthen and enlarge all sorts of Governments: But if Carthage the Rival City be once destroy'd, what can be expected but Civil Wars among the Romans themselves, and the hatred likewise of all their Allies for the Pride and Covetousness of the Roman Magistrates; all which accordingly happen'd to the Romans after the Destruction of Carthage. For turbulent Factions, Agrarian Laws, grievous Revolts of Confederates, continual and destructive Civil Wars, and all the other Mischiefs which Publius Scipio foretold, came to pass: His Son Nasica afterwards, when he was well in years, ordering the Senate to follow him, kill'd Tiberius Gracchus with his own hands, when he was contriving to set up himself and take upon him the Government. At the Commission of which Fact, the Commons being in an Uproar and Exasperated against the Authors of the Murder, and the Tribunes of the People asking every one of the Senators Man by Man, being brought before them, Who it was that kill'd Gracchus? Every one out of fear of the Rage of the People, deny'd the Fact, and made use of shifting and impertinent Answers: But when it came to Nasica, he own'd, that he kill'd him with his own Hand; and further declar'd, That the designs of Gracchus in aspiring to be absolute Monarch, was a Secret to all other Persons, but very well known to him and the Senate. Whereupon the People, though they were much troubled at the Fact, yet being mov'd by the Boldness and Authority of the Man, from thenceforth rested quiet and said no more: This Scipio Nasica likewise, (Son of the former Nasica) who dy'd Consul this Year, was of an unspotted Conversation all his Days, never tainted or corrupted with Bribes: And being endow'd with Philosophical Principles, he was not only a Philosopher in Words, but in Truth; so that he inherited both the Glory and Virtues of his Ancestors.

25. Antiochus Cyzicenus as soon as he got into Possession of the Kingdom, applied himself to Revellings and Luxury, and Courses altogether unbeseeming Kings. For being extremely Addicted to Anticks, Stage-players, and all sorts of Juglers, he learn'd their Arts with a great deal of Vehemency; He apply'd himself also to Puppit-playing, and plac'd his chiefest Delight in making the Images of living Creatures in bulk Five Cubits, (cover'd over with Gold and Silver,) to move of themselves, and other Engines of that Nature. But as for Warlike Engines and Testudoes, call'd Helepoles, whose Preparations and Magnificence belong'd to Princes, and were commonly of great use, he was altogether wanting in them. Moreover, he was much addicted to unseasonable Huntings, and oftentimes would steal out privately by Night, with a Servant or two, to hunt Boars, Lions and Leopards; so that many times he was in danger of his Life by his rash encountring of these wild Beasts.

26. Mecipsa, Son of Massinissa King of Numidia, had many Children; but above them all he lov'd Adherball his Eldest, and Hiempsales and Micipsa; the last of which was the mildest Prince of all the Kings of Numidia, and sent for the Learnedst Men out of Greece he could hear of, and spending his time with them in improving himself in all sorts of Liberal Sciences, and especially in Philosophy, he enjoy'd his Kingdom, together with his Study of Philosophy to his Old Age.

27. Contoniatus, the Petit Prince of Jentora in Gaul, was eminent for his Prudence and Skil in Martial Affairs: He was a Friend and an Ally of the Romans, being formerly brought up in Rome, and so season'd with Virtue and Civility; by the help of the Romans he gain'd that Principality in Gaul.


Page 775

28. Caius Marius, one of the Ambassadors, was slighted by the Proconsul, as one of the Meanest of them. The rest who were of eminent Birth, and in high Place, were Honour'd and Respected by the Proconsul. But as for the other who was said to have been but a Publican, and had much ado to get into the lowest Form amongst the Magistrates, Metellus made no account of him: Though in truth, all the rest lov'd their Ease and avoided the Camp, but Marius having been often employ'd in the Wars in desperate Adventures, seem'd highly to resent the Injury and Affront. But addicting himself with great application of Mind to Martial Affairs, he became a most expert Soldier; and being naturally of a warlike Spirit, in a short time he grew very Famous; and for his Generosity and courteous Deportment, and his affable Carriage in all Meetings towards all that were under his Command, he gain'd the Hearts of all the Soldiers, who studying to make grateful returns for his Kindness, fought the more Chearfully and Courageously, to the end they might advance the Honour and Reputation of their General: And if any other at any time happen'd to be sent to command them, the Soldiers on purpose in the very height of the Battel would fight more carelesly; so that most commonly things miscarry'd and came to nought when any other commanded the Army; but when Marius was General the Romans were ever Conquerors.

Out of the 36th BOOK.

1. THE Rebellious Slaves did not only waste and destroy Sioily, but those that were free, who had neither Lands nor Goods) betook themselves to Rapine and Robberies, and ravag'd up and down in the Country in Flocks and Droves; they drave away whole Herds of Cattel; Robb'd the Barns in the Towns and Villages, and carried away the Corn and other Fruits of the Earth, and kill'd every one they met, without distinction of either Bond or Free, that none might be left to tell tales of their Murthers and Cruelties. For being there was at this time an Anarchy in Sicily, having no Roman Praetor that exercis'd any Jurisdiction, all ran headlong and committed many and great Enormities with impunity; so that all Places were full of Rapines and Robberies, and the Goods of the Rich made a Prey to Force and Violence: and they who a little before were Noted and Eminent amongst their fellow Citizens for their Wealth, by a sudden change of Fortune, were not only with the greatest Contempt and Scorn imaginable, Robb'd of all they had by their Slaves, but were forc'd to bear unsufferable Abuses from them that were Freemen of the same Country. And therefore none could scarcely call any thing his own within the City Gates; but what was without, they lookt upon as quite lost, and to be an irrecoverable Prey to the Robbers. To conclude, Confusion and utter Subversion of Law and Justice, rag'd throughout all the Cities and Towns in the Country. For the Rebels after they had wasted the Country, out of Hatred to their Masters, and insatiable Covetousness, beset the High Ways and made them impassable. And those Slaves that were yet within the Cities Sick, but in their Hearts longing for an opportunity to Rebel, were a dread and terror to their Masters.

2. Saturninus the Tribune being a Man of a profuse Life, and Quaestor in the Province of Ostia, ordering all the Corn to be carry'd away to Rome, for his Male Administration of the Government was Rebuk'd by the Senate, and divested of his Authority, and the Province committed to the Care of another. But afterwards leaving off his former Luxurious course of Life, and growing Sober in his Conversation, he was chosen Tribune of the People.

3. Whereas for Two years together in every Publick Assembly Q Metellus his restoring from Banishment was taken into Debate—His Son traversing the Market-place with his Beard and Hair overgrown, and in a nasty Garment, with Tears in his Eyes, prostrated himself at the Feet of every Citizen, intreating them to recall his Father. But the People, though they were very backward to make a President for Exiles for the time to come to hope for Return against the Laws; yet in Compassion to the Young Man, and being moved with importunity of his Intreaty, they recall'd Metellus from Banishment, and sirnam'd the Son Pius for his singular Affection and Care he had of his Father.

4. The Romans formerly being govern'd by good and wholesom Laws and Constitutions, by degrees grew to that height of Power, that at length they gain'd the greatest Empire of any that ever any History makes mention of. But of later times, after they


Page 776

had conquer'd many Nations, and had so long nuzzl'd themselves in the Enjoyment of an unterrupted Peace, they declin'd from their Ancient manners, to wicked and destructive Courses. For the young Men, enjoying Rest and Ease from War, with Plenty of all things to be Fuel to their Lusts, gave themselves up to Luxury and Intemperance; for in the City, Prodigality was preferr'd before Frugality, and living at Ease, before the Service of the Camp: And he that Wasted all his time in Voluptuousness, and not he that was of a virtuous and sober conversation, was accounted by all to be the only happy Man. And therefore sumptuous Feasts, most fragrant Oyntments, flowr'd and embroider'd Carpets, rich and stately Furniture, for their Banqueting Rooms, curiously wrought with Gold, Silver, Ivory, and such like Materials were then cry'd up every where. Wine that was but of an ordinary Gusto, would not be toucht, but only Falernian and Chian, and such like pleasant Wines: the choicest Fish likewise, and every thing of the best sort, was provided to gratifie their shameless Luxury. The young Gallants likewise, wore Garments of the finest and softest Wooll, Woven so fine, as that they were even transparent, and for their slender Webb, altogether like unto Womens Gowns. All these things serving to nourish Luxury, and Voluptuousness (to their Ruin and destruction) being generally coveted by all, in a short time grew to excessive Rates; for a Hogshead of Falernian Wine was sold for a 100 Drachmas, and a Hogshead of Salted Fish from the Pontick Sea, for 400. Skilful Cooks were sold for Four Talents a-piece, and delicate and beautiful Boys, for many Talents. And whereas all with full swing gave up themselves to this luxurious course of Life, some of the Governors in the Provinces, us'd their utmost endeavour to reform these Enormities, and to that end, being in high Places, and so most observable, by reason of the Eminency of their Stations, they fram'd their own Lives so, as to be Examples of Virtue, and liberal Education to others.

5. Quintus Mucius Scoevola, us'd his utmost endeavour to reform other Mens corrupt Manners, by his own Virtuous Example. For when he was sent Proconsul into Asia, he made choice of Quintus Rutilius his most intimat Friend for his Legate, and ever took his Advice in the management of his Government, and making of Laws: All the Costs and expences both of himself and his Retinue, he order'd to be defray'd out of his own Purse; and by his moderation and frugality, together with his just and upright dealing, he freed the Province from its former Miseries and Oppressions. For the Proconsuls of Asia that were before him, confederated with the Publicans (in whose hands at that time, was the administration of Justice at Rome) and fill'd the whole Province with the Pressures of their illegal Exactions.

6. Mucius Scoevola managing his Government with all possible Diligence and Integrity, did not only suppress all false Accusations, but restrain'd the Injuries and Oppressions committed by the Publicans. For as often as any who had been pinch'd by those Toll-gatherers made their address to him, he Commissionated upright Judges, by whom he Condemn'd them wheresoever he came, and forc'd them to pay the Mulct impos'd upon them to the Persons they had injur'd, but for Offences that deserv'd death, he gave sentence of death. One of the chief of these Publicans that had contracted with his Master for his Freedom, for a great Sum of Money, before he was manumitted, he condemn'd to die and crucify'd him.

7. Those that were condemn'd by the Judges, he deliver'd over to the Persons injur'd, to be by them carry'd away to Prison, so that they who before through their insolency and covetousness committed all manner of Injustice, were unexpectedly hurried away to the Goal by them that they had injur'd. Moreover by discharging his own Expences and the Expences of his Retinue out of his own private Purse, he soon inclin'd the Hearts of all the Province towards the People of Rome.

8. Lucius Asellius (whose Father was a Quaestor) being sent Praetor into Sicily, finding in the Province great Havock and Devastation, by his prudent management of things in a short time restor'd it to its former state and condition. For after the Example of Scoevola, he made choice of his intimate Friend Caius Sempronius Longus for his Legate, and join'd with him Publius, the famous Roman Knight for his Counsellor, who then resided at Syracuse, and besides the goods of Fortune, was eminent for the Virtues of his Mind; his Piety towards the Gods is sufficiently testify'd by his Sacrifices, Gifts, and Adorning of the Temples. And the quick and lively use of all his Senses to the last moment of his Life was an evident Argument of his Sobriety and Temperance: And his Learning, & courteous Disposition are apparent from the great Value and Esteem he ever had of learned Men, and his Bounty and Liberality out of his own Purse towards them that appli'd themselves to the study of the Liberal Arts and Sciences. Assellius assisted with the advice of those two Men, who continu'd with him under the same Roof, and sate with him in Judgment


Page 777

upon the Bench, made it his daily care to reform and set all things right again in the Province.

9. In the Courts of Justice, he aim'd at the Publick Good, and clear'd the Court of all Sycophants, and false Accusers; and it was his chief care to relieve the poorest Man, and those that were less able to help themselves; for whereas the other Praetors committed the care of Orphans and Widows, that were destitute of Friends, to Tutors and Guardians that were Strangers, he lookt after them himself, and decided their Causes with all the care and diligence imaginable, and was a great Relief to the Oppressed. And as long as he was Governor of Sicily, continually using his utmost endeavour to Suppress both private and publick Injuries, he at length settled the Province in its former State of happiness and prosperity.

10. Marcus Livius Drusus, tho' he was very young, yet was adorn'd with whatever was commendable either in reference to his Body or Mind: For he was the Son of a renown'd Father, who was singularly belov'd of the People of Rome, both upon the account of his noble Birth, and virtuous Qualifications. And he himself for Eloquence excell'd all his equals in Age, and all his fellow Citizens in Wealth and Riches: And upon the account of his Faithfulness to his Word, he gain'd a very great Interest and Authority among the Citizens, and being likewise of a great Spirit, seem'd to be the only Patron of the Senate.

Out of the 37th BOOK.

1. POmpoedius General of the Marsians, attempted indeed a Great, but a most Rash and inconsiderate Act; for he pickt out 10000 Soldiers from amongst them, that were afraid of suffering due punishment for their Offences, and commanding them to hide their Swords under their Coats, Marcht with them towards Rome, with a design to beset the Senate round with this Rabble, and to demand the Freedom of the City, and if he could not prevail, to lay the City Wast with Fire and Sword. Being by chance met upon the Road by Caius Domitius, he askt him, whither goest thou Pompedius with so great a Company? Who answer'd, to Rome, for that he was sent for by the Tribunes of the People, to be receiv'd into the Freedom of the City. But Domitius reply'd, saying, Thou mayest obtain what thou seek'st for, with far more ease and much more honesty, if thou didst not make up to the Senate in a Hostile manner; for the Senate will not be compelled, but intreated and petitioned to bestow that Grace and Favour upon the Latines, that are their Allies and Confederates. The Man being taken with this, as with a Divine Admonition from Heaven, and over-perswaded with what Domitius had said, forthwith return'd home. And thus Domitius by his seasonable and prudent advice, deliver'd his Country from dreadful Mischiefs that threatned it, addressing himself to Pompaedius, much better than Servilius the Proconsul did to the Picentians. For he spoke not to them as to Freemen and Allyes, but as to Slaves, and insulted over them with the greatest scorn and contempt imaginable, and threatn'd and terrifi'd them to that Degree, that he stirr'd up the Confederates, to the Ruin and Destruction both of himself and others. But Domitius on the contrary, by his Mild and calm Discourse, allay'd the Fury and Violence of the Inrag'd Multitude.

2. There was one Agamemnon a Cilician, for his many wicked pranks and slaughters of the Confederates, was committed to Prison in Asculum by the Romans. This Man being Releas'd by the Picentians, in gratitude for the kindness shew'd him, Fought resolutely on their side: And being enur'd to Robberies from a Boy, joyning with others of the like Gang, he Wasted and Spoil'd the Enemies Country.

3. The Inhabitants of the City Pinna, for their constant Fidelity to the Romans, fell into most dreadful calamities, for being obstinately resolv'd not to desert the Romans (without any touch or Sense of Natural affection) were forc'd to see their Children knockt on the Head before their Eyes.

4. Lucius Suila bravely and gallantly perform'd most noble Actions, and his Fame and Renown was Blazon'd all over the City: And the People of Rome judg'd him worthy of the Consulship, looking upon him as a Man Eminent, both for Valour and Conduct in Martial affairs: To conclude, it was apparent, he was likely to arrive at the highest pitch of Glory.

5. Mithridates having conquer'd the Roman Generals in Asia, and taken many Prisoners, sent them all home Cloth'd, and with provision in their Snapsacks. This mild Passage


Page 778

was cry'd up every where, that all the Cities generally came flocking in to him; insomuch that Ambassadors came to him from all Cities, inviting him by their publick Decrees to come in to them, calling him their God, and Deliverer. And upon notice of the Kings approach, the People came hudling out of the several Cities in white Garments, to to Salute him, and receiv'd him with great joy and acclamation.

6. Mithridates his Party sweeping all before them in Asia, as they went without Controul, all the Cities strangely Revolted from the Romans: And as for the Lesbians, they resolv'd not only to yield up themselves to the King, but to deliver up Aquilius also, who flew away to Mitilene, and lay there to be Cur'd of a Disease. Whereupon they sent to his Lodgings a Company of choice Youths, Stout and Resolute, who came rushing into the Room where Aquilius was, and took him and bound him, supposing he would be a most rare Present, and very acceptable to Mithridates: But Aquilius tho' he was but as yet a Youth, perform'd a most Noble and Heroick Act; for preferring Death before Disgrace, and the punishments of a Slave, he prevented them that were ready to hurry him away, and kill'd himself. With which desperate Act, those that came to take him along with them, were so Terrifi'd, that they durst not approach him. His Valour and Resolution therefore was cry'd up every where, who by the putting an end to his own Life, had rescu'd himself with an undaunted Courage from the Torments design'd to be Executed upon him.

7. In order to a Sea Fight, the Rhodians were overmatcht in nothing, but in the number of Ships, and in all other respects they were far Superiour, as being the better Pilots, knew better how to order their Ships, ply the Oars, had the more sprightly Soldiers, and the more expert Commanders; whereas on the contrary, the Cappadocians were but Fresh water Soldiers, seldom exercis'd at Sea Fights, and, which commonly proves the Bane of all, did all Tumultuously and without any Order. It's true indeed, they were as cheerful and ready to Ingage as the Rhodians, because they were to Fight just under the King's Eye, and therefore desir'd to approve their Loyalty and Affection to him; and in regard they only overpowr'd their Enemies in number of Ships, they us'd all the Arts and Contrivances they could devise, to Surround and Hem them in.

8. Caius Marius was the most renown'd Person of any of his time, when he was young; he was ambitious of Honour and Glory, free from Covetousness, and perform'd many noble Acts, both in Europe and Africa, so that his Name was famous, and cry'd up in all Places. But when he grew old, and coveted the Riches of King Mithridates, and the Wealth of the Cities of Asia, and sought against the Laws to have the Province which was allotted to Cornelius Sulla, to be transferr'd to him, he fell justly into many Calamities; for he not only miss'd those Riches which he Coveted, but lost all that were his own; the Quaestors by reason of his extraordinary Covetousness being sent, to seize upon all his Goods for the publick Use. He was moreover by the Judgment of the People condemn'd to die, but escap'd that punishment by flight, and wander'd Solitarily and alone, up and down Italy, and at length got into Numidia, poor and destitute of all things Afterwards when the Civil Wars broke out in Rome, he join'd with those that were judg'd Enemies to the Romans, and being Victorious, he was not contented with his Return into his own Country, but rais'd great Commotions in the Commonwealth; But at length having gain'd the Seventh Consulship, and by his own Misfortunes, learn'd the inconstancy of Fortune, he was unwilling to put things to a hazard any more: And therefore foreseeing the dreadful War Sylla was bringing upon his Country, he Murder'd himself; but leaving behind him the Seeds of a most grievous War, he involv'd his Son and Country in most dreadful Calamities: For his Son being forc'd to contest with an Enemy more Potent than himself, he most miserably perisht (upon taking of the City) in a Vault, whither he fled to hide himself. And the People of Rome, and Cities of Italy, having been now long ingag'd in a cruel War, fell under most dreadful Calamities. For two principal Men of the City, Scaevola and Crassus, without any Course of Legal proceedings, were Murder'd in the Senate; whose cruel Murder plainly evidenc'd the greatness of those Miseries that then threatned both the City and all Italy. For the greatest part of the Senate, and the most eminent Men of the City were slaughter'd by Sylla, and no less than 100000 Soldiers were slain, either in Mutinies or Battles; and all these Miseries were at first occasion'd by the Covetousness only of Marius.

9. Lucius Cornelius Merula, who was chosen Consul in the room of Cinna; when Cinna agreed to Peace, upon Condition he might be restored to the Consulship, approv'd himself a good Citizen, and evidenc'd his extraordinary love to his Country. For addressing himself to the Senate and People, and Discoursing concerning what might most tend to the publick good, he promis'd he would be the Procurer of Peace; and whereas


Page 779

he was chosen Consul much against his Will, he declar'd he would now freely of his own accord give up his Authority into the hands to Cinna; upon which he forthwith surrendred his Consulship, and became a private Man. The Senate hereupon sent Ambassadors to Cinna, and having agreed with him upon the Terms of Peace, introduc'd him into the City.

10. Lucius Sylla being greatly straiten'd for want of Money, rifled Three Temples that were full of devoted Gold and Silver, that is the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, of Aesculapius at Epidaurus, and the famous Temple of Jupiter at Olympus, out of which last, he carry'd away a vast Treasure; for that it had never been before violated. But as to the Temple at Delphos, the Phocians in the time of the sacred War, had drain'd it of its Wealth. When Sylla therefore had thus heap'd up a mighty mass of Gold and Silver, and other Treasure, he was sufficiently furnish'd with Money to carry on the War in Italy. But having without all Fear or Sense of Religion, thus robb'd the Temples, he consecrated a piece of Land to the Gods, for the maintaining of yearly Sacrifices, in lieu of the Money: And would often in a Joke and Jest say, That he was sure to be Victorious in all Encounters, who had the Gods for his Assistants, and for that end, had help'd him with Money.

11. Fimbria having out-ran Flaccus, and gotten a long way before him in his March, thought he had now gain'd a most convenient opportunity for some Commotion or other; and therefore that he might indear the Soldiery to him, he permitted them to make incursions into the Countreys of their Allies, and make what havock they pleas'd therein, and to take Captive every one they met withal. The Soldiers very readily embrac'd the License, so that within few days, they had scrambl'd together abundance of Wealth by their plundering. But those that had been spoil'd of their Goods, went to meet the Consul, and made bitter complaints to him of the Injuries they had receiv'd, who being much troubl'd at the business, commanded them to follow him, and he himself would see restitution made to every one that had suffer'd; and accordingly with Threats he commanded Fimbria to return forthwith to the Owners, whatsoever had been taken away from them. But Fimbria laid all the blame upon the Soldiers, who did this without any Commission from him; but covertly he advis'd them, not to regard the Consul's Command, nor suffer that to be taken from them which they had got by the Law of Arms: Upon this, when Flaccus commanded restitution to be made of their Rapine, adding threatning to his commands, the Soldiers refus'd to Obey, so that there follow'd a great Mutiny in the Camp.

12. Fimbria having again cross'd the Hellespont, animated his Soldiers to Rapines and all kind of Villanies, exacted Moneys from the Cities, and divided it amongst the Soldiers, who having obtain'd an uncontroul'd License, did what they listed, and allur'd moreover with the hopes of a large Income, lov'd Fimbria as one who had deserv'd extreamly well of the whole Army. Moreover those Cities that had stood out against him, when he had taken 'em, he gave them to the plunder of his Soldiers, and so he dealt with * Nicomedia.

13. The same Fimbria being admitted into Cizicum, professing himself a Friend to the Place, as soon as he was got in, began to Impeach all the wealthiest of them, and charge them with some Crime or other: Two of these, the principal Men of the City, after he had pass'd Sentence on them, he caus'd to be whipt with Rods, to terrifie the rest, and afterwards struck off their Heads, and set their Goods to Sale, and forc'd others out of Fear, to give him all they had, as a Ransom for their Lives.

14. Cn. Pompeius addicted himself to Martial Affairs, and inur'd himself to the hardships and Fatigues of War, so that in a short time he became very expert in Military Matters: For casting off all Sloth and Effeminateness, he was always Night and Day doing something or other that was useful and advantagious for matters relating to War: For he was very sparing in his Diet, eat his Meat sitting, and altogether forbore Baths, and such like delights. He allotted but a few Hours of the Night for Sleep, and spent the rest in the Cares of a General, relating to what he was to put in Execution the next Day; so that by his constant forethoughts of the uncertain Events of War, he became a most expert Commander. And therefore, whereas another could scarce in the same time sit himself to take upon him the Charge of an Army already rais'd, in that time, and much less he Rais'd them, Train'd, and Disciplin'd them. And when the News of his famous Exploits was brought to Rome, every Body at first reflecting upon his youth, more than thinking upon his Valour, slighted him, supposing the Messengers stretcht in their Relations, and made things look bigger, than in truth they were. But when the certain Event confirm'd the former Report, the Senate sent out Junius against him, whom he routed and put to Flight.


Page 780

against 'em. But one of the Tribunes introducing them into the Senate, and violently plucking down the Praetor from the Desks, who was stirring them up to the War, he caus'd them to speak, who saying many things in a way of humble Supplication, receiv'd such an Answer as altogether freed them from their excessive Fears; But for some of their Crimes they were sharply rebuk'd.

XX. About this time came Ambassadors to Rome from all parts to Congratnlate their Victories; the Senate courteously receiv'd them all, and returning them Gracious Answers, presently sent them back into their own Country.

XXI. About this time there being many Ambassadors arriv'd, the Senate first dispatch'd those that came along with Attalus. For the Romans were jealous of Eumenes, by reason of some Letters that were intercepted, by which it appear'd that he had confederated with Perseus against the Romans, being likewise accus'd by many Ambassadors that came out of Asia, and especially by those that were sent from King Prusias, and the Gallo-Greeks; those with Attalus readily answer'd to every Article of the Charge, and not only clear'd themselves of all the Crimes, but return'd home with much Honour and Reputation. However, the Senate did not altogether lay aside the Suspicion of Eumenes: but pitching upon Caius, sent him away strictly to observe his Affairs and Motions.

XXII. Prusias became unworthy of the Royal Dignity, spent his days basely and sordidly in flattering his Superiours; and when the Roman Ambassadors came to him, he threw aside the Ensigns of Royalty the Diadem and the Purple, and imitating exactly the Garb of the Roman Libertines, met the Ambassadors with his Head shaven, and wearing a White Cap, and having on the Gown and * Shooes of a Manumitted Slave, so Saluted the Ambassadors, Declaring himself to be a Libertine of the Romans, then which it's no easie matter to find a more dishonourable Title; and many other such mean things he had done before. And when he came to the Portico of the Senate-House, standing at the Door straight over against the Senators, he fell down prostrate upon both Hands, kissing the Threshold, and cry'd out with a loud voice to them as they sate, All Health! Ye Gods! The Saviours! not sparing any high-soaring Compliments of unmanly Flattery and Effeminacy. And moreover, making a Speech in the Senate agreeable to his sordid Deportment, he proceeded so far as is a shame for me to write. But the Senate being offended at many things he said, return'd him Answer suitable to his Flatteries. For the Romans are eager chiefly to conquer a Stout and Couragious Enemy.

XXIII. Ambassadors came to Rome both from the younger and the elder Ptolemy. An Account of Affairs being given to those in the Assembly, the Senate upon hearing of part decreed, that the Ambassadors from the elder Ptolemy should depart out of Italy within Five Days at most, and the Confederacy be broken off. But that Ambassadors should be sent to the younger Ptolemy to Declare to him the Good Will of the Senate, and those things that had been signify'd to his Brother.

XXIV. About the 155 Olympiad, Ambassadors came from Ariarathes bringing a Crown of the value of 10000 pieces of Gold, signifying the Good Will the King bore to the Romans, and that upon their account he had prohibited Marriage and Amity with Demetrius; which was attested and confirm'd by the Ambassadors from Greece. The Senate commended Ariarathes and accepted the Crown, and sent back to him such Presents as were of greatest Esteem among the Romans.

XXV. At the same time Ambassadors came from Demetrius bringing likewise a Crown of the value of 10000 pieces of Gold, and those prisoners that were guilty of the Murther of Octavus: But the Senate had a long Debate what was best and most advisable to do in these Concerns; at last they accepted the Crown, but wou'd not receive Isocrates and Leptinas that were offer'd to be deliver'd up to them.

XXVI. The Celtiberians after the Victory, wisely foreseeing what wou'd follow, sent Ambassadors to the Consul to Treat of Peace, but he looking upon it necessary to keep up the Grandeur and Magnanimity of his Country, made Answer, That they must either give up all to the Romans, or else be Victors in the War.

XXVII. When the Romans were at War with the Carthaginians, the Carthaginians hearing that they were sailing to Lilybaeum, and not in the least making a Descent upon them, sent Ambassadors to Rome, and by them deliver'd up both themselves, and all the Concerns of their Country to the Romans. The Senate accepting the Surrender of their Country, gave this Answer; Since the Carthaginians are so well advis'd, the Senate returns them their Country, their Laws, their Temples, their Sepulchres, their Liberties and their Estates; (not at all mentioning their City Carthage, for that was conceal'd under these kind Concessions) if they wou'd give Three hundred Sons of the Senators Hostages, and obey the Consuls Commands. They thinking hereby to be


Page 781

free from the War sent the Hostages not without great Lamentation. Afterwards they came to Utica; and the Carthaginians again sent Ambassadors to ask what further commands the Romans would lay upon 'em; when the Consuls told them they must deliver up their Arms and Engines without fraud, they at first (because of the War against Asdrubal) took it heavily, however they brought in 200000 Arms of all sorts, and 2000 Engines. Afterwards the Romans sent again to the Carthaginians Commands, to send some Persons of their Senate to whom they would declare their further Commands, and accordingly they sent Thirty of the Noblest. Manilius the Senior Consul told 'em that it was the Senates Pleasure they should leave the City they Inhabited, and build another Eighty Furlongs distant from the Sea: But the Ambassadors crying out for Mercy & Compassion, all of them cast themselves to the Ground, uttering many lamentable Complaints with Tears, upon which great confusion was rais'd in the Assembly: And when the Carthaginians were a little recover'd out of their Consternation, one only, Named Blannus delivering himself in the natural Language of the Auditory, Debated the matter with great Heat and Earnestness, attended with an undaunted Presence of Mind, which mov'd the Auditors to Pity and Commiseration.

28. The Romans being unmovable in their Decrees, as to the Razing of Carthage, the Senate commanded them forthwith to depart to Carthage, and to declare to the Citizens what things were Decreed; but some of the Ambassadors refusing to return to their Country, fled each of them where ever they could; the rest chusing rather to return, went home, having thus finish'd a doleful Embassy. When the People came thronging together to meet 'em, they gave 'em never a Word, but beating their heads, and stretching out their hands, and invocating their Gods, they went on to the Court, and inform'd the Senate what things were commanded.

29. The Arradians supposing they had got an opportunity to destroy those of Marathum, sent privately to Ammonius Viceroy of the Kingdom, and with a Bribe of 300 Talents, prevail'd with him to deliver up Marathum, whereupon Ammonius sent Isadore to the Marathonians, who by his speech was to pretend some other matters, but in truth went to seize upon the City, and to deliver it up to the Arradians. The Marathonians being ignorant that they were design'd for Destruction, yet observing how that the Arradians were higher in the Kings Favour than themselves, refus'd the Kings Soldiers Entrance into their City, and resolved to make their Addresses as Supplicants to the Arradians. They forthwith therefore sent Ten of the most Eminent of their eldest Citizens, as Ambassadors to Arradus, who brought with them a humble Address and Supplication, and the oldest Images of their Gods, which they had in their City, hoping that upon the account of their kindred, and mov'd with Reverence to their Gods, the Arradians would be appeas'd, and their anger diverted. As soon as they landed according to the Commands given, they addressed themselves as Supplicants to the People: But the Arradians Blood being up, they slighted the usual and common Laws of Supplicants, and cast off all Reverence of their kindreds Images, and their Gods, and therefore broke the Images, and trampled them most shamefully under their Feet, and attempted to Stone the Ambassadors; but some of the Senators interposing themselves between 'em and the rage of the People (scarce restrain'd from stoning them, notwithstanding the Reverence they ow'd the Senators) commanded 'em to be convey'd to Prison.—

The Numantines and Termisians sent Ambassadors to the Romans, to treat of a Peace, which was granted to them upon these Conditions, that they should deliver up each their Cities to the Romans, 300 Hostages, 900 Soldiers Coates, 300 Hides, 800 War-Horses, and all their Armes, and they should be Friends and Allies to the Romans. There being a day appointed for the performance of these Conditions by the Cities, all was done according to the Articles, but when at last it came to the delivering up of their Arms, there a rose a certain Generous Regret and Lamentation, and a couragious Resolution in the Populacy to regain their Liberties. Therefore they were angry one at another they should ever consent, that they should like Women strip themselves of their Arms. Wherefore repenting of those things that were decreed, the Fathers accus'd their Sons, Children their Parents, and Women their Husbands, and so coming to themselves again, resolving not to deliver up their Arms, they renew'd the War against the Romans.

31. Tryphon, of a private Man being made King, hasted all he could to establish the Government in himself, by a decree of the Senate: Wherefore preparing a golden Medal of Victory weighing 10000 Crowns, he sent Ambassadors to Rome, to present it to the People, not doubting but that he should obtain from them the Compellation of King, considering the Present which he sent was not only very rich in it self, but such whose Name carried along with it the happy Prognostication of Victory. But he found the Senate


Page 782

far more Subtile than himself, whose Prudence prompt'd them to a Dislike of those that deceitfully circumvent others: For they receiv'd the Present, and the good Omen, together with the profit, but instead of Grifon's Name, the Senate Decreed that the Title of the King that was treacherously Murder'd, should be Engraven upon it; and thus doing they approv'd themselves haters of his wickedness in Murdering of the Child, and such as would not accept of the presents of wicked Men.

32. There came with Scipio Africanus other Ambassadors to Alexandria, to view the whole Kingdom. Ptolemy met them in Pomp and State, with a great Retinue, and Feasted them Sumptuously, and going about with them, shew'd them his Palace and Treasury. But they being Persons Eminent in Virtue, contented themselves with a spare Diet, and such as was wholesome, scorning that rich Provision, as prejudicial both to Mind and Body. As for those things which the King esteem'd as Rarities and Admirable, they only Glanc'd their Eyes upon 'em, and look'd on 'em as things of no Value: But what was really worth their Eying, those things they view'd most exactly; as the Scituation of the City and its Capacity, and particularly the Pharos, and what belong'd thereunto: Thence likewise they Sail'd to Memphis, and took notice of the goodness of the Country, the conveniencies of the River Nile, the number of the Cities, the infinite Thousands of Inhabitants, the Fortification of Egypt, and the excellency of the Country, how well it was provided, both as to the Security, and Extent of an Empire: And having admir'd both the Populousness of Egypt, and the Conveniency of the Places therein, they were of opinion that the Kingdom of Egypt would easily swell into a vast Empire, if it once had Masters answerable. After the Ambassadors had well view'd Egypt, they went to Cyprus, and from thence into Syria. In short, they past through most parts of the World: And carrying themselves Soberly, to Admiration in all Places wherever they came, they gain'd exceeding Honour and Reputation; and Travelling through most parts of the World, with the general Applause of all, they return'd home. For those that were at difference, they reconcil'd one to another; others they perswaded to do Right and Justice, to those that complain'd against them; those that were impudently Obstinate, they were necessitated to Curb and Restrain by Force; such Causes as were Difficult to be Determined, they transmitted to the Senate. Conferring both with Kings and their People, and renewing all former Leagues, they increas'd the love of all sorts to the Roman Government, and so all applying themselves in their several Countrys to chuse fit Persons, they sent Ambassadors to Rome, and highly applauded the Delegates with Scipio, and the Senate for imploying of such Men.

33. Bocchus, King of Lybia, having sharply rebuk'd those that would have perswaded him to make War upon the Romans, sent Commissioners to Marius, craving pardon for for his Crimes, and desiring to enter into a League, made many promises to be serviceable to the Romans for the time to come. But Marius ordering him to send Ambassadors to the Senate, to Treat of these matters, the King observ'd his directions, and sent accordingly. Upon which the Senate answer'd, that Bocchus should in every respect be receiv'd into Grace and Favour, if he could prevail with Marius. Marius desirous to have Jugurtha, the King his Prisoner, Bocchus willing to serve him, sends for Jugurtha, as if he would discourse with him about Business of concern to them both, and by this means seizes him, and delivers him Bound to Lucius Sylla the Quaestor, who was sent out for that purpose; and so by the misfortune of this Prince, he bought his own Safety, and escap't Punishment from the Romans.

34. Ambassadors came from King Mithridates to Rome, with a great sum of Money, with hopes by that to corrupt the Senate. Saturnius thinking now he had an advantage against the Senate, reproach'd and bespatter'd the Embassy at a great rate; the Senators instigated the Ambassadors, and promis'd to assist them, who thereupon call'd Saturnius in question for this abuse. There being then rais'd a mighty popular Tumult by reason of the violation of the Ambassadors, and of that constant Abhorrence the Romans have of such notorious Affronts, Saturnius (who was now condemn'd to die, by the Senate his proper Judges in such Cases) fell into most racking Fears and Perplexities; and because of the great Stirs and Tumults that were rais'd, in a Consternation he betook himself for Shelter to the Pity those commonly find that are cast out of all; throwing therefore off his rich Apparel, and putting on a mean and sordid Habit; suffering his Beard to grow, he ran up and down to the Tumultuous throngs of People throughout the City, falling. down upon his Knees to some, catching others fast by the Hands, begging with Tears that they would assist him in his present Calamities, declaring he was Factiously opprest by the Senate against all Right and Justice, and suffer'd all this for his Good-will he bore to the People; that the Senators were his Enemies, Accusers and Judges. The


Page 783

To the READER.

THese few Fragments, together with those of Polybius, Dionysius Halicarnassus, Dion Casseus, and Appian were Publish'd in the Year of Our Lord 1581. By Fulvius Ursinus a Roman Born, and Eminently Learn'd; But for a further and more particular Account of 'em, I refer the Reader to the Epistle to the Fragments of Valerius plac'd next before these. And therefore have now no further to add, but an acknowledgment of Thanks due to a Learned Person in Oxford, through whose Candor the Book out of which the Translation of these Fragments was made, was brought to hand for perusal.

I. IN the Reign of Tullus Hostilius King of the Romans, the Albans, jealous of the growth of the Roman Power, pretended that the Romans committed Thefts and Robberies in their Country, and therefore sent Ambassadors to Rome to demand Justice, with Instructions, that if they did not hearken to them, to denounce War against 'em; Hostilius the King of Rome understanding that they sought occasion to pick a Quarrel, and begin a War, Commanded his Friends and Officers to Entertain the Ambassadors courteously, and persuade them to Peace and Amity. But the King not willing hastily to give 'em Audience, sent some in the mean time to the Albans with Orders and Instructions like to those of the Albans to him; ordering this, as prompted thereunto by that Antient Custom, according to which the Old Romans studied nothing more than that their Wars should be Just and Warrantable: For he was very cautious lest not being able to find out the First Authors of the Depredations, or such as were to be deliver'd up to the Demands of Justice, he should be thought to be the first Fomenter of an unjust War. But it falling out that the Ambassadors that were sent to Alba were first denied Justice; upon the 30th. day they denounc'd War against the Albans. The Albane Ambassadors, according to their desires receiv'd Answer, That they being the first that deny'd doing Justice, the Romans were they that now denounc'd War against them. And these were the Reasons that the People, who were before Ally'd by Marriages, and at mutual Amity one with another, now became Enemies, and Alienated one from another.

II. When Cambyses King of Persia was Lord of all Aegypt, the Lybians and Cyrenians confederating with the Aegyptians, sent Presents, and promised entire Obedience and Subjection to their Commands.

III. The Ambassadors that were sent from Nabis and Flamininus to Rome concerning the terms of Peace, after they had open'd to the Senate the Matters given them in Charge; the Senate decreed the Articles to be confirm'd, and that all their Garisons should be remov'd, and their Forces drawn out of all parts of Greece. When Flamininus heard of the Senate's Decree, he Summon'd all the Nobility of Greece from all parts, to meet in a General Council, where he rehears'd to 'em the great Kindnesses and Good will of the Romans towards the Grecians, and Apologiz'd for the matter relating to Nabis, because they did in that Affair, as far as they were able. He told them likewise, that according to their Desire all the Inhabitants of Greece should be free and eas'd of all their Garisons, and above all, be Govern'd by their own Laws. But he begg'd the Greeks would so far Gratifie him, as to enquire what Italian Servants were among 'em, and to discharge them within Thirty Days; which was done accordingly.

IV. The Senate again gave Audience to the Grecian Ambassadors, and Caress'd 'em with very fair words, desirous to have them earnest and forward in the prosecution of the War against Antiochus, which they suddenly expected. They gave Answer likewise to the Ambassadors of Philip, that because he maintain'd his Fidelity they would free him from Tribute, and discharge his Son Demetrius. And to those that came from Antiochus they appointed Ten of the Senate to hear what they said they had in charge from the King. When the Commissioners sate, one of the Ambassadors nam'd Menippus, President of the Embassie, Declar'd, that they came to make up a League of Friendship and Confederacy between the Romans and Antiochus. But he said that the King greatly wondred for what manner of reason the Romans should lay their Commands


Page 784

THE SUPPLEMENT Referred unto in the XVIIth. BOOK of DIODORUS, (Pag. 557.)

1. How Alexander marching through a dry Country, for want of Water lost many of his Soldiers.

Curtius, lib. VII. c. 5.

ALexander himself, with a Band of Light-arm'd Men, marching all the Night, entred the Deserts of Susitana. The total want of Water, with the Thoughts of their desperate Condition (as is before declared) enflam'd their Thirst before they had a reald esire to drink; for, sor the space of 400 Furlongs, not the least Lake, or any thing that was moist, appear'd. The scorching Sun fired the Sands, which when inflam'd, burnt up all round about like a raging Fire; hence, through the excessive Heat of the Earth, arose a Mist which obscur'd the Light, and all the Champaigne seem'd no other than if it had been the vast Ocean.

Their March in the Night was tolerable, because their Bodies were refresh'd by the Dew and Coldness of the Air, before the rising of the Sun; but when Light appear'd, the Heat began, and Drought dried up all their natural Moisture, and both their Mouths and their very Intrails were altogether parch'd up with scorching Heat; and therefore first their Spirits and then their Bodies began to faint. It was grievous to 'em both to stand still and go forward: Some few of 'em, by the help of them that knew the Country, had got Water, which quench'd their Thirst for a little while; but the Heat encreasing, their desire of Drink was again the more enflam'd; and therefore whoever had any Wine or Oil, it was presently guzzl'd down, and the present Pleasure of Drinking was so great, that it banish'd all fear of Thirst for the future. Those that had thus swell'd themselves with immoderate Drinking, cou'd neither carry their Arms, nor march forward; and those seem'd to be in a far better condition that wanted Water, than they who by pouring it down to excess, were forc'd to vomit it up again. Those that were about the King seeing him griev'd and much perplex'd with these Misfortunes, entreated him to mind and take care of himself; for his Courage was the only Life and Relief of his drooping Army. While they were thus advising him, two of those that were sent before to mark out a convenient Place where to encamp, came with Water in their Vessels for the use of their Children who were in the Army, and whom they knew were not able to hold out without Drink: These meeting the King, one of 'em opened his Vessel, and fill'd a Cup which he had with him, and offer'd it to the King, who receiv'd it; but ask'd him for whom the Water was brought, who answer'd, That it was for his Children. Upon which. returning the Cup full as it was, I cannot find in my Heart (says he) to drink it alone; and 'tis to be divided amongst them all; away therefore with all speed, and give it your Children, for whom it was brought. At length he came to the River Oxus about evening, but a great part of the Army were left behind: He commanded therefore Fires to be kindled upon a high Mountain, that those that followed slowly after might know they were not far from the Camp. He commanded likewise those that were in the Van (having sufficiently refresh'd themselves both with Meat and Drink) to fill


Page 785

all sorts of Vessels wherein Water might be carried, and help their Companions that were behind. But those that drank immoderately, quench'd their natural Heat by Surfeit, and died presently, by which means he lost far more Men than he had done before in any Battel.

2. How Alexander destroy'd all the Branchidans (as Traitors to the Grecians) whom anciently the Persians forc'd to remove from their own Habitations to the furthest Part of the Kingdom.

Curtius, lib. VII. c. 6.

HE came to a little Town where the Branchidans inhabited, who heretofore remov'd from Miletus, by the Command of Xerxes when he return'd out of Greece, and settled themselves in this place: They were they that violated the Temple call'd Did

••eus,

 to ingratiate themselves with Xerxes. The Customs and Manners of their Country were not as yet wholly laid aside, but they spoke a kind of broken Language, neither perfect Greek nor Barbarian. They receiv'd therefore the King very joyfully, and gave up themselves and their City into his hands. He thereupon call'd together the Milesians that were in his Army, who bore an old Grudge and inveterate Hatred against the Branchidans, he left it therefore to these Milesians, whose Ancestors had been betray'd by 'em, to do with them what they thought fit either to remember the Injury, and so revenge themselves, or the Original of the Branchidans, who were so their Country-men, and upon that account to spare them. When they cou'd not agree amongst themselves what to resolve upon, the King told 'em he himself wou'd take time to consider what was fittest to be done. The next day the Branchidans meeting him, he order'd 'em to go along with him; and when he came to the City, he enter'd the Gate with a select Detachment, having in the mean time order'd the Phalanx to surround the Walls, and upon a Sign given to raze the City to the Ground, that had been a Nest for the Traitors, and to put them all to the Sword, Man, Woman, and Child. Hereupon being all disarm'd, they were knock'd on the head in every place up and down, and no stop cou'd be put to their Cruelty by nearness of Language, or the Prayers and Tears of the poor and miserable People.

At length they raz'd the Walls to the very bottom of the Foundation, that there might not remain so much as the least sign where it had once stood. Neither stopt they here, for they not only cut down, but rooted up the Sacred Groves, that they might leave all a vast and solitary Desert, barren, without so much as a Root in the Ground; which Executions, had they been inflicted upon the first Actors of the Treason, might have been judg'd a just Revenge, and not the Effects of Cruelty, as they seem'd to be; sor now the Posterity, who never so much as ever saw Miletus (and therefore cou'd not betray it to Xerxes) suffered for the Faults of their Ancestors.—.

3. How the King led his Army against the Sogdians and Scythians.
Arrianus, lib. 4.

IN the mean time the Barbarians that border'd next to the River, surpriz'd the Macedonians that were plac'd in Garisons in Scythia, and put them all to the Sword, and fortified the Cities for their greater Security. Many of the Sogdians join'd with him in the Defection, being sollicited thereunto by them that had seiz'd upon Bessus, who likewise drew away after them some of the Bactrians, either because they were afraid of Alexander, or for that (as they gave the reason for their Rebellion) Alexander had summon'd a Senate of the Governours of the Province to meet at Zariaspa, the greatest City there, from which Convention they saw no ground to hope for any good to themselves. When Intelligence was brought to Alexander of these things, he forthwith commanded his Foot in every Regiment to prepare Scaling Ladders; and he himself march'd away with his Army to a City call'd Gaza, which was next to the Camp, and lay first in his way; for it was said the Barbarians had fled into seven Towns of that Country. Craterus he sent to Cyropolis, the greatest of all the Cities, and in which a very great number of the Barbarians had shelter'd themselves. The King commanded him to encamp near the City, and to fortifie his Camp with a Trench and Wall drawn round, and place such Engines upon


Page 786

his Bulwarks as he saw occasion to use, that the Townsmen being busie in assaulting, Craterus might have no leisure to come in to the assistance of other Cities. The King himself, as soon as he came to Gaza, forthwith at the first approach commanded his Men to set Scaling-Ladders round the Walls, which were but of Earth, and not very high. Upon which, the Slingers, Darters, and Archers, together with the Foot, made an Assault, ply'd and gall'd them that defended the Walls with their Darts, and shot out of the Engines, so that by Showres of Darts and Arrows the Wall was presently clear'd of its Defendants, and the Scaling-Ladders in a trice were set to the Walls, and the Macedonians enter'd, and put all the Men to the Sword (for so Alexander had commanded) but the Women and Children, with the rest of the Prey, they carry'd away. Thence the King forthwith march'd to another City (fortified much like unto Gaza) which he took much after the same manner the very same day, and dealt with the Prisoners after the same manner as with them at Gaza. After this, he made to a third City, which he took the next day upon the first Assualt.

In the mean time, while he was reducing these Cities with his Foot, he sent away his Horse to two other neighbouring Cities, with Orders to watch 'em, lest the Inhabitants hearing of the taking of the Cities bordering upon 'em, and o

•

 the King's near approach, should fly and leave the Cities, so as he should not be able to pursue with any hopes to overtake 'em. And indeed it fell out as he thought, which evidenc'd the sending forth of the Horse to be necessary: For the Barbarians, who still were possess'd of two other Cities, seeing the Smoak of the City which was burnt, and was over-against 'em (besides some who escap'd out of the Overthrow, brought them news of the City being taken) with all speed in whole droves fled out of the Cities, and fell in among the Horse that were sent forth, and multitudes of 'em were knock'd on the Head.

The King having taken and raz'd these five Towns in the space of two days, march'd away to Cyropolis, the greatest of their Cities: The Walls of this City were higher than any of the rest, the Town being built by Cyrus. And forasmuch as there were many stout Men and good Soldiers, the Inhabitants of the Country were got together into this place; the Macedonians could not easily (like to the other places) take it at the first Assault, and therefore Alexander order'd, that with the Battering-Rams and other Engines they shou'd batter the Walls, and where-ever any Breach was made, there forthwith to make an Assault. But the King observing the Channel of the River (which ran through the City like a little Brook) to be then dry, and not contiguous or near the Walls, but affording a direct Passage for his Soldiers into the City, he took with him his Guard Targateers, Archers, and the Agrians (the Barbarians then busie in observing the Engines and those that manag'd 'em) and secretly with few at first enter'd through the Channel into the City, and broke down the Gates that were in that part, and readily let in the rest of the Soldiers: Upon which, the Barbarians perceiving the City to be enter'd, however set upon Alexander's Soldiers, and fought and resolutely, in which Conflict Alexander receiv'd a Blow on his Head and Neck with a Stone. Craterus and many others were wounded with Darts and Arrows; but at length the Barbarians were driven out of the Market-place. In the mean time, those that assaulted the Walls enter'd, all being clear of those that should have defended them. In the first Conflict at the entring of the City, there were slain of the Enemy about eight thousand, the rest (for they were eighteen thousand that had there put in themselves) fled into the Castle, who after one day's siege for want of Water surrender'd themselves. The seventh City the King took at the first Assault: Ptolemy indeed says that it was surrender'd; but Aristobulus relates that it was taken by storm, and that all in it were put to the Sword. Ptolemy writes, that all the Prisoners were distributed in the Army, and order'd to be kept bound till the King left the Country, lest any one of 'em that revolted should be left behind.

While these things were on foot, the Army of the Asian Scythians came to the Banks of the River Ganais, because they heard that some of the Barbarians inhabiting beyond the River had revolted from Alexander; and their aim therefore was, that if there were any considerable Defection, they likewise might act their part in falling upon the Macedonians. At the same time Intelligence was brought, that Spitamenes had besieg'd those that were left in Garison in the Castle of Patachades. Alexander therefore sent Andromachus, Medemenus, and Caranus against Spitamenes, with sixty Horse of the Social Band, and eight hundred of the Mercenaries, who were under the Command of Caranus: But of Foot there were Fifteen hundred Mercenaries; with them the King join'd in Commission one Pharnuches for an Interpreter, a Lycian by Nation, who was well skill'd in the


Page 787

Language of the Barbarians, and therefore was judged a fit Person to transact matters with them.

The King having in the space of 20 days Wall'd the City he had before design'd to build, gave it the Greek Mercenaries to be Inhabited by them, and to such neighbouring Barbarians as had a mind to remove their Habitations and dwell there, and to some of the Macedonians that were Disabled, and unfit to bear Arms.

Afterwards having Sacrificed to the Gods after the manner of his Country, and exhibited the Gymnick Sports, and Horse-Courses, finding that the Scythians did not March back and leave the River, but threw their Darts over, (for it was there very narrow) and after their Barbarous manner, gave out most opprobious and railing Language against Alexander, as that he durst not fight with the Scythians, and if he did, he should find by experience, how great a difference there was between the Scythians and the Barbarous Asiaticks: The King being provok'd with these things, resolv'd to pass the River and fall upon 'em, and commanded Leather Boats to be made ready for that purpose. Having therefore Sacrific'd for his good Success, the Intrails of the Beasts promised nothing that was Prosperous, which made him very uneasie, but he bore it very patiently, and staid there. The Scythians still continuing their slight and contemptuous Language, he again Sacrificed, and when Aristander the Soothsayer declar'd that danger was 

portended, Alexander answer'd, it was better to undergo the extreamest hazard, than for him who had Conquered all Asia to be a Scorn, a Mocki

•

g-Stock to the Scythians, as Darius the Father of Xerxes was heretofore. Aristander, on the other side repli'd, that he wou'd not declare any thing to the King, but what was portended by the Gods, tho' Alexander had rather hear other things.

 However Alexander's Boats being now ready, and his Army standing all in Arms at the Rivers Brink, he order'd that upon a Sign given, they should Discharge the Engines against the Scythians that Rid over against them, on the other side; which done, some of them were wounded with the Darts, and one of them especially was pierc'd with a Dart througli his Buckler and Breast-plate, and fell down dead from his Horse. But the Barbarians being terrified with Darts that wounded them at so great a distance, and with the fall of that Valiant Man, by degrees drew off further from the Bank of the River. Alexander discerning 'em to be in disorder by the stroaks of the Darts, with sound of Trumpet passed over the River at the head of his Army; and the Archers and Slingers being first sent over, he Commanded them to ply the Scythians with their Slings and Arrows least they should fall in upon the Phalanx as they were passing over, before all his Body of Horse had recover'd the other-side. When all had now gain'd the further Bank of the River, he first fell upon the Scythians with one of the Squadrons of the Social Regiment, and Four Regiments of those that were arm'd with Saralles, whose Shock the Scythians bravely bore up against, and surrounded 'em with their Horse, so that many overpowring them, that were but few, they easily kept themselves whole and entire. Alexander thereupon mixing his Archers and Agrians, and other select Troops (over whom Balacrus had the Command) fell in upon the Scythians, and being now on both sides mixt together, the King order'd three Squadrons of Horse of the Social Band, and all his Horse that were Darters, to Charge in upon the Scythians; and he himself at the Head of the rest of the Horse made straight upon 'em, so that now they were not able any longer to keep their Horse in a Ring as before; for the Horse prest sore upon 'em, at the same time, and the light armed Men being mixt with the Horse, they suffer'd not the Enemy with any safety to Wheel about with their Horse to surround 'em. Upon which the Scythians were put to a Total Flight, and about a Thousand kill'd, and an Hundred and fifty taken Prisoners, amongst whom was Satrices one of their two Generals.

4. How the Sogdian Noblemen being led forth to be put to Death, were unexpectedly preserv'd.

Curtius lib. VII. c. 10.

SOme of the Prisoners of the Sogdians of Noble Birth, and Proper Handsome Men were brought before the King; who as soon as they understood by an Interpreter that they were to die, they began to Sing, Skip and Dance as Men transported with joy, using many Lascivious gestures of their Bodies. The King admining the greatness of their Courage, at the approach of Death, commanded them to be brought to him, and as

•

t them why they were so Excessively m

••

y, when Death was even before their Eyes? who


Page 788

answer'd, that if they had been put to death by any others Command, they should have, been as Sad at the apprehension of death as other Men; but since they were sent out of the World by so great a King as was Conqueror of the World, they Celebrated their honorable death (which all valiant Men wish for) with Songs of Mirth and Jollity, after the Custom and Manner of their Country: The King wondring at their Courage askt them, whether they would not be his Enemies, if he was so kind and generous as to suffer them to live. They answered, they never were his Enemies, but as Invaded, Oppos'd him to defend themselves, and if any made trial of 'em by fair means, and not by Force and Injury, they would lay out themselves to the utmost, that none should exceed 'em in grateful Offices of respect. Then he askt 'em what pledges they would give of Loyalty. They repli'd, their lives which they had receiv'd from him, and which they wou'd give him up again upon his demand. Nor did they sail him by Breach of promise: For they that return'd into their own Counrey, kept their Countrymen in due Obedience, Four of them which he kept for Squires of his Body, prov'd as true and faithful to the King, as any of the Macedonians.

5. How Alexander punish'd the Bactrians, and subdued the Sogdians a Second time, and built Cities in convenient Places to punish the Revolters.

Arrianus lib. IV.

ALexander himself Marcht again to the River Oxus; for he resolv'd to make against the Sogdians, for he heard that many of them put themselves into Forts and Castles, and refus'd to obey the Provincial Governors the King had placed over them. At the time he was encampt near the River Oxus, two Springs rose out of the Earth near to Alexander's Pavilion, the one of Water, and the other of Oyl: Of which prodigy Pt

•lemy Lagus

 forthwith inform'd the King as soon as he heard of it, whereupon Alexander without delay, at the command of the Priest, Sacrific'd; Aristander the Priest told the King that the Fountain of Oyl portended Labour, but Victory at last, the fruit of Toil and Pain: Marching therefore away with part of his Army against the Sogdians, he left in Bactria, Polyspercon, Attalus, Gorgias, and Meleager to be a Guard in that Country, both to keep them in Obedience that were Reduc'd, and to Subdue the others that had fallen off from their Allegiance; having divided his Army into Five parts, he gave the Command of Three of them to Hephestion; a Fourth part to Caenus and Artabazus: He himself with the Fifth entr'd the Country leading towards Maracanda. The rest enter'd wherever each of them cou'd, and stormed the Forts of them that had possessed themselves of them, and others they took in upon Surrender. After all, the Forces (having first ran over the greatest part of the Country) join'd together at Maracanda, he sent forth Hephestion to bring in Colonies into the Cities of the Sogdians: Coenus and Artabazus he order'd against the Scythians, because he heard Spitamenes was fled to 'em. He himself with the rest of the Army entring into Sogdiana, easily reduc'd the rest of the Towns that had revolted.

6. How the Sogdians revolted the Third time, and how they were taken that betook themselves to the top of the Rock.

Arrianus lib. IV.

AFterwards at the beginning of the Spring, he Marcht to a Rock to which he heard many of the Sogdians fled; and here it was said that the Wife and Daughters of Oxyartes had sheltred themselves. For Oxyartes plac'd them here as in a Hold that was Inexpugnable, he himself being one that had revolted from Alexander. And the King was the more earnest for that this Rock being taken, there appeared no Fort left in Sogdia that cou'd incourage them to a Defection. When he came to the Rock, he found it steep and inaccessable on every side, and that the Barbarians had brought in Provision for a long Siege, and that the depth of the Snow, as it made the Approach of the Mace

••mians

 more difficult, so it furnisht the Barbarians with plenty of Water. However Alexander resolv'd to assault the Rock. The Proud and Contemptuous answer likewise of the Barbarians stirr'd up Rage and Ambition in Alexander at one and the same time. For whereas at a Parly with them, he promis'd them that if they would Surrender, they should all have liberty to return safely home; they barbarously scoffed at him, and bid him seek some Soldiers that had Wings, who might so take the Rock, for they feared


Page 789

no other Mortals. Upon which Alexander commanded Proclamation to be made by an Herald, that he would bestow 12 Talents as a reward upon him that should first mount the Rock, and so the second and the third, in their due order should every one receive a reward till it came to the last that ascended the Rock, who should receive 300 Daricks; the hopes of which reward stirr'd up the Macedonians, who were eager before to fall upon them of their own accord. Three hundred therefore of those that were accustom'd to climb Rocks, being drawn out, they furnish'd themselves with Cramp-Irons (wherewith they fastned their Tents) that they might fix them in the Snow where it was hard Frozen, and in other parts of the Rock where there was no Snow, and to them they tied strong Cords, and in the Night made to that part of the Rock that was steepest and highest, and therefore (as they conceiv'd) least guarded; and with the Cramps, some fastned in the Rock, and others in the Snow that was frozen, they scrambled up from place to place 'till they gain'd the Top: But of these, 30 perish'd in endeavouring to get up, so that their Bodies could not be found to be buried, being lost in the depth of the Snow; the rest about break of day recovered the top, and by shaking of the Linnen Cloaths gave notice to the Army that they had gain'd the place, for that sign Alexander had commanded them: Upon which a Trumpeter was forthwith sent out with command to the Barbarians that they should without any further delay surrender themselves, for that he had now found Soldiers that had Wings, who had possessed themselves of the top of the Rock; and at the same time the Soldiers that had gain'd the Rock, presented themselves in view to the Barbarians, who being amaz'd at such an unexpected sight, supposing them to be more, and better arm'd than indeed they were, gave up themselves; the sight of a few Macedonians was so terrible to 'em. There were there taken Prisoners many of the Wives and Children of the Barbarians, and amongst them the Wife and Daughters of Oxyartes. Oxyartes's Son likewise was about the Age of Nine Years.

7. Of the Hunting in Basistis, and the multitude of Wild Beasts there.

Curtius, lib. VII. c. 1.

HAving given a gracious Audience to the Ambassadors, he there stayed waiting for Hephestion and Artabazus, who being afterwards join'd him, he came into the Country call'd Bazaria. Of the riches of the Barbarians in those Places, there can be no greater argument, than the multitude of stately wild Beasts that range in large Woods and Forrests in that Country. They frequent spacious Woods pleasantly water'd with many refreshing springs. They are Wall'd round, in which are built Towers for Stands to view the hunting of the Beasts. One of these Chases had remain'd free and untouch'd for the space of Four generations, which Alexander entring with his Army, he commanded the Game in all parts as he came to be rouz'd; amongst which when a Lyon of a vast Bigness met and set upon the King, L

•simachus

 (who afterwards was King) happening to be next to Alexander offered to make at the Beast with his hunting Spear, the King put him by, and bid him be gone adding that the Lyon might be kill'd by himself as well as by Lysimachus. This Lysimachus had before in a hunting in Syria kill'd an exceeding great Lyon with his own hand, but he had been even at the point of Death, his lest shoulder having been (in that Encounter) rent and torn even to the very Bone. The King twitting him with this, shew'd more of Valour afterwards in action than he did before in this expression; for he not only stood the Beast, but kill'd him at one blow. The story that was foolishly spread abroad that the King gave up Lysimachus to be devoured by a Lyon, rose (I believe) from this accident before related. But the Macedonians (though the King was thus happily delivered) yet according to the Custom of their Country, establish'd a Decree that he should not hunt on Foot without a Guard of his Captains and Friends. The King having kill'd Four thousand brave wild Beasts, feasted with his whole Army in the Forrest.

1. Of his Offence against Bacchus, and the Murder of Clitus in his Cups.

Arrianus, lib. IV.

TO declare in this place the death of Clitus, and the foul act of Alexander in that matter (though it happned some little time after) yet I judge it not altogether out of course. The Macedonians (its said) have a certain day sacred to Bacchus, and Alexander


Page 790

was accustomed to sacrifice to Bacchus every year upon that day; but at that time he neglected Bacchus, and sacrific'd to Custor and Pollux; and from that time he appointed Sacrifice to them, with Feasting always at that day. And whereas now the Company had been a considerable time quaffing and carouzing (for Alexander had now learn'd to imitate the Barbarians in his Cups) and all were heated with Wine, a discourse happned concerning the Discorides how to derive their Original from Jupiter, and set aside that of Tyndarus; some who were present to flatter the King (which sort of Creatures are ever Pernicious both to the Persons and Concerns of Kings, and are ever at hand) deliver'd their Judgment that Castor and Pollux were not in the least respect to be compar'd to Alexander, and his brave and noble Actions: Others in their Cups did not spare Hercules himself; but said that Envy was the cause that debarr'd Mortals from these Honours that were due to them from those among whom they convers'd. But Clitus who ever heretofore hated Alexander's imitation of the Manners of the Barbarians, and the discourses of his Flatterers, having now his Spirits something rais'd with Wine, was not able to bear those Contempts cast upon the Gods, nor that by undervaluing those Acts of the antient Heroes, so thankless a piece of service should be paid to the King. And declar'd that Alexander had neither done such wonderful things as they cri'd him up for, neither did he do any of them himself alone, but the Praise of a great part of 'em was due to the Valour of the Macedonians. But Alexander was much inrag'd at these words of Clitus; neither indeed, can I commend him in what he said, for I am of opinion it had been much more prudent for him in this time of carouzing to have held his peace, as well as to forbear joining with others in this sordid Vice of Flattery: And whereas some call'd to mind the Acts of Philip, and did all they could most unjustly to bear down and make slight of all he did as nothing at all memorable (in the mean time caressing and extolling of Alexander) Clitus now not himself, began to advance the the actions of Philip, and vilifie Alexander and his Atchievments: And cast it in the King's Teeth (now raging like a Madman) amongst other things, how he had at the River Granicus in the Charge, in the Horse Engagement preserv'd him, and impudently stretching out his right Hand, cried out, This Hand O Alexander, preserv'd thy Life in that Battel: Alexander not being able longer to endure the unbridled Passion of Clitus, or his base language, nor his reproaches cast upon him, in a rage leapt out towards him, but was held back by them that were round about him; on the other hand Clitus let fly all the reproachful words he cou'd devise, surpassing all bounds. The King with a loud voice call'd out for Argyraspides, and no Man regarding him, he cried out again that he was now in the same Condition Darius was in, when he was seiz'd and led away by Ressus and his Accomplices, and that there was nothing left him but the Name of a King. His Friends then could not hold him any longer, but springing from them, some say he snatcht a Launce out of the hands of one of his Guards, and with that run Clitus through, and kill'd him; others report it was with a Sarissa deliver'd to him by one of the Guard; Aristobulus gives no account whence this mad Fit of Alexander's arose; but says all the fault was wholly in Clitus; for that when Alexander in a rage rush't up and made at him to kill him, he at a back Door shifted out of the way, and got quite out of the Trenches into the Fort to Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, a Squire of the Body, yet could not contain himself but must needs come back again; and lighting upon Alexander when he was calling out for Clitus, Here's Clitus, Alexander, said he, upon which the King ran him through with a Sarissa: As I cannot but greatly blame Clitus for his Insolency to the King, so I am troubled for Alexander on the other side, because at that time he expos'd himself as guilty of Two Vices together, Anger and Drunkenness; to be overtaken with either of which, did not in the least become a sober Man. But yet again I must praise Alexander upon another account, that presently he repented of the soul Fact he had committed. For some who write of the Affairs of Alexander, say, that he set the end of the Spear against the Wall, and attempted to run himself upon the point, because his Life seem'd hateful to him, having through his Drunkenness destroy'd his Friend. But many Writers do not mention this. But when he was upon his Bed he lay lamenting, calling and repeating still the name of Clitus. Lanices the Daughter of Dropidus, who had brought up Alexander, received from him now he was a Man a large reward for his Education: she had lost Two Sons in the War, fighting for the King, and had her Brother now kill'd by his own Hand: He cry'd out he was the Murderer of his Friends, and wou'd neither eat nor drink for Three days space, nor take any care of himself what became of him. Some of Bacchus's Priests told him that these Misfortunes befell him because he had neglected to Sacrifice to Bacchus. His Friends had much ado to perswade him to eat or drink any thing to refresh him. But at last


Page 791

he sacrific'd to Bacchus; since it was not displeasing to him that that misfortune should be imputed rather to the Anger of the God, than to his own wickedness.

9. Of the Death of Calisthenes.
Arrianus, lib. IV.

AS to the Adoration of Alexander, how Calisthenes oppos'd him, and what relates to it, 'tis reported, That it was agreed between Alexander and the Sophisters, and some of the Nobility of the Medes and Persians that attended upon him, that in the time of their Feasting a Discourse should be started concerning this matter. Anaxarchus was the Person that began, and declar'd, That Alexander had more right to be accounted a God than either Bacchus or Hercules, not only for the greatness of his Noble Actions, but because Bacchus was a Theban, a meer Stranger, having no Communication with the Macedonians; and Hercules was of Argos, as much a Stranger as the other, save that Alexander was of the same Stock, for he was from the Heraclides; and 'tis far more just and equal for the Macedonians to adore their own King with Divine Honours than any other. And no doubt (he said) was to be made but they wou'd pay to him Divine Honours when he was dead; therefore 'tis much better to adore him as a God while he was alive, than when he was dead, when their Divine Worship of him would be of no advantage to him. When these and other things to the same purpose were said by Anaxarchus, those who were of the same Pack praised all that was spoken, and declar'd they would forthwith Adore him: But many of the Macedonians, who condemn'd Anaxarchus's Speech, held their peace. But Calisthenes in the midst of the Silence spoke thus:

Indeed, Anaxarchus, I count not Alexander unworthy of any Honour (how great soever it be) that is fit to be ascrib'd to Men; but there are prescrib'd Differences amongst Men between Divine and Human Honours, amongst many others in the Building of Temples and Erecting of Statues; for to the Gods we consecrate Oratories, offer Sacrifices and drink Offerings: To the Gods are sung Hymns; Men are prais'd, but not ador'd: Kisses in Salutations are given to Men, but the Gods are plac'd on high, and 'tis not lawful to touch 'em; and therefore they are worshipp'd with Adoration. Solemn Times of Dancings are perform'd to the Gods, and Paeans sung to them. Neither is it to be wonder'd at, inasmuch as the Honours given to the Gods are various; some sort of Honours given to one, and others to another (especially those Honours of later time.) Nay; those Honours given to some of the Hero's differ from Divine Honours. 'Tis not therefore fit to confound these things, nor to advance Men above themselves and all Mankind besides, and to degrade the Gods, by Worshipping them with the same Worship wherewith we adore Men. Alexander himself would not suffer any private Man to usurp the Regal Dignity and Honours due to himself, though he gain'd 'em by the unjust Suffrages of the People; much more justly therefore may the Gods be angry if any mortal Man assume to himself Divine Honours, or accept of them from others. However, let Alexander be esteem'd (as in truth he is) by many degrees the most Valiant of them that are Valiant, the greatest King amongst all other Kings, and amongst Generals the most Worthy to Command. But as for thee, Anaxarchus, 'tis thy Duty above any other to instruct Alexander in these things that have been spoken, and to d

•ter him from the contrary; for thy Conversation he daily makes use of, in order to improve in Wisdom and Learning. Neither does it become thee to be the beginner of this Discourse, but rather to remember that thou art not advising

 Cambyses or Xerxes, but the Son of Philip, descended from Hercules and Achilles, whose Ancestors came out of Argos into Macedonia, and maintain'd their Empire not by Arbitrary Power, but by Ruling according to the Laws and Customs of the Macedonians. But Divine Houours were not confevr'd upon Hercules himself by the Grecians while he was living, nay nor when he was dead, before the Oracle at Delphos commanded that he should be worshipp'd as a God. But if there be but few that are in the Country of the Barbarians, we ought to entertain the same Sentiments with them. And I earnestly entreat thee, Alexander, to remember Greece, for whose sake this Expedition was undertaken by thee, in order to add Asia to Greece: And now consider whether when you return thither, you can be able to compel the free People of Greece to adore you as a God, or (excepting them of Greece) you can impose this Dishonour and Slavery upon the Macedonians only, or whether it be fit that quite different Honours be there allow'd you; being the Grecians confer only those that are Human, according to the Custom and Manner of the Greeks, when at the same time only the Barbarians worship you as a God after the manner of Barbarians. But if it be objected, That Cyrus Son of Cambyses was the first of all mortal Men that was ador'd by Men as a God, ana that since that time this Adoration has continued amongst the Medes and Persians; yet you are to consider how his Pride was curb'd by the Scythians,


Page 792

a poor and indigent People. And how other Scythians again reduc'd Darius to more sober Thoughts of himself, and the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, Xerxes and Clearchus, and Xenophon, Artaxerxes, only with Ten thousand Men; and Darius now overcome by Alexander, when at that time no Divine Honours were decreed to him.

When Calisthenes had spoken these and other things to the same purpose, Alexander took it very heinously; but what he said was very grateful and acceptable to the Macedonians; which being known, Alexander sent some to urge the Macedonians to remember the Adoration of the King; upon which there being a great silence, those among the Persians that were most Eminent for Birth and Honourable for Age, all rose up together, and ador'd him. But Leonatus, one of Alexander's Friends, when he saw one of the Perfians sordidly prostrating himself, he fell a laughing at the poor and mean Gesture of the Persian; at which Alexander was at the first very angry, but was afterwards pacifi'd. Some write, that the King drank in a golden Bowl to them with whom he had made the Compact to adore him in a Ring as they sat, and that the first that pledg'd him, presently arose and ador'd him, and then kiss'd him, and so in order the rest did the same, one after another. But when it came to Calisthenes's turn, he rose up, and drank off the Bowl, and when he had done (without adoring him) drew near to the King to kiss him. Alexander was then accidentally discoursing with Hephestion, and therefore did not mind whether he omitted the Adoration or not. But Demetrius the Son of Pythonax, one of Alexander's Friends, observing when Calisthenes approach'd to kiss Alexander, inform'd him that Calisthenes had not ador'd him, upon which the King turn'd away from him; and thereupon Calisthenes said, he must now be discarded with the Loss of a Kiss.

I cannot indeed praise either any of these things that tended to Alexander's Dishonour, or the Moroseness of Calisthenes; for I conceive it had been enough for him modestly to have carry'd himself, and for him who would serve the King, to promote his Affairs to the best advantage, as far as ever he was able: And therefore I am of Opinion, that Calisthenes was not without just cause hated by Alexander, by reason of the unseasonable liberty of his Speech and foolish Malepertness. For which reason (I believe) Credit was more easily given afterwards to his Accusers, by whom he was charg'd to be in the Conspiracy with the Pages against the King's Life, and to others who affirm'd that they were put on to it by him.

The Conspiracy was thus: There was an Order formerly made by Philip, that from among the Sons of the Macedonian Nobility, when they grew up to Men's estate, choice should be made of some from time to time to attend upon the King, both to be Squires of his Body, and Gentlemen of his Bedchamber: These Youths, when the King was about to ride, receiv'd the Horses from the Querries, and led them to the King, and after the Persian manner help'd him to mount, and waited upon him whenever he went forth a Hunting: Among these, there was one Hermolaus, the Son of Sopolides, who studied Philosophy, and was Scholar to Calisthenes: The Report is, That a wild Boar in the course of Hunting meeting Alexander, this Hermolaus prevented the King (who was aiming at him) and kill'd the Boar. The King hereupon being in a rage to have the Opportunity of killing the Boar snatch'd out of his hand, commanded that the Youth should be whipt in the presence of all the other Pages, and have his Horse taken from him: Which Disgrace he not being able to bear, open'd his Mind to Sostrates, the Son of Amyntas, one of his Companions, of the same Quality, and his Bosom Friend, and declar'd to him that his Life wou'd be but a Burden to him, unless he could revenge the Injury done him upon Alexander; and it was no difficult matter to persuade Sostrates (being his special Friend) to join with him in this Traiterous Conspiracy. Antipater likewise, the Son of Asclep

•odorus

 (Lord Lieutenant of Syria) Epimenes the Son of Arseus, and Anticles the Son of Theocritus, together with Philotas the Son of Carsides the Thracian, were all brought in by him to join in the same Treason. The Night that it came to Antipater's turn to wait in the Bedchamber, was the time pitch'd upon to kill Alexander when he was asleep. But it hapned (as some write) that Alexander that very Night sate up Drinking till Morning. But Aristobulus says, That a certain Woman of Syria pretending to be divinely inspir'd, still follow'd Alexander from place to place, whom Alexander and his Courtiers at first ridicul'd; but when what she had foretold was still verify'd by the Event, she was no longer despis'd by Alexander, but was freely admitted to the King both by night and by day, and often was in his Bed-chamber when he was asleep. 'Tis said at that time this Prophetess by chance met the King as he came from his Cups, and entreated him to return to his Companions, and spend the whole Night in Drinking. Alexander judging it might be a Divine Warning, return'd, and by that means disappointed the Traiterous Designs of the Pages.


Page 793

The next day, Epimenes the Son of Arseus, one of the Conspirators, discover'd the whole matter to his Friend Caricles the Son of Menander, Caricles to Eurylochus the Brother of Epimeues; Eurylochus going into Alexander's Tent; reveal'd all to Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, the Esquire of the King's Body, and he to Alexander, who forthwith order'd all that Eurylochus had nam'd to be seiz'd; who being apprehended, upon their Examination confess'd their Treason, and discover'd some others.

Aristobulus indeed says, that they declar'd Calisthenes stirr'd 'em up to undertake this piece of Villany, which Ptolemy likewise confirms: But there are some others that give another account of this matter, viz. That Alexander perfectly hated Calisthenes, and because there was a great Intimacy between him and Hermolaus, he was easily wrought up on by the Informers to suspect Calisthenes.

Some likewise say, That Hermolaus being brought beforethe Macedonians, confess'd that he himself plotted the Treason, and that it was not in the Power of any free-born Man to endure the Disgrace and Dishonour Alexander had brought upon him; and then reckon'd up all that Alexander in that kind had done; to wit, the unjust Death of Philotas, and with far more Injustice his putting to death Parmenio, Philotas's Father, and the rest that were then kill'd; the Murder of Clitus through his Drunkenness, his assuming the Habit of the Medes, the Edict for his Adoration, not yet recall'd, his carousing and drunken Dozing; which vile Courses he not able further to endure, he was earnest to regain Liberty both to himself and the rest of the Macedonians. Hereupon Hermolaus and the rest that were seiz'd were ston'd to death by the Standers-by. But Aristobulus says, That Calisthenes was carry'd about with the Army in Chains, and died. Ptolemy says he was first rack'd, and afterwards hang'd. So that these Authors, though of great Credit and Repute, and who were themselves present in the Army, and attending upon Alexander at the very time when these things were acted, yet cannot agree about a matter, whereof there cou'd be no doubt at all at the time when it was done.

10. The King's Expedition against those call'd Nauticans, or Naurans; and the Destruction of many of his Army by a great Snow.

Curtius, lib. VIII. c. 4.

THese things being thus set in order, the third Month he march'd out of his Winter-Quarters towards a Country call'd Gabaza. The first day he had an easie March; the next day was not as yet stormy or gloomy, but something darker than the day before, not without some threatning of a Storm at hand. The third day the whole heaven flash'd with Lightning, sometimes light, then presently dark, which not only amaz'd the Eyes, but terrify'd the Hearts of the distracted Army. The Air resounded with continual Thunder, and Thunder-bolts up and down seem'd to be shot from the Clouds; the Army, even struck deaf with the Thunder, as Men astonish'd, durst neither march nor stand still. Then on a sudden fell down a Storm of Hail like a violent Torrent. At first they cover'd themselves with their Shields, but presently their henumb'd and frozen Hands let fall their Arms, neither did they know towards what Place or Country to move themselves, the Violence of the Storm being greater than could possibly be avoided, turn themselves, which way soever they would. Their Ranks and Order therefore being broke, they wander'd through the Wood in Parties as they could; and many fainting rather with Fear than through Weariness, fell down upon the Ground, although the Fierceness of the Cold had frozen the Hail; others lean'd themselves to the Bodies of Trees, which was to many both a Support and Defence. Neither were they deceiv'd in chusing out a place to die in, when their natural Heat, overcome by the Cold, left them immovable.

But it was a grateful Sloth to them that were tir'd out, neither did they count it i

•

ksome to find Rest by Death; for the Cold was not only vehement, but also not likely to abate, and the dark Shades of the Wood, besides the Storm (which was as the Night) supprest and kept out the Light, that common Comfort and Refreshment. The King only was patient under this sad Misforttune, and walk'd round his Camp, and brought together the dispers'd, and lifted up them that were down, shewing them the Smoak that came from Chimneys afar off, advising every one to take the highest Refuge. Neither did any thing conduce more to their Safety, than to see the King, who had taken more Pains than they, yet most unwearied of any, and therefore were asham'd to leave him. But Necessity, more forcible than Reason in their Distresses, found out a Remedy for


Page 794

the Cold: For hewing down the Trees with their Axes, they set the Heaps of Wood up and down on fire, so that you would have thought all the Wood had been on a 

•

lame, and scarce any place left for the Army to lodge. This Heat presently enliven'd their benumb'd Limbs, and by degrees their Spirits, which the Cold had even clos'd up, began freely to pass Some were entertain'd in the Houses of the Barbarians which hid from them in the late Wood; but now their Necessity had discover'd others lodg'd in their Tents, which though wet, yet were more tolerable, the Fury of the Storm being something abated. This unhappy Accident swept away a thousand Soldiers and other mean Attendants upon the Camp. 'Tis reported, that some were found standing at the side of the Trees, and seem'd not only as if they had been alive, but as if they had been discoursing one with another in the same posture as they were in when they died.

11. How Alexander falling in Love with Roxana, marry'd her, and induc'd many of his Friends to marry the Daughters of the Chief Men among the Barbarians.

Arrianus, lib. IV.

Roxana, the Daughter of Oxyartes, was there likewise, a Virgin ripe for Marriage, whom Alexander's Fellow-Soldiers judg'd to be the most Beautiful Lady of all Asia next to the Wife of Darius; upon sight of her, Alexander fell deeply in Love, yet would not by any means use her dishonourably as a Captive; neither did he disdain to take her for his Wife. Which Act of Alexander (I conceive) was more worthy of Praise than Reprehension. And for Darius's Wife (who was esteem'd the most Beautiful Lady of all Asia) he neither was tainted so much as with an unlawful Desire towards her, or as a domineering Lord commanded her to his Bed, though he was then in the Heat of his Youth, and the highest pitch of Worldly Prosperity; which two Conditions are apt greatly to provoke Men to be very injurious to others: But he, out of a Reverence to her Person, spar'd her; herein evidencing his great Continency, and prompted likewise thereunto by a desire of his own Honour and Reputation.

12. His breaking into India, and his putting all to the Sword in the first Country he enter'd, to be a Terrour to the rest.

Arrianus, lib. IV.

IN the middle of the Spring, Alexander remov'd with his Army out of Bactria towards India, and left Amyntas there with three thousand five hundred Horse, and ten thousand Foot. Having pass'd the Caucasus, in ten days he came to Alexandria, which he had built in Paropanisus at his first Expedition into Bactria, and put out the Governour here for his ill Behaviour in the Place, and then Peopled the City with more Inhabitants out of the Neighbouring Countries, and such of his Macedonians as were grown unser 

•

ceable for the War, and made Nicanor, one of his Associates, Governour of the City;-but appointed Tyriaspes Commander of the whole Region of Paropanisus, and of all that Territory or Province as far as the River Cophene. Thence he went to the City of Nicea, and there offer'd Sacrifice to Minerva, and then march'd to the River Cophene, and sending an Herauld, commanded Taxiles and the rest of the Governours of the Countries lying beyond the River to come to him. Taxiles and other petty Princes came first and met him, bringing him large Presents, such as were most esteem'd in India, promising likewise to send him five and twenty Elephants. He there divided his Army, and sent Hephestion and Perdiccas into the Country call'd Peucelaotis towards the River Indus, together with the Troops of Georgias, Clitus, and Meleager, and half the Horse of the Social Band, and all the Mercenary Horse, commanding them to take in by fair means or foul all the Towns which lay in their way, and that when they came to the Bank of the River Indus, they should prepare all things that were necessary to pass over. And with them was sent Taxiles and other Commanders of those Parts, to put in execution, when they came to the River Indus, what Alexander had commanded.

Astes, the Governour of the Country of Peucelaotis, offering to revolt, lost both himself and the City which he put himself into; for Hephestion came and besieg'd it, and after thirty days time took it, and killing Astes, made one Sangaeus Governour of it, who a


Page 796

concerning Bacchus's Peregrination, and wou'd have none to doubt but that Nysa was built by Bacchus, because that he himself was now come as far as Bacchus ever came, and was still desirous to go further than he ever did. And he was of Opinion, that the Macedonians, out of Emulation to the Acts of Bacchus, wou'd willingly with himself undergo further Toils and Labours. He granted therefore Liberty to the Nysaeans, and that they should Govern according to their own Laws And when he understood what their Laws were, and how they were under the Government of an Aristocracy, he commended their Constitution, and commanded 'em to furnish him with three hundred Horsemen, and send him a hundred of them that were of the Aristocracy (who were three hundred in all) such as he would chuse. Acuphis was one of the Number of them that were pick'd out, whom the King had made Governour of the whole Province of Nysaea. 'Tis reported, that Acuphis smil'd at these Demands, and that Alexander asking him why he laugh'd, Acuphis answer'd, How is it possible, O King, for the City to be well Govern'd, when 'tis stript of an hundred good Men all at once! But if your Majesty have a Kindness for the City, be pleas'd to accept of three hundred Horsemen (and more if you think fit;) but as for an hundred of the best Men of the City which you desire, be pleas'd to be content with two hundred of the worst, that whensoever you return hither again, you may find that the City has maintain'd and kept up her ancient State and Grandeur. With these Words, because he judg'd them prudently spoken) Alexander was persuaded, and commanded only the three hundred Horsemen to be sent him; and for the three hundred of the Chief of the City, he neither desir'd them, nor any others in their stead. But Acuphis his Son, and his Nephew by his Sister, were sent to Alexander.

Afterwards Alexander had a longing desire to see that City, in which the Nysaeans boast there are some Monuments of Dionysius; and to go likewise, accompanied with some Horse of his Friends, and a Regiment of Foot, to the Mountain Meros, that he might see the Hill grown over with Ivy and Laurel, and the shady Groves, that abounded with all sorts of wild Beasts. The Ivy was a very pleasant Sight to the Macedonians, having not seen any of a long time; for India bears no Ivy, neither those Places where Vines grow. Of the Ivy they wore Garlands on their Heads, singing Praise to Bacchus, with all his Titles and Appellations. Alexander there sacrific'd to Bacchus, and feasted with his Friends.

14. How having taken a strong City call'd Massaga, he put to the Sword all the Mercenary Soldiers that had fought Valiantly.

Arrianus, lib. IV.

WHen the Barbarians heard of Alexander's coming, they durst not abide him in a Body, but brake up their Army, and dispers'd themselves every one as they could into several Cities, purposing there to stand upon their Guard.

Alexander march'd first with his Army to Massaga, the greatest City of that Country; approaching therefore with his Army close to the City; the Barbarians having got into the Town for their assistance seven thousand Mercenary Indians from the inner parts of India made a fierce Sally upon the Macedonians as they lay Encampt. Alexander perceiving that the Fight was likely to be under the City Walls, design'd to draw off the Enemy at a further distance, lest when they fled (which he clearly foresaw they would) they might with ease (being so very near) get into the Town and so escape, perceiving therefore the Barbarians pouring out upon them, he forthwith commanded his Macedonians to wheel about and make to a Hill about seven furlongs distant from the River Guraeus, where he had purpos'd to Encamp. The Enemy hereupon emboldned (the Macedonians seeming to give back) in great confusion and disorder hotly pursu'd them, But when they were got within the cast of a dart, upon a sign given by Alexander, the Phalanx furiously turned upon 'em. But first indeed the Horse that were darters, the Agrians and Archers made an excursion, and ingag'd with the Barbarians, But Alexander led the Phalanx (in Battalia) himself. The Indians amaz'd at the sudden and unexpected turn, when it came to the Swords point fled back into the City. Two hundred of 'em were kill'd in the pursuit, but the rest got within the Walls.

Alexander presently drew up his main Battel of Macedons before the Walls, and from thence was slightly wounded by an Arrow struck into his Heel. The next day the Engines being brought up to the Walls, part of 'em were easily batterr'd down, upon which (the Macedonians endeavouring to force their way through the Ruins) the Indians stoutly


Page 797

withstood them, so far as that Alexander for that day sounded a retreat, and call'd off his Men. But the next day the Macedonians renew'd the Assault with greater vigour, bringing up a wooden Tower to the Walls, out of which the Archers powring showers of Darts and Arrows grievously gall'd the Indians. But yet with all these devices they were not able to enter. The Third day the main Body of the Macedonians being again led up to the Walls, a Bridge was cast out of the Wooden Tower over that part of the Wall that was broken down, upon which Bridge the King order'd the Agyraspides who had before taken Tyre after the same manner; but when with great Courage and Resolution they had got upon it with too much Weight, it yielded and broke, and it and the Macedonians tumbled down together. The Barbarians rejoycing at the Accident, set up a great shout, and ply'd the Macedonians with Stones, and all sorts of Darts and Arrows, or whatever was at hand, or they could come at; and others issuing out through narrow Sally-ports that were placed between the Turrets, knock'd them in that Disorder and Confusion on the head. Alexander sent Alcetas with a Party to take care of the wounded Men, and to call the Besiegers off into the Camp. The 4th day he cast another Bridge with other Devices upon the Walls; but the Indians (as long as the Governor of the place was alive) valiantly repuls'd the Macedonians: But when he was kill'd by a Dart from the Engines, and many of their Men lost by continual Assaults, and others wounded and become thereby unserviceable, they sent to Alexander, who was very ready and willing to spare such stout and valiant Men. He agreed therefore with the mercenary Indians, that they should take up Arms with him, and join themselves to his Army. Hereupon they march'd out of the City by themselves, and encamp'd upon an Hill opposite to the Macedonians, with a design to fly away in the night to their own Country, because they wou'd not fight against the other Indians. When Alexander was inform'd hereof, the same night he surrounded the Hill with his Forces, and put 'em every one to the Sword, and took the City (now without these that should defend it) by storm, and in it the Mother and Daughter of Assacenus. On Alexander's side there were only five and twenty kill'd during the whole Siege.

FINIS.
