THE LIBRARY OF HISTORY OF DIODORUS THE SICILIAN
Vol. I (Books I-V)
Made English by G. Booth
London: Printed by Edw. Jones for Awnsham and John Churchill [1814]

[Transcribed from sarata.com's presentation of the 1814 Booth translation. Raw text, not proofread. Public domain: published 1814; translator unidentified (G. Booth of Chester). Books VI-X are lost.]




THE LIBRARY OF HISTORY OF DIODORUS THE SICILIAN
Vol. I (Books I-V)
Made English by G. Booth
London: Printed by Edw. Jones for Awnsham and John Churchill [1814]

[Transcribed from sarata.com's presentation of the 1814 Booth translation. Raw text, not proofread. Public domain: published 1814; translator unidentified (G. Booth of Chester). Books VI-X are lost.]




Page 1

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK I.

CHAP. I.

Of the first Generation of Men. How the World first began. Mens first manner of Life, and who were the first Men. First Men in Egypt. Who were the most antient Gods of Egypt. Of their Demy-Gods. Sol, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter, Juno, Vulcan reign'd in Egypt. Of Osiris and Isis. The Acts of Osiris and Isis. Hermes his Inventions. Osiris prepares for his Expedition through the World, and to that end raises a great Army.

WHAT Notions they had of the Gods who first instituted Divine Worship, and what is fabulously related of every one of the Deities (because the Subject requires much to be said) we shall distinctly set forth: And whatever we conceive to be pertinent to the present History, we shall discourse of severally and distinct, that nothing worth Observation may be omitted And we shall here give an accurate Account (as far as the Antiquity of the matters will admit) of the Generation and Original of Mankind, and of the Affairs and Transactions of all Parts of the Known World, drawing down our History from the most ancient Times.

Of the Origen therefore of Men, there are Two Opinions amongst the most famous and authentick Naturalists and Historians.

Some of these are of Opinion, that the World had neither Beginning, nor ever shall have End; and likewise say, that Mankind was from Eternity, and that there never was a Time when he first began to be. Others on the contrary, conceive both the World to be made, and to be corruptible, and that there was a certain Time when Man had first a Being.

For whereas all things at the first were jumbled together, Heaven and Earth, were in one Mass, and had one and the same Form: But afterwards (they say) when Corporeal Beings appear'd one after another, the World at length presented it self in the Order we now see; and that the Air was in continual agitation, whose fiery part ascended together to the highest Place, its nature (by reason of its Levity) tending always upwards; for which reason, both the Sun, and that vast number of the Stars, are contain'd within that Orb. That the gross and earthy Matter (clotted together by Moisture) by reason of its Weight sunk down below into one Place, is continually whirling about; the Sea was made of the Humid Parts; and the muddy Earth of the more Solid, as yet very meorish and soft; which by degrees at first was made crusty by the Heat of the Sun; and then after the Face of the Earth was parcht, and as it were firmented, the Moisture afterwards in many Places bubled up, and appear'd as so many Pustles wrapt up in thin and slender Coats and Skins; which may be even seen in standing Ponds, and Marish Places, when after the Earth has been pierc'd with


Page 2

Cold, the Air grows hot on a sudden, without a gradual Alteration. And whereas Moisture generates Creatures from Heat, as from a Seminal Principle, things so generated, by being inwrapt in the dewy Mists of the Night, grew and increas'd, and in the Day solidated, and were made hard by the Heat of the Sun; and when the Births included in those Ventricles had received their due proportion, then those slender Skins being burst asunder by the Heat, the Forms of all sorts of Living Creatures were brought forth into the Light; of which those that had most of Heat mounted aloft, and were Fowl, and Birds of the Air; but those that were drossy, and had more of Earth, were number'd in the order of Creeping things, and other Creatures altogether us'd to the Earth. Then those Beasts that were naturally watery and moist (call'd Fishes) presently hasten'd to the place connatural to them; and when the Earth afterwards became more dry and solid by the Heat of the Sun, and the drying Winds, it had not power at length to produce any more of the greater living Creatures; but each that had an Animal Life, began to increase their Kind by mutual Copulation. And Euripides the Scholar of Anaxagoras, seems to be of the same Opinion, concerning the first Generation of all things; for in his Monalippe he has these Verses.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

A Mass confus'd, Heaven and Earth once were

Of one Form; but after Separation,

Then Men, Trees, Beasts of th' Earth, with Fowls of th' Air

First sprang up in their Generation.

But if this Power of the Earth to produce living Creatures at the first Origen of all things seem credible to any; the Aegyptians do bring Testimonies of this Energy of the Earth, by the same things done there at this day. For they say, that about Thebes in Egypt, after the overflowing of the River Nile, the Earth thereby being covered with Mud and Slime, many Places putrify through the heat of the Sun, and thence are bred multitudes of Mice. It is certain therefore, that out of the Earth when it's hardn'd, and the Air chang'd from its due and natural Temperament, Animals are generated. By which means it came to pass, that in the first beginning of all things, various living Creatures proceeded from the Earth. And these are the Opinions touching the Original of Things.

But Men, they say, at first, led a rude and brutish sort of Life, and wandered up and down in the Fields, and fed upon Herbs, and the natural Fruit of the Trees. Their Words were confus'd, without any certain signification; but by degrees they spoke articulately, and making Signs, and giving proper Terms to every thing upon occasion; at length their Discourse became intelligible one to another: But being dispers'd into several parts of the World, they spoke not all the same Language, every one using that Dialect proper to the Place, as his Lot fell: Upon which account there were various and all sorts of Languages in the World; and these Associations of Men, first planted all the Nations of the World.

But forasmuch as what was useful for Mans Life, was not at the beginning found out, this first Race of Mankind liv'd a laborious and troublesom Life, as being as yet naked, not inur'd to Houses, nor acquainted with the use of Fire, and altogether destitute of Delicacies for their Food. For not knowing as yet how to house and lay up their Food, they had no Barns or Granaries where to deposite the Fruits of the Earth; and therefore many through Hunger and Cold perisht in the Winter: But being at length taught by experience, they fled into Caves in the Winter, and laid up such Fruits as were fit to keep; and coming by degrees to the Knowledge of the usefulness of Fire, and of other Conveniences, they began to invent many Arts, and other things beneficial for Man's Life. What shall we say? Necessity was Man's Instructor, which made him skilful in every thing, being an Ingenious Creature, assisted (as with so many Servants) with Hands, Speech, and a Rational Soul, ready to put every thing in execution. But what


Page 3

we have here said concerning the first Generation of Mankind, and his way of living in old time may suffice, designing to keep within due Bounds.

And now we shall apply our selves to recount those things that have been done in all the known Parts of the World, whereof there is any Memorial handed down to us.

Who were the First Kings, we our selves can neither assert nor agree with those Historians who affirm they know; for it's not possible that the Account given of Affairs, should be so ancient as to be contemporary with the first Kings; and if any should admit any such thing, yet it's apparent, that all the Historians extant liv'd long after those Times. For the Greeks themselves are not only in the dark concerning the Antiquity of Nations, but many of the Barbarians also, who call themselves Natural Inhabitants, and boast themselves to be the first of all other Men who have found out things beneficial to Mankind, and to have committed to writing, things done among them many Ages before. And as for us, we determine nothing certainly of the Antiquity of particular Nations, nor which Nation is antienter than another, or how many Years one was before another. But that we may attain the Scope and End we have before design'd, we shall distinctly set forth in these Chapters, what is reported concerning things done in the several Nations, and the Antiquity of them.

We shall first speak of the Barbarians; not that we judge them more ancient than the Grecians (as Ephorus affirms) but that we are willing in the First place to relate many considerable things of them, that when we come afterwards to the History of the Greeks, we may not confound their Antiquity with the other which are of a foreign nature to them. And because the Gods are fabulously reported to be born in Egypt, and the first Observation of the Motion of the Stars is attributed to them, and that there are many remarkable and famous Actions of renown'd Men recorded to be done amongst them, we shall begin with the Affairs of Egypt.

The Egyptians report, that at the beginning of the World, the first Men were created in Egypt, both by reason of the happy Climate of the Country, and the nature of the River Nile. For this River being very Fruitful, and apt to bring forth many Animals, yields of it self likewise Food and Nourishment for the things produc'd. For it yields the Roots of Canes, the Fruit of the Lote-Tree, the Egyptian Bean, that which they call Cors

•on,

 and such like Rarities for Man's Food, always ready at hand.

And that all living Creatures were first produc'd among them, they use this Argument, that even at this day, about Thebes at certain Times, such vast Mice are bred, that it causes admiration to the Beholders; some of which to the Breast and Fore-feet are animated and begin to move, and the rest of the Body (which yet retains the nature of the Soyl) appears without Form. Whence it's manifest, that in the beginning of the World, through the Fertileness of the Soyl the first Men were form'd in Egypt, being that in no other parts of the World any of these Creatures are produc'd; only in Egypt these supernatural Births may be seen.

And that we may sum up all in a word: If in the time of Deucalion's Flood, the greatest part only of all living Creatures were destroy'd, then of such as were so preserv'd, its very probable that those in Egypt, especially, were of the number, whose Inhabitants lye under the South Pole, and the Country for the most part without Rain: Or if all that had Life generally perisht (as some affirm) and that the Earth produc'd Animals anew; yet they say, that notwithstanding this, the chief production of things animated, is to be ascribed to this Country. For they affirm, that if the Showers which fall in any other Places, were warm'd with the same Heat that is in Egypt, the Air would be of that Temperature, as that it would aptly conduce to the Generation of Animals, as at first, in the beginning of the World. For even at this day, such Births may be seen (in the Waters that have lain long) over all the water'd Country of Egypt. For they affirm, that when the River returns into its Channel, and the Sun dries the Mud, living Creatures are generated, some perfect, others half form'd, even cleaving to the Soyl whence they are produc'd. 

The first Generation of Men in Egypt, therefore contemplating the Beauty of the Superior World, and admiring with astonishment the frame and order of the Universe, judg'd there were Two chief Gods that were Eternal, that is to


Page 4

say, The Sun and the Moon, the first of which they call'd Osiris, and the other Isis, both Names having proper Etymologies; for Osiris in the Greek Language, signifies a Thing with many Eyes, which may be very properly apply'd to the Sun darting his Rays into every Corner, and as it were with so many Eyes viewing and surveying the whole Land and Sea, with which agrees the Poet,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

. 

The Sun from's lofty Sphear all sees and hears.

Some also of the antient Greek Mythologists call Osiris Dionysus, and sirname him Sirius, amongst whom Eumolphus in his Bacchanal Verses,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Dionysus darts his Fiery Rays.

And Orpheus;

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

He's call'd Phanetes and Dionysus.

Some likewise set him forth cloath'd with the spotted Skin of a Fawn (call'd Nebris) from the variety of Stars that surround him.

Isis likewise being interpreted, signifies Antient, that Name being ascrib'd to the Moon from Eternal Generations. They add likewise to her, Horns, because her Aspect is such in her Increase and in her Decrease, representing a Sickle; and because an Ox among the Egyptians is offer'd to her in Sacrifice. They hold that these Gods govern the whole World, cherishing and increasing all things; and divide the Year into Three Parts (that is to say, Spring, Summer and Autumn) by an invisible Motion perfecting their constant Course in that time: And though they are in their Natures very differing one from another, yet they compleat the whole Year with a most excellent Harmony and Consent. They say that these Gods in their Natures do contribute much to the Generation of all things, the one being of a hot and active Nature, the other moist and cold, but both having something of the Air; and that by these, all things are both brought forth and nourish'd: And therefore that every particular Being in the Universe is perfected and compleated by the Sun and Moon, whose Qualities, as before declar'd, are Five; A Spirit or quickning Efficacy, Heat or Fire, Dryness or Earth, Moisture or Water, and Air, of which the World does consist, as a Man made up of Head, Hands, Feet, and other parts. These Five they reputed for Gods, and the People of Egypt who were the first that spoke articulately, gave Names proper to their several Natures, according to the Language they then spake. And therefore they call'd the Spirit Jupiter, which is such by Interpretation, because a quickning Influence is deriv'd from this into all Living Creatures, as from the original Principle; and upon that account he is esteem'd the common Parent of all things. And to this the most famous Poet of the Greeks gives Testimony, where speaking of this God he says—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

. 

Of Men and Gods the Father.

Fire they call'd by Interpretation Vulcan, and him they had in Veneration as a Great God, as he that greatly contributed to the Generation and Perfection of all Beings whatsoever.

The Earth, as the Common Womb of all Productions, they call'd Metera, as the Greeks in process of time, by a small alteration of one Letter, and an omission of Two Letters, call'd the Earth Demetra, which was antiently call'd Gen Metera, or the Mother Earth, as Orpheus attests in this Verse.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

The Mother Earth Demeter also call'd,

Brings forth most richly—


Page 5

Water or Moisture, the Antients call'd Oceanus; which by Interpretation is a nourishing Mother, and so taken by some of the Grecians, of which the Poet says thus,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

. 

The Father of the Gods the Ocean is

Tethys the Mother call'd—

But the Egyptians account their Nile to be Oceanus, at which all the Gods were Born. For in Egypt, only among all the Countries in the World, are many Cities built by the ancient Gods, as by Jupiter, Sol, Mercury, Apollo, Pan, Elithia, and many others.

To the Air they gave the Name of Minerva, signifying something proper to the nature thereof, and call'd her the Daughter of Jupiter, and counted a Virgin, because the Air naturally is not subject to Corruption, and is in the highest part of the Universe; whence rises the Fable, that she was the Issue of Jupiter's Brain: They say she's call'd also Tritogeneia, or Thrice Begotten, because she changes her natural Qualities thrice in the Year, the Spring, Summer and Winter; and that she was call'd Glaucopis, not that she hath Grey Eyes (as some of the Greeks have suppos'd, for that's a weak Conceit) but because the Air seems to be of a Grey Colour, to the view. They report likewise, that these Five Gods travel through the whole World, representing themselves to Men sometimes in the shapes of Sacred living Creatures, and sometimes in the Form of Men, or some other Representation. And this is not a Fable, but very possible, if it be true, that these generate all things; and the Poet who travell'd into Egypt, in some part of his Works, affirms this Appearance, as he learnt it from their Priests,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

The Gods also like Strangers come from far,

In divers Shapes within the Towns appear,

Viewing Mens good and wicked Acts:—

And these are the Stories told by the Egyptians of the Heavenly and Immortal Gods. And besides these, they say there are others that are Terrestrial, which were begotten of these former Gods, and were Originally Mortal Men, but by reason of their Wisdom and Beneficence to all Mankind, have obtain'd Immortality, of which some have been Kings of Egypt. Some of whom by Interpretation, have had the same Names with the Celestial Gods, others have kept their own proper Names. For they report that Sol, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter, (surnam'd by some Ammon) Juno, Vulcan, Vesta, and lastly, Mercury, reign'd in Egypt; and that Sol was the first King of Egypt, whose Name was the same with the Celestial Planet call'd Sol.

But there are some of the Priests who affirm Vulcan to be the first of their Kings, and that he was advanc'd to that Dignity upon the account of being the first that sound out the use of Fire, which was so beneficial to all Mankind. For a Tree in the Mountains hapning to be set on Fire by Lightning, the Wood next adjoyning was presently all in a Flame; and Vulcan thereupon coming to the Place, was mightily refresht by the heat of it, being then Winter Season; and when the Fire began to fail, he added more combustible Matter to it, and by that means preserving it, call'd in other Men to enjoy the Benefit of that which he himself was the first Inventer, as he gave out.

Afterwards they say Saturn reign'd, and marry'd his Sister Rhea, and that he begat of her Osiris and Isis; but others say, Jupiter and Juno, who for their great Virtues, rul'd over all the World. That of Jupiter and Juno were born Five Gods, one upon every day of the Five Egyptian intercalary Days. The Names of these Gods are Osiris, Isis, Typhon, Apollo and Venus. That Osiris was interpreted Bacchus, and Isis plainly Ceres. That Osiris marry'd Isis, and after he came to the


Page 6

Kingdom, did much, and perform'd many things for the common Benefit and Advantage of Mankind. For he was the first that forbad Men eating one another; and at the same time Isis found out the way of making of Bread of Wheat and Barley, which before grew here and there in the Fields amongst other common Herbs and Grass, and the use of it unknown: And Osiris teaching the way and manner of Tillage, and well management of the Fruits of the Earth, this change of Food became grateful; both because it was naturally sweet and delicious, and Men were thereby restrain'd from the mutual Butcheries one of another: For an evidence of this first finding out the use of these Fruits, they alledge an antient Custom amongst them: For even at this day, in the time of Harvest, the Inhabitants offer the first Fruits of the Ears of Corn, howling and wailing about the Handfuls they offer, and invoking this Goddess Isis: And this they do in return of due Honour to her for that Invention at the first. In some Cities also, when they celebrate the Feast of Isis in a Pompous Procession, they carry about Vessels of Wheat and Barley, in memory of the first Invention, by the care and industry of this Goddess. They say likewise, that Isis made many Laws for the good of Human Society, whereby Men were restrain'd from lawless Force and Violence one upon another, out of fear of Punishment. And therefore Ceres was call'd by the ancient Greeks, Themophorus (that is) Lawgiver, being the Princess that first constituted Laws for the better Government of her People.

Osiris moreover built Thebes in Egypt, with an Hundred Gates, and call'd it after his Mother's Name: But in following Times, it was call'd Diospolis, and Thebes; of whose first Founder not only Historians, but the Priests of Egypt themselves, are much in doubt. For some say that it was not built by Osiris, but many Years after by a King of Egypt, whose History we shall treat of hereafter in its proper place. They report likewise, that he built Two magnificent Temples, and Dedicated them to his Parents, Jupiter and Juno; and likewise Two Golden Altars, the greater to the great God Jupiter; the other to his Father Jupiter, who had formerly reign'd there, whom they call Ammon. That he also erected Golden Altars to other Gods, and instituted their several Rites of Worship, and appointed Priests to have the Oversight and Care of the Holy things. In the time of Osiris and Isis, Projectors and ingenious Artists were in great Honour and Esteem; and therefore in Thebes there were then Goldsmiths and Braziers, who made Arms and Weapons for the Killing of Wild Beasts, and other Instruments for the husbanding of the Ground, and improvement of Tillage; besides Images of the Gods, and Altars in Gold. They say that Osiris was much given to Husbandry, that he was the Son of Jupiter, brought up in Nisa, a Town of Arabia the Happy, near to Egypt, call'd by the Greeks Dionysus, from his Father, and the Place of his Education. The Poet in his Hymns makes mention of Nysa, as bordering upon Egypt, where he says,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Far off from Phenice stands the Sacred Nyse,

Where Streams of Eygypt's Nile begin to rise,

On Mountain high with pleasant Woods adorn'd.

Here near unto Nyse, (they say) he found out the use of the Vine, and there planting it, was the first that drank Wine; and taught others how to plant it and use it, and to gather in their Vintage, and to keep and preserve it. Above all others, he most honoured Hermes, one of an admirable Ingenuity, and quick Invention, in finding out what might be useful to Mankind. This Hermes was the first (as they report) that taught how to speak distinctly and articulately, and gave Names to many things that had none before. He found out Letters, and instituted the Worship of the Gods; and was the first that observ'd the Motion of the Stars, and invented Musick; and taught the manner of Wrestling; and invented Arithmetick, and the Art of curious Graving and Cutting of Statues. He first found out the Harp with Three Strings, in resemblance of the Three Seasons of the Year, causing Three several Sounds, the Treble, Base and Mean. The Treble,


Page 7

to represent the Summer; The Base, the Winter; and the Mean, the Spring. He was the first that taught the Greeks Eloquence; thence he's call'd Hermes, a Speaker or Interpreter. To conclude, he was Osiris's Sacred Scribe, to whom he communicated all his Secrets, and was chiefly steer'd by his Advice in every thing. He (not Minerva, as the Greeks affirm) found out the use of the Olive-tree, for the making of Oyl. It's moreover reported, that Osiris being a Prince of a publick Spirit, and very ambitious of Glory, rais'd a great Army, with which he resolv'd to go through all parts of the World that were inhabited, and to teach Men how to plant Vines, and to sow Wheat and Barly. For he hop'd that if he could civilize Men, and take them off from their rude and Beast-like Course of Lives, by such a publick good and advantage, he should raise a Foundation amongst all Mankind, for his immortal Praise and Honour, which happen'd accordingly. For not only that Age, but Posterity ever after honour'd those among the chiefest of their Gods, that first found out their proper and ordinary Food. Having therefore settl'd his Affairs in Egypt, and committed the Government of his whole Kingdom to his Wife Isis, he join'd with her Mercury, as her chief Councellor of State, because he far excell'd all others in Wisdom and Prudence. But Hercules his near Kinsman, he left General of all his Forces within his Dominions, a Man admir'd by all for his Valour and Strength of Body. As to those parts which lay near Phaenicia, and upon the Sea-Coasts of them, he made Busiris Lord Lieutenant, and of Ethiopia and Lybia, Anteus.

Then marching out of Egypt, he began his Expedition, taking along with him his Brother, whom the Greeks call'd Apollo. This Apollo is reported to have discover'd the Laurel-Tree, which all Dedicate especially to this God. To Osiris they attribute the finding out of the Ivy-Tree, and dedicate it to him, as the Greeks do to Bacchus: And therefore in the Egyptian Tongue, they call Ivy Osiris's Plant, which they prefer before the Vine in all their Sacrifices, because this loses its Leaves, and the other always continues fresh and green: Which Rule the Ancients have observ'd in other Plants, that are always green, dedicating Mirtle to Venus, Laurel to Apollo, and the Olive-Tree to Pallas.

It's said, that Two of his Sons accompany'd their Father Osiris in this Expedition, one call'd Anubis, and the other Macedo, both valiant Men: Both of them wore Coats of Mail, that were extraordinary remarkable, cover'd with the Skins of such Creatures as resembled them in Stoutness and Valour. Anubis was cover'd with a Dog's, and Macedon with the Skin of a Wolf; and for this reason these Beasts are religiously ador'd by the Egyptians. He had likewise for his Companion, Pan, whom the Egyptians have in great Veneration; for they not only set up Images and Statues up and down in every Temple, but built a City in Thebides after his Name, call'd by the Inhabitants † Chemmin, which by interpretation is Pan's City. There went along with them likewise those that were skilful in Husbandry, as Maro in the planting of Vines, and Triptolemus in sowing of Corn, and gathering in the Harvest.

CHAP. II.

The Continuance of Osiris's Expedition through Ethiopia, all Arabia, India and Europe. Buried by Isis and Mercury. How he was kill'd. His Death reveng'd by Isis and Orus. Two Bulls, Apis and Mnevis, worshipp'd in Egypt. Places discuss'd where Osiris and Isis were Buried. Histories of the Egyptian Priests. Their Tears, Lunar Tears. Giants. Laws about Marriage. Osiris and Isis, their Pillars and Inscriptions. Colonies out of Egypt.

ALL things being now prepar'd, Osiris having vow'd to the Gods to let his Hair grow till he return'd into Egypt, marcht away through Aethiopia; and for that very Reason it's a piece of Religion, and practis'd among the Egyptians at this Day, that those that travel Abroad, suffer their Hair to grow, till they return Home. As he pass'd through Ethiopia, a Company of Satyrs were


Page 8

presented to him, who (as it's reported) were all Hairy down to their Loyns: For Osiris was a Man given to Mirth and Jollity, and took great pleasure in Musick and Dancing; and therefore carry'd along with him a Train of Musicians, of whom Nine were Virgins, most Excellent Singers, and expert in many other things (whom the Greeks call Muses) of whom Apollo was the Captain; and thence call'd the Leader of the Muses: Upon this account the Satyrs, who are natuturally inclin'd to skipping, dancing and singing, and all other sorts of Mirth, were taken in as part of the Army: For Osiris was not for War, nor came to fight Battels, and to decide Controversies by the Sword, every Country receiving him for his Merits and Virtues, as a God. In Ethiopia having instructed the Inhabitants in Husbandry, and Tillage of the Ground, and built several stately Cities among them, he left there behind him some to be Governors of the Country, and others to be Gatherers of his Tribute.

While they were thus imploy'd 'tis said that the River Nile, about the Dog-days (at which time it uses to be the highest) broke down its Banks, and over-flow'd the greatest part of Egypt, and that part especially where Prometheus govern'd, insomuch as almost all the Inhabitants were drown'd; so that Prometheus was near unto Killing of himself for very grief of heart; and from the sudden and violent Eruption of the Waters, the River was call'd Eagle.

Hercules, who was always for high and difficult Enterprizes, and ever of a stout Spirit, presently made up the Breaches, and turn'd the River into its Channel, and kept in within its ancient Banks; and therefore some of the Greek Poets from this fact have forg'd a Fable, That Hercules kill'd the Eagle that fed upon Prometheus his Heart. The most ancient Name of this River was Oceames, which in the Greek pronunciation is Oceanus; afterwards call'd Eagle, upon the violent Eruption. Lastly, it was call'd Egyptus, from the Name of a King that there reign'd; which the Poet attests, who says,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

In th' River of Egyptus then I plac'd

The Gallies swift—

For near Thonis (as it's call'd) an ancient Mart Town of Egypt, this River empties it self into the Sea.

The last Name which it still retains, it derives from Nileus, a King of those Parts.

Osiris being come to the Borders of Ethiopia, rais'd high Banks on either side of the River, lest in the time of its Inundation it should overflow the Country more than was convenient, and make it marish and boggy; and made Floodgates to let in the Water by degrees, as far as was necessary. Thence he pass'd through Arabia, bordering upon the Red Sea as far as to India, and the utmost Coasts that were inhabited: He built likewise many Cities in India, one of which he call'd Nysa, willing to have a remembrance of that in Egypt where he was brought up. At this Nysa in India, he planted Ivy, which grows and remains here only of all other Places in India, or the Parts adjacent. He left likewise many other Marks of his being in those Parts, by which the latter Inhabitants are induc'd to believe, and do affirm that this God was born in India.

He likewise addicted himself much to hunting of Elephants; and took care to have Statues of himself in every place, as lasting Monuments of his Expedition. Thence passing to the rest of Asia, he transported his Army through the Hellespont into Europe; and in Thrace he kill'd Lycurgus King of the Barbarians, who oppos'd him in his Designs. Then he order'd Maro (at that time an Old Man) to take care of the Planters in that Country, and to build a City, and call it Maronea, after his own Name. Macedon his Son he made King of Macedonia, so calling it after him. To Triptolemus he appointed the Culture and Tillage of the Land in Attica. To conclude, Osiris having travell'd through the whole World, by finding out Food fit and convenient for Man's Body, was a Benefactor to all Mankind. Where Vines would not grow and be fruitful, he taught the Inhabitants to make Drink of Barley, little interiour in strength and pleasant Flavour to Wine it self. He brought back with him into Egypt the most pretious and richest things that ever place did afford; and for the many Benefits and Advantages that he was


Page 9

the Author of, by the common Consent of all Men, he gain'd the Reward of Immortality and Honour equal to the Heavenly Deities.

After his Death, Isis and Mercury celebrated his Funeral with Sacrifices and other Divine Honours, as to one of the Gods, and instituted many Sacred Rites mystical Ceremonies in Memory of the mighty Works wrought by this Hero, now Deify'd. Antiently the Egyptian Priests kept the manner of the Death of Osiris secret in their own Registers among themselves; but in after-times it fell out, that some that could not hold, blurted it out, and so it came Abroad. For they say that Osiris, while he govern'd in Egypt with all Justice imaginable, was Murder'd by his wicked Brother Typhon; and that he mangled his dead Body into Six and Twenty Pieces, and gave to each of his Confederates in the Treason a Piece, by that means to bring them all within the same horrid Guilt, and thereby the more to ingage them to advance him to the Throne, and to defend and preserve him in the Possession.

But Isis, the Sister and Wife likewise of Osiris, with the assistance of her Son Orus, reveng'd his Death upon Typhon and his Complices, and posses'd her self of the Kingdom of Egypt. It's said the Battel was fought near a River not far off a Town now call'd Antaea in Arabia, so call'd from Anteus, whom Hercules slew in the time of Osiris. She found all the Pieces of his Body, save his Privy Members; and having a desire to conceal her Husband's Burial, yet to have him honour'd as a God by all the Egyptians, she thus contriv'd it. She clos'd all the Pieces together, cementing them with Wax and Aromatick Spices, and so brought it to the shape of a Man of the bigness of Osiris; then she sent for the Priests to her, one by one, and swore them all that they should not discover what she should then intrust them with. Then she told them privately, that they only should have the Burial of the King's Body; and recounting the many good Works he had done, charg'd them to bury the Body in a proper place among themselves, and to pay unto him all Divine Honour, as to a God. That they should Dedicate to him one of the Beasts bred among them, which of them they pleas'd, and that while it was alive, they should pay it the same Veneration as they did before to Osiris himself; and when it was dead, that they should Worship it with the same Adoration and Worship given to Osiris. But being willing to incourage the Priests to these Divine Offices by Profit and Advantage, she gave them the Third part of the Country for the Maintenance of the Service of the Gods and their Attendance at the Altars.

In memory therefore of Osiris's good Deeds, being incited thereunto by the Commands of the Queen, and in expectation of their own Profit and Advantage, the Priests exactly perform'd every thing that Isis injoin'd them; and therefore every Order of the Priests at this Day are of opinion that Osiris is bury'd among them. And they have those Beasts in great Veneration, that were so long since thus consecrated; and renew their Mournings for Osiris over the Graves of those Beasts. There are Two sacred Bulls especially, the one call'd Apis, and the other Mnevis, that are Consecrated to Osiris, and reputed as Gods generally by all the Egyptians. For this Creature of all others was extraordinarily serviceable to the first Inventers of Husbandry, both as to the Sowing Corn, and other Advantages concerning Tillage, of which all reapt the Benefit. Lastly, they say, that after the Death of Osiris, Isis made a Vow never to Marry any other Man, and spent the rest of her Days in an exact Administration of Justice among her Subjects, excelling all other Princes in her Acts of Grace and Bounty towards her own People; and therefore after her Death, she was numbred among the Gods, and as such had Divine Honour and Veneration, and was buri'd at Memphis, where they shew her Sepulchre at this day in the Grove of Vulcan.

Yet there are some that deny that these Gods are Buri'd at Memphis; but near the Mountains of Ethiopia and Egypt, in the Isle of Nile, lying near to a place call'd Philas, and upon that account also nam'd the Holy Field. They confirm this by undoubted Signs and Marks left in this Island, as by a Sepulchre built and erected to Osiris, religiously Reverenc'd by all the Priests of Egypt, wherein are laid up Three Hundred and Threescore Bowls, which certain Priests appointed for that purpose, fill every Day with Milk, and call upon the Gods by Name, with Mourning and Lamentation. For that cause none go into the Island but Priests. The


Page 10

Inhabitants of Thebes (which is the most ancient City of Egypt) account it a great Oath, and by no means to be violated, if a Man swear by Osiris that lies bury'd at Philas.

The several parts therefore of Osiris being found, they report were bury'd in this manner before related; but his Privy-Members (they say) were thrown into the River by Typhon, because none of his Partners would receive them; and yet that they were divinely honour'd by Isis; for she commanded an Image of this very part to be set up in the Temples, and to be religiously ador'd; and in all their Ceremonies and Sacrifices to this God, she ordered that part to be held in divine Veneration and Honour. And therefore the Grecians, after they had learn'd the Rites and Ceremonies of the Feasts of Bacchus, and the Orgian Solemnities from the Egyptians in all their Myteries and Sacrifices to this God, they ador'd that Member by the Name of Phallus.

From Osiris and Isis, to the Reign of Alexander the Great, who built a City after his own Name, the Egyptian Priests reckon above Ten Thousand Years, or (as some write) little less than Three and Twenty Thousand Years. They affirm, that those that say this God Osiris was born at Thebes in Boetia of Jupiter and Semele, relate that which is false. For they say that Orpheus, after he came into Egypt, was initiated into the Sacred Mysteries of Bacchus or Dionysus, and being a special Friend to the Thebans in Boetia, and of great esteem among them, to manifest his Gratitude, transferr'd the Birth of Bacchus or Osiris over into Greece.

And that the Common People, partly out of Ignorance, and partly out of a desire they had that this God should be a Grecian, readily receiv'd these Mysteries and Sacred Rites among them; and that Orpheus took the occasion following to fix the Birth of the God and his Rites and Ceremonies among the Greeks: As thus, Cadmus (they say) was born at Thebes in Egypt, and amongst other Children begat Semele: That she was got with Child by one unknown, and was deliver'd at Seven Months end of a Child very like to Osiris, as the Egyptians describe him. But such Births are not us'd to live, either because it is not the pleasure of the Gods it should be so, or that the Law of Nature will not admit it. The Matter coming to Cadmus his Ear, being before warn'd by the Oracle to protect the Laws of his Country, he wrapt the Infant in Gold, and instituted Sacrifices to be offer'd to him, as if Osiris had appear'd again in this shape; and caus'd it to be spread abroad, that it was begotten of Jupiter, thereby both to honour Osiris, and to cover his Daughter's Shame. And therefore it is a common Report among the Grecians, that Semele, the Daughter of Cadmus, was got with Child by Jupiter, and by him had Osiris.

In After-times, Orpheus, by reason of his excellent Art and Skill in Musick, and his Knowledge in Theology, and Institution of Sacred Rites and Sacrifices to the Gods, was greatly esteem'd among the Grecians, and especially was receiv'd and entertain'd by the Thebans, and by them highly honour'd above all others; who being excellently learn'd in the Egyptian Theology, brought down the Birth of the ancient Osiris, to a far later time, and to gratifie the Cadmeans or Thebans, instituted new Rites and Ceremonies, at which he ordered that it should be declared to all that were admitted to those Mysteries, that Dionysus or Osiris was begotten of Semele by Jupiter. The People therefore partly through Ignorance, and partly by being deceived with the dazling Luster of Orpheus his Reputation, and with their good Opinion of his Truth and Faithfulness in this matter (especially to have this God reputed a Grecian, being a thing that humour'd them) began to use these Rites, as is before declared. And with these Stories the Mythologists and Poets have fill'd all the Theaters, and now it's generally received as a Truth not in the least to be questioned. To conclude, The Priests say, that the Grecians have arrogated to themselves both their Gods and Demy-Gods (or Heroes,) and say that divers Colonies were transported over to them out of Egypt: For Hercules was an Egyptian, and by his Valour made his way into most parts of the World, and set up a Pillar in Africa; and of this they endeavour to make proof from the Grecians themselves. For whereas it is own'd by all, that Hercules assisted the Gods in the Giants War, it's plain that at that time when


Page 11

the Grecians say Hercules was born, the Earth had not then strength to produce Giants, neither were there any in those Days, that is to say, in the Age next before the Trojan War; but rather (as the Egyptians affirm) at the first Generation and Beginning of Mankind; from which Time the Egyptians account above Ten Thousand Years; but from the Trojan War, not Twelve Hundred: And according to this Computation of the Egyptians, a Club and Lion's Skin may agree well enough with the ancient Hercules; for the use of Arms not being at that time found out, Men fought with Clubs and Staves, and cover'd their Bodies with Beasts Skins. This ancient Hercules they say was the Son of Jupiter, but know not who was his Mother: But he who was the Son of Alemena, they affirm was born above Ten Thousand Years after the other, and was call'd at first Alceus; but afterwards Hercules, not that he had that honourable Surname from Juno (as Matris says) but assum'd to himself the Name out of emulation, desirous to do as great things as the ancient Hercules, and so to inherit as well his Fame and Glory as his Name.

Moreover, the Grecians have a very antient Tradition, which agrees with the Egyptians, that Hercules freed the Earth from wild Beasts; which cannot possibly be apply'd to him who flourish'd about the Times of the Trojans, when most Parts of the World were free from such annoyances, by improvement of Lands and Multitudes of Populous Cities. But the reduction of the World to a more civil course of Living, agrees best with the ancient Hercules, when Men were as yet vext and plagu'd with wild Beasts; and especially in Egypt, whose upper part is a Wilderness, and full of Wild Beasts at this very Day. And 'tis but very reasonable to think that Hercules should mind the Prosperity and Welfare of Egypt, his own Country, and free the Land from Beasts, and so deliver it into the Hands of the Husbandman, to be improv'd by Tillage; and that upon this account he was Honour'd as a God.

They report likewise, that Perseus was born in Egypt, and that the Grecians have transferr'd from thence the Birth of Isis into Argos, inventing a Story that she was the same with Io, who was metamorphosed into a Bull. And indeed there are great Differences and Disputes concerning these Gods: For some call the same Goddess Isis, others call her Ceres; some Thesmophorus, others Luna, others Juno, and some by all these Names.

They term Osiris sometimes Serapis, sometimes Dionysus, and sometimes Pluto; then again Ammon; sometimes Jupiter, and often Pan. There are some likewise that say, Serapis is the same, whom the Grecians call Pluto.

The Egyptians report that Isis found out many Medicines for the Recovery of Mens Health, being very expert in the Art of Physick, and contriv'd many Remedies for that purpose; and therefore even now when she is advanc'd to an immortal State, she takes pleasure in curing Mens Bodies, and to those that desire her assistance, in their sleep she clearly manifests her presence, and affords ready and effectual Relief to them that stand in need of it.

For clear proof of all this, they say, they have not only the usual Fables of the Greeks, but the undoubted Evidence of the fact to confirm it; and that almost the whole World bears Testimony to this, by the Respect and Honour they pay to this Goddess upon the account of her great Fame in curing of Diseases: For in Sleep she's present with Persons, and applies Remedies to the Sick, and wonderfully cures those that are her Votaries. That many that have been given off by the Physitians as incurable, have been restor'd by her; and that many that have been blind and lame, who have sought to her for help, have been perfectly restor'd to their former Sight, and Soundness of Body.

They say she found out a Medicine that would raise the Dead to Life, with which she not only rais'd her Son Orus, that was kill'd by the Titans, and found dead in the Water, but by that Application made him Immortal. This Orus was the last of the Gods that reign'd in, Egypt, after the Translation of Osiris his Father. This Orus, they say, by interpretation is Apollo, who being taught by his Mother Isis, the Art of Physick and Divination, was very beneficial to Mankind in these respects.

The Egyptian Priests in their Computation of Time do reckon above Three and Twenty Thousand Years from the Reign of Sol, to the passage of Alexander the Great into Asia.


Page 12

In their fabulous Stories they say, that the most ancient of their God's reign'd Twelve Hundred Years, and the latter no less than Three Hundred Years apiece. Whereas this great number of Years seems incredible, some have not stuck to affirm that the motion of the Sun not being then known, the Year was reckon'd according to the Course of the Moon; and therefore the Solar Year, consisting then but of Three Hundred Days, some of them were sure to live Twelve Hundred Lunary Years; and even at this Day now that there are Twelve Months in the Year, many live a Hundred Solar Years.

The like they say of them that reign'd Three Hundred Years: For in their Time (they say) the Year was made up of Four Months, every Four applicable to each of the Three Seasons of the Solar Year, that is to say, Spring, Summer and Winter; which is the reason that some of the Grecians call Years, Horas, Seasons; and Historical Annals, Horography.

The Egyptians moreover among their Fables report, that in the Time of Isis, there were Men of vast Bodies, whom the Grecians call Giants, and whom they place in their Temples in prodigious Shapes, who are whipt and scourg'd by them that Sacrifice to Osiris. Some idly give forth, that they sprang from the Earth, when at first it gave Being to Living Creatures. Others report, that from many extraordinary things done by Men of strong Bodies, the Fables and Stories of Giants arose. But in this most agree, that for the War they rais'd against the Gods, Jupiter and Osiris, they were all destroy'd.

It was a Law likewise (they say) in Egypt, against the Custom of all other Nations, that Brothers and Sisters might Marry one with another, which accordingly was prosperous and successful in the Marriage of Isis, who marry'd her Brother Osiris, and after his Death made a Vow never to marry any other Man; and after she had reveng'd her Husbands Death upon his Murderers, she govern'd the Kingdom, and reign'd justly all her Days; and did good universally to all sorts of People, obliging them with many and extraordinary Benefits and Advantages. And for her sake it is a Custom among them, that they honour a Queen, and allow her more Power and Authority than a King: And in their Contracts of Marriage Authority is given to the Wife over her Husband, at which time the Husbands promise to be obedient to their Wives in all things. 

Isis was Buri'd at Memphis, where at this day her Shrine is to be seen in the Grove of Vulcan: Although some affirm, that these Gods lie Bury'd in the Isle of Nile, at Philas, as is before said. Neither am I ignorant that some Writers say, their Sepulchers are at Arabia; whence Dionysus is call'd Nysaeus; there they say is a Pillar erected to each of the Deities with Inscriptions of Sacred Letters upon them; in one of which, that belonging to Isis, are these Words—

I am Isis, Queen of all this Country, the Scholar of Mercury: What Laws I have made, none ought to disannul. I am the Eldest Daughter of the Youngest God, Saturn. I am the Wife and Sister of King Osiris. I am she that first found out Corn for Man's use. I am the Mother of King Orus. I am she that arises in the Dog-Star. The City Bubastus was built in memory of me. Farewel, rejoyce O Egypt that was my Nurse, that brought me up.

Upon Osiris's Pillar are these that follow.
 

My Father was Saturn, the Youngest of all the God's. I am Osiris, that led an Army through all the Nations, as far as to the Deserts of India, and in the Countries lying to the North, as far as to the Head Springs of the River Ister; and to other Parts, as far as to the Ocean. I am the Eldest Son of Saturn, a Branch of a famous noble Stock, Cosin German to the Day. There's not a Place in the World where I have not been; and what I have discover'd, I have imparted to all.

So much of the Inscriptions on the Pillars (they say) may be read, the rest is defac'd and worn out through length of Time. Thus therefore many disagree concerning the Sepulchres of these Gods, because the Priests, who were secretly instructed in the perfect Knowledge of these matters, would not suffer them to be spread abroad, out of fear of those Punishments that such were liable unto, who reveal'd the Secrets of the Gods.


Page 13

They report, that afterwards many Colonies out of Egypt were dispers'd over all parts of the World: That Belus (who was taken to be the Son of Neptune and Lybra) led a Colony into the Province of Babylon, and fixing his Seat at the River Euphrates, Consecrated Priests, and according to the custom of the Egyptians, freed them from all publick Taxes and Impositions. These Priests the Babylonians call Caldeans, who observe the Motions of the Stars, in imitation of the Priests, Naturalists and Astrologers of Egypt. That Danaus likewise took from thence another Colony, and planted them in Argos, the most ancient City almost of all Greece. And that the People of Cholchos, in Pontus, and the Jews lying between Arabia and Syria, were Colonies out of Egypt; and that therefore it is an ancient Custom among these Nations, to Circumcise all their Male Children after the Rites and Customs receiv'd from the Egyptians. That the Athenians likewise are a Colony of the Saits, which came out of Egypt, and are their Kindred, they endeavour to prove by these Arguments; (That is to say) That they only of all the Greeks call the City Astu, from Astu a City among those People of the Saits: And that for the better Government of the Commonwealth, they divide their People into the same Ranks and Degrees as they in Egypt do, to wit, into Three Orders; the first of which are call'd Eupatride, imploy'd for the most part in studying the Liberal Arts and Sciences, and are advanc'd to the highest Offices and Places of Preferment in the State, as the Priests of Egypt are. The Second Order of Men are the Rustick and Country People, who are to be Souldiers, and take up Arms upon all occasions for the Defence of their Country, like to those who are call'd Husbandmen in Egypt, who furnish out Soldiers there. In the Third Rank are reckon'd Tradesmen and Artificers, who commonly bore all the necessary and publick Offices, which agrees exactly with the Orders and Usage among the Egyptians.

They say likewise, that there were some of the Athenian Generals that came out of Egypt. For they affirm, that Peteos the Father of Menestheus, who was a Captain in the Trojan War, was an Egyptian, and afterwards was King of Athens. That the Athenians had not Wit enough to find out the true reason why Two Natures were ascrib'd to him; for every Man knows that he was call'd Half a Beast, that is, half a Man, and half a Beast; and the true ground was, because he was a Member of Two several Commonwealths, a Grecian and a Barbarian.Erechtheus likewise, one of the Kings of Athens, they say was an Egyptian, which they prove by these Arguments, viz. That whereas there was a great Drought (as all confess) almost over all the World, except Egypt only (because of the peculiar property of the Place) which destroy'd both Men and the Fruits of the Earth together, Erechtheus transported a great quantity of Corn to Athens out of Egypt, because they and the Egyptians were of the same Kindred; with which Kindness the Citizens were so affected, that they advanc'd him to the Kingdom. After which, he instituted the Festivals, and taught the Egyptian Rites and Mysteries of Ceres in Eleusina.

They say moreover, that it's reported upon good ground, that the Goddess her self came into Attica at that time when Corn and other goodly Fruit in her Name were transported thither; and that therefore it seem'd as if she had again renew'd the Invention of Seed, as she did at the beginning. Likewise that the Athenians themselves confess, that in the Reign of Erichtheus, when the Drought had burnt up all the Fruits of the Earth, Ceres came thither and gave them Corn. And that the Rites and Mysteries of this Goddess, were then begun in Eleusina, and that the Sacrifices and ancient Ceremonies, both of the Athenians and Egyptians, are one and the same: And that they took the original of their Eumolphide from the Egyptian Priests, and their Heralds from their Pastophori. Further, that only the Grecians swear by the Name of Isis, and that in all their Manners and Customs, they are altogether like the Egyptians. These and many other such like Arguments they bring to maintain this Colony, more (I think) out of Ambition, because of the Glory and Renown of that City, than any ground of Truth they have for their Assertion. To conclude, the Egyptians say, that many Parts of the World were planted by their Ancestors, by Colonies sent from thence, by means of the State and Grandure of their Kings, and the vast number of their People. Which Reports not being supported with sufficient Arguments, nor attested by credible Authors, we think 'em not worthy of any further Account. But thus much we thought fit to say of the Egyptian Theology.


Page 14

CHAP. III.

The Description of Egypt. Of the Lake of Serbon. The Nature of the River Nile. The Cataracts; the Mouths of Nile. The Fruits of Egypt. The Beasts, Crocodile, &c. Several Opinions concerning the Inundation of Nile.

AND now we shall endeavour to treat distinctly of the Country it self, and the River Nile, and other things worthy of Remark. The Land of Egypt almost all lies wholly to the South, and is naturally fortify'd, and the most pleasant Country of any of the Kingdoms round about it. For on the West it's defended by the Desarts of Libya, full of Wild Beasts, running out a vast way in Length; where the Passage is both difficult, and extreamly hazardous, through want of Water, and other Provision. On the South it's inviron'd with the Cataracts of Nile, and the Mountains adjoyning. For from the Country of the Troglodites, and the higher Parts of Ethiopia, for the space of Five Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs, there's no passing either by Land or Water, without such a measure of Provision as a King himself could only be furnish'd with. Those Parts towards the East, are partly secur'd by the River, and partly surrounded by the Deserts and by the Marishes call'd the Barathra. For there's a Lake between Coelo-Syria and Egypt, very narrow, but exceeding deep, even to a Wonder, two Hundred Furlongs in length, call'd Serbon: If any through Ignorance approach it, they are lost irrecoverably; for the Channel being very narrow, like a Swadling-band, and compass'd round with vast heaps of Sand, great quantities of it are cast into the Lake, by the continu'd Southern Winds, which so cover the Surface of the Water, and make it to the view so like unto Dry Land, that it cannot possibly be distinguish'd; and therefore many unacquainted with the nature of the Place, by missing their way, have been there swallow'd up, together with whole Armies. For the Sand being trod upon, sinks down and gives way by degrees, and like a malicious Cheat, deludes and decoys them that come upon it, till too late when they see the mischief they are likely to fall into, they begin to support and help one another, but without any possibility either of returning back, or escaping certain Ruin; for sinking into the Gulf, they are neither able to swim (the Mud preventing all motion of the Body) nor in a capacity to wade out, having nothing firm to support them for that purpose; for Sand and Water being mixt together, the Nature of both is thereby so chang'd, that there's neither fording, nor passing over it by Boat. Being brought therefore to this pass, without the least possibility of help to be afforded 'em, they go together with the Sand to the Bottom of the Gulf, at the very Brink of the Bog; and so the Place agreeable to its nature is call'd Barathrum.

Having spoken of the Three Boundaries of Egypt, by which it is distinguish'd from the rest of the Continent, we now proceed to the next.

The Fourth side is near surrounded with a vast Sea, without any Harbours, being a very long and tedious Voyage, and very difficult to find any place of Landing. For from Parcetonium in Africa, to Joppa in Coelo-Syria, for the space almost of Five Thousand Furlongs, there's not one safe Harbour to be found, except Pharus. Then again all along the Coasts of Egypt, the Sea is full of Rocks and Sands, not discernible by Mariners unacquainted with the Places; so that when they look upon themselves as safe, and to have escaped the danger of the Seas, and make with great joy to Land (wanting skill to steer aright) they are on a sudden and unexpectedly shipwrackt. Others inconsiderately, because they cannot see the Land, in regard it lies so low, are carried either into the Bogs, or to the Deserts. And in this manner is Egypt naturally guarded on every side. It's of a long Form or Shape; that part that lies along to the Sea-Coast stretches forth it self in length Two Thousand Furlongs; but to the South it runs almost Six Thousand Furlongs. It was anciently the most Populous Country in the World, and at this day not inferior to any. It was formerly full of Famous Towns, and had in it above Eighteen Thousand Cities, as is to be seen registred in their Sacred Records: And in the time of Ptolemy Lagus, there were reckon'd above


Page 15

Three Thousand, which remain still to this day. Once they say in a General Account taken of all the Inhabitants, they amounted to Seven Millions; and at this time are no less than Three Millions of People. And therefore they say that their Kings by the help of such a Multitude, left behind them in their great and wonderful Works, eternal Monuments of their state and grandure; which we shall by and by distinctly treat of: But at present we shall speak of the nature of Nile, and of the property of the Soyl.

Nile runs from the South towards the North from Spring-heads hitherto unknown, for they are in the utmost Borders of Ethiopia, where by reason of the vast Deserts, and Extremity of Heat, there's no coming. It's the greatest of all other Rivers, and runs through many Countries, and therefore has many large Turnings and Windings, sometimes making its Way to the East and Arabia, and then again to the West and Lybia. For it runs down from the Mountains of Ethiopia, till it empties it self into the Sea, at least Twelve Thousand Furlongs, accounting the several Windings it makes in the way. In its Course it makes many Islands; amongst many others in Ethiopia, one remarkable for its Greatness, call'd Meroes, Two and Twenty Furlongs broad. But in the lower Places its swelling Waves grow narrower, and the Current divides it self into Two Channels towards the Continents that lye on either side the Island. One of the Currents bends towards Africa, and is at length swallow'd up in a Bed of Sand of an incredible Depth: The other makes its Course towards Arabia, on the other side, and falls into deep Guts and vast Bogs, inhabited round by divers Nations; entring at last into Egypt, it keeps no direct Course, but turns and winds here and there in some Places Ten Furlongs in breadth, in others less, sometimes running towards the East, then to the West, and sometimes back again to the South. For Mountains stand on both sides the River, and take up a large Tract of Ground; and the River forcing it self with great violence against strait and narrow Precipices, the Water is driven back, and flows over the Neighbouring Fields; and after it has run a considerable way towards the South, it returns at length to its natural Course. And though this River is thus remarkable above all others, yet this is especially observable in it, that its Stream runs calm and smooth, without any violent Surges, or tempestuous Waves, except at the Cataracts; a Place of Ten Furlongs being so call'd, running down in a Precipice, in a straight and narrow Passage amongst steep Rocks; the whole is a rugged shelvy Gulf, where there lye many great Stones, like huge Rocks. The Water dashing violently against these Rocks, is beaten back, and rebounds the contrary way, by which are made wonderful Whirlpools, and by the repeated Influx, the whole Place is cover'd with Froth and Foam, to the no small amazement of the Beholders: For the River there runs down with as quick and violent a Current, as an Arrow out of a Bow. Sometimes it happens that (these Rocks, and the whole Gulf being cover'd with the vast quantity of Waters of the Nile) some Ships driven with contrary Winds are hurried down the Cataract, but there's no possibility of Sailing up against it, the force of the Stream baffling all the Art of Man. There are many Cataracts of this kind, but the greatest is that in the Confines of Ethiopia and Egypt.

How the River Nile makes several Islands near Ethiopia (amongst which Meroe is the chief) is before declar'd. In this Island is a Famous City of the same Name, which Cambyses built, and call'd it after the Name of his Mother Meroe. This Island is said to be of the shape of a Shield, and for Greatness exceeding all the rest of the Islands in those Parts, being Three Thousand Furlongs in Length, and a Thousand in Breadth, having in it many Cities, of which Meroe is the Noblest. The Island is surrounded towards the Coasts of Lybia with vast Heaps of Sand, all along close to the River, and towards Arabia run along steep rocky Mountains. It's said there are in it Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron and Brass, a great number of Ebony Trees, and all sorts of precious Stones. To conclude, there are so many Islands made by this River, that it's scarce credible. For besides those Islands in that part of Egypt call'd Delta, there are (they say) Seven Hundred, some of which the Ethiopians inhabit, and sow with Millet; others are so pester'd with Serpents, Baboons, and all Kinds of hurtful Beasts, that it's dangerous to come into them.


Page 16

The River Nile parting it self into several Channels in Egypt, makes that part call'd Delta, so call'd from the shape resembling that Greek Letter. The Two Sides of this Delta are fashion'd by the Two extream Branches of the River; the Foot of this Letter is the Sea, where the Seven Mouths of Nile disgorge themselves. For there are Seven Places call'd Mouths, through which it empties itself into the Ocean. The first lying to the most Eastward Channel, is at Pelusium, call'd Pelusaicum; the Second Taniticum; the Third Mendesium; the Fourth Phatniticum; the Fifth Sebenyticum; the Sixth Bolbitinum, and the last Canopicum or Herculeum, as some call it. There are some other Mouths made by Art, of which it's not material to write. At every of the Mouths is a City built on either side of the River, defended with strong Guards and Bridges on each Bank. From Pelusaicum as far as to the Arabian Gulf, and the Red Sea, is a Canal cut out. Necos the Son of Psameticus, was the First that began this Work, and after him Darius the Persian carry'd it on, but left it unfinish'd, being told by some that if he cut it through the Isthmus, all Egypt would be drown'd, for that the Red Sea lay higher than Egypt. The last Attempt was made by Ptolemy the Second, who cut a Sluce cross over the Isthmus in a more convenient Place, which he open'd when he had a mind to Sail down that way, and then presently after shut up again; which Contrivance prov'd very useful and serviceable. The River which runs through this Cut is call'd Ptolemy, after the Name of the Maker. Where it falls into the Sea, there's a City built call'd Arsinoe. Delta is of the shape of Sicily: Both sides are Seven Hundred and Fifty Furlongs in length, and the Foot which lies along the Sea-Coast, is Thirteen Hundred Furlongs.

This Island has in it many Dikes and Sluces cut by Art, and is the most sweet and pleasantest part of Egypt; for being inricht and water'd by the River, it produces all sorts of Grain and other Fruits; and by the Yearly overflowing of the River, the Face of the Ground is still continually renew'd, and the Inhabitants have an easie way to water it by means of a certain Engin, invented by Archimedes the Syracusian, which from its Form is call'd Choclia. And whereas the Nile flows gently over it, it brings along with it much Soyl, which resting in low and hollow Grounds, makes very rich Marishes. For in these Places grow Roots of several Tasts and Savours, and Fruits and Herbs of a singular nature and quality, which are very useful both to the Poor, and those that are Sick; for they do not only afford plentifully in every Place things for Food, but all other things necessary and useful for the Life of Man. There grows in great Plenty Lotus, of which the Egyptians make Bread for the nourishment of Man's Body. Here's likewise produc'd in plenty Ciborium, call'd the Egyptian Bean. Here are divers sorts of Trees, amongst which those call'd Persica, whose Fruit is of wonderful sweetness: This Plant was brought out of Ethiopia by the Persians, when Cambyses conquer'd these Places. The Sycamore (or Egyptian Fig-tree) some of them bear Mulberries, others a Fruit like unto Figs, and bear all the Year long; so that a Man may satisfie his Hunger at any time. After the falling of the Waters of the River, they gather the Fruits call'd Bates, which for their sweet and delightful Taste are at Entertainments served up at last Course as delicious Deserts.

The Egyptians make a Drink of Barley, call'd Zythus, for smell and sweetness of Taste not much inferior to Wine. They make a Liquor like Oyl for the feeding of their Lamps, of the Juice of a Plant which they call Cici. There are many other Plants which grow in Egypt of admirable use, which would be too tedious here to enumerate.

The River Nile breeds many Creatures of several Forms and Shapes, amongst which, Two are especially remarkable, the Crocodile and the Horse as it's call'd: Amongst these the Crocodile of the least Creature becomes the greatest; for it lays an Egg much of the bigness of that of a Goose, and after the young is hatcht, it grows to the length of Sixteen Cubits, and lives to the Age of a Man: It wants a Tongue, but has a Body naturally arm'd in a wonderful manner. For its Skin is cover'd all over with Scales of an extraordinary hardness; many sharp Teeth are rang'd on both sides its Jaws, and Two of them are much bigger than the rest. This Monster does not only devour Men, but other Creatures that come near the River. His Bites are sharp and destructive, and with his Claws he tears his Prey cruelly in Pieces, and what Wounds he makes, no Medicine or Application can heal. The Egyptians formerly catcht these Monsters with Hooks, baited with


Page 17

raw Flesh; but of later times, they have us'd to take 'em with strong Nets like Fishes; sometimes they strike them on the Head with Forks of Iron, and so kill them. There's an infinite Multitude of these Creatures in the River and the Neighbouring Pools, in regard they are great Breeders, and are seldom kill'd. For the Crocodile is ador'd as a God by some of the Inhabitants; and for Strangers to hunt and destroy them is to no purpose, for their Flesh is not eatable. But Nature has provided relief against the increase of this destructive Monster; for the Ichneumon, as it's call'd (of the Bigness of a little Dog) running up and down near the Water-side, breaks all the Eggs laid by this Beast, whereever he finds them; and that which is most to be admir'd, is, that he does this not for Food or any other Advantage, but out of a natural Instinct for the meer Benefit of Mankind.

The Beast call'd the River Horse, is Five Cubits long, Four Footed, and cloven Hoof'd like to an Ox. He has Three Teeth or Tushes on either side his Jaw, appearing outwards larger than those of a Wild-Boar; as to his Ears, Tayl and his Neighing, he's like to a Horse. The whole Bulk of his Body is not much unlike an Elephant; his Skin is firmer and thicker almost than any other Beast. He lives both on Land and Water; in the Day time he lies at the Bottom of the River, and in the Night time comes forth to Land, and feeds upon the Grass and Corn. If this Beast were so fruitful as to bring forth Young every Year, he would undo the Husbandman, and destroy a great part of the Corn of Egypt. He's likewise by the help of many Hands often caught, being struck with Instruments of Iron; for when he is found, they hem him round with their Boats, and those on Board wound him with forked Instruments of Iron, cast at him as so many Darts; and having strong Ropes to the Irons, they fix in him, they let him go till he loses his Blood, and so dies: His Flesh is extraordinary hard, and of ill digestion. There's nothing in his inner Parts that can be eaten, neither his Bowels, nor any other of his Intrails.

Besides these before mention'd, Nile abounds with multitudes of all sorts of Fish; not only such as are fresh taken to supply the Inhabitants at hand, but an innumerable Number likewise which they salt up to send Abroad. To conclude, no River in the World is more Beneficial and Serviceable to Mankind, than Nile.

Its Inundation begins at the Summer Solstice, and increases till the Equinoctial in Autumn; during which time he brings in along with him new Soyl, and waters as well the Till'd and Improv'd Ground, as that which lies waste and untill'd, as long as it pleases the Husbandman; for the Water flowing gently and by degrees, they easily divert its Course, by casting up small Banks of Earth; and then by opening a Passage for it, as easily turn it over their Land again, if they see it needful. It's so very advantageous to the Inhabitants, and done with so little pains, that most of the Country People turn in their Cattel into the sow'd Ground to eat, and tread down the Corn, and Four or Five Months after they reap it. Some lightly run over the Surface of the Earth with a Plow, after the Water is fallen, and gain a mighty Crop without any great Cost or Pains: But Husbandry amongst all other Nations, is very laborious and chargable, only the Egyptians gather their Fruits with little Cost or Labour. That part of the Country likewise where Vines are planted after this watering by the Nile, yields a most plentiful Vintage. The Fields that after the Inundation are pastur'd by their Flocks, yield them this advantage, that the Sheep Yean twice in a Year, and are shorn as often. This Increase of the Nile is wonderful to Beholders, and altogether incredible to them that only hear the Report; for when other Rivers about the Solstice fall and grow lower all Summer long, this begins to increase, and continues to rise every day, till it comes to that height that it overflows almost all Egypt; and on the contrary in the same manner in the Winter Solstice, it falls by degrees till it wholly return into its proper Channel. And in regard the Land of Egypt lies low and Champain, the Towns, Cities and Country Villages that are built upon rising-ground (cast up by Art) look like the Islands of the Cyclades: Many of the Cattel sometimes are by the River intercepted, and so are drown'd; but those that fly to the higher Grounds are preserv'd. During the time of the Inundation, the Cattel are kept in the Country Towns and small Cottages, where they have Food and Fodder before laid up and prepar'd for them. But the common People now at liberty from all Imployments in the Field, indulge themselves


Page 18

in Idleness, feasting every day, and giving themselves up to all sorts of Sports and Pleasures. Yet out of fear of the Inundation, a Watch Tower is built in Memphis, by the Kings of Egypt, where those that are imploy'd to take care of this concern, observing to what height the River rises, send Letters from one City to another, acquainting them how many Cubits and Fingers the River rises, and when it begins to decrease; and so the People coming to understand the Fall of the Waters, are freed from their fears, and all presently have a foresight what plenty of Corn they are like to have; and this Observation has been Registred from time to time by the Egyptians for many Generations.

There are great Controversies concerning the Reasons of the overflowing of Nile, and many both Philosophers and Historians have endeavour'd to declare the Causes of it, which we shall distinctly relate, neither making too long a Digression, nor omitting that which is so much banded and controverted. Of the Increase and Spring-heads of Nile, and of its emptying of it self at length into the Sea, and other properties peculiar to this River above all others, though it be the greatest in the World, yet some Authors have not dar'd to say the least thing: Some who have attempted to give their Reasons, have been very wide from the Mark. For as for Hellanicus, Cadmus, Hecataeus, and such like ancient Authors, they have told little but frothy Stories, and meer Fables. Herodotus above all other Writers very industrious, and well acquainted with General History, made it his Business to find out the Causes of these things, but what he says, is notwithstanding very doubtful, and some things seem to be repugnant and contradictory one to another. Thucydides and Xenophon, who have the reputation of faithful Historians, never so much as touch upon the Description of any Place in Egypt. But Ephorus and Theopompus, though they are very earnest in this matter, yet they have not in the least discover'd the Truth.

But it was through Ignorance of the Places, and not through Negligence, that they were all led into Error. For anciently none of the Grecians, till the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus, ever went into Ethiopia, or so much as to the utmost Bounds of Egypt. For those Places were never frequented by Travellers, they were so hazardous, till that King marcht with a Grecian Army into those Parts, and so made a more perfect Discovery of the Country.

No Writer hitherto has pretended that he himself ever saw or heard of any one else that affirm'd he had seen the Spring-heads of Nile: All therefore amounting to no more but Opinion and Conjecture, the Priests of Egypt affirm that it comes from the Ocean, which flows round the whole Earth: But nothing that they say is upon any solid grounds, and they resolve Doubts by things that are more doubtful; and to prove what they say, they bring Arguments that have need to be proved themselves.

But the Troglodites (otherways call'd Molgii) whom the scorching Heat forc'd to remove from the higher Parts into those lower Places, say, that there are some Signs whence a Man may rationally conclude, that the River Nile rises from Streams which run from many Fountains or Spring-heads, and meet at last in one Channel, and therefore to be the most fruitful and richest River of any that is known in the World.

The Inhabitants of the Isle of Meroe (who are most to be credited upon this account) are far from inventing so much as any probable Arguments; and though they live near to the Place in controversy, are so far from giving any certain account of this matter, that they call Nile, Astapus, which in the Greek Language, signifies Water that issues out of a Place of Darkness; so that they give a Name to the River to denote their Ignorance of the Place whence it springs: But that seems the truest Reason to me, that looks to be furthest from Fiction and study'd Contrivance. Yet I am not ignorant, that Herodotus who bounds Lybia both on the East and West with this River, does ascribe the exact Knowledge of it to the Africans, call'd Nasamones, and says, that Nile rises from a certain Lake, and runs through a large Tract of Ground down all along through Ethiopia: But neither are the Sayings of the Africans in this behalf (as not altogether agreeable to Truth,) nor the affirmation of the Writer (who proves not what he says) to be of absolute credit. But enough concerning the Spring-heads and Course of Nile, let us now venture to treat of the Causes of the Risings of this River.


Page 19

Thales, who is reckon'd one of the Seven Wise Men of Greece, is of Opinion that the Etesean Winds that beat fiercely upon the Mouth of the River, give a check and stop to the Current, and so hinder it from falling into the Sea, upon which the River swelling, and its Channel fill'd with Water, at length overflows the Country of Egypt, which lies flat and low. Though this seem a plausible Reason, yet it may be easily disprov'd. For if it were true what he says, then all the Rivers which run into the Sea against the Etesean Winds would overflow in like manner; which being never known in any other part of the World, some other Reason and more agreeable to Truth must of necessity be sought for. Anaxagoras the Philosopher ascribes the Cause to the melting of the Snow in Ethiopia, whom the Poet Euripides (who was his Scholar) follows, saying thus—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

The pleasant Streams of th'River Nile forsakes,

Which flowing from the Negro's parched Land,

Swells big when th' melting Snow to th'River takes,

Comes furling down and overflows the Strand.

Neither is it any hard Task to confute this Opinion, since it's apparent to all, that by reason of the parching Heats, there's no Snow in Ethiopia at that time of the Year. For in these Countries there's not the least Sign either of Frost, Cold or any other effects of Winter, especially at the time of the overflowing of Nile. And suppose there be abundance of Snow in the higher Parts of Ethiopia, yet what is affirm'd is certainly false: For every River that is swell'd with Snow, fumes up in cold Fogs, and thickens the Air; but about Nile, only above all other Rivers, neither Mists gather, nor are there any cold Breezes, nor is the Air gross and thick. Herodotus says, that Nile is such in its own nature, as it seems to be in the time of its Increase; for that in Winter, when the Sun moves to the South, and runs its daily Course directly over Africa, it exhales so much Water out of Nile, that it decreases against Nature; and in Summer when the Sun returns to the North, the Rivers of Greece, and the Rivers of all other Northern Countries fall and decrease; and therefore that it is not so strange for Nile about Summer time to increase, and in Winter to fall and grow lower. But to this it may be answer'd, that if the Sun exhale so much moisture out of Nile in Winter time, it would do the like in other Rivers in Africa, and so they must fall as well as Nile, which no where happens throughout all Africa, and therefore this Author's Reason is frivolous; for the Rivers of Greece rise not in the Winter, by reason of the remoteness of the Sun, but by reason of the great Rains that fall at that time.

Democritus the Abderite says, that the Northern Countries, and not those towards the South (as Anaxagoras and Euripides say) are subject to Snow; for that it's clear and evident to every Body, that in the Northern Parts, Drifts and Heaps of Snow lye congeal'd at the time of the Winter Solstice; but in Summer, the Ice being melted by the heat of the Sun, the Land becomes very wet, which causes many thick Mists to appear upon the Hills from the Vapours rising from the Earth. These Vapours, he says, are driven about by the Etesean Winds, till they fall upon the highest Mountains, which are (as he affirms in Ethiopia) and by the violent impression they make upon the Tops of these Mountains, great Storms and Showers of Rain are occasion'd, which about the time of the Etesean Winds cause the River to rise. But if any will diligently observe the time and season of the Year when this falls out, he may easily answer this Argument; for Nile begins to swell at the time of the Summer Solstice, when there are no Etesean Winds; and after the Autumnal Equinox, when those Winds are past, it falls again. Inasmuch therefore as certain Experience to the contrary, answers all Arguments be they never so probable, the Mans diligence and ingenuity is to be commended, but his Affirmations and Opinions by no means to be rely'd upon: And I wave this, that it's evident that the Etesean Winds come as often from the West, as from the North. For not only the North-East Winds call'd Aparctie, but those of the North-West call'd Argeste, go under the name of the Etesean Winds. And whereas he


Page 20

affirms that the greatest Mountains are in Ethiopia, as it wants proof, so likewise all grounds for credit and belief, as is evident from the thing itself.

Ephorus, who gives the last account of the thing, endeavours to ascertain the Reason, but seems not to find out the Truth.

The whole Land of Egypt (says he) is cast up from the River, and the Soyl is of a loose and spungy nature, and has in it many large Clifts and hollow Places, wherein are abundance of Water, which in the Winter-time is frozen up, and in the Summer issues out on every side, like Sweat from the Pores, which occasions the River Nile to rise. This Writer does not only betray his own Ignorance of the nature of Places in Egypt, that he never saw them himself, but likewise that he never was rightly inform'd by any that was acquainted with them. For if the overflowing of Nile should proceed from Egypt it self, it could not flow above the Land of Egypt, where it passes through Rocks and Mountainous Places. For as it takes its Course through Ethiopia for above the space of Six Thousand Furlongs, it is at its full height before ever it reach Egypt, and therefore if the River Nile lye lower than the Caverns of congested Earth, those Clefts and hollow Places must be above, towards the Superficies of the Earth, in which it is impossible so much Water should be contain'd. And if the River lye higher than those spongy Caverns, it is not possible that from hollow Places, much lower than the River, the Water should rise higher than the River. Lastly, who can imagin that Waters issuing out of Holes and hollow Parts of the Earth, should raise the River to such a height, as to overflow almost all the Land of Egypt? But I let pass this vain Imagination of Casting up the Soyl, and lodging of Waters in the Bowels of the Earth, being so easily to be confuted. The River Meander hath cast up a great Tract of Land in Asia, whereas at the time of the Rising of Nile, nothing of that kind in the least can be seen.

In the same manner the River Archelous in Arcadia, and Cephesus in Beotia, which runs down from Phocea, have cast up great quantities of Earth, by both which the Writer is convicted of falsity: And indeed no Man is to expect any certainty from Ephorus, who may be palpably discern'd not to make it his business in many things to declare the Truth. The Philosophers indeed in Memphis have urg'd strong Reasons of the Increase of Nile, which are hard to be confuted; and though they are improbable, yet many agree to them. For they divide the Earth into Three Parts, one of which is that wherein we inhabit; another quite contrary to these Places in the Seasons of the Year; the Third lying between these Two, which they say is uninhabitable by reason of the scorching heat of the Sun; and therefore if Nile should overflow in the Winter-time, it would be clear and evident, that its Source would arise out of our Zone, because then we have the most Rain: But on the contrary being that it rises in Summer, it's very probable that in the Country opposite to us it's Winter-time, where then there's much Rain, and that those Floods of Water are brought down thence to us: And therefore that none can ever find out the Head-Springs of Nile, because the River has its Course through the opposite Zone; which is uninhabited. And the exceeding sweetness of the Water, they say, is the Confirmation of this Opinion; for passing through the Torrid Zone, the Water is boil'd, and therefore this River is sweeter than any other in the World; for Heat does naturally dulcorate Water. But this Reason is easily refuted; for its plainly impossible that the River should rise to that height, and come down to us from the opposite Zone; especially if it be granted that the Earth is round. But if any yet shall be so obstinate as to affirm it is so as the Philosophers have said, I must in short say it's against and contrary to the Laws of Nature.

For being they hold Opinions that in the nature of the things can hardly be disprov'd, and place an inhabitable part of the World between us and them that are opposite to us; they conclude, that by this device, they have made it impossible, and out of the reach of the Wit of Man to confute them. But it is but just and equal, that those who affirm any thing positively, should prove what they say, either by good Authority or strength of Reason. How comes it about that only the River Nile should come down to us from the other opposite Zone? Have we not other Rivers that this may be as well apply'd to? As to the Causes alledg'd for the sweetness of the Water, they are absur'd: For if the Water be boyl'd with the parching Heat, and thereupon becomes sweet, it would have no productive


Page 21

quality, either of Fish or other Kinds of Creatures and Beasts; for all Water whose Nature is chang'd by Fire, is altogether incapable to breed any living thing, and therefore being that the Nature of Nile contradicts this decoction and boyling of the Water, we conclude that the Causes alledg'd of its increase are false.

The Opinion of Oenopides of Chios is this: The Waters (say he) that are under the Earth in Summer-time, are cold, and warm in the Winter, as we see by experience in deep Wells; for in a sharp Winter they are the least cold, but in Summer they are the coldest of any other time; and therefore, saith he, there's good reason that Nile in the Winter should grow low and contracted, because the Heat in the Bowels of the Earth exhales much of the Water, which cannot be supply'd, in regard no Rains fall in Egypt. But in Summer-time, when the Waters that lye deep in the Earth are no longer exhal'd, then the Channel of the River, according to the order of Nature, fills without any obstruction. But to this it may be answer'd, that many Rivers in Africa, whose Mouths lye parallel with this River, and run the like Course, yet overflow not like Nile. For on the contrary they rise in Winter, and fall in Summer, which clearly evinces his Falsity, who endeavours with a shew of Reason to oppose the Truth. But to the true cause, Agartharchides of Cnidus comes nearest. For he says, that in the Mountainous parts of Ethiopia, there are Yearly continual Rains from the Summer Solstice to the Equinox in Autumn, and therefore there's just cause for Nile to be low in the Winter, which then flows only from its own natural Spring-heads, and to overflow in Summer through the abundance of Rains. And though none hitherto have been able to give a Reason of these Inundations, yet he says his Opinion is not altogether to be rejected; for there are many things that are contrary to the Rules of Nature, for which none are able to give any substantial Reason. That which happens in some parts of Asia, he says, gives some confirmation to his Opinion. For in the Confines of Scythia, near Mount Caucasus, after the Winter is over, he affirms, that abundance of Snow falls every Year for many Days together: And that in the Northern Parts of India, at certain Times, there falls abundance of Hail, and of an incredible Bigness: And that near the River Hydaspis; in Summer-time, it rains continually; and the same happens in Ethiopia for many Days together; and that this disorder of the Air whirling about, occasions many Storms of Rain in Places near adjoyning; and that therefore it's no wonder if the Mountainous Parts of Ethiopia, which lies much higher than Egypt, are soakt with continual Rains, wherewith the River being fill'd, overflows; especially since the natural Inhabitants of the Place affirm, that thus it is in their Country. And though these things now related, are in their nature contrary to those in our own Climates, yet we are not for that Reason to disbelieve them. For with us the South Wind is cloudy and boysterous, whereas in Ethiopia it's calm and clear; and that the North Winds in Europe are fierce and violent, but in those Regions low and almost insensible.

But however (after all) though we could heap up variety of Arguments against all these Authors concerning the Inundation of Nile, yet those which we have before alledg'd shall suffice, lest we should transgress those Bounds of Brevity which at the first we propos'd to our selves. Having therefore divided this Book, because of the Largeness of it, into Two Parts (having before determin'd to keep within moderate Bounds) we shall now end the first part of this Treatise, and continue in the other, those things that are further remarkable in Egypt coherent with those before, beginning with the Actions of the Kings of Egypt, and the antient way of Living among the Egyptians.


Page 22

THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST BOOK OF Diodorus the Sicilian.

CHAP. IV.

The First way of Living of the Egyptians: Gods and Demy-Gods their Reigns in Egypt. The antient Kings of Egypt, Menis, &c. Their several Works. Thebes built by Busiris. The stately Sepulchers, Oblisks and Temples there. A Description of Osimanduas's Sepulcher. Memphis built by Uchoreus. Meris's Lake. Sesostris or Sesoosis his famous Expedition, and great Works.

THE First Book of Diodorus is divided into Two Parts by reason of the Greatness of it; the First whereof is as a Preface to the whole Work, and in which an Account is given of what the Egyptians say concerning the Beginning of the World, of the first Creation of the Universe, and of those Gods that built Cities in Egypt, and call'd them after their own Names; of the First Men, and their antient way of Living; of the Worship of the Gods, and the building of Temples by the Egyptians. Moreover of the Situation of Egypt, and what strange things are related of Nile; the Causes of its Inundation, and the various Opinions of Philosophers and Historians concerning it: Wherein likewise is set down the Confutations of the several Writers. In this we shall handle and go through those matters that have a dependance upon the former.

After we have distinctly set forth the antient way of Living among the Egyptians, we shall then begin with their first Kings, and declare the Acts of every one of them successively down to Amasis.

They say the Egyptians in antient Times fed upon nothing but Roots and Herbs, and Colewort Leaves, which grew in the Fens and Bogs, having first try'd the Taste of them: But above all and most commonly, they fed upon the Herb call'd Agrostis, because it was sweeter than any other, and was very nourishing to Mens Bodies: And it's very certain, that the Cattel much covet it, and grow very fat with it. At this Day therefore Superstitious Persons in memory of its usefulness when they Sacrifice to the Gods, they worship them with their Hands full of this Herb: For they conceive Man from the frame of his Nature and frothy Constitution, to be a watery Creature, something resembling the Fenny and Marish Ground, and that he hath more need of moist than of dry Food. They say the Egyptians afterwards fell to another Course of Diet, and that was eating of Fish, wherewith they were plentifully supply'd by the River, especially after the Inundation; when it was return'd within its former Bounds: And they eat likewise the Flesh of some Cattel, and cloath'd themselves with their Skins. That they


Page 23

made their Houses of Reeds, of which there are some Marks amongst the Shepherds of Egypt at this day, who care for no other Houses, but such like, which they say, serves their turn well enough. Afterwards in process of time, after many Ages, they fell to those Fruits which were made more apt and fit for Mans Food, amongst which was Bread made of Lotus, which invention some attribute to Isis, others to Menas, one of the antient Kings: The Priests indeed do make Hermes the Inventer of all Arts and Sciences, but say, that their Kings found out all things necessary for the Support of Mens lives; and therefore that Kingdoms antiently were not inheritable, but given to such as had been most useful and serviceable to the People, thereby either to induce their Kings to be kind and beneficial to all their Subjects, or for that (as most agreeable to the Truth) it was a Law registred in their Sacred Records commanding them so to do.

At the first (as some of them, i. e. the Priests have fabulously reported) the Gods and Demy-Gods reign'd in Egypt for the space almost of Eighteen Thousand Years, the last of which was Orus, the Son of Isis. Afterwards they say that Men reign'd there for the space of Fifteen Thousand Years, to the Hundred and Eightieth Olympiad, at which time I my self came into Egypt in the Reign of Ptolemy, who took upon him the Name of Dionysius the Younger. Most of their Kings were Natives of the Country. There were a few in the mean time that were Ethiopians, Persians and Macedonians. Four of them that were Ethiopians, reign'd not in a continued Line, but at several times, for the space of Thirty Six Years or thereabouts: From the time that Cambyses conquer'd the Nation, the Persians reign'd for the space of a Hundred Thirty Five Years, reckoning the Defections of the Egyptians within the time occasion'd by the intolerable Cruelty of the Governours, and their Impiety against the Egyptian Gods. Last of all, the Macedonians tul'd there for the space of Two Hundred Seventy Six Years. The rest of the Princes were Egyptians, to the number of Four Hundred and Seventy Men, and Five Women. The Egyptian Priests keep Registers in their Temples of all their Kings successively from many Generations past; to what Greatness and Majesty every one of them arriv'd; what were their particular Tempers and Inclinations, and their Actions in their several times. To write particularly of every one of them, as it would be tedious, so it would be altogether superfluous, inas much as many things concerning them are insignificant, and of no use; and therefore we have limited our selves to treat only of those Matters that are most remarkable and worthy remembrance.

After the Gods (they say) Menas was the First King of Egypt. He taught the People the Adoration of the Gods, and the manner of Divine Worship; how to adorn their Beds and Tables with rich Cloaths and Coverings, and was the first that brought in a delicate and sumptuous way of Living.

Many Ages after, reign'd Gnephachthus, Father of Bocchoris the Wise; who leading an Army into Arabia, through many barren and desert Places, his Provision fail'd, so that for the space of one day he was forc'd to take up with such mean Food as the common People, among whom he happen'd then to be, could supply him with, which he eat so heartily, and relisht with so much delight, as for the future he forbad all Excess and Luxury, and curs'd that King who first brought in that Sumptuous and Luxurious way of Living; and this change and alteration of Meat and Drink and Bedding was so delightful to him, that he order'd the Curse before mention'd, to be enter'd in the Sacred Records in the Temple of Jupiter at Thebes; which was the chief Reason why the Fame and Reputation of Menas became to be clouded in future Generations.

They say, the Posterity of Gnephachthus, to the number of Fifty Two, reign'd for the space of Fourteen Hundred Years; in which time there's found nothing worthy of Remark.

Afterwards reign'd Busiris, and Eight of his Posterity after him; the last of which (of the same Name with the First) built that great City which the Egyptians call Heliopolis, the Greeks Thebes; it was in Circuit a Hundred and Forty Furlongs, adorn'd with stately publick Buildings, magnificent Temples, and rich Donations and Revenues to Admiration; and that he built all the Private Houses, some Four, and others Five Stories high. And to sum up all in a word, made it not only the most beautiful and stateliest City of Egypt, but of all others in the World. The Fame therefore of the Riches and Grandure of this City was so nois'd abroad in every Place, that the Poet Homer takes notice of it in these Words—


Page 24

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

—Nor Thebes so much renown'd, 

Whose Courts with unexhausted Wealth abound,

Where through a Hundred Gates with Marble Arch,

To Battel Twenty Thousand Chariots march.

Although there are some that say it had not a Hundred Gates; but that there were many large Porches to the Temples, whence the City was call'd Hecatompylus, a Hundred Gates, for many Gates: Yet that it was certain they had in it Twenty Thousand Chariots of War; for there were a Hundred Stables all along the River from Memphis to Thebes towards Lybia, each of which were capable to hold Two Hundred Horses, the Marks and Signs of which are visible at this day: And we have it related, that not only this King, but the succeeding Princes from time to time, made it their Business to beautify this City; for that there was no City under the Sun so adorn'd with so many and stately Monuments of Gold, Silver and Ivory, and multitudes of Colossus's and Obelisks, cut out of one entire Stone. For there were there Four Temples built, for Beauty and Greatness to be admir'd, the most ancient of which was in Circuit Thirteen Furlongs, and Five and Forty Cubits high, and had a Wall Four and Twenty Foot broad. The Ornaments of this Temple were suitable to its Magnificence, both for Cost and Workmanship. The Fabrick hath continu'd to our Time, but the Silver and the Gold, and Ornaments of Ivory and Precious Stones were carry'd away by the Persians, when Cambyses burnt the Temples of Egypt. At which time they say those Palaces at Persepolis and Susa, and other Parts of Media (famous all the World over) were built by the Persians, who brought over these rich Spoils into Asia, and sent for Workmen out of Egypt for that purpose. And it is reported, that the Riches of Egypt were then so great, that in the Rubbish and Cynders there were found and gather'd up above Three Hundred Talents of Gold, and of Silver no less than Two Thousand and Three Hundred.

There, they say, are the wonderful Sepulchers of the ancient Kings, which for State and Grandure far exceed all that Posterity can attain unto at this Day. The Egyptian Priests say that in their Sacred Registers, there are enter'd Seven and Forty of these Sepulchers; but in the Reign of Ptolemy Lagus, there remain'd only Seventeen, many of which were ruin'd and destroy'd when I my self came into those Parts, which was in the Hundred and Eightieth Olympiad. And these things are not only reported by the Egyptian Priests out of their Sacred Records, but many of the Gr

•cians

 who travel'd to Thebes in the time of Ptolemy Lagus, and writ Histories of Egypt (among whom was Hecateus) agree with what we have related. Of the First Sepulchers (wherein they say the Women of Jupiter were buri'd) that of King Osymanduas was Ten Furlongs in Circuit, at the entrance of which they say, was a Portico of various colour'd Marble, in length Two Hundred Foot, and in height Five and Forty Cubits; thence going forward, you come into a foursquare Stone Gallery, every Square being Four Hundred Foot, supported instead of Pillars, with Beasts, each of one intire Stone, Sixteen Cubits high, carv'd after the antique manner. The Roof was intirely of Stone, each Stone Eight Cubits broad, with an Azure Sky, bespangl'd with Stars. Passing out of this Perystilion, you enter into another Portico much like the former, but more curiously carv'd, and with more variety. At the Entrance stand Three Statues, each of one intire Stone, the Workmanship of Memnon of Sienitas. One of these made in a fitting posture, is the greatest in all Egypt, the measure of his Foot exceeding Seven Cubits; the other Two much less than the former, reaching but to his Knees, the one standing on the right, and the other on the left, being his Daughter and Mother. This Piece is not only commendable for its greatness, but admirable for its Cut and Workmanship, and the Excellency of the Stone; in so great a Work there's not to be discern'd the least Flaw, or any other Blemish.

Upon it there is this Inscription—


Page 25

I am Osimanduas King of Kings; if any would know how great I am, and where I lye, let him excel me in any of my Works.

There was likewise at this Second Gate, another Statue of his Mother, by her self, of one Stone, Twenty Cubits in height; upon her Head were plac'd Three Crowns, to denote she was both the Daughter, Wife and Mother of a King. Near to this Portico they say there was another Gallery or Piazzo, more remarkable than the former, in which were various Sculptures representing his Wars with the Bactrians, who had revolted from him, against whom (it's said) he march'd with Four Hundred Thousand Foot, and Twenty Thousand Horse; which Army he divided into Four Bodies, and appointed his Sons Generals of the whole.

In the first Wall might be seen the King assaulting a Bulwark, inviron'd with the River, and fighting at the Head of his Men against some that make up against him, assisted with a Lion in a terrible manner, which some affirm is to be taken of a true and real Lion, which the King bred up tame, which went along with him in all his Wars, and by his great strength ever put the Enemy to flight. Others make this Construction of it, that the King being a Man of extraordinary Courage and strength, he was willing to trumpet forth his own praises, setting forth the Bravery of his own Spirit, by the representation of a Lion.

In the Second Wall was carv'd the Captives dragg'd after the King, represented without Hands and Privy Members; which was to signifie that they were of effeminate Spirits, and had no Hands when they came to fight.

The Third Wall represented all sorts of Sculptures and curious Images, in which were set forth the King's sacrificing of Oxen, and his Triumphs in that War.

In the middle of the Peristylion, open to the Air at the top, was rear'd an Altar of shining Marble, of excellent Workmanship, and for largeness to be admir'd.

In the last Wall were Two Statues, each of one intire Stone, Seven and Twenty Cubits high: Near to which Three Passages open'd out of the Peristylion, into a stately Room supported with Pillars like to a Theater for Musick; every side of the Theater was Two Hundred Foot Square. In this there were many Statues of Wood, representing the Pleaders and Spectators looking upon the Judges that gave Judgment. Of these there were Thirty carv'd upon one of the Walls. In the middle sat the Chief Justice, with the Image of Truth hanging about his Neck, with his Eyes clos'd, having many Books lying before him: This signify'd that a Judge ought not to take any Bribes, but ought only to regard the Truth and Merits of the Cause.

Next adjoyning was a Gallery full of divers Apartments, in which were all sorts of Delicate Meats ready drest up. Near hereunto is represented the King himself, curiously carv'd and painted in glorious Colours, offering Gold and Silver to the Gods; as much as he yearly receiv'd out of the Gold and Silver Mines. The Sum was there inscrib'd (according to the Rate of Silver) to amount unto Thirty Two Millions of Minas. Next hereunto was the Sacred Library, whereon was inscrib'd these Words, viz. The Cure of the Mind. Adjoyning to this were the Images of all the Gods of Egypt, to every one of whom the King was making Offerings peculiarly belonging to each of them, that Osiris and all his Associates who were plac'd at his Feet, might understand his Piety towards the Gods, and his Righteousness towards Men. Next to the Library was a stately Room, wherein were Twenty Beds to eat upon, richly adorn'd; in this House were the Images of Jupiter and Juno, together with the Kings: And here it's suppos'd the King's Body lies inter'd: Round the Room are many Apartments, wherein are to be seen in curious Painting, all the Beasts that are accounted Sacred in Egypt. Thence are Ascents to the top of the whole Monument of the Sepulcher, which being mounted, appears a Border of Gold round the Tomb of Three Hundred Sixty Five Cubits in Compass, and a Cubit thick; within the Division of every Cubit, were the several Days of the Year ingraven, with the natural rising and setting of the Stars and their Significations, according to the Observations of the Egyptian Astrologers. This Border, they say, was carry'd away by Cambyses and the Persians, when he conquer'd Egypt. In this manner they describe the Sepulcher of King Osimanduas,


Page 26

which seems far to exceed all others both for Magnificence and Curiosity of Workmanship.

The Thebans boast they were the most antient Philosophers and Astrologers of any People of the World, and the first that found out exact Rules for the improvement both of Philosophy and Astrology, the Situation of their Country being such as gave them an Advantage above others, more clearly to discern the rising and setting of the Stars: And that the Months and Years are best and most properly order'd and dispos'd by them; for they measure their Days according to the Motion of the Sun, and not of the Moon; and account Thirty Days to every Month, and add Five Days and a quarter to every Twelve Months; and by this means they compleat the whole Year; but they add no intercalary Months, nor substract any Days, as it is the Custom of many of the Greeks. But these of Thebes seem most accurately to have observ'd the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and from them do so manage their Prognostications, that they certainly foretel every particular Event.

The Eighth of this King's Race, call'd after the Name of his Father Ʋchoreus, built Memphis, the most Famous City of Egypt. For he chose the most convenient Place for it in all the Country, where Nile divides it self into several Branches, and makes that part of the Country call'd Delta, so nam'd from the shape of the Greek Letter Delta, which it resembles. The City being thus conveniently situated at the Head of the River, commands all the Shipping that sail up it. He built it in Circuit a Hundred and Fifty Furlongs, and made it exceeding strong and commodious in this manner: For Nile flowing round the City, and at the time of its inundation covering all round on the South Side, he casts up a mighty Rampart of Earth, both for a Defence to the City against the raging of the River, and as a Bulwark against an Enemy at Land; on every other side likewise he dug a broad and deep Trench, which received the violent Surges of the River, and fill'd every Place round the Rampart with Water, which fortify'd the City to Admiration.

This Place was so commodiously pitcht upon by the Builder, that most of the Kings after him prefer'd it before Thebes, and remov'd the Court thence to this Place: From that time therefore the Magnificence of Thebes began to decrease, and Memphis to increase to the Times of Alexander King of Macedon, who built a City call'd after his own Name, near the Sea, and planted it with Inhabitants, which all the succeeding Kings of Egypt still made it their business to inlarge: For some so beautify'd it with Royal Palaces, some with Ports and Arsenals, and others with magnificent Buildings and rich Donations, that it's judg'd by most to be Second, if not the first City of the whole World.

But we shall treat of this particularly in its proper Time and Place. But the Builder of Memphis after he had finish'd the Rampart and Trench, built Palaces not inferior to others, built elsewhere; yet much below the state and grandure of the former Kings. For the Inhabitants of this Country little value the short time of this present Life; but put an high esteem upon the Name and Reputation of a Virtuous Life after Death; and they call the Houses of the Living, Inns, because they stay in them but a little while; but the Sepulchers of the Dead they call Everlasting Habitations, because they abide in the Graves to infinite Generations. Therefore they are not very curious in the building of their Houses; but in beautifying their Sepulchers they leave nothing undone that can be thought of.

Some have thought that the City of which we have but just now spoken, was so call'd from the Daughter of the Founder, and tell a Fabulous Story, that the River Nile, in the shape of a Bull fell in love with her, and begat Egyptus, famous among the Inhabitants for his admirable Vertue, from whom the whole Country was call'd Egypt; for coming to the Crown by Descent, he was exceeding kind to his Subjects, just and diligent in all his Affairs, and therefore was judg'd justly to merit Honour and Esteem from all, and for his gracious Disposition generally applauded.

After the Death of this King, and Twelve Descents, Miris came to the Crown of Egypt, and built a Portico in Memphis towards the North, more stately and magnificent than any of the rest. And a little above the City, he cut a Dyke for a Pond, bringing it down in length from the City Three Hundred and Five and Twenty Furlongs, whose use was admirable, and


Page 27

the Greatness of the Work incredible. They say it was in Circuit Three Thousand and Six Hundred Furlongs; and in many Places Three Hundred Foot in depth. Who is he therefore that considers the greatness of this Work, that may not justly ask the Question, How many Ten Thousand Men were imploy'd, and how many Years were spent in finishing it? Considering the Benefit and Advantage (by this great Work) brought to the Government, none ever sufficiently could extol it, according to what the Truth of the thing deserv'd. For being that Nile never kept to a certain and constant height in its Inundation, and the fruitfulness of the Country ever depended upon its just proportion, he dug this Lake to receive such Water as was superfluous, that it might neither immoderately overflow the Land, and so cause Fenns and standing Ponds, nor by flowing too little, prejudice the Fruits of the Earth for want of Water. To this end he cut a Trench all along from the River into the Lake, Fourscore Furlongs in length, and Three Hundred Foot broad; into this he let the Water of the River sometimes run, and at other times diverted it, and turn'd it over the Fields of the Husbandmen, at seasonable times, by means of Sluces which he sometimes open'd, and at other times shut up, not without great labour and cost; for these Sluces could not be open'd or shut at a less Charge than Fifty Talents. This Lake continues to the Benefit of the Egyptians for these purposes to our very Days, and is call'd the Lake of Myris or Meris to this Day.

The King left a place in the middle of the Lake, where he built a Sepulcher and Two Pyramids, one for himself, and another for his Queen, a Furlong in Height; upon the Top of which he plac'd Two Marble Statues seated in a Throne, designing by these Monuments to perpetuate the Fame and Glory of his Name to all succeeding Generations. The Revenue arising from the Fish taken in this Lake, he gave to his Wife to buy her Pins, which amounted to a Talent of Silver every Day. For there were in it Two and Twenty sorts of Fish, and so vast a number were taken, that those who were imploy'd continually to salt them up (though they were multitudes of People) could hardly perform it. And these are the things which the Egyptians relate of Myris.

Seven Descents after (they say) Sesoosis reign'd, who excell'd all his Ancestors in great and famous Actions. But not only the Greek Writers differ among themselves about this King, but likewise the Egyptian Priests and Poets relate various and different Stories concerning him: We shall relate such as are most probable and agreeable to those Signs and Marks that are yet remaining in Egypt to confirm them. After his Birth his Father perform'd a noble Act, and becoming a King; he caus'd all throughout Egypt, that were born the same Day with his Son, to be brought together; and together with his Son to be bred up with the same Education, and instructed in the same Discipline and Exercises, conceiving that by being thus familiarly brought up together, and conversing one with another, they would be always most loving and faithful Friends, and the best Fellow-Souldiers in all the Wars. Providing therefore every thing for the purpose, he caus'd the Boys to be exercised daily in the Schools with hard and difficult Labours; as that none should eat till he had run a Hundred and Fourscore Furlongs: And by this means when they came to be at Mens Estate, they were fit either to be Commanders, or undertake any brave or noble Action, both in respect of the vigour and strength of their Bodies, and the excellent Endowments of their Minds.

Sesostris in the first Place being sent with an Army into Arabia, by his Father, (with whom went his Companions that were bred up with him) toil'd and troubl'd himself with the hunting and killing of Wild Beasts; and then having at last overmaster'd all his Fatigues and wants of Water and Provision, he conquer'd all that barbarous Nation, which was never before that time subdu'd. Afterwards being sent into the Western Parts, he conquer'd the greatest part of Lybia, being as yet but a Youth. Coming to the Crown after the Death of his Father, incourag'd by his former Successes, he design'd to subdue and conquer the whole World. Some report that he was stirr'd up by his Daughter Athyrte to undertake the gaining of the Empire of the World; for being a Woman of an extraordinary Understanding, she made it out to her Father, that the Conquest was easie: Others incourag'd him by their Divinations, foretelling his Successes


Page 28

by the Intrals of the Sacrifices, by their Dreams in the Temples, and Prodigies seen in the Air.

There are some also that write that when Sesoosis was born, Vulcan appear'd to his Father in his Sleep, and told him that the Child then born should be Conqueror of the Universe; and that that was the reason why his Father assembled all of the like Age, and bred them up together with his Son, to make way for him with more ease to rise to that height of Imperial Dignity: And that when he was grown to Mans Estate, fully believing what the God had foretold, he undertook at length this Expedition.

To this purpose he first made it his chief Concern, to gain the love and good will of all the Egyptians, judging it necessary in order to effect what he design'd, so far to ingage his Souldiers, as that they should willingly and readily venture, nay lose their Lives for their Generals, and that those whom he should leave behind him, should not contrive or hatch any Rebellion in his Absence: To this end therefore he oblig'd every one to the utmost of his power, working upon some by Mony, others by giving them Lands, and many by free Pardons, and upon all by fair Words, and affable and courteous Behaviour. He pardon'd those that were condemn'd for High Treason, and freed all that were in Prison for Debt, by paying what they ow'd, of whom there was a vast Multitude in the Goals.

He divided the whole Country into Thirty Six Parts, which the Egyptians call Nomi; over every one of which he appointed a Governor, who should take care of the King's Revenue, and manage all other Affairs relating to their several and respective Provinces. Out of these he chose the strongest and ablest Men, and rais'd an Army answerable to the greatness of his Design, to the number of Six Hundred Thousand Foot, and Twenty Four Thousand Horse, and Seven and Twenty Thousand Chariots of War: And over all the several Regiments and Battalions, he made those that had been brought up with him Commanders, being such as had been us'd to Martial Exercises, and from their Childhood hot and zealous after that which was brave and virtuous, and that were knit together as Brothers in Love and Affection, both to the King and one to another; the number of whom were above Seventeen Hundred.

Upon these Companions of his, he bestow'd large Estates in Lands, in the richest Parts of Egypt, that they might not be in the least want of any thing, reserving only their Attendance upon him in the Wars.

Having therefore rendezvouz'd his Army, he march'd first against the Ethiopians, inhabiting the South, and having conquer'd them, forc'd them to pay him Tribute of Ebony, Gold, and Elephant's Teeth.

Then he sent forth a Navy of Four Hundred Sail into the Red Sea, and was the first Egyptian that built long Ships. By the help of this Fleet, he gain'd all the Islands in this Sea, and subdu'd the bordering Nations as far as to India. But he himself marching forward with his Land-Army, conquer'd all Asia: For he not only invaded those Nations which Alexander the Macedonian afterwards subdu'd, but likewise those which he never set foot upon. For he both pass'd over the River Ganges, and likewise pierc'd through all India to the main Ocean. Then he subdu'd the Scythians as far as to the River Tanais, which divides Europe from Asia; where they say he left some of his Egyptians at the Lake Meotis, and gave Original to the Nations of Colchis; and to prove that they were originally Egyptians, they bring this Argument, that they are circumcis'd after the manner of the Egyptians, which Custom continu'd in this Colony as it did amongst the Jews. In the same manner he brought into his Subjection all the rest of Asia, and most of the Islands of the Cyclades. Thence passing over into Europe, he was in danger of losing his whole Army, through the difficulty of the Passages, and want of Provision. And therefore putting a stop to his Expedition in Thrace, up and down in all his Conquests, he erected Pillars, whereon were inscrib'd in Egyptian Letters, call'd Hieroglifics, these Words—
 

Sesoosis, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, subdu'd this Country by his Arms.

Among those Nations that were stout and warlike, he carv'd upon those Pillars the Privy Members of a Man: Amongst them that were cowardly and fainthearted, the secret Parts of a Woman; conceiving that the chief and principal


Page 29

Member of a Man would be a clear Evidence to Posterity of the Courage of every one of them. In some Places he set up his own Statue, carv'd in Stone (arm'd with a Bow and a Lance) above Four Cubits and Four Hands in height, of which stature he himself was.

Having now spent Nine Years in this Expedition, (carrying himself courteously and familiarly towards all his Subjects in the mean time) he ordered the Nations he had conquer'd, to bring their Presents and Tributes every Year into Egypt, every one proportionable to their several Abilities: And he himself with the Captives and the rest of the Spoils (of which there was a vast quantity) return'd into Egypt, far surpassing all the Kings before him in the greatness of his Actions and Atchievements. He adorn'd all the Temples of Egypt with rich Presents, and the Spoils of his Enemies. Then he rewarded his Souldiers that had serv'd him in the War, every one according to their Desert. It's most certain that the Army not only return'd loaded with Riches, and receiv'd the Glory and Honour of their approv'd Valour, but the whole Country of Egypt reapt many Advantages by this Expedition.

Sesoosis having now disbanded his Army, gave leave to his Companions in Arms, and Fellow Victors, to take their ease, and injoy the Fruits of their Conquest. But he himself fir'd with an earnest desire of Glory, and ambitious to leave behind him eternal Monuments of his Memory, made many fair and stately Works, admirable both for their Cost and Contrivance, by which he both advanc'd his own Immortal Praise, and procur'd unspeakable Advantages to the Egyptians, with perfect Peace and Security for the time to come. For beginning first with what concern'd the Gods, he built a Temple in all the Cities of Egypt, to that God whom every particular place most ador'd; and he imploy'd none of the Egyptians in his Works, but finish'd all by the labours of the Captives; and therefore he caus'd an Inscription to be made upon all the Temples thus, None of the Natives were put to labour here. It's reported that some of the Babylonian Captives, because they were not able to bear the fatigue of the Work, rebell'd against the King; and having possess'd themselves of a Fort near the River, they took up Arms against the Egyptians, and wasted the Country thereabouts: but at length having got a Pardon, they chose a Place for their Habitation, and call'd it after the Name of that in their own Country, Babylon. Upon the like occasion they say that Troy situated near the River Nile, was so call'd: For Menelaus, when he return'd from Ilium with many Prisoners, arriv'd in Egypt, where the Trojans deserting the King, seiz'd upon a certain strong place, and took up Arms against the Greeks, till they had gain'd their Liberty, and then built a famous City after the name of their own. But I am not ignorant how Ctesias the Cretian gives a far different account of these Cities, when he says, that some of those who came in former times with Semiramis into Egypt, call'd the Cities which they built, after the Names of those in their own Country. But it's no easie matter to know the certain truth of these things: Yet it's necessary to observe the different Opinions concerning them, that the Judicious Reader may have an occasion to inquire, in order to pick out the real Truth.

Sesoosis moreover rais'd many Mounts and Banks of Earth, to which he remov'd all the Cities that lay low and in the plain, that both Man and Beast might be safe and secure at the time of the Inundation of the River. He cut likewise many deep Dykes from the River, all along as far as from Memphis to the Sea, for the ready and quick conveying of Corn and other Provision and Merchandize by short Cuts thither, both for the support of Trade and Commerce and maintenance of Peace and Plenty all over the Country: And that which was of greatest moment and concern of all, was, that he fortify'd all Parts of the Country against Incursions of Enemies, and made it difficult of access; whereas before the greatest part of Egypt lay open and expos'd either for Chariots or Horsemen to enter. But now by reason of the multitude of Canals drawn all along from the River, the Entrance was very difficult, and the Country not so easily to be invaded. He defended likewise the East side of Egypt against the Irruptions of the Syrians and Arabians, with a Wall drawn from Ielusium through the Deserts, as far as to Heliopolis, for the space of a Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs. He caus'd likewise a Ship to be made of Cedar, Two Hundred and Fourscore Cubits in length, guilded over with Gold on the outside, and with Silver within; and this he dedicated to the God that was most ador'd by the Thebans. He erected likewise Two


Page 30

Obelisks of Polish'd Marble, a Hundred and Twenty Cubits high, on which were inscrib'd a Description of the large Extent of his Empire, the great value of his Revenue, and the number of the Nations by him conquer'd. He plac'd likewise at Memphis, in the Temple of Vulcan, his and his Wives Statues, each of one intire Stone, Thirty Cubits in height, and those of his Sons, Twenty Cubits high, upon this occasion. After his return from his great Expedition into Egypt, being at Pelusium, his Brother at a Feast having invited him, together with his Wife and Children, plotted against his Life; for being all overcome by Wine, and gone to rest, he caus'd a great quantity of dry Reeds (long before prepar'd for the purpose) to be plac'd round the King's Pavilion in the Night, and set them all on Fire; upon which the Flame suddenly mounted aloft; and little assistance the King had either from his Servants or Life-guard, who were all still overloaden with Wine: Upon which Sesostris with his Hands lift up to Heaven, calling upon the Gods for help for his Wife and Children, rusht through the Flames and escap'd; and so being thus unexpectedly preserv'd, he made Oblations as to other of the Gods (as is before said) so especially to Vulcan, as he by whose Favour he was so remarkably deliver'd.

Although Sesostris was eminent in many great and worthy Actions, yet the most stately and magnificent of all, was that relating to the Princes in his Progresses. For those Kings of the conquer'd Nations, who through his Favour still held their Kingdoms, and such as had receiv'd large Principalities of his free Gift and Donation, came with their Presents and Tributes into Egypt, at the times appointed, whom he receiv'd with all the Marks of Honour and Respect; save that when he went into the Temple or the City, his Custom was to cause the Horses to be unharnest out of his Chariot, and in their Room Four Kings, and other Princes to draw it; hereby thinking to make it evident to all, that there was none comparable to him for Valour, who had conquer'd the most potent and famous Princes in the World. This King seems to have excell'd all others that ever were eminent for Power and Greatness, both as to his Warlike Atchievements, the number of his Gifts and Oblations, and his wonderful Works in Egypt.

After he had reign'd Three and Thirty Years, he fell blind, and wilfully put an end to his own Life; for which he was admir'd not only by Priests, but by all the rest of the Egyptians; for that as he had before manifested the Greatness of his Mind by his Actions, so now his End was agreeable (by a voluntary Death) to the Glory of his Life.

The Fame and Renown of this King continu'd so fresh down to Posterity, that many Ages after, when Egypt was conquer'd by the Persians, and Darius the Father of Xerxes would set up his Statue at Memphis above that of Sesoosis, the Chief Priest in the debating of the matter in the Conclave boldly spoke against it, declaring that Darius had not yet exceeded the noble Acts of Sesoosis. The King was so far from resenting this, that on the contrary he was so pleas'd and taken with this freedom of Speech, that he said he would endeavour (if he liv'd as long as the other did) to be nothing inferiour to him; and wisht them to compare things done proportionable to the time, for that this was the justest examination and trial of Valour. And thus much shall suffice to be said of Sesoosis.


Page 31

CHAP V.

The Acts of Sesostris the Second. Of Ammosis, Actisanes, Mendes, Proteus or Cetes, Remphis, Chemmis (the great Pyramids built by him) Cephres, Mycerinus, Bocchoris, Sabach. The Reign of Twelve Kings in Egypt. Psammetichus Saites, one of the Kings, gain'd the whole; Two Hundred Thousand of his Army forsook him, and settle themselves in Ethiopia. Apries succeeds long after. Amasis rebels, and next succeeds; and Apries is strangled by the People. Amasis the last King, to the time of the Conquest of Egypt by Cambyses.

THE Son of Sesostris succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, and took upon him the same Name, yet perform'd nothing remarkable by his Arms; but the Affliction and Misery that befel him was observable; for he became blind, as his Father did before him, deriving the Malady either from his Father in his Birth, or as a Judgment upon him for his Impiety against the River, against which (as its fabulously reported) he threw his Javelin; whereupon falling under this Misfortune, he was forc'd to apply himself for help to the Gods, whom he sought to appease with many Offerings and Sacrifices for a long time together, yet could find no Relief, till at the end of Ten Years he was directed by the Oracle to go and worship the God of Heliopolis, and wash his Face in the Urin of a Woman that never had known any other Man besides her own Husband. Hereupon he began with his own Wife, and made trial of many others, but found none honest except a Gardener's Wife, whom he afterwards marry'd when he was recover'd. All the Adulteresses he caus'd to be burnt in a little Village, which from this Execution the Egyptians call'd the Holy Field, to testify his Gratitude to the God of Heliopolis for this great Benefit. At the Command of the Oracle he erected Two Obelisks, each of one entire Stone, Eight Cubits in breadth, and a hundred in height, and dedicated them to the Deity.

After this Sesostris the Second, were many Successions of Kings in Egypt, of whom there's nothing worth remark to be found. But many Ages after, Ammosis came to the Crown, who carry'd it Tyrannically towards his Subjects. For he put many to Death against all Law and Justice, and as many he stript of all they had, and turn'd them out of their Estates, and carry'd himself haughtily and proudly in every thing towards all Persons he had to deal with. This the poor oppress'd People indur'd for a time, while they had no power to resist those that overpower'd them. But as soon as Actisanes King of Ethiopia invaded him (having now an opportunity to discover their Hatred, and to revenge themselves) most of his Subjects revolted from him, so that he was easily conquer'd, and Egypt became subject to the Kings of Ethiopia.

Actisanes bore his Prosperity with great Moderation, and carried himself kindly and obligingly towards all his Subjects. Against Robbers he contriv'd a notable Device, neither putting them that were guilty to Death, nor wholly acquitting or discharging them from Punishment. For he caus'd all that were guilty, to be brought together from all parts of the Country, and after a just and strict inquiry, and certain Knowledge of their Guilt, he order'd all their Noses to be cut off, and banisht them into the utmost parts of the Desart; and built a City for them, call'd from the cutting off of the Noses of the Inhabitants, Rhinocorura, which is situated in the Confines of Egypt and Syria, in a barren Place, destitute of all manner of Provision. All the Country round about is full of Salt and brackish Ponds, and the Wells within the Walls, afford but very little Water, and that stinking and very bitter. And he sent them to this Place on purpose that they might not for the future do any more hurt, nor lye lurking and unknown among other Men. But being banished to such a barren Place, void almost of all things necessary for the support of Man's Life (Men naturally Contriving all manner of Arts to prevent starving) they wittily found out a way to supply their Wants. For they cut up out of the Neighbouring Fields, Reeds, and flit them in several pieces, and made long Nets of them, and plac'd them several Furlongs all along


Page 32

upon the Shoar, with which they catcht the Quails (which came flying over Sea in great Flocks) and by that means sufficiently provided for themselves.

After this King's Death the Egyptians recover'd their Liberty, and set up a King of their own Nation to rule over them, Mendes (whom some call Marus) who never undertook any Warlike Design, but made a Sepulcher for himself call'd a Labyrinth, not to be admir'd so much for Its greatness, as it was unimitable for its Workmanship. For he that went in, could not easily come out again, without a very skilful Guide. Some say that Dedalus, who came into Egypt, admir'd the Curiosity of this Work, and made a Labyrinth for Minos King of Creet, like to this in Egypt, in which they fabulously relate the Minotaur was kept. But that in Creet was either ruin'd by some of their Kings, or came to nothing through length of Time, but that in Egypt continu'd whole and entire to our Days.

After the Death of this Mendes, and Five Generations spent (during which time there was an Interregnum) the Egyptians chose one Cetes, of an ignoble Extraction, to be their King, whom the Grecians call Proteus; this fell out in the time of the Trojan War. This Prince, they say, was a Magician, and could transform himself sometimes into the shape of a Beast, other times into a Tree, or Appearance of Fire, or any other Form and Shape whatsoever. And this agrees with the Account the Priests of Egypt give of him; from his daily Converse with the Astrologers, they say, he learnt this Art. The Greeks rais'd this Story of Transformation, from a Custom amongst the Kings; for the Egyptian Princes us'd to wear upon their Heads (as Badges of their Royal Authority) the shapes of Lions, Bulls and Dragons; and sometimes to fix upon their Heads Sprouts of Trees, Fire and strong Perfumes of Frankincense, and other sweet Odours. And with these they both adorn'd themselves, and struck a Terror and Superstitious Awe into the Hearts of their Subjects at one and the same time.

After the Death of Proteus, his Son Remphis succeeded him, who spent all his Time in filling his Coffers, and heaping up Wealth. The poorness of his Spirit, and his sordid Covetousness was such, that they would not suffer him to part with any thing, either for the worship of the Gods, or the good of Mankind; and therefore more like a good Steward than a King, instead of a Name for Valour, and noble Acts, he left vast Heaps of Treasure behind him, greater than any of the Kings that ever were before him: For it's said he had a Treasure of Four Hundred Thousand Talents of Gold and Silver.

After this King's Death, for Seven Generations together, there reign'd successively a Company of Kings, who gave themselves up to Sloath and Idleness, and did nothing but wallow in Pleasures and Luxury; and therefore there's no Record of any great Work, or other thing worthy to be remembred that ever any of them did, except Nile, who call'd the River after his own Name, which was before call'd Egyptus. For being that he cut many Canals and Dikes in convenient Places, and us'd his utmost endeavour to make the River more useful and serviceable, it was therefore call'd Nile.

Chemmis the Eighth King from Remphis, was of Memphis, and reign'd Fifty Years. He built the greatest of the Three Pyramids, which were accounted amongst the Seven Wonders of the World. They stand towards Lybia Hundred and Twenty Furlongs from Memphis, and Five and Forty from Nile. The Greatness of these Works, and the excessive Labour of the Workmen seen in them, do even strike the Beholders with Admiration and Astonishment. The greatest being Four-square, took up on every Square Seven Hundred Foot of Ground in the Basis, and above Six Hundred Foot in height, spiring up narrower by little and little, till it come up to the Point, the Top of which was Six Cubits Square. It's built of solid Marble throughout, of rough Work, but of perpetual Duration: For though it be now a Thousand Years since it was built (some say above Three Thousand and Four Hundred) yet the Stones are as firmly joynted, and the whole Building as intire and without the least decay, as they were at the first laying and Erection. The Stone, they say, was brought a long way off, out of Arabia, and that the Work was rais'd by making Mounts of Earth; Cranes and other Engines being not known at that time. And that which is most to be admir'd at, is to see such a Foundation so imprudently laid, as it seems to be, in a Sandy Place, where there's not the least Sign of any Earth cast up, nor Marks where any Stone was cut and polish'd; so that the whole Pile seems to be rear'd all at once, and fixt in the midst of Heaps of Sand by some God, and not built by


Page 33

degrees by the Hands of Men. Some of the Egyptians tell wonderful things, and invent strange Fables concerning these Works, affirming that the Mounts were made of Salt and Salt-Peter, and that they were melted by the Inundation of the River, and being so dissolv'd, every thing was washt away but the Building it self. But this is not the Truth of the thing; but the great multitude of Hands that rais'd the Mounts, the same carry'd back the Earth to the Place whence they dug it; for they say there were Three Hundred and Sixty Thousand Men imploy'd in this Work, and the Whole was scarce compleated in Twenty Years time.

When this King was dead, his Brother Cephres succeeded him, and reign'd Six and Fifty Years: Some say it was not his Brother, but his Son Chabryis that came to the Crown: But all agree in this, that the Successor, in imitation of his Predecessor, erected another Pyramid like to the former, both in Structure and Artificial Workmanship, but not near so large, every square of the Basis being only a Furlong in Breadth.

Upon the greater Pyramid was inscrib'd the value of the Herbs and Onions that were spent upon the Labourers during the Works, which amounted to above Sixteen Hundred Talents.

There's nothing writ upon the lesser: The Entrance and Ascent is only on one side, cut by steps into the main Stone. Although the Kings design'd these Two for their Sepulchers, yet it hapen'd that neither of them were there buri'd. For the People being incens'd at them by the reason of the Toyl and Labour they were put to, and the cruelty and oppression of their Kings, threatned to drag their Carkases out of their Graves, and pull them by piece-meal, and cast them to the Dogs; and therefore both of them upon their Beds commanded their Servants to bury them in some obscure place.

After him reign'd Mycerinus (otherwise call'd Cherinus) the Son of him who built the first Pyramid. This Prince began a Third, but died before it was finish'd; every square of the Basis was Three Hundred Foot. The Walls for fifteen Stories high were of black Marble like that of Thebes, the rest was of the same Stone with the other Pyramids. Though the other Pyramids went beyond this in greatness, yet this far excell'd the rest in the Curiosity of the Structure, and the largeness of the Stones. On that side of the Pyramid towards the North, was inscrib'd the Name of the Founder Mycerinus. This King they say detesting the severity of the former Kings, carried himself all his Days gently and graciously towards all his Subjects, and did all that possibly he could to gain their Love and Good Will towards him; besides other things, he expended vast Sums of Money upon the Oracles and Worship of the Gods; and bestowing large Gifts upon honest Men whom he judg'd to be injur'd, and to be hardly dealt with in the Courts of Justice.

There are other Pyramids, every Square of which are Two Hundred Foot in the Basis; and in all things like unto the other, except in bigness. It's said that these Three last Kings built them for their Wives.

It is not in the least to be doubted, but that these Pyramids far excel all the other Works throughout all Egypt, not only in the Greatness and Costs of the Building, but in the Excellency of the Workmanship: For the Architects (they say) are much more to be admir'd than the Kings themselves that were at the Cost. For those perform'd all by their own Ingenuity, but these did nothing but by the Wealth handed to them by descent from their Predecessors, and by the Toyl and Labour of other Men.

Yet concerning the first Builders of these Pyramids, there's no Consent, either amongst the Inhabitants or Historians. For some say they were built by the Kings before mention'd, some by others.

As that the greatest was built by Armeus, the Second by Amasis, and the Third by Inaronas: But some say that this last was the Sepulcher of one Rhodopides, a Curtesan, and was built in remembrance of her, at the common Charge of some of the Governors of the Provinces, who were her Amours.

Bocchoris was the next who succeeded in the Kingdom, a very little Man for Body, and of a mean and contemptible Presence; but as to his Wisdom and Prudence far excelling all the Kings that ever were before him in Egypt.


Page 34

A long time after him, one Sabach an Ethiopian came to the Throne, going beyond all his Predecessors in his Worship of the Gods, and kindness to his Subjects. Any Man may judge and have a clear Evidence of his gentle Disposition in this, that when the Laws pronounc'd the severest Judgment (I mean Sentence of Death) he chang'd the Punishment, and made an Edict that the Condemn'd Persons should be kept to work in the Towns in Chains, by whose Labour he rais'd many Mounts, and made many Commodious Canals; conceiving by this means he should not only moderate the severity of the Punishment, but instead of that which was unprofitable, advance the publick Good, by the Service and Labours of the Condemn'd. A Man may likewise judge of his extraordinary Piety from his Dream, and his Abdication of the Government; for the Tutelar God of Thebes, seem'd to speak to him in his Sleep, and told him that he could not long reign happily and prosperously in Egypt, except he cut all the Priests in Pieces, when he pass'd through the midst of them with his Guards and Servants; which Advice being often repeated, he at length sent for the Priests from all parts, and told them that if he staid in Egypt any longer, he found that he should displease God, who never at any time before by Dreams or Visions commanded any such thing. And that he would rather be gone and lose his Life, being pure and innocent, than displease God, or injoy the Crown of Egypt, by staining his Life with the horrid Murder of the Innocent. And so at length giving up the Kingdom into the Hands of the People, he return'd into Ethiopia. Upon this there was an Anarchy for the space of Two Years; but the People falling into Tumults and intestine Broyls and Slaughters one of another, Twelve of the chief Nobility of the Kingdom joyn'd in a Solemn Oath, and then calling a Senate at Memphis, and making some Laws for the better directing and cementing of them in mutual peace and fidelity, they took upon them the Regal Power and Authority. After they had govern'd the Kingdom very amicably for the space of Fifteen Years, (according to the Agreement which they had mutually sworn to observe) they apply'd themselves to the building of a Sepulcher, where they might all lye together; that as in their Life-time they had been equal in their Power and Authority, and had always carried it with love and respect one towards another; so after Death (being all bury'd together in one Place) they might continue the Glory of their Names in one and the same Monument. To this end they made it their business to excel all their Predecessors in the greatness of their Works: For near the Lake of Myris in Lybia, they built a Four-square Monument of Polish'd Marble, every square a Furlong in length, for curious Carvings and other pieces of Art, not to be equall'd by any that should come after them. When you are enter'd within the Wall, there's presented a stately Fabrick, supported round with Pillars, Forty on every side: The Roof was of one intire Stone, whereon was curiously carv'd Racks and Mangers for Horses, and other excellent pieces of Workmanship, and painted and adorn'd with divers sorts of Pictures and Images; where likewise were portray'd the Resemblances of the Kings, the Temples, and the Sacrifices in most beautiful Colours. And such was the Cost and Stateliness of this Sepulcher, begun by these Kings, that (if they had not been dethron'd before it was perfected) none ever after could have exceeded them in the state and magnificence of their Works. But after they had reign'd over Egypt Fifteen Years, all of them but one lost their Sovereignty in the manner following.

Psammeticus Saites, one of the Kings, whose Province was upon the Sea Coasts, traffickt with all sorts of Merchants, and especially with the Phenicians and Grecians; by this means inriching his Province, by vending his own Commodities, and the importation of those that came from Greece, he not only grew very wealthy, but gain'd an interest in the Nations and Princes abroad; upon which account he was envy'd by the rest of the Kings, who for that reason made War upon him. Some antient Historians tell a Story, That these Princes were told by the Oracle, That which of them should first pour Wine out of a brazen Viol to the God ador'd at Memphis, should be sole Lord of all Egypt. Whereupon Psammeticus when the Priest brought out of the Temple Twelve Golden Viols, pluckt off his Helmet, and pour'd out a Wine Offering from thence; which when his Collegues took notice of, they forbore putting him to death, but depos'd him, and banish'd him into the Fenns, bordering upon the Sea-Coasts. Whether therefore it were this, or Envy as is said before, that gave Birth to this Dissention and


Page 35

Difference amongst them, it's certain Psammeticus hir'd Souldiers out of Arabia, Caria and Ionia, and in a Field-Fight near the City Moniemphis, he got the day. Some of the Kings of the other side were slain, and the rest fled into Africa, and were not able further to contend for the Kingdom.

Psammeticus having now gain'd possession of the whole, built a Portico to the East Gate of the Temple at Memphis, in honour of that God, and incompass'd the Temple with a Wall, supporting it with Colosses of Twelve Cubits high in the room of Pillars. He bestow'd likewise upon his Mercenary Souldiers many large Rewards over and above their Pay promis'd them.

He gave them also a Place call'd Stratopedon to inhabit, and divided amongst them by Lot a large piece of Land, a little above the Mouth of Pelusium, whom Amasis (who reign'd many Years after) transplanted to Memphis. Being therefore that he had gain'd the Kingdom by the help of his stipendary Souldiers, he intrusted them chiefly in the concerns of the Government, and entertain'd great numbers of Strangers and Foreigners.

Afterwards undertaking an Expedition into Syria (to honour the Foreigners) he plac'd them in the right Wing of his Army; but out of slight and disregard to the natural Egyptians, he drew up them in the Left; with which Affront the Egyptians were so incens'd, that above Two Hundred Thousand of them revolted, and marcht away towards Ethiopia, there to settle themselves in new Habitations. At first the King sent some of his Captives after them, to make an Apology for the Dishonour done them; but these not being hearken'd unto, the King himself with some of his Nobility follow'd them by Water. But they marcht on, and entred Egypt, near the River Nile, where he earnestly entreated them to alter their purpose, and to remember their Gods, their Country, Wives and Children: They all cry'd out (beating upon their Shields, and shaking their Spears) that as long as they had Arms in their Hands, they could easily gain another Country; and then turning aside the Flaps of their Coats, they shew'd their Privy Members, bawling out, That as long as they were so furnish'd, they should never want Wives or Children. Possess'd with this Resolution and Magnanimity of Mind, they despis'd every thing that by all others are highly priz'd and valu'd, and setled themselves in a rich and fruitful Soyl in Ethiopia, dividing the Land amongst themselves by lot.

Psammeticus laid this greatly to heart, and made it his Business to settle the Affairs of Egypt, and to increase his Revenues, and enter'd into League with the Athenians and other Grecians, and was very kind and liberal to all Strangers that came into Egypt. He was so taken with the Grecians, that he caus'd his Son to be instructed in the Grecian Learning. He was certainly the first of all the Kings of Egypt that incourag'd Foreigners to traffick in his Country, giving safe Conduct to all Strangers that sail'd thither. For the former Kings allow'd no Strangers to come into Egypt, and if any did arrive, they either put them to death, or made them Slaves: And it was the Churlishness of this Nation, which caus'd all that noise among the Greeks concerning the Cruelty and Wickedness of Busiris, though all was not true as it was related, but the extraordinary Severity of the Country gave occasion to the raising of those Fables.

After Psammticeus and Four Generations past, Apries reign'd Two and Twenty Years. He invaded with mighty Forces, Cyprus and Phenicia, and took Sidon by Storm; and through Fear and Terror of him, brought other Cities of Phenicia into Subjection. And having routed the Cyprians and Phenicians in a great Sea-Fight, he return'd into Egypt, loaden with the Spoils of his Enemies. But afterwards sending an Army against Cyrene and Barca, he lost most of them; at which those that escap'd, were extraordinarily inrag'd; and suspecting that he imploy'd them in this Expedition on purpose to have them all cut off, that he might reign the more securely over the rest, they all revolted. For Amasis, a Nobleman of Egypt, being sent against them by the King, not only slighted the King's Commands in endeavouring to make all whole again, but on the contrary incited the Rebels to a higher degree of Rage and Indignation against him, and turn'd Rebel himself, and was created King. And not long after, when the rest of the People all went over to him, the King not knowing what to do, was 

〈◊〉

 to fly for Aid to the stipendiary Souldiers, who were about Thirty Thousand; but being routed in a Field-Fight near to a Town call'd Marius, he was there taken Prisoner and strangl'd.


Page 36

Amasis having setl'd his Affairs in Egypt, so as he judg'd most conducing to the publick good, govern'd the Egyptians with all Justice and Moderation, and by this gain'd the good Will of all the People. He conquer'd also the Cities of Cyprus, and adorn'd the Temples of the Gods with many rich Gifts and Offerings. Having reign'd Five and Fifty Years, he died about the time Cambyses King of Persia first invaded Egypt, in the Third Year of the Sixty Third Olympiad, in which Parmenides of Camarina was Victor.

CHAP. VI.

The Customs of the Egyptians: Of their Kings. Of their Hourly Imployment, Sacrifices, Diet, &c. Their Burials. The division of Egypt. Their Trades in Egypt. Courts of Justice. Their Law Proceedings. The several Laws of Egypt. Beasts and Birds ador'd in Egypt, as Lions, Wolves, Cats, the Bird Ibis, Kites, &c. Costs in their Burial of these Creatures. Reasons given of this Adoration.

SInce sufficient hath been said of the Egyptian Kings from the most ancient Times, to the Death of Amasis, (leaving for a while what remains till a more proper time) we shall now give a brief account of those Laws and Customs of the Egyptians that are most to be admir'd, and may especially delight and profit the Reader. For many of the ancient Customs of the Egyptians were not only allow'd by the natural Inhabitants, but were greatly admir'd by the Grecians, so that every Learn'd Man earnestly coveted to travel into Egypt to learn the Knowledge of their Laws and Customs, as things of great weight and moment: And though the Country anciently forbad all reception to Strangers (for the Reasons before alledg'd) yet some of the Ancients, as Orpheus and Homer, and many of latter times, as Pythagoras the Samian, and Solon the Lawgiver, adventur'd to travel thither. And therefore the Egyptians assirm that Letters, Astronomy, Geometry, and many other Arts were first found out by them; and that the best Laws were made and instituted by them. To confirm which, they alledge this as an undeniable Argument, that the Native Kings of Egypt have reign'd there for the space of above Four Thousand and Seven Hundred Years, and that their Country for all that time has been the most prosperous and flourishing Kingdom in the World, which could never have been so, if the Inhabitants had not been civilized, and brought up under good Laws, and Liberal Education in all sorts of Arts and Sciences. But we shall omit what Herodotus and other Writers of the Egyptian History relate, who wilfully pursue and prefer prodigious Stories before Truth, and relate a company of Fictions meerly for Sport and Diversion sake, and shall give an Account of such things as we have carefully perus'd and examin'd recorded in their Books by the Egyptian Priests.

The First Kings of Egypt liv'd not after the way and manner of other Monarchs, to do what they list, without Controul; but in every thing conform'd themselves to their Laws, not only in the publick Administration of the Government, but in their daily private Conversation, and their very Meals and Diet. For among their Attendants, they had neither Slaves for Servants, nor such as were born in their Houses; but the Sons of the chiefest of the Priests (after they attain'd to the Age of Twenty Years) brought up and educated more nobly than any other of the rest of the Egyptians; that having such noble Attendants upon his Person (of the best and highest Rank in the Kingdom) to be always with him night and day, he might not do any thing that was base and blame-worthy. For no Prince is apt to be very wicked, except he have some ready at Hand to incourage him in his Lusts.

There were Hours set apart in the Night as well as the Day, wherein the King was to do something injoyn'd him by the Laws, and not to indulge himself in his Pleasures.


Page 37

When he rose in the Morning, the first thing he was to do, was to peruse all the publick Letters and Advices sent from all Parts, that he might order his Concerns the better, by having perfect knowledge of all the Affairs of the Kingdom. Then Washing himself, and putting on his Splendid Robes, and the Ensigns and Badges of his Royal Authority, he went to Sacrifice to the Gods.

When the Victims were brought to the Altar, it was the Custom for the High Priest in the presence of the King and People standing round about him, to pray with a loud Voice for the Health and Prosperity of the King, who righteously rul'd and govern'd his Subjects, wherein he recounted all the Virtues of the Prince, his Piety towards the Gods, his kindness to his People; how Continent, Just, Magnanimous and Faithful he was; how Bountiful, and what a Master he was over all inordinate Appetites and Passions; how he was Mild and Gentle in inflicing Punishments upon Offenders, less than their Deserts, and Bountiful in distributing of his Rewards. When the Priest had utter'd these and such like Commendations, he at last pronounc'd a Curse upon all such Offences and Miscarriages as had been ignorantly committed; yet withal, clearing the King, and laying all the Blame and Guilt upon his Ministers and Advisers. And this the Priest did that he might thereby induce and persuade the King to an Awe of the Gods, and to live so as might be pleasing to them; and likewise by Praise and Commendation rather gently to win upon him, than by harsh and rugged Rebukes to drive him to the practice of Virtuous Actions. Afterwards when the King had view'd the Intrals and finish'd his Sacrifices, the Priests read out of the Sacred Records, the Edicts, Laws and most useful and remarkable Actions of such as were most famous in their Generations, that the Prince might seriously consider and ponder upon what was most commendable in those Examples, and imitate them according to the Rules there prescrib'd. For there were not only set Times allotted for dispatch of publick Business, and Administration of Justice, but likewise for taking of the Air, Bathing, lying with the Queen, and almost every action of their Lives.

The Custom was likewise for the Kings to feed upon plain and ordinary Meat, as Veal and Goose, and to drink Wine according to a stinted measure, which might neither overcharge their Stomacks, nor make them drunk. Such a moderate Diet was prescrib'd, as that it seem'd rather to be order'd by a Skilful Physitian for Health sake, than by a Law-maker. It is indeed to be admir'd and very strange, that the King should not be left to his liberty for his daily Food; but much more is it to be admir'd, that he could not do any publick Business, Condemn or Punish any Man to gratify his own Humour or Revenge, or for any other unjust Cause; but was bound to do according as the Laws had ordered in every particular case. The Kings observing those Rules according to the ancient Custom, were so far from thinking it dishonourable, or being uneasy under it, that they lookt upon themselves to live most desirable and happy Lives; and judg'd that all other Men who inconsiderately indulg'd their natural Appetites, did many things that were attended with great Losses, or apparent Hazards at the least; yea, that some, though they know beforehand that what they were about to do was ill and unjustifiable, yet overcome either with Love or Hatred, or some other unruly Passion, committed the wicked act notwithstanding; and therefore they were resolv'd to follow the Rules of living, before approv'd by wise and prudent Men, and not to fall into the least Irregularity. The Kings therefore carrying this even Hand towards ail their Subjects, were more beloved by them than by their own Kindred and Relations: For not only all the Orders of the Priests, but the whole Nation together were more concern'd for the Health and Prosperity of their Kings, than they were for their Wives and Children, or their private Interests in their Goods and Estates; and therefore as long as these wholsom Laws were observ'd amongst 'em, they preserv'd their Government without stain or blemish for many Ages under the Kings before-mention'd, living in the height of all Worldly Happiness: And besides all this, were Conquerors of many Nations, and grew exceeding rich, and their Provinces were beautify'd with many stately magnificent Works, and their Cities adorn'd with many rich Gifts of all sorts.

What the Egyptians perform'd after the Deaths of every of their Kings, clearly evidences the great Love they bore to them. For Honour done him that cannot possibly know it (in a grateful return of a former Benefit) carries along with


Page 38

it a Testimony of Sincerity, without the least colour of Dissimulation. For upon the Death of every King, the Egyptians generally lament with an universal Mourning, rend their Garments, shut up their Temples, inhibit Sacrifices and all Feasts and Solemnities for the space of Seventy Two Days: They cast Dust likewise upon their Heads, and gird themselves under their Breasts with a Linnen Girdle; and thus Men and Women Two Hundred or Three Hundred sometimes in a Company, twice a Day go about singing mournful Songs in praise of the deceas'd King, recalling his Virtues (as it were) from the very Grave. During that time, they neither eat Flesh, nor any thing bak'd or heated by the Fire, and abstain from Wine and all Sumptuous Fare: Neither dare any use Baths or Oyntments, Beds trim'd up, or indulge themselves with Women. But every one (as if they had lost their dearest beloved Child) is in mourning and sadness, and spends all these Days in Lamentation. In the mean time all things are prepar'd in a stately manner for the Funeral, and the last day the Coffin with the Body inclos'd, is set at the Entrance into the Sepulcher: And there, according to the Law, in honour of the Deceased, all the Actions of his Life are rehears'd, where every one that will, has free liberty to accuse him. But all the Priests set forth his Praise, mentioning all the noble Actions of his Life; and many Thousands of People met together at the bringing forth of the Body (if the King have rul'd well) second the Priests with a tumultuous Cry and Noise of Approbation: But if he have govern'd otherwise, they are hush and still: And therefore many of the Kings (through the dislike of the People) have not been honour'd with any Funeral Pomp or solemn Burial; upon which account the succeeding Kings (not only for the Reasons before-mention'd, but because they fear the abuse of their Bodies after Death, and everlasting disgrace and dishonour) have study'd how to acquit themselves by just and Virtuous Actions. These are the most remarkable Manners and Customs of the ancient Kings of Egypt.

The whole Land of Egypt is divided into several Parts, which the Greeks call Nomoi, over every one of which is appointed a Lord Lieutenant or Provincial Governor, who is intrusted with Administration of publick Affairs in the Province. The whole Country likewise is divided into Three Parts, whereof the First is allotted to the Priests, who are highly reverenc'd, and are in great Authority among the People, both for their Piety towards the Gods, and their great Wisdom and Learning wherein they instruct the People. And out of their Revenues, they provide Sacrifices throughout all Egypt, and maintain their Families and Servants, and procure all other things necessary for themselves: For they judge it not lawful by any means that the Worship of the Gods should be altered (but always perform'd by them after the same manner) nor that those who are the publick Ministers of State should want any thing that is necessary. For these are always at the King's Elbow, as the Chief of his Privy Counsel, who assist, advise and instruct him upon all occasions. By the help of Astrology, and viewing the Intrals of the Sacrifices, they Divine and foretel future Events, and out of the Records in the sacred Registers from things done in former times, they read profitable Lectures for present use and practice. For it is not (as among the Grecians) that one Man or one Woman only executes the Priest's Office, but in Egypt many are imploy'd in the Sacrifices and Worship of the Gods, who teach the same way and manner of Service to their Children and Posterity. They are free from all publick Taxes and Impositions, and are in the Second place to the King in Honour and Authority. The Second Portion belongs to the King, as his Revenue to support his Royal State and Dignity, and maintain the Charge of his Wars, and to inable him to reward those that have been eminent for their Virtue and publick Service, with Gifts according to their Deserts; and inasmuch as this Portion brings in a plentiful Provision for all these purposes, the People are not oppress'd with Taxes and heavy Impositions. The last Portion belongs to the Soldiers, who at a word are ready at the King's Commands for every Expedition; that they who venture their Lives in the Wars, being indear'd to their Country by that plentiful share and proportion allotted them, may more chearfully undergo the hazards of War. For it would be an irrational thing to intrust the safety and preservation of the whole, with them who have nothing in their Country that's dear or valuable to them to sight for. And the chief Reason why so large a share is allotted to them, is that they might more readily marry, and by that means make the Nation more populous; and so there might be no need of Foreign Aids


Page 39

and Assistances. Besides, that Children descended from Soldiers, would be apt to imitate the valour of their Ancestors, and minding Arms from their very Childhood, would at length (through their natural Courage and Skill in their Arms) become unconquerable.

The Nation likewise is distinguish'd into Three other Classes and Orders of Men, Shepherds, Husbandmen and Artificers. The Husbandmen take the Land (fit for Tillage and bearing of other Fruits) of the King, the Priests and the Swordmen, upon an easie Rent, and take up all their Time in this Business; and because they are bred up from their very Infancy in Country Affairs, they are the most Skilful Husbandmen of any other Nation in the World. For they know exactly the Nature of the Land, the Inundation of the Waters, Seed-time and Harvest, and the gathering in of the other Fruits of the Earth, partly from the knowledge gain'd from their Ancestors, and partly from their own particular Experience.

The way and manner of the Shepherds is the same, who being us'd to look after the Flocks and Herds from Father to Son, make it their whole Imployment to feed and pasture them. They have indeed learnt many things from their Ancestors concerning the best way of governing and feeding their Flocks, but not a few by their own Study and Invention. And that which is chiefly to be admir'd, is that their Industry is such in these matters, that they that keep Poultry and Geese, not content with the ordinary way of breeding these Creatures (as amongst other People) but by their Wit and Ingenuity cause them to increase to an infinite number, for they do not suffer them to hatch, but to admiration force out the Young with their Hands with so much Art and Skill, that it's done as effectually as by Nature it self.

Arts and Trades likewise among the Egyptians are greatly improv'd and brought to their highest perfection. For it's a Rule only among the Egyptians, that no Mechanick or other Artificer is to be of any other Trade or Imployment, or to be reckon'd up among any other Orders or Classes of the Commonwealth, than such as by the Law is allow'd, and taught them by their Parents; to the end that neither Envy attending Magistracy, nor publick Business of the State, or any thing else might interrupt them in the diligent improvement of their Trades. In other Places we see Artificers and Tradesmen busy'd about many other things, and (to gratify their Covetousness) not to stick to any one Imployment. For some apply themselves to Husbandry, others to Merchandize, and some follow Two or Three Trades at once. And many who run to the publick Assemblies in Cities, under a Democratical Government, by Bribes and Rewards inrich themselves, to the damage and prejudice of the Commonwealth. But in Egypt if any Tradesman meddle in Civil Affairs, or exercise any more than one Trade at once, he is grievously punish'd. And in this manner the antient Egyptians divided their Commonwealth, and every Order took care to preserve themselves intire, as that which they had learnt, and had been handed down to them from their Ancestors. They were likewise extraordinary careful concerning their Courts of Justice, for they lookt upon just Sentences and Decrees pronounc'd from the Seats of Justice on both sides, to be of great weight and moment to the advancement of the publick good. For they knew very well, that Mens miscarriages would be best reform'd, if Offenders were duly punish'd, and the Injur'd and Oppress'd reliev'd: And on the contrary they foresaw, that if the Punishment due by the Law to Malefactors could be bought off for Mony, Favour or Affection, then nothing but Disorder and Confusion would enter into all Orders and Societies of Men among them: And therefore to prevent this (with good effect) they chose Men of the greatest Reputation out of the Chiefest Cities to be their Judges: As out of Heliopolis, Thebes and Memphis; which Assembly of the Judges was nothing inferior to the Arcopagites in Athens, or the Senate at Sparta. Out of these (being Thirty in number) they chose one the most eminent among them to be President, and in his Room the City sent another. The Judges receiv'd their Salaries from the King, but the President had the greatest Allowance; about his Neck he wore a golden Chain, at which hung a Picture representing Truth, set with precious Stones. When the President put on his Chain, it was a Sign then he was about to hear Causes. And when the Eight Books wherein the Laws were written were laid before the Judges, it was the Custom that the Plaintiff exhibited his Complaint in writing distinctly and particularly; setting forth wherein he was injur'd, and


Page 40

how, and the value of his damage sustain'd. On the other side the Defendant or the Party accus'd, after a Copy had of his Adversaries Libel, answered in Writing to every particular, either by denying or justifying, or pleading something in mitigation of Damages. Then the Plaintiff reply'd in Writing, and the Defendant rejoyn'd. After the Litigants had thus twice exhibited their Libels, it was then the part of the Thirty Judges to consider amongst themselves of the Judgment to be pronounc'd, and incumbent upon the President to turn the Essigies of Truth towards one of the Litigants. And this was the usual manner of Proceedings in their Courts of Justice among the Egyptians. For it was judg'd, that by the Harangues of Lawyers, a Cloud was cast upon the Truth and Justice of the Cause; inasmuch as the Arts of Rhetoricians, the jugling Tricks of Dissemblers, and the Fears of them that are like to be overthrown in their Cause, have wrought upon many to wave the strictness of the Law, and to turn aside from the Rule of Justice and Truth: And indeed its often found by experience, that Offenders brought to the Bar of Justice by the help of a cunning Orator, or their own Rhetorical Flourishes (either through a Fallacy put upon the Court, or taking Insinuations, or melting Compassions wrought by the Speaker in the Judge) have escap'd: Therefore the Egyptians concluded, that if all the Accusation was put into Writing, and consideration had barely of what was there set down, the Sentence would be more exact and just. And so by that means crafty and ingenious Fellows would be no more favour'd, than those that were more dull, nor the experienc'd Artist more than those that were ignorant and unskilful, nor the audacious Liar more than those that are modest and sincere; but all would have equal Justice, in regard sufficient time was allow'd by the Law, both for the Parties to answer each other, and for the Judges to consider and give Judgment upon the Allegations of both sides.

And since now we are come to mention the Laws, we conceive it will not be foreign from our History to give an account of such Laws of the Egyptians as are either remarkable for their Antiquity, or strange and different from all other, or that may be any way useful and profitable to the studious Readers.

1. And in the first place, those were to dye who were guilty of Perjury, being such as committed the Two greatest Crimes; that is, Impiety towards the Gods, and Violation of Faith and Truth, the strongest Band of Humane Society.

2. If any upon the Road saw a Man likely to be kill'd, or to be violently assaulted, and did not rescue him if he were able, he was to dye for it. And if in truth he were not able to defend him, yet he was bound to discover the Thieves, and to prosecute them in a due Course of Law. If he neglected this, he was according to the Law to be scourg'd with a certain number of Stripes, and to be kept without Food for Three Days together.

3. False Accusers were to suffer the same Punishment as those whom they falsly accus'd were to have undergone, if they had afterwards been convicted of the Offence.

4. All the Egyptians were injoyn'd to give in their Names in Writing, to the Governors of the Provinces, shewing how and by what means, they got their Livelihood. He that gave a false Account in such case, or if it appear'd he liv'd by Robbery, or any other unjust course, he was to dye; which Law it's said Solon brought over out of Egypt into Athens.

5. He that wilfully kill'd a Freeman; nay, a very Bondslave, was by the Law to dye; thereby designing to restrain Men from wicked Actions, as having no respect to the state and condition of the Person suffering, but to the advis'd act of the Offender; and by this care of Slaves, Men learnt that Freemen were much less to be destroy'd.

6. Parents that kill'd their Children, were not to dye, but were forc'd for Three Days and Nights together to hug them continually in their Arms, and had a Guard all the while over them, to see they did it; for they thought it not fit that they should dye, who gave Life to their Children; but rather that Men should be deterr'd from such Attempts by a Punishment that seem'd attended with Sorrow and Repentance.

7. But for Patricides, they provided a most severe kind of Punishment: For those that were convicted of this Offence, were laid upon Thorns, and burnt alive after that they had, first mangl'd the Members of their Bodies with sharp Canes, Piece-meal about the bigness of a Man's Thumb. For they counted it


Page 41

the most wicked Act that Men could be guilty of, to take away the Lives of them from whom they had their own.

8. Those that were with Child, were not to be executed till they were delivered, which Law was receiv'd by many of the Grecians, judging it very unjust for the Innocent to suffer with the Offender, and Two to dye for the Offence of one only. Besides, in as much as the Crime was maliciously and advisedly committed, it was unreasonable that the Child that understood not what was done, should undergo the same Punishment. And that which is of the greatest Consideration, is, that it was altogether unjust (being the Mother was only accus'd and condemn'd as guilty) the Child (Common both to Father and Mother) should lose its Life; for that Judge is as unjust that destroys the Innocent, as he that spares him that is guilty of Murther.

9. These are the Capital Laws which are chiefly worthy of Praise and Commendation; as to others, those concerning military Affairs, provided that Souldiers who ran away from their Colours or mutined, though they should not dye, yet should be otherwise punish'd with the utmost Disgrace imaginable; but if they after wipe off their Disgrace by their Valour, they are restor'd to their former Post and Trust. By this inflicting of a Punishment more grievous than Death, the Lawgiver design'd that all should look upon Disgrace and Infamy as the greatest of Evils: Besides it was judg'd, that those who were put to Death, could never be further serviceable to the Commonwealth; but such as were degraded only (through a desire to repair their Reputation) might be very useful, and do much good service in time to come.

10. Such as reveal'd the Secrets of the Army to the Enemy, were to have their Tongues cut out.

11. They that coyn'd false and adulterated Mony, or contriv'd false Weights, or Counterfeited Seals; and Scriveners or Clerks that forg'd Deeds, or raz'd publick Records, or produc'd any forg'd Contracts, were to have both their Hands cut off, that every one might suffer in that part wherewith he had offended in such a manner as not to be repaired during their Life; and that others warn'd by so severe a Punishment, might be deter'd from the Commission of the like Offence.

12. In Relation to Women the Laws were very severe: For he that committed a Rape upon a Free Woman, was to have his Privy Members cut off; for they judg'd that Three most hainous Offences were included in that one vile Act, that is, Wrong, Defilement and Bastardy.

13. In case of Adultery, the Man was to have a Thousand Lashes with Rods, and the Woman her Nose cut off. For it was lookt upon very sit, that the Adulteress that trickt up her self to allure Men to Wantonness, should be punish'd in that part where her Charms chiefly lay.

14. They say that Bocchoris made the Laws concerning Merchandize. As to these, it was a Law, That if a Man borrow'd Mony, and the lender had no Writing to shew for it, and the other deny'd it upon his Oath, he should be quit of the Debt; to that end therefore in the First Place, they were to sacrifice to the Gods, as Men making Conscience, and tender and Scrupulous in taking of an Oath. For it being clear and evident that he that swears often again and again, at last loses his Credit, every Man to prevent that Mischief, will be very cautions of being brought to an Oath. Moreover, the Lawgiver had this Design, that by grounding a Man's Credit and Reputation wholly upon the Integrity of his Life and Conversation, every one would be induc'd to honest and virtuous Actions, lest he should be despis'd as a Man of no Credit or Worth. Besides, it was judg'd a most unjust thing not to believe him upon his Oath in that matter relating to his Contract, to whom Credit was given in the self same thing without an Oath before.

15. For those that lent Mony by Contract in Writing, it was not lawful to take Usury above what would double the Stock; and that Payment should be made only out of the Debtors Goods; but his Body was not to be liable in any wise to Imprisonment: And those were counted the Debtors Goods, which he had either earn'd by his Labour, or had been bestow'd upon him by the just Proprietors. But as for their Bodies, they belong'd to the Cities where they inhabited, who had an Interest in them for the publick Services, both in Times of Peace and War; for that it was an absurd thing for him who was to venture his Life for


Page 42

his Country, to be carried to Goal for a Debt by his Creditor (if it should so happen) and that the publick safety should be hazarded to gratify the Covetousness of some Private Men. This Law seems to have been established in Athens by Solon, which he call'd Sisachthy, freeing all the Citizens from being imprison'd by their Creditors for debt. And some do justly blame many of the Law-makers of Greece, that they forbad Arms, Plows and other things absolutely necessary for Labours, to be taken as Pawns, and yet permitted them that should use them to be imprison'd.

16. There's a very remarkable Law among the Egyptians concerning Theft. Those that enter into the List of Thieves, are to give in their Names to one that is their Chief and Head, and whatever they steal, they ingage to bring to him. They that have lost any thing, are to set down in writing every particular, and bring it to him, and set forth the Day, and Hour and Place, when and where they lost their Goods. Every thing being thus readily found out, after the things stolen are valu'd, the true Owner is to pay a Fourth part of the value, and so receives his Goods again. For being it was not possible to restrain all from Thieving, the Law-maker found out a way that all might be restor'd, except a small Proportion for Redemption.

The Egyptian Priests only Marry one Wife, but all others may have as many Wives as they please; and all are bound to bring up as many Children as they can for the further increase of the Inhabitants, which tends much to the Well-being either of a City or Country. None of the Sons are ever reputed Bastards, though they be begotten of a Bond-Maid, for they conceive that the Father only begets the Child, and that the Mother contributes nothing but Place and Nourishment. And they call Trees that bear Fruit Males, and those that bear none Females, contrary to what the Grecians name them. They bring up their Children with very little Cost, and are sparing upon that account to admiration. For they provide for them Broth made of any mean and poor Stuff that may easily be had; and feed those that are of strength able to eat it, with the Pith of Bulrushes rosted in the Embers, and with Roots and Herbs got in the Fenns; sometimes raw, and sometimes boyl'd, and at other times fry'd and boyl'd. Most of their Children go bare-footed and naked, the Climate is so warm and temperate. It costs not the Parent to bring up a Child to Man's Estate, above Twenty Drachma's; which is the chief Reason why Egypt is so Populous, and excels all other Places in magnificent Structures. The Priests instruct the Youth in Two sorts of Learning; that which they call Sacred, and the other which is more common and Ordinary. In Arithmetick and Geometry they keep them a long time: For in regard the River every Year changes the Face of the Soyl, the Neighbouring Inhabitants are at great difference among themselves concerning the Boundaries of their Land, which cannot be easily known but by the help of Geometry. And as for Arithmetick, as it's useful upon other occasions, so its very helpful to the Study of Geometry, and no small advantage to the Students of Astrology; for the Egyptians (as well as some others) are diligent Observers of the Course and Motions of the Stars, and preserve Remarks of every one of them for an incredible number of Years, being us'd to this Study, and to endeavour to outvy one another therein from the most antient Times. They have with great Cost and Care observ'd the Motions of the Planets; their Periodical Motions, and their stated Stops, and the Influences of every one of them, in the Nativity of Living Creatures, and what good or ill they foreshew; and very often they so clearly discover what is to come in the Course of Mens Lives, as if they pointed at the thing with the point of a Needle. They frequently presage both Famine and Plenty; grievous Diseases likely to seize both upon Man and Beast; Earthquakes, Inundations and Comets; and through long Experience they come to the fore-knowledge of such things as are commonly judg'd impossible for the Wit of Man to attain unto. They affirm that the Chaldeans in Babylon are Egyptian Colonies, and that their Astrologers have attain'd to that degree of Reputation, by the Knowledge they have learnt of the Egyptian Priests.

The rest of the common People of Egypt (as we have before declar'd) are train'd up from their very Childhood either by their Parents or Kindred in all manner of Arts and Trades whereby to get their Livelyhood.


Page 43

They teach but a very few to write and read; but Tradesmen especially learn both. It's not the Custom there to learn the Art of Wrestling or Musick; for they think that by the Exercise of daily Wrestling, the Youth improve in their Strength but for a little time, and that with a great deal of Hazard, but gain no Advantage at all as to the Health of their Bodies. And as for Musick, they look upon it not only unprofitable, but that it also makes Men soft and effeminate.

To prevent Diseases they make use of Clysters and purging Potions, Abstinence and Vomits, and this they repeat sometimes for several days together, and other times every third or fourth day. For in all manner of Food (they say) the greatest Part of it is superfluous, which breeds Diseases, and therefore the aforesaid Method whereby the Root of the Disease is pluckt up (they say) is a mighty Help both to the Preservation and Recovery of Health. For the Physicians have a publick Stipend, and make 

〈◊〉

 of Receipts prescrib'd by the Law, made up by the Ancient Physicians; and if they cannot cure the Patient by them, they are never blam'd; but if they use other Medicines, they are to suffer Death, in as much as the Law-maker appointed such Receipts for Cure, as were approved by the most learned Doctors, such as by long Experience had been found effectual.

The Adoration and Worshipping of Beasts among the Egyptians seems justly to many a most strange and unaccountable thing, and worthy Enquiry; for they worship some Creatures even above measure, when they are dead as well as when they are living; as Cats, Ichneumons, Dogs, Kites, the Bird Ibis, Wolves and Crocodiles, and many other such like. The Cause of which I shall endeavour to give, having first premis'd something briefly concerning them. And first of all, they dedicate a piece of Land to every kind of Creature they adore, assigning the Profits for feeding and taking care of them. To some of these Deities the Egyptians give Thanks for recovering their Children from Sickness, as by shaving their Heads, and weighing the Hair, with the like Weight of Gold or Silver, and then giving that Mony to them that have the Care of the Beasts. To the Kites, while they are flying they cry out with a loud Voice, and throw pieces of Flesh for them upon the Ground till such time as they take it. To the Cats and Ichneumons they give Bread soakt in Milk, stroaking and making much of them, or feed them with pieces of Fish taken in the River Nile. In the same manner they provide for the other Beasts Food according to their several kinds. They are so far from not paying this. Homage to their Creatures, or being asham'd of them, that on the contrary they glory in them, as in the highest Adoration of the Gods, and carry about special Marks and Ensigns of Honour for them through City and Country; upon which Account those that have the Care of the Beasts (being seen after off) are honour'd and worshipp'd by all by falling down upon their Knees. When any one of them dye they wrap it in fine Linnen, and with Howling beat upon their Breasts, and so carry it forth to be salted, and then after they have anointed it with the Oyl of Cedar and other things, which both give the Body a fragrant Smell and preserve it a long time from Putrefaction, they bury it in a secret place. He that wilfully kills any of these Beasts, is to suffer Death; but if any kill a Cat or the Bird Ibis, whether wilfully or otherwise, he's certainly drag'd away to Death by the Multitude, and sometimes most cruelly without any formal Tryal or Judgment of Law. For fear of this, if any by chance find any of these Creatures dead, they stand aloof, and with lamentable Cries and Protestations tell every body that they found it dead. And such is the religious Veneration imprest upon the Hearts of Men towards these Creatures, and so obstinately is every one bent to adore and worship them, that even at the time when the Romans were about making a League with Ptolomy, and all the People made it their great Business to caress and shew all Civility and Kindness imaginable to them that came out of Italy, and through Fear strove all they could that no Occasion might in the least be given to disoblige them or be the Cause of a War, yet it so happ'ned that upon a Cat being kill'd by a Roman, the People in a Tumult ran to his Lodging, and neither the Princes sent by the King to dissuade them, nor the Fear of the Romans could deliver the Person from the Rage of the People, tho' he did it against his Will; and this I relate not by Hear-say, but was my self an Eye-witness of it at the time of my Travels into Egypt. If these things seem incredible and like to Fables, those that we shall hereafter relate will look more strange. For it's reported, that at a time when


Page 44

there was a Famine in Egypt, many were driven to that strait, that by turns they fed one upon another; but not a Man was accused to have in the least tasted of any of these sacred Creatures. Nay, if a Dog be found dead in a House, the whole Family shave their Bodies all over, and make great Lamentation; and that which is most wonderful, is, That if any Wine, Bread or any other Victuals be in the House where any of these Creatures die, it's a part of their Superstition, not to make use of any of them for any purpose whatsoever. And when they have been abroad in the Wars in foreign Countries, they have with great Lamentation brought with them dead Cats and Kites into Egypt, when in the mean time they have been ready to starve for want of Provision. Moreover what Acts of Religious Worship they perform'd towards Apis in Memphis,Mnevis in Heliopolis, the Goat in Mendes, the Crocodile in the Lake of Myris, and the Lyon kept in Leontopolis, and many other such like, is easie to describe, but very difficult to believe, except a Man saw it. For these Creatures are kept and fed in consecrated Ground inclos'd, and many great Men provide Food for them at great Cost and Charge; for they constantly give them fine Wheat-Flower, Frumenty, Sweet-meats of all sorts made up with Honey, and Geese sometimes rosted, and sometimes boyl'd; and for such as fed upon raw Flesh, they provide Birds. To say no more, they are excessive in their Costs and Charges in feeding of these Creatures; and forbear not to wash them in hot Baths, to anoint them with the most precious Unguents, and perfume them with the sweetest Odours. They provide likewise for them most rich Beds to lye upon, with decent Furniture, and are extraordinary careful about their generating and coition one with another, according to the Law of Nature. They breed up for every one of the Males (according to their Kinds) the most beautiful She-mate, and call them their Concubines or Sweet-hearts, and are at great Costs and Charges in looking to them.

When any of them dye, they are as much concern'd as at the Deaths of their own Children, and lay out in Burying of them as much as all their Goods are worth, and far more. For when Apis through Old Age dy'd at Memphis after the Death of Alexander, and in the Reign of Ptolomy Lagus, his Keeper not only spent all that vast Provision he had made, in burying of him, but borrow'd of Ptolomy Fifty Talents of Silver for the same purpose. And in our time some of the Keepers of these Creatures have lavisht away no less than a Hundred Talents in the maintaining of them. To this may be further added, what is in use among them concerning the sacred Ox, which they call Apis. After the splendid Funeral of Apis is over, those Priests that have the Charge of the Business, seek out another Calf, as like the former as possibly they can find; and when they have found one, an end is put to all further Mourning and Lamentation; and such Priests as are appointed for that purpose, lead the young * Ox through the City of Nile, and feed him Forty Days. Then they put him into a Barge, wherein is a Colden Cabbin, and so transport him as a God to Memphis, and place him in Vulcan's Grove. During the Forty Days before mention'd, none but Women are admitted to see him, who being plac'd full in his view, pluck up their Coats, and shew their Privy Parts: After they are forbad to come into the Sight of this New God. For the Adoration of this Ox, they give this Reason. They say that the Soul of Osiris pass'd into an Ox; and therefore whenever the Ox is Dedicated, to this very Day the Spirit of Osiris is infus'd into one Ox after another to Posterity. But some say, that the Members of Osiris (who was kill'd by Typhon) were thrown by Isis into an Ox made of Wood, cover'd with Ox-Hides, and from thence the City Busiris was so call'd. Many other things they fabulously report of Apis, which would be too tedious particularly to relate. But in as much as all that relate to this Adoration of Beasts are wonderful and indeed incredible, its very difficult to find out the true Causes and Grounds of this Superstition. We have before related, that the Priests have a private and secret account of these things in the History of the Gods; but the Common People give these Three Reasons for what they do. The First of which is altogether Fabulous, and agrees with the old Dotage: For they say, that the First Gods were so very few, and Men so many above them in number, and so wicked and impious, that they were too weak for them, and therefore transform'd themselves into Beasts, and by that means avoided their Assaults and Cruelty. But afterwards they say that the Kings and Princes of the Earth (in gratitude to them that were the first Authors of their well-being) directed how carefully those Creatures


Page 45

whose Shapes they had assum'd) should be fed while they were alive, and how they were to be Buried when they were dead. Another Reason they give is this: The antient Egyptians, they say, being often defeated by the Neighbouring Nations, by reason of the disorder and confusion that was among them in drawing up of their Battalions, found out at last the way of Carrying Standards or Ensigns before their Several Regiments; and therefore they painted the Images of these Beasts, which now they adore, and fixt 'em at the end of a Spear, which the Officers carry'd before them, and by this means every Man perfectly knew the Regiment he belong'd unto; and being that by the Observation of this good Order and Discipline, they were often Victorious, they afcrib'd their Deliverance to these Creatures; and to make to them a grateful Return, it was ordain'd for a Law, that none of these Creatures, whose Representations were formerly thus carry'd, should be kill'd, but religiously and carefully ador'd, as is before related. The Third Reason alledg'd by them, is the Profit and Advantage these Creatures bring to the common support and maintenance of Humane Life. For the Cow is both serviceable to the Plow, and for breeding others for the same use. The Sheep yeans twice a Year, and yields Wool for Cloathing and Ornament, and of her Milk and Cream are made large and pleasant Cheefes. The Dog is useful both for the Guard of the House, and the pleasure of Hunting in the Field, and therefore their God whom they call Anubis, they represent with a Dog's Head, signifying thereby that a Dog was the Guard both to Osiris and Isis. Others say, that when they sought for Osiris, Dogs guided Isis, and by their barking and yelling (as kind and faithful Associates with the Inquisitors) drove away the wild Beasts, and diverted others that were in their way; and therefore in celebrating the Feast of Isis, Dogs lead the way in the Procession. Those that first instituted this Custom, signifying thereby the ancient kindness and good Service of this Creature. The Cat likewise is very serviceable against the Venemous Stings of Serpents, and the deadly Bite of the Asp. The Ichneumenon secretly watches where the Crocodile lays her Eggs, and breaks them in pieces, and that he does with a great deal of eagerness, by natural instinct, without any necessity for his own support; and if this Creature were not thus serviceable, Crocodiles would abound to that degree, that there were no Sailing in Nile: Yea, the Crocodiles themselves are destroy'd by this Creature in a wonderful and incredible manner. For the Ichneumenon rouls himself in the Mud, and then observing the Crocodile sleeping upon the Bank of the River with his Mouth wide open, suddenly whips down through his Throat into his very Bowels, and presently gnaws his way through his Belly, and so escapes himself, with the Death of his Enemy. Among the Birds, the Ibis is serviceable for the destroying of Snakes, Locusts and the Palmer Worm. The Kite is an Enemy to the Scorpions, horn'd Serpents, and other little Creatures, that both bite and sting Men to Death. Others say, that this Bird is Deify'd, because the Augurs make use of the swift flight of these Birds in their Divinations. Others say, that in ancient Time, a Book bound about with a Scarlet Thred (wherein were written all the Rites and Customs of Worshipping of the Gods) was carry'd by a Kite, and brought to the Priests at Thebes: For which Reason the Sacred Scribes wore a red Cap with a Kite's Feather in it.

The Thebans worship the Eagle, because she seems to be a Royal Bird, and to deserve the Adoration due to Jupiter himself. They say, the Goat was accounted amongst the number of the Gods, for the sake of his Genitals, as Priapus is honour'd among the Grecians: For this Creature is exceeding Lustful, and therefore they say that Member (the Instrument of Generation) is to be highly honour'd, as that from which all living Creatures derive their Original. They say that these Privy Parts are not only accounted Sacred among the Egyptians, but among many others, are religiously ador'd in the time of their Solemn Rites of religious Worship, as those Parts that are the Causes of Generation. And the Priests, who succeed in the Office, descended to them from their Fathers in Egypt, are first initiated into the Service of this God. For this Reason the Panes and Satyrs are greatly ador'd among them, and therefore they have Images of them set up in their Temples, with their Privy Parts erected like to the Goat, which they say, is the most lustful Creature in the World. By this Representation they would signify their Gratitude to the Gods, for the Populousness of their Country.


Page 46

The Sacred Bulls Apis and Mnevis (they say) they honour as Gods by the Command of Osiris, both for their Usefulness in Husbandry, and likewise to keep up an honourable and lasting Memory of those that first found out Bread-corn and other Fruits of the EARTH.

But however, its lawful to sacrifice red Oxen, because Typhon seem'd to be of that Colour, who treacherously murder'd Osiris, and was himself put to Death by Isis for the Murther of her Husband. They report likewise, that anciently Men that had red Hair, like Typhon, were sacrifis'd by the Kings at the Sepulcher of Osiris. And indeed, there are very few Egyptians that are red, but many that are Strangers: And hence arose the Fable of Busiris his Cruelty towards Strangers amongst the Greeks, not that there ever was any King call'd Busiris; but Osiris his Sepulcher was so call'd in the Egyptian Language. They say they pay divine Honour to Wolves, because they come so near in their Nature to Dogs, for they are very little different, and mutually ingender and bring forth Whelps.

They give likewise another Reason for their Adoration, but most fabulous of all other; for they say, that when Isis and her Son Orus were ready to joyn Battle with Typhon, Osiris came up from the Shades below in the form of a Wolf, and assisted them, and therefore when Typhon was kill'd, the Conquerors commanded that Beast to be worshipp'd, because the Day was won presently upon his Appearing.

Some affirm, that at the time of the Irruption of the Ethiopians into Egypt, a great Number of Wolves flockt together, and drove the invading Enemy beyond the City Elaphantina, and therefore that Province is call'd Lycopolitana; and for these Reasons came these Beasts before mention'd, to be thus ador'd and worshipped.

CHAP. VII.

Why the Crocodile is Worship'd. Some sorts of Herbs and Roots not Eaten. Why other Creatures are Worship'd. The manner of their Burials. The Lawmakers in Egypt. Learned Men of Greece made Journeys into Egypt, as Orpheus, Homer, Plato, Solon, Pythagoras, &c. Several Proofs of this, as their Religious Rites, Fables, &c. in Greece, of Egyptian Extraction. The exquisit Art of the Stone-Carvers in Egypt.

NOW it remains, that we speak of the Deifying the Crocodile, of which many have inquir'd what might be the Reason; being that these Beasts devour Men, and yet are ador'd as Gods, who in the mean time are pernicious Instruments of many cruel Accidents. To this they answer, that their Country is not only defended by the River, but much more by the Crocodiles; and therefore the Theeves out of Arabia and Africa being affraid of the great number of these Creatures, dare not pass over the River Nile, which protection they should be depriv'd of, if these Beasts should be fallen upon; and utterly destroy'd by the Hunters.

But there's another Account given of these Things: For one of the Ancient Kings, call'd Menas, being set upon and pursu'd by his own Dogs, was forc'd into the Lake of Miris, where a Crocodile (a Wonder to be told) took him up and carri'd him over to the other side, where in Gratitude to the Beast he built a City, and call'd it Crocodile; and commanded Crocodiles to be Ador'd as Gods, and Dedicated the Lake to them for a place to Feed and Breed in. Where he built a Sepulcher for himself with a foursquare Pyramid, and a Labyrinth greatly admir'd by every Body. In the same manner they relate Stories of other Things, which would be too tedious here to recite. For some conceive it to be very clear and evident (by several of them not Eating many of the Fruits of the Earth) that Gain and Profit by sparing has infected them with this Superstition: for some never Taste Lentils, nor other Beans; and some never eat either Cheese or Onions or such like Food, although Egypt abounds with these Things. Thereby signifying that all should learn to be temperate; and whatsoever any feed upon, they should not


Page 47

give themselves to Gluttony. But others give another Reason; for they say that in the Time of the Ancient Kings, the People being prone to Sedition, and Plotting to Rebel, one of their wise and prudent Princes divided Egypt into several Parts, and appointed the Worship of some Beast or other in every Part, or forbad some sort of Food, that by that means every one Adoring their own Creature, and slighting that which was Worship'd in another Province, the Egyptians might never agree amongst themselves. And this is evident from the Effects; for when one Country despises and contemns the Religious Rites and Customs of their Neighbours, this always begets Heart-burnings among them. But some give this Reason for Deifying of these Creatures: They say, that in the beginning, Men that were of a fierce and beastly Nature herded together and devoured one another; and being in, perpetual War and Discord, the stronger always destroy'd the weaker. In process of time, those that were too weak for the other (taught at length by Experience) got in Bodies together, and had the representations of those Beasts (which were afterwards Worship'd) in their Standards, to which they ran together when they were in a Fright, upon every occasion, and so made up a considerable Force against them that attempted to assault them. This was imitated by the rest, and so the whole Multitude got into a Body; and hence it was that that Creature, which every one suppos'd was the cause of his safety, was honour'd as a God, as justly deserving that Adoration. And therefore at this day the People of Egypt differ in their Religion, every one Worshiping that Beast that their Ancestors did in the beginning. To conclude, they say that the Egyptians, of all other People, are the most grateful for Favours done them, judging Gratitude to be the safest Guard of their Lives, in as much as it is evident, that all are most ready to do good to them with whom are laid up the Treasures of a grateful Mind to make a suitable Return. And for these Reasons the Egyptians seem to honour and adore their Kings no less than as if they were very Gods. For they hold that without a Divine Providence they never could be advanc'd to the Throne; and being they can confer the greatest Rewards at their will and pleasure, they judge them partakers of the Divine Nature. Now tho' we have said perhaps more than is needful of their sacred Creatures, yet with this we have set forth the Laws of the Egyptians, which are very remarkable. But when a Man comes to understand their Rites and Ceremonies in Burying their Dead, he'l be struck with much greater Admiration.

For after the Death of any of them, all the Friends and Kindred of the deceased throw Dirt upon their Heads, and run about through the City; mourning and lamenting till such time as the Body be interr'd, and abstain from Baths, Wine and all pleasant Meats in the mean time; and forbear to cloath themselves with any rich Attire. They have three sorts of Funerals: The Stately and Magnificent, the Moderate, and the Meanest. In the first they spend a Talent of Silver, in the second twenty Minas, in the last they are at very small Charges. They that have the Charge of wrapping up and burying the Body, are such as have been taught the Art by their Ancestors. These give in a Writing to the Family of every thing that is to be laid out in the Funeral, and inquire of them after what Manner they would have the Body interr'd. When every thing is agreed upon, they take up the Body and deliver it to them whose Office it is to take Care of it. Then the Chief among them (who is call'd the Scribe) having the Body laid upon the Ground, marks out how much of the left Side towards the Bowels is to be incis'd and open'd, upon which the Paraschistes (so by them call'd) with an Ethiopian Stone dissects so much of the Flesh as by the Law is justifiable, and having done it, he forthwith runs away might and main, and all there present pursue him with Execrations, and pelt him with Stones, as if he were guilty of some horrid Offence, for they look upon him as an hateful Person, who wounds and offers Violence to the Body in that kind, or does it any Prejudice whatsoever. But as for those whom they call the Taricheutae, they highly honour them, for they are the Priests Companions, and as Sacred Persons are admitted into the Temple. Assoon as they come to the dissected Body, one of the Taricheutae thrusts up his Hand through the Wound, into the Breast of the Dead, and draws out all the Intestins, but the Reins and the Heart. Another cleanses all the Bowels, and washes them in Phaenician Wine mixt with diverse Aromatick Spices. Having at last wash'd the Body, they first anoint it all over with the Oyl of Cedar and other precious Ointments for the space of forty days together; that done, they rub it well with Myrrhe, Cinnamon, and such like things, not only apt and effectual for long Preservation,


Page 48

but for sweet scenting of the Body also, and so deliver it to the Kindred of the Dead, with every Member so whole and intire, that no Part of the Body seems to be alter'd till it come to the very Hairs of the Eye-lids and the Eye-brows, insomuch as the Beauty and Shape of the Face seems just as it was before. By which Means many of the Egyptians laying up the Bodies of their Ancestors in stately Monuments, perfectly see the true Visage and Countenance of those that were buried, many Ages before they themselves were born. So that in viewing the Proportion of every one of their Bodies and the Lineaments of their Faces, they take exceeding great Delight, even as much as if they were still living among them. Moreover, the Friends and nearest Relations of the Dead acquaint the Judges and the rest of their Friends with the Time prefixt for the Funeral of such an one by Name, declaring that such a day he is to pass the Lake. At which Time forty Judges appear and sit together in a Semicircle, in a Place beyond the Lake; where a Ship (before provided by such as have the Care of the Business) is hal'd up to the Shoar, govern'd by a Pilot, whom the Egyptians call Charon. And therefore they say, that Orpheus seeing this Ceremony when he was in Egypt, invented the Fable of Hell, partly imitating them in Egypt, and partly adding something of his own; of which we shall speak particularly hereafter. The Ship being now in the Lake, every one is at Liberty by the Law to accuse the Dead before the Coffin be put aboard; and if any Accuser appears and makes good his Accusation, that he liv'd an ill Life, then the Judges give Sentence, and the Body is debarr'd from being buried after the usual Manner; but if the Informer be convicted of a scandalous and malicious Accusation, he's very severely punish'd. If no Informer appear, or that the Information prove false, all the Kindred of the Deceased leave off Mourning, and begin to set forth his Praises; but say nothing of his Birth (as is the Custom among the Greeks) because they account all in Egypt to be equally noble. But they recount how the deceased was educated from a Child, his Breeding till he came to Man's Estate, his Piety towards the Gods and his Justice towards Men, his Chastity and other Virtues, wherein he excell'd; and they pray and call upon the infernal Deities to receive the deceas'd into the Society of the Just. The common People take it from the other, and approve of all that is said in his Praise with a loud Shout, and set forth likewise his Vertues with the highest Praises and Strains of Commendation, as he that is to live for ever with the just in the Kingdom of JOVE. Then they (that have Tombs of their own) interr the Corps in Places appointed for that Purpose; they that have none of their own, build a small Apartment in their own Houses, and rear up the Coffin to the Sides of the strongest Wall of the Building. Such as are deny'd common Burial, either because they are in Debt, or convicted of some horrid Crime, they bury in their own Houses; and in After-times it often happens that some of their Kindred growing rich, pay off the Debts of the deceas'd, or get him absolv'd, and then bury their Ancestor with State and Splendour. For amongst the Egyptians it's a Sacred Constitution, that they should at their greatest Costs honour their Parents and Ancestors, who are translated to an Eternal Habitation. It's a Custom likewise among them to give the Bodies of their Parents in Pawn to their Creditors, and they that do not presently redeem them, fall under the greatest Disgrace imaginable, and are deny'd Burial after their Deaths. One may justly wonder at the Authors of this excellent Constitution, who both by what we see practis'd among the living, and by the decent Burial of the dead, did (as much as possibly lay within the Power of Men) endeavour to promote Honesty and faithful Dealing one with another. For the Greeks (as to what concern'd the Rewards of the Just and the Punishment of the Impious) had nothing amongst them but invented Fables and Poetical Fictions, which never wrought upon Men for the Amendment of their Lives, but on the contrary, were despis'd and laught at by the lewder Sort. But among the Egyptians, the Punishment of the bad and the Rewards of the good being not told as idle Tales, but every day seen with their own Eyes, all Sorts were warn'd of their Duties, and by this Means was wrought and continu'd a most exact Reformation of Manners and orderly Conversation among them. For those certainly are the best Laws that advance Virtue and Honesty, and instruct Men in a prudent Converse in the World, rather than those that tend only to the heaping up of Wealth, and teach Men to be rich.


Page 49

And now its necessary for us to speak of the Legislators of Egypt, who establish'd such Laws as are both unusual elsewhere, and admirable in themselves. After the ancient way of living in Egypt, which was (according to their own Stories) in the Reigns of the Gods and Demigods; they say that Mnevis, a Man of an heroic Spirit and famous in his Generation for a commendable Life, was the first that instituted written Laws, feigning that he receiv'd them from Mercury, and that from them would accrue great Benefit and Advantage to the publick. The same Device Minos us'd among the Grecians in Creet, and Lycurgus among the Lacedemonians; The first pretending he had them from Jupiter, and the other from Apollo. This Contrivance, its said, has been made use of amongst diverse other Nations, who have reapt much Advantage by observing such Laws. For its reported, that among the Aramaspi, Zathrausles pretended he receiv'd his Laws from a good Genius; and that Zamolxis amongst the People call'd the Getes patroniz'd his by Vesta; and among the Jews, that Moses alledg'd the God call'd I AO to be the Author of his. And this they did either because they judg'd such an Invention (which brought about so much Good to Mankind) was wonderfully commendable and of a divine Stamp; or that they concluded the People would be more observant out of a reverend Regard to the Majesty and Authority of those who were said to be the Lawmakers. The second Lawmaker of Egypt, they say, was Sasyches, a very wise and prudent Prince, who added to the former, and made excellent Laws also relating to the Honour and Worship of the Gods. He's reported to have found out Geometry, and to have taught the Art of Astronomy. The third who they cry up is Sesostris, who not only excell'd all the Kings of Egypt in his warlike Atchievments, but fram'd Laws for Military Disciplin among the Egyptians, and put every thing in due Order relating to Military Affairs.

The fourth Lawmaker they say was King Bocchoris; a wise and prudent Man, he establish'd every thing that concern'd the Kings, and prescrib'd exact Rules and Laws for the making of Contracts. He was so wise and of so piercing a Judgment in his Decisions, that many of his Sentences for their Excellency are kept in Memory to this very day. He was (they say) of a very weak Constitution of Body and extraordinary covetous.

After him King Amasis imploy'd himself in the framing of Laws for the Directions of the Nomarchi in their several Governments, which reduc'd all the Provinces of Egypt into due Order. It's said, he was a most wise, just and good Man, for which he was advanc'd to the Throne by the Egyptians, tho' he was not of the Blood-Royal. 'Tis repored, that when the Eleans were about to celebrate the Olympick Games, and sent their Embassadors to him to advise them how they might manage those Sports most justly, he answer'd, That the way to do that was for none of the Eleans to be Parties in the Contest.

Polycrates, the petty King of Samos, entred into a League of Friendship with him: But when he heard how Polycrates opprest his own Subjects, and injur'd Strangers that came into his Country, he sent Embassadors to him to advise to Moderation; but not being able to persuade him, he at length sent a Letter to him to let him know he dissolv'd and renounc'd the League that was betwixt them, saying, He was not willing forthwith to be involv'd in Grief and Sorrow, for that he perfectly foresaw the miserable. Fall that would presently overtake one who govern'd so tyrannically. He was greatly admir'd, they▪ say, by the Grecians both for his kind and gentle Disposition, and for that what he said, shortly after befel Polycrates.

Darius, the Father of Xerxes, is said to be the sixth who made Laws for the Government of the Egyptians. For with Hatred and Abhorrence of the Impiety Cambyses his Predecessor for his prophaning of the Temples in Egypt, he made it his Business to approve his reverend Regard towards the Gods, and his Kindness towards Men; for the familiarly convers'd with the Egyptian Priests, and learnt their Theology, and acquainted himself with the Things and Transactions recorded in their Sacred Registers, whereby he came to understand the Heroic Spirits of the Ancient Kings, and their Kindness towards their Subjects, which caused him to imitate them in the like, and upon that Account he was so highly honour'd amongst them, that while he was alive he gain'd the Title of a GOD, which none of the other Kings ever did; and when he was dead, the People allow'd him all those Ancient Honours due and accustom'd to be done to the former Kings of Egypt after their Deaths. And these are the Men (they say) who compos'd the Laws of Egypt that are so celebrated and cry'd up amongst other People.


Page 50

But in After-times (they say) many of their excellent Laws were abrogated by the Macedonians, who came to be Lords and Kings of EGYPT.

Having now given an Account of these Things, it remains we should declare how many wise and learned Men among the Grecians journey'd into Egypt in Ancient Times, to understand the Laws and Sciences of the Country. For the Egyptian Priests out of their Sacred Records relate, that Orpheus, Musaeus, Melampodes, Daedalus, Homer the Poet, Lycurgus the Spartan, Solon the Athenian, Plato the Philosopher, Pythagoras the Samian, Eudoxus the Mathematician, Democritus the Abderite, and Oenopides the Chian, all came to them in Egypt, and they shew certain Marks and Signs of all these being there. Of some by their Pictures, and of others by the Names of Places, or Pieces of Work that have been call'd after their Names. And they bring Arguments from every Trade that is us'd, to prove that every thing wherein the Grecians excel, and for which they are admir'd, was brought over from Egypt into Greece. For they say, that Orpheus brought over most of the Religious Rites and Ceremonies, both as to what concerns the Celebration of the Orgia, and relating to his wandring up and down, and the whole intire Fable of Hell; for that the Ceremonies and Rites of Osiris agree in every thing with those of Bacchus, and that those of Isis and Ceres are one and the same, differing in nothing but the Name. And whereas he introduces the wicked tormented in Hell, the Elysian Fields for the pious and just, and the fictitious Appearances of Ghosts (commonly nois'd abroad) they say he has done nothing but imitated the Egyptian Funerals. And that the feigning of Mercury to be the Conductor of Souls, was deriv'd from the old Egyptian Custom, that he who brought back the dead Body of Apis (when he came to the Place) deliver'd it to him who represented Cerberus, which being communicated by Orpheus to the Greeks, Homer in Imitation of him inserted it in his Poem,

Cyllenius leads to the infernal Strand, 

The Hero's Ghost arm'd with his golden Wand.

And then he adds,

They reach th' Effluxes of the swelling Seas,

Then Leuca's rock; thence on their Course they keep

To the Sun's Portals and the Land of Sleep,

When streight they come into a flowry Mead,

Where after Death departed Souls reside.

The Name (they say) of Oceanus here mention'd is attributed to the River Nile, for so the Egyptians in their own Language call it; by the Sun's Portals is meant Heliopolis; the Meadow feign'd to be the Habitation of the dead (they say) is the Place bordering upon the Lake call'd Acherusia, near to Memphis, surrounded with pleasant Ponds and Meadows, with Woods and Groves of Lotus and sweet Canes; and that therefore he feign'd those Places to be inhabited by the dead, because that many of the Egyptian Funerals, and such as were the most considerable were there; the dead Bodies being carry'd over the River and the Lake Acherusia, and there interr'd. And that other Fictions among the Grecians concerning Hell agree with those things that are done in Egypt even at this day. For the Ship which transports the dead Bodies is call'd Baris, and that for the Fare an Half-penny is paid to the Ferryman, who is call'd in their own Country Language, Charon. They say likewise, that near to these Places is the Temple of black Hecates, and the Gates of Cocytus and Lethe, made up with brazen Bars; and besides these, that there is another Gate of Truth, next to which stands the headless Image of Justice. There are many others of these Grecian Fictions remaining still in Egypt, which both in Name and Practice continue there to this day. For in the City of Acanthus, beyond Nile towards Lybia, about an hundred and twenty Furlongs from Memphis stands an Hogshead full of Holes, into which (they say) three hundred Priests every day pour in Water carried out of the River Nile. The Fable likewise of the Ass is acted at a solemn Festival not far from thence, where a Man is twisting a long Rope, and many that follow him are as fast undoing what he had before wrought.


Page 51

The Egyptians further say, That Melampodes brought into Greece the Rites and Solemnities of Bacchus, and the fabulous Story of Saturn and the Titans, and the intire History of the Sufferings of the Gods out of Egypt. And they say that Dedalus imitated the Labyrinth there, which remains to this very Day, built at first by Mendes, or (as some report) by King Marus, many Years before the Reign of Minos. They affirm likewise, that the ancient Statues of Egypt are of the same size and proportion with those set up by Dedalus in Greece; and that the stately Porch of Vulcan in Memphis, was the handy-work of Dedalus, and that he was in such high Esteem among them, that they plac'd his Statue of Wood (made by his own Hands) in the Temple; whom at length for his Ingenuity and excellent Inventions, they honour'd as a God; for in one of the Islands belonging to Memphis, a Temple dedicated to Dedalus is resorted unto by the Inhabitants at this day.

That Homer came into Egypt, amongst other Arguments, they endeavour to prove it especially by the Potion Helen gave Telemachus (in the Story of Menelaus) to cause him to forget all his Sorrows past. For the Poet seems to have made an exact Experiment of the Potion Nepenthes, which he says Helen receiv'd from Polymnestes the Wife of Thonus, and brought it from Thebes in Egypt; and indeed in that City even at this Day, the Women use this Medicine with good success: And they say, that in ancient Times, the Medicine for the Cure of Anger and Sorrow, was only to be found among the Diopolitans; Thebes and Diospolis being by them affirm'd to be one and the same City. And that Venus from an ancient Tradition, is call'd by the Inhabitants, Golden Venus; and that there is a Field so call'd, within the Liberties of Memphis: And that Homer deriv'd from Egypt his Story of the Embraces between Jupiter and Juno, and their Travelling into Ethiopia; because the Egyptians every Year carry Jupiter's Tabernacle over the River into Africa, and a few Days after bring it back again, as if the God had return'd out of Ethiopia: And that the Fiction of the Nuptials of these Two Deities was taken from the Solemnization of their Festivals, at which time both their Tabernacles adorn'd with all sorts of Flowers, are carry'd by the Priests to the Top of a Mountain. To these they add, that Lycurgus, Solon, and Plato borrow'd from Egypt many of those Laws which they establish'd in their several Commonwealths. And that Pythagoras learnt his mysterious and sacred Expressions, the Art of Geometry, Arithmetick, and Transmigration of Souls, in Egypt. They are of Opinion likewise, that Democrates was Five Years in Egypt, and in that time much improv'd himself in the Art of Astrology. So they say, thet Oenopides by his familiar Converse with the Priests and Astrologers, amongst other Advantages, gain'd especially the Knowledge of the Periodical Motion of the Sun; and came to know that his Course is contrary to that of the Stars: And that Eudoxus likewise by studying Astrology in Egypt, left many useful Monuments of his Art behind him in Greece, for which his Name was famous. Lastly, they say that the most famous Statuaries of ancient Time liv'd amongst them for some time, as Telecles and Theodorus, the Sons of Rhaecus, who made the Statue of Apollo Pythius in Samos; for its said, that one half of this Statue was made by Telecles in Samos, and the other part was finish'd by Theodorus in Ephesus; and that there was such an exact Symmetry of Parts, that the whole seemed to be the Work of one and the same hand: Which Art (they say) the Grecians were not at all acquainted with, but that it was in frequent use among the Egyptians. For with them the exact Cut of a Statue is not judg'd of by the Eye and Fancy (as it is by the Greeks) but after that they have cut out the Stone, and wrought every part by it self, then they measure the exact proportion of the whole, from the least Stone to the greatest. For they divide the whole Body into One and Twenty Parts, and One Fourth, which makes up the Symmetry and intire proportion. Upon which, after the Workmen have agreed among themselves of the bigness of the Statue, they go away, and every one of them carve their several Parts so exactly, according to their just Proportions, that the singular skill of these Workmen is wonderful and amazing. And thus the 
Statue in Sainos which (according to the Art and Skill in Egypt) was cut in Two from the Head to the Privities exactly in the middle, yet notwithstanding was equally proportion'd in every part. And they say, that it exactly resembles the Statues in Egypt, having its Hands stretcht out, and its Thighs in a walking Posture. But we have


Page 52

now said enough of such things as are remarkable and worthy of memory in Egypt. In the next Book (according to what we purpos'd in the beginning of this) we shall give an account of things done elsewhere, and of other Fables and Srories, beginning with the Actions of the Assyrians in Asia.


Page 53

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK II.

The PREFACE.

THE Former Book (being the First of the whole) contains the Affairs of Egypt; among which are related what is fabulously reported of the Gods of Egypt, and what strange and wonderful Accounts are given of the Nature of Nile, and other things concerning that River. We have spoken there likewise of the Land of Egypt, their ancient Kings, and their several Actions; and have added the Building of the Pyramids, reckon'd amongst the Seven Wonders of the World. We have likewise set forth their Laws and Courts of Justice, and the strange Adoration of Beasts in Egypt. Lastly, the manner of their Burials, and the Greeks that were famous for Learning, and travell'd into Egypt, and brought over from thence many useful and profitable Arts and Sciences into Greece. In this next Book we shall describe the things done in Asia in ancient times, beginning with the Assyrian Empire.

CHAP. I.

Ninus the First King of Assyria: His Acts: He invades Babylonia, Media, and overruns several other Countries. Nineve built by him; the Description of it; Marries Semiramis; her Descent. Derceta the Philistines Dagon. His Expedition against Bactria; he dies. Semiramis builds Babylon, and several strange Works there; as a Passage under Water, Jupiter's Temple, &c. Hanging Gardens in Babylon. A vast Stone cut out. The strange property of a Morass. Her several Expeditions. The wonderful Lake in Ethiopia; their Burials there. Semiramis's Expedition into India: Her mock Elephants. Her Expedition proves fruitless. She surrenders her Kingdom to Ninyas her Son; her End.

ASIA was anciently govern'd by its own Native Kings, of whom there's no History extant, either as to any memorable Actions they perform'd, or so much as to their Names.


Page 54

Ninus is the First King of Assyria that is recorded in History; he perform'd many great and noble Actions; of whom we have design'd to set forth something particularly.

He was naturally of a Warlike Disposition, and very ambitious of Honour and Glory, and therefore caus'd the strongest of his Young Men to be train'd up in Martial Discipline, and by long and continual Exercise inur'd them readily to undergo all the Toyls and Hazards of War.

Having therefore rais'd a gallant Army, he made a League with Arieus King of Arabia, that was at that time full of strong and valiant Men. For that Nation are constant Lovers of Liberty, never upon any Terms admitting of any Foreign Prince: And therefore neither the Persian, nor the Macedonian Kings after them, (though they were most powerful in Arms) were ever able to conquer them. For Arabia being partly Desart, and partly parcht up for want of Water (unless it be in some secret Wells and Pits known only to the Inhabitants) cannot be subdu'd by any Foreign Force.

Ninus therefore, the Assyrian King, with the Prince of Arabia his Assistant, with a numerous Army, invaded the Babylonians, then next bordering upon him: For the Babylon that is now, was not built at that time; but the Province of Babylon had in it then many other considerable Cities, whose Inhabitants he easily subdu'd, (being rude and unexpert in Matters of War,) and impos'd upon them a Yearly Tribute; but carried away the King with all his Children Prisoners, and after put them to Death. Afterwards he entred Armenia with a great Army, and having overthrown some Cities, he struck Terror into the rest, and thereupon their King Barzanus seeing himself unable to deal with him, met him with many rich Presents, and submitted himself; whom Ninus out of his generous dissition, courteously receiv'd, and gave him the Kingdom of Armenia, upon condition he should be his Friend for the future, and supply him with Men and Provision for his Wars as he should have occasion.

Being thus strengthen'd, he invaded Media, whose King Pharnus coming out against him with a mighty Army, was utterly routed, and lost most of his Men, and was taken Prisoner with his Wife and Seven Children, and afterwards Crucified. 

Ninus being thus successful and prosperous, his Ambition rose the higher, and his desire most ardent to conquer all in Asia, which lay between Tanais and Nile; (so far does Prosperity and Excess in getting much, inflame the Desire to gain and compass more.) In order hereunto, he made one of his Friends Governor of the Province of Media, and he himself in the mean time marcht against the other Provinces of Asia, and subdu'd them all in Seventeen Years time, except the Indians and Bactrians. But no Writer has given any Account of the several Battels he fought, nor of the number of those Nations he conquer'd; and therefore following Ctesias the Cnidian, we shall only briefly run over the most famous and considerable Countries. He over-ran all the Countries bordering upon the Sea, together with the adjoining Continent, as Egypt and Phenicia, Celo-Syria, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Lycia, Caria, Phrygia, Mysia and Lydia; the Province of Troas and Phrygia upon the Hellespont, together with Propontis, Bithynia, Cappadocia, and the Barbarous Nations adjoyning upon Pontus, as far as to Tanais; he gain'd likewise the Country of the Caddusians, Tarpyrians, Hyrcanians, Dacians, Derbians, Carmanians, Choroneans, Borchanians and Parthians. He pierc'd likewise into Persia, the Provinces of Susiana, and that call'd Caspiana, through those narrow Straits, which from thence are call'd the Caspian Gates. He subdu'd likewise many other less considerable Nations, which would be too tedious here to recount. After much toyl and labour in vain, because of the difficulty of the Passes, and the multitude of those Warlike Inhabitants, he was forc'd to put off his War against the Bactrians to another opportunity.

Having marcht back with his Army into Syria, he markt out a Place for the building of a stately City: For in as much as he had surpast all his Ancestors in the glory and success of his Arms, he was resolv'd to build one of that state and grandeur, as should not only be the greatest then in the World, but such as none that ever should come after him should be able easily to exceed.

The King of Arabia he sent back with his Army into his own Country, with many rich Spoils, and noble Gifts. And he himself having got a great number


Page 55

of his Forces together, and provided Mony and Treasure, and other things necessary for the purpose, built a City near the River Euphrates, very famous for its Walls and Fortifications; of a long Form; for on both sides it ran out in length above an Hundred and Fifty Furlongs; but the Two lesser Angles were only Ninety Furlongs apiece; so that the Circumference of the whole was Four Hundred and Fourscore Furlongs. And the Founder was not herein deceived, for none ever after built the like, either as to the largeness of its Circumference, or the stateliness of its Walls. For the Wall was an Hundred Foot in Height, and so broad as Three Chariots might be driven together upon it in breast: There were Fifteen Hundred Turrets upon the Walls, each of them Two Hundred Foot high. He appointed the City to be inhabited chiefly by the richest Assyrians, and gave liberty to People of any other Nation, (to as many as would) to dwell there, and allow'd to the Citizens a large Territory next adjoining to them, and call'd the City after his own Name Ninus.

When he had finish'd his Work here, he marcht with an Army against the Bactrians, where he marry'd Semiramis; who being so famous above any of her Sex (as in History it is related) we cannot but say something of her here in this Place, being one advanc'd from so low a Fortune, to such a state and degree of Honour and Worldly Glory.

There's a City in Syria, call'd Ascalon, near which is a deep Lake abounding with Fish, where not far off stands a Temple dedicated to a famous Goddess call'd by the SyriansDerceto, she represents a Woman in her Face, and a Fish in all other parts of her Body, upon the account following, as the most Judicious among the Inhabitants report; for they say, that Venus being angry at this Goddess, caus'd her to fall into a vehement pang of Love with a beautiful Young Man, who was among others sacrificing to her, and was got with Child by him, and brought to Bed of a Daughter; and being asham'd afterwards of what she had done, she kill'd the Young Man, and expos'd the Child among Rocks in the Desert, and through Sorrow and Shame cast her self into the Lake, and was afterwards transform'd into a Fish; whence it came to pass, that at this very Day the Syrians eat no Fish, but adore them as Gods. They say that the Infant that was expos'd, was both preserv'd and nourish'd by a most wonderful Providence, by the means of a great Flock of Pigeons that nestled near to the Place where the Child lay: For with their Wings they cherisht it, and kept it warm; and observing where the Herdsmen and other Shepherds left their Milk in the Neighbouring Cottages, took it up in their Bills, and as so many Nurses thrust their Beaks between the Infants Lips, and so instil'd the Milk: And when the Child was a Year old, and stood in need of stronger Nourishment, the Pigeons fed it with pieces of Cheese which they pickt out from the rest: When the Shepherds return'd, and found their Cheeses pickt round, they wondred (at first) at the thing; but observing afterward how it came to pass, they not only found out the cause, but likewise a very beautiful Child, which they forthwith carry'd away to their Cottages, and made a Present of it to the King's Superintendent of his Flocks and Herds (whose Name was Simma) who (having no Children of his own) carefully bred up the Young Lady as if she had been his own Daughter, and call'd her Semiramis, a denomination in the Syrian Language deriv'd from Pigeons, which the Syrians ever after ador'd for Goddesses. And these are the Stories told of Semiramis.

Being now grown up, and exceeding all others of her Sex for the Charms of her Beauty, one of the King's great Officers call'd Menon, was sent to take an account of the Kings Herds and Flocks: This Man was Lord President of the King's Council, and chief Governor of Syria, and lodging upon this occasion at Simma's House, at the sight of Semiramis, fell in love with her, and with much intreaty obtain'd her from Simma, and carried her away with him to Ninive, where he Marry'd her, and had by her Two Sons, Hypates and Hydaspes: And being a Woman of admirable Parts as well as Beauty, her Husband was altogether at her Devotion, and never would do any thing without her Advice, which was ever successful.

About this time Ninus having finish'd his City (call'd after his own Name,) prepar'd for his Expedition against the Bactrians; and having had experience of the greatness of their Forces, the valour of their Souldiers, and the difficulties of passing into their Country, he rais'd an Army of the choicest Men he could


Page 56

pick out from all Parts of his Dominions'; for because he was baffl'd in his former Expedition, he was resolv'd to invade Bactria with a far stronger Army than he did before. Bringing therefore his whole Army together at a General Randezvouz, there were numbred (as Ctesias writes) Seventeen Hundred Thousand Foot, above Two Hundred and Ten Thousand Horse, and no fewer than Ten Thousand and Six Hundred Hooked Chariots. This number at the first view seems to be very incredible; but to such as seriously consider the largeness and populousness of Asia, it cannot be judg'd impossible. For if any (not to say any thing of the Eight Hundred Thousand Men that Darius had with him in his Expedition against the Scythians, and the innumerable Army Xerxes brought over with him into Grecce) will but take notice of things done lately, even as of Yesterday, he'l more easily credit what we now say. For in Sicily Dionysius led only out of that one City of Syracuse, an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Foot, and Twelve Thousand Horse; and lancht out of one Port, a Navy of Four Hundred Sail, of which some were of Three Tyre of Oars, and others of Five: And the Romans a little before the Times of Hannibal, rais'd in Italy of their own Citizens and Confederates, an Army little less than a Million of Fighting Men; and yet all Italy is not to be compar'd with one Province of Asia for number of Men. But this may sufficiently convince them, that compute the ancient Populousness of the Countries by the present depopulations of the Cities at this day.

Ninus therefore marching with these Forces against the Bactrians, divided his Army into Two Bodies, because of the straitness and difficulty of the Passages. There are in Bactria many large and populous Cities, but one is more especially Famous, call'd Bactria, in which the King's Palace, for greatness and magnificence, and the Citadel for strength, far excel all the rest.

Oxyartes reign'd there at this time, who caus'd all that were able, to bear Arms, and muster'd an Army of Four Hundred Thousand Men. With these he met the Enemy at the Streights, entring into his Country, where he suffered Ninus to enter with part of his Army: When he saw a competent number enter'd, he fell upon them in the open Plain, and fought them with that resolution, that the Bactrians put the Assyrians to flight, and pursuing them to the next Mountains, kill'd a Hundred Thousand of their Enemies; but after the whole Army enter'd, the Bactrians were overpower'd by number, and were broken, and all fled to their several Cities, in order to defend every one his own Country. Ninus easily subdu'd all the rest of the Forts and Castles; but Bactria it self was so strong and well provided, that he could not force it; which occasion'd a long and tedious Siege, so that the Husband of Semiramis (who was there in the King's Camp) being Love-sick, impatient of being any longer without his Wife, sent for her, who being both discreet and couragious, and indowed with other noble Qualifications, readily imbrac'd the opportunity of shewing to the World her own natural Valour and Resolution; and that she might with more safety perform so long a Journey, she put on such a Garment as whereby she could not be discern'd whether she were a Man or a Woman; and so made, that by it she both preserv'd her Beauty from being scorcht by the heat in her Journey, and likewise was thereby more nimble and ready for any business she pleas'd to undertake, being of her self a youthful and sprightly Lady; and this sort of Garment was in so high esteem, that the Medes afterwards when they came to be Lords of Asia, wore Semiramis's Gown, and the Persians likewise after them.

As soon as she came to Bactria, and observ'd the manner of the Siege, how Assaults were made only in open and plain Places most likely to be enter'd, and that none dar'd to approach the Cittadel, because of its natural Strength and Fortisication, and that they within took more care to defend the lower and weaker parts of the Walls, than the Castle where they neglected their Guards, she took some with her that were skilful in climbing up the Rocks, and with them with much Toyl, pass'd over a deep Trench, and possess'd her self of part of the Castle; whereupon she gave a Signal to them that were assaulting the Wall upon the Plain. Then they that were within the City being suddenly struck with a Panick Fear at the taking of the Castle, in desperation of making any further defence forsook the Walls.

The City being taken in this manner, the King greatly admir'd the Valour of the Woman, and bountifully rewarded her, and was presently so passionately affected at the sight of her Beauty, that he us'd all the Arguments imaginable to persuade


Page 57

her Husband to bestow his Wife upon him, promising him as a Reward of his Kindness, to give him his Daughter Sosana in Marriage: But he absolutely refus'd; upon which the King threatn'd him, that if he would not consent, he would pluck out his Eyes.

Menon hereupon out of fear of the King's Threats, and overpower'd with the Love of his Wife, fell into a distracted Rage and Madness, and forthwith hang'd himself. And this was the occasion of the advancement of Semiramis to the Regal state and dignity.

Ninus having now possess'd himself of all the Treasures of Bactria (where was abundance of Gold and Silver) and settled his Affairs throughout the whole Province of Bactria, return'd with his Army to his own Country.

Afterwards he had a Son by Semiramis, call'd Ninyas, and dy'd leaving his Wife Queen Regent. She bury'd her Husband Ninus in the Royal Palace, and rais'd over him a Mount of Earth of a wonderful bigness, being Nine Furlongs in height, and ten in breadth, as Ctesias says: So that the City standing in a Plain near to the River Euphrates, the Mount (many Furlongs off) looks like a stately Cittadel. And it's said, that it continues to this day, though Nin

•ve

 was destroy'd by the Medes when they ruin'd the Assyrian Empire.

Semiramis was naturally of an high aspiring Spirit, ambitious to excel all her Predecessors in glorious Actions, and therefore imploy'd all her Thoughts about the building of a City in the Province of Babylon; and to this end having provided Architects, Artists, and all other Necessaries for the Work, She got together Two Millions of Men out of all Parts of the Empire to be imploy'd in the building of the City. It was so built as that the River Euphrates ran through the middle of it, and she compass'd it round with a Wall of Three Hundred and Sixty Furlongs in Circuit, and adorn'd with many stately Turrets; and such was the state and grandeur of the Work, that the Walls were of that breadth, as that Six Chariots abreast might be driven together upon them. Their height was such as exceeded all Mens belief that heard of it (as Ctesias Cnidius relates) But Clitarchus, and those who afterwards went over with Alexander into Asia, have written that the Walls were in Circuit Three Hundred Sixty Five Furlongs; the Queen making them of that Compass, to the end that the Furlongs should be as many in number as the Days of the Year: They were of Brick cemented with Brimstone; in height as Ctesias says Fifty Orgyas; but as some of the later Writers report, but Fifty Cubits only, and that the Breadth was but a little more than what would allow two Chariots to be driven afront. There were Two Hundred and Fifty Turrets, in height and thickness proportionable to the largeness of the Wall. It is not to be wondred at, that there were so few Towers upon a Wall of so great a Circuit, being that in many Places round the City, there were deep Morasses; so that it was judg'd to no purpose to raise Turrets there where they were so naturally fortify'd: Between the Wall and the Houses, there was a Space left round the City of Two Hundred Foot.

That the Work might be the more speedily dispatcht, to each of her Friends was allotted a Furlong, with an allowance of all Expences necessary for their several Parts, and commanded all should be finish'd in a Years time; which being diligently perfected with the Queen's Approbation, she then made a Bridge over the narrowest part of the River, Five Furlongs in length, laying the Supports and Pillars of the Arches with great Art and Skill in the Bottom of the Water Twelve Foot distance from each other. That the Stones might be the more firmly joyn'd, they were bound together with Hooks of Iron, and the Joints fill'd up with melted Lead. And before the Pillars, she made and placed Defences, with sharp pointed Angles, to receive the Water before it beat upon the flat sides of the Pillars, which caus'd the Course of the Water to run round by degrees gently and moderately as far as to the broad sides of the Pillars, so that the sharp Points of the Angles cut the Stream, and gave a check to its violence, and the roundness of them by lit

•

le and little giving way, abated the force of the Current. This Bridge was 

〈◊〉

 wi

•

h 

•

reat 

•

oices and Planks of Cedar, Cypress and Palm Trees, and was Thi

〈…〉

•

oot in breadth, and for Art and Curiosity, yielded to none of the Works o

•

〈◊〉.

 On either side of the River she rais'd a Bank, as broad 

〈◊◊◊◊〉

 great cost drew it out in length an Hundred Furlongs.


Page 58

She built likewise Two Palaces at each end of the Bridge upon the Bank of the River, whence she might have a Prospect over the whole City, and make her Passage as by Keys to the most convenient Places in it, as she had occasion. And whereas Euphrates runs through the middle of Babylon, making its course to the South, the Palaces lye the one on the East, and the other on the West Side of the River; both built at exceeding Costs and Expence. For that on the West had an high and stately Wall, made of well burnt Brick, Sixty Furlongs in compass; within this was drawn another of a round Circumference, upon which were portray'd in the Bricks before they were burnt, all sorts of living Creatures, as if it were to the Life, laid with great Art in curious Colours. This Wall was in Circuit Forty Furlongs, Three Hundred Bricks thick, and in height (as Ctesias says) a Hundred Yards, upon which were Turrets an Hundred and Forty Yards high. The Third and most inward Wall immediately surrounded the Palace, Thirty Furlongs in Compass, and far surmounted the middle Wall, both in height and thickness; and on this Wall and the Towers were represented the Shapes of all sorts of Living Creatures, artificially exprest in most lively Colours. Especially was represented a General Hunting of all sorts of wild Beasts, each Four Cubits high and upwards; amongst these was to be seen Semiramis on Horseback, striking a Leopard through with a Dart, and next to her, her Husband Ninus in close Fight with a Lion, piercing him with his Lance. To this Palace she built likewise Three Gates, under which were Apartments of Brass for Entertainments, into which Passages were open'd by by a certain Engin. This Palace far excell'd that on the other side of the River, both in greatness and adornments. For the outmost Wall of that (made of well burnt Brick) was but Thirty Furlongs in compass. Instead of the curious Portrature of Beasts, there were the Brazen Statues of Ninus and Semiramis, the great Officers, and of Jupiter, whom the Babylonians call Belus; and likewise Armies drawn up in Battalia, and divers sorts of Hunting were there represented, to the great diversion and pleasure of the Beholders. After all these in a low Ground in Babylon, she sunk a Place for a Pond Four-square, every Square being Three Hundred Furlongs in length, lin'd with Brick, and cemented with Brimstone, and the whole Five and Thirty Foot in depth: Into this having first turn'd the River, she then made a Passage in nature of a Vault, from one Palace to another, whose Arches were built of firm and strong Brick, and plaister'd all over on both sides with Bitumen Four Cubits thick. The Walls of this Vault were Twenty Bricks in thickness, and Twelve Foot high, beside and above the Arches; and the breadth was Fifteen Foot. This Piece of Work being finish'd in Two Hundred and Sixty Days, the River was turn'd into its ancient Channel again, so that the River flowing over the whole Work, Semiramis could go from one Palace to the other, without passing over the River. She made likewise Two Brazen Gates at either end of the Vault, which continu'd to the time of the Persian Empire. In the middle of the City, she built a Temple to Jupiter, whom the Babylonians call Belus (as we have before said) of which since Writers differ amongst themselves, and the Work is now wholly decay'd through length of Time, there's nothing that can certainly be related concerning it: Yet it's apparent it was of an exceeding great height, and that by the advantage of it, the Chaldean Astrologers exactly observ'd the setting and rising of the Stars. The whole was built of Brick, cemented with Brimstone, with great Art and Cost. Upon the top she plac'd Three Statues of beaten Gold of Jupiter, Juno and Rhea. That of Jupiter stood upright in the posture as if he were walking; he was Forty Foot in height, and weighed a Thousand Babylonish Talents. The Statue of Rhea was of the same weight sitting on a Golden Throne, having Two Lions standing on either side, one at her Knees, and near to them Two exceeding great Serpents of Silver, weighing Thirty Talents apiece. Here likewise the Image of Juno stood upright, and weighed Eight Hundred Talents, grasping a Serpent by the Head in her right Hand, and holding a Scepter adorn'd with precious Stones in her left. For all these Deities there was plac'd a Common Table made of beaten Gold, Forty Foot long, and Fifteen broad, weighing Five Hundred Talents: Upon which stood Two Cups weighing Thirty Talents, and near to them as many Censers weighing Three Hundred Talents: There were there likewise plac'd Three Drinking Bowls of Gold, one of which dedicated to Jupiter, weigh'd Twelve Hundred Babylonish Talents, but the other Two Six Hundred apiece; but all those the Persian


Page 59

Kings sacrilegiously carry'd away. And length of Time has either altogether consum'd, or much defac'd the Palaces and the other Structures; so that at this day but a small part of this Babylon is inhabited, and the greatest part which lay within the Walls is turn'd into Tillage and Pasture.

There was likewise a Hanging Garden (as it's call'd) near the Citadel, not built by Semiramis, but by a later Prince, call'd Cyrus, for the sake of a Curtesan, who being a Persian (as they say) by Birth, and coveting Meadows on Mountain Tops, desir'd the King by an Artificial Plantation to imitate the Land in Persia. This Garden was Four Hundred Foot Square, and the Ascent up to it was as to the Top of a Mountain, and had Buildings and Apartments out of one into another, like unto a Theater. Under the Steps to the Ascent, were built Arches one above another, rising gently by degrees, which supported the whole Plantation. The highest Arch upon which the Platform of the Garden was laid, was Fifty Cubits high, and the Garden it self was surrounded with Battlements and Bulwarks. The Walls were made very strong, built at no small Charge and Expence, being Two and Twenty Foot thick, and every Sally-port Ten Foot wide: Over the several Stories of this Fabrick, were laid Beams and Summers of huge Massy Stones each Sixteen Foot long, and Four broad. The Roof over all these was first cover'd with Reeds, daub'd with abundance of Brimstone; then upon them was laid double Tiles pargeted together with a hard and durable Mortar, and over them after all, was a Covering with Sheets of Lead, that the Wet which drencht through the Earth, might not rot the Foundation. Upon all these was laid Earth of a convenient depth, sufficient for the growth of the greatest Trees. When the Soyl was laid even and smooth, it was planted with all sorts of Trees, which both for Greatness and Beauty, might delight the Spectators. The Arches (which stood one above another, and by that means darted light sufficient one into another) had in them many stately Rooms of all Kinds, and for all purposes. But there was one that had in it certain Engins, whereby it drew plenty of Water out of the River through certain Conduits and Conveyances from the Platform of the Garden, and no body without was the wiser, or knew what was done. This Garden (as we said before) was built in later Ages.

But Semiramis built likewise other Cities upon the Banks of Euphrates and Tigris, where she establish'd Marts for the vending of Merchandize brought from Media and Paretacenes, and other Neighbouring Countries. For next to Nile and Ganges, Euphrates and Tigris are the noblest Rivers of all Asia, and have their Spring-heads in the Mountains of Arabia, and are distant one from another Fifteen Hundred Furlongs. They run through Media and Paretacena into Mesopotamia, which from its lying in the middle between these Two Rivers, has gain'd from them that Name; thence passing through the Province of Babylon, they empty themselves into the Red Sea. These being very large Rivers, and passing through divers Countries, greatly inrich the Merchants that traffick in those Parts; so that the Neighbouring Places are full of Wealthy Mart Towns, and greatly advanc'd the glory and majesty of Babylon.

Semiramis likewise caus'd a great Stone to be cut out of the Mountains of Armenia, an Hundred and Twenty Five Foot in length, and Five in breadth and thickness; this she convey'd to the River by the help of many Yokes of Oxen and Asses, and there put it Aboard a Ship, and brought it safe by Water to Babylon, and set it up in the most remarkable High-way as a wonderful Spectacle to all Beholders. From its shape it's call'd an * Obelisk, and is accounted one of the Seven Wonders of the World. There are indeed many remarkable and wonderful things to be seen in Babylon; but amongst these, the great quantity of Brimstone that there flows out of the Ground, is not to be the least admir'd, which is so much, that it not only supply'd all their occasions in building such great and mighty Works, but the common People profusely gather it, and when its dry, burn it instead of Fewel; and though it be drawn out by an innumerable Company of People, as from a great Fountain, yet it's as plentiful as ever it was before. Near this Fountain there's a Spring not big, but very fierce and violent, for it casts forth a Sulphureous and gross Vapour, which suddenly kills every living Creature that comes near to it; for the Breath being stopt a long time, and all power of Respiration taken away by the force of the Exhalation, the Body presently swells so, that the Parts about the Lungs are all in a Flame.


Page 60

Beyond the River there is a Morass, about which is a crusty Earth; if any unacquainted with the Place get into it, at first he floats upon the Top, when he comes into the Middle he's violently hal'd away, and striving to help himself, seems to be held so fast by something or other, that all his Labour to get loose is in vain. And first his Feet, then his Legs and Thighs to his Loyns are benumm'd, at length his whole Body is stupify'd, and then down he sinks to the Bottom, and presently after is cast up dead to the Surface. And thus much for the Wonders of BABYLON.

When Semiramis had finish'd all her Works, she marcht with a great Army into Media, and encamp'd near to a Mountain call'd Bagistan; there she made a Garden twelve Furlongs in Compass: It was in a plain Champain Country, and had a great Fountain in it, which water'd the whole Garden. Mount Bagistan is dedicated to Jupiter, and towards one side of the Garden has steep Rocks seventeen Furlongs from the Top to the Bottom. She cut out a Piece of the lower Part of the Rock, and caus'd her own Image to be carv'd upon it, and a Hundred of her Guard that were Launceteers standing round about her. She wrote likewise in Syriac Letters upon the Rock, That Semiramis ascended from the Plain to the Top of the Mountain by laying the Packs and Fardles of the Beasts that follow'd her one upon another.

Marching away from ence, she came to Chaone, a City of Media, where she incamp'd upon a rising Ground, from whence she took notice of an exceeding great and high Rock, where she made another very great Garden in the very Middle of the Rock, and built upon it stately Houses of Pleasure, whence she might both have a delightful Prospect into the Garden, and view the Army as they lay incamp'd below in the Plain; being much delighted with this Place she stay'd here a considerable Time, giving up her self to all kinds of Pleasures and Delights, for she forbore marrying lest she should then be depos'd from the Government, and in the mean time she made Choice of the handsomest Commanders to be her Gallants; but after they had layn with her she cut off their Heads.

From hence she march'd towards Ecbatana, and arriv'd at the Mountain Zarcheum, which being many Furlongs in Extent, and full of steep Precipices and craggy Rocks, there was no passing but by long and tedious Windings and Turnings. To leave therefore behind her an Eternal Monument of her Name, and to make a short Cut for her Passage, she caus'd the Rocks to be hew'd down, and the Valleys to be fill'd up with Earth, and so in a short time at a vast Expence laid the Way open and plain, which to this day is call'd Semiramis's WAY.

When she came to Ecbatana, which is situated in a low and even Plain, she built there a stately Palace, and bestow'd more of her Care and Pains here than she had done at any other Place. For the City wanting Water (there being no Spring near) she plentifully supply'd it with good and wholesom Water, brought thither with a great deal of Toyl and Expence, after this manner: There's Mountain call'd Orontes, twelve Furlongs distant from the City, exceeding high and steep for the Space of five and twenty Furlongs up to the Top; on the other side of this Mount there's a great Mear which empties it self into the River. At the Foot of this Mountain she dug a Canal fifteen Foot in Breadth and forty in Depth, through which she convey'd Water in great Abundance into the City. And these are the Things which she did in Media.

Afterwards she made a Progress through Persia and all the rest of her Dominions in Asia, and all along as she went she plain'd all the Way before her, levelling both Rocks and Mountains. On the other hand in Champain Countries she would raise Eminences on which she would sometimes build Sepulchres for her Officers and Commanders, and at other times Towns and Cities. Throughout her whole Expeditions she always us'd to raise an Ascent, upon which she pitcht her own Pavilion, that from thence she might have a View of her whole Army. Many Things which she perform'd in Asia remain to this day, and are call'd Semiramis's Works.

Afterwards she pass'd through all Egypt, and having conquer'd the greatest Part of Lybia, she went to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, and there inquir'd of the Oracle how long she should live; which return'd her this Answer, That she should leave this World and afterwards be for ever honour'd by some Nations in Asia, when Ninyas her Son should be plotting against her.


Page 61

When she had perform'd these things, she marcht into Ethiopia, and having subdu'd many Places in it, she had an Opportunity to see what was there very remarkable and wonderful. For they say there's a four-square Lake, a hundred and sixty Foot in Circuit, the Water of which is in Colour like unto Vermilion, and of an extraordinary sweet Flavour, much like unto old Wine; yet of such wonderful Operation, that whosoever drinks of it goes presently mad, and confesses all the Faults that ever he had been before guilty of; but some will scarce believe this Relation.

The Ethiopians have a peculiar way of burying their Dead; for after they have imbalm'd the Body they pour round about it melted Glass, and then place it upon a Pillar, so that the Corps may be plainly seen through the Glass, as Herodotus has reported the thing. But Ctesias of Cnidus assirms that he tells a Winter-tale, and says that its true indeed that the Body is imbalm'd, but that Glass is not pour'd upon the naked Body, for the Bodies thereby would be so scorch'd and defac'd that they could not possibly retain any likeness to the dead: And that therefore they make an hollow Statue of Gold, and put the Body within it, and then pour the melted Glass round upon this Statue, which they set upon some high Place, and so the Statue which resembles the dead is seen through the Glass, and thus he says they use to bury those of the richer Sort; But those of meaner Fortunes they put into Statues of Silver; and for the poor they make Statues of Potters Clay, every one having Glass enough, for there's Abundance to be got in Ethiopia, and ready at hand for all the Inhabitants. But we shall speak more fully of the Customs and Laws of the Ethiopians and the Product of the Land and other things worthy of Remark presently when we come to relate their Antiquities and old Fables and Stories.

Semiramis having settl'd her Affairs in Egypt and Ethiopia, return'd with her Army into Asia to Bactria: And now having a great Army, and enjoying a long Peace, she had a longing Desire to perform some notable Exploit by her Arms. Hearing therefore that the Indians were the greatest Nation in the whole World, and had the largest and richest Tract of Land of all others, she resolv'd to make War upon them. Stabrobates was at that time King, who had innumerable Forces, and many Elephants bravely accoutred and fitted to strike Terror into the Hearts of his Enemies. For India for the Pleasantness of the Country excell'd all others, being water'd in every Place with many Rivers, so that the Land yielded every year a double Crop; and by that Means was so rich and so abounded with Plenty of all things necessary for the Sustenance of Man's Life, that it supply'd the Inhabitants continually with such things as made them excessively rich, insomuch as it was never known that there was ever any Famine amongst them, the Climate being so happy and favourable; and upon that account likewise there's an incredible Number of Elephants, which for Courage and Strength of Body far excel those in Africa. Moreover this Country abounds in Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron and pretious Stones of all sorts, both for Profit and Pleasure. All which being nois'd abroad, so stirr'd up the Spirit of Semiramis, that (tho' she had no Provocation given her) yet she was resolv'd upon the War against the Indians. But knowing that she had need of great Forces, she sent Dispatches to all the Provinces, with Command to the Governors to list the choicest young Men they could find, ordering the Proportion of Souldiers every Province and Country should send forth according to the Largeness of it; and commanded that all should furnish themselves with new Arms and Armour, and all appear in three years time at a general Randezvouz in Bactria bravely arm'd and accountred in all Points. And having sent for Shipwrights out of Phoenicia, Syria, Cyprus, and other Places bordering upon the Sea-coasts, she prepar'd Timber for them fit for the Purpose, and order'd them to build Vessels that might be taken asunder and convey'd from place to place wherever she pleas'd. For the River Indus bordering upon that Kingdom being the greatest in those Parts, she stood in need of many River-boats to pass it in Order to repress the Indians. But being there was no Timber near that River she was necessitated to convey the Boats thither by Land from Bactria. She further consider'd that she was much inferior to the Indians for Elephants (which were absolutely necessary for her to make use of) she therefore contriv'd to have Beasts that should resemble them, hoping by this Means to strike a Terror into the Indians, who believ'd there were no Elephants in any place but in India.


Page 62

To this End she provided three hundred thousand black Oxen, and distributed the Flesh amongst a Company of ordinary Mechanicks and such Fellows as she had to play the Coblers for her, and ordered them by stitching the Skins together and stuffing them with Straw to imitate the Shape of an Elephant, and in every one of them she put a Man to govern them, and a Camel to carry them, so that at a distance they appear'd to all that saw them as if they were really such Beasts.

They that were imploy'd in this Work wrought at it night and day in a Place which was wall'd round for the Purpose, and Guards set at every Gate, that none might be admitted either to go in or out, to the end that none might see what they were doing, lest it should be nois'd abroad and come to the Ears of the Indians.

Having therefore provided Shipping and Elephants in the space of two years, in the third she randezvouz'd all her Forces in Bactria. Her Army consisted (as Ctesias says) of three Millions of Foot, two hundred Thousand Horse, and a hundred Thousand Chariots, and a hundred Thousand Men mounted upon Camels with Swords four Cubits long. The Boats that might be taken asunder were two Thousand; which the Camels carry'd by Land as they did the Mock-Elephants, as we have before declar'd. The Souldiers made their Horses familiar with these feign'd Beasts by bringing them often to them, lest they should be terrify'd at the Sight of them; which Perseus imitated many Ages after when he was to fight with the Romans, who had Elephants in their Army out of Africa. However this Contrivance prov'd to be of no Advantage either to him or her, as will appear in the Issue herein a little after related.

When Stabrobates the Indian King heard of these great Armies and the mighty Preparations made against him, he did all he could to excel Semiramis in every thing. And first he built of great Canes four Thousand River-boats: For abundance of these Canes grow in India about the Rivers and Fenns, so thick as a Man can scarce fathom: And Vessels made of these Reeds (they say) are exceeding useful, because they'l never rot or be worm-eaten.

He was very diligent likewise in preparing of Arms and going from Place to Place throughout all India, and so rais'd a far greater Army than that of Semiramis. To his former Number of Elephants he added more, which he took by hunting, and furnish'd them all with every thing that might make them look terrible in the Face of their Enemies, so that by their Multitude and the Compleatness of their Armour in all Points it seem'd above the Strength and Power of Man to bear up against the violent Shock of these Creatures.

Having therefore made all these Preparations, he sent Embassadours to Semiramis (as she was on her March towards him) to complain and upbraid her for beginning a War without any Provocation or Injury offer'd her; and by his private Letters taxed her with her whorish Course of Life, and vow'd (calling the Gods to witness) that if he conquer'd her he would nail her to the Cross. When she read the Letters, she smil'd, and said, the Indian should presently have a Trial of her Valour by her Actions. When she came up with her Army to the River Indus she found the Enemies Fleet drawn up in a Line of Battle; whereupon she forthwith drew up her own, and having mann'd it with the stoutest Souldiers, joyn'd Battle, yet so ordering the Matter as to have her Land-forces ready upon the Shoar to be assisting as there should be Occasion. After a long and sharp Fight with Marks of Valour on both sides, Semiramis was at length victorious, and sunk a Thousand of the Enemies Vessels, and took a great number of Prisoners. Puffed up with this Success she took in all the Cities and Islands that lay in the River, and carry'd away a hundred Thousand Captives. After this the Indian King drew off his Army (as if he fled for Fear) but in Truth to decoy his Enemies to pass the River.

Semiramis therefore (seeing things fall out according to her wish) laid a broad Bridge of Boats (at a vast Charge) over the River, and thereby passed over all her Forces, leaving only threescore Thousand to guard the Bridge, and with the rest of her Army pursu'd the Indians. She plac'd the Mock-Elephants in the Front that the Enemies Scouts might presently inform the King what Multitudes of Elephants she had in her Army: And she was not deceiv'd in her hopes; for when the Spies gave an Account to the Indians what a great Multitude of these Creatures were advancing towards them, they were all in amaze, inquiring among themselves, whence the Assyrians should be supply'd with such a vast number of Elephants: But the Cheat could not be long conceal'd, for some of Semiramis's Souldiers being


Page 63

laid by the Heels for their Carelesness upon the Guard (through Fear of further Punishment) made their Escape and fled to the Enemy, and undeceiv'd them as to the Elephants; upon which the Indian King was mightily encourag'd, and caus'd Notice of the Delusion to be spread through the whole Army, and then forthwith march'd with all his Force against the Assyrians, Semiramis on the other hand doing the like. When they approach'd near one to another, Stabrobates the Indian King plac'd his Horse and Chariots in the Van-guard at a good distance before the main Body of his Army. The Queen having plac'd her Mock-Elephants at the like distance from her main Body, valiantly receiv'd her Enemies Charge; but the Indian Horse were most strangely terrify'd; for in Regard the Phantasms at a distance seem'd to be real Elephants, the Horses of the Indians (being inur'd to those Creatures) prest boldly and undauntedly forward; but when they came near and saw another sort of Beast than usual, and the smell and every thing else almost being strange and new to them, they broke in with great Terror and Confusion, one upon another, so that they cast some of their Riders headlong to the Ground, and ran away with others (as the Lot happen'd) into the midst of their Enemies: Whereupon Semiramis readily making use of her Advantage, with a Body of choice Men fell in upon them, and routed them, forcing them back to their main Body: And though Stabrobates was something astonish'd at this unexpected Defeat, yet he brought up his Foot against the Enemy with his Elephants in the Front: He himself was in the right Wing, mounted upon a stately Elephant, and made a fierce Charge upon the Queen her self, who happen'd then to be opposite to him in the left. And tho' the Mock-Elephants in Semiramis's Army did the like, yet they stood the violent shock of the other but a little while, for the Indian Beasts being both exceeding strong and stout, easily bore down and destroy'd all that oppos'd them, so that there was a great Slaughter; for some they trampl'd under foot, others they rent in pieces with their Teeth, and toss'd up others with their Trunks into the Air. The Ground therefore being cover'd with Heaps of dead Carcases and nothing but Death and Destruction to be seen on every hand, so that all were full of Horror and Amazement, none durst keep their Order or Ranks any longer. Upon which the whole Assyrian Army fled outright, and the Indian King encountred with Semiramis, and first wounded her with an Arrow in the Arm, and afterwards with a Dart (in wheeling about) in the Shoulder, whereupon the Queen (her Wounds not being mortal) fled, and by the Swiftness of her Horse (which far exceeded the other that pursu'd her) she got off. But all making one way to the Bridge of Boats, and such a vast Multitude of Men thronging together in one strait and narrow Passage, the Queen's Souldiers miserably perish'd by treading down one another under foot, and (which was strange and unusual) Horse and Foot lay tumbling promiscuously one over another. When they came at length to the Bridge, and the Indians at their Heels, the Consternation was so great that many on both sides the Bridge were tumbled over into the River. But when the greatest part of those that remain'd had got over; Semiramis caus'd the Cords and Tenons of the Bridge to be cut, which done, the Boats (which were before joyn'd together, and upon which was a great Number of Indians not in the Pursuit) being now divided into many Parts, and carry'd here and there by the force of the Current, Multitudes of the Indians were drown'd, and Semiramis was now safe and secure, having such a Barrier as the River betwixt her and her enemies. Whereupon the Indian King being forewarn'd by Prodigies from Heaven and the Opinions of the Soothsayers, forbore all further Pursuit. And Semiramis making Exchange of Prisoners in Bactra return'd with scarce a third part of her Army.

A little time after Semiramis being assaulted by an Eunuch through the treacherous Contrivance of her Son, remembred the former Answer given her by the Oracle at the Temple of Hammon, and therefore pass'd the Business over without punishing of him who was chiefly concern'd in the Plot: But surrendring the Crown to him, commanded all to obey him as their lawful King, and forthwith disappear'd as if she had been translated to the Gods, according to the Words of the Oracle. There are some which fabulously say she was metamorphos'd into a Pigeon; and that she flew away with a Flock of those Birds that lighted upon her Palace: And hence it is that the Assyrians adore a Dove, believing that Semiramis was enthron'd amongst the Gods. And this was the * End of Semiramis Queen


Page 64

of all Asia, except India, after she had liv'd Sixty two years, and reign'd Forty two. And these are the Things which Ctesias the Cnidian reports of her in his History.

Athenaeus, and some other Writers, affirm that she was a most beautiful Strumpet, and upon that account the King of Assyria fell in Love with her, and at first was taken into his Favour, and at length becoming his lawful Wife she prevail'd with her Husband to grant her the sole and absolute Authority of the regal Government for the space of five days. Taking therefore upon her the Scepter and royal Mantle of the Kingdom, the first day she made a sumptuous Banquet and magnificent Entertainments, to which she invited the Generals of the Army and all the Nobility, in order to be observant to all her Commands. The next day having both great and small at her beck, she committed her Husband to the Goal: And in Regard she was of a bold and daring Spirit, apt and ready to undertake any great Matters, she easily gain'd the Kingdom, which she held to the time of her old Age, and became famous for her many great and wonderful Acts: And these are the Things which Historians variously relate concerning her.

CHAP. II.

Ninyas succeeds Semiramis: His close and slothful Manner of Life. The Reign of Sardanapalus: His Luxury and Effeminacy. His Epitaph. Depos'd by Arbaces the Mede; and the Assyrian Empire overturn'd. Nineveh raz'd.

AFTER her Death Ninyas, the Son of Ninus and Semiramis, succeeded, and reign'd peaceably, nothing at all like his Mother for Valour and martial Affairs. For he spent all his Time shut up in his Place, insomuch as he was never seen of any but of his Concubines and Eunuchs; for being given up wholly to his Pleasures, he shook off all Cares and every thing that might be irksome and troublesome, placing all the Happiness of a King in a fordid Indulgence of all sorts of Voluptuousness. But that he might reign the more securely, and be fear'd of all his Subjects, every year he rais'd out of every Province a certain number of Souldiers, under their several Generals, and having brought them in the City, over every Country appointed such a Governor as he could most confide in, and were most at his Devotion. At the end of the year he rais'd as many more out of the Provinces, and sent the former home, taking first of them an Oath of Fidelity. And this he did, that his Subjects observing how he always had a great Army ready in the Field, those of them that were inclin'd to be refractory or rebel (out of fear of Punishment) might continue firm in their due Obedience. And the further Ground likewise of this yearly Change was, that the Officers and Souldiers might be from time to time disbanded before they could have time to be well acquainted one with another. For length of Time in martial Imployments so improves the Skill and advances the Courage and Resolution of the Commanders, that many times they conspire against their Princes and wholly fall off from their Allegiance.

His living thus close and unseen, was a Covert to the Voluptuous Course of his Life, and in the mean time (as if he had been a God) none durst in the least mutter any thing against him. And in this manner (creating Commanders of his Army, constituting of Governors in the Provinces, appointing the Chamberlains and Officers of his Houshold, placing of Judges in their several Countries, and ordering and disposing of all other Matters as he thought sit most for his own Advantage) he spent his Days in Nineve.


Page 65

After the same manner almost liv'd all the rest of the Kings for the space of Thirty Generations, in a continu'd Line of Succession from Father to Son, to the very Reign of Sardanapalus; in whose time the Empire of the Assyrians devolv'd upon the Medes, after it had continu'd above Thirteen Hundred and Sixty Years, as Ctesias the Cnidian says in his Second Book. But it's needless to recite their Names, or how long each of them reign'd, in regard none of them did any thing worth remembring, save only that it may deserve an Account how the Assyrians assisted the Trojans, by sending them some Forces under the Command of Memnon the Son of Tithon.

For when Teutamus reign'd in Asia, who was the Twentieth from Ninyas the Son of Semiramis, it's said the Grecians under their General Agamemnon, made War upon the Trojans, at which time the Assyrians had been Lords of Asia above a Thousand Years. For Priam the King of Troy (being a Prince under the Assyrian Empire, when War was made upon him) sent Ambassadors to crave aid of Teutamus, who sent him Ten Thousand Ethiopians, and as many out of the Province of Susiana, with Two Hundred Chariots under the Conduct of Memnon the Son of Tithon. For this Tithon at that time was Governor of Persia, and in special Favour with the King above all the rest of the Princes: And Memnon was in the Flower of his Age, strong and couragious, and had built a Pallace in the Cittadel of Susa, which retain'd the Name of Memnonia to the time of the Persian Empire. He pav'd also there a Common High-way, which is call'd Memnon's Way to this day. But the Ethiopians of Egypt question this, and say that Memnon was their Country-man, and shew several antient Palaces which (they say) retain his Name at this day, being call'd Memnon's Palaces.

Notwithstanding, however it be as to this matter, yet it has been generally and constantly held for a certain Truth, that Memnon led to Troy Twenty Thousand Foot, and Two Hundred Chariots, and signaliz'd his Valour with great Honour and Reputation, with the Death and Destruction of many of the Greeks, till at length he was slain by an Ambuscade laid for him by the Thessalians. But the Ethiopians recover'd his Body, and burnt it, and brought back his Bones to Tithon. And these things the Barbarians say are recorded of Memnon in the Histories of their Kings.

Sardanapalus, the Thirtieth from Ninus, and the last King of the Assyrians, exceeded all his Predecessors in Sloth and Luxury; for besides that, he was seen of none out of his Family, he led a most effeminate Life: For wallowing in pleasure and wanton Dalliances, he cloathed himself in Womens Attire, and spun fine Wool and Purple amongst the throngs of his Whores and Concubines. He painted likewise his Face, and deckt his whole Body with other Allurements like a Strumpet, and was more lascivious than the most wanton Curtezan. He imitated likewise a Womans Voice, and not only daily inured himself to such Meat and Drink as might incite and stir up his lascivious Lusts, but gratify'd them by filthy Catamites, as well as Whores and Strumpets, and without all sense of Modesty, abusing both Sexes, slighted Shame, the concomitant of filthy and impure Actions; and proceeded to such a degree of Voluptuousness and sordid Uncleanness, that he compos'd Verses for his Epitaph, with a Command to his Successors to have them inscrib'd upon his Tomb after his Death, which were thus Translated by a Grecian out of the Barbarian Language,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque exsaturata Libido. 

Hausit, at illa jacent multa ac praeclara relicta.


Page 66

Being thus corrupt in his Morals, he not only came to a miserable end himself, but utterly overturn'd the Assyrian Monarchy, which had continu'd longer than any we read of.

For Arbaces a Mede, a Valiant and Prudent Man, and General of the Forces which were sent every Year out of Media to Ninive, was stir'd up by the Governor of Babylon (his Fellow Soldier, and with whom he had contracted an intimate familiarity) to overthrow the Assyrian Empire. This Captain's Name was Belesis, a most Famous Babylonian Priest, one of those call'd Caldeans, expert in Astrology and Divination; of great Reputation upon the account of foretelling future Events, which happen'd accordingly. Amongst others, he told his Friend, the Median General, that he should depose Sardanapalus, and be Lord of all his Dominions. Arbaces hereupon hearkning to what he said, promis'd him, that if he succeeded in his Attempt, Belesis should be chief Governor of the Province of Babylon: Being therefore fully persuaded of the truth of what was foretold, as if he had receiv'd it from an Oracle, he enter'd into an Association with the Governors of the rest of the Provinces, and by feasting and caressing of them, gain'd all their Hearts and Affections. He made it likewise his great business to get a sight of the King, that he might observe the Course and manner of his Life; to this end he bestow'd a Cup of Gold upon an Eunuch, by whom being introduc'd into the King's Presence, he perfectly came to understand his Laciviousness, and Esseminate course of Life. Upon sight of him, he contemn'd and despis'd him as a Vile and Worthless Wretch, and thereupon was much more earnest to accomplish what the Chaldean had before declar'd to him. At length he conspir'd with Belesis so far, as that he himself persuaded the Medes and Persians to a defection, and the other brought the Babylonians into the Confederacy. He imparted likewise his Design to the King of Arabia, who was at this time his special Friend.

And now the Years attendance of the Army being at an end, new Troops succeeded, and came into their Place, and the former were sent every one here and there, into their several Countries. Hereupon Arbaces prevail'd with the Medes to invade the Assyrian Empire, and drew in the Persians in hopes of Liberty, to join in the Confederacy. Belesis in like manner persuaded the Babylonians to stand up for their Liberties. He sent Messengers also into Arabia, and gain'd that Prince (who was both his Friend, and had been his Guest) for a Confederate.

When therefore the Yearly Course was run out, all these with a great number of Forces flockt together to Nineve, in shew to serve their Turn according to custom, but in truth to overturn the Assyrian Empire. The whole number of Soldiers now got together out of those Four Provinces, amounted to Four Hundred Thousand Men. All these (being now in one Camp) call'd a Council of War in order to consult what was to be done.

Sardanapalus being inform'd of the Revolt, led forth the Forces of the rest of the Provinces against them; whereupon a Battel being fought, the Rebels were totally routed, and with a great Slaughter were forc'd to the Mountains Seventy Furlongs from Nineve.

Being drawn up a Second time in Battalia to try their Fortune in the Field, and now fac'd by the Enemy, Sardanapalus caus'd a Proclamation to be made by the Heralds, that whosoever kill'd Arbaces the Mede, should receive as a Reward, Two Hundred Talents of Gold, and double the Sum to him (together with the Government of Media,) who should take him alive. The like Sum he promis'd to such as should kill Belesis, or take him alive. But none being wrought upon by these Promises, he fought them again, and destroy'd many of the Rebels, and forc'd the rest to fly to their Camp upon the Hills. Arbaces being disheartn'd with these Misfortunes, call'd a Council of War to consider what was sit further to be done: The greater part were for returning into their own Countries, and possess themselves of the strongest Places, in order to fit and furnish themselves with all things further necessary for the War. But when Belesis the Babylonian assur'd them that the Gods promis'd, that after many Toyls and Labours they should have good Success, and all should end well, and had us'd several other Arguments (such as he thought best) he prevail'd with them to resolve to run through all the hazards of the War.


Page 67

Another Battle therefore was fought, wherein the King gain'd a third Victory, and pursu'd the Revolters as far as to the Mountains of Babylon. In this Fight Arbaces himself was wounded, though he fought stoutly, and slew many of the Assyrians with his own Hand.

After so many Defeats and Misfortunes one upon the neck of another, the Conspirators altogether despair'd of Victory, and therefore the Commanders resolv'd every one to return to their own Country. But Belesis, who lay all that Night Star-gazing in the open Field, prognosticated to them the next day, that if they would but continue together Five Days, unexpected Help would come, and they would see a mighty change, and that Affairs would have a contrary aspect to what they then had; for he affirm'd, that through his Knowledge in Astrology, he understood that the Gods portended so much by the Stars; therefore he intreated them to stay so many days, and make trial of his Art, and wait so long to have an Experiment of the Goodness of the Gods.

All being thus brought back, and waiting till the time appointed, News on a sudden was brought that mighty Forces were at hand, sent to the King out of Bactria. Hereupon Arbac

•s

 resolv'd with the stoutest and swiftest Soldiers of the Army, forthwith to make out against the Captains that were advancing, and either by fair words to perswade them to a defection, or by Blows to force them to join with them in their Design. But Liberty being sweet to every one of them, first the Captains and Commanders were easily wrought upon, and presently after the whole Army join'd, and made up one intire Camp together. It happen'd at that time, that the King of Assyria not knowing any thing of the Revolt of the Bactrians, and puft up by his former Successes, was indulging his Sloath and Idleness, and preparing Beasts for Sacrifice, plenty of Wine, and other things necessary in order to feast and entertain his Soldiers.

While his whole Army was now feasting and revelling, Arbaces (receiving intelligence by some Deserters of the Security and Intemperance of the Enemy) fell in upon them on the sudden in the Night; and being in due order and discipline, and setting upon such as were in confusion, he being before prepar'd, and the other altogether unprovided, they easily broke into their Camp, and made a great Slaughter of some, forcing the rest into the City.

Hereupon Sardanapalus committed the charge of the whole Army to Salemenus his Wife's Brother, and took upon himself the defence of the City. But the Rebels twice defeated the King's Forces, once in the open Field, and the Second time before the Walls of the City; in which last ingagement Salemenus was kill'd, and almost all his Army lost, some being cut off in the pursuit, and the rest (save a very few) being intercepted, and prevented from entring into the City, were driven headlong into the River Euphrates; and the number of the Slain was so great, that the River was dy'd over with Blood, and retain'd that Colour for a great distance, and a long course together.

The King being afterwards besieg'd, many of the Nations (through desire of Liberty) revolted to the Confederates; so that Sardanapalus now perceiving that the Kingdom was like to be lost, sent away his Three Sons and Two Daughters, with a great deal of Treasure into Paphlagonia, to Cotta the Governor there, his most intire Friend; and sent Posts into all the Provinces of the Kingdom, in order to raise Souldiers, and make all other Preparations necessary to indure a Siege. And he was the more incouraged to this, for that he was acquainted with an ancient Prophesy, That Nineve could never be taken by force, till the River became the City's Enemy; which the more incourag'd him to hold out, because he conceiv'd that was never like to be; therefore he resolv'd to indure the Siege till the Aids which he expected out of the Provinces came up to him.

The Enemy on the other hand grown more couragious by their Successes, eagerly urg'd on the Siege, but made little impression on the Besieg'd by reason of the strength of the Walls; for Ballistes to cast Stones, Testudos to cast up Mounts, and Battering Rams were not known in those Ages. And besides (to say truth) the King had been very careful (as to what concern'd the defence of the place) plentifully to furnish the Inhabitants with every thing necessary. The Siege continu'd Two Years, during which time nothing was done to any purpose, save that the Walls were sometimes assaulted, and the Besieg'd pen'd up in the City. The Third Year it happened that Euphrates overflowing with continual Rains, came up into a part of the City, and tore down the Wall Twenty Furlongs in


Page 68

length. The King hereupon conceiving that the Oracle was accomplish'd, in that the River was an apparent Enemy to the City, utterly despair'd, and therefore that he might not fall into the Hands of his Enemies, he caus'd a huge Pile of Wood to be made in his Palace Court, and heapt together upon it all his Gold, Silver, and Royal Apparel, and enclosing his Eunuchs and Concubines in an Apartment within the Pile, caus'd it to be set on Fire, and burnt himself and them together, which when the Revolters came to understand, they enter'd through the Breach of the Walls, and took the City; and cloath'd Arbaces with a Royal Robe, and committed to him the sole Authority, proclaiming him King. When he had rewarded his Followers, every one according to their demerit, and appointed Governors over the several Provinces, Belesis the Babylonian, who had foretold his advancement to the Throne, put him in mind of his Services, and demanded the Government of Babylon, which he had before promis'd him. He told him likewise of a Vow that he himself had made to Belus, in the heat of the War, that when Sardanapalus was conquer'd, and the Palace consum'd, he would carry the Ashes to Babylon, and there raise a Mount near to his Temple, which should be an eternal Monument to all that sail'd through Euphrates, in memory of him that overturn'd the Assyrian Empire. But that which in truth induc'd him to make this Request was, that he had been inform'd of the Gold and Silver by an Eunuch (that was a Deserter) whom he had hid and conceal'd: Arbaces therefore being ignorant of the Contrivance (because all the rest beside this Eunuch, were consum'd with the King) granted to him liberty both to carry away the Ashes, and likewise the absolute Government of Babylon without paying any Tribute. Whereupon Belesis forthwith prepar'd Shipping, and together with the Ashes carry'd away most of the Gold and Silver to Babylon. But when the King came plainly to understand the Cheat, he committed the Examination and Decision of this Theft to the other Captains who were his Assistants in the deposing of Sardanapalus. Belesis upon his Trial confess'd the Fact, and thereupon they condemn'd him to lose his Head. But the King being a Man of a noble and generous Spirit, and willing to adorn the beginning of his Reign with the Marks of his Grace and Mercy, not only pardon'd him, but freely gave him all the Gold and Silver which had been carry'd away; neither did he deprive him of the Government of Babylon, which at the first he conferr'd upon him, saying, That his former good Services did overballance the Injuries afterwards. This gracious Disposition of the King being nois'd abroad, he thereby not only gain'd the Hearts of his People, but was highly honour'd, and his Name famous among all the Provinces, and all judg'd him worthy of the Kingdom, who was so compassionate and gracious to Offenders.

The like Clemency he shew'd to the Inhabitants of Nineve; for though he disspers'd them into several Country Villages, yet he restor'd to every one of them their Estates, but raz'd the City to the ground. 

The rest of the Silver and Gold that could be found in the Pile (of which there were many Talents) he convey'd to Ecbatana the Seat Royal of Media.

And thus was the Assyrian Empire overturn'd by the Medes after it had continu'd Thirty Generations; from Ninus above Fourteen Hundred Years.


Page 69

CHAP. III.

Of the Ancient Chaldeans, and their Philosophy. The Planets and their Course. The Empire of the Medes and their Kings. A Description of India: The ancient Manners and Customs of the People. Their Laws; Tribes. A Description of Scythia. Of the Amazons. Of the Hyperboreans.

HEre it will not be amiss to say something of the Chaldeans (as the Babylonians call them) and of their Antiquity, that nothing worth Remark may be omitted.

They being the most ancient Babylonians, hold the same station and dignity in the Common-wealth as the Egyptian Priests do in Egypt: For being deputed to Divine Offices, they spend all their Time in the study of Philosophy, and are especially famous for the Art of Astrology. They are mightily given to Divination, and foretel future Events, and imploy themselves either by Purifications, Sacrifices, or other Inchantments to avert Evils, or procure good Fortune and Success. They are skilful likewise in the Art of Divination, by the flying of Birds, and interpreting of Dreams and Prodigies: And are reputed as true Oracles (in declaring what will come to pass) by their exact and diligent viewing the Intrals of the Sacrifices. But they attain not to this Knowledge in the same manner as the Grecians do; for the Chaldeans learn it by Tradition from their Ancestors, the Son from the Father, who are all in the mean time free from all other publick Offices and Attendances; and because their Parents are their Tutors, they both learn every thing without Envy, and rely with more confidence upon the truth of what is taught them; and being train'd up in this Learning from their very Childhood, they become most famous Philosophers, (that Age being most capable of Learning, wherein they spend much of their time.) But the Grecians for the most part come raw to this study, unfitted and unprepar'd, and are long before they attain to the Knowledge of this Philosophy: And after they have spent some small time in this Study, they are many times call'd off and forc'd to leave it, in order to get a Livelihood and Subsistence. And although some few do industriously apply themselves to Philosophy, yet for the sake of Gain, these very Men are opinionative, and ever and anon starting new and high Points, and never fix in the steps of their Ancestors. But the Barbarians keeping constantly close to the same thing, attain to a perfect and distinct Knowledge in every particular.

But the Grecians cunningly catching at all Opportunities of Gain, make new Sects and Parties, and by their contrary Opinions wrangling and quarelling concerning the chiefest Points, lead their Scholars into a Maze; and being uncertain and doubtful what to pitch upon for certain truth, their Minds are fluctuating and in suspence all the days of their Lives, and unable to give a certain assent unto any thing. For if any Man will but examine the most eminent Sects of the Philosophers, he shall find them much differing among themselves, and even opposing one another in the most weighty parts of their Philosophy. But to return to the Chaldeans, they hold that the World is eternal, which had neither any certain Beginning, nor shall have any End; but all agree, that all things are order'd, and this beautiful Fabrick is supported by a Divine Providence, and that the Motions of the Heavens are not perform'd by chance and of their own accord, but by a certain and determinate Will and Appointment of the Gods.

Therefore from a long observation of the Stars, and an exact Knowledge of the motions and influences of every one of them, wherein they excel all others, they foretel many things that are to come to pass.

The say that the Five Stars which some call Planets, but they Interpreters, are most worthy of Consideration, both for their motions and their remarkable influences, especially that which the Grecians call Saturn. The brightest of them all, and which often portends many and great Events, they call Sol, the other Four they name Mars,Venus,Mercury and Jupiter, with our own Country Astrologers. They give the Name of Interpreters to these Stars, because these only


Page 70

by a peculiar Motion do portend things to come, and instead of Jupiters, do declare to Men before-hand the good-will of the Gods; whereas the other Stars (not being of the number of the Planets) have a constant ordinary motion. Future Events (they say) are pointed at sometimes by their Rising, and sometimes by their Setting, and at other times by their Colour, as may be experienc'd by those that will diligently observe it; sometimes foreshewing Hurricanes, at other times Tempestuous Rains, and then again exceeding Droughts. By these, they say, are often portended the appearance of Comets, Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, Earthquakes and all other the various Changes and remarkable effects in the Air, boding good and bad, not only to Nations in general, but to Kings and Private Persons in particular. Under the Course of these Planets, they say are Thirty Stars, which they call Counselling Gods, half of whom observe what is done under the Earth, and the other half take notice of the actions of Men upon the Earth, and what is transacted in the Heavens. Once every Ten Days space (they say) one of the highest Order of these Stars descends to them that are of the lowest, like a Messenger sent from them above; and then again another ascends from those below to them above, and that this is their constant natural motion to continue for ever. The chief of these Gods, they say, are Twelve in number, to each of which they attribute a Month, and one Sign of the Twelve in the Zodiack.

Through these Twelve Signs the Sun, Moon, and the other Five Planets run their Course. The Sun in a Years time, and the Moon in the space of a Month.

To every of the Planets they assign their own proper Courses, which are perform'd variously in lesser or shorter time according as their several motions are quicker or slower. These Stars, they say, have a great influence both as to good and bad in Mens Nativities; and from the consideration of their several Natures, may be foreknown what will befal Men afterwards. As they foretold things to come to other Kings formerly, so they did to Alexander who conquer'd Darius, and to his Successors Antigonus and Seleucus Nicanor; and accordingly things fell out as they declar'd; which we shall relate particularly hereafter in a more convenient time. They tell likewise private Men their Fortunes so certainly, that those who have found the thing true by Experience, have esteem'd it a Miracle, and above the reach of Man to perform. Out of the Circle of the Zodiack they describe Four and Twenty Stars, Twelve towards the North Pole, and as many to the South.

Those which we see, they assign to the living; and the other that do not appear, they conceive are Constellations for the Dead; and they term them Judges of all things. The Moon, they say, is in the lowest Orb; and being therefore next to the Earth (because she is so small,) she finishes her Course in a little time, not through the swiftness of her Motion, but the shortness of her Sphear. In that which they affirm (that she has but a borrow'd light, and that when she is eclips'd, it's caus'd by the interposition of the shadow of the Earth) they agree with the Grecians.

Their Rules and Notions concerning the Eclipses of the Sun are but weak and mean, which they dare not positively foretel, nor fix a certain time for them. They have likewise Opinions concerning the Earth peculiar to themselves, affirming it to resemble a Boat, and to be hollow, to prove which, and other things relating to the frame of the World, they abound in Arguments; but to give a particular Account of 'em, we conceive would be a thing foreign to our History. But this any Man may justly and truly say, That the Chaldeans far exceed all other Men in the Knowledge of Astrology, and have study'd it most of any other Art or Science: But the number of Years during which the Chaldeans say, those of their Profession have given themselves to the study of this natural Philosophy, is incredible; for when Alexander was in Asia, they reckon'd up Four Hundred and Seventy Thousand Years since they first began to observe the Motions of the Stars. But lest we should make too long a digression from our intended Design, let this which we have said concerning the Chaldeans suffice.

Having now therefore spoken of the Assyrian Empire, and its Translation to the Medes, we shall return to that part of our History from whence we broke off.


Page 71

Whereas remarkable Authors have differ'd among themselves about the large Empire of the Medes, we conceive we shall not stray from the Duty of true and faithful Historians, if we compare the different relations of Writers one with another.

Herodotus indeed, who liv'd in the time of Xerxes, says that the Assyrians were conquer'd by the Medes after they had held the Empire of Asia for the space of five Hundred Years: That thence for many Ages after there was no one King that had the sole and absolute Authority of the Empire, but that the Cities in every Place enjoy'd their own Laws in a Democratical Government. At length after the Course of many Years, he says one Cyaxares, renown'd for his Justice, was advanc'd to the Throne; and that he was the first that subdu'd the neighbouring Nations to the Medes, and gave beginning to that Empire; whose Posterity afterwards brought under the bordering Countries and inlarg'd their Dominions, and continu'd their Empire to the time of Astyages (who was conquer'd by Cyrus and the Persians) of whom we shall now only give a touch in short, and shall treat more distinctly and particularly hereafter when we come to the Times more proper for this Purpose. For in the second year of the seventeeenth Olympiad (as Herodotus says) Cyaxares was elected King by the Medes. But Ctesias the Cnidian who was later then Herodotus, and liv'd about the time of Cyrus his Expedition against his Brother A

•taxarxes:

 (for being then taken Prisoner (for his Skill in Physic) he was taken into the King's Favour, and continu'd with him in great Honour and Esteem for the space of seventeen years.) Out of the publick Records (in which the Persians (by force of some Law made for that Purpose) had in Order of Time noted and registred the ancient Affairs and Things done in the Kingdom) he industriously pick'd out every thing that was remarkable, and methodically compos'd them into an History, and brought them over into Greece.

In this History he declares that after the Overthrow of the Assyrian Empire, all Asia was under the Power of the Medes, and that Arbaces who overcame Sardanapalus (as is before related) was sole Monarch, and that after he had reign'd eight and twenty years, his Son Mandauces succeeded him, who reign'd over all Asia fifty years. After him reign'd Sesarmus thirty years; then Artias Fifty; after whom succeeded Arbianes two and twenty years. In his time (its said) a great War broke out between the Medes and the Cadusians upon the Occasions following. One Parsodes a Persian, for his Valour, Prudence and other Virtues, was a Man highly honour'd and dearly belov'd of the King, and one of the greatest Statesmen in the Kings Council.

This Man taking some Offence at a Sentence pronounc'd against him by the King, fled with three Thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse to the Cadusians, where he marry'd the Sister of the most potent Man amongst them; and not only rebell'd himself, but perswaded the whole Nation of the Cadusians to a general Revolt, and to stand up for their Liberties: Whereupon he was presently (upon the Account of his noted Valour) made General of the War. And now hearing that mighty Forces were preparing against him, he rais'd no less than two hundred Thousand Men out of the Country of the Cadusians, and pitcht his Camp upon the Borders of the Province; and tho' King Arseus came against him with eight hundred Thousand Men, yet Parsodes routed him and kill'd above fifty Thousand, and drove the rest out of the Country. Upon this Victory he was so honour'd and admir'd that the Inhabitants forthwith made him their King; after which he vex'd and tyr'd out Media with continual Incursions, and wasted and destroy'd all Places round about him. His Name therefore being grown famous, and now waxing old and drawing near to the End of his days, he injoyn'd his Successor (with the Denunciation of most dreadful Execrations) never to make Peace with the Medes, and if they did he wish'd that both the whole Nation of the Cadusians and his own Posterity might be rooted out and perish together. And for this Reason the Cadusians were ever after Enemies to the Medes, never subject to their Kings, till Cyrus transferr'd the Empire to the Persians.

After the Death of Artaeus, Artynes was King of the Medes, and reign'd two and twenty years; after him A

••ibarnas

 fourteen years, in whose Reign the Parthians revolted and deliver'd up both their City and Country into the Hand of


Page 72

the Sacae; whereupon arose a War between the Sacae and the Medes, which continu'd many years, and after many Battles fought, and great Slaughter on both sides, at length Peace was made upon these Conditions, That the Parthians should return to their ancient Subjection, and that both sides should quietly whatever enjoy they didbefore, and should ever after be Friends and Confederates. Zanara at that time was Queen of the Sacae, a Woman of a warlike Spirit, far exceeding any of her Sex among the Sacae for Courage and Activity in Martial Affairs. For this Nation is remarkable for brave spirited Women that use to go out to the Wars as Fellow-souldiers with the Men; and they say that this Virago was extraordinarily beautiful, and admirable for Courage and Council in all her Affairs. For she conquer'd the neighbouring Princes who had proudly oppress'd the Sacae, and civiliz'd the most part of the Country, and built many Cities, and every way improv'd and inrich'd her People; and therefore the Citizens after her Death in Gratitude for the many Advántages they injoy'd by her and to preserve the Memory of her Virtues, built for her a Sepulcher far higher than any of the rest. For they rear'd up for her a Pyramid Triangular from the Foundation Three Furlongs broad on every side, spiring up in a sharp Point at the Top a Furlong in Height. They plac'd likewise upon her Tomb a Colossus in Gold representing her, and ador'd her as a Demi-Goddess, and perform'd all other things with more State and Grandeur than to any of her Predecessors.

After the Death of Astibara King of the Medes, who dy'd old in Ecbatana, his Son Apandas (whom the Grecians call Astyages) succeeded, who being conquer'd by Cyrus the Persian, the Empire devolv'd upon the Persians. Of which we shall write distinctly in its proper Place.

Having therefore said enough (as we conceive) of the Empire of the Assyrians and Medes, and the Differences among Writers concerning them, we shall pass over to India, and give a particular Account of Things said to be done there.

INDIA is of a Quadrangular Form, one side lying towards the East, and the other to the South, inviron'd and washt by the great Ocean; that side on the North is divided by the Mountain Hemodus from Scythia, where the Sacae inhabit: The Fourth part towards the West, is bounded with the River Indus, the greatest of all others next to the River Nile.

The whole Extent of India from East to West, is Eight and Twenty Thousand Furlongs; and from North to South Two and Thirty Thousand Furlongs. The Extent of India being thus very large, it seems most of any other part of the World to lye under the Tropick of Capricorn. And in many remote parts of India, the Sun casts no Shadow, neither is the North Pole seen there in the Night, nor any of the Constellation call'd Arcturus, in the utmost parts; and for this reason they say, the Shadows bend towards the South.

The Mountains of India abound with all sorts of Fruit Trees, and the Fields every where cloath'd with Fruits of the Earth, full of pleasant Plains, watered with many Rivers; so that the Country bears Two Crops in the Year. It breeds likewise divers sorts of Creatures, both Volatile and Terrestrial, for strength and largeness remarkable above others. It affords plentiful Pastures for multitudes of mighty Elephants, in so much as those kind of Beasts which are bred there, are far stronger than those in Africa. And therefore many of them being taken in Hunting, and inur'd to Martial Exercises, are of great use and advantage to them for the obtaining of Victories. And such is the plenty there of all sorts of Fruits, that the Men are taller and bigger than any elsewhere; and the Air is so pure, and the Water so clear and wholsom, that by the help of these natural Advantages, the Inhabitants are very quick and ingenious in any Art or Profession. As the Earth is fruitful in the producing plenty of pleasant Fruits, so in the Bowels of it are to be found all sorts of Metals: For it abounds in Mines of Gold and Silver, Brass, Iron and Tin, and richly affords all other things useful both as to Pleasure and Profit, and likewise for Service in Times of War. Besides Corn, abundance of Millet grows there, being richly water'd by the overflowing of the Rivers: There's likewise great store of all sorts of Pulse and Rice, and that which they call Bosphorus, and many other Fruits for the sustaining of Man's Life. To all these may be added many other Fruits useful for


Page 73

Food, and likewise as many fit for the feeding of Cattel, of which it would be too tedious to write particularly. And for this reason it's said, that there's never any Famine in India, or want of Victuals; for being that the Land there bears Two Crops every Year, once in the Winter about the time of Wheat-seeding among other Nations, and the other about the time of the Summer Solstice, when Rice, Bosporus, Sesamus and Millet are us'd to be sown; at both these times the Indians reap very plentifnl Harvests. And if one Harvest happens to miss, the other is sure to make amends for it. Besides there are many Fruits which grow naturally of themselves, and the Marishes afford for Mens Food, abundance of Roots of a most sweet and delicious Taste. For all the Fields almost of the whole Country are watered in Summer time with the sweet Waters of the overflowing Rivers, and with the Rains from Heaven, which fall constantly at certain times every Year in the Summer; and the Roots in the Marishes (especially of the Canes) are perfectly boyl'd by the heat of the Sun. There are Laws likewise in India, which conduce much to the preventing of Famine among them. Amongst other People, by Devastations in time of War the Land lies untill'd; but amongst the Indians, Husbandmen (as sacred) are never toucht, so that though the Armies fight and ingage even under their very Noses, yet they are never in the least prejudic'd. For though the Armies on both sides slaughter one another, yet they never hurt the Husbandman, as one who is a Servant for the common good and advantage of them all; neither do they burn their Enemies Country, or cut down their Trees or Plants.

Moreover in India are many great navigable Rivers which descend into the Plains from the Mountains in the Northern Parts (where they have their Spring-heads) and at length all meet together and fall into the River Ganges, which is Thirty Furlongs in breadth, and takes its Course from the North to the South, and so empties it self into the main Ocean; passing by in its course the Nation of the Gandarides lying on the East, where are bred Multitudes of most monstrous Elephants. No Foreign King hitherto ever conquer'd that part of the Country, all Strangers dreading the number and strength of those Creatures. Even Alexander himself, who conquer'd all Asia besides, left only the Gandarides untoucht. For when he came with his whole Army as far as to the River Ganges, and had subdu'd all the Indians behind him, as soon as he understood that the Gandarides had Four Thousand Elephants sitted and compleatly furnished for War, he wholly desisted the further Prosecution of his Design against them. Much like to the River Ganges is that call'd Indus, which runs with a swift Course likewise from the North, and falls into the Ocean, and divides India from the rest of Asia; and in its Course through wide and spacious Plains takes in many Navigable Rivers, amongst which the most famous are Hipanis, Hydaspes, and Arcesines. There are many other Rivers also which pass through several Parts of India which inrich the Country with pleasant Gardens, and all sorts of Fruits.

The Philosophers and Naturalists of this Country give this Reason why there are so many Rivers, and such plenty of Water in India. They say, that the adjacent Countries, the Scythians, Bactrians and Arianians, lye higher than India, whence (from good reason) they conclude that the Rains flowing down by degrees into the lower Countries, so water them, that they make many large Rivers: But above all the other Rivers of India, that they call Silla (which springs from a Fountain of the same Name) has a peculiar property: For this only of all the others will not admit any thing thrown into it to swim, but in a wonderful manner swallows up every thing, and forceably draws it to the bottom.

Moreover India being of the largest Extent of all other by far, is inhabited by many different Nations (of whom none are Foreigners, but all natural Inhabitants:) And they say that no Strangers ever planted amongst them, nor they themselves ever sent forth any Colonies into other Countries; and they tell Stories that anciently the Inhabitants fed only upon Herbs and Roots that grow in the Fields, and cloath'd themselves with wild Beasts Skins, as the Grecians did; and that Arts and other things conducing to the well-being of Man's Life were found out by degrees, Necessity pressing upon a Creature that was rational and ingenious, and had likewise the further helps and advantages of Hands, Speech and quickness of invention to find out ways to relieve himself.

Some of the Learnedst of the Indians have given an account of the Antiquity of their Country, of which it is our part here to say something in short.


Page 74

They say, that in ancient Time, when Men liv'd scatter'd and dispers'd here and there, Bacchus with a great Army from the West, overran all India, which at that time had no considerable City in it able to make any resistance; and that a Plague (through the violent and parching heat) destroying many of his Souldiers, (they say) that prudent General drew his Army out of the Plains to the tops of the Mountains, where (by means of the cool Blasts of the refreshing Air, and drinking of the Spring-Waters there at hand) they were restor'd to their former Health; and that the Place where his Army was thus recover'd, was call'd the Thigh; hence the Grecians frame a Story of this God to this Day, that Bacchus was bred in the Thigh. Afterwards (they say) he diligently imploy'd himself in sowing and planting divers Fruit-Trees, and imparted the Art to the Indians, and found out the use of Wine, and other things conducing to the comfort of Man's Life. He built likewise stately Cities, and remov'd the Villages to more commodious Situations; and instituted the manner of Divine Worship, and made Laws, and set up Courts of Justice; and at last for the many excellent Inventions imparted to the Indians, he was esteem'd as a God, and obtain'd immortal Honours. They report that he had a Regiment of Women in his Army, and that in the heat of Battel he made use of Timbrels and Cymbals, the Trumpet being not at that time found out: And that after he had reign'd over all India for the space of Two and Fifty Years, he dy'd of extream old Age, leaving the Kingdom to his Sons, who injoy'd it, and their Posterity after them successively, till many Ages after the Regal Authority was abrogated, and the Cities were govern'd by a Democrasy. These are the things related of Bacchus and his Posterity by the Inhabitants of the Mountainous parts of India.

They say moreover, that Hercules was born amongst them, and like the Greeks, furnish him with a Club and a Lion's Skin; and for Strength and Courage that he excell'd all other Men, and clear'd both Sea and Land of Monsters and Wild Beasts: That of many Wives he begat many Sons, but one only Daughter. Among these Sons, when they were grown up, he divided India into equal Parts, and appointed each to be King over their several shares, allotting likewise one part of the Kingdom to his Daughter, whom he carefully brought up under his own Eye. It's said that he built many Cities, the most famous of which is call'd Palibothra, in which he built a stately Palace, and planted it with a great number of Inhabitants, and fortify'd it round with deep Trenches, fill'd with Water from the River. And at length after his Death he was honour'd as a God. His Posterity reign'd for many Ages together, and perform'd many noble Actions; but never made any Foreign Expeditions, or sent forth any Colonies into other Parts; and though that after the Course of many Years, most of the Cities reduc'd themselves under the power of a Democratical Government, yet there were some of the Indians that flourish'd under a Monarchy, till the very time that Alexander invaded that Country.

Although the Indians have Laws peculiar to themselves, differing from all other People, yet one especially is most remarkable, instituted by their ancient Philosophers, which is this:

It's an establish'd Law, That none amongst them should be a Servant; but that every one being free, all should be honour'd with equal respect: For they that know that they are neither to be superior nor inferior to any, are ready to undergo all the Shocks of Fortune with Courage and Resolution. For it's a Foolish thing to make Laws for an equality amongst all, and yet at the same time to order inequality of Estates.

All the People of India are divided into Seven Ranks; the First is Philosophers, who are least in number, but chiefest in esteem: For they are free from all publick Offices; and are neither subject themselves to any, nor any subject to them. Yet they are made use of by their Friends to offer Sacrifice for them while they are alive, and to perform the solemn Exequies at their Funerals when they are dead, as Persons who are greatly belov'd of the Gods, and skilful in Matters relating to the Affairs of the Dead in the Shades below; for which piece of Service they are highly honour'd, and presented with many rich Gifts: Especially they much advantage the Indians in general, at such times as being admitted into the publick Assemblies, at the beginning of every Year they foretel Droughts, Rains, Winds and Diseases, and other things convenient and useful for the Auditors to be inform'd of; for so both King and People being forewarn'd of things to come,


Page 75

provide against them, and always prepare something or other that may be of advantage to them in such cases.

And if any of the Philosophers prove afterwards to be mistaken in his Prognostication, he undergoes no other Punishment, save only that he is evil spoken of, and is to be silent ever after while he lives.

The Second Rank or Tribe is of the Husbandmen; These are more in number than any of the rest: These likewise are free from the Militia, and all publick Offices, and spend all their time and care about Tilling and Improving the Lands.

No Enemy ever does them any Prejudice; but out of a due regard to the common good, forbear to injure them in the least degree; and therefore the Land being never spoil'd nor wasted, yields its Fruits in great Abundance, and furnishes the Inhabitants with plenty of Victuals and all other Provision. The Husbandmen live in the Fields with their Wives and Children, and never meddle with the concerns of the Cities. They pay the King his Tribute out of the Fruits of the Ground: For all the Land of India belongs to the King, and no private Man has any Land of his own. Besides the Tribute, the Fourth part of the Fruits are paid to the King.

The Third Tribe comprehended the Herdsmen and Shepherds, and all sorts of feeders of Cattel; and these neither liv'd in the Cities nor Villages, but in Tents, and by Hunting clear'd the Land both of wild Beasts and hurtful Birds; and by this Exercise all India was freed from Ravenous Creatures which abounded in the Country, both Birds and wild Beasts of all sorts, that eat up and devour'd the Seed and Fruits of the Husbandman.

The Fourth Classis and Order of Men amongst them was made up of the Mechanicks, some of whom were imploy'd in making of Arms, and others of Tools for Tillage and Husbandry, and other serviceable Utensils. This Order is not only free from all Taxes and Impositions, but is allow'd a yearly proportion of Corn out of the King's Granaries.

The Fifth is the Militia (the Second for number) who in Times of Peace live idle lives, and give themselves up wholly to their pleasures. All the Souldiers with the War-Horses and Elephants are kept and maintain'd out of the King's Treasury.

The Sixth Tribe are the Ephori, who are the Inquisitors, and have a diligent and observant Eye upon every thing that is done throughout all India, and upon any discovery inform the King of what the know; and when there's no King, the Princes and principal Ministers of state.

In the Seventh Rank are reckon'd the Senators, such as have Place in the great and General Councils: These are the fewest in number, but of greatest Dignity for their Birth, and highest esteem for their Wisdom and Prudence. Out of these are chosen the King's Privy-Council, Governors of Provinces, Judges, Generals of Armies in Times of War, and other Principal Officers.

These are the parts into which almost all India is divided.

It is not lawful for any to marry out of the Tribe to which he belongs, nor to exercise any other Trade or Calling than that wherein he has been bred up, as for a Souldier to imploy himself in Husbandry or for an Artificer to turn Philosopher.

India breeds the largest, most couragious and strongest Elephants of any other Place. This Creature does not couple with the Female in any strange or unusual manner (as some say) but as Horses and all other four-footed Beasts.

They go with young at the least Sixteen Months, at the most Eighteen. They bring forth for the most part (like Mares) but one at a time, which the Dam suckles till it be Six Years old.

Most of the Inhabitants live very long; the Oldest attain to Two Hundred Years.

In India there are Magistrates appointed to take care of Strangers to see that no Injury be offer'd them; and if any of them be sick these Magistrates provide Physitians, and in all other respects are very careful of them; and if they dye, they bury them; and whatever Goods or Monies they leave behind, they give it to their Kindred.


Page 76

Their Judges are very diligent in deciding Suits brought before them; and severely punish Offenders. But this short account shall suffice concerning India and its Antiquities. And now we shall say something particularly of the Scythians, which border upon the other.

The Scythians anciently injoy'd but a small Tract of Ground, but (through their, Valour) growing stronger by degrees, they inlarg'd their Dominion far and near, and attain'd at last to a vast and glorious Empire.

At the First a very few of them, and those very desplcable for their mean original, seated themselves near to the River Araxes. Afterwards one of their ancient Kings, who was a warlike Prince, and skilful in Arms, gain'd to their Country, all the Mountainous Parts as far as to Mount Caucasus, and all the Champain Country, to the Ocean, and the Lake Maeotis, and all the rest of the Plain to the River Tanais. Then they tell a Story, That a Virgin was born among them of the Earth, of the shape of a Woman from the middle upwards, and of a Viper downwards: And that Jupiter begot of her a Son call'd Scythes; they say, that from this Prince (being more eminent than any of his Ancestors) the People were call'd Scythians: There were Two Brothers that descended from this King, that were remarkable for Valour, the one call'd Palus, and the other Napas. These Two Brothers, after many glorious Actions done by them, divided the Country between them, and from their own Names call'd one part of the Inhabitants Palians, and the other Napians.

Some time afterwards their Posterity becoming famous and eminent for Valour and martial affairs, subu'd many Territories beyond Tanais.

Then turning their Arms the other way they led their Forces as far as to the River Nile in Egypt, and having subdu'd many Nations lying between, they inlarg'd the Empire of the Scythians as far as to the Eastern Ocean one way, and to the Caspian Sea and the Lake of Maeotis another.

This Nation prosper'd still more and more, and had Kings that were very famous; from whom the Sacans, the Massageties, and the Arimaspanis, and many others call'd by other Names derive their original. Amongst others, there were two remarkable Colonies that were drawn out of the conquer'd Nations by those Kings; the one they brought out of Assyria, and settl'd in the Country lying between Paphlagonia and Pontus; the other out of Media, which they plac'd near the River Tanais, which People are call'd Sauromatians, who many Years after increasing in number and power, wasting the greatest part of Scythia, and rooting out all that they conquer'd, totally ruinated the whole Nation. Afterwards the Royal Line failing, they say, Women remarkable for Courage and Strength of Body reign'd instead of Kings. For in these Nations, Women like Men, are train'd up for the Wars, being nothing inferior to Men for Courage.

Henceforward many and great things were done by famous Women, not only in Scythia, but in the neighbouring Nations. For when Cyrus King of Persia the most powerful Prince in his Age, led a mighty Army into Scythia, the Queen of Scythia routed the Persian Army, and taking Cyrus himself in the Battel Prisoner, afterwards Crucify'd him. And such was the Valour of the Amazons, after they had thus strengthened themselves, that they not only overran their Neighbours, but conquer'd a great part both of Europe and Asia. But since now we have begun to speak of the Amazons, we conceive it not impertinent if we here relate cursorily those things concerning them which for the strangeness of the matter may seem to resemble Romantick Fables.

There was heretofore a Potent Nation seated upon the River Thermodon, govern'd always by Women, as their Queens; in which the Women, like Men, manag'd all their Martial Affairs. Amongst these Female Princes (they say) there was one that excell'd all the rest for strength and valour, who got together an Army of Women, and having train'd them up in Martial Discipline, first subdu'd some of her Neighbouring Nations; afterwards by her Valour growing more fam'd and renown'd, she led her Army against the rest, and Fortune favouring her Arms, she was so puft up, that she call'd her self The Danghter of Mars, and ordered the Men to spin Wool, and do the Womens Work within Doors.


Page 77

She made Laws also, whereby she injoin'd the Women to go forth to the Wars, and the Men to be as Slaves, and do all the Servile work at Home. Therefore when any Male Child was born, they broke their Thighs and Arms, to render them useless and unfit for War: And for the Females they sear'd off the right Breast, lest it should be an hinderance to them in Fight: And hence they were call'd Amazons. At length grown eminent for Policy and Skill in Military Affairs, she built a large City call'd Themiscyra, at the Mouth of the River Thermodon, and beautify'd it with a stately Palace. She was very exact in Martial Discipline, and keeping good Order: She first conquer'd all the Neighbouring Nations, as far as to the River Tanais; and having perform'd all these noble Exploits (they say) in a Battel, she afterwards fought, (having first signalized her Valour) she ended her Days like an Hero. Upon her Death her Daughter succeeded her in the Kingdom, who imitating her Mother's Valour, in some Exploits excell'd her: For she caus'd the Girls from their very Infancy to be exercis'd in Hunting, and daily train'd up in Martial Discipline. Then she instituted solemn Festivals and Sacrifices to be offer'd to Mars and Diana, call'd Tauropoli. She advanc'd her Arms beyond Tanais, and brought under all the Nations as far as to Thrace. Then returning to her own Country with a rich Booty, she erected stately Temples to those Deities before mention'd, and gain'd the Hearts of her Subjects by her easie and gentle Government. Afterwards she undertook an Expedition against them that lay on the other side of the River, and added a great part of Asia to her Dominion, and extended her Arms as far as to Syria.

After her Death, the Crown descended still to the next of Kin, and every one in their time govern'd with great Commendation, and advanc'd the Honour and Renown of the Amazons Kingdom.

Many Ages after (the Fame and Renown of the Amazons being spread Abroad all the World over) they say, that Hercules, the Son of Jupiter and Alcmena, was enjoin'd by Eurystheus to fight Hippolyta, the Amazon Queen, and to strip her of her Belt. Upon which, he made War upon the Amazons, and in a great Battel routed them, and took Hippolyta, and her Belt together, which so weaken'd them, that the Neighbouring Barbarians knowing their low Condition, despis'd them; and remembring what ruin and destruction they had formerly made amongst them, so wasted them with continual War, that not so much as the Name of Amazons is now to be found any where in the World. For a few Years after Hercules's Time, the Trojan War broke forth, at which time Penthesilia Queen of those Amazons that were left, and Daughter of Mars (having committed a cruel Murther among her own People) for the horridness of the Fact fled, and after the Death of Hector, brought aid to the Trojans; and though she bravely behav'd her self, and kill'd many of the Greeks, yet at last she was slain by Achilles, and so in Heroick Actions ended her Days. This, they say, was the last Queen of the Amazons, a brave spirited Woman, after whom the Nation (growing by degrees weaker and weaker) was at length wholly extinct: So that these later Ages look upon all those old Stories concerning the valiant Acts of the Amazons, to be but meer Fictions and Fables. Now since we have thus far spoken of the Northern Parts of Asia, it's convenient to observe something relating to the Antiquity of the Hyperborcans.

Amongst them that have written old Stories much like Fables, Hecateus and some others say, that there is an Island in the Ocean over against Gall, (as big as Sicily) under the Artick Pole, where the Hyperboreans inhabit, so call'd, because they lye beyond the Breezes of the North Wind. That the Soyl here is very rich, and very fruitful; and the Climate temperate, insomuch as there are Two Crops in the Year.

They say that Latona was born here, and therefore that they worship Apollo above all other Gods; and because they are daily saying Songs in praise of this God, and ascribing to him the highest Honours, they say that these Inhabitants demean themselves, as if they were Apollo's Priests, who has there a stately Grove, and renown'd Temple of a round Form, beautify'd with many rich Gifts. That there is a City likewise consecrated to this God, whose Citizens are most


Page 78

of them Harpers, who playing on the Harp, chant Sacred Hymns to Apollo in the Temple, setting forth his glorious Acts. The Hyperboreans use their own natural Language: But of long and ancient time, have had a special Kindness for the Grecians; and more especially for the Athenians, and them of Delos. And that some of the Grecians pass'd over to the Hyperboreans, and left behind them divers Presents, inscrib'd with Greek Characters; and that Abaris formerly travell'd thence into Greece, and renew'd the ancient League of Friendship with the Delians.

They say moreover, that the Moon in this Island seems as if it were near to the Earth, and represents in the face of it Excrescences like Spots in the Earth. And that Apollo once in Nineteen Years comes into the Island; in which space of time, the Stars perform their Courses, and return to the same Point; and therefore the Greeks call the Revolution of Nineteen Years, the Great Year. At this time of his appearance (they say) that he plays upon the Harps, and sings and daunces all the Night from the Vernal Equinox, to the rising of the Pleiades, solacing himself with the Praises of his own successful Adventures. The Sovereignty of this City, and the care of the Temple (they say) belongs to the Boreades, the Posterity of Boreas, who hold the Principality by Descent in a direct Line from that Ancestor.

CHAP. IV.

A Description of Arabia the Desert, Happy, &c. Metals, Precious Stones, Beasts, &c. A Description of Taprobana in the Southern Ocean, now call'd Ceylon or Zeilan. The strange things there. How discover'd by Iambulus.

HAving now finish'd these foregoing Relations, we shall bend our Discourse to the other Parts of Asia not yet spoken of, and chiefly to Arabia.

This Country is situated between Syria and Egypt, and is divided into several Nations. On the East the Arabians, call'd the Nabateans, inhabit a Tract partly Desert, and in other Parts without Water, and very little of it there is that bears any Fruit; and therefore the Inhabitants live by Robbing and Stealing, and for that end roving up and down the Countries far and near, they vex the Inhabitants with their continual Incursions and Robberies, it being a very difficult matter to subdue them. For in the dry Country, they have Wells digg'd in convenient Places, unknown to Strangers, whither they fly for refuge, and are safe: For knowing where the Waters lye hid and private, upon opening of the Wells they are largely supply'd; but Strangers, who pursue them (unacquainted with those Fountains) either perish for Thirst, or falling into many other Disasters, and quite tyr'd out, scarcely ever return home: And therefore these Arabians (being that they are not to be conquer'd) are never inslav'd, nor ever admit any Foreign Prince over them, but preserve themselves continually in perfect Liberty; and therefore neither the Assyrians antiently, nor the Medes and Persians, nor the very Macedonians themselves, were ever able to conquer them; who, though they often march'd with great Forces against them, yet they ever fail'd in their Designs.

In the Country of the Nabateans, there's a Rock strongly Fortified, to which there is an Ascent but one way, through which a few only at a time mount up to cast down their Fardles. There's likewise a large Mere which produces Brimstone, from whence they raise no small Revenue: It's Five Hundred Furlongs in length, and Sixty in breadth: The Water for Smell stinks, and is bitter in Taste, so that neither Fish, nor any other living thing us'd to the Water can live there. There are indeed great Rivers, whose Waters are exceeding sweet, which empty themselves into the Lake, and yet it stinks howsoever. Every


Page 79

Year the Brimstone rises up out of the middle of the Mere, some Pieces Two, and others Three Plethras Square in quantity. The greater Pieces the Inhabitants call Bulls, and the lesser Calfs. When the Brimstone swims upon the Water, it represents at a distance the form of an Island. There are apparent Signs of casting up of the Brimstone Twenty Days before; for every where round the Lake for many Furlongs distant, a Steam arises with a stinking smell, and all Gold, Silver, or Brass near those Places, change their natural Colour; but return to their former, when all the Brimstone is exhal'd. And in as much as all Places near adjoyning are corrupted with a Fire and stinking Stench, it infects Mens Bodies with Diseases, and shortens their days. However this Region abounds with Palm-trees, because it's water'd with wholesom Rivers and Springs. In a Valley thereabouts grows that which they call Balsam: Whence they gain a plentiful Revenue, in regard this Plant grows in no other Parts of the World; which affords likewise excellent Medicines for the Use of the Physician.

The other Arabia adjoyning to this barren and dry Country Arabia, so far excels it, that for its Fruitfulness and Plenty of all other good things its call'd Arabia the Happy. It plentifully produces Calamus and Mastick, and other Aromatick Plants, and breaths out all sorts of fragrant Smells from the Trees, and abounds with divers kinds of sweet Gums, which distil from them. The furthest Parts likewise of Arabia produce Myrrh and Frankincense (so grateful to the Gods) which is carry'd all the World over.

Upon the Mountains grow in abundance not only Firs and Pine-trees, but tall Cedars, Junipers and the Tree call'd Agyreus; and many other fruitful Plants, which yield not only a pleasant Tastle, but a most sweet and delicious Smell to those that come near them. The very Nature of the Soyl it self is odoriferous and useful for sweet Perfumes; and therefore in some Places of Arabia in digging of the Ground they find sweet-scented Veins of Stone Metal, which furnish the Inhabitants with large Quarries, who build Houses of the Stone cut out of these Delphs; and when the Rain falls upon them, the Metal in the Stone melts, and runs within the Joints of the Building, and so binds all together, that the Wall seems to be all of one Piece. In Arabia are found Mines of pure Gold call'd Gold without Fire: For it is not extracted out of the little Pieces of drossy Metal by melting in the Fire as in other Places, but its pure and refin'd at the first digging it out of the Earth, every Piece about the Bigness of a Chesnut, and of so bright and glorious a Colour that this Gold adds an exceeding Beauty and Lustre to the most precious Stones that are set in it.

ARABIA is so rich in all sorts of Cattle, that many Provinces (imploying themselves only as Herdsmen and Shepherds) live fully and contentedly without the Use of Corn. That Part joyning upon Asia breeds vast Multitudes of exceeding great wild Beasts; for the Lyons and Leopards here are far more for Number, and larger and stronger than any in Africa; to which may be added those they call the Babylonian Tygers. It produces likewise Beasts of a double Nature, and mixt Shape; amongst whom are those that are call'd Struthocameli, who have the Shape both of a Camel and an Ostrich. For in the Bulk of their Bodies they are as big as a Camel newly foal'd, having upon their Heads small Hairs and great and black Eyes; in Shape and Colour they are like to Camels, having long Necks, and very short Beaks turning inwards, and sharp at the Point; they have Wings also of soft and hairy Feathers; they are supported with two strong Thighs, and are cloven hoofed, so that this Creature seems to be both terrestrial and volatile, a Land-Beast and a Bird: But being not able to fly by reason of the Bulk of her Body, she runs upon the Ground as swift as if she flew in the Air; and when she is pursu'd by Horsemen, with her Feet she hurls the Stones that are under her, with that Force as if they were sent out of a Sling, and many times kills the Pursuers with the Blows and Strokes they receive. When she is near being taken, she thrusts her Head under a Shrub or some such like Cover; not (as some suppose) through Folly and Blockishness, as if she would not see any or be seen of them, but because her Head is the tenderest Part of her Body she seeks to secure that Part all manner of ways she can; for Nature teaches all Creatures to seek not only to preserve themselves but their Kind; through a natural Instinct and Love of Life prompting them to perpetuate their Species by a constant Propagation.


Page 80

Those Creatures call'd Cameleopards partake of both kinds, as is denoted by their Name. They are indeed less then Camels, and lower crested; but in their Heads and Eyes like unto Leopards: In the Bulch upon their Backs they resemble Camels; but in Colour, Hair, and in the Length of their Tails they are in Nature Leopards.

There are likewise bred Tragclaphi and Buffels, and many other Creatures of a double Shape, partaking of several Natures; which would require a long Discourse to describe every one of them particularly. For its very reasonable to conceive that by the vivifying Heat of the Sun in the Southern Parts of the World many sorts of wonderful Creatures are there bred. And upon this Account it is that there are Crocodiles and River-horses in Egypt; and great Numbers and divers sorts of Elephants, Serpeuts and other Beasts, and (amongst the rest) Dragons of an unusual Bigness and Fierceness in Ethiopia and the Deserts of Africa; and for the same Reason it is that there are Elephants in India more than elsewhere for their Number, and excelling all others in Strength and the Bulk of their Bodies. In these Parts also are produc'd by the Influence of the Sun, not only several kinds of living Creatures, but divers sorts of precious Stones commendable both for the Variety of their Colours, and their sparkling Lustre and Beauty.

Crystal (they say) is produc'd of the purest Water congeal'd and hardned, not by Cold, but by the Power of the Sun; so that it continues for ever, and receives many Shapes and Colours according as the Spirits are exhal'd.

The Smaragdos and Beryl (as they are call'd) which are found in the Copper-Mines are said to have their Colour from their Mixture with Sulphur: And that the Chrysolite produc'd by the Heat of the Sun, receives its Tincture from an hot and fiery Exhalation. And therefore its said that those Stones call'd Pseudocrists are made of Crystal calcin'd by the Goldsmiths Fire. By the Heat of the Sun likewise are produc'd Rubies, which differ one from another as there is more or less Light inclos'd in them in the Concretion. And for the same Reason Birds Feathers differ in Colour, so that some are all over of a Purple Dye, others only spotted here and there. For some things seem red, others yellow, some green, and many of a golden Colour, according to their Position to the Light. To conclude, innumerable sorts of Colours (very difficult to be reckon'd up) are occasion'd by this Means; which we see is done by the Reflection of the Sun's Beams upon the Rainbow. Whence the Naturalists do agree, that even the various Colours of Things above proceed from their Diversity of Heat, the lively Operation of the Sun causing their several Forms and Shapes; and that the various Colours of Flowers, and even of the Earth it self proceed from the Efficacy of the Sun, whose natural Operations the Arts of Men (as Nature's Scholars) do imitate, framing Variety of Colours in Painting and Embroidery: And that as Colours are form'd by Light, so Smells of Fruits, Variety of Tastes, Greatness of living Creatures, and the natural Constitution of every Thing, and the several Properties of the Earth are caus'd by the Heat of the Sun, which makes both the Earth and Water fruitful with its cherishing Heat, and is the Parent of every Creature; and therefore neither the Marble of Paros, nor any other Stone (tho' never so admirable) are comparable to the Stones in Arabia, which exceed all others for Lustre, Weight and Delicacy. This singular Property (as I have said) every thing is cloath'd with by the Power of the Sun in this Region: For by its Heat it concretes, by Exhalation hardens, and by its Light beautifies.

Hence it is that Birds are of a hot Nature, swift of Flight, and deck'd most with Variety of Colours in those Regions that are directly under the Scorching Heat of the Sun.

For in the Province of Babylon are bred many Peacocks, beautify'd with various Colours; and in the furthest Parts of Syria, Parrots, Porphyrios, Meleagrides, and many strange Birds of various Natures and Colours. The like may be said of other Parts of the World, where the Climate is the same; as of India, the Parts about the Red Sea, of Ethiopia, and


Page 81

some Parts of Africa. But the Eastern Parts being richer and more fruitful breed larger and more noble Creatures.

Those Creatures that are bred in other Countries have Natures agreeable to the Goodness of the Soyl. So as to the Trees, the Palm Trees of Africa bear but small and indigested Fruit: But in Coelo-Syria the Dates which they call Cariots, excel all others for pleasant Juice, Sweetness and Largeness. Yet in Arabia and in the Province of Babylon grow far larger than those, in Quantity fix Fingers round, some of a yellow, some scarlet, and others of a purple Dye, delightful both to the Eye and grateful to the Taste. The Palm Trees are very tall, streight and smooth to the Top. The Branches grow near to the Head, but not all in the like Manner. For some have their Branches growing round them on every side here and there and between them, the Fruit bursting out in Clusters through the Bark. Others represent a burning Lamp, their spiring Branches surrounding only one Part near the Top. Others whose Boughs clasp on every Part round the Tree, and guarded on both sides with a double row of tender Sprouts, represent something painted or inscrib'd.

That Part of Arabia lying to the South is call'd Arabia the Happy; the Arabians that inhabit the inner Parts, live Pastoral Lives, and in Tents. They have great Herds of Cattle, and are continually in vast and large Pastures. That Region which lyes between them and Arabia the Happy, is Desert, without Water, as we have before observ'd. The Places towards the West are sandy Deserts, so that all that travel there direct their Course (as Mariners at Sea) by the BearStar. The other Part of Arabia stretching towards Syria is full of Husbandmen and divers sorts of Merchants. These by their Traffic and Merchandize by importing and exporting plentifully furnish all other Parts round about, with what things they want. That Part bordering upon the Ocean lyes about Arabia the Happy, and there (by many Rivers falling down together) are made many large Ponds and Lakes up and down in the Country: And because large Tracts of Ground are water'd by the Rivers and the Rains that fall in the Summer time, they have a double Harvest. This Place breeds Troops of Elephants and other Beasts of vast Proportion, and likewise of double Shapes and strange Kinds; and also abundance of tame Cattle, especially Oxen and Sheep, which have very great and thick Tales. There are there bred in like manner a sort of Camels far beyond all others (both bare and rough) and the Bulch upon their Backs twice as big as any others, and therefore they are call'd Dityles. Some of these bring in great Profit both by their Milk and their Flesh. Others, accustom'd to Burthens, will carry twenty Bushels of Corn upon their Backs; which being of smaller Bodies, but swifter than the rest, are us'd to running, and dispatch a vast Tract of Ground, especially in the dry and desert Country.

These Beasts are useful in times of War; for in Battles they carry two Archers sitting back to back, the one to oppose them that attack them in the Front, and the other to repulse such as fall upon them in the Rear. Although this Discourse of Arabia and the Things there bred and produc'd may perhaps seem to be too tedious, yet the observing Reader may find in it many things worthy to be known.

And now we purpose to say something briefly of a certain Island lying in the Southern Ocean, and of the Wonders there, giving first an exact Account by what Means it came to be discover'd.

There was one Iambulus, from his Youth studious and learn'd. After the Death of his Father (who was a Merchant) he apply'd himself likewise to that Calling; but as he travell'd through Arabia to that Part of the Country where Spices most abounded, he and all his Company fell into the Hands of Thieves.

And first he was made a Shepherd, together with another of his Fellow Captives. Afterwards he was again taken by Ethiopian Skulkers, and carry'd away into the Maritime Parts of Ethiopia. And they were thus stolen and carried away, that (being Strangers) by them they might purge and expiate the Land. For the Ethiopian Inhabitants there had a Custom anciently us'd among them, and appointed by the Oracles of the Gods Twenty Generations before, that is, Six Hundred Years (every Generation comprehending Thirty Years) that the Land should be purg'd by Two Men that were Strangers. They prepar'd therefore


Page 82

a little Ship, yet sufficient to endure the Storms at Sea, and easily to be govern'd by Two Men: Upon this Ship they put the Men on Board, with Six Months Provision, that (according to the direction of the Oracle) they might sail away in a direct Course towards the South, in order to arrive at a Fortunate Island, where they might find People that were gentle and kind, with whom they might live happy lives. And that if they arriv'd safe at the Island (they told them) their own Nation, from whence they came, should enjoy Peace and Prosperity for Six Hundred Years to come. 

But if they were affrighted with the length of the Voyage, and should return again, they told them, that like impious Wretches, and destructive to the Nation, they should undergo most severe Punishments. Then they say the Ethiopians kept a Festival upon the Sea-shoar, and after splendid Sacrifices, crown'd the Purgators with Garlands, and sent them away, and so perfected the Purgation of the Nation. These Two Men (they say) being tossed for Four Months together, having pass'd over a vast Ocean (after many Storms and hardships at Sea) at last arriv'd at the Island design'd in the Fourth Month.

The Island is of a round Form, Five Thousand Furlongs in Compass. When the Men drew near to Shoar, some of the Inhabitants came to meet them, and brought the Ship into Harbour: Whereupon many more flockt in, and throng'd about the Strangers, wondring how ever they got thither; however they courteously receiv'd them, and entertain'd them with what their Country could afford.

The Inhabitants are much unlike to us in these Parts of the World, both as to their Bodies, and their way of living; but among themselves, they are for Form and Shape like one to another, and in stature above Four Cubits high. They can bend and turn their Bones somewhat like unto Nerves; and as the Nervous Parts after motion ended, return to their former state and position, so do their Bones. Their Bodies are very tender, but their Nerves far stronger than ours, for whatever they grasp in their Hands, none are able to wrest out of their Fingers. They have not the least Hair in any part of their Bodies, but upon their Heads, Eye-brows, Eye-lids and Chins; all other Parts are so smooth, that not the least Down appears any where. They are very comely and well shap'd, but the Holes of their Ears are much wider than ours, and have something like little Tongues growing out of them. Their Tongues have something in them singular and remarkable, the Effect both of Nature and Art; for they have partly a double Tongue, naturally a little divided, but cut further inwards by Art, so that it seems two, as far as to the very Root, and therefore there's great variety of Speech among them, and they not only imitate Mans Voice in articulate Speaking, but the various Chatterings of Birds, and even all sorts of Notes as they please; and that which is more wonderful than all, is, that they can speak perfectly to two Men at once, both in answering to what is said, and aptly carrying on a continu'd Discourse relating to the subject Matter in hand; so that with one part of their Tongue they speak to one, and with the other part to the other.

This Island is under a most excellent and moderate Climate (lying under the Aequator) neither scorcht with Heat, nor pincht with Cold; there they have ripe Fruit all the Year long, as the Poet says,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Apples and Pears always both ripe and green,

With Grapes and Figs may ever there be seen.

The Days and Nights are there always of an equal length; neither is there any Shadow at Noon-day, because the Sun is directly in the Zenith over head. They live divided into Tribes, according to their Kindred, and into distinct Societies; yet so as that there are not above Four Hundred admitted into any one Tribe or Society. They live in Meadows where they are plentifully supply'd with all things necessary for Food by what the Earth produces. For the Fertility of the Soyl, and the Temperature of the Air is such, that Corn (more than enough) grows there of it self. Plenty of Calamus likewise is produc'd there, whose Fruit is like to white Vetches: When they have gather'd it, they steep in it hot


Page 83

Water, till it puffs up to the bigness of a Pigeons Egg; then bruising it, and rubbing it skilfully in their Hands, they knead it into Dough, and then bake and eat it, being exceeding sweet and delicious Bread to the Taste. There are there both hot and cold large Baths, both for the curing and preventing of Distempers, being exceeding sweet and pleasant. They are learn'd in all sorts of Sciences, especially in Astrology. They use Eight and Twenty particular Letters, for the signifying what they mean, and Seven Characters, every one of which are form'd Four manner of ways. They live long generally, without ever being Sick, to an Hundred and Fifty Years of Age.

Those that are lame, or have any other weakness or infirmity of Body (according to the severe Law of their Country) they put to Death. They write not cross over the Sheet as we do, but begin at the top of the Leaf, and go on in one direct Line down to the Bottom. They have a Law that they may live to such a certain number of Years, and when those are run up, they dispatch themselves by a strange kind of Death; for there's an Herb of a double nature, that grows among them, upon which, if any one lies down, he silently passes away and dies, without any sense of pain, as if he were in a sweet Sleep. They never marry, but make use of Women promiscuously, and breed up the Children so begotten (as common to them all) with equal care and affection to one as well as to another. The Children while they are tender Infants are often chang'd by the Nurses, that they cannot be known by their Mothers; and therefore by that means there being no Ambition among them, they live in great concord and amity, without any Seditions or Tumults. There are Beasts among them very small, but of an admirable property as to their Flesh, and the excellent virtue that is in their Blood. Their Bodies are round, and something like to a Tortoise, divided by Two Streaks which run down the Back; at each end of every Streak they have an Eye and a Mouth; so that they have Four Eyes to see with, and Four Mouths to feed with; but the Meat they eat, is convey'd through one Throat, and hence into the Belly, the common Receptacle of all: And so in like manner they have but one Gut, nor but one of every other of the inner Parts: They have many Feet plac'd round their Bodies, and make use of them to go on what side they will. There's a marvelous virtue in the Blood of this little Creature, for it presently at an instant closes all Cuts and gaping Wounds in every Body that has still life in it; and if a Hand, or any other Member of that kind (that is not Vital) be cut off, by the application of this Blood (while the Wound continues green) it heals up again.

Each Society of these Inhabitants do keep many great Birds of a singular Nature, by which they try the Courage of their Children; for they place them upon the Birds Backs, and as many of them as sit fast when the Birds take their Flight, they bring up; but those that faint and are terrify'd, they throw away, as such that can never indure hardship any long time, nor have any generous Spirit in them.

In every Tribe or Society, the eldest governs the rest as King, and all yield him perfect Obedience: If the first put himself to Death (according to the Law) after he has liv'd a Hundred and Fifty Years, the next to him in age succeeds in the chief Command and Authority.

The Sea that surrounds this Island is very rough, and causes very great and high Tides, but the Water is fresh and sweet. The Bear Star, and many other visible with us, are never seen here.

These Islands are Seven in number, equal in bigness one to another, and of the same distance one from another, and the same Laws and Customs are us'd in all of them: And though these Islands afford plenty of Provision out of the natural growth of the Country to all the Inhabitants, yet they use them not luxuriously, but are frugal, and gather only so much as will serve their turns. They do indeed cook for themselves Flesh-meat, and all other sorts of Victuals both rosted and boil'd, but as for Sauces, and other delicate Inventions of that kind by Cooks, and the various Tasts and Savours contriv'd for curious Pallats, they are altogether ignorant of them.

For Gods they worship especially the whole frame of Heaven, because it comprehends all things; and next to that the Sun, and then all the Celestial Bodies. By various ways of Fishing and Fowling, they catch Fish and Fowl of all sorts. There are among them abundance of Fruit-Trees, and Vines, and Olive-Trees, whence they draw great quantity of Oil and Wine.


Page 84

Here are exceeding great Serpents, which yet do no harm to any; nay, their Flesh is good Meat and very sweet. They make their Garments of a soft and fine Cotton, contain'd in certain Reeds and Canes. This Cotton they dye with the Shell-Fishes call'd Ostreses, made up in Balls, and mixt and wrought amongst the Wool, and so with great pains make themselves Garments of a Purple Colour.

It produces living Creatures of different Natures from all others, and even incredible because they are unusual.

Their way of Feeding is according to a prescrib'd Rule; for they do not eat all sorts of Meats together at one and the same time, nor the same always; but upon some certain Days Fish, other Fowl, sometimes the Flesh of Land-Cattel, at other times Olives, and on other Days, very low and mean Diet. They help one another in their Callings and Imployments by turns: Some imploy themselves in Fishing; others in Manufactures, and others in other things useful and profitable to the Commonwealth. Some at certain times do exercise publick Offices, except those that are grown old. Upon their Festival Days, and times of Invocation upon their Gods, they celebrate their Praises both in Acclametions and Songs; especially the Sun, to whom they devote themselves and their Islands.

Their Dead they carry to the Sea-shoar at the Fall of the Tide, covering them with a little Sand, that at the time of Full Sea heaps of Sand may be rais'd higher upon them.

Those Canes whence they gather Fruit to eat, are the Compass of a Crown in thickness; they say, that towards the Full of the Moon they increase, and towards the New Moon they proportionably decrease.

The Water of their hot Springs is sweet and wholsom, and ever continues warm, never growing cold, unless it be mixt with Wine or cold Water.

After Iambulus with his Companion had continu'd in this Island Seven Years, they were (as wicked and vile Fellows) ejected. Having therefore their Ship fitted out, and furnish'd with Provision, they set Sail, and after they had continu'd their Voyage for above Four Months together, they fell at length upon the Sandy shallows of India, where Iambulus his Companion was drown'd, and he himself was afterwards cast upon a certain Village, and forthwith carried away by the Inhabitants of the Place, to the King, then at a City call'd Polybothia, many Days Journey distant from the Sea; where he was kindly receiv'd by the King, who had a great love for the Grecians, and was very studious in the liberal Sciences. At length (having obtain'd Provision from the King) he first sail'd into Persia, and thence safely arriv'd in Greece. This Iambulus committed all these Adventures to Writing, and gave an account of many things relating to the Affairs of India, before unknown to Strangers. But having now perform'd what we promis'd in the beginning of this Book, we shall here make an end.


Page 85

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK III.

The PREFACE. 

THE First of the Two Books preceding, contains the Acts of the ancient Kings of Egypt, and the Fabulous History of the Egyptian Gods: Of those things reported of the River Nile; of their Fruits, divers kinds of Beasts, the Situation of the Country, and of their Laws and Courts of Justice. In the Second are comprehended the Affairs of Asia, the Acts of the Assyrians in antient Times, and amongst them the Birth and Advancement of Semiramis; how she built Babylon, and many other Cities, and invaded the Indians with a mighty Army. We have treated there likewise of the Caldeans, and their Art in Astronomy. Of Arabia, and the wonderful things there: Of the Amazons: And lastly, of the Hyperboreans, and the Island Taprobana. In this ensuing Book pursuing such things as are coherent with those that went before, we shall treat of the Ethiopians and Africans, and of the Atlantick Islands.

CHAP. I.

Of the Ethiopians: Their Letters, Laws, Arms, Religion, Funerals: The Description of several Parts of the Country. Manner of making of Gold. Of the Ichthyophages, their several sorts, and way of Living.

THE Ethiopians say that they were the First Men that ever were in the World, and that to prove this, they have clear Demonstrations: For they say, they are Natives of the Country, and not Strangers that came to settle there, and are therefore by the general Consent almost of all Men call'd Autochthones; and that in every Man's Opinion, it's most probable that those that inhabit the South, were the first Living Men that sprung out of the Earth. For being that the heat of the Sun at the first exhal'd the Moisture of the Earth, and in the first production of all things, influenc'd it with a quickening Virtue, they say it's very rational to conclude, that those Places next to the Sun, should be the first Parents of all Living Creatures.


Page 86

It's affirm'd among them, that they were the first that instituted Religious Worship, and pompous Sacrifices, with solemn Assemblies, and other things us'd in the Service, and to the honour of the Gods; and they hold that the Sacrifices of the Ethiopians are the most acceptable to the Gods of any other; and in Testimony hereof, they produce the most ancient Poet, and of greatest Authority amongst the Grecians, who in his Iliads introduces Jupiter with the rest of the Gods travelling into Ethiopia to the Anniversary Sacrifice, and solemn Festival prepar'd for them by the Ethiopians.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

For Jove and all the Gods are gone to Feast

With pious Ethiopians in the West.

And they say it's very evident, that the Gods reward them for their Piety, for that they were never brought into subjection to any Foreign Prince, but always remain'd a free People, and at perfect Peace among themselves. And although many, and those most Potent Princes likewise, have invaded, yet none have succeeded in their Attempts. For Cambyses making in upon them with mighty Forces, was in danger both to have lost his Life and his whole Army. And Semiramis (who was so famous both for her Skill and Success in Arms,) having but enter'd a little way into Ethiopia, presently saw it was to no purpose to think of conquering that Nation.

Hercules likewise, and Bacchus, who ran through the whole World, forbore only the Ethiopians, being awed by the Piety of that People, and discourag'd with the difficulty of the Attempt.

The Ethiopians likewise say, that the Egyptians are a Colony drawn out from them by Osiris; and that Egypt was formerly no part of the Continent, but a Sea at the beginning of the World; but that afterwards it was by degrees made Land by the River Nile, which brought down Slime and Mud out of Ethiopia. And that that Country was made dry Land, by heaps of Earth forc'd down by the River (they say) is apparent by evident Signs about the Mouths of Nile. For always every Year, may be seen fresh Heaps of Mud cast up at the Mouths of the River by the working of the Sea, and the Land increas'd by it. Moreover they affirm, that most of the Egyptian Laws, are the same with those in Ethiopia, the Colony still observing the Customs of their Ancestors; and that they learnt from the Ethiopians the Custom of Deifying of their Kings, and their Care and Costs in their Burials, and such like things us'd amongst them: Besides the making of Statues, and the Characters of their Letters. For whereas the Egyptians have common and ordinary Characters us'd promiscuously by all the Inhabitants, and likewise those they call Sacred, known only by the Priests, privately taught them by their Parents; yet the Ethiopians use both those sorts without any difference or distinction. The several Colleges of the Priests (they say) observe one and the same Order and Discipline in both the Nations. For as many as are so consecrated for Divine Service, are wholly devoted to Purity and Religion, and in both Countries are shaven alike, and are cloath'd with the like Stoles and Attire, and carry a Scepter like unto a Plow-share, such as their Kings likewise bear; with high crown'd Caps tufted at the Top, wreath'd round with Serpents call'd Asps; by which is seem'd to be signify'd, that those who contrive any thing against the Life of the King, are as sure to dye, as if they were stung with the deadly Bite of the Asp. Many other things they report of their Antiquity, and of a Colony of them heretofore carry'd away into Egypt, of which it's unnecessary further to write.

But lest we should omit things that are antient and remarkable, it's fit something should be said of the Ethiopick Characters, and of those which the Egyptians call Hieroglyphicks.

The Ethiopick Letters represent the Shapes of divers Beasts, Parts and Members of Mens Bodies, and Artificers Tools and Instruments. For by their Writing they do not express any thing by composition of Syllables, but by the signification of Images and Representations, the meaning of them being ingraven and fixt in the Memory by use and exercise. For sometimes they draw the Shape of a


Page 87

Kite, Crocodile or Serpent, sometimes the Members of a Man's Body, as the Eye, the Hand, the Face, and such like. The Kite signifies all things that are quickly dispatcht; because this Bird flies the swistest almost of any other. For Reason presently applies it by a suitable Interpretation to every thing that is suddain and quick, or of such nature, as perfectly as if they had been spoken. The Crocodile is the Emblem of Malice: The Eye the preserver of Justice, and the Guard of the Body. Amongst the Members of the Body, the Right Hand, with open Fingers signifies Plenty, the Left with the Fingers close Preservation, and custody of Men's Goods and Estates.

The same way of reasoning extends to all other Parts of the Body, and the forms of Tools and all other things; for being that they diligently pry into the hidden signification of every thing, and have their Minds and Memories daily imploy'd with continual Exercise, they exactly read and understand every thing coucht within the Hieroglyphicks.

A great part of the Ethiopian Laws differ very much from other Nations, especially those which concern the Election of their Kings: For they pick out the best of their Priests out of every Rank and Order, and whomsoever of those so chosen, their Revelling God (which they carry about according to Custom) does first lay hold on, the People they make King, and forthwith fall down upon their Knees, and worship as a God, and render him other Honours, as he to whom the Authority of the chief Magistrate is committed by Divine Providence.

Being so elected, he orders the Course of his Life according as the Law has prescrib'd; and governing in all other respects according to the Customs of the Country; he neither confers Rewards, nor inflicts Punishments upon any, but according to the ancient Laws ratify'd and approv'd by his Ancestors from the beginning.

It is a Law among them, That no Subject shall be put to Death, nor Condemn'd to Dye, though he be never so guilty: But one of the Lictors is sent to the Criminal, bearing before him the Badge or Sign of Death; upon sight of which, the Party goes Home, and kills himself. It is not lawful to change his Punishment by wilful Banishment, and flying into other Countries, as it is the Custom of the Greeks. And therefore they report, that one once preparing to fly out of Ethiopia, after the Sign of Death was sent to him by the King, that his Mother discerning his Design, fastned her Garter about his Neck, and he never in the least lifted up his Hands to hinder her, but underwent all till he was strangl'd to Death, lest he should leave behind him a Blot and Stain upon his Kindred and Family. And above all, that Custom is most strange, which relates to the Death of the Kings; for those Priests that are imploy'd in the Service of the Gods at Meroe, who are here of greatest Authority, whensoever they please, they send a Messenger to the King, commanding him to put himself to death; for that such is the pleasure of the Gods, and that it is not lawful for any to despise the Commands of the Gods; adding also other Reasons, which a plain and honest Mind, inur'd to an ancient and constant Custom (and not being furnish'd with sufficient Arguments to evince the unreasonableness of the Commands) is easily induc'd to believe.

And so in former Ages, the Kings without force or compulsion of Arms, but meerly bewitcht by a fond Superstition, observ'd the Custom; till Ergamenes a King of Ethiopia, who reign'd in the time of Ptolomy the Second (bred up in the Grecian Discipline and Philosophy) was the first that was so bold as to reject and despise such Commands. For this Prince assuming the Spirit and Courage becoming a King, marcht with a considerable Body of Men to the Place (very difficult of access) where stood the Golden Temple of the Ethiopians, and there cut the Throats of all the Priests; and having abolish'd that ancient barbarous Custom, reform'd what appertain'd to the Service of the Gods, in such manner as he thought fit. There is moreover a strange and wonderful Law amongst the great Officers of the King's Houshold, which continues, they say, to this very day. For it's a Custom amongst the Ethiopians, that if the King be maim'd or debilitated upon any occasion in any Member of his Body, all his Houshold-Servants do the same thing to themselves. For they hold it a base and unworthy thing, that if the King be lame, for his Servants to attend upon him with whole and sound Limbs, and not all to be lame as well as he. And that it's a thing most unworthy of true and firm Friendship, not to sympathize and bear


Page 88

a share both in Prosperity and Adversity, in Sorrow and Sadness, and in the pains and deficiencies of the Body. They say moreover, that it's a Custom for the King's Domestick Servants, to put themselves to Death when their Kings dye, and such Death they account honourable, and as a Testimony of their sincere love to their Prince; and therefore it's no easie matter for the Ethiopians to assassinate any of the King's Friends, being that both they and the King are careful and solicitous for the mutual preservation of each other.

These are the Laws of those Ethiopians that inhabit the Capital City, and the Island Meroes, and those Tracts that lye next unto Egypt. But there are many other Ethiopian Nations, whereof some dwell on both sides the River Nile, and in the Islands in the River; others border upon Arabia, and some are seated in the heart of Africa. The greatest part of these, especially those in and about the River, are Blacks, flat Fac'd, of curl'd Hair, exceeding fierce and cruel, and in their Manners like Beasts, not so much in their natural Temper, as in their study'd and contriv'd pieces of wickedness. Their whole Bodies are filthy and nasty, and their Nails long like wild Beasts, and cruel one towards another. They have a shrill Voice, and in regard they are never taught by any how to lead a more civiliz'd Course of Life (in that way of Education as others are) they mightily differ from us in all their Manners.

Some of them carry Shields made of the raw Hide of an Ox, and short Launces: Others Darts with forkt Points; sometimes they use Bows of Wood Four Cubits long, and discharge their Arrows, by forcing the Bow with the help of their Foot; and when their Shafts are spent, they fall on with Clubs. They arm likewise their Women, till they attain to such an Age; many of whom use to hang a Brass Ring at their Lips. Some of them never wear any Cloaths, but go naked all their Lives long, and shelter themselves from the scorching heat of the Sun, only with such helps and defences as in their way they can meet withal. Some of them cut off Sheeps Tails, and bind them about their Loyns to cover their Privities: Others make use of Beasts Skins for this purpose. Some there are that are cloth'd round their Loyns with Breeches made of the Hair of their Heads; for the nature of the Ground is such, that the Sheep carry no Fleeces.

Their Meat is a certain Fruit that grows about the Pools and Marishes: Some pluck off the tender Branches of small Trees, and with them cover themselves from the heat of the Southern Sun. Some sow Sesamus and Lotus: And others live upon certain tender Roots of Canes. And many of them that are good Archers, maintain themselves with abundance of Fowl they kill. But most of them live upon Flesh, Milk and Cheese. Those that inhabit the Parts above Meroes, have Two Opinions concerning the Gods.

Some of them say they are eternal and incorruptible: Amongst which, they reckon the Sun, Moon, and the intire Universe. Others they conceive were at first Mortal Men, but for their Virtue and their Benefits procur'd to Mankind, purchas'd immortal Honour. They especially worship Isis, Pan, Hercules and Jupiter, whom they account to be the greatest Benefactors to Mankind. But some few of the Ethiopians are of opinion, that there are no Gods at all: And these fly to the Marishes from the Sun when it rises, as from an implacable Enemy.

They have Laws likewise different from all other Nations about their Funerals. Some throw their Dead into the River, as looking upon that to be the best sort of Burial. Others by pouring upon them melted Glass, keep them in their Houses; because they think it not convenient or decent that their Countenances should not be known by their Kindred, or that they should be forgotten by their Posterity. Some bury them in Earthen Coffins, about their Temples; and to swear by their Names, is counted the most Sacred Oath. Those that are most Beautiful some of of them chuse to be their King, judging that Regal Power and Beauty are always the Gifts of Fortune. Others intrust the Royal Power in the Hands of the most industrious Shepherds, as such as would make it their business to take most care for the good of their Subjects. Others bestow the Kingdom upon those that are richest, judging such only most able by their Riches, to supply the wants of their People.

There are others that are for the advancing them to the Throne, who are most approv'd for their Valour; because they judge those that are Conquerors to be most worthy of Honour.


Page 89

That part of the Country in Lybia that borders upon Nile, is the most pleasant and richest for all manner of Provision; for the Morasses afford the most advantagious shelters against the parching heat of the Sun; and therefore the Ethiopians and Africans quarrel, and are at continual Wars one with another for the possession of that Place. Herds likewise of Elephants out of the higher Lybia (as some write) come down into those Parts, because of the abundance of Pasture, and the sweetness of it. For there are wonderful Morasses, abounding in all sorts of Food all along the Banks of the River, and here they are held by the Mouth, when they taste the sweetness of those Reeds and Canes that grow here, and so eat up the Food of the Inhabitants; and therefore the People are forc'd to resort to these Places for Relief (being Shepherds and living in Tents) making that their Country where they can find the most Plenty.

The Herds of Elephants of which we before hinted, leave the upper Parts for want of Pasture, which is presently burnt up there by the heat of the Sun. For by reason of the scorching Heat, and want both of Spring and River-water, the Grass is parcht up, and none to be had.

Some write, that in the Deserts and other wild Places (as they are call'd) are bred a World of Serpents of a wonderful bigness. These (they say) with great fury and violence, set upon the Elephants at the brink of the Waters, clasping themselves in many Circles round their Thighs, and sticking fast there so long, as that at length the Beasts (tir'd out by their great and weighty bulk) fall down in a foaming Sweat to the ground; upon which, others in multitudes coming in, they presently devour them, and that with ease; the poor Creatures being so unweldy, as scarce able to move themselves. If for some Reason or other, they succeed not in their Attempt, (out of eagerness to their natural Food) they pursue not the Elephants to the Rivers Bank before mentioned. For they say these vast Serpents avoid all they can the open Fields, and abide about the Feet and hollows of the Mountains in deep Holes and Caves: And hence it is, that they leave not those Places so fit for their shelter and defence, Nature teaching every Creature to make use of that which is most helpful to it, and to avoid what is hurtful.

And thus much we have thought fit to say of the Ethiopians and their Country: And now something is to be said of the Historians: For many have written such things concerning Egypt and Ethiopia, as deserve not the least credit, in as much as the Authors were either too easie to believe Lies, or else in sport and for diversion invented them themselves.

But Agatharchides of Cnidus in his Second Book of the Affairs of Asia, Artemidorus the Ephesian, in his Eighth Book of Geography, and some others that were natural Egyptians, who have written Histories of the things herein before by us related, have in their Writings nearly pursu'd the Truth. And I my self in the time of my Travelling and Sojourning in Egypt, associated with many of the Priests, and conferr'd with many Ambassadors and others sent out of Ethiopia, whence having exactly come to the knowledge of every thing, and having likewise examin'd the several Relations of the Historians, have fram'd and moulded my History, so as to suit with those things wherein all of them did agree and consent.

But this shall suffice to be said of the Western Ethiopians.

We shall now speak a little of those inhabiting the Southern Parts, and towards the Red Sea. But it's fit first that we say something of the making of Gold in these Parts.

In the Confines of Egypt and the neighbouring Countries of Arabia and Ethiopia there's a Place full of rich Gold-mines, out of which with much Cost and Pains of many Labourers Gold is dug. The Soyl here naturally is black, but in the Body of the Earth, run many white Veins, shining with white Marble, and glistering with all sorts of other bright Metals; out of which labourious Mines, those appointed Overseers cause the Gold to be dug up by the labour of a vast Multitude of People. For the Kings of Egypt condemn to these Mines, notorious Criminals, Captives taken in War, Persons sometimes falsly accus'd, or such against whom the King is incens'd; and that not only they themselves, but sometimes all their Kindred and Relations together with them, are sent to work here, both to punish them, and by their Labour to advance the Profit and Gain of the King. There are infinite numbers upon these Accounts thrust down into these Mines, all bound


Page 90

in Fetters, where they work continually, without being admitted any rest Night or Day, and so strictly guarded, that there's no possibility or way left to make an escape. For they set over them Barbarians, Souldiers of various and strange Languages, so that it's not possible to corrupt any of the Guard, by discoursing one with another, or by the gaining Insinuations of a familiar Converse.

The Earth which is hardest and full of Gold, they soften by putting Fire under it, and then work it out with their Hands: The Rocks thus softn'd, and made more pliant and yielding, several Thousands of profligat Wretches break it in pieces with Hammers and Pickaxes. There's one Artist that is the Overseer of the whole Work, who marks out the Stone, and shews the Labourers the way and manner how he would have it done. Those that are the Strongest amongst them, that are appointed to this Slavery, provided with sharp Iron Pickaxes, cleave the Marble-shining Rock by meer Force and Strength, and not by Art or Slight of Hand. They undermine not the Rock in a direct Line, but follow the bright shining Vein of the Mine.

They carry Lamps fastn'd to their Forheads to give them Light, being otherways in perfect Darkness in the various windings and turnings wrought in the Mine; and having their Bodies appearing sometimes of one Colour, and sometimes of another (according to the nature of the Mine where they work) they throw the Lumps and Pieces of the Stone cut out of the Rock upon the Floor. And thus they are imploy'd continually without intermission, at the very nod of the Overseer or Tax-master, who lashes them severely besides. And there are little Boys that attend upon the Labourers in the Mine, and with great labour and toyl gather up the Lumps and Pieces hew'd out of the Rock as they are cast upon the Ground, and carry them forth and lay them upon the Bank. Those that are about Thirty Years of Age take a Piece of the Rock of such a certain quantity, and pound it in a Stone Mortar with Iron Pestels till it be as small as a Vetch, then those little Stones so pounded are taken from them by Women and older Men, who cast them into Mills that stand together there near at hand in a long Row, and Two or Three of them being imploy'd at one Mill, they grind it so long till it be as small as fine Meal, according to the pattern given them. No care at all is taken of the Bodies of these poor Creatures, so that they have not a Rag so much as to cover their Nakedness, and no Man that sees them can chuse but must commiserate their sad and deplorable Condition. For tho they are Sick, Maim'd or Lame, no rest no intermission in the least is allow'd them: Neither the weakness of Old age, nor Womens Infirmities are any plea to excuse them; but all are driven to their work with Blows and Cudgelling, till at length overborn with the intollerable weight of their misery, they drop down dead in the midst of their insufferable Labours; so that these miserable Creatures always expect worse to come than that which they then at present indure, and therefore long for Death as far more desirable than Life.

At length the Masters of the Work take Stone thus ground to Powder, and carry it away in order to the perfecting of it. They spread the Mineral so ground upon a broad Board somewhat hollow and lying shelving, and pouring Water upon it, rub it and cleanse it, and so all the Earthy and Drossy part being separated from the rest by the Water, it runs off the Board, and the Gold by reason of its weight remains behind. Then washing it several times again, they first rub it lightly with their Hands; afterwards they draw up the Earthy and Drossy Matter with slender Spunges gently apply'd to the Pouder'd Dust, till it be clean pure Gold. At last other Workmen take it away by Weight and Measure, and these put it into Earthen Urns, and according to the quantity of the Gold in every Urn, they mix with it some Lead, Grains of Salt, a little Tin and Barley Bran. Then covering every Pot close, and carefully dawbing them over with Clay, they put them in a Furnace where they abide Five Days and Nights together; then after a convenient time that they have stood to cool, nothing of the other matter is to be found in the Pots but only pure refin'd Gold, some little thing diminish'd in the weight.

And thus is Gold prepar'd in the Borders of Egypt, and perfected and compleated with so many and so great toyls and Vexations. And therefore I cannot but conclude that Nature itself teaches us, that as Gold is got with Labour and Toyl, so its kept with difficulty; creates every where the greatest cares; and the use of it mixt both with Pleasure and Sorrow.


Page 91

Yet the invention of those Metals is very ancient, being found out, and made use of by the ancient Kings.

Now we shall treat of those Nations that lye scatter'd among the Coasts of the Red Sea, and through Troglodyta and the Southern parts of Ethiopia.

And First we shall speak of the Ichthyophages who inhabit the Sea Coasts all along as far as from Carmania and Gedrosia to the uttermost point of the Red Sea, which runs up into the Land an incredible long way, and at the entrance into it lyes bounded on one side with Arabia the Happy, and with the Country of the Troglodites on the other.

Some of the Barbarians go stark naked, and their Wives and Children are as common among them as their Flocks and Herds. They know nothing either of Pleasure or Sorrow but what is natural, like Bruit Beasts, and have no apprehension either of Good or Evil. They inhabit not far from the very brink of the Sea Shore, where there are not only deep Caves, but Craggy Cliffs, and strait and narrow Valleys divided naturally into many crooked Windings and Turnings; which being of their own nature useful to the Inhabitants, they make up the passages both in and out with heaps of great Stones, and make use of those Places instead of Nets to catch their Fish. For when the Tide comes in and overflows the Coasts (as it does twice every Day about the Third and Ninth Hour) and the Sea covers the Strand up to the Brinks of the Banks, together with the Tide it brings in a Vast number of all sorts of Fish within the Land, which at the first are kept within those parts next to the Sea, but afterwards for Food disperse themselves about those hollow Caverns; but when the Tide ebbs, and the Water by degrees leaves the hollows, and reflows through those heaps of Stones, the Fish within those Caverns are left destitute of Water. Upon which all the Barbarians (as if they were rouz'd up by one general shout) with their Wives and Children Flock to the Place. Yet they divide themselves into several Companies, and each run with an hideous shout to their several Places as if a Prey were suddenly and unexpectedly presented to them. Then the Women and Children gather the little Fish next to the shore; and throw them upon the dry Land, as fast as they can gather them; and the Men, and more able people busie themselves in catching the great and strong Fish; for the Sea not only casts up the huge Lobsters, Lampreys and Dog-Fish, but also the Sea Calves, and many such like both of strange names and shape. They Master not these Creatures with Arms made by the Artist, but strike 'em through with the sharp Goats Horns, and wound and cut them with rough Stones broken off from the Rock. For Necessity in every thing instructs Nature what to do, and readily complies with that which seems most useful and advantagious in the present exigency.

After they have got their number in heaps together, they carry away their Booty, and put all they have caught into Stone Pots turn'd towards the South: the Fish being, as it were even by Fire, Fry'd by the heat of the Sun, after a small time they turn them upon the other side, then they take 'em by the Tails and shake 'em, and the Flesh thus scalded and softned by the Sun falls off; but the Bones they heap together in one place; and keep 'em for their use as shall be hereafter related. Then they boil their Flesh in a little Stone Pot for a certain time, mixing with them the seed of a Fruit call'd Paliurus. By working of this together it becomes a Lump of one and the same colour, and this seems as if it were a Sauce to their Meat. At last this that is thus brought into a Body, they spread upon long Tiles, and lay it forth to dry in the Sun; which after it has been dry'd a little (lying down together) they merrily feed upon, and eat not according to Weight and Measure but as every one thinks fit, making their natural Appetite the measure of their Repast. For they have always enough of this store to resort unto, as if Neptune perform'd the Office of Ceres. Yet sometimes the Sea rises so high, that all the Shoars are overflow'd for many Days together, so that none dare attempt to come near; in the mean time therefore (wanting food) they first gather Shell-fish of such a vast magnitude, as that some of them weigh Four Minas. These they break in Pieces with huge great Stones, and eagerly guttle up the raw Fish in them, which are in Taste much like Oysters.

If by Storms and Winds the Sea continues long in a high Tide, and that they are hindred from taking of Fish by Tempestuous Weather, they first (as is said before) betake themselves to the Shell-fish; and when these fail, they run to the heaps of Bones; and from among them pick out those that are fresh and moist,


Page 92

and divide 'em one joint from another, and some they presently grash in Pieces with their Teeth, and others that are more hard they bruise with Stones and Feed upon them like so many Beasts in their Dens. And thus they provide dry Food for themselves: And as to that which is moist and juicy, their use of it is wonderful and past belief. For they Fish continually for Four Days successively, in the mean time eating merrily together in great Flocks and Companies, congratulating one another with harsh and untuneable Songs without any Melodious Harmony: Then they fall promiscuously, as every Man's Lot chances to company with their Women, for procreation sake; minding no business, nor taking any care for any thing, having so much plenty ready at hand. But the Fifth Day, they go in Droves to get Drink, to those Tracts lying under the Feet of the Mountains, where are many Springs of Sweet Water, whither likewise the Shepherds drive their Flocks for the same purpose. Neither do they differ much from Herds of Cattel, as they go making a horrid noise, without any articulate Voice: In this Procession the Mothers carry their sucking Children continually in their Arms, and the Fathers after they are weaned; but after they are Five Years old, they run before their Parents very jocant and playful, as if they were going to some delightful and pleasant Recreation. For not being of a froward and discontented Temper, they place their chiefest good in having sufficient to supply their necessities, never seeking any further addition to their happiness in gaining more. When they come to the Shepherds watering Places, they gorge themselves with Water to that degree, that when they return, they can scarce go, they are so heavy and unweldy.

All that Day they eat nothing, but every one lies groveling upon the Ground like a Drunken Man, with their Bellies almost burst, and scarce able to breath. And the next Day they fall a feeding upon their Fish; and this course and round they run in this manner of feeding all the days of their Lives. But those People who live thus within the strait narrow Caves near to the Sea-shoar, by reason of the plainness and meanness of their Diet, though they are scarce ever Sick, yet are far shorter liv'd than our own Countreymen.

As for those other that live further beyond the Gulf, their way of Living is much more strange, who naturally never covet any Drink, nor are affected with any Passion: For their Lot falling to be in the Deserts, in Places unfit for Humane Habitation, they feed plentifully, by catching of Fish, but matter not any other Food; and in regard they eat their Fish slaby, and almost raw, they are so far from coveting Drink, that they know not what it is to drink. They are therefore contented with what Providence has provided for them; accounting themselves happy in this respect, that they are not affected with that troublesom Passion, the sense of want. And that which is most to be admir'd, is, that they so far exceed all other Men in freedom from boysterous Passions, that what we shall now relate is scarce credible. But many Egyptian Merchants, who in their Voyage through the Red Sea, have arriv'd at the Country of the Ichthophages, have avow'd it to me to be a certain truth, that they are not in the least mov'd with any thing. And Ptolemy the Third, who had a great desire to hunt the Elephants that were bred in that Country, sent Simia, one of his Friends to view the Place; who being furnish'd with sufficient Provision for his Journey, exactly and diligently observ'd the manner of those Nations lying along the Sea-shoar, as Agatharchides of Cnidus the Historian relates. Amongst other things he says, that the Ethiopians in those Parts are not affected with any disturbing Passion; that they never use to drink, nor have the least appetite or inclination thereunto, for the Reasons before mention'd. He affirms moreover, that they have no Converse or Discourse with any Stranger, nor are mov'd or concern'd at the sight of any, but fixing their Eyes upon them, are no more mov'd or affected, than as if no Person at all were near them. Nay, if they be assaulted (he says) with drawn Swords they'l not stir; and though they are hurt and wounded, yet they are not in the least provoked. Neither are the Common People at all concern'd, when any of the rest are hurt or injur'd; but many times when their Wives and Children are kill'd before their Eyes, they stand insensible as if nothing of prejudice were done to them, shewing no sign either of Anger or Compassion; and therefore they say, they speak not a word, but act a part with a mimick gesture of their Hands, as they use to do upon such an occasion. And that which is most of all to be admir'd, the Sea Calves (which are very familiar with them) like Men, help them


Page 93

to catch Fish. These different and distinct People are yet exceeding Faithful one to another, in securing one another's Children from harm and prejudice, and preserving their several Habitations from force and incroachment; and though they are of different Stocks, yet they peaceably and affectionately converse one with another, without offering the least injury on either side.

And though this way of Living together be somewhat strange, yet through long custom, and constant use and practice, or because they find it necessary and conducing to their mutual advantage, it is still continu'd among them to this day.

These Nations inhabit not after the manner of the other Ichthiophages, but have divers sorts of Dwellings according as their several Circumstances fall out to be; some live in Caves lying most commonly to the North, by which they have the advantage of being refresh'd not only by the depth of the Covert, but by the cooling Breezes of the Northern Air. For those towards the South scorch like a Fiery Furnace, and by reason of the violent heat no Man can indure them. Others that cannot otherwise furnish themselves with Caves that lye Northward, gather the Ribs of Whales (which the Sea casts up in abundance) and then bending them, tye 'em together at both ends, and cover them with Sea-grass, and so rest under those, guarded from the parching heat of the Sun, as by the Cover of a shady Arch; which Art and Contrivance they are taught by their own Necessities.

A Third sort of Lodgings these Ichthiophages have are these; about those Places grow abundance of Fir-trees, which are water'd by the Sea, and bear very thick Leaves, and Fruit like unto Chesnuts: The Boughs and Leaves of these Trees, they interlace one within another, and so make for themselves a thick and close Shade, and live merry and jocund Lives, under this their new Canopy, both in Land and in Water at one and the same time, being hereby guarded from the Sun by the shade of the Trees, and the natural heat of the Place being mitigated by the continual Fluctuations of the Sea, and their Bodies refresht with the cooling Air of some Winds that blow at certain Seasons. But to proceed as to the Fourth sort of Dwellings.

In this place there has been from the beginning of Time, a vast heap of Moss, like a Mountain, cast up by the Sea, which is so firm by the constant heat of the Sun, that its become solid and cemented together with Sand. In this they dig Caves of a Man's height, that part over-head they leave for a Roof, but below they make long Passages or Galleries to go in or out, one over against another. Here they abide with ease, protected from the heat of the Sun; and about the Time the Tide comes in, out they start, and then for that time imploy themselves in Fishing; and at the ebbing of the Tide, after they have fed deliciously together upon the Fish they have caught, they fly again to their several Caves. They bury their Dead only at the time of Low-Water; and at that time they cast their Carcases upon the Shoar, and there let them lye uncover'd, to be carry'd away by the next Tide. And so after all, having spent all their Days in a strange and unusual Course and way of Living, they themselves at last in their Burials become Food for the Fishes.

But there's one Nation of the Ichthiophages whose Habitations are so strange, that inquisitive Men are very much pulled about them. For some of them dwell upon steep and dangerous hollows which time out of mind have been unaccessible to Mankind, as far as appears: For over their Heads are exceeding high Rocks, rugged and steep every way; and on both sides they are blockt up with unpassable Precipices; and before, the Sea is a Guard and Boundary to them, so that the best Footman cannot come at them. Neither have they any use or so much as knowledge of any Boats or Ships as we have. Hence (the thing being so intricate and doubtful) we may justly conclude that they are Aborigines, and were ever in this Place without any certain time of their First Generation; which some Naturalists doubt not to affirm of all other Works of Nature whatsoever. But for as much as the perfect Knowledge of things of this nature are far above our Comprehension we may easily conclude, that those know but little, who are the most inquisitive, and soaring so high as to know all; who may perhaps tickle Mens Ears with a probable Fancy, but never really attain to the Knowledge of the Truth.


Page 94

CHAP. II.

Chelonophages: The Manner of taking Sea Tortoises. The Cetivores or Whale Eaters. The Sea Coasts over against Babylon; their Manner of taking of Fish. The Rizophages or Root Eaters. Those call'd Spermaphages and Hylophages, Hylogones or Hunters; their taking of wild Beasts: The Elephant Fighters; how they are taken: The Simoes, Struthophages, Acridophages or Locust Eaters; their miserable Deaths. Cynomolges: The Country of the Troglodites. Wild Beasts: The Terrible Wild Bull: Serpents; That great one brought alive to Alexandria.

SOmething likewise is to be spoken of the Chelonophages, to shew the whole Course and Manner of their way of living.

There are a vast number of Islands in the Ocean near to the Continent, very small and of a low Situation, barren both as to Tillage and the natural Fruits of the Earth. Amongst these Islands (because they are so near one to another) there are no Storms or Tempests: For the Force of the Waves are broke by the Promontories of these Islands that shoot out into the Sea, and therefore abundance of Sea Tortoises lye in and about these Places, seeking Relief under the Covert of this calm and quiet Shelter. In the Night they lye at the bottom of the Water feeding, but in the Day time appear above Water in that Part of the Sea that flows through the midst of the Islands, and lye sleeping with their Shells erect, expos'd to the Sun, and seem to resemble a little Skiff turn'd with the Keel upwards; for they are of a wonderful Bigness, no less than a small Fisher's Boat.

The Barbarians that inhabit these Islands, taking the Opportunity, quietly and silently swim to these Sea Tortoises, and assailing them on both sides; some they thrust forward to the Shoar, others they lift up till they have turn'd them upon their Backs; then they that are on each side guide and direct the Creature to land like a Ship by the Stem, lest the Tortoise should turn it self again, and so by its natural Strength in swimming escape from them into the Sea: And while they are thus imploy'd, one of the Company swims to Shoar before with a long Rope ty'd at one end to the Fish, and then draws him to Land, those that assisted at the taking of him following close after. When he's brought into the Island, they fry the Fish a little while in the Sun, and then feed upon it merrily together. The Shells being in shape like to Boats are very useful to the Inhabitants; for they use them both to fail in to the Continent to get fresh Water; and likewise for Roofs to cover their Cottages, turning the hollow Parts downwards. So that Nature's Bounty has provided for them by one Gift many useful Advantages as Food, Vessels, Shipping and Habitations.

Not far off from these upon the Sea Shoar in the Continent dwell other Barbarians far different from the others in their way of living; for they feed upon Whales cast up by Chance by the Sea. Sometimes they have Plenty of Food by Reason of the vast Proportion of these Creatures; but at other times for want of them they are almost starv'd; and are forc'd through want of Food to gnaw Pieces of old stinking Bones, and to suck the Ends of the rotten Ribs.

So many are the Nations of the Ethiopians who feed upon Fish; and this is the manner of their living, concluding this Account in a brief and summary way.

But the Sea Coasts over against the Province of Babylon border upon a fruitful Country abounding in all sorts of Fruit-trees, where there is such Plenty of Fish, that they are more than the Inhabitants can consume: For upon the Sea shoar they set such a number of Canes, and so interwoven one within another, that they are like to a Net spread all along by the Sea-side. In every of which Works, there are many little Portals wrought and interlac'd with Reeds, and are tossed this way and that way with an easy Motion. These open by the Tide, when the Sea flows


Page 95

in upon the Land, and when it returns into the Channel they shut again. So that through these Portals with the Efflux of the Sea the Fish slip every day, and when it ebbs they are left behind, because they cannot pass with the Water through those Canes thus knit and wrought together: And therefore near to the Sea-side sometimes may be seen Heaps of Fish panting for want of Water, which those that have the Care and Oversight of this Business, gather and carry away. Hence they have both Plenty of Food, and raise a large Revenue beside. Some of the Inhabitants, when the Shoar is dry and the Country lies flat, draw broad Sluces from the Sea many Furlongs to their Cottages, at the ends of which they place Wears made of Twigs, which open when the Tide comes in, and shut again when the Sea goes out; And then the Water flowing through the narrow Mouths of the Portals, the Fish remain behind in the Sluces, and there they take out every time as many as they have occasion to use.

Having gone through all those People bordering upon the Sea-coasts as far as from the Province of Babylon to the Red-Sea, we shall now proceed to give an Account of the other Nations.

In Ethiopia above Egypt near to the River Asa, inhabit a People call'd Rizophages, who get up the Roots of the Canes that grow in the Marishes, and first wash them very clean: Then they bruise and pound 'em with Stones till they are soft and pliant; afterwards they lay a handful of 'em in the Sun till they are broil'd, and this is the Food they live upon all their days. But tho' they live in Plenty and are at constant Peace one with another, yet they are miserably infested and often fallen upon by the Lyons that abound in those Parts: For the Air being scorching hot, they come out of the Deserts into the Rizophages Country, both for shelter from the Heat, and to hunt the lesser Beasts for Prey; so that when the Ethiopians come out of the Marishes they are torn in Pieces by these Creatures; for being unarm'd they are unable to withstand the Strength of the Lyons: And the whole Nation would certainly be utterly destroy'd if Providence had not provided a Remedy in this Case; for about the beginning of the Dog-days, when there's not the least Wind, there comes in such a Multitude of Gnats (larger than those that are commonly seen) that the Inhabitants are forc'd to fly into the Marishes and so avoid them: And the Lyons partly tormented by their biting and stinging of 'em, and partly terrify'd with their humming and buzzing run far away out of the Country.

Next to these are those Nations call'd Hylophages and Spenmatophages. The last of these gather in great Plenty Fruits which fall from the Trees in the Summer time, and so feed on them without taking any further Pains. The rest of the Year they feed upon a certain sweet Herb which grow in the shady Valleys: Which being a solid Plant, and having a Stalk like to a Turnip, it sufficiently supplies the want of other necessary Food.

But the Hylophages, together with their Wives and Children, go into the Fields and climb the Trees, and feed upon the Buds and tender Branches; and by constant Usage and Practice are so nimble in getting up to the Top of the highest Branch that it seems almost incredible. They skip from Tree to Tree like so many Birds, and mount up upon the slenderest Branches without the least Hazard. For being very slender and light body'd People, if their Feet fail, they catch hold with their Hands; nay, if they fall down from the very Top they are so light they get no harm. They easily chew every juicy Twig of the Tree, and as easily concoct them. They always go naked, and make use of their Wives promiscuously, and therefore all their Children they look upon to be common amongst them. They sometimes quarrel one with another for Places of Habitation; Their Arms are Clubs, with which they both defend themselves and pound in Pieces their conquer'd Enemy. Many of them are often famish'd to Death when they grow blind, being depriv'd of so necessary a Member for the procuring of Sustenance.

The next adjoyning Country is inhabited by the EthiopianHylogones call'd Hunters, who are indeed but few, but live after a peculiar and strange manner, answerable to their Name; for the Land being infested with multitudes of wild Beasts, is very terrible to live in, and very little running Water is to be found; therefore for fear of the Beasts the Inhabitants sleep all Night in Trees; and in the Morning they go to the Pools of Water with their Arms, where they hide themselves among the Boughs, and spy in the mean time out of the Trees: Then


Page 96

when the Sun grows hot, the wild Bulls and Leopards, and a great Number of other wild Beasts come running to the Waters (being scorch'd with Heat and Thirst) and do so gorge themselves with drinking, that they are ready to burst, upon which the Ethiopians leap out of the Trees and set upon the Beasts (that can scarcely stir or move) with Clubs burnt at the end, Stones and Darts, and kill 'em with ease: Thus dividing themselves into Companies, they finish their Pursuit, and feed together upon the Prey they have caught: Very rarely it is that any of them are kill'd, even by the fiercest or strongest of them; but by slight they overcome might. If they miss of their Prey, they wash the Skins of those they have formerly taken, and lay them upon a Fire made for the Purpose, and scorching off the Hair under the Ashes, and dividing the Skin amongst themselves, with this hard Fare they satisfy their Hunger. They teach the Boys to cast Darts exactly to hit a Mark, and if they miss, they suffer them not to eat. And by this Means (through pinching Hunger) they become excellent Archers.

Not far from these, towards the West inhabit the Ethiopians, that are call'd Elephantomachies. They dwell in large and woody Forests; where from the Tops of the highest Trees they diligently observe the Motions and Walks of the Elephants. But they set not upon the intire Troops at once (for that were to little Purpose) but with wonderful Courage single them out as they come near to them. For when the Beast approaches to the right side of the Tree, where he that watches for him lyes hid, just as the Elephant passes by, he catches, hold of his Tail with his Hands, and clasps his Feet close to his left Thigh: Then with his right Hand he lays hold of a sharp Ax (bound upon his Shoulder and managable by one Hand) and with that gives him one Wound after another whereby he cuts the Nerves and Sinews of the Elephant's right Ham, guiding and governing his Body in the mean time by his right Hand. This Feat is perform'd with that admirable Quickness and Activity, as if the Combat had been design'd to be ended no otherwise than by the Loss of one of their Lives. For what could be expected (since the Nature of the thing cannot admit of any other Conjecture) but either the Man must dye or the Beast be overcome? The Beast being thus Hamstrung, not able to turn himself round by reason of the Slowness of his Motion, sinks sometimes on that side where he is wounded and falls down, and together with himself kills the Ethiopian. Sometimes the Elephant dashes the Man against a Tree or a Stone, and with his Weight presses upon him till he has kill'd him. Some of the Elephants overmaster'd (through the Smart and Torment of their Wounds) never regard him that wounds them, but run so long up and down the Plain, till the Ethiopian behind by his continual hacking and cutting in one and the same place, cuts his Sinews in pieces, and at length altogether disables him and brings him down: Whereupon the Ethiopians run in flocking, and cutting of Collops of his Flesh while he is yet alive, feed and feast themselves merrily together. 

Some of the neighbouring Ethiopians take the Elephants without any Danger of their Lives at all, overcoming Force by Slight. For this Creature when he is full, after feeding, differs from all other four-footed Beasts in disposing of himself to Sleep. For he cannot bend his Knees and lye down, but sleeps leaning his Body to the side of a Tree; so that the Tree by his frequent resort to it and pressing upon it, withers and rots; there being therefore many Signs and Footsteps of the Elephant's Walks by which the Hunters of this Prey discover where he rests himself, they having found out the Tree, saw it a little above the Ground till it be almost ready to fall, then rubbing out the Marks of their Feet they go away before the Elephant comes there, who afterwards in the Evening being full fed, makes to his usual Resting-place; and as soon as he leans with the Weight of his whole Body to the Tree, down it falls, and the Beast along with it, and there lyes all Night with his Heels upward, for he cannot possibly rise. As soon as it's day, they that saw'd the Tree come to the Place, and there kill the poor Creature without any Hazard, and build themselves Huts, where they stay till they have eaten him up.

Next to these Nations upon the West inhabit those Ethiopians call'd Simoes: To the South lye the Nation of the Struthophages; for among them is a sort of Bird of a mixt Nature, partly a Fowl and partly a Beast, and thence it has its Name. She's little less than the greatest Hart: Nature has form'd her with a long Neck, a round Body with Wings, but a tender and small Head, yet she has strong Thighs and Legs, and her Feathers are forkt; and she's so heavy and unweldy that she


Page 97

cannot fly above the Earth; but she runs along with that Swiftness that she scarce touches the Ground. With a brisk gale of Wind she mounts up her Wings and makes forward as swift as a Ship with her Sayls spread under Sayl. Against the Pursuer she defends her self with flinging of Stones; which she throws with that Violence out of her Feet as out of a Sling; but when the Wind is low, her Wings flag, and so being depriv'd of that natural Help, she's easily taken. There are a great Number of those Birds; and by divers Arts and Devices the Barbarians easily take Multitudes of them, and feed upon their Flesh and make use of their Skins both for Vestments and Coverlets for Beds.

But when these Struthophages are set upon by the Ethiopians call'd Simoes, for Arms they use the Horns of the Oryxes, with which they repel the Assaults of their Enemies. For they are very great and sharp at the Ends, and these sort of Beasts do there so abound that their Horns are found scatter'd up and down, and so they become of special use to the Inhabitants.

A little distant from these are the Acridophages, bordering upon the Deserts; lesser they are than other Men, of lean and meager Bodies, and exceeding black. In these Parts in the time of the Spring the South Winds rise high and drive an infinite Number of Locusts out of the Desert, of an extraordinary Bigness, furnish'd with most dirty and nasty colour'd Wings; and these are plentiful Food and Provision for them all their days. They have a strange and peculiar way of catching of them; for in their Country there's a large and deep Vale extending far in length for many Furlongs together, all over this they lay Heaps of Wood and other combustible Matter, of which they have Plenty in every Place, and when the Swarms of Locusts are by the Force of the Winds driven thither, then some of the Inhabitants go to one Part of the Valley and some to another, and set the Grass and other combustible Matter on Fire, which was before thrown among the Piles; whereupon arises a great and suffocating Smoke, which so stifles the Locusts, as they fly over the Vale, that they go not much further before they fall down dead to the Ground. This Destruction of them is continu'd for many days together, so that they lye in great Heaps: The Country being full of Salt, they gather these Heaps together and season 'em sufficiently with this Salt, which gives them an excellent Relish, and preserves them a long time sweet without the least Putrefaction, so that they have Food ever ready at hand from these Insects during all the rest of the Year: For they neither concern themselves with Flesh or Fish (being far remote from the Sea) nor have any other Provision for their Support and Sustenance. They are a little sort of People, very swift of Foot, but exceeding short liv'd, for they that live the longest never exceed forty: And as the Manner of their Death is strange and wonderful, so it's sad and most miserable: For when they grow old, wing'd Lice breed in their Flesh, not only of divers Sorts but of horrid and ugly Shapes. This Plague begins first at the Belly and Breast, and in a little time eats and consumes the whole Body. He that is seiz'd with this Distemper, first begins to itch a little, as if he had the Scab, Pleasure and Trouble being mixt together. But afterwards when the Lice begin to break out at the Skin, abundance of putrid Matter (accompany'd with intolerable sharp Pa

〈…〉

) issues out with them. Hereupon the sick Person so tears himself in Pieces with his own Nails, that he sighs and groans most lamentably, and while he is thus scratching of himself, the Lice come pouring out in such Abundance one after another as out of a Vessel full of Holes, and thus they miserably close and end their Days. Whether this proceeds from the Nature of their Food or the Temper of the Air is uncertain.

Upon this Nation there borders a large Country, rich in fair Pastures, but desert and uninhabited; not that there never were any People there, but that formerly when it was inhabited, an immoderate Rain happen'd which bred a vast Company of Spiders and Scorpions: And (as they write) these Creatures did so increase that tho' at the first the whole Nation attempted to destroy these implacable Enemies of their Country, yet they were not able to master them (for whosoever was bit or string with them, immediately fell down dead) so that not knowing where to abide, or how to get Food, they were forc'd to fly to some other Place for Relief. And this is not at all incredible, for we are assur'd by very good and substantial Historians, that far more strange and wonderful Things than those have happen'd in the World. For in Italy Field-mice bred in such vast Numbers,


Page 98

that they forc'd the Inhabitants out of the Country. In Media great Flocks of Sparrows ate up all the standing Corn, so as the People were forc'd to remove elsewhere. The People call'd Autariats, were forc'd by Frogs bred in the Clouds, which pour'd down upon them instead of Rain, to forsake their Country, and fly to these Parts where they are now settl'd. And who is there that is not well acquainted by Ancient Histories, how among those many Labours Hercules undertook to eternize his Name, his driving out those devouring Birds out of the Marishes of Stymphalides was one? And some Cities of Lybia were altogether depopulated by Lyons, breaking in upon them. And these Instances we have given to convince those that are apt to question whatsoever Historians relate that seem strange and unusual. But to return to the orderly Course of our History.

The Southern Border is inhabited by Men whom the Grecians call Cynomones; but by the neighbouring Barbarians they are call'd in their own Country Language Wild Ethiopians. They wear long Beards, and keep up numbers of fierce Dogs to get them Food. For from the beginning of the Summer Solstice to the middle of Winter, an innumerable number of Indian Oxen come into their Countrey; the Reason of it is unknown. For its uncertain whether they fly from cruel wild Beasts, which in Troops set upon them, or that they do it for want of Pasture, or upon some other Accident (the Effect of Nature, the Parent of all Wonders) which Man's Reason cannot comprehend. These Oxen are so numerous, that the Inhabitants are not able to master them; therefore they loose their Dogs upon them, and by hunting 'em take many, of which they eat some fresh, and others they salt up.

Many other Beasts they kill with these masty Dogs, and by this Means live upon Flesh. The Nations that lye furthest South live the Lives of Beasts under the Shapes of Men.

But it yet remains to speak of two other Nations; the Ethiopians and the Troglodites: But of the Ethiopians mention is made elsewhere, and therefore now we shall treat of the Troglodites. The Grecians call them Nomades, for they live Pastoral Lives in the Manner of Shepherds; and are divided into Tribes under a Monarchical Government, and enjoy their Wives and Children in common, except only the Wife of the King; yet if any of them happen to lye with her, he's only fin'd by the King in a certain Number of Sheep.

When the Etesian Winds blow (at which time there falls abundance of Rain) they feed upon Milk and Blood mingl'd together, and boil'd for a little time. Afterwards when the Pastures are burnt up with the scorching Heat of the Sun, they fly into the low Marishes, where they often fight one with another for convenient Pastures for their Flocks: Those Cattle that grow old or are sick, they knock on the Head, and eat them; and from these always they have their Food and Sustenance: And therefore they never call any Father and Mother, but only a Bull, an Ox, a Goat or a Sheep, of which they call the Males Fathers, and the Females Mothers, because they have their daily Food from these and not from their Parents. Their ordinary Drink is a Liquor strain'd out of the Plant call'd Paliurus: But the Drink 

•

or the Noblemen and Persons of Quality, is made of the Juice of a Flower no better than the worst of our Wines. Because of their Cattle they often shift and remove from one Pasture to another, and are very cautious and careful not to stay long in one Place.

Their whole Bodies are naked, except about their Loyns, which they cover with Beasts Skins. All the Troglodites are circumcis'd like the Egyptians, except those who by reason of some Accident are call'd Cripples; for these only, of all those that inhabit these Streights, have from their Intancy that Member (which in others is only circumcis'd) wholly cut off with a Razor. Among the Troglodites those call'd Megabareans for Arms bear round Shields made of Ox raw Hides, and Clubs bound round with Iron at the thick ends; the rest are arm'd with Bows and Spears.

When they are dead they tye them Neck and Heels with the Twigs and Branches of the Plant Paliurus; then they carry the Body to the Top of a Hill, where with great Sport and Laughter they pelt it with Stones till it be covered over; and then they stick up a Goats Horn upon the Heap, and so leave it without the least Sense of Pity or Compassion. They fight not one with another out of any Spleen or Rage one against another, like the Grecians, but meerly for their


Page 99

flourishing Pastures. In the beginning of their Fights they make their Onsets with throwing of Stones; after some Wounds given on both Sides they fall to it with their Bows and Arrows, whereupon great Numbers are slain in a short time. For by long Experience they become good Marksmen, and being all naked are expos'd to every Shot. At length their old Women by their Intreaties put an end to their Conflicts (whom they greatly reverence, for it's unlawful to do them the least Harm) and therefore as soon as they see them come towards them, they cease casting their Darts immediately, and all are quiet.

When they grow so old that they cannot follow the Flocks, they tye themselves by their Necks to an Oxes Tail, and so put an end to their days: And if any defer his Death, any one as a Friend may first admonish him, and then if he does it not, the other may cast a Rope about his Neck and strangle him. In the like manner its lawful to put to Death any that become lame, or are seiz'd with any desperate and incurable Distemper. For they count it the highest and greatest Offence for any one to love his Life when he is able to do nothing worth living. And therefore all the Troglodites are of sound Bodies and of a strong and healthful Age, none exceeding Threescore. But this shall suffice concerning the Troglodites. Yet if this Account seem strange to any, and this Manner of living incredible, let but the Climate of Scythia be compar'd with that of the Troglodites, and then this our Relation may easily gain Belief. For there's so great a Difference between our Climate and theirs of which we write, that the different Natures being weigh'd and consider'd distinctly are scarce credible. For in some Places of Scythia by the Extremity of Cold the greatest Rivers are so frozen, that vast Armies and Chariots may pass over them; and Wine and other Liquors do so congeal that they must be cut with Knives and Hatches. And most strangely and wonderfully Mens Fingers and Toes drop off with rubbing against their Cloaths, and their Eyes grow dark and dim. Neither can the Fire cast any Warmth or Heat; and by the Force of Cold even brazen Statues are burst asunder; and at these Seasons they say the Clouds are so thick and gross, that there's neither Thunder nor Lightning in those Parts. Many other Things there happen which seem incredible to the ignorant, but are intolerable to them that feel them by Experience. But in the utmost Coasts of Egypt and the Troglodites the Sun is so scorching hot at Mid-day that two standing together cannot see each other by reason of the Thickness of the Air. Neither is it safe for any to go without Shoes in these Parts, for if they do the Soles of their Feet are presently blister'd all over: And except Men have something ready to drink to quench their Thirst, they forthwith faint and dye, the violence of the heat quickly exhaling all the moisture out of a Man's Body: And moreover, if any do put Meat and Water into a Brazen Pot, and set it in the open Sun, it's presently boil'd without Fire and Fuel. But the Inhabitants of both these Countries are so far from seeking to avoid these uncomfortable Circumstances, that they chuse rather to be as it were ever dying here, than to be forc'd to live another sort of Life elsewhere. And thus every Country is belov'd by its own natural Inhabitants, and a long usage, even from the time of Childhood, overcomes the inconveniences of an intemperate Climate. These great differences of Climates are sometimes not far asunder; for from the Lake Meotis (where some of the Scythians inhabit, in the midst of extream Cold, and biting Frost,) many with a fair Wind sail to Rhodes in Ten Days time; thence in Four Days more, they reach to Alexandria; thence crossing the River Nile, they recover Ethiopia (most commonly) the Tenth Day; so that it's not above Four and Twenty Days sail from the coldest to the hottest Climates in the World. And therefore it's no wonder that there's such diversity of Food, Manners and Bodies so far differing from ours, when there's so great a Contrariety of Climates in so small a distance one from another.

Having given a distinct account of Nations, and their strange and unusual Manners and Customs; something now is to be said particularly concerning the wild Beasts bred in those Countries.

There's bred in Ethiopia, a Creature, call'd from the nature of the Beast, a Rhinoceros, for Courage and Strength equal with the Elephant, but not so tall. His Skin is exceeding hard, and of the colour of Box. He has a flat Horn growing out a little above his Nostrils as hard as Iron. He's always at war with the Elephant for his Pasture, and for that purpose whets his Horn against a great Stone; in the Conflict he gets under the Belly of the Elephant, and cuts and gashes him, as


Page 100

if it were with a Sword; and by this means his Enemy bleeds to death, and thus he destroys many of them. But if the Elephant prevent him from coming under his Belly, he catches the Rhinoceros up in his Trunk, and easily overcomes him, being far stronger in Body, and wounding deeper with the Stroaks of his Tushes.

Sphinges are bred near to the Troglodites in Ethiopia, not much unlike those which the Limners draw, save that they differ only in being rough. They are of a gentle nature, very docible, apt to learn any thing presently that is taught them.

Those that are call'd Cynocephales, resemble ugly fac'd Men, and are continually snarling and grumbling. This Creature is exceeding curst, never to be tam'd, and from his Eye-brows looks with a most surly Countenance. The Females are extraordinary remarkable, for having their Privy Parts continually hanging down out of their Body.

The Beast call'd Cepus, so nam'd from the beauty of his Body, and the comliness of Proportion. He has the Face of a Lion, and in all other Parts is like to a Panther, except that for his bigness he is as large as a Deer. Of all these strange Beasts none's so fierce as the Wild Bull, which Feeds upon Flesh, and is altogether invincible: he's larger than any tame Bull, and as Swift as any Horse, and his Mouth is Wide even up to his Eyes: He's exceeding red, his Eyes grayer than a Lions, and Sparkling in the Night like Fire. His Horns have a wonderful property, for he can move 'em as well as his Ears, and when he Fights keeps them fast and immovable. His Hair contrary to all other Beasts, stands on end, He's so exceeding Fierce that he'll set upon the strongest Creature whatsoever, and Feeds upon the Flesh of such as he destroys. He destroys the Flocks and Herds of the Inhabitants, and in a terrible manner Fights with Troops of Shepherds and whole Armies of Dogs at once. It's said his Skin is impenetrable; and therefore tho many have attempted to Kill him, yet none were ever able to efect it. If he fall into a Pit, or be taken any other way by Snares or Ginns laid for him, he Choaks and Stiffles himself with his unrully Rage, and will not suffer any Man to come near him tho never so gently: And therefore the Troglodites justly account this Beast the strongest of all other; to whom Nature has given the stoutness of a Lion, the swiftness of a Horse, and the strength of a Bull; and which cannot be conquer'd with the Sword, which subdues all other things.

There's another Creature among the Ethopians call'd a Crocut, of a mixt nature, between a Dog and a Wolf, more fierce than them both, and exceeding all others for his Tearing and Biting. Let the Bones be never so great, he presently grashes them in Pieces and digests them immediatly as soon as they come into his Stomach. Some Historians (who love to tell strange things) report that this Beast will imitate the Voice and Speech of a Man, which we cannot in the least credit.

The Inhabitants bordering upon the Deserts, say that there are in these Parts divers sorts of Serpents of an incredible bigness; for those that say they have seen some a hundred Cubits long, are lookt upon to be Liers, not only by me, but by every one else. But to gain the more credit to their fabulous Relation, they add a Story far more absurd and impropable. For they say, that when these vast Creatures lye rould up in a Round in the open Plain, every Circle lying one upon another, they seem like Hills to them that are at a distance. But who can easily believe there are any such monstrous Creatures?

But we shall say something of the greatest Serpents (that ever were seen) which were brought to Alexandria in Nets, discoursing by the way of the manner of the hunting and taking them.

For Ptolemy the Second being very much given to the hunting of Elephants, for that purpose incourag'd with great Rewards many that were skilful Hunters of the strongest wild Beasts, and not sparing Costs (in gratifying the pleasure he took in this kind) he got together great multitudes of Elephants, which he train'd up for his Wars; by which means many strange Beasts which were never seen before, became known to the Grecians.

Upon these Considerations some of the Huntsmen, knowing the generosity and bounty of the King in his Rewards for things of this nature, agreed together with the hazard of their Lives to bring if it were but one of these monstrous Serpents,


Page 101

alive to the King to Alexandria. It was a bold and difficult undertaking; but Fortune crown'd the Enterprize, and Prosperity effected the Attempt. They spy'd a Serpent lying in the standing Pools Thirty Cubits long, still and quiet (as it used to do at all other times, save when he spy'd any Beast come to the Water to drink, and then he suddainly leapt out, and with his wide Jaws, and the winding himself round about their Bodies, held them so fast as that they could never escape.)

Hereupon these persons considering he was so very long, and naturally dull and slow, conceiv'd some hopes of catching him in Gins and Chains, having all things ready and prepar'd for the purpose; but the nearer they came to him, the more they were terrify'd, and when they saw his Eyes kindle like sparks of Fire, his Tongue slapping about his Jaws, his terrible Hissing, the sharpness of his Scales, his rusling among the Reeds and Bushes when he began to stir himself, the greatness of his terrible Teeth, his horrible Aspect and high Round whereunto he had wound himself, they grew wan and pale with excessive fear, and with trembling Hands cast the Gin upon his Tail; upon which, as soon as it toucht him, the Monster roul'd about with a terrible hiss, and lifting up himself above the head of the First that approacht him, he snapt him up, and tore him in Pieces. The Second he catcht by the winding of his Tail at a great distance when he was making away, and (winding himself round him) held him fast round the middle of his Belly. Hereupon the rest were so affrighted, that away they fled; however, they did not so leave the Monster, for the hopes of the King's bounty overcame the fear of the imminent danger; and therefore what they could not do by Force they endeavour'd to effect by Art, making use of this following Contrivance. They made a Toil of Bulrushes, in shape like to a Bosom Net, large enough to receive and hold the Beast; observing therefore his Hole, and the time when he went out to Feed, and when he return'd, as soon as he was gone forth to hunt for his usual Prey, they stopt up the mouth of his Den with great Stones and Earth, and near to it dug another Hole, and there Plac'd the Toil made of Bulrushes just over against the Mouth of the Hole, that the Entrance might be plain and open. Then as he return'd from Feeding, the Darters, Slingers and a great Number of Horse-men with Trumpeters and other Assailants set upon him, and the Monster (as he came nearer to them) prickt up his Head far above the Heads of the Horse-men, but none of the whole Troop of Hunters durst come near him, being made cautious by the former misfortune; but many cast Darts at him all at once at a great distance; so that by the sight of the Horses, multitude of great Dogs, and the noise of Trumpets, they terrify'd the Beast, and pursu'd him cautiously by degrees, till he came to his Hold, lest by pressing too hard and close upon him, he should be too much provok'd and inrag'd.

Now approaching near to the mouth of the Den, before prepar'd for him, they all at once made a great noise with beating upon their Arms; and so with such a multitude of Men, and the noise and sound of Trumpets, they exceedingly terrify'd the Monster, who not finding his former Hold, and fearing the Hunters, flies into the mouth of that which was open and near at hand. In the mean time while he was filling the Net, by rouling of himself round in it, some forthwith rid up with full speed to the Place, who (before the Beast could wind up himself) ty'd up the mouth of the Net, which was to the Top made very long on purpose for quickness of dispatch in this business. Then with all speed they put Roulers under the massy weight of the Net, to lift it up, and so drew it forth. The Serpent being thus shut up, hiss't most dreadfully, gnawing the Bulrushes with his Teeth, and tossing himself to and fro as if he were just leaping out of the Net, which the Hunters exceedingly fearing he would do, drew him out upon the ground, and by often pricking him in the Tail, caus'd him to snap and bite there where he was most sensible of pain. At length they brought him to Alexandria, and presented the Beast to the King; a most strange Monster, and almost incredible. And to admiration this Creature was afterwards made tame: For keeping him low in want of Food, he abated in his fierceness, so as by degrees to be very gentle. Ptolemy liberally rewarded the Hunters; and kept and fed the Serpent thus tam'd; a most wonderful sight to all Strangers that travell'd into his Kingdom.


Page 102

It may not therefore be judg'd altogether incredible (or accounted for a Fable) what the Ethiopians have related, since so vast a Monster has been expos'd to open view. For they affirm that there have been seen Serpents amongst them of that extraordinary bigness, that they have not only devour'd Cows and Bulls, and other Beasts of that size, but have even fought with Elephants themselves: For they so wrap themselves round their Thighs, and hold them so fast, that they are not able to move or stir, and pricking up their heads from under the Elephants Trunk, and looking direct upon them full in the Face with the fiery Rays that dart out of their Eyes, strike them blind, so that they fall down to the Ground as if they were struck with a flash of Lightning, and when they are down they tear them in Pieces.

And now since we have given a clear and sufficient account of Ethiopia and Troglodita, and the bordering Countries as far as to the Torrid Zone, and of the Southern Coasts and Climates of the Red Sea, and the Atlantick Ocean, we shall proceed to the Description of the other parts bordering upon the Arabian Gulf, which we have learnt partly from the publick Records in Alexandria, and partly from those that have seen the Places themselves. For this part of the inhabited World, as likewise the British Isles, and the Places lying far to the North, are the least known of any other. But we shall describe those Northern parts which border upon the Frigid Zone, together with the British Isles, when we come to treat of the acts of Caius Caesar, who inlarg'd the Bounds of the Roman Empire, as far as to those parts, and by his means we come to the Knowledge of all those Countries which were altogether unknown to us before.

CHAP. III.

A Description of the Coasts and Countries on both sides the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea. The Perfumes of Arabia the Happy. The Fortunate Islands. A Description of part of Lybia: The Spectras near the Syrtes.

THe Arabian Gulf (as it's call'd) empties it self into the Southern Ocean, and stretches out many Furlongs in length; where it falls into the Sea its both bounded with Arabia and Troglodita. It's breadth both at the Mouths, and where it's lost in the Sea, is about Fifteen Furlongs. But from the Port of Panormus, the opposite Shoar, is one Days sailing: The greatest breadth is at Mount Tyrceus, and Macaria, where the Sea is very rough and tempestuous; nor can Land be seen from one side to another; from thence it grows narrower, till it fall into the Ocean.

In the Sea are many great Islands, between which the Passage for Ships is very narrow, and the Water very rough. And this in short is the Situation of this Gulf. We shall begin at the utmost Parts of this Sea, and describe the Coasts on both sides, and what is remarkable in each, as if we were sailing along.

And first, we shall give an account of the Coast on the Right Hand, the Seat of the Troglodites: The Troglodites take up all this part as far as to the vast Deserts. All along the Shoar on this right side from the City of Arsinoe, Mariners meet with many Rivers of Salt-water, pouring down from the Rocks into the Sea.

After the passing these running Fountains, appears a Mountain in a vast and large Plain of a red Colour, which dazles the Eyes of all those that look earnestly upon it. At the Foot of this Mountain is a Lake, with an Entrance of many windings and turnings into it, known by the Na

•

e of Aphrodites; in this are Three Islands, Two of which abound with Figs and Olives; but the Third has neither; yet breeds great numbers of those Birds they call M

•leogrides.

From hence you sail through a vast Gulf call'd Filthy, or Acathartus, and near unto it is an exceeding deep Current, making a Peninsula, carrying Ships through a narrow straight into the open Sea on the other side. In sailing along by these Places, there lies an Island, surrounded with a deep Sea, Fourscore Furlongs


Page 103

in length; call'd the Serpents Island, because that in former times it abounded with divers sorts of dreadful Serpents; but in after-times, by the diligence of the Kings of Alexandria, it was so improv'd, that now there's not the least sign of any such Beast there. But it's not to be omitted for what Reason this Island was with so much charge improv'd: The chief reason was, for that in this Island was found the Topaz, a resplendent Stone, of a delightful Aspect, like to Glass, of a Golden colour, and of admirable brightness; and therefore all were forbidden to set footing upon that Place; and if any landed there, he was presently put to death by the Keepers of the Island. These Keepers were few, and liv'd a most miserable Life. And lest the Stones should be stolen and carry'd off, there was not a Ship left there; and if any by chance pass near to these Places, (out of fear of the King) they sail away as far off as they can. The Provision that is imported, is commonly soon spent, and there's nothing to be had that grows naturally in the Island; and therefore when their Store grows low, all the Inhabitants of the Village sit upon the Shoar, waiting and longing for the arrival of the Provision Ships; and if they stay longer than ordinary, the People are driven to the utmost desperation.

This Stone grows in the Rocks, darken'd by the brightness of the Sun; it's not seen in the Day, but shines bright and glorious in the darkest Night, and discovers it self at a great distance. The Keepers of the Island disperse themselves into several Places to search for this stone, and whereever it appears, they mark the Place, with a great Vessel of largeness sufficient to cover the sparkling Stone; and then in the Day time, go to the Place, and cut out the Stone, and deliver it to those that are Artists in polishing of 'em.

Then sailing on further from these Parts, appear many of those Nations call'd the Ichthuophages, dispers'd along the Sea-shoar; and many likewise of those Troglodites call'd Nomades; several Mountains likewise present themselves in this Course, as far as to the Haven call'd Safe-Port, which gain'd this Name from some Grecians that first sail'd into these Parts, and there arriv'd safe.

Thence passing on, the Gulf begins to grow narrower, and bends its Course towards Arabia: And the peculiar property of the Places is such, that both the nature of the Sea, and the Soyl seem to be chang'd; for the Land appears very flat and low, without any Hills or Rising Ground, and the Sea seems to be muddy and green all over, and is not above Two Fathom and an half deep. The Greenness there is not ascrib'd to the nature of the Water, but to the abundance of Moss and Sea-Grass that grows at the bottom, and casts their Colour through the Water.

This part is very safe and commodious for small Ships with Oars, because the Sea is there very calm, and no roughness of the Waves for many Leagues; and there they take abundance of Fish. But the Mariners that transport Elephants, run into great and desperate Hazards by reason of the strong built Ships they use for that purpose, and the depth of Water they draw. For oftentimes they are so driven by the violence of the Winds, at full Sail in the Night time, that they are either split upon the Rocks, or stranded upon some of the deep sanded Necks of Land thereabouts; and it's no going for the Mariners out of the Ship, because the Ford is above the height of any Man: Neither can they force the Ship in the least forward with their Poles: And although they throw all over-board but their Victuals; yet (even while they have Provision) they are reduc'd to the utmost Extremities; for neither Island, Promontory or Ship is to be seen in these Parts, being desert, and seldom frequented by Mariners.

And to the other Inconveniencies, this further is an Addition, the violent Waves on a suddain raise up such heaps of Sand out of the Channel, and so inclose the Ship, as if Men on purpose had fixt it to some Continent: Being plung'd into this Calamity, at first they only gently and modestly breath out their Complaints to a doleful Wilderness, which regards them not, yet not altogether desparing of deliverance.

For often by the raging working of the Sea, the Ship is mounted up on high above the heaps of Sand, and so the poor Creatures that were in this desperate Condition are unexpectedly (as by some God, assisting them out of an Engin) deliver'd. But if this help from God do not intervene, when their Provision grows low, the stronger throw the weaker overboard, that the Meat that is left may last the longer for the support of those few that remain: But at length,


Page 104

when all hope of safety is gone, and Provision spent, these few die far more miserably than those that perisht before. For these in a moment of time, give up that Breath which Nature had given them, but those (by prolonging their Misery, and dividing as it were their Sorrows into several parts) dye at last with more lingering Torments. The Ships being in this miserable manner depriv'd of their Pilots and Mariners, continue a long time as so many Solitary Sepulchers; and at length being buried in heaps of Sand, their lofty Masts and Main-Yards remain only Spectacles to move Compassion in them that see them afar off. For by the King's Command, the Monuments of these Misfortunes are not to be toucht, but are to remain as Sea-marks to Mariners to avoid those dangerous Places. It has been an ancient Report among the Ichthuophages (the Inhabitants of those Tracts) continu'd down to them from their Fore-fathers, that by a mighty reflux of the Sea (which hapned in former days) where the Sea is thus green, the whole Gulf became dry Land, and appear'd green all over, and that the Water overflow'd the opposite Shoar, and that all the Ground being thus bare to the very lowest bottom of the Gulf, the Water by an extraordinary high Tide, return'd again into the ancient Channel.

The Navigation from Ptolemais to the Promontary of Taurus, has been describ'd when we spoke of Ptolemy's Pleasure in hunting of Elephants: From Taurus the Sea Coasts turn towards the East.

Here from the time of the Summer, to the Winter Solstice, the Sun casts the shadow to the South, contrary to what it does with us. This Country is water'd with Rivers flowing down from the Psebarian Mountains (as they are call'd) and is divided into many spacious Plains, which produce Mallows, Cardanum, and extraordinary Palm-Trees, and divers other Fruits of an unsavory Taste, altogether unknown to us. The South parts of this Country are full of Elephants, wild Bulls, Lions and other wild Beasts. In passing over to this Coast, there lye several Islands in the way, which are altogether barren as to any Fruit that is grateful, but in them are bred strange sorts of Birds, and wonderful to view and observe. From hence sailing forward, the Sea is exceeding deep, and abounds with mighty great Whales, which yet do no harm, unless any (by chance) run upon their erected Finns; for they cannot pursue the Ships, because when they rise up towards the top of the Water, they are struck blind by the brightness and splendour of the Sun. These are the utmost Bounds of Troglodita (known to us) inviron'd with the Psebarian Promontaries.

And now we shall pass over to the other side of the Gulf, and take a view of the Regions lying towards Arabia, beginning again at that part of the Sea which is call'd Neptunium, because Ariston erected there an Altar in honour of Neptune, when Ptolemy sent him to discover the Arabian Coast as far as to the Ocean. From thence to the Month of the Gulf is a place along the Sea-Coast of great esteem among the Inhabitants for the profit it yields them; it's call'd the Garden of Palm-Trees, because they abound there, and are so very Fruitful, that they yield sufficient both for pleasure and necessity. But the whole Country next adjoyning, is destitute of Rivers and Brooks, and lying to the South, is even burnt up with the heat of the Sun; and therefore this fruitful Tract that lies amongst dry and barren Regions (far remote from Tillage and Improvement,) and yet affords such plenty of Food and Provision, is justly by the Barbarians dedicated to the Gods. For there are in it many Fountains, and running Streams as cold as Snow, by which means the Region from one side to the other is always green and flourishing, and very sweet and pleasant to the view. In this place there's an ancient Altar of hard Stone, with an Inscription in old and illegible Characters; where a Man and a Woman (that execute here the Priests Office, during their Lives) have the charge of the Grove and Altar. They are Persons of Quality and great Men that abide here, and for fear of the Beasts, have their Beds (they rest upon) in the Trees.

The Mariner passing by this Country of Palms, arrives at an Island near to a Promontory of the Continent, which is call'd the Island of Sea-Calves, from the great multitudes of those Creatures that frequent this Place. The Sea here so abounds with them, that it's to the admiration of the Beholders.


Page 105

The Promontory that shoots out towards this Island, lies over against Petra in Arabia and Palestine. It's said that the Gerrheans and Mineans, bring out of the higher Arabia, Frankincense and other odoriferous Gums into this Island.

The Coast next adjoining, has been anciently inhabited by the Marranians, and afterwards by the Garyndaneans their Neighbours, who got possession in this manner.

At the Festival celebrated every Fifth Year in the Palm Country, a great Concourse of the Neighbours meet together from all Parts; both to Sacrifice Stallfed Camels to the Gods of the Grove; and likewise to carry some of the Spring-water that rises there, back into their own Country, which they say is Physical.

The Garyndanians taking the opportunity when the Marranians were gone to the Feast, cut the Throats of all those that remain'd at Home, and lay in wait for those that return'd, and in their way homeward, slew all them likewise; and so the Country being by this means depopulated, they divided that fruitful Region, and those rich Pastures for Flocks and Herds, by Lot amongst themselves.

But this Coast has very few Harbours in it by reason of the many vast Mountains that lye all along as they sail; from whence is presented to the view, such variety of Colours, that they afford a most wonderful and delightful Prospect to the Passengers at Sea as they sail along.

The Promontory of Alainites next salutes them that sail on forward, full of Towns and Villages inhabited by the Arabians call'd Nabateans: They possess a large Country all along the Sea-Coast, and go far likewise up into the Land: This Tract is very Populous, and exceeding rich in Cattel. Once they liv'd justly and honestly, content with the Sustenance they had from their Flocks and Herds; but after that the Kings of Alexandria allow'd liberty to Merchants to traffick in the Red Sea, they not only rob'd them that were Shipwrackt, but provided little Skiffs, and acted the Pyrats, and spoil'd all other Merchants that traffickt in those Seas, imitating the Taurians of Pontus in cruelty and inhumanity. But afterwards being beaten in a Fight at Sea by some Gallies sent out against them, they were punish'd according to their Demerits.

After the passing of these Tracts, follows a flat Champain Country, water'd in every part, which (by the advantage of the many Springs and Fountains that are in it) abounds in rich Pastures, and produces great plenty of Medica and Lotus, as high as a Man. Here in these Pastures are fed not only an infinite number of Cattel of all sorts, but of wild Camels, Harts, Red and Fallow Deer. This extraordinary Plenty, invites out of the Deserts, Lions, Wolves and Leopards, with whom the Shepherds and Herdsmen are forc'd to have Conflicts Night and Day for the preservation of their Flocks and Herds: And thus the richness of the Countrey, occasions Mischief and Prejudice. For Nature often distributes her Gifts with a mixture of good and evil.

In sailing further along by this Champain Country, the Gulf offers to the view something strange and wonderful: For it shoots up with a bending Course into the Inland Parts, Five Hundred Furlongs in length, wall'd in on both sides with high and steep Rocks, so that both the Entrance and Passage is very difficult. For the Rocks that lye under Water, so stop up the Entrance, that it's scarce possible to enter into the Gulf, or come out; and by the continual dashing of the Floods with the violence of the Winds beating upon the Shoar, it foams terribly, and rages on every side the Rock.

The People that inhabit these Parts, are call'd Bizomenians, and live upon wild Beasts taken in hunting. Here's a Sacred Temple in high veneration among all the Arabians.

To the Shoar of these Tracts, are adjoining Three Islands, which have many Ports: The first which is Desert, they say is consecrated to Isis. There remain the Foundations of the ancient Buildings and Pillars, whereon are Inscriptions in barbarous Characters; the rest are as much defac'd and ruin'd, yet they are shaded with Olive Trees planted here and there, much different from ours.

Beyond these Islands, there are steep Rocks hard to pass all along the Shoar, for the space of a Thousand Furlongs. For there's neither Port nor Ancorage for Ships, nor any Wood which can afford any necessary Relief to Mariners, be they in never so great wants and extremities. To this Shoar adjoins a Mountain


Page 106

roof'd over with craggy Rocks of a stupendious height; and at the foot, are many sharp Shelves which lye under water; and behind them, many winding Hollows, worn wide by the raging Waves dashing one upon another; and the Sea being very deep, when a Storm beats upon them, and the Water rebounds, they make a noise like a mighty Thunder; and part of the Waves dashing against those huge Rocks, mount up in a Curl, and foam to admiration; and part being swallow'd up within these Caverns, cause such a terrible Whirlpool, that they that are driven (against their wills) near to these Places, are ready to dye for Fear. The Arabians call'd Thamudenians inhabit this Coast.

Next adjoining to this Perilous Sea, is a mighty great Gulf, which washes many Islands disper'd in it here and there to the view, not much unlike to the Echinades.

All along this Coast which is very long and broad, lye high Heaps of black Sand.

Thence sailing forward, is presented to the view, a Peninsula, where there is the most famous Port of any mention'd by Historians call'd Carmutha. For it lies under a large Key, where the Gulf as it inclines to the West, is not only wonderfully pleasant to the view, but far more commodious than any other.

A Woody Mountain hangs over it a Hundred Furlongs in compass. The Mouth of the Haven is Two Hundred Foot broad, affording a very calm and safe Harbour, where Two Thousand Sail may ride: The Water moreover is exceeding good and sweet, a large River emptying itself into it. In the middle of it lies an Island full of good Water, and fit for gardening. To conclude, it's in every respect like to the Port at Carthage, call'd Cothon, the Commodiousness of which we shall speak of in its proper place. By reason of the quietness and sweetness of the Water, abundance of Fish come into it out of the Ocean.

Sailing forward, appear Five exceeding high Mountains, spiring up like the Pyramids of Egypt, so close as if they all united into one at the Point: Thence the Gulf appears in a round Form, surrounded with large and high Promontories: In the very middle of which rises a Hill, in form of a Table, upon which stand three Temples of a wonderful Height, dedicated to Gods unknown indeed to the Greeks, but in great honour and veneration with the Inhabitants. Hence the Coast shoots out forward a long way, abounding with Fountains and fresh Water. On this Coast is the Mountain Chabnus, cover'd over with divers shady Woods. The Country lying at the Foot of the Mountain, is inhabited by Arabians, call'd Debae, who imploy themselves in feeding Herds of Camels, which they make use of in their most weighty Concerns: For they ride upon these when they charge their Enemy; carry upon them their Victuals, and use them upon every speedy dispatch; they drink their Milk, and feed upon their Flesh; and with their Dromedary Camels, they presently run over all the Country. There runs a River through the Country, which carries along with it such abundance of Golden Sand, that at the Mouth of it where it falls into the Sea, the Soil seems to shine and glister like Gold; but the making and refining of Gold is altogether unknown to the Inhabitants. They entertain not all sorts of Strangers, but only the Beotians and the Peloponesians, by reason of the ancient familiarity of Hercules with this Nation, as they have fabulously receiv'd it from their Ancestors.

The Region next adjoining to this, is inhabited by the Alilaeans and Gasandians, another People of Arabia, which is not so burning hot as those near unto it, but often cover'd with thick Clouds, whence fall Snow, and seasonable Showers, which moderate the Heat of the Air. The Land there is rich, and capable of bringing forth any kind of Grain or Fruit whatsoever, but through the unskilfulness of the Inhabitants who addict themselves chiefly to Fishing, the Ground is not till'd and improv'd as it ought. Abundance of Gold is got there out of several Hollows in the Earth, not refin'd by melting of little Pieces, but growing there pure naturally, which from the nature of it is call'd Apyros. The least Piece of it is as big as an ordinary Nut-Kernel, the greatest not much bigger than a large Nut. The Inhabitants wear them about their Arms and Necks, interlac'd with several bright sparkling Stones. But as they abound in Gold, so they are as much wanting in Iron and Brass, and therefore they exchange Gold with the Merchants, for the like weight in Iron and Brass.


Page 107

Next to these inhabit those Arabians call'd Carbi, and next to them the Sabeans, the most populous of any of the Arabians, for they possess Arabia the Happy, exceeding rich in all those things which we esteem most precious, and for breeding of Cattel of all sorts, the most fertil Country in the World; for the whole Country is naturally perfum'd all over, every thing almost growing there, sending forth continually most excellent Odours. On the Sea-Coasts grow Balsom and Cassia, and another Herb of a strange and peculiar property, which while it's fresh, is delightsom and strengthening to the Eyes, but kept a while, presently loses its virtue. Higher in the heart of the Country, are shady Woods and Forests, grac'd and beautify'd with stately Trees of Frankincence and Myrrh, Palm-Trees, Calamus and Cinamon, and such like Odoriferous Plants. For none can enumerate the several natures and properties of so great a multitude, or the excellency of those sweet Odours that breath out of every one of them. For their Fragrancy is such, that it even ravishes the Senses with delight, as a thing divine and unutterable; it entertains them that sail along by the Coast at a great distance with its Pleasures and Delights. For in Spring-time the Winds from off the Land waft the Air perfum'd with the sweet Odours of Mirrh, and other Odoriferous Plants, to those Parts of the Sea that are next to them. And these Spices have nothing of a faint and languishing Smell, as those that come to our Hands; but a strong and vigorous Odour that strongly pierces all their Senses to the utmost of their Capacity: For the Wafts of Air dispersing the Perfumes of these Odoriferous Plants, abundance of pleasant, healthful and strange variety of Scents (proceeding from the richest Spices) are convey'd to them that Sail near unto the Coast. For this sweet smell, comes not from Fruit bruis'd in a Mortar (whose strength is in a great measure decay'd) or from Spices made up in divers sorts of Vessels for Transportation; but from the ripeness of the Fruit as it grows, and from the pure and divine Nature of the Plant it self. So that they that have the advantage of these sweet Odours, seem as if they were entertain'd with that feign'd Meat of the Gods call'd Ambrosia; since those excellent Perfumes cannot have a Name ascrib'd them transcending their worth and dignity.

Yet Fortune has not imparted to Men an intire and unmixt Felicily in these things, but has join'd some inconveniences with these Advantages, to correct them who (through a constant Confluence of Earthly Blessings) have usually despis'd and slighted the Gods. For these fragrant Forests abound with Red Serpents of a Span long, whose Bite is deadly and incurable. They strike a Man with a violent Assault, leaping up in his very Face, leaving him besmear'd with his own Blood.

There's something very remarkable amongst these People, as to them that have been long sick: For being that things of a more than ordinary piercing operation pass quick through the Pores of the Body, and so discuss the stubborn Matter, there follows a dissipation of Humours, and the Party becomes curable: Therefore they burn Brimstone mixt with Goats Hair under the Noses of the Sick, that by a contrary smell they may discuss and drive out those sweet and fragrant Odours that have overpower'd the Spirits of the Sick; for that which is good in it self, is profitable and delightful, us'd moderately and seasonably; but an immoderate injoyment, and beyond a due proportion of time loses the benefit and advantage of the Blessing bestow'd.

The Capital City of this Nation is call'd Sabas, and stands upon an high Hill: They are govern'd by Kings who inherit the Crown by Descent; yet the Honour allow'd them by their Subjects is such, as that they are in some respects, notwithstanding in a sort of Bondage and Slavery: For though they seem to be priviledg'd in this, that they have a Sovereign and absolute power in making of Laws, and are not to give an account of any of their Actions to their Subjects; yet they are as unhappy in this, that they are never to stir out of their Palace, for if they do, the People stone them to Death, for so they are commanded by an ancient Oracle.

This Nation net only excels all the Neighbouring Barbarians in Wealth, but all other People whatsoever, for plenty of every thing that is accounted precious. For in their Traffick for a thing of a very small weight, they receive a greater Sum of 

〈◊◊〉

 any other Merchants that sell Goods for Silver.


Page 108

Being therefore that they never were conquer'd by reason of the largeness of their Country, they flow as it were in Streams of Gold and Silver, especially at Sabas, the Seat Royal of their Kings: Their Vessels, and all their Cups are of Gold and Silver, and likewise their Beds, Chairs and Stools have their Feet of Silver; and all other their Houshold-stuff is so sumptuous and magnificent, that it's incredible. The Portico's of their Houses and Temples, are some of them overlaid with Gold, and Silver Statues are plac'd upon some of the Chapiters of the Temples. The Doors and Roofs of their inner Rooms, are adorn'd with many Golden Bowls, set with pretious Stones. The like wonderful cost they are at throughout their whole Building, adorning them in some Parts with Silver and Gold, in others with Ivory and precious Stones, and other things of great value. For they have injoy'd a constant and uninterrupted Peace for many Ages and Generations, being very far remote from those whose Covetousness prompts them to advance their Gain by the Riches of others.

The Sea there, is of a very white colour, so that a Man may as justly wonder at the strangeness of the thing, as be inquisitive what should be the cause.

Near hereunto are the Fortunate Islands, full of wall'd Towns; where all the Sheep and Cattel are exceeding white, and none of the Females bear any Horns. The Merchants from all parts resort to these Islands, especially from Potana, built by Alexander the Great, upon the Banks of the River Indus, that there might be a commodious Port Town for shipping upon those Coasts: But of this Country and its Inhabitants we have said enough.

And now we are not to omit what Wonders are seen there in the Heavens: What is said of the North Pole, is greatly to be admir'd, and puts all Mariners at a stand. For during the Month which the Athenians call Memacterion, none of the Seven Stars are seen about the Bear, till the first Watch of the Night; and in Posidion not till the Second: In the following Months, few of these (i'ts said) are seen by them at Sea, nor any of the Planets at all. As for the rest, some of them seem to be greater at the time of their rising, than they do with us; others not to rise and set in the same manner. Nor that the Sun (as with us) enlightens the Air upon the approach of it's rising, but even while its dark night, strangely and on a suddain appears, darting forth his refulgent Rays: And therefore there both Day and Sun appears together. They say it rises out of the middle of the Sea like a burning Coal, and shoots forth great Sparks of Fire, and appears not in a round form (as it seems to do with us) but like to a Pillar something thicker than ordinary towards the Head; and that it shines not bright, nor casts forth any Rays till one a Clock, but glows like Fire in the Night without Light; at Two a Clock it resembles the form of a Shield, and sends forth on a suddain, a fiery scorching Light, even to admiration. But near the time of it's setting, it's effects are contrary; for during the space of Two (or as Agatharchides of Cnidus says) Three Hours before (which is the most pleasant part of the Day to the Inhabitants) he both inlightens the World by his Rays, and abates in his Heat as he sets by degrees.

The West, South, North-west and East Winds, blow here, as in other Parts of the World; but the South Winds never blow, nor are ever known in Ethiopia. But in Troglodita and Arabia, the South Winds are so exceeding hot, that they sometimes set whole Woods on Fire; and though the Inhabitants run into their Cottages for shelter, yet they faint and pine away with Heat; therefore North Winds are justly judg'd the best, which run through the whole Earth, and are always cool and refreshing.

Having now given an account of these Countries, it will well agree with the Course of our History, to describe Lybia, bordering upon Egypt; for in Cyren, the Syrtes, and in the Mid-lands, inhabit Four sorts of Africans: Those call'd Nasomones possess the Parts towards the South; the Auchises the West: The Marmarides inhabit that large Tract lying between Cyrene and Egypt, as far as to the Sea-Coast: The Macae the most populous of all the rest, have their Habitations near the Syrtes.

Some of these before-mention'd People are Husband-men, as having Fertil Lands, fit for all sorts of Tillage: Others are Shepherds and Herdsmen, who imploy themselves in feeding of Cattel, and maintain themselves and Families by that means. Both sorts are under a Kingly Government, not living altogether like


Page 109

wild Beasts or unciviliz'd. A Third sort there is, that are neither subject to any King, nor have any Knowledge of good or bad, or regard to right or wrong, but live continually upon Spoil and Robbery: They make suddain Eruptions out of the Deserts: These rob and steal whatever is in their way, and then presently make away back to their former lurking Holes.

All these rude Lybians lye in the Fields in the open Air, and live like wild Beasts, contriving how they may be most cruel: They affect neither Dainty Food, nor Civil Rayment, but are cloath'd in Goats Skins.

Their Princes have neither City or Town, but live in Castles near Rivers sides, where they lay up all their Stores. They command all their Subjects once a Year to take an Oath of Allegiance: Those that are obedient and observant of them, they protect as Friends and Associates: Those that refuse to submit, they condemn to dye, and prosecute them with Fire and Sword, as Thieves and Robbers. Their Arms are suitable to the nature of their Country and their own Disposition; for being nimble, and inhabiting a Country for the most part Champain, they go to the Field in times of War, each with their Darts, and a Bag fill'd with Stones. But they use neither Sword nor Helmet, nor any other Arms, but make it chiefly their Business to be quick and nimble in pursuing and retreating; and therefore are very active in running, and slinging of Stones; Care and continual Exercise improving natural Habits. They are neither just nor faithful to Strangers in any of their Compacts.

The Country about Cyrene is a fat Soyl, and very Fertile: It not only abounds in Corn, but in Wine and Oyl, Fruit-Trees and Pastures, and is water'd with many Rivers.

But those Parts that lye far South, are barren and dry, without Water, and look like the Sea, where there's no variety of Objects, but all on every side Waste and Desert; over which there's no possibility of passing, and therefore there's neither Bird, nor Four-footed Beast to be seen, except it be Deer or Oxen: Neither is there so much as any Plant, or any thing else for the Eye to fix upon; for the Parts further up into the Land (for a long way together) are all full of Heaps of Sand. And as it's destitute of all things for the support of Man's Life, so it abounds as much in Serpents of all shapes and sizes, especially those which they call Cerestes; whose Bites are Mortal, and they themselves of the same colour with the Sand; and therefore not being discern'd or distinguish'd from the Soyl, many (treading upon them unawares) run the hazard of losing their Lives.

It's reported that this sort of Serpents once enter'd Egypt, and depopulated a great part of the Country.

There's likewise a strange and wonderful thing often happens in this Country, both in the Deserts, and that part lying near to the Syrtes. For some time, and most commonly in calm Weather, there appear in the Air the shapes of divers living Creatures, some standing still, others moving; some flying, others pursuing; and are of that monstrous bigness, that they greatly terrify such as are ignorant of the nature of them. Some of them pursue Men, and when they take hold of them, a Chilness with a Trembling seizes upon all parts of their Bodies; and therefore Strangers unaccustom'd to such things, are ready to fall down dead with fear; but the Natural Inhabitants (being us'd to them) regard them not.

Some Natural Philosophers endeavour to give a Reason of these strange Apparitions, which look indeed like meer invented Fables: They say that there are never any Winds in this Country, and if there be any, they are very small and inconsiderable, and that the Air is often so wonderfully serene, that it's altogether without the least motion, in regard that near those Parts, there are neither Woods, deep Valleys, nor swelling Hills; neither are there any great Rivers that run through the Country, nor any sort of Grain or other Fruits that grow there; and therefore there's nothing from whence any Vapours can arise, which are the Productive matter of Winds. The Air therefore being thick in this dry and sandy Region, the same things happen here in Lybia, as do upon Rainy Days elsewhere, where in the Clouds, various Shapes and Forms may be observ'd: Because the Air being concreted, transforms it self into many Shapes, which being wasted up and down with gentle Gales, and with often brushing one upon another, are consolidated, and carry'd about hither and thither.


Page 110

At length when the Air is serene and calm, these Phaenomena by their weight fall to the Earth in that shape, that each have accidentally before receiv'd; and being that there is nothing at hand to dissolve it, what sort of Living Creature soever it meets with, it cleaves to it.

And as for that motion to and fro which they seem to have (they say) it is not directed by any voluntary faculty; for that it is impossible any inanimate things should have a Will either to fly or pursue; but the Living Creatures to which they adhere, are the secret Causes of their several Motions.

For in their going forward, they drive the Air before them, and therefore the Spectrum, which is made up of Air, seems gradually to go forward, and resemble one that flies; and by the Rule of Contraries, when the Body to which it approaches goes back, the Resemblances appear as if they pursu'd; for as much as being but empty and airy Images, they are attracted by the more solid Bodies; for by the force of the attraction the other way, they move again towards the fore-parts of the Body attracting; and whether the flying animated Bodies turn or stand still, the Spectrum is still with it; and then 'tis no strange thing, or unreasonable for the Image to dissolve, when it joins to a solid animate Body, and so by diffusing it self to affect it with a chilling Cold.

CHAP. IV.

Of the Amazons of Africa. Their Acts: Rooted out by Hercules; and the Gorgonians by Perseus. The Atlantides, and the Gods among them. The Original of the Titanes. The Acts of Basilea, or Cybele, said to be born in Phrygia. The Original of Atlas and Saturn. A long Account given of Bacchus; and the several Bacchus's there were. A Description of the Grota in Nysa, where he was brought up. The Building of the Temple of Hammon by him. The several Hercules's. The Monsters, Aegides and Campes kill'd by Minerva and Bacchus.

HAving now run over those things before mention'd, it will be pertinent in this place to relate what is reported concerning the ancient Amazons of Africa: For many have been persuaded into this Error, as to believe that there never were any but those that inhabited upon the Banks of Thermodon in Pontus; but in truth it is quite otherwise; for those in Africa were far more ancient and famous than any of the rest.

Though we are not ignorant that the Account to be given of these will seem very strange, and a meer Novelty to the Readers, being that the Race of those Amazons were extinct long before the Trojan War; but these Virago's about the River Thermodon, flourish'd not long before these our Days: For what wonder is it that the latter (the knowledge of whom is so fresh) should seem more renown'd than the more ancient who are altogether unknown (through length of Time) to the greatest part of Mankind?

For as much therefore as many things are reported of them both by the ancient Poets and Historians, and also by many later Authors, we shall likewise endeavour to give a distinct and orderly Account of their Actions; following the Example of Dionysius, who writ the History of the Argonauts and Bacchus, and many other Actions perform'd in ancient Times.

In Africa there was not only one Race of Women who were famous for Valour and Warlike Exploits: For we are inform'd that the Gorgones (against whom Perseus made War) for Courage and Valour were eminent: How famous and potent they were, may be gather'd hence, in as much as that Son of Jupiter (the most eminent Hero among the Grecians in his time) made choice of this Expedition as the greatest and most noble Enterprize. And as for the Amazons, of whom we are now about to write, their Valour was most eminently remarkable, if we compare them with the greatest Spirited Women of our own Times.


Page 111

In the Western Parts of Africa, upon the Borders of those Tracts that are inhabitable, there were anciently a Nation under the Government of Women, whose Manners and Course of Living were altogether different from ours. It was the Custom for those Women to manage all matters of War, and for a certain time keeping themselves Virgins, they went out as Soldiers into the Field, and after so many Years run up in their warfare, they accompany'd with Men, for the preservation of Posterity; but the Magistracy and all publick Offices, they kept wholly in their own Hands; and the Men (as the Women do with us) lookt to the Houshold Affairs, submitting to whatever was thought sit to be done by the Wives; and were not upon any terms admitted to intermeddle in Martial Affairs, or to Command, or be in any publick Authority, which might any ways incourage them to cast off the Yoak of their Wives.

As soon as any Child was born, they deliver'd it to the Father to nurse it up with Milk and other Meat agreeable to its Age. If it were a Girl, they sear'd off its Paps, lest they should be burthensom when they grew up; for they lookt upon them to be great hindrances in Fighting; and from the searing of their Paps, the Grecians call'd them Amazons.

It's reported, they inhabited an Island call'd Hisperia, because it lies to the West near to the Morass call'd Tritonides: This Fen they say, is near to the Ocean which surrounds it, and is call'd Tritonides, from a River that runs into it, call'd Triton. This Morass borders upon Ethiopia, under the greatest Mountain in those Parts, call'd by the Grecians Atlas, extending it self to the Ocean.

This Island, they say, is very large, abounding with all sorts of Fruit-Trees, which supply the Inhabitants with Food: That they have many Herds of Cattel, and Flocks of Sheep and Goats, which feed their Possessors both with their Milk and Flesh: But that they had no sort of Corn, for that in those Times they knew not what it was.

These Amazons therefore, for Valour eminent above all others, and heated with an ambitious desire of War, first subdu'd all the Cities of this Island (except one call'd Mena, accounted Sacred) inhabited now by the Ethiopians, call'd Ichthophages: It's often scorch'd with many Eruptions of Fire, which break out of the Earth, and its Bowels are inricht with precious Stones, which the Grecians call Anthraces,Sardes and Smaragdos.

Afterwards having subdu'd many of the Neighbouring Africans and Numidians, they built a great City in the Morass of Triton, which for the shape of it was call'd Chersonesus.

Then being further instigated by their innate Valour and Courage, they attempted greater Matters, and invaded many other Countries. And first they set upon them upon Mount Atlas, a soft sort of People, who injoy'd a rich Country full of great Cities; among whom (in those Parts bordering upon the Ocean) the Gods first had their Original, as the Grecians fabulously report, of whom a particular Account shall be given hereafter.

To this end, when Merina was Queen of the Amazons, she rais'd an Army of Thirty Thousand Foot, and Two Thousand Horse, for they were very exact and diligent in Training up Horses for the War. The Armour they wore for Coats of Mail, were the Skins of vast Serpents, with which sort of Creatures Africa abounds. But for offensive Arms, they carry'd Swords, Darts and Bows, in which they were so expert, that with these they not only broke their Enemies Battalions; but when they pursu'd them upon their Flight, they were sure to hit their Mark.

Entring therefore the Country of the Atlantides, in a Battel they routed them that inhabited Cercenes, and pursu'd them so close, that they enter'd pell-mel with them that got within the Walls, and took the City: And to strike a greater Terrour into their Neighbours, they executed horrid Cruelties upon the Conquer'd; for they put all the Men to the Sword, and having raz'd the City to the Ground, carry'd away Captive all the Women and Children. The noise of this Destruction being spread all over the Country, the rest of the Atlantides (being struck with a Pannick Fear) submitted, and deliver'd up all their Cities: Whereupon Merina receiv'd them all into her Favour, and made a League with them, and in the room of that which was destroy'd, built another City, calling it after her own Name, and peopled it with the Captives, and with such as were willing to come there to inhabit.


Page 112

In the mean time being presented by the Atlantides with many rich Gifts, and decreeing to her (with a general Consent) many high Honours, she not only graciously accepted those Marks of their Kindness, but promis'd she would for the future endeavour to merit the good Opinion of the whole Nation.

Being therefore often infested by their envious Neighbours the Gorgans, Merina to gratifie the Atlantides (who address'd themselves to her for that purpose) with an Army invaded the Country of the Gorgons, where joining Battel with them, the Ingagement was smart, in which the Amazons got the day, and kill'd great numbers of their Enemies, and took Three Thousand Prisoners: The rest flying into Woods, Merina (designing utterly to root up the Nation) endeavour'd to set the Woods on Fire; but not being able to effect it, she return'd with her Army into the Confines of her own Country, where by reason of her late Victory, being secure and careless in setting her Watch, the Prisoners kill'd many of her Amazons with their own Swords as they were asleep; but at length being surrounded by the whole Army (fighting it out to the last) they were every Man kill'd upon the spot. Then Merina erected Three Funeral Piles, and burnt up all those of her Army that were slain, and rais'd up as many Mounts of Earth over them, which are at this day call'd the Amazon's Sepulchers.

The Gorgonians notwithstanding, were afterwards of great Power, till the Reign of Medusa, at which time they were conquer'd by Perseus. At length both they and the Amazons were utterly extinct by Hercules at the time when he travell'd into the Western Parts, and erected the Pillar in Africa. For it was a thing intollerable to him, who made it his business to be renown'd all the World over, to suffer any Nation to be govern'd any longer by Women.

It's reported likewise, that by an Earthquake, the Tract towards the Ocean, open'd its Mouth, and swallow'd up the whole Morass of Triton.

Merina likewise overran a great part of Africa, and passing into Egypt, made a League with Orus the Son of Isis, who then reign'd there. She made War also upon the Arabians, and destroy'd many of them: Afterwards having subdu'd Syria, the Cilicians met her with Presents, and submitted themselves; whom (upon the account they of their own accord, gave up all into her Hands) she by an Edict ordain'd to be a free People; and for that reason they are call'd the free Cilicians to this Day. Afterwards having conquer'd the Nations about Mount Taurus (who were both Men of strong Bodies, and stout Hearts) she descended through the greater Phrygia to the Sea; thence passing through the Maritime Tracts, she put an end to her Expedition at the River Caicus: Out of her new Conquests, she pickt out the most convenient Places for the building of Cities, and built many there, among others one after her own Name; the rest she call'd after the Names of the chief Commanders of her Army, as Cymes, Pitanes, and Prineia, situated upon the Sea-Coasts; others she built up higher into the Continent.

She possess'd her self likewise of several Islands, particularly Lesbos, where she built Mitylene, calling it after the Name of her Sister, who went along with her in the Expedition. Whilst she was busie in taking other Islands, she was endanger'd by a Storm at Sea, where offering up her Prayers to the Mother of the Gods for deliverance, she was driven upon a certain Desert Island, which she consecrated to the before-mention'd Goddess, being admonish'd so to do by a Dream; and there she erected Altars, and offered magnificent Sacrifices. This Island is call'd Samothracia, which according to the Greek Dialect signifies the Sacred Island. But there are some Historians that say, it was formerly call'd Samos; and from some Thracians that came to inhabit there, Samothracia. After that the Amazons were return'd into the Continent, they fabulously report, that the Mother of the Gods (being delighted with this Island) plac'd there her Sons, call'd the Corybantes. In the Records of their Sacred Mysteries, it's declar'd who was their Father; and she her self, (they say) taught them the Rites and Mysteries that are now in use in that Island, and instituted and appointed a Sacred Grove, and an inviolable Sanctuary.

About these times (they say) one Mompsus, a Thracian, banish'd by Lycurgus King of Thrace, with an Army invaded the Country of the Amazons: His Associate was one Sipylus, who was likewise Banish'd out of Scythia, bordering upon


Page 113

Thrace. They with Sipylus and Mompsus overcame the other in a Battel, in which Merina the Amazon Queen, and many more of the Amazons were slain. In process of Time (after the Thracians had overcome them in several Engagements,) they say that those that remain'd of the Nations of the Amazons, retir'd into Lybia. And such was the end of the Amazonian Expedition out of Africa.

And now since we have made mention of the Atlantides, we judge it not impertinent to relate what the Atlantides fabulously report concerning the Genealogy of the Gods, not much differing from the Fables of the Greeks.

The Atlantides inhabited a Rich Country, bordering upon the Ocean, and were esteem'd to excel all their Neighbours in civil Reception and Entertainment of Strangers; and they boast that the Gods were born amongst them, and say that the most famous Poet amongst the Grecians does confirm this their Assertion, where he brings in Juno speaking thus—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

The utmost bounds of Earth far off I see,

Where Thetys and Ocean boast to be

The Parents of the Gods.—

They say that Ʋranus was their first King, who caus'd the People (who then wandred up and down) to dwell in Towns and Cities, and reducing them from a lawless and savage Course of Life, taught them to use and lay up the Fruits of the Earth, and many other things useful for Man's Life. It's said he had under his Dominion, the greatest part of the World, especially towards the West and the Northern Parts: And that being much addicted to Astrology, he prognosticated many things that were come to pass in the World; and measur'd the Year according to the Course of the Sun, and the Months according to the Motion of the Moon; and divided the Days into Hours, and therefore the People, as at that time ignorant of the constant motion of the Stars, did so admire his Prognostications, that it grew into a common Opinion among them, that he was a God; and when he was dead, (by reason of his Deserts, and Art in Astronomy) they honour'd him as a God.

The Starry Heaven was call'd after his Name, because that he was so familiarly acquainted with the Rising and setting of the Stars, and other things hapning in the Etherial World; and for that his Merits transcended all the Honours that could be attributed to him, he was call'd the Eternal King of the Universe.

They report that this Ʋranus had Five and Forty Children by several Wives, and Eighteen of these were by one Titea, who had each of them a peculiar Name, but all in Common call'd Titanes, from their Mother Titea, who for her Wisdom and Beneficence was after her Death reputed a Goddess by those whom she had oblig'd by her Kindnesses, and was call'd Terra.

Of Ʋranus and Titea were born several Daughters, of whom Two were most famous above the rest, Basilea and Rhea, by some call'd Pandora. Basilea being the Eldest (and most Prudent and Discreet) bred up her Brothers with the care and affection of a Mother, and therefore was call'd the Great Mother.

After the Death of her Father, by the general Suffrage of the People and Consent of her Brothers she was elected Queen, being as yet a Virgin, and remarkable for her Modesty and Chastity. She was long unwilling to marry; but afterwards (desiring to leave Heirs of her own Body to succeed in the Kingdom) she marry'd Hyperion one of her Brothers, whom she most dearly lov'd, by whom she had two Children, Helio and Selene, who for their Beauty and Modesty were the Admiration of all; her other Brothers (they say) partly out of Envy at the Issue, and partly out of fear lest Hyperion should assume the Kingdom intirely to himself, committed a notorious wicked Act; for entring into a Conspiracy, they assassinated Hyperion and drown'd Helio (then a tender Infant) in Eridanus.


Page 114

Upon the Discovery of this sad Disaster, Selene, who passionately lov'd her Brother, threw her self down headlong from the House-top; and the Mother, while she was seeking for her Son at the River side, with Grief fell asleep, and dreamt that she saw Helios standing by her to comfort her, and wish'd her not to grieve too much and afflict her self for the Death of her Children; for the Titanes should execute due Revenge upon the Malefactor, and that he and his Sister by the Providence of the Gods were to be deify'd, so as that which before was call'd the Holy Fire in Heaven should then be call'dHelios, and that which before had the Name of Mene should then be term'd Selenes.

When she awak'd she told her Dream, and repeated all her Misfortunes, and then intreated her Subjects that they would adore her deceas'd Children as Gods, and that none for the future would come near her.

Presently afterwards in a furious Rage of Madness (taking her Daughters gingling Gewgaws) she wandred up and down, with her Hair dishevell'd about her Ears, and playing like a mad Woman upon a Timbrel and Cymbal, she was even a Terror to the Spectators: And while every body pity'd her miserable Condition, and some attempted to lay hold on her, there arose on a sudden a terrible Storm of Rain, Thunder and Lightning, and she was never seen after. The People hereupon admiring this Prodigy, began to transfer the Name of Helios and Selene (in Honour of them) to the Sun and the Moon in the Heavens; and being persuaded that the Mother was a Goddess, they erected Altars, and (with the noise of Timbrels and tinkling of Cymbals, and other things agreeable to her Circumstances) offer'd Sacrifices, and instituted other divine Rites and Ceremonies in Honour of her.

But however Phrygia is said to be the Birth-place of this Goddess: For the Inhabitants fabulously report, that Meones heretofore reign'd in Phrygia and Lydia, and that he marry'd Dyndima, and upon her begat a Daughter, which he unnaturally expos'd in the Mountain Cybelus: And that there, by a divine Providence, Leopards and other fierce and wild Beasts, nourish'd the Child with their own Milk: But Shepherdesses thereabouts observing what was done, and (admiring the Strangeness of the thing) took away the Child, and call'd it, from the Place, Cybele. The young Lady growing up both in Strength and Years, was admir'd by all for her Beauty, Modesty and Ingenuity: For she was the first that invented the Pipe, compos'd of many Reeds, and the Timbrel and Cymbal in Sports and Dances: She taught likewise how to cure (by purging) Diseases both in Children and Cattle.

For her extraordinary Love to Children, whom she often restor'd to Health, by singing and lulling them in her Arms, she was call'd by all The Mother of the Mount. Marsyas the Phrygian (they say) was very much with her, and the chiefest of all her Lovers: This Man, it's said, was mighty ingenious, and wonderfully chast. His Ingenuity they gather hence, that imitating the Sound of a Pipe compos'd of many Reeds, he found out how one single Pipe might make the same Harmony: And as an Argument for his Chastity (they say) he never had to do with any Woman all the days of his Life.

Cybele being now ripe of Years, lov'd a young Man, one of the Natives, first call'd Attis, afterwards Papas: This Youth she accompany'd with, and was got with Child, about which time she was own'd by her Parents, and receiv'd by her Father into his Palace, as a Virgin: But being afterwards inform'd of the Miscarriage of his Daughter, caus'd Attis and her Nurses to be put to Death, and their Bodies to lye expos'd without Burial: Whereupon (they say) Cybele (through the Love she bore to the young Man, and overwhelm'd with Grief for her Nurses) fell into a furious Madness, and ran out into the Fields, where all alone with her Hair about her Ears she fill'd the whole Country with the noise of her Timbrel, and her Wayling and Lamentations. But Marsyas pitying her miserable Condition, and prompted thereunto by the Remembrance of his ancient Love and Kindness he had for her, follow'd her wherever she went; and coming together at length to Bacchus in Nysa, found there Apollo, then in great Esteem for his Skill in playing upon the Harp, invented by Mercury. There Marsyas contended with Apollo who should be accounted the greatest Artist, and the Nysians were to be the Judges. And first Apollo play'd only upon his Harp. But Marsyas as soon as he had winded his Hoboy (tickling their Ears with the Novelty of the Melody, and the Sweetness of his Notes) seem'd far to excel his Rival. Then they made a


Page 115

Match that they should both make a Second Trial of their Skill before the Judges: Apollo therefore leading the way, first began as before, and added to the melodiousness of his Harp, the Harmony of his Voice, and by that means gain'd the Victory over the Applause formerly wan by the Hoboy. At which Marsyas was in a Rage, and said, that he was highly injur'd in not being allow'd the preheminence, for that they ought to judge by the Art in playing, and not in the Voice and in singing, and that according to that Rule, Trial should be made, and Judgment given concerning the Melody and Harmony between the Harp and Hoboy; and that it was unjust to lay in the ballance Two Arts against one. To which it's said, Apollo answered, that he did no more than the other; for that Marsyas did the same thing, when he tun'd his Hoboy with his Breath, and therefore either both ought to be allowed the same Priviledge, or both should be restrained from making use of their Mouths, and their Hands only should be the Instruments of evidencing the excellency of their Art and Skill. What Apollo said, seem'd most just and reasonable to all the Auditors. Then there was a Third Contest between them, in which Marsyas was again overcome: But Apollo was so incens'd with his vying with him, that he flea'd him alive: But presently after he was so sorry for what he had done, that he broke in pieces all the Strings of his Harp, and destroy'd that Musick which he himself had invented. But it was afterwards reviv'd; for the Muses restor'd the Meane, Linus the String call'd the Tenor, and Orpheus and Thamyris the Two Strings call'd the Base, and next to the Base.

They say that Apollo consecrated both the Harp and Hoboy to Bacchus, and left them in his Cave; and afterwards falling in love with Cybele, wandred up and down with her as far as to the Hyperborean Mountains.

And whereas there was a Plague and Famine in Phrygia, the Phrygians inquir'd at the Oracle how they should be freed from the Calamity they lay under, It's said the God commanded them to bury Attis, and adore Cybele as a Goddess.

The Phrygians therefore (because they could not find any part of his Body through length of time since he was kill'd) made a Statue for him, which they follow'd as to his Burial, with Howling, Lamentations, and other honourable Ceremonies proper for his Funeral, and so made an Attonement for their former Offence; which Solemnity they constantly observe to this very Day; and offer Yearly Sacrifices to Cybele, who formerly erected Altars to the Gods there. In honour of this Cybele, they built a magnificent Temple in Pesinunte, a City of Phrygia, and instituted solemn Sacrifices, and Divine Worship to her, which Work was advanc'd by the assistance of King Midas. They Plac'd Leopards and Lions standing by the Statue of the Goddess, because it was generally believ'd she was nurs'd up by them. And these are the things which the Phrygians and the Atlantides, the Inhabitants of the Coasts bordering on the Ocean, do report of this Mother of the Gods.

After the Death of Hyperion, they report that the Children of * Coelus divided the Kingdom amongst themselves; amongst whom Atlas and Saturn were the most renown'd. The Country bordering upon the Ocean, fell by lot upon Atlas, who call'd the People there Atlantides, and the greatest Mountain in the World Atlas, after his own Name.

They say, that he was an excellent Astrologer, and was the first that discover'd the Knowledge of the Sphere; whence rose the common Opinion, that he carry'd the World upon his Shoulders; noting by this Fancy, his Invention and Description of the Sphere. The most eminent among his many Sons, was Hesperus, for Piety towards the Gods, and Justice and Kindness towards his Subjects. Being upon the Top of Mount Atlas to observe the motion of the Stars, he suddainly vanisht in a Tempest. The People hereupon much lamenting the loss of him, that they might for ever honour him, call'd the Brightest Star in the Heavens after his Name.

Atlas likewise had Seven Daughters, who were all call'd after their Father's Name Atlantides; but their several proper Names were Maia, Electra, Taygeta, Asterope, Merope, Halcyone, and Celaeno. All these were got with Child by several Heroick Princes, and even by some of the Gods themselves, and bore divers Sons


Page 116

who were the first Ancestors of several Nations, and for their virtuous Qualifications, were afterwards call'd Gods and Demy-Gods.

So Maia the Eldest, was got with Child by Jupiter, and bore Mercury, the Inventor of many Arts and Sciences for the use of Mankind.

All the rest likewise had Sons who were famous in their Times, some of which gave beginning to whole Nations, others to some particular Cities; and therefore not only some of the Barbarians, but likewise some among the Greeks, refer the Original of many of the ancient Heroes, to these Daughters of Atlas; for they were in great Reputation for Wisdom and Justice; and therefore when they were Dead, were ador'd as Goddesses, and fixt in the Constellation of the Pleiades.

Nymphs were commonly call'd Atlantides, because Nymphs is a general Term in this Country apply'd to all Women.

They say that Saturn the Brother of Atlas, was extraordinary Prophane and Covetous; and Marrying his Sister Rhea, he begat Jupiter, afterwards surnam'd Olympus. There was another Jupiter the Brother of Coelus, and King of Crete, but much inferior for Glory and Renown to the later: For this later was Lord of the World; but the ancient Jupiter was only King of the Island before-nam'd, and had Ten Sons whom they call'd Curetes, and call'd the Island Ida, after the Name of his Wife, where he himself was buried, the Remains of whose Sepulcher are to be seen at this Day.

However the Cretians relate several Stories of these Jupiters, of whom we shall write distinctly when we come to their History.

Saturn reign'd (they say) over Sicily, Africa and Italy, and inlarg'd his Dominion over all the Western Parts of the World, and by Garrisons and strong Forts plac'd in convenient Places, kept his Subjects every where within the Bounds of their Duty: And hence it is, that at this very Day in the Western Parts of Sicily, the high Mounts that are to be seen here and there, are call'd Cronia.

Jupiter (they say) was the Sun of Saturn, who contrary to what his Father did before him, carry'd himself justly and courteously toward all, and therefore he was call'd Father by all his Subjects. He succeeded in the Kingdom either as given up to him by his Father, or set upon the Throne by his Subjects out of hatred to his Father: And though Saturn afterwards by the help of the Titans, made War upon his Son, yet Jupiter overcame him in a Battel, and so gain'd the Kingdom: And afterwards he ran through the whole World, doing good to all Mankind: And because he was of a strong Body, and endowed with all virtuous Qualifications of Mind, he easily conquer'd the whole World. He chiefly made it his Business to punish the Impious, and to do good to all his People: And therefore (after he left the World) he was call'd Zena, from Life, because he was the first that taught Men to live well: And therefore they of whom he had deserv'd well, rewarded him with this Honour, that he was unanimously by all placed in the highest Heavens, and call'd a God, and Supream Lord of all the Earth. And this is the full Account (distinctly related) of all the Gods mention'd and recorded by the Atlantides.

And for as much as before in the account we gave of the Egyptian Antiquities, we came in the Course of the general History, to the Genealogy of Bacchus, (whom the Greeks call Dionysius) and his Acts—

We conceive it sit here to add what the Grecians have delivered to Posterity concerning this God: But in regard the ancient Fabulous Historians and Poets have given different Accounts of Bacchus, and have related many monstrous Stories, it's very difficult to set forth truly his Genealogy and Acts. For some say, there was but one Dionysius, others that there were Three. But some say there never was any such Man, but conceive that Wine is to be taken for Dionysius. We shall therefore in short, run over distinctly what is said by every one of them.

The Naturalists who speak of this God, and call Wine Bacchus, say, that the Earth amongst other Plants, naturally produc'd the Vine, and that it was not planted or found out at the first by any whatsoever. In Confirmation whereof, they instance in wild Vines, which in many places at this day bear Grapes of themselves, as well as if they were husbanded and improved by the Care and Industry of Men: And that Bacchus was by the Ancients call'd Bimeter, because when the Vine is planted in the Earth, and begins to grow, that is to be esteem'd the


Page 117

First Birth: The Second, when it shoots forth Branches, and puts forth Fruit, and brings them to Ripeness and Perfection; and so the First Birth of this God is to be judg'd to proceed from the Earth, and the Second from the Vine it self.

The Fabulous Writers likewise feign a Third Generation of Bacchus, that he was the Son of Jupiter and Ceres, and that some Men of the Earth pull'd him in Pieces, and boil'd his Parts; and that Ceres gather'd his Members together again, and renew'd and reviv'd him. Which Fictions the natural Philosophers explain according to natural Reason; for he is said (they say) to be the Son of Jupiter and Ceres, because the Vine is nourish'd by the Earth, and the Rain from Heaven, and so produces Fruit; whence comes Wine, by pressing of the Grape. That the boyling of his Members, signifies the manner of ordering the Wine, which many boyl to make it more strong and fragrant. That his Members were pull'd in pieces by Earthly Men afterwards, and join'd together again, and he restor'd to his former State, denotes no more, but that after the Vintage and pruning of the Vines at the season of the Year, the Earth causes them to flourish again, and to be as fruitful as ever they were before. For it's certain, that by Ceres the ancient Poets and other Fabulous Authors meant the Mother Earth: And agreeable hereunto, are those things that are deliver'd in the Verses of Orpheus, and which are exhibited in the celebration of the Sacred Mysteries, which it is not lawful for any ordinary Person particularly to treat of.

In the same manner the Naturalists explain his being the Son of Semele; for they say, that the Earth was by the Ancients call'd Thion and Semele;Semele, because the Worship of this Goddess was splendid and pompous; and Thyon from the frequent Sacrifices which were offered to her.

He is feign'd to be begotten of Jupiter, Twice, because it being suppos'd that the Vines with other Plants, were destroy'd in Deucalion's Flood, and that it afterwards sprung up again, therefore when this God appear'd again, as if he had sprung up by a Second Birth, he was feign'd to be born out of Jupiter's Thigh. And these are the Opinions of them, who take Bacchus for nothing else but the use and strength found out to lye in Wine.

But those Fabulous Authors that say this God was a Man, unanimously attribute to him the finding out and first planting of the Vine, and every thing that belongs to the use of Wine. But whether there were more than one of that Name, they differ among themselves. Some affirm there was but One, and this very Bacchus who taught the use of Wine, and gathering of Grapes, and with an Army overran the whole World, and first instituted the Rites and Festivals of the Bacchanalia. Some (as I have before declar'd) have affirm'd, that there were Three that liv'd at several times, and have given an Account of the Actions of each of them.

Of whom (they say) the most ancient was born in India, and therefore in regard that Country (through the Temper of the Climate, and richness of the Soil) naturally produc'd Vines, they affirm he was the first that taught the way of pressing of Grapes, and found out the use of Wine; and imploy'd himself likewise in pruning of Fig-Trees, and other Fruit Trees of a larger size, and taught others the same Art: And in Conclusion, that he found out whatever appertain'd to the Vine. And hence he was call'd the Presser, and the Bearded, because it is the Custom among the Indians to let their Beards grow all their Days without cutting them.

This they say, is the Bacchus which overran the whole World with his Arms, and found out the manner of Planting of Vines, and the pressing of Grapes with Wine-Presses (and thence was surnam'd Leneus, as before) and imparted what he had discover'd to others; by which Advantages he so gain'd the Hearts and Respects of all Men, that when he was dead, they ador'd him with Divine Honours. At this day they shew the Place of his Birth in India, and many Cities there in their own proper Language, call'd after his Name. Many other things they relate of this Indian Bacchus, which is too tedious here to rehearse.


Page 118

Another Bacchus (they say) there was who was the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina, or as some think, of Ceres. This they say, was the first that taught how to plow with Oxen, when Men before till'd the Ground with their own Handy Labours, and invented many other things useful for the Art of Husbandry, that the Countryman might not be overlaid with his Labours. By these Advantages and Benefits to Mankind, he gain'd such Reputation and Esteem, that he was by all ador'd as a God, and Divine Worship and Solemn Sacrifices were offered in honour of him. In all his Images and Statues he was painted and ingraven with Horns, as well to signifie the nature of this Second Bacchus, as to denote how great a benefit and advantage accrew'd to the Husbandmen by the invention of the Plow.

A Third Bacchus they say, was born at Thebes in Beotia, of Jupiter and Semele, the Daughter of Cadmus; for Jupiter being in love with her, by reason of her extraordinary Beauty, is said frequently to lye with her; at which Juno was so inflam'd with Jealousy, that she resolv'd to be reveng'd upon the Girl; and to this end (minding to deceive her (she appear'd in the shape of one of her Servants, and perswaded Semele (who never suspected any finister design) that it was very fitting that Jupiter should lye with her in the same splendour, and glorious appearance as he did with Juno: Whereupon Semele over perswaded Jupiter, that he would honour her in his Addresses in the same manner as he did Juno; upon which he visited her in Thunder and Lightning, which kill'd the young Lady, causing her to miscarry; and Jupiter forthwith clapt up the Infant within his Thigh, and when he was come to the full time of his Birth, he convey'd him to Nysa in Arabia, where being nurs'd by Nymphs, he was call'd from his Father and the Place Dionysus. Being a very Beautiful Young Man, he spent the time of his Youth in Dancing, Plays, and all manner of Sports and Pleasures with Young Women.

Afterwards he got together an Army of Women arm'd with Launces, and adorn'd with Garlands of Flowers, and marcht with 'em through all Parts of the World, teaching Men his Mysterious Rites and Ceremonies, yet imparting them only to those that liv'd virtuously and piously. He every where likewise instituted Festival Days, and General Meetings for Sports and Dancings, and compos'd Differences both in Cities and Countries; and instead of Wars and Seditions, establish'd Peace and Concord amongst them. And when the noise of his coming to any Place was spread Abroad, and how kind he was to all, and how great a Benefactor he was in improving and civilizing the Manners of Men, they ran out flocking from all Parts to receive him. But some few Proud and Impious Persons despis'd him, and gave forth that he carry'd * Women along with him to gratify his Lusts, and that he taught his Rites and Ceremonies, meerly to commit Whoredom with strange Women; but of these he took a speedy Revenge; for whenever he exerted his divine power in punishing the Wicked, sometimes he struck them with Madness, and at other times caus'd them to be torn in pieces by the Hands of the Women; and sometimes by his Sovereign Skill in Martial Affairs, caus'd his Enemies suddainly to be Slain. For instead of the Launces, he ordered his Bacchides to carry Darts wrapt round with Ivy at the Points, with which (on a suddain and unexpectedly) they assaulted and wounded to Death the Kings that were ignorant of the Stratagem, and therefore despis'd and contemn'd them, because they were Women.

Amongst them that were punish'd by him, the most considerable and eminent were Pentheus the Grecian, and Myrrhanus the Indian King, and Lycurgus of Thrace. For Bacchus intending to transport his Forces out of Asia into Europe made a League with Lycurgus King of Thrace, whose Country was wash'd by the Hellespont. As soon as Bacchus had transported his Bacchides into the Country, one of his Allies (as he thought Lycurgus) commanded his Souldiers to set upon Bacchus and all his mad Crew in the Night, and to cut them all off. Of which Bacchus being inform'd by one of the Inhabitants, call'd Tharops, he was no little amaz'd, because he had but a few with him, the Strength of his Army being on the other side of the Hellespont; upon which he himself secretly pass'd over to his Army: But Lycurgus in the mean time cut the throats of all his Bacchides that were left behind, in a Place call'd Nisius. As soon therefore as Bacchus had transported his Forces, he fought the Thracians, and overcame them; and having taken Lycurgus Prisoner, first pluck'd out his Eyes, and after he had put him to all sorts of Torments


Page 119

he could devise, and us'd him with all the Contempt and Disgrace imaginable, he nail'd him to the Cross. Afterwards in Recompence to Tharops for the Kindness shew'd him, he advanc'd him to the Kingdom of Thrace, and taught him the manner of Celebrating the Mysteries of his Solemnities call'd Orgyae.

Oeagrus the Son of Tharops, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, being instructed by him, in the same mysterious Rites and Ceremonies. Oeagrus afterwards taught them Orpheus his Son, who (being eminent for his Learning and Ingenuity) chang'd many things in the Orgyae. Hence those Rites and Mysteries first instituted by Bacchus were afterwards call'd Orphea.

But some of the Poets, among whom is Antimachus, say, Lycurgus was not King of Thrace, but of Arabia; and that he treacherously set upon Bacchus and his Bacchides in Nysa in Arabia: And further relate that Bacchus having every where punish'd the wicked and rewarded the good, return'd out of India, mounted upon an Elephant, into Thebes; and because he spent three Years in his Expedition, the Grecians celebrate the Festivals call'd Trieteriades. And report that being loaden with the Spoils of so great an Expedition, he was the first that was brought in Triumph into the Country. These are the Genealogies of Bacchus, according to the unanimous Consent of all the Ancients.

But many of the Cities in Greece contend for the Place of his Birth; for the Eleans, Naxians and the Inhabitants of Eleutherae, the Teians and many other, appropriate his Birth each particularly to themselves. And the Teians for Confirmation of what they say, bring this Argument, that there is a Spring in their City, which at some certain times streams forth most rich and fragrant Wine: And as to the rest, some of them shew Parcels of Land dedicated to him; and others (from ancient Tradition) sacred Groves and consecrated Temples. But in Truth since this God has left behind him many Tokens of his Beneficence, and likewise of his personal Presence in most Parts of the World, it's no wonder that every one affirms that his own Country and City, was the Place that was especially dear to Bacchus.

The Poet in his Hymns confirms what we have before declar'd, where speaking of those that doubt the Place of his Birth, brings him in as born at Nysa in Arabia in this manner—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Some Dracanum, Icarus some, some Naxus name,

Places from which the divine Bacchus came.

From Thebes some, and from thy curling Streams

Alphaeus others say: All silly Dreams.

Thee Father JOVE in secret brought to Light

Fearful of Men's, and his fair Juno's Sight,

On Nysas Mount adorn'd with pleasant Woods

Far from Phoenician Coasts near Egypt's Floods.

Yet I am not ignorant that the Africans inhabiting the Sea-coasts, do themselves challenge the Birth Place of this God, and say that what things are reported to be done by him were done among them, and shew many Marks and Signs to prove what they say, which remain among them to this very day: And in further Confirmation hereof many of the ancient Historians and Poets, and likewise a great Part of the Modern Writers do agree in this thing concerning him.

And that we may not omit any thing that is said of Bacchus, we shall range under distinct Heads what the Africans have related concerning him, and wherein the Grecian Historians have agreed with them, and lastly what Account is given of him by Dionysices, who compos'd a History of the ancient Stories and Fables.


Page 120

For he has written a History of Bacchus, of the Amazons, of the Expedition of the Argonauts, and the War of Troy, and many other things, annexing thereunto several Poems of the ancient Mythologists and Poets. He says that Linus was the first that invented Rhimes and Musick in Greece: And that Cadmus brought Letters out of Phoenicia, and was the first that taught the Grecians to pronounce them, and gave them their several Names, and form'd their distinct Characters: Hence these Letters are all generally call'd Phoenician Letters, because they were brought over out of Phoenicia into Greece: but they were afterwards call'd Pelasgian Characters, because the Pelasgians were the first that understood them after they were brought over. He says, that this Linus being an excellent Poet and Musician, had many Scholars, amongst whom there were three that were the most famous, Hercules, Themyris and Orpheus. Hercules learnt to play upon the Harp, but was very dull and unapt to learn, insomuch as he was sometimes box'd and beaten, at which he was at length so inrag'd that he kill'd his Master by a Blow with his Harp. Themyris was very ingenions, and gave himself wholly to Musick; and grew so eminent therein, that he would boast he could sing more sweetly and melodiously than the Muses themselves; at which the Goddesses were so inrag'd, that they both depriv'd him of his Art, and struck him blind besides, as Homer affirms in these Verses,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Themyris then by th' Muses was envy'd

And of his Art the Thracian they depriv'd.

And then again,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Th' inraged Goddesses then struck him blind

That th' way to Sing or Play he could not find.

Of Orpheus, the last of his Scholars, we shall speak particularly when we come to what concerns him.

This Linus (they say) writ in Pelasgian Letters, the Acts of the first Bacchus, and left other Stories in his Writings behind him. Orpheus, likewise it's said, us'd the same Characters, and Pronapides, Homer's Master, an ingenious Musician. Thymaetes also the Son of Thymaetus, the Son of Leomedon, who liv'd in the time of Orpheus, and travell'd through many Parts of the World, as far as to the Western Parts of Lybia to the very Ocean: This Thymaetes visited likewise (they say) Nysa the Place where Bacchus was brought up, as is reported by the Ancient Inhabitants; where being instructed by the Nysians, he wrote a Poesy call'd Phrygia, of the particular Actions of this God, in very old Language and Character. Amongst other things, he says, that Ammon a King, reigning in some Part of Lybia, marry'd Rhea the Daughter of Coelus, Sister of Saturn and the other Titans; and that when he came first to the Kingdom, he met with a beautiful Virgin call'd Amalthea, upon the Ceraunean Mountains, and falling in Love with her, begat a Son of her, who was afterwards famous and admirable both for Strength and Comeliness of Person; afterwards he made Amalthea Queen of the neighbouring Nations, which in its Situation being in shape of an Ox's Horn, was therefore call'd the Western Horn, and that the Soyl is so very rich, that it abounds with Vines and all other sorts of Fruit-trees. Being possess'd of this Country, she call'd it after her own Name, Amalthea's Horn. And therefore Posterity call every rich Piece of Land that abounds with Fruit-trees, Amalthea's Horn.

But Ammon fearing the rageful Jealousy of Rhea, conceal'd his Adultery, and privately sent away the Child afar off to the City Nysa, which lyes in an Island almost inaccessible, surrounded with the River Triton, into which there is but one strait and narrow Entrance, call'd the Nysian Gates.


Page 121

The Land there is very rich, abounding with pleasant Meadows, Gardens and Orchards, water'd on every side with refreshing Streams; wherein grow all sorts of Fruit-trees and Vines, which grow of themselves, for the most part running up upon the sides of Trees. A gentle, cooling and refreshing Wind pierces through the whole Island, which makes the Place exceeding healthful, so that the Inhabitants live much longer here, than any others in the neighbouring Countries. The first Entrance into the Island runs up in a long Vale, shaded all along with high and lofty Trees, so thick, that only a dim and glimmering light passes through; but the Fiery Beams of the Sun enter not in the least to offend the Passenger. In passing along, drill many Sweet and Christal Springs, so that the Place is most pleasant and delightful to them that have a desire there to divert themselves. When you are out of this Vale, a pleasant and very large Grota, of a round Form, presents it self, arch'd over with an exceeding high Craggy Rock, bespangled with Stones of divers resplendent Colours; for being exchequer'd, some sparkl'd with Purple Rays, some with Azure, and others darted forth their refulgent Beauty in divers other Colours, no Colour being ever known, but it might be seen there. At the Entrance grew Trees of a strange and wonderful Nature, some bearing Fruit, others always green and flourishing, as if they had been created only by Nature to delight the sight: In these nested all sorts of Birds, whose Colour and pleasant Notes, even ravisht the Senses with sweet delight: So that all the Place round, imparted a sort of Divine Pleasure, not only to the Eye, but the Ear; the sweetness of Natural Notes far excelling the Artificial Harmony of all other Musick whatsoever. Passing through this, appears a large and spacious Grota, in every part inlightned by the bright Rays of the Sun: Here grow various sorts of Flowers and Plants, especially Cassia, and others that perpetually preserve their sweet Odours in their natural Strength. Here are to be seen the many pleasant Apartments of the Nymphs, (compos'd of various Flowers, planted in that order by wise Nature's Hands, and not by Man's Art) fit to receive even the Gods themselves. Within all this pleasant Round, is not a Flower or Leaf to be seen wither'd, or in the least decay'd; so that the Spectators are not only delighted with the sight, but even transported with the Pleasures of the fragrant Smells, and sweet Odours of the Place.

To this Cave the Child was brought by Ammon, and committed to the care of Nysa, one of the Sisters of Aristeus, to be brought up; but ordered Aristeus himself to be his Tutor, who was a Prudent, Honest, and very Learned Man: And that the Child might be the beteer secur'd against the mischievous Contrivances of his Stepmother Rhea, to these was joyn'd Minerva to be his Guardian, whom the River Triton they say, brought forth a little before these Times; and therefore from thence she was call'd Tritonides. They report that this Goddess liv'd a Virgin all her Days, and that being likewise endu'd with extraordinary Wisdom, she found out many Arts and Sciences; and that her strength of Body, and Manly Courage was such, that she imploy'd her self in feats of Arms, and went out to the Wars. Amongst her other Actions, this was one remarkable, that she kill'd Aegides a terrible Monster, before esteem'd invincible. It was the Birth of Terra, and (in an horrible manner) naturally breath'd forth Flames of Fire at her Mouth. This Monster first appear'd in Phrygia, and burnt up the whole Country, which is therefore call'd Burnt Phrygia at this Day. Afterwards she bent her Course to the Places about Mount Taurus, and burnt and destroy'd all the Woods and Forests all along, as far as to India: Thence she mov'd towards the Sea-Coasts, and burnt down the Cedars upon Mount Libanus in Phaenicia: Thence passing through Egypt, she burnt up Lybia, as far as to the Western Shoar, till at length she set on Fire all the Woods upon the Ceraunian Mountains. The Earth being thus all in a Flame, and the Inhabitants partly consum'd, and partly through Fear, having forsaken their Country, Minerva (they say) eminently furnish'd both with Wisdom and Courage, kill'd this Monster; and wore its Skin upon her Breast, to be both as a Breast-plate and Coat of Mail against future Encounters, and likewise as a Memorial of her Valour and glorious Victory.

Terra, the Mother of this Monster, being hereat inrag'd, in revenge brought forth the Giants, those implacable Enemies of the Gods, which were afterwards destroy'd by Jupiter, with the assistance of Minerva, Bacchus and other Deities.


Page 122

But as for Dionysus bred up in Nysa, and instructed in the most learned Arts and Sciences, he grew not only eminent for the Strength and Beauty of his Body, and Endowments of his Mind, but for his Inventions of things useful for Man's Life. For while he was but as yet a meer Boy, he found out the nature and use of Wine, discovering the pressing of the Clusters of the Vine, and drying of the Grapes, to the end to store them up for future use. He found out likewise what Ground was most proper for the planting of every thing, and in hopes of attaining unto Immortal Honour for the great Benefits and Advantages of those things by him discover'd, he communicated his Inventions to Mankind.

When his Fame and Glory was nois'd abroad in every Place, Rhea (it's said) inrag'd at Ammon, endeavour'd to seize Dionysus: But being disappointed in her Design, she forsook Ammon, and returning to her Brother the Titans, Marry'd her Brother Saturn, who at the instigation of Rhea, with the other Brothers, made War upon Ammon, and in a Battel routed him. That Ammon by reason of Famine was forc't to fly into Crete, and marry'd Geta, one of the Daughters of the Curati, then reigning there, and with her gain'd the Sovereignty of the Island, and call'd it after his Wife's Name Gete, which was before called Idea.

Saturn they say, having gain'd the Kingdom of Ammon, govern'd cruelly, and marcht with an Army to Nysa against Dionysus, who hearing of the routing of his Father, and the Confederacy of the Titans against him, rais'd Souldiers in Nysa, Two Hundred of which were bred up with him, who as they were eminent for Valour, so they were great Lovers of Dionysus. He confederated likewise with the Neighbouring Lybians, Africans and the Amazons, of whom we have before related, that they were both valiant, and us'd to send great Forces abroad in other Countries, and had brought many Parts of the World under their Dominion. They were brought (they say) into this Confederacy chiefly for the sake of Minerva, who minded the same way and course of Life as they did: For the Amazons were both Warriers and Virgins. The Army with Dionysus was divided into Two Bodies, the Men commanded by him, and the Women by Minerva; and in this Order they made a violent Charge upon the Titans: The Ingagement was very hot, and great numbers fell on both sides: At length upon a Wound given to Saturn, Dionysus gain'd the Day, who signaliz'd his Valour in this Battel above all others. The Titans then fled to the Places formerly belonging to Ammon, and Dionysus with a great number of Prisoners return'd to Nysa, where he surrounded them with his Souldiers, and then in an Harangue, accus'd the Titans; so that all thought they must every Man be put to the Sword: But forthwith pardoning them all, he gave them liberty either to go Home, or to take up Arms with him: Upon which they all chose to serve him, and upon the account of their suddain and surprizing Deliverance, all ador'd him as a God. Then giving to each of them a Cup of Wine, as a Sacred Pledge of their Fidelity, he caus'd them Man by Man to swear that they would serve him faithfully, and fight for him to the end of the War.

This Rite and Ceremony of pledging their Faith on both sides, by pouring out and drinking of Wine, being then first begun, was afterwards imitated by Posterity, and Truces and Leagues in times of War were called Libations.

Dionysus afterwards undertaking a War against Saturn, and marching out of Nysa with all his Forces for that purpose, they report that Aristaeus his Tutor, was the First that with great Solemnity offered Sacrifices to him as to a God. It's said the noblest of the Nysaeans, call'd Silenians, were his Companions. For Selenus was the First that reign'd in this Island, who is so very ancient, that none knows his Original: And forasmuch as he had a Tail growing out at his Rump, his Posterity partaking of his nature, had the same Badge. Dionysus therefore marcht away with his Army (and after much toyl and hazard for lack of Water passing through many Deserts, infested with wild Beasts) he came at length to Zabima a City of Lybia, and there encamp'd; near to this place he kill'd the Monster (the Spawn of Terra, call'd Campes, which had destroy'd many of the Inhabitants, for which he was in high Reputation among the People for his Valour. He rais'd a Mount of Earth over this Monstrous Beast he had kill'd, to the end to leave an everlasting Monument of his Valour to Posterity, which remains to this very day. Thence he marcht against the Titans, causing his Army


Page 123

to pass quietly and orderly through all Places, carrying himself courteously and civilly towards all; assuring every Body that he undertook this Expedition for no other Reason but to punish the Impious, and benefit all Mankind: So that the Lybians admiring his good Order and Discipline, and the Greatnese of his Mind, largely supply'd his Army with Provision, and freely join'd with him as Confederates.

And now approaching near to the City of Ammon, he routed Saturn again before the Walls, who afterwards set the City on Fire in the Night, with a purpose to destroy the ancient Palace of Ammon, and he himself, with his Wife Rhea, and others of his distressed Friends, secretly fled out of the City. But Dionysus was nothing like to him in his Temper; for he not only pardon'd Saturn and Rhea, whom he had taken Prisoners, upon the account of being his Kindred, but intreated them that for the future they would as his Parents love him, and live with him as his choicest and most beloved Friends; so that Rhea lov'd him all her Life long as dearly as her own Son, but the love of Saturn was deceitful. About this time Saturn and Rhea had a Son born, call'd Jupiter, who was advanc'd to many Places of Honour by Dionysus, and afterwards became King upon the account of his Virtuous Qualifications.

The Africans had inform'd Dionysus before the Fight, that Ammon at the time he was driven out of his Kingdom, foretold, that after a certain time his Son Dionysus would recover his Father's Kingdom, and that he should inlarge his Dominion over the whole World, and should be ador'd as a God. Dionysus hereupon concluding that the Prophesie would certainly take effect, he built a Temple and a City to his Father, and having order'd him to be worshipt as a God, constituted Priests for the Oracle.

It's reported that Ammon was portray'd with a Ram's Head, because he always wore an Helmet in the Wars of that shape.

There are some that report he had Horns naturally growing out at his Temples; and hence it is, that his Son Dionysus is represented in the same manner; and modern Authors do deliver it as a most certain Truth, That this God was Horn'd.

When he had built the City, and setled the Oracle, they say, he first consulted with this new God, concerning his intended Expeditions, and that his Father answer'd him, that by doing good to all Mankind, he should attain to an Estate of Immortality. Being thus incourag'd, he first invaded Egypt, and made Jupiter the Son of Saturn and Rhea, King of the Country, though he was but then a Boy: But appointed Olympus his Assistant and Tutor, by whose Instructions he attain'd to a high degree of Virtue and noble Endowments, and thence was call'd Jupiter Olympus.

Dionysus was said to have taught the Egyptians the manner of planting, and use of the Vine, and to keep and store up Wine, Apples and other Fruits. His Fame was now so nois'd abroad in every Place, that none durst oppose him, but all submitted of their own accord, and with Praises and Sacrifices ador'd him as a God. Passing thus (they say) through the whole World, he planted and improv'd the Countries all along as he went, and by his good Acts oblig'd all Mankind to a grateful remembrance, by rendring him immortal Honour: And whereas all Men have divers Sentiments of the rest of the Gods, yet they all agree in the Immortality of Bacchus: For there's neither Greek nor Barbarian, but have tasted of his Grace and Bounty; yea, even those that inhabit the most barren Countries altogether unfit for the Planting of Vines, learnt of him how to make Drink of Barly, little inferior for deliciousness of Taste to Wine. 

They say moreover, that Dionysus with a swift March hasted out of India to the Sea, and there found the Titanes passing over with great Forces into Crete, against Ammon. And whereas Jupiter in the mean time had brought over Forces out of Egypt to the assistance of Ammon, and a great War was broke out in that Island, Dionysus forthwith, together with Minerva and others (reputed to be Gods) transported Aids to them in Crete. Hereupon was fought a great Battel, wherein the Dionysans were Victors, and the Titanes were every Man cut off.

After Ammon and Bacchus were translated to a state of Immortality, (and all the Titanes now utterly extinct,) Jupiter became Lord of the Universe, none daring to be so impious as to oppose him.


Page 124

These are the things which the Libyans say were done by the first Bacchus the Son of Ammon and Amalthea.

The Second Bacchus (they say) was Son of Jupiter, by Io, the Daughter of Inachus, and reign'd in Egypt, and there taught the manner of divine Worship and Sacrifices.

The Third was the Issue of Jupiter and Semele, and was among the Grecians a Rival of the other Two before mention'd. For making it his business to imitate them, he likewise with a great Army marcht through the whole World, and set up many Pillars at the utmost, Bounds of his several Expeditions, and planted and improv'd likewise the Countries as he went. And as the ancient Bacchus listed the Amazons into his Army, so did this other Women. He took likewise much care and pains about the Orgia and Sacred Rites and Ceremonies, some of which he reform'd, and added others. But because of the length of time, the first Invention and finding out of things is unknown to many; this last Bacchus only inherits the Glory and Reputation belonging to the former, which Misfortune not only befell him, but Hercules after him.

For whereas there was anciently Two of the same Name; one of them (and the more ancient) is said to have flourish'd in Egpyt, who having overcome a great part of the World, erected a Pillar in Africa. The other was born in Crete, and was one of the Idaei Dactyli; he was a Jugler, but likewise a good Soldier, and instituted the Olympick Games.

The last was the Son of Jupiter, by Alcmena, born a little before the Trojan War: He travel'd through many Parts of the World, to execute the Commands of Euristheus; and succeeded in all his Enterprizes; he erected a Pillar in Europe.

His Name being the same, and his Actions much like to those of the former, was the occasion that what things were done by the ancient Hercules's after their Deaths, were by Posterity solely ascrib'd to him, as if there had been never any but one Hercules in the World.

Amongst other evident Proofs that there were more than one Dionysus or Bacchus, this very Fight of the Titanes does make it clear: For it's generally acknowledg'd, that Dionysus was with Jupiter in the War against the Titanes, and they say that it is an absurd and undecent thing to account Semele Contemporary with the Titanes, and to affirm that Cadmus, the Son of Agenor was more ancient than the Celestial Gods. And these are the things which the Lybians relate of Bacchus. Thus having now perform'd our Promise made at the beginning, we shall here put an end to this Third Book.


Page 125

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK IV.

The PREFACE.

I Am not ignorant that the Writers of Antiquities in many things fall short of the truth in their Relations. For being that ancient things are (as it were) scrap'd out of the Rubbish with very great difficulty, they greatly perplex the Historian. And because the Supputation of Times, wherein things were done, cannot now be so exact as to infer an Infallible Argument for the truth of the Actions related; therefore it is that the Reader despises the Authors of the History. And the multitude and variety of the Gods, Demy-Gods, and other Famous Men, whose Genealogies are to be treated of, add much more to the difficulty. And the greatest vexation of all is, that the Writers of Antiquities and Mythologies differ exceedingly in their Relations one from another: And therefore the most fam'd and noted Historians of later Times, have altogether wav'd Treatises of Ancient Things, and apply'd themselves to Composing Histories only of such as have happened in Times a little before their own. For Ephorus the Cumean, the Scholar of Isocrates, designing to write a General History, passing over matter of former Ages, began his Writings with theReturn of the Heraclides: Callisthenes and Theopompus, who were Contemporary, follow'd the same Method, and wav'd all matters of Antiquity. But I am of a contrary Opinion from them in this matter, and therefore the more fully to discharge what I have undertaken, have resolv'd with the greatest care and diligence I can, to treat of the Antiquities of Ancient Times: For there are many things, and such as are very remarkable, that have been done by the Gods and Demy-Gods, and other Famous Men, to some of whom Posterity for their good Actions to the general benefit of Mankind, have attributed Divine Honours, as to Gods, and have ador'd others, by instituting Sacrifices to them as Demy-Gods. But the due praises of all these Worthies are publish'd to the World by History, to the Succession of perpetual Generations.


Page 126

In the Three former Books, we have treated of the Affairs of other Nations, and of their Gods; of the Description of Places in the several Countries; of the wild Beasts, and other living Creatures bred amongst them, and whatever we judg'd worthy of remark, or strange and wonderful.

In this Book we shall set forth the Antiquities of the Grecians from themost ancient Times, and therein treat of the Gods, and Demy-Gods, and of all others that have been famous and remarkable in feats of Arms, in times of War, or have found out what has been beneficial to Mankind in times of Peace, or such as have been Law-makers.

We shall begin therefore with Dionysus or Bacchus, because he's the most ancient, and did most benefit to Mankind.

In the former Books we have shew'd how that some of the Barbarians have challeng'd the Birth of this God to be amongst them. For the Egyptians say, that their God Osiris is the same whom the Grecians call Dionysus; and that he went through the whole World, and first found out the use of Wine, and taught Men how to plant the Vine, and that for this great Benefit to Mankind, all generally agree that he attain'd to a state of Immortality.

The Indians likewise with no less Confidence say, that he was born among them, and that he shew'd the way and manner of Planting the Vine, and discovered the use of Wine; which having before declar'd, we shall now deliver what the Grecians report concerning this God.


Page 127

CHAP. I.

What the Grecians say further of Bacchus. The Story of Priapus. Of Hermophroditus. Of the Muses. The Birth of Hercules; and his Twelve Labours injoin'd him by Euristheus. His wandring Expeditions through Africk, Spain, France, Italy, Sicily: His setting up Two Pillars at Gades, and his other Acts by the way. The Story of Orpheus.

CAdmus (they say) the Son of Agenor, being sent out of Phenicia by the King his Father to seek Europa, was commanded to bring her back, or he himself never to return into Phenicia. After many long and tedious Travels through many Countries, not being able to find the lost Lady in any place, despairing of ever returning into his own Country, he came at length into Beotia, and by Command of the Oracle, built Thebes, where he resided, and marry'd Harmonia, the Daughter of Venus, by whom he had Semele, Ino, Autonoes, Agaves and Polydores. Semele was so beautiful, that Jupiter fell in love with her, and lay with her: But making his Addresses in a mean and ordinary manner, she lookt upon it as if he did it in contempt of her, and therefore earnestly entreated him to come to his Embraces with her in the same manner as he did when he lay with Juno. Whereupon decking himself in his Divine Majesty, he approacht to her in Thunder and Lightning, and so lay with her in Light and Splendour: But Semele being great with Child, and not able to bear the Flashes of Lightning that shot round about her, miscarry'd, and she herself was consum'd by the Flame; and then Jupiter took away the Infant, and deliver'd it to Mercury, with Orders to convey him to the Cave in Nysa (which lies between Phenicia, and the River Nile) and there to recommend him to the care of the Nymphs, to be carefully bred up. Hence from Jupiter, whom the Greeks call Dia and Nysa, he was call'd Dionysus, as Homer in his Hymns witnesses in this Distick.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

Far off from Phenice stands the Sacred Nyse,

Where Streams of Egypt's Nile begin to rise,

On Mountain high with pleasant Woods adorn'd

Being brought up by the Nymphs in Nysa, they say, he found out the use of Wine, and taught the way and manner of planting the Vine; and going almost into all Parts of the World, he civiliz'd many Nations and Countries, so that he was highly honour'd of all. He found out likewise the manner of making Drink of Barley; some call it Zythus, for Taste and fragrant Smell not much inferior to Wine, which Art he especially taught them, whose Country was not fit for Planting, or producing of Vines. He led along with him an Army, not only of Men, but of Women, to execute Punishments upon impious and wicked Men.

In Beotia (in gratitude to his own Country,) he set free all the Cities, and upon the account of this Freedom, built a City, and call'd it Eleuthera.

After he had spent Three whole Years in an Expedition into India, he return'd with many rich Spoils into Beotia, and was the first in triumph mounted upon an Indian Elephant. Therefore the Beotians and the rest of the Grecians and Thracians, to keep up the Memory of the Indian Expedition, instituted solemn Sacrifices every Third Year to Bacchus, call'd Trieterica, at which time they are of opinion this God appears among Men; and therefore every third Year in many Towns of Greece, the Festivals of Bacchus, call'd Bacchanalia, are celebrated by a Company of Women and Virgins, who (according to the solemn Rites)


Page 128

carry * Javelins deckt with Flowers, and run about like Furies, hollowing and setting forth the Praises of the God. The Married Women likewise run to these Sacrifices, and fill the Air with loud and solemn Hymns to Bacchus, as if he were then present amongst them, in imitation of the Menades, which heretofore (as is said) went along with Bacchus. Amongst many others who were impious and wicked, he especially inflicted Punishment upon Pentheus and Lycurgus. But because the invention and use of Wine is very grateful to Manboth for its pleasant relish, and its strengthening and inlivening of the Body, it is the Custom at Supper-time, when pure and unmixt Wine is freely offer'd to all, to call upon the Good Genius; but after Supper, when the Wine is mixt with Water, to call upon Jupiter Soter: For from pure and unmixt Wine, many times proceeds Madness; but temper'd and allay'd with the Liquor that descends from Jove, it truly chears and refreshes the Spirits, and cures Men of their Madness and Intoxication. Amongst all the Gods (they say) Bacchus and Ceres deserve most to be honour'd by Mankind, because they were by their good Inventions most benefited: For he found out the most pleasant Drink, and she the most strengthening Food.

They report that there was another Bacchus or Dionysus, much ancienter than this, the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina, call'd by some Sabazius, at whose Birth Sacreds and Sacrifices were celebrated in secret, and in the Night, by reason of the filthy Commixtures that were then among them. It's said, he was of a very sharp Wit, and was the first that taught how to yoke Oxen, and by them how to Plow and Sow the Ground; whence they feign him to have Horns. They say likewise, that the Son of Semele was of later times; of a slender and delicate shape of Body, and most comly Feature, exceeding Amorous, and addicted to the Sports of Venus: That he carry'd about with him, multitudes of Women in his Army, furnish'd with Launces wrapt about with all sorts of Flowers: And that the Muses attended him in his Expedition, Virgins excellently learn'd, who by their melodious Singing, Dancing and other pleasant Diversions, exceedingly delighted the God.

Selenus, its said was his Master, his Fauster Father, and Associate in his Wars; and was an excellent Instructor and Teacher, and contributed much to the improvement of Bacchus in Virtue, and the advancement of his Reputation and Honour.

In the time of Battel, he was furnish'd with warlike Weapons, and a Coat of Mail cover'd with a Panther's Skin; in time of Peace, when he celebrated Solemn Festivals, and came into the General Assemblies, he was cloathed with splendid and delicate Apparel; and to prevent the Head-ach by drinking of too much Wine, he wore a Mitre upon his Head, and was call'd Mitrophorus. This gave occasion to Kings afterwards to wear Diadems.

They say, he was call'd Bimater, because both Dionysus's had one Father, but several Mothers; but the Younger succeeded the Elder in the like remarkable Actions, and therefore Posterity through ignorance of the Truth, and being both had one and the same Name, concluded that there was but one Dionysus.

They attribute to him the carrying of a Rod, for the Reasons following: When Wine was first found out, it was drunk pure, not mix'd with Water, so that in many Meetings and solemn Festivals, many times Men drunk to that Excess, that they grew Mad and Furious, and beat one another with Clubs and Staves, insomuch as some were grievously wounded, and others were kill'd; at which Dionysus was much offended; and though he did not altogether forbid the drinking of unmixt Wine, because it was so pleasant and delicious, yet instead of Clubs, he order'd the use of Wanns and small Rods.

Men have given him many Sirnames, according to the several Acts or Circumstances of his Life. For he's call'd Bacchaeus, from the Bacchae, that accompany'd him. Leneus, from pressing of the Grapes at the Winepress. Bromeus or Thunderer, because of the Crash of Thunder that was at the time of his Birth; and for the same Reason he was call'd * Fireborn: He was sirnam'd likewise Thriambus, because he was the first (of whom ever any mention was made) that Triumph'd, when he return'd loaden with many Spoils into his Country from his Indian Expedition. Many other Names were assign'd him, which would be both


Page 129

too tedious particularly to recite, and likewise foreign from the Design of this History.

They held that he had two Faces, because there were two Dionysus's, the ancient Dionysus, who always wore a long Beard, because all in ancient time let their Beards grow; and this later Bacchus who was a spruce young Man, as we have before declar'd. But some say, that a double Countenance was assign'd him, because of the two special Qualities wherewith Drunkards are affected, being either raging mad, or transported with Mirth.

They say likewise that he carry'd Satyrs along with him, who by their dancing and skipping in his Sports and Plays made the God exceeding merry. To conclude, as the Muses pleas'd and delighted him with the Knowledge of the liberal Sciences, so the Satyrs with their Tricks and antick and ridiculous Gestures and Actions compleated the Happiness and Comfort of his Life.

It's reported likewise he invented Plays, and set up Theaters, and instituted Musick Schools, and freed all Musicians that went along with him in his Expeditions from publick Taxes; and hence it is, that Posterity (after the Example of Dionysus) have created Societies of Musicians, and decreed that all of that Profession should be free.

But that we may keep within due Bounds, we shall here put an end to our Discourse concerning Bacchus, and his Actions in Ancient times.

And now since what is anciently reported of Priapus is (as we conceive) pertinent to this History of Bacchus, we shall here proceed to give an Account of him.

The Ancients feign that Priapus was the Son of Bacchus and Venus, induc'd thereunto by a probable Argument, which is this, That when Men are drunk they are naturally prone to Venery; and some say, that when the ancient Mythologists would name a Man's Yard, they call'd it Priapus; and therefore that the privy Parts (because they are the Instruments of Generation, and support the constant and continual Succession of Mankind) have receiv'd divine Honour.

The Egyptians tell this Story concerning Priapus; They say that the Titanes in ancient times treacherously assassinated Osiris, and divided his Members into equal Parts, and that every one privately carry'd away a Part out of the Palace, only his privy Members they threw into the River, because none would meddle with them: But Isis (they say) after a diligent Inquiry made concerning the Murder of her Husband, and having reveng'd his Death upon the Titanes; by conjoyning his dismember'd Parts, reduc'd them to a humane Shape, and deliver'd the Body to the Priests to be bury'd, and commanded that Osiris should be ador'd as a God, and appointed the Shape of his privy Member (which only was wanting and could not be found) to be set up as a sacred Relict in the Temple, and to be honour'd likewise as a Deity: And these are the Things which the ancient Egyptians feign concerning the Original and divine Worship of Priapus. Some call this God Ithyphallus, others Typhon. He's not only worshipp'd in the Temples in the Cities, but in the Fields and Villages, where he is reputed the Guardian and Keeper of their Vineyards and Orchards, and say that if any steal their Goods he inflicts Punishment upon them for it. This God is not only honour'd in the Festivals of Bacchus, but in all other sacred Solemnities, where with Sport and Ridicule his Image is presented to the View of all.

They feign likewise that Hermaphroditus had the like Original, who being sprung from Hermes and Aphrodita, was from their two Names joyn'd together so call'd. Some say that this Hermaphroditus is a God, who at some certain times appears to Men, and is naturally both Man and Woman; in Beauty and Slenderness of his Body he represents a Woman, but in Strength and manly Countenance, a Man. Others account these Births for Monsters, which being but rare, portend sometimes both Good and Bad by turns; but enough of these.

Here it's fit to say something of the Muses (of whom some mention is made in the History of Bacchus.) Most of the Writers of Antiquities, and those of greatest Authority, say they were the Daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne. Some few of the Poets (among whom is Alcman) say they were the Issue of Coelus and Terra. They differ likewise about their Number, for some reckon three, others nine; but the Number Nine by the Authority of the most famous Authors (such as Homer, Hesiod, and some others of the like Esteem) has prevail'd before all others. For thus says Homer—


Page 130

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

The Muses Nine with Voices sweet do cant.

Hesiod likewise summs up their Names in these Verses—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

Clio, Thalia and Melpomene,

Likewise Erato and Terpsichore,

Polymnia, Urania, Euterpe,

And one beyond them all, Calliope.

To each of these they attribute their peculiar Art in particular sorts of Sciences, as poetical Harmony, Dancing, Singing, Astrology and the rest of the liberal Arts. They are said by most to be Virgins, because liberal Sciences seem to be uncorrupt, and virtuous Qualifications.

They are call'd Muses from the Greek Word Myein, which signifies the teaching of things commendable and profitable, and such as are unknown to them that are instructed. They apply likewise to each a particular Reason of their several Names. Clio, they say, is so call'd, because she advances Mens Names to the Skies in assisting the Poets to resound their Praise. Euterpe, because she delights her Auditors with wholesom and commendable Instructions. Thalia, from the constant Glory and Honour that attends upon Learning. Melpomene, is so call'd from Melody, by which means she insinuates her self with Delight into the Minds of Men. Terpsichore, because she delights her Scholars with those Pleasures that result from Learning. Erato, because she procures Love and Respect to Learned Men from all. Polymnia, from the many Hymns whereby she advances the Renown of her Poets, and crowns their Names with immortal Praise and Glory. Urania, because those that are taught and improv'd by her are even lifted up to Heaven. Lastly, Calliope, from the Sweetness of her Voice, that is, her elegant Language and exact Composures of her Verse, whereby she gains the general Applause of her Learned Auditors.

Having treated sufficiently of these Matters, we shall now bend our Discourse to the things done by Hercules.

I am not ignorant that those that write of the Actions of the Ancients, especially of the Acts of Hercules, meet with many Difficulties; for of all the great Actions that ever were done in the World, those of Hercules far exceed all that ever have been recorded. A most difficult Task therefore it is to give such an Account of what this Hero did, as may be agreeable to the Worth and Dignity of his Actions, or to frame such a Discourse as may equalize the Greatness of them, for which he attain'd to a State of Immortality. For in as much as things that are ancient and unusual are judg'd incredible by most, its absolutely necessary, though with the Diminution of this God's Glory, to omit some of his Acts, lest by relating all, the whole History be rejected as fabulous. For some unreasonably expect as clear Evidence for things that are ancient, as for those done in our own Age, and judge of the Greatness of Actions (which makes them seem incredible) according to the Rule of things done in the present time; and judge of the Strength of Hercules according to the weak Measure of Mens Strength now.

And so by reason of the Greatness and Strangeness of things related, History suffers in its Credit and Reputation. But in old Stories the Truth ought not to be search'd into too critically and punctually: For in the Plays and Theaters, tho' we do not believe for certain that there ever were such Creatures as Centaurs, or Creatures of a double Nature of several Species's, nor such a one as Geryon, that had three Bodies, yet we favourably receive and entertain those Fables, and with a general Applause advance the Honour of the God. How unjust is it then that Men should forget the Labours of Hercules while he was here upon Earth? Whereby he did Good to all the World, and instead of rendring him his due Praises,


Page 131

to calumniate him, whom our Ancestors with unanimous Consent for his eminent Virtue honour'd with divine Honours.

And what can be more impious, than not to preserve and defend that Religious Respect to this God, which they by their Example have recommended to us? But letting these things pass; we shall relate the things done by him from the beginning, according as the Poets and the most ancient Mythologists have handed them down to us.

Perseus (they say) was the Son of Jupiter by Danae, the Daughter of Acrisius, and that Perseus begat Electryo of Andromeda, the Daughter of Cepheus, and that Electryo begat Alcmenes of Eurydice the Daughter of Pelops, and that Jupiter (deceiving Alcmenes) lay with her and begat Hercules: So that by this Genealogy Hercules descended from the chiefest of the Gods, both immediately by his Mother, and more remotely by his Great-Grand-Father Perseus. His Virtue and Valour were not only evident from his Acts, but might be concluded and foreseen by what happen'd before he was born: For when Jupiter lay with Alcmenes, he lengthen'd the Night threefold, so that spending so much time in procreating this Child, was a Sign how extraordinary strong he was like to be. They say that Jupiter lay not with her out of any amorous Pang of Love, as with other Women, but meerly for Procreation sake: And therefore willing that his Embraces at this time should be lawful, he forbore all Violence; and knowing that the Woman's Chastity was such, that no Arguments would prevail with her, he deceiv'd her by taking upon him the Shape of Amphitryo.

And now the Time of her Delivery drew nigh, when Jupiter full of thoughts concerning the Birth of Hercules, in the presence of all the Gods declar'd, that he would make him King of the Persians, who was to be born that that day. Whereupon Juno inrag'd with Jealousie, with the assistance of Ilithyia her Daughter, gave a Check to the delivery of Alcmenes, and brought forth Eurystheus before his full time. But though Jupiter was thus outwitted by Juno, yet that he might perform his Promise, he took care to preserve the Honour and Reputation of Hercules. And therefore its reported that he prevail'd with Juno to consent, that Eurystheus being made King according to his Promise, Hercules (who should be subject to him) performing Twelve Labours (such as Euristheus should impose upon him) should be taken into the Society of the Immortal Gods.

Alcmenes being deliver'd (out of fear of Juno's Jealousie) expos'd the Child in a place which is now from him call'd Hercules's his Field. About which time Minerva, together with Juno, walking Abroad, found the Infant, and much admiring his Beauty, Minerva persuaded Juno to give it suck: The Child drawing the Breast with more violence than at his Age was usual, Juno not able to indure the pain, cast away the Infant; whom Minerva took up, and brought Home to his Mother to be nurs'd by her. The Accident here seems very strange and remarkable. For the Mother, who ow'd a natural Affection to her own Child, expos'd him to Destruction; but she who hated him, as a Stepmother (unknowingly) preserv'd her natural Enemy.

Afterwards Juno sent two Serpents to devour the Child: But he took them with both his Hands by their Throats and strangl'd them. Upon which account the Argives (coming to understand what was done) call'd him Hercules, because Juno was the Occasion of his Glory and Fame; for he was before call'd Alcaeus. Others are nam'd by their Parents, but he gain'd his Name by his Valour.

In After-times it happen'd that Amphitrio, being banish'd from Tyrinthe, settl'd himself in Thebes; here Hercules was educated, here he was instructed and greatly improv'd in all laudable Exercises, in so much as he excell'd all others in Strength of Body, and also in the excellent Endowments of his Mind.

Being now grown up to Man's Estate, he first freed Thebes from tyrannical Slavery, and thereby made a grateful Return to the Country where he was bred. The Thebans at that time were under the Tyranny of Erginus, King of the Menyans, who every year exacted Tribute from them, not without Scorn and Contempt. Hercules therefore not at all discourag'd with the Greatness of the Bondage they labour'd under, attempted a glorious Piece of Service. For when those who were sent from the Menyae to collect the Tribute, carry'd it * insolently towards the People, he cut off their Ears, and cast them out of the City, whereupon


Page 132

Erginus demanded the Delivery up of the Malefactor, and Creon the Prince of Thebes (dreading the Potency of Erginus) resolv'd to deliver him up; But Hercules stirr'd up the young Men of the City to arm themselves, in order to recover the Liberty of their Country, and to that end took away all the Arms that were in the Temples, formerly dedicated to the Gods by their Ancestors, of the Spoyls of their Enemies. For none of the Citizens had any Arms of their own, by Reason the Menyans had disarm'd the City; so that the Thebans had not the least Thought of a Revolt.

Intelligence being brought that Erginus with an Army approach'd the City, Hercules set upon him in a strait Passage (where a Multitude was of little Use) and kill'd Erginus, and cut off almost his whole Army. He fell likewise suddainly upon the City of the Orchomenians, entring unexpectedly, and burnt the Palace of the Menyae, and raz'd the City to the Ground.

The Fame of this notable Exploit was presently nois'd over all Greece, while such a suddain and unexpected Atchievement was the Subject of every Man's Admiration, and Creon the King (wonderfully taken with the Valour of the young Man) gave him his Daughter Megaera to Wife, and committed to him the Care and Charge of the City as if he had been his own Son.

But Euristheus King of Argos (jealous of Hercules his growing Greatness) sent for him to perform the Labours he was to impose upon him, which he refusing, Jupiter commanded him to obey King Euristheus; whereupon Hercules went to Delphos, and inquir'd of the Oracle concerning this Matter, who answer'd him, That it was the Pleasure of the Gods, that he should perform twelve Labours at the Command of Euristheus, and that when he had finish'd them, he should receive the Reward of Immortality. Hereupon Hercules became exceeding sad and melancholy; for he judg'd it very much below him to be at the Beck of his inferior; and to disobey his Father Jupiter a second time he concluded was both unprofitable and impossible. While he was in this Perplexity Juno struck him with Madness; being therefore through the Discomposure of his Mind become distracted, and by the Growth of his Distemper altogether a mad Man, he design'd to murder Iolaus, who saving himself by Flight he fell upon his own Children by Megara, who were next in his Way, and struck them through with his Darts, as if they had been his Enemies.

As soon as he came again to himself, and understood his Error, he almost sunk under the Weight of his Misery (being pity'd by every Body) and shut up himself in his own House a long time from the Converse and Society of Men.

At length Time moderating his Grief, resolving to undergo all the Difficulties that were enjoyn'd him, he went to Euristheus; who in the first place commanded him to kill the Lyon in the Forest of Nemea, which was of a monstrous Bigness, not to be pierc'd or wounded by Sword, Spear or Stones, and therefore not to be dealt with but by meer Force and Strength of Hand. His Walks were commonly between Mycenas and Nemea, near the Mountain (from what happen'd to it) call'd Tretos. For at the Foot of this Hill there was a Den, in which this Monster us'd to lurk. Hercules here meeting with him lay'd hold on him, whereupon the Beast beginning to fly to his Den, he resolutely pursu'd him (having before stop'd up one of the Mouths of the Den) and so both clos'd, where he got the Lyon by the Throat, and strangl'd him with his Arms. Then he cloath'd himself with his Skin (which was big enough to cover his whole Body) and ever after wore it as a Defence in all Conflicts.

His second Task was to kill the Hydra of Lerna. This Monster had a hundred Necks rising out of one Body, and upon every Neck a serpentine Head, and when one of these was cut off, two others grew up in its stead, and therefore this Monster was accounted invincible; and not without good reason; for from the Part that was lost, arose a double Assistance in its Room. Against this Difficulty he invented this Stratagem; he commanded Iolaus to sear the Part that was cut off with a Firebrand, that thereby the Blood might be stop'd, by which Means the Beast was kill'd; and he dipt the Points of his Darts in the Monster's Gall, that wherever they struck, the Wound might be incurable.

The third Command was, that he should bring the Erymanthean Boar (which rov'd about in the Plains of Arcadia) to him alive. This seem'd to be a most difficult Task. For he that fought with this Beast ought to be so subtil as diligently to watch the exact Time and fittest Opportunity in the Management of the


Page 133

Conflict; for if he should let him go while he was in his full strength, the Champion was in danger to be rent in pieces with his Tushes; and if he wounded him too sore, and so kill'd him, his Labour was lost, and his Victory imperfect. However he so prudently manag'd the Combat, that he brought the Boar alive to Euristheus, who was so terrify'd to see him come hurrying with the Boar upon his Shoulders, that he hid himself in a Brazen Hogshead.

In the mean time Hercules subdu'd the Centaurs upon this occasion: There was one Pholus among the Centaurs, from whom the Neighbouring Mountain was call'd Pholoes; this same having entertain'd Hercules as his Guest, took up an Hogshead of Wine that had for a long time been bury'd in the Earth. For it's reported that this Wine was anciently deposited in the Hands of a certain Centaur by Bacchus, who commanded that it should be broacht at that very time when Hercules came thither; who now hapning to be there the Fourth Age after, Pholus remembring Bacchus his Command, open'd the Hogshead; whereupon the Wine being old, and exceeding strong, the Flavour of it reacht to the Neighbouring Centaurs, and struck them all with a fit of Fury and Madness; whereupon they all came in Troops, and in a terrible Tumult assaulted Pholus his House, to carry away the Prey, in so much as Pholus in a great Fright hid himself.

But Hercules unexpectedly set upon the Aggressors; for he was to fight with those who from the Mother partook of the Nature of the Gods, were as swift as Horses, as strong as double Bodied Beasts, and were indu'd with the understanding and prudence of Men.

Some of these Centaurs assail'd him with Fir-Trees pluck'd up by the Roots; others with huge and massy Stones, some with lighted Firebrands, and others with Axes, with whom he undauntedly enter'd the List, and fought with that bravery, as was agreeable to the glory of his former Actions.

Their Mother Nephele assisted them by a violent Storm of Rain, which was no prejudice to them that were Four-footed; but he that had but Two, had by this means a troublesom and slippery Standing: However Hercules with wonderful Valour overcame them, that had so many and great Advantages above him, Killing most of them, and putting the rest to flight: Of those that were slain, the most remarkable were Daphnis, Argeus, Amphion, Hippotion, Oreus, Isoples, Melanchetes, Thereus, Dupo and Phrixus. And every one of those that fled, came afterwards to condign Punishment; For Homadus, (because he ravisht in Arcadia, Atalcyona, the Sister of Euristheus) was slain by Hercules, for which his Generosity was greatly admir'd: For though he hated his Enemy upon his own private Account, yet he judg'd it a commendable piece of Humanity, to have Compassion of a Woman in her afflicted Condition, upon the account of her Dishonour and Disgrace.

Somewhat likewise remarkable happened to Pholus, Hercules his Friend: For burying the Centaurs that were kill'd (upon the account of his Kindred and Relation to them) plucking a Dart out of one of them, he chanc'd with the Point mortally to wound himself, of which he died; whom Hercules with great Pomp and State bury'd at the Foot of the Mount; which fell out to be far more glorious than the most stately Monument; for the Mountain being call'd Philoe, preserves the memory of him bury'd there, not by Characters and Inscriptions, but by similittude of Name. In the same manner he kill'd Chiron (eminent for his Art in Phisick) by chance with the throwing of a Dart. But this that has been said of the Centaurs shall suffice.

Afterwards Hercules receiv'd a further Command, That he should take the swift Hart that had golden Horns, and bring him to the King. This he perform'd more by Art and Subtilty than strength of Body: For some say he took her in a Net, others by tracing her to the place where she rested, and there laying hold on her when she was asleep; but others say, that he ran her down, and so gain'd her by swiftness of Foot. However it were, it's certain he perform'd this Labour not by force or any hazard, but by Art and Skill.

Being next commanded to drive away the Birds that were about the Stymphalian Lake, by Art and Contrivance he easily perform'd this: For there were an innumerable number of Birds in those Places, which destroy'd and eat up all the Fruits in the Neighbourhood; and they were so numerous, that no Force could


Page 134

prevail to be rid of them. Being therefore there was need of Art and Contrivance in this matter, he invented a Brazen Pan, and by the mighty sound it made, by striking upon it, frighted the Birds, and by the continual noise, drave them at length quite away; so that the Lake was never infested with them afterwards.

This Labour being now at an end, Eurystheus in Contempt of him, commanded him without any Assistant to cleanse Augeus his Stable, in which were vast heaps of Muck and Dirt which had been gathering together for many Years. Hercules therefore to avoid the ignominy of this Contempt cast upon him, scorn'd to carry out the Muck and Dung upon his Shoulders, but in one Days time, without any disgrace to himself, cleans'd the Stable, by turning the Course of the River Peneus through it; in which thing the ingenuity of Hercules is admirable, who so executed the proud Command of his domineering Master, as to avoid every thing that was base and unbecoming the glory of his immortal Honour.

Next was impos'd upon him the bringing the Bull out of Crete, with which (they say) Pasiphae fell in love. To this end therefore he sail'd into the Island, and by the assistance of King Minos, transported the Beast (for which he had made so long a Voyage) into Peloponesus.

Having perform'd this Task, he instituted the Olympick Games, and for that purpose chose out a place he judg'd most convenient for the reception of such a Pompous Assembly, which were the Fields all along the Banks of the River Alpheus. Here he order'd the Solemnity of these Games to the honour of his Father Jupiter; and appointed to the Victors a Crown for a Reward, minding the general good and benefit of Mankind, without taking any advantage to himself. In every Exercise he was Victor, without any opposition; for by reason of his remakable strength and valour, none durst contend with him, although the Contests were of a contrary and different nature one from another: For it's a hard matter even for a mighty Champion in Combate, always to win the Prize in a Course, and as difficult for those that are usually Victors in small Contentions, to prevail against them that are eminent in greater Contests. Hercules therefore prevail'd in all these Games, carrying away the Prize from the chiefest among them.

And here we are not to omit giving an account of the Rewards given to him by the Gods for his Virtue; for when he retir'd himself from Wars, and betook himself to his ease and quietness, and to follow Sports, Panegyricks and Festivals, every one of the Gods presented him with their several Gifts.

Minerva gave him an imbroidered Hood, Vulcan a Club and a Breast-plate; and between these Two, was a Contest who should excel in their several Arts, whilst the one wrought and bestow'd what was for pleasure and ornament in time of Peace, and the other what was for defence in time of War. Neptune presented him with Horses, Mercury with a Sword, Apollo a Bow, and taught him the art of Archery. And Ceres to expiate the Slaughter of the Centaurs, instituted in honour of Hercules some small Mysteries. But concerning the Birth of this God, this is remarkable, for the first Woman upon Earth that Jupiter lay with, was Niobe, the Daughter of Pharoneus; and the last was Alcmena, who was in the Sixteenth Age after Niobe as the Mythologists say. From the time of † her Ancestors, he began to beget Men, and at length ended in this Alcmena, and would never after have any thing to do with any Mortal, or beget any Issue, never expecting to beget a more excellent Offspring.

Afterwards when the Giants fought with the immortal Gods at Pallene, Hercules aided the Gods, and after a great Slaughter made by him of those Sons of the Earth, he became greatly renown'd. For Jupiter call'd those only Gods of Olympus, who assisted him in the War, by this Title of Honour, to distinguish the Couragious from the Coward; which Surname he gave to Bacchus and Hercules, though their Mothers were Mortals; not only because they were the Offspring of Jove, but likewise for that they were like him in virtuous Qualifications, doing good generally to all Mankind.


Page 135

But Prometheus because he stole Fire from Heaven, and handed it to Men, was clapt in Chains by Jupiter, who caus'd an Eagle to seize and feed continually upon his Liver: But Hercules seeing that he suffered so much for his Kindness to Mankind, shot the Bird with an Arrow, and then having pacify'd Jove, freed this common Benefactor from all farther trouble.

Afterwards he was injoyn'd to bring away Diomedes King of Thrace's Mares, which were kept in Stalls of Brass, and (by reason of their Strength and Fierceness) ty'd up in Iron Chains. Their Provender was not from the Product of the Earth, but they were fed with the Flesh of miserable Strangers that came thither, cut in small Pieces for that purpose. Hercules to gain Possession of them, laid their own Master Diomedes before them, who satiating their Hunger by his Flesh, who had wickedly taught them to feed upon Flesh, thereby became tame and manageable. Euristheus when they were brought to him, dedicated them to Juno, and their Breed continu'd to the time of Alexander the Great. When he had perform'd this Labour, he saild with Jason to Colchos, to bring away the Golden Fleece by force of Arms. But of this we shall speak, when we come to the Expedition of the Argonauts.

Then he was commanded to strip Hyppolyta the Amazon of her Belt. Hereupon resolving upon a War against the Amazons, he sail'd into Pontus, from him call'd Euxinus, and arriving at the Mouth of the River Thermodon, he incampt near the City Themiscyra, the Seat Royal of the Amazons: And first he demanded the Belt to be deliver'd to him; which being refus'd, he join'd Battel with them.

The choice and most noble of the Amazons were drawn up against Hercules, the rest of the Army oppos'd the other ordinary Troops, so that there was a very sharp Ingagement. The first that fought Hand to Hand with him, was Aella, so call'd from her swiftness; but she found her Enemy swifter than her self: The Second was Philippis, who upon the first Onset, receiv'd a Mortal Wound, and fell down Dead. Then Prothoe entred the List, who, they say, Seven times baffl'd her Enemy in single Combat; but she being at length slain, he kill'd the Fourth call'd Eribea. She was so confident in her strength and feats of Arms, that she us'd to boast she needed none to second her; but meeting with one stronger than her self, she presently experienc'd the vanity of her boasting.

After these Celaenus, Euryaea and Phobe, Companions with Diana in Hunting, (who never us'd to miss their Mark, yet now could none of them hit one,) in defending one another, were all kill'd together upon the Spot. Then he overcame Deianita, Asteria, Marpes, Tecmessa and Alcippe. The last mention'd had vow'd perpetual Virginity, and kept their Oaths, but could not preserve their Lives. Melanippe also the Queen of the Amazons, (who was famous and highly admir'd every where for her Valour) then lost her Kingdom. The chief of the Amazons being thus cut off, he forc'd the rest to fly, and killing most of them in the pursuit, wholly destroy'd and rooted up that Nation. Of the Prisoners he gave Antiope to Theseus, but Melanippe he discharg'd, having first taken from her her Belt.

After this, a Tenth Labour was impos'd upon him by Eurystheus, and that was to drive away the Oxen of Geryon that pastur'd in Iberia near to the Ocean. Hercules perceiving he could not perform this Task without much trouble and great preparation, set forth a brave Fleet, and mann'd it with such a number of Seamen and Souldiers, as such an Expedition justly requir'd: For it was nois'd Abroad through the whole World, that Chrysaores (so call'd from his Riches) King of Iberia, had Three Sons, strong Bodied Men, and famous for Martial Affairs, and that each of them had great Armies of Valiant Men, constantly at hand attending upon them; which was the reason Euristheus impos'd this Task upon him, conceiving this Expedition was greater than he was ever able to perform: But Hercules undertook this with as much considence as he had done those before, and commanded Forces to be rais'd in Crete, whence he resolv'd to set forth; this Island being the most convenient Port from whence to make any Expedition into any part


Page 136

of the World. Before he set Sail, mighty Honours were conferr'd upon him by the Inhabitants; in grateful return of which Favours, he freed the Island from wild Beasts, so that no hurtful Creatures, such as Bears, Wolves, Serpents, and such like remain'd there ever after. He did these things in reverence to the Island, because it was reported that Jupiter was bred and born there. Loosing thence, he arriv'd at Libya. Here in the first place he challeng'd and slew Antaeus (famous for his great strength and skill in Wrestling,) who was us'd to kill the Strangers he wrestled with, after he had master'd them. Then he destroy'd the wild Beasts in the Deserts, and made Africa so quiet and improvable (which was before full of hurtful Creatures,) that every part was fit for Tillage, and planting of Fruit-Trees; the whole Country productive of Wine and Oyl. In short, he so improv'd Libya (which by reason of the multitude of wild Beasts was before uninhabitable,) that no Country in the World afterwards exceeded it for fertility and richness of Soyl. In like manner he so purg'd the Nation from wicked Men, and insolent Tyrants, that he put all the Cities into a flourishing state and condition. It's therefore reported that he was prosecuted with the hatred and opposition of all sorts of dreadful wild Beasts, and of wicked Men; for when he was an Infant in his Cradle, he was assaulted by Serpents, and when he was a Man, he was vext and perplext with the Commands of a proud and unjust Tyrant.

After the Killing of Antaeus, he went into Egypt, where he slew the Tyrant Busiris, who murder'd all Strangers that landed there. After he had pass'd over the Sandy Deserts of Libya, he found a fertil and well water'd Country, in which he built an extraordinary great City, from the number of its Gates call'd Hecatompylon, which continu'd in a flourishing Condition till of latter Times that the Carthaginians with a great Army, (commanded by Eminent Captains) took it.

Hercules having pass'd through a great part of Africa, arriv'd in the Ocean, near Gades, where he erected Two Pillars, one on each side the straight upon the Continent.

Thence (with his Fleet sailing along with him) he pass'd over into Iberia, where he found the Sons of Chrysaores, with Three mighty Armies. These at a distance, he challeng'd to a single Combat, and having at length slain the Three Generals, he gain'd Iberia, and drove away those remarkable Herds of Cattel.

In the mean time as he travell'd through Spain, he was magnificently entertain'd by a petit Prince in the Country (who was a Pious and Just Man) in return of which, he bestow'd upon him some of the Cattel; and he again consecrated them all to Hercules, and every Year sacrific'd to him one of the fairest Bulls that were bred of them; some of which Sacred Breed remain in Iberia to this Day.

And now because we have before made mention of Hercules Pillars, we conceive it fit in this Place to say something further concerning them.

Hercules, when he arriv'd at the utmost Coasts of both Continents adjoining to the Ocean, resolv'd to set up these Pillars as lasting Monuments of his Expedition. That his Work therefore might be famous to all Posterity, it's said, that he much inlarg'd both the Mountains on each side, by making great Moulds for a long way into the Sea; so that whereas before they lay in the Sea at a great distance one from another, he made the Passage so narrow, that the great Whales from that time could not pass out of the Ocean through those Streights into the Mediterranean; and by the greatness of the Work, the Glory of the Workman is preserv'd in everlasting remembrance.

But there are some of a contrary Opinion, and affirm that the Continents once join'd together, and that he cut a Trench through them, whereby he open'd a Passage, and so brought the Ocean into our Sea. But every Man may judge of this matter as he thinks fit. The like he did before in Greece: For when the large Champain Country about Tempe, was all over a standing Lake, he cut Sluces through the lower Grounds, and through those Trenches drain'd all the Water out of the Lake, by which means were gain'd all those pleasant Fields of Thessaly as far as to the River Penaeus. But in Beotia he did quite contrary, for he caus'd the River which ran through the Country of the Minyae to overflow the whole Region, and turn all into a standing Pool: What he did in Thessaly, was to


Page 137

gain the favour of the Grecians, but that in Beotia he did to punish the Minyae, because they opprest the Thebans.

Hercules having committed the Government of the Kingdom of Iberia to the chiefest of the Inhabitants, marcht away with his Army into Celtica; and over

〈…〉

n the whole Country, and put an end to their usual Impieties and Murdering of Strangers.

And whereas a vast multitude from all Nations came and listed themselves of their own accord in his Army; having such a number, he built a Famous large City, which he call'd from his wandering Expedition Alesia. But because many of the Barbarians from the neigbouring Places were mixt among the Citizens, it happened that the rest of the Inhabitants (being much inferior in number) learnt the Barbarians Manners of the other. The Celtae at this Day have a great esteem and honour for this City, as being the chief and Metropolis of all Gaul; and ever since the time of Hercules it has remain'd Free never taken by any to our very days; till at length Caius Caesar, who (by reason of the greatness of his actions) was call'd Divus, took it by storm, and so it came into the hands of the Romans. With the rest of the Gauls Hercules marching out of Gaul into Italy, as he pass'd over the Alps levell'd and open'd those rough and difficult Ways (that were scarce passable) to make way for his Army and Carriages. The Barbarians who Inhabited those Mountainous Parts, were us'd to Kill and Rob, in the straight and craggy Places, Armies as they happned to pass this way; but he subdu'd them and put to Death the Ringleaders of those wicked practices, and so made the Passage safe this way to all Posterity. Having pass'd the Alps, he continu'd his March through Gaul, as it's now call'd, and came into Liguria. The Ligurians inhabit a rough and barren Soil, but being forc'd by continual Labour and Toyl, it produces some little Corn and other Fruits: The People here are short and low, but by reason of their constant Labours well set and strong; for they are far from idle and luxurious livers, and therefore are very active, and Valiant in time of War. To conclude, because all these neighbouring Regions are ply'd with continual Labours and Pains (for that the Land requires it) it's the Custom for the Women to work and labour in that kind, as well as the Men; and whereas the Women as well as the Men work for Hire, there fell out a remarkable Accident concerning one of these Women, strange and unusual to any of our Female Sex. Being great with Child, and falling in Labour in the midst of her work amongst the Men, without any noise or complaint she withdrew herself into a certain Grove there near at hand, and there being Delivered, she cover'd the Infant with Leaves, and hid it among the Shrubs, and then return'd to her Work again, without the least sign of having born a Child, and continu'd with her Fellow-labourers in her Work as she did before. But the Infant crying and bawling, discover'd the whole matter; yet the Overseer of the Workmen would by no means be perswaded to suffer her to leave her miserable Labour, till he that hir'd her, pitying her condition, paid her her Wages, and discharged her.

Hercules after he had gone through Liguria, and Thuscany, incampt at Tiber, where Rome now stands, built many Ages after by Romulus the Son of Mars. The Natural Inhabitants at that time inhabited a little Town upon a Hill, now call'd Mount Palla

〈…〉e.

 Here Politius and Pinarius, the most eminent Persons of Quality among them, entertain'd Hercules with all the demonstrations of Kindness imaginable, and presented him with many noble Presents: There are now at Rome ancient Monuments of these Men; for the most noble Family, call'd the Pinarii, remains still among the Romans, and is accounted the most ancient at this day. And there are Politius his Stone Stairs to go down from Mount Pallatine (call'd after his Name) adjoyning to that which was anciently his House.

Hercules being much pleas'd with the civil Entertainment of the Pallatines, foretold them, that whosoever should dedicate the Tenth of their Goods to him, after he was translated to the Gods, should be ever after more prosperous: And this Dedication has been over since constantly us'd to this day. For many of the Romans, not only such as are of mean Estates, but the great and rich Men (having experienc'd how Riches have flow'd in upon them, after the Decimation of their Goods to Hercules,) have dedicated the Tenth part of their Substances, which have been of the value of Four Thousand Talents. For Lucullus (the richest almost of all the Romans in his time, valu'd his Estate, and consecrated the Tenths


Page 138

to this God, and feasted continually with prodigious Charge and Expence. The Romans afterwards built a Magnificent Temple near to the River Tiber, in honour of this God, and instituted Sacrifices to him out of the Tenths.

Hercules marching from Mount Pallatine, pass'd through the Maritime Coasts of Italy, as they are now call'd, and came into the Champain Country of Cumaea, where (it's said) there were men infamous for their Outrages and Cruelties, call'd Giants. This Place is also call'd the Phlegraean Plain, from a Hill which anciently vomited out Fire, like unto Etna in Sicily, now call'd Vesuvius, which retains many Signs and marks of its ancient Irruptions.

These Giants hearing of Hercules his Approach, met him in Battel Array; and fighting with the force and cruelty of Giants, Hercules (with the Assistance of the Gods) overcame them; and cutting off most of them, quieted that Country. These Giants were call'd Sons of the Earth, by reason of the vast Bulk of their Bodies. These are the things that some report (whom Timaeus follows) concerning the destruction of the Giants of Phlegraea.

Leaving the Plains of Phlegraea, he came to the Sea, where he perform'd some remarkable Works about the Lake Avernus (as it's call'd) which is consecrated to Proserpine. It's situated between Micenus and Diciarcheos, near the hot Baths, Five Furlongs in Circuit, and of an incredible Depth. The Water of this Lake is exceeding clear, and the mighty depth of this Gulf casts a blew Colour upon the Surface.

It's reported, that anciently there was here an Oracle, where they conjur'd the Infernal Spirits, which the latter Ages abolish'd. Whereas this Lake extended as far as to the Sea, it's said Hercules by casting up of Earth, so stopt up its Current, that he made the way near the Sea, now call'd the Herculean way. And these are the things he did there.

Marching thence, he came to a certain Rock in the Country of the Posidonia

•s,

 where they report a kind of a Miracle happened. A certain Huntsman (famous all over the Country for his brave Exploits) was us'd formerly to fix the Heads and Feet of all the Game he took, to Trees, as an Offering to Diana: But having then taken a great wild Boar (in Contempt of the Goddess) he boasted, and declar'd he would only consecrate the Head to her; and forthwith according to what he said, hung it upon a Tree. It being then Summer-time, about Noon, he laid him down to Sleep, during which time, the Band which fastned the Head, broke, and so it fell down upon him that slept, and kill'd him. And there's no reason to wonder at this, when many of the like kind are reported to have happened, by which the Goddess has reveng'd her self of the Impious. But the contrary happened to Hercules, for the sake of his Piety; for when he came to the Borders of Rhegium and Locris, being wearied with his March, and laid down to rest, they say he was disturb'd with the noise and creaking of the Grashoppers, whereupon he intreated the Gods to free him from that disturbance, who heard his Prayers: For the Grashoppers flew away, not only for that time, but none were ever seen there at any time after.

When he came to the narrowest Passage over the Sea, he caus'd the Cattel to swim over before him into Sicily, and he himself catcht hold of one of the Horns of the Oxen, and in that manner swam along for the space of Thirteen Furlongs, as Timaeus reports the matter. Afterwards, desiring to go round the Island, he went on his Journey from Peloriadis to Eryx, and passing along the Shoar, the Nymphs open'd the hot Baths for him, where he refresh'd himself after his tedious Journey. These Baths were Two in number, the Hemerian and Egestean, so call'd from the Places. After Hercules came into the Country of Eryx, Eryx the Son of Venus and Bula, the King of the Country, challeng'd Hercules to wrestle with him. Both sides propos'd the Wager to be won and lost; Eryx laid to stake his Kingdom, but Hercules his Oxen; Erix at first disdain'd such an unequal Wager, not fit to be compar'd with his Country; but when Hercules on the other side answer'd, that if he lost them, he should lose together with them Immortality, Eryx was contented with the Condition, and engag'd in the Contest: But he was overcome, and so was stript out of the Possession of his Country, which Hercules gave to the Inhabitants, allowing them to take the Fruits to their own use, till some one of his Posterity came to demand it, which afterwards hapned: For many Ages after, Doriaeus the Lacedemonian (sailing into Sicily) recover'd his Ancestors Dominion, and there built Heraclea, which growing


Page 139

great on a suddain, became the Object of the Carthaginians Envy and Fear, lest growing stronger than Carthage it self, it should deprive them of their Sovereignty; and for that Reason they besieg'd it with a mighty Army, and took it by force, and raz'd it to the Ground; of which we shall speak particularly in its proper time.

Hercules having view'd Sicily round, came to the City now call'd Syracuse, where when he came to be inform'd of the Rape of Proserpina; he offer'd magnificent Sacrifices to the Goddesses, and at Cyane sacrific'd the goodliest of his Bulls, and ordered the Inhabitants to sacrifice Yearly to Proserpina, and observe an Anniversary Festival at Cyane. Then travelling through the heart of the Country with his Oxen, he was set upon by the Sicani, with a strong Body of Men; whom after a cruel Battel he routed, and cut off most of them; amongst whom (it's reported) there were Captains of extraordinary Valour, who are honour'd as Demy-Gods to this Day; to wit, Leucaspis, Pedicrates, Buphonas, Caugates, Cygaus and Crytidas: Thence he pass'd through the Country of Leontines, and much admir'd the pleasantness of the Territory, and by reason of the singular respect he found from the Inhabitants, he left there eternal Monuments of his Presence.

Among the Agyrineans something remarkable happened concerning him; for they kept magnificent Festivals, and offered Sacrifices to him as to the Gods themselves; which was the first time he approv'd of such Worship, never before allowing any Sacrifice to himself: But now the Deity it self ratify'd his Divinity; for not far from the City in a Rocky Way, the Oxen made Impressions with their Feet, as if it had been in Wax; and the same thing likewise happening to Hercules himself, caus'd him to conclude that (his Tenth Labour being now perfected) his Immortality was in part sealed to him; and therefore he refus'd not the Yearly Solemnity of Sacrifices instituted in honour of him by the Inhabitants. That he might therefore manifest his gratitude to them for the Honours conferr'd upon him, he caus'd a Pond to be sunk near the City, Four Furlongs in Compass, which he call'd after his own Name. The Impressions likewise made by the Hoofs of his Oxen, he nam'd after himself; and consecrated a Grove to Geryon, as to a Demy-God, whom the Inhabitants religiously worship at this Day. He built likewise there a famous Temple in honour of Iolaus, his Associate in his Expedition, and appointed he should be honour'd with Yearly Sacrifices, which are observ'd at this day: For all the Inhabitants of this City let their Hair grow, without Cutting, from their very Births, in honour of Iolaus; till they make an Offering of them to him, and gain the favour of the God by costly and magnificent Sacrifices. Such is the Holiness and Majesty of this Temple, that whosoever do not observe these holy Rites, they are strucken Dumb, and are like Dead Men: But as soon as any recollects himself, and vows to offer his Sacrifices, and gives a Pledge to the God for that purpose, they are presently restor'd to their former Health. The Inhabitants therefore very fitly call the Gate where these Sacred Solemnities are perform'd Heraclea. They every Year likewise with great earnestness celebrate the Gymnick Sports, and Horse-Races; whither all the People both Bond and Free flocking, they privately taught their Servants how to worship this God, how to celebrate the Solemn Sacrifices, and to perform when they met together the Sacred Rites and Festivals.

After this, Hercules pass'd over his Oxen again into Italy, and in his marching along by the Sea-Coasts, he kill'd one Lacinius that was stealing some of his Oxen. There he buried Croton, and erected a stately Monument over him, whom he had unfortunately slain; and foretold that in time to come there should be built a famous City, call'd after the Name of him that was there bury'd. Having at length marcht round about Adria, and all the Coasts of that Gulf on Foot, he pass'd through Epirus into Peloponesus.

Having finisht his Tenth Labour, Euristheus impos'd another Task upon him, and that was that he should bring Cerberus out of Hell. Preparing himself therefore to perform this, to be better enabled thereunto, he went to Athens to be initiated into the Mysterious Rites of Elusina, where Musaeus the Son of Orpheus was then High Priest.

And because we have now occasion to mention Orpheus, we conceive it will not be amiss here to give a short Account of him. He was the Son of Oeagrus, and by Birth a Thracian, for the Art of Musick and Poetry far excelling all that


Page 140

ever were recorded. For he compos'd a Poem for sweetness and smoothness, the Subject of all Mens admiration: And he grew so eminent in this Art, that by the Melody of his Musick, he was said to draw even wild Beasts and Trees after him: And being naturally very studious, he attain'd to an extraordinary degree of Knowledge in the ancient Theology. He improv'd himself likewise very much by travelling into Egypt, so that he was accounted to excel the most accomplish'd Person among all the Grecians for his Knowledge, both in Divinity and Sacred Mysteries, in Musick and Poetry. He was one likewise in the Expedition of the Argonauts, and for the exceeding Love he had to his Wife (with an admirable Courage) descended into Hell, and there so inchanted Proserpina with the sweetness of his Musick, that she gratify'd him so far as to suffer him to carry back his Wife along with him, that dy'd a little before.

In like manner they say Bacchus hereupon rais'd his Mother Semele from the Shades below, and enduing her with Immortality, surnam'd her Thyone.

Having now done with this Digression relating to Orpheus, we return to Hercules: When he enter'd the Infernal Regious (the Mythologists say) Proserpina kindly receiv'd him as her Brother, and gave him liberty to loose Theseus and Perithous from their Chains; and at length contrary to the Expectations of all Men, brought up the Dog ty'd in his Chain, and presented him to open view.

The last Labour injoin'd him was to fetch away the Golden Apples of the Hesperides, to which purpose he pass'd over a Second time into Africa. The Mythologists vary in their Writings concerning this; for some affirm that there were really golden Apples in some of the Gardens of the Hesperides, guarded continually by a terrible Dragon. Others say, that there are Sheep of exquisite beauty in the Hesperides, and that from thence they are Poetically call'd Golden Apples, as Venus from her Beauty is call'd Golden Venus. Others will have it, that the Fleeces upon the Sheep's Backs are of that admirable Colour, that they glitter like Gold, and thence have been so call'd. And by the Dragon they understand the Shepherd of the Flocks, who being a Man of a strong Body and stout Heart, preserv'd the Flocks, and kill'd the Thieves that attempted to steal them.

But let every one judge of this matter as he thinks best himself: For Hercules kill'd the Keeper, and brought away the Apples or Sheep (which soever they were) to Eurystheus, trusting now, that since all his Tasks were perform'd (according to the Oracle of Apollo) he should be rewarded with Immortality.


Page 141

CHAP. II.

An Account of Atlas and his Daughters, call'd Atlantides and Hesperides. The Amazons routed by Theseus in Attica. The further Acts of Hercules; he goes against Leomedon King of Troy, and other Acts. The Story of Meleager Son of King Oeneus. Amalthea's Horn. Hercules his further Acts. His Death by a poyson'd Shirt.

BUT we are not to omit what is said of Atlas, and the Original of the Hesperides. In the Country call'd Hesperis, liv'd Two famous Brothers, Hesperus and Atlas; They were possess'd of most lovely Sheep, of a Ruddy and Golden Colour, for which cause the Poets in their Phrase call'd them Golden Apples.

Hesperis the Daughter of Hesperus was married to his Brother Atlas, whence the Country was call'd Hesperis; by her Atlas had Seven Daughters, which from their Father were call'd Atlantides, and from their Mother Hesperides. Busiris King of Egypt having a great desire to injoy these Virgins by reason of their extraordinary Beauty, sent out some Pirates, with Orders to seize these Ladies, and bring them away to him. 

About this time Hercules being imploy'd in his last Labour, kill'd Anteus in Lybia, who compell'd those Strangers that came into his Country, to wrestle with him; and inflicted condign Punishment upon Busiris in Egypt, who sacrific'd all Strangers that (arriv'd there) to Jupiter. Afterward passing over the River Nile, he came into Ethiopia, and kill'd Ematheon the Ethiopian King, who had challeng'd him to a Battel: And then he again set upon the Task injoin'd him. In the mean time the Thieves hurried away the Girls out of a Garden where they were Playing, and in great haste got to their Ships; whom Hercules met with upon a certain Shoar, where they were refreshing themselves; and being inform'd by the Virgins of the Rape, he kill'd all the Thieves, but deliver'd the Girls to Atlas their Father; for which Kindness he was so grateful, that he not only readily assisted him with what things were needful for the accomplishment of what he had then in hand, but willingly taught him the Art of Astrology: For he bestowed much of his Care and Pains in the Study of this Art; and because he had a curiously wrought Sphear of the Stars, he was said to carry the whole World upon his Shoulders. In the like manner Hercules tranferring the Doctrine of the Spheres to the Greeks, gain'd a Name, as he that from Atlas took upon himself the burden of the whole World: The Greeks darkly signifying thereby what then happened betwixt him and Atlas.

While Hercules was thus imploy'd, they say, those Amazons that were left, gather'd all in a Body from all Parts of the Nation, to the River Thermodon, with a Design to revenge themselves upon the Grecians, for the Losses they sustain'd by Hercules; and they bore a particular grudge and hatred to the Athenians, because that Theseus carry'd away Captive Antiope, (or as others write) Hippolytes, Queen of the Amazons.

Being therefore join'd with the Scythians, as their Confederates, they rais'd a great Army, with which the Amazonian Leaders passing over the Cimerian Bosphorus, marcht through Thrace, and pierc'd through a great part of Europe, and incamp'd at length in Attica, at a Place which from them is now call'd the Amazonian Field. Theseus having intelligence of their Approach, marcht out against them with an Army rais'd from among the Citizens, taking along with him Antiope, by whom he had now his Son Hippolytus. Battel being join'd, those with Theseus through the Valour of the Athenians won the day, and slew part of the Amazons upon the spot, and drave all the rest out of Attica. There Antiope in the defence of her Husband, fought bravely, and dy'd in Battel like a Hero. Those Amazons that remain'd, despairing ever to recover their Country, went away with the Seythians their Confederates into Seythia, and there seated themselves.


Page 142

•

at having spoke sussiciently of these, we return to Hercules; who having now finish'd all his Labours, was told by the Oracle that it was a thing very necessary, that before he was translated to the Gods, he should plant a Colony in Sard

•nia,

 and make his Sons of the Stock of the Thespiadae, Governors of the Island. He therefore with his Nephew Iolaus, pass'd over thither with the Boys, because they were yet very Young. Here we think it convenient to premise something concerning the Birth of these young Boys, that we may more clearly give an account of the Colony. Thespis was of the most noble Family among the Athenians, the Son of 

•r

••

theus,

 and Prince of a Territory so call'd from him. He had of many Wives, Fifty Daughters. This Thespis being desirous that his Daughters should have Issue by Hercules, who was as yet but very Young, but of strength of Body beyond the usual course of Nature at that Age, invited him to a sacred Festival, and there nobly entertain'd him, and sent for his Daughters severally, one after another; Hercules lay with them all, and got them with Child, and so became both a Husband of Fifty Wives, and a Father of Fifty Sons; all which (being call'd by the general Name of Thespiadae in obedience to the Oracle, when they were grown up, he ordered them to be sent away, to plant a Colony in Sardinia; and because Iolaus was Admiral of his whole Fleet, and his Companion in all his Expeditions, he committed the care of the Colony of these Thespians to him. But Two of the Fifty remain'd in Thebes, whose Posterity (they say) continue there in great Honour and Esteem at this Day; and Seven more, whom they call Pe

•uchi,

 resided in the City Thespis, whose Posterity (they say) were the principal Men of the City within the time of Man's Memory. All the rest, and whosoever else would go along with them, Iolaus transported into Sardinia; and having overcome the Inhabitants in Battel, the pleasantest part of the Island, and that which was most Champain, he divided by Lot, which at this day is call'd Iolacion. And he so improv'd the Island, and planted it with Fruit-Trees, that it became afterwards a Bone of Contention: For from that time it grew so Famous for the Riches and Fruitfulness of the Soyl, that the Carthaginiaus growing Rich and Powerful, so coveted this Island, that they fought many Battles to gain it; of which we shall speak hereafter in its proper Place.

After Iolaus had setled his Colony, he sent for Daedalus out of Sicily, and imploy'd him in building many stately Structures, which remain to this Day, and from the name of the Architect, are call'd Daedalus his Works. He built likewise stately and sumptuous Publick Schools for all manner of Exercises, and Courts of Justice, with many other such Works conducing to the happiness and well-being of Man's Life: He call'd also the Inhabitants Iolacians, after his own Name, the Thespiade allowing him that honour as their Father. For upon the Account of his faithful Service to them, they so loved him, that they call'd him Father. Whence it came to pass in After-times, that they who sacrifi'd to this God, call Iolaus Father, as the Persians did Cyrus.

Afterwards Iolaus return'd into Greece, and arriv'd at Sieily, were he staid a considerable time.

About that time some of his Fellow-Travellers (taken with the pleasantness of the Island) th

〈…〉

e seated themselves; and being mixt among the Si

•ani,

 they continu'd there, and are in great esteem with the Inhabitants. But Iolaus is especially honour'd, to whom for the general good, he did in many Cities, Temples and Groves are built, and Divine Worship instituted as to a Demy-God. This Colony is 

〈◊〉

 upon the account of a remarkable Circumstance; for the Oracle commanded that all Persons of this Colony should be Freemen, and that their Posterity for ever should so continue; which Freedom is effectually injoy'd at this very day: For many Barbarians being mixt with this Colony, in process of time the whole Colony became Barbarous; and removing themselves to the Mountains, inhabited in Places inaccessible; where being us'd to Flesh and Milk (having many Herds and Hocks of Cattel,) they never made use of Bread-Co

〈…〉

; and being that they live in Caves under Ground, they have easily avoided the Miseries of War; and therefore though both the Carthaginians and Romans have often attempted to subdue them by force of Arms, yet all has been in vain: But let this now suffice that has been said concerning Iolaus and the Thespiadae, and their Colony in Sardinia.


Page 143

Hercules having now finish'd all his Labours, gave his Wife Megara to Iolaus, suspecting that to have Issue by her, would be unfortunate, by reason of the miserable Disaster that befel his former Children; and for this Reason, he sought after another Wife (less to be suspected) by whom he might have more Children. In order whereunto, he desir'd Iole the Daughter of Eurytus Prince of Oechaliae, in Marriage. But Eurytus (fearing the Misfortune of Megara) told him he would consider of it. Hercules looking upon this as a Denial, to revenge himself for the Dishonour put upon him, drave away Eurytus his Horses: But Iphitus the Son of Eurythus suspecting how the matter was, came to Tirynthus to seek them; where Hercules brought him up to the Top of an high Turret, and bid him look round about, to see whether he could spy the Horses pasturing in any Place: Iphitus not discerning any of them, Hercules complain'd he had falsly accused him of Theft, and thereupon threw him down headlong from the Top of the Tower. For which wicked Fact being punished with a grievous Disease, he went to Neleus, at Pylus, and intreated him to expiate his Offence. Whereupon Neleus consulted concerning this matter with his Sons; who all declar'd (except Nestor the Youngest,) that no expiation ought to be allowed. Then he went to Deiophobus the Son of Hippolytus, and desired him to expiate him. But sinding still no Remedy for his Disease, he consulted at the Oracle of Apollo what he should do to be cured; who answer'd him, that he should be easily freed from his Distemper, if he were sold for a valuable Price, and the Mony given to Iphitus his Children. In obedience therefore to the Oracle, (forc'd through the violence of the Distemper) with some Friends he pass'd over into Asia, and there suffer'd one of his Servants to sell him: And sold he was as a Slave to Omphala the Daughter of Jardanus, and Queen of the Maeones, (for so the Lydians were formerly call'd) and the Seller gave the Price to the Children of Iphitus according to the command of the Oracle.

Hercules hereupon being recover'd of his Distemper diligently serv'd Omphala, and clear'd the Land of Robbers that infested it; for some of the Thieves call'd Cercopes (who had done abundance of mischief) he Kill'd, others he brought bou

•

d before the Queen. He Kill'd also Sileus with a Spade, who forc'd all Strangers that came thither to work in the Vineyards. He recover'd likewise the Spoils by force of Arms from the Itones, that wasted a great part of the Kingdom with their Depredations, and took and raz'd their City to the Ground, from whence they made all their Excursions. Omphales admiring the Valour and noble Exploits of the Man, after she came to understand who he was, and from whence descended, not only Manumitted him, but Marry'd him, by whom she had Lamon. He had a Son likewise before call'd Cleolaus, begotten in the time of his servitude, of one of his Fellow Servants.

Returning afterwards into Peloponesus, he led an Army against Laomedon, King of Troy, for some Injuries receiv'd from him. For he had deny'd to deliver the Horses he had promis'd him for the Killing of the Whale at the time that he accompany'd Jason by force of Arms to bring away the Golden Fleece, of which we shall presently treat particularly in the History of the Argonauts. But being at that time prevented from revenging himself by reason of the Expedition wherein he was ingag'd with Jason, he pickt out a fit opportunity afterwards, and sail'd (as some say) with Eightheen Ships against Troy, but as Homer says with Six only in the whole, who introduces Tlepolimus in these Words.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

But Hercules my Father, as is said,

The Lions strong in Valour did exceed,

That only with Six Ships and Slender Force,

For Laomedon's Horses took his Course;

And then Besieg'd and took the City Troy,

And many of her People did destroy.


Page 144

Hercules therefore, when he arriv'd in the Country of Troas, marcht straight with a Valiant Number of Men to Troy, but left Oiclcus the Admiral, the Son of Amphiaraus with the Fleet to be ready to assist him as occasion serv'd. In the mean time Laomedon being surpriz'd by the suddain advance of the Enemy, in a great hurry raised as many Forces as the shortness of the time would admit him to do, and led them against the Fleet, hoping by burning of it, to put a speedy end to the War. Oicleus the Admiral met the Enemy, and was kill'd at the first Onset; the rest being forc'd to their Ships, stood off to Sea.

Laomedon then return'd and Fought with Hercules, and he and most of his Men were cut off. Hereupon Hercules presently took the City by Storm, and put many of the Inhabitants that oppos'd him, to the Sword, but advanc'd Priam (for his Justice) to his Father's Throne. He was the only Son of Laomedon, that disapprov'd what his Father did, and advis'd that the Horses should be deliver'd to Hercules according to the Contract. Hercules to crown Telamon's Valour with an honourable Reward, gave him Hesione the Daughter of Laomedon to Wife. For he was the first that in this Storm made his Way into the City at the very strongest part of the Castle Wall, where Hercules himself made the Assault.

After his Return into Peloponesus, he made War upon Augeas for defranding him of his promis'd Reward; but after a Battel fought with the Eleans, without effecting any thing further at that time, he return'd to Olenus, who had before entertain'd him as his Guest, whose Daughter Hippolyte was at that time just Marry'd to Axanus. Hercules being then there, kill'd Eurytion the Centaur, for offering Violence to Hippolyte at the time of her Marriage.

Being return'd to Tirynthe, Eurystheus (mov'd upon some Suspicion of Treason or other) Banish'd him with his Mother Alcmena; and likewise Ephicle and Iolaus out of the Kingdom. Being thus forc'd away, he resided at Pheneus in Arcadia. Where he heard that the Sacreds of Neptune in a Solemn Procession were sent to the Istmos under the Conduct of Eurytus the Son of Augeas: Whereupon he hasted away, and set upon Eurytus on the suddain near to Cleone where Hercules's Temple now stands, and kill'd him. Afterwards entring the Country of Elis, with a Potent Army, he kill'd also King Augeas, and took the City by Storm, and recall'd Phyleus into his Country, and gave up the City, together with the Kingdom into his Hands. For he was banish'd by his Father, for ordering the Reward to be given to Hercules, being chosen an Arbitrator between them.

Afterwards it happened that Tyndarus was banish'd from Sparta by Hippocoon, whose Sons likewise being Twenty in number, had kill'd Hyionus the Son of Lycimnius, Hercules his Special Friend. Hercules understanding what they had done, made War upon them, and in a great Battel routing them, slew Multitudes of them; and took Sparta by Storm, and restor'd Tyndarus the Father of the Dioscuri to the Kingdom, upon this Condition, that (in as much as he had gain'd it by Conquest) he should keep it, and hereafter deliver it up intire to his Posterity. In this Battel there were very few kill'd on Hercules his side, amongst whom were those Famous Men Iphiclus, and Seventeen Sons of Cepheus; for of Twenty, Three only escap'd. On the other side, there fell Hippocoon himself with Ten of his Sons, and a great number of the Spartans. After this Battel, he return'd into Arcadia, and resorted to King Aleos, whose Daughter Augeas by stealth lay with, and got with Child, and then went to Stymphalus. Aleos being ignorant of what was done, afterwards discover'd the matter, by the swelling of his Daughter's Belly, and thereupon askt her who was the Father; who answer'd she was forc'd by Hercules. Her Father not giving any credit to what she said, deliver'd her to a Nauphan whom he consided in, and order'd him to drown her.

Auge being carry'd away for Nauphalia, in her Voyage fell in labour near the Mountain Parthenius, and turn'd aside into a Wood near adjoining, under colour of discharging the necessities of nature, and there was deliver'd of a Son, which she left hid among the Shrubs: Then she went away with the Nauplian, and came at length to Nauplia, a Port in the Territory of Argos, and so was unexpectedly preserv'd: For the Nauplian was not willing to drown her as the King had commanded, but gave her to certain Strangers of Caria, who were then setting Sail for Asia, who took her away, and sold her to Teathras King


Page 145

of Mysia. In the mean time the Child that was left in Mount Parthenius was found sucking of an Hind, by some Shepherds belonging to King Corythus, who brought it to their Master: Corythus willingly receiv'd it, and educated and brought it up as his own Son, and nam'd him Telephus from the Hind that suckl'd him. When he was grown up to Mans Estate, he went to the Oracle at Delphos to inquire who was his Mother, where he was answer'd that he must repair to Teuthras, King of Mysia: Having found out his Mother, and it being now known who was his Father, he was in high Esteem and Reputation, so that Teuthras, who had no Heir Male, marry'd him to his Daughter Argiope, and adopted him his Heir and Successor to the Kingdom.

In the mean time Hercules the Fifth Year after his Banishment into Pheneus, being exceedingly griev'd for the Deaths of Hyionus the Son of Lycimnius, and of his Brother Iphiclus, wholly abandon'd Arcadia and Peloponesus; and being accompany'd with Multitudes of the Arcadians went to Calydon, a City of Aetolia. And having now neither Wife nor lawful Issue, he marry'd Deianira the Daughter of Oen

•us, Meleeager

 being then dead.

And here it will not be amiss to make a small Digression, and declare what hapned to Meleager.

Oencus upon a great Plenty of Corn, in Gratitude, sacrific'd to all the Gods, but only Diana: At which the Goddess being inrag'd, sent among them that so fam'd and mighty Calydonian Boar, which wasted and spoyl'd all the Neighbouring Region, and kill'd and destroy'd most of their Cattle. Meleager the Son of Oeneus being then in the Flower of his Age and full Strength, and not inferiour to any for Valour, associated himself with many other Gallants to hunt this Boar. He being the first that wounded the Beast with his Dart, by the general Consent of all carry'd away the Spoyl and Honour of the day, which was the Boar's Skin. Atalanta the Daughter of Echeneus, was one of his Associates in this Hunting; and therefore Meleager (being much in Love with her) presented her with the Skin, attributing to her the Glory of the Action. But the Sons of Thestius his Fellow-hunters took it most hainously, that a Stranger should be preferr'd before them, and no regard be had to the Nearness of Kindred that was between them and Meleager. To defeat her therefore of Meleager's Gift they lay in wait for her, and fell upon her in her return to Arcadia and took away the Skin by Force. But Meleager (for the Love he bore to Atalanta) being much troubled at the Affront and Disgrace offer'd her, took upon him the Defence of her Cause, and at first advis'd the Aggressors to restore what they had violently taken away. But when he could not prevail, he slew them. They were the Brothers of Althea, his Mother, who so immoderately griev'd for their Deaths, that she pour'd out most heavy Curses against her Son, and wish'd the Gods would cut him off, who heard her Prayer, and kill'd him. Some there be that feign that when Meleager was born the Destinies appear'd to Althea in her Dream, and foretold that Meleager her Son should dye when a Brand that was then in the Fire should be consum'd. His Mother therereupon conceiving the Life of her Son depended upon the Preservation of the Firebrand, laid it up very carefully: But being incens'd at the Death of her Brothers, she threw it into the Fire, and so hastned her Sons Death. But afterwards repenting and grievously afflicted for what she had done, she hang'd her self. In the mean time Hipponous in Olenum being incens'd at his Daughter Peribaea, because she said she was with Child by Mars, sent her to Oeneus in Aetolia, and desir'd him that he would forthwith put her to Death: But he having lately lost both his Son and his Wife, would not kill the Lady, but marry'd her, and begat of her Tydeus. But let this suffice concerning Meleager, Althea and Oeneus.

Hercules to gain the Favour of the Calydonians diverted the River Achelous into another Channel which he cut for it, and by that means water'd a great Part of the Country, and made it exceeding fruitful, which gave Occasion to the Poetical Fables, that Hercules fought with Achelous transform'd into the Shape of a Bull, and in the Conflict cut off one of his Horns, and gave it to the Aetolians: This they call Amalthea's


Page 146

Horn, in which (the Poets feign) grow all manner of Summer-fruit, as Grapes, Apples, and such like. By the Horn they darkly signify the new Course of the River Achelous, bending like a Horn through the other Channel: By the Apples, Pomegranates and Grapes they denote the Fruitfulness of the Soyl water'd by the River and the Plenty of fruitful Plants. By terming it * Amalt

〈…〉

 Horn they signify'd the Strength of him that cut the Ditch. 

Afterwards Hercules assisted the Calydonians in the War against the Thes

•rot.,

 and took the City Ephyra by Storm, and slew their King Phileus; and lying with his Daughter, who was his Prisoner, on her he begat Tlepolemus. The Third Year after his Marriage to Deianira, Eurynomus the Son of Architelus (then a young Boy) serving Oeneus at Table, Hercules for some small Mistake in his Attendance gave him such a Box on the Ear (that much against his Will) he kill'd the poor Boy; for which Misfortune he was so griev'd, that with his Wife Deianira and Hyllus his Son by her who was then a young Child, he voluntarily banish'd himself out of Calydonia: In his Journey, when he came to the Banks of the River Euenus he found Nessus the Centaur, who carry'd People over the Ford for Hire. Deianira being the first that he carry'd over, the Centaur fell in Love with her for her Beauty, and attempted to ravish her, whereupon she cry'd out for Help to her Husband, who presently shot him through the Body with an Arrow. The Centaur through the Grievousness of his Wound dy'd in the very Act of his Rape, only had time to teil her that for the great Love he bore her he would teach her a Receipt for the procuring of Love by Force, whereof Hercules should never after be familiar with any other Woman besides her self, and that was, that she should anoint Hercules his under Garment with the Blood that issu'd from his Wound mixt together with Oyl and some of his Seed that fell from him; and having thus said he immediatly breath'd out his last.

Deianira observ'd what Directions he had given her, and mixing the Seed of Nessus with his Blood which dropt from the Arrow, kept it privately in a little Box for Hercules. Hercules having pass'd the River went to Ceyces, King of Trachinia, and dwelt with him as a Stranger, ever accompany'd with the Arcadians as his Fellow-soldiers and Associates.

After these things, Philas King of the Dryopi being accus'd for some Act of Impiety against the Temple of Delphos, Hercules with the Assistance of the Melienses took up Arms against him, and both kill'd him and cast the Dryopi out of their ancient Habitations, and gave their Country to the Melienses. On his Captive the Daughter of Philas he begat Antiochus. Besides Hyllus he had afterwards other Children by Deianira, Gryneus or Gleneus and Hodites. Some of the Dryopi that were driven out of their Country passed over to Eubaea, and there built the City Carystus: Others of them sayl'd into the Island Cyprus, and gain'd new Seats, and became one People with the Inhabitants; the rest fled to Eurystheus, who (in Hatred of Hercules) receiv'd them into his Protection, and they with his Assistance built three Cities in Peloponesus, Asine, Hermione and Eione.

After the Expulsion of the Dryopi, a War broke forth between the Doreans (which inhabited Hestiaetes in the Reign of Aegimius) and the Lapithae, the Inhabitants of Mount Olympus, whose King was Coronus the Son of Phoroneus.

But the Lapithae being much stronger than the other, the Doreans crav'd the Assistance of Hercules, and promis'd him the third Part of the Kingdom; upon which Terms they prevail'd with him to joyn with them as their Confederate. With their joint Forces therefore they set upon the Enemy, and Hercules by the Valour of the Arcadians (whom he ever had with him as his Assistants) routed them, and slew the King himself, and cutting off Multitudes of the Enemy, forc'd the Lapithae out of the Territory which they contested for.

This being thus effected, he gave up the third Part of the Country promis'd him to Aeginius, to be kept by him in Trust in Order to be restor'd to Hercules his Posterity. In his return to Trachinia, he kill'd Cygnus the Son of Mars, who challeng'd him to a Duel. And as he passed through the Country of the Pelasgi, from Itonus, he met with King Hormenius, and demanded his Daughter Astydamia in Marriage; but because Deianira was his lawful Wife before, he refus'd to give his Consent. Upon which he made War upon him, and both took the City and kill'd the King; and so possessing himself of Astydamia by Force of Arms, begat of her C

•esippus.

 Afterwards he made a second Expedition against the Sons of


Page 147

Eurytus, for denying to give him Iole in Marriage▪ And by the Help of the Arcadians took the City, and slew Toxeus, Molion and Pytius, the Sons of Eurytus; and carrying away Iole, made to the Promontory Cenaeus in Eubaea, where he appointed a solemn Sacrifice, and sent Lichas his Servant to Trachine to his Wife Deianira with Orders to wish her to send him his Coat and Shirt he us'd to wear when he sacrific'd to the Gods. Deianira (being inform by Lichas of her Husband's Love to Iole, and how he had a greater Love and Kindness for her than her self) anointed the Coat and Shirt with the destructive Receipt given her by the Centaur, which Lichas (ignorant of the Matter) carry'd to the Sacrifice. But as soon as Hercules put on the Garment, the Infection and Venom of the Receipt began by little and little to work, which put him at last upon the Rack in most miserable Torment. For the Poyson of the Arrow like a stinging Viper overspread the Garment, and by its scorching Heat even eat up the Flesh of his whole Body. Hercules being thus intolerably tormented forthwith kill'd his Servant Lichas; and then dismiss'd his Army, and return'd to Trachinia. But his Torment more and more increasing he sent Lioymnion and Iolus to Delphos to inquire of Apollo how he might be 

••

'd. Deianira amaz'd at the Extremity of her Husband's Misery, and conscious of what she had done, hang'd her self. The Answer of the Oracle was, That with a warlike Train they should carry Hercules away to O

••a,

 and there raise up for him a great Pile of Wood, and Jupiter would take great Care of the rest. Iolus hereupon and those with him perform'd what was commanded, suspecting what the Issue was like to be. Hereupon Hercules (despairing of his Recovery) mounted the Pile, and earnestly desir'd those present to set it on Fire. When none would do it, at length Philocletes observ'd his Order, and put Fire under the Pile; and for a Reward Hercules gave him his Bow and Arrows; hereupon the Pile was presently on a Flame, not only by the Fire but with Thunder and Lightning from Heaven, and all was in an instant reduc'd to Ashes. Iolus afterwards seeking for his Bones, could find none at all; whence arose an Opinion that Hercules (as the Oracle had foretold) was translated from Men to the Gods. Iolus and the rest having therefore sacrific'd to him as a Demy-God, and rais'd up a great Monument in Remembrance of him, return'd to Trachinia. Afterwards Men

•alus,

 the Son of Actor, Hercules his special Friend, instituted that in Opuntus there should be offer'd up to him every Year as to a Demy-God, a Bull, a Boar and a Goat. The Thebans did the same; and the Athenians were the first that offer'd Sacrifices to him as a God, and their pious Example first induc'd all the Grecians, and afterwards all other Nations as such to worship him.

To what we have said, we must further add this, that after his Translation to the Gods, Jupiter persuaded Juno to adopt Hercules for her Son; and ever after she bore towards him a Motherly Affection. And they report, that this Adoption was brought about in this manner; Juno being gone to Bed, and Hercules layd close to her Body, she dropt down from under her Cloaths to the Ground; which Rite and Ceremony the Barbarians use in adopting of a Son to this day. They feign that afterwards Juno marry'd him to Hebe; and in the Story of the Dead the Poet introduces his Ghost in these Words,—

—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

Among the Gods he feasts with Hymns

And in fair Hebe joys and sings.

But they report that when Jupiter would have him to be one of the Twelve Gods; Hercules refus'd that Honour; for that it was impossible for him to be taken into the Number, unless one of the Twelve were rejected, and it was an unseemly thing to accept such an Honour with the Disgrace of another God.


Page 148

Altho' we have been long in our Relation concerning HERCƲLES, yet to make amends we have not omitted any thing material that is reported of him. And now it's time that we treat of the Argonauts, for Hercules went with them in that Expedition.

CHAP. III.

Of the Argonauts, Medea and the Daughter of Pileus. How the Argonauts gain'd the Golden Fleece. The Pranks of Medea, The Acts of Jason. The Cruelty of Pelias towards Jason's Kindred; how he was kill'd by his own Daughters through Medea's Charms. Medea burns the King of Corinth's Palace, and him in it. The miserable End of Jason. Of the Heraclidae, and their Return to Peloponesus.

JASON (they say) was Son of Aeson, and Nephew to Pelius King of Thessaly. And being a Man of strong Body and of an high Spirit, far above any of his Age, was ambitious to perform some memorable and remarkable Action; for knowing that Perseus his Ancestor and some others (by their expeditious and admirable Atchievments in foreign Countries) had purchased eternal Honour and Renown, he resolv'd to imitate them in the like heroick Undertakings: Acquainting therefore the King his Uncle with his Purpose, he easily obtain'd his Consent, not that Pelius thereby aim'd at the Honour and Glory of the young Man, but that he hop'd (among so many Hazards and Difficulties) he would be cut off; for having no Issue Male, he was afraid lest his Brother with the Assistance of his Son would some time or other invade his Kingdom. But he conceal'd his Suspicion in the mean time, and promis'd to furnish him with Provisions for his Voyage, encouraging him to undertake the Adventure in Sayling to Colchis to bring away the Ram's Golden Fleece, so much fam'd and spoken of all the World over.

Pontus at that time was inhabited by fierce and barbarous People, that were infamous for murdering of all Strangers that came amongst them, and therefore it was call'd Axenos: However Jason (being ambitious of Glory) tho' he was something concern'd at the Difficulty of the Undertaking, yet when he consider'd it was not altogether impossible to be accomplish'd, and that the more hazardous it was, the greater his Honour and Glory would be, he furnish'd himself with all things necessary for his Expedition.

And in the first Place built a Ship at the Mountain Pelius, much larger in every respect than was usual in those Times; for then they us'd to sayl only in Boats and little Skiffs. Every one therefore at the sight of the Vessel was amaz'd, and the intended Design and the Building of this Ship was nois'd over all Greece, so that many of the noble and brisk Youths were eager to joyn and go away with Jason in Order to partake of the Honour in this Expedition.

Jason now lanching forth his Ship, compleatly furnish'd with all things necessary, made choice of four and fifty of the greatest Persons of Quality out of the Number of those that were desirous to go along with him. Amongst whom the most remarkable were Castor and Pollux, Hercules and Telamon, Orpheus and Atalanta, the Daughter of Schaeneus, the Sons of Thespius, and JASON himself the Head and Captain of the Expedition to Colchos; he call'd the Ship Argo, from the Builder, whose Name was Argus (as some fabulous Writers report) who (they say) imbark'd with them to repair the Ship, as Occasion might serve: But others say it was so call'd from its swift Sayling, for that Argon among the ancient Greeks signify'd swift. Being all on Board, they unanimously chose Hercules for his extraordinary Valour to be their General. After they had set Sayl from Iolcus, and passed by Athos and Samothrace, they were by a Tempest cast upon Sigeum, a Promontory


Page 149

of Troas: Where landing, they found a Young Virgin tied near to the Sea-shoar, for this Reason as is said.

The Report was, that Neptune being displeas'd with Laomedon the King concerning the fabulously fam'd building of the Walls of Troy, sent a vast Monster out of the Sea upon the Land, which devour'd all that came upon the Shoar, and the Husbandmen that till'd the Ground upon the Sea-Coast; and that this Sea-God destroy'd the People by a Plague, and blasted all the Fruits of the Field. The whole Country being in this miserable Condition, the People met in a general Assembly, and consulted together what Course was to be taken for the redress of their deplorable Condition. Hereupon it's said that the King sent to inquire of the Oracle of Apollo what was to be done in this matter: Who receiv'd this Answer, That Neptune was angry, and would be then appeas'd, when one of the Trojan's Children upon whom the Lot should fall, should be offer'd up to be devour'd by the Sea-Monster. Hereupon they say, that a General Lot was cast, and that it fell upon the King's Daughter, call'd Hesione; whereupon Laomedon was forc'd to deliver up his Daughter, and left her bound in Chains upon the Shoar: And it fortunately happened at that very time, that Hercules landed with the rest of the Argonauts, and being inform'd by the Lady of her Misfortune, he broke off her Fetters, and brought her into the City, promising he would kill the Monster. Laomedon hereupon rejoyced exceedingly, and promis'd to bestow upon him as a Reward, some Horses he had that were unconquerable. They say this Monster was kill'd accordingly by Hercules, and that free Liberty was given the Lady either to go along with her Deliverer, or stay at Home with her Parents; the Lady it's said, chose to go along with the Stranger, not only as being more affected with the deliverance, than the Society of her Parents and Kindred, but fearing lest (if another Monster should appear) she should be again expos'd by the People to the same Calamity.

Hercules therefore receiving honourable Rewards suitable to so welcom a Guest, left Hesione and the Horses in trust with Laomedon, to be restor'd to him after his return from Colchis. Then he proceeded on his Voyage with the Argonauts; and presently after they were overtaken with another violent Storm, insomuch as they despair'd of their Lives; Orpheus only, they say, of all his Companions in the Expedition (being a Religious Man) sacrific'd and pray'd to the Gods of Samothracia for their Preservation: Whereupon on a suddain there was a Calm, and Two Stars fell down upon the Heads of Castor and Pollux, to the great amazement of the Beholders; and so all concluded, that by the Providence of the Gods, they were now out of danger. Hence it has been a Custom ever since, that when any are in a Storm at Sea, they call upon the Gods of Samothracia, and when any Stars appear, they are lookt upon then to be Castor and Pollux, that appear for their Deliverance.

When the Storm was over, the noble Adventurers landed in a Province of Thrace, of which Phineus was King; where met them Two Young Men, who for the Punishment of their Offences, were driven out of the Territories, and grievously whipt all along as they came. They prov'd to be the Sons of Phineus, by Cleopatra the Daughter of Boreas, and Orithya the Daughter of Erechtheus. But through the malice of their Stepmother (by false Accusations) their Father was wrought upon to deal thus severely and unjustly with them; for Phineus having Marry'd (besides his former Wife) Idaea the Daughter of Dardanus King of Seythia, was so inslav'd by an inordinate Affection to her, that he humour'd her in every thing she requir'd; and therefore at that time he gave credit to her Accusation, that those Two Young Men (to please their own Mother, and in contempt of her) attempted to lay violent Hands on her.

Hercules with the rest, fortunately landing at that very time, they say the Young Men call'd out to those noble Hero's, and implor'd them as if they had been so many Gods, to rescue them out of those miserable Circumstances, declaring the cause why their Father was so inrag'd against them. But Phineus meeting the Strangers, in a rage charg'd them not to meddle in other Peoples Concerns; for they might be assur'd, that no Father would willingly so punish his own Sons, unless the greatness of their Faults had overcome all Natural Affection.


Page 150

But it happened, that at that time, the Boreadae, the Brothers of Cleopatra, were Companions with Hercules in this Expedition. These therefore were the First that (by reason of their near Relation) by force of Arms reliev'd the Young Men, and breaking in Pieces their Chains, kill'd as many of the Barbarians as oppos'd them. But when Phineus himself with a multitude of Thracians that came flocking in, marcht up to decide the matter by a Battel, it's said, that then Hercules stoutly laid about him, and slew both Phineus, and a great number of the other Thraclans. Then seizing upon the King's City and Palace, he set Cleopatra at liberty, and restor'd to her Sons their Father's Kingdom; who resolving to be reveng'd upon their Step-mother, he persuaded them to forbear doing any such thing, but rather to send Messengers into Scythia to her Father, to let him know that they left her wholly to his Discretion, to be punish'd for her Offences. Which being done accordingly, the Scythian put his Daughter to Death; and the Sons of Cleopatra were highly commended by the Thracians for their Mildness and Equity. But I am not ignorant how some of the Fabulous Authors relate, that Phineus put out his Two Sons Eyes, and that in retaliation when he was old, Boreas serv'd him the same Sauce: And they report likewise, that Hercules going out of the Ship to get a little fresh Water, was left behind by the Argonauts in Asia. For in ancient Stories no Historians unanimously agree one with another; and therefore it's not to be admir'd, that in giving account of things in ancient Times, we do not in every thing agree with the Poets and other Writers.

But it's said, that the Two Sons gave up the Kingdom to their Mother Cleopatra, and went along with the Argonauts in their Expedition; who sailing away from Thrace, and arriving at Pontus, landed in Taurica Chersonesus, being altogether ignorant of the cruelty of the Inhabitants: For it was a Custom amongst those Barbarians, to sacrifice all Strangers that arriv'd there, to Diana Taurica. Amongst whom it's said, that in after-times, Ephigenia, the Priests of the Goddess, practis'd the same Cruelty upon all she could lay hold on.

And here in regard the Course of the History requires it, it's requisite we should give an Account of the Causes of this horrid Cruelty executed upon Strangers, especially this Digression seeming pertinent to the Acts of the Argonauts.

They say, that Sol begat Two Sons, Aeetes and Perses, and that Aeetes was King of Colchis, and the other of Taurica, and that both were exceeding cruel. That Hecate was the Daughter of Perses, far more fierce and cruel than her Father; for being given to Hunting (if she could find no Game) she would sport her self with casting her Darts at Men instead of Beasts: She made it her business likewise to compound Deadly Poysons, and was the first that found out Aconitum; and made trial of the nature and efficacy of every Composition, by mixing them with the Food given to Strangers. Being thus grown extraordinary skilful in this devilish Art, she first poyson'd her own Father, and so usurpt the Crown.

Then she built Diana's Temple, and ordered all Strangers that arriv'd there, to be sacrific'd to that Goddess; so that her Cruelty was nois'd abroad in every Place. She afterwards Marry'd Aeetes, and by him had Two Daughters, Cerces and Medea, and one Son call'd Aegialeus. Cerces likewise being much addicted to the Compounding of all sorts of Medicines, found out the wonderful Natures and efficacy of divers sorts of Roots and Herbs, many she learnt of her Mother Hecate, but many more she discover'd by her own industry; so that she left nothing new (for any that came after her) which might any ways advance that Art. This Cerces was Marry'd to the King of the Sarmathians, whom some call Scythians; but she likewise poyson'd her Husband, and so usurping the Kingdom, executed many Butcheries and Cruelties upon the Subjects; for which (as some Writers relate) she was driven out of the Kingdom, and fled to the Ocean, and possessing herself of a certain Desert Island, settl'd there, together with the Women her Companions. But as other Historians say, leaving Pontus, she settl'd in the Promontory of Italy, now call'd from her Cerceum.

They report likewise, that Medea learnt the same Art from her Mother and Sister; but she plainly made use of it for contrary ends and purposes; for she constantly laid out her self to save the Lives of Strangers that were driven thither, sometimes begging the Lives of such as were condemn'd of her Father,


Page 151

and at other times by her subtil Contrivance procuring their Escapes out of Prison.

For Aectes prompted thereunto both by the cruelty of his own Nature, and likewise incited by the Counsels and Persuasions of Hecate his Wife, observ'd the Custom of Murdering of Strangers. But Medea every day more and more opposed her Parents in this thing; Aectes (upon suspicion of Treason) committed his Daughter Medea to Prison, whence notwithstanding the escap'd, and fled to a Temple of Apollo, seated on the Sea-Shoar; about which same time, the Argonauts sail'd by Taurica, and arriv'd in the Night at Colchis, at the very Place where the Temple stood; where meeting with Medea, wandring upon the Shoar, were inform'd by her of the cruel Custom of Murdering of Strangers in those Parts; whereupon giving the Virgin thanks for her Humanity and Kindness, they told her of their Designs, and of the end of their adventure; and she on the other Hand inform'd them what Dangers she was surrounded with from her Father, by reason of her Kindness and Compassion to Strangers: It being therefore evident to both Parties what was then fit to be done, Medea on her part promis'd she would assist 'em to the uttermost of her power, till they had accomplish'd their Design; and Jason promis'd and confirm'd by a Solemn Oath, that Medea should from that time forward be his Wife. Hereupon the Argonauts leaving a Party to guard their Ships, went with Medea in the Night to the Golden Fleece: Of which we must here write more largely, that nothing may be omitted which is pertinent to the History.

They say that Phryxus the Son of Athamantes, to avoid the malice of his Step-mother, fled out of Greece, together with Helles his Sister, and being by the advice and direction of the Gods, transported out of Europe into Asia, upon the Back of a Golden-fleec'd Ram, it happened that the Young Maid fell off into Pontus, which was therefore from thence call'd Hellespont: But Phryxus landing safe in Colchis, by the Command of the Oracle sacrific'd the Ram, and hung up its Skin in the Temple of Mars.

Afterwards the King was told by the Oracle, that he should dye when some Sea-faring Men came thither, and carry'd away the Golden-Fleece. And this was the Cause (besides the cruelty of his Nature) that mov'd this Vile Man to sacrifice Strangers, that (this horrid Cruelty being nois'd Abroad in all Parts) no Stranger might dare to set footing in his Country. He built a Wall likewise round the Temple, and plac'd a strong Guard of Taurican Soldiers to keep it, which has afforded matter for prodigious Stories among the Grecians; as how that Bulls that breath'd out Fire at their Nostrils guarded the Temple, and that a Dragon kept the Fleece. For by reason of the ambiguity of the Word Taurus, it was strain'd to signify the fierceness and violence of Bulls, and the cruel Murdering of Strangers, gave rise to the fiction of the Bulls breathing out Fire. Upon the same Account the Poets have given the Name of a most terrible and monstrous Beast, plac'd as a Guard for Security of the Temple.

And much like to this Story, is what they say concerning Phryxus: For they say that he sail'd in a Ship, upon whose Foredeck was carv'd the Head of a Ram, and that Helles by leaning too much forward over the sides of the Ship to vomit, fell over-board into the Sea.

Others say, that about the time that Phryxus with his School-master was taken by Aeetes; the Scythian King, the Father in Law of Aeetes, came to Colchis, and fell in love with the Boy, and upon that account he was bestow'd by Aeetes upon the Scythian, who lov'd him as his own Child, and adopted him his Heir and Successor to the Kingdom. But that the School-master whose Name was Crius, was sacrific'd to the Gods, and his Skin according to the Custom, was fastened to the Walls of the Temple.

Afterwards Aeetes being foretold by the Oracle that he should dye when Strangers carry'd away the Ram's-Skin, it's said that he gilt it with Gold, that the Splendour thereof should cause the Soldiers who were set to guard it, to be more careful and diligent in their watch. But we leave every one to judge of these things as he thinks fit.

However it was, Medea conducted the Argonauts to the Temple of Mars, which was not above Seventy Furlongs distant from the City Sybaris, dignify'd with the Palace Royal of the Kings of Colehis. Medea therefore coming in the Night to


Page 152

the Temple Gates, which were fast shut up, spoke to the Guards in the Language of Taurica: Whereupon knowing her to be the King's Daughter, they forthwith open'd the Gates; upon which, the Argonants rush'd in with their drawn Swords, and kill'd many of the Barbarians, and drove the rest (terrify'd with the suddain Surprize) out of the Temple; and then plucking down the Fleece, they hasted back to their Ship with all speed.

While these things were in acting, Medea was as diligent on her part, and poyson'd the ever wakeful Dragon, which wound himself about the Fleece in the Temple; and then she went on Ship-Board with Jason. The Tauricans that fled, inform'd the King of what was done, who forthwith pursuing the Greeks with his Souldiers which were ready at hand, overtook them at the Sea-side, and falling upon them on the suddain, slew Iphitus, one of the Argonauts, Brother of Euristheus, who impos'd upon Hercules so many Labours. But when the rest of the Greeks (who were before dispers'd) fell on in a great Body upon them, the Barbarians were most of them kill'd by Meleager, amongst whom was the King himself. The Grecians hereupon being fir'd with this Success, press'd more resolutely upon the Colchians, and at length put them to flight, and slew the greatest part of them in the pursuit. Of the Argonauts were wounded in this Encounter, Jason, Lacrtes, Atalanta, and the Thespiadae, but they were cur'd within a few Days, by Applications, as is said, made up of Herbs and Roots by Medea. Then furnishing themselves with Provision, they set Sail, in order to return. But being got into the midst of the Pontick Sea, they were overtaken with a suddain Tempest, to the great hazard of their Lives. But Orpheus addressing himself to the Gods of Samothracia as before, the Winds presently ceas'd, and Glaucus the Sea-God presently appear'd near to the Ship, and swam along by the Ship-side for Two Days and Nights together, and foretold to Hercules his Labours and future Immortality. He told likewise the Tyndarides, that they should be call'd Dioscuri, and should be ador'd and reverenc'd by all Men as Gods. Then he call'd the Argonauts every one by their Names, and told them, that for the sake of Orpheus's Prayers, by the provident care of the Gods, he now appear'd to them, and had foretold them of things to come. Therefore he advis'd them, that as soon as they landed, they should pay their Vows, and give Thanks to the Gods, by whose Kindness they had been now twice deliver'd. Having said this, Glaucus dived again into the Sea.

The Argonauts being now arriv'd at the Mouth of Pontus, made to Land, where Byzas then reign'd, from whom the City is now call'd Byzantium. Here they erected Altars, and offered up their Prayers and Thanks to the Gods, and consecrated the Place, which is now at this Day accounted Sacred, and reverenc'd by all that sail by that way. Loosing from thence, they pass'd through Propontis, and the Hellespont, and made to the Coasts of Troy. When they arriv'd there, Hercules sent his Brother Iphiclus and Telemon into the City, to demand Hesione and the Horses: But Laomedon laid the Messengers by the Heels, and plotted the Destruction of all the Argonauts. To which foul Act, all his Sons (except Priam) contributed their helping Hands. For Priam alledg'd, that Compacts with Strangers ought to be kept inviolable, and press'd that his Sister, with the Horses that were promis'd should be restor'd; whose Advice being disregarded, he privately convey'd Two Swords into the Goal to Iphiclus and Telamon, declaring to them his Father's Design, and by this means procur'd their Deliverance. For forthwith killing the Keepers that resisted them, they escap'd to the Sea, and discover'd all particularly to the Argonauts. The Heroes hereupon readily prepar'd themselves for Battel, and marcht on to meet the Trojans, who with their King were issu'd out of the City against them.

A sharp Dispute and Conflict there was, but at length the Valour of the Heroes prevail'd, where they say, Hercules exceeded them all; for he kill'd Laomedon, and took the City by a sudden Assault, and punish'd them who were Parties and Contrivers in the Design with the King; but gave the Kingdom to Priam for his Justice and Equity; and after entring into a League of Friendship with him, loos'd from thence with the Argonauts. But some out of the ancient Poets say, that being furnish'd only with Six Ships, upon the Account of being deny'd the Horses, he took Troy himself, without the help of the Argonauts, and to confirm this, they alledge these Verses of H

〈…〉


Page 153

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

But Hercules my Father, as is said,

The Lions strong in Valour did exceed,

That only with Six Ships and Slender Force,

For Laomedon's Horses took his Course;

And then Besieg'd and took the City Troy,

And many of her People did destroy.

From Troy the Argonauts arriv'd at Samothracia, and then again gave Thanks to the Gods, where they dedicated their Drink-Offering Bowls, and left them in the Temple, which remain there at this Day.

The return of the Heroes was not yet known; but the common Report was throughout all Thessaly, that Jason and all his Companions were destroy'd some where or other about Pontus.

Pelias therefore now thinking it a fit opportunity to cut off all that might in any probability seem to affect the Kingdom, compell'd Jason's Father to drink 

〈…〉

ls Blood, and Murdered his Brother Promachus, who was then but a meer Child.

But when Amphinome his Mother was sought for to be butchered, she acted the part of a manlike and noble Spirit, worthy of remark; for running to the King's Palace, she pour'd out most heavy Curses upon his Head, wishing that due Vengeance might overtake him for his Impiety; and then immediately stab'd her self, and so like an Hero ended her Days.

Pelias having thus extinguish'd Jason's whole Family, in a short time after paid for it, and receiv'd the due Reward of his Wickedness: For Jason in the Night entring a Port of Thessaly not far from the City Iolcos (yet out of view of the Inhabitants) was by one inform'd of the sad state and condition of his Family, and thereupon all the Heroes were in a readiness to assist Jason, and to undergo all hazards for that purpose; but there arose some difference of Opinions amongst them; for some were for surprizing the King with a suddain Assault, others were for the Raising of Forces out of every Country, and so to join against him in a common War: For it was impossible for Three and Forty Men, to think to overcome so Potent a Prince, both as to his Riches and the number of his Cities. In these different Councils its said, that Medea promis'd to kill the King by a Stratagem, and deliver up the Palace into their Hands, without any hazard to any of them. The Heroes wondring at what she said, askt how she would accomplish it? Who answer'd, that she had great variety of Poysons of admirable strength and efficacy, some of them found out by her Mother Hecate, and others by her Sister Cerces; that she had not as yet made use of them for the killing of any Man; but now by the help of them, she would execute due and deserved Punishment upon the wicked Wretches; and told the Argonauts her whole Design, after what manner she would get to the King; and promis'd that from some Turret in the Palace that look'd towards the Sea, she would give a Sign to their Watch by Fire in the Night, and by Smoke in the Day.

Hereupon she provided a Hollow Image of the Goddess Diana, in which she hid several sorts of Poysons, and anointed her Hair with a sort of Oyntment, which turn'd it all gray and hoary, and with the same Ointment wrinkl'd up her Face and her whole Body, so that she look'd like an old wither'd Hagg. Then taking the Goddess with her, order'd in all respects so as to excite the common People to a superstitious Adoration, she enter'd the City when it was light; whereupon the People came running in to her from all Quarters, as if she had been an inspir'd Priestess: And she her self commanded every Body to bear a reverend regard to the Goddess, who was now by the special Providence of the Gods, come to them from the Hyperboreans, for the Preservation of the King and


Page 154

the whole City. All being now imploy'd up and down in adoring the Goddess, and preparing of Sacrifices in honour of her, the whole City was possess'd with such a Fanatical Fury of Superstition, that Medea

••

ily procur'd her self to be brought into the Palace; where with her Delusions she infatuated both 

〈◊〉

 his Daughters with such a Pang of Superstition, that they all believ'd the Goddess was come to load the King's House with all manner of Blessings, for 

〈…〉

 declar'd that Diana in a Chariot, drawn through the Air by Dragons, had 

〈…〉

 over many Parts of the World, and had now at length made choice of the K

〈…〉

 as the most Pious Prince to settle her Image, and establish her worship 

〈…〉

 ever; adding, that she was commanded by the application of 

〈…〉

 to give a Check to his Old Age, and restore him to his former Youth and 

〈…〉

 and bestow many other Blessings upon him that might make hi

•

 Life comfort

〈…〉

 to himself, and pleasing unto the Goddess.

The King being amaz'd at this strange and unusual Discourse, she promis'd him forthwith to give an assurance of the truth of what she said, by 

〈…〉

 in her own Body. To this end therefore she order'd one of 

〈◊〉

 his 

〈…〉

ters to bring her some Spring-Water; which being done, she shut up her self in a little Room, and bathing her Body all over in the Water, she cleans'd her self of the Ointment, and so being restor'd to her former Vigour, as soon as she came into the King's Presence, all the Beholders were amaz'd; for they conceited that an Old Woman was transforw'd into a Youthful and Beautiful Virgin by the power and providence of the Gods. She forthwith likewise by her Witchcraft caus'd the appearance of the shape of the Dragons to appear, by which the 

〈…〉

dess was drawn through the Air from the Hyperborcans to continue as a Guest with Pelias.

These things done by her, being lookt upon to be above the Course of Nature, the King highly honour'd her, and believ'd all she said to be true; and it's said that he took his Daughter's aside, and order'd them to assist her, and do whatever she commanded; and that it was fitter his own Children should apply Medicines to his Body than Servants, in order to reap the Benefits design'd him by the Favour of the Gods. Pelias therefore having expresly commanded that his Daughters should observe whatever Medea order'd to be done, in reference to the care of their Father's Body, were ready in all things to obey her. About Midnight therefore when Pelias was fast asleep, she said it was absolutely necessary that his Body should be boil'd in a Cauldron: And though the young Ladies easily and readily of their own accord, prepar'd themselves to obey her, yet she apply'd her self to another Experiment for the gaining of further Credit to what she said: There was an old Ram bred up in the Stall, which she told the young Ladies, she would first Boil, and then it should come forth a Lamb. Whereupon they agreed, and then it's said, she cut the Ram into small Pieces, and boil'd them, till to their seeming, by the use of her inchanted Drugs, she brought forth a young Lamb out of the Kettle, to the admiration and astonishment of the young Women, who now thinking they might with great assurance depend upon what she promis'd, resolv'd to observe her in all her Commands; and all of them, but Alcetis (who out of a pious and natural Affection to her, Father, would not lay Hands upon him) cudgell'd him to Death. Whereupon Medea pretended that Vows and Prayers were first to be made to the Moon, before his Body was dissected, and cast into the Cauldron: To which end, she carried the Young Ladies with Torches and Fire-brands to the top of the highest part of the Palace; where Medea to spin out time, mumbled out a long Prayer in the language of Colchis, that the Argonauts might make the Assault in the mean time; who now seeing the Fire from the Turret, concluded the King was dispatch'd; and therefore in a Body they made hastily to the City; where presently mounting over the Walls, they enter'd the Palace with their drawn Swords, and kill'd the Watch that oppos'd them. As soon as Pelias his Daughters were come down to boil their Father, unexpectedly seeing Jason with the rest of the Noble Youths his Companions, enter'd into the midst of the Palace, they grievously cry'd out with exceeding sorrow and lamentation: Having now neither power to revenge themselves upon Medea, nor time to purge themselves from the horrid fact that by her Delusions they had committed, they had forthwith murder'd themselves, if Jason (pitying their miserable Condition) had not prevented them, and comforted them with this Consideration, that their present Misery was not occasion'd by


Page 155

their own malitious Contrivance, but that they were without any Fault of theirs led aside by the deceit of another: He promis'd them likewise, that their whole family should be civilly and honourably us'd. Having therefore call'd together a General Assembly, he excus'd what was done, and declar'd that he had dealt far more gently with the Authors of those Injuries than they deserv'd, and what he had done, was far short of what he and his had suffer'd. Then he plac'd Acastus the Eldest Son of Pelias upon his Father's Throne, and carry'd himself with all due respect to the King's Daughters; and in performance of what he had promis'd, it's said, he at length marry'd them to the greatest Persons of Quality.

Alcestis the Eldest he marry'd to Admetus the Thessalian the Son of Pheretes; Amphinome to Andraemon the Brother of Leonteus; and Eradne to Canas the Prince of Phocis, the Son of Cephalus. And these were the things afterwards done by Jason.

Then arriving with the rest of the Heroes in the Isthmos of Peloponesus, he there sacrific'd to Neptune, and dedicated the Ship Argo to that God. Having gain'd the special favour of Creon King of Corinth, he was made Free of the City, and ever after dwelt among the Corinthians.

When the Argonauts were preparing every one to return into his own Country, they say Hercules made this Proposal, that to obviate the unexpected Blasts and Frowns of Fortune, they should enter into an Oath mutually to assist each other, whenever any of them stood in need of help; and that they should pick out the most remarkable place in Greece for the celebrating of Sports, and a General and Solemn Meeting of all the Grecians, and that the Games should be celebrated in honour of Jupiter Olympus, the greatest of the Gods.

Upon which the Heroes enter'd into the Association propos'd, and left it to Hercules to institute the Games; who made choice of the Ground in the Territories of Elis, near to the River Alpheus, for the General and Solemn Meeting, and dedicated the Place to the chiefest of the Gods, from whom it was call'd Olympick. Having therefore appointed Horse-coursing, Wrestling, and other Oymnick Sports, and ordered their several Prizes and Rewards, he sent Messengers to all the Cities, to acquaint them with the institution of these Games. He was in no small Honour and Repute before, upon the account of his Expedition with the Argonauts: But this Institution of the Olympick Games much more advanc'd his praise; for he was so cry'd up amongst all the Grecians, and was so eminently famous in the esteem of most of the Cities, that many desir'd to enter into a League of Friendship with him, and to stand and fall with him in all Dangers whatsoever.

His Valour and Military Art was so admir'd by every Body, that he presently got together a vast Army, with which he went through the whole World, desiring to benefit all Mankind: Upon which account all unanimously agree that he has attain'd to a state of Immortality. But the Poets according to their prodigous way of relating matters, say, that Hercules himself alone, and without any Arms, perform'd all those famous Actions reported of him. But we have before given an Account of all those things that are fabulously related concerning this God: And now it remains that we should proceed with the History of Jason.

It's said that he and Medea, as Man and Wife, liv'd together Ten Years in Corinth, and of her begat first Two Twins, Thessalus and Alcimena, and a Third call'd Tisandrus, much younger than the other Two. During all this time, they say Medea was greatly belov'd of her Husband, being eminent not only for the excellency of her Beauty, but for her Prudence and other Virtuous Qualifications: But it's said, that when she grew old, and her Beauty began to decay, Jason fell in love with Glauces, the Daughter of Creon, and courted the young Lady to marry her. The Father agreed to the Match, and appointed a Day, but Jason they say, first apply'd himself to Medea, in order to persuade her to a voluntary Divorce; telling her, that he did not marry this other Lady out of any aversion or disgust to her, but that he might have Children to be Heirs to the Royal Family. Hereat the Woman storm'd, and appeal'd to the Gods for Revenge,


Page 156

the Witnesses of his Oath and Vows. However it's said, Jason without any further regard to her, marry'd the King's Daughter.

Medea therefore being commanded to leave the City, having only one Day allow'd her by Creon to prepare for her Departure, by the Art of Witchcraft she chang'd the Form of her Countenance, and enter'd the Palace in the Night, and by a Root found out by Cerces her Sister (which being kindled, was of such a nature, as it could not be extinguish'd) she set the Palace on Fire. And now all being in a Flame, Jason sprang out from the Burning, and escap'd, but Glance and her Father Creon hem'd in on every side by the Fire, were both consum'd. Some Historians say, that Medea's Sons presented the new Bride with poyson'd Plasters, which she applying to her self, miserably perish'd, and her Father together with her, by only touching her Body in endeavouring to help her. Medea thus succeeding in her first Attempt, proceeded still to be further reveng'd upon Jason; for she was so far transported with Rage and Jealousie, yea, with implacable Cruelty, that notwithstanding Jason's narrow Escape, and the Destruction of the Bride, she further inhanc'd his Misery, by murdering his Sons he had by her; for she cut all their Throats (except one who made his Escape by Flight) and bury'd them in the Temple of Juno; and when she had done, at Midnight fled with some of her Faithful Maid-servants from Corinth to Hercules at Thebes, who undertaking as a Surety for Jason, that he should perform his Vows made to her in Colchis, promis'd to assist her in taking Revenge. In the mean time, every one judg'd Jason was justly punish'd in this loss, both of his Wife and Children: Not being therefore able to bear the insupportable weight of his Calamities he kill'd himself. The Corinthians were even astonish'd at the extremity of his Misery, and were especially perplext concerning the Burying of the Children. Therefore they sent to Delphos to inquire of the Oracle how their Bodies were to be dispos'd of: And it's said, the Oracle ordered them to be bury'd in Juno's Temple, and that they should for ever after be worship'd as Demy Gods. The Corinthians accordingly observ'd what was commanded; and Thessalus, who escap'd the cruel Hands of his Mother, was brought up by them.

Afterwards he return'd to Iolcus, his Father's Country, and found Acastus the Son of Pelius, then lately dead; and thereupon (as next Heir to the Crown) took upon him the Sovereign Authority, and call'd the People within his Dominion after his own Name, Thessalians. But I am not ignorant that there are other Accounts given concerning the naming of them Thessalians, of which we shall speak in their proper Place.

In the mean time they say, Medea finding Hercules at Thebes distracted, and his Children a little before by him murder'd, she cur'd him with her Medicinal Applications. But because there was no hope of Assistance for her from Hercules at the present, by reason of the Labours impos'd upon him by Eurystheus, she fled to Aegeus the Son of Paedion at Athens, who marry'd her, and begat of her Medus, afterwards King of the Medes. Others say, she was brought to her Trial by Hippotus the Son of Creon, and fairly acquitted.

Some small time after, when Theseus return'd from Traezene to Athens, she was expell'd the City for Witchcraft; and Aegeus sent her away by Messengers, with Orders to conduct her to what Place soever she had a mind to go; and it's said, she went into Phaenicia; and that from thence she past into the upper Parts of Asia, and being Marry'd there to a certain famous King, she had a Son by him call'd Medus, who after the Death of his Father, succeeded in the Kingdom, and became renown'd for his Valour, and after his own Name, call'd the People Medes.

But by reason of the Monstrous Stories feign'd by the Tragedians, there's great variety and difference in the History concerning Medea. Others in favour to the Athenians say, that she return'd safe to Colchis, and took along with her Medus the Son of Aegeus: And that about that time, Aeetes was by force of Arms depriv'd of his Kingdom by Perses his Brother, and was restor'd by his Nephew Medus, who kill'd Perses.

Afterwards Medeus having rais'd a great Army, overran many Parts of Asia above Pontus, and subdu'd that Part now call'd from him Media: But it would be here unnecessary and too tedious to relate all the Stories that they have written


Page 157

concerning Medea; therefore we shall now proceed with what remains of the History of the Argonauts.

Many both of the Ancient and Modern Writers (amongst whom is Timaeus) report that the Argonauts (after the carrying away of the Golden Fleece) coming to understand that Aeetes had blockt up the Mouth of Pontus with his Fleet, to prevent their return, perform'd that which was wonderfully remarkable: For it's said, they sail'd up to the Head of the River Tanais, and there drew the Ship a considerable way over Land into another River that ran into the Ocean, and so fell down that way into the Sea; and then bending their Course from the North to the West, leaving the Continent on their Left-Hand, they at length enter'd our Sea near Gades: And to confirm this, they use these Arguments.

First, that the Celts, the Inhabitants near the Ocean, do adore Castor and Pollux above all the rest of the Gods; for amongst these Celts, there's an ancient Tradition, that these Gods appear'd, and came to them out of the Ocean: And they affirm, that there are several Places near the Sea, that had their Names from the Argonauts and the Dioscuri, which remain still to this Day; and that within the Continent beyond Gades, there are apparent Marks and Signs of the return of the Argonauts: For sailing by Tyrrhenia, and arriving at a certain Island call'd Aethalia, there's a Spacious Haven, was call'd by them Argo, from the Name of their Ship, which Name the Port retains to this Day: And that there is another Harbour in Hetruria, Eight Hundred Furlongs from Rome, which they nam'd Telamon, and that the Port at the City Formia into Italy they call'd Aeetes, which is now nam'd Caieta.

They further say, that being driven upon the Quick-sands in Lybia, by a Violent Tempest, they were inform'd by Triton the King, of the nature of the Sea in those Parts, and how to avoid the Danger; for which Kindness they presented him with a Brass Tripode, on which were inscrib'd very ancient Characters, which not long since it's said was amongst the Hesperians.

We are not here to omit refuting those Historians, that affirm the Argonauts sailing through the River Ister to the Spring-heads below, pass'd through the Channel there straight before them into the Adriatick Gulf. But Time has now clearly manifested the mistakes of those Authors, who thought that that Ister which disimbogues itself by several Mouths into the Pontick-Sea, and that other which falls into Adria, rise from one and the same Spring-head. For since the Conquest of Istria by the Romans, it's known by experience, that the Fountainheads of this River, are not above Forty Furlongs from the Sea: But the Identity of Rivers Names has been the occasion of Historians Mistakes.

Having now insisted long enough upon the Acts of Hercules, and the Argonauts, it's requisite according to my Promise, to relate the Actions of his Sons.

After the Translation of Hercules to the Gods, his Children dwelt in Trachinia, with Ceyces the King. When Hyllus and some of the rest were grown up to Mens Estates, Eurystheus began to fear, lest when they were all grown up, he should be ejected out of the Kingdom of Micaena: Therefore he resolv'd to expel the Heraclides out of all parts of Greece. To this end he requir'd Ceyces, to banish the Heraclides and the Posterity of Licymnius, together with Iolaus and the Arcadian Regiments (that assisted Hercules in his Expeditions) out of his Dominions, and threatned him that if he did not he would proclaim War against him.

Hereupon the Heraclides and their Friends, considering they were not able to contend with him, resolv'd to fly from Trachine of their own accord: Making therefore away to other Cities more wealthy and considerable, they desir'd Residence amongst them: But none durst receive them but the Athenians, who out of their natural Generosity, entertain'd them, and gave them and their Friends Habitations in Tricorynthus, which is one of the Four Cities of that part of Attica call'd Tetrapolis.


Page 158

After some time when all the Heraclides were attain'd to Mens Estates, and their Spirits were rais'd up upon the account of the glory of their Father, Euristheus jealous of their growing Interest, led a strong Army against them. But the Heraclides assisted by the Athenians, having committed themselves to the care of Iolaus (Hercules his Brother's Son) who together with Theseus and Hyllus, commanded the Forces, fought Eurystheus, and routed his Army, and cut off a great part of them; and Euristheus himself (his Chariot breaking in pieces in his Flight) was kill'd by Hyllus the Son of Hercules; and all the Sons of Eurystheus fell in this Battel.

The Heraclides having obtain'd so remarkable a Victory over Eurystheus, and their prosperous Success now advancing the number of their Forces, they invaded Peloponesus under their General Hyllus.

One Atreus at that time, after the Death of Eurystheus, had obtain'd the Kingdom of Mycaena; and being join'd with the Tegeans, and some other Confederates, marcht out against the Heraclidae. Both Armies met in the Isthmos, and there Hyllus challeng'd any one of the Enemy to fight him singly, upon condition that if he overcame the other, the Kingdom of Euristheus should be given up to the Heraclidae; but if he himself were kill'd, that then the Heraclidae should not return into Peloponesus, within the space of Fifty Years. Whereupon Echemus King of the Tegeans enter'd the List, and fought with Hyllus, who was slain in the Combat. The Heraclidae thereupon in performance of the Agreement, made no further Attempt to enter Peloponesus, but return'd to Trycorinthus. Afterwards Licymnius with his Children, and Tlepolemus the Son of Hercules, by the consent of the Citizens took up their Residence, and dwelt in Argos; the rest continu'd in Tricorynthus, till the Fifty Years were expir'd, and then they return'd into Peloponesus, whose Acts we shall set forth, when we come to those Times. Alchmena in the mean time came to Thebes, and a little time after vanish'd away, so that she was worshipt by the Thebans as a Goddess. The rest of the Heraclidae, they say, apply'd themselves to Aeginius the Son of Dorus, who restor'd them to their Father's Kingdom, with which he was intrusted by Hercules, and so setled themselves among the Doreans.

But they say, that Tlepolemus the Son of Hercules, who resided in Argos, was forc'd to fly thence to Rhodes, for the Killing of Licymnius the Son of Electryo, upon some falling out that was between them. The Island was then inhabited by the Hellenes, a Colony brought thither by Triopas the Son of Phorbas.

Tlepolemus divided Rhodes, together with its Inhabitants, into Three equal Parts, and built there Three Cities, Lyndus, Jalysus and Camirus; becoming King of the Rhodians upon the account of the renow'd Actions of his Father, he afterwards assisted Agamemnon at the Siege of Troy.


Page 159

CHAP. IV.

The Acts of Theseus. The Minotaur in Crete. Androgeus the Son of Minos murther'd by Egeus. Ariadna Daughter of Minos, in love with Theseus. Ariadna's Crown. Aegeus King of Athens kills himself. Theseus's Death. The War of Thebes by the Seven Captains. The Epigoni renew the War. The Pedigrees of the Heroes at Troy. Of the Centaurs, and Lapithae. The Pedigrees of Aesculapius, Aeacus, Ajax, Pelops, Tantalus, Oenomeus. Dardanus's Posterity to Priam King of Troy.

SInce we have spoken of Hercules and his Posterity, it remains that we say something of Theseus, because he seem'd to imitate Hercules in his brave and noble Actions. 

He was the Son of Aethra, the Daughter of Pittheus, by Neptune, and brought up in Traezena, with Pittheus his Mothers Father. Having afterwards found (as is reported) the Tokens hid under a Stone by Aegeus, he resolv'd to go to Athens: As he travell'd along the Sea-Coasts in the Isthmos, his Mind was full of Thoughts how to imitate the Valour of Hercules, and to perform some glorious and honourable Enterprizes.

1. First therefore he kill'd Corynetes, who us'd to carry a Club call'd Coryne, which he us'd as defensive Arms, and with the same Weapon knockt all Passengers and Travellers on the Head.

2. Then next he slew Sinnis, who haunted the Isthmos, and us'd to bend down Two Pine-Trees, one to meet another, and bind one Arm to one of the Trees, and another to the other, of such as he took passing that way; and when he had done, then to let them spring up on a suddain, which by their force and violence so rent in Pieces the Bodies of the poor Miserable Creatures, that they dy'd in most horrid pain and torment.

3. The Third thing remarkable that he did, was the Killing of the Crommyonion Sow, a most vast and fierce Creature which destroy'd many.

4. The Fourth was the Killing of Sciron, who lay lurking amongst the Rocks, call'd from him the Scyronian Rocks: His manner was, that he would force Passengers to wash his Feet upon the top of a steep Rock, and then kick them down head-long into the Sea, near Chelone.

5. Next he slew Cercyon at Eleusina, who kill'd all that he overcame in Wrestling.

6. Afterwards he kill'd one Procrustes, who resided in Corydallus in Attica: His Custom was to force all that past that way, to lye down upon a Bed, and if they were longer than it, to cut off so much of their Legs, as reacht beyond the Bed; if they were shorter, then he wrackt and stretcht out their Limbs, till they reacht the full length; thence he was nam'd * Procrustes.

Having perform'd these notable Exploits, he came to Athens, and by the Tokens which he brought along with him, he was known and owned by Aegeus.

7. Afterwards he master'd the Marathonian Bull (which Hercules in performance of one of his Labours, brought from Crete into Peloponesus) and led the Monster in Triumph into Athens, which Aegeus sacrific'd to Apollo.

And now it remains that we speak of the Minotaur which was kill'd by Theseus: But for the clearer understanding of the History, it's necessary that we first ascend to things done some time before, that have a Reference to the Narration.

Tectamus the Son of Dorus, the Son of Hellen, the Son of Deucalion, arriving in Crete, with the Aeolians and Pelasgians, reign'd there as King, and marrying the Daughter of Cretheus, had by her Asterius; in the time of whose Reign, they say Jupiter having carry'd away Europa out of Phaenicia, transported her upon a


Page 160

Bull's Back into Crete, and upon her begot Three Sons, Minos, Rhadomanthus, and Sarpedon.

Asterius King of Crete afterwards marry'd Europa, but having no Children of his own, he adopted the Sons of Jupiter, and left the Kingdom to them. Rhadamanthus prescrib'd Laws for the Cretians: Minos taking the Kingdom upon him, marry'd Itone, the Daughter of Lyctius, and of her begat Lycastes, who coming to reign, Marry'd Ida the Daughter of Corybantus, and of her begat another Minos, whom some say was the Son of Jupiter. He was the first of the Grecians that rigg'd out a gallant Navy, and gain'd the Dominion of the Sea. He marry'd Pasiphoe, the Daughter of Sol and Cretes, and by her had Deucalion, Astrea, Androgeus, Ariadne, and many other Children.

Androgeus in the Reign of Aegeus, went to Athens, to the Panathenean Solemnities, where he was Victor in all the Sports and Contests; upon which Account, he became very familiar with the Sons of Pallas; and thereupon Aegeus grew jealous, lest the House of Pallas, with the assistance of Minos, should out him of his Kingdom, and therefore contriv'd to cut off Androgeus. To which end, as he was travelling to Thebes to see a Sacred Procession by order of Aegeus, he was way-laid by some of the Country People, and assassinated near Oenon in Attica.

Minos afterwards hearing of the sad Misfortune of his Son, went to Athens, and requir'd Justice for the Murder committed: But seeing that he could not prevail, he proclaim'd War against the Athenians, and prayed Jupiter to send a Drought and Famine upon the City of Athens; whose Prayer was speedily heard, for forthwith there was a great Drought throughout Attica, and even through all Greece it self, together with a miserable Scarcity and dreadful Famine.

The chief Men therefore of the several Cities, assembling themselves together, sent to consult the Oracle at Delphos, what they must do in order to avert the present Calamity; who answer'd, that they were to go to Aeacus the Son of Jupiter, and Aegina the Daughter of Asopus, and intreat him to offer Sacrifices for them: Which they did accordingly, and Aeacus perform'd what they desir'd: Upon which the Drought and Famine ceas'd in all Parts of Greece, but only in Attica, and there it still continu'd; so that the Athenians were forc'd to resort again to the Oracle, to implore Relief from the pressing Calamity. Upon which, the God return'd Answer, that to expiate the Murder of Androgeus, they should give to Minos such satisfaction as he requir'd. The Athenians obey'd the Oracle; and Minos demanded, that for Seven Years together, they should send Seven Boys, and as many Girls to be devour'd by the Minotaur, and that this they should do as long as the Monster liv'd. The Athenians sent them accordingly, and so the Famine ceas'd, and Minos desisted from further prosecuting of the War. When the Seven Years were expir'd, Minos came again with a great Navy into the Coasts of Attica, and demanded Fourteen Boys, which were delivered him.

Theseus with the rest of the Children his Fellows, being now ready to set Sail, Aegeus sent a Pilot along with them, with Orders, that if Theseus overcame the Minotaur, that they should enter the Port of Athens with white Sails; but if he perish'd with black, as they us'd formerly to do.

When the Athenians arriv'd in Crete, Ariadna, Minos his Daughter, fell in love with Theseus for his gallant mean and deportment: Having therefore opportunity of Converse with her, by her Advice and Assistance, he both kill'd the Minotaur, and learn'd the Passage out of the Labyrinth, and so came out safe. Then privately preparing for his return into his own Country, he stole away Ariadna, and sail'd out of the Port in the Night, and arriv'd at the Island then call'd Dia, but now Naxos.

They report, that at that time Bacchus being taken with the Beauty of the Young Lady, took her by force from Theseus, and through the ardent Affection he had for her, marry'd her; and that his love for her was such, as that after her Death, he dignify'd her with Immortality, and transform'd her crown into


Page 161

a Constellation of Stars, call'd Ariadna's Crown. Theseus they say, was so griev'd to be thus bereav'd of the Young Lady, that through Sorrow and Vexation, he forgot the Commands of Aegeus, and made into the Port of Athens with black Sails. At which sight, Aegeus concluding that his Son was destroy'd, resolv'd upon an Heroick, but a sad and lamentable Action; for he went up to the top of the Citadel (and through the excessiveness of his Grief, counting his Life a Burden to him) he threw himself down Headlong. After his Death Theseus succeeded him in the Kingdom, and govern'd according to the Laws, and ordered and performed many things, which conduc'd to the welfare and increase of the City. The most famous and remarkable among all the rest was this, That he gather'd all the People together that were scatter'd Abroad in the Country (and so were more considerable for their Number than their Power) and brought them into Athens. From this time the largeness of the City did so puff up the Athenians, and swell them with that confidence, that they question'd not but to be Lords of all Greece. But having said enough of these things, we shall go on with those that remain concerning Theseus, and which afterwards happened to him.

Deucalion, the Eldest of Minos's Sons, reigning in Crete, enter'd into a League with the Athenians, and Marry'd his own Sister Phoedra to Theseus.

After his Marriage he sent away his Son Hippolytus, whom he had by the Amazon, to Troezena, to be bred and brought up by his Sister Aethra: Of Phoedra he begat Acamantes and Demophon.

Hippolytus a while after coming to Athens to the Celebration of a great Festival, Phoedra was so taken with his Beauty, that she fell passionately in love with him: But he going back again for that time, she built near to the Citadel the Temple of Venus, whence she might have a prospect of Traezene.

Afterwards going with Theseus to Traezene to visit Pittheus, she solicited Hippolytus to lye with her; who refusing the Motion, her Love was turn'd into Hatred and Rage, and therefore she accus'd him to her Husband, that he attempted to Ravish her. Theseus suspecting the truth of what she said, summon'd Hippolytus to appear and answer the Accusation; but Phoedra fearing she should be discover'd upon the Trial of the Cause, hang'd herself.

When Hippolytus first heard of the Accusation, he was driving a Chariot; upon the News whereof, he was in such a Consternation and Disturbance, that he let the Reins fall; which so startled the Horses, that they hurried him away, and broke the Chariot in Pieces; and he himself being fastn'd in the Harness, was drag'd along upon the Ground, and so perish'd. Hippolytus thus losing his Life upon the account of his commendable Chastity, was ador'd by the Troezenians as a God. Theseus afterwards by a Sedition being driven out of the City, died in Banishment. But the Athenians being sorry for what they had done, brought back his Bones, and honour'd him as a God, and the Place where they bury'd him in the midst of Athens, they made a Sanctuary, which from him was call'd Theseion.

Since we have proceeded so far in the Story of Theseus, we shall give a distinct account also of the Rape of Helen, and of the intention of Perithous to court Proserpina; for these things have a Relation to the History of Theseus.

Perithous the Son of Ixion, after the Death of his Wife Hippodamia, by whom he had a Son call'd Polypodes, went to Athens to Theseus; whom finding a Widower (having then lately bury'd his Wife Phoedra) he advis'd to steal away Helen, the Daughter of Jupiter and Laeda, who was then about Ten Years of Age, and of surpassing Beauty: To this end they went (with some other of their Associates) to Lacedemon, and catching a fit opportunity for the purpose, seiz'd upon Helen, as their common Prize, and carry'd her away to Athens; where it was agreed between them, to cast Lots for her, and that he who should have the good Fortune to gain her, should faithfully assist the other (through all Hazards whatsoever) in procuring him another Wife. This Compact being confirm'd by a Solemn Oath, she fell by Lot to Theseus. The Athenians were much incens'd at what was done in this Business: Theseus therefore fearing the bad effect of it, privately kept Helen at Aphidna, one of the Cities of Attica, and committed her to the care of his Mother Aethra, and some other Persons of Quality that were his Faithful Friends.


Page 162

Afterwards Perithous had a desire to court Proserpina, and for this purpose requir'd Theseus to go along with him: At first Theseus endeavour'd to dissuade him, and to take him off from such a wicked and impious Design. But Perithous urging him the more vehemently (and by vertue of his Oath being bound thereunto) he at length agreed to joyn with him in the Attempt. To this end both of them descended into the Shades below, and for their Impudence and Impiety, were clapt up, and bound fast in Chains; but Theseus was afterwards releas'd for the sake of Hercules. But Perithous suffers Eternal Pains with the Infernal Spirits for his Wickedness; though some Writers report, that neither of 'em ever return'd. About the same time they say, Castor and Pollux (the Brother of Helen) assaulted Aphidna, and taking it by Storm, raz'd it to the Ground, and carry'd away Helen (still a Virgin) to Lacedemon, and with her among the Captives, A

•thra

 the Mother of Theseus.

Having spoke sufficiently of these things, we shall now proceed to give an Account of the Seven Captains that made War against Thebes, and shew the first Causes of that War. Laius the King of Thebes having marry'd Jocasta the Daughter of Creon, and for a long time being without Children; at length consulted the Oracle whether he ever should have any Issue. Pithia the Priestess gave answer from the Oracle, that it would be unfortunate to him to have any Issue; for the Son that he should afterwards beget, should kill him, and involve his whole Family in most dreadful Calamities. But somewhat forgetful of what the Oracle had declar'd, he afterwards begat a Son, but bor'd his Feet through with an Iron, and order'd him to be expos'd in the open Fields; and for that reason he was afterwards call'd Oedipus. The Servants that took him into their Custody for that purpose, were unwilling to leave him so to the wide World, but gave him to Polybus his Wife, who was barren.

Being attain'd at length to Man's Estate, Laius resolv'd to inquire of the Oracle, to know what was become of the expos'd Infant; and Oedipus at the same time being by some one inform'd of the Design against him when he was so very Young, took a Journey to Delphos, to inquire of the Oracle who were his true Parents: It so fell out, that both of them meeting one another upon the Road in Phocis, Laius in a proud and haughty manner commanded Oedipus to get out of the way; who thereupon was so inrag'd, that he fell upon Laius and kill'd him, not knowing him to be his Father.

About that time they report that Sphinx, a double shap'd Monster, came to Thebes, and put forth a Riddle to be resolv'd by any that could: Which none being able to do (by reason of the difficulty of the thing) she destroy'd many: At length she became more moderate, and offer'd a Reward to such as should unfold it, that he should marry Jocasta, and with her injoy the Kingdom of Thebes. When none else could expound the Riddle, Oedipus was the only Man that did it. The Riddle propounded by Sphinx was this; What Creature is that that is Two-Footed, Three-Footed, and Four-Footed? When all others were puzled, Oedipus interpreted it to be a Man; who when he is an Infant, creeps upon all Four; when he grows elder, goes upright upon his Two Feet; but when he is old, he's Three-Footed, using a Staff to support him by reason of his weakness. Whereupon Sphinx (as it is reported) threw herself down Headlong from the top of the Rock: And Oedipus marry'd his Mother unknown to him, and begat of her Two Sons, Eteocles and Polynices, and Two Daughters, Antigone and Ismene. The Sons being grown up to Mans Estate, came to the knowledge of the Wickedness committed in their Family, and therefore for the foulness of the Fact, confin'd Oedipus so as that he should not stir Abroad; and his Sons took upon them the Government, first agreeing together to rule Yearly one after another by turns. Eocles the Elder Brother reign'd first, but when his Year was out, he refus'd to give way to his Brother: Polynices demanded the Government according to the Covenant between them, but his Brother turn'd to him the Deaf Ear; upon which he repair'd to Ardrastus King of Argos.


Page 163

At which time Tydeus the Son of Oeneus King of Calydonia, was fled out of Aetolia to Argos, for Killing of his Nephews Alcathous and Lycotheus. Adrastus kindly entertain'd them both, and by command of the Oracle, gave his Daughter Argia in marriage to Polynices, and Deipyle to Tydeus. The young Men being both in great Honour and Esteem, and highly approved of by the King for their virtuous Qualifications, Adrastus promis'd to restore them both to their own Countries. Resolving therefore first to bring back Polynices, he sent Tydeus on an Embassage to Etocles to debate the matter with him: In his Return, it's said, he was set upon by Fifty Men, imploy'd by Eteocles to way-lay him; all whom notwithstanding he slew, and came safe, beyond all seeming Probability to Argos. Adrastus being inform'd of this piece of Treachery, prepar'd all things necessary for the War, and Procur'd Capaneus, Hippomedon and Parthenopaeus the Son of Atalanta, the Daughter of Sheneus to joyn with him: Polynices also endeavour'd to persuade Amphiraus the Sooth-sayer, to go along with them to the War against Thebes; but he foreknowing he should fall in that War if he went, refus'd to stir. Polynices therefore presented Amphiraus his Wife with a Golden-Chain (which as is reported, was bestow'd upon Harmonia by Minerva) to persuade her Husband to joyn with them as one of their Confederates. There being some Controversie about that time between Adrastus and Amphiaraus concerning the Kingdom, they agreed together to refer the whole matter in difference, both as to the Kingdom and the War, to the decisive Judgment of Euriphile the Sister of Adrastus, and Wife to Amphiaraus. Hereupon she gave Judgment for Adrastus, and that her Husband should joyn with the rest in the War against Thebes. Amphiaraus (though he lookt upon himself to be betray'd by his Wife,) yet prepar'd to go along with the other Captains: But before he went, commanded his Son Alchmeon, that after he was dead, he should kill Eriphyle; who afterwards executed his Father's Commands, by murdering his Mother; but was some time after so terrify'd in Conscience with the horridness of the Fact, that he went stark mad.

But to proceed; Adrastus, Polynices and Tydeus, together with Four other Captains, Amphiraus, Capaneus, Hippomedon, and Parthenopeus, with a great Army, marcht against Thebes; where Eteocles and Polynices kill'd each other. Capeneus in attempting to scale the Walls, was likewise slain. The Earth open'd her Mouth and swallow'd up Amphiaraus and his Chariot together, and so he was never more seen. All the rest of the Generals likewise perish'd in this War except Adrastus, and a great Slaughter there was among the common Souldiers, whom the Thebans would not suffer to be carried off the Ground; so that Adrastus was forc'd to leave them unbury'd, and return to Argos.

The Bodies of the Slain thus lying unbury'd at Cadmea, none daring to interr them, the Athenians (always commendable above others for their Humanity) took care of this matter, and bury'd them all. And these were the Misfortunes that befel the Seven Captains in the War at Thebes.

But the Children of them that were Slain (call'd † Epigoni) to revenge their Father's Deaths, all joyn'd together, and resolv'd to make War upon that City. The Oracle of Apollo (upon Enquiry) answer'd them, that they should overcome Thebes, if they made Alchmaeon the Son of Amphiaraus their General. Whereupon Alchmaeon being accordingly (with unanimous consent) created Commander in chief, consulted the Oracle, both concerning the present intended Expedition, and the Revenge that he was injoyn'd by his Father to execute upon Eripyle his Mother. The Oracle commanded him to perform both, because she not only receiv'd a Chain of Gold for what she did, which was the occasion of his Father's Death, but a rich Vale likewise as a Bribe, in order to the ruine of himself. Venus (they say) heretofore bestow'd this Chain and Garment upon Harmonia the Wife of Cadmus; but both were given to Eripyle; the Chain by Polynices, and the Vale by Thersandrus, Polynices his Son, that she might persuade Alchmaeon, to go to the Theban War.

Alchmaeon therefore rais'd Souldiers out of Argos, but great Numbers out of the Neighbouring Towns, and with these he marcht against Thebes: The Thebans issued out of the City against them, upon which there was a sharp Ingagement; but the Alchmeons at length got the Day. The Thebans being thus overcome with a great Slaughter of their Citizens, seeing themselves too weak for the other, utterly despair'd of all future Success, and therefore consulted


Page 164

Teiresias the Soothsayer what they should do. Who advis'd them to abandon the City, as the only means left for their Safety and Preservation. The Cadmeans follow'd his Advice, and in the Night forsook the City, and fled to a Province in Beotia, call'd Tilphotium. The Epigonians afterwards enter'd and raz'd the City, and being now Lords of all (among others) possessed themselves of Daphne, the Daughter of Teiresias, whom (according to their Vow) they devoted (as the chief of their Spoils) to the Oracle at Delphos. The Daughter nothing inferior to her Father for the Art of Divination, mightily improv'd it while she continu'd at Delphos; for she was endued with those Parts and Qualifications that were to be admir'd: She writ divers sorts of Prophetical Verses in a most artificial dress and composure, out of which (they say) the Poet Homer borrow'd many Verses for the adorning of his Poems. Being often in an Enthusiastical inspiration from the God, she utter'd things that were Prophetical, and therefore (they say) she was call'd a Sibyl. For to be so inspir'd, is in the Greek Language to act the Sibyl.

The Epigonians thus prosperously succeeding in their Expedition, return'd at length (loaden with Spoyl) into their own Country. Among those Thebans that fled to Tilphosium, Tiresias dy'd, and was bury'd by the Cadmeans with great Funeral Pomp, and ador'd afterwards as a God.

Some time after leaving the City Tilphosium, they invaded the Doreans, and overcoming them in a Battel expell'd them out of their Country, and settl'd themselves for a while in their Rooms; but afterwards part of them return'd to Thebes in the Reign of Creon, the Son of Menaeceus, and the rest continu'd in Doris: But the expuls'd Doreans at length return'd into their Country, and inhabited Erineus, Citinius, and part of † Beotia. About this time Beotus the Son of Neptune and Arne, came into the Country, then call'd Aeolis, (now Thessaly) and nam'd those that accompany'd him Beotians.

Here it's necessary to give a distinct and particular Account of those things which we have gather'd out of the Rubbish of Antiquity, concerning these Aeolians.

In former times, some of the Children of Aeolus (the Nephew of Deucalion and Helen) inhabited the Places before mention'd, but Mimas another Son reign'd in Aeolis, and Hippotes the Son of Mimas begat Aeolus of Menalippe: And Arne the Daughter of this later Aeolus had a Son by Neptune call'd Beotus. Aeolus not believing she was got with Child by Neptune, judg'd her guilty of Whoredom, and therefore deliver'd her to a Metapontinian Stranger (that was there by chance at that time) to be transported to Metapontum; which he did accordingly, and there she was deliver'd of Aeolus and Beotus, whom the Metapontinian (being Childless) by direction of the Oracle, adopted for his own Sons. When they grew to Mens Estate, a Sedition being rais'd in Metapontum, they possess'd themselves of the Kingdom by force of Arms. Afterwards Arne and Autolyte, the Wife of the Metapontinian falling together by the Ears, the Sons of Arne, in assisting their Mother, kill'd Autolyte; which cruel Fact the Metapontinian took most heinously, and therefore they got on Shipboard, and put to Sea with their Mother Arne and many other of their Friends. Aeolus possess'd himself of the Islands in the Tyrrhenian Seas, call'd the Aeolides, after his Name, and built a City there which he call'd Lipara. But Beotus went to his Grandfather Aeolus, who receiv'd him as his Son, and he came afterwards to the Kingdom, and call'd the Country after his Mother Arne, but nam'd the People Beotians, after his own Name.

Itonus the Son of Beotus begat Four Sons, Hippalcimus, Electrion, Archilicus and Alegenor: Hippalcimus had Peneleos, Electryon, Leitus, Algenor, Cloncus, Archilycus, Prothaenor and Ariesilaus, who were all Commanders in chief of the Beotians in the Trojan War.

Having now set forth these Affairs, we shall endeavour to give an account of Salmoneus and Tyro, and of their Progeny down to Nestor, who was one of the Grecian Commanders at the Siege of Troy.

Salmoneus was the Son of Helen, Nephew of Aeolus, and Nephew's Son to Deucalion: He made an Expedition out of Aeolis, and possess'd himself of a Territory in Elis, upon the Banks of the River Alpheus, and there he built a City, which he call'd after his own Name Salomnia: He marry'd Alcidice the Daughter of Aleus, and by her had a Daughter nam'd Tyro, who was an extraordinary Beauty. His Wife Alcidice dying, he marry'd another call'd Siderone, who (after the manner of Step-mothers) hated Tyro.


Page 165

Afterwards Simoneus (being both cruel and unrighteous towards Men, and impious towards the Gods) was hated by his Subjects, and at length for his Contempt of the Gods, was by Jupiter struck dead with a Thunderbolt.

About this time Neptune begat Two Sons of Tyro, Pelias and Neleus. Tyro being afterwards married to Cretheus, she had by him Amythaon, Pheretes and Aesones. After the Death of Cretheus, Pelias and Neleus were at strife one with another for the Kingdom. Pelias reign'd as King of Iolcus and the Neighbouring Countries, and being joyn'd with Melampus and Bias, the Sons of Amythaon and Aglaia, together with some Achaeans, Phthiots and Eolians, made an inroad with his Army into Peloponesus. At which time, in Argos, Melampus (being a Sooth-sayer) restor'd some Women to soundness of Mind, that through the Anger of Bacchus were struck with a raging Madness. And for this good Act he was rewarded by Anaxagoras, King of the Argives, Son of Megapentheus, with Two parts of the Kingdom. Hereupon Melampus took his Brother Bias as his Associate with him in the Government, and resided at Argos. Then marrying Iphianira the Daughter of Megapantheus, he had by her Antiphates, Manto, Bias and Pronoes. Antiphates had by Zeuxippe the Daughter of Hippocoon, Oicles and Amphales. From Oicles and Hypermnestra, the Daughter of Thespius, descended Iphianira, Polybaea, and Amphiaraus: And thus Melampus and Bias, and their Posterity injoy'd the Kingdom of Argos.

Neleus likewise with those whom he conducted, enter'd. Messina, and built the City Pylus, which was given to him by the bordering Inhabitants; who reigning here, married Chloris the Daughter of Amphion the Theban, and by her had Twelve Sons, of whom Periclimenus was the Eldest, and Nestor the Youngest, who went along with the rest to the Trojan War. But to the end we may keep within Bounds, this that has been said shall susfice concerning the Ancestors of Nestor.

And now something is to be further added concerning the Lapithites and the Centaurs; most of whom were the Sons of Oceanus and Thetys (as the Mythologists do report,) remarkable for their giving Names to Rivers; amongst whom was Peneus, from whom the River in Thessaly was so call'd. He was familiar with the Nymph Creuta, and of her begat Hypseus and Stibes, of whom Apollo begat Lapithes and Centaurus. Lapithes resided near the River Peneus, and reign'd over the Neighbouring Territories. He marry'd Orsinome the Daughter of Eurynomus, and by her had Two Sons, Phorbas and Periphas, who afterwards reign'd in those Parts; and the whole Nation of the Lapithae, are so call'd from Lapithes. Phorbas one of the Sons of Lapithes, resided at Olenus: Whence Alector the King of Elis (fearing the power of Pelops) sent for him to his Assistance, and made him his Associate in the Kingdom. Phorbas had Two Sons, Egeus and Actor, who were afterwards Kings of Elis.

Periphas the other Son of Lapitha, marry'd Astyagea, the Daughter of Hypseus, and by her had Eight Children; the Eldest of whom Antion, had Issue Ixion of Perimela, the Daughter of Amythaon. Ixion (they say) upon Promise to Hesioneus of a great Dowry and rich Gifts, marry'd his Daughter Dia, of whom he begat Perithous: But Ixion not performing his Promise made on the behalf of his Wife Hesioneus seiz'd his Horses in lieu of a Pawn. Ixion under colour of giving full satisfaction, desir'd his Father in Law to come to him; who coming accordingly, Ixion threw him into a Fiery Furnace.

But because none could expiate him from the guilt of so heinous a Parricide, it's said that Jupiter did it. But growing afterwards in love with Juno (they say) he was so impudent, as to court her to play the Adulteress: Whereupon Jupiter turn'd a Cloud into the shape of Juno, with which Ixion gratify'd his Lust, and begat those Half Men, call'd Centaurs. At length, for his enormous Impiety, he was fasten'd by Jupiter to a Wheel, and after his Death suffer'd Eternal Torments.

Others say, that the Centaurs were bred up by the Nymphs in Pelion, and that when they grew up to Mens Estates, they ingender'd with Mares, and so begat a double shap'd Brood, call'd Hippocentaurs. Others say, that the Centaurs were the Issue of Nephele and Ixion, and because they were the first that attempted to ride upon Horses, therefore they were call'd Hippocentaurs, and feign'd to be of a double Nature, both Man and Horse. It's said that these Centaurs being of the same Stock and Original, demanded of Perithous a share of


Page 166

their Father's Kingdom; which being deny'd, they made War upon the Lapithites; and that when the War was ended, Perithous marry'd Hippodamia the Daughter of Bystus, and invited Theseus and the Centaurs to the Marriage; and that the Centaurs (being Drunk, and inflam'd with Wine) attempted to ravish the Women that were then at the Marriage Feast: At which bold and wicked Prank, Theseus and the Lapathites were so incens'd, that they kill'd many of them, and drove the rest as Fugitives out of the City. And for this Reason, the whole Body of the Centaurs afterwards made War upon the Lapithites, and kill'd most of them, and forc'd the rest that had escap'd the Sword, to fly into Pholoe in Arcadia: But some got into Malea, and there continu'd. The Centaurs lifted up with this Success, often issu'd out of Pholoe, and robb'd all the Grecians that travell'd that way, and kill'd many of the Neighbouring Inhabitants.

Having now done with these occurrences, we shall next speak of Aesculapius and his Posterity: They say he was the Son of Apollo and Coronis, and being of an acute and sharp Wit, earnestly bent his Mind to the study of Physick, and found out many Preservatives for the Health of Mens Bodies; and grew at length so famous, that curing many in a wonderful manner, whose Distempers were lookt upon to be desperate, he was judg'd to raise up many from the Dead: And therefore it's reported by the Mythologists, that Pluto complain'd to Jupiter of Aesculapius, that through his Cures the number of the Dead decreas'd; and accus'd him for the weakning of his Empire in the Shades below: At which Jupiter was so incens'd, that he kill'd Aesculapius with a Thunderbolt. At whose Death Apollo was inrag'd to that degree, that he kill'd the Cyclops that made the Thunderbolt for Jupiter. Whereat Jupiter was again in wrath, and for a Punishment of his Offences, forc'd * Apollo to serve Mankind in a piece of constant Drudgery. Aesculapius (it's said) had Two Sons, Machaon and Podalirius, who were skilful in their Father's Art, and went along with Agamemnon to the Trojan War; in which War they were very useful and serviceable to the Grecians, for they cur'd them that were wounded in Fights with singular industry, and were in such esteem and favour among the Grecians, that by reason of their extraordinary usefulness in their Art, they were exempted from hazarding their Persons, and freed from all other publick Services.

But here we shall conclude the History of Aesculapius, and his Sons; and shall now proceed to give an account of the Daughters of Asopus, and the Sons of Aeacus.

Oceanus and Tethys (as some Stories have it) had many other Sons, which gave Names to famous Rivers, besides Peneus and Asopus. The Residence of Peneus, was that Country which is now call'd Thessaly, who gave Name to that Famous River there call'd Peneus. Asopus dwelt at Phlias, and marry'd Medon the Daughter of Ladon, by whom he had Two Sons, Pelasgus and Ismenus, and twelve Daughters, whose Names were Cercyra, Salamis, Aegina, Pirene, Cleone, Thebe, Tanagra, Thespira, Asopis, Sinope, Oenia and Chalcis. Ismenus one of his Sons, came into Beotia, and seated himself near the River call'd after his own Name. Sinope one of the Daughters was forc'd away by Apollo to that Place where the City Sinope now stands; so call'd from her: From her and Apollo sprang Syrus, who reign'd over those People, from him call'd Syrians. Neptune transported Cercyra into that Island, now call'd from her Corcyra. He had by her a Son call'd Pheax, from whom the Pheans are so nam'd.

This Pheax was the Father of Alcinous, who guided Ʋlysses into Ithaca: Salamis also was forc'd by Neptune, and carry'd away into the Island call'd after her own Name; by him she had Cenchreus, who was King of this Island, and a brave spirited Man; he kill'd a Serpent of a vast bigness, which had destroy'd many of the Inhabitants. Aegina was carry'd away by Jupiter from Phlias, into the Island Aegina, so call'd from her; and by her had Aeacus, afterwards King of that Island, whose Sons were Peleus and Telamon. Peleus by the throwing of an Hand-Stone, unfortunately kill'd his Half-Brother Phocus, being both of the same Father, but not of the same Mother; for this Fact he was banish'd by his Father, and fled into Phthia, a Province of that Country, now call'd Thessaly, where he was acquitted and purg'd of the Slaughter by King Actor, and succeeded him in the Kingdom, Actor dying without Issue. Achilles was the Son of Peleus and Thetis, and went along with Agamemnon to the War of Troy. Telamon likewise fled out of Egina, and arriv'd in Salamis, where he marry'd Glance the King's


Page 167

Daughter, and by that means afterwards came to be King of that Island. After 

•

he Death of Glauce, he marry'd Eribaea of Athens, the Daughter of Alcathous, and by her had Ajax, another Associate in the Trojan War.

Having given account of these things, we shall now speak of Pelops, Tantalus and Oenomaus. And here it will be necessary to go higher, and treat distinctly of some things in time long before.

In Pisa a City of Peloponesus, Mars begat Oenomaus of Harpina, the Daughter of Asopus: Oenomaus had one only Daughter, call'd Hippodamia, and consulting the Oracle how long he should live, the God answer'd that he should dye when his Daughter was Marry'd: Dreading therefore her Marriage, he resolv'd she should ever remain in a Virgin State, conceiving by this means only, he should avoid the danger foretold.

But whereas many earnestly su'd to have her to Wife, he made a Proposal of a Horse-Race to the Suitors, with this Condition, that he who won the Race, should have his Daughter, and that he that lost, should be put to Death.

The Course to be run was from Pisa to the Altar of Neptune, in the Isthmus of Corinth, and the manner of starting was thus: Oenomaus first sacrific'd a Ram to Jupiter; and in the mean time the Suitor makes speedily away in a Chariot drawn with Four Horses; and Oenomaus having at length finish'd his Sacrifice, mounts his Chariot driven by one Myrtilus, and with a Launce in his Hand, pursues the Suitor, and overtaking him, runs him through. And in this manner, by the swiftness of his Horses, always coming up to the Suitors (though they set out so long before him) he kill'd very many.

But Pelops the Son of Tantalus coming to Pisa, and desiring to have Hippodamia for his Wife; as soon as he saw her, bribed Myrtilus (Oenomaus's Chariot-driver) to suffer him to be Victor; by which means he got to Neptune's Altar in the Isthmus, before Oenamaus; who concluding that what the Oracle had foretold, was now near to be fulfilled, through grief of Heart was so dejected, that he murther'd himself. Pelops thus gaining Hippodamia, with her likewise gain'd the Kingdom of Pisa; and being a Valiant and Prudent Man, and growing rich besides, subdu'd most of the Countries of Peloponesus, and so called the whole Peninsula after his own Name.

Since we have made mention of Pelops, it's fit to say something of Tantalus's Father, that we may not omit any thing worthy Remark. Tantalus the Son of Jupiter was a rich and renowned Prince, and had his Royal Seat in that part of Asia, which is now call'd Paphlagonia, and for the nobleness of his Birth, being the Offspring of Jove (they say) he was the very Darling of the Gods themselves. However he us'd not his Prosperity with that Moderation and Humility as became a Mortal; but being admitted to Familiarity and Feasting with the Gods, discover'd their Secrets to Men; for which he was not only punish'd while he was Living, but was thrust down among the Wicked and Impious (as the Histories relate) to suffer Eternal Torments after Death. This Tantalus had Pelops, and a Daughter nam'd Niobe, who had Seven Sons, and as many Daughters, who were extraordinary Beauties: Being proud of the great number of her Children, she often boasted, that for her fruitfulness, she excell'd Latona her self: At which the Goddess they say, was so enrag'd, that she commanded Apollo with his Arrows, to kill the Sons, and Diana with hers, the Daughters; who executing their Mothers Commands, slew all the Children at once. So that Niobe who abounded with Children, was childless at one and the same moment.

But because Tantalus being hated by the Gods, was expell'd out of Paphlagonia by Ilus the Son of Tros, something is fit to be said concerning Ilus and his Ancestors.

The first that reign'd in the Country of Troas, was Teucer the Son of the River Scamander, and the Nymph Idaea; he was a brave Man, and gave the Name of Teucri to the Inhabitants. He had a Daughter call'd Batea, whom Dardanus marry'd, and succeeded Teucer in the Kingdom; and ordered the People to be call'd from him Dardanians; and built a City near the Sea Shore, and call'd it Dardanum.


Page 168

He had a Son nam'd Erichthonius, a Prosperous and Wealthy Prince; of whom the Poet Homer writes thus—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

None richer was of all Men under th'Sun,

Whose brave Three Thousand Mares in th' Meads did run.

Tros was the Son of Erichthonius, and of him the People were nam'd Trojans; he had Three Sons, Ilus, Assaracus and Ganimede; Ilus built a noble City in the Champain Country of Troas, which he call'd Ilium; the Son of Ilus was Lao

〈…〉don,

 whose Sons were Tithonus and Priam: Tithonus led an Army into the Eastern Parts of Asia, and pierc'd as far as to Aethiopia, whence rose the Story of Memnon, being the Son of Aurora; which Memnon brought aid to the Trojans, and was kill'd by Achilles.

Priam marry'd Hecuba, and by her (besides many other Sons) had Hector, who was especially remarkable for his Valour in the Trojan War. Asaracus King of the Dardanians, had Capys his Son, the Father of Anchises, who of Venus begat Aeneas, a Famous Man among the Trojans. Ganymede lastly was extraordinary beautiful, and is reported to be caught up to Heaven by the Gods to be Jupiter's Cupbearer.

And now from these, we shall proceed to Daedalus and the Minotaur, and the Expedition of Minos into Sicily against King Cocalus.

CHAP. V.

Of Daedalus, and his Works in Crete, Sicily, and elsewhere. His Flight into Sicily: Minos invades Sicily; the manner of his Death there. The Famous Temple of the Curetes or Corybantes in Sicily, built by the Posterity of the Cretians that came there with Minos. The Pedigree of Aristeus; his Acts; his Son Acteon. of Eryx. Venus her Temple in Eryx in Sicily; the Fame of it. Of Daphnis the Shepherd. A Description of the Herean Mountains. Of Orion. Of the Streight of Messina.

DAedalus was an Athenian, of the Family of the Ericthidae; for he was the Son of Hymetion, the Son of Eupalamus, the Son of Erechtheus. He was extraordinary Ingenious, and very studious in the Art of Architecture, and was an excellent Statuary, and Engraver upon Stone, and improv'd those Arts with many notable Inventions. He made many wonderful Pieces of Work in several Parts of the World, and so far excell'd in the framing and cutting of Statues, that those that were long after him, report that the Statues he made, did resemble living Men even to the Life. For their Symmetry was so exact and perfect, that their Eyes, and frame of Motion, and the whole Composure of the Body, was a lively Representation of Living Creatures. For he was the first that in Statues exprest the direct and lively aspect of the Eyes, and the progressive Motion of the Legs and Thighs, and stretching forth of the Hands and Arms, and therefore was justly admir'd by all: For those Artists that were before him, fram'd their Images with blinking Eyes, Heads hanging down, as if they were glu'd to their sides. But though Daedalus was thus admir'd for his exquisite Skill in this Art, yet he was forc'd to fly his Country for a Murther committed upon the occasion following. Talus Daedalus his Sister's Son, being but a Young Boy, was at that time bred up with his Uncle, to learn his Trade. This Talus for Ingenuity excell'd his Master, and


Page 169

invented the Potter's Wheel: He got likewise a Serpent's Jaw-bone, and with it saw'd a little piece of Wood asunder; then in imitation of the Tooth in the Jaw, he made the like in Iron, and so he found out an Instrument for the sawing of the greatest Pieces of Timber, exceeding useful, and tending much to the furtherance and ease of all Architects. He invented likewise the Turner's Lath, and many other Tools for the use of Architects; upon which account he was in great Esteem and Reputation. Daedalus hereat burnt with Rage and Envy against the poor Boy, and fearing he would grow far more famous than himself, secretly murder'd him. Being seiz'd upon just as he was laying the Carcass in the Ground, he was askt what he was burying? He answer'd, that he was covering a Serpent with Earth. Here it's very worthy of Remark, that the same Creature that was the occasion of making of the Saw, should be also the means of discovery of the Murther. Being therefore brought to his Trial at the Court of the Areopagites, and there condemn'd to dye for the Murder; he first fled to a sort of People in Attica, who from him were call'd Daedalians: Thence he got into Crete, where he was much admir'd for his Art, and in great favour with King Minos.

Afterwards (as it is commonly reported) Pasiphae the Queen, Minos his Wife, burning in her Lust after a Bull, he fram'd an Engin like to a Cow, and helpt her by that means to satisfy her Lust. They say, that before that time, Minos Yearly sacrific'd the best and largest Bull in the Herd to Neptune; and once there being a most lovely Beast in the Herd, a worse was pickt out to be sacrific'd; at which Neptune was so incens'd at Minos, that he caus'd his Wife Pasiphae to go Mad for Love after the Bull; and by the Art of Daedalus, she prostituted her self to the Beast, and brought forth the Minotaur so famous in ancient Stories.

They ascribe a double nature to this Creature, that from the Head to the Shoulders, he resembled a Bull, and in all his lower Parts was like to a Man. It's said, that for the keeping and feeding of this Monster, Daedalus built the Labyrinth full of windings and turnings, this way and that way, impossible to be found out by any Stranger before unacquainted. Here it was that the Minotaur devour'd the Seven Boys, and the like number of Girls Yearly sent thither from Athens, as we have before declar'd.

Daedalus being inform'd of Minos his Threats for making of the Cow, fearing the Rage of the King, by the help of the Queen got on Shipboard, and secretly escap'd out of the Island. Icarus his Son fled away with him, and both arriv'd at a certain Island, situated in the Ocean far off from any Land, where the Young Man being too rash, and hasty to Land, dropt into the Sea, and there perish'd; from whom it's call'd the Icarian Sea, and the Island Icaria.

From hence Daedalus sail'd into Sicily, and landed there where Cocalus reign'd, who receiv'd him very courteously, and upon the account of his great skill, and the Fame that went of him, made him his Bosom Friend.

Some report this Story concerning him, That Daedalus continuing still in Crete, was hid by Pasiphae; Minos in the mean time making diligent search after him, in order to punish him, but not able to find him out, he promis'd great Rewards to such as should discover him.

Daedalus utterly despairing to get away by Shipping, made for himself and Son, artificial Wings, joynted and compacted in a wonderful manner with Wax, and fastn'd them to his own and his Son's Body, and with them Daedalus suddenly flew away, and got over the Cretian Sea: But Icarus soaring too high (such is the folly of Young Men) fell down into the Sea, the Sun melting the Wax wherewith the Feathers of the Wings were joyn'd together. But his Father flying low near the Surface of the Sea, and sprinkling his Wings in the Water, pass'd over safe into Sicily. Though this may seem an absurd Fable, yet we judg'd it not sit to be past by.

Daedalus staid with Cocalus and the Sicilians a long time, and was highly honour'd and esteem'd by all for his excellent Art and Skill in his Profession: There are some Works of his there that remain to this day; for in the Territory of Megaris, he made a Fish-pond with wonderful Art, through which the great River Alabone emptied it self into the Sea. He built likewise a City (now call'd Agrigentina in Camacus) upon a Rock so strong, that it was inexpugnable. The Passage to it was so straight and winding, that the Place might be easily defended


Page 170

by Three or Four Men. Therefore Cocalus here built a Palace, and treasur'd up all his Wealth, as a Place (through this Architect's ingenious Contrivance) wonderfully secure. In the Third Place, he made a Cave in the Territory of Selementa, in which by Fire there under Ground, a warm Steam was so artificially rais'd, that by it's moderate heat, it caus'd a gentle Sweat, and gradually cur'd many that resorted thither of their Distempers, with a great deal of Pleasure, without any uneasiness from the Heat. And whereas there was a high and craggy Rock in the Country of Eryx, and no room to build but upon the highest and craggiest part of it, by reason of the strait and narrow Passages about the Temple of Venus, he drew a Wall round the very Top, and plain'd and inlarg'd it in a wonderful manner. They say, he likewise made a Golden Honey-Comb (dedicated to Venus Erycina) with such exquisite Art, and so like to a true and real one, that none could ever be comparable to it. He wrought many other excellent Pieces in Sicily, which length of Time has worn out, and consum'd.

But Minos King of Crete, who had the Dominion at Sea, hearing that Daedalus was fled into Sicily, proclaim'd War against that Island. Having therefore rigg'd out a mighty Fleet, he set Sail, and arriv'd upon the Coasts of Agrigentum, which was from him call'd Minoa, where he landed his Men, and sent Messengers to Cocalus, to demand the delivery up of Daedalus to Justice. Hereupon Minos and Cocalus came to an interview, and Cocalus promis'd to do all that Minos requir'd, and entertain'd him with all honourable Respect: But when he was in a Bath, Cocalus kept him there so long, that he was stiffl'd with the steam and heat. Afterwards he deliver'd his Body to the Cretians that came along with him, pretending he came to his Death, by slipping accidentally into the Hot and Scalding Baths. His Souldiers bury'd him with great Pomp, and built him a double Sepulcher, in the lower part whereof, in a Vault, they deposited his Bones, and near to the higher Part that was open to the view, they erected a Temple to Venus, which for many Ages after was so ador'd by the Inhabitants, that they offer'd Sacrifices there, as in a Temple peculiarly consecrated to her.

In later Times, when Agrigentum was built, it being then discover'd that the Bones were there bury'd, the Sepulcher was wholly ruin'd, and the Bones sent to the Cretians, at the time when Thero was Sovereign Lord of Agrigentum. The Cretians that were thus brought over into Sicily, after the Death of Minos, having then no King, fell at odds one with another, and rais'd a great Tumult. But their Ships being all burnt by the Sicilians, Cocalus his Subjects, they were out of all hope ever to return into their own Country; and therefore resolv'd to settle themselves in Sicily. To that end, some of them built a City, which from the Name of their King they call'd Minoa. Another part of them went up into the heart of the Country, and possessing themselves of a Place naturally very strong, there built Engium, a City so call'd from a Fountain there.

After the Destruction of Troy, they receiv'd Merion, with other Cretians that were cast upon Sicily; and because they were of the same Nation, they made them Members of their City. Afterwards making frequent Inroads into the Neighbouring Country, from so strong a Fort, they subdu'd many of the Borderers, and got some small Territory; afterwards being grown wealthy, they built a Temple to the Curetes or Corybantes, and most religiously ador'd those Goddesses and adorn'd their Temple with many rich Gifts. They say, these Goddesses came into Cicily out of Crete, where they were most especially ador'd and honour'd. It's reported that they privatly bred up and conceal'd Jupiter from his Father Saturn. In reward of which Kindness, they were taken up into the Heavens and plac'd among the Stars, where they make the Constellation call'd Arctos. Of whom Aratus (agreeable hereunto) in his Poem of the Stars, speaks thus—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.


Page 171

Ʋpon their Shoulders him they bore away,

If that we may believe what Stories say:

From Crete great Jove advanc'd to th' Heavens clear,

And plac'd the Curetes in the Northern Bear.

For that from's Father Saturn him they hid,

When young; and th' Youth out of all danger rid.

It's not fit therefore that we should pass by in silence the piety of these Goddesses, and their Fame and Reputation amongst all Men. For they are not only ador'd by the Inhabitants of this City, but several of the Neighbouring Countries worship them with pompous Sacrifices, and other Religious Services. And the Oracle at Delphos injoyn'd many Cities to give divine Honour to these Goddesses; promising that by this means they should be bless'd both in their private and publick Concerns. And at length these Goddesses grew so Famous, that rich Gifts both of Gold and Silver were dedicated to them by the Inhabitants, and such Offerings are continu'd to the very time of writing this History. For they built to them a most sumptuous Temple, both for greatness of Structure, and Costlyness of Ornament. For in regard there was not Stone in that part of the Country fit for the raising such a Structure, they took care to have it brought from the Agyrinaeans, which was a Hundred Furlongs distance, and the way very rough and craggy, and hard to pass: And therefore to convey the Stones, they provided Wagons, and a Hundred Yoke of Oxen; being the better inabled to bear the Charge, for that the Sacred Treasures were very large. For a little before our time, there were Three Thousand Oxen dedicated to those Goddesses, and so much Land as rais'd a vast Revenue: But having said enough of this, we shall proceed to the History of Aristaeus.

Aristaeus was the Son of Apollo and Cyrene, the Daughter of Gypsaeus, who was the Son of Peneus. Of his Birth some tell this Story: They say that Cyrene was very beautiful, and brought up at Mount Pelion, and that Apollo fell in love with her, and transported her into Lybia, where in later time was built a City, call'd after her Name Cyrene. There Apollo committed his Son Aristaeus, begotten of Cyrene (then a young Infant) to the care of the Nymphs, to be brought up by them; who gave him Three several Names, Norricus, Aristaeus and Agreus. These Nymphs taught him how to curdle Milk, to order and make Bee-Hives, and plant Olive-Yards; and by this means he became the first that directed all other Men in this Art: For which he was so honour'd, that all ador'd him as a God, as much as they did Bacchus.

Afterwards they say, he went to Thebes, where he marry'd Autonoe, one of Cadmus's Daughters, by whom he had Actaeon, torn in Pieces (as the Mythologists say) by his own Dogs. Some give this Reason of his Misfortune, Because that he design'd Nuptial Imbraces with Diana in her Temple, dedicating to her what he got in hunting, for that Solemnity. Others say, because he boasted that in hunting, he excell'd Diana her self. And it is not improbable, but that the Goddess might be incens'd at either of these. For whether for the gratifying of his Lust by his Prey, he abus'd the Goddess, who was ever averse from Marriage, or that he dar'd to prefer himself in the Art of Hunting before her, who by all the Gods themselves was granted to excel all others in that respect, the Goddess was certainly most justly angry: It's therefore very probable, that being transform'd into the likeness of those Beasts he us'd to take, the Dogs when they were in pursuit of other Game, might tear him himself in Pieces.

After the Death of Actaeon, Aristaeus went to his Father the Oracle at Delphos, and there it's said, he was commanded by the Oracle to remove into the Island Coos, who told him that he should be there highly honour'd, and in great esteem with the Coons.

Thither therefore he sail'd; a Plague afterwards raging over all Greece, he sacrific'd to the Gods for the deliverance of the Grecians: When he had perfected his Sacrifice about the rising of the Dog Star, at which time the Etesian


Page 172

Winds began to rise, the Plague staid. This remarkable change (if it be seriously considered) may justly be wonder'd at; for he who had his Son torn in Pieces with Dogs, allay'd the evil Influences of the Dog-Star (which commonly are pernicious) and at that time restor'd Health to many Thousands.

Afterwards leaving his Children behind him, he went to Lybia, and from thence being furnish'd with Shipping by the Nymph his Mother, he sail'd into Sardinia, where being taken with the pleasantness of the Island, he feated himself, and improved the Ground with Planting and Tillage, and civiliz'd the Inhabitants who were before Rude and Barbarous. Here he begat Two Sons, Carmus and Calaecarpus. Afterwards he sail'd to other Islands, and staid for some time in Sicily, upon the account of its Fruitfulness both in Corn and Cattel, where he imparted several things to the Inhabitants that were of great Benefit and Advantage. Therefore it's said all the Sicilians, and especially those that had Olive-Yards, ador'd Aristaeus as a God.

At last, they say, he went into Thrace to Bacchus, where he learnt the Rites of the Orgia, and through his familiar Converse with that God, was instructed in many other things, both useful and profitable.

After he had liv'd for some time near Mount Haemus, he vanish'd away, and never was seen more; and was afterwards honour'd as a God, not only by the Barbarians in those Parts, but by all the Gracians: But concerning Aristaeus, this shall suffice.

Now to say something concerning Daphne and Eryx; it's reported that Eryx was the Son of Venus and Butes, a Native, a most Famous Prince. This Eryx for the Nobleness of his Birth on the Mothers side, was of great Esteem among the Inhabitants, and became King of part of the Island, and built a City call'd after his own Name, upon a high and lofty Hill, upon the top of which within the City, he built a Temple to Venus, adorn'd with rich Oblations, and all other stately Furniture. The Goddess in reward of the Piety of the Inhabitants, and the devotion of her Son the Founder, exprest a special Love and Kindness for this City, and upon that nam'd her self Venus Erycina.

When any seriously considers the Majesty of this Temple, he cannot but greatly admire it; for all other Sacred Structures, after they have been famous for some time, have often by the adverse Blasts of Fortune, been at length ruin'd and destroyd; but this has been so far (from the very first Dedication of it) from decreasing in its Glory, that it has grown still more and more in Reputation and Esteem. For after the Consecration of it by Eyrx, Aeneas another Son of Venus, when he arriv'd in Sicily in his Voyage to Italy, beautify'd it with many rich Oblations, because it was Consecrated to his Mother; and after him the Sicilians for many Ages together (at great Cost and Expence) ador'd this Goddess with magnificent Sacrifices, and further adorn'd her Temple with many great Oblations. The Carthaginians also in later times, when they conquer'd part of the Island, still continu'd the splendid Worship of this Goddess. And lastly, the Romans, when they became Masters of the whole Island, surpass'd all that were before 'em in the Worship of this Deity; and this they did upon good ground, for they deriv'd their Original from her, and by her means were prosperous in all their Affairs, and therefore in gratitude for so many Benefits, they return'd her the greater Honour and Esteem. For the Consuls and Praetors, and all that came as Governors into this Island, as soon as they came to Eryx, offer'd most magnificent Sacrifices, and dedicated rich Gifts for the beautifying of this Temple; and by little and little laid aside their Austerity, and pleasantly convers'd both with the Women and Children in their Jollity, looking upon this to be the only way to ingratiate themselves into the favour of the Goddess. The Roman Senate likewise out of their singular respect to this Goddess, decreed that Seventeen of the most considing Cities they had in Sicily, should make an Offering in Gold to Venus, and that the Temple should be continually guarded by Two Hundred Soldiers.

And thus though we have treated something largely of Eryx, yet the Account is not impertinent to the History of Venus.


Page 173

We shall now endeavour to relate what the Mythologists report concerning Daphnis: In Sicily they say, are Mountains call'd Herei, so pleasant for Situation, and of so sweet an Air, that no Place can be better pitcht upon than they, for Pleasure and Diversion in the Summer time: For there are many Springs of admirable sweet Water, and deckt with Trees of all sorts. There are whole Woods of tall and stately Oaks, which bear Acorns of a vast bigness, twice as many, and twice as big as in any other part of the World.

There likewise grows abundance of Roots and Herbs, natural Vines, and unspeakable number of Melons, so that a Carthaginian Army once ready to starve for want of Provision, was there reliev'd and preserv'd; and though so many Thousands were there fed, yet plenty remain'd in the Mountains still. In this Region there's a pleasant Valley, grac'd with Rows of Trees, affording a most ravishing prospect to the Eye, and likewise a Grove dedicated to the Nymphs: Here they say Daphnis was begotten by Mercury upon one of the Nymphs, and gain'd that Name from the multitude of Laurels that grow there. Being bred up by the Nymphs, and having many Herds of Cattel, he diligently follow'd the Shepherds Life; upon which account he was also call'd Bubulcus; and being very skilful and ingenious in composing Songs and Tunes, he found out the Bucolick Poems, and Harmonious Notes which are much us'd, and highly esteem'd amongst the Sicilians at this Day. They say likewise, that he often hunted with Diana, and by his dutiful observance and attendance upon the Goddess, mightily gain'd her Favour, and with his Piping and Singing, wonderfully delighted her. It's likewise said, that a Nymph falling in love with him, told him, that if he lay with any other Woman but her, he should be struck blind; which afterwards prov'd true, for lying with a King's Daughter who had made him drunk, he forthwith lost his Sight.

But this concerning Daphnis shall suffice. Now we proceed in short to the Story of Orion. It's said, that he was the biggest and strongest Man of all the Heroes, and was much given to Hunting; and being so very strong, for the sake of Vain-glory, perform'd many great Actions.

Amongst other things, by casting up a Mold, he made the Harbour call'd Acte, for Zanclus the Sicilian King, from whom the City was anciently call'd Zancle, but now Messina.

But since we make mention of Messina, we conceive it no digression if we here subjoyn what is related concerning the narrow Sea, whereon it is seated.

Some ancient Writers say, that Sicily was once a Peninsula, and afterwards became an Island, in the manner following.

The Sea beating violently upon each side of the narrowest part of the Isthmus, at length cut through and disjoyn'd one part from the other, and the place from thence was call'd Rhegium, where many Years after, was built the City now so call'd. Others say, that that narrow Neck of the Continent, was rent asunder by an Earthquake, and by that means the Sea burst into that part where the Convulsion was made. But the Poet Hesiod affirms the contrary; for he says, that the Sea being formerly broader, Orion rais'd up in the open Sea, the Promontary Pelorus, and built upon it a Temple to Neptune, religiously ador'd by the Inhabitants. After the performing of these things, they report that he sail'd into Eubaea, and there resided. Afterwards for the glory of his Actions, being fix'd as a Constellation amongst the Stars, his Name became Famous to Eternity, of whom the Poet Homer makes mention in his Poem of the Dead, in these Words:

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Next vast Orion his appearance made,

Hunting Wild Beasts within a Fruitful Mead,

Which on th' wast Mountains he had kill'd before,

When once a brazen Knotted Club he bore.


Page 174

Where likewise he takes notice of his great Bulk; and a little after making mention of Aloiades, he adds, that at Nine Years of Age, he was Four Yards and an half in thickness, and Eighteen Yards in height.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

His Mother Earth his Body did so rear,

That none for Height and Beauty might compare

With him; except Orion who excell'd

In both; and so him more than parallell'd.

Having now treated sufficiently of the Heroes and Demy-Gods, according as we at first design'd, we shall here put an end to this Book.


Page 175

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK V.

The PREFACE.

IT ought to be the special care of all Historians, not only in their Writings to observe whatever may be useful and profitable, but also to keep to a due Order and Method in the several parts of their History. This not only conduces much to direct and caution private Persons how to get and keep Estates, but is an extraordinary help to Writers, in composing of their Historical Treatises. For some there are, that though they are justly in high Esteem for their Eloquent Style, and Variety of Learning discover'd in their Writings, yet have been too careless in distributing their Matter under proper Heads; so that though the Readers may easily discern their great Pains and Industry, yet their manner of Writing deserves justly to be censur'd. Timaeus indeed was very exact in his Chronology, and extraordinarily industrious to abound in variety of Relations; but for his unseasonable and immoderate Censuresof others, may be justly tax'd and reprehended himself; who for his unbounded Liberty that he takes in this bitter Censuring, is call'd by some, the Detracter.

But Ephorus, on the contrary, in his Ʋniversal History, acts the part of an excellent Historian, both as to the Elegancy of his Style, and his accurate Method: For he divides his Books according to their several Subjects, keeping close in every Book to things of one and the same nature. Which way and order of Writing, I approve above all others, and therefore shall endeavour to imitate him as well as I can.


Page 176

CHAP. I.

A Description of Sicily. The Aeolides or Lipari 

〈…〉nds. Of

 Malta, Gaulus, Cercina, Corsica, Sardinia, Pityusa and the Baleares.

HAving design'd this Book for a Description of the Islands, we shall first begin with Sicily, being the chiefest and most remarkable for Ancient and Memorable Actions.

It was anciently call'd Trinacria, from its Shape. Afterwards by the Sicanians, the first Inhabitants, it was call'd Sicania; and at last it was call'd Sicily, from the Sicilians, who with all their People entirely transported themselves thither out of Italy.

In Circuit, it's Four Thousand, Three Hundred and Sixty Furlongs: For one of the Three Sides, from the Promontory Pelorus to Lilibeum, is a Thousand and Seven Hundred Furlongs; the other from Lilibeum to Pachinum, a Promontory of Syracuse, runs out in length a Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs. The rest contains a Thousand, One Hundred and Forty Furlongs.

The Sicilians, the Inhabitants, from old Tradition, continu'd down to them from their Fore-fathers, say, that this Island is dedicated to Ceres and Proserpine. Some of the Poets feign, that at the Marriage of Pluto and Proserpine, this Island was given to the new Bride, by Jupiter for a † Present. The most approv'd Authors say, that the Sicanians who were the ancient Possessors, were the first natural Inhabitants of this Isle; and that the Goddesses which we have before-mention'd, appear'd first in this Island; and that the fatness of the Soyl was such, that Corn first grew here of it self, which the most Eminent of all the Poets confirms in these Words—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Within this Island all things grow,

Without the help of Seed or Plow,

As Wheat and Barley; with the Vine,

From whence proceeds both Grapes and Wine,

Which with sweet Showers from above

Are brought to ripeness by great Jove.

For in the Territory of Leontium, and in many other Parts of Sicily, there grows up wild Wheat at this very Day. If it be ask'd in what part of the World these Grains were first known, before the use of Corn was found out; it's most probable that they were first brought to the best and richest Country, and therefore upon that Account, we see that the Sicilians most especially worship those Goddesses who were the first Discoverers of these Fruits. That the Rape of Proserpine was in this Country (they say) is most clear and evident from hence, that neither of these Goddesses ever resided in any other Place, but in this Island, wherein they delighted above all others. The Rape, they say, was in the Meadows of Enna, not far from the City, a Place deck'd with Violets, and all sorts of other Flowers, affording a most beautiful and pleasant Prospect. It's said, that the fragrancy of the Flowers is such, that the Dogs sent out to hunt the Game, thereby lose the benefit of their Sense, and are made incapable by their Scent to find out the Prey. This Meadow-ground in the middle and highest part of it is Champain, and well water'd, but all the Borders round are craggy, guarded with high and steep Precipices, and is supposed to lye in the very Heart of Sicily: Whence it's call'd by some the Navel of Sicily: Near


Page 177

at hand are Groves, Meadows and Gardens, surrounded with Morasses, and a deep Cave, with a Passage under Ground opening towards the North, through which they say, Pluto pass'd in his Chariot, when he forc'd away Proserpine. In this Place the Violets and other sweet Flowers flourish continually all the Year long, and present a pleasant and delightsom Prospect to the Beholders all over the flourishing Plain.

The say, that Minerva and Diana, who had both vow'd Virginity as well as Proserpine, were bred up together with her, and all Three wrought a Gown for Jupiter their Father, of the Flowers they had gather'd in Company one with another. And that they were exceedingly delighted in the Island upon the account of the familiar Converse they injoy'd one with another; so that each of them chose out a particular Place for their several Residences. Minerva made choice of those Parts near Himaera, where the Nymphs for the sake of Minerva open'd the Hot Baths about the time of Hercules his coming thither. The Inhabitants likewise dedicated the City to her (to this Day call'd Athenaeum) with the Country round about. To Diana was allotted by the Goddesses the Island at Syracuse, which from her was call'd both by the Oracles of the Gods and by Men, Ortygia. The Nymphs likewise to ingratiate themselves the more with Diana, made a mighty great Fountain in this Island, call'd Arethusa, wherein were bred many great Fishes, not only in Ancient Times, but there they remain to this very Day as Sacred and never toucht by any. But when some in time of War have made bold to feed upon 'em, they have suddenly by the apparent anger of the Goddess been afflicted with some remarkable Calamity, of which we shall write more fully in its proper Time and Place.

Proserpine injoy'd the pleasant Meadows about Enna in Common, with the other two Goddesses, and had a great Fountain call'd Cyane, in the Territories of Syracuse, consecrated to her. For they say, that Pluto after the Rape, carry'd away Proserpine in a Chariot to Syracuse, and there the Earth opening, both of them descended into Hell together, from which time in that Place arose the Spring and Lake call'd Cyane, where the Syracusians every Year celebrate a solemn Festival; at which they privatly Sacrific'd the lesser Victims, but publickly and openly they threw Bulls into the Lake; which manner of Sacrifice Hercules introduc'd, when he went over all Sicily with the Herds of Geryon. After the Rape of Proserpine, they say, Ceres (not being able to find out her Daughter) lighted Firebrands at the Irruptions of Aetna, and wandred through divers Parts of the World to seek her, and did much good where she came, especially where she was courteously receiv'd, bestowing Wheat upon the Inhabitants in a grateful return of their Civility. And because the Athenians entertain'd this Goddess with the greatest civility; therefore next to Sicily, they were the First upon whom she bestow'd this Grain; for which the People of Athens honour'd this Goddess above all others with splendid Sacrifices, and sacred Mysteries at Eleusis, which for their antiquity and sanctity are greatly esteem'd every where.

The Athenians generously communicated this Blessing of Corn to many others, and they imparted of the Seed to their Neighbours, so that by degrees the whole World was full of it.

The Sicilians therefore being the First that had the use of Corn, by reason of their Familiar Converse with Ceres and Proserpine who dwelt among them, instituted Sacrifices and Solemn Festivals to both these Goddesses, whose Names gave Reputation to the things; which Festivals were solemniz'd at such a time, as was most proper to point at the great benefit they had receiv'd: For they celebrated the Rape of Proserpine, in the time of Wheat Harvest, and perform'd these Sacrifices and Solemnities with that sanctity and application of Mind, as became them, who were oblig'd to be thankful for being prefer'd before all other People in the World with the First reception of so great a Blessing.

They had another Festival which they celebrated to Ceres at the time of Wheat Seedings; it continu'd for the space of Ten Days, and was remarkable for the Name of the Goddess; and during this time every thing was celebrated with great Pomp and Splendour; but the rest of the Worship was after the old way and Fashion. But it's a Custom among them during all these Ten Days, to use Obscene and Fifthy Language in their Converse one with another, because the Goddess being put into dumps of Melancholy for the loss of her Daughter, is put to the Smile they say, by smutty Discourse. That the Rape of Proserpine


Page 178

was in this manner, as we have before declared, many of the Ancients both Poets and Historians do generally affirm. For Carcinus the Tragaedian, who came often to Syracuse, observing how Zealous the Citizens were in celebrating the Sacreds and Festivals of Ceres, has these Verses in his Poems.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Ceres most lovely Daughter, as they say,

By Pluto's Crafty Snares was snatcht away,

Who under Ground through darksom Caves convey'd

To th' gloomy Shades below, the harmless Maid.

Her mournful Mother wept and wrung her Hands,

Seeking her Ravish'd Daughter in all Lands.

Then Aetna's Flames through all the Land did roar,

And Flakes of Fire spread the Island o're;

And while the noble Maid was thus bemoan'd,

For want of Corn the fainting Country groan'd:

And hence it is, that to this very Day,

Devoutly to these Goddesses they pray.

It's not fit we should here omit giving an Account of the Kindness and Bounty of this Goddess to Mankind: For besides that she found out Corn, she taught the Art of Husbandry, and instituted Laws, whereby Men govern'd their actions according to the Rules of Justice and Honesty: For which reason they say, she was call'd the Law-maker And certainly none can bestow greater Benefits than these imparted by her, which include both Being and Well-being. But this concerning the Antiquities of Sicily shall suffice.

But its necessary to say in brief something of the Sicanians, the first Inhabitants of Sicily, because several Historians differ in their Relations concerning them. For Philistus says they were a Colony transplanted from Iberia into this Island, and came thither from the River Sicanus from whence they were call'd Sicani. But Timaeus (condemning the Ignorance of this Writer) proves clearly and evidently that they were the Original Inhabitants; whose Reasons to prove their Antiquity being many we conceive it needless to recite. The Sicanians anciently dwelt in Villages, and built little Towns upon Hills that were naturally strong, for their better Security against Thieves and Robbers. For they were not under one General Monarch, but every Town had each a several Prince. And at first they injoy'd the whole Island, and liv'd by Tillage and improvement of the Ground: But after that Aetna burst out in Flames in many Parts of it, and streams of Fire even overflow'd the neighbouring Territory, the Country lay wast and ruin'd for a great space and Tract of Ground together. And in regard the Fire continu'd thus to spoil the Country for many years together, the Inhabitants in a Consternation forsook the Eastern Parts of Sicily, and went down into the West. At length after many Ages the Sicilians with all their Families transported themselves out of Italy, and setled in that part of the Island before forsaken by the Sicanians. Where out of a covetous desire to gain more, they incroacht still further, and made incursions into the neighbouring Countries, so that there were frequent Wars between them and the Sicanians, till by a mutual Compact and agreement they settl'd the Boundaries of each others Territories; of which we shall give a particular account in their Proper place and time. The last that sent Colonies into Sicily were the Grecians, and those very considerable, who built Cities


Page 179

upon the Sea Coasts. By the multitude of Grecians that resorted thither and the frequent and ordinary Commerce with them, they learnt both the Language, and the Grecians way of living, and lost (together with their own barbarous Dialect) their very Name likewise, and were call'd Sicilians. Having said enough of these, we shall now pass to the Islands called the Eolides, which are seven in number call'd Strongyle, Euonymus, Didyme, Phoenicusa, Hiera, Vulcania, and Lipara; in which last there's a City of the same name: These lie between Sicily and Italy in a direct line from East to West, and are distant from Sicily about an hundred and fifty Furlongs: They are much of an equal bigness; the greatest of them is in Circuit an hundred and fifty Furlongs. They have been all subject to great eruptions of Fire, the Passages of which by the openings of the Earth are apparent and visible at this day. But in Strongyle and Hiera to this very time violent Vapours burst out of the Earth, with a roaring dreadful noise; abundance likewise of Sand and Fiery stones are Vomited out of the Ground; the like to which may be seen about Mount Aetna: For some affirm that from these Islands there are Caverns within the Earth that run out as far Aetna, and so there's a Communication one with another, and therefore both these, and those Breaches and Casmas of the Earth at Aetna, cast forth their Flames at certain seasons by turns. They say that these Islands anciently were desert and uninhabited; and that afterwards Liparus Son of King Auson upon a sedition rais'd against him by his Brothers with a Fleet well man'd, Fled out of Italy into the Island, from him call'd Lipara, where he built a City of the same name, and till'd and cultivated the rest of the Islands. When he was old, Aeolus the Son of Hippotas, with some other of his Associats arriv'd in the Island, and marri'd Cyane the Daughter of Liparus; and investing the rest that he brought along with him, with the same Rights and Privileges that the natural Inhabitants injoy'd, he became supream Lord of the Island. Liparus afterwards having a desire to return into Italy, Aeolus assisted him in possessing the Country about Syrrentum, where (after he had reign'd with a general applause) he dy'd, and was bury'd in great state and funeral Pomp, and honour'd by the Inhabitants as a Demy God. This is that Aeolus (which they say) entertaind Ʋlysses in his Wandrings; and was reported to be pious towards the Gods, righteous towards Men, and kind and courteous to Strangers.

It's likwise reported that he taught Mariners the use of Sails; and by the diligent observance of Fire foretold the rising of Winds; whence he was feign'd to have a Sovereign power over the Winds; and for his Piety was call'd the Friend of the Gods. He had Six Sons, Astyochus, Xuthus, Androcles, Pheroemon, Jocastes and Agathurnus, who were all in great Reputation and esteem upon the account of the Fame of their Father's Vertues.

Amongst these Sons Jocastes reign'd as King over those Parts, lying upon the Sea-Coasts of Italy, as far as Rhegium. Pheroemon and Androcles injoy'd that Part of Sicily from the narrow cut of the Sea to Lilibaeum. That part of the Country that lyes Eastward was inhabited by the Sicilians; the other towards the West by the Sicanians, which several People were continually Quarrelling one with another: But they freely submitted to the Sons of Aeolus, for the sake of their Father's Eminent Piety, and their own gentle and sweet Dispositions. Xuthus reign'd in the Territory of Leontium, call'd from him Xuthia to this Day. Agathurnus possess'd the Region now call'd Agathynites, and built the City call'd Agathurnum, after his own Name.

Astyochus was Sovereign Lord of Lipara; and all of them imitating their Father's Piety and Justice, were in great Honour and Esteem. After the Posterity of Aeolus had reign'd successively for many Ages together, at last the Royal Line in Sicily was extinct. After which, the Sicilians were under an Aristocratical Government: But the Sicanians fell to odds one with another about the Sovereignty, and for a long time together were imbroil'd in a Civil War.

Many Years afterwards, when the other Islands (through the Severity of the Kings of Asia) were more and more empty'd of their Inhabitants, some of Cnydus and Rhodes determin'd to transplant themselves; to which end they created Pentathlus a Cnidian, their Captain (who deriv'd his Pedigree from Hippotes the Son of Hercules) and under his Conduct they transported themselves into Sicily, and arriv'd at Lilibaeum.


Page 180

This fell out in the Fiftieth Olympiad, in which Epitilidas the Laconian was Victor. At which time likewise it happen'd, that Aegestanes and Selinuntes were at War one with another; in which War (joyning with the Selinuntines) in one Battel, they lost many of their Men, and among the rest, their General Pentathlus. The Selinuntines being thus routed, those of these Strangers that surviv'd, determin'd to return Home; to which purpose they chose Gorgus Thestores and Epitherides, of the Houshold of Pentathlus, to be their Captains, who sail'd through the Tyrrhene Sea, to Lipara, where they were kindly receiv'd, and easily perswaded to enter into a League with the Inhabitants, and dwell among them, who were then scarce Five Hundred that remain'd of those that came over with Aeolus.

Afterwards when the Tyrrhenians infested the Seas with their Pyracies, (being vext with their Incursions) they prepar'd a Fleet for their Defence; and divided themselves into several Parts, some to till the Ground, and others to guard the Seas against the Pirats.

Then injoying their Estates in Common, and feeding together in Societies, they continu'd for some time in this Community of Life. Afterwards they divided Lipara (wherein was situated the Metropolitan City) amongst themselves; the rest of the Islands they Till'd and improv'd for the use of them all in Common.

At last they divided all the Islands for the space of Twenty Years; and when that time was expir'd, they again made a Division by Lot. Afterwards they overcame the Tyrrhenians in many Sea-Fights, and devoted the Tenths of the best of their Spoils to the Oracle at Delphos.

It remains we should shew by what means the City of Lipara in succeeding Ages grew to that height of Wealth, that they were not only happy in themselves, but renown'd and glorious Abroad.

This City is beautify'd by Nature with very large and fair Harbours, and furnish'd with famous Baths; for they are not only Medicinal, but by reason of their singular Properties and Qualities, afford much Pleasure and Delight; and therefore many in Sicily that are taken with strange and unusual Diseases, pass over into this Island, and by washing themselves in the hot Baths, are restor'd presently to perfect Health, even to Admiration.

And the Island it self to this Day, abounds in that famous Mineral of Allom, which brings in a great Revenue both to the Liparians and the Romans; For being in no other part of the World, and so very useful, the Inhabitants (upon good Reason) have the sole vending of this Commodity, and by setting what rate they please upon it, they grow prodigiously rich. Only indeed in the Isle of Melos, there grows a sort of small Allom, but not sufficient to supply any considerable number of Cities. This Island of Lipara is not large, but reasonably well stor'd with Fruit, and abounds with every thing necessary for the Sustenance of Man's Life; for it plentifully supplies the Inhabitants with all sorts of Fish, and bears Fruit most delicious to the Taste. But this may suffice to be said of Lipara, and the rest of the Aeolid Islands.

Next to Lipara Westward, lies a small Island uninhabited, call'd (upon a remarkable Accident) Ostales. For at the time when the Carthaginians were ingag'd in great Wars with the Syracusians, they were furnish'd with considerable Forces both at Sea and Land; amongst whom were many Mercenaries out of several Countries, which were always a turbulent sort of Men, and commonly accustom'd to raise many horrid Mutinies in the Army, especially when they receiv'd not their Pay at the Day when it was due. Some therefore there were at that time (about the number of Six Thousand) according to their usual Insolency and rude Behaviour (not receiving their Pay) first got into a Body together, and then with rude Shouts and Clamours, assaulted their Commanders. And when for want of Money, they still delay'd to pay them, they threatned they would prosecute their Right against the Carthaginians with Force of Arms, and thereupon laid hold upon their Officers; and though they receiv'd a Check from the Senate for their unruliness, yet they were the more furious and outragious. Whereupon the Senate privately order'd the Colonels and Officers to put all the Mutineers to Death; upon which Orders, they forthwith got them all on Ship-board, and (under colour of some Military Service to be perform'd)


Page 181

transported them to the Island before-mention'd, and there landed them and left them: And though they storm'd and rag'd at this Misfortune, yet they were in no capacity to revenge themselves upon the Carthaginians, but at length were all famished to Death: And being that so great a Number (as if they had been Captives of War) perish'd in so small an Island, this strait place was fill'd with the multitude of dead Mens Bones; and for this reason the Island was call'd as aforesaid.

And in this manner these Mercenaries (by the fraud of their own Officers) were brought into these Extremities, and miserably perished for want of Food.

Having now gone through the Aeolides, we shall next view those Islands that lie on both Sides of them.

Southward over against Sicily, lie Three Islands, which have all safe and commodious Harbours, and each of them a City.

The first is Malta, about Eight Hundred Furlongs from Syracuse, furnish'd with very good Harbours; and the Inhabitants are very Rich; for it's full of all sorts of Artificers, amongst whom there are excellent Weavers of fine Linen. Their Houses are very Stately and Beautiful, adorn'd with graceful Eaves, and pargeted with white Plaister. The Inhabitants are a Colony of Phaenicians, who trading as Merchants as far as the Western Ocean, resorted to this Island upon the account of its commodious Ports, and convenient situation for a Sea-Trade; and by the advantage of this Place, the Inhabitants presently became famous both for their Wealth and Merchandize.

The next is Gaulus, furnish'd with several safe Harbours, and first inhabited by the Phaenicians.

Then follows Circina, lying to the Coasts of Africa, in which is a handsom City, and most commodious Ports, wherein may ride not only Merchant Men, but Men of War.

Having spoken of the Southern Islands, we shall return to the rest near to the Lipari, which lye in the Tyrrhenian Sea; for near to Populonium (as it's call'd) a City of Hetruria, lies Aethalia, distant from Lipara, near a Hundred Furlongs, so call'd from the great Mists and Fogs that rise there. This Island abounds with Iron Stone, which they dig and cut out of the Ground to melt, in order for the making of Iron; much of which Mettal is in this sort of Stone. The Workmen imploy'd first, cut the Stone in Pieces, and then melt them in Furnaces, built and prepar'd for the purpose. In these Furnaces, the Stones by the violent heat of the Fire, are melted into several Pieces, in form like to great Spunges, which the Merchants buy by Truck and Exchange of other Wares, and transport them to Dicearchia; and other Mart-Towns.

Some of these Merchants that buy of these Wares, cause 'em to be wrought by the Copper Smiths, who beat and fashion 'em into all sorts of Tools, Instruments and other shapes and Fancies; as some they neatly beat into the shape of Birds, others into Spades, Hooks, and other sorts of Utensils. All which are transported and carry'd about into several parts of the World by the Merchants.

There's another Island, by the Greeks call'd Cyrnon, and by the Romans and Natural Inhabitants Corsica, Three Hundred Furlongs distant from Aethalia. It's an Island of an easy Access, and has a beautiful large Harbour, call'd Syra

•usium.

 There are in it two Cities Calaris and Nicaea.

The Phoceans built Calaris, at the time they were possessors of the Island, but were afterwards ejected by the Tyrrhenians. Nicaea was built by the Hetrurians, when they Lorded it as Masters at Sea, and subdu'd all the Islands that lye near adjoyning to Hetruria.

During the time the Cities of Corsica were subject to them, they exacted a Tribute from the Inhabitants, of Rozen, Wax and Hony, of which great plenty is produc'd in this Island. Corsican Bond-Slaves are naturally of such a Temper and Qualification, that for usefulness they are to be preferr'd before all others whatsoever. The Island is large, a great part of it Mountainous and Woody, and water'd with several small Rivers.


Page 182

The Inhabitants feed upon Milk, Honey and Flesh, which this Country affords plentifully, and exceed all other Barbarians in Justice and Humanity one towards another: For where any find Honey in hollow Trees in the Mountains, it's certainly his that finds it, without any further Dispute. The Sheep have all their Owners Mark set upon them, and that certainly secures the Property of their Masters, though there be no Shepherd to look after them. And in all other respects in their Converse and way of Living, every one of them in their several Stations observe the Rules of common Right and Justice. A very strange thing there is among 'em concerning the Birth of their Children; for when the Woman is in Labour, there's no care taken of her in the time of her Travel; but the Husband goes to Bed as if he were sick, and there continues for certain Days, as if he were under the Pains of a Woman in Travel.

Here grows in this Island abundance of extraordinary Box-Trees, which is the Reason that the Honey produc'd here, is many times very bitter. It's possess'd by Barbarians, whose Language is very strange and difficult to be understood; they are above the number of Thirty Thousand.

Next to this lies Sardinia, an Island as big as Sicily; it's inhabited by Barbarians, whom they call Iolaeians, sprung (as they they themselves suppose) from those few that inhabited the Country with Iolaus and the Thespidae. For at that time that Hercules instituted those so much Celebrated Games, having many Children by the Daughters of Thespius, by the Command of the Oracle, he sent them with a numerous Train, both of Barbarians and Grecians into Sardinia, to settle themselves in new Habitations.

Their Captain Iolaus (Hercules his Nephew on his Brother's side) possess'd himself of the Island, and built in it several famous Cities; and dividing the Country by Lot, call'd the People from himself, Iolaeians. He built likewise publick Schools and Temples, and left other Monuments for publick use, and general advantage, which remain to this Day.

For the most pleasant Fields of the Country are call'd after him, The Fields of Iolaus, or The Iolaeian Fields; and the People are still call'd Iolaeians from him. It was foretold likewise by the Oracle concerning his Colony, that if they were call'd after his Name, their Freedoms and Liberties should be secur'd to them for ever; and accordingly their Laws and Government have been preserv'd firm and unshaken to this Day. For though the Carthaginians, when they were in the height of their Power, took this Island, yet they could not inslave the People: for the Iolaeians fled to the Mountains, and made them Habitations under Ground, and kept and maintain'd many Herds and flocks of Cattel, which afforded them Food sufficient, both as to Milk, Cheese and Flesh. And thus leaving the Champain Parts of the Country, they were both freed from the Toyl of Plowing and Tilling the Ground; and besides, liv'd at ease in the Mountains, contented with a mean and moderate Provision, as we before said.

And although the Carthaginians often assaulted them with great Armies, yet the difficulties of the Places were such, and the windings and turnings within these Subterraneous Caves were so inexplicable, that they were ever the security of these Inhabitants from Bondage and Slavery. And lastly, the Romans, since they became Masters of the Place, have often attempted to reduce them by force of Arms, but were never able to prevail, for the Reasons before alledg'd. But to return to the ancient Times; Iolaus after he had settled all the Concerns relating to the Colony, return'd into Greece. The Thespiades after they had been Lords of the Island for many Ages, were at length expuls'd, and driven into Italy, and seated themselves in the Parts and Places about Cuma: The rest of the People return'd to their former Barbarism, and making choice of the best Captains from among their own Countrymen, have defended their Liberties to this Day.

Having said enough of Sardinia, we shall now go on with the other Islands.

Next to the before-mention'd Island, is Pityusa, so call'd from the multitude of Pine-Trees growing there, lying in the midst of the Sea, Three Days, and as many Nights Sayl from Hercules's Pillars, one Day and Nights Sail from the Coast of Africa, and only a Days Sayl from Spain; as large as Corcyra, and reasonably Fruitful. It bears some few Vines and wild Olive-Trees. Amongst other things it produces, it's most esteem'd for fine Wool. It's chequer'd with pleasant Champain Fields, and lovely Hills. There's a City in it call'd Ercsum, inhabited


Page 183

by a Colony of Carthaginians: The Island is grac'd with famous Ports, and high Walls, and a great number of stately Houses. Barbarians of several Nations inhabit there, but most are Carthaginians, a Colony of whom settled there about a Hundred and Sixty Years after the building of Carthage.

There are other Islands over against Spain, which the Grecians call Gymnesiae, because in Summer-time the Inhabitants go naked. By the Natives and the Romans they are call'd Baleares, from casting of huge massy Stones out of Slings, wherein the Inhabitants excel all other People.

The Greater of these Islands is larger than all the rest of the Islands, except these Seven, Sicily, Sardinia, Cyprus, Crete, Eubaea, Corsica, and Lesbos. It's one Days Sail distant from Spain.

The Lesser lies more Eastward, and breeds and feeds all sorts of brave and large Cattel, especially Mules, which for the largeness of their Bodies, and the exceeding noise they make in their Braying, are remarkable above all others. Both these Islands are of a good and fertile Soyl, and are Peopled with above Thirty Thousand Inhabitants.

As to the Fruits of the Earth; they are altogether destitute of Wine; the want therefore of it makes 'em the more eager after it. Neither have they any Oyl amongst them; to supply which, they press out the Oyly part of Mastick, and mix it and Swines-Grease together, and with this Composition anoint their Bodies.

They love Women exceedingly, whom they value at such a Rate, that when the Pyrats bring any Women they have taken, thither, they'l give as a Ransom Three or Four Men for one Woman. They live in Caves hew'd in the Rocks, and spend all their Days in these Holes, dug up and down in the steepest part of the Rocky Mountains, by which means they provide for themselves both shelter and security.

They make no use either of Silver or Gold Coyn, but prohibit the importation of it into the Island; for which they give this Reason: For that Hercules in former times made War upon Geryon the Son of Chrysaores, for no other reason but because he was rich in Silver and Gold; and therefore that they may live more securely, and quietly injoy what they have, they have made it a standing Law to have nothing to do with that Wealth which consists in those Metals.

According therefore to this Decree, when once heretofore in a War they assisted the Carthaginians, they brought nothing of their Pay into their own Country, but laid it all out in Wine and Women.

They have a filthy Custom likewise amongst 'em concerning their Marriages; for in their Marriage Feasts, all their Friends and Houshold Servants, as they are in Seniority of Age, one after another, carnally know the Bride, till at length it come to the Bridegrooms turn, who has the honour to be last.

They have another strange Custom likewise about the burying of their Dead; they cut the Carcass in Pieces with Wooden Knives or Axes, and so put up all the Parts into an Urn, and then raise up a great heap of Stones over it.

Their Arms are Three Slings, one they wind about their Heads, another they tye about their Loyns, and the Third they carry in their Hands. In time of War, they throw much greater Stones than any other People, and with that Violence, as if a thing were shot out of an Engine; and therefore in the time of Assaults made upon Towns, they grievously gall those that stand upon the Bulwarks, and in Field-Fights break in pieces their Enemies Shields, Helmets, and all other defensive Armour whatsoever; and are such exact Marksmen, that (for the most part) they never miss what they aim at: They attain to this Skill by contiual Exercise from their very Childhood, for while they are very Young, they are forc'd under the tutorage of their Mothers, to cast Stones out of Slings. For they fasten a Piece of Bread for a Mark to a Pole, and till the Child hit the Bread, he must fast, and then at length the Mother gives him the Bread to eat.


Page 184

CHAP. II.

Of Medera, Britain, Gallia, Celtiberia, Iberia and Tyrrhenia, and of the Inhabitants, and their Laws and Customs.

SInce we have gone through the Islands lying Eastward, on this side within the Pillars of Hercules, we shall now lanch into the main Ocean to those that lye beyond them; for over against Africa, lies a very great Island in the vast Ocean, of many Days Sayl from Lybia, Westward. The Soyl here is very fruitful, a great part whereof is Mountainous, but much likewise Champain, which is the most sweet and pleasant part of all the rest; for it's water'd with several navigable Rivers, beautify'd with many Gardens of Pleasure, planted with divers sorts of Trees, and abundance of Orchards, interlac'd with Currents of sweet Water. The Towns are adorn'd with stately Buildings, and Banquetting Houses up and down, pleasantly situated in their Gardens and Orchards. And here they recreate themselves in Summer Time, as in Places accomodated for Pleasure and Delight.

The Mountainous part of the Country is cloathed with many large Woods, and all manner of Fruit-Trees; and for the greater Delight and Diversion of People in these Mountains, they ever and anon open themselves into pleasant Vales, watered with Fountains and refreshing Springs: And indeed the whole Island abounds with Springs of sweet Water: Whence the Inhabitants not only reap pleasure and delight, but improve in Health and Strength of Body.

There you may have Game enough in Hunting all sorts of Wild Beasts, of which there's such plenty, that in their Feasts there's nothing wanting either as to Pomp or Delight. The adjoyning Sea furnishes them plentifully with Fish, for the Ocean there naturally abounds with all sorts.

The Air and Climate in this Island is very Mild and Healthful, so that the Trees bear Fruit (and other things that are produc'd there, are fresh and beautiful) most part of the Year; so that this Island (for the excellency of it in all respects) seems rather to be the Residence of some of the Gods, than of Men.

Anciently by reason of its remote situation, it was altogether unknown, but afterwards discover'd upon this occasion.

The Phaenicians in ancient Times undertook frequent Voyages by Sea, in way of Traffick as Merchants, so that they planted many Colonies both in Africa and in these Western Parts of Europe. These Merchants succeeding in their undertaking, and thereupon growing very rich, pass'd at length beyond the Pillars of Hercules, into the Sea call'd the Ocean: And first they built a City call'd Gades, near to Hercules his Pillars, at the Sea-side, in an Isthmus in Europe; in which, among other things proper for the Place, they built a stately Temple to Hercules, and instituted splendid Sacrifices to be offer'd to him after the Rites and Customs of the Phaenicians. This Temple is in great Veneration at this Day, as well as in former Ages; so that many of the Romans, famous and renown'd both for their Births and glorious Actions, have made their Vows to this God, and after Success in their Affairs, have faithfully perform'd 'em. The Phaenicians therefore upon the account before related, having found out the Coasts beyond the Pillars, and sailing along by the Shoar of Africa, were on a suddain driven by a furious Storm afar off into the main Ocean; and after they had lain under this violent Tempest for many Days, they at length arriv'd at this Island; and so coming to the Knowledge of the nature and pleasantness of this Isle, they were the first that discover'd it others: And therefore the Hetrurians (when they were Masters at Sea) design'd to send a Colony thither; but the Carthaginians oppos'd them, both fearing lest most of their own Citizens should be allur'd (through the goodness of the Island) to settle there, and likewise intending to keep it as a Place of Refuge for themselves, in case of any suddain and unexpected blasts of Fortune, which might tend to the utter ruin of their Government. For being then Potent at Sea, they doubted not but they could easily (unknown to the Conquerors) transport themselves and their Families into that


Page 185

Island. Having now spoken sufficiently of the African Ocean, and the Islands belonging to it, we shall pass over to Europe.

For over against the French Shoar, opposite to the Hircinian Mountains (which are the greatest of any in Europe) there lye in the Ocean many Islands; the greatest of which is that which they call Britain, which anciently remain'd untoucht, free from all Foreign Force; for it was never known that either Bacchus, Hercules, or any of the ancient Heroes or Princes, ever made any attempt upon it by force of Arms: But Julius Caesar in our time (who by his great Atchievments gain'd the Title of Divine) was the first (that any other makes mention of) that conquer'd the Island, and compell'd the Britains to pay Tribute. But these things shall be more particularly treated of in their proper time: We shall now only say something concerning the Island, and the Tin that's found there.

In Form it's Triangular, like Sicily; but the Sides are unequal. It lies in an Oblique Line, over against the Continent of Europe; so that the Promontory call'd Cantium, next to the Continent (they say) is about a Hundred Furlongs from the Land: Here the Sea ebbs and flows; but the other Point call'd Belerium, is Four Days Sail from the Continent.

The last call'd Horcas or Orcas, runs out far into the Sea. The least of the Sides facing the whole Continent, is Seven Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs in length; the Second stretching out itself all along from the Sea to the highest Point, is Fifteen Thousand Furlongs, and the last is Twenty Thousand. So that the whole Compass of the Island is Forty Two Thousand, Five Hundred Furlongs. The Inhabitants are the Original People thereof, and live to this time after their own ancient manner and custom: For in Fights they use Chariots, as it's said the old Grecian Heroes did in the Trojan War. They dwell in mean Cottages, covered for the most part with Reeds or Sticks. In reaping of their Corn, they cut off the Ears from the Stalk, and so house them up in Repositories under Ground; thence they take and pluck out the Grains of as many of the oldest of them as may serve them for the day, and after they have bruis'd the Corn, make it into Bread. They are of much Sincerity and Integrity, far from the Craft and Knavery of Men among us; contented with plain and homely Fare, Strangers to the Excess and Luxury of Rich Men. The Island is very Populous, but of a cold Climate, subject to Frosts, being under the Artick Pole. They are govern'd by several Kings and Princes, who for the most part are at Peace and Amity one with another. But of their Laws and other things peculiar to this Island, we shall treat more particularly, when we come to Caesar's Expedition into Britain.

Now we shall speak something of the Tin that's dug and gotten there. They that inhabit the British Promontary of Balerium, by reason of their Converse with Merchants, are more civiliz'd and courteous to Strangers than the rest are. These are the People that make the Tin, which with a great deal of Care and Labour they dig out of the Ground; and that being Rocky, the Meetle is mixt with some Veins of Earth, out of which they melt the Mettle, and then refine it: Then they beat it into Four-square Pieces like to a Dye, and carry it to a British Isle near at Hand, call'd Ictis. For at low Tide, all being dry between them and the Island, they convey over in Carts abundance of Tin in the mean time. But there's one thing peculiar to these Islands which lye between Britain and Europe: For at Full Sea, they appear to be Islands, but at low Water for a long Way, they look like so many Peninsula's. Hence the Merchants transport the Tin they buy of the Inhabitants, to France; and for Thirty Days Journey, they carry it in Packs upon Horses Backs through France, to the Mouth of the River Rhosne. But thus much concerning Tin. Now something remains to be said of Amber.

Over against Scythia above Gall in the Ocean, lies an Island call'd Basilea, upon which there's cast by the working of the Sea, abundance of Amber, not to be found in any other part of the World.


Page 186

Many of the ancient Historians have written incredible Stories of this Amber, which since have been experienc'd to be false: For many Poets and other Writers report, that Phaeton the Son of Sol, while he was but as yet a young Boy, prevail'd with his Father to give him liberty to drive his Chariot for one Day: Which Request obtain'd, the Youth not being able to manage the Reins, the Horses scorn'd the Charioteer, and forsook their ancient Course, and ran wildly and disorderly through the Heavens, and first set them on Fire, and by that means caus'd that Tract call'd the Milky Way; then burning up a great part of the Earth, many Countries were laid waste; at which Jupiter was so inrag'd, that he threw a Thunder-blot at Phaeton, and commanded Sol to guide his Steeds into their wonted Course: And that Phaeton himself fell down into the River Po, anciently call'd Eridanus; and that his Sisters greatly bewailing his Death, (through excessive grief) chang'd their Nature, and were transform'd into Poplar Trees, which Yearly to this Day distil their Tears, and by Concretion (they say) becomes this Electrum or Amber, which for Beauty and Brightness, excels all others of its Kind, and is distill'd most in that Country, when the Deaths of Young Men are solemnly bewail'd. But forasmuch as they that have invented this Story, have turn'd their Backs upon Truth, and that later Ages have disprov'd it by Experience of the Contrary, regard is rather to be had to true and Faithful Historians. For Amber is gather'd in this Island before-mention'd, and transported by the Inhabitants into the opposite Continent, from whence it's brought over to us in these Parts as is before declar'd.

After this Account given of the Western Islands, we conceive it not impertinent, if we briefly relate some things which were omitted in the former Books concerning the Neighbouring Nations in Europe.

In Celtica (they say) once rul'd a famous Man, who had a Daughter of a more Tall and Majestick Stature than ordinary, and for Beauty far beyond all others of her Sex. This Lady glorying much both in her Strength and Beauty, despis'd all that courted her, as judging none worthy of her Bed. It happened that Hercules at the time he was ingag'd in the War against Gallia, marcht into Celtica, and there built Alesia. When this young Virgin saw him, admiring both his Valour and stately Proportion, she readily admitted him to her Bed; yet not without the consent of her Parents. Of this Lady he begat Galetes, who for Virtues of Mind, and strength of Body, far excell'd the rest of his Nation. When he came to Man's Estate, and was possess'd of his Grandfather's Kingdom, he subdu'd many of the Neighbouring Countries, and perform'd many notable Atchievments by his Sword. His Valour being every where nois'd Abroad, he call'd his Subjects after his own Name, Galatians, and the Country Gallatia, Gall.

Having shewn the Original of the Name, something is to be said of the Country it self. Gall is inhabited by several Nations, but not all alike Populous: The greatest of them have in 'em Two Hundred Thousand Men, the least but Fifty Thousand. Of these there's one that has been an Ancient Ally of the Romans, and continues so to this Day.

In regard it lies for the greatest part under the Artick Pole, it's very cold, and subject to Frosts; for in Winter in Cloudy Days, instead of Rain, the Earth is cover'd with Snow; in clear Weather, every Place is so full of Ice and Frost, that the Rivers are frozen up to that degree, that they are naturally cover'd over with Bridges of Ice. For not only a small Company of Travellers, but vast Armies, with their Chariots and loaden Carriages, may pass over without any danger or hazard.

There are many great Rivers run through Gaul, which by their various Windings and turnings cut through and parcel the Champain Grounds, some of which have their Spring-heads from deep Lakes, others issue out from the Mountains, and empty themselves either into the Ocean or into our Seas.

The greatest that falls into our Sea, is the Rhosne, which rises out of the Alps, and at Five Mouths, disgorges itself into the Sea. Of those that empty themselves into the Ocean, the greatest are the Danube and the Rhine; over the last of which Caesar, call'd Divus, (in our time) to admiration, cast a Bridge, and past over his Forces, and subdu'd the Gauls on the other side.


Page 187

There are many other Navigable Rivers in Celtica, to write of which particularly would be tedious: Almost all of them are some times Frozen up, as if Bridges were cast over their Channels. But the Ice being naturally smooth, and therefore Slippery to the Passengers, they throw Chaff upon it that they may go the more firmly.

In many Places of Gaul, there's something strange and very remarkable, which is not fit to pass over in silence. For the West and North Winds in Summer are so fierce and violent, that they fling into the Air great Stones as big as a Man can grasp in his Hands, together with a Cloud of Gravel and Dust. Nay, the violence of this Whirlwind is such, that it forces Mens Arms out of their Hands, rents their Cloaths off their Backs, and dismounts the Rider from his Horse.

This excessive Cold and immoderate Temper of the Air, is the cause why the Earth in these Parts produces neither Wine nor Oyl; and therefore the Gauls to supply the want of these Fruits, make a Drink of Barley, which they call Xythus: They mix likewise their Hony-Combs with Water, and make use of that for the same purpose. They are so exceedingly given to Wine, that they guzle it down as soon as it is imported by the Merchant, and are so eager and inordinate, that making themselves drunk, they either fall dead asleep, or become stark mad. So that many Italian Merchants (to gratify their own Covetousness) make use of the Drunkenness of the Gauls to advance their own profit and gain. For they convey the Wine to 'em both by Navigable Rivers, and by Land in Carts, and bring back an incredible price: For in lieu of a Hogshead of Wine, they receive a Boy, giving Drink in truck for a Servant.

In Gaul there are no Silver Mines, but much Gold, with which the nature of the Place supplies the Inhabitants, without the labour or toyl of digging in the Mines. For the winding Course of the River washing with its Streams, the Feet of the Mountains, carries away great pieces of Golden Ore, which those imploy'd in this business gather, and then grind and bruise these Clods of Golden Earth; and when they have so done, cleanse them from the gross Earthy part, by washing them in Water, and then melt them in a Furnace; and thus get together a vast heap of Gold, with which not only the Women, but the Men deck and adorn themselves. For they wear Bracelets of this Mettal about their Wrists and Arms, and massy Chains of pure and beaten Gold about their Necks, and weighty Rings upon their Fingers, and Croslets of Gold upon their Breasts. The Custom observ'd by the higher Gauls in the Temples of their Gods, is admirably remarkable; for in their Oratories and sacred Temples of this Country, in honour of their Gods they scatter Pieces of Gold up and down, which none of the Inhabitants (their superstitious Devotion is such) will in the least touch or meddle with, tho the Gauls are of themselves most exceeding Covetous.

For Stature they are tall, but of a sweaty and pale Complexion, Red-Hair'd, not only Naturally, but they endeavour all they can to make it redder by Art. They often wash their Hair in a Water boyl'd with Lime, and turn it backward from the Forehead to the Crown of the Head, and thence to their very Necks, that their Faces may be more fully seen, so that they look like Satyrs and Hobgoblins. By this sort of management of themselves, their Hair is as hard a Horse's Mane. Some of them shave their Beards; others let them grow a little. The Persons of Quality shave their Chins close, but their Mustaches they let fall so low, that they even cover their Mouths; so that when they eat, their Meat hangs tangling in their Hair; and when they drink, the Liquor runs through their Mustaches as through a Sieve. At Meal-time they all sit, not upon Seats, but upon the Ground, and instead of Carpets, spread Wolves or Dogs Skins under them. Young Boys and Girls attend them, such as are yet but meer Children. Near at Hand they have their Chimneys, with their Fires well furnish'd with Pots and Spits full of whole Joynts of Flesh Meat; and the best and fairest Joynts (in a way of due honour and regard) they set before the Persons of best Quality: As Homer introduces the Grecian Captains entertaining of Ajax, when he return'd Victor from his single Combat with Hector, in this Verse—

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

But Agamemnon as a favouring Sign,

Before great Ajax set the lusty Chine.


Page 188

They invite likewise Strangers to their Feasts, and after all's over, they ask who they are, and what's their Business. In the very midst of Feasting, upon any small occasion, it's ordinary for them in a heat to rise, and without any regard of their Lives, to fall to it with their Swords. For the opinion of Pythagoras prevails much amongst them, that Mens Souls are Immortal, and that there is a Transmigration of them into other Bodies, and after a certain time they live again; and therefore in their Funerals they write Letters to their Friends, and throw them into the Funeral Pile, as if they were to be read by the Deceas'd. In their Journeys and Fights they use Chariots drawn with Two Horses, which carry a Charioteer and a Souldier, and when they meet Horsemen in the Battle, they fall upon their Enemies with their Saunians; then quitting their Chariots, they to it with their Swords. There are some of them that so despise Death, that they'l Fight naked, with something only about their Loyns. They carry along with them to the Wars for their Servants Libertines, chosen out of the poorer sort of People, whom they make use of for Wagoners, and Pedees. When the Army is drawn up in Battalia, it's usual for some of 'em to step out before the Army, and to challenge the stoutest of their Enemy to a single Combat, brandishing their Arms to terrify their Adversary. If any comes forth to fight with them, then they sing some Song in commendation of the valiant Acts of their Ancestors, and blazon out their own Praises: On the contrary they vilify their Adversary, and give forth slighting and contemptuous Words, as if he had not the least Courage. When at any time they cut off their Enemies Heads, they hang 'em about their Horses Necks.

They deliver their Spoils to their Servants, all besinear'd with Blood, to be carry'd before them in Triumph, they themselves in the mean time singing the triumphant Paean. And as the chief of their Spoils, they fasten those that they have kill'd, over the Doors of their Houses, as if they were so many Wild Beasts taken in Hunting. The Heads of their Enemies that were the chiefest Persons of Quality, they carefully deposite in Chests, emblaming them with the Oyl of Cedars, and shewing them to Strangers, glory and boast how that some of their Ancestors, their Fathers or themselves (though great Sums of Money have been offer'd for them) yet have refus'd to accept 'em.

Some glory so much upon this account, that they refuse to take for one of these heads its weight in Gold; in this manner exposing their barbarous Magnanimity. For it's brave and generous indeed not to sell the Ensigns of true Valour; but to fight with the dead Bodies of those that were Men like our selves, resembles the cruelty of wild Beasts.

Their Garments are very strange; for they wear party coloured Coats, interwoven here and there with divers sorts of Flowers; and Hose which they call Brac

•.

 They make likewise their Cassocks of † Basket-work join'd together with Laces on the inside, and chequer'd with many pieces of work like Flowers; those they wear in Winter are thicker, those in Summer more slender.

Their defensive Arms are a Shield, proportionable to the height of a Man, garnish'd with their own Ensigns.

Some carry the shapes of Beasts in Brass, artifically wrought, as well for Defence as Ornament. Upon their Heads they wear Helmets of Brass, with large Pieces of Work rais'd upon 'em for ostentation sake, to be admir'd by the Beholders; for they have either Horns of the same Mettal joyn'd to them, or the shapes of Birds and Beasts carv'd upon them. They have Trumpets after the Barbarian manner, which in sounding make a horrid noise, to strike a terror fit and proper for the occasion. Some of them wear Iron Breast-plates, and hookt; but others, content with what Arms Nature affords them, fight naked. For Swords, they use a long and broad Weapon call'd Spatha, which they hang cross their right Thigh by Iron or Brazen Chains. Some gird themselves over their Coats, with Belts gilt with Gold or Silver. For Darts they cast those they call Launces, whose Iron Shafts are a Cubit or more in length, and almost Two Hands in breadth.

For their Swords are as big as the Saunians of other People; but the Points of their Saunians are larger than those of their Swords; some of them are straight, others bow'd and bending backwards, so that they not only cut, but


Page 189

break the Flesh; and when the Dart is drawn out, it tears and rents the Wound most miserably.

These People are of a most terrible Aspect, and have a most dreadful and loud Voice. In their Converse they are sparing of their Words, and speak many things darkly and * figuratively. They are High and Hyperbolical in trumpeting out their own Praises, but speak slightly and contemptibly of others. They are apt to menace others, self-opinionated, grievously provoking; of sharp Wits, and apt to learn.

Among them they have Poets, that sing melodious Songs, whom they call Bards, who to their Musical Instruments like unto Harps, chant forth the praises of some, and the dispraises of others.

There are likewise among them Philosophers and Divines, whom they call Saronidae, and are held in great Veneration and Esteem. Prophets likewise they have, whom they highly honour, who foretel future Events, by viewing the Intrals of the Sacrifices; and to these Soothsayers all the People generally are very observant.

When they are to consult of some great and weighty matter, they observe a most strange and incredible Custom; for they sacrifice a Man, striking him with a Sword near the Diaphragma cross over his Breast, who being thus slain, and falling down, they judge of the Event from the manner of his Fall, the Convulsion of his Members, and the Flux of Blood; and this has gain'd among them (by long and ancient usage) a firm credit and belief.

It's not lawful to offer any Sacrifice without a Philosopher; for they hold that by these, as Men acquainted with the nature of the Deity, and familiar in their Converse with the Gods, they ought to present their Thank-Offerings, and by these Ambassadors to desire such things as are good for them. These Druids and Bards are observ'd and obey'd, not only in times of Peace but War also, both by Friends and Enemies. 

Many times these Philosophers and Poets stepping in between Two Armies, when they are just ready to ingage near at Hand, with their Swords drawn, and Spears presented one against another, have pacify'd them, as if some wild Beasts had been tam'd by Inchantments. Thus Rage is master'd by Wisdom, even amongst the most Savage Barbarians; and Mars himself reverences the Muses.

And now it will be worth while to declare, that which Multitudes are altogether ignorant of. Those who inhabit the Inland Parts beyond Massylia, and about the Alps, and on this side the Pyrenean Mountains, are call'd Celts: But those that inhabit below this part call'd Celtica, Southward to the Ocean and the Mountain Hyrcinus, and all as far to Scythia, are call'd Gauls. But the Romans call all these People generally by one and the same Name, Gauls.

The Women here are both as Tall and as Couragious as the Men. The Children for the most part from their very Birth are gray-headed; but when they grow up to Mens Estate, their Hair changes in Colour like to their Parents. Those towards the North, and bordering upon Scythia, are so exceeding Fierce and Cruel, that (as Report goes) they eat Men, like the Britians that inhabit Iris.

They are so noted for a fierce and warlike People, that some have thought them to be those that anciently overran all Asia, and were then call'd Cimmerians, and who are now (through length of time) with a little alteration call'd Cimbrians.

Anciently they gave themselves to Rapine and Spoil, wasting and destroying other Countries, and slighted and despis'd all other People. These are they that took Rome, and rob'd the Temple at Delphos. These brought a great part of Europe and Asia under Tribute, and possess'd themselves of some of the Countries of those they subdu'd. Because of their mixture with the Grecians, they were at last call'd Gallo-Grecians. They often routed and destroy'd many great Armies of the Romans.

According to their natural Cruelty, they are as impious in the Worship of their Gods; for Malefactors after that they have been kept close Prisoners Five Years together, they impale upon Stakes, in honour to the Gods, and then with many other Victims upon a vast Pile of Wood, they offer them up as a burnt


Page 190

Sacrifice to their Deities. In like manner they use their Captives also, as Sacrifices to the Gods. Some of them cut the Throats, burn or otherwise destroy both Men and Beasts that they have taken in time of War: Though they have very beautiful Women among them, yet they little value their private Society, but are transported with raging Lust to the filthy act of Sodomy; and lying upon the Ground on Beasts Skins spread under them, they there tumble together, with their Catamites lying on both sides of them. And that which is the most abominable is, that without all sense of Shame, or regard to their Reputation, they'l readily prostitute their Bodies to others upon every occasion. And they are so far from looking upon it to be any fault, that they judge it a mean and dishonourable thing, for any thus caress'd, to refuse the favour offer'd them.

Having spoken of the Celts, we shall now give an account of their Neighbours the Celtiberians. The Two Nations Celts and Iberians, heretofore breaking forth into a War about the Boundaries of their Countries, at length agreed to inhabit together promiscuously, and so marrying one with another, their Issue and Posterity (they say) afterwards were call'd Celtiberians. Two Potent Nations being thus united, and possess'd likewise of a rich and fertil Country, these Celtiberians became very famous and renown'd; so that the Romans had much ado to subdue them after long and tedious Wars with them. These Celtiberians bring into the Field not only stout and valiant Horsemen, but brave Foot, both for strength and hardiness able to undergo all manner of Labour and Toyl. They wear black rough Cassocks made of Wool, like to Goats Hair. Some of them are arm'd with the Gauls light Shields, others with Bucklers as big as Shields, and wear Greaves about their Legs made of rough Hair, and brazen Helmets upon their Heads, adorn'd with Red Plumes. They carry Two-edg'd Swords exactly temper'd with Steel, and have Daggers beside, of a Span long, which they make use of in close Fights. They make Weapons and Darts in an admirable manner, for they bury Plates of Iron so long under Ground, till the Rust hath consum'd the weaker part, and so the rest becomes more strong and firm: Of this they make their Swords and other Warlike Weapons; and with these Arms thus temper'd, they so cut through every thing in their way, that neither Shield, Helmet, nor Bone can withstand them. And because they are furnish'd with Two Swords, the Horse when they have routed the Enemy, light and joyn with the Foot, and fight to admiration.

There's another strange and wonderful Custom they have amongst 'em; for though they are very nice and curious in their Diet, yet they have a very fordid and filthy Practice, to wash their whole Bodies over with Urin, and rub their very Teeth with it, which is counted a certain means of Health to their Bodies. As to their Manners, they are very cruel towards their Enemies and other Malefactors, but very Courteous and Civil to Strangers: For to all such from what Place soever they come, they readily and freely entertain them, and strive who shall perform the greatest Office of Kindness and Respect. Those who are attended upon by Strangers, they commend and esteem them as Friends of the Gods. They live upon all sorts of Flesh in great Plenty, and their Drink is made of Honey, their Country abounding therewith: But they buy Wine also of the Merchants that Traffick thither.

Of those that border upon them, the most civiliz'd Nations are the Vaccaei, who every Year divide the Lands among them, and then Till and Plow it, and after Harvest, distribute the Fruits, allotting to every one their Share; and therefore it's Death to Steal, or underhand to convey away any thing from the Husbandman. Those they call Lusitanians, are most valiant of all the Cimbri. These in Times of War carry little Targets made of Bowel Strings, so strong and firm, as compleatly to guard and defend their Bodies. In Fights they manage these, so nimbly whirling them about here and there, that with a great deal of Art they avoid and repel every Dart that's cast at them.

They use hookt Saunians made all of Iron, and wear Swords and Helmets like to those of the Celtiberians. They throw their Darts at a great distance, and yet are sure to hit their Mark, and wound deeply: Being of active and nimble Bodies,


Page 191

they can easily fly from, or pursue their Enemy, as there is occasion: But when they are under Hardships, they cannot bear near so much as the Celtiberians. In time of Peace, they have a kind of a light and airy way of Dancing, which requires great agility and nimbleness of the Legs and Thighs: In time of War they march observing time and measure; and sing the Paeans when they are just ready to charge the Enemy.

The Iberians, especially the Lusitanians, are singular in one thing that they do; for those that are young and prest with 

•

ant, but yet are strong and couragious, get together upon the Tops of the Mountains, and furnish themselves with Arms; and having made up a considerable Body, make Incursions into Iberia, and heap up Riches by Thieving and Robbery; and this is their constant Practice in despite of all hazard whatsoever; for being lightly arm'd, and nimble of Foot, they are not easily surpriz'd. And indeed steep and craggy Mountains are to them as their natural Country, and to these they fly for shelter, because there's no way in those Places for great Armies to pass. And therefore though the Romans often set upon them, and in some measure have curb'd them, yet they were never able wholly to put an end to their Thieving and Robbing.

Having related what concerns the Iberians, we conceive it not impertinent to say something of their Silver Mines. For almost all this Country is full of such Mines, whence is dug very good and pure Silver; from whence those that deal in that Mettal, gain exceeding great Profit. And in the former Book we have spoken of the Pyrenean Mountains in Iberia, when we treated of the Acts and Atchievements of Hercules: These are the highest and greatest of all others; for from the South-Sea, almost as far as to the Northern Ocean, they divide Gall from Iberia and Celtiberia, running out for the space of Three Thousand Furlongs. These Places being full of Woods, and thick of Trees, it's reported that in ancient time this Mountainous Tract was set on Fire by some Shepherds, which continuing burning for many Days together, (whence the Mountains were call'd † Pyrenean) the parch'd Superficies of the Earth swet, abundance of Silver and the Ore being melted, the Metal flow'd down in Streams of pure Silver, like a River; the use whereof being unknown to the Inhabitants, the Phaenician Merchants bought it for Trifles given for it in Exchange, and by transporting it into Greece, Asia and all other Nations, greatly inricht themselves; and such was their Covetousness, that when they had fully loaded their Ships, and had much more Silver to bring Aboard, they cut off the Lead from their Anchors, and made use of Silver instead of the other.

The Phaenicians for a long time using this Trade, and so growing more and more wealthy, sent many Colonies into Sicily and the Neighbouring Islands, and at length into Africa and Sardinia: But a long time after the Iberians coming to understand the nature of the Metal, sunk many large Mines, whence they dug an infinite quantity of pure Silver (as never was the like almost in any other place of the World) whereby they gain'd exceeding great Wealth and Revenues.

The manner of working in these Mines, and ordering the Metal among the Iberians is thus; there being extraordinary rich Mines in this Country, of Gold as well as Silver and Brass, the Labourers in the Brass take a Fourth part of the pure Brass dug up, to their own use, and the common Labourers in Silver have an Euboick Talent for their Labour in Three Days time; for the whole Soil is full of solid and shining Oar, so that both the nature of the Ground, and the industry of the Workmen is admirable. At the first every common Person might dig for this Metal; and in regard the Silver Ore was easily got, ordinary Men grew very rich: But after that Iberia came into the Hands of the Romans, the Mines were manag'd by a throng of Italians, whose Covetousness loaded them with abundance of Riches; for they bought a great number of Slaves, and deliver'd them to the Task-masters and Overseers of the Mines. These Slaves open the Mouths of the Mines in many Places, where digging deep into the Ground, are found Massy Clods of Earth, full of Gold and Silver; and in sinking both in length and depth, they carry on their Works in undermining the Earth many Furlongs distance, the Workmen every way here and there making Galleries under Ground, and bringing up all the Massy Pieces of Ore (whence the Profit and Gain is to be had) even out of the lowest Bowels of the Earth.


Page 192

There's a great difference between these Mines and those in At

•ica;

 for besides the Labour, they that search there are at great Cost and Charge; and besides are often frustrated of their hopes, and sometimes lose what they had found, so that they seem to be unfortunate to a Proverb: But those in Iberia that deal in Mines, according to their Expectations, are greatly inricht by their Labours; for they succeed at their very first sinking, and afterwards by reason of the extraordinary richness of the Soyl, they find more and more resplendent Veins of Ore, full of Gold and Silver; for the whole Soil round about is interlac'd on every hand with these Metals. Sometimes at a great depth they meet with Rivers under-ground, but by Art give a check to the violence of their Current; for by cutting of Trenches under ground, they divert the Stream; and being sure to gain what they aim at, when they have begun, they never leave till they have sinished it; and to admiration they pump out those Floods of Water with those Instruments call'd Aegyptian Pumps, invented by Archimedes the Syracusian, when he was in Egypt. By these with constant pumping by turns, they throw up the Water to the Mouth of the Pit, and by this means drain the Mine dry, and make the Place fit for their Work. For this Engin is so ingeniously contriv'd, that a vast Quantity of Water is strangely with little Labour cast out, and the whole Flux is thrown up from the very bottom, to the Surface of the Earth.

The Ingenuity of this Artist is justly to be admir'd, not only in these Pumps, but in many other far greater things, for which he is famous all the World over, of which we shall distinctly give an exact narration, when we come to the time wherein he liv'd.

Now though these Slaves that continue as so many Prisoners in these Mines, incredibly inrich their Masters by their Labours, yet toyling Night and Day in these Golden Prisons, many of them by being over-wrought, dye under Ground. For they have no rest nor intermission from their Labours; but the Task-masters by Stripes force them to intollerable hardships, so that at length they dye most miserably. Some that through the Strength of their Bodies, and vigour of their Spirits are able to endure it, continue a long time in those Miseries, whose Calamities are such, that Death to them is far more eligible than Life.

Since these Mines afforded such wonderful Riches, it may be greatly admir'd that none appear to have been sunk of later Times: But in answer hereunto, the Covetousness of the Carthaginians, when they were Masters of Spain, open'd all: And hence it was they grew so Rich and Potent, and hir'd so many Valiant Soldiers, by whose assistance they carry'd on so many great Wars, that they neither trusted to the Soldiers rais'd from among their own Citizens, nor to those of their Confederates, but involv'd the Romans, Sicilians and Africans in extream Hazards, almost to their utter Ruins, by conquering all with their Monies dug out of the Mines. For the Carthaginians were ever of old excessively thirsting after Gain, and the Italians came not one jot behind any of them, but were as eager to ingross all.

In many Places of Spain there's found also Tin; but not upon the Surface of the Ground, as some Historians report, but they dig it up, and melt it down as they do Gold and Silver. Above Lusitania there's much of this Tin Metal that is in the Islands, lying in the Ocean over against Iberia, which are therefore call'd Cassiterides; and much of it likewise is transported out of Britain into Gaul, the opposite Continent, which the Merchants carry on Horse-backs through the heart of Celtica to Marselles, and the City call'd Narbo, which City is a Roman Colony, and the greatest Mart Town for Wealth and Trade in those Parts.

But now having done with the Gauls and Celtiberians, we shall pass to the Ligurians. They inhabit a rough and barren Country, and live a toylsom and troublesom Life in their daily Labour for their common Sustinence; for the Country being Mountainous and full of Woods, some are imploy'd all Day long in cutting down Trees, being furnish'd with strong and great Hatchets for that purpose. The Husbandman's business for the most part lies in hewing and breaking Rocks, the Soyl is so very rough and craggy; for there's not a Clod of Earth they can dig up without a Stone; and though they continually thus conflict so many Hardships, yet Custom has turn'd it to a Second Nature; and after all their Labour


Page 193

and Toyl, they reap but very little Fruit, scarce sufficient to supply their Necessities. Daily Toil therefore, and scarcity of Food, is the reason they are so Lean, and nothing but Sinews. The Women share in these Laborious Tasks as much as the Men: These People hunt often, and take many wild Beasts, by which they supply the want of Bread. Being therefore accustom'd to range the Snowy Mountains, and climb the rough and craggy Hills, their Bodies are very strong and brawny. Some of them for want of Corn and other Fruits, drink Water; and feed upon Locusts and wild Beasts, and cram their Bellies with such Herbs as the Land there produces; their Country being altogether a Stranger to those desirable Deities, Ceres and Bacchus.

In the Night they lie in the Fields, and very seldom so much as in the meanest Huts or Cottages; but most commonly in hollow Rocks, and natural Caves, wheresoever they judge there may be a convenient shelter for them; and much after this manner they do in all other things, living after the old fordid and barbarous manner.

In short, the Women here are as strong as Men, and the Men as Beasts; and therefore it's reported, that in their Wars, sometimes the biggest Men among the Gauls, have been foyl'd and slain in a single Combat upon a Challenge, by a little slender Ligurian.

They are lighter arm'd than the Romans, for they defend themselves with a long Shield, made after the fashion of the Gauls, and their Cassocks are girt about them with a Belt: They wear wild Beasts Skins, and carry a Sword of an ordinary length: But some of them conversing much with the Romans, have chang'd their ancient manner of arming themselves, and have imitated their Lords and Masters. They are bold and daring, not only in times of War, but upon all other occasions. For in their Traffick they sail through the Sardonian and African Seas, exposing themselves to great Hazards in little Skiffs, less than the ordinary Ships, without the help of any other Vessels; in which notwithstanding they'l boldly (to admiration) venture to weather out the greatest Storms and Tempests.

Now it remains we should speak of the Tyrrhenians: They were anciently very valiant, and injoy'd a large Country, and built many Famous Cities; and having a great Navy, were long Masters at Sea, and call'd the Sea lying under Italy the Tyrrhenian Sea, after their own Name. Amongst other things wherewith they furnish'd their Land Army, they found out the most useful Instrument for War, the Trumpet, which from them is call'd Tyrrhena. To the Generals of their Army they gave these Badges of Honour; they allow'd them an Ivory Throne, and a Purple Robe. They were the first that invented Portico's or Galleries to their Houses, to avoid the trouble and noise of a croud of Servants, and other Hangers-on; most of which being imitated by the Romans, and brought into their Commonwealth, were afterwards improv'd to a great degree of Curiosity. They gave themselves much to Learning, especially to the study of natural Philosophy; and amongst natural Events, mightily intent (above all others) to find out the nature of Thunder and Lightning: And therefore to this Day, they are admir'd by all Princes all the World over, who make use of them to interpret all the Prodigious effects of Thunder.

They injoy a very rich Country, and well Till'd and Improv'd; and so reap abundance of all sorts of Fruits, not only for their necessary Food, but for Pleasure and Delight.

They had their Tables spread twice a Day, furnish'd with all sorts of Varieties, even to Luxury and Excess.

Their Foot-Carpets are interwoven with Flower-works, and abundance of Silver Cups, and great variety of them they make use of. Of Houshold Servants they have great numbers, some of whom are very beautiful, and others exceeding rich in Apparel, above the Condition of Servants.

Both Servants and Freemen have several Apartments allow'd them, compleatly furnish'd with all manner of Adornments. At last they threw off their former Sobriety, and now live an idle and debaucht Life, in Riot and Drunkenness; so


Page 194

that it's no wonder that they have lost the Honour and Reputation their Fore-fathers gain'd by Warlike Atchievments. The goodness of the Soyl does not a little add Fuel to their Luxury, for they injoy a most Fertile Country, rich Land, whence they reap abundance of all sorts of Fruits: For Hetruria is second to none for Fertility of Soil, being a large Champain Country, yet distinguish'd with rising Hills here and there, fit and commodious likewise for Tillage: It's water'd also with moderate Showers, not only in the Winter, but in the Summer Season.

CHAP. III.

Of Gredosia. Of the Isles of the Arabian Sea. Of the Holy Island. Of Panchaea. Of Samothracia. Of Naxus, Syme, Nausus, Calydna, Nisyrus, Carpathus. Of Rhodes, and of Chersonesus.

HAving gone through the Western and Northern Countries, and the Islands of the Ocean, we shall now describe the Southern Islands lying in the Arabian Ocean, on the East part of Arabia next to Gredosia. This part of Arabia is a Country full of Villages, and considerable Towns, some of which are situated upon high Hills, others upon rising Grounds, or something higher than Champain Fields. Their greatest Cities have stately Royal Palaces, and are very wealthy and Populous: The Country abounds with all sorts of Cattel, and is of a very fruitful Soyl, affording plenty of rich Pasture for the Flocks and Herds: Many Rivers run through it, watering the Fields, to the great increase of the Fruits of the Earth. And therefore this part of Arabia which excels the rest in richness of Soil is justly call'd Arabia the Happy.

Over against the utmost point of this Country near the Ocean, lye many Islands but there are but Three that are worth remark: The First is call'd the Holy Island, wherein it's unlawful to bury the Dead: But not far from this, about Seven Furlongs distant, there's another wherein they bury: The Sacred Isle chiefly produces Frankincense, and in that abundance, as suffices for the Service and Worship of the Gods all the World over; it has likewise Plenty of Myrrhe, with other odoriferous Spices of several sorts, which breath out a most fragrant Smell. The nature of Frankincense, and the manner of getting it is thus: The Tree is very small, like to the white Egyptian Thorn, and bears a Leaf like to the Willow: It puts forth a Flower of a Golden Colour; from the Bark of this Tree by incision made, distils the Frankincense in Drops like Tears.

The Myrrhe-Tree is like to the Mastick-Tree, but bears a more slender Leaf, and grows thicker upon the Branches. The Myrrhe flows forth, by digging up the Earth round about the Roots. Those that grow in a rich Soyl, bear twice a Year, that is, in the Spring and Summer: That in the Spring-time, is of a red colour, caus'd by the Dew; the other nearer Winter, is white.

There they got likewise the Fruit of the Paliurus Tree, very wholsom both in Meat and Drink, and good against a Dissentery. The Land is divided amongst the Inhabitants, of which the best part is allotted to the King, who has likewise the Tenths of the Fruits.

They say the breadth of the Island is about Two Hundred Furlongs, inhabited by them they call Panchaeans, who transport the Myrrhe and Frankincense into Foreign Parts, and sell it to the Arabian Merchants, from whom others buy these and other such like-Merchandise, and convey them to Phaenicia, Coelo-Syria and Egypt; and from those Places they are carried by the Merchants over all parts of the World.


Page 195

Besides these, there's another large Island about Thirty Furlongs distance from this last mention'd, lying to the East many Furlongs in length. For they say, from a Promontory thereof running out towards the East, may be seen India like a Cloud in the Air, the distance is so great.

There are many things observable in Panchaea, that deserve to be taken notice of. The natural Inhabitants are those they call Panchaei; the Strangers that dwell among them are * People of the Western Parts, together with Indians, Cretians, and Scythians. In this Island there's a Famous City, call'd Panara, not inferior to any for Wealth and Grandure. The Citizens are call'd the Suppliants of Jupiter Triphylius, and are the only People of Panchaea, that are govern'd by a Democracy, without a Monarch. They choose every Year the Presidents or Governors, that have all Matters under their Cognizance, but what concerns Life and Death; and the most weighty Matters they refer to the College of their Priests. The Temple of Jupiter Triphylius is about Sixty Furlongs distant from the City, in a Champain Plain. It's in great veneration because of it's Antiquity and the Stateliness of the Structure, and the Fertility of the Soyl.

The Fields round about the Temple are Planted with all sorts of Trees, not only for Fruit, but for Pleasure and Delight; for they abound with tall Cypresses Plane-Trees, Laurels and Myrtles, the Place abounding with Fountains of running Water: For near the Temple there's such a mighty Spring of sweet Water rushes out of the Earth, as that it becomes a Navigable River: Thence it divides it self into several Currents and Streams, and Waters all the Fields thereabouts, and produces thick Groves of tall and shady Trees; amongst which in Summer abundance of People spend their time, and a multitude of Birds of all sorts build their Nests, which create great delight both by affecting the Eye with the variety of their Colours, and taking the Ear with the sweetness of their Notes. Here are many Gardens, sweet and pleasant Meadows deckt with all sorts of Herbs and Flowers, and so glorious is the Prospect, that it seems to be a Paradise worthy the Habitation of the Gods themselves.

There are here likewise large and Fruitful Palms, and abundance of Walnut-Trees, which plentifully Furnish the Inhabitants with pleasant Nuts.

Besides all these, there are a multitude of Vines of all sorts, spiring up on high, and so curiously interwoven one amongst another, that they are exceeding pleasant to the view, and greatly advance the delights of the Place.

The Temple was built of White Marble, most artificially joynted and cemented, two Hundred Yards in length, and as many in breadth, supported with great and thick Pillars, curiously adorn'd with with Carved Work. In this Temple are plac'd huge Statues of the Gods, of admirable Workmanship, and amazing largeness. Round the Temple are built Apartments for the Priests that attend the Service of the Gods, by whom every thing in that Sacred Place is perform'd. All along from the Temple, is an even course of Ground, Four Furlongs in length, and a Hundred Yards in breadth; on either side of which, are erected vast Brazen Statues, with Four-square Pedestals; at the end of the Course, breaks forth the River from the Fountains before-mention'd, from whence flows most clear and sweet Water, the drinking of which, conduces much to the Health of the Body. This River is call'd the Water of the Sun.

The whole Fountain is lin'd on both sides, and flag'd at the bottom with Stone at vast Expence, and runs out on both sides for the space of Four Furlongs. It's not lawful for any but the Priests to approach to the brink of the Fountain. All the Land about for Two Hundred Furlongs round, is consecrated to the Gods, and the Revenues bestow'd in maintaining the publick Sacrifices, and Service of the Gods: Beyond these consecrated Lands, is an high Mountain, dedicated likewise to the Gods, which they call the Throne of Celus and Triphylius Olympus; for they report that Ʋranus, when he govern'd the whole World, pleasantly diverted himself in this Place; and from the top of the Mount observ'd the motion of the Heavens and Stars, and that he was call'd Triphylius Olympus, because the Inhabitants were compos'd of Three several Nations, Panchaeans, Oceanites and Doians, who were afterwards expell'd by Ammon; for it's said that he not only rooted out this Nation, but utterly destroy'd all their Cities, and laid Doia and Asterusia even with the Ground. The Priests every Year solemnize a Sacred Festival in this Mountain, with great Devotion.


Page 196

Behind this Mount, in other Parts of Panchaea, they say there are abundance of wild Beasts of all kinds, as Elephants, Lions, Leopards, Deer, and many other wonderful Creatures both for Strength and Proportion. In this Island there are Three chief Cities, Hyracia, Dalis and Oceanis. The whole Country is very Fertile, and especially in the production of all sorts of Wine in great Plenty.

The Men are Warlike, and use Chariots in Battles, after the ancient manner. The whole Nation is divided into Three Parts: The First Class is of the Priests, with whom are joyn'd the Artificers. The other Tribe consists of the Husband-men; and the Third are the Militia and the Shepherds.

The Priests govern all, and are the sole Arbitrators in every matter; for they give Judgment in all Controversies, and have the Power and Authority in all publick Transactions of State. The Husbandmen Till the Land, but the Fruit is brought into the Common Treasury, and who is judg'd the most skilful in Husbandry, receives the largest share of the Fruits for a Reward in the First Place; and so the Second, and the rest in order to the Tenth, as every one merits less or more, receives his Reward by the Judgment of the Priests. In the same manner the Shepherds and Herdsmen carefully bring into the publick Stock, the Victims and other things both by number and weight, as the nature of the things are; for it's not lawful for any to appropriate any thing to themselves particularly, except a House and a Garden. For all the young Breed of Cattel, and other things, and all the Revenues, are receiv'd by the Priests, and they justly distribute to every one as their necessity does require; only the Priests have a double Proportion. 

They wear soft and fine Garments; for their Sheeps Wooll is much finer here than any where else; both Men and Women likewise deck themselves with Golden Ornaments; for they wear Necklaces of Gold, and Bracelets about their Arms, and like the Persians have Rings hanging in their Ears. Their Shooes are such as others wear, but richly beautify'd with divers sorts of Colours.

Their Soldiers for ordinary Pay, defend the Country, fortifying themselves within Camps and Bulwarks; for there's a part of the Island infested with most daring Thieves and Robbers, who often lurch and surprize the Husband-men.

To conclude, these Priests for Delicacy, State and Purity of Life, far exceed all the rest of the Inhabitants: Their Robes are of white Linen, and sometimes of pure soft Wooll. They wear likewise Miters, imbroider'd with Gold. Their Shoes are Sandals curiously wrought with exquisite Workmanship, and in their Ears hang Golden Ear-rings like to the Womens.

They attend chiefly upon the Service of the Gods, singing melodious Songs in their Praises, setting forth their glorious Acts and Benefits bestow'd upon Men. The Priests say they came originally from Crete, and were brought over into Panchaea by Jupiter, when he was upon Earth, and govern'd all the World; and alledge their Language for a Confirmation of this Assertion, in as much as they retain many Words of the Cretian Speech among them. And further say, that they deriv'd from their Ancestors that Civility and kindness wherewith they entertain the Cretians, the Fame and report of their ancient Consanguinity descending continually in a perpetual Succession to their Posterity: They shew likewise a Record written, as they say, by Jupiter's own Hand, at the time when he was on Earth, and laid the Foundation of the Temple.

There are in this Island likewise Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass and Iron, but not lawful for any to export them. Nay, it's not lawful for any of the Priests to go out of the Verge of the Consecrated Ground; and if any do, it's lawful for any Man that finds 'em to kill 'em. They have under their Charge, innumerable vast Vessels, and other Consecrated things, both of Gold and Silver, which have been laid up there in honour of the Gods for many Ages. The Gates of the Temple are of admirable Workmanship, beautify'd with Gold, Silver, Ivory and Thyne Wood.

The Bed of the God is Six Cubits long, and Four broad, of massy Gold, most curiously wrought in every part; and near adjoyning, stands the Table, as large, and of the like Materials and Workmanship with the other in every respect.


Page 197

In the middle of the Bed, is plac'd a great Golden Pillar, whereon are Letters inscrib'd, call'd by the Egyptians, Sacred Writing, expressing the famous Actions of Ʋranus, Jupiter, Diana and Apollo, written they say, by Mercury himself. But this may suffice concerning the Islands lying in the Ocean over against Arabia.

We shall now speak of those in the Aegaean Sea, near to Greece, beginning with Samothracia. It's said this Island was anciently call'd Samos, and afterwards Samothracia, to distinguish from one near to it, call'd Samos, built by Samus.

The Inhabitants are those that have ever been originally there, so that there's nothing certain handed down to Posterity, concerning the first Inhabitants and Governors of this Place. Some there are notwithstanding, that report, that it was anciently call'd Samos, and afterwards Samothracia, from Colonies that settl'd there out of Samos and Thrace.

The natural Inhabitants had anciently a peculiar kind of Speech, some Marks whereof remain in the Worship of their Gods at this Day. The Samothracians themselves report, that before there was any Flood in any other Nations, there was a great one amongst them.

The first Irruption was at the Mouth of the Cyneae, and the other made through the Hellespont: For they say, that the Pontick Sea being once a standing Pool, was so swell'd by the falling in of Rivers, that being overcharged with Water, it empty'd it self into the Hellespont, and overflow'd a great part of the Coasts of Asia, and laid a considerable part of the Champain Country of Samo-thracia under Water. And as a manifestation of this, some Fishermen of later time have brought up with their Nets, the Heads of Stony Pillars, certain Signs of the Cities being overflow'd and ruin'd by the Waters. The Inhabitants that escap'd (they say) fled to the higher parts of the Island, but the Sea rising still higher, they made their Addresses to their Gods, and thereupon being deliver'd from the imminent Danger they were in, they compass'd in the Bounds of those Places wherein they were preserv'd throughout the whole Island, and there erected Altars, where they sacrifice to their Gods at this Day: Whence it's apparent, that they inhabited Samothracia before the last Deluge.

Afterwards one Saon an Islander, the Son (as some say) of Jupiter and Nympha, but (as others, of Mercury and Rhena,) gather'd the Inhabitants (before living scatter'd and dispers'd) into a Body; and made Laws for their better Government, and divided them into Five Tribes, calling them after the Names of his Sons, but nam'd himself Saon, after the Name of the Island. The Government being thus setled, it's said, that Dardanus, Jasion and Harmonia, the Children of Jupiter and Electra, one of the Daughters of Atlas, were born among them. Of these, Dardanus (being a bold and brave Spirited Man) pass'd over in a Pinnace into Asia, and first built the City Dardanus, and erected the Kingdom of Troy (so call'd, from Troy built afterwards,) and call'd the People Dardanians. He Reign'd (they say) over many other Nations besides in Asia, and that the Dardanians above Thrace, were a Colony setled there by him.

It's further said, that Jupiter desiring likewise to advance his other Son to a high degree of Honour and Reputation, discover'd to him the Rites of the Sacred Mysteries anciently observ'd in that Island, but then newly reviv'd, which it was not lawful for any to hear, but those that are initiated.

But he seems to be the first that initiated Strangers; whence these Rites and Ceremonies became more noted and famous.

About this time, Cadmus the Son of Agenor came thither to seek after Europa, and being initiated into these Sacred Mysteries, married Harmonia the Sister of Jasion, not the Daughter of Mars, as the Greeks report: They say, that this was the first Marriage that was celebrated in the presence of the Gods, where Ceres in love with Jasion, presented him with Corn, Mercury with a Harp; Minerva bestow'd that famous Necklace, Vail and Pipe. Electra taught him to celebrate the Sacred Mysteries of the great Mother of the Gods with Cymbals, Timbrels and Dancing. Apollo play'd upon his Harp, and the Muses upon wind Instruments, and the rest of the Gods celebrated the Nuptials with joyful Acclamations.


Page 198

Cadmus afterwards (as he was commanded by the Oracle) built Thebes in Beotia; and Jasion marry'd Cybele, of whom they say he begat Coxybas; after Jasion was receiv'd into the Number of the Gods, Dardanus, Cybele and Coripas travelling into Phrygia brought over the sacred Mysteries of the Mother of the Gods into Asia; then Cybele Marry'd Olympus, the first, and bore Alces, and call'd this Godess Cybele after her own Name. Corybas call'd those that celebrated the sacred Mysteries of his Mother (in a furious Rage like Madmen) after his own Name, Corybantes, and marry'd Thebe the Daughter of Cilix; and thus Pipes were brought over into Phrygia, and Mercury's Harp into Lyrnesus; which when the City was taken, was carry'd, away by Achilles. It's reported likewise that Pluto was the Son of Jasion and Ceres, which rose from this real Truth, that Ceres at the Marriage of Haermonia bestowed upon Jasion upon the account of her Familiarity with him, rich Presents of Corn: But what are particularly acted in the Celebration of these sacred Mysteries, it's granted are only known by those that are initiated.

It's commonly said, that these Gods are always present, and afford their help and assistance to those that are Initiated, and call upon them, when they fall into any suddain and unexpected Distress; and that these Worshipers grow more and more Pious and Righteous, and still exceed themselves in Goodness; and therefore the most famous of the Ancient Heroes and Demygods greatly coveted to be initiated into these sacred Rites and Ceremonies: For it's believ'd, that Jasion, Dioscurus, Hercules and Orpheus (who were Members of this Society) through the favour of these Gods prosper'd in all their Wars.

Having now finish'd what concerns Samothracia, the Course of the History leads us to Naxus.

This Island was formerly call'd Strongyle. The Thracians were the first that setl'd here, upon the occasion following. It's said, that Boreas had two Sons, Butes and Lycurgus, of several Mothers. Butes the younger Plotted to Murther his Brother, which being plainly discover'd, the Father appointed no greater a Punishment to be Executed upon his Son, but only commanded him, with his Accomplices to take Shipping and be gone, and seek out for themselves some other Habitations: Upon which, Butes with a Number of Thrasians (his fellow Criminals) went aboard, and in a direct Course made their way through the Cyclade Islands, and arriv'd at Strongyle, and thus possess'd of the Island, robb'd all by their Piracies that pass'd that way. But being in want of Women, they rov'd about here and there, and forcibly carry'd them away where ever they could find them. Some of the Ciclade Islands at that time were wholly desolate, and others of them but very thinly inhabited. Running out therefore a long way off, and being repuls'd at Eubaea, they arriv'd at Thessaly; and there landing, they met with the Nurses of Bacchus at the Mountain call'd Diros, Celebrating the Mysteries of the Gods in Achaia Phthiotis; being then ready to seize upon the Women, some of them cast away their Offerings and fled to the Sea, and others to the Mountain before mention'd: But Butes seiz'd upon Coronides, and Ravish'd her, which dishonour she bore so hainously, that she call'd upon Bacchus to revenge her Disgrace, and thereupon he struck Butes with Madness, who in his Mad mood cast himself into a Pit and so perish'd. The rest of the Thracians seiz'd upon other Women, amongst whom were two Noble Ladies, Iphimedia the Wife of Aloeas, and his Daughter Pancratis; with these they return'd to Strongyle. In the room of Butes they Created Agassamenus King of the Island, and Marry'd him to Pancratis the Daughter of Aloeas, a Lady of an admirable Beauty: For (before whom he took her to be his Wife) Siculus and Hecaterus, two of the most eminent Commanders, fought a Duel, and Wounded one another. Agassamenus bestow'd Iphimedia upon one of his intimate Friends, whom he had made General of his Army. In the mean time Aloeas sent his two Sons, Otus and Ephialtes, to seek after his Wife and Daughter, who invading Strongyle, fought with the Thracians, routed 'em, and took the City by Storm. Not long after Pancratis dy'd, Otus and Ephialtes possess'd themselves of the Island, and ousted the Thracians, and call'd it Dia. Shortly after they fell out and fought a set Battel, wherein many were kill'd on both sides, and the two Brothers kill'd one another, whom the Inhabitants afterwards ador'd as Demygods. After the Thracians had held the Island for above two hundred Years, at length a Drought and Famin forc'd 'em to leave the Place. After them the Carians (being expuls'd Lamia) possess'd themselves of it, whose King Naxus, the Son of Polemon, afterwards order'd the Island should be call'd Naxus, after his own Name. This


Page 199

Naxus was a very famous and good Man, and left behind him a Son, call'd Leucippus, whose Son Smardius afterwards reign'd in the Island; in whose Reign Theseus coming out of Crete with Ariadne, landed here; and in his Sleep saw Bacchus threatning him with Ruin, if he did not forsake Ariadne; with which Vision being terrify'd, he left her, and withdrew himself out of the Island. Then Bacchus in the Night led away Ariadne to the Mountain Arius, and then immediately disappear'd, and not long after Ariadne was no more seen.

The Naxians have many Stories amongst them concerning this God; for they say he was bred up with 'em, and therefore that this Island was lov'd by Bacchus more than any other, and by some call'd Dionysiades. For Jupiter (as the Story goes) (Semele before the Birth of Bacchus, being struck with a Thunderbolt) took the Infant Bacchus out of his Mother's Womb, and clapt him within his Thigh: But when the full time of his Birth was at Hand, to conceal him from Juno, he was brought forth in Naxus, and there committed to the care of the Nymphs, Philias, Coronidis and Cleidis, to be educated by them; and that Semele was therefore before his Birth kill'd by Lightning, to the end that Bacchus not being born of a Mortal, but of Two immortal Deities, might from his Birth be of an Immortal Nature. Upon the account therefore of the kindness shew'd him in his Education, he express'd his gratitude to the Inhabitants so far, as that he advanc'd them to a high degree of Wealth and Power, and furnish'd them with a brave Fleet of Ships; and that they being the first that made a defection from Xerxes, (they say) he assisted 'em to vanquish the Barbarians in a Sea-Fight, and that he gave a clear Evidence and Token of his Concern with them in the Battel at Platea; and that the excellency of their Wine, was an apparent demonstration of the Kindness of this God to their Island.

The First that inhabited Syme (which before lay waste and desolate) were those that came thither with Triops, under the Conduct of Chthonius, the Son of Neptune and Symes, from whom the Island was so call'd.

Nireus, the Son of Charopus and Aglaies, was in after-times King of this Island; he was a very comely and beautiful Man, and went along with Agamemnon to the War against Troy; and together with this Island, was Lord of Cnidus.

After the end of the Trojan War, the Carians possessed themselves of this Place at such time as they were Masters at Sea; afterwards forc'd thence by an excessive Drought, they settl'd themselves in Ʋranium. From that time it lay desolate, till the Fleet of the Lacedemonians and Argives arriv'd there, and then it was Planted with new Colonies in this manner.

Nausus, one of the Companions of Hippotas, taking along with him those that came too late, at the time when the Country was divided by lot, possessed himself of Syme, which then lay desolate, and afterward receiv'd others (that came there under the Conduct of Xuthus) to share with him both in the Priviledges of the City, and Commodities of the Country, and possess'd the Island equally among them. They say, that both Cnidians and Rhodians made up part of this Colony.

The Cares anciently possess'd Calydna and Nisyrus; and afterwards Thessalus, the Son of Hercules, was Lord of both the Islands; and therefore Antiphus and Philippus Kings of Coos (when they were ingag'd in the War of Troy) were Generals of those Forces that were sent out of these Islands. In their return from the Trojan War, Four of Agamemnon's Ships were by a Storm cast upon Calydna, and the Men that were on Board, continu'd there intermixt with the other Inhabitants. But the ancient Inhabitants of Nisyrus, were swallow'd up by an Earthquake. After which, the Coons added it to their Dominion, as they had done Calydna before. After them, the Rhodians sent a Colony thither; all the former Inhabitants being wholly swept away with a Plague.

As for Carpathus, that was first seiz'd upon by some of Minos his Soldiers, at such time as he was Master at Sea, and lorded it over the Grecians. Many Ages after, Ioclus, the Son of Thymoleon of Argos, by the Command of the Oracle, brought over a Colony thither.


Page 200

The Island of Rhodes was anciently inhabited by those call'd Telchines; who (as an old Story goes) were the Offspring of † Thalassa, and with Caphira the Daughter of Oceanus brought up Neptune, who was committed to their care by Rhea. It's said, they invented several Arts, and found out many other things useful and conducing to the well-being of Man's Life. It's reported, they were the first that made Statues of the Gods, and that some of the ancient Images were denominated from them; for amongst the Lindians, Apollo is call'd Apollo Telchinius: Amongst the Ialysians, Juno and the Nymphs were call'd Telchiniae; and amongst the Camiraeans, Juno was call'd Juno Telchinia. But these Telchines were likewise reported to be Conjurers, for they could raise Storms and Tempests, with Rain, Hail and Snow, when ever they pleas'd; which the Magicians (as is related in History, were used to do. They could likewise transform themselves into other Shapes, and were envious at all that learnt their Art.

Neptune they say, fell in love with Halia, the Sister of the Telchines, and of her begat several Children, Six Sons, and one Daughter call'd Rhoda, from whom the Island was call'd Rhodes.

In those Days there were Giants in the Western Parts of the Island. Then likewise Jupiter having conquer'd the Titans, fell in love with a Nymph nam'd Hamalia, and of her begat Three Sons, Spartaeus, Cronius and Cytus. About the time they were grown up to Mens Estate, Venus in her Passage from Cythera to Cyprus, arriv'd at this Island; but being hinder'd from landing by the Sons of Neptune, together with proud and impious Language, the Goddess was so provok'd, as that she struck 'em mad, and caus'd 'em in their raging mood to ravish their own Mother, and commit many other outrages upon the Inhabitants. Neptune coming to the Knowledge of this vile Fact, sunk his Sons under Ground for their Wickedness. Whence they were call'd the Eastern Daemons. Halia threw her self into the Sea, and after was ador'd by the Inhabitants as a Goddess by the Name of Leucothea. Afterwards the Telchines foreseeing an Inundation coming upon Rhodes, forsook the Island, and were dispers'd and scatter'd Abroad. Of whom Lycus went into Lycia, and built the Temple of Apollo Lycius, near to the Banks of the River Xanthus.

When the Flood came, it rose so high, that besides destroying those that remain'd in the Island, all the flat and Champain part of the Country (with Showers that pour'd down continually) was like a standing Pool of Water: Some few that fled to the higher Grounds were preserv'd, amongst whom were the Sons of Jupiter. But Sol (as the Story is) falling in love with Rhoda, call'd the Island after her Name Rhodes, and cleared the Island of the Inundation. But the truth coucht in the Fable is this: In the first Generation of all things, when the Island lay in Mud and Dirt, the Sun dry'd up the Moisture, and made the Land productive of Living Creatures; whence sprang the Seven Heliades, so call'd from the Sun, and other Men, the Original Inhabitants. And hence it is, that they account the Island to be consecrated to the Sun, and the Rhodians in after-times constantly worship'd the Sun above all other Gods, as the Parent from whence they first sprang. The Names of his Seven Sons are Ochimus, Ceraphus, Macir, Astis, Tenages, Triopas and Candalus; he had only one Daughter call'd Electryo, who dying a Virgin, became ever after ador'd by the Rhodians as a Demy-Goddess. When the Heliades attain'd to Mens Estate, Sol told 'em, that which soever of them first sacrific'd to Minerva, should ever enjoy the presence of the Goddess. The same thing it's said, was promis'd and foretold at the same time to the Athenians. Hereupon it fell out that the Heliades, through too much hast, forgot to put Fire under the Altars, before they laid the Sacrifices upon them: Cecrops they say, then reign'd in Athens, and was later than the other in slaying the Burnt-Offering, but was before them in burning the Victim; for which Reason there's a peculiar Ceremony us'd in Rhodes in their Sacred Mysteries to this Day, and the Image of the Goddess is set up there.

These things some have related concerning the Antiquities of the Rhodians, among whom is Zenon, who wrote their History.

The Heliades, as they were in station above other Men, so they excell'd others in Learning, and especially in Astrology. They were the Persons that first found out the Art of Navigation, and the dividing of the Day into Hours. Tenages was the most ingenious of any of them, and therefore through Envy was


Page 201

Murdered by his Brothers; Upon discovery of the Fact, both the principal. Authors and their Accomplices fled for it.

Macer got to Lesbos, and Candalus to Coos. Actis fled into Egypt, and there built Heliopolis, calling it after the Name of his Father; and from him the Egyptians learnt the Science of Astrology.

Afterwards, when most of the Inhabitants of Greece were destroy'd by the Flood, and all Records and ancient Monuments perish'd with them; the Egyptians took this occasion to appropriate the study of Astrology solely to themselves; and whereas the Grecians (through Ignorance) as yet valu'd not Learning, it became a general Opinion, that the Egyptians were the first that found out the Knowledge of the Stars.

And so even the Athenians themselves, though they built the City Sais in Egypt, yet by reason of the Flood, were led into the same Error of forgetting what was before. And therefore it's believ'd, that many Ages after, Cadmus the Son of Agenor, brought the Knowledge of Letters out of Phaenicia first into Greece; and after him, it's suppos'd the Grecians themselves added some Letters to those they learn'd before; but a general Ignorance however still prevailed amongst them.

Triopas, another Son, past over into Caria, and possessed himself of the Promontory there, call'd from him Triopium. The rest of Sol's Sons, having had no hand in the Murder, staid behind in Rhodes; and afterwards built the City Achaia, and dwelt in Ialysia. But the Regal Power was in Ochymus the Eldest Son, who marry'd Hegetoria, one of the Nymphs, and of her begat a Daughter call'd Gydippe, who afterwards went by the Name of Cyrbias, by marrying of whom Cercaphis his Brother came to the Kingdom; after whose Death, Three of the Sons, Lindus, Ialysus and Camirus reign'd together; in whose time a great Inundation laid Cyrbe waste and desolate. These Three Brothers divided the Country amongst themselves, and each built a City, and call'd them after their own Names.

At this time Danaus fled out of Egypt with his great number of Daughters, and landed at Lindus in Rhodes; where being receiv'd by the Inhabitants, he built a Temple to Minerva, and consecrated to her an Altar. During this Travel of Danaus, Three of his Daughters dy'd in Lindus, and the rest pass'd over with their Father to Argos.

Not long after, Cadmus, the Son of Agenor, being commanded by the King to seek after Europa, made for Rhodes; and in the Voyage being overtaken with a violent Storm, made a Vow to build a Temple to Neptune. Having therefore escap'd the danger (according to his Vow) he dedicated a Temple to this God in the Island, and left some of the Phaenicians to be Overseers of the Sacred Mysteries, who were made Members of the City with the Ialysians, and out of their Families (they say) from time to time were chosen the Priests. Cadmus at that time devoted many rich Gifts to Minerva Lindia, amongst which, was a Brass Cauldron, a most excellent piece of curious ancient Workmanship; it had an Inscription upon it in Phaenician Letters; which were therefore called Phaenician, because (they say) they were first brought out of Phaenicia into Greece.

In after-times, vast Serpents bred in Rhodes, which destroy'd many of the Inhabitants; those therefore that remain'd, sent to Delos, to consult the Oracle what was to be done for the removal of the present Calamity they suffer'd under, who return'd answer, That they should admit Phorbas and his Followers to share with them in the Island. He was the Son of Lapithas, and was then with many of his Friends in Thessaly, seeking for a convenient Place wherein to settle themselves. The Rhodians hereupon (according to the direction of the Oracle) sent for Phorbas, and receiv'd him as a Proprietor with them in the Island, who destroy'd all the Serpents, and freed the Country from their former fears; and from thenceforth continu'd in Rhodes, and was after his Death ador'd as a Demy-God, having approv'd himself a Good Man in several other respects.

Afterwards Althaemenes the Son of Catreus King of Crete, consulting the Oracle concerning some Affairs, was answer'd, that it would be his Fate to kill his own Father; to avoid which Misfortune, he voluntarily forsook Crete, with many others who of their own accord went along with him, and pass'd over to Camirus, the Metropolis of Rhodes, and there built a Temple upon Mount Atamirus,


Page 202

to Jupiter Atamirus, which is in great Veneration and Esteem at this Day. It's situated upon the very Top of the Mountain, whence may be had a clear Prospect of Crete. Althamenes with his Followers, thus setl'd in Camirus, liv'd in great Honour and Esteem among the Citizens. But his Father Catreus having no issue Male, and exceedingly loving his Son, undertook a Voyage to Rhodes, longing to find out his Son, and bring him back to Crete.

And now his unalterable Destiny was near at Hand, for landing at Rhodes in the Night, with some others of his Attendants, forthwith there was a Conflict between them and the Islanders; whereupon Althamenes run in hastily to their Assistance, and (unknown to him) kill'd his Father with a Dart; which when he came to understand, he was so overwhelm'd with Sorrow, he ever after avoided all manner of Society, and wander'd up and down in the Deserts, and at last dy'd of Grief: But by the Command of the Oracle he was afterwards honour'd by the Rhodians as a Demy-God.

After this, a little before the Trojan War, Tlepolimus the Son of Hercules, fled voluntarily from Argos, by reason of his Killing of Licymnius, whom he slew unawares; and upon inquiry having receiv'd an Answer from the Oracle concerning the planting of a Colony, he pass'd over with a few People into Rhodes, where being receiv'd, he settled: And being afterwards created King of the Island, he divided the Country into equal Shares by Lot; and during his Reign, order'd all other Matters according to the Rules of Justice and Equity. At length preparing to go along with Agamemnon, in the Expedition against Troy, he committed the Government into the Hands of Butas, who fled with him from Argos. And after he had gain'd much Glory and Renown in that War, he dy'd in the Country of Troas.

Now because some things of Chersonesus, are intermix'd with the Affairs of Rhodes, over against which it lyes, we conceive it not amiss here to give an account of it. Some are of Opinion it's call'd Chersonesus, from the nature of the Place, being like to an Istmus, or as others write, from one Chersonesus, once a Petty Prince there. Not long after whose time (it's said) Five of the Curetes came there; which Curetes were the Posterity of those that brought up Jupiter (born of the Mother Goddess Rhea) in the Mountains of Ida in Crete. After their arrival in Crete (with a considerable Navy) they expell'd the Cares, the ancient Inhabitants, and divided the Country into Five Parts, and each of them built a City, and call'd them after their own Names. 

Not long after, Inachus King of Argos, sent Cyrnus, one of his Noblemen and Commanders, with a considerable Fleet, to find out his Daughter Io, and not to return till he found her. After he had rov'd about into several Parts of the World, and could not find her, he at length arriv'd at Caria in Chersonesus, and there settled himself, despairing ever to return to his own Country; and afterwards partly by Force, and partly by Perswasions, he reign'd as King over part of the Country, and built a City, and call'd it Cyrnus, after his own Name; and govern'd so well, to the advancement of the publick Good, that he was greatly belov'd and honour'd by the Citizens.

Afterwards Triopas, one of the Sons of Sol and Rhoda, fled into Chersonesus, for the Killing of his Brother: But being cleared and acquitted by King Melisseus, he sayl'd into Thessaly, to the assistance of Deucalion's Sons, and helpt to expel the Pelasgians thence, and they divided the Country call'd Dotion among them. He there cut down the Grove of Ceres, and made use of it for the Building of himself a Palace; for which he was hated of the People, and forc'd to fly out of Thessaly, and sayl'd away with some of his Followers to Cnidia; where he built a City call'd after his own Name Triopium. Leaving this Place, he gain'd Chersonesus, and a great part of Caria adjoining to it.

Many Writers, and especially the Poets, much differ about the Descent of Priopas. Some derive his Descent from Canace (the Daughter of Aeolus) and Neptune, others say, his Parents were Lapitha, the Son of Apollo, and Stibes the Daughter of Pineus. In Castabus in Chersonesus, there's a Temple dedicated to Hemithea; what is remarkable concerning her, is not fit to be omitted. Although there are many various Stories related of her, yet we shall only give an Account of what is generally granted and agreed upon by the Inhabitants to be true.


Page 203

Staphylus and Chrysothemides had Three Daughters, Molpadia, Rhoeo and Parthenos. Rhoeo was got with Child by Apollo, at which her Father was so incens'd, thinking she had play'd the Whore with some Mortal Man, that he lockt her up in a Chest, and threw her into the Sea, and the Chest was afterwards cast up upon the Island Delos, where she was deliver'd of a Son, whom she nam'd Arrius. Being thus wonderfully preserv'd, she laid the Child upon the Altar of Apollo, and pray'd to him, that if he was the Child's Father, he would save and defend the Infant: Upon which the Story goes, that Apollo hid the Child; but afterwards took care to have him carefully brought up, and endued him with a Prophetick Spirit, and advanc'd him to great Honour and Reputation.

Molpadia and Parthenos, the other Sisters, having the Charge of their Father's Wine (the use of which was then but newly found out) with Drinking too much, fell fast asleep; in the mean time, a Sow which they fed, coming into the Place, threw down the Hogshead and spilt all the Wine. When the poor Ladies perceiv'd what was done, they so dreaded the Severity of their Father, that they fled to the Sea Shoar, and threw themselves headlong from the Top of a high Rock into the Sea: But Apollo for the sake of their Sister, took them up safe, and brought them to some Cities in Chersonesus. Where Parthenos at Bubastus was ador'd as a Goddess, and had a Temple erected in honour to her.

Molpadia was brought to Castabus, and for the special Revelations she had from the God, she was call'd Hemithea, and was in great honour and esteem among all the Chersonesians. In the Celebration of her Mysteries, (in remembrance of the Misfortune concerning the Wine) they offer Drink-Offerings of Water and Honey mixt together; and he that has toucht a Swine, or eaten of Swines-Flesh, is not permitted to enter into her Temple.

This Temple of Hemithea, in following times grew so Famous, that not only the Inhabitants ador'd it, but Strangers far and near resorted to it with great Devotion, and with many rich Presents and magnificent Sacrifices; and that which is most observable is, that the very Persians themselves when they destroy'd all other Temples throughout all Greece, only spar'd the Temple of Hemithea. Thieves and Robbers likewise that spoyl and waste all before them, have still from time to time spar'd this Temple, though it stand open and naked, without the defence of a Wall to secure it. They say, that the Cause of the flourishing Condition of this Place is, the great Kindness of this Goddess to all Men whatsoever; for she appears to those that are sick, in their Sleep, and directs them to proper Remedies for the recovery of their Health; sach as are in desperate Distempers, and resort thither, she perfectly cures and restores. Women likewise that are in hard Labour, she safely delivers, and frees from the pains and hazards of Child-bearing, and therefore that Temple is full of ancient Relicts and Donations safely kept and preserv'd to this Day, not by Guards or Walls, but only by the Religious Devotion observed in this Place.

But let this suffice concerning Rhodes and Chersonesus; it remains we should now treat of Crete.


Page 204

CHAP. IV.

Of Crete: The First Inhabitants. Of the Idaei Dactyli: Of Jupiter, Saturn, Hyperion, Prometheus, Mnemosyne, Themis, Ceres, Neptune, Pallas. Jupiter's Race; as the Muses, Vulcan, Mars, &c. Of the ancient Hercules, Britomartis, Pluto. Rhadamanthus's Justice. Of Lesbos. Deucalion's Flood. Of the Blessed Islands. Of Tenedos, and the Cyclades.

THE Inhabitants of Crete affirm, that the most ancient People of Crete are the Eteocretes, whose King, whom they call Creta, found out many very useful things, conducing much to the support and comfort of Man's Life. They say, likewise, that many of the Gods were born amongst them, who for their Benefits conferr'd upon Mankind, were eternally honour'd as Deities. Of which things we shall here distinctly treat, as they are deliver'd to us by the most approv'd Authors that have writ the History of Crete.

The first Inhabitants of Crete (of whom there's any remembrance) were the Idaei Dactyli, in Mount Ida: Some say there were a Hundred others, but Ten in number, call'd Dactyli, from the Ten Fingers on Mens Hands.

Some affirm, and amongst those Ephorus, that the Idaei Dactyli had their Original from Mount Ida in Phrygia, and pass'd over with Minos into Europe; and that they were Conjurers, and gave themselves to Inchantments, and Sacred Rites and Mysteries; and abiding in Samothracia, greatly amus'd and astonish'd the People of the Island. At which time it's said, Orpheus (who was naturally of a prompt Wit to Musick and Poetry) was their Scholar, and the first that brought over the Rites and Ceremonies of their Mysteries into Greece. The Dactyli moreover (as is said) found out the use of Fire; and discover'd the nature of Iron and Brass, to the Inhabitants of the Antisapterians, near to the Mountain Berecynthus, and taught the manner of working of it: And because they were the first discoverers of many things of great use and advantage to Mankind, they were ador'd and worship'd as Gods: One of them, they say, was call'd Hercules; a Person he was of great Renown, and he that instituted the Olympick Games, which were thought by Posterity to have been appointed by Hercules the Son of Alcmena, led into that Error by the Identity of Names.

An Evidence of these things, they say, remains to this Day, in that the Women chant the Songs formerly sung by this God, and wear about them certain Amulets, in imitation of him who was a Magician, and taught sacred Rites and Ceremonies: All which were different from the Manners of Hercules the Son of Alemena.

After the Idaei Dactyli (they say) there were Nine Curetes, some of which are feign'd to be the Offspring of the Earth, and the rest to descend from the Idaei Dactyli. They dwelt in the Mountains, under the shade of thick Trees, and in Caves, and other Places that naturally afforded them a shelter and covering, the building of Houses not being then found out. They were very Ingenious, and therefore invented many things very useful and profitable: For they were the first that taught how to manage Flocks of Sheep, and to tame and bring up other Cattel, and how to gather Honey; and that they were the first that shew'd how to cast Darts, and to Hunt; and that order'd Men into Societies and Communities, and sociably eating one with another, and brought Men into a peaceable and orderly Course of Life: They invented likewise Swords and Helmets, and dancing in Arms, and by the great noise they made, deceiv'd Saturn. For it's said, that by them Jupiter (whom his Mother Rhea, to hide him from her Father Saturn committed to their Care) was secur'd and brought up: But being willing to treat of this more particularly, we must go a little higher with ou

•

 Relation.

The Cretians say, that the Titans were contemporary with the Curetes: They dwelt in the Country of the Gnosians, where now may be seen the ancient Foundations and Courts of the House where Rhaea inhabited, and an old Sacred Grove


Page 205

of Cyprus Trees. They were in number, Six Men and Five Women, the Issue of Ʋranus and Terra, as some affirm; but as others say, the Offspring of one of the Curetes and Titaea, and call'd Titans after the Name of their Mother. The Sons were call'd Cronus, Hyperion, Coeus, Japetus, Crius and Oceanus; the Sisters were Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Phaebe and Thetis; every one of whom were the Inventers of something useful and profitable to Man's well-being, and as a Reward of their Deserts, are by all Men honour'd with an everlasting Remembrance.

Saturn the Eldest, obtained the Kingdom, and reduc'd his Subjects from a wild and barbarous, to a more civil Course of Life, both as to Food and Manners. Having therefore upon that account gain'd much Honour and Reputation, he went into many Parts of the World, and perswaded all wherever he came, to Justice and Integrity of Heart; and therefore it's brought down as a certain Truth to Posterity, that in the times of Saturn, Men were plain and honest, free from all sorts of wicked Designs or Practices; yea, that they were then happy and blessed. He chiefly reign'd over the Western Parts of the World, and was advanc'd to the highest Pinacle of Honour and Renown; and therefore of later Times, both the Romans and Carthaginians (while their City stood) and other Neighbouring Nations, ador'd this God with magnificent and splendid Festivals and Sacrifices; and many Places up and down are call'd after his Name: And because at that time the Laws were strictly observ'd, no act of Injustice was committed, but all submitting to his Authority, liv'd happily, and injoy'd Pleasure and Content without any Molestation; which is attested by the Poet Hesiod, in these Verses.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

:

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Whilst Saturn reign'd, those then his Subjects were,

Who liv'd the lives of Gods without all care;

Who Sorrow, Labour, nor Old Age opprest,

But soundness both in Hands and Feet them blest;

With joyful Vigour to their Feasts they went,

Free from all Ills, their Deaths did represent

Sound Sleep; to them flow'd down what e're was good,

And without Toyl, the Earth did yield them Food,

And from her Fruitful Womb did them afford

Her Fruits most freely of her own accord.

Rich in their Flocks, and to the Gods most dear,

During this Reign, these happy People were.

And these are the things they reported of Saturn.

As to Hyperion, they say, that he was the first that by his own Industry found out the Motions of the Sun and Moon, and other Stars, and the Seasons and Distinctions of Time measur'd out by them, and afterwards imparted his Knowledge to others. And therefore he was call'd the Father of those Planets, as he that first taught the Knowledge and nature of them.

Latona, they say, was the Daughter of Coeus and Phebe; and that Prometheus was the Son of Japetus, who (as some feign) stole Fire from the Gods, and bestow'd it upon Men.


Page 206

But the truth of the Story is, he found out the way how to strike Fire out of Flint or Stone. Mnemosyne they say, found out the Art of Logick, and gave proper Names to every thing, by which, whatever is discours'd of, might be distinctly known and understood: But some attribute this to Mercury. They ascribe likewise to this Goddess every thing conducing to the help of Man's Memory, from whence she has her Name.

Themis taught the Art of Divination, and instructed Men in Holy Rites, and prescrib'd Laws for the Service and Worship of the Gods, and for preservation of Peace and good Government amongst Men; and therefore we call those that keep and take care of the Sacred Laws both of Gods and Men, Thesmophylacae, and Thesmothetae. And when Apollo himself is to give his Answer at the Oracle, we say, Themisteum, because he was the first that practiz'd Divination. These Gods therefore having thus greatly benefited Mankind, were not only ador'd with Divine Honours, but were accounted to be the first that after their Deaths were translated to Heaven. Vesta, Ceres, Juno, Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto, are said to be the Children of Saturn and Rhea.

Vesta invented the Building of Houses, and upon this account almost every Body sets up her Statue in their Houses, and adore her with Divine Honours.

Ceres was the first that discover'd the use of Bread-Corn, finding it by chance growing of it self amongst other Plants and Herbs; and taught the way of Housing and Baking it, and how to sow it. For she found out Corn before Proserpina was born; after whose Birth and Rape by Pluto, she was so incens'd at Jupiter, and in such grief for the loss of her Daughter, that she set all the Corn on Fire. But when she had found out Proserpina, she was reconciled to Jupiter, and gave Seed-Corn to Triptolemus, with order to impart it to all People, and teach them how to order it, and make use of it.

Some say, she made Laws, to direct Men to deal justly and truly one with another; and from hence she was call'd Thesmophoron: For these great Advantages to Mankind, she was likewise highly honour'd; and not only Grecians, but the Barbarians almost every where, that partook of these Fruits, ador'd and worship'd her with Solemn and Magnificent Festivals and Sacrifices.

There are many Controversies and Differences concerning the first finding out of this Fruit, for some say, this Goddess first saw it, and taught the nature and use of it before any other. For the Egyptians say, that Isis and Ceres were one and the same Person, who first brought Seed-Corn into Egypt, the River Nile watering the Fields, and washing the Country at proper Seasons, much advancing thereby the growth and increase thereof.

But the Athenians say, that although Corn was first found out amongst them, yet it was transported from other Places into Attica. The Place where it was first seen, they call Eleusina, because that Seed-Corn was first brought thither.

The Sicilians likewise who inhabit the Island, specially dedicated to Ceres and Proserpina, say, it's most reasonable to conclude, that this great Gift was first bestow'd upon them who till'd and improv'd that Country which was most belov'd of this Goddess. For it's a most unreasonable thing this Place should be reported the richest Island of the World, and yet to judge it the last in sharing of this great Blessing, as if it had been no part of their Fertility, especially when Ceres resided there her self; and all agree that Proserpina was ravish'd in this Place; and that this Island is a Country most proper for Corn of any other in the World, as the Poet testifies. 

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

.

Within this Island all things grow, 

Without the help of Seed or Plow,

As Wheat and Barley—

Of Ceres therefore thus they say

In Stories of her—


Page 207

As to the other Deities, they say, that Neptune was the first that us'd Navigation, and rigg'd out a Navy, and was appointed Admiral by Saturn; and therefore it was a common Tradition afterwards, that all Sea-Affairs were under his Rule and Government, and upon that account Mariners worship him with Solemn Sacrifices. They say moreover, that Neptune was the first that manag'd Horses, and taught the Art of Horsemanship, whence he was call'd Hippius.

Pluto (they say) first shew'd the way of Sepulchres and Pompous Funerals, whereas before no regard was had to any of these; which was the reason he was accounted Lord of the Dead, and Prince of the Infernal Shades.

There are many differing Opinions concerning the Genealogy and Kingdom of Jupiter. There are some of Opinion, that after the Death of Saturn, he succeeded in the Kingdom, not advanc'd to that dignity by a forceable Expulsion of his Father, but by a just and lawful Succession. Others report, that Saturn being forewarned by the Oracle concerning Jupiter, that a Son of his to be afterwards born, would oust him of his Kingdom by force, kill'd his Children one after another, as soon as they were born; at which Rhea was so griev'd (not being able to work upon her Husband's obstinate Humour) that she forthwith upon his Birth hid Jupiter in Ida, recommending his Education to the Care of the Curetes, who inhabited that Mountain: And that they again lodg'd him in a Cave, and intrusted him with the Nymphs, intreating them to be very careful of him; who fed him with Milk and Hony mixt together, and for his better nourishment suckled him at the Paps of a Goat, call'd Amalthaea: For there are many Tokens of his Birth and Education in this Island to this Day.

For when he was a young Infant, and carried away by the Curetes, they say, that the Navel String fell from him at the River Triton, whence that part of the Country, sacred to this God, is call'd Omphalium, and the Region adjoyning, Omphaleus. In Ida likewise, where this Goddess was educated, the Cave wherein he was hid, is not only consecrated to him, but the Ports near to that Promontory are under his Guard and Protection.

But here is not to be omitted a wonderful Story that's related concerning the Bees: For they say, the God to preserve an eternal Memory of his familiarity with the Bees, chang'd their colour into that of Brass or Copper, washt over with Gold: And whereas the Place is exceeding high, and subject to stormy Winds, and us'd to be cover'd over with depths of Snow, he fortify'd the Bees with an Impassibility, so that they were able to feed and gather Honey in the most stormy and coldest Places.

Amongst other Honours attributed to the Goat that gave him suck, he bestow'd this, that he himself from her, assum'd the Name of Aegiochus. When he was grown up to Man's Estate, he first built a City at Dicta, where he was born, the Ruins whereof are to be seen at this Day.

This God excell'd all the other in Valour, Prudence, Justice, and all other Virtues: And therefore after the death of his Father, when he came to reign, he conferr'd many and great Benefits upon Mankind. For he was the first that instructed Men how to punish Injuries, and to deal justly and honestly one with another, to forbear Force and Violence, and bring their Differences and Controversies orderly before Tribunals and Courts of Justice, there to be ended and decided. In sum, he did whatsoever was necessary for the making of good Laws, and Preservation of Peace among Men; stirring up the Good by wholsom Advice to their Duty, and restraining the Bad through fear of severe and due Punishment for their Offences.

It's reported, he travell'd through the whole World, putting to Death Thieves, Robbers, and other Impious Persons, establishing Commonwealths and Democracies in every Place wherever he came.

About that time he slew several Giants with their Adherents, as Mytinus in Crete, and Typhon in Phrygia.

Before the Battel with the Giants in Crete, upon Jupiter's sacrificing of Oxen to Sol, Coelus and Terra, in all the Intrals appear'd evident Signs of what was decreed by the Gods: Their Victory especially was portended; and a defection of some from the Enemy, as it prov'd in the issue of the War; for Musaeus fled and revolted from them, for which he was highly honour'd.


Page 208

At length, all that fought with the Gods were every one cut off, and destroy'd: But he was afterwards ingag'd in a new War against the Giants at Pallene in Macedonia, and anciently in the Plains of Italy, call'd Phlegraei, from the Conflagration the Country once suffer'd, but now call'd Cumaei.

The reason why Jupiter destroy'd the Giants, was their Violence and Oppression, making use of their strength and massy Bodies to inflave their Neighbours; and for that they were lawless, and not to be kept within any bounds of Justice, made War upon them; who for their doing good, and being beneficial to Mankind, were reputed for Gods by all People whatsoever. And he not only rooted up the Wicked and Impious, but rewarded the best of the Gods, Heroes and Men, with due Honours according to their several Deserts. The great Authority therefore and good Deeds of Jupiter were such, that to him was attributed an eternal Habitation and Kingdom in Olympus. And more splendid Sacrifices by his Command are offered to him than to any of the other Gods; and since his passing from Earth to Heaven, a strong Perswasion is sixt in the Hearts of all those he was kind unto, that he has the Command and Government of all that's done in Heaven; and is supream Lord of Storms, Thunder and Lightning; and therefore they call him Zena, because he seem'd to be the Preserver of Mens lives, by affording fruitful Seasons to ripen the Fruits of the Earth. They call him likewise Father, not only upon the account of his 

〈…〉

e and Kindness to all Mankind, but likewise for that it's generally believ'd all Men were originally his Offspring.

He's call'd likewise the Supream King, by reason of the Majesty and Excellency of his Kingdom; and moreover Eubuleus and † Metietes, by reason of his Wisdom and Prudence in Counsel.

It's said also, that Minerva was the Daughter of Jupiter, born in Crete, at the Spring-heads of the River Triton, and therefore she was call'd Tritogenea; and now at this Day there stands a little Chappel dedicated to this Goddess at the Place where she's said to have been born. They say likewise, that the Marriage of Juno and Jupiter was solemniz'd in the Country of the Gnosians, near the River Therone, where there's now a Temple, in which the Priests offer an anniversary Sacrifice and Festival with great Devotion, imitating the Nuptial Rites according as by Tradition they have receiv'd them.

The Daughters of Jupiter, it's said, were the Goddesses, Venus, the Graces, Lucina and her Servant Diana, together with those call'd Horae, that is to say, Eunomia, Dica, and Irene.

The Gods he begot; were Vulcan, Mars, Apollo and Mercury: To every one of these (they say) Jupiter imparted the knowledge of things invented and perfected by himself, and attributed the honour of the Invention to them, desirous to perpetuate their Memories, and advance their Reputation and eternal Praise amongst all Men.

To Venus he committed the care of the mature Age of Virgins; at which time they ought to Marry, and the oversight of other things us'd at Nuptials, together with Sacrifices and Drink-offerings, which are solemnly offer'd to this Goddess; but all first Sacrifice to Jupiter the Perfector, and to Juno the Perfectris, because they are the Authors and Inventors of all, as a little before we have declar'd.

To the Graces was given power to beautify the Face, and to give a Comely Shape and Proportion to all the Members of the Body, and to do good where-ever they pleas'd, and to cause the Persons to be grateful and thankful for what they receiv'd.

To Lucina he committed the care of them that were in Travel and Child-bearing, and easing of them in their Pains; and therefore Women in these hazards chiefly at that time, call'd upon her for help and assistance.

Diana shew'd the way how to nurse up little Infants, and to provide Food for them suitable to their tender Age; upon which account she was call'd the Childrens Nurse.

To every one of the Horae, is allotted an Office agreeable to their several Names, to the great advantage of Mankind, for the Government of themselves in the Course of their Lives. For there's no greater blessedness in this Life, than Good Laws, Peace and Justice.


Page 209

To Minerva he committed the Care of Olive-Yards, and planting of Olive-Trees, and extracting of Oyl. For before the Birth of this Goddess, this Tree grew wild, disregarded among other Trees of the Wood. But the use and culture of them (as is now practis'd) was not then known.

The making of Garments likewise and Architecture, and many other Arts was discover'd to Men by this Goddess: She invented Pipes, and the manner of Wind Musick, and many ingenious Tools and Instruments for Handicrafts; whence she was call'd Ergana.

To the Muses, their Father allotted the Invention of Letters, and the Composing of Verses, call'd Poetry.

But there are some who attribute the Invention of Letters to the Syrians, from whom the Phaenicians learnt them, and communicated them to the Grecians when they came along with Cadmus into Europe; whence the Grecians call'd them Phaenician Letters. To these that hold this Opinion, it's answer'd, that the Phaenicians were not the first that found out Letters, but only chang'd the Form and Shape of them into other Characters, which many afterwards using, the Name of Phaenician grew to be common.

Vulcan they say, found out the working of Iron, Brass, Silver and Gold, and all other Metals that require forging by Fire; and that the general use of Fire in all other cases, was found out by him, and discover'd not only to Artificers, but to all other Men; and therefore all the Masters of these Arts, pay their Devotions, and offer their Sacrifices chiefly to this God; and both they and all others, call Fire Vulcan, to the end that this great Good bestow'd upon all Mankind, might be for ever remembred, to his eternal Honour and Praise.

Mars they say, first taught the making of all sorts of Weapons, and how to furnish Soldiers both with offensive and defensive Arms, and to fight with Courage and Resolution, destroying all them that were Enemies to the Gods.

To Apollo is attributed the invention of the Harp, and that sort of Musick; and 'tis said, he discover'd the Art of Physick, which is practis'd by Revelation from him, by which the Sick heretofore were commonly restor'd to Health: He found out likewise the use of the Bow, and taught the Inhabitants to shoot; and therefore the Cretians delight much in Shooting, and call the Bow Scythicus.

Aesculapius was the Son of Apollo and Coronides; he was instructed by his Father in the Art of Physick, and found out Chirurgery, and the making up of Medicines, the Vertues of Roots and Plants, and improv'd to that degree in his Art, that he was reputed the first Founder and Author of it, and likewise the Prince of Physitians.

To Mercury they attribute the Invention of Messages in Times of War, by Trumpets and Heralds, of Truces and Leagues; and as a Sign, they were sent to treat with the Enemy, they carry'd a Rod before them; and therefore were suffered safely to come and go. Hence they were call'd the Common Mercury, because both sides injoy'd the equal benefit of a Peace after a War.

They say, he was the first that invented Weights and Measures, and getting of Wealth by Merchandize, and the way of Cheating and Cozening of others. He was accounted the Herald of the Gods, and the best Messenger, because he was quick and ingenious in declaring particularly every thing he had in Command. Whence he was call'd Hermes.

He was not the Inventer of Names and Words, as some say, but excell'd in clear and eloquent Expression, and delivery of his Message. He was likewise the Author of the Games of Wrestling, and invented the Harp made of a Tortois Shell, after the Contest between Apollo and Marsyas; in which (they say) Apollo was Victor, and reveng'd himself of his Adversary, to a greater degree than was fit; for which he was afterwards so griev'd, that they say, he broke the Strings of his Harp, and for some time forbore to play upon that Instrument.

The Cretians say, that Bacchus found out the use of the Vine, and the manner of planting and pruning of it, and the making of Wine, and the way of laying up the Summer Fruits; by which means they were preserv'd for Mens use and sustenance for a long time.


Page 210

It's further reported, that this God was the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina, and born in Crete; and Orpheus in his Sacred Rites and Mysteries, says, he was torn in pieces by the Titans: But there were many of this Name Bacchus, of which we have more largely and particularly given an account already; but of this Dionysius or Bacchus his being born in Crete, they endeavour to shew evident Signs, as Arguments to prove it; for they say, there are Two Islands form'd by him, near Crete, in a part of the Sea call'd the Double Gulfs; to which Islands he gave the denomination of Dionysiadae, which he never did in any other part of the World.

As to Hercules, it's said, that there was one of that Name, the Son of Jupiter, born many Years before him, that was begotten of Alcmena in Argos; but who was the Mother of this Hercules is uncertain: Only this is certain, that there was no Man comparable to him for Strength; that he travell'd through the whole World, inflicting just and deserv'd Punishment upon the Wicked, and destroy'd wild Beasts that infested the Countries, and made them desolate: That he delivered Men every where out of Bondage and Slavery, and that yet he himself (notwithstanding so many hazards and difficulties) was never worsted, remaining still unconquerable and invulnerable; for which renown'd Actions, he is by all Men ador'd with eternal Honours. But that Hercules, who was the Son of Alcmena was much later; but because he was like unto this ancient Hercules in his noble Acts, he likewise attain'd immortal Glory, and in after Ages (being of the same Name) was accounted to be the same Person, and (through the ignorance of the Vulgar) the Deeds of the former were ascrib'd to the later. They say, that the Praise and Renown of this elder God, for his famous Actions, continues in Egypt to this Day, where he built a City.

Britomartis, otherwise call'd Dictynna (they say) was born in Caenon in Crete, and was the Daughter of Jupiter, begotten on Carmes, the Daughter of Eubulus, the Son of Ceres. It's said; she invented the Hunters Toyls and Nets, and thence was call'd Dictynna: She was very familiar with Diana, and therefore it was thought by some, that Dictynna and Diana were one and the same Person, which Goddess is ador'd and honour'd in Crete both with Temples and Sacrifices. Those are very much mistaken, who say that Dictynna was so call'd, from her flying and hiding her self in the Fishers Nets to avoid Minos, who would have forc'd and ravish'd her. For it's not reasonable to imagine, that a Goddess (the Daughter of the most Supream God) should be reduc'd to so low a Condition, as to stand in need of Humane help; nor is it just to imagine, that Minos, who (by the general Consent of all) was reputed a righteous and upright Man, and liv'd a good Life, should be guilty of such an horrid Impiety, and grand piece of Wickedness.

Pluto (they say) was the Son of Jasion and Ceres, and born in Tripolus in Crete; and of his Descent there's a double Relation in History.

For some say, that Jasion so improv'd and cultivated the Land, that it brought forth Fruit in that abundance, that they that saw it, impos'd upon it a Name proper to the abundance of the Fruits, and call'd it Pluto; and therefore Posterity afterwards us'd to say, That he who had more than enough had Pluto.

Others say, that Jasion and Ceres had a Son nam'd Pluto, who first taught Men a more orderly and careful way of Living, and how to gain and treasure up Wealth. Whereas a provident Care of getting and keeping of Estates, was altogether neglected. And these are the things which the Cretians say of those Gods which they pretend were born among them. Moreover they say, the manner of Worshipping and Sacrificing to the Gods, and other Rites and sacred Mysteries came from them to other Nations, and they bring in this as a most certain and undeniable Argument, as they suppose. For they say, the Rites and Initiations practis'd by the Athenians in Elusina, which are almost the most famous of any other, and those in Samothracia, and in Thracia among the Cidonians (of all which Orpheus was the Institutor) are celebrated darkly and Mystically; but in Crete at Gnosus (by an ancient Law) the very same sacred Mysteries are celebrated plainly and openly, and whatever is done in secret by others, none amongst them conceals from any that have a desire to know them; for many of the Gods (they say) went out from Crete, and travell'd through many parts of the World, and were Benefactors to all sorts of Men, and communicated to them the Benefit


Page 211

and Advantage of such things as they themselves had found out and invented. For Ceres sail'd into Attica, and from thence into Sicily, and at length into Egypt; in which Places, after she had deliver'd them Corn, and taught them how to sow it, she was highly honour'd amongst them: So Venus dwelt near Eryx in Sicily, in the Island Cythera, at Paphus in Cyprus, and in Syria in Asia; and because she was often seen, and continu'd long among the Inhabitants of these Places, she was call'd Venus Erycina, Cytherea, Paphya and Syria. Apollo likewise continu'd long in Delos, Lycia and Delphos; and Diana in Ephesus, Pontus, Persia and Crete; and therefore from the Places and things done there by them, Apollo was call'd Apollo Delius, Lycius and Pythius; and she was stiled Diana Ephesia of Cresia, Tauropolia and Persia; although both of them were born in Crete.

This Goddess Diana is highly honour'd by the Persians, and the same Mysteries and Sacrifices that are celebrated and offered to her by others, the Barbarians themselves at this very day, celebrate in honour of Diana Persia. To this purpose they give an Account of the rest of the Gods, which as they are easie for the Reader to understand, so they are too tedious for us to recite.

Moreover they say, that many Ages after the Birth of the Gods, there were many Heroes among them, of whom the most Eminent were Minos and Rhadamanthus, who were the Progeny of Jupiter and Europa (the Daughter of Agenor) whom they report by the Providence of the Gods, to be carried over into Crete upon the Back of a Bull. Minos they say, who was the Elder, obtain'd the Kingdom, and built in the Island many Cities; amongst which, Three were most Famous; Gnosius, situated in that part of the Island that look'd towards Asia; Phaetus, lying Southward upon the Shoar; and Cidonia situated in the Western Part over against Peloponesus. Many Laws they say, were made by him for the Government of the Cretians, receiving them from Jupiter his Father, who us'd to converse with him privately in a Cave. He had a great Fleet, and conquer'd many of the Islands, and was the first of the Greeks that gain'd the Dominion of the Seas; and after he had arriv'd to a high pitch of Glory and Honour by reason of his Justice and Valour, he dy'd in Sicily, in undertaking a War against Cocalus, of which we have before given a particular Narrative, when we treated of the Affairs of Daedalus, who was the occasion of this War.

Rhadamanthus they say, was the most Just Man in the World, for in executing of Justice upon Thieves, Robbers and other Impious and Wicked Persons, he was inexorable.

They report likewise, that he gain'd several Islands, and many of the Maritime Coasts of Asia, all voluntarily submitting to him upon the account of his eminent Justice. He gave the Kingdom to Erythro, one of his Sons, who call'd themselves Erythri, from him. To Oenopion the Son of Minos and Ariadna, they say he allotted Chius: Others say, he was the Son of Bacchus, and was taught how to make Wine by his Father.

He rewarded likewise each of his Captains, either with some Island or City: Upon Thoantes he bestow'd Lemnos; on Engyeus, Cyrnus; to Pamphilus he gave Peparathus; to Euambeus, Maronea; to Alcaeus, Parus; to Arrion, Delus; to Andreus the Island Andros, so call'd after his Name.

And because he was so remarkably Just, he's feign'd to be the Judge of Hell; and to distinguish between the Pious and Impious, the Good and the Bad: They say likewise that Minos is Copartner with him in that dignity, upon the account of his Uprightness, and his just and righteous Reign.

Sarpadon, the Third Brother, they say, past over with an Army into Asia, and possest himself of Lycia and the Neighbouring Territories. His Son Evander succeeded him in the Kingdom of Lycia, who marrying Deidamia, the Daughter of Bellerophon, of her begat Sarpedon, who went to the Trojan War with Agamemnon, and is call'd by some the Son of Jupiter. Deucalion and Molus (they say) were the Sons of Minos: Deucalion had a Son call'd Idomeneus, and Molus another nam'd Merion, who (as is said) assisted Agamemnon against Troy with a Fleet of Fourscore Sail, and afterwards return'd and dy'd in their own Country, and were honourably bury'd and ador'd as Gods: They show their Sepulcher in Gnosus, whereon is this Inscription.


Page 212

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

Idomeneus in this Tomb doth lye,

Who born in Gnosus was; and him hard by,

I Son of Molus rest, Merion call'd.

These Two are ador'd as Demy-Gods by the Cretians, for they offer Sacrifice to them, and in their Wars call upon them for aid and assistance.

Having given an Account of these things, it remains we should now speak of the Nations that are intermixt with the Cretians. That the Aeteocretians were the first Inhabitants of this Island, and reputed to have been there from the beginning, we have before declar'd. Many Ages after, the Pelasgi planted among them a Nation inur'd continually to Arms, and wandring up and down from their ancient Habitations, seiz'd upon that part of the Island where they landed.

The Third Nation that came thither (they say) were the Dorienses, under the Conduct of Teutamus, one of the Posterity of Dorus. It's said the greatest part of his Colony he brought from the Neighbouring Parts of Olympus, and some part from the Achaians in Laconia; for that Dorus gather'd his Colony out of the Parts and Territories near to Malea.

A Fourth sort of People that pour'd into Crete, were a promiscuous Company of Barbarians from several Parts round about, who notwithstanding in process of time, spoke the same Language with the ancient Cretians, the natural Inhabitants. But after the power of Minos and Rhadamanthus became prevalent and considerable, all these Nations were reduc'd into one Body, as one People throughout the whole Island. And at length after the return of the Heraclidae, the Argives and Spartans sent Colonies, and possess'd themselves likewise of other Islands, and both in this and those other built several Cities, of which we shall treat more fully in due and proper time.

But since that almost all the Historians of the Cretian Affairs, differ among themselves, it's not to be wonder'd at if we do not agree with them all in every thing we relate; for we follow them who give the most probable Account, and are esteem'd to be of most credit. For sometimes we follow Epimenides the Theologist, and sometimes Dosiadas, Sosicrates and Leosthenidas.

Having therefore treated thus largely of Crete, we shall now apply our selves to speak of Lesbos.

This Island was anciently inhabited by many several Nations one after another, by reason it was so often left and forsaken: The first that seis'd upon it, were the Pelasgi when it lay desert and uninhabited. For Xanthus the Son of Triopas Prince of the Pelasgians that came from Argos, seated himself in a part of Lycia, which he had possessed himself of, and there reign'd over the Pelasgians that came thither with him; whence he sail'd over to Lesbos, which at that time lay desolate, and divided the Country amongst the People, and call'd the Island Pelasgia, which before was call'd Isa.

In process of time, after the Seventh Generation, many People were destroy'd by Deucalion's Flood, and Lesbos likewise at that time was by Chataracts of Showers laid waste and desolate. But afterwards Macarius happening to touch there, and considering the pleasantness of the Island, there seated himself.

This Macarius was the Son of Crinacus, the Son of Jupiter (as Hesiod and some other of the Poets say) and dwelt in the City Olanus, then call'd Jados, and now Achaia.

He got together a great Company of Ionians, and multitudes from several other Nations flockt in to him; in the first place he possessed himself of Lesbos; afterwards growing more powerful, through the richness of the Island, and his own Justice and Humanity, he gain'd many Neighbouring Islands, and divided the Lands amongst his Countrymen and Followers.

About that time Lesbos, the Son of Lapithas, the Son of Eolus, the Son of Hippotas (by the Direction of the Oracle at Delphos) arriv'd in this Island with new Colonies, and marrying Methymna the Daughter of Macareus, seated himself


Page 213

and his Followers there, and injoy'd an equal Interest with them that were there before him; and afterwards becoming a Man of great Renown, he call'd the Island Lesbos, after his own Name, and the People Lesbians: For Macareus had Two Daughters, Mytylene and Methymna, from whom two of the chiefest Cities of the Island were so call'd.

Macareus having a design to possess himself of some of the neighbouring Islands, ordered one of his Sons to carry over a Colony first into Chius; afterwards he sent another into Samos, nam'd Cycholaus, who seated himself there, and divided the Lands by Lot amongst those of his Colony, and rul'd over them as King. The Third Island Peopl'd by Macareus, was Coos, over which he appointed Neander King.

After this, he sent a large Colony with Leucippus into Rhodes, whom the Rhodians (by reason of the small number of Inhabitants that were left among them) willingly receiv'd, and suffered them to have and injoy the Lands equally with them.

But about that time, the Continent over against these Islands, lay under most pressing and grievous Calamities by reason of the late Flood; for in regard all the Fruits of the Earth by the Inundation and Excess of Rain were rotted and spoil'd for a long time together, Famine exceedingly prevail'd, and through Corruption of the Air, Plague and Pestilence depopulated and laid the Towns and Cities waste. But in the mean time, the Islands lying more open to the Winds, and so partaking of their healthful Gales, were loaded with the Fruits of the Earth, and the Inhabitants had fulness of all things, and in a short time were in a happy and prosperous State and Condition; and by reason of the great Plenty that was amongst them, they were call'd the Islands of the Blessed, or The Blessed Islands. But some say, that they were call'd the Macarean Islands, from Macareas and Ion, two Sons of one of the Princes that formerly rul'd there. And indeed these Islands for richness of Soyl and plenty of all things, did not only excel all the neighbouring Countries in ancient Time, but do so even to this Day. For the fertility of the Soyl, the pleasantness of the Situation, and the healthfulness of the Climate is such, that they are not without cause call'd, but are really and in truth, Blessed and Happy Islands.

Lastly, Macareus King of Lesbos, made the first Law among them, which was so beneficial and advantagious to the Publick, that he gave it the Name of the Lion, because of the strength and force of that Beast.

A considerable time after this Colony planted in Lesbos, another was brought into the Island Tenedos in this manner.

Tennes was the Son of Cyrnus, King of Colone in Troas, and was a Man renown'd for his Valour; he brought over a Colony out of the opposite Continent, and possess'd himself of the Island Leucophrys, at that time desolate.

After he had divided the Country by Lot amongst his Subjects, and had built a City, he call'd it Tennus, after his own Name. By his good and upright Government he gain'd upon the Hearts of his People, and was highly honour'd while he liv'd, and after his Death was ador'd as a Demy-God: For they built a Temple in honour of him, and offered Sacrifices to him as a God: Which Religious Veneration was continu'd to Times not long since. But we are not here to omit what the Islanders report concerning Tennes, the Founder of the City Tenedos. They say that Cygnus, the Father of Tennes, giving Ear to the false Suggestions and Calumniations of his Wife, lockt his Son in a Chest, and caus'd him to be thrown into the Sea, and that the Chest was cast up by the Waves upon Tencdos; and being thus strangely preserv'd by the special Providence of God, became King of the Island, and afterwards growing renown'd for his Justice and other eminent Virtues, he was at length honour'd and ador'd as a God. And because his Stepmother hir'd a Piper by a false Oath to support her own Calumny, it's a Law amongst them of Tenedos, That no Piper shall come into the Temple.

Afterwards when Tennes, was kill'd by Achilles in the time of the Trojan War, and Tenedos then laid wast by the Grecians, the Tenedeans, made another Law, that it should not be lawful so much as once to name Achilles in Tennes his Temple. These are the things related of Tenedos and it's ancient Inhabitanas.

Having now given an Account of the most considerable Islands, we shall proceed in the next place to the lesser.


Page 214

The Cyclade Islands were Formerly desolate and uninhabited: But Minos the Son of Jupiter and Europa, King of Crete, having a strong Army at Land, and with a powerful Navy, Master at Sea, sent many Colonies out of Crete, and Peopled many of the Islands of the Cyclades, and divided the Lands to the People by Lot, and subdu'd a great part of the Sea-Coasts of Asia; and therefore the Sea-Ports and Havens of Asia, and of the Islands, have the same Names with those in Crete, and are call'd Minoi. Minos being now grown great and powerful, began to envy his Brother Rhadamanthus his Copartner in the Kingdom, for the honour and reputation he had gain'd by his Justice. Willing therefore to remove him as far from him as possibly he could, he sent him into the furthest parts of his Dominions. Whereupon Rhadamanthus abiding in the Islands over against Ionia and Caria, caus'd Erythrus to build a City in Asia after his own Name, and made Oenopion, the Son of Ariadna the Daughter of Minos, Lord of Chius.

These things were all done before the Trojan War: But after the destruction of Troy, the Cares grown rich and wealthy, gain'd the Dominion at Sea, and subdu'd the Cyclades, some of which they took into their own hands, and rooted out the Cretians; others they injoy'd in Common with the ancient Cretian Inhabitants. But in process of time the Grecians growing strong and powerful, the barbarous Carians were ejected out of most of the Cyclades, and the Islands fell into the hands of the Greeks. Of which we shall give a more particular Account hereafter in proper Time and Place.

D. G.

The following Books, that is to say, the VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, are lost.
