Exegetical Fragments of Dionysius (Dionysius of Alexandria)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf06.iv.iv.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

  Exegetical Fragments

 Exegetical Fragments. [929]

 ------------------------

 I.--A Commentary on the Beginning of Ecclesiastes. [930]

 ------------------------

 Chapter I.

 Ver. 1. "The words of the son of David, king of Israel in Jerusalem."

 In like manner also Matthew calls the Lord the son of David. [931]

 3. "What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the
 sun?"

 For what man is there who, although he may have become rich by toiling
 after the objects of this earth, has been able to make himself three
 cubits in stature, if he is naturally only of two cubits in stature? Or
 who, if blind, has by these means recovered his sight? Therefore we
 ought to direct our toils to a goal beyond the sun: for thither, too,
 do the exertions of the virtues reach.

 4. "One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh: but the
 earth abideth for ever" (unto the age).

 Yes, unto the age, [932] but not unto the ages. [933]

 16. "I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great
 estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been before
 me in Jerusalem; yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and
 knowledge.

 17. I knew parables and science: that this indeed is also the spirit's
 choice. [934]

 18. For in multitude of wisdom is multitude of knowledge: and he that
 increaseth knowledge increaseth grief."

 I was vainly puffed up, and increased wisdom; not the wisdom which God
 has given, but that wisdom of which Paul says, "The wisdom of this
 world is foolishness with God." [935] For in this Solomon had also an
 experience surpassing prudence, and above the measure of all the
 ancients. Consequently he shows the vanity of it, as what follows in
 like manner demonstrates: "And my heart uttered [936] many things: I
 knew wisdom, and knowledge, and parables, and sciences." But this was
 not the genuine wisdom or knowledge, but that which, as Paul says,
 puffeth up. He spake, moreover, as it is written, [937] three thousand
 parables. But these were not parables of a spiritual kind, but only
 such as fit the common polity of men; as, for instance, utterances
 about animals or medicines. For which reason he has added in a tone of
 raillery, "I knew that this also is the spirit's choice." He speaks
 also of the multitude of knowledge, not the knowledge of the Holy
 Spirit, but that which the prince of this world works, and which he
 conveys to men in order to overreach their souls, with officious
 questions as to the measures of heaven, the position of earth, the
 bounds of the sea. But he says also, "He that increaseth knowledge
 increaseth sorrow." For they search even into things deeper than
 these,--inquiring, for example, what necessity there is for fire to go
 upward, and for water to go downward; and when they have learned that
 it is because the one is light and the other heavy, they do but
 increase sorrow: for the question still remains, Why might it not be
 the very reverse?

 [929] See, in the Bibliotheca Veterum Patrum of Gallandi, the Appendix
 to vol. xiv., added from the manuscripts, after the editor's death by
 an anonymous scholar.

 [930] [Compare the Metaphrase, p. 9, supra. Query, are not these twin
 specimens of exegetical exercises in the school at Alexandria?]

 [931] Matt. i. 1.

 [932] heis ton aiona.

 [933] heis tous haionas.

 [934] proairesis.

 [935] 1 Cor. iii. 19.

 [936] eipe, for which eide, "discerned," is suggested.

 [937] 1 Kings iv. 32.

 Chapter II.

 Ver. 1. "I said in mine heart, Go to now, make trial as in mirth, and
 behold in good. And this, too, is vanity."

 For it was for the sake of trial, and in accordance with what comes by
 the loftier and the severe life, that he entered into pleasure. And he
 makes mention of the mirth, which men call so. And he says, "in good,"
 referring to what men call good things, which are not capable of giving
 life to their possessor, and which make the man who engages in them
 vain like themselves.

 2. "I said of laughter, It is mad; [938] and of mirth, What doest
 thou?"

 Laughter has a twofold madness; because madness begets laughter, and
 does not allow the sorrowing for sins; and also because a man of that
 sort is possessed with madness, [939] in the confusing of seasons, and
 places, and persons. For he flees from those who sorrow. "And to mirth,
 What doest thou?" Why dost thou repair to those who are not at liberty
 to be merry? Why to the drunken, and the avaricious, and the rapacious?
 And why this phrase, "as wine?" [940] Because wine makes the heart
 merry; and it acts upon the poor in spirit. The flesh, however, also
 makes the heart merry, when it acts in a regular and moderate fashion.

 3. "And my heart directed me in wisdom, and to overcome in mirth, until
 I should know what is that good thing to the sons of men which they
 shall do under the sun for the number of the days of their life."

 Being directed, he says, by wisdom, I overcame pleasures in mirth.
 Moreover, for me the aim of knowledge was to occupy myself with nothing
 vain, but to find the good; for if a person finds that, he does not
 miss the discernment also of the profitable. The sufficient is also the
 opportune, [941] and is commensurate with the length of life.

 4. "I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards.

 5. I made me gardens and orchards.

 6. I made me pools of water, that by these I might rear woods producing
 trees.

 7. I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house;
 also I had large possessions of great and small cattle above all that
 were in Jerusalem before me.

 8. I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of
 kings and of the provinces. I gat me men-singers and women-singers, and
 the delights of the sons of men, as cups and the cupbearer.

 9. And I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in
 Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.

 10. And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from them; I withheld
 not my heart from any pleasure."

 You see how he reckons up a multitude of houses and fields, and the
 other things which he mentions, and then finds nothing profitable in
 them. For neither was he any better in soul by reason of these things,
 nor by their means did he gain friendship with God. Necessarily he is
 led to speak also of the true riches and the abiding property. Being
 minded, therefore, to show what kinds of possessions remain with the
 possessor, and continue steadily and maintain themselves for him, he
 adds: "Also my wisdom remained with me." For this alone remains, and
 all these other things, which he has already reckoned up, flee away and
 depart. Wisdom, therefore, remained with me, and I remained in virtue
 of it. For those other things fall, and also cause the fall of the very
 persons who run after them. But, with the intention of instituting a
 comparison between wisdom and those things which are held to be good
 among men, he adds these words, "And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I
 kept not from them," and so forth; whereby he describes as evil, not
 only those toils which they endure who toil in gratifying themselves
 with pleasures, but those, too, which by necessity and constraint men
 have to sustain for their maintenance day by day, labouring at their
 different occupations in the sweat of their faces. For the labour, he
 says, is great; but the art [942] by the labour is temporary, adding
 [943] nothing serviceable among things that please. Wherefore there is
 no profit. For where there is no excellence there is no profit. With
 reason, therefore, are the objects of such solicitude but vanity, and
 the spirit's choice. Now this name of "spirit" he gives to the "soul."
 For choice is a quality, not a motion. [944] And David says: "Into Thy
 hands I commit my spirit." [945] And in good truth "did my wisdom
 remain with me," for it made me know and understand, so as to enable me
 to speak of all that is not advantageous [946] under the sun. If,
 therefore, we desire the righteously profitable, if we seek the truly
 advantageous, if it is our aim to be incorruptible, let us engage those
 labours which reach beyond the sun. For in these there is no vanity,
 and there is not the choice of a spirit at once inane and hurried
 hither and thither to no purpose.

 12. "And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for
 what man is there that shall come after counsel in all those things
 which it has done?" [947]

 He means the wisdom which comes from God, and which also remained with
 him. And by madness and folly he designates all the labours of men, and
 the vain and silly pleasure they have in them. Distinguishing these,
 therefore, and their measure, and blessing the true wisdom, he has
 added: "For what man is there that shall come after counsel?" For this
 counsel instructs us in the wisdom that is such indeed, and gifts us
 with deliverance from madness and folly.

 13. "Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as much as light excelleth
 darkness."

 He does not say this in the way of comparison. For things which are
 contrary to each other, and mutually destructive, cannot be compared.
 But his decision was, that the one is to be chosen, and the other
 avoided. To like effect is the saying, "Men loved darkness rather than
 light." [948] For the term "rather" in that passage expresses the
 choice of the person loving, and not the comparison of the objects
 themselves.

 14. "The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walketh in
 darkness."

 That man always inclines earthward, he means, and has the ruling
 faculty [949] darkened. It is true, indeed, that we men have all of us
 our eyes in our head, if we speak of the mere disposition of the body.
 But he speaks here of the eyes of the mind. For as the eyes of the
 swine do not turn naturally up towards heaven, just because it is made
 by nature to have an inclination toward the belly; so the mind of the
 man who has once been enervated by pleasures is not easily diverted
 from the tendency thus assumed, because he has not "respect unto all
 the commandments of the Lord." [950] Again: "Christ is the head of the
 Church." [951] And they, therefore, are the wise who walk in His way;
 for He Himself has said, "I am the way." [952] On this account, then,
 it becomes the wise man always to keep the eyes of his mind directed
 toward Christ Himself, in order that he may do nothing out of measure,
 neither being lifted up in heart in the time of prosperity, nor
 becoming negligent in the day of adversity: "for His judgments are a
 great deep," [953] as you will learn more exactly from what is to
 follow.

 14. "And I perceived myself also that one event happeneth to them all.

 15. Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it
 happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise?"

 The run of the discourse in what follows deals with those who are of a
 mean spirit as regards this present life, and in whose judgment the
 article of death and all the anomalous pains of the body are a kind of
 dreaded evil, and who on this account hold that there is no profit in a
 life of virtue, because there is no difference made in ills like these
 between the wise man and the fool. He speaks consequently of these as
 the words of a madness inclining to utter senselessness; whence he also
 adds this sentence, "For the fool talks over-much;" [954] and by the
 "fool" here he means himself, and every one who reasons in that way.
 Accordingly he condemns this absurd way of thinking. And for the same
 reason he has given utterance to such sentiments in the fears of his
 heart; and dreading the righteous condemnation of those who are to be
 heard, he solves the difficulty in its pressure by his own reflections.
 For this word, "Why was I then wise?" was the word of a man in doubt
 and difficulty whether what is expended on wisdom is done well or to no
 purpose; and whether there is no difference between the wise man and
 the fool in point of advantage, seeing that the former is involved
 equally with the latter in the same sufferings which happen in this
 present world. And for this reason he says, "I spoke over-largely [955]
 in my heart," in thinking that there is no difference between the wise
 man and the fool.

 16. "For there is no remembrance of the wise equally with the fool
 forever."

 For the events that happen in this life are all transitory, be they
 even the painful incidents, of which he says, "As all things now are
 consigned to oblivion." [956] For after a short space has passed by,
 all the things that befall men in this life perish in forgetfulness.
 Yea, the very persons to whom these things have happened are not
 remembered all in like manner, even although they may have gone through
 like chances in life. For they are not remembered for these, but only
 for what they may have evinced of wisdom or folly, virtue or vice. The
 memories of such are not extinguished (equally) among men in
 consequence of the changes of lot befalling them. Wherefore he has
 added this: "And how shall the wise man die along with the fool? The
 death of sinners, indeed, is evil: yet the memory of the just is
 blessed, but the name of the wicked is extinguished." [957]

 22. "For that falls to man in all his labour."

 In truth, to those who occupy their minds with the distractions of
 life, life becomes a painful thing, which, as it were, wounds the heart
 with its goads, that is, with the lustful desires of increase. And
 sorrowful also is the solicitude connected with covetousness: it does
 not so much gratify those who are successful in it, as it pains those
 who are unsuccessful; while the day is spent in laborious anxieties,
 and the night puts sleep to flight from the eyes, with the cares of
 making gain. Vain, therefore, is the zeal of the man who looks to these
 things.

 24. "And there is nothing good for a man, but what he eats and drinks,
 and what will show to his soul good in his labour. This also I saw,
 that it is from the hand of God.

 25. For who eats and drinks from his own resources?" [958] That the
 discourse does not deal now with material meats, he will show by what
 follows; namely, "It is better to go to the house of mourning than to
 go to the house of feasting." [959] And so in the present passage he
 proceeds to add: "And (what) will show to his soul good in its labour."
 And surely mere material meats and drinks are not the soul's good. For
 the flesh, when luxuriously nurtured, wars against the soul, and rises
 in revolt against the spirit. And how should not intemperate eatings
 and drinkings also be contrary to God? [960] He speaks, therefore, of
 things mystical. For no one shall partake of the spiritual table, but
 one who is called by Him, and who has listened to the wisdom which
 says, "Take and eat." [961]

 [938] periphoran.

 [939] peripheretai.

 [940] hos oinon.

 [941] Or, temporary.

 [942] techne.

 [943] Reading prostitheisa for protitheisa.

 [944] poion ou kinesis.

 [945] Ps. xxxi. 5.

 [946] perisseia.

 [947] hos eleusetai opiso tes boules sumpanta hosa epoiesen haute.

 [948] John iii. 19.

 [949] to hegemonikon.

 [950] Ps. cxix. 6.

 [951] Eph. v. 23.

 [952] John xiv. 6.

 [953] Ps. xxxvi. 6.

 [954] ek perisseumatos.

 [955] perisson.

 [956] kathoti ede ta panta epelesthe.

 [957] Prov. x. 7.

 [958] par' autou.

 [959] Eccles. vii. 2.

 [960] The text gives, pos de kai ouk parek Theou asoton bromaton kai
 methe.

 [961] Prov. ix. 5.

 Chapter III.

 Ver. 3. "There is a time to kill, and a time to heal."

 To "kill," in the case of him who perpetrates unpardonable
 transgression; and to "heal," in the case of him who can show a wound
 that will bear remedy.

 4. "A time to weep, and a time to laugh."

 A time to weep, when it is the time of suffering; as when the Lord also
 says, "Verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament." [962] But
 to laugh, as concerns the resurrection: "For your sorrow," He says,
 "shall be turned into joy." [963]

 4. "A time to mourn, and a time to dance."

 When one thinks of the death which the transgression of Adam brought on
 us, it is a time to mourn; but it is a time to hold festal gatherings
 when we call to mind the resurrection from the dead which we expect
 through the new Adam. [964]

 6. "A time to keep, and a time to cast away."

 A time to keep the Scripture against the unworthy, and a time to put it
 forth for the worthy. Or, again: Before the incarnation it was a time
 to keep the letter of the law; but it was a time to cast it away when
 the truth came in its flower.

 7. "A time to keep silence, and a time to speak."

 A time to speak, when there are hearers who receive the word; but a
 time to keep silence, when the hearers pervert the word; as Paul says:
 "A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition,
 reject." [965]

 10. "I have seen, then, the travail which God hath given to the sons of
 men to be exercised in it.

 11. Everything that He hath made is beautiful in its time: and He hath
 set the whole world in their heart; so that no man can find out the
 work that God maketh from the beginning and to the end."

 And this is true. For no one is able to comprehend the works of God
 altogether. Moreover, the world is the work of God. No one, then, can
 find out as to this world what is its space from the beginning and unto
 the end, that is to say, the period appointed for it, and the limits
 before determined unto it; forasmuch as God has set the whole world as
 a realm of ignorance in our hearts. And thus one says: "Declare to me
 the shortness of my days." [966] In this manner, and for our profit,
 the end of this world (age)--that is to say, this present life--is a
 thing of which we are ignorant.

 [962] Luke vi. 25; John xvi. 20.

 [963] John xvi. 20.

 [964] The fast of the Paschal week, and the feast that follows, are
 here referred to. Of course the religious salutation of the Hebrews (2
 Sam. vi. 14) is the thought of Koheleth, and figuratively it is here
 adopted for holy mirth.]

 [965] Tit. iii. 10.

 [966] Ps. cii. 24, ten oligoteta ton hemeron mou anangeilon moi.

 II.--The Gospel According to Luke.

 An Interpretation.--Chap. XXII. 42-48

 ------------------------

 Ver. 42. "Father, if Thou be willing to remove [967] this cup from me:
 nevertheless not my will, but Thine, be done."

 But let these things be enough to say on the subject of the will. This
 word, however, "Let the cup pass," does not mean, Let it not come near
 me, or approach me. [968] For what can "pass from Him," certainly must
 first come nigh Him; and what does pass thus from Him, must be by Him.
 For if it does not reach Him, it cannot pass from Him. For He takes to
 Himself the person of man, as having been made man. Wherefore also on
 this occasion He deprecates the doing of the inferior, which is His
 own, and begs that the superior should be done, which is His Father's,
 to wit, the divine will; which again, however, in respect of the
 divinity, is one and the same will in Himself and in the Father. For it
 was the Father's will that He should pass through every trial
 (temptation); and the Father Himself in a marvellous manner brought Him
 on this course, not indeed with the trial itself as His goal, nor in
 order simply that He might enter into that, but in order that He might
 prove Himself to be above the trial, and also beyond it. [969] And
 surely it is the fact, that the Saviour asks neither what is
 impossible, nor what is impracticable, nor what is contrary to the will
 of the Father. It is something possible; for Mark makes mention of His
 saying, "Abba, Father, all things are possible unto Thee." [970] And
 they are possible if He wills them; for Luke tells us that He said,
 "Father, if Thou be willing, remove [971] this cup from me." The Holy
 Spirit, therefore, apportioned among the evangelists, makes up the full
 account of our Saviour's whole disposition by the expressions of these
 several narrators together. He does not, then, ask of the Father what
 the Father wills not. For the words, "If Thou be willing," were
 demonstrative of subjection and docility, [972] not of ignorance or
 hesitancy. For this reason, the other scripture says, "All things are
 possible unto Thee." And Matthew again admirably describes the
 submission and humility [973] when he says, "If it be possible." For
 unless I adapt the sense in this way, [974] some will perhaps assign an
 impious signification to this expression, "If it be possible;" as if
 there were anything impossible for God to do, except that only which He
 does not will to do. But...being straightway strengthened in His
 humanity by His ancestral [975] divinity, he urges the safer petition,
 and desires no longer that should be the case, but that it might be
 accomplished in accordance with the Father's good pleasure, in glory,
 in constancy, and in fulness. For John, who has given us the record of
 the sublimest and divinest of the Saviour's words and deeds, heard Him
 speak thus: "And the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not
 drink it?" [976] Now, to drink the cup was to discharge the ministry
 and the whole economy of trial with fortitude, to follow and fulfil the
 Father's determination, and to surmount all apprehensions. And the
 exclamation, "Why hast Thou forsaken me?" was in due accordance with
 the requests He had previously made: Why is it that death has been in
 conjunction with me all along up till now, and that I bear not yet the
 cup? This I judge to have been the Saviour's meaning in this concise
 utterance.

 And He certainly spake truth then. Nevertheless He was not forsaken.
 But He drank out the cup at once, as His plea had implied, and then
 passed away. [977] And the vinegar which was handed to Him seems to me
 to have been a symbolical thing. For the turned wine [978] indicated
 very well the quick turning [979] and change which He sustained, when
 He passed from His passion to impassibility, and from death to
 deathlessness, and from the position of one judged to that of one
 judging, and from subjection under the despot's power to the exercise
 of kingly dominion. And the sponge, as I think, signified the complete
 transfusion [980] of the Holy Spirit that was realized in Him. And the
 reed symbolized the royal sceptre and the divine law. And the hyssop
 expressed that quickening and saving resurrection of His, by which He
 has also brought health to us. [981]

 43. "And there appeared an angel unto Him from heaven, strengthening
 Him.

 44. And being in an agony, He prayed more earnestly; and His sweat was
 as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground."

 The phrase, "a sweat of blood," is a current parabolic expression used
 of persons in intense pain and distress; as also of one in bitter grief
 people say that the man "weeps tears of blood." For in using the
 expression, "as it were great drops of blood," he does not declare the
 drops of sweat to have been actually drops of blood. [982] For he would
 not then have said that these drops of sweat were like blood. For such
 is the force of the expression, "as it were great drops." But rather
 with the object of making it plain that the Lord's body was not bedewed
 with any kind of subtle moisture which had only the show and appearance
 of actuality, but that it was really suffused all over with sweat in
 the shape of large thick drops, he has taken the great drops of blood
 as an illustration of what was the case with Him. And accordingly, as
 by the intensity of the supplication and the severe agony, so also by
 the dense and excessive sweat, he made the facts patent, that the
 Saviour was man by nature and in reality, and not in mere semblance and
 appearance, and that He was subject to all the innocent sensibilities
 natural to men. Nevertheless the words, "I have power to lay down my
 life, and I have power to take it again," [983] show that His passion
 was a voluntary thing; and besides that, they indicate that the life
 which is laid down and taken again is one thing, and the divinity which
 lays that down and takes it again is another.

 He says, "one thing and another," not as making a partition into two
 persons, but as showing the distinction between the two natures. [984]

 And as, by voluntarily enduring the death in the flesh, He implanted
 incorruptibility in it; so also, by taking to Himself of His own
 free-will the passion of our servitude, [985] He set in it the seeds of
 constancy and courage, whereby He has nerved those who believe on Him
 for the mighty conflicts belonging to their witness-bearing. Thus,
 also, those drops of sweat flowed from Him in a marvellous way like
 great drops of blood, in order that He might, as it were, drain off
 [986] and empty the fountain of the fear which is proper to our nature.
 For unless this had been done with a mystical import, He certainly
 would not, even had He been [987] the most timorous and ignoble of men,
 have been bedewed in this unnatural way with drops of sweat like drops
 of blood under the mere force of His agony.

 Of like import is also the sentence in the narrative which tells us
 that an angel stood by the Saviour and strengthened Him. For this, too,
 bore also on the economy entered into on our behalf. For those who are
 appointed to engage in the sacred exertions of conflicts on account of
 piety, have the angels from heaven to assist them. And the prayer,
 "Father, remove the cup," He uttered probably not as if He feared the
 death itself, but with the view of challenging the devil by these words
 to erect the cross for Him. With words of deceit that personality
 deluded Adam; with the words of divinity, then, let the deceiver
 himself now be deluded. Howbeit assuredly the will of the Son is not
 one thing, and the will of the Father another. [988] For He who wills
 what the Father wills, is found to have the Father's will. It is in a
 figure, therefore, that He says, "not my will, but Thine." For it is
 not that He wishes the cup to be removed, but that He refers to the
 Father's will the right issue of His passion, and honours thereby the
 Father as the First. [989] For if the fathers [990] style one's
 disposition gnomè, [991] and if such disposition relates also to what
 is in consideration hidden as if by settled purpose, how say some that
 the Lord, who is above all these things, bears a gnomic will? [992]
 Manifestly that can be only by defect of reason.

 45. "And when He rose from prayer, and was come to His disciples, He
 found them sleeping for sorrow;

 46. And said unto them, Why sleep ye? Rise and pray, lest ye enter into
 temptation."

 For in the most general sense it holds good that it is apparently not
 possible for any man [993] to remain altogether without experience of
 ill. For, as one says, the whole world lieth in wickedness;" [994] and
 again, "The most of the days of man are labour and trouble." [995] But
 you will perhaps say, What difference is there between being tempted,
 and falling or entering into temptation? Well, if one is overcome of
 evil--and he will be overcome unless he struggles against it himself,
 and unless God protects him with His shield--that man has entered into
 temptation, and is in it, and is brought under it like one that is led
 captive. But if one withstands and endures, that man is indeed tempted;
 but he has not entered into temptation, or fallen into it. Thus Jesus
 was led up of the Spirit, not indeed to enter into temptation, but to
 be tempted of the devil. [996] And Abraham, again, did not enter into
 temptation, neither did God lead him into temptation, but He tempted
 (tried) him; yet He did not drive him into temptation. The Lord
 Himself, moreover, tempted (tried) the disciples. Thus the wicked one,
 when he tempts us, draws us into the temptations, as dealing himself
 with the temptations of evil. But God, when He tempts (tries), adduces
 the temptations (trials) as one untempted of evil. For God, it is said,
 "cannot be tempted of evil." [997] The devil, therefore, drives us on
 by violence, drawing us to destruction; but God leads us by hand,
 training us for our salvation.

 47. "And while He yet spake, behold a multitude, and he that was called
 Judas, one of the twelve, went before them, and drew near unto Jesus,
 and kissed Him.

 48. But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with
 a kiss?

 How wonderful this endurance of evil by the Lord, who even kissed the
 traitor, and spake words softer even than the kiss! For He did not say,
 O thou abominable, yea, utterly abominable traitor, is this the return
 you make to us for so great kindness? But, somehow, He says simply
 "Judas," using the proper name, which was the address that would be
 used by one who commiserated a person, or who wished to call him back,
 rather than of one in anger. And He did not say, "thy Master, the Lord,
 thy benefactor;" but He said simply, "the Son of man," that is, the
 tender and meek one: as if He meant to say, Even supposing that I was
 not your Master, or Lord, or benefactor, dost thou still betray one so
 guilelessly and so tenderly affected towards thee, as even to kiss thee
 in the hour of thy treachery, and that, too, when the kiss was the
 signal for thy treachery? Blessed art Thou, O Lord! How great is this
 example of the endurance of evil that Thou hast shown us in Thine own
 person! how great, too, the pattern of lowliness! Howbeit, the Lord has
 given us this example, to show us that we ought not to give up offering
 our good counsel to our brethren, even should nothing remarkable be
 effected by our words.

 For as incurable wounds are wounds which cannot be remedied either by
 severe applications, or by those which may act more pleasantly upon
 them; [998] so [999] the soul, when it is once carried captive, and
 gives itself up to any kind of [1000] wickedness, and refuses to
 consider what is really profitable for it, although a myriad counsels
 should echo in it, takes no good to itself. But just as if the sense of
 hearing were dead within it, it receives no benefit from exhortations
 addressed to it; not because it cannot, but only because it will not.
 This was what happened in the case of Judas. And yet Christ, although
 He knew all these things beforehand, did not at any time, from the
 beginning on to the end, omit to do all in the way of counsel that
 depended on Him. And inasmuch as we know that such was His practice, we
 ought also unceasingly to endeavour to set those right [1001] who prove
 careless, even although no actual good may seem to be effected by that
 counsel.

 [967] parenenkein.

 [968] ouk esti. Migne suggests ouketi: "Let it no more come near me."

 [969] met' auton. May it be, "and next to Himself" (the Father)?

 [970] Mark xiv. 36.

 [971] parenenke.

 [972] epieikeias.

 [973] The text gives kan touto palin to eiktikon, etc. Migne proposes,
 kan touto palin to euktikon = and Matthew again describes the
 supplicatory and docile in Him.

 [974] Reading houtos for oute.

 [975] patrikes.

 [976] John xviii. 11.

 [977] pareleluthe.

 [978] ektropias oinos.

 [979] tropen.

 [980] anakrasin.

 [981] The text is, hemas hugia edeixen. Migne proposes hugiasen.

 [982] [Note this somewhat modern "explaining away." It proves the
 freedom of our author from any predisposition to exegetical
 exaggeration, if nothing more.

 [983] John x. 18.

 [984] This sentence is supposed to be an interpolation by the
 constructor of the Catena.

 [985] The text is, tes douleias. Migne suggests, tes deilias ="the
 feeling of our fear."

 [986] anaxerane.

 [987] The text is, oude he sphodra deilotatos, etc. We read, with
 Migne, hei instead of he.

 [988] [Note the following sentence, without which, as explanatory, this
 might be quoted as a Monothelite statement. Garbling is a convenient
 resource for those who claim the Fathers for other false systems.]

 [989] archen.

 [990] [This seems to be a quotation from the Alexandrian Fathers
 showing how early such questions began to be agitated. Settled in the
 Sixth Council, a.d. 681, the last "General Council."]

 [991] gnome, gnomè.

 [992] thelema gnomikon.

 [993] malista isos panti anthropo.

 [994] 1 John v. 19.

 [995] Ps. xc. 10.

 [996] Matt. iv. 1.

 [997] James i. 13.

 [998] Some such clause as iathenai dunatai requires to be supplied
 here.

 [999] Reading houto for oute.

 [1000] Reading hotinioun for hotioun.

 [1001] rhuthmizein.

 III.--On Luke XXII. 42, Etc. [1002]

 ------------------------

 But let these things be enough to say on the subject of the will. This
 word, however, "Let the cup pass," does not mean, Let it not come near
 me, or approach me. For what can pass from Him must certainly first
 come nigh Him, and what does thus pass from Him must be by Him. For if
 it does not reach Him, it cannot pass from Him. Accordingly, as if He
 now felt it to be present, He began to be in pain, and to be troubled,
 and to be sore amazed, and to be in an agony. And as if it was at hand
 and placed before Him, He does not merely say "the cup," but He
 indicates it by the word "this." Therefore, as what passes from one is
 something which neither has no approach nor is permanently settled with
 one, so the Saviour's first request is that the temptation which has
 come softly and plainly upon Him, and associated itself lightly with
 Him, may be turned aside. And this is the first form of that freedom
 from falling into temptation, which He also counsels the weaker
 disciples to make the subject of their prayers; that, namely, which
 concerns the approach of temptation: for it must needs be that offences
 come, but yet those to whom they come ought not to fall into the
 temptation. But the most perfect mode in which this freedom from
 entering into temptation is exhibited, is what He expresses in His
 second request, when He says not merely, "Not as I will," but also,
 "but as Thou wilt." For with God there is no temptation in evil; but He
 wills to give us good exceeding abundantly above what we ask or think.
 That His will, therefore, is the perfect will, the Beloved Himself
 knew; and often does He say that He has come to do that will, and not
 His own will,--that is to say, the will of men. For He takes to Himself
 the person of men, as having been made man. Wherefore also on this
 occasion He deprecates the doing of the inferior, which is His own, and
 begs that the superior should be done, which is His Father's, to wit,
 the divine will, which again, however, in respect of the divinity, is
 one and the same will in Himself and in His Father. For it was the
 Father's will that He should pass through every trial (temptation), and
 the Father Himself in a marvellous manner brought Him on this course;
 not indeed, with the trial itself as His goal, nor in order simply that
 He might enter into that, but in order that He might prove Himself to
 be above the trial, and also beyond it. And surely it is the fact that
 the Saviour asks neither what is impossible, nor what is impracticable,
 nor what is contrary to the will of the Father. It is something
 possible, for Mark makes mention of His saying, "Abba, Father, all
 things are possible unto Thee;" and they are possible if He wills them,
 for Luke tells us that He said, "Father, if Thou be willing, remove
 this cup from me." The Holy Spirit therefore, apportioned among the
 evangelists, makes up the full account of our Saviour's whole
 disposition by the expressions of these several narrators together. He
 does not then ask of the Father what the Father wills not. For the
 words, "if Thou be willing," were demonstrative of subjection and
 docility, not of ignorance or hesitancy. And just as when we make any
 request that may be accordant with his judgment, at the hand of father
 or ruler or any one of those whom we respect, we are accustomed to use
 the address, though not certainly as if we were in doubt about it, "if
 you please;" so the Saviour also said, "if Thou be willing:" not that
 He thought that He willed something different, and thereafter learned
 the fact, but that He understood exactly God's willingness to remove
 the cup from Him, and as doing so also apprehended justly that what He
 wills is also possible unto Him. For this reason the other scripture
 says, "All things are possible unto Thee." And Matthew again admirably
 describes the submission and the humility, when he says, "if it be
 possible." For unless we adapt the sense in this way, some will perhaps
 assign an impious signification to this expression "if it be possible,"
 as if there were anything impossible for God to do, except that only
 which He does not will to do. Therefore the request which He made was
 nothing independent, nor one which pleased Himself only, or opposed His
 Father's will, but one also in conformity with the mind of God. And yet
 some one may say that He is overborne and changes His mind, and asks
 presently something different from what He asked before, and holds no
 longer by His own will, but introduces His Father's will. Well, such
 truly is the case. Nevertheless He does not by any means make any
 change from one side to another; but He embraces another way, and a
 different method of carrying out one and the same transaction, which is
 also a thing agreeable to both; choosing, to wit, in place of the mode
 which is the inferior, and which appears unsatisfying also to Himself,
 the superior and more admirable mode marked out by the Father. For no
 doubt He did pray that the cup might pass from Him; but He says also,
 "Nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt." He longs painfully, on
 the one hand, for its passing from Him, but (He knows that) it is
 better as the Father wills. For He does not utter a petition for its
 not passing away now, instead of one for its removal; but when its
 withdrawal is now before His view, He chooses rather that this should
 be ordered as the Father wills. For there is a twofold kind [1003] of
 withdrawal: there is one in the instance of an object that has shown
 itself and reached another, and is gone at once on being followed by it
 or on outrunning it, as is the case with racers when they graze each
 other in passing; and there is another in the instance of an object
 that has sojourned and tarried with another, and sat down by it, as in
 the case of a marauding band or a camp, and that after a time withdraws
 on being conquered, and on gaining the opposite of a success. For if
 they prevail they do not retire, but carry off with them those whom
 they have reduced; but if they prove unable to win the mastery, they
 withdraw themselves in disgrace. Now it was after the former similitude
 that He wished that the cup might come into His hands, and promptly
 pass from Him again very readily and quickly; but as soon as He spake
 thus, being at once strengthened in His humanity by the Father's
 divinity, He urges the safer petition, and desires no longer that that
 should be the case, but that it might be accomplished in accordance
 with the Father's good pleasure, in glory, in constancy, and in
 fulness. For John, who has given us the record of the sublimest and
 divinest of the Saviour's words and deeds, heard Him speak thus: "And
 the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?" Now, to
 drink the cup was to discharge the ministry and the whole economy of
 trial with fortitude, to follow and fulfil the Father's determination,
 and to surmount all apprehensions; and, indeed, in the very prayer
 which He uttered He showed that He was leaving these (apprehensions)
 behind Him. For of two objects, either may be said to be removed from
 the other: the object that remains may be said to be removed from the
 one that goes away, and the one that goes away may be said to be
 removed from the one that remains. Besides, Matthew has indicated most
 clearly that He did indeed pray that the cup might pass from Him, but
 yet that His request was that this should take place not as He willed,
 but as the Father willed it. The words given by Mark and Luke, again,
 ought to be introduced in their proper connection. For Mark says,
 "Nevertheless not what I will, but what Thou wilt;" and Luke says,
 "Nevertheless not my will, but Thine be done." He did then express
 Himself to that effect, and He did desire that His passion might abate
 and reach its end speedily. But it was the Father's will at the same
 time that He should carry out His conflict in a manner demanding
 sustained effort, [1004] and in sufficient measure. Accordingly He (the
 Father) adduced all that assailed Him. But of the missiles that were
 hurled against Him, some were shivered in pieces, and others were
 dashed back as with invulnerable arms of steel, or rather as from the
 stern and immoveable rock. Blows, spittings, scourgings, death, and the
 lifting up in that death, [1005] all came upon Him; and when all these
 were gone through, He became silent and endured in patience unto the
 end, as if He suffered nothing, or was already dead. But when His death
 was being prolonged, and when it was now overmastering Him, if we may
 so speak, beyond His utmost strength, He cried out to His Father, "Why
 hast Thou forsaken me?" And this exclamation was in due accordance with
 the requests He had previously made: Why is it that death has been in
 such close conjunction with me all along up till now, and Thou dost not
 yet bear the cup past me? [1006] Have I not drank it already, and
 drained it? But if not, my dread is that I may be utterly consumed by
 its continuous pressure; [1007] and that is what would befall me, wert
 Thou to forsake me: then would the fulfilment abide, but I would pass
 away, and be made of none effect. [1008] Now, then, I entreat Thee, let
 my baptism be finished, for indeed I have been straitened greatly until
 it should be accomplished.--This I judge to have been the Saviour's
 meaning in this concise utterance. And He certainly spake truth then.
 Nevertheless He was not forsaken. Albeit He drank out the cup at once,
 as His plea had implied, and then passed away. And the vinegar which
 was handed to Him seems to me to have been a symbolical thing. For the
 turned wine indicated very well the quick turning and change which He
 sustained when He passed from His passion to impassibility, and from
 death to deathlessness, and from the position of one judged to that of
 one judging, and from subjection under the despot's power to the
 exercise of kingly dominion. And the sponge, as I think, signified the
 complete transfusion of the Holy Spirit that was realized in Him. And
 the reed symbolized the royal sceptre and the divine law. And the
 hyssop expressed that quickening and saving resurrection of His by
 which He has also brought health to us. [1009] But we have gone through
 these matters in sufficient detail on Matthew and John. With the
 permission of God, we shall speak also of the account given by Mark.
 But at present we shall keep to what follows in our passage.

 [1002] Another fragment from the Vatican Codex, 1611, fol. 291. See
 also Mai, Bibliotheca Nova, vi. 1. 165. This is given here in a longer
 and fuller form than in the Greek of Gallandi in his Bibliotheca, xiv.,
 Appendix, p. 115, as we have had it presented above, and than in the
 Latin of Corderius in his Catena on Luke xxii. 42, etc. This text is
 taken from a complete codex.

 [1003] dunamis.

 [1004] liparos.

 [1005] tou thanatou to hupsoma.

 [1006] paraphereis.

 [1007] ei de ouk epion auto ede kai anelosa; alla deos me hup' autou
 pleres epikeimenou katapotheien.

 [1008] kekenomenos.

 [1009] [In these allegorical interpretations we see the pupil of
 Origen.]

 IV.--An Exposition of Luke XXII. 46, Etc. [1010]

 ------------------------

 This prayer He also offered up Himself, falling repeatedly on His face;
 and on both occasions He urged His request for not entering into
 temptation: both when He prayed, "If it be possible, let this cup pass
 from me;" and when He said, "Nevertheless not as I will, but as Thou
 wilt." For He spoke of not entering into temptation, and He made that
 His prayer; but He did not ask that He should have no trial whatsoever
 in these circumstances, or [1011] that no manner of hardship should
 ever befall Him. For in the most general application it holds good,
 that it does not appear to be possible for any man to remain altogether
 without experience of ill: for, as one says, "The whole world lieth in
 wickedness;" [1012] and again, "The most of the days of man are labour
 and trouble," [1013] as men themselves also admit. Short is our life,
 and full of sorrow. Howbeit it was not meet that He should bid them
 pray directly that that curse might not be fulfilled, which is
 expressed thus: "Cursed is the ground in thy works: in sorrow shalt
 thou eat of it all the days of thy life;" [1014] or thus, "Earth thou
 art, and unto earth shalt thou return." [1015] For which reason the
 Holy Scriptures, that indicate in many various ways the dire
 distressfulness of life, designate it as a valley of weeping. And most
 of all indeed is this world a scene of pain to the saints, to whom He
 addresses this word, and He cannot lie in uttering it: "In the world ye
 shall have tribulation." [1016] And to the same effect also He says by
 the prophet, "Many are the afflictions of the righteous." [1017] But I
 suppose that He refers to this entering not into temptation, when He
 speaks in the prophet's words of being delivered out of the
 afflictions. For He adds, "The Lord will deliver him out of them all."
 And this is just in accordance with the Saviour's word, whereby He
 promises that they will overcome their afflictions, and that they will
 participate in that victory which He has won for them. For after
 saying, "In the world ye shall have tribulation," He added, "But be of
 good cheer, I have overcome the world." And again, He taught them to
 pray that they might not fall into temptation, when He said, "And lead
 us not into temptation;" which means, "Suffer us not to fall into
 temptation." And to show that this did not imply they should not be
 tempted, but really that they should be delivered from the evil, He
 added, "But deliver us from evil." But perhaps you will say, What
 difference is there between being tempted, and falling or entering into
 temptation? Well, if one is overcome of evil--and he will be overcome
 unless he struggles against it himself, and unless God protects him
 with His shield--that man has entered into temptation, and is in it,
 and is brought under it like one that is led captive. But if one
 withstands and endures, that man is indeed tempted; but he has not
 entered into temptation, or fallen under it. Thus Jesus was led up of
 the Spirit, not indeed to enter into temptation, but "to be tempted of
 the devil." [1018] And Abraham, again, did not enter into temptation,
 neither did God lead him into temptation, but He tempted (tried) him;
 yet He did not drive him into temptation. The Lord Himself, moreover,
 tempted (tried) the disciples. And thus the wicked one, when he tempts
 us, draws us into the temptations, as dealing himself with the
 temptations of evil; but God, when He tempts (tries), adduces the
 temptations as one untempted of evil. For God, it is said, "cannot be
 tempted of evil." [1019] The devil, therefore, drives us on by
 violence, drawing us to destruction; but God leads us by the hand,
 training us for our salvation.

 [1010] Another fragment, connected with the preceding on Christ's
 prayer in Gethsemane. Edited in a mutilated form, as given by Gallandi,
 in his Bibliotheca, xiv. p. 117, and here presented in its
 completeness, as found its the Vatican Codex 1611, f. 292, b.

 [1011] Reading e for en.

 [1012] 1 John v. 19.

 [1013] Ps. xc. 10.

 [1014] Gen. iii. 17.

 [1015] Gen. iii. 19.

 [1016] John xvi. 33.

 [1017] Ps. xxxiv. 19.

 [1018] Matt. iv. 1.

 [1019] James i. 13.

 V.--On John VIII. 12. [1020]

 ------------------------

 Now this word "I am" expresses His eternal subsistence. For if He is
 the reflection of the eternal light, He must also be eternal Himself.
 For if the light subsists for ever, it is evident that the reflection
 also subsists for ever. And that this light subsists, is known only by
 its shining; neither can there be a light that does not give light. We
 come back, therefore, to our illustrations. If there is day, there is
 light; and if there is no such thing, the sun certainly cannot be
 present. [1021] If, therefore, the sun had been eternal, there would
 also have been endless day. Now, however, as it is not so, the day
 begins when the sun rises, and it ends when the sun sets. But God is
 eternal light, having neither beginning nor end. And along with Him
 there is the reflection, also without beginning, and everlasting. The
 Father, then, being eternal, the Son is also eternal, being light of
 light; and if God is the light, Christ is the reflection; and if God is
 also a Spirit, as it is written, "God is a Spirit," Christ, again, is
 called analogously Spirit. [1022]

 [1020] A fragment. Edited from the Vatican Codex 1996, f. 78, belonging
 to a date somewhere about the tenth century.

 [1021] Reading pollou ge dei. The text gives polu ge dei.

 [1022] atmis. If this strange reading atmis is correct, there is
 apparently a play intended on the two words pneuma and atmis, = if God
 is a pneuma, which word literally signifies Wind or Air, Christ, on
 that analogy, may be called atmis that is to say, the Vapour or Breath
 of that Wind.

 VI.--Of the One Substance. [1023]

 ------------------------

 The plant that springs from the root is something distinct from that
 whence it grows up; and yet it is of one nature with it. And the river
 which flows from the fountain is something distinct from the fountain.
 For we cannot call either the river a fountain, or the fountain a
 river. Nevertheless we allow that they are both one according to
 nature, and also one in substance; and we admit that the fountain may
 be conceived of as father, and that the river is what is begotten of
 the fountain. [1024]

 [1023] That the Son is not different from the Father in nature, but
 connatural and consubstantial with Him. From the Panoplia of Euthymius
 Zigabenus in the Cod. xix. Nanianæ Biblioth.

 [1024] [See his explanations in the epistle to Dionysius p. 92, supra.]

 VII.--On the Reception of the Lapsed to Penitence. [1025]

 ------------------------

 But now we are doing the opposite. For whereas Christ, who is the good
 Shepherd, goes in quest of one who wanders, lost among the mountains,
 and calls him back when he flees from Him, and is at pains to take him
 up on His shoulders when He has found him, we, on the contrary, harshly
 spurn such a one even when He approaches us. Yet let us not consult so
 miserably for ourselves, and let us not in this way be driving the
 sword against ourselves. For when people set themselves either to do
 evil or to do good to others, what they do is certainly not confined to
 the carrying out of their will on those others; but just as they attach
 themselves to iniquity or to goodness, they will themselves become
 possessed either by divine virtues or by unbridled passions. And the
 former will become the followers and comrades of the good angels; and
 both in this world and in the other, with the enjoyment of perfect
 peace and immunity from all ills, they will fulfil the most blessed
 destinies unto all eternity, and in God's fellowship they will be for
 ever (in possession of) the supremest good. But these latter will fall
 away at once from the peace of God and from peace with themselves, and
 both in this world and after death they will abide with the spirits of
 blood-guiltiness. [1026] Wherefore let us not thrust from us those who
 seek a penitent return; but let us receive them gladly, and number them
 once more with the stedfast, and make up again what is defective in
 them.

 [1025] A fragment, probably by the Alexandrian Dionysius. This seems to
 be an excerpt from his works On Penitence, three of which are mentioned
 by Jerome in his De Script. Eccl., ch. 69. See Mai, Classici Auctores,
 x. 484. It is edited here from the Vatican Codex.

 [1026] tois palamnaiois daimosi. Or, with the demons of vengeance.

 Note by the American Editor.

 ------------------------

 Frequent references to Gallandi, whose collection I have been unable to
 inspect, the cost of the best edition being about two hundred dollars,
 makes it worth while to insert here, from a London book-catalogue, the
 following useful memoranda: "Gallandii, Cong. Orat. (Andr.) Bibliotheca
 Veterum Patrum Antiquorumque Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Græco-Latina;
 Opera silicet eorundum minora ac rariora usque ad xiii. Sæculum
 complexa, quorum clxxx. et amplius nec in Veteri Parisiensi, neque in
 postrema Lugdunensi edits sunt. Venet., 1765.

 "The contents are given in Darling, col. 298-306. Of the three hundred
 and eighty-nine writers enumerated, it appears that nearly two hundred
 are not in the earlier collections.

 "The contents of these great collections are, not the works of the
 Great Fathers, of whose writings separate editions have been published,
 but the works, often extensive and important, of those numerous
 Ecclesiastical writers whose works go, with the Greater Fathers
 referred to, to make up the sum of Church Patristic literature."

  Julius Africanus

 Julius Africanus.

 Introductory Notice

 to

 Julius Africanus.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 200-232-245.] In a former volume, strengthened by a word from
 Archbishop Usher, [1027] I have not hesitated to claim for Theophilus
 of Antioch a primary place among Christian chronologists. It is no
 detraction from the fame of our author to admit this, and truth
 requires it. But the great Alexandrian school must again come into view
 when we speak of any considerable achievements, among early Christian
 writers, in this important element of all biblical, in fact, all
 historical, science. Africanus was a pupil of Heraclas, and we must
 therefore date his pupilage in Alexandria before a.d. 232, when
 Dionysius succeeded Heraclas in the presidency of that school. It
 appears that in a.d. 226 he was performing some duty in behalf of
 Emmaus (Nicopolis) in Palestine; but Heraclas, who had acted
 subordinately as Origen's assistant as early as a.d. 218, could not
 have become the head of the school, even provisionally, till after
 Origen's unhappy ordination. [1028] Let us assume the period of our
 author's attending the school under Heraclas to be between a.d. 228 and
 a.d. 232, however. We may then venture to reckon his birth as circa
 a.d. 200. And, if he became "bishop of Emmaus," it could hardly have
 been before the year 240, when he was of ripe age and experience. He
 adds additional lustre to the age of Gregory Thaumaturgus and
 Dionysius, as well as to that of their common mother in letters and
 theology, the already ancient academy of Pantænus and of Clement. His
 reviving credit in modern times has been largely due to the learned
 criticism of Dr. Routh, to whose edition of these Fragments the student
 must necessarily apply. Their chief interest arises from the important
 specimen which treats of the difficult question of the genealogies of
 our Lord contained in the evangelists. For a succinct statement of the
 points involved, and for a candid concession that they were not
 preserved to meet what modern curiosity would prefer to see
 established, I know of nothing more satisfactory than the commentary of
 Wordsworth, [1029] from which I have borrowed almost wholly one of my
 elucidations.

 The reader will remember the specimen of our author's critical judgment
 which is given with the works of Origen. [1030] He differed with that
 great author, and the Church Catholic has sustained his judgment as
 just. I regret that the Edinburgh editors thought it necessary to make
 the Letter to Origen concerning the Apocryphal Book of Susannah a mere
 preface to Origen's answer. It might have been quoted there as a
 preface; but it is too important not to be included here, with the
 other fragments of his noble contributions to primitive Christian
 literature.

 It does not clearly appear, from the Edinburgh edition, who the
 translator is; but here follows the

 Translator's Introductory Notice.

 The principal facts known to us in the life of Africanus are derived
 from himself and the Chronicon of Eusebius. He says of himself that he
 went to Alexandria on account of the fame of Heraclas. In the
 Chronicon, under the year 226, it is stated that "Nicopolis in
 Palestine, which formerly bore the name of Emmaus, was built,
 Africanus, the author of the Chronology, acting as ambassador on behalf
 of it, and having the charge of it." Dionysius Bar-Salibi speaks of
 Africanus as bishop of Emmaus.

 Eusebius describes Africanus as being the author of a work called
 kestoi. [1031] Suidas says that this book detailed various kinds of
 cures, consisting of charms and written forms, and such like. Some have
 supposed that such a work is not likely to have been written by a
 Christian writer: they appeal also to the fact that no notice is taken
 of the kestoi by Jerome in his notice of Africanus, nor by Rufinus in
 his translation of Eusebius. They therefore deem the clause in Eusebius
 an interpolation, and they suppose that two bore the name of
 Africanus,--one the author of the kestoi, the other the Christian
 writer. Suidas identifies them, says that he was surnamed Sextus, and
 that he was a Libyan philosopher.

 The works ascribed to Africanus, beside the Cesti, are the following:--

 1. Five Books of Chronology. Photius [1032] says of this work, that it
 was concise, but omitted nothing of importance. It began with the
 cosmogony of Moses, and went down to the advent of Christ. It
 summarized also the events from the time of Christ to the reign of the
 Emperor Macrinus.

 2. A very famous letter to Aristides, in which he endeavoured to
 reconcile the apparent discrepancies in the genealogies of Christ given
 by Matthew and Luke.

 3. A letter to Origen, in which he endeavoured to prove that the story
 of Susanna in Daniel was a forgery. A translation of this letter has
 been given with the Works of Origen.

 The Acts of Symphorosa and her Seven Sonsare attributed in the mss. to
 Africanus; but no ancient writer speaks of him as the author of this
 work.

 [1027] Vol. ii. p. 87, this series.

 [1028] Vol. iv. p. 227.

 [1029] On St. Matt. i. 1-17.

 [1030] Vol. iv. p. 385.

 [1031] Hist. Eccl., vi. 31.

 [1032] Cod. 34.

 The Extant Writings of Julius Africanus.

 ------------------------

 I.--The Epistle to Aristides.

 ------------------------

 I.

 [Africanus on the Genealogy in the Holy Gospels. [1033] --Some indeed
 incorrectly allege that this discrepant enumeration and mixing of the
 names both of priestly men, as they think, and royal, was made
 properly, [1034] in order that Christ might be shown rightfully to be
 both Priest and King; as if any one disbelieved this, or had any other
 hope than this, that Christ is the High Priest of His Father, who
 presents our prayers to Him, and a supramundane King, who rules by the
 Spirit those whom He has delivered, a cooperator in the government of
 all things. And this is announced to us not by the catalogue of the
 tribes, nor by the mixing of the registered generations, but by the
 patriarchs and prophets. Let us not therefore descend to such religious
 trifling as to establish the kingship and priesthood of Christ by the
 interchanges of the names. For the priestly tribe of Levi, too, was
 allied with the kingly tribe of Juda, through the circumstance that
 Aaron married Elizabeth the sister of Naasson, [1035] and that Eleazar
 again married the daughter of Phatiel, [1036] and begat children. The
 evangelists, therefore, would thus have spoken falsely, affirming what
 was not truth, but a fictitious commendation. And for this reason the
 one traced the pedigree of Jacob the father of Joseph from David
 through Solomon; the other traced that of Heli also, though in a
 different way, the father of Joseph, from Nathan the son of David. And
 they ought not indeed to have been ignorant that both orders of the
 ancestors enumerated are the generation of David, the royal tribe of
 Juda. [1037] For if Nathan was a prophet, so also was Solomon, and so
 too the father of both of them; and there were prophets belonging to
 many of the tribes, but priests belonging to none of the tribes, save
 the Levites only. To no purpose, then, is this fabrication of theirs.
 Nor shall an assertion of this kind prevail in the Church of Christ
 against the exact truth, so as that a lie should be contrived for the
 praise and glory of Christ. For who does not know that most holy word
 of the apostle also, who, when he was preaching and proclaiming the
 resurrection of our Saviour, and confidently affirming the truth, said
 with great fear, "If any say that Christ is not risen, and we assert
 and have believed this, and both hope for and preach that very thing,
 we are false witnesses of God, in alleging that He raised up Christ,
 whom He raised not up?" [1038] And if he who glorifies God the Father
 is thus afraid lest he should seem a false witness in narrating a
 marvellous fact, how should not he be justly afraid, who tries to
 establish the truth by a false statement, preparing an untrue opinion?
 For if the generations are different, and trace down no genuine seed to
 Joseph, and if all has been stated only with the view of establishing
 the position of Him who was to be born--to confirm the truth, namely,
 that He who was to be would be king and priest, there being at the same
 time no proof given, but the dignity of the words being brought down to
 a feeble hymn,--it is evident that no praise accrues to God from that,
 since it is a falsehood, but rather judgment returns on him who asserts
 it, because he vaunts an unreality as though it were reality.
 Therefore, that we may expose the ignorance also of him who speaks
 thus, and prevent any one from stumbling at this folly, I shall set
 forth the true history of these matters.]

 [1033] This letter, as given by Eusebius, is acephalous. A large
 portion of it is supplied by Cardinal Angelo Mai in the Bibliotheca
 nova Patrum, vol. iv. pp. 231 and 273. We enclose in brackets the parts
 wanting in Gallandi, who copied Eusebius (Hist. Eccl., i. 7). On this
 celebrated letter of Africanus to Aristides, consult especially
 Eusebius (Hist. Eccl., i. 7); also Jerome, comm. on Matt. i. 16;
 Augustine, Retract., ii. 7; Photius, cod. xxxiv. p. 22; and in addition
 to these, Zacharias Chrysopol. in Bibl. P. P. Lugd., vol. xix. p. 751.

 [1034] dikaios.

 [1035] Ex. vi. 23.

 [1036] Ex. vi. 25.

 [1037] [Heb. vii. 14.]

 [1038] 1 Cor. xv. 12, etc.

 II.

 For [1039] whereas in Israel the names of their generations were
 enumerated either according to nature or according to law,--according
 to nature, indeed, by the succession of legitimate offspring, and
 according to law whenever another raised up children to the name of a
 brother dying childless; for because no clear hope of resurrection was
 yet given them, they had a representation of the future promise in a
 kind of mortal resurrection, with the view of perpetuating the name of
 one deceased;--whereas, then, of those entered in this genealogy, some
 succeeded by legitimate descent as son to father, while others begotten
 in one family were introduced to another in name, mention is therefore
 made of both--of those who were progenitors in fact, and of those who
 were so only in name. Thus neither of the evangelists is in error, as
 the one reckons by nature and the other by law. For the several
 generations, viz., those descending from Solomon and those from Nathan,
 were so intermingled [1040] by the raising up of children to the
 childless, [1041] and by second marriages, and the raising up of seed,
 that the same persons are quite justly reckoned to belong at one time
 to the one, and at another to the other, i.e., to their reputed or to
 their actual fathers. And hence it is that both these accounts are
 true, and come down to Joseph, with considerable intricacy indeed, but
 yet quite accurately.

 [1039] Here what is given in Eusebius begins.

 [1040] Reading sunepeplake. Migne would make it equivalent to
 "superimplexum est." Rufinus renders it, "Reconjunctum namque est sibi
 invicem genus, et illud per Salomonem et illud quod per Nathan
 deducitur," etc.

 [1041] anastasesin ateknon. Rufinus and Damascenus omit these words in
 their versions of the passage.

 III.

 But in order that what I have said may be made evident, I shall explain
 the interchange [1042] of the generations. If we reckon the generations
 from David through Solomon, Matthan is found to be the third from the
 end, who begat Jacob the father of Joseph. But if, with Luke, we reckon
 them from Nathan the son of David, in like manner the third from the
 end is Melchi, whose son was Heli the father of Joseph. For Joseph was
 the son of Heli, the son of Melchi. [1043] As Joseph, therefore, is the
 object proposed to us, we have to show how it is that each is
 represented as his father, both Jacob as descending from Solomon, and
 Heli as descending from Nathan: first, how these two, Jacob and Heli,
 were brothers; and then also how the fathers of these, Matthan and
 Melchi, being of different families, are shown to be the grandfathers
 of Joseph. Well, then, Matthan and Melchi, having taken the same woman
 to wife in succession, begat children who were uterine brothers, as the
 law did not prevent a widow, [1044] whether such by divorce or by the
 death of her husband, from marrying another. By Estha, then--for such
 is her name according to tradition--Matthan first, the descendant of
 Solomon, begets Jacob; and on Matthan's death, Melchi, who traces his
 descent back to Nathan, being of the same tribe but of another family,
 having married her, as has been already said, had a son Heli. Thus,
 then, we shall find Jacob and Heli uterine brothers, though of
 different families. And of these, the one Jacob having taken the wife
 of his brother Heli, who died childless, begat by her the third,
 Joseph--his son by nature and by account. [1045] Whence also it is
 written, "And Jacob begat Joseph." But according to law he was the son
 of Heli, for Jacob his brother raised up seed to him. Wherefore also
 the genealogy deduced through him will not be made void, which the
 Evangelist Matthew in his enumeration gives thus: "And Jacob begat
 Joseph." But Luke, on the other hand, says, "Who was the son, as was
 supposed [1046] (for this, too, he adds), of Joseph, the son of Heli,
 the son of Melchi." For it was not possible more distinctly to state
 the generation according to law; and thus in this mode of generation he
 has entirely omitted the word "begat" to the very end, carrying back
 the genealogy by way of conclusion to Adam and to God. [1047]

 [1042] The reading of the Codex Regius is akolouthian , i.e.,
 succession; the other leading mss. give epollagen, i.e. interchange or
 confusion.

 [1043] But in our text in Luke iii. 23, 24, and so, too, in the
 Vulgate, Matthat and Levi are inserted between Heli and Melchi. It may
 be that these two names were not found in the copy used by Africanus.

 [1044] Here Africanus applies the term "widow" (chereuousan) to one
 divorced an well as to one bereaved.

 [1045] kata logon.

 [1046] Two things may be remarked here: first, that Africanus refers
 the phrase "as was supposed" not only to the words "son of Joseph," but
 also to those that follow, "the son of Heli;" so that Christ would be
 the son of Joseph by legal adoption, just in the same way as Joseph was
 the son of Heli, which would lead to the absurd and impious conclusion
 that Christ was the son of Mary and a brother of Joseph married by her
 after the death of the latter. And second, that in the genealogy here
 assigned to Luke, Melchi holds the third place; whence it would seem
 either that Africanus's memory had failed him, or that as Bede
 conjectures in his copy of the Gospel Melchi stood in place of Matthat
 (Migne). [A probable solution.]

 [1047] Other mss. read, "Adam the son of God."

 IV.

 Nor indeed is this incapable of proof, neither is it a rash conjecture.
 For the kinsmen of the Saviour after the flesh, whether to magnify
 their own origin or simply to state the fact, but at all events
 speaking truth, have also handed down the following account: Some
 Idumean robbers attacking Ascalon, a city of Palestine, besides other
 spoils which they took from a temple of Apollo, which was built near
 the walls, carried off captive one Antipater, son of a certain Herod, a
 servant of the temple. And as the priest [1048] was not able to pay the
 ransom for his son, Antipater was brought up in the customs of the
 Idumeans, and afterwards enjoyed the friendship of Hyrcanus, the high
 priest of Judea. And being sent on an embassy to Pompey on behalf of
 Hyrcanus, and having restored to him the kingdom which was being wasted
 by Aristobulus his brother, he was so fortunate as to obtain the title
 of procurator of Palestine. [1049] And when Antipater was treacherously
 slain through envy of his great good fortune, his son Herod succeeded
 him, who was afterwards appointed king of Judea under Antony and
 Augustus by a decree of the senate. His sons were Herod and the other
 tetrarchs. These accounts are given also in the histories of the
 Greeks. [1050]

 [1048] The word "priest" is used here perhaps improperly for "servant
 of the temple," i.e., hiereus for hierodoulos.

 [1049] So Josephus styles him "procurator of Judea, and viceroy"
 (epimeletes tes 'Ioudaias, and epitropos).

 [1050] This whole story about Antipater is fictitious. Antipater's
 father was not Herod, a servant in the temple of Apollo, but Antipater
 an Idumean, as we learn from Josephus (xiv. 2). This Antipater was made
 prefect of Idumea by Alexander king of the Jews, and laid the
 foundation of the power to which his descendants rose. He acquired
 great wealth, and was on terms of friendship with Ascalon, Gaza, and
 the Arabians.

 V.

 But as up to that time the genealogies of the Hebrews had been
 registered in the public archives, and those, too, which were traced
 back to the proselytes [1051] --as, for example, to Achior the
 Ammanite, and Ruth the Moabitess, and those who left Egypt along with
 the Israelites, and intermarried with them--Herod, knowing that the
 lineage of the Israelites contributed nothing to him, and goaded by the
 consciousness of his ignoble birth, burned the registers of their
 families. This he did, thinking that he would appear to be of noble
 birth, if no one else could trace back his descent by the public
 register to the patriarchs or proselytes, and to that mixed race called
 georæ. [1052] A few, however, of the studious, having private records
 of their own, either by remembering the names or by getting at them in
 some other way from the archives, pride themselves in preserving the
 memory of their noble descent; and among these happen to be those
 already mentioned, called desposyni, [1053] on account of their
 connection with the family of the Saviour. And these coming from Nazara
 and Cochaba, Judean villages, to other parts of the country, set forth
 the above-named genealogy [1054] as accurately as possible from the
 Book of Days. [1055] Whether, then, the case stand thus or not, no one
 could discover a more obvious explanation, according to my own opinion
 and that of any sound judge. And let this suffice us for the matter,
 although it is not supported by testimony, because we have nothing more
 satisfactory or true to allege upon it. The Gospel, however, in any
 case states the truth.

 [1051] Several mss. read archiproseluton for achri proseluton, whence
 some conjecture that the correct reading should be achri ton
 archiproseluton, i.e., back to the "chief proselytes,"--these being, as
 it were, patriarchs among the proselytes, like Achior, and those who
 joined the Israelites on their flight from Egypt.

 [1052] This word occurs in the Septuagint version of Ex. xii. 19, and
 refers to the strangers who left Egypt along with the Israelites. For
 Israel was accompanied by a mixed body, consisting on the one hand of
 native Egyptians, who are named autochthones in that passage of Exodus,
 and by the resident aliens, who are called geiorai. Justin Martyr has
 the form georan in Dialogue with Trypho, ch. cxxii. The root of the
 term is evidently the Hebrew rg, "stranger."

 [1053] The word desposunoi was employed to indicate the Lord's
 relatives, as being His according to the flesh. The term means
 literally, "those who belong to a master," and thence it was used also
 to signify "one's heirs."

 [1054] proeiremenen. Nicephorus reads prokeimenen.

 [1055] ek te tes biblou ton hemeron. By this "Book of Days" Africanus
 understands those "day-books" which he has named, a little before this,
 hidiotikas apographas. For among the Jews, most persons setting a high
 value on their lineage were in the habit of keeping by them private
 records of their descent copied from the public archives, as we see it
 done also by nobles among ourselves. Besides, by the insertion of the
 particle te, which is found in all our codices, and also in Nicephorus,
 it appears that something is wanting in this passage. Wherefore it
 seems necessary to supply these words, kai apo mnemes es hoson
 exiknounto, "and from memory," etc. Thus at least Rufinus seems to have
 read the passage, for he renders it: Ordinem supradictæ generationis
 partim memoriter, partim etiam ex dierum libris, in quantum erat
 possibile, perdocebant (Migne).

 VI.

 Matthan, descended from Solomon, begat Jacob. Matthan dying, Melchi,
 descended from Nathan, begat Heli by the same wife. Therefore Heli and
 Jacob are uterine brothers. Heli dying childless, Jacob raised up seed
 to him and begat Joseph, his own son by nature, but the son of Heli by
 law. Thus Joseph was the son of both. [1056]

 [1056] [Elucidation I.]

 II.--Narrative of Events Happening in Persia on the Birth of Christ.
 [1057]

 ------------------------

 The best introduction to this production will be the following preface,
 as given in Migne:--Many men of learning thus far have been of opinion
 that the narrative by Africanus of events happening in Persia on
 Christ's birth, [1058] is a fragment of that famous work which Sextus
 Julius Africanus, a Christian author of the third century after Christ,
 composed on the history of the world in the chronological order of
 events up to the reign of Macrinus, and presented in five books to
 Alexander, son of Mammæa, with the view of obtaining the restoration of
 his native town Emmaus. With the same expectation which I see incited
 Lambecius and his compendiator Nesselius, I, too, set myself with the
 greatest eagerness to go over the codices of our Electoral
 Library....But, as the common proverb goes, I found coals instead of
 treasure. This narrative, so far from its being to be ascribed to a
 writer well reputed by the common voice of antiquity, does not contain
 anything worthy of the genius of the chronographer Africanus.
 Wherefore, since by the unanimous testimony of the ancients he was a
 man of consummate learning and sharpest judgment, while the author of
 the Cesti, which also puts forward the name of Africanus, has been long
 marked by critics with the character either of anile credulity, or of a
 marvellous propensity to superstitious fancies, I can readily fall in
 with the opinion of those who think that he is a different person from
 the chronographer, and would ascribe this wretched production also to
 him. But, dear reader, on perusing these pages, if your indignation is
 not stirred against the man's rashness, you will at least join with me
 in laughing at his prodigious follies, and will learn, at the same
 time, that the testimonies of men most distinguished for learning are
 not to be rated so highly as to supersede personal examination when
 opportunity permits.

 Events in Persia: On the Incarnation of Our Lord and God and Saviour
 Jesus Christ.

 Christ first of all became known from Persia. For nothing escapes the
 learned jurists of that country, who investigate all things with the
 utmost care. The facts, [1059] therefore, which are inscribed upon the
 golden plates, [1060] and laid up in the royal temples, I shall record;
 for it is from the temples there, and the priests connected with them,
 that the name of Christ has been heard of. Now there is a temple there
 to Juno, surpassing even the royal palace, which temple Cyrus, that
 prince instructed in all piety, built, and in which he dedicated in
 honour of the gods golden and silver statues, and adorned them with
 precious stones,--that I may not waste words in a profuse description
 of that ornamentation. Now about that time (as the records on the
 plates testify), the king having entered the temple, with the view of
 getting an interpretation of certain dreams, was addressed by the
 priest Prupupius thus: I congratulate thee, master: Juno has conceived.
 And the king, smiling, said to him, Has she who is dead conceived? And
 he said, Yes, she who was dead has come to life again, and begets life.
 And the king said, What is this? explain it to me. And he replied, In
 truth, master, the time for these things is at hand. For during the
 whole night the images, both of gods and goddesses, continued beating
 the ground, saying to each other, Come, let us congratulate Juno. And
 they say to me, Prophet, come forward; congratulate Juno, for she has
 been embraced. And I said, How can she be embraced who no longer
 exists? To which they reply, She has come to life again, and is no
 longer called Juno, [1061] but Urania. For the mighty Sol has embraced
 her. Then the goddesses say to the gods, making the matter plainer,
 Pege [1062] is she who is embraced; for did not Juno espouse an
 artificer? And the gods say, That she is rightly called Pege, we admit.
 Her name, moreover, is Myria; for she bears in her womb, as in the
 deep, a vessel of a myriad talents' burden. And as to this title Pege,
 let it be understood thus: This stream of water sends forth the
 perennial stream of spirit,--a stream containing but a single fish,
 [1063] taken with the hook of Divinity, and sustaining the whole world
 with its flesh as though it were in the sea. You have well said, She
 has an artificer [in espousal]; but by that espousal she does not bear
 an artificer on an equality with herself. For this artificer who is
 born, the son of the chief artificer, framed by his excellent skill the
 roof of the third heavens, and established by his word this lower
 world, with its threefold sphere [1064] of habitation.

 Thus, then, the statues disputed with each other concerning Juno and
 Pege, and [at length] with one voice they said: When the day is
 finished, we all, gods and goddesses, shall know the matter clearly.
 Now, therefore, master, tarry for the rest of the day. For the matter
 shall certainly come to pass. For that which emerges is no common
 affair.

 And when the king abode there and watched the statues, the harpers of
 their own accord began to strike their harps, and the muses to sing;
 and whatsoever creatures were within, whether quadruped or fowl, in
 silver and gold, uttered their several voices. And as the king
 shuddered, and was filled with great fear, he was about to retire. For
 he could not endure the spontaneous tumult. The priest therefore said
 to him, Remain, O king, for the full revelation is at hand which the
 God of gods has chosen to declare to us.

 And when these things were said, the roof was opened, and a bright star
 descended and stood above the pillar of Pege, and a voice was heard to
 this effect: Sovereign Pege, the mighty Son has sent me to make the
 announcement to you, and at the same time to do you service in
 parturition, designing blameless nuptials with you, O mother of the
 chief of all ranks of being, bride of the triune Deity. And the child
 begotten by extraordinary generation is called the Beginning and the
 End,--the beginning of salvation, and the end of perdition.

 And when this word was spoken, all the statues fell upon their faces,
 that of Pege alone standing, on which also a royal diadem was found
 placed, having on its upper side a star set in a carbuncle and an
 emerald. And on its lower side the star rested.

 And the king forthwith gave orders to bring in all the interpreters of
 prodigies, and the sages who were under his dominion. And when all the
 heralds sped with their proclamations, all these assembled in the
 temple. And when they saw the star above Pege, and the diadem with the
 star and the stone, and the statues lying on the floor, they said: O
 king, a root (offspring) divine and princely has risen, bearing the
 image of the King of heaven and earth. For Pege-Myria is the daughter
 of the Bethlehemite Pege. And the diadem is the mark of a king, and the
 star is a celestial announcement of portents to fall on the earth. Out
 of Judah has arisen a kingdom which shall subvert all the memorials of
 the Jews. And the prostration of the gods upon the floor prefigured the
 end of their honour. For he who comes, being of more ancient dignity,
 shall displace all the recent. Now therefore, O king, send to
 Jerusalem. For you will find the Christ of the Omnipotent God borne in
 bodily form in the bodily arms of a woman. And the star remained above
 the statue of Pege, called the Celestial, until the wise men came
 forth, and then it went with them.

 And then, in the depth of evening, Dionysus appeared in the temple,
 unaccompanied by the Satyrs, and said to the images: Pege is not one of
 us, but stands far above us, in that she gives birth to a man whose
 conception is in divine fashion. [1065] O priest Prupupius! what dost
 thou tarrying here? An action, indicated in writings of old, [1066] has
 come upon us, and we shall be convicted as false by a person of power
 and energy. [1067] Wherein we have been deceivers, we have been
 deceivers; and wherein we have ruled, we have ruled. No longer give we
 oracular responses. Gone from us is our honour. Without glory and
 reward are we become. There is One, and One only, who receives again at
 the hands of all His proper honour. For the rest, be not disturbed.
 [1068] No longer shall the Persians exact tribute of earth and sky. For
 He who established these things is at hand, to bring practical tribute
 [1069] to Him who sent Him, to renew the ancient image, and to put
 image with image, and bring the dissimilar to similarity. Heaven
 rejoices with earth, and earth itself exults at receiving matter of
 exultation from heaven. Things which have not happened above, have
 happened on earth beneath. He whom the order of the blessed has not
 seen, is seen by the order of the miserable. Flame threatens those; dew
 attends these. To Myria is given the blessed lot of bearing Pege in
 Bethlehem, and of conceiving grace of grace. Judæa has seen its bloom,
 and this country is fading. To Gentiles and aliens, salvation is come;
 to the wretched, relief is ministered abundantly. With right do women
 dance, and say, Lady Pege, Spring-bearer, thou mother of the heavenly
 constellation. Thou cloud that bringest us dew after heat, remember thy
 dependants, O mistress.

 The king then, without delay, sent some of the Magi under his dominion
 with gifts, the star showing them the way. And when they returned, they
 narrated to the men of that time those same things which were also
 written on the plates of gold, and which were to the following
 effect:--

 When we came to Jerusalem, the sign, together with our arrival, roused
 all the people. How is this, say they, that wise men of the Persians
 are here, and that along with them there is this strange stellar
 phenomenon? And the chief of the Jews interrogated us in this way: What
 is this that attends you, [1070] and with what purpose are you here?
 And we said: He whom ye call Messias is born. And they were confounded,
 and dared not withstand us. But they said to us, By the justice of
 Heaven, tell us what ye know of this matter. And we made answer to
 them: Ye labour under unbelief; and neither without an oath nor with an
 oath do ye believe us, but ye follow your own heedless counsel. For the
 Christ, the Son of the Most High, is born, and He is the subverter of
 your law and synagogues. And therefore is it that, struck with this
 most excellent response as with a dart, [1071] ye hear in bitterness
 this name which has come upon you suddenly. And they then, taking
 counsel together, urged us to accept their gifts, and tell to none that
 such an event had taken place in that land of theirs, lest, as they
 say, a revolt rise against us. But we replied: We have brought gifts in
 His honour, with the view of proclaiming those mighty things which we
 know to have happened in our country on occasion of His birth; and do
 ye bid us take your bribes, and conceal the things which have been
 communicated to us by the Divinity who is above the heavens, and
 neglect the commandments of our proper King? And after urging many
 considerations on us, they gave the matter up. And when the king of
 Judæa sent for us and had some converse with us, and put to us certain
 questions as to the statements we made to him, we acted in the same
 manner, until he was thoroughly enraged at our replies. We left him
 accordingly, without giving any greater heed to him than to any common
 person.

 And we came to that place then to which we were sent, and saw the
 mother and the child, the star indicating to us the royal babe. And we
 said to the mother: What art thou named, O renowned mother? And she
 says: Mary, masters. And we said to her: Whence art thou sprung? [1072]
 And she replies: From this district of the Bethlehemites. [1073] Then
 said we: Hast thou not had a husband? And she answers: I was only
 betrothed with a view to the marriage covenant, my thoughts being far
 removed from this. For I had no mind to come to this. And while I was
 giving very little concern to it, when a certain Sabbath dawned, and
 straightway at the rising of the sun, an angel appeared to me bringing
 me suddenly the glad tidings of a son. And in trouble I cried out, Be
 it not so to me, Lord, for I have not a husband. And he persuaded me to
 believe, that by the will of God I should have this son.

 Then said we to her: Mother, mother, all the gods of the Persians have
 called thee blessed. Thy glory is great; for thou art exalted above all
 women of renown, and thou art shown to be more queenly than all queens.

 The child, moreover, was seated on the ground, being, as she said, in
 His second year, and having in part the likeness of His mother. And she
 had long hands, [1074] and a body somewhat delicate; and her colour was
 like that of ripe wheat; [1075] and she was of a round face, and had
 her hair bound up. And as we had along with us a servant skilled in
 painting from the life, we brought with us to our country a likeness of
 them both; and it was placed by our hand in the sacred [1076] temple,
 with this inscription on it: To Jove the Sun, the mighty God, the King
 of Jesus, the power of Persia dedicated this.

 And taking the child up, each of us in turn, and bearing Him in our
 arms, we saluted Him and worshipped Him, and presented to Him gold, and
 myrrh, and frankincense, addressing Him thus: We gift Thee with Thine
 own, O Jesus, Ruler of heaven. Ill would things unordered be ordered,
 wert Thou not at hand. In no other way could things heavenly be brought
 into conjunction with things earthly, but by Thy descent. Such service
 cannot be discharged, if only the servant is sent us, as when the
 Master Himself is present; neither can so much be achieved when the
 king sends only his satraps to war, as when the king is there himself.
 It became the wisdom of Thy system, that Thou shouldst deal in this
 manner with men. [1077]

 And the child leaped and laughed at our caresses and words. And when we
 had bidden the mother farewell, [1078] and when she had shown us
 honour, and we had testified to her the reverence which became us, we
 came again to the place in which we lodged. And at eventide there
 appeared to us one of a terrible and fearful countenance, saying: Get
 ye out quickly, lest ye be taken in a snare. And we in terror said: And
 who is he, O divine leader, that plotteth against so august an
 embassage? And he replied: Herod; but get you up straightway and depart
 in safety and peace.

 And we made speed to depart thence in all earnestness; and we reported
 in Jerusalem all that we had seen. Behold, then, the great things that
 we have told you regarding Christ; and we saw Christ our Saviour, who
 was made known as both God and man. To Him be the glory and the power
 unto the ages of the ages. Amen.

 [1057] Edited from two Munich codices by J. Chr. von Aretin, in his
 Beiträge zur Geschichte und Literatur, anno 1804, p. ii. p. 49. [I
 place this apocryphal fragment here as a mere appendix to the
 Genealogical Argument. An absurd appendix, indeed.]

 [1058] Which is extant in two mss. in the Electoral Library of Munich,
 and in one belonging to the Imperial Library of Vienna.

 [1059] The mss. read gar, for.

 [1060] The term in the original (alklariais) is one altogether foreign
 to Greek, and seems to be of Arabic origin. The sense, however, is
 evident from the use of synonymous terms in the context.

 [1061] There is a play upon the words, perhaps, in the original. The
 Greek term for Juno (Era) may be derived from era, terra, so that the
 antithesis intended is, "She is no longer called Earthly, but
 Heavenly."

 [1062] i.e., Fountain, Spring, or Stream.

 [1063] The initial letters of the Greek 'Iesous Christos Theou Huios
 Soter, i.e., "Jesus Christ the Son of God the Savior," when joined
 together, make the word hichthus, i.e., fish; and the fathers used the
 word, therefore, as a mystic symbol of Christ, who could live in the
 depth of our mortality as in the abyss of the sea. [Vol. ii. p. 297.]

 [1064] i.e., as sea, land, and sky

 [1065] theias tuches sullemma.

 [1066] ellraphos.

 [1067] empraktou.

 [1068] The text gives throbadei, for which Migne proposes thorubethi.

 [1069] praktikous phorous.

 [1070] ti to epomenon, perhaps meant for, What business brings you?

 [1071] huper manteias aristes hosper katatoxeuomenoi.

 [1072] hormomene.

 [1073] Bethleoton.

 [1074] makras tas cheiras according to Migne, instead of the reading of
 the manuscript, makrin ten keran echousa.

 [1075] sitochroos.

 [1076] diopetei.

 [1077] The manuscripts give antartas, for which Migne proposes
 anthropous or antergatas. [Unworthy, wholly so, of our author. This
 curious specimen of the romances of antiquity might better have found
 its place with other Protevangelia in vol. viii., this series.]

 [1078] suntaxamenoi.
