Dionysius of Halicarnassus: Roman Antiquities, Vol. 4 (Books IX-XI; Spelman, 1758)
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (Edward Spelman, trans.)

Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/romanantiquities04dion
Edition: Edward Spelman's English translation (London, 1758), via Internet Archive scan. The standard public-domain English Dionysius; complete with translator's preface, notes, and dissertations. (Note: 18th-century orthography; the scan renders the long s as f.)
Public domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel library, 2026-10-09.

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS,


Tranflated  into  English  j


WITH


NOTES  and  DISSERTATIONS.


EDWARD  S  P  E  L  M  A  N,  Efq.


VOL.  IV.


LONDON,

Printed,  and  fold  by  the  Bookfellers  of  London  and  Wejiminjier .

MDCCLVIII.


I


THE


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES


DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.


THE  NINTH  BOOK.

“'HE  following  year,  a  difpute  arifing  between  the
people,  and  the  fenate,  concerning  the  perfons,  who
were  to  be  created  confuls  (for  the  latter  defired  that
both  of  them  fhould  be  chofen  out  of  the  ariftocratical
party,  and  the  people,  out  of  fuch,  as  were  agreeable  to
them)  after  many  contefts,  wherein  they  difcovered  each
other’s  ftrength,  they  agreed  that  a  conful  fhould  be  chofen  out
of  each  party.  And  Caefo  Fabius,  who  had  accufed  Caffius
of  aiming  at  tyranny,  was  elected  conful  for  the  fecond  time
on  the  part  of  the  fenate,  and  Spurius  ’Furius  on  That  of
the  people,  in  the  feventy  fifth  Olympiad,  Calliades  being


Annotations  on  the  Ninth  Book.

The  Vatican  manufcript  this  year  are  thus  fetdown  in  the  Fajli
calls  this  conful  but  I  believe  confulares ,  K.  Fabius  Vibulanus  2.

it  is  a  miftake  j  becaufe  the  confuls  of  Sp.  Furius  Fufus.

Vol.  IV,  B  archon


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

archon  at  Athens,  and  *  the  fame  year  that  Xerxes  undertook
his  expedition  againft  Greece.  They  had  no  fooner  taken
poflfeflion  of  their  dignity,but  the  embafladors  of  the  Latines
came  to  the  fenate,  defiring  they  would  fend  to  them  one
of  the  confuls  with  an  army  to  reftrain  the  infolence  of  the
Aequi :  The  fenate  were,  alfo,  informed  that  all  Tyrrhenia
was  in  motion,  and  would,  foon,  declare  war  againft  them :
For  there  had  been  a  general  aflembly  of  that  nation,  in
which,  after  many  in  treaties  of  the  Veientes  to  aflift  them
in  the  war  againft  the  Romans,  a  decree  pafled  that  all
the  Tyrrhenians,  who  were  willing,  might  ingage  in  their
fervice :  And  a  confiderable  number  of  voluntiers  were
prepared  to  aflift  the  Veientes.  Upon  this  information,  the
fenate  refolded  to  raife  forces,  and  that  beth  the  confuls
jfhould  take  the  field ;  one  to  make  war  upon  the  Aequi,
and  to  aflift  the  Latines  ;  and  the  other,  to  march  with  an
army  into  Tyrrhenia.  All  this  was  oppofed  by  Spurius
3  Icilius,  one  of  the  tribunes,  who,  aflembling  the  people
every  day,  demanded  of  the  fenate  the  execution  of  their
promifes  relating  to  the  divifion  of  the  lands ;  and  faid  he
would  fuller  none  of  their  decrees,  whether  they  concerned
military,  or  civil  regulations,  to  take  effeft,  unlefs  they
would,  firft,  appoint  the  decemvirs  to  fix  the  bounds  of  the

2*  K«9’  cv  x$ovov  s?£a7su<rg  stti  it,  inftead  of  Xui\ios  in  the  editions.

t>;v  See  the  twenty  fourth  For  the  fame  reafon,  he  would  have

annotation  on  the  fixth  book.  us  read  Icilius  for  Licinius,  which,  in

3*  Ix<A*of.  Sigonius  thinks,  very  juft-  the  editions,  is  the  name  aLivy  gives
Jy,  that  we  muft  read  the  name  of  this  to  this  tribune,
tribune  in  the  manner  I  have  corrected

,  ‘  i  '  _  /

3  B.  ii.  c.  43.


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC AR N AS  SE NS  I S.  3

public  lands,  and  divide  them  among  the  people,  as  they
had  promifed.  The  fenate  being  at  a  lofs,  and  not  know¬
ing  what  refolution  to  take,  Appius  Claudius  fuggefted  this
expedient  to  them,  which  was  to  confider  by  what  means
the  other  tribunes  might  diffent  from  Icilius,  telling  them
there  was  no  other  method  of  putting  a  ftop  to  the  power
of  a  tribune,  who  oppofes,  and  obftrucfts  the  decrees  of  the
fenate,  and  whofe  perfon  is  facred,  and  his  authority  legal,
unlefs  fome  other  tribune,  invefted  with  the  fame  dignity,
and  the  fame  power,  withftands  him,  and  oppofes  the  nega¬
tive,  given  by  the  former.  And  he  advifed  all  fucceeding
confuls  to  do  this,  and  to  confider  by  what  means  they
might,  always,  gain  the  affection,  and  friendfhip  of  fome  of
the  tribunes ;  faying,  that  the  only  method  of  deftroying
the  tribunitian  power,  was  to  fow  diflenftom  among  the
tribunes.

II.  This  advice  being  given  by  Appius,  and  approved
of  by  the  confuls,  and  the  reft  of  the  men  in  power,  they
courted  the  tribunes  fo  effectually,  as  to  ingage  the  other
four  in  the  intereft  of  the  fenate:  Thefe,  at  firff,  endea¬
voured  to  perfuade  Icilius  to  defift  from  preffing  the  divi-
fion  of  lands,  till  the  wars  they  were  ingaged  in,  fhould  be
ended.  But,  when  he  rejected  their  folicitations  with  an
oath,  and  had  the  affurance  to  utter  thefe  outrageous  words
in  the  prefence  of  the  people,  that  he  had  rather  fee  the
Tyrrhenians,  and  the  reft  of  their  enemies  matters  of  the
city,  than  difmifs  the  ufurpers  of  the  public  lands ;  they
thought  this  a  fair  opportunity  of  reftraining  fo  great  an

B  2  infolence


4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

infolence  both  by  their  words,  and  adtions ;  and  even  the
people  fhewing  themfelves  not  well  pleafed  with  his  decla¬
ration,  they  faid  they  oppofed  their  negative;  and,  openly,
purfued  fuch  meafures,  as  were  agreeable  both  to  the  fenate,
and  confuls :  And  Icilius,  being  deferted  by  his  collegues,
had,  no  longer,  any  authority.  After  which,  the  army  was
raifed,  and  every  thing,  that  was  neceflary  for  the  war,  was
fupplied,  partly  by  the  public,  and  partly  by  private  per-
fons,  with  all  pofiible  alacrity  :  And  the  confuls,  alter
drawing  lots  for  the  command  of  the  armies,  prefently  took
the  field ;  Spurius  4  Furius,  marching  againft  the  cities  of
the  Aequi,  and  Caefo  Fabius  againft  the  Tyrrhenians.
Every  thing  fucceeded  according  to  the  defire  of  Spurius,.
the  enemy  not  daring  to  come  to  an  ingagement ;  fo  that,
in  this  expedition,  he  had  an  opportunity  of  taking  a  great
booty,  both  in  money,  and  fiaves:  For  he  overrun  almoft
all  the  enemy’s  country,  carrying,  and  driving  off  every
thing;  and  gave  all  the  fpoils  to  the  foldiers:  And,  being
efteemed,  even  before,  a  lover  of  the  people,  he  gained  their
affection,  ftill  more,  by  his  conduct  in  this  command.
And,  when  the  feafon  for  action  was  over,  he  brought

4*  1 7n  t as  Antuvm  aro>.«?.  b  Li-  gonius  contends  for  is,  certainly,  con-

ry  makes  Fabius  march  againft  the  firmed  by  c  Livy,  where  he  makes  the
Aequi ,  and  Furius  againft  the  Veientes.  Tyrrhenians  fay  that  the  Roman  con-
This  Sigonius,  in  his  notes  upon  this  ful  had  been  deferted  by  his  army
paffage  of  Livy,  fays  is  the  reading  of  after  he  had  overcome  the  Aequi ,  which
an  old  manufcript.  If  the  French  happened  to  Fabius,  confenfu  exercitiis
tranflators  had  read  this  note,  they  traditam  ultro  vitloriam  viflis  Aequis;
would  not  have  faid  that  this  was  a  figna  defer! a ;  imperatorem  in  acie  rc-
naodern  correction.  The  reading  Si-  hchm ;  injujfu  in  cajira  reditum.

bB.ii.  c.43.  cId,  ib.  c,  44.


home


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALI C  AR  N  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  5
home  his  army  undiminifhed,  unhurt,  and  inriched  with

III.  Caefo  Fabius,  the  other  conful,  though  he  performed
the  duty  of  a  general  with  no  lefs  ability,  was  deprived  of
the  praife  due  to  his  adtions,  not  by  any  fault  of  his  own,
but  becaufe  the  plebeians  were  not  well  affedted  to  him
from  the  time  he  had  caufed  Caffius,  a  confular  perfon,  to
be  condemned,  and  put  to  death  for  affedting  tyranny:
For  they  never  fhewed  any  alacrity  either  in  thofe  things,,  in
which  foldiers  ought  to  yield  a  quick  obedience  to  the  orders
of  their  general,  or  when  a  becoming  eager nefs  was  requilite
to  feize  places  by  force,  or  where  it  was  neceflary  to  gain,
by  health,  advantageous  pofts,  or  in  any  thing  elfe,  from
whence  the  general  might  derive  honor,  and  reputation.
Their  uniform  condudt,  by  which  they  were,  continually,
infulting  their  general,  was  not  very  uneafy  to  him,  or
extremely  hurtful  to  the  commonwealth  :  But  the  laft
adtion  they  were  guilty  of,  brought  no  fmall  danger,  and
great  difgrace,  to  both:  For  the  two  armies  coming  to  a
general  ingagement  in  a  valley  between  the  two  hills,  011
which  both  their  camps  were  placed,  and  the  Romans
having  performed  many  gallant  actions,  and  forced  the
enemy  to  give  way,  they  refufed  both  to  purfue  them,
notwithftanding  the  repeated  orders  of  their  general,  and
to  ftay  till  they  had  taken  the  enemy’s  intrenchments ;  but,
leaving  a  glorious  adtion  unfinished,  they  returned  to  their
own  camp.  And,  when  fome  of  the  men  attempted  to  falute

the


6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

the  conful,  5  emperor,  all  the  reft  joined  in  loud  exclama¬
tions  againft  him,  and  upbraided  him  with  the  lofs  of  many
brave  men  through  his  want  of  ability  to  command :  And,
after  many  other  reproachful,  and  paflionate  expre (lions,
they  demanded  ofhim  to  break  up  the  camp,  and  lead  them
back  to  Rome,  pretending  they  were  unable,  if  the  enemy
fhould  attack  them,  to  maintain  a  fecond  ingagement :
Neither  would  they  hearken  to  the  remonftrances  of  their
general,  when  he  endeavoured  to  perfuade  them  to  change
their  refolution ;  or  regard  his  intreaties,  when  he  lamented,
and  fupplicated;  or  were  terrified  with  the  violence  of  his
threats,  when  he  made  ufe  of  thefe  alfo ;  but  ftill  continued
exafperated  notwithftanding  all  thefe  attacks;  and  the
whole  army  poffefled  with  fuch  a  fpirit  of  difobedience,  and
fuch  a  contempt  for  their  general,  that  they  got  up  about
midnight ;  and,  without  orders,  ftruck  their  tents,  took  their
arms,  and  carried  off  their  wounded.

IV.  When  the  general  was  informed  of  this,  he  was
forced  to  give  the  word  of  command  for  all  to  march  ;  fo
great  was  his  apprehenfion  of  their  difobedience,  and  au-
dacioufnefs.  The  men  retired  with  as  great  precipitation,
as  if  they  had  faved  themfelves  by  flight,  and  approached
the  city  about  day  break.  The  guards,  who  were  polled
upon  the  walls,  not  knowing  thefe  were  their  own  people,

5.  A vloxgalofet.  This  was  the  title  of  d  Julius  Caefar  after  his  vidtory  at
Jmperator ,  conferred  by  the  foldiers  Munda :  The  latter  was  given  to  him,
on  their  general  after  a  vidtory,  which  and  his  pofterity,  and  ufed  by  his  fuc-
was  very  different  from  the  title  of  the  ceffors.
fame  name  granted  by  the  fen  ate  to

d  Dion  Caffius,  B.  xliii.  p.  2 66.


ran


Book  IX.  DIONYSTUS  HALICARN  A  S  SENS  IS.  7

rail  to  arms,  and  called  to  their  companions,  all  the  reft  of
the  citizens  being  full  of  trouble,  and  confufion,  as  if  fome
great  misfortune  had  happened :  And  the  guards  did  nor
open  the  gates  to  let  them  in,  till  it  was  broad  day,  and  they
could  diftinguifti  their  own  army:  So  that,  befides  the
ignominy  .they  incurred  in  deferting  their  camp,  they,  alfo,
expofed  themfelves  to  great  danger,  in  returning  through  the
enemy’s  country  in  the  dark,  and  without  obferving  any
order.  And,  if  the  Tyrrhenians  had  been  informed  of  this,,
and  purfued  them  in  their  return,  nothing  could  have  hin¬
dered  the  army  from  being  intirely  deftroyed.  The  motive
of  this  unaccountable  retreat,  or  flight,  was,  as  I  have  faid,
the  hatred  of  the  people  againft  the  general,  and  the  envy
of  his  honor,  left,  by  being  adorned  with  a  triumph,  he
fhould  acquire  the  greateft  glory.  The  next  day,  the
Tyrrhenians,  having  intelligence  of  the  retreat  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  ftripped  their  dead,  and  carried  o£F  their  wounded
with  all  the  warlike  ftores  they  had  left  in  their  camp,
which  were  in  great  quantity,  as  having  been  prepared  for  a
long  war;  and,  like  conquerors,  laid  wafte  the  adjacent
country  of  the  enemy,  and,  then,  returned  home  with  their
army.

V.  The  fucceeding  confuls,  Cneius  Manlius,  and  Marcus
Fabius,  for  the  fecond  time,  being  ordered  by  the  fenate  to
march  againft  the  Veientes  with  the  greateft  army  they
could  raife,  appointed  a  day  for  levying  the  forces.  Tiberius
Pontificius,  one  of  the  tribunes,  oppofing  this  levy,  and
calling  upon  them  to  put  in  execution  the  order  of  the

fenate


ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I T I E  S  OF  Book  IN.

fenate  for  the  divifion  of  the  lands,  they  applied  themfelves
to  court  fome  of  his  collegues,  as  their  predeceffors  had  done
before,  and  divided  the  tribunes :  And,  after  that,  they
executed  the  orders  of  the  fenate  with  full  liberty.  The
levies  being  completed  in  a  few  days,  the  confuls  took  the
field  ;  each  of  them  having  with  him  two  legions  raifed  in
the  city  itfelf,  and  a  body  not  lefs  numerous,  fent  by  their
colonies,  and  fubjeCts :  There  came,  alfo,  from  the  La  tines,
and  the  Hernici,  double  the  number  of  auxiliaries  they  had
ordered.  However,  they  did  not  make  ufe  of  all  thefe
forces ;  but,  giving  them  great  thanks  for  their  zeal,  they
difmiffed  one  half  of  the  fuccours  they  had  fent.  Befides,
they  appointed  a  third  army,  confiding  of  two  legions  of
young  men,  to  incamp  before  the  city,  with  orders  to  guard
the  country,  in  cafe  any  other  army  of  the  enemy  fhould,
unexpectedly,  make  its  appearance.  And  they  left  in  the
city  fuch  as  were  above  the  military  age,  who  had,  yet,
ftrength  fufficient  to  bear  arms,  as  a  garrifon  to  defend  the
citadels,  and  the  walls.  After  this,  the  confuls  advanced  at
the  head  of  their  armies  near  the  city  of  Veii,  and  incamped
on  two  hills  not  far  afunder.  The  enemy’s  army,  confifting
of  great  numbers  of  good  troops,  had,  alfo,  taken  the  field,
and  lay  incamped  before  the  city :  For  the  men  of  the  greateft
power  throughout  all  Tyrrhenia  had  joined  them  with  their
dependents ;  by  which  means,  the  Tyrrhenian  army  was,
confiderably,  more  numerous  than  That  of  the  Romans.
When  the  confuls  faw  the  numbers  of  the  enemy,  and  the
iuftre  of  their  arms,  they  were,  greatly,  afraid  left  their  own
•  .  forces,


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  .  9
forces,  rent  with  iadlion,  might  not  be  able  to  prevail  over
Thofe  of  the  enemy,  whofe  minds  were  united:  For  which
reafon,  they  determined  to  fortify  their  camps,  and  to  pro¬
long  the  war,  in  expe&ation  of  fome  opportunity  of  adling
with  advantage,  which  the  affurance  of  the  enemy,  elated
with  an  inconfiderate  contempt  of  them,  might  afford.
In  the  mean  time,  there  were  continual  fkirmifhes,  and  in-
gagements  of  the  light  armed  men  in  fmall  parties,  but  no
confiderable,  or  illuftrious  adtion.

VI.  The  Tyrrhenians,  being  uneafy  at  this  prolongation
of  the  war,  upbraided  the  Romans  with  cowardife,  fince
they  declined  coming  out  to  fight ;  and,  looking  upon  the
enemy  to  have  quitted  the  field  to  them,  they  grew  exceed¬
ingly  elated.  Their  contempt  of  the  Roman  army,  and  their
fcorn  of  the  confuls  were  further  encreafed  by  the  opinion
they  entertained,  that  they  themfelves  were  affifted  even
by  the  gods:  For  the  lightning,  falling  upon  the  general’s
tent  of  Cneius  Manlius,  one  of  the  confuls,  tore  it  in  pieces,
overturned  the  altar,  tarnifhed  fome  of  the  arms,  fcorched
others,  and  fome  it  quite  confumed  :  It  killed,  alfo,  the
fineffc  horfe  belonging  to  him,  the  fame  he  ufed  in  battle5
and  fome  of  his  domeftics :  And  the  augurs  faying  that  the
gods  portended  the  taking  of  the  camp,  and  the  death  of
the  moil  confiderable  perfons  in  it,  Manlius  removed  with
his  forces  to  the  other  camp  about  midnight,  and  polled
himfelf  with  his  collegue.  The  Tyrrhenians,  hearing  the
general  had  decamped,  and  being  informed,  by  fome  of  the
prifoners,  of  the  reafons  of  that  motion,  grew  flill  more

Vol.  IV.  C  "  elated,


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

elated,  from  an  opinion  that  the  gods  made  war  upon  the
Romans,  and  entertained  great  hopes  of  overcoming  them  :
For  their  augurs,  who  are  thought  to  have  examined  meteors
with  greater  accuracy,  than  any  other  people,  from  whence
the  flafhes  of  lightning  come,  what  quarters  receive  it  when
it  flits  after  the  ftroke,  to  Which  of  the  gods  each  kind
of  lightning  is  afligned,  and  what  good,  or  evil  they  por¬
tend,  advifed  them  to  attack  the  enemy,  and  interpreted  the
omen,  which  had  happened  to  the  Romans,  in  the  following
manner :  Since  the  flafli  of  lightning  had  fallen  upon  the
confuls  tent,  which  was  That  of  the  general,  and  utterly
demolifhed  it,  even  to  the  altar,  the  gods  portended  to  their
army,  the  demolition  of  their  camp  after  it  was  taken  by
ftorm,  and  the  death  of  the  principal  perfons  in  it :  If,
therefore,  faid  they,  the  enemy  had  continued  in  the  place,
where  the  lightning  fell,  and  not  removed  their  enfigns  to
the  other  army,  the  god,  who  is  incenfed  againft  them,  had
fatisfied  his  anger  with  the  taking  of  one  camp,  and  the
deftru&ion  of  one  army  :  But,  fince  they  have  endeavoured
to  be  wifer  than  the  gods,  and  removed  to  the  other  camp,
deferting  that  place,  as  if  the  god  had  flgnified  that  the
calamities  fhould  fall  not  upon  the  men,  but  upon  the  places,
the  divine  wrath  fhall  be  extended  to  all  of  them,  to  thofe,
who  removed,  and  to  thofe,  who  received  them  :  And
flnce,  when  It  was,  inevitably,  portended  by  the  gods  that
the  other  camp  fhould  be  taken  by  ftorm,  they  had  not
waited  for  their  fate,  but  had  themfelves  abandoned  it  to
the  enemy ;  the  camp,  which  had  received  the  deferters  of

their


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  n

their  own,  fhould  be  taken  by  ftorm,  infiead  of  That  which
they  had  deferted.

VII.  The  Tyrrhenians,  hearing  thefe  things  from  their
augurs,  fent  a  detachment  to  poffefs  themfelves  of  the  camp,
which  the  Romans  had  abandoned,  with  a  defign  to  make  ufe
of  it,  as  a  place  of  ftrength  to  annoy  the  other :  For  the  {itu-
ation  of  it  was  exceeding  ftrong,  and  lay  very  convenient  to
cut  off  all  communication  betwen  Rome  and  the  enemy’s
camp.  After  they  had  made  other  difpofoions  alfo,  calcu¬
lated  to  give  them  an  advantage  over  the  enemy,  they  led
out  their  army,  and  advanced  into  the  plain  :  But  the  Ro¬
mans  remaining  quiet,  the  boldeft  of  the  Tyrrhenians  rode
up  to  their  camp;  then,  ftanding  near  it,  called  them  all
women  ;  and,  faying  that  their  leaders  refembled  the  rnoft
cowardly  of  all  animals,  they  abufed  them,  and  defired  they
would  do  one  of  thefe  two  things ;  either  come  down  into
the  plain,  if  they  pretended  to  the  title  of  valiant  men,  and
decide  the  conteft  by  one  battle ;  or,  if  they  owned  them¬
felves  to  be  cowards,  deliver  up  their  arms  to  thofe,  who
were  fuperior  to  them  in  valor  ;  and,  after  fuffering  the
punifhment  they  deferved,  renounce,  for  ever,  their  pre-
tenfions  to  all  that  was  great.  This  they  repeated
every  day  ;  and,  when  it  had  no  effect,  they  refolved  to
draw  a  line  of  contravallation  round  their  camp,  with  a
defon  to  ftarve  them  into  a  furrender.  The  confuls  buffered

o

them  to  go  on  for  a  coniiderable  time;  not  through  any
want  of  courage,  or  refolution  (for  they  were  both  men  of
fpirit,  and  of  military  accomplifhments)  but  from  a  fufpicion

C  2  of


Book  IX.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

of  the  unwillingnefs  of  their  men  to  do  their  duty,  and  of
their  want  of  alacrity,  which  ftill  remained  in  the  minds  of
the  plebeians  ever  Ance  they  had  raifed  the  fedition,  on  ac¬
count  of  the  diviAon  of  the  public  lands:  For  the  ears,  and
eyes  of  their  generals  were  ftill  aftonifhed  with  the  fhameful
adions,  unworthy  the  dignity  of  the  commonwealth,  which
the  foldiers  had  been  guilty  of  the  former  year,  through
their  refentment  to  the  conful,  when  they  yielded  up  the
the  vidory  to  the  conquered,  and  fuftained  the  pretended
ignominy  of  a  flight,  in  order  to  deprive  their  general  of  a
triumph,  the  confequence  of  a  vidory.

VIII.  Deftring,  therefore,  at  once  to  banifh  fedition  from
the  army,  and  to  re-eftablifh  a  general  harmony;  and,  mak¬
ing  this  Angle  point  the  objed  of  all  their  counfels,  and  of
all  their  care,  Ance  it  was  not  in  their  power,  by  punifhing
fome  of  them,  to  reform  the  reft,  who  were  numerous,  bold,
and  armed,  or  to  perfuade  thofe,  who  were  refolved  not  to
be  perfuaded,  they  concluded  that  the  two  following,  motives
would  reclaim  the  feditious ;  that  thofe  of  milder  tempers
(for  there  was  a  mixture  of  thefe,  alfo,  among  fo  great  a
multitude)  would  be  wrought  upon  by  the  fhame  of  being
abufed  by  the  enemy,  and  that  fuch,  as  were  not,  eaftly,
induced  to  tread  the  paths  of  honor,  by  that,  which  terrifles
all  mankind,  neeeffity.  And  to  efted  both  thefe,  they  fuf-
fered  the  enemy  to  infult  them  by  their  words,  and  behavi¬
our,  while  they  called  their  inadion  cowardice,  that,  by
repeated  inftances  of  fcorn,  and  contempt,  they  might  com¬
pel  thofe  to  be  brave,  who  were  not  difpofed  to  be  fo  of

their


♦


x


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C A RN  A  S  S E N S I  S.  13.

their  own  accord  :  For  thefe  infults  being  continued,  they
entertained  great  hopes  that  all  the  foldiers  would  flock  to  the
general’s  tent ;  and,  fired  with  refentment,  and  indignation,
would  demand  of  the  confuls  to  lead  them  againfi:  the  ene¬
my  ;  which  happened  accordingly  :  For,  when  the  latter
began  to  barricade  the  gates  of  the  camp  with  palifades,  and
ditches,  the  Romans,  refenting  the  attempt,  ran  to  the
tents  of  the  confuls,  firft,  in  fmall  numbers,  and,  then,  in  a
body ;  and,  crying  out,  accufed  them  of  treachery,  and  faid
that,  if  none  would  lead  them,  they  themfelves  would  take
arms,  and,  without  their  commanders,  fally  out  againfi:  the
enemy.  This  being  the  general  cry,  the  confuls  thought
this  the  opportunity  they  had  waited  for,  and  ordered-  the
li&ors  to  call  the  troops  together,  when  Fabius,  advancing,
fpoke  to  them  as  follows :

IX.  “  Soldiers,  and  officers,  your  indignation  at  the  in-
tc  fults  you  have  received  from  the  enemy,  is  flow ;  and
<c  this  general  eagernefs  to  attack  them,  by  fhewing  itfelf
C£  much  too  late,  becomes  unfeafonable.  Then  was  the  time
££  for  you  to  do  this,  when  you,  firfl,  faw  them  come,  down
u  from  their  intrenchments,  and  defire  to  begin  the  battle.
C£  Then  would  the  contefl  for  fovereignty  have  been  glo-
tc  rious,  and  worthy  of  the  Roman  fpirit :  But  now  it  is
“  become  neceflary  ;  and,  however  fuccefsful,  will  not  be,
u  equally,  glorious.  But,  even  now,  you  do  well  in  defiring
“  to  repair  your  flownefs,  and  recover  your  forgotten  vigor;
<£  and  great  thanks  are  due  to  you  for  your  eagernefs  in  the
££  purfuit  of  glory,  if  it  flows  from  virtue  :  For  it  is  better

££  to


/


ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  TIES  OF  Book  IX.

“  to  begin  late  to  do  one’s  duty,  than  never.  I  wifh  you
££  had  all  the  fame  fentiments  of  what  is  advantageous,  and
“  that  you  were  all  animated  with  the  fame  ardor  :  But
“  we  are  afraid  left:  the  difguft  of  the  plebeians  againft  the
iC  fenate  concerning  the  divilion  of  lands  may  be  the  caufe
cc  of  great  mifchief  to  the  commonwealth  :  And  we  fufpeCt
<c  that  this  clamor,  and  indignation  concerning  your  going
“  out  to  the  charge,  do  not  fpring  from  the  fame  motive  in
<c  all  of  you  :  But,  that  fome  delire  to  go  out  of  the  camp,
in  order  to  take  revenge  on  the  enemy  ;  and  others,  to
C£  run  away.  The  reafons,  that  have  induced  us  to  entertain
££  thefe  fufpicions,  are  neither  divinations,  nor  conjectures ;
“  but  plain  faCts,  not  of  ancient  date,  but  which  happened
u  laft  year,  as  you  all  know  ;  when  a  numerous,  and  brave
“  army  having  taken  the  field  againft  this  very  enemy,  and
“  the  event  of  the  firft  battle  proving  moft  fuccefsful  to  us,
u  Caefo,  the  conful,  and  my  brother,  who  then  commanded,
4£  had  it  in  his  power  to  take  the  enemy’s  camp,  and  to
u  triumph  after  a  moft  glorious  victory  ;  when  fome,  envy-
“  ing  his  glory,  becaufe  he  was  not  a  popular  man,  nor
“  purfued  fuch  meafures,  as  were  agreeable  to  the  poorer
“  fort,  ftruck  their  tents  the  night  after  the  battle ;  and,
<c  without  orders,  fled  out  of  the  camp,  not  confidering
££  either  the  danger  they  were  expofed  to  in  a  diforderly
££  retreat,  without  a  general,  through  an  enemy’s  country,
4£  and  that  in  the  night,  or  the  ignominy  they  were  fure  to
u  fuftain  in  yielding,  as  far  as  in  them  lay,  the  fovereignty
a  to  the  enemy ;  and  in  fubmitting,  when  conquerors,  to

“  the


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  15

C£  the  conquered.  Being  afraid,  therefore,  tribunes,  centu-
££  rions,  and  foldiers,  of  thefe  men,  who  are  neither  able  to
££  command,  nor  willing  to  obey,  and  who  are  numerous,
C£  bold,  and  armed,  we  have  avoided  a  battle  hitherto,  and
££  dare  not,  even  now,  with  fuch  affiftance,  hazard  a  deciiive
££  ingagement,  left  they  obftrudt,  and  prejudice  thofe,  who
££  are  performing  their  parts  with  all  poffible  alacrity.  But,
££  if  fome  god  fliould  reform  their  inclinations,  and  induce
££  them  to  lay  afide  their  divifions,  from  which  the  coni-
£C  monwealth,  at  this  time,  receives  great  prejudice,  or  to
££  defer  th^m  till  peace  fhall  be  reftored,  and  redeem  their
££  palled  fhame  by  their  prefen t  valor,  nothing  fhall,  then,
“  hinder  us  from  ingaging  the  enemy  with  great  hopes  of
££  vidory.  To  obtain  which  we  have  many  advantages,  but
££  the  moft  confiderable,  and  the  moft  to  be  confided  in  is
££  the  folly  of  the  enemy;  who,  far  exceeding  us  in  the
C£  number  of  their  forces,  and,  by  that  alone,  enabled  to
C£  withfland  our  valor,  and  experience,  have  deprived  them-
££  felves.  of  this  only  benefit  by  con  fuming  the  greatefl;  part
££  of  their  army  in  garrifons.  In  the  next  place,  when  they
££  ought  to  adl  with  caution  and  prudence  in  every  thing,
££  knowing  what  kind  of  men,  far  fuperior  to  them  in  valor,
“  they  have  to  deal  with,  they  run  boldly,  and  inconfider-
<£  ately  to  the  battle,  as  if  they  were  invincible,  and  we  in-
££  timidated:  This  appears  by  their  barricading  the  gates  of
££  our  camp  ;  by  their  riding  up  to  our  intrenchments,  and
££  infulting  us  fo  frequently,  both  by  their  words,  and  ac-
“  tions.  Confider  thefe  things;  remember  the  many

££  glorious


1 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.
,£  glorious  battles,  in  which  you  have  overcome  them,  and
u  go  on  with  alacrity  to  this  ingagement  alfo:  And  let
cc  every  one  of  you  look  upon  the  fpot,  on  which  he  fhall
a  be  pofted,  as  his  houfe,  his  land,  and  his  country:  Let
“  him,  who  faves  his  next  man,  think  he  faves  himfelf ;

and  who  forfakes  him,  conclude  that  he  delivers  himfeli
C£  up  to  the  enemy:  But,  above  all,  remember  this,  that,
<c  of  thofe  who  ftand  their  ground,  and  fight,  few  are
cc  flain ;  but  of  thofe  who  give  way,  and  fly,  very  few  are
“  faved.”.

X.  While  he  was  yet  difplaying  thefe  incentives  to  bra¬
very,  and  accompanying  his  words  with  many  tears,  calling
by  name  every  one  of  the  centurions,  tribunes,  and  foldiers,
who,  he  knew,  had  performed  fome  gallant  adtion  in  for¬
mer  battles,  and  promifing  many  great  rewards  to  fuch,  as
flrould  diftinguifh  themfelves  in  this  ingagement  in  pro¬
portion  to  their  a&ions,  as  honors,  riches,  and  other  ad¬
vantages,  they  all  cried  out  to  encourage  him,  and  defired
he  would  lead  them  on  to  the  battle.  As  foon  as  he  had
done  fpeaking,  there  came  out  from  the  throng  a  man,
called  Marcus  Flavoleius,  a  plebeian,  and  bred  to  country
work,  though  not  of  mean  condition,  but  celebrated  for
his  virtue,  and  military  bravery  and,  on  both  thefe  ac¬
counts,  honoured  with  the  mod  confiderable  command  in
one  of  the  legions,  which  command  the  fixty  centuries
are  injoined  by  the  law  to  follow,  and  obey :  Thefe
officers  are  called  by  the  Romans,  in  their  own  language,

Primipili.


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  17

6  Primipili.  This  man,  who,  befides  his  other  qualifications,
was  tall,  and  a  comely  perfon,  {landing  where  all  might  fee


6-  Thefe  officers  were

called  by  the  Romans,  primopili ,  or
primipili.  They  were  the  firft  officers
In  a  legion  next  to  the  tribunes.  The
reader  has  already  feen  e  that  a  legion,
as  inftituted  by  Romulus,  confided  of
3000  foot,  and  30ohorfe  :  This  num¬
ber  was  afterwards  augmented  *,  and
inftances  may  be  found  in  f  Livy,
where  the  fenate  ordered  what  number
both  of  horfe,  and  foot  each  legion
fhould  confift  of;  which  number  in
the  war  with  Perfeus  they  extended  to
6000  foot,  and  300  horfe.  g  I  have,
in  a  former  note,  fpoken  of  the  HaJI at i ,
Principes ,  and  Triarii ,  who  compofed
the  three  lines  of  heavy  armed  men,
in  which  every  legion  was  drawn  up.
If  I  repeat  it  now,  my  reafon  is,  be-
caufe  I  have  fince  found  that  fome
learned  men  have  been  milled  by  the
word  Principes ,  and  from  thence  con¬
cluded  that  thefe  conftituted  the  firft
line.  But  this  is  a  miftake  :  For  they
were  certainly  drawn  up  in  the  order
they  are  here  mentioned.  II  the  reader
pleafes  to  turn  to  the  193d  page  of  a
noble  performance,  the  idea  of  a  pa¬
triot  king,  he  will  find  this  miftake
to  have  crept  in  there  among  a  thou-
fand  beauties.  But,  in  order  to  explain
what  our  author  means  when  he  fays
that  the  primipili  commanded  the  fixty
centuries  of  every  legion,  it  will  be
necefiary  to  difieft  the  conftituent
parts  of  a  legion.  Every  legion  con¬
futed  of  thirty  divifions,  called  by  the
Romans,  or  dines ,  ten  of  the  haftati ,  ten


of  the  principes ,  and  ten  of  the  triarii  ;
each  of  thefe  orders  was  fubdivided  into
two  centuries,  confequently  there  were
fixty  centuries  in  every  legion.  The
poll  of  honor  in  a  legion,  though  in
the  rear,  was  That  of  the  triarii ;  next
in  rank  were  the  principes  ;  and  the  laft
the  haftati:  By  this  means,  it  hap¬
pened  that  the  lowefl  officer  in  a  legion
was  the  centurion  of  the  tenth  order,
or  of  the  twentieth  century  of  the
haftati ,  called  in  Latin,  decimus  haftatus
pofterior  ;  and  the  firft  officer  after  the
tribunes  was  the  firft  centurion  of  the
triarii ,  otherwife  called,  primipilus.-
There  is  a  fpeech  made  by  Sp.  Ligu-
ftinus  in  h  Livy,  where  he  gives  an
account  of  his  riling  from  a  common
foldier  to  the  degree  of  a  primipilus  ;
which  account  contains  a  gradation,
that  will  confirm  what  I  have  afierted;
biennium  miles  gregarius  fui — tertio  anno
virtutis  caufd  mihi  T.  Quintius  Flami-
ninus  decumum  ordinem  haftatum  aftigna-
vit — hie  me  imperator  dignum  judicavit,
cui  primum  haftatum  prioris  centuriae
aftignaret — a  Man.  Acilio  mihi  primus

princeps  prioris  centuriae  eft  aftignatus _

a  Pi.  Graccho  rogatus ,  in  provinci dm  ii.
quater  intrap aucos anno s  primum  piluni
duxi.  As  I  have  mentioned  the  legio¬
nary  tribunes,  it  may  be  necefiary  to
fpeak  of  their  number :  There  were
fix  tribunes  in  every  legion  ;  thefe
were,  at  firft,  created  by  the  generals ;
afterwards,  that  is,  in  the  year  of
Rome  392,  CU  Servilius  Ahala,  and
L.  Genucius  being  conluls,  both  for


c  See  the  fixteenth  annotation  on  the  fecond  book.  ( B.  xlii.  c.  3 1.
feventh  annotation  on  the  fourth  book,  h  B.  xlii.  c.  34.

Vol.  IV.  D


s  See  the  twenty

him,


o


Book  IX.


1 8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

him,  fpoke  in  the  following  manner :  “  Are  you  afraid,
“  confuls,  that  our  a&ions  will  not  agree  with  our  words  ?
“  I  will  be  the  firft  to  give  you,  in  my  own  name,  the
“  greateft  affurance  for  the  performance  of  my  promife  :
tc  And,  fellow-citizens,  and  partakers  of  the  fame  fortune,
“  as  many  of  you  as  refolve  to  fupport  your  words  by  your
<c  a&ions,  you  will  not  err  in  following  my  example,”
Having  faid  this,  he  held  up  his  fword,  and  took  the  oath
in  ufe  among  the  Romans,  and  efteemed  by  them  the  moft
facred  of  all  others,  by  ingaging  his  own  7  faith,  That  he
would  return  to  Rome  vi&orious,  or  not  at  all.  After
Flavoleius  had  taken  this  oath,  they  all  gave  him  great
applaufe :  And,  prefently,  both  the  confuls  did  the  fame,
as  did,alfo,  the  inferior  officers,  the  tribunes,  and  centurions,
and,  laft  of  all,  the  foldiers.  This  being  done,  they  all  felt
great  alacrity,  great  friendfhip  for  one  another,  confidence,
and  fpirit :  And,  going  from  the  afiembly,  fome  bridled

the  fecond  time,  a  law  paffed,  by  which  people  to  chufe  the  principal  officers
this  power  was  transferred  from  the  of  an  army,  raifed  and  maintained  to
generals  to  the  people  ;  1  et  quum  eo  perpetuate  their  flavery.
anno  primitm  placuijfiet  tribunos  militum  7*  tv  totvlx  -msiv.  The  Latin

ad  legiones  fuffragio  fieri  ( nam  et  antea  tranfiators  have  rendered  this,  bona
ficutnunc,  quosrufulos  vacant ,  impera-  fides.  I  have  never  met  with  this  oath
tores  ipfi  faciebant)  fecundum  in  texlocis  in  any  Roman  author;  which  I  am
tenuit  (T.  Manlius.)  This  power  was,  furprifed  at,  fince  Dionyfius  fays  it
upon  fome  occafions,  reftored  to  the  was,  among  the  Romans,  the  moft
generals  by  the  confent  of  the  people,  binding  of  all  oaths.  1  Livy  makes
However,  we  find  k,  by  the  laft  paf-  Flavoleius  fwear  by  Jupiter,  Mars,  and
fage  of  Livy,  that  the  generals  were  the  other  gods ;  Si  fallal,  Jovempatrem,
pofiTeffed  of  it  in  his  time:  Which  is  Gradivwmque  Martem ,  aliofque  iratos
not  to  be  wondered  at,  fince  Auguftus  invocat  deos.
would  certainly  not  have  fuffered  the

;  Livy,  B,  vii.  c.  c.  k  Id.  ib.  'B.ii.  c.  a:.

their


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  19

their  horfes ;  others  fharpened  their  fwords,  and  fpears ;
and  others  cleaned  their  defenflve  arms :  And,  in  a  fhort
time,  the  whole  army  was  ready  for  the  battle.  The  confuls,
after  invoking  the  gods  by  vows,  facriiices,  and  prayers,  to
be  their  guides  in  fallying  forth,  led  the  army  out  of  the  camp
in  a  proper  difpoiition,  and  order.  The  Tyrrhenians,  feeing
them  quit  their  intrenchments,  were  furprifed  at  it,  and
marched  out  with  their  whole  army  to  meet  them.

XI.  When  both  armies  were  come  into  the  plain,  and
the  trumpets  had  founded  a  charge,  they  gave  a  About,  and
ingaged :  And,  the  horle  charging  the  horfe,  and  the  foot
doling  with  the  foot,  they  fought;  and  great  was  the
daughter  on  both  fldes.  The  right  wing  of  the  Romans,
commanded  by  Manlius,  one  of  the  confuls,  repulfed  that
part  of  the  enemy,  that  flood  oppofite  to  them ;  and  the
horfemen,  quitting  their  horfes,  fought  on  foot.  But  their
left  was  furrounded  by  the  right  wing  of  the  enemy :  For
the  line  of  the  Tyrrhenians  on  this  fide  outflanked  That
of  the  Romans,  and  was  conflderably  deeper  :  The  troops
of  the  latter,  therefore,  were  broken  in  this  part,  and  many
wounded :  This  wing  was  commanded  by  Quintus  Fabius,
who  was,  then,  8  legate,  and  proconful,  and  had  been  twice

8*  RgecGevIttf.  In  Latin  Legatus ,  the  translated  propreteur ,  be-

next  officer  to  the  confuls.  I  chufe  to  caufe  Portus  has  rendered  it  fo  ;  how-
call  this  officer  a  legate  rather  than  a  ever,  both  le  Jay,  and  his  guide  are
lieutenant ,  with  le  Jay,  or  a  lieutenant-  miftaken  :  For  a  conful,  alter  the  ex-
general ,  withM.***,  as  I  before  faid:  piration  of  his  magiftracy,  might  in-
For,  if  we  are  to  give  modern  names  deed  be  a  proconful,  but  never  a
to  all  the  military  eltabliffiments  of  the  praetor,  which  was  a  title  peculiar  to
Romans,  we  muft,  by  the  fame  rule,  thofe,  who  had  arrived  to  no  higher
call  a  legion,  a  regiment.  Le  Jay  has  dignity  than  to  That  of  .praetor ;  .and

D  2  confuk


Book  IX.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

conful :  He  maintained  the  fight  a  long  time,  and  received
wounds  of  all  kinds ;  till,  being  ftruck  in  the  bread:  with  a
fpear,  the  point  of  which  pierced  his  bowels,  he  fell  through
lofs  of  blood.  When  Marcus  Fabius,  one  of  the  confuls,
who  commanded  in  the  center,  was  informed  of  this,  he
took  with  him  the  beft  of  his  foot,  and,  calling  to  Caefo
Fabius,  his  other  brother,  to  follow  him,  he  palled  before  his
own  line ;  then,  advancing  a  confiderable  way,  when  he  had
got  beyond  the  enemy’s  right  wing,  he  turned  upon  thofe,
who  were  9  furrounding  his  men ;  and,  charging  them,  he
made  a  vaft  daughter  of  all  he  encountered,  and  put  to  flight
thofe  who  were  at  a  diftance :  And,  finding  his  brother,
ftill  breathing,  he  took  him  up :  However,  he  died  prefently
after.  The  defire  of  revenging  his  death  inflamed  the  two
brothers,  ftill  more,  againft  the  enemy  ;  and,  regardlefs
now,  of  their  own  life,  they  rufhed  with  a  few  among  the
thickeft  of  them,  and  made  large  heaps  of  their  dead  bodies.
Here  the  Tyrrhenian  army  buffered ;  and  thofe  who,  be¬
fore,  had  forced  the  enemy  to  give  ground,  were,  now,
repulfed  by  the  conquered.  But,  in  the  left  wing,  where  the
Tyrrhenians,  oppofed  to  Manlius,  were  already  fpent,  and  be¬
ginning  to  run  away,  they  put  to  flight  thofe  they  were  ingaged

Fabius  had,  we  fee,  been  twice  &  avion,  etc.  However,  Sylburgrus,
conful.  M.  ***  has  not  tranflated  and  confequently  M.  *  *  *  have  taken
enlirgochtyot  at  all,  becaufe  Sylburgius  it  paffively.  This  obliged  the  former
has  omitted  it.  to  fay  in  the  next  fen  ten  ce,  in  holies

9-  KuxA^jirsf.  This  word  mull  be  irruens ,  and  the  latter  to  explain  thele
taken  actively  in  this  place,  and  relates  words,  by  il  fond  fur  les  Tyrrhenian  ;
to  the  Tyrrhenians,  who  were  fur-  neither  of  which  are  in  the  Greek  text,
rounding  the  Romans;  which  is  plain  where,  as  our  author  has  ufedxuxA^fya*
from  the  following  fentence,  ly-msm  actively,  they  are  not  wanted.

with :


2  r


EooklX.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  ICARN  ASSENSIS.

with  :  For  Manlius  being  wounded  in  the  knee  with  a  javelin,
the  point  of  which  reached  to  his  ham,  thofe  about  him  took
him  up,  and  carried  him  to  the  camp.  The  enemy,  think¬
ing  the  Roman  general  flain,  took  heart,  and  the  reft  com¬
ing  to  their  aftiftance,  they  prefled  hard  upon  the  Romans,
who,  now,  had  no  commander.  This  obliged  the  twoFabii
to  quit  the  left  wing,  and  fly  to  the  relief  of  the  right :
And  the  Tyrrhenians,  feeing  them  advance  in  a  ftrong  body,
gave  over  the  purfuit.  However,  they  doubled  their  files,  and
fought  in  good  order;  and,  lofing  a  great  number  of  their
own  men,  they  killed,  alfo,  many  of  the  Romans.

XII.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Tyrrhenians,  who  had  pof-
fefied  themfelves  of  the  camp  abandoned  by  Manlius,  as  foon
as  the  fignal  was  given  by  their  general,  ran  with  great
expedition,  and  alacrity  to  the  other  camp  of  the  Romans,
from  an  opinion  that  it  was  not  guarded  with  a  fufHcient
force;  neither  was  their  opinion  groundlefs:  For,  befides
the  10  Triarii,  and  fome  young  men,  the  reft  of  the  number
then  in  the  camp,  confifted  of  merchants,  fervants,  and  ar¬
tificers  :  And  many  being  crowded  into  a  fmall  place  (for
the  battle  was  at  the  gates  of  the  camp)  a  fharp,  and  fevere
ingagement  infued,  and  feveral  fell  on  both  fides.  In  this
adion,  Manlius,  the  conful,  coming  out  with  the  cavalry  to
the  relief  of  his  men,  hishorfe  fell,  and  he  falling  with  him,
and  being  unable  to  rife  through  the  number  of  his  wounds,
he  died ;  and  many  brave  young  men  were  flain  by  his  fide.
After  this  misfortune,  the  camp  was  foon  taken :  And  the

T PictPiuv.  See  the  twenty  feventh  annotation  on  the  fourth  book.

a  a  rr~\

1  vr~


10.


22  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

Tyrrhenian  prophecies  were  fulfilled :  If,  therefore,  they  had
made  a  proper  ufe  of  their  prefen t  good  fortune,  and  fecured
the  camp,  they  had  remained  matters  of  the  enemy’s  bag¬
gage,  and  forced  them  to  a  fhameful  retreat :  But,  inftead
of  that,  by  amufing  themfelves  with  plundering  what  was
left,  and  taking  refrefhment,  as  moft  of  them  did  after  the
a&ion,  they  fuffered  a  fine  booty  to  efcape  out  of  their
hands :  For,  as  foon  as  the  other  conful  heard  the  camp  was
furprifed,  he  haftened  thither  with  a  body  of  chofen  men,
both  horfe,  and  foot.  The  Tyrrhenians,  being  informed  of
his  arrival,  lined  the  intrenchments  quite  round  the  camp  ;
and  a  fliarp  battle  was  fought,  while  thefe  endeavoured  to
recover  their  own,  and  the  others  were  afraid  of  being  all
put  to  the  fword,  if  the  camp  was  taken.  The  adlion  lafting
a  confiderable  time,  and  the  Tyrrhenians  having  many
advantages  (for  they  flood  upon  an  eminence,  and  had  to
do  with  men  fpent  with  fighting  the  whole  day )  Titus
11  Sicinus,  the  legate,  and  proconful,  after  communicating
his  defign  to  the  conful,  ordered  a  retreat  to  be  founded,
and  that  all  the  men  fhould  aflemble  in  one  body,  and
aflault  that  fide  of  the  camp,  which  was  the  weakeft.
He  gave  over  the  attack  of  thofe  parts  next  the  gates
from  a  reafonable  confideration,  that  did  not  deceive  him ;
which  was,  that,  if  the  Tyrrhenians  had  a  profpect  of

**•  law.  The  Vatican  manufcript  ful,  I  fuppofe  him  to  be  the  fame
has  2»c»A<of,  and  Lapus  and  Gelenius  perfon,  who  was  m  conful  with  C.
Xmviog.  As  our  author  calls  him  Aquilius  in  the  year  267.

rgethiyov,  which  I  translate  procon-

ni  See  the  eighth  book,  c.  64.


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  R  N  AS  SEN  SI  S.  *  23

lafety,  they  would  abandon  the  camp  ;  whereas,  if  they
defpaired  of  it,  by  feeing  themfelves  inverted  on  all  fides,
and  no  way  left  to  efcape,  necertity  would  make  them
brave.  The  attack^  therefore,  being  directed  againft  one
place  only,  the  enemy,  no  longer  refifted ;  but,  opening  the
gates,  faved  themfelves  by  retiring  to  their  own  camp.

XIII.  The  conful,  after  he  had  difpelled  this  mifchief,
returned  to  the  affiftance  of  thofe,  who  were  in  the  plain.
This  battle  is  faid  to  have  been  the  moft  conrtderable  the
Romans  had,  till  then,  been  ingaged  in,  with  regard  to  the
numbers  of  the  combatants,  the  time  it  lafted,  and  the  fudden
turns  of  fortune:  For  their  army  conrtfted  of  about  twenty
thoufand  foot,  all  inhabitants  of  Rome,  the  flower,  and
choice  of  their  youth  ;  of  twelve  hundred  horfe  appointed
to  the  four  legions ;  and  of  the  fame  number  from  their
colonies,  and  allies.  The  battle  began  a  little  before  noon,
and  lafted  till  fun  fet ;  and  the  fortune  of  it  continued  long
in  fufpenfe ;  and,  by  inclining  fometimes  to  this  flde,  and
fometimes  to  that,  difpenfed  vidtories,  and  defeats  to  both :
One  of  the  confuls  was  flain,  with  a  legate,  who  had  himfelf
been  twice  conful,  and  a  greater  number  of  other  officers,
tribunes,  and  centurions,  than  had,  ever  before,  been  killed
in  one  action.  However,  the  Romans  feemed  to  have  had
the  vidtory,  for  no  other  reafon,  than  becaufe  the  Tyrrhe¬
nians  decamped  the  following  night.  The  next  day,  the
former  plundered  the  camp,  which  the  Tyrrhenians  had
abandoned ;  and,  having  buried  their  dead,  returned  to
their  own:  Where,  in  an  affembly  of  the  foldiers,  they

diftri-


24-  R OMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

diftributed  to  thofe,  who  had  diftinguifhed  themfelves  in  the
battle,  the  honors  due  to  their  valor.  Firft,  to  Caefo  Fabius,
the  conful’s  brother,  who  had  performed  great,  and  wonderful
exploits ;  next,  to  Sicinus,  who  had  given  occafion  to  the
recovery  of  their  camp ;  and,  in  the  third  place,  to  Marcus
Flavoleius,  the  primipilus,  on  account  both  of  the  oath  he  had
taken,  and  the  bravery  he  had  fhewnin  the  midftof  dangers.
After  this  was  done,  they  ftaid  a  few  days  in  the  camp ;
and,  no  enemy  appearing  to  give  them  battle,  they  returned
home.  At  Rome,  all  being  defirous  to  honour  the  furviving
.conful  with  a  triumph,  in  confederation  of  the  moft  glorious
event,  in  which  the  greateft  battle  they  ever  fought,  had
terminated,  he  himfelf  refufed  this  honor,  alledging  that  it
was  neither  pious,  nor  lawful  for  him  to  triumph,  and  wear
a  crown  of  laurel  after  the  death  of  his  brother,  and  the  lofs
of  his  collegue.  Having,  therefore,  laid  up  the  enfigns,  he
difcharged  the  foldiers ;  and,  though  two  months  yet  re¬
mained  to  complete  his  year,  he  abdicated  the  confulfhip,
as  incapable  of  performing  the  functions  of  that  magiftracy :
For  he  was  ftill  exceeding  ill  of  a  large  wound,  and  obliged
to  keep  his  bed.

XIV.  Upon  this,  the  fenate  chofe  interreges  to  prefide  at
the  eledion  of  magiftrates,  and  the  fecond  interrex  having
affembled  the  people  in  the  plain,  Caefo  Fabius  was  created
conful  for  the  third  time,  the  fame  who  had  been  the  firft
man  honoured  for  his  bravery  in  the  laft  adion,  and  brother
to  the  perfon,  who  had  abdicated  that  magiftracy ;  and,  with
him,  Titus  Virginius.  Thefe,  having  drawn  lots  for  the


com-


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARNAS  SE NS  I  S.  25

command  of  the  armies,  took  the  field:  Fabius  marching
againft  the  Aequi,  who,  then,  annoyed  the  territories  of  the
Latines ;  and  Virginius  againft  the  Veientes.  The  former,
when  they  heard  that  the  army  was  preparing  to  invade
them,  prefently  evacuated  the  enemy’s  country,  and  re¬
turned  to  their  own  cities ;  after  which,  they  fuffered  their
territories  to  be  pillaged  :  So  that,  the  conful,  as  foon  as  he
entered  them,  poflefled  himfelf  of  large  fums  of  money,
many  flaves,  and  a  great  booty.  But  the  Veientes  ftaid,  at
firft,  within  their  walls,  till,  finding  a  proper  opportunity,
they  fell  upon  the  enemy,  as  they  were  difperfed  about  the
country,  and  employed  in  plundering :  And,  attacking  them
with  a  numerous  army  in  good  order,  they,  not  only,  took
away  their  booty,  but,  alfo,  killed,  or  put  to  flight  all  who
durft  oppofe  them :  And,  if  Titus  Sicinus,  who  was  then
legate,  had  not  come  up  to  their  relief  with  a  body  of  foot,
and  horfe  in  good  order,  and  put  a  flop  to  the  progrefs  of
the  enemy,  nothing  could  have  hindered  the  army  from
being,  totally,  deftroyed :  But  he  giving  them  a  check,  the
reft  of  the  troops,  which  had  been  difperfed,  prefently  got
together  ;  and,  being  now  all  in  a  body,  they  poflefled
themfelves  of  an  eminence  when  it  was  late  in  the  evening,
and  continued  there  the  following  night.  The  Veientes,
elated  with  this  fuccefs,  flood  to  their  arms  at  the  foot  of
the  eminence,  and  fent  for  the  forces  in  the  city,  imagining
they  had  fhut  up  the  Romans  in  a  place,  where  they  could
get  no  provifions ;  and  that  they  fhould,  foon,  force  them
to  deliver  up  their  arms.  Their  numbers  being  now
Vol.  IV.  E  con-


Book  IX.


26  /  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

confiderably  encreafed,  they  formed  two  armies,  and  ported
them  opportte  to  the  rtdes  of  the  eminence,  that  feemed  the
weakeft ;  and,  againft  the  ftronger  parts,  they  placed  many
fmaller  detachments :  So  that,  every  place  was  full  of  armed
men.  The  other  conful,  being  informed  by  the  letters  of
his  collegue,  that  the  army,  which  was  fhut  up  on  the  hill,
was  reduced  to  the  laft  extremity,  and  in  danger  of  being
taken  by  famine  if  they  were  not  relieved,  decamped,  and
marched  againft  the  Veientes  with  all  expedition;  and,  if
he  had  come  but  one  day  later,  his  arrival  would  have  been
ineffectual,  and  he  had  found  the  army  there,  utterly,  deftroy-
ed.  For  thofe,  who  were  upon  the  hill,  being  oppreffed  with
the  want  of  neceffaries,  were  come  down,  refolving  to  die
in  the  moft  glorious  manner  :  And,  having  ingaged  the
enemy,  they  were,  then,  fighting  ;  the  greateft  part  of  them
being  oppreffed  with  hunger,  thirft,  want  of  fleep,  and  every
other  evil.  After  a  ffhort  time,  when  the  army  of  Fabius,
which  was  very  numerous,  was  feen  coming  up  in  order  of
battle,  they  brought  confidence  to  their  own  people,  and
terror  to  the  enemy ;  who,  not  thinking  themfelves  able  to
encounter  a  brave  and  frefh  army,  retired,  and  abandoned
their  camps.  After  the  two  armies  of  the  Romans  were
joined,  they  formed  a  large  camp  in  an  advantageous  place,
near  the  city  of  the  Veientes;  and,  having  continued  there
feveral  days,  and  plundered  the  beft  part  of  their  country,
they  returned  home.  As  foon  as  the  Veientes  heard  that
the  forces  of  the  Romans  were  diibanded,  they  marched
with  fuch  of  their  own  youth,  as  were  prepared  for  expedition,

and


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  27
and  already  aflembled,  and  That  of  their  neighbours,  which
was  then  prefent,  and  made  an  incurflon  into  the  plains,
that  lay  contiguous  to  their  own  territories ;  and  thefe  being
full  of  corn,  cattle,  and  men,  they  plundered  them  :  For
the  hufbandmen  had  come  down  from  the  places  of  ftrength,
in  order  to  get  feed  for  their  cattle,  and  till  their  lands,
depending  upon  the  protection  of  their  own  army,  which
then  lay  encamped  between  them,  and  the  enemy  :  And,
after  this  army  was  retired,  they  had  made  no  hafte  to  re~
turn  with  their  herds,  as  not  expeding  the  Veientes,  after
fuch  repeated  defeats,  would  be  fo  foon  in  a  condition  to
make  an  attempt,  in  their  turn,  againft  the  enemy.  This
irruption  of  the  Veientes  into  the  Roman  territories  was
indeed  fhort,  with  refpeCt  to  the  time  it  lafted ;  but  of  the
greateft  confequence,  in  regard  to  the  large  trad  of  land
they  overrun ;  which  gave  the  Romans  an  unufual  concern
mixed  with  fhame,  the  enemy  advancing  as  far  as  the  river
Tiber,  and  mount  Janiculum,  which  is  not  even  twenty
fiadia  from  Rome :  And  there  were  no  forces,  then,  on
foot  to  flop  their  further  progrefs :  For  the  Veientes  came
upon  them  before  the  Roman  army  could  be  got  together,
and  divided  into  companies.

XV.  Upon  this,  the  confuls  aflembled  the  fenate ;  and,
after  confldering  in  what  manner  the  war  fhould  be  carried
on  againft  the  Veientes,  it  was  the  opinion  of  the  majority
to  keep  an  army  conftantly  aflembled  upon  the  frontiers,
which  fhould  guard  the  entrance  into  the  Roman  territories,
and  always  continue  in  arms :  But  the  expence  of  maintaining

E  2  thefe


Book  IX.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

tliefe  guards,  which  would  be  very  confiderable,  made
them  uneafy,  the  public  treafury  being  exhaufted  by  the
continual  expeditions  they  had  been  ingaged  in,  and  their
private  fortunes  wafted  in  furnifhing  contributions  :  And
their  uneafinefs  was  ftill  encreafed  by  the  conftderation  of
the  manner,  in  which  the  guards,  propofed  to  be  fent,
fhould  be  raifed ;  there  being  little  probability  that  any
particular  perfons  would,  voluntarily,  expofe  themfelves  in
the  defence  of  all,  and,  without  being  fucceeded  by  others,
undertake  a  continual  fatigue.  While  the  fenate  were  anxi¬
ous  on  both  thefe  accounts,  the  two  Fabii  aftembled  all
thofe  of  their  family  ;  and,  having  confulted  with  them,
they  promifed  the  fenate  that  they  themfelves  would,  vo¬
luntarily,  undertake  this  danger  in  defence  of  all  the  citizens;
and,  with  their  clients  and  friends,  and  at-  their  own  ex¬
pence,  continue  in  arms  as  long  as  the  war  lafted.  All
admired  their  generous  zeal,  and  placed  their  hopes  of
viffory  in  this  ftngle  acftion;  and  the  whole  city  celebra¬
ting  their  praife,  and  offering  up  vows,  and  facrifices  for
their  fuccefs,  they  took  their  arms,  and  went  out.  They
were  commanded  by  Marcus  Fabius,  who  had  been  conful
the  preceding  year,  and  overcame  the  Tyrrhenians  in  the
laft  adlion:  Their  number  confifted  of  about  four  thou-
fand,  the  greateft  part  of  whom  were  their  clients,  and
friends ;  and,  of  the  Fabian  family,  three  hundred  and
fix  perfons.  They  were  foon  after  followed  by  the  Roman
army  under  the  command  of  Caefo  Fabius,  one  of  the

confuls.


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LIC  A  R  N  A  $  S  EN  S  I  S.  29

confuls.  When  they  came  near  the  river  12  Cremera,  which
is  not  far  from  the  city  of  the  Veientes,  they  built  a  fortrefs
upon  a  fieep  and  craggy  hill,  of  ftrength  fufficient  to  be
defended  by  fo  numerous  a  garrifon,  furrounded  it  with  a
double  ditch,  and  fortified  it  with  many  towers :  The
fortrefs  was  called  Cremera  from  the  river.  As  many  hands
were  employed  in  this  work,  and  the  conful  himfelf  afilfted
them,  it  was  finiflaed  iboner  than  could  have  been  expected.
After  that,  the  conful  marched  out  of  the  fortrefs  with  his
army,  and  went  to  the  oppofite  fide  of  the  country  of  the
Veientes,  that  lies  next  to  the  other  part  of  Tyrrhenia,
where  the  Veientes  kept  their  herds,  not  expecting  that  a
Roman  army  would  ever  penetrate  into  that  country  ;  and,
having  pofiefled  himfelf  of  a  great  booty,  he  caufed  it  to  be
tranfported  to  theneweredled  fortrefs ;  which  booty  gave  him
great  pleafure  for  both  thefe  reafons ;  the  firft,  that  he  had
taken  a  fwift  revenge  on  the  enemy ;  and  the  other,  that  he
fhould  fupply  the  garrifon  with  every  thing  they  wanted,  in
great  abundance  :  For  he  neither  brought  any  part  of  the  fpoils
to  the  treafury,  nor  divided  any  to  the  foldiers,  who  ferved
under  him;  but  granted  all  the  cattle,  the  beaftsof  burden,
the  yokes  of  oxen,  the  iron,  and  the  other  inftruments  of  huf-
bandry,  to  the  guards  of  the  Roman  territories.  After  he  had
performed  thefe  things,  he  returned  home  with  the  army.

lz*  K ciui%oc.  This  river  rifes  out  of  called  b  la  Varca ,  or  la  Valca  •,  near
the  lake  Baccanenfis,  now  called  Bac -  the  fouth  fide  of  which  flood  the  for-
cano^  and  falls  into  the  Tiber  on  the  trefs  about  five  Roman  miles  from
Tufcan  or  weft  fide.  This  river  is  now  Rome.

D  Cluver,Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  p.  536.


The


3 o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

The  Veientes  found  themfelves  in  great  ftreights  after  this
fortrefs  was  erected  to  awe  their  country  :  Since,  from  this
time,  they  could  neither  till  their  land  with  fecurity,  nor
receive  any  provifions  imported  from  abroad  :  For  the  Fabii
had  divided  their  army  into  four  bodies ;  one  of  which  they
left  as  a  guard  to  the  fortrefs ;  and,  with  the  other  three,
they,  continually,  harraffed  the  enemy’s  country :  And,
whether  the  Veientes  attacked  them,  openly,  with  a  con-
fiderable  force,  which  often  happened,  or  endeavoured  to
draw  them  into  an  ambufh,  the  Fabii  had  the  advantage  in
both ;  and,  after  killing  many  of  them,  retired  in  fafety  to
the  fortrefs :  So  that,  the  enemy  durft,  no  longer,  encounter
them;  but  continued  fhut  up  within  their  walls  during
the  greateft  part  of  the  time,  and  only  ventured  out  by
Health.  And  thus  ended  that  winter.

XVI.  The  following  year,  Lucius  Aemilius,  and  Caius
Servilius  being  confuls,  the  Romans  were  informed  that  the
Volfci,  and  the  Aequi  had  entered  into  an  agreement  to  attack
them  at  the  fame  time  ;  and  that  it  would  not  be  long  before
they  made  an  irruption  into  their  territories.  This  information
was  true :  For  each  of  thefe  people  marched  fooner  than  could
have  been  expe&ed  into  that  part  of  the  Roman  territories,  that
lay  contiguous  to  their  own,  and  laid  it  wafte  ;  as  thinking
it  impoffible  that  the  Romans  would  be  able  to  fupport
themfelves  under  the  Tyrrhenian  war,  and  to  repulfe  them.
At  the  fame  time,  they  received  intelligence  from  others
that  all  Tyrrhenia  was  upon  the  point  of  declaring  war
againft  them,  and  preparing  to  fend  joint  fuccours  to  the

Veientes :


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALI C A RN  A  S  S E N  S I  S.  31

Veientes :  For  thefe,  finding  themfelves  unable  to  deftroy
the  fortrefs  by  their  own  ftrength,  had  fled  to  them,  putting
them  in  mind  of  the  relation,  and  friendfhip,  that  was
between  them;  and  enumerating  the  many  wars  they  had
maintained  with  united  forces.  In  confideration  of  all  thele
things,  they  defired  they  would  affift  them  in  the  war
againft  the  Romans,  they  being,  by  their  fituation,  as  a
barrier  to  all  Tyrrhenia,  and  an  obftacle.  to  the  torrent  of  the
war,  which,  in  its  courfe  from  Rome,  would  overwhelm
their  whole  country.  The  Tyrrhenians,  prevailed  upon  by
thefe  reafons,  promifed  to  fend  them  as  great  a  number  of
auxiliaries,  as  they  defired.  The  fenate,  being  informed  of
this,  refolved  to  fend  three  armies  into  the  field :  And  thefe
being  foon  levied,  Lucius  Aemilius  was  fent  againft  the
Tyrrhenians;  Caefo  Fabius,  who  had  lately  abdicated  the
confulfhip,  went  with  him,  having  obtained  leave  of  the
fenate  to  join  his  relations  at  Cremera,  whom  his  brother
had  conducted  to  the  fortrefs,  as  a  garrifon,  and  to  partake
of  the  fame  dangers  with  them ;  and,  being  honoured  with
the  dignity  of  proconful,  he  fet  out  with  his  dependents :
Caius  Servilius,  the  other  conful,  marched  againft  the  Volfci:
And  Servius  Furius,  the  proconful,  againft  the  Aequi.  They
had  each  two  Roman  legions,  and  the  fame  number  of  La-
tines,  Hernici,  and  their  other  allies.  The  war,  to  which
Servius  the  proconful  was  appointed,  fucceeded  according
to  his  wifh,  and  was  foon  over:  For,  in  one  battle,  he  totally
defeated  the  Aequi,  and  that  without  any  trouble,  having
terrified  them  at  the  firft  onfet ;  and  they  taking  refuge  in
.  ,  •  their


32  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I T I E  S  OF  Book  IX.

their  ftrong  places,  lie  employed  the  reft  of  his  time  in
laying  wafte  their  country.  But  Servilius,  one  of  the  con-
fills,  having  ingaged  the  Volfci  with  precipitation,  and  rafh-

nefs,  found  himfelf  much  deceived  in  his  expectation,  the

♦

enemy  making  a  very  ftout  refiftance  :  So  that,  after  lofing
many  brave  men,  he  was  forced  to  refrain  from  fighting ;
and  refolved  to  continue  in  his  camp,  and  to  prolong  the
war  by  fkirmifhes,  and  ingagements  of  the  light  armed  men.
Lucius  Aemilius,  who  had  been  fent  againft  Tyrrhenia,
finding  the  Veientes  incamped  before  their  city,  together  .
with  a  great  number  of  auxiliaries  of  the  fame  nation,  he
refolved  to  fight  without  delay  ;  and,  flaying  but  one  day
after  he  had  formed  his  camp,  he  led  out  his  army  to  the
ingagement,  and  was  received  by  the  Veientes  with  great
refolution :  The  battle  continuing  doubtful,  Aemilius  put
himfelf  at  the  head  of  the  horfe,  and  charged  the  right  wing
of  the  enemy ;  and,  having  difordered  them,  he  went  to  the
other  wing ;  fighting  on  horfeback,  where  the  ground  would
allow  it,  and,  where  it  would  not,  on  foot :  Both  the  enemy’s
wings  being,  now,  broken,  the  center,  no  longer,  flood  their
ground,  but  was  forced  by  the  Roman  foot ;  and,  after  that,
they  all  fled  to  their  camp.  Aemilius  followed  them  clofe
with  his  army  in  good  order,  and  killed  many  of  them.
When  he  came  to  the  camp,  he  attacked  it  by  a  fucceflion
of  frefh  troops,  and  ftaid  there  all  that  day,  and  the  following
night.  The  day  after,  the  enemy  being  fpent  with  labor,
with  wounds,  and  want  of  fleep,  he  made  himfelf  mafter  of
their  camp  :  For  the  Tyrrhenians,  when  they  faw  the

Romans


Book IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  33

Romans  mount  the  palifades,  left  their  camp,  and  fled,  feme
to  the  city,  and  others  to  the  neighbouring  hills.  That  day  the
conful  (laid  in  the  enemy’s  camp:  And  the  day  after,  he  re¬
warded  thofe,  who  had  diftinguifhed  themfelves  in  the  a&ions,
with  magnificent  prefents,  and  gave  to  the  foldiers  all  the
beaits  of  burden,  and  flaves  the  enemy  had  left  in  the  camp,
together  with  the  tents,  in  which  there  was  a  great  quantity
of  riches.  By  which  means,  the  Roman  army  found  them¬
felves  in  greater  opulence,  than  from  any  former  battle :
For  the  Tyrrhenians  were,  even  then,  a  luxurious  and  ex¬
pen  five  people,  both  at  home,  and  in  the  field,  and  carried
with  them,  befides  necefiary  things,  implements  of  pleafure,
and  luxury  of  all  kinds,  curioufly  wrought,  and  inriched.

XVII.  The  following  days,  the  Veientes,  now  broken
with  their  misfortunes,  fent  the  moft  ancient  of  their  citi¬
zens,  with  the  enfigns  of  fuppliants,  to  the  conful  to  treat
of  a  peace  :  Thefe,  lamenting,  and  intreating,  and,  with
many  tears,  urging  every  motive,  that  could  move  compaf-
fion,  prevailed  on  him  to  let  them  fend  embafladors  to
Rome,  in  order  to  treat  with  the  fenate  concerning  peace  ;
and,  in  the  mean  time,  and  untill  the  embafladors  returned
with  the  fenate' s  anfwer,  to  do  no  injury  to  their  country.
And,  to  obtain  thefe  conceflions,  they  promifed  to  fupply
the  Roman  army  with  corn  for  two  months,  and  with  their
pay  for  fix,  as  the  conqueror  had  commanded.  The  conful,
after  he  had  received  the  contributions  agreed  on,  and  di¬
vided  them  among  his  men,  confented  to  the  truce.  The
fenate,  having  heard  the  embafladors,  and  received  the  letters

Vol.  IV.  F  of


Book  IX.


34  ROMAN  ANTI  QTJ  I  T I E  S  OF

of  the  conful,  in  which  he  earneftly  defired,  and  recom¬
mended  to  them  to  put  an  end  to  the  war  with  the  1  yr-
rhenians  as  foon  as  pofiible,  came  to  a  refolution  to  grant
them  peace,  as  the  enemy  had  defired;  and  that  Lucius
Aemilius,  the  conful,  fhould  fettle  the  terms  of  that  peace
in  fuch  a  manner,  as  he  fhould  think  fit.  The  conful,  having
received  this  anfwer,  concluded  a  peace  with  the  Vcientesr
with  greater  lenity  to  the  conquered,  than  advantage  to  the
conquerors  :  For  he  neither  took  from  them  any  part  of
their  country,  nor  impofed  any  further  contributions  on
them,  nor  compelled  them  to  give  hoftages,  as  a  fecurity  for
the  performance  of  their  agreement.  This  proceeding  ex-
pofed  him  to  great  cenfure,  and  was  the  occafion  of  his  not
receiving  from  the  fenate  the  reward  due  to  his  fuccefs :
For,  when  he  requefted  the  triumph,  they  oppofed  it,  and
objected  to  him  the  arrogance  he  had  been  guilty  of  in
making  the  laft  treaty,  which  he  had  concluded  without
their  concurrence  :  But,  left  he  fhould  think  this  oppofition
proceeded  from  anger,  or  contumely,  they  ordered  him  to
march  with  his  army  againft  the  Volfci  to  the  afiiftance  of
his  collegue,  giving  him,  by  that  means,  an  opportunity,  if
he  fucceeded  in  that  war  (for  he  was  a  very  brave  man)  of
extinguishing  their  refentment  for  his  former  errors.  But
Aemilius,  exafperated  at  this  difgrace,  inveighed,  violently,
againft  the  fenate  in  the  afiembly  of  the  people,  accufing
them  of  being  difpleafed  that  the  war  againft  the  Tyrrhenians
was  ended  ;  and  this,  he  faid,  proceeded  from  their  contempt
of  the  poor,  and  from  an  infidious  defign  againft  them,  left,

when


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  35

when  freed  from  foreign  wars,  they  fhould  demand  the
performance  of  their  promifes  concerning  the  divifion  of  the
lands,  with  which  they  had  been  amufed  by  them  for  fo
many  years.  After  he  had  gratified  his  ungovernable  re-
fentment  by  laying  himfelf  out  in  thefe,  and  the  like  re¬
proaches  againft  the  patricians,  he,  not  only,  difbanded  the
army  he  himfelf  had  commanded,  but  fent  for  the  forces,
that  lay  incamped  in  the  territories  of  the  Aequi  under  the
command  of  Furius,  the  proconful,  and  difmiffed  them  like-
wife  :  By  which,  he  adminifired  a  frefh  occafion  to  the
tribunes  to  accufe  the  fenate  in  the  affemblies  of  the  people,
and  to  fow  diffenfion  between  the  poor,  and  the  rich.

•  XVIII.  Thefe  confuls  were  fucceeded  by  Caius  Horatius,
and  Titus  Menenius,  in  the  feventy  fixth  Olympiad,  at  which
Scamander  of  Mitylene  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium,
Phaedon  being  archon  at  Athens.  Thefe  were,  at  firft,
hindered  from  performing  the  fun&ions  of  their  magifiracy
by  a  popular  tumult,  the  people  being  exafperated,  and  not
buffering  any  public  affair  to  be  tranfa&ed,  till  there  was  a
diftribution  made  of  the  public  lands.  But,  afterwards,  thefe
commotions,  and  difturbances  gave  way  to  neceffity,  and
the  people  came  in,  voluntarily,  to  be  inrolled  :  For  the
eleven  nations  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  which  had  not  been
comprifed  in  the  peace,  holding  a  general  aflembly,  accufed
the  Veientes  for  having  put  an  end  to  the  war  with  the
Romans  without  the  general  confent  of  the  nation,  and  de-
fired  they  would  do  one  of  thefe  two  things,  either  cancel
the  agreement  they  had  made  with  the  Romans,  or  make

F  2  war


36  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

war  againft  the  Tyrrhenians  in  conjun&ion  with  the  former.

°  On  the  other  fide,  the  Veientes  transferred  the  accufation
upon  the  neceflity  they  had  been  under  to  make  peace,  and
defired  the  aflembly  to  confider  by  what  means  they  might
break  it  with  decency.  Upon  this,  one  of  the  aflembly  fug-
gefted  this  expedient  to  them,  which  was,  to  complain  of
the  erecting  thefortrefs  of  Cremera  to  annoy  them,  and  that
the  Romans  had  not  withdrawn  the  garrifon  from  thence :
Then,  to  perfuade  them  to  evacuate  the  place;  and,  if  they
refufed,  to  befiege  it,  and  make  that  enterprife  the  beginning
of  the  war.  Thefe  points  being  fettled,  they  left  the  aflembly ;
and,  not  long  after,  the  Veientes  fent  embafladors  to  the
Fabii  to  demand  the  fortrefs ;  and  all  Tyrrhenia  was  in
arms.  The  Romans,  being  informed  of  thefe  things  by  the
Fabii,  refolved  that  both  the  confuls  ihould  take  the  field  ;
one  to  command  in  the  war,  that  was  coming  upon  them
from  Tyrrhenia;  and  the  other  to  profecute  That,  which
was, 'already,  begun  with  the  Volfci.  Horatius,  therefore,
marched  againft  the  Volfci  with  two  legions,  and  a  fufficient
number  of  their  allies :  And  Menenius  was  preparing  to
march  againft  the  Tyrrhenians  with  the  fame  number  of
forces :  But,  while  he  was  making  his  preparations,  and
lofing  time,  the  fortrefs  of  Cremera  was  taken,  and  the
family  of  the  Fabii  deftroyed.  There  are  two  accounts
concerning  the  misfortune,  that  befell  thefe  perfons  :  one,
lefs  probable  ;  the  other,  coming  nearer  to  the  truth  :  I
fhall  give  them  both,  as  I  have  received  them.


XIX.


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HAL  ICARNAS.SENSIS.  37

XIX.  Some  fay  that,  at  the  time  appointed  for  a  cufto-
mary  facrifice  peculiar  to  the  Fabian  family,  they  went  out
of  the  fortrefs,  attended  with  a  few  clients,  to  perform  this
facriiice;  and  advanced  without  ordering  the  roads  to  be
vifited,  or  marching  in  a  regular  manner  under  their  enfigns,
but  negligently,  and  unguarded,  as  in  time  of  peace,  and  as
if  they  were  going  through  the  territories  ot  their  allies:
And  that  the  Tyrrhenians,  being  previoufly  informed  of
their  defign  to  go  out  of  the  fortrefs,  placed  one  part  of
their  army  in  ambufh  upon  the  road,  and  followed  them,
foon  after,  with  the  other  in  good  order  ;  and,  when  the
Fabii  came  near  the  ambufh,  the  Tyrrhenians,  who  were
placed  there,  difcovered  themfelves,  and  attacked  them,
fome  in  front,  and  others  in  flank;  and,  not  long  after,  the
reft  of  the  Tyrrhenian  army  fell  upon  their  rear ;  and,  incom-
pafling  them  on  all  fides,  they  overwhelmed  them  with  a
fhower  of  ftones,  arrows,  darts,  and  javelins,  and  put  them
all  to  death.  This  account  appears  to  me  the  leaft  probable:
For  it  cannot  either  be  fuppofed  that  fo  many  perfons  actually
upon  duty,  would  have  ventured  to  return  from  the  camp  to
the  city  on  account  of a  facrifice  without  leave  from  the  fenate,
when  this  facrifice  might  have  been  performed  even  by  others
of  the  fame  family,  who  were  more  advanced  in  years ;  or,  if
they  were  all  at  Cremera,  and  no  part  of  the  Fabian  family  left
at  home,  was  it  probable  that  all,  who  garrifoned  the  fortrefs,
fhould  abandon  it ;  fince,  if  three,  or  lour  of  them  had  re¬
turned  to  Rome,  they  would  have  been  enow  to  perform
the  facrifice  for  the  whole  family  :  For  thefe  reafons,

there-


3S  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

therefore,  to  me  this  account  does  not  feem  to  be  cre¬
dible.

XX.  The  other,  relating  to  the  deftrucfion  of  the  Fabii,
and  the  taking  of  the  fortrefs,  which,  in  my  opinion,  comes
nearer  to  the  truth,  is  this  :  As  they  went  out,  frequently,
to  pillage  the  country,  and  advanced  ftill  further  as  their
fuccefs  encouraged  them,  the  Tyrrhenians  aflembled  a
numerous  army,  and  incamped  in  the  neighbourhood,  un¬
perceived  by  the  enemy  :  Then,  fending  out  of  their  ftrong
places,  flocks  of  fheep,  herds  of  oxen,  and  ftuds  of  mares,
in  appearance  to  pafture,  they  allured  them  with  thefe :
Upon  which,  the  garrifon,  coming  out,  feized  the  herdfmen,
and  drove  away  the  cattle.  The  Tyrrhenians  doing  this
often,  and  drawing  the  enemy  ftill  further  from  their  camp,
after  they  had  extinguifhed  in  them  all  regard  to  their
fecurity  by  inticing  them  with  a  conftant  booty,  they,  in  the
night,  placed  ambufcades  in  proper  places,  and  others  pof-
fefled  themfelves  of  the  eminences,  that  commanded  the
plains.  And,  the  next  day,  fending  fome  armed  men,  as
if  defigned  for  a  guard  to  the  herdfmen,  they  drove  out  a
great  number  of  herds  from  their  fortrefles.  As  foon  as  the
Fabii  had  intelligence  that,  if  they  pafled  over  the  neigh¬
bouring  hills,  which  they  might  foon  do,  they  would  find
the  plain  covered  with  cattle  of  all  forts,  and  no  fufficient
guard  to  defend  them,  they  went  out  of  the  fortrefs,  leaving
a  competent  garrifon  therein  :  And,  marching  with  Ipeed,
and  alacrity,  they  foon  came  to  the  place,  and  prefented
themfelves  before  the  guards  of  the  cattle  in  good  order  :

Thefe


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  39

Thefe  never  ftaid  to  be  attacked,  but  fled  immediately.
And  the  Fabii  thinking  themfelves  now  fecure,  made  the
herdfmen  prifoners,  and  carried  off  the  cattle.  In  the  mean
time,  the  Tyrrhenians,  riflng  up  from  their  ambufcadesy
appeared  in  many  places,  and  fell  upon  them  on  all  fides.
The  greatefl:  part  of  the  Romans,  being  difperfed,  and  un¬
able  to  aflift  one  another,  were  killed  upon  the  fpot  :  But
thofe  who  were  in  a  body,  endeavoured  to  gain  fome  fecure
place  ;  and,  haftening  to  the  hills,  fell  into  another  ambuf-
cade,  that  lay  concealed  in  the  woods,  and  vallies.  Here  a
fharp  battle  was  fought,  and  great  was  the  daughter  on  both
fldes :  However,  the  Romans  beat  thefe  alfo;  and,  having
filled  the  valley  with  dead  bodies,  ran  up  to  the  top  of  a  hill
not  eafy  to  be  taken ;  where  they  pafled  the  night  in  want
of  every  thing.

XXL  The  day  after,  thofe,  who  had  been  left  to  guard
the  fortrefs,  being  informed  of  the  misfortune  of  their  com¬
panions,  that  the  greatefl:  part  of  the  army  had  been  de¬
ft  royed  in  their  purluit  of  plunder,  and  that  the  braveft  of
them  were  befieged,  and  fhut  up  on  a  defert  mountain,  and,
if  not  prefently  relieved,  would  foon  be  taken  through  the
want  of  provifions,  went  out  in  all  hafte,  leaving  very  few
of  their  men  to  guard  the  fortrefs.  Thefe  the  Tyrrhenians,
fallying  out  from  their  ftrong  places,  intercepted  before  they
could  join  their  companions ;  and,  furrounding  them,  they,
at  laft,  put  them  all  to  death,  after  they  had  performed
many  brave  aftions.  Not  long  after,  thofe  alfo,  who  had
poflefled  themfelves  of  the  hill,  being,  opprefled  both  with

hunger*


Book  IX.


40  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

hunger,  and  third,  refolded  to  charge  the  enemy :  And  a
few  ingaging  with  many,  they  continued  fighting  from
morning  to  night,  and  made  fo  great  a  daughter  of  the
enemy,  that  the  heaps  of  dead  bodies,  difperfed  in  many
places,  were  a  hindrance  to  them  in  fighting.  By  this  time,
the  Tyrrhenians  had  loft  above  a  third  part  of  their  army  ;
and,  fearing  to  lofe  the  reft,  gave  the  fignal  for  a  fhort  cef-
fation  of  arms ;  and,  fending  heralds  to  the  Romans,  offered
them  their  lives,  and  a  free  paffage  to  Rome,  if  they  would
lay  down  their  arms,  and  evacuate  the  fortrefs :  But  they
refilling  thefe  conditions,  and  chufing  a  glorious  death,  the
Tyrrhenians  renewed  the  fight  by  turns,  and  no  longer  clofed
with  them,  but  affailed  them  with  a  (Lower  of  javelins,  and
ftones  at  a  diftance,  which  fell  upon  them  as  thick  as  hail :
The  Romans,  forming  deep  files,  rufhed  upon  the  enemy,
who  did  not  ftand  their  ground,  while  the  others  fupported
themfelves  under  the  many  wounds  they  had  received  from
thofe,  who  flood  round  them.  When  feveral  of  their  fwords
were  become  ufelefs,  fome  being  blunted,  and  others  broken,
the  borders  of  their  fhields  hacked  in  pieces,  and  they  them¬
felves  for  the  mod  part  bloodlefs,  and  overwhelmed  with
mifiive  weapons,  and  their  limbs  relaxed  through  a  multitude
of  wounds,  the  Tyrrhenians  defpifed  them,  and  came  to  clofe
fight.  And  the  Romans,  running  furioufly  at  them  like
wild  beads,  grafped  their  fpears,  and  broke  them  ;  and,
laying  hold  on  the  edge  of  their  fwords,  wrenched  them  out
of  their  hands  ;  then,  twining  round  their  bodies,  threw
them  to  the  ground,  and  fell  with  them,  thus  continuing

the


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  41
the  fight  with  greater  rage,  than  ftrength :  So  that,  the
enemy,  aftonifhed  at  their  perfeverance,  and  terrified  at  the
fury  they  had  borowed  from  defpair,  ventured,  no  longer,
to  fight  with  them  hand  to  hand ;  but,  retiring  again,  they
all  at  once  threw  at  them,  flicks,  ftones,  and  every  thing
elfe  they  could  meet  with ;  and,  at  laft,  overwhelmed  them
with  the  multitude  of  miflive  weapons.  After  they  had
put  them  to  death,  they  ran  to  the  fortrefs,  carrying  with
them  the  heads  of  the  moll  confiderable  perfons,  and  not
doubting  but  they  fhould  make  the  garrifon  prifoners  at
their  firft  appearance ;  however,  this  attempt  did  not  fuc-
ceed  according  to  their  expectation:  For  the  men,  who
had  been  left  there,  emulating  the  glorious  death  of  their
friends,  and  relations,  came  out  of  the  fortrefs,  though  very
few  in  number ;  and,  after  fighting  a  confiderable  time,  were
all  put  to  death,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  others :  And,
when  the  Tyrrhenians  took  the  place,  they  did  not  find  a
man  in  it.  This  account  appears  to  me  much  more  credible
than  the  former  :  However,  both  of  them  are  to  be  found
in  Roman  hiftories  of  good  authority.

XXII.  But  there  is  a  circumftance  added  by  fome  to  this
relation,  which,  though  13  neither  true,  nor  probable,  but
formed  by  the  vulgar  from  fome  report,  I  have  not  thought

13-  Ou7«  ov,  »7a  witavov.  I  find  to  him;  and  fhall  only  add,  that  it  is
by  a  note  in  M.  *  *  *,  that 0  Perifonius  a  very  dangerous  thing  for  modern
is  of  a  different  opinion  from  our  writers,  with  fewer  materials,  and  lefs
author  in  this  *refpe£t :  As  I  neither  parts,  to  contradict  ancient  authors  of
have,  nor  can  get  a  fight  of,  Perifonius  acknowledged  authority,
in  the  country,  I  muff  refer  the  reader

6  Apimad.  Hill.  c.  5.

G


Vol.  IV.


proper


42  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Hook  IX.

proper  to  pafs  by  without  examination :  For  it  is  faid  by
fome  that,  after  the  three  hundred  and  fix  Fabii  were  flain,
there  was  only  one  young  fon  left  of  the  whole  family  :
Which  is  a  thing,  not  only,  improbable,  but,  even,  impof-
fible ;  fince  it  is  not  poffible  that  all  the  Fabii,  who  went  out
of  Rome  to  the  fortrefs,  fhould  have  been  all  childlefs,  and  un¬
married  :  For  there  was  an  old  law  among  the  Romans,  that
obliged  all  of  a  proper  age,  both  to  marry,  and  to  bring  up
all  their  children :  And  the  Fabii  would  not  have  been  the
only  perfons  to  violate  a  law,  which  had  been  obferved  by
their  anceftors  to  their  time.  But,  if  any  one  would  allow
even  That,  yet  he  could  never  grant  this  alfo,  that  none  of
them  had  any  brothers,  who  were  then  children.  Thefe
things  refemble  fables,  and  theatrical  fictions.  Befides,
would  not  as  many  of  their  fathers  as  were  ftill  of  an  age
to  beget  children,  after  fo  great  a  defolation  of  their  family,
both  willingly,  and  unwillingly,  have  begotten  other  children,
to  the  end  that  neither  the  facrifices  of  their  anceftors  might
be  abandoned,  nor  fo  great  a  reputation  of  the  family  ex-
tinguifhed  ?  I+But,  if  none  even  of  their  fathers  were  left,
and  the  whole  family  was  included  in  thofe  three  hundred
and  fix  perfons,  yet  is  it  impoffibte  that  none  of  thefe  fhould
have  left  either  infants  behind  them,  wives  with  child,  or

Ei  /a?v  aoa,  «.<?g  Trails?  avJuv  t kuv  that  it  is  impoflible  none  of  the  Fabii
t\H7rov1o.  I  am  furprifed  that  none  of  fhould  have  left  either  infant  children,
the  tranfiators  faw  the  abfurdity  of  wives  with  child,  brothers,  cr fathers:
this  reasoning  ;  that  is,  if  the  text  is  Thefe  laft  words,  therefore,  I  have
not  corrupted,  which  I  much  fufpcd.  omitted  in  the  tranOation.  Le  Jay
Our  author  firft  fuppofes  that  none  of  has  left  them  out  in  both  places,
their  fathers  were  left,  and  then  fays


brothers


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  43

brothers  too  young  to  bear  arms.  When,  therefore,  I  confider
this circumftance  in  the  lightl  have  mentioned,  I  donot  think
it  true:  But  this  I  think  true;  that,  of  the  three  brothers,
Caefo,  Marcus,  and  Quintus,  who  had  been  confuls  feven
years  fucceffively,  Marcus  alone  left  a  fon,  who  was  then  an
infant ;  and  nothing  hinders  this  fon  from  being  the  fame,
who  is  faid  to  have  been  left  of  the  Fabian  family:  And,
becaufe  this  fon,  when  he  came  to  be  a  man,  was  the  only
famous,  and  illuftrious  perfon  of  thofe  who  furvived,  the
generality  of  mankind  entertained  this  opinion  that  he  was
the  only  one  left  of  the  Fabian  family ;  not,  that  no  other
was  left,  but  none  like  the  Fabii ;  and  they  judged  of  their
relation  to  that  family  by  virtue,  not  birth.  But  I  have  faid
enough  of  thefe  things.

XXIII.  After 'the  Tyrrhenians  had  put  thefe  men  to
death,  and  made  themfelves  mailers  of  the  fortrefs  of  Cre-
mera,  they  marched  againft  the  other  army  of  the  Romans :
For  Menenius,  one  of  the  confuls,  lay  incamped  not  far  off
in  an  infecure  poll :  And,  when  the  family  of  the  Fabii,
and  their  clients  were  cut  off,  he  was  only  thirty  ftadia  from
the  place,  where  that  misfortune  happened  :  Which  gave
many  people  reafon  to  believe  that,  though  acquainted  with
the  dillrefs  of  the  Fabii,  he  had  taken  no  care  of  them,  from
the  envy  he  bore  to  their  virtue,  and  glory.  For  which
reafon,  when  he  was,  afterwards,  brought  to  his  trial  by  the
tribunes,  this  was  the  chief  caufe  of  his  condemnation  :  For
the  Roman  people  greatly  lamented  the  lofs  of  fo  many
brave  men;  and  were  fevere  and  inexorable  to  all,  whom  they

G  2  fulpecled


Book  IX.


44  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

fufpe&ed  to  have  occafioned  their  calamity.  They  look  upon
the  day,  oil  which  that  defeat  happened,  as  black  and  in-
aufpicious;  and  will  begin  no  good  work  on  that  day,
efteeming  the  misfortune  of  it  as  ominous.  When  the
Tyrrhenians  advanced  near  the  Romans,  and  obferved  the
fituation  of  their  camp,  which  lay  under  the  fide  of  a  hill,
they  defpifed  the  inexperience  of  their  general,  and  willingly
laid  hold  on  the  advantage  prefented  to  them  by  Fortune  :
They,  prefently,  marched  up  the  oppofite  fide  of  the  hill
with  their  horfe,  and  gained  the  fummit  without  oppofition.
Then,  having  poftefied  themfelves  of  the  eminence,  that  com¬
manded  the  camp  of  the  Romans,  they  flood  to  their  arms,  fe-
cured  the  afcent  of  the  reft  of  their  army,  and  formed  their  own
camp,  which  they  fortified  with  high  palifades,  and  a  deep
ditch.  If,  therefore,  Menenius,  after  he  was  fenfible  of  the
advantage  he  had  given  the  enemy,  had  corrected  his  error,
and  removed  his  army  to  a  more  fecure  poft,  he  had  a&ed
wifely ;  but,  being  afhamed  to  be  thought  to  have  erred,
and  continuing  obftinate  to  all,  who  advifed  him  to  alter  his
meafures,  he  drew  upon  himfelf  a  misfortune,  that  defervedly
covered  him  with  ignominy  :  For,  as  the  enemy  were,  con-
ftantly,  fending  out  detachments  from  thofe  places,  that
commanded  the  camp  of  the  Romans,  they  had  great  ad¬
vantages  in  furprifing  the  convoys,  which  the  merchants
were  bringing  thither,  and  in  attacking  their  men,  as  they
went  out  for  forage,  or  water :  And,  at  laft,  the  conful
had  it  not  in  his  power  to  chufe  either  the  time,  or  place
of  combat ;  which  feems  to  be  a  great  argument  of  the

in-


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNA  SSENSIS.  45
incapacity  of  a  general  :  Whereas,  the  Tyrrhenians  had  the
command  of  both.  And,  even  then,  Menenius  would  not
fuffer  the  army  to  remove  from  thence  ;  but,  leading  out  his
men,  he  drew  them  up  with  a  defign  to  fight,  in  contempt
of  all  who  fuggefted  advantageous  counfels.  The  Tyrrhe¬
nians,  looking  upon  the  folly  of  this  general  as  a  great  hap-
pinefs,  came  down  from  their  camp,  being  double  in  number
to  the  enemy.  When  they  ingaged,  there  was  a  great
{laughter  of  the  Romans,  who  were  unable  to  keep  their
ranks  :  For  the  Tyrrhenians  forced  them  out  of  the  line,
as  having,  not  only,  the  advantage  of  the  ground,  but,  alfo.
That  of  being  pufhed  forward  with  violence  by  thofe,  who
flood  behind  them ;  for  their  army  was  drawn  up  with  a
great  depth.  The  moll  confiderable,  therefore,  of  the  cen¬
turions  being  flain,  the  reft  of  the  Roman  army  gave  way,
and  fled  to  the  camp :  The  others  purfued  them,  took  their
enligns,  and  made  themfelves  mafters  both  of  their  wounded,
and  dead:  Then,  fhutting  them  up  in  their  camp,  they
befieged  them  there ;  and,  continuing  the  attack  of  it  all  the
reft  of  the  day,  and  even  the  following  night,  they  poftefled
themfelves  of  the  camp,  which  the  Romans  had  abandoned,
and  took  many  prifoners,  and  a  great  quantity  of  effects :
For  thofe  who  fled,  had  not  been  able  to  carry  off  any
thing,  but  were  glad  to  fave  themfelves,  many  not  keeping
even  their  arms.

XXIV.  When  they  heard  at  Rome  that  their  army  was
deftroyed,  and  the  camp  taken  (for  the  firft,  who  had  laved
themfelves  in  the  general  defeat,  arrived  there  while  it  was

yet

*


Book  IX


46  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

yet  night)  they  were  greatly  alarmed,  as  may  well  be  ima¬
gined  :  And,  expecting  the  enemy  every  moment  at  their
gates,  they  took  arms ;  and  fome  lined  the  walls ;  others
ported  themfelves  before  the  gates,  and  others  took  pofleflion
of  the  eminences  in  the  city :  The  inhabitants  ran  in  diforder
through  every  ftreet,  and  a  confufed  cry  was  heard:  The  tops
of  the  houfes  were  covered  with  the  people  of  every  family,
prepared  to  defend  themfelves,  and  annoy  the  enemy :
The  fires  they  made  were  fo  clofe  to  one  another,  it  ‘being
in  the  night,  and  dark,  and  fuch  a  number  of  torches  were
lighted  in  the  rooms,  and  on  the  tops  of  the  houfes,  that,  at
a  diftance,  it  feemed  one  continued  blaze,  and  had  the  ap*-
pearance  of  a  town  on  fire.  And,  if  the  Tyrrhenians,  at
that  time,  had  defpifed  the  booty  they  found  in  the  camp,
and  followed  the  Romans  clofe  when  they  fled,  the  whole
army,  which  had  been  fent  againft  them,  w7ould  have  been
cut  off* :  But,  inftead  of  that,  they  fell  to  plunder  the  camp
of  every  thing,  which  had  been  left  there,  and  took  their
reft :  By  which,  they  deprived  themfelves  of  the  glory  of  a
great  a&ion.  The  next  day,  they  marched  towards  Rome ;
and,  when  they  were  about  fixteen  ftadia  from  it,  they  pof-
feffed  themfelves  of  a  hill  called  Janiculum,  from  whence
the  city  may  be  feen :  And,  fending  detachments  from
thence,  they  harraffed  the  territories  of  the  Romans  without
control!,  holding  them  in  great  contempt,  till  the  other
conful  Horatius  appeared  with  the  army,  which  had  been
employed  againft  the  Volfci.  Then  the  Romans  thought
themfelves  fecure  ;  and,  arming  the  youth  that  was  in  the

city.


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A S S  EN  S  I  S.  47

city,  they  took  the  field :  And,  having,  in  the  firft  battle,
which  was  fought  at  the  diftance  of  eight  ftadia  from  the
city  near  the  temple  of  Hope,  overcome  the  enemy,  and
beaten  them  out  of  the  field  ;  and,  after  that,  fought  them
again  near  the  gate  called  Collina,  the  Tyrrhenian  army
being  more  numerous  than  the  former,  and  behaved  them-
felves  with  great  bravery,  they  recovered  from  their  fear.
And  thus  ended  this  fumrner.

XXV.  The  following  year,  the  confuls,  Spurius  Servilius,
and  Aulus  Virginius,  both  men  of  experience  in  war,  entered
upon  their  magiftracy  in  15  the  month  of  June,  about  the
fumrner  folftice:  To  whom  the  Tyrrhenian  war,  however
confiderable  and  difficult,  appeared  advantageous  in  com-


IIf£»  t as  B'cgivotg  txahifoc

t(A 1 uyvof.  So  this  fentence  ftands  in  all
the  editions,  andmanufcripts ;  but  this
cannot,  poffibly,  be  the  true  reading,
becaufe  all  the  world  knows  that  the
fumrner  folftice  falls  on  the  twenty
firft  of  June,  and  not  in  the  month
Sextilis,  Auguft.  Sylburgius,  in  his
note  upon  this  paflage,  which  both
the  French  translators  have  rendered
in  their  language,  without  mentioning
his  name,  thinks  we  ought  to  read

y.yiVoi :  But  this  is  writing  for  our  au¬
thor  rather  than  correfting  an  error  in
his  tranfcribers.  I  would,  therefore,
make  a  lefs  violent  alteration  in  the
text,  and  read  a m*,  inftead  of  c-ef-nAty,
and  the  difficulty  is  fofved.  Le  Jay
has  explained,  or  endeavoured  to  ex¬
plain,  this  paffage  by  the  prettied:


conceit  imaginable.  He  has,  firft,
rendered  it,  vers  les  jours  Us  plus  chaux
de  Pefte  an  mois  d'Aouft ;  and  then  fup-
ports  this  tranflation  by  the  following
realbning,  which  is  fo  curious,  that  I
am  afraid  of  disfiguring  feme  beauty
in  it,  if  I  give  it  in  any  words  but  his
own  ;  Ce  qui  pent  encore  favorifer  l* in¬
terpretation  que  je  donne  a  ce  pajfage,  eft
P  adverb  e^ccAi?  a  joint  a  FadjeffifStgivxsy
qui  ne  pent  fignifier  autre  chofe  que  tres-
chaux,  ce  qui  convient  parfaitement  an
mois  d'Aoufty  pendant  lequel  les  plus
grandes  chaleurs  fe  font  fentir.  Dans  le
fyfteme  que  je  pr ends  icy  il  faut  entendre
le  terme  Grec  tgcTryi,.  non  pas  de  la  con-
verfion  annuelh  du  foleil ,  du  Midy  an
Septentrion ,  et  du  Septentrion  an  Midy,
mats  la  converjion  journaliere  de  P  Orient
a  P Occident ,  et  de  P Occident  a  P  Orient.


4S  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

pari  ion  of  the  civil  diforders :  For  the  land  having  been
unfown  the  former  winter,  by  reafon  of  the  camp,  which
the  enemy  had  formed  upon  the  neighbouring  hill,  and  the
continual  excurfions  they  had  made  from  thence ;  and  the
merchants,  no  longer,  importing  any  provifions  from  abroad,
a  great  fcarcity  of  com  was  felt  at  Rome,  which  was  then
full,  not  only,  of  the  conftant  inhabitants,  but,  alfo,  of  fuch,
as  had  retired  thither  from  the  country  :  For  the  number
of  the  citizens,  who  were  men  grown,  amounted  to  above
one  hundred  and  ten  thoufand,  as  appeared  by  the  laft
cenfus ;  and  the  women,  children,  domeftics,  the  foreign
merchants  and  artificers,  did  not  amount  to  lefs  than  treble
the  number  of  the  citizens ;  it  not  being  lawful  for  any  of
the  Romans  either  to  follow  the  bufinefs  of  a  merchant,  or
to  exercife  the  trade  of  an  artificer.  To  this  multitude  it
was  not  eafy  to  adminifter  comfort,  as  they  were  exafperated
at  this  misfortune,  and  gathering  together  in  the  forum,
clamouring  againft  the  magiftrates,  running  in  a  body  to  the
houfes  of  the  rich,  and  endeavouring  to  feize  the  provifions,
that  were  laid  up  there,  without  paying  for  them.  In  the
mean  time,  the  tribunes  aflembled  the  people;  and,  by
accufing  the  patricians  of  contriving  always  fome  mifchief
ngainft  the  poor,  and  calling  them  the  authors  of  all  the
evils,  which  had  ever  happened  according  to  the  courfe  of
fortune,  whofe  attacks  human  prudence  can  neither  forefee,
nor  guard  againft,  they  infpired  them  with  infolence,  and
refentment.  The  confuls,  oppreffed  with  thefe  evils,  fent
proper  perfons  with  large  fums  of  money  to  the  neighbouring

parts


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  49

parts  to  purchafe  corn  ;  and,  having  ordered  all  thofe,  who
had  laid  up  more  than  was  fufficient  for  the  moderate  fub-
fiftance  of  their  families,  to  produce  their  corn,  they  fixed
a  reafonable  price  on  it.  By  thefe,  and  many  other  the  like
expedients,  they  put  a  flop  to  the  diforders  of  the  poor,  and
had  leifure  to  return  to  the  preparations  for  the  war.

XXVI.  In  the  mean  time,  the  provifions  they  expected
from  abroad  being  delayed,  and  thofe  of  every  fort  in  the
city  confumed,  and  there  being  no  other  means  of  averting
thefe  evils,  but  to  chufe  one  of  thefe  two  things,  either  to
hazard  an  ingagement  with  all  their  forces,  in  order  to  drive
the  enemy  out  of  their  country  ;  or,  by  fhutting  themfelves
up  within  their  walls,  to  perifh  both  by  famine,  and  fedition ;
they  chofe  the  lead  of  thefe  evils,  and  refolved  to  meet
That,  which  arofe  from  the  enemy.  Marching,  therefore,
out  of  the  city  with  their  forces,  they  pafled  the  river  about
midnight  on  rafts ;  and,  before  it  was  broad  day,  incamped
near  the  enemy.  The  day  after,  they  came  out  of  their
camp,  and  drew  up  their  army  in  order  of  battle ;  Virginius
commanding  the  right  wing,  and  Servilius  the  left.  The
Tyrrhenians,  feeing  them  prepared  for  the  ingagement,
greatly  rejoiced,  from  an  expectation  that,  if  this  battle
fucceeded  to  their  with,  they  fhould  fubvert  the  Roman
empire,  as  they  knew  that  all  the  bed  of  their  forces  were
to  ingage  upon  this  occafion,  and  entertained  hopes  (in
which  there  was  great  prefumption)  of  defeating  them  with
eafe,  fince  they  had  overcome  the  troops  of  Menenius,  when
thefe  fought  upon  a  diladvantageous  ground.  The  armies,

Vol.  IV.  H  there-


5o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

therefore,  ingaging,  a  fharp  and  long  battle  infued,  and  the
Tyrrhenians,  after  having  killed  many  of  the  Romans,  and
loft  many  more  of  their  own  men,  retreated  leifurely  to  their
camp.  Upon  this,  Virginius,  who  commanded  the  right
wing,  would  not  fuffer  his  men  to  purfue  the  enemy  ;  but
contented  himfelf  with  the  advantage  he  had  gained  :
However,  Servilius,  who  commanded  the  other  wing,  pur-
fued  thofe  on  his  fide,  and  followed  them  a  great  way :
When  he  came  to  the  rifing  ground,  the  Tyrrhenians  faced
about ;  and,  being  afiifted  by  thofe  in  the  camp,  they
charged  the  Romans:  Thefe,  after  a  fhort  refiftance,  turned
their  backs ;  and,  being  purfued  down  the  hill,  and  dif-
perftng  themfelves,  many  were  flain.  When  Virginius  was
informed  of  the  condition  of  the  left  wing,  he  advanced  with
all  his  forces  in  order  of  battle ;  and,  wheeling  to  the  left,
marched  along  the  ftde  of  the  hill  :  Then,  being  in  the  rear
of  thofe,  who  were  purfuing  the  Romans,  he  left  a  part  of
his  forces  there,  to  prevent  any  relief  from  the  camp,  and
himfelf  attacked  the  enemy  with  the  reft.  In  the  mean
time,  the  troops  under  Servilius,  encouraged  by  the  arrival
of  their  companions,  faced  about,  and,  ftanding  their  ground,
ingaged.  The  Tyrrhenians,  being  thus  furrounded  by  both,
and  unable  either  to  advance,  by  reafon  of  thofe  who  at¬
tacked  them  in  front,  or  to  retire  to  their  camp,  by  reafon
of  thofe  who  charged  them  in  the  rear,  fought  with  greater
bravery  than  fuccefs,  and  were  almoft  all  cut  in  pieces.  As  the
victory,  which  the  Romans  had  obtained,  was  a  melancholy
vidory,  and  the  event  of  the  battle  not  altogether  fortunate,

A  ,  the


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  5r

the  confuls  incamped  before  the  dead  bodies,  and  there
paffed  the  following  night.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Tyr¬
rhenians,  who  were  in  pofieflion  of  the  hill  Janiculum,  no
fuccours  coming  to  them  from  their  own  country,  refolved
to  abandon  the  fortrefs ;  and,  decamping  in  the  night,
marched  to  the  city  of  the  Veientes,  which  was  the  neareft
Tyrrhenian  city.  The  Romans  having  pofiefied  themfelves
of  their  camp,  took  all  the  baggage,  which  the  others  could
not  carry  away  with  them  in  their  flight,  and,  alfo,  many
of  their  wounded,  fome  of  whom  had  been  left  in  the  tents,
and  others  lay  fcattered  all  over  the  road :  For  thefe
underwent  the  fatigue  of  this  march  from  a  defire  of
returning  to  their  country,  and  fupported  it  beyond  their
ftrength  in  following  their  companions;  afterwards,  when
their  limbs  failed  them,  they  dropped  down  half  dead  :
Thefe,  the  Roman  horfe,  advancing  a  good  way  upon  the
road,  took  up.  And  no  enemy  appearing  after  this,  the
army  rafed  the  fortrefs,  and  entered  the  city  with  the  fpoils,
carrying  with  them  the  bodies  of  thofe,  who  had  been  flain
in  the  action ;  a  fight  that  drew  tears  from  all  the  citizens,
on  account  both  of  the  number,  and  valor  of  the  dead.
So  that,  the  people  did  not  think  proper  either  to  rejoice,
as  for  a  victory,  or  to  mourn,  as  for  a  great,  and  irreparable
calamity.  The  fenate  ordered  the  cuftomary  facrifices  to
be  offered  to  the  gods,  but  refufed  the  honor  of  a  triumph
to  the  confuls.  A  few  days  after,  the  city  was  fupplied  with
a  plenty  of  all  forts  of  provifions ;  fome  of  which  were  fent
by  the  embaffadors  employed  for  that  purpofe  by  the  public,

H  2  and


52  ROMAN  ANTI  QJU  I T I E  S  OF  BooklX.

and  others  imported  in  great  quantity  by  thofe,  who  ufed
to  carry  on  this  trade.  So  that,  all  the  citizens  enjoyed  the
fame  abundance  as  before.

XXVII.  The  foreign  wars  being  now  ended,  the  civil
diffenfion  was  renewed  by  the  tribunes,  who  were,  at  this
time,  railing  fre(h  diflurbances  among  the  people.  How¬
ever,  the  patricians,  by  oppofing  every  ftep  they  took,  de¬
feated  all  their  meafures,  except  That,  which  related  to
the  trial  of  Menenius,  the  late  conful,  which,  notwithstand¬
ing  all  their  endeavours,  it  was  not  in  their  power  to  pre¬
vent  :  So  that,  he  was  brought  to  his  trial  by  16  Quintus
Confidius,  and  Titus  Genucius,  two  of  the  tribunes;  and,
being  called  upon  to  give  an  account  of  his  conduct,  as
general  in  the  preceding  war,  the  event  of  which  had  been
neither  fortunate,  nor  honourable ;  and,  particularly,
charged  with  having  occafioned  the  deftru&ion  of  the
Fabii,  and  the  lofs  of  Cremera,  he  was  condemned  by  the
people  ;  who  paffed  judgement  upon  him  in  their  tribes,
a  great  majority  of  which  voted  againft  him,  though
he  was  the  fon  of  Agrippa  Menenius,  who  brought  home
the  people  after  their  feceffion,  and  reconciled  them  with
the  patricians,  whom  the  fenate,  after  his  death,  honoured
with  a  moft  magnificent  funeral  at  the  expence  of  the
public,  and  for  whom  the  Roman  matrons  mourned  a

l6*  Kovo-Jix.  p  Livy  calls  this  tribune  Quintilian  family,  Ko»1thwf,  which

Confidius.  This  reading  Sigonius,  hands  in  the  Greek  text,  were  patri-
in  his  note  upon  this  paffage  of  Livy,  cians,  and,  confequently,  incapable  of
fupports  with  this  reafon,  that  the  being  chofen  tribunes  of  the  people.

pj.ii.  c.  52.


whole


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENS  I  S.  53

whole  year,  laying  afide  their  purple,  and  gold.  However,
they  did  not  condemn  him  to  death,  but  only  impofed  a
fine  on  him,  which,  if  a  judgement  was  to  be  formed  of  it
by  the  manner  of  living,  that  prevails  at  this  time,  would
appear  ridiculous;  but,  to  the  men  of  that  age,  who  worked
with  their  own  hands,  and  aimed  at  no  more  than  the  ne-
ceflaries  of  life,  particularly  to  Menenius,  who  had  inherited
poverty  from  his  lather,  it  was  a  large,  and  heavy  fine,  as
it  amounted  to  17  two  thoufand  ajjes ;  the  as  was  a  brafs
coin  weighing  a  pound  :  So  that,  the  whole  fine  amounted
to  18  fixteen  talents  of  brafs  in  weight.  And  this  appeared
invidious  to  the  men  of  thofe  days ;  who,  in  order  to  redrefs  it,
abolifhed  all  pecuniary  fines,  changing  them  to  payments
in  fheep,  and  oxen,  and  limited,  even,  the  number  of  thefe
in  all  future  fines  to  be  impofed  upon  private  men  by  the
magiftrates.  From  this  condemnation  of  Menenius,  the
patricians  took  a  frefh  occafion  of  refentment  againft  the
people,  and  would  neither  fuffer  the  divifion  of  the  lands  to


I7i  A oi<r<?oicicov.  The  Roman
as,  at  this  time,  was  a  brafs  coin
weighing  a  pound.  And  ^  Livy,  like
our  author,  in  fpeaking  of  the  fine
impofed  on  Menenius,  fays  it  amount¬
ed  to  two  thoufand  afies,  or  pounds
of  brafs ;  duo  millia  aeris  damnato
multtam  edixerunt.  Arbuthnot  makes
the  as  to  amount  to  no  more  than
three  farthings  and  one  tenth  of  our
money  •,  confequently,  two  thoufand
alfes  will  make  no  more  than  61.  9 s.  2d.

l8*  ToiKoivluv  £KK<ziJex(X.  Cafaubon
has  a  note  upon  this  paffage,  which


M.  ***  has,  according  to  his  cuftom,
tranflated  without  acknowledging  his
obligation  to  him.  Cafaubon  fhews,
from  Hefychius  and  Suidas,  that  the
talent,  confidered  as  a  weight,  weighed
125  pounds:  So  that,  if  2000  be  di¬
vided  by  125,  the  quotient  will  be  16.
However,  it  muft  be  confidered  that
the  Roman  pound  confifted  only  of
1 2  Avoirdupois  ounces.  This  pound,
Arbuthnot  fays,  weighed  no  more  than
ten  ounces,  eighteen  penny  weight,
and  thirteen  grains,  five  fevenths.Troy*
weight.


iB.  ii.  c.  52.


proceed,


54  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

proceed,  nor  make  any  other  conceffion  in  their  favor.
And  it  was  not  long  before  the  people  themfelves  repented
of  their  having  condemned  him,  when  they  were  informed
of  his  death :  For,  from  that  time,  he  neither  came  into  com¬
pany,  nor  was  feen  in  any  public  place.  And,  when  he  had
it  in  his  power,  by  paying  his  fine,  not  to  be  excluded  from
any  public  employments  (for  many  of  his  friends  were  willing
to  pay  it)  he  would  not  accept  their  offer,  but  changed  his
fine  into  a  capital  punifhment ;  and,  flaying  at  home,  and
admitting  no  one,  died  through  deje&ion,  and  abftinence.
Thefe  were  the  tranfacfions  of  this  year.

XXVIII.  Publius  Valerius  Poplicola,  and  Caius  Nautius
being  confuls,  Spurius  Servilius,  another  patrician,  who  had
been  conful  the  former  year,  w^as  tried  for  his  life,  not  long
after  the  expiration  of  his  magistracy.  The  perfons,  who
cited  him  to  his  trial  before  the  people,  were  Lucius
Caedicius,  and  Titus  Statius,  two  of  the  tribunes,  who
called  upon  him  to  give  an  account,  not  of  any  crime,  but
of  fortune ;  becaufe,  in  the  battle  againft  the  Tyrrhenians,
he  had  pufhed  on  to  the  enemy’s  camp  with  greater  refo-
lution,  than  prudence ;  and,  being  purfued  at  once  by  all
who  were  in  the  camp,  he  had  loft  the  flower  of  the  youth.
The  patricians  looked  upon  this  trial,  as  the  moll  grievous
of  all  others  :  They  had  frequent  meetings,  in  which  they
expreffed  their  refentment ;  and  faid  they  had  every  thing
to  fear,  if  generals,  who  adled  with  refolution,  and  declined
no  danger,  were  to  be  accufed,  becaufe  Fortune  had  oppofed
their  defigns,  of  cowardice,  and  backwardnefs  by  thofe,  who

had


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  II ALI C ARN  A  S  S  E  N S  I  S.  55-
had  not  been  prefent  at  the  battle :  That,  if  their  generals
were  reflrained  from  inventing  new  flrategems,  their  liberty
of  a&ing  would  be  taken  away,  and  their  power  fubverted :
And  that  trials  of  this  kind  would,  infallibly,  produce  thefe
mifchiefs.  At  the  fame  time,  they  exhorted  the  people,  with
great  earneftnefs,  not  to  condemn  the  man;  telling  them,
they  would  do  great  prejudice  to  the  commonwealth,  if
they  punifhed  their  generals  for  being  unfortunate.  When
the  day  appointed  for  the  trial  was  come,  Lucius  Caedicius,
one  of  the  tribunes,  appeared,  and  accufed  Servilius  of
having,  through  his  folly,  and  inexperience  in  the  duty  of
a  general,  led  his  forces  to  manifeft  deftrudion,  and  loft  the
beft,  and  choicefl  troops  belonging  to  the  commonwealth  ;
and,  if  his  collegue  had  not,  prefently,  been  informed  of  the
misfortune,  and,  by  coming  up  with  his  forces  in  all  hafte,
flopped  the  progrefs  of  the  enemy,  and  faved  the  other
army,  nothing  could  have  hindered  them  from  being  all
cut  in  pieces,  and  the  commonwealth  from  lofing  half  the
number  of  her  citisens :  Having  faid  this,  he  produced  as
witnefles  all  the  centurions,  who  had  efcaped ;  and  fome  of
the  foldiers,  who,  in  order  to  obliterate  their  own  ignominy,
arifing  from  that  defeat,  and  flight,  were  willing  to  attribute
the  unfortunate  event  of  the  a&ion  to  their  general :  Then,
having  railed  great  compaflion  for  the  calamity  of  thofe,  who
had  loft  their  lives  upon  that  occafion,  exaggerated  the  defeat,
which  the  commonwealth  had  received,  and,  with  great
contempt  of  the  patricians,  infilled  upon  every  tiling  elfe,
which,  by  expofing  their  whole  order  to  envy,  was  fure  to


5 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

difcourage  all,  who  fhould  pretend  to  intercede  for  the  man,
he  gave  him  an  opportunity  of  making  his  defence.

XXIX.  This  being  granted,  Servilius  faid  :  “It  you  have
“  called  me  to  a  trial,  citizens,  and  detire  an  account  of  my
“  condud  in  the  command  of  the  army,  I  am  ready  to
a  make  my  defence :  But,  if  to  a  punifhment  already  de-
“  termined,  and  no  advantage  is  to  accrue  to  me  in  con-
“  vincing  you  that  I  am  guilty  of  no  crime,  take  my  pertbn,
“  and  treat  it  in  the  manner  you  have  long  refolved  :  Since
“  it  is  better  for  me  to  die  without  a  trial,  than  after  I  have
“  made  my  defence,  and  not  perfuadedyouof  my  innocence:
“  For  I  fhall  then  feem  to  fuffer,  defervedly,  whatever  you
“  fhall  have  determined  againft  me :  And  you  yourfelves
<c  will  be  more  excufable  in  not  fuffering  me  to  make  my
“  defence,  and  indulging  your  paflion,  while  it  is  yet  urn
“  certain  whether  I  have  offended  you  in  any  thing.  Your
“  difpofition,  therefore,  will  difcover  itfelf  by  the  manner,
“  in  which  you  hear  me;  as  This  is  either  tumultuous,  or
“  quiet,  I  fhall  judge  whether  you  have  called  me  to  a
“  punifhment,  or  a  trial.”  Having  faid  that,  he  flopped.
This  being  followed  by  a  general  filence,  and,  prefently,  the
greatefl  part  calling  out  to  him  to  take  courage,  and  fay
what  he  thought  fit,  he  refumed  his  difcourfe,  and  faid :
“  Since,  then,  citizens,  you  are  to  be  my  judges,  and  not
“  my  enemies,  I  make  no  doubt  but  I  fhall,  eafily,  convince
“  you  that  I  am  guilty  of  no  crime.  I  fhall  begin  my  dif-
“  courfe  from  thofe  fads,  which  you  are  all  acquainted  with.
u  I  was  created  conful  with  Virginius,  a  moft  worthy  man,

“  at


I


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  57
“  at  the  time  when  the  Tyrrhenians,  having  fortified  the
“  hill,  that  commands  your  city,  were  matters  of  all  the
cc  country,  and  entertained  hopes  of  fubverting  your  empire
“  in  a  fhort  time.  There  was,  at  that  juncture,  a  great
“  famine,  and  a  fedition  in  the  city,  and  a  general  irrefolu-
<c  tion  concerning  the  meafures  to  be  purfued.  In  fo  tur-
“  bulent,  and  fo  formidable  a  crifis,  I  together  with  my
“  collegue  overcame  the  enemy  in  two  ingagements,  and
“  obliged  them  to  abandon  the  fort,  and  leave  the  country.
cc  The  famine  I  foon  put  an  end  to,  by  fupplying  the  markets
“  with  a  plenty  of  provifions,  and  delivered  to  my  fucceflors
“  the  country  free  from  hoftile  arms,  and  the  city  recovered
“  from  all  the  political  diftempers,  with  which  the  dema-
“  gogues  had  infeded  it.  What  offence,  therefore,  have  I
“  been  guilty  of,  unlefs  to  overcome  your  enemies  is  to
cc  offend  you?  If  fome  of  the  foldiers  happened  to  lofe
“  their  lives,  after  they  had  fought  with  fuccefs,  in  what
cc  has  Servilius  offended  the  people  ?  For  no  god  is  furety
“  to  generals  for  the  lives  of  all,  who  are  going  to  ingage  :
<c  Neither  do  we  receive  the  command  of  armies  upon  fuch
“  terms,  and  conditions,  as  to  overcome  all  our  enemies,  and
“  lofe  none  of  our  own  men:  For  what  man,  as  fuch,  would
“  dare  to  take  upon  himfelf  all  the  events  both  of  condud,
“  and  fortune  ?  So  far  from  it,  that  we  always  purchafe
“  great  fucceffes  with  great  dangers.

XXX.  “  I  am  not  the  firft  to  whom  this  misfortune  has


“  happened  in  battle;  but  almoft  all,  who  have  ventured
“  to  encounter  armies  fuperior  in  number  to  their  own,

Vol.  IV.  I  “  have


53  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

£C  have  been  expofed  to  it :  For  fome,  after  they  had  pur-
u  feed  the  enemy,  have  themfelves  been  put  to  flight ;  and,
€£  after  they  hadkilled  many  of  their  adverfaries,  have  loft  ftill
“  more  of  their  own  men.  I  fhall  not  add  that  feveral,  even,
££  after  an  in  tire  defeat,  have  returned  home  with  ignominy,
££  and  great  lofs :  None  of  whom  were  punifhed  becaufe
££  they  were  unfortunate:  For  the  calamity  itfelf  is  a  fuf-
<£  ficient  punifhment ;  and  to  receive  no  praife,  if  there  was
££  nothing  elfe  in  it,  is  a  great,  and  grievous  chaftifement
££  to  a  general.  However,  I  am  fo  far  from  pretending,
££  what  all  reafonable  men  will  allow  to  be  juft,  that  I  ought
££  not  to  give  an  account  of  fortune,  that,  though  no  other
££  perfon  ever  ventured  to  undergo  fuch  a  trial,  I  alone  do
££  not  decline  it,  but  confent  that  my  fortune  may  be  in-
C£  quired  into,  as  well  as  my  conduct ;  and  fhall  only  pre-
C£  mife  this :  I  obferve  that  a  judgement  is  always  formed
“  of  human  a&ions,  whether  fuccefsful,  or  other  wife,  not
<£  from  the  particular  meafures  that  have  been  purfued,
<£  which  are  many  and  various,  but  from  the  event  :  And,
<c  when  this  is  profperous,  though  even  the  intermediate  ope-
££  rations,  which  are  many,  may  not  be  applauded,  yet  I  find
u  the  actions  themfelves  not  the  lefs  praifed,  emulated  by
“  all,  and  looked  upon  as  the  effe<fts  of  good  fortune  :  But,
££  if  the  event  is  unfuccefsful,  though  every  thing  that  pre~
“  ceded  it,  was  carried  on  with  the  greateft  fuccefs,  thofe
<£  actions  are  afcribed  not  to  the  good,  but  to  the  ill  fortune
u  of  their  authors.  Make  ufe  of  this  maxim  yourfelves ;  and,
u  by  that,  judge  of  my  fortune  alfo  with  regard  to  the  war:

“  And,


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SE NS  I  S.  59'

“  And,  if  you  find  me  vanquifhed  by  the  enemy,  call  my
“  fortune  bad  ;  but,  if  victorious,  call  it  good.  Concerning
“  fortune,  therefore,  I  could  add  many  things ;  but,  as  I
“  am  not  ignorant  that  every  argument,  which  can  be
“  offered  upon  that  fubjeCt,  is  difagreeable,  I  fhall  fay  no
“  more.

XXXI.  “  But,  fince  they  cenfure  my  conduCt  alfo,  not
C£  daring  indeed  to  accufe  me  of  treachery,  or  cowardice,  for
“  which  other  generals  are  often  tried  ;  and  charge  me  with
“  inexperience  in  the  duty  of  a  general,  and  imprudence,  for
“  having  expofed  myfelf  to  an  unnecefiary  danger  in  purfuing
u  the  enemy  to  their  camp  ;  I  will  anfwer  this  charge  alfo,

“  which  I  could  do  very  readily,  by  faying  that  it  is  an
“  exceeding  eafy  thing,  and  in  the  power  of  every  man  to
u  cenfure  paft  aClions ;  but  difficult,  and  of  which  few  are
“  capable,  to  attempt  great  things  with  danger  :  And  that
“  future  events  do  not  appear  what  they  will  be,  in  the
££  fame  manner  as  paft  events  appear  what  they  are ;  but
<£  thefe  we  difcover  by  our  fenfes,  and  our  fufferings,  and
C£  thofe  we  form  conjectures  of  by  divination,  and  opinions,

<£  in  which  there  is  great  deceit:  And  that  it  is  the  eafieft
££  thing  in  the  world  for  people  to  play  the  general  in  dif-
££  courfe,  when  they  are  at  a  diftance  from  the  danger;

££  which  is  the  cafe  of  my  accufers.  But  I  wave  all  this;

££  and  defire,  in  the  name  of  the  gods,  that  you  will  tell  me
££  whether  you  look  upon  me  as  the  fifft,  or  the  only  man,

C£  who  ever  attempted  to  force  intrench ments,  and  led  his
a  men  againft  an  eminence  ?  Or  have  not  many  other  of

I  2  ££  your


6o


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

“  your  generals  done  the  fame ;  fome  of  whom  have  fuc-
<c  ceeded  in  thefe  attempts,  and  others  not?  Why,  there-
“  fore,  do  you  not  try  them  as  well  as  me,  if  you  look  upon
<£  thefe  actions  to  prove  the  incapacity,  and  imprudence  of
“a  general?  How  many  other  enterprifes,  more  daring
“  than  this,  have  generals  thought  fit  to  attempt  at  a
“  juncture,  which  leaft  of  all  admits  of  fafe  counfels,  and
u  deliberation  ?  Some  have  fnatched  the  enfigns  from  their
<c  own  men,  and  thrown  them  among  the  enemy,  in  order
“  to  force  the  backward,  and  cowardly  to  do  their  duty,
“  when  they  knew  that  thofe,  who  did  not  recover  their
“  enfigns,  were  fure  to  fufter  an  ignominious  death  by  the
<c  orders  of  their  generals.  Others,  after  they  had  made  an
<c  irruption  into  the  enemy’s  country,  have  broken  down  the
“  bridges  over  which  they  had  pafled,  to  the  end  that  thofe,
“  who  had  any  thoughts  of  faving  themfelves  by  flight,
“  might  be  infpired  with  boldnefs,  and  refolution  from  their
“  defpair  of  effecting  it.  And  others,  by  burning  their  tents,
“  and  baggage,  have  impofed  a  neceflity  on  their  men  of
“  fupplying  themfelves  with  every  thing  they  wanted  out
“  of  the  enemy’s  country.  I  omit  many  inflances  of
cc  the  like  nature,  and  all  the  other  daring  a&ions,  and
“  defigns  of  generals,  which  we  have  learned  both  from
“  hiftory,  and  our  own  knowledge;  for  which,  when  they
<c  did  not  fucceed,  none  yet  was  ever  punifhed  :  Unlefs
<c  any  of  you  can  object  to  me  that,  when  I  expofed  others
u  to  manifeft  deftrudtion,  I  kept  myfelf  out  of  danger  :
“  But,  if  I  charged  with  the  reft,  came  off  laft,  and  fhared

“  the


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  ENS  I  S.  61
u  the  fame  fortune  with  others,  what  crime  am  I  guilty  of?
££  And  let  this  fuffice  concerning  myfelf.

XXXII.  u  Now,  concerning  the  fenate,  and  the  patri-
£C  cians,  I  think  it  necedary  to  fay  a  few  words  to  you,  iince
££  the  general  hatred  you  bear  to  them  all,  by  reafon  of  the
££  oppolition  that  has  been  made  to  the  divifionof  the  lands,
££  aftedls  me  alfo,  and  this  hatred  my  accufer  was  fo  far  from
££  concealing,  that  he  made  it  no  finall  part  of  his  accufation
££  againft  me.  Let  me  fpeak  to  you  upon  this  iubjedt  with
££  freedom:  For  it  is  confident  neither  with  my  temper  to
££  fpeak,  nor  with  your  advantage  to  hear  me,  in  any  other
££  manner.  You  ad:  contrary  both  to  judice,  and  piety,
££  plebeians,  in  not  acknowledging  the  many  great  benefits
££  you  have  received  from  the  fenate,  and  in  refenting  their
££  refufal  of  fome  of  your  defires,  which,  if  granted,  would
££  bring  great  prejudice  to  the  public,  when  this  refufal  does
££  not  proceed  from  their  envy  to  you,  but  from  their  re-
££  gard  to  the  advantage  of  the  commonwealth.  Whereas,
££  the  bed  thing  you  could  have  done  was  to  have  paid  a
££  deference  to  their  refolutions,  as  dowing  from  the  bed  of
££  motives,  and  calculated  for  the  general  good,  and  to  have
££  defided  from  your  earnednefs :  But,  if  you  were  unable
££  to  conquer  your  unprofitable  defires  by  prudent  confi-
££  derations,  you  ought  to  have  aimed  at  obtaining  the  fame
££  things  by  perfuafion,  and  not  by  violence  :  For  voluntary
££  prefents  are,  not  only,  more  agreeable  to  thofe  who  grant
££  them,  than  fuch  as  are  extorted,  but,  alfo,  more  lading  to
££  thofe  who  receive  them :  Which  is  a  thing,  I  call  the

“  gods


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

w  gods  to  witnefs,  you  do  not  confider ;  but  are  agitated  by
u  your  demagogues,  like  the  fea  by  various  winds  perpetually
“  l'ucceeding  one  another,  and  provoked  to  rage,  and  will
cc  not  fuffer  the  commonwealth  to  enjoy  even  the  leaft  quiet,
“  and  tranquillity.  This  has  made  us  prefer  war  to  peace ;
ic  ftnce,  when  we  are  in  war,  we  hurt  our  enemies ;  but,
u  when  in  peace,  our  friends.  However,  plebeians,  if  you
<c  look  upon  all  the  refolutions  of  the  fenate  to  be  advan-
<c  tageous  to  the  commonwealth,  as  they  really  are,  why  do
tc  you  not  look  upon  this  refolution  alfo  in  the  fame  light  ?
“  But,  if  you  are  of  opinion  that  the  fenate  do  not  take  the
“  leaft  conftderation  of  any  thing  that  is  incumbent  on  them,
cc  but  govern  the  commonwealth  di (honourably,  and  un-
“  fkilfully,  why  do  you  not  remove  them  all  at  once,  take
<c  the  government  upon  yourfelves,  confult,  and  make  war
cc  in  fupport  of  your  own  fovereignty,  rather  than  pare  them,
<c  deftroy  them  by  degrees,  and  take  off  the  moft  confider-
<c  able  men  by  your  fentences  ?  Since  it  is  better  for  all  of
u  us  in  general  to  be  attacked  by  open  war,  than  for  every
“  one  in  particular  to  be  circumvented  by  calumnies.
“  However,  you  are  not  the  caufe  of  thefe  diford ers,  as  I
“  faid,  but  the  demagogues  who  inflame  you,  and  who  are
“  both  unwilling  to  obey,  and  unable  to  command.  And
“  their  imprudence,  and  inexperience  have  often  exerted  all
“  their  power  to  overfet  this  (hip  ;  but  the  fenate,  who  have
“  been  reviled  by  them  in  the  fevereft  terms,  corre&ed  their
H  errors,  and  kept  the  commonwealth  upright.  Whether
^  thefe  things  are  agreeable  to  you,  or  difpleafing,  they

tc  have


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LIC  AR  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  63

t£  have  been  uttered,  and  hazarded  by  me  with  the  greatefl:
“  truth :  And  I  had  rather  lofe  my  life  by  ufing  a  freedom
u  of  fpeech,  that  may  be  advantageous  to  the  common-
“  wealth,  than  fave  it,  by  flattering  you.”

XXXIII.  After  he  had  fpoken  in  this  manner,  he  neither
lamented,  nor  bewailed  his  misfortune,  nor,  by  intreaties,
and  calling  himfelf  at  the  feet  of  any  one  indecently,  ap¬
peared  dejeded ;  but,  without  fhewing  the  leaf!:  mark  of
an  infirm  mind,  gave  way  to  thofe,  who  were  willing  to
fpeak,  or  bear  witnefs  in  his  favor.  Upon  which,  many
prefented  themfelves,  and  made  his  innocence  appear  ;  par¬
ticularly  Virginius,  who  had  been  his  collegue  in  the  con-
fulfhip,  and  was  looked  upon  to  have  been  the  caufe  of  the
vidory  :  He,  not  only,  fhewed  him  to  be  innocent,  but
reprefented  him  both  as  the  braveft  of  men,  and  the  ableft
of  generals,  and,  as  fuch,  deferving  to  be  applauded,  and
honoured  by  all.  And  he  faid  that,  if  they  thought  the  war
was  happily  concluded,  they  ought  to  thank  them  both ;
but,  if  unhappily,  to  punifh  them  both;  fince  their  coun-
fels,  their  adions,  and  their  fortune  had  been  the  fame.
The  people  were  moved  both  with  this  fpeech,  and
with  the  charader  of  the  man  who  fpoke  it,  which  was
eftablifhed  by  virtuous  adions  of  every  kind  :  To  this  was
added  a  fympathizing  look,  which  raifed  the  greatefl:  com-
miferation,  fuch  a  look,  as  appears  in  the  faces  of  thofe  very
perfons,  who  either  adually  fuffer,  or  are  going  to  fuffer,
great  miferies :  So  that,  even  the  relations  of  the  men,  who
had  loft  their  lives  in  the  adion,  and  feemed  irreconcileable

to


V


64  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book IX.

to  the  author  of  their  misfortune,  were  foftened,  and  laid
afide  their  refentment,  which  they  foon  made  appear  :  For
the  votes  of  the  people  being  taken,  not  a  fmgle  tribe  con¬
demned  him.  This,  therefore,  was  the  event  of  the  danger,
to  which  Servilius  had  been  expofed.

XXXIV.  Not  long  after,  an  army  of  the  Romans  marched
againft  the  Tyrrhenians  under  the  command  of  Publius
Valerius,  one  of  the  confuls :  For  the  forces  of  the  Veientes
were  again  aftembled,  and  the  Sabines  had  joined  them ;
who,  though  unwilling,  till  then,  to  aflift  them  in  a  war,
the  objed:  of  which  they  looked  upon  as  impoffible  for  them
to  attain,  when  they  heard  both  of  the  flight  of  Menenius,
and  of  the  erecting  the  fort  upon  the  hill  clofe  to  the  city,
they  concluded  that,  not  only,  the  forces  of  the  Romans
were  overcome,  but  that  their  fpirit,  alfo,  was  humbled  ;
and,  efpouflng  the  caufe  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  fent  them  a
great  number  of  auxiliary  troops.  The  Veientes,  confiding
both  in  their  own  forces,  and  in  Thofe  of  the  Sabines,
which  had  lately  joined  them,  defired,  while  they  were
expecting  fuccours  from  the  reft  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  to
march  dire&ly  to  Rome  with  the  greateft  part  of  their  army,
from  a  perfuafion  that  none  would  oppofe  them,  but  that
they  fhould  take  the  city  either  by  force,  or  famine.
However,  Valerius  prevented  their  defign,  while  they  were
delaying  the  execution  of  it,  and  waiting  for  the  arrival  of
thofe  allies,  who  had  not  yet  joined  them,  by  putting  himfelf
at  the  head  of  the  braveft  Roman  youth,  and  of  their  allies,
and  marching  out  of  the  city,  not  openly,  but  in  fuch  a

manner


Book IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSENSIS.  65

manner  as  to  conceal  his  march  from  the  enemy  as  much
as  poffible:  For,  coming  out  late  in  the  evening,  and  paf-
fing  the  Tiber  at  a  fmall  diftance  from  the  city,  he  in-
camped:  Then,  marching  in  order  of  battle  about  mid¬
night,  he  attacked  one  of  the  enemy’s  camps  before  it  was
day:  For  there  were  two  camps  at  no  great  diftance  from
one  another,  one  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  and  the  other  of  the
Sabines:  The  firft  camp  he  attempted  was  That  of  the  Sa¬
bines,  in  which  moft  of  the  men  being  afleep,  and  no  fufficient
guard  appointed  (the  place,  where  they  lay,  being  the  country
of  their  allies,  and  they  entertaining  a  great  contempt  of
the  enemy,  of  whom  they  had  received  no  account)  he  took
it  by  ftorm.  Some  of  the  Sabines  were  flain  in  their  beds ;
others,  juft  as  they  were  getting  up,  and  taking  their  arms ;
and  others,  after  they  were  armed,  but,  while  they  were
difperfed,  and  fighting  without  order:  The  greateft  part
of  them,  endeavouring  to  efcape  to  the  other  camp,  were
intercepted  by  the  Roman  horfe,  and  cut  in  pieces.

XXXV.  The  camp  of  the  Sabines  being  thus  taken,
Valerius  marched  to  the  other,  where  the  Veientes  lay,  the
place  not  being  very  ftrong.  Here  it  was  not  poffible  for
them  to  approach  the  camp  without  being  feen :  For  it
was,  now,  broad  day,  and  the  Sabines  who  efcaped,  had
acquainted  the  Tyrrhenians  both  with  their  own  calamity,
and  the  defign  of  the  Romans  to  attack  them  :  So  that,  it
was,  now,  become  necefiary  to  depend  upon  their  courage
in  charging  the  enemy.  Here  the  Tyrrhenians  fighting
before  their  camp  with  all  poffible  Fravery,  a  fharp  a&ion

Vol.  IV.  K  infued


66  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I  TIE  S  OF  Book  IX.

infued  with  great  daughter  on  both  fides,  the  vi&ory  being
doubtful,  and  for  a  long  while  inclining  fometimes  to  one
fide,  and  fometimes  to  the  other :  But,  at  laft,  the  Tyr¬
rhenians  were  broken  by  the  Roman  horfe,  and  retired  to
their  camp.  The  conful  followed :  And,  when  he  came
near  their  intrenchments,  which  had  been  ill  fortified,  and
the  place,  as  I  faid,  not  very  fecure,  he  affaulted  them  in
many  parts  at  once,  and  continued  the  affault  all  the  reft
of  that  day,  without  refting  even  the  following  night.  The
Tyrrhenians,  fpent  with  continual  toil,  left  their  camp  the
next  day,  as  foon  as  it  was  light ;  fome  taking  refuge  in
their  city,  and  others  difperfing  themfelves  in  the  neigh¬
bouring  woods.  The  conful,  having  made  himfelf  mafter
of  this  camp  alfo,  refted  his  army  all  that  day :  The  day
after,  he  diftributed  the  fpoils  he  had  taken  in  both  the
camps,  which  were  in  great  quantity,  among  thofe  who  had
fought  for  them  ;  and  honoured  fuch,  as  had  diPcinguifhed
themfelves  in  the  two  a&ions,  with  the  cuftomary  crowns.
The  man,  who  was  looked  upon  to  have  fought  with  the
greateft  bravery,  and  put  the  troops  of  the  Veientes  to
flight,  was  Servilius,  the  conful  of  the  former  year,  who
had  been  acquitted  by  the  people,  and  was,  at  that  time,,
legate  to  Valerius,  and,  in  confideration  of  the  fuperior
valor  he  fhewed  upon  this  occafion,  was  the  firft,  who
received  thofe  rewards,  which  among  the  Romans  are  the
rnoft  efteemed.  After  that,  the  conful,  having  ordered  the
enemy’s  dead  to  be  ftripped,  and  his  own  to  be  buried,
marched  out  with  his  army ;  and,  incamping  near  the  city

of


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  AS  SEN  SIS.  67

of  the  Veientes,  he  challenged  them  to  come  to  an  ingage-
ment ;  but  none  venturing  out  to  fight,  and  he  looking
upon  it  as  a  work  of  difficulty  to  take  ,  by  afiault  a  town
exceeding  ftrong,  laid  wafte  a  great  part  of  their  country,
and  then  invaded  That  of  the  Sabines.  And,  having,  alfo,
laid  wafte  their  territories,  which  had  been  untouched  for
many  days,  the  carriages  of  his  army  being,  now’,  heavily
loaded  with  booty,  he  returned  home.  The  people  met
him  a  good  way  from  the  city  crowned  with  flowers  ;  and?
perfuming  the  road,  as  he  pafled,  with  frankincenfe,  received
the  army  with  bowls  of  Hydromel :  And  the  fenate  decreed
to  him  the  honor  of  a  triumph.  The  other  conful,  Caius
Nautius,  to  whom  the  defence  of  the  Latines,and  the  Hernici,
their  allies,  had. been  allotted,  had  delayed  taking  the  field;
not  from  any  irrefolution,  or  apprehenfion  of  danger,  but
becaufe  he  was  waiting  the  event  of  the  war  with  the  Vei¬
entes,  which  was  then  undecided  ;  to  the  intent  that,  if  any
misfortune  fhould  befall  the  army  employed  againft  them,
the  commonwealth  might  have  another  in  readinefs  to
hinder  them  from  making  an  irruption  into  the  country,
in  cafe  they  fhould,  like  thofe  who  had  before  marched  to
Rome,  attempt  to  fortify  any  places  in  order  to  annoy  the
city.  In  the  mean  time,  the  war,  brought  upon  the  Latines
by  the  Aequi,  and  the  Volfci,  was  alfo  happily  concluded ;
and  news  was  brought  that  the  enemy,  being  defeated,  had
quitted  the  country  of  their  allies,  who,  no  longer,  flood  in
need  of  any  affiftance  for  the  prefent.  However,  Nautius,
after  their  affairs  in  Tyrrhenia  had  taken  a  happy  turn,

K  2  marched


Book  IX.


68  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

marched  out  with  his  army :  Having  invaded  the  coun¬
try  of  the  Volfci,  and  overrun  a  great  part  of  it,  which
they  had  abandoned,  he  made  himfelf  mafter  of  a  few  flaves,
and  cattle ;  and,  having  fet  fire  to  their  corn,  which  was
then  ripe,  and  done  other  confiderable  damage  to  their
country,  as  none  appeared  to  oppofe  him,  he  brought  back
his  army.  Such  were  the  tranfa&ions,  that  happened
during  the  confulfhip  of  thefe  perfons.

XXX VI.  Their  fucceffors,  Aulus  Manlius,  and  Lucius
Furius,  after  the  fenate  had  ordered  that  one  of  them  fhould
march  againft  the  Veientes,  drew  lots,  according  to  cuftom,
who  fhould  command  in  this  expedition  :  And  the  lot
falling  to  Manlius,  he  prefently  took  the  field,  and  incamped
near  the  enemy.  The  Veientes,  being  fhut  up  within  their
walls,  defended  themfelves  for  fome  time;  and,  fending
embaffadors  both  to  the  other  cities  of  Tyrrhenia,  and  to
the  Sabines,  who  had,  lately,  affifted  them,  defired  they
would  immediately  fend  them  fuccours:  But,  finding  them-
felves  refufed  by  all,  and  having  confumed  their  provifions,
the  moft  ancient,  and  the  molt  dignified  among  them,  com¬
pelled  by  famine,  came  out  of  the  city ;  and,  prefenting  them¬
felves  before  the  conful  with  the  enfigns  of  fuppliants, '
begged  of  him  to  put  an  end  to  the  war.  Upon  this,
Manlius  ordered  them  to  furnifh  the  army  with  their  pay
for  a  year,  and  with  provifions  for  two  months ;  and,  after
they  had  complied  with  this,,  to  fend  embaffadors  to  Rome,
in  order  to  treat  of  peace  with  the  fenate ;  and  they,  having
accepted  thefe  conditions,  and  prefently  brought  the  pay  for

the


Book IX.  DIONYSIUS  H AL ICARN ASSENSIS.  69  ,

the  army,  together  with  the  money  allowed  by  the  conful
to  be  paid  by  them  inftead  of  the  corn,  they  went  to  Rome :
And,  being  introduced  into  the  fenate,  they  afked  forgivenefs
for  what  had  paffed,  and  to  be  freed  from  the  war  for  the
future :  And,  after  many  arguments  on  both  hides,  it  was
carried  to  put  an  end  to  the  war  by  a  treaty ;  and  a  truce
was  granted  to  them  for  forty  years.  Upon  which,  the
embafladors  returned,  having  made  great  acknowledgements
to  the  commonwealth  for  the  peace  they  had  obtained.
And  Manlius  coming  to  Rome  requefted  the  19  Ovation  for
having  put  an  end  to  the  war,  which  was  granted  to  him.
There  was,  alfo,  a  cenfus  in  this  confulfhip  ;  and  the  num¬
ber  of  the  citizens,  who  regiftered  their  own  names,  their
fortunes,  and  the  names  of  their  fons,  who  were  arrived  to
manhood,  amounted  to  a  little  more  than  one  hundred  and
thirty  three  thoufand.

XXXVII.  Thefe  confuls  were  fucceeded  by  20  Lucius
Aemilius  Mamercus  for  the  third  time,  and  Vofpifcus  Julius
lulus,  who  entered  upon  their  magiftracy  in  the  feventy
feventh  Olympiad,  at  which  Datis  of  Argos  won  the  prize
of  the  ftadium,  Chares  being  archon  at  Athens.  The  ad¬
min  iftration  of  thefe  confuls  was  exceeding  uneafy  and  tu¬
multuous  :  It  was  indeed  attended  with  peace  abroad  (for
all  their  enemies  were  quiet)  but,  through  civil  diflenfions,
both  they  themfelves  were  expofed  to  dangers,  and  the

J9*  Tov  3-qixyEov.  See  the  thirty  confuls  ftand  thus  in  th z  Fajli  confu-
ninth  annotation  on  the  fifth  book.  lares,  Lucius  Aemilius  Mamercus  3.

20*  Aevjcjo?  AiyiAiog  May.tqx.Qi  to  t qilov,  V  opifcilS  Julius  lulus.
xca  OvwirMs  LAisj.  The  names  of  thefe

common-


N


7o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

commonwealth  was  almoft  ruined  by  their  means:  For,  as
foon  as  the  people  had  a  refpite  from  military  expeditions,
they,  prefently,  purfued  the  divifton  of  the  public  lands.
The  perfon,  who  inflamed  this  paffion  in  the  poor,  was  one
of  the  tribunes,  a  bold  man,  and  not  uneloquent,  whofe
name  was  Cneius  Genucius :  This  man  was,  conftantly,
aflembling  the  people,  captivating  the  minds  of  the  poorer
fort,  and  endeavouring  to  oblige  the  confuls  to  carry  into
execution  the  orders  of  the  fen  ate,  concerning  the  diviiion
of  lands.  Thefe  refufed  to  do  it,  alledging  that  this  commif-
fton  was  given  by  the  fenate  not  to  them,  but  to  Caffius,  and
Virginius,  who  were  then  confuls,  and  to  whom  even  thofe
orders  were  directed ;  they  added  that  the  refolutions  of  the
fenate  were  notlaws  deftgned  to  continue  in  force  for  ever,  but
temporary  inftitutions,  the  efficacy  of  which  lafled  only  one
year.  The  confuls  making  ufe  of  thefe  evafions,  Genucius
found  himfelf  unable  to  employ  compulfton  againft  thofe,
who  were  inverted  with  a  fuperior  authority,  and  took  a
bold  refolution  :  For  he  exhibited  a  public  charge  againft
Manlius,  and  Furius,  the  confuls  of  the  former  year,  and
fummoned  them  to  appear  before  the  people,  and  make
their  defence,  declaring,  openly,  the  crime  they  were  ae-
cufed  of,  which  was,  that  they  had  wronged  the  people  in
not  appointing  the  decemvirs  directed  by  the  fenate  to
divide  the  lands.  Fie  gave  very  plaufible  reafons  for  his  not
having  accufed  any  of  the  other  confuls,  when  there  had
been  twelve  confulrthips  ftnce  the  fenate  had  parted  this  order,
and  for  his  charging  thefe  men  only  with  the  breach  of

promife  :


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASS  EN  SIS.  71

promife:  Fie  ended  with  faying  that  the  only  way  to  com¬
pel  the  prefent  confuls  to  divide  the  lands,  was  to  let  them
fee  fome  others  punifhed  by  the  people,  which  would  put
them  in  mind  that  they,  alfo,  might  expedl  the  fame  treat¬
ment.

XXXVIII.  After  he  had  faid  this,  he  exhorted  all  the
plebeians  to  be  prefent  at  the  trial ;  and,  having  fworn  by
the  holy  rites  that  he  would  affuredly  perfift  in  his  refolution,
and  accufe  thefe  perfons  with  all  poffible  vigor,  he  appointed
a  day  for  the  trial.  The  patricians  feeing  this,  were  under
great  fear,  and  anxiety  concerning  the  meafures  they  were
to  take  both  to  procure  thefe  men  to  be  acquitted,  and
put  a  flop  to  the  boldnefs  of  this  demagogue  :  And  the
refolution  they  came  to  was,  to  oppofe  the  people  with  force,
if  they  attempted  to  pafs  any  vote  to  the  prejudice  of  the
confular  power,  and,  even,  to  have  recourfe  to  arms,  if  that
fhould  be  neceffary.  However,  they  were  under  no  necef-
fity  of  ufing  any  violent  means,  the  danger  being  difpelled
in  a  fudden,  and  unexpe&ed  manner  :  For,  the  day  before
the  trial,  Genucius  wras  found  dead  in  his  bed,  31  without

21  •  ovSiv  (xwv  sk  c rfyovyw ,  etc.  lamque fervent  malo  domandam  tribunici-

Livy  fays,  not  only,  that  the  fenators  am  poteftatem.  This  victory  of  the  fe-
caufed  Genucius  to  be  put  to  death,  nate  was  truly  what  Livy  calls,  in  the
but,  alfo,  that  they  were  fo  far  from  next  fentence,  pejftmi  exempli  vibloria.
repenting  of  the  murder,  that  thofe  Here  we  fee  a  great  contradiction  in
among  them  who  had  no  fhare  in  it,  the  conduCt  of  the  fenate.  Fifteen
bragged  of  their  having  committed  it-,  years  before,  they  had,  with  a  noble
1 neepatres  fatis moderate ferre  laetitiam.  firmnefs,  refufed  to  concur  with  the
adeaque  neminem  noxae  poenitebat ,  ut  people  in  recalling  Coriolanus,  when
etiam  infont es  fecifj'e  videri  vellent ,  pa -  he  was  at  their  gates  with  a  victorious

*  B.  ii.  c.  5.4*


\


the


72  .  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

the  leaft  appearance  of  his  having  been  ftabbed,  ftrangled,
poifoned,  or  put  to  death  by  any  other  infidious  means.
As  foon  as  this  accident  was  known,  and  the  body  brought
into  the  forum,  the  event  was  looked  upon  as  a  kind  of
providential  obftacle  to  the  trial,  which  was  prefently  dif-
miffed  :  For  none  of  the  other  tribunes  had  the  boldnefs  to
revive  the  fedition ;  on  the  contrary,  they  looked  upon
Genucius  to  have  been  guilty  of  a  great  madnefs.  If,  there¬
fore,  the  confuls  had  not,  after  this,  overacted  their  part,
and  awakened  the  fedition,  which  heaven  had  laid  afleep,
they  would  have  drawn  upon  themfelves  no  further  danger :
But,  by  giving  themfelves  up  to  pride,  and  a  contempt  of
the  plebeians,  and  by  defiring  to  (hew  the  whole  extent  of
their  power,  they  were  the  occafion  of  great  mifchiefs :
For,  having  appointed  a  day  to  make  levies,  and  endea¬
voured  to  compel  the  difobedient  to  give  in  their  names  by
various  punifhments,  and  by  caufing  them  to  be  whipped
with  rods,  they  drove  the  greateft  part  of  the  plebeians  to
defpair,  which  broke  out  upon  the  following  occafion.

XXXIX.  A  certain  plebeian,  celebrated  for  his  valor,
called  Publius  Volero,  who  had  commanded  a  century
in  the  late  wars,  was,  now,  lifted  by  them  as  a  com¬
mon  foldier;  which  he  refilling  to  fubmit  to,  and
declining  a  lefs  honourable  employment,  when  he  had
been  guilty  of  no  mifbehaviour  in  the  former  campaigns,

army  of  Volfci;  and  here  they  de-  terror  of  a  victorious  enemy;  but  not
fcend  to  the  meaneft  of  all  actions,  virtue  enough  to  refill:  the  fuggeftions
the  affaffination  of  an  adverfary:  They  of  a  party  fpirit.
had  refolution  enough  to  refill  the


the


Book  IX,  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC APvN  ASSENS  IS.  73

the  confuls,  offended  at  the  liberty  he  took,  ordered  the
lidors  to  ftrip  him,  and  tear  his  body  with  rods.  The  young
man  called  upon  the  tribunes,  and,  if  he  was  guilty  of  any
crime,  defired  to  be  tried  by  the  people.  But  the  confuls,
regardlefs  of  what  he  faid,  repeated  their  orders  to  the  lidors
to  take  him  away,  and  whip  him ;  when  he,  impatient  of
the  infult,  revenged  his  own  wrongs ;  and,  ftriking  the  firft
lictor,  who  came  near  him  in  the  face  with  his  lift,  as  he
was  young  and  ftrong,  he  knocked  him  down,  and  treated
the  next  in  the  fame  manner  :  And,  when  the  confuls,  in  a
rage,  commanded  all  the  lidors  at  once  to  feizehim,  theple-
beians,  who  were  prefent,  thought  it  a  heinous  thing ;  and,
gathering  together  in  a  body,  and  inflaming  one  another’s
refentment  with  their  cries,  they  refcued  the  young  man,
and  repulfed  the  lidors  with  blows :  At  laft,  they  ran  to  the
confuls ;  and,  if  thefe  had  not  left  the  forum,  and  fled,  they
had,  that  inftant,  done  fome  irreparable  mifchief.  This
affair  divided  the  whole  city,  and  thofe  tribunes,  who,  till
then,  had  been  quiet,  grew  wild  with  rage,  and  inveighed
againft  the  confuls.  Thus  the  conteft  concerning  the  divi-
fion  of  lands  was  changed  into  another  conteft  of  greater
confequence,  that  concerned  the  very  form  of  their  govern¬
ment  :  For  the  patricians,  who  looked  upomthis  attempt  as
the  fubverfion  of  the  confular  power,  refented  it  no  lefs  than
the  confuls,  and  infifted  that  the  man,  who  had  dared  to
lay  hands  on  the  lidors,  fhould  be  thrown  down  the  Tar-
peian  rock.  On  the  other  fide,  the  plebeians  affernbling,
clamoured  againft  the  patricians,  and  exhorted  one  another
Vol.  IV.  L  not


74  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

not  to  betray  their  liberty,  but  to  carry  the  matter  before  the
fenate,  to  accufe  the  confuls,  and  endeavour  to  obtain  fome
juftice  againft  them  for  their  ufage  of  a  free  man,  and  a
citizen,  whom,  after  he  had  implored  the  affiftance  of  the
tribunes,  and  defired  to  be  tried  by  the  people  if  he  had
been  guilty  of  any  crime,  they  had  deprived  of  both  thefe
rights,  treated  him  like  a  fiave,  and  ordered  him  to  be
whipped.  While,  therefore,  the  two  parties  thus  oppofed  one
another,  and  neither  were  difpofed  to  yield,  all  the  remain¬
ing  part  of  this  confulfhip  was  confumed  without  being
adorned  either  with  military  actions  worthy  to  be  celebrated,
or  with  political  worthy  to  be  related.

XL.  The  time  for  the  ele&ion  of  magiftrates  being  come,
Lucius  Pinarius,  and  Publius  Furius  were  created  confuls.
In  the  beginning  of  this  year,  there  happened  many  pro-
dig  ies,  and  omens,  which  filled  the  city  with  a  kind  of
fuperftition,  and  fear  of  the  gods ;  and  all  the  augurs,
and  the  interpreters  of  holy  things  declared  that  thefe  were
the  figns  of  divine  anger,  fome  rites  not  having  been  per¬
formed  with  fanclity,  and  purity.  And,  not  long  after,  a
diftemper,  fuppofed  to  be  peftilential,  attacked  the  women,
particularly  fuch  as  were  with  child,  and  more  of  them  died
than  had  ever  been  known  before  :  For,  as  they  mifcarried,
and  brought  forth  dead  children,  they  died  together  with  their
infants :  And  neither  ^applications  at  the  ftatues,  and  altars
of  the  gods,  nor  expiatory  facrifices,  performed  on  behalf  of
the  public,  and  of  private  families,  gave  the  women  any
relief.  While  the  commonwealth  was  fuffering  under  fo

ftrange


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SE NS  I  S.  75

ftrange  a  calamity,  information  was  given  to  the  pontifs  by
a  fiave,  that  one  of  the  Veftal  virgins,  who  have  the  care  of
the  perpetual  fire,  by  name  Urbinia,  had  loft  her  virginity,
and,  though  impure,  performed  the  public  facrifices :  And
the  pontifs,  having  removed  her  from  the  miniftry,  brought
her  to  a  trial ;  and,  after  fhe  was  convi&ed,  they  ordered
her  to  be  whipped  with  rods,  to  be  carried  through  the  city,
and  buried  alive.  One  of  the  two  men,  who  had  been  the
accomplices  in  her  crime,  killed  himfelf ;  the  other  the
pontifs  feized,  and  ordered  him  to  be  whipped  in  the  forum
like  a  Have,  and  then  put  to  death.  After  thefe  punifh-
ments,  the  diftemper,  which  had  attacked  the  women,  and
caufed  fo  great  a  mortality  among  them,  prefently  ceafed.

XLI.  But  the  fedition  raifed  by  the  plebeians  againft  the
patricians,  which  had  long  continued  in  the  city,  was  re¬
newed  :  The  perfon  who  renewed  it  was  Publius  Volero,
one  of  the  tribunes,  the  fame  who,  the  year  before,  had
difobeyed  the  confuls  Aemilius,  and  Julius,  when  they
would  have  lifted  him  for  a  common  foldier  inftead  of  a
centurion :  The  reafons,  that  induced  the  poorer  fort  to
chufe  him  tribune  of  the  people,  were  chiefly  thefe  (for  he
was  both  ignobly  born,  and  brought  up  in  great  obfcurity,
and  want)  becaufe  he  was  looked  upon  as  the  firft  private
man,  who,  by  his  difobedience,  had  humbled  the  confular
power,  which  was  till  then  inverted  with  the  royal  dignity  ;
and  particularly  by  reafon  of  the  promifes  he  had  rrad,
when  he  flood  candidate  for  that  inagiftracy,  to  deprive  the
patricians  of  their  power.  This  man,  therefore,  as  foon  as

L  2  he


Book  IX.


76  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

he  was  at  liberty  to  perform  the  functions  of  his  office,  the
divine  anger  having  ceafed,  affembled  the  people,  and  pro-
pofed  a  law  concerning  the  eletftion  of  the  tribunes,  by
which  that  election  was  to  be  transferred  from  the  affemblies
of  the  curiae,  called  by  the  Romans,  Comitia  Curiata ,  to  the
affemblies  of  the  tribes :  The  difference  of  which  is  this  :
In  order  to  render  the  refolutions,  taken  in  the  22  affemblies
of  the  curiae,  valid,  it  was  neceffary  that  the  fenate  fhould
make  the  previous  order,  and  that  the  people,  voting
in  their  curiae,  fhould  confirm  it,  and  that,  after  both  thefe?
the  heavenly  figns,  and  aufpices  fhould  not  oppofe  it
Whereas,  in  the  affemblies  of  the  tribes,  neither  the  previous
order  of  the  fenate  was  neceffary,  nor  the  ratification  of  the
holy  rites,  and  aufpices,  but  only  that  the  refolutions  there
taken  fhould  be  finally  determined  by  the  members  of  the
tribes  in  one  day.  Now,  two  of  the  other  four  tribunes
joined  with  Volero  in  propofing  this  law :  So  that,  by  in-
gaging  thefe  two,  he  carried  it  again  ft  the  others,  who  dif¬
fered  from  him  in  opinion,  and  were  inferior  in  number.
On  the  other  fide,  the  confuis,  the  fenate,  and  the  patricians,
to  a  man,  oppofed  the  law  :  And,  coming  to  the  forum  in
a  body,  on  the  day  appointed  by  the  tribunes  for  enabling
this  law,  they  made  harangues  of  all  forts,  the  confuis,  the
mod  ancient  fenators,  and  every  one,  who  defined  it,  enu¬
merating  the  abfurdities  contained  in  the  law.  The  tribunes
anfwered,  and  the  confuis  replied  ;  and  the  debate  having

7-2,  Tag  juiv  $$*1  gemots  vj <*iQr,(po£iuf9  etc.  See  the  I22d  annotation  on  the
fecond  book.

lafted


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  AS  SENSIS.  77
lafted  a  long  while,  and  night  coming  on,  the  aflembly  was
difmified.  The  tribunes  having,  again,  appointed  the  third
market  day  for  the  confideration  of  the  law,  and  greater
numbers  than  before  flocking  to  the  forum  on  that  day,  the
fame  thing  happened  again.  Volero  feeing  this,  refolved
not  to  fuffer  either  the  confuls  to  find  fault  with  the  law,
or  the  patricians  to  be  prefent,  when  the  people  were  to  give
their  votes :  For  the  patricians,  with  thofe  of  their  faction,
and  of  their  body,  together  with  their  own  clients,  who  were
not  a  few,  took  up  a  great  part  of  the  forum  ;  and,  both
by  animating  thofe  who  blamed  the  law,  and  interrupting
thofe  who  juftified  it,  and  by  many  other  adfions,  they
created  diforders,  and  fliewed  they  were  refolved  to  force
the  people  to  vote  as  they  defired.

XLII.  But  another  calamity,  Tent  from  heaven,  put  a
flop  to  his  defigns,  that  were  tyrannical  :  For  a  peftilen-
tial  diftemper  attacked  the  city,  which  was,  indeed,  felt
in  other  parts  of  Italy,  but  no  where  fo  feverely  as  at
Rome.  No  human  aftiftance  could  relieve  the  fick  ;  but,
whether  remedies  were  adminiftred  to  them  with  the  greateft
care,  or  none  at  all  applied,  they  died  equally  :  No  dupli¬
cations  to  the  gods,  nor  facrifices ;  no  private,  nor  public
expiations,  to  which  mankind,  under  fuch  calamities,  are  com¬
pelled  at  laft  to  have  recourfe,  then  availed.  The  diftemper
made  no  diftin&ion  of  age,  or  fex,  of  ftrong  or  weak  con-
ftitutions,  or  between  the  negledi,  or  application  of  the
medicinal  art,  or  of  any  thing  elfe,  from  whence  relief
might  be  expe&ed ;  but  feized  both  women  and  men,  old

and


73  ROMAN  ANT  I  QJJ  I  TIES  OF  Book  IX.

and  young.  However,  it  lafted  not  long,  which  preferred
the  city  from  utter  defolation ;  but,  like  a  torrent,  or  a
conflagration,  it  overwhelmed  mankind  at  once  ;  fuddenly
came,  and  fuddenly  departed.  As  foon  as  the  calamity
ceafed,  Volero,  whofe  magiftracy  was  near  expiring,  flnce
it  was  not  in  his  power  to  get  the  law  ena&ed  during  the
remainder  of  it,  and  the  ele&ion  of  magiftrates  drew  near,
endeavoured  to  get  himfelf  rechofen  for  the  following  year,
by  making  many  large  promifes  to  the  people:  And  he
was  again  chofen  tribune,  together  with  two  of  his  collegues.
The  patricians,  in  order  to  defeat  the  confequences  of  this
election,  contrived  to  advance  to  the  confirlfliip  a  man  of  a
fevere  temper,  and  an  enemy  to  the  people,  and  one  who
was  not  like  to  leflen,  in  any  refpecft,  the  power  of  the
ariftocracy  ;  this  was  Appius  Claudius,  the  fon  of  Appius,
who  gave  the  greateft  obftru6tion  to  the  return  of  the
people ;  and,  though  he  ftrongly  oppofed  the  defign  of  the
patricians,  and,  even,  refufed  to  be  prefent  at  the  election,
the  fenate,  neverthelefs,  came  to  a  previous  refolution  to  raife
him  to  that  dignity  though  abfent,  and  appointed  him
conful.

XLIII.  His  eledtion  being  carried  with  great  eafe  (for  the
poorer  fort  left  the  place  as  foon  as  they  heard  his  name)
Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus,  and  Appius  Claudius  Sabinus
entered  upon  their  magiftracy;  men  of  different  tempers,
and  different  principles :  For  Appius  was  of  opinion  that
the  idle  and  the  poor  ought  to  be  kept  employed  in  foreign
wars ;  to  the  end  that,  while  they  enjoyed  a  plenty  of  thofe


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  7  9

daily  neceflaries,  of  which  they  were  in  the  greateft  want,
and  with  which  they  fupplied  themfelves  out  of  the
enemy’s  country  by  their  own  adlivity;  and  while  they
were  performing  adlions,  that  tended  to  the  advantage  of
the  commonwealth,  they  would,  leaft  of  all,  be  ill  difpofed
and  uneafy  to  the  fenators,  who  had  the  adminiftration  of
the  public  affairs ;  and  he  fhewed  that  every  pretence  of
making  war  would  be  juftifiable  in  a  commonwealth,  that
claimed  the  fovereignty,  and  was  envied  by  all :  He,  alfo,
defired  they  would  form  a  reafonable  judgement  of  the
future  by  the  pad ;  adding  that  all  the  commotions,  which
had  already  been  raifed  in  the  city,  had  happened  during
the  refpites  from  war.  Quintius,  on  the  contrary,  thought
they  ought  not  to  be  the  aggreffors  in  any  war,  but  reft
fatisfied  if  the  people,  when  called  upon  to  ingage  in  necef-
fary  dangers,  and  thofe  that  were  brought  upon  them  by
others,  obeyed  their  fummons ;  and  he  fhewed  them  that,  if
they  attempted  to  force  the  difobedient,  they  would  drive
the  plebeians  to  defpair,  as  their  predeceflors  had  done  ;  by
which  they  would  expofe  themfelves  to  one  of  thefe  two
evils  ;  either  to  extinguifh  the  fedition  with  blood,  and
{laughter,  or  to  fubmit  to  a  fhameful  adulation  of  the  people.
Now,  it  happened  that  Quintius  had  the  command  during
that  month  ;  fo  that,  the  other  conful  could  do  nothing
without  his  confent.  In  the  mean  time,  Volero,  and  the
other  two  tribunes,  impatient  of  any  longer  delay,  propofed
again  the  law,  which  they  had  not  been  able  to  get  enadfed
the  year  before,  with  this  addition,  that  the  aediles  fttould,

alfo,


8o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

alfo,  be  chofen  in  the  fame  comitia,  and  that  every  thing
elfe,  that  was  to  be  done,  and  enabled  by  the  people,  fhould
be  determined  in  the  fame  manner,  by  the  members  of  the
tribes ;  which  was,  indeed,  openly  to  deftroy  the  power  of
the  fenate,  and  to  eftablifh  That  of  the  people.

XLIV.  When  the  confuls  were  informed  of  this,  they
grew  anxious,  and  confidered  by  what  means  the  commo¬
tion,  and  fedition  might  fpeedily,  and  fafely,  be  removed.
Appius  advifed  to  fummon  to  arms  every  man,  who  defired
the  conftitution  might  be  preferved ;  and,  if  any  refufed  to
take  arms,  to  look  upon  them  as  enemies.  But  Quintius
was  of  opinion  they  ought  to  apply  perfuafion  to  the  ple¬
beians,  and  convince  them  that,  through  ignorance  of  their
intereft,  they  were  led  into  pernicious  refolutions :  And  he
faid  that  it  was  the  greateft  of  follies  to  aim  at  obtaining
from  their  fellow-citizens  againfl:  their  will  thofe  things,
which  they  might  receive  by  their  confent.  The  advice  of
Quintius  being  approved  of  by  the  red:  of  the  fenators,  the
confuls  went  to  the  forum,  and  defired  the  tribunes  would
give  them  leave  to  be  heard,  and  appoint  a  time  for  it :
And,  having  obtained  both  with  difficulty,  when  the  day
they  had  defired  them  to  fix  was  come,  the  forum  being
filled  with  a  great  concourfe  of  people  of  all  forts,  which
the  magiftrates  on  both  fides  had  prepared,  and  invited  to
come  to  their  affiftance,  the  confuls  prefented  themfelves,
in  order  to  fhew  the  ill  confequences  of  the  law.  Then
Quintius,  who  was,  in  all  refpedts,  a  man  of  moderation,
and  mafter  of  that  eloquence,  which  was  the  moft  adapted  to

•  '  gain


/


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  II AL  IC  ARN  A  S  SE  N  SIS.  81

gain  the  affe&ions  of  the  people,  firft  defired  leave  to  fpeak;
and  then  made  a  fpeech  fuited  to  the  occafion,  and  agree¬
able  to  all:  So  that,  thofe,  who  fpoke  in  favor  of  the  law,
were  under  great  difficulties,  having  nothing  to  offer,  that
was  more  juft,  or  more  reafonable.  And,  if  his  collegue  could
have  prevailed  upon  himfelf  not  to  meddle  in  this  affair,  the
people,  confcious  of  the  injuftice,  and  illegality  of  their
pretenftons,  would  have  rejected  the  law :  But,  inftead  of
that,  his  fpeech  was  fo  full  of  haughtinefs,  and  fo  offenfive
to  the  ears  of  the  poorer  fort,  that  they  grew  outrageous,
and  implacable,  and  broke  out  into  greater  animofity  than
ever :  For  he  did  not  talk  to  them  as  if  they  had  been  free
men,  and  his  fellow-citizens,  who  had  the  power  either  to
enadt,  or  rejedl  the  law;  but,  domineering  over  them  as  if
they  had  been  a  vile  populace,  foreigners,  or  men,  whole
liberty  was  precarious,  he  uttered  fharp,  and  infufferable
reproaches,  upbraiding  them  with  the  abolition  of  their  debts,
and  their  revolt  from  the  confuls,  when,  fnatching  up  the
facred  enfigns,  they  left  the  camp,  and  ran  away  of  their  own
accord :  He  put  them  in  mind  of  the  oaths  they  had  entered
into,  when  they  took  arms  in  defence  of  that  country  to  which
they  owed  their  birth,  and  againft  which  they  turned  thofe
very  arms :  For  which  reafon,  he  faid,  it  was  not  to  be  won¬
dered  at,  if,  after  they  had  been  guilty  of  perjury  to  the  gods,
deferted  their  generals,  difpeopled  the  city  as  far  as  in  them  lay,
and  grounded  their  return  on  the  diflolution  of  public  faith,
the  fubverlion  of  the  laws,  and  the  deftru&ion  of  the  con¬
futation,  they  ufed  no  moderation,  nor  could  behave  them-
*  Vol.  IV.  M  felves


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

felves  like  good  citizens ;  but  were,  always,  aiming  at  fome-
thing  advantageous  to  themfelves,  and  unwarrantable  by
the  laws ;  fometimes,  defiring  the  power  of  creating  magi-
fixates  out  of  their  own  body,  and  making  thefe  unaccount¬
able  for  their  actions,  and  all  facred;  fometimes,  bringing
to  trial  fuch  of  the  patricians  as  they  thought  fit,  under  the
moft  fhameful  accufations,  and  transferring  the  legal  jurif-
didtion,  which  the  commonwealth  had,  before,  made  ufe  of
in  caufes  that  relate  to  death,  or  banifhment,  from  the  moft
uncorrupt  tribunal,  to  the  vileft  populace ;  and,  fometimes,
bringing  in  tyrannical,  and  wicked  laws  againft  men  of  birth,
they,  who  were  mechanics,  and  had  no  habitation,  without
leaving  to  the  fenate  the  power  even  of  voting  previoufly
concerning  thofe  laws,  but  depriving  them  of  this  honor
alfo,  which  they  had,  always,  enjoyed  undifputed  under
both  kings,  and  tyrants.  After  he  had  uttered  thefe  things,
and  many  others  of  the  like  nature,  and  abftained  from  no
fharp  reproach,  or  injurious  appellation,  he  concluded  with
this  declaration,  which  gave  greater  offence  to  the  people
than  all  the  reft,  that  the  commonwealth  would  never  ceafe
to  be  divided  upon  every  thing,  but,  always,  fome  new
diftemper  would  fucceed  the  old,  as  long  as  the  tribunitian
power  lafted ;  and  faid,  great  care  ought  to  be  taken  that
the  commencements  of  every  political,  and  public  affair  be
pious  and  juft  (ior  from  good  feeds,  is  produced  good  and
wholefome  fruit,  and  from  bad,  evil  and  pernicious.)

XLV.  <€  If,  therefore,  fays  he,  this  magiftracy  found  its
“  way  into  the  commonwealth  by  concord  ;  was  calculated

“  for


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A S  S  EN  S I  S.  83

u  for  the  good  of  all,  and  received  the  fandtion  both  of  the
C£  aufpices,  and  the  religious  rites,  it  would  have  produced
€C  among  us  many  great  advantages,  beneficence,  harmony,
u  wholefome  laws,  hopes  of  bleffings  from  heaven,  and  a
“  thoufand  other  benefits :  But,  fince  it  was  introduced  by
“  violence,  a  contempt  of  law,  fedition,  the  apprehenfion
cc  of  a  civil  war,  and  by  every  thing  mankind  moft  abhors,
u  how  can  it  be  expedted  that  this  inftitution  fhould  ever
“  be  good,  or  falutary,  when  fuch  were  its  commencements  ?
“  So  that,  it  is  in  vain  for  us  to  feek  for  a  cure,  and  for
“  thofe  remedies,  which  human  reafon  fuggefts  againft  the
“  evils  that  are,  continually,  fpringing  out  of  it,  fo  long  as
cc  the  pernicious  root  remains  :  For  we  fhall  have  no  end,
“  no  deliverance  from  the  divine  wrath,  while  this  envious
“  fury,  this  cancer,  rankling  in  our  conftitution,  taints  and
<c  deftroys  every  virtuous  effort.  But  this  fubjedt  fhall  be
“  treated  at  a  more  proper  feafon.  Now,  fince  it  is  my
“  duty  to  compofe  the  prefent  difturbances,  I  fay  this  to
“  you  without  diffimulation  :  Neither  this,  nor  any  other
“  law  fhall  be  enadted  in  my  confulfhip  without  the  previous
<c  order  of  the  fenate;  and  I  will  contend  for  the  ariftocracy,
u  not  only  in  words,  but,  if  it  fhall  be  neceflary  to  proceed
<c  to  adtions,  I  will  not  yield  to  her  adverfaries  even  in
cc  thefe :  And,  if  you  did  not  know,  before,  the  extent  of
u  the  confular  power,  you  fhall  learn  it  under  my  con-
“  fulfhip.”

XLVI.  ThusAppius  fpoke:  When  the  mofi;  ancient,  and
the  moft  refpedtable  perfon  among  the  tribunes,  by  name,

M  2  Caius


84  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.


Caius  23  Laedtorius,  a  man  of  acknowledged  valor  in  war,
and  of  political  abilities,  rofe  up  to  anfwer  him  :  And,
beginning  from  the  earlieft  tranfadions,  he  fpoke  long  in
favor  of  the  people:  That  the  poor,  whom  Appius  had
loaded  with  injurious  appellations,  had  made  many  fevere
campaigns,  not  only,  under  their  kings,  when  the'  neceflity
of  ferving  might  be  imputed  to  them,  but,  alfo,  after  their
expullion,  while  they  were  acquiring  liberty,  and  fove-
reignty  for  their  country,  for  which  they  had  received  no
return  from  the  patricians,  nor  fhared  in  any  of  the  public
advantages ;  but,  like  captives,  had  been  deprived  by  them
even  of  their  liberty;  to  recover  which  they  had  been
compelled  to  leave  their  country,  from  the  delire  of  another,
in  which,  as  they  were  free  men,  they  might  live  without
being  infulted  :  And  had  obtained  their  return  neither  by
offering  violence  to  the  fenate,  nor  compelling  them  by  a
'  war  to  eonfent  to  it,  but,  by  yielding  to  them,  when  thefe
delired,  and  intreated  them  to  receive,  again,  the  pledges
they  had  left  behind  them.  He,  then,  mentioned  the  oaths,
and  appealed  to  the  agreement,  which  had  been  entered
into,  to  induce  them  to  return  ;  in  which  there  wTas,  firft,  a
general  amnefty  ;  then,  a  power  granted  to  the  poor  to
create  magiftrates  both  to  protect  them,  and  oppofe  thofe,
who  delired  to  opprefs  them.  After  he  had  expatiated
upon  thefe  things,  he  produced  the  laws,  which  the  people
had,  not  long  before,  ratified;  both  That  concerning  the


zv  AotnflagiQS'  This  tribune  is  called  At*! agios  in  the  editions ;  and  Laetorius
by  sLivy.  .......  ....... .  J

?B.  ii.  c.  56.


the


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  85

the  tranflation  of  the  jurifdi&ion,  by  which  the  fenate  had
granted  to  the  people  the  power  of  trying  any  of  the  patri¬
cians  they  fhould  think  fit ;  and  That  concerning  their  fuf-
frages,  by  which  the  authority  of  thofe  fuffrages  was  tranf-
ferred  from  the  affemblies  of  the  centuries  to  Thofe  of  the
H  tribes.

XLVIL  When  he  had  gone  through  the  defence  of  the
people,  he  turned  to  Appius,  and  faid :  u  After  this,  dare
tC  you  abufe  thefe,  by  whofe  means  the  commonwealth,


<c  from  being  fmall,  is  become

24’  AAA*  TY> V  KVfjlOlltV  £7T0l<=i  TMV

x voiotv.  If  any  paffage  in  our  author
ever  called  for  the  affiftance  of  the
commentators,  it  is  this;  and  yet  not
one  of  them  has  fo  much  as  taken  no¬
tice  of  the  difficulty,  fo  far  from  ap¬
plying  any  remedy  to  it.  In  the  firft
place,  hiftorians  are  not  allowed  either
to  draw  confequences  themfelves,  or
to  introduce  others  drawing  confe¬
quences  from  fads,  which  have  never
been  mentioned  in  their  hiftories.
This  rule  Dionyfius  could  not  have
been  ignorant  of;  and,  to  do  him
jufbice,  he  has,  always,  obferved  it.
But  here,  if  we  follow  the  editions,
and  manufcripts,  he  fays  that  the  fe¬
nate  had  confented  to  a  law,  by  which
the  power,  before  exercifed  by  the  af-
fembiies  of  the  centuries,  was  tranf-
ferred  to  Thofe  of  the  curiae.  This
law  he  had  never  mentioned  before ;
nor,  indeed,  any  other  author;  be¬
cause  fuch  a  law  never  exifted :  For,
after  the  eftablifhment  of.  the  csmitia
tribute* ,  the  curiata  were  fo  far  from
fuccecding  to  the  power  of  the  centu-

1  Cicero  againftRull.  c.


confiderable,  and,  from  beino-

o

riata,  that  they  were  declining  apace,
and  only  made  ufe  of  upon  particular
occafions;  nay,  they,  at  laft,  were:
fo  far  in  difrepute,  that,  when  they
were  called  for  the  fake  of  the  aufpices,

1  thirty  lidors  reprefented  the  thirty
curiae.  This  being  moft  certainly  the
cafe,  I  would  read  QvAtliv  inftead  of
xxqixhv  ;  becaufe  this  was  really  the
fad,  and  a  fad  which  our  author  had
before,  not  only,  mentioned,  but  in-
larged  upon,  in  relating  the  affair  of
u  Coriolanus ;  when  the  fenate  con¬
fented  to  the  two  laws  here  mentioned
by  Laedorius :  By  the  firft  of  which,
the  people  had  a  power  of  trying  the
patricians ;  and,  by  the  laft,  That  of
trying  them  in  the  comitia  tributa ,
inftead  of  the  centuriata.  As  thefe
two  laws  were  obtained  at  the  fame
time,  and  are  mentioned  together  by
Laedorius;  and,  as  the  other  was'
never  before  taken  notice  of  by  Dio¬
nyfius,  or  by  any  other  author,  I  have
made  no  difficulty  to  follow  this  cor-
redion  in  the  tranflatien.


u  oblcure,


ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  T I E  S  OF  Book  IX.

44  obfcure,  illuflrious  ?  And  call  others  feditious,  and  re-
44  proach  them  with  a  kind  of  banifhment,  as  if  all  prefent
44  did  not  flill  remember  what  paffed  in  their  own  time,
44  that  your  anceftors,  having  raifed  a  fedition  againfl;  the
44  magistrates,  and  left  their  own  country,  took  refuge  here,
44  as  fuppliants  ?  Unlefs,  indeed,  you  will  fay  that  your
44  family,  in  leaving  their  country  through  a  defire  of
44  liberty,  a&ed  nobly  ;  but  that  the  Romans,  when  they
44  did  the  fame  thing,  a£ted  otherwife.  -  You  have  dared,
44  alfo,  to  revile  the  tribunitian  power,  as  introduced  into
44  the  commonwealth  for  its  deftru&ion,  and  perfuaded
44  thefe  to  abrogate  this  relief  of  the  poor,  this  facred,  this
44  irrevocable  relief,  fecured  by  the  great  fandlion  both  of
44  gods,  and  men,  thou  greateft  enemy  to  the  people,  and
44  moft  tyrannical  of  all  men  !  Neither  have  you  been  able
44  to  difcover  even  this,  that,  in  advancing  thefe  things,  you
44  traduce  both  the  fenate,  and  your  own  magiftracy  :  For
44  the  fenate,  having  raifed  a  fedition  againfl;  the  kings,
44  whofe  pride,  and  infults  they  refolved,  no  longer,  to  bear,
44  eftablifhed  the  confulfhip,  and,  before  they  had  expelled
44  the  kings,  invefled  others  with  the  regal  power  :  So  that,
44  every  thing  you  have  faid  againfl;  the  tribunitian  power,
44  as  introduced  for  the  definition  of  the  commonwealth,
44  becaufe  it  fprung  from  fedition,  you  have  faid  againfl
44  the  confulfhip  alfo  :  For  this  fprung  from  no  other  caufe,
44  than  from  the  fedition  of  the  patricians  againfl  the
44  kings.  But,  to  what  purpofe  do  I  fay  thefe  things  to  you,
4 4  as  to  a  citizen  indued  with  humanity,  and  moderation,

44  whom


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  87

whom  all  here  prefent  know  to  have  inherited  from  your
<c  anceftors  perverfenefs,  feverity,  and  enmity  to  the  people,
u  and  to  have  received  from  nature  a  favagenefs  incapable
<£  of  being  tamed  ?  Why  do  I  not  rather  prefer  adtions  to
<c  words ;  fall  upon  you,  and  let  you  fee  how  great  the
“  ftrength,  unknown  to  you,  is  of  that  people,  whom  you
a  were  not  affiamed  to  call  vagabond  and  vile,  and  how
<c  great  the  power  of  this  magiftracy,  which  the  law  obliges
“  you  to  reverence,  and  fubmit  to  ?  I  too  fhall  lay  alide  all
“  diffimulation,  and  begin.”

XLVIII.  Having  faid  this,  and  taken  the  oath,  which
was  among  them  the  greateft,  that  he  would  either  get  the
law  paffed,  or  lofe  his  life,  the  people  being  all  (ilent,  and
in  an  agony  of  expectation  concerning  what  he  was  going
to  do,  he  ordered  Appius  to  depart  the  aflembly :  But  he,
inftead  of  obeying,  placed  the  lidlors  about  him  together
with  the  body  of  men,  which  he  had  brought  from  home
for  that  purpofe,  and  obftinately  refufed  to  leave  the  forum ;
when  Laedtorius,  commanding  (Hence,  faid,  that  the  tri¬
bunes  ordered  the  conful  to  be  carried  to  prifon.  Upon
this,  the  officer,  by  his  command,  advanced  to  feize  his
perfon ;  and  the  foremoft  lidtor  repulfed  him  with  blows.
The  people  railing  a  great  outcry,  and  (hewing  their  refent-
ment,  Laedtorius  himfelf  came  forward,  and  exhorted  them
all  to  affift  him.  Appius,  fupported  by  a  numerous,  and
ftrong  body  of  young  men,  flood  his  ground.  After  that,
indecent  words,  and  clamors  palled  between  them,  and  they
puffied  one  another  5  till,  at  laft,  the  conteft  ended  in

blows.


88  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

i  »  .

n

blows,  and  they  began  to  throw  (tones.  But  Quintius,  the
other  conful,  repreffed  their  fury,  and  prevented  the  mifchief
from  proceeding  further ;  he,  together  with  the  moft  an¬
cient  fenators,  intreating,  and  conjuring  them  all  to  defift,
and  throwing  himfelf  between  the  contending  parties.  The
day,  alfo,  was  well  nigh  fpent :  So  that,  they  feparated
againft  their  will.  The  following  days,  the  magiftrates
accufed  one  another ;  the  conful  charging  the  tribunes  with
an  endeavour  to  invalidate  his  authority,  by  ordering  a  con¬
ful  to  be  carried  to  prifon;  and  the  tribunes  complained
that  the  conful  had  ftruck  thofe,  whofe  perfons  were  ren¬
dered  facred  by  the  law,  LaecTorius  having  on  his  face  the
marks  of  the  ftrokes  Bill  to  be  feen :  And  the  whole  city,
being  full  of  rage  and  fury,  was  rent  with  fa&ion.  From
this  time,  the  people,  together  with  the  tribunes,  kept  guard
in  the  capitol  both  day,  and  night  without  intermiflion.
The  fenate  then  affembled,  and  entered  into  a  long,  and  dif¬
ficult  coniideration  of  the  means  to  put  a  flop  to  the  fedi-
tion ;  and,  not  only,  the  greatnefs  of  the  danger,  but  the
difleniion,  alfo,  of  the  confuls  prefented  itfelf  to  their
thoughts :  For  Quintius  advifed  to  yield  to  the  people  in
every  thing,  that  was  reafonable ;  but  Appius  thought  death
more  eligible  than  fubmiffion.

XLIX.  There  being  no  end  of  thefe  contefts,  Quintius
took  the  tribunes,  and  Appius  apart,  and  begged,  and  con¬
jured  them  to  prefer  the  confideration  of  the  public  to  their
private  animolities :  And,  obferving  that  thofe  relented,  but
that  his  collegue  perlifted  in  his  former  arrogance,  he  per-
*  fuaded


Book  l5C.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  89

fuaded  LaeCtorius,  and  the  reft  of  the  tribunes  to  refer  both
their  private,  and  public  complaints  to  the  determination  of
the  fenate.  After  he  had  obtained  this,  he  aflembled  the
fenate  ;  and,  giving  great  commendations  to  the  tribunes,
begged  of  his  collegue  not  to  oppofe  the  public  fafety;
then  called  upon  thofe,  who  ufed  to  deliver  their  opinions.
Publius  Valerius  Poplicola,  who  was  firft  called,  advifed  that
the  mutual  accufations  of  the  tribunes,  and  the  conful,  re¬
lating  to  what  they  had  fuffered,  or  done  in  the  tumult,
fince  it  had  not  flowed  from  an  infidious  deflgn,  or  a  view
to  their  own  ambition,  but  from  a  conteft  concerning  public
meafures,  might  be  difmifled  by  a  general  vote,  and  that
no  one  be  called  in  queflion  on  that  account :  And,  con¬
cerning  the  law  itfelf,  flnce  Appius,  the  conful,  would  not
fuller  any  law  to  be  laid  before  the  people  without  the
previous  order  of  the  fenate,  that  the  fenate,  firft:,  take  it  into
confideration  ;  and  that  the  tribunes,  together  with  the
confuls,  take  care  to  preferve  union,  and  good  order  among
the  citizens,  when  they  come  to  give  their  votes  in  relation
to  it.  This  advice  being  approved  of  by  all,  Quintius  imme¬
diately  put  the  queflion  to  the  fenate  concerning  the  law;
and,  after  many  objections  made  to  it  by  Appius,  and  many
anfivers  made  to  them  by  the  tribunes,  it  was  carried  by  a
great  majority  to  lay  it  before  the  people.  The  previous
refolution  of  the  fenate  being  palled,  the  private  contefls  of
the  magiftrates  ceafed,  and  the  people,  joyfully,  accepting
this  conceffion  of  the  fenate,  ratified  the  law  by  their  votes.
From  that  time  to  this,  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  and  the
,  Vol.  IV.  N  aediles


Book  IX.


9o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

aediles  are  chofen  without  aufpices,  or  any  other  religious
rites,  in  the  affemblies  of  the  tribes.  This  was  the  end  of
the  tumult,  which  difturbed  the  commonwealth  at  that
time.

L.  Not  long  after,  the  Romans  thought  proper  to  raife
forces,  and  to  fend  out  both  the  confuls  againft  the  Aequi,
and  the  Volfci:  For  it  was  faid  that  numerous  armies  of
both  thefe  nations  had  taken  the  field,  and  were,  then,  laying
wafte  the  territories  of  their  allies :  The  armies  being  foon

o

ready,  and  the  confuls  having  drawn  lots  for  the  command
of  them,  Quintius  marched  againft  the  Aequi,  and  Appius
againft  the  Volfci.  The  fuccefs  of  each  of  the  confuls  was
fuch  as  might  be  expected :  For  the  army  commanded  by
Quintius,  pleafed  with  the  mildnefs,  and  moderation  of  their
general,  were  ready  to  obey  all  his  orders,  and  prefented
themfelves  to  mod  of  the  dangers  of  their  own  accord,  from
a  defire  of  acquiring  glory,  and  honor  for  their  command¬
er  :  Thus,  he  overrun  great  part  of  the  country  of  the
Aequi,  and  plundered  it,  the  enemy  not  daring  to  come  to
an  ingagement :  By  which  means,  he  poftefied  himfelf  of  a
great  booty,  and  rich  fpoils :  And  the  army,  after  a  fhortftay
in  the  enemy’s  country,  returned  to  the  city  without  any  lofs,
bringing  home  their  general  adorned  with  the  luftre  of  his
a&ions.  Butthe  army  under  Appius,  from  their  hatred  to  him,
negledted  many  things  eftablifhed  by  the  Roman  difcipline  :
For,  during  the  whole  campaign,  they  fhewed  an  affecled
cowardice,  and  a  contempt  of  their  general ;  and,  when  they
were  to  ingage  the  army  of  the  Volfci,  and  their  commanders

had


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENSIS.  91
had  drawn  them  up  in  order  of  battle,  they  refufed  to  fight ;
and,  even,  the  centurions,  and  the  ftandard  bearers,  thefe,
throwing  away  their  ftandards,  and  the  others  leaving  their
ranks,  fled  to  the  camp  :  And,  it  the  enemy,  wondering
at  their  unexpected  flight,  and  fearing  an  ambufh,  had  not
flopped  their  purfuit,  the  greateft  part  of  the  Romans  had
been  cut  in  pieces.  This  they  did  through  the  envy  they
bore  to  their  general,  left,  by  the  luftre  of  his  fuccefs,  he
might  have  obtained  a  glorious  triumph,  and  the  other
honors  due  to  a  conqueror.  And  the  next  day,  when  the
conful  fometimes  upbraided  them  with  their  inglorious
flight,  fometimes  exhorted  them  to  efface  that  ignominious
action  by  a  noble  effort ;  and,  at  others,  threatened  to  put
the  laws  in  execution  againft  them,  if  they  refufed  to  face
the  dangers  of  the  field,  they  broke  out  into  difobedience,
clamoured  againft  him,  and  defired  he  would  lead  them
out  of  the  enemy’s  country,  fpent  as  they  were  with  the
wounds  they  had  received  :  For  moft  of  them  had  bound
up  the  found  parts  of  their  bodies,  as  if  they  had  been
wounded:  So  that,  Appius  was  obliged  to  withdraw  his
forces  from  the  enemy’s  country  :  And  the  Volfci,  purfuing
them  in  their  retreat,  killed  a  great  number  of  them.  As
foon  as  they  were  in  their  own  territories,  the  conful  affem-
bled  the  troops ;  and,  after  many  reproaches,  laid  he  was
refolved  to  inflid  on  them  the  punifhment  ordained  againft
thofe  who  leave  their  ranks :  And,  not  with  ftanding  the  le¬
gates,  and  the  other  officers  intreated  him  toufe  moderation,
and  not  to  accumulate  calamities  upon  the  commonwealth,

N  2  he


92  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

he  paid  no  regard  to  any  of  them,  but  ordered  the  punifh-
ment  to  be  inflicted.  After  which,  the  centurions,  whofe
centuries  had  run  away,  and  the  ftandard  bearers,  who  had
loft  their  ftandards,  were  fome  of  them  beheaded  with  an
ax,  and  others  beaten  with  flicks  till  they  died :  The  com¬
mon  foldiers  were  decimated ;  every  tenth  man,  upon  whom
the  lot  fell,  being  put  to  death  for  the  reft :  This  is  the
punifhment  in  ufe  among  the  Romans  for  thofe  who  leave
their  ranks,  or  deliver  up  their  ftandards.  After  this,  the
election  of  magiftrates  drawing  near,  the  conful,  detefted  by
all,  brought  home  the  remains  of  the  army  afflicted,  and
difgraced.

LI.  25  Lucius  Valerius  for  the  fecond  time,  and  Tiberius
Aemilius  being  appointed  confuls,  the  tribunes,  after  a  fhort
time,  refumed  the  affair  of  the  divifion  of  the  lands;  and,
coming  to  the  confuls,  delired,  and  earneftly  intreated  them  to
perform  the  promifes  made  by  the  fenate  to  the  people  in  the
confulfhip  of  Spurius  Caflius,  and  Proculus  Virginius.  Both
the  confuls  favoured  their  requeft  ;  Tiberius  Aemilius  from
an  old,  and  not  an  unreafonable  refentment  he  entertained
againft  the  fenate  for  having  refufed  the  triumph  to  his  father,
when  he  demanded  it ;  and  Valerius  defired  to  apply  a  re¬
medy  to  the  difpleafure,  which  the  people  had  conceived
againft  him  for  having,  when  quaeftor,  caufed  Spurius  Caflius
to  be  put  to  death  as  aiming  at  tyranny,  a  man,  who  had
fhewn  himfelf,  not  only,  the  greateft  general,  but  the  ableft
politician  of  his  time,  and  firft  propofed  the  law  concerning

*5*  Asxm  Ovatefw.  See  the  firft  annotation  on  the  feventh  book.

the


Book IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  93

-  y

the  divifion  of  lands ;  and,  for  that  reafon  chiefly  was  hated
by  the  patricians,  as  one  who  fought  to  gain  the  affedions
of  the  people.  The  confuls,  therefore,  having  promifed
them  to  propofe  the  diviflon  of  lands  in  the  fenate,  and  to
aflift  them  in  procuring  the  law  to  be  enaded,  the  tribunes
gave  credit  to  their  promifes ;  and,  going  to  the  fenate,  fpoke
with  great  moderation :  And  the  former,  deflring  to  avoid  the
appearance  of  contention,  gave  them  no  oppofition,  but  de-
flred  the  oldeft  fenators  to  deliver  their  opinions :  Lucius
Aemilius,  the  father  of  one  of  the , confuls,  was  the  firft
perfon  called  upon,  who  faid  that,  “  in  his  opinion,  it  was
“  both  juft  in  itfelf,  and  for  the  intereft  of  the  coinmon-
“  wealth,  that  the  pofleflions  of  the  public  fhould  be  di-
“  vided  among  all,  and  not  among  a  few ;  and  he  advifed
“  to  gratify  the  people  in  what  they  defired,  to  the  end  that
<c  this  conceffion  might  be  efteemed  a  favor:  For  they  had
“  granted  even  many  other  things  to  them  through  necefi-
(C  fity,  not  choice:  And,  that  the  poflefiors  of  the  public
cc  lands  ought  to  be  thankful  for  the  time  they  had  enjoyed
<c  them  unobferved  ;  and,  when  ordered  to  refign  thofe
“  lands,  not  defire  to  continue  in  the  poffeflion  of  them,
“  He  added  that,  befides  the  point  of  right,  the  force  of
“  which  every  one  muft  acknowledge,  and  according  to
“  which  the  pofleflions  of  the  public  ought  to  be  common
“  to  all,  and  Thofe  of  private  perfons  the  property  of  fuch
“  as  had  acquired  them  according  to  law,  the  matter  in
“  queftion  was,  now,  made  even  neceflary  by  the  fenate^
<c  who,  feventeen  years  before,  had  ordered  the  lands  to

«  be


Book  IX.


<>4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

■“  be  divided:  And  he  fhewed  that  the  order,  then  made
cc  by  them,  was  advantageous  to  the  commonwealth,  fince
<£  the  view  of  it  was  that  neither  the  lands  fhould  lie  un-
u  cultivated,  nor  the  poor,  by  living  at  Rome  in  idlenefs,
*£  which  was  now  the  cafe,  envy  the  advantages  of  others ;

“  and  that  young  men  might  be  brought  up  for  the  fervice
of  the  commonwealth  in  the  habitations,  and  pofiefiions
t£  of  their  fathers,  and  derive  fome  fpirit  from  a  good  edu-
“  cation;  fince  fuch,  as  have  no  pofleffions  of  their  own,
“  and  live  miferably  on  the  wages  they  receive  for  cultiva-
C£  ting  Thofe  of  others,  either  do  not  defire  to  beget  children
“  at  all,  or,  if  they  do,  produce  a  bad  and  unhappy  off-
£C  fpring,  fuch,  as  may  be  expe&ed  from  low  marriages,  and
“  a  beggarly  education.  My  opinion,  therefore,  is,  fays  he,
££  that  theconfuls  carry  into  execution  the  refolutions,  which
t£  were,  then,  paffed  by  the  fenate,  and  have,  fince,  been
££  delayed  by  reafon  of  the  intervening  tumults,  and  appoint
££  the  perfons,  who  are  to  divide  the  lands.5 5

LII.  Aemilius  having  fpoken  thus,  Appius  Claudius,  the
conful  of  the  former  year,  being  the  fecond  perfon  called
upon,  gave  a  contrary  opinion,  and  faid,  ££  that  neither  the
££  fenate  ever  defigned  to  divide  the  pofiefiions  of  the  public
t£  (otherwife  their  defigns  had,  long  fince,  been  carried  into
££  execution)  but  only  deferred  it  to  another  feafon,  and  to
££  another  confideration,  from  a  defire  of  putting  a  flop  to
“  the  fedition,  then,  raging,  which  had  been  raifed  by  the
£C  conful,  who  was  aiming  at  tyranny,  and,  afterwards,
*£  fuffered  condign  punifhment:  Neither  did  the  confuls,

££  who


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSEN  SIS.  9^

<c  who  were  created  immediately  after  this  refolution  of  the
“  fenate,  carry  the  fame  into  execution,  forefeeing  the  great
“  mifchiefs  to  which  this  would  give  birth,  if  the  poor  were
u  once  accuftomed  to  fhare  the  poffeffions  of  the  public  :
“  Neither  did  the  confuls  of  the  next  fifteen  years,  though
££  many  dangers  were  brought  upon  them  by  the  people^
c£  do  any  thing  contrary  to  the  interefl  of  the  public,  becaufe
££  £ven  thefe  were  not  authorized  by  the  refolution  of  the
“  fenate  to  appoint  the  perfons,  who  were  to  divide  the
££  lands,  but  the  firft  confuls :  So  that,  it  neither  becomes
££  you,  Valerius,  and  Aemilius,  defcended  as  you  are  from
£l  worthy  anceftors ;  neither  is  it  fafe  for  you  to  propofe  the
££  divifion  of  lands  in  this  place,  fince  the  fenate  did  not
££  diredlyou  to  carry  it  into  execution.  Let  this  fuffice  to
££  evince  that  you,  who  have  been  made  confuls  fo  many
££  years  after  that  refolution  was  paffed  by  the  fenate,  are
££  not  bound  by  it.  Now,  concerning  thofe,  who  have  either
££  forcibly,  or  fecretly,  appropriated  to  themfelves  the  public
££  lands,  a  few  words  will  be  fufficient :  If  any  man  knows
££  that  another  enjoys  lands,  to  which  he  cannot  fupport  his
££  title  by  law,  let  him  give  information  of  it  to  the  confuls,
c  1  and  profecute  him  according  to  the  laws,  which  are  not,
££  now,  to  be  enaded :  For  thev  have  been  ena&ed  Iona’
££  fince,  and  no  length  of  time  has  abrogated  them.  But
££  fince  Aemilius  has,  alfo,  fpoken  to  the  utility  of  this  mea-
££  fure,  and  aflerted  that  the  diviiion  of  lands  will  tend  to,
C£  the  good  of  all,  I  will  not  fufl’er  even  this  part  to  paik
£<  without  refuting;  it :  For  he  feems  to  me  to  confider  onlv

££  the-


Book  IX.


96  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

(i  the  prefent,  without  any  regard  to  the  future  ;  becaufe
££  the  portion  of  the  public  lands  to  be  granted  to  the  idle,
u  and  the  poor,  which  feems  to  him,  now,  of  fmall  im-
u  portance,  will,  one  day,  produce  many  great  evils :  Since,
<c  the  cuftom,  that  accompanies  it,  and  will  fubflft,  mu  ft
<c  for  ever  prove  pernicious  and  dreadful :  For  the  gratifi-
u  cation  of  wicked  defires  does  not  eradicate,  but  inflame
cc  them,  and  render  them  ftill  more  wicked.  Let  their
€C  actions  convince  you  of  what  I  fay  :  For,  to  what  pur-
<{  pofe  fhould  you  pay  any  regard  either  to  my  words,' or  to
u  Thofe  of  Aemilius  ?

LIII.  “  You  all  know  how  many  enemies  we  have  over-
C£  come,  how  large  an  extent  of  country  we  have  ravaged,
cc  and  how  great  a  quantity  of  fpoils  we  have  taken  in  the
<c  towns  we  have  conquered,  the  lofs  of  which  has  reduced
<c  the  enemy  from  a  ftate  of  opulence,  to  great  want ;  and
<c  that  thofe  who,  now,  complain  of  poverty,  were  deprived
C£  of  none  of  thefe  fpoils,  nor  had  lefs  than  their  fhare  in  the
<c  diftribution  of  them.  And,  does  it  appear  that  they  have
4  c  improved  their  former  condition  by  thefe  acquifttions,  or  live
<£  in  greater  fplendor  ?  I  have  wifhed,  indeed,  and  prayed  to
4C  the  gods  that  it  might  prove  fo,  to  the  end  they  might
C£  become  lefs  troublefome  to  the  city  they  inhabit:  But,
c£  inftead  of  that,  you  fee,  and  hear  them  complaining  of
C£  their  extreme  poverty :  So  that,  if  you  were  to  grant  them
c£  what  they  now  afk,  and  more,  their  fortunes  would  not  even
££  be  improved  by  it:  For  the  poverty  of  thefe  men  does  not
u  flow  from  their  condition,  but  from  their  behaviour;

<c  whom


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  97

££  whom  this  fmall  portion  of  land  will  be  fo  far  from  con-
££  tenting,  that  even  all  the  prefents  ol  kings,  and  tyrants
££  cannot  fatisfy  them.  And,  if  we  grant  them  this  alfo,
££  we  fhall  a£t  like  thofe  phyficians,  who,  in  their  prefcrip-
££  tions,  confult  the  tafte  of  their  patients :  For  the  diftem-
££  peredpart  of  the  commonwealth  will  not  be  cured  by  this
££  conceffion,  but  even  the  found  part  will  be  infecfted.
££  Upon  the  whole,  fenators,  it  is  incumbent  upon  you
£C  to  employ  great  care,  and  eonftderation  that  you  may
££  preferve,  with  all  poffible  vigor,  the  manners  of  the
££  people  from  the  corruption,  that  is  ftealing  upon  them  :
££  For  you  fee  to  what  a  height  the  difobedience  of  the
££  people  is  arrived,  and  that  they  will,  no  longer,  be  go-
£C  verned  by  the  confuls ;  and  were  fo  far  from  repenting
££  of  what  they  did  here,  that  they  fhewed  the  fame  difo-
£C  bedience  even  in  the  army,  throwing  down  their  arms,
££  leaving  their  ranks,  abandoning  their  ftandards  to  the
££  enemy,  and  running  away  in  a  fhameful  manner  before
££  they  ingaged,  as  if  they  could  rob  me  of  the  glory  of  the
££  vi<ftory,  without  robbing  their  country,  at  the  fame  time,
££  of  the  trophies,  which  adorn  that  victory :  Thefe,  now,  are
££  erected  by  the  Volfci  againft  the  Romans,  their  tem-
£C  pies  are  adorned  with  our  fpoils,  and  their  cities  triumph,
££  now,  more  than  ever,  which,  before,  ufed  to  fupplicate  our
££  generals  to  fave  them  from  flavery,  and  fubverfion.  Is
££  it  then  juft,  is  it  becoming  in  you  to  thank  them  for  fuch
££  fucceffes,  and  to  reward  them  with  public  grants  by  a
€£  divifton  of  thofe  lands,  which,  as  far  as  in  them  lay,  the
Vol.  IV.  O  v  <c  enemy


98  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

££  enemy  are  roafters  of?  But,  why  fhould  we  accufe  thefe,
£C  who,  through  the  want  of  education,  and  of  birth,  pay
“  little  regard  to  worthy  actions,  when  we  fee  that  all  even
“  of  our  own  number  are  not  actuated  with  an  ancient  fpirit :
“  So  far  from  it,  that,  by  fome,  gravity  is  called  haughti-
££  nefs;  juftice,  folly;  fortitude,  madnefs,  and  modefty,
££  fimplicity.  On  the  other  fide,  thofe  things  that  were,
££  formerly,  the  objects  of  deteftation,  are,  now,  extolled,
££  and  looked  upon  by  the  corrupted  as  wonderful  qualifi-
££  cations,  fuch  as  cowardife,  bufFoomy,  malignity,  crafty
cc  wifdom,  rafhnefs  in  undertaking  every  thing  that  is  bad,
<£  and  eafinefs  in  abandoning  every  thing  that  is  good  ;
££  vices,  which  have  firft  feized,  and  then  fubverted  many
££  ftrong  cities.  Thefe  things,  fenators,  whether  agreeable,
££  or  difpleafing  to  you,  have  been  delivered  with  all  truth,
££  and  freedom;  and,  to  thofe  among  you,  who  fhall  ap-
£C  prove  of  them  (if  any  of  you  fhall  approve  of  them)  they
££  will  prove  both  a  prefent  advantage,  and  a  future  fecurity ;
££  but,  to  me,  who,  to  promote  the  good  of  the  public,  bring
££  private  hatred  upon  myfelf,  the  caufe  of  great  dangers :
u  For  reafon  enables  me  to  forefee  what  will  happen,  and  I
££  confider  the  calamities  of  others,  as  the  examples  of  my
££  own  misfortunes.”

LIV.  After  Appius  had  fpoken  thus,  and  almoft  all  the
reft  of  the  fenators  had  delivered  the  fame  opinion,  the  fenate
was  difmiffed.  The  tribunes,  refenting  their  difappointment>
departed ;  and,  after  thatj  confidered  by  what  means  they
might  take  revenge  on  the  man:  They  refolved,  therefore,,

after


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC A RN  A  S  S E NTS  I  S.  99
after  a  long  confutation,  to  try  Appius  for  his  life:  And
having,  purfuant  to  that  refolution,  accufed  him  in  an
affembly  of  the  people,  they  defired  all  to  be  prefent  on
the  day  they  fhould  appoint,  in  order  to  give  their  votes
concerning  him.  The  accufations  they  defigned  to  bring
againfl:  him  were  thefe:  That  he  had  given  pernicious
counfels  againft  the  people ;  introduced  a  fedition  into  the
city  ;  laid  hands  on  a  tribune,  contrary  to  the  facred  laws ;
and,  having  the  command  of  the  army,  returned  home
with  lofs,  and  great  infamy.  The  tribunes,  having  declared
thefe  accufations  in  the  aflembly,  and  appointed  a  certain
day,  on  which  they  faid  they  would  go  through  with  the
trial,  they  fummoned  him  to  appear  on  that  day,  and  make
his  defence.  All  the  patricians,  refenting  this  proceeding,
prepared  themfelves  with  the  greateft  zeal  to  fave  the  .
man ;  but,  when  they  advifed  Appius  to  fubmit  to  his
fituation,  and  appear  in  a  manner  fuitable  to  his  condition,  '
he  faid,  he  would  do  nothing  ungenerous,  or  unworthy  of
his  former  adlions ;  and  that  he  had  rather  die  a  thoufand
deaths,  than  throw  himfelf  at  the  feet  of  any  man :  And,
when  his  friends  were  prepared  to  intreat  the  people  in  his
favor,  he  oppofed  it,  faying  that  he  fhould  be  doubly
afhamed  to  fee  others  do  That  for  him,  which  he  thought
unbecoming  to  do  even  for  himfelf.  After  he  had  faid  this,
and  many  other  things  of  the  like  nature,  and  neither
changed  his  drefs,  altered  the  fiercenefs  of  his  looks,  nor
abated  any  thing  of  his  fpirit,  when  he  faw  every  one  intent
upon  his  trial,  and  anxioufly  expe&ing  the  event  of  it,  and

O  2  that


ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  IX.

that  a  few  days  only  were  left,  before  it  was  to  come  on,  he
put  himfelf  to  death.  However,  his  friends  pretended  that
he  died  of  ficknefs.  When  his  body  was  brought  to  the
forum,  his  fon  went  to  the  tribunes,  and  confuls,  and  defired
they  would  aflemble  the  people  in  the  manner  ufual  upon
fuch  occafions,  and  give  him  leave  to  make  an  oration  upon
the  death  of  his  father,  according  to  the  practice  of  the
Romans  at  the  funerals  of  worthy  men:  But  the  tribunes,
while  the  confuls  were  calling  the  affembly,  oppofed  it,  and
ordered  the  youth  to  take  away  the  dead  body.  However,
the  people  would  not  fuffer  it,  nor  bear  to  fee  the  body  caft
out  with  ignominy ;  but  gave  leave  to  the  youth  to  perform  the
cuftomary  honors  to  his  father.  This  was  the  end  of  Appius.

LV.  The  confuls,  having  raifed  the  armies,  led  them  out
of  the  city  ;  Lucius  Valerius  marching  againfi:  the  Aequi,
and  Tiberius  Aemilius  againfi:  the  Sabines:  For  thefe  had
made  an  irruption  into  the  country  of  the  Romans,  during
the  fedition ;  and,  having  plundered  a  great  part  of  it,  were
returned  home  with  a  confiderable  booty.  The  Aequi  often
ingaged ;  and,  great  numbers  of  their  men  being  wounded,
they  fled  to  their  camp,  which  was  ftronglyfituated,  and,  from
that  time,  never  came  out  to  fight.  Valerius  endeavoured  to
force  their  camp,  but  was  hindered  by  the  gods  from  effecting
it :  For,  after  he  had  approached  the  camp,  and  begun  the
attack,  the  heavens  were  covered  with  darknefs,  and  there
fell  a  prodigious  rain,  accompanied  with  lightning,  and
terrible  thunder  ;  and,  as  foon  as  the  army  was  difperfed,
the  ftorm  ceafed,  and  over  that  place  the  fky  was  clear.

The


/


roi


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  AS  SENS  I  S.

The  conful,  looking  upon  this  as  an  omen,  and  the  augurs,
at  the  fame  time,  diftuading  him  from  befieging  the  camp,
he  was  deterred  from  it,  and  laid  wafte  their  country ;  and,
having  given  to  his  men  all  the  booty  he  met  with,  he  re¬
turned  home  with  his  army.  While  Tiberius  Aemilius  was
over-running  the  enemy’s  country  with  great  contempt  of
them  at  fir  ft,  and  expecting  no  enemy,  he  was  attacked  by
the  army  of  the  Sabines,  and  a  pitched  battle  was  fought,
which  began  about  noon,  and  lafted  till  fun  fet ;  and  when
it  was  dark,  the  two  armies  retired  to  their  camps,  without
either  conquering,  or  being  conquered :  The  following  days,
the  generals  buried  each  their  own  dead,  and  fortified  their
camps  with  ditches ;  and  both  of  them  took  the  fame  refo-
lution,  which  was  to  defend  their  own  camps ;  and  not  to
ingage  in  another  action.  At  laft,  they  ftruck  their  tents,
and  withdrew  their  forces.

LVI.  The  year  following,  which  was  the  feventy  eighth
Olympiad,  at  which  Parmenides  of  Pofidonia  won  the  prize
of  the  ftadium,Theagenides  being  annual  archon  at  Athens,
Aulus  Virginius  Nomentanus,  and  Titus  Numicius  Prifcus
were  chofen  confuls.  They  had  no  fooner  entered  upon
their  magiftracy,  than  news  was  brought  that  the  Volfci
were  advancing  with  a  numerous  army.  And,  not  long
after,  one  of  the  fortreffes  of  the  Romans  was  furprifed,
and  fet  on  fire :  This  fortrefs  was  near  Rome,  and  the  fmoke
informed  the  citizens  of  the  misfortune.  Upon  this,  the
confuls,  it  being  yet  night,  fent  fome  horfe  to  difcover  the
motions  of  the  enemy ;  and,  having  placed  guards  upon  the

walls.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

walls,  and  ported  themfelves  before  the  gates  with  thofe
who  were  beft  prepared  for  expedition,  they  waited  for  the
report  of  the  horfe.  As  foon  as  it  was  day,  and  all  the  forces
in  the  city  were  aflembled,  they  marched  againft  the  enemy :
Thefe,  after  they  had  plundered  the  fortrefs,  and  fet  fire  to
it,  retired  in  hafte.  The  confuls  extinguifhed  the  fire;  and,
leaving  a  garrifon  in  the  fortrefs,  returned  to  Rome.  A  few
days  after,  both  of  them  took  the  field  with  their  own  forces,
and  thofe  of  their  allies,  Virginius  marching  againft  the
Aequi,  and  Numicius  againft  the  Volfci :  The  war  fuc-
ceeded  according  to  the  defire  of  both:  For  the  Aequi,
when  Virginius  was  laying  wafte  their  country,  durft  not
venture  an  ingagement ;  but,  having  placed  an  ambufh  of
chofen  men  in  the  woods  with  orders  to  fall  upon  the
enemy  when  difperfed,  they  were  difappointed  of  their  hopes,
the  Romans  foon  difcovering  their  defign ;  when  a  fharp
adlion  infued,  in  which  the  Aequi  loft  many  of  their  men:
So  that,  from  that  time,  they  declined  even  to  try  the  fortune
of  another  ingagement.  Neither  did  Numicius  find  any
army  to  oppofe  him,  while  he  was  marching  to  26  Antiurn,
which  was,  at  that  time,  one  of  the  moft  confiderable  cities
of  the  Volfci;  but  all  the  people  of  that  nation  were  forced
to  defend  themfelves  from  the  walls  of  their  refpe&ive  cities.
In  the  mean  time,  great  part  of  their  country  was  laid  wafte,
and  27  a  final  1  fea-port  town  was  taken,  in  which  there  was

2,6‘  Aft  aim  aroA<v.  See  the  fifty  fe-  as  Sigonius  fays  it  is  in  theold  editions,
venth  annotation  on  the  fourth  book.  Cerio.  If  this  is  the  prefent x  Net  tunc,

27-  noAi^vv?  tic  mdakarltof.  w  Livy  it  flood  on  the  eaft  of  Antiurn,  upon
calls  this  fmall  fea-port  town  Ceno,  or,  the  little  river  Loracina.

*  Cluver.  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  p.  937.


w  B.  ii.  c.  63.


a  dock


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  103

a  dock  for  their  fhips,  and  a  market  for  all  the  neceftaries  of
life  ;  and  thither  they  ufed  to  carry  the  many  prizes  they
made  by  their  piracies :  The  conful  gave  leave  to  the  army
to  plunder  the  place  of  the  flaves,  effects,  cattle,  and  mer-
chandife :  But  all  the  free  men,  who  had  efcaped  military
execution,  were  directed  to  be  fold  publicly  :  There  were,
alfo,  taken  twenty  two  long  fhips  belonging  to  the  Antiates,
together  with  the  rigging,  and  furniture  of  other  fhips :
After  that,  the  Romans  fet  fire  to  the  houfes  by  order  of
the  conful,  deftroyed  the  dock,  and  demolifhed  the  walls
to  the  foundations  :  So  that,  even  after  their  departure,  the
fortrefs  was  no  longer  of  any  ufe  to  the  Antiates.  Thefe
were  the  exploits  of  the  two  confuls,  while  they  adted
feparately  :  They,  afterwards,  joined  their  forces,  and  made
an  incurfion  into  the  territories  of  the  Sabines  ;  and,  having
laid  them  wade,  returned  home  with  their  forces.  And
thus  the  year  ended.

LVII.  The  year  after,  Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus,  and
Quintus  Servilius  Prifcus  having  entered  upon  the  conful-
fhip,  the  national  forces  of  the  Romans  were  in  arms,  and
thofe  of  their  allies  prefented  themfelves  of  their  own  accord,
before  they  had  notice  fent  them  of  the  intended  expedition.
And  the  confuls,  after  they  had  offered  up  their  vows  to  the
gods,  and  performed  the  luftration  of  the  army,  went  out
againft  the  enemy.  The  Sabines,  againft  whom  Servilius
marched,  neither  came  to  an  ingagement,  nor  took  the
field  ;  but,  continuing  in  their  ftrong  places,  fuffered  their
lands  to  be  laid  wafte,  their  houfes  to  be  burned,  and  their

{laves


104  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

flaves  to  defert :  So  that,  the  Romans  retired  out  of  their
country  with  great  eafe,  loaded  with  fpoils,  and  exulting  in
their  fuccefs.  This  was  the  event  of  the  expedition  con¬
duced  by  Servilius.  The  forces,  which  marched  under
Quintius  againft  the  Aequi,  and  the  Volfci  (for  thofe,  who
were  to  fight  for  the  common  caufe,  were  gathered  together
in  one  place  from  both  the  nations,  and  had  incamped  be¬
fore  the  city  of  the  Antiates)  advancing  with  greater  expedi¬
tion  than  ufual,  appeared  before  them,  and  laid  down  their
baggage  not  far  from  the  enemy’s  camp,  in  a  low  place,
where  they  firft  had  been  feen  by,  and  feen,  the  enemy,
to  avoid  the  appearance  of  fearing  the  number  of  their  forces,
greatly  fuperior  to  their  own.  When  both  armies  were
ready  lor  the  battle,  they  advanced  to  the  plain  ;  and,
ingaging,  fought  till  noon,  neither  of  them  yielding  to,  or
gaining  ground  upon,  the  other,  and  both  continuing  to
relieve  that  part  which  fuffered  with  frefh  troops  :  But  the
Aequi,  and  the  Volfci,  being  more  numerous  than  the
Romans,  found  the  greateft  benefit  from  this  relief ;  and,
by  that  means,  had  the  advantage  over  the  enemy,  whole
number  was  not  equal  to  their  courage.  Quintius,  feeing
many  of  his  men  lie  dead,  and  that  the  greatefl  part  of  thofe
who  furvived  were  wounded,  was  upon  the  point  of  order¬
ing  a  retreat  to  be  founded ;  but,  fearing  left  the  enemy
fhould  look  upon  this  retreat  as  a  flight,  he  relblved  to  make
apufh:  And,  taking  with  him  the  beft  of  his  horfe,  flew
to  the  right,  which  fuffered  moft ;  where  he  upbraided  the
officers  themfelves  with  want  of  courage,  put  them  in  mind

of


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  105

of  their  former  exploits;  fhewed  them  to  what  fhame,  and
danger  they  would  be  expofed  to,  if  they  offered  to  fly ;
and,  at  laft,  aflerted  a  thing  that  was  not  true,  which  con-
tributed  more  than  all  he  had  faid,  to  infpire  his  own  men
with  confidence,  and  the  enemy  with  fear :  He  told  them,
that  their  other  wing  had,  already,  put  the  enemy  to  flight,
and  were  advanced  to  their  camp.  Having  faid  this,  he
charged  the  Volfci ;  and,  leaping  from  his  horfe,  he,  with
the  chofen  horfe  he  had  brought  with  him,  fought  hand  to
hand.  Upon  this,  thofe  whofe  fpirits  flagged  till  then,  were
animated,  and,  as  if  they  were  become  other  men,  all  rufhed
upon  the  enemy.  And  the  Volfci  (for  thefe  flood  oppolite
to  them)  after  a  long  reflftance,  gave  way.  Quintius,  having
put  thefe  to  flight,  mounted  his  horfe ;  and,  riding  to  the
other  wing,  fhewed  to  the  foot  ported  there  that  part  of  the
enemy  which  was  overcome,  and  exhorted  them  not  to
behave  themfelves  with  lefs  bravery  than  the  others.

LVIII.  After  this,  none  of  the  enemy  flood  their  ground ;
but  all  fled  together  to  their  camp.  However,  the  Romans
did  not  purfue  them  far;  but,  being  themfelves  fpent  with
toil,  and  their  arms,  no  longer,  in  the  fame  condition,  they
returned.  And,  after  a  few  days  were  pafled,  for  which
they  had  made  a  truce  in  order  to  bury  their  dead,  and
recover  their  wounded,  they  fupplied  themfelves  with  every
thing  that  was  wanting,  and  fought  another  battle  before
their  own  camp :  For  the  Volfci,  and  the  Aequi,  having  re¬
ceived  a  reinforcement  from  the  neighbouring  fortrefles,  their
general  grew  full  of  confidence,  becaufe  his  forces  were,

.  Vol.  IV.  P  now,


I06  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

now.,  even  five  times  more  numerous  than  Thofe  of  the
enemy  ;  and,  obferving  the  camp  of  the  Romans  not  to  be
ftrongly  fituated,  he  thought  this  the  beft  opportunity  to
attack  them.  Having  formed  this  defign,  he  led  his  army
to  their  camp  about  midnight;  and,  furrounding  it  with  his
men,  took  care  they  fhould  not  fteal  away.  Quintius,  being
informed  of  the  number  of  the  enemy,  was  glad  they  had
refolved  upon  the  attack  of  his  camp  ;  and  flayed  till  it
was  day,  and  till  the  hour,  when  the  markets  are,  ufually,
crouded ;  then,  obferving  that  the  enemy  were,  already,
fpent  both  with  want  of  fleep,  and  fkirmifhing,  and  advanced
neither  in  their  centuries,  nor  ranks,  but  promifcuoufly,
and  fcattered  here  and  there,  he  opened  the  gates  of  the
camp,  and  fallied  out  with  his  chofen  horfe ;  and  the  foot,
doubling  their  files,  followed.  The  Volfci,  aftonifhed  at
their  boldnefs,  and  at  the  madnefs  of  their  onfet,  after  a
fhort  refiflance,  were  repulfed,  and  retired  from  the  camp
of  the  Romans.  There  flood  not  far  from  it  a  hill  of  a  mo¬
derate  height :  Thither  they  haflened,  with  a  defign  both
to  reft  themfelves,  and,  after  that,  to  form  again ;  but  they
had  no  leifure  given  them  either  to  form,  or  to  recover  them¬
felves  :  For  the  enemy  followed  them  at  their  heels,  clofing
their  files  as  much  as  poffible,  to  the  end  that,  while  they
were  forcing  their  way  up  the  rifing  ground,  they  might
not  be  borne  down.  Here  followed  a  fharp  action,  which
lafled  great  part  of  the  day,  and  many  fell  dead  on  both
fides.  The  Volfci,  though  fuperior  in  number,  and  defended
by  the  advantage  of  the  ground,  received  no  benefit  from

either;


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSENSIS.  107

either;  but,  being  forced  by  the  ardor,  and  bravery  of  the
Romans,  they  abandoned  the  hill ;  and,  in  flying  to  their
camp,  the  greatefl:  part  of  them  were  cut  in  pieces :  For
the  Romans  gave  them  no  refpite  in  the  purfuit ;  but  fol¬
lowed  them  clofe,  and  never  gave  over  the  chafe  till  they
had  taken  their  camp  by  ftorm  ;  and,  having  made  all  the
men  prifoners,  who  were  left  in  the  camp,  and  taken  a
great  many  horfes,  arms,  and  baggage,  they  incamped
there  that  night:  And  the  following  day,  the  conful,
having  prepared  every  thing  that  was  neceflary  for  a  fiege,
marched  with  his  army  to  the  city  of  the  Antiates,  which
was  not  above  thirty  ftadia  diftant  from  the  camp.  It
happened  that  fome  auxiliary  forces,  fent  by  the  Aequi
to  the  Antiates,  were  then  in  the  city,  and  had  the  guard
of  the  walls ;  who  dreading  the  boldnefs  of  the  Romans,
endeavoured  to  efcape  out  of  the  place  ;  but,  being  pre¬
vented  by  the  Antiates,  who  had  notice  of  their  defign,  they
refolved  to  deliver  up  the  city  to  the  Romans,  as  foon  as
they  came  before  it :  The  Antiates,  being  informed  of  this,
yielded  to  the  neceflity  they  were  under ;  and,  concerting
meafures  with  the  Aequi,  furrendered  the  city  to  Quintius
upon  thefe  conditions ;  that  the  Aequi  fhould  have  leave  to
depart,  and  that  the  Antiates  fhould  receive  a  garrifon,  and
obey  the  commands  of  the  Romans.  The  conful,  having
made  himfelf  mafter  of  the  city  upon  thefe  terms,  and
received  proviflons,  and  every  thing  elfe  he  wanted  for  his
army,  placed  a  garrifon  there,  and  returned  to  Rome  with
his  forces.  In  conflderation  of  his  fuccefs,  the  fenate,  came

P  2  out


Book  IX.


108  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

out  to  meet  him ;  and,  having  received  him  with  great
marks  of  favor,  honoured  him  with  a  triumph.

LIX.  The  following  year,  the  confuls  were  Tiberius
Aemilius  for  the  fecond  time,  and  Quintus  Fabius,  the  fon
of  one  of  the  three  brothers,  who  commanded  the  forces
fent  to  the  defence  of  Cremera,  and  were  put  to  the  fword
there,  together  with  their  clients.  As  the  tribunes,  fup-
ported  by  Aemilius,  one  of  the  confuls,  were,  again,  ftirring
up  the  people  on  account  of  the  divifion  of  lands,  the  fenate,
with  a  view  both  to  court,  and  relieve  the  poorer  fort,  paiTed
an  order  to  divide  among  them  fome  part  of  the  country  of
the  Antiates,  which  they  had  conquered  the  year  before,
and  now  poflefied.  And  the  triumvirs,  appointed  to  divide
thefe  lands,  were  Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus,  to  whom  the
Antiates  had  furrendered  themfelves,  and  with  him  Lucius
Furius,  and  Aulus  Virginius.  But  the  generality  of  the
people,  and  the  poor,  who  looked  upon  themfelves  as  driven
out  of  their  country,  were  difpleafed  with  this  divifion;
and  few  giving  in  their  names,  the  fenate  refolved,  fince  the
colony  was  not  complete,  to  permit  fuch  of  the  Latines,
and  Hernici,  as  were  willing,  to  join  it.  The  triumvirs,
who  were  fent  to  Antium,  divided  the  land  among  their  own
people,  leaving  a  certain  part  of  it  to  the  Antiates.  In  the
mean  time,  both  the  confuls  took  the  field,  Aemilius
marching  againft  the  Sabines,  and  Fabius  againft  theAequi.
Aemilius,  having  ftaid  a  confiderable  time  in  the  enemy’s
country,  found  no  army  there  to  defend  it :  So  that,  after
he  had  ravaged  it  with  impunity,  the  ele&ion  of  rnagiftrates

~  -  drawing


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I S.  109
drawing  near,  he  returned  home  with  his  army.  The
Aequi  fent  embaffadors  to  Fabius  to  treat  of  a  reconciliation,
and  friendfhip,  before  they  were  compelled  to  either  by  the
defeat  of  their  army,  or  the  lofs  of  their  towns :  The  conful,
having  exacted  from  them  two  months  provifions  for  his
army,  two  vefts  for  every  man,  and  fix  months  pay,  and
whatever  elfe  he  thought  neceffary,  concluded  a  truce  with
them,  till  they  could  go  to  Rome,  and  obtain  a  peace  from
the  fenate ;  who,  hearing  what  had  pafled,  gave  to  Fabius
full  power  to  make  peace  with  the  Aequi  upon  fuch  terms,
as  he  himfelf  fhould  think  fit.  After  that,  the  two  nations
entered  into  a  league,  by  the  interpofition  of  the  conful,  upon
thefe  conditions:  That  the  Aequi  fhould,  for  the  future,  be
fubjeft  to  the  Romans  without  being  difpofiefled  either  of
their  cities,  or  their  territories ;  and  that  they  fhould  not  be
obliged  to  fend  any  thing  to  the  Romans  but  troops,  when
ordered,  to  be  maintained  at  their  own  expence.  Fabius,
having  made  this  treaty,  returned  home  with  his  army,  and,
together  with  his  collegue,  nominated  the  magiftrates  for
the  following  year.

LX.  The  confuls,  named  by  them,  were  28  Spurius
Foftumius  Albinus,  and  Quintus  Servilius  Prifcus  for  the
fecond  time.  In  their  confulfhip,  the  Aequi  came  to  a
refolution  to  violate  the  treaty  lately  made  with  the  Romans,

28,  Sirofw nowpuof  M&voe.  y  Livy  this  conful  Sp.  Poftnmius  Albanus
calls  thefe  confuls  Servilius,  and  Regillenfis  •,  and  others  Sp.  Foftumius
Sp.  Poftumius,  without  any  addition.  Albus  Regillenfis.

The  Fafii  conjulares  of  Petavius  call

yB.  iii.  c.  2,


upon


I  IO


Book  IX.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

upon  the  following  occafion :  The  Antiates,  who  were
poflefled  of  houfes,  and  lands,  continued  ftill  in  the  country,
cultivating,  not  only,  the  lands  appropriated  to  themfelves,
but,  alfo,  Thofe  allotted  by  the  triumvirs  to  the  colony,
under  an  ingagement  to  pay  to  thefe  a  certain  proportion
of  the  produce :  But  thofe,  who  had  neither,  left  the  city  ;
and,  the  Aequi  willingly  receiving  them,  they  fet  out  from
thence,  and  committed  robberies  upon  the  territories  of  the
Latines.  After  that,  fuch  of  the  Aequi,  as  were  bold  and
poor,  joined  thefe  robbers :  And,  when  the  Latines  lamented
their  condition  in  the  fenate,  and  defired  them  either  to  fend
an  army  to  their  relief,  or  to  fuffer  them  to  revenge  them¬
felves  on  the  aggreffors,  the  fenate,  upon  hearing  their  com¬
plaint,  did  not  think  fit  either  to  fend  an  army,  or  to  fuffer
the  Latines  to  take  arms ;  but,  appointing  three  embaffa-
dorsr  of  whom  Quintus  Fabius,  who  had  concluded  the
treaty  with  that  nation,  was  the  chief,  they  ordered  them
to  inquire  of  the  principal  perfons  of  that  people,  whether
they  had  fent  out  thefe  bands  of  robbers>  by  a  general  con-
fent,  into  the  territories  of  their  allies,  and  into  Thofe  of  the
Romans  (for  there  had  been  fome  incurfions  made  upon
thefe,  alfo,  by  the  fugitive  Antiates)  or  whether  the  public
had  no  hand  in  any  thing  which  had  happened :  And,  if
they  faid  the  actions  complained  of  had  been  committed  by
private  perfons,  without  the  confent  of  the  people,  to  de¬
mand  reftitution  of  the  things  ftolen,  and  that  the  male¬
factors  might  be  delivered  up  to  them.  Upon  the  arrival  of
the  embaffadors,  the  Aequi,  having  heard  their  propofals,

gave


Book IX.  DIONYSIUS  H AL ICARN A S SE N SIS.  m

gave  them  evative  anfwers ;  faying,  indeed,  that  the  robberies
complained  of  had  not  been  committed  with  the  approbation
of  the  public;  but  refuting  to  deliver  up  the  guilty  perfons,
who,  being  driven  out  of  their  city,  and  becoming  wan¬
derers,  had  implored  their  protection.  Fabius,  refenting
this,  protefied  againft  their  violation  of  the  treaty  they  had
made  with  him ;  and,  feeing  the  Aequi  diflembled,  and
detired  time  to  confider  of  his  propofals,  and  fought  to  de¬
tain  him  under  the  pretence  of  hofpitality,  he  took  that
opportunity  of  flaying  there,  in  order  to  pry  into  their  af¬
fairs;  and,  vifiting  every  part  of  their  city,  under  the  color
of  feeing  their  public  places,  and  their  temples,  and  parti¬
cularly  the  (hops  of  their  armourers,  where  he  found  fome
arms  already  made,  and  others  making,  he  difcovered  their
detign  :  And,  returning  to  Rome,  informed  the  fenate  both
of  what  he  had  heard ,  and  feen.  And  the  fenate,  without
hetitating  any  longer,  came  to  a  refolution  to  fend  the  feciales
with  orders  to  declare  war  againft  the  Aequi,  unlefs  they
fent  away  the  fugitive  Antiates,  and  ingaged  to  do  juftice
to  the  injured.  The  Aequi  gave  haughty  anfwers  to  the
feciales,  and  made  no  fecret  of  their  difpotition  to  accept
the  war.  But  the  Romans  were  not  at  liberty  to  fend  an
army  againft  them  that  year  ;  either  by  reafon  of  a  divine
prohibition,  or  on  account  of  the  diftempers,  with  which
the  people  were  affli&ed  during  great  part  of  it:  However,
a  fmallarmy,  fent  to  defend  their  allies,  under  the  command
of  Quintus  Servilius,  one  of  the  confuls,  incamped  on  the
frontiers  of  the  Latines.  At  Rome,  his  collegue,  Spurius

Poftu-


I  I  2


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

Poftumius,  confecrated  the  temple  of  29  Dius  Fidius,  upon
the  30  Quirinal  hill,  on  the  day  called  the  nones  of  June;
which  temple  had,  indeed,  been  built  by  Tarquin,  the  laft
king,  but  not  confecrated  in  his  reign  with  the  ceremo¬
nies  in  ufe  among  the  Romans.  By  order,  therefore,  of  the
fenate,  the  name  of  Poftumius  was,  upon  this  occafton,  in-
fcribed  on  the  temple.  Nothing  elfe  worth  relating  happened
during  their  confulfhip.

LXI.  In  the  feventy  ninth  Olympiad,  at  which  Xeno¬
phon  of  Corinth  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium,  Archedemides
being  archon  at  Athens,  Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus,  and
Quintus  Fabius  Vibulanus  entered  upon  the  confulfhip  ;
Quintius  being  appointed  conful  for  the  third  time  by  the
people,  and  Fabius  for  the  fecond.  Both  thefe  the  fenate
fent  into  the  field  at  the  head  of  numerous  armies  well
provided :  Quintius  was  appointed  to  defend  that  part  of
the  Roman  frontiers,  that  lay  contiguous  to  Thole  of  the
enemy;  and  Fabius,  to  harrafs  the  country  of  the  Aequi:
Thefe  Fabius  found  waiting  for  him  on  their  own  confines
with  a  great  army.  After  each  of  them  had  formed  their
camps  in  the  moft  advantageous  ports,  they  advanced  to
the  plain,  and  the  Aequi  provoking  the  Romans  to  an  in-
gagement,  and  beginning  theonfet,  they  continued  fighting
great  part  of  the  day  with  refolution,  and  conftancy  ;  every
man  placing  his  hopes  of  victory  in  himfelf  alone  :  But,  the

z9 •  Ts  n<s-/«  Aw.  See  the  ninety  firft  the  Mons  Quirinalis ,  now  called,  Monte
annotation  on  the  fecond  book.  Cavallo.

3°*  Ejh  Tg  Evv^Ajs  Aotyx.  This  was


fwords


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSEN.SXS.  n

fwords  of  the  greateft  part  becoming  ufelefs  by  their  re¬
peated  ftrokes,  the  generals  ordered  a  retreat  to  be  founded,
and  both  returned  to  their  camps.  After  this  adlion,  no
pitched  battle  was  fought,  but  continual  fkirmifhes  happened,
and  ingagements  of  the  light  armed  men,  as  they  were  go¬
ing  out  for  water,  and  efcorting  convoys.  And,  upon  thefe
occafions,  it  feldom  happened  that  either  of  them  had  the
advantage.  During  thefe  tranfadtions,  a  detachment  of  the
army  of  the  Aequi,  marching  by  other  roads  that  were  un¬
guarded,  made  an  irruption  into  that  part  of  the  Roman
territories,  which  lay  at  the  greateft  diftance  from  the  fron¬
tiers,  and  was  for  that  reafon  defencelefs ;  from  whence  they
took  many  captives,  and  effects ;  and  returned  home  without
being  difcovered  by  the  parties  fent  out  by  Quintius  to  de¬
fend  the  country.  The  fame  thing  happened  continually,
and  expofed  the  confuls  to  great  obloquy.  After  this,
Fabius,  being  informed  by  his  fcouts,  and  by  the  prifo-
ners,  that  the  Aequi  were  gone  out  of  their  camp  with
the  beft  of  their  forces,  he  himfelf  marched  in  the  night,  at
the  head  of  a  chofen  body  both  of  horfe,  and  foot,  leaving
thofe,  who  were  the  moft  advanced  in  age,  to  guard  the  camp.
The  Aequi,  having  plundered  the  country  into  which  they
had  made  an  incurfion,  were  returning  to  their  camp  with  a
great  booty  ;  but  they  had  not  proceeded  far,  before  Fabius
prefented  himfelf  before  them ;  and,  having  taken  away
their  booty,  defeated  thofe  who  flood  their  ground,  after  a
brave  refiftance:  The  reft  difperfed  themfelves;  and,  being
acquainted  with  the  roads,  efcaped  the  purfuers,  and  fled
Vol.  IV.  to


1 14  °  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

to  their  camp.  The  Aequi,  ftruck  with  this  unexpected
misfortune,  decamped  in  the  night;  and,  after  that,  never
ftirred  out  of  their  city  ;  but  fuffered  their  corn,  which  was
then  fit  to  cut,  to  be  carried  off  by  the  enemy  in  their  fight ;
their  herds  of  cattle  to  be  driven  away ;  their  effects  to  be
feized ;  their  country  houfes  to  be  fet  on  fire,  and  many
prifoners  to  be  taken.  After  this  aCtion,  Fabius,  the  time
being  come  for  the  confuls  to  refign  their  power  to  others,
returned  home  with  his  army :  As  did  alfo  Quintius.

LXII.  When  they  came  to  Rome,  they  declared  Aulus
Poftumius Albus,and31  Spurius  Furius  confuls.  Thefehad,  no
fooner,  entered  upon  their  magiftracy,  than  meflengers  fent  in
hafte  arrived  from  their  allies  the  Latines,  who  being  introduced
into  the  fenate,  informed  them  that  the  Antiates  were  not  to
be  depended  upon,  fince  the  Aequi  were,  continually,  fend¬
ing  deputies  to  them  fecretly,  and  great  numbers  of  Volfci
reforted  to  their  city  openly,  under  the  color  of  buying
provifions,  and  were  introduced  there  by  thofe,  who  had,
before,  left  the  city  of  the  Antiates  through  want,  when  their  /
lands  were  divided  among  the  Romans,  as  I  faid,  and  de-
ferted  to  the  Aequi.  They,  alfo,  informed  the  fenate  that
this  corruption  of  the  inhabitants  had  fpread  itfelf  even  to
many  of  their  own  colony  ;  and  that,  unlefs  their  defigns
were  prevented  by  the  impofition  of  a  fufficient  garrifon,  an
unexpected  war  would  arifefrom  thence  againfl:  the  Romans.

31*  Ssgs/ov  I  believe  the  vy,  and  the  Fajii  ccnfulares  call  him

praenomen  of  this  confulwas  miftaken  Spurius  Furius.
by  the  tranfcribers,  becaufe  both  z  Li-

2  B,  iii.  c,  4.


Not


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AIINASSE  NSIS.  115

Not  long  after  thefe  mefiengers,  others  came  from  the
Hernici,  with  advice  that  a  numerous  army  of  the  Aequi
were  come  out  of  their  confines,  an4  lay  incamped  in  their
country,  where  they  plundered  every  thing ;  that  the  Volfci
had  joined  the  Aequi  upon  this  occafion ;  and  that  the
greateft  part  of  their  army  confided  of  the  former.  Upon
this,  the  fenate  came  to  a  refolution  to  fend  another  garrifon
to  quell  thofe  who  were  railing  difturbances  among  the
Antiates,  and  to  fecure  the  city  (for  fome  of  them  were
come  to  Rome  to  juftify  themfelves,  and  it  was  vifible  they
had  no  good  defign)  and  that  Spurius  Furius,  one  of  the
confuls,  fliould  march  with  an  army  againft  the  Aequi.
And  both  armies  foon  ,took  the  field.  The  Aequi,  hear¬
ing  that  the  Romans  were  upon  their  march,  decamped
from  the  territories  of  the  Hernici,  in  order  to  meet  them.
When  they  came  in  fight  of  one  another,  they  incamped
that  day  at  no  great  diftance:  The  day  after,  the  enemy
advanced  to  the  camp  of  the  Romans  in  order  to  found
their  intentions ;  but  thefe  not  coming  out  to  fight,  the
others  fkirmifhed  ;  and,  without  performing  any  confider-
able  exploit,  returned  in  triumph.  The  next  day,  the  Roman
conful  decamped  (for  the  place  was  not  very  fecure)  and
formed  his  camp  in  a  more  advantageous  poft,  where  he  funk
a  deeper  ditch,  and  ftrengthened  it  with  palifades  of  a  greater
height.  The  enemy,  feeing  this,  were  greatly  encouraged;
and  ftill  more,  after  they  had  received  a  reinforcement  both
from  the  Volfci,  and  the  Aequi :  So  that,  without  further
delay,  they  led  their  forces  to  the  camp  of  the  Romans.

Qj2  LXIII.


Book  IX.


1 1 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

LXIII.  The  conful,  confidering  that  the  army  under  his
command  was  not  fufficientlyftrong  to  encounter  both  thefe
nations,  Tent  fome  of  his  horfe  to  Rome  with  letters,  by
which  he  defired  that  a  reinforcement  might,  fpeedily,  be
fent  to  him,  his  army  being  in  danger  of  a  total  defeat.
After  thefe  letters  were  received  by  his  collegue  Poftumius
(it  being  about  midnight  when  the  horfe  arrived)  he  affem-
bled  the  fenate  by  difpatching  feveral  meftengers  to  the  houies
of  the  fenators ;  and,  before  it  was  broad  day  light,  they
came  to  a  refolution,  that  Titus  Quintius,  who  had  been
thrice  conful,  fhould  inftantly  march  againft  the  enemy,  in
quality  of  proconful,  at  the  head  of  the  braveft  youth  both
foot,  and  horfe ;  and  that  Aulus  Poftumius,  the  other  conful,
fhould  affemble  the  reft  of  the  troops,  that  could  not  fo  foon
be  brought  together,  and  go  to  the  affiftance  of  the  Roman
army  with  all  expedition.  It  was  now  day  light,  and  Quin¬
tius  had  afiembled  about  fivethoufand  voluntiers,  with  whom
he,  prefently,  marched  out  of  the  city.  The  Aequi  had  a
fufpicion  of  this  :  For  which  reafon,  they  refolved  to  attack
the  camp  of  the  Romans,  before  the  fuccours  fhould  arrive,
in  expe&ation  of  forcing  it  by  their  numbers;  and,  with
this  view,  they  divided  their  army  into  two  bodies,  and  all
of  them  came  out  of  their  camp.  The  attack  was  maintained
with  great  vigor  during  the  whole  day ;  and  the  enemy,
who  boldly  mounted  the  intrenchments  in  many  places,
though  expofed  to  a  continual  fhower  of  javelins,  arrows,
and  ftones  thrown  by  flings,  could  not  be  repulfed.  Here,
the  conful,  and  the  legate  encouraging  one  another,,  both

opened


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A RN  AS  S EN  SI  S.  117

opened  the  gates  at  the  fame  time ;  and,  Tallying  out  upon
the  enemy  with  the  braveft  of  their  men,  attacked  them  on
both  Tides  of  the  camp,  and  put  to  flight  thofe,  who  were
mounting  the  intrenchments.  The  enemy  now  giving  way,
the  conful,  after  a  fhort  purfuit  of  thofe  who  fled  before
him,  returned  :  But  his  brother  and  legate,  Publius  Furius,
carried  on  by  his  courage  and  ardor,  followed  the  enemy  to
their  camp,  charging  them  as  they  fled,  with  great  daughter.
He  had  with  him  two  cohorts,  not  exceeding  a  thoufand
men.  As  foon  as  the  enemy,  who  were  about  five  thoufand,
faw  this,  they  rufhed  upon  him  from  their  camp :  Some
attacked  his  men  in  front,  while  their  horfe,  wheeling  about,
fell  upon  their  rear.  The  troops  of  Publius  being  thus  fur-
rounded,  and  cut  off  from  their  own  army,  when  they  had
it  in  their  power  to  fave  their  lives  by  delivering  up  their
arms  (for  the  enemy  invited  them  to  this,  and  were  ex¬
tremely  defirous  to  take  a  thoufand  of  the  braveft  among
the  Romans  prifoners,  in  order  to  obtain,  through  their
means,  an  honourable  peace)  they  defpifed  the  terms  offered
them ;  and,  exhorting  one  another  to  do  nothing  unworthy
of  their  country,  they  all  died  fighting,  after  they  had  killed
many  of  the  enemy.

LXIV.  Thefe  being  flain,  theAequi,  elated  with  their  fuc-
cefs,  advanced  to  the  camp  of  the  Romans,  bearing  aloft  the
head  of  Publius,  and  Thofe  of  the  other  confiderable  perfons,
fixed  to  their  fpears,  in  expedition  that  fo  dreadful  a  fpedicle
would  terrify  them,  and  compel  them  to  deliver  up  their
arms.  The  Romans  were,  indeed,  moved  with  compaflion

at


Book  IX.


1 1 8  #  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

at  the  calamity  of  the  ilain,  and  lamented  their  misfortune ;
but  they  were  infpired  with  a  double  ardor  for  the  fight,  and
with  a  noble  paflion  either  to  conquer,  or  to  die  like  them
rather  than  furrender.  That  night  therefore,  while  the  enemy
lay  before  their  camp,  the  Romans  continued  awake,  and
employed  themfelves  in  reftoring  thofe  parts  of  it,  that  were
impaired,  and  in  contriving  many  and  various  things  to  re-
pulfe  the  enemy  ?  if  they  attempted  to  renew  the  attack.
The  next  day,  the  afiault  was  repeated,  and  the  palifades  were
pulled  up  in  many  places :  The  Aequi  were  often  repulfed
by  the  Romans,  when  thefe  fallied  out  upon  them  in  a  body;
and,  when  the  Romans  advanced  with  too  much  boldnefs,  they
were  often  forced  back  by  the  others.  This  lafted  the  whole
day  :  Here,  the  Roman  conful  was  wounded  in  the  thigh
by  a  javelin,  that  pierced  his  fhield,  and  many  other  perfons
of  diftinCtion,  who  fought  by  his  fide,  were  alfo  wounded.
By  this  time,  the  Romans  were  fpent  with  toil,  when  Quin-
tius,  unexpectedly,  appeared  about  the  clofe  of  the  evening,
at  the  head  of  the  reinforcement  of  choice  voluntiers.  At
the  fight  of  thefe,  the  enemy  retired,  and  raifed  the  inef¬
fectual  fiege  ;  and  the  Romans,  fallying  out  upon  them  in
their  retreat,  put  the  hindmoft  to  the  fword  :  However,  as
the  greateft  part  of  the  former  were  weakened  by  their
wounds,  they  did  not  purfue  them  far,  but  foon  returned :
And,  ‘after  this,  both  remained  a  confiderable  time  in  their
camps,  aCting  upon  the  defenfive.

LXV.  After  that,  another  body  of  the  Aequi,  and  Volfci,
thinking  this  a  proper  opportunity  to  plunder  the  country  of

the


Book IX.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN A S SE N SIS.  .119

the  Romans,  while  their  beft  troops  were  in  the  field*
marched  out  in  the  night ;  and,  entering  that  part  of  their
territories  that  was  moft  remote,  and  where  the  hufbandmen
feemed  to  be  under  no  apprehenfion,  they  poflefted  them-
felves  of  many  captives,  and  a  great  booty.  But  the  event
of  this  expedition  proved  unfortunate  to  them  in  their
return:  For  the  other  conful,  Poftumius,  being  informed
of  this  enterprife  of  the  enemy,  while  he  was  marching  to
the  relief  of  the  Romans,  then  befieged  in  their  camp,
appeared  before  them  unexpectedly.  Thefe  were  neither
aftonifhed,  nor  terrified  at  his  approach  ;  but,  having,  at
their  leifure,  fecured  their  baggage,  and  booty  in  a  ftrong.
place,  and  left  a  fufficient  guard  to  defend  it,  the  reft
marched  in  good  order  to  encounter  the  Romans;  and,
ingaging,  performed  many  memorable  actions ;  a  few  main¬
taining  the  fight  againft  great  numbers  (for  many  came  to
the  affiftance  of  the  Romans  from  the  country)  and  thofe
lightly  armed,  againft  men,  whofe  bodies  were,  intirely,
fecured  with  armour :  However,  they  killed  many  of  the
Romans ;  and,  though  intercepted  in  an  enemy’s  country,
were  very  near  ereCting  a  trophy  themfelves  againft  thole,
who  had  come  to  attack  them :  But  the  conful,  and  the
Roman  horfe  that  was  with  him,  all  chofen  men,  charging,
with  their  horfes  unbridled,  that  part  of  the  enemy  that  was
firmed,  and  fought  with, the  greateft  refolution,  they  broke
them,  and  killed  great  numbers.:  Thofe  in  the  front  being
flain,  the  reft  gave  way,  and  fled:  And  the  men  appointed
to  guard  the  baggage,  abandoned  it,  and  ran  to  the  neigh¬
bouring


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

bouring  mountains.  In  the  adtion,  few  of  them  were  flain ;
but  very  many  in  the  rout,  as  they  were  both  unacquainted
with  the  country,  and  purfued  by  the  Roman  horfe.

LXVI.  While  thefe  things  were  tranfadting,  the  other
conful,  Spurius,  being  informed  that  his  collegue  was  com¬
ing  to  his  afliftance,  and  fearing  left  the  enemy  fhould  go
out  to  meet  him,  and  intercept  his  march,  refolved  to  divert
them  from  this  delign  by  attacking  their  camp :  But  the
enemy  prevented  him  by  decamping,  as  foon  as  they  were
informed  of  the  misfortune  of  their  forces  by  thofe,  who
had  fled  from  the  defeat ;  and,  the  night  after  the  adtion,
they  retired  to  their  city,  without  performing  every  thing
they  had  propofed  ;  ftnce,  befides  thofe,  who  had  loft  their
lives  in  the  adtions,  and  in  plundering,  they  loft  many  more
in  their  retreat :  For,  fuch  of  them,  as  were  opprefled  with
toil,  and  weakened  with  the  lofs  of  blood,  marched  flowly ;
and  their  limbs  failing  them,  they  dropped  down,  particu¬
larly  at  the  fountains,  and  rivers,  to  quench  their  thirft  :
Thefe  the  Roman  horfe  overtaking,  put  to  death  :  Neither
did  the  Romans  themfelves  return  home  with  complete
fuccefs  from  this  campaign :  For  they  loft  many  brave
men  in  the  feveral  adtions,  and  a  legate,  who  had  diftin-
guifhed  himfelf  above  all  the  reft  in  that  battle :  However,
they  brought  with  them  a  vidtory  inferior  to  none.  Thefe
were  the  tranfadlions  of  this  confulfhip.

LX VII.  The  next  year,  Lucius  Aebutius,  and  Publius
Servilius  Prifcus  were  confuls ;  when  the  Romans,  being  af-
flidted  with  a  peftilential  diftemper  more  feverely  than  ever,

performed


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  12  r
performed  nothing  memorable  either  in  military,  or  civil
affairs.  This  diftemper  firft  attacked  the  ftuds  of  mares,
and  herds  of  oxen,  and  then  feized  the  flocks  of  goats,  and
fheep,  and  deftroyed  almoft  all  the  quadrupeds :  After  that,  it
fell  upon  the  fhepherds  and  hufbandmen ;  and,  having  fpread
itfelf  through  the  whole  country,  it  infecfted  the  city.  It
was  no  eafy  matter  to  difcover  the  number  of  fervants,
workmen,  and  the  poorer  fort,  who  were  carried  off  by  it :
For,  at  firft,  the  dead  bodies  were  conveyed  away  in  carts  by
heaps ;  and,  at  laft,  thofe  of  the  perfons  of  leaf!  confequence
were  thrown  into  the  river :  But  of  the  fenate,  the  fourth
part  was  computed  to  have  died  of  it;  among  whom  were
both  the  confuls,  and  the  greateft  part  of  the  tribunes.
This  diftemper  began  about  the  calends  of  September,  and
continued  all  that  year;  feizing  and  deftroying,  without
diftin&ion,  perfons  of  both  fexes,  and  all  ages.  When
the  neighbouring  people  were  informed  of  the  calamity,
with  which  the  Romans  were  affli&ed,  the  Aequi,  and  the
Volfci  thought  this  a  proper  juncture  to  fubvert  their  em¬
pire  ;  and,  with  this  view,  they  entered  into  an  alliance,
which  they  confirmed  by  their  oaths:  And,  having  prepared
every  thing  that  was  neceffary  for  a  fiege,  they  drew  out
their  forces  with  all  expedition.  And,  in  order  to  deprive
the  Romans  of  the  affiftance  of  their  allies,  they  firft  in¬
vaded  the  territories  of  the  Latines,  and  of  the  Hernici.
Lucius  Aebutius,  one  of  the  confuls,  happened  to  die  on  the
very  day  the  deputies  from  thefe  nations,  then  invaded,  came
to  the  fenate  to  beg  affiftance.  However,  Publius  Servilius,
Vql.  IV.  R  who


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

who  was  then  dying,  and  could  juft  breathe,  ordered  the
fenate  to  aflemble :  And  the  greateft  part  of  the  fenators
being  brought  half  dead  in  litters,  after  confultation,  dire<fted
the  deputies  who  were  then  prefent,  to  acquaint  their  citi¬
zens,  that  the  fenate  gave  them  leave  to  repulfe  the  enemy
by  their  own  courage,  till  the  conful  was  recovered,  and  the
forces  defigned  for  their  relief  were  raifed.  After  this  an-
fwer,  the  Latines  removed  every  thing  they  could  out  of
the  country,  into  their  cities ;  and,  placing  guards  upon
the  walls,  fuffered  all  the  reft  to  be  deftroyed.  But  the
Hernici,  refenting  the  ruin,  and  defolation  of  their  country,
ran  to  arms,  and  came  out  of  their  cities.  They  ingaged
with  great  bravery  ;  and,  having  loft  many  of  their  own
men,  and  put  ftill  more  of  the  enemy  to  the  fword,  they
were  forced  to  take  refuge  within  their  walls,  and  did  not,
after  that,  venture  another  ingagement.

LXVIII.  When  the  Aequi,  and  Volfci  had  laid  wafte
their  country,  they  marched  without  reiiftance  into  That  of
the  Tufculani.  And,  having  plundered  this  alfo,  none
offering  to  defend  it,  they  arrived  at  the  territories  of  the
Sabines.  They  patted  through  their  territories  with  the  fame
eafe,  and  advanced  to  Rome.  Their  approach  alarmed  the
city  fufficiently  :  However,  they  could  not  make  themfelves
matters  of  it :  For  the  Romans,  though  in  a  weak  condition,
and  having  loft  both  the  confuls  (for  Servilius  was  lately
dead)  armed  themfelves  with  greater  vigor  than  ftrength,
and  lined  the  walls,  the  circuit  of  which  was,  at  that  time,
of  the  fame  extent  with  That  of  Athens :  Some  parts  of  thefe

walls.


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  ENS  I  S.  123

walls,  {landing  on  hills,  and  being  fortified  by  nature  itfelf
with  fteep  rocks,  required  but  few  men  to  defend  them ;
and  others  were  defended  by  the  Tiber,  the  breadth  of
which  is  about  four  hundred  feet,  and  the  depth  capable  of
carrying  large  fhips ;  and  the  ftream  of  it  is  as  rapid  as  That
of  any  other  river,  and  forms  great  eddies :  There  is  no
pafling  it  on  foot,  unlefs  it  is  over  a  bridge ;  and  there  was,
at  that  time,  only  one,  which  was  built  with  timber,  and
taken  to  pieces  in  time  of  war:  The  weakeft  part  of  the  city
is  from  the  gate  called  Efquilina,  to  That  named  Collina,
which  interval  is  rendered  ftrong  by  art:  For  there  is  a
ditch  funk  before  it  above  one  hundred  feet  in  breadth,
where  it  is  the  narroweft,  and  thirty  in  depth;  on  the
edge  of  this  ditch  {lands  a  wall,  fupported  on  the  infide  with
fo  high  and  broad  a  rampart,  that  it  can  neither  be  fhaken
by  battering  rams,  nor  thrown  down  by  undermining  the
foundations :  This  rampart  is  about  feven  ftadia  in  length,
and  fifty  feet  in  breadth.  Here  the  Romans  were,  then,
drawn  up  in  great  numbers,  and  from  hence  they  repulfed
the  enemy ;  the  men  of  that  age  being  unacquainted  with
the  ftru&ure  either  of  towers  to  fill  up  ditches,  called
32  XsA wmi  Xcorf  i$e$,  Tortoifes ,  or  of  the  machines,  particularly

32-  XsA mat  %ois%iSzs.  The  ufe  of  their  name)  and,  alfo,  to  afifault  the
this  x£Auvt>  (f°r  t^iere  were  fevera*  walls,  which  they  equalled  in  height,
kinds  of  them)  is  defcribedby  a  Poly-  The  ftrufture  of  them  is  defcribed  by
bius,  where  he  gives  an  account  of  the  b  Vitruvius.  c  Caefar  fays  that  Tre-
fiege  carried  on  by  Philip  againft  the  bonius,  who  commanded  the  fiege  of
city  of  the  Echinaeenfes.  The  inten-  Marfeilles,  made  ufe  of  one  of  thefe
tion  of  them  was  to  fill  up  the  ditches  tejiudines  (for  fo  they  were  called  by
(from  whence,  I  imagine,  they  had  the  Romans)  that  was  fixty  feet  in

*B.ix.  p.571.  bB.  x.  c.  20.  c  De  Bell,  civili,  B.  ii.  c.  2.

R  2


con


124  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IX.

contrived  for  the  taking  of  towns,  called  33  EAstfoAs^ :  The
enemy,  therefore,  defpairing  of  fuccefs  in  their  attempt  to
take  the  city,  retired  from  the  walls ;  and,  having  laid  wafte
all  the  country  they  marched  through,  returned  home  with
their  forces.

LXIX.  The  Romans  created  interreges  to  prefide  at  the
election  of  magiftrates ;  which  is  a  thing  they  ufually  do  in
a  time  of  anarchy,  and  advanced  Lucius  Lucretius,  and
34  Titus  Veturius  Geminus  to  the  confulfhip.  In  their
magiftracy  the  diftemper  ceafed,  and  all  civil  contefts,  both
public  and  private,  were  deferred,  notwithftanding  the  en¬
deavours  of  Sextus  Titus,  one  of  the  tribunes,  to  refume
the  propofal  of  the  agrarian  law,  which  the  people  would
not  hear  of,  but  delired  it  might  be  deferred  to  a  more  fa¬
vourable  juncture.  There  was,  at  the  fame  time,  a  great
eagernefs  in  men  of  all  degrees  to  take  revenge  on  thofe,
who  had  alarmed  the  city  during  the  time  of  the  plague  :


height,  in  order  to  equal  the  wall ;
antecedebat  teftudo  ■pedum  lx.  aequandi
loci  caufd  facia.

33*  eajttoAw?.  The  Helepolis  was  a
vail  wooden  tower  con  filling  of  a  great
many  ftories.  It  is  fuppofed  to  have
been  invented  by  Demetrius  Polior-
cetes,  at  the  fiege  of  Rhodes,  or,  more
probably,  by  his  military  architect,
Epimachus,  an  Athenian.  d  Vitruvius
fays  that  it  was  125  feet  in  height,
and  40  fquare  at  the  bottom,  accord¬
ing  to  Perrault,  not  60,  as  it  Hands  in
the  editions.  However,  Diognetus,
the  Rhodian  engineer,  difappointed

6  E.  x.  c.  22.


the  effect  of  this  enormous  machine
by  caufing  a  great  quantity  of  water
to  be  poured  upon  the  ground  at  the
foot  of  the  wall  •,  by  which  means,  the
earth  being  foaked  with  the  water,  the
wheels  of  the  Helepolis  funk  into  the
ground  i  fo  that,  it  could  never  be
brought  near  the  walls.

34-*  T Hov  Ovilxgiov  r Ef. uvov.  The  Fajli
confulares  call  this  conful  T.  Vetufius
Geminus  ;  and  e  Livy  himfelf  feems
to  doubt  which  is  the  right  name ;
V.  Veturium  Geminum ,  five  ille  Vetufius
fuit.


*  B,  iii.  c,  8,


And


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  125
And  the  fenate  having  Toon  refolved  upon  the  war,  and
the  people  confirmed  their  refolution,  they  prefently  be¬
gan  to  raife  forces,  every  man  of  the  military  age,  even
thofe,  who  were  by  law  exempt,  defiring  to  fhare  in  this
expedition.  The  army  being  divided  into  three  bodies,  one  of
them  was  left  to  defend  the  city,  which  was  commanded  by
Quintus  Fabius,  a  confular  perfon  ;  and  the  other  two
marched  out  againft  the  Aequi,  and  the  Volfci.  The  fame
thing  had,  alfo,  been  done  by  the  enemy :  For  the  bed  forces
of  both  thofe  nations  were,  already,  in  the  field  under  two
generals,  and  defigned  to  begin  with  the  territories  of  the
Hernici,  in  which  they  were,  then,  incamped,  and  to  proceed
in  their  march  through  all  Thofe,  that  were  fubjedt  to  the
Romans  :  And  the  forces  of  lefs  ufe  were  left  to  guard  their
towns,  left  any  fudden  attempt  might  be  made  upon  them
by  the  enemy.  The  Roman  confuls,  confidering  thefe  dif-
pofitions,  thought  it  moft  advifeable  firft  to  attack  their
towns,  concluding  that  the  confederate  army  would  be  dif-
folved,  as  foon  as  each  of  the  two  nations  of  which  it  was
compofed,  fhould  hear  that  their  own  towns  were  expofed
to  the  greateft  danger,  and  that  they  would  think  it  more
advifeable  to  fave  their  own  fortunes,  than  to  deftroy  Thofe
of  the  enemy.  Lucretius,  therefore,  invaded  the  country  of
the  Aequi,  and  Veturius  That  of  the  Volfci.  The  former
fuffered  every  thing  without  their  walls  to  be  ruined,  and
prepared  to  defend  their  city,  and  their  fortrefies.

LXX.  But  the  Volfci,  led  on  by  their  boldnefs  and  pride,
and  defpifing  the  Roman  army,  as  unable  to  cope  with

the


i  a6  ROMAN  ANTI  QtJ  IT  I  E  S  OF  Book  IX.

the  great  numbers,  of  which  their  own  confifted,  came  out
in  order  to  fight  in  defence  of  their  country,  and  3Sincamped
near  to  Veturius :  But  the  fame  thing,  that  ufually  hap¬
pens  to  a  new  raifed  army  compofed  of  a  mixed  multitude
of  citizens,  and  hufbandmen,  brought  together  for  that  oc-
cafion,  of  which  many  are  both  unarmed,  and  unacquainted
with  danger,  happened  to  the  Volfci,  who  durft  not  fo  much
as  encounter  the  enemy;  but  the  greateft  part  of  them,
aftoniflhed  at  the  firft  onfet  of  the  Romans,  and  unable
to  bear  either  their  fhouts,  or  the  noife  of  their  arms,  fled
in  all  hafte  to  their  city:  So  that,  many  of  them,  being
overtaken  in  the  narrow  roads,  were  put  to  death,  and  many
more  loft  their  lives,  while  they  were  crouding  at  the  gates,
to  avoid  the  horfe  that  purfued  them.  The  Volfci,  there¬
fore,  after  this  misfortune,  reproached  themfelves  with  their
folly,  and  were  unwilling  to  hazard  another  ingagement :

‘  But  the  generals,  who  commanded  the  forces  of  the  latter,
and  Thofe  of  the  Aequi  in  the  field,  hearing  their  own
cities  were  attacked,  refolved  to  perform  fome  brave  action
on  their  part  alfo ;  to  decamp  from  the  country  of  the  Her-
nici  and  the  Latines,  and,  in  the  height  of  their  refentment,
to  march  in  all  hafte  to  Rome,  fince  they,  alfo,  perfuaded


35*  UhYIVlOV  T%  OutlxgliSX.OiliS'Q&loTriSiVffUV.

Le  Jay  has  enjoyed  a  long  truce,  which
I  lhall  only  interrupt  for  a  moment  in
order  to  give  the  reader  an  opportu¬
nity  of  admiring  his  tranflation  of  this
paffage,or  rather  of  Portus’s  tranflation
of  it.  The  latter  fays,  prope  Veturium
caftra  pofuerunt ;  and  le  Jay,  having


forgotten  that  Veturius  was  the  name
of  one  of  the  confuls,  takes  Veturium
for  a  town,  and  renders  it  thus,  fe
camper ent  proche  Veturium.  Had  he
call  his  eye  on  the  Greek  text,  and
underftood  it,  the  article  t#  would
have  faved  him  from  this  ridicule.

them-


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  127

themfelves  that  they  fhould  fucceed  in  one  of  thefe  two  great
defigns,  either  take  Rome,  which  was  then  unguarded,  or
draw  the  enemy  out  of  their  territories,  fince  the  confuls
mu  ft,  neceflarily,  haften  to  the  relief  of  their  own  country,
when  attacked.  In  confequence  of  this  plan,  they  made  a
forced  march,  to  the  end  that,  coming  to  the  city  unex¬
pectedly,  they  might  that  inftant  begin  the  afiault.

LXXI.  But  having  advanced  as  far  as  the  city  of  Tuf-
culum,  and  being  there  informed  that  the  whole  circuit  of
Rome  was  lined  with  armed  men,  and  that  four  cohorts,  of
fix  hundred  men  each,  were  polled  before  the  gates,  they
abandoned  their  defign  of  marching  to  Rome ;  and,  in¬
camping,  laid  wafte  the  lands,  that  lay  near  the  city,  which,
in  their  former  irruption,  they  had  left  untouched.  But
the  conful,  Lucius  Lucretius,  appearing,  and  incamp¬
ing  not  far  from  them,  they  thought  this  a  proper  oppor¬
tunity  to  give  him  battle  before  the  other  army  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  which  was  commanded  by  Veturius,  fhould  come  to
the  afliftance  of  Lucretius ;  and,,  placing  their  baggage  upon
a  certain  eminence,  and  leaving  two  cohorts  to  defend  it,
the  reft  advanced  to  the  plain.  After  which,  they  in-
gaged  the  Romans,  and  fought  bravely  for  a  long  time  :
But  fome  of  them  being  informed  that  an  army  was  come
out  of  the  fortrefles,  that  were  in  their  rear,  and  marching
down  from  an  eminence,  they  thought  the  other  conful  was
advancing  with  the  forces  under  his  command ;  and,  fearing
to  be  incompafied  by  both,  they,  no  longer,  flood  their
ground,  but  fled.  In  this  a&ion,  both  their  generals  fell,


32g  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklX.

after  they  had  given  great  proofs  of  their  valor,  and  with
them  many  other  brave  . men  lighting  by  their  fide.  Thofe,
who  efcaped  from  the  battle,  difperfed  themfelves,  and  every
man  retired  to  his  own  country.  After  this' defeat,  Lucre¬
tius  laid  wade  the  country  of  the  Aequi  with  great  fecurity,
and  Veturius  That  of  the  Volfci ;  till  the  time  appointed
for  the  eledtion  of  magiftrates  drew  near  :  Then  both  of
them,  decamping,  returned  to  Rome  with  their  armies,
and  triumphed  in  honor  of  their  victories :  Lucretius  enter¬
ing  the  city  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  four  horfes,  and  Veturius
on  foot:  36  For  thefe  two  triumphs  are  granted  to  generals


36*  Avo  xtqi  S-gisty-Got.  See  the
thirty  ninth  annotation  on  the  fifth
book.  M.  *  *  *  obferves  that f  Livy,
in  fpeaking  of  the  ovation  granted  by
the  fenate  to  Veturius,  fays,  altericon-
fuli  datum ,  ut  ovans  fine  militibus  urbem
iniret.  From  thefe  words,  he  con¬
cludes  that  all,  to  whom  the  ovation
was  granted,  performed  this  procef-
fion  without  their  foldiers :  I  do  not
deny  the  fadt  •,  but  I  deny  the  confe-
quence.  I  do  not  deny  the  fa£V,  I  fay,
becaufe  I  know  from  g  Mafliirius,
quoted  by  Gellius,  that,  in  the  leffer
triumph,  called  the  ovation ,  the  gene¬
ral  went  on  foot,  and  was  not  follow¬
ed  by  his  foldiers,  but  by  the  whole
fenate.  But  ftill  I  fay  that  it  cannot
be  concluded  from  this  particular  de¬
cree,  by  which  the  ovation  without
foldiers  was  granted  to  Veturius,  that
no  generals,  upon  thefe  occafions,
were  ever  attended  by  their  foldiers,
any  more  than  it  can  be  concluded


from  another  decree,  by  which  the
fenate  ordered  C.  Claudius  to  perform
his  ovation  on  horfeback,  h  C.  Clau¬
dius  equo  fine  militibus  inveheretur ,  that
all  generals  proceeded  on  horfeback  in
that  ceremony.  This  nobody  will  fay;
becaufe  we  know  from  1  our  author,
and, indeed,  from  all  others,  who  have
written  upon  this  fubjedt,  that  the
ovation  was,  generally,  performed  on
foot.  But,  though  I  have  faid  that
the  generals,  upon  thofe  occafions,
were  not  attended  by  their  foldiers,
yet  there  are  fome  reafons  alledgcd  by
Livy  why  C.  Claudius  wasnot  attended
by  his  foldiers,  which  give  reafon  to
fufpedt  that  this  practice  was  not  fo
univerfal  as  it  is  fuppofed.  When
I  fpeak  of  the  ovation  decreed  to  C.
Claudius,  the  reader  will  recolledt
that  it  was  in  confideration  of  the  im¬
portant  fervice  he  had  done  his  coun¬
try  in  leaving  his  own  province,  and
joining  his  collegue  M.  Livius :  The


f  B.iii.  c.  10.  s  B.  v.  c.  6.  b  Livy,  B.  xxviii.  c.  9.  *  See  the  forty  feventh  chapter

of  the  fifth  book.

by


Book  IX.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN AS S E N S IS.  129


by  the  fenate,  as  I  have  laid,  s
but  differ  in  this,  that  one  is
the  other,  on  foot.

confequence  of  this  ftep  was  the  de¬
feat,  and  death  of  Afdrubal,  who  was
come  into  Italy  at  the  head  of  a  for¬
midable  army  to  affift  his  brother
Annibal.  Had  the  junction  of  thefe
two  armies  been  effe&ed,  it  is  highly
probable  that  the  Romans,  notwith-
itanding  their  courage,  and  conftancy,
would  have  been  ruined.  In  confider-
ation  of  this  fervice,  the  fenate  decreed
the  greater  triumph  to  M.  Livius,
becaufe  the  a£tion  had  been  performed
in  his  province,  and  under  hisaufpices,
as  the  Romans  called  it ;  and  to  C.
Claudius  the  leffer  •,  and  that  the  for¬
mer  fhould  be  attended  with  his  fol-
diers,  and  the  latter  not :  For  which,
thefe  reafons  are  alledged  in  the  decree
of  the  fenate-,  becaufe  the  army  of
Livius  was  already  at  Rome,  but  the
army  of  Claudius  could  not  be  drawn

k  Livy,  B.  xxviii.  c.


md  are  equal  in  other  honors,-
performed  in  a  chariot,  and

<  •  1

out  of  his  province  k  quoniam  exercitus
Livianus  dedubfus  Romam  venijfet ,  Ne~
ronis  de  provincid  deduct  non  potuijfet ;
ut  M.  Livium  quadrigis  urbem  ineuntem
milites  fequerentur :  C.  Claudius  equo  fine
militibus  inveheretur.  Here  the  reafon
afiigned  in  the  decree  why  Claudius
was  not  to  be  attended  by  his  men,  is,
becaufe  his  army  could  not  be  drawn
out  of  his  province  ;  which  reafon,  I
am  apt  to  think,  would  not  have  been
afiigned,  if  it  had  been  the  conftant
praftice  for  a  general  never  to  be  fol¬
lowed  by  his  foldiers  in  an  ovation.
But  this  queftion  has  been,  already,
decided  by  1  our  author,  where  he  fays
in  fo  many  words,  that  the  general,
who  triumphs  in  the  manner  called  the
ovation,  enters  the  city  on  foot,  fol¬
lowed  by  the  army ,  t»j 5

&g0iiy%(AtVO{.

>.  >B.v.c.  47.


The  end  of  the  Ninth  book.

•  *  #


.  tJ  \  .....

Vol.  IV.  s  THE


G


—


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES

O  F

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.

THE  TENTH  BOOK.

TH  E  year  after  this  confulfhip,  the  eightieth  Olym¬
piad  was  folemnized,  at  which  Torymbas,  a  Thef-
falian,  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium,  1  Phraficles
being  archon  at  Athens,  and  Publius  Volumnius,  and  Servius
Sulpicius  Camerinus  confuls  at  Rome.  Thefe  led  no  forces
into  the  field,  either  to  take  revenge  on  thofe,  who  had
injured  both  the  Romans,  and  their  allies,  or  to  defend  their
own  country ;  but  employed  themfelves  in  providing  againft
the  evils,  that  might  arife  within  the  walls,  and  in  prevent¬
ing  the  mifchief  flowing  from  a  combination  of  the  people
againft  the  fenate :  For  they  were  again  in  motion,  being

Annotations  on  the  Tenth  Book.

*•  A^ov7o?  A0«v»j<n  This  $x<rni\ei$*, jf,  and,  in  the  fuccefiion  of

archon  is  called,  by  8  Diodorus  Siculus,  the  Athenian  archons,  Phaciclides.

*B.  xi.  c.  77.


told


BjokX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  in


told  by  the  tribunes  that  the  bed  of  all  inftitutions  for  free
men  was  an  2  equal  diftribution  of  jufcice  ;  and  they  defired
that  all  affairs,  both  private  and  public,  might  be  admini-
ftred  according  to  laws:  For  there  was,  as  yet,  no  fuch
thing  among  the  Romans  as  an  equality  of  laws,  or  an  equal
diftribution  of  juftice,  neither  were  all  their  laws  committed
to  writing;  but,  formerly,  their  kings  ufed  to  adminifter
juftice  to  the  fuitors,  and  their  deciftons  were  laws :  After
they  ceafed  to  be  governed  by  kings,  among  the  other
functions  of  royalty,  That  of  ad miniftring  juftice  alfo  was
transferred  to  the  annual  confuls,  and  they  decided  all
contefts,  of  what  nature  foever.  3  The  rules  of  thefe  decilions


2*  le-vi yo^ice.  See  the  ninth  annotation
on  the  fourth  book  ;  where,  I  think,
I  have  proved  that  nmyo^tx  does  not,
always,  fignify  an  equal  liberty  offpeecb.
However,  the  Latin  tranflators  have
given  it  that  fenfe  here  *,  and,  after
their  example,  both  the  French  tranf¬
lators  have  faid,  une  egale  liber  te  de
parler ;  a  privilege,  which  the  wives
of  the  Romans  might,  very  naturally,
have  claimed  :  This  cannot  pofiibly
be  the  fenfe  of  the  word  in  this  place  ;
becaufe  our  author  will  prefently  tell
us  that  there  was  no  fuch  thing  among
the  Romans  hitherto,  as  Krovofjuoc,  or
KTKyogia.  And  will  any  one  fay  that  the
Romans  were  not,  as  yet,  intitled  to
freedom  of  fpeech  ?  Truly  the  many
bold  harangues  of  the  tribunes,  which
our  author  has  given  us  at  length,
fufficiently  prove  the  contrary.  Livy,
in  fpeaking  of  this  very  tranfadtion,
never  fays  a  word  of  freedom  of  fpeech  ;
but,  in  the  original  propofal  made  by
the  tribunes  for  creating  thefe  legifLa-

b  B.  iii.  c.  31 .


tors,  he  fays,  the  intention  was  that
they  fhould  propole  fuch  laws,  as
fhould  be  beneficial  both  to  the  patri¬
cians,  and  plebeians,  and  eftablifh  e-
qual  liberty;  h  qui  utrifque  utilia  fer¬
vent,  quaeque  aequandae  libertatis  ejfent.
Again,  he  makes  the  firil  decemvirs,
after  they  had  finifiied  ten  of  the  tables,
tell  the  people  that  they  had,  as  far
as  the  wit  of  ten  men  could  provide,
eftablifhed  laws  equal  to  men  of  all
conditions ;  cfe,  quantum  decern  bomi-
num  ingeniis  provideri  potuerit ,  omnibus
fummis  infimifque  jura  aequajje.  This
is  what  our  author  calls /o-ovopa.  But,
as  impartial  laws  would  have  been  of
no  avail  to  the  Roman  people  without
an  impartial  execution  of  them,  This
alfo  they,  with  great  reafon,  infilled
on;  and  this  is  what  he  calls  i<rtjyo^x.

3-  Tjfwv  cTs  Tx  zaoWx.  This  period  is
certainly  corrupted  in  all  the  editions,
and  manufcripts.  The  fenfe  I  have
given  to  it  was  fuggelled  to  me  by  the
next  fentence.

CB.  iii.  c.  34.

S  2  were.


1 3 2  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

were,  for  the  greatefl  part,  kept  by  the  minifters  of  the
confuls,  who  were  advanced  to  that  magiftracy  for  their
virtue :  And  fome  very  few  of  them  were  recorded  in  the
books  of  the  pontifs,  which  had  the  force  of  laws,  and  with
which  the  patricians  alone  were  acquainted,  by  reafon  of
their  refidence  in  the  city  ;  while  the  people,  who  were
either  merchants,  or  hufbandmen,  and  came  to  town  only  on
the  market  days,  between  which  many  days  intervened,  were,
as  yet,  unacquainted  with  them.  This  inftitution  was,  firft,
attempted  to  be  introduced  by  Caius  Terentius  the  year
before,  while  he  was  tribune ;  but  he  was  forced  to  aban¬
don  it,  becaufe  the  people  were,  then,  in  the  field ;  and  the
confuls,  induftrioufly,  detained  the  armies  in  the  enemy’s
country  till  the  expiration  of  their  magiftracy.

II.  Aulus  Virginius,  and  the  other  tribunes  of  this  year
refumed  this  inftitution,  and  refolved  to  carry  it  through :
On  the  other  fide,  the  confuls,  the  fenate,  and  all  the  reft
of  the  men  in  power  tried  every  art  to  defeat  their  defign?
and  to  avert  the  neceflity  of  making  laws  the  rules  of  their
government.  The  fenate  met  frequently,  the  people  were
continually  aflfembled,  and  attempts  of  all  kinds  were  made
by  the  magiftrates  againft  one  another.  From  all  which,
it  was  manifeft  to  every  one  that  fome  great,  and  irreparable
mifchief  would  flow  from  this  animofity.  Thefe  human
reafonings  were  confirmed  by  divine  omens,  fome  of  which
had  never  been  recorded  in  the  public  archives,  nor  the
memory  of  them  been  preferved  by  any  other  means :  Lights
(hooting  along  the  heavens,  and  flames  continuing  in  the

fame


Book X.  DIONYSIUS  H AL ICARN AS SE N SIS.  133

fame  place,  roarings  of  the  earth,  and  continual  tremblings
of  it  had  happened,  fpedlres  of  various  fhapes  at  various  times
gliding  through  the  air,  and  voices  aftonifhing  the  minds  of
men,  and  every  thing  of  that  nature  was  found  to  have
happened  formerly,  more  or  lefs :  But  the  following  prodigy,
which  they  were  unacquainted  with,  and  had  never  heard
of,  ftruck  them  with  the  greateft  terror:  There  fell  from
heaven  a  violent  fhower,  bringing  down  with  it,  inftead  of
fnow,  4  pieces  of  flefh,  fome  lefs,  fome  greater ;  moft  of
thefe  the  birds,  flying  to  them  in  flocks,  feized  with  their
beaks,  as  they  were  falling  through  mid  air  ;  and  thofe
pieces,  that  fell  to  the  ground  in  the  city  itfelf,  and  in  the
fields,  lay  there  a  confiderable  time  without  changing  their
color,  as  happens  to  ftale  meat,  or  even  corrupting,  or
fmelling  ill.  The  Roman  foothfayers  were  unable  to  guefs
at  the  meaning  of  this  prodigy ;  but  in  the  Sibylline  books
it  was  found  that  a  foreign  enemy  would  enter  the  city  ^
that  the  citizens  would  fight  to  preferve  themfelves  from
being  made  flaves,  and  that  a  civil  diflenfion  would  be  the


4*  3"^ <xuiT pa?#.  If  any  of  my

readers  have  a  take  for  prodigies,  they
will  find  this  tale  recorded  by  d  Livy
alfo,  who  deals  much  more  in  prodi¬
gies  than  our  author.  But,  if  thefe
authorities  are  not  fufficient  to  prove
the  fa£t,  let  it  be  remembered  that  it
e  rained  flefh  likewife  upon  the  Ifrael-
ites,  when  they  were  in  the  defert.
We  hear  of  fhowersof  blood,and'milk,
and  of  many  other  things :  But  the
mod  beneficial  fhower  I  have  met  with
(next  to  Jupiter’s  golden  fhower)  was

d  B.  iii.  c.  10.


a  fhower  of  filver,  which  Xiphiiinus,
the  epitomator  of  Dion  Caflius,  fays
fell  on  the  forum  of  Auguflus  in  the
reign  of  Severus  :  This  fhower  Dion
fays  he  did  not  indeed  fee,  but  is  fure
it  fell,  becaufe  he  had  fome  of  it,  with
which  he  filvered  over  fome  pieces  of
brafs,  and  the  color  of  the  filver  re¬
mained  upon  them  for  three  days  ;
but,  on  the  fourth,  it  quite  difappeared.
By  this,  it  feems  that  the  filver  rain-
was  not  filver  after  all  ;  which  1  am
very  furry  for.

c  Pfal.  Ixxviii.  y.  27.


r


A


fore-


i34  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

forerunner  of  this  war  with  a  foreign  enemy ;  which  fedition
they  were  to  banifh  from  the  city  in  its  birth;  and  that,  if
they  invoked  the  gods  by  facrifices,  and  prayers  to  avert  thefe
misfortunes,  they  would  gain  the  victory  over  their  enemies.
After  thefe  things  were  publifhed  to  the  people,  the  perfons,
who  had  the  care  of  religious  rites,  firft,  facrificed  victims  to
thofe  gods,  who  remove,  and  avert  evils :  After  which,  the
fenators  aflembled,  and  the  tribunes  being  alfo  prefent,  they
confidered  of  the  means  both  to  fecure,  and  preferve  the
commonwealth.

III.  They  all  agreed  to  put  an  end  to  their  mutual  ani-
mofities,  and  to  aCt  with  unanimity,  according  to  the  di¬
rection  of  the  oracles.  But  they  were  under  no  fmall  dif¬
ficulty  concerning  the  means,  that  were  to  be  employed  to
effeCt  this;  and  which  of  the  contending  parties,  by  taking
the  firft  ftep  in  yielding  to  the  other,  fhould  put  an  end  to
the  fedition :  For  the  confuls,  and  the  leading  men  of  the
fenate  accufed  the  tribunes  of  being  the  authors  of  this  di-
fturbance,  by  attempting  to  introduce  new  laws,  and  to
fubvert  the  conftitution.  On  the  other  fide,  the  tribunes
faid  they  aimed  at  nothing,  that  was  either  unjuft  or  dif¬
ad  vantageous  to  the  commonwealth,  in  defiring  to  introduce
a  good  fyftem  of  laws,  and  an  equal  diftribution  ofjuftice;
and  that  the  confuls,  and  the  patricians  promoted  the  fedi¬
tion  by  fomenting  their  lawlefs  appetites,  and  thirft  of  power,
and  by  imitating  the  behaviour  of  tyrants.  Thefe,  and  the
like  reproaches  were  urged  by  each  of  them  for  many  days,
and  the  time  was  fpent  in  vain  ;  during  which,  no  bufinefs

either


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  135

either  public,  or  private  was  difpatched.  The  tribunes,
finding  that  nothing  they  could  fay  proved  effe&ual,  ceafed
to  harangue,  and  inveigh  againft  the  fenate ;  and,  aflem-
bling  the  people,  promifed  them  to  bring  in  a  law  relating
to  what  they  defired.  This  being  approved  of  by  the
people,  they,  without  further  delay,  read  the  law  they  had
prepared;  the  heads  of  which  were  as  follows:  That  5  ten
perfons  be  chofen  by  the  people  in  a  legal  afiembly,  the
moft  diftinguifhed  both  by  their  age,  and  prudence,  and
.  who  have  the  greateft  regard  for  honor,  and  a  good  reputa¬
tion  :  That  thefe  draw  up  laws  concerning  all  matters  both
public  and  private,  and  lay  them  before  the  people :  And
that  the  laws,  fo  to  be  drawn  up  by  them,  be  affixed  in  the
forum,  as  rules  both  to  the  magiftrates,  who  fhall,  from
henceforth,  be  annually  chofen,  and  to  private  men  of  their
mutual  rights.  After  the  tribunes  had  propofed  this  law,
they  gave  leave  to  all  who  were  willing,  to  (peak  againft
it;  and  appointed  the  third  market  day  for  that  purpofe.
And  many,  not  the  leaft  confiderable  of  the  fenate,  both  old
and  young,  oppofed  the  law  in  elaborate,  and  fet  fpeeches.
This  lafted  many  days :  After  which,  the  tribunes,  being
uneafy  at  the  lofs  of  time,  would  not  fuffer  the  oppofers  of
the  law  to  harangue,  any  longer,  againft  it ;  but,  appointing
a  day  for  paffing  it,  defired  all  the  plebeians  to  attend*

5-  Avfyecs  «&**.  There  is  a  note  of  the  laws.  But,  that  learned  man  forgot
Sylburgius  upon  this  paffage,  in  which  that  the  propofal  Livy  lpeaks  of  was
f  Livy  is  quoted  for  faying  that  only  made  the  year  before,  in  the  confulihip
five  men  were  to  be  chofen  to  compile  of  Lucretius,  and  Veturius.

f  B.  iii.  c.  9.

afiuring


Book  X.


136  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

alluring  them  they  fhould  not  be  tired,  any  more,  with  long
difcourfes,  but  give  their  votes  in  their  tribes,  concerning
the  law.  After  thefe  affurances,  the  tribunes  di {miffed  the
affembly.

IV.  Upon  this,  the  confuls,  and  the  patricians  who  had
moll  power,  going  to  the  tribunes,  treated  them  with  more
feverity  than  before  ;  faying  they  would  not  fuffer  them  to
propofe  laws  without  the  previous  approbation  of  the  fenate :
For  that  laws  were  contracts  entered  into  by  the  whole
body  of  the  commonwealth,  and  not  by  a  part  of  it :  They
told  them,  alfo,  that  the  moft  afflicting,  and  the  mod  fflame-
ful  deftrudtion  muft  be  the  confequence  both  to  govern¬
ments,  and  private  families,  whenever  the  worft  part  pre-
fcribes  laws  to  the  beft.  “  What  power,  faid  they,  have
“  you,  tribunes,  either  to  introduce,  or  abrogate  laws?  Did
u  you  not  receive  this  magiftracy  from  the  fenate,  upon
u  certain  conditions  ?  Did  you  not  defire  that  the  tribunes
“  might  be  created  to  aflift  the  poorer  fort,  when  injured,

and  opprefted  and  to  take  cognizance  of  nothing  elfe  ?
“  But,  if  you  were,  before,  inverted  with  any  power,  which
“  you  had  extorted  from  us  contrary  to  juftice,  while  the
<c  fenate  acquiefced  in  every  thing  you  propofed  for  your
u  own  advantage ;  have  you  not  loft  even  this  power  now,
u  by  the  alteration  of  the  comitia  ?  For  neither  a  decree  of
“  the  fenate  appoints  you,  any  longer,  to  the  magiftracy;
“  nor  do  the  curiae  give  their  votes  concerning  you ;
“  neither  do  you  offer  up  to  the  gods,  before  your  eledion,
*c  the  facrifices  appointed  by  the  laws;  nor  is  there  any

“  thing


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  137

<c  thing  elfe  performed,  that  has  an  appearance  of  religion
“  to  the  gods,  or  of  legality  to  men,  when  you  are  elected  :
“  What  then  is  there  you  can,  now,  pretend  to  fhare  in,  that
<c  requires  facrifices,  and  holy  rites,  of  which  the  law  is  one,
“  when  you  renounce  all  laws  ?”  Thefe  things  both  the
old,  and  young  patricians,  going  about  the  town  with  thofe
of  their  faction,  urged  to  the  tribunes:  The  more  moderate
of  the  plebeians  they  foothed  with  courteous  language  ;  and
the  refractory  and  turbulent  they  terrified  with  threats  of
the  dangers,  to  which  they  would  expofe  themfelves  through
want  of  modefty  ;  and  fome,  who  were  exceeding  poor  and
abje<ft,  and  regardlefs  of  every  thing  relating  to  the  public
in  comparifon  of  their  own  intereft,  they  drove  out  of  the
forum  with  blows,  as  if  they  had  been  flaves.

V.  But  the  perfon,  who  was  attended  with  the  greateft
number  of  followers,  and  who  had  the  greateft  power  of  all
the  young  men  at  that  time,  was  Caefo  Quintius,  the  fon
of  Lucius  Quintius,  called  Cincinnatus,  a  man  of  illuftrious
birth,  and  of  a  fortune  inferior  to  none,  beautiful  in  his
perfon  beyond  any  of  his  age,  diftinguifhed  above  all  men
for  his  bravery,  and  qualified  by  nature  for  eloquence ;  to
which  he  gave  a  loofe,  upon  this  occafion,  in  inveighing
againft  the  plebeians,  without  refraining  either  from  fuch
language,  as  freemen  cannot  hear  with  patience,  or  from
adions  as  outrageous  as  his  language:  For  thefe  reafons,
the  patricians  held  him  in  great  efteem  ;  and,  encouraging
him  to  continue  this  dangerous  behaviour,  promifed  to  fup-
port  him.  On  the  other  fide,  the  plebeians  hated  him  above
Vol.  IV.  -  T  all


138  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

all  men.  This  man  the  tribunes  determined  to  remove  out
of  the  way,  in  order  to  terrify  the  reft  of  the  youth,  and
compel  them  to  reform  their  manners.  Having  taken  this
refolution,  and  prepared  their  charge  with  many  witnefles
to  fupport  it,  they  accufed  him  of  a  capital  crime  committed
by  him  againft  the  public.  After  that,  they  fummoned  him
to  appear  before  the  people ;  and  the  day  they  had  appointed
for  the  trial  being  come,  they  aflembled  them,  and  laid
themfelves  out  in  long  accufations  againft  him ;  enumerat¬
ing  all  the  ads  of  violence  he  had  been  guilty  of  towards
the  plebeians,  of  which  they  brought  the  fufferers  them¬
felves  to  give  teftimony.  Leave  being  given  him  to  {peak,
the  youth  himfelf,  when  called  upon,  refufed  to  make  his
defence ;  but  offered  to  anfwer  the  complaints  of  fuch
private  perfons,  as  he  was  accufed  of  having  injured,  before
the  confuls  according  to  the  laws.  His  father,  obferving  the
plebeians  to  be  exafperated  at  the  haughtinefs  of  the  youth,
endeavoured  to  excufe  him  by  fhewing  that  the  greateft
part  of  the  accufations  was  falfe,  and  contrived  infidioufly
againft  his  fon ;  that  thofe  inftances,  which  he  could
not  deny,  were  fmall  and  trifling,  and  not  deferving  the  re-
fentment  of  the  public  y  and  that,  even,  thefe  had  not  pro¬
ceeded  from  deftgn,  or  infolence;  but  from  a  youthful
ambition,  through  which  he  had  done  many  inconfiderate
things  during  thefe  contefts,  and,  poflibly  alfo,  fuffered
many,  as  neither  his  age,  nor  his  prudence  were  yet  arrived
to  their  maturity :  And  he  defired  the  plebeians,  not  only,
to  entertain  no  refentment  for  the  offence,  which  his  words

had


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  139
had  given,  but  even  gratefully  to  remember  the  many
fervices  he  had  done  to  all  of  them  in  the  wars,  while  he
was  employed  in  acquiring  liberty  for  private  men ;  fove-
reignty  for  his  country ;  and,  for  himfelf,  if  ever  he  fliould
be  guilty  of  any  offence,  the  favor,  and  protection  of  the
people.  He,  then,  enumerated  all  the  campaigns,  and  the
adions,  in  which  he  had  received  from  his  generals  rewards
of  valor,  and  crowns ;  how  many  citizens  he  had  faved  in
battle ;  and  how  often  he  was  the  firfl:  man,  who  mounted
the  walls  of  the  enemies  towns.  He  ended  with  imploring
their  compaffion,  and  with  intreating  them  that,  in  confi-
deration  of  his  own  mildnefs  to  all  of  them,  and  of  his
courfe  of  life,  which  they  knew  to  be  free  from  every  kind
of  imputation,  they  would  grant  him  this  {ingle  favor,  to
fave  his  fon.

VI.  The  people  were  exceedingly  pleafed  with  this  {peech,
and  ready  to  grant  the  life  of  the  youth  to  his  father  :  But
Virginius,  well  knowing  that,  if  he  was  not  punifhed,  the
infolence  of  the  audacious  youth  would  become  intolerable,
rofe  up,  and  faid:  “  We  acknowledge  in  you,  Quintius,
<<  every  virtue,  as  well  as  an  affe&ion  for  the  people ;  for
u  which  we  honour  you :  But  the  offenfive  behaviour  of
tc  this  youth,  and  his  haughtinefs  to  us  all  admits  not  of  any
“  deprecation,  or  pardon:  Who,  being  educated  in  your
“  principles,  which  we  all  know  to  be  fo  popular,  and  mo-
«  derate,  defpifed  your  inflitutions,  and  grew  fond  of  a
“  tyrannical  arrogance,  and  a  barbarian  infolence ;  and  in-
u  troduced  an  example  of  wicked  actions  into  our  common-

T  2  “  wealth.


140  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

cc  wealth.  If,  therefore,  you  were,  before,  unacquainted
“  with  his  character,  now  you  know  him,  you  ought  in
<c  juftice  to  efpoufe  our  refentment :  But,  if  you  were  privy  to,
<c  and  abetted,  theabufes,  with  which  he  infulted  the  miferies
<c  of  the  indigent  citizens,  you,  alfo,  were  a  wicked  man,  and
“  did  not  deferve  the  virtuous  character  you  had  acquired  :  But
“  you  did  not  know  that  he  had  degenerated  from  your
“  virtue :  This  teftimony  I  can  give  you.  But,  when  I
C£  acquit  you  of  joining  with  your  fon  in  injuring  us  at  that
u  time,  I  blame  you  for  not  joining  with  us,  now,  in  re-
“  fen  ting  thofe  injuries.  However,  that  you  may  be  the
“  more  convinced  how  great  a  mifchief  you  have  nurfed  up,
“  unknown  to  yourfelf,  againft  the  commonwealth,  how
“  cruel  and  tyrannical,  and  not  free  from  the  murder  of  his
u  fellow-citizens,  hear  his  great  exploit ;  and,  then,  place
“  in  the  other  fcale  thofe  rewards  of  valor  he  received  in  the
<c  wars.  And,  citizens,  as  many  of  you  as  were,  juft  now,
“  affedted  with  the  compaffion,  which  this  man  endeavoured
<c  to  excite,  confider  whether  it  is  your  intereft  to  fpare  fuch
“  a  citizen.”

VII.  Having  faid  this,  he  deftred  Marcus  Volfcius,  one
of  his  collegues,  to  rife  up,  and  fay  what  he  knew  concern¬
ing  the  youth.  All  being  filent,  and  full  of  expe&ation,
Volfcius,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  faid;  “  I  could  have  wifhed,
“  citizens,  to  have  received  a  private  fatisfadtion,  fuch  as
“  the  law  affords,  from  this  man  for  the  moft  cruel  out-
“  rages  I  have  fuffered:  But,  having  been  prevented  from
“  obtaining  this  by  poverty;  weaknefs,  and  by  my  rank

“  among


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  141

“  among  the  vulgar,  I  (hall  lay  hold  on  this  opportunity
<c  to  take  upon  myfelf  the  part  of  a  witnefs,  fince  I  cannot
<c  That  of  an  accufer.  Hear,  then,  my  fufferings,  how
“  cruel,  how  irreparable  they  are.  I  had  a  brother,  whofe
“  name  was  Lucius,  whom  I  loved  above  all  men :  He  and
“  I  fupped  with  a  friend  ;  and,  night  coming  on,  we  rofe
u  from  fupper,  and  departed.  After  we  had  palfed  through
cc  the  forum,  Caefo  came  up  to  us,  revelling  with  other  in-
“  folent  youths :  At  firft,  they  laughed  at  us,  and  abufed  us,
C£  as  young  men,  when  drunk  and  infolent  are  apt  to  abufe
“  thofe,  who  are  mean  and  poor:  We  being  difpleafed  at
“  this  behaviour,  my  brother  fpoke  to  them  with  freedom.
“  Caefo,  thinking  himfelf  injured  in  having  any  thing  faid
<c  to  him  he  did  not  like,  ran  to  him ;  and,  by  (hiking,
“  kicking,  and  every  other  a£t  of  cruelty  and  abufe,  put
C£  him  to  death.  In  the  mean  time,  I  cried  out,  and  did
u  all  I  could  to  defend  him;  when  Caefo,  leaving  my
“  brother  who  lay  dead,  (truck  me  next,  and  ceafed  not,
“  till  he  faw  me  ftretched  upon  the  ground  without  motion,
“  without  fpeech,  and,  as  he  thought,  without  life:  Upon
“  -  this,  he  went  away  exulting,  as  if  he  had  performed  a  great
“  exploit.  Some  perfons,  coming  by  after  he  was  gone,
<<  took  us  up  covered  with  blood,  and  carried  us  home,  my
<c  brother  Lucius  being  dead  as  I  faid,  and  I  half  dead,  and
“  (hewing  fmall  hopes  of  life.  Thefe  things  happened  in
“  the  confuhhip  of  Publius  Servilius,  and  Lucius  Aebutius,
cc  while  the  diftemper  raged  in  the  city,  with  which  we
“  both  had  been  attacked.  It  was  not,  therefore,  poffible

“  for


i42  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookX.
u  for  me  to  obtain  juftice  againft  him,  at  that  time,  fince  both
u  the  confuls  were  dead.  After  Lucius  Lucretius,  and  Titus
“  Veturius  had  entered  on  their  magiftracy,  I  defigned  to
“  have  brought  him  to  juftice,  but  was  prevented  by  the
“  war,  both  confuls  being  in  the  field :  After  they  returned
u  from  the  campaign,  I  often  cited  him  to  appear  before
u  thofe  magiftrates  (as  many  of  the  citizens  know)  and  as
iC  often  received  blows  from  him.  Thefe  are  my  fufterings,
“  plebeians,  which  I  have  related  to  you  with  the  greateft
<c  truth.”

VIII.  After  he  had  faid  this,  all  who  were  prefent,  cried
out ;  and  many  were  proceeding  to  violence;  but  they  were
prevented,  not  only,  by  the  confuls,  but,  alfo,  by  the
greateft  part  of  the  tribunes,  who  were  unwilling  that  a
pernicious  cuftom  fhould  be  introduced  into  the  common¬
wealth  :  The  moft  difpaflionate  even  of  the  people  were  not
lefs  unwilling  to  deprive  thofe,  who  were  upon  their  trial
when  the  event  was  of  the  greateft  confequence,  from  making
their  defence.  Upon  this  occafion,  therefore,  a  regard  to  juftice
reftrained  the  violence  of  the  bolder  fort,  and  the  trial  was
put  off ;  but  no  fmall  conteft,  and  doubt  arofe  concerning  his
perfon,  whether  he  fhould  be  detained  in  prifon  in  the  mean
time,  or  whether  bail  fhould  be  taken  for  his 6  appearance,

6‘  A I  think  Stephens  had  bail  for  his  appearance.  h  Livy,  in
no  reafon  to  find  fault  with  this  word,  fpeaking  of  this  affair  of  Caefo,  calls
and  to  fubftitute  ara^as-airewf  in  its  itfijlireum^  which  amounts  to  the  fame
room.  A(pi%ig  fignifies,  as  5  Julius  thing;  in  vincula  conjici  vet  ant  (tri-
Pollux  explains  the  word,  nugwiot,  buni)  hftXxeum,  pecuniamque^  nijifijla-
what  we  call  an  appearance ;  and  tfyvylag  tur ,  populo  promitti ,  placere  pronun-
Jxvxi  t> if  is  plainly,  to  give  tiant.

eB.v.  Segm.  155.  bB.  iii.  c.  13.


as


Rook  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S E N S I S.  143
as  his  father  defired  :  When  the  fenate  aflembling  ordered
that,  if  fecurity  was  given  for  the  payment  of  a  fum  of
money  in  cafe  of  his  non  appearance,  his  perfon  fhould  be
free  till  the  trial.  The  next  day,  the  tribunes  affembled
the  people,  and  the  youth  not  appearing,  they  procured  a
vote  to  be  palled  for  his  condemnation,  and  compelled  his
fureties,  who  were  ten,  to  pay  the  money  agreed  on  in  cafe
they  did  not  furrender  him.  Caefo,  therefore,  being  thus
circumvented  by  the.  intrigues  of  the  tribunes,  and  the  falfe
teftimony  of  Volfcius,  as  it  afterwards  appeared,  chofe  Tyr-
rhenia  for  the  place  of  his  banifhment.  His  father,  having
fold  the  greateft  part  of  his  eftate,  and  repaid  the  fureties
the  money  they  had  been  bound  in,  left  nothing  for  himfelf
but  one  fmallfarm  lying  on  the  other  fide  of  the  river  Tiber,
on  which  there  was  an  humble  cottage ;  where,  cultivating
this  farm  with  the  help  of  a  few  Haves,  he  led  a  laborious,
and  calamitous  life ;  and,  through  melancholy,  and  poverty,
neither  came  to  Rome,  vifited  his  friends,  affifted  at  the  fefti-
vals,  nor  allowed  himfelf  any  other  entertainment.  However,
the  tribunes  were  greatly  difappointed  in  their  expectations :
For  the  animofity  of  the  young  men  was  fo  far  from  being
reformed,  and  extinguifhed  by  the  calamity  of  Caefo,  that  it
grew  much  more  outrageous  and  exceffive ;  and  they  oppofed
the  law,  which  the  tribunes  had  fo  much  at  heart,  both  by
their  words,  and  aCtions :  So  that,  the  whole  time  of  their
magiftracy  being  taken  up  with  thefe  contefts,  they  were
not  able  to  effeCt  any  thing.  However,  the  people  continued
them  in  the  tribunefhip  for  the  following  year.


IX,


X44  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

IX.  Publius  Valerius  Poplicola,  and  Caius  Claudius  Sabinus
being  confuls,  Rome  faw  herfelf  expofed  to  a  greater  danger
than  (he  had  ever  yet  experienced,  by  a  foreign  war,  which
the  civil  difienrton  brought  upon  the  city  ;  as  both  the
Sibylline  oracles,  and  the  prodigies  had  foretold  the  year
before.  I  fhall  now  relate,  not  only,  the  caufe  of  this  war,
but,  alfo,  the  actions  performed  by  the  confuls  during  the
courfe  of  it.  The  tribunes,  who  had  been  inverted  by  the
people  with  this  magiftracy  for  the  fecond  time,  in  expec¬
tation  of  their  procuring  the  law  to  be  pafled,  feeing  one
of  the  confuls,  Caius  Claudius,  pofieded  with  an  heredi¬
tary  hatred  againft  the  plebeians,  and  prepared  to  defeat
their  defigns  by  every  method,  and  the  moft  powerful  of
the  youth  a&ing  with  undifguifed  rage,  whom  it  was  im-
poflible  to  fubdue  by  force;  and,  above  all,  that  the  greateft
part  of  the  people,  courted  by  the  patricians,  yielded  to  their*
application,  and  preferved,  no  longer,  the  fame  zeal  for  the
law  in  queftion  ;  they  refolved  to  take  bolder  meafures,  by
which  they  expected  to  terrify  the  people,  and  repel  the
attempts  of  the  conful.  Firft,  therefore,  they  caufed  re¬
ports  of  all  forts  to  be  fpread  about  the  city;  after  that,
they  fate  in  council,  publicly,  from  morning  till  night,
without  admitting  any  perfon,  bertdes  Thofe  of  their  own
college,  to  their  counfels,  and  deliberations.  When  they
faw  a  proper  opportunity  to  carry  their  defigns  into  execu¬
tion,  they  writ  feigned  letters,  and  contrived  to  have
thefe  delivered  to  them  by  an  unknown  perfon,  as  they  fate
in  the  forum  :  After  they  had  read  thefe  letters,  they  beat

their


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  145

their  foreheads ;  and,  having  compofed  their  looks  for  grief,
rofe  up:  The  people  flocking  about  them,  and  concluding
that  fome  dreadful  mifchief  was  contained  in  thofe  letters,
they  commanded  filence,  and  faid  :  ££  The  plebeians  are  in
ec  the  greateft  of  all  dangers,  citizens ;  and,  if  fome  benevo-
££  lence  of  the  gods  had  not  taken  care  of  thofe,  who  were
a  expofed  toundeferved  fufferings,  we  fhould  all  have  fallen
££  under  dreadful  calamities.  We  defire  you  will  have  a
££  little  patience,  till  we  give  an  account  to  the  fenate  of  the
£C  information  we  have  received,  and  with  joint  confent  take
£C  fuch  meafures,  as  are  neceflary  in  the  prefent  juncture.”
Having  faid  this,  they  went  to  the  confuls.  While  the  fenate
was  aflembling,  many  and  various  difcourfes  palled  in  the
forum ;  fome  publifhing  to  the  people  aflembled  in  circles,
with  defign,  fuch  reports,  as  had  been  fuggefted  to  them  by
the  tribunes ;  and  others,  thofe  things  they  mod  dreaded,
as  the  fubjed:  of  the  information  fent  to  thole  magiftrates.
One  faid,  that  the  Aequi  and  the  Volfci,  having  received
Caefo  Quintius,  lately  condemned  by  the  people,  had  chofen
him  general  of  both  the  nations  with  unlimited  authority,
and  that  he  had  raifed  a  great  number  of  forces,  and  was
preparing  to  march  to  Rome :  Another,  that,  in  concert
with  the  whole  body  of  the  patricians,  he  was  to  be  brought
home  by  foreign  troops,  to  the  end  that  the  magiftracy,
which  was  the  guardian  of  the  plebeians,  might  both  now,
and  for  ever  after,  be  abolilhed :  And  another  faid,  that  all
the  patricians  had  not  entered  into  thefe  defigns,  but  only
the  young  men  among  them :  Some  had  the  confidence  to
Vol,  IV.  U  affirm


146  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

affirm  that  Caefo  was  hid  even  in  the  city,  and  would,  foon,
poffefs  himfelf  of  the  moft  advantageous  ports.  The  whole  city
being  alarmed  with  the  expectation  of  thefe  calamities,  and
all  men  fufpeCting,  and  guarding  againft,  one  another,  the
confuls  aflembled  the  fenate ;  and  the  tribunes,  going  in,
acquainted  them  with  the  information  they  had  received  :
Aulus  Virginius,  in  the  name  of  the  rert,  fpoke  as  follows:

X.  “  While  none  of  the  dangers  we  have  been  informed
<c  of  appeared  certain,  but  were  only  vague  reports,  and
“  there  was  nothing  to  confirm  them,  we  were  unwilling,
<c  fenators,  to  acquaint  you  with  thefe  rumors,  from  a  fufpi-
u  cion  of  the  great  commotions  they  would  give  birth  to,
<c  fuch  as,  ufually,  flow  from  dreadful  relations;  and,  alfo,
<c  from  an  apprehenfion  of  appearing  to  you  to  have  a<fted
“  with  greater  precipitancy,  than  prudence  :  However,  we
“  did  not  negleCt  thefe  reports ;  but  have  inquired,  with
<c  all  poflible  care,  into  the  truth  of  them.  But,  fince  the
“  divine  providence,  by  which  this  commonwealth  is,  ever,
“  preferved,  has,  through  its  goodnefs,  brought  to  light  the
<£  hidden  defigns,  and  wicked  attempts  of  thofe  who  are
c<  enemies  to  the  gods;  and  that  we  have  letters  to  produce,
“  which  we,  juft  now,  received  from  foreigners,  who  fhew
ct  their  good  will  to  us,  and  whofe  names  you  fhall,  after-
“  wards,  hear ;  and  fince  our  domeftic  intelligence  concurs,
u  and  agrees  with  That  we  have  received  from  abroad ;
<c  and  thefe  affairs,  now  ripe  for  execution,  can  be  no
u  longer  delayed,  or  deferred ;  we  have  thought  proper  to
“  acquaint  you  with  them,  as  it  is  reafonable,  before  we

“  publifh


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN AS  SE NSIS.  147

“  publifh  them  to  the  people.  Know  then,  that  there  is  a
u  confpiracy  formed  againft  the  people  by  no  obfcure  men,
“  among  whom,  it  is  faid,  there  is  a  fmall  number  even  of
iC  the  ancient  members  of  this  fenate;  but  the  greateft  oart
“  are  knights,  not  of  this  houfe,  whofe  names  it  is  not  yet
“  time  to  acquaint  you  with.  They  defign,  as  we  are  in-
“  formed,  to  take  the  advantage  of  a  dark  night,  and  fall
“  upon  us  while  we  are  afleep,  when  we  can  neither  lee
“  any  thing  that  is  doing,  nor  get  together  in  a  body  to
cc  defend  ourfelves ;  and,  rufhing  into  our  houfes,  to  cut  the
“  throats,  not  only,  of  us  tribunes,  but  of  all  thofe  plebeians
“  alfo,  who  had  ever  oppofed  them  in  defence  of  their
“  liberty,  or  fhould  oppofe  them,  for  the  future :  And,  after
“  they  have  taken  us  off,  they  promife  themfelves  they
cc  fhall  be  able  to  effedt  the  reft  with  great  fecurity,  and
(C  prevail  upon  you  to  abolifh,  by  a  general  vote,  the  con-
“  trails  you  have  made  with  the  people.  But,  finding  they
“  fhould  ftand  in  need  of  a  body  of  foreign  troops,  privately
“  raifed,  to  carry  on  their  defigns,  and  That  even  not  an
“  inconfiderable  one,  they  have  pitched  upon  Caefo  Quin-
“  tius,  one  of  our  fugitives,  as  their  general,  whom,  though
u  convicfted  of  the  murder  of  his  fellow  citizens,  and  of
“  railing  a  fedition,  fome  of  your  number  fkreened  from
“  punifhment,  and  fent  him  away  with  impunity  ;  and,

“  now,  promife  to  reftore  him  to  his  country,  and  offer  him
“  magiftracies,  and  honors,  and  other  rewards  to  ingage  him
u  in  their  fervice :  And  he,  on  his  fide,  undertakes  to  bring
a  to  their  afliftance  as  many  forces  of  the  Aequi,  and  Volfci,

U  2  u  as


j48  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

u  as  they  fhall  have  occafion  for ;  and  he  himfelf  will,  foon,

4  4  appear  at  the  head  of  the  moft  daring,  whom  he  will
4£  introduce  into  the  city  privately,  a  few  at  a  time,  and  in
44  fmall  bodies :  The  reft  of  the  forces,  as  foon  as  we,  who
44  are  the  leaders  of  the  people,  are  put  to  death,  will  fall
44  upon  the  poorer  fort,  if  any  of  them  fhall  aflert  their
44  liberty.  Thefe  are  the  dreadful,  and  wicked  refolutions,
44  fenators,  which  they  have  taken  in  private,  and  defign  to
44  effed,  without  either  fearing  the  anger  of  the  gods,  or
44  regarding  the  indignation  of  men.

XI.  44  Expofed  to  fo  great  a  danger,  fathers,  we  make
44  ^application  to  you  ;  conjuring  you  by  the  gods,  and  ge-
44  nius’s  to  whom  we  facrifice  in  common,  and  deiiring  you
44  to  call  to  mind  the  many  great  wars  we  have  maintained
44  in  conjunction  with  you,  not  to  fuffer  us  to  fall  a  facrifice
44  to  thecruel,  and  wicked  attempts  of  our  enemies;  but  to
44  affift  us ;  to  efpoufe  our  indignation,  and,  jointly  with  us,
44  to  bring  to  condign  punifhment  thofe,  who  have  formed
44  thefe  defigns;  all,  if  poffible ;  but,  if  that  cannot  be,  at
44  leaf!  the  authors  of  this  execrable  confpiracy.  And,  firft,
u  we  defire,  fathers,  that  you  will  pafs  an  order,  as  it  is
£C  moft  juft,  appointing  us  tribunes  to  inquire  into  the  fads
“  contained  in  this  information :  For,  befides  the  juftice  of
44  this  demand,  it  muft  alfo  neceffarily  happen  that  thofe,
<£  whofe  lives  are  expofed  to  danger,  will  make  the  moft
u  exad  inquiries  into  the  caufe  of  it.  If  there  are  any  among
4£  you,  who  are  incapable  of  ading  with  candor  even  in
<£  any  one  inftance,  but  oppofe  every  man  who  fpeaks  in

u  favor


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  149

“  favor  of  the  people,  I  would,  willingly,  afk  them  what
“  there  is  in  our  demands,  that  difpleafes  them,  and  what
“  advice  they  defigrr  to  give  us.  Would  they  advife  us  to
“  make  no  inquiry  at  all,  but  to  negled  fo  great,  and  fo
“  wicked  a  confpiracy,  while  it  is  carrying  on  againft  the
“  people  ?  Who  would  affirm  that  thofe,  who  advance  thefe
“  things,  are  in  their  fenfes,  and  not  fay  rather  that  they
IC  are  tainted  with  the  fame  corruption,  and  accomplices  in
“  the  confpiracy ;  and  that,  fearing  left  they  themfelves
u  may  be  difcovered,  they  throw  a  damp  upon  the  inquiry
“  into  the  truth  of  it?  To  whom  there  is  no  reafon  you
“  ffiould  pay  any  regard, 7  if  poffibly  they  fhall  pretend  that
u  the  cognizance  of  this  information  ffiould  be  committed  not
“  to  us,  but  to  the  fenate,  and  confuls.  What  then  ffiould
“  hinder  the  leaders  of  the  people  alfo  from  faying  the  fame
ic  thing,  if  any  of  the  plebeians,  confpiring  againft  the  con-
u  fuls  and  the  fenate,  ffiould  attempt  the  deftrudion  of  the
“  latter,  that  thofe,  to  whom  the  protedion  of  the  people  is
u  committed,  ought  to  take  cognizance  of  the  adions  of  the
cc  plebeians?  What  will  be  the  confequence  of  this?  Why,
“  that  no  inquiry  will,  ever,  be  made  into  any  fecret  tranf-
“  adion.  But  this  is  a  thing  we  ffiould  not  defire  (for  fuch
u  a  pretenfion  is  fufpicious)  neither  ought  you  to  counte-

7'  E<  Jiayvatrius  raving.  The  rendering  thofe,  who,  he  knew,  would

Vatican  manufeript  has r»jf  make  that  objection,  fufpebted  of  be-

which  can  have  no  place  here,  any  .  ing  accomplices  in  the  confpiracy.  It
more  than  «  in  the  editions.  It  is  is  fubmitted  to  the  learned  reader,
plain  that  the  tribune  here  anticipates  whether  the  fmall  alteration  I  have
an  obje&ion,  which  he  forefaw  would  made  in  the  Greek  text  does  not  fup-*
be  made  to  his  propofal ;  and  endea-  port  this  reafoning.
vours  to  take  off  the  force  of  it  by

6i


nance


150  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

<c  nance  thofe,  who  infill  upon  the  fame  thing  againft  us ;
“  but  to  look  upon  them  as  the  common  enemies  of  the
4C  Hate.  However,  fathers,  nothing  is  fo  neceffary  in  the
u  prefent  juncture,  as  difpatch :  For  the  danger  is  fwift,
u  and  a  delay  in  providing  for  our  fecurity  is  unfeafonable
u  in  the  midft  of  thofe  dangers,  that  delay  not  their  ap-
“  proach  :  So  that,  laying  afide  your  con  tells,  and  long
“  fpeeches,  take  forthwith  fuch  a  refolution,  as  may  appear
“  the  moll  conducive  to  the  public  good.”

XII.  This  harangue  of  the  tribune  greatly  allonifhed,
and  embarraffed  the  fenate.  They  confidered,  and,  con¬
ferring  together,  obferved  that  it  was  of  dangerous  confe-
quence  both  to  grant,  and  to  refufe  the  tribunes  the  commif-
fion  of  inquiring  by  themfelves  into  an  affair  of  a  public
concern,  and  great  importance.  However,  Caius  Claudius,
one  of  the  confuls,  fufpe&ing  their  intention,  rofe  up,  and
fpoke  as  follows  :  cc  I  am  not  afraid,  Virginius,  left  the
cc  fenate  fhould  look  upon  me  as  an  accomplice  in  the  con-
u  fpiracy,  which,  you  fay,  is  formed  againft  yourfelves,  and
“  the  people ;  or  that,  fearing  for  myfelf,  or  for  any  be-
*£  longing  to  me,  as  partakers  of  this  guilt,  I  rife  up  to  op-
“  pofe  you  :  For  the  whole  courfe  of  my  life  acquits  me  of
cc  all  fufpicions  of  this  kind.  What,  therefore,  I  efteem  to
“  be  advantageous  both  to  the  fenate,  and  people,  I  fhall
“  lay  before  you  with  the  bell  intentions,  and  without  any
“  fort  of  fear.  Virginius  feems  to  me  to  be  very  much,  or
“  rather  abfolutely,  miftaken,  if  he  imagines  that  any  of  us
will  fay  either  that  an  affair  of  fo  great  confequence,  and

neceffity


Book  X.


DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSEN SIS.  i5i

££  neceflity  ought  not  to  be  inquired  into,  or  that  the  ma-
“  giftrates  of  the  people  ought  not  to  be  joined  in,  nor
“  prefent  at,  this  inquiry.  No  man  is  fo  void  of  fenfe,  or
£C  affeStion  to  the  people,  as  to  advance  fuch  things.  If,
“  therefore,  any  one  fhould  afk  me  what  motive  ingages  me
££  to  rife  up  in  order  to  oppofe  thofe  meafures,  which  I
“  agree  to,  and  allow  to  be  juft,  and  with  what  intention  I
££  fpeak,  I  fhall  explain  myfelf  to  you  in  the  mod  folemn
cc  manner.  I  am  of  opinion,  fathers,  that  prudent  men
“  ought,  diligently,  to  examine  the  beginnings,  and  firft
“  foundations  of  every  affair  :  For,  of  what  nature  foever
£  thefe  rftay  be,  fuch  inuft  alfo  be  the  conclufions,  that  are
£  drawn  from  them.  Hear,  then,  what  the  foundation  of
c  this  affair  is,  and  what  the  view  of  the  tribunes  in
£  promoting  it.  They  have  not  been  able  to  carry  any
£  of  the  defigns  they  undertook  laft  year  into  execu-
c  tion,  by  reafon  of  your  repeated  oppofttion,  and  an
£  unwillingnefs  in  the  people  to  efpoufe  their  quarrel  with
£  their  ufual  zeal.  Senftble  of  thefe  difficulties,  they  con-
c  lidered  by  what  means  both  you  might  be  compelled  to
£  yield  to  them  contrary  to  your  inclinations,  and  the  people
£  to  aflift  them  in  every  thing  they  fhould  defire :  But,

£  finding  no  lawful,  nor  juft  means  to  effeSt  both  thefe
£  defigns,  after  examining  various  projects,  and  turning  the
£  thing  every  way,  they,  at  laft,  pitched  upon  this  fcheme :

£  Let  us,  faid  they,  accufe  fome  confiderable  men  of  a  con-
1  fpiracy  to  fubvert  the  power  of  the  people,  and  to  put
£  their  protestors  to  death ;  and,  after  we  have  caufed  thefe

.  reports


152  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X;

u  reports  to  be  Ipread  about  the  city  for  a  long  time,  and
££  the  plebeians  fhall  give  credit  to  them  (for  they  will  give
££  credit  to  them  through  fear)  let  us  contrive  to  have  letters
£C  delivered  to  us  in  the  prefence  of  many  people,  by  an
££  unknown  perfon ;  after  that,  let  us  go  to  the  fenate,  let
“  us  be  angry,  and  lament,  and  delire  a  commillion  to  in-
<c  quire  into  the  circumftances  of  this  information  :  If  the
££  patricians  refufe  our  demand,  we  will  lay  hold  on  this
u  opportunity  to  accufe  them  before  the  people ;  and,  by
C£  this  means,  the  whole  body  of  the  plebeians,  being  inraged
“  againd:  the  patricians,  will  be  ready  to  fupport  us  in  every
<c  thing  we  delire :  If  they  grant  it,  we  will  banilh  the  mod:
££  refolute  of  them,  and  thofe  who  have  mod:  oppofed  us,
<£  both  old  and  young,  as  perfons  we  have  difcovered  to  be
<£  concerned  in  this  confpiracy.  Thefe,  through  the  fear
cc  of  a  condemnation,  will  either  agree  to  give  us  no  further
C£  oppolition,  or  be  obliged  to  leave  the  city;  by  this
££  means,  we  fhall,  in  a  great  meafure,  get  rid  of  our  ad-
cc  verfaries.

XIII.  £C  Thefe  were  their  deligns,  fathers ;  and,  during  the
££  time  you  faw  them  fitting  together,  and  confulting,  this
<£  deceit  was  weaving  againd  the  mod:  virtuous  of  your
££  members,  and  this  net  was  framing  againd:  the  noblelt
££  of  the  knights.  To  prove  thefe  things,  very  few  words
££  will  be  necedfary.  Tell  me,  Virginius,  and  the  red:  of  you,
££  againd:  whom  thefe  dreadful  mifchiefs  are  levelled,  who
C£  are  the  ftrangers  from  whom  you  received  thefe  letters  ?
<£  Where  do  they  live?  ‘  How  came  they  acquainted  with

££  you  ?


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  153

<£  you  ?  Or,  by  what  means,  do  they  know  what  is  in  agi-
££  tation  here?  Why  do  you  defer  naming  thefe  men,  and
<£  promife  to  do  it  afterwards;  rather,  why  have  you  not,
££  already,  named  them?  But,  who  is  the  man,  who  brought
“  thefe  letters  to  you  ?  Why  do  you  not  produce  this  man,
“  that  we  may  begin  by  inquiring  firft  of  him,  whether
“  thefe  things  are  true,  or,  as  I  fufped,  your  own  ficftions  ?
££  Then,  your  domeftic  informations,  which,  you  fay,  agree
££  with  Thofe  contained  in  the  foreign  letters,  of  what  na-
<£  ture  are  they,  and  by  wdiom  given?  Why  do  you  con-
a  ceal  thefe  proofs,  and  not  bring  them  to  light  ?  But  I
<£  conceive  it  is  an  impoflible  thing  to  find  a  proof  of  what
££  neither  ever  did,  nor  ever  will,  happen.  Thefe  are  dif-
££  coveries,  fathers,  not  of  a  confpiracy  againft  them,  but  of
u  a  device,  and  a  wicked  defign  againft  us,  which  thefe
££  men  both  employ,  and  conceal :  For  the  things  themfelves
<£  fpeak  aloud.  But  you  are  the  caufe  of  this,  by  the  con-
£C  ceftions  you,  firft,  made  to  them,  and  by  arming  the
<£  extravagance  of  their  magiftracy  with  a  great  power,
“  when  you  allowed  Caefo  Quintius  to  be  tried,  laft  year,
<<  upon  a  falfe  accufation,  and  buffered  fo  great  a  defender  of
<£  the  ariftocracy  to  be  forced  away  by  them  :  For  which
<£  reafon,  they  keep,  no  longer,  any  meafures  with  you  ;  nor
££  take  off  the  men  of  birth  one  by  one,  but  now  8  cover

8  •  I  am  very  forry  to  it  is  plain  that  our  author  purfues  the

fay  that  none  of  the  tranllators  have  metaphor  he  before  made  ufe  of,  when
o-iven  the  fenfe  of  this  word,  which  is  he  faid,  mlo  to  tirfvov  enhwilo:  This  is
here  taken  figuratively,  and  might  further  confirmed  by  the  addition  of
have  been,  very  properly,  rendered  by  IhKwi  to  sr«£i£aAAev7gf.
the  Latin  tranllators,  irretientes :  For

Vol.  IV.


X


“  the


154  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

iC  the  whole  body  of  worthy  men  with  their  net,  and  drag  them
“  out  of  the  city.  And,  to  fill  up  the  meafure  of  your  calami-
<c  ties,  they  will  not  fuffer  even  any  one  of  you  to  contradidt
“  them;  but,  by  expofing  him  to fufpicions,  and  accufations,

“  as  an  accomplice  in  fecret  defigns,  they  try  to  terrify  him,

“  call  him  prefently  an  enemy  to  the  people,  and  cite  him
“  to  appear  before  them  to  give  an  account  of  what  he  faid
C£  in  this  place.  But  this  fubjedt  fhall  be  fpoken  to  at  a  more
“  feafonable  jundture.  I  fhall,  therefore,  now  contradl  what
“  I  have  to  fay,  and  ceafe  to  extend  myfelf.  I  advife  you
“  to  guard  againft  thefe  men,  as  difturbers  of  the  common-
“  wealth,  and  laying  the  foundations  of  great  evils :  And
“  what  I  fay  to  you,  I  fhall  not  conceal  from  the  people,
but  fhall  fpeak  there,  alfo,  with  a  juft  freedom,  and  ac-
“  quaint  them  that  no  mifchief  hangs  over  their  heads,  un-
“  lefs  it  is  from  their  wicked,  and  deceitful  patrons,  who,
“  under  the  appearance  of  friendfhip,  are  committing  adtions
“  full  of  enmity.”  This  difcourfe  of  the  conful  was  received
by  all  prefent  with  great  acclamations,  and  applaufe  :  And,
without  allowing  the  tribunes  even  to  reply,  they  difmifled
the  affembly.  After  which,  Virginius,  calling  the  people
together,  inveighed  both  againft  the  fenate,  and  the
confuls :  And  Claudius  defended  them ;  repeating  the  fame
things  he  had  faid  in  the  fenate.  The  more  moderate
among  the  people  looked  upon  the  fear  to  be  vain ;  while
the  weaker  fort,  giving  credit  to  reports,  thought  it  well
grounded :  But  the  wicked,  who  always  want  a  change,
without  troubling  tnemfelves  to  examine  into  the  truth,  or

falfhood


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  155
faliTiood  of  them,  fought  for  an  occafion  of  fedition,  and
tumult.

XIV.  While  the  city  was  in  this  diforder,  a  certain  Sabine
of  no  obfcure  birth,  and  powerful  by  his  riches,  called,
Appius  Herdonius,  attempted  to  fubvert  the  empire  of  the
Romans,  with  a  view  either  to  make  himfelf  tyrant,  or  to
transfer  the  fovereignty  and  power  to  the  Sabine  nation,
or  elfe  to  gain  a  great  name.  Having  imparted  his  defign
to  a  great  number  of  his  friends,  and  communicated  to  them
his  plan  for  executing  it,  and  they  alfo  approving  thereof,
he  afiembled  his  clients,  and  the  moft  daring  of  his  fervants  ;
and,  in  a  fhort  time,  got  together  a  body  of  about  four
thoufand  men ;  then,  fupplying  them  with  arms,  provifions,
and  every  thing  elfe  that  was  neceflary  for  a  war,  he  im-
barked  them  in  boats;  and,  failing  down  the  river  Tiber,
landed  at  that  part  of  Rome,  where  thecapitol  ftands,  which
is  fcarce  a  ftadium  from  the  river.  It  was  then  midnight,
and  quiet  reigned  in  all  parts  of  the  city  ;  aflifted  by  which,
he  difimbarked  his  men  in  all  hafle ;  and,  pafling  through
the  gates  that  were  open  (for  there  is  a  certain  facred  gate
of  the  capitol,  called  Carmentalis ,  which,  by  the  direction  of
fome  oracle,  is  always  open)  he  afcended  the  hill  with  his
forces,  and  poffeffed  himfelf  of  the  fortrefs :  From  thence,
he  pufhed  on  to  the  citadel,  which  is  contiguous  to  the
capitol,  and  took  that  alfo.  His  intention  was,  after  he  had
feized  thefe  very  advantageous  pofts,  to  receive  the  exiles;
to  invite  the  flaves  to  liberty  ;  to  promife  the  poor  an  abo¬
lition  of  debts,  and  to  fhare  the  fpoils  with  thofe  citizens,

X  2  ^  who,


156  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

who,  being  themfelves  in  a  low  condition,  envied,  and  hated
eminence  of  every  kind,  and  were  eager  for  a  change.  The
hope,  that  both  animated,  and  deceived  him,  by  fuggeftino-
to  him  that  he  fhould  be  difappointed  in  none  of  his  ex¬
pectations,  was  founded  on  the  civil  diflenfion ;  by  reafon
of  which,  he  imagined  that  neither  friendfhip,  nor  corre-
fpondence  could,  any  longer,  intervene  between  the  people,
and  the  patricians.  But,  if  none  of  thofe  things  fhould
fucceed,  he  then  refolved  to  call  in  the  Sabines  with  all  their
forces,  and  alfo  the  Volfci,  and  all  the  reft  of  the  neigh¬
bouring  people,  who  defired  to  be  delivered  from  the  invi¬
dious  domination  of  the  Romans.

XV.  However,  it  happened  that  all  his  hopes  were  dif¬
appointed  :  Neither  the  flaves  came  over  to  him,  nor  the
exiles  returned  ;  neither  did  the  lower  fort  of  people,  nor
thofe  in  debt  prefer  their  private  advantage  to  the  public
good ;  and  the  foreign  nations,  from  whom  he  expected
fuccours,  had  not  time  to  prepare  themfelves  for  the  war;
ftnce,  within  three  or  four  days,  this  affair,  which  had  created
a  great  terror,  and  tumult  among  the  Romans,  was  termi¬
nated  :  For,  asfoon  as  the  fortreffes  were  taken  byHerdonius,
there  being  immediately  an  outcry,  and  flight  of  all  the
inhabitants  living  near  thofe  places,  who  were  not  prefently
put  to  the  fword,  the  reft  of  the  citizens,  not  knowing
what  misfortune  had  happened,  took  their  arms,  and  got
together ;  feme  running  to  the  eminences  of  the  city,  others
to  the  open  places  within  it,  which  are  very  numerous,  and
others  to  the  neighbouring  fields ;  thofe,  who  were  difabled

by


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICAR N AS  SE  NS  I  S.  157

by  age,  and  weaknefs,  got  upon  the  tops  of  the  houfes
together  with  the  women,  defigning  to  defend  themfelves
from  thence  againft  the  enemy,  who  had  entered  the  city :
For  they  imagined  thefe  had  fpread  themfelves  through  every
part  of  it.  But,  when  it  was  day,  and  it  came  to  be  known
that  the  fortrefies  of  the  city  were  taken,  and  who  the  perlon
was,  who  had  the  pofleffion  of  them,  the  confuls,  going
into  the  forum,  called  the  citizens  to  arms :  On  the  other
fide,  the  tribunes,  affembling  the  people  at  the  fame  time,
faid,  they  did  not  oppofe  any  thing,  that  was  for  the  advan¬
tage  of  the  commonwealth  ;  but  thought  it  juft  that,  as  the
people  were  going  upon  fo  great  an  a&ion,  they  ought  to
ingage  in  the  danger  of  it  upon  certain  terms,  and  conditions:
“  If,  therefore,  faid  they,  the  patricians  will  promife  you,
“  and  call  the  gods  to  witnefs  to  that  promife,  that,  as  foon
c<  as  this  war  fhall  be  at  an  end,  they  will  allow  you  to  create
CQ  legiflators,  and  to  enjoy  an  9  equal  adminiftration  ofjuftice
u  for  the  future,  we  will  affift  them  in  delivering  our
“  country:  But,  if  they  will  condefcend  to  nothing  that  is
“  reafonable,  why  fhould  we  run  hazards,  and  expofe  our
“  lives  for  them,  when  we  are  to  reap  no  advantage  from
a  die  event  ?”  While  they  were  faying  this,  and  the  people
expreffing  their  approbation  of  what  they  faid,  and  would
not  even  hear  any  one,  who  difluaded  it,  “  Claudius  faid,
u  that  he  wanted  no  fuch  auxiliaries,  who  would  not

9-  Ev  icYiyo£iQt,.  See  the  iecond  anno-  people,  could  not  be  tranflated,  free-
tation  on  this  book.  By  this  time,  the  dom  of  fpeech ,  and  have,  at  lad,  aban-
tranQators  difcovered  that  tciyycgia,  one  doned  that  fenfe  of  the  word,
of  the  points  contended  for  by  the


“  volnn-


15S  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book X.
u  voluntarily,  but  for  a  recompence,  and  That  not  a  mo-
“  derate  one,  fuccour  their  country  ;  and  that  the  patricians?
*£  by  arming  themfelves,  and  their  clients,  and  fuch  of  the
“  people,  as  were  willing  to  affift  them  in  this  war,  would
“  compofe  a  force  fufficient  to  befiege  the  fortrefles ;  that,
u  if  even  thefe  were  thought  unequal  to  the  talk,  he  would
cc  call  in  the  La  tines,  and  the  Hernici ;  and,  if  it  fhould
u  be  neceflary,  he  would  even  promife  liberty  to  the  Haves,
<c  and  implore  the  afliftance  of  all  forts  of  people  rather
“  than  of  thofe,  who,  at  fuch  a  juncture,  (hewed  their  re-
“  fentment  for  pad  difappointments.”  But  Valerius,  the
other  conful,  oppofed  this ;  being  of  opinion  that  they  ought
not  to  render  the  plebeians,  who  were  already  exafperated,
abfolutely  implacable  againft  the  patricians ;  and  he  advifed
to  yield  to  the  prefent  emergency ;  and,  when  they  treated
with  a  foreign  enemy,  to  oppofe  juftice  to  their  demands;
but  to  Thofe  of  their  fellow  citizens,  moderation,  and
humanity.  The  majority  of  the  fenate  judging  that  his
advice  was  the  moft  advantageous,  he  went  to  the  af-
fembly  of  the  people ;  and,  having  made  a  becoming  fpeech
to  them,  he  ended  with  promiftng  on  oath  that,  if  the
people  would  affift  in  this  war  with  alacrity,  and  the  com¬
monwealth  fhould  be  reftored  to  its  former  tranquillity,  he
would  give  the  tribunes  leave  to  propofe  to  the  people  the
confideration  of  the  law,  which  they  were  deftrous  of  in¬
troducing  concerning  the  equality  of  laws ;  and  ufe  his
utmoft  endeavours  that  the  refolutions  of  the  people  might
be  carried  into  execution  during  his  confulfhip.  But  it  was

decreed


Book  X,  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  SSENSI  S.  159
decreed  that  he  fhould  perform  nothing  he  had  promifed,
his  death  being  near  at  hand.

NVI.  After  the  aflembly  was  difmifled,  they  all  flocked
to  the  appointed  places  that  afternoon,  giving  in  their  names
to  the  generals,  and  taking  the  military  oath.  The  reft  of
that  day,  and  all  the  following  night  were  employed  in  thefe
things.  The  day  after,  the  centurions  were  placed  by  the
confuls  in  their  pofts,  and  had  the  command  of  the  holy
enflgns;  the  people  of  the  country,  alfo,  coming  in  to  them,
in  great  numbers :  Every  thing  being  foon  ready,  the  con¬
fuls  divided  the  forces,  and  drew  lots  for  the  command.  It
fell  to  the  fhare  of  Claudius  to  poft  himfelf  without  the-
walls,  as  a  guard  to  prevent  any  foreign,  forces  from  coming,
to  the  relief  of  the  enemy  in  the  city  :  For  there  was  a  general
fufpicion  of  a  great  commotion,  and  a  dread  that  all  their
enemies  would  fall  upon  them,  at  once,  with  joint  forces:
And  to  Valerius  Heaven  decreed  the  attack  of  the  fortrefles.
Commanders  were  appointed  to  defend  the  other  ftrong
places  alfo,  that  lay  within  the  city ;  and  others  were  polled
in  the  ftreets  leading  to  the  capitol,  to  prevent  the  flaves,
and  the  poor,  whom  they  were  molt  afraid  of,  from  going
over  to  the  enemy.  In  this  juncture,  the  Romans  received
no  fuccours  from  any  of  their  allies,  but  the  Tufculani,  who,
the  fame  night  they  heard  of  this  invafton,  prepared  them-
felves  to  march  under  the  conduct  of  Lucius  Mamilius,  a
man  of  activity,  who,  at  that  time,  had  the  chiei  command
in  the  city:  And  thefe  alone  lhared  in  the  danger  with
Valerius,  and  aflxfted  him  in  recovering  the  fortrefles,  In

which


i 60  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

which  they  fhewed  the  greateft  zeal,  and  alacrity.  Thefe
fortrefies  were  attacked  on  all  fides :  For  fome,  fitting
veflels  of  bitumen,  and  burning  pitch  to  their  flings,  threw
them,  from  the  neighbouring  houfes,  upon  the  hill :  And
others,  bringing  falcines  of  brufh  wood,  raifed  high  piles  of
them  againft  the  fteep  part  of  the  rock,  and  fet  them  on  fire,
leaving  it  to  a  favourable  wind  to  carry  the  flames  among
the  enemy.  But  the  braveft  of  the  Romans,  doubling  their
files,  went  up  the  roads  made  by  art ;  and  here,  neither
their  numbers,  in  which  they,  greatly,  exceeded  the  enemy,
were  of  any  fervice  to  them,  by  reafon  of  the  ftraitnefs  of
the  road  by  which  they  afcended,  and  the  great  quantity  of
broken  pieces  of  the  rock,  that  were  thrown  down  upon  them
from  above,  where  a  fmall  body  of  men  might  be  upon  an
equality  with  a  much  greater  ;  neither  was  their  conftancy
in  dangers,  which  they  had  acquired  by  many  wars,  of  any
advantage  to  them,  while  they  were  forcing  their  way  up  a
fteep  rock  :  For  they  had  no  opportunity  of  fhewing  their
refolution,  and  perfeverance  in  fighting  hand  to  hand ;  but
were  obliged  to  ingage  with  miflive  weapons ;  and  the  effect
of  thefe,  when  thrown  from  below  to  a  high  place,  is  flow,
and,  as  may  be  fuppofed,  weak,  even  when  they  hit  the
mark ;  but,  when  thrown  from  above,  their  efFed  is  quick
and  ftrong,  the  weight  of  the  weapons  cooperating  with  the
force  they  are  thrown  with.  However,  the  men,  who  at¬
tacked  the  fortrefies,  were  not  difcouraged ;  but  fupported
themfelves  under  thefe  neceffary  dangers,  and  ceafed  not  to
labour  day,  and  night.  At  laft,  the  befieged  having  fpent

all


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  161

all  their  mifiive  weapons,  and  their  ftrength  failing  them,
the  Romans  took  the  fortrefies  the  third  day.  In  this
adion,  they  loft  many  brave  men,  and  among  them  the
conful,  who  was,  univerfally,  acknowledged  to  have  been  the
braveft  of  them  all;  and  who,  though  he  had  received
many  wounds,  did  not,  even  in  that  condition,  withdraw
himfelf  from  danger,  till  a  large  ftone,  falling  upon  him
with  violence  as  he  was  mounting  the  walls,  deprived  him
both  of  the  victory,  and  of  his  life.  The  fortrefies  being  taken,
Herdonius  (for  he  was  remarkable  for  his  ftrength,  and
perfonal  bravery)  having  made  an  incredible  heap  of  dead
bodies  round  him,  died  overwhelmed  with  darts.  Of  thofe,
who  with  him  had  feized  the  fortrefies,  fome  few  were  taken
alive ;  but  the  greateft  part  either  flew  themfelves,  or  leaped
down  the  precipices.

XVII.  The  war,  raifed  by  thefe  robbers,  being  thus
ended,  the  tribunes  renewed  the  civil  diffenfion,  defirincr  to

o

receive  from  the  furviving  conful  the  performance  of  the
promifes  made  by  Valerius,  who  loft  his  life  in  the  a&ion,
concerning  the  promulgation  of  the  law :  But  Claudius,
for  a  while,  prolonged  the  time ;  fometimes,  by  performing
the  luftration  of  the  city  ;  at  others,  by  offering  facrifices
of  thankfgiving  to  the  gods ;  and,  at  others,  by  entertaining
the  people  with  games,  and  fhews.  After  all  his  pretences
were  exhaufted,  at  laft  he  told  them  that  another  conful
mu  ft  be  chofen  in  the  room  of  the  deceafed  :  For  he  faid,
that  the  acts  performed  by  him  alone  would  be  neither  legal
nor  firm  ;  whereas  Thofe  performed  by  both,  would  be
Vol.  IV.  '  Y  valid


1 62  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

valid  and  lading.  After  he  had  put  them  off  with  this
pretence,  he  appointed  a  day  for  the  election  of  his  collegue.
In  the  mean  time,  the  leading  men  of  the  fenate,  confulting
privately  together,  agreed  upon  the  perfon  to  be  raifed  to
that  dignity  :  And,  when  the  day  appointed  for  the  election
was  come,  and  the  cryer  had  called  the  firft  clafs,  the  eighteen
centuries  of  horfe,  together  with  the  eighty  centuries  of  foot,
confiding  of  the  riched  citizens,  entering  the  appointed
place,  chofe  Lucius  Quintius  Cincinnatus  conful,  whofe  fon
Caefo  Quintius  the  tribunes  had  brought  to  a  trial  for  his
life,  and  compelled  him  to  leave  the  city  :  And,  no  other
clafs  being  called  to  vote  (for  the  centuries,  which  had  voted,
exceeded  the  number  of  thofe,  that  were  left,  10  by  three
centuries)  the  people  departed,  looking  upon  it  as  a  heavy
misfortune  that  a  man  who  hated  them,  was  going  to  be
inveded  with  the  confular  power.  However,  the  fenate
fent  proper  perfons  to  defire  the  conful  to  come  to  Rome,
and  take  poffedion  of  the  magidracy.  It  happened  that
Quintius  was,  at  that  very  time,  ploughing  11  a  piece  of  land

I0-  Tgin  ntM  Ao^o/ff  srAew,  etc.  k  Cluver  Ihews  that  thefe  Prata  Quin-
See  the  33d  annotat.  on  the  4th  book.  tia  were  in  the  campo  Vaticano ,  called

”•  At>xf>av  ri vet.  1  Livy  takes  an  op-  now,  I  Prati^  oppofite  to  the  navalia ,
portunity  of  defcribing  the  ruftic  em-  which  place,  he  fays,  is  now  called,
ployment,  and  the  little  farm  of  Cin-  La  Ripetta.  It  is  concluded  from  this
cinnatus,  when  he  was  made  dictator  extreme  poverty  of  Cincinnatus,  that
two  years  after.  He  there  alfo  fays,  it  was  the  general  praflice  in  the  early
thefe  four  acres,  of  which  that  farm  ages  of  the  commonwealth  to  take  the
confided,  were  afterwards  called  Praia  dictators,  and  confuls  from  the  plough;
Qiiintia\  and  that  they  lay  on  the  other  and  that  their  magiftrates  were  no
fide  of  the  Tiber,  oppofite  to  a  place,  richer  than  Cincinnatus.  But  this  I
where,  in  his  time,  were  the  navalia.  look  upon  as  a  miftake ;  becaufe  the

1 B.  iii.  c.  26.  kItal.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  p.  866.


for


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSENSIS.  163

for  fowing,  himfelf  following  the  oxen  that  were  breaking
up  the  fallow,  without  a  veil,  his  waift  girded,  and  a  cap
upon  his  head  :  Seeing  a  great  number  of  men  come  into
the  field,  he  flopped  his  plough,  and  could  not,  for  a  long
time,  conceive  who  they  were,  and  what  they  wanted  with
him :  When,  one  of  them  coming  to  him,  and  defiring  him
to  drefs  himfelf  in  a  more  becoming  manner,  he  went  into
his  cottage ;  and,  putting  on  his  clothes,  came  out  to  them  :
Upon  which,  the  perfons,  who  were  fent  to  condudl  him
to  Rome,  all  faluted  him,  not  by  his  name,  but  as  conful;
and,  clothing  him  with  the  robe  bordered  with  purple,  and
placing  before  him  the  axes,  and  the  other  enfigns  of  his
magiftracy,  de fired  him  to  follow  them  to  the  city.  He,


mean  education  they  muft  have  re¬
ceived  under  fo  much  poverty,  could
never  have  qualified  them  to  difcharge
their  magiftracies  with  fo  great  ability,
as  we  know  they  did  difcharge  them.
Even  Cincinnatus  himfelf  had  been
poffefled  of  other  efcates,  which  our
author  fays  he  was  obliged  to  fell  in
order  to  pay  the  feveral  forfeitures,
that  accrued  to  the  public  upon  the
flight  of  his  fon.  When  I  fay  this,  I
do  not  deny  that  the  richeft  of  thefe
old  Romans  were  far  below  what  we
call  rich,  any  more  than  I  would  deny
that  the  moll  virtuous  of  them  were
far  above  what  we  call  virtuous.  Our
author  deferves  great  commendations
for  the  freedom,  with  which  he  cen-
fures  the  degeneracy  of  the  Romans
in  his  time,  faying  they  aCted,  in  all
relpeCts,  contrary  to  the  maxims  of
their  anceftors.  Notwichftanding  this


fevere,  but  true  reflexion,  it  is  become
a  fafhion  among  the  French  writers  to
aflert  that  the  view  of  Dionyflus  in
writing  his  hiftory  was  to  flatter  Au-
guftus,  and  the  Romans  of  his  age  :
Nay  one  of  them  has  had  even  the
pertnefs  to  affirm,  in  fo  many  words,
that  his  defign  was  not  fo  much  to
write  a  true  hiftory,  as  to  flatter  the
Romans,  and  to  fhew  with  what  ad-
drefs  he  himfelf  could  handle  the  mod
difficult  fubjects  :  1  Denys  d’Halicar-
naffe  avoit  bien  moins  pour  but  de  donner
une  hijloire  veritable ,  que  de  flatter  les
Romains ,  et  de  montrer  avec  quelle  a-
dreff'e  il  f (avoit  lui  me  me  manier  les  fujets
les  plus  dtfficiles.  This  is  not  the  only
pafifage  in  our  author,  that  flatly  con¬
tradicts  his  aflertion.  If  he  had  never
read  thefe  paflages,  his  cenfure  is  ri¬
diculous  •,  and,  if  he  had  read  them,
it  is  fomething  worfe.


‘Beaufort,  fur  l’incert.  etc.  Part,  i,  c.  2.


Y  2


making


164  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

making  a  fhort  paufe,  and  fhedding  tears,  faid  only  this ;
“  I  fee  my  land  will  be  unfown  this  year,  and  we  fhall  be
<£  in  danger  of  not  having  wherewithall  to  fubfift.”  After
that,  he  embraced  his  wife,  and,  charging  her  to  take  care
of  his  family  concerns,  went  to  Rome.  The  only  reafon,
that  induced  me  to  relate  all  thefe  particulars,  was  to  let  all
the  world  fee  what  kind  of  men  the  Roman  magiftrates  were
at  that  time  ;  that  they  worked  with  their  own  hands,  and
were  temperate  ;  that  they  were  not  uneafy  under  innocent
poverty ;  and  were  fo  far  from  aiming  at  regal  power,  that
they  refufed  it  even  when  offered :  For  the  Romans  of
this  age  will  appear  not  to  bear  the  leaf!  refemblance  to
them  ;  but  to  purfue  every  thing  that  is  contrary  to  their
maxims,  except  a  very  few,  by  whom  the  dignity  of  the
commonwealth  isftill  fupported,  and  a  refemblance  to  thofe
men  preferved.  But  of  this  enough.

XVIII.  Quintius,  having  entered  upon  the  confulfhip,
firft  put  an  end  to  the  new  inftitutions  of  the  tribunes,  and
to  their  earneftnefs  for  the  law,  by  declaring  that,  if  they  did
not  ceafe  to  difturb  the  peace  of  the  commonwealth,  he
would  give  notice  of  an  expedition  againft  the  Volfci,  and
lead  all  the  Romans  out  of  the  city :  And,  when  the  tribunes
faid  they  would  hinder  him  from  railing  an  army,  he  af-
fembled  the  people,  and  told  them  that  they  had  all  taken
the  military  oath,  by  which  they  had  ingaged  themfelves  to
follow  the  confuls  in  any  wars,  to  which  they  fhould  be
called ;  and  neither  to  leave  their  enligns,  nor  do  any  thing
elfe  contrary  to  the  military  law;  and  that,  upon  his  being

invefted


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICA  Rtf-ASSEN  SIS.  165

inverted  with  the  confular  power,  he  had  found  them  all
bound  by  thefe  oaths.  Having  faid this,  and  fworn  to  punifli
the  difobedient  with  all  the  rigor  of  the  law,  he  ordered  the
enfigns  to  be  brought  out  of  the  temples:  “  And,  fays  he,
“  that  you  may  give  over  all  thoughts  of  being  flattered  by
cc  your  demagogues  during  my  confulfliip,  I  will  not  with-
“  draw  the  army  from  the  enemy’s  country,  before  the
“  whole  time  of  it  fhall  be  expired.  Expedl,  therefore,  to
“  pafs  the  winter  in  the  field,  and  prepare  every  thing  ne-
u  ceffary  againft  that  time.”  Having  terrified  them  with
thefe  threats,  when  he  faw  they  were  become  more  obfer-
vant,  and  begged  to  be  difcharged  from  this  expedition,  he
faid,  he  would  grant  them  a  refpite  from  war  upon  thefe
conditions,  that  they  fhould  raife  no  more  commotions ;
but  allow  him  to  govern,  during  the  remaining  part  of  his
magiftracy,  as  he  fhould  think  fit;  and  fuffer  the  law  to
take  its  courfe  in  all  the  contefts  they  fhould  have  with  one
another.

XIX.  The  tumult  being  appeafed,  he  gave  judgement  in
all  caufes,  where  the  fuitors  defired  it ;  a  thing  which  had
long  been  delayed ;  and  he  himfelf  decided  the  greateft  part
of  the  fuits  with  equality  and  juftice,  fitting  the  whole  day
in  the  tribunal,  and  fhewing  himfelf  eafy  of  accefs,  mild
and  humane  to  all,  who  applied  to  him  for  his  determina-
tions:  By  which  means,  he  raifed  the  reputation  of  the
ariftocracy  to  that  degree,  that  neither  thofe,  who,  through
poverty,  ignoble  birth,  or  any  other  low  circum fiance,  were
opprerted  by  their  fuperiors,  wanted  the  affiftance  or  the

tribunes ;


Book  X.


1 66  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

tribunes;  nor  thofe,  who  defired  to  enjoy  an  equal  admi-
niftration  ofjuftice,  were,  any  longer,  fond  of  new  laws;
but  all  were  contented,  and  pleafed  with  the  equity,  with
which  juftice  was  then  adminiftered.  Quintius  was  ap¬
plauded  by  the  people  for  thefe  actions ;  and,  alfo,  for  re¬
filling  the  confulfhip,  when,  after  the  expiration  of  his
magiftracy,  it  was  offered  to  him  a  fecond  time ;  and  for
not  {hewing  even  the  leaf!;  fondnefs  for  fo  great  an  honor :
For  the  fenate  ufed  many  intreaties  with  him  to  continue
in  the  confulfhip,  becaufe  the  tribunes  had .  prevailed  with
the  people  to  continue  them  in  their  magiftracy  for  the  third
year ;  the  former  looking  upon  him  as  a  proper  perfon  to
oppofe  thefe,  and  make  them  drop  their  new  laws,  either
through  refpect,  or  fear ;  and  obferving  that  the  people  were
not  averfe  to  be  governed  by  a  good  man:  But  Quintius
anfwered,  that  he  neither  approved  of  this  unwillingnefs  in
the  tribunes  to  part  with  their  power;  neither  would  he
himfelf  fall  under  the  like  cenfure.  After  which,  he  afi
fembled  the  people ;  and,  having  made  a  fpeech  full  of
inve&ives  againft  thofe,  who  did  not  refign  their  magiftra-
cies ;  and  taken  a  folemn  oath  not  to  accept  the  confulfhip
again,  before  he  had  refigned  his  former  magiftracy,  he  fixed
a  day  for  the  eledion  of  magiftrates ;  and  having  appointed
the  confuls,  he  returned  to  his  cottage,  and  refumed  his
laborious  life.

XX.  Quintus  Fabius  Vibulanus  for  the  third  time,  and
Lucius  Cornelius  having  entered  upon  the  confulfhip,  and
being  employed  in  exhibiting  the  cuftomary  games,  a  chofen


Book X.  DIONYSIUS  H AL ICARN A S SE N SIS.  167

body  of  the  Aequi,  amounting  to  about  fix  thoufand  men,
armed  for  expedition,  came  out  of  their  confines  in  the
night,  while  it  was  yet  dark,  and  advanced  to  Tufculum,  a
city  of  the  Latines,  and  diftant  from  Rome  not  lefs  than  one
hundred  ftadia ;  and  finding,  as  in  a  time  of  peace,  the
gates  open,  and  the  walls  unguarded,  they  took  the  town
at  the  firfit  onfet,  to  gratify  their  refentment  againft  the
Tufculani  for  afiifting  the  Romans,  upon  all  occafions,
with  alacrity ;  and  particularly,  becaufe  they  alone  had  joined
them  with  their  forces,  when  the  capitol  was  befieged.
The  Aequi  put  many  to  death  in  taking  the  city;  but  the
inhabitants,  except  thofe,  who  through  age,  or  ficknefs,  were
unable  to  efcape,  fled  out  at  the  gates,  before  the  enemy
could  make  themfelves  mafters  of  it :  However,  they  made
flaves  of  their  wives,  children,  and  domeftics ;  and  carried
off  their  effects.  As  foon  as  the  news  of  this  misfortune  was
brought  to  Rome  by  thofe  who  had  efcaped  out  of  the  city,
the  confuls  thought  it  incumbent  on  them  to  aflift  the
fugitives  immediately,  and  to  reftore  their  city  to  them  :
But  the  tribunes  oppofed  them,  and  would  not  fuffer  any
forces  to  be  raifed,  till  the  people  had  given  their  votes  con¬
cerning  the  new  laws.  While  the  fenate  were  exprefling
their  indignation  at  this  oppofition,  and  the  levies  were
fufpended,  other  deputies  arrived  from  the  Latin  nation,
who  informed  them  that  the  city  of  the  Antiates  had  openly
revolted,  the  Volfci,  who  were  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  it,
and  the  Roman  colony,  to  whom  a  fhare  of  their  lands  had
been  granted,  being  united  in  this  confpiracy  :  There  arrived.


1 68  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES'  OF  Book  X.

alfo,  at  the  fame  time,  mefiengers  from  the  Hernici,  ac¬
quainting  them  that  a  numerous  army  of  the  Volfci,  and
the  Aequi  had  marched  out  of  their  confines,  and  were,
already,  in  the  country  of  the  Hernici.  Thefe  advices  coming
all  together,  the  fenate  refolved  to  ufe  no  further  delay,  but
to  march  againft  thefe  enemies  with  all  their  forces,  and  that
both  the  confuls  fhould  take  the  field;  and,  if  any  of  the
Romans,  or  their  allies,  fhould  decline  the  fervice,  to  treat
them  like  enemies.  As  the  tribunes,  alfo,  fubmitted  to  this
refolution,  the  confuls,  having  inlifted  all  who  were  of  the
military  age,  and  fent  for  the  forces  of  their  allies,  prefently
marched  out ;  leaving  a  third  part  of  the  national  forces  to
guard  the  city.  Fabius  marched,  in  all  hafte,  againft  the
Aequi,  who  were  in  pofleffion  of  Tufculum;  the  greateft
part  of  whom  had  quitted  the  city,  after  they  had  plundered
it,  and  a  few  ftaid  to  defend  the  citadel,  which,  being  ex¬
ceeding  ftrong,  did  not  ftand  in  need  of  a  numerous  garrifon.
It  is  faid  by  fome  that  the  men,  who  were  left  to  guard  the
citadel,  feeing  the  army  12  marching  from  Rome  (for  all  the

12*  Ei-itfc-av.  The  Latin  tranflators  One  hundred  ftadia  make  twelve  Ro-
have  rendered  this  Roma  egredientem ;  man  miles,  and  a  half.  This,  I  fay,
and  le  Jay,  Vennemi  vit  fortir  les  Ro-  is  too  great  a  diftance  for  fuch  an  ob-
mains  ;  the  other  French  tranflator  has  fervation.  The  thing,  that  milled  the
prudently  avoided  this  abfurdity.  I  Latin  tranflators  (for  le  Jay,  I  dare
call  it  an  abfurdity  to  fuppofe  that  the  fay,  was  not  milled  by  any  thing  in
garrifon  of  the  citadel  at  Tufculum  the  Greek  text)  feems  to  be  the  tenfe,
could  fee  with  their  naked  eyes  (and  and  confequently  the  force,  of  the
it  is  certain  they  had  no  telefcopes)  participle  *£*«■#*,  which  they  ought
the  Roman  army  marching  out  of  to  have  rendered  not  egredientem ,  but
Rome.  Our  author  has,  juft  now,  egrejfum  (exercitum.)  It  is  plain  they
told  us  that  Tufculum  was  not  lefs  have  taken  it  in  the  prefent  tenfe;  but
than  an  hundred  ftadia  from  Rome  :  I  look  upon  it  to  be  the  fecond  aorift ;

inter-


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  169

interjacent  country  may  be  eafily  difcovered  from  this  emi¬
nence)  they  quitted  it  of  their  own  accord  :  And,  by  others,
that,  being  unable  to  defend  themfelves,  any  longer,  againft
Fabius,  they  furrendered  the  place  by  compofition,  having
ftipulated  that  their  lives  fhould  be  fpared,  and  fubmitted  to
pafs  under  the  yoke.

XXI.  After  Fabius  had  reftored  the  city  to  the  Tufculani,
he  decamped  that  evening,  and  marched,  with  all  poffible
fpeed,  againft  the  enemy,  upon  information  that  the  com¬
bined  army  of  the  Volfci,  and  Aequi  lay  near  13  Algidum:
And,  having  continued  his  march  all  night  with  great  expe¬
dition,  he  appeared  before  them  early  the  next  morning,  as
they  lay  incamped  in  a  plain,  without  either  a  ditch,  or  palifades
to  defend  them,  they  being  in  their  own  territories,  and  defpi-
fingthe  enemy:  Then,  exhorting  his  men  to  do  their  duty,
he  put  himfelf  at  the  head  of  the  horfe,  and  was  the  firft  man
who  broke  into  the  enemy’s  camp ;  and  the  foot,  fhouting,
followed.  Some  of  the  enemy  were  flain,  while  they  were
afleep,  and  others  juft  as  they  got  up,  and  were  endeavouring
to  defend  themfelves ;  but  the  greateft  part  efcaped  by  flight.
The  camp  being  taken  with  great  eafe,  Fabius  gave  his  men
leave  to  appropriate  to  themfelves  the  booty,  and  the  prifoners,

and,  like  all  participles  of  the  fecond  of  the  loweft  rank,  but  fometimes  ne-
aorift,  derived  from  the  fecond  aorift  cefiary  ;  and  one  of  thofe  things,
of  the  indicative  mood  *,  which  fecond  that  may  be  too  much  defpifed.
aorift  of  this  verb  is  g^iov.  The  reader  x3*  uoAiv  AkytJov.  m  Cluver

will  excufe  this  piece  of  grammatical  fays  that  a  public  inn,  now  called
criticifm,  which  he  has  not  been  often  UOJleria ,  ftands  upon  the  fpot,  where
troubled  with  :  I  own  it  is  a  criticifm  the  town  of  Algidum  formerly  ftood.

1B  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  p.  778.

Z


Vol.  IV.


V


except


I70  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

except  fuch  as  were  Tufculani ;  and,  after  a  fhort  ftay,
marched  to  14  Ecetra,  which  was,  at  that  time,  the  moft
confiderable  city  of  the  Volfci,  and.  the  moft  ftrongly  fitu-
ated :  And,  having  incamped  near  the  city  for  many  days,
in  hopes  the  enemy  would  come  out  to  fight,  when  none
appeared,  he  laid  wafte  their  territories,  which  were  full  oi
men,  and  cattle  :  For  the  Volfci,  furprifed  with  the  fudden-
nefs  of  the  irruption,  had  not  time  to  remove  their  effects
out  of  the  country.  This  booty,  alfo,  Fabius  gave  to  his
foldiers ;  and,  after  many  days  fpent  in  defolating  the  coun¬
try,  he  returned  home  with  his  army.  Cornelius,  the  other
conful,  was  upon  his  march  againft  thofe  Romans,  and  Volfci,
who  were  at  Antium,  when  he  found  an  army,  that  was  ready
to  receive  him  before  he  entered  their  confines :  And,  in-
gaging,  he  killed  many  ;  and,  having  put  the  reft  to  flight,  he
incamped  near  the  city  :  But  the  inhabitants  not  daring  to
venture  another  ingagement,  he  firft  laid  wafte  the  country,
and  then  furrounded  their  city  with  a  ditch  fortified  with
palifades.  Upon  this,  the  enemy  were  compelled  to  come
out,  again,  with  all  their  forces,  a  numerous  and  diforderly
multitude;  then,  ingaging  in  battle,  and  fighting  with
lefs  bravery  than  before,  they  were  fhut  up  within  their
walls  a  fecond  time,  after  a  fhameful  and  unmanly  flight.
But  the  conful,  giving  them  no  reft,  planted  fcaling  ladders
againft  the  walls,  and  forced  open  the  gates  with  battering
rams:  The  befieged  making  a  laborious  and  painful  re-
fiftance,  he  without  much  difficulty  took  the  town  by  ftorm.

H4  Ettj  ryjv  E %'fyetvvv  w«a<v.  See  the  fifty  fixth  annotation  on  the  fourth  book.

Such


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  171

Such  of  their  effects  as  confided  in  gold,  filver,  and  brafs,
lie  ordered  to  be  carried  to  the  treafury;  and  that  the
quaeftors  fhould  fell  the  Haves,  and  the  rePc  of  the  fpoils ;
giving  to  the  foldiers  the  apparel,  and  provifians,  and  every
thing  elfe  of  that  nature :  Then,  chuiing  out  the  mold  con-
fiderable  men  both  of  the  Roman  colony,  and  of  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  Antium,  and  thofe,  who  had  been  the  authors
of  the  revolt,  and  were  many,  he  ordered  them  to  be  whip¬
ped  with  rods  for  a  long  time,  and  then  beheaded.  After
he  had  done  thefe  things,  he  alfo  returned  home  with  his
army.  The  fenate  met  thefe  confuls,  as  they  were  coming
to  the  city,  and  decreed  a  triumph  to  both :  And  the  Aequi
fending  embafladors  to  treat  of  a  peace,  they  concluded  a
treaty  with  them  upon  thefe  conditions ;  that  the  Aequi
jfhould  continue  in  poffeflion  of  the  cities,  and  territories
they  were  poffefied  of  at  the  time  of  the  treaty,  and  become
fubje&s  of  the  Romans,  without  paying  any  tribute  ;  but
under  the  obligation  of  furnifhing  as  great  a  number  of
forces,  as  they  fhould  at  any  time  be  required,  like  the  reft
of  the  allies.  And  thus  ended  this  year.

XXII.  The  year  following,  Caius  Nautius  for  the  fecond
time,  and  Lucius  Minucius  entered  upon  the  confulfhip,
and  were,  for  fome  time,  employed  in  a  conteft  at  home,
concerning  the  civil  rights  with  Virginius,  and  his  collegues,
who  were  now  in  pofieffion  of  the  fame  magiflracy  for  the
fourth  year  :  But,  a  war  being  brought  upon  the  common¬
wealth  by  the  neighbouring  nations,  and  the  Romans  fearing
to  be  deprived  of  the  fovereignty,  the  confuls  willingly

Z  2  laid


Book  X.


172  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

laid  hold  on  the  opportunity  prefented  to  them  by  Fortune ;
and,  having  raifed  an  army,  they  divided  both  their  own
forces,  and  Thofe  of  their  allies,  into  three  bodies ;  leaving
one  of  them  to  guard  the  city,  which  was  commanded  by
Quintus  Fabius  Vibulanus ;  and,  putting  themfelves  at  the
head  of  the  other  two,  they  marched  out  immediately;  Nautius
going  againft  the  Sabines,  and  Minucius  againft  the  Aequi :
For  both  thefe  nations  had  revolted  from  the  Romans  at
the  fame  time:  The  Sabines  indeed  openly,  and  advanced
as  far  as  Fidenae,  which  was  in  the  poffeffion  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  and  is  diftant  from  Rome  forty  ftadia  :  But  the  Aequi,
though  obferving  in  appearance  the  terms  of  the  alliance
they  had  lately  entered  into  with  the  Romans,  yet  a<fted  in
reality  like  enemies :  For  they  made  war  upon  the  Latines
their  allies,  pretending  they  had  entered  into  no  alliance
with  them:  Their  army  was  commanded  by  Gracchus
Cloelius,  an  adtive  man,  who  had  been  inverted  by  them
with  the  chief  magiftracy,  which  he  raifed  to  little  lefs  than
a  fovereignty  ;  and,  marching  as  far  as  the  city  of  Tufculum,
which  the  Aequi  had  taken,  and  plundered  the  year  before,
and  been  driven  out  of  it  by  the  Romans,  he  feized  a  great
number  of  men,  and  all  the  cattle  he  found  in  the  country,  and
deftroyed  the  corn,  which  was  then  fit  to  cut.  And,  when  the
embafladors,  fent  by  the  Roman  fenate,  came  to  him  to  know
what  provocation  had  induced  the  Aequi  to  make  war  upon
the  allies  of  the  Romans,  after  they  had,  fo  lately,  entered
into  a  treaty  of  peace  confirmed  by  their  oaths ;  and  that  no
caufe  of  complaint  had  fince  arifen  between  the  two  nations ;

and.


K


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC ARNAS  SE  NS  I  S.  173

and,  alfo,  to  exhort  him  toreleafe  the  prifoners  he  had  taken,
and  to  withdraw  his  forces ;  and  to  juftify  himfelf  for  the
injuries,  and  damages  he  had  occafioned  to  the  Tufculani  3
it  was  a  long  time  before  Gracchus  would  even  give  audience
to  the  embaffadors,  pretending  he  was  not  at  leifure;  and,
when  he  thought  fit  to  have  them  introduced,  and  they  laid
before  him  the  orders  they  had  received  from  the  fenate :
“  I  wonder,  Romans,  fays  he,  why  you,  who,  from  your
“  pafilon  for  domination,  and  tyranny,  look  upon  all  men
“  as  your  enemies,  even  thofe,  from  whom  you  never  re-
“  ceived  any  injury,  fhould  not  fuffer  the  Aequi  to  take
“  revenge  on  the  Tufculani,  who  are  their  enemies,  when
“  no  article  of  the  treaty  we  made  with  you  extends  to  them.
“  If,  therefore,  you  can  fay  that  you  have  been  injured,  or
“  hurt  by  us  in  any  thing,  that  relates  to  your  own  concerns,
“  we  will  do  you  juftice  according  to  the  treaty  :  But,  if
“  you  are  come  to  demand  fatisfadtion  on  the  behalf  of  the
c<  Tufculani,  addrefs  not  this  difcourfe  to  me,  but  to  that
“  beech  tree  pointing  to  one  that  flood  near.

XXIII.  The  Romans,  thus  infulted  by  the  man,  did  not
immediately  give  way  to  their  refentment,  and  march  out
with  their  forces ;  but  fent  even  a  fecond  embafly  to  him,
and  alfo  the  holy  men,  or  feciales,  calling  the  gods,  and
genius’s  to  witnefs  that,  if  they  were  unable  to  obtain  juftice,
they  fhould  be  obliged  to  wage  a  pious  war  :  After  which,
they  ordered  the  conful  to  take  the  field.  When  Gracchus
heard  the  Romans  were  advancing,  he  decamped,  and  re¬
tired  to  a  greater  diftance,  the  enemy  following  him  clofe :

His


/


i74  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookX.
His  defign  was  to  draw  them  to  fuch  places,  as  fhould  give
him  a  fuperiority  over  them ;  which  happened  accordingly  :
For,  taking  advantage  of  a  valley  furrounded  with  hills,
as  foon  as  the  Romans,  in  punning  him,  had  ingaged  them-
felves  in  it,  he  faced  about,  and  incamped  in  the  road,  that
led  out  of  the  valley  :  By  this  means,  the  Romans  were  re¬
duced  to  pitch  upon  fuch  a  place  for  their  camp,  as  the
prefent  occafion  offered,  not  fuch  a  one  as  they  would  have
chofen ;  where  it  was  not  eafy  either  for  the  horfe  to  get  forage,
the  place  being  furrounded  with  hills,  both  naked,  and  of
difficult  accefs ;  or  for  themfelves  to  bring  in  provifions
out  of  the  enemies  country,  after  Thofe  they  had  brought
from  home  were  confumed  ;  or  to  change  their  ground,
while  the  enemy  lay  before  them,  and  defended  the  pafies :
Refolving,  therefore,  to  force  their  way  out,  they  ingaged,
and  were  repulfed ;  and  many  of  their  men  being  wounded,
they  were  compelled  to  return  to  the  fame  camp.  Cloelius,
elated  with  this  fuccefs,  furrounded  the  place  with  a  ditch
fortified  wfith  palifades,  and  had  great  hopes  of  reducing
them,  by  famine,  to  deliver  up  their  arms.  The  news  of
this  misfortune  being  brought  to  Rome,  Quintus  Fabius,
who  had  been  left  governor  of  the  city,  chofe  out  of  his
own  army  a  body  of  the  braveft  and  beft  men,  and  fent  them
to  the  relief  of  the  conful:  Thefe  were  commanded  by
Titus  Quintius,  the  quaeftor,  a  perfon  of  confular  dignity.
And,  writing  to  Nautius,  the  other  conful,  who  commanded
the  army  in  the  country  of  the  Sabines,  he  informed  him  of
what  had  happened  to  Minucius,  and  defired  him  to  come

prefently


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C ARN  A  S  S E N S  I S.  175
prefently  to  Rome.  Upon  this,  Nautius  committed  the
guard  of  the  camp  to  the  legates,  and  he  himfelf,  with  a  few
horfe,  rode  in  all  hafte  to  the  city:  Arriving  there  at  mid¬
night,  he  confulted  with  Fabius,  and  the  reft  of  the  moft
ancient  citizens  what  meafures  they  were  to  take  :  And  all
being  of  opinion  that  the  prefent  juncture  required  a  dictator*
he  named  Lucius  Cincinnatus  to  that  magiftracy ;  and*
having  difpatched  thefe  things,  he  himfelf  returned  to  the
camp.

XXIV.  Fabius,  the  governor  of  the  city,  lent  proper
perfons  to  Quintius  to  invert  him  with  the  magiftracy.  It
happened  that  Quintius  was,  then  alfo,  employed  in  fome
work  of  hufbandry;  when,  feeing  a  great  number  of
people  advancing,  he  fufpedled  they  were  coming  to  him  ;
and,  putting  on  a  more  becoming  apparel,  went  to  meet
them.  When  he  came  near  them,  they  brought  to  him
horfes  decked  with  magnificent  trappings ;  placed  before
him  four  and  twenty  axes  with  the  rods,  and  prefented
to  him  the  purple  robe,  and  the  other  eniigns,  with
which  the  royal  dignity  had  been  formerly  adorned.
Quintius,  finding  that  he  was  appointed  dictator,  was  fo  far
from  rejoicing  in  this  honor,  that  he  was  even  grieved  at  it,
faying,  “  This  year’s  crop  will,  alfo,  be  loft  through  the  mill-
“  tiplicity  of  my  bufinefs,  and  we  fhall  all  endure  great  want.”
After  that,  he  went  to  Rome ;  and  firft  encouraged  the
citizens  by  fpeaking  to  them  in  a  manner  capable  of  railing
their  fpirits  with  hopes  of  fuccefs ;  then,  aftembling  all  the
youth  both  of  the  city,  and  the  country,  and  fending  for  the

forces-


176  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

forces  of  their  allies,  he  appointed  Lucius  15  Tarquitius
mafter  of  the  horfe,  a  man  negledted  by  reafon  of  his  po¬
verty,  but  brave  in  the  field  :  All  his  forces  being  now
drawn  together,  he  fet  out ;  and,  in  his  march,  joined  Titus
Quintius  the  quaeftor,  who  expected  him ;  and,  taking  with
him  his  forces  alfo,  he  advanced  towards  the  enemy.  After
he  had  viewed  the  nature  of  the  places,  in  which  the  camps
lay,  he  ported  a  part  of  his  army  upon  the  eminences,  to
prevent  the  Aequi  from  receiving  either  fuccours,  or  pro-
vifions ;  and  he  himfelf  marched  forward  with  the  reft  in
order  of  battle.  Cloelius  unmoved  with  fear  (for  the
number  of  his  forces  was  not  fmall,  and  he  himfelf  was
looked  upon  as  a  brave  warriour)  received  his  onfet ;  and  a
fevere  battle  infued ;  which  lafting  long,  and  the  Romans,
by  reafon  of  their  continual  wars,  enduring  the  toil,  and  the
horfe,  always,  relieving  the  foot,  whereever  they  fuffered,
Gracchus  was  beaten,  and  fhut  up  in  his  camp  :  After  that,
Quintius,  having  furrounded  it  with  high  palifades,  fortified
with  many  towers,  and  heard  that  Gracchus  was  in  diftrefs
for  want  of  provifions,  he,  not  only,  made  continual  attacks
upon  the  camp  of  the  Aequi  himfelf,  but  ordered  Minucius
to  march  out  with  his  forces  on  the  other  fide  :  So  that,  the
Aequi,  wanting  provifions,  defpairing  of  fuccours,  and  be-
fieged  on  many  fides,  were  compelled  to  fend  deputies  to

JS’  Ta^vhov.  All  the  editions,  and  fays  upon  this  paflage  of  Livy)  by  the
manufcripts  read  Tagawiov :  But  this  Capitoline  tables.  Neither  would  Livy
is  certainly  a  mi  flake  ;  becaufe  n  Livy  have  thought  it  neceflary  to  have  faid
calls  him  L.  Tarquitium  patriciae  gen-  that  he  was  of  a  patrician  family,  if
its  j  which  is  confirmed  (as  Sigonius  his  name  had  been  Tarquinius.

n  B.  iii.  c.  27.


Quintius


BookX.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENSIS.  177

Quintius  with  the  marks  of  16  fuppliants  to  treat  of  a  peace :
Quin tius  faid,  that  he  would  make  peace  with  the  Aequi,
and  grant  them  an  impunity  for  their  perfons,  provided  they
laid  down  their  arms,  and  all  pafied  17  under  the  yoke  one
after  another ;  but,  as  to  Gracchus  their  general,  and  thofe,
who,  together  with  him,  had  been  the  authors  of  this  revolt,
he  would  treat  them  as  enemies ;  and  ordered  them  to  bring
thefe  men  to  him  in  chains.  The  Aequi  fubmitting  to  this,
the  laft  thing  he  infifted  upon  was,  that,  as  they  had  inflaved
the  inhabitants  of  Tufculum,  a  city  in  alliance  with  the
Romans,  and  plundered  it,  without  having  received  any  injury
from  the  Tufculani,  they  flhould  yield  up  to  him  the  city  of
lS  Corbio  to  be  treated  in  the  fame  manner.  The  deputies
of  the  Aequi,  having  received  thefe  anfwers,  departed  ;
and,  not  long  after,  returned  bringing  with  them  Gracchus,
and  his  affociates  in  chains ;  and  they  themfelves,  laying
down  their  arms,  came  out  of  their  own  camp,  and,  purfu-
ant  to  the  orders  of  the  general,  marched  through  That  of
the  Romans  under  the  yoke  ;  and  delivered  up  Corbio  ac¬
cording  to  the  treaty,  deftring  only  that  the  inhabitants  of
free  condition  might  have  leave  to  retire  out  of  the  city,  in
exchange  for  whom  they  releafed  the  Tufculan  captives.

XXV.  Quintius,  having  taken  poffeffion  of  Corbio,  or¬
dered  thofe  fpoils,  that  were  moft  ornamental,  to  be  carried
to  Rome,  and  permitted  all  the  reft  to  be  diftributed  by

centuries,  both  to  the  troops  he  brought  with  him,  and  to

»

16.  ctf.  See  the  feventeenthan-  notation  on  the  third  book,
notation  on  the  fixth  book.  18 *  noA»»  K ogGiavct.  See  the  fecond

17*  tiro  £wycv.  See  the  twentieth  an-  annotation  on  the  fixth  book.

Vol.  IV.  A  a  Thofe,


!78  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

Thofe,  which  had  been  fent  before  with  Quintius  the  quae-
ftor.  As  for  the  forces,  which  had  been  fhut  up  in  their
camp  with  Minucius  the  conful,  he  faid  that  he  had,  al¬
ready,  19  bellowed  a  great  prefent  upon  them  in  delivering
their  perfons  from  death  :  After  that,  he  obliged  Minucius
to  relign  his  magiftracy ;  and,  returning  to  Rome,  20  tri¬
umphed  with  greater  fplendor  than  any  other  general ;  having
within  the  fpace  of  lixteen  days  in  the  whole,  from  That
on  which  he  received  the  magiftracy,  faved  a  camp  of  his
fellow-citizens ;  defeated  a  flourilhing  army  of  the  enemy ;
plundered  one  of  their  cities,  and  left  a  garrifon  in  it ;  and
then  led  in  triumph  the  general  of  their  army  with  other  men
of  diftin&ion  in  chains.  But  no  part  of  his  conduct  deferved
fo  much  to  be  admired  as  this,  that,  after  he  had  received
fo  great  a  power  for  fix  months,  he  did  not  retain  it  fo  long ;
but,  having  aflembled  the  people,  and  given  them  an  ac¬
count  of  his  adminiftration,  he  abdicated :  And,  when  the
fenate  defired  him  to  accept  as  much  of  the  conquered  land,
as  he  pleafed,  together  with  Haves,  and  money  out  of  the
fpoils,  and  that  he  would  relieve  his  poverty  with  innocent

l9*  M (yctXyjv  eQrj  won  Jogeotv.  he  does  not  feem  to  have  fufpedled
Nothing  fure  can  be  more  beautiful  that  the  ides  of  September  in  the
than  the  words,  which  0  Livy  makes  Pompilian  year,  then  in  ufe  among
the  dictator  fay  to  the  army  of  Minu-  the  Romans,  which  confifted  only  of
cius  :  Carebis ,  inquit ,  praedae  parte ,  354  days,  could  not  coincide  exactly
miles,  ex  eo  hojley  cui prope  praedaefuijti.  with  the  ides  of  September  in  the
20‘  K dlyyuyz  K»^7r^ohx1ov  otTruvIuv  Julian  year,  which  confifls  of  365
yytfAovwv  9-£»<#ju.6ov.  The  Capitoline  days,  and  ^ — 1 1  minutes.  Concern-
tables  place  this  triumph  of  Quintius  ing  which,  fee  the  thirty  fourth  anno-
on  the  ides  of  September.  This  M.  tation  on  the  eighth  book.

*  *  *  took  notice  of  before  me :  But

CB.  iii,  c.  29.

riches3


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  ARN AS  S E N S  IS.  179

riches,  which  he  had  gained  from  the  enemy  by  the  mod
honourable  means,  his  own  toils,  he  refufed  it :  And  his
friends,  and  relations  offering  him,  at  the  fame  time,  con-
fiderable  prefents,  and  placing  their  greateft  happinefs  in
affifting  fuch  a  man,  he  thanked  them  for  their  affe&ion,
but  accepted  none  of  their  prefents ;  returned  to  his
little  farm,  and  preferred  the  laborious  life  he  led  there  to
That  of  a  fovereign ;  glorying  more  in  his  poverty,  than
others  in  their  riches.  Not  long  after,  Nautius  alfo,  the
other  conful,  returned  to  Rome  with  his  army,  after  he  had
overcome  the  Sabines  in  a  pitched  battle,  and  overrun  a  great
part  of  their  country.

XXVI.  After  thefe  confuls,  the  eighty  firft  Olympiad
was  celebrated,  at  which  Polymnaftus  of  Cyrene  won  the
prize  of  the  ftadium,  Callias  being  archon  at  Athens,  and
Caius  Horatius,  and  Quintus  Minucius  confuls  at  Rome.
During  their  confulfhip,  the  Sabines  made  another  irruption
into  the  territories  of  the  Romans,  and  laid  wafte  a  great
part  of  them ;  and  the  country  people,  flying  from  thence
in  great  numbers,  brought  an  account  that  all  the  country
between  21  Cruftumerium,  and  Fidenae,  was  in  pofleflion
of  the  enemy.  The  Aequi  alfo,  who  had  been  lately  con¬
quered  were  again  in  arms ;  and  the  moft  refolute  of  them,
marching  to  the  city  of  Corbio  in  the  night,  which  they
had  delivered  up  to  the  Romans  the  year  before,  and,  finding
the  garrifon  there  afleep,  put  them  to  the  fword,  except  a

**•  Kfxfoptgiae  xoti  Seethe  book:  And  the  fifty  third  chapter  of

fixty  fixth  annotation  on  the  fecond  the  fecond  book.

A  a  2  few,


j8o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

few,  who  happened  to  be  abfent :  The  reft  of  the  Aequi
marched  in  a  conftderable  body  to  22  Ortona,  a  city  of  the
Latin  nation,  and  took  it  by  ftorm  ;  and  thofe  mifchiefs
they  were  unable  to  inflict  upon  the  Romans,  they,  through
refentment,  inflicted  on  their  allies:  For  they  put  to  death
all  who  were  men  grown,  except  thofe  who  made  their
efcape  while  the  city  was  taking,  and  inflaved  their  wives*
and  children  with  the  old  men;  then,  gathering  together*
in  hafte,  all  the  effeCts  they  could  carry  oft7,  they  returned
before  the  Latines  could  afiemble  all  their  forces  to  relieve
the  city.  The  news  of  thefe  tranfaCtions  being  brought  to
Rome  at  the  fame  time,  both  by  the  Latines,  and  thofe  of
the  garrifon  who  had  efcaped,  the  fenate  refolved  to  fend  out
an  army,  and  that  both  theconfuls  fhould  take  the  field:  But
Virginius,  and  his  collegues,  who  were  continued  in  the  fame
power  for  the  fifth  year,  oppofed  this,  as  they  had  alfo  done
in  the  former  years,  and  hindered  the  confuls  from  making
levies;  defiring  that  the  civil  conteft  might  firft  be  appeafed,
by  allowing  the  people  to  take  into  confideration  the  law
they  were  bringing  in  to  eftablifh  an  equal  adminiftration  of
jufti  ce.  .And,  upon  this  occafion,  they  laid  themfelves  out  in
long,  and  invidious  accufations  againft  the  fenate,  and  were
countenanced  by  the  people.  But  a  great  deal  of  time  being
fpent,  while  neither  the  confuls  would  fubmit  to  let  the  fenate
pafs  the  previous  vote,  and  the  law  to  be  laid  before  the  people ;
nor  the  tribunes  allow  the  levies  to  be  made,  and  the  army
to  take  the  field  :  And  many  fpeeches  being  made  by  both,
and  invectives  thrown  out  againft  one  another  without

32t  Oflwct'  See  the  fixtieth  annotation  on  the  eighth  book.

efFedt,


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I S,  181

effect,  both  in  the  affemblies  of  the  people,  and  in  the  fenate,
another  inftitution  was  introduced  by  the  tribunes  againft
the  fenate,  which,  by  impofing  upon  them,  did  indeed  ap-
peafe  the  prefent  commotion,  but  proved  the  fource  of
many  other  great  advantages  to  the  people.  I  fhall,  now,
give  an  account  of  the  manner,  in  which  the  people  added
this  power  to  Thofe  they  had,  before,  acquired,.

XXVII.  While  the  territories  both  of  the  Romans,  and
of  their  allies  were  laid  wafte  and  plundered,  and  the  enemy
marching  through  them,  as  through  a  defert,  from  a  con¬
fidence  that  no  army  would  come  out  againft  them,  by
reafon  of  the  fedition  then  raging  in  the  city,  the  confuls
aflembled  the  fenate  with  a  defign  to  confult  them  upon  the
whole  of  their  affairs  for  the  laft  time.  Many  fpeeches
having  been  made,  the  perfon,  who  was  firft  afked  his
opinion,  was  Lucius  Quintius,  who  had  been  didlator  the
year  before,  a  man,  who  was  not  only  the  greateft  general^
but  alfo  the  ableft  ftatefman  of  his  time:  He  delivered
fuch  an  opinion,  as  was  moft  likely  to  perfuade  both  the
tribunes,  and  the  reft  of  the  citizens,  to  defer  to  a  more
proper  feafon  the  confederation  of  the  law,  which  did,,
in  no  refped,  require  to  be  entered  upon  at  that  jun&ure ;
and,  with  all  alacrity,  to  undertake  the  war,  that  prefled
’  upon  them,  and  was  almoft  at  their  gates  3  and  not  to
fuffer  the  fovereignty,  which  they  had  acquired  with  fo<
much  labor,  to  be  wrefted  from  them  by  a  fhameful,  and
pufillanimous  conduct ;  but,  if  the  people  would  not  yield
to  thefe  remonftrances,  he,  then,  advifed  the  patricians  to

take


i82  '  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookX.

take  arms,  together  with  their  clients,  and  fuch  of  the  citi¬
zens,  as  were  willing  to  fight  for  their  country  upon  this
moft  glorious  occafion,  and  to  march  againft  the  enemy  with
refolution,  imploring  the  gods,  who  protect  the  city  of
Rome,  to  be  their  guides:  Which,  hefaid,  would  be  attend*
ed  with  one  of  thefe  two  honourable,  and  juft  events,  they
would  either  obtain  a  more  illuftrious  victory  than  they,  or
their  anceftors  had  ever  obtained,  or  die  in  fighting  bravely
for  fo  noble  a  prize :  He  added,  that  he  himfelf  would  not
decline  fharing  in  fo  worthy  an  enterprife,  but  would  be
prefen t,  and  fight  with  a  fpirit  equal  to  That  of  the  moft
robuft ;  and  that  all .  the  aged  men,  who  had  any  regard
either  for  liberty,  or  glory,  would  follow  his  example.

XXVIII.  The  reft  of  the  fenators  approving  of  this  advice,
and  no  one  contradicting  it,  the  confuls  called  an  aflembly
of  the  people  :  And  all  the  inhabitants  of  Rome  flocking
thither  in  expectation  of  hearing  fomething  new,  Caius
Horatius,  one  of  the  confuls,  prefented  himfelf,  and  endea¬
voured  to  perfuade  the  people  to  ingage  in  this  war,  alfo,
with  chearfulnefs :  But  this  being  oppofed  by  the  tribunes,
and  the  people  hearkening  to  them,  the  conful  again  rofe  up,
and  faid:  “  Virginius,  you  have  performed  a  noble,  and  a
“  wonderful  exploit,  in  dividing  the  people  from  the  fenate;
<c  and,  as  far  as  it  depends  upon  you,  we  have  loft  all  the
“  advantages  we  have  either  inherited  from  our  anceftors,
cc  or  acquired  by  our  own  labor:  However,  we  fhall  not
“  eafily  part  with  them ;  but  are  refolved  to  take  arms
cc  with  all  thofe,  who  defire  the  prefervation  of  their  country,

“  and


Book X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  .183

«  and  to  go  on  to  this  ingagement  in  full  confidence  of
“  fuccefs;  and,  if  any  god  looks  down  upon  battles  fought
“  in  a  glorious,  and  juft  caufe ;  and,  if  Fortune,  which  has
<c  been  long  railing  this  city,  has  not  yet  abandoned  it,  we
“  fhall  overcome  our  enemies :  But,  if  any  genius  fhould  ob-
“  ftrudt,  and  oppofe  the  prefervation  of  the  commonwealth,
“  it  fhall  not  perifh,  however,  through  any  want  of  piety,
“  and  zeal  in  us ;  but  we  will  chufe  the  moft  glorious  of
“  all  deaths,  to  die  for  our  country.  In  the  mean  time,
“  O  generous,  and  worthy  patrons  of  the  commonwealth,
“  do  you  flay  at  home  with  the  women,  fince  you  have  aban-
“  doned,  or,  rather,  betrayed  us,  you,  I  fay,  who  can  never
“  live  with  honor,  if  we  conquer,  or,  if  not,  with  fafety ;
“  unlefs,  perhaps,  you  flatter  yourfelves  with  this  frivolous
<c  hope,  that,  when  the  patricians  are  all  deftroyed,  the
“  enemy  will  Ipare  you  in  confideration  of  this  fervice,  and
<c  fuffer  you  to  enjoy  your  country,  your  liberty,  your  fove-
<c  reignty,  and  all  the  other  advantages  you,  now,  pofiefs;
“  which  enemy,  when  you  entertained  the  belt  fentiments
«  in  favor  of  the  commonwealth,  you  deprived  of  a  great
“  part  of  their  territories,  rafed  many  of  their  cities,  and
«  inflaved  their  inhabitants ;  and  againft  whom  you  ere&ed
«  many  noble  trophies  of  your  vi&ories,  and  monuments  of
“  your  enmity,  which  no  time  will,  ever,  be  able  to  abolilh.
u  But,  why  do  I  find  fault  with  the  people  for  all  this,  who
“  never  erred  willingly,  and  not  rather  with  you,  Virginius,
“  and  your  collegues,  who  are  the  authors  of  thefe  glorious
“  meafures  ?  We,  therefore,  whom  necefllty  forbids  to

“  enter-


i84  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  K.

€C  entertain  low  thoughts,  have  taken  our  refolution,  and
<c  nothing  fhall  hinder  us  from  fighting  in  defence  of  our
cc  country :  As  for  you,  who  have  abandoned,  and  betrayed
u  the  commonwealth,  the  gods  will  purfue  you  with  no
“  flight  revenge ;  and,  if  you  efcape  the  punifhment  of
“  men,  That  of  the  gods  you  will  not  avoid.  Think  not
I  fay  this  to  terrify  you  ;  but  be  affured  that  thofe  patri-
u  cians,  who  will  be  left  here  to  guard  the  city,  fhould  the
u  enemy  prove  vi&orious,  will  take  fuch  refolutions,  as  be-
“  come  them.  Have  there  not  been  inftances  of  Barbarians,
<l  who,  when  they  were  upon  the  point  of  being  taken
et  by  the  enemy,  rather  than  fuffer  them  to  become  mafters
of  their  wives,  children,  and  cities,  refolved  to  burn  the
u  latter,  and  put  the  former  to  death  ;  and  fhall  not  the
<c  Romans,  to  whom  the  command  of  others  was  derived
“  from  their  anceftors,  entertain  the  fame  fentiments  with
lt  regard  to  themfelves?  They  will  never  be  fo  degenerate,
c<  but  will,  fir  ft,  fhed  the  blood  of  you,  who  are  their  greateft
<c  enemies,  and,  afterwards,  That  of  their  friends.  When
€C  you  reflect  on  thefe  things,  hold  your  aftemblies,  and  bring
M  in  new  laws.”

XXIX.  After  he  had  faid  this,  and  many  things  to  the
fame  purpofe,  he  prefented  before  them  the  moft  ancient
patricians  in  tears.  At  this  fight,  many  of  the  plebeians  could
not  even  themfelves  refrain  from  weeping  :  And  great  com¬
panion  being  raifed  both  by  the  age,  and  dignity  of  thofe
perfons,  the  conful,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  faid  :  “  Are  you
V  not  afliamed,  citizens,  and  ready  to  fink  into  the  earth,

,  “  when


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  $  S  EN  S  I  S.  185

u  when  you  fee  thefe  old  men  going  to  take  arms  in  defence
C£  of  you  who  are  young?  And  can  you  bear  to  abandon
“  thefe  leaders,  whom  you  have,  always,  called  fathers?
££  Unfortunate  men  !  unworthy  to  be  deemed  citizens  of  this
££  country,  which  was  planted  by  thofe,  who  bore  their
££  fathers  on  their  fhoulders,  and  to  whom  the  gods  granted
££  a  fafe  paffage  through  arms,  and  through  fire  !  ”  When
Virginius  found  the  people  wrere  afieded  with  this  difcourfe,
he  was  afraid  left,  contrary  to  his  defire,  they  might  confent
to  join  in  this  war ;  and  advancing,  faid  :  We  neither  aban-
£c  don,  nor  betray  you,  fathers;  neither  do  we  defire  to
££  defert  you,  as  we  have,  hitherto,  never  declined  ingaging
££  in  any  war ;  but  refolve  both  to  live  with  you,  and  fuller
££  with  you  whatever  Heaven  fhall  decree:  But,  fince  we
c£  have,  at  all  times,  cheerfully  concurred  with  you,  we  defire
<£  you  to  grant  us  a  moderate  favor,  that,  as  we  fhare  in  the
££  fame  dangers  with  you,  we  may,  alfo,  fhare  in  the  fame
££  rights,  by  inftituting  laws,  the  guardians  of  liberty,  which
££  may,  ever  after,  be  common  to  all:  However,  if  you  are
££  averfe  to  this,  and  refufe  to  grant  this  favor  to  your  fellow-
££  citizens,  looking  upon  it  as  a  capital  crime  to  fuffer  the
“  people  to  have  an  equal  fhare  with  you  in  the  diftribution
“  of  juftice,  we  fhall,  no  longer,  contend  with  you ;  but,
<£  inftead  of  that,  we  fhall  defire  another  favor  of  you,  which
££  if  we  obtain,  we  may  poffibly  ftand,  no  longer,  in  need  of
<£  new  laws:  However,  we  are  afraid  we  fhall  not  obtain
<£  even  this,  which  will  prove  no  prejudice  to  the  fenate,
“  but  fome  honor,  and  indulgence  to  the  people.”

Vol.  IV.  B  b


XXX.


1 86  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

XXX.  In  anfwer  to  this,  the  conful  faid,  that,  if  the
tribunes  would  leave  this  inftitution  to  the  determination  of
the  fenate,  they  would  deny  them  nothing  that  was  reafon-
able  ;  and  ordered  them  to  explain  what  they  defired  :  When
Virginius,  after  a  fhort  conference  with  his  collegues,  faid  he
would  propofe  it  in  the  fenate;  which  being  afiembled  by  the
confuls,  he  went  in;  and,  after  enumerating  all  the  rights  of  the
people,  he  defired  that  the  magiftracy,  appointed  to  prefide
over  them,  might  be  doubled ;  and  that,  inftead  of  five
tribunes,  ten  might  be  chofen  every  year.  Mod:  of  the  fe-
nators  were  of  opinion  that  this  would  bring  no  fort  of
prejudice  to  the  commonwealth,  and  advifed  to  grant  it
without  oppofition :  This  opinion  was  propofed  by  Lucius
Quintius,  who,  at  that  time,  had  the  greateft  authority  in
the  fenate.  Caius  Claudius  was  the  only  perfon,  who  op-
pofed  it ;  he  was  the  fon  of  Appius  Claudius,  who  had,  ever,
obje&ed  to  the  new  inflitutions  of  the  plebeians,  when  any
of  them  were  not  agreeable  to  law ;  and,  having  inherited
the  principles  of  his  lather,  he  hindered,  when  he  himfelf
was  conful,  the  inquiry,  concerning  the  knights  who  were
accufed  of  being  ingaged  in  the  confpiracy,  from  being  com¬
mitted  to  the  tribunes  :  This  man  made  a  long  fpeech,
telling  them  that  the  people,  if  their  magiftracy  was
doubled,  inftead  of  being  more  reafonable,  and  obfervant,
would  become  more  extravagant,  and  infolent :  For,  fays  he,
the  future  tribunes  will  not  receive  their  magiftracy  upon
certain  terms,  fo  as  to  adhere  to  the  eftablifhed  cuftoms ;
but  will,  again,  propofe  the  law  concerning  the  divifion  of

lands  >


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  187
lands,  and  alfo  That  relating  to  an  23 equality  of  laws;  and
all  of  them,  fucceflively,  will  endeavour,  both  by  their
words  and  actions,  to  encreafe  the  power  of  the  people,
and  abolifh  the  prerogatives  of  the  fenate.  This  fpeech  had  a
great  effedt  upon  the  majority  of  that  affembly.  After  this,
Quintius  brought  them  over  again,  by  fliewing  them  that  it
was  for  the  intereft  of  the  fenate  that  there  fhould  be  many
tribunes,  becaufe  there  would  be  lefs  union  among  many,
than  among  a  few ;  and  that  the  only  relief  the  common¬
wealth  could  expect,  which  Appius  Claudius,  the  father  of
Caius,  firfl;  difcovered,  w'as  That  arifing  from  the  difienfion


23’  A  AA#  xai  tcv  u?ct  Tfj?  xhiipxtett
A  T  0  I  X  zrgoQtjcreiv  A oyov,  kou  tcv  vnz%  rv,g
I  XOTIMI  A  X.  So  this  fen  fence  (lands
in  all  the  editions,  and  manufcripts  :
However,  I  cannot  help  being  of  opi¬
nion  that,  inftead  of  iffohpiew,  we  ought
to  read  urovofuc tg  :  My  reafon  is,  be¬
caufe  av^is  governs  as  well  the  a oycv
V7K£  TVS  i<roV'*f»  as  That  zregi  th?
>tA Now  h  is  certain  that  the
law  concerning  an  equality  of  honors
between  the  patricians,  and  plebeians,
had  not  yet  been  propofed,  nor  was
propofed  till  feveral  years  after:  I  think
it  plain  therefore,  that  we  mud  read
V7TF£  t»j?  KTOVJ/Aiaf,  inftead  of  vttco  t y\g
10-ohy.nxg,  which  the  tranfcribers  might
eafily  infert  for  the  other.  I  am  fur-
priled  that  none  of  the  tranflators  have
taken  notice  of  the  inaccuracy,  which
our  author  muft  have  been  guilty  of,
if  he  had  made  Claudius  fay  that  the
tribunes  would  again  propofe  a  law,
which  had  never  yet  been  propofed.
Portus,  I  obferye,  has  not  tranflated
iterum ,  but  confejlim>  which  I


believe  he  did  in  order  to  avoid  the
abfurdity  I  have  taken  notice  of,
though  he  fays  nothing  of  it  in  his
notes.  However,  this  caution  has  been
of  ufe  to  le  Jay,  and  preferved  him
from  falling  into  that  abfurdity.  For
want  of  fuch  an  aftiftance,  the  other
French  tranflator  has  rendered  this
unfortunate  word  very  fully,  fay¬
ing;  qu'ils  remettroient  d’abord  fur
le  tapis  le  partage  des  terres ,  et  1’egalite
des  honneurs  entre  le  peuple ,  et  les
patriciens ;  for  this  miftake  he  is  ob¬
liged  to  his  old  friend  Sylburgius,  who
has  faid,  fed  rurfus  verba  fadluros  de
agris  dividundis ,  et  communicandis
honoribus.  But  my  correction  is  e-
ftablifhed  by  the  words,  which  our
author  will  make  ufe  of  in  the  thirty
fifth  chapter  of  this  book  (and  which
are  the  fame  with  Thole  now  before
us)  joining  IXONOMIA  to  xAjj^^kb ;
for  he  there  fays,  yug  AT01X

TCV  Ti  GTZgl  TV,<;  TCV

wzgi  Tr,s  I X  ON  OM I  AX.


B  b  2


of


1 88  ROMx\N  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Eook  X.

of  the  tribunes,  and  their  want  of  unanimity.  This  opinion
prevailed;  and  the  fenate  decreed  that  the  people  be  allowed
to  chufe  ten  tribunes  annually,  provided  that  no  perfon,
who  was  then  a  tribune,  fhould  be  of  that  number.  Vir-
ginius,  and  his  collegues  received  this  decree  from  the  fenate,
and  laid  it  before  the  people,  who,  having  confirmed  it,
chofe  ten  tribunes  for  the  following  year.  After  the  fedition
was  appeafed,  the  confuls  raifed  two  armies,  and  drew  lots
for  the  command  :  In  confequence  of  which,  Minucius  was
appointed  to  march  againft  the  Sabines,  and  Horatius  againft
the  Aequi :  And  both  of  them  took  the  field  with  all  ex¬
pedition.  The  Sabines  garrifoned  their  cities,  and  fuffered
every  thing  in  the  country  to  be  carried  off  by  the  enemy.
But  the  Aequi  fent  an  army  to  oppofe  the  Romans :  How¬
ever,  proving  inferior  to  them  in  a  battle,  in  which  they
fought  with  great  bravery,  they  were  forced  to  retire  to  their
cities  after  the  lofs  of  a  fmall  town,  in  defence  of  which
they  had  fought  the  battle.  Horatius,  having  put  the  enemy
to  flight,  and  laid  wafte  a  great  part  of  their  country,  rafed
the  walls  of  Corbio,  demolifhed  the  houfes  to  their  foun¬
dations,  and  returned  home  with  his  army.

XXXI.  The  following  year,  Marcus  Valerius,  and  Spurius
Virginius  being  confuls,  no  army  of  the  Romans  went  out
of  their  confines,  but  the  civil  conteffs  were  renewed  by  the
tribunes  againft  the  confuls ;  in  the  event  of  which,  the
former  poffeffed  themfelves  of  fome  part  of  the  confular
power :  For,  before  this,  the  power  of  the  tribunes  was
confined  to  the  affemblies  of  the  people;  but  they  had  no

authority


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SE NS  I  S.  189

authority  either  to  aflemble  the  fenate,  or  to  deliver  their
opinions  there,  24  the  former  being  a  power  belonging  to
the  confuls.  The  tribunes  of  this  year  were  the  firft,  who
attempted  to  aflemble  the  fenate,  leilius,  who  was  at  the
head  of  their  college,  an  active  man,  and,  for  a  Roman,
not  uneloquent,  introducing  this  attempt :  For  this  perfon
was,  at  that  time,  bringing  in  a  new  law,  by  which  he  de¬
fir  ed  that  a  place,  called  the  Aventine  hill,  might  be  divided
among  the  plebeians  to  build  houfes  there :  This  is  a  hill
moderately  high,  not  lefs  than  twelve  fladia  in  circuit,  and
ftands  within  the  city ;  it  was  not,  then,  all  inhabited ;  but
belonged  to  the  public,  and  was  full  of  trees.  The  tribune?
in  order  to  get  this  law  pafied,  went  to  the  confuls,  and  to
the  fenate,  defiring  they  would  pafs  the  previous  vote  in
favor  of  this  law,  and  lay  it  before  the  people  :  But  the
confuls  deferring  it,  and  protrading  the  time,  he  fent  an
officer  to  them,  with  orders  that  they  fhould  follow  him  to


24*  AM’  yv  ruv  uVa7ft’vTOYTO  to  yogoig.

So  this  paflage  Hands  in  all  the  edi¬
tions,  and  manufcripts *,  and,  accord¬
ing  to  this  fenfe,  all  the  tranfiators
have  rendered  it.  But  I  would  afk
whether  mlo  to  y^ag  relates  to  both,
or  only  to  the  laft ;  that  is,  to  the
power  of  afifembling  the  fenate,  and
to  That  of  delivering  their  opinions
there,  or  only  to  the  laft  ?  If  to  both,
txIo  to  yepxg  is  improper*,  and  it  to  the
laft,  it  is  not  true  in  fad,  becaufe  all
the  fenators  had  a  right  to  deliver
their  opinions  in  the  fenate,  when
called  upon,  as  well  as  the  confuls.
The  firft,  I  mean  the  power  of  af¬
fembling  the  fenate,  was,  no  doubr,  a


privilege  of  the  confuls  :  To  this,
therefore,  and  to  this  alone,  t»7o  to
yi^otg  mult  refer :  But  that  cannot
poftibly  be,  as  the  words  now  Hand $
becaufe  the  right  of  delivering  an
opinion  in  the  fenate  immediately
precedes  thefe  words.  I  know  of  no
way  of  curing  this  impropriety,  but
to  fuppofe,  what  I  do  not  think  im¬
probable,  that  our  author  writ  siceivo
inftead  of  ts7 0  to  ytgag ;  and  then  jxf/va
will  very  properly  relate  to  the  firft,
and  to  that  alone  :  This  is  confirmed
by  the  next  fentence,  where  it  is  faid,
oh  eft  To7f  sr^wloj  <rvy y.xh&v  om-

/3oiA«>7o  t>jv  (oxhyv,


the


igo  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookX.
the  college  of  the  tribunes,  and  affemble  the  fenate.  And,
when  one  of  the  lictors,  by  the  orders  of  the  confuls,  drove
away  the  officer,  ftiiius,  and  his  collegues,  refenting  this,
feized  the  lidtor,  and  carried  him  away  with  a  delign  to
throw  him  down  the  Tarpeian  rock.  The  confuls,  though
they  looked  upon  this  as  a  great  infult,  were  unable  to  ufe
violence,  or  to  refcue  the  man,  who  was  carrying  away ;
but  implored  the  affiftance  of  the  other  tribunes :  For  no
perfon  has  a  power  of  putting  a  flop  to,  or  of  obftru cling,
the  actions  of  that  college,  but  another  tribune.  And  all  of
them  had,  at  firft,  come  to  thefe  refolutions,  that  no  fingle
tribune  fhould  either  introduce  any  new  law  projected  by
himfelf,  unlefs  they  all  concurred  in  it,  or  oppofe  their  de¬
terminations  ;  but  that  every  one  of  them  fhould  be  bound
by  the  refolutions  of  the  majority  :  And,  in  order  to  give  a
fandlion  to  thefe  refolutions,  they  had,  as  foon  as  they  entered
upon  the  magiftracy,  confirmed  them  by  facrifices,  and
mutual  oaths ;  being  perfuaded  that  the  moll:  effe£tual
means  to  render  the  power  of  the  tribunefhip  indifioluble,
was  to  banifh  diflenfion  from  it.  Adhering,  therefore,  to
this  confederacy,  they  ordered  the  lidlor  to  be  carried  away,
faying  this  was  the  unanimous  refolution  of  their  college :
However,  they  did  not  perfift  in  their  refentment,  but  re¬
leafed  the  man  at  the  interceffion  of  the  mofc  ancient  fe-
nators;  being  apprehenfive  not  only  of  the  odium,  with
which  fuch  a  proceeding  would  be  attended,  if  they
fhould  be  the  firft  to  puniffi  with  death  a  man  for  obeying
the  orders  of  the  magiftrates,  but  alfo  left,  by  this  violence,

the


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI C  ARN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  191
the  patricians  fhould  be  compelled  to  take  defperate  re-
folutions.

XXXII.  After  this  aCtion  the  fenate  was  afiembled,  and
the  confuls  laid  themfelves  out  in  many  invectives  againft
the  tribunes :  They  were  anfwered  by  Icilius,  who,  to  ex-
cufe  their  refentment  againft  the  lidtor,  alledged  the  facred
laws,  by  which  it  was  enadted,  “  that  it  fhallnot  be  lawful
tc  either  for  a  magiftrate,  ora  private  man,  to  give  any  oppoft-
“  tion  to  a  tribune;”  and,  concerning  his  attempt  to  aflemble
the  fenate,  he  fhewed  them  there  was  nothing  abfurd  in  it ;
this  he  proved  by  many,  and  various  arguments,  which  he
had  before  prepared.  After  he  had  anfwered  thefe  accufations*
he  came  to  the  law,  which  he  propofed  to  introduce,  the
tenor  of  which  was  as  follows :  u  That  all  the  ground,  which
u  has  been,  juitly,  acquired  by  any  private  perfons,  fhall
“  continue  in  the  pofteftion  of  the  owners;  but  that  fuch
tc  part  of  it,  as  may  have  been  ufurped  by  force  or  fraud  by
“  any  perfons,  and  built  upon,  fhall  be  given  to  the  people ;
€i  thofe  perfons  being  repaid  the  expences  of  fuch  buildings
“  by  the  eftimation  of  umpires  to  be  appointed  for  that  pur-
“  pofe;  and  that  all  the  reft  of  the  ground,  belonging  to  the
“  public,  be  divided  among  the  people,  they  paying  no
“  confideration  for  the  fame.”  He  then  fhewed  them,  that
this  law  would  be  advantageous  to  the  commonwealth  in
many  refpedts,  but  particularly  in  this,  that  it  would  put  an
end  to  the  difturbances  raifed  by  the  poor  concerning  the
public  lands,  of  which  the  patricians  were  in  pofteftion  :
For  he  faid  they  would  be  contented  with  their  fhare  in  this

part


i92  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

part  of  the  city,  fmce  they  could  have  none  in  the  lands
lying  in  the  country,  by  reafon  of  the  number,  and  power
of  thofe,  who  had  ufurped  them.  When  he  had  ended  his
difcourfe,  Caius  Claudius  was  the  only  perfon  who  oppofed
the  law,  while  many  fpoke  in  favor  of  it :  So  that,  it  was
decreed  that  the  place  fhould  be  given  to  the  people.  After  *
this,  the  pontifs  being  prefent,  together  with  the  augurs,  and
two  facrificers,  and  having  offered  up  their  cuftomary  vows,
and  prayers,  the  confuls  held  an  aftembly  of  the  people  by
centuries,  in  which  the  law  was  enabled ;  and  is  infcribed
on  a  column  of  brafs ;  which  column  they  carried  to  the
Aventine  hill,  and  placed  it  in  the  temple  of  Diana.  The
law  being  pafied,  the  plebeians  aflembled ;  and,  drawing
lots  for  the  ground,  began  to  build,  every  man  regulating
the  area  of  his  houfe  according  to  his  abilities ;  and,  fome-
times,  two,  three,  or  more  joined  together  to  build  one
houfe;  and,  drawing  lots,  fome  had  the  lower,  and  others  the
upper  ftories.  This  year,  therefore,  was  employed  in  build¬
ing  habitations.

XXXIII.  The  following  year,  in  which  Titus  Romilius,
and  Caius  Veturius  were  confuls,  and  Lucius  Icilius,  and
his  collegues  tribunes  for  the  fecond  time,  was  not  of  the
fame  tenor,  but  various,  and  fraught  with  great  events :  For
the  civil  contefts,  which  feemed  to  be  extinguifhed,  were
renewed  by  thefe  tribunes ;  and  fome  foreign  wars  fprung  up,
which,  without  being  able  to  hurt  the  commonwealth  in  any
degree,  did  her  great  fervice,  by  banifhing  thefe  contefts :
For  this  was  become  a  fucceftive,  and  a  cuftomary  thing

for


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  193

for  the  Romans  to  agree  in  war,  and  difagree  in  peace;  which
all  the  chief  magiftrates  obferving,  beheld  the  appearance
of  any  foreign  war  with  joy  ;  and,  when  their  enemies  were
quiet,  they  themfelves  contrived  complaints,  and  pretences  for
wars,  well  knowing  that  wars  rendered  the  commonwealth
great  and  flourifhing;  and  feditions,  low  and  weak  :  Actuated,
therefore,  with  this  principle,  the  confuls  of  that  year  re-
folved  to  take  the  field  with  an  army,  from  an  apprehenlion
that  idle  and  poor  men  might,  in  a  time  of  peace,  begin  to
raife  fome  difturbances:  In  this  they  judged  right,  that  the
people  ought  to  be  kept  employed  in  foreign  wars ;  but  not
in  the  fteps  they  took  to  effect  it :  For  the  city  being  di-
{tempered,  they  ought  to  have  made  the  levies  with  mode¬
ration;  but,  inftead  of  that,  they  compelled  the  difobedient
by  violence  to  give  in  their  names,  without  allowing  any
excufe,  or  fhewing  the  leaft  indulgence,  to  any  man ;  but
executed  the  punifhments  ordained  by  law  with  feverity  both
on  their  perfons,  and  fortunes.  While  they  were  employing
this  rio-or,  the  tribunes  took  the  occafion  to  inflame  the
people,  again,  with  their  harangues ;  and,  affembling  them,
they  exclaimed  againft  the  confuls  on  many  accounts,  but,
particularly,  for  having  ordered  feveral  of  the  citizens  to  be
carried  to  prifon,  who  had  implored  the  protection  of  the
tribunes ;  and  faid,  they  would  difcharge  them  from  the
fervice ;  as  if  the  foie  power  of  the  laws  had  been  vetted  in
them.  When  this  had  no  effedt,  but  they  faw  the  levies
carrying  on  with  ftill  greater  feverity,  they  refolved  to  ob-
ftruCt  them  by  force ;  and  the  confuls  refitting  with  all  the
Vol.  IV.  C  c  power


i94  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

power  of  their  magiftracy,  fome  irritating  words  pafled,  and
a<fts  of  violence  :  The  confuls  were  fupported  by  the  young
patricians ;  and  the  tribunes  by  the  poor,  and  idle  multitude.
That  day,  therefore,  the  confuls  were  by  much  fuperior  to
the  tribunes :  But,  the  following  days,  greater  numbers
flocking  to  the  city  out  of  the  country,  the  tribunes  thought
themfelves  fufficiently  ftrong ;  and,  afiembling  the  people
continually,  they  produced  their  officers,  who  were  in  a  bad
condition  with  the  blows  they  had  received,  and  faid  they
would  reflgn  their  magiftracy,  if  the  people  did  not  aflift
them.

XXXIV.  The  plebeians  fharing  in  their  refentment,  they
fummoned  the  confuls  to  appear  before  the  people,  and  give
an  account  of  their  actions  :  But  thefe  paying  no  regard
to  their  fummons,  they  addrefled  themfelves  to  the  fenate
(who  happened  to  be  then  debating  this  matter)  and  deftred
they  would  not  fuffer  them  to  be  treated  in  the  moft  igno¬
minious  manner,  or  the  people  to  be  deprived  of  their  af~
fiftance :  They  enumerated  all  the  injuries  they  had  received
from  the  confuls,  and  their  fa&ion,  who  had  infulted  not
only  their  authority,  but  their  perfons ;  and  defired  the
confuls  might  do  one  of  thefe  two  things;  either  that,  if
they  denied  they  had  committed  any  infult  on  the  perfons
of  the  tribunes,  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the  laws,  they
might  go  to  the  aflembly  of  the  people,  and  confirm  their
denial  upon  oath ;  or,  if  they  durft  not  take  fuch  an  oath,
that  they  might  appear  before  the  people,  and  give  an  ac¬
count  of  their  conduct :  And  they  would  take  the  votes  of

,  the


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNAS S ENS IS.  195

the  tribes  concerning  them.  On  the  other  ftde,  the  confuls
defended  themfelves  by  faying  that  the  tribunes  had  given
occafion  to  the  abufe  by  their  infolence,  and  by  daring  to
infult  their  perfons,  contrary  to  law  ;  firft,  in  ordering  their
officers,  and  the  aediles  to  carry  magiftrates  to  prifon,  in
whom  the  whole  power  of  the  commonwealth  is  veiled  ;
and,  after  that,  in  attacking  them  outrageouily  themfelves,
with  the  moil  daring  of  the  plebeians :  They  ffiewed  how
great  a  difference  there  is  between  the  confuls,  in  whom  the
royal  power  reiides,  and  the  tribunes,  who  were  inilituted
for  the  relief  of  the  oppreffed,  and  who  were  fo  far  from
having  the  power  to  give  the  people  their  votes  againft  the
confuls,  that  they  could  not  do  it  even  againft  the  meaneft  of
the  patricians  without  the  confent  of  the  fenate ;  and  they
threatened  to  arm  the  patricians,  if  the  tribunes  gave  the
people  their  votes.  Thefe  contefts  lading  the  whole  day,
the  fenate  came  to  no  refolution,  being  unwilling  to  leflen
either  the  power  of  the  confuls,  or  That  of  the  tribunes,
both  which  they  faw  would  be  attended  with  great  dangers.

XXXV.  When  the  tribunes  found  they  could  obtain  no
relief  from  the  fenate,  they  went,  again,  to  the  affembly  of
the  people,  and  confidered  what  meafures  they  were  to  take:
Some,  particularly  the  moft  turbulent,  advifed  that  the  ple¬
beians  fhould  take  arms,  and,  again,  retire  to  the  holy
mountain,  where  they  had  formerly  incamped ;  and,  from
thence,  make  war  upon  the  patricians,  ftnce  thefe  had  Vio¬
lated  the  convention  they  had  made  with  the  people,  by
openly  fubverting  the  tribunitian  power:  But  the  greater

C  c  2  part


196  ROMAN  ANTIQJJ I  TIES  OF  Book  X.

part  were  of  opinion  that  they  ought  not  to  leave  the  city,
nor  to  attribute  the  outrages  committed  by  fome  particular
perfons  againft  the  tribunes,  to  the  whole  body  of  patricians,
provided  they  could  obtain  the  relief  granted  by  the  laws ;
which  ordain  that  thofe,  who  infult  the  perfons  of  the
tribunes,  may  be  put  to  death  with  impunity  :  However,
the  more  moderate  did  not  approve  either  of  leaving  the
city,  or  of  putting  any  perfon  to  death  without  a  trial,  and
leaft  of  all  the  confuls,  who  were  the  chief  magiftrates ;  but
advifed  to  transfer  their  refentment  to  thofe,  who  had  af-
fifted  them,  and  to  inflidt  on  their  abettors  the  punifhment
ordained  by  the  laws.  If,  therefore,  the  tribunes  had,  that
day,  been  led  by  their  paffion  to  attempt  any  thing  againft
the  confuls,  or  the  fenate,  nothing  could  have  hindered
Rome  from  being  deftroyed  by  her  own  hands :  So  ready
were  all  to  run  to  arms,  and  ingage  in  a  civil  war.  But,  by
deferring  matters,  and  giving  themfelves  time  for  better
confederation,  they  not  only  grew  more  moderate  them¬
felves,  but  appeafed  the  refentment  of  the  people.  The
following  days,  they  appointed  the  third  market  day  for  the
affemblyof  the  people,  and  for  laying  a  fine  upon  the  confuls,
and,  after  that,  difmifled  the  affembly.  When  the  time-
drew  near,  they  defifted  from  this  attempt  alfo,  alledging
that  they  granted  this  favor  to  the  intercefiion  of  perfons  of
the  greatefl:  age,  and  dignity.  After  that,  they  affembled
the  people,  and  told  them  they  pardoned  the  infults,
which  they  themfelves  had  received,  at  the  defire  of  many
worthy  men,  whom  they  ought  not  to  refufe :  But,  as  to  the

injuries3


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  197

injuries,  which  the  people  had  buffered,  they  would  punifh  the
authors  of  them,  and  prevent  the  like  for  the  future:  For  they
would  again  propofe,  not  only,  the  Agrarian  law,  the  enadting
of  which  had  been  poftponed  for  thirty  years,  but,  alfo,
That  concerning  an  equality  of  laws,  which  their  prede-
ceffors  had  propofed,  but  not  put  to  their  votes.

XXXVI.  Having  made  thefe  promifes,  and  confirmed
them  by  their  oaths,  they  appointed  a  day,  on  which  the
people  were  to  aflemble,  and  give  their  votes  concerning
thefe  laws.  The  day  being  come,  they,  fir  ft,  propofed  the
Agrarian  law ;  and,  after  they  had  dwelt  long  upon  this
fubjedt,  they  gave  leave  to  all  the  plebeians,  who  defired  it,
to  fpeak  in  favor  of  the  law:  Many  prefented  themfelves;
and,  after  enumerating  the  exploits  they  had  performed  in
the  wars,  they  exprefied  their  indignation  that  they,  who
had  taken  fo  much  land  from  their  enemies,  fhould  have
received  no  part  of  it  themfelves,  while  they  faw  that  fuch,  as
were  powerful  by  their  riches,  and  their  friends,  had  ufurped
the  lands  that  belonged  to  the  public,  and  enjoyed  them  by
the  moft  violent  means;  and  they  defired  that  the  people
might  have  their  {hare  not  only  in  the  dangers,  that  were  un¬
dertaken  for  the  good  of  the  public,  but  alfo  in  the  pleafures,
and  profits,  that  refulted  from  thofe  dangers.  Thefe  were
well  heard  by  the  people;  but  the  perfon,  who  confirmed
them  the  moft  in  their  refolution  to  pafs  the  law,  was  Siccius,
furnamed  Dentatus,  who,  by  the  account  he  gave  them  oi
the  many  great  actions  he  had  performed,  made  them  re-
folve  not  even  to  hear  a  word  againft  it :  This  man  had  a

wonder-


Book  X.


198  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

wonderful  appearance ;  was  in  the  ftrength  of  his  age  being
fifty  eight  years  old,  fufnciently  wife,  and,  for  a  foldier,  not
uneloquent :  Prefenting  himfelf,  therefore,  to  the  aflembly,
thus  he  fpoke  :  u  If,  citizens,  I  fhould  enter  into  a  detail
u  of  all  my  addons,  the  day  would  not  fuffice  me  :  For
<£  which  reafon,  I  rtiall  only  mention  the  moft  confiderable,
c(  and  in  the  fewefl  words  I  am  able.  This  is  the  fortieth
“  year  that  I  ferve  my  country  in  the  wars,  and  the  thirtieth
a  that  I  have  always  had  fome  military  command,  fometimes
u  of  a  cohort,  and  fometimes  of  a  whole  legion,  from  the
£C  confulfhip  of  Caius  Aquilius,  and  Titus 25  Sicinus,  to  whom
£C  the  fenate  committed  the  condud  of  the  war  againft  the
u  Volfci :  I  was  then  in  my  twenty  fixth  year,  and  ported


2S*  Xmivx.  So  we  muft  read  the
name  of  this  conful,  and  not  Siccius,
as  I  have  fhewn  in  the  thirty  ninth
annotation  on  the  eighth  book.  It  is
poflible  that  the  name  of  Siccius  Den-
tatus,  fo  often  mentioned  in  this  tranf-
adlion,  may  have  milled  the  tranfcri-
bers.  I  find  by  a  note  in  Hudfon
(  which  M.  *  *  *  has  appropriated )
that  the  manufcript,  from  which  La-
pus  tranfiated,  had  tqiquosov  kcu
inftead  of  rgi omo$ov,  which  is  the  read¬
ing  of  all  the  editions,  and  of  all  the
other  manufcripts.  Whether  we  follow
this  reading,  or  not,  we  muft  read
inftead  ol  tnl  ocicueiKo  cnxdw,
which  neither  M.  *  *  *,  nor  any  of  the
other  commentators  have  obferved  ;
becaufe,  with  regard  to  the  age  of
Siccius,  the  two  laft  years  he  did  not
ferve  as  an  officer  muft  be  added  to
the  30  years  he  did  ferve  as  fuch,
which  32  years  require  26,  not  27,


to  make  58,  which,  we  find,  was  his
age  at  this  time.  Notwithftanding  all
the  pains,  which  M.  *  *  *  has  taken
to  fupport  this  reading  of  Lapus,  he
has  not  perfuaded  me  to  recede  from
That  of  the  editions;  becaufe  his
whole  reafoning  feems  to  be  built  on
a  wrong  foundation  :  He  fuppofes  .
that  Siccius  includes  in  the  time  he
ferved  as  an  officer,  both  the  year  we
are  now  in,  that  is  the  299th,  and  alfo
the  preceding  year :  But  this  cannot
be,  becaufe,  hitherto,  the  armies  had
not  taken  the  field  this  year  ;  and  the
year  before  the  Romans  had  no  war :
Thefe  two  years  muft,  therefore,  be
deducted  from  the  time  of  his  having
ferved  as  an  officer,  and  then  it  will
be  found  that,  from  the  confulfhip  of
C.  Aquilius,  and  T.  Sicinus,  that  is,
from  the  year  of  Rome  267  inclufive-
ly,  he  had  ferved  in  the  army  as  an
officer  juft  thirty  years.


“  under


i99


BookX.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.

t

“  under  the  centurions:  A  fevere  battle  infuing,  and  our
“  forces  being  put  to  flight,  the  commander  of  the  cohort
“  killed,  and  the  enflgns  taken  by  the  enemy,  I  alone  ex-
u  pofed  myfelf  in  defence  of  all,  and  recovered  the  enflgns
“  of  the  cohort ;  repulfed  the  enemy,  and  evidently  pre-
“  vented  the  centurions  from  being  covered  with  eternal
“  ignominy,  which  would  have  rendered  the  reft  of  their
“  lives  more  bitter  than  death,  as  they  themfelves  acknow-
“  ledged  by  crowning  me  with  a  golden  crown  :  And
u  Sicinus,  the  conful,  gave  me  the  fame  teftimony  by  ap-
“  pointing  me  commander  of  the  cohort.  In  another  battle,
cc  it  happened  that  the  26  camp  mafter  of  our  legion  was
“  thrown  to  the  ground,  and  the  eagle  taken  by  the  enemy,
“  when  I  fought,  in  the  fame  manner,  in  defence  of  the


2<5*  Tov  This  word

well  deferves  to  be  explained,  and  the
more  becaufe  all  the  tranflators  have
miftaken  the  fenfe  of  it.  Portus  calls
this  officer,  praefeffus  legionis ,  and  five
lines  after,  prmipilus  Sylburgius  fays,
tribunns  qui  legioni  et  cajtris  praeerat ,
by  which  he  confounds  the  two  com¬
mands  :  However,  he  has  given  occa-
fion  to  his  follower,  M.  *  *  *,  to  fay,
le  colonel  de  notre  legion ,  qui  commandoit
auffi  toute  V  armee :  This,  befides  the
impropriety  of  giving  to  this  officer
the  command  of  the  whole  army,
which  belonged  to  the  confuls  alone,
is  fuch  a  jumble  of  ancient,  and  mo¬
dern  terms,  that  I  am  much  miftaken
if  his  readers  are  the  wifer  for  his
tranflation.  Le  Jay  has  fallen  into  the
fame  inconfiftency,  and  calls  him,  le

P  Veil.  Pat.  B.  ii.  c.  129,  and  1


lieutenant  de  notre  legion.  But,  not  to
miffpend  any  more  time  in  fhewing  the
reader  what  this  officer  was  not,  I  fhall
inform  him  what  he  was  :  The  5-^7 0-
TtzS&exw  was  called  by  the  Romans,
as  the  name  implies,  praefedlus  cajlro-
rum ,  and  fo  the  Latin  tranflators  ought
to  have  rendered  it.  p  There  was  one
of  thefe  officers  in  every  legion  :  His
bufmefs  was  to  mark  out  the  ground
in  the  camp  for  his  own  legion  j  and
all  of  them  marked  out  That  for  the
incampment  of  the  whole  army.  They
alfo  directed  where,  and  in  what  man¬
ner  the  intrenchments  were  to  be  made
for  the  fecurity  of  the  camp.  In  a
march,  they  had  the  care  of  the  bag¬
gage,  and  ot  the  engines ;  and  many
other  things  of  lefs  importance  were
under  their  infpedtion.

'.  Tacit.  Annal.  B.  xiv,  c.  37.


“  whole


zoo


ROMAN  ANTI  QU  I  T  I E  S  OF  Book  X.

“  whole  legion  ;  recovered  the  eagle,  and  faved  the  camp
w  mailer ;  who,  in  acknowledgement  for  the  afililance  I
“  then  gave  him,  offered  me  his  command  in  the  legion,
u  and  the  eagle ;  but  I  refufed  both,  being  unwilling  to
“  deprive  the  man,  whole  life  I  had  faved,  of  the  honors
“  he  enjoyed,  and  of  the  fatisfadlion  refulting  from  them.
“  The  conful  was  pleafed  with  my  behaviour,  and  gave  me
“  the  poll  of  camp  mailer  in  the  firft  legion,  the  former
u  having  been  killed  in  that  adlion.

XXXVII.  “  Thefe,  citizens,  are  the  brave  adlions,  that
<c  have  diilinguifhed  me,  and  raifed  me  to  commands.

After  I  had  gained  an  illuilrious  name,  I  hazarded  my
“  life  in  every  other  ingagement,  being  afhamed  to  ex-
£C  tinguifh  the  honors,  and  favors  I  had  received  for  my
cc  former  actions ;  and,  from  that  time,  I  have  always  ferved,
“  and  undergone  the  toils  of  war,  without  fearing,  or  even
iC  confidering,  any  danger :  By  all  which,  I  have  received
cc  rewards,  fpoils,  crowns,  and  other  honors  from  the  con-
cc  fuls :  In  a  word,  during  the  forty  years  I  have  conti-
“  nually  ferved,  I  fought  about  an  hundred  and  twenty
“  battles,  and  received  forty  five  wounds,  all  before,  and  not
“  one  behind:  Of  thefe  I  happened  to  receive  twelve  in  one
“  day,  when  Herdonius,  the  Sabine,  was  in  pofieifion  of  the
“  fortrefs,  and  the  capitol.  The  rewards  of  valor  bellowed

upon  me  are  thefe;  fourteen  27  civic  crowns,  with  which
“  I  have  been  crowned  by  thofe  I  had  faved  in  battle  ;  one


a7*  'ZrtQuv at  aroA/Wf.  See  the  eighteenth  annotation  on  the  eighth  book.

“  obfidional.


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  SS  EN  S  I  S.  201

<c  28obfidional,  for  having  raifed  a  fiege;  and  three  29  mural
“  crowns,  for  having  firft  mounted  the  enemies  walls,  and
“  taken  poffeffion  of  them;  and  eight  others  I  have  been
“  honoured  with  by  the  generals  for  my  behaviour  in  feveral
“  battles :  Add  to  thefe,  eighty  three  golden  collars,  one
u  hundred  and  fixty  bracelets  of  gold,  eighteen  30  pike  ftaves,
“  and  twenty  five  rich  31  gorgets,  nine  of  which  are  the


Ev#  So  I  read  this

after  Lapus.  The  * corona  obfidionalis ,
the  mold  honourable  of  all  others,  was
made  of  grafs  growing  in  the  place
befieged,  and  given  by  the  foldiers,
who  had  been  (hut  up  in  the  fiege,  to
the  general,  who  raifed  it.

29-  The  corona  muralis

was  given  by  the  general  to  the  man,
who  firft  mounted  the  walls  of  a  town
befieged,  if  it  was  taken  :  For  which
reafon,  it  was  adorned  with  battle¬
ments,  r  Pinnis  adornata  •,  a  lure  proof
that  thefe  are  not  of  Gothic  inftitution;
but  borrowed  by  the  Goths,  like  ma¬
ny  other  ornaments,  from  the  Roman,
or  rather  the  Greek,  architecture:  For,
in  all  the  old  Gothic  buildings,  we  fee
lb  me  traces,  though  horribly  dilguifed,
of  a  true  tafte.  When  I  fay  that  battle¬
ments  are  not  Gothic  ornaments,  it  is
poffible  that  fome  gentlemen  in  my
neighbourhood,  if  they  do  me  the
honor  to  read  this,  may  think  that  I
have  an  eye  to  the  ufe  I  mylelf  have
made  of  them  :  But  I  can  allure  thefe
gentlemen,  and  I  know  they  will  be¬
lieve  me,  that  the  defcriptions  I  had,
long  before,  met  with  of  the  mural
crown,  taught  me  to  ufe  them,  before

sPlin.  Nat.  Hift.  B.  xxii.  c.  4.  Gell.  B.  v.  c.
t  Life  of  Auguftus,  c.  25.  »  B.  vi.  p.  483.

Vol.  IV.


they  taught  me  to  juftify  the  ufe  I
have  made  of  them.  The  s  mural
crown  was  of  gold,  though  1  Sueto¬
nius  feems  to  infinuate  the  contrary  ;
but  u  Polybius  affirms  it  exprefsly :

T CIS  afoteoig  xx'xhapExvcy.'cvvis  zcr^ulcig

itu  to  r et%o;  avoiGsitri  XPY20TN  JjJWj

$i(pXV0V.

3°*  Aofdla.  Thefe  were  called  hafiae
purae ,  becaufe  without  iron.  w  Virgil
gives  one  of  thefe  to  Silvius  :

Ille  ( vides )  pur  a  juvenis  qui  nititur  hajld.

Upon  which  occafion,  Servius  fays,
from  Varro,  that  this  reward  was  given
to  thofe,  who  had  then  firji  overcome
in  battle,  hoc  fnit  praemium  apud  ma~
jores  ejus ,  qui  tunc  primum  viciffet  in
proelio:  If  fo,  no  man  could  receive
but  one  of  them ;  and  here  we  find
that  Siccius  had  obtained  eighteen.
But  that  grammarian  is  not  always  to
be  depended  on  for  his  quotations  any
more  than  for  his  remarks.

3 1  ’  Q>x\ot,aot..  I  have  been  obliged  to
tranfiate  thefe,  gorgets ,  for  want  of
another  word,  though  I  believe  thefe
bear  fome  refemblance  to  the  orna¬
ments  here  in  queftion.  Harnois ,  which
is  the  word  made  ufe  of  by  the  French

6  rGell.  B.  v.  c.  6.  *Id.  ib.

w  Aeneid.  B.  vi.  f.  760.

D  d  “  rewards


Book  X.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

“  rewards  of  fo  many  ftngle  combats,  in  which  I  voluntarily
“  higaged,  and  overcame  thofe,  who  challenged  any  of  our
“  men.  However,  fo  it  is,  citizens,  that  this  Siccius,  who
“  has  ferved  fo  many  years  in  defence  of  you;  fought  fo
u  many  battles ;  been  honoured  with  fo  many  teftimonies
“  of  his  valor;  who  never  feared,  nor  declined  any  danger;
c<  but  has  been  in  pitched  battles,  and  afiaults  of  towns,
“  among  the  foot,  and  among  the  horfe;  with  all,  with  a
“  few,  and  alone;  whofe  body  is  covered  with  wounds,
“  and  who  has  contributed  to  the  conqueft  his  country  has
<c  made  of  a  large  extent  of  fertil  land,  which  you  have
<c  taken  from  the  Tyrrhenians,  the  Sabines,  the  Aequi,  the
“  Volfci,  and  the  Pometini,  after  you  had  overcome  them,
<c  and  ftill  poffefs;  has  not  received  even  the  leafh  portion
“  of  this  land,  nor  any  one  of  you,  plebeians,  who  have
“  fhared  in  the  fame  toils ;  but  the  moft  violent,  and  the
4C  moft  fhamelefs  men  of  this  city  poffefs  the  moft  fruitful


tranflators,  fignifies  indeed  the  accou¬
trements  of  a  horfeman  ;  but,  in  that
fenfe,  it  is  too  extenfive,  becaufe  it
includes  a  complete  armour  :  How¬
ever,  I  fancy  they  were,  like  me,  re¬
duced  to  make  ufe  of  the  beft  term
their  language  could  fupply  them  with.
I  cannot  pretend  to  defcribe  the  par¬
ticular  ornaments  exprelTed  by  the
word  phalerae,  becaufe  authors  differ
fo  much  concerning  them  ;  but  this  I
know,  that  they  were  not  only  given
to  foldiers,  as  the  rewards  of  Superior
valor,  but  alfo  worne  by  the  Roman
noblemen,  as  marks  of  diftindtion  *,  I


believe  they  were  fomething  like  gor¬
gets  made  of  leather,  and  inriched
with  large  gold  ftuds,  which  hung
down  their  breaks  :  It  is,  however,
certain  they  were  v/orne  by  thofe  no¬
blemen  •,  fince  we  find  in  x  Livy  that
the  fenate  were  fo  much  offended  at
the  eledtion  of  Flavius  to  the  office  of
curule  aedile,  that  moft  of  the  noble¬
men  laid  afide  their  gold  rings,  and
their  phalerae tantum  Flavii  comitia
indignitatis  habuerunt ,  lit  plcrique  nobi -
Hum  annulos  aureos ,  et  phaleras  depo -
nerent.


Li


*  B,  ix.  c.  46.


part


Book  X.  DION  YSIUS  HALICARN  ARSENS  IS.  203

££  part  of  it,  and  have  enjoyed  it  thefe  many  years  without
££  having  either  received  a  grant  of  it  from  you,  or  purchafed
“  it,  or  without  being  able  to  fhew  any  other  juft  title  to  it.
u  If,  indeed,  they  had  taken  an  equal  fhare  with  us  in  the
“  toils,  by  which  we  acquired  this  land,  and,  upon  that
“  account,  claimed  a  greater  part  of  it  (though,  even
“  then,  it  would  not  have  been  either  juft,  or  agreeable  to
££  a  well  ordered  commonwealth,  that  a  few  fhould  appro-
<£  priate  to  themfelves  what  belongs  to  all)  however,  there
<c  would  then,  at  leaft,  be  fome  color  for  the  avarice  of  thefe
u  men :  But,  when,  unable  to  fhew  they  have  performed
££  any  great,  or  brave  adion  to  intitle  them  to  pofiefs  our
££  properties  by  violence,  they  ad  in  this  fhamelefs  manner,
££  and,  though  even  convided  of  it,  ftill  retain  the  poftefiion
££  of  thefe  lands;  who  can  bear  it?

XXXVIII.  “  But,  in  the  name  of  Jupiter,  if  I  have  mif-
u  reprefented  any  thing,  let  any  one  of  thefe  folemn  men
££  ftand  forth,  and  flhew  us  what  illuftrious,  what  noble
££  adions  he  relies  on,  to  claim  a  greater  fhare  in  them,  than
“  my felf:  Has  he  ferved  more  years ;  fought  more  battles;
££  received  more  wounds;  or  does  he  exceed  me  in  crowns,
u  gorgets,  fp°ils,  or  in  any  other  ornaments  of  vidory,  by
££  which  our  enemies  have  been  weakened,  and  our  country
££  rendered  more  illuftrious  and  powerful  ?  Rather  let  him
££  fhew  the  tenth  part  of  what  I  have  made  appear  to  you  :
££  But  the  generality  of  them  could  not  even  produce  the
££  leaft  part  of  what  I  have  laid  before  you ;  and  fome  there
<£  are,  whofe  labors  are  not  to  be  compared  with  thofe  of

D  d  2  ££  the


204  ROMAN  ANTI  QJU  I T I E  S  OF  BookX.

£‘  the  meaneft  plebeian  :  For  their  excellence  does  not  con-
“  fift  in  arms,  but  in  words ;  neither  is  their  power  exerted
££  againft  their  enemies,  but  againft  their  friends:  They
“  look  upon  the  city  they  inhabit,  not  as  common  to  all,
<£  but  as  their  own  property  ;  as  if  they  had  not  been  freed
££  by  us,  and  with  us,  from  tyranny,  but  had  received  us,
“  as  an  inheritance  from  the  tyrants.  I  fay  nothing  of  the
<c  other  infults,  both  great  and  fmall,  which  they  continue
££  to  heap  upon  us,  as  you  all  know;  but  they  have  carried
££  their  pride  fo  far,  that  they  will  not  fuffer  any  one  of  us  to
££  utter  a  free  word  in  favor  of  our  country,  nor  even  to
££  open  our  mouths.  Spurius  Caffius,  who  firft  propofed
<c  the  Agrarian  law,  was  adorned  with  three  confulfhips,
££  and  two  moft  illuftrious  triumphs,  and  had  fhewn  in
£C  many  inftances  that  he  was  as  great  a  general,  and  as  able
£c  a  politician,  as  any  man  of  that  age;  yet  they  accufed
££  him  of  tyranny,  and  circumvented  him  with  falfe  wit-
“  neffes,  for  no  other  reafon,  than  becaufe  he  was  a  lover
££  of  his  country,  and  of  the  people ;  and,  cafting  him  down
££  the  Tarpeian  rock,  put  him  to  death.  When  Caius
££  Genucius,  one  or  our  tribunes,  refumed  the  fame  inftitu-
££  tion  after  the  expiration  of  eleven  years,  and  cited  the
££  confuls  of  the  former  year  to  a  trial,  for  having  neglected
u  to  carry  into  execution  the  decree  of  the  fenate  concern-
££  ing  the  appointment  of  the  commiffioners  to  divide  the
££  lands,  finding  they  could  not,  openly,  take  him  off,  they,
££  privately,  put  him  to  death  the  day  before  the  trial
u  This  infpired  the  fucceeding  tribunes  with  terror,  and,

££  after


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  AS  SENS  I  S.  205


“  after  that,  none  of  them  would  expofe  themfelves  to  the
“  fame  danger ;  and  this  is  the  thirtieth  year  we  bear  thefe
u  things,  as  if  we  had  loft  our  power  under  a  tyranny.

XXXIX.  “  I  omit  the  reft :  But  your  prefent  magiftrates,
“  though  by  law  their  perfons  are  facred  and  inviolable,
“  when  they  endeavoured  to  oppofe  the  violence,  that  was
iC  offered  to  fome  of  the  plebeians,  what  dreadful  treatment
“  did  they  not  meet  with?  Were  they  not  driven  out  of
“  the  forum  with  blows,  kicks,  and  every  other  outrage  ?
“  Can  you  bear  thefe  things,  and  not  endeavour  to  revenge
“  yourfelves  on  the  authors  of  them  ?  Do  this  by  your  votes
“  at  leaft,  in  which  alone  you  can  exert  your  liberty.  This
“  is  the  time,  plebeians ;  afliime  the  fpirit  of  free  men ;  give
“  your  fancftion  to  the  Agrarian  law,  now  it  is  brought  in
“  by  your  tribunes,  and  fuffer  not  a  word  to  befaid  againft;
“it.  As  for  you,  tribunes,  you  want  no  exhortation  to  pro-
“  ceed  in  this  affair :  For  you  began  it,  and  you  do  your
“  duty  in  not  deferting  it:  And,  if  the  audacious,  and
<c  fhamelefs  youth  fhall  obftrudf  you  by  overturning  the 32  urns.


32*  We  are  obliged  to

the  Vatican  manufcript  for  this  word,
inftead  of  xetletSuust  in  the  editions,
which  can  have  no  place  here.  K«<Wjco?,
a  diminutive  of  fignifies  an  urn ,
or  ballot  box,  called  by  yLivy ,fitella,  if
we  are  not  rather  to  read  cijlella,  becaufe
2  Cicero  fays,  cifias  dejicit ,  for  what  our
author  fays,  mg  HuSiCMs  otvoilgwei.  Into
thefe  the  Roman  people  caft  their
billets  •,  and  on  thofe  billets  were  in-
fcribed  the  letters  u.  r.  uti  rogas ,  for


the  affirmative,  and  a.  antiquo ,  for  the
negative.  Thefe  billets  were  called,  in
Greek,  in  Latin,  tabellae ,  and,

alfo,  punfla  \  from  whence  a  Horace
took  this  expreffion,

Omne  tulit  punctum,  qui  ml f cult  utile  dulci.

The  account  I  have  given  of  the  word
Kot£i<rKO(  is  confirmed  by b  Julius  Pollux,
and  alfo  by  c  Harpocration,  who  ex¬
plains  this  word  by  afy&ov  t /,  0

saJjj <Pi](Pogisv  c'i  Jaaroa*


yB.xxv.c.3.  z  Ad  Keren,  c,  12.  a  De  Art.Poet  f.  343.  bB.  viii.fegm.  16,  cInK«W>?„

“  taking

O'


2o6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookX.
<£  taking  away  the  billets,  or  committing  any  other  dif-
tc  orders,  while  the  people  are  giving  their  votes,  let  them
a  feci  the  whole  weight  of  the  tribunitian  power.  And,
“  fince  you  are  not  allowed  to  abrogate  the  dignity  of  the
“  confuls,  bring  to  trial  the  private  men,  whom  they  make
“  ufe  of  as  the  minifters  of  their  violence ;  and  take  the
t£  votes  of  the  people  concerning  them,  as  charged  by  you
<s  with  violating,  and  fubverting  your  magiflracy,  contrary
6c  to  the  facred  laws.”

XL.  The  people  were  fo  much  pleafed  with  his  difcourfe,
and  fhewed  fo  great  an  indignation  again  ft  their  adverfaries,
that, 'as  I  faid  before,  they  would  not  even  fuffer  them  to
fay  a  word  againft  the  law.  However,  Icilius,  the  tribune,
riling  up,  faid  that  Siccius  had  fpoken  exceedingly  well,  and
gave  great  commendation  to  the  man ;  but  fhewed,  at  the
fame  time,  that  it  was  neither  juft,  nor  agreeable  to  a  well
ordered  commonwealth,  to  refufe  liberty  of  fpeech  to  thofe,
ivho  defired  to  fpeak  in  oppofition  to  the  law,  particularly
fmce  the  law  itfelf,  now  under  their  confideration,  was
calculated  to  render  equity  fuperior  to  violence ;  and  that
this  would  give  occafion  to  fuch,  as  entertained  no  fenti-
ments  of  equality,  and  juftice  with  regard  to  the  people,  to
raife  frefh  difturbances,  and  caufea  divifion,  when  any  thing
advantageous  to  the  commonwealth  was  propofed.  Having
faid  this,  and  appointed  the  next  day  for  hearing  thofe,  who
had  any  thing  to  object  againft  the  law,  he  difmifled  the
aflembly.  On  the  other  fide,  the  confuls  held  a  private
meeting  of  thofe  patricians,  who  were  the  mod:  diftinguiflied

for


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNA  SSENSIS.  207
for  their  courage,  and  reputation  in  the  city,  and  (hewed
them  that,  by  all  means,  they  muft  hinder  the  law  from  paf-
fing,  firft  by  their  words;  and,  if  thefe  cannot  perfuade  tl)e
people,  then  by  their  actions :  And  they  defired  them  all
to  come  early  in  the  morning  to  the  forum,  with  all  the
friends,  and  clients  they  could,  poffibly,  affemble  ;  and  that
fome  of  them  flhould  place  themfelves  round  the  tribunal,
and  the  comitium,  and  ftand  there ;  and  others  form  federal
bodies,  and  poft  themfelves  in  different  parts  of  the  forum,
in  order  to  divide  the  plebeians,  and  hinder  them  from
uniting  in  one  body.  This  advice  was  approved  of;  and,
before  it  was  broad  day  light,  the  greateft  part  of  the  forum
was  taken  up  by  the  patricians.

XLI.  After  that,  the  tribunes,  and  the  confuls  appear¬
ed  ;  and  the  cryer  made  proclamation  that  any  perfon,
who  defired  it,  might  objeCt  to  the  law:  And  many  worthy
men  offering  to  fpeak,  none  of  them  could  be  heard,  by
reafon  of  the  tumult,  and  diforderly  behaviour  of  the  af-
fembly :  For  fome  encouraged,  and  animated  the  fpeakers,
and  others  exploded,  and  hooted  them :  But,  neither  the
applaufe  of  the  favourers,  nor  the  clamors  of  the  oppofers
prevailed.  The  confuls  being  incenfed  at  this,  and  pro-
tefting  that  the  people  began  the  violence,  in  refuting  to
hear  what  the  others  had  to  offer,  the  tribunes  excufed  them
by  faying  that,  having  already  heard  the  fame  arguments
for  five  years  together,  it  was  not  to  be  wondered  at,  if  they
would  not  fubmit  to  hear  thefe  dale,  and  trite  objections.
The  greateft  part  of  the  day  being  fpent  in  thefe  contefts,

and


2o8


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

and  the  people  infifting  upon  giving  their  votes,  the  young
patricians,  unable  to  bear  thefe  proceedings  any  longer,  hin¬
dered  the  people  from  dividing  themfelves  into  their  tribes ;
took  the  urns  from  thofe  who  were  appointed  to  keep  them  ;
and,  beating  fuch  of  the  officers,  as  would  not  part  with  them,
they  pufhed  them  out  of  the  forum.  Upon  this,  the  tribunes
cried  out ;  and,  ruffiing  into  the  midft  of  them,  the  others
indeed  made  way  for  thefe,  and  fuffered  them  to  go,  quietly,
whitherfoever  they  pleafed ;  but  the  reft  of  the  people,  who
either  a&ually  followed  them,  or  were  endeavouring  to  fol¬
low  them  from  different  parts  of  the  forum  during  this  tu¬
mult,  and  confufion,  were  not  allowed  to  pafs  :  So  that,  the
people  were  deprived  of  the  affiftance  of  their  tribunes.
At  laft,  the  patricians  prevailed,  and  would  not  fuffer  the
law  to  be  ena&ed.  Thofe,  who  were  thought  to  have
affifted  the  confuls  with  the  greateft  zeal  upon  this  occafion,
were  of  thefe  three  families,  the  Poftumii,  the  Sempronii,
and  the  Cloelii,  all  men  illuflrious  by  the  dignity  of  their
birth,  powerful  by  the  number  of  their  friends,  and  diftin-
guifhed  by  their  riches,  their  reputation,  and  their  military
exploits :  Thefe  were  allowed  to  have  been  the  chief  inftru-
ments  in  preventing  the  law  from  being  paffed.

XLII.  The  next  day,  the  tribunes  confulted  with  the
moft  conliderable  plebeians  what  meafures  they  were  to  take,
laying  this  down  for  a  rule  univerfally  acknowledged,  not
.  to  bring  the  confuls  to  a  trial,  but  the  private  men,  who  had
been  their  inftruments ;  whofe  punifhment  would  be  lefs
regarded  by  the  generality  of  the  citizens,  as  Siccius  had


Book  X:  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  ARN  AS  S  E  N $  IS.  209


fuggefted.  However,  they  confidered  with  great  attention
how  many  they  fhould  accufe,  what  name  they  Ihould  give
to  their  offence,  and,  particularly,  how  great  a  fine  they
fhould  fet  upon  them.  Thofe  who  were  of  a  fevere  difpo-
fition,  advifed  to  carry  all  thefe  things  to  a  great,  and  dread¬
ful  height.  On  the  other  fide,  the  milder  fort  were  for  a  more
moderate,  and  humane  proceeding.  The  perfon,  who  was
the  author  of  this  advice,  and  prevailed  with  the  reft  to  come
into  it,  was  Siccius,  who  had  made  the  fpeech  to  the  people
in  favor  of  the  Agrarian  law.  They  reiolved,  therefore,  to
let  the  reft  of  the  patricians  alonCj  and  to  bring  the  Cloelii,
the  Poftumii,  and  the  Sempronii  before  the  people  to  give
an  account  of  their  actions:  And  that  their  charge  fhould
be  that,  whereas  the  facred  laws,  which  both  the  fenate,  and
the  people  had  enabled  concerning  the  tribunes  of  the
people,  forbid  any  perfon  to  compel  the  tribunes  to  fubmit
to  any  thing  againft  their  will  like  the  reft  of  the  citizens,
they,  33  by  violence,  had  hindered  them  from  carrying  through


33-  K otliftvovlse  »v%g.  This  word  I
have  taken  the  liberty  of  fubftituting
in  the  room  of  KXT*%ov\eg,  which  is  the
reading  of  all  the  editions,  and  manu-
fcripts.  The  former  is  a  word  often
ufed  by  our  author  in  this  fenfe ;  par¬
ticularly  in  the  fixty  fifth  chapter  of
the  fixth  book,  where  he  fays  the
ariftocratical  party  defired  the  confuls
to  remain  neuter  between  the  two  par¬
ties,  and  to  offer  violence  to  neither  ;
fxyj  KATI2XYEIN  renv  scicsoov  :

And  the  latter  muft  fignify  here  de¬
taining^  or  fomething  of  that  kind ;
which  was  not  the  cafe :  For  the  young

Vol.  IV.


patricians  were  fo  far  from  detaining
the  tribunes,  that  our  author  tells  us
they  made  an  opening  for  them,  and
fuffered  them  to  go  where  they  pleafed.
On  the  other  fide,  they  certainly  made
ufe  of  violence  to  hinder  them  from
getting  the  law  patted.  I  do  upon  this
occafion  what  1  have  always  done
whenever  I  have  made  any  alteration  in
the  text ;  I  give  the  word  I  except
againft,  with  That  which  I  have  in-
ferted  :  By  this  means,  I  may  indeed
expofe  my  own  ignorance,  but  cannot
do  any  injury  to  the  text,  if  I  am
miftaken  in  my  conjectures :  The

E  e  the


210  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookX.

•  •  •  _  \  at

the  deliberation  concerning  the  Agrarian  law.  And  they,
alfo,  refolved  that  the  judgement  confequent  to  their  con¬
viction  fhould  be  neither  death,  bani£hment,  nor  any  other
invidious  punifhment,  left  this  fhould  fave  them,  but  that
their  fortunes  fhould  be  confecrated  to  Ceres;  which  was
the  mildeft  punifhment  ordained  by  that  law.  Thefe  re-
folutions  were  purfued,  and  the  time  came  when  the  men
were  to  be  tried.  In  the  mean  while,  the  confuls,  and  the
moft  confiderable  of  the  patricians  held  a  confultation,  in
which  it  was  refolved  to  let  the  tribunes  go  on  with  the
trials,  left,  if  they  were  hindered,  they  might  do  fome
greater  mifchief;  and  to  fuffer  the  inraged  plebeians  to  fpend
their  fury  upon  the  fortunes  of  thefe  men,  to  the  end  they
might  be  tamer  for  the  future,  after  they  had  taken  fome
kind  of  revenge  at  leaffc  upon  their  enemies ;  particularly,
fence  it  was  eafy  to  make  the  fufferers  amends  for  a  calamity
arifing  from  a  pecuniary  punifhment:  Which  happened
accordingly :  For  the  men  being  condemned  by  default,  the
fury  of  the  people  ceafed,  and  fome  reafonable  fatisfadtion
feemed  to  be  made  to  the  tribunes ;  and  the  patricians  bought
the  delinquents  eftates  of  the  purchafers,  with  the  public
money,  at  the  fame  price  they  had  given  for  them,  and  re¬
ft  ored  them  to  the  owners.  Thus,  by  the  conduct  of  the
patricians  at  this  jun&ure,  the  ftorm  that  hung  over  their
heads  was  34  difpelled.

law  here  alluded  to,  upon  which  the  34*  Aiutehvlo.  Livy  gives  a

tribunes  defigned  to  ground  their  very  flight  account  of  this  con-
charge  againft  thefe  young  patricians,  tentious  fcene  between  the  confuls,
is  let  forth  at  length  in  the  eighty  and  the  tribunes  of  this  year  :  Of  all
ninth  chapter  of  the  fixth  book.  which  he  lays  no  more  than  this;

XLIII.


I


BockX.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  zit


XLIII.  Not  long  after,  when  the  tribunes  began 'again  to
mention  the  Agrarian  law,  news  was  fuddenly  brought  that
the  enemy  had  made  an  irruption  into  the  territories  of  the
Tufculani ;  which  was  fufficient  to  put  a  flop  to  their  de~
fign :  For  the  Tufculani,  coming  to  Rome  in  great  numbers,
faid  that  the  Aequi  were,  already,  in  their  country  with  a
numerous  army  laying  it  wafte,  and  that,  unlefs  fome  fuc-
cours  were  fpeediiy  fent,  they  would  be  matters  of  their
city  within  a  few  days.  Upon  which,  the  fenate  ordered
that  both  the  confuls  ttiould  go  to  their  relief.  The  con-
fuls,  having  given  notice  of  their  intention  to  raife  forces,
called  all  the  citizens  to  arms.  This,  alfo,  produced  forne-
thing  like  a  fedition,  the  tribunes  oppoiing  the  levies,  and


6 Hi  ( tribuni )  fequenti  anno. ,  T’.Ro.milio ,
C.  Veturio  confulibus ,  legem  omnibus
concionibus  fuis  celebrant :  puderc  fe  nu-
meri  fui  nequicqi.iam  anEli,  ft  ea  res  aeque
fuo  biennio jaceret ,  ac  toto  Juperiore  lujlro
jacuiffet.  This  is  fure  the  moft  com¬
pendious  account,  that  ever  was  given
of  the  many  interefting  particulars,
that  fill  this  important  fcene  ;  and  the
omiffion  is  the  more  to  be  lamented
in  Livy,  becaufe  no  hiftorian,  in  my
opinion,  ever  related  with  greater  ele¬
gance,  and  perfpicuity,  or  enlivened
his  relation  with  greater  fpirit :  But
the  misfortune  is  (and  a  misfortune,
which  all  his  readers  feel)  that  he  was
either  too  indolent  to  confult  all  the
hiftorians,  records,  and  monuments,
that  were  neceflfary  to  fupply  him  with
a  large  Hock  of  materials ;  or  had  too
much  vivacity  to  confine  himfelf  to  fo
laborious  a  tafk  :  However,  if  he  did


give  himfelf  that  trouble,  he  feems  to
have  done  it  with  no  other  view  than
to  feledt  fuch  fadts,  as  were  moft  fuf-
ceptible  of  ornament,  and  of  thofe
glowing  colors,  which  his  mafterly
pencil  was  very  capable  of  throwing
on  them.  But  this  choice,  however
happily  improved,  is  rather  the  pro¬
vince  of  a  poet,  who  is  mafter  of  his
fubjedt,  than  of  an  hiftorian, who  ought
to  be  a  (lave  to  it.  The  former  may
indeed  do  what  e  Horace  fays  that
Homer  did,

et  quae

Defperat  tr  aft  at  a  nitefcerepojfe^relinquit ,

But  the  hiftorian  is  tied  down,  not
only,  by  the  fadts,  but,  even,  by  the
order,  in  which  they  happened*,  and
has  no  other  choice  than  in  the  man¬
ner  of  relating  them.


dB.  iii.  c.  31.  *De  Art.  Poet.  f.  149.

E  e  2


not


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

not  fuffering  the  punishments,  ordained  by  law,  to  be  in-
flided  on  the  difobedient ;  but  without  effed :  For  the
fenate  affembling  ordered  that  the  patricians  fhould  take  the
field  with  their  clients,  and  fuch  of  the  citizens,  as  were
willing  to  join  them  in  an  expedition  undertaken  for  the
prefervation  of  their  country,  with  an  afliirance  that  the
gods  would  be  propitious  to  thofe  who  fhould  join  the  con-
fuls  upon  this  occafion,  and  offended  with  thofe  who  fhould
defert  them.  When  the  decree  of  the  fenate  was  read  in
the  affembly  of  the  people,  many  even  of  thefe  voluntarily
ingaged  in  the  fervice:  The  worthieft  men,  through  the
fhame  they  felt  in  not  relieving  a  nation  in  alliance  with
them,  which,  by  reafon  of  their  attachment  to  the  Romans,
was  always  receiving  fome  damage  from  their  enemies :  Even
Siccius,  who,  in  the  affembly  of  the  people,  had  inveighed
againft  the  ufurpers  of  the  public  lands,  was  one  of  thefe,  and
brought  with  him  a  body  of  eight  hundred  men,  who  were
paft  the  military  age  as  well  as  himfelf,  and  not  fubjed  to  the
compulfion  of  the  laws ;  but,  as  they  honoured  the  man,  in
confideration  of  the  many  confiderable  favors  they  had  re¬
ceived  from  him,  they  refolved  not  to  leave  him,  when  he
was  going  upon  this  fervice.  This  body  of  men,  by  their
experience  in  war,  and  their  refolution  in  dangers,  was  far
fuperior  to  the  reft  of  the  army.  Great  numbers  were
induced  to  ferve  by  the  exhortations  of  the  moft  ancient
citizens,  and  the  affedion  they  bore  to  them:  Others
were  ready  to  expofe  themfelves  to  any  danger  for  the  fake
of  the  booty  they  expeded  to  acquire  in  this  expedition.:

So


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENSIS.  213

So  that,  in  a  ffiort  time,  an  army  took  the  field,  fufficiently
numerous,  and  magnificently  provided.  The  enemy,  who
had  intelligence  beforehand  that  the  Romans  defigned  to
march  out  againftthem,  prepared  to  return  home  with  their
forces:  But  the  confuls,  making  a  forced  march,  came  up
with  them,  while  they  lay  incamped  on  a  high,  and  fleep
hill  near  the  city  of  Antium,  and  polled  themfelves  not  far
from  them.  For  fome  time,  both  armies  continued  in  their
camps :  After  which,  the  Aequi,  defpifing  the  Romans  for
not  having,  firft,  attacked  them,  and  judging  their  army  not
to  be  fufficiently  numerous,  they  detached  parties  to  cut  off
their  provifions ;  forced  back  with  their  horfe  the  Romans,
when  fent  out  to  bring  in  corn,  or  forage;  fell  fuddenly
upon  thofe  who  went  for  water,  and  challenged  them,  often,
to  come  to  an  ingagement.

XL IV.  The  confuls,  feeing  this,  refolved  to  protradl  the
war  no  longer.  It  happened  that,  during  thefe  days,  Ro~
rnilius  had  the  conduct  of  it ;  and  it  belonged  to  him  to  give
the  word,  to  draw  up  the  army,  and  to  watch  the  opportu¬
nity  both  of  beginning,  and  ending,  the  battle :  Who,
having  ordered  the  fignal  to  be  given,  and  led  his  army  out
of  the  camp,  polled  the  horfe  and  foot,  according  to  their
divifions,  each  in  their  proper  places :  Then,  calling  Siccius
to  him,  he  faid :  “  We  propofe,  Siccius,  to  ingage  the  enemy
“  in  this  place ;  but,  before  we  begin,  and  while  both
“  armies  are  preparing  for  the  battle,  do  you  march,  by  that
“  winding  road,  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  where  the  enemy
“  have  placed  their  camp,  and  attack  the  men  left  to  guard


214  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  X.

e£  it,  to  the  end  that  thofe,  who  will  be  ingaged  with  us,
<£  either  fearing  for  their  camp,  and  defiring  to  relieve  it,
“  may  turn  their  backs,  and,  by  that  means,  be  eafily
“  defeated,  as  I  expedt,  while  they  are  making  a  hafty
“  retreat,  and  all  preffing  through  one  road;  or,  by  ftay-
“  ing  here,  lofe  their  camp :  For  the  forces,  that  are  left
“  to  guard  it,  are  not  ftrong  enough  for  that  purpofe,  as
“  may  be  conjedtured,  fince  they  place  all  their  fecurity  in  the
“  ftrength  of  its  fituation  ;  and  your  body  of  eight  hundred
“  men,  exercifed  in  many  wars,  will  be  of  force  fufficient
“  to  defeat,  by  a  bold  attack,  thofe  guards  of  their  camp,
ct  when  aftonifhed  by  your  unexpedted  onfet.”  To  whom
Siccius  replied :  cc  For  my  part,  I  am  ready  to  obey
“  you  in  every  thing ;  but  the  enterprife  is  not  fo  eafy  as
“  it  feems  to  you :  For  the  rock,  on  which  the  camp  is
“  lituated,  is  high  and  fteep ;  and  I  fee  but  one  road  that
“  leads  to  it,  by  which  the  enemy  will  come  down  upon  us;
cc  and  probably,  a  fufficient  guard  is  placed  there;  which,
“  though  very  fmall  and  weak,  will  be  able  to  maintain
“  their  ground  againft  a  much  greater  force  than  mine;
cc  and  the  place  itfelf  will  fecure  the  guard  from  being
<c  forced:  By  all  means,  therefore,  reconfider  your  defign:
“  For  the  attempt  is  extremely  hazardous.  But,  if  you  are
“  refolved,  at  all  events,  to  fight  two  battles  at  the  fame  time,
“  order  a  fufficient  number  of  chofen  men  to  follow  me  and
cc  the  veterans :  For,  in  that  cafe,  we  fhall  not  march  up  the
“  hill  to  take  the  place  by 35  furprife,  but  by  open  force.”

35*  Ou  xXi'bovlzs  to  %ugiov.  This  rallying  Cheiri Tophus,  the  Lacedae-
is  an  expreflion  of  Xenophon,  who,  in  monian  general,  upon  the  cuftom  of

XLV.


Book X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN AS SENSIS.  215

XLV.  While  he  was  going  on  in  this  manner,  the  conful
interrupted  him,  and  faid:  “  There  is  no  need  of  many
“  words :  If  you  dare  to  obey  my  orders,  march  this  minute,
“  and  do  not  play  the  general ;  but,  if  you  decline  it,  and
“  fiart  at  the  danger,  I  fhall  give  the  command  to  others :
c<  As  for  you,  who  have  fought  an  hundred  and  twenty
“  battles,  and  ferved  forty  years,  and  whole  body  is  covered
u  with  wounds;  finceyou  came  voluntarily,  depart,  without
“  either  encountering  the  enemy,  or  feeing  them ;  and,  in-
“  ftead  of  your  arms,  fharpen  your  tongue  once  more  againft
“  the  patricians.  Where,  now,  are  thofe  many  rewards  of
<c  valor,  thofe  collars,  bracelets,  fpears,  gorgets,  thofe  crowns
“  the  gifts  of  confuls,  and  the  fpoils  gained  in  (ingle  combats,
“  with  all  your  tedious  boafts,  which  we,  then,  fuffered  you
“  to  difplay?  For,  when  you  are  tried  in  this  one  action,  where
“  the  danger  is  real,  you  are  found  to  be  the  man  you  are,
“  and  found  to  be  a  boafter ;  and  that  you  pradtife  fortitude
tc  in  appearance,  not  in  reality.”  Siccius,  flung  with  thefe
u  reproaches,  anfwered;  “  I  am  fenfible,  Romilius,  that
iC  you  propofe  to  yourfelf  one  of  thefe  two  things,  either  to
“  deftroy  me  living,  and  to  vilify  me  by  fixing  the  moft

dealing,  which  was  encouraged  in  the  rovltg  t»  ofxg9  cog  pyj  zscXKug  nMyxg  ha-
boys  at  Sparta,  advifes  him  to  take  The  old  Englifli  tranflator  of

care,  left,  in  ftealing  a  march  to  the  the  expedition  of  Cyrus,  John  Bing-
mountain  they  propofed  to  poftcfs  ham,  has  rendered  this,  to  Jieal  fome
themfelves  of,  they  were  notdifcover-  part,  or  other ,  of  the  hill.  This  ui>
ed,  and  treated  like  the  Spartan  boys,  fortunate  verfion  is  taken  notice  of  by
that  is,  feverely  whipped:  f  Nwavpahoc  me  in  the  preface  to  my  tranftation  of
troi  zocifjog  zgiv  t7ri$ei<zct,c&cti  rqv  zrxiJeixv,  the  Anabafis,

Koa  (pvhX-rUs&eii  [Mvloi  hqtpQcopzv  kXvit-

f Ava£.  B.  iv.  p.  325.  Edit,  of  Hutchinfon;

u  fhameful


216  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book X.

<c  fhameful  mark  of  cowardife  on  me,  or  to  expofe  me  to  a
“  miferable,  and  obfcure  death  by  the  hands  of  the  enemy,
“  becaufe  you  look  upon  me  to  be  one  of  thofe,  who  enter-
“  tain  fentiments  of  liberty:  For  you  fend  me  not  to  a
u  doubtful,  but  to  a  determined  death.  However,  I  will
<c  undertake  even  this  adtion,  and  endeavour,  by  fhewing
“  that  I  am  no  cow7ard,  either  to  gain  the  camp,  or,  if  I  fail,
C£  bravely  to  die:  And  I  defire  you,  fellow-foldiers,  if  you
“  hear  of  my  death,  to  bear  witnefs  for  me  to  the  reft  of
“  the  citizens,  that  I  fell  a  facrifice  to  virtue,  and  to  the
“  great  liberty,  with  which  I  exprefled  my  thoughts.”
Having  made  this  anfwer  to  the  conful,  and  wept,  he  em¬
braced  all  his  acquaintance,  and  fet  out  at  the  head  of  the
eight  hundred  men,  who  were  caft  down,  and  fhed  tears,
as  if  they  had  been  going  to  certain  death :  And  the  reft
of  the  army  were  moved  at  the  fight,  expe&ing  to  fee  them
no  more.

XL VI.  However,  Siccius  took  a  different  road  from
That  propofed  by  Romilius,  and  marched  by  the  fide  of
the  hill ;  then,  leading  his  men  into  a  thick  wood  that  lay
near,  he  halted,  and  fpoke  to  them  in  this  manner:  “  We
“  are  fent,  as  you  fee,  by  the  general  to  deftru&ion:  For
cc  he  expected  we  fhould  have  taken  the  winding  road,
“  which  it  was  impoffible  we  could  afcend  without  being
“  difcovered  by  the  enemy;  but  I  will  lead  you  by  a  way,
“  where  they  fhall  not  difcover  us,  and  have  great  hopes  of
“  gaining  fome  paths,  that  will  bring  us  over  the  top  of
4C  the  hill  to  their  camp:  Be  not,  therefore,  caff  down.”


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  217
Having  faid  this,  he  continued  his  march  through  the  wood ;
and,  after  he  was  far  advanced,  he  happened  to  meet  a  man,
who  was  travelling  that  way,  whom  he  ordered  to  be  feized
by  the  youngeft  of  his  company,  and  took  him  for  his
guide:  This  man,  after  leading  them  round  the  hill  for  a
confiderable  time,  brought  them  to  the  top  of  it,  that
36  commanded  the  camp,  to  which  they  had  now  a  fhort,
and  eafy  defcent.  During  their  march,  the  armies  of  the
Romans,  and  Aequi  ingaged,  and  fought  hand  to  hand
with  equal  numbers,  equal  arms,  and  equal  ardor;  the
battle  was  long  and  doubtful ;  the  horfe  and  foot,  fometimes,
gaining  ground  upon  one  another,  and,  fometimes,  giving
way ;  and  many  perfons  of  diftindion  fell  on  both  fides :
At  laft,  the  fate  of  the  battle  was  decided :  For  Siccius,  and
his  men,  when  they  came  near  the  camp  of  the  Aequi,
found  that  part  of  it  unguarded  (becaufe  all  the  forces,  which
had  been  appointed  to  defend  it,  were  gone  to  the  other
fide  that  lay  next  the  field  of  battle,  to  fee  the  adion)  and,
entering  the  camp  with  great  eafe,  faw  themfelves  upon
a  much  higher  ground  than  the  guard :  Then,  fhouting,
ran  to  attack  them:  The  Aequi,  terrified  with  this  unex~
peded  danger,  and  judging  them  to  be  more  numerous  than,
they  were,  and  that  the  other  conful  was  there  with  his
army,  threw  themfelves  out  of  the  camp  ;  many  leaving,
even,  their  arms  behind  them.  Siccius  and  his  men  flew

36,  E irtneipevov.  The  editions,  and  place,  the  o'Jo?  was  or  evem-

manufcripts  have  which  < pogoc,  as  the  Vatican  manufcript  has

does  not  feem  to  me  near  fo  proper  as  it,  which  implies  a  declivity,  and  feems
the  other-,  particularly  as  our  author  to  fuggeft  the  word  I  have  made  ufe
fays,  prefen dy  after,  that,  from  this  of.

Vol.  IV.  -  F  f


all


2i8  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book X.

all  they  could  come  up  with ;  and,  having  poflefled  them¬
felves  of  their  camp,  marched  againft  thofe,  who  were  in
the  plain.  The  Aequi,  being  informed  by  the  flight  and
outcries  of  their  men,  that  the  camp  was  taken,  and,  not
long  after,  feeing  the  enemy  falling  upon  their  rear,  fought
no  longer  with  the  fame  fpirit ;  but  broke  their  ranks,  and
endeavoured  to  fave  themfelves  forne  one  way,  and  fome
another.  And  here  was  the  greatefl:  daughter:  For  the
Romans  did  not  give  over  the  purfuit  till  night,  putting  all
to  the  fword  they  could  overtake.  But  no  man  flew  fo  many
of  them,  nor  performed  fo  great  adions,  as  Siccius ;  who,
when  he  faw  the  affair  was  over,  it  being  now  dark,  returned
with  his  men  to  the  camp  they  had  taken,  full  of  joy,  and
exultation.  And  all  his  men  fafe  and  unhurt,  not  only
without  having  differed  any  of  the  mifchiefs  they  expeded,
but  alfo  crowned  with  the  greatefl:  glory,  called  him  their
father,  their  preferver,  and  their  god ;  and,  giving  him  every
honourable  appellation,  could  notfatisfy  themfelves  with  em¬
bracing  the  man,  and  fhewing  every  other  inftance  of  their
gratitude.  In  the  mean  time,  the  reft  of  the  Roman  army,
with  the  confuls,  returned  from  the  purfuit  to  their  own
camp.

XLVIX.  It  was  now  midnight,  when  Siccius,  full  of  re-
fentment  againft  the  confuls  for  having  fent  him  to  deftruc-
tion,  refolved  to  take  from  them  the  glory  of  the  vidory  ;
and,  having  communicated  his  defign  to  his  companions,
and  they  approving  it,  and  every  one  of  them  admiring  the
fagacity,  and  fpirit  of  the  man,  he  took  his  arms ;  and,

ordering


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  EN  S  I  S.  219

ordering  the  reft  to  do  the  fame,  firft  put  to  death  all  the
Aequi,  whom  he  found  in  the  camp,  and  ftabbed  all  the
horfesj  and  other  beafts  of  burden  ;  then  fet  fire  to  the  tents,
which  were  full  of  arms,  apparel,  warlike  ftores,  and  of  the
booty  they  had  taken  from  the  Tufculani,  which  was  ex¬
ceeding  great ;  after  every  thing  was  confumed  by  the  fire,
he  left  the  camp  about  break  of  day,  carrying  with  him
nothing  but  his  arms,  and,  after  a  quick  march,  came  to
Rome :  As  foon  as  armed  men  appeared,  celebrating  their
victory,  marching  haftily,  and  covered  with  blood,  the  people
flocked  to  them,  earneftly  defiring  both  to  fee  them,  and  to
hear  their  exploits.  But  they  went  diredly  to  the  forum,
and  gave  an  account  to  the  tribunes  of  what  had  pafied ;
and  thefe,  calling  the  people  together,  ordered  them  to  repeat
it  before  them  all.  There  being  a  great  concourfe,  Siccius
prefented  himfelf,  and  related  to  them  both  the  victory,  and
the  circumftances  of  the  adfion,  and  that,  by  his  own
valor,  and  the  valor  of  his  eight  hundred  veterans,  whom
the  confuls  had  fent  to  be  flain,  the  camp  of  the  Aequi
had  been  taken,  and  the  army,  which  was  ingaged
with  the  confuls,  put  to  flight :  He  defired  they  would
impute  the  victory  to  no  other  perfons,  and  ended  with
adding  this :  u  We  have  faved  our  lives,  and  our  arms,  and
“  have  brought  with  us  no  other  marks  of  our  victory.”
The  people,  hearing  this,  exprefled  their  compaflion,  and
wept :  The  age  of  the  men  affeded  them,  their  valor  moved
them ;  and  they  were  filled  with  refentment,  and  indig¬
nation  again  ft  thofe,  who  had  attempted  to  deprive  the

F  f  2  com-


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.


commonwealth  of  fnch  warriours.  This  relation  (as  Siccius
had  forefeen)  drew  upon  the  confuls  the  hatred  of  all  the
citizens ;  even  the  fenate  was  exafperated  beyond  meafure :
For  they  granted  them  neither  a  triumph,  nor  any  other
diftindtion,  the  ufual  confequences  of  vidtory.  The  people,
at  their  next  eledtion,  created  Siccius  one  of  their  tribunes,


rewarding  him  with  an  honor,  of  which  they  themfelves  had
the  difpofal.  Thefe  were  the  moft  remarkable  tranfadlions


of  that  time.

XLVIIL  the  confuls  for  the  following  year  were  Spurius
Tarpeius,  and  Aulus  37  Aterius:  Thefe  favoured  the  people
in  every  thing  during  their  magiftracy,  and  particularly  in
procuring  the  previous  vote  of  the  fenate  for  laying  before
them  38  the  propofal  of  the  tribunes :  Since  they  faw  that
the  patricians  reaped  no  advantage  from  their  oppofition ;
but,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  moft  zealous  affertors  of  their
caufe  drew  upon  themfelves  envy,  and  hatred,  private  lofles,
and  calamities :  But  they  were,  chiefly,  terrified  with  the
recent  misfortune  of  the  laft  confuls,  who  had  been  feverely


37*  At Sigonius,  in  his  note
upon  the  confuls  of  this  year  in  s  Livy,
prefers  this  name  upon  the  authority
of  Diodorus  Siculus.  In  the  Fajli
confulares  of  Petavius,  the  confuls  of
this  year  ftand  thus,  Spurius  Farpeius
Montaia ,  Aulus  Aetermus  vel  Aterius
Fontinalis.  4

38,  To  r uv  Jqjuctgxw  JoyfACi*  It  ap¬
pears  by  the  tranftation  of  Lapus,
that  st££i  was  not  in  his  manufcript  •>
neither  does  the  fenfe  admit  that  pre-
pofition.  The  Jtyufr  here


alluded  to,  relates,  in  my  opinion,  to
their  refolution  to  folicit  the  previ¬
ous  vote  of  the  fenate,  which  our
author  will  explain  in  the  fifty  fe-
cond  chapter  of  this  book,  and  which
had  been  fo  often  prefied  by  the  tri¬
bunes,  and  paded,  at  laft,  in  this  con-
fulfhip,.I  mean  That  for  laying  before
the  people  the  propofal  of  the  tri¬
bunes  for  compiling  a  body  of  Jaws,
by  which  the  patricians,  as  well  as  the
plebeians,  the  magiftrates  as  well  as
private  men,  fhould  be  bound.


s  B.  Hi.  c.  31,


treated


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S S E N S I  S.  221
treated  by  the  people,  and  found-no  protection  from  the  fenate :
For  Siccius,  who  had  taken  the  camp  of  the  Aequi,  and
defeated  their  army,  being  now  one  of  the  tribunes,  as  I
faid,  the  very  firft  day  he  took  poffeftion  of  his  magiftracy,
after  he  had  offered  up  the  ufual  facrifices  for  the  preferva-
tion  of  the  commonwealth,  and  before  he  entered  upon  any
other  public  affair,  had  cited  Titus  Romilius  to  appear
before  the  tribunal  of  the  people,  and  make  his  defence  to
a  charge  brought  againft  him,  for  having  injured  the  public ;
and  appointed  a  day  for  his  trial :  And  Lucius  Icilius,  who
was  then  aedile,  and  had  been  tribune  the  year  before,  had
fummoned  Caius  Veturius,  the  other  conful  of  the  former
year,  to  take  his  trial,  alfo,  for  the  like  offence*  During  the
interval  between  the  citation,  and  the  trial,  both  fides  em¬
ployed  many  intrigues,  and  folicitations ;  the  perfons  accufed
relying  on  the  fenate ;  and,  encouraged  by  the  affurances
both  of  the  old  and  young  fenators,  that  they  would  not
fuffer  the  trial  to  proceed,  made  light  of  the  danger  :  On
the  other  fide,  the  tribunes,  who  had  long  provided  againft
all  attempts,  and  confidered  neither  intreaties,  threats,  nor
any  danger,  when  the  day  was  come,  affembled  the  people.
Before  this,  great  numbers  of  handicraft’s  men,  and  labourers
were  come  out  of  the  country;  and,  having  joined  the
citizens,  filled  not  only  the  forum,  but  all  the  ftreets  that
led  to  it.  *

XLIX.  Romilius  was  tried  iirft  :  When  Siccius  prelented
himfelf;  and,  after  charging  him  with  all  theacfts  of  violence
he  had  committed  againft  the  tribunes,  while  he  was  conful,

he


22  2


'  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

he  came,  at  laft,  to  the  infidious  defign,  which  the  other
had  formed  both  againft  him,  and  the  cohort,  that  was  under
his  command :  And,  to  fupport  this  charge,  he  produced,
as  witnefles,  the  moft  confiderable  men,  then,  in  the  army,
not  plebeians,  but  patricians  ;  among  whom  there  was  a
youth,  diftinguifhed  by  his  birth,  his  own  virtue,  and  his
remarkable  bravery,  by  name  Spurius  Virginius,  who  faid
“  that,  being  defirous  to  get  Marcus  Icilius,  who  was  fonto
u  one  of  the  men  commanded  by  Siccius,  and  of  his  own
u  age,  and  his  friend,  exempted  from  that  fervice,  in  which
c<  he  expeded  that  both  he,  and  his  father  would  perifh,  he
“  had  prevailed  upon  Aulus  Virginius,  his  own  uncle,  then
“  a  legate  in  the  army,  to  go  to  the  confuls,  and  afk  this
C£  favor  of  them;  which  they  refufing,  hehimfelf  wept,  and
u  lamented  the  misfortune  of  his  friend ;  that  the  young
cc  man,  for  whom  he  had  interceded,  being  informed  of  this,
“  39  went  to  the  confuls;  and,  defiring  leave  to  fpeak,  faid
“  that  he  thought  himfelf  much  obliged  to  thofe,  who  had
c<  interceded  for  him,  but  could  not  accept  a  favor,  that


39*  EA0«u.  This  is  rendered  by  the
Latin  tranflators  limply  veniffe ,  as  it  is
in  Greek,  without  faying  to  whom  he
went,  which  is  explained  by  the  fub-
fec}uent  words,  \oyov  alJyi<roifji.ivov :  T.  hefe
can  relate  only  to  the  confuls  j  fince  it
cannot  be  fuppofed  that  the  youth
would  ufe  fcf  much  ceremony  with  a
man  of  his  own  age,  and  his  friend.
Again,  he  fays  that  r oig  stoAAjjv

oiSi  xa^v->  interceffors  were  the

legate,  and  Virginius  ;  confequently
thofe  words,  ao^ov  <r^4u£vov,  could


not  with  any  propriety  be  addreffed  to
the  latter.  Thefe  reafons,  I  fuppofe,
did  not  occur  to  M.  ***-,  becaufe
he  has  made  the  youth  go  to  Virgi¬
nius,  not  to  the  confuls,  que  le  jeune
Icilius  I’etoit  venu  trouver :  But  then
he  feems  embarrafled  with  thefe  cere¬
monious  words,  Aoycv  ulltio-oiptvov,  and
leaves  them  out.  I  always  commend
le  Jay  with  pleafure,  when  I  can  com¬
mend  him  with  juftice  •,  he  has  trans¬
lated  this  extremely  well.


“  would


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SE NS  I  S.  223

“  would  deprive  him  of  the  opportunity  of  fhewing  his
cc  piety  to  a  parent,  whom  he  was  the  more  refolved  not  to
“  abandon,  becaufe  he  was  going  to  his  death,  of  which
c<  every  one  was  convinced ;  but  that  he  would  go  with
C£  him,  defend  him  to  the  utmoft  of  his  power,  and  fhare
<c  the  fame  fortune  with  them  all.”  After  the  young  man
had  given  this  evidence,  there  was  hot  a  fingle  perfon,  who
did  not  feel  fome  emotion  at  the  fate  of  thofe  men.  But,
when  Icilius  the  father,  and  his  fon  were  called  upon  as
witnefles,  and  gave  an  account  of  what  related  to  them-
felves,  the  greateft  part  of  the  plebeians  could,  no  longer^
refrain  from  tears.  Romilius,  then,  made  his  defence;  and,
in  his  fpeech,  neither  courted  the  people,  nor  ufed  a  ftyle
adapted  to  his  fituation ;  but  expreffed  himfelf  in  haughty
terms,  exalting  the  power  of  the  magiftracy  he  had  been
inverted  with,  as  fubjed  to  no  account :  By  which,  he  in¬
flamed  the  refentment  of  the  citizens :  So  that,  when  they
came  to  give  their  votes,  every  one  of  the  tribes  condemned
him :  His  punifhment  was  a  fine,  which  amounted  to
40  ten  thoufand  ajjes .  And  Siccius  feems  to  me  not  to  have
done  this  without  fome  defign,  but  with  this  view  that  the
patricians  might  be  the  lefs  felicitous  to  fave  the  man,
and  commit  no  outrages  at  the  time  of  voting,  when
they  refleded  that  the  condemned  perfon  would  be
only  fined;  and,  alfo,  that  the  plebeians  might  be  the

4C*  Aff<roi^a.  fxv^toi.  h  I  have,  before,  money:  So  that,  10, coo  ajjes  will
fhewn  that  a  Roman  as  amounted  to  amount  to  32/.  §s.  10  d.
three  farthings  and  one  tenth  of  our

h  See  the  feventeenth  annotation  on  the  ninth  book.


more


224  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookX.

more  eager  for  the  pimifhment,  when  it  was  not  to  extend
either  to  the  death,  or  banifhment  of  a  confular  perfon.  A
few  days  after  the  condemnation  of  Romilius,  Veturius
was  likewife  condemned  ;  his  punifhment  was  alfo  pecu¬
niary,  and  amounted  to  one  41  half  more  than  the  other.

L.  The  prefen t  confuls  were  terrified  with  the  confide-
ration  of  thefe  punifhments,  and  attentive  to  prevent  the  like
from  being  infli&ed  on  themfelves  after  the  expiration  of
their  confulfhip :  So  that,  they  no  longer  concealed  their
refolutions,  but,  openly,  directed  all  their  meafures  to  the
intereft  of  the  people.  And,  firft,  they  paffed  a  law  in  an
affembly  of  the  people  by  centuries,  “  by  which  all  magiftrates
iC  are  impowered  to  fine  fuch,  as  are  guilty  of  any  diforderly,
<c  or  illegal  attempts  againft  their  authority  For,  till  then,
none  but  the  confuls  had  this  power.  However,  they  did
not  leave  the  fine  arbitrary  in  thofe,  who  fhould  impofe  it,
but  confined  the  greateft  to  42  two  oxen,  and  thirty  fheep.


41*  HjUioXiov  Sdtgx.  That  is,  15,000
ajfeS)  or  48  /.  8  s.  9  d.  of  our  money.
I  find  that  M.  *  *  *,  in  his  note  upon
this  pafifage,  and  alfo  le  Jay,  in  his
note,  make  10,000  affes  to  amount  to
no  more  than  500  French  livres,  which
do  not  make  25/.  of  our  money.  This
is  much  below  Arbuthnot’s  computa¬
tion,  and,  in  my  opinion,  a  great  deal
lefs  than  it  ought  to  be.  Is  feems  very
odd  that  our  author,  and  ;Livy  fhould
make  the  fine  of  Veturius  to  have
amounted  to  fo  much  more  than  That
of  Romilius,  who  was  certainly  the
molt  guilty ;  fince  it  was  he,  who  fent


Siccius,  and  his  veterans  to  deftruCtion.
This  induced  Sylburgius  to  read  r/xta-v,
inftead  of  iy. iqKiov .  By  this  correction,
the  fine  of  Veturius  will  come  to  no
more  than  5000  ajjh :  Bur,  as  both
Livy,  and  our  author  make  it  amount
to  15,000,  and,  as  all  the  manufcripts,
and  editions  concur  in  this  fum,  the
correction  of  Sylburgius  appears  too
violent.

42'  A vo  ftcocs  kxi  Tgictxcn'ix  srgsGxla.

I  find,  by  a  note  of  Sylburgius,  that
k  Briflonius  thinks  we  ought  to  read
JilQ  T&goQdlol  XOtl  TglOMOtlx  (Sous  :  His
reafon  is,  becaufe  'Gellius  fays  that  the


1 B.  iii.  c.  3.1 ,  k  In  Select,  ex  Jur.  antiq.  B.  i.  c.  5.


J  B.  xi.  c.  1.


And


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN ASSENSIS.  225

And  this  law  continued  long  in  force  among  the  Romans.
In  the  next  place,  they  referred  to  the  conhderation  of  the
fenate  the  laws,  which  the  tribunes  preffed  to  have  enacted,
that  fhould  bind  all  the  Romans,  and  be  obferved  for  ever.
Upon  this  occafion,  many  fpeeches  were  made  by  the  beft
men;  fome  tending  to  perfuade  the  fenate  to  grant  the
requeft  of  the  tribunes,  and  fome  to  rejedt  it :  However,  the
opinion  of  Titus  Romilius,  who,  contrary  to  the  expectation
both  of  the  patricians,  and  plebeians,  fupported  the  intereft
of  the  people  againft  the  oligarchy,  carried  it:  For  they
concluded  that  a  man,  who  had,  lately,  been  condemned
by  the  people,  would  both  think,  and  fay  every  thing  that
might  oppofe  the  defires  of  the  plebeians.  But  he,  riling
up,  when  called  upon  to  deliver  his  opinion  in  his  turn  (for


greateft  fine,  mult  a  fuprema ,  amounted
to  two  fheep,  and  thirty  oxen,  from
the  confideration  of  the  plenty  of  oxen
in  Italy,  and  the  fcarcity  of  fheep.
But,  if  this  was  the  only  reafon  Brif-
fonius  had  for  altering  the  text,  it  is
not  a  very  ftrong  one  ;  becaufe  Gel-
lius  contradidts  himfelf  three  lines
after :  For  he  there  fays  that,  by  the
Aterian  law,  which  is  the  very  law
Dionyfius  is  now  treating  of,  and  was
fo  called  from  Aulus  Aterius,  one  of
the  confuls  of  the  prefent  year,  the
perfon  fined  was  to  pay  ten  ajfes  for
every  fheep,  and  one  hundred  for
every  ox  •,  idcirco  pojlea  lege  Ateria
conftituti  funt  in  oves  fingulas  aeris  deni ,
in  boves  aeris  centeni.  Feftus,  I  know,
fays  the  fame  thing  under  the  word
Peculium.  Notwithstanding  their  au¬
thority,  we  find  not  a  tittle  of  this
commutation  in  the  Aterian  law,  as

Vol.  IV.


recited  by  our  author.  But,  if  there
was  fuch  an  article  in  that  law,  which
Dionyfius  has  omitted  (a  fuppofition,
by  the  way,  not  at  all  probable)  ftill
this  will  not  reconcile  thecontradidtion
in  Gellius,  and  Feftus ;  becaufe  the
latter  fays  that  the  law,  which  fixed
the  mult  a  fuprema  to  two  fheep,  and
thirty  oxen,  was  palled  in  the  confulfhip
of  Menenius  Lanatus,  and  Ceftius
Capitolinus,  which  coincides  with  the
year  of  Rome  302,  that  is,  two  years
after  the  Aterian  law  was  enadted,  by
which,  as  they  fay,  the  condemned
perfon  was  to  pay  ten  times  more  for
an  ox,  than  for  a  fheep :  So  that,  ac¬
cording  to  Gellius,  and  Feftus,  the
greateft  fine  amounted  to  two  fheep,
and  thirty  oxen,  at  the  fame  period  of
time,  when  an  ox  was  ten  times  as
dear  as  a  fheep.

Gg


he


226  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

he  was  of  the  middle  rank  both  for  dignity,  and  age)  fpoke
as  follows :

LI.  “  I  fhould  be  troublefome  to  you,  fathers,  if  I  related
c  what  I  have  fullered  from  the  people,  not  for  any  crime,
£  but  for  my  attachment  to  you,  when  you  yourfelves  are
£  fo  well  acquainted  with  it :  However,  I  find  myfelf  under
£  a  neceflity  of  mentioning  it,  to  the  end  you  may  be  allured
£  that  the  opinion  I  lhall  deliver,  which  I  think  will  prove
£  advantageous  to  the  commonwealth,  does  not  flow  from
£  a  defire  of  flattering  the  people,  whom  I  look  upon  as
£  my  enemy,  but  from  the  greateft  fincerity :  And  let  no
£  one  wonder,  if  I,  who  have  been  of  a  different  opinion
£  upon  many  occafions,  both  before,  and  when  I  was  conful,

£  am  now  changed  on  a  fudden ;  and  let  not  any  of  you
£  imagine  either  that  my  fentiments  were,  then,  ill  grounded,
£  or  that  I  have,  now,  altered  them  without  reafon:  For,
c  while  I  thought  your  party  ftrong,  fathers,  I  fupported
£  the  ariftocracy  as  it  was  my  duty,  and  defpifed  the  ple-
£  beians ;  but,  grown  wifer,  fince,  by  my  own  misfortunes ;

£  and  finding  by  a  dear  bought  experience  that  your  power
£  is  lefs  than  your  will ;  and  that,  yielding  to  neceflity,  you
£  have,  already,  fullered  many  who  defended  your  caufe,

£  to  be  dragged  to  deftrudlion  by  the  people ;  I  no  longer
£  entertain  the  fame  fentiments.  I  wiflh,  indeed,  that  thofe
£  misfortunes,  which  you  all  commiferate,  had  never  hap-
£  pened  either  to  myfelf,  or  to  my  collegue :  But,  fince  our
£  affair  is  over,  and  you  have  it  in  your  power  to  correct
£  thefe  things  for  the  future,  I  advife  you  to  confider  in

££  time


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARNAS  S  E  NS  IS.  227

u  time  by  what  means  the  fame  misfortunes  may  not  happen
a  to  others;  and  that  all  of  you  in  general,  and  every  one
“  in  particular,  will  adt  with  prudence  in  the  prefent  junc-
“  ture :  For  that  nation  is  beft  governed,  which  changes  her
a  conduct,  as  circumftances  change ;  and  that  man  is  the  beft
“  counfellor,  whofe  advice  is  influenced  not  by  his  private
u  enmity,  or  favor,  but  by  the  advantage  of  the  community  *
“  and  they  judge  beft  of  future  events,  who  make  the  exam-
“  pies  of  the  paft,  the  rules  of  their  judgement.  It  has  hap-
“  pened,  fathers,  that,  in  all  the  diiputes,  and  contefts  we  have
“  had  with  the  people,  the  difad  vantage  has  been  on  our  fide;
u  and  we  have  been  chaftifed  with  the  death,  the  ignominy,
“  and  the  banifhment  of  illuftrious  men.  And  what  greater
“  misfortune  can  happen  to  a  commonwealth,  than  to  lofe
u  her  greateft  men  by  degrees?  Thefe,  therefore,  I,  who
K  43  plead  your  caufe,  advife  you  to  fpare,  and  not  to  expofe
“  either  the  prefent  confuls  to  manifeft  danger,  and,  then,
Ci  defert  them  in  the  article  of  it,  or  any  others  from  whom
“  the  commonwealth  may  reap  the  leaft  advantage.  Upon
u  the  whole,  my  advice  is  that  you  chufe  embafladors,  and
“  fend  fome  of  them  to  the  Greek  cities  in  Italy,  and  others
“  to  Athens,  to  defire  the  Greeks  will  communicate  to  them
<c  their  beft  laws,  and  fuch  as  are  moft  adapted  to  our
“  cuftoms ;  and  that  the  embafladors  bring  thefe  laws  hither;

43-  Txluv  xv  cWncfciv  vy.iv.  This  paf-  trouble  the  reader  with  their  correc-
fage  is  certainly  corrupted  in  all  the  tions.  Mine  has  this  merit  at  leaft,
editions,  and  manufcripts ;  which  the  that  it  diiturbs  the  text  lets  than  any,
Latin  tranllators  have  been  fo  fenfible  and  fee  ms  connected  with  the  precede
of,  that  great  pains  have  been  taken  ing  fentence.
by  them  to  correct  it.  I  fhall  not

G  g  2  <c  and9


228  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookX.

“  and,  when  they  return,  that  the  confuls  propofe  to  the
£C  confederation  of  the  fenate  whom  to  eledt  as  legiflators,
“  with  what  power,  and  for  how  long  a  time;  and  to  de-
“  termine  every  thing  elfe  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  they  fhall
“  think  proper:  But  that  you  contend,  no  longer,  with  the
u  plebeians;  nor  accumulate  calamities  upon  yourfelves;
“  particularly,  fince  you  will  ftruggle  about  laws,  which,  if
<(  nothing  elfe,  give,  at  leaft,  a  fpecious  color  to  their 44  re-
£C  queft.”

LII.  After  Romilius  had  fpoken  in  this  manner,  the  two
confuls  fupported  his  opinion  by  long,  and  elaborate  fpeeches;
and  alfo  many  other  fenators :  So  that,  it  was  carried  by  a  ma¬
jority.  When  the  previous  decree  was  going  to  be  drawn  up,
Siccius,  a  tribune  who  had  cited  Romilius  to  be  tried  by  the
people,  rifing  up,  made  a  long  fpeech  in  his  commendation ;
and  praifed  him  for  changing  his  opinion,  and  for  not  prefer¬
ring  his  private  refentment  to  the  public  utility,  but  deliver¬
ing  with  lincerity  an  advice,  that  was  advantageous  to  the
commonwealth:  “  In  confederation  of  which,  fays  he,  I  make
<c  him  this  acknowledgement;  I  remit  the  fine,  and  am  re-
“  conciledto  him  from  this  time:  For  he  has  overcome  us
“  by  his  probity.”  This  was  confirmed  by  the  reft  of  the
tribunes.  However,  Romilius  would  not  fubmit  to  receive
this  favor ;  but,  having  returned  thanks  to  the  tribunes  for

44*  A^wo-fw?.  This  word  has  been  a  lations  of  this  paflage  abfolutely  un-
ibumbling  block  to  all  the  tranflators  :  intelligible.  I  have  rendered  it,  Re-
They  have  agreed  to  give  to  queji ,  which  is  the  common  acceptation

the  fenfe  ot  and  rendered  it  in  of  the  word  ;  too  common  indeed  to

their  refpedlive  languages,  Majejiy.  Hand  in  need  of  any  authorities  to
This  miftake  has  made  all  their  tranf-  fupport  it.


their


Book X.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN AS SENSIS.  229

their  defire  to  oblige  him,  he  faid  he  would  pay  the  fine,
becaufe  it  was,  already,  confecrated  to  the  gods ;  and  that  he
fhould  ad  contrary  both  tojuftice,  and  religion,  if  he  deprived
the  gods  of  what  the  law  had  given  them.  And  he  paid  it
accordingly.  The  previous  order  of  the  fenate  being  drawn
up,  and  afterwards  confirmed  by  the  people,  the  perfons
who  were  appointed  embafladors  to  receive  the  laws  from
the  Greeks,  were  Spurius  Poftumius,  Servius  Sulpicius,  and
Aulus  Manlius,  who  were  furniflied  with  gallies  having  three
tire  of  oars,  at  the  public  expence,  and  fuch  an  equipage,  as
was  fufficient  to  difplay  the  dignity  of  the  Roman  empire.
And  thus  the  year  ended.

LIII.  In  the  eighty  fecond  Olympiad,  at  which  Lycus  of
Lariffa  in  Thefialy  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium,  Chaere-
phanes  being  archon  at  Athens,  when  three  hundred  years
were  completed  fince  the  foundation  of  Rome,  and  during
the  confulfhip  of  Publius  Horatius,  and  Sextus  Quintilius,
Rome  was  affli&ed  with  a  peftilential  diftemper,  the  levereft
that  had  ever  been  known  before ;  by  which,  almoft  all  the
fervants  were  carried  off,  and  near  one  half  of  the  citizens,
the  phyficians  being  unable,  any  longer,  to  affift  the  fick,  or
their  domeftics,  and  friends  to  fupply  them  with  necefiaries :
For  thofe,  who  were  willing  to  relieve  the  calamities  of
others,  by  touching  the  bodies  of  the  difeafed,  and  continu¬
ing  with  them,  contra&ed  the  fame  diftemper  :  So  that,
many  houfes  became  defolate  for  want  of  people  to  attend  the
fick  :  One  of  the  greateft  grievances,  and  the  reafon  why  the
contagion  did  not  quickly  ceafe,  arofe  from  their  manner  of

throwing

o


23o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

throwing  out  the  dead :  For,  at  firft,  both  from  fhame,  and
the  plenty  they  had  of  every  thing  that  was  necefiary  for
burials,  they  burned  the  dead  bodies,  and  laid  them  in  the
ground ;  but,  at  laft,  fome,  through  a  neglect  of  decency,
and  others,  from  a  want  of  neceffaries,  threw  them  into  the
common  fhores,  and  many  more  caft  them  into  the  river,
which  occafioned  the  greateft  mifchief :  For  the  dead  bodies,
being  thrown  up  by  the  waves  upon  the  45  rocks,  and  fhores,
a  grievous  and  horrible  ftench  was  difperfed  by  the  wind;
and,  being  received  by  fuch  as  were  yet  in  health,  produced
a  quick  change  in  their  bodies.  For  the  fame  reafon,  the
water  brought  from  the  river  was,  no  longer,  fit  to  be  drunk,
partly  by  its  uncommon  fmell,  and  partly  by  its  caufing  a
bad  46  digeftion.  Thefe  calamities  were  not  confined  to  the


♦5*  n^of  rat  oixlots  nm  rat  jjTovtff.  Our
author  makes  here  a  difference  be¬
tween  arfou  and  govern  ;  the  firft  figni-
fying  a  high,  and  the  other  a  low,
fhore :  This  diftindtion  in  the  Greek
language,  though  not  conftantly  ob-
ferved,  is  as  old  as  m  Homer,  who
gives  to  ctttlti  the  epithet  of  e giJwoc ;
from  the  roaring  of  the  fea  at  the  foot
of  it,

AAAOt’  i7t  CtElcCW  f£t ^7TUV  l/.0CX£QV

Any  other  voice  but  that  of  Minerva,
I  imagine,  would  have  been  filenced
by  the  noife  of  the  waves.  As  for  tji'wv,
n  Homer  gives  that  name  to  the  fpace
between  two  promontories  ;

z<rA oizua'tjg

Hi'ovo?  sopa  pcMj>ov,  oaov  axgau.

4C*  Tm  wovqgxs  roij  ccva^oira;  &oietv  tjjj

01 II.  v.  f.  50.


I  am  forry  that  I  cannot  purfue
the  panegyrical  ftrain  in  fpeaking  of
le  Jay:  But  he  has  tranflated  this
paffage  in  fo  burlefk  a  manner  that
his  verfion  is  below  cenfure  :  He  has
faid,  ni  propres  a  bien  cuire  les  viandes
qidon  mettoit  bouillir.  The  reader  may
poffibly  be  furprifed  at  this  ridiculous
miftake,  but  I  can  explain  it.  He
found  in  Portus  (for  the  Greek  word
avoi$o<rets  could  not  poffibly  lead  him
into  it)  malam  cibi  concoEHonemfaciebat ;
and  his  misfortune  arofe  from  taking
this  conco Elion ,  not  for  the  concoction
performed  by  the  ftomach,  but  for
That  performed  in  a  kettle.
tnluDv  is  a  medicinal  term  of  no  very
difficult  comprehenfion,  and  fignifies
the  digeftion,  and  diftribution  of  nourifh-
ment  through  the  whole  body.

“II- 1-  $■  3  V


city


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICA  RNASSENSIS.  231

city  only,  but  extended  themfelves  to  the  country  alfo ;
where  the  hufbandmen  felt  the  feverity  of  the  diftemper  in
no  lefs  a  degree ;  the  infection  being  communicated  to  them
by  the  fheep,  and  the  other  cattle  they  were  always  tending.
While  the  people  had  any  hopes  in  the  afiiftance  of  Heaven,
they  all  had  recourfe  to  facrifices,  and  expiations:  And,
upon  this  occafion,  many  innovations,  and  pra&ices  unknown
to  the  Romans,  and  indecent  in  themfelves,  were  introduced
into  the  worfhip  of  the  gods ;  but,  when  they  found  thefe
fhewed  no  regard,  or  compaffion  to  their  fufferings,  they
abandoned,  even,  the  obfervance  of  religious  rites.  During
this  calamity,  Sextus  Quintilius,  one  of  the  confuls,  died,  as
alfo  Spurius  Furius,  who  had  been  appointed  in  his  room;
and  four  of  the  tribunes ;  together  with  many  worthy  fe-
nators.  While  the  city  was  afflidted  with  this  diftemper,
the  Aequi  prepared  to  make  war  upon  the  Romans,  and
fent  embaffadors  to  the  other  nations,  who  were  their  ene¬
mies,  to  ingage  them  to  enter  into  the  war;  but  they  had
not  time  to  draw  the  forces  out  of  their  cities :  For,  while
they  were  making  preparations,  they  were  attacked  with  the
fame  diftemper;  which  fpread  itfelf,  not  only,  over  the
country  of  the  Aequi,  but,  alfo,  over  Thofe  of  the  Volfci,
and  the  Sabines,  and  carried  off  great  numbers  of  their
people;  by  which  means,  it  happened  that,  as  the  lands
were  not  cultivated,  the  plague  was  followed  by  a  famine.
By  reafon,  therefore,  of  this  diftemper,  no  adtion,  either
military  or  civil,  worth  relating,  was  performed  by  the
Romans  under  thefe  confuls.


LIV..


232  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  X.

LIV.  The  following  year,  47  Caius  Menenius,  and  Publius
^  Ceftius  were  chofen  confuls,  when  the  diftemper,  intirely,
ceafed.  After  which,  public  facrifices  of  thankfgiving  were
performed  to  the  gods,  and  magnificent  games  celebrated  at
a  great  expence ;  the  people  palling  their  time,  as  may  well
be  fuppofed,  in  rejoicings,  and  feftivals :  And  thus  was  the
winter  employed.  In  the  beginning  of  the  fpring,  a  large
quantity  of  corn  was  brought  to  Rome  from  many  places ;
the  greateft  part  of  which  was  purchafed  with  the  public
money,  and  fome  imported  by  private  merchants :  For  the
people  laboured  under  a  great  want  of  provilions,  the  lands
having  lain  uncultivated  by  reafon  of  the  diftemper,  and  the
death  of  the  hulbandmen.  At  the  fame  time,  the  embaf-
fadors  arrived  from  Athens,  and  the  Greek  cities  in  Italy,
with  the  laws.  After  which,  the  tribunes  went  to  the  con-
fuls,  and  defired  them  to  appoint  the  legillators  purfuant  to
the  decree  of  the  fenate :  Thefe  knew  not  how  to  elude  their
folicitations,  and  importunities ;  but,  as  they  difliked  the
thing,  and  were  unwilling  the  ariftocracy  fhould  be  fubverted
during  their  confulfhip,  they  had  recourfe  to  a  fpecious  pre¬
tence,  by  telling  them  that  the  election  of  magiftrates  being
at  hand,  they  “were  under  an  obligation,  firft,  to  appoint  the
confuls ;  which  they  would  foon  do ;  and,  after  thefe  were
appointed,  they  faid,  they  would,  in  conjunction  with  them,

47*  Toaos  Mmvios.  °  Livy,  and  the  called  by  p  Livy.  In  the  Faft'i  confulares
Fajli  confulares  call  this  conful,  Caius  :  of  Petavius,  he  is  called  Ceftius ,  as  he
Thefe  1  have  followed  inftead  of  the  is  alfo  by  Feftus  in  the  paffage  I  quot-
editions,  which  call  him  .Lucius.  ed  from  him  in  the  forty  fecond  anno-

4s*  Itfios.  So  this  conful  is  alfo  tation  on  this  book.

•B,  iii.  c.  32.  Pld.  ib.


refer


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  AR  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  233

refer  to  the  fenate  the  confideration,  relating  to  the  legifta-
tors.  The  tribunes'  confenting  to  this,  they  gave  notice  of
the  eledion  much  fooner  than  ufual,  and  appointed  Appius
Claudius,  and  Titus  Genucius,  confuls.  Alter  which,  lay¬
ing  afide  all  attention  to  the  affairs  of  the  public,  as  if  that
care  was  now  devolved  upon  others,  they  paid,  no  longer,
any  regard  to  the  tribunes ;  but  determined  to  withdraw
themfelves,  under  this  color,  from  their  importunities,  during
the  remainder  of  their  confulfhip.  And  it  happened  that
one  of  them,  namely  Menenius,  was  feized  with  fome  illnefs
of  long  continuance.  Some  gave  out  that  grief,  and  dejec¬
tion  of  mind  had  brought  on  him  a  confumption  hard  to  be
removed.  Ceftiuslaid  hold  on  this  occalion,  pretending  he
could  do  nothing  alone ;  and  eluded  the  folicitations  of  the
tribunes  by  fending  them  to  the  new  confuls.  The  tribunes,
deftitute  of  all  other  relief,  were  forced  to  have  recourfe  to
Appius,  and  his  collegue,  who  had  not  yet  entered  upon
their  magiftracy,  and  folicited  them  fometimes  in  the  pre¬
fence  of  the  people,  and  fometimes  alone.  At  laft,  they
overcame  them,  by  difplaying  great  hopes  of  honor,  and
power,  if  they  would  efpoufe  the  intereft  of  the  people :
For  Appius  was  deftrous  of  a  new  magiftracy,  in  order  to
conftitute  fuch  laws  for  his  country,  as  fhould  produce
unanimity  and  peace ;  and  to  teach  all  his  fellow-citizens,
by  his  own  example,  to  look  upon  the  commonwealth  as
one  body.  However,  when  he  was,  adually,  invefted  with
this  great  magiftracy,  he  did  not  preferve  his  probity  ^  but
corrupted  with  the  greatnefs  of  his  power,  was,  at  laft,
Vol.  IV.  H  h  carried


234  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.

carried  away  with  an  ambition  to  perpetuate  it ;  and  was
very  near  running  into  tyranny :  All  which  I  fhall  relate  in
its  place.

LV.  At  that  time,  he  took  thofe  refolutions  with  the

the  greateft  ftncerity;  and,  having  prevailed  upon  his  col-

legue  to  enter  into  the  fame,  and  the  tribunes,  often,  calling

upon  Appius  to  be  prefent  at  the  aflemblies  of  the  people,

he  appeared  there,  and  made  many  fpeeches  to  them  full  of

benevolence ;  the  fum  of  which  was,  that  both  he,  and  his

%

collegue  were  intirely  of  opinion  that  legiflators  ought  to
be  appointed,  and  an  end  put  to  the  contefts  of  the  citizens,
concerning  the  eftablifhment  of  equal  rights ;  and  thefe  they
declared  to  be  their  fentiments :  However,  as  they  had  not,
yet,  entered  upon  the  magiftracy,  they  faid,  they  had  no
power  to  appoint  the  legiflators,  but  would  be  fo  far  from
oppoftng  Menenius,  and  his  collegue  in  their  execution  of
the  orders  of  the  fenate,  that  they  would  not  only  aflift
them,  but  return  them  great  thanks  for  it :  And,  if  they
declined  it,  pretending  that,  new  magiftrates  being  appointed,
it  was  not  lawful  for  them  to  create  others  with  confular
power,  after  the  former  had,  already,  been  ele<fted  to  it,  they
faid  that,  as  far  as  this  related  to  themfelves,  they  would
give  them  no  oppofltion :  For  they  were  willing  to  refign
the  confulfhip  to  fuch  magiftrates,  as  fhould  be  appointed
in  their  room,  provided  the  fenate  fhould  approve  of  it.
The  people  applauded  them  for  thefe  fentiments;  and,
running  in  a  body  to  the  fenate  houfe,  Ceftius  was  forced
to  aflemble  the  fenate  alone  (Menenius  being  unable  to  attend

by


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN ASSENS  IS.  235

by  reafon  of  his  ficknefs)  and  propofed  to  them  the  confi-
deration  of  the  laws.  Many  fpeeches  were  made  upon  this
occafion  alfo,  both  by  thofe,  who  contended  that  the  com¬
monwealth  ought  to  be  governed  by  laws,  and  by  thofe,
who  advifed  to  adhere  to  the  cuftoms  of  their  anceftors.
However,  the  opinion  of  the  confuls  eled  carried  it ;  which
opinion  was  delivered  by  Appius  Claudius,  who  was  firft
called  upon,  that  ten  perfons  be  chofen  out  of  the  moft
diftinguifhed  fenators;  that  thefe  govern  during  one  year
from  the  day  of  their  election;  and  be  invefted  with  the
whole  power  of  the  commonwealth,  in  as  ample  a  manner
as  the  confuls,  and,  before  them,  the  kings,  enjoyed  it ;  and
that  all  the  other  magiftracies  be  abrogated  during  the  go¬
vernment  of  thefe  decemvirs;  that  thefe  feled,  as  well  out
of  the  Roman  cuftoms,  as  out  of  the  Greek  laws  brought
by  the  embaffadors,  the  beft  inftitutions,  and  fuch  as  are
advantageous  to  the  Roman  commonwealth,  and  form
them  into  a  body  of  laws ;  that  thefe  laws,  after  they  have
been  approved  of  by  the  fenate,  and  confirmed  by  the  people,
be  eftablifhed  for  a  perpetuity ;  and  that  all  future  magi-
ftrates  fhall  determine  private  contefts,  and  adminifter
the  affairs  of  the  public,  according  to  thefe  laws.

LVI.  The  tribunes,  having  received  this  decree  from  the
fenate,  went  to  the  affembly  of  the  people ;  and,  having
read  it,  gave  great  commendations  both  to  the  fenate,  and
to  Appius,  who  had  propofed  it:  And,  when  the  time
came  for  the  election  of  magiftrates,  the  tribunes  affembled
the  people,  and  defired  the  confuls  eled  to  come,  and  per-

H  h  2  form


Book  X.


236  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES,  etc.

form  the  promifes  they  had  made  to  them ;  and  they  ap¬
pearing,  abdicated  their  magiftracy ;  upon  which,  the  people
commended,  and  admired  them  ;  and,  when  they  were  to
chufe  legiflators,  named  them  firft;  and  the  perfons  ap¬
pointed  in  an  affembly  by  centuries  were  Appius  Claudius,
and  Titus  Genucius,  who  had  been  chofen  confuls  for  the
following  year ;  Publius  Ceftius,  then  conful ;  Spurius  Po-
ftumius,  Servius  Sulpicius,  and  Aulus  Manlius,  who  had
brought  the  laws  from  the  Greeks;  and  Titus  Romilius,
who  having,  a  few  years  before,  been  conful,  was  con¬
demned  by  the  people  upon  a  charge  brought  againfl:  him
by  Siccius,  and  was  now  chofen  in  confideration  of  the
popular  advice,  of  which  he  feemed  the  author ;  and
with  thefe,  Caius  Julius,  Titus  Veturius,  and  Publius
Horatius,  all  confular  fenators.  At  the  fame  time,  the
authority  of  the  tribunes,  aediles,  quaeftors,  and  of  all
the  other  magiftracies  inftituted  by  their  anceftors,  was
abrogated.

LVII.  The  following  year,  the  legiflators  took  upon
themfelves  the  adminiftration  of  affairs,  and  eftablifhed  this
form  of  government:  One  of  them  had  the  rods,  and  the
other  enfigns  of  the  confular  power ;  aflembled  the  fenate  ;
declared  their  refolutions ;  and  performed  all  the  other
functions  belonging  to  the  head  of  the  commonwealth  :
While  the  reft,  contracting  their  invidious  power  within  a
more  popular  compafs,  differed  in  their  appearance  but
little  from  the  other  citizens :  After  that,  another  fucceed-
ed  to  the  exercife  of  this  power.  And  thus  they  governed

fuc-


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  ENS  I  S.  237
49  fucceffively,  during  the  50  number  of  days  they  had  agreed
upon,  till  the  year  expired.  But  all  of  them  fate  in  the  tri¬
bunal  early  in  the  morning,  and  took  cognizance  of  all  caufes,
both  private  and  public,  and  alfo  of  the  complaints,  that  were
brought  againfi:  the  fubjeffs,  and  allies  of  the  Romans,  and
againft  thofe,  who  gave  reafon  to  doubt  of  their  obedience
to  them ;  every  one  of  which  they  examined  with  great
moderation,  and  juftice.  And  the  Roman  commonwealth
feemed,  that  year,  to  be  exceedingly  well  governed  by  the
decemvirs.  But,  above  all,  they  were  commended  for  their
care  of  the  plebeians,  and  for  oppoflng  every  kind  of  violence,
that  was  offered  to  the  weaker  fort :  And  the  generality  of
the  people  faid  that  the  commonwealth  flood,  no  longer,  in
need  of  tribunes,  or  of  any  other  magiftracies,  while  ali
affairs  were  managed  with  prudence  by  this  lingle  regency ;
of  which  Appius  was  looked  upon  as  the  chief ;  and  the
people  gave  to  him  the  praife  flowing  from  the  conduct  of
the  whole  decemvirate:  For  he  gained  the  reputation  of
probity,  not  only,  by  thofe  things,  which  he  did  in  concert
with  his  collegues  from  the  beft  motives,  but  much  more

49-  e*  Jf.  I  know  nothing  *  Livy  fays  that  each  of  the  decemvirs

of  this  word-,  neither  have  I  ever  met  (whom  he  calls  upon  that  occafion,
with  it  before-,  though  it  (lands  in  all  praefettum  juris )  governed  one  day;
the  editions,  and  manufcripts,  except  during  which,  he  was  attended  with
the  Vatican,  which  has  ex  we^vop j?.  the  twelve  fafces,. and  each  of  the  other
This  expreffion,  though  very  uncom-  nine  with  an  officer,  called  by  the
mon,  yet,  when  joined  to  Romans,  Accenjus ;  Decitno  die  jus

may  fignify  a  cujlomary  fuccejfion.  The  populo  Jinguli  reddebant.  eo  die  penes
fenfe  feems  to  require  zk  praefedtum  juris  fafces  duodecim  erant :

but  fupplies  that.  collegis  novem  Jinguli  accenfi  appare-

5°*  E/j  -m#  fa agifaov.  bant.

SB,  iii.  c.  33.


\


23B  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookX.
by  thofe,  that  were  owing  to  his  perfonal  behaviour,  with
regard  to  his  falutations,  his  obliging  affability,  and  the  other
favors  he  conferred  upon  the  poorer  fort.  The  decemvirs,
having  formed  a  body  of  laws,  both  from  Thofe  of  the
Greeks,  and  their  own  unwritten  cuftoms,  propofed  them
to  the  confideration  of  the  public  in  ten  tables ;  and,  by
receiving  every  amendment  fuggefted  by  private  perfons,
endeavoured  to  correCt  them  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  give
a  general  fatisfaCtion.  They  confulted  long  in  public  with
the  bed  men  concerning  thefe  laws,  and  examined  them
with  the  greateft  attention;  and,  when  they  were  fatisfied
with  them,  they,  firft,  affembled  the  fenate,  and  no  new
objections  being  made  to  the  laws,  they  procured  a  previous
vote  of  that  affembly  in  approbation  of  them  :  After  which,
they  convened  the  people  by  centuries,  and  the  pontifs,  the
augurs,  and  the  reft  of  the  priefts  being  prefent,  and  having
directed  the  performance  of  the  cuftomary  rites,  they  gave
the  centuries  their  votes.  And  thefe  laws  being,  alfo,  con¬
firmed  by  the  people,  they  caufed  them  to  be  ingraved  on
brazen  pillars,  and  placed  them  in  order  in  the  moft  con-
fpicuous  part  of  the  forum.  Then,  as  the  time  of  their
magiftracy  was  near  expiring,  they  affembled  the  fenate,
and  propofed  to  their  confideration  what  kind  of  magiftrates
fhould  be  chofen  at  the  next  election.

LVIII.  After  a  long  debate,  it  was  carried  that  a  decem-
virate  fhould,  again,  be  invefted  with  the  fupreme  power:
For  this  collection  of  laws  feemed  to  be  imperfeCt,  by  reafon
of  the  fhortnefs  of  the  time,  in  which  they  had  been  compiled,

and


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN AS  SE NS  I  S.  239

and  fome  magiftracy,  abfolute  in  power,'  feemed  neceflary
to  compel  the  unwilling  to  obferve  thofe  laws,  that  were
already  enadted.  But  the  chief  motive,  that  induced  the
fenate  to  give  the  preference  to  the  decemvirate,  was  the
fuppreffion  of  the  tribunitian  power,  which  they  defired
above  all  things.  This  was  the  refult  of  their  public  conful-
tations ;  but,  in  private,  the  leading  men  of  the  fenate  de¬
termined  to  make  intereft  for  this  magiftracy,  from  an  ap~
prehenfion  that  the  turbulent,  if  invefted  with  fuch  a  power,
might  occafion  fome  great  mifchief.  The  people  having,
cheerfully,  received  the  refolutions  of  the  fenate,  and  con¬
firmed  them  with  the  greateft  alacrity,  the  decemvirs  them-
felves  appointed  a  day  for  the  election ;  and  thofe  among
the  patricians,  who  were  the  moft  diftinguifhed  both  for
their  dignity,  and  age,  flood  candidates  for  this  magiftracy.
Upon  this  occafion,  Appius,  who  was  the  chief  of  that
decemvirate,  received  great  praife  from  the  whole  afiembly,
and  all  the  plebeians  defired  to  continue  him  in  the  magi¬
ftracy,  fince  no  man  had  governed  better  than  himfelf;
But  he  pretended,  at  firft,  to  refufe  it,  and  defired  they
would  difcharge  him  from  a  fervice,  that  was  both  trouble-
fome  and  invidious.  But,  at  laft,  when  they  all  prefled  him,
he,  not  only,  fubmitted  to  fue  for  it  himfelf,  but,  accufing
the  moft  worthy  of  thofe,  who  flood  candidates  with  him,
of  being  ill  difpofed  to  him  through  envy,  he  openly  folicited
in  favor  of  his  friends:  So  that,  he  was,  again,  chofen  legis¬
lator  by  the  centuries ;  and  with  him  Quintus  Fabius,  fur-
named  Vibulanus,  who  had  been  thrice  conful,  a  man


irre-


Book  X.


240  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

irreprehenfible  till  that  time,  and  adorned  with  every  virtue :
Thefe  patricians,  whom  he  favoured,  werealfo  chofen,  Marcus
Cornelius,  Marcus  Sergius,  Lucius  Minucius,  Titus  Antonius,
and  Manius  Rabulejus,  men  of  no  great  note  ;  and,  of  the
plebeians,  Quintus  Poetilius,  Caefo  Duillius,  and  Spurius
Oppius ;  for  thefe  alfo  were  taken  in  by  Appius,  in  order  to
flatter  the  plebeians :  His  pretence  was  that,  as  only  one
magiftracy  was  appointed  to  govern  all  the  citizens,  it  was
juft  that  the  people  fhould  likewife  have  fome  fhare  in  it.
Thus  Appius,  whofe  reputation  was  raifed  by  all  thefe  things,
and  who  was  looked  upon  as  fuperior  both  to  their  kings,
and  confuls,  received,  again,  this  magiftracy  for  the  follow¬
ing  year :  Thefe  were  the  tranfa&ions  of  the  Romans  under
that  decemvirate,  nothing  elfe  having  happened  worth  re¬
lating.

LIX.  The  year  after,  Appius,  and  his  collegues  having
received  the  confular  power  on  the  51  ides  of  May  (for  the
Romans  computed  their  months  according  to  the  courfe  of
the  moon,  and  the  full  moon  coincided  with  the  ides)  the
firft  ftep  they  took  was  to  enter  into  an  agreement,  without
the  privity  of  the  people,  which  they  confirmed  by  their
oaths,  not  to  oppofe  one  another  in  any  thing ;  that,  what¬
ever  was  propofed  of  by  any  one  of  them,  all  the  reft  fhould
fupport  it;  that  they  fhould  hold  their  magiftracy  during
their  lives,  and  admit  no  other  perfon  into  the  adminiftration ;

51*  Mai*/?.  This  was  the  day  Maiae  folennes  ineundis  magijiratibus

then  appointed  for  the  magiftrates  to  erant.
enter  upon  their  office.  r  Idus  turn

rLivy,  B.  iii.  c.  36.


that


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  HA LIC  A R N  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  241

that  all  fhould  enjoy  the  fame  honors,  and  the  fame  power ;
and  that  they  would  feldom  make  ufe  of  the  votes  either  of
the  lenate,  or  people,  and  only  in  thofe  things,  that  were  ab-
folutely  neceffary ;  but  tranfact  the  greateft  part  of  affairs  by
their  own  authority.  When  the  day  was  come,  on  which
they  were  to  enter  upon  their  magiftracy,  after  they  had
offered  up  the  ufual  facrifices  to  the  gods  (for  the  Romans
look  upon  this  day  as  holy,  and  particularly  make  it  a  point
of  religion  neither  to  hear,  nor  fee  any  thing  difagreeable
on  that  day)  they  appeared  in  public  early  in  the  morning,
each  of  them  being  attended  with  all  the  enfigns  of  royalty.
When  the  people  law  they,  no  longer,  preferved  the  fame
popular,  and  modeft  appearance  in  the  ufe  of  their  power,
nor  took  the  enfigns  of  royalty,  as  before,  by  turns,  they
were  greatly  afflidted,  and  call  down:  They  were  terrified
with  the  axes  fixed  to  the  rods,  which  were  borne  by  the
lidtors,  twelve  of  whom  preceded  each  of  the  decemvirs,
and  with  blows  forced  the  people  to  make  way,  as  had  been
formerly  pradtifed  under  the  kings ;  but  this  cuftom  was
abolifhed  prefently  after  their  expulfion  by  Publius  Valerius,
a  popular  man,  who  fucceeded  to  their  power;  and  all  the
confuls  after  him,  following  the  good  example  he  had  fet
them,  would  never,  from  that  time,  fuffer  the  axes  to  be
fixed  to  the  rods,  unlefs  they  went  out  of  the  city  either  to
command  the  armies,  or  upon  any  other  occafion  ;  but,
when  they  were  in  the  field,  or  went  to  infpedt  the  affairs
of  thofe,  who  were  fubjedt  to  the  Romans,  the  axes  were
added  to  the  rods,  to  the  end  that  this  fight  might  terrify
Vol.  IV.  I  i  their


242  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  X.
their  enemies,  or  fubjedts,  but  never  give  offence  to  the
citizens.

LX.  When,  therefore,  they  all  faw  this,  which  was  con-
lidered  as  a  mark  of  the  kingly  power,  they  were,  as  I  faid,
greatly  terrified,  and  concluded  they  had  loft  their  liberty,
and  chofen  ten  kings  inftead  of  one.  The  decemvirs  having,
by  this  means,  ftruck  terror  into  the  multitude,  and  refolved
to  make  that  terror  the  fupport  of  their  future  government,
each  of  them  formed  a  fadlion  confifting  of  the  moft
daring  among  the  youth,  and  of  thofe,  who  were  moft
attached  to  their  perfons.  That  moft  men  of  defperate
fortunes,  and  low  condition  fhould  fhew  themfelves  the
flatterers  of  a  tyrannical  power,  and  prefer  their  private
advantages  to  the  public  good,  is  neither  extraordinary,  nor
furprifing;  but  that  there  fhould  be  found  many,  even
among  the  patricians,  qualified  both  by  their  fortune,  and
birth  to  entertain  fentiments  of  fome  elevation,  who  could
fubmit  to  join  with  the  decemvirs  in  fubverting  the  liberty
of  their  country,  This  every  one  muft  wonder  at,  who  con-
fiders  that  thefe  decemvirs  governed  the  commonwealth
with  great  licentioufnefs,  indulging  every  paflion,  that  fub-
dues  mankind,  and  difregarding  both  the  fenate,  and  people ;
affirming  to  themfelves  to  be  not  only  the  legiflators,  but
the  judges,  of  all  laws ;  putting  many  of  the  citizens  to
death,  and  depriving  many  others  of  their  fortunes,  contrary
to  juftice:  However,  to  give  a  color  to  their  illegal,  and
cruel  proceedings,  they  appointed  tribunals  to  try  every  caufe ;
but  the  accufers,  who  were  chofen  from  among  the  inftru-

ments


Book  X.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  243

ments  of  their  tyranny,  were  fuborned  by  the  decemvirs
themfelves,  and  the  tribunals  filled  with  men  of  their  own
fa&ion,  who  gratified  one  another  by  turns  in  the  decifion
of  thofe  caufes ;  and  many,  not  of  the  lead:  confequence,  the
decemvirs  themfelves  heard :  So  that,  thofe  fuitors,  who  had
the  leaf!:  right,  were  under  a  neceffity  of  entering  into  thefe
factions,  fince  they  could  not,  otherwife,  be  fecure  of  fuccefs :
And,  in  time,  the  corrupted,  and  infe&ed  became  more
numerous  than  the  incorrupt:  For  thofe,  who  were  dif-
fatisfied  with  the  conduct  of  the  decemvirs,  would  not  fo
much  as  ftay  in  the  city ;  but  retired  to  the  country,  in  order
to  wait  for  the  election  of  magiftrates,  from  an  expe&ation
that  the  decemvirs  would  refign  their  power  after  the  year
was  expired,  and  appoint  other  magiftrates.  But  Appius,
and  his  collegues,  having  caufed  the  remaining  laws  to  be
infcribed  on  two  tables,  added  them  to  Thofe  they  had,
before,  publiftied  :  Among  the  former  there  was  this  law,
“  That sz  it  fhould  not  be  lawful  for  the  patricians  to  contract
“  marriages  with  the  plebeians which  law  they  inferted
for  no  other  reafon,  in  my  opinion,  than  to  prevent  the  two
orders  from  uniting,  and  mixing  together  by  reciprocal
marriages,  and  a  communication  of  affinity:  Even  when
the  time  for  the  ele&ion  of  magiftrates  was  come,  they  bid
adieu  both  to  the  ancient  cuftoms,  and  to  the  new  laws ;

5*-  m»j  t%<Hvou  r 01$  vralf/xtotf,  etc.  I  pages,  fince  our  author  fays  he  there
fhall  defer  fpeaking  of  the  laws  of  the  gave  an  account  of  thefe  laws,  and
twelve  tables  till  I  come  to  that  un-  compared  them  with  Thofe  of  the
fortunate  hiatus  in  the  next  book,  Greeks,
which  mult  have  confided  of  many

li  2


and,


244  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES,  etc.  BookX.

and,  without  the  appointment  either  of  the  fenate,  or  of  the
people,  they  continued  in  the  fame  magiftracy.

LXI.  After  the  expiration  of  this  year,  the  eighty  third
Olympiad  was  celebrated ;  at  which  Crifo  of  Himera  won
the  prize  of  the  ftadium,  Philifcus  being  archon  at  Athens,
while,  at  Rome,  Appius  Claudius,  who  was  at  the  head  of
the  decemvirate  for  the  third  year  fucceffively,  retained  the
confular  power;  and  the  other  decemvirs,  who  had  governed
jointly  with  him  the  year  before,  continued  in  the  fame  ma¬
giftracy  for  the  fecond  time.


The  end  of  the  Tenth  book.


THE


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES

O  F


DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.


THE  ELEVENTH  BOOK.

I“N  the  eighty  third  Olympiad,  at  which  Crifo  of  Himera
won  the  prize  of  the  fladium,  Philifcus  being  archon  at
Athens,  the  Romans  abolifhed  the  decemvirate,  after  it
had  governed  the  commonwealth  three  years.  I  fhall  now
endeavour  to  relate  from  the  beginning  in  what  manner
they  attempted  to  extirpate  a  domination,  by  this  time,
deeply  rooted ;  who  the  leaders  were  in  the  caufe  of  liberty ;
and  what  reafons,  and  motives  induced  them  to  undertake
it.  I  look  upon  it  that  knowledge  of  this  kind  is  neceflary,
and  does  honor  indeed  to  all  men,  but  particularly  to  thofe,
who  are  employed  either  in  philofophical  fpeculations,  or
the  adminiftration  of  civil  affairs:  For  the  generality  of
mankind  are  not  fatisfied  with  learning  this  alone  from


246  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.
hiftory,  that,  in  1  the  Perfian  war  (for  example)  the  Athe¬
nians,  in  conjunction  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  overcame
the  Barbarian,  whofe  forces  amounted  to  three  millions,  in
two  battles  at  fea,  and  in  one  at  land,  when  the  army  of  the
former,  with  their  allies,  did  not  exceed  one  hundred  and
ten  thoufand :  But  they  require,  alfo,  to  be  informed  of  the
places,  where  thofe  battles  were  fought ;  of  the  caufes,  that
enabled  them  to  perform  fuch  wonderful,  and  aftonifhing
exploits;  who  were  the  commanders  of  the  Greek,  and
Barbarian  armies,  and  to  be  unacquainted  with  no  one  cir-
cumftance,  as  I  may  fay,  that  happened  in  thofe  ingage-
ments :  For  the  minds  of  all  men  are  pleafed  with  being
conduced  by  narrations  to  fads,  and  not  only  with  hearing
what  is  related,  but,  alfo,  with  feeing  what  is  aCted.  In
the  fame  manner,  when  they  read  an  account  of  civil  tranf-
adions,  they  are  not  fatisfied  with  knowing  only  the  prin-


Annotations  on  the  Eleventh  Book.


i*  Tov  TLspo’ikov  ziro\2jtAov.  See  the
twenty  fourth  annotation  on  the  fixth
book.  The  reader,  by  this  time,  may
not  be  furprifed  to  find  that  the  two
French  tranfiators  did  not  know  how
many  [AvgiotJe;  amounted  to ;

but  he  may  be  furprifed  to  find  they
have  rendered,  tricks  centena  millia ,  in
the  Latin  tranfiators,  trois  cents  mille
homines.  TgHXKomou  or  ten

thoufand,  multiplied  by  three  hundred,
make  three  millions ;  and  tricks  cen¬
tena  millia ,  or  one  hundred  thoufand,
multiplied  by  thirty,  make  the  fame


fum.  They  had  both  the  ill  luck  to
tranfiate  tricks ,  three  times ,  not  thirty
times ,  as  they  ought  to  have  rendered
it.  Our  author  feems  to  have  taken
the  number  of  which  the  Perfian  army
confifted,  from  the  epitaph,  which
a  Herodotus  fays  was  infcribed  on  the
monument  of  the  four  thoufand  Pelo-
ponnefians,  who  loft  their  lives  fo
glorioufiy  at  Thermopylae  in  defend¬
ing  that  pafs  againfi:  the  Perfians  :

MIPIAS1N  zpolt  TJJcFfi  TP1HK02IAI2  [y,x^oylo
Ek  IU\Q7rovyoc<n \  yj'hiv.Sis  rilo^ec.


3  In  Polym.  c.  228.


cipal


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALI CA RN  A  S  S E N  S I  S.  247

cipal  points,  and  the  events  of  thofe  tranfadlions,  as,  for
inftance,  that  the  2  Athenians  fuffered  the  Lacedaemonians


z‘  On  <rvvs%c0(>t;crMv  A0»j vaiot  Aaxe Sou-
povtoi;,  etc.  After  Ly lander  had  de¬
stroyed  the  Athenian  fleet  at  Aegos
potamos,  he  failed  to  the  port  of  Pi¬
raeeus,  and  blocked  up  Athens  by  fea,
with  one  hundred  and  fifty  Ships,
while  the  b  Lacedaemonians,  with  all
the  forces  of  Peloponnefus  except
Thofe  of  the  Argivi,  invefted  the  city
by  land,  incamping  in  the  gymnafium
of  the  academy.  This  blocade  lading
a  confiderable  time,  the  Athenians,
being  oppreffed  with  famine,  of  which
many  had  died,  fent  to  Agis,  one  of
the  Lacedaemonian  kings,  who  com¬
manded  a  body  of  forces  at  Decelia,
to  treat  of  a  peace  :  The  terms  they
offered,  were  to  enter  into  an  alliance
with  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  to  pre-
ferve  the  port  of  Piraeeus,  and  the
walls  that  lead  to  that  port  from  the
city  of  Athens,  called  by  them,
t«x*i •  But  Agis  alledged  that  he  had
no  power  to  treat  with  their  embaffa-
dors,  and  fent  them  to  Sparta.  While
they  were  on  their  way  thither,  and
before  they  entered  the  territories  of
the  Lacedaemonians,  the  ephori,  hear¬
ing  they  had  brought  no  other  propo-
fals  than  Thofe  they  had  offered  to
Agis,  ordered  them  to  depart  •,  and,  if
they  defired  peace,  to  confider  better,
and  return.  Upon  this,  the  Athenians
fentTheramenes  to  Ly  lander  to  found
his  intentions  concerning  their  fate.
Theramenes  ftaid  above  three  months
with  Lyfander  in  expectation  that  the
Athenians,  when  all  their  provifions


were  fpent,  would  hear  reafon.  In  the
fourth  month  he  returned,  and  told
the  Athenians  that  Lyfander  had  de¬
tained  him  fo  long,  and  ordered  him
to  go  to  Sparta,  lince  the  Ephori,  not
he,  had  the  power  to  grant  what  was
defired.  The  Athenians  then  fent  him,
and  nine  others  to  Sparta,  with  full
power  to  conclude  a  peace.  The
Ephori,  being  informed  of  their  ar¬
rival  with  thefe  powers,  called  an  af-
fembly  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  and
their  allies  :  Of  thefe  the  Corinthians,
and  Thebans,  with  feveral  others,
preffed,  with  great  vehemence,  that
Athens  might  be  totally  deffroyed ;
but  the  Lacedaemonians  generoufly
faid  they  would  not  inflave  a  people,
who  had  done  fo  great  fervice  to
Greece  in  the  greateft  dangers.  They
made  peace,  therefore,  with  the  Athe¬
nians  upon  thefe  terms  ^  that  the  latter
lhould  demolifh  the  long  walls,  toge¬
ther  with  the  port  of  Piraeeus ;  de¬
liver  up  all  their  fhips  except  twelve  •>
reftore  their  exiles ;  have  the  fame
friends,  and  enemies  with  the  Lace¬
daemonians,  and  follow  them  by  fea,
and  land,  whitherfoever  they  lhould
lead  them.  Thefe  are  the  dreadful
conditions  our  author  alludes  to  •,  and
this  is  the  peace,  which  put  an  end  to
the  Peloponnefian  war.  In  confe-
quence  of  this  peace,  the  Athenians
delivered  up  to  c  Lyfander  all  their
fhips  except  twelve,  and  the  long  walls,
on  the  fixteenth  of  the  month  d  Muny-
chion,  about  the  eighteenth  of  April.


b  Xenoph.  EXAw*.  B.  ii.  p.  458.  Edit.  ofLeunclav.  c  Plutarch,  Life  of  Lyfand,
d  Petav.  part.  prim.  B.  iii.


to


248  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

to  demolifti  the  walls  of  their  city  ;  to  deftroy  their  fhips ;
to  garrifon  their  citadel,  and,  inftead  of  a  democracy,  which
was  their  eftablifhed  ronn  of  government,  to  veft  the  admi-
niftration  in  an  oligarchy,  without  fo  much  as  fighting  a
battle  with  them :  But  they  will,  prefen tly,  want  to  be  in¬
formed  of  the  neceffity,  that  reduced  them  to  fubmit  to
fuch  dreadful,  and  miferable  calamities ;  what  the  reafons
were,  that  perfuaded  them  to  it ;  and  by  whom  thofe  reafons
were  urged ;  and  of  every  circumftance,  with  which  thofe
tranfa&ions  were  attended.  Men,  who  are  ingaged  in  the
management  of  civil  affairs,  among  whom  I  place  even  thofe
philofophers,  who  look  upon  philofophy  to  confift  in  the
exercife  of  line  atftions,  rather  than  in  That  of  fine  difcourfes,
have  this  in  common  with  the  reft  of  mankind,  that  they


The  year,  in  which  this  peace  was
made,  is  furely  afcertained,  becaufe
e  Xenophon  fays  that  the  Olympiad
was  celebrated  the  year  after,  in  which
year  Pythodorus  was  archon  at  Athens,
though  not  named  by  the  Athenians,
becaufe  he  was  chofen  during  the  oli¬
garchy,  they  calling  that  year  an  an¬
archy  :  In  that  year  alfo,  he  fays,  there
happened  an  eclipfe  of  the  fun.  All
thefe  chara&ers  coincide  with  the  firft
■year  of  the  ninety  fourth  Olympiad,
when  Pythodorus,  as  appears  by  the
fucceffion  of  the  Athenian  archons,
was  archon  at  Athens  *,  and  the  eclipfe
of  the  f  fun  he  mentions  fell  out,  that
year,  on  the  third  day  of  September  in
the  morning.  In  the  fame  year,  the
Athenians,  at  the  defire,  or  rather  by
the  command,  of  the  Lacedaemonians,


changed  their  form  of  government  in
the  manner  related  by  our  author,
that  is,  they  transformed  their  confti-
tution  from  a  democracy  to  an  oli¬
garchy,  confining  of  thirty  tyrants,  as
they  loon  appeared.  Xenophon,  by
fetting  down  all  their  names,  has  con¬
demned  them  to  perpetual  infamy.
Not  long  after,  thefe  tyrants  defired
the  Lacedaemonians  to  fend  them
troops  to  garrifon  their  citadel,  which
troops  they  ingaged  to  pay.  It  may
be  eafily  fuppofed  they  found  no  fort
of  difficulty  in  obtaining  this  requeff.
Thefe  troops  arrived  ;  and  they  were,
as  our  author  fays,  introduced  into  the
citadel,  and  made  ule  of  by  the  oli¬
garchy  to  fecure  every  man,  who  had
virtue,  and  fpirit  enough  to  oppofe
their  unwarrantable  proceedings.


e Xenophon EMwjk.  B.  ii.  p.  461.  fUiher,  p.  izS.


are


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  AS  SE N S  IS.  249

are  pleafed  with  the  intire  view  of  all  the  particulars,  that
accompany  every  adtion  :  But,  befides  that  pleafure,  they
have  this  advantage,  that  the  experience  they  have  acquired
by  fuch  means,  enables  them  to  do  great  fervice  to  their
countries  in  times  of  difficulty,  and  to  lead  them  to
their  interefts  through  choice,  by  the  power  of  their  elo¬
quence  :  For  all  men  are  eafieft  convinced  both  of  their
advantages,  and  difad  vantages,  when  they  difcover  them
through  the  medium  of  many  examples ;  and  thofe,  who
advife  them  to  make  ufe  of  thefe,  are  applauded  by  them
for  their  prudence,  and  great  wifdom.  For  thefe  reafons,
therefore,  I  have  determined  to  enter  into  an  accurate  detail
of  all  the  circumftances  worthy  of  notice,  that  attended  the
fubverfion  of  the  oligarchy.  I  ffiall  not  begin  this  relation
from  the  laft  incident,  which  many  people  look  upon  as  the  foie
caufe  of  the  reeftablifhment  of  liberty,  I  mean,  the  excefs
committed  by  Appius  in  regard  to  the  virgin  he  was  in  love
with  :  For  this  was  an  acceffion,  and  ferved  to  fill  up  the
meafure  of  the  people’s  refentment,  which  a  thoufand  other
indignities  had  provoked  :  But  I  fhall  begin  with  an  account
of  the  firft  infults  offered  by  the  decemvirate  to  the  Romans,
and  relate,  fucceffively,  all  the  enormities  committed  under
that  adminiftration.

II.  The  firft  caufe  of  the  hatred  conceived  againft  the
oligarchy  feems  to  have  been  this,  that  the  members  of  it
had  conne&ed  their  fecond  magiftracy  with  the  firft,  in
contempt  both  of  the  fenate,  and  people.  Another  was,
that,  by  falfe  and  heinous  accufations,  they  banifhed  fome
Vol.  IV.  K  k  of


250  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

of  the  worthieft  men,  who  were  diflatisfied  with  their  pro¬
ceedings,  and  put  others  to  death :  And,  to  effedt  this,  they
fu horned  fome  of  their  own  fadtion  to  accufe  them,  and
they  themfelves  tried  thefe  caufes.  But  nothing  drew  upon
them  fo  much  hatred,  as  the  licence  they  gave  to  the  moft
audacious  of  the  young  men,  with  whom  each  of  them  was
always  attended,  to  plunder  and  pillage  the  fortunes  of  all,
who  oppofed  their  adminiftration.  Thefe  men,  as  if  the
city  of  Rome  had  been  taken  by  force  of  arms,  not  only
ftripped  the  legal  pofleflors  of  their  effedts,  but  even  ravifhed
their  wives,  when  inflamed  by  their  beauty ;  abufed  fuch  of
their  daughters,  as  were  marriageable ;  and,  when  the  others
refented  their  brutality,  they  beat  them  like  flaves.  And,
by  this  ufage,  they  forced  thofe,  who  were  unable  to  bear  it,
to  leave  their  country  with  their  wives,  and  children,  and
take  refuge  in  the  neighbouring  cities,  where  they  were
received  by  the  Latines,  on  account  of  their  affinity,  and  by
the  Hernici,  in  acknowledgement  for  the  conceffion  lately
made  to  them  by  the  Romans  of  the  rights  of  citizens.  So
that,  at  laft,  as  might  be  expedted,  there  were  none  left  at
Rome  but  the  friends  to  tyranny,  and  fuch,  as  had  no  concern
for  the  public  good :  For  neither  the  patricians,  who  were
equally  incapable  of  flattering  the  decemvirs,  and  of  oppofing
their  proceedings,  continued  there ;  nor  the  fenators,  whofe
prefence  was  neceflary  to  the  magiftrates ;  but  the  greateft
part  alfo  of  thefe  had  removed  with  their  whole  families ;
and,  leaving  their  houfes  empty,  lived  in  the  country.  The
oligarchical  fadtion  were  pleafed  with  the  flight  of  the  moft


con-


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  251

confiderable  men  for  many  reafons,  but  particularly,  becaufe
it  encreafed  the  arrogance  of  the  licentious  youth  not  to
have  before  their  eyes  thofe  perfons  whofe  prefence  would
have  made  them  blufii  at  their  enormities.

III.  Rome  being,  thus,  deferted  by  her  belt  citizens,  and
abfolutely  deprived  of  her  liberty,  the  nations,  who  had
been  conquered  by  her,  looked  upon  this  as  the  molt  favour¬
able  opportunity  both  to  revenge  the  infults  they  had  re¬
ceived,  and  to  repair  the  Ioffes  they  had  fultained,  while  the
commonwealth  was  weakened  by  the  government  of  the
oligarchy,  and  unable,  from  henceforth,  to  allemble  its  forces,
to  unite,  or  refume  the  adminiftration  of  affairs :  And,  to
this  end,  they  prepared  every  thing,  that  was  neceflary  for
the  war,  and  marched  towards  Rome  with  numerous  armies :
The  Sabines,  at  the  fame  time,  making  an  irruption  into
that  part  of  the  Roman  territories,  that  lay  next  to  them,
poffeffed  themfelves  of  a  large  booty;  and,  having  killed
great  numbers  of  the  hulbandmen,  incamped  at  3  Eretum,
a  city  fituated  near  the  river  Tiber,  at  the  diftance  of  one
hundred  and  feven  ftadia  from  Rome.  On  the  other  fide,

3*  Hirfu.  So  mud  we  read  the  only  107  ftadia  from  Rome,  and  here
name  of  this  town,  notwithftanding  he  fays  it  is  140.  h  Cluver,  I  find,
the  authority  of  Stephens,  and  even  thinks  the  laft  number  is  corrupted,
of  the  Vatican  manufcript,  both  which  becaufe  Eretum ,  now  1  Monte  Ritondo ,
have  tv  Ftjya,  as  Hudfon  has  obferved:  is  13  Roman  miles  from  Rome,  or
Fort  Livy  fays,  in  fpeaking  of  this  107  ftadia,  which  make  only  375
incurfion  of  the  Sabines,  recepto  ad  paces  more  than  13  miles.  Upon  the
Eretum  quod paflim  vagatum  erat ,  ag-  authority,  therefore,  of  Cluver,  I  have
mine,  cajtra  locant.  But  here  is  a  dif-  made  this  paflage  correfpond  with  the
ficulty  :  Dionyfius  told  us  in  the  third  other,
book,  chapter  32,  that  Eretum  was

rB.  iii.  c,  38.  h  leal.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  p.  668.  *  See  the  twenty  feventh  annot.  on  the  third  book.

K  k  2  the


252  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

the  Aequi  made  an  inroad  into  that  part  of  the  territories
of  the  Tufculani,  that  was  contiguous  to  their  confines  ;
and,  having  laid  wafte  a  large  tra &  of  it,  placed  their
camp  near  the  city  of  Algidum.  When  the  decemvirs  were
informed  of  this  irruption  of  their  enemies,  they  were  con¬
founded;  and,  aflembling  the  men  of  their  own  fadtion,
confulted  with  them  what  meafures  they  were  to  take  :
Thefe  were  all  of  opinion  that  they  ought  to  fend  an
army  into  the  enemies  country,  and  not  ftay  till  their  forces
advanced  to  Rome  itfelf :  But  they  were  in  great  doubt,
firPc,  whether  they  fhould  arm  all  the  Romans,  even  thofe,
who  were  diflatisfied  with  their  adminiftration ;  and,  fe-
condly,  whether  they  fhould  make  the  levies  in  an  overbear¬
ing,  and  rigorous  manner,  according  to  the  pradlice  both  of
the  kings,  and  confuls,  or  with  indulgence,  and  moderation :
They  were  of  opinion,  alfo,  that  no  fmall  confideration  was
necefiary  to  determine  this  point,  who  fhould  authorize  the
war,  and  the  levies ;  whether  the  fenate,  or  the  people  ;  or
neither,  fince  they  fufpeded  both ;  but  the  decemvirs  them-
felves :  At  laft,  after  a  long  confutation,  they  concluded  to
afiemble  the  fenate,  and  prevail  with  them  to  vote  for
the  war,  and  to  allow  them  to  make  the  levies :  For,  if  both
thefe  were  decreed  by  the  fenate,  they  imagined,  firft,
that  all  would  obey  them,  particularly  fince  the  tribunitian
power  was  fuppreffed,  which  alone  could  legally  oppofe
the  orders  of  the  magiflrates;  and,  in  the  next  place,
that,  if  they  obeyed  the  directions  of  the  fenate  in  any  one
point,  and  carried  their  orders  into  execution,  they  fhould

appear


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  R  N  ASSENSlS.  253
appear  to  have  received  a  legal  commiflion  to  enter  upon
the  war.

IV.  After  they  had  taken  this  refolution,  and  prepared
their  friends,  and  relations  to  deliver  fuch  opinions  in  the
fenate,  as  were  calculated  to  promote  their  views,  and  to
oppofe  thofe,  who  fhould  not  efpoufe  the  fame  fentiments,
they  went  to  the  forum,  and  ordered  the  cryer  to  call  over
the  names  of  the  fenators :  But  no  man  of  worth  anfwered.
The  cryer  often  repeating  this,  and  none  appearing  but  the
flatterers  of  the  oligarchy,  and  thefe  the  moft  profligate  of
their  faction,  everyone  who  happened  to  be  then  in  the  forum,
rejoiced  that  the  decemvirs,  who  had  never  aflembled  the
fenate  upon  any  account,  found,  the  firft  time  they  attempted
it,  that  there  was  4ftill  at  Rome  an  aflembly  even  of  worthy
men,  who  deferved  to  be  confulted  in  all  things  relating  to
the  public.  The  decemvirs,  obferving  that  the  fenators  did
not  anfwer  to  their  names,  refolved  to  fend  to  their  houfes,
and  fummon  them  to  attend  ;  but,  hearing  the  greateft  part
of  thefe  were  left  empty,  they  deferred  the  matter  till  the
next  day :  In  the  mean  time,  they  fent  into  the  country,
and  called  them  from  thence.  The  fenate  being  full,  Ap-
pius,  the  chief  of  the  decemvirate,  rofe  up,  and  informed
them  that  Rome  was  attacked  on  two  fldes,  by  the  Aequi,
and  the  Sabines ;  the  confequences  of  which  he  fet  forth  in
a  very  elaborate  fpeech  ;  and  ended  with  prefling  them  to

4*  Eti.  The  reader  will  obferve  by  viz.  that  the  greateft  part  of  the  fen  a-
my  tranflation  that  I  read  e?<,  inftead  tor?,  difgufted  at  the  government  of
of  t»  ;  in  which  I  think  myfeh  juftified  the  decemvirs,  had  retired  into  the
by  what  our  author  before  told  us,  country.

order


254  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XL

order  levies  to  be  made,  and  the  armies  to  take  the  held
immediately,  fince  the  jundure  admitted  of  no  delay.  While
he  was  fpeaking,  Lucius  Valerius,  furnamed  Potitus, rofe  up;
a  man,  whofe  anceftors  infpired  him  with  exalted  fentiments :
For  his  father  was  that  Valerius,  who  retook  the  capitol,
when  it  was  poftefied  by  Herdonius  the  Sabine,  and  reco¬
vered  the  fortrefs,  and  he  himfelf  loft  his  life  in  the  adion ;
and  his 5  grandfather  by  the  father’s  fide  was  Poplicola,  who
expelled  the  kings,  and  eftablifhed  the  ariftocracy.  Appius,
obferving  that  he  was  going  to  fpeak,  and  expecting  he
would  fay  fomething  againft  him,  “  This  is  not  your  rank,
“  Valerius,  fays  he;  neither  does  it  become  you,  now,  to
<c  fpeak :  But,  when  thefe  fenators,  who  are  older  and  more
“  dignified  than  yourfelf,  have  delivered  their  opinions,  then
<c  you  alfo  will  be  called  upon,  and  may  fay  what  you  think
u  proper  :  In  the  mean  time,  be  filent,  and  fit  down.”
cc  Neither  did  I  rife  up,  fays  Valerius,  to  fpeak  to  thefe
<c  points ;  but  to  others  of  greater  moment,  and  far  more
“  neceflary,  which,  I  think,  the  fenate  ought  firft  to  hear ;
“  and,  from  what  they  will  hear,  they  will  be  able  to  judge
<c  whether  the  fubjed,  for  which  you  have  aftembled  us,  is
“  more  neceflary  to  the  commonwealth,  than  That,  which
“  I  flhall  lay  before  them.  Confider  that  I  am  a  fenator,
“  and  that  my  name  is  Valerius;  hinder  me  not,  therefore,
from  fpeaking,  when  the  object  of  it  is  the  prefervation  of
“  my  country:  But,  if  you  perfift  in  your  ufual  arrogance


5*  notTMog  it  &{og  srotlgog  IIo7r\uo^ag,  o  rug  Awv.

annotation  on  the  feventh  book.


See  the  firft

<(


to


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  255

“  to  all  men,  what  tribunes  fhall  I  call  upon  to  aflifb
“  me?  For  you  have  abolifhed  this  relief  of  the  citizens
u  againft  oppreffion ;  and  what  greater  oppreffion  can  there
<c  be  than  this,  that  Valerius  Potitus,  like  a  man  of  the  lowed
“  rank,  cannot  enjoy  a  right  common  to  all,  but  ftands  in
“  need  of  the  tribunitian  power  ?  However,  fince  we  are  de-
u  prived  of  this  magiftracy,  I  implore  the  afiiftance  of  you
c<  all,  who,  with  this  man,  are  inverted  with  the  power  of
“  that  magiftracy,  and  exercife  a  domination  over  the  com-
“  mon wealth  :  I  am  not  ignorant  that  I  do  this  in  vain ;
“  but  my  defign  is  to  lay  open  your  confpiracy ;  to  fhew
<c  that  you  have  thrown  every  thing  into  confufion,  and  that
u  you  have  all  the  fame  intentions :  But  I  chufe  rather  to
“  call  upon  you  alone,  Quintus  Fabius  Vibulanus,  you,  who
a  have  been  honoured  with  three  confulfhips,  if  you  ftill
“  preferve  the  fame  fentiments:  Rife  up,  therefore,  and
“  relieve  the  opprefled  :  For  the  fenate  fix  their  eyes  upon

cc  >»

“  you.

V.  After  Valerius  had  faid  this,  Fabius  fate  ftill  through
fhame,  and  made  him  no  anfwer.  But  Appius,  and  all
the  reft  of  the  decemvirs,  leaping  from  their  feats,  hin¬
dered  Valerius  from  going  on.  Upon  this,  there  was  a
great  tumult  in  the  fenate,  the  greateft  part  of  the  fena-
tors  exprefting  their  refentment  at  the  behaviour  of  the
decemvirs,  and  thofe  of  their  fa&ion  juftifying  them;  when
Marcus  Horati-us,  furnamed  Barbatus,  c  the  grandfon  of  that

6-  A? reyovog  m  ffvvvTrdivo’civlot  was  alfo  Marcus  Horatius,  who,  upon

UottAiu)  O vethspu  UoTrAuoAx.  The  the  death  of  Sp.  Lucretius  Tricipiti-
grandfather  of  this  Marcus  Horatius,  nus,  was  the  collegue  of  P.  Valerius

Horatius,


256  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XL

Horatius,  who  was  conful  with  Publius  Valerius  Poplicola,
after  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,  rofe  up  ;  he  was  a  man  of
great  perfonal  bravery,  and  not  uneloquent,  and  had  been
long  a  friend  of  Valerius ;  who,  unable  to  contain  his  re-
fentment,  faid:  u  You  will  the  fooner  force  me,  Appius,
£<  to  break  through  all  reftraint  by  your  want  of  moderation,
cc  and  by  a&ing  the  part  of  Tarquin,  in  not  fuffering  thofe
“  to  fpeak,  who  are  led  to  it  by  a  defire  to  fave  their  coun-
“  try.  Have  you  forgotten  that  there  are  defcendants  ftill  left
cc  of  that  Valerius,  who  expelled  tyranny,  and  fucceflors  of
C£  thofe  Horatii,  in  whom  it  is  hereditary  to  oppofe,  both
u  7  with  others,  and  alone,  all,  who  would  inflave  their
S£  country  ?  Or  do  you  imagine  that  both  we,  and  the  reft
“  of  the  Romans,  have  fo  mean  a  fpirit,  as  to  be  contented
“  if  we  are  fuffered  to  enjoy  life  on  any  terms,  and  neither  to
“  fpeak,  nor  a<ft  in  favor  of  liberty,  and  freedom  of  fpeech?
<c  Or  are  you  intoxicated  with  the  greatnefs  of  your  power?

Poplicola  in  the  year  245,  the  year  the  furviving  champion  of  the  three,
after  theexpulfion  of  the  kings :  They  who  fought  for  the  fovereignty  of  their
were  alfo  collegues  in  the  year  247.  country  againft  the  Curatii,  from
Here  we  fee  the  two  worthy  defcen-  whom,  as  k  our  author  fays,  Horatius
dants  of  thefe  confuls  oppofing  the  Codes  was  defcended,  who  was  alfo
tyranny  of  the  decemvirs  with  a  fpirit,  nephew  to  Marcus  Horatius,  one  of
which  fpeaks  that  defcent.  We  Ihall  the  confuls  at  the  time,  when  he  de-
prelently  find  them  the  great  inftru-  fended  the  bridge  alone :  And  this,  in
ments  in  effecting  that  glorious  revo-  my  opinion,  is  the  circumftance,  to
lution,  by  which  the  decern  virate  was  which  the  laft  word  in  this  pafiage  al-
abolifhed,  the  tyrants  puniihed,  and  ludes.  Thefe  confiderations  feem  ne-
the  liberty  of  their  country  reftored.  cefifary  to  characterize  the  fpeech  of
7*  fj.il oc  tcov  aAAwv,  xai  y.ovoig.  I  Horatius,  and  tolhewthat  thefe  words
look  upon  the  firfi:  words  of  this  fen-  could  be  fpoken  by  none  but  himfelf.
tence  to  relate  to  Marcus  Horatius,

kB.  v.  c.  23.


“  Who


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENS  IS.  257
C£  Who  are  you,  or  what  legal  magiftracy  are  you  in  veiled
££  with,  that  you  dare  to  deprive  Valerius,  or  any  other  fe-
t£  nator  of  the  liberty  of  fpeaking?  Were  you  not  appointed
££  to  govern  the  commonwealth  for  a  year?  Is  not  the  term
££  of  your  magiftracy  expired  ?  Are  you  not  become  private
tc  men  by  that  law  ?  Think  of  laying  thefe  things  before
££  the  people  :  For,  what  fhould  hinder  any  of  us  from  af-
££  fembling  them,  and  from  charging  you  with  exercifing  a
££  power  unwarranted  by  the  laws?  Take  their  votes  upon
££  this  point,  whether  your  decemvirate  fhall  fubfift,  or,  the
££  ufual  magiftracies  be  reeftablifhed ;  and,  if  the  people  are
££  fo  mad,  as  to  fubmit  to  the  former,  reafiiime  your  ad-
C£  miniftration ;  and,  then,  hinder  any  man  from  faying
C£  what  he  pleafes  in  defence  of  his  country  :  For,  if  the
££  people  give  their  fandlion  to  thefe  things,  we  fhall  deferve
C£  to  fuffer  this,  and  a  worfe  treatment,  by  living  fubjecft  to
£C  you,  and  by  fully ing  both  our  own  virtues,  and  Thofe  of
££  our  anceftors.”

VI.  While  he  was  yet  fpeaking,  the  decemvirs  furrounded
him,  crying  out ;  urging  the  tribunitian  power,  and  threate¬
ning  to  throw  him  down  the  Tarpeian  rock,  if  he  was  not
filent.  Upon  which,  all  called  out  that  their  liberty  was
taken  away  :  And  the  fenate  was  full  of  indignation,  and
confufton.  When  the  decemvirs  faw  the  fenators  were  exafpe-
rated  at  their  behaviour,  they  prefently  repented  both  of  the
obftru&ion  they  had  given  to  the  freedom  of  fpeech,  and  of
their  threats :  Then  Appius,  rifing  up,  deftred  thofe,  who
were  railing  difturbances,  to  have  patience  a  moment ;  and,
Vol.  IV.  L  1  having


258  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I T I E  S  OF  BookXI.

having  appeafed  the  diforder,  he  faid  :  “We  hinder  none  of
“  you,  fathers,  from  fpeaking,  provided  you  fpeakata  proper
“  time  :  But  we  hinder  thofe,  who  are  too  forward,  and  rife  ~
“up  before  they  are  called  upon.  Be  not,  therefore,  of-
“  fended :  For  we  fhall  give  leave  to  Horatins,  and  Valerius,

“  and  to  every  other  fenator,  to  deliver  his  opinion  in  his  own
“  rank,  according  to  the  ancient  cuftom  and  order,  provided
“  they  fpeak  to  thofe  points,  that  are  the  fubjedt  of  your
“  deliberation,  and  to  no  others ;  but,  if  they  endeavour  to
“  feduce  you  by  popular  harangues,  and  to  divide  the  com-
“  mon wealth,  without  fpeaking  to  the  fubjedt  in  debate,

“  you  fhall  then  find,  Marcus  Horatius,  that  we  are  in  pof-
“  feffion  of  a  power  to  reftrain  the  diforderly,  which  we
<c  received  from  the  people,  when  they  inverted  us  with  the
“  magiftracy  both  of  the  confuls,  and  tribunes;  and  that
“  the  term  of  it  is  not  yet  expired,  as  you  may  think :  For
“  we  were  not  appointed  fora  year,  or  for  any  other  limited
“  time;  but  till  we  had  inftituted  the  whole  body  of  laws:

“  When,  therefore,  we  have  completed  what  we  propofe,

“  and  eftablifhed  the  remaining  laws,  we  fhall  then  refign
“  our  magiftracy,  and  give  an  account  of  our  adtions  to  any
“  of  you  who  defire  it:  In  the  mean  time,  we  fhall  fuffer  no
“  part  either  of  the  confular,  or  the  tribunitian  power  to  be
“  infringed.  As  to  the  war,  I  defire  you  will  deliver  your
<c  opinions  in  what  manner  we  may  repulfe  our  enemies  with
“  the  greateft  celerity,  and  fuccefs;  and  that,  in  doing  this,

“  the  oldeft  fenators,  according  to  cuftom  and  decency,  may
“  fpeak  firft;  after  them,  thofe  of  a  middle  age;  and,  laft
“  of  all,  the  youngeft.”  VII.


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  ENS  I  S.  259

VII.  Having  faid  this,  he  firft  called  upon  his  uncle,
Caius  Claudius,  who,  riling  up,  fpoke  in  the  following
manner :  “  Since  Appius,  fathers,  by  a  deference  due  to
“  our  affinity,  defires  me  to  deliver  my  opinion  firft,  and
££  that  I  am  under  an  obligation  to  fay  what  I  think  con-
££  cerning  the  war  with  the  Aequi,  and  Sabines,  before  I
<c  acquaint  you  with  my  own  fentiments,  I  would  defire  you
££  to  inquire  what  hopes  have  induced  the  Aequi,  and  Sa-
“  bines  to  dare  to  make  war  upon  us,  and  to  lay  wafle  our
££  country;  they  who,  till  now,  thought  themfelves  happy,
“  and  under  great  obligations  to  Heaven  in  being  buffered
<c  quietly  to  enjoy  their  own  :  For,  if  you  once  know  what
tc  thofe  hopes  are,  you  will  alfo  know  what  meafures  will
££  be  the  mod  effedlual  to  deliver  you  from  this  war.  Thofe
C£  people  then  being  informed  that  our  conftitution  has,  long
££  lince,  been  fhaken,  and  difordered,  and  that  neither  the
££  plebeians,  nor  the  patricians  are  well  affedled  to  thofe,  who
<c  are  at  the  head  of  the  commonwealth  (and,  in  this,  their
££  information  was  not  groundlefs,  but  really  true,  the  caufes
£C  of  which  I  need  not  explain  to  you,  who  are  acquainted
££  with  them)  they  concluded  that,  if  any  foreign  war  fhould
££  be  brought  upon  us,  while  we  are  oppreffed  with  thefe
££  domeftic  evils,  and  the  magiftrates  fhould  determine  to
££  march  out  with  an  army  in  defence  of  the  country,  all
££  the  citizens  would  not  prefent  themfelves  chearfully,  as
££  before,  to  take  the  military  oath,  by  reafon  of  their  dif-
££  affedtion  to  the  magiftrates ;  neither  would  thefe  inflidt  the
<£  punifhments  ordained  by  law  upon  thofe,  who  did  not

L  1  2  ££  prefent


260  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XL
“  prefent  themfelves,  left  they  fhould  occafion  fome  greater
<c  mifchief;  and  that  thofe,  who  did  obey,  and  take  arms,
“  would  either  defert  their  enfigns,  or,  if  they  ftaid,  volun-
c<  tarily  mifbehave  themfelves  in  every  adion.  None  of
<c  thefe  hopes  were  ill  grounded  :  For,  when  an  united  people
cc  enter  upon  a  war,  and  both  the  governors,  and  the  go-
“  verned  look  upon  their  interefts  to  be  the  fame,  they
<c  encounter  terrors  with  alacrity,  and  decline  no  toil,  nor
“  danger  :  But,  when  difunited  among  themfelves,  they
cc  march  againft  a  foreign  enemy,  before  they  have  compofed
“  their  domeftic  troubles,  and  the  army  comes  to  confider
<l  that  they  are  labouring  not  for  their  own  advantages,  but
“  to  fecure  the  domination  of  others  over  them;  and  the
u  generals  refled:  that  their  own  forces  are  not  lefs  animated
“  againft  them  than  the  enemy,  every  thing  is  diftempered,
<c  and  any  force  fufficient  to  defeat,  and  deftroy  fuch  armies.

VIII.  “  Thefe  are  the  thoughts,  fathers,  both  of  the
M  Sabines,  and  Aequi ;  in  confidence  of  which  they  have
“  made  an  irruption  into  our  territories.  And,  if  we,  in
tC  refentment  for  their  infolence,  and  contempt  of  us,  fuffer
u  ourfelves  to  be  fo  far  tranfported  with  our  paflion,  as  to  re-
a  folve  to  march  out  againft  them,  lam  afraid  left  thofe  things
“  they  have  forefeen  fhould  happen  to  us ;  or  rather  I  know
a  they  will  happen.  Whereas,  if  we  eftablifh  thofe  re-
cc  gelations,  that  are  the  firft,  and  the  moft  neceffary  (I
<l  mean  the  good  order  of  the  people,  and  that  all  may
“  look  upon  their  interefts  to  be  the  fame)  by  banifliino-
a  the  pride,  and  ambition  that  are  now  grown  familiar
to  us,  and  by  reftoring  the  conftitution  to  its  ancient

“  form^


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARNAS  SE NS  I S.  261

cc  form,  thefe  enemies,  who  are  now  fo  confident,  will
<£  tremble;  and,  throwing  down  their  arms,  will  foon
<£  come  to  us  to  indemnify  us  for  our  Ioffes,  and  to  treat  of
“  a  peace;  and  we  fhall  have  it  in  our  power,  which  all
“  men  of  fenfe  would  wifh,  to  put  an  end  to  this  war  with-
cc  out  employing  our  arms.  I  am,  therefore,  of  opinion
££  that,  for  thefe  reafons,  we  ought  for  the  prefent  to  defer
<£  the  confi deration  of  the  war,  fince  our  domeftic  affairs
<£  are  in  great  diforder;  and,  inftead  of  that,  give  leave  to
££  every  one,  who  defires  it,  to  propofe  the  means  of  re^-
<£  ftoring  concord,  and  good  order  in  the  commonwealth:
££  For,  till  this  war  broke  out,  w’e  were  never  called  upon
££  by  thefe  magiftrates  to  take  the  affairs  of  the  common-
c£  wealth  into  confideration,  nor  had  liberty  to  debate  whe-
“  ther  any  of  them  were  ill  conduced.  That  man,  there-
££  fore,  would  deferve  great  cenfure,  who  fhould  let  flip  this
££  opportunity,  and  employ  it  in  fpeaking  of  other  things  :
££  Neither  can  any  one  affirm  with  certainty,  that,  if  we
££  negled:  this  occafion  as  improper,  we  fhall  ever  be  able  to
££  find  one  that  is  more  proper:  For,  if  one  may  judge
££  of  the  future  by  the  paft,  it  will  be  a  long  time  before
££  we  fhall  meet  again  to  confider  of  any  one  thing  relating
££  to  the  public.

IX.  <£  I  defire  this  of  you,  Appius,  and  of  your  collegues,
C£  who  are  at  the  head  of  the  commonwealth,  and  under
££  an  obligation  of  confulting  the  advantage  of  the  public,
££  rather  than  your  own  intereft,  that,  if  I  fpeak  the  truth
<£  with  freedom,  and  do  not  flatter  you,  you  will  not  for
u  that  reafon  be  offended,  when  you  confider  that  I

££  fhall


262  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

“  fhall  not  fpeak  with  a  defign  to  abufe,  and  infult  your
c  magiftracy,  but  to  fhew  in  how  great  a  ftorm  the  com-
c  monwealth  is  tolled,  and  to  point  out  the  road  that  leads
c  to  fafety,  and  a  redrefs  of  thefe  grievances.  It  is,  per-
c  haps,  incumbent  upon  all,  who  have  any  concern  for
c  their  country,  to  plead  for  the  advantages  of  it,  particu-
c  larly  upon  me:  Firft,  by  reafon  of  the  honor  I  have  re-
£  ceived  in  being  the  firft  perfon,  whofe  opinion  is  alked ;
c  and  it  would  be  a  great  fhame,  and  folly  for  the  man,
c  who  firft  rifes  up,  not  to  mention  thofe  things,  that  require
c  firft  to  be  reformed :  In  the  next  place,  as  I  am,  by  the
c  father’s  fide,  uncle  to  Appius,  who  is  at  the  head  of  the
{  decemvirate,  I  have  more  reafon  than  any  one  both  to  be
c  pleafed,  when  the  commonwealth  is  governed  by  them  in
c  the  beft  manner,  and  to  be  grieved,  when  it  is  not  fo.
c  Befides  thefe  motives,  I  have  inherited  fuch  political  prin-
c  ciples  from  my  anceftors,  as  teach  me  to  prefer  the  good
c  of  the  public  to  my  own  private  advantage,  and  to  confider
‘  no  perfonal  danger;  which  principles  I  would  not  will-
£  ingly  betray :  8  This  is  the  rule  of  life  they  delivered  down
c  to  me,  and  I  will  endeavour  not  to  difhonour  the  virtues
£  of  thefe  men.  As  to  the  prefent  form  of  government,
c  there  can  be  no  ftronger  proof  to  convince  you  that  it  is
“  bad,  and  that  almoft  all  ranks  of  men  are  diffatisfied  with

8*  Ovlot  Si  zrugio-xivxtrciv  ravl^v  etvcu  ments :  The  learned  reader  will  judere
[to i  t a  sr£C0i*££<m.  Sylburgius,  and  whether  the  two  words  I  have  add?d
Portus  have  attempted  to  rdtore  this  do  not  render  the  fenfe  complete.  I
pallage,  which  is  plainly  defedive  in  need  not  inform  him  that  (KvvUV  in  the
all  the  editions,  and  manuferipts.  next  fentence  does  not  always  fuppofe
Hudfon  has  given  us  their  amend-  a  diftant  reference.


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  E N  S I  $.  263
“  it,  than  this ;  all  the  former  magiftrates  (which  you  alone
“  cannot  be  ignorant  of)  abandon  their  paternal  houfes,
“  and  fly  out  of  the  city  every  day;  the  moft  conflderable
“  of  the  plebeians  do  the  fame,  fome  removing,  with  their
“  wives  and  children,  to  the  neighbouring  cities,  and  others
“  to  that  part  of  the  country,  which  is  fartheft  from  Rome ;
“  few  even  of  the  patricians  live  now  in  the  city  as  they
“  ufed  to  do,  the  greateft  part  of  thefe  alfo  being  retired  to
“  the  country :  But  why  fhould  I  fay  any  thing  of  the  others,
“  when  only  a  few  even  of  the  fenators,  and  thofe  fuch  as
“  are  attached  to  you  either  by  affinity,  or  friendffiip,  remain
“  within  the  walls  ?  The  reft  look  upon  folitude  to  be  more
“  defirable  than  their  country.  This  you  were  fenflble  of,
“  when  you  thought  it  neceffary  to  affemble  the  fenate;
“  they  were  then  called  up  from  their  country  feats  one
“  by  one ;  they,  with  whom  it  was  an  eftabliftied  cuftom
“  to  watch  over  the  fafety  of  their  country  in  conjunction
a  with  the  magiftrates,  andtoabfent  themfelves  from  nothing
“  that  concerned  the  public.  And  do  you  think  that  men
“  leave  their  country  to  fly  from  happinefs,  or  mifery  ?
“  From  mifery  I  think.  And  what  greater  mifery  can  there
<c  be  to  a  commonwealth,  particularly  to  That  of  the  Ro~
“  mans,  which  ftands  in  need  of  a  great  number  of  national
“  forces  to  prefer ve  the  fovereignty  fhe  exercifes  over  her
“  neighbours,  than  to  be  abandoned  by  the  plebeians,  and
<c  deferred  by  the  patricians,  without  being  oppreffed  with
“  war,  peftilence,  or  any  other  calamity  inflided  by  the
“  hand  of  Heaven?


X.  “Would


264  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

X.  ££  Would  you  be  informed  of  the  reafons,  that  have
££  compelled  thefe  men  to  abandon  the  temples,  and  fe-
££  pulchres  of  their  anceftors,  to  defer t  the  houfes,  and  pof-
££  feflions  of  their  fathers,  and  to  look  upon  every  country
C£  as  dearer  to  them  than  their  own?  For  thefe  things
f£  happen  not  without  reafon;  this  I  fhall  inform  you  of
£C  without  concealing  any  thing:  Many  cenfures  arepafled
££  upon  your  government,  Appius,  by  many  people:  Whe-
tc  ther  they  are  true,  or  falfe,  I  need  not  at  prefen t  inquire;
<c  but  fuch  cenfures  are  pafled:  In  a  word,  none  but  your
££  own  faction  are  friends  to  your  adminiflration.  For  the
“  men  of  worth,  defeended  from  men  of  worth,  who  ought
££  to  enjoy  the  priefthood,  the  magiftracies,  and  the  other
££  honors,  which  were  enjoyed  by  their  fathers,  cannot  bear
££  to  be  deprived  of  thefe  by  you,  and  to  lofe  the  dignities
££  of  their  anceftors :  The  men  of  middle  rank,  who  have
u  nothing  in  view  but  an  undifturbed  tranquillity,  accufe
cc  you  of  rapine;  and  lament  the  infults  you  offer  to  their
cc  wives,  and  your  drunken  licentioufnefs  to  fuch  of  their
cc  daughters,  as  are  marriageable;  and  many  other  grievous
££  abufes :  And  the  poorer  fort  of  the  people,  who  have  no
<£  longer  the  power  either  of  chufing  magiftrates,  or  of
£C  giving  their  votes  upon  any  occafion;  who  are  never
££  called  to  hold  their  aflemblies,  or  partake  of  any  other
££  inftance  of  humanity,  to  which  citizens  are  intitled,  hate
££  you  upon  all  thefe  accounts,  and  call  your  government  a
££  tyranny.


XL  ££  How


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  265

XI.  <c  How  then  fhall  you  reform  thefe  things,  and
“  filence  the  accufations  of  your  fellow-citizens?  For  this
cc  remains  to  be  fpoken  to.  The  way  to  effed  this,  is  for
C£  you  to  procure  an  order  from  the  fenate,  by  virtue  of
c<  which  you  will  reftore  to  the  people  the  power  of  deli-
Ci  berating  whether  confuls,  tribunes,  and  the  ufual  magi-
<c  ftrates  fhall  be  reeftablifhed,  or  the  fame  form  of  govern-
<c  ment  continued:  For,  it  all  the  Romans  are  content  to
“  be  governed  by  an  oligarchy,  and  vote  that  you  fhall  retain
“  the  fame  power,  your  magiftracy  will  be  founded  on  law,
<c  and  not  on  violence:  But,  if  they  defire  that  confuls,
<c  and  all  the  former  magiftrates  fhould  again  be  chofen,
“  you  will  refign  your  power  in  a  legal  manner,  and  avoid
“  the  imputation  of  governing  your  equals  without  their
<c  confent ;  for  this  is  tyrannical;  but  to  receive  power  from
<c  the  confent  of  the  governed,  ariftocratical.  This  is  a
“  meafure,  of  which,  in  my  opinion,  you  ought  to  be  the
<c  author,  and  put  an  end  to  an  oligarchy  inftitu ted  by  your-
“  felf,  Appius,  which  was,  once,  an  advantage  to  us,  but  is
“  now,  a  grievance.  Hear  then  what  you  will  gain  by
<c  following  my  advice,  and  by  religning  this  invidious
£c  power  :  If  all  your  collegues  are  a&uated  with  the  fame
“  fentiments,  every  one  will  think  they  owe  their  virtue  toyou,
“  who  fet  the  example;  but,  if  they  delight  in  the  enjoyment
“  of  their  illegal  power,  every  one  will  think  themfelves
Ci  obliged  to  you  for  being  the  only  perfon,  who  defired  to
<c  a&  with  juftice;  and  will  force  the  power  out  of  the
cc  hands  of  thofe  who  refufe  to  refign  it,  with  ignominy,  and
Vol.  IV.  Mm  “  a  fevere


266  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

44  a  fevere  chaftifement:  But,  if  you  have  entered  into  any
44  contracts,  and  given  private  afiurances  to  one  another
44  by  calling  the  gods  to  atteft  them  (for  it  is  poflible  you
44  may  have  done  fomething  of  this  kind)  look  upon  thefe
44  contracts,  fince  they  are  formed  againft  your  fellow-
44  citizens,  and  your  country,  to  be  impious,  if  obferved,
44  and  pious,  if  tranfgreffed  :  For  the  gods  defire  not  to  be
44  called  upon  to  fecure  the  performance  of  fhameful,  and
44  unjuft  contracts,  but  of  Thofe,  that  are  honourable,  and  juft.

XII.  44  However,  if  you  are  afraid  to  refign  your  magi-
44  ftracy,  left  your  enemies  fhould  form  fome  dangerous  de-
44  figns  againft  you,  and  you  be  compelled  to  give  an  account
44  of  your  a&ions,  your  fear  is  vain:  For  the  Roman  people
44  will  be  neither  fo mean  fpirited,  nor  fo  ungrateful,  as  tore-
44  member  your  faults,  and  forget  your  fervices;  but  will
4  4  ballance  your  prefent  merits,  with  your  paft  errors,  and  look
44  upon  thefe  as  worthy  of  forgivenefs,  and  thofe  of  praife.
44  You  will,  alfo,  have  the  advantage  of  putting  the  people  in
44  mind  of  the  many  great  a&ions  you  performed  before  the
44  eftablifhment  of  the  oligarchy,  of  claiming  the  acknow-
44  ledgement  due  to  them,  as  a  means  toaflift,  and  fave  you,
44  and  of  defending  yourfelf  by  various  methods  againft  thefe
44  accufations;  as,  that  you  yourfelf  were  not  in  fault,  but
44  one  of  the  others  without  your  knowledge;  that,  as  the
44  perfon,  who  committed  the  crime,  was  of  equal  authority
44  with  yourfelf,  you  had  no  power  to  reftrain  him ;  and
44  that  you  were  forced  to  fubmit  to  fome  things  againft
44  your  will  for  the  fake  of  others,  which  you  thought  ufeful.

44  I  fhould


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSEN'S  IS.  267
£C  I  fhould  fa y  a  great  deal,  if  I  endeavoured  to  enumerate
££  every  thing  you  may  alledge  in  your  defence:  Even  thofe,

££  who  can  make  no  defence,  that  is  either  juft,  or  plauftble,
c£  by  acknowledging  their  crime,  and  begging  pardon,  foften
££  the  refentment  of  the  injured;  fome,  by  laying  the  fault
u  on  the  folly  of  youth ;  and  others,  on  the  converfation  of
££  wicked  men  ;  thefe,  on  the  greatnefs  of  their  power ;  and
££  thofe,  on  fortune,  that  mifleads  all  human  confiderations.
££  If  you  relign  your  magiftracy,  I  myfelf  will  undertake  that
“  all  your  faults  fhall  be  buried  in  oblivion,  and  that  the
“  people  fhall  be  reconciled  to  you  upon  fuch  terms,  as,  in
££  your  unfortunate  fituation,  will  be  honourable.

XIII.  “  But  I  am  afraid  that  the  danger  is  not  the  real
££  motive  ofyour  unwillingnefs  to  refignyour  power  (for  many
££  men  have  refigned  their  tyrannies  without  being  punifhed
“  in  any  manner  by  their  fellow-citizens)  but  that  a  vain
££  ambition,  which  purfues  the  fhadow  of  an  honeft  glory,
££  and  a  fondnefs  for  thofe  pernicious  pleafures,  that  accom-
££  pany  the  lives  of  tyrants,  are  the  true  caufes  of  this  un-
£<  willingnefs:  Elowever,  if,  inftead  of  purfuing  thefantoms,
<£  and  fhadows  of  honor,  and  glory,  you  deftre  to  enjoy  real
££  honors,  reftore  the  ariftocracy  to  your  country,  receive
<£  honors  from  your  equals,  and  gain  the  admiration  of
££  pofterity ;  and,  in  exchange  for  a  mortal  life,  leave  an
££  immortal  glory  to  your  defendants:  For  thefe  honors
££  are  lafting  and  real ;  they  can  never  be  taken  from  you,
££  and  afford  pleafure  without  repentance :  Transform
££  your  mind ;  take  fatisfacftion  in  the  advantages  of  your

Mm2  “  country.


268  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookXI.

u  country,  of  which  you  will  be  looked  upon  as  the  chief
“  caufe,  by  delivering  her  from  an  infupportable  domination;
“  imitate  the  example  of  your  anceftors  upon  this  occafion,
“  and  confider  that  not  one  of  thofe  men  aimed  at  defpotic
“  power,  or  fuffered  himfelf  to  be  a  Have  to  the  infamous
“  pleafures  of  the  body :  For  which  reafons,  they  were  not
“  only  honoured  while  they  lived,  but,  after  their  death,
(C  applauded  by  pofterity ;  and  all  acknowledge  that  they
“  were  the  firmed  guardians  of  that  ariftocracy,  which  Rome
“  eftablifhed  after  the  expulfion  of  the  kings.  Neither
C£  ought  you  to  forget  the  great  glory  both  of  the  fenti-
(C  ments  you  difplayed,  and  of  the  adions  you  performed:
“  For  your  views,  when  you  firft  entered  upon  the  admini-
“  ftration,  deferved  applaufe,  and  gave  us  great  hopes  of  your
c<  virtue;  and  we  defire  that  the  reft  of  your  adions  may
cc  correfpond  with  thofe  views.  Return  to  your  own  dif-
“  pofition,  Appius,  my  child  ;  and,  inftead  of  the  caufe
<c  of  tyranny,  efpoufe  That  of  the  ariftocracy  ;  fly  from
u  thofe  flatterers,  by  whom  you  have  been  prevailed  upon
“  to  deviate  from  your  virtuous  principles,  and  to  wander
“  from  the  right  way  :  For  it  is  not  to  be  expeded  that  a
<c  man  can  be  reftored  to  his  virtue  by  the  fame  perfons,
“  who  firft  robbed  him  of  it.

XIV.  “  Thefe  things  I  have  often  defired  to  remonftrate
<c  to  you  in  private;  to  inftrud  you  when  you  erred,  and  to
<c  reform  you  when  you  tranfgrefled;  and,  with  this  intention,
iC  I  have  been  more  than  once  at  your  houfe ;  but  your 9  fer-

9*  Tleti&ff.  See  the  128th  annotation  on  the  firft  book.

<c


vants


BookXI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  269
“  vants  fent  me  away,  faying  you  were  bufy,  and  employed
“  in  things  more  necefiary  ;  as  if  any  thing  could  be  more
“  neceffary  than  piety  to  your  family:.  It  may  be  they  fhut
ic  your  doors  againft  me  of  their  own  accord,  and  not  by
“  your  orders;  and  I  wifh  it  may  be  fo  :  This  has  laid  me
“  under  a  neceffity  of  declaring  my  fentiments  to  you  in  the
u  fenate,  lince  I  had  no  opportunity  of  doing  it  in  private  ;
<£  and  whatever  is  honourable,  and  advantageous,  Appius,
“  may  be  always  mentioned  feafonably  in  public,  rather  than
“  no  where.  Having  now  performed  the  duty  I  owe  to
“  our  family,  I  call  the  gods  to  witnefs,  whofe  temples,  and
“  altars  we,  who  are  the  defcendants  of  Appius,  honour
cc  with  common  facrifices;  and  the  genius’s  of  our  anceftors,
“  to  whom  we  pay  a  fecondary  worfhip,  and  acknowledge-
<c  ment  in  common,  and  above  all  thefe,  this  land,  that  con-
cc  tains  your  father,  and  my  brother,  that  I  have  employed
cc  both  my  mind,  and  my  voice  to  give  you  the  beft  advice;
<c  and,  now,  deiiring  to  reform  your  errors  to  the  utmoft  of  my
cc  power,  I  beg  of  you  not  to  attempt  the  10  cure  of  evils  by
“  evils;  not  to  lofe  even  what  youpoflefs  by  aiming  at  more;
“  nor,  by  affe&ing  to  give  law  to  your  equals,  and  your

,0‘  M>j  t oig  Koixou  la&oa  rx  xocxot.  a  fi mil ar  paffage  of  Thucydides,  fays
This  is  a  kind  of  proverbial  expreffion  that  this  proverb  took  its  rife  from
among  the  Greek  writers.  The  firft  Oreftes,  the  fon  of  Agamemnon,  who
author,  in  whom  I  remember  to  have  cured  the  murder  of  his  father  by
met  with  it,  though  probably  not  the  That  of  his  mother:  TV  &<*-

firft,  who  made  ufe  of  it,  is  1  Herodo-  gotpiccv  Ogtsx  t«  Ayot^sf^ovog  fvjQeuroiv,
tus,  who  makes  the  filter  of  Lycophron  rov  ra  ar«7§os  $-#vdlov  rco  ryg  (Ayflgcg
fay  to  her  brother,  ^  to  xotxov  t«  kcuw  iu.  (povu  e$tigot7nvrt.

The  m Greek  Scholiaft,  in  explaining


’In  Thalia,  c.  53.


w  B.  v.  c.  65.


<c  fupcriors,


270  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookXI.
fc  fuperiors,  to  expofe  yourfelf  to  receive  it  from  thofe,  who
u  are  inferior  to  you  both  in  dignity,  and  virtue.  I  could
u  willingly  fay  more  to  you  upon  this  fubjedl,  and  many
“  others,  but  fhall  decline  it:  For,  if  the  gods  lead  you  to
cc  better  refolutions,  I  have  faid  more  than  was  neceflary;
“  but,  if  to  worfe,  what  I  have  fbill  to  fay,  will  be  faid  in
u  vain.  You  have  now  my  opinion,  fathers,  and  you,  who
u  are  at  the  head  of  the  commonwealth,  concerning  the
“  means  to  put  an  end  both  to  the  war,  and  to  the  civil
“  diforders.  If  any  one  fhall  offer  a  better  opinion,  let  the
u  beft  carry  it.”

XV.  After  Claudius  had  fpoken  thus,  and  given  the  fenate
great  reafon  to  hope  that  the  decemvirs  would  refign  their
power,  Appius  did  not  think  fit  to  make  him  any  anfwer ;
but  Marcus  Cornelius,  one  of  the  other  members  of  the
oligarchy,  advancing,  faid :  “  We,  Claudius,  fhall  deliberate
“  concerning  our  own  interefts,  without  Handing  in  need  of
iC  your  advice:  For  we  are  of  an  age  the  beft  qualified  for
cc  prudence,  fo  as  to  be  ignorant  of  nothing  that  concerns
“  us;  and  want  no  friends  to  advife  us,  if  neceflary:
c<  Ceafe  then,  old  man,  to  do  an  unfeafonable  thing,  in
c<  giving  advice  to  thofe,  who  do  not  want  it ;  and,  if  you
€<  defire  to  advife,  or  abufe  Appius  (which  is  the  truer)  when
tx  you  are  out  of  the  fenate,  abufe  him.  Now,  give  us  your

thoughts  concerning  the  war  with  the  Aequi,  and  Sabines,
u  in  regard  to  which  you  have  been  called  upon  to  deliver
cc  your  opinion,  and  ceafe  to  talk  idly  of  things,  that  have
u  no  relation  to  it.”  After  him,  Claudius  rofe  up  again,

with


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN AS  SE  NS  I  S.  271

with  grief  in  his  looks,  and  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  faid  :
“  Appius  does  not  even  think  me,  who  am  his  uncle,  worthy
cc  of  an  anfwer,  fathers,  in  your  prefence;  but,  as  he  fhut
<c  his  own  houfe  againft  me,  fo  he  does  every  thing  in  his
tc  power  to  render  the  fenate  inacceffible  to  me;  and,  if  I
<c  muft  fpeak  the  truth,  I  am  even  expelled  the  city  :
<c  For  I  can,  no  longer,  bear  the  fight  of  a  man,  who  is
£<  unworthy  of  his  anceftors,  and  emulates  tyrants  in  his
“  excefs.  I  fhall,  therefore,  retire  with  my  family,  and
cc  efte&s,  to  the  Sabines,  and  live  at 11  Regillum,  from  whence
“  we  derived  our  original,  as  long  as  thefe  men  continue  in
“  the  pofleffion  of  this  worthy  magiftracy ;  and,  when  the
“  fate  I  forefee  fhall  have  overtaken  the  decemvirate,  which
“  will  foon  happen,  I  fhall  then  return.  So  much  con-
“  cerning  myfelf.  As  to  the  war,  I  give  you  this  advice,
“  fathers,  to  come  to  no  refolution  concerning  any  thing
cc  whatever,  till  the  ufual  magiftrates  are  appointed.”  After
he  had  faid  this,  and  received  great  applaufe  from  the  fenate
for  the  generous  fjpirit,  and  love  of  liberty,  with  which  he
had  given  his  opinion,  he  fate  down.  After  him,  Lucius
Quintius,  furnamed  Cincinnatus,  Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus,
Lucius  Lucretius,  and  all  the  leading  men  of  the  fenate
rofe  up  one  after  another,  and  fupported  the  opinion  of
Claudius.

XVI.  Appius,  and  his  collegues,  being  ruffled  at  this,
refolved,  no  longer,  to  afk  the  advice  of  the  fenators  according
to  their  age,  or  their  dignity  in  the  fenate,  but  according  to

PyyyiAhov.  See  the  thirty  fifth  annotation  on  the  fifth  book.


their


272  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

their  friendfliip,  and  attachment  to  the  decemvirs:  And,  with
this  view,  Marcus  Cornelius,  advancing,  called  upon  Lucius
Cornelius  his  brother,  who  had  been  collegue  to  Quintus
Fabius  Vibulanus  in  his  third  confulfhip,  a  man  of  activity,
and  not  uneloquent  in  political  debates ;  this  perfon,  riling
up,  fpoke  as  follows;  “  Even  this  is  wonderful,  fathers,  that
“  men  of  fuch  an  age  as  thofe  are,  who  delivered  their  opi-
<c  nions  before  me,  and  who  pretend  to  be  the  principal
<£  perfons  in  the  fenate,  retain  an  implacable  enmity,  derived
“  from  political  difputes,  againft  the  leading  men  of  the
“  commonwealth,  whom  it  is  their  duty  to  defend  with  all
C£  their  power,  and  to  exhort  the  young  men  to  ingage  with
C£  the  beft  intentions  in  contefts,  of  which  glory  is  the  prize;
“  and  to  look  upon  thofe,  who  oppofe  them  in  order  to  pro-
££  cure  advantages  to  the  public,  not  as  enemies,  but  as  friends:
££  However,  it  is  ftill  more  wonderful  that  they  fhould  transfer
££  their  private  animoftties  to  the  public  affairs,  and  chufe
c£  rather  to  perifh  with  their  enemies,  than  to  be  preferved
££  with  all  their  friends.  This  is  an  excefs  of  folly,  and  not
££  far  from  a  Heaven-fent  madnefs,  which  the  leading  men
t£  of  our  fenate  have  been  guilty  of:  For  thefe,  being
“  difpleafed  that  others,  who  appeared  more  worthy  at  the
££  ele&ion,  were  preferred  to  them,  when  they  flood  can-
<c  didates  for  the  decemvirate,  which  they  themfelves  now
££  inveigh  againft,  declare  an  eternal,  and  irreconcileable
££  war  againft  them,  and  are  arrived  to  this  pitch  of  folly,
££  or  rather  madnefs,  that,  in  order  to  accufe  thefe  to
££  you,  they  refolve  to  fubvert  their  whole  country;  who,

t£  when


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  273
“  when  they  fee  our  territories  laid  wafte  by  the  enemies,  and
“  that  they  are  upon  the  point  of  coming  even  to  our  gates,
cc  as  they  are  at  no  great  diftance  from  us,  inftead  of  ex-
“  horting,  and  exciting  the  youth  to  fight  for  their  country,
“  and  going  themfelves  to  her  relief  with  all  the  alacrity,
“  and  earneftnefs,  which  their  age,  and  ftrength  will  admit,
“  they  defire  you  will,  at  this  juncture,  confider  of  a  form
“  of  government,  create  new  magiftrates,  and  do  every  thing
“  rather  than  annoy  the  enemy;  and  even  this  they  cannot
“  fee,  that  their  opinions,  or  rather  their  withes,  are  im-
<c  practicable.

XVII.  cc  For,  confider  the  thing  in  this  light;  there  muft
“  be  a  previous  vote  of  the  fenate  for  the  election  of  magi-
<£  ftrates ;  after  that,  the  decemvirs  muft  lay  this  refolution
“  before  the  people,  and  appoint  the  third  market  day  for
<£  the  consideration  of  it:  For  how  can  any  thing,  that  is
“  voted  by  the  people  become  really  valid,  if  it  is  not  tranf-
“  aCted  according  to  the  laws?  Then,  after  the  tribes  have
“  given  their  votes,  the  new  magiftrates  muft  take  upon
“  themfelves  the  government  of  the  commonwealth,  and
<£  propofe  to  you  to  confider  of  the  war :  In  this  interval

between  the  appointment  of  the  election,  and  the  holding
“  it,  which  will  take  up  fo  much  time,  if  our  enemies  march
“  to  the  city,  and  approach  the  walls,  what  fhall  we  do,
£C  Claudius?  Shall  we  really  fay  to  them ;  Stay  till  we  have
<c  appointed  other  magiftrates  ?  For  Claudius  advifed  us  nei-
“  ther  to  make  a  previous  order  of  the  fenate  upon  any  other
c<  account,  nor  to  lay  any  thing  before  the  people,  nor  to  raife

Vol.  IV.  N  n  ££  forces,


274  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

“  forces,  till  we  had  fettled  every  thing,  that  relates  to  the
“  ele&ionof  magiftrates  according  to  our  defire:  Return,
“  therefore,  and  when  you  fliall  hear  that  the  confuls,  and
<c  the  other  magiftrates  are  appointed,  and  that  we  have
“  made  all  the  neceflary  preparations  to  give  you  battle,
“  then  come,  and  fue  for  peace,  fince  you  firft  injured  us
“  without  any  provocation ;  and  let  an  eftimate  be  made  of
“  all  the  damages  you  have  caufed  to  us  in  your  feveral  irrup-
“  tions,  and  pay  us  punctually  the  fum,  that  fliall  appear  by
«  that  means  to  be  due  to  us :  As  to  the  murder  of  the
“  hufbandmen,  the  infults,  and  abufes  offered  by  your
“  foldiers  to  women  of  free  condition,  or  any  other  irrepa-
“  rable  mifchief,  we  (hall  charge  you  nothing  for  them.
“  And  they,  no  doubt,  upon  our  offering  them  fuch  con-
“  ditions,  will  ufe  moderation;  and,  after  they  have  fuffered
<£  us  to  chufe  new  magiftrates,  and  to  make  preparations
££  for  the  war,  will  then  come  with  olive  branches  in  their
u  hands,  inftead  of  arms,  and  deliver  up  themfelves  to  us  ?

XVIII.  ££  O  the  great  folly  of  thofe  men,  who  can  en-
“  tertain  fuch  idle  imaginations!  And  as  great  muft  be  our
<£  infenfibility,  if,  while  they  are  uttering  fuch  things,  we
u  fhevy  no  difpleafure,  but  fubmit  to  hear  them,  as  if  we
“  were  confulting  how  to  fave  our  enemies,  and  not  how
<c  to  fave  ourfelves,  and  our  country.  Shall  we  not  get  rid
<c  of  thefe  triflers  ?  Not  vote  a  fpeedy  relief  to  the  country,
u  that  is  laying  wafte  ?  Not  arm  all  the  youth  of  Rome?
(C  Not  march  ourfelves  againft  the  cities  of  our  enemies?
a  Or  fhall  we  flay  at  home,  and  employ  our  time  in  abufing

u  the


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I S.  275

££  the  decemvirs;  in  eftablifhing  new  magiftracies ;  in  con-
C£  iidering  a  form  of  government,  as  if  we  were  in  peace;
“  let  everything  in  the  country  become  a  prey  to  the  enemy;
“  and,  at  laft,  run  the  hazard  of  being  inflaved  ourfelves,
c<  and  of  feeing  our  city  laid  in  ruins,  by  fuffering  the  war
££  to  approach  our  walls?  Such  counfels,  fathers,  cannot  be
cc  given  by  men  in  their  fenfes,  nor  dictated  by  found  policy,
(£  which  always  prefers  the  public  good  to  private  animo-
cc  hides;  but  by  an  unfeafonable  contentioufnefs,  a  thought-
££  lefs  enmity,  and  an  unfortunate  envy,  which  will  not  fuffer
<£  thofe  it  has  taken  poffeffion  of,  to  judge  rightly.  However,
“  let  us  take  leave  of  thefe  men,  and  of  their  animoftties.
“  I  fhall,  now,  endeavour  to  lay  before  you  thofe  refolutions,
“  which,  if  you  concur  in  them,  will  prove  falutary  to  the
<£  commonwealth,  becoming  yourfelves,  and  formidable  to
“  our  enemies.  Refolve,  immediately,  upon  a  war  againft
<£  the  Aequi,  and  Sabines,  and  raife  forces  with  the  greateft
C£  alacrity,  and  expedition,  to  be  employed  againft  both:
t£  And,  after  the  war  fhall  be  terminated  in  the  happieft
“  manner,  a  peace  concluded,  and  our  forces  return-
<c  ed,  then  confider  of  the  form  of  your  government;
u  call  the  decemvirs  to  an  account  for  all  their  actions,
“  during  the  time  of  their  adminiftration ;  create  new
t£  magiftrates ;  appoint  judges,  and  honour  with  both  thefe
“  offices  thofe,  who  are  worthy  of  them,  when  both  are  im
u  your  power;  and  be  afliired  that  opportunities  are  not
C£  fubfervient  to  affairs,  but  affairs  to  opportunities,”  Cor¬
nelius  having  delivered  this  opinion,  thofe,  who  rofe  up  after

N  n  2  him,


276  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

him,  except  a  few,  declared  in  favor  of  it :  Some  looking
upon  thefe  things  as  neceffary,  and  fuited  to  the  prefent
juncture;  and  others  yielding  to  the  times,  and  making
their  court  to  the  decemvirs  from  a  dread  of  their  magi-
ftracy :  For  the  greateft  part  of  the  fenate  flood  in  awe  of
their  power.

XIX.  After  mofl  of  the  fenators  had  delivered  their
opinions,  and  thofe,  who  declared  for  the  war,  appeared  to
be  much  more  numerous  than  the  others,  the  decemvirs
called  upon  Lucius  Valerius  among  the  laft :  He,  as  I  faid,
had  offered  to  fpeak  in  the  beginning  of  the  debate,  but  had
been  hindered  by  them :  And  now  riling  up,  he  fpoke  as
follows :  “  You  fee,  fathers,  the  treachery  of  the  decemvirs,
“  who  would  not  fuffer  me  at  firft  to  fay  thofe  things  to
^  you  I  had  propofed,  and  now  give  me  leave  to  fpeak
“  among  the  laft,  with  this  view,  as  may  be  ealily  judged,
“  that,  if  I  adhere  to  the  opinion  of  Claudius,  I  fhall  do  no
“  fervice  to  the  commonwealth,  becaufe  few  have  efpoufed
u  it;  and,  if  I  deliver  an  opinion  different  from  thofe  they
<c  have  propofed,  how  advantageous  foever  it  may  be,  my
“  reafons  will  appear  an  unavailing  rhapfody:  For  thofe,
u  who  are  to  rife  up  after  me,  are  not  many ;  and,  if  they
u  fhould  all  agree  with  me,  what  good  fhall  I  do,  when  their
<£  numbers  will  be  vaftly  inferior  to  thofe,  who  vote  with
<£  Cornelius  ?  However,  with  all  thefe  things  to  fear,  I  fhall
<c  not  decline  giving  you  my  opinion:  For,  when  you  have
<£  heard  all,  you  will  have  it  in  your  power  to  chufe  the  beft.
u  Concerning,  therefore,  the  decemvirate,  and  the  manner


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  ASSENSIS.  277

u  in  which  they  govern  the  commonwealth,  I  defire  you  will
“  think  that  every  thing  Claudius,  the  beft  of  men,  hasfaid,
u  to  have  been  faid  by  me  alfo,  and  that  you  ought  to  create
cc  new  magiftrates,  before  you  come  to  any  refolution  in
<£  refpeCt  to  the  war:  For,  all  he  faid  upon  that  fubjeCt  was
<c  founded  on  the  greateft  reafon.  But,  fince  Cornelius  has
cc  endeavoured  to  fhew  that  his  opinion  is  impracticable,  and
cc  that  much  time  would  be  fpent  in  this  civil  ©economy,
“  while  the  war  is  preffing;  and  attempted  to  ridicule
“  things,  that  do  not  defer ve  to  be  ridiculed,  and  by  that
“  means  feduced  many  of  you  to  concur  with  him  ;  I  fhali
“  fhew  you  that  the  opinion  of  Claudius  is  not  impracticable
“  (for,  that  it  is  unprofitable,  none  even  of  thofe  who  derided
tc  it,  have  dared  to  alledge)  and  let  you  fee  by  what  means
“  the  country  may  be  fecured ;  thofe,  who  have  dared  to  lay  it
c(  wafte,  punifhed,  and  we  recover  our  ancient  ariftocracy ;
((  and  how  thefe  things  maybe  brought  to  pafs  with  thecon-
cc  currence  of  all  the  citizens,  and  without  the  leaft  oppo-
4C  fition:  In  doing  this,  I  fhali  not  pretend  to  difplay  any
u  fort  of  wifdom,  but  produce  your  own  aClions,  as  examples
u  for  you  to  follow:  For,  when  experience  fuggefts  what  is
tc  ufeful,  why  fhould  we  have  recourfe  to  conjectures?

XX.  “  You  remember  that  numerous  forces,  lent  from
*c  the  fame  nations,  made  an  inroad  into  our  territories,
“  and  into  thofe  of  our  allies  at  the  fame  time,  and  in  the
u  fame  manner,  when  Caius  Nautius,  and  Lucius  Minucius
<c  were  confuls,  about  nine  or  ten  years  ago;  and  that,  upon
our  fending  a  numerous,  and  brave  youth  againft  both

u  thefe


278  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

C£  thefe  nations,  one  of  the  confuls  being  obliged  to  incamp
u  in  a  (freight,  and  difadvantageous  port,  could  perform
££  nothing,  but  was  befleged  in  his  camp,  and  in  danger  of
££  being  taken  for  want  of  proviiions :  While  Nautius,
££  being  prefled  by  the  Sabines,  and  under  a  necefflty  of
C£  ingaging  with  them  continually,  was  not  in  a  condition
f£  to  relieve  his  collegue:  Thus  it  was  manifeft  that,  if
“our  army  which  was  oppofed  to  the  Aequi,  fhould  be
“  defeated,  the  other,  that  was  carrying  on  the  war  againfl:
“  the  Sabines,  would  not  be  able  to  maintain  its  ground,
t£  when  both  the  armies  of  our  enemies  fhould  be  united.
££  While  the  commonwealth  was  furrounded  with  fuch
“  dangers,  and  even  the  city  itfelf  not  free  from  diflenflon,
“  what  relief  had  you  recourfe  to  ?  You  affembled  in  the
c£  fenate  about  midnight,  and  came  to  a  refolution,  which
“  all  acknowledge  to  have  been  of  great  advantage  to  your
“  affairs,  and  to  have  preferved  the  commonwealth  from
“imminent  ruin;  you  created  a  Angle  magiftracy  with
“  abfolute  authority  both  in  war  and  peace,  and  abrogated
cc  all  the  others;  and,  before  it  was  day,  Lucius  Quintius,
“  that  moft  worthy  man,  was  appointed  didator,  who  was
“  then  in  the  country.  You  are  acquainted  with  the  adions,
“  which  this  man  performed  foon  after ;  that  he  raffed  a  num-
“  ber  of  forces  fufficient  to  anfwer  his  deflgn  ;  that  he  deli-
“  vered  the  camp,  which  was  in  danger;  that  he  chaftifed
“  the  enemy,  and  took  their  general  prifoner ;  and,  having
“  efteded  all  thefe  things  within  the  compafs  of  fourteen
days  only,  and  reformed  every  diforder  of  the  common-

££  wealth,


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  AS  SENSIS.  279

££  wealth,  he  laid  down  the  rods :  And  nothing  hindered  you
“  then  from  creating  a  new  magiftracy  in  one  day,  when
{C  you  thought  proper  to  do  it.  This  example,  therefore,
<c  I  think  you  ought  to  imitate,  fince  there  is  nothing  elfe
“  we  can  do,  and  chufe  a  didtator  before  you  go  out  of  this
“  place:  For,  if  we  lofe  this  opportunity,  the  decemvirs
cc  will  never  affemble  us  again,  to  deliberate  upon  any  thing:
“  And,  in  order  to  render  the  appointment  of  a  didtator
u  regular,  create  an  interrex,  and  chufe  the  perfon  you  fhall
u  think  the  moft  proper  to  execute  that  office.  This  is  no
<£  unufual  thing,  when  you  have  neither  kings,  confuls,  nor
“  any  other  legal  magiflrates ;  which  is  the  cafe  at  prefent :
“  Since  the  term,  for  which  thefe  men  received  their  magi-
u  ftracy,  is  expired,  and  the  law  has  taken  their  rods  from
“  them.  This  is  the  advice  I  give  you,  fathers,  which  is
c<  both  advantageous,  and  practicable:  Whereas  That  of
“  Cornelius  tends  manifeftly  to  the  fubverfion  of  your  arifto-
“cracy:  Since,  if  the  decemvirs  are  once  trufted  with  arms
“  under  the  pretence  of  this  war,  I  am  afraid  they  will
“  make  life  of  them  againft  ourfelves:  For  will  thofe,
“  who  refufe  to  lay  down  their  rods,  lay  down  their  arms?
“  Confider,  therefore,  what  I  have  faid ;  beware  of  thefe
“  men,  and  forefee  all  the  effedts  of  their  treachery :  For
<c  forelight  is  better  than  repentance;  and  it  ffiews  more
“  prudence  not  to  truft  wicked  men,  than  to  accufe  them

«  after  they  have  betrayed  you.”

XXI.  This  opinion  of  Valerius  pleafed  the  majority  of

the  fenators,  as  it  was  eafy  to  conclude  both  from  their

accla-


•Book  XI.


280  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

acclamations,  and  the  concurrence  of  thofe,  who  (poke  after
him  (for  there  were  ftill  fome  of  the  young  fenators  left)  and,
except  a  few,  declared  their  approbation  of  it.  After
they  had  all  delivered  their  fentiments,  and  the  debate  was
near  a  concluhon,  Valerius  deiired  the  decemvirs  might
propofe  to  the  fenate  to  refume  the  debate,  and  again  call
upon  all  the  fenators  in  their  order :  This  was  approved  of  by
many  of  them,  who  defired  to  retradl  their  former  opinions :
But  Cornelius,  who  had  advifed  the  fenate  to  give  the  com¬
mand  of  the  war  to  the  decemvirs,  ftrongly  oppofed  this,
faying  that  the  affair  was  already  decided,  and  legally  de¬
termined,  fince  every  man  had  given  his  vote ;  and  he  infifted
on  counting  the  votes,  and  that  no  innovation  fhould  be
admitted.  Thefe  things  being  urged  by  both  with  great
heat,  and  exclamations,  and  the  fenate  dividing  in  favor  of
each,  fuch  as  were  defirous  to  reform  the  diforders  of  the
government,  adhered  to  Valerius,  while  thofe,  who  efpoufed
the  worfl:  caufe,  and  all,  who  fufpedted  fome  danger  from  a
change,  fupported  Cornelius :  The  decemvirs  took  advantage
of  this  difturbance  to  carry  their  point,  and  adopted  the
opinion  of  Cornelius ;  and  Appius,  one  of  their  number,
advancing,  faid:  u  We  affembled  you,  fathers,  to  confider
“  of  the  war  with  the  Aequi,  and  the  Sabines,  and  have
“  given  all  of  you  leave  to  fpeak,  from  the  oldeft  to  the
<c  youngeft,  in  your  refpedtive  ranks ;  and  there  having  been
“  three  different  opinions  delivered  by  Claudius,  Cornelius,
“  and,  laft  of  all,  by  Valerius,  the  reft  of  you  have  confider-
“  ed  them,  and  every  one  has  declared,  in  the  hearing  of

•  “  the


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  AR  N  ASSENS  IS.  281

£C  whole  fenate,  to  which  of  the  three  he  gave  his  afient:
cc  Every  thing,  therefore,  having  been  tranfaded  according
cc  to  the  laws,  and  That  of  Cornelius  having  been  approved
“  of  by  the  majority,  we  pronounce  that  his  opinion  carries
“  it,  and  accordingly  w^e  fhall  order  it  to  be  drawn  up,  and
“  publifhed.  Let  Valerius,  and  his  partifans,  when  they
“  fhall  obtain  the  confular  power,  rehear,  if  they  think  fit,
“  caufes  already  determined,  and  annul  refolutions  palled
“  by  you  all.”  Having  faid  this,  and  ordered  the  clerk  to
read  the  decree,  by  which  the  power  of  railing  forces,  and
the  command  of  the  war  was  given  to  the  decemvirs,  he
difmified  the -fenate.

XXII.  After  this,  thofe  of  the  oligarchical  fadion,  ap¬
peared  every  where  with  pride,  and  infolence,  as  if  they  had
gained  a  vidory  over  their  adverfaries,  and  prevented  a  dif-
folution  of  their  power  by  having  the  fword  put  into  their
hands :  While  the  men  of  the  bell  affedions  to  the  com¬
monwealth  were  under  great  afflidion,  and  conllernation,
looking  upon  themfelves  as  deprived  for  ever  of  any  fhare
in  the  government:  Thefe  fplit  into  many  parties ;  thofe  of
the  leaf!:  refolute  difpofitions,  thinking  themfelves  obliged  to
abandon  every  thing  to  the  conquerors,  and  join  the  oligar¬
chical  fadion :  And  fuch,  as  were  lefs  timorous,  deferting
the  care  of  the  public  in  exchange  for  a  quiet  life :  But  thofe,
whofe  minds  were  warmed  with  a  generous  fpirit,  employed
themfelves  in  colleding  a  number  of  their  friends,  and  united
in  the  defign  of  defending  one  another,  and  of  changing
the  form  of  government.  The  heads  of  this  party  were
Vol.  IV.  O  o  Lucius


2$2  ROMAN  ANTIQJJIT IES  OF  BookXI.

Lucius  Valerius,  and  Marcus  Horatius,  who  had  the  refo-
lution  firft  to  propofe  in  the  fenate  the  abolition  of  the  de¬
cern  virate  :  Thefe  fecured  both  their  houfes  with  arms,  and
their  perfons  with  a  ftrong  guard  of  their  fervants,  and  clients,
in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  have  nothing  to  fear  either  from
force,  or  fraud.  On  the  other  fide,  thofe  perfons,  who
were  unwilling  to  court  the  power  of  the  conquerors,  and
thought  it  unbecoming  in  them  either  to  abandon  all  care
of  the  public,  or  to  lead  an  inactive  life,  and  looked  upon
it  as  no  eafy  matter  openly  to  attack  fo  great  a  power,  the
fubverfion  of  which  they  thought  it  a  folly  to  expedt,  quitted
the  city.  At  the  head  of  thefe  was  the  illuftrious  Caius
Claudius,  uncle  to  the  chief  of  the  decemvirate,  who  by
this  ftep  performed  the  promifes  he  had  made  to  his  nephew
in  the  fenate,  when  he  attempted  in  vain  to  prevail  upon
him  to  refign  his  power :  He  was  followed  by  a  great  number
of  his  friends,  and  clients.  After  his  example,  many  other
citizens  alfo,  not  privately  as  before,  or  in  fmall  numbers,
but  openly,  and  in  a  body,  abandoned  their  country,  taking
with  them  their  wives,  and  children.  Appius,  and  his  col-
legues,  being  inraged  at  this,  endeavoured  at  firft  to  ftop
them,  by  caufing  the  gates  to  be  fhut,  and  fome  perfons  to
be  feized.  Afterwards,  being  afraid  left  thofe  they  attempted
to  ftop,  fhould  have  recourfe  to  violence,  and  judging  it
rightly  to  be  more  for  their  intereft  that  their  enemies  fhould
be  out  of  the  way,  than  that  they  fhould  ftay  to  create
difturbances,  they  opened  the  gates,  and  fuffered  all,  who
were  willing,  to  depart.  However,  they  treated  them  as

deferters2


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  SEN  SIS.  283

deferters,  and  confifcated,  in  appearance,  their  houfes,  and
eflates,  and  every  thing  elfe  they  could  not  carry  away  with
them ;  but,  in  reality,  they  bellowed  thofe  confutations  on
their  friends,  pretending  they  had  purchafed  them  of  the
public.  Thefe  grievances,  added  to  the  former,  greatly
inflamed  the  animolity  both  of  the  patricians,  and  plebeians
againft  the  decemvirs.  However,  it  is  my  opinion  that,  if
they  had  not  gone  on  in  multiplying  their  crimes,  they
might  have preferved  their  power  a  confiderable  time:  For
the  fedition,  which  maintained  that  power,  ftill  continued
in  the  city,  and  had  been  encreafed  by  many  caufes,  and  by  a
great  length  of  time.  To  this  it  was  owing  that  each  of  the
two  parties  rejoiced  in  the  other’s  miferies :  The  plebeians  in
feeing  the  fpirit  of  the  patricians  humbled,  and  the  fenate
deprived  of  every  branch  of  their  authority ;  and  the  patri¬
cians,  in  feeing  the  people  ftripped  of  their  liberty,  and
without  the  leaft  ftrength,  flnce  the  decemvirs  had  taken
from  them  the  tribunitian  power :  But  thofe  men,  by  treat¬
ing  both  parties  with  great  arrogance,  and  by  uling  neither
moderation  in  the  army,  nor  modefty  in  the  city,  forced
them  both  to  unite,  and  to  abolifh  their  magiftracy  as  foon
as  the  war  put  arms  into  their  hands.  The  laft  crimes  they
were  guilty  of,  and  for  which  their  power  was  fubverted  by
the  people,  whom  they  had  chiefly  inraged  by  their  abufes,
were  thefe :

XXIII.  After  they  had  procured  a  decree  of  the  fenate
for  the  war,  they  prefently  raifed  forces ;  and,  dividing  them
into  three  bodies,  left  one  of  thefe,  which  confifted  of  two

O  o  2  legions,


284  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  BookXI.

legions,  to  guard  the  city:  This  body  was  commanded  by
Appius  Claudius,  the  chief  of  the  oligarchy,  and  by  Spurius
Oppius.  Quintus  Fabius,  Quintus  Poetilius,  and  Manius
Rabuleius  marched  with  the  fecond,  in  which  there  were
three  legions,  againfl:  the  Sabines.  And  Marcus  Cornelius,
Lucius  Minucius,  Marcus  Sergius,  Titus  Antonius,  andCaefo
Duillius  led  the  third  body,  which  was  compofed  of  the
five  remaining  legions,  againfl:  the  Aequi.  The  auxiliary
troops  both  of  the  Latines,  and  their  other  allies  joined  them,
being  not  fewer  than  Thofe  of  the  Romans.  But  the  de¬
cemvirs  fucceededin  nothing  they  undertook,  notwithftanding
the  armies  they  commanded  confifted  of  fuch  numbers  both
of  national,  and  auxiliary  forces :  For  the  enemies,  de-
fpifing  their  troops  as  compofed  of  new  raifed  men,  incamped
oppofite  to  them;  and,  placing  ambufcades  in  the  roads,
cut  off  their  provifions,  and  attacked  them  when  they  went
out  for  forage ;  and,  whenever  they  came  to  an  ingagement,
in  which  both  the  horfe,  and  foot  charged  one  another,  they
were  always  fuperior  to  the  Romans,  many  of  whom  volun¬
tarily  mifbehaved  themfelves  in  every  action ;  difobeyed  their
officers,  and  refufed  to  charge :  That  part  of  the  army,
therefore,  that  was  oppofed  to  the  Sabines,  grown  wife  by
leffer  evils,  refolved  to  leave  their  camp  of  their  own  accord ;
and,  decamping  about  midnight,  withdrew  from  the  enemy’s
territories  to  their  own,  making  a  retreat  not  unlike  a  flight,
till  they  came  to  Cruftumerium,  a  city  not  far  from  Rome.
But  the  other,  that  lay  incamped  on  mount  Algidus  in  the
country  of  the  Aequi,  having  fuftered  alfo  very  much  from

the


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  A  S  SE  N  S I S.  285

the  enemy,  and  ftill  refolving  to  ftand  their  ground  in  the
midft  of  thefe  dangers,  in  hopes  of  repairing  the  difadvantages
they  had  fuftained,  were  moft  miferably  treated :  For  the
enemy,  having  attacked  their  camp,  and  cleared  the  in-
trenchments  of  thofe,  who  defended  them,  forced  their  way
into  it ;  and,  pofiefling  themfelves  of  their  camp,  killed
a  few  who  relifted,  but  flew  many  more  in  the  purfuit :
Thofe,  who  efcaped  from  this  rout,  being  moft  of  them
wounded,  and  having  almoft  all  loft  their  arms,  went  to  the
city  of  Tufculum;  but  the  enemy  took  their  tents,  beads
of  burden,  money,  Haves,  and  the  reft  of  their  military  pro¬
visions:  When  the  news  of  this  defeat  was  brought  to  Rome,
the  enemies  of  the  oligarchy,  and  thofe  who  before  had  con¬
cealed  their  hatred,  difcovered  themfelves  now  by  rejoicing
at  the  misfortunes  of  the  generals;  and  both  Horatius,  and
Valerius,  who,  as  I  faid,  were  the  leaders  of  the  ariftocratical
party,  had  already  a  ftrong  body  of  men  at  their  command.

XXIV.  In  the  mean  time,  Appius,  andSpurius  fupplied
their  collegues,  who  were  in  the  field,  with  arms,  money,
corn,  and  every  thing  elfe  they  flood  in  need  of,  taking  all
thefe  with  a  high  hand  whether  they  belonged  to  the  public,
or  to  private  perfons ;  and,  lifting  all  the  men  in  every  tribe,
who  were  able  to  bear  arms^  in  order  to  replace  thofe,  who
had  been  killed,  they  fent  them  to  the  army :  So  that,  the
centuries  were  all  completed  :  They  were  alfo  very  careful
in  providing  for  the  fecurity  of  the  city,  by  placing  guards
in  the  moft  advantageous  pofts,  left  thofe,  who  had  joined
Valerius,  fhould  privately  foment  fome  diforders:  After  that.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.
they  gave  fecret  inftru&ions  to  their  collegues  in  the  army
to  put  to  death  all,  vvhooppofed  their  meaiures;  the  men  of
diftin&ion  privately ;  and  thofe  of  lefs  confideration  openly  ;
ufing  always  fome  pretences  to  make  them  appear  criminal.
Thefe  inftrudlions  were  purfued :  For  fome  of  the  former
being  fent  for  forage,  others  to  convoy  provifions,  and  others
upon  different  military  fervices,  when  once  out  of  the  camp,
were  never  feen  after:  As  to  the  common  men,  they  were
accufed  of  having  been  the  firft,  who  turned  their  backs
upon  the  enemy ;  of  giving  them  fecret  intelligence,  or  of
quitting  their  ranks ;  and  put  to  death  publicly,  in  order
to  ftrike  terror  into  the  reft.  Two  caufes,  therefore,  con¬
tributed  to  the  deftrudtion  of  the  foldiers ;  the  friends  of  the
oligarchy  were  flain  by  the  enemy  in  different  adlions,  and
Thofe  of  the  ariftocracy,  by  the  generals.

XXV.  Many  cruelties  of  this  nature  were  alfo  committed
in  the  city  by  Appius,  and  his  collegue.  However,  the
generality  of  the  people  were  lefs  affe&ed  with  the  lofs  of
others,  though  many  were  taken  off :  But  the  cruel,  and
wicked  affaffination  of  one  man,  who  was  the  moll  di-
ftinguifhed  of  all  the  plebeians,  and  had  performed
the  greatefl  exploits  in  war,  executed  in  one  of  the  camps,
where  the  three  generals  commanded,  difpofed  every
one  there  to  a  revolt.  The  perfon  affaffinated  was  Siccius,
who  had  fought  the  hundred  and  twenty  battles,  and  been
rewarded  for  his  bravery  in  all;  and  who,  as  I  faid,  when
he  was  exempt  from  fervice  by  reafon  of  his  age,  voluntarily
ingaged  in  the  war  againft  the  Aequi,  at  the  head  of  a  band

of


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI  C  A  RN  ASSENSIS.  28;

of  eight  hundred  men,  who  had  alfo  completed  their  term
of  fervice  ordained  by  the  laws,  and  followed  him  from  their
affection  to  his  perfon ;  with  whom  being  fent  by  one  of  the
confuls  to  attack  the  enemy’s  camp,  or  rather  to  manifeft
deftrudion,  as  every  one  thought,  he  not  only  made  himfelf
mafterof  their  camp,  but  gave  occafion  to  the  confuls  to  ob¬
tain  a  complete  victory :  This  man,  who  had  made  many
fpeeches  in  the  city  againft  the  condudt  of  the  generals,  who
were  then  in  the  field,  and  accufed  them  of  the  want  both  of
courage,  and  experience,  Appius,  and  his  colleguerefolved  to
deftroy ;  and,  to  that  end,  invited  him  to  friendly  conven¬
tions,  and  to  confult  with  them  concerning  the  operations  of
the  war,  defiring  him  to  give  them  his  opinion  by  what  means
the  errors  of  the  generals  might  be  corrected;  and,  at  laft,
prevailed  upon  him  to  go  to  the  camp  at  Cruftumerium  in
quality  of  legate.  This  dignity  is  of  all  others  the  mod
honourable,  and  the  mod  facred  among  the  Romans,  and  to
it  is  annexed  the  power,  and  authority  of  a  general,  and  the
inviolable,  and  holy  character  of  a  prieft.  When  he  came
to  the  camp,  the  generals  received  him  with  great  marks  of
friendfhip ;  and,  defiring  him  to  fcay  there,  and  command
in  conjun&ion  with  them,  and  making  him  fome  prefents,
and  promifing  others,  this  military  man,  indued  with  fim-
plicity  of  manners,  was  deceived  by  thefe  wicked  diflemblers,
and  fo  far  deluded  by  the  magic  of  their  profeflions,  as  not
to  fee  the  fnare,  that  was  laid  for  him ;  and,  among  other
counfels,  which  he  thought  advantageous  to  them,  he  firft
of  all  advifed  them  to  remove  their  camp  from  their  own

territories


233  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

territories  to  Thofe  of  the  enemy,  and  laid  before  them  both
the  inconveniences  they  then  fuftained,  and  the  advantages
they  would  gain,  by  removing  their  camp.

XXVI.  The  generals  pretending  to  receive  his  advice
with  great  fatisfa&ion,  “  Why  then,  faid  they,  do  you  not
“  take  upon  yourfelf  the  command  of  the  army,  when  they
u  decamp,  and  go  before  hand  to  view  the  ground,  and  chufe
u  an  advantageous  poft  ?  You  are  fufficiently  acquainted
“  with  the  country  by  the  many  campaigns  you  have  made
iC  there,  and  we  will  give  you  a  century  of  chofen  youth  armed
“  for  expedition;  you  fhall  have  a  horfe  by  reafon  of  your
“  age,  and  armour  becoming  your  dignity.”  Siccius  having
accepted  the  com  million,  and  defired  an  hundred  chofen  light
armed  men  to  attend  him,  they  without  delay  fent  him  out
while  it  was  night,  and  with  him  the  hundred  men,  whom
they  had  picked  out  as  the  moft  daring  of  their  faction,  with
orders  to  kill  the  man,  promifing  them  great  rewards  for  the
murder :  Thefe,  when,  at  a  great  diftance  from  the  camp,  they
came  to  a  mountainous  place,  where  the  road  was  narrow,
and  difficult  for  a  horfe  to  go  any  other  pace  than  a  walk,  by
reafon  of  the  unevennefs  of  the  ground,  gave  the  fignal  to  one
another,  and  aflembled  with  a  defign  to  return  upon  him  in
a  body :  But  a  fervant  of  Siccius,  who  was  his  fhield  bearer,
and  a  brave  man,  gueffedat  their  defign,  and  gave  his  mafter
notice  of  it :  Siccius,  feeing  himfelf  confined  in  a  narrow
pafs,  where  it  was  not  poffible  for  him  to  drive  his  horfe  full
fpeed,  alighted ;  and,  ftanding  againft  the  hill  to  avoid  be¬
ing  furrounded  by  his  affailants,  he,  without  any  other

affiftance


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  LI ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  289
affiftance  than  that  of  his  fliield  bearer,  determined  to  receive
their  attack:  They  falling  upon  him  all  at  once,  he  pre-
fently  killed  about  fifteen  of  them,  and  wounded  twice  as
many ;  and  would  have  flain  all  the  reft,  if  they  had  come  to
clofe  fight  with  him  ;  but  they,  convinced  that  he  was  a
man  not  to  be  overcome,  and  that  they  could  never  van-
quifh  him  by  ingaging  hand  to  hand,  gave  over  this  way
of  fighting ;  and,  retiring  farther  off,  threw  javelins,  ftones,
and  flicks  at  him,  and  fome,  afcending  the  hills,  that  flood
on  each  fide,  and  getting  above  him,  rolled  down  large  ftones
upon  him;  till,  by  the  number  of  the  miftive  weapons,  that
were  thrown  by  thofe  before  him,  and  the  weight  of  the
ftones,  that  fell  upon  him  from  above,  he  fell  dead.  This
was  the  end  of  Siccius.

XXVII.  The  aftafilns  returned  to  the  camp  bringing
their  wounded  with  them,  and  fpread  a  report  that  a  party
of  the  enemy  having  furprifed  them,  had  killed  Siccius,  and
fuch  of  their  company,  as  they  firft  attacked  ;  and  that
they  themfelves,  after  receiving  many  wounds,  had  efcaped
with  great  difficulty:  This  every  one  believed.  However,
their  crime  could  not  remain  concealed  ;  but,  though  com¬
mitted  in  a  folitude,  and  no  information  could  be  given  of
it,  yet,  by  fate  itfelf,  and  that  juftice,  which  inlpedls  all
human  adtions,  undoubted  proofs  appeared  to  convidt  them;
For  the  foldiers  in  the  camp,  looking  upon  the  man  to  de-
ferve  not  only  a  public  funeral,  but  alfodiftinguiffied  honors
for  many  reafons,  but  particularly  becaufe,  though  he  was  a
perfon  in  years,  and  exempted  by  his  age  from  the  fervice,  he
Vol.  IV.  P  p  had


29o  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  XI.

had  voluntarily  thrown  himfelf  into  danger  for  the  public
good,  refolved  unanimoufly  that  a  detachment  from  the  three
legions  fhould  go  out  in  fearch  of  his  body,  to  the  end  it
might  be  brought  to  the  camp  with  great  fecurity,  and  honor;
and,  the  generals  confenting  to  this  for  fear  of  creating  fome
fufpicion  of  their  guilt  by  oppofing  a  worthy,  and  becoming
action,  they  took  their  arms,  and  went  out  of  the  camp.
When  they  came  to  the  fpot,  and  faw  neither  woods,  nor
valleys,  nor  any  other  place  proper  to  conceal  an  ambufcade,
but  a  naked,  and  open  hill  on  each  fide  of  the  narrow  pafs,
they  prefently  fufpedted  what  had  happened  ;  then,  ap¬
proaching  the  dead  bodies,  and  feeing  Siccius  himfelf,  and
all  the  reft  lying  unftripped,  they  wondered  what  fhould
have  induced  the  enemy,  when  victorious,  to  have  taken
away  neither  their  arms,  nor  their  clothes ;  and,  when  they
examined  every  part  round  the  place,  and  found  no  traces
of  horfes,  nor  footfteps  of  men,  befides  Thofe  in  the
road,  they  thought  it  impoflible  that  the  enemy  fhould  have
prefented  themfelves  at  once  before  their  companions,  as  if
they  had  wings,  or  fell  from  Heaven :  But,  befides  thefe,
and  many  other  things,  the  moft  convincing  proof  that
Siccius  had  been  (lain  not  by  the  enemy,  but  by  his  own
men,  was  this ;  that  not  fo  much  as  one  dead  body  of  the
former  was  to  be  found  :  For  they  could  not  conceive  that
Siccius,  a  man  irreliftible  both  by  his  ftrength,  and  valor,
or  his  fhield  bearer,  or  thofe,  who  had  been  flain  with  him
could  have  fallen  unrevenged,  particularly  fince  they  had
fought  hand  to  hand ;  this  they  obferved  by  their  wounds  t
■  "  For


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  EN  S  I  S.  291

For  both  Siccius  himfelf,  and  his  (Field  bearer  had  many
wounds,  Tome  by  ftones,  others  by  javelins,  and  others  by
fwords ;  whereas  thofe,  who  had  been  (lain  by  them,  were
all  wounded  by  fwords,  and  none  by  ftones,  javelins,  or  other
miffive  weapons:  This  raifed  their  refentment,  and  they
all  cried  out,  making  great  lamentations.  After  they  had
bewailed  the  calamity  of  this  brave  man,  they  took  up  his
body ;  and,  carrying  it  to  the  camp,  threw  out  many  in¬
vectives  againft  their  generals ;  and,  above  all  things,  they
wanted  to  put  the  murderers  to  death  by  military  violence ;
or,  if  that  could  not  be  done,  to  have  judges  prefen tly  ap¬
pointed  to  try  them,  many  offering  themfelves  to  be  their
accufers.  The  generals  paid  no  regard  to  any  thing  they
deftred,  but  concealed  the  men,  and  put  off  the  trial,  telling
them  they  (hould  anfwer  any  accufations,  when  the  army
returned  to  Rome :  Upon  which,  the  foldiers,  finding  that
the  generals  had  been  the  authors  of  this  affaffination,
buried  Siccius  in  a  moft  magnificent  manner,  and  ere&ed  a
large  funeral  pile,  where  every  man,  according  to  his  power,
prefented  the  firft  offerings  of  every  thing,  that  is  ufually
employed  in  performing  the  laft  honors  to  brave  men;  but
they  were  all  alienated  from  the  decemvirs,  and  refolved
from  that  moment  to  revolt.  Thus,  the  army,  that  lay
incamped  at  Crufturnerium,  and  Fidenae,  were,  by  the
murder  of  Siccius  the  legate,  irritated  againft  the  rulers  of
the  commonwealth.

XXVIII.  The  other  army,  that  lay  on  mount  Algidus  in
the  territories  of  the  Aequi,  as  well  as  the  whole  body  of  the

P  p  2  people


292  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

people  at  Rome,  became  exafperated  againft  them,  for  the
following  reafons:  A  plebeian,  whofe  name  was  Lucius  Vir-
ginius,  a  man  inferior  to  none  in  military  accomplifhments,
had  the  lz  command  of  a  century  in  one  of  the  five  legions,
that  were  employed  againft  the  Aequi ;  this  perfon  had  a
daughter,  called  from  her  father,  Virginia,  who  far  furpaffed
all  the  Roman  virgins  in  beauty,  and  was  promifed  in  marriage
to  Lucius,  formerly  a  tribune,  the  13  grandfon  of  that  Icilius,
who  firft  inftituted,  and  was  firft  invefted  with,  the  tribunitian
power :  Appius  Claudius,  the  chief  of  the  decemvirs,  having
feen  this  virgin,  who  was  now  marriageable,  as  fhe  was
reading  in  a  fchool  (for  the  fchools  flood  at  that  time  near
the  forum)  he  was  prefently  captivated  with  her  beauty,  and
the  violence  of  his  pafiion  forcing  him  often  to  return  to
the  fchool,  his  phrenfy  was,  by  this  means,  encreafed.  But,
finding  it  impoffible  for  him  to  marry  her,  both  becaufe  fhe


A o%y  r /vo?  vyEfACviuv  i%uv  gv  to/?
i?ev7s  rvyiMunv  Whenever  Por-

tus  (who  certainly  underflood  Greek
extremely  well)  miftakes  the  fenfe  of
our  author,  le  Jay  never  fails  to  adopt
his  rniflake :  This,  if  it  happened  but
feldom,  might,  and  ought  to  be  attri¬
buted  to  accident :  But,  when  it  is
never  otherwife,  it  can  be  afcribed  to
nothing  but  to  his  tranflating  him
without  any  regard  to  the  Greek  text.
Portus,  through  inadvertency,  had
rendered  this  paffage,  quinque  illis  legi-
cnibus  praefebius  fuerat  ;  and  his  faith¬
ful  follower  has  faid,  eftoit  parvenu  au
commands mcnt  des  cinq  legions .  n  Livy,


in  fpeaking  of  the  command  of  Vir-
ginius,  fays,  honejlum  ordinem  in  Algido
ducebat.

r icovot.  Sylburgius  has  very  well
obferved  that  Lucius  Icilius  muft  have
been  the  grandfon,  not  the  fon  of  that
Icilius,  who  was  one  of  the  firft  tri¬
bunes;  fince,  from  that  time  to  the
prefent  year  305,  there  are  no  lels
than  44  years,  and  this  Lucius  is  all
along  fpoken  of  as  a  young  man.
This  correction  I  have  followed  in  the
Greek  text,  and  in  my  tranflation,
have  fubftituted  i jmos  in  the  room  of
1 for,  which  is  the  reading  of  all  the
editions,  and  manufcripts.


n  B.  iii.  c.  44.


was


I


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN AS  SE  NS  I  S.  293

was  promifed  to  another,  and  becaufe  he  himfelf  was  mar¬
ried  ;  and  looking  upon  it,  at  the  fame  time,  to  be  below
him  to  marry  into  a  plebeian  family,  and  contrary  to  the
law,  which  he  himfelf  had  inferted  among  Thofe  of  the
twelve  tables,  he  firft  endeavoured  to  corrupt  her  with  mo¬
ney  ;  and,  for  that  purpofe,  was  continually  fending  fome
women  to  her  governeffes  (for  Virginia  had  loft  her  mother)
and  gave  them  much,  and  promifed  more.  The  women
he  fent  to  tempt  the  governeffes,  had  orders  not  to  acquaint
them  with  the  name  of  the  man,  who  was  in  love  with
Virginia,  but  only  that  he  was  a  perfon,  who  had  it  in  his
power  to  do  good,  and  bad  offices,  to  thofe  he  thought  fit.
When  he  found  himfelf  unable  to  gain  the  governefies,  and
faw  the  virgin  guarded  even  with  greater  care  than  before,  his
paffion  was  inflamed,  and  he  refolved  upon  more  audacious
meafures :  Then,  fending  for  Marcus  Claudius,  who  was  one
of  his  clients,  a  daring  man,  and  ready  for  any  fervice,  he
acquainted  him  with  his  paffion ;  and,  having  inftru&ed
him  with  what  he  would  have  him  do,  and  fay,  he  fent  him
away,  accompanied  with  a  band  of  the  moft  profligate  men.
Claudius,  going  to  the  fchool,  feized  the  virgin,  and  at¬
tempted  to  lead  her  away  publicly  through  the  forum  ;
but,  there  being  an  outcry,  and  a  great  concourfe  of
people,  he  was  hindered  from  carrying  the  virgin  to  the
place  he  had  defigned,  and  addreffed  himfelf  to  a  magiftrate;
this  was  Appius,  who  was  then  fitting  alone  in  the  tribunal
to  hear  caufes,  and  adminifter  juftice  to  thofe}  who  applied
for  it :  But,  when  Claudius  was  going  to  fpeak,  the  people*

who


294  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

who  flood  round  the  tribunal,  cried  out,  and  exprefied  their
indignation,  and  all  delired  he  might  flay  till  the  relations
of  the  virgin  were  prefent :  And  Appius  ordered  it  fhould
be  fo.  In  a  Abort  time,  Publius  Numitorius,  uncle  to  Vir¬
ginia  by  her  mother,  a  man  of  diftindion  among  the  pie-  -
beians,  appeared  with  many  of  his  friends,  and  relations ;
and,  not  long  after,  came  Lucius,  to  whom  {he  had  been
promifed  by  her  father,  accompanied  with  a  ftrong  body
of  young  plebeians.  He  came  to  the  tribunal  out  of
breath,  and  14  labouring  for  refpiration,  and  delired  to  know
who  it  was  had  dared  to  lay  hands  upon  a  virgin,  who  was
a  Roman  citizen,  and  what  he  meant  by  it.

XXIX.  All  being  filent,  Marcus  Claudius,  who  had  laid
hold  on  Virginia,  fpoke  as  follows :  “  I  have  committed
“  neither  a  ralh,  nor  a  violent  adion  in  relation  to  this
“  virgin,  Appius  Claudius;  but,  as  I  am  her  mafler,  I  take
<c  her  according  to  law.  I  fhall  now  inform  you  by  what
cc  means  fhe  is  become  mine;  I  have  a  female  Have,  who


H’  MfliUQOS  TO  3TV£V|M04.  °  Hor3.CC  haS

tranflated  this  Greek  expreffion  very
happily  in  that  fine  ode,  where,  in
fpeaking  of  Tydides,  he  fays  to  Paris,

Quern  tu ,  cervus  uti  vallis  in  altera
Vifum  parte  lupum graminis  immemor,
Sublimi/^zVj  mollis  anhelitu.

I  with  the  reader  would  accept  this
verfion,  and  give  me  leave  to  follow
the  example  of  the  French  tranfiators,
who  have  both  agreed  to  leave  out
thefe  words :  They  have  faid,  tout  hors


d'haleine ,  which  very  well  explains
oio&Y* ouviov  *,  but  what  becomes  of  ju/Ib-
to  zrvBvpot,  ?  They  have  avoided
thefe  words  as  religioufly,  as  if  there
was  fome  conjuration  in  them.  It  is
certain  I  cannot  tranflate  this  expref-
fion.  But  it  is  too  late  now  to  call
out  for  quarter,  after  I  have  attempted
the  tranfiation  of  fo  many  difficult
paffages,  rather  than  leave  them  out.
If  the  reader  diffikes  my  tranfiation  of
this,  I  can  allure  him  that  he  cannot
diflike  it  more  than  I  do.


®  B.  i.  Ode  15.


“  belonged


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  SENS  I  S.  295
“  belonged  to  my  father,  and  has  ferved  a  great  many  years :
u  This  Have,  being  with  child,  was  ingaged  by  the  wife
c<  of  Virginius  15  whom  (lie  was  acquainted  with,  and  ufed
cc  to  vifit,  to  give  her  the  child  fhe  fhould  be  brought
“  to  bed  of ;  and,  in  performance  of  this  promife,  when
“  delivered  of  this  daughter,  fhe  pretended  to  us  that  fhe
“  was  brought  to  bed  of  a  dead  child,  and  gave  the  girl  to


“  Numitoria ;  who,  having
“  female,  took  the  child ;  and

J5*  H  Ovioytvix  yvvy  ffvvy^yi,  KCti  acoSiotv
%<rav  tneuriv.  ’  Pvl,  *  *  *  very  juftly  cen-
fures  le  Jay  for  having  fuffered  him-
felf  to  be  milled  by  Portus  in  render¬
ing  this  paflage.  For  my  own  part,
I  never  cenfure  le  Jay  for  miftaking
the  Greek  text,  becaufe  it  is  plain  that
he  never  confulted  it  j  but  here  he  has
grofsly  miftaken  the  Latin  of  Portus ;
and,  by  miftaking  it,  has  invented  an
intrigue  between  the  father  of  Clau¬
dius,  and  his  Have,  for  which  there
is  not  the  leaft  foundation  either  in
the  Greek  text  (but  that  is  out  of  the
queftion)  or  in  the  Latin  tranftation
of  Portus.  The  latter  fays,  quod  ipfi
ejfet  familiarise  et  cum  ipfd  confuetudinem
haberet.  Thefe  laft  words  impofed
upon  le  Jay,  and  gave  him  occafion
to  fuppofe  this  intrigue  ;  whereas,  ipfi
plainly  relates  to  the  wife  of  Virginius,
and  not  to  patri,  as  he  has  taken  it ;
fince  the  father  of  Claudius  is  not
mentioned  either  in  the  Greek  text,  or
in  the  Latin  of  Portus:  In  the  former,
the  flave  is  called  Stoonrouvx  zrdlgiKK  ■>
and,  in  the  latter,  paterna  ferva  and
confuetudinem  haberet  is  defigned  for  a
tranflation  of  «<rc<h«v,  as  le  Jay  muft


no  children,  either  male,  or
, 16  fuppofing  it,  brought  it  up:

have  known,  if  he  had  confulted,  and
underftood,  the  Greek  text :  However,
I  fhall  do  him  the  juftice  I  have  al¬
ways  done  to  tranfcribe  hisown  words:
J’ay  une  efclave  chez  moy  qui  efioit  au¬
trefois  a  mon  pere ,  et  qui  me  fert  depuis
plufieurs  annees :  elle  eut  Vavantage  de
lui  plaire,  et  par  le  commerce  qu  elle  eut
avec  luie  elk  en  devint  enceinte.

l6,  TTroGxhAcIcu.  I  hope  the  reader
will  allow  me  to  translate  this  fuppofesy
which  I  cannot  do  otherwife  without,
a  great  circumlocution,  nor  properly
with  it.  I  own  that  I  do  not  remember
to  have  met  with  this  word  ufed  in  this
fenfe  as  a  verb  in  our  language  ;  but
we  make  ufe  of  the  participle  fuppofede
and  of  the  adjective  fuppofititious.  I
was  furprifed  to  find  that  the  French
tranflators  did  not  employ  this  verb  ;
fince  fuppofer  un  enfant  is  certainly
good  French.  If  they  had  done  this,
le  Jay  needed  not  to  have  faid  Numi -
tone  la  fit  paffer  pour  fa  fills,  and  I’eleva
avec  le  mefme  foin  que  ft  elle  en  eufil  efte
la  mere:  Nor  M.  '*** — elle  Veleva
avec  autant  de  foin  que  fit  o' eut  ete  la
fienne :  which,  by  the  way,  are  almoft
the  fame  words  with  the  former.  They:

cc  For


296  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

“  For  along  time,  I  was  ignorant  of  all  this;  but  now  being
u  informed  of  it,  and  provided  with  many  credible  witnefles,
££  and  having  alfo  examined  the  Have,  I  fly  to  that  law,
£C  which  is  common  to  all,  and  determines  that  the  children
cc  fhall  belong  to  their  mothers,  not  to  thofe  who  fuppofe
“  them;  that,  if  the  mothers  are  free,  the  children  fhall  be
££  free;  if  tho{p  are  flaves,  the  children  fhall  be  flaves  alfo  ;
££  and  that  both  the  children,  and  the  mothers,  fhall  have
“  the  fame  mafters :  In  virtue  of  this  law,  I  defire  that  I
££  may  take  the  daughter  of  my  flave,  and  am  ready  to  fub-
££  mit  my  pretenfions  to  a  trial ;  and,  if  any  one  claims  her,
££  to  give  fufficient  fiireties  to  produce  her  at  the  time  ap-
£C  pointed;  but,  if  they  defire  to  have  this  affair  ipeedily
££  determined,  I  am  willing  this  minute  to  plead  my  caufe
££  before  you,  and  fhall  neither  give  fecurity  for  her  ap-
££  pearance,  nor  offer  any  thing  that  may  create  a  delay.
££  Let  them  chufe  which  of  thefe  two  conditions  they  like
££  beft.”

XXX.  After  Claudius  had  faid  this,  and  added  many
intreaties  that  his  claim  might  not  be  lefs  regarded  than
That  of  his  adverfaries,  becaufe  he  was  his  client,  and  of
mean  birth ;  the  uncle  of  Virginia  anfwered  in  few  words,
and  thofe  fuch,  as  were  proper  to  be  addreffed  to  a  magi-
ftrate,  faying,  that  Virginius,  a  plebeian,  was  the  father  of
this  girl,  and  then  abroad  in  the  fervice  of  his  country ;  that

Numitoria,  his  own  filter,  a  woman  of  virtue,  and  worth,

*  ...

might  have  faved  themfelves  this  cir-  books  that  une  femme  qui  a  fuppofe  un
cumlocution  by  faying  elle  la  fuppofa :  enfant ,  doit  per  dr  e  fon  douaire.

For  I  have  read  in  the  French  law


was


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENS  IS.  297

was  her  mother,  who  died  not  many  years  before;  that  the
virgin  herfelf  had  been  educated  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  be¬
came  a  perfon  of  free  condition,  and  a  citizen  of  Rome ;
that  fhe  had  been  folemnly  betrothed  to  Icilius,  and  that  the
marriage  had  taken  effed,  if  the  war  with  the  Aequi  had
not  intervened;  that,  during  no  lefs  than  fifteen  years,
Claudius  had  never  attempted  to  aver  any  thing  of  this  kind
to  the  relations  of  Virginia ;  but  that  now  the  virgin  was
marriageable,  and  of  diftinguifhed  beauty,  he  was  charmed
with  it,  and  publifhed  an  infamous  calumny,  contrived  not
indeed  by  himfelf,  but  by  a  man,  who  thought  he  had  a
right  to  gratify  all  his  paflions,  by  all  the  methods  he  could
invent :  He  added  that,  as  to  the  trial,  the  father  himfelf
would  defend  the  caufe  of  his  daughter,  when  he  returned
from  the  campaign;  and  that,  in  the  mean  time,  as  he
was  her  uncle,  and  ready  to  fupport  her  right,  he  himfelf
claimed  her  perfon,  to  which  he  was  intitled  by  the  laws;
and,  in  this,  he  infifted  upon  nothing  that  was  either  new,
or  not  allowed  to  every  Roman,  if  not  to  every  other
man,  which  is,  that,  if  it  is  pretended  that  any  perfon  is  a
flave,  not  the  man,  who  maintains  that  he  is  fo,  but  he  who
afierts  his  liberty,  fhall  have  the  cuftody  of  that  perfon,  till
the  decifion  of  the  conteft :  And  he  faid  that  Appius  was
obliged,  on  many  accounts,  to  obferve  this  inftitution;
firft,  becaufe  he  had  inferted  17  this  very  law  with  the  reft  in
the  twelve  tables ;  and,  in  the  next  place,  becaufe  he  was

ly  Toy  vopov  t^Iov.  This  law  will  be  our  author  has  here  given  us  the  fenfe
tranflated,  when  we  come  to  Thofc  of  of  it.
the  twelve  tables.  In  the  mean  time,

Vol.  IV.  Qjl


chief


29B  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

chief  of  the  decemvirate ;  and,  befides,  that  he  was  invefted
not  only  with  the  confular,  but  alfo  with  the  tribunitian,
power,  the  principal  fun&ion  of  which  was  to  relieve  fuch
of  the  citizens,  as  were  weak,  and  deftitute  of  all  other  help :
He  then  defired  him  to  compaffionate  a  virgin,  who  fled  to
him  for  afliftance,  and  who  had  long  fince  loft  her  mother,
and  was  then  deprived  of  her  father,  and  in  danger  of  lofing
not  only  her  paternal  fortunes,  but  alfo  her  hufband,  her
country,  and,  the  greateft  of  all  human  bleffings,  her  liberty.
And,  having  lamented  the  abufe,  to  which  the  virgin  would
be  delivered  up,  and,  by  that  means,  raifed  great  companion
in  all  prefent,  he,  at  laft,  fpoke  of  the  time  to  be  appointed
for  the  decifion  of  this  caufe,  and  faid:  ££  Since  Claudius,
“  who,  during  fifteen  years,  never  complained  of  any  injury,
<c  now  defires  it  fliould  be  prefently  decided,  any  other
£C  perfon  but  myfelf,  to  whom  the  event  was  of  fo  great  con-
“  fequence,  would  fay  that  he  wasfeverely  treated,  and  have
u  great  reafon  to  exprefs  his  indignation,  and  alfo  to  infift
££  that,  when  the  peace  was  made,  and  all,  who  are  now  in
<£  the  army,  were  returned,  he  fhould  then  defend  his  caufe,
“  by  reafon  that  both  parties  would  then  have  great  numbers
“  of  witnefies,  friends,  and  judges;  and,  in  that  cafe,  his
“  demand  would  become  a  citizen,  be  full  of  moderation,
t£  and  agreeable  to  the  Roman  conftitution:  But  we,  fays
££  he,  ftand  in  need  of  none  of  thefe  reafons;  we  want
cc  neither  peace,  nor  a  number  of  friends,  and  judges;
“  neither  do  we  put  off  the  caufe  to  the  time  appointed  for
££  fuch  decifions;  but,  even  in  war,  in  a  fcarcity  of  friends,

“  before


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  IIALICARNASSENSIS.  299

“  before  judges  not  impartial,  and  without  delay,  we  fubmit
cc  to  defend  ourfelves,  and  defire  only  that  you  will  grant
cc  us  fo  much  time,  Appius,  as  will  be  fufficient  for  the
“  father  of  the  virgin  to  return  from  the  army,  to  lament
“  his  own  misfortunes,  and  plead  his  own  caufe.”

XXXI.  Numitorius  having  faid  this,  and  the  people,  who
flood  round  the  tribunal,  fignifying  by  their  applaufe  that
his  demand  was  juft,  Appius,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  faid :  “  I
“  am  not  ignorant  of  the  law  concerning  bailing  thofe,  who
<c  are  claimed  as  flaves,  which  does  not  fuffer  their  perfons
“  to  continue  in  the  power  of  the  claimants  till  the  hearing
C£  of  the  caufe;  neither  would  I  willingly  break  through  a
cc  law,  of  which  I  myfelf  am  the  author  :  For  which  reafon,
“  as  there  are  two  claimants,  the  mafter,  and  the  father,  I
tc  think  it  juft  that,  if  they  were  both  prefent,  the  father
“  fiiould  have  the  cuftody  of  her  perfon  till  the  hearing  :

But,  fince  he  is  abfent,  let  the  mafter  take  her  away,

“  giving  fufficient  fureties  to  produce  her  before  the  magi-

“  fixate,  when  the  father  returns.  I  ffiall  take  great  care,

“  Numitorius,  concerning  the  fureties,  and  the  18  fum  they
*

l8,  Ta  Ttfxv^otloi.  The  Latin  tranf-  nounced.  The  word  here  plainly  fig-
lators  have  rendered  this  de  litis  aefii -  nifies  the  fum  of  money,  in  which  the
matione ;  and  by  them,  both  le  Jay,  fureties  were  to  be  bound:  This,  and
and  M.  *  *  *  have  been  milled ;  the  the  fufficiency  of  the  fureties  to  pay
firft  has  faid,  Veftimation  des  depens ;  that  fum,  if  they  failed  to  produce
and  the  other,  de  reftimation  du  proces,  Virginia,  explains  that  part  of  the
ou.  de  l*  amende  qidil  foudr a  impofer .  decree,  where  it  is  faid  ifyv^Joa
Tiuyy.x,,  In  this  place,  does  not  fignify  pOur  author,  in  fpeaking  of  the

either  the  cofts ,  or  a  fine\  neither  of  affair  of  Caefo,  has  himfelf  explained
which  had  any  relation  to  the  decree,  what  he  means  by  Tipr^at  in  this  place,
which  Appius  had,  juft  before,  pro-  viz.  ra.  srtgi  t*  cu^dlog  t>jj  anoKoAusoLcwg

fB.  x.  c.  8.

Qjj  2  u  are


3oo  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

C£  are  to  be  bound  in,  and  alfo  that  you  {hall  lofe  no  advan-
“  tage  you  are  intitled  to  in  the  courfe  of  thiscaufe  ;  now
“  deliver  up  the  virgin.”  After  Appius  had  pronounced
this  fentence,  Virginia,  and  the  women,  who  attended  her,
broke  out  into  lamentations,  and  beat  their  breads ;  and  all
the  people,  who  flood  round  the  tribunal,  cried  out,  and
exprefied  their  indignation:  But  Icilius,  who  was  to  marry
her,  caught  her  in  his  arms,  and  faid:  “  While  I  am  alive
“  at  leaft,  Appius,  no  man  fhall  take  away  this  virgin ;  but,
cc  if  you  are  refolved  to  violate  the  law,  to  confound  our
C£  rights,  and  deprive  us  of  our  liberty,  deny  no  longer  the
££  tyranny  you  are  reproached  with,  but  take  off  my  head,
C£  and,  after  that,  order  this,  and  every  other  virgin,  and
££  matron  to  be  carried  away  to  any  place  you  {hall  appoint ;
££  to  the  end  the  Romans  may,  atlaft,  be  convinced  that,  from
C£  freemen,  they  are  transformed  toflaves,and  ceafe  to  enter-
‘ £  tain  fentiments  more  elevated  than  their  condition.  What,
££  therefore,  do  you  flay  for  ?  Why  do  you  not  pour  out
<£  my  blood  before  your  tribunal  in  the  prefence  of  all  the
<£  citizens  ?  But  affure  yourfelf  that  my  death  will  prove
“  to  the  Romans  the  fource  either  of  great  miferies,  or  of
“  great  bleffings.”

XXXII.  He  was  going  on,  when  the  liclors,  by  order  of  the
magiflrate,  kept  him  off  from  the  tribunal,  and  commanded
him  to  obey  the  fentence.  Upon  which,  Claudius  laid  hold
on  the  virgin,  and  was  going  to  take  her  away,  while  fhe


ofAohoyyQivl a,  xgy/ualx.  The  great  care
Appius  told  Numitorius  that  he  would
take  of  thefe  two  points,  was  a  piece


of  judge  craft,  calculated  tofoften  the
injuftice  of  his  decree.


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  301

hung  upon  her  uncle,  and  her  fpoufe.  The  people,  who
flood  round  the  tribunal,  feeing  her  in  fo  moving  an  agony,
cried  out  all  at  once ;  and,  without  regarding  the  authority
of  the  magiftrate,  fell  upon  thofe,  who  were  endeavouring
to  force  her  away :  So  that,  Claudius,  fearing  their  violence,
quitted  Virginia,  and  fled  for  refuge  under  the  feet  of  the
decemvir.  Appius,  feeing  all  the  people  in  a  rage,  was,  at
firft,  greatly  difordered,  and  in  doubt  for  a  confiderable  time
what  meafures  to  take;  then  calling  Claudius  to  the  tribunal,
and  fpeaking  a  few  words  to  him,  as  it  feemed,  he  made  a
fign  for  the  audience  to  be  filent,  and  faid:  “  Since  I  find
“  you  are  exafperated  at  the  fentence  I  have  pronounced,
“  citizens,  I  (hall  wave  the  exadnefs  of  that  part  of  it,  which
“  relates  to  the  giving  fureties  by  Claudius  for  the  appearance
“  of  Virginia ;  and,  in  order  to  gratify  you,  I  have  prevailed
“  upon  my  client  to  confent  that  the  relations  of  the  virgin
<c  fhall  bail  her  till  the  arrival  of  her  father :  Take  away  the
“  virgin,  therefore,  Numitorius,  and  acknowledge  yourfelf
“  bound  for  her  appearance  to  morrow :  For  this  time  is
“  fufficient  for  you  both  to  give  Virginius  notice  to  day,
“  and  to  bring  him  hither  in  three  or  four  hours  from  the
“  camp  to  morrow.”  And  they  defiring  further  time,  he
gave  no  anfwer,  but  rofe  up,  and  ordered  his  feat  to  be  taken
away.

XXXIII.  He  left  the  forum  full  of  anguifh,  diftraded
with  love,  and  determined  not  to  relinquifli  the  virgin  any
more  to  her  relations;  but,  when  fhe  was  produced  by  her
furety,  to  take  her  away  by  force ;  to  place  a  ftronger  guard

about


3°2


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

about  his  perfon,  in  order  to  prevent  any  violence  from  the
multitude,  and  early  to  poft  a  great  number  of  his  friends,
and  clients  round  the  tribunal.  That  he  might  execute  this
refolution  with  a  fhew  of  juftice  under  the  pretence  of  the
nonappearance  of  the  father,  he  fent  fome  horfemen,  whom
he  chiefly  confided  in,  to  the  camp  with  letters  for  Antonius,
who  commanded  the  legion,  in  which  Virginius  ferved,  to
defire  he  would  detain  the  man  in  fafe  cuftody,  left,  when
he  was  informed  of  the  fituation  of  his  daughter,  he  might
efcape  out  of  the  camp  :  But  his  defign  was 19  prevented  by
the  fon  of  Numitorius,  and  the  brother  of  Icilius,  who  being
fent  away  by  the  reft  of  her  relations  upon  the  firft  motion
of  this  affair,  as  they  were  young,  and  full  of  fpirit,  rode
full  fpeed  ;  and,  arriving  at  the  camp  before  the  men  fent  by
Appius,  informed  Virginius  of  every  thing  which  had  paffed ;
who,  going  to  Antonius,  and  concealing  the  true  caufe  of
his  requeft,  pretended  that  he  had  received  an  account  of
the  death  of  fome  near  relation,  whofe  funeral,  and  burial
he  was  obliged  by  the  law  to  perform  ;  and,  by  that  means,
obtained  his  difmiflion ;  and,  fetting  out  in  the  20  evening
with  the  youths,  he  took  a  by  road  for  fear  of  being  purfued
both  from  the  camp,  and  the  city ;  which  really  happened :
For  Antonius,  having  received  the  letters  about  the  firft

J9*  E(pO#<r<#v  h  ctvlov ,  etc.  Nothing  the  time  of  lighting  up  lamps.  It  is  a
can  be  faid  with  greater  fimplicity,  very  common  thing  with  the  ancient
and  beauty  than  what  *  Livy  fays  writers,  particularly  with  Homer,  to
upon  this  occafion  :  Improhum  confi-  exprefs  the  time  of  the  day  by  the
Hum  ferum ,  ut  debuit ,  fuit.  employment  of  it.

a0*  a v%vuv  d$u{.  Literally,  at

S  B.  iii.  c.  46.

watch,


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN AS SENSIS.  303

watch,  detached  a  party  of  horfe  after  him,  and  others,  fent
from  the  city,  patrolled  all  night  in  the  road,  that  led  from
the  camp  to  Rome.  When  Appius  was  informed  of  the
unexpected  arrival  of  Virginius,  he  was  in  a  fury  ;  and,  go¬
ing  to  the  tribunal  with  a  great  number  of  attendants,  or¬
dered  the  relations  of  Virginia  to  appear.  When  they  were
come,  Claudius  repeated  what  he  had  faid  before,  and  de-
fired  Appius  to  decide  the  conteft  without  delay,  faying  that
both  his  informer,  and  his  witnefles  were  prefent,  and  that
he  was  ready  to  deliver  up  the  Have  herfelf  to  be  examined :
He  ended  all  with  a  feigned  lamentation,  grounded  on  a
fuppofed  fear  of  not  obtaining  the  fame  juftice  with  others,
as  he  had  faid  before,  becaufe  he  was  his  client ;  and  alfb
with  defiring  that  Appius  would  not  relieve  thofe,  whofe
complaints  were  the  moft  affeCting,  but,  whofe  demands
were  the  moft  equitable.

XXXIV.  On  the  other  fide,  the  father  of  the  virgin,  and
the  reft  of  her  relations,  brought  many  juft,  and  well-
grounded  proofs  to  fhew  the  child  could  not  have  been
fuppofed ;  alledging  that  the  fifter  of  Numitorius,  and  wife
of  Virginius,  could  have  no  probable  reafon  to  fuppofe  a
child,  fince  fhe  was  then  young,  and  married  to  a  young  man,
and  had  brought  forth  a  child  no  very  conliderable  time
after  her  marriage ;  neither,  if  fhe  had  been  ever  fo  defirous
to  introduce  a  foreign  offspring  into  her  own  family,  would
fhe  have  taken  the  child  of  another  perfon’s  Have,  rather
than  That  of  a  free  woman  united  to  her  by  confanguinity,
or  friendfhip,  whofe  fidelity  might  have  fecured  to  her  the

poffeflion


304  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookXI.

pofieflion  of  the  child  fhe  had  taken ;  and,  when  fhe  had
it  in  her  power  to  take  either  a  male,  or  a  female  child,
flie  would  certainly  have  chofen  the  former:  For,  after  a
woman  is  brought  to  bed,  if  fhe  wants  children,  fhe  muft
necefiarily  be  contented  with,  and  bring  up,  whatever  nature
produces ;  whereas,  a  woman,  who  fuppofes  a  child,  will  in
all  probability  chufe  one  of  that  fex,  which  excels  the  other :
As  to  the  informer,  and  the  credible  witnefles,  which
Claudius  faid  he  would  produce  in  great  numbers,  they
difproved  their  teftimony  by  this  reafon  drawn  from  proba¬
bility,  that  Numitoria would  never  have  done  a  thing  openly,
and  in  conjun&ion  with  witnefles  of  free  condition,  which
required  fecrecy,  and  might  have  been  tranfa&ed  by  one
perfon ;  and,  by  that  means,  have  expofed  herfelf  to  have  the
girl  taken  from  her  by  the  mafter  of  the  mother,  after  fhe
had  brought  her  up :  The  length  of  time  alfo  was  no  fmall
proof,  they  faid,  that  the  claimant  advanced  nothing,  that  was
well  grounded:  For  it  was  not  to  be  imagined  that  either  the
informer,  or  the  witnefles  would  have  kept  this  fuppofition
of  the  child  a  fecret  during  fifteen  years,  but  would  long  be¬
fore  have  aifclofed  it.  After  they  had  refuted  the  proofs  of
their  adverfaries,  and  fhewn  them  to  be  neither  true,  nor  pro¬
bable,  they  defired  that  their  own  proofs  might  be  weighed
againft  them,  and  named  many  women,  and  thofe  of  no  mean
note,  who,  they  faid,  knew  thatNumitoria  was  then  with  child
by  her  fhape :  Befides  thefe,  they  produced  others,  who,  as
relations,  had  been  prefent  at  her  labor,  and  delivery,  and
had  feen  the  child  brought  into  the  world,  and  defired  they

might


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C AR N ASSEN S I S.  305

might  be  examined:  But,  the  cleared:  proof  of*  all,  which
was  attefted  by  many  both  men  and  women,  free  people,
and  even  Haves,  they  referred  for  the  laft,  and  faid  that  the
child  had  been  fuckled  by  her  mother ;  and  that  it  was
impoffible  a  woman  could  have  her  breads  full  of  milk,  if
flie  had  not  been  brought  to  bed.

XXXV.  While  they  were  alledging  thefe  reafons,  and
many  others  of  equal  weight,  and  fuch  as  could  admit  of  no
reply;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  reprefenting  the  calamities  of
the  virgin  in  a  very  affecting  manner,  all  who  heard  them,
when  they  cafi:  their  eyes  upon  her,  compaflionated  the
diftrefles,  in  which  her  beauty  had  involved  her  (for,  being
drefied  in  mourning,  her  looks  fixed  on  the  ground,  and
the  luftre  of  her  eyes  drowned  in  tears,  flie  attracted  the
regard  of  all  the  fpeCfators ;  fuch  was  her  beauty,  and  fuch
her  grace,  that  fhe  appeared  more  than  mortal)  and  all  be-
wailed  this  unexpected  turn  of  fortune,  when  they  confidered
from  what  profperity  fhe  was  fallen,  and  to  what  abufes,
and  infults  fhe  was  going  to  be  expofed :  They  alfo  reflected
that,  fince  the  law,  which  had  fecured  their  liberty,  was
violated,  nothing  could  hinder  their  own  wives,  and  daugh¬
ters  alfo  from  fuffering'  the  fame  treatment.  While  they
were  making  thefe,  and  the  like  reflexions,  and  communi¬
cating  them  to  one  another,  they- could  not  refrain  from
tears.  But  Appius,  who  was  not  in  his  nature  a  man  of
fenfe,  being  then  corrupted  with  the  greatnefs  of  his  power,
his  mind  diftempered,  and  his  heart  inflamed  with  the  love
of  Virginia,  paid  no  regard  to  the  reafons  alledged  in  her

Vol.  IV.  R  r  favor.


3o6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

favor,  nor  was  moved  with  her  tears,  but  even  refented  the
compaflion  fhewn  to  her  by  the  audience ;  fince  he  looked
upon  himfelf  to  deferve  greater  companion,  and  to  fuffer
greater  torments  from  that  beauty,  which  had  inflaved  him.
Wrought  up  to  madnefs,  therefore,  by  all  thefe  incentives,
he  had  the  confidence  both  to  make  a  fhamelefs  fpeech,  by
which  he  plainly  confirmed  the  fufpicion,  that  he  himfelf
had  contrived  the  calumny  againft  the  virgin,  and  to  commit
a  tyrannical,  and  cruel  a&ion.

XXXVI.  For,  while  they  were  going  on  to  plead  in
her  favor,  he  commanded  filence;  and  all  being  filent,
and  the  people  in  the  forum  flocking  to  the  tribu¬
nal  from  a  defire  to  hear  what  he  would  fay,  he  often
turned  his  eyes  here  and  there,  to  obferve  the  number  of
his  friends,  who  by  his  orders  had  polled  themfelves  in  dif¬
ferent  parts  of  the  forum,  and  then  fpoke  as  follows:
“  This  is  not  the  firft  time,  Virginius,  and  you,  who  at-
u  tend  with  him,  that  I  have  heard  of  this  affair;  I  was
“  informed  of  it  long  ago,  even  before  I  was  invefted  with
<c  this  magiftracy.  Hear  now,  by  what  means  it  came  to  my
“  knowledge  :  The  father  of  this  Marcus  Claudius,  when
u  he  was  dying,  defired  me  to  be  truftee  for  his  fon,  whom
<c  he  was  leaving  an  infant:  For  the  Claudii  are  hereditary
“  clients  to  our  family.  During  the  time  of  this  truft,  I
u  had  information  given  me  that  Numitoria  had  fuppofed
c<  this  girl,  whom  (he  had  received  from  the  flave  of  Clau-
u  dius ;  and,  upon  examining  into  the  matter,  I  found  it
u  was  fo.  As  it  did  not  become  me  to  llir  in  this  affair

“  myfelf.


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSEN SIS.  307

“  myfelf,  I  thought  it  beft  to  leave  it  to  this  man,  when  he
<c  grew  up,  either  to  take  away  the  girl  if  he  thought  fit,
“  or  to  come  to  an  accommodation  with  thofe,  who  had
“  brought  her  up,  for  a  fum  of  money,  or  to  gratify  them
“  with  the  poffeffion  of  her.  Since  that  time,  being  ingaged
<c  in  public  affairs,  I  gave  myfelf  no  further  concern  about
“  Thofe  of  Claudius:  But  it  is  probable  that,  when  he  was
u  taking  an  account  of  his  own  fortunes,  he  alfo  received
“  the  fame  information  concerning  this  girl,  which  had
cc  before  been  given  to  me;  neither  does  he  claim  any  thing
<c  unwarranted  bylaw,  in  defiring  to  take  the  daughter  of  his
cc  ownflave:  If  they  would  have  accommodated  this  matter,
“  it  had  been  well ;  but,  fince  it  is  brought  into  litigation,
<£  I  give  this  teftimony  in  his  favor,  and  decree  him  to  be
“  the  mafter  of  the  girl.”

XXXVII.  When  thofe,  who  were  uncorrupted,  and
friends  to  juftice,  heard  this  fentence,  they  held  up  their
hands  to  Heaven,  and  raifed  an  outcry  mixed  with  lamen¬
tation,  and  refentment :  While  the  flatterers  of  the  oligarchy
gave  acclamations  capable  of  infpiring  the  men  in  power
with  confidence.  And  the  affembly  being  inflamed,  and
full  of  various  expreffions,  and  agitations,  Appius  commanded
filence,  and  faid;  “  Difturbers  of  the  public  tranquillity,
“  and  ufelefs  both  in  peace  and  war,  if  you  ceafe  not  to
“  divide  the  city,  and  to  oppofe  us  in  the  execution  of  our
“  office,  neceflity  fhall  teach  you  to  fubmit.  Think  not
“  that  thefe  guards  in  the  capitol,  and  the  fortrefs,  are  placed
“  there  by  us  only  to  fecure  the  city  againft  a  foreign  enemy,
/  .  Rr  2  “  and


3 o*8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.'

“  and  that  we  fhall  fuffer  you  to  fit  here,  and  taint  the
t£  adminiftration  of  the  government.  Be  more  prudent  for
u  the  future  than  you  are  now;  depart  all  of  you,  who  have
“  nothing  to  do  here,  and  mind  your  own  affairs,  if  you  are
u  wife.  And  do  you,  Claudius,  take  the  girl,  and  lead  her
cc  through  the  forum  without  fearing  any  one  :  For  the
tc  twelve  axes  of  Appius  fhall  attend  you.”  After  he  had
faid  this,  the  people  withdrew  from  the  forum  fighing,
beating  their  foreheads,  and  unable  to  refrain  from  tears ;
while  Claudius  was  taking  away  the  virgin,  who  hung  round
her  father,  killing  him,  and  calling  upon  him  with  the  moft
indearing  expreffions.  In  this  diftrefs,  Virginius  refolved
upon  an  a&ion,  deplorable  indeed,  and  afflicting  for  a  father ;
but,  at  the  fame  time,  becoming  a  lover  of  liberty,  and  a
man  of  great  fpirit :  For,  having  defired  leave  to  embrace
his  daughter  for  the  laft  time  without  moleftation,  and  to  fay
what  he  thought  fit  to  her  in  private  before  fhe  was  taken
from  the  forum,  he  obtained  it  of  the  magiftrate;  and  his
enemies  retiring  a  little,  he  held  her  in  his  arms,  while  fhe
was  fainting,  finking  to  the  ground,  and  fcarce  able  to  fup-
port  herfelf ;  and,  for  fome  time,  called  upon  her,  killed  her,
and  wiped  off  her  tears  that  flowed  without  ceafing  :  Then,
drawing  her  on  by  degrees,  when  he  came  to  a  cook’s  /hop,
he  fnatched  up  a  knife  from  the  table,  and  plunged  it  in  her
breaft,  faying  only  this:  “  I  lend  thee,  child,  to  the  manes
cc  of  thy  anceftors  with  liberty,  and  innocence  :  For,  if  thou
<l  hadft  lived,  that  tyrant  would  not  have  fuffered  thee  to
c<  enjoy  either.”  An  outcry  being  raifed  upon  this,  he  held
■r.  y  ,  '  the


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  A  S  S E N  S I S.  309

the  bloody  knife  in  his  hand ;  and,  covered  as  he  was  with
the  blood  of  his  daughter,  he  ran  like  a  mad  man  through
the  city,  and  called  the  citizens  to  liberty.  Then,  forcing
his  way  through  the  gates,  he  mounted  a  horfe,  that  flood
ready  for  him,  and  rode  to  the  camp  accompanied  by
2IIcilius,  and  Numitorius,  who  had  attended  him  from
thence  to  the  city.  He  was  followed  by  many  other  ple¬
beians  :  So  that,  in  the  whole,  their  number  amounted  to
about  four  hundred.

XXXVIII.  When  Appius  was  acquainted  with  the  ca-
taftrophe  of  the  virgin,  he  leaped  from  his  feat,  and  would
have  purfued  Virginius,  betraying  great  indecency  both  in
his  words,  and  a&ions :  But  his  friends  flanding  about  him,
and  begging  of  him  to  refrain  from  all  excefs,  he  departed
with  his  heart  full  of  refentment  againft  every  man.  When
he  came  home,  fome  of  his  people  informed  him  that  Icilius,
the  fpoufe  of  Virginia,  and  Numitorius  her  uncle,  together
with  many  of  their  friends,  and  relations,  were  flanding
round  her  body,  uflng  all  forts  of  inve&ives  againft  him,
and  calling  the  people  to  liberty.  Appius,  imaged  as  he
was,  fent  fome  of  the  litftors,  with  orders  to  carry  thofe,  who
had  clamoured  againft  him,  to  prifon,  and  to  remove  the
body  out  of  the  forum :  Which  was  an  adtion  of  the  greateft
imprudence,  and  leaft  of  all  fuited  to  the  prefent  juncture
For,  when  he  ought  to  have  courted  the  people,  who  had  a

2i.  lx,*,*.  This  was  the  brother  of  and  Numitorius,  Virginia’s  uncle,
that  Icilius,  who  was  to  have  married  with  their  friends,  and  relations,  were
Virginia  :  Which  I  mention,  becaufe  (landing  round  her  body,
the  latter,  who  is  called  IwAief  d  xytenh


juft


3io  .ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

juft  caufe  of  refentment,  by  yielding  to  them  for  the  prefent,
and  afterwards  juftifying  fame  parts  of  his  conduct,  and
begging  pardon  for  others,  and  regaining  their  affedfion
by  lome  inftances  of  favor,  he  fuffered  himfelf  to  be  hur¬
ried  on  to  violent  meafures,  and  drove  them  to  defpair:
For  they  would  not  fuffer  the  licftors  either  to  remove  the
body,  or  to  carry  the  men  to  prifon ;  but,  encouraging  one
another  by  their  cries,  they  puftied,  and  ftruck  them,  when
they  attempted  to  ufe  violence,  and  forced  them  to  leave  the
forum :  So  that,  Appius,  hearing  this,  was  obliged  to  go  to
the  forum  himfelf,  accompanied  with  a  great  number  of  his
friends,  and  clients,  and  to  order  them  to  fall  upon  every
one  they  found  in  the  ftreets,  and  compel  them  to  depart.
But  Valerius,  and  Horatius,  who,  as  I  faid,  were  at  the  head
of  thofe,  who  deftred  to  recover  their  liberty,  being  informed
of  his  defign,  brought  with  them  a  numerous  body  of  brave
youth,  and  placed  themfelves  before  the  body :  And,  when
Appius,  and  his  people  advanced,  they,  firft,  inveighed
againft,  and  abufed,  the  power  of  the  decemvirs ;  then,
confirming  their  words  by  their  actions,  they  ftruck,  and
threw  to  the  ground  all  who  durft  attack  them.

XXXIX.  .Appius,  exafperated  at  this  unexpected  oppo-
lition,  and  not  knowing  how  to  fubdue  the  authors  of  it,  re-
folved  upon  the  moft  pernicious  of  all  meafures :  For,  con¬
fiding  in  the  continuance  of  the  people’s  attachment  to  him,
he  went  to  the  temple  of  Vulcan ;  and,  affembling  them
in  that  place,  he  attempted  to  charge  thofe  perfbns  with  -
having  treated  him  in  an  outrageous,  and  abufive  manner ;

and


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  A RN  ASSENSIS.  31 1

and  flattered  himfelf  that,  as  he  was  inverted  with  the  tri-
bunitian  power,  the  people  would  efpoufe  his  refentment,
and  fuffer  them  to  be  thrown  down  the  Tarpeian  rock.
On  the  other  flde,  Valerius,  and  his  party,  poflefled  them-
felves  of  another  part  of  the  forum ;  and,  placing  the  body
of  the  virgin  where  it  might  be  feen  by  all,  they  held  an¬
other  afiembly  of  the  people,  and  laid  themfelves  out  in
many  invetftives  againft  Appius,  and  the  reft  of  the  oli¬
garchical  fatftion.  And  it  happened,  as  it  might  well  be
expecrted,  that,  while  fome  were  invited  thither  by  the  dig¬
nity  of  the  perfons;  others,  by  their  compaffion  for  the
virgin,  whofe  unfortunate  beauty  had  drawn  upon  her  fuch
22  dreadful,  and  more  than  dreadful,  difafters;  and  others,
by  the  foie  defire  of  feeing  their  ancient  conftitution  reftored,
this  afiembly  was  more  numerous  than  the  other :  So  that,
only  a  few,  and  thofe  the  abettors  of  the  oligarchy,  re¬
mained  with  Appius ;  among  whom  there  were  fome,  who
adhered  to  it,  no  longer,  for  many  reafons ;  and,  if  their
adverfaries  gained  ftrength,  were  ready  to  take  arms  againft
it.  Appius,  feeing  himfelf  deferted,  was  obliged  to  change
his  refolution,  and  leave  the  forum ;  which  proved  of  the
greateft  advantage  to  him:  For,  if  he  had  fallen  into  the

A«v<#  mi  mg#  Jhvuv.  Cafaubon  gical  events  in  the  affecting  colours  of
has  very  juftly  obferved  that  this  is  a  poetry.  But  the  misfortune  is  that
tragical  expreflion :  But,  if  any  event  a  mere  modern  reader,  who  is  unac-
can  juftify  an  hiftorian  in  the  ufe  of  cuftomed  to  thefe  pathetic  {trains,
thefe  expreflions,  this  cataftrophe  of  will  think  the  author,  or  rather  the
Virginia  will  juftify  our  author:  If  tranflator,  mad,  when  he  renders  them,
this  will  not,  cuftom  will:  For  the  as  he  ought,  literally,
belt  Greek  hiftorians  often  paint  tra-


hands


312  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

hands  of  the  populace,  he  had  met  with  the  punifhment  he
deferved.  After  that,  Valerius,  and  his  party,  having  all  the
opportunity  they  could  delire,  indulged  themfelves  in  de¬
claiming  againft  the  oligarchy  ;  and,  by  their  harangues,
determined  thofe,  who  were  yet  unrefolved  :  The  relations
of  the  virgin  ftill  encreafed  the  difaffecrtion  of  the  citizens,
by  bringing  her  bier  into  the  forum;  by  adorning  her  body
with  all  poffible  magnificence,  and  carrying  it  through  the
moil  remarkable,  and  moft  confpicuous  ftreets  of  the  city  :
For  the  matrons,  and  virgins  ran  out  of  their  houfes,  la¬
menting  her  misfortune,  and  fome  threw  flowers  upon  the
bier,  fome  their  girdles,  or  ribbands,  others,  their  virgin  toys,
and  others  even  cut  off*  their  curls,  and  caft  them  upon  it :
And  many  of  the  men,  either  purchafing  ornaments  in  the
neighbouring  fhops,  or  receiving  them  by  the  favor  of  the
owners,  contributed  to  the  pomp  by  prefents  proper  to  the
occafion  :  So  that,  the  funeral  was  celebrated  through  the
whole  city ;  and  all  defired  the  fubverfion  of  the  oligarchy  :
But  the  favourers  of  it,  being  armed,  kept  them  in  awe ;
and  neither  Valerius,  nor  his  friends,  were  willing  to  de¬
cide  the  conteft  by  fliedding  the  blood  of  their  fellow-
citizens.

•  „  ix lx  t  t  '

XL.  The  affairs  of  the  city,  therefore,  were  in  this  dis¬
order.  In  the  mean  time,  Virginius,  who,  as  I  laid,  had  flain
his  daughter  with  his  own  hand,  riding  full  fpeed,  arrived  at
the  camp  on  mount  Algidus  that  evening,  in  the  condition
he  had  left  Rome,  all  covered  with  blood,  and  holding  the
knife  in  his  hand.  When  the  guards,  who  were  ported

before


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  ITALIC ARNASSENS  IS.  313
before  the  camp,  faw  him,  they  could  not  imagine  what  had
happened  to  the  man ;  but  attended  him  in  expectation  of
hearing  fome  great,  and  dreadful  event.  Virginius,  for
fome  time,  went  on  weeping,  and  making  figns  to  thofe  he
met  to  follow  him ;  and  the  foldiers,  who  were  then  at
fupper,  all  ran  out  of  their  tents,  as  he  paffed  by  them,  and
with  torches,  and  lamps,  followed  him  on  both  fides,  in
fufpenfe,  and  confirmation.  When  he  came  to  the  open
place  in  the  camp,  he  flood  upon  a  rifing  ground,  fo  as  to
be  feen  by  all,  and  related  the  misfortunes,  which  had  be¬
fallen  him,  and  called  upon  thofe,  who  came  with  him  from
the  city,  to  attefl  the  truth  of  his  relation.  When  he  faw
great  numbers  of  them  lament,  and  filed  tears,  he  had  re-
courfe  to  fupplications,  and  intreaties,  and  conjured  them
nor  to  fuffer  him  to  be  unrevenged,  or  their  country  to
be  abufed :  While  he  was  faying  this,  they  all  fhewed  a
great  defire  to  hear  *him,  and  encouraged  him  to  go  on.
For  which  reafon,  he  now  declaimed  againfl  the  oligarchy
with  greater  confidence ;  and,  having  fhewn  that  the  de¬
cemvirs  had  deprived  many  men  of  their  fortunes;  caufed
many  to  be  whipped;  forced  many  innocent  perfons  to
leave  their  country ;  and  enumerated  their  infults  offered
to  matrons ;  their  raviflhments  of  marriageable  virgins ;  their
abufes  of  boys  of  free  condition,  and  all  their  other  excefles,
and  cruelties,  he  faid  :  <c  And  thus  are  we  infulted  by  thofe,
“  who  derive  their  power  neither  from  law,  the  approbation
<£  of  the  fenate,  nor  the  confent  of  the  people  (for  the  term
tc  of  their  magiflracy,  that  was  confined  to  a  year,  after
'  Vol.  IV.  S  s  “  which


3 14  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookXI.

N  _  '

“  which  they  were  to  deliver  up  to  others  the  adminiftration
“  of  affairs,  is  expired)  but  from  the  moft  violent  of  all
u  means,  while  they  look  upon  us  as  fo  many  women
“  without  courage,  or  fpirit.  Let  every  one  of  you  con-
“  fider  both  his  own  fufferings,  and  thofe  of  others ;  and,
“  if  any  of  you,  allured  by  them  with  pleafures,  or  gratifi-
i(  cations,  neither  fear  the  oligarchy,  nor  apprehend  that,
<c  one  day,  thefe  calamities  will  reach  them  as  well  as  others,
“  let  them  reflect  that  tyrants  are  not  to  be  trufted  ;  and
<c  that  favors,  and  every  thing  of  that  nature,  flow  not  from
“  the  good  will  of  the  men  in  power ;  and  let  them  change
“  their  opinion.  Join,  therefore,  all  in  the  refolution  to
“  free  from  thefe  tyrants  your  country,  in  which  are  placed
<c  both  the  temples  of  the  gods,  and  the  fepulchres  of  your
“  anceftors,  whom  you  honour  next  to  the  gods ;  in  which
“  are  your  aged  fathers,  who  demand  of  you  many  ac-
“  knowledgements,  and  fuch,  as  the  pains  they  have  be-
t£  flowed  upon  your  education,  deferve ;  and  in  which  are
<c  your  lawful  wives,  and  your  marriageable  daughters,  who
“  require  no  fmall  attention  from  their  parents,  together
<c  with  your  fons,  who  have  a  natural  right  to  continue
“  the  race  derived  to  them  from  their  anceftors :  For  I  fay  ’
<c  nothing  of  your  houfes,  your  eftates,  and  effeds,  which
u  have  been  acquired  with  great  pains  both  by  your  fathers,

“  and  yourfelves;  none  of  which  you  can  fecurely  enjoy
u  while  you  live  under  the  tyranny  of  thefe  decemvirs.

XLI.  u  It  is  the  part  neither  of  prudent,  nor  brave  men,

“  to  acquire  the  poffeflions  of  others  by  their  valor,  and  to

u  lofe


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR N  A S S  E N  S  I S.  315

£<  lofe  their  own  by  their  cowardice ;  neither  does  it  become
c<  you  to  wage  long,  and  i  nee  flan  t  wars  with  the  Aequi,  the
u  Volfci,  the  Sabines,  and  all  the  reft  of  your  neighbours,
£C  for  fovereignty,  and  dominion,  and  not  to  take  arms
“  againft  thofe,  who  govern  you  againft  law,  when  both
“  your  prefervation,  and  your  liberty  are  at  ftake.  Is  it
“  poflible,  that  you  fhould  not  afliime  the  fpirit  of  your
“  country?  That  you  fhould  not  enter  into  a conftderation
<c  worthy  the  virtue  of  your  anceftors,  who,  becaufe  one
“  woman  was  abufed  by  a  fon  of  Tarquin,  and,  by  reafon
“  of  this  calamity,  put  herfelf  to  death,  refented  this  mif-
“  fortune  with  fo  much  warmth,  and  were  fo  much  ex-
“  afperated  at  it,  looking  upon  the  abufe  to  be  common  to
“  all,  that  they  not  only  expelled  Tarquin,  but  even  abo-
“  lifhed  monarchy  itfelf,  and  pafled  a  law  that,  for  the  future,
“  no  man  fhould  govern  the  Romans  with  a  perpetual,  and
“  uncontrollable  authority;  and,  binding  themfelves  with
“  the  moft  folemn  oaths  to  obferve  this  law,  they  curfed
“  their  pofterity,  if  ever  they  fhould  violate  it.  They  could
cc  not  bear  the  tyrannical  abufe  of  one  licentious  youth,
“  committed  upon  one  perfon  of  free  condition;  and  will
u  you  bear  a  many  headed  tyranny,  that  revels  in  all  forts  of
“  excefs,  and  licentioufnefs,  and  will  ftill  encreafe  in  both,
<c  if  you  now  fubmit  to  it  ?  I  am  not  the  only  man,  who
“  had  a  daughter  diftinguifhed  for  her  beauty,  whom  Appius
“  openly  attempted  to  force,  and  abufe,  but  many  of  you
“  alfo  have  daughters,  others,  wives,  and  others,  young  fons
“  remarkable  for  their  beauty;  and  what  fhould  hinder

S  s  2  “  thefe


3 16  '  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

“  thefe  from  being  treated  in  the  fame  manner  by  fome
“  other  of  the  ten  tyrants,  or  by  Appius  himfelf?  Unlefs
“  indeed  fome  god  fhould  undertake  that,  if  you  fuller  my
ct  calamities  to  go  unrevenged,  the  fame  misfortunes  will
“  not  fall  upon  many  of  you,  but  that  this  tyrannical  luffc
£C  will  flop  at  my  daughter,  and  grow  chafte  to  all  other
<c  youths,  and  virgins.  Be  affured  that  it  is  a  great  folly*
“  and  weaknefs  to  23refle£t  that  thefe  things  have  happened,
“  and  then  to  fay  that  they  will  not  happen  again :  For  the
<c  paffions  of  tyrants  are  unlimited,  as  we  may  juftly  con-
£C  elude,  lince  they  are  not  to  be  checked  either  by  law,  or
u  fear.  Revenge,  therefore,  with  juftice  the  injury  I  have
<c  fuftained  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  fecure  yourfelves  from
“  the  like  treatment;  break  your  chains  at  laft,  O  miferable
“  men  !  and  fix  your  eyes  on  liberty.  What  greater  caufe
“  of  refentment  can  you  have  than  the  prefent,  when  the
t£  tyrants  take  awa y  the  daughters  of  citizens,  like  flaves,
“  and  force  them  to  their  beds  with  ftripes  ?  At  what  junc-
“  ture  will  you  refume  the  fpirit  of  free  men,  if  you  omit
“  this,  in  which  you  have  arms  in  your  hands?”

*3*  T cc  yivoy.tva  ruJct  vor.trxi,  kcu  &>V  makes  Virginius  conclude  from  the
sjt  ss-ai,  Myeiv.  This  palTage  is  allowed  misfortune,  which  had  happened  to
to  be  corrupted  in  all  the  editions,  and  his  own  daughter,  that  the  fame  would
manuferipts,  where  it  flands  thus,  t*  happen  to  the  daughters  of  others.
vexpivet  Tuvla  tog  etc.  Cafaubon  has  The  pafiage,  therefore,  muft  be  re¬
endeavoured  to  correft  it  by  reading  flored  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  fome
ssr^ovoeiv,  or  to  jusv  tuvIoc.  This,  words  may  exprefs  the  paft,  as  ug  hk

to  be  fure,  makes  fome  fenfe,  at  leaft,  t$cti  exprefles  the  future.  The  learned
of  the  words*,  but,  in  my  opinion,  it  reader  will  chufe  which  of  thefe  cor-
is  not  the  fenfe  of  our  author ;  who  regions  he  likes  beft.


XLIL


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICAR  NAS  SE  NS  I  S.  317

XL  1 1.  While  he  was  yet  fpeaking,  moft  of  the  foldiers
cried  out,  and  promifed  to  revenge  him:  Then,  calling
upon  the  centurions  by  name,  they  defired  them  to  begin
the  work;  and  many  of  them  prefented  themfelves,  and
were  not  afraid  to  publifh  any  ill  treatment  they  had
fuftered.  In  the  mean  time,  the  five  generals,  who,  as  I
faid,  had  the  command  of  the  legions,  fearing  fome  attempt
from  the  foldiers,  ran  all  to  the  general’s  tent,  and  considered
with  their  friends  whether  it  might  not  be  poffible  to  ap-
peafe  the  tumult  by  arming  thofe  of  their  own  fadtion,  and
polling  them  round  the  tent :  But,  being  informed  that  the
foldiers  were  retired  to  their  tents,  and  that  the  difturbance
was  ended,  and  appeafed,  and  not  knowing  that  the  greateft
part  of  the  centurions  had  fecretly  confpired  to  revolt,  and
to  unite  in  freeing  their  country,  they  refolved  to  feize  Vir~
ginius,  when  it  was  day,  as  the  author  of  this  diforder,  and
to  keep  him  in  cuftody ;  and  then  to  decamp,  and,  march-
ing  againft  the  enemy,  to  poft  themfelves  in  the  beft  part
of  their  country,  and  lay  it  wafte;  and  not  to  fuffer  their
men  fo  much  as  to  inquire,  from  that  time,  what  was  doing
in  the  city,  but  to  divert  them  from  that  inquiry,  partly  by
the  booty  they  would  acquire,  and  partly  by  the  continual
battles,  in  which  their  own  fafety  would  be  the  foie  objed
of  their  thoughts.  But  they  fucceeded  in  none  of  their  de-
figns :  For  the  centurions  would  not  fuffer  Virginius  to  go  to
the  general’s  tent,  when  he  was  fent  for,  fufpecting  he  might
fuffer  fome  ill  treatment ;  but,  hearing  accidentally  that  the
had  refolved  to  lead  the  troops  againft  the  enemy.


3 1 8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

they  broke  out  into  the  following  reproaches ;  “  How  fuc-
£c  cefsfully  have  you  commanded  us  hitherto,  that  we  fhould
C£  now  alfo  entertain  any  hopes  of  fuccefs  in  following  you,
££  who,  after  you  had  raifed  more  forces  both  in  Rome  itfelf,
<£  and  among  our  allies,  than  any  other  Roman  generals,
££  never  gained  any  victory  over  the  enemy,  nor  did  them
££  any  damage,  but  only  expofed  your  own  want  of  valor,
“  and  experience,  by  incamping  in  difadvantageous  pofts;
C£  and,  by  harraffing  your  own  country  inftead  of  That
<£  belonging  to  the  enemy,  you  have  impoverished  us,  and
££  deprived  us  of  all  thofe  advantages  we  ufed  to  acquire  by
<£  our  vidtories,  when  we  were  commanded  by  better  gene-
££  rals ;  and  the  enemy  now  eredt  trophies  to  perpetuate  the
££  memory  of  our  defeats,  and  have  feized,  and  ftill  retain
££  our  tents,  our  Haves,  our  arms,  and  our  money.”

XLIII.  Virginius  ftill  indulging  his  refentment,  and
ftanding,  no  longer,  in  awe  of  the  generals,  inveighed  againft
them  with  the  greater  confidence,  calling  them  the  bane,
and  fcourge  of  their  country,  and  exhorting  all  the  centurions
to  feize  the  enfigns,  and  lead  back  the  forces  to  Rome.
But  the  greateft  part  of  them  were  ftill  afraid  to  remove
thefe  holy  enfigns,  and  did  not  think  it  either  confident
with  religion,  or  fafe  for  the  whole  army  to  defert  their
commanders,  and  generals:  For  the  military  oath,  which
the  Romans  obferve  with  greater  ftridtnefs  than  any  other
people,  obliges  them  to  follow  their  generals  whitherfo-
ever  they  lead  them;  and  alfo  the  law  gives  power  to  the
generals  to  put  to  death,  without  a  trial,  all  who  are  difobe-

dient,


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  319

dient,  or  defert  their  enfigns.  Virginius,  therefore,  perceiving
that  thefe  motives  kept  them  in  awe,  told  them  that  the  law
had  difpenfed  with  their  oath,  became  it  is  neceffary  that  the
general,  who  commands  the  troops,  fhould  be  legally  appoint¬
ed;  and  the  power  of  the  decemvirs  was  illegal,  fince  the  term
of  a  year,  for  which  they  had  been  created,  was  expired ;  and
that,  to  obey  the  orders  of  thofe,  whofe  power  was  not  fup-
ported  by  law,  was  not  obedience,  and  piety,  but  folly,  and
madnefs.  The  men,  hearing  thefe  reprefentations,  approved
of  them;  and,  after  mutual  exhortations,  and  receiving  even
fome  encouragement  from  Heaven,  they  feized  the  enfigns,
and  marched  out  of  the  camp :  However,  as  it  often  hap¬
pens  among  men  of  various  difpofitions,  and  when  all  have
not  the  beft  intentions,  fome,  both  foldiers  and  centurions,
flayed  with  the  decemvirs,  but  thefe  were  greatly  infe¬
rior  in  number  to  the  others ;  who,  after  they  had  left  the
*  camp,  marched  the  whole  day,  and  arrived  at  Rome  in  the
evening,  no  notice  having  been  given  of  their  arrival :  For
this  reafon,  the  inhabitants  were  under  no  fmall  confterna-
tion,  fuppofing  an  enemy  was  within  their  walls,  which
occafioned  an  outcry,  and  a  diforderly  concourfe  throughout
the  whole  city.  However,  this  tumult  did  not  laft  long
enough  to  produce  any  mifchief:  For,  the  foldiers,  palling
through  the  ftreets,  called  out  that  they  were  friends,  and
come  to  preferve  the  city :  And  indeed  they  confirmed  their
profeffions  by  their  behaviour,  in  doing  no  injury  to  any
perfon :  Then,  proceeding  to  the  Aventine  hill  (which,  of
all  thofe  that  are  within  the  walls,  is  the  moffc  proper  for  a

camp)


,20  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookXI.
camp)  they  flood  to  their  arms  near  the  temple  of  Diana.
The  day  after,  they  fecured  themfelves  by  an  intrench-
ment ;  and,  having  appointed  ten  tribunes,  at  the  head  of
whom  was  Marcus  Oppius,  to  take  care  of  their  common
interefls,  they  remained  quiet.

XLIV.  They  were  foon  joined  by  the  moft  eminent  of
the  centurions  belonging  to  the  three  legions,  that  lay  at
Fidenae,  who  came  to  their  afiiftance  with  a  great  number
of  forces :  Thefe  had  been  long  difaffeded  to  their  generals,
for  having  caufed  Siccius  to  be  affafimated,  as  I  faid  :  How¬
ever,  they  were  afraid  to  begin  the  revolt,  becaufe  they  looked
upon  the  five  legions,  that  lay  at  Algidus,  to  be  attached  to
the  decemvirs ;  but,  as  foon  as  they  heard  of  their  revolt,
they  chearfully  embraced  the  opportunity  prefented  to  them
by  fortune.  Thefe  legions  were  alfo  commanded  by  ten
tribunes,  who  had  been  created  during  their  march,  the
moft  confiderable  of  whom  was 24  Sextus  Manilius.  The
troops,  after  their  jun&ion,  incamped,  and  commifiioned
the  twenty  tribunes  to  25  tranfad  all  affairs  in  the  name  of
the  reft:  Out  of  thefe  twenty,  they  appointed  two  perfons,

Mctnhios.  Thus,  I  think,  that  he,  and  M.  Oppius  were  after-
wemuft  read  this  name,  becaufe r  Livy  wards  chofen  out  of  the  twenty  tri-
lays  that  M.  Oppius,  and  Sextus  bunes.  I  fhall  not  repeat  what  I  men-
Manilius  were  chofen  to  command  tioned  in  the  fortieth  annotation  on
thefe  feceders:  Though  he  makes  the  fixth  book  from  Livy,  concerning
them  to  have  been  chofen  after  the  the  deputation  fent  by  the  fenate  to  the
junction  of  their  forces ;  and  our  au-  forces,  that  lay  incamped  on  mount
thor  fays  that  Manilius  was  firft  ap-  Aventine.

pointed  commander  by  the  troops  2s-  Atym  ts  xm  ^arhv.-  Literally,
from  Fidenae  during  their  march,  and  to  fay  and  do,

r  B.  iii.  c.  51.

*  *  J


Marcus


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN ASSENSIS.  321

Marcus  Oppius,  and  Sextus  Manilius,  who  were  the  moil
confiderable  among  them,  to  be  their  prefidents:  Thefe
formed  a  council  confiding  of  all  the  centurions,  and  tranf-
aded  all  things  in  concurrence  with  them.  Their  intentions
not  being  as  yet  generally  known,  Appius,  who  was  confcious
to  himfelf  of  having  given  occalion  to  the  preferit  diftur-
bance,  and  to  all  the  evils,  that  were  expeded  to  refult  from
it,  did  not  think  fit,  any  longer,  to  ad  in  a  public  capacity,
but  ftaid  at  home :  However,  Spurius  Oppius,  who  had
been  appointed  to  govern  the  city  in  conjundion  with  him,
being  himfelf  alfo  in  a  confirmation  at  firfl:,  and  expeding
that  their  enemies  would  prefently  fall  upon  them,  and
were  come  to  Rome  with  that  intention,  when  he  found
they  attempted  nothing  further,  he  laid  afide  his  fears,  and
aflembled  the  fenate,  fending  officers  to  the  houfes  of  every
fenator  with  diredions  for  them  to  attend.  While  thefe
were  coming  to  the  houfe,  the  commanders  of  the  army
at  Fidenae  arrived,  full  of  indignation  that  both  the  camps
had  been  abandoned  by  the  foldiers,  and  endeavoured  to
perfuade  the  fenate  to  refent  this  defertion  in  the  manner  it
deferved.  When  the  fenators  were  to  deliver  their  opinions,
Lucius  Cornelius  faid  that  the  foldiers,  who  were  pofted
upon  the  Aventine  hill,  ought,  that  very  day,  to  return  to
their  own  camps,  and  obey  their  generals ;  that  no  other
perfons  be  called  in  queftion  for  what  had  happened,  but
the  authors  of  the  revolt ;  that  thefe  ought  to  be  puniffied
by  the  generals ;  and  that,  if  they  refufed  to  return,  the
fenate  fhould  deliberate  concerning  them,  as  concerning
Vol.  IV.  T  t  perfons,


322  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XL

perfons,  who  had  abandoned  their  port,  in  which  they  had
been  placed  by  their  generals,  and  violated  their  military

oath.  On  the  other  fide,  Lucius  Valerius 26  *  *  *  *  *  *

•*****'**********  ******  *  *  *

%%******  *******  *  *  *  *  #  $  *  *  *


26 •  It  appears  that  we  have  loft
many  things  by  this  untoward  hiatus.
The  firft,  is  the  fpeech  of  Valerius  in
anfwer  to  the  motion  of  Cornelius,
and  poffibly  fome  others  on  both  Tides
of  this  important  queftion.  It  Teems
probable  by  Livy,  as  the  reader  will
obTerve  preTently,  that  the  decemvirs
had  ftill  To  ftrong  a  party  in  the  fe-
nate,  as  to  prevent  them  from  coming
to  any  refolution  in  prejudice  of  their
ufurpation.  This  obliged  the  army,
which  was  ftill  incamped  on  the
Aventine  hill,  to  remove  to  the  Holy
mountain,  after  the  example  of  their
anceftors.  All  thefe,  and  the  fubfe-
quent  tranfa&ions  to  the  confulfhip
of  Valerius  and  Horatius,  with
which  our  author  begins  the  next
chapter  may  be  pretty  well  fupplied
out  of  Livy,  whom  I  fhali  tranf-
late  To  far,  to  the  intent  that  thofe,
who  do  not  read  Latin,  may  have  an
uninterrupted  thread  of  this  revolution
in  the  Roman  government.  The  lofs
of  the  other  part,  I  mean  of  That,
which  relates  to  the  laws  of  the  twelve
tables,  and  to  our  author’s  reflexions

*B.

*  »

[£C  The  fathers,  felicitous
wealth,  afiembled  every  day  ;
©ftener  than  in  deliberations,


on  them;  and,  above  all,  to  the  com¬
panion  we  find  he  made  between  thefe
laws,  and  Thofe  of  Greece,  cannot
poffibly  be,  in  any  degree,  repaired.
All  I  can  do,  fhali  be  done  ;  but  that
is  not  much  :  It  will  confift  of  the
colle&ion  of  thofe  laws  as  publilhed
by  Fulvius  Urfinus,  which  Hudfon
has  alfo  inferted  from  Sylburgius,  at
the  end  of  his  firft  volume.  But,  as
thefe  laws  were  written  in  the  language
then  fpoken  by  the  Romans,  and  ac¬
cording  to  the  orthography  then  in
ufe  among  them,  I  have  added,  I  had
almoft  faid,  a  verfion  of  them  into
fuch  Latin  as  every  one,  who  is  ac¬
quainted  with  this  language,  will  un-
derftand  at  firft  fight,  which  will  be
accompanied  with  a  tranflation  of  thofe
laws  into  Englifh.  I  do  not  know
that  any  thing  of  this  kind  has  been
attempted  before;  ar-d,  if  the  trouble,
which  this  attempt  has  coft  me,  can
recommend  it  to  the  reader,  oh  that
account  at  leaft,  I  may  hope  for  his
approbation  of  it.  But  I  (hall  begin
with  tranflating  that  part  of  sLivy,
which  I  before  mentioned.

iii.  c.  5 1 .

for  the  fafety  of  the  common-
yet  fpent  the  time  in  contefts
,  The  affafilnation  of  Siccius,


the


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN  AS  S E NS  IS.  323

the  luft  of  Appius,  and  the  difgraces  in  the  field  were  ob¬
jected  to  the  decemvirs.  The  fenate  refolved  to  fend  Va¬
lerius,  and  Horatius  to  the  Aventine  hill.  Thefe  refufed  to
go  unlefs  the  decemvirs  would  lay  down  the  enfigns  of  that
magiftracy,  which  had  expired  the  year  before.  But  the
decemvirs  complained  that  they  were  reduced  to  the  con¬
dition  of  private  men,  and  faid  they  would  not  refign  their
power,  till  thofe  laws  were  enacted,  for  compiling  which
they  had  been  created.  The  people,  being  informed  by
Marcus  Duilius,  who  had  been  one  of  their  tribunes,  that
thing  was  refolved  upon  by  reafon  of  thefe  perpetual  con-
tefts,  went  from  the  Aventine  hill  to  the  Holy  mountain  :
Duilius  alluring  them  that  the  fenate  would  take  no  care
of  any  thing  till  they  faw  the  people  abandoning  the  city  :
'That  the  Holy  mountain  would  put  them  in  mind  of  the  fteadi-
nefs  of  the  people .  They  would  then  know  that ,  without  the
refitution  of  the  tribunitian  power ,  concord  could  never  be
refored .  The  army  marched  through  the  road  Nomentana,
which  was  then  called  Ficulnenfis,  and  incamped  on  the
Holy  mountain;  imitating  the  modefty  of  their  anceftors
by  committing  no  fort  of  violence.  The  people  followed
the  army,  none,  whofe  age  allowed  him  to  go,  declining  it.
They  were  accompanied  by  their  wives  and  children,  who
alked  them,  in  moving  accents,  to  whom  they  defigned  to
abandon  them  in  that  city,  in  which  neither  modefty,  nor
liberty  could  be  fafe.  When  an  unufual  folitude  had  ren¬
dered  every  thing  defolate  at  Rome,  and  none  were  to  be
feen  in  the  forum  but  a  few  of  the  elder  fort;  and  confe-

T  t  2  quently


324  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XL

quently  the  fathers,  when  fummoned  to  the  fenate,  obferved
that  place  to  be  deferted,  others,  befides  Horatius  and
Valerius,  now  called  out,  “  What  will  you  flay  for,  con-
“  fcript  fathers?  If  the  decemvirs  do  not  put  an  end  to
“  their  obftinacy,  will  you  fuffer  every  thing  to  fall  to  pieces,
<c  and  burft  into  flames  ?  But,  what  is  this  dominion,  de-
“  cemvirs,  that  you  are  fo  tenacious  of?  Will  you  adminifler
<c  juftice  to  houfes  and  walls?  Are  you  not  afhamed  that
«  there  fhould  be  almofl:  a  greater  number  of  your  lidors
“  feen  in  the  forum  than  of  citizens,  and  others  ?  What
“  will  you  do,  if  our  enemies  approach  the  city  ?  What  if
<c  our  own  people  fhould  prefently  come  armed,  fince  their
cc  feceflion  makes  fo  fmall  an  impreflion  on  us?  Do  you
“  defire  that  your  dominion  fhould  end  with  the  deftrudion
cc  of  the  city  ?  It  is  certain  that  we  muft  either  not  have  a
<c  people,  or  have  their  tribunes.  We  fhall  fooner  bear  the
<c  want  of  patrician,  than  they  of  plebeian,  magiftrates.
<c  They  extorted  this  new,,  this  untried  power  from  our  an-
cc  ceftors;  think  not  that,  now  they  have  once  tafted  the
“  fweet  of  it,  they  will  ever  brook  its  abfence ;  particularly,
“  fince  we,  on  our  fide,  do  not  abftain  from  thofe  powers,
iC  that  teach  them  how  much  they  want  a  protedion.”
Thefe  things  being  thrown  out  on  all  fides,  the  decemvirs,
overcome  by  the  concurrent  fenfe  of  the  fenate,  faid  that,
fince  this  was  their  pleafure,  they  would  be  governed  by
them;  they  only  requefted,  and  advifed  that  the  fenate
would  proted  them  from  the  refentment  of  the  public;
and  not,  by  their  blood,  accuftoin  the  people  to  the  punifh-

ment


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  323'

ment  of  fenators.  Then  Valerius,  and  Horatius  were  fent
to  bring  back  the  people,  and  compofe  the  prefent  diftur-
bances  upon  fuch  terms,  as  they  fhould  think  proper ;  and
alfo  ordered  to  provide  for  the  fecurity  of  the  decemvirs
againft  the  refentment,  and  violence  of  the  populace.  When
they  arrived,  they  were  received  in  the  camp  with  great  joy
by  the  people,  who  looked  upon  them  as  their  undoubted
deliverers  both  in  the  beginning  of  the  commotion,  and  in
the  event  of  it.  For  thefe  reafons,  at  their  arrival,  thanks
were  given  to  them.  Icilius  fpoke  in  the  name  of  the  reft.
The  fame  man,  when  the  conditions  came  to  be  difcufied,
and  the  deputies  deftred  to  know  the  demands  of  the  people,
having,  before  their  arrival,  concerted  his  plan  with  the  reft
of  the  feceders,  demanded  fuch  things,  as  made  it  apparent
that  greater  confidence  was  placed  by  them  in  the  equity  of
thofe  demands,  than  in  arms:  For  they  redemanded  the
tribunitian  power,  and  the  right  of  appealing  to  the  people
(which  had  been  their  fafeguards  before  the  inftitution  of  the
decemvirate)  and  that  no  perfon  fhould  be  called  in  queftion
for  having  excited  either  the  foldiers,  or  the  people  to  re¬
cover  their  liberty  by  the  feceflion:  The  only  fevere  demand
they  made  related  to  the  punifhment  of  the  decemvirs :
For  they  infilled  upon  their  being  delivered  up  to  them ;
and  threatened  to  bum  them  alive.  To  thefe  things  the
deputies  made  anfwer:  “  That  part  of  your  demands,  which
“  flows  from  deliberation,  is  fo  reafonable,  that  we  fhould
“  have  offered  it  to  you  of  our  own  accord:  For  you  defire
“  fuch  things,  as  are  the  fupports  of  liberty,  not  of  licenti-

a  oufnefs


326  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

<£  oufnefs  to  annoy  others.  Your  refentment  deferves  rather
C£  to  be  forgiven,  than  indulged;  fince  you  run  into  cruelty
“  through  the  deteftation  of  it;  and,  almoft  before  you
<£  yourfelves  are  free,  defire  to  domineer  over  your  adverfaries.
“  Shall  our  commonwealth  never  be  at  reft  from  punifh-
“  ments  infli&ed  either  by  the  fenate  on  the  Roman  people,
<£  or  by  the  people  on  the  fenate  ?  You  ftand  in  need  of  a
<c  fhield,  rather  than  of  a  fword.  That  man  is  at  leaft  fuf-
<c  ficiently  humbled,  who  lives  in  a  ftate  upon  the  lame  terms
<£  with  others,  without  either  doing,  or  fuffering,  injuries.
<£  Belides,  if  at  any  time  you  delire  to  render  yourfelves  for-
<£  midable,  let  it  be  after  the  recovery  of  your  magiftracies,
<£  and  your  laws,  when  you  will  have  the  power  of  trying  us
<£  for  our  lives  and  fortunes;  then  you  will  determine  every
i£  caufe  according  to  its  own  merits :  Now  it  is  fufficient  that
c£  your  liberty  is  reftored.”  All  giving  leave  to  the  deputies
to  do  as  they  thought  proper,  thefe  promifed  foon  to  return
with  a  ratification  of  their  defires.  After  they  arrived  at
Rome,  and  had  laid  the  demands  of  the  people  before  the
fenate,  all  the  decemvirs  except  Appius,  finding  that,  con¬
trary  to  their  expectation,  no  mention  was  made  of  their
punifhment,  confented  to  every  thing :  He,  who  was  fierce
in  his  nature,  and  the  principal  object  of  public  refentment,
meafuring  the  hatred  of  others  to  himfelf  by  his  own  to
them,  faid;  “  I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  fate,  that  hangs
££  over  my  head.  I  find  that  the  attack  upon  us  is  deferred
“  till  arms  are  delivered  to  our  adverfaries.  Our  blood
££  mull  be  offered  up  to  public  odium.  However,  even  I
u  myfelf  fhall  make  no  delay  in  refigning  the  decern virate.”

The


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  HALICA  R  N  ASSENSIS.  327
T he  fenate  palled  a  decree  that  the  decemvirs  fhould  forth¬
with  abdicate  their  magiftracy  :  That  Marcus  Papirius,  the
high  prieft,  fhould  appoint  the  tribunes;  and  that  no  man
fhould  be  queftioned  for  the  feceffion  of  the  foldiers,  and
the  people.  After  the  decree  was  paffed  in  thefe  terms,  and
the  fenate  difmifted,  the  decemvirs  proceeded  to  the  affembly
of  the  people,  where,  to  the  great  fatisfa&ion  of  all  men,
they  abdicated  their  magiftracy.  The  account  of  thefe  things
was  fent  to  the  feceders.  And  all,  who  had  been  left  in  the
city,  attended  the  deputies.  This  multitude  was  met  by
another  rejoicing  multitude  from  the  camp.  They  con¬
gratulated  each  other  upon  the  reftitution  of  liberty,  and
concord.  The  deputies  fpoke  thus  to  the  aftembly  :  “  Re-
u  turn  to  your  country,  to  your  houflhold  gods,  to  your
“  wives  and  children;  and  may  your  return  prove  benefi-
“  cial,  aufpicious,  and  fortunate  to  yourfelves,  and  to  the
“  commonwealth.  But  bring  with  you  to  the  city  the  fame
u  modefty  you  have  obferved  here,  where,  in  the  confump-
“  tion  of  fo  many  things  neceffary  to  fo  great  a  multitude,
cc  no  man’s  land  has  fuffered.  Return  to  the  Aventine  hill,
“  from  whence  you  came.  On  that  aufpicious  fpot,  where
“  you  laid  the  firft  foundations  of  your  liberty,  you  fhall
“  create  your  tribunes.  The  high  prieft  will  be  prefent  to
“  hold  the  comitia.”  Every  thing  was  approved  of  with  a
general  concurrence,  and  alacrity.  They  took  up  their
enfigns ;  and,  in  their  march  to  Rome,  contended  with  thofe
they  met  in  their  demonftrations  of  joy.  They  proceeded

in  filence  through  the  city  to  the  Aventine  hill  with  their

arms  s


328  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XL

arms :  Where,  the  comitia  being  held  by  the  high  prieft,
they  immediately  chofe  their  tribunes ;  firft  of  all  Lucius
Virginias,  then  Lucius  Icilius,  and  Publius  Numitorius  the
uncle  of  Virginia,  who  had  been  the  authors  of  the  fecefiion  ;
in  the  next  place,  Caius  Sicinius,  a  defendant  of  that  Sici-
nius,  who,  as  it  is  recorded  in  hiftory,  was  created  the  firft
tribune  on  the  Holy  mountain  ;  and  Marcus  Duilius,  who
had  fignalized  himfelf  in  the  exercife  of  the  tribuneftnp
before  the  creation  of  the  decemvirs,  and  had  not  been
wanting  to  the  people  in  their  contefts  with  them :  After
thefe,  Marcus  Titinius,  Marcus  Pomponius,  Caius  Apronius,
Publius  Villius,and  Caius  Oppius  were  chofen  rather  through
expe&ation  than  merit.  As  foon  as  Lucius  Icilius  had
entered  upon  his  magiftracy,  he  propofed  a  law,  which
the  people  enabled,  that  no  perfon  fhould  be  called  to
account  for  the  feceffion  from  the  decemvirs.  Prefently
after,  Marcus  Duilius  procured  a  law  to  be  pafied  for  the
creation  of  confuls  with  an  appeal  from  them  to  the  people.
All  thele  things  were  tranfa&ed  in  an  aflembly  of  the  people
held  in  the  Flaminian  meadows,  now  called  the  Circus
Flaminius ,”]


Then  follows  the  election  of  Lucius
Valerius,  and  Marcus  Horatius  to  the
confulfhip,  with  which,  as  I  faid,  our
author  begins  the  next  chapter.

I,  now,  proceed  to  the  laws  of  the
twelve  tables,  which  I  fhall  tranferibe
from  Fulvius  Urfinus,  rather  than


from  Hudfon  ;  becaufe  the  former
has  exhibited  them,  as  they  were
originally  written,  in  capital  letters,
with  a  full  point  after  each  word;
which  ancient  way  of  ingraving  in-
feriptions  Hudfon  has  thought  fit  to
change  to  fmall  characters  with  mo¬
dern  points.


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  PIALICARNASSENS  IS.  329

LEGES  DUODECIM  TABULARUM.

The  laws  of  the  twelve  tables.


DE  JURE  PRIVATO.
Of  private  right,

I.  SEI.  IN.  IOVS.  VOCAT.  NEI.  EAT.
STATIM.  ENCAPITO.  ANTESTARIER.

i.  Si  in  jus  vo cat ,  ni  eat  jiatim ,  inci-
-pito  antefiari.

1.  If  anyone  cites  another  to  ap¬
pear  before  a  magiftrate,  and  he  does
not  go  prefently,  let  the  other  call
witneffes.

2.  S  E  I.  C  A  L  VI  T  OR.  PEDEMVE.
STRVIT.  MANOM.  EN.  DO.  IACITO.

2 .  Si  decipit ,  pedemve  Jiruit ,  manum
injicito.

2.  If  he  endeavours  to  deceive,  or
to  run  away,  let  the  plaintiff  feize  him.

3.  SEI.  IN.  IOVS.  VOCATO.  MORBOS.
AEV1TASVE.  VITIOM.  ESCIT.  QVEI.  IN.
IOVS.  VOCASIT.  IVMENTOM.  DATO.
SEI.  NOLET.  ARCERAM.  NEI.  STERNITO.

3.  Si  in  jus  vocato  morbus ,  aetasve
vitium  erit,  qui  in  jus  vocaverit,  jumcn-
tum  dato.  Si  nolet ,  arceram  ne  Jternito.

3.  If  the  perfon  cited  is  infirm,  or
old,  let  the  perfon  citing  provide  him
with  a  cart.  If  he  refufe  it,  let  him
not  furnifh  him  with  a  litter.

4,  AERIS.  CONFESEI.  REBOSQVE.
IOVRE.  I  OVD  IK  AT  ElS.  XXX.  DIES.
IOVSTEI.  SVNTO.  POSTIDEA.  EN.  DO.
MANOS.  IACTIO.  ESTOD.  IN.  DV.  IOVS.
EDOVCITO.  NEI.  IOVDIKATOM.  FACIT.
AVT.  QVIP3.  EN.  DO.  EO.  IM.  IOVRE.
VJNDIC1T.  SECOM.  DVCITO.  VINCITO.
AVT.  NESVO.  AVT.  COMPEDEEOS.  XV.
PONDO.  NEI.  MAIOSE.  AVT.  SEI.  VOLET.
MI  NOSE.  VINCITO.  SEI.  VOLET,  SOVO,

Vol.  IV.


VI VITO.  NEI.  SOVO.  VIVEIT.  C^VEI.  IM.
VINCTOM.  HABEBIT.  LIBRAS.  FARIS.
EN.  DO.  DIES.  DATO.  SEI.VOLET.  PLVVS.
DATO.  ENDOTERATIM.  PACIO.  ESTOD.
NEI.  CVM.  EO.  PACIT.  LX.  DIES.  VINC¬
TOM.  HABETOD.  EN.  IEIS.  DIEBOS.  TER-
TIEIS.NONDINEIS.  CONTINOEIS.  IN.  DV.
COMITIOM.  EN.  DO.  IOVRE.  IM.  PRO-
CITATO.  QV ANTEIQVE.  STLIS.  AESTV-
MATA.  SIET,  PRAEDICATO.  POSTIDEA.
DE.  KAPITE.  ADEICTEI.  POENAS.  SV-
MITOD.  AVT.  SEI.  VOLET.  TRANS.
T1BERIM.  PEREGRE,  VENOM.  DATOD.
AST,  SEI.  PLVSEBOS.  ADEICTOS.  SIET.
TER  TIE  IS.  NONDINEIS.  PARTE  I S.  SE-
CANTO.  SEI.  PLVVS.  MINVSVE.  SECVE-
RINT.  SE.  FRAVDED.  ESTOD.

4.  Aeris  confejfi  rebufque  jure  judicatis
triginta  dies  jujli  Junto.  Pojiea  manus
injedlio  ejlo.  In  jus  educito.  Nijudicatum
facit ,  nut  quis  in  eo  ilium  jure  vindicate
fecum  ducito ,  vincito ,  aut  nervo ,  aut
compe dibus  quindecim  pondo  ne  majcre  j
aut  ft  volet ,  minor e  vincito.  Si  volet ,
fuo  vivito.  Ni  fuovivit ,  qui  eum  vindlum
habebit ,  libras  f arris  indies  dato.  Si
volet ,  plus  dato.  Interim  padiio  ejlo.
Ni  cum  eo  pagit ,  fexaginta  dies  vindium
habeto.  In  eis  diebus  tertiis  nundinis
continuis  in  comitium  in  jure  eum  proci-
cato  •,  quantique  lis  aejlimata  fit ,  prae-
dicato.  Pojiea  de  capite  addicii  poenas
fumito :  Aut  ft  volet ,  trans  Tiberim
peregre  venum  dato.  Ajl  fi  pluribus  ad-
didtusfit ,  tertiis  nundinis  partes  fecanto .
Si  plus  minufve  fecuerint,Jine  fraude  ejlo.

4.  Let  thirty  days  grace  be  given
to  the  debtor  after  the  debt  is  confeffed,
U  u  and


Book  XI.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF


33°

and  judgement  given.  After  which,
let  him  be  arrefted.  Let  the  creditor
bring  him  before  the  judge.  If  he
does  not  comply  with  his  order,  nor
is  bailed  by  any  one,  let  the  creditor
take  him  away,  and  bind  him  with  a
nerve,  or  fetters  weighing  no  more
than  fifteen  pounds,  or,  if  he  will,lefs.
If  the  debtor  pleafes,  let  him  maintain
himfelf.  If  he  does  not  maintain  him-
fell,  let  the  perfon,  who  keeps  him  in
bonds,  give  him  a  pound  of  fpelt  every
day  ;  if  he  thinks  fit,  let  him  give  him
more.  In  the  mean  time,  let  them
agree.  If  the  debtor  does  not  agree
with  his  creditor,  let  the  latter  keep
him  in  bonds  for  fixty  days.  During
thefe  days,  let  his  creditor  cite  him  to
appear  in  court  three  market  days  fuc-
ceffively,  and  let  him  proclaim  the
fum,  at  which  the  debt,  and  cofts  are
laid.  After  which,  let  him  put  the
debtor  to  death  j  or,  if  he  pleafes,  fell
him  for  a  Have  to  a  foreign  country,
on  the  other  fide  of  the  Tiber :  But,
if  the  debtor  is  delivered  up  to  many
creditors,  let  them,  on  the  third  mar¬
ket  day,  cut  his  body  into  feveral
pieces.  If  they  cut  more,  or  lefs,  let
it  be  without  prejudice.

5.  SEI.  QVEI.  EN.  DO.  IOVRE.  MA-
NOM.  CONSERONT.  VTREIQUE.  SO-
PERSTITEBOS.  PRAESETEBOS.  VINDI-
CIAS.  SVMVNTO.

5.  Si  qui  in  jure  mannm  confer unt,
utrique  fuperfiitibus  praefentibus  vindi-
cias  fumunto .

5.  If  any  join  iffue,  let  both  lay
hold  of  the  thing  in  conteft  in  the
prefence  of  witneffes.

6.  SEI.  VECINEI.  ENTER.  SE.  IOR-
CASINT.  ENTERA.  QyiNQVE.  PEDEIS.
OESOCAPIO.  NEI.  ESTOD.  PRAETOR.
ARBITROS.  TREIS.  DATO.  EOROM.  AR-


BITRIO.  FINIOM.  CONTROVE  R  SI  AS.
COMPONITO.

6.  Si  vicini  inter  fe  jurgarint ,  intro,
quinque  pedes  ufucapio  ne  ejlo  :  Praetor
arbitros  ires  dato :  Romm  arbitrio  finium
controverjias  componito.

6.  If  neighbours  have  a  conteft  with
one  another,  let  not  prefeription  pre¬
vail  with  regard  to  the  boundary  of
five  feet  lying  between  their  lands  :
Let  the  praetor  appoint  three  arbi¬
trators  and  compofe  the  controver-
fies  concerning  the  limits,  according
to  their  report.

7.  QVOI.  TESTIMONIOM.  DEFVERIT.
IS.  TERTIEIS.  DIEEOS.  OB.  PORTOM.
OF  V  A  COL  ATOM.  EITO.

7.  Cui  teftimonium  defaerit ,  is  teriiis
diebus  ad  domum  obvagulatum  ito.

7.  If  a  perfon  has  no  witnefs  to
prove  that  his  goods  are  in  another
man’s  houfe,  let  him  go  thither  on  the
third  day,  and  demand  entrance  with
outcries  to  fearch  for  them.

8.  TICNOM.  IVNCTOM.  AEDEBOS.
VINIAEQVE.  NEI.  SOLVITO.  QVEI.
OLVD.  IVNXSIT.  DVPLIONE.  LVITO.

8.  lignum  jundium  aedibus  vineae-
que  ne  folvito.  Qui  illud  junxit ,  duplione
luito.

8.  Let  no  man  pull  down  any  part
of  a  houfe,  that  is  built  joining  to  his
own,  or  to  his  vineyard.  Let  the
perfon,  who  erefted  it,  pay  double
damages.

9.  QVOM.NEXSOM.  FACIET.  MANCI-
PIOMQVE.  VTEI.  DINCVA.  NVNCVPA-
SIT.  ITA.  IOVS.  ESTOD.

9.  Quum  nexum  facie t  mancipiumque ,
ut  lingua  nuncuparit ,  itajus  efto.

9.  When  any  one  (hall  warrant  the
title  of  any  thing  he  fells,  as  the  tongue
pronounced  the  words,  fo  let  the  law
be.


10..  PA-


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  ENS  I  S.  331


IO.  PATERFAMILIAS.  VTEI.  SOPER.
FAMILIA.  PEQVNIAQVE.  SOVA.  LECA-
SIT.  ITA.  IOVS.  ESTOD.

10.  Paterfamilias  uti  fuper  familid
pecunidque  fuel  legarit ,  it  a  jus  efto.

10.  As  the  matter  of  a  family  (hall
difpofe  of  his  (laves,  and  potteftions  by
his  will,  fo  let  the  law  be.

11.  PATREI.  EN.  DO.  FIDIO.  VITAE.
NECISQVE.  POTESTAS.  ESTOD.  TER-
QVE.  IM.  VENOM.  DARIER.  IOVS.
ESTOD.  SEI.  PATER.  FIDIOM.  TER.
VENOM.  DVIT.  FIDIOS.  A.  PATRE.
LEBER.  ESTOD.

11.  Patri  infilio  vitae  necifque  po-
t  eft  as  ejio :  1‘erque  ilium  venum  dari  jus
efto.  Si  pater  filium  ter  venum  dederit,
filius  a  pat  re  liber  efto.

1 1.  Let  a  father  have  the  power  of
life  and  death  over  his  fon  :  Let  it  be
lawful  for  the  fon  to  be  fold  for  a  (lave
three  times.  If  the  father  lliall  fell  his
fon  three  times,  let  the  fon  be  free
from  his  father.

12.  ASVORSOM.  HOSTEM.  AETERNA.
AVCTORIT AS.  ESTOD.

12.  Adverfus  peregrinum  aeterna
auttoritas  efto.

1 2.  Let  the  right  of  a  citizen  never
be  extinguilhed  by  the  prefeription  of
a  foreigner.

13.  SEI.  QVIS.  F0VSIOSVS.  SIET.
ACNATOROM.  OF.  NTILEOMQVE.  EN.
DO.  EO.  PEQVNIAQVE.  EIVS.  POTES¬
TAS.  ESTOD.

13.  Si  quis  furiofus  fit ,  agnatorum
gentiliumque  in  eo  pecunidque  ej  us  pot  eft  as
efto.

13.  If  any  one  is  mad,  let  his  re¬
lations  by  the  father’s  fide,  and  thole
of  the  fame  family  have  power  over
him,  and  his  potte  (lions.

14.  SEI.  QVIS.  ALIENAS.  ARBORES.


4NIOVRIA.  SECVESIT.  XXV.  AERIS.  IN.
DV.  SINCOLAS.  POENAE.  SVNTO.

14.  Si  quis  alienas  arbor es  injuria
fecuerit ,  viginti  quinque  librae  aeris  in
fingulas  poenae  funto.

14.  If  any  one  (hall  cut  the  trees  of
another  wrongfully,  let  the  punidi-
ment  be  twenty  five  pounds  of  brafs
for  every  one.

15.  QVEI.  ALIENAS.  AEDES.  FRV-
MENTEIVE.  ACERVOM.  IVXSTA.  AE-
DEIS.  POSITOM.  SCIENS.  D.  M.  VSIT.
VSERITVE.  PRAETORIS. ARBITRATVV.
VINCTOS.  VERBER  ATOSQVE.  ICNE.
NECATOR.  AST.  SEI.  IMPRVDENS.
SE.  D.  M.  DAMNOM.  DVIT.  NOXSIAM.
SARC1TO.  AVT.  PRAETORIS.  ARBI¬
TRATVV.  VIRCEIS.  CAESOS.  POENAM.
LVITO.

1 5.  ffti  alienas  aedes ,  frumentive
acervum  juxta  aedes  pofitum  feiens  dolo
malo  uffit ,  ufferitve ,  praetoris  arbitratu
v  in  A  us  verberatufque  igne  necator.  Aft
fi  imprudens  fine  dolo  malo  damnum  de-
derit ,  noxiam  farcito ,  aut  praetoris  ar¬
bitratu  virgis  caefus  poenam  luito.

1 5.  Whoever  has  burned,  or  (hall
burn  defignedly,  and  malicioufly,
another’s  houfe,  or  a  (lack  of  corn
(landing  near  his  houfe,  let  him  be
bound,  and  whipped  at  the  diferetion
of  the  praetor,  and  burned.  But,  if
he  did  the  mifehief  undefignedly,  and
without  malice,  let  him  repair  the
damage,  or  be  puniihed  for  it  by
being  whipped  at  the  diferetion  of  the
praetor.

16.  CLANDEM.  QVAE.  DE.  TVOD  .
IN.  DV.  ALIENOM.  ACROM.  CADIT.  SE.
FRAVDED.  LECERE.  LICETO.

1 6.  Glandem ,  quae  de  tuo  in  alienum
agrum  cadit ,  fine  fraude  legere  lice  to.

16.  Let  it  be  lawful  for  thee  to
U  u  2  gather


332  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.


gather  up  the  fruit,  that  falls  from  a
tree  growing  on  thy  land  into  the  land
of  another,  without  moleflation.

17.  QVEI.  NOX.  FRVCEM.  ARATRO.
QVAESITAM.  FORTIM.  PAYESIT.  SE-
CVESITVE.  SEI.  POBES.  S1ET.  CERERI.
SACER.  ESTOD  .  IMPOBES.  PR  AETORIS.
ARBITRATVV.  VERBERATOS.  NOXSI-
AM.  DVPLIONE.  SARCITO.

i  7.  £hd  nodlu.  frugem  aratro  quaefi-
tam  furtim  -paver it ,  fecueritve ,  ft  puber
fit ,  Cereri  facer  efto  :  Impuber  praetoris
arbitratu  verberatus  noxiam  duplione
farcito.

17.  Whoever  fhall  privately  in  the
night  feed,  or  cut  grain  railed  by  the
plough,  if  a  man  grown,  let  him  be
confecrated  to  Ceres.  If  not  arrived
to  manhood,  let  him  be  whipped  at
the  difcretion  of  the  praetor,  and  re¬
pair  the  mifchief  by  paying  double
damages.

18.  SEI.  QVADROPES.  PAVPESIEM.
FAXSIT.  QV  ADROPEDIS.  DOMINOS.
NOXSIAM.  SARCITOD.  AVT.  QVOD.
NOXSIAM.  NOCVIT.  DARE.  DAMNAS.
ESTOD.

18.  Si  quadrupes  damnum  fecerit ,
quadrupedis  dominus  noxiam  farcito
aut  quod  noxiam  nocuit  dare  damnatus  efto.

18.  If  a  quadruped  lhall  do  any
damage,  let  the  owner  of  the  quadru¬
ped  repair  the  damage ;  or  let  him
be  fentenced  to  deliver  That,  which
cauied  the  damage.

19.  SEI.  VIR.  AVT.  MOLIER.  ALTER.
ALTEREI.  NONTIOM.  MISEIT.  DEVOR-
SIOM.  ESTOD.  MOLIER.  RES.  SOVAS.
S1BEI.  HABETO.  VIR.  MOLIEREI.  CLA-
VEIS.  ADIMITOD.  EXICITOQVE.

19.  Si  vir  aut  mulier  alter  alteri
nuntium  miferit ,  divortium  efto  :  Mulier
res  fuai  fibi  habeto  ;  vir  mulieri  claves
adimitQ  ejiicitcueq .


19.  If  either  the  hufband,  or  the
wife  fhall  fend  notice  to  the  other,  let
this  be  a  divorce :  Let  the  wife  have
her  own  fortune  to  herfelf :  Let  the
hufband  take  away  the  keys  from  his
wife,  and  turn  her  out  of  his  houfe.

20.  MOLIER.  TERTIEIS.  NOCTEBOS.
OESORPATOM.  EITO.  NEI.  ITA.  OESOR-
PASIT.  AF.  VIROD.  OESOCAPITOR.

20.  Mulier  tertiis  no'clibus  ufurpa-
tum  ito.  Ni  ita  ufurparit ,  a  viro  ufu-
capitor.

20.  Let  the  wife  go  three  nights  to
difhurb  the  prefcription.  If  fhe  has
not  diflurbed  the  prefcription  by  this
method,  let  her  be  poffeifed  by  her
hufband  by  prefcription.

2  I .  QVEI.  REM.  DE.  QVA.  CONTRO-
VERSIA.  SIET.  IN.  DV.  SACROM.  DE-
DICASIT.  DVPLIONE.  POENAM.  LVITO.

2  i .  Sfui  rem  de  qua  controverfia  ft,
in facnim  dedicarit ,  duplione  poenam  luito.

21.  Whoever  fhall  confecrate  to
religion  any  thing  litigated,  let  him
be  punifhed  by  paying  double  the
value  of  it.

22.  PATRISFAMII.IAS.  QVEI.  EN.
DO.  TESTATO.  MOR1TOR.  QVOIQyE.
SOVOS.  HERES.  NEC.  ESCIT.  ACNA-
TOS.  PROXSVMOS.  FAMILIAM.  PEQV-
NIAMQVE.  HABETO.

22.  Patrisfamilias ,  qui  inteftato  mo-
ritur ,  cuique  fuus  heres  nec  erit,  agna-
tus  proximus  familiam ,  pecuniamque  ka~
beto.

22.  When  the  mailer  of  a  family
dies  inteftate,  and  without  heirs  of  his
blood,  let  the  next  of  kin  by  the  fa¬
ther’s  fide  have  his  Haves,  and  pof-
feffions.

23.  LEIBERTO.  QVEI.  EN.  DO.  TES¬
TATO.  M0RIT0R.  QVOIQVE.  SOVOS.
HERES.  NEC. ESCIT.  PATRONOS.  HERES.
ESTOD.


23.  Liber  to.


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN AS  SE NS  I  S.  333


23.  Liber  to ,  quiinteftato  moritur ,  cui-
que  fuus  heres  nec  erit ,  pair  onus  heres
efto.

23.  When  a  freed  man  dies  inteft-
ate,  and  without  heirs  of  his  blood,
let  his  patron  be  his  heir.

24.  SEI.  COHEREDES.  PARTEM;  RE-
ROM.  SINCOLEI.  SOVAM.  HABERE.
MALONT.  FAMILIAE.  E  RCISCVNDAE.
ARBITROM.  SVMONTO.  EIQVE.  IOVS.
ARBITRIOMQVE.  REROM.  PERMI-
TVNTO.

24.  Si  coheredes  partem  rerum  fin-
guli  fuam  habere  malunt ,  familiae  ercif-
cendae  arbitrum  fumunto ,  eique  jus  arbi-
triumque  rerum  permittunto.

24.  If  coheirs  chufe  to  have  each
their  own  fnare  of  the  inheritance,  let
them  take  an  arbitrator  for  the  divi-
fion  of  it,  and  let  them  leave  to  him
the  right,  and  arbitration  concerning
the  inheritance*.

25.  SEI.  QVIS.  PRODICOS.  SIET.
PRAETOR.  El.  BONEIS.  SOVEIS.  EN.
DO.  TERDEICITO.  EN.  DO.  QVE.  EO.
peqvniaqve.  EIVS.  ACNATOROM.
CENTILEOMQJE.  POTESTAS.  ESTOD.

25.  Si  quis  prodigus  fit ,  praetor  ci
bonis  fuis  interdicito  •,  inque  eo  pecunid-
que  ejus  agnatorum  gentiliumque  potejias
efto.

25.  If  any  one  is  prodigal,  let  the
praetor  forbid  him  the  ufe  of  his  for¬
tune  •,  and  let  his  relations  by  the  fa¬
ther’s  fide,  and  thofe  of  the  fame  fa¬
mily  have  power  over  him,  and  his
poffefiions.

26.  SEI.  QVIS.  DOLEI.  MALEI.  CAL-
PAEVE.  SVSPECTOS.  EN.  DO.  TOTELA.
SIET.  EIVS.  QVEI.  VOLET.  NOMEN.
DEFERTO.  VBE I .  DETOLER  IT.  SEI,
DOLEI.  MALEI.  ARCVESIT.  PRAETOR.
IM.  CVM.  FLACITIO.  REMOVETOD.
AST.  SEI.  TOVTOR.  REM.  POP1LET.


FORATOS.  SIET.  DVPLIONE.  POENAM.
LVITO.

26.  Si  quis  doli  mali fraudifve  fufpec-
tus  in  tuteld  fit ,  ejus  qui  volet  nomen
defer  to.  Ubi  detulerit ,  fi  doli  mali'  ar-
guerit,  praetor  eum  cum  flagitio  removeto.
Aft  fi  tutor  rem  pupilli  furatus  fit ,  du-
plione  poenam  luito.

26.  If  any  one  is  fufpedted  of  de¬
ceit,  or  fraud  in  a  guardianfhip,  let
any  perfon,  who  Will,  fue  him  :  After
he  has  fued  him,  if  he  proves  him
guilty  of  the  deceit,  let  the  praetor
remove  him  with  ignominy.  But,  if
a  guardian  has  robbed  his  ward,  let
him  be  punifhed  by  paying  double
damages.

27.  SEI.  QVIS.  INIOVRIAM.  ALTERI.
FAXSIT.  XXV.  AERIS,  POENAE.  SVNTO.

27.  Si  quis  injur iam  alteri  fecerit ,
viginti  quinque  librae  aeris  poenae  junto.

27.  If  any  one  fhall  do  an  injury
to  another,  let  the  punifhment  be
twenty  five  pounds  of  brafs.

28.  SEI.  MEMBROM.  RVPSIT.  NEI.
CVM.  EO.  PACIT.  T ALIO.  ESTOD.

28.  Si  membrum  ruperit ,  ni  cum  eo
pagit ,  talio  efto.

28.  Ifa  perfon  fhall  break  the  limb
of  another,  and  does  not  agree  with
him,  let  retaliation  take  place.

29.  QVEI.  NOX.  FORTOM.  FAXSIT.
SEI.  IM.  ALIQVIPS.  OCISIT.  IOVRE.
CAESOS.  ESTOD.  SEI.  LOVCI.  FORTOM.
FAXSIT.  TELOQVE.  SE.  PRAEHENDIER.
PROHIBESIT.  SEI.  IM.  ALIQVIPS.  O-
CISIT.  IOVRE.  CAESOS.  ESTOD.  AST.
SEI.  LOVCI.  FORTOM.  FAXSIT.  NEQVE.
TELO.  SE.  PRAEHENDIER.  PROHIBESIT.
SEI.  LEBER.  SIET.  PRAETOR.  IM.  VER-
BERARIER.  IOVBETOD.  EIQVE.  QVOI.
FORTOM.  FAXSIT.  ADEICITO.  SEI.
SERVOS.  SIET.  VIRCEIS.  CAESOS.  EX.
SAXSO.  DEICITOR.  SEI.IMPOBES.  SIET.

PRAE-


334  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.


P  R  AETORIS.  ARBITRATVV.  VERBE-
RATOS.  NOXSIAM.  SARCITO.

29.  §hti  noftu  fur  turn  fecerit,  fi  eum
aliquis  occiderit ,  jure  caefus  ejio.  Si
luce  fur  turn  fecerit,  teloque  fe  prehendi
prohibuerit,  ft  eum  aliquis  Occident ,  jure
caefus  ejlo :  Sed  fi  luce  fur  turn  fecerit ,
neqae  telo  fe  prehendi  prohibuerit,  ji  liber
fit ,  praetor  eum  verberari  jubeto  •,  eique
cui  furtum  fecerit ,  aadicito  :  Si  fervus
fit ,  virgis  caefus ,  ex  faxo  dejicitor.  Si
impuber  fit ,  praetoris  arbitratu  verbe-
ratus  noxiam  farcito.

29.  If  a  perfon  fhall  rob  in  the
night,  and  any  one  fhall  kill  him,  let
his  death  be  warranted  by  law.  If  he
fhall  rob  by  day,  and  make  ufe  of  a
weapon  to  prevent  his  being  appre¬
hended,  if  any  one  fhall  kill  him,  let
his  death  be  warranted  by  law  :  But,
if  he  lhall  rob  by  day,  and  not  make
ufe  of  a  weapon  to  prevent  his  being
apprehended,  if  he  is  a  free  man,  let
the  praetor  order  him  to  be  whipped  ;
and  deliver  him  over  as  a  Have  to  the
perfon  he  robbed  :  If  he  is  a  (lave,  let
him  be  whipped,  and  call  down  the
Tarpeian  rock.  If  he  is  not  arrived
to  manhood,  let  him  be  whipped  at
the  dilcretion  of  the  praetor,  and  re¬
pair  the  damage.

30.  FORTA.  PER.  LANCEM.  LICI-
OMQVE.  CONCEPTA.  VTEI.  MANIFES-
TA.  VINDICATO.

30.  Furta  per  lancem  liciumque  con¬
cept  a,  ut  manifejla ,  vindicato.

30.  Let  him  punifh  thefts,  when
the  goods  are  found  upon  a  fearch,  in
the  fame  manner  as  if  the  thief  had
been  taken  in  the  fad.  »

31.  STATOLOBEROM.  VENOM.  DA-
RIER.  LICETO.  DVM.  NEI.  QVID.  AS-
VORSOM.  E I  VS.  STATOM.  FVAT .

3 1 .  Statu  liberum  venum  dari  licet 0  j


dum  ne  quid  adverfum  ejus  Jlatum  fi¬
eri  t.

31.  Let  it  be  lawful  for  that  man
to  be  fold  for  a  (lave,  who  is  ordered
by  his  mafter’s  will  to  be  made  free
upon  fome  condition  not  yet  perform¬
ed  •,  provided  nothing  is  done  to  dif¬
able  him  from  performing  that  con¬
dition.

DE  JURE  PUBLICO.

Of  public  right.

I.  REM.  VBEI.  PACONT.  OR  ANT  O
NEI.  PACONT.  ANTE.  MEDIDIEM.  EN.
DO.  COMITIO.  AVT.  EN.  DO.  FORO.
CAVSAM.  CONICIVNTO.  POST.  MEDI¬
DIEM.  PR  AE  SET  ED.  AMBOBOS.  LEITEM.
ADEICITO.  SOL.  OCASOS.  SOPREMA.
TEMPESTAS.  ESTOD.

i.  Rem  ubi  pagunt,  or  ant  0 :  Ni  pa-
gunt ,  ante  meridiem  in  comitio ,  aut  in
foro  caufam  agunto.  Pojl  meridiem ,
praefentibus  ambobus ,  litem  addicito.  Sol
occafus  fuprema  tempejlas  ejlo.

1.  If  the  parties  agree,  let  them
pray  judgement  according  to  that  a-
greement :  If  they  do  not  agree,  let
them  plead  their  caufe  before  noon  in
the  comitium,  or  in  the  forum.  In  the
afternoon,  let  the  praetor  give  judge¬
ment  in  the  prefence  of  both  parties.
Let  the  fetting  of  the  fun  be  the  lafl
hour.

2.  ASIDVO.  VINDEX.  ASIDVOS.  ES¬
TOD.  PROLETARIO.  QVOI.  QVEIVIS.
VOLET.  VINDEX.  ESTOD.

2 .  AJJiduo  vindex  ajfduus  ejlo  :  Fro -
letario  cui  quivis  volet ,  vindex  ejlo.

2.  Let  a  rich  man  be  bail  for  a  rich
man ;  and  let  any  one,  who  will,  be
bail  for  a  poor  man.

3.  qvei.se.  seierit.  testarier.
LIBRIPENSVE.  FVERIT.  NEI.  TESTIMO-

NIOM.


t


BookXL  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  SSENSIS.  335

niom.  fariator.  improbos.  intes-  7.  IF  any  one  fhall  publilli  {lander,
tabelisqve.  estod.  or  write  verfes  to  the  defamation  of

3.  Qui  fe  ftverit  teftari ,  libripenfve  another,  Jet  the  offence  be  capital.
fuerit ,  ni  teftimonium  fari  velit ,  impro-
bus  inteftabilifque  efto.

3.  Whoever  has  fuffered  himfelf
to  be  cited  as  a  witnefs,  or  been  a


weigher  of  money,  and  refufes  to  give
his  teftimony,  let  him  be  deemed  a
wicked  man,  and  incapable  of  being
a  witnefs.

4.  SEI.  PATRONOS.  CLIENTEI.
FRAVDEM.  FAXSIT.  PATRONOS.  CLI-
ENT IS.  DEIVEIS.  SACER.  ESTOD.

4.  Si  patronus  clienti  fraudem  fecerit,
patronus  clientis  divis  facer  efto.

4.  If  a  patron  fhall  defraud  his
client,  let  the  patron  of  fuch  client  be
confecrated  to  the  gods.

5.  NEXSO.  SOLVTOQVE.  FORCTEI.
SANATEIQVE.  EIDEM.  IOVS.  ESTOD.

5.  Nexo  folutoque ,  forbii  fanatique
idem  jus  efto .

5.  Let  the  debtor,  who  is  in  bond


8.  QVEI.  PERDVELEM.  CONCITASIT.
QVEIVE.  CEIVEM.  PERDVELEI.  TRANS-
DVIT.  KAPITAL.  ESTOD.

8.  Qui  per duellem  concitaverit ,  quive
civemperduelli  tradiderit ,  capital  efto.

8.  Whoever  fhall  excite  an  enemy
to  make  war  againft  the  Romans,  or
deliver  up  a  citizen  to  an  enemy,  let.
the  offence  be  capital.

9.  PREIVI LECIA.  NEI.  IROCANTO.
NEI.  VE.  DE.  KAPITE.  CEIVIS.  NISEI,
MAXSVMO.  COMITIATVV.  FERVNTO.

9.  Privilegia  ne  irroganto ,  neve  de
capite  civis  nifi  maximo  comitiatuferunto »

9.  Let  them  enadl  no  private  laws,
nor  try  a  citizen  for  his  life,  otherwife
than  in  the  greateft  comitiatus.

10.  PATREBOS.  CVM,  PLEBED.  CO-
NVBIA.  NEI.  SVNTO.

10.  Patribus  cumplebe connubia  ne [unto.

10.  Let  there  be  no  intermarriages


age,  enjoy  the  fame  right  with  him,  between  the  patricians,  and  the  ple-
who  is  releafed*,  and  the  ftranger,  who  beians.


returns  to  his  duty,  enjoy  the  fame
right  with  the  Roman,  who  never  fell
from  it.

6.  PEQVNIAM.  QVEI.  NANCITOR.
HABETO.  SEI.  QVID.  PICNORIS.  NAN¬
CITOR.  SIBEI.  HABETO.


II.  IOVSVS.  POPLEI.  SOFRACIAQVE,
SVNTO.  QVODCVOM QVE.  POSTREMOM.
POPLOS.  IOVSIT.  ID.  IOVS.  RATOMQVE.
ESTOD.

1 1  *  Juftus  populi  fuffragiaque  j unto .
ftjuodcumque  poftremum  populus  jujjit,  id


6.  Pecuniam  qui  nancifcitur ,  habeto :  jus  ratumque  efto.

Si  quid pignoris  nancifcitur ,  fibi  habeto.-  1 1.  Let  there  be  a  command,  and
6.  If  a  perfon  has  acquired  any  fuffrages  of  the  people.  Whatever  the
pofieflions,  let  him  have  them  :  If  he  people  fhall  command  laft,  let  that  be
has  acquired  any  pledge,  let  him  have  law,  and  valid.


it  to  himfelf.

7.  SEI.  QVI S,  OCENTASIT.  CAS-
MENVE.  CONDVIT.  QVOD.  ALT  E  R I.
FLACITIOM.  F AXSIT.KAPIT AL.  ESTOD.

7.  Si  quis  occentarit ,  carmenve  con-
diderit ,  quod  alteri  fiagitium  fecerit ,  ca¬
pital  efto .


12.  QVEI.  IOVDEX.  QVEIVE.  ARBI¬
TER.  IOVREDATOS.  OB.  REM.  IOVDI-
KANDAM.  PEQVNIAM.  CEPET.  KAPI¬
TAL.  ESTOD.

1 2 .  Qui  judex,  quive  arbiter  jure  da-
tus  ob  rem  judicandam  pecuniam  ceperit *
capital  efto .

12.  If


336  ROMAN  A.NTIQUITIES  0F  BookXI.


12.  If  any  judge,  or  arbitrator  ap¬
pointed  by  law  fhall  take  money  for  a
judgement  to  be  given,  let  the  crime
be  capital.

13.  Q^VEI.  FALSOM.  TESTIMONIOM.
D IXSERIT.  EX,  SAXSO.  JDEICITOR.

13.  Qui  falfum  tejlimonium  dixerit ,
ex  faxo  dejicitor.

13.  If  any  one  fhall  give  a  falfe
teftimony,  let  him  be  thrown  down
the  Tarpeian  rock.

14.  QVEI.  ADORAT.  LECE.  SEI.
rLVVS.  PETET.  QVAM.  IOVS.  SIET.
CAVSA.  CADITO.

14.  Sfui  agit  lege ,  fi  'plus  petet  quam
jus  fit ,  caufd  cadito.

14.  If  a  fuitor  prays  for  more
than  the  law  allows,  let  him  lofe  his
caufe.

15.  IOVRIS.  IOVRANDI.  AD.  STRIN-
CENDAM.  FIDEM.  MAXSVMA.  VIS.
ESTOD.

13.  Juris] urandi  ad  Jlringendamfidem
maxima  vis  ejto.

15.  Let  an  oath  be  of  the  greateft
force  to  infure  credit.

16.  QVEI.  C ALIM.  EN.  DO.  VRBE.
NOX.  COIT.  COIVERIT.  KAPITAL.  ES-
TOD.

16.  Qui  clam  in  urbe  noflu  coit ,  coi-
verit,  capital  ejlo.

16.  Whoever  alTembles,  or  fhall
affemble  in  the  city  privately  in  the
night,  let  the  crime  be  capital.

17.  VNCIASIO.  FOENOSE.  NEI.  QVIS.
PLVVS.  EXSERCEROD.  SEI.  QVIS.  ALI-
VTA.  FAXSIT.  QVADRVPLIONE.  POE-
NAM.  LVITO.

17.  Unciario  foenore  ne  qui spins  exer-
eeto.  Si  quis  aliter  fecerit,  quadruplione
poenam  luito.

1 7.  Let  no  man  take  more  interefb
For  money  than  one  per  cent,  every
month.  If  any  one  ihall  do  otherwife,


let  him  be  amerced  in  four  times  the
fum.

18.  SEI.  QVIS.  EX.  LEIBERTATED.
IN.  DV.  SERVITVTEM.  ASERITOR.
PRAETOR.  SECVNDVM.  LEIBERTATEM.
VINDICI AS.  DATOD.QVEI.  VINDICIAS.
TOLLIT.  SPONSORES.  IOVDICIO.  SIS-
TIER.  DATOD.

18.  Si  quis  ex  libertate  in  fcrvitutem
ajferitur ,  praetor  fecundum  libertatem
vindicias  dato.  Qui  vindicias  tollit ,
fponfores  judicio  fifli  dato.

18.  If  any  one  fuppofed  to  be  free,
is  claimed  as  a  have,  let  the  praetor
decree  the  pofieflion  in  favor  of  liberty:
And  let  the  man,  who  has  obtained
this  decree  for  the  pofilflion,  give
fureties  to  produce  the  perfon  at  the
trial.

Ip.  AMBITOS.  P ARIETIS.  SESTER-
T I  OS.  PES.  ESTOD.

19.  Ambitus  parietis  fejlertius  pes
ejlo.

19.  Let  there  be  a  fpace  of  two  feet
and  a  half  round  the  outer  wall  of
every  houfe.

DE  JURE  SACRORUM.

Laws  concerning  religious  rites.

I.  PRAECO.  FONVS.  ENDEICITO.
DOMINOS.  FONERIS.  EN.  LVDEIS.  A-
CENSO.  LICTOREBOSQVE.  OETITOR.
EN.  DO.  FONERE.  TRIBOS.  RICINIEIS.
RICA.  PORPOREA.  DECEMQVE.  TIBI-
CINEBOS.  OETIER.LICETO.  HOC.  PLVVS.
NEI.  FAC1TO.

i.  Praeco  funus  indicito.  Dominus
funeris  in  ludis  accenfo  lifloribufque  uti-
tor.  In  funere  tribus  riciniis ,  ncd  pur¬
purea^  decemque  tibicinibus  uti  liceto.
Hoc  plus  nefacito.

1.  Let  the  cryer  proclaim  the  fu¬
neral.  Let  the  mafter  of  the  funeral,

'in


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC AR NASSENSIS.  337


in  the  games,  make  ufe  of  a  public
officer,  and  lidtors.  Let  it  be  lawful
for  him  to  make  ufe  of  .three  fquare
mantles  in  the  funeral,  a  purple  fillet
for  the  head,  and  ten  players  on  the
flute.  Let  him  do  no  more  than  this.

2.  SERV1LIS.  VNCTVRA.  CIRCOM-
POTATIOQVE.  QVOM.FONVS.  EXSEQVI-
ANTOR.  VINEI.  VE.  RESPERSIO.  NET.
FVAT.  ACERAS.  SEPOLCREIS.  AVT.
LONGAS.  KORONAS.  NEI.  EN.  DO.  PO-
NITO.

2 .  Servilis  unRura ,  circumpotatioque ,
quum  funus  exequiantur,  vinive  refperfio
ne  fiat.  Acerras  fcpulchris ,  aut  longas
coronas  ne  imponito.

2.  Let  not  the  body  of  a  flave  be
anointed  ;  let  there  be  no  drinking
round  a  dead  body,  when  they  per¬
form  the  funeral  rites,  nor  fprinlding
of  wine.  Let  none  place  altars  with
perfumes,  orfeftoonson  the  fepulchres.

3.  MVRINAM.  MORTVO.  NEI.  EN-
DITO.

3.  Murinam  mortuo  ne  indito.

3.  Let  none  pour  wine  mixed  with
precious  ointment  into  dead  bodies.

4.  PLVSA.  FONERA.  VNEI.  NEI.  FA-
CITO.  NEI.  VE.  PLVSEIS.  LECTOS.  EN.
DO.  FERTO.

4.  Plura  funera  uni  ne  fact  to  :  Neve
plures  leclos  inferto.

4.  Let  none  make  more  than  one
funeral  for  one  perfon :  Nor  carry
more  than  one  bier  in  the  funeral  pro-
ceflion.

5.  NEI.  VE.  AVSOM.  ADVITO.  AST.
QVOI.  AVSO.  DENTEIS.  VINCTEI.
SIENT.  IM.  CVM.  OLO.  SEPELIRE.  VRE-
RE.  VE.  SE.  FRAVDED.  LICETO.

5.  Neve  aurum  addito  :  Sed  cui  auro
dentes  vinRi  fmt ,  eum  cum  illo  fepelire
urereve  fine  fraude  liceto.

5.  Let  none  make  ufe  of  gold  in
Voe.  IY.


funerals :  But,  if  the  teeth  of  any  per¬
fon  were  fattened  with  gold,  let  none
be  impeached  for  burying,  or  burning
him  with  that  gold.

6.  HOM INI.  MORTVO.  OSA.  NET.
LECITO.  QVO.  POST.  FON VS.  FACIAT.
EXSTRA.  QVAM.  SEI,  QVIS.  FORIS.
M  ILITIAEQVE.  MORTVOS.  SIET.

6.  Homini  mortuo  ojfia  ne  legito ,  quo
pofiea  funus  faciat ;  extra  quam  ft  quis
foris  militiaeque  mortuus  fit.

6.  Let  none  gather  up  the  bones  of
a  dead  body  in  order  to  make  a  fune¬
ral  afterwards  ;  unlefs  the  perfon  died
abroad,  and  in  war.

7.  HOMINEM.  MORTVOM.  EN.  DO.
VRBE.  NEI.  SEPELITO.  NEI.  VE.  VRITO.

7.  Hominem  mortuum  in  urbe  ne  fe-
pelito ,  neve  urito.

7.  Let  none  bury,  or  burn  a  dead
body  in  the  city.

8.  ROCOM.  ASCI  A.  NEI.  POLITO.

8.  Rogum  afcid  ne  polito.

8.  Let  none  poliffi  the  billets  of  a
funeral  pile  with  a  plane.

9.  ROCOM.  BVSTOM.  VE.  NOVOM.
PROPIVS.  AEDEIS.  ALIENAS.  LX.  PE-
DEIS.  INVEITO.  DOMINO.  NEI.  ADI-
CITO.  NEI.  V£.  FOROM.  SEPOLCRET.
BVSTOM.  VE.  OESOCAPITO.

9.  Rogum  buftumve  novum  propius
aedes  alienas  fiexaginta  pedes  invito  do¬
mino  ne  adjicito :  Neve  forum  fepulchri
buftumve  ufucapito.

9.  Let  no  one  eredt  a  funeral  pile,
or  a  new  fepulchre,  nearer  to  another’s
houfe  than  lixty  feet,  without  leave  of
the  owner  :  Neither  let  any  one  enjoy
the  porch  of  a  fepulchre,  or  the  fe¬
pulchre  itfelf,  by  prefcription.

10.  QVOM.  FONVS.  EXFERTOR.  NEI.
ENCOMITIATO.

i  o.  Quum  funus  exfertur ,  ne  incomi-
tiato.

X  x  10.  Whilft


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.


10.  Whilft  the  funeral  is  proceed¬
ing  through  the  city,  let  not  the  co-
mitia  be  held.

11.  MOLIERES.  FACIEM.  NEI.  CAR-
PVNTO.  NEI.  VE.  CENAS.  RADVNTO.
LESOM.  FONERIS.  NEC.  HABENTO.

ii.  Mulieres  faciem  ne  car punt o  ;
neve  genas  radunto :  Lejfum  funeris  ergo
nec  habento.

11.  Let  not  women  fcratch  their
faces ;  nor  tear  their  cheeks ;  nor
ufe  lamentations  on  account  of  a  fu¬
neral.

12.  HONORATOROM.  VIROROM.
LAVDES.  EN.  DO.  CONTIONE.  MEMO-
RANTOR.  EASQVE.  NAENIAE.  AD.  TI-
EICINEM.  P  ROSEQVVNTOR.

12.  Honor aiorum  virorum  laudes  in
condone  memorantor ;  eafque  naeniae  ad
tibicinem  profequuntor .

12.  Let  the  praifes  of  honoured
men  be  difplayed  in  an  aflfembly  of
the  people and  let  mournful  fongs,
accompanied  with  a  flute,  attend  thole
praifes.

13.  QVEI.  KORONAM.  PARET.  IPSVS.
PEQVNIA.  VE.  EIVS.  VIRTVTIS.  DI-
DITOR.  IPSE IQVE .  MORTVO.  PAREN-
TIBVSQVE.  EIVS.  QVOM.  ENTVS.  PO-
SITOS.  EST.  QVOMQVE.  FORIS.  EXFER-
TOR.  IMPOSIT  A.  SE.  FRAVDED.  ESTOD.

1 3 .  Qui  coronam  pararit  ipfe ,  pecu-
niave  ejus ,  virtutis  ergo  daior  ei :  Ipji-
que  mortuo ,  et  parenti  ejus ,  quumintus

‘Nat.  Hilt.  B.  xxi.  c.  3.


pojitus  eft,  quumque  foris  exfertur ,  im-
pofita  fine  frauds  efto.

1 3.  If  any  one  had  obtained  a  crown
himfelf,  or  his  flaves,  or  horfes  for
him,  let  it  be  given  to  him  on  account
of  his  merit :  And,  after  he  is  dead,
let  the  crown  be  placed  on  his,  and  his
father’s  head  with  impunity,  as  well
whilft  the  body  remains  in  the  houfe,
as  when  it  is  carried  out  to  be  buried.

There  has  been  a  great  controverfy
among  the  learned  concerning  the
fenfe  of  the  laft  law.  I  have  trandated
it  according  to  That,  which  1  Pliny
has  given  to  it;  and,  according  to
him  alfo,  I  have  laid,  in  the  law  itfelf,
pecuniave ,  inftead  of  pecumaeve ;  and
virtutis ,  inftead  of  virtutisve.  By
this  means,  the  law  becomes  intelli¬
gible,  which  it  was  not  before.  I  have,
alfo,  faid  in  the  law,  parentibufque ,  in¬
ftead  of  parentalebofque ,  and  have  ren¬
dered  parentibus,  bp  parenti,  upon  the
authority  of 11  Cicero,  who,  in  explain¬
ing  this  lav/,  lays,  et  ejus  parenti.

The  reader  will  find  that,  in  tranf-
lating  thefe  laws,  I  have  given  a  fenfe
to  many  pafiages  in  them,  that  may
feem  uncommon  at  firft  fight ;  but,
if  he  pleafes  to  confult  the  interpre¬
tations,  which  the  civilians  have  given
to  thefe  pafiages,  I  believe  he  will  find
my  tranflation  to  bejuftifted  by  them.

u  De  Legib.  B.  ii.  c.  24.


*  *  *  But  it  behooved  me  neither  to  make  no  mention  of
the  Roman  laws,  which  we  find  written  in  the  twelve
tables,  fince  they  are  fo  venerable  in  themfelves,  and  fo  far
fuperior  to  Thofe  of  the  Greeks,  nor  to  extend  the  account
of  them  further  than  was  neceffary.


XLV,


I


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  II ALIC  ARN  A  S  SEN  SIS.  339

XLV.  After  the  fubverfion  of  the  decemvirate,  the  firft
perfons,  who  were  inverted  with  the  confular  dignity  by  the
people  in  an  aflembly  of  the  centuries,  being,  as  I  faid,
Lucius  Valerius  Potitus,  and  Marcus  Horatius  Barbatus,
thefe  magiftrates,  who  were  themfelves  of  a  popular  difpo-
fition,  and  had  inherited  thefe  principles  from  their  anceftors,
adhering  to  the  promifes  they  had  made  to  the  plebeians,
when  they  perfuaded  them  to  lay  down  their  arms,  that,  in
their  whole  adminiftration,  they  would  confult  the  intereft  of
the  people,  27  enadted  feveral  laws,  in  the  afiemblies  by  centu¬
ries,  which  I  need  not  take  any  notice  of,  and  with  which  the
patricians  were  diftatisfied,  though  afhamed  to  oppofe  them,
but  particularly  That,  which  ordains  that  the  laws,  parted  by
the  people  in  their  afiemblies  by  tribes,  fhould  bind  all  the

27'  N opus  oiXhiss  ts  tivo&s

yV  a  Stored  ygxtyeiV'  d  hefe  laws  are  fet
forth  by  w  Livy,  from  whom  I  fhall
tranfcribe  them.  The  firft,  after  That
already  mentioned  by  our  author,  re-
ftored  the  appeal  to  the  people  from
the  magiftrates,  which  the  decemvirs
had  abolifhed,  and  made  it  capital  for
any  perfon  to  create  any  magiftrate
without  an  appeal- to  them.  Ne  quis
ullum  magiftratum  fine  provocatione  ere-
aret :  Qui  creajfet ,  eum  jus  fafque  ejfet
cccidi :  Neve  ea  caedes  capitalis  noxae
haberetur.  So  that,  from  this  time,
there  lay  an  appeal  to  the  people,  even
from  the  dictators.  The  fecond  re¬
lated  to  the  renovation  of  an  old  law,
mentioned  by  xour  author,  in  virtue
of  which  the  perfons  of  the  tribunes
were  to  be  held  facred.  The  third  law

w  B.  iii,  c.  55.  *See  the  fixth  book,  c.  89.  *  Livy,  B.  iii.  c.  55.

X  x  2  Romans


was  brought  in  by  M.  Duilius,  one  of
the  tribunes,  and  pafted :  By  this  it
was  enabled  that,  whoever  left  the
people  without  their  tribunes,  and
created  a  magiftrate  without  an  appeal
to  the  people,  fhould  be  whipped,  and
beheaded,  y  M.  Duilius  deinde  tribunus
plebis  plebem  rogavit ,  plebsque  f civ  it ;
qui  plebem  fine  tribunis  reliquijfet ,  quique
magiftratum  fine  provocatione  creajfet ,
ter  go  et  capite  puniretur.  Thus  we  fee
that  the  Romans  were  not  only  brave
enough  to  bring  about  a  revolution,
by  which  tyranny  was  abolifhed,  but
alfo  wife  enough  to  aflert  their  liberty
in  the  plaineft,  and  ftrongeft  terms,
and  to  fecure  it  at  once  with  all  the
precautions,  that  wifdom  could  fug-
geft,  or  a  regard  to  themfelves, and
their  pofterity,  infpire.


340  ROMAN  A  N  T  I  QJU  I  T  I E  S  OF  Book  XI.

Romans  without  diftindion,  and  have  the  fame  force  with
Thofe,  which  fhould  be  paffed  in  the  affemblies  by  centuries :
And  the  punifhments  appointed  againft  fuch,  as  fhould  abro¬
gate,  or  tranfgrefs  this  law,  if  convided  thereof,  were  death,
and  the  confifcation  of  their  fortunes :  This  law  put  an  end
to  the  cavils  made  ufe  of,  before,  by  the  patricians  againft
the  plebeians,  when  they  refufed  obedience  to  the  laws  en¬
abled  by  the  latter,  and  would  not  allow,  upon  any  account,
that  Thofe  paffed  in  the  affemblies  by  tribes,  were  binding
to  the  whole  body  of  the  commonwealth,  but  only  to  the
plebeians ;  but  allowed  that  they  themfelves,  as  well  as  the
reft  of  the  citizens,  were  concluded  by  the  refolutions  of  the
affemblies  by  centuries.  It  was  obferved  before  that,  in  the
affemblies  by  tribes,  the  plebeians,  and  the  poorer  fort  were
fuperior  to  the  patricians;  but,  in  the  affemblies  by  cen¬
turies,  the  patricians,  though  far  lefs  numerous,  were  fupe¬
rior  to  the  plebeians.

XL VI.  This  law  being  enaded  by  the  confuls,  together
with  feme  others  of  a  popular  nature,  immediately  the
tribunes,  looking  upon  this  as  a  proper  time  to  punifh  Ap-
pius,  and  his  collegues,  refolved  to  fummon  them  to  appear
before  the  people,  not  all  together,  left  they  might  affift  one
another,  but  one  by  one :  For  they  concluded  that,  by  this
means,  they  would  the  more  eafily  be  brought  to  juftice.
They  conftdered  which  of  them  it  was  moft  proper  to  begin
with,  and  determined  to  try  Appius  firft,  who  was  odious
to  the  people  on  account  both  of  his  other  crimes,  and  of
the  outrages  he  had  lately  been  guilty  of  with  regard  to

Virginia;


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL I C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  341

Virginia:  For  they  judged  that,  if  they  convidled  him,  they
fhould  eafily  get  the  better  of  the  others ;  whereas,  if  they
fhould  begin  with  thofe  of  a  lower  rank,  they  imagined  that
the  refentment  of  the  citizens,  which  is  always  more  violent
in  the  firft  contefts,  would  grow  languid  with  regard  to  the
mod  confiderable  men,  if  thefe  fhould  be  tried  laft,  which
had  often  happened  before.  Having  refolved  upon  this,
they  ordered  the  decemvirs  to  be  fecured ;  and  appointed
Virginius  to  be  the  accufer  of  Appius,  without  drawing  lots.
After  that,  Appius,  being  cited  before  the  tribunal  of  the
people  to  anfwer  an  accufation,  exhibited  againft  him
in  their  affembly  by  Virginius,  defired  time  to  prepare
himfelf  for  his  defence;  but,  being  committed  to  cuftody
till  he  fhould  be  tried  (for  he  was  not  allowed  to  be  bailed)
he  was  put  to  death  in  prifon  before  the  day  appointed  for
his  trial,  as  it  was  generally  fufpedted,  by  order  of  the  tri¬
bunes;  but  others,  who  defired  to  wipe  off  this  afperiion,
gave  out  that  he  23  hanged  himfelf.  After  him,  Spurius
Oppius  was  brought  before  the  people  by  Publius  Numi~
torius,  another  of  the  tribunes ;  and,  being  allowed  to  make
his  defence,  was  unanimoufly  condemned;  fent  to  prifon,
and  put  to  death  the  fame  day  :  The  reft  of  the  decemvirs
punifhed  themfelves  by  a  voluntary  exile,  before  they  were
accufed ;  and  the  quaeftors  confifcated  the  fortunes  both  of
thofe  who  had  been  put  to  death,  and  of  thofe  who  had  fled.

2S*  Avlos  ioivlov  amtfrjtrxusvos  put  himfelf  to  death  :  Priufquam  pro-

2  Livy  does  not  fay  how  he  died  •,  but  ditto,  dies  adejj'et ,  Appius  Jibi  mortem
affirms,  in  fo  many  words,  that  he  confcivit.

ZB.  iii.  c.  58,


Marcus


342  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

Marcus  Claudius,  who  had  attempted  to  take  away  Virginia,
as  his  Have,  was  alfo  accufed  by  Icilius  her  fpoufe  :  However,
by  laying  the  fault  on  Appius,  who  had  ordered  him  to  commit
that  crime,  he  efcaped  death ;  but  was  condemned  to  per¬
petual  banifhment.  As  for  the  others,  who  had  been  the
inftruments  of  the  decemvirs  in  any  iniquitous  a&ion,  none
were  brought  to  a  public  trial ;  but  an  impunity  was  granted
to  them  all.  Marcus  Duilius,  one  of  the  tribunes,  wras  the
author  of  this  meafure,  the  citizens  being  already  difiatisfied,
and  expecting  to  be  treated  like  enemies.

XL VI I.  After  the  domeftic  troubles  wrere  appeafed,  the
confuls  aflembled  the  fenate,  and  procured  a  decree  to  be
paffed  impowering  them  to  lead  out  the  forces  immediately
againft  the  enemy ;  and  the  people  having  confirmed  the
decree  of  the  fenate,  Valerius,  one  of  the  confuls,  marched
againfi:  the  Aequi,  and  the  Volfci,  with  one  half  of  the  army
(for  thefe  two  nations  had  joined  their  forces)  and,  knowing
that  the  Aequi  were  elated  with  their  former  fuccefles,  and
entertained  a  great  contempt  of  the  Roman  army,  he  had  a
mind  to  encreafe  their  prefumption,  and  confidence,  by
infufing  into  them  a  falfe  opinion  that  he  apprehended  an
ingagement,  and  affe&ed  in  his  whole  conduct  the  appear¬
ance  of  fear :  For  he  placed  his  camp  upon  an  eminence  of
difficult  accefs ;  furrounded  it  with  a  deep  ditch,  and  fortified
it  with  high  palifades;  and,  when  the  enemy  provoked  him
to  battle,  which  they  often  did,  and  reproached  him  with
cowardife,  he  bore  it  with  patience,  and  remained  quiet:
But,  after  he  had  received  intelligence  that  their  beft  forces

were


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALI  C  A  RN  ASSENSIS.  343

were  marched  out  to  lay  wafte  the  territories  of  the  Hernici,
and  the  Latines,  and  that  thofe  left  to  guard  the  camp,  were
neither  many  in  number,  nor  good  troops,  he  thought  this
a  proper  opportunity  to  execute  his  defign ;  and,  leading  out
his  army  in  order  of  battle,  he  advanced  with  an  intent  to
ingage ;  but  none  coming  out  to  encounter  him,  he  remained
quiet  that  day :  The  day  after,  he  led  his  army  to  their
camp,  which  was  not  very  ftrong.  When  the  forces,  that
were  before  gone  out  to  lay  wafte  29  the  country,  heard  that
their  camp  was  belieged,  they  appeared,  though  not  in  a
body,  and  in  good  order,  but  fcattered,  and  in  fmall  parties,
every  one  coming  up  as  he  could :  As  foon  as  thofe  in  the
camp  faw  their  own  men  advancing,  they  took  courage,  and
fallied  out  in  a  body.  Upon  this,  a  great  battle  infixed,  and
many  fell  on  both  hides:  The  Romans,  gaining  the  vidory,
put  to  flight  thofe,  with  whom  they  were  ingaged  hand  to
hand;  and,  purfuing  fuch  as  fled,  killed  fome,  and  made
others  prifoners.  After  this  vidory,  Valerius  overrun  the
enemy’s  country  with  impunity,  and  laid  it  wafte.

XLVIII.  On  the  other  fide,  Marcus  Horatius,  who  had
been  fent  againft  the  Sabines,  hearing  of  the  exploits  of  his
collegue,  marched  out  of  his  camp  alfo,  and  prefently  ad¬
vanced  with  all  his  forces  againft  the  enemy,  who  v/ere  not
inferior  to  him  in  number,  and  perfedly  acquainted  with

z9‘  Tyc  we  mid  rea^  t g  kou  A cihvav  yw,  and  never

this,  or  rt is  ytif9  inftead  of  t»  <*5-20?,  mentioned  any  town  they  propofed  to
which  (lands  in  all  the  editions,  and  befiege :  And  if  he  had,  he  would
manufcripts ;  becaufe  our  author  be-  never  have  called  it  but  aroAiv ;
fore  told  us  that  the  forces  of  the  ene-  and  even  to  this,  szn  t<x?  5 rgonpeu,  is,
my  were  gone  out  ear*  t rts  in  no  degree,  applicable.


344  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

the  art  of  war :  For  they  all  fought  with  fpirit,  and  great
boldnefs,  the  confequence  of  their  former  victories;  and
particularly  their  commander,  who  was  not  only  a  good  gene¬
ral,  but  alfo  a  man  of  perfonal  bravery :  However,  theRoman
horfe  behaving  themfelves  with  diftinguifhed  courage,  the
conful  obtained  a  moft  illuftrious  vidory,  killing  many  of
the  enemy,  and  taking  more  of  them  prifoners;  he  alfo
made  himfelf  mafter  of  their  camp,  which  they  had  aban¬
doned,  and  in  which  he  found  all  their  baggage,  and  all  the
booty  they  had  taken  in  their  excurhons  into  the  territories
of  the  Romans ;  and  here  he  found,  and  recovered  a  great
number  of  his  own  people,  who  had  been  taken  prifoners :
For  the  Sabines  defpifed  the  Romans  fo  far,  that  they  had
not  fent  away  their  booty  before  the  battle.  All  the  effeds,
therefore,  of  the  Sabines  he  diftributed  among  the  foldiers,
after  he  had  feleded  fuch  a  part  of  them,  as  he  defigned  to
confecrate  to  the  gods ;  and  the  booty,  which  had  been  taken
from  the  Romans,  he  reftored  to  the  owners.

XL IX.  Having  performed  thefe  things,  he  returned  to
Rome  with  his  army :  And  Valerius  came  thither  at  the
fame  time  :  And  both  of  them,  being  greatly  elated  with
their  vidories,  expeded  illuftrious  triumphs ;  but  the
event  did  not  anfwer  their  expedations :  For  the  fenate  af-
fembling  in  order  to  defeat  their  views,  while  they  lay  in-
camped  '  without  the  city  in  the  field  called  the  field  of
Mars,  and  being  informed  of  the  exploits  of  both,  would  not
lufferthem  to  perform  the  triumphal  facrifice:  Many  of  the
fenators  oppofed  their  demand  openly,  and  particularly  Caius

Claudius,


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN AS SE N S  IS.  345

Claudius,  the  uncle,  as  I  faid,  of  Appius,  who  had  eflablifhed
the  oligarchy,  and  lately  been  put  to  death  by  the  tribunes :
He  objected  to  them  the  laws  they  had  ena&ed,  by  which
they  had  weakened  the  power  of  the  fenate,  and  the  other
meafures  they  had  taken  during  the  whole  courfe  of  their
magiftracy ;  and,  laft  of  all,  the  death  of  fome  of  the  de¬
cemvirs,  and  the  confifcation  of  the  fortunes  of  others,  whom
they  had  betrayed  to  the  tribunes,  contrary  to  their  oaths,
and  to  the  treaties:  For  he  faid  that,  by  the  convention
entered  into  upon  the  vidims  between  the  patricians  and
the  plebeians,  all  were  intitled  to  an  impunity,  and  to  an
amnefty  for  every  thing  that  was  part.  To  this  he  added
that  Appius  had  not  fallen  by  his  own  hand,  but  by  the
treachery  of  the  tribunes,  who  had  taken  him  off  before  his
trial,  that  he  might  not,  when  tried,  obtain  either  leave
to  defend  himfelf,  or  companion ;  which,  if  he  had  been
brought  to  his  trial,  would  never  have  been  refufed  to  a
man  of  his  dignity,  who  had  done  many  great  fervices  to
the  commonwealth,  while  he  implored  the  faith  of  a  treaty
confirmed  by  oaths,  in  confidence  of  which  mankind  ac¬
commodate  their  differences,  and  prefented  himfelf,  with
his  children,  and  relations  before  the  people,  whofe  pity  his
very  habit  of  a  fuppliant,  and  many  othercircumftances  could
not  have  failed  to  excite.  All  thefe  accufations  having  been
thrown  out  againft  the  confuls  by  Caius  Claudius,  the  fe-
nators,  who  were  prefent,  concluded  that  they  ought  to
content  themfelves  with  not  being  punifhed :  But  that  they
Vol.  IV.  Y  y  had


346  ROMAN  ANTIQJJIT1BS  OF  BookXI.

Lad  not  the  lea  ft  pretence  to  a  triumph,  or  to  any  other
favors  of  that  nature.

L.  The  fenate  having  rejected  the  demand  of  a  triumph,
Valerius,  and  his  collegue  were  full  of  refentment;  and,
looking  upon  themfelves  to  be  highly  affronted,  they  affem-
bled  the  people;  and,  after  many  inve&ives  againft  the  fe¬
nate,  they  obtained  the  triumph  from  the  lormer  by  a  law,
which  the  tribunes  propofed  in  their  favor,  and  30  were  the


3°'  TT^Coloi  P WjJLOUUV  #Vfliv7ft)y  txIo  atyyj-
ywotfxtvoi  to  Glareanus,  and,  after
him,  M.  *  *  *,  without  naming  the
former,  have  obferved  that  our  author
contradicts  himfelf  here  ;  becaufe  he
had  faid,  before,  that  Servilius  ob¬
tained  the  honor  of  a  triumph  from
the  people  after  the  fenate  had  refufed
it.  But  this  is  a  miftake  in  both  thole
authors  :  For  Servilius  did  not  obtain
his  triumph,  like  Valerius  and  Hora-
tius,  by  virtue  of  a  vote  pafled  by  the
people;  but,  as  he  fays  himfelf,  he
derived  the  power  of  triumphing  from
his  own  exploits,  and  the  army,  which
had  ferved  under  him;  as(p>j  zougct  tuv
letvla  you  ts  cwuycovHr&iAivx

?gulsvfACiIo$i%tiv  ryv  ra  tfou7rivav  —  i%x<nuv.

The  people  did  not  indeed  contradict
him,  and  even  attended  his  triumph,
but  they  paffed  no  vote  in  favor  of  it.
Thefe  two  cafes,  therefore,  are  very
different ;  and  we  find  not  only  by  our
author,  but  alfo  by  b  Livy,  that  Va¬
lerius  and  Horatius  were  the  firfl  per-
fons,  who  triumphed  by  the  order  of
the  people,  without  the  authority  of
the  fenate  :  Turn  primum ,  fine  auffori-
tate  fenatusypopidijujfu  triumph  at  um  eft.

aB.  vi.  c.  30.


I  am  not  at  all  furprifed  that  M.  *  **
fhould  think  that  our  author  contra¬
dicts  himfelf;  becaufe  he  has  added  to
the  words  quoted  by  me  from  the
fixth  book  thole  which  follow,  and-
for  which  there  is  not  the  leaft  au¬
thority  in  the  Greek  text;  que fes  belles
actions — V autGr if ent  a  recevoir  du  peuple
les  honneurs  que  le  fenat  lui  a  ref  ups.
So  that,  it  is  not  Dionyfius,  who  con¬
tradicts  himfelf;  but  his  tranflator,
who  has  milled  himfelf.  But  the  tri¬
umph  of  thefe  confuls  is  attended  with
another  difficulty,  which  muft  not  be
paffed  over  in  filence.  The  Fafti  Ca-
pitolini  make  Valerius  triumph  on  the
ides  of  the  month  Sextiiis,  that  is,  the
27th  of  the  Julian  Auguft ;  and  Ho¬
ratius  on  the  feventh  of  the  kalends  of
September,  that  is,  the  feventh  of  the
Julian  September,  in  the  year  of  Rome
304,  according  to  that  computation,,
which  is  the  305th  of  Varro,  and  the
306th  of  our  author,  and  of  Cato:
The  confequence  of  all  this  is,  that,
according  to  the  two  firft,  they  tri¬
umphed  during  the  third  year  of  the
decemvirate,  or  more  properly  before
the  expiration  of  it ;  in  other  words,

bB.  iii.  c.  63.

firft


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  347

firft  of  all  the  Romans,  who  introduced  this  cuftom.  This
gave  occafion  to  frefh  dilputes,  and  accufations  urged


that  the  third  year  of  the  decemvirate,
and  the  year  of  thefe  confuls  was  one
and  the  fame  year.  This  opinion,  I
find,  Dodwell  has  embraced  ;  and  yet
many  arguments  may  be  brought,
both  from  our  author  and  Livy,  in
oppofition  to  it,  and  in  fupport  of
That,  which  Dionyfius  has  adopted  ;
namely,  that  the  year  of  this  confulfhip
was  diftind  from,  and  fubfequent  to,
the  laft  year  of  the  decemvirate  :  Even
Dodwell  himfelf  is  forced  to  have  re-
courfe  to  two  fuppofitions  in  order  to
maintain  the  computation  of  Varro  *,
I  call  them  fuppofitions,  becaufe  they
are  not  in  fad  founded  on  the  autho¬
rity  of  any  author  :  The  firlt  is,  that
Valerius,  and  Horatius  entered  upon
their  magiftracy  on  the  ides  of  Decem¬
ber  of  the  Varronian  year  305  :  And
the  fecond,  that  this  year,  which  he
fays  began  on  the  ides  of  May  in  the
Varronian  year  304,  comprehended
18  months.  Nothing  lefs  than  thefe
two  affumptions  was  neceflary  to  fup¬
port  this  opinion.  I  own  indeed  that
the  confuls  of  the  year  312  entered
upon  their  magiftracy  on  the  ides  of
December,  as  c  our  author  fays  ex-
prefsly.  From  whence  Dodwell  con¬
cludes  that  Valerius,  and  Horatius
entered  upon  theirs  at  the  fame  time  :
His  real'on  is,  becaufe  Dionyfius  does
not  fay  that  the  former  were  the  firft
confuls,  who  entered  upon  their  magi¬
ftracy  on  the  ides  of  December.  But,
I  think,  this  argument  may  be  turned
upon  him :  For,  if,  from  the  year  306,

•  B.  xi.  c.  63.


as  he  contends,  the  ides  of  December
had  been  the  ftated  time  for  the  con¬
fuls  to  enter  upon  their  magiftracy,
our  author  needed  not  to  have  faid
that  the  confuls  of  the  year  312  en¬
tered  upon  theirs  on  that  day.  But
it  is  not  improbable  that  thefe  confuls
were  chofen  later  than  ufual ;  becaufe,
the  year  before,  there  had  been  firft
military  tribunes,  who,  being  deterred
by  fome  omens,  abdicated  their  magi¬
ftracy,  after  they  had  held  it  only  fe-
venty  three  days:  Upon  their  abdi¬
cation,  the  fenate,  according  to  cuftom,
chofe  interreges,  who  referred  it  to  the
determination  of  the  people  whether
they  would  chufe  military  tribunes,  or
confuls  •,  and  they  refolving  to  chufe
confuls,  the  patricians  ftood  candidates
for  this  magiftracy,  two  of  whom  were
chofen.  All  thefe  things,  I  fay,  may
probably,  have  occafioned  the  confuls
of  the  following  year  to  be  chofen,
and  confequently  to  enter  upon  their
magiftracy  later  than  ufual.  I  (hall,
now,  proceed  to  (hew  that  the  third,
and  laft  year  of  the  decemvirate  was
complete  before  Valerius,  and  Hora¬
tius  were  chofen  confuls,  and  confe¬
quently  that  the  year  of  their  conful-
lliip  did  not  coincide  with  the  laft
year  of  the  decemvirate.  There  are
many  paflages,  both  in  our  author,
and  in  Livy,  that  infinuate  this  very
ftrongly  *,  but  I  fhall  only  quote  one
from  each,  which  do  fomething  more;
they  prove  it.  The  firft  fhall  be  taken
from  the  fpeech  of  Virginius  in d  Livy,

11 B.  iii.  c.  36.

Y  y  2  by


34B  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

by  the  plebeians  againft  the  patricians;  which  were  inflamed
by  the  daily  harangues,  and  inve&ives  of  the  tribunes  againft
the  fenate.  But  the  thing,  which  exafperated  the  plebeians
the  moft,  was  a  jealoufy,  confirmed  by  the  artifice  of  the
tribunes,  and  encreafed  by  unavowed  reports,  and  not  a  few
conjectures,  that  the  patricians  defigned  to  abolifh  the  laws,
which  had  been  enaCted  by  Valerius,  and  his  collegue ;  and
a  ftrong  opinion  of  this,  which  was  little  lefs  than  an  af-
furance,  poflefled  the  minds  of  the  people.  Thefe  were
the  tranfa&ions  of  this  confulfhip.

LI.  The  confuls  of  the  following  year  were  3ILarus
Herminius,  and  Titus  Verginius,  who  were  fucceeded  by

Marcus  Ge  s*  ******  *************

*  *  *  *  *  **********  ******  *  *  *

********  *******  ******


when  he  is  accufing  Appius :  He  tells
him  that  he  will  pafs  over  all  the  ac¬
cumulated  acts  of  wickednefs,  and
injuftice  he  had  been  guilty  of  during
two  years  j  Omnium  igitur  tibi ,  Appi
Claudi ,  quae  impie  nefarieque  per  bien¬
nium  alia  fuper  alia  es  aufus ,  gratiam
facio.  Thefe  two  years  plainly  relate
to  the  two  laft  of  the  decemvirate ;
becaufe  all  authors  agree  that  Appius
had  gained  univerfal  applaufe  by  his
behaviour  in  the  firft  year  of  his  ma-
giftracy.  If,  therefore,  he  governed
wickedly  the  two  following  years,  he
governed  thofe  two  years.  The  next
paftage  fhall  be  taken  from  our  author,
where  he  fays  that  the  Romans  abolifh-
ed  the  decemvirate,  after  it  had  go¬


verned  the  commonwealth  during  three
years  :  e  KtxIaAvmri  ?ay.xioi  ryv  ruv  Jskm
ciggy jvETH  TPIA  tuvhoivuv  sm/xtA tjQeurav.
If  the  decemvirate  governed  th^e  com¬
monwealth  three  years,  the  laft  year
muft  have  been  complete,  and  confe-
quently  diftind  from,  as  well  as  ante¬
cedent  to,  the  year,  in  which  Valerius,
and  Horatius  were  confuls.

31'  Aoi(>os  E fpmof.  f  Livy  calls  this
conful  Lar.  Herminius,  which  the
Fajli  confulares  of  Petavius  explain  by
Larfius.

32-  Here  is  another  hiatus,  which  I
ftiall  likewife  fill  up  by  tranflating  as
much  of  s  Livy,  as  will  carry  us  to  the
next  chapter.


f  B.  xi,  c.  1.  ^B.  iii.  c.  65.  SB.  iii.  c.  65.


[“  The


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HAL  IC  A  R  N  ASSENSIS.  349

[“  The  fucceeding  confuls,  Marcus  Geganius  Macerinus,
and  Caius  Julius,  difperfed  the  cabals  of  the  tribunes  levelled
againft  the  patrician  youth  without  impeaching  the  power
of  the  former,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  maintained  the  maiefty
of  the  fenate.  Levies  having  been  ordered  for  the  war
againft  the  Volfci  and  the  Aequi,  they  reftrained  the  people
from  feditions  by  forbearance ;  and  alfo  by  representing  to
them  that,  when  the  city  was  quiet,  every  thing  was  quiet
abroad ,  and  that  civil  difcord  infpired  foreigners  with  cou¬
rage.  Their  care  to  maintain  peace  abroad  was  the  caufe
likewife  of  tranquillity  at  home :  But  one  order  always  in-
fulted  the  modefty  of  the  other.  When  the  people  were
quiet,  the  young  patricians  began  to  opprefs  them ;  and,
when  the  tribunes  endeavoured  to  relieve  the  lower  fort,
their  endeavours  were,  at  firft,  of  little  effedl;  and,  at  laft,
even  they  themfelves  did  not  efcape  violation,  efpecially
during  the  laft  months  of  their  office,  fmce  not  only,
through  the  cabals  of  the  powerful,  injuries  were  done,  but
alfo  the  force  of  every  magiflracy  grows  generally  fomething
more  languid  at  the  latter  end  of  the  year  :  And  now  the
people  derived  fome  hope  from  the  tribunefhip,  provided
they  could  have  tribunes  like  Icilius;  fince  Thofe  of  the
two  laft  years  had  been  only  nominal  tribunes.  On  the
other  fide,  the  elder  fenators,  though  they  might  think  their
youth  too  fierce,  yet  they  chofe  rather,  if  there  muft  be
fome  excefs,  that  their  own  party  ffiould  have  too  much
fpirit,  than  their  adverfaries:  So  difficult  a  thing  is  modera¬
tion  in  the  defence  of  liberty,  while  every  one,  by  pretending

to


350  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

to  aim  at  ail  equality,  exalts  himfelf  fo  far  as  to  deprefs
others;  and  i*nen,  by  taking  care  to  have  nothing  to  fear,
wantonly  render  themfelves  formidable:  And  thus  we  repel
injuries  from  ourfelves,  and  inflidl  them  on  others,  as  if
there  was  a  neceffity  either  to  do,  or  fuller  them.

Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus  for  the  fourth  time,  and
Agrippa  Furius,  the  confuls  of  the  following  year,  received
with  their  magiflracy  neither  a  domeftic  fedition,  nor  a
foreign  war;  but  both  hung  over  their  heads:  For  the  civil
difcord  could  now  be  no  longer  reprefied,  both  the  tribunes,
and  the  people  being  inflamed  againfl:  the  lenate,  flnce  a
citation  of  any  one  patrician  always  difturbed  their  aflem-
blies  with  frefli  contefts.  On  the  report  of  which,  as  at  a
fignal,  the  Aequi,  and  Volfci  took  arms ;  being  at  the  fame
time  allured  by  their  chiefs,  who  were  defirous  of  plunder,
that  the  levies,  ordered  two  years  before,  could  not  be  raifed,
becaufe  the  people  refufed  to  obey  thofe  orders :  “  For  this
<c  reafon,  they  told  them  no  armies  had  been  fent  againfl:
“  them;  that  the  military  difcipline  of  the  Romans  was
<c  now  diflolved  by  licentioufnefs ;  neither  was  Rome  looked
<£  upon  by  them  as  their  common  country;  that  all  the
cc  anger,  and  animofity  they  ufed  to  exert  againfl:  foreigners,
“  was  turned  upon  themfelves:  And  that  this  was  the  time
<c  todeftroy  thofe  wolves,  while  they  were  blinded  with  their
44  inteftine  rage.”  They  fir  ft  defolated  the  territories  of
the  Latines  with  their  joint  forces ;  and,  after  that,  when
none  appeared  there  to  defend  them,  the  authors  of  the
war  now  indeed  exulting,  they  advanced  to  the  very  walls

of


Book XI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN AS SENSIS.  351

of  Rome  near  the  Efquiline  gate,  laying  wade  the  country
in  their  march ;  and  expofing  to  the  view  of  the  city,  by
way  of  infult,  the  devaluation  of  her  lands;  from  whence
they  drove  their  booty  before  them  unpunished,  and  re¬
turned  by  a  regular  march  to  Corbio :  When  Quintius,
the  conful,  called  an  affembly  of  the  people;  where,  I  find,
he  fpoke  to  this  purpofe:  “  Though  I  am  confcious  to
“  myfelf  of  no  crime,  Romans,  yet  I  am  come  to  your  af-
“  fembly  under  the  greateft  confufion:  That  you  Should
“  know,  that  pofterity  Should  know  that  the  Aequi,  and
“  Volfci,  who  were,  the  other  day,  fcarce  a  match  for  the
<c  Hernici,  Should,  in  the  fourth  confulShip  of  Titus  Quin-
“  tius,  have  approached  the  walls  of  Rome  in  arms,  with
u  impunity.  Could  I  have  forefeen  (though  we  have  long
cc  lived  in  fuch  a  manner,  fuch  is  the  ftate  of  our  affairs,
“  my  mind  could  prefage  no  good)  that  this  ignominy
“  threatened  this  particular  year,  I  Should  have  avoided  it,
<c  either  by  exile,  or  death,  if  there  had  been  no  other  means
“  of  flying  from  this  honor.  Might  then  Rome  have  been
<(  taken  in  my  confulShip,  if  thofe  arms,  that  were  at  our
“  gates,  had  been  in  the  hands  of  brave  men?  I  had  en~
“  joyed  a  fufficiency  of  honors,  and  more  than  a  Sufficiency
“  of  life;  and  ought  to  have  died  in  my  third  confulShip.
«  Whom  then  did  the  mofl:  daftardly  of  all  our  enemies
a  defpife?  Did  they  defpife  us  confuls?  or  you  Romans?
<c  If  the  fault  lies  at  our  door,  depofe  us,  as  unworthy;
“  and,  if  that  is  too  little,  add  chaftifement  to  our  depofi-
“  tion:  If  at  yours,  may  neither  gods,  nor  men  puniSh  your

£C  errors.


35a  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

<£  errors,  Romans;  may  you  yourfelves  only  repent  of  them!
££  But  they  neither  defpifed  your  cowardife,  nor  relied  on
££  their  own  valor ;  fince,  by  being  often  routed,  and  put
££  to  flight,  difpofiefied  of  their  camps,  amerced  in  their
“  lands,  and  fent  under  the  yoke,  they  knew  both  them-
££  felves,  and  you.  The  difcord  between  the  two  orders,
<£  the  contefts  between  the  fenate,  and  the  people  are  the
£C  bane  of  this  city  :  While  neither  we  fet  bounds  to  power,
“  nor  you  to  liberty,  while  you  are  diflatisfied  with  patri-
C£  cian,  and  we  with  plebeian,  magiftrates,  they  took  courage.
££  What,  in  the  name  of  the  gods,  would  you  have?  You
<c  wanted  tribunes  of  the  people;  we  granted  them  for  the
u  fake  of  union:  You  defired  decemvirs;  we  fuifered  them
cc  to  be  eftablifhed. :  You  grew  tired  of  decemvirs;  we
u  forced  them  to  refign  their  magiftracy :  When  you  per-
“  lifted  in  your  refen tment  againft  them,  after  they  were
“  become  private  men ;  we  allowed  thefe  moft  noble,  and
<{  moft  dignified  perfons  to  be  put  to  death,  and  banifhed:
££  You  defired  that  tribunes  might  again  be  created;
<c  you  created  them :  Though  we  faw  the  injuftice  that
££  would  be  done  to  the  fenate,  if  you  chofe  confuls  of  your
££  own  party ;  yet  we  have  feen  a  patrician  magiftracy  alfo  be-
££  come  a  grant  to  the  people :  The  protection  of  the  tri-
<c  bunes,  the  appeal  to  the  people,  the  laws  made  by  thefe
C£  impofed  on  the  fenate,  and  the  abolition  of  our  rights,
££  under  the  pretence  of  rendering  the  laws  equal,  we  have
££  fuffered,  and  ftill  fuffer.  What  end  will  there  be  of  our
€£  diffenfions?  Shall  we  ever  be  allowed  to  have  one  city?

££  Shall


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNA  SSENSIS.  353

<£  Shall  this  ever  become  our  common  country?  We,  who
“  are  conquered,  are  more  willing  to  be  quiet  than  you,
“  who  are  conquerors.  Is  it  not  enough  that  you  are  for-
“  midable  to  us?  In  oppofition  to  us  the  Aventine  hill  is
cc  poflefled ;  in  oppofition  to  us  the  Holy  mountain  is  feized  :
“  But  the  Aefquiliae  were  near  being  taken  by  the  enemy;
cc  and  no  man  offered  to  repulfe  the  Volfci,  when  they  were
u  fealing  our  ramparts.  Againft  us  you  are  brave;  againft
“  us  you  are  armed :  Well  then,  after  you  have  here  beffeged
cC  the  fenate  houfe,  rendered  the  forum  terrible,  and  filled
“  the  prifon  with  the  principal  men  of  the  city,  march  out
cc  of  the  Efquiline  gate  with  the  fame  fierce  fpirit ;  or,  if
<c  you  dare  not  do  even  that,  contemplate  from  the  walls
“  your  lands  laid  wafte  with  fire  and  fword,  the  booty
cc  carrying  away,  and  your  houfes  all  over  the  country  in
c<  flames,  and  fmoaking:  However,  the  commonwealth
“  buffers  by  thefe  things;  the  country  is  ravaged  ;  the  city
“  befieged,  and  the  glory  of  the  war  transferred  to  our
<c  enemies.  But,  in  what  fituation  are  your  private  affairs?
cc  Prefen tly  every  one  of  you  will  receive  an  account  of  the
“  Ioffes  he  has  fuftained  in  the  country :  And  what  fund  is
c<  there  in  the  city  to  repair  thofe  Ioffes?  Will  the  tribunes
tc  return,  and  reftore  what  you  have  loft?  They  will  indeed
<£  be  as  lavifh  as  you  pleafe  of  their  voice,  and  their  words;
“  of  inve&ives  againft  our  principal  men ;  of  laws  upon
“  laws,  and  of  their  harangues;  but  none  of  you  ever  re-
“  turned  home  from  thofe  harangues  improved  in  his  cir-
iC  cumftances,  in  his  fortune :  Who  carried  back  to  his  wife,
Vol.IV.  Zz  “  and


354  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

£  and  children  any  thing  but  hatred,  di (content,  public
‘  and  private  animofities  ?  From  which  you  are  always
£  preferved  not  by  your  own  virtue  and  innocence,  but  by
c  the  affiftance  of  others.  But  fo  it  is,  when  you  ferved
£  under  us  confuls,  not  under  your  tribunes,  and  in  the
c  camp,  not  in  the  forum,  and  your  enemies  trembled  at
£  your  fhouts  in  battle,  not  the  Roman  fenators  at  Thofe
£  in  your  affemblies,  you  acquired  booty ;  took  lands  from
c  the  enemy ;  full  of  riches,  and  of  glory  both  public  and
c  private,  you  returned  triumphant  home  to  your  houfhold
£  gods :  Now,  you  fuffer  the  enemy  to  go  away  loaded  with
£  your  own  fortunes.  Stand  fixed  to  harangues,  and  live
£  in  the  forum  :  But  the  neceffity  of  fighting,  which  you
‘  would  avoid,  follows  you  thither.  Did  you  think  it  a
{  grievance  to  march  againft  the  Aequi,  and  the  Volfci?

(  The  war  is  at  your  gates ;  if  it  is  not  repelled  from  thence,
c  it  will  prefently  be  within  the  walls ;  will  mount  both
£  the  fortrefs,  and  the  capitol,  and  purfue  you  even  into
£  your  own  houfes.  Two  years  ago,  the  fenate  ordered
£  levies  to  be  made,  and  the  army  to  march  to  mount
£  Algidus ;  but  we  fit  idle  at  home,  quarrelling  wTith*  one
1  another  like  women ;  pleafed  with  the  prefent  eafe,  and
£  unable  to  difcern  that,  from  this  fhort  tranquillity,  war
£  will  return  manifold.  I  am  fenfible  that  another  kind  of
£  language  would  be  more  agreeable  to  you  than  this :

£  But,  if  my  own  temper  did  not  admonifh  me  to  fay  fuch
£  things,  as  are  true  rather  than  agreeable,  neceffity  would
£  compel  me  to  it.  I  could  wiffi  indeed  to  pleafe  you,

“  Romans,


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  AS  SE  NS  I  S.  355

“  Romans,  but  I  chufe  much  rather  to  preferve  you,  what-
cc  ever  may  be  your  future  difpofition  towards  me.  It  is
u  in  the  order  of  nature  that  a  man,  who  fpeaks  to  the
u  multitude  from  a  regard  to  his  own  intereft,  fhall  pleafe
“  more  than  he,  who  has  no  other  view  but  the  public
ic  good;  unlefs,  perhaps,  you  think  that  thefe  common
u  flatterers,  thefe  fawners  on  the  people,  who  fuffer  you
“  to  be  neither  in  war,  nor  in  peace,  incite  and  inflame  you
“  for  your  own  fake :  When  you  are  inflamed,  you  admi-
cc  nifter  either  to  their  honor,  or  profit;  and,  becaufe  they
<c  find  themfelves  inconfiderable  every  where  while  the  two
“  orders  are  united,  they  chufe  to  be  the  chiefs  in  a  bad
u  thing,  rather  than  in  none,  in  diforders,  and  feditions.
u  If  thefe  things  can,  at  laft,  give  you  a  difguft,  and  you
<c  will  exchange  your  new  conduct  for  That  of  your  an-
cc  ceftors,  once  your  own,  I  refufe  no  punifhments,  if  I  do
cc  not,  in  a  few  days,  rout  and  put  to  flight  thefe  ravagers
c<  of  our  lands ;  take  their  camp,  and  transfer  the  terror  of
€t  this  war,  with  which  you  are  now  aftonifhed,  from  our
cC  gates  and  walls,  to  their  own  cities.”  r  It  has  feldom
happened  that  the  fpeech  of  a  popular  tribune  was  better
received  by  the  people  upon  any  occafion,  than  the  fpeech
pronounced  by  the  fevereft  of  confuls  was  upon  this.  Even
the  youth,  who  had  been  accuftomed,  amidft  fuch  terrors,  to
make  ufe  of  their  refufal  to  inlift  themfelves,  as  the  fharpeft
weapon  againft  the  fenate,  now  breathed  war  and  arms ;
and  the  flight  of  the  country  people,  feme  of  whom  had
been  ftripped,  and  others  wounded,  by  the  relation  they

Z  z  2  made


356  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

made  of  more  difmal  havock  than  the  citizens  had  beheld,
inflamed  them  all  with  rage.  When  the  fenate  was  af-
fembled,  all  turned  their  eyes  upon  Quintius,  as  upon  the
only  aflertor  of  the  Roman  majefty;  and  the  principal
fenators  faid  his  fpeech  was  worthy  of  the  confular  dignity,
worthy  of  the  many  confulihips  he  had  exercifed,  worthy
of  his  whole  life  full  of  honors  often  borne,  oftener  deferred :
That  other  confuls  had  either  flattered  the  people  by  betray¬
ing  the  dignity  of  the  fenate ;  or,  by  maintaining  the  rights
of  that  order  with  rigor,  had  rendered  the  multitude  more
impatient  ofcontroll:  That,  on  the  contrary,  Titus  Quin¬
tius  had  in  his  fpeech  been  mindful  of  the  dignity  of  the
fenate;  of  the  union  of  the  two  orders,  and,  above  all,  of
the  times.  They  befought  him,  and  his  collegue,  to  take
charge  of  the  commonwealth ;  they  befought  the  tribunes
to  unite  with  the  confuls  in  removing  the  war  from  the  city,
and  their  walls,  and  to  prevail  on  the  people  to  obey  the
fenate  in  this  article  of  danger:  They  faid,  their  common
country  invoked  the  tribunes,  and  implored  their  afliftance
at  a  time  when  their  lands  were  laid  wafte,  and  their  city
almoft  befleged.  By  general  confent,  the  levies  were  decreed,
and  made.  After  the  confuls  had  declared  in  the  aflembly
of  the  people,  “  that  this  was  no  time  to  inquire  into  the
“  validity  of  excufes :  That  all  the  youth  fhould  appear  in
“  the  Campus  Martius  the  next  morning  by  break  of  day :
“  That,  after  the  war  was  at  an  end,  they  would  appoint  a
«  time  to  inquire  into  the  excufes  of  thofe,  who  had  not
“  lifted  themfelves:  And  that  all,  whofe  excufes  they  did

“  not


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  357

“  not  allow,  (hould  be  treated  as  deferters,”  all  the  youth
appeared  the  next  day.  Each  cohort  chofe  their  own  cen¬
turions;  and  two  fenators  were  placed  at  the  head  of  every
cohort.  I  find  that  all  thefe  things  were  performed  with
fuch  expedition,  that  the  enfigns  being,  the  very  fame  day,
taken  out  of  the  arfenal  by  the  quaeftors,  and  brought  into
the  field,  were  removed  from  thence  at  the  fourth  hour;
and  this  new  army,  followed  by  fome  few  cohorts  of  veterans,
who  ferved  as  voluntiers,  incamped  at  the  tenth  ftone.
The  next  day  gave  them  a  fight  of  the  enemy ;  and  they
incamped  clofe  to  them  at  Cor  bio.  On  the  third  day,  the
Romans  being  irritated  with  refentment,  and  the  others
with  the  confcioufnefs  of  the  guilt  they  had  contra&ed  by
frequent  revolts,  and  by  defpair,  they  ingaged  without  delay*
As  in  the  Roman  army  there  were  two  confuls  with  equal
authority,  the  foie  command  was,  by  the  confent  of  Agrippa,
devolved  on  his  collegue,  which  is  a  moft  falutary  thing  in
the  adminiftration  of  great  affairs :  And  the  perfon  preferred
made  a  handfome  return  to  the  condefcenfion  of  the  man,
who  fubmitted  to  him,  by  making  him  a  partaker  both  of
his  counfels,  and  his  praifes,  and  by  putting  one,  who  was
inferior  to  him,  upon  a  level  with  himfelf.  In  the  battle,
Quintius  commanded  the  right  wing,  and  Agrippa  the  left:
The  care  of  the  center  was  committed  to  Spurius  Poftumius
Albus,  a  legate :  And  to  Servius  Sulpicius,  another  legate,
they  gave  the  command  of  the  horfe :  The  foot  on  the  right
fought  bravely,  and  the  Volfci  made  no  faint  refiftance.
Servius  Sulpicius  with  the  horfe  broke  through  the  center

of


358  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

of  the  enemy ;  and,  though  he  might  have  returned  to  his
own  people  the  fame  way,  before  the  enemy  could  have
reftored  their  broken  ranks,  he  thought  it  more  advifeable
to  charge  them  in  the  rear;  and,  by  attacking  the  enemy,
when  their  backs  were  towards  him,  he  would  have  difperfed
them  in  a  moment  with  the  terror  of  this  double  affault,  if
the  horfe  of  the  Volfci,  and  Aequi  had  not  entertained  him
with  a  combat  in  his  own  way,  and  flopped  him  for  a  while.
Then  Sulpicius  cried  out,  “  this  was  no  time  to  hefitate;
“  they  would  be  furrounded,  and  cut  off  from  their  own
<c  army,  if  they  did  not  fummon  all  their  vigor,  and  put  an
tc  end  to  this  battle  of  the  cavalry.  Neither  was  it  enough
<c  to  make  the  enemy  fly  without  lofs  of  blood;  they  ought
<(  to  flay  horfe  and  man,  that  not  one  of  them  might  return
“  to  the  battle,  or  renew  the  ingagement:  That  it  was  not
cc  pofllble  the  enemy’s  horfe  could  refift  Thofe,  before  whom
tc  the  clofe  ranks  of  the  foot  had  given  way.”  The  men
were  not  deaf  to  the  orders  of  their  general ;  they  routed
the  whole  body  of  horfe  at  the  firft  fhock ;  threw  many
headlong  to  the  ground,  and  pierced  both  the  men,  and  the
horfes  with  their  fpears.  Thus  ended  the  battle  of  the
cavalry :  After  that,  they  charged  the  foot,  and  fent
the  news  of  this  action  to  the  confuls,  where  the  enemy’s
line  had  already  begun  to  give  way  :  This  news  both  in-
creafed  the  courage  of  the  Romans,  who  were  conquering,
and  ftruck  terror  into  the  Aequi,  who  were  retiring.  The
firft  impreflion  had  been  made  in  their  center,  where  the
furious  charge  of  the  horfe  had  broken  their  ranks :  Then

the


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  359
the  left  wing  began  to  give  way  before  Quintius,  the  conful.
But  their  right  gave  the  Romans  moft  trouble :  There
Agrippa,  exulting  in  his  youth  and  ftrength,  feeing  every
part  of  the  aCtion  more  fuccefsful  than  his  own,  began  to
point  fome  of  the  enfigns,  which  he  had  fnatched  from  their
bearers,  againft  the  enemy,  and  even  to  throw  others  into
the  thickeft  of  them  :  The  foldiers,  dung  with  the  dread  of
this  ignominy,  fell  on ;  by  this  means,  the  victory  became
equal  on  all  fides.  Then  Quintius  fent  him  word  that  he
was  victorious,  and  going  to  aflault  the  enemy’s  camp;
but  would  not  break  in,  till  he  knew  that  the  affair  was
over  in  the  left  wing  alio  :  And  defired  that,  if  he  had  then
routed  the  enemy,  he  would  join  him,  that  the  whole  army
might,  at 'the  fame  time,  polfefs  themfelves  of  the  booty.
Agrippa,  now  victorious,  advanced  with  mutual  congratu¬
lation  to  his  victorious  collegue,  and  to  the  enemy’s  camp ;
where  the  few  who  defended  it,  being  foon  put  to  flight,
they  broke  into  the  intrenchments  without  any  reflftance  ;
and  brought  home  the  army  inriched  with  a  vaft  booty,
having  alfo  recovered  the  effeCts,  which  the  Romans  had  loft
in  the  plunder  of  their  country.  I  do  not  find  that  a
triumph  was  either  demanded  by  the  confuls,  or  offered  to
them  by  the  fenate  :  Neither  is  there  any  reTafon  afligned
why  that  honor  was  *  negleCted,  or  not  expe&ed.  As  far
as  I  can  conjecture  at  fo  great  a  diftance  of  time,  fince  a

*  The  verbal  analogy  in  Livy  is,  voured  to  preferve  in  the  tranflation  ;
fpreti  aut  non  fperati  honoris ;  which  not  becaufe  I  thought  it  a  beauty  >  but
fome  of  his  readers  may  be  pleafed  becaufe  I  thought  it  my  duty.
with :  This  analogy  I  have  endea-

triumpli


36o  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  XI,

triumph  had  been  refufed  by  the  fenate  to  the  confuls
Valerius,  and  Horatius,  who,  befides  their  vi&ory  over  the
Volfci  and  Aequi,  had  alfo  acquired  the  glory  of  putting  an
end  to  the  war  with  the  Sabines,  thefe  confuls  were  alhamed
to  demand  a  triumph  for  half  the  exploits  of  the  others :
They  might  alfo  apprehend  left,  if  they  had  obtained  it,  a
greater  regard  might  feem  to  have  been  fhewn  to  their  per-
fons,  than  to  their  merit.  This  glorious  victory,  obtained
over  their  enemies,  was  disfigured  by  an  inglorious  judge¬
ment  pronounced  at  home  by  the  people,  concerning  the
bounds  of  fome  lands  belonging  to  their  allies.  The  Aricini,
and  the  Ardeates,  having  often  fought  for  a  trad  of  contefted
land,  and  being  tired  out  with  frequent  mutual  lofles,  re¬
ferred  their  difpute  to  the  arbitration  of  the  Romans.  When
they  came  to  plead  their  caufe  before  an  aflembly  of  the
people,  convened  by  the  magiftrates  for  that  purpofe,  the
affair  was  debated  with  great  warmth :  After  the  witnelfes
were  produced,  the  tribes  called,  and  the  people  ready
to  give  their  votes,  Scaptius,  a  plebeian  and  an  aged  man,
rofe  up,  and  faid  :  “  If,  confuls,  I  may  be  allowed  to
<c  fpeak  concerning  the  commonwealth,  I  will  not  fuffer  the
“  people  to  be  milled  in  this  caufe.”  The  confuls  faying
that  fuch  a  trifler  ought  not  to  be  heard,  and  ordering  him
to  be  taken  away,  he  cried  out  that  the  caufe  of  the  public
was  betrayed,  and  appealed  to  the  tribunes:  Thefe,  who
are  governed  by  the  multitude  oftener  than  they  govern
them,  indulged  the  curiofity  of  the  people,  by  giving
Scaptius  leave  to  fay  what  he  thought  fit ;  who  told  them

M  that


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C A R N  A  S  S  E N S I  S.  361
u  that  he  was  in  his  eighty  third  year,  and  had  ferved  on
“  the  land  in  queftion,  not  when  he  was  young,  but  in  his
u  twentieth  campaign,  when  the  war  was  carried  on  at
u  Corioli:  For  which  reafon  he  fpoke  of  a  thing,  that
u  might  indeed  be  obliterated  by  time,  but  was  fixed  in  his
“  own  memory  :  That  the  land  in  difpute  lay  in  the  country
“  formerly  belonging  to  the  Coriolani :  And,  after  Corioli
“  was  taken,  devolved  by  right  of  war  on  the  Roman  people
“  in  common.  That  he  wondered  with  what  decency  the
tc  Ardeates  and  Aricini,  who  had  never  claimed  any  right
<c  to  this  land,  while  the  city  of  Corioli  was  in  profperity,
c<  fhould  expert  to  obtain  it  by  furprife  from  the  Roman
“  people,  whom,  inftead  of  acknowledging  as  owners,  they
“  had  conftituted  judges.  That  the  remaining  part  of  his
“  life  was  {hort ;  however,  that,  old  as  he  was,  he  could  not
u  forbear  to  claim  that  land  by  his  voice  at  leaft,  the  only
“  means  in  his  power,  which,  when  a  foldier,  he  had  con-
“  tributed  to  take  by  his  fword.  And  that  he  earneftly
u  exhorted  the  people  not  to  give  fentence  againft  themfelves
<(  through  an  unprofitable  modefty.”  When  the  confuls
found  that  Scaptius  was  heard,  not  only  with  filence,  but
alfo  with  affent,  they  called  both  gods,  and  men  to  witnefs
that  a  moft  flagrant  adlion  was  upon  the  point  of  being
committed,  and  fent  for  the  principal  fenators :  In  com¬
pany  with  thefe  they  addreffed  themfelves  to  the  tribes,  and
begged  of  them  “  not  to  commit  the  worfl  oi  actions,  and
“  fet  a  worfe  example,  by  converting  a  caufe,  in  which  they
(l  themfelves  were  judges,  to  their  own  advantage  3  efpecially
Vox..  IV.  A  a  a  “  fince,


362  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookXI.

ic  fince,  though  it  was  lawful  for  a  judge  to  take  care  of
u  his  own  intereft,  the  gain  they  would  make  by  intercept-
“  ing  this  land,  was  in  no  degree  equal  to  the  lofs  they
“  would  fuftain  by  alienating,  through  this  injury,  the
“  minds  of  their  allies :  For  the  lofs  of  reputation,  and  cred  it
a  was  greater  than  could  be  eftimated.  Shall  the  deputies
tc  carry  this  home?  Shall  this  be  publifhed  ?  Shall  our  allies,
“  fhall  our  enemies  hear  this?  With  what  grief  will  the
“  former,  and  with  what  joy  will  the  latter,  receive  it  ?  Let
<c  not  the  people  imagine  that  the  neighbouring  nations  will
“  impute  this  to  an  haranguing  old  man.  The  Scaptian
<c  family  will  indeed  be  rendered  famous  by  the  reprefenta-
“  tion  of  this  exploit ;  but  the  Roman  people  will  gain  the
“  character  of  an  informer,  and  an  intercepter  of  other  mens
u  claims :  For  what  judge  in  a  private  caufe  ever  afted  in
“  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  decree  the  thing  in  controverfy  to
“  himfelf  ?  Even  Scaptius  himfelf,  though  now  he  has  out-
“  lived  all  fhame,  would  not  do  this.”]

It  appears  by  what  Scaptius  fays  ftions,  before  the  people  gave  their
prefently  in  our  author,  that  he  afked  votes:  To  which  queftions  Dionyfius
the  Ardeates,  and  Aricini  fome  que-  fays  they  did  not  give  any  anfwer.

LII.  They  making  no  anfwer,  but  continuing  diflatisfied,
Scaptius  again  afcended  the  tribunal,  and  faid:  “  It  is  agreed,
“  citizens,  by  your  adverfaries  themfelves,  that  they  claim  our
“  lands  without  having  any  fort  of  right  to  them.  Confider
u  thefe  things ;  and,  in  giving  your  votes,  have  a  regard  to  juf-
“  tice,  and  to  your  oaths.”  While  Scaptius  was  faying  this,
the  confuls  were  afhamed  to  find  that  the  event  of  this  trial

would


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  IS.  363

would  prove  neither  juft,  nor  decent,  if  the  Roman  people,
after  they  had  been  chofen  umpires  by  others,  fhould  take
away  the  lands  in  queftion  from  the  contending  parties,
without  having  ever  claimed  them  before,  and  adjudge
thofe  lands  to  themfelves :  And  many  fpeeches  were  made
both  by  the  confuls,  and  the  leading  men  of  the  fenate,  to
diffuade  the  people  from  pronouncing  this  judgement ;  but
in  vain :  For,  when  called  to  give  their  votes,  they  faid  it
would  be  a  great  folly  in  them  to  fuffer  their  own  lands  to
continue  in  the  poffeffion  of  others ;  and  that  their  decifion
of  this  caufe  would  not  be  confident  with  religion,  if  they
fhould  adjudge  the  contefted  lands  to  the  Aricini,  or  the
Ardeates,  after  they  had  fworn  to  adjudge  them  to  thofe,
whom  they  fhould  find  to  have  a  right  to  them  :  Befides,
they  were  angry  with  the  contending  parties  for  having
chofen  thofe,  who  were  deprived  of  thefe  lands,  for  their
umpires,  with  this  view,  that  they  might  not,  even  after¬
wards,  have  it  in  their  power  to  recover  their  own  pofief-
fions,  which  they  themfelves,  as  fworn  judges,  had  decreed
to  others.  The  people,  therefore,  confidering  thefe  things^
and  being  full  of  refentment,  ordered  a  33  third  urn  to  be
placed  before  every  tribe  on  behalf  of  the  Roman  people,

33*  T^jIgv — KcJjirxcv.  If  the  reader  in  unaquaque  tribu  poni  pro  populo  Ro-
pleafes  to  turn  to  the  thirty  fecond  memo.  This  he  has  tranflated,  lepeupls
annotation  on  the  tenth  book,  he  will  'voulut  qu'on  dijiribuaji  des  urnes  dans
find  an  explanation  of  the  word  zx-  toutes  les  tribus,  et  que  cbacun  pufi  don- -
iitTKog.  I  expeft,  and  hope  that  the  ncr  fon  fuffrage  pour  la  troifieme  fois.
following  animadverfion  on  le  Jay’s  Here  he  has  left  out  the  material  part ;
tranflation  of  this  pafiage  will  be  a  I  do  not  mean,  aroAfwj  Fupuiuv,

parting  blow.  Unfortunately  for  him,  but,  pro  populo  Romano .

Portus  had  faid,  tertium jujferunt  urnam


A  a  a  2


into


364  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

into  which  they  might  put  their  billets :  And  the  people
of  Rome  was  declared,  by  all  the  votes,  to  be  the  owners
of  the  contefted  lands.  Thefe  things  paffed  in  this  conful-
fhip.

LIII.  In  the  confulfhip  of  Marcus  Genucius,  and  Caius
34  Curtius,  the  civil  contefts  were  renewed ;  the  plebeians
demanding  that  it  might  be  lawful  for  all  the  Romans
to  be  chofen  confuls  (for,  till  then,  the  patricians  were  the
foie  candidates  for  that  dignity,  and  always  eleCled  in  the
affemblies  by  centuries)  and  all  the  tribunes  of  that  year
concurring  to  promote  this  meafure,  except  Caius  Furnius,
they  drew  up  a  law  concerning  the  confular  ele&ions,  and
publifhed  it,  by  which  they  left  it,  every  year,  to  the  determi¬
nation  of  the  people,  whether  patricians,  or  plebeians  fhould
ftand  candidates  for  the  confulfhip.  The  fenate  refented  this ;
and,  looking  upon  the  law  as  the  ruin  of  their  authority ,  refolv-
ed  to  hazard  every  thing  rather  than  fuffer  it  to  pafs ;  and  both
in  the  private,  and  public  affemblies  of  all  the  patricians,  great
paffion  was  expreffed ;  invectives  thrown  out,  and  oppofi-
tions  concerted;  their  whole  body  being  violently  exafperated
againft  all  the  plebeians.  Many  fpeeches  were  made  in  the
fenate  by  the  leading  men  of  the  ariftocracy ;  and  many  in
the  affemblies  of  the  people;  the  more  moderate  by  fuch,
as  looked  upon  the  plebeians  to  be  milled  by  the  ignorance
of  their  intereft ;  and  the  feverer  by  thofe,  who  were  of

34-'  Kvfiov.  b  Sigonius  has  fhewn,  in  called  in  the  editions,  and  manufcripts.
Ids  notes  upon  Livy,  that  we  mult  read  And,  I  find,  this  conful  is  called  Cur-
Curtius,  inftead  of  Quintius ,  as  he  is  tius  in  the  Fajli  confulares .

hB.iv.  c.  i,

opinion


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENS  IS.  365

opinion  that  this  attempt  flowed  from  an  infidious  defign,
and  from  envy  to  their  order.

LIV.  While  they  were  protrading  the  time  in  vain,  mef*
fengers  arrived  from  their  allies,  to  acquaint  them  that  the
Aequi,  and  the  Volfci  were  upon  the  point  of  invading
them  with  a  numerous  army,  and  to  deflre  they  would  fend
them  immediate  relief,  as  their  country  lay  in  the  paflage
of  the  war.  Thofe  Tyrrhenians  alfo,  who  are  called  Veientes,
were  faid  to  be  preparing  for  a  revolt :  And  the  Ardeates
no  longer  obeyed  them,  being  irritated  at  the  Roman  people
for  having,  the  year  before,  when  chofen  umpires,  adjudged
the  contefted  lands  to  themfelves.  The  fenate,  upon  this
intelligence,  ordered  an  army  to  be  raifed,  and  that  both  the
confuls  fhould  take  the  field :  But  the  tribunes,  who  were  bring¬
ing  in  the  law,  oppofed  the  execution  of  thefe  orders  (for  they
have  a  power  of  oppoiing  the  confuls)  by  refcuing  fuch  of
the  citizens,  as  they  were  compelling  to  take  the  military
oath;  and  by  not  fuffering  them  to  inflidt  any  punifhment
on  the  difobedient :  And,  when  the  fenate  earneftly  intreated
them  to  lay  afide  their  animofity  for  the  prefent;  and,
when  the  wars  were  at  an  end,  then  to  propofe  the  law
concerning  the  elections  of  the  confuls,  they  were  fo  far
from  yielding  to  the  prefent  juncture,  that  they  faid  they
would  oppofe  every  other  decree  of  the  fenate  alfo,  and
fuffer  none  to  be  enadted,  unlefs,  by  their  previous  vote,  they
would  authorize  the  law  they  were  bringing  in :  And  they
were  fo  far  tranfported,  as  not  only  to  ufe  thefe  menaces
to  the  confuls  in  the  fenate,  but  alfo  to  fwear  to  the  per¬
formance


566  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Rook  XI.

formance  of  them,  in  the  aflembly  of  the  people,  by  their
faith,  which  with  them  is  the  moll  folemn  of  all  oaths,  to
the  end  they  might  not  be  at  liberty  to  revoke  any  of  their
refolutions,  fhould  they  be  convinced  to  the  contrary.

LV.  Alarmed  at  thefe  menaces,  the  moft  ancient  fenators,
and  the  leading  men  of  the  ariftocracy  held  a  private  meet¬
ing  at  the  delire  of  the  confuls.  When  Caius  Claudius,
who  was  far  from  being  a  friend  to  the  people,  and  had
inherited  thefe  principles  from  his  anceflors,  advifed  them
to  carry  things  with  a  high  hand,  and  not  to  admit  the
people  either  to  the  confulfhip,  or  to  any  other  magiftracy
whatever :  And,  if  any  fhould  attempt  to  ad:  contrary  to
this  determination,  to  reduce  them  by  force  of  arms,  fhould
reafon  not  prevail,  without  giving  any  quarter  either  to
private  perfons,  or  to  magiftrates:  For  he  faid  that  all,  who
endeavoured  to  change  the  eftabliHied  cuftoms,  and  to  cor¬
rupt  the  ancient  form  of  government,  were  aliens,  and  ene¬
mies  to  the  commonwealth.  On  the  other  hand,  Titus
Quintius  diffuaded  them  from  reftraining  their  adverfaries
by  violence,  or  from  invading  the  plebeians  with  arms,  and
fhedding  civil  blood,  particularly  fince  they  were  fure  to  be
oppofed  by  the  tribunes,  whofe  perfons  their  fathers  had
decreed  to  be  holy,  and  all  facred,  and  made  the  gods,  and
genius’s  fureties  for  the  performance  of  thofe  ingagements,
and  of  the  folemn  oaths  they  had  taken  with  imprecations
both  againft  themfelves,  and  their  pofterity,  if  they  tranf-
greffed  a  lingle  article  of  that  convention.


LV  I.


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  367

LVI.  This  advice  being  approved  of  by  all  the  reft  of
the  council,  Claudius  refumed  his  dilcourfe,  and  faid:
“  I  am  not  ignorant  of  how  great  calamities  to  us  all  a
u  foundation  will  be  laid,  if  we  fuffer  the  people  to  give
“  their  votes  concerning  this  law :  But,  being  at  a  lofs  what
cc  to  do,  and  unable  to  oppofe  fo  great  a  number,  I  fubmit
<c  to  your  determinations :  For  it  is  juft  that  every  man
“  fhould  declare  what  he  thinks  will  be  of  advantage  to  the
u  commonwealth ;  and,  after  that,  fubmit  to  the  refolu-
“  tions  of  the  majority  :  However,  as  you  are  in  a  difficult,
<c  and  involuntary  fituation,  I  ffiall  give  you  this  advice ;
“  not  to  admit  either  now,  or  hereafter,  to  the  confulflhip,
u  any  but  patricians,  who  are  alone,  both  by  religion  and
“  law,  qualified  for  it :  But,  whenever  you  are  reduced  to
“  the  neceffity,  as  at  prefent,  of  communicating  the  greateft
“  power,  and  magiftracy  to  the  other  citizens,  appoint
“  confular  tribunes,  infteadof  confuls,  and  limit  their  num-
u  ber  as  you  fhall  think  proper.  In  my  opinion,  eight,  or

fix  will  be  fufficient;  and,  of  thefe,  let  not  the  patricians
«  be  fewer  than  the  plebeians :  In  doing  this,  you  will
«  neither  debafe  the  confulffiip  by  conferring  it  on  mean,
“  and  unworthy  men,  neither  will  you  appear  to  be  form-
“  ing  unjuft  dominations  for  yourfelves,  by  communi-
«  eating  no  magiftracy  whatever  to  the  plebeians.’5  All
approving  this  opinion,  and  no  one  contradi&ing  it,  he
added  this :  “  Hear  now,  confuls,  the  advice  I  give  to  you
«  alfo :  After  you  have  appointed  a  day  for  paffing  the
a  previous  vote,  and  the  refolu tions  of  the  fenate,  let  ail,

u  who


368  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookXI.

u  who  deftre  to  fay  any  thing  either  in  favor  of  the  law,  or
“  in  oppofttion  to  it,  have  liberty  to  fpeak ;  and,  after  they
“  have  fpoken,  and  it  is  time  to  a  fie  the  opinions  of  the
“  fenators,  begin  neither  with  me,  nor  with  Quintius,  nor
“  with  any  one  of  the  other  ancient  fenators,  but  with  Lucius
a  Valerius,  who  is  the  greateft  patron  of  the  people;  and,
iC  after  him,  a  fie  Horatius  if  he  has  any  thing  to  fay  :  When
<c  you  have  taken  their  opinions,  then  deiire  us,  who  are
“  more  ancient,  to  give  ours.  For  my  part,  I  fhall  deliver
ct  an  opinion  contrary  to  That  of  the  tribunes  with  the
<c  greateft  freedom,  fince  this  tends  to  the  advantage  of  the
“  commonwealth.  Now,  as  to  the  law  concerning  the
“  creation  of  confular  tribunes,  if  you  think  proper,  let
<c  Titus  Genucius  propofe  it :  For  this  motion  will  be  the
“  moft  fpecious,  and  give  the  leaft  fufpicion,  if  introduced
iC  by  your  brother,  Marcus^  Genucius.”  This  fuggeftion
was  alfo  approved  of.  Upon  which,  they  departed  from  the
council.  This  fecret  meeting  infpired  the  tribunes  with  a
jealoufy  that  it  was  calculated  to  bring  fome  great  milchief
upon  the  people ;  lince  it  was  held  in  a  private  houfe,  and
not  in  public,  and  they  had  admitted  none  of  the  tribunes  to
partake  of  their  counfels.  After  which,  they  alfo  held  a
meeting  conlifting  of  fuch  perfons,  as  were  moft  in  the
intereft  of  the  people,  and  prepared  a  counter-battery  to
repel,  and  guard  them  againft  the  infidious  defigns,  which
they  fufpedted  the  patricians  would  employ  againft  them.

LVII.  When  the  time  was  come  for  the  previous  vote  to
be  pafted,  the  confuls  aflembled  the  fenate ;  and,  after  many

exhor-


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  IC  A  R  N  ASSENSIS.  369
exhortations  to  concord,  and  decency,  they  called  upon  the
tribunes,  who  had  propofed  the  law,  to  fpeak  firft;  when
Caius  Canuleius,  one  of  their  number,  advanced ;  and,
without  either  fhewing,  or  mentioning  the  juftice,  or  ad¬
vantage  of  the  law,  faid,  cc  that  he  wondered  at  the  confujs,
“  who,  alter  they  had  confulted,  and  determined  between
u  themfelves  what  they  were  to  do,  had  attempted  to  lay
cc  before  the  fenate  an  affair,  as  unexamined,  and  requiring
“  confideration,  and  then  given  every  man  who  was  willing,
cc  leave  to  fpeak  to  it ;  in  which  they  had  been  guilty  of  a
“  diflimulation  unbecoming  both  their  age,  and  thegreatnefs
cc  of  the  magiftracy,  with  which  they  were  invefted.  He
<c  added  that  they  introduced  the  beginnings  of  an  evil  ad-
“  miniftration  by  affembling  fecret  councils  in  private  houfes,
u  and  in  defiring  not  even  all  the  fenators  to  be  prefent  at
tc  them,  but  only  thofe,  who  were  moft  attached  to  their  own
u  party.  He  was  lefs  furprifed,  he  faid,  that  other  fenators
u  were  excluded  from  this  domeftic  council ;  but  aftonifhed
u  that  Marcus  Horatius,  and  Lucius  Valerius,  who  had  def-
<c  troy ed  the  oligarchy  ;  were  confular  fenators,  and  inferior  to
<£  none  in  giving  advice  for  the  benefit  of  the  public,  were
“  not  thought  worthy  to  be  invited  to  this  council,  and  could
“  not  imagine  what  juft  motive  they  had  to  exclude  them;
“  but  he  gueffed  they  were  influenced  by  this  Angle  reafon,
“  that,  defigning  to  propofe  wicked,  and  pernicious  meafures
“  againft  the  plebeians,  they  were  unwilling  to  invite  to  thefe
“  councils  thofe,  who  were  the  greateft  friends  to  the  people;
“  who  would  be  fure  to  exprefs  their  indignation  at  fuch
Vol.  IV.  B  b  b  propofals,


3;o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XL

<£  propofals,  and  nottofuffer  any  unjuft  defign  to  be  formed
C£  againft  their  intereft.”

LVIII.  Thefe  things  being  urged  by  Canuleius  with  great
lamentation,  and  the  fenators,  who  had  not  been  called  to
the  confultation,  refenting  the  indignity,  Genucius,  one  of
confuls,  rofe  up,  and  endeavoured  to  juftify  himfelf  and  his
collegue;  and  to  appeafe  their  anger,  by  telling  them,  “  that
“  they  had  defired  their  friends  to  aflift  at  this  confultation,
cc  not  with  any  defign  againft  the  people,  but  in  order  to  con-
“  fult  with  thofe  they  mod  confided  in,  in  what  manner  they
cc  might  appear  to  do  no  prejudice  to  either  of  the  parties,
“  whether  they  referred  the  confideration  of  the  law  to  the
“  fenate  fooner,  or  later.  And  that  they  had  not  invited  Hora-
“  tius,  and  Valerius  to  be  prefent  at  the  confultation  for  any
“  other  reafon,  than  that  the  plebeians  might  not  entertain
“  an  injurious  fufpicion  of  them,  as  of  men,  who  had  changed
“  their  principles,  if  they  fhould  have  embraced  the  other  opi-
iC  nion,  which  tended  to  put  off  the  confideration  of  the  law
u  to  a  more  proper  feafon  :  But,  fince  all,  who  affifted  at  the
“  meeting,  had  been  of  opinion  that  the  confideration  of  it,
“  ought  rather  to  be  accelerated,  than  retarded,  he  would
<c  purfue  their  determination.  Having  faid  this,  and  called
“  the  gods  to  witnefs  to  the  truth  of  what  he  faid,  he  added
“  that  the  fenators,  who  had  been  called  to  that  meeting,
“  would  clear  themfelves  of  every  imputation,  not  by  their
“  words,  but  by  their  adions :  For  he  allured  them  that,  after
“  all  who  fhould  defire  to  fpeak  in  opposition  to  the  law,
4 4  and  in  favor  of  it,  had  given  their  reafons,  he  would  firft

afk


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  AS  SENSIS.  371

C£  afk  the  opinions,  not  of  the  mod  ancient,  and  the  moft
££  dignified  fenators,  to  whom  this  privilege  was  due  by  the
££  eftablifhed  cuftorn,  nor  of  thofe,  who  were  fufpected  by  the
“  plebeians,  as  perfons,  from  whofe  words,  or  thoughts  they
C£  could  expecft  no  favor,  but  of  the  younger  fenators,  whofe
££  aftedlion  to  the  people  was  the  lead  doubted.”

LIX.  After  thefe  promifes,  he  gave  leave  to  any  one
who  defired  it,  to  fpeak,  and  none  offering  either  to  cenfure
the  law,  or  to  defend  it,  he  rofe  up  again ;  and,  beginning
with  Valerius,  afked  him  what  he  thought  was  moft  for  the
intereft  of  the  public,  and  what  previous  vote  he  ad-
vifed  the  fenate  to  pafs.  Valerius,  riling  up,  made  a  long
fpeech  concerning  both  himfelf,  and  his  anceftors,  who,  he
faid,  had  always  been  at  the  head  of  the  plebeian  party  to  the
advantage  of  the  commonwealth ;  and  enumerated  all  the
dangers  from  the  beginning,  which  had  been  brought  upon
it  by  thofe,  who  purfued  contrary  meafures,  fliewing
that  a  hatred  for  the  plebeians  had  been  of  no  advantage  to
any  who  had  profefled  it :  He  then  faid  many  things  in
commendation  of  the  people,  alledging  that  they  had  been
the  principal  caufe  not  only  of  the  liberty,  but  alfo  of  the
fovereignty,  of  the  commonwealth.  After  he  had  difplayed
thefe  reafons,  and  many  others  of  the  like  nature,  he  ended
with  faying  that  no  nation  could  be  free,  from  which  equality
was  banifhed ;  and  that,  for  his  part,  he  looked  upon  that
law  as  juft,  which  allowed  all  the  Romans  to  afpire  to  the
confular  dignity,  provided  their  lives  were  irreprehenfible,
and  their  actions  worthy  of  that  honor :  But  he  thought  this

B  b  b  2  was


372  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book XI.

was  not  a  proper  time  to  enter  into  the  confederation  of  this
law,  when  the  commonwealth  was  difturbed  with  the  ap-
prehenfions  of  a  war:  He  advifed  the  tribunes  to  fuffer
the  forces  to  be  raifed,  and  not  to  hinder  them,  when
raifed,  from  taking  the  field,  and  alfo  the  confuls,  after  they
had  ended  the  war  in  the  moft  fuccefsful  manner,  to  lay
before  the  people  the  previous  vote  of  the  fenate  in  favor  of
the  law,  before  they  entered  upon  any  other  bufinefs :  And
he  defired  that  thefe  refolutions  might  now  be  drawn  up,
and  confented  to  by  both  parties.  This  opinion  of  Valerius,
which  was  fupported  by  Horatius  (for  the  confuls  called
upon  him  next)  had  the  fame  effedt  upon  all  who  were
prefent :  For  thofe,  who  defired  to  throw  out  the  law,
though  pleafed  to  hear  that  the  confideration  of  it  was  put
off,  were  yet  diffatisfied  to  find  themfelves  under  an  obli¬
gation  to  pafs  a  previous  vote  in  favor  of  it,  as  foon  as  the
war  fhould  be  ended :  While  the  others,  who  wifhed  the
law  might  receive  the  approbation  of  the  fenate,  though
glad  that  it  was  acknowledged  to  be  juft,  were  yet  dif-
pleafed  that  the  previous  vote  was  put  off  to  another  op¬
portunity.

LX.  This  opinion,  therefore,  having  caufed  a  diforder  in
the  fenate,  as  might  well  be  expedted,  fince  neither  fide  was
pleafed  with  every  part  of  it,  the  conful,  riling  up,  afked,  in
the  third  place,  the  opinion  of  Caius  Claudius,  who  feemed
the  moft  haughty,  and  the  moft  powerful  of  all  the  leaders
of  that  party,  which  oppofed  the  plebeians :  This  man
made  a  premeditated  fpeech  againft  them,  in  which  he

enumerated


Book  XL  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARNASSENS  IS.  373

enumerated  all  the  attempts  they  had  ever  been  guilty  of  to
fubvert,  as  he  thought,  the  glorious  inftitutions  of  their
anceftors :  The  end  of  this  fpeech  was,  that  the  confuls
fhould  not  refer  the  law  in  queftion  to  the  confideration  of
the  fenate  either  now,  or  hereafter  ;  fence  the  intention  of  it
was  to  deftroy  the  ariftocracy,  and  to  confound  the  whole
form  of  their  government.  This  opinion  having  encreafed
the  diforder,  Titus  Genucius,  who  was  brother  to  one  of  the
confuls,  being  called  upon  in  the  fourth  place,  rofe  up  ;
and,  after  a  fhort  recapitulation  of  the  prefent  diftreffes,  by
which  the  commonwealth  was  reduced  to  the  neceffity  of
fubmitting  to  one  of  thefe  two  moft  grievous  evils,  either  to
ftrengthen  the  enemy  through  her  own  civil  contefts,  and
animofeties,  or,  from  a  delire  of  averting  the  attacks  of
foreign  enemies,  to  compofe  with  ignominy  a  domeftic,  and
civil  war,  he  faid  that,  lince  they  were  under  a  neceffity  of
fubmitting  unwillingly  to  one  of  thefe  two  evils,  he  thought
it  was  lefsdiladvantageous  for  the  fenate  to  fuffer  the  people
to  ufurp  forne  part  of  their  ancient  authority,  than  to  expofe
the  commonwealth  to  the  ridicule  of  foreigners,  and  enemies.
Having  faid  this,  he  propofed  the  opinion,  which  had  been
approved  of  by  thofe,  who  had  been  prelent  at  the  meeting
held  in  a  private  houfe,  and  which  Claudius  had  offer¬
ed,  as  I  faid ;  which  was,  inltead  of  confuls,  to  create
tribunes  with  confular  power,  three  of  whom  fhould  be
patricians,  and  three  plebeians;  and  that,  after  thefe  had
completed  the  term  of  their  magillracy,  and  the  time  was
come  to  create  new  magiftrates,  the  fenate,  and  people

fhould


374  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookXf.

fliould  again  aflemble,  and  confider  whether  they  would
commit  the  government  to  confuls,  or  to  confular  tribunes:
That  the  majority  of  votes  fhould  carry  it:  And  that  the
lenate  fliould  pafs  a  previous  vote  upon  this  occaflon,  every
year.

LXI.  This  opinion  of  Genucius  was  received  with  general
applaufe ;  and  almoft  all,  who  rofe  up  after  him,  allowed
that  thefe  were  the  beft  refolutions  they  could  take :  The
previous  vote,  therefore,  for  carrying  them  into  execution,
being  drawn  up  by  order  of  the  confuls,  the  tribunes  received
it  with  great  joy,  and  proceeded  to  the  forum.  After  which,
they  aflembled  the  people;  and,  having  given  great  com¬
mendations  to  the  fenate,  they  exhorted  fuch  of  the  ple¬
beians  as  were  willing,  to  ftand  candidates  for  this  magi-
ftracy,  together  with  the  patricians.  But 3S  there  is  fo  much
levity  in  pafllons  not  founded  on  reafon,  and  they  incline
fo  fwiftly  to  the  other  fide,  particularly  the  pafllons  of  the
multitude,  that  thofe,  who,  before,  looked  upon  it  as  a
point  of  the  greateft  confequence  to  partake  of  the  magi-
ftracy,  and  if  this  was  not  granted  to  them  by  the  patricians,

35*  oJlco  Si  n^oL  >ta(pov  n  'sr^otyy.x  etc.  more  noble  motive  to  the  preference
If  Dionyfius  had  written  his  hiftory  given  by  the  people  to  the  patricians  :
with  no  other  view  but  to  flatter  the  He  attributes  this  preference  to  mo-
Romans  (as  Mr.  Beaufort,  and  feveral  defty,  equity,  and  greatnefs  of  mind,
of  his  countrymen  have  thought  fit  to  But  I  fhall  tranfcribe  his  words,  be-
alledge)  he  would  moft  certainly  have  caufe  I  think  them  as  beautiful,  as  his
attributed  this  behaviour  of  the  people,  judgement  is  folid  :  Hanc  modejiiam
not  to  their  levity,  but  to  their  gene-  aequitatemque  et  altitudinem  animi ,  uki
rofity.  This  I  am  the  morejuftified  nunc  in  uno  inveneris ,  quae  tunc  fopuii
in  affirming,  becaufe  1  Livy  has,  and,  univerfi  fuit  ?
without  flattery,  I  think,  afligned  a

>B.  iv.  c.  6.


were


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I S.  375

were  ready  either  to  abandon  the  city,  as  they  had  done  before,
or  to  feize  that  privilege  by  force  of  arms,  as  foon  as  they
had  obtained  this  conceffion,  they  prefently  relinquifhed  their
fondnefs  for  it,  and  transferred  their  earneftnefs  to  the  other
fide ;  fo  that,  though  many  plebeians  flood  candidates  for
the  confular  tribunefhip,  and  ufed  the  moft  earned  folicita-
tions  to  obtain  it,  the  people  thought  none  of  them  worthy
of  this  honor :  But,  when  they  came  to  give  their  votes,
they  chofe  the  patrician  candidates,  who  were  all  men  of
diftindtion;  thefe  were  Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus,  Lucius
Atilius  Longus,  and  Titus  36  Cloelius  Siculus.

LXII.  Thefe  were  the  firft,  who  were  inverted  with  the
proconfular  power,  upon  which  they  entered  in  the  third
year  of  the  eighty  fourth  Olympiad,  Diphilus  being  archon
at  Athens ;  but  they  retained  the  pofleflion  of  it  only  feventy
three  days ;  after  which,  they  voluntarily  refigned  purfuant
to  an  ancient  cuftom,  fbme  heavenly  omens  oppofing  their
continuance  in  the  adminiftration.  After  thefe  had  abdi¬
cated  their  power,  the  fenate  aflembled,  and  chofe  inter-
reges;  who,  having  appointed  a  day  for  the  election  of
magiftrates,  left  it  to  the  confideration  of  the  people  whether
they  dertred  to  chufe  confular  tribunes,  or  confuls;  and
the  people  refolving  to  adhere  to  the  ancient  cuftoms,  they
gave  leave  to  fuch  of  the  patricians  as  were  willing,  to  ftand
candidates  for  the  confuhhip ;  and  two  patricians  were  again
eledted  confuls :  Thefe  were  Lucius  Papirius  Mugillanus,  and
Lucius  Sempronius  Atratinus, brother  to  one  of  the  perfons,  who


36*  KaojAjov.  k  Sigonius,  in  his  notes  reading,  and  not  KAv<nov,  as  it  (lands
upon  Livy,  fhews  this  to  be  the  true  in  the  editions.

k  lv* c>  7*  had


376  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  XI.

had  refigned  the  confular  tribunefhip.  Thefe  two  magiftracies,
invefted  with  the  fupreme  power,  were  appointed  at  Rome
the  fame  year:  However,  both  do  not  appear  in  all  the
Roman  annals ;  but,  in  fome,  the  confular  tribunes  only,
in  others,  the  confuls,  and  in  a  few,  both  of  them;  with
which  I  agree  not  without  reafon,  but  confiding  in  the
teftimonies  of  the  holy,  and  37  fecret  books.  No  tranfadtion,
either  military,  or  civil,  worthy  the  notice  of  hiftory,  hap-


37-  Atto^Iuv  j3<£a«v.  I  take  thefe  to
have  been  the  books,  called  by  the
Romans,  Lintei  ;  becaufe  Livy1,  in
Ipeaking  of  the  magiftrates  of  this
year,  fays  that  the  names  of  thefe  con¬
fuls  were  not  to  be  found  either  in  the
ancient  annals,  or  in  the  books  of  the
magiftrares  •,  but  that  Licinius  Macer
had  written  that  their  names  were
mentioned  both  in  the  treaty  with  the
Ardeates,  and  in  the  Lintei  libri ,  that
were  kept  in  the  temple  of  Juno  Mo-
neta ;  Licinius  Macer  aubior  eji ,  et  in
foedere  Ardeatino ,  et  in  Linteis  libris  ad
Monetae  invent  a.  By  this  it  appears  that
thefe  a7rc6£lo<|3i£Aoi,or  Libri  Lintei ,w er e
public  records,  and  not  the  memoirs  of
fome  private  families,  as  m  Mr.  Beau¬
fort  has  advanced,  in  order  to  prove
this  extraordinary  pofition,  that  the
Roman  hiftory  for  the  five  firft  cen¬
turies  was  neither  more,  nor  lefs  than
a  romance.  His  way  of  reafoning  will
equally  prove  that  every  other  ancient
hiftory,  nay  the  hiftory  of  the  firft  ages
of  every  nation,  that  either  now  fub-
fifts,  or  ever  did  fubfift  upon  the  face
of  the  earth,  is  no  better  than  a  ro-
jmance;  with  this  difference,  that  the

'B.  iv.  c.  7.


hiftory  of  the  firft  ages  of  no  nation  in
the  world  was  ever  delivered  down  to
pofterity  by  writers  of  fo  great  parts,
fo  much  impartiality,  and  fo  much
learning,  as  the  hiftory  of  the  firft
ages  of  the  Roman  empire.  But  this
kind  of  Pyrrhonifm,  revived  by  Bayle,
has  fo  much  infedled  the  French  wri¬
ters  in  Holland,  that,  if  they  go  on,
mankind  will  foon  be  brought  to  doubt
whether  the  Perfians  invaded  the
Greeks  under  Xerxes,  or  the  Greeks,
the  Perfians;  whether  Alexander  con¬
quered  Darius,  or  Darius,  Alexander;
and  whether  the  Romans,  at  laft,  beat
the  Carthaginians,  or  thefe  the  Ro¬
mans.  But  much  worfe  confequences
will  refult  from  this  Pyrrhonifm  ;  the
great  examples  of  policy,  of  bravery,
and  of  every  other  virtue,  both  public
and  private,  by  which  the  Romans,
during  the  firft  five  centuries,  laid  the
foundation  of  their  future  grandeur,
will  lofe  their  force,  if  they  were  never
realized  ;  and  hiftory  will  be  deprived
of  the  advantage  fhe  has  over  philo-
Lphy,  which  is  That  of  teaching  by
examples.


m  Incert,  de  l’hift.  Rom.  p.  99.


Book  XI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  A  S  SE N  S IS.  377

pened  in  their  confulfhip,  except  a  treaty  of  friendfhip,  and
alliance  entered  into  with  the  Ardeates :  For  thefe,  having
laid  afide  their  complaints  on  account  of  the  lands  they  had
been  deprived  of,  had  fent  embaflidors  to  defire  they  might
be  admitted  into  the  friendihip,  and  alliance  of  the  Romans,
and  this  treaty  was  ratified  by  thefe  confuls.

LXIIL  The  following  year,  the  people  having  voted  that
confuls  fhould  again  be  appointed,  Marcus  Geganius  Mace-
rinus,  for  the  fecond  time,  and  Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus,
for  the  fifth  time,  entered  upon  the  confulfhip  on  the  ides
of  December.  Thefe  reprefented  to  the  fenate  that  many
things  were  neglected  by  reafon  of  the  continual  employ¬
ment  of  the  confuls  in  the  field,  and  particularly  the  moffc
neceffary  of  all,  the  cuftom  relating  to  the  cenfus,  by  which
the  number  of  fuch,  as  were  of  the  military  age,  was  known,
together  with  the  amount  of  their  fortunes,  in  proportion  to
which  every  man  was  to  furnifh  the  fupplies  for  the  wars,
there  having  been  no  cenfus  for  feventeen  years  fince  the
confulfhip  of  Lucius  Cornelius,  and  Quintus  Fabius :  So
that,  the  worthy,  and  ufeful  men  only  were  regiftei~ed,  and
ferved  in  the  armies,  while  the  mo  ft  profligate,  and  the  moft
abandoned  were  left  unregiftered,  and  changed  the  places  of
their  habitation,  where  they  might  live  without  controll.  *
********  ********  ********
*******  ****  *************

7 he  reft  of  the  Greek  text  is  wanting*


Vol.  IV,


C  c  c


.  *->  '  -  .


4  *  *  ^  '  *  L  k  ,  <  ;  .  ,


‘  ‘  '  >


*  f-v  t


L:  »


.


■f  'i


-  -  r

.  k>


'  <  *  'J  ~  -•  ■

1  -  *


'  .*  ,  A  .


*  •  -  '  •  f

3k  i  l  4".  v^i


*  ‘

'  ;  -


J  ^  ^41


.1.  .  •

v  *  '  .  :,


.i  .*  ,  >


i


•  / ! .  *  ■

.  '  ,

T  f

*  '  *<r  *>  *  vr  ..  4  fV  I-  G  XI  IfH

'  I  ‘I  ..  ■

•  ^  :  ’  k  :  •  ;


~«w  —  ^  —  -r—— —

n-

..  -  -f  -'  /•  ,  ■>  ;  •

»

,  ji  -  trrff'r

-  •  .  ■

-  r;  ;?L  •'  ,  J  ..  4 ,, . .:

-  :  •:  :  .,  •  *  -  ■ .

■


■  ♦.


■


.  ■


C**  *«.■**

-


..?  .  ;


'

■


-  v  -  *  w  v«r  «  .  «


~  i _


*  <  .  •

X  (  ft  ■


*  *


.  ;  \


■  ■


,  ,  ,

k>  * ...


T  f

*  '  J-  i  u.  s>  4


(  379  )


A


TO  THE

TEXT.


\\the  Numerals  denote  the  Volume  3  the  Figures  the  Pages.]


A

Aberrigines,  i.  27.

Abolition  of  debts.  See  Poor.
Aborigines  natives,  i.  26.

_ originally  from  Greece,  i.  28.

_ .  defcended  from  the  Oenotri,  i.  34,

205.

_  a  colony  of  the  Arcadians,  i.  28,
288.

—  fome  imagine  them  to  be  the  fame
with  the  nation  of  the  Leleges,  i.

27*

_ whence  their  name  is  derived,

ib.

—  they  difpolfefs  the  Siceli  of  their
territories,  i.  24.
expel  the  Umbri  and  Siceli,  i.  38,

39-

—  never  put  their  children  to  death,
T  i*  39-

_ poffefs  theReatine  country,  i.  307.

_ .  began  to  be  called  Latines,  under
their  king  Latinus,  i.  25.

—  the  cities  of  the  Aborigines,  i.  35.
Abflcmious  ceremonies  of  Ceres,  1.  74.
Acallaris ,  daughter  of  Eumedes,  i.
142.

VoL.IV.


Acanthus ,  the  Lacedaemonian,  was
the  firft  who  ran  in  the  ftadium
naked,  iii.  270.

Acarnanes ,  in  what  manner  they  were
rewarded  by  the  Romans,  i.  117.

Acclamation ,  the  people  fignify  their
will  by  it,  ii.  292.

Acejlorides ,  archon  at  Athens,  ii.  368.'

Achtei,  in  Pontus,  degenerated  from
the  Greeks,  i.  206,  7.

Adorns,  fon  of  Neptune  and  Larifla,
i.  41.

Achaia ,  Peloponnefus  fo  called  from
the  Achaiaris,  i.  59.

—  part  of  Haemonia,  or  Theffaly,  fo
called  from  Achasus,  i.  41.

Achilles  lofes  three  Ihips,  i.  120.

. —  celebrates  games  at  the  funeral  of
Patroclus,  ii.  339.

—  his  fhield  made  by  Vulcan,  iii.  272.

C.  Acilius ,  his  account  concerning  the

cleanfing  of  the  aqueducts,  ii.  130.

Acqiiifitions  of  two  forts,  ii.  78.

Acrojlics  prove  the  modern  Sibylline
oracles  to  be  impoftures,  ii.  263.

Aclium ,  its  fituation,  i.  1 1 4.


Ddd


'Aftius


380  I  N  D  E  X  to

AlVms.  See  Claufus.

Adies ,  or  Afies,  Ton  of  Cotys,  i.  6 o.

Adultery  punifhed  with  death,  i.  270.

L.  Atbutius,  conful,  iv.  120.

— •  dies  of  the  plague,  iv.  12  1.

T.  Abutius  Elva ,  conful,  ii.  404.

■ —  is  appointed  general  of  the  horfe,
by  A.  Poftumius,  the  didator,  iii.
4*

• —  deprives  the  Latines  of  provifions,
iii.  7.

- —  is  pofted  in  the  left  wing  of  the
Roman  army,  iii.  8.

• —  being  wounded  in  a  fingle  combat
with  Odavius  Mamilius,  he  falls
from  his  horfe,  iii.  17.

Abutius,  the  fon  of  Titus,  is  appoint¬
ed  one  of  the  deputies  fent  to  the
feceders,  iii.  104.

Adiks,  0 1  Ayo^avoy.01.  iii.  137*

■ —  from  whence  they  had  their  name,
and  what  were  their  functions,  iii.
137,  1 4.6.

r—  Were  minifters  to  the  tribunes,  111.

nr-1

.  are  empowered  by  the  fenate  to  de¬
corate  the  feftivals,  iii.  146.

—  are  honoured  by  the  fenate,  with
royal  enfigns,  ib.

—  are  r:  pulled  by  the  patricians,
while,  they  were  arrefting  Marcius,
by  order  of  the  tribunes,  iii.  19  r.
Volero,  the  tribune,  brings  in  a
Jaw,  by  which  the  sediles,  were  to
be  coated  in  the  tributa  comitia,viv.
79,  80. -

' —  the  eledion  of  the  sediles  and  tri¬
bunes  performed  in  the  tributa  co¬
rn  iti  a,  iv,  90.

the  violence  offered  to  the  ae-
diles,  was  equally  criminal  with
That  offered' to  the  tribunes,  iii.  202.

Adilejhi$ ,  a  Plebeian  magiftracy,  ii.

'  342.' ‘

Ageda,  a-  town  in  Sicily,  by  fome  call¬
ed  Segefta,  i.  120.


the  TEXT.

Agejlus,  the  Trojan  in  Sicily,  by  what
accident  born,  i.  119.

— .  flies  into  Sicily,  i.  120.

Agejlus,  chief  of  the  Lavinian  prieft-
hood,  i.  150.

Ageflus,  fon  of  Numitor,  i.  175.

—  is  afluflinated  by  order  of  Amulius,
ib.

Amilia,  the  veffal,  her  prayer  to  Vefta,
and  efcape  from  danger,  i.  349.

L.  Amilius  Mamercus,  by  order  of
the  fenate,  hands  for  the,conlulfhip,
iii.  419.

—  marches  againft  theVolfci,  iii.  421.

—  through  fhame  of  an  ignominious
defeat,  remains  in  his  camp,  iii.
426.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  30.

—  marches  with  an  army  into  Tyr-
rhenia,  iv.  31.

—  overcomes,  and  puts  the  Veientes
to  flight,  iv.  32.

—  is  exafpei  ated  againft;  the  fenate  for
denying  him  a  vidory,  iv.  34.

—  is  third  time  conful,  iv.  69,

—  what  opinion  his  father  gave,  con¬
cerning  the  divifion  of  the  public
lands,  iv.  93.

Tib.  At  minus',  conful,  iv.  92.

—  marches  againft;  the  Sabines,  iv.

1 00'.

—  is  fe-cond  time  conful,  iv;  208.'

—  harrafles  the  Sabines,  ib.

Anea,  a  town  of  Latium,  called  fo-
from  iEneas ;  and  afterwards  called
Janiculum,  i.  167.

Aneada,  their  removal,  i.  112.

Aneas ,  fon  of  Anohifes  and  Venus,-
i.  142.

—  his  progenitors,  ib.

—  in  what  manner  he  conveyed  his
father  from  Troy,  i.  104.

— .  upon  what  conditions  he  obtained
leave  of  the  Greeks  to  depart  from
Troy,  i.  105,  6.


the


INDEX  to

—  the  reafon  why  he  betrayed  his
country,  according  to  Menecrates,
i.  109.

—  flies  from  Afia  into  Europe,  iii.
120.

—  arrives  with  the  Trojans  in  Italy,
i.  100.

—  where  he  landed  in  Italy,  ib.  and

118.

— *  the  arrival  of  ./Eneas  in  Italy  is  va-
rioufly  related  by  authors,  i.  102.

—  fome  deny  that  he  ever  was  there,
i.  124.

—  concerning  the  arrival  of  /Eneas
in  Italy.  See  the  difiertation  at  the
end  of  the  firft  book.

—  fome  afiert  that  he  retired  out  of
Italy  into  Phrygia,  i.  125.

— -  JEneas  brings  with  him  ceremo¬
nies  into  Italy,  i.  445.

—  what  thofe  ceremonies  were,  i.  155.

• —  a  truce  being  made  with  Latinus,

and  the  Rutuli  conquered,  he  builds
Lavinium,  i.  136.

—  fucceeds  Latinus,  i.  144.

—  arrives  in  Italy  from  the  Moloffi,
after  Ulyffes,  and  is  faid  to  have
built  Rome.  i.  164.

—  is  Gain  in  battle,  i.  145.

—  the  temple  of  Tineas,  i.  122,  26,
and  46.

—  the  ftatue  of  /Eneas,  i.  1 15.

—  his  epitaph,  i.  146.

—  his  daughters  mariied  in  Arcadia,
i.  iii.

—  his  four  fons,  i.  163.

. —  Romulus  and  Remus  are  faid  to
be  the  fons  of  /Eneas,  i.  166.

—  the  races  of  /Eneas  and  Venus,  i.
1 14.

JEneas  Sihius ,  king  of  the  Latines,  i.

*57-

jEnus,  a  town  of  Thrace,  built  by
/Eneas,  called  alfo  ZEnea,  i.  112.
JEqui,  infeft  the  confines  of  the  La-
-  tines,  iii.  54.


the  TEXT.

—  are  conquered,  iii.  64.

—  are  in  alliance  with  the  Volfci  a-
gainft  the  Romans,  iii.  304.

—  the  ZEqui  and  Volfci,  in  an  expe¬
dition  againft  the  Romans,  turn
their  arms  againft  one  another,  iii.

381-

• —  the  /Equi  make  incurfions  into  the
Latin  territories,  iii.  436.

* —  take  Hortona,  iii.  437.  and  iv.  1 80.

—  invade  the  Latines,  iv.  2.

—  are  forced  by  Fabius  to  retire  to
their  own  cities,  iv.  25.

—  make  an  alliance  with  the  Volfci  a-
gainft  the  Romans,  iv.  30.

—  are  beaten  and  plundered  by  Ser-
vius  Furius,  the  proconful,  iv.  31..

—  the  /Equi  and  Volfci  are  beaten  by
the  Latines,  iv.  67.

■ —  are  plundered  by  Titus  Quintius,
iv.  go.

—  by  Valerius,  iv.  100.

—  evacuate  a  fortrefs  of  the  Antiates,
iv.  107.

—  on  what  conditions  they  accepted
of  a  peace  from  the  Romans,  iv.
109.

—  they  violate  that  peace,  ib.

—  make  an  incurfion  into  the  Roman
territories  by  unguarded  roads,  iv.-

11 .?»

—  advance  as  far  as  Tufculum,  iv.

167 .

—  infeft  the  Latines,  iv.  172.

—  being  led  under  the  yoke  by  the
Romans,  they  deliver  up  Ccrbio,
together  with  their  general,  iv.  177.

—  take  up  arms  again,  iv.  179.

—  march  to  Coibio,  and  put  the  Ro¬
man  garrifon  there  to  the  fword,  iv.

l79-

—  are  forced  by  Floratius  to  retire  to
their  cities,  iv.  188.

—  again  annoy  the  Tufculani,  iv.  2 1 1 .

—  lofe  their  camp  and  the  vidory,  iv.

2 1  7.

D  dd  2  defign-


INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


. —  designing  to  attack  the  Romans
during  the  plague,  are  themfelves
afflicted  with  it,  iv.  231.

—  make  another  irruption  into  the
territories  of  the  Tufculani,  iv.  252.

—  incamp  at  Algidum,  ib.

—  are  defeated  by  Valerius,  iv.  343.

./ Equkoli ,  their  feciales,  i.  355.

AEquinox ,  the  beginning  of  feed  time

about  the  autumnal  ./Equinox,  iii.
148.

JEfculapius,  one  of  the  demigods,  iii.
277.

— theifiand  of  iEfculapius,  ii.  334.

M.  AEtilius ,  his  punifhment  for  par¬
ricide,  ii.  262.

Aitoli ,  formerly  Curetes,  i.  41,  117.

AEzii,  a  people  afterwards  called  Ly-
caonians,  and  Oenotri,  i.  31.

AEzius,  his  reign  and  pofterity,  i.  30.

ALzius  and  Phoroneus  were  the  firft
kings  of  Peloponnefus,  ib.

Agatharchus ,  of  Corcyra,  vidtor  at
the  Olympic  games,  ii.  229.

Age ,  at  the  age  of  twenty  years  the
manly  gown  was  taken  at  Cumae,
iii.  165.

r—  Servius,  at  the  age  of  twenty  years
is  appointed  to  command  the  au¬
xiliaries,  ii.  147.

•- —  the  laws  permitted  the  Romans  at
the  age  of  thirty,  to  enter  upon  the
commonwealth,  ii.  154.

- —  at  forty  five,  a  citizen  was  dif-
charged  from  ferving  in  the  field,
ii.  177.

■«—  thirty  years  was  the  proper  age
for  entering  upon  the  adminiftra-
tion  of  public  affairs,  ii.  212.

i —  thofe  who  are  paft  the  military  age
were  employed  in  the  defence  of
the  walls*  iii.  342.  and  iv.  8.
thofe  were  obliged  by  the  Roman
laws  to  marry,  who  were  of  a  pro¬
per  age,  iv.  42.


—  a  cohort  of  thofe  paft  the  military
age  voluntarily  follow  their  leader
to  the  war,  iv,  212.

Agonenfes  inftituted  by  T.  Hoftilius,
i-  351-

Agrarian  law  is  debated,  iii.  397.

—  is  poftponed  for  more  than  thirty
years,  iv.  197.

—  is  referred  to  the  people  by  the
tribunes,  ib.

—  is  oppofed,  iv.  207

—  again  oppofed,  iv.  21 1.

—  for  what  reafon  this  affair  is  pro-
traded  by  the  confuls,  iv.  70.

—  thofe  who  hindered  the  pafling  of
the  Agrarian  law,  are  fined,  iv.
208,  9,  10.

—  the  debate  is  warmly  carried  on,
iv.  73.

—  is  firft  brought  in  by  Caffius,  iv.

92,  3.

Sp.  Caffius,  author  of  the  Agrarian
law,  iv.  204.

—  See  Lands ,

Agreements ,  compulfive  agreements
are  feldom  lading,  iii.  357

Agriculture  and  war,  the  ftudy  of  them
is  united  by  Romulus,  i.  276.

Agriculture  and  graft ng,  recommend¬
ed  by  Ancus  Marcius,  ii.  83.

Agrippas,  king  of  Alba,  i.  158.

Agrippa ,  fee  Menenius.

Agylla ,  called  fo  by  the  Pelafgi,  and
afterwards  called  Gere  by  the  Tyr¬
rhenians,  i.  47.  and  ii.  1 16.

Ajax  and  Ulyffes,  their  wreftling,  iii.
270.

Ajus  Locutius ,  fee  Faunus.

Alba  Longa ,  its  founder,  fituation,
and  fortune,  i.  102,  and  148,  9.

Alba,  the  mother  of  thirty  Latin  ci¬
ties,  is  rated  by  Marcus  Horatius,
and  its  citizens  tranfplanted  to
Rome,  ii.  62,  7*2.

Alban  country,  fruitful,  i.  83,  149.

Alban


INDEX  to  the  TEX  T.


Jib  an  kings,  a  catalogue  of  them,  i.
•158.

—  hill,  the  Latin  feftivals  kept  upon
it,  iii.  428.

—  nation,  of  what  people  compofed,
i.  222.

— 1  patricians,  removed  to  Rome,  ii.
69.

-v-  war,  the  caufe,  the  general,  and
the  event  of  it,  ii.  5.

—  wine,  delicious,  i.  149.

Albans ,  after  the  demife  of  Nu  mi  tor,
chole  annual  delators,  inftead  of
kings  j  according  to  Licinius,  ii.

433*

Albans  and  Romans,  their  treaty  under
Romulus,  ii.  5.

Albas  Silvias ,  king  of  the  Latines,  i.
158.

Albinus ,  fee  Poftumius.

Albula ,  the  ancient  name  of  the  Tiber,
i.  158.

Alcaeus  the  poet  is  profcribed,  ii.  430.

Alcyone,  a  prieftefs  of  Argos,  i.  51.

Algidum ,  the  camps  of  the  iEqui  and
Volfci  before  it,  iv.  169,  252.

—  the  Romans  greatly  beaten  there,
iv.  284,  5.

Alladius ,  king  of  Alba,  i.  158,  9.

Allies  of  the  Romans  were  obliged  to
fend  fuccours  to  Rome  in  time  of
war,  iv.  171.

—  the  Latines  and  Hernici  fend  dou¬
ble  the  number  ordered,  iv.  8.

— •  the  allies  could  neither  create  a  ge¬
neral,  nor  lead  out  forces  when  they
pleafed,  iii.  3°3>  4-

—  the  Romans  lend  fceptres  and  dia¬
dems  to  the  kings  their  allies,  as  a
confirmation  of  their  government,
ii.  121.

— -  the  forces  of  the  allies  were  equal
to  thofe  of  the  city,  in  the  Tyrrhe¬
nian  war,  iv.  23,  31.

* _ whatever  was  acquired  after  alliance

was  in  common  among  the  confe-


derates,  iii.  404,  7.

—  thofe  powers  exercife  their  refent-
ment  againft  the  allies,  who  did
not  do  it  againft  the  Romans  them-
felves,  iv.  180.

Alontium,  its  fituation,  i.  117.

Alps,  i.  26.

Alfion,  its  fituation,  i,  47.

Altar,  the  royal  altar,  and  the  facrifice
ufually  laid  upon  it,  ii.  146.

• —  an  altar  overturned  by  lightning,
iv.  9.

—  a  fubterraneous  altar,  i.  280,  1.
Altars ,  erefted  to  fwear  upon,  and  ra¬
tify  a  treaty,  i.  305.

Amata ,  the  wife  of  Latinus,  i.  145.
Ambracian  bay,  i.  115.

Ambrax,  king  of  Ambracia,  ib.
Amiternum ,  its  fituation,  i.  37,  310.
Amnefiy ,  offered  to  all  thofe  who  had
fled  with  Tarquinius,  if  they  would
return  to  the  city  within  twenty
days,  ii.  334.

■—  an  amnefty  propofed  to  the  feceders,
iii.  73.

Amph'tttyon ,  his  inftitutions,  ii.  197.

—  the  Amphidlyonic  council  and
laws,  id.  ib.

Amphitheatrical portico,  ii.  132.

Amulius  defrauds  his  elder  brother
Numitor  of  the  kingdom,  i.
174.

—  reigned  forty  two  years  at  Alba,  i..
159-  .

. —  is  (lain,  i.  195.

Amyntor,  fon  of  Phraftor-,  i.  63.
Anafiorium,  its  fituation,  i.  1 1 7.
Anchife ,  fo  called  from  Anchifes,  i.
167.

Anchifenfian  table ,  i.  169,  70.
Anchifes,  fon  of  Capys,  father  of  JE-
neas,  i.  142.

— —  his  chappel,  b  146.

—  the  haven  of  Anchifes,  i.  1 16.
Anchifes,  archon  at  Athens,  iii.  282.
Ancilia,  or  bucklers  of  theSalii,  i.  354,

Ancus «,


384  I.NDEX  to

Ancus.  fee  Marcius.

Ancus  Publicius  of  Cora,  the  Latin
general,  ii.  79.

Anio^  the  name  of  a  river,  ii.  51.

—  runs  not  far  from  the  holy  moun¬
tain,  iii.  69.

—  its  courfe  and  quality,  ii.  369.

—  the  confluence  of  the  Anio,  and  the
Tiber,  ii.  112.

Anius,  king  of  Delos,  i.  112,  136.

Annals ,  Greek,  i.  20.

—  what  the  annals  of  Fabius  relate
concerning  the  death  of  Aruns  Tar-
quinius,  ii.  209.

—  for  what  reafon  they  are  miftaken
in  their  relation  of  the  tyrants  of
Sicily,  iii.  153.

—  the  annals  of  Pifo,  ii.  157,  174.

Annibale  his  war,  i.  255.

.Annual  magi  fl  rates,  i.  32  6.

Annual  magiftrates  at  Athens,  as  well
as  at  Rome,  iv.  101.

Annual  dictators  among  the  Albans,
inftead  of  kings,  ii.  433.

Antemna ,  taken  formerly  by  the  Oe-
notri,  or  Aborigines,  from  the  Si-
celi,  i.  2.88.

—  made  a  colony  of  Rome,  ib.

—  the  founders  of  the  Antemnates,  i.

39 ■

—  taken  by  Romulus,  i.  283.

• —  aflifls  the  Tarquinii  againft  the  Ro¬
mans,  ii.  346.

Antencrid* ,  their  treachery,  i.  102.

Anthemone^  daughter  of  Tineas,  i.  1 1 1.

Anti  as ,  fon  of  Ulylfes,  founder  of  An-
tium,  i.  165.

Antigenes  >  archon  at  Athens,  iii.  152.

Antiochus ,  of  Syracufe,  a  very  old
hiftorian,  i.  32,  78,  1  67.

Antijlius  Petron ,  killed  by  the  treach¬
ery  of  Sex.  Tarquinius,  ii.  253,4.

Antium ,  chief  city  of  the  Volfci,  iii.
283.  iv.102.

—  the  Tqui  incamp  near  it,  iv.

212.


the  T  E  X  T.

—  the  people  of  Antium  enter  into
a  treaty  with  Tarquinius  Super  bus,
ii.  240.

—  aflift  the  Aricini,  ii.  366.

—  fend  help  to  theLatines,  iii.  5.

—  fend  troops  to  the  Coriolani,  iii.

140.

— -  are  beaten  by  Poftumus  Comi-
nius,  iii.  143.

—  are  obliged  to  difmifs  the  Sicilian
embaifadors,  iii.  206.

—  a  fmall  feaport  town  of  the  Volfci
is  taken  with  lome  Flips  belonging
to  the  Antiates  in  it,  together  with
their  furniture,  iv.  102,  3.

—  the  Antiates,  and  the  garrifon  of
the  Tqui  furrender  to  Quintius,  iv.

.1  107.

*—  a  colony  is  led  out  by  the  tri¬
umvirs  into  the  the  country  of  the
Antiates,  iv.  108.

—  the  exiles  of  the  Antiates,  toge¬
ther  with  the  Tqui,  make  an  in-
curflon  into  the  territories  of  the
Latines,  iv.  1 10.

—  begin  to  revolt,  iv.  114.

—  both  the  natives,  and  the  Roman
colony  openly  revolt,  iv.  167.

—  are  taken  by  Form,  iv.  170.

• —  Marcius,  afte  r  his  Banilhment,  re¬
tires  to  Antium,  iii.  283.

T.  Antonius,  one  of  the  decemvirs,  iv.
240,  284,  302.

—  marches  with  four  of  his  collegues
againft  the  Tqui,  iv.  284.

Apennine  mountains,  i.  24,  35.  ii.
94.

Apiolani ,  their  city  taken  and  rafed
by  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  ii.  102.

Appeal  from  the  confuls  to  the  peo¬
ple,  given  by  the  Valerian  law,  ii.
344,  424.  iii.  87,  2  1 1.  iv.  73.

—  a  punifliment  is  demanded  of  the
confuls,  who  obftrubted  an  appeal
to  the  people,  iv.  74.

Appius.  See  Claudius .

AqueduB


INDEX  to

Aquedutt,  one  of  the  moft  magnificent
ftru&ures  at  Rome,  ii.  129.

C.  Aquilius,  conful,  iii.  382.  iv.  198.

—  bravely  defeats  the  Hernici,  iii.

385-

—  triumphs  over  them,  iii.  391.

L.  and  M.  Aquilius  are  among  the
confpirators,  ii.  321.

—  are  impeached,  ii.  327.

Ara  Maxima ,  i.  92.

Arcadia ,  formerly  Lycaonia,  i.  221.

—  Atlas  the  firft  King  of  Arcadia,

i.  139.

— •  the  deluge  of  Arcadia,  i.  139,
15  4-

—  the  Arcadians  delight  in  moun¬
tains^  i.  35.

■ —  their  migration  from  Pelopon-
nefus  on  account  of  the  deluge,  i.
154.

—  are  the  firft  Greeks,  who  failed  to
Italy,  i.  29.

• —  what  infticutions  they  brought
with  Evander  into  Italy,  i.  75.

—  what  place  they  firft  inhabited,  i.
102,

—  their  moft  honoured  and  moft  an¬
cient  divinity  was  Pan,  i.  71,  2.

Archedemides ,  archon  at  Athens,  iv.

1 12.

Archeflratides ,  archon  at  Athens,  ii.
144-

Arftinus ,  an  ancient  poet,  i.  153.
Ardeas ,  fon  of  Ulyfles,  and  founder
of  the  city  of  Ardea,  i.  165.
Ardeates ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.

4°9*  1

— .  the  feciales  of  the  Ardeates,  i.
355»

—  are  befieged  by  Tarquinius  Super¬
bus,  ii.  265.

■ —  make  a  truce  with  the  Romans,

ii.  296,  312.

—  are  oufted  of  the  controverted  lands,
iv.  363,  4.

—  revolt  from  the  Romans  on  ac-


the  TEX  T.  385

count  of  the  controverted  lands,
iv.  365.  _

—  are  received  into  the  friendfhip,
and  fociety  of  the  Romans,  iv.
377*

Argolic  bucklers,  i.  47.

Argos ,  the  Achaian,  i.  40.

— 1  the  hiftory  of  the  prieftefles  in  Ar¬
gos,  i.  164.

Aricia ,  diftant  120  ftadia  from  Rome,

iii.  50.

— .  is  befieged  by  the  Tyrrhenians  un¬
der  Aruns,  the  fon  of  Porfena,  ii.
366.  iii.  158.

—  relieved  by  Ariftodemus  of  Cumse,
iii.  159.

Aricini ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.  409.

—  defire  fuccours  from  the  Cumae-
ans  againft  the  Tyrrhenians,  iii.
358.

—  accufe  the  Romans  in  the  aflem-
bly  held  at  Ferentinum,  ii.  391.

—  the  Aricini,  2nd  the  Ardeates  are
oufted  of  the  controverted  lands,

iv-  36s,  4*

Arijlocracy  not  at  Rome  only,  but
alfo  among  the  neighbouring  peo¬
ple,  iii.  94.

Arfiocrates , .  father  of  Ariftodemus,
iii.  154.

Ariftodemus,  fon  of  Ariftocrates,  why
called  Effeminate,  iii,  154.

— .  upon  what  occafion,  and  in  what
manner  he  made  himfelf  tyrant  at
Cumae,  and  the  cataftrophe  he
met  with,  iii.  1 54.

—  performs  a  great  achievement  for
his  country  in  putting  the  Barbari¬
ans  to  flight,  iii.  157.

—  endeavours  by  all  methods  to  gain
the  affedtions  of  the  people,  ib.

—  leads  the  fuccours  defigned  for
Aricia,  iii.  159.

_ obtains  a  moft  famous  vidlory,

ib.

—  having  (lain  the  partifans  of  the

ariftocracy,


386  INDEX  to

ariftocracy,  he  afiumes  the  power
to  himfclf,  iii.  161.

—  the  manner  in  which  he  governed,
iii.  1 6 4.

.. —  he  receives  the  banifhed  Tarquin
into  his  friendfhip;  and  Tarquin
dying  fhortly  after,  he  buries  him,
iii.  35.

—  in  his  higheft  fecurity  is  oppofed
by  the  Cumasan  exiles,  iii.  166.

—  is  cut  off  with  all  his  relations,  iii.

169.  .

Arms,  fome  tarnifhed  with  lightning,
and  others  quite  confumed,  iv.  9.

Army  *,  a  difpofition  of  the  Roman
army,  when  drawn  up,  ii.  335,
348.  iii.  8.

—  the  poorer  fort  polled  in  the  rear,
ii.  420.

—  divided  into  three  bodies  by  the
fenate  and  confuls,  iii.  383.  iv.
125.

—  a  third  part  is  left  to  defend  the
city,  iv.  125,  168.

—  Marcius  does  not  fuffer  his  troops
to  be  quartered  in  the  cities,  iii .  3 1 1 .

—  the  army  could  not  be  difbanded
by  the  confuls  without  an  order  of
the  fenate,  iii.  68.

Arretini ,  a  people  of  Tyrrhenia,  ii.
107.

Artemifium ,  the  battle  fought  there,
ii.  340.

Aruns,  fon  of  D.amaratus,  ii.  99.

Arms,  fon  of  Porfena,  king  of  the
Tyrrhenians,  gives  wife  counfel  to
his  father,  much  beyond  the  ex¬
perience  of  a  youth,  ii.  358.

—  is  fent  by  his  father  with  part  of
his  forces  to  make  himfelf  mailer
of  Aricia,  ii.  366.  iii.  158.

- —  is  killed  by  Arillodemus  at  the
fiege  of  Aricia,  ii.  367.  iii.  159.

—  at  what  time  he  died,  ii.  366.

Aruns  farquinius.  See  Tarquinius.

As,  a  Roman  coin,  its  value,  iv.  53.


the  TEXT.

—  T.  Menenius  is  fined  2000  afies,
ib.

—  T.  Romilius  is  fined  10,000  afies,
and  his  collegue  Veturius,  15,000,
iv.  223,  4.

Afcanian  lake,  i.  106.

Afcanius,  fon  of  iEneas  and  Creufa,
ii-  73-

_  having  left  his  Dafcylitic  king¬
dom,  he  rellores  the  Hedtoridae  to
their  paternal  throne,  i.  106.

—  fucceeds  his  father  /Eneas  in  the
kingdom  of  Latium,  i.  126,  146.

—  divides  the  kingdom  with  Ro¬
mulus  and  Remus,  his  brothers,  i.
167.

—  by  aprofperousomen  is  encouraged
to  march  out  againll  Mezentius,
i.  230.

—  builds  Alba,  i.  148.  ii.  72,  3.

—  dies,  i.  1 56.

Afies ,  fon  of  Cotys,  i.  60

Ajjaracus,  fon  of  Tros,  i.  142.

Afiemblies  -,  the  place  of  alTemblies,
i.  312.  ii.  283.

—  the  people  were  aflembled  by  the
found  of  oxens  horns,  i.  236.

—  afiemblies  held  at  the  temple  of
Vulcan,  i.  312.  iii.  101.  178.  iv.
310.

—  afiemblies  called  by  the  heralds
through  every  llreet,  ii.  220,  283,
402.

—  the  right  of  calling  an  afiembly
was  lodged  in  the  magillrates  alone,
ii-  275.

—  the  confuls  had  a  power  of  calling
an  afiembly,  iii.  434,  5.

—  a  tribune  of  the  people  orders
Appius  the  conful  to  depart  the  af-
fembly,  iv.  87.

—  no  private  per  fon  could  fpeak  in
an  alTembly  of  the  people,  ii.  329,

3°*

—  an  afiembly  oppofed  to  an  afiem¬
bly,  iv.  31 1.


after


INDEX  to

—  after  the  expulfion  of  the  Tar-
quins,  the  right  of  holding  aflem-
blies  was  reftored  to  the  people,  ii.
3 1 4-

AJfeJfments ,  in  what  manner  made,
“•  1 73-

AJfurances  made  upon  oath,  iii.  127.

AJfyrians ,  their  empire,  i.  5,  6.

Ajlyllus,  of  Syracufe,  victor  at  the
Olympic  games,  iii.  407.

AJlylus ,  of  Croton,  victor  at  the
Olympic  games,  iii.  282.

Afylum  opened  by  Romulus,  i.  251.

* —  a  public  afylum,  ii.  75.

Aterius  (Aulus)  conful,  iv.  220.

Athenians ;  the  EviroUfji^oti  and  Aygoinot
of  the  Athenians,  i.  236.

— .  the  ©jjJgj  of  the  Athenians,  i.  238.

—  the  Athenians  decreed  an  abolition
of  debts  by  the  advice  of  Solon,  ii.

414*

—  the  Athenians  jealous  of  their
nobility,  and  privileges,  i.  254.

i —  the  Athenian  computation  of  time,
i.  143.

Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians  with
what  number  of  forces  they  rout¬
ed  the  Perfians,  iv.  246.

—  how  lafting,  and  how  extenfive
their  empire,  i.  8.

—  fubmit  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  iv.
247,  8.

—  are  deprived  of  their  power,  i.

255*

—  the  Romans  fend  to  Athens  for  a
body  of  laws,  iv.  232.

— .  the  glory  of  the  Athenian  com¬
monwealth,  ii.  24.

L.  Atilius  Longus ,  a  military  tribune,
iv-  375*

Atlas ,  firft  king  of  Arcadia,  his  pofte-
rity,  i.  139.

—  his  fuccefifors  in  the  kingdom,  ib.

Atratinus.  See  Sempronius.

Attic  computation  of  time,  i.  143.

Attius  (Navius)  the  foothfayer,  an
Vol.  IV.


the  TEXT.  387

account  of  him,  ii.  135,  7.

* —  he  difappears,  ii.  140.

Attius  (Tullus)  chief  of  the  Volfcian
nation,  iii.  283.

—  honourably  entertains  thebanifhed
Marcius,  and  admits  him  to  a  fhare
of  the  government,  iii.  285.

—  ftirs  up  the  Vollci  againll  the  Rov
mans,  iii.  289.

—  being  appointed  general  of  the
war  by  the  Volfci,  he  makes  an  in-
curfion  into  the  Latin  territories,
iii.  299.

—  gives  up  the  command  of  the
army  in  the  field  to  Marcius,  and
himfelf  commands  the  forces,  which
flay  at  home,  iii.  302.

—  excites  the  rage  of  his  people
againft  Marcius,  iii.  374.

— -  he  and  his  faction,  ftone  Marcius
to  death,  iii.  376.

—  plunders  the  allies  of  the  Romans,

iii.  387.

— -  a  valiant  foldier,  but  not  qualified
for  a  general,  iii.  390.

—  is  killed  in  battle,  ib.

Atys,  his  anceftors  and  pofterity,  i.
60,  1.

Avarice  fubdues  all  men,  and  forces
them  to  aft  unworthily,  ii.  387.
Aventine  hill,  or  mount,  i.  71,  159,
185.

—  called  fo  from  Aventinus  Silvius,
king  of  Alba,  i.  1 59.

— *  oppofite  to  the  Palatine  hill,  i.
185,  200.

—  is  fortified  by  Romulus,  i.  290.

—  is  added  to  the  city  by  Ancus
Marcius,  ii.  93.

—*  is  given  to  the  people  to  build  on,

iv.  192.

— •  is  feized  by  the  feceders  from  the
decemvirs,  iv.  319.

—  they  retire  from  hence  to  the  holy
mountain,  iv.  323.

—  is  the  moll  advantageous  of  all

E  e  e  the


388  INDEX  to

the  hills  in  the  city  to  incamp  on,
iv.  319.

- —  is  the  higheft  hill,  ii.  200.

— .  its  afcent  and  circumference,  ii.
93.  iv.  189.

■ —  the  temple  of  Diana  flood  upon
it,  ii.  93.  iv.  192.

—  the  Circus  Maximus  was  fituated
between  the  Aventine,  and  Palatine
hills,  ii.  130.

Avernus  lake,  iii.  167,  8.

- —  is  furrounded  with  hills,  and  is  not
far  from  Cumae,  ib.

Augurs ,  oiuvottoKoi,  their  fun&ions,  i.
34i.

— .  hired  with  the  public  money  in  the
creation  of  magiftrates,  i.  231.

—  are  confulted  by  Tarquinius  con¬
cerning  the  building  of  a  temple,
ii.  134.

; —  are  confulted  by  him  concerning
the  purchafe  of  the  Sibylline  ora¬
cles,  ii.  262.

•*—  they,  together  with  the  pontiffs,
appoint  the  king  of  lacrifices,  ii.

3J3'

— -  are  prefent  at  the  enacting  of  laws,
iv.  192,  238.

—  the  moft  celebrated  among  them
was  Attius  Navius,  ii.  135.

— -  augural  divifions  of  places,  ii.
136.

—  teachers  of  the  augural  art,  ii.

*37-

— - •  great  difficulties  are  undertaken
by  the  affi dance  of  favourable
auguries,  ii.  356.

—  a  controverfy  is  decided  by  augury,
i.  200.

the  eaftern  parts  of  the  heavens
were  efteemed  the  moft  proper  for
auguries,  i.  229,30.

— -  the  ceremony  of  augurs  is  pre-
ferved  only  for  form  lake  in  can-
vaffing  for  magiftracies,  i.  231.

r—  Tanaquil,  the  wife  of  Tarquinius


the  TEX  T.

Prifcus,  (killed  in  the  art  of  augury,

ii.  100.

—  Tyrrhenian  augurs,  the  moft
knowing  in  meteors,  etc.  iv.  10.

Augurinus.  See  Minucius.

Aulus  ( Balbus )  is  appointed  one  of  the
deputies  fent  to  the  feceders,  iii.

104..

Angujlus  Cafar  puts  an  end  to  the  ci¬
vil  war,  i.  18,  19.

Aurunci ,  a  people  of  Italy,  tall,  ro-
buft,  fierce,  and  warlike,  i.  48.

iii.  51.

—  Inhabit  the  fineft  plains  of  Cam¬
pania,  iii.  50.

—  demand  the  Ecetranian  territo¬
ries  of  the  Romans,  ib.

—  arefubduedby  Servilius,  iii. 51,  5 2,
Aurufpex.  See  Augurs.

Aufones ,  being  conquered  by  the
Iapyges,  remove  to  Sicily,  i.  51.
Aufonia ,  the  ancient  name  of  Italy,
i.  80.

—  Aufonian  gulph,  afterwards  called
the  Tyrrhenian  bay,  i.  31.

Axes,  and  rods  borne  by  twelve  lidlors
before  Romulus,  i.  277.

—  twelve  axes  carried  before  the  con¬
fute,  ii.  3  13.

. —  the  confute  change  the  axes  and.
rods  every  month,  ib.

—  Valerius  takes  the  axes  from  the
rods,  and  orders  the  axes  to  be  ufed
abroad  in  time  of  war,  or  over
conquered  nations  ;  and  the  rods
to  be  ufed  at  home  in  time  of  peace,
ii-  343’  4-

—  the  didlator  commands  the  axes
with  the  rods  to.  be  borne  before
him  in  the  city,  ii.  434.

• —  Cincinnati^,  the  didlator,  has
twenty  four  axes,  and  as  many  rods
carried  before  him,  iv.  175.

—  the  axes  were  lowered  when  an  in¬
ferior  magiftrate  met  a  fuperior,

111..  352.


whether


INDEX  to

—  whether  the  twelve  axes  were  bor¬
rowed  from  the  Tyrrhenians,  and
at  what  time,  ii.  120,  1.

—  to  behead  with  an  ax,  i.  277.  iv.

iji.

B.

Babylon  -,  the  walls  of  Babylon,  ii.
196.

—  the  beauty  of  the  territory  belong¬
ing  to  Babylon,  i.  80.

Bacchanalia,  Athenian  feafts,  iii.  2.81.

Bacchiad#,  Damaratus  defcendedfrom
that  family,  ii.  97.

Bacchus,  his  adventures,  i.  257,8.
Poftumius,  the  dictator,  having
made  a  vow,  builds  a  temple  to
Bacchus,  Ceres,  and  Proferpine,
iii.  27.

—  which  temple  is  dedicated,  iii.
144.

Baggage,  belonging  to  a  camp,  fold
by  the  quasftors,  ii.  364.

Bail ;  an  arraigned  perfon,  upon  giving
bail,  is  difcharged  till  the  day  of
trial,  iv.  143.

Balbus.  See  Aulus.

Ballot  boxes.  See  Urns.

Banijhed  perfons  were  interdicted  fire
and  water,  ii.  165.

Barbatus.  See  Horalius.

Barley  \  offerings  of  barley  meal  and
fait  in  facrifices,  i.  268,  9.

• —  is  efteemed  the  moft  ancient  grain
by  the  Greeks,  i.  268.

Barrennefs  ',  Spurius  Carvilius  was  the
firft  Roman,  who  divorced  his  wife
on  account  of  barrennefs  j  not
without  the  difguft  of  the  people,
i.  271.

Bajket  bearers,  i.  48,  261.

—  firft  fruits  offered  in  bafkets,  i.
264.

Batia ,  its  fituation,  i.  37.

Battea,  daughter  of  Teucrus,  andfe-
cond  wife  of  Dardanus,  i.i  13,142.


the  TEXT.  389

Battle  with  the  Barbarians,  iii.  155.

—  which  was  the  greateft  of  all  bat¬
tles,  iv.  23.

—  a  battle  put  off  by  unlucky  omens,
iv.  100,  1.

Beam  \  the  Sifter’s  Beam,  ii.  49.

Beech-tree  \  Gracchus  Cloelius,  gene¬
ral  of  the  fEqui,  bids  the  Roman
embaffadors  add  refs  themfeives  to
a  neighbouring  beech-tree,  iv.  1 73,

,  Begging ;  no  begging  under  the  co¬
lor  of  religion,  i.  258.

Beheading  with  an  ax,  i.  277.  iv.171.

Bellutus .  See  Sicinius.

Benefits  ought  not  to  be  buried  with
the  perfons  of  benefaClors,  ii.  159.

Betrothed',  a  lover  flies  to  the  relief
of  his  betrothed  wife,  iv.  294.

Biers  adorned  with  garlands  and  rib¬
bands,  iv.  312.

Births monftrous  births  put  to  death,
i.  250,  1.

Bitumen,  and  pitch,  veffels  filled  with
them  are  fet  on  fire,  and  thrown  by
flings  amongft  the  enemy,  who  had
poffeffed  the  capitol,  iv.  160.

Blood',  the  fhedding  of  civil  blood
attoned  by  luflration,  ii.  403.

Boarium.  See  Ox  jnarket.

Boats ',  a  bridge  of  Boats  made  ufc
of  in  paffing  rivers,  ii.  112.

—  boats  filled  with  pitch  in  order  to
burn  a  bridge,  ii.  ib.

Bolani,  their  city  taken,  plundered,
and  burnt  by  Marcius,  iii.  307,  8.

Books, holy  and  fecret  books,  iv.  37 6.

—  Sibylline  books.  See  Sibylline.

Booty,  taken  from  the  enemy,  is  given

to  the  people  bylaw,  iii.  251.

—  the  booty  is  fold  by  the  quaeftors,
and  the  produce  of  it  carried  into
the  treafury,  iii.  251.

—  Ocrifia,  a  female  captive,  is  feleCt-
ed  out  of  the  booty,  and  given  to
Tarquinius,  ii.  145.

—  facrifices,  and  games  are  celebrat-

E  e  e  2  cd.


390  INDEX  to

ed,  and  temples  built,  with  the
tenths  of  the  booty,  iii.  27,  144.

—  the  braveft  warriour  is  honoured
with  the  firft  fruits  of  the  booty,
iii.  143.  See  Spoils.

Born.  See  Lncina.

Bovillte ,  the  chief  town  of  the  Latines,
taken  by  Marcius,  iii.  31 1,  12.

Bovillani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

Boundaries ,  Tt^ovzc,  i.  362.

—  the  law  of  Numa  concerning
boundaries,  ib.

—  the  punifhment  of  taking  away,
or  removing  boundaries,  i.  362.

—  facrifices  offered  unto  them,  ib.

—  Terminus  will  not  be  removed,
d-  134,  5-

• —  the  powers  which  prefided  over
boundaries,  i.  362.

- —  Terminalia,  or  the  feftival  of
boundaries,  ib,

• —  the  boundaries  of  the  public  lands
diftinguifhed  by  handfome  pillars,
iii.  402.

Bowls ,  and  tables,  a  vidtorious  army
received  with  them,  ii.  338.

Boxing  matches  j  Irus  and  Ulyffes,
their  boxing,  iii.  270.

Boys,  *and  girls  affiftants  at  the  facri¬
fices,  i.  261.

— -  the  education  of  boys  is  rendered
effeminate  by  Ariftodemus,  iii.
164,  5.

Bracelets ,  golden,  iv.  201.

Bride  cake,  a  marriage  ceremony  call¬
ed  fo  from  the  participation  of
bread,  i.  269.

Bridge ,  made  of  boats  for  the  croffing
of  rivers,  ii.  1 1 2.

—  the  holy  bridge  built  of  wood,
which  the  pontifs  had  the  care  of,

*■  3r9-

—r  a  bridge  of  wood  fir  ft  built  erofs
the  Tiber  by  Ancus  Marcius,  ii.
96.


the  TEX  T.

—  is  cut  away  from  the  city,  ii.  350^

—  the  bridge,  which  joined  the  Sa¬
bine,  and  the  Tyrrhenian  camps*
fet  on  fire,  ii.  1 12.

Brujhwood ',  faggots  made  of  brufh-
wood  are  piled  up  to  a  great  height,
and  fet  on  fire,  in  order  to  burn  the
citadel  near  the  capitol,  which  had

•  been  taken  by  Appius  Herdonius,
iv.  160.

Brutus ,  HAiS/o?,  why  L.  Junius  ac¬
quired  that  furname,  ii.  270.

—  L.  Junius,  a  plebeian,  takes  upon
him  the  name  of  Brutus,  iii.  105.

—  whether  the  firft  Brutus  left  any
pofterity,  ii.  341,  2.

See  more  relating  to  Brutus,  under
the  article  Junius.

Bubetani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii..
409.

Bucklers',  Argolic  bucklers,  i.  47.

— -  fhields,  inftead  of  Bucklers,  are
given  to  the  centuries  of  the  fecond
dafs,  ii.  176.

— ^  bucklers  of  the  Salii,  i.  354.

- —  what  bucklers  the  facrificers  of
the  Curetes  carried,  i.  352,  3.
See  Shields.

Bull  •,  a  fingle  bull  is  offered  in  com¬
mon  by  all  the  Latin  cities,  ii.
241.

—  a  brazen  bull,  ii..  372..

See  Suovetaurilia.

Burial.  See  Funeral.

Burr  e-reed,,  an  herb,  i.  38.

Burying:  alive,  i.  180,  347.

Buthrotum ,  its  fituation,  i.  115.

C.

Cabals,  held  in  private  houfes  are
generally  fufpicious,  iv.  368.

Cabani,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.  409..

Cabiri ,  the  tenths  vowed  to  them,  i.
55'

Gacus,  his  robbery  and  death,  i.  87,
96.

L.  Cacilius


INDEX  to

L.  Cacilius  Metellus ,  his  triumph,  and
zeal  in  faving  the  veflels,  and  ftatue
of  Vefta  in  the  capitol,  i.  344.

L.  Cadicius ,  a  tribune  of  the  people,
cites  Sp.  Servilius,  a  confular  per-
fon,  to  trial,  iv.  54.

Ctelian  hill ,  fo  called  from  Caelius  the
Tyrrhenian,  i.  288.

—  contiguous  to  mount  Pallantine,
i.  312.

• —  is  added  to  the  city  by  Romulus
and  Tatius,  ib.

—  is  included  within  the  walls  of  the
citybyTullus  Holfilius,  ii.  3.

Galimontanus.  See  Virginias.

C<elus  caftrated,  i.  257.

Ccenina ,  its  fituation,  i.  186.

—  formerly  taken  by  the  Oenotri,  or
Aborigines  from  the  Siceli,  i.  288.

—  is  taken  by  Romulus,  i.  283.

• —  and  made  a  colony  of  the  Romans,
i.  288.

Ccere ,  formerly  called  Agylla,  i.  47.

—  befieged  by  Tarquinius,  ii.  115.  •

Caretani  confpire  with  the  Veientes

againft  the  Romans,  ii.  202.

Cafar.  See  Julius.

CdiJ'o.  See  Fabius.

Cajeta ,  the  name  of  a  promontory,  i.
123.

Cake.  See  Bride :  Barley.

Calf ,  AxfAxAi ?,  i.  79*

Calliades ,  archon  at  Athens,  iv.  1,  2.

Callias ,  archon  at  Athens,  iii.  152.
iv.  179.

Callias ,  the  hiftorian,  i.  165.

Callirhoe ,  daughter  of  Oceanus,  i.  60.

Cdlirhoe ,  daughter  of  Scamandrus,  i.
1 42.

Callithea ,  daughter  of  Chorasus,  i.  60.

Calpetus  Silvius ,  king  of  Alba,  i.  158.

Calpurnius.  See  Ptfo.

Camerini  are  conquered  by  Romulus,
and  Tatius,  i.  313.

. —  fubmit  themfelves  to  Tarquinius
Prifcus,  ii.  106.


the  TEXT.  391:

—  fupport  the  expelled  Tarquinii
againft  the  Romans,  ii.  346.

■ —  the  fugitive  Camerini  accufe  the
Romans  in  the  aflembly  held  at
Ferentinum,  ii.  391.

Camermus  ( Sulpicius )  is  appointed  one
of  the  deputies  fent  to  the  feceders,
iii.  104.

Cameria,  built  by  the  Albans,  i.

3 1 3*

• —  is  made  a  colony  of  Rome,  ib.

■ —  fu rrenders  to  Tarquinius  Prifcus,
ii.  106.

—  at  the  inftigation  of  Sextus  Tar¬
quinius  it  revolts  from  the  Ro-,
mans,  ii.  373.

• —  is  taken  and  rafed,  ii.  389.

Camilli ,  K xbcoAoi,  i.  262.

Campania ,  wavering  in  their  afteeftions
to  the  Romans,  iii.  77.

—  the  Campani  affift  the  Cumaean
exiles  againft  Ariftodemus,  iii.  166.

—  the  plains  of  Campania,  i.  48.

■ —  are  very  fruitful,  i.  82.

—  the  Cumaean  territories  were  the
moft  fertil  parts  of  the  Campanian
plains,  iii.  155.

Campus  Martius ,  the  field  where  the
comitia  were  held,  iii.  244.

—  appointed  likewife  for  the  creation
of  magiftrates,  ii.  295,  and  332.

—  the  comitia  centuriata  were  held
in  the  campus  Martius,  iii.  244.  .

Canal  round  the  circus  maximus,  ii.

13.1*

Cannes,  the  defeat  there,  i.  256.

C.  Canuleius ,  a  tribune  of  the  people,
fpeaks  in  the  fenate  concerning  the
laws  for  communicating  the  conful-
fhip  with  the  Plebeians,  iv.  369.

Cap',  an  eagle  takes  the  cap  of  Tar¬
quinius  from  his  head,  and  replaces
it,  ii.  99.

• —  the  caps,  or  mitres  of  the  Salii,  i.

352*

—  a  large  train  of  men  with  caps  in

a  funeral


392  I  N  D  E  X  to

a  funeral  proceffion,  ii.  194.
Capena ,  a  gate  at  Rome,  iii.  288.
■Capet US)  king  of  Alba,  i.  158.
Capital  crimes  determined  by  the  peo¬
ple,  ii.  47.

■Capitol)  fcarce  a  ftadium  from  the
Tiber,  iv.  155.

—  the  land  about  it  is  levelled,  i.

3 12.

Garment  alls,  the  holy  gate  of  the  Ca¬
pitol,  is  always  open  by  the  di¬
rection  of  fome  oracle,  iv.  155.

—  a  fortrefs  contiguous  to  the  ca-
pitol,  iv.  155.

—  the  fortrels  and  capitol  are  fortified
when  a  fiege  is  apprehended,  iii.
3H-

— .  the  capitol  and  fortrefs  are  gar-
rifoned  during  a  tumult,  iv.

3°7*

—  the  capitol  is  feized  by  the  tri¬
bunes,  and  people  in  a  fedition,  iv.
88..

Capitoline  hill ,  formerly  called  Sa-
turnius,  i.  76.

—  and  alfo  Tarpeius,  ii.  134.

* —  is  called  Capitoline,  becaufe  Ca¬
put)  a  head  was  found  there,  ii.
256,  and  259.

.. —  is  fortified  by  Romulus,  i.  290.

—  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Feretrius
ftands  upon  the  top  of  the  Capito¬
line  hill,  i.  285.

~~  the  building  of  the  Capitoline
temple  is  begun  by  Tarquinius
Prifcus,  ii.  256.

—  continued  by  Tarquinius  Super¬
bus,  ii.  259.

— -  and  confecrated  by  M.  Horatius,
ii.  366.

—  the  length  and  width  of  it,  ii.
260,  1.

~  after  it  had  been  burnt,  is  rebuilt
in  the  fame  manner  it  was  before,
ii.  261.

when  it  was  burnt,  ii.  263.


the  TEXT.

' — •  the  temple  of  Saturn  upon  the  ca¬
pitoline  hill,  iii.  2.

Capitolinus.  See  Quintius.

Capua ,  in  Italy,  i.  167.

Capy<«)  in  Arcadia,  i.  no.

—  fo  called  from  Capys ,  i.  no.

Capys ,  the  Trojan,  i.  no,  142.

• —  the  fon  of  Affaracus,  ib.

Capys  SilviuS)  king  of  Alba,  i.  158.

Car  dianus  {Hieronymus)  an  hiflorian,
i.  15.

Caring)  a  ftreet  at  Rome,  i.  15 1.

Carmenta,  or  Carmentis,  called  in
Greek  or  more  com¬
monly  i.  69.

—  the  annual  facrifices  of  Carmenta
are  offered  under  the  Capitoline
hill,  i.  71.

Carmentalis.  See  Capitol.

Cart-)  to  rally  people  from  a  cart  in
proceffions,  iii.  274.

—  heaps  of  dead  bodies  carried  out
in  carts,  during  a  peftilence,  iv.
121.

Carthage)  and  Rome  built  at  the  fame
time,  according  to  Timaeus,  i.
168,  9.

Carthage  contends  again  for  empire,
i.  255.  _  •

Carthaginians  driven  off  the  fea,  i.  9.

—  their  facrifices,  i.  85.

Sp.  Carvilius ,  the  firft  Roman,  who
divorces  his  wife  on  account  of
barrennefs  ;  not  without  the  dif-
guft  of  the  people,  i.  271.

Cajjander)  king  of  Macedon,  i.  112.

Sp:  Cajjius  Vifcellinus ,  conful,  ii.  388.

—  triumphs  over  the  Sabines,  ib.

—  is  appointed  general  of  the  horfe
by  T.  Lartius,  the  dictator,  ii.
434-

—  he  receives  part  of  the  army  from
the  dictator,  ii.  435.

—  Caffius  would  have  the  price  of
the  corn,  which  had  been  given  by
Gelo,  and  divided  among  the  peo¬
ple,


INDEX  to

pie,  to  be  reftored  to  the  purchafers,
iii.  397.

—  fpeaks  feverely  for  chaftifing  the
revolt  of  the  Latines,  iii.  32.

—  is  created  fecond  time  conful  by
the  people,  iii.  75.

—  is  allotted  to  take  charge  of  the
city,  iii.  138.

—  dedicates  the  temple  of  Ceres,
Bacchus,  and  Proferpine,  iii.  144.

—  is  third  time  conful,  iii.  391.

—  marches  againfl  the  Hernici  and
Volfci,  iii.  392.

—  alienates  the  fenate  by  his  ambi¬
tious  defign  in  demanding  a  tri¬
umph,  and  for  his  too  gentle  treat¬
ment  of  the  Hernici,  iii.  394.

— .  recounts  his  exploits  before  an  af-
fembly  of  the  people,  iii.  395.

—  endeavours  to  obtain  the  palling
of  the  Agrarian  law  by  compul-
fion,  iii.  400.

—  is  accufed  of  aiming  at  tyranny,
iii.  408.

—  is  capitally  condemned  by  the  peo¬
ple,  and  thrown  down  theTarpeian
rock,  iii.  41 1.

■ —  whether  he  was  accufed  and  put  to
death  by  his  father,  iii.  412,  13.

—  why  he  was  put  to  death  by  the
patricians,  according  to  Siccius
Dentatus,  iv.  204.

—  his  houfe  is  demolifhed,  and  his
goods  confifcated,  iii.  414.

—  his  fons  are  neither  baniffied,  nor
deprived  of  their  eftates,  or  their
honors,  on  account  of  their  father’s
crimes,  iii.  414,  15-

—  the  people  are  forry  for  having
condemned  CalTius,  iii.  419.

Qijlor  and  Pollux,  their  fhape  and
age,  iii.  20,  1.

_ many  monuments  of  their  mani-

feftation  at  Rome-,  namely  a  tem¬
ple,  a  fountain,  ceremonies,  and
annual  games,  iii.  21.


the  TEX  T.  393

Cato.  See  Porcius.

Cattle  infefted  with  a  diftemper,  iv.
231.

—  fome  cattle,  let  out  of  a  fortrefs  to
feed,  are  taken,  ii.  353.

—  a  facrifice  of  cattle  at  the  funerals
of  princes  and  generals,  iii.  377.

Caucafius ,  or  rather  Thaumafius,  a
mountain  of  Arcadia,  i.  139.

Cauls  of  net  work  for  the  hair,  iii.
1 65.

Caufeways ,  or  paved  ways,  one  of  the
moil  magnificent  buildings  at
Rome,  ii.  129.

Celeres ,  their  name  and  function,  i.
245,  6.

—  borrowed  from  the  Lacedemo¬
nians,  i.  248.

—  Celeres  oi  iroipoi  v.cu  roi%etf  £7ri  roc,
t^yoc,  i.  246.

—  the  commanders  of  the  Celeres,
and  their  Office,  i.  340.

—  the  command  of  the  Celeres  given
to  Brutus  by  Tarquinius,  ii.  275,  6.

— .  Brutus  lays  down  that  command,
ii.  281.

Celt  a  offer  human  facrifices  to  Sa¬
turn,  i.  85.

—  which  facrifices  are  aboliffied  by
Hercules,  i.  85.

—  drive  the  Tyrrhenians  from  the
country  near  the  Ionian  gulph,  iii.

5-

Cenfers  ufed  in  proceffions,  iii.  275.

Cenfors  put  out  the  fewers  to  be
cleanfed  and  repaired,  ii.  130.

— .  upon  what  condition  they  permit

.  Carvilius  to  divorce  his  Wife,  i.
271 .

Cenforii  commentariiy  or  the  records
of  the  cenfors,  i.  171,  2.

Cenfus  of  the  Romans,  i.  172.

—  inftituted  by  Tullius,  ii.  171— -
188.

—  why  inftituted,  iv.  377.

~  the  order,  cenfus,  centuries,  and

arms


394  INDEX  to

arms  of  the  firft  clafs,  ii.  175..

—  the  fame  afterwards  for  the  other
clafles,  ib.  to  108.

—  the  number  of  the  firft  cenfus,  ii.
190.

—  the  cenfus  revived  by  the  confuls,

ii.  344.

—  in  which  cenfus  the  number  of  ci¬
tizens  amounted  to  130,000,  ib.

—  a  cenfus  appointed  by  T.  Lartius,
the  firft  dictator,  ii.  434,  5.

—  another  cenfus,  261  years  from  the
building  of  Rome,  in  which  the
number  amounted  to  110,000,

iii.  147.

- —  another,  in  which  thofe  of  the  mi¬
litary  age  amounted  to  above
110,000,  iv.  48.

—  another,  in  which  there  were
found  a  little  more  than  133,000,

iv.  69.

—  no  cenfus  renewed  for  feventeen
years  together,  iv.  377.

—  many  remove  from  Rome  in  or¬
der  to  avoid  the  cenfus,  ib.

—  the  punifhment  of  thofe  who  neg¬
lected  the  cenfus,  ii.  434.

Centuriata.  See  Comitia .

Centuries  of  the  clafles  were  one  hun¬
dred  and  ninety  three,  iii.  244.

— .  the  193  centuries  diftributed  into
fix  clafles,  ib.

—  two  centuries  of  carpenters,  iii.
2  44*

■ —  the  century  of  hornblowers,  ii.
179.  iii.  245.

—  centuries  of  old  and  young  men  in
each  clafs,  ii.  1  77,  8.

—  the  fixth  century  feldom  called  to
give  their  votes,  ii.  1  86.  iii.  245.

Centurions ,  their  appointment,  ii.
179,  80.

—  had  the  command  of  the  holy  en-
figns,  iv.  159.

Cephalo ,  the  Gergithian,  a  very  an¬
cient  writer,  i.  no,  163.


the  TEX  T.i

Ceremonies ;  the  abftemious  ceremo¬
nies  of  Ceres,  i.  74.

—  the  ceremonies  of  lacrifices  among
the  Greeks,  iii.  2,  3.

—  ceremonies,  difturbed  by  the  in-
curfion  of  an  enemy,  are  renewed
with  double  magnificence,  iii.
4  9*

—  the  fupremacy  of  ceremonies  be¬
longed  to  the  king,  i.  248.

—  the  fuperintendence  of  the  com-*
mon  ceremonies  in  the  Latin  fefti-
vals  belonged  to  the  Romans,  ii.
200.

foreign  ceremonies  never  adopted
by  public  authority  at  Rome,  i.
258.

—  ceremonies  appointed  by  Numa,

»•  339-

Ceres  teaches  agriculture  to  Triptole-
mus,  i.  31,  2.

—  her  temple  and  rites,  i.  73,  4.

—  Poftumius,  the  didtator,  accord¬
ing  to  his  vow  builds  a  temple  to
Ceres,  Bacchus,  and  Proferpine,
iii.  27.

—  which  temple  is  dedicated  by
Sp.  Caflius,  iii.  144.

—  brazen  ftatues  eredted  to  Ceres,

iii.  414.

—  the  goods  of  thofe,  who  aflaulted
a  tribune,  were,  confecrated  to
Ceres,  iii.  136.

—  and  of  thofe  likewife,  who  oppofed
them  in  the  execution  of  their  office,

iv.  210.

P.  CejiiuSy  conful,  iv.  232.

—  from  being  conful  is  made  a  de¬
cemvir,  iv.  236.

Cetia,  taken  by  Marti  us,  iii.  339.
Chareploanes ,  archon  at  Athens,  iv.
229.

Ch<er onea,  the  defeat  there,  i.  255.
Chair ,  confular,  iii.  428.

• —  an  ivory  chair  placed  for  the  confuls
when  they  fit  in  judgment,  ii.  279.

Chal-


INDEX  to

Chalcidenfes ,  a  colony  of  them  build
Cumae,  iii.  155.

Chalices ,  little  earthen  chalices,  i.  164.

Characters  ;  a  tripod  infcribed  with
ancient  chandlers,  i.  45.

—  a  fhield  infcribed  with  them,  ii.
255>  6\

• — •  and  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  Diana,
ii.  200.

Chares ,  archon  at  Athens,  iv.  69.

Chariots  \  Romulus  dedicates  a  brazen
chariot,  and  fourhorfes  to  Vulcan,
i.  318.

— .  royal  chariots  ufed  in  the  greater
triumph,  ii.  384.

—  chariots  ufed  in  a  procefiion  be¬
fore  the  games,  iii.  269,

—  chariot  races,  iii.  279.

—  Tuliia  orders  her  chariot  to  be
driven  over  her  father’s  body,  ii.  225

—  Fufetius  torne  to  pieces  by  cha¬
riots,  ii.  71.

—  Lucre  da  drives  to  Rome  in  a  cha¬
riot,  ii.  268.

_ Manius  Tullius,  falling  from  his

chariot,  during  a  procefiion,  dies
before  the  expiration  of  his  conful-
fhip,  ii.  403,  4.

Charondas ,  his  law  concerning  chil¬
dren,  i.  272.

Charops,  archon  at  Athens,  i.  162.

Cheefe  ufed  in  the  Latin  feftivals,  ii.
241.

Che/ls  of  (tone  for  keeping  the  Sibyl¬
line  oracles,  ii.  263.

Children  *,  women  feldom  bear  chil¬
dren  after  they  are  fifty  years  of
of  age,  ii.  155.

—  children  not  put  to  death  by  the
Aborigines,  i.  39.

—  thofe  were  compellable  to  beget
children  who  were  of  age  to  do  it,
iv.  42.

See  Parents.

Choraus  the  father  of  Callithea,  i.  60.

Chortaei ,  hairy  veils,  iii.  274.

Vol.  IV.


the  T  E  X  T.


Chronology  of  the  Romans  redu  .ed  to
that  of  the  Greeks,  i.  169.

Chryfes ,  daughter  of  Palas,  and  wife
of  Dardanus,  i.  139.

— -  what  dowry  fhe  brought  to  Dar¬
danus,  as  the  gift  of  Minerva,  i.

I53‘

Cinathion ,  a  promontory  of  Pelopon-
nefus,  fo  called  from  one  of  the
companions  of  fEneas,  whofe  name
was  Cinasthus,  and  was  buried  on
that  place,  i.  1 13.

L.  Cincius ,  an  hiflorian,  i.  16.

Cincinnatus.  See  L.  Quintius.

CinClures  ufed  by  the  ancient  comba¬
tants,  iii.  269,  70.

Qirajitts ,  father  of  Mac  an,  i.  42.

Circaenfes ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409 .

Circe,  daughter  of  the  Sun  •,  where  fhe
dwelt,  ii.  264.

—  Telegonus,  fon  of  Circe  by  Ulyf-
fes,  ii.  233.

Circeii ,  by  whom,  and  where  founded,
and  from  whence  fo  called,  ii.
264.

—  furrenders  to  Marcius,  iii.  302.'

Circus ,  the  dimenfions  of  it,  ii.  130, 1.

—  Circus  Maximus,  by  whom  built
and  adorned,  where,  and  in  what
manner,  ii.  130.

- —  in  the  end  of  the  Circus  Maximus
flood  the  temple  of  Ceres,  Bac¬
chus,  and  Proferpine,  iii.  144.

Citadel  contiguous  to  the  capitol,  iv.
1 55-

Citizens  (Roman)  in  what  manner
they  were  divided  by  Romulus,  i.
233.

- —  how  Servius  Tullius  difcovered
their  number,  fex,  and  age,  ii.  174.

—  by  what  means  he  encreafed  their
number,  ii.  190.

—  Tullius  would  have  the  rights  of
citizens  to  be  equal,  ii.  16 1.

_  what  common  rights  the  ci-
F  f  f  tizens


396  INDEX  to

tizens  ought  to  have,  iii.  2x2.  ,

*—  a  citizen  could  not  be  put  to
death,  without  a  trial,  ii.  4 6.

■ —  it  was  not  lawful  for  any  one  to
lay  hands  on  the  daughter  of  a  ci¬
tizen,  iv.  294.  ,  .

—  a  Roman  citizen  was  not  allowed
to  keep  a  tavern,  or  exercife  any
mechanical  trade,  i.  275.  iv.  48.

— -  the  citizens  defert  the  city  under
the  deqemvirs,  iv.  282.

-  the  preferver  of  ,a  citizen  was
crowned,  iii.  327.

City  is  like  an  individual  man,  ii.

4I9*  4

—  is  compared  to  the  human  body,

iii.  124.

what  things  are  the  rnoft  valuable
in  a  city,  i.  223,  4.  ]

—  in  what  the  glory  of  cities  confifts,
ii.  24,  5.

<—  by  vjhat  methods  a  city  is  rendered
more  large  and  auguft,  i.  337,

8.

by  what  means  a  city  is  preferved,
i.  22 3>  4*

—  a  city  is  rendered  pious,  juft,  mo¬
derate,  and  warlike  by  an  emulation
of  worthy  pijirfuits,  i.  -25b.

—  a  city  ought  to  change  ijts.conducft
as  circumftances  change,  iv.  227,

—  in  a  city  ther.e  are  many  ranks  of
people,  iii.,  130.

. —  the  affqtied  part  of  a  city  fhould
not  always  be  cut. oft',  iii.  82.

; —  a  city  cannot  buffer  a  greater  mif-
fortune  than  to  lofe  her  greateft
men  by  degrees,  iv.  227.

•—  the  harmony  of  cities,  ii.  199.

—  how  it  may  be  maintained,  i.
224*  l  1

a  city  weakened  by  domeftic  war
may  be  eafily  deftroyed,  iii.  37.
a  city  is  oftener  fubverted  by  the
more  powerful,  than  by  the  weaker
parties,  ii.  417.  . .


the  T  ;E  X  T.

—  the  di&atorfhip  is  a  great  re¬
lief  to  a  defperate  city,  ii.  437.

—  every  Greek  city  had  its  own  king,
ii.  431.

—  whether  the  rights  of  a  city  may
be  communicated  to  foreigners,  i.
254,  5.

—  the  communication  of  the  rights
of  a  city  carries  more  glory  than
fhame,  ii.  24.

—  how  conquered  cities  fhould  be
treated,  i.  252.

1 —  whether  the  youth  of  a  conquered
city  fhould  be  put  to  the  fword,  i.
252,  3-

—  the  Romans  were  moderate  in
punifhing  conquered  cities,  ii.

378-

— •  ploughing  round  the  place  where  a
city  was  defigned  to  be  built,  i.
204.

■ —  reprefentations  of  conquered  cities
carried  in  a  funeral  proceftion,  iii.
377-

See  Qome.  Governor.

Civil  commotions,  and  feditions;  the
caufes,  and  fpeeches  which  com-
pofed  them,  ought  to  be  related
by  an  hiftorian,  iii.  260.

ClafJeS)  KA»jcr«f,  ii.  180.

■ —  the  fix  daffies  of  centuries,  in
1 75-

—  diftinguilhed  by  Servius  Tullius
according  to  their  cenfus,  and  the
order,  and  arms  he  aftigned  to
the  firft  five,  ii,  175 — 1 8 1 .

—  the  daffies  in  the  comma  are  cited
by  the  cryer  in  their  order  to  give
their  votes  for  the  future  confuls,
iv.  162.

Claudian  family  derive  their  origin
from  Regillum,  a  Sabine  city,  iv.
271.

—  the  Claudian  tribe,  ii.  374.

Appius  Claudius*  Sabinus  affirms  that

the  abolition  of  debts  will  not

purge


INDEX  to

«  X.  ,•*.  *  *

purge  the  city,cjf  fedjtion,  iL|i6.

• —  is  chofen  conuiL  .ifi.  ,2p.

• — difagrees  with  'hj£  ..qollegpe,  in.
S'7>8.  .

— -  expoftulates  with  his  collegue  for
his  patronage  of. the  poor,  iii.  38.

—  flies  from  the  forum  in  order. to
avoid  the  fury  of  the  people,  iii.  42.

—  beheads  three  hundred  Volfqian

hoftages  for  the  perfidy  of  their
nation,  iii.  47.  .  1

—  hinders  his  coliegue  from  obtain¬
ing  a  triumph,  ib.

—  what  opinion  he  delivered  in  or¬
der  to  appeafe  the  foreign  and
domeftic  commotions,  iii.  58.

—  is  .called  by  Valerius  an  enemy  of

the  people,  and  a  favourer  of  the
oligarchy,  iii.  88.  ,  .>

— r  anthers .  the  accufations.  of  Vale¬
rius,  ib.  .  :

—  his  opinion  for  bringing  back  the,
people,'  iii.  102.

— -  oppofes  the  demands  of  the  fe-
ceders,  iii.  133.  ,  j

~  is  praifed  by  C.  Marcius,  iii.

—  diiTuades  the  fenate  from  deliver¬
ing  the  parri  clans  to  be  tried  by
thp, people,  hi,  221.

• — oppofes  Catiius  in  the  Agrarian
.  law,  iii,  397.

• —  his  fpeech  concerning  the  Agra¬
rian  law,  iii.  401,  2.
is  highly  praifed  by  A.  Semp.
Atfatinus  for  his  great  prudence,
and  courage,  in.  403.

—  what  advice  he  offered  for  rendering,

ineffectual  the  tribunjtian  power,
iv.  3.  ;  •  '  )

Appius  Claudius ,  the  fon  of  Appius,  is
encouraged  by  the  patricians  to
ftand  for  the  confulfhip-,  and,tho’
abfent,  and  unwilling,  is  created
copful,  iv.  78.

—  makes  a  levere  fpeech  againfi:  the


the  -T  E  X  T.

tribunes,  -  iv.  81,  3,

—  mod  giievoufiy  exafpefates  the.
people  by  a  rough  and  imperious
inveCtive,  ib.

—  is  feverely  reprimanded  by  C.
LaeCtorius,  a  tribune  of  the  peo¬
ple,  iv.  85.

—  in  the  Volfciap,  war  he  experiences
the  contumacy  of  his  army,  iv,
90,  1.

—  punifhes  the  contumacious  foldiers
with  great  feverity,  iv.  92.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  divifion

of  the  public  lands,  iv.  94.  .  ,

—  is  cited,  by  a  tribune  of  the  peo¬
ple,  to  take  his  trial  before  them,
iv.  99.

—  a  few  days  before  his  trial  he  put
himfelf  to  death,  iv,  99,  100.

Appius  Claudius,  nephew  of  Cains
Claudius  by  the  brother’s  fide,  iv.

259»  345-

—  is  appointed  conful,  iv.  233.

■ —  is  defirous  of  a  new  magiftracy,
ib.

— -  advifes  that  decemvirs  be  cheated
for  compiling  the  laws,  iv.  235.

—  is  created  a  decemvir,  iv.  236.

—  he  alone  gains  the  praife  flowing
from  the  conduft  of  the  whole  de-
cemvirate,  iv.  237.

—  is  again  created  a  decemvir,  iv.

2  39-

—  continues  in  the  decemvirate  for
the  third  year,  iv.  244.

—  refers  to  the  fenate  concerning  a
war  with  the  Sabirics,  and  Acqui,
iv.  253.

—  compoles  the  difturbances  ,in  the
fenate,  iv.  257,  8.

—  returns  no  anfwer  to  the  advice  of

t  -  <  \  J  1  1  •  i

his  uncle,  iv.  270.

«— *  decides  the  difpute  ip  the  fenate
in  favor  of  himfelf,  and  his  party,
iv.  2,80,  1.

—  is  left  with  Sp.  Oppius,  and  two

F  f  f  2  legions


398  INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


legions  to  govern  the  city,  iv.  284.

—  falls  defperately  in  love  with  Vir¬
ginia,  iv.  292.

—  in  what  manner  he  endeavours  to
corrupt  her  governeffes,  iv.  293.

—  is  more  and  more  in  love  with  her,
ib.

—  fends  for  Marcus  Claudius,  iv.  293.

—  pronounces  a  partial  fentence  a-
gainft  her,  iv.  307.

but  is  deprived  of  the  fruit  of  his
paffion,  and  is  oppofed  in  every
thing,  iv.  310.

—  fhuts  himfelf  up  in  his  houfe,  iv.

321- 1

dies  in  prifon,  iv.  341.

—  whether  he  hanged  himfelf,  ib.
Cams'  Claudius ,  fon  of  Appius,  iv.

187.

—  uncle  to  Appius  the  decemvir,  iv.

‘  259,  345.  _

—  what  political  principles  he  re¬
ceived  from  his  anceftors,  iv.  262.

—  his  determination  to  retire  to  Re-
gillum  during  the  decemvirate,  iv.
271.

—  adheres  to  that  determination,  iv.
282.

C.  Claudius ,  conful,  iv.  144.

—  his  fpeech  concerning  the  demands
of  Virginius,  one  ol  the  tribunes,
relating  to  of  their  inquring  into  a
pretended  confpiracy,  iv.  i  50.

—  he  advifes  the  patricians  to  march
with  their  clients  againfl  the  enemy,
without  the  adiftance  of  the  people,
iv.  158.

*■—  commands  the  guard  without  the
walls,  iv.  159.

is  againfl  doubling  the  number  of
*  the  tribunes,  iv.  186.

*—  what  advice  he  gives  to  Appius,
and  the  decemvirs  in  the  fenate,  iv.


his  fpeech  after  the  filence  of  Ap-*
pius.,  iv.  2  jo,  1,


—  leaves  the  city,  and  removes  to  the
Sabines,  iv.  282.

—  oppofes  the  granting  a  triumph  to
L.  Valerius,  and  M.  Horatius,  iv.

34  5*

—  is  of  opinion  that  the  people  ought
not  to  be  gratified  either  with  the
confullhip,  or  any  other  magiflracy,
iv.  366.

—  gives  the  fenate,  and  confuls  whole^
fome  advice,  iv.  367.

— -  oppofes  the  tribunes,  and  people
very  fbrenuou fly,  iv.  372.

M 1  Claudius ,  client  to  Appius  Clau¬
dius,  a  man  of  confummate  af-
furance,  iv.  293.

gives  the  reafon  for  his  apprehend¬
ing  Virginia,  iv.  294.

— -  endeavours  to  carry  her  off  by-
force,  but  is  obliged  to  quit  her,
iv.  301.

—  is  condemned  to  perpetual  banifh-
ment,  iv.  342.

Aftius  Claufus  removes  with  his  clients
from  the  Sabines  to  Rome,  ii.

373-

Clemency  to  be  ufed  rather  than  vio¬
lence  in  overcoming  our  adverfa-
ries,  iii.  204.

—  fometimes  even  a  tyrant  makes  ule
of  clemency,  ii.  255.

Cleonidas ,  the  Theban,  viiftor  at.  the
pic  games,  ii.  97.

Clients ,  their  duty,  i.  239.

—  numerous  clients  were  a  glory  and'
honor  to  illuftrious  families,  i.
240.

—  clientfhip,  the  laws  of  it,  i.  238.
See  Patrons.

Clcelia ,  at  the  head  of  the  hoflages,
makes  her  efcape  with  them,  ii.
362.

—  fhe  is  prefented  with  a  war  horfe
adorned  with  trappings,  and  ho¬
noured  with  a.  brazen  ftatue,  ii.

36 4,  5-


Cl  AH


INDEX  to

Clctlii  remove  From  Alba  to  Rome,
ii.  69.

— -  obftruft  the  Agrarian  law,  iv.
208.

—  upon  that  account  are  fined  by
the  people,  iv.  210.

Clcelius  ( Gracchus )  general  of  the
iEqui,  iv.  172.

—  returns  a  haughty  and  ignomini¬
ous  anfwer  to  the  Roman  embaf-
fadors,  iv.  172,  3.

■ —  bids  them  addrefs  themfelves  to  a

—  neighbouring  beech- tree,  ib.

—  artfully  furrounds  the  Roman
troops,  iv.  174.

—  is  beaten,  and  (hut  up  in  his  camp,
iv.  176.

—  is  led  in  chains  at  a  triumph,  iv.
178.

Clcelius  Siculus ,  conful,  is  advanced
to  the  adminiftration  of  domeftic
affairs,  on  account  of  his  gentle
difpofition,  ii.  405,.

- —  having  abdicated  the  confulfhip,
he,  as  interrex  appoints  T.  Lar-
tius,  dictator,  ii.  428.

—  receives  a  body  of  troops  from  the
didfator,  ii.  435.

—  takes  a  party  of  Latin  plunderers,
ii-  436*

T.  Ch'lius  Siculus^  is  appointed  a  mili¬
tary  tribune,  iv.  375.

Chilian  ditches,  ii.  7.  iii.  314.

• —  Marcius  incamps  there,  ib.

Cluilius  excites  the  Albans  againft  the
Romans,  ii.  4.

—  is  cut  off  in  a  private  and  fudden
manner,  ii.  8,  9.

Glufini ,  a  people  of  Tyrrhenia,  ii.
107.

Clymene ,  daughter  of  Oceanus,  i.  41.

Codes ,  why  the  furname  of  Horatius,
ii-  349*

from  whom  defeended,  ii.  349.

—  his  brave  exploit  at  the  bridge,  ib.

Codone ,  .daughter  of  Aineas,  i.  1 1 1.


the  TEX  T.

Cohorts ,  of  500,  iv.  117.

• —  of  600,  iv.  127.

—  of  800,  iv.  2I2.

Caefo  Fabius  fends  the  moft  va¬
liant  cohorts  to  the  relief  of  his  col-

legue,  iii.  425.

Collar j,  golden,  iv.  201.

Collatia  is  taken  by  Tarquinius,  and
receives  a  garrifon,  and  a  diftator,
ii.  104.

Collatinus,  from  whence  Egerius,  and
his  poflerity  acquired  the  furname
of  Collatinus,  ii.  266.

—  whether  L.  Tarquinius  Collatinus
was  the  fon  of  Egerios,  ib.

See  Junius.

Collegue  \  favor  to  be  fhewn  to  a  col-
legue,  ii.  330.

• — A.  Virginius  faithfully  efpoufes
his  collegue,  Spurius  Servilius,  iv.

63*

Colline  \  the  Colline  region,  ii.  169.

—  the  Colline  gate,  i.  347.

—  Tyrrhenians  beaten  at  the  Colline
gate,  iv.  47.

— -  Colline  Salii,  i.  351.

Colony  led  out  by  the  triumvirs,  iy,
108.

—  colonies  owe  that  refpedt  to  their
founders,  which  children  owe  to
their  parents,  ii.  14.

— ■  not  founded  on  truth,  or  juftice,

ii.  23.

—  fometimes  a  colony  has  command¬
ed  its  mother-city,  ii.  23.

See  Mother-city.

Combats  Siccius  overcomes  in  nine
frngle  combats,  iv.  201,  2.

—  a  fingle  combat  between  Aruns
Tarquinius  and  Brutus,  ii.  ^36.

—  between  Mamilius  and  iEbutius,

iii.  1 7.

Cominius  ( Pojtumus)  conful,  ii.  390.

—  is  created  fecond  time  conful  by
the  people,  iii.  75.

—  dedreates  the  temple  of  Saturn  on

the


I  N  D  E,X  to

•  I  -•  i  WJ  JL  s'.  J


the  Capitqlijie  hill,  .iii,  2,  3.
is  appointed  one  of  the  five  em-
baffadors  fent  to  Marcius,  iii.


—  marches  againfl  the  Volfci,  iii.
138.

—  takes  Longula,  iii.  138.

—  and  Polufca,  iii.  139.

— -  leaves  T.  Lartius  with  one  half  of
his  army  to  carry  on  the  fiege  of
Corioli,  while  he  himfelf  marches
with  the  other  againfl  the  Antiates,

iii.  140.

—  beats  them,  iii.  143.

—  rewards  Caius  Marcius,  iii.  143.

—  returns  home,  and  difbands  his
army,  iii.  144.

Comitia  in  what  the  curiata  differed
from  the  tributa  comitia,  iv.  76.

—  tributa  comitia  are  permitted  by
the  fenate  to  the  people,  inflead  of
the  centuriata,  iv.  85.

—  the  difference  between  the  curiata
and  centuriata  comitia,  ii.  184,5.

—  laws,  palfed  in  the  tributa  comi¬
tia,  were  equally  binding  with  tho.fe
paired  in  the  centuriata  comitia,

iv.  340.

—  the  comitia  held  in  the.  Campus
Martius,  iii.  244.

—  the  centuriata  comitia  are  appoint¬
ed  by  the  interrex  for  the  creation
of  confuls,  iii.  435,  6.

—  the  moll  confiderabie  perfbns  car¬
ried  every  queftion  in  the  centu¬
riata  comitia,  iii.  419.  iv.  340.

-~r.  the  decrees  of  the  centuriata  comi¬
tia  alone  were  looked  upon  as  va¬
lid  by  .the  patricians,  iv.  340.

—  thole  were  lawful  comitia,  to
which  numbeis.  were  fent  from
every  city  in  the  nation,  iii.  375.

— -  comitia,  in  which  the  votes  were
given  according  to  the  cenfus,  iii,

O  O  r


^44?  5*  "  yj

the  comitia  are  not  permitted  by


the  T  E  X  T.

the  tribunes  of  th,e  people,  iii.

434-

— -  heralds  call  the  people  to  the  co¬
mitia  flreet  by  flreet,  ii.  220*

—  in  the  tributa  comitia  the  people
were  fuperior  to  the  patricians,
iv.  340.

—  the  tributa  comitia  were  held  in-
Head  of- the  centuriata,  in  the  trial
of  Marcius,  iii.  246.

• —  a  law  enadled,  which  ordained  that
the  laws,  palfed  by  the  people  in
the  tributa  comitia,  fhould  bind  all
the  Romans,  iv.  339.

Commonwealth ,  three  forms  of  it,  i.
226.

—  commonwealth  rendered  pious,

juft,  temperate,  and  warlike  by  an
emulation  of  worthy  purfuits,  i.
256.  ;

—  commonwealth  compofed  of  mo¬
narchy,  and  ariftocracy,  iii.  290.

—  commonwealth,  compofed  or  mo¬
narchy,  ariftocracy,  and  democra¬
cy,  the. bell  of  all  governments,  iii.
23d,  7.

—  the  worfe  Part  of  a  common¬
wealth  fhould  not  be  gratified  at
the  expence  of  the  better,  ii.  4 17.

—  the  adminiftrationof  the  cops  mon¬
wealth  is  transferred  from  the  poor-
eft  to  the  richeft  citizens  by  Seryius
Tullius,  ii.  184,  5.  i,  :

Compacts  and  treaties,  in  what  man¬
ner  they  11  fed  to  be  ratified,  iii.
126,  7.

Compitalia ,  feafts  at  Rome,  the  time
and  foiemnity  of  them,  ii.  17,1.

■ —  Daves  were  free  duiing  their  cele¬
bration,  ib.

Cmpuljive  agreements  leidom  lafting,
in.  357..

Concord ,  an  exhortation  to  it,  ii.  199.

—  is  absolutely  neceffary  in  .time,  of
war,  iv. .260.  ,,

—  preferved  with  more  d.i’fitulty

among


©


I  N  D  E  X  to

among  many,  than  among  few,  iv.
187.'

Condemnation  ;  condemned  perfons
were  thrown  down  the  Tarpeian
rock,  iii.  41 1,  12.

1 —  their  fortunes  are  confifcated,  iv.

i.jlo:  <i  Buipi&V  —

Confarreatio.,  See  Marriage.

Confluence  of  rivers,  u.\fiz.  :

Conqueror ;  in  what  manner  he  was
received  by  the  people  after  a  fa¬
mous  viftory,  iv.  67.

— ■  Ariftodemus  is  received  with  a
general  joy,  and  applaufe,  iii.  161.
See  Victory.

Confcience  j  the  ding  of  an  evil  con-
fcience,  ii.  397.  •  •  ,v>  •

i^.  Confidius ,  a  tribune  of  the  people,
brings  T.  Menenius  to  a  trial  for
his  ill  conduit  in  Tyrrhenia,  iv.
52.

Confpiracy  j  a  confpiracy  again  ft  the
commonwealth,  in  order  to  reftore
the  tyrants,  ii.  321.

«—  a  confpiracy  of  the  flaves  againft
the  commonwealth  being  difcover-
ed,  they  are  crucified,  ii.  392,

3-

—  a  confpiracy  both  of  the  freed
men  and  flaves  againft  the  chief
men,  ii.  396.

—  the  manner  of  apprehending  thefe
conipirators,  ii.  401.

—  a  confpiracy,  in  which  many  are
concerned,  is  foon  difcovered,  ii.
12,  67,  82.

—  the  dilcovery  of  a  pretended  con¬
fpiracy  is  laid  by  the  tribunes  be¬
fore  the  fenate,  iv.  144.

—  the  tribunes  of  the  people  claim  to
themfelves  the  power  of  inquiring
into  that  confpiracy,  iv.  148.

— -  confpirators  put  to  death,  ii.  324,
5..:  u

Confualia ,  imroHgotleia,  a  feftival^  i.
'74,  280.


the  T  E  X  T..  401

Confuls ,  or  ? the  fame

as  uVaJo/,  ii.  282.

—  L.  Junius  Brutus,  and  L.  Tar-
quinius  Collatinus  are  the  firft  ap¬
pointed  confuls,  ii.  295.

—  the  confuls  are  invefted  with  the
regal  power,  ii.  309.

—  retain  fome,  and  difcard  others  of
the  royal  enfigns,  ii.  120,  1,  279,

V.  434  iv.  241,

—  have  the  power  of  calling  the  af-
femblies  of  the  people  and  giving
their  votes,  iv.  188  ,  9.

- —  adminifter  juftice,  as  the  kings
did  formerly,  iv.  13 1.

—  the  power  of  making  peace  is  given
to  a  conful  by  the  fenate,  iii.  393.
iv.  34.

—  confuls  nominate  the  confuls  their
fucceffors,  iv.  109.

—  the  people  themfelves  create  two
confuls,  iii.  75.

—  one  conful  being  killed  in  battle,
another  is  appointed  to  fucceed
him  •,  becaufe  the  a£ts  of  one  con¬
ful  are  neither  legal,  nor  firm,  iv.
161.

—  a  conful  is  fuperfeded  by  the
didlator,  iv.  178.

—  Icilius,  a  tribune  of  the  people,  af-
fumes  a  power  of  afiembling  the
fenate,  which  power  formerly  be¬
longed  to  the  confuls,  iv.  188,  9.

—  the  confuls  quarrel  with  the  tri¬
bunes,  iii.  173,  6.

—  in  order  to  fubvert  the  tribunitian
power,  the  confuls  gain  fome  of
that  college  to  their  party,  iv.  3.

—  the  tribunes  order  a  conful  to  pri-
fon,  iv.  87.

—  hold  meetings  at  private  houfes,
iv.  368.

—  a  conful  charges  the  tribunes  with
an  endeavour  to  invalidate  his  au¬
thority,  iv.  88.

—  fince  the  confuls  themfqlves  could

not


402  I  N  D  E  X  to

not  be  brought  to  a  trial,  their  mi-
nifters  could,  iv.  206.

— -  the  confuls  begin  to  govern  the
commonwealth  in  a  popular  man¬
ner,  iv.  220.

•—  one  of  the  confuls  is  chofen  from
among  the  favourers  of  the  people,
and  the  other  out  of  the  ariftocra-
tical  faction,  iii;  436.

—  decemvirs  are  chofen  inftead  of
confuls,  iv.  236.

—  confuls  are  again  chofen,  after  the
fubverfion  of  the  decemvirate,  by
the  people  in  their  centuriata  comi-
tia,  iv.  339.

—  tribunes  with  proconfular  power
are  chofen  in  the  room  of  confuls,

iv-  375-

- —  two  confuls  die  of  the  peftilence,
iv.  12 1.

—  confuls  again  fucceed  the  confular
tribunes,  iv.  375.

—  the  officers  of  the  confuls  are
beaten  by  thofe  of  the  plebeians,
iii.  54.

•—  the  robes  of  the  confuls  in  a
triumph,  ii.  385.

—  the  ornaments  of  the  confuls  af¬
ter  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,  ii.
r  2  r.

—  Menenius,  and  Sp.  Servilius,  two
confular  perfons,  are  called  to  their
trials  by  the  tribunes  of  the  people,
for  bad  adminiftration  in  their  con-
fulffiips,  iv.  52,  54.

—  Caffius,  after  the  expiration  of  his
confulfhip,  is  called  to  his  trial  by
the  quseftors,  for  aiming  at  tyran¬
ny,  iii.  408.

- —  the  confuls  are  called  to  a  trial,  by
the  tribunes  of  the  people,  for  not
appointing  decemvirs  to  divide  the
lands,  iv.  70.

•—  confular  perfons,  why  fined  by  the
tribunes,  and  notr put  to  death,  iv.
223,  4.


the  T  E  X  T.

—  were  afked  their  opinions  accord¬
ing  to  their  age,  iii.  102.

—  a  confular  perfon,  eminent  for  his
birth  and  dignity,  while  the  fathers
were  wavering,  propofes  a  ufeful
advice,  ii.  426.

—  P.  Valerius  Poplicola,  in  order  to
foften  the  envy  of  the  people,  di-
miniffies  the  enfigns  of  the  con¬
fular  power,  ii.  434.  iv.  241.

—  the  fenate  are  infpe&ors,  and  regu¬
lators  of  the  confular  power,  iii.

.  237> 8-

—  the  confular  power  is  again  fofne-
what  reduced  by  the  tribunes  of  the
people,  iv.  188.

—  the  confular  power  of  impofing
fines  is  likewife  permitted  to  ail  the
magiltrates,  iv.  224.

—  the  great  refpedt  that  was  former¬
ly  paid  to  the  confular  power,  iii.
203.

—  the  confular  power  exercifed  by
months,  iv,  79.

—  Quintius  is  adorned  with  the  con¬
fular  robes  and  enfigns,  while  he
was  plowing  in  his  own  farm,  iv.
162,  3.

—  the  confulffiip  was  entered  upon  in
the  month  of  June,  about  the
fummer  fold  ice,  iv.  47.

—  the  confulfhip  was  entered  upon
on  the  calends  of  September,  iii.

75-

—  the  confulffiip  entered  upon  on  the
ides  of  December,  iv.  377.

■ — *  during  the  feceffion  of  the  people
no  perfon  offering  himfelf  for  the
confulffiip,  it  is  conferred  on  Poflu-
mus  Cominius,  and  Sp.  Caffius  by
thofe  plebeians,  who  remained  in
the  city,  iii.  75.

—  the  confulfhip,  at  firft  belonging
to  the  patricians  alone,  is  affe&ed
by  the  plebeians  alfo,  iv.  364.

—  Claudius  denies  that  the  conful¬

ffiip


INDEX  to

lhip  ought  to  be  yielded  to  the
plebeians,  iv.  367.

—  Valerius  is  of  opinion  that  the  con-
fullhip  ought  to  be  communicated
to  all,  who  are  worthy  of  it,  iv.

371-

—  the  confulfhip,  which  was  former¬
ly  open  to  the  patricians  alone,  is
afterwards  communicated  to  the
plebeians,  iv.  374.

—  Quintius  refufes  to  be  continued
in  the  confulfhip,  iv.  166.

—  a  conful,  being  ill  of  his  wounds,
abdicates  his  confulfhip,  iv.  24.

■ —  the  confuls,  and  all  other  ma-
giftrates,  except  the  tribunes  of  the
people,  abrogated  when  a  dictator¬
ship  is  appointed,  ii.  424,  5.  iii;
4,  59,  60.  iv.  175.

—  the  decemvirate  is  inftituted  in
lieu  of  all  the  magiftracies,  iv.
236.

—  the  confular  tribunefhip  is  infti¬
tuted  in  lieu  of  the  confulfhip,  iv.

375-

Con/us,  Neptune,  fhaker  of  the  earth,
i.  74,  280.

Contempt  of  riches  in  the  ancients,  iv.
164.

—  remarkable  inftances  of  it  in  Po-
plicola,  Agrippa  Menenius,  and
Cincinnatus,  ii.  3 86-«  8.  iii.  146.
iv.  164,  178,  9.

Controverfies  are  decided  by  time,  iii.
229.

—  a  brotherly  compofition  of  con¬
venes  moft  praife  worthy,  iii.  261.

&crat  its  fituation,  ii.  79.

Corant ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.  409.
Corbienfes ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ib.
Corbio ,  a  garrifon  of  the  Romans,
feized  on  by  the  Latines,  iii.  4.

—  furrenders  to  Marcius,  iii.  310.

. —  is  furrendered  by  the  iEqui  to  the
Romans,  iv.  177.

—  is  retaken  by  the  iEqui,  iv.  179.

Vol.  IV.


the  TEX  T.  403

—  is  rafed  by  Horatius,  iv.  188.

Corcyrxi,  their  fedition,  iii.  261.
Cordus.  See  Mucins.  ......

Coriolani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.

-  409.

Coriolanus.  See  Marcius.

Coriolis  the  metropolis  of  the  Volfci,
iii.  139.

—  taken  by  Poll.  Cominius,  iii.  141,

—  furrenders  to  Marcius,  iii.  310,
339 •

■ —  C.  Marcius  derived  his  furname
of  Coriolanus  from  this  place,  iii.
144-

See  Marcius.

Corn ;  ripe  corn  is  carried  off  by  the
enemy,  iv.  114.

—  ripe  corn  is  fet  on  fire,  iv.  68.

—  corn  diftributed  every  month  out
of  the  public  granaries,  ii.  194.

—  Thrafibulus  the  Milefian  ftrikes
off  the  talleft  ears  of  corn,  ii.  252.

—  the  Roman  embaffadors  were  fent
into  Sicily  to  buy  corn,  iii.  149,
5°.

—  devoted  corn,  ii.  333.

—  a  difpute  in  the  fenate  concerning
the  diftribution  of  the  corn  given
by  Gelo,  iii.  183.

—  Caffius  would  have  the  price  of
the  corn,  which  had  been  given  by
Gelo  and  divided  among  the  peo¬
ple,  to  be  reftored  to  the  purchafers,,
iii.  397.

L.  Cornelius ,  conful,  iv.  1 66.

—  takes  Antium  by  ftorm,  iv.  170.

—  his  triumph,  iv.  171.

—  his  opinion  in  the  fenate  concern¬
ing  a  war  with  the  Sabines,  and
Volfci,  iv.  272,  5.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  fe~
ceders,  iv.  321.

L.  Cornelius  Sylla  draws  envy  upon
the  divftatorfhip  by  his  immoderate
cruelty,  ii.  438,

<*  ss


M,  Cor-


404.  INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


M.  Cornelius  1  one  of  the  decemvirs*  iv.
240.

—  the  anfwer  he  makes  to  the  advice
of  C.  Claudius,  iv.  270.

calls  upon  his  brother  Lucius  to
deliver  his  opinion,  iv.  272.

*■»  marches  againft  the  iEqui  with
four  of  his  collegues,  iv.  284.
Serv.  Cornelius ,  conful,  iii,  407.

—  grants  a  truce  to  the  Veientes,  iii,

417-

Corniculanian  mountains,  i.  39,
Corniculuniy  itslituation,  ii.  105, 145.
is  taken,  plundered,  and  burnt  by
Tarquinius,  ib.

Corpfe  is  brought  on  a  bier  into  the
forum,  ii.  282.  iv.  72,  100,  312,
the  corpfe  of  a  tribune  is  brought
into  the  forum,  iv.  72.
the  corpfe  of  Appius  is  brought
into  the  forum,  and  honoured  with
a  funeral  oration,  iv.  100.
Corthonia ,  formerly  Croton,  i.  59.
Corfula ,  its  fituation,  i.  36.

Cotyna,  its  fituation,  i.  310.  o
is  taken  by  the  Sabines,  ib.  -
Colys,  his  anceftors,  and  defcendants,
i.  60.

Counfeh,  with  refpedl  to  future  events,
ought  to  be  founded  on  what  is
paft,  iv.-2  2  7.

ought  to  regard  not  private  con¬
venience,  but  public  benefit,  iv.
22  7.

CraJJus  ( Licinius )  his  defeat  in  Parr
thia,  i.  232-

Greqiera,  a  fortrels  eredled  by  the  Ro¬
mans  againft  the  Veientes,  near  to
the  river  Crefnera,  iv.  29.
vrr  is  voluntarily  defended  by  306  of
the  Fabian  family,  ib.
is  taken  by  the.  Tyrrhenians,  iv.

43*  ■  ’  r'-  •  '

Crejls  and  plumes  on  helmets,  iii.

—  271.

Cretan  band  of  dancer,  iii.  273, :


CretanSy  their  Phiditia,  i.  263.

Creufay  daughter  of  Priam,  and  wife
to  iEneas,  ii.  73.

Crimes ;  to  let  enormous  crimes  go
unpunifhed  is  as  bad  as  never  to
pardon  trifling  offences,  iii.  33.

—  criminal  caufes  tried  by  the  peo-
pie,  ii.  47.

CrimefuSy  a  river  of  Sicily,  i.  119.

Crifoy  of  Himera,  vidfor  attheOlym-
pic  games,  iv.  244.

Crops ;  lands  bearing  three  crops  in
a  year,  i.  82.

Crotony  when  and  by  whom  built,  i.

329*

r—  is  taken  by  the  Pelafgi  from  the
Umbri,  i.  47.

■v  changes  its  name,  and  inhabitants,
and  is  called  Corthonia,  i.  59.

—  the  language  of  the  Crotoniatae,

.  i.  66.

Crowns  \  to  be  crowned  with  Olive

—  brances,  iii.  22.

a  golden  crown,  ii.  119,  20.

—  Porfena  is  prefented  with  a  golden
crown  by  the  Romans,  ii.  365.

—  a  golden  crown  the  reward  of

.  thole,  who  recovered  the  enfigns,

iv.  199.

theicivic  crown,  iii.  327.  iv.  200, .

—  theobfidional  crown,  iv.  201.
the  mural  crown,  ib.

—  unlawful  to  be  crowned  with  laurel

.  in  mourning,  iv.  24.

—  the  people  being  crowned  with
flowers  receive  the  conqueror*  iv.

,  67. T:  .

Crucify ;  flaves,  who  had  been  con?
ipirators,  crucified,  ii.  392,  3.

Crufai ,  a  people  of  Thrace,  i.  108,

tl  12.  1  ’  •  i  i .  ■  -

Crujiumerium  fituated  not  far  from
.Rqmei,  iv. -284,  •  —

an  Alban  colony,  i.  317.

—  is  made  a  Roman  colony,  ib.

is  belieged  by  the  Sabines,  iii.  54.


INDEX  to  the  TEX  T.


—  is  again  infefted  by  them,  iv.  179."“

- —  the  Cruftumeri  fend  proViftons  to

■  Rome,  i.  316.  '  '

—  furrender  to  Tarquinius,  ii.  103.
the  camp*  at  - Cruftumerium,  iv.

28  7.

Cryers  call  the  people  to  the'  comitia,  '
ftreet  by  ftreet,  ii.  22  0,  2  8  3  V

r—  call  the  people  .by  the  found  of
oxens  horns,  i.  236.  !

—  the  cryer  calls  the  clafles  in  their
turns  to  give  their  votes,  iv.  162.

5 —  calls  thofe,  who  are  againft  a  law,
to  come  forth,  and  give  their  opi¬
nions,.  iv.  .207.  '  .

— ■  the  cryers  call  over  the?  names  of
the  fenators,  iv.  .253.

Cuma  in  Italy,  a  Greek  city  in  the
country  of  the  Opici,  built  by  the
Eretrienfes,  and  Chalcidenfes,  iif.
*55-  .  .

—  ftands  in  Campania,  ib.

—  famous  for  its  riches  and  power,
ib.

—  is  befieged  by  the  Tyrrhenians,
Umbri,  Daunii,  and  other  Bar-
barousmations,  and  bravely  defends
itfelf,  iii.  155.

—  the  partifans  of  the  ariftocracy  be¬
ing  (lain,  it  is  opprefied  with  tyran¬
ny  by  Ariftodemus,  iii.  161.

•—  his  ftrategem  to  effedt  it,  iii.  154.

—  the  Roman  embaffadors  fent  to
buy  corn  at  Cumae  in  Italy,  are
fiezed  by  the  Roman  exiles,  iii.

*53-

—  its  ancient  form  of  government  is
reftored,  iii.  169.

—  the  Cumaeans  in  Campania  fend
fuccours  to  the  Aricini,  iii.  158.

— -  the  Cumsean  exiles  take  up  arms
againft  Ariftodemus,  iii.  166.

—  the  haven  of  Cumae  in  Campania,
iii.  155.

Curatii ,  Albans,  their  mother,  and  re¬
lations,  ii.  29.


40$

—  the  fpoils  of  the  Curatian  three
twin  brothers,  ii-.  42.  u

—  the  Curatii  are  tranfplanted  from
Alba  to' Rome,  ii.  69.

Cures ,  a  city  by  whom  built,  i.  308.

■ —  in  the  Sabine  language  fignifies  a
fpear,  i.  308.  -  .

Curetes,  a  people,  their  origin,  r.  41.’

—  what  bucklers  their  facrificers  car¬
ried,  i.  352,  3.  -  .

—  the  Curetes  of  the  Greeks  are  the
fame  with  the  Salii  of  the  Latines,

i*  353*  .  a

—  the  Curetes  nurfe  the-child  ’Jai-
piter,  iii.  272.

—  are  fuppofed  to  have  invented  the'
Pyrrhic,  or  armed  dance,  ib.

—  the  Curetic  dance  molt  in  ufe
among  the  Romans,  i.  354,  5.

Curia ,  the  lefier  di-*

vifions  of  the  city,  h;2;33.  <  -  3

—  whether  they  received-  their  names,
from  the  Sabine  matrons,  -  i.  306. v'

—  divided  into  decuria?,  i.  234,  5.

—  they  appointed  the  celeres,  in  the
fame  manner  as  the  fenators,  f.

245.  ^  :L  j

—  the  thirty  curiae  give  their  votes-

concerning  the  reftoration-  of  the
effedts  of  Tarquin,  ii.  3^20.

—  the  people  diftributed  into  curia;
chufe  their  annual  magiftrates,  iii.

I34*

the  priefts  of  the  curise,  i.  260.  ""

—  the  common  facrifice  of  the  curiae,

i.  263^

—  a  dining  room  in  each  curia,
ib.

—  the  tables  and  facrihces  of  each,
ib.

—  each  curia  had  its  particular  Ra¬
tion  at  the  exhibition  of  the  gamess

ii.  13 1.

Curiata.  See  Comitia.

Curis ,  Juno  Quirida,  her  tables,  u

313-  ;  '  •  -

G  g  g  2  Curtius,


4o6  INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


Curtius^  the  lake  fo  called  from  Me-
tius  Curtius,  i.  299.

C.  Curtius ,  conful,  iv.  364.

Curtius  (Metius )  the  braveft  champion
of  the  Sabines,  i.  298.

—  fettles  at  Rome,  i.  305.

Cujlody  i  the  cuftody  of perfons  claim¬
ed  as  flaves  belonged  to  their  near-
eft  relations,  iv.  297.

Cutylia  in  the  Reatine  plains,  i.  37.

a  lake  and  ifland,  ib.

Cyclades ,  iflands,  i.  41.

Cyllene  mount,  from  the  nymph,  i.
34»  HO-

Cyprian  ftreet  at  Rome,  ii.  49.
Cypfelus  tyrant  of  Corinth,  ii.  98.
Cythera ,  an  ifland,  i.  1 1 3

D.

Aufed  formerly  for©,  i.  152.
Dagger ;  Lucretia  ftabs  herfelf  with  a
dagger,  ii.  269.

D aides,  of  Meflene,  i.  162.
Damaratus  a  Corinthian  of  the  family.

of  the  Bacchiadae,  ii.  97.

*—  dying,  leaves  all  his  fortune  to
Lucumo,  ii.  99.

Damafias^  annual  archon  at  Athens,,
ii.  82.

Dance ;  the  leader  of  the  dance,  iii.

271.

—  an  unacceptable  leader  of  the
dance,  iii.  263.

—  dances  in  armour,  i.  353.  iii.

272.

—  an  ancient  Greek  inftitution  in¬
vented  by  Minerva,,  iii.  272.

—  triumphal  dances,  iii.  274.

—  fatyrical  and  jocofe  dances  of  fa-
tyrs  by  whom  invented,  ib.

—  bands  of  dancers,  iii.  271.

—  funeral  dances,  iii.  275.

Dangers  \  common  dangers  generally

produce  union,  iii.  320.  iv.  283.

—  dangers  conciliate  the  ftrifteft
friendlhip,  iii.  io.


—  the  article  of  danger  adds  vigor*,
iii.  322.

—  great  fuccefies  are  purchafed  with
great  dangers,  iv.  57.

Dardanus ,  fon  of  Jupiter  by  Eledtra,

*•  II3>  I39*

—  leads  a  colony  into  Afla,  i.  141.

—  builds  Dardanum  in  Troas,  i.
139,  141.

—  removes  his  dwelling  and  rites
out  of  Samothracia  into  Phrygia,,
i.  154.

—  confults  the  oracle,  ib.

—  tranfplants  his  rites  into  his  own
city,  i.  155.

—  his  anceftors,  and  defendants,  i.
I39*

—  Idasus,  and  Dimas,  his  fons  by
Cryfes,  ib.

—  the  pofterity  of  Dardanus  by  his
feond  wife  Battea,  i.  142.

Dardanus ,  or  Dardanum. ,  its  fituation,.
i.  L02,  139.

abandoned  by  its  inhabitants,  wheh
they  beheld  Troy  in  flames,  i.,
105...

Dafcylitis,  a  country  fa  called,  i.  106.
Datis,  of  Argos,  vidtor  at  the  Olym¬
pic  games,  iv.  69.

Daunii  invade  Cumae,  iii.  155.

—  their  olive  grounds,  i.  83.

Dead. ;  a  dead  perfon  is  brought  on  a

bier  into  the  forum,  ii.  282.  iv.
72,  100,  312.

See  LiUtina.

Debtors ,  their  perfons  are  bound,  ii.

3.96-

—  thofe,  who  were  bound  for  debt,
were  obliged  to  cultivate  their  own
lands  for  the  benefit  of  their  cre¬
ditors,  iii.  1 19.

—  Tullius  forbids  a  citizen  to  be
carried  to  prifon  for  debt,  ii.  i6o-^
164.

—  Servilius  orders  a  proclamation  to
be  made  that  no  creditor  Ihould


INDEX  to

carry  a  citizen  to  prifon  for  debt,

*  iii.  42 f

«—  a  folder,  paft  the  military  age,  and
his  two*  Tons,  become  flaves  for
debt,  iii.  41,  2.

—  debtors  are  confined  with  wooden
and  iron  collars,  iii.  119,20.

See  Poor.

December ;  on  the  calends  of  Decem¬
ber  an  altar  and  rites  are  appointed
to  Fortuna.Muliebris,  in  memory
of  the  day  on  which  the  matrons
prevailed  over  Marcius,  iii.  370,1.

r—  on  the  fourth  of  the  ides  of  De¬
cember  the  firft  tribunes  of  the  peo¬
ple  were  created,  and  on  the  fame
day  afterwards  the  reft,  iii.  134,  5.

—  the  confulfhip  was  entered  upon
on  the  ides  of  December,  iv.  377.

Decemvirs  are  appointed  to  fix  the
bounds  of  the  public  lands,  iii;
407.

■—  the  law  is  laid  before  the  people
by  the  tribunes  for  appointing  de¬
cemvirs  to  compile  a  body  of  laws,
iv.  135.

■ —  upon  what  conditions  Appius
moved  to  have  the  decemvirs
created,  iv.  235.

• —  when  the  decemvirs  were  created
to  compile  a  body  of  laws,  all
other,  magiftracies  were  abrogated,
iv.  236.

—  how  they  governed  the  common¬
wealth  for  the  firft  year,  iv.  236,7.

—  in  what  manner  they  compiled  the
laws,  iv.  238.

*—  for  how  long  time  they  received
their.power,  iv.  235 — 37.

. —  at  what  time  they  were  created,
iv.  240.

—  are  again  placed  at  the  head  of
affairs,  iv.  237 — 40.

—  confpire  among  themfelves,  iv.
240.

—  they  likewife  feduce  not  a  few,  nor


the  TEX  T.  407

the  leaft  con fider able,  of  the  patri¬
cians  to  fupport  their  domination,
iv.  242.

—  govern  more  licentioufly,  ib.

—  whatjudgements  they  pronounced,
iv.  243.

—  they  hold  their  magiftracy  for  the
third  year,  iv.  244.

— -  in  what  manner  they  governed
during  that  year,  iv.  250.

— -  by  what  means  they  rendered  their
government  odious  both  to  the
patricians  and  plebeians,  iv.  249.

—  for  what  crimes  they  were  expofed
to  obloquy,  iv.  264.

—  they  threaten  Horatius,  who  op-
pofed  them,  with  the  tribunitian
power,  iv.  257.

are  feverely  inveighed  againft  by.
Virginius,  iv.  313.

j—  are  deferted  by  their  own  foldiers,
iv.  319.

—  are  punifhed  fome  with  death,  and
others  with  banifhment,  iv.  341.

—  the  decemvirate  is  canvaffed  for.
by  the  moft  dignified,  and  the  moft
ancient  fenators,  iv.  239.

—  three  of  the  plebeians  were  alfo-
chofen  into  the  decemvirate,  iv.
240.

—  the  decemvirate  is  fubverted  after
the  expiration  of  three  years,  iv.

339*

—  the  names  of  the  laft  decemvirs,,
iv.  284.

—  the  decemvirate  was  entered  upon
on  the  ides  of  May,  iv.  240.

Decimation  of  a  colony,  i.  56.

• —  of  a  difobedient  army,  iv.  92.

M.  Decius  is  fent  with  Icilius,  and
Brutus  to  obtain  affurances  from
the  fenate  to  the  people,  iii.  134.  -

Decrees  of  the  fenate ;  the  people
could  determine  nothing  without
a  decree  of  the  fenate,  iii.  207,  8.

~  the  tribunes  could  not  give  the

people


4p.8;.  INDEX  to

—  people  their  votes  again#  even
the  loweft  patricians,  without  a
decree  of  thefenate,  iv.  195.

—  Poftumus  Cominius  dedicates  the
temple  of  Saturn  upon  the  Capito-
line  hill,  by  a  decree  of  the  fenate,

3.  -  -

—  the  decrees  of  the  fenate  are  not  a
perpetual,  law,  but  an  inftitution
for  one  year  only;  thus,  mention
is  made  of  an  annual  decree  of  the

•  fenate,  iv.  70.  >

r—  a.  decree  of  the  fenate  is  not  re-
quifite,  when  there  is  a  law  in  be-~
ing,  iii.  21 1.

— ^  the  previous  order  of  the  fenate
for  the  trial  of  Marcius  is  drawn
up,  iii.  240,  1.

a  decree  of  the  fenate  to  ratify  the
promifes  made  by  the  deputies  to
the  feceders,  iii.  133,  4.

r—  a  decree  of  the  fenate  is  referred  to
the  people,  in  order  to  receive  their
fandlion,  iii.  340.

; —  a  decree  of  the  fenate,  pafied  by
the  coniuls  is  brought  before  the
people  by  their  tribunes,  iv.  374.

*—  Sp.  Poftumius  confecrates  the
temple  of  Dius  Fidius,  on  which
his  name  is  infcribed  purfuant  to  a
decree  of  the  fenate,  iv.  11/2.

. —  a  decree  of  the  fenateds  confirmed
by  the  people,  iv.  229.

—  the  previous  order  of  the  fenate  is
laid  before  the  people,  iii.  207,
8.

—  a  decree  of  the  fenate  for  fubmitting
the  patricians  to  be  tried  by  the
people,  iii..  241.

—  a  decree  of  the  fenate  concerning
the  piice  of  corn,  iii.  205.

. — »  concerning  the  confpirators,  and
thofe,  who  informed  again#  them,
ii.  402.

• —  concerning  the  creation  of  decem¬
virs,  iv.  235.


the  X  E  X  T.

*tt  concerning  a  di&aftor’s  being  fob-
ftituted  in  the  room  of  confuls,  ii.
425*

rr-  concerning  the  Agrarian  law,  iii.
407.

-?->  concerning  the  Latin  and  Roman
women,  either  to  ftay  with  their
hulbands,  or  to  return  home,  iii.
I,  2 fe  .  :  1  :

Decuri<e>  AtnoeJtc,  1.  235.

Decurio ,  AEkctJagxoc9  ib.

Defeat *  through  fhame  of  an  igno¬
minious  defeat  the  conful  remains
in  his  camp,  iii.  426.

— n  %  general  is  impeached  under  the
article  of  a  defeat,  iv.  54*.

-r*  X.  Menenius  is  fined  for  a  defeat
occafioned  through  his  own  fault,
iv.  53.

Defemz  denied,  to  no  man,  ii.  317.

— r  the  accufed  are  permitted-  to  de¬
fend  themfelves,  ii.  325.

—*  the  time  for  preparing  a  defence  is
given  to  the  third  market  day,  iii.
241.

—  a  defence  with  deprecation,  iii.

Si  6.

—  Csefo  Quintius  refufesto  make  his
defence  before  the  people,  iv.
138.

—  a  defence  is  not  to  be  declin¬
ed,  no  not  in  a  falie  accufation,  iii.

225*

Dejanira ,  daughter  of  Lycaon,  mo¬
ther  to  the  laid  Lycaon  by  Pe-
lafgus,  i.  30.

Delos ,  an  ifiand,  i.  112.

Delphic.  See  Oracle.

Deluge  in  Arcadia,  i.  139,  154.
Demigods ,  iii.  276,  7.

Democracy ,  whenever  it  runs  into  ex¬
cels,  is  retrained  by  the  didlator-
fhip,  iii.  237.

Dent  ai  us.  See  Siccius.

Deputies  feat  to  the  feceders,  iii,
104.

Defer  tion  5


I  N  D  £  X  to

Defertion  ;  defertion  of  a  poft  capital,
iii.  415.

Deucalion ,  fon  of  Prometheus,  i,
4I*

Devoted  perfons  killed  with  impunity,
iii.  136.  -  -i

— -  devoted  corn,  ii.  333.

Dexamenus,  fon  of  Hercules,  i.  115.
Diana ,  her  temple  at  Ephefus,  ii.
198.

*—  ftatues  of  the  Ephelian  Diana,  i.
262.

•—  her  temple  built  by  Tatius,  f.
312’  T3*

•  the  temple  of  Diana  on  mount
Aventine,  built  by  Servius  Tullius,
ii.  93,  200.  . •

—  a  pillar,  in  the  temple  of  Diana,
infcribed  with  ancient  Greek  cha¬
racters,  ii.  200.

Diftceus,  a  mountain  of  Crete,  i.

336-

Dictator ,  whence  fo  called,  ii.  428,
9.

the  fame  almoft  with  the  ma-
giftrate,  who,  among  the  Greeks,
was  formerly  called  curv/uv^f,  ii.
430.

when  he  ufed  to  be  appointed ;
with  what  authority  j  and  for  how
long  a  time,  ii.  424.

•-r  ufually  appointed,  when  the  com¬
monwealth  laboured  under  any
great  diftrefs,  ii.  437.
in  what  manner  the  firft  dictator
exercifed  that  power,  ii.  433—

7*  r

—  from  that  time  the  following

dictators  imitated  the  example  of
the  firft  didator  down  to  Sylla,  ii.

*  437’  8--

—  every  dictator  chofe  a  general  of
the  horfe,  ii.  434.

—  the  dictator,  having  refigned  his
power,  and  appointed  the  comitia,
creates  the  confuls,  iii.  36.


tte  TEX  T,  409

—  A.  Poftumius,  the  fecond'  dicta¬
tor,  is  appointed  in  the  Latin  war,
iii.  4.

■—  Manius  Valerius  is  appointed  by
the  confuls  the  third  didator,  iii.
59,  60.

«—  the  fourth  didator  was  L.  Quin-
tius  Cincinnatus,  iv.  175.

—  the  robes  of  a  didator,  ib.

—  Cincinnatus,  the  didator,  has
twenty  four  axes,  and  as  many  rods
carried  before  him,  ib.

—  the  didator  Commands  the  axes
and  rods  to  be  borne  before  him  in
the  city,  ii.  434.

.  annual  didators  among  the  Albans,
inftead  of  kings,  ii.  433.

—  a  fort  of  eledive  tyranny,  ii.

43  °*

; —  the  etymology  of  the  didatorfhip,
ii.  428,  9.

—  the  name  was  borrowed  from  the
Albans,  ii.  432,  3.

—  the  example  from  the  Greeks,  ii,

433-

— -  it  is  the  only  remedy  of  a  deplora¬
ble  ftate,  and  the  laft  hope  in  ex¬
treme  danger,  ii.  437.

—  it  takes  away  from  the  people  the
advantage  of  the  Valerian  law,  iii.,
87.

—  it  lafted  fix  months,  ii.  424.

—  the  didatorfhip  is  abdicated  by
Quintius  before  the  fix  months
were  expired,  iv.  178.

—  T.  Lartius  adds  veneration  to  the
didatorfhip,  ii.  434.

—  through  the  cruelty  of  Sylla  it
falls  into  difgrace,  and  is  found  to
be  a  real  tyranny,  ii.  438.

Dimas ,  fon  of  Dardanus,  king  of  Ar¬
cadia,  i.  139.

Diognetus ,  archon  at  Athens,  iii.
75- •

Dienyfius ,  at  what  time  he  came  into
Italy,  and  with  what  affiftance

he


4. io  I  N  /D  E  X  to

,he  began  to  write  his  hiftory,  i.

<i8.

—  lived  at  Rome  immediately  after
the  civil  war,  i.  18,  19.

r-  what  is  the  fubjedt  of  his  hiftory,
i.  20.

— ■  was  the  fon  of  Alexander  of  Ha-
licarnaffus,  i.  23.

Dionyfms ,  the  elder,  at  what  time  he
feized  the  tyranny  of  Sicily,  iii.  152.
Dioryblus,  an  ifthmus,  i.  114.

Dis ,  or  infernal  J  upiter,  i.  240.
Difobedient  army  decimated,  iv.  92.
Dfiemper  •,  cattle  infected  with  a  dif-
temper,  iv.  231.

See  Plague ,  and  Pejlilence.

Divorce  •,  Sp.  Carvilius,  the  firft  Ro¬
man,  who  divorced  his  wife  on  ac¬
count  of  barrennefs ;  not  without
the  difguft  of  the  people,  i.  271.
Dius  FidiuSy  his  temple,  i.  309,  10.
Dodona.  See  Oracle.

Doors  of  houfes  how  they  opened,  ii.

372,

Dorians ,  their  migration,  ii.  198.
Dowry ,  the  reftitution  of  one,  i.
2 67,  8.

—  the  dowry  of  Chryfes,  i.  153.
Drepanay  a  promontory  of  Sicily,  i.

1 18.

Duillius  (C<efo)  one  of  the  decemvirs,
iv.  240.

•  marches  with  four  of  his  collegues
againft  the  iEqui,  iv.  284.

Duillius  ( Marcus )  a  tribune  of  the
people,  iv.  342.

Dyna ,  or  Launa,  daughter  of  Evan-
der,  i.  97.

E.

Eagle  takes  the  cap  from  Tar-
quinius*  head,  and  places  it  on
again,  ii.  99.

an  eagle  fans  a  fire,  i.  137.

—  an  airy  of  eagles  deftroyed  by  a
flock  of  vultures,  ii.  265.


the  :T  E  X  T.l

—  an  augury  by  eagles,  i.  204.

Eajlern  part  of  the  heavens  the  moft

proper  for  auguries,  i.  229.

Ebutius .  See  JEbutius.

Ecetray  thd  metropolis  of  the  Volfci',
iv.  170.

—  moftftrongly  fituated,  ib.

—  the  Volfci  hold  their  aflemblies
there,  iii.  289.

—  the  plunder,  taken  from  the  Ro¬
man  territories  by  Marcius,  is  car¬
ried  thither,  iii.  338.

«—  the  Ecetrani  enter  into  a  treaty
with  Tarquinius,  ii.  240.

—  the  Aurunci  demand  the  Ecetra-
nian  territories  of  the  Romans,  iii.
50.

—  the  Ecetranian  territories  are  laid
wafte  by  Fabius,  iv.  170.

Echinadesy  ifiands  fo  called,  i.  1*7.

EditlSy  JiaygCtQocl  ilKOtlUV  Tf  KOtl  CtftKUVy

ii.  429.

Edifices ;  the  tribunitian  law  con¬
cerning  them,  iv.  19 1.

Education  \  liberal  education  effemi¬
nated  by  Ariftodemus,  iii.  164.

Effetts  of  Tarquinius  diftributed  a-
mong  the  people,  ii.  333.

Effeminate ,  why  Ariftodemus  acquir¬
ed  that  opprobrious  title,  iii.  1 54.

—  effeminacy  cultivated  by  him,  in
order  to  fupport  his  tyranny,  iii.
*  64*  5  *

Egeria,  the  familiar  of  Numa,  i.

334*

Egeriiy  cnro^oi  kui  ii.  105.

EgeriuSy  from  whence  Egerius,  and
his  pofterity  acquired  the  furname
of  Collatinus,  ii.  266.
for  what  reafon  the  furname  of
Egerius  was  given  to  Aruns  Tar¬
quinius,  ii.  104,  5.

—  Egerius  marches  againft  Fidenae,
i.  114,  15.

—  the  pofterity  of  Egerius  according
to  Fabius,  ii.  2  66.

Egyptian


INDEX  to

Egyptian  pyramids,  ii.  196.

Elehra ,  daughter  of  Atlas,  i.  113.

—  mother  of  Iafius,  and  Dardanus
by  Jupiter,  ib.  139.

Eleftra^  daughter  of  Latinus,  i.
16  6.

Elephants ,  hundred  and  thirty  eight  in
the  triumph  of  Mttellus,  over  the
Carthaginians,  i.  344.

Elienfes ,  companions  of  Hercules,  i.
76.

Elva.  See  A Ebutius .

Elyma ,  or  EryXy  its  fituation,  i.  12 1.
Elymi,  a  people  of  Sicily,  i.  122.

—  being  driven  out  of  their  native
country  by  the  Oenotri,  they  re¬
move  into  Sicily,  i.  1 1 9.

ElymuSy  a  Trojan  of  royal  defcent,  ib.

—  removes  into  Sicily,  i.  51,  120.
Emathiany  father  of  Remus,  i.  166.
Embajfadors  fent  into  Sicily  to  buy

corn,  iii.  149,  50.

See  Legates.

Embajfies  of  the  Sabine  women,  i.
3°3-

—  of  the  moft  confiderable  men  to
Marcius,  iii.  315 — 41.

Ennius.  See  Euxenus.

Enfignsy  the  royal  enfigns  of  the  Tyr¬
rhenians,  and  the  Romans,  ii.  120.
— -  the  royal  enfigns  are  diminiflied
in  the  confular  magiftracy,  ii.  120,
1 »  2 79>  434-  iv.  241.

—  the  ftandards  of  the  cohorts,  iii.

385-

—  the  warlike  enfigns  are  carried  out
in  the  inlifting  of  foldiers,  iii.  417.

every  one  lifted  under  his  own  en-
fign,  iii.  431.

—  the  holy  enfigns  under  the  com¬
mand  of  the  centurions,  iv.  159.

—  the  army  is  difpofed  under  en¬
figns,  and  leaders,  ii.  334.

r—  upon  what  account  the  foldiers
dreaded  to  remove  the  holy  enfigns,
iii.  69.  iv.  318, 19.

Vol.  IV.


the  TEX  T.  41  r

— -  the  foldiers  are  ordered  to  remain
under  their  proper  enfigns,  iii.

23.

—  it  was  not  lawful  to  defert  the  en¬
figns  unlefs  they  were  dilcharged
from  their  oaths,  iii.  69.  iv.  3 1 8,

19.

—  a  general,  at  his  return,  lays  up
the  enfigns,  iv.  24.

—  the  enfigns  were  fnatched  from  the
ftandard  bearers,  and  thrown  by  a
general  among  the  enemy,  in  or¬
der  to  excite  the  greater  ardor  in
his  men,  iii.  385.

—  the  enfigns  are  taken  from  the  Ro¬
mans,  iv.  45.

—  the  enfigns  of  a  cohort  are  reco¬

vered  from  the  enemy  by  Siccius,
iv.  199,  200.  •

—  unlefs  the  enfigns  were  retaken,
the  perfon,  who  loft  them,  under¬
goes  a  fevere  punilhment,  iii.  385.

r—  the  punilhment,  iv.  92.

—  a  general  might  without  trial  put
to  death  thofe  who  deferted  their
enfigns,  iv.  318,  19.

—  the  foldiers  kept  under  their  en¬
figns  againft  their  will,  iii.  1 16.

—  the  enfigns  are  thrown  away  by
the  ftandard  bearers  through  con¬
tumacy,  iv.  91.

—  the  plebeians  take  the  holy  enfigns,
leave  the  camp,  and  fecede  to  the
holy  mountain,  iii.  69.

—  and  to  the  Aventine  hill,  iv.  319,

20.

—  the  Sabines  defert  their  enfigns,
and  run  away,  ii.  123.

Eny alius.  Curinus,  a  warlike  power,
i.  307.

Epeii  Elienfesy  companions  of  Her¬
cules  in  his  expedition  to  Spain,
and  Italy,  i.  76,  7.

—  they  fettle  in  Italy,  ib.

Ephefusy  Diana’s  temple  there,  ii.

198.

H  h  h  Epigoni


4*2


INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


Epigoni  of  Hieronymus  Cardianus,  i.

i5-

Epitelides ,  a  Lacedaemonian,  vidtor  at
the  Olympic  games,  ii.  144.
Eque(lrian  order ;  the  cenfus,  cen¬
turies,  and  commanders  of  the
equeftrian  order,  ii.  1 80.

*—  four  hundred  of  the  mod  wealthy
plebeians  are  added  to  the  equeftrian
order,  iii.  68.
equeftrian  races,  i.  280.

—  equeftrian  combats  in  the  votive
games,  iii.  269.

Eretrienfesy  a  colony  of  them  at  Cumae,
iii.  155.

Eretum,  its  fttuation,  ii.  75.  iv.  251.
the  Sabines  are  conquered  at  Ere-
tum  by  Tarquinius  Supeibus,  ii.
243.  .  .  !

•—  the  Sabine  camp  at  Eretum,  iv.
251.

Erichthonius ,  fon  of  Dardanus,  i.
1 14,  142.

— -  his  anceftors,  defcendants  and  fe¬
licity,  i.  142.

Erythea ,  an  ifland,  i.  86,  221.

Erythr ^?,  a  town  of  Phrygia,  i.  127.

a  place  in  Afia,  ii.  263.

Eryx ,  a  mountain,  i.  122.

—  a  city,  i.  120,  1.

Efquiline  hill,  added  to  the  city  by
Servius  Tullius,  and  built  upon,  ii.
168.

—  Efquiline  region,  ii.  169.

—  Efquiline  gate,  iv.  123.

Evander^  an  Arcadian,  fon  of  Mer¬
cury,  and  the  nymph  Carmenta,
leads  a  colony  from  Arcadia  into
Italy,  i.  69.

in  what  part-  he  fettled  with  his
Arcadians,  i.  68.

- —  what  inftitutions  he  brought  with
him  into  Italy,  i.  75.
t —  confecrates  honors-  to  Hercules,
i.  89.  •

—  annual  facrifices  made  to  Evander


at  the  fcot  of  mount  Aventine,J.

7 r*

—  Dyna,  or  Launa,  his  daughter,  i.
97-

Evening  began  about  the  time  oft
lighting  up  lamps,  iv.  302.

Eumedes,  father  of  Acallaris,  i.  142.

Eurybates ,  an  Athenian,  vidtor  at  the
Olympic  games,  ii.  2.

Euryleon  Afcanius ,  fon  of  iEneas, .
king  of  the  Latines,  i.  146,  163.

Euryftheus.  impofes  various  labors  on..
Hercules,  i.  86.

Euxenus ,  an  ancient  poet,  his  opinion
concerning  the  Saturnian  hill,

77.

Expiation  by  fire,  i.  204.

—  for  the  death  of  Tatius,  i.  316.

—  Horatius  expiates  the  murder  of
his  fifter,  ii.  48.

—  expiation  after  the  cenfus,  ii.  1 8  8, 9.

■—  expiations,  or  public  and  private

luftrations  in  a  raging  peftilence,
iv.  74.

•—  it  was  not  lawful'  to  approach,  or
aftift  at  the  facrifices,  before  an  exr
piation  was  made  for  fhedding  the
blood  of  citizens,  ii.  403.

Expofed\  what  births  it  was  lawful  to
expofe,  i.  251.

F. .

F  the  vEolic  digamma,  or  v  con-
fonant,  forme;  ly  placed,  before
words  beginning  with  a  vowel,  i."
46.

Fabian  family,  three  hundred  and  fix
of  them  voluntarily  offer  their,
affiftance  to  the  commonwealth,  at
their  own  expence,  and  march  to
the  fortrefs  of  Cremera,  in  Tyr-
rhenia,  iv.  28.

— ■  theFabnexercife  feven  confulfhips
fucceflively,  iv.  43.

•—  alter  the  three  hundred  arid  fix  of
the  Fabian  family  weie  put  to

death*


4*3


INDEX  to

^deaih,  whether  of) ly  one  youth  fur-
vived,  iv.  42.

« —  vvhofe  Ton  that  Fabius,  and  what
was  the  common  foundation  of
that  opinion,  iv.  43.

-—two  different  accounts  of  the  ex¬
tinction  of  the  Fabian  family,  iv.

*37>J**.

Ccsjo  Fabius ,  brother  of  Quintus  Fa¬
bius,  fon  of  Ctefo,  iii.  408.

—  in  his  quasftorfhip,  he  accufes  Sp.
Caflius  of  aiming  at  tyranny,  iii..
408.

—  at  the  interceftion  of  the  patricians
he  fets  up  for  the  confulfhip,  iii.
4 1 9  ■

. — *  enters  upon  his  confulfhip,  ib.

--  affifts  the  allies  of  the  Romans,

iii.  421.

fends  fuccours  to  his  collegue
iEmilius,  iii.  425.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  1.

—  marches  againft  the  Tyrrhenians,

iv.  4.

— «  his  foldiers  difobey  him,  iv.  5,

6.

—  obtains  a  reward  for  his  valor,  iv.
24.

—  is  conful  for  the  third  time,  ib.

—  marches  againft  the  iEqui,  iv.  25.

- —  affifts  his  collegue,  iv.  26.

—  is  fent  with  fuccours  to  the  conful,
iv.  20.

. —  when  proconful,  follows  three
hundred  and  fix  of  his  relations  to
Cremera  in  Tyrrhenia,  iv.  28,  31.
M.  Fabius ,  fon  of  Crefo,  the  brother
of  C*fo,  is  made  conful,  iii.  426.
— *  is  fent  to  affift  the  allies,  iii.  431.

. —  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  7.

—  his  fpeech  to  the  foldiers,  iv.  13.

— .  marches  with  his  brother  Caefo  to

the  relief  of  Fabius,  iv.  20.

—  recovers  the  camp  taken  by  the
enemy,  iv.  22,  3.

. —  refufes  a  triumph,  and  abdicates


the  TEX  T.

his  magiftracy,  iv.  24.

• —  marches  to  Cremera,  iv.  28.
Fabius ,  fon  of  Casio,  conful,  iii,'
407.

— -  inarches  with  an  army  againft  the
iEqui  and  Volfci,  iii.  417.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iii.  436.

—  when  legate,  is  killed  in  battle,  iv.
19,  20.

FK  Fabius ,  conful,  iv.  108.

—  marches  againft  theiEqui,  iv.  108.

- —  by  leave  of  the  fenate,  preferibes

the  conditions  of  peace  to  the
iEqui,  iv.  109.

—  is  fent  embaffador  to  the  iEqui,
after  they  had  violated  thofe  con¬
ditions,  iv.  no.

FK  Fabius,  the  hiftorian,  i.  16.

Fabius  Pibior ,  what  he  relates  con¬
cerning  the  twins  of  Ilia,  i.  174 —

J95*

—  Fabius, ^and  Cincius,  what  they
write  concerning  the  treachery  of
Tarpeia,  i.  293.

—  the  opinion  of  Fabius,  concern¬
ing  the  fons  of  Tarquinius  Prifcus,
is  refuted,  ii.  153.

—  Fabius  fays  that  the  Roman  terri¬
tories  were  divided  into  twenty  fix
parts  by  Tullius,  ii.  171.

—  whether  Fabius  has  rightly  made.
L.  Tarquinius  Collatinus  the  fon  of
Egerius,  ii.  266.

—  what  he  has  faid  concerning  the
Roman  manner  of  worlhip,  and
ceremonies,  iii.  268.

—  Fabius  is  remifs  in  his  fearch  into
antiquity,  ii.  210.

Q  Fabius  Vibulanus ,  conful,  iii.  407.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  112.

— •  harrafies  the  iEqui,  iv.  113.

—  is  conful  for  the  third  time,  iv.  1 66.

—  marches  in  all  hafte  againft  the
iEqui,  iv.  168.

—  triumphs  over  them,  iv.  171.

—  is  left  with  a  third  part  of  the

H  h  h  2  forces


414  I  N  D  E  X  to

forces  for  the  defence  of  the  city,
iv.  125,  172.

—  fends  fuccours  to  Minucius,  when
he  was  in  great  danger  j  and  re¬
call  the  other  conful  Nautius  from
the  Sabines  to  take  care  of  the
commonwealth,  iv.  174.

—  is  made  one  of  the  decemvirs,  iv.

239-  r  f

—  is  filenced  at  the  reproof  of  L.

Valerius,  iv.  255.

■—  marches  with.  Poetilius  and
Manius  Rabuleius,  two  of  his  col-
legues,  againft  the  Sabines,  iv.
284.

Fabhs  *,  a  fable  fpoken  in  the  ftyle  of
.ZEfop,  iii.  124 — 9.

Faggots  of  brufhwood  piled  up  to  a
great  height  and  fet  on  fire,  in  or¬
der  to  burn  the  fortrefs  taken  by
the  enemy,  iv.  160.

Faith  \  by  what  methods  faith  was
ufed  to  be  given,  and  ratified
in  conventions,  and  treaties,  iii.
126.

—  to  promife  by  their  faith  was  the
ftridteft  obligation  among  the  Ro¬
mans,  iv.  18.

to  fwear  by  their  faith  was  the
greatefl  oath  among  the  Romans,
iv.  36 6.

public  Faith,  a  temple  and  rites
appointed  to  her  by.  Numa,.  i.

364*

— -  another  temple  and  annual  fa-
crifices,  ii.  422.

Falernian  wine,  the  choicefl  wine  in
Italy,  i.  149.

Falermis  mount  very  fertil,.  i.  83.
Family .facrifices,  iv.  37.

Famine  ;  thofe  are  obliged  to  furren-
der  through  famine,  who  could
not  be  conquered  by  arms,  ii.
406.

■ —  a  famine  fucceeds  a  plague,  iv.
231.


the  TEX  T.

Farracia ,  a  participation  of  fpelt,  L
2 68,  9.

Fafces.  See  Axes,

Fathers ;  why  the  fenators  were  called
fo,  i.  235.

—  L.  Quintius  Cincinnatus  pleads
the  caufe  of  his  f©n  Csefo  before
the  people,  iv.  138.

—  how  great  a  power  was  given  by
the  Romans  to  the  father  over  his
fon,  i.  273.

—  a  father  had  a  power  over  the  per-
fon  and  fortunes  of  his  fon,  iii.
414..

—  the  feverity  of  fathers  in  punifh-
ing  the  offences  of  their  fons,  iii.
412.

—  the  crimes  of  fathers  did  not  af-
fedt  their  fons,  iii.  414,  15.

—  iEneas  bears  his  father  on  his
fhoulders  through  arms  and  through,
fire,  iv.  185.

—  confcript  fathers,  ii  244.

—  how  long,  and  in  what  manner
the  fon  was  fubjedt  to  his  father,
i.  271.

_ at  what  time  he  was  free  from  his-

father’s  authority,  i.  273.

—  the  father  could  fell  his  fon  for  a
flave  three  times,  i.  273,4.

—  fons  pulled  down  from  the  roltrum
by  their  fathers,  i.  273.

— .  and  fome  even  killed,  ib.

—  fons  have  no  property  during  the:
lives  of  their  fathers,,  iii.  414.

—  the  crimes  of  a  fon  do  not  deprive
the  father  of  his  eftate,  iii.  414,.

*5-

—  Brutus  orders  his-  fons  to  be  put
to  death  for  having  been  found;
among  the  confpirators,  ii.  324,.

5-

—  a  mother  fhould  have  the  govern*
ment  of  her  fon,  iii.  366.  1

Faunas ,  a  defcendant  of  Mars,  king
of  the  Aborigines,  i,  69,  97.

FauJluIuSy


INDEX  to

Fauftulas ,  keeper  of  the  royal  herds,
i.  184.

—  informs  Romulus  of  his  fortune,
i.  189.

—  is  apprehended  by  the  guards,  i.
192.

—  his  birth,  and  condition,  i.  19 6.
•—  his  death,  and  burial,  i.  202.

Feafis.  See  Fejlivals.

February  ;  the  Lupercalia  were  cele¬
brated  in  this  month,  i.  187,  8.
Feciales  ;  Xn ovio<po$ot,  among  the  an¬
cient  Pelafgi,  and  Aborigines,  i.
47’  8*

—  Feciales,  Eigyvofmcei,  i.  355.
their  fun&ions,  i.  356,  7.

in  what  manner  and  form  they  de¬
manded  reftitution,  i.  357.
Ferentinum ,  the  afiemblies  of  the  La¬
tin  nation  held  there,  ii.  79.

*—  the  debate  concerning  a  war  a-
gainft  the  Romans,  held  at  this
place,  ii*  408,  9.

Feretrius.  See  Jupiter.

Fryonia ,  formerly  FVonia,  i.  31 1.

*■—  her  temple,  and  feftival,  ib.
Fefcennia ,  its  fituation,  i.  47.

Fejlivals  of  the  Latines,  ii.  241;

—  votive  feftivals,  iii.  268.

—  feftivals,  interrupted  by  the  ap¬
proach  of  an  enemy,  are  renewed
with  double  magnificence,  iii.  49.

—  the  care  of  the  feftivals  was  com¬
mitted  to  the  rediles,  iii.  146.

—  feftivals  at  Athens  in  honor  of
Bacchus,  iii.  281.

Ficana ,  rafed  by  Ancus  Marcius,  ii.

87-

Ficulenfes ,  their  founders,  i.  39.
Ficulnenjts ,  the  name  of  a  road;.

called  alfo  Nomentana,.  iv.  323.
Fidente  formerly  built  by  the  Albans,

*•  3 17*  ,

—  forty  ftadia  diftant  from  Rome,  i.
316.  ii.  62.

—  is  made  a  Roman  colony  by  Ro-


the  TEX  T.  415

J

mulus,  i.  317.

—  is  walked  by  the  Tiber,  i.  320.

—  is  befieged  by  Tullus  Hoftilius,  ii.

73*

—  is  taken  by  him,  ii.  73.  4.

— -  by  Ancus  Marcius,  ii.  89.

—  and  by  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  ii.  106.

—  at  the  inftigation  of  Sextus  Tar¬
quinius  it  revolts  from  the  Ro¬
mans,  ii.  373.

—  is  reduced,  ii.  378.

—  is  invaded  by  the  Sabines,  iv.  1 72.

—  the  Sabines  are  beaten,  ii.  245.

— ■  the  Fidenates,  and  Veientes  con-

fpire  againft  the  Romans,  ii.  10.

— •  the  fugitive  Fidenates  accufe  the
Romans  in  the  Ferentine  aflembly,
ii.  391.

—  the  Fidenates,  having  obtained
fuccours  from  Tarquinius  Superbus
offer  injuries  to  the  Roman  colo¬
nies,  and  embafladors,  ii.  393.

—  are  befieged  by  Veturius,  ii.  404.

^ —  being  conquered  by  him  in  the

Held,  they  retreat  to  their  city,  ii.
404»  5 •

«— furrender  to  Lartius,  ii.  407,  8.

—  their  camp  is  abandoned,  iv.  321.
Fidius  {Me dills')  i.  308.

Fidius .  See  Jupiter.

Figtree.  See  Ruminalis.

Fines ;  Sureties  for  a  fine,  iii.  179.

—  a  fine  is  exacted  from  fureties,  iv.
r43*

—  the  fine  of  a  conquered  nation,  ii.
388.

—  thirty  ftieep,  and  two  oxen  were
the  greateft  fine,  iv.  224.

— *•  why  a  fine  is  impofed  on  confuls,
and  not  a  capital  punifhment,  iv.
223?  4*  <  _

—  Romilius  will  not  accept  his  fine
though  it  had  been  remitted  to
him,  but  held  it  as  a  thing  de¬
voted,  iv.  229.

—  after,  a  fine  is  paid,  it  was  law¬

ful.


INDEX  to  the  T  E ;  X  T.


ful  to  return  to  public  employ¬
ments,  ■  iv.  54.

Fire  kindled  fpontaneoufly,  i.  137.

—  playing  round  a  youth’s  head,  ii.

J4 7-  •  •.

— ■  fires  fhooting  along  the  heavens,
iv.  132.

—  why  the  perpetual  fire  of  Vefta
was  committed  to  virgins,  i.  343.

—  why  dedicated  to  Vefta,  ib.

• —  when  fuffered  to  go  out,  why
dreaded  by  the  Romans,  i.  348.

—  after  its  extinction,  how  procured
again,  ib.

—  a  communion  of  fire  and  water,  a
marriage  rite,  i.  279,  80.

See  JVolf.

Firjl  offerings  were  taken  from  all  the
limbs,  and  entrails  of  a  victim,  iii.
277>  &

—  the  oblation  of  the  firft  offerings
at  the  funerals  of  brave  men,  iv.
291.

Flammea ,  i.  340.

Flames  iffuing  from  the  tops  of  jave¬
lins;  ii.  382,  3.

Flamines ,  $i(p<xvi;(po(>ot,  i.  340.

M.  Flavoleius  a  primipilus,  fets  the
example  to  his  fellow  foldiers  in  a
great  exploit,  iv.  1 6.

—  is  honoured  with  the  reward  of
bravery,  iv.  24.

Flavus.  See  Lartius.

Flejh  \  pieces  of  flefh  fall  in  a  violent
ihower,  iv.  133.  r  ...

Flutes  ,  fhort  flutes  ufed  in  proceffions,
iii.  271.

Force ,  feldom  binding,  iii.  357.

Foreigners ,  driven  away  by  the  Greeks,
who  are  blamed  for  it,  i.  254.

—  the  reception  of  foreigners  during
the  votive  games,  iii.  269.

Forentani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

Fors  Fortuna,  ii.  263.’

Fortrejfes  of  the  city,  iii.  384.


—  garrifoned  by  thofe  above  the  mi¬
litary  age,  iii.  342.  iv.  8..

—  the  punifhment  of  thofe,  who  de-
ferted  a  fortrefs,  iii.  4"i3.

Fortune ,  two  temples  ereCted  to  her
by  Serv.  Tullius,  ii.  203.  .  \

—  the  temple  of  fortune  is  burnt,  ii.

228.  ;  -

• —  the  temple,  altar,  flatue,  and  rites
of  Fortuna  Muliebris,  iii.  369.

—  the  priefteffes  of  Fortuna  Mu¬
liebris,  iii.  370,  1.

—  the  temple  of  Fortune  flood  in  the
Ox  market,  ii.  203.

Forum,  in  what  part  of  the  city,  i.

343-

—  in  the  plain  at  the  foot  of  Capito-

line  hill,  i.  3 1 2.  ;

—  the  forum,  where  juftice  was  ad-1
miniftered,  and  the  affemblies
were  held,  is  adorned  by  Tarqui-
nius  Prifcus,  ii.  129.

— •  the  forum  Boarium,  or  Ox  market,
i.  92.  ii.  203.

—  the  forum  Popilii,  i.  49.

Fox  quenches  a  fire,  i.  137.

Freeborn ,  in  what  they  differed  from

flaves,  ii.  190,  1.

—  not  lawful  to  ftrike  a  freeman,  iv..
74-

Friends ,  an  appellation  given  to  com¬
mon  women,  i.  196.

Frugi  ( Pifo )  an  hiftorian,  ii.  157.
Fufetius  ( Me  tins )  fucceeds  Cluilius  in
the  command  of  the  Albans,  ii.  10.

—  invites  Tullus  Hoftilius  to  an  ac¬
commodation,  ib.

«—  his  treachery,  ii.  51.

• —  and  punifhment,  ii.  71.

Funeral  performed  in  the  night,  ii.
227.

—  carried  through  the  forum,  ib.

—  borne  through  the  molt  confpicu-
ous  ftreets  of  the  city,  iv.  312.

—  funeral  triumphal,  iii,  376,  7.

—  the  fenate  defrays  the  expences  of

Popli-


INDEX  to

Poplicola’s  funeral,  ii.  387.

—  Agrippa  Menenius  is  honoured
with  a  magnificent  funeral  at  the
public  expence,  iii.  146,  7.

Siccius,  the  legate,  is  honoured  with
a  public  funeral,  iv.  289—91.

- —  a  fatyric  dance  at  the  funerals  of
great  men,  iii.  274,  5.

—  funeral  games,  ii.  339.

—  funeral  orations,  ib.

—  by  whom  invented,  ii.  339.

—  common  burial  denied  an  un¬
worthy  daughter,  ii.  44,  5.

—  funeral  rites  enjoined  to  relations,
iv.  302.

—  a  fpendid  funeral  in  honor  of
Virginia,  iv.  312.

Furius  (Agrippa)  conful,  iv.  350.

L.  Furius ,  conful,  iv.  68..

— *  is  cited,  together  with  hiscollegue
Aulus  Manlius,  to  a  trial  by  Cn.
Genucius,  a  tribune  of  the  people,
for  not  having  carried  into  exe¬
cution  a  decree  of  the  fenate  con¬
cerning  the  Agrarian  law,  iv.  70.'

L.  Furius ,  a  triumvir,  iv.  108.

P.  Furius ,  conful,  iv..  74.

P.  Furius ,  the  legate  of  his  brother
Spurius,  is  killed,  together  with
two  cohorts  under  his  command,
iv.  1 17.  ,

Serv.  Furius,  proconful,  totally  de¬
feats  the  Aiqui,  iv.  31.

Sex.  Furius ,  conful,  iii.  304.

Sp.  Furius ,  conful,  iv.  1.

— .  plunders  the  iEqui,  iv.  4.
fecond  time  conful,  iv.  114.

—  marches  againll  the  iEqui,  iv.  1 15.

—  is  wounded  in  the  thigh  by  a
javelin,  iv.  1 18.

—  dies  of  the  plague,  iv.  231.

C.  Furniusy  a  tribune  of  the  people*
iv.  364.

« —  oppofes  the  demands  of  the  ple¬
beians  with  refpedt  to  the  conful-
fhip,  ib.


the  TEX  T.  '  417

G.

G  a  b  11,  an  Alban  colony,  a  town  of
Latium  (landing  in  the  road  to
Praenefte,  once  great,  and  power¬
ful,  ii.  246,  409.

—  Romulus  and  Remus  were  educat¬
ed  at  this  place,  i.  197.

—  Sextus  Tarquinius,  fon  of  Su¬
perbus,  communicates  to  his  father
an  artful  contrivance  to  reduce  the
Gabini,  ii.  249.

—  the  Gabini  are  betrayed  by  a
feigned  revolt  to  them,  ii.  250.

—  he  reduces  them,  and  is  made
king  of  Gabii  by  his  father,  ii.
2  55.

—  Gabii,  being  taken  by  Tarqui¬
nius,  is  treated  mildly  beyond  ex¬
pectation,  ib.

—  Tarquin,  when  banifhed,  retires
to  Gabii,  ii.  296.

G allies.  See  Legates.

Gamesy  a  proceffion  on  foot  in  the  vo-'
tive  games,  iii.  269.  •  ;

—  the  fons  of.  the  knights  lead  an
equeltrian  proceffion  in  the  votive
games,  ib.

—  the  reception  of  foreigners  during
the  votive  games,  iii.  269.

—  the  games  of  the  Zacynthii,  i.

1 14.

—  games,  and  public  (hews,  ii.
198.

—  exhibited  after  a  proceffion,  iii.
279.

—  performed  after  the  difcovery  and
fuppreffion  of  a  confpiracy,  ii.

403.

—  games,  difturbed  by  an  irruption  of
the  Sabines,  are  renewed  with
double  magnificence,  iii.  49.

— -  votive  games,  when,  and  at
how  great  expence  exhibited,  iii.
268.

—  games  are  commanded  by  Ju¬

piter


4i8  INDEX  to  the  TEX  T.


piter  to  be  renewed,  iii.  263.

—  thofe  games  are  renewed,  iii.  281.

—  funeral  games,  iii.  274,280.

—  games,  and  Ludiones  called  fo
from  the  Lydians,  who  were  the
firft  inventors  of  them,  i.  355.

—  the  Ludiones  bore  lbrne  refem-
blance  to  the  Salii ;  the  difference
between  them,  ib.

—  performers  at  games  were  of  two
forts,  iii.  269.

—  three  forts  of  trials  of  fkill  among
the  ancients,  Running,  Wreftling,
and  Boxing,  iii.  280.

—  the  antagonifts  were  girded  about
the  middle,  and  all  the  reft  of  their
bodies,  was  naked,  iii>  269.

— >  charioteers,  their  games,  iii.  279.
Gamori ,  or  the  landed  men,  of  Syra-
cufe  were  expelled  by  their  clients,

iii.  93.

Gates  j  Capena,  iii.  288.

« —  Carmentalis,  or  holy  gate  of  the
capitol,  always  flood  open,  i.  71.

iv.  155.

Mugionia,  i.  312.

— •  Trigemina,  i.  89.

—  Efquiline,  iv.  123.

Gauls  drive  the  Tyrrhenians  out  of
the  country  near  the  Ionian  gulph,
iii.  154,  5.  j

—  at  what  period  they  took  Rome,  i.
170.

Gegania  Tarquin’s  confort,  ii.  157.
Geganit  are  transferred  from  Alba  to
Rome,  ii.  69.

L.  Geganius ,  brother  of  T.  Geganius
the  conful,  is  fent  with  Publius
Valerius  into  Sicily  to  buy  corn,
iii.  149,  50.

—  returns,  iii.  1 53.

M.  Geganius  Macerinus ,  conful,  iv.
349-

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  377.

T.  Geganius  Macerinus ,  conful,  iii.
148.


Cn.  Gellius ,  his  opinion  concerning  the
time  of  the  ravifhment  of  the  Sa¬
bine  women,  i.  280.
from  what  example  the  college  of
the  feciales  were  inftituted,  as  he
thinks,  i.  356.

—  what  he  has  delivered  in  his  hifto-
ry  concerning  the  pofterity  of  Nu-
ma,  i.  366.

— -  his  account  of  the  coming  of  Tar-
quinius  to  Rome,  ii.  154.

—  he  has,  without  foundation,  af-
ferted  that  Tarquinius,  in  the  laft
battle  with  the  Romans  at  the  lake
Regillus,  fought  on  horfeback,

iii.  17.

Gelo^i bn  of  Dinomenes,  fucceeds  the
fons  of  Hippocrates  in  the  tyranny
of  Sicily,  iii.  150,  1.

— -  he  fends  a  handfome  prefent  of
com  to  the  Roman  people,  iii.
183.

Cn.  Genucius ,  a  tribune  of  the  peo¬
ple  prefies  the  Agrarian  law,  iv.  70.

—  the  day  before  the  affair  was  to  be
debated,  he  is  found  dead  in  his
bed,  iv,

the  fame  perfon,  with  a  different
prsenomen,  is  affirmed  to  have
been  put  to  death  privately  by  the
patricians,  iv.  204.

M.  Genucius ,  conful,  iv.  364.

—  his  anfwer  in  the  fenate  to  the  de¬
mands  of  a  tribune  of  the  people,

iv.  370.

T.  Genucius ,  a  tribune,  cites  T.
Menenius  before  the  people  for
his  ill  conduct  in  Tynhenia,  iv.

52*

CT.  Genucius ,  brother  of  M.  Genucius,
iv.  368.

—  is  appointed  conful,  iv.  233.

—  inftead  of  conful  is  made  a  de¬
cemvir,  iv.  236.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  de¬
mands  of  the  tribunes,  iv.  373.

Geryon’s


INDEX'  to

•  -L.  x  v .  _  i  «  ■  :

Geryoits  cows  driven  away  by  Her¬
cules,  i.  79.

Girdles ,  cinctures,  iii.  270.

Glanis ,  a  river  of  Campania,  flows
backvvards,  iii.  155.

God  is  incapable  of  any  function,  that
is  unworthy  of  an  incorruptible,
and  happy  nature,  i.  1 77.

Gorgets,  very  rich  ones,  iv.  201.

Government  \  that  form  of  govern¬
ment  is  the  bell,  which  is  compofed
of  monarchy,  ariftocracy,  and  de¬
mocracy,  iii.  236.

—  that  form  is  efleemed  the  beft,  in
which  liberty  and  laws  are  equal,
iv.  13  1.

— -  that  form  is  the  mpft  felf-fufr
ficient,  which  anfwers  ail  the  ends
both  of  peace,  and  war,  i.  233.

—  the  confultation  concerning  a
form  of  government,  immediately
before  the  expulflon  of  the  kings,
ii.  276.

■*—  the  Romans  fend  feeptres,  and
diadems  to  the  kings  their  allies,
as  a  confirmation  of  their  power,
ii.  1 2 1.

Governors ;  a  governor  at  Rome,
during  the  king’s  abfence,  ii.  289.

—  the  governor  of  the  city  defends
the  neighbouring  country,  iii.  383.

—  the  governor  of  the  city  fends
fupplies  to  one  of  the  confuls  fur-
rounded  by  the  enemy,  and  calls
the  other  home  to  look  after  the
commonwealth,  iv.  174.

Gown  diflinguifhed  with  gold,  ii.

385-

* —  the  make  of  the  gown  wome  by
the  Roman  kings,  ii.  120.

See  Manly.

fT.  Gracchus ,  his  tribunefhip  diffolves
the  harmony  of  the  government,  i.
242.

See  Clcelius.

Grains  j  the  Greeks  looked  upon  v


tlie  TEXT.  419

barlev  as  the  moil  ancient  of  grains,
i.  268.

Grapes ,  a  prodigious  bunch,  ii.  136.
Grafing ,  the  art  of  it  recommended
by  Ancus  Marcius,  ii.  83.

Greeks ;  the  Arcadians  are  the  firffc
Greeks,  who  remove  to  Italy,  i.  29,
3  o-

—  the  Pelafgi  were  the  fecond,  i.  40:

• —  the  third  colony  under  Evander,

i.  68,  9,  76.

• —  the  fourth  under  Hercules,  i.  76.

—  the  fifth  under  iEneas,  i.  100.

—  all  the  Greek  cities  had  every  one
their  own  king,  ii.  431.

—  a  comparifon  of  the  Greek,  and
Roman  empires,  1.  7,  8.

—  the  Greeks  blamed  for  their  ex-
ciufion  of  foreigners,  i.  252.

—  the  Romans  fend  to  the  Greeks
for  laws,  iv.  229.

—  Greek  cities  in  Italy,  iv:  232:

—  Greek  fables,  i:  25^:  ,  _ _

Ground ;  a  foothfayer  marks  the

ground  with  his  flick,  ii.  258,  9.
Gymnafium  for  the  youth  to  exercife
in  arms,  ii.  333:

Gymnic  games,  iii.  270.

H.

T

H.f'E  m  o.jj  i  a,  now.  ^called  Thefialy,
i.  41:

Hair  plucked  from  the  head  of  sl
vidlim,  and  thrown  into  the  flames,
iii.  278.

—  a  caul  of  network  for  the  hair,  iii-:
165 .

—  to  drefs  up  the  hair  like  girls,  ib.

—  hairy  veils,  iii.  274.

Halls  •,  the  public  halls  of  the  Greeks,
i.  263.

—  were  temples  ferved  by  their  chief
magiflrates,  i.  343

Hands  the  walking  of  hands  al¬
ways  performed  before  a  facrifice,
iii.  278.

Iii'  *  Hannibal \

/


4*20


INDEX  to  the  TEXT,


Hannibal ,  his  war,  i.  255.

Happinefs ;  Virtue,  not  fhameful
pleafures  the  meafure  of  Roman
happinefs,  i.  2 56.  ii.  388.

Head  of  a  man  newly  killed  is  found
in  digging  the  foundation  of  the
temple  on  the  Saturnian  hill,  ii.
2  56—259.

r—  which  accident  gave  occafion  to
its  being  afterwards  called  the  Ca¬
pitol  ine,  from  Caput,  a  head,  ii.

259.

Hefiorid <e  are  reftored  to  their  pa¬
ternal  government  by  Afcanius,  i.
106.

Hegefippus ,  an  ancient  hiftorian,  i.
1 10.

Helenus  fettles  with  the  Trojans  at
Dodona,  i.  116.

Hellanicus ,  the.  Lefbian,  his  account
of  the  two  Italian  colonies  carried
into  Sicily,  i.  51.
his  account  of  the  Tyrrhenians,
i.  63.

r—  of  the  name  of  Italy,  i.  79.

■ —  of  the  flight  of  /Eneas,  i.  102,  8.
Hellefponty  a  ftreight  fo  called,  i.
140.

Helmet s,  with  crefts  and  plumes,  iii.
271.

—  brazen  helmets,  ii.  1  75.
Heniochides ,  archon  at  Athens,  ii.  97.
Herculaneum ,  its  fituation,  i.  98.
Hercules ,  the  greateft  general,  and  the

moft  juft  reformer  of  kingdoms
through  the  world,  i.  93.

—  takes  Ilium,  i.  77.

having  conquered  Spain,  he  comes
with  his  army  into  Italy,  i.  76,

94*

—  by  what  exploits  he  gained  great
glory  in  Italy,  i.  96,  7.

—  he  qualifies  the  cruel  rites  of  Sa¬
turn,  to  whom  human  facrifices
uled  to  be  offered,  by  fubftituting
pageants  in  their  room,  i.  85.


—  ere&s  an  altar,  and  appoints  fa¬
crifices  to  Saturn,  i.  85.

—  is  honoured  himfelf  with  an  altar,
and  rites  by  Evander,  i.  89.

—  delivers  rites  to  the  Potitii  and
Pinarii,  i.  91.

—  celebrates  games  at  the  funeral  of
Pelops,  ii.  339.

—  the  opinions,  which  prevail  con¬
cerning  Hercules,  are  fome  fa¬
bulous,  and  others  nearer  truth,  i.
86.

—  an  expedient  of  Hercules  to  find
his  cows,  i.  88.

—  his  companions  fettle  in  Italy,  i.

99-

— -  his  fons  in  Italy,  namely  Palas  by
Launa,  daughter  of  Evander,  and
Latinus  by  a  nothern  nymph,  i.

9  7-

—  Tyrrhenus,  fon  of  Hercules  by
Omphale,  i.  62.

—  his 'altars  are  frequent  in  Italy,  i.
92.

—  the  pillars  of  Hercules,  i.  8.
Herdonius  ( Appius )  the  Sabine  fiezes

the  capitol,  iv,  155.

• —  is  killed  fighting  bravely,  iv,.
161.

Herdonius  (Turnus)  thwarts  Tarqui-'
nius  Superbus,  ii.  234,  5.

—  he  is  circumvented  by  the  treachery "
of  Tarquinius,  and  put  to  death,
ii.  239,

Herminius  ( Larus )  confu),  iv.  348.
Herminius  ( Titus )  the  legate  is  left:
with  M.  Horatius  in  the  camp  by
Tarquinius,  ii.  296.

— -  Herminius,  and  Horatius  com'
elude  a  truce  with  the  Ardeates,  ib.

—  is  one  of  the  generals  of  the  Ro¬
man  forces,  ii.  348.

—  protebfs  the  bridge,  for  fome  time
with  Codes,  ii.  349.

— -  brings  provifions  to  the  city,  ii.

353-


—  13


INDEX  to

—  is  chofen  confuj,  ii.  366.

—  when  legate,  flops  thofe  foldiers,
who  were  running  away,  iii.  19.

• —  kills  Mamilius  with  his  own
hand,  and,  while  he  is  taking  the
fpoils  off  the  body,  is  killed  him-
felf,  iii.  19.

Hernia ,  a  neighbouring  nation  to  the
Romans,  iii.  396.

—  enter  into  an  alliance  with  Tarqui-
nius  Superbus,  ii.  240.

—  the  Latines,  and  Romans  defining
their  affiffance,  they  return  an  am¬
biguous  anfwer,  ii.  41 1.

— -  promife  to  aftift  the  Latines  againft
the  Romans,  iii.  8.

—  join  arms  with  the  Volfci  againft
the  Romans,  iii.  40.

—  the  Romans  applying  to  them  for
juftice,  they  anfwer  them  in  an  im¬
perious  manner,  iii.  383.

—  defert  their  camp  in  the  night,  iii.

386.

— -  fue  to  the  Romans  for  peace,  iii.

392-

—  are  admitted  by  Caffius  into  friend-
fhip,  and  alliance  upon  the  fame
terms  with  the  Latines,  iii.
394.

i —  are  propoftd  by  Caflius  to  be  ad¬
mitted  to  a  participation  of  the
public  lands,  iii.  395 — 8.

—  fend  twice  the  number  of  auxi¬
liaries  to  the  Romans,  that  were  re¬
quired,  iv.  8.

—  dtfire  fuccours  againft  the  in-
curfions  of  the  Aiqui,  and  Volfci,
iv.  12 1.

—  are  confined  within  their  walls  by
the  enemy,  iv.  122.

—  again  defire  fuccours  againft  the
^Equi,  and  Volfci,  iv.  168.

Herodotus ,  his  account  of  the  voyage
of  Tyrrhenus  to  Italy,  i.  61.
a  paffage  quoted  from  Herodotus
concerning  the  language  of  the


the  TEXT.  421

Crotoniatae,  and  their  neighbours,
i.  65,  6.

Herfilia ,  a  Sabine,  the  promotrefs,
and  condutftrefs  of  the  embaffy  of
women  to  their  own  people,  i.
303-

Hefpericiy  the  name  of  Italy  among
the  Greeks,  i.  80.

Hejliotis ,  a  country  fo  called,  i,  41.

Hetrufci ,  and  Hetruria.  See  Tyr¬
rhenian

Hieronymus  Cardianus ,  his  treatife  of
the  Epigoni,  i.  15.

—  his  hiftory  not  altogether  faithful,
i.  18.

Hill  \  Valerius  removes  his  houfe
from  the  hill  into  the  plain,  ii.
343-

See  the  hills  at  Rome  under  their
refpedtive  names.

Aver.tine,  Capitoline  (Saturnian)
Colline,  Efquilipe,  Pallantine,
Quirinal,  Viminal  (Caelius.)

Hipparchus ,  archon  at  Athens,  ii,
439-

Hippocratia ,  an  Arcadian  feftival,  i.;
74-

Hippomedon ,  general  of  the  horfe  in
the  Cumasan  war  againft  the  Bar¬
barians,  is  competitor  with  Arifto-
demus,  iii.  157.

—  the  fons  of  Hippomedon  take  up
arms  againft  the  tyrant  Arifto-
demus,  iii.  166.

Hiftory  5  what  hiftories  are  ufeful,  ii.'
433-

—  hiftory  ought  to  relate  not  only
the  events  of  things,  but  the  caufes,
and  manners  of  all  tranfa&ions ;
and  likewife  the  counfels,  from
which  they  flowed,  and  the  cir-
cumftances  of  thofe  counfels,  ii.
400,  1.

—  the  hiftories  of  countries  ought  to

be  aflifted  not  only  by  the  relations
of  natives,  but  alfo  by  other  in-
I  i  i  2  difputable


422  INDEX  to

difputable  teftimonies,  iii.  2 66.
extraordinary  events,  if  they  are
not  confirmed  by  their  own  reafon-
ablenefs,  do  not  find  credit,  iii.

2  59*

—  in  ancient  hiftory,  which  contains
the  tranfadtions  of  many  ages,  the
computation  of  time  can  fcarce  be
exadtly  fixed,  iii.  152.

•—  the  prefaces  of  hiftorians,  i.  4.

—  the  duty  of  an  hiftorian,  ii.  386.
*■—  the  duty,  the  merits  and  praifes

of  diligent  hiftorians,  iv.  248,

9‘

r—  not  only  the  military  adtions  of
illuftrious  men  are  to  be  recorded
by  hiftorians,  but  alfo  an  account
of  their  private  lives,  ii.  386.

Holy  way,  ii.  365.

—  holy  mountain,  iii.  69.

—  holy  youth,  in  what  manner  they
were  fent  out  as  a  colony,  i.
38.

«—  holy  lake,  i.  4 6.

—  the  people  eredt  altars,  and  per¬
form  facrifices  on  the  holy  moun¬
tain,  iii.  137.

—  the  people  fecede  to  the  holy
mountain,  iii.  69.

—  the  aediles  had  the  charge  of  the
holy  places,  ib.

• —  holy  bodies,  that  is,  devoted  to
infernal  Jupiter,  i.  240.

—  the  perlons  of  the  tribunes  were
‘  held  holy,  and  inviolable,  iii.  136,

7-  -

Homer ,  in  what  manner  he  relates  the

taking  of  Troy,  i.  102.

—  what  he  has  faid  in  relation  to  the
gymnic  games,  iii..  270.

« —  divides  the  athletic  games  into
three  forts,  iii.  280.

4-  what  he  has  related  concerning
the  rite  of  facrifices,  iii.  278.
what  he  has  delivered  concerning;
the  ancient  dances,  iii.  272.


the  TEX  T.

—  kings  mentioned  in  Homer,  i.

244*

— '  Homer  calls  kings  and

ii.  43 1.

—  a  paffage  in  Homer  concerning
the  kingdom  of  the  iEneadae,  i.
124.

Hone  divided  by  a  razor,  ii.  138.

—  both  of  them  buried  under  an  al¬
tar  near  the  ftatue  of  Attius  Na-
vius,  ii.  139.

Hope,  the  fource  of  glorious  actions,
iii.  15.

—  a  fteady  hope  or  conftancy  fupports
men  under  every  dreadful  circum-
ftance,  ii.  406.

—  men  are  more  outrageous  when
deprived  of  conceffions,  than  when
they  are  difappointed  of  their  hopes,
ii.  419.

—  the  temple  of  Hope,  iv.  47.

Horatian  pillar,  ii.  49.

Horatii ,  the  three  twin  brothers,  their
mother,  and  coufins,  ii.  29.

C.  Horatius ,  conful,  iv.  35.

—  marches  againft  the  Volfci,  iv.

36-.

—  brings  relief  to  the  city,  iv.  46.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  1  79.

—  the  debate  he  had  with  the  tribunes,,
and  people,  in  order  to  obtain  their
affiftance  in  the  war,  iv.  182.

—  marches  againft  the  iEqui,  iv.
188.

—  conquers  them,  and  demolifties
Corbio,  ib.

M.  Horatius ,  one  of  the  three  twin
brothers  is  acquitted  of  the  murder
of  his  fiftcr,  and  expiates  it,  ii.  48.

—  is  fent  to  rale  Alba,  ii.  62.

—  and  rafes  it,  ii.  72.

Af.  Horatius  is  left  by  Tarquinius  in
the  camp,  as  legate,  ii.  296.

—  is  fubftituted  to  Sp.  Lucretius  in
the  confulfhip,  ii.  343.

—  is  fecond  time  conful*  ii.  345.

—  fends


INDEX  to

fends  his  fon  a  hoftage  to  the
Tyrrhenian',  ii.  361.

1 —  ded  cares  the  Capitoline  temple,
ii.  366.

M.  1  lor  at  i  us,  and  L.  Valerius  are
heads  of  the  party  againft  the
decemvirs,  iv.  281,  2.

—  confpire  againft  the  decemvirs,  iv.
282.

■ —  are  fent  to  the  feceders  on  the  holy
mountain,  iv.  325.

*—  M.  Horatius,  and  his  friends  op-
pofe  Appius,  iv.  310.
l\d.  Horatius  Bar  bat  us,  grand  fon  of
Marcus,  his  fpeech  in  the  fe-
nate  againft  Appius,  iv.  255,
6.

* —  is  chofen  conful,  iv.  339.

• —  leads  out  the  forces  againft  the
Sabines,  iv.  343.

—  is  denied  a  triumph,  iv.  344.
however,  he  triumphs  with  his  col-

legue,  without  the  confent  of  the
fenate,  iv.  346.

his  opinion  concerning  the
demands  of  the  tribunes,  iv.
372-

P.  Horatius  Codes ,  from  whence  he
derived  his  furname,  ii.  349.

• —  from  what  family  he  came,  and
with  what  qualifications  endued,  ii.
349-

’• —  alone  maintains  the  bridge  againft
the  Tyrrhenians,  ib.

—  fwims  crofs  the  Tiber  to  his  coun¬
trymen  with  his  arms  in  his  hand,
if  351*

—  the  honours  with  which  he  was  re¬
warded,  ib.

P.  Horatius ,  conful,  iv.  229;

—  is  made  a  decemvir,  iv.  236.

Horns ;  why  the  people  ufed  to  be

affembled  by  the  found  of  oxens
horns,  i.  236.

the  century  of  hornblowers,  ii.
179.  iii.  245.


the  TEX  T.  433

Horfe  \  a  horfe  is  given  to  Sicc  us,
when  legate,  on  account  of  his
age,  iv.  288.

—  a  war  horfe,  with  molt  fumptuous
trappings,  is  prefented  to  Marcius
for  his  gallant  behaviour,  iii.
*43-

■ —  horfes  of  the  knights  maintained
by  the  public,  i:i  22.

■ —  horfes,  with  golden  bridles,  draw
a  triumphal  chariot,  iii  391.

—  the  fons  of  the  knights  lead  a  pro-
ceflion  on  horfeback  at  the  votive
games,  iii.  269.

—  the  feftival  of  horfes  and  mules,
i.  74.

—  the  trace  horfe,  iii.  279.

—  every  didator  appointed  his
own  general  of  the  horfe,  ii*
434*

H oft  ages ;  Cloelia,  and  the  Roman
ladies,  who  were  hoftages,  make
their  elcape,  ii.  362.

—  unlawful  to  offer  any  violence
to  the  perfons  of  hoftages,  ii;

363-

- —  prifoners  are  retained  in  lieu  of

'/  hoftages,  ii.  114.

—  hoftages  put  to  death  on  account
of  the  perfidy  of  their  nation,  iii.
47-

Hortona,  its  fituation,  iii.  437.

■ —  is  taken  by  the  iEqui,  iv.  180:

Hoftilius  of  Medullia,  ii.  1.

Tullus  Hoftilius ,  the  third  king  of  the
Romans,  from  what  family  he  was
defcended,  ib.

— *  how  long  he  reigned,  i.  173.

—  what  regulations  he  made  in  the
commonwealth,  ii.  3.

- —  divides  the  demains  of  the  kings
among  the  people,  ii.  3.

—  according  to  his  vow,  he  inflitutes
the  agonenfes,  i.  351.

—  his  military  exploits,  ii.  4.

7—  by  what  ftrategem  he  prevented

the


424  INDEX  to

the  Albans  in  demanding  reftitu-
tion,  ii.  5.

—  triumphs  over  the  Albans,  ii.

4  6.

• —  and  over  the  Fidenates,  ii.  74.

—  vows'  to  celebrate  feftivals  in  ho¬
nor  of  Saturn  and  Rhea,  ii.  75.

—  triumphs  over  the  Sabines,  ii.  76,

• —  dwelt  upon  mount  Caelius,  ii.  3.

—  the  death  and  praifes  of  Tullus
Hoftilius,  ii.  80.

—  what  occalioned  his  death,  ib.
Houfe ;  Valerius  removes  his  houfe

from  the  top  of  a  hill,  into  the
plain,  ii.  343.

Human  facrifices  abolifhed  by  Her¬
cules,  i.  85.

Hybrilides ,  archon  at  Athens,  iii.  152.
Hydromel ;  Valerius,  and  his  victori¬
ous  army  are  received  with  bowls
of  Hydromel,  iv.  67.

I.

Jantculum,  formerly  called  JEnea,
i.  167.

—  is  furrounded  with  a  wall  by  An-
cus  Marcius,  ii.  96.

—  is  diftant  twenty  ftadia  from  the
city,  iv.  27.

- —  Rome  may  firft  be  feen  from  thence
by  thofe,  who  are  coming  from
Tyrrhenia,  ii.  99.  iv.  46.

—  Janiculum,  a  Roman  fortrefs,  is
taken  by  Porfena,  ii.  347.

* —  is  feized  by  the  Tyrrhenians,  iv.

4 6.

—  and  abandoned  by  them,  iv.  51.
Iapygiay  a  promontory  belonging  to

Salentum,  i.  117.

Iafius ,  fon  of  Jupiter  by  Eleftra,  i.
l39-

—  is  killed  by  lightning,  i.  140.
Javelins ,  what  kind  of  weapons,  ii.

382.

flames  iffuing  from  the  tops  of
javelins,  ii.  382,  3.


the  TEXT.

L.  Icilius  Rugay  a  tribune  of  the  peo¬
ple,  iv.  189.

—  is  fecond  time  tribune  of  the  peo¬
ple,  iv.  192.

■ —  what  he  diflikes  in  the  fpeech  of
Siccius,  concerning  the  Agrarian
law,  iv.  206.

• —  when  sedile  of  the  people,  he  cites
C.  Veturius  to  appear  on  a  cer¬
tain  day,  in  order  to  take  his  trial
before  them,  iv.  221.

—  is  grandfon  of  C.  Icilius  Ruga,
and  betroths  the  daughter  of  L.
Virginius,  iv.  292.

—  flies  to  the  afliftance  of  his  fpoufe
Virginia,  iv.  294.

moft  ftrenuoufly  prote&s  her,  iv.

3°°.

—  bitterly  inveighs  againft  Appius,
ib.

- —  accufes  Marcus  Claudius  before
the  people,  iv.  342.

Icilius ,  the  brother  of  L.  Icilius  the
lover,  iv.  302.

M.  Icilius ,  of  the  fame  age  with  Sp.
Virginius,  and  his  friend,  iv.  222.

Sp.  Icilius  Ruga  is  fent  with  Decius
and  Brutus  to  receive  the  affurance
of  the  fenate,  iii.  134.

—  is  created  a  tribune  of  the  people,
ib.

. —  expoftulates  with  the  fenate  con¬
cerning  the  dearnefs  of  provifions,
and  the  colonies  fent  into  unhealth¬
ful  countries,  iii.  173,  4.

—  inveighs  againft  the  fenate  in  an
aflembly  of  the  people,  iii.  178.

—  perfuades  ther  people  to  pais  the
Jaw  concerning  the  right  of  a
tiibune  when  Haranguing  the  peo¬
ple,  iii.  179.

—  when  aedile  of  the  people,  he  is
repulfed  by  the  patricians,  while
he  is  endeavouring  to  apprehend
Marcius  by  order  of  the  tribunes,
iii.  19 1.


—  in


INDEX  to

•—in  vain  oppofes  the  confuls  in
railing  force: ,  iv.  2.

: —  when  tribune,  encreafes  the  power
of  the  tribunes  and  people,  by  a
new  inditution,  iv.  189.

—  is  the  firft  tribune  who  attempted
to  afiemble  the  fenate,  ib.

, —  lays  the  reafons  of  his  actions  be¬
fore  the  fenate,  iv.  1 9 1 .

—  propofes  a  law  concerning  the
right  of  building  on  mount  Aven-
tine,  iv.  19 1.

Icilius,  the  father,  and  fon  give
evidence  againft  Romilius,  iv.
222,  3,

Ida ,  her  rites,  i.  258.

Idceus ,  fon  of  Dardanus,  i.  139.

• —  fettles  on  mount  Ida,  i.  140,
1.

Ideot  *,  a  pretence  of  being  an  ideot,
when  life  is  in  danger,  ii.  271.

Ides\  the  full  moon  coincides  with
the  ides,  iv.  240.

Jealoufy ,  the  parent  of  mutual  (laugh¬
ter,  i.  266.

Ilia9  daughter  of  Numitor,  i.  175.

—  is  admitted  into  the  college  of
vedals,  ib.

—  proves  with  child,  i.  178.

—  brings  forth  twins,  i.  180.

«—  what  became  of  them,  i.  181.

Ilium  taken  by  Hercules,  i.  77.

Images  carried  in  proceflion,  iii.  275.

—  Images  thrown  into  the  Tiber,  i.
85,  6.

• —  the  images  of  the  penates  remove
themfelves  of  their  own  accord  to
their  old  pededals,  i.  150.

Immolations ,  frugal  among  the  old
Romans,  i.  264.

Inachus ,  a  river,  fon  of  Oceanus,  i.

58,  9,

Incontinence  •,  Pinaria,  the  vedal  is  pu-
nifhed  for  incontinence,  ii.  128.

—  fo  like  wife  is  Opimia,  iii.  433,

—  and  Urbinia,  iv.  75.


the  TEX  T.  425

Infcriptions  ancient,  i.  45.  ii.  200,
255>

Inftruments  of  mufic  ufed  in  the
games,  iii.  275.

Interreges  were  created  when  there  was
neither  a  king,  nor  any  other  law¬
ful  magidracy,  iv.  279.

—  or  when  one  conful  died,  or  one
was  fick,  iv.  24.

—  they  were  appointed  on  account  of
the  comitia,  when  both  the  confuls
died  of  the  plague,  iv.  124.
were  created  from  among  the  mod
ancient,  and  mod  honourable  citi¬
zens  to  infpeft  the  conduct  of  the
chief  magidrates,  during  the  dif-
fenfions  of  the  people,  and  patri¬
cians,  iii.  435.

—  were  fometimes  created  on  account
of  the  comitia,  iv.  375.

—  the  function  of  the  interreges,  i.
326.  ii.  226,  28 1,  6.

Interregnum ,  in  what  manner  created,
i-  3.25-

—  what  it  was  after  the  death  of  Ro¬
mulus,  and  how  long  it  laded,  i»

325-

—  after  the  death  of  Numa,  ii.  1.

r —  after  the  death  of  Tullus  Hodi-
lius,  ii.  82.

—  during  an  interregnum  all  other
magidracies  ceafed,  iii.  435.

Ionians ,  their  migration,  and  common
council,  ii.  197,  8.

—  Ionian  gulph,  iii.  154.

lrus  and  Ulyffes,  their  boxing,  iii,
270.

Ifagoras ,  archon  at  Athens,  ii.  309.

Ifcomachus ,  of  Croton,  vi&or  at  the
Olympic  games,  ib.

—  and  again,  ii.  368.

IJfa ,  an  ifiand,  i.  36.

Italians ,  fo  named  from  Italus  their

king,  i.  33*  .  ,

—  the  fame  people  were  anciently

called  Oenotri,  i.  31,  2,

Italus


426  INDEX  to  the  T ; E  X  T.;


V ,  *

Italus  defcended  from  the  Oenotri,  i.

•  ....

79-  .

—  is  king  of  Italy,  a  wife  and  a  good
prince,  i.  78.

—  Sicelus  his  fon,  i.  52.

—  Morges  fucceeds  Italus,  i..  33,
168.

Italy  fo  called  from  Italus,  i.  78,

—  Italy  ufed  for  Vitaly,  i.  79.

—  is  called  Hefperia,  and  Aufonia
by  the  Greeks,  i.  80.

—  was  anciently  called  Saturnia,  ib.

«—  the  reafon  why  it  was  fo  called,  i.

78.

—  why  it  was  thought  to  be  confe-
crated  to  Saturn,  i.  84.

—  preferable  of  all  countries,  i.  80.

—  the  panegyric  of  Italy,  i.  81.

—  the  bounds  of  Italy,  i.  26.

—  the  ancient  extent  of  it,  ib.

—  which  are  the  eaflern,  and  which
the  weftern  parts  of  Italy,  i.  31,  2.

—  the  Greek  cities  in  Italy,  iv.
232.

—  the  revolt  of  Italy  from  the  Ro¬
mans,  i.  255.

'Julian  family,  its  founder,  and  great
confpicuoufnefs,  i.  157,  8.

—  thejuliitranfplanted  from  Alba  to
Rome,  ii.  69.

Julius  Proculus ,  defcended  from  Af-
canius,  what  he  related  of  Ro¬
mulus,  i.  339.

C.  Julius  Cafar,  reftores  the  tribunes
of  the  people  to  their  power,  after
they  had  been  expelled  by  Pom-
pey,  iii.  428,  9.

C.  Julius  lulus,  con ful,  iii.  282.

C.  Julius ,  conful,  iv.  349.

C.  Julius ,  a  decemvir,  iii.  436.

Vcpifcus  Julius  lulus ,  conful,  iv.  69.

lulus ,  fon  of  Afcanius,  is  prefen  ted
with  the  pritfthood  inftead  of  the
kingdom,  i.  157.

June  i  on  the  nones  of  this  month  the
temple  of  Dius  Fidius  was  de¬


dicated^  iv.  I  1 2T.

—  the  confuifhip  is  entered  on  by

.  Servilius,  and  Virginius  in  the

month  of  June,  about  the  fummer
folftice,  iv.  47.

L.  Junius ,  fon  of  M.  Junius  by  T ar-*
quinia,  ii.  270.

• —  why  furnamed  Brutus,  ib.

—  enclofes  a  rod  of  gold  within  a
wooden  ftaff,  and  offers  it  ta
Apollo,  ii.  272.

—  excites  Collatinus,  Lucretius,  and
others  to  revenge  the  infults  of  the
Tarquinii,  ii.  273.

—-  is  appointed  conful,  with  Colla¬
tinus,  ii.  309.

—  is  fevere  in  pu.nifhing  his  fons  and
the  other  confpirators,  ii.  324,  5.

— -  having  removed  Collatinus,  ap¬
points  Valerius  for  his  coUegue,  ii.
33  2*.

—  is  killed  in  a  fingle  combat  with
Aruns  Tarquinius,  ii.  336.

—  is  brought  to  the  city  with  pomp,
and  honoured  with  a  funeral  ora-
tion,  ii.  333,  9.

—  leaves  no  Ions,  ii.  341.

—  in  what  manner,  and  for  how  long
a  time  the  Roman  matrons  mourn¬
ed  for  him,  ii.  388.

—  the  latter  Junian  family,  whether
defcended  from  the  hrft,  ii.  342.

L.  Junius ,  a  man  of  plebeian  ex¬
traction,  affumes  the  furname  of
Brutus,  iii.  105.

—  pleads  the  caule  of  the  people,  iii.
108.

—  what  fecurity  he  demanded  of  the
fenate  for  the  people,  iii.  132.

—  is  fent  with  Icilius,  and  Decius  to
receive  from  the  fenate  their  af-
furances  in  favor  of  the  people,
iii.  134.

—  is  made  a  tribune  of  the  people,
iii.  134.

—  perfuades  the  people  to  render

their


INDEX  to

their  tribunes  facred,  and  inviolate,
iii.  1 36.

— -  is  made  an  aedile  of  the  people,
iii.  191.

rr-  urges  the  law  to  the  tribunes  con¬
cerning  the  right  of  a  tribune,  when
he  is  haranguing,  iii.  1 79.
being  ordered  by  the  tribunes  to
apprehend  Marcius,  he  is  repulfed
by  the  patricians,  iii.  191.
i—  advifes  Sicinius,  while  under  a
great  perplexity,  iii.  203.

—  a  power  being  given  to  the  confuls
to  draw  up  a  decree  of  the  fenate,
what  he,  in  his  turn,  demanded  of
the  fenate,  iii.  210.

—  is  accufed  of  vanity  by  Appius
Claudius,  iii.  231.

—  his  fpeech  againft  Marcius,  iii.
250.

Juno,  her  temple,  i.  118.

—  her  temple  at  Phalerium,  i.

48*

—  the  chapel  of  Juno  and  Minerva
in  the  temple  of  the  Capitoline
Jupiter,  ii.  133.  256.

—  the  tables  -of  Juno  Quiritia,  i.

3I3-

—  the  altar  of  Juno  the  infpe&refs  of
filters,  ii.  48.

—  Juno  Lucina,  Hgx  Quurtpogo;,  ii.

*74-

•—  fhe  is  called  by  another  name
EiheiQijoi,  by  the  Greeks,  ii.  174.
Ivory  throne,  ii.  120,  12 1,  365.

—  an  ivory  fcepter,  ii.  121.

Jupiter  dethrones  Saturn,  i.  257.

—  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  i.  45.

— ~  Tarquinius  Prifcus  begins  to  build
a  temple  common  to  Jupiter,  Juno,
and  Minerva,  ii.  133,  256.

— -  Jupiter  Capito'inus  orders  games
to  be  renewed,  iii.  263.
infernal  Jupiter,  i.  240.

« —  Jupiter  Feretrius,  why  lb  called,
i.  285.

Vol.  IV.


the  TEXT.  427

■ —  his  temple,  ib.

—  Jupiter  Fidius,  orDius  Fidius  his
temple,  i.  309,  to.

—  is  confecrated  by  Sp.  Poftumius,’
iv.  1 12.

•—  Jupiter  the  Difcoverer,  his  altar,*
i.  89.

—  Jupiter  Terribilis,  his  altar,  iii;
r37*

—  Jupiter  Latiaris,  his  rites,  ii.  241.’

—  Jupiter  Stator,  his  temple,  i.  312.

—  Jupiter  Terminalis,  i.  361.

—  Manes,  fon  of  Jupiter  and  Terra,

i.  60.

Jurian  way,  i.  36.

JuJiice ,  in  what  manner  obferved  by
Numa,  i.  363.

—  juftice  not  preferred  before  clemen¬
cy,  iii.  34.

Juventus ;  thofe,  who  took  the  man¬
ly  gown,  paid  a  piece  of  money
into  the  treafury  of  Juventus,  ii.
174-

—  Terminus,  and  Juventus  will  not
be  removed,  ii.  134,  5.


K.

Kindred  not  to  be  preferred  before
honefty,  and  virtue,  ii.  36.

—  is  fometimes  reckoned  according
to  virtue,  not  birth,  iv.  43.

■ —  fhould  not  be  too  warmly  efpoufed,

ii.  330.

King ;  every  Greek  city  had  its  own
king,  ii.  431.

' —  what  kind  of  king  was  formerly
efteemed  the  bell,  ii.  431.

—  in  what  manner  a  king  was  law¬
fully  chofen,  ii.  2.

—  was  not  created  at  Rome  without
the  aufpices,  i,  230,  1.

—  a  king  was  confirmed  by  augury,
i.  230.  ii.  2.

Romulus  appointed  in  that  man¬
ner,  i.  230.

—  kings  offered  facrifice  out  of

Kkk  their


428  INDEX  to  the  TEXT


their  own  demains,  ii.  3.

«—  kings,  ancient  and  modern  com¬
pared,  i.  245.

the  defign  of  the  ancient  kings,
ii.  287.

<*-  the  modefty  of  the  ancient  kings,
ii.  121.

an  example  of  a  moderate  king,
ii.  219.

*—  the  decifions  of  kings  were  former¬
ly  laws,  iv.  1 3 1.
the  functions  of  kings,  i.  248.
the  demains  of  the  kings,  i.  3.
ii.  3.

s—  which  demains  were  divided  a-
mong  the  poor  by  Tullus  Hofti-
lius,  ib.

•—  the  Romans  fent  fcepters  and
diadems  to  the  kings,  their  allies,
in  confirmation  of  their  power,  ii.

1 21.

•—  the  government  of  kings  is  pre¬
ferred  by  the  Romans  to  all  other
forms  of  government,  i.  22.7.
is  banifhed  from  the  Roman  com¬
monwealth,  ii.  296.
how  long  it  lafted  at  Rome,

ib.

—  in  order  that  the  name  of  a  kingly
government  might  not  he  altoge¬
ther  loft  in  the  Roman  common¬
wealth,  a  king  of  facrifices  was  in-
ftituted,  ii.  280.

the  fundions  and  privileges  of
th  it  king,  ii.  313.


hereditary,  ii.  216.

—  the  right  of  a  kingdom  is  invefted
in  thole,  who  confer  it,  ii.  216,
i7-

Knife  belonging  to  cooks,  iv.  308.

Knights ,  cenfors  examine  their  con-
dud,  ii.  195.

—  the  fons  of  knights  lead  an  e-
qutftrian  procefiion  at  the  votive
games,  iii.  269.

L.

Labicant,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

—  a  colony  of  Albans,  taken  pri-
foners  by  Marcius,  iii.  309,  10.

Lacedemonians  fettle  a  colony  among
the  Sabines,  i.  3 10.

—  abolifh  the  cuftom  of  contending
naked  at  the  Olympic  games,  iii.
270.

__  negled  their  women,  1.  267.

—  jealous  of  their  nobility  and  pri¬
vileges,  i.  254.

—  became  mafters  of  Athens,  iv.
247>

—  by  what  means  they  acquired
power,  ii.  279.

—  the  duration  and  extent  of  their
empire,  i.  8.

—  in  what  manner  they  were  deprived
of  the  fovereignty  of  Greece,  i.

—  what  kind  of  monarchy  they  had,
ii.  431,


*—  Adai  ius  Papirius,  the  fitft  king  of  —  how  far  the  power  of  the  Lacedae-
facr  fices,  ib.  monian  kings  extended,  i.  249.

•—  the  regal  enfigns  of  the  Tyrrhe-  —  the  Lacedaemonian  kings  were
ni  ns  and  Romans,  ii.  120.  iv.  guarded  by  three  hundred  of  the
175.  braveft  youth,  i.  248.

■r  thv  kingly  enfigns  are  dimh  iflied  — ■  the  Lacedaemonian.  Phiditia,  i.
in  the  confular  magiftracy,  ii.  263.,

279.  —  the  Lacedemonian  law  concern-

K  ngdom  i  for  fome  time  refilled  by  ing  foldiers  and  hufbandmen,  i.
Ism  a,  i.  330.  276.

«-=  whether,  the  Roman  kingdom  was  C.  Le  florins ,  a  tribune  of  the  people,

anfwers


INDEX  to

an  fivers  Appius  Claudius  in  their
name,  iv.  83,  4.

—  attacks  Appius,  iv.  85.

—  orders  Appius  to  depart  the  af-
fembiy,  iv.  87.

Lamenejs  is  an  impediment  to  Hofa-
tius  fn  <  obtaining  the  con  fulfil  ip  and
military  offices,  ii.  352.

Xamp  •,  the  evening  began  about  the
time  of  lighting  up  lamps,  iv.
302-

Lanatus.  See  Menentus.

Lands  \  hufbandmen  pay  a  certain
portion  of  the  produce  arifing  out
of  hired  lands,  iv.  110.

— -  the  ftipends  of  the  foldiers  arifing
out  of  the  produce  of  the  public
lands,  iii.  402.

—  letting  a  leafe  of  the  public  lands
for  five  years,  ib.

—  the  boundaries  of  the  public  lands
diftinguifhed  by  handfome  pillars,
iii.  402.

—  lands  that  bear  three  crops  in  a
year,  i.  82.

—  the  lands  of  the  banifhed  Tar-
quinii  are  divided  among  the  poor
citizens,  ii.  333.

■—  in  what  manner  the  Roman  lands
were  divided  by  Romulus,  i.
235-

—  by  Numa  Pompilius,  i.  365.

—  and  by  Servius  Tullius,  ii.  171.

—  part  of  the  public  lands  diftributed
by  Numa  among  the  poor,  i.

338-

—  and  by  Servius  Tullius,  ii.  162,
3-

—  rhe  divifion  of  the  public  lands  is
moved  for,  and  preffed  by  Caflius,
iii-  395 — 7*

•—  he  likewife  would  have  the  La-
tines,  and  Hernici  to  be  partakers
of  the  public  lands,  iii.  396.

—  the  fixing  the  bounds  of  the  pub¬
lic  lands,  and  the  divifion  of  them


the  TEXT.  429

is  urged  by  Icilius,  a  tribune  of
the  people,  iv.  2.

—  again  urged  by  the  tribunes,  and
people,  iv.  70,

* —  and  again,  iv.  92.

—  is  oppofed  by  Appius,  iv.  94.

—  again  urged  by  the  tribunes,  and
in  part  yielded  to  by  the  fenate,  iv.
108.

—  as  much  of  the  public  lands  is
given  to  Ploratius,  as  he  could
plow  round  in  one  day  with  one
yoke  of  oxen,  ii.  352.

—  and  as  much  to  Mucius,  ii,
365-

Lamivini ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.

409.

Laocoon ,  a  tragedy  of  Sophocles,  i.
108.

—  the  prodigy  fhewn  to  the  Lao-
coonticlae,  ib.

Lar,  Lars ,  or  Larns.  See  Her  mini  us  ^
and  Porfena .

Larijfa ,  two  cities  fo  called,  i.  49,

—  Larifla  of  Theflaly,  iv.  229.

Sp>  Lartius ,  one  of  the  generals  of
the  Roman  forces,  ii.  348.

—  prote&s  the  bridge  for  fome  time
with  Codes,  ii.  349.

—  brings  provifions  to  the  city,  ii,
353*

■ —  is  chofen  confu-I,  ii.  366.

—  brings  fuccours  of  horfe  to  Va¬
lerius,  ii.  371.

—  triumphs,  ii.  372.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iii.  262.

—  is  one  of  the  five  embaffiadors  fent
to  Marcius,  iii.  315.

—  is  made  governor  of  the  city,  iii.

383-

—  when  governor  of  the  city,  he  de¬
fends  the  neighbouring  territories,
iii-  383-  .

—  is  made  interrex,  iii.  435.

—  perfuades  a  war  with  the  Veientes,
iii.  437,  8,

K  k  k  2


T.  Lartius


INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


43°


T.  Lartius  Flavus,  conful,  ii,  390.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  ii..  405.

—  fubdues  the  Fidenates,  ii.  407,

8.


a  ftridt  obferver  of  modefty  and
clemency,  ii.  407.

L—  what  difpofition,  and  virtues  en¬
dowed  with,  ii.  426.

—  refufes  the  didtaiorfhip,  ii.  428.

. isappointed  di&atorby  Cloelius,  ib.
•—  how  he  behaves  himfelf  in  his
diflatorfhip,  ii.  433,  4.

*—  appoints  Spurius  Caffius  his  ge¬
neral  of  the  horfe,  ii.  434.
p—  conquers  the  Latines  by  his  hu¬
manity,  and  beneficence,  ii.  436,7.
lays  down  his  magiftracy,  ii.  436.
his  name  is  infcribed  on  the  tem¬
ple  of  Saturn,  iii.  3.

— .  his  advice  concerning  the  reception
of  the  Latines  into  favor,  iii.  30.
*—  his  fpeech  for  appeafing  the  dif-
turbance  at  home,  and  commo¬
tions  abroad,  iii.  54,  5.
is  appointed  governor  of  the  city,
iii.  63,  4.

his  addrefs  to  the  feceders,  iii.
122.

5T.  Lartius,  legate  of  Poftumus  Co-
minius,  marches  againft  Corioli,
iii.  140,  1.

Latiaris ,  See  Jupiter.

Latin the  thirty  Latin  cities,  iii.


97*

i—  the  public  affembly  ot  the  Latin
nation  at  Rome,  ii.  200.
the  aflembly,  and  comitia  of  the
Latin  nation  held  at  Fcrentinum,


11.  234.

—  the  Latin  feftivals  held  on  mount
Albanus  for  the  profperity  of  the
whole  Latin  nation,  ii.  241.

< —  another  day  is  added,  on  account
of  the  city’s  being  delivered  from
tynu  j'y,  and  a  third  for  the  re¬
turn  oi  the  people,  iii.  145,  6.


—  the  Latin  way,  i.  37.'

Latines  ;  the  Aborigines  begin  to  be
called  fo  under  their  king  Latinus,

i.  25.  102.

—  are’  called  Romans  under  Ro¬
mulus,  i.  25.

—  both  natives,  and  foreigners  af-
fume  this  name,  i.  222.

—  the  Latines  deny  any  fubjedtion.
of  the  Albans,  and  Latin  nation  to
the  Romans,  ii.  79.

• —  they  debate  concerning  a  war  with
the  Romans,  ii.  78,  9.

• —  are  conquered  by  Ancus  Marcius,

ii.  86.

and  fubdued  byTarquinius  Prif-
cus,  ii.  106,  1 10.

—  are  received  into  friendfhip  and
fociety  byTarquinius,  ii.  in.

—  at  the  inftigation  of  O&avius  Ma-
milius,  they  revolt  from  the  Ro¬
mans,  ii.  390.

■ —  enter  into  a  confederacy  among
themfelves  againft  the  Romans,  ii,
408,  9.

—  by  fending  embafiadors  to  the.
neighbouring  nations,  they  define
affiftance  of  them  againft  the  Ro¬
mans,  ii.  410.

—  are  kindly  invited  by  T,.  Lartius,
the  dictator,  to  peace  and  amity, .
ii-  435.,  6<

—  many  Latins,  by  reafon  of  the  ill.
ufage  of  their  governors,  leave  their
country,  and  remove  to  Rome,

iii.  3.

—  all  the  Latines  fled  from  the  field,
of  battle,  iii.  20.

—  are.  totally  defeated  in  their  laft.
ingagement  with  .  the  Romans,  at
the  lake  Regillus,  iii.  20.

—  beg  for  peace  in  afuppliant  man¬
ner,  iii.  28..

—  are  admitted  to  friendfirlp  and  .  a
treaty,  iii.*  34.

—  they  .bring  the  Volfci  bound  to

Rome,


INDEX  to

Rome,  having  been  folicited  by
them  to  take  up  arms  againft  the
Romans ;  and  on  that  account  are
rewarded  with  a  moft  honorable
clifmifiion  of  their  captives  without
ranfom,  iii.  40.

•—  are  very  importunate  with  the  Ro¬
mans,  to  obtain  the  right  of  citi¬
zens,  iii.  97.

the  treaty  is  renewed  with  the  La-
tines,  iii.  144.

the  articles  of  this  treaty,  iii.
*45-

—  the  Latines  are  infefted  by  the
Volfci,  iii.  299.

—  having  defired  fuccours  of  the  fe-
nate,  obtain  leave  to  chufe  a  gene¬
ral,  and  to  fend  out  what  number
of  forces  they  pleafe,  iii.  303.

• —  are  invaded  by  Marcius,  iii.  306.
s —  are  invited  to  a  participation  of
the  public  lands  by  Cafiius,  iii.

395’  6-

r —  require  fuccours  from  the  fenate
againft  the  iEqui,  iv.  167.

•—  fend  to  the  Romans  double  the
.  number  of  auxiliaries  required,  iv.
8.

•—  they  beat  the  iEqui  and  Volfci,
iv.  67,  8.

7—  defire  fuccours  from  the  fenate
againft  the  Antiates  and  jRqui,  iv.
1 10.

r—  entreat  for  further  fuccours  a-
gainft  the  incurfions  of  the  Aiqui
and  Volfci,  iv.  122.

* —  a  ftrategem  of  the  Latines,  i.
146,  7.

T.  Latinus  declares  to  the  fenate  his
dream  concerning  the  renewal  of
the  games,  iik  263.

Latinus ,  fon  of  Hercules  hy  a  northern
nymph,  i.  97.

—  why  imagined  the  fon  of  Faunus,
ib.

is  fucceecled  by  tineas,  i.  97,  8.


the  TEX  T,


43 1


—  dies  in  battle,  i.  145.

Latinus  Silvius ,  king  of  Alba,  i.
158.

Latium ,  a  place  in  the  Opic  terri¬
tory,  i,  165.

■ —  the  Pometine  plain,  the  largeft  in
Latium,  ii.  264.

Lavinienfes ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

preferve  the  wooden  hut  of  iEneas,
i.  130.

—  brazen  images  in  the  marketplace
of  the  Lavinienfes,  i.  137.

r—  entreat  the  Romans  to  punilh  the
fpoilers  of  their  country,  and  the
violators  of  their  embafladors,  i.315,

—  the  anceftors  of  the  Albans,  and
Romans,  ii.  21.

Lavinium ,  the  mother  city  of  La¬
tium,  iii.  312.

the  mother  of  Rome,  and  all  La¬
tium,  ib.

—  is  built  by  iEneas,  and  the  Tr#-
jans,  i.  100,  136.  iii.  312.

—  when  it  was  built,  i.  136,  142.

—  is  befieged  by  the  Rutuli,  i.  145,

6.

—  is  befieged  by  Marcius,  iii.  312.

—  and  taken  by  him,  iii.  339.

—  the  Roman  kings  facrififed  for  the
profperity  oi  the  commonwealth  to
the  tutelary  powers  of  Lavinium,


''3l5-

Lavinia ,  daughter  of  Latinus,  i.

—  is  given  in  marriage  to  iEneas,  i.

13  7*

—  retires  with  Tyrrhenus  into  a
wood,  i.  1 57.

— -  is  brought  back  from  the  woods
to  Lavinium  with  her-  fon  Silvius,


ib.

Laurels  ufed  in  a  triumph,  i.  2 83.-
— ^  in  an  ovation,  ii.  385.

Laurentes ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.


409,


Laurent  ia^


432  INDEX  to

Laurent ia,  the  wife  of  Fauftulus,  i.

.  196.

Laurent um,  a  town  of  Italy,  i.  123.

—  a  town  of  the  Aborigines,  i.
100.

Lauretum ,  part  of  mount  Aventine;

ii.  93.

Laufus ,  fon  of  Mezentius,  i,  147.
Laws\ >  that  form  of  government  is
etleemed  the  beft,  in  which  li¬
berty,  and  the  laws  are  equal,  iv.

,3I-

—  laws  are  firft  laid  before  the  peo¬
ple,  and  then  referred  to  the  fenate,
i.  249,  50.

; —  a  law  is  propofed  to  be  taken  into
the  confideration  of  the  people  on
the  third  market  day,  iv.  135.

4—  a  law  is  propofed  in  an  aftembly
of  the  people,  in.  order  that  thofe,
who  pleafe,  may  fpeak  for,  or  a-
gainft  it,  iv.  135.

—  thofe,  who  are  againft  a  law,  are
ordered  by  the  cryer  to  come
forth,  and  deliver  their  opinions,  iv.

t.  20 7.

~~  a  law  paHTed  by  the  people,  with¬
out  the  concurrence  of  the  fenate,

iii.  179.

—  laws,  palled  in  the  tributa  comi-
tia  are  equally  valid  with  Thofe,
that  are  palled  in  the  centuriata
comitia,  iv.  339.

- —  laws,  palfed  in  the  centuriata  co¬
mitia  were  alone  elleemed  valid  by
the  patricians,  iv.  340.

—  laws  made  by  Romulus,  i.  265.

* —  laws,  unobferved,  are  again

brought  into  ufe  by  Tullius,  ii.
163.

—  the  laws  of  Servius  Tullius,  ii.
168.

—  Tarquinius  Superbus  cancels  all

laws,  ii.  231.  -!-

the  law  for  building  on  mount
Aventine  pafieft  in  the  centuriata


the  TEX  T.

-  .  »  T

comitia  with  concurrence  of  the.
priefts,  the  augurs,  and  the  fa-
crificers,  and  inferibed  on  a  brazen
column  in  the  temple  of  Diana,  iv.

I92\  ••  .  *

—  the  holy,  and  inviolate  law,  which

•  ordained  that  the  magiftracy  of  the!
tribunes  Ihould  be  holy  and  in¬
violate,  iii,  1  36.  iv.  19 1.

- —  a  law  is  laid  before  the  people  by
the  tribunes  for  creating  decemvirs,

iv.  1 35*

—  fome  laws  were  written  in  the
books  of  the  pontifs,  though  but
few,  iv.  132.

the  cognizance  of  law  and  right
was  veiled  in  the  patricians,  jb.

—  C.  Terentius,  a  tribune  of  the  peo¬
ple,  was  the  firfl  perfon,  who  at¬
tempted  to  bring  laws  and  rights
into  the  commonwealth,  iv.  132.

—  the  tribunes  required  that  de¬
cemvirs  be  appointed  by  the  peo¬
ple  to  compile  a  body  of  laws,  iv.

135-  '

—  the  Romans  fend  embafiadors  to

•  the  Greeks  for  a  collection  of  their
laws,  iv.  229.

—  the  laws  of  the  ten  tables,  com¬
piled  from  the  laws,  and  cuftoms  of
the  Greeks,  and  enacted  by  the  cen¬
turiata  comitia  in  the  prefence  of
the  priefts,  augurs,  and  the  whole
college  of  the  pontifs,  are  placed
in  the  moft  confpicuouspart  of  the
forum  *,  but,  before  they  were
committed  to  the  tables,  they  were
produced,  in  order  to  ,be  confide  red
publickly  by  the  beft  men,  iv.
238.

—  two  tables  are  added  to  the  former
ten,  iv.  243.

—  the  laws  of  the  twelve  tables,  iv,

—  329-

— ■  are  held  venerable,  iv.  338..

■—  the  guardianship  of  the  laws,  and

cuftoms


I  N  D  E  X  to  the  TEX  T.


cuftoms  lodged  formerly  in  the
king,  i.  248.

.  laws  concerning  marriage,  i.  267,

8.

t _ concerning  the  power  of  a  father

over  his  fon,  i.  2.71,  2.
concerning  the  felling  of  a  fon,  i,
2  73-  .

concerning  fuppofititious  children,
iv.  296.

concerning  traitors  and  deferters,
ii.  72.

c —  concerning  thofe,  who  from  free¬
dom  were  demanded  into  flavery,
iv.  297.

i —  concerning  the  power  of  laying  a
fine,  iv.  224.

; —  concerning  the  right  of  building
on  mount  Aventine,  iv.  191.

| —  concerning  the  power  of  a  tribune
of  the  people,  iii.  136.

£—  concerning  the  right  of  a  tribune,
when  haranguing  the  people,  iii.


179.

concerning  the  ele&ion  of  the
tribunes,  iv.  76,  79.

Leafe  of  the  public  lands  for  five
years,  iii.  402-.

Legates  j  ten  legates  chofenout  of  the
fenate  go  to  the  fecedcrs,  iii.  104.
gallies,  and  other  preparations  are
provided  at  the  public  expence  for
the  fplendor  of  the  commonwealth
to  carry  thofe  legates,  who  were  to
be  fent  into  Greece,  iv.  229.

* —  the  Roman  legates  are  fent  to
Sicily  to  buy  corn,  iii.  149,  50.

— p  the  Roman  legates,  fent  to  Cumae
to  buy  corn,  are  feiztd  there  as
fpies  by  the  banifhed  Tarquinii,  iii.


153r  *

—  but  make  their  efcape,  iii.  170.

—  the  Roman  legates  are  directed  by
Gracchus  Clcelius,  general  of  the
iEqui,  to  addrefs  themfelves  to  a
beech  tree,  iv.  173.


•*—  the  Volfcian  legates  ftirring  up  the
Latines  to  a  revolt  are  delivered  by
them  bound  to  the  Romans,  iii.
40.

—  unlawful  to  offer  violence  to  the
perfons  of  legates,  ii.  363.

—  the  violence  offered  to  legates  calls
for  a  fpeedy  expiation,  i.  315.

• —  the  violence  offered  to  legates  fell
under  the  cognizance  of  the  fe-
ciales,  i.  357.

—  their  perfons  moft  honourable,
and  inviolate,  iv.  287.

—  the  general  of  the  horfe  being
wounded,  a  legate  fucceeds  to  his
command,  iii.  17,  18.

—  the  defence  of  the  camp  is  com¬
mitted  to  the  legates  by  a  conful,
who  had  been  recalled  to  the  city,
iv.  175.

Leleges ,  whence  derived,  i.  27.

—  expel  the  Pelafgi,  i  41.

LeojiratuSy  archon  at  Athens,  ii.  2.

iii.  407.

LejboSy  an  ifland,  i.  42.

Lethe  \  the  field  of  Lethe,  iii.  365.

Letters  of  the  Greeks  brought  into
Italy  by  Evander,  i.  75.

—  fi&itiom  Letters,  ii.  253.

—  feigned  letters  are  delivered  to  the
tribunes  of  ihe  people  by  an  un¬
known  perfon,  iv.  144.

—  the  proof  of  letters  by  the  hand¬
writing  and  feal,  ii.  323.  iv.
144.

—  letters  of  the  confpirators  given  to
the  fecretary  to  be  publicly  read,

&  323>  4-

See  Char  after  s.  See  like  wife  a
differtation  on  the  Greek,  and  Ro¬
man  letters,  at  the  end  of  the
Fourth  Book.

Leucas ,  its  fituation,  i.  114.

—  is  given  to  the  Acarnanes,  ib.  117.

Leucojia,  an  ifland,  i.  122.

Leu  Hr  a,  the  defeat  there,  i.  254.

Levies,,


INDEX  to


Levies ,  in  what  manner  made,  ii.

'  1 73*  ...

—  hindered  by  the  tribunes,  iii.  428.

iv.  180.

Libations ,  veflfels  for  them  of  earth,
i.  264.

Libitina  ;  the  treafury  of  Venus  Libi-
tina,  ii.  174.

—  money  brought  into  it  for  every
one  who  dies,  ib.

C.  and  P.  Licinnius  are  created
tribunes  by  the  people,  iii.  134.
LiciniuSy  the  hiftorian,  what  he  relates,
concerning  the  death  of  Tatius,  i.


316.

—  the  time,  at  which  he  fays  Tar-
quinius  Prifcus  came  to  Rome,  ii.

54*

—  what  he  fays  concerning  ovations.


ii.385.

has  inconfiderately  faid  that  Tar-
quinius  Superbus  fought  on  horfe-
back  in  the  laft  ingagement  of  the
Latines  with  the  Romans  at  the
lake  Regillus,  iii.  17.

Littor.y  f<x£$o(po£os,  went  before  the
king  with  a  bundle  of  rods,  and  an
ax,  ii.  120.

. —  axes,  and  .rods  borne  by  twelve
lidtors  before  Romulus,  i.  277.

— -  a  lidtor  is  ordered  to  whip  a  re-
fradtory  perfon  with  rods,,  iv.  72,


d’

— -  defends  a  conful  againft  an  officer
of  the  tribunes,  iv.  87.
the  lidtors,  by  order  of  the  confuls,
difperfe  a  tumult,  iii.  203.

—  twelve  lidtors,  with  axes,  and
rods,  go  before  each  of  the  de¬
cemvirs,  iv.  241.

-r-  the  tribunes  order  a  lidtor,  execut¬
ing  the  commands  of  the  confuls,
to  be  thrown  down  the  Tarpeian
rock,  iv.  190.  •

lidtors  crowned  in  a  triumph,  iii.
48.


the  T  E  X  T.

Lightnings  to  the  left  a  happy  omen*
i.  228.

—  lightning  deftroys  a  general’s  tent,
iv.  9.

—  fudden  lightning  defers  the  fiege
of  a  camp,  iv.  100,  i.

Ligures,  their  fettlement,  i.  27,  94.  •

—  their  removal  out  of  Italy  into
Sicily,  i.  52.

—  the  Ligures  obftrudt  the  paffiage
of  Hercules,  i.  94.

—  the  war  of  the  Ligures  with  Her-

—  cules,  i.  95.

<■ —  are  received  into  the  city,  i.
206.

Liris ;  the  fource  and  mouth  of  that
river,  i.  24.

Lift  a,  its  fituation,  i.  37.

Locri.y  formerly  the  Leleges,  i.  41.

Longula,  a  town  of  the  Volfci,  taken
by  Poftumus  Cominius,  iii.  138.

—  is  retaken  byMarcius,  iii.  338.

—  the  Roman  army  encamp  before
Longula,  iii.  423.

Longus.  See  AtiliuSy  and  T ullius .

Lncinay  a  piece  of  money  is  deliver¬
ed  into  the  treafury  of  Juno  Lu-
cina,  for  every  one  that  is  born,  ii.
174.

Lucius ;  that  name  afiumed  by  Tar-
.quinius,  who  before  was  called  Lu-
cumo,  ii.  101.

Lucretia  is  raviffied  by  Sextus  Tar-
quinius,  ii.  267,  8.

—  drives  to  Rome  in  her  chariot,  ii.
268.

—  kills  herfelf,  ii.  269.

her  funeral  oration  by  Brutus,  ii;
289 .

L.  LucretiuSy  conful,  iv.  124.

—  invades  the  ^Equi,  iv.  125.

—  fubdues  them,  iv.  127.

—  triumphs  over  them,  iv.  128.

Sp.  LucretiiiSy  father  of  Lucretia,  go¬
vernor,  of  the  city  in  the  abfence  of
Tarquinius,  ii.  289.

r—  is


INDEX  to  the  TEX  T.


—  is  made  interrex  after  the  expulfion
of  the  king,  ii.  295.

—  intercedes  for  Collatinus,  ii.  329,

3°-

—  is  chofen  conful  with  P.  Valerius,
«•  34 3-

-1-  dies  in  his  confulfhip,  ib.

V.  Lucretius ,  conful,  ii.  344.

• —  one  of  the  generals  of  the  Roman
people,  ii.  348.

—  fecond  time  conful,  ii.  372.

—  triumphs  with  his  collegue  Va¬
lerius,  ii.  378.

Lucumo.  See  Tarquinius.

Ludiones ,  forne  refemblance  of  the
Salii,  i.  355.

—  Ludi,  games,  fo  called  from  the-
Lydians,  who  were  the  inventors
of  them,  ib.

Lupa,  or  Strumpet  y  i.  196.

Lupercal ,  Avkxiov ,  a  mountain,  i.  72.

—  Lupercalia,  a  feaft  of  the  Arca¬
dians  in  honor  of  Pan,  i.  187,  8.

Luftration ;  the  fliedding  of  civil
blood  attoned  by  luftration,  ii.
403-

—  a  public  luflration  after  the  exe¬
cution  of  treacherous  citizens,  ii.

4°  3-

—  after  the  cenfus,  ii.  189.

—  after  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,
ii.  312.

—  luftration  of  the  army,  ii.  189.
iv.  103.

• —  after  a  war  with  the  exiles  and  La-
tines,  ii.  188.

* —  before  an  expedition,  iv.  103.
Lujtrum ,  a  fpace  of  five  years,  ii.
189.

Lycaon  \  two  of  that  name,  i.  30.

—  the  father  of  Palas,  i.  73.

—  two  and  twenty  fons  of  Lycaon,
ib.

Lycaonidy  now  called  Arcadia,  i.  221.
Lycaonians ,  fo  called  from  Lycaon,
i.  31.

Vol.  IV.


—  formerly  called  iEzii,  and  after¬
wards  Oenotri,  i.  31.

Lycurgus ,  guardian  to  his  nephew
Eunomus,  impofes  fevere  laws
upon  the  Lacedaemonians,  i.  310.

—  whether  he  received  his  laws  from
Apollo,  i.  336.

— -  the  Phiditia  among  the  Lacedae-.
monians,  were  borrowed  by  Ly¬
curgus  from  the  Cretenfes,  i.  264.

LycuSy  the  Theftalian,  vi6lor  at  the.
Olympic  games,  iv.  229.

Lydia ,  a  country  fo  called  from  king.
Lydus,  i.  60,  1.

Lydians y  their  anceftors,  and  pofte-*
rity,  ib.

—  the  inventors  of  games,  i.  355.

—  the  robes  of  their  kings,  ii.  120.

LyduSy  king  of  Lydia,  i  60.

Lyrey  an  Arcadian  inftrument  of  mu-
fic,  i.  75.  -  «

ivory  lyres  with  feven  firings
made  ufe  of  in  proceflions,  iii.  271 .

Lytodoray  daughter  of  Laomedon,  i.
142.

M.

Macar,  fon  of  Cirafius,  i.  42.

Macedonia  conquered  by  the  Romans,
i-  9*

• —  the  Macedonian  empire,  i.  7.

Macer  ( Licinius )  an  hiftorian,  i.  20*

Maoerinus.  See  Geganius .

C.  Manias,  tribune  of  the  people,  in
what  manner  deceived  by  the  con.*
fuls,  iii.  427,  8.

Magi  fir  acy ;  a  capital  offence  to  exer*.
Cife  a  m  a  gift  racy,  unlefs  received,
from  die  people,  ii.  344.

—  a  magiflracy  cannot  be  held  a*

gainft  the  colifent  of  the  citizens,,
ii.  330.  ^  ..

—  miift  be  refigned  at  the  expiration
of  the  limited  time,  iv.  166.

—  the  annual  magi  (trades  among

the  Albans  after  the  extinction  of
L  1  1  ther


43<J  INDEX  to

the  royal  family,  are  called  di&ator-
Ihips,  ii.  433.

-v—  magiftracy  holy  and  inviolable,

iii.  136,  7.

—  during  an  interregnum  all  other
magiftracies  ceafed,  iii.  435.

—  all  magiftracies  were  likewife
abrogated  under  the  decemvirate,

iv.  236.

—  in  one  and  the  fame  year  there
were  two  fupreme  magiftracies  at
Rome,  the  confuls,  and  the  con-
fular  tribunes,  iv.  376.

—  the  honor  of  a  magiftracy  does
not  diminifh  the  paternal  autho¬
rity,  i.  273^

—  the  decemvirs  entered  upon  their
magiftracy  on  the  ides  of  May,  iv.
240.

Magifirates ,  what  the  lawful  creation
of  them  is,  iv.  136,  7.

—  were  not  created  formerly  at
Rome,  without  the  aulpices,  i.
230,  1.

—  the  power  of  appointing  ma-
giltrates  was  veiled  in  the  people,
j.  249.

— -  the  tribunes  would  have  the  an¬
nual  magiftrates,  and  private  citi¬
zens  included  within  certain  limits
of  the  laws,  iv.  135.

—  an  inferior  magiftrate  lowered  the
axes  to  a  fuperior,  iii.  352.

Malacus.  See  Ariftodemus.

Malea ,  a  cape,  i.  165.

Malefactors ,  a  wood  fo  called,  ii.  78.

Mamenns.  See  /Emilius.

L.  Mamilius  brings  fuccours  to  the
Romans  confifting  of  Tufculani,
and  affifts  them  in  recovering  the
capitol  from  Appius  Herdonius,
the  Sabine,  iv.  159.

Mamilius  {Octavius )  fon-in-law  of
Tarquinius,  ii.  233.

—  is  faid  by  fome  to  have  been  de¬
fended  from  the  fon-in-law  of


the  TEX  T.

Tarquinius,  iii.  5.

*—  was  famous  for  his  ftature,  and
ftrength,  iii.  19.

—  marches  with  a  body  of  Latines
to  the  afiiftance  of  his  father:in-
law  Tarquinius,  ii.  346.

—  lays  wafte  the  Roman  territories,

352>  3'

— -  is  renounced  with  Tarquinius  by
the  Tyrrhenians,  ii.  363.

— -  infefts  the  Romans  with  incur-
fions,  ii.  366.

—  withdraws  the  Latines  from  the
alliance  of  the  Romans,  ii.  390.

— -  inveighs  againft  the  Romans  in
the  Latin  afiembly,  ii.  392.  408.

—  excites  private  commotions  in  the
city,  ii.  395,  6.

—  is  appointed,  with  Sextus.  Tarqui¬
nius,  general  of  the  Latin  forces  in
the  war  with  the  Romans,  ii.  409.

—  undertakes  an  expedition  with.
Sextus  Tarquinius  againft  the  city,
ii.  436.

—  commands  the  right  wing  of  the
Latin  army,  iii.  8.

—  fights  with  Adbutius  on  a  chal¬
lenge,  iii.  17.

—  is  killed  by  Herminius,  iii.  19.

L.  Mamins ,  i.  45.

Manes ,  fon  of  Jupiter  and  Terra,  i.
60.

Manilius  (Sextus)  and  Marcus  Op-
pius,  are  appointed  prefidents  of
the  twenty  tribunes  at  the  head  of
the  fecond  feceflion,  iv.  321.

A.  ManliuSy  conful,  iv.  68.

—  performs  an  ovation  for  having
overcome  the  Veientes,  iv.  69.

—  is  cited  with  his  collegue  L.  Fu-
rius  to  a  trial  by  Cn.  Genucius,  a
tribune  of  the  people,  for  not  hav¬
ing  carried  into  execution  the  de¬
cree  of  the  fen  ate  relating  to  the
Agrarian  law,  iv.  70.

A.  Manlius y  the  legate,  is  fent  into

Greece


INDEX  to

Greece  to  collect  a  body  of  laws,
iv.  229.

*— •  is  made  a  decemvir,  iv.  236.

Cn.  Manlius ,  conful,  iv.  7.

—  his  tent  and  favourite  horfe  are
ftruck  with  lightning,  iv.  9.

—  repulfes  the  Veienfes  in  an  ingage-
ment  of  the  foot,  iv.  19.

is  wounded  in  the  knee  with  a
javelin  ;  and  dies  of  that  wound,
iv.  21.

Manlius  Torquatus ,  his  fe verity  to  his
fon,  i.  273.

kills  him  for  deferting  his  poll,  iii.
4*3-

Manly  gown ;  thofe,  who  took  the
manly  gown,  paid  a  piece  of  money
into  the  trealury  of  Juventus,  ii.
174.

* —  the  manly  gown  was  taken  at
Cumae  at  the  age  of  twenty  years,
iii.  165.

Marathon ,  the  battle  fought  there,  ii.
340.

Marcius  ( Ancus )  grandfon  of  Numa
JPompilius  by  his  daughter,  ii.  81.

• —  whether  he  was  the  author  of  the
death  of  Tullus  Hoftilius,  ii.  82.

—  is  created  king,  ib.

—  is  drawn  from  peace  into  a  war,
ii.  85.

■—  his  triumph,  ii.  90,  1.

• —  his  achievements  in  the  common¬
wealth,  ii.  93.

—  how  long  he  reigned,  i.  173.

—  the  death,  and  fons  of  Ancus
Marcius,  ii.  97.

—  the  Marcii  are  punifhed  with  per¬
petual  banifhment,  and  confifcation
of  goods,  ii.  153.

C.  Marcius  Coriolanus  from  whom  de¬
fended,  with  what  qualifications
indued,  and  what  a  glorious  ex¬
ploit  he  performed  at  the  taking  of
Corioli,  iii.  140,  4.

-T-  after  the  taking  of  Corioli,  he


the  TEX  T.  437

performs  another  remarkable  aftion
at  the  battle  with  the  Antiates,  iii.
142.

• —  is  prefented  with  a  war  horfe,  iii.
*43*

*—  is  admired  for  his  frugality  and
modefty,  iii.  144.

—  is  furnamed  Coriolanus  for  his
gallant  behaviour  at  Corioli,  iii.
144.

—  leads  out  an  army  againfi:  the  Aa-
tiates,  iii.  181.

— >  being  repulfed  when  he  flood  for
the  con  fulfh  1  p,  he  becomes  ex-
afperated  againfi:  the  people,  iii.
184.

—  advifes  to  fell  the  corn  to  the  peo¬
ple  at  an  extravagant  price,  iii.
188.

—  repulfes  the  tribunes  with  abufive
words,  iii.  19 1.

— -  the  tediles  being  ordered  by  the
tribunes  to  apprehend  him,  he  is
defended  by  the  patricians,  iii.  19 1.

—  is  recommended  to  the  people  by
Minucius,  the  conful,  iii.  198.

—  makes  a  virulent  fpeech  againfi:
the  people,  iii.  200.

— •  is  protected  by  the  patricians  a-
gainfi:  the  violence  of  the  tribunes
and  people,  iii.  202.

— -  is  cited  by  the  tribunes  to  a  trial
before  the  people,  iii.  207.

—  is  greatly  accufed  in  the  fenate  by
Decius,  the  tribune,  iii.  215.

—  is  praifed  by  Appius,  iii.  225.

—  the  fpeech  he  made  in  the  fenate,
when  he  was  upon  the  point  of  be*
ing  delivered  up  to  his  trial  before
the  people,  iii.  240.

—  is  cited  to  his  trial  before  the  peo¬
ple,  iii.  241.

—  in  what  manner  he  cleared  him*
felf  before  them,  of  aiming  at

•  tyranny,  iii.  249.

—  the  reafon  why  he  gave  to  the

JL  f  1  2  foldiers'


43  8  INDEX  to

foldiers  the  plunder  taken  from  the
Antiates,  iii.  252.
is  condemned  by  a  majority  of
two  voices  only,  iii.  254.

—  he  bears  his  fentence  of  perpetual
banifhment  with  an  unmoved  con-
ftancy,  iii.  261.

■—  the  manner,  in  which  he  took
leave  of  his  mother,  and  wife,  iii.
262.  346.

■ —  in  order  to  revenge  the  treatment
he  received  from  the  Roman  people
he  goes  over  to  theVolfei,  iii.  282.

—  is  kindly  received  by  Tullus  At-
tius,  chief  of  theVolfcian  nation,
and  is  admitted  to  a  participation
of  the  government,  iii.  285 — 297.

■ —  his  fpeech  in  an  affembly  of  the
Volfci,  iii.  290.

prailes  Appius  in  his  fpeech,  iii.
291.

—  is  honoured  by  them  with  the  fe-
natorial  dignity,  and  a  power  of
fuing  for  any  magiftracy,  iii.  297.

• —  being  made  general  of  the  war  by
the  Volfci,  he  marches  into  the
Roman  territories,  iii.  299.

—  gives  orders  to  plunder 'the  ple¬
beians,  and  to  fparethe  patricians,
iii.  300.

—  confults  with  Tullus  concerning
the  future  operations  of  the  war,
iii.  201.

—  having  received  the  command  of
the  army,  which  was  to  take  the
held,  he  falls  upon  the  allies  of  the
Romans,  iii.  302.

■ —  is  held  in  great  efteem  by  the
Volfci,  iii.  306.

—  annoys  the  Latines,  and  the  other
allies  of  the  Romans,  iii.  306 —

M-

■ —  marches  with  an  army  againft  the
city,  iii.  314.

* —  incamps  at  the  Cluilian  ditches, ib.
his  anfwer  to  the^  fpeech  of  Mi-


the  TEX  T.

I

nucius,  iii.  326.

—  briefly  lays  open  his  own  condu<5t
and  principles,  iii.  328.

—  greatly  complains  of  the  fenate,
iii.  330.

—  the  rewards  and  honors,  with
which  he  was  diftinguilhed  by  the
Volfci,  iii.  333.

• —  upon  what  conditions  he  offers
peace  to  the  Romans,  iii.  336,  7.

—  again  annoys  the  Latines,  iii.  3-38,
9-

■ —  marches  at  lafl  from  Latium  to
Rome,  iii.  339.

—  the  anfwer  he  returned  to  the  fe-
cond  embaffy  of  the  Romans,  iii,
34i-

—  his  anfwer  to  the  third,  iii.  342.

—  in  what  manner  he  received  his
mother,  and  wife,  who  had  under¬
taken  to  entreat  for  their  country,
iii.  351.

—  the  anfwer  he  made  to  his  mo¬
ther’s  entreaties,  iii.  366.

—  being  prevailed  upon  by  his  mo¬
ther,  he  confults  with  her  what  i$
to  be  done,  iii.  367.

— .  was  chiefly  defirous  of  juftice,
piety  and  reputation,  ib.

—  marches  away  with  his  army,  iii.

*  368-  373.

—  is  accufed  by  Tullus  Attius,  iii.
374.

—  is  ftoned  to  death  before  his  trial
by  the  fadlion  of  Tullus,  iii.  376.

• — •  is  honoured  with  a  triumphant  fu¬
neral,  iii.  376,  7.

—  his  qualifications,  iii.  377.

• —  his  faults,  iii.  378.

—  is  mourned  for  both  by  the  Ro¬
mans  and  Volfci,  iih  380.

Market  \  an  affembly  of  the  people  is
appointed  for  the  third  market  day,
iii.  242.

See  Nundin a.

Marriage  ceremonies ;  the  bride  cake

called


INDEX  to  the  TEX  T.


called  fo  from  the  participation  of
fpelt,  i.  269.

—  thofe  were  obliged  by  the  Roman
laws  to  marry,  who  were  of  a  pro¬
per  age,  iv.  42.

' —  marriage  in  murder,  ii.  285.

* —  the  patricians  are  forbidden  by
law  to  contrad  marriages  with  the
plebeians,  iv.  243.

—  Appius  Claudius,  the  decemvir,
who  had  inferred  this  law  among
Thofe  of  the  twelve  tables,  is  the
fit  ft  perfon,  who  feels  the  ill  ef¬
fects  of  it,  iv.  293.

— -  the  laws  of  Romulus  relating  to
married  women,  i.  266 — 271.

■ —  fire,  and  water,  a  marriage  rite,  i.

27  9>

—  women  twice  married  were  ex¬
cluded  from  the  priefthood  of  For-
tuna  Muliebris,  iii.  373.

Mars,  and  Quirinus,  it  is  uncertain
whether  they  were  the  fame  power,
i.  307.

■ —  a  very  ancient  temple  of  Mars,  i.

3 6-

— -  the  oracle  of  Mars,  i.  37.

—  a  temple  of  Mars,  that  ftood  with¬
out  the  walls,  iii.  22.

—  the  grove  of  Mars,  i.  176.

—  a  field  confecrated  to  Mars,  ii.

333*.„

—  lacrinces,  called  Suovetaurilia,
performed  in  the  Campus  Mar¬
tins,  iii.  244.

—  foidiers  wereinliftedin  the  Campus
Martius,  iii.  428.

—  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Fidius  ftood
on  the  Martial  hill,  i.  309,  10.

Marji  received  into  the  city,  i.  206.

—  the  Marfic  war,  ii.  263.

Maruvium,  its  fituation,  i.  37.

Maticna ,  Tiora,  its  fituation,  ib.

Matrons  *,  the  Roman,  and  Latin

matrons  are  permitted  to  return  to
their  own  country,  their  hufbands


being  left  behind,  iii.  1,  2.

—  matrons,  particularly  fuch  as  were
with  child,  grievoufly  attacked
with  the  plague,  iv.  74.

—  in  what  manner,  and  for  how
long  a  time  the  matrons  mourned
for  their  relations,  and  other  re¬
nowned  men  of  the  common¬
wealth,  ii.  388.

May  ;  the  ides  of  May  were  religi-
oufly  kept,  iv.  240,  1.

—  pageants  offered  to  Saturn  on  the
ides  of  May,  i.  86.

— -  the  decemvirs  entered  upon  their
magiftracy  on  the  ides  of  May,  iv.
240.

Mechanic  trades  were  exercifed  by
foreigners  and  flaves,  i.  275.

Medes ,  their  empire,  i.  6.

Medimnus ,  a  Sicilian  dry  meafure,  iii.
183.

Medius  Fidius ,  i.  308.

Medullia ,  formerly  built  by  the  Al¬
bans,  is  made  a  Roman  colony,  i.
289.  ii.  1.

—  is  reduced  by  T.  Hoftilius,  ii.  80.

• —  is  taken  by  the  Latines,  ii.  86.

—  and  recovered  by  Ancus  Marcius,
ii.  87.

—  the  inhabitants  of  Medullia  fub-
rnit  to  Romulus,  i.  289.

—  revolt  to  the  Sabines,  iii.  53.

Meetings  held  in  private  houfes  gene¬
rally  fufpicious,  iv.  368.

Melas,  a  gulph,  1.  140.

Memphis  \  the  pyramids  at  Memphis,
ii.  196.

Mens  crates^  his  account  of  fEneas,  i.

io9*

Menenius  ( Agrippa  Lanatus )  fon  or
Caius,  is  made  conful,  ft.  379.

• —  brings  fuccours  to  his  coilegue
Pofturnius,  ii.  380.

—  triumphs  over  the  Sabines,  ii.

3*4-

—  is  remarkable  for  his  age  and

,Pm-


INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


prudence,  iii.  75.

—  fteers  between  both  parties,  ib.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  return
of  the  people,  iii.  75.

—  he  is  oppofed  by  Appius  Claudius,
iii.  93. .

• —  is  appointed  chief  of  the  deputies
fent  to  the  feceders,  Hi.  104.

—  the  fpeech,  by  which  he  almoft
prevailed  over  them,  iii.  124.'

—  his  anfwer  to  their  demands,  iii.

—  perfuades  them  to  fend  fome,  who
fhould  receive  affurances  from  the
fenate,  iii.  134.

—  draws  up  the  law  for  the  people
concerning  the  eledtion  of  plebeian
magiftrates,  iii.  134.

—  he  dies,  iii.  146.

—  on  account  of  his  poverty,  he  is
magnificently  buried  by  the  fenate,
ib.

—  the  people  give  the  children  of
Menenius  fortunes,  which  had  been
colledled  man  by  man,  iii.  147.

—  the  Roman  matrons  mourn  a
whole  year  for  him,  iv.  52,  3.

C.  Menenius ,  conful,  iv.  232.

—  dies  with  grief,  and  ficknefs,  iv.

233*

T.  Menenius ,  fon  of  Agrippa,  conful,
iv*  35-

—  lofes  time  in  preparing  for  his  ex¬
pedition  into  Tyrrhenia,  iv.  36.

—  was  only  thirty  ftadia  from  fort
Cremera,  when  it  was  taken,  and
all  the  Fabii  put  to  death,  iv.  43.

—  he  carries  on  the  Tyrrhenian  war
with  neither  prudence,  nor  fuccefs,
iv.  44,  5.

— -  is  fined  by  the  people  for  his  ill
conduct  in  Tyrrhenia,  iv.  53.

• —  while  under  that  fentence,  he  dies
through  d ejection,  and  abftinence,
iv.  54.

Menippe ,  daughter  of  Peneus,  i.  63.


Mephyla,  its  fituation,  i.  36.

Metilii  tranflated  from  Alba  to  Rome,
ii.  69.

Metius  Cur  tins,  i.  298,  305.

Mezen  tins  1  king  of  Tyrrhenia,  with
the  Rutuli,  marches  againft  Aineas,
i.  145.

—  being  reduced  to  extremity,  makes
peace  with  the  Latines,  i.  148.

Milefii,  their  fedition,  iii.  261.

Military.  See  Age,  Oath.

Milk  ufed  in  lacrifices,  ii.  241.

Miltiades ,  archon  at  Athens,  iii.  154.

Minerva ,  inventrefs  of  the  armed
dance  called  Pyrriche,  iii.  272.

— ~  the  antient  temple  of  Minerva  at
Mephyla,  i.  36.

—  Minerva  is  educated  by  Palas,  i.


73-  .

—  Minerva  gives  a  dowry  to  Chryfes,


»•  *53-

—  the  portico  of  the  chapel  of  Mi¬
nerva,  ii.  135.

—  the  chapels  of  Minerva  and  Juno,
in  the  temple  of  Capitoline  Ju¬
piter,  ii.  133,  256.

—  the  prieft  of  Minerva,  the  tutelary
goddefs  of  Troy,  iii.  103.

Minervium ,  the  temple  of  Minerva  in
Italy,  i.  1 18.

Minturna  wafhed  by  the  Liris,  i.  24.
L.  Minucius ,  conful,  iv.  171.

—  marches  againft  the  TEqui,  iv.
172.

—  marches  againft  the  Sabines,  iv.
188.

L.  Minucius ,  one  of  the  decemvirs,
marches  with  four  of  his  collegues,
againft  the  TEqui,  iv.  284.

M.  Minucius  ( Augurinus )  conful,  iii.  1 .

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iii.  182.

—  defends  the  fenate  before  the  peo¬
ple,  and  intercedes  for  Marcius,  iii.

1 93*

—  treats  with  the  tribunes  concern¬
ing  the  decree  of  the  fenate  to

be


INDEX  to

be  referred  to  them,  iii.  207.

•—  his  fpeech  to  the  people  in  favor
of  Marcius,  iii.  246,  7:

—  his  fpeech  to  the  tribunes  in  be¬
half  of  Marcius,  iii.  248.

—  is  appointed  one  of  the  five  em-
bafTadors  fent  to  Marcius,  iii.  315.
his  fpeech  to  Marcius,  ib.  •

P.  Minucius ,  conful,  iii.  148.

^  Minucius ,  conful,  iv.  179.

• —  marches  againft  the  Sabines,  iv.
188.

Mifenum ,  a  haven  in  Campania,  i.
122,3.

—  the  name  of  a  promontory,  iii.  155.
Mitylenaans  create  Pittacus  dictator

againft  Alcteus,  ii.  430.

Monarch ,  the  firft  at  Rome,  after  the
expulfion  of  the  kings,  was  T.
Lartius,  the  dictator,  ii.  428.
Monarchy ,  what  evils  attend  it,  and
how  they  may  be  corredted,  ii.  278.

• —  monarchy,  degenerating  into  ty¬
ranny,  is  reduced  to  bounds  by  the
ariftocracy,  iii.  237.

• —  abolifhed  at  Rome,  ii.  309.

Money  great  hardfhips  are  under¬
gone  for  the  fake  of  Money,  ii.

%

—  by  the  different  payments  of  mo¬
ney,  the  fex,  age,  and  number  of
the  citizens  is  dilcovered,  ii.  174.
See  Juventus ,  Libitina  and  Lucina.

Monjlrous  births  lawful  to  expofe
them,  i.  251.

Montanus ,  or  Ccelimonlanus .  See  Vir-
ginius.

Months ,  reckoned  according  to  the
courfe  of  the  moon,  iv.  240.
Monuments  to  one  perfon  eredted  in
many  places,  i.  125.

Moon'\  the  full  moon  falls  out  on  the
ides,  iv.  240.

Jbfor££rfucceedsltalus,  i.  33,  and  168.
— -  Morgetes,  a  people  fo  called  from
Merges  their  king  j  they  are  lince


the  TEXT.  441

called  Italians,  and  were  formerly
called  Oenotri,  i.  33.

Mofynaci ,  a  people  of  Afia,  i.  60.

Mother  city  •,  the  fafety  of  the  mother
city  promoted  by  its  colonies,  iii.

233*

• —  a  mother  city  fhould  not  be  ex¬
cited  againft  its  colony,  ii.  9:

—  whether  the  fovereignty  of  a  mo¬
ther  city  is  always  to  be  exercifed
over  its  colonies,  ii.  23,  4.

—  a  mother  city  will  not  defert  its
fidelity  towards  its  colony,  iii.  3 13-.

—  a  mother  fhould  have  the  com¬
mand  over  her  fon,  iii.  366.

Mountain  \  the  holy  mountain,  iii.  69.

—  the  people  fecede  from  the  city  to
the  holy  mountain,  ib.

—  the  people  eredt  an  altar,  and  per¬
form  annual  facrifices  on  the  holy
mountain,  iii.  137.

Mourning  habit,  ii.  339.

—  the  people  neither  rejoice,  nor
mourn,  nor  the  fenate  triumph  for
a  fatal  vidlory,  iv.  5 1 .

Mucian  meadows,  ii.  365.

C.  MuciusCordus,  abrave  man,  ii.  352.

—  propofes  his  defign  to  the  fenate,
ii.  354.

—  amazes  Porfena  with  his  bold  at¬
tempt,  ii.  357,  8.

—  his  fpeech  when  brought  before
Porfena,  ib.

—  with  what  honors  he  is  rewarded,
ii.  365.

Mugillanus.  See  Papyri  its.

Mugionian  gate,  i.  312.

Murder  of  lathers.  See  Parricide.

—  a  marriage  in  murder,  ii.  285.

Mafic  j  inftrumental  mufic  brought

into  Italy  by  Evander,  i.  75.

Myrus ,  archon  at  Athens,  ii.  389.

My r filus,  the  Lelbian,  his  account  of
thePelafgi  in  Italy,  i.  55.

—  his  account  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  i.
64.


Myfcelus ,


442  I  N  D  E  X  to

Myfcelus ,  the  founder  of  Croton,  i.
329.

N.

Naides,  watry  nymphs,  i.  142.

Naked ;  the  Lacedaemonians  abolifh
the  cuftom  of  contending  naked,
iii.  270.

—  to  drip  quite  naked  in  any  game,
was  formerly  a  fcandal,  ib.

Names ,  the  change  of  them  among
nations,  i.  64.

—  in  the  Greek  appellations  of  places,
i-  79-

—  the  method  of  Roman  names  is
fuch,  that,  befides  the  common,  or
appellative,  (that  is,  the  praenomen)
they  have  the  names  of  families
given  to  them,  or  a  name  derived
from  their  father’s  family :  Thus
the  appellative  name,  Servius,  is
derived  from  the  condition  of  the
perfon  •,  the  proper,  and  family

/  name  Tullius,  is  derived  from  his
father,  ii.  145.

—  the  name  of  a  daughter  is  like
That  of  her  father,  iv.  292.

—  that  the  names  of  fome  plebeian
families  were  the  fame  with  Thofe
of  patrician  extraction,  is  plain
from  thefe  inftances,  the  Claudii,
Junii,  Siccii,  and  alfo  the  Gerfucii,
and  Virginii  i  of  which  this  feems
to  be  the  reafon,  becaufe  not  a  few
of  the  plebeians,  who  were  men  of
great  virtue,  were  admitted  to  the
order  of  patricians ;  and  fometimes
the  right  of  family,  and  names,
were  given  to  clients  alfo,  by  thofe,
who  were  their  patrons,  iv.  293.

Nanas,  fonof  Teutamid.es,  i.  63.

Navi  us.  See  Attius.

Nautian  family  derive  the  cuftody  of
the  palladium  from  Nautius,  their
anceftor,  iii.  103.

Nautius ,  companion  of  ./Eneas,  and


the  TEXT.

author  of  the  Nautian  Family,  ib.
C.  Nautius ,  conful,  iv.  54.

. —  lays  wafte  the  country  of  the-
Volfci,  iv.  67,  8.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  1 7  r .

—  marches  againft  the  Sabines,  iv.
172.

—  being  called  from  the  Sabines,  he
prefides  over  the  commonwealth  at
home,  iv.  174,  5.

a—  returns  victorious  from  the  Sa¬
bines,  iv.  1 79.

Sp.  Nautius ,  famous  for  the  nobility
of  his  anceftors,  and  his  own  vir¬
tues,  iii.  103.

—  the  opinion  he  delivered  in  the
name  of  the  younger  fenators,  con¬
cerning  the  return  of  the  people,
ib.

—  is  made  conful,  iii.  304:

NeceJJity  ftronger  than  human  nature,

ii.  4*4.

—  renders  men  daring  beyond  their
judgement,  and  brave  beyond  their

power,  iii.  30.

Nemejis  and  Erynnis,  i.  363.
Neoptolemus ,  with  his  forces,  takes
the  citadel  of  Troy,  i.  104.

—  dilmiffes  the  EleCtoridae,  i.  106.
Neptune ,  Confus,  fhaker  of  the  earth,

i.  74,  and  280:

— •  his  feftival,  ib.

—  the  temple,  and  games  of  the
Hippian  Neptune,  i.  72.

—  whether  there  was  a  lubterraneous
altar  dedicated  to  Neptune,  i.  280.

Nefos ,  a  place  of  Arcadia,  i.  1 10.
Niceas ,  of  Opus  in  Locris,  victor  at
the  Olympic  games,  ii.  389;
Nicodemus ,  archon  at  Athens,  iii.-
419,  20.

Niobe ,  daughter  of  Phoroneus,  the
firft  woman,  whom  Jupiter  is
thought  to  ha-ve  Iain  with,  i.  40.

—  is  mother  of  Pelafgus  by  Jupiter,

i.  50.


Nobility


INDEX  to

Nobility  confifts  in  nothing  but  in
virtue,  ii.  25.

Ncmentana ,  the  name  of  a  road,  called
alfo  Ficulnenfis,  iv.  323.
Nomentani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

Nomentanus ,  or  Coelimontanus.  See
Virginias.

N omentum ,  a  colony  of  Albans,  i.
3*7-

—  furrender  to  Tarquinius,  ii.  104.
Norbani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.  409.

—  receive  a  Roman  colony,  iii.  173.
Numa  Pompilius ,  fon  of  Pompon,

born  at  Cures,  is  called  to  the  go¬
vernment  of  Rome,  i.  327.

—  whether  he  was  a  pupil  of  Pytha¬
goras  of  Samos,  i.  328.

■ —  why  he  is  thought  by  fome  to  have
been  a  pupil  of  Pythagoras,  i.

33°-

—  how  long  he  reigned,  i.  173.

—  in  what  manner  he  governed  the
commonwealth,  i.  338.

*—  by  what  method  he  promoted  re¬
ligion,  i.  339.  361.

«— *  in  what  manner  he  divided  the
land,  and  encouraged  the  people  to
a  diligent  ftudy  of  agriculture,  i.

364,  5-

— ■  how  he  brought  the  Fidenates  to
their  duty,  i.  3 56.

—  the  wifdom  ol  Numa,  i.  327.

—  his  political  inftitutions,  i.  361.

—  his  law  concerning  the  right  of  a
father  in  felling  his  fon,  i.  273.

- —  his  death,  burial,  and  pofberity,  i.

3 66>  7-

* —  his  charadter,  i.  365.

—  whether  he  had  any  intimacy  with
a  nymph,  or  a  mufe,  i.  334,  5,

Numicius ,  the  name  of  a  river,  i.
146.

T.  Numicius  P  rife  us,  c-onful,  iv.  101.
r —  marches  againit  the  Voifci,  iv.
102.

Vql.  IV.


the  TEXT.  443

Numitor ;  Amulius  endeavours  to  de¬
prive  Numitor  of  iflue,  i.  174.

- —  by  what  device  Numitor  is  re¬
venged  on  him,  i.  196,  7.

—  recovers  the  empire  of  the  Albans,

i.  198.

—  in  what  manner  he  put  a  flop  to
the  controverfy  between  Romulus
and  Remus,  i.  200.

—  ^Fgeftus,  fon  of  Numitor,  i.  175.

—  Ilia,  or  Rhea  Silvia,  daughter  of
.  Numitor,  i.  175.

Numitoria ,  mother  of  Virginia,  iv.

296.

P.  Numitorius  defends  his  niece  Vir¬
ginia,  ib.

—  and  claims  the  cuftody  of  her,  iv.

297.

—  lpeaks  feverely  againft  Appius,
iv.  309.

—  when  tribune  of  the  people,  ac-
cufes  Oppius,  a  decemvir,  iv.  341,

Nundina ,  in  what  manner,  and  for
what  purpofe,  inftituted,  i.  276.

—  every  nine  days  determined  them,
iii.  241,  2.

G.

Oath  made  ftanding  upon  the  vic¬
tims,  ii.  312.

—  the  military  oath,  iv.  164.

—  the  military  oath  was  held  the  mod
religious  of  all  others,  iv.  318.

—  thole,  who  had  taken  the  military
oath,  dared  not  defert  the  enfigns,

iii.  69.

—  the  greateft  oath  By  good  Faith,

iv.  366.

—  an  oath  upon  Lucretia’s  dagger,

ii.  274.

Ocrijia ,  of  Corniculum,  by  what
means  the  mother  of  Servius  Tul¬
lius,  ii.  145,  6.

O  Pawns.  See  Mamilius.

Oeneadd:  are  reftored,  i.  117.

Oenotri ,  a  people  formerly'  called
M  m  m  TEzii,  t


444  INDEX  to

JE zii,  and  Lycaonians,  i.  31.

• —  lived  in  Italy,  i.  33.

what  parts  of  Italy  they  poffeffed,
i-  34-

—  are  led  out  of  Arcadia  into  Italy
by  their  prince  Oenotrus,  i.  30.

Oenotria ,  the  country  of  the  Oenotri,
1.31.

Oenotrus ,  his  defcent,  and  voyage  into
Italy,  i.  30.

Offences ;  to  let  enormous  crimes  go
unpunifhed,  is  the  fame  as  never^o
pardon  trifling  offences,  iii.  33.
capital  offences  tried  by  the  peo¬
ple,  ii.  47.

Offerings  of  barley,  i.  268.

Old  men  were  called  by  the  ancients
men  renowned  for  age  and  merit,
i.  244.

Olive.  See  Crowns.

Oligarchy ,  if  it  exceeds  due  bounds,
is  corrected  by  the  prudence  of  the
people,  iii.  237.

Olympiad ,  in  the  iff  year  of  thevn.
Olympaid  Rome  was  built,  i.

1 6 1 ,  2.  169.  222.

—  in  the  middle  of  the  xvi.  Numa
Pompilius  was  chofen  king,  i.  328.

* —  in  the  3d  of  the  xvn.  Croton  was
built,  i.  329.

— -  in  the  2d  of  the  xxvn.  Tullus
Hoftilius  was  chofen  king,  ii.  2.

—  in  the  2d  of  the  xxxv.  Ancus
Marcius  was  chofen  king,  ii.  82.

• —  about  the  2d  of  the  xli.  L.  Tar-
quinius  Prifcus  was  chofen  king,  ii.

97-

* —  in  the  4th  of  the  l.  Servius  Tul¬
lius  was  cholen  king,  ii.  144.
after  the  l.  Pythagoras  came  into
Italy,  i.  329.

*—  in  the  4th  of  the  lxi.  L.  Tarqui-
nius  Superbus  was  chofen  king,  ii.
228,  9.

—  in  the  lxviii.  the  firft  confuls
were  chofen,  ii.  309.


the  TEX  T.

—  in  the  lxxiii.  Marcius  CoriolanUS
went  over  to  the  Volfci,  iii.  282.

—  in  the  lxxv.  Xerxes  invaded
Greece,  iv.  1,  2.

—  in  the  lxxxiii.  the  decemvirate
was  abolifhed,  iv.  245.

—  in  the  3d  of  the  xcm.  Dionyfius
the  elder  poffeffed  himfelf  of  the
tyranny  of  Syracufe,  iii.  152.

—  in  the  xcvm.  Rome  was  taken
by  the  Gauls,  i.  1 71.

— -  in  the  3d  of  cxxvm.  the  firft
Punic  war  broke  out,  i.  21.

— -  in  the  clxxiii.  the  Capitoline
temple  was  burnt,  ii.  263.

—  in  the  middle  of  the  clxxxvit.
Dionyfius  came  into  Italy,  imme¬
diately  after  Auguftus  had  put  an
end  to  the  civil  war,  i.  18,  19.

Omphale ,  a  Lydian,  mother  of  Tyr-
rhenus  by  Hercules,  i.  62.

Ophrynium  is  deferted  by  its  inha¬
bitants,  i.  102,  3.

Opica ,  a  country  fo  called,  i.  165.

—  the  Opican  haven,  i.  122.

Opici  drive  out  theSiceli,  i.  52.

—  received  into  the  city,  i.  206.

Opimia ,  a  Veftal,  is  put  to  death  for

incontinence,  iii.  433.

Opinions  \  the  prerogative  of  deliver¬
ing  opinions,  i.  337.

— ■  in  what  order  the  confuls  demand¬
ed  them,  iii.  221.

—  the  rnoft  ancient,  and  moft  dig¬
nified  fenators  are  firft  afked  their
opinions,  ib.

—  confular  perfons  delivered  their
opinions  according  to  their  age,  iv.
258.

—  the  younger  fenators  fpoke  laft,
ib.

. —  every  one  is  called  upon  by  name
to  deliver  his  opinion,  iii.  86.

—  every  one  had  a  right  to  deliver
his  opinion  in  his  own  rank,  iv.
238.


—  the


INDEX  to

— -  the  manner  of  afking  opinions  is
inverted  by  the  decemvirs,  iv.

271,  2.

• —  the  tribunes  of  the  people  require
that  opinions  fhould  be  delivered
upon  oath,  both  in  trials,  and  in
the  fenate,  iii.  209.

—  whoever  is  firft  afked  his  opinion
ought  not  to  negledt  thofe  things,
which  require  an  immediate  re-
drefs,  iv.  262.

—  the  bed  opinion  ought  to  prevail,
iv.  270.

—  Cornelius  orders  opinions  to  be
counted  that  no  innovation  fhould
be  admitted,  iv.  280.

—  the  opinion  that  prevails  is  or¬
dered  to  be  drawn  up,  iv.  281.

Opis.  See  Rhea.

M.  Oppius ,  at  the  head  of  the  fecond
feceffion,  iv.  320.

Sp.  Oppius ,  one  of  the  decemvirs,,  iv.
240.

— -  is  left  with  Appius  Claudius  to  go¬
vern  the  city,  iv.  284.

—  affembles  the  fenate,  iv.  321.

—  is  condemned,  and  put  to  death  in
prifon,  iv.  341.

Ops.  See  Rhea.

Optimates.  See  Patricians.

Oracle  given  to  the  Pelafgi,  i.  45.

—  another  given  to  Dardanus,  i.  1 54.

—  the  Delphic  oracle  is  confulted
concerning  the  caufes,  and  reme¬
dies  of  an  uncommon  peftilencey
ii.  271.

—  the  Delphic  oracle,  ib.

—  the  oracle  of  Dodona,  i.  37.  116.
127.

—  the  oracle  of  Mars,  i.  3  7.

—  the  Pythian  oracles,  i.  hi.

—  the  Sibylline  oracles,  ii.  128.

—  the  oracle  of  the  Erithraean  Sibyl,'
i.  127.

Orchomenus ,  its  fituation,  i.  no.

Orgia  of  the  Phrygians,  i.  258,  9.


the  TEX  T.

Orvinium ,  its  fituation,  i.  36.

OJiia,  its  fituation,  ii.  96.

—  by  whom  built,  ib.

—  from  whence  its  name  was  de¬
rived,  ib.

Ovation ,  derived  from  E voaruos  of  the
Greeks,  ii.  384,  5.

—  in  what  it  differed  from  the  greater
triumph,  ii.  385.

—  is  a  triumph  on  foot,  ib.

—  what  were  the  ornaments  of  the
perfon,  who  triumphed  in  the  ova¬
tion,  ii.  385.

0 ufted ;  the  Ardeates  are  oufled  of
the  contelled  lands,  iv.  363,  4.

Ox  Market,  Boarium,  i.  92.  ii.  203.

—  the  Ara  Maxima  flood  near  the
ox  market,  i.  92.

Oxen  thirty  fheep,  and  two  oxen
were  the  greateft:  fine,  iv.  224.

P.

P^estu.m  Pofidonia,  i.  168.

Paganalia,  feafts  fo  called,  ii.  173.

Palas,  fon  of  Chryfes  by  Dardanus,
i.  139.

—  Palas,  fon  of  Elercuies  by  Dyna,
daughter  of  Evander,  i.  70.  97.

—  dies,  i.  97.

—  Palas,  fon  of  Lycaon,  i.  73.

Palatine  mountain,  and  the  neigh¬
bouring  hills  are  fortified  by  Ro¬
mulus,  1.  290.

—  the  Palatine  tribe,  ii.  169.

• —  the  Tyrrhene  ftreet,  vie  us  Tufcus,
lay  between  the  Palatine  and  Capi-
toline  hills,  ii.  367.

Palatini  Salii,  i.  351.

Palinurus ,  a  port  of  Italy,  i.  122.

Palladium  \  the  rites  of  the  greater
powers  given  by  Minerva  to
Chryfes,  in  lieu  df  a  dowry,  i.  153,

—  two  Palladiums,  and  which  was
carried  into  Italy  by  ./Eneas,  i.

l65-

—  the  famous  Palladium,  brought

M  m  m  2.  by


446  INDEX  to

by  /Eneas  is  committed  to  the  care
of  the  Veftals,  i.  156.

—  the  cuftody  of  the  Palladium  com¬
mitted  to  the  care  of  the  Nautian
family,  iii.  103.

Pallantium ,  in  Arcadia,  i.  68.
Pallcintium ,  in  Latium,  i.  70.

- —  a  colony  fent  thither  by  the  Al¬
bans,  i.  102.

—  is  incompaffed  by  them  with  a  wall
and  a  ditch,  ib.

—  Romulus  intends  to  build  upon  it,
i.  199.

Tallantium ,  now  called  Palatium,i.  70.

—  the  Pallantine  and  Ctelian  hills,
the  feat  of  Romulus,  i.  312.  *

Pallene ,  a  Peninfula  of  Thrace,  i.
107.

Pan ,  the  moll  ancient,  and  mod:  ho¬
norable  divinity  among  the  Arca¬
dians,  i.  72.

—  one  of  the  demigods,  iii.  277.

- —  his  rites,  i.  187.

—  the  rites  of  the  Lycasan  Pan,  i.
71,  2.

—  woods  and  mountains  dedicated  to
Pan,  i.  85.

—  the  wood  of  Pan,  i.  183.
Panatbenaa ,  feafts  of  Minerva,  i.

351*

—  when  they  were  kept,  ib.

C.  Papirius ,  high  pried,  ii.  84,  5.

A.  Papirius  Miigillanus  conful,  iv.

375-

Manias  Papirius ,  the  hr  ft  king  of  the
facri  flees,  ii.  313.

Pardon  ;  to  let  enormous  crimes  go
unpunifhed,  is  the  fame  as  never  to
pardon  trifling  offences,  iii.  33.
Parents  are  bound  by  lav/  to  bring  up
all  their  male  children,  i.  250..

—  children  follow  the  condition  of
their  parents,  whether  thefe  are
free  or  flaves,  iv.  296.

Parilia ,  a  feftival  for  the  founding  of
Rome,  i.  204.


the  TEXT.

Parmenides ,  of  Pofidonia,  vidor  at
the  Olympic  games,  iv.  10 r.

Parricide ,  the  punifhment  of  it,  ii.
262.

Parjley  laid  under  bread,  inftead  of
tables,  i.  127.

Patera  brazen  patera  in  the  temple
of  Juno,  i.  1 1 8.

Patricians  •,  what  privileges  the  peo¬
ple  had  in  common  with  the  patri¬
cians,  iii.  212.

—  a  decree  of  the  fenate  for  fubmitting
the  patricians  to  be  tried  by  the
people,  iii.  241.

—  thole,  who  were  defeended  from
the  Fathers,  were  called  patricians,
i.  236.

—  the  functions  of  the  patricians,  i.
23  7-

—  the  patricians  ftudied  the  laws,  iv.
132.

—  in  what  manner  they  were  affem-
bled,  i.  236,  7.

the  number  of  the  patricians,  or
rather  of  the  fathers,  is  doubled
by  adding  another  hundred,  i.

305-

—  who  ufed  to  be  chofen  in  the  num¬
ber  of  the  patricians,  ii.  128.

—  L.  Tarquinius  Prifcus  is  chofen
into  the  number  of  the  patricians
and  fenators,  ii.  91.

■ — •  Ad ius  Claufus  Sabinus,  is  rank¬
ed  among  the  patricians,  ii.  374.

—  a  hundred  of  the  principal  plebei¬
ans  are  ranked  in  the  order  of  the
patricians,  ii.  333.

—  the  patricians  alone  with  their
clients  take  arms  for  the  pre¬
fer  vation  of  the  commonwealth,
during  the  ieceflion  of  the  people,
iii.  7  1  .

• —  the  patricians  with  their  clients
undertake  an  expedition  againff
the  Antiates,  iii.  1  8  1.

—  the  patricians  infill  upon  the  peo¬

ple’s


INDEX  to

pie’s  being  aftembled  in  their  cen¬
turies  at  the  trial  of  Coriolanus,
iii.  244.

•—  the  patricians  are  angry  with  Va¬
lerius  for  having  perfuaded  them
to  fuffer  the  people  to  try  thofe  of
their  own  body  lor  capital  crimes,

iii.  261.

. —  are  accufed  by  the  plebeians  of
haughtinefs,  feverity,  and  great
diflimulation,  iii.  73.

. —  are  accufed  by  the  tribunes  as  if
they  were  always  contriving  forne
mifchief  a  gain  ft  the  poorer  fort,

iv.  48.

—  whether  they  were  to  be  tried  by
the  people,  iii.  229,  30.

—  they  were  not  to  be  tried  by  the
people,  without  the  confent  of  the
fenate,  iii,  241,  2.  iv.  195.

— *  the  patrician  order  does  not  per¬
mit  a  patrician  to  be  apprehended
by  the  officers  of  the  tribunes,  be¬
fore  his  trial,  iii.  191.

• —  at  what  time  the  patricians  were
permitted  to  be  tried  by  the  peo¬
ple,  iii.  256.

—  Marcius  was  the  firfb  patrician
cited  to  the  tribunal  of  the  people,
ib.

—  the  patricians  yield  to  the  people
the  pow'er  of  trying  thofe  of  their
own  order  •,  of  being  admitted
into  the  fenate  *,  to  magiftracies,
and  the  prieflhood,  iii.  257.

- —  patricians,  and  thofe  not  a  few,
nor  obfcure,  join  themfelves  to
the  faction  of  the  decemvirs,  iv.
242.

—  the  patricians  oppofe  the  return  of
Marcius,  iii.  313, 14.

— •  the  patricians  are  forbidden  by
law  to  contract  marriages  with  the
plebeians,  iv.  243.

—  fome  of  the  patricians  are  cenfured
by  Appius,  iv.  98.


the  TEXT.  447

’ —  the  young  patricians  opprefs  the
people,  iv.  349.

Patron ,  the  Thurian,  companion  of
iFlneas,  i.  116.

Patrons  were  appointed  not  only  for
plebeians,  but  alfo  for  colonies,
and  cities  in  alliance,  i.  241.

* —  the  duty  of  patrons,  i.  238.

■ —  patronage,  a  guard  for

the  poor,  and  lower  fort,  i.  238.

—  the  patronage  of  clients  defend¬
ed  through  families,  i.  240.

—  clients  chole  what  patrons  they
thought  fit,  i.  237.

—  patrons,  and  their  clients  contend
in  their  zeal,  and  fidelity  to  each
other,  i.  240.

—  a  patron  is  attended  by  his  clients,
when  he  feceded,  iv.  282.

—  a  client  dying  recommends  to  his
patron  the  guardianfhip  of  his  fon,
iv.  306.

Peace  is  recommended,  when  it  is  not
to  the  detriment  of  the  common¬
wealth,  iv.  34.

—  peace  is  fued  for  by  the  mofl  an¬
cient,  and  mofl  honourabfeVeientes
in  form  of  fuppliants,  iv.  33.
68.

—  the  terms  of  a  peace  were  referred
to  the  fenate  by  the  confuls,  iv.

33-

Pedani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.  409.

'=■—  Marcius  takes  them  by  ftorm,
iii.  310.

Pelafgi  defended  from  the  Argivi,  i.
205.

—  remove  out  of  Theffaly  into  Italy,
i.  40.

—  the  progenitor  of  the  Pelafgi,  their
firft  country,  their  removals,  and
their  various  fortune,  i.  34.  40:

—  the  Pelafgi,  and  Tyrrhenians  are
thought  by  fome  to  be  the  lame
people,  i.  58.  ,

r —  are  called  Tyrrhenians  by  Myr-

filus.


4+8  INDEX  to  the  TEX  T.

filus,  the  Lefbian,  i.  64.  x7>jc-<oj,  igxjoi,  i.  150,  1.

. —  at  what  time,  and  in  what  coun-  —  the  images  of  the  penates  remove
try  the  Pelafgi  began  to  be  called  themfelves  twice  of  their  own  ac-

Tyrrhenians,  i.  63.  See  Tyrrhe-  cord  from  the  Alban  temple  to  La-

nians.  vinium,  i.  1 50.

—  the  Pelafgi,  and  the  Tyrrhenians  People  are  the  body  of  a  city,  as  the-


were  not  one  and  the  fame  nation,
i.  64.  67.

—  the  Pelafgi  are  received  by  the
Aborigines,  i.  24.  46.

• —  they  fend  tenths  to  Delphi,  i.  44.
■—  after  they  had  made  themfelves
mailers  of  Croton,  they  plant  Tyr-
rhenia,  i.  47.

• —  after  a  fhort  profpcrity  in  Italy,
they  are  driven  out,  i.  52.

—  the  cities  of  the  Pelafgi  in  Italy  de-
molifhed,  i.  53.

—  a  remnant  of  the  Pelafgian  nation
are  left  in  Italy,  ib.

*—  the  Pelafgian  nation  were  former¬
ly  in  polfefiion  of  Lemnos,  and
Athens,  i.  58.

why  they  were  called  Pelargi,  i.
64.

—  thePelargian  wall  at  Athens,  ib.
Pdafgus ,  fort  of  Jupiter  by  Niobe,

daughter  of  Phoroneus,  i.  30,  40.
• —  founder  of  the  Pelafgian  nation,

i.  40..

—  is  father  of  the  latter  Lycaon  by
Dejanira,  i.  30.

—  the  defcertdants  of  Pelafgus,  i.  63.
Pelafgus ,  foil  of  Neptune,  and  La¬
ri  ffa,  i.  41.

Peloponnefians ,  companions  of  Her¬
cules,  where  .they  fettled  in  Italy,
i.  205.

—  AEzius,  and  Phoroneus  were  the
Idrfb  princes  of  Peloponnefus,  i.

30.

Pelops  •,  Hercules  celebrates  games  at
the  funeral  of  Pelops,  ii.  339.
Penates ,  and  Lares,  belonging  to  fa¬
milies,  by  the  Greeks  they  were
called  sr<x7  gun,  ytv^Aioiy


fenate  and  the  other  magiftracies
are  the  foul  of  it,  ii.  419.

—  the  people  leave  the  regulation  of
the  commonwealth  to  the  fenate,
i.  326.

—  the  people  for  the  mod  part  lived
in  the  country,  i.  237.

—  what  privileges  they  had  in  com¬
mon  with  the  patricians,  iii.  212.

—  what  rights,  and  immunities  they
had  even  from  the  beginning,  i.

249*

—  could  chufe  magiflrates,  enadt
laws,  and  determine  concerning
war,  ib.

—  create  confuls,  iii.  75.

« —  could  determine  nothing  without
a  previous  order  of  the  fenate,  iii.

207,.  8.

—  are  protected  by  Servius  Tullius
from  the  infoJence  of  the  more
powerful,  ii.  161.

• —  in  their  difpute  with  the  patrici¬
ans,  they  aie  defended  by  the  Va¬
lerian  law,  ii.  344.  iii.  210.

—  the  cognizance  of  a  capital  crime
is  referred  to  the  people,  ii.  47.

—  a  vote  is  not  permitted  by  the-
tribunes  to  them  againft  even  the
meanelt  of  the  patricians,  without
the  confent  of  the  fenate,  iv.  195.

what  trials  the  people  could  af-
fume  to  themfelves,  iii.  239.

—  at  what  time  the  people  obtained
the  privilege  of  trying  capital  of¬
fences,  ii.  47.  iii.  256.

- —  are  admitted  to  public  offices,  iii.
236.

— -  Appius  Claudius,  the  decemvir,  is
of  opinion  that  the  people  likewile

might


INDEX  to

might  enjoy  a  fhare  of  that  ma¬
gi  ftracy,  which  prefided  at  the
head  of  affairs,  iv.  240.

—  if  the  people  fhould  grow  infolent
in  the  adminiftration  of  the  com¬
monwealth,  they  may  be  reftrained
by  a  dictator,  iii.  237.

— *  the  people  being  called  to  an  ex¬
pedition  refufe  to  obey,  iii.  43.  53.

—  fecede  from  the  city  to  the  holy
mountain,  iii.  69.

—  are  branded  with  the  charadler  of
infamous,  iii.  122.

—  at  what  time  they  leceded  from  the
patricians,  and  when  they  returned
to  the  city,  iii.  148.

—  -  are  recalled  by  ten  confular  de¬
puties,  lent  to  them  with  full  power
to  accommodate  matters,  iii.  104.

—  are  commended  by  Brutus,  a  ple¬
beian,  for  many  and  great  fervices
done  by  them  to  the  common¬
wealth,  iii.  iii.

—  upon  what  terms  they  are  admit¬
ted  into  friendfhip,  iii.  229.

—  among  other  demands,  they  re¬
quire  annual  magistrates,  iii.  132.

— -  they  create  the  ffrft  live  tribunes,
iii.  134.

• —  again  quarrel  with  the  patricians
on  account  of  the  fcarcity  of  pro-
vifions,  and  the  colonies  fent  into
unhealthful  places,  iii.  172,  3.

—  will  not  hold  the  decrees  of  the
Senate  valid,  iii.  179.

—  aregrtevouffy  inveighed  againft  by
Marcius,  iii.  1  85.

—  are  reprehended  in  a  modeff  and
grave  fpeech  by  Minucius,  the  con¬
sul,  ni.  194.

—  their  power  difc.laimed  by  Mar¬
cius,  iii.  201.

—  join  with  their  tribunes  againft  the
patricians,  concerning  Marcius,  iii.

•  203.

— -  infift  upon  the  judgement  of  thofe


the  TEX  T.  44.9

caufes,  that  were  referred  to  them
by  law,  iii.  212.

—  are  grievoufly  inveighed  againft
by  Appius  Claudius,  iii.  220.  •

—  obtain  the  power  of  trying  citi¬
zens  of  all  degrees,  ii.  47,  8.  iii.

2  57*

—  leave  the  comitia,  and  depart  from
the  Campus  Martius,  becaufe  con-
fuls  were  appointed  by  the  fenate
out  of  the  ariftocratical  fadtion,  iv.

78 '

—  difpute  with  the  fenate  concern¬
ing  the  creation  of  confuls,  iv.  1.

—  repent  of  having  condemned  Me*
nenius,  iv.  54.

—  are  greatly  inveighed  againft  by
Servilius,  iv.  61.

—  are  again  provoked  at  the  imperi¬
ous  behaviour  of  the  confuls,  iv.
72.

—  rufh  upon  the  confuls,  iv.  73.

—  at  hearing  the  name  of  Appius
(fon  of  Appius  Claudius)  they
leave  the  Campus  Martius,  iv.  78.

—  are  imperiouffy,  and  haughtily,
reproved  by  Appius  Claudius,  iv.
81.

— ■  are  defended  by  Lredtorius  againft
Appius  Claudius,  iv.  84.

—  with  their  tribunes  they  guard  the
capitol  in  a  fedition,  iv.  88.

—  are  feverely  cenfured  by  Appius,
iv.  96.

augment  their  power  by  a  new  ac-
ceffion,  iv.  181.

—  obtain  leave  from  the  fenate  to
create  ten  tribunes  every  year,  iv.
188.

—  again  difagree  with  the  patricians,
iv.  347,  8.

—  demand  the  confulfhip  for  their
own  fadtion,  iv.  364.

—  are  commended  by  Valerius,  iv.

371*

—  obtain  the  right  of  being  admitted

into


into  the  fenate,  magiftracies,  and
the  priefthood,  iii.  257.

—  the  privileges  of  the  people,  i.

2-49-  .

—  the  ancient  privileges  of  the  peo¬
ple,  ii.  184.

—  the  people  are  reftored  to  their  an¬
cient  privileges,  after  the  expulfion
of  Tarquin,  the  tyrant,  ii.  314.

—  the  flight  of  the  people  (pvyy ,
or  srAjjSi;?  r^07r>?,  i.  324*

—  the  people  are  called  to  their  af-
femblies  by  the  cryers  through  eve¬
ry  ftreet,  ii.  220.

—  the  decifion  of  a  fine  is  left  to  the
vote  of  the  people,  iii.  179.

—  the  determination  of  a  capital  of¬
fence  is  referred  to  the  people,  ii.
329.

■ —  Caffius  is  cited  to  a  tryal  before
the  people,  iii.  408.

—  in  what  manner  the  people  ufed  to
receive  a  conqueror  alter  a  glorious
vidtory,  iv.  67.

See  Plebeians.

Perjury  fecret  perjuries  are  punifhed
by  the  gods  ;  open  perjuries,  by
the  magiftrates,  ii.  328.

Perftans ,  with  what  number  of  forces
they  invaded  Greece,  iv.  246.

— -  the  empire  of  the  Per  flans,  i.

6.

* —  the  drefs  of  the  Perfian  kings,  ii.
120.

Pejlilence  attacks  the  iEqui  them-
•felves,  while  they  were  preparing
war  againft  the  Romans  labouring
under  that  calamity,  iv.  231.

. —  a  fevere peftilence,  iv.  229.

■ —  the  Delphic  oracle  is  confuted
concerning  the  caufes  and  remedies
of  an  unufual  peftilence  among  the
Pelafgi,  i.  54*  5*

—  a  Ridden  and  dreadful  peftilence,
as  fuddenly  ceafes,  iv.  77,  8.

a  peftilence  deftroys  almoft  all  the
i‘


quadrupeds,  iv.  121.

See  Plague.

Petron.  See  Antifiius.

Peucetius ,  fon  of  Lycaon,  removes'
with  his  brother  Oenotrus  into
Italy,  i.  30.

*—  the  fettlement  of  the  Peucetians,
i.  31.

Phadon ,  archon  at  Athens,  iv.  35.
Phaler gorgets,  very  rich  ones,  iv.
201.

Phaler ium ,  its  fituation,  i.  47.
Phanodemus ,  his  Greek  antiquities,
and  his  account  of  the  migration
of  Dardanus,  i.  141.

Pheneatx,  Arcadians,  companions  of
Hercules  in  his  expedition  to  Italy,
and  Spain,  i.  76.

—  fettle  in  Italy,  i.  139.

Pherecydes ,  the  Athenian,  a  pafiage

quoted  from  his  treatife  on  genea¬
logies  concerning  the  Oenotri,  i.
33>  4-

Phiditia ,  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  Ro¬
mans,  and  Cretans,  i.  263.
Philifcus ,  archon  at  Athens,  iv.  244.
Philiftus ,  of  Syracufe,  his  account  of
the  migration  of  the  Ligures  from
Italy  to  Sicily,  i.  52.

Philo fophy  confifts  in  the  ftudy  of  fine
adtions,  more  than  in  the  ftudy  of
fine  difeourfes,.  iv.  248.

—  a  felf-taught  philofopher,  ii.  332.
Pheroneus,  his  reign  and  pofterity,  i.

3°*

—  Niobe,  daughter  of  Phoroneus,  i.

40.

Phoronis ,  a  hiftory  written  by  Hel-
lanicus,  i.  63.

Phcrtinienfes ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

Phrajicles ,  archon  at  Athens,  iv.  130.
P  hr  aft  or ,  fon  of  Pelafgus,  i.  63.
Phrygian ,  and  Trojan  nations,  why
they  were  thought  one  and  the
fame,  i.  64.

r—  Phrygian


I  N  D  E  X  to

—  Phrygian  myfteries,  i.  14 1.

* —  Phrygian  ceremonies,  i.  259.

Pbthius ,  ion  of  Neptune  and  Larifta,
i.  41.

founder  of  Phthiotis,  ib.

Piety ,  and  juftice  ought  efpecially  to
be  cherifhed  by  lawgivers,  i.  338.

— =  piety  to  relations  to  be  preferred
to  our  own  fafety,  iv.  223.

— •  remarkable  inftances  of  piety  to¬
wards  a  father,  iv.  185.  223.

Pigeon  ;  a  prophefying  pigeon,  i.  37.

Pike  ftaves,  iv.  201.

Pillar ;  a  league  engraven  on  a  pil¬
lar,  i.  322.

•*—  the  pillars,  on  which  a  treaty  was
engraven,  are  placed  in  the  temple
of  the  Sabines,  ii,  76,  7.

—  laws  engraven  on  brazen  pillars,
iv.  192.  238.

—  before  the  ufe  of  brazen  pillars,
laws  were  cut  on  oaken  boards,  ii.
83,  4.

a  triple  row  of  pillars,  ii.  261.

— -  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  Diana  in¬
ferred  with  ancient  characters,  ii,
200.

the  Horatian  pillar,  ii.  49.

— •  the  boundaries  of  the  public  lands
diftinguiflied  by  handfome  pillars,
iii.  402.

P inaria ,  daughter  of  Publius,  is  re¬
duced  in  her  veftai  priefthood,  ii.
128.

Pinarii ,  on  account  of  their  late  at¬
tendance,  are  excluded  from  a  fa-
criftcial  banquet,  i.  91.

h.  Pinarius ,  conful,  iv.  74.

P.  Pinarius  Rufus ,  conful,  iii.  282.

— •  is  one  of  the  five  embafiadors  fent
to  Marcius,  iii.  3 1 5.

Pipes 5  players  on  ihort  pipes  of  an¬
cient  make,  iii.  271.

Ptfa,  its  fituation,  i.  47.

Pifo  Frugi ,  an  hiftorian,  ii.  157.

Pit,  foe#!,  ii.  139.

Vol.  IV.


the  TEX  T.  451

Pitch ;  veflels,  filled  with  burning
pitch,  are  thrown  by  flings  among
the  enemy,  who  had  pofiefied
themfelves  of  the  capitol  under
Appius  Herdonius,  iv.  160.

—  boats  and  rafts,  being  filled  with
dry  wood,  fafeines,  fulphur,  and
pitch,  are  fet  on  fire,  and  floated

.  down  to  the  bridge,  which  joined
the  Sabine  and  Tyrrhenian  camps,
ii.  113.

Pittacus  is  appointed  dictator  by  the
Mitylenaeans  againft  Alcaeus,  ii.
43°*

Plague  raging  more  among  the  cat-
tie,  than  among  men,  iii.  262.

—  a  plague  fevere  among  the  ma¬
trons,  efpecially  thofe  with  child,
iv.  74.

—  a  molt  deftruCtive  plague  rages
over  all  Italy,  but  particularly  at
Rome,  iv.  77.

—  a  molt  fevere  plague,  which  was
firft  of  all  felt  by  the  cattle,  and
the  hufbandmen,  does  afterwards
invade  the  city,  iv.  121.

—  a  famine  fucceeds  a  plague,  iv.  23 1.

Plattea ,  the  battle  fought  at  that  place,

ii.  340.

Pleasures',  virtue,  not  lhameful  plea¬
sures  the  meafure  of  Roman  hap-
pinefs,  i.  256.  ii.  388.

Plebeians ,  J^o7<jco/  ^  who  had  that  ti¬
tle  under  Romulus,  i.  235.

—  the  duties  of  the  plebeians,  i.  237.

—  the  care  of  the  plebeians  is  recom¬
mended  to  the  patricians,  ib.

the  plebeians  take  the  enfigns  with
them,  and  fecede  from  the  camp
to  the  holy  Mountain,  iii.  69.

—  the  plebeians  feize  the  Aventine,
and  retire  from  thence  to  the  holy
mountain,  iv.  319.  323.

—  the  priefthood  was  conferred  orv
the  plebeians,  iii.  257.

—  the  aedilelhip  formerly,  and  the

N  n  n  tribune-


452  INDEX  to

tribunefhip,  were  granted  to  the
plebeians  *,  and,  at  laft,  even  the
confulfhip  was  obtained  by  them,

ii.  342.  iii.  257.

-—the  plebeians  could  not  make  laws,
before  the  previous  order  of  the
•  fenate  was  obtained,  iii.  208.

—  laws  made  by  the  plebeians,  with¬
out  the  approbation  of  the  fenate,
were  not  held  valid,  iv.  136.

—  Volero,  a  tribune  of  the  people,
firfb  prevails  that  laws,  made  by
the  plebeians  in  the  tributa  comi-
tia,  fhould  be  valid,  iv.  79,  80.

Pleiades ,  daughters  of  Atlas,  i.  139.

Plowman  ;  the  drefs  of  Quintius,  as
he  was  plowing  when  called  to  the
confulfhip,  iv.  162.

—  plowing  round  the  place  where  a
city  was  defigned  to  be  built,  i.
204.

Plunder.  See  Spoils.

Po  \  the  mouths  of  that  river,  i.  43.

PcetiliuSy  one  of  the  decemvirs,  iv.
240.

—  marches  with  Quintus  Fabius,
and  Manius  Rabuleius,  two  ot  his
collegues,  again  ft  the  Sabines,  iv.
284.

Politorium ,  its  fituation,  ii,  86.

—  is  plundered  and  rafed  by  Ancus
Marcius,  ib.

° —  the  people  of  Politorium  are  per¬
mitted  to  build  on  mount  Aven-
tine,  ii.  93.

Polufca ,  its  fituation,  iii.  139.

—  is  taken  by  Poftumus  Cominius,
ib.

—  is  retaken  by  Marcius,  iii.  339.

Polybius ,  of  Megalopolis,  not  accu¬
rate  in  fixing  the  time  when  Rome
was  built,  i.  169.

A  fragment  of  his,  concerning  the
feveral  powers  of  the  fenate,  con-
fuls,  and  people  of  Rome,  tranf-
lated  at  the  end  of  the  firft  volume.


the  TEX  T.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  word
Palatium,  i.  70.

Polymnajhis ,  of  Cyrene,  vibtor  at  the
Olympic  games,  iv.  179.

Pometine  plains,  i.  31 1.

—  the  largeft  of  all  the  Latin  plains,

ii.  264.

—  the  Roman  embafiadors  are  fent
to  the  Pometine  plains  to  buy  corn,

iii.  149.

—  and  very  narrowly  efcape  being
put  to  death  by  the  Volfci,  iii.

*53;.  .

Pompeii ,  its  fituation,  i.  99.

Pompey  tacitly  cenfured,  hi.  415..
Pompilius  ( Nitma )  See  Numa.
Pompon  Pompilius,  a  Sabine.  See  Numa*
Pib.  Pontificius ,  a  tribune  of  the  peo¬
ple,  oppofes  the  levying  of  forces,.

iv.  7.

Pontifs  had  the  care  of  the  wooden
biidge,  i.  359.  ii.  96.

—  was  the  higheft  priefthood  at
Rome,  ib.

—  why  they  were  called  pontifs,  i.

360.

—  their  functions,  and  privileges,  ib.

—  the  pontifs,  and  augurs  create  a
king  of  facrifices,  ii.  313.

• —  they  go,  with  the  augurs,  and  the
whole  college  of  priefts,  on  an  em-
bafly  to  Marcius  in  favor  of  the
commonwealth,  but  in  vain,  iii.
342.

• —  are  prefen t  with  their  whole  body
at  the  enabling  of  the  law  for
building  on  mount  Aventine,  iv.
192.  238.

—  inquire  into  the  deflowering  of  a
veftal,  iii.  433.

—  the  power  of  fupplying  a  vacancy
occafioned  by  the  death  of  a  pon-
tif,  belonged  to  the  college  of  pon¬
tifs,  i.  361.

• —  the  books,  or  records  of  the  pon¬
tifs,  iii.  371.

Poor'3


r  N  D  E  X  to

Poor  ;  the  patricians  are  accufed  as  if
they  were  always  contriving  fome
mifchicf  againft  the  poorer  fort,  iv.
48.  _

—  the  infbitution  of  patrons  was  de-
figned  as  a  guard  for  the  poor,-  and
lower  fort,  i.  238.

Serv,  Tullius  confiders  the  poor  citi¬
zens,  ii.  1 61.

—  the  poor  only  made  ufe  of  to  de¬
fend  the  country,  ii.  347.

—  the  poor  are  compelled  by  Tar-
quinius  the  tyrant  to  pay  as  large
taxes,  as  the  rich,  ii.  231.

—  their  relief  taken  into  confider-
ation,  ii.  412.

—  whether  the  debts  of  the  poor
fhould  be  remitted,  ii.  412.  iii.

37-

—  the  poor  are  defirous  of  a  change,
ii.  396.

—  raife  a  tumult  in  the  city,  iii.  41,  2.
53-

Popliccla.  See  Valerius.

Poppies ;  what  Tarquinius  meant  by
ftriklng  off  the  tailed  poppies  with
his  Hick,  ii.  251,  2.

Populifitgia.  See  People.

Populous  ;  by  what  means  a  city  may
become  populous,  ii.  190.

—  Rome  the  mod  populous  city,  i.
253-

Porcius  Cato  ;  what  he  has  written
concerning  the  twins  of  Ilia,  i.

1 8 1 .

—  a  diligent  compiler  of  ancient
hidory,  i.  19.

—  at  what  time  he  fays  Rome  was
built,  i.  169.

—  what  he  has  recorded  concerning
the  tribes  indituted  by  Tullius,  ii.

I7I-

Porfena  befiegesRome  in  conjunction
with  the  Tarquinii,  ii.  347.

—  feizes  the  Janiculum  by  dorm,  ii.

347-


the  TEX  T.  453

—  treats  of  a  peace  with  the  Ro¬
mans,  ii.  359.

—  is  appointed  umpire  between  the
Tarquinii,  and  the  Romans,  ii.

361.

—  rejeCts  the  Tarquinii,  and  deals
honorably  with  the  Romans,  ii.
363‘

—  is  prefented  with  a  feepter,  and  an
ivory  throne  by  the  Romans,  ii.

365*

—  fends  his  fon  Aruns  with  part  of
his  forces  to  fubdue  Aricia,  iii.
158.

See  Mucins ,  Secretary.

Porticos  of  the  Circus  Maximus,  ii.
J32,  3-

Pojfejfions ,  obtained  by  lawful  arms
and  the  right  of  conqued  are  the
mod  jud  and  honed,  iii.  56.  298.

—  illegal  podefiions,  iv.  95,  6.

—  podefiions  of  public  lands,  ufurped
by  force,  or  fraud,  are  held  illegal,
iv.  191.

—  the  boundaries  of  podefiions,  iii.
402.

Pcjl ;  the  pod  appointed  to  a  foldier
ought  to  be  looked  upon  by  him,
as  his  houfe,  his  land,  and  his  coun¬
try,  iv.  16.

—  Manlius  Torquatus  kills  his  fon
for  having  delerted  his  pod,  iii.

4:3*

—  thofe,  who  deferted  their  pod
w’ere  put  to  death,  ib.

Poftumii  hinder  the  pading  of  the
Agrarian  law,  iv.  208.

—  for  which  they  are  fined  by  the
people,  iv.  209,  10.

A.  Pofiumius ,  conful,  iii.  3.

—  is  appointed  dictator  by  his  col-
Jegue  Virginius,  iii.  4.

—  creates  T.  fEbutius  Elva  his  ge¬
neral  of  the  horfe,  iii.  4.

— .  marches  againd  the  Latines,iii.  5.

—  commands  the  center  of  the

Nnn  2  Roman


454  INDEX  to

Roman  army,  iii.  9.
makes  a  long  fpeech  to  the  fol-
diers,  ib.

•—  in  the  Latin  war,  he  vows  a  tem¬
ple  to  Ceres,  Bacchus,  and  Pro-
ferpine,  iii.  27.

—  triumphs  over  the  Latines,  and
performs  his  vow,  ib.

—  abdicates  the  di&atorfhip,  and  ap¬
points  confuls,  iii.  36.

•—  with  the  horfe,  he  bravely  fights
againft  the  Aurunci,  iii.  51.

—  is  appointed  one  of  the  deputies
fent  to  the  feceders,  iii.  104.

— -  the  fenate  very  magnificently  dif-
charse  the  vow,  which  he  had
made  in  the  Latin  war,  iii.  268.

A.  Pojlumius  Albus^  conful,  iv.  114.

• —  brings  fuccours  to  his  collegue
Furius,  and  attacks  a  party  of  the
enemy,  fent  out  to  plunder,  iv.  1 19.

P.  Pojlumius  Tubertus,  conful,  ii.  368.

— -  fuccours  his  collegue  Valerius  with
a  body  of  foot,  ii.  371.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  ii.  379.

—  teceives  a  fhameful  defeat  through
his  precipitancy,  ii.  379,  80.

—  in  order  to  efface  the  ignominy  of

his  former  defeat,  he  fights  bravely,
ii.  383.  \

—  triumphs  over  the  Sabines  with
an  ovation,  ii.  384.

—  why  he  was  not  honored  with  the
greater  triumph,  ii.  386.

—  is  one  of  the  deputies  fent  to  the
feceders,  iii.  104.

Sp.  Pojlumius  Albinus ,  conful,  iv.109.

—  confecrates  the  temple  of  Dius
Fidius,  iv.  112.

—  is  lent  with  Servius  Sulpicius  em-
baflador  into  Greece  to  collect  a
body  of  laws,  iv.  229.

— -  is  made  a  decemvir,  iv.  236.

—  when  legate  commands  in  the  cen¬
ter  of  the  Roman  army,  iv.  357.

Pcjlumus.  See  Commits .


the  TEXT.

Potitii ,  and  Pinarii,  Hercules  delivers
inftitudons  to  them,  i.  91.

Poverty  and  want  break  the  gene-
rofity  of  the  mind,  ii.  161.

—  poverty  obliges  many  to  dege¬
nerate,  iii.  147.

—  always  quarrels  with  riches,  iii.
81.

—  what  kind  of  poverty  is  to  be  pi¬
tied,  ii.  420.

—  the  ancient  Romans  were  never
fcandalized  at  innocent  poverty,  iv.

1 64.

■ —  an  example  of  honored  poverty
in  Valerius  Poplicola,  ii.  386.

—  in  Agrippa  Menenius,  iii.  146,  7.

—  Quintius  Cincinnatus  refufes  to
relieve  his  poverty  with  innocent
riches,  iv.  178,  9.

—  to  receive  poverty  from  parents  in
lieu  of  inheritance,  iv.  53.

Powers ,  by  being  abufed  are  tranf-
formed  into  tyrannies,  ii.  439.

— -  kingdoms  and  empires  are  over¬
turned  by  the  abufe  of  power,  ii.
432,

—  powers,  when  once  abolilhed  by
oaths,  and  execrations,  are  not  to
be  reftored,  ii.  433.

— *  the  divifion  of  power  lays  a  re-
ftraint  upon  magiftrates,  ii.  279.

Pranejlini ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

—  the  Prameftine  road,  ii.  246.

Pranomen.  See  Name.

Priejts ,  great  numbers  of  them  at
Rome,  excelling  all  others  in  dig¬
nity,  iii.  342.

—  priefts,  and  other  minifters,  by
whom  chofen,  and  in  what  man¬
ner  confirmed,  i.  260.

—  how  many  priefts,  and  minifters
were  inftituted  by  Romulus,  ib.

—  the  privileges  of  the  priefts,  ib.

—  the  college  of  priefts  were  pre-
fent  at  the  enacting  of  the  law

for


45  S


INDEX  to

for  building  on  mount  Aventine,
iv.  192.  238.

—  on  whom  Romulus  conferred  the
priefthood,  i.  260.

—  the  priefthood  was  likewife  con¬
ferred  on  the  plebeians,  iii.  257..

—  family  piiefthoods,  i.  260.

—  the  priefthood  not  venal,  i.  261.

■ —  the  high  prieft  was  prefent  at  the
holding  of  the  comitia,  iv.  327.
See  Pont  if s.

Primipilus ,  commander  of  fixty  cen¬
turies,  iv.  17.

— -  Marcus  Fiavoleius,  a  primipilus,
vows  to  return  victorious  to  Rome,
or  not  at  all,  iv.  18.

Prifcus.  See  Larquinius ,  Numicius.

Private  \  meetings  held  at  private
houfes  generally  lufpicious,  iv.  368.

Procas  Silvius ,  king  of  Alba,  i.  159.

Procejfion  *,  images  carried  in  procef-
ftons,  iii.  275.

—  the  equeftrian,  and  pedeftrian
procefiion,  at  the  time  of  the  vo¬
tive  games,  was  the  molt  magni¬
ficent,  iii.  22.  269.

— *  the  Tons  of  the  Roman  knights
lead  out  an  equeftrian  proceftion  at
the  votive  games,  iii.  269.

See  Quintilis.

Prochyta ,  the  name  of  an  ifland,  i.

1 2  3  •

Proconful }  the  proconfular  power,  iv.

375-

—  Caefo  Fabius,  while  he  was  pre¬
paring  for  an  expedition  to  Tyr-
rhenia,  is  honored  with  the  pro¬
confular  power,  iv.  31.

—  the  proconful  is  fent  with  fuccours
to  the  conful,  iv.  116.

Prodigy  fhewn  at  the  building  of  La-
vinium,  i.  137.

a  prodigy  of  fire  ftreaming  out  of
the  points  of  javelins,  ii.  382,  3.

Produce  ;  the  ftipends  of  the  foldiers
arifing  out  of  the  produce  of  the


the  TEX  T.

public  lands,  iii.  402.

See  Qutejlors.

Progenitors ,  nature  has  given  them  a
power  over  their  descendants,  ii.-
21.

Proferpine ,  or  Libera ;  Poftumius,  the
dictator,  builds  that  temple  to
Ceres,  Bacchus  and  Proferpine,
which  he  had  vowed  to  them,  iii.
27.

—  that  temple  confecrated,  iii.  144.

Public  halls  of  the  Greeks,  i.  263.

—  were  temples  ferved  by  their  chief
magitl rates,  i.  343.

—  public  lands.  See  Lands.

Pitblicius.  See  Ancus.

Punic  war  ;  Dionyfius  brings  his
hiftory  down  to  the  beginning  of
the  firft  Punic  war,  i.  20.

—  the  firft  Punic  war  was  entered
into  on  account  of  Sicily,  i.  344.

Purification  for  fhedding  civil  blood,
ii.  403.

Purple  uled  in  triumphs,  i.  283.

—  purple  embroidered  with  gold,  ii.
120.

—  purple  embroidered  with  gold  is
forbidden  to  be  worne  by  the  con-
fuls,  ii.  279.

—  a  Secretary,  clothed  in  purple,  is
miftaken  for  king  Porfena  and
killed  by  Mucius,  ii.  356.

Puteus,  the  hole  in  the  ground,  in
which  the  razor  and  hone  of  At-
tius  Navius  were  buried,  ii.  139.

Pyramids  of  Egypt,  ii.  196.

Pyrgion ,  archon  at  Athens,  i.  170.

Pyrrhic* os  the  armed  dance,  an  an¬
cient  Greek  inftitution,  iii.  272.

Pythagoras ,  a  Lacedaemonian,  viCtor
at  the  Olympic  games,  i.  328.

Pythagoras ,  of  Samos,  at  what  time
he  taught  philofophy  in  Italy,  i.
328,9.

Pythian .  See  Oracle.


Qs  NESTORS


456  INDEX  to

Qi

Quaestors  fell  the  baggage  of  a
camp,  ii.  364.

—  they  fell  the  booty  and  fpoils,  and
bring  the  produce  into  the  treafury,
hi.  251.  418.

—  they  fell  the  captives,  and  the
booty,  ar.d  bring  the  produce  into
the  treafury,  iv.  1 71.

—  they  confifcate  the  fortunes  of  the
decemvirs,  iv.  341.

• —  receive  orders  from  the  fenate  to
intend  the  funeral  of  Menenius,
iii.  147.

—  have  the  power  of  calling  an  af-
fembly  of  the  people,  iii.  408.

— •  impeach  Cafiius  of  aiming  at  ty¬
ranny,  ib.

—  Cafiius  being  condemned  by  the
people,  they  throw  him  down  the
Tarpeian  rock,  iii.  41 1.

—  T.  Quintius,  a  confular  perfon,
exercifes  the  quteftorfhip,  iv.  1 74.

Quarter ;  which  is  the  right  hand
quarter  of  the  world,  i.  228,  9.

—  eaftern  quarter  of  the  heavens  the
moft  proper  for  auguries,  i.  229,

3°-

Querquttulani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

Quejlion ,  properly  put,  a  material  point
in  the  art  of  prophefy,  ii.  257.

Quint ian  way,  i.  36.

Quintii  remove  from  Alba  to  Rome,

ii.  69.

Quintilis ;  the  fixth  day  of  this  month,
or  the  day  before  the  nones,  iii.  371.

—  the  temple  of  Fortuna  Muliebris
was  finifhed  and  confecrated  on  that
day,  ib.

—  a  magnificent  procefiion  on  horfe-
bac'k  performed  on  the  ides  of  this
month,  iii.  21,2.

Sextus  Quintilius,  conful,  iv.  229.

—  dies  of  the  plague,  iv.  231.


the  TEX  T.

Cafo  Quintius ,  fon  of  L.  Quin¬
tius  Cincinnatus,  ftrenuoufly  op-
pofes  the  plebeians  both  by  his
words,  and  adtions  in  pafiing  a  law,
iv.  137.

—  is  impeached  before  the  people  by
the  tribunes,  iv.  138.

—  is  defended  by  Iris  father  L.  Quin¬
tius  Cincinnatus,  ib.

—  goes  into  banifhment  to  Tyrrhe-
nia,  iv.  143:

—  is  unjuflly  condemned,  ib.

L.  Quintius  Cincinnatus  pleads  the
caufe  of  his  fon  Caefo  before  the
people,  iv.  138.

—  fells  the  greateft  part  of  his  eftate,
in  order  to  difcharge  the  fine  of  his
fon,  and  retires  to  a  fmall  farm,
lying  on  the  other  fide  of  the  Tiber,
iv.  143.

—  is  called  from  his  little  farm  to  the
ccnfulfhip,  iv.  162.

—  in  what  manner  he  put  an  end  to
the  new  inftitutions  of  the  tribunes,
iv.  165.

—  by  what  meafures  he  rendered  the
ariftocracy  agreeable  to  all,  iv.
165.

—  will  not  be  continued  in  the  con-
fulfhip,  iv.  166.

—  is  again  called  from  his  little  farm
to  the  didtatorfhip,  iv.  175.

—  within  the  fpace  of  fixteen  days  he

^ .  .laves  a  camp,  defeats  the  iEqui,

plunders  Corbio,  and  in  his  triumph
leads  Gracchus  Clcelius  in  chains,
iv.  178.

—  abdicates  the  diftatorfhip,  ib.

--  refufes  the  liberality  of  the  fenate,
and  retires  to  his  little  farm,  iv.
178,  9.

—  what  opinion  he  delivered  in  the
fenate  concerning  the  defigns  of
the  tribunes,  iv.  181.

—  affirms  that  the  number  of  the
tribunes  may  be  doubled  without

any


INDEX  to

any  detriment  to  the  common¬
wealth,  iv.  1 86.

T.  Quin  tins  Capitolinus ,  conful,  iv.  78.

—  diftents  from  Appius,  his  collegue,
iv.  79;

—  quiets  the  people  by  his  mild
fpeech,  iv.  8o*

—  reconciles  his  collegue  with  the
tribunes,  iv.  88.

—  plunders  the  JEqui,  iv.  90.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  103.

—  overcomes  the  iEqui  and  Volfci,
iv.  106.

—  triumphs  over  them,  iv.  108.

—  leads  out  a  co'ony  into  the  territo¬
ries  of  the  Antiates,  ib.

—  is  third  time  conful,  iv.  112.

—  defends  the  frontiers  againft  the
incurfions  of  the  enemy,  ib.

—  is  fent  as  proconful  with  fuccours.
to  Spurius  Furius,  iv.  116.

. —  when  quneftor,  is  fent  to  the  relief
of  Minucius,  when  befieged  in  his
camp  by  Gracchus  Clcelius,  iv.  1 74.

—  is  fourth  time  conful,  iv.  350.

— -  his  fpeech  to  the  people,  iv.  351.

—  marches  againft  the  i£qui  and
Volfci,  iv.  356.

—  is  fifth  time  conful,  iv.  377.

— •  incamps  with  great  expedition  at
the  tenth  ftone,  iv.  357.

Quirinah,  the  hill  Quirinal  is  added
to  the  city  by  Romulus,  and  Ta-
tius,  i.  312.

—  is  included  within  the  wails  by
Numa,  i.  338.

Quirinus  the  name  of  Romulus  after
his  death,  i.  339.

Quirites  the  name  of  the  Romans
from  the  city  Cures,  i.  305.

R.

C.  Rabuleius,  in  what  manner  he
put  an  end  to  the  debate  among  the
confuls  concerning  the  Agrarian
law,  iii.  399.


the  TEX  T.  457

Manius  Rabuleius ,  a  decemvir,  iv.  240.

—  marches  with  Quintus  Fabius,  and
Quintus  Poetilius  two  of  his  col¬
leges,  againft  the  Sabines,  iv.  284.

Race  of  chariots  drawn  by  three
horfes,  iii.  279.

—  of  chariots  drawn  by  two  horfes,
ib.

—  of  horfes,  and  men,  iii.  280.

—  of  fingle  horfes,  ib.

—  the  races  of  iEneas  and  Venus,  i.
1 14.

Rafts  ufed  by  the  Siceli,  i.  49.

Rams ;  battering  rams,  ii.  389.  iii.
140.

—  the  gates  of  Antium  are  forced
open  by  them,  iv.  170.

Ranks  \  the  punifhment  of  thofe,  who
left  their  ranks,  iv.  91.

Ravijhment  of  the  Sabine  virgins,  i.
278.

—  ancient  and  illuftrious,  i.  279:

—  the  number  of  the  ravilhed  vir¬
gins,  ib.

—  at  what  time,  and  for  what  reafon
it  was  undertaken,  i.  277,  8.

—  the  ravifhed  women  obtain  a  par¬
don  for  the  rebellion  of  their  coun¬
trymen,  i.  286.

Razenua ,  the  general  of  the  Tyr¬
rhenians,  i.  68.

Razor  and  hone  of  Attius  Navius
buried  under  the  altar  near  his
ftatue,  ii.  139.

Reatine  country,  i.  35,  6.

—  inhabited  by  the  Aborigines,  i.  35,

—  the  Reatines  receive  the  conquered
Liftani,  i.  37.

—  the  Reatine  country  inhabited  by
the  Sabines,  i.  308.

Records  of  the  cenfors,  i.  171,  2.

Regillum ,  its  fituation,  ii.  373.  iv.
271.

—  the  native  place  of  the  Claudian
family,  ib.

— ■  Caius  Claudius,  uncle  to  Appius,

the


453  INDEX  to

the  decemvir,  retires  to  Regillum,
iv.  282.

Regillus,  the  name  of  a  lake,  iii.  5..

—  a  defcription  of  the  battle  fought
there,  iii.  8,  9.

Religion  ;  the  Greek  religion  lefs  pure
than  the  Roman,  i.  259.

—  eight  religious  inflitutions,  and  the
laws  of  Numa  relating  to  them,  i,
34°-

Remuria,  p i.  199.

Remus ,  that  namegiven  by  Fauftulus,
i.  184.

- —  Remus  is  taken  by  ftrategem,  i.
186,  7.

—  is  releafed,  i.  191.

—  his  death  and  burial,  i.  202,  3.

—  Remus,  the  fon  of  iEneas,  i.  1 63, 4.

of  Afcanius,'i.  166.
ofEmathion,  ib.
of  Italus,  ib.
of  Ulyffes,  i.  165.

—  Remus,  and  Romulus,  the  fons  of
king  Latinus,  i.  165.

Reflitution ;  in  what  manner,  and
form  the  feciales  demanded  refti-
tution,  i.  357.

Revolt  of  Sardinia,  i.  255.

the  Gabini  are  betrayed  by  a
feigned  revolt  to  them,  ii.  249.

—  fo  likewife  is  Ariltodemus,  iii.
1 67.

■—  the  Romans  prevent  the  revolt  of
the  conquered  cities,  by  fending
colonies  into  them,  ii.  378.

•—  the  authors  of  a  revolt  whipped
with  rods,  and  beheaded,  iv.  17s*

■—  the  authors  of  a  revolt  are  left  to
the  mercy  of  the  generals,  iv.  321.

Rhea,  daughter  of  Numitor,  i.  175.
See  Ilia .

Rhea ,  or  Ops,  and  Saturn,  their  an-
niverfary,  ii.  75,  6.

—  the  temple  of  Rhea,  i.  312.

Rhene ,  a  nymph  of  Cyllene,  i.  140.

Riches ,  the  great  contempt  of  them


the  TEXT.

among  the  ancient  Romans,  iv.  1 64.

—  remarkable  inftances  of  it  in  Va¬
lerius  Poplicola,  ii.  386.

—  in  Agrippa  Menenius,  iii.  146,  7.

—  and  in  Quintius  Cincinnatus,  iv.
178,  9.

Rights  ;  whether  the  rights  of  a  city
may  be  communicated  to  fo-
reigners,  i.  254,  5.

Rites.  See  Ceremonies.

Rivers  •,  a  confluence  of  rivers,  ii.
1 12.

—  the  flowing  back  of  rivers,  iii.

l55*

Role ;  a  white  robe  worne  by  the  con-
fuls,  ii.  385.

Rod the  defilers  of  veftal  virgins
were  whipped  with  rods,  and  put
to  death,  iii.  434.

Brutus  inclofes  a  rod  of  gold
within  a  wooden  llaff',  and  offers
it  to  Apollo,  ii.  272.

See  Axes.

Romans  5  the  La  tines  began  to  be
called  Romans  under  Romulus  *
formerly  they  were  called  Abori¬
gines,  i.  25.

**—  the  anceftors  of  the  Romans  were
Greeks,  i.  13.  138.

— .  proved  to  be  fo  by  indifputable
teftimonies,  iii.  265.

—  fome  of  the  Roman  citizens,  dur¬
ing  a  famine,  feed  patiently  on
roots ;  others  remove  into  the
neighbouring  country,  iii,  180.

*■—  the  Romans  agree  in  war,  and
difagree  in  peace,  iv.  193.

•—  the  Roman  foldiers  were  robuft
and  patient  of  labor,  ii.  92.

—  the  number  of  the  Roman  forces
at  the  death  of  Romulus,  i,  253.

— -  Roman  kings,  how  long  each  of
them  reigned,  i»  173.

—  Roman  empire  by  far  exceeded  all
others,  i.  4.

~~  Roman  religion  more  pure  than

that


/


INDEX  to

that  of  the  Greeks,  i.  259.

— -  the  Roman  language,  i.  207.
Rome ,  a  Trojan  woman,  is  thought  to
have  given  her  name  to  Rome,  i.
165.

Rome ,  three  cities  fo  called,  i.  167.

—  Rome  the  miftrefs  of  the  world,

i.  23.

—  the  city  of  Rome,  an  Alban  co-

'J  '

lony,  at  what  time,  and  by  whom
built,  i.  25.  102.  161.
i —  was  firft  begun  by  Remus,  fon
of  iEneas,  and  afterwards  finifh-
ed  by  Romulus,  and  Remus,  i.
167.

. —  received  its  name  from  Romulus,
its  founder,  i.  102.

—  was  not  a  retreat  of  Barbarians,  i.
2°  5.

—  thefoundersof  Rome  were  Greeks,
ib.

—  called  by  many  Greeks  a  Tyrrhe¬
nian  city,  i.  65.

—  its  fituation,  i.  220.

—  of  a  quadrangular  figure,  i.  204:

—  is  enlarged  by  Romulus  and  Ta-
tius,  i.  312.

— -  by  Numa,  i.  338.

—  and  by  Tullus  Hoftilius,  ii.  3.

- —  the  circumference  of  Rome  is  en¬
larged  by  Servius  Tullius  with  the
addition  of  two  hills ;  and  was  no
farther  enlavged,  ii.  168.

—  the  extent  of  the  city  without  the
fuburbs,  ii.  169.

—  the  circumference,  and  fortifica¬
tions  of  Rome  round  the  walls,  iv.
122,  3.

—  is  divided  by  Servius  Tullius  into
four  local  tribes,  namely,  the  Pala-
tina,  Suburrana,  Collina,  and  Ef-
quilina,  ii.  169.

—  the  three  moft  magnificent  build¬
ings  at  Rome  were  the  paved  ways,
the  aquedu&s,  and  theTewers,  ii.
129.

Vo  l.  IV.


the  TEX  T.  459

—  the  feven  hills  of  Rome,  ii.  168.

—  many  open  fquares  in  Rome,  iv.
156.

—  the  fields  adjacent  to  Rome,  ib.

—  has  no  walls  in  that  part,  which  is
wafhed  by  the  Tiber,  ii.  349.

—  is  firft  leen  from  the  Janiculum,
by  thofe,  who  come  from  Tyr-
rhenia,  ii.  99.  iv.  46.

—  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Rome,

i.  23.

—  of  what  people  Rome  confifted,  i:
205,  6.

—  by  what  means  Romulus  rendered
it  confiderable  and  populous,  i.
250.

—  in  what  manner  it  encreafed  in  the
number  of  its  citizens,  and  the  ex¬
tent  of  its  empire,  ii.  24.

—  whether  it  arrived  to  fuch  great-
nels  by  virtue,  or  by  a  greater  de¬
gree  of  fortune,  i.  255.

—  was  preferved  from  dangers  by
the  continual  favor  of  Providence,

ii.  39 7.

—  what  was  the  foundation  of  its
liberty,  i.  252.

— -  it  owed  its  liberty  in  a  particular
manner  to  Brutus,  ii.  271.

—  is  moft  tenacious  of  its  dignity,
efpecially  in  the  greateft  dangers,

iii.  340.

—  its  chief  view  was  to  be  thought
never  to  do  any  thing  by  com¬
mand,  or  through  fear,  ib.

—  never  grants  a  favor  upon  com-
pulfion,  ii.  398.  iii.  340.

—  never  yields  in  the  leaft  to  her  ad-
verfaries,  iii.  107.

—  by  what  means  it  was  enabled  to
fupport  itfelf  again  ft,  and  even
overcome,  many  enemies  at  one  and
the  fame  time  in  different  places,  i.

255*

—  the  ftrenath  of  Rome,  even  in

diftenfion,  was  greater  than  the
Ooo  united


460  INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


united  forces  of  other  cities,  iii.
6  2.

■ —  the  concord  of  Rome  for  how
long  time  it  continued  firm,  i.
241.

—  was  the  moft  humane,  and  the
moft  communicative  of  all  other
cities,  i.  25.  205.

—  how  humane  towards  ftrapgers,  ib:

—  the  refuge  of  all,  who  fought  a
place  of  fafety,  ib.

• —  the  moft  populous  of  cities,  i.

253-

■ —  the  number  of  citizens,  women,
and  children,  of  fervants  alfo,  of
merchants  and  tradefmen  at  Rome,
was  four  hundred  and  forty  thou-
fand.  See  likewife  Cenfus ,  iv.  48.
*—  the  number  of  the  firft  colony,
which  followed  Romulus  from  Al¬
ba,  i.  223.

-  Rome  is  accufed  by  Aricia  in  the
.  Latin  afiembly  held  at  Ferentinum,

ib39I-

in  vain  defires  fuccours  by  its
legates  of  the  neighbouring  na¬
tions  againft  the  Latines,  ii.  410,

1 1.

0 —  is  taken  by  the;  Gauls,  i.  170.

'  the  garrifon  of  the  city,  ii.  43.5.
a —  thofe,  above  the  military  age,  and
the  flaves  are  left  to  guard  the  city,

iii.  342.  iv.  8.

—  during  the  diffenfion  of  the  con-
fuls,  all  thofe,  who  were  not  inha¬
bitants,  were  ordered  forthwith  to
depart  the  city,  iii.  400,  1.

See  Governor ,  City .

T.  RomiliuSy  conful,  iv.  192,

—  what  orders  he  gave  to  L.  Siecius,,

iv.  213.

- —  feverely-  inveighs  againft:  Siecius,
iv.  215,

is  impeached  by  Siecius  before  the
people,  iv.  221.

■*—  is  condemned  and  fined  by  the


votes  of  all  the  tribes,  iv.  223.

—  his  fpeech  in  the  fenate  concern¬
ing  the  bringing  in  of  the  laws,  iv.
226.

—  will  not  accept  his  fine,  which
had  been  remitted  to  him  by  the
tribunes,  iv.  228.

—  is  made  a  decemvir,  iv.  236.

Romulus ,  fon  of  /Eneas,  i.  m.

Romulus  and  Remus,  grandfons  of

/Eneas  by  a  daughter,  i.  166.

Romulus y  fon  of  /Eneas,  builds  feverai
cities,  and  calls  feme  of  them  by
the  names  of  his  anceftors,  and
fome  of  them  after  his  own  name,
i.  167.

—  the  birth,  and  education  of  Ro¬
mulus  and  Remus,  i.  181.

—  Romulus,  the  feventeeth  in  defeent
from  /Eneas,  i.  102.

—  is  called  fo  by  Fauftulus,  i.  184.

—  contrives  to  let  his  captive  brother
at  liberty,  i.  189.

—  treats  with  his  brother  about  build¬
ing  a  city,  but  they  difagree,  i..
198,9.

—  after  a  fatal  vi&ory,  he  builds  up¬
on  the  Pajatine  hill,  i.  203.

—  calls  Rome  after  his  own  name,  L.
223.

—  confults  witlmhis  citizens  concern¬
ing  a  commonwealth,  i.  223.

— ■  is  inaugurated  by  particular  o-
mens,.  i.  228,  9,,

— -  is  chofen  king  by  the  people,  i. .
230.

how  long  he  reigned,  i,-  173.  324.

—  what  was  the  number  of  the  colo¬
ny,  which  he  brought  with  him
from  Alba,  for  the  building  of
Rome  ;  and  what  was  the  number
of  the  citizens  at  his  death,  i.  253..

- —  in  what  manner  he  rendered  his
city  populous,  i.  250,  1.

—  and  inibtured  a  commonwealth,  j.


2  3  3*


*


INDEX  to

— •  by  what  means  he  regulated  the
>ives  of  private  perfons,  i.  275.

—  he  reigns  jointly  with  T atius,  i.  3 1 2.

■i —  what  religion  he  inftitiited,  i.  257.

—  his  laws  relating  to  married  wo¬
men,  i.  266.  271.

—  is  preceded  by  twelve  litftors,  with
axes,  and  rods,  i.  277.

*—  he  triumphs  for  his  vidtory  over
the  Cseninenfes,  and  Antemnates,
i.  283.

—  is  dangeroufly  wounded,  i.  299.

- —  again  triumphs,  over  the  Fidenates,
i.  318.

—  and  a  third  time,  over  theYeientes,
i.  321.

- —  eredts  a  ftatue  to  himfelf  with  an
inlcription  of  his  exploits,  i.  318.

—  whether  he  built  the  temple,  and
inftituted  the  priefteffes  of  Vefta,
i.  34*.

—  how  many  years  he  lived  and
reigned,  i.  173.  324.

- —  where  he  dwelt,  i.  312.

—  was  prudent  in  councils,  and  mag¬
nificent,  i.  286,  7.

—  his  death,  i.  324.

—  the  cottage  of  Romulus,  i.  185.

—  Numa  builds  a  temple  and  in-
ftitutes  an  annual  facrihce  to  him
under  the  name  of  Quirinus,  i.

339-

Reft r a  in  the  Roman  forum,  i.  202.
273-

— -  Ions  pulled  down  from  the  Roftrum
by  their  fathers,  i.  273.

Rufus .  See  Pinarius.

liumimlis ,  the  holy  figtree,  under
which  the  wolf  fuckled  Romulus
and  Remus,  ii.  139.

• —  the  brazen  ftatue  of  Attitis  Na¬
vi  us  flood  near  to  it,  ib.

Rufellani ,  a  people  of  Tyrrhenia,  ii.
107.

Rujtic  habit,  aftaffins  fent  under  that
d.fguile,  ii.  142.


the  TEXT.  461

r

Rutiili  wage  war  with,  Latinus,  i.  1 3 1,

—  again  revolt  From  Latinus,  i.  145.

—  march  againft  TEneas,  ib.

—  offer  themfelves  to  the  Romans
and  Latines,  as  umpires  in  their
controverfy,  ii.  411.

S.

Sabines,  fo  called  from  Sabitius;
they  were  formerly  called  Um-
bri,  i.  308.

—  were  defeended  from  the  Lace¬
daemonians,  i.  310.

—  formerly  wore  gold,  and  lived
luxurioufly,  like  the  Tyrrhenians,

b  293-  ....

■*-  take  Lifta,  the  chief  city  of  the

Aborigines,  by  night,  i.  37.

—  invade  Cotyna  in  the  Reatine  ter¬
ritory,  i.  31O.

—  wage  war  againft  the  Romans,  and
appoint  Tatius  their  general,  i.
289.

—  upon  what  terms  they  enter  into
an  alliance  with  Romulus,  i.  304.

—  are  fubdued  by  Tullus  Hoftilius,
ii.  76.

—  make  a  truce  with  him,  ib.

—  violate  that  truce,  and  are  again
fubdued  by  him,  ii.  78.

—  are  conquered  by  Ancus  Marcius,
ii.  90.

—  promife  the  Latines  fuccours  a-
gainft  the  Romans,  ii.  108.

—  are  fubdued  by  Tarquinius  Prif-
cus,  ii.  1 13.

—  and  again,  ii.  123,  4.

.  are  beaten  by  Tarquinius  Super-
bus,  ii.  241—5.

—  are  conquered  by  a  Roman  con-
ful,  ii.  371,  2.

and  again  receive  a  fignal  defeat,
ii  -  377*

• —  invade  the  Romans  for  the  third
time,  ii.  379.

are  elated  with  a  frnall  yi&ory,
O  o  o  2  and


462  I  N  D  E  X  to

and  infult  the  Romans,  ii.  380.

—  but  fue  for  peace  in  a  fuppliant
manner,  ii.  388.

—  fall  upon  the  Romans,  during  the
celebration  of  a  feftival,  iii.  48,  9.

— -  afiift  the  Volfci  againft  the  Ro¬
mans,  iii.  40.

—  again  make  war  upon  the  Romans
in  conjunction  with  the  Medullini,
id.  53.

* — are  fubdued  by  Manius  Valerius,
the  dictator,  iii.  64.
aflift  the  Veientes  againft  the  Ro¬
mans,  iv.  64.

» —  are  plundered  by  Publius  Vale¬
rius,  the  conful,  iv.  67.

—  during  a  fedition  at  Rome,  they
invade  the  Roman  territories,  iv.

100.

- —  are  beaten  back  by  jEmilius,  iv.

101.

are  plundered  by  Quintus  Servi-
lius,  iv.  103,  4.

—  advance  to  Fidenae,  iv.  172.

--  again  infeft  the  Roman  tertitories,
iv.  179.

■«-  make  another  incurfion  into  the
Roman  territories,  that  lay  next  to
them,  iv.  251.

—  encamp  at  Eretum,  ib,

—  are  put  to  flight  by  Horatius,  iv.
344*

—  the  ravifhment  of  the  Sabine,  and
other  virgins,  i.  278.

—  the  embafiy  of  the  Sabine  women
to  their  own  people,  in  behalf  of
their  hufbands,  i.  303.

the  number  of  the  Sabine  matrons,
who  went  upon  this  embafly,  i.
306.

the  olive  grounds  of  the  Sabines,

b'83.

the  Sabines  firft  dwelt  in  the  Rea-
tine  country,  but  were  afterwards
driven  out  of  it-,  i.  308.

S&binus,  fon  of  Sancus,  founder  of


the  TEX  T.

the  Sabine  nation,  i.  309.

Sacrifices  *,  it  was  not  lawful  to  ap¬
proach,  or  afiift  at  the  facrifices,  be¬
fore  an  expiation  was  made  for
ihedding  the  blood  of  citizens,  ii.

403-

—  a  king  of  facrifices,  ii.  313.

—  the  facrificers  were  prefent  at  the
pafiing  of  the  law  for  building  on
mount  Aventine,  iv.  192.

—  common  facrifices,  ii.  241.

—  facrifices  among  the  Romans  were
b-gun  with  fpelt,  i.  268,  9.

—  the  ceremonies  of  facrifices,  iii.
278.

—  the  frugality  of  facrifices  among
the  old  Romans,  i.  264.

• —  foie  mn  facrifices  through  the  city
and  country,  ii.  3 14.

—  the  facrifices  before  the  entrance
upon  a  magiftracy,  iv.  241.

— -  facrifices  for  than kfgiving,  ii.  4031

—  facrifices  for  thankfgiving  after  a
victory,  i.  286.  iii.  23.  157.

• —  facrifices  for  thankfgiving  after  a-
peftilence,  iv.  232.

—  ftcrifices  peculiar  to  families,  iv.

37-

— .  peculiar  to  the  Fabian  family,  ib;
Sacrilege ,  the  punifhment  of  it,  i.
362.

Safety ;  greater  regard  is  to  be  had
for  fafety,  than  for  decency,  iii.
73-.

—  while  private  fafety  is  confult-
ed,  public  fafety  is  neglected,  iii.
109.

Salentine  cape,  a  promontory  of  Ia-
pygia,  i.  118.

Salii,  called  by  the  Greeks  K^^  i.

35 1  •

• —  inftituted  byNuma,.ib.

—  their  number  doubled  by  Hofti-
Jius,  purfuant  to  a  vow,  i.  351.  ii.
76.

—  two  forts  of  Salii,  i.  351.

; —  tliek


INDEX  to  the  TEXT.  463


•  es-  their  habits,  i.  352.  iii.  271.

—  their  feftival,  and  ceremonies,  i.
351-

■ —  the  caps,  or  mitres  of  the  Salii,
i.  352.

—  round  fhields  ufed  by  the  Salii,  i.
353-

•—  the  bucklers,  or  ancilia  of  the
Salii,  i.  354.

Saltatores ,  the  name  of  the  Salii,  i.
353-

Salt  pits  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber,
i.  321.

—  fait  pits  belonging  to  the  Veientes,
ib.  ii.  91.

Samnites  received  into  the  city,  i.
206.

Samon ,  fon  of  Mercury,  ii  140.
Samothrace ,  whence  derived,  ib.

. —  what  powers  the  Samothracians
chiefly  worfhiped,  i.  154.

.  their  ceremonies  brought  into
Italy,  i.  345.

Sancus.  See  Dius  Fidius.

Sardinia ,  the  revolt  of  it,  i.  255.
Satricani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.

4°9‘

—  Marcius  takes  their  city  after  a
fhort  reflftance,  iii.  338.

Saturnalia.  See  Saturnius.

Saturnia ,  its  fituation,  i.  47.

—  a  colony  of  the  Albans  fent  thi¬
ther,  i.  102.

—  why-  Italy  was  formerly,  fo  called,
i.  78.

Saturnian  hill  in  Elis,  i.  76.

—  in  Latium,  i.  205.

—  at  Rome,  i.  78.

—  now  called  the  Capitoline  hill,  i.

*7  f)

'  '

—  is  inclofed  with  a  wall  and  a  ditch
by  the  Albans,  i.  222.

— »  the  Saturnian  age,  i.  80.

Saturnius ,  K^ovof,  or  X^ovor,  i.  84.

—  deftroys  his  own  children,  i.

2 5.7e  '


—  reigned  in  Italy,  i.  80.

—  his  altars,  and  ceremonies,  i:

86.

—  his  altar  built  by  Hercules,  and
his  companions,  at  the  foot  of  the
capitol,  i.  77.

—  his  temple,  i.  312.

—  a  temple  is  dedicated  to  Saturn  on
the  Capitoline  hill ;  and  an  annual
feaft  and  facrifice  inftituted,  iiu
2.

— -  formerly  human  facrifices  were  of¬
fered  to  him,  till  abolilhed  by  Her¬
cules,  i.  85.

Satyres  i  the  habit  of  thofe,  who  per-
lonated  fatyres,  iii.  274.

—  who  invented  the  fports,  and
dances  of  the  fatyres,  ib.

*—  fatyrical  and  jocofe  dances  per¬
mitted  in  triumphs,  iii.  274,
5*

—  bands  of  fatyres,  ib.

Satyrus ,  a  colle&or  of  antique  fa¬
bles,  i.  153.

Scavola.  See  Mucius.

Scaling  ladders  brought  to  the  walls  of
a  town,  ii.  389.

—  the  walls  of  Antium  were  fcaled'
by  the  application  of  ladders,  iv.

1 70.

Scamander ,  of  Mitylene,  vi<5tor  at  the'
Olympic  games,  iv.  35.

Scamandrius ,  fon  of  Hedfor,  i.  106.

Scamandrus ,  a  river  fo  called,  the  fa¬
ther  of  Callirhoe,  i.  142.

Scaptini ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409,

Scaptius  maintains  that  the  contro¬
verted  lands  belonged  to  the  Ro¬
mans,  iv.  36 1,  2.

Scepter  of  ivory,  ii.  12 1.

—  a  fcepter,  with  an  eagle  on  the  top,
a  royal  enfign,  ii.  120.

—  Porfena  is  prefented  with  a  fcepter
by  the  Romans,  ii.  365.

—  fcepters  and  diadems  are  fent  by

the


464  INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


the  Romans  to  kings  their  allies,

ii.  121.

—  fcepters  refufed  by  the  confuls,  ii.  '
279.

Schools  for  reading  near  the  forum,,  iv.
292.

—  fchools  fupprefiedby  Ariftodemus,

iii.  165.

Scylletic  bay,  i.  7 9.

Seal  imprcfied  upon  Letters,  ii.  333.
Seats  with  coverings,  ii.  131.

feats  of  ftone  and  wood,  ii,  131,

2.

■—  Marcius  orders  his  feat  to  be
placed  on  the  ground,  when  he  re¬
ceives  his  mother*  and  the  other
Roman  ladiesj,  iii.  353.

SeceJJwn  the  fir  ft,  iii.  69.

— .  about  the  autumnal  aequinox,  iii.
*148.

• —  the  fecond  feceflion,  iv.  319.

■  Secrecy  ;  an  aftlirance  of  feerecy  is
made  with  an  oath,  iii.  287,
8.

Secretary ,  belonging  to  the  city,  pub¬
licly  reads  the  letters  of  the  con-
fpirators,  ii.  323,  4.

«—  fecretary  clothed  in  purple  is  mif-
taken  for  king  Porfena,  and  killed
by  Mucius,  ii.  356.

Security ;  aftlirance  with  an  oath  is
given  to  an  informer  for  fecurity,

ii.  322.  iii.  287,  8.

—  danger  often  incurred  through  too
great  fecurity,  iii.  165.

See  Surety.

Sedentary  arts  exercifed  by  ftrangets,
not  by  citizens,  i.  275.

Sedition ,  the  fwiftell  of  ali  deftrudions.

iii.  2  12.

—  is  banifned  from  a  city,  if  the
caufes,  which  produced  it,  be  re¬
moved.  iii.  125.

Seed  time  ;  all  winter  corn  Town
before  the  winter  folftice,  iii.

148.


—  the  beginning  of  feed  time  was
about  the  autumnal  aequinox,  iii.
148.

Semones ,  i^Geo/,  iii.  276,  7.

Sempronius ;  Aulus  Sempronius  Atra-
tinus,  conful,  iii.  1 .

—  is  appointed  governor  of  the  city
by  Poftumius*  the  dictator,  iii#
4*

-j—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iii.  182.

—  commands  the  veterans,  iii.  384.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  Agra¬
rian  law,  iii.  403.  .  .

—  is  created  interrex,  iii.  435.

—  is  chofen  confular  tribune*  iv.

...

C.  Sempronius ,  the  hiftorian,  i.  28.

L.  Sempronius  Atratinus ,  conful,  iv.

375-

—  the  Sempronii  hinder  the  pafling
of  the  Agrarian  law,  and  upon  that
account  are  fined  by  the  people*  iv.
208,  9,  10.

Senate ;  the  people  leave  the  regulat¬
ing  of  the  commonwealth  to  the
fen  ate,  i.  326.

—  the  people  are  the  body  of  the
city,  as  the  fenate,  and  the  other
magi  (trades  are  the  head  and  foul
of  it,  ii..  4 1 9.

—  among  other  articles  the  people
demand  annual  magiftrates  from
the  fenate,  iii.  132.

—  the  people  leave  the  comitia,  and
depart  from  the  Campus  Martius,
becaufe  confuls  had  been  appointed
by  the  fenate  out  of  the  arifto-
cracy,  iv.  78.

—  the  fenate  whence  fo  called,

i.  244.

*—  the  functions  of  the  fenate,  i,
249.

—  the  privileges  of  the  fenate,  iii.
100.

—  what  the  fenate  enjoyed  pecu¬
liarly  to  themlelves,  and.  what

they


INDEX  to

they  enjoyed  in  common  with  the
people,  iii.  212.

' —  the  power  of  the  fenate  is  a  fecure
defence  to  repel  the  infolence  of  the
people,  iii.  38,9.

.  the  fenate  was  compofed  of  the
the  chief  citizens,  iii..  1 31.

_ _ a  fenate  of  a  hundred  patricians  is

appointed  by  Romulus,  i.  242.

— .  is  augmented  by  another  hundred
after  the  reception  of  the  Sabines
into  the  city,  i.  306.

—  is  augmented  by  another  hundred
by  Tarquin'ius  Prifcus ;  fo  that,
in  (lead  of  two  hundred,  there  were
three  hundred  fenators,  ii.  128.

—  is  changed  by  Tarquinius  Super-
bus,  ii.  230,  1.

after  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,
they  are  again  encreafed  to  three
hundred,  by  receiving  the  chief  of
the  plebeians  into  the  order  of  the
patricians,  ii.  333.

—  is  compofed  by  Sylla  of  obfcure
men,  ii.  438.

the  fenate  were  appointed  to  watch
over  the  conduct  of  the  confuls,

iii.  238.

_  (land  in  need,  in  their  turn,  of  the
people  to  obferve  their  conduct,  ib.

—  the  kings  had  the  power  of  af-
fembling  the  fenate  and  people,  i.

249*

=—  the  fenate  is  aflembled  about  mid¬
night  by  Tullus  Hoftilius,  ii.  61.

—  is  obliged  very  late  at  night  to  af-
femble  in  the  curia  by  the  confuls,

iv.  1 16.  278.

: —  are  called  man  by  man  by  the
confuls,  on  account  of  an  informa¬
tion,  iii.  288.

; —  are  called  from  the  country  to  the
curia,  ib.

•—  are  brought  in  litters  during  a.
peftilence,  iv.  122.

—  the- tribunes  attempted  even  to  af*


the  TEXT.  465

femble  the  fenate,  though  that
power  formerly  belonged  to  the
confuls  alone,  iv.  288,  9.

—  Mucius  defires  that  the  fenate
might  be  aflembled  upon  his  ac¬
count,  in  order  to  lay  before  them
his  bold  defign,  ii.  354.

—  private  meetings  of  the  fenate  arc
held  by  the  confuls,  iv.  206.

—  which  private  meetings  are
grievoufly  complained  of  by  a.
tribune  of  the  people,  iv.  369.

— -  the  diflenflon  of  the  fenate  during
the  interregnum  after  the  death  of
Romulus ;  and  likewife  another  of
the  people,  i.  337.

—  the  diflenflon  of  the  fenate  in
creating  a  king,  after  the  death  of
Romulus,  i.  32 6.

— -  the  fenate  diflents  with  a  great
clamor  during  the  inteftine  dif-
turbances,  iii.  175.

- —  will  not  allow  the  laws,  made  by
the  people,  to  be  valid,  iii.  179.

—  why  they  would  not  concur  with
the  people,  in  recalling  Marcius,

iii.  323,

—  are  ftrenuoufly  defended  by  Ser-
vilius  againft  the  people,  iv.  62,  3.

t—  their  power  is  lefs  than  their  will,

iv.  226.

—  they  afford  an  occafion  by  their-
diflenflons  to  the  decemvirs  of  go¬
verning  the  commonwealth  at  dif-
cretion,  iv.  280.

—  are  diminifhed  a  fourth  part  by,
the  peftilence,  iv.  121.

—  the  decemvirs  having  ordered  the
cryers  to  call  over  the  names  of  the
fenatorSj  no  man  of  worth  an-,
fwers,  iv.  253.

the  right  of  the  fenate  is  commu¬
nicated  to  the  plebeians  alfo,  iii. 2  57.

—  the  leading  men  of  the  fenate,  ii.
425.

—  the  prince,  or  prefldent,  of  the

fenate  -


466  I  N  D  E  X  to

fenate  appointed  by  Romulus,  i.
243*

—  the  prince  of  the  fenate  is  alfo  go¬
vernor  of  the  city,  i.  242.

— *  the  elder  fenators  are  overpowered
by  the  number  and  fadlion  of  the
younger,  iii.  59.

—  the  younger  fenators  were  not  ac-
cuftomed  to  deliver  their  opinions
in  the  fenate,  but  followed  the  fuf-
frages  of  the  confular  fenators,  iii.
221.

—  the  elder  fenators  declared  their
opinions  firft,  iv.  258.

—  the  younger  fenators  fpoke  laft,
ib.

—  the  audacioufnefs  of  the  younger
fenators  is  reftrained,  iii.  99.

—  the  younger  fenators  wipe  off  the
reproach  of  audacioufnefs,  iii.  103,
4*

—  the  cenfors  inquire  into  the  con-
duff  of  the  fenators,  ii.  195.

—  the  decrees  of  the  fenate.  See
Decrees.

—  concerning  the  feveral  powers  of
the  fenate,  confuls,  and  people  of
Rome,  fee  the  fragment  at  the
end  of  the  firft  volume.

Septem  Pagi.  See  Seven  villages.

September  ;  the  confulfhip  was  entered
upon  on  the  calends  of  September,
contrary  to  cuftom,  iii.  75.

—  a  peftilence,  which  began  about
the  calends  of  September  continues
all  that  year,  iv.  121.

Sepulchral  honors  •,  deflowered  veftals
were  buried  without  any  fepulchral
honors,  i.  347,  8.

Sepulchre  ;  many  fepulchres  ereffed  to
one  perfon  in  different  places,  i.

125.

—  a  degenerate  daughter  is  excluded
from  the  fepulchre  of  her  anceftors,
ii.  44,  5.

Sergius  ( Marcus )  one  of  the  decern-


the  .TEX  T.

virs,  iv,  240,  ;

—  marches  with  four  of  his  collegues
againft  the  iEqui,  iv.  284.

Serve ;  thofe,  who  refufed  to  fervc,
were  punifhed  either  in  their  per-
fons,  or  effedfs,  iii.  417. .

—  the  Romans  were  obliged  to  ferve
in  the  field  till  they  were  five  and
forty  years  of  age,  ii.  177.

—  the  old  Romans  ferved  at  their
own  expence,  ii.  184.

Servilii  remove  from  Alba  to  Rome,
ii.  69.

C.  Servilius ,  conful,  iv.  30.

—  carries  on  the  war  againft  the
Volfci  with  little  fuccefs,  iv.  31,

2.

P.  Servilius  Prifcus ,  conful,  iii.  36.

—  diflents  from  his  coilegue  Ap,.
Claudius,  iii.  37,  8.

—  appeafes  the  rage  of  the  poorer  "
fort,  iii.  42.

—  transfers  the  caufe  of  the  tumult
to  his  coilegue  Ap.  Claudius,  iii,
42.

—  excites  the  plebeians  to  undertake
an  expedition,  iii.  45.

—  conquers  the  Volfci,  iii.  46,  7.

—  triumphs  without  the  confent  of
the  fenate,  iii.  47,  8.

—  chaftifes  the  Sabines,  who  had
made  an  irruption,  during  the  fefti-
vals,  iii.  48,  9.

—  conquers  the  Aurunci,  iii.  50.

—  is  appointed  one  of  the  deputies
fent  to  the  fectders,  iii.  104.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  120.

—  aflembles  the  fenate  though  at  the
point  of  death,  iv.  122.

—  dies  of  the  plague,  ib.

Servilius ,  is  appointed  general  of
the  horfe  by  Manius  Valerius,  the
dictator,  iii.  60.

Servilius  Prifcus ,  conful,  iv.  103.

—  lays  wafte  the  country  of  the
Sabines,  iv.  103,  4.


INDEX  to

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  109.

—  carries  fuccours  to  the  Latines,  iv.

hi.

Sp.  Servilius ,  conful,  iv.  47.

—  purfues  the  Tyrrhenians  with  more
refolution  than  prudence,  iv.  50.

■—  is  called  to  his  trial  before  the  peo¬
ple  for  his  ill  conducl,  iv.  54.

—  his  defence  before  the  people,  iv.
56.

■—  is  acquitted  by  the  votes  of  all  the
tribes,  iv.  64.

—  while  he  is  legate  of  Valerius  in
the  Veientan  war,  he  receives  the
rewards  of  bravery,  iv.  66.

Servius ,  AovA<o?,  a  prsnomen  derived
from  the  condition  of  the  per fon,

ii.  145.

See  Tullius.

Servius  (Flavius)  is  appointed  one  of
the  deputies  lent  to  the  feceders,

iii.  104.

Set  ini,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.  409.
Seven  villages  are  ceded  to  Romulus
by  theVeientes,  i.  321.

■ —  are  reftored  by  the  Tyrrhenian
treaty,  ii.  360.

—  are  returned  to  the  Romans  by
Porfena,  king  of  the  Tyrrhenians,
ii.  368.

Severity ;  an  inftance  of  ancient  feve-
rity,  ii.  44,  5.

the  examples  of  Roman  feve-
rity  incredible  to  the  Greeks,  ii.

323 •  .

— -  feverity  ought  not  always  to  be
fhewn,  ii.  399.

—  an  immoderate  feverity  is  offen-
five,  iv.  193,  4.

Sewers ,  or  common  fhores,  one  of  the
moft  magnificent  buildings  of  the
city,  ii.  129.

—  the  digging  of  them  begun  by
Tarquinius  Prifcus,  ib.

—  finilhed  by  Tarquinius  Superbus,
ii.  232,  3.

Vo  l.  IV.


the  TEX  T.  467

—  the  cleanfing  and  repairing  of
them  put  out  by  the  cenfors  at  a
thoufand  talents,  ii.  130.

—  bodies,  dead  of  the  plague,  being
thrown  into  the  fewers  encreafe  the
fury  of  the  peftilence,  iv.  230.

Sextus.  See  Tarquinius.

Sheep  •,  thirty  fneep,  and  two  oxen
were  the  greatefl;  fine,  iv.  224.

Shields ,  inllead  of  bucklers,  were
given  to  the  centuries  of  the  fecond
clafs,  ii.  1 76.

—  the  fhield  of  Achilles  made  by
Vulcan,  iii.  272.

—  a  fhield'  pierced  with  a  javelin,  iv.

.  I  18.  ,  '  .  ..  ;  ,

—  the  articles  of  a  treaty  infcribed
on  a  fhield,. ii.. 255,  6.

Shops  in  the  forum,  ii.  129.

ShoreS  (common)  See  Sewers.

Shout ;  the  military  fhout  ftrikes  the

.  enemy  with  fear,  iv.  126.

—  a  charge  made  with  a  Barbaric
About,  iii.  156.

Sibylline.  See  Oracle.

Sibylline  books  are  offered  to  be  fold
to  Tarquinius,  ii.  261.

—  who  had  the  care  of  them,  ii.  262.

—  how  carefully  they  were  preferved,
and  at  what  times  confulted,  ii.  262,
3-

—  are  confulted  in  a  great  dread  of
famine,  iii.  27,  8.

—  foretel  both  a  foreign,  and  a  civil
war,  iv.  133.

—  the  Sibylline  books,  after  the  firft
were  burnt,  were  colledted  from
various  places,  and  corrupted,  ii.
263.

—  the  marks,  by  which  they  may  be
diftinguifhed,  ii.  263.

—  the  privileges  of  thofe,  who  kept
the  Sibylline  books,  ii.  262.

Sieania ,  a  country  fo  called  from  the
Sicani,  a  people  of  Iberia,  i.  50.

—  formerly  it  was  called  Trinacria,

P  p  p  and


1  «.


468  INDEX  to

and  afterwards  Sicilia,  i.  51.

L.  Sicrius  Dentatus ,  his  fpeech  to  the
people  concerning  the  Agrarian
Jaw,  iv.  197,  8.

—  pcrfuades  a  punifhment  to  be  con¬
verted  into  a  fine,  iv.  209,  10.

—  follows  the  confi.il  in  a  war,  with
a  cohort  of  eight  hundred  veterans,
iv.  212.

—  his  anfwer  to  the  orders  of  Ro-
nnJius,  iv.  2 13  —  1 6,

* —  after  taking  the  camp  of  thefEqui,
he  alfo  defeats  them,  and  puts  them
to  flight  in  the  field, .  iv.  217,  18.

— -  in  what  manner  he  .revenges  the
injury  done  to  him  by  the  conful,
iv.  219.

—  is  made  a  tribune  by  the  people,
iv.  220.

—  cites  Romilius  to  his  trial,  iv.

221:.  .1  ,  ■  .  'a-  ■  u  .  .

— •  is  reconciled  to  Romilius,  iv.  228.

—  is  fent  in  quality  of  legate  to  the
camp  lying  before  Cruftumerium,
iv.  286,  7.

« —  is  afiafiinated  by  the  treachery  of
the  decemvirs,  iv.  289.

—  in  what  manner  their  treachery
was  difcovered,  iv.  290.

—  is  magnificently  buried  by  the
army,  iv.  291.

Siceli,  a  barbarous  nation,  i.  23.
49.  •  t\ £  d  < -  *

- —  derived  their  name  from  their  king
Sicelus,  i.  5 1 .  ...  .1  .

— -  formerly  inhabited  the  place  where
Rome  was  built,  i.  23."

—  are  driven  out  by  the  Aborigines

and  Felafgi,  i.  24.  49.  .  :  .

—  are  expelled  by  the  Aborigines,  i.

—  remove  from  Italy  to  Sicania,  i.-

5°‘-

• —  what  parts  of  Italy  they  inhabit¬
ed,  i.  220.  .)  . :  * ;

Sice/us,  king  of  the  Aufones,  i.  51.--'


the  TEXT.

Sicelus ,  fon  of  Italus,  leads  out  a  co¬
lony  of  Ligures  into  Italy,  i.  52.

Sicelus  flies  from  Rome,  and  goes  over
to  Morges,  i.  168.

Sicilian  embafiadors  are  intercepted
by  the  Antiates,  and  releafed  by
the  Romans,  iii.  20 6.

—  the  Sicilian  fea  tempeftuous,  i.
1 18.

— •  Medimnus,  a  Sicilian  dry  mea-
fure,  iii.  183.

Sicily,  fo  called  from  the  Siceli  (an
Italian  nation)  formerly  called  Si¬
cania,  and  Trinacria,  i.  51.

—  many  monuments  of  the  arrival  of
TEneas,  and  the  Trojans  in  Sicily,
i.  122.

—  every  city  in  Sicily  was  governed
by  a  king,  iii.  150.

■ —  the  Roman  embafiadors  were  fent
into  Sicily  to  buy  corn,  iii.  149,

50.

—  theRoman  embafiadors  are  obliged
to  fail  round  Sicily,  iii.  153.

—  the  revolt  of  Sicily,  i.  255.

Sicinnis ,  a  Grecian  armed  dance,  iik

274*  '  •

C.Sieinnius  Bellutus ftirs  up thefoldicrs
to  fectrde,  iii.  69.

—  what  reply  he  made  to  the  legates
of  the  confuls,  iii.  69.  123.

— -  having  called  an  afiembly  of  the
people,  he  gives  thole,  who  were
fent  upon  the  fecond  embafiy,  leave
to  fpeak,  iii.  106.

— -  gives  the  plebeians  leave  to  an¬
fwer,  iii.  108.

—  is  irritated  at  the  fpeech  of  Lar-
tius,  and  becomes  the  more  in-

f  cenfid  againft  the  patricians,  iii.
123.

- —  is  made  a  tribune  by  the  people,

—iii-.  134.

—  is  made  an  aedile  of'the. people,  iii.

*  r73*  i2

■ —  is  again  chofen  tribune,  iii.  199.

—  is


INDEX  '  t6

—  is  raifed  to  the  tribuneftip  for  his
hatred  againft  the  ariftocracy,  ib.

* —  feverely  inveighs  againft  Marcius,
iii.  200.

— -  ftirs  up  the  people  againft  the
fadlion  of  Marcius,  iii.  202.

■ —  is  dilfuaded  from  his  defign  at  the
inftigadon  of  Brutus,  iii.  203.

—  cites  Marcius  to  a  trial,  iii.  204.

—  oppofes  the  demands  of  the  con-

'  fuls,  iii.  209.

T.  Sicinus,  conful,  iii.  382.

—  overcomes  the  Vollci,  iii.  390.

—  triumphs  over  them,  iii.  391.

—  when  legate,  is  honored  with  the
rewards  of  bravery,  iv.  24:

* —  comes  to  the  relief  of  T.  Virgi-
nius,  the  conful,  iv.  25.

Siculus .  See  Clcelius.

Signis ,  a  colony  of  Tarquinius,  ii.
264.

— ■  is  befieged  by  Sextus  Tarquinius
without  fuccefs,  ii.  405.

Silence ;  to  order  filence  in  an  aftem-
bly,  iii.  250.

—  to  proclaim  filence,  iv.  306.

*—  filence  reigns  in  an  aflembly  of  the
people,  as  much  as  in  a  folitude,
iii.  124.

—  filence  a  fign  of  attention,  iv.  56.

Sileni ,  their  drefs,  iii.  274.

Silenus^  the  hiftorian,  i.  15.

Silvius ,  a  pofthumous  fon  of  ./Eneas,
called  fo  from  his  being  born  in
Silva ,  a  wood,  i.  156,  7.

— -  is  declared  king  by  the  Latines,  i.

J57-

—  all  the  Alban  kings  were  fur-
named  Silviifrom  Silvius,  i.  157.

S’Jler  s  the  murdrefs  of  her  hufband
is  led  as  a  bride  to  the  bed  of  her
filter,  ii.  285.

—  the  altar  of  Juno  the  infpedlrefs  of
filters,  ii.  48.

—  the  filter’s  beam,  ii.  49.

— -  the  parricide  of  Horatius,  ii.  44.


the  T  E  X/'JV  469

Slaves  ;  the  cuftody  of  perfons  claim¬
ed  as  Haves  belonged  to  their  near-
eft  relations,  iv.  297.

—  (laves  were  acquired  by  three  me¬
thods,  ii.  193.

—  Oaves  were  propofed  to  be  made
ufe  of  in  military  employments,
iii.  96.

—  were  made  free  during  the  com-
pitalian  rites,  ii.  171.

* —  Oaves  aftift  at  the  facrifices,  ii.
170.

—  Claudius  advifes  liberty  to  be  given
to  Oaves,  rather  than  domination
to  plebeians,  iii.  96.

■—  Oaves  fubftituted  in  the  room  of
the  Potitii,  i.  91,  2.

—  Brutus  advifes  that  the  Oaves
Ihould  be  fet  at  liberty  in  times  of
danger,  iii.  233.

—  by  what  means  Oaves  might  ob¬
tain  their  freedom,  ii.  193.

—  a  Oave  once  fold,  and  afterwards
manumitted,  was  his  own  mailer,  i.
274.  _

—  Tullius  conferred  the  rights  of  ci¬
tizens  even  on  manumitted  Oaves,
ii.  190.

—  Oaves  exercifed  mechanic  trades,
i.  275.

—  plots  are  contrived  by  corrupt
Oaves  againft  their  mailers,  ii.
238. 253.

—  a  confpiracy  of  the  Oaves  againft
the  commonwealth  being  difco-
vered,  they  are  crucified,  ii.  392,

3*

—  the  hardftups  of  flavery,  iii.

1 19.

—  the  Oaves  defert  from  their  ma¬
tters,  ii.  353.

—  whoever  was  claimed  as  a  Oave,
did  not  continue  in  the  power  of
the  claimant,  but  in  the  cuftody
of  the  perfon,  who  afierted  his  li¬
berty,  iv.  297.

P  p  p  2  Slings y


470  INDEX  to

Slings ,  and  darts,  the  arms  of  the  fifth
clafs,  ii.  1 79.

—  vefifcls,  filled  with  burning  pitch,
are  thrown  by  flings  among  the
enemy,  who  had  poffcfled  them-
felves  of  the  capitol  under  Appius
Herdonius,  iv.  160.

Soldiers  ought  to  look  upon  their  pofl
as  their  houfe,  their  land,  and  their
country,  iv.  16.

. —  thole,  who  deferted  their  poll,
were  put  to  death,  iii.  413.

—  the  manner  in  which  foldiers
were  raifed  by  Servius  Tullius,  ii.

18 1.

—  were  raifed  out  of  all  the  tribes,
iv.  285.

—  foldiers  in  triumphs  were  permit¬
ted  to  fatyrize  even  their  generals,
iii.  274.

■ —  were  enrolled  in  the  Campus  Mar-
tius,  iii.  428.

—  too  imperioufiy  by  the  confuls,  iv.
72*  .  .

—  are  hindered  by  the  tribunes  of  the
people  from  being  raifed,  iv.  180.

.365-

• —  in  raffing  of  foldiers,  thofe  ple¬
beians  of  advanced  fortunes  were
removed  into  the  order  of  knights,

iii.  68.

Solonium ,  its  fituation,  i.  290,  1.
Soljlice  \  the  fummer  folftice  in  June,

iv.  47.

Sen.  See  Farter.

S t  oth fryers.  S  t  e  Augurs.

, Sophocles ,  a  pa  Cage  in  his  Tnachus
concerning  the  Tyrrhene  Pelafgi,
i.  58,  9.

• —  a  pallage  from  his  Laocoon  con¬
cerning  the  flight  of  /Eneas,  i.
108.

—  a  quotation  from  his  Triptolemus
concerning  Oenotria,  i.  31,  2.

Sew  efcapes  from  the  lactificers,  i.
128.


the  TEX  T.

—  ^neas  facrifices  a  fow,  and  her
young  ones,  i.  130.

Sparta ,  a  city  of  the  Doric  nation,
commands  all  the  other  Greek  ci¬
ties,  and  its  own  progenitors,  ii.

23*

—  the  Spartans,  after  their  defeat  at
Leudlra,  were  unable  to  recover
themfelves,  i.  254,  5.

Speaking  ftatue,  iii.  372.

Spears  ;  fhort  fpears  ufed  in  dances,
iii.  271.  See  Pike Jlaves.

Spectators ,  fpies  under  that  ap¬
pearance,  iii.  49.

Speeches ,  why  they  are  inferted  in  hi-
ftory,  iii.  260.

The  fpeech  of  /Eneas  to  Latinus,
i-  1 3}>  3*

the  anlwer  of  Latinus,  i.  135.

—  of  Appius  Claudius  for  quieting
the  domeftic,  and  foreign  com¬
motions,  iii.  58.

againfl:  the  opinion  of  Marcus  Va¬
lerius,  iii.'  88..

concerning  the  return  of  the  peo¬
ple,  iii.  102.

againfl:  a  decree  of  the  fenate  for
fubmitting  the  patricians  to  be
tried  by  the  people,  iii.  221.

againfl  -the  demands  of  the  tri¬
bunes,  iii.  401,. 2.'

to  the  tumultuous  fenators,  iv.
257,  8.

concerning  Virginia,  iv.  307.

—  of  Caius  Claudius  againfl  the  de¬
mands  of  Virginius,  the  tribune,  iv.
150.

to  the  fenate  after  the  fllence  of
Appius,  iv.  271.

to  the  knate,  and  confuls,  con¬
cerning  the  demands  of  the
people,  iv.  372.

— -  of  Marcus  Claudius  to  Appius,  _
the  decemvir,  concerning  his  seiz¬
ing  Virginia,  iv.  294.

• —  of  Clcelius  (Gracchus)  general  of

the


INDEX  to

/

the  Aiqui  to  the  Roman  embafia-
dors,  iv.  173.

—  of  the  confuls  to  the  tumultuous
fenators,  iii.  99.

to  the  demands  of  the  Volfci,  iii.
298.

—  of  L.  Cornelius  in  favor  of  the
demands  of  the  decemvirs,  iv.  3  2  j.

—  of  M.  Cornelius  to  the  advice  of
Caius  Claudius,  iv.  270.

—  of  M.  Fabius  to  his  foldiers,  iv.

♦  1 3  •

- r -  of  a  Roman  Fecialis  to  Cluilius,
the  Alban  didtator,  ii.  6.

—  of  Metius  Fufctius  to  Tullus  Ho-
ftilius,  and  the  Romans,  ii.  13.

to  Hoftiiius  concerning  the  fove-
rtignry  of  the  Albans  over  the
Romans,  ii.  21.

to  Hoftiiius  concerning  the  com¬
bat  of  the  three  twin  brothers.,
ii.  30.

to  the  Alban  generals  concerning
his  treachery,  ii.  52.
of  Horatia  to  her  lurviving  bro¬
ther,  ii.  43.
and  his  anfwer,  ib.

■ —  of  Horatius,  the  father  to  his  three
twin  fons,  ii.  35.
and  their  anfwer,  ib.

—  of  C.  Horatius,  to  the  tribunes,
and  people,  expoftulatory,  iv.  1.82.

—  of  Tullus  Hoibiius  to  Metius  Fu-
fetius,  and  the  Albans,  ii.  17.

to  .Fufetius,  for  claiming  the  fo-
vereignty  in  favor  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  ii.  23.

to  the  three  twin  Floratii,  ii.  33.
and  their  anfwer,  ii.  35.
to  the  army  concerning  the
treachery  of  Fufetius,  ii.  63.
concerning  the  fame  fubjedt  to  the
Aibans,  ii.  67.

—  of  Iciiius  to  Appius  Claudius,  in
favor  of  his  fpoufe  Virginia,  iv.

300<


the  TEX  T.  471

—  of  L.  Junius  Brutus  to  his  friends,

ii.  273.

to  the  people  concerning  the  in-
ftitution  of  a  commonwealth,
ii.  283.

againft:  Collatinus,  ii.  327.

—  of  L.  Junius  Brutus,  a  plebeian,
in  favor  of  the  people  againft  the
patricians,  iii.  108.

againft: Marcius, iii.  210,  20.  250.

—  or  C.  Laedtorius,  a  tribune  of  the
people,  againft:  the  cenfure  of  Ap¬
pius,  iv.  85.

— -  of  T.  Lartius,  concerning  the
domeftic  and  foreign  commotions,
id.  54>  5*  57'

■ —  of  Lucretia  to  her  father  and
friends,  ii.  268.

• —  of  C.  Marcius,  containing  his  ad¬
vice  for  felling  the  corn  to  the  peo¬
ple  at  an  exorbitant  price,  in  order
to  quell  their  infolence,  iii.  185.

to  Tullus  Attius,  iii.  284..  28 6.

in  the  aftembly  of  the  Volfci,  iii.
290.

his  anfwer  to  Minucius,  iii.  326.

to  his  mother,  and  the  other  Ro¬
man  ladies,  iii.  354.

—  of  Agrippa  Menenius  concerning
the  return  of  the  people,  iii.  75.

to  the  feceders,  iii.  124.

to  the  demands  of  Brutus,  the
plebeian,  iii.  133.

—  of  M.  Minucius  to  the  people  in
favor  of  the  fcnate  andC.  Marcius,

iii.  193.

to  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  iii.
207.

to  Marcius  in  the  camp,  iii.  315.

—  of  C.  Mqcius  (Sc^evoia)  to  the
fenate,  concerning  his  defign  againft:
Porfena,  ii.  354.

when  brought  before  Porfena,  ,ii.

'  357-

—  of  Numitor  to  Remus,  1.  190,  1.

— .  of  P.  Numitorius  to  Ap.  Clau-

*  dius?


472  INDEX  to

dius,  the  decemvir,  in  favor  of  his
niece  Virginia,  iv.  297,  8,  9.

—  of  Aulus  Poftumius,  the  dictator,
to  the  foldiers  before  their  ingage  -
ment  with  the  Latines,  iii.  9.

to  the  Latin  embafladors,  iii.

34-

—  of  a  primipilus  to  the  confuls,  and
his  comrades,  iv.  18.

—  of  T.  Romiiius,  to  L.  Siccius,
commander  of  the  veteran  cohort,
iv.  213.

_ the  anfwer  of  Siccius,  iv.  213.

1 6.

concerning  the  compilation  of
laws  demanded  by  the  tribunes,
iv.  226.

f—  of  Romulus  to  his  citizens  con¬
cerning  the  inftitution  of  a  com¬
monwealth,  i.  223.
and  their  anfwer,  i.  227.
to  the  Sabine  virgins,  concerning
the  ill  behaviour  of  their  na¬
tion,  and  his  intent  of  for¬
giving  ir,  in  their  favor,  i.
28  6.

—  of  Servilius,  the  dicbior,  to
the  people,  iii.  60.

of  Sp.  Servilius  to  the  people,  con¬
cerning  his  own  conduct,  iv.  56.
— .  of  L.  Siccius  (Dentatus)  in  favor
of  the  Agrarian  law,  iv.  197,  8.
to  Romiiius,  the  conful,  iv.  213.
1 6.

4-  of  Sicinnius  Bellutus  to  the  legates
of  the  confuls,  iii.  69.  123.
to  the  people,  concerning  the  zeal
of  the  patricians  in  defending
Marcius,  iii.  204.

—  of  Serv.  Sulpicius  to  the  legates
of  the  Latines,  ii.  398.

. —  of  Tanaquil  to  Servius  Tullius,
ii.  150.

: —  of  Tarquinius  Prifcus  to  the  em¬
bafladors  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  ii.
1 19.


the  TEX  T.

—  of  Tarquinius  Superbus  to  Serv.
Tullius,  in  vindication  of  his  right
to  the  government,  ii.  21 1.

the  anfwer  of  Tullius,  ii.  214.

—  of  young  Tullia  to  Tarquinius  for
exchanging  their  marriages,  ii,
206.

-—of  Servius  Tullius  to  the  people
in  favor  of  the  grandchildren  of
Tarquinius,  againft  the  Marcii,  ii.
158.

for  afierting  his  right  to  the  go¬
vernment,  againft  the  Marcian
fadtion,  ii.  164.

againft  Tarquinius,  his  fon-in-
law,  ii.  210.

—  of  Valeria  to  the  aflembly  of  ma¬
trons,  iii.  343.

toVeturia,  the  mother  of  Mar¬
cius,  iii.  344.

—  of  L.  Valerius  Potitus,  inveigh¬
ing  againft  Appius  Claudius,  iv.
254-

againft  the  demands  of  the  de¬
cemvirs,  iv.  276.

—  of  Manius  Valerius  to  the  people,
for  taking  up  arms  againft  the
enemy,  iii.  60.

to  the  people,  concerning  the  in¬
juries  done  to  him  by  the  fe-
nate,  iii.  66.

to  the  feceders,  iii.  106.

to  the  fenate,  concerning  their  de¬
livering  the  patricians  to  be  tri¬
ed  by  the  people,  iii.  236.

—  of  Marcus  Valerius  to  the  fenate,
concerning  the  abolition  of  debts,
ii.  412,  13.

—  of  Veturia  to  the  requeft  of  Va¬
leria,  and  the  other  ladies,  iii.
346.

to  her  fon  Marcius,  in  favor  of
the  Roman  people,  iii.  353.

356-  .  .

_  of  Aulus  Virginius,  a  tribune  of
the  people,  againft  Casfo  Quintius

at


INDEX  to

at  his  trial  before  them,  iv.
*39-

concerning  a  confpiracy  againft
the  people,  iv.  146.

—  of  Publius  Virginius  concerning
the  method  of  quieting  the  com¬
motions  at  home,  and  abroad,  iii.
5 7-

—  of  Marcius  Volfcius,  being  a  ca¬
lumnious  fpeech  againft  the  be¬
haviour  of  Caefo  Quintius,  iv.  140.

Spelt,  go*,  is  taken  for  the  molt  an¬
cient  of  grains  by  the  Romans,  i.
268,  9.

—  is  placed  upon  their  religious  ta¬
bles,  i.  264.

— •  facrifices  were  begun  with  fpelt,
i.  269.

—  a  participation  of  fpelt  was  a  mar¬
riage  ceremony,  i.  269.

Spharus,  the  Lacedaemonian,  vi&or
at  the  Olympic  games,  ii.  82.

Spies  are  fent  under  the  quality  of
embaffadors,  iii.  25.

—  come  under  the  appearance  of
fpe&ators,  iii.  49.

Spines ,  one  of  the  mouths  of  the  Po,
j*  43-

Spoils  ;  the  choicefl  of  the  fpoils  were
brought  into  the  city,  the  reft  were
divided  among  the  foldiers  by  cen¬
turies,  iv.  177.

—  gifts  and  ornaments  of  a  conquer¬
ed  city  are  given  to  the  temples  out
of  the  fpoils,  iii.  306.  iv.  344.

—  the  choiceft  of  the  fpoils  are  con-
ftcrated  to  the  temples,  iii.  307.

—  the  fpoils  taken  from  the  enemy
are  given  to  the  people  by  the  Jaws,
iii.  251.

— -  the  fpoils  are  fold  by  thequseftors,
iii.  418.

—  an  equal  (hare  of  the  fpoils  is
given  to  the  Latin  allies,  iii.  145.

—  the  oftentation  of  the  fpoils  at  the
games,  iii.  281.


the  TEX  T.  473

—  fpoils  are  difplayed  in  funerals,  iii.

377-.

—  facrifices  and  games  are  celebrated,
and  temples  built  with  the  tenths
of  the  fpoils,  iii.  27.

— *  the  braveft  warriour  is  honored
with  the  firft  fruits  of  the  fpoils,
iii.  143,  4.

See  Booty.

Springs  of  hot  waters  in  Italy,  i.  84.

—  fprings  of  water  dedicated  to  the
fun,  i.  126.

—  fprings  of  the  fweeteft  waters  rife
out  of  the  earth  fpontaneoufly,  r.
126.

Sprinkle  the  facrifice  with  clear  water,
iii.  277.

See  Lujlration.

Staff ;  Brutus  inclofes  a  golden  rod
within  a  wooden  ftaff,  and  offers  it
to  Apollo,  ii.  272.

Standard  bearers,  their  punifhment,
when  they  loft  their  ftandards,  iv.
60.  92.

—  ftandards  fnatched  from  their  bear¬
ers,  and  thrown  among  the  enemy,
iii.  385.

T.  Statius ,  a  tribune  of  the  people,
cites  Sp.  Servilius,  a  confular  per-
fon,  to  trial,  iv.  54.

Stator.  See  Jupiter.

Statues  \  the  ftatue  of  Metellus  in  the
capitol,  i.  344.

—  a  brazen  ftatue  is  erefted  to  Na-
vius,  the  augur,  ii.  139.

—  a  brazen  ftatue  is  eredted  to  Clce-
lia,  ii.  365.

—  the  ftatue  of  the  wolf  fucklingthe
twins,  i.  183.

—  an  armed  brazen  ftatue  to  Hora-
tius  Codes,  ii.  351.

—  a  fmall  ancient  ftatue  of  TSneas,

i.  115.

— .  a  wooden  ftatue  remains  unburnt,

ii.  228.

—  ftatues  remove  themfelves  of  their

own.


474  I  N  D  E  X  to

own  accord  to  their  old  pedeftals,.
i.  1 50.

—  the  brazen  ftatues  of  Ceres  were
madeoutof  the confifcated  fortunes
of  Sp.  Cafli us,  iii.  414.

- —  the  ftatue  of  Fortuna  Muliebris
fpeaks  twice,  iii.  372.

Stepmother,  an  invidious  name,  i.  156.
Stick  •,  a  foothfayer  marks  the  ground
with  his  flick,  ii.  25 S.

Stipends  of  the  foldiers  arifing  out  of
the  produce  of  the  public  lands,  iii.
402.

Storksi  TliA^yoi,  a  name  given  to  the
Tyrrhenians,  i.  64.

Strategem  of  Ariflodemus  at  Cumae,
iii.  162,  3.

—  of  Cloelius  (Gracchus)  general  of
the  iEqui,  iv.  1 74.

—  a  double  ftrategem  of  the  banifh-
ed  Cumani,  iii.  167.

—  of  the  fons  of  Ancus  Marcius,  ii.
142.

—  of  Mucius  (Scaevola)  ii.  354.

—  of  T.  Quintius,  iv.  105.

. —  of  Romulus,  i.  320,  1.

—  of  the  Sabines,  ii.  379.

—  of  Tanaquil,  ii.  150.

. —  of  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  ii.  112.

; —  of  Tarquinius  Superbus,  ii.  244.
againft  Turnus  Herdonius,  ii.
239.

r-  of  Tarquinius  the  father,  and  fon,
in  order  to  reduce  the  Gabini,  ii.
250,  1,  2.

of  Tullus  Hoftilius,  ii.  5.  57.

—  of  the  Volfci,  iii.  422.

Streets  ;  the  Tyrrhenian  ftreet,  or  Vi -
cus  Tufcus ,  at  Rome,  ii.  367.

—  the  impious  ftreet,  ii.  225.

—  a  ftreet  called  the  Carinae,  i.  15 1.

—  cryers  call  the  people  to  their
comitia  ftreet  by  ftreet,  ii.  220.
283.

Strumpet  *,  Lupa,  a  name  given  to
ftrumpets,  i.  196.


the  TEXT.

Suburrana ,  the  name  of  a  tribe,  ii.
169.

Succejjion  \  the  right  of  fuccefiion  in
whom  veiled,  ii.  215,  1 6.

Succours  \  the  allies  of  the  Roman
people  were  obliged  to  fend  fuc-
cours  to  the  Romans  in  time  of
war,  iv.  171.

Sue£a  Ponte tia,  head  of  the  Vollcian
nation,  iii.  46,  7.

—  is  conquered  by  Tarquinius  Su¬
perbus,  ii.  242,  3,  4.

— -  is  taken  by  Servilius,  iii.  46,  7.

—  the  great  value  of  the  plunder
taken  at  this  place,  iii.  1 1 1.

— .  the  banifhed  Sueffani  excite  the
Gabini  to  make  war  upon  Tarqui-
nius,  ii.  247.

SueJJula ,  its  fttuation,  i.  36.

Suffetius.  See  Fufetius.

Suiters ,  their  drefs,  ii.  43.

kh  Sulpicius  (Camerinus)  conful,  iii.

,  262.

—  is  one  of  the  five  embaftfadors  ftnt
to  Marcius,  iii.  315.

Serv.  Sulpicius  ( Camerinus )  conful,  ii.

393-

—  the  great  prudence  he  fhewed  in
feizing  the  confpirators,  ii.  401.

—  after  the  death  of  his  collegue,  he
continues  in  the  confulfhip  alone
to  the  time  of  its  expiration,  ii.

-  404-

—  hisfpeech  concerning  the  reception
of  the  Latines  again  into  favor,  iii.
32.

*—  isfecondtime  conful,  iv.  130.

— -  is  appointed  one  of  the  deputies
fent  to  the  feceders,  iii.  104.

— -  is  fent  with  Sp.  Poftumius  embaf-
fador  into  Greece,  iv.  229.

—  is  made  a  decemvir,  iv.  236;

—  when  legate,  commands  the  horfe,
iv.  357-

Summer  lolftice  in  June,  iv.  47.

Sun  i  the  temple  of  the  fun,  i.  .312.

—  fprings


INDEX  to

fprings  of  water  dedicated  to  the
fun,  i.  126.

,  Suna ,  its  fituation,  i.  36.

Suovetaurilia ,  facrifices  fo  called,  ii.
188.

Superbus.  See  Tarquinius.

Suppers  ;  the  firft  fruits  of  fuppers
are  offered  on  the  royal  altars,  ii.

* —  an  extemporary  fupper  is  magni¬
ficently  ferved  up  by  Numa’s  fa¬
miliar  genius,  i.  335.

Supplications  of  the  matrons  in  the
temple  on  the  Capitoline  hill,  iii.

343-

Suppofititious  children  did  not  belong
to  thofe,  who  fuppofed  them,  but
to  the  mothers,  who  bore  them ;
and  were  of  the  fame  condition
with  them,  iv.  296.

Sureties  for  a  fine,  iv.  1 43.
r—  a  fine  is  exadled  from  the  fureties
of  a  perfon,  ib.

. —  to  give,  and  take  furety,  i.  136.
Surname  fometimes  more  known  than
the  name,  iii.  154.

—  derived  from  misfortune,  ii.  349.

—  from  manners,  ii.  229.  iii.  154.

—  from  a  conquered  city,  iii.  144.
Surrender ers  are  obliged  to  furniGi

Servilius  with  clothes,  provifions
and  hoftages,  iii.  40.

—  Marcius  demands  clothes,  and  pro¬
vifions  by  the  month  of  furren-
derers,  iii.  302.

. —  money  and  com  are  demanded,
iii.  310.  iv.  33.

—  money  and  provifions  are  demand¬
ed,  iii.  392.  iv.  68.

—  money,  provifions,  and  clothes  are
demanded,  iv.  109.

—  Marcius  takes  particular  care  that
furrenderers  fhoulcl  not  fuffer  the
mifchiefs  incident  to  war,  iii.  311.

Swearing  by  every  thing  facred,  iii.
136.

Vol.  IV.


the  TEX  T.  475

—  upon  the  burning  victims,  ii.  37.

—  a  military  cuftomof  fwearingupon
a  fword  held  up,  iv.  18.

—  upon  Lucretia’s  dagger,  ii.  274.
See  Oath.

Sylla ,  his  feverity,  and  cruelty,  ii.  438.

Sympathizing  ;  a  fympathizing  look
excites  great  companion,  iv.  63.

Syracufe  ;  the  Gamori,  or  landed  men,
of  Syracufe  were  expelled  by  their
clients,  iii.  93.

T.

Tables;  laws  were  infcribed  upon
oaken  tables  before  the  invention
of  brazen  pillars,  ii.  83,  4.

—  the  wooden  tables  of  ceremonies
placed  in  the  forum,  ii.  83.

—  were  removed  from  thence  byTar-
quinius  Superbus,  ii.  231.

Tanaquil ,  wife  of  Tarquinius  Prifcus
was  fkilled  in  the  art  of  augury,  ii,
100.

—  was  a  matron  mofl  fkilled  in  in¬
terpreting  omens,  ii.  146.

—  her  prudence,  ii.  149.

—  her  regard  for  Servius  Tullius,  ib.

—  whether  fhe  buried  her  fon  Aruns
Tarquinius,  ii.  209.

! Tarpeia ,  her  adventure,  i.  293.

—  and  death,  i.  296.

—  her  fepulchre  and  annual  rites,
ib.

Tarpeian  rock,  afterwards  called  the
Capitoline  hill,  from  Caput ,  a  head
being  found  there,  ii.  256,  9.

— ■  the  Tarpeian  rock  overlooks  the
forum,  and  was  the  place  from
whence  the  condemned  perfons
were  thrown  down,  iii.  41 1,  12.

Sp.  Tarpeius ,  conful,  iv.  220.

Tarquinia,  wife  of  Servius  Tullius,  is
taken  off  by  a  fudden,  and  uncer¬
tain  death,  ii.  227,  8.

. —  was  poifoned  by  Tarquinius  Su¬
perbus,  ii.  285.

Q^q  q  Tar-


4.7 &  I  N  D  E  X  .  to

Tarquinia,  mother  of  L.  Junius  Bru¬
tus,  ii.  270.

Tarquinii,  their  effects  are  given  to  the
public,  ii.  33 3.

—  endeavour  to  effect  their  return  by
force  of  arms,  ii.  334,  5.

—  the  banifhed  Tarquinii  are  diiven
out  of  Latium,  iii.  34.

— ■  fome  retire  to  Cumae  in  Campania,
and  others  to  other  places,  iii.  35.

1 Tarquinii ,  its  fituation,  ii.  98.

■ —  the  inhabitants  of  Tarquinii  con-
fpire  with  the.  Veientes  againfl  the
Romans,  ii.  202..

—  intercede  for  Tarquinius  Superbus,
ii.  316.

— .  attempt  to  redore  the  banifhed
Tarquinii  by  force  of  arms,  ii.

3  34-y  5*

Aruns  Tarquinius,  nephew  to- Tarqui¬
nius,  is  made  di&ator  at  Collatia  ^
and  from  thence  acquired  to  him-
felf  and  his  pofterity  the  name  of
Collatinus,  ii.  105.

—  why  furnamed  Egerius,  ii.  1.04,  5*

—  is  made  general  of  the  Tyrrhenian
forces  in  the  Sabine  war,  .ii.  126.

Aruns  Tarquinius ,  grandfon  of  Tar¬
quinius  Prifcus,  and  younger  bro¬
ther  of  Super.bus,  marries  the
younger  Tullia,  ii.  205..

— ■  is  murdered  by  .his  wife  and  bro¬
ther,  ii.  209.

whether  he  was  the  fon  of  Prifcus,
and  buried  by  Tanaquil,  ib.

'Aruns  Tarquinius ,,  fan  of  Superbus
leads  out  a  colony  to  Circeii,  ii.  .264.

Arms  and  T.  Tarquinius,  ions  of  Su-
perbus,  are  feat  to  the  oracle  at
Delphi,  and  take  Brutus,  as  their
companion,  ii.  271.

—  was  the  mod  comely  and  robudof
all  the  fons  of  Superbus,  ii.  335,  6.

—  was  killed  by  Brutus,  whom  he
had  challenged  to  a  dngle  combat,
ii.  336,


the  TEXT;

L.  Tarquinius ,  furnamed  Prifcus,  from
what  ancedcrs  defeended,  ii.  *97.

—  changes  his  name  from  Lucumo,
but  retains  his  family  name,  from
his  country  Tarquinii,  ii.  joi.

—  Lucomo  is  a  Tyrrhenian  name,,
ii.  99.

— *  Lucumo  brings  fuccours  to  Ro¬
mulus,  i.  290.

■ —  by  what  means  Tarquinius  obtain¬
ed  the  empire,  ii.  97.

—  at  what  time  he  came  to  Rome,
ii.  154.

—  an  eagle  takes  his  cap  from  his
head,  and  places  it  on  again,  ii.
99.

—  he  is  made  general  of  the  horfe  in
the  Latin  war,  ii.  88.

—  and  in  the  Sabine  war,  ii.  89.

—  is  appointed  general  of  the  horfe

for  the  reniarkableperfonal  bravery
he  fhewed  in  the  war  again d  the
Veientes  ;  and,  among  other  ho¬
nors,  is  admitted  to  the  number  of
patrician?,  and  fenators,  ii.  91.  .

—  for  what  qualifications  he  gained

the  edeem  of  the  king,  and  the
whole  commonwealth,  ii.  10 1.  .

■ —  is  created  king  at  Rome,  ii.  97.  .

—  his  wars,  ii.  io£.

—  his  triumphs  ever  the  Latinesy
Tyrrhenians,  and  Sabines,  ii.  1  j  i.
1 1,8.  126.

—  begins  to  build  a  temple  to  Ju¬
piter,  Juno,  and.  Minerva,  ii.  2 56.

■ —  will  not  make  ufe  of  the  orna¬
ments  worne  by  the  kings,  unjefs
by  the  approbation  of  the  fenate
and  people,  ii.  121,

—  his  tranfactions  in  the  common¬
wealth,  ii.  127.

— *  is  difluaded  byNavius,  the  augur,
from  encreafing  the  number  of
tribes,  ii.  1  37.

—  is  adaflinaced  by  the  fons  of  An-
cus  Marcius,  ii.  140,  3.

.  —  his


I  N  D  E  X  to

his  funeral  and  monument,  if.
I57*

—  how  long  he  reigned,  ii.  143.

. — 1  whom  he  married,  and  at  what
*  age,  ii.  154.

—  whether  he  had  more  wives  than
'  Tanaquil,  ii.  157.

—  whether  he  left  any  children,  ii.

’  *53-

L.  Tar  quint  us  Superbus ,  whether  he
was  the  fon  of  Tarquinius  Prifcus,
ii-  153-

—  marries  the  elder  Tullia,  ii.
2°  5.

—  poifons  her,  and  marries  her
younger  lifter,  ii.  209.

—  at  what  time,  and  by  what  means
he  acquired  the  government,  ii.
22  5*

—  why  he  was  furnamed  Supeibus,
ii.  229.

—  in  what  manner  he  governed,  ii.
230.

—  by  what  ftrategem  he  obtained  the
principality  of  the  Latin  nation,
ii.  249.

j —  gains  the  alliance  of  the  neigh¬
bouring  nations,  and  inftitutes  the
Latin  leftivals,  ii.  241.

; —  his  wars,  ib.

—  his  tranfadions  at  home,  ii.
256.

. —  by  what  omens  he  was  foretold  the
iofs  of  his  empire,  ii.  265.

—  is  accufed  of  molt  grievous  crimes,
ii.  285.

. _ is  driven  both  out  of  the  city,  and

camp,  ii.  295,  6.

—  is  condemned,  with  his  children
and  relations,  to  perpetual  banilh-
ment,  ii.  293.

—  at  what  time  he  was  expelled,  ii.
156.

in  his  banilhment  he  attempts  va¬
rious  means  to  effed  his  return,  ii.

3*5-


the  TEXT.  477

—  endeavours  to  intercept  the  ho-
ftages  and  confuls,  who  were  re¬
turning  to  the  camp  of  the  Tyr¬
rhenians,  ii.  362,  3.

— 1  is  renounced  by  Porfena,  ii.  363.

—  excites  the  Latines  againft  the  Ro¬
mans,  ii.  391.  408.

—  raifes  private  commotions  in  the
city,  ii.  396.

—  whether,  in  the  Iaft  battle  with  the
Romans  at  the  lake  Regillus,  he
fought  on  horfe'oack,  iii.  17.

—  how  long  he  reigned,  i.  173.  ii.
296.

—  being  deftitute,  and  worne  out,  he
retires  from  Latium  into  Cam¬
pania,  dies  in  banifhment  at  Gu¬
ms:,  and  is  buried  by  Arifto-
demus,  iii.  35.

L.  Tarquinius  Collatinus ,  whether  he
was  the  fon  of  Egerius,  ii.  26b.

•—  returning  from  the  camp,  he  finds
his  family  in  great  diforder,  ii.
270.

—  is  chofen  conful  with  Brutus,  ii.
282.

—  abdicates  the  confulfhip,  and  re¬
tires  to  Lavinium,  ii.  332.

—  efpoufes  the  caufe  of  his  country
though  in  banilhment,  iii.  360.

M.  and  P.  Tarquinius ,  of  Laurentum,
principal  perfons  in  a  confpiracy,
being  ftung  with  remorfe,  are
prompted  to  betray  the  defign,  ii.

397-  ;

—  what  rewards  were  given  to  thele
brothers,  ii.  402,  3.

Sex.  Tarquinius ,  fon  of  Superbus,
communicates  to  his  father  an  art¬
ful  contrivance  to  reduce  the  Ga-
bini,  ii.  250.

—  is  made  king  of  Gabii  by  his  fa¬
ther,  ii.  256^.

; —  ravilhes  Lucretia,  ii.  2 6b,  7.

— ■  while  in  banilhment,  he  car¬
ries  on  a  war  againft  the  Romans
Q^q  q  2  in


478  I  N  D  E  X  to

in  behalf  of  his  father,  ii.  348.
352.

*—  is  made  general  by  the  Sabines
againft  the  Romans,  ii.  373.

• —  fends  fuccours  to  the  befieged  Fi-
denates,  ii.  404.

—  raifes  the  fiege  of  Signia,  ii.  405.

. —  is  appointed  general  of  the  Latin

forces,  with  O&avius  Mamilius,
againft  the  Romans,  ii.  409.

; —  contrives  an  expedition  with  Ma¬
milius  againft  the  city,  ii.  436.

—  commands  the  left  wing  of  theLa-
tin  army,  iii.  8.

—  is  killed,  iii.  19,  20.

T.  Tarquinius ,  fon  of  Superbus,  leads
out  a  colony  to  Signia,  ii.  264.

—  commands  the  center  of  the  Latin
army,  iii.  8.

—  is  carried  out  of  the  battle  wound¬
ed,  iii.  17.

L.  Tarquitivs,  general  of  the  horfe  un¬
der  the  di&ator  T.  Quintius  Cin-
cinnatus,  iv.  176.

T.  Tatius ,  king  of  Cures,  is  made
general  by  the  Sabines  againft  the
Romans,  i.  289.

—  after  a  peace  is  concluded  he  fet¬
tles  at  Rome,  i.  305.  12.

— _  reigns  jointly  with  Romulus  at
Rome,  i.  304.

—  in  what. part  of  the  city  he  built,

i.  312.

—  what  temples,  and  altars  he  erecfted,
ib.

—  his  death,  tomb,  and  annual  fcfti-
vals,  i.  314.

‘Taxes  ought  to  be  raifed  according  to
the  value  of  pofieftons,  ii.  161.

—  the  poor  were  exempt  from  taxes,

ii.  183.

—  Tarquinius  abolifhes  the  taxes,
that  were  paid  according  to  the
cenfus,  ii.  231..

—  the  taxes,  payable  according  to  the
cenfus,  are  again  reftored,  ii.  344.


the  TEX  T.

—  are  remitted  to  the  poor  in  war,
ii-  347-

—  are  reftored  to  the  citizens  out  of
a  great  booty,  ii.  384.

Telegonus ,  fon  of  Circe  by  Ulyfies,  ii.

.  233-

Telephus ,  father  of  Tyrrhenus,  i.  6 2.

Tellen# ,  its  fituation,  ii,  86.

Telleni ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.  409.

—  after  the  taking  of  their  town,  they
are  removed  to  Rome  by  Ancus
Marcius,  ii.  86.

—  fettle  upon  mount  Aventine,  ii.93.

Tellus ;  the  temple  of  Tellus,  iii.  414.

Temperance  recommended  by  Romu¬
lus,  i.  256.

Temple  *,  a  triple  temple,  ii.  261.

—  a  temple  common  to  the  Romans,
and  their  allies,  ii.  240.

—  a  temple  erefled  out  of  the  fpoils,

iii.  144.

—  temples,  and  their  appurtenances
are  fpared  at  the  rafing  of  cities,  ii.
62.

Tenths  of  the  produce  is  vowed  to  the
gods,  i.  55.

—  the  Pelafgi  fend  tenths  to  Delphi,,
i.  44-

■ —  the  tenths  of  the  booty  are  paid  by
Hercules’,  i.  98.

— -  the  temple  of  the  Capitoline  Ju¬
piter  is  built  with  the  tenths  of  the
fpoils,  ii.  243.

C.  Tcrentius ,  a  tribune  of  the  people,
is  the  fir  ft,  who  attempted  to  intro¬
duce  laws  into  the  commonwealth,’

iv.  132.

Terentins  ( Varro )  what  he  has  written
concerning  the  priefihcod,  infti-
tuted  by  Romulus,  i.  260.

—  what  he  has  faid  concerning  the
names  ot  the  curiae,  i.  306.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  Sibyl¬
line  books,  ii.  264.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  cities
of  the  Aborigines,  i.  35.

Terminals  a ,


INDEX  to

Terminalia ,  the  feflival  of  boundaries,
i.  362.

Terminus  will  not  be  removed,  ii.
x34»  5-

Teftrina,  its  fituation,  i.  310.

Teucris,  the  fame  which  is  now  called
Troas,  a  country  of  Phrygia,  i.
141.

Teucrus ,  king  of  Troy,  yields  his
lands  in  Troas  to  Dardanus,  i.
141.

Teut  amides,  fon  of  Amyntor,  i.  63.

©  expreflfed  by  A,  i.  152.

Thargelion ,  the  name  of  a  month,  i.

J4  3-

Thaumafms ,  a  mountain  fo  called,  i.
l39‘

Theagenides ,  annual  archon  at  Athens,
iv.  101.

Thebans  deprive  the  Lacedaemonians
of  their  empire,  i.  8.
jealous  of  their  nobility  and  pri¬
vileges,  i.  254.

—  are  themfelves  deprived  of  their
empire,  and  liberty,  i.  254.

Themis ,  and  Nemeiis,  i.  363.

—  by  the  Latines  called  Carmentis,
i.  69.

Themijtocles ,  archon  at  Athens,  iii.
52>  3’

Theology ,  the  Roman  preferred  to  that
of  the  Greeks,  i.  259.

Therkles,  archon  at  Athens,  ii.  229.

TheJ[ali,  the  n  ins  on  of  the  Theflali,
i.  238.

Thejfalonica,  the  building  of  it,  i.
1 12.

TheJJaly,  formerly  called  Haemonia,
i.  41.

Thieves,  their  punifhment,  i.  323.  ii.
390.

Tbrafybulus,  the  Milefian,  ftrikes  off
the  tailed:  ears  of  corn,  ii.  252.

Three  crops  ;  lands  bearing  three
crops,  i.  82.

Three  twins,  two  fets  of  them,  ii.  20.


the  TEX  T.

Throne  of  ivory,  ii.  120.  365.

Thunder ;  terrible  thunder  deters  the
attack  of  a  camp,  iv.  100,  1.

—  an  imitation  of  thunder  fatal,  i.

I59:

Thus,  Thufci,  Tufci.  See  Tyrrhe¬
nians.

Tiber,  its  fource,  and  mouth,  i.  24.

—  its  breadth,  depth,  courfe,  and
bridge,  iv.  123.

—  the  confluence  of  the  Tiber,  and
the  Anio,  ii.  1 12.

11 —  the  Tiber  runs  near  Fidense,  i..
320.

—  runs  there  in  eddies  and  windings,
ii.  60.

—  how  large  fhips  of  burden  it  car¬
ried,  and  how  far  it  was  navigable,,
ii.  94,  5.

—  it  received  its  name  from  Tibe-
rinus,  who  had  been  drowned  in
if,  i.  1 58.

—  its  ancient  name  was  Albula,  ib.

—  images  thrown  into  the  Tiber,  i.,
85,  6.

Tiberinus ,  king  of  Alba,  drowned
in  the  Aibub,  which  afterwards
changed  its  name,  to  that  of  the
Tiber,  i.  158.

Tibtir,  is  wafhed  by  the  Anio,  ii.  369.

Tiburtini,  a  people  cf  Latium,  ii.  409.

—  the  founders  of  theTiburtini,  i.  39.

Timaus,  an  hiftorian  of  Sicily,  not.

altogether  faithful,  i.  15.

—  his  account  of  the  figure,  and  ap¬
pearance  of  the  penatcs,  i.  15 1.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  time
when  Rome  was  built,  i.  168,  9.

Time ;  the  exadt  computation  of  time
is  often  neglected  by  the  Roman
writers,  iii.  152.

Tier  a ,  its  fituation,  i.  37.

Tifurates ,  of  Croton,  vi<5tor  at  the
Olympic  games,  ii.  439.  iii.  53.  75.

Sex.  Titus,  a  tribune-  of  the  people,,
iv.  124.


4§q  INDEX  to

Toga,  a  royal  robe,  ii.  120.

See  Manly.

T ckrinenfis ,  a  people  of  LatiUffi,  ii.
409.

Toler  ini  taken  by  Marcius,  iii.  306,  7.
Torebi ,  a  people  of  Maeonia,  fo  called
from  Tortbus,  fon  of  Atys,  i.

Tbrtoifes,  or  towers,  to  fill  up  ditches,
iv..  123.

Torture  -,  confeflion  expreffed  by  tor¬
ture,  ii.  143.

Tcrymbas ,  a  ThefTalian,  vidtor  at  the
Olympic  games,  iv.  130.

Trabea ,  the  name  of  a  robe,  mGswat
(potvwcTragvcQcif  iii.  22.

— -  what  kind  of  a  robe,  ib.

Trades-,  foreigners  exercifed  the  fe-
dentary  and  mechanic  trades,  i.
275.  iv.  48.

Traitors ,  their  punifhment,  ii.  71.
Treachery ,  a  moft  unpardonable  crime
among  the  Romans,  iii.  415.

- —  the  punifhment  of  a  treacherous
general,  ii.  71.

Treafury  -,  the  public  treafury,  iii.  403.

—  part  of  the  booty  was  brought  in¬
to  the  treafury,  and  part  adjudged
to  the  foldiers,  iv.  171.

the  booty  is  fold  by  the  quaeftors,
and  the  produce  brought  into  the
treafury,  iii.  251.

■—  money  is  brought  into  the  treafury
of  Juno  Lucina,  for  every  one  who
is  born,  ii.  174.

money  is  brought  into  the  treafury
of  Venus  Libitina,  for  every  one
who  dies,  ii.  174.

Treaties ,  and  compacts  in  what  man¬
ner  ratified,  i.  136.

—  the  infringers  of  treaties  were  held
abominable,  iii.  214.

—  a  treaty  between  the  Greeks  and
fugitive  Trojans,  i.  105.

—  between  the  Trojan  Grangers,  and
Latinus,  i.  136.


the  TEXT.

— 1 -  between  the  Sabines,  and  the  K.0*
mans,  i.  304.

— -  the  form  of  a  treaty  renewed  with
the  Latines,  iii.  144,  5.

—  articles  of  a  treaty  inlcribed  on  a>
fhield,  ii.  255,  6.

—  a  treaty  engraven  on  pillars,  ii.
240.

—  a  treaty  cut  on  a  pillar,  eredted  in
the  temple  of  Diana,  ii.  200.

—  infringers  of  a  treaty  delivered  up
to  the  party  injured,  i-  357-

Trebula,  its  fituation,  i.  36.

Trial-,  an  accufed  perfon,  upon  giv¬
ing  bail,  was  difeharged  till  the  day
of  trial,  iv.  143.

— -  the  law  forbids  to  put  a  citizen  to
death  without  trial,  ii.  46.

—  capital  crimes  were  tried  by  the
people,  ii.  47.

—  the  confuls  are  cited  to  a  trial  be¬
fore  the  people,  for  having  neg-
ledted  to  put  the  decrees  into  exe¬
cution  concerning  the  Agrarian
law,  iv.  70.

—  the  law  concerning  the  popular
trials,  which  had  been  brought  in
by  Valerius,  is  explained  by  Ap-
pius,  iii.  229.

Triarii ,  what  fort  of  foldiers,  and
when  ufed,  ii.  337.  iii.  424.

—  are  left  to  guard  the  camp,  ib.

Tribes ,  (pv\ctt  mu  were  the

greater  divifions  of  the  city,  namely,
the  third,  i.  233,

—  were  each  divided  into  ten  curiae,
ib.

—  Tarquinius  is  forbidden  to  encreafe
the  number  of  the  tribes,  ii.  137.

*—  Tullius  conflitutes  four  local,  in-
flead  of  four  national  tribes  at
Rome,  ii.  1 69.

—  Tullius  made  fix  and  twenty  ruftic
tribes,  and  four  city  tribes,  ii.  171.

—  two  and  twenty  tribes,  iii.  254.

7—  the  tribes  give  their  votes  con¬
cerning


INDEX  to

cerning  thofe  things,  that  were  re¬
ferred  to  the  people,  iv.  273.

—  the  people  were  alfembled  in  their
tribes,  for  the  firft  time,  to  give
their  votes  at  the  trial  of  Coriola-
nus,  iii.  243,  4.

— -  ballot  boxes  for  voting  were  placed
in  every  tribe,  iv.  363.

—  a  third  urn  for  the  Romans,  ib.

—  Suburrana,  the  name  of  a  tribe,
ii.  169.

— v  the  commanders  of  each  tribe,  ii.
170.

'Tribunal  of  the  generals,  iii.  353.

—  the  conful  decides  all  controversies
from  his  tribunal,  iv.  165.

—  the  tribunal  of  Romulus,  i.  277.

—  a  tribunal  in  the  forum,  iv.  207.

—  Marcius  orders  his  chair  to  be

brought  down  from  the  tribunal,
and  placed  on  the  ground  at  the  ap¬
proach  of  his  mother,  iii.  353.  .

\ Tribunes ,  who  were  the  firft  five
tribunes,  iii.  134.

■ —  were  heads,  or  mafters  of  the  tribes,
i.  234.

—  the  tribunes  of  the  celeres,  and
their  fun&ions,  i.  247.  340.

—  twenty  tribunes  of  the  foidiers  are
at  the  head  of  the  feceders  on  mount
Aventine,  iv.  320.

— ■  confular  tribunes  appointed  in  the
room  of  confuls,  iv.  375.

—  the  confular  tribunes  abdicate,  ib.

— •  the  perfons  of  the  tribunes  of  the

people  were  held  facred,  and  in¬
violable  by  law,  iii.  136,  7.
a  law  foi  bidding  a  patrician  to  in-
terpofe,  or  to  interrupt  a  tribune,
while  he  was  Speaking  to  the  peo-

*  pie,  iii.  *79.

• —  none,  but  a  tribune,  could  oppofe
a  tribune,  iv.  190.

—  the  tribunes  alone  could  legally  op¬
pofe  the  orders  of  the  magiftrates,
iv.  252.


the  TEX  T.  481

—  could  oppofe  the  confuls,  iv.  365.

—  could  not  pafs  a  night  without  the
walls,  unlefs  in  the  Latin  feftivals,
iii.  428.

—  had  no  authority  without  the  city,
ib.

—  expoftulate  with  the  fenate,  con¬
cerning  the  dearnefs  of  provifions,
and  their  having  fent  out  colo¬
nies  into  peftilential  places,  iii.

l73>4-

—  claim  a  right  over  the  affemblies
of  the  people,  iii.  176.

.« —  claim  to  themfelves,  whatever  ufed
to  be  judged,  or  determined  by  the
people,  ib.

—  expotlulate  with  the  confuls,  iii.
J79-

—  are  called  into  the  fenate,  iiu  *
1 90.

—  having  been  called  into  the  fenate

■  by  the  confuls,  they  greatly  inveigh

againft  Marcius,  iii.  19 1.

—  are  hindered  by  the  patricians  from
arrefting  Marcius,  iii.  191,  2.

—  heavily  accufe  the  patricians  be¬
fore  the  people,  iii.  392.

—  are  reproved  by  a  conful,  iii.  196,

7-

—  demand  of  the  fenate  that  the  con¬
fuls  might  go  to  the  affembly  of  the
people,  and  give  an  account  of  their
conduct,  iv.  194.

—  are  admitted  into  the  fenate,  to
the  great  disadvantage  of  the  com¬
monwealth,  according  to  Appius,
iii.  224.

—  acquire  to  themfelves  the  power  of
impeaching  any  of  the  patricians,
iii.  241.

— -  hold  the  tributacomitia,  inftead  of
the  centuriata,  at  the  trial  of  Mar¬
cius,  iii.  244.

—  begin  to  cite  any  of  the  citizens  te¬
at  ri.al  before  the  people,  iii.  256,  7.

•  together  with  the  lenate,  they  op-

pole


482  I  N  D  E  X  to

pofe  Caffius  in  the  Agrarian  law,

iii.  397,  8.

' —  are  acculed  of  treachery  by  the
poorer  fort,  iii.  427.

—  while  they  endeavoured  to  hin¬
der  the  levying  of  forces,  they  are
prevented  by  the  confuls,  iii.
428.

—  hinder  the  comitia  by  virtue  of
their  power,  iii.  434.

—  excite  the  people  againft  the  pa¬
tricians,  on  account  of  the  dear-
nefs  of  ptovifions,  iv.  48.

—  call  the  confuls  to  a  trial  before
the  people,  for  their  ill  fuccefs  in
their  confulfhip,  iv.  52,  4.

—  Aulus  Virginius,  and  his  collegues
continue  another  year  in  their  ma¬
gistracy,  iv.  143.

—  order  a  conful  to  prifon,  iv.  87.

—  difpute  with  a  conful,  iv.  88.

—  again  prefs  the  Agrarian  law,  iv.

92.

; —  urge  the  introdu&ion  of  laws,  iv.

l35-

; —  are  admitted  into  the  fenate  to
confult  for  the  fafety  of  the  com¬
monwealth,  iv.  134.

—  drive  Caefo  Quintius,  fon  of  Cin-
cinnatus,  out  of  the  city  upon  a
falfe  accufation,  iv.  143.

gain  nothing  by  his  expulfion,
ib.

—  contrive  an  impofture,  concerning
a  confpiracy,  by  having  feigned
letters  delivered  to  them,  iv.  144.

—  demand  a  power  to  inquire  into
that  confpiracy,  iv.  148.

—  continue  for  the  third  year  in  their
magiftracy,  iv.  166.

— -  for  the  fourth  year,  iv.  171.

— ■  in  the  fifth  year  of  their  magiftracy,
they  hinder  the  levies  from  being
made,  till  a  decree  of  the  fenate
fhould  pafs,  concerning  the  laws,

iv.  180.


the  TEX  T.

—  attempt  even  to  afiemble  the  fe¬
nate,  though  that  power  belong¬
ed  to  the  confuls  alone,  iv.  188,

9*

—  are  refolved  to  a£t  in  concert,  iv.
190.

—  at  the  interceftion  of  the  moft  an¬
cient  fenators,  they  remit  the  pu-
nifhment  of  a  lidtor,  ib.

—  L.  Icilius,  and  his  collegues,  con¬
tinue  tribunes  for  the  fecond  time,
iv.  192.

—  again  raife  inteftine  commotions,
ib.

—  ftir  up  the  people  againft  the  fe¬
nate,  iv.  194.

—  complain  of  the  confuls  before  the
fenate,  ib.

—  by  what  contrivance  they  were
hindered  from  bringing  in  the
Agrarian  law,  iv.  208.

—  again  are  hindered,  iv.  2 1 1.

• —  four  tribunes  die  of  the  plague,  iv.

231.

—  purfuant  to  a  decree  of  the  fenate,
they  demand  of  the  confuls  fome
perfons  to  compile  the  laws,  iv.

232.

' —  are  abrogated  by  the  inftitution  of
the  decemvirs,  iv.  235,  6.

— .  again  excite  the  people  againft  the
patricians,  iv.  340.

—  accufe  the  decemvirs  before  the
people,  iv.  341.

—  bring  in  a  law  concerning  the
right  of  the  confulfhip,  iv.  364.

—  being  driven  out  of  the  city,  they
retire  to  C^far  in  Gallia,  and  by
his  means  are  reftored  to  their
power,  iii.  428,  9.

: —  all  endeavours  fhould  be  ufed  that
the  tribunes  fhould  be  worthy  men,

iii.  259.

—  Appius  very  artfully  advifes  to
fow  diffenfion  among  the  tribunes,

iv.  43-


—  Cin-


INDEX  to

•—  Cincirinatus  affirms  that  the  num¬
ber  of  tribunes  may  be  doubled,
without  any  detriment  to  the  com¬
monwealth,  iv.  1 86.

—  Appius  advifes  the  confuls  to  gain
fome  of  the  tribunes,  iv.  3.

—  they  are  accordingly  doubled,  iv.
188.

- —  the  boldnefs  of  the  tribunes  is
greatly  cenfured  by  Appius, iii.  227.

—  the  tribunes  accufe  Appius  in  an
affembly  of  the  people,  iv.  99.

—  ten  tribunes  cieated  on  mount
Aventine,  iv.  328.

thofe,  who  were  formerly  called
the  minifters,  collegues  and  judges
belonging  to  the  tribunes,  were  af¬
terwards  called,  aediles,  iii.  137.

— -  if  any  of  the  officers  of  the  tribunes
were  infulted,  the  inful t  was  looked
upon  as  done  to  the  tribunes  them-
felves,  iii.  202.

—  the  tdbunefhip  was  accounted  ho¬
ly,  iii.  430,  1.

—  not  ralhly  to  be  conferred  on  any
perl'on,  iii.  259.

—  is  greatly  cenfured  by  Ap.  Clau¬
dius,  iv.  81,  3.

—  is  defended  by  Lsedorius  againft
Ap.  Claudius,  iv.  84,  5.

■ —  the  facred  law  concerning  the  right
of  the  tribunitian  power,  iii.  136.
iv.  19 1.

—  a  law  to  puniffi  thofe  with  death
or  banifhment,  who  infulted  the
tribunes,  iv.  196.

—  the  mildeft  punifhment  for  vio¬
lating  the  tribunitian  power,  iv. 2 10.

* —  Sylla  reduces  the  tribunitian  power
within  very  narrow  l.mits,  ii.  438.

—  ten  tribunes  are  granted  to  the
people  by  the  fenate,  iv.  188.

—  originally  five,  iii.  132,  5.

T ributa.  See  Camilla,  T ribes.

tribute ;  the  payment  of  a  tribute  is

appointed  by  Servius  Tyillius  ac-

Vol.  IV.


the  TEX  T.  483

cording  to  the  value  of  pofieffions,
ii.  161 .  18  1.

Tricojius.  See  Virginias.

! Tricrinenfes ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

Trigemina,  the  name  of  a  gate,  i.  89.

Trigon,  an  Arcadian  inftrument  of
mufic,  i.  75.

T rinacria ,  the  name  of  an  ifland,  from
its  triangular  form  •,  afterwards  cal¬
led  Sicania,  and  laftly  Sicilia,  i.  51.

Triopian  Apollo ,  his  temple,  ii.  198.

Tripod  infcribed  with  ancient  cha¬
racters,  i.  45.

Triptolemus  learns  agriculture  from
Ceres,  i.  31,  2.

Triumph ,  t7rivix.iog  koci  t^o-

7 raioPocag  ■uycfjnrv.,  1.  283.

—  two  forts  of  triumphs,  and  the
difference  between  them,  ii.  384.

—  in  what  manner  the  greater  tri¬
umph  was  performed,  and  in  what
manner  the  lefier,  iii.  391.

—  the  general  of  the  enemy  (Gracchus
Cloelius)  and  other  men  of  dif-
tindion,  are  led  in  chains  in  the  tri¬
umph  of  Q^Cincinnatus,  iv.  178.

—  the  memorable  triumph  of  Lucius
Caecilius,  called  Metellus,  i.  344.

—  fatyric,  and  jocofe  dances  per¬
mitted  in  a  triumph,  iii.  274.

—  vows,  and  part  of  the  fpoils  are
paid  to  Capitoline  Jupiter  in  a  tri¬
umph,  iii.  48.

—  after  a  triumph,  an  account  of  the
generai’seondud  wasgiven,iii.  395.

—  the  triumphs  of  Romulus,  i.  283.
318.  321.

—  a  kingly  triumph  is  decreed  by  the
fenate  to  Valerius  Poplicola,  the
conful,  after  his  conquering  the
Tyrrhenians,  ii.  338.

—  a  triumph  is  reiufed  after  a  fatal
victory,  iv.  31.

—  lidors  crowned  in  a  triumph,  iii. 48.

—  a  triumph  is  declined  by  M.  Fa-

R  r  r  bius,


484  I  N  D  E  X  to  the  TEX  T.


bills,  after  the  lofs  of  his  brother,
and  his  coilegue,  iv.  24.

~  a  triumph  is  performed  by  fome,
even  indomeftic  grief,  ii.  46.

—  is  ambitioufly  demanded  by  Caf-
fius,  iii,  394.

—  is  refufed  to  /Emilius,  on  account
of  his  arrogance  in  making  a  peace,

iv*  34-

—  Ser vilius  triumphs  without  the
confent  of  the  ienate,  iii.  48.

'■ —  granted  by  the  people  to  L.  Va¬
lerius  Potitus,  and  M.  Horatius
Barbatus,  iv.  346.

*—  the  triumphs  of  the  modern  Ro¬
mans,  i.  285.

*—  the  decorations  of  a  triumph,  ii.
1 2 1 ,  2.

in  what  the  ovation  differed  from
the  greater  triumph,  ii.  385.  iii.

3 91-  r  ,

; —  what  were  the  ornaments  of  the
perfon,  who  triumphed  in  the
ovarion,  ib.

‘ —  the  ovation  was  a  triumph  on  foot,

H.  3%-

5 Triumvirs  appointed  to  divide  the
lands  conquered  from  the  Antiates,
iv.  108.

I fm,  fon  of  Erichthonius,  and  Ca!-
lirhoe,  i.  142.

Troy,  in  what  manner  taken  by  the
Greeks,  i.  102.

—  Troy  in  Italy,  i.  123.

—  Troy,  when  taken,  was  preferved
by  iEneas  from  utter  deftrudfion,
i.  125,  6.

—  the  Trojans,  a  nation  truly  Greek,
i.  139.

—  1  roy  was  taken  at  the  end  of  the
fpring,  bvrnteen  days  before  the
fummer  f.lftice,  i.  143.

—  Minerva  the  tutelary  goddefs  of
Troy,  iii.  103.

Tubero ,  an  hiftorian,  i.  187.

T ubertus  Titus  is  appointed  one  of  the


deputies  fent  to  the  feceders,  iii.
104.

Tucia,  the  veftal,  being  falfely  accufed
of  incontinence,  efcapes  her  pu-
nifhment  by  performing  a  pro¬
digy*  i-  350-

Tullia ,  the  youngeft  daughter  of  Serv.
Tullius,  ii.  205.

—  marries  Aruns  Tarquinius,  ib.

—  fends  for  Lucius  Tarquinius,  and
communicates  her  defign  to  him,
ii.  206.

—  murders  her  hufband  Aruns,  and
marries  Lucius,  ii.  209,  10.

—  orders  her  chariot  to  be  driven
over  her  father’s  body,  ii.  225.

Servius  Tullius ,  in  the  Sabine  war  is
appointed  general  of  the  Latin
auxiliaries  by  Tarquinius  Prifcus,
ii.  126.

—  fucceeds  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  ii.

144*

• —  an  account  of  his  family  and  birth,,
ii.  145.

—  his  memorable  adtions,  ii.  147.

—  receives  the  rewards  of  bravery,
ib.

■ —  is  made  a  patrician,  ii.  148.

—  marries  one  of  the  daughters  of
Tarquinius,  ib.

—  the  methods,  by  which  he  efbablifh-
ed  himfelf  in  the  government,  ii.
162,  3.

—  is  chofen  king  by  the  curiae,  ii.

1 67 —  226.

■—  his  civil  inftitutions,  ii.  167.

■ —  chofe  the  Efquiline  hill  for  his  ha¬
bitation,  ii.  168.

—  by  what  means  he  difeovered  the
number  of  men,  women,  and  chil¬
dren  in  the  city,  ii.  174.

—  in  what  manner  he  divided  the
city,  ii.  175.

—  diminifhes  the  royal  power,  ii.  195;

■ —  his  military  actions,  ii.  201.

—  is  tt  eacheroufly  flain  by  Tarqui¬

nius,


INDEX  to

nius,  his  fon-in-law,  and  by  his
own  daughter,  ii.  204—  225.

—  his  burial,  ii.  227.

Tullus.  See  Attius ,  and  Hoftilius.
Tullus  Tyr annus ,  a  Sabine,  i.  305.
Turnus.  See  Herdonius.

Turnus  joins  the  Rutuli,  and  makes
war  upon. VEneas,  i.  145.

■ —  is  fiain,  ib.

Tufcnlani ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.

409.

Twins  •,  two  fiders  bring  forth  each
three  twin  fons,  ii.  29.

—  the  combat  between  them,  ii.  36.
Tyranny  is  edablifhed  on  thepromile

of  a  popular  government,  iii.  162.

—  Caffius  accufed  of  aiming  at  ty¬
ranny,  iii.  408.

■ —  Tarquinius  expelled  for  his  ty¬
ranny,  ii.  2 95,  6.

Tyrrhenia  abounds  in  vineyards,  i.

83-

—  moil  drong  both  by  fea  and  land,
iii.  1 14.

—  didridt  of  Tyrrhenia,  or  twelve
cities,  ib.

—  the  mod  grand  cities  of  Tyrrhe¬
nia  were  Veil,  and  Tarquinii,  iii.
1 1  2.

Tyrrhenians ,  mod  fumptuous  and  de¬
licate  both  at  home  and  in  the  field,

iVt  33’  .  '

• —  promife  to  aid  the  Latines  agamd

the  Romans,  ii.  107.

—  afiid  the  Sabines  againd  the  Ro¬
mans,  ii  112.

—  are  Conquered  by  Tarquinius
Pnfcus,  ii.  1 13.

—  ate  fubdued  by  Servius  Tullius,
ii.  202,  3.

i —  are  beaten  at  Aricia,  and  treated
mod  humanely  by  the  Romans,  ii.

367-

—  refufe  to  add  either  the  Latines,
or  the  Romans  in  the  Latin  war,
ii.  41 1.


the  TEXT.  485

—  order  fuccours  in  their  public  co¬
rn  itia  to  be  fent  to  the  Veientes
againd  the  Romans,  iv.  2.

• —  abandon  their  camp,  iv.  23.

—  accufe  the  Veientes  for  making  a
peace  with  the  Romans,  iv.  35.

• —  make  themfelves  maders  of  fort
Cremera,  iv.  41.

—  feize  the  Janiculum,  iv.  46.

—  abandon  the  Janiculum  after  a  de¬
feat,  and  retire  to  Veii,  iv.  51.

- —  what  enfigns  of  royalty  the  Tyr¬
rhenian  kings  made  ufe  of,  ii.  120.

—  Veii  was  the  frontier  town  of  the
Tyrrhenians  towards  Rome,  iv.

5 1  •

—  being  beaten  out  of  the  Ionian
gulph  by  the  Gauls,  they  invade
Cumae,  iii.  154,  5.

—  are  received  into  the  city,  i.  206.

—  the  Tyrrhenian  flreet  Vic  us  Tujcus
at  Rome,  ii.  367.

• — -  the  Tyrrhenians  and  Pelafgi  are
thought  by  fome  to  be  the  fame
people,  i.  58.

—  the  Pelafgi  are  called  Tyrrhe¬
nians  by  Myrfilus,  the  Leflbian,  i.

55>

—  at  what  time,  and  in  what  country
the  Pelafgi  began  to  be  called  Tyr¬
rhenians,  i.  63.

—  they  were  not  one  and  the  fame
nation,  i.  64.  67.

—  from  whence  the  Tyrrhenians  de¬
rived  their  name,  i.  60.  67.

—  by  the  Greeks,  the  Latini,  Um-
bri,  Aufones,  and  other  people  of
Italy  were  called  Tyrrhenians,  i.  65.

—  by  the  Romans  they  were  called
Tufci,  Thyfcoi,  and  Etrufci;  in
their  own  language  Razenui,  i.
67,  8.

—  the  Tyrrhenian  augurs  were  the
mod  fkilled  in  meteors,  iv.  10.

— -  the  Tyrrhenian  bay,  formerly
called  the  Aufonian  gulph,  i.  31.

R  r  r  2  Tyrrhenus ,


4S6  INDEX  to

lyrrheuus,  Ton  of  Atys,  i.  6 o,  i.

V.

V,  or  F ,  the  JEolic  di  gamma,  was
formerly  placed  before  words  be¬
ginning  with  a  vowel,  i.  4 6.

Valeria ,  filter  to  Poplicola,  gives  good
advice  to  the  ladies,  and  to  the
whole  commonwealth,  during  the
danger  of  the  fiege  under  Marcius,
iii- 343*4-

—  her  fpeech  to  Veturia,  mother  of
Marcius,  iii.  344.

—  is  appointed  prieftefs  of  Fortuna
Muliebris,  iii.  370.

Valerian  family  always  at  the  head  of
the  plebeian  party,  iv.  371.

— .  magistrates  of  the  Valerian  family
were  moft  acceptable  to  the  people,
iii.  60.

—  the  fepulchral  monument  of  the
Valerian  family,  ii.  388.

■ — ■  Appius  afferts  that  the  Valerii  were
always  flatterers  of  the  people,  and
authors  of  deftrudtive  laws,  iii.
65.

Valerian  law  granted  an  appeal  to  the
people,  ii.  424.  iii.  210,  11.
two  branches  of  it,  ii.  344.

—  is  examined  by  Claudius,  iii.  229.

—  is  weakened  by  the  power  of  the
didatorlhip,  iii.  87.

L.  Valerius ,  Nephew  to  Poplicola,
duiing  his  quteftorfhip,  accufes
SpuriusCaffius  of  aiming  at  tyran-
.  ny,  iii.  408.

—  is  made  conful,  iii.  426.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  92..

—  endeavours  to  apply  a  remedy
againfl:  the  difpleafure  of  the  peo¬
ple,  who  were  incenfed  againfl  him
on  account  of  Caflius,  iv.  92.

—  carries  on  the  war  againfl;  the
fEqui,  iv.  too.

—  fubdues  them,  iv.  10 1.

£.  Valerius  Pot  it  as ,  grandfon  of  Po-


the  TEX  T.

plicola,  is  hindered  by  Appius
from  giving  his  opinion,  iv.  254.

-v-  his  opinion  concerning  a  war  with
the  Sabines  and  Volfci,  which  had
been  propofed  by  the  decemvirs,
iv.  276.

—  propofes  with  Horatius  in  the  fe-
nate  an  abolition  of  the  decem-
virate,  iv.  281,  2.

—  is  head  of  the  conflitutional  par*
ty  with  Marcus  Horatius,  -iv.  282.

—  with  Horatius,  he  oppofes  Ap¬
pius,  iv.  310.

—  is  created  conful  with  Horatius,
IV-  339 •

—  leads  out  an  army  againfl:  the  iE-
qui,  and  Volfci,  iv.  342.

—  is  denied  a  triumph  over  them,  iv.
344--

- —  however  he  triumphs  with  his  col-
Jegue  Horatius,  without  the  con-
fenc  of  the  fenate,  iv.  346.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  de¬
mands  of  the  tribunes,  iv.  371.

L.  Valerius  Poiitus,  and  T.  Manlius
Capitolinus,  conftils,  i.  173.

Manius  Valerius ,,  brother  of  Popli¬
cola,  is  appointed  dictator,  iii.  59,
60.

—  exhorts  the  people  to  lhare  in  an.
expedition,  iii.  60.

— -  triumphs  over  the  Sabines,  iii.
65..

—  fends  a  colony  into  the  countries
taken  from  the  Volfci,  ib.

—  is  put  off  with  evafive  promifes  by
the  fenate,  ib.

• —  complains  to  the  people  of  the  in¬
juries  offered  to' him  by  the  fenate,
iii.  66.

—  his  opinion .  concerning  the  return
of  the  people,  iii.  Sb.

—  is  appointed  one  of  the  deputies
fent  to  the  feceders,  iii.  104.

—  his  fpeech  to  the  feceders,  iii.
106.


INDEX  to

*—  is  appointed  to  lay  the  demands  of
the  people  before  the  fenate,  iii.133.

—  during  the  trial  of  Marcius,  what
advice  he  gave  to  the  fenate,  and
to  Marcius  himfelf,  iii.  233.

—  his  fpeech  to  the  fenate  concern¬
ing  their  delivering  a  patrician  to
be  tried  by  the  people,  iii.  236.

Marcus  Valerius ,  brother  of  Popli-
cola,  is  made  one  of  the  Roman
generals,  ii.  348.

—  is  wounded,  and  carried  out  of  the
battle,  ib.

—  is  made  conful  with  P.  Pofhi-
mius,  ii.  368.

—  triumphs  with  P.  Poftumius  over
the  Sabines,  and  is  honored  with  a
magnificent  houfe  by  the  fenate,  ii.

372*

— -  is  fent  as  legate  to  the  Latin  cities,
and  demands  fatisfadtion  concern¬
ing  robberies,  ii.  390.

i—  replies  in  behalf  of  the  Romans,
ii.  392.

—  is  made  legate,  and  fucceeds  iEbu-
tius,  who  had  been  wounded,  iii.  1 8.

is  killed  himfelf,  ib.

Marcus  Valerius ,  fun  of  Poplicola,  per-
fuades  an  abolition  of  debts,  ii.  413.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  fedition
of  the  poorer  fort,  iii.  37.

Marcus  Valerius,  conful,  iv.  188.

Publius  Valerius  Poplhola ,  of  Sabine
extraction,  is  one  of  the  alfertors  of
Roman  liberty,  ii.  269.
apprehends  the  accomplices  cf  a.
confpirary,  ii.  322.

«—  Brutus  appoints  him  for  his  col-
legue,  in  the  room  of  Collatinus,.
ii-  332'

—  triumphs  over  the  Tyrrhenians,
if  338-  .

—  buries  his  collegue  Brutus,  ii.  339.

—  by  what  means  he  removed  the
fufpicion  of  his  aiming  at  fove-
reignty,  ii.  343.


the  TEXT.  48  7

—  removes  the  invidious  enfigns  of
the  regal  power  from  the  conful-
ftnp,  ii.  344.

—  from  whence  he  acquired  the  name
of  Poplicola,  ii.  344.

— -  is  lecond  time  conful,  ib.

—  is  third  time  conful,  ii.  345.

—  fends  his  daughter  a  hoftage  to
the  Tyrrhenians,  ii.  361.

—  is  fourth  time  conful,  ii  372.

—  triumphs  with  his  coliegue  T.
Lucretius  over  the  Sabines,  ii.  3 78.

—•  his  death,  virtues,  and  adtions,
his  frugality,  and  remarkable  tem¬
perance,  his  funeral,  monument,
and  the  public  mourning  made  for
him,  ii.  386 — 8.

P.  and  M.  Valerius ,  fons  of  Popli¬
cola,  protect  their  uncle  with  their
fhields,  iii.  18.

—  are  (lain,  iii.  19.

P.  Valerius ,  fon  of  Poplicola,  is  fent
with  L.  Geganius  to  Sicily,  to  buy
corn,  iii.  149,  50.

—  returns,  iii.  153.  .

—  is  made  conful,  iv.  54.

—  leads  an  army  into  Tyrrhenia,  iv.
64.

—  triumphs  over  the  Sabines,  and
Tyrrhenians,  iv.  67.

—  his  opinion  concerning  the  dif¬
ference  between  the  tribunes,  and
one  of  the  confuls,  iv.  89.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  144.

—  the  advice,  by  which  he  both  re¬
conciled  his  collegue,  and  prevailed
upon  the  people  to  take  up  arms, ,
iv.  1 58.

—  is  killed  by  the  fall  of  a  very  large
Lone,  iv.  161.

—  is  the  father  of  L.  Valerius  Potitus,

iv.  954.

Volufus  Valerius ,  a  Sabine  of  dif-
tinction,  i.  305.

Valuation  of  pofleffions  delivered  to
Seryius  Tullius,  ii.  174,  5.

Varro,.


48 8  INDEX  to  the  T  E  X  T.


Varro.  See  'Terentius.

Vatici)  or  Batia,  its  fituation,  i.  37.

Sp.  Vecilius ,  of  Lavinium,  one  of  the
Latin  generals,  ii.  79.

Veientes  j  upon  what  terms  they  ob¬
tain  a  peace  from  Romulus,  i.  321.

—  confpire  with  the  Fidenates  againft
the  Romans,  ii.  10.

—  their  camp  is  taken  by  Hoftilius,
ii.  60.

- —  are  conquered  by  AncusMarcius,
ii.  90.

—  are  again  conquered  by  him,  ii.
91*

—  are  fubdued  by  Tarquinius,  ii.
1 15.

' —  are  overcome  by  Serv.  Tullius,  ii.
201,  2.

■ —  endeavour  to  reftore  the  banifhed
Tarquinii,  ii.  334.

—  are  beaten  by  the  Romans,  ii.  337,

8.

- —  obtain  a  truce  from  Cornelius,  iii.
417.

—  are  retrained  by  arms  on  account
of  the  incurfions  into  the  Roman
territories,  iii.  437.

; —  obtain  auxiliaries  from  the  Tyr¬
rhenians  their  relations,  againft  the
Romans,  iv.  2.

• —  fall  upon  the  Romans,  while  they
were  plundering,  iv.  25.

■ —  make  an  excurfion  as  far  as  the
Tiber,  iv.  27.

• —  obtain  fuccours  from  the  Tyrrhe¬
nians  againft  the  Romans,  iv.  30,

1.

* —  rely  upon  the  affiftance  of  the  Tyr¬
rhenians  and  Sabines,  and  again
take  up  arms  againft  the  Romans,
iv.  64.

—  obtain  a  truce  from  the  Romans
for  forty  years,  iv.  68,  9.

—  prepare  for  a  revolt,  iv.  365.
feiiy  a  fortified  town,  belonging  to  the

T>rrhenians,  i.  318,  19.


—  is  the  barrier  of  Tyrrhenia  to¬
wards  Rome,  iv.  31.

—  is  the  neareft  of  the  Tyrrhenian
cities  towards  Rome,  iv.  51.

—  the  fituation,  and  extent  of  Veii,
i.  318,  19.

Velia,  a  ftreet  at  Rome,  i.  151.

* —  the  Velian  hill,  ii.  343.

Veliterni ,  a  people  of  Latium,  ii.
409.

—  revolt  from  the  Romans,  ib.

—  Tullus  Attius  is  polled  in  the
territories  of  the  Veliterni,  iii.
387.

VeHtr^i  its  fituation,  ii.  91.

■ —  furrenders  to  Ancus  Marcius,  ii.

9  2i

—  is  taken  by  AuIus-'Virginius,  the
conful,  iii.  64.

—  is  almoft  depopulated  by  a  plague,
and  fends  to  Rome  for  a  colony,
iii.  1 7 1 .

Venus ,  her  temple  at  Pallene,  i.  j  12.

—  at  Zacynthus,  i.  114.

—  and  at  Leucas,  ib.

—  her  temple  among  the  Leucadians*
i.  115.

—  among  the  Adlienfes,  ib.

—  and  in  Ambracia,  ib.

—  her  temple  at  the  haven  of  An-
chifes,  i.  116.

—  the  haven  of  Venus,  i.  118.

—  her  altar,  on  the  fummit  of  mount
Eryx,  i.  122.

—  the  trcafury  of  Venus  Libitina,  iL
174.

V.  Verginius ,  conful,  iv.  348.

Verfes^  called  by  the  Greeks  nJa/,  i.
69.

—  extemporary  verfes  made  in  tri¬
umphs,  i.  284.  iii.  274.

Vefbcla ,  its  fituation,  i.  36.

Vefl  of  hair,  iii.  274.

Vejia,  orTellus,  i.  343.

—  the  prefent  help  (he  afforded  to
thofe  of  her  virgins,  who  were

brought


INDEX  to

brought  into  danger,  without
foundation,  i.  349,  50.

—  the  perpetual  fire  of  Vefta,  i  343.

—  to  whom  the  ntes  of  Vefta  were
known,  i.  345.

—  the  prieftefles  of  Vefta  were  chofen
out  of  the  nobleft  families,  i.  17 6.

—  her  temple,  i.  341.

—  by  whom  built,  ib.

—  where  fituated,  i.  342.

• —  what  rites  were  performed  in  her
temple,  and  why  by  virgins,  i.  343.

—  it  was  not  lawful  for  any  man  to
pafs  a  night  in  her  te  nple,  i  345, 6.

—  a  fountain  near  her  temple,  iii.  20.

Vejial  virgins ,  Fswa&jsrfl^Gsvo/,  by  whom

they  were  firft  inftitured,  i.  341.

—  how  many  were  at  firft  appointed
by  Numa,  and  how  many  by  the
fubfequent  kings,  i.  34.5.

—  two  were  added  to  the  former  four
by  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  ii.  128.

' —  what  images  they  were  entrufted
with,  i.  156.

—  for  how  long  time  they  made  their
vow,  i.  176.  346.

—  when  the  full  time  of  obferving
their  vow  was  complete,  they  might
marry,  i.  346.

—  TEmilia  and  Tucia  being  falfely
accufed,  the  manner  in  which  they
proved  their  innocence,  i.  349,  50.

—  they  wore  fillets,  iii.  433.

—  their  fundions,  i.  175.

number,  i.  345.
honors,  i.  345.

—  their  punifhment  when  feduced,  i.
180.  347.

—  by  whom  their  punifhment  was
appointed,  i.  347.  ii.  128.

—  a  veftal,  convided  of  incontinence,
undergoes  that  punifhment,iv.74,5.

—  the  incontinence  of  a  veftal  virgin
being  difcovered  by  various  pro¬
digies,  fhe  is  lentenced  by  the  pon-
tifs,  hi.  433.


the  TEXT.  489

• —  the  feducers  of  veftal  virgins  are
whipped  in  public,  and  put  to
death,  -ii.  434.

—  Pinaria,  daughter  of  Publius,  is
feduced  in  her  veftal  priefthood,  ii.
128.

—  Opimia,the  veftal,  is  punifhed  for
her  incontinence,  iii.  433.

—  fo  1  kewife  is  Urbinia,  iv.  75.

Veteran  foldiers,  or  Triarii,  what  fort

ol  foldiers  they  were,  iii.  424.

—  are  left  to  guard  the  camp,  iv.  1 1 3.

Vetulonienfes ,  a  people  of  Tyrrhenia,

.  ii.  107.

Vetur'ra ,  the  mother  of  Marcius  Corio-
lanus,  the  anfwer  floe  returned  to
the  fpeech  of  Valeria,  iii.  346.

—  in  what  manner  fhe  was  received
by  her  fon  Marcius,  in  the  camp
before  Rome,  iii.  352,  3.

—  her  affedionate  fpeech  to  him  in
behalf  of  her  country,  iii.  353.

—  fhe  prevails  over  him,  iii.  366.

C.  Veturius,  conful,  iv.  192.

—  is  accufed  by  Lucius  Icilius  before
the  people,  iv.  221.

—  is  condemned,  and  fined,  iv.  224.

P.  Veturius ,  conful,  ii.  404.

T.  Veturius  Geminus,  conful,  iii.  52.

—  marches  againft  the  iEqui,  iii.  63;

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  124.

—  invades  the  Volfci,  iv.  125.

—  triumphs  over  them,  iv.  128.

—  is  made  a  decemvir,  iv.  236.

Via facra ,  ii.  365.

Vibulanus.  See  Fabius.

Viftims  an  oath  taken  Handing  upon
the  vidims,  ii.  312.

—  the  heads  of  the  vidims  were
fprinkled  with  flower,  iii.  277.

—  the  ceremony  of  killing  the  vidims
in  a  facritice,  iii.  277,  8.

—  hairs,  plucked  from  the  head  of  a
vidim,  were  thrown  into  the  fire,
iii.  278

See  Sacrifices ,  Human .

Vi  ft  cry  -y


INDEX  to  the  TEXT.


49°

Victory  ;  in  what  manner  a  conqueror
was  received  by  the  people  after  a
famous  victory,  iv.  67.
a  victorious  army  is  received  with
bowls,  and  tables,  ii.  338.  iv.  67.

«—  Marcus  Flavoleius,  a  primipilus,
vows  not  to  return  home,  unlefs  he
proves  vibtoi  1011s,  iv.  18.

—  Valerius  lofes  the  victory,  and  his
life,  iv.  1 61.

—  the  people  neither  rejoice,  nor
mourn,  nor  the  fen  ate  grant  a  tri¬
umph,  for  a  fatal  victory,  iv.  51.

—  the  holy  lake  of  Viitory,  i.  37.

—  the  temple  of  Victory,  i.  73.

—  Vidtory  is  fuppofed  to  be  the
daughter  of  Palas,  ib.

* —  vibtoiy  is  obtained  by  courage  ra¬
ther  than  by  numbers,  hi.  12.

—  facrifice  of  thankfgiving  after  a
vibtory,  i.  286.  iii.  23.  157.

Villages.  See  Seven.

Viminal  hill  is  added  to  the  city  by
Servius  Tullius,  ii.  168.

Vindicius ,  of  Caenina,  impeaches  the
confpirators,  ii.  322.

—  his  reward,  ii.  332.

Vine ;  the  fruit  of  the  vine  is  con-
fecrated  by  Afcanius  to  Jupiter,  i.
147-

Virginia ,  daughter  of  Lucius  Virgi¬
nia,  iv.  292.

* —  is  beloved  by  Appius  Claudius,
the  decemvir,  iv.  292.

•—  is  forced  away  by  Marcus  Clau¬
dius,  client  to  Appius,  iv.  293.

* —  is  refcued  by  her  fpoufe  lcilius,
iv.  294.

—  has  a  partial  fentence  pronounced
againft  her  by  Appius  Claudius,  iv.
306,  7.

■ —  is  {tabbed  by  her  father,  iv.  308.

■ —  is  buried  in  a  moft  fumptuous
manner,  iv.  312.

Aulns  Virginius  Ccelimontanus ,  conful,
iii.  52.


—  marches  againft  the  Voffci,  iii.  63.

A.  Virginius ,  conful,  iv.  47..

—  brings  fuccours  to  his  collegue
Servilius,  iv.  50.

—  faithfully  defends  his  collegue  Ser¬
vilius  at  his  trial,  iv.  63.

Aulus  Virginius  Nomentanus ,  conful,
iv.  10 1.

—  marches  againft  the  Atqui,  iv.  102.

— .  plunders  them,  ib.

— -  is  made  a  triumvir,  iv.  108.

A.  Virginius ,  a  legate  in  the  war  with
the  iEqui,  iv.  222.

A.  Virginius ,  a  tribune  of  the  people,
continues  to  fupport  the  compiling
of  the  laws,  as  it  was  brought  in
by  Caius  Terentius,  iv.  132.

—  his  anfwer  to  L.  Quintius,  in  re¬
gard  to  his  defence  of  his  fon  be¬
fore  the  people,  iv.  139.

—  his  fpeech  to  the  fenate,  concern¬
ing  the  pretended  confpiracy  of  the
tribunes,  iv.  146.

—  traduces  the  fenate,  and  confuls
before  the  people,  iv.  154.

—  continues  with  his  collegues  in  the
tribunefhip  for  the  fourth  year,  iv.

1?l.'

—  being  tribune  for  the  fifth  year  he
hinders  the  levies,  and  fupports  the
decree  of  the  fenate,  concerning  the
compilation  of  laws,  iv.  180.

—  his  anfwer  to  Horatius,  the  con¬
ful,  iv.  185.

L.  Virginius ,  a  centurion,  flies  to  the
relief  of  his  daughter,  iv.  302.

—  preferves  her  from  the  violation
of  Appius  by  {tabbing  her,  iv.

308.

—  after  he  has  killed  her,  he  haftens
back  to  the  camp,  iv.  309.

—  and  there  grievoufly  complains  of
the  tyranny  of  the  decemvirs,  iv.
3*3-

—  excites  the  army  to  revolt,  iv.  314..

- —  cites  Appius  to  a  trial,  iv.  341.

Qpiter


INDEX  to

Opiter  Virginias  I’ricojius ,  conful,  ii.
388.

—  takes,  plunders,  and  rafes  Came-
ria,  ii.  389.

Prcculus  Virginias ,  conful,  iii.  391.

—  confecrates  the  temple  of  Fortuna
Muliebris,  iii.  371.

—  is  fecond  time  conful,  iii.  391.
marches  againft  the  JEqui,  iii.  392.

—  oppofes  the  Agrarian  law,  iii.  397.
Tub.  Virginius ;  his  fpeech  for  ap-

peafing  the  domeftic,  and  foreign
commotions,  iii.  57.

Sp.  Virginius ,  conful,  iv.  118.

Sp.  Virginius ,  a  patrician  youth,  gives
evidence  againft  T.  Romilius,  iv.
222.  x

CT.  Virginius ,  conful,  iii.  3.

—  appoints  A.  Poftumius  didator,
iii.  4~

—  with  his  army  he  incamps  upon
the  ridge  of  a  mountain  exceeding
craggy,  and  ftrongly  fituated,  iii.  6.

—  commands  the  right  wing  of  the
Romans,  iii.  8.

— -  is  fecond  time  conful,  iv.  24.

—  marches  againft  the  Veientes,  iv.
25.

Virgins  bathe  in  a  river,  ii.  362.

—  virgins  are  under  the  care  of  their
mothers,  ii.  42.

See  Vejials.

Virtue ,  not  fhameful  pleafures,  the
meafure  of  Roman  happinefs,  i.
256.  ii.  388.

Vitellia  ;  Marcius  takes  it  by  dorm,
iij-  339-

Vitellii ,  brothers,  among  the  confpira-
tois,  ii.  321.

Ulyjfes ,  and  Diomedes  carry  off  the
Palladium,  i.  155.

—  Ulyffes  fails  into  Italy  before
iEneas,  i.  164.

—  the  fons  of  Ulyffes  by  Circe,  i.
165.

Utnbri ,  their  fetdement,  i.  44.

Vol.  IV.


the  TEXT.  491

Umpire ;  Porfena  is  appointed  um¬
pire  between  the  Romans,  and  the
Tarquinii,  ii.  361.

—  umpires  appointed  concerning  the
public  lands  ufurped  by  force,  or
fraud,  iv.  19 1.

—  the  Rutuli  offer  themfelves  as  um¬
pires  between  the  Romans  and  La-
tines,  ii.  41 1.

— "  the  Romans  are  appointed  um¬
pires  of  the  controverted  lands,  iv.
36°.

Uncle ;  an  uncle  claims  the  cuftody
of  his  niece,  who  had  been  de¬
manded  as  a  (lave,  iv.  297.

Unlucky  day,  on  which  the  daughter
of  the  Fabii  happened,  iv.  44.

Volaterra ,  its  fituation,  ii.  107.

Volaterrani ,  a  people  of  Tyrrhenia,
ib.

P.  Volero  defends  himfelf  againft  the
feverity  of  theconfuls,  iv.  72,  3.^

—  though  ignobly  born,  is  made  a
tribune,  iv.  75.

—  lays  before  the  people  a  law  con¬
cerning  the  eledion  of  tribunes,
iv.  76.

—  again  obtains  the  tribunefhip,  iv.

78.  #

again  preffes  the  law  concerning
the  eledion  of  tribunes,  iv.  79,  80.

Volfci)  conquered  by  Ancus  Marcius,
ii.  91,  2.

—  enter  into  alliance  with  Tar.  Super¬
bus,  ii.  240.

—  only  the  Ecetrani,  and  Antiates
enter  into  that  alliance  ;  the  reft  are
fubdued  by  him,  ii.  246.

—  they  invite  the  Gabini  to  under¬
take  a  war  againft  Tarquinius,  ii.
247.

—  deny  the  Romans  any  fuccours
againft  the  Latines,  ii.  41 1.

—  promife  to  affift  the  Latines,  iii.

8.

• —  after  the  battle,  they  come  with
S  f  f  fuccours


492  I  N  D  E  X  to

fuccours  to  the  Latines,  iii.  23.

—  fend  fpies  to  the  Roman  camp  in
quality  of  embaffadors,  iii.  24,  5.

—  fue  for  peace,  iii.  40.

—  again  prepare  for  war,  ib.

—  three  hundred  of  the  Volfcian
hoftages  are  put  to  death  on  ac¬
count  of  the  perfidy  of  their  nation,
iii.  47.

—  demand  reftitution  of  the  lands
taken  from  them  by  the  Romans,

iii.  54,

—  are  forced  to  admit  a  Roman  co¬
lony,  iii.  65.

—  revolt  from  the  Romans,  iii.  114.

—  are  fubdued  by  Poftumus  Comi-
nius,  iii.  138.

—  while  they  are  falling  upon  the
Romans,  during  a  famine,  are  them-
felves  afflidted  with  a  peftilence,  iii.
170.

_ are  obliged  to  quit  Rome  at  one

gate,  iii.  288.

—  demand  fatisfadtion,  iii.  297.

_ appoint  Tullus  Attius,  and  C.

Marcius  their  generals  againfi:  the
Romans,  iii.  299.

—  learn  the  Roman  difcipline,  iii.

388-

—  offer  peace  to  the  Romans,  iii.

336.

—  in  an  expedition  againfi:  the  Ro¬
mans,  they  turn  their  arms  againfi:
the  i£qui,  their  own  allies,  iii.

3Sl-

—  fue  for  peace  to  the  Romans,  iii.
.892.

—  inf- ft  theKernici,  iv.  168.

. —  are  beaten  by  Fabius  near  Antium,

iv.  170.

_ pretend  a  flight  from  the  Romans,

iii.  422.

—  enter  into  alliance  with  the  vEqui,

iv.  30.

. —  make  a  brave  defence  againfi:  Sici-
nus,  iii.  387.  91.


the  TEX  T.

—  are  plundered  by  Nautius,  the  con-
ful,  iv.  67.

—  lofe  their  camp,  iv.  107:

—  confpire  with  theiEqui  againfi:  the
Romans,  during  a  plague,  iv.  121..

—  are  driven  in  all  hafte  to  their  city,
iv.  126.

—  are  put  to  flight  by  Valerius,  iv;

34 3-

—  are  beaten  by  Quintius,  and  Fu-
rius,  iv.  359.

M.  Volfcins ,  the  tribune,  falfely  ac-
cufes  Caefo  Quintius  of  a  capital
crime,  iv.  140.

—  his  teftimony  appears  afterwards
to  have  been  falfe,  iv.  143.

Volumnia ,  wife  of  C.  Marcius,  iii.  344..

—  in  what  manner  received  by  him,
iii.  352.

P.  Volumniu conful,  iv.  130.

Vote  is  not  permitted  againfi:  the  low-
eft  patricians,  unlefs  by  a  decree  of
the  fenate,  iii.  241,  2.  iv,  195.

—  in  what  manner  the  people  ufed
to  give  their  votes,  i.  249.  iii.  244.

—  were  given  on  the  third  market
day,  iii.  241,  2.

—  were  given  by  tribes,  iv.  208.

* —  ballot  boxes  in  every  tribe,  iv.

363-

—  votes  were  given  in  the  centuriata
comitia  according  to  the  cenfus,  ii.
185,

—  an  accufed  perfon  was  acquitted
when  there  was  an  equality  of  votes,
iii.  255.

—  votes  delivered  upon  oath,  iii.  217..

— ■  the  tribunes  would  have  the  rights

of  voting  to  be  equal,  iii.  244.

* —  a  tribune  would  not  have  the  pa¬
tricians  to  be  prefent  at  the  giving
of  votes,  iv.  77.

— -  the  palling  of  votes  is  interrupted
by  the  young  patricians,  iv.  208.

—  Marcius  is  condemned  by  a  majo¬
rity  of  two  votes  only,  iii.  254,  5.

Vows ,


INDEX  to

Vows,  and  prayers  in  confirmation  of
a  law  for  building  on  mount  Aven-
tine,  iv.  192.

—  Marcus  Fiavoleius  makes  a  vow,
iv.  18.

See  Veftals.

XJrbinia ,  the  veftal,  undergoes  the
punishment  of  incontinence,  iv.
75*

Urns  ufed  for  voting,  iv.  363.

—  a  third  urn  for  the  Romans,,  ib.

—  overturning  the  urns,  iv.  205.

— -  the  urns  are  taken  away,  iv.  208.
See  Ballot  boxes.

Ufurers ,  their  unmercifulnefs,  ii.  396.
iii.  36.

—  their  inhumanity,  iii.  1 19.

—  no  power  is  given  them  over  the
perfons,  but  only  over  the  goods  of
debtors,  ii.  160,  1.  422.

—  by  exceflive  ufury  many  became
(laves,  iii.  87.

Vulcan  lies  with  Ocrifia,  ii.  146.

—  Romulus  dedicates  a  brazen  cha¬
riot  and  four  horfes  to  Vulcan,  i.
3 1 8*

• —  afiemblies  held  at  the  temple  of
Vulcan,  i.  312.

Vultures', \  fix  appear  firft  to  Remus,
and  twelve  afterwards  to  Romulus,
i.  201.

- —  a  llock  of  vultures  attack  an  airy
of  eagles,  ii.  265.

* Vulturnus ,  flows  backwards,  iii.  155.

W.

Walls  ;  Tarquinius  was  the  fir  ft
who  built  the  walls  of  Rome  with
hewn  ftone,  ii.  129.

—  one  of  the  confuls  commands  the
guards  before  the  walls,  in  time  of
danger,  iv.  159.

—  the  walls  of  Babylon,  ii.  196.

—  the  walls  of  Rome,  iv.  123.


the  TEXT.  493

— -  the  foundations  of  a  wall  were
marked  out  with  a  plow,  i.  204.

—  a  machine  to  mount  the  walls,  iv.
1 70.

See  Scaling.

War ,  and  agriculture  united  by  Ro¬
mulus,  i.  276.

—  the  ancient  method  of  carrying  on
war,  ii.  79.

— •  war  declared  by  the  feciales,  i.
357 •

—  a  war  horfe  prefented  to  Cloelia,  ii.
364-

—  and  likewife  to  Marcius,  iii.
*  43*

Water  j  to  fprinkle  with  clear  water,
iii.  277.

—  the  feven  Waters,  i.  37.

—  pure  water  ufed  in  facri flees,  i.
176.

—  fprings  of  hot  waters,  i.  84.

«—  fprings  of  fweeteft  water  rife  out
of  the  earth  fpontaneoufly,  i.

126.

—  Tucia,  the  veftal  carries  water  in
a  fieve,  i.  350.

See  Luftraiion.

Way  i  the  holy  way,  ii.  365.

See  Caufevoays.

Wife ,  ywt)  yxuslvj,  i.  268.

— -  the  privilege  of  a  modeft  wife,  i.
269.

—  a  wife  married  according  to  law
partakes  of  all  effe&s  and  rites  with
her  hufband,  i.  268.

• —  thofe  of  age  were  obliged  to  mar¬
ry,  iv.  42.

• —  the  trial  and  punifhment  of  faulty
wives,  i.  269.

See  Divorce ,  Carvilius ,  Icilius ,  Wo¬
men.

Wine  ;  the  choiceft  wines  in  Italy  were
the  Falernian,  and  Alban  wines,  i.
149.

—  wme  was  poured  out,  when  the

S  f  2  flrft


494  INDEX  to

firft  fruits  of  a  facrifice  were  fet  on
fire,  iii.  278;

* —  wine  forbidden  to  women,  i.  270.

Winter  folftice,  i.  73.

Wolf-,  a  wolf  endeavours  to  extinguifh
a  fire  by  dipping  his  tail  in  water,
1.137.

—  the  fig  tree,  under  which  a  wolf
is  fuppofed  to  have  fuckled  Ro¬
mulus  and  Remus,  ii.  139.

Women  feldom  bear  children  after
they  are  fifty  years  of  age,  ii.  155.

• —  the  laws  of  Romulus  relating  to
married  women,  i.  266 — 271.

*—  Lupa,  a  name  given  to  common
women,  i.  196.

—  Friends,  another  appellation  of
them,  ib.

— -  wine  forbidden  to  women,  i.  270.

Wooden  collars,  debtors  bound  with
them,  iii.  120.

* —  a  wooden  image  remains  unhurt
by  fire,  ii.  228.

Woodpecker ,  d^vc)toA<x7rV>  a  prophefy-
ing  woodpecker,  i.  37.

Wooers  of  virgins,  their  drefs,  ii.

43*

World-,  which  are  the  right,  and
which  are  the  left  quarters  of  the
world,  i.  228,  9.

Wreftlers  girded  with  cinblures,  iii.
269,  70.

Wtiting  is  the  image  of  the  mind,  i.  3.

. .  .1  ‘  1  ■  ■  •


the  TEX  T.

x.

Xanthus,  the  Lydian,  an  hiftorian3
i.  62.

Xenophon ,  of  Corinth,  victor  at  the
Olympic  games,  iv.  112.

Xerxes  invades  Greece  in  the  lxxv
Olympiad,  iv.  1,  2.

Xypete,  a  divifion  in  Attica,  i.  141;

Y.

Years*,  the  manly  gown  was  taken
at  Cumre,  at  the  age  of  twenty
years,  iii.  165.

Toke ;  Horatius,  in  order  to  expiate
the  murder  of  his  fifter,  is  puri¬
fied,  and  led  under  the  yoke,  ii.
48.

■ —  the  form  of  the  yoke,  ii.  48,  9.

Youth  holy,  in  what  manner  they  were
fent  out  as  a  colony,  i.  38.

—  the  treafury  of  Youth,  ii.  174.

Z.

Zacynthii,  their  games,  i.  114.

Z acynthiis,  fon  of  Dardanus,  i.  113.

—  peoples  an  ifland  after  his  own
name,  ib.

—  the  temple  of  Venus  in  that  ifiand*
i.  1 14.

Zenodotus  of  Troezene,  writ  the
hiftory  of  the  Umbrian  nation,  i._
308..


INDEX


(  495  )


INDEX

TO  THE

N  O  T  E  S.


[the  Numerals  denote  the  Number  of  the  Book  \


A.

bolition  of  debts,  a  law  of
Solon  relating  to  it,  v.  51.

Aborigines ,  Rickius,  and  M.  *  *  *  cen-
fured  for  affirming  that  the  Abo¬
rigines  could  not  be  a  colony  of
Arcadians,  i.  37.

A who  they  were,  i.  270,

Acrojlics  prove  that  the  Sibylline  ora¬
cles  in  Greek  hexameter  verfe  are
an  impofture,  iv.  72.

Aftium,  a  town  Handing  at  the  mouth
of  the  Ambracian  gulph,  i.  164.

AHKtyoL  Si  txIci?  eytvelo  n  •urgoSaluv
nxi  ywutKuv  yovxs.  In  what  man¬
ner  the  tranflators  have  fucceeded
in  rendering  this  paffage,  i.  70.

A Sihjpos  explained,  iii.  11.

tv  (pvAany  Aonr/uv  explained,  i.  259.
the  perfon  Adopted  bears  the  name
of  the  Adopter,  v.  20.

Algos  Potamos ,  the  Athenian  fleet  is
deftroyed  at  that  place  by  Ly-
fander,  i.  14.  xi.  2.

Mnea ,  a  town  founded  by  Aineas,  i.

*57-


the  Figures  the  Note.]

JEneas ,  concerning  his  arrival  in  Italy,
fee  the  differtation  at  the  end  of
the  firft  book.

APolic  dialed!,  i.  271.

ALqiiicola,  who  they  were,  ii.  143.

—  the  inftitution  of  the  Feciales  taken
from  them,  ib.

AiJa/Ax  and  A£7o?,a  term  of  architecture
among  the  Greeks,  iv.  68.

Aysntcu  Qegst  explained,  i.  196.

Ayinvovlse,  Ee  Jay  cenfured  for  his
tranflation  of  this  word,  i.  126.

Ayvq  yxfM»v  voas,  admirably  tranflated
by  le  Jay,  i.  61.

t%c  Ayovhxs  explained,  i.  258.

A yuuri  nou  Qtgwm,  a  military  expreffion
fometimes  applied  to  civil  affairs,
vii.  16.

Agrarian  law,  Caffius  the  author  of
it,  viii.  48.

• —  fome  confiderations  upon  it,  ib.

Agylla.  See  Care.

Aigejtan ,  i.  179.

Aitpjv  y. ai  Eft  out  by  le  Jay,  and
tolerably  well  rendered  by  M.

*  *  *,  i.  11.

AkIxs  explained,  x.  45.

Alb  a  ~


496  I  N  D  E  X  to

Alba,  its  fituation,  i.  215.

—  the  Alban  kings,  their  fuccefiion,
i.  225.  iii.  25.

AA>;0£V(rcif  f£«f,  Attic  for  >jA>jG#V(r#r,  i.

257*

Algidum ,  its  fituation,  x.  13.

AA iffno[x^vyj(  TH)t  TirohtuS;  How  this  paf-
fage  is,  and  in  what  manner  it
ought  to  have  been,  tranflated  by
M.  *  *  *,  i.  178.

AAjcvovtj?  itftufAtvYis  iv  Agyei,  i.  67.

Allontum ,  its  fituation,  i.  168.

*£t>v  AAwv,  explained,  ii.  in.

jcjci  €?t  j'tj?  AArTMf  An

expreftion  copied  from  Polybius  ;
by  whom  it  appears  that  it  ought
to  be  ration,  and  not  rgnlxi,  as  Hud-
fon  thinks,  i.  35.

Amata ,  and  Turnus,  in  Virgil,  are
not  imaginary  perfons,  i.  212.

Ambracian  gulph,  i.  164.

Ambrax ,  who  he  was,  i.  165.

AuilxT^7ih  explained  by  a  fimilar  paf-
fage  in  Livy,  vi.  14.

Anrphiftycn,  the  fon  of  Deucalion,  and
brother  of  Hellen,  inftitutes  the
Amphi&yonic  council,  iv.  38.

• —  the  time  when  that  council  was
inftituted,  and  the  place  where  it
was  held,  ib.

Amphitheatre  defcribed,  iii.  71.

Av,  a  potential  word  nfegledted  by  all
the  tranflators,  i.  87.

Anattorium ,  a  town  near  the  Ambra¬
cian  gulph,  i.  171.

A ridiculoufly  miftaken  by  le
Jay,  x.  46.

AvaA yU'Uxlot  explained,  iii.  73.

Avonri-^Mv  explained,  v.  44.

Anaxilaus ,  i.  2.

Anchefmus ,  the  name  of  a  haven,  i.
167.

AvJg&xt  not  Fortuna  Virilis,  but  Fors
For  tuna,  iv.  43.

s/m  0  Av^,in  what  manner  rendered  by
both  the  French  tranflators,  vi.  39.


the  NOTES.

jAnio,  that  river  defcribed,  iii.  21.

—  its  rife,  v.  33.

Anius ,  a  king  and  pried,  i.  1 59.

Anna  Perennafifex  toDido,  no  w  San<5ta
Petronella,  her  hiftory,  i.  138.

Annibal ,  a  remarkable  dream  of  his
told  by  Silenus,  i,  20.

—  the  fame  dream  related  with  greater
pomp  by  Livy,  ib.

Antemna ,  its  fituation,  ii.  65.

tov  AvO^wTmov  j3iav  explained,  viii.  30.

Antigonus  Aueruv,  i.  14.

Antigonus  Gonatas ,  ib.

Antigontis  the  hiftorian,  if  19.

Antiochus  the  Syracufian,  his  hiftory,
i.  42.

Antium ,  its  fituation,  iv.  57.

A7ravocxoc^c,  fubftituted,  with  great
reafon  by  Sylburgius,  Portus,  and
Stephens,  in  the  room  of  tTravxw
CMf,  i.  78.

Atp’  ixvjx  thought  a  fufficient  ground
by  the  French  tranflators  to  make
Medius  Fidius  build  a  city,  called
Cures,  after  his  own  name ,  ii.  89.

ASx£k  explained,  x.  6.

A<pGi1ov  cue<  explained,  i.  219.

Apices ,  like  miters,  ii.  127.

Atto  T07ruv  fubftituted  in  the  room  of
OiTTO  7 rxvluv,  11.  87.

A7 the  word  feldom  ufed,  if
ever,  and  therefore  corrected  to
aTrcpCj’^utuoi,  i.  203.

ATToJeiKwlcii,  the  term  for  appointing  a
veftal,  ii.  13 1.

ATroAavtrtf^uev  explained,  i.  202.

A7roA«7r£jQ*/,  the  generality  of  the
tranflators  miftaken  in  their  fenfe
of  this  word,  i.  76.

A7to7tJcc  explained,  ii.  108.

f|  A-renlx  explained,  vi.  13.

A7ro^a,mv.  Ou  [aqvov  tGxhivtrxv  tx(p'  v^uwv
tnrorxfiv,  xKKx  xxi  tTrocvasaciv.  A
pafiage,  in  which  Dionyfius  has
imitated  Thucydides  without  copy¬
ing  him,  iii.  7.


A71Q


INDEX  to  the  NOTES,  497


AvoQilw  ft <Eawv  explained,  xi.  37.

Appeal  to  the  people,  even  from  the
dictators,  at  what  time  it  com¬
menced,  xi.  27.

Ajrgoy««o»  explained,  ii.  18.

A^r,  an  unlucky  word,  explained,

, vl  4^*

Ara  Maxima  defer! bed,  i.  129.

Ardea ,  its  fituation,  iv.  6.

Ardeatcs ,  v.  49.

Aj>£o[j,wvis  inftead  of  ctgfvf/.evu,  i.  114*

Argolic  buckler,  round,  i.  59.

Aricia ,  its  fituation,  v.  30.

Arijlodemus ,  why  furnamed  MaAaxcr,
Effeminate,  vii.  4.

Arijlctle ,  i.  230.

—  his  opinion,  concerning  comets,
unphilofophical,  ii.  128.

A^juofan  explained,  v.  61.

./Xmy  Roman  how  drawn  up,  iv.  27.

Arretium ,  its  fituation,  iii,  54.

./&,  a  Roman  coin,  its  value,  ix.  17.

Afcanian  lake  in  Bythinia,  i.  146.

t7t  A<nridoi,  a  term  in  tallies  among
the  foot,  iii.  58.

A  emu,  clypeus,  buckler,  deferibed,
iv.  25.

AJfaJjinations ,  mod  abominable  and
unjuftifiable  ;  and  not  to  be  coun¬
tenanced  by  any  authority  what¬
ever,  v.  26.  ix.  21.

AJJyrian  empire,  by  whom  founded,
and  how  long  it  lafled,  i.  14.

Aftyanax^  fometimes  called  Seaman*
drius,  i.  147.

Afylum ,  inftituted  by  the  Athenians,
borrowed  from  them  by  Romulus,
and  to  this  day  abufed  by  the
church  of  Rome,  ii.  34.

* —  enclofed  in  the  time  of  Livy,  ac¬
cording  to  Dion  Cafiius,  ii.  3 3.

«—  the  embafliidors  of  Romulus  are
contemptuouflyafked  by  the  neigh¬
bouring  nations,  to  whom  they
were  fent,  why  they  did  not  open
an  afylum  for  women  alfo,  ii.6o.

L


Aterian  law,  what,  x.  42.

A0JJV<X<O<  /usv  yct[ 0  cevJjjf  povov  y (>%otv  tjj?

57«^<xa<x.  Le  Jay  cenfured,  and  M.
*  *  *  commended  for  their  dif¬
ferent  tranflations  of  this  paffage,
i.  12.

Athenians ,  the  beginning  of  their
power,  and  its  duration,  i.  14.

—  their  fleet  deftroyed  at  iEgos  Po~
tamos  by  Lyfander,  i.  14.  xi.  2.

Athens ,  the  port  of  Athens  called  Pira¬
eus  being  blocked  up  by  Lyfander
with  one  hundred  and  fifty  fhips,
and  the  city  itfelf  inverted  by  land,
the  inhabitants  are  reduced  by  fa¬
mine,  and  forced  to  fue  for  peace,
xi.  2.

—  the  terms  of  that  peace,  ib.

aM<x<  explained,  vii.  31.

Attonement ,  human  Sacrifices,  under

the  notion  of  a  delegated  attone¬
ment,  abominable,  i.  57.

Audi  ores  \  Patres  aubtores  fiunt,  large¬
ly  explained,  ii.  122.

Aventine  hill,  Dionyfius  juftified  a-
gain  ft  M.  *  *  *,  in  relation  to  this
hill,  ii.  72.

Avernus ,  a  lake  fo  called,  vii.  9.

Augurs^  their  functions,  ii.  13.

Aurunci ,  who  they  were,  vi.  21.

Ada  Signifies  ^uevee,  i.  239.

miftaken  by  the  tranflators,x.23.

Ad u  tu  an  Atticifm,  which-

Portus,  by  defiring  to  add  the  pre-
pofition  <ruv,  would  deftroy,  ii.  77.

A \Ho%Qovar,  I^e  Jay’s  fenfe  of  this
word,  i.  34.

AdoK^ylo^c  explained,  ix.  5.

AvIogoQise  explained,  i.  252.
explained,  i.  5.

A^iucsas  explained,  x.  44.

B.

Babylon,  the  walls  of  Babylon  were
not  built  by  Semiramis,  according
to  Ufher,  iv.  36.

Batch! ad


49§  I  N  D  E  X  to

Bacchiada^  their  hiflory,  iii.  42.

Ballot  box.  See  Urn.

msB explained,  iv.  2.

trcKpic*  explained,  ii.  124.

B«0^,  pedeltais,  i.  190.

B i^Koi;  explained,  i.  221.

B sQiumvcii  fubflituted  in  the  room  of
Be£>;K£Ytfi/,  li.  5.

icdv  BsAwv,  miffive  weapons,  i.  13 1.

B<0f  oil TOiffi  J'ftivJ/lAvj?  oVfiCO/f  (PwfflV ,

Le  Jay’s  tranflation  of  thispaflfage
cenlured,  i.  in.

Bw,  a  word  of  very  extenfive  figni-
fication  in  Greek,  i.  91.  viii.  30.

BoU,  its  fituation,  viii.  6.

Lord  Bolingbroke  cenfured,  and  com¬
mended,  i.  241.

Bsf  affijv  explained,  i.  2 66.

BovilU,  its  fituation,  viii.  12.

BiuAojUci«(3f  with  an  accufative  cafe,  i.

1.

BoJopov,  Burre  reed,  or  Gladden,  i.

5°.

Bubetani ,  who  they  were,  v.  50.

Bucklers  of  the  Greeks,  and  Trojans
were  made  of  leather,  iv.  25.

Buthrotum ,  its  fituation,  i.  166.

C.

Cacus,  his  hiftory,  i.  101.

£b?r<?,  the  name  of  Agylla,  and  the
reafon  why,  iii.  62.

In  C writes  tabulas  ref  err  i  explained,
iii.  62.

Cafar  is  the  laft  author  we  fhould  con-
fult,  if  we  have  a  mind  to  unfold
his  ambitious  views,  viii.  57.

Caieta ,  a  promontory  fo  called  from
the  nurfe  of  TEneas,  i.  1 84.

JL.  Calpurnius  Pifo  Frugi ,  an  hiftorian,
and  conful,  i.  25.

Cameria,  its  fituation,  ii.  ior.

Campania  defcribed,  i.  114.

Canna .  After  the  battle  of  Cannae,
a  very  great  number  of  gold  rings,
worne  by  the  Roman  knights,  were


die  NOTE  S.

fent  to  Carthage  with  Mago  the
brother  of  Annibal,  ii.  28.

—  Dionyfius  follows  Polybius  in  his
account  of  this  battle,  and  yet  M.
*  *  *  quotes  Polybius  againft  Dio¬
nyfius,  ii.  38.

Canonization  of  ./Eneas,  i.  213*

Capitol  defcribed,  iv.  68.

Capuay  its  fituation,  i.  153.

Car.  See  Triumph.

Car  ceres  explained,  iii.  72.

Caria.  Cafaubon  would  read  Afia,
but  improperly,  iv.  39.

Garment  a ,  the  mother  of  Evander,
i-  97-

Carthage  when  built  by  Dido,  ii.

9  4*

—  a  very  great  number  of  gold  rings
fent  thither  after  the  battle  of  Can-
nte,  ii.  28.

Carthaginians  are  obliged  to  deliver  up
to  the  Romans  all  their  fhips  of
war,  except  ten,  i.  14.

Cafa  Romuli  defcribed,  i.  253.

Cafaubon  never  had  feen  the  Vatican
manufcript,  i.  16.

Caffius ,  his  death,  viii.  48.

Cataract  formed  by  the  Anio,  v.  33.

Celeres ,  their  fundtions,  and  by  whom
inftituted,  ii.  28.

—  Le  Jay  commended,  and  M.*  *  #
cenfured  for  their  different  tranf-
lations  of  a  paflage  concerning
them,  ii.  29.

• — Brutus  was  their  commander,  iv.79.

Cenfus ,  in  what  it  differed  from  the
Luftrum,  iv.  35.

Centuriata .  See  Comitia.

Centuries ,  their  number,  iv.  30.

Charonea.  Philip,  king  of  Macedon.
conquers  the  united  armies  of  the
Athenians,  and  Thebans  at  this
place,  ii.  37.

—  the  ungenerous,  and  then  the  no¬
ble,  behaviour  of  .Philip  after  this
battle,  ib.

XaAniuif.


v


.INDEX  to;  the  NOTES.


'Xahwcous  explained,  ii.  137.

Charondas ,  a  Chalcidican  legislator,  ii.


57*

XfA uvoa  the  teftudo,  ix.  32.

t»jv  Xh(>ovc&  <haAA<*£«<r0a/.  This


expreffion  altered,  ii.  7.

Chinefe ,  their  impertinent  folly  of
hanging  bells  on  the  outfides  of
their  buildings,  v.  24.


Xu^oi  iv$a.i[j.Qv(i  explained,  i.  112.
Xoflctms  explained,  vii.  35.

Xfvpdla  does  not  always  fignify  mo


ney,  1.  71.

Cincinnatus ,  the  dictator ;  his  little
farm,  confifting  of  four  acres,  was
called,  in  memory  of  him,  Prata
Quint ia,  x.  1 1 .

L.  Cincius ,  the  historian,  is  Styled  by
Livy  maximus  audior,  i.  21.

Circeii ,  its  Situation,  iv.  74.

Circus  Maximus  defcribed,  iii.  69.

Civic.  See  Crown.

Lord  Clarendon's  hi  (lory  difcoloured
by  a  dream,  vii.  27.

ClaJJes  fix,  ii.  28.

—  of  whom  compofed,  iv.  24.

Claudian  family,  Abtius  Claufus  the
firft  of  it,  v.  36.

Clients ,  who  were  called  fo,  ii.  18.


22.

Clufium ,  its  fituation,  iii.  53.  v.  24.

—  an  extravagant  labyrinth  ere&ed
there  by  Porfena  for  his  burial,
ib.

Coemption  a  marriage  ceremony,  ii.
51.

Coffins ,  two  Slone  coffins  dug  up  at  the
foot  of  the  Janiculum,  iii.  33.

Collatia ,  its  fituation,  iii.  49.

Collatinus ,  the  reafons  for  his  depo-
fition  are  not  fo  well  founded  in
Livy,  as  in  Dionyfius,  v.  11.

Column  of  gold  in  the  temple  of  Juno
Lacinia,  Annibal  very  defirous  of
carrying  it  away,  and  the  reafon
why  he  did  not,  ii.  121.

Vol.  IV.


Comitia  centuriata  and  tributa,  their
difference,  ix.  24.  vii.  25.

—  when  instituted,  ii.  122.

—  the  method  of  voting  in  them,
iv.  33.-

—  the  manner  in  which  the  tributa

comitia  condemned  Coriolanus,
vii.  26.  .  V  ^  —  .

—  the  curiata  comitia,  ii.  122.
Common  Shores.  See  Sewers.
Compitalia ,  a  moveable  feaft  among

the  Romans,  iv.  15.

Confarreatio ,  a  marriage  ceremony,  ii:

51*

Confuls ,  a  fovereign  power  granted  to
them  in  times  of  great  danger,  v.
4b.  0  -  :

—  this  power  defcribed  by  Salluft,  ib.
Confuls ,  their  power,  and  duty,  iv.

81.

—  farther  explained  in  the  fragment
of  Polybius  at  the  end  of  the  firft
book.

Confultation  held  after  the  death  of
Lucretia  bears  a  very  near  refem-
blance  to  That,  held  by  the  feven
Perfian  noblemen  after  the  de-
ftrudlion  of  the  Magi,  v.  1.

Cora>  its  fituation,  iii.  30.

Cor  bio ,  its  fituation,  vi.  2.

Corillce ,  not  the  fame  with  Corioli,
iv.  54.

Coriolanus ,  his  trial.  See  Comitia.

—  makes  ufe  of  a  poor  fubterfuge  to
prevail  upon  the  Volfci  to  take  up
arms  againft  the  Romans,  viii.  2.

—  is  put  to  death  by  the  Volfci,  viii.

37*

Corniculum,  its  fituation,  iii.  51.
Cremera,  the  name  of  a  river,  and  a
fortrefs  about  five  Roman  miles
from  Rome,  ix.  12.

Cretenfes,  a  Greek  colony,  i.  47.
Crimifus ,  the  name  of  a  river,  i.  lyy.
Croton ,  its  fituation,  founder,  &c.  i.
92.  ii.  121.

T  1 1  Crowny


5oo  INDEX  to  the  NOTE  S


Crown,  civic,  viii.  18.

of  gold,  iii.  63.
mural,  x.  29.
obfidional,  x.  28.
triumphal,  iii.  65.

Crujlumerium ,  its  fituation,  ii.  66. 105.

Cume  JEolis ,  v.  31.

—  It  allot  is,  vii.  3.

Curatii ,  the  Alban  champions,  iii.  10.

Cam,  the  capital  of  the  Sabines,  ii.

71,

—  built  by  Medius  Fidius,  and  the
French  tranflators  fay  it  was  called
Cures,  after  his  own  name ,  ii.  89.

Curia,  a  divifion  of  the  tribes,  ii.

15'

— .  the  names  of  the  curire  were  not
taken  from  the  countries,  from
whence  the  people,  who  compofed
them,  originally  came,  ii.  87.

*—  there  could  not  have  been  a  ma¬
jority  of  only  one  vote  among  the
thirty  curiae,  v.  7.

Curiata.  See  Comitia.

D.

explained,  ii.  2.

A ao-xuA/luv  yw-  The  Afcanian  lake  in
that  country,  i.  146.

A>j,  anexpreffion  of  irony,  iii.  23.

Decemvirate  by  whom  aboli(hed,xi.  6.

Decemvirs ,  in  what  manner  they  di¬
vided  the  government  according  to
Livy,  x.  50.

Decrees  of  the  fenate  were  not  figned
by  the  fenators,  but  the  names  only
of  thofe,  who  attended  at  the  draw¬
ing  them  up,  were  inferted,  vi.  42.

Decuria,  a  divifion  both  civil,  and
military,  ii.  16.

Decury,  in  what  manner  each  decury
governed,  during  the  Interregnum,
ii.  1 16.

Plutarch  miftaken  in  his  account
of  it,  ib.

Dejanira  married  to  Hercules,  i.  169.


Deifls many  pafiages  in  the  ancient
writers  give  great  reafon  to  believe,
and  hope,  that  the  Egyptians,  in
the  earlieft  times,  were  Deifts,  vii.
36-

Delos,  an  ifland  fo  called,  i.  159:

Delphic .  See  Oracle.

Demades,  an  Athenian  orator,  in  what
manner  he  chaftens  Philip,  king
of  Macedon,  for  his  ungenerous
behaviour  to  the  Athenian  and
Theban  prifoners,  after  the  battle
of  Chaeronea,  ii.  37.

Demons,  Plato’s  opinion  concerning
them,  i.  245.

A ivocg,  not  Penates,  i.  217.

Aivligx,  ymx,  Portus  mifleads  le  Jay,
i.  226.

AiaAaQovlav  JtJioIsc,  this  expreflion
rectified,  i .77.

Dialeffs,  different  dialects,  i.  271.

A uz(pt^eiv,  none  of  the  tranflators,  ex¬
cept  M.  *  *  *,  have  rendered  this
word  properly,  ii.  79.

A<*1f/£>j  explained,  ii.  120.

Dictator,  his  power,  iii.  5.

— -  the  common  opinion,  founded
upon  the  accidental  poverty  of
Cincinnatus,  that  all  the  Roman
dictators  were  taken  from  the  plow,
refuted,  x.  11.

—  Diftatorfhip  for  what  reafons  in-
ftituted,  v.  54.

—  when  created,  all  other  magiflracies
were  abrogated,  except  That  of  the
tribunes  of  the  people,  ib.

—  always  appointed  in  the  night,  ib.

A»e|£A9«v,  Le  Jay  miftaken  in  his

fenfe  of  this  word,  i.  40.

t 00  AiKoua  moiety  ct,yaynx^oy,iym.  All
the  tranflators  miftake  the  fenfe  of
this  paflage,  v.  52.

A»>ca<o<m»jv  explained,  ii.  54.

A iKufycQui  explained,  ii.  103.

Dionyfius  acquitted  of  flattery,  i.  14,
i.  274.  ii.  13.  x.  11.  xi.  35.

~  Dionyfius


INDEX  to

—  Dionyfius  cenfured  for  faying  that
the  Trojans  were  armed  after  the
manner  of  the  Greeks,  i.  204.

■ —  and  for  making  ufe  of  this  ex-
preflion,  rag  XHgctg  vpiv  cl  a  a  rocis
•ffvXoug  otvctTrelato-aa-cCf  vi.  43.

— .  Dionyfius  acquitted  of  being  a
mercenary  writer  to  Auguftus,  i.
223.

• —  and  vindicated  from  the  cenfure
of  Dodwell  concerning  the  sera  of
the  foundation  of  Rome,  i.  225.

—  Dionyfius  vindicated  from  a  cen¬
fure  of  Cafaubon,  who  fuppofes
that  he  did  not  underftand  Latin
enough  to  know  the  meaning  of
the  word  Ferculum ,  ii.  67.

Divorce ,  when  the  firft  happened,  ii.
53-

Dodona.  See  Oracle .

Dodwell  has  written  a  kind  of  differ-
tation  upon  the  fenfe  of  the  words
yiveuv  iGJopjv  ;  which  differtation
le  Jay  has  tranflated  without  men¬
tioning  from  whom  he  took  it;
but  M.  *  *  *  has  acknowledged
it,  i.  14.

—  reafons  for  departing  from  the
opinion  of  Dodwell,  ib.

A oypci  ^yifjcat^uv  explained,  x.  38.

Ao^lx  explained,  x.  30.

Doric  cities,  five  of  them  refort  to  the
temple  of  Apollo  at  Triopium,  iv.
40.

sm  A oqv.  A  term  in  tadtics,  iii.  58.

Drachma ,  its  value,  iv.  24.  52.

Dream  of  Annibal  related  by  Silenus,
but  told  with  greater  pomp  by
Livy,  i.  20.

—  dreams  difgrace  any  work,  vii.
2  7*

—  Lord  Clarendon’s  hiftory  difco-
loured  with  a  dream,  ib.

Drepanum ,  its  fituation,  i.  175.

Duilian  infcription,  a  paffage  tranf-
fcribed  from  it,  to  juftify  Polybius


the  NOTES.  5oi

concerning  the  firft:  naval  vidtory
of  the  Romans  over  the  Carthagi¬
nians,  ii.  52.

thrc-^  Awtxfjciv  lAocyylcu  explained  from  a
fimilar  paflfage  in  Thucydides,  vi.


Eocgog  inftead  of  i.  210.

Ex«v  to  inhabit,  i.  150.

Ecetra ,  its  fituation,  iv.  56.

Echinada  fmall  ifiands,  i.  170.

E%oileg.  O*  tjjv  ivctvhocv  t^ovlig

TsroXtfXis  yvcopyiv,  miftaken  by  the
French  tranfiators,  vi.  16.

Eclipfe  of  the  fun  falls  out  the  year
after  the  peace  made  between  the
Athenians,  and  Lacedaemonians,
xi.  2.

Eh  explained,  i.  60.

Ediles^  Plebeian  and  Curule,  in  what
they  differed,  vi.  46.

H or  prince  of  the  fenate,  ii.
25.

Egeria ,  familiar  to  Numa,  ii.  124.

Egerius ,  from  whence  his  name  was
derived,  iii.  50.

EyxoiXvmv  explained,  ii.  19.

E«  St]  inftead  of  «  i.  16.

E/jcocr<  inftead  of  Tgiunovhx,  ii.  23.

E<jc offw  iXarloiri  Aoyoig,  a  corrupt  paffage
reftored,  iv.  31.

Ht'ovs?  explained,  x.  45.

tv  E igxly  xSv]Xu  explained,  i.  249.

E ifuvetoiv  explained,  iv.  46.

EKlija-avIo  fupplied  in  a  fentence,  i.  95.

E xho-xv  miftaken  by  le  Jay,  i.  88.

ev  E?fc>j<n.  the  general  name  of

the  Greeks,  called  fo  from  Hellen
the  fon  of  Deucalion,  three  hundred
and  twelve  years  before  the  Trojan
war,  i.  197.  iv.  38.

E/Gwv  explained,  x.  39.

Elyma ,  or  rather  Eruca,  i.  179.

EynruAiv  t*js  kccIx  (pvav  Toig  zvogaaf

explained,  i,  121.

T  1 1  2  «<$>’


502  INDEX  to  the  N  O  T  E  S.


t(p’  *nav,  a  term  of  ta&ics  among  the
horfe,  iii.  58.

Ennius  inftead  of  Euxenus,  i.  107.

tK  tuv  Evovlotv  explained,  i.  141.

E \1v7rnov  ufed  adverbially,  i.  J92.

Eoglij  $v\po\ e\»f.  The  Latin  tranflators
miflead  their  followers,  ii.  136.

EirxytffOai,  Le  Jay  cenfured,  i.  10.

Ephori  of  Sparta  inftituted  by  Theo-
pompus,  ii.  27.

—  their  oath  to  the  kings,  and  of
the  kings  to  them  renewed  every
month,  ii.  30.

E<p»c7ov,  Sylburgius  and  M.  *  *  *  mif-
take  this  word :  Portus  and  le  Jay
do  not,  ii.  76.

Etc  1  for  am,  i.  108.

Etc i  with  an  accufative  cafe,  though
generally  ufed  with  a  dative,  ii.  74.

ETrt&xAcjfv  explained,  ii.  109.

Ew^aAivov  inftead  of  ii.  5.

Epicurus,  why  his  doftrine  prevailed,
ii.  69.

Epigoni ,  their  hiftory  written  by  Hie¬
ronymus  of  Cardia,  i.  17.

EjrixXtj^  explained,  i.  211.

E7nf£a%ots—~ ct)iii()7cct<Tiv  explained,  viii.

31’

E7rou«f  explained,  i.  216.

E7cla  its  fituation,  ii.  no.

Equejlrian  cenfus,  when  inftituted,  ii.
28.

Equejirian  order  by  whom  inftituted,
vi.  11.

St,  etc.  Hercules  fubftitutes
pageants  inftead  of  human  fa-
crifices,  i.  120.

Eratojlhenes  his  great  character,  i.

.

Eretum ,  its  fituation,  iii.  27.  xi.  3.

—  a  difficulty  concerning  it,  ib.

Efquiline  hill,  iv.  13.

E ?<«  explained,  viii.  1.

Eteocles,  his  anfwer  to  his  mother  Jo*<
Cafta  from  Euripides,  i.  130.

Eri,  the  force  of  this  word,  vii.  2.


Evao’/uof  inftead  of  fva?yjc,  v.  39.

— -  derived  from  tvot,  ib.

E v%io-Qm  explained,  i.  73.

Ev<rlaQ an  (5 ict.  All  the  tranflators

miftake  this  expreffion,  ii.  47.
Evening,  or  lighting  up  of  lamps,  xi.
20.

Evils.  not  to  cure  evils  with  evils,',  a
Greek  proverb,  xi.  10.

explained,  vii.  8.
adverbially  for  nuAiv,  vii.  15.
explained,  ii.  14.

E|«xA«ov  explained,  vii.  12.

E|fA<|«vJgf  me  a cfaxs,  a  term  in  tallies,
explained,  viii.  40.

Ezixjoiv  explained,  x.  12.

Expulfon  ofTarquin.  Someobferva-
tions  made  on  a  note  of  M.  *  **
relating  to  the  expulfion  of  Tar-
quin  •,  and  the  right  of  the  Roman
people  to  expel  him  vindicated,

iv.  82.

F.

Fabius  Maximus,  i.  25.

Fabius  the  hiftoi  ian  ftyled  by  Livy
feriptorum  antiquiffimus,  i.  21.
Faith  public,  a  temple  ere&ed  to  her,

v.  53’

—  to  fwear  by  their  faith  the  molt
binding  of  all  oaths  among  the  Ro¬
mans,  ix.  7.

Far,  Spelt,  a  marriage  ceremony,  ii.
51*

Feciales,  the  inflitution  of  them  taken
from  the  iEquicoli,  ii.  143 .

—  the  manner  in  which  they  de¬
manded  fatisfabtion,  ii.  144.

Ferculum ,  Dionyfius  improperly  cen¬
fured  by  Cafaubon  for  not  under-
ftanding  this  word,  ii.  67.
Ferentinum ,  its  fituation,  iii.  29.

Feria  Laiinae,  when,  and  where  held,
iv.  58.  (  •  ;  i ;  j  '

Ficana ,  its  fituation,  iii.  36.

Ficulea,  its  fituation,  v.  37.

Figtree


INDEX  to  the  NOTES.


Fig  tree  holy,  iii.  77.

Fine  of  Veturius  amounted  to  more
than  that  of  Romiiius,  x.  41.

■ —  the  greateft  Fine,  what,  x.  42.
Fire  and  Water,  a  marriage  cere¬
mony  ;  and  a  remarkable  reafon
given  for  it  by  M.  *  *  *,  ii.  61.

■ —  the  perpetual  fire  of  Veka,  in  what
manner  fupplied,  when  it  happen¬
ed  to  be  extinguished,  ii.  133.
Flammeum>  and  Flamines,  ii.  127.
Flejh)  a  miraculous  Slower  of  flefli,

x.  4.  ui

For s  Fortuna ,  her  temple,  iv.  43.


Godlike  men*  Diony  fins,  and  all  other
writers  cenfured  for  ufing  that  ex-
preffion,  i.  22.  \

Government  j  Monarchy,  Ariftocracy
and  Democracy,  all  imperfed  forms
of  government,  when  unmixed  \
the  only  perfed  form  of  govern¬
ment  confifts  in  an  union  of  all
three  :  To  which  purpofe  Diony-
fius,  and  Polybius  are  compared,

.  ii.  8.  14.  vii.  23.

— ■  the  ancient  governments  in  Greece
were  hereditary  limited  monarchies,
according  to  Thucydides,  ii.  27.


Fortuna  Virilis ,  her  temple,  iv.  43.  T^/x^xlav  E^unoiv  x$q<rw  Le  Jay

cenfured  for  faying  that  Evander,
and  his  Arcadians  brought  the


See'  Ocrifia.

Fortune ,  her  temple  at  Antium,  how
called  St.  Biagio,  iv.  57.

Frugality  of  facrifices  commended  ;
and  a  fine  reflexion  of  Livy  on  that
fubjed,  ii.  46.

Fufetius ,  not  Suffetius,  iii.  5.

Funeral  orations  by  whom  firS  ufed,

v.  19.

G.

Gabii,  its  fituation,  iv.  63.

Games ,  their  different  forts,  i.  104.'
vii.  31,  32.  38.

Gamori  of  Syracufe  reffored  by  Gelo,

vi.  36.  vii.  2.  See  Gelo.

explained,  iii.  12.

Sextus  and  Cneius  Gellius,  annalifls,
i.  25.

Gelo ,  the  number  of  years  he  reigned
at  Syracufe,  vii.  2.

See  his  whole  hiftory,  ib.

Tfvgsiv  IGJouyv  explained,  i.  14*
Gentilia  facrificia,  ii.  40.

GenuciuSy  the  patricians  caufe  him  to
be  affaflinated,  ix.  21.
f«p>\#  explained,  vi.  49.

Glanis ,  the  name  of  a  river,  vii.  6.

explained  from
a  fimilar  paffage  in  Thucydides,
vi.  19.

y  r  1.1


Greek  language  into  Italy,  which,
even  to  them,  was,  at  that  time,  a
new  thing,  i.  105.

Greece ,  when  conquered  by  the  Ro¬
mans,  vii.  29.

—  a  noble  decree  publifhed  at  the
Ifthmian  games,  by  order  of  Titus
Quindius  Flaminir.us,  in  behalf  of
the  Greek  cities,  ib.

Greek  letters.  See  a  differtation  con¬
cerning  them  at  the  end  of  the
fourth  book.

Greeks ,  at  the  time  of  the  Am-
phidyonic  council,  were  called
r^»»co/,  and  not  three  hun¬

dred  and  thirteen  years  before  the
taking  of  Troy,  iv.  38.

See  €V  EAAjjch.

Ii.  ,

PLtmqnia,  the  ancient  name  of
Theffaly,  i.  51.

Hajlati.  See  Army ,  iv.  27.

Haft*  puree  explained,  x.  30.

Hebrew ,  and  Egyptian  languages,  no
affinity  between  them,  as  contended
for  by  Bochart,  and  the  author  of
the  hiftory  of  heaven,  i.  72.  .V-

HeUpoliS)


5°4


INDEX  to  the  NOTES.


Helepolis ,  a  warlike  engine,  defcribed,  lnceft,  a  term  for  the  incontinence  of
ix.  33.  a  Veftal,  ii.  132.

Hellanicus ,  the  Lefbian,  an  hiftorian,  —  the  dreadful  and  unnatural  pu«
i.  66.  nifhment  of  it,  ib.

Herculaneum  deftroyed  by  an  eruption  Interregnum  ;  Plutarch  tranflates  Li-
of  mount  Vefuvius,  i.  134.  vy,  and  miflakes  him  concerning

Hieronymus  of  Cardia,  an  hiftorian,  it,  ii.  116.

i.  17.  Inftitutions  of  the  Romans  preferred

Hone ,  the  remarkable  hone  of  Attius  to  thofe  of  the  Greeks,  ii.  36.
Navius  was  buried  in  the  place  Ionian  migration,  iv.  39.
where  the  comitia  were  held,  iii.  Ionic  cities,  twelve  of  them  refort  to
78.  Panionium,  iv.  39.

Horatiiy  the  Roman  champions,  iii.  Ipfi  familiaris  in  Portus  miftaken  by
10.  le  Jay  to  relate  to  patri ,  and  not

M.  Horatius ,  grandfon  of  M.  Hora-  the  wife  of  Virginius,  xi.  15.
tius  collegueof  P.  Valerius  Popli-  Irony  explained,  iv.  46.
cola,  one  of  the  glorious  inftru-  I%y%<ra  explained,  ii.  107.
ments,  by  which  the  Decemvirate  explained,  iv.  9.  x.  2.  9.

was  abolifhed,  xi.  6.  I eov.ofxixg  fubftituted  in  the  room  of

Horfes ,  belonging  to  the  Roman  x.  23.

knights,  were  maintained  by  the  I<ro4*>$xf  explained,  ii.  83.


public,  vi.  11.


Italy  defcribed,  i.  113.

Julian  the  emperor,  his  gentle  dif-
pofition,  ii.  133.

Julii,  the  heads  of  a  long  lift  of
ufurpers,  iii.  24.

Juno  Lacinia ,  a  golden  column  in  her
temple,  ii.  121.


I.

Iapygia.  Strabo’s  account  of  its  in¬
habitants,  i.  38.  172.

Iafius ,  who  he  was,  i.  206.

Janiculum  -,  the  two  ftone  coffins,  in  JuJlin  the  martyr,  cenfured  for  mif-
one  of  which  the  body  of  Numa  taking  Semoni  Sango,  ii.  91.
had  been  buried,  and  in  the  other  Juventus  and  Juventa,  iv.  21.
his  books  had  been  depofited,  were
dug  up  at  the  foot  of  this  mount,  K.

iii-  33-


uAhl  ocTT<x,ffYi<;  iSioig  fxixlov.  This  paf-
fage  explained,  and  fupplied,  i.  29.
Ic&o?  explained,  iv.  55.
tc t  Iegy  tuv  9ict>v  explained,  i.  219*
Ixeke/x  explained  from  Livy,  vi.  17.
Ilex.  See  Oak.

Imperatoria  brevitas  commended,  vi.
7-

Improbum  conjilium ,  a  fimple  and  beau¬
tiful  expreffion  of  Livy,  xi.  19.
Inachus ,  a  tragedy  of  Sophocles,  now
loft,  i.  8 1.


liotGeifot,  who  they  were,  i.  72.
KaJWxo?  explained,  x.  32.

KaJuAci  difcarded  for  Ku^uiWoi,  ii.
43-

RaAcx,  a  chapel,  but  oftener  a  hut,
i.  194.

ev  K«aw  explained  from  Thucydides,
vii.  28.

Kav>j (po^oi  their  funflion,  ii.  42.
K«vwv,  how  tranllated  by  le  Jay,  i.

237-

Kavevg?  explained,  ii.  14 1.


KoiC/xiAAoi


INDEX  to

Kacr/A/AAoi  inftead  of  K aJwAo/,  ii.  43.
KaLx;w£,«ra<  inftead  of  Kdlax^^cxi,
i.  6.

K alatfae&ott  explained,  i.  124.
Kxlet*yov1eg  aulvg  explained,  ii.  80.
ev  Kx9x^x  %&>£/«  explained,  ii.  10.
K#6f go/utvog  explained  from  Thu¬
cydides,  viii.  1.

Ko9a<riul<x4  fubftituted  in  the  room  of
jcoGw<r/«7o,  ii.  44*

K«7/o-^uov7g?  inftead  ofKa7<x<rp£ov7f?,  x.33.
rt  Ktrfuv  eQofot,  when  it  happened,  i.
240.

YL-i^xv  explained,  ii.  68.

Kermes  of  the  Arabians,  or  the  gall
of  the  Scarlet  oak,  viii.  18.

Kivduvwv.  Ex  Ttf  I uzlx  KtvSwUV  IXOieiffbxt

ixg  fAtkflxg.  This  paffage  imitated
from  Thucydides,  i.  79.

Kittim  and  Dodanim,  their  defen¬
dants,  i.  37.

KAs^oihf  to  xw&ov  explained  from
Xenophon,  x.  35.

KAw^  explained  by  the  Vatican,  i.
123.

KAioWjf  explained,  v.  34.
Knights  Roman,  when  inftituted,  ii.
28.

Kotvtff  rots  j Plato’s  fyftem  de-
fervedlycenfuredbyAriftotle,  ii.48.
Kotv>j  telo&ta,  explained,  i.  7.

Koxxof  fixpwK,  or  gall  of  the  Scarlet
oak,  viii.  j  8.

KmexuAix,  Chariot  races,  i.  104.
f.v  K-Qouva  C£w(>  (pg^«v.  To  carry  water
in  a  fieve ,  a  Greek  proverb,  ii.  135.
K oo-fAog  explained,  i.  59.

KTti/uuxlx  explained,  i.  260.

KvkAm  oi  Txrxaxv  eiKiluv  vtu[X7tAv}Qixv.
This  paffage  rendered  in  a  different
manner  from  all  the  tranllators,  i.
1 51-

KujcA viAivxg  taken  actively,  ix.  9;

L.

Labicum,  its  fituation,  viii.  7;


the  NOTES.  505

Labyrinth ,  an  extravagant  one  erefted
at  Clufium  by  Porfena,  for  his  bu¬
rial,  v.  24.

Lacedemonian  power,  at  what  time  it
began,  and  how  long  it  lafted,  i.
14.

—  the  Lacedaemonian  government
commended,  ii.  30.

—  the  oath  of  the  Lacedaemonian
kings,  ib.

—  Lacedaemonian  women  found  great
fault  with  by  Ariftotle,  ii.  49.

—  magiftrates  appointed  to  examine
into  their  conduct,  ii.  50.

—  the  difpohtion  of  the  Lacedae¬
monians  before  Lycurgus  gave
them  his  laws,  ii.  94.

—  the  Lacedaemonians,  with  all  the
forces  of  Peloponnefus,  except
thofe  of  the  Argivi,  inveft  Athens
by  land,  while  Lyfander  blocked  it
up  by  fea  with  one  hundred  and  fif¬
ty  fhips,  xi.  2.

Larijfa ,  the  citadel  at  Argos,  and  two
cities  in  Theffaly  called  by  that
name,  i.  63.

Lavinium ,  its  fituation,  i.  138.

Laurentes ,  fubftituted  by  Cafaubon
in  the  room  of  Laviniates,  ii.

Laurentum ,  its  fituation,  i.  137.

Laws  of  the  twelve  tables,  xi.  26.

Learning ,  and  fuperftition,  though
feemingly  inconfiftent,  found  a-
mong  the  Egyptians ;  and  the  rea-
fon  for  it,  vii.  36.

Legates ,  two  forts,  vi.  9.  ix.  8.

Legions  Roman  defcribed,  iv.  28.

—  in  what  manner  they  were  com-
pofed,  ix.  6.

—  Legionary  Tribunes,  ib.

Af»af  explained,  i.  132.

AiMyuv  fubftituted  with  great  fagacity
by  Stephens  in  the  room  of  Sm
Aeyw,  i.  36.

rn  who  thofe  people  were,  ib.

Leucofia ,


co6  I  N  D  E  X  to  the  NOTE  S.


Leucofia ,  a  little  rocky  ifland,  i.
iSi.

'  Leuttr a,  after  the  battle  of  Leudra,
the  Lacedemonians  were  never  able
to  recover  themfelves ;  and  why,
ii.  36.

Liberty ,  and  tyranny,  a  fine  contrail
between  them  taken  from  Livy,
v.  4.  .  ,

Libitina  Venus ,  Ratio  Libitine,  iv.
20.

Libri\ intei,  what  they  were,  i.  234.
xi.  37.

Licinnius  Macer  an  annalift,  i.  25.

Lightning  to  the  right,  an  aufpicious
omen  among  the  Greeks,  but  to
the  left  among  the  Romans ;  and
wherefore,  ii.  11,  12.

A iyves,  a  difficulty  concerning  them,
i.  65.

Ligures ,  not  the  fame  people  with  the
Ligues,  i.  65.

Liris,  the  name  of  a  river,  i.  31.

Liternum ,  its  fituation,  vii.  6.

Livy  relates  a  dream  of  Annibal  with
great  pomp,  i.  20.

—  a  fine  reflexion  of  his  upon  the
ambition  of  Romulus,  and  Remus,
i.  262.

Aoyoy^Qos  explained,  i  233*

Aoyov  cuir^ufAtvov  explained,  x.  39*

A vyywv  ctQccg  explained,  xi.  20.

Ludi  circenfes,  Chariot  races,  i.
104.

AvSag.  Aa^atnjf  Si  tvs  cI/aoi,  Av«L  [AQi.oye
Tt]V  fXiV  UfAeiVCOTV^V  .  This

paffage  reformed  by  Cafaubon,  and
by  the  tranflator,  i.  85.

A vKcuvot,  etc.  explained,  i.  251.

A\J7r<nv  explained,  i.  261.

Lupercal ,  not  derived  from  Lupa,  ii
100.  255.

Luftrum ,  the  number  of  years  it  con¬
tained,  iv.  35.

*—  in  what  the  Luftrum  differed  from
the  Cenfus,  ib.


Lycaan  hill  in  Arcadia,  on  which  the
temple  of  Pan  flood,  i.  100.

Lycurgus,  at  what  time  he  gave  laws
to  Sparta-,  ii.  94.

Lyfander ,  in  what  year  he  deftroyed
the  Athenian  fleet  at  iEgos  Pota-
mos,  i.  14.

—  Lyfander  blocks  up  the  port  of
Athens  called  Piraeus  with  one
hundred  and  fifty  fhips,  xi.  2.

M.

Macar,  the  father  of  Erefus,  from
whom  the  city  of  Erefus  in  Lefbos
took  its  name,  according  to  Stepha¬
ns,  i.  53.

Macedonians,  the  beginning  of  their
empire,  and  the  duration  of  it,  i.

14.

MotxJxs  bi,  etc.  different  tranfiations
of  this  paffage,  ii.  6.

Magijler  equitum,  was  appointed  by
the  dictator,  v.  62.

Muaukos,  Effeminate,  a  furname  given
to  Ariftodemus  j  and  the  reafon,
vii.  4.

with  a  comparative,  i.  199.

Manly  gown,  received  at  feventeen,
iv.  26.

Marathon,  the  year  when  that  battle
was  fought,  vi.  6.

Marriage  ceremonies,  ii.  51.

Marriage  ceremonies  ;  fire  and  wa¬
ter  ufed  at  them  j  and  a  remark¬
able  reafon  given  by  M.  *  *  *  for
that  cuftom,  ii.  61.

Majler  of  the  horfe  was  appointed  by
the  didator,  v.  62.

May,  the  ides  of  this  month  appointed
for  the  magiftrates  to  enter  upon
their  offices,  x.  5 x.

Medes  revolt  from  the  Affyrians,  i.14.

M yhyuoiv  e-'mi  ™  etc.  an

expreffion  taken  by  Dionyfius  from
Herodotus,  ii.  81.

MiJipvos,  a  bufhel,  iii,  41;

— -  MiJfftVCg


INDEX  to

—  'MsJi/aw  Atticus,  a  meafure  of  four
pecks,  and  fix  pints,  vii.  14.

—  M Sicilienfis  contained  fix
Englifh  pecks,  ib.

Mediterranean ,  M sroyeiot,  unfortunate¬
ly  applied  by  le  Jay  to  the  Me¬
diterranean  fea,  i.  54.

—  a  conje&ure  concerning  the  caufe
why  the  Mediterranean  is  not  fub-
je<5t  to  tides,  like  the  ocean,  i.
65.

Medius  Fidius  builds  a  city,  and  calls
it  Cures,  after  his  own •  name ,  ac¬
cording-  to  the  French  tranflators,
ii.89.

Meyitos  (Bcti/uor,  Ara  Maxima,  i.  129.

Melas ,  a  gulph  fo  called,  i.  207.

t  1  this  word  miftaken  by  Por-

tus,  Sylburgius,  and  le  Jay  ;  and
left  oat  by  M.  *  *  *,  i.  43.

lA^oiKKot  explained,  i.  118.

Mvomoi  at  Athens,  ii.  18.

Military  age  began  at  feventeen,  and
ended  at  forty  five,  iv.  26.

‘  Millia.  Fricies  centena  millia  ;  thefe
numbers  miftaken  by  the  French
tranflators,  xi.  1.

Mina ,  its  value,  iv.  22.  61.

Minerva ,  where  her  temple  ftood,  i.

x74*

Minturnre ,  a  Roman  colony,  i.  31.

Miracles  have  been  wrought,  and
will  be  wrought,  by  impoftors,  ii.
124.

Mifenum ,  a  cape  fo  called,  i.  182.

Mi<ro7rcv>j£&j  explained,  iii.  16.
explained,  ii.  137.

M oc^ivofjun}  explained,  vii.  20.

MotrwoiKOi,  Xenophon  gives  a  very  re¬
markable  account  of  thefe  people,
i.  83.

Mucius.  See  Scavola.

Mugionia  -porta,  ii.  99.

T&KXKOfftou.  The  French
tranflators  have  miftaken  thefe
numbers,  xi.  1.

Vol.  IV.


the  NOTES.  507

MuO o(.  The  Latin,  and  confequently
the  French,  tranflators  miftake  this
word,  i.  37.

Myrfilus ,  the  Lefbian,  an  hiftorian,  i.
74-

N.

Names  Roman,  iii.  45.

Na7r^1<v5f  y.cu  Cluver  upoiv

this  paffage,  i.  109.

Ngjuav  explained,  ii.  18.

5v<riou7  facrifices,  i.  103.
Nictea ,  its  fituation,  i.  146.

Night ,  divided  into  four  (4

Vigilise,  Watches,  or  Guards;
and  the  times  at  which  they  mount¬
ed,  iii.  60.

Nomentum ,  its  fituation,  ii.  104.
Norba ,  its  fituation,  vii.  11.

Numa ,  his  character,  ii.  119.

—  the  manner  in  which  he  was  elect¬
ed,  ii.  i22.

—  the  ftone  coffin,  in  which  he  him-
felf  was  buried,  and  another,  in
which  his  books  were  depofited,
dug  up-  at  the  foot  of  the  Jani-
culum,  iii.  33.

Numicius ,  a  river  fo  called,  receives
Anna  Perenna  to  his  watry  bed,  i.
138.

Nundina  explained,  vii.  24.

O.

O,  a  very  exprefiive  particle  in  Greek,

•  •  o

11.  82.

Oaks  of  feveral  forts,  viii.  1 8.
Obfidional.  See  Crown .

Ocrifia ,  her  adventure,  iv.  43.
Ceniadce ,  who  they  were,  i.  170.

OfMnoi  explained  from  Demofthenes,
iv.  8.

Attic  for  eyyv{9  i.  246.

Open  their  arms,  and  their  gates,  an
exprefiion  of  Dionyfius  cenfured,

vi.43.

Opima  fpolia ,  Plutarch  cenfured  for
U  u  u  con-


5o8  I  N  D  E  X  to

contradifling  the  derivation  of  Var-
ro,  ii.  67.

OttA*  Ssfxtv oi  explained,  iii.  1 5.
OTrhtleu  the  fame  with  iv.  2  8 .

Oracle  of  Delphi,  ii.  94.

—  the  charafter  of  its  priefts,  ib.

—  oracle  of  Dodona,  i.  166.

— -  Pythian  oracles,  delivered  in  verfe,
as  long  as  they  were  in  credit
enough  to  maintain  a  poet,  i.

J55'

—  Sibylline  Books  in  profe,  i.  155.
iv.  72.

—  Sibylline  oracles  in  Greek  hexame¬
ter  verfe,  an  impofture,  i.  *55-
iv.  72.

<— *  the  oracle  given  to  the  Pelafgi,
i-  57-

O oGof,  not  oa£<c?,  explained,  iv.  48.
npxhrav  explained,  i  273.

Otyv  explained,  vii.  13.  18.
n n  nil g  O^oif.  The  tranflators  are
miftaken  in  this  paflage,  ii.  85.
Ortona ,  or  Hortona ,  its  fituation,  viii.
60.

O <rov,  miftaken  by  all  the  tranflators
except  Portus,  i.  44.

Ojlia ,  a  Roman  colony,  i.  31.

—  a  bad  port  according  to  Strabo,
iii.  40.

O,  before  a  fubftantive,  iv.  32.
Ovation ,  the  perfon  honored  with  an
ovation  was  crowned  with  laurel,

v-  39<  ,  r

—  Pliny  fays  with  myrtle,  and  after¬
wards  he  fays  with  olive,  ib.

• —  ovations  defcribed,  ix.  36.
Ou*Pagv,  Vitulum,  according  to  fome
the  etymology  of  Italy,  i.  no.
Ov^oi  explained,  i.  176.

Oxen.  White  oxen  fend  a  petition  to
the  emperor,  i.  73.

P.

n,  the  PEolians  made  ufe  of  a  t,  in¬
stead  of  a  |3  j  though  M.  *  *  *


the  NOTES.

maintains  the  contrary,  ii.  15.
Paganalia  a  Roman  feftival,  iv.  17.
Pageants  fubftituted  by  Hercules  in
the  room  of  human  facrifices,  i.  57.
120.

TlxiAii  explained,  i.  128.

Palladium ,  i.  220.

Pallantium ,  its  fituation,  i.  96.
Pallene ,  a  promontory,  i.  149.  156.
n«v  how  reprefented,  i.  99.
Panionium.  See  Ionian  migration .
Tlx^iQodou  explained,  vii.  38.
n*£?Ao>v explained  from  Ariftophanes,
i.  48.

n oi^cfA.01  dvfyuvoi,  ftrangely  tranf-
lated  by  M.  *  *  *,  i.  125.
explained,  i.  247.

Uaoei\y,(pus  not  exprefled  by  M.  *  *  *,
i.  98.

lx vlov  explained,  i.  264.
nottfogas  explained,  vii.  37.

TJx^/uxc  £%ovhf.  Le  Jay  has  fallen  into
a  ridiculous  error  in  tranflating
this  paflage,  ii.  142.

Parricide ,  in  what  manner  this  crime
was  punifhed  by  the  Romans,  iv.

7°-

nxQtjfxdct  explained,  i.  33.
rLxQuiV,  X7T0  100V  ithxv  tzxQoov,  a  paflage
imitated  from  Thucydides,  v.  10.
Patres  audlores  jiunt  explained,  ii.
122.

Patres  confcripti  explained,  ii.  26.  v.
I4<

Patricians^  a  dignity  antecedent  to
that  of  fenator,  ii.  86.

—  the  patricians  fhew  a  truly  noble
fpirit  in  oppofmg  the  return  of
Corioianus,  viii.  14.

—  patricians  defcend  to  the  meaneft
of  all  aflions,  the  aflfaffination  of
Genucius,  ix.  2 1 .

Pedum ,  its  fituation,  viii.  8.

Uthxyiog  wAat  how  tranflated  by  M«
•  *  *,  i.  163.

Jlth&iiyiMs  explained,  89.


INDEX  to

Pelafgi  fettled  in  Crete,  i.  52.

—  why  they  were  called  ib.

. Peloponnejian  war,  upon  what  dread¬
ful  conditions,  with  regard  to  the
Athenians,  it  was  put  an  end  to,
xi.  i.

People ,  Roman,  had  conflitutionally
a  fovereign  power  concerning  the
election  of  magiftrates,  the  enact¬
ing  or  repealing  laws,  and  the  de¬
claring  war,  or  making  peace,  vii.
19.

n£e>6*M.cv7f?  explained,  x.  S.

Yle&nileiot.  explained,  iii.  13.

Perftans  never  made  any  conquefts  in
Europe  under  Darius  Hyftafpes,
i.  10.

—  were  defeated  at  Marathon  by  the
Athenians,  and  Datis,  their  ge¬
neral,  was  (lain,  ib.

■ —  Perfians  invade  Greece,  vi.  24.

—  Perfian  army,  the  number  of
which  it  confided  at  the  battle  of
Thermopylae,  xi.  1.

—  the  number  of  Greeks  there  (lain,
ib.

{pouvopzvii  improperly  for  vi.

3 T*

(pxhotyfnou  the  fame  with  b-nh^ouy  iv.
28.

Phalanx  deferibed,  ib.

the  Macedonian  Phalanx,  ib.
explained,  x.  31.

Pherecydes  the  Athenian,  M.  *  *  *
confounds  this  hiftorian  with  Phe¬
recydes  of  Syros,  i.  45.

Gegolhc  aoltjv,  aphrafe  of  chronologers,
iv  209.

C piJliix  explained,  ii.  45.

explained,  i.  262.

Philip ,  his  ungenerous,  and  then  no¬
ble,  behaviour  to  the  Athenian,
and  Theban  prifoners  after  the  bat¬
tle  of  Chasronea,  ii.  3  7.

Philijlusy  of  Syracufe,  the  hiftorian,
i.  68.


the  NOTES.  509

QiXcbtwgxq  rm  y.sihuv  xou

The  different  translations  of  le  Jay,
and  M.  *  *  *  upon  this  paffage,
i.  23.

QqQu  ufed  adfively,  ii.  78.

(pomico7r«£v(p*j  explained,  ii.  138,
curiae,  not  tribes,  ii.  86.

Puteus,  explained,  iii.  79.

Qgovvicrctf  TOi  &0\l1lK0t  ffVVtluloclor,  etc.
this  thought  imitated,  but  not  the
expreffion  taken,  from  Thucydides,
iv.  3.

(pthyfos  explained,  i.  272.-

TQS?  (pvyxJsct  7T vA«f,  a  difficult  ex-
preffion,  i.  142.

£v  (puAofjej}  ct$i<ryMy  1.  259.

< VvKxkv  explained,  iii.  60.

tpvA a|o»7 a  xxhovlct  wv  fxv7  tranflated
Ebbtide ,  and  why,  i.  65.

<pvAj*  jt«i  Tt/L-xlvs  explained,  ii.  15.

QvhtJw  inftead  of  ix.  24.

Pilumy  a  defeription  of  it,  i.  59.  v.

38-

Piraeus^  the  port  of  Athens,  blocked
up  by  Lyfander  with  one  hundred
and  fifty  fhips,  xi.  2.

PittacuSy  a  legiflator,  ii.  56.

Pittacusy  a  chief  magiftrate,  v.  56.

Placianiy  who  they  were,  i,  93.

Plebern  j  ferre  ad  Plebemy  explained,
vii.  19.

Plethrum ,  a  meafure  of  length,  af-
certained,  iii.  70.  iv.  68.

Plutarch  cenfured  for  contradicting
Dionyfius  concerning  the  triumph
of  Romulus,  ii.  67.

—  the  extraordinary  method,  in  which
he  makes  the  decuries  reign  during
the  interregnum,  ii.  116.

—  he  tranflates  Livy,  and  miftakes,
him,  ib.

IIoAawf  explained,  i.  136.  139.

IIoA Umoi  explained,  iii.  32.

tuv  TloKilm  inftead  of  ruv  IIcAA&sv  y  not-
withftanding  Cafaubon  and  Ste¬
phens  both  contend  for  noAAwv,  i.  1 5.
U  u  u  2  Pohtoriunu


510  INDEX

Politorium ,  its  fituation,  iii.  34.

Polufca ,  its  fituation,  vi.  47.

Polybius ,  the  hiftorian,  i.  20.

Pometine  plains,  their  fituation,  ii.
96.

Pontifices ,  the  etymology  of  this  word,
ii.  145.

e—  not  chofen  originally  by  the  peo¬
ple,  though  they  were  fo  after¬
wards,  ii.  146.

Pope's  tranflation  of  the  Iliad  com¬
mended,  i.  186.

Popes  change  their  names,  i.  213.

—  their  legates  a  latere ,  vi,  9.

IloariTwaf  Forum  Popilii,  i.

64.

P optic ola ,  buried  at  the  public  ex¬
pence,  v.  40.

Porcius  Cato ,  the  cenfor,  his  great
character,  i.  25.

Porfena ,  his  labyrinth,  and  monu¬
ment,  v.  24.

Pofidonium ,  its  fituation,  i.  235.

,  Prafeblus  urbis  explained,  ii.  24.

Pranefte,  its  fituation,  iv.  63.

IT^t7«v  explained,  ii.  112.

TlpaGevltK  explained,  vi.  9.

Previous  vote  of  the  fenate  explained,
x.  38.

Primipili ,  their  command,  ix.  6,

Principes ,  military,  iv.  27.

or  the  previous  order  of
the  fenate,  vii.  19.

Prochyta ,  a  fmall  ifland,  i.  183.

Tl£oJo<na?  explained,,  ii.  21.

.UgovuTri explained  from  iEfchylus,
iv.  14.

Prophet ,  or  author  of  the  Sibylline
oracles,  in  what  he  differs  from  all
other  prophets,  i.  155.
explained,  iii.  39.

n^o<r>j7'0^of  explained,  i.  222.

n$ohfov,  a  very  elegant  word,  i.  2  63.

M.  *  *  *,  his  opinion,  con¬
cerning  this  word,correded,  ii.  44.

Pfalms ,  a  paffage  in  them  rectified,
ii.  123.


to.  the  NOT  E  S.

explained,  x.  32.

IIvAflif,  Tot?  (pvyotJoic  sruAaf,  a  difficult
exprefiion,  i.  142.

PunEta  explained,  x.  32.

Punic  war,  in  what  manner  the  fe-
cond  Punic  war  was  ended,  i.  14.
—  Punic  war,  the  firfb,  when  it  be¬
gan,  i.  27.

Puteal ,  and  Puteus,  their  difference,
iii.  70.

Pyramids  of  Egypt,  iv.  37.

Pyrrh^a^  the  ancient  name  of  Thef-
faly,  i.  51.

Pyrrhonifm  in  hiftory,  the  bad  con-
lequences  of  it,  xi.  37.

Pythagoras  could  not  inftrudf  Numa,
ii.  88.  1 19.

—  the  time  when  Pythagoras  came
into  Italy,  ii.  120.

Pythian.  See  Oracle.

Ql

Quintilius,  no  fuch  month  in  ths
Roman  calendar,  vi.  10.

Quirinal  hill,  iv.  13.

Quirites ,  the  name  of  the  Romans
from  the  city  Cures,  ii.  71,.  84.

R.

Races,  Chariot  races,  i.  104.
Records  of  the  cenfors,  i.  241.
Rcgillum ,  its  fituation,  v.  35.

Regillus ,  the  name  of  a  lake  ;  a  bat¬
tle  fought  there,  iv.  65.  vi.  4.
Religion  \  the  Greeks  borrowed  the
whole  fyflem  of  their  abfurd  reli¬
gion  from  the  ^Egyptians,  vii.  36.
Remus ,  the  moft  probable  account  of
his  death,  ii  265.

Rickius ,  and  M.  *  *  *  cenfured  for
affirming  that  the  Aborigines  could
not  be  a  colony  of  Arcadians,  i.

37-

Rimes ,  a  monkifh  yoke,  vii.  33.

Rings  of  gold,  worne  by  the  Roman
knights,  ii.  2.8*


; —  a  very


INDEX  to  the  NOTES.  511


< —  a  very  great  number  of  them  fent
to  Carthage,  after  the  battle  of
Cannae,  with  Mago  the  brother  of
Annibal,  ii.  28.

Robes  triumphal  defcribed,  iii.  63.

H  Si  P uux*ctiv  aro «7rar»if  //.sv

yvs,  etc.  Le  Jay  has  tranflated  a.
long  note  of  Cafaubon  upon  this
palfage,  without  any  acknowledge¬
ment,  i.  13.

j Romans,  when  they  received  Chrifli-
anity,  frill  preferved  their  old  reli¬
gion,  and  only  changed  the  objedt
of  it,  ii.  39.

—  Romans  were  originally  Greeks,
iv.  29.  41.

P ofj&aetSet  explained,  ii.  140.

Rome ,  the  time  of  its  foundation,  i.
22  5.

Rufella ,  its  fituation,  iii.  56.

Pu$(uoi?  explained,  vii,  33..

S>

Sacer  mons,  its  fituation,  vi.  33.

Sacrifices  human  abolifhed  by  Her¬
cules,  i.  57.  120.

—  human  facrificts,.  under  the  notion
of  a  delegated  attonement,  abo¬
minable,  ib.

oxen  facrinfed  for  thankfgiving  af¬
ter  a  viftory,  i.  73.

—  white  oxen  petition  the  emperor,
ib.

—  a  king  of  the  fac’ifices,  v.  3.

—  facrifices  peculiar  to  families,  ii.
40.

Salentinum,  a  promontory,  i.  173.

Satina,  the  fait  pits,  ii.  111.  iii.  37.

Sanctis ,  Juflin  cenlured  for  millaking
him,  ii.  88.

Saturnalia ,  when  celebrated,  vi.  i.

Saturnus ,  the  happinefs  ol  the  people
of  Italy  under  his  reign,  i.  107.
1 19.

Scavola ,  Mucins',  the  horrid  fcene  of
his  roaftjng  his  hand  is  related  by


Livy,  but  judicioufly  omitted  by
Dioriyfius,  v.  26.

Scamandrius,  or  Ally  an  ax,  i.  147.

Scarlet  oak  defcribed,  viii.  18.

Scipio  Afiricanus  retires  voluntarily  to
Liternum,  vii.  6.

Scutum  defcribed,  i.  59.

Secefiion ,  in  what  manner  the  firft  and
fecond  ended,  vi,  40.

S  emir  amis  did  not  build  the  walls  of
Babylon,  according  to  Ufher,  iv.
36.  .  *

Semoni  Sango ,  Juflin  cenfured  for  his
miflake  of  this  name,  ii.  88.

Senate^  at  what  age  the  Romans  might
be  admitted  into  that  affembly,  vi.

*8-

—  the  prince  of  the  fenate,  ii.  25.

Senators ,  their  number  one  hundred  in

the  time  of  Romulus,  ii.  25.

—  another  hundred  added  byTatius,
and  Romulus  \  and  another  hun¬
dred  by  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  iii.  66.

Septem  Pagi ,  their  fituation,  ii.  no.

Sewers ,  the  common  lewers  defcribed,
iii.  67.

—  the  prodigious  fum  which  only
the  efeanfing  them  cofl,  iii.  68.

Sextilis ,  the  month  Augu-ft,  ix.  15.

Sextus  Tarquinius,  Dionyfius  and  Livy
differ  in  many  things  relating  to
him,  iv.  65.

—  his  ftrategem  to  reduce  the  Ga-
bini,  ib.

Shower ,  miraculous  fhower.  of  flefh,..
x.  4.

Sibyl.  See  Oracle.

Sicani ,  a  difficulty  concerning  them,
i.  65.

Siccius ,  his  age,  and  the  number  of
years  he  had  ferved,  x.  25.

Siceli,  their,  hiftory,  i.  33.

Sieve,  to  carry  water  in  a  fieve ,  ?v  xo<rx ma.
vSu%  $€£««,  a  Greek  proverb,  ii,.
135-

Sigma,  its  fituation,  iv.  73-


2»iw»w>


5X2  INDEX  to  the  NOTES.


Stmm  explained,  vii.  34.

Silenus ,  the  hiftorian,  mentions  a
remarkable  dream  of  Annibal,
i.  20.  -  ; . .  ■' ■

—  the  fame  dream  related  with  greater
pomp  by  Livy,  ib.

Sifenna ,  a  Roman  hiftorian,  i.  25.

Xwcxcptj  explained,  i.  250.

Scion ,  was  not  an  Athenian,  though
the  legiflator  of  Athens,  ii.  55.

— •  the  time  of  his  death,  v.  5 1 .

—  a  law  of  his  relating  to  an  abo¬
lition  of  debts,  ib.

Sophocles  the  tragic  poet,  i.  39.

Xolyyioig  v7ro\yi^ig  explained,  ii.  4.

Spartan  women,  their  unnatural  con-
fpiracy,  iii.  7 2.

Spear  defcribed,  i.  59.

YnryiKaAQv  piyoc,  the  cave  of  Cacus,  i.

IOI.

Spelt,  in  marriage  ceremonies,  ii:  51.

Kefla  X<poi g  £t?£ch  explained,  i.  133.

Spines  the  principal  mouth  of  the  Po,
i*  55*

Spufius  anciently  for  Spurius,  iii.  31:

St a&m  afcertained,  i.  31.  iii.  71.

Starting  places  for  the  horfes,  iii.  72.

Statue ,  brazen,  eredled  to  Horatius
Codes,  v.  25.

—  an  equeftrian  ftatue,  the  firft,
erefted  to  the  honor  of  Cloelia,
v.  28.

—  the  words  of  a  fpeaking  ftatue,
viii.  36.

Sre^fls  [accio/amoi ,  etc.  the  oracle  gi¬
ven  to  the  Pelafgi,  i.  57.

Ireju/uotlx  explained,  ii.  130.

Sr£(f>«vov  re  xgvcreov  explained,  iii.  63.

Zr^Syiyo;  uvloKger'lwg  explained,  iii.  5,
explained,  x.  26.

—  the  ftrange  manner,  in  which  the
French  tranflators  have  rendered
this  word,  ib.

Sublimi  anhelitu  in  Horace,  a  tranflation

of  MtliWfjO?  ‘TO  UViVfJLOf;  xi.  14.

Suejfa  P omnia,  iv.  59,


—  the  great  booty  taken  at  this  place,
iv.  62.

Suffibula ,  the  veils  of  the  veftals,  ii.

I3°*

S vyUvtix  fubftituted  in  the  room  of
arUtfAiot,  and  explained,  vi.  28.

Zvywrif,*  all  the  tranflators  have  mif-
taken  the  fenfe  of  this  word,  ii.

115.

Xwonafyn  explained,  ii.  3;

Suovetaurilia ,  a  iacriflce,  confifting  of
a  Boar,  a  Ram,  and  a  Bull,  iv.  35.

Superjlition ,  and  learning,  tho’  feem-
ingly  inconfiftent,  found  among
the  Egyptians  j  and  the  reafon  for
it,  vii.  36.

To  Suppole  a  child,  xi.  16.

Svo-o-J/*  explained,  ii.  45.

Sylla,  Cornelius  Sylla,  the  dictator,  a
moft  cruel  man,  v.  63.

—  the  grants,  which  he  extorted  from
his  fellow  citizens,  ib.

—  the  prodigious  number  of  perfons
he  put  to  death,  v.  64.

T.

Tables,  the  laws  of  the  twelve  ta¬
bles,  xi.  2 6.

Totyy.oi<rnr,  sv  rmg  zrsvle  ioeyy.u<nv

this  paffage,  becaufe  it  is  miftaken
by  Portus,  is  therefore  miftaken
bylejay,  xi.  12.

‘ Talent ,  its  value,  iii.  68.  iv.  62.

—  talent,  a  weight,  ix.  18.

T otiMt'jurQou  Ttjv  Tvfcyv  explained,  i.  214.

tarpeia ,  Livy  treats  that  affair  as  a
fable,  ii.  75.

Tutpou,  or  ToSpK,  a  funeral ;  rajcpor,  a
monument,  ii.  148.  iii.  17.

Tarquinii,  its  fituation,  iii.  43.

L.  tarquinius,  and  his  brother  Aruns,
were  not  the  fons,  but  the  grand-
fons  of  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  iv.  1.

77-

P.  and  M.  tarquinius,  a  difcovery
of  le  Jay  concerning  them  com¬
municated


INDEX  to  the  NOTES,  513


municated  with  great  modefty,
v.  45.

T tjfiewov,  a  robe,  defcribed,  iii.  64.

Tellen#,  its  fituation,  iii.  35.

TeAof  z%eiv  c(pi<ri  to  Szqttqotuqv  wi nhaGov,
ill  tranflated  by  Portus,  and  le  Jay,

i.  56.

Teptvog  does  not  always  fignify  a  tem¬
ple,  i.  102.

T ‘erminalia,  a  feftival,  when,  and  by
whom  inftituted,  ii.  147.

Tejtrina ,  its  fituation,  ii.  92.

Tejludo  defcribed,  vi.  49.  ix.  32.

Quvulyj$o(>Gv  xyunv  explained,  iii.  18.

QctV'Ua.ffiov  0^0?,  a  mountain  in  Arcadia,

i.  205.

©£ fxivoi  rot  oVa«  explained,  iii.  15.

Themijlocles ,  M.  *  *  *  is  of  opinion,
that  the  great  Themiftocles  could
not  be  this  Archon  j.  his  opinion
refuted,  vi.  24.

Theophraftus ,  v.  55.

! Theopompus ,  the  hiitorian,  his  great
character,  i.  2.

—  Theopompus,  king  of  Sparta,  an
anfwer  of  his  to  his  wife,  concern¬
ing  the  inftitution  of  the  Ephori,

ii.  27.

/uxlav  explained,  iv.  67.

Thermopylae,  the  Amphidftyonic  coun¬
cil  held  there,  iv.  38.

—  the  number  of  the  Perfian  army
at  the  battle  of  Thermopylae,  xi.  1 .

T.hejjalonica ,  its  fituation,  i.  158.

Thejjaly ,  anciently  called  Haemonia,
and  Pyrrhaea,  i.  51.
explained,  i.  188.

0>flzg  at  Athens,  ii.  18.  iii.  2.  iv.  11.

Thucydides ,  the  hiftorian,  i.  69.  80.

Qvggog,  fcutum,  afhield,  defcribed,  iv.
25.

Tiber  defcribed,  i.  31.  iii.  40.

Timaus  of  Sicily,  an  hiftonan,  high¬
ly  commended  by  his  countryman
Diodorus  Siculus,  i.  18.
explained,  xi.  18.


r um  Tiy.))ltKuv  v7roiAvtj[A,ofluv  explained,  i.
241.

Toga  Virilis ,  at  what  age  taken,  iv.
26.

Toieria ,  its  fituation,  viii.  5.

Tovlo  to  ytqag  explained,  x.  24.

T &vy.<xhocs  explained,  i.  256.

Tejkuxovla  AzyiJca  etc.  i.  193.

Trial  of  Marcius  Coriolanus,  in  what
manner  he  was  condemned  by  the
tribes,  vii.  26.

—  the  number  of  tribes  at  his  trial
Rated,  ib.

T riarii.  See  Army.

Tribes ,  the  firft  divifion  of  the  peo¬
ple  into  tribes,  related  by  Livy  in
a  contradidoiy  manner,  ii.  15.

—  three  national,  and  four  local,  iv.
32.

—  there  could  not  poffibly  have  been
five  and  thirty  tribes,  in  the  time
of  Servius  Tullius,  iv.  16.

—  one,  or  rather  two  and  twenty  at
the  trial  of  Coriolanus,  vii.  26.

* —  the  number  of  tribes,  into  which
the  city  of  Rome,  and  the  whole
country  was  divided  by  Servius
Tullius,  ib.

Tribunes ,  their  number  originally  five,
vi.  44.

—  and  thirty  fix  years  after,  their
number  was  augmented  to  ten,  ib.

—  all  modern  writers  cenfured  for
treating  the  tribunes  difrefpebtfully,
ib.

—  legionary  tribunes,  ix.  6.

Tributa.  See  Comitia.

T ^ycova.  taxi  AuoV,  mufical  inflrii-
ments,  i.  106.

TejKctgTrxg  ccgxgyg,  the  fertility  of  the
Campanian  plains,  i.  115.

Triopium ,  its  fituation,  iv.  40.

T voruf,  a  Pnip  carrying
three  thoufand  bufhels,  or  feventy
five  tun  ;  not  three  thoufand  men,

iii.  41.


INDEX  to  the  NOTES.


xa»  TeS<C“  TBi&l'XjiLGW  €K  yvs  AA7T«f,  an
expreffion  copied  from  Polybius,
wherein  it  is  fhewn,  that  it  ought  to
be  and  not  T&nlcti,  as  Hud-

fon  thinks,  i.  35.

Triumph  confular,  the  firft,  v.  17.

—  triumph  of  Quintius,  x.  20.

—  triumph  of  Romulus.  See  Plu¬
tarch ,

—  Valerius  and  Horatius,  the  fir  ft
who  triumphed  by  a  vote  of  the
people  without  the  authority  of  the
fenate,  xi.  30.

Triumphal  car  was  preceded  by  the
fpoils  firft,  and  then  by  the  pri-
foners,  and  followed  by  the  army,
viii.  41.

—  triumphal  crown,  iii.  65.

* —  triumphal  robes,  iii.  63.

Triumvir s,  agrarian  explained,  vii.  10.

Trey  in  Italy,  i.  185.

•—  Troy,  when  taken,  i.  210.  219.

Tuhero ,  a  Roman  hiftorian,  i.  25.

Tunicapalmata  deferibed,  iii.  63.

Tv^vmcv  ^yi/xot  explained,  i.  224*

Tv&ms  not  always  in  a  bad  fenfe,

„  I3°*

Turmu?,  ii.  16.

Tu£ct«? explained,  i.  82.

Tufculum ,  its  fituation,  x.  12.

Tyranny ,  and  liberty,  a  fine  contraft
between  them  taken  from  Livy,
v.  4.

Tyrrhenian  a  city  built  by  le  Jay,  i.
88,

V.

Valerian  family,  its  genealogy
maintained  againft  Glareanus,  and
M.  *  *  *,  vii.  1.

Valerius ,  on  what  day  he  triumphed,
xi.  30.

Veiin.  its  fituation,  ii.  107.

Veils  of  the  Veftals,  ii.  130.

—  the  manner  in  which  they  took
the  veil,  ii.  131.


—  the  dreadful  and  unnatural  pu-
nifhment  of  their  Inceft,  or  In¬
continence,  ii.  132.

Velitr^n  its  fituation,  iii.  38,

Veftals n  their  number  never  any  more
than  fix,  ii.  129.

VefuviuSn  a  dreadful  eruption  of  that
mount  deftroys  Herculaneum,  i.

IK*.  .  .  ..

Vetulonian  its  fituation,  iii.  57.

Vetulonium  fubftituted  by  Cluver  in
the  room  of  Solonium,  its  fituation,
ii-  73-

Veturius,  the  name  of  a  conful,  mif-
taken  by  le  Jay  for  the  name  of  a
town,  ix.  35.

Victory ,  oxen  facrififed  after  a  vi&ory,
i-  73-

—  white  oxen  petition  the  emperor,  ib.

Vigilian  guards,  or  watches,  iii.  60.

Villian  law,  relating  to  the  age,  at

which  the  Romans  might  be  ad¬
mitted  into  the  magiftraey,  not  of
ancient  inftitution,  vi.  38.

Vtminal  hill,  iv.  13.

VindiciuSy  the  name  of  the  (lave,  who
difeovered  the  confpiracy  to  reftore
Tarquin,  v.  9.

— -  the  firft  perfon,  who  was  made
free  according  to  the  method  in
ufe  among  the  Romans  called  Vin-
didta,  v.  13.

— *  the  method  of  it,  ib.

Virtue  confifts  in  the  mean,  viii.  38.

T<&ivo?,  Lucius  Icilius  was  not  the  fon,
but  the  grandfon,  of  that  Icilius,
who  was  one  of  the  firft  tribunes,
xi.  13.

T/wvxf  explained,  iv.  1.

Vitellidn  its  fituation,  viii.  27.

Ta>7  xocKafyuv  explained,  iii.  28.

T pvxcrav  TVjv  Bw,  the  tranflation  of  this
paftage  apologized  for,  i.  62.

Volaterr^n  its  fituation,  iii.  55.

Volumus  et  juhemus  explained,  vii.

*9-

Voftius


INDEX  to  the  NOTES.  515


Vcjfius  cenfured  for  faying  that  Livy
published  his  hiftory  before  the
temple  of  Janus  was  fhut  for  the
fecond  time,  i.  8.

Votes,  the  manner  in  which  the  peo¬
ple  voted  at  the  trial  of  Corio-
lanus,  vii.  26.

—  Coriolanus  is  condemned  by  a
majority  of  two  votes,  ib.  viii.  3.

—  there  could  not  have  been  a  ma¬
jority  of  only  one  vote  among  the
thirty  curise,  v.  7.

—  the  method  of  voting  in  the  cen-
turiata  comitia,  iv.  33.

—  centuries  voted  by  lot,  iv.  34.

Vowels,  i.  272.

TTr&yopmi  explained,  i.  254:

TTraloi  explained,  vi.  5.

T7ro€xAMlxi  explained,  xi.  16.

Urn,  or  ballot  box  ufed  in  voting,  x.

3Z-

explained,  iii.  72.

Vulturnum ,  its  fituation,  vii.  6.

Vnlturnus ,  the  name  of  a  river,  vii.  6.

W.

Watch,  guard,  explained,  iii.  60.

Water  and  fire,  a  marriage  ceremony ;
and  a  remarkable  reafon  given  for
it  by  M.  *  *  *,  ii.  61.

—  to  carry  water  in  a  fieve,  iv  kowu

(ptovv ,  a  Greek  proverb,  ii.

]35-


Women,  the  Lacedaemonian  women
are  found  great  fault  with  by  Arifto-
tle,  ii.  49.

—  magiflrates  appointed  to  examine
into  their  conduct,  ii.  50.

—  Spartan  women,  their  unnatural
confpiracy,  iii.  72.

—  the  embafiadors  of  Romulus  were
contemptuoufly  afked,  why  they
did  not  open  an  afylum  for  women
too,  ii.  60.

X.

Xanthus,  the  Lydian,  an  hiftorian,
i.  86.

Hv7re7»f,  a  divifion  of  an  Athenian
tribe,  i.  208.

Y.

Year  Roman,  when  it  began,  v.  1!

—  the  Pompilian,  and  Julian  years,
viii.  34.

—  the  year,  in  which  the  Pelopon-
nefian  war  was  ended,  xi.  2.

Yoke  deferibed,  iii.  20.

Z.

ZfjAs  explained,  i.  135.

ZvAmV u  explained,  i.  4.

Zopyrus ,  his  ftrategem  to  reduce  Ba¬
bylon  to  the  obedience  of  Darius,
iv.  65.

v7to  Zvyov  explained,  iii.  20.


FINIS,


Yol.  IV.


X  x  x


(  5>6  )


ADVERTISEMENT.


¥  H  AV  E,  in  the  courfe  of  my  notes,  fo  often  cenfured  authors  for  borrow-
Jv  ing  from  others,  without  any  acknowledgement,  that  I  fhould  expofe  my-
felf  to  the  fame  cenfure,  if  I  did  not  acquaint  my  readers  with  the  following
fadt.  An  ingenious  clergyman  in  my  neighbourhood,  hearing  the  Preface  to
my  work  was  printed,  defired  to  read  it ;  and,  upon  returning  it,  told  me  that
the  pafifege  quoted  by  me  from  Plato,  had  been  made  ufe  of  by  John  Mafon,
M.  A.  in  a  fmall  effay  on  the  power  of  numbers,  printed  in  1749.  This  I
had  not  the  lead  fufpicion  of ;  and  am  very  well  affured  that  all,  who  know  me,
will  believe  me  :  but,  for  the  fake  of  thofe,  v/ho  do  not,  I  fhall  lay  Mr.  Ma-
fon’s  words  before  them,  and  leave  it  to  every  impartial  reader  to  determine
whether  the  manner,  in  which  I  have  treated  this  quotation,  has  the  air  of  an
original,  or  of  a  copy.

After  giving  the  paffage  of  Plato,  Mr.  Mafon  fays,  p.  25 ;  “  Here  the
“  two  firft  feet  are  cretics,  then  follow  two  fpondees,  then  acretic,  and  laflly
“  a  bacchic :  fo  that  here  again  he  ufes  both  diflyllable,  and  trifiyllable  feet.
“  And  [by]  his  calling  the  three  laft  fyllables  of  the  word  elfAXfpw tjv  a  cretic,
“  it  is  plain  he  read  it  thus,  without  any  regard  to  the  accent  on

“  the  penultima

I  do  not  underftand  why  this  gentleman  calls  sro£««v  a  bacchic,  when  Dio-
nyfius,  in  fcanning  thefe  meafures,  calls  it  v3ro(dotKX‘&  a  hypobacchic;  but
this  is  a  trifle.  His  obfervation  upon  the  dadlyl,  dignified  by  Dionyfius  with
the  title  of  ersp©-,  grand ,  is  much  more  exceptionable.  Mr.  Mafon  fays,  p.  10.
“  that  of  itfelf  it  is  too  light  and  feeble,  and  never  fit  to  end  a  verfe.”  He
forgets  that  there  are  many  odes  in  Horace,  where  every  verfe  ends,  not  only
with  one  dadtyl,  but  with  two  :  as  his  firft  ode  addrdfed  to  Maecenas,
Maecenas,  at  avis  edite  rcgibus ,

O  et  pr<gfidum>  et  dulce  decus  meum.

And  in  that  to  the  fhip,  which  was  carrying  his  friend  Virgil  to  Athens,

Sic  te  diva  potens  Cypri ,

Sic  fratres  Helena^  lucida  fidera.

But  what  fhall  we  fay  to  the  firft  verfe  in  the  firft  chorus  of  GEdipus  Tyrannus
in  Sophocles,  which  confifts  folely  of  da&yls  ?

fl  ocbvnrs;  <pcflt9  Tif  zroli

And  two  verfes  after,  another,

EkIHx/uou  Qofiigav

Befides  feveral  others  in  the  fame  chorus.

This  fhews  how  dangerous  a  thing  it  is  for  modern  writers  to  emancipate
themfelves  from  the  authority  and  practice  of  the  ancients,  and' to  hazard  re¬
flexions,  that  are  fupported  by  neither.


‘


a


ERRATA  in  VOL.  IV.


PAGE  2.  Line  14.  For  beth.  Read  both.

P.  4.  L.  1 1.  no  comma  after  Furius.

P.  6.  L.  14.  after  army,  r.were.

P.  to.  L.  1 1.  f.  confuls.  r.  conful’s.

P.  2 1 .  L.  20.  f.  crowded,  r.  crouded.

P.  31.  L.  18.  f.  the.  r.  that.

P.  47.  L.  6.  after  being,  r.  then.

P.  54.  laft  line  f.  cowardice,  r.  cowardife,

P.  59.  L.  8.  f.  cowardice,  r.  cowardife.

P.  75.  laft  line  but  two.  f.  mad.  r.  made.

P.  79.  L.  1 7.  after  Jhewed.  ftrike  out  them .

P.  86.  L.  21.  f.  power,  r.  authority.

P.  90.  laft  line  but  one.  f.  cowardice,  r.  cowar¬
dife.

P.  92.  laft  line  but  two.  f.  as.  r.  for.

P.  95.  laft  line  but  two.  no  comma  after  tend  to.
P.  107.  L.  5.  f.  chafe,  r.  chace.

P.  123.  L.  9.  f.  taken  to.  r.  taken  in.

P.  134.  L.  6.  f.  facrificed.  r.  facrififed.

P.  136.  L.  19.  a  comma  after  oppreffed.

P.  141.  L.  10.  a  comma  after  infolent.

P.  142.  L.  1 8.  f.  when.  r.  where.

P.  155.  laft  line  but  five.  f.  forces,  r.  troops.

P.  166.  L.  4  f.  adminiftered.  r.  adminiftred.

,  P.  167.  laft  line,  no  comma  after  arrived.

P.  176.  L.  16.  f.  whereever.  r.  wherever.

P.  180.  L.  2.  f.  Ortona.  r.  Hortona.


P.  196.  L.  3.  after  of.  infert  the.

P.  220.  L.  10.  f.  the  confuls.  r.  The  confinls.
P.  227.  L.  8.  f.  they.  r.  thofe  perfons.

P.  229.  L.  22.  no  comma  after  domefics.

P.  230.  L.  6.  f.  fhores.  r.  fewers.

P.  240.  laft  line  but  two.  dele  the  firft  of.

P.  243.  L.  7.  f.  fecure.  r.  fure.

P.  249.  laft  line,  after  they.  r.  had.

P.  251.  L.  3.  a  comma  after  Perfons.

Ib.  C.  1.  L.  1.  f.  H'gtfu.  r.  Hgrjlia.

P.  257.  L.  10.  no  comma  after  or.

P.  262.  L.  10.  f.  firft  rifes  up.  r.  rifes  up  firft:.
P.  294.  C.  1.  L.  6.  f.  immemor.  (in  Romans)
print  immemor.  (in  Italics.)

P.  310.  L.  1 6.  f.  body.  r.  corps.

P.  31 5.  L.  1.  f.  cowardice,  r.  cowardife.

P.  317.  L.  7.  f.  the  legions,  r.  thefe  legions.

P.  322.  C.  1.  f.  their  poft.  r.  the  poll.

P.  323.  L.  10.  and  13.  f.  Duilius.  r.  Duillius.

Ib.  L.  1 1.  f.  thing,  r.  nothing.

P.  332.  C.  1.  laft  line.  f.  ejiicetoueq.  r.  ejicito-
que.

P.  342.  L.  8.  f.  Duilius.  r.  Duillius.

P.  358.  L.  17.  f.  the  foot.  r.  their  foot.

P.  365.  L.  14.  f.  the  tribunes,  r.  thofe  tribunes.
P.  366.  L.  17.  f.  the.  r.  their.
