Dionysius of Halicarnassus: Roman Antiquities, Vol. 1 (Books I-II; Spelman, 1758)
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (Edward Spelman, trans.)

Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/romanantiquities01dion
Edition: Edward Spelman's English translation (London, 1758), via Internet Archive scan. The standard public-domain English Dionysius; complete with translator's preface, notes, and dissertations. (Note: 18th-century orthography; the scan renders the long s as f.)
Public domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel library, 2026-10-09.

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS?


Tranflated  into  English;

WITH


NOTES  and  DISSERTATIONS.


BY

EDWARD  S  P  E  L  M  A  N,  Efq.


V  O  L.  I.


LONDON,

Printed,  and  fold  by  the  Bookfeliers  of  London  and  Wejiminjier ,

MDCCLVIII.


i . ..  J  -


PREFACE.


I  HAVE  often  wondered  that  the  hiffory ,  which  I  now  take
the  liberty  of  offering  to  the  public ,  and  which  is  perpe -■
tually  quoted  by  every  author ,  written  upon  the  con-

Jlitutio n  of  the  Romans ,  the  fource  of  all  their  learnings  and

an  authority ,  to  which  all  men  have  agreed  to  fubmit ,  ffould
never  have  appeared  in  our  language .  Whether  the  length  of
the  work ,  or  the  difficulty  of  explaining  the  original  conjlitution
of  the  Romans ,  and  particularly  of  afcertaining  the  differences
between  the  three  forts  of  comitia ,  the  exercife  of

that  conjlitution ,  <2  graz/  meafure ,  depended ;  whether  thefe>

or  any  other  7?iotives  difcouraged  our  men  of  learning  from
attempting  atranfation  of  this  hifory ,  I  cannot  fay:  But  this
I  will  venture  to  affirm ,  that  the  analogy  between  the  regal

conjlitution  of  the  Romans ,  and  our  own ,  #  more  furpri -

ffii<y  analogy  ^  I  mean  Eh  at  between  the  Cj?  eerty  ah  ei  EuffijO

a  languages


VI


PREFACE.


languages ,  might  very  well  have  encouraged  them  to  t  ran  fate
it ,  and  to  recommend  it  to  their  countrymen ,  as  a  poffeffon  they
were ,  #  particular  manner ,  intitled  to .  Whether  my

translation  of  this  hijlory  will  anfwer  the  defgn  of  juch  a  recom¬
mendation^  mujl  be  left  to  the  voice  of  the  public ,

decifion ,  the  fate  of  all  produSlions  of  this  hind  rnufl  ne-
cefjarily  depend:  And  the  only  hope  I  can  entertain  that  their
determination  may  not  be  hi  my,  disfavor ,  is  derived  from  the
pains  I  have  beflowed  upon  this  tranflation,  rather  than  from
the  effeEl  of  thofe  pains.

Every  reader  has  a  natural  curiofity  to  be  informed  of  the
birth ,  the  private  life ,  and  character,  and  of  all  other  parti¬
culars  relating  to  the  author  of  any  work  he  perujes :  I  am  forry
it  is  not  in  my  power  to  fatisfy  this  reafonable  curiofity  any
otherwife,  than  by  referring  my  readers  to  what  our  author
fays  of  himfelf  in  the  preface  to  this  hiflory:  "There  they  will find,

-  among  other  things ,  that  Dionyfus  lived  at  Rome  in  the  Au-
gufan  age,  an  age  celebrated  above  all  others  in  the  Roman
hifory  both  for  the  great  writers  it  produced ,  and  for  the  dif in¬
gulf  Mg  encouragement  given  by  Augufus  to  thofe  writers.  He
was  cotemporary ,  and,  probably,  acquainted  with  Livy,  Vir¬
gil,  Horace,  Ovid,  and  many  other  learned,  and  polite  authors ,
with  whom  that  remarkable  age  was  adorned ,  and  was  himfelf
a  confpicuous  far  in  that  bright  confiellation .

I  need


PREFACE.


v*


I  need  not  acquaint  the  learned  reader  that  our  author ,  he -

fides  his  hifory ,  compofed  many  other  works ,  all  tending  to  the

improvement  of  or  at  orial)  a?id  hiforical  writing,  fome  of  which

are  lofi  ;  hut  much  the  greatef  part  is  prefierved ,  and  contains

■

the  befl  precepts  to  form  an  orator ,  and  an  hforian ,  and  to
enable  others  to  judge  of  both .  It  has  been  a  doubt  among  the
men  of  learning ,  whether  he  publijhed  thefe  critical  works  be¬
fore,  or  after  his  Roman  hifory :  14  Dodwell  has  embraced  the
former  opinion  ;  for  which  he  gives  this  very  good  reafon ,  that ,
in  his  critical  works,  he  never  makes  any  mention  of  his  hifory ,
though  he  often  takes  notice  of  the  other  writings  he  had  before
publijhed .  Dodwell  alfo  thinks  that  the  Cn.  Pompeius ,  to  whom
he  dedicates  his  criticifm  upon  the  Greek  hforians,  was  the
fame  perfon,  who  was  fubftituted  conful  (conful  fuffedhis)  in
the  month  of  0 Bober  in  the  Varronian  year  723.  By  this ,
and  many  other  arguments,  it  appears  that  this  Cn .  Pompeius
could  not  have  been  the  great  Pompey ,  who  was  fain  in  /Egypt
in  706,  though  M.  *  *  in  his  preface,  has  thought  ft  to
efiablifi  a  friendfiip  between  that  great  man,  and  our  author ;
and  to  make  the  former  defire  his  judgement  concerning  the

Greek  hforians :  'This  I  conclude  from  his  mentioning  Pom¬
pey  without  any  dfinBion ;  which  manner  of fpeaking  is,  both

in  his,  and  in  all  other  languages,  applicable  only  to  the  per-

’•  Differt.  de  j£tat.  Dionyf.  c.  vii.  &  viii,

a  2  fin.


vl


PREFACE.

fin ,  who  has  rendered  his  name  fo  famous  both  by  his  fucceffes ,
and  his  misfortunes .

We  know  by  Photius ,  toZa  lived  in  the  middle  of  the  ninth
century ,  by  many  other  authors ,  hijlory  contained

twenty  books,  and  that  Dionyfms  himfelf  made,  what  Photius
calls ,  a  fynopfis  of  it  in  five  books .  So  that,  the  nine  lafl  books
mufi  have  been  lofi  fince  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century  ;  but
how  long  fnce  we  know  not .  Henry  Glarean,  profeffor  at
Freiburg,  fays,  at  the  end  of  his  chronological  tables  dedicated  in
1 5  3  2  to  Ferdinand,  thenking  of  the  Romans,  that  thefe  nine  bools
were  at  that  time  in  being,  and  concealed  by  feme  men  of  learn¬
ing  :  The  reafon  he  gives  for  this  afi'ertion  is,  that  Confiantine
Lafcaris,  a  modern  author,  cites  him  in.  Greek .  This,  indeed,
leaves  us  fome  room  to  hope  that  they  may  one  day  fee  the  light .

I  come  now  to  my  brother  labourers,  the  tranfators  of  Dio -
nyfius.  7 he  firfi  was  La  pus  Biragus,  a  Florentine,  who  tranfi
lated  the  eleven  books  now  remaining  into  Latin  from  two
old  manufcripts,  and  dedicated  his  tranfation  to  pope  Paid  the
fecond .  It  was  firfi  printed  at  Trevifo,  a  town  in  the  territo¬
ries  of  the  Venetians,  in  1480.  2*  V ofiius  very  jufily  cen-

fares  both  his  fidelity,  and  his  ftyle .  The  next  was  That  of  Gele  -
nius,  printed  at  Bafil  in  1549.  He  writes  better  Latin  than
La  pus but  the  liberties  he  has  taken  in  mangling  the  periods


a  De  Hift.  Lat.  B.  iii.  c.  10,


°f


PREFACE.


vii

of  the  Greek  text ,  and  of  altering  many  places,.  which  he  did
not  under  ft  and ,  have  condemned  his  tranjlation  to  he  never
read:  Particularly ,  after  idle  at  of  Sylhurgius  appeared  in
1586 ,  printed  at  Frankfort ,  with  the  Greek  texty  which  had

n  **

not  <5^  printed  with  the  former  Latin  tranjlations  :  Sylhur¬
gius  had  alfo  the  ajffta?:ce  of  the  V enetian,  and  Roman  manu -
ftcripts ,  which  his  predecejfors  wanted.  Not  long  after ,
p eared  another  Latin  tranjlation,  viz.  in  1590,  by  JEmilius
Port  us ,  which  Hudfon  has- printed  with  the  Greek  text  in  1704  •
Lice  latter  fays  indeed,  in  his  preface ,  that  he  has  corrected
the  tranjlation  of  Portus ,  where  he  thought  it  necejfary :  I
wifh  he  had  oftener  thought  it  necejfary ;  hecaufe  he  has  fujfered
many  errors  of  Portus  to  ft  and  unmolefted.  However ,  this
edition  of  Hudfon  is  hy  much  the  beft ;  as  the  Greek  text  is
throughout  illuftrated  with  the  notes  of  Sylhurgius ,  Cafauhon,
Portus,  and  fome  others ;  all  which  I  have  occafionally  made
ufe  of,  and  always  acknowledged.  But  the  great  eft  adva?i~
tage ,  which  this  edition  has  over  all  the  others ,  is  derived
from  two  V atica7t  manufcripts ,  one  700  years  old  for  the
ftrft  ten  hooks,  and  the  other  not  quite  fto  old.  for  the  eleventh
hook  \  the  readings  of  both  which  are  jet  down  at  the  foot
of  every  page  ;  and,  in  every  page,  thefe  manufcripts,  particu¬
larly  the  ftrft,  illuftrate  the  Greek  text  where  it  is  obfcure,  ex¬
plain  it  where  doubtful,  and fupply  it  where  it  is  defective.  The

great


PREFACE.


Vlll

great  advantages ,  arijingfrom  thefe  two  manufcripts ,  ought  y  moft
certainly ,  to  have  induced  Hudfon  to  print  his  Greek  text  from
them ,  rather  than  from  the  edition  of  Sylburgius ,  the  defeSls

of  which  thefe  manuf crips  fuffciently  jhew.

I  have  now  brought  down  the  hiftory  of  the  tranfations  of Diony-
fus  to  the  year  1722,  when  a  comet  appeared  in  the  literary
world ,  portending  no  lefs  than  the  extinction  of  all  former  tran-
f at  ions ,  a?td  the  downfall  of  their  authors  :  I  mean  the  French
tranfation  of  the  reverend  father  le  fay ,  a  Jefuity  who  had  pre¬
pared  himfelf  for  this  undertaking  by  teaching  rhetoric  in  Cler-
-  mont  college  at  Paris,  as  he  fay  s, for  above  twenty  years  ;  and  ex-
haufled  the  whole  fock  of  his  learnings  which  he  had  been  fo  long
collecting ,  in  polifhing ,  adorning ,  and  rendering  his  tranfation
more  correSt  and  elegant ,  than  any  that  had  ever  before  appeared  hi
any  age ,  in  any  country ,  or  in  any  language .  But  his  brother  Je-
fuits ,  in  their  journal  ofTrevoux  for  the  month  of  January  1723,
ufer  this  tranfation  into  the  world  with  fo  much  pomp ,  that  I
think  my f elf  obliged  to  give  their  char  abler  of  it  in  Fnglif ,  in  order
to foeWy  not  what  his  tranfation  is,  but  what  all  tranfations  ought
to  be .  Denys  d’Halicarnafle,  difent  les  journalifeSy  s’affure  par
lui-meme,  une  conftante  fuperiorite  de  reputation  parmiles
dotftes  de  profonde  litterature  ;  et  cette  preeminence  ne
tombera  qu’avec  eux  :  la  chute  s’avance:  pour  refTource,
ii  eft  un  monde  entier  d’autres  perfonnes,  dont  l’eftime

n’hono-


PREFACE.


IX


n’honcreroit  pas  moins  la  memoirede  Denys  d’Halicarnafie*
et  Fauroit  lui-meme  flatte  d’avantage  :  Ce  font  une  infi¬
nite  d’honnetes  gens  fans  Grec,  connoifieurs  neanmoins  par
genie,  le&eurs  par  gout,  ftudieux  fans  befoin,  et  f^avans
fans  le  f^avoir  :  ils  ne  connoiffent  que  de  nom  Denys  d’Ha-
licarnafie ;  fon  Grec  leleur  rend  inacceffible :  aujourd’hui  Ton
produit  Denys  d’  Halicarnafie  dans  ce  nouveau  monde.  Un
interprete  cgalement  bienfadleur  et  du  public  et  de  Fauteur,
acquiert  tout  a  coup  a  celui-ci  un  nombre  innombrable
d’honorables  admirateurs,  qui  Feftimeront  par  tout  fon  me-
rite  perfonnel  d’hiftorien  et  d’ecrivain,  tandis  que  les  f^a-
vans  de  metier  s’acharneront  a  fon  Grec  .  .  .  C’eft  a  regret
que  nous  nommons  verfion,  ou  tradu&ion  cet  ovrage :  ce
n’efi  point  un  langage  Grec  rendu  en  langage  Francois ;
e’eft  Fexprefiion  immediate  des  penfees  de  Denys  d’Hali-
carnafie;  la  conformite  du  Franqois  avec  le  Grec ,  riejl  point
celle  dFune  copie  a  T original^  mais  celle  d'une  copie  avec  F autre
copie .  On  prend  plus  aifement  un  auteur,  quand  on  tient

de  fon  genie  et  de  fon  cara&ere  ;  et  d’imitateur  fidelle,  on
devient  avec  moins  d’effort  un  fidelle  interprete.  Sur  ce
pied,  Denys  d’ Halicarnafie,  homme  folide  et  vrai,  fage  et
judicieux,  laborieux  et  infatigable,  exadl  et  applique,  vif  et
eloquent,  amateur  des  lettres,  a  trouve  fon  veritable  traduc-
teur ;  et  il  n’eft  pas  etonnant  qu’il  Fait  fi  long-terns  at¬
tend


X


PREFACE.


tendu.  .  .  On  peut  juger  de  la  religion  du  tradudteur  a  pefer
fcrupuleufement  les  termes  de  fon  auteur,  par  la  reflexion
fubtile  qu’il  fait  faire  fur  le  mot  laotyripiot  ;  f9avoir  que
l’egalite  des  fuffrages  fignifiee  par  ce  nom,  fe  trouve  quel-
quefois  dans  un  nombre  de  voix  inegal ;  puifque  Denys
avance  que  Coriolan,  qui  de  vint  et  une  voix  en  avoit  douze
contre  lui,  eut  ete  abfous  par  le  benefice  de  la  loi  touchant
1’egalite  des  fuffrages,  fi  deux  voix  fe  fuflent  jointes  aux  neuf
qui  lui  etoient  favorables ;  c’eft-a-dire,  s’il  eut  eu  pour  lui
onze  voix  contre  douze  ;  c’eft  qu’en  matiere  criminelle,
une  voix  de  plus  ne  fuffifoit  pas  pour  condamner;  c’etoit
le  meme  effet  que  fi  le  nombre  des  voix  eut  ete  tgal  de  part
et  d’autre .

“  Diony fms  of  Halicarnajfus^  lay  thefe  journalifts,  hasaf-
c<  fured  to  hhnfelf  a  conjlant  fuperiority  of  reputation  among
cc  the  men  of  profound  learning  ;  and  this  preeminence  cannot
‘ c  fall  but  with  them  :  "The  fall  approaches :  To  prevent  which ,
u  there  is  a  whole  world  of  other  people ,  whofe  efeem  would  not
<c  do  lefs  honor  to  the  memory  of  Diony f  us  of  Halicarnaffus^  and
( £  would  have  flattered  him  more  :  Thefe  are  an  infinite  number
“  of  men  of  diflinElion  without  Greeks  but  connoijjeurs  by  their
u  genius,  readers  through  tafle,  ft tedious  without  neceffity ,  and
u  learned  without  knowing  it :  Thefe  are  acquainted  with  Dio-
H  ny frns  of  Halicar naff  us  only  by  name  :  His  Greek  renders  him
1  “  inacceff  ble


i


PREFACE.


xi


“  inaccejfeble  to  them:  Into  this  new  world  is  Dionyjius  now
“  produced :  An  interpreter ,  equally  a  benefaSlor  both  to  the
* c  public,  a?td  to  the  author ,  acquires ,  at  once ,  the  latter  a
“  numberlefs  number  of  honourable  admirer s,  who  will  ejleem
“  for  his  whole  merit  of  an  hifeorian ,  ^  writer ,  while

cc  the  learned  by  profejfton  will  exercife  their  keennefs  upo?i  his
< c  . . .  /Fi?  forry  to  call  this  work  a  verfeoti ,  or  a  tranf

“  lation:  It  is  7iot  the  Greek  language  rendered  in  French  ;  it  is
u  the  immediate  exprejfeoti  of  the  thoughts  of  Dionyjius  \  the  con-
“  formity  of  the  French  with  the  Greek  is  not  That  of  a  copy
<c  with  the  original,  but  That  of  one  copy  with  another  copy*
«c  J?very  0ne  takes  an  author  with  eafe ,  when  he  refembles  him
“in  his  genius  and  char  alder  ;  and,  from  being  a  faithful
“  imitator ,  he  becomes ,  w/VZ>  the  lefs  effort ,  <3  faithful  interpret
“  ter .  Upon  this  foot ,  Dionyjius  of  Halicarnaffus,  a  man  folid
“  and  true ,  wife  and  judicious,  laborious  a?id  indefatigable,  ex -
“  aB  and  intent,  lively  and  eloquent,  a  lover  of  letters,  has
“  found  his  true  tranfeator  ;  and  we  are  not  to  wonder  that  he
“  has  fo  long  waited  for  him . . .  ?  may  jttdge  of  the  religion  of
“  the  tranfeator  in  weighing  fcrupuloufey  the  terms  of  his  author,
“  by  the  fubtil  reflexion  he  makes  upon  the  word 3  hto^yiQicc  ;  which
11  is,  that  the  equality  of  fuffrages,  fegnified  by  this  word,  is
“  fometimes  found  in  an  unequal  number  of  voices ;  fence  Dioz

*  See  the  twenty  fixth  annotation  on  the  viith  book.

b


“  nyfeus


xii  PREFACE.

“  nyfius  affierts  that  Coriolanus,  who,  out  of  2 1  voices,  baa
“  1 2  againfl  him,  would  have  been  acquitted  by  the  benefit  of
“the  law  concerning  the  equality  of  fuff  rages,  if  two  voices  ’
“  had  joined  the  nine  that  were  for  him  ;  that  is  to  fay,  if  he
u  had  had  x  x  voices  againfi  1 2  ;  becaufe ,  in  criminal  cafes,

“  a  majority  of  one  voice  was  not  fujficient  for  a  condemnation ;

(C  tpe  ejfetf  of  it  being  the  fame,  as  if  the  number  of  voices  had
“  been  equal  on  both  fidesP  This  willfuffice  (for  I  omit  fever al
other  panegyrical  flights)  to  jhm  what  opinion  thefe  journalifls
entertained,  or  had  a  mind  the  world  fhould  entertain,  of  this
famous  tranflation :  And  yet,  methinh,  amidft  all  the  praifis
they  have  laviped  upon  it,  they  feem,  by  one  expreffion ,  to  have
left  to  themfelves  an  opening  for  an  efcafe,  une  echappatoire,
if  they  fhould  ever  be  heartily  piped  upon  this  fubje3 :  The
expreffion  I  mean,  is  this,  that  the  conformity  of  the  French
with  the  Greek,  is  not  That  of  a  copy  with  the  original,
but  That  of  one  copy  with  another  copy.  I  may  venture
,0  pronounce,  fmce  I  have  ffiewn  it  fujficiently  in  my  notes ,
that  this  tranflation  of  le  Jay  is  neither  more  nor  lefs,  than  a
literal,  and  not  always  an  exaEl,  tranflation  of  the  Latin
tranflation  of  Partus.  It  cannot,  therefore,  bethought  too  great
a  refinement ,  particularly  to  thofle,  who  are  acquainted  with
the  difingenuous  fubtilty  of  this  order  of  men,  and  what  they
are  capable  of,  when  the  interefl ,  or  reputation  of  their  body


PREFACE.


xiu

is  concerned ,  to  fufpecl  they  dejigned  to  conceal  their  real  opi¬
nion  of  this  tranfation  under  a  cloud  of  praifes ;  and ,  at  the
fame  time ,  to  let  fome  fparks  of  that  opinion  break  out :  But ,
if  thofe  praifes  were  fmcere 3  and  they  really  thought  this  tranf-
lation  had  all  that  tranfcendent  merit  they  have  afcribed  to  it>
I  may  fafely  affirm  that ,  had  they  not  among  them  greater
politicians ,  than  tranfatorSy  or  critics ,  they  would  never  have
acquired  both  in  Europe ,  and  America ,  the  great  powery
and  wealth  they  are  now  poffeffed  of  \  neither  would  they  have
had  the  direEiion  of  what  they  call  the  confcienceSy  but  mean .
the  government ,  of  all  the  princes  of  their  own  communion .
If  any  of  his  fraternity  have  a  mind  to  doubt  whether
the  tranfation  of  their  brother  Jefuit  is  a  tranjlation  of  the
Greek ,  or  the  Latmy  let  them  open  his  book  where  they
willy  and  confront  it  with  the  Greek  text ;  andy  if  they
fnd  in  it  the  leaf  pretence  to  a  tranfation  of  the  latter ,
I  defire-  that  my  own  tranfation  may  be  alfo  thought  a
tranfation  of  PortuSy  ory  what  is  worfey  of  le  Jay  himfelf
But  there  is  another  dijingenuoufnefsy  that  he  has  been  guilty
cfy  which  fhews  his  heart  to  have  been  as  bad  as  his  head :
His  notes  throughout  are  fcarce  any  thing  elje  but  literal  tranf-
latio?2S .  of  the  notes  of  SylburgiuSy  Cafaubony  and  other Sy  all
contained  in  Hudfon  s  edition  wider  their  refpe&ive  names  :
Thefe  names  he  has  concealedy  and  impofed  their  notes  upon  the
world  for  his  own .

b  2  I  am


PREFACE.


xiv

1  am  tired  with  the  invidious  tajk  of  cenfuring  ;  and  wifh  I
could  fay  that  the  other  French  tranfation ,  which  appeared  the
year  after ,  under  the  tiame  of  M*  *  *,  is  a  tranfation  of
Dionyfus  :  But  the  love  of  truth  compels  me  to  declare  what,  I
think ,  I  have  fhewn  too  in  my  notes ,  that,  as  le  Jay  tranfated
from  Portus ,  this  gentleman  has  tranfated  from  Sylburgius.
He  has,  indeed,  avoided  maty  abfurdities,  which  the  other  was
led  into  by  too  fervile  an  adherence  to  his  original,  even  to  the
faults  of  the  bnpreffon  ;  his  fyle,  by  being  more  diffufe,  is  more
perfpicuous  ',  and,  if  he  par aphrafes,  as  he  often  does,  he  fel-
dom  fails  to  give  the  fenfe  of  his  own  original  at  leaf,  which
comes  nearer  to  the  Greek,  that  Fhat  of  le  Jay ;  His  notes
are  often  his  own ;  and,  when  he  borrows  Fhofe  of  others,  he
often  pays  them  a  proper  acknowledgement :  I  wifj  he  had

informed  his  readers  that  his  chronological  table  was  copied
literally  from  Fhat  of  DodwelL

So  much  has  been  faid  both  by  the  ancients ,  and  the
moderns  in  praife  of  the  advantages  refulting  from  the
fudy  of  hifory,  particularly  by  Diodorus  Siculus,  among  the
former,  in  the  noble  preface  to  his  hiflorical  colleSlions  \  and
by  the  late  LordBolingbroke,  among  the  moderns,  in  his  admir¬
able  letter  supon  that  fubjeEl,  that  I  am  afonifoed  no  treatife
has  ever  yet  appeared  in  any  age,  or  any  language  pro -
feffedly  written  to  prefcribe  rules  for  writing  hifory ;  a  work

allowed


PREFACE.


XV'


allowed  to  be  of  the  greatejl  advantage  of  all  others  to  ?nan-
kind \  the  repoftory  of  truth  fraught  with  lejfons  both  of  pub-
lie ,  and  private  virtue ,  and  inforced  by  fronger  motives ,  than
precepts ,  by  examples .  Rules  for  poetry ,  and  rhetoric  have
been  written  by  many  authors  both  ancient  y  and  modern ,  as  if
delight ,  and  eloquence  were  of  greater  confequence  than  in -
firuffion  :  However y  rhetoric  was  a  part  of  hiflory  ^  as  treated
by  the  ancients  ;  not  the  principal  part  indeed ,  but  fubfer-
vie?it  to  the  principal  \  and  calculated  to  apply  the  faffs  exhi¬
bited  by  the  narration .  I  know  it  may  be  faid  that  ma?ty  an¬
cient  hijlories  are  fillpreferved ,  and  that  thefe  models  are  fuf-
ficient  guides  for  modern  hifiorians  without  particular  rules  s
So  had  the  Greeks  poets  of  all  denominations  in  their  hands 5
and  yet  Ariflotle  thought  it  necejfary  to  preferibe  particular
rules  to  his  countrymen  for  applying  thofe  examples  to  evety
branch  of  poetry  :  I  wifh  he  had  done  the  fame  in  hiflory ;  if
he  had ,  it  is  very  probable  that  his  precepts  would  have  rendered

•m

the  bejl  of  our  modern  hijlories  more  perfeff ,  and  the  worjl 5
lefs  abominable .  Since  the  refurreffion  of  letters ,  the  want
of  fuch  a  guide  has  been  complained  of  by  ?nany  author sy  and
particularly  by  Rapin  in  the  preface  to  his  hiflory  of  England \
This  want  I  think  it  not  impojfble  to  fupply  in  fome  degree >
not  by  any  thing  of  my  own  growth y  but  by  extra  ffingy  a?id

con*


XVI


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.


conneSling  what  has  been  written  upon  this  fubjeSi  by  Dionyjius
himfelf. \  the  author  of  this  hijlory ;  who,  in  his  criticifms  upo?i
the  Greek  hijiorians ,  and  particularly  in  his  parallel  between
Herodotus  and  Thucydides ,  has  indireSlly  laid  down  rules  for
attaining  all  the  perfeSlions ,  and  avoiding  all  the  fault s>  of
writing  hifory.  1  know  that  Lucian  has  written  a  treatife
upon  this  fubjeSi ,  great  part  of  which  he  has  employed  in
rallying  the  hforia7ts  of  his  own  time ,  in  a  manner  peculiar
to  himfelf  \  with  great  fpirit  and  elegance  of  expreffo?i\  but ,
at  the  end  of  this  treatife ,  he  ajfumes  another  character ,  and
treats  the  fubjeSi  with  great  gravity  and  judgemettt .  /  alfo

know  that  Cicero  has  laid  down  fome  direEiions  for  the  conduSl
of  an  hiforian ;  the  firfl  of  which  Lord  Clarendon  has  made
choice  of  for  the  Latin  motto  of  his  hifory:  Thefe  direEiions ,
though  conceived  with  all  the  power  of  thought ,  a7id  exprejfed
with  all  the  power  of  latiguage ,  Jhew  what  difpofition  of  ?nind
is  required  in  a7i  hiforian ,  rather  than  what  rules  he  ought
to  purfue  ;  and  befides ,  they  are  fo  general \  and  fo  fhort 5
that  I  chufe  rather  to  refer  the  reader  to  that  part  of  Cicero's
works ,  or  to  a  very  good  tranfation  of  them  by  Dr .  Middle -
ton  in  the  preface  to  his  life ,  than  to  infert  thetii  here .

Before  I  prefent  the  reader  with  the  comparifon  between
Herodotus ,  and  Thucydides ,  it  will  be  necejfary  to  premife  that
Diotiyfus  divides  hifory  into  two  parts ,  that  is ,  into  the  prag¬


matic


PREFACE,  xvii

matte  part)  as  he  calls  it ,  and  the  language  :  The  former
comprehends ,  ifi,  the  choice  of  the  f abject ;  2 dly,  the  know¬
ledge  whence  to  begin ,  and  where  to  end ;  the  difeern-

ment  between  fuch  events ,  as  are  to  be  related \  and  fuch  as
are  to  be  omitted ;  \thly,  the  placing  every  event  in  its  proper
order ;  and  $thly ,  the  heart  of  the  hiflorian :  4  ‘The  language
he  divides  into  fmple  elementary  words ,  or  atoms  of  fpeech ,
the  compofition  of  thofe  words ;  both  which  are  fufceptible
either  of  a  proper ,  cr  #  figurative ,  :  Concerning  the  lafi

of  thefe ,  /  compofition  ofi  words ,  author  has

written  a  treatife ,  fill  extant)  5  />z  he  promifes  another

concerning  the  choice  of  words  \  but  this ,  if  ever  publifhed \
is  loft.  In  the  firfi  treatife ,  W&V/6  has  always  been  defervedly
admired*,  6  he  gives  the  preference ,  w/V/6  great  reafon ,  the
compofition  of  words ,  a?id  lays  down  fuch  rules  for  this  compo -
fition,  fupported  throughout  by  examples  drawn  fro?n  the  befl
Greek  writers ,  both  poets ,  <2;%/  hifiorians,  that  any  man ,  ^
obferving  them ,  acquire  a  finooth ,  <m/  harmonious  Jlyle  •
./3W,  notwithfianding  thefe  rules  fee?n  calculated  for  the  Greek

language  only ,  influence  will \  upon  a  clofe  examination,
appear  to  be  univerfal ,  and  to  govern  every  other  language,
both  ancient  and  modern ,


+  ar?e/t  th  OxKvS.  X*cy*!-  c •  xx^*  5  arfg,*  <w0.  cvcpotl.  c,  i,  6  Jb.  c.  ii,

Dionyfius 5


xviii  '  PREFACE.

Dionyfius ,  therefore ,  7  /fe  comparifon  of  Herodotus  with
Thucydides,  fays  that  the  fir  ft  duty,  and  poffthly  the  moftnecejfary
of  all,  in  an  hijlorian,  is  to  make  choice  of  a  grattd fubjeSl,  and
fuch  a  one ,  as  will  be  agreeable  to  the  reader :  In  thisy  he
faysy  Herodotus  has  the  advantage  of  Thucydides ;  becaufe  his
hiftory  comprehends  the  aElions  both  of  the  Greeks ,  and  Bar¬
barians  ;  and  the  defign  of  it  is  to  prevent  thofe  aElions
from  being  buried  in  oblivion .  On  the  other  fide ,  Thucydides
writes  the  hiftory  of  a  fingle  war ,  and  that  neither  juflifi -
abky  nor  fortunate ;  a  war ,  which  ought  never  to  have  been
undertaken ;  or,  if  that  could  not  be,  to  have  been  delivered
up  to  filence,  and  fhade,  and  unknown  to  pofierity:  And \
that  he  had  chofen  a  bad  fubjeSl,  he  himfelf  makes  mani-
feft  in  the  preface  to  his  hiftory:  For  he  there  fays  that
*c  many  Greek  cities  had  been  defolated  through  this  war ,
<c  fame  by  the  Barbarians ,  and  others  by  the  Greeks  them -
“  f  elves  ,  that  more  banijhments,  and  flaughters  had  hap -
* £  pened  by  that  means ,  than  had  ever  been  known  before  3
“  together  with  earthquakes ,  droughts ,  diftempers,  and  many

other  calamities So  that ,  the  readers,  by  his  preface,  are
alienated  from  a  fubjeSl  fraught  with  the  misfortunes  of
Greece.  By  as  much,  therefore,  as  a  hiftory ,  which  relates
the  wonderful  aElions  of  the  Greeks ,  and  Barbarians,  is  pre¬
ferable  to  one,  that  difplays  the  miferable,  and  dreadful

7  ar^Of  Tvaci .  Ear/c?.


calamities


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.


xlx


talamities  of  the  Greeks,  by  fo  much  is  Herodotus  more
judicious  in  the  choice  of  his  JubjeEl,  than  "Thucydides .
Neither  can  it  be  fiaid,  that  the  latter  was  compelled  to
this  choice ,  and  knew  the  other  to  be  more  beautiful ,  but
refolved  riot  to  treat  the  fame  fubjetl  with  other  writers;
On  the  contrary ,  Thucydides ,  in  his  preface,  traduces  the
earlier  aElions  of  the  Greeks,  and  fays  Thofe  of  his  own
time  were  the  greatefi,  amd  the  moft  wonderful ;  Which  fhews
that  he  voluntarily  made  choice  of  thefie .  The  conduEl  of
Herodotus  was  different ;  and,  though  Hellanicus,  and
Charon  had,  treated  the  fame  fubjecl  before  him,  he  was
not  difcouraged,  but  thought  he  could  write  fomething  more
perfeSt ;  in  which  he  fucceeded .

The  fecortd  duty  relating  to  the  'pragmatic  part  of  hifi-
tory,  is  to  know  whence  to  begin,  and  where  to  end*  In  this
alfo,  Herodotus  feems  7nuch  more  judicious  than  Thucydides;
For  he  begins  by  relating  the  motives ,  that  firjl  induced  the
Barbarians  to  injure  the  Greeks ;  and,  going  on,  ends  in
the  punifhment  oj7  the  former,  and  in  the  revenge  taken  on
them  for  thofe  mjuries .  On  the  other  fide,  Thucydides  be-
gms  from  the  time,  when  the  fortune  of  Greece  began  to  8  de-

8  The  reader  will  obferve,  that  I  read  kxkus  here,  inftead  of  as  it

ftands  in  all  the  editions ;  but  the  context  ftiews  that  it  mud  be  kockw.

dine ;


c


XX


PREFACE.


cline ;  which ,  as  a  Greeks  and  an  Athenian ,  he  ought  not  to
have  done ;  particularly,  fence  he  was  not  a  man  of  femall
repute ,  but  a  perfeon  diftinguijhed  by  the  Athenians ,  who
had  conferred  on  him  the  command  of  their  armies ,  and
other  honors:  Neither  ought  he  openly  to  have  laid  the
blame  of  the  war  upon  his  country ,  when  he  might  have
charged  it  on  many  other  caufes :  Nor  to  have  begun  his
narration  with  the  affairs  of  Corcyra ;  but  with  the  mofe
renowned  aElions  of  his  country ,  which  fhe  performed  im¬
mediately  after  the  Perfean  war  \  and  which  he  afterwards
mentions ,  indeed ,  9  but  not  in  their  proper  place,  and  that
fight ly,  and  curforily :  A?td,  after  he  had  related  thefe
aElions  with  great  complacency ,  like  a  lover  of  his  country ,
he  ought  to  have  added  that  the  Lacedaemonians ,  from  their
envy ,  and  dread  of  thefe ,  but  from  other  pretences ,  entered
up07i  the  war :  And  then  to  have  mentioned  the  a  fairs  of
Corcyra ,  the  vote  agamfe  the  megarenfes ,  and  whatever  elfe.
he  thought  fit .  As  for  the  e?id  of  his  hifiory ,  it  is  ftill
more  defeElive :  For ,  though  he  fays  he  lived  during  the.
whole  courfe  of  the  war ;  and  promifes  to  relate  all  the  events
cf  it,  he  concludes  with  the  naval  ingage??ient  between  the
Athenians,  and  P elopomtefians  off  Cynoffema,  which  happened
in  the  twenty  fecond  year  of  that  war.  But  he  would  have

9  Here,  again,  I  read  m  m  (nmiSHus  to?™,  inftead  of  y.at  tv,  etc.  which  is
the  reading  of  all  the  editions,  and  renders  this  fentence  inconfiftent  with
That,  which  immediately  precedes  it,

done


PREFACE.  xxi

done  better ,  if,  after  he  had  related  all  the  tranfaElions  of
of  it,  he  had  concluded  his  hifory  in  a  manner,  of  all  others,
the  mofl  wonder  fid,  and  the  mof  agreeable  to  his  readers ;  I
mean,  with  the  return  of  the  baniffed  men  from  Phyle,  from
which  time  his  country  began  to  recover  her  liberty .

The  third  duty  of  an  hfor'ian  is  to  difingufj  between

thofe  things,  that  are  to  be  related,  and  Thofe,  that  are  to

be  omitted .  In  this  alfo,  Thucydides  fee?ns  inferior  to  He -

rodotus :  For  the  latter,  being  fenfble  that  all  narrations,

confifing  of  long  difcourfes,  when  they  have  certain  refing

places,  affeSl  the  minds  of  the  readers  with  pleafure  \  but ,

if  they  dwell  always  upon  the  fame  things,  however  they  may

fucceed  in  the  defcription  of  them,  they  offend  the  ear  with

«

fatiety,  he  refolved,  in  imitation  of  Homer,  to  vary  his  fub -
jeSl :  For  which  reafon,  if  we  take  up  his  book,  we  admire  it
even  to  the  lafl  fy liable,  and  always  wifh  for  more :  Whereas
Thucydides  defcribes  one  war ;  and,  without  breathing,  accu¬
mulates  battles  upon  battles,  preparations  upon  preparations,
and  fpeeches  upon  fpeeches',  which  tire  the  minds  of  his
readers:  For,  as  Pindar  fays,  we  may  be  fated  both  with
honey,  and  women .  I  am  alfo  of  opinion  that  a  change,
and  a  variety  in  writing  are  delightful  things  in  hifory ;
which  Thucydides  has  made  ufe  of  in  two,  or  three  places,  I
mean,  where  he  accounts  for  the  encreafe  of  -the  power  of  the
0  dry  fee,  and  defcribes  the  cities  of  Sicily .

C  2


After


PREFACE.


xxii

Aft  er  this ,  it  is  the  duty  of  an  hijlorian  to  diflribute ,  and
place  every  event  in  its  proper  order .  How,  therefore ,  does
each  of  thefe  hijlorians  diflribute ,  and  order  his  narration  f
\ Thucydides  purfues  the  periods  of  tune ;  and  Herodotus  the
fucceffion  of  events :  By  this  means ,  "Thucydides  is  obfcure ,
hard  to  be  followed :  For ,  tranfaSlions  mufl  have

happened  in  different  places  during  the  fame  fummer ,  and
winter ,  he  is  obliged  to  leave  the  firfi  half  flnijhedy  and
touch  upon  othersy  that  were  in  agitation  during  the  fame
fummer y  or  winter :  TV e  wander x  thereforey  as  may  well  be
fuppofed  y  andy  our  minds  being  confufedy  we  follow  his  nar -
ration  with  difficulty*  Whereas  Herodotus ,  beginning  withy
the  kingdom  of  the  Lydians  y  comes  down  to  That  of  Crcefus ;
from  whence  he  prefently  makes  a  tranftion  to  Cyrus ,  who  put
an  end  to  the  kingdom  of  Crcefus  \  after  which y  he  enters
upon  the  relation  of  the  affairs  of  the  TEgyppanSy  Scythiansf
and  Libyans  :  Some  of  which  he  introduces  as  confequential
to  the  former y  and  others ,  with  a  defgn  to  render  his  narration:
more  agreeable  :  Andy  in  defcribing  the  a&ions  of  the  Greeks y
and  Barbarians  y  which  happened  diming  the  CGurfe  of  two  hun¬
dred  and  twenty  years,  in  the  three  continents,  and  adding  the
flight  of  Xerxes y  he  has  not  mangled  his,  hiflory  :  But  it  has
happened  to  "Thucydides,  who  chofe  a  fingle  fubjeSl,  to  divide
mp  body  into  many  parts ;  and  to  Herodotus ,  who  made

choice


PREFACE.  xxiii

choice  of  many  fubjeBs ,  in  no  degree  refejnbling  one  another,
to  make  one  concordant  body .


I  fhall  mention  one  branch  more  of  the  pragjnatic  party
which  we  require  in  all  hiforiesy  no  lefs  than  any  of  thofe  al¬
ready  mentionedy  I  mean  the  heart  of  the  hiforiany  and  the
difpoftion  of  it  with  regard  to  the  faSls  he  relates .  'That  of
HerodotuSy  which  is  humane  in  all  things,  congratulates  the
happy,  and  condoles  with ,  the  unfortunate  :  Whereas  the  dif-
pofition  of  Thucydides  is  fever e,  and  harfh,  and  full  of  re-
fentment  againfl  his  country  for  his  banifhment :  For  he  enu-


%  V

merates  all  her  defeats  with  the  greateft  exaB?iefs,  but  takes
no  notice  of  her  fuccejfes  ,  or,  when  he  does,  he  feems  to  be
forced  to  it .  For  thefe  reafons,  Thucydides  is  inferior  to  He¬
rodotus  in  the  pragmatic  part .  As  to  the  la?iguage ,  he
is  in  fome  parts  inferior ,  in  others,  fuperior and,  in
others,  equal .  Concerning  which  alfo,  I  foall  deliver  my
opinion .


There  is  a  merit  in  writing,  which  may  be  called  the  firf,
and,  without  which,  all  others  are  ufelefs .  What  is  that  f  A
fyle ,  pure  in  the  choice  of  words,  and  preferving  the  true
charaBer  of  the  Greek  language In  this  they  are  both  very
exaB ,  Herodotus  being  the  fta?tdard  of  the  Ionic,  a?id  Thu¬
cydides. :


xxiv  PREFACE.

cydides  of  the  Attic ,  language.  Concifenefs  has  the  10  third
place ,  In  this ,  Thucydides  feems  to  have  the  advantage  of

Herodotus .  However ,  //  ^<37  ^  fad  that ,  when  concifenefs

is  attended  with  perfpicuity ,  //  w  pleafng  ;  hut^  when  it  wants
that ,  /V  w  harfh .  But  /<#  not  this  conf deration  fop  us.  Af¬
ter  thefe >  illuflration  has  the  firf  place  among  the  adventitious
merits :  In  this ,  the  fuccefs  of  both  is  fufjiciently  confpicuous.
Aft  er  this  merit ,  «■  placed  the  imitation  both  of  the  manners ,
and  the  paffions :  This  merit  the  two  hiforians  have  divided
between  them  :  For  Thucydides  has  the  advantage  of  expr effing
the  paffions ;  Herodotus  That  of  reprefenting  the  man -
ners.  After  thefe  come  the  merits ,  that  fhew  the  great ,
wonderful  art  of  the  compoftion.  In  thefe  alfo ,  the  hiforians
are  equal.  Then  follow  Thofe ,  that  comprehend  the  frength ,
vehemence ,  fuch  like  powers  of  eloquence  :  In  thefe  Thu¬
cydides  is  fuperior  to  Herodotus  ;  the  latter  carries  plea-
fur  perfuafon ,  delight ,  0//  merits  of  that  kind  to  a  much

greater  height  than  Thucydides .  The  phrafeology  of  Hero¬

dotus  is  natural  \  and  That  of  Thucydides  vehement ;  wA?

10  The  fecond  merit  in  language  is  unfortunately  left  out  in  all  the  editions,
and  manufcripts.  Sylburgius  refers  us  to  two  paffages  in  our  author’s  judge¬
ment  of  Lyfias,  and  to  one  in  That  of  Ifocrates :  I  have  confulted  them  all ;
but  none  or  them  will  fupply  this  hiatus.


always


PREFACE.


XXV


always  uniform  in  his  language .  But  the  principal  merit
of  all  others  is  to  characterize  every  thing  :  In  this ,  Herodotus
is  more  ex  at  than  'Thucydides :  For  the  latter  is  uniform  in  all
things ,  and  more  fo  in  his  fpeeches  than  in  his  narration *
However ,  I  am  of  opinion  that  Demofihenes  has  particularly
adopted  his  fentences.  Upon  the  whole ,  the  poetical  pieces  of
both  are  fine  (for  I  am  not  afraid  of  giving  them  that  name )
but  the  greatefi  difference  between  them ,  is  this :  The  beauty
of  Herodotus  is  chearful  \  and  That  of  Thucydides y  ter -
ribleT

Thefe  are  the  rules  laid  down  by  Dionyfus  for  writing  hif-
iory ;  and,  by  thefe  rules ,  he  has  examined  the  hifories  of
Herodotus ,  and  Thucydides ,  of  Xenophon ,  Philifius ,  and
Theopompus*.  Nothings  thereforey  can  be  more  juft  than  to.
examine  his  own  hifiory  by  his  own  rules ;  and  to  inquire  how.
far  his  praElice  has  been  confftent  with  his  theory .

The  choice  of  the  fubjeEl  is  the  fir  ft  thing  we  are  to  confi ~
der :  Of  this  he  has  faid  fo  much  in  his  preface ,,  that  no  man.
can  refufe  him  the  merit  of  having  chofien  the  noblefi  fubjeEl ,
that  hifiory  can  treat  of:  The  rife  and  pro grefs^  the  original \
and  improved  confi  it  ut  ion  of  a  fiatey  which  in  time  conquered y
and  governed  the  greatefi  part  of  the  then  known  world, .  mufi
be  allowed  to  open  a  fcene,  in  which  hifiory ,  and  philofophy:

have


XXVI


PREFACE.


have  an  opportunity  of  dif playing  all  their  powers  for  the  in¬
formation ,  infir uEtion ,  and  improvement  of  mankind.

It  is  not  without  t'eafon ,  that  our  author  dates  the  begin¬
ning  of  his  hifiory  from  the  infant  fiate  of  the  Roman  com¬
monwealth  :  For,  though  it  may  generally  be  true  that  the
origin  of  a  people ,  as  contaming  mean  incidents,  and  fomething
of  Barbarifm  in  it,  feldom  draws  the  attention  of  the  reader ;
yet  the  origin  of  fo  confiderable  a  people  as  the  Romans  will  always
be  interefiing  ;  and  the  world  will  be  curious  to  inquire  into  the
fource  of  a  river  fo  large,  and Jo  awful  in  its  courfe,  and,  though
fojnetnnes  apt  to  overflow  its  banks,  yet  always  carrying  with
it  greater  fertility,  than  defolation.  It  is  hnpojfible  to  fpeak
of  the  beginning  of  our  author  s  hifiory,  without  mentioning  his
preface,  which  makes  fo  great  a  figure  in  his  own  language,
whatever  it  may  do  in  7nine  :  This  preface,  which  is  not  like
That  of  Sallufi,  applicable  to  any  other  hifiory,  or  to  any  other
kind  of  writing,  is  adapted  to  his  fubjeEl,  and  to  that  alone.
In  that  part  of  it,  in  which  he  compares  the  empire  of  the
Romans  with  other  empires,  he  feems  to  have  imitated  Polybius ,
who,  in  his  preface  alfo ,  compares  the  power  of  the  Romans
with  That  of  the  Lacedaemonians ,  the  Perfians,  and  the  Ma¬
cedonians  ;  and,  like  our  author,  gives  the  preference  to  the
power  of  the  Romans  :  But  every  one,  who  reads  the  two  pre¬
faces,  will  find  this  fubjeEl  treated  in  a  much  greater  extent,

and


,  P  R  E  F  A  C  E.  xxvii

and  with  greater  beauty  both  of  thought ,  and  language  by
Dionyfeus ,  than  by  Polybius :  To  whom ,  however ,  the  former
has  paid  a  4acit  compliment ,  ending  his  hifory  where  Po¬
lybius  begins  his ;  /to  the  firft  Punic  war .

indeed ,  floews  either  his  defpair  of  furpaffmg  him  in  treat -
ing  the  fame  fubjeEl  \  or  his  modefly  in  not  attempting

it .

us  now  examine  in  what  manner  our  author  has
acquitted  himfelf  of  the  third  duty  incumbent  upon  an  hiftori-
an ,  which ,  he  fays ,  is  That  of  knowing  what  to  relate ,
#//£/  toW  to  omit.  Under  this  heady  he  blames  Thucy-

didesy  as  we  have  feeny  for  dwelling  too  long  upon  the

fame  fubjeEl ;  which  he  himfelf  has  with  great  judgement
avoided.  With  this  view ,  he  has  introduced  the  digreffion
concerning  Ariftodemus  in  the  beginning  of  the  feventh  booky
in  order  to  relieve  his  readers  from  the  long  conteftsy  which
preceded  the  efablifhment  of  the  tribunes  of  the  people ,
and  had  taken  up  the  great  eft  part  of  the  fixth  book .  Andy
in  the  feventh  book  alfoy  the  long  political  debates  in  the
affair  of  Cor  iol anus  are  fucc  ceded  by  an  enter  taming  rela¬
tion  of  proceffionSy  and  games.  Among  the  meritorious
cmifftions  of  our  author ,  I  muft  place  That  of  a  horridy  and
incredible  incident  related  by  11  Livyy  who  makes  Mucius

11  Book  ii.  Chap.  is.

d  Sc&vola


xxviii  PREFACE.

Sccevola  roafi  his  hand  in  the  fire,  in  order  to  Jhew  Porfena
how  much  thofe ,  who  aimed  at  a  great  name ,  defpifed  their
perfons.

I he  order ,  in  which  the  events  are  to  he  placed \  is  the
next  point  he  recommends .  In  this ,  he  has  followed  the

fucceflion  of  events ,  without  breaking  his  narration  by  the
intervention  of  fummers ,  and  winters .  A  remarkable  in -

fance  of  this  appears  in  the  fxth  book ,  where ,  the  elec¬
tion  of  the  confuls  coming  on  during  the  feceffon  of  the
people ,  he  does  not  interrupt  the  narration  of  the  events ,
the  feceffon  was  attended ;  to,  having  jujl  given
the  names  of  the  new  confuls ,  d/%/  mentioned  the  Olympiad. ,  in
which  they  were  chofen ,  hafens  to  the  fenate ,  dm/

the  fpeechesy  that  were  made  there  for ,  <2;%/  againjl  the  return
of  the  people .

It  is  with  pleafure  that  I  now  enter  upon  that  part  of
our  author  s  writings  which  relates  to  him  more  as  a  man>
than  as  an  hiftorian .  It  is  impoffble  to  read  his,  hifiory
without  dif covering  in  the  author ,  a  mind  fraught  with
all  the  elements  of  humanity ,  a  fincere ,  <2  dW  d#

honefi  heart ;  d/z  unaffected  love  of  virtue ;  dm/,  what  is
more  amiable  than  a  deteflation  of  vice , .  <2  companion  for
it  \  he  congratulates  indeed  the  happy ,  dm/  condoles  with  the
inferable^  but  without  infulting  even  thofe ,  deferve

.  their


PREFACE.


XXIX


their  mifery :  He  is  never  fatisjied  with  celebrating  the
bravery ,  the  patriotifm ,  the  frugality ,  and  contempt  of
riches  in  the  old  Romans ;  jwr  lamenting  the  dege¬

neracy  of  Thofe  of  his  own  time:  Upon  the  whole ,  he
teaches  by  precept  what  his ,  other  hifory ,  w7/

teach  by  examples ,  that  the  profperity  of  every  ?iation
is  owing  to  their  public ,  <m/  private  virtue ,  aiid  their
adverfity  to  the  want  of  both .  ii&r  love  of  libe?~ty  is  no
lefs  confpicuous  than  his  love  of  virtue:  He  never  lofes  an
opportunity  of  afcribing  the  greatnefs  of  thofe  old  Roma?ts
to  their  liberty ,  and  their  liberty  to  their  virtue ;  is
alarmed  at  the  leaf  appearance  of  danger ,  threatens

them  with  the  lofs  of  either .  can  read  the

charaSlers  given  by  him  of  Numa ,  and  the  lajl  Tar quin ,
without  a  wip  that  his  memory  may  be  as  much  revered
by  pofierity  as  '  That  of  Nwna ,  or  without  a  dread  of
being  delivered  down  to  the  latefi  ages ,  as  a  tyrant ,  and
a  criminal  of  the  firft  magnitude ,  like  Tar  quin?  Hifory
is  the  tribunal \  before  which  all  princes  muf  one  day  ap¬
pear,  and  derive  their  lafling  glory ,  or  dijhonour  from  her
decifions .  When  they  themfelves  are  no  more ;  when  the
mercenary  fcribblers  of  their  time  are  as  much  for¬
gotten  as  their  works ,  then  hifory  takes  her  feat \  and,
like  jufice  with  her  ballance ,  but  with  eagle  s  eyes ,  weighs

d  2  every


XXX


2»


PREFACE.


every  aElion ,  and  explores  the  aElors  heart ;  Jlrips  ambi -
if/0/z  of  her  vain  difguife ,  treats  a  conqueror  like  a  fuc-

cefsfid  robber :  'Then  will  jufl  praife  be  given  to  the  prince ,
who  made  the  happinefs  of  his  people  his  only  care ,  and  their
law  his  only  guide ;  only  errors ,  they  were  er¬

rors^  proceeded  from  an  excefs  of  goodnefs  mifapplied ,  and
are  almoft  transformed  to  virtues  by  the  dignity  of  the  prin¬
ciple ?,  from  whence  they  flowed :  Such  a  prince  will  hiflory
paint  in  her  fair  eft  colors ,  and  decorate  him  for  nations
yet  unborn  to  love,  and  for  princes  yet  unborn  to  imi¬
tate.

I  Jhould  now ,  to  follow  our  author's  progreffion ,  exa¬
mine  his  flyle ;  but ,  if  I  was  to  enter  into  particulars ,
this  examination  would  lead  me  a  great  way,  not  to  men*
tion  the  many  Greek,  quotations ,  of  which  it  mufl  confifl :
I  jhall,  therefore ,  fay  in  general ",  that  his  language  is
Attic,  perfectly  pure  and  elegant :  TVhen  I  call  it  Attic ,
I  do  not  mean  fuch  trifles  as  writing  a  £  for  a  cr ;  but  I
mean  an  Attic  di&ion ;  fuch  a  one  as  Thucydides,  and
Xenophon,  and,  before  them,  Herodotus,  were  celebrated  for ;
Since  the  latter,  though  he  writ  in  the  Ionic  dialeSl,  has ■
many  Attic  phrafes,  whether  originally  natives  of  Athens,
or  afterwards  made  free  of  that  city,  I  cannot  fay  \  and.
it  is  upon  his  finooth,  attd  flowing  Jlyk  chiefly,  that  Dio-


PREFACE.  xxxi

nyfius  feems  to  have  formed  his  own :  This,  I  think ,  /
have  proved  in  feveral  of  my  notes .  For  this  reafony  I
could  never  wider f  and  what  12  Photius  meaned ,  when  he
faid  our  author  was  ty]v  Mivongzzriz,  that  he  had  a

becoming  novelty  in  his  ftyle.  Dionyfius  is  certainly  no
mnovator  either  in  the  choice ,  or  in  the  compofttion ,  of  his
words ;  but  it  is  well  known  that  Photius  was  patriarch  of
Confantinople  in  the  ninth  century ;  and)  though  a  man  of
learnings  lived  in  an  ignorant  agey  when  the  delicacy  of
the  Greek  language  was  much  declined*  I  think  the  cha¬
racter  Cicero  has  given  of  the  Jlyle  of  Herodotus  may  well
he  applied  to  That  of  our  author ;  line  ullis  falebris,  quail
fedatus  amnis,  fluit.  ‘This  is  very  different  from  the  Jlyle
of  fome  admired  Latin  authors ,  and  more  different  yet  from
the  fhort  unrelative  Jlyle ,  that  now  prevails  among  the.
French  writers ;  whofe  concife ,  acuminated \  unconnected  pe¬
riods  are  like  fo  many  proverbs ,  and  follow ,  rather  than
fucceed)  one  another .  Among  the  many  beauties  of  our  au¬
thor  s  ftyle ^  I  muft  not  omit  one y  which  is  more  or  lefts  to
be  found  in  all  good  writers  in  all  languages and  never
fails  to  charm  the  reader ;  I  mean  his  poetical  expr efforts :
With  thefe  he  has  animated  his  ftyle ,  particularly  in  his
fpeeches ,  which ,  by  this  means ,  become  elevated  and  pathetic y

12  Cod,  86,


and


xxxii  PREFACE.

and  infenfbly  perfuade,  while  they  feem  intended  only  to
pleafe:  To  this  the  compojition  alone  of  his  words  does  not
a  little  contribute ;  and  to  the  harmony  of  his  compoftion
I  [hall  apply  what  he  himfelf  fays  of  his  favourite  ora¬
tor  Demofhenes,  that 13  his  fyle  comprehends  numbers ,  fome
complete  and  perfeEl,  others,  incomplete ;  but  fo  co?meEled
together ,  and  compounded,  that  it  is  impoffble  to  difcover
them  to  be  numbers  :  By  which  means  his  fiyle  is  poetical,
not  poetry ;  and  melodious,  not  melody .

The  reader  may  very  well  expeEl  that  I  foould  give  a
reafon  for  my  not  having  accetited  the  Greek  in  my  notes :
This  will  7iaturally  lead  to  a  queftion,  which  has  been,
long  fince,  difcujfed  by  men  of  great  learning  both  in  our
own  nation,  and  in  others .  Mofl  of  them  I  have  read,
and  chufe  rather  to  refer  my  readers  to  them,  than  to
repeat  what  they  have  faid ;  to  avoid  which,  I  fhall  lay  before

the  reader  only  two  arguments,  which  I  have  not  met  with
in  any  of  thofe  authors,  and  which  convince  me,  though  I
myfelf  was  taught  otherwife,  that  Greek  profe  ought  to  be
read,  like  verfe,  according  to  the  quantity,  without  any  re¬
gard  to  the  accents .  It  is  left  to  thofe,  who  do  me  the
honor  to  read  this,  to  determine  whether  my  conviSlion
is  well  or  ill  founded .  The  firfl  of  thefe  arguments  will,

*3  7Tffi  ?>j?  MhJik.  Ayy-ocrS.  kivolql.  C.  50.

I  think.


PREFACE.  xxxiii

I  thinks  fhew  that  the  dejtgn  of  accents  was  not  to  trans¬
form  long  fyllables  into  fhort ,  and  fhort  fyllables  into  long ;
and  confequently ,  as  I  faid ,  that  we  ought  to  read  Greek
profe  according  to  the  quantity y  without .  fuff ering  this  to  be
defroyed  by  the  accents .

I  could  prove  the  proportion  I  have  advanced  by  7nany
pajfages  taken  from  our  author  s  treatifey  concerning  the
compoftion  of  words ;  but  I  fhall  content  my f elf  with  one
of  them ,  which ,  by  its  fmplicityy  will  be  intelligible ,  and
confequently  conclufve :  'The  paffage  I  mean  is  quoted  by.
him  from  14  Plato  to  fhew  what  kind  of  compoftion  confi -
tutes  dignity y  and  from  what  feety  or  7netrey  it  is  deri -
ved:  Thit  pajfage  is  taken  from  his  enljotcpLog  A oyocy  and
is  as  follows  y  E fyw.  psv  jjjwv  oi&’  eyyai  toc  ngoorrimlct
avlotc*  ch  Tv)(pvlecy  nogevoy]ou  rqv  iipoc/spsvy)'/  nogeioiv.  I  fhall
only  7nake  ufe  of  the  laft  member  of  this  period ;  which ,
I  believey  will  be  fuff  dent  to  prove  all  that  I
we  read  this  accordmg  to  the  accents y  it  muf  be  pronounced
thus  wv  TvfovTZQ  wogt vovjocT  r rf v  sipcigfsvYjv  7 vogeiotv  •  Plere
the  penult ima  of  7 rogevov]ot7y  from  being  long ,  is  by  the  ac¬
cent  made  fhort  y  and  the  penult i7na  of  s  from

being  fhort }  is  made  long :  But  I  fhall  now  fhew  that

I4-  7rt(>t  <rvv$£<r..  cvopotl.  C.  18,^


the


xxxiv  PREFACE.

the  jirjl  ought  to  be  read ,  as  it  is ,  long ;  and  the  lajl ,
it  floort .  Dionyfus,  in  fcanning  this  member  of  the  pe¬
riod^  fays  that  the  frf  and  fecond  feet  of  it ,  cJjT  Tuypvje;
.nogev,  are  cretic ;  that  the  two  following  ovtocT  rijv  iT,  are
fpondees ;  then  another  cretic ,  the  lajl  a

hypobacchius ,  nofioiv  *  7VW  /V  /r  ^/#///  that,  if  we  read
this  according  to  the  accents ,  the  frf  of  the  two  fpondees
will  be  an  iambic ,  oyra/ ;  [xxofzvriV  will  not  be  a

cretic ,  but  a  molojfus .  TZ/V  confufon  of  long ,  fhort

fyllables  will  be  avoided ,  if  we  can  but  perfuade  ourfelves
that  Dionyfus  knew  how  to  pronounce  his  own  lattguage .

‘The  patrons  of  accents  do,  indeed,  allow  that  we  muft
read  verfe  according  to  the  quantity :  But,  if  it  happens
that  there  are  verfes  inter??iixed  with  profe,  15  as  our  au¬
thor  has  j hewn  there  are  many  in  Demoflhenes  of  feveral
forts,  which,  he  fays,  were  the  effeSl  of  choice,  not  of  acci¬
dent,  and  defigned  to  render  his  Jlyle  melodious',  how  are
we  to  read  thefe  verfes  ?  Are  we  to  read  them,  like  the
context,  according  to  the  accents  f  In  that  cafe,  they  will
ceafe  to  be  verfes:  Or  rnufi  we  not  read  both  them,  and
the  context  according  to  the  quantity,  which  alone  can  pre¬
vent  thefe  verfes  from  difinguijhing  themfelves  too  much,

Js  lb.  c.  25.


and


PREFACE*  xxxv

and  from  interrupting  that  harmony  of  fyle ,  which  they
were  defgned  to  promote  ?

*The  other  argument  is  this :  16  Arijiotle  fays  that  iam¬
bic  verfe  is  the  very  language  of  the  vulgar ;  for  which
reafon ,  they  made  ufe  of  iambics  more  than  of  any  other
verfes  in  talking ;  0  Se  iuy£oQ  ocvtyi  env  n  \t%ic  r\  twi>  wo7-

TlCov*  (ho  y,oihi<?ot.  noivjwv  rwv  pilgM  tot^Suot  (p&eyfoi]oii  teyov] se¬
lf  iambics  were  the  language  of  the  vulgar ,  the  language
of  the  vulgar  mufl  be  pronounced  like  iambics:  Bui  the
patrons  of  accents  allow  that  iambics  mufl  be  pronounced,
according  to  the  quantity ;  therefore  the  language  of  the
vulgar  mufl  be  pronounced  according  to  the  quantity .  I
have  not  the  leaf  fufpicion  of  any  argument ,  that  can  be
oppofed  to  this  y  though  I  a?n  fenfble  that  prejudices  are
great  logicians ,  and  will  find  cavils ,  where  reafons  are  want¬
ing  ;  and  here  indolence  comes  to  their  affiance ;  a?id  both
mafter ,  and  fcholar  are  concerned  in  adhering  to  the  old
method  of  readmg  Greek  according  to  the  accents For  a
boy  may  be  taught  to  read  that  language  tolerably  well  ac¬
cording  to  the  accents  in  a  very  few  months^  when  as  ma?iy
years  will  be  necejfary  to  enable  him  to  read  it  accordmg
to  the  quantity ;  which  is  a  knowledge  the  mafter  himfelf
wiufi  be  well  acquamted  with ,  unlefs  he  has  a  mind  the  fay-

16  PqlogiK,  Book  iii.  chap.  8.

Vol.  Ip  e  ing


xxxvi  PREFACE.

%

.  ing  of  Petronius  ffould  be  applied  to  him ,  plus  docet  quarn
fcit.  The  difficulty  in  reading  Greek  according  to  the  quan¬
tity ,  is  occafioned  by  the  three  common ,  or  doubtful  vowels ,  oc,  /,
v  ;  which ,  though  called  by  that  name ,  <2//  a/'  always

long  in  fome  words ,  and  always  front  in  others  :  This  di-
flmSlion  is  only  to  be  acquired  by  a  long  cojiverfation  with
the  Greek  poets :  For  no  p'rofodies ,  that  I  have  feen>  will
leach  it.  From  this  laborious  taff  we  are  freed  by  the  ac¬
cent  j,  which  prefent  us  with  a  language  unhiown  either  to
the  ancients ,  or  moderns ,  a  language  without  quantity.

To  what  purpofe  then ,  will  it  be  [aid ,  were  the  Greek
■accents  mtroduced ,  if  no  regard  is  to  be  paid  to  them  in
pronouncing  that  language  ?  To  this  I  anfwer ,  that  they
were  defigned  to  mark  the  17  elevation ,  and  depreffon  of  the
voice  \  but  not  to  interfere  with  the  quantity:  And  that
the  ancient  Greeks  had  accents  (contrary  to  the  opinion  of
many  learned  men)  and  alfo  a  name  for  thofe  accents ,  will

-  r-  r  .  *  »

appear  beyond  contradiction  by  a  paffage  in  18  Strabo ,  where ,
in  fpeaking  of  the  Ilienfes ,  he  fays  that  the  Palladium ,  which
was  foewn  by  thetn  in  his  time ,  was  in  a  fanding  pofure  ;
but  That j  mentioned  by  Homer ,  fittings  which  he  proves  by

r  •  ,  -  ■  ♦

19  this  paffage  in  that  poet ,

Giivou  A^nvodri;  im  yovvaaiv  - . .

17  Prifcian,  B.  xv.  Diomed.  B.  ii.  lS  B.xiii.  p.  897.  Edit,  of  Cafaub.

*9  II.  Z.  V.  02.

To


t


PREFACE.  xxxvdi
To  this  argument ,  he  fays ,  the  Ilienfes  gave  an  idle  an-
fwer ,  alledging  that  the  accent  ^  which  he  calls  Ttgoo-uhoc,
in  yovvoiaiv,  ought  to  he  transferred ,  from  the  antepenultima ,  to
the  penultima ,  yovvxaiv  will fignify  iiil  hcflyjoiouc.

And  here  it  is  well  worth  ohferving  that  the  tranfation  of
the  accent^  here  contended  for  by  the  Ilienfes ,  could  only  trans¬
fer  the  elevatioji  of  the  voice not  the  emphafs ,  or  the  quan¬
tity  ;  other  wife  ^  the  metre  would  not  have  bee?i  preferved ,  as
the  reader  will  fee^  when  the  whole  verfe  is  laid  before  him .


Ssivou  “A Qfimfyjc


ju  u\  —  u  \j  /  —  —

Z7ti  yovvoc  cnv  w  v  a  op  oio*


Tlhe  'urpoaAiQU  of  the  Greeks  were  20  called  by  the  ancient
Latin  authors ,  notae  vocum,  moderamenta,  accentiunculae,
ajid  voculationes.

\

Thefe  pajfages  fujfciently  prove  the  antiquity  of  accents ;
but j  as  the  moderns  have  for  many  ages  made  an  ill  ufe  of
them ,  and  employed  them  to  confound  the  quantity ,  infead  of
direEling  the  elevation ,  and  depreffion  of  the  voice ,  yir  which
they  were  originally  defgned ;  and ,  as  //j/j-  laf  application  of
the  accents  is  irrecoverably  lofl ,  /  cannot  fee  to  what  purpofe
they  jhould  be  retained ;  particularly  fnce  thofey  who  read  Greek
according  to  the  accents ,  always  mifed ,  <2;%/  thofe ,
rmr/  /V  according  to  the  quantity ,  infnared ,  by  them .


40  Cell.  Book  xiii.  chap.  6.


!  '\ .


f  ~


-

.

'

■

,  „  »«F  •  -,'X  «  •**.*.

■

i  ,  .  <  i * •  ■

*  f

»

'

■  ■

■  ■  ■■  '  '  ■'  ■  ' .  :  ■


■

.  vi  l  '■

-

:i  1  '  M

<

i

*

’

*

*

.  '  til


A


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE,

Chiefly  from  D  O  D  W  E  L  L.


Before

Lilian

Before

Before

Julian

Chrift.

Period.

taking

Chrift.

Period.

Troy.


3+45


i235


8l

3*


2  5


5«


9i


346°


Faunus


I


n

35°c


J3


1  j


121c


1 1


3«


35I£>


?5


1 1


Before

Before

lulian

Beforer

taking

Faunus

Chrift.

Period.

taking!  Latinus

Troy.

Troy.


l7


35 1 3


l6

*7


1 8


*9

I  I


JVIe  to¬
nic  Pe-


riod.

4i


I


3i


3 *


8  '


.34


353°

Troy


9  •


After


Latinus

taking

I


Troy.


I


3°


3  2


u


1 1


.tineas


I


>3


'3

H


IS


Afca-

nius.

*5


*7


*3


1 1


!9


J5


i


VOL.  I


f


(  xli  )


lie  lore

Julian

After  I

..atinus

Me  tonic

Alba

Before

Julian

After

..atinus

Metonic

Alba  j

Chrift.

3eriod.

;aking  !:

ilvius.

Period.

built.

Chrift.

period,  t

aking

Silvius.

Period.

built.


Troy .

r  '

rroy.

'I


I

114  I 15


*54


J  22


I  I


l6

i7


5i


,  7s


Albas


1 10


l8


Silvius,


1 1


19  120


I


I  20

2 1


1.4


7  I


*3


r070


6q


J5


1 1


*3


*9


365°


l8


1 1


>7


3i


1 6


*3


*3


1 060


17c

H


7i


1  58


S7


1 1


*7


s6


3^>


I0lO


c  ^


J9


l  ^  ^


13°


6i


n

/


2 1


1  52


roo


?8


1  ^

c  1


I  j  *

!  10  so


I  AO


1 1


3l


15c

I  47


1  46


100C

*4


1  AS


1  TJ

1  4


.48


3°


i  43

7 1

4»


*5°


1 7


1  O

5  42


1 5°


1  4>


5 1


1 1


*9


(104c


1 2


1  20

7  S


1 3


4b

4i


H


1  37


9i


6j

I  3^


99c


1  3'


x7


5i


X5C


Capetus

3;
|  3-


?.  82


*9


I


\  3


.  8'


I  53

6ry

(  Xlii  )


Before

Julian

After

Albas

Metonic

Alba

Before

Julian

1  After

Metonic

Alba

Chrift.

Period.

taking

Silvius.

Period.

built.

Chrift.

Period,

taking

Capys.

Period.

built.

Troy.

Troy.


N>

OO

I98


l66


373o


16  ,


/  2


Calpe-

8l


'  3


tus.


:  1


l8  »


5i


1 1


3i


*3


no


*4


1 1


1 1


*3


*7


J3


8 1


J5


7i


9i


23O


Tibe-


rinus.


!9


*9


J9


33  :

Capys.


9b


I


9*


6B


5,9


*4


Agrip-


pas.


*3


7 1

I


376°


I  1


J3°


1 1


5i

A3


3?


*4


l7


'  3

1 1


*9


*3


5i


7l


*4


*5


4i


1 1


1 6


1 00


T7


39!

75  1

45  1

24  '


t8


4-4

<;6

(  xliii  )


Before

Julian

After

Agnp-

Metonic

Alba

Beiore

ulian

After

Aven-

Metonic

Alba

C  hr  ill.

Period.

taking

pas.

Period,

built,

Chrift.

’criod.

taking

tinus.

Period.

built.

Troy.

Troy.


*9


85I


3OI


382O

29O


85O


4i


387°


7 1


1 1


4i


J3


1 1


383°

3  °°

3°


3 1


J5


J3


5o


8 1


l7

5i


•  78


*9


*7


1 1


5 1


*9


*3


J4


J5


Alladi-


US.

2  80


I


H


36o


33°


J7


*9


7i


1 1


Procas,

6 1


1 2


-68

I


3b


H


1 5

3°


Aven-


tinus.


3i

I

•35


1 1


,  6?


VOL.  I*  g


i


Before

Chrift.

Julian

After

Pro-

lJeriod,

1  taking

cas«

Troy.


39 10

38°

*3


1 1

8l


1 6


1 7


J9


Amu-

lius.


I


92-


■23


24.


3 1


1 1


J4


*5


l7


i8


7'


J3;


69  ,


*5


i


18  \


xliv  )


Metonic

,  Alba

Olym-

Period.

built.

piad.


5 1


ICO


37°


1 10


1 1


I  ?

l3


I

a


a

*

*5


5  3


I  4

a  x


2  *


a.


19'


♦


a  4

3  1


3  £


1  1

(  xlv  )


Before

Chrift.

J  aJian  |
Period.  1

Alter

taking

Troy.

Amu-

iius.

JM  etonic
Period.

Aiua

built.

Olym¬

piad.


4I9


3  1


3  4

4  I


4  £

'62


a


t


9 1


4  4

5  I


5  i


3.


6  t


6  £

Rome.


*  54

396°


-

Varron.

a?ra.

•

t  '  -


6 1


4i


J

Rome

built.


i

f  t  *


6  4

7  I


j

]

Romu¬

lus.

% ,


Caton.

sera.

!

*

►

5 1


I


7  £


•  ^


*?


7  4

8  1


f


3  1


;  4


co

H4*-  1


t


4i


9  £


j  3


4i


1 1


J3


!  9  4

10  1


*4

(  xlvi  )


Before

Chrift.

Julian

Period,

After

taking

Troy.

Romu¬

lus.

Metonic

Period.

Alba

built.

Olym¬

piad.

Caton.

aera.

Varron

aera.


I49


IO  l

*3


l6


*5


*7


l6


zo  4

XX  1


I


II  \

*7


!  450

l8


%


J9


J9


II  4

IX  1


12  *


86„


iz  4
13  1


13  1


a


1 1


>3  4

14  1


9i


H  i


.30


*


*


3i

*5

3i


3i


1  94


14  4

*5  1


*7


lS  l


z


II  r


Interreg¬

num*


l6  1


(  xlvii  )


Before

Chrift.

Julian

Period.

After

taking

Troy.

Numa.

Metonic

Period.

7r3


I


1 1


-9


6-


’  9


1 1


1  11


*3


*3


38-


J7


40*


4i*


44.

9*


4  ♦  '


Olym¬

piad.

Caton.

♦era.

Varron.

aera.

.

16  l


16  4

17  X


17  a


a


;*7  j


18  *


IS  4

19  I


5°

l9  i


5i


5i


*.  4  1

19  4

20  1


't

20  l


>


V


20  4

21-  I


l


21  4

22.  I


22  l


6  3


22  4

23  *


23  l

,  65


Alba

built.


4i


6 1


VOL.  I


h


(  xlviii  )


Before

J  ;lian

After

Metonic

Alba

Olym

-

Caton.

Varron

Chrift.

Period.

taking

Nuflra.

Period.

built.

pi  ad.

at  ra.

aera.

Troy.


4O3O


X


\  1


72.

*4

-5


X


a


as


l


4i


%1


X


Tullus

Hofti.


I


X


X


a


*9


7i


r**

CO


Alba


5  20


rafed.

a8


5i


9i


*3


~


9i


1 1


t


(  xlix  )


Before

Chrift.

Julian

Period.

After

talcing

Troy.

Tullus

Hofti.


S8


l6


l8


54o


4i


29-

4i


Ancus

Marcius.


I


5i

I  6

Olym¬

piad.

Caton.

cera.

Varron.

ara.

30  l


a


30  4

31  r


31  1


2.


31  4

3i  1


32  i


31  4
33  1


33  l


33  4

34  *


no

34  i


1 1

2.


1 10


1 1

*3

14  4
35  1


35  l

J3


a


l6


i5


f


36  i


1  1

Metonic

Period.


:  82


9i


( 1 )


Before

Chnft.

Julian  1
Period.

After

taking

Troy.

Ancus

Marcius.

Metonic

Period.

Olym

piad.

.  Caton.

aera.

Varron.

asra.


36  4

37  *


37  £


a


37  4

38  1


38  l


1 10


1 1


38  •  4

39  1


39  l


X


^5


39  4

40  •  X


*7

40  i

'33


x


J9


40  4

41  1


41  £


«

Tarq.

Prifcus.


I


*


J3


4*  4

41  I


1 1


42  l


■  4


4.5


41  4

43  1


43  l


1  J3°

a


1  Before.  \

.JjiUwu-l.

. .  Af.uu-.-  f

i“v  ii/i  nx  t

rti;iiu|  ||

oici  ;i

J  ctdft.  1

Period.

taking'

Trty.

Prifcus.

,:;n

•Per^d.il

--••I  n

1st  |

Bit

.(oi  T

,bctMrI  9

*  fl

.fihilO


4IO9


JO

«  I3I  '

\

43  4  !

?47


78  4  j

v.i


4IIO


II

32 1

43  4

44  *


*5°

I


I  I


V


L.23

44  l  !


5*

)r  1

V  1

'  \


*3

3.4

9  1

1-50

Q  52

op  1

V  O  1

3  \


C$3

x4;


<  !  3


‘51

0!5’3

OM  .  I

v  \


H


44  ’  4

45  1

•52

r ’54

8.T


76  l


45"  1  l

‘53

"‘55

*4

<■  7  i

*■  x


l6

&


i  *


1  C.4

1  v


J7


1.8

!  39

i

1  3


'55

f:57

+  4

C'U


x9


4S-  i  4
46  1

^6

c58

-  •

Cl*

>  1

;  ^

1  95


i  41

46  l


c  59


1  !

ed


21',


ft


\ii6o

1  V4  ;

I  93


I  91


2i  *


;  84  ;

dd


46  4

47  .  1


;  i?  4-

N

<>

9i


.  93


45  ■

47- »  a

:6i


V

1  V


!  94


J  ■-  3

'62

-'64

1  J  >

*  c

<:3


|  95


-  K


■5


j  <>5

*

|  s  2.

1  '  -


.  96

■  2Z>


47  4

4»  *


i  i  d

iv)


;■  49

48  1

i  •-  67

4 1

1  0  0  >


.98

*  29

,

1  "  -

1 50

a

;  £  3

!  66

j  c.  68

\

Zl

1  ^


*

5i

- .  3

;.l  4

I  67

£  69

|

1  c


413°

|  600

3'

:  52

48  4

49  -  *

.  68

1-70

'  '

1  ?


3r


I  t


J?

I

49  -  J


3*

i  ^


1  0 2

1  >  -

3-3

t  ‘  *•

1  i  ^2

b3

r-70

>-72

1  91


c;.  i

•7*


05.,

I  1


.  4

49  . 4

so  -  ...  I

;72


|  4

I  u


1 36

i  5

|  5°-  i


I  *  7-


!  a

!  37


,  l

i  '74

1  976

\

j  :

1  !  1

Vot.  I. . .  . I


(  lii  >


Before

Chrift.

Julian

Period.

After

taking

Troy.

Tarq.  ;
Prifcus.  1

Metonic  1
Period.

Olym-  1
piad.  I

1  a

50  l

Caton.

sera,

r

Varron.

*ra.'


j


>  7

J75


Serviuj

»  **  '

i  I

^  -


Tullius.

\ '  l

5  8

so  4

V  1


f *■


a  2


S\  5

7-7


SI


1  10


4i


1 1


V  5


*

S*  4

sa  1


j  6

n

52  a


1  v

v  *


I  \  14

?  7


a


:  84

1  \  *


:  c  8

>  1 5' b

k  1


J-r  1  4


i  *'  f

1  0

V.


*  9

..,6

5»  4
53  I


I


r  3*i7


1 7

53  1


.


T  V.


is

a


1  a.

•  0

c  V


^,79


i  19


1  87


!  r8


53  4

54  1

,  88

j  190

,  ;•


5i


-i-4


54-  i

‘  89


•


I


t  92

1  c

\  y


,1 1  (>

(  1


1,93

J


a?


54  4

55  *


i  -

m  n

\  C*


j  *  ?5


j  <18


55  £


j  95

5  ;  2

;  0
Co


j  19

|  20

:  i  26

a


J  r\  A

U4

>

C  *


|  ,  27


*

■  >


fi  i


1  '


56  S


1  i  •’


'  630


a


1  61

3i


S

»  4


-


?5


56  4

57  »


S  r


5i


1  26


1  57  1


(  1m  )


Before

Chrift.

Julian

Period,

After

taking

Troy.

Servius

Tullius.

Metonic

’eriod.

Olym¬

piad.

Caton.  1
xra.  I

Varron.

xra.

*•  *  (\  :


57  ?

202  I


57  4

58  1


58  1


ft


|

J  '  c


•  (  f


J8  4

59  »'


7i

4i


59  l


I  *  l  >

L


ft


hi

4i


4.3


1 1

J3

*  r


59  4

60  1


t


60  ;


*5


a


60  4

61  1


61  i


5i


5i


2 1


-  -  .

Tarq.

Superbus.


I

S2

61  4

61  (


62  »


*


ft


62.  4

63  I


,  \  •  ’*

-


63  i


«3  4

64  I


■

■(  Kv  )


B

C

:.tre

irift.


Julian

Period.

419I

After
taking  ,
Troy.

i

66l

iSuferbps.

,|  s,


Metallic

Period.

I

j

r  i  r

'g.

Olym¬

piad,

,1  1

64  :

c

aton.

ra,. .


Varrdn.

.sera.

j  JO


.

i  1
T

1  1  ,  >  ,

.

•i.ii.ij  j

0??.  f


I  I


•30


i  93

6  3


“1


l6+

*


x  |


f*


.  *

6+  4

65  I


! »

>  i  \


r5

.  J4


ft"  1
°3  a


•

1  !.  1


*5


\  3


i

1  ■  t

■  i

i

'  »  I


;


6s  4

66  1


66  *


i


%  2


i  1

;


7i


4i


|  1


66  4

67  1


.

1 1


67  £

4i


i


Expelled.


&  1

•


Before

Chrift.

Julian

Period,

After

taking

Metonic

Period.

Olym¬

piad.

Caton.

^era.

Varron.

a?ra.

Expul-

fion.

Consuls.

w  i  ‘  *  ]

|


j


lroy.


68  l


I

Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  fucceedelby  >

Spuriu :  Lucretius,  the  father  of  Lu-,
cretia  ;  who  was  fucceeded  by

Marcus  Horatius.

LuciusTarqu  nius  Colhtinus,  fucceeded
by  Publius  Valerius  Poplicola.


.  46.

j  x  I'y


Publius  Valerius  Poplicola  II.

Titus  Lucretius.


P*  »


*  3


l  3

Publius  Valerius  Poplicola  III.

Marcus  Horatius  II.


63  4

69  ,


Spurius  Lartius.

Titus  Herminius.


»'■  <»  4U

1 1

81  j

Sirs

'  *  *

69  £

4  -  — ,■*%  -


-  . .


Marcus  Valeriu<-,

Publius  Poftumius  Tubertus.  i

(  !v  )


Before

Chrift.


Julian

Period-


A  ter
taking
T  roy.


Metonic

Period,


Olym¬

piad.

69  f

Caron.

a-ra.

25O

Voiron.

sera.


Expul-

fion.


'

Consul3.

Publius  Valerius  Poplicola  lV.

Titus  Lucretius  II,

I


Publius  Poftumius  Tubertus  II.

Agrippa  Mcnenius  Lanatus,

5OC


69  4.

70  I


Spurius  Caflius  Vifcellinus.

Opiter  Virginius  Tricoftus,


*5


7°  2


Poftumus  Cominius.  Titus  Lartius,


8/


Servius  Sulpicius  Camerinus.

Markus  Tullius  Longus.


1 1

Publius  Veturius  Geminus.

Titus  ZEbutius  Elva,


70  4

7£  J


1 2

Titus  Lartius  Flavus  II.

Quintus  Clcelius  Siculus.


*9


71  1


Aulus  Sempronius  Atratlnus.

Marcus  Minucius.


H

Aulus  Poftumius.  Titus  Virginius.


9 1

9 1


Appius  Claudius  Sabinus.

Publius  Servilius  Prifcus.


71  4

72  1


Aulus  Virginius  Ccelimontanus.

Titus  Veturius  Geminus.]

9i


72  i

6 1


*7

Poftumus  Cominius  II.

Spurius  Caflius  II,


Titus  Geganius  Macerinus.

Publius  Minucius.


l9

Marcus  Minucius  Augurinus  II.

Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus  11.


7»  4

73  1


Quintus  Sulpicius  Camerinus.

Spurius  Lartius  Flavus  II.

OC

*^1


73  J


Caius  Julius  lulus.

Publius  Pinarius  Rufus.


Spurius  Nautius.  Sextus  Furius.


Caius  Aquilius.  Titus  Sicinus.


73  4

74  *


Proculus  Virginius.

Spurius  Caflius  III.


74  \


7i


Quintus  Fabius,  the  fon  of  Caefo.

Servius  Cornelius.


Lucius  ZEmilius,  the  fon  of  Mamer-
cus.

Caefo  Fabius,  the  fon  of  Caefo.

VOL.  I.  k


(  Ivi  )


Before

Chrill.

48  1

Julian

Period.

42  33

After

taking

Troy.

7°3

Metonic

Period.


Olym¬

piad.

74  4

Caton.

sera.

27  I

Varron

aera.


Expul-

fion.


Consuls.

Marcus  Fabius,  the  fon  of  Caefo.
Lucius  Valerius,  the  fon  of  Marcus.


74  4

75  1


Caius  Julius  lulus  II.

Quintus  Fabius  II.


75  S


Caefo  Fabius  II.

Spurius  Furius.


a


3°

Cneius  Manlius.  Marcus  Fabius  II.


Caefo  Fabius  III.

Titus  Virginius.


7I  4

76!


Lucius  FEmilius  11.  Caius  Servilius,


76  a


Caius  Horatius.  Titus  Mecenius.


71c

1 10


Spurius  Servilius.  Aulus  Virginius.


4i

1 1

1 1


Publius  Valerius  Poplicola.

Caius  Nautius.

.42

1 2


76  4

77  1


3b

Aulus  Manlius.  Lucius  Furius.

7 1


1  3

lZ

77  !


Lucius  ^Emilius  Mamercus  III.
Vopifcus  Julius  lulus.


i  1 4

J4

a


84 .


Lucius  Pinarius,  Publius  Furius;


.  45

*5

1 5


Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus.

Appius  Claudius  Sabinus.


l6

 .


77  4

78  r


8(5


Lucius  Valerius  II.

Tiberius  uTlmilius.

J  ,  y  >


*7


78  i


4i

Aulus  Virginius  Ncrmcntanus.

Titus  Numicius  Prifcus,


a


Titus  Qu'ntius.  Capitolinus  II.

Quintus  Servilius  Prifcus.


Tiberius  :/Emilius  M.

Quintus  Fabius.


72c


78  4

79  1


Spurius  Poflumius  Albinus,

Quintus  Servilius  Prifcus  II.


5 1


79  *


9i

A


Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus  III.

Quintus  Fabius  Vibulanus  11.


Aulus  Poftumius  Albus.

Spurius  Furius.


2  3


Lucius  FEbutius.

Publius  Servilius  Prifcus.

46c


79  4

80  I


Lucius  Lucretius.

Titus  Vetuiius  Geminus.

(  Ivii  )


Before

Chrift.


Julian  •
Period.


After

aking

Troy.


Metonic

Period.


Olym¬

piad.

80  l

Caton.

sera.


Vsrron.

sera.

29  5

Expul-

fion.


Consuls.

Publius  Volumnius.

Servius  Sulpicius  Camerinus.

5^


Publius  Valerius  Poplicola  11.
Caius  Claudius  Sabinus.


5i

Quintus  Fabius  Vibulanus  III.
Lucius  Ccrnelius.


l

0  «

coco


Caius  Nautius  II.

Lucius  Minucius.


8<  l


Caius  Horatius.

Quintus  Minucius.


13°


*

i4

Marcus  Valerius,

Spurius  Virginius.


3i


Titus  Romilius.

Caius  Veturius.


81  4

82  1

3°o


5^

Spurius  Tarpeius.

Aulus  Aterius.


CO

N


Publius  Horatius.

Sextus  Quintilius.


"


"58

Caius  Menenius.

Publius  Seftius.


-  i  1


|


\


The  First  Decemvirs.

Appius  Claudius.

Titus  Genucius.

Publius  Seftius.

Spurius  Poftumius.

Servius  Sulpicius.

Aulus  Manlius.  _  .  .

Titus  Romilius.

Caius  Julius.

Titus  Veturius.

Publius  Horatius.


8s  4

83  *


•

The  Second  Decemvirs.

Appius  Claudius.

Quintus  Fabius  Vibulanus.
Marcus  Cornelius.

Marcus  Sergius.

Lucius  Minucius.

Titus  Antonius.

Manius  Rabuleius,

Quintus  Poetilius,

Caefo  Duillius.

Spurius  Oppius.

(  Iviii  )


Before

Chrift.

Julian

Period.

After

■taking

Troy.

Metonic

Period.

Olym¬

piad,

Caton.

tera.


83  l


COCO


7*

4i

4i

CO

4*-


4i


*

XI


84  4

85  *  1


Varron.

aera.

Ex  pul  -
fion.

The  Third  Decemvirs.


6l

Appius  Claudius,  and  the  fame  eol-
legues.


Varro.

6l

Consuls.

Lucius  Valerius  Potitus.

Marcus  Horatius  Barbatus.


Varro.


Larus  Herminius.

Titus  Verginius.


Varro.


Marcus  Geganius  Macerinus.

Caius  Julius.


Varro.


Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus  IV.

A  grippa  Furius.  [both  from  Livy.]


Varro.


Marcus  Genucius.  Caius  Curtius'

Consular  Tribunes


Varro.


Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus.
Lucius  Atilius  Lor.gus.

Titus  Cloelius  Siculus.

Consuls.

*3


Varro.


Marcus  Geganius  Macerinus  II.
Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus  V.

The  Remains  of  Dionyfius  end  with  thefe  Confuls.

I**"— 1 Hi .Mil.. ■■  ■  1  ■


THE


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES

O  F

DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.


THE  FIRST  BOOK.

|  'HOUGH  no  friend  to  the  difcourfes  ufually  em-
ployed  in  the  prefaces  to  hiftories,  yet  I  am  obliged
to  fpeak  of  myfelf:  In  doing  which  I  fhall  neither
dwell  too  long  on  my  own  praife,  which  I  know  would  be


Annotations  on  the  Firft  Book.


**Ta?  ttw0c7*f  ct7ro£^Q(&oti  roig  u$ooiy.ioie
Xoyvg.  This  firft  period  has  occafioned
great  difficulty,  and,  confequently,
great  diverfity  of  opinions  both  in  the
tranflators  and  commentators.  Henry
Stephens,  as  we  call  him,  who  was
a  man  of  great  parts  as  well  as  great
learning  (which  qualities  are  not  al¬
ways  fuch  infeparable  companions  as
they  may  be  thought)  contends  that  we
ought  to  read  £v  t oh  <zr%ooifAiois,  becaufe,
fays  he,  it  is  too  hard  an  expreffion  to
fay  Ac yu  cnrohio<&M  ioig  Tffgooipioig,  as  if
the  hiftorian  was  to  give  an  account


to  the  preface  of  his  hiftory;  when,
on  the  other  fide,  the  preface  itfelf
is  the  thing,  that  gives  the  account.
This  is  confining  the  fenfe  of  the  word
uxoMovou  to  a  fingle  fignification  i
whereas  it  is  capable  of  many,  'and,
particularly,  of  That,  which  our  au¬
thor  has  given  to  it  in  this  paflage.
Plato  has  taken  it  in  the  fame  fenfe,
where  he  fays,  (Ay  7rx^x

<pv<nv  t oag  tojv  (pvhxxwv  ^<uy.vy

ts  Koa  yujwvosfoojv  AIIOA1AONAI.  I
agree,  indeed,  with  him  that
|3xa opevos  fhould  be  underftood  as  if


a  Plato  B.  v.  ITfgi  wcAiT.  p.  654.  Edit,  of  Marl'd.

B  dif-


<2


Book  I.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

difagrceable  to  the  reader,  neither  fhall  I  cenfure  other
hiftorians,  zas  Anaxilaus  and  Theopompus  have  done  in  the
prefaces  to  their  hiftories ;  but  fhall  only  fhew  the  reafons,
that  induced  me  to  undertake  this  work,  and  give  an  account
of  the  means,  by  which  I  was  furnifhed  with  the  knowledge


the  author  had  faid  (3xAo-

/utvos ;  but  I  cannot  agree  with  him  in
joining  Koyxe  with  «7r«v,

becaufe  I  often  find  @«Aoiw<x<  governing
an  accufative  cafe  in  the  beft  authors,
and  applied  in  the  fame  fenfe  our  au¬
thor  ufes  it  upon  this  occalion  :  Thus,
Thucydides  ufes  the  word  in  giving  an
account  of  the  unfortunate  expedition
of  the  Athenians  to  Sicily  under  Nicias,
Lamachus,  and  Alcibiades,  b  K«i  ue
ocvht;  oi  Kaloivaioi  tSt^ovlo  (svycrctv  yet, £
ccvioQtctvfytfTaZvgctKiiiriuv  BOTAOMENOI )
iHO/ui otv  87 n  rovTtigiuv  vroloifxov.

a*  Clcntf*  Ava^tAoiog  kcu  ©go7rojU7ro?  tv
rots  ruv  iVo (>iav  sttoi^colv.  As

to  the  firft  of  thefe  hiftorians,  I  can
find  nothing  relating  to  him,  that  is
worth  mentioning.  The  other  was  an
hiftorian  of  great  merit,  and  treated
as  fuch  by  many  ancient  authors  both
Greek  and  Latin,  particularly  by
Dionyfius  of  Halicarnaffus  himfelfin
his  letter  to  Cn.  Pompeius  ;  in  which
he  gives  the  chara&er  of  the  moft
celebrated  hiftorians  j  and,  among  the
reft,  of  Theopompus,  “who,  he  fays,
“  was  the  moft  illuftrious  of  all  the
“  fcholars  of  Ifocrates  ;  and,  after
“  enumerating  the  many  advantages
46  he  had  of  being  well  informed  of
“  what  he  writ,  he  fays,  that  the
“  greateft  charadteriftic  of  his  writing,
“  and  That,  in  which  he  was  more


“  exadt  than  all  the  other  hiftorians,
“  either  ancient  or  modern,  was  this,
“  that  he  obferved,  and  related,  not
“  only  thofe  things,  thit  were  oblerv-
“  able  by  others,  but,  alfo,  fearched
“  into  the  hidden  motives  both  of  the
“  adtions,  and  of  the  adtors,  and  into
<c  the  pafiions  of  the  foul,  which  are
“  not  eafily  difeovered  by  the  gen?-
“  rality  of  mankind  *  and  that  he
“  unfolded  all  the  myfteries  both  of
“  Teeming  virtue,  and  of  latent  vice/*
It  is  no  wonder  that  fo  free  a  fearcher
into  the  fprings  of  Philip’s  policy,
whofe  affairs  were  the  fubjedt  of  one  of
his  hiftories,  and  with  whom  he  was
cotemporary,  fhould  pafs  for  a  cenfori-
ous  writer.  But  the  truth  is,  that  the
iniquitous  defigns  of  Philip  to  enQave
Greece  •,  the  corrupt  methods,  made
ufe  of  by  him  to  accomplifti  that  de-
fign-,  the  diforders  of  his  court  j  his
perfonal  proftitution  to  every  vice,
fometimes,  through  intemperance,  and
fometimes,  through  policy,  were  fo
flagrant,  that  a  naked  relation  of  all
thefe  exceffes  might  make  his  hiftory
appear  a  fatire.  This  Philippic  hiftory
of  Theopompus  contained  fifty  eight
books,  as  we  learn  from  Diodorus  Si¬
culus,  who  fays  that  five  of  them  were
fufpedted  not  to  be  genuine.  c  Tty^afyi


((dt07roy.7roi')  fti&Axs  okIu  wgog  t ar£v7jj»
KQvlot,  gf  COV  TXl\ii

b  Thucyd.  B.  vi.  c.  50.  cDiod.  Sic.  B,  xvi.  p.  51 1.  Edit,  of  Steph.


of


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  SSENS  IS.  3

of  thofe  things,  I  am  going  to  relate.  For  I  am  of  the
opinion  that  all,  who  propofe  to  leave  fuch  monuments  of
their  minds  to  pofterity,  as  time  fhall  not  involve  in  one
common  ruin  with  their  bodies,  and,  particularly,  thofe,
who  write  hiftories,  which  we  look  upon  as  the  repolitories
of  truth,  3  the  fource  both  of  prudence  andwifdom,  ought,
firft  of  all,  to  make  choice  of  worthy  and  grand  fubjeds,
and  fuch  as  are  of  great  utility  to  their  readers ;  then,  with
great  care  and  pains,  provide  themfelves  with  proper  ma¬
terials.  For  thofe,  who  build  their  hiftories  upon  fubjeds
inglorious,  wicked,  or  of  no  importance,  either  fond  of  being
known,  and  of  getting  a  name  of  any  kind,  or  defirous  to
difplay  the  abundance  of  their  oratory,  4  are  neither  known
by  pofterity  to  their  advantage,  or  commended  for  their
eloquence,  leaving  this  opinion  in  the  minds  of  all,  who  are
converfant  with  their  hiftQries,  that  their  lives,  and  their
writings  were  of  a  piece ;  fince  it  is  a  juft,  and  a  general
obfervation,  that  the  works  of  an  author  are  the  images  of
his  mind.  There  are  others,  who  make  choice  indeed  of
the  beft  fubjeds ;  but,  by  founding  their  relations  upon

common  reports  through  precipitancy  and  careleftnefs,  lofe

*

A£%>?v  <p£ov>j crtug  t«  xai  roQiot;  a<rocv.  not  the  fenfe  it  bears  here,  where  it
Le  Jay  has  left  out  this  fine  obferva-  plainly  implies  admiration ,  praife ;
tion  in  his  paraphrafe  on  this  paffage.  and,  in  this  fenfe,  it  agrees  very  well
The  other  French  tranflator  has  not  with  what  goes  before  :  Thefe  men,
left  it  out  in  his.  fays  our  author,  are  fond  of  being

4*  Ovlt  ryg  yvuartag  fytevlou  to/?  known,  and  they  are  fo,  but  it  is  to
iTr/y/vojusvo/?.  Both  the  French  tranf-  their  difadvantage.  And  thus  Suidas
lators have  applied  ^A»v7a/ in  this  place  explains  the  word  £jAw7o?.  ^e<wco!f»s,c?.
to  imitation  and  emulation ,  which  is,  «zram7 0?.
no  doubt,  one  fenfe  of  the  word,  but

B  2


the


Book  L


4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

the  merit  of  that  choice.  5  For  we  do  not  allow  the  hiftories
of  renowned  cities,  and  of  men  who  have  governed  nations,
to  be  written  in  a  hafty,  and  negligent  manner.  As  there¬
fore  I  am  convinced  that  thefe  confederations  are  neceflary  to,
and  ought  firft  to  be  regarded  by,  hiftorians,  and,  as  I  have
taken  great  care  to  obferve  them  both,  I  would  neither
omit  the  mention  of  them,  nor  6  give  it  any  other  place  than
in  the  preface  to  this  work.

II.  That  I  have  made  choice  of  a  fubjetft,  worthy,  grand,
and  ufeful,  will  be  readily  granted  by  all,  who  are  not
utterly  unacquainted  with 7  general  hiftory :  For,  if  any  one,
who  has  confidered  the  ancient  empires  both  of  cities  and
of  nations,  as  delivered  down  to  us  by  hiftory,  and,  after
that,  in  furveying  them  feverally,  and  comparing  them  toge¬
ther,  deftres  to  be  fatisfied  which  of  them  obtained  the  moft
extenfive  dominion,  and,  both  in  peace  and  war,  performed
the  moft  glaring  achievements,  he  will  find  the  empire
of  the  Romans  to  have  far  exceeded  all  thofe  that  preceded
it,  not  only  in  the  extent  of  their  dominion,  and  in  the

fplendor  of  their  a&ions  (8  which  no  hiftory  has  hitherto

-  •  *  *

Ou  yet£  ul-ivfMv  ecv7o%eJttif,  etc.  I  can  manufcript;  the  firft  being  an
am  fenfible  that  the  general  fignifica-  active  verb,  and  fignifying  to  place ,  to
tion  of  the  word  ctvloa^tJiog  is  extern-  difpofe and  the  other,  if  there  is  fuch
porary  ;  but,  as  it,  alfo,  fignifies  fud-  a  word,  a  neuter,  in  which  fenfe  it  can
den ,  hafty,  I  have  chofen  to  give  it  this  have  nothing  to  do  here,
fenfe,  becaufe  it  agrees  better  with  7*  t>k  koivyjs  Isolate.  Cafaubon  very

which  our  author  had  employed,  juft  well  obferves,  upon  this  place,  that
before,  to  fignify  the  fame  thing..  xcuv>j  a  fignifies  jtafioTujoj  in  op-

I  have  followed  the  pofition  to  tjj  tuv  xdloijuB^og  cvvIcc^bi.
common  editions  in  reading  8‘  As  *7 r«  KtxocrfAw g  a oyos

rather  than  xdlap'oj^trut  with  the  V ati-  Que  perfonne  jufqu’ici  n’a  vantees  comme

worthily


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  5

worthily  celebrated)  but  alfo  in  the  length  of  time,  that  ha6
handed  it  down  to  our  days:  For  the  empire  of  the  Afiyrians,


dies  le  meritent  in  Le  Jay,  is,  by  much,
too  vain  a  tranfl  ation  of  the  word  Koc^eiv :
The  other  French  tranflator  has  tranf-
lated,  or,  rather,  paraph rafed  this  paf-
fage  with  more  modefty,  ghdaucun
auteur  rt a  traitees  jufqu’ici  avec  toute  la
dignite ,  et  toute  r eloquence  qu  dies  de¬
manded.  When  I  read  this  expreffion
in  our  author,  I  cannot  help  being
furprifed  at  his  cenfuring,  at  one  dafh,
all  the  writers  of  the  Roman  hiftory  ;
particularly,  if,  as  it  is  generally
thought,  Livy’s  hiftory  appeared  be¬
fore  his.  For,  if  ever  an  hiftorian  had
the  talent  of  adorning  the  actions  he
relates,  I  really  think  that  Livy  pof-
feffed  it  in  the  higheft  degree.  For
this  reafon,  Caligula,  that  mad  em¬
peror,  whofe  fayings,  though  deftitute
of  reafon,  were  not  deftitute  of  the
appearance  of  it,  called  Livy  verbofum
in  hiftorifd.  However,  I  have  great
reafon  to  think  that  Livy’s  hiftory  did
not  make  its  appearance  in  the  world
fo  early  as  the  confulfhip  of  Claudius
Nero,  and  Calpurnius  Pifo,  which  was
in  the  year  of  Rome  745,  according
to  Cato.  Yoflius,  I  know,  contends
that  Livy  muft  have  finifhed  his  hi¬
ftory  before  the  year  730 e;  becaufe  he
fays,  that,  after  Numa,  the  temple  of
Janus  was  twice  fhut,  once,  in  the  con¬
fulfhip  of  Titus  Manlius,  after  the  end
of  the  firft  Punic  war  and,  the  fecond
time,  by  Auguftus,  after  the  battle  of
Adlium. f  Bis  deindepojl  Numae  regnum
(  Janus )  claufus  fuit :  femel ,  PitoManlio
confule ,  poji  Punicum  primum  perfedum


helium  ;  iterum ,  quod  noflrae  aetati  dii
dederunt  ut  videremus ,  poji  bellum  Adi -
acum  ab  imperatore  Caefare  Augnjlo ,
pace  terra  marique  partd.  Voffius  goes
on,  and  fays,  It  is  well  known  that  the
temple  of  Janus  was  fhut  a  fecond
time,  by  Auguftus  in  the  year  730  ;
and,  alfo,  a  third  time,  by  the  fame
emperor,  the  following  year  ;  and,
fays  he,  What  can  be  plainer,  when
Livy  fays  That  temple  was  fhut,  but
once ,  in  his  time,  that  he  writ  thofe
words,  before  it  was  fhut  the  fecond,
and  third  time  ?  I  will  not  quarrel
with  Voflius  for  making  Livy  fay
more  than  he  does,  in  order  to  favour
his  argument :  Livy  does  not  fay,  but
once ,  though,  what  he  fays,  feems  to
imply  it.  This  argument  of  Voffius
proves,  moft  certainly,  that,  when
Livy  writ  thofe  words,  the  temple
of  Janus  had  been  only  fhut  once  by
Auguftus,  but  it  is  very  far  from
proving  that  Livy  finifhed  his  hiftorv
before  it  had  been  fhut,  the  fecond  and
third  time.  I  find  by  s  Dion  Caffius
that,  after  Caius  Antiftius  had  ob¬
tained  a  vidlory  over  the  Aftures  and
Cantabri  (Auguftus  having  left  the
command  of  the  army  to  him  by  rea¬
fon  of  his  indifpofition)  the  temple  of
Janus  was  fhut  by  this  emperor,  for
the  fecond  time,  during  his  reign,
which  happened  in  the  729th  year  of
Rome,  Auguftus  being  conful  for  the
ninth  time  together  with  Marcus  Si-
lanus.  Now,  it  is  impoffible  that  Livy
could  have  finifhed  his  hiftory  before


<?  Sueton.  Life  of  Calig.  c.  34.  e  De  Hill.  Latin.  B.  i.  c.  19.  ‘  Liv.  B  i.  c.  19,

tB.  liii.  p.  589.  Edit.  Steph,.

ancient


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

ancient  as  it  was,  and  running  back  as  far  as  the  fabulous
times,  fpread  itfelf  no  farther  than  over  a  fmall  part  of  Afia.
That  of  the  Medes,  who  overthrew  the  Aflyrian  empire,
and  9  attained  ftill  greater  power,  lafted  not  long,  but  was
diflolved  in  the  fourth  generation :  the  Ferfians,  indeed,
alter  they  had  conquered  the  Medes,  at  laft,  became  mafters
of  almoft  all  Alia ;  but,  having  alfo  invaded  the  European


nations,  they  did  not  1  prevail

that  year •,  fince  it,  plainly,  appears,
by  the  epitome,  that  he  extended  it  to
the  death  of  Drufus,  which  happened
in  the  744th  year  of  Rome,  Drufus
himfelf  and  Crifpinus  being  confuls.
Nay,  there  are  fome  authors,  who
carry  his  hiftory  even  to  the  time  of
Tiberius,  in  the  fourth  year  of  whofe
reign  he  is  faid  by  Eufebius  to  have
died  in  his  76th  year  h.  As  the  words
quoted  by  Voftius  out  of  Livy,  are  in
his  fir  ft  book,  it  is  very  poffible  he
might  afterwards  forget  to  alter  them.

9*  M ITe-
giiGahovlo.  £7r£>t7>j<rav7o.  Suidas.  I  fhall
defer  taking  notice  of  the  ancient  em¬
pires,  here  mentioned  by  our  author,
till  he  has  gone  through  them  j  as  I
fhall,  alfo,  confidering  the  fenfe  he
gives  to  the  word  ytvsa,  till  I  come  to
the  place,  where  he  applies  it  to  the
duration  of  the  Roman  empire.

,0*  Ou  TvoXhctiTniyoiyoiPo.  Le  Jay  has
tranflated  this  qui  fubjuguerent  mefme  une
partie  de  V Europe  \  which  is  neither
agreeable  to  the  fenfe  of  the  Greek
word,  nor  to  the  fatft,  as  it  ftands  re¬
corded  in  hiftory.  EnayiS-ai  fignifies
to  prevail  on  any  one  by  money ,  promifes


on  many  of  them  to  fubmit


or  perjuafion.  E netyopivct,  eQoAxcc,  tjr
cvrdl^iKd.  Hefychius.  E 7rt)yayf1o.  z<rgo<r-
MK&uirdlo.  ibiQ7roiy}<rulo.  Suidas.  In  this
fenfe,  it  is,  frequently,  ufed,  by  Thu¬
cydides  ;  particularly,  in  relation  to
the  Acanthians  who  were  perfuaded  by
a  fpeech  of  Brafidas  to  revolt  from  the
Athenians,  as  the  Boeotians  had,  be¬
fore,  been,  by  the  Perfians,  to  abandon
the  caufe  of  the  Greeks.  The  Acan¬
thians,  fays  Thucydides1,  barer*
E  II A  r  n  r  A  en r«v»  tov  Bganfav,  xcu  a ngi
ra  xagmi  (poCa  tyvutrav  01  zrAease

A^vxicov.  I  faid  that  Le  Jay’s  tranf-
lation  was  not  agreeable  to  the  truth
of  hiftory.  For  the  Perfians  never
made  any  conquefts  in  Europe  under
Darius,  the  fon  of  Hyftafpe^  ;  they
advanced  no  further  than  Marathon,
where  they  were  defeated  by  the  Athe¬
nians,  andDatis,  their  general,  was
flain.  In  their  fecond  expedition,  when
Xerxes  commanded  in  perfon,  they
were  far  from  making  conquefts  in
Europe.  They  were  defeated  at  Sa-
lamis  by  fea,  and  at  Plataea  by  land  ;
and  Xerxes  himfelf  was  forced  to  fly
into  Afia  with  ignominy.  But,  if  the
Perfians  were  unfuccefsful  in  their


h  In  Chronic.


>Thuc.  B.  iv.  c.  88.


to


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  AS  S  E  NS  I S.  7

to  their  obedience,  and  continued  not  in  power  much  above
two  hundred  years.  The  Macedonian  empire  itfelf,  which
overthrew  the  Perfian,  and,  in  the  extent  of  its  dominion,
exceeded  all  before  it,  did  not  flourifh  long,  but,  after
Alexander’s  death,  began  to  decline:  For,  being  immediately
divided  into  many  kingdoms  by  his  fucceffors ;  and,  after
them,  fupporting  itfelf  to  the  fecond  or  third  generation,  it
was  weakened  by  its  own  hands,  and,  at  laft,  deftroyed  by
the  Romans.  But,  even,  the  Macedonian  empire  did  not
fubdue  every  country,  and  every  fea.  Of  the  wide- extended
region  of  Libya,  only  that  part,  which  borders  upon  Aegypt,
obeyed  their  power ;  neither  did  they  fubdue  all  Europe,
Thracia  being  the  limits  of  their  European  conquefts  to  the
north,  and  the  Adriatic  to  the  weft.

III.  The  raoft  famous  empires,  therefore,  we  have  any
account  of  in  hiftory,  11  after  they  had  arrived  to  fo  great  a
maturity  and  power,  have  mouldered  away.  As  for  the
empire  of  the  Greeks,  it  does  not  deferve  to  be  compared


attempts  to  conquer  Greece,  they  were
not  fo  in  their  attempts  to  corrupt  it,
as  every  one  knows,  who  has  read  the
Greek  hiftory.  By  their  intrigues,
they  prevailed  on  the  Boeotians,  the
Macedonians,  and  Theflalians  to  ef-
poufe  their  caufe  againft  the  Greeks,
in  the  expedition  of  Xerxes  :  and
this  is  what  our  author  means  by
i7TYiyceyol\o,  in  tranflating  which  Sylbur-
gius  has  been  much  more  cautious  than
Le  Jay  ;  he  has  faid  non  multum  pro-
cejferunt ,  which,  though  it  is  far  from
exprefting  the  fenfe  of  the  word,  made
ufe  of  by  our  author,  ftiews,  at  leaft.


that  he  did  not  look  upon  this  expref-
fion  to  carry  with  it  any  idea  of  a  con-
queft.  But,  as  bad  as  that  transition
of  Sylburgius  is,  the  other  French
tranflator  has  tranflated  it  laterally  :
For  he  has  faid,  ils  ne  firent  plus  de
grands  pr ogres.

”*  Tocrcculyv  an[jiviv  y.ou  io/vv  \ot,Gtf<rec*.

Intirely  left  out  by  Le  Jay.  FI  is
countryman  has  faid  very  well  apr'es
etre  parvenus  au  degre  de  puijfance  que
nous  avons  dit ;  which,  if  it  does  not,
abfolutely,  come  up  to  the  author’s
fenfe,  is  very  near  it.


to


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

to  the  former;  ftnce  it  was  neither  fo  extenftve,  nor  its
fplendor  fo  long-lived.  12  For  the  Athenians  were  mailers
only  of  the  maritime  country  during  the  fpace  of  iixty
eight  years,  neither  did  their  dominion  extend  even  over  all
'That,  but  only  to  the  coafls  of  the  Euxine  andPamphylian
feas,  when  they  were  moft  powerful  on  that  element.  The
Lacedaemonians,  having  the  command  of  Peloponnefus,  and
the  reft  of  Greece,  advanced  their  dominion  as  far  as  Macedon ;
but  were  deprived  of  their  power  by  the  Thebans,  of  which
they  had  not  been  in  poffeftion  quite  thirty  years.  13  But
Rome  is  miftrefs  of  every  country  not  inacceffible,  or  unin¬
habited;  every  fea  owns  her  power,  not  only  That  within
Hercules  Pillars,  but  alfo  the  whole  navigable  ocean :  She  is
the  firft,  and  the  only  ftate  recorded  in  hiftory,  that  ever
made  the  eaft  and  weft  the  boundaries  of  her  empire.
Neither  has  her  dominion  been  of  ftiort  duration,  but  more
lading  than  That  of  any  other  commonwealth  or  kingdom.
For,  the  city  was  no  fooner  built,  but  fhe  conquered  many
warlike  nations,  her  neighbours,  and  ftill  advanced,  over-

**•  A Qkvouoi  jjiiv  yag  ccolm  ^.ovov  tj g£av  rye  beholden.  Upon  the  whole,  his  notes
vrotguAm.  Le  Jay  has  furpaflfed  himfelf  are  nothing  elfe  but  one  continued
in  trandating  this  paflage.  He  has  tranflation  of  the  notes  of  other  com-
faid,  Les  Atheniens  n’ ont  ete  redoutable  mentators.  As  to  Cafaubon’s  criti-
que fur  lamer.  The  other  Fiench  tranf-  cifm  upon  this  hyperbolical  paflage,
lator  has  rendered  it  very  properly.  all  that  I  fhall  fay  in  vindication  of

li*  H  h  F&fxcuuv  zroAif  dircccv^q  [mv  ocgxH  our  author,  is,  that  it  was  the  ftyle  in
yyq,  etc.  Cafaubon  has  a  long  note  vogue  at  Rome  in  his  time,  and  many
upon  this  paflage,  which  Le  Jay  has  years  after.  Other  authors,  in  fpeak-
trandated  without  taking  any  notice  of  ing  of  the  Roman  power,  have  had  the
him,  as  he  has  many  others  from  other  fame  flights,  but  few  have  exprefled
commentators  without  giving  his  rea-  them  fo  beautifully.

.ders  the  lead  hint,  to  whom  he  was


coming


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  ARN  A  S  SE  N  SI  S.  9

coming  all  oppofition.  Thefe  things  happened  during  the
courfe  of  feven  hundred  and  forty  five  years  from  her  foun¬
dation  to  the  confulfhip  of  Claudius  Nero,  conful  for  the
fecond  time,  and  of  Calpurnius  Pifo,  who  were  chofen
in  the  hundred  and  ninety  third  Olympiad.  By  the  con-
queft  of  all  Italy,  fhe  was  emboldened  to  proceed  even
to  univerfal  empire ;  and,  having  driven  the  Carthaginians
from  off  the  fea,  whofe  maritime  ftrength  was  fuperior  to
That  of  all  others ;  and  fubdued  Macedon  the  moft  powerful
nation,  till  that  time,  at  land,  no  enemy  being  left  either
among  the  Greeks  or  Barbarians,  fhe  is  miftrefs  of  the  whole
world  ;  14  and  this  is  the  feven th  generation  fhe  has  continued


*+.  TiVtOiV  IJtfy  TtfV  in T  ifMf  SlOi-

j u£v«  zrav log  eras  t ott*.  I  fha.ll,  in

this  note,  confider  the  ancient  em¬
pires,  mentioned  by  our  author,  and
give  a  fhort  fynopfis  of  them.  The
Affyrian  empire  was  founded  by  Ni-
nus,  the  fon  of  Belus,  and  pofleflfed
the  Upper  Afia  during  520  years  k.
As  the  foundation  of  this  empire  is
placed  by  the  chronologers 1  in  the
3447th  year  of  the  Julian  period,  that
is,  491  years  before  the firft  Olympiad,
our  author,  very  properly,  fays  that  it
ran  back  into  the  fabulous  times1",
which  are  computed  from  the  Ogygian
flood,  to  the  inftitution  of  the  Olym¬
piads,  and  comprehend  1020  years.
The  Medes  revolted  from  the  Affy-
rians  under  Dejoces,  who  was  fucceed-
ed  by  his  fon  Phraortes,  whofe  fon,
Cyaxares,  fucceeded  him n  •,  and  Afty-
ages,  the  fon  of  the  latter,  fucceeded

*  Herod,  in  Clio,  c.  95.  1  Ulher,  p.  24

®  Ufher  p.  81.  rid.  p.175. -

VOL.  I,


his  father  ;  during  whofe  reign,  the
empire  of  the  Medes  was  diffolved  by
Cyrus,  in  the  fourth  generation ,  as  our
author  fays  \  by  which,  he  plainly  fhews
in  what  fenle  he  takes  the  .  word  ytvix.
The  beginning  of  the  Perfian  empire
is,  generally,  computed  from  the  tak¬
ing  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus,  which  hap¬
pened  in  the  4176th  year  of  the  Julian
period  From  that  aera,  to  the  year
Alexander  made  his  triumphal  entry
into  the  fame  city,  which  was  the
4383d  of  the  fame  period p,  there  are
no  more  than  207  years  ;  confequent-
ly,  the  empire  of  the  Perfians  was  of
no  longer  duration  j  which  juffcifies
our  author,  in  faying,  that  it  did  not
continue  much  above  two  hundred  years.
Imorder  to  follow  the  computation  of
our  author,  we  mull  date  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  Macedonian  empire  from
the  time  fhe  deftroyed  That  of  the

m  Id.  p.  7.  c  Herod,  in  Clio,  c.  107.

c


in


Book  I.


ROMAN  ANTI  QJtJ  I  T  IE  S  OF

in  poileflion  of  that  dominion ;  neither  is  there  any  nation,
as  I  may  fay,  that  claims  a  fhare  in  her  univerfal  power,  or


Perfians,  iw  Tlt^cm  x.uQi\x<rx  i%w,  that
is,  from  the  abovementioned  year  of
the  Julian  period  4383  •,  and  not  from
any  of  the  Macedonian  kings  before
Alexander,  much  lefs  from  Caranus,
the  founder  of  that  kingdom.  From
that  aera,  to  the  year  4546  of  the  fame
period^,  in  which  Perfeus,  their  laft
king,  was  defeated,  and  the  Macedo¬
nian  kingdom  deftroyed  by  Paulus
Aemilius,  there  are  found  no  more
than  163  years -,  out  of  which  number,
muft  be  ded u£led  the  reigns  of  Alex¬
ander’s  generals  (becaufe  our  author
fays  ixvc'  to  the  reign  of  Anti-

gonus  Gonatus,  from  whom  there  was
a  regular  fucceffion  of  kings  from  fa¬
ther  to  fon  down  to  Perfeus,  if  we  ex¬
cept  Antigonus  Aw<r«v,  who  was  rather
regent  of  the  kingdom,  during  the
minority  of  Philip,  than  king.  An¬
tigonus  Gonatas,  his  fon  Demetrius,
his  grandfon  Philip,  and  his  great-
grandfon  Perfeus,  make  three  genera¬
tions-,  in  the  laft  of  which,  as  our  au¬
thor  fays,  the  Macedonian  empire  was
diflfolved.  As  to  the  power  of  the
Athenians  over  the  maritime  country,
which  our  author  fays  lafted  68  years,

I  fhall  not  mandate  the  note  in  Hud-
fon,  as  M  *  *  *  has  done,  but  date  the
beginning  of  that  power,  with  Thucy¬
dides r,  from  the  recalling  of  Paufanias,
whofe  arbitrary  government  had  alie¬
nated  the  minds  of  the  Allies  from  the
Lacedaemonians,  and  thrown  them
into  the  arms  of  the  Athenians.  This
happened  in  the  4240th  year  of  the
Julian  period  6;  from  whence,  to  the

s  Ulher,  p.  321.  *  Thucyd.  B.  i.  c.  95.


battle  of  Aegos  Potamos,  in  which
the  Athenian  fleet  was  deftroyed  by
Lyfander  and  which  was  fought  in
the  4309th  year  of  the  fame  period,
there  are  69  years,  which  agrees  pretty
well  with  the  computation  of  our  au¬
thor.  The  Lacedaemonian  power  over
all  Greece  muft  be  dated  from  the
abovementioned  battle  at  Aegos  Po¬
tamos.  From  thence,  to  the  battle  of
Leuftra,  in  which  they  were  utterly
defeated,  and  ftripped  of  that  power
by  the  Thebans  under  the  command
of  Epaminondas.  This  battle  was
fought  in  the  4344th  year  of  the  Julian
period 1  and,  from  the  battle  of  Aegos
Potamos,  to  That  of  Leuftra,  there  are
found  35  years,  which  make  five  years
more  than  are  afligned  by  our  author,
to  the  duration  of  their  power.  The
only  difficulty  that  remains,  is  to  know
what  Dionyfius  means  by  ytvtav  16-
Lp jv,  the  feventh  generation ,  during
which  he  fays,  Rome  had  continued,
in  his  time,  miftrefs  of  the  world.
Dodwell  has  written  a  kind  of  difier-
tation  upon  this  paffage,  which  Le  Jay
has  mandated  without  taking  any  no¬
tice  of  Dodwell.  The  other  French
tranfiator  has  afted  with  more  candor,
and  mentioned  his  name.  I  agree
with  Dodwell  that,  by  the  word  yt
Dionyfius  does  not  mean  any  deter¬
minate  number  of  years,  but  a  fuc¬
ceffion  of  princes,  or  of  men  ;  but  I
cannot  agree  with  him  that  Dionyfius
had  a  view,  in  fpeaking  of  thefe  feven
generations,  to  any  fucceffion  of  priefts,.
or  princes  in  the  Julian  family,  which

s  U flier,  p.  105.  rId.  p.  147.

refiifes.


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  A  S S E N S I S.  n

refufes  obedience  to  it.  But  I  need  fay  no  more  to  prove
that  I  have  not  made  choice,  as  I  have  faid,  of  the  leaf!:  of
fubjedls^  or  propofed  to  relate  trivial,  or  obfeure  actions,  but
have  undertaken  the  hiftory  both  of  the  moft  illuftrious
ftate,  and  of  the  moft  fhining  achievements  that  can  poflibly
be  treated  of.

IV.  Before  I  proceed,  I  fhall  fhew,  in  a  few  words,  that
it  is  not  without  deftgn,  and  mature  premeditation,  that  I


imaginary  fuccefiion  both  the  French
translators  have  adopted.  Whoever
reads  Dionyfius  muft  be  convinced  of
his  zeal  for  liberty,  and  his  deteftation
of  tyranny,  which  he  never  fails  to
fhew  upon  all  occafions,  where  his
fubjedt  gives  him  any  opportunity  of
declaring  thofe  fentiments :  So  that,  I
fee  no  reafon,  why  he  Should  be  ac-
cufed  of  flattering  either  Caefar,  who
ufurped  the  tyranny,  or  Auguftus  who
continued  that  ufurpation.  I  Should
fooner  fufpedt  him  of  drawing  the
pidure  of  Caefar  in  the  charader  of
Spurius  Caflius,  who  had  been  thrice
conful,  had  obtained  many  vidories,
and,  like  Caefar,  courted  the  people,
in  order  to  enflave  them.  Had  thefe
been  as  corrupt  when  Caflius  attempted
to  feduce  them,  as  they  were  virtuous,
or  as  virtuous  when  Caefar  made  the
fame  attempt,  as  they  were  corrupt,
Caflius  had  fucceeded,  like  Caefar,
and  Caefar,  like  Caflius,  had  received
the  puniShment  he  deferved.  Diony¬
fius  mentions  the  periods,  which,  in
their  order,  preceded  the  uninterrupted
poflfeflion  of  the  univerfal  power,  the
Romans  enjoyed  in  his  time,  which
was  the  feventh  generation,  they  had

"  Livy,  B.  xxx.  c.  37.  w  Polyb.  B.  xv.


enjoyed  it.  The  firft  of  thefe  periods
was  the  conqueft  of  all  Italy  ;  the  Se¬
cond,  the  happy  conclufion  of  the  fe-
cond  Funic  war,  one  of  the  conditions
of  the  peace,  granted  to  the  Cartha¬
ginians  by  the  Romans,  being  this,
that  they  Jhould  deliver  up  all  their  Jh ip s
of  war ,  but  ten  \  Naves  rojlratas ,  praeter
decern  triremes ,  trader ent ,  fays  Livy  u ;
who  has  translated  Polybius :  Ta  paxg*

srA otoi  zreivlo))  sr A*jv  bsna  t^oj-

w,  are  the  words  of  the  latter  :  This
article  deftroyed  their  maritime  power.
The  third  period  was  the  conqueft  of
Macedon  by  Aemilius  Paulus,  which
happened,  as  I  have  faid,  in  the  4546th
year  of  the  Julian  period  ;  from  which,
to  the  conful  (hip  of  Tiberius  Claudius
Nero,  for  the  Second  time,  and  of
Cneius  Calpurnius  Pifo,  which  fell
out  in  the  745th  year  of  Rome  ;  and,
in  the  4707th  of  the  Julian  period x,  in
which  our  author  published  his  hiftory,
there  will  be  found  161  years:  During
which  period,  if  any  reader  pleafes  to
run  over  the  generations  of  his  own
family,  he  will  find  that,  for  the  moft
part,  fix  generations  are  elapfed,  and
the  feventh  begun.

».  705.  Edit.  Cafaub.

C  2


*  U flier,  p.  595.

date


Book  I;


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

date  my  hiftory  from  the  earlieft  times;  but,  from  good
reafons,  which  I  can  produce  to  juftify  my  conduct
againft  the  cenfure  of  thofe,  who,  fond  of  finding  fault
with  every  thing,  and,  as  yet,  unacquainted  with  the  fubjedt
of  this  difcourfe,  may  blame  me  for  this  reafon;  that,
Rome,  being,  at  this  time,  grown  famous,  and  her  infancy
fo  inglorious,  and  obfcure,  and  fo  unworthy  the  notice  of
hiftory,  that  it  is  but  a  few  generations  ago,  and,  fince  the
overthrow  of  the  Macedonian  power,  and  the  happy  event  of
the  Punic  wars,  that  fhe  has  made  any  appearance,  or
gained  a  reputation;  when  I  was  at  liberty  to  chufe  fome
celebrated  incidents  in  her  hiftory  for  my  fubjetft,  I  fhould
deviate  into  one  fo  barren  of  fhining  events,  as  the  Roman
Antiquities.  For,  to  this  day,  almoft  all  the  Greeks  are
ftrangers  to  the  ancient  hiftory  of  Rome,  and  the  greateft  part
of  them  are  impofed  upon  by  fome  falfe  opinions,  grounded
on  common  reports,  and  led  to  believe  that  the  firft  found¬
ers  of  it  were  certain  vagabonds  without  houfe  or  home,
Barbarians,  and,  even  thefe  not  freemen,  whom  chance,
and  the  injuftice  of  fortune,  inconftderately  fhowering  down
her  greateft  favours  upon  the  moft  unworthy,  and  not  re¬
ligion,  juftice,  and  every  other  virtue,  have  raifed,  in  procefs
of  time,  to  the  empire  of  the  world  :  While  thofe,  who  are
more  malicious,  openly  rail  at  fortune,  for  having  conferred
on  the  moft  abandoned  of  all  Barbarians  thofe  bleffmgs,  which
the  Greeks  had  formerly  enjoyed.  But  why  fhould  I  men¬
tion  others?  when,  even,  fome  hiftorians  have  dared  to
publifh  thefe  things,  contrary  to  juftice,  and  the  truth  of


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  ASSENSIS.


hiftory,  in  favour  of  foreign  kings,  enemies  to  the  Roman
government,  to  whom  they  had  fervilely  devoted  themfelves,
and  whofe  paflions  they  have,  perpetually,  flattered.

V.  In  order,  therefore,  to  remove  thefe  falfe  imprefilons
from  the  minds  15  of  my  countrymen,  and  to  fubftitute  true
ones  in  their  room,  I  fhall,  in  this  book,  fhew  of  what
nations  the  firft  founders  of  this  city  were  compofed,  at
what  particular  times,  each  of  them  aflembled,  and,  by  what
turns  of  fortune,  they  left  their  refpe&ive  countries :  By  this
means,  I  engage  to  make  it  appear  that  they  were  Greeks,
and  came  together  from  nations  not  the  meaneft,  nor  the
leaf!:  confiderable.  In  the  beginning  of  the  next  book,  I
fhall  enter  upon  the  a&ions,  they  performed  immediately
after  the  building  of  the  city ;  and  give  an  account  of  their
difcipline,  the  obfervance  of  which  raifed  their  fucceflbrs  to
fo  great  power.  In  the  execution  of  this  defign,  I  fhall,  as
far  as  I  am  able,  omit  nothing  worthy  of  hiftory;  to  the  end
that  I  may  infufe  in  the  minds  of  thofe,  who  fhall  then  be


,s*  Twv  sreA/7 uv.  I  have  fo  great  a
refpedt  for  the  memory  of  Cafaubon,
and  Stephens,  that  I  am  always  forry
when  I  am  obliged  to  differ  from  them.
They  both  contended  that  we  ought  to
read  twv  a roAAwv,  inftead  ofrwi/  arsAfwv.
But  the  reafon  given  by  the-  laft,  to
lupport  this  alteration,  feems  to  me  to
prove  the  contrary  :  He  fays,  that  our
author  attributes  thefe  erroneous  opi¬
nions  t oig  arcAAoj?,  not  rot ;  zvoAilxtg  l
But,  by  oi  aroAAo/,  he  can  mean  none
but  the  generality  of  the  Greeks,  his
countrymen  fince,  immediately  be¬
fore,  he  fays  that  almoftall  the  Greeks


were  unacquainted  with  the  ancient
hiftory  of  Rome-,  and  then  adds,  that
the  greateft  part  of  them  had  been
impofed  upon  by  common  reports :
Neither  can  I  underftand  why  zvoAilai
fhould  be  confined  to  the  citizens  of
Halicarnaflus,  and  not  extended  to  all
the  Greeks ;  fince  the  errors  he  under¬
takes  to  refute  were  common,  as  he
fays,  to  almoft  all  of  them,  and  not
only  to  the  citizens  of  Halicarnaflus,
which,  though  in  Cana,  was  a  Greek
colony  and  this  might  well  juftify
Dionyfius  in  calling  all  the  Greeks  his
countrymen.

informed


14  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

informed  of  the  truth,  fuch  an  idea  of  this  city,  as  may  be
adequate  to  its  merit,  if  wild  prejudice,  and  difaffe&ion  have
not  entirely  exafperated  them  againft  it ;  and  root  out  all
indignation  at  a  fubje&ion  grounded  on  reafon,  (for,  by  an
univerfal,  and  unalterable  law  of  nature,  it  is  ordained  that
fuperiors  fhall  govern  their  inferiors)  and,  at  the  fame  time,
filence  their- complaints  of  fortune,  as  if  fhe  had  wantonly
beftowed  upon  an  undeferving  people  an  empire  fo  great,  and
of  fo  long  a  continuance  ;  particularly,  when  they  fhall  be
convinced  from  this  hiftory,  that  Rome,  even  in  her  infancy,
brought  forth  infinite  examples  of  virtue,  than  which  no  city}
either  Greek,  or  Barbarian,  ever  produced  greater  for  piety,
juftice,  habitual  temperance,  and  military  accompliftiments.
16  If  thefe  things  are  really  fo,  I  fhall  efcape  cenfure,  which
generally  attends  the  promife  of  things  unexpected  and
wonderful :  Since  all  thefe  men,  who  raifed  their  country  to
fo  great  power,  are  unknown  to  the  Greeks,  for  want  of
worthy  relators.  For,  no  accurate  hiftory  of  the  Romans,
written  in  the  Greek  language,  has,  hitherto,  appeared,  but
only  fummary  accounts,  and  fhort  epitomes.

16 •  Ei  Aj.  Stephens  and  Cafaubon  Thus,  Cyaxares,  in  Xenophon,  fends
would  have  us  read  «  ye  :  But,  I  find,  an  angry  meflage  to  Cyrus  to  order
by  many  of  their  alterations  of  the  text,  him,  or,  at  leaft,  the  Medes,  who  were
that  they  had  never  feen  the  Vatican  with  him,  to  return  immediately  *,
manufcript,  which  has  «  <kj.  This  kou  f/EvKv^o?  (SxXyJou'  «

makes  the  text  very  clear  without  the  ye  t^v  :  Where,  after

neceffity  of  altering  crnistu  into  fixhylen,  is  underftood;  and  here.

Every  one  knows  that  the  figure,  called  after  «  <?«,  Tavla  e% «,  or  fomething

by  the  grammarians,  an  ellipfis,  is  very  equivalent  to  it,  muft  be  fupplied  by
common  among  the  Attic  writers,  the  reader.


y  Xenoph.B,  iv.  m  Ki>£S7 r«(J.  p.  288.  Edit,  of  Hutchinf.


VI.


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICA  RN  ASSENSIS.  15

VI.  17  Hieronymus  Cardianus  (the  firft  author  I  know  of
upon  this  fubjedt)  has  given  a  curfory  account  of  the  Roman
Antiquities  in  his  hiftory  of  the  Epigoni.  After  him*
l8Timaeus,  the  Sicilian,  treated  of  antiquities  in  his  univerfal
hiftory,  and  placed  in  a  feparate  work,  the  wars  of  the
Romans  with  Pyrrhus  of  Epirus.  Befides  thefe,  r  Antigonus,
20  Polybius,  Silenus,  and  innumerable  other  authors  have


*7'  l9gttvv/A.o$  sv  ry  zrtgi  twv

"ETTiyovccv  w^uyy.ixT^ioi.  It  plainly  ap¬
pears,  by  a  note  in  Eludfon  on  this
paftage,  that  the  Epigoni,  whofe  hi¬
ftory  was  wrritten  by  Hieronymus  of
Cardia,  were  not  the  generals,  who
divided  the  empire  of  Alexander,  but
their  def  endants.  z  Hieronymus  writ
the  wars  of  Alexander  alfo,  and  was
much  efteemed  by  Eumenes  his
countryman,  who  made  fo  great  a
figure  after  Alexander’s  death  *,  by
which,  the  age  of  this  hiftorian  is
certainly  known.

l8*  T I'Ucuos  0  a  Diodorus

Siculus  gives  great  commendations  to
his  countryman,  Timaeus,  for  his
exadtnefs  in  chronology,  and  great
learning;  but,  at  the  fame  time,  fays,
he  was,  juftly,  accufed  for  his  cen-
forioufnefs,  which  acquired  him  the
name  of  EniU/moiios ;  which  name,  A-
thenaeus  b  tells  us,  was  given  him  by
Callimachus  liter.  Suidas  fays,  he
was  cotemporary  with  Agathocles ;
and,  being  banifhed  by  him,  revenged
himfelf  by  traducing  the  author  of  his
banifhment.  The  fame  writer  fays  he
was  a  difciple  of  Philifcus,  the  Mile-
fian,  and  that  he  writ  the  tranfadtions


of  the  Romans  and  Sicilians,  and  thofe
of  the  Greeks  and  the  latter.

**•  Avhyova.  I  can  find  very  little
concerning  this  hiftorian.  The  note
in  Hudfon,  which  M  *  *  *  has  tranf-
lated,  without  faying  from  whence  he
had  it,  gives  very  little  light  with  re-
fpect  either  to  this  author,  or  his  writ¬
ings.  cVoftius,  very  juftly,  thinks
this  hiftorian  not  to  have  been  the
fame  with  Antigonus  Caryftius.

a0*  xui  'LiAvivx.  1l  he  firft  of

thefe  hiftorians  is  fo  well  known,  and
fo  defervedly  admired,  that  I  need  fay
nothing  concerning  him.  In  another
note,  which  M  *  *  *  has  alfo  trans¬
lated,  we  are  told,  that  d  Cicero  fays
Silenus  writ  the  hiftory  of  Hannibal
with  great  exadtnefs,  and  that  e  Livy
quotes  him.  Both  which,  upon  turn¬
ing  to  the  places  in  thofe  authors,  I
find  to  be  fo.  But  there  is  one  thing
worth  obferving,  which  is  not  taken
notice  of  in  that  note,  nor  any  where
elfe  that  I  know  of.  Cicero,  a  little
after,  fays  that  Silenus,  whom  Coelius
follows,  gives  an  account  of  a  very
remarkable  dream  of  Hannibal,  which
I  am  far  from  mentioning  for  the  hike
of  the  dream,  but  to  Ihew  that  Livy


1  Suidas.  Diod.  Sic.  B.  xix.  p .695.  3  Diod.  Sic.  B.  v.  p.  198.  b  Athen.  B.  vi.  c.  20.

*  De  Hill.  Grace.  B.  i.  c.  1 2.  d  Cic.  of  Div.  B.  i.  c.  24.  *  Liv.  B.  xxvi.  c.  49.

attempted


1 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book I.


attempted  the  fame  fubjedt,  though  in  a  different  manner ;
each  of  whom  has  written  fome  few  things  concerning  the
Romans,  which  they  have  compiled  from  common  reports,
without  any  diligence,  or  accuracy.  Like  to  thefe,  in  all
refpedts,  are  the  hiftories,  which  fome  Romans  alfo  have
publifhed  in  Greek  concerning  the  ancient  tranfadlions  of
their  own  nation:  Of  whom  the  moft  ancient  are  2IQuinctus
Fabius,  and  Lucius  Cincius,  who  both  flourifhed  during  the
Punic  wars :  Each  of  thefe  has  related  the  adtions,  at  which
he  himfelf  was  prefent,  with  great  exadtnefs,  as  being  well
acquainted  with  them;  but  given  a  fummary  account  of


took  the  fame  relation  from  Silenus,
though  he  has  not  mentioned  him.
Hannibal  dreamed,  it  feems,  that  the
gods  had  given  him  a  guide  to  con-
dud:  him  into  Italy,  and  that  this  guide
commanded  him  not  to  look  back :
But  Hannibal  could  not  govern  his
curiofity  •,  and,  upon  looking  back,
faw  a  vaft  monfter  with  ferpents  twin¬
ing  round  it,  which,  in  its  march,
overturned  trees,  lhrubs,  and  houfes.
And,  when  Hannibal  admired  what
this  might  be,  he  was  told  by  his
guide,  that  it  was  the  defolation  of
Italy  •,  and  that  he  Ihould  go  forward,
without  troubling  himfelf  with  what
was  doing  behind  him.  Vajlitatem
Italiae  ejje :  precepijfeque  ut  pergeret
protinns :  quid  retro ,  atque  a  ter  go  jieret ,
ne  labor aret.  This  dory  Livy  relates,
though  with  greater  pomp  than  Cicero,
and  clofes  it  in  this  manner : f  Vajlitatem
Italiae  ejje :  pergeret  porro  ire ,  nec  ultra
inquirer  et ,  finer  etque  fata  in  occulto  ejfe.

f  Livy,  B.  xxi.  c.  22.  8  Pliny,  B.  xxxv.  c.

'  Appian  in  Hanibalic.  k  Livy,  B.  xxi.  c.  38


4I'  K otvloi  ncti  Atuxiof  K iyx,io(.

The  firft  was  the  grandfon  of  Caius
Fabius,  who  painted  the  temple  of
Salus,  and  obtained  the  name  of  Pic-
tor  e.  Quindus  Fabius  lived  in  the
time  of  the  fecond  Punic  war,  of  which
he  writ  the  tranfadions,  and  is  called
Script  or  um  antiquiffimus  by  h  Livy.  He
was  fent  by  the  fenate  to  5  Delphi  to
confult  that  oracle,  concerning  the
means  to  be  taken  by  the  Romans  to
put  a  {top  to  their  misfortunes.  Lu¬
cius  Cincius  Alimentus  lived  at  the
fame  time,  and  treated  the  fame  fub-
jed.  We  find  by  k  Livy  that  he
mentioned  many  particulars  relating
to  the  fecond  Punic  war,  which  he
had  learned  from  Hannibal  while  he
was  his  prifoner.  He  is  there  honoured
byLivy  with  the  title  of  maximusauttor.
It  appears  plainly,  from  this  pafiage
in  our  author,  that  both  thefe  Roman
hiftorians  writ  in  Greek.

.  h  Livy,  B.  xxii.  c.  7.  id.  B.  i.  c.  42.

thofe


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  RN  A  S  SE N  S I S.  17

thofe  early  events,  that  happened  foon  after  the  building  of
the  city.  For  thefe  reafons,  therefore,  I  have  determined  not
to  pafs  over  that  beautiful  part  of  the  Roman  hiftory,  which
the  ancient  authors  have  difregarded ;  and  from  which,  if
accurately  treated,  will  refult  two  things,  that,  of  all  others,
are  the  mod  advantageous,  and  the  moft  juft :  Thofe  brave
men,  who  have  fulfilled  their  deftiny,  will  gain  immortal
glory,  and  be  extolled  by  their  pofterity,  (both  which  render
human  nature  like  to  the  divine,  and  prevent  their  actions
from  perifhing  together  with  their  bodies;)  and  the  prefent
and  future  race  of  thofe  22  godlike  men,  when  they  confider
that  all,  who  are  fprung  from  an  illuftrious  origin,  ought  to
fet  a  value  on  themfelves,  and  purfue  nothing  unworthy  of
their  anceftors,  will  tread  the  paths  of  the  moft  generous,
and  moft  virtuous  ambition,  rather  than  lead  a  life  of  plea-
fure  and  eafe;  and  I,  who  have  not  undertaken  this  work
for  the  fake  of  flattery,  but  of  truth  and  juftice,  (which
ought  to  be  the  aim  of  all  hiftory)  fliall,  in  the  firft  place,
have  an  opportunity  of  exprefling  my  benevolence  to  all
good  men,  and  to  thofe,  who 23  take  a  pleafure  in  the  con-

**•  Lto0£&>v  oufym.  Our  author  here  therefore,  any  thing  of  this  kind  dial],
is  fo  far  tranfported  with  his  admi-  hereafter,  occur,  I  defire  the  reader  will
ration  of  the  ancient  Romans,  as  to  look  upon  me  as  a  tranfiator  of  an-
dare  to  call  them  godlike  men,  and  other’s  thoughts,  not  a  publifher  of
to  talk  of  the  human  nature  being  my  own.

rendered  like  to  the  divine.  Thefe  aj  •  r xmAm  zoym  xou

impious  (trains  have  been  copied  from  j uzyxAuv.  Le  Jay  has  tranfiated  this
the  heathen,  by  the  chriftian,  writers  ;  in  a  very  extraodinary  manner  •,  qui
and,  by  thefe,  rendered  (till  more  im-  fe  piquent  de  belles  letres.  The  other
pious:  For  there  is  certainly  more  French  tranfiator  has  faid  much  better ;
impiety  in  comparing  men  to  the  true  qui  veulent  s'inftruire  des  belles  actions
God,  than  to  falfe  ones.  Whenever,  et  des  grandes  chofes.

Vol.  I.  D  federation


Book  I.


18  ROMAN  ANTIQJJ I  TIE  S  OF

federation  of  great  and  worthy  a&ions ;  and,  after  that,  of
making  the  moft  grateful  return  I  am  able,  to  the  city  of
Rome  for  the  inftrudtions  I  have  received,  and  the  other
advantages  I  have  enjoyed  during  my  abode  here.

VII.  Having  thus  given  an  account  of  the  defign  of  this
work,  I  fhall  now  fay  fomething  concerning  the  materials
I  provided  myfelf  with  before  I  began  it:  For  it  is  poffible
that  thofe,  who  have  read  Hieronymus,  Timaeus,  Poly¬
bius,  or  any  of  the  hiftorians,  whom  I  have,  juft  now,  accufed
of  abbreviating  hiftory,  not  finding  in  thofe  authors,  many
things  mentioned  by  me,  will  fufpecft  that  I  have  recourfe  to
invention,  and  inquire  how  I  came  by  the  knowledge  of
thofe  particulars.  Left  any  one,  therefore,  fhould  entertain
this  opinion  of  me,  I  think  it  proper  to  acquaint  them  with
the  relations,  and  records,  I  have  made  ufe  of.  I  came  into
Italy,  24  immediately,  after  Auguftus  Caefar  had  put  an  end


24’  A fjix  r w  xalizhvQyivxi  tov  (p ,(pu\iov
sroAejuov  vVo  t a  EiGotgx  Kouffctgog  &$oy.Y\g
xou  oy^ovixogyis  xou  ixoAogns  OAujU.7n#(lc?

jus<rg<nj<r.  Many  things  are  to  be  taken
notice  of  in  this  paffage,  in  order  to
make  it  clear  to  the  reader.  The  year
our  author  came  to  Italy,  mull  have
been  the  724th  of  Rome,  and  the  be¬
ginning  of  the  third  year  of  the  187th
Olympiad.  This  aera  is  remarkable
for  the  death  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra,
the  conqueft  of  Aegypt,  and  the  end
of  the  civil  war,  which  happened  in
the  month  of  Auguft  that  year,  as  the
decree  of  the  fenate,  paired  upon  that
occalion,  plainly  fhews k.  But  the


month  of  Auguft  was,  then,  called  by
its  old  name,  Sextilis ,  and  Caefar  Oc-
tavianus  was  not  called  Auguftus,
when  he  conquered  Aegypt,  and  put
an  end  to  the  civil  war1.  This  year,
Odtavianus  himfelf  was  conful  for  the
fourth  time,  and  his  collegue  for  this
part  of  the  year  was  Marcus  Tullius
Cicero m,  fon  to  the  great  Roman
orator ;  who,  being  left  at  Rome,  while
Caefar  was  employed  in  Aegypt,  re¬
ceived  the  letters  of  his  collegue  con¬
cerning  the  death  of  Antony,  and  the
happy' event  of  the  Alexandrine  war  ;
and,  after  reading  thofe  letters  in  the
rottrum,  ordered  a  copy  of  them  to  be


k  Macrob.  Sat.  B.  i.  c.  12.  .  1  Dion.  Caff.  B.  li.  p.  523,  m  Plutarch,  Life  of  Cicero.

to


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  19

to  the  civil  war,  in  the  middle  of  the  hundred  and  eighty
feventh  olympiad ;  and,  having  from  that  time,  to  this  pre-
fent,  that  is,  twenty  two  years,  lived  at  Rome,  learned  the
Roman  language,  and  acquainted  myfelf  with  their  writings,
I  employed  all  that  interval  in  preparing  materials  for  this
work ;  and  fome  things  I  received  from  men  of  the  greateft.
conlideration  among  them  for  learning,  whofe  converfation  I
ufed;  and  others  I  gathered  from  hiftories,  written  by  the
moft  approved  Roman  authors ;  fuch  as 25  Porcius  Cato,


fixed  up  there,  in  the  fame  place,  where
Antony  had,  fo  cruelly,  made  a  fpec-
tacle  of  his  father’s  head.  This  was
much  taken  notice  of  at  that  time.  I
faid  that  Caefar  had  not  the  title  of
Auguftus,  when  he  reduced  Aegypt :
But,  as  it  was  given  to  him  in  727,
long  before  our  author  finifhed  his
hiftory,  and,  probably,  before  he  began
it,  there  is  no  room  to  be  furprifed  that
Dionyfius  fhould  give  him  that  title
upon  this  occafion.  Caefar,  it  feems,
three  years  after  the  redudlion  of
Aegypt,  he  himfelf  being  conful  for
the  feventh  time,  and  Agrippa  for  the
third  time,  pretended  to  refign  his
illegal  power  to  the  fenate  and  people
of  Rome,  from  whom  he  had  ufurped
it.  To  which  purpofe,  he  makes  a
long  fpeech,  in  Dion.  Cafiius  %  to  the
fenate,  who,  certainly,  never  believed
a  tittle  of  it.  However,  they  repaid
his  difiimulation  with  the  title  of  Au¬
guftus.

*5'  n ogmos  te  Kcclav,  taxi  M ot%i-

juo?,  etc.  The  firft  is  known  by  the
name  of  the  Cenfor,  to  which  dignity


he  arrived  after  having  pafied  through
all  the  great  offices  of  the  common¬
wealth.  There  fcarce  ever  was  a  man,
who  came  into  the  world  with  greater
parts,  or  cultivated  thofe  parts  with
greater  application  ;  a  great  general,
a  great  orator,  and  a  great  hiftorian,
and,  above  all,  the  moft  virtuous  man
of  the  moft  virtuous  commonwealth.
Among  his  other  accompliihments,
he  underftood  agriculture  perfectly,
which  is  a  qualification,  that  will,  al¬
ways,  be  highly  efteemed  by  a  wife
people.  0  Voffius  fuppofes  this  Fabius
Maximus  not  to  be  the  fame  perfon
p  Cicero  fpeaks  of,  when  he  fays,  Ser.
Fabius  Piffior,  et  juris,  et  liter  arum,  et
antiquitatis  bene  ■per tius,  but  Q^Fabius
Servilianus.  Valerius  Antias  is  often
mentioned  by  the  Roman  authors,  as
a  writer  of  annals,  and  faid  by  Velleius
Paterculus q,  to  have  been  cotempo¬
rary  with  Sifenna,  another  Roman
hiftorian,  with  whom  rCicero,  if  there
is  no  miftake  in  the  text,  fays  Lici-
nius  Macer,  a  writer  of  annals  alfo,
lived  in  friendfhip.  There  were  many


*  Dion.  Caff.  B.  liii.  p.  581.  ®  Voffius  in  hift.  Lat.  B.  i.  c.  3.  P  Cicero  in  Bruto,  c.  zr.

^  B.  ii.  c.  5.  rDe  Leg.  B.  i.  c.  2.

D  2  Fabius


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

Fabius  Maximus,  Valerius  Antias,  Licinius  Macer,  the  Aelii,
Gellii,  and  Calpurnii,  and  feveral  others  of  good  note.
a6  Supported,  therefore,  by  the  authority  of  thefe  hiftories,
which  are  like  the  Greek  annals,  I  undertook  this  work.
So  much  concerning  myfelf.  It  now  remains,  that  I  fhould,
alfo,  fay  fomething  concerning  the  hiftory  itfelf ;  what  com-
pafs  of  time  I  affign  to  it ;  what  fubjedts  I  relate ;  and  what
form  I  give  to  the  work.

VIII.  I  begin  my  hiftory  from  the  moft  ancient  rela¬
tions,  which  the  hiftorians  before  me  have  omitted,  as  a
fubjedl  not  to  be  cleared  up  without  great  difficulty ;  and
bring  it  down  27  to  the  beginning  of  the  firft  Punic  war,.


Roman  authors  of  the  name  of  Tu-
bero,  one  of  whom  Lucius  Aelius
Tubero*,  was  an  hiftorian,  and  one  of
Quintus  Cicero’s  1  legates  in  Afia.
Sextus  and  Cnaeus  Gellius  were,  alfo,
annalifts.  Lucius  Calpurnius  Pifo
Frugi  was  conful  the  620th  year  of
Rome  with  Publius  Mucius  Scaevola,
which  was  the  year  Tiberius  Gracchus
was  (lain  •,  and  cenfor  the  633d  with
Quindtus  Caecilius  Metellus  :  His
hiftory,  or  rather  annals,  are  often
quoted  by  the  Roman  authors u.  There
was  another  Calpurnius  Pifo,  who  is
faid  to  have  written  of  Marius  ;  and,
confequently,  muft  have  been  a  later
hiftorian  than  the  former.

l6‘  Att'  zkhvuv  oqfMOfAivos  tuv  zr/iotypct-
thwV  «<r<  cfs  roug  Eh\yivntoug
toiKijoti.  Thus  translated  by  Le  Jay  ;
dont  fay  lit  les  ouvrages  tres  conformes
d  ceux  de  nos  Grecs.  So  that,  according


to  him,  the  works  of  thefe  Roman
annalifts  are  very  like  Thofe  of  Thucy¬
dides  or  Xenophon,  or  of  any  other
Greek  hiftorian  of  the  firft  clafs.

17  *  Etti  tjjv  rs  zrgctnx  3>omxjJta

The  firft  Punic  war,  from
whence  Polybius  dates  his  hiftory,
properly  began  in  the  confulfhip  of
Manius  Valerius  Maximus,  and  Ma-
nius  Otacilius  Crafius,.  when  the  Ro¬
mans  fent  Appius  Claudius  at  the  head
of  an  army  to  the  relief  of  the  Ma-
mertines,  who  had  poflefied  themfelves
of  Melfana w.  Appius  not  only  re¬
lieved  Meflana,  then  befieged  by  Hiero
king  of  Syracufe,  and  the  Carthagi¬
nians,  but  defeated  them  both,  and,
after  that,  the  Romans  concluded  a
peace  with  Hiero  :  Though  I  am  fen-
fible  that  the  firft  Punic  war  is,  gene¬
rally,  fuppofed  to  have  begun  the  fuc-
ceeding  year,  when  the  confuls  Lucius


*  Cicero  to  his  brother,  B.  i.  ep,  j.  *  Id,  Verr,  iv,  c.  49.  "  VolT,  Hill.  Lat,  B,  i.  c.  6.

*  Polybius,  B.  i.  p.  11.  et  16,

which


2  l


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C  AR  N  A  S  $  E N  S 1  S.


which  broke  out  in  the  third  year  of  the  hundred  and
twenty  eighth  olympiad  :  I  relate  all  the  foreign  wars  the
city  was  engaged  in  during  that  period,  and  all  the  feaitions5
with  which  fhe  was  agitated ;  from  what  caufes  they  flowed,
and,  by  what  meafures,  and,  from  what  motives,  they  were
appeafed  :  I  give  an  account,  alfo,  of  all  the  forms  of  go¬
vernment  fhe  ufed,  as  well  during  the  monarchy,  as  after
its  difiolution ;  and  what  was  the  conftitution  of  each :  I
enter  into  a  detail  of  the  beft  of  all  cuftoms,  and  the  mod
excellent  of  all  laws ;  and,  in  fliort,  I  fhew  the  whole
manner  of  living  of  the  ancient  Romans.  As  to  the  form
I  give  to  this  work,  it  does  not  refemble  That,  which  the
authors,  who  make  wars  alone  their  objedt,  have  given  to
their  hiftories ;  nor  That,  which  others,  who  treat  of  the
feveral  forms  of  government  by  themfelves,  haveadopted;  nei¬
ther  is  it  like  the  chronological  works,  which  28  the  authors
of  the  Athenian  annals  have  published  (for  thefe,  being
uniform,  foon  grow  tedious  to  the  reader)  29  but  partakes  of


Poftumius,  and  Quindtus  Mamilius
were  fent  into  Sicily  to  command  the
army.  This  year  I  find  to  have  been
the  445  ift  of  the  Julian  period x,  and
not  the  4449th,  as  M  *  *  *  has  faid  *,
and  the  492d  of  Rome,  not  the  487th,
or  the  489th,  as  he  fuppofes :  At
leaft,  it  {lands  the  49 2d,  in  the  Fafii
confulares .

*8,  0<  t ot,g  A IQiJcte  zr^ay/xoilivirauivoi.
If  I  were  to  tranflate  the  doubts  con¬
tained  in  the  Jatin  annotation,  as  M***
has  done,  I  believe  they  wouid  afford
very  little  fatisfadtion  to  the  reader.

*  Uiher,  p.  271.


All  that  I  fhall  fay,  therefore,  is,  that
I  cannot  difcover  the  author  of  thefe
Athenian  annals  ;  and,  if  I  could,  I  do
not  imagine  the  difcovery  would  be-
of  any  great  confequence.

19 '  Akk  a|  oo7rci<rw  /xixJov.  There
is.  great  difficulty  in  this  paffage  ;  con¬
cerning  which,  I  fhall  acquaint  the
reader  with  the  critical  obfervations  of
Henry  Stephens,  not  as  they  are  ab-
ftradted  in  Hudfon’s  notes,  and  ffill
more  fo  in  Thofe  of  M  *  *  *  j  but,  as
they  Hand  in  his  Prolegomena  •,  and,
then,  addfome  obfervations  of  my  own..


every


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

every  kind ;  of  the  oratorial,  fpeculative,  and  narrative  ;  to
the  intent  that  I  may  afford  fatisfa&ion  to  thofe  perfons,  who


y  Stephens  contends,  and,  I  think,  very
juftly,  that,  in  the  period  which  pre¬
cedes  this,  we  fhould  read  /xovyg  artel*
oi  mg  sroA tfxxg  avaygx^xvlzg,  in  order  to
anfwer  sroA<7 etag  avlxg  £<p’  eavlwv,  in  the
next  fentence.  He  goes  on,  with  the
fame  ftrength  of  reafon,  and  fays  that,
after  thefe  words,  «aa’  *Va<r> jg  tJ'sag

[mxJov  zvotyovix  te  y,cu  QtwgypiKY] ?,  fome  third,
kind  of  dza,  is  wanting-,  becaufe  our
author  fays  g|  dir  am j?  rfsxg,  and  not  f|
wdlegag  i&xg,  as  he  would  have  faid,
if  he  had  mentioned  but  two  forts.
This,  he  fays,  is  further  confirmed  by
our  author’s  propofing  not  two,  but
three  forts  of  men,  in  whofe  favour
he  gave  this  form  to  his  hiftory  :  He
adds,  that  all  the  tranfiators  have  mif-
taken  the  fenfe  of  the  word  tvxyuviog,
by  applying  it  to  a  relation  of  wars,
and  contends  that  the  thx  twyanog
relates  to  ftatefmen,  as  the  ifox
regards  philofophers;  and  that  the
third  Jtct,  propofed  in  favour  of  the
third  fort  of  men,  whom  our  author
defigns  to  gratify,  meaning  thofe,  who
make  hiftory  an  amufement,  fhould
be  yfetx,  or  fomething  of  that  nature.
Thus,  I  have  laid  before  the  reader,
in  as  fhort,  and  as  clear  a  manner  as
I  am  able,  thefe  truly  judicious  re¬
marks  of  Stephens  on  this  paftage
and  fhall  only  add,  that  I  find  by  a
note  of  not  quite  two  lines  in  Sylbur-
gius,  that  the  Venetian  manufcript  has
aymiey-ottri  inftead  of  xvxyvu<rjAx<ri^  and
that  Lapus  has  followed  this  reading,
and  tranflated  it  in  hijioricis  certamini-
bus:  However,  Sylburgius  has  not


followed  it  himfelf,  nor  faid  any  thing
in  his  notes,  to  fignify  either  his  ap¬
probation,  or  difapprobation  of  it ;
neither  has  this  reading  been  taken
notice  of  by  Hudfon  in  his  collation
even  of  the  Venetian  manufcript ;  or
followed  by  any  tranflator  eitherLatin,
or  French.  But,  I  muft  own,  I  look,
upon  this  reading  as  the  true  one,  and
that  it  will  conduce  much  to  clear  up
this  paffage,  which,  otherwife,  feems
to  me  almoft  inexplicable.  In  order,
therefore,  to  form  a  clear  idea  of  our
author’s  defign  in  giving  a  mixed
form  to  his  hiftory,  and  in  chufing  a
form  fo  mixed,  as  to  give  fatisfa&ion
to  political  orators,  to  philofophers,
and  to  thofe,  who  read  for  amufement,
we  muft  obferve  that  the  iozx  tvaymiog
is  defigned  for  the  firft,  the  j

for  the  fecond,  and  what  for  the  third  ?
fomething  muft  be  wanting  :  Stephens
fupplies  it  by  I  fhould,  rather,

chufe  Siy\ ytjjudliKt j,  which  is  a  word,
properly,  adapted  to  hiftory,  narration
being  the  foul  of  it,  and  a  word  ufed
by  our  author  himfelf,  in  his  character
of  Thucydides2.  And  what  can  be
more  entertaining  to  thofe,  who  read
hiftory,  as  they  do  romance,  than  a
relation  of  battles,  fieges,  and  all  the
other  military  operations,  of  which
hiftory  furnifhes  fo  great  a  variety?
This,  in  my  opinion,  will  juftify  us  in
reading  aycovia-jAao-i,  with  the  Venetian
manufcript,  inftead  of  avayvcca-fxaa-i.  If
any  one  doubts  of  the  fenfe  I  have
given  to  the  t vxyuvtos,  let  him  read
the  critical  works  of  our  author,  and


y  Stephens  Proleg.  c.  12.  ZC.  37,

defiie


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LIC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  SIS.  23

delire  to  qualify  themfelves  for  political  debates  j  to  fuch,
as  are  engaged  in  philofophical  fpeculations  5  and  to  all,  who
propofe  no  other  end  in  the  contemplation  of  military
a&ions,  than  an  undifturbed  entertainment.  Thefe  things,
therefore,  will  be  the  fubjeft  of  my  hiftory,  and  this  the
form  of  it.  The  author  is  Dionyfius  of  Halicarnafllis,  the
fon  of  Alexander ;  and,  from  hence,  I  begin.


IX.  THE  moft  ancient  polleffors  of  the  place,  where
this  city,  the  miftrefs  of  the  whole  earth  and  fea,  now  ftands,
and  which  the  Romans  inhabit,  are  faid  to  have  been  the
barbarous 30  Siceli,  natives  of  the  country.  As  to  the  con¬
dition  of  the  place  before  their  time,  whether  it  was  inha¬
bited,  or  defert,  none  can  certainly  fay.  Afterwards,  the
Aborigines  made  themfelves  mafters  of  it,  having  dilpoflefled
the  inhabitants  after  a  long  war :  Thefe  people  lived,  before
that,  on  the  mountains,  in  villages  without  walls,  and  dif-


he  will  find  inftances  without  number
of  his  ufing  it  in  this  fenfe.  In  fpeak-
ing  of  Demofthenes,  he  fays,  a  Ex

T«v  tvuycoviwv  ccu\x  Aoyuv  cVocrot  Siv.txr

SY]Pio(,  ytyovctri  rt  a (x.x.Ay,(rioc <;.  The

lair  thing  I  fhall  mention  in  this  note,
which  I  am  afraid  is,  already,  too  long,
is, that,  by  philofophers,  for  whofe  fatif-
fa&ion  he  propofes  the  ihoi
he  does  not  mean  either  natural,  or
moral,  but  political philofophers  :  And,
however  unnatural  this  alliance  may
ieem,  yet  our  author,  himfelf,  fays,
that  he  writ  a  treatife  (now  loft)  againft
thofe,  who,  unjuftly,  cenfured  political


vTrsf  THE  nOAITIICHS  «>1A020$IAS

z rqog  TX(  KulalgiXovlas  cco]t jf

30,  ErtiAoi.  I  do  not  wonder  that
the  Latin  tranflators  call  thefe  people
Siculi  •,  becaufe  That  was  the  name
they  were  known  by  among  the  Ro¬
mans  :  But  I  wonder  the  French  tranf¬
lators  fhould  call  them  les  Sicilies.
However,  Thucydides  calls  them  E^
xs;\of,  and  tells  us  that,  being  driven
out  of  Italy,  they  pafted  over  into  Si¬
cily  *,  and,  having  overcome  the  Si-
canians,  who  were  then  in  poffeflion
of  that  ifland,  they  caufed  it  to  be


hilofophy  •,  b  v  (wgayficdvoiv)  (rvviia^iutjv

a  Ilegy  Aripotr.  Any  or.  C.  45*  ^  ts  QvxvS.  C.  2,


called  ZikzAux,c,  inftead  of


Thucyd.  B.  vi.  c.  z.

nerfed


2  4


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

perfed.  But,  after  the  Pelafgi,  and  fome  other  Greeks,
mingling  with  them,  affifted  them  in  the  war  againft  their
neighbours,  they  drove  the  Siceli  out  of  this  place,  walled  in
many  towns,  and  contrived  to  make  themfelves  mafters  of
all  the  country,  that  lies  between  the31  Liris,  and  the  Tiber:
Thefe  rivers  fpring  from  the  foot  of  the  Apennine  mountains,
by  which  the  whole  length  of  Italy  is  divided ;  and,  at  the
diftance  of  about  eight  hundred  ftadia  from  one  another,
difcharge  themfelves  into  the  Tyrrhene  Sea;  the  Tiber  to
the  north,  near  the  city  of  Oftia  ;  and  the  Liris  to  the  fouth,
palling  by  Minturnae :  Both  thefe  cities  are  Roman  colonies.
This  nation  remained  in  the  fame  place,  being  never,  from
that  time,  driven  out  by  any  others ;  the 32  fame  people  being


**•  A xouT&tgig.  Thefe  two  ri¬
vers  were  the  boundaries  of  Latium,
after  the  conqueft  of  the  Aequi,  the
Hernici,  and  the  Volfci.  The  Liris  is
now  called  il  Garigliano ,  and  either  ran
through,  or  palled  by  Minturnae,  a
very  confiderable  city.  d  Cluver  fays
that  there  are  to  be  feen,  on  the  left  of
the  river,  and  about  four  Roman  miles
from  the  mouth  of  it,  vaft  ruins  of
aquaedudts, amphitheatres,  and  towers.
Between  Minturnae,  and  the  fea,  are
the  marlhes  in  which  Marius  endea¬
voured,  in  vain,  to  conceal  himfelf.
Minturnae,  as  our  author  fays,  was  a
Roman  colony,  which  was  fent  thither
in  the  conlulfhip  of e  Appius  Claudius
Caecus,  for  the  fecond  time,  and  of
Quintus  Volumnius  Flamma,  alfo,
for  the  fecond  time ;  which  year  ap¬
pears  by  the  Fajli  confulares  to  have
been  the  458  th  of  Rome.  f  Oftia  was,

d  Cluver  Ital.  Antiq.  p.  1074.  f  L


alfo,  a  Roman  colony,  fettled  there
by  Ancus  Marcius.  All  authors  agree,
that  a  ftadium  contained  600  feet ;  but
then  it  muft  be  remembered,  that  thefe
are  Greek  feet :  Now,  Arbuthnot
makes  an  Englifh  foot  to  exceed  a
Greek  foot  by  ,0875  decimals:  So
that,  a  ftadium  contains  504  feet,  four
inches,  and,  5  decimals,  Englifh  mea-
fure.

32.  O vo/xaluv  otWayoug  cu/lxig  01  avlot

uvQt>u)7iot  Tariff  ay  00^0^01.  Here  is  cer¬
tainly  fome  eiror  in  the  tranferiber:
Sylburgius  thinks  it  may  be  corredted
by  reading  trv^vo us  inftead  of  cwlxis.
Hudfon  prefers  ovofxxciv  xhXoig  km  «a-
ack  ot  avloi,  etc.  I  would  read  the
fentence  thus  ;  ovofxaiuv  #aa o7g  «AAo<f  o*i
ojj\oi  a\iQ(>unoi  ■sr^offxyo^svofMvot ;  becaule
our  author  tells  us,  in  the  very  next
fentence,  that  they  were  known  by  dif¬
ferent  names,  at  different  periods.

y,  B.  x.  c.  2 1 .  *  Florus,  B.  i.  c.  3.

called


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  H A L I  C  ARN  A S SE N SIS.  25


called  by  different  names,  at  different  periods :  Till  the  time
of  the  Trojan  war,  they  preferved  their  ancient  name  of
Aborigines ;  but,  under  Latinus,  their  king,  who  reigned
during  that  war,  they  began  to  be  called  Latines :  And
Romulus,  having  built  a  city  after  his  own  name,  fixteen
generations  from  the  taking  of  Troy,  they  changed  their
name  to  That,  which  they  now  bear ;  and,  in  procefs  of
time,  contrived  to  raife  themfelves  from  the  fmalleft  nation,
to  the  greateft,  and,  from  the  moft  obfcure,  to  the  moft
illuftrious,  by  their  humane  reception  of  thofe,  who  were
deftitute  of  a  fettlement ;  by  a  communication  of  the  rights
of  citizens  to  all,  who,  after  a  brave  refiftance,  had  been
conquered  by  them ;  by  extending  thofe  rights  to  fuch,  as
had  been  manumifed  among  them  ;  and  by  difdaining  no
condition  of  men,  from  whom  the  commonwealth  might
reap  an  advantage:  33  But,  above  all,  by  the  conftitution  of


33  •  Y7T££  t avlx  Se  vrxvlx,  Mtr[Au>  ts#
zrohflevpxlog,  ov  ex  vro\Auv  xxlerqo-xvlo
vrotQtiy.oc]uV)  tx  vrxvlog  x xigx  hx/uGxvovlsg  t i
Le  Jay  has  translated  this
palSage  in  a  ftrange  manner  j  et  fur
tout  de  profiler  avec  adrejfe  des  bons  et
des  mauvais  fucces  pour  maintenir  par  de
f ages  loix  la  forme  du  government.
He  was  milled  by  Portus,  who  has
tranflated  it  pretty  much  in  the  fame
manner.  Sylburgius,  and  the  other
French  translator,  have  rendered  it
much  better.  It  is  certainly  a  fine
observation  j  and,  I  believe,  a  very
juft  one,  that  the  Romans  made  So
good  an  ufe  of  their  fufferings ,  as  to
improve  their  conftitution  by  them.

e  B.  vi.  p.  459.  h


Polybius,  in  Speaking  of  the  Romans,
makes  the  Same  observation ;  s  Six  Se

sro7vA«v  ctyavuv,  xxi  zrguy/Adlav,  e%  xvlqg
ccet  t rig  ev  t ocig  zce^nreleixig  e7nyvu<nug
atyxfxevot  to  fietJiov.  Where,  by  the
way,  srgxy/xxlx  'Signifies  difficulties ,  as
vrctQyifjioblct,  in  the  paflage  before  us.
Signifies  fufferings  •,  which  are,  moft
certainly,  the  belt  lefions,  both  in
private,  and  in  public  life  :  pxQyifxxlx,
u unpaid,  is  a  thought,  which  has  been
employed  in  all  ages,  and  in  all  lan¬
guages  ;  and  may,  very  pofiibly,  be,
originally,  derived  from  h  Herodotus,
who  makes  Croefus,  when  a  captive.
Say  to  Cyrus  rxSs  y.01  IT  A  ©  H  M  A  T  A
tx  tovlx  xx*^<*i  MA0HMATA  yeyovse.
'erodot.  in  Clio,  c.  207.

E


VOL.  I.


their


Book  h


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

their  government,  which  they  formed  out  of  the  various
misfortunes,  that  befel  them,  extrading  always  fomething
ufeful  from  every  occurrence.

X.  There  are  fome,  who  affirm  that  the  Aborigines,  from
whom  the  Romans  are,  originally  defcended,  were  34  natives
of  Italy,  a  people  fprung  from  no  other  ;  (for  I  call  Italy,
all  that  ffiore,  which  is  furrounded  by  the  Ionian  and  Tufcan
gulphs ;  and,  in  the  35  third  place,  by  the  Alps  on  the  fide


34-'  Oi  [a?v  uvlox^ova;  ItxAixs-  Le  Jay
has  tranflated  this  in  a  manner  equally
bold,  and  unphilofophical ;  Enfants  de
la  terre  mefme  :  So  that,  the  Aborigines
fprung  from  the  earth,  like  the  animals
mentioned  by  Diodorus  Siculus  tohave
been  formed  by  the  (lime  of  the  Nile.
The  other  French  tranflator  has  faid
des  naturels  d'ltalie ,  which  is  as  well  as
his  language  will  allow :  Ours  is  not
at  all  happier  in  expreffing  avlo^ovxg :
The  word  natives ,  which  I  have  ufed,
becaufe  I  know  no  better,  will  not
explain  it  without  fome  addition  :  For
I  look  upon  naturels  in  French,  and
natives  in  Englifh,  to  fignify  no  more
than  a  people  born  in  the  country  in
oppofition  to  foreigners.  I  even  doubt
whether  indigenae  in  Latin  fignifies  any
more  :  When  1  Lucan  fays  of  the  Ap-
pennine  —  piniferis  amplexus  rupibus
omnes  Indigenas  Latii  populos ,  I  think
he  means  no  more  than  the  natives  of
Italy  at  that  time:  But  xvlo^ons  fig¬
nifies  a  people  who  are  not  only  born
in  a  country,  but  whofe  anceftors,  from
time  immemorial,  always  inhabited
that  country.  Every  body  knows  theA-
thenians  pretended  to  befuch  a  people.

*  Lucan,  B.  ii.  v.  432.  k  B.  vi.


3S*  t£<7 cm  gjc  yv\s  AAtths.

Hudfon  tells  us  the  Venetian  manu-
fcript  has  t^itIxi,  which  reading  he
favours,  becaufe  k  Zofimus  mentions
three  Alps,  viz.  jcot7/#/,  sromva/,  /xagfii-
(aou.  But  Ptolomy  mentions  four,  viz.
tqis  te  t v\m  Podliav  A Amois  Og(<rt,
rolls  Hoivivais,  kou  tjj  Oxgx,  xou  rv\
c(>icri  to/?  v7ro  ro  N&^ncov;  by  which,  he
fays  Italy  was  bounded  to  the  north.
So  that,  we  may  as  well  read  four  Alps
upon  the  authority  of  Ptolomy,  as
three  upon  That  of  Zofimus.  But
there  is  a  defcription  of  the  bounds  of
Italy  in  Polybius,  which  our  author
feems  to  have  had  in  his  eye  upon  this
occafion  ;  and  which,  I  believe,  will
put  it  out  of  all  doubt  that  he  writ
and  not  Tgnlai.  Polybius  fays
1  Tvj?  $yi  -ttoicrYis  ItxAixs  tw  T^iyu-

voetfxs  v7roi$x/xiry;s,  ryv  /asv  /xixv  o^i^et
srAwgav  ocdhis,  t*jv  ar^o?  xvx'oAxs  xsxAijuivtjv,
0,  te  I u\ios  aro^o?,  xouxcdiono  cvvi^ts,  oxotlx
t>jv  A^ixv  mAxos'  t/jv  cfe  ar^o?  y.i<TYiy,Z^ia t*

X on  JWjU&J  TilgX(A[AtVt}V,  TO  Z/JCfA/XOV,  XXI

T u^yvixov  TffiAxyos - T)jy  Aonryv  t^v

n  t as  x^kIhskou  t>jv  /Ate -oyauxv  ux^x-
r eivxtrav  c£/£«  nxlx  to  <ruv >7  tuv  AA-

mwv  nrx^co^Hx.  Here,  what  our  author


•Polybius,  B.  ii.  p.  10a,


of


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  $  S  ENS  IS.  27

of  the  land)  and  thefe  authors  fay  that  they  were  firft  called
Aborigines  from  their  having  been  the  origin  of  their  pofte-
rity  ;  as  we  fhould  call  them  ysvot^ixe  or  ^moyovsic*  Others
pretend  that  certain  vagabonds  without  houfe  or  home,
gathered  together  out  of  many  places,  met  one  another  there
by  chance,  and  feated  themfelves  in  the  faftnefles,  living  by
robbery  and  feeding  of  cattle  :  For  this  reafon,  thofe,  who
are  of  this  opinion,  change  their  name  alfo  to  one  more
fuitable  to  their  condition,  calling  them  Aberrigines,  to  fhew
they  were  wanderers ;  and,  according  to  thefe,  the  Abori¬
gines  are  in  danger  of  being  confounded  with  thofe,  the
ancients  called  36  Leleges :  For  this  is  the  name  they,  gene-
rally,  give  to  a  vagabond  and  mixed  people,  who  have  no
fixed  abode  they  can  call  their  country.  Others  give  a
fabulous  account  of  their  being  a  colony  of  thofe  Ligures,
who  are  near  neighbours  to  the  Umbri.  For  the  Ligures
inhabit  many  parts  of  Italy,  and  fome  of  Gaul ;  and,  which
of  them  is  their  native  country  is  not  known,  fince  nothing
certain  is  further  faid  of  them.


calls  Tfnou,  in  the  third  place ,  Poly¬
bius  calls  t>jv  St  Ao<7n;v,  the  remaining
fide  of  the  triangle  \  and,  where  our  fays
tx  yv)<;,  Polybius  fays,  zsa^ot.  t>jv  putroyxtoiv
zn#i>ol\&vis<yxv.

*6,  Atj  htyw.  Stephens  has,  with
great  fagacity,  fubftituted  Aiteyuv  in
the  room  of  $y\  Myu,  which  words
fignify  nothing  in  this  place.  The
Leleges  are  mentioned  by  Homer  as
a  warlike  nation,  and  to  have  been
governed  by  Altes  their  king,

m  Iliad  <p.  jr.  87.


Aa7ew,  osAt\eye<r<ri$i\o7rlo\efji.oio'iv  civoitreet
n>j Sacov  ounr,i<T<ic tv  na  Hoflviotvli  m.

They  were  firft  fettled  in  the  Idaean
gulph;  and,  being  driven  from  thence,
they  went  into  Caria,  and  lived  in  a
city,  called  Pedafa n,  lying  in  the  in¬
land  country  of  the  Halicarnaffenfes.
They,  afterwards,  ingaged  in  a  mili¬
tary  expedition  with  the  Carians,  and
were  difperfed  over  all  Greece,  and
their  nation  extinguifhed.


“  Strabo,  B.  xiii.  p.  909.  Cafaub.  Edit.

E  2


XI.


Book  I;


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

XI.  But  the  moft  learned  of  the  Roman  hiftorians,  among
whom  is  Porcius  Cato,  who  has  collected,  with  the  greateft
care,  the  origins  of  the  Italian  cities;  Caius  Sempronius,
and  a  great  many  others,  fay,  they  were  Greeks;  part  of
thofe,  who,  formerly,  inhabited  Achaia,  and,  many  generations
before  the  Trojan  war,  left  that  country :  But  they  do  not
point  out  either  the  Greek  nation,  to  which  they  belonged,  the
city,  from  which  they  removed,  the  time,  when,  the  leader,
under  whom,  or,  from  what  turns  of  fortune,  they  left  their
mother  country ;  and,  founding  their  account  on  a  Greek
relation,  they  have  quoted  no  Greek  author  to  fupport  it :
It  is  therefore  uncertain  how  the  truth  ftands.  If,  what  they
fay  be  true,  37  they  can  be  a  colony  of  no  other  people,  but


37‘  Oujc  uv  rivo?  etyfotv  ot.7roiy.oi

•ytvxt)  y  Tif  xaAtfjU .tvx  vuv  AgyuJutx.  M***

has,  upon  this  occafion,  translated  a
note  of  Ryckius,  in  which  the  latter
contends  that  Dionyfius  is  mistaken,
when  he  afferts  that  the  Aborigines
were  a  colony  of  the  Arcadians.  For,
fays  he,  if  the  Aborigines  were  the  firft
inhabitants  of  Italy,  it  is  not  poffible
that  the  Arcadians  under  Oenotrus
could  be  the  fame  people  with  the
Aborigines  ;  becaufe  it  is  proved  by
Scripture  that  Italy  was  inhabited  be¬
fore  the  time  of  Oenotrus.  This  is,
properly,  to  raife  Shadows,

and  then  fight  with  them.  I  wonder
that  neither  Ryckius,  nor  his  translator
Should  remember  what  Dionyfius  fays
a  few  pages  before,  viz.  that  the  Siceli
were  the  original  inhabitants  of  that  part
of  Italy,  where  Rome  was,  afterwards,
built ;  and  that  they  were  driven  out


of  their  country  by  the  Aborigines  af-
fifted  by  the  Pelafgi.  The  origines  of
Cato  are  fo  often  quoted  by  the  Latin
writers,  and  particularly,  by  Varro,
the  mofl  celebrated  antiquary  of  his
time,  that  I  Should  make  no  difficulty
to  prefer  the  authority  of  Cato  before
That  of  any  modern  writers,  who  are
deprived  of  the  books,  and,  particu¬
larly,  of  the  records,  which  he,  as
cenfor,  mu  ft  have  had  before  him  :
And  we  find  that  not  only  Cato,  but
Sempronius,  and  many  other  Roman
hiftorians  affirm  that  the  Aborigines
were  Greeks,  who,  before  their  com¬
ing  into  Italy,  had  lived  in  Achaia.
Ryckius  has  alfo  difeovered  another
error  in  Dionyfius,  for  afferting  that
the  Arcadians  were  the  firft  Greek
colony,  that  came  into  Italy  :  Where¬
as,  he  allures  us  from  0  Pliny  that  the
Pelafgi  came  from  Greece  into  Italy,


•Pliny,  B.  iii.  c.  5.


of


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALTCARN  ASSENSIS.  29

of  thofe,  who  are  now  called  Arcadians :  For  thefe  are  the
firft  of  all  the  Greeks,  who  eroded  the  Ionian  gulph  under


before  the  Arcadians.  I  have  looked
into  this  place  of  Pliny,  and  all  I  can
find  there,  is,  that  Pliny,  in  enume¬
rating  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  La-
tium,  mentions,  firft,  the  Aborigines,
then  the  Pelafgi,  and,  after  them,  the
Arcades,  the  Siculi,  the  Aurunci,  and
the  Rutili.  This,  I  believe,  the  reader
will  think  a  very  weak  argument  to
urge  againft  the  authority  of  Diony-
fius ;  particularly,  fince  Paufanias  fays
that  the  colony,  p  Oenotrus  led  into
Italy,  was  the  firft  fent  out  of  Greece.
Oenotrus  was  the  youngeft  fon  of  Ly-
caon,  the  fon  of  Pelafgus ;  and  Pau¬
fanias  makes  Lycaon  to  have  been
cotemporary  with  Cecrops,  who  was
fo  with  Mofes  *,  and  Lycaon  carried  a
colony  of  Sa'ites,  who  were  Aegyptians,
into  *  Attica,  65  years  before  Mofes
led  the  Ifralites  out  of  Aegypt.  As
to  the  other  proof,  drawn  from  Scri¬
pture  to  (hew  that  Italy  was  inhabited
before  the  arrival  of  Oenotrus ;  this
argument,  I  am  fure,  if  it  could  be
proved  from  thence,  as  I  believe  it
cannot,  is  far  from  fubverting  the
authority  ofDionyfius;  becaufe,  as  I
have  fhewn,  he  afterts  the  fame  thing.
The  only  text  in  Scripture  which  can,
by  any  contrivance,  be  tortured  to
fignify  the  peopling  of  Italy,  muft  be
this:  r  And  the  fons  of  Javan  ;  Elifloah
and  T arjhijh ,  Kittim  and  Eodanim.  By
thefe  were  the  ifles  of  the  Gentiles  di¬
vided  in  their  lands  *,  every  one  after  his
tongue ,  after  their  families ,  in  their  na¬
tions.  Of  thefe  four  fons  of  Javan,
Kittim  is  the  perfon,  whofe  pofterity  -

PlnArcad.  c.  3.  s  Ufher,  p


are  fuppofed  to  have  peopled  Italy.
I  call  him  Kittim  with  the  Englifh
tranfiation  •,  the  Vulgate  calls  him
Cethin,  the  Septuagint  K*j7 \oi,  and  the
Cotton  manufeript  K thor,  in  Hebrew,
EDTD>  which  word,  as  it  was,  un¬
doubtedly,  written  by  Mofes  (if  he  writ
in  the  Cananaean,  commonly  called,
the  Hebrew  language)  without  points,
or  a  Dagefh,  may  be  eitherfpeit  Kitim,
or  Chetim,  but  I  fhould  rather  write
it  Ketim.  The  authority,  therefore,
of  this  text  is  brought  to  prove  that
the  pofterity  of  this  man,  however  he
fpelt  his  name,  peopled  Italy.  This
we  cannot,  poffibly,  believe  without
fuppofing,  at  the  fame  time,  that  Italy
was  one  of  the  Ifles  of  the  Gentiles.
But,  fmall  miftakes  in  geography,  I
know,  muft  not  be  regarded,  when
texts  of  Scripture  are  to  be  wrefted  in
order  to  carry  any  favorite  point.
However,  I  think  it  may  be  proved
from  feveral  texts  of  Scripture,  thar,
by  the  defeendants  of  Ketim,  are  meant
the  Macedonians,  and  not  the  Italians.
I  cannot  put  an  end  to  this  note,  with¬
out  taking  notice  of  a  miftake,  which
the  Latin,  and,  confequently,  the
French  tranfiators,  have  fallen  into,  by
rendering  pvQos  a  fable.  Every  body
knows  that  /uv9os  fignifies  a  fable  \  but
it  is  often  ufed  for  hoy  os,  which  muft
be  the  fignification  of  it  in  this  place,
unlefs  the  tranfiators  have  a  mind  to
make  our  author  deftroy  the  authority
of  Cato,  and  of  the  other  Roman  hi-
ftorians,  whom  he  quotes  to  fupport
his  fyftem.  That  y.vQos  does  often

10.  r  Genefis,  c.  x.  f.  4,  5.


the


3o  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Bookl.

the  condudt  of  Oenotrus,  the  fon  of  Lycaon,  and  fettled  in
Italy.  This  Oenotrus  was  the  fifth  from  iEzius  and  Phoro-
neus,  who  were  the  firft  kings  of  Peloponnefus.  For  Niobe
was  the  daughter  of  Phoroneus,  and  Pelafgus  is  faid  to  have
been  the  fon  of  Jupiter  and  Niobe;  Lycaon  was  the  fon  of
iEzius,  whofe  daughter  was  Deianira ;  and  Deianira  and
Pelafgus  were  the  parents  of  another  Lycaon,  whofe  fon,
Oenotrus,  was  born  feventeen  generations  before  the  Trojan
expedition.  And  this  was  the  time,  when  the  Greeks  fent
this  colony  into  Italy.  Oenotrus  left  Greece  as  diflatisfied
with  his  portion  of  land  :  For  Lycaon,  having  two  and
twenty  fons,  it  was  neceffary  to  divide  Arcadia  into  as
many  fhares :  This  inducing  Oenotrus  to  depart  out  of
Peloponnefus,  he  prepared  a  fleet,  and  croffed  the  Ionian
gulph  with  Peucetius  one  of  his  brothers :  They  were  fol¬
lowed  by  many  of  their  own  people,  (for  this  nation  is  faid
to  have  been  very  populous  in  early  times)  and  by  as  many
other  Greeks,  as  had  lefs  land,  than  was  fufficient  for  them.
Peucetius,  therefore,  landing  his  men  38  above  the  cape

fignify  Aoyo?  we  know  from  the  beft  is  not  agreeable  to  the  geography  of
critics,  and  the  beft  writers:  MvQwv  that  coaft.  For  it  is  well  known  that
fyhgoc ,  »  Set  A eyetv  vnoSeiMwloi,  fays  the  country,  called  from  him,  Peuce-
Hefychius.  In  Homer,  we  find  jUvSo?  tia,  and,  afterwards,  Mefiapia,  lay  to
ufed  in  this  fenfe  almoft  in  every  book-,  the  north  of  the  Calabri, whofe  country
and,  in  the  following  verfe,  it  can  be  lay  to  the  north  of  that  cape.  Strabo
taken  in  no  other,  gives  the  following  account  of  the  in-

H7T«A>j<m  MT0ON,  0  TtltKttrpim  ttrlt  s.  habitants  of  this  peninfula,  tfie  point  of

which  is  the  cape  Iapygia,  and  the
*s-  Yitt%  etx.as  Iairvyiotf.  The  French  neck,  that  piece  of  land,  which  lies
tranflators  have  made  Peucetius  land  between  Tarentum  and  Brundufium,
and  fettle  at  the  cape  Iapygia,  which  and  which,  he  fays,  is  one  day’s  jour-

4  Iliad  «,  f.  388.


Iapygia,


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  A S S  E  NS  I S.  3r

Iapygia,  which  was  the  firft  part  of  Italy  they  made,  fettled
there ;  and,  from  him,  the  inhabitants  of  thefe  places  were
called  Peucetians.  But  Oenotrus,  with  the  greateft  part  of
the  army,  came  into  another  gulph,  that  wafhes  the  weftern
coaft  of  Italy,  and  which  was  then  called  the  Aufonian  gulph,
from  the  Aufonians  bordering  on  it :  But,  after  the  Tyrrhe¬
nians  became  matters  at  fea,  it  changed  its  name  to  That  by
which  it  is  known  at  this  day.

XII.  And,  finding  there  a  large  tradl  of  land  proper  both
for  pafture  and  tillage,  but,  in  a  great  meafure,  defert ;  nor,
even  That,  which  was  inhabited,  populous,  he  cleared  fome
of  it  of  the  Barbarians ;  and  built  fmall  cities  contiguous  to
one  another,  according  to  the  manner  of  habitation  in  ufe
among  the  ancients :  And  all  the  country  he  pofiefled,  which
was  very  large,  was  called  Oenotria ;  and  all  the  people  under
his  command,  Oenotrians ;  which  was  the  third  time  they
changed  their  name.  For,  in  the  reign  of  iEzius,  they  were
called  JEzii ;  when  Lycaon  fucceeded  to  the  command,  Ly-
caonians ;  and,  after  Oenotrus  led  them  into  Italy,  they  were,
for  a  while,  called  Oenotrians.  What  I  fay  is  fupported  by  the
teftimony  of 39  Sophocles,  the  tragic  poet,  in  his  drama,  intituled
Triptolemus :  For  he  there  introduces  Ceres  informing  Trip-

ney  to  a  man  on  foot.  tO t  t7n^u)^oi  the  life  of  Sophocles,  prefixed  to  his
Kofi*  p  to  ju?v  tj  'ZothtvTivvt  km  Asm  to  tragedies,  fays  he  writ  one  hundred
ar£ot  I<x7rvyictv,  to  <fs  KaA«£^c*  and  thirty,  of  which  feventeen  were

V7re$  tx1«?  st£og-6o£oj  TIwndiDt  &<n.  I  am  thought  not  to  be  his.  Seven  only  of
confident  their  miftake  arofe  from  their  ail  thefe  tragedies  remain:  Among
not  attending  to  the  word  vnig.  thofe  that  are  loft,  is  the  tragedy  of

39-  Xo(poK\tis  o  T(xyu><$Q7roiQs  tv  Triptolemus,  mentioned  by  our  au»

As jua  fyupah.  The  Greek  author  of  thor  upon  this  occafion.

*  Strabo,  B.  vi.  p.  425.


tolemus


32  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book!.

tolemus  40  how  large  a  trad  of  land  he  was  to  travel  over,
in  order  to  fow  the  feeds  fhe  had  given  him  ;  for,  taking
notice,  firft,  of  the  eaftern  part  of  Italy,  which  reaches
from  the  cape  Iapygia  to  the  Sicilian  ftreight,  and,  then,
{lightly  mentioning  Sicily  on  the  oppofite  fide,  fhe  returns
again  to  the  weftern  part  of  Italy  ;  and  runs  over  the  moft
confiderable  nations,  that  inhabit  this  coaft,  beginning  with
the  fettlement  of  the  Oenotrians.  But  I  need  only  quote
thefe  lambics,  “  41  Thefe  you  will  leave  behind  you:  On
“  your  right,  all  Oenotria,  the  Tyrrhene  gulph,  and  the
“  Ligurian  land  will  receive  you.”  And  42  Antiochus  of
Syracufe,  a  very  old  hiftorian,  in  his  account  of  the  planting
of  Italy,  enumerates  the  moft  ancient  inhabitants,  in  43  the
order,  in  which  each  of  them  pofleffed  themfelves  of  any
part  of  it ;  and  fays  that  the  firft,  who  are  recorded  in  hiftory

4°'  0<rv)v  %Uf>oiv  uvor.yxa,c&ti<rfta,i  —

we£e a9«v.  Thus  tranflated  by  le  Jay  *,

Vefpace  de  terre  quHl  avoit  a  labourer.

This  is,  indeed,  improving  upon  the
commands  given  by  Ceres  to  Trip-
tolemus.  In  Sophocles,  we  find  fhe
orders  him  to  travel  over  Italy  and
Sicily  :  But,  in  le  Jay,  fhe  commands
him  to  plough  them  up.  The  other
French  tranfiator  has  rendered  it  very
properly.

41  •  T»  F  i%Q7n&e.  I  have  followed
the  pointing  of  Lapus  in  tranflating
thefe  verfes.

4if  A v\io%of  0  XvguKxo-iof.  This  au¬
thor  flourifhed  in  the  90th  olympiad  u,
that  is,  about  the  year  of  Rome3  3 6.  He
writ  the  hiftory  of  Sicily  in  nine  books.

*  Diod.  Sicul.  B.  xii.  p.  322.


4J*  flc  Is ictsoi  n  y.egoe  u\j1> k  k<x1&%ov.

I  do  not  think  that  either  Portus,  Syl-
burgius,  or  le  Jay  has  tranQated  this
fentence  properly  The  firft  has  faid
quam  partem ,  the  fecond  quae  loca ,  and
le  Jay  des  lieux  qu'ils  ont  occupez.
The  point  contended  for  by  our  au¬
thor  is  to  fhew  that  the  Oenotri  were
the  firft  colony  that  came  into  Italy :
This,  he  fays,  Antiochus  of  Syracufe
afferts  :  And  wV,  vifibly,  relates  to
the  order  of  time,  in  which  each  of
thefe  ancient  inhabitantspofTeffed  them¬
felves  of  fome  particular  part  of  the
country.  The  other  French  tranfiator
was  aware  of  the  difficulty,  and  has
not  tranflated  this  fentence  at  all.


to


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  33

to  have  inhabited  that  country,  were  the  Oenotri :  His
words  are  thefe  :  “  Antiochus,  the  foil  of  Xenophanes,  has
“  given  this  account  of  Italy,  which  is  the  mod  credible  and
“  certain,  out  of  the  ancient  hiftories :  That  country,  which
“  is  now  called  Italy,  was  formerly  poffeffed  by  the  Oeno-
<c  tri.”  Then,  he  relates  in  what  manner  they  were
governed,  and  that,  in  procefs  of  time,  Italus  came  to  be
their  king,  from  whom,  changing  their  name,  they  were
called  Italians ;  that  he  was  fucceeded  by  Morges,  from  whom
they  were  called  Morgetes :  And  that  Sicelus,  being  received
as  a  gueft  by  Morges,  and,  fetting  up  for  himfelf,  divided  the
nation.  After  which  he  adds  this,  u  Thus  were  the  Oeno-
u  tri  called  Siceli,  Morgetes,  and  Italians.’5

XIII.  Now,  let  us,  alfo,  fhew  how  44confiderable  a  nation
the  Oenotri  were  from  the  teftimony  of  45  Pherecydes,


44-*  K ai  to  ytvoq  oVov  »jy  to  tuv  Oivolgcov
ctTroSei^aifMv.  The  fenfe  of  the  word  oVov
has  been  miftaken  by  all  the  tranf-
lators,  except  Portus  :  Le  Jay  has  not
fo  much  as  attempted  to  tranflate  this
fentence  ;  but  has  faid  in  a  loofe  man¬
ner  ;  Voyons  ce  qu'  on  doit  penfer  des  Oe-
notriens.  Sylburgius  is  not  quite  fo
loofe ;  however,  he  has  not  rendered
cVoi/.  Nunc  genus  quoque  Oenotrorum
declarabimus.  This  has  milled  the  other
French  tranflator,  who  has,  vifibly,
tranflated  him;  prouvons  encore  Vorigine
des  Oenotriens.  But  our  author  has
already  proved  the  origin  of  the  Oe¬
notri  •,  and,  now,  goes  on  to  fhew  the
extent  of  the  country,  and  the  number
of  the  cities  they  were  mailers  of,  that
is,  how  confiderable  a  people  they  were,


which  is  the  force  of  the  word  b<rov.

4-s*  &s{j£KV<ft]v  tov  A Qtjvociov  ywt ot\oyov

vJtvos  Jivjtgov.  M***fays,  upon  this
occafion,  that  Pherecydes  lived  about
the  time  of  Servius  Tullius.  But  he
confounds  Pherecydes  of  Syrus,  the
Theologer,  with  Pherecydes,  theAthe-
nian,  of  whom  our  author  fpeaks.
The  firft  flourifhed  in  the  59th  "'olym¬
piad  ;  according  to  Diogenes  Laer¬
tius,  who  has  written  his  life  :  The
other  was  born  at  Leros,  in  the  74th
olympiad;  and,  living  at  Athens,  was
called  an  Athenian.  He  is  named
ywiotAoyos  by  Diogenes,  for  which  he
quotes  Eratollhenes.  Pherecydes  writ
the  Athenian  Antiquities  in  ten  books,
as  Suidas  fays.  He  was  about  the
fame  age  with  Herodotus.


w  avccyga.'p.


F


Vol.  I.


the


34  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book I.

the  Athenian,  another  ancient  hiftorian,  and  a  genealogift  in¬
ferior  to  none :  He  thus  exprefles  himfelf  concerning  the
kings  of  Arcadia ;  “  Lycaon  was  the  fon  of  Pelafgus  and
“  Deianeira  :  This  man  married  Cyllene,  a  Naid  nymph,
iC  from  whom  the  mountain  Cyllene  took  its  name Then,
having  given  an  account  of  their  children,  and  what  places
each  of  them  inhabited,  he  mentions  Oenotrus  and  Peuce-
tius,  faying,  thus:  <c  And  Oenotrus,  from  whom  thofe,
u  who  inhabit  Italy,  are  called  Oenotri ;  and  Peucetius,
cc  from  whom  thofe,  who  live  near  the  Ionian  gulph,  are
<c  called  Peucetii.”  Thefe,  therefore,  are  the  accounts
given  by  the  ancient  poets  and 46  hiftorians,  concerning  the
fettlement  and  origin  of  the  Oenotri ;  by  whofe  autho¬
rity,  I  am  convinced  that,  if  the  Aborigines  were,  in  reality,
a  Greek  nation,  according  to  the  opinion  of  Cato,  Sempro-
nius,  and  many  others,  they  were  defcendants  of  thefe
Oenotri :  For  I  find  that  the  Pelafgi  and  47  Cretenfes,
and  the  other  nations,  that  inhabited  Italy,  came  thither
afterwards ;  neither  can  I  difcover  that  any  other  colony,
more  ancient  than  this,  came  from  Greece  to  the  weftern
parts  of  Europe.  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  Oenotri  made
themfelves  mafters  of  many  other  places  in  Italy,  fome  of
which  were  defert,  and  others  ill  inhabited ;  and  that  they

*6,  Mu  Soyfa,(pav*  See  the  37th  an-  — cttnEla  mails  habit  ant  ur  moeniaGraiis*
notation  towards  the  end.  Hie  et  Naritii  pofuerunt  moenia  Locri ,

47  •  Kgij 7ixov.  This  is  one  of  the  Greek  Et  Valentinos  obfedit  milite  campos
colonies  on  the  eaftern  fide  of  Italy*  Lyfiins  ldomeneus x.
whichHelenus  advifes  Aeneas  to  avoid ;

*  Virgil,  Aeneid.  iii.  398.


poflelled


Chap.  L  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  35

poflefled  themfelves,  alfo,  of  fome  part  of  the  country  be¬
longing  to  the  Umbri,  and  were  called  Aborigines  from
their  dwelling  on  mountains  (for  the  Arcadians  are  fond  of
fuch  fituations)  in  the  fame  manner,  as,  at  Athens,  fome  are
called  48  Hyperacrii,  and,  others,  Paralii.  But,  if  any  are,
naturally,  flow  in  giving  credit  to  accounts  of  ancient  tranf-
a&ions  without  examination,  let  them  be  fo  in  believing
them  to  be  Ligures,  Umbri,  or  any  other  Barbarians;
and  let  them  fufpend  their  judgment  till  they  have  heard
what  remains,  and,  then,  determine  which  opinion  is,  of  all
others,  the  moft  probable.

XIV.  Of  the  cities,  firft  inhabited  by  the  Aborigines,  few
remain  at  this  time ;  but,  the  greateft  part  of  them,  having
been  laid  wafte  both  by  wars,  and  other  deftru&ive  calamities,
are  abandoned.  Thefe  cities  were  in  the  Reatine  territory,  not
far  from  the  Apennine  mountain  (as  Terentius  Varro  writes
in  his  Antiquities)  the  neareft  being  one  day’s  journey  from
Rome  ;  the  moft  celebrated  of  which  I  ftiall  give  an  account
of  after  him.  Palatium,  five  and  twenty  ftadia  diftant  from
Reate,  which  city  is  ftill  inhabited  by  the  Romans  near  the


4-8,  flc  vTTfgctKfHfr  rivxt,  kou  vrcctotKivs  Paralii ,  or  inhabitants  of  the  fea  coaft,
A&nvtjm.  There  is  a  note  of  the  Greek  I  ftiall,  alfo,  tranfcribe  it  •,  the  verfe

in  Ariftophanes  is  as  follows  :

A\h*  %$t  Tlxgothwv  yvvtj  tssapar'.

$tcc5i%oi[j.t)iof  r>jv  K^ottc?  ftourih&xv
plaining  the  word  «v.  As  this  kxi  t>jv  MiyugiSx,

note  will  Ihew  the  origin  of  this  divi-  t oh  vreuciv  etg  $  ftoigotg'  Aiyet  t yjv

fton  of  the  Athenians,  fome  of  whom  to  riv9<«*  TlxKx\h  Si  rw  tsx^x-

were  called  Diacrii  or  Hyperacrii,  in-  Ktav’  Avx«  oi  tjjv  Aixk^ixv’  Nio-wJeTjjn
habitants  of  the  mountains,  and  others,  M syx^Sx.

7  f.  58.

F  2


fcholiaft  upon  the  tollowing  verle  or
Ariftophanes  in  his  wild,  but  witty
comedy,  called  Lyfi  ft  rate  *,  which  note
Suidas  has  tranfcribed  literally  in  ex-


Quintian


36  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  T.

Quintian  way.  Trebula,  diflant  from  the  fame  city  about
fixty  fladia,  and  {landing  upon  an  eafy  afcent.  Vefbola,  at
the  fame  diftance  from  Trebula49.  Suna,  a  famous  city  forty
ftadia  from  Vefbola,  where  there  is  a  very  ancient  temple  of
Mars.  Mephyla,  about  thirty  ftadia  from  Suna;  of  which
the  ruins,  and  the  traces  of  the  walls  are  to  be  feen.  Orvi-
nium,  forty  ftadia  from  Mephyla,  a  city  inferior  to  none
in  that  part  of  the  country  for  fame  and  extent :  For  the
foundations  of  the  walls  ftill  appear,  and  fome  tombs  of
ancient  magnificence ;  as  well  as  the  inclofures  of  burying
places  extending  themfelves  on  high  terrafles :  Here  is  an
ancient  temple  of  Minerva,  feated  on  the  top  of  the  hill.
At  the  diftance  of  eighty  ftadia  from  Reate,  on  the  Jurian
way  near  the  mountain  Coritus,  flood  Corfula,  lately  de-
ftroyed :  There,  an  ifland  is  to  be  feen,  called  Iffa,  furrounded
with  a  lake ;  which  ifland  is  faid  to  have  been  inhabited  by
the  Aborigines,  without  any  artificial  fortification,  the  inha¬
bitants  relying,  for  their  fecurity,  on  the  bogs  of  the  lake,


♦9*  To>v  KtgMJvicdv  cg&ov  srA>j<nov.  I  am

intirely  of  z  Cluver’s  opinion  that  the
tranfcribers  fct  down  the  Ceraunian
inftead  of  others  mentioned  by  our
author  :  Since  every  body  knows  thofe
mountains  are  in  Epirus,  oppofite  to
Italy.  Le  Jay  has,  upon  this  occafion,
tranflated  two  notes,  one  of  Sylbur-
gius,  and  the  other  of  Portus  :  But
neither  of  them  give  any  light  to  this
paftage  :  Elad  I  done  fo,  I  fhould  have
thought  myfelf  obliged  to  name  Thofe
from  whom  I  took  them.  All  the

i


commentators  refer  us  to  Cluver  for
the  fituation  of  thefe  ancient  towns  of
the  Aborigines.  But,  upon  looking
into  that  great,  and  learned  geogra¬
pher,  I  find  he  is  very  uncertain  con¬
cerning  their  fituation,  for  which  he
gives  this  very  good  reafon  :  That
moft  of  them  lay  in  ruins  at  the  time
our  author  writ  his  hiftory.  I  fhall,
therefore,  not  trouble  the  reader  with
the  conjedtures  of  various  authors,
concerning  their  names  and  fitua-
tions.


z  Cluver,  It.  Antiq.  p.  684.


inftead


Chap.  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  ENSI S.  37

inftead  of  walls.  Near  to  Ifla,  is  Maruvium,  at  the  end
of  the  fame  lake,  diftant  forty  ftadia  from  what  they  call
I 'be  feven  waters .  Again,  Batia,  towards  the  Latin  way,
thirty  ftadia  from  Reate :  Then,  Tiora,  which  is  called
Matiena,  forty.  In  this  city,  they  fay,  there  was  a  very  old
oracle  of  Mars ;  the  manner  of  which  was  near  the  fame  with
that  oracle,  fabled  to  have,  formerly,  been  among  the  Dodo-
naeans ;  only  there,  a  pigeon  was  faid  to  prophefy,  fitting
on  a  holy  oak  :  But,  among  the  Aborigines,  a  bird,  fent
from  heaven,  which  they  call  Picus>  a  woodpecker ,  and  the
Greeks  Agvoxol>OL7r}r)e,  appearing  on  a  pillar  of  wood,  did  the
fame.  Lifta,  twenty  four  ftadia  from  the  laft  mentioned
city,  the  metropolis  of  the  Aborigines ;  which,  formerly,  the
Sabines,  from  Amiterna,  attacking  it  by  night,  furprifed.
Thofe,  who  furvived  the  taking  of  the  town,  being  received
by  the  Reatines,  when,  after  many  attempts,  they  found
themfelves  unable  to  retake  it,  they  confecrated  the  country
to  the  gods,  as  if  it  ftill  had  been  their  own,  denouncing
curfes  againft  thofe,  who  fhould,  after  that,  enjoy  the  pro¬
duce  of  it.

XV.  Cutylia,  a  renowned  city,  feventy  ftadia  from  Reate,
fituated  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain ;  not  far  from  which,  is  a
lake  of  four  acres,  full  of  native  waters,  ever  flowing,  and,
as  they  fay,  bottomlefs :  This  lake,  as  having  fomething
divine  in  it,  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  look  upon  as
facred  to  victory ;  and,  furrounding  it  with  an  inclofure,  left
any  one  fhould  approach  the  water,  they  preferve  it  inac-
cefiibk ;  only,  once  a  year,  thofe,  who  are  appointed  by

their


38  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

religion,  perform  certain  cuftomary  facrifices  on  a  little  ifland
in  the  lake:  This  ifland  is  near  fifty  feet  diameter;  and
not  more  than  one  foot  above  the  water :  It  is  loofe,  and
floats  about,  the  wind,  gently,  wafting  it  from  one  place  to
another.  There  grows  an  herb  in  this  ifland,  like  50  Burre-
reed,  as,  alfo,  certain  fmall  flirubs ;  a  thing,  which  thofe,  who
are  unacquainted  with  the  works  of  nature,  will  hardly
comprehend,  and  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  wonder  inferior
to  none.

XVI.  The  Aborigines  are  faid  to  have  fettled,  firft,  in
thefe  places,  after  they  had  driven  out  the  Umbri :  And,
making  excurfions  from  thence,  they  warred  upon  the
Barbarians ;  but,  particularly,  upon  the  Siceli,  their  neigh¬
bours,  in  order  to  difpoflefs  them  of  their  lands.  Firft,  a
body  of  young  men,  confecrated  to  the  gods,  confiding  of  a
few,  were  fent  out  by  their  parents  to  feek  a  maintenance,
according  to  a  cuftom,  which,  I  know,  many  Barbarians  and
Greeks  have  ufed.  For,  whenever  the  numbers  of  the  in¬
habitants  of  any  of  their  cities  were  fo  far  increafed,  that  the
produce  of  their  lands  would,  no  longer,  maintain  them  all,
or  the  earth,  injured  by  unfeafonable  changes  of  the  weather,
brought  forth  her  fruits  in  lefs  abundance  than  ufual,  or  any
other  accident  of  that  nature,  either  better  or  worfe,  intro¬
duced  a  neceflity  of  leflening  their  numbers,  they  confecrated
to  fome  god  all  the  men,  who  were  born  within  a  certain
year ;  and,  providing  them  with  arms,  fent  them  out  of

5°-  B»7Sjuov.  This  plant  is  called  in  call  it  Gladden.  It  is  very  common  in
Englilh  Burre-reed ;  in  Norfolk,  we  marlhy  grounds.


their


Chap.r.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  39


their  country  :  If  this  was  done  by  way  of  thankfgiving  for
populoufnefs,  or  a  vi&ory  in  war,  they,  after  the  ufual  facri-
fices,  profecuted  their  colony  with  benedictions :  But,  if  the
deftgn  of  it  was  to  pray  a  deliverance  from  thofe  evils,  which
the  divine  anger  had  inflicted  on  them,  they  performed  the
fame  ceremony,  but,  with  dejeCted  looks,  and  begging  for-
givenefs  of  the  youth  they  fent  away.  Thofe,  who  departed,
having,  now,  no  longer,  any  country  they  could  call  their
own,  unlefs  by  favour,  or  force,  they  fhould  gain  another  to
receive  them,  looked  upon  the  latter  as  their  country.  And
the  god,  to  whom  they  had  been  confecrated  when  they
were  fent  out,  feemed,  generally,  to  aflift  them,  and,  beyond
all  human  expectation,  to  profper  thofe  colonies.  In  pur-
fuance,  therefore,  of  this  cuftom,  fome  of  the  Aborigines,
alfo,  at  that  time,  their  country  growing  very  populous,
(for  they  would  not  put  any  of  their  children  to  death,
looking  on  this  as  the  greateft  of  crimes)  confecrated  to  fome
god  the  offspring  of  the  year,  and,  when  they  were  grown
to  be  men,  they  fent  them  out.  Thefe,  after  they  had  left
their  country,  were  continually  plundering  theSiceli:  And,
as  foon  as  they  became  matters  of  any  places  in  the  enemy's
country,  the  reft  of  theAborigines,  alfo,  who  wanted  lands,  with
greater  fecurity,  now,  attacked  each  of  them  their  neighbours;,
and  built  feveral  cities,  fome  of  which  are  inhabited,  to  this
day,  by  the  Antemnates,  the  Tellenenfes,  and  the  Ficulenfes,
who  live  near  the  mountains,  called  Corniculi,  and  by  the
Tiburtini,  among  whom  a  part  of  their  city  is,  at  this  time,
called  Sicelion  :  And,  of  all  their  neighbours,  they  infefted

the


ROMAN  ANTI  QJJI  TIES  OF  Book  I.


the  Siceli  moft.  From  thefe  differences,  there  arofe  a  gene¬
ral  war  between  the  two  nations,  more  confiderable  than  any
of  the  former  in  Italy,  which  was  drawn  out  to  a  great
length.

XVII.  Afterwards,  fome  of  the  Pelafgi,  who  inhabited
Theflaly,  as  it  is,  now,  called,  being  obliged  to  leave  their
country,  fettled  among  the  Aborigines ;  and  thefe,  with  joint
forces,  made  war  upon  the  Siceli.  It  is  poffible  the  Abori¬
gines  might  receive  them  from  the  hopes  of  their  afilftance,
but  I  rather  believe  it  was  chiefly  on  account  of  their  affinity.
For  the  Pelafgi  were,  alfo,  a  Greek  nation,  anciently,  of
Peloponnefus :  They  were  unfortunate  in  many  things,  but,
particularly,  in  wandering  much,  and  having  no  fixed  abode.
For  they,  firft,  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Achaian
Argos,  as  it  is  now  called,  being,  in  the  opinion  of  many,
natives  of  the  country.  They  received  their  name,  origi-
ginally,  from  Pelafgus  their  king:  Pelafgus  was  the  fon  of
Jupiter,  as  it  is  faid,  and  of  Niobe,  the  daughter  of  Phoro-
neus,  who,  as  the  fable  fays,  was  the  firft  mortal  woman
Jupiter  had  knowledge  of.  In  the  fixth  generation  after¬
wards,  leaving  Peloponnefus,  they  came  51  into  that  country,


51 '  E<?  t»jv  t <Pt  Aiftovtoiv,  vuv  Si  OirlaAiuv
xxtejuivvv.  Cafaubon,  in  his  notes  up¬
on  Strabo,  quotes  fome  Greek  verfes
of  Rhianus,  which  explain  the  account
given  by  our  author  of  Theflaly,  as
well  as  That  given  of  it  by  a  Strabo  ;
who  fays  that  Theflaly  was  called  Pyr-
rhaea  from  Pyrrha,  the  wife  of  Deu¬
calion  *,  afterwards,  Haemonia,  from


Haemon  •,  and,  at  laft,  Theflaly,  from
Theflfalus,  the  fon  of  Haemon.  Thefe
verfes  the  reader  may  not  be  difpleafed
to  find  here  :

TIv^ccikv  -noli  rr.vyt  GTcchuiolegoi  xafaicxov
Aivxaht mo;  air  uXo^oto'

ifat/lt?  Atfjkwoc,  o>  (>u  Thhctcryos
T mctlo,  tp'glalo v  y\ov*  O  S'ctv  Tf*«  ®t<rau>^ot  Aipur.
Ta  y  ccjvo  ©JC-aaTuijv  1  (A,el«pvpiiict>lo.


*  Strabo,  B.  ix.  p.  677.


which


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  4l

which  was,  then,  called  Haemonia,  and,  now,  Theflalia:  The
leaders  of  the  colony  were  Achaeus,  Phthius,  and  Pelafg  ns
the  fons  of  Larifla,  and  Neptune.  When  they  were  arrived
in  Haemonia,  they  drove  out  the  Barbarians,  who  were  the
inhabitants  of  it,  and  divided  the  country  into  three  parts,
calling  them  after  the  names  of  their  commanders,  Phthiotis
Achaia,  and  Pelafgiotis.  After  they  had  remained  there  five
generations,  during  which,  they  arrived  to  the  greateft  prof-
perity,  enjoying  the  moft  fertil  plains  in  Theflaly,  in  the
fixth  generation,  they  were  driven  out  of  it  by  the  Curetes,
and  Leleges,  who  are  now  called  Aetoli,  and  Locri,  and  by
many  others,  who  inhabit  the  parts  near  Parnafliis,  their
enemies  being  commanded  by  Deucalion,  the  fon  of  Pro¬
metheus,  and  of  Clymene,  the  daughter  of  Oceanus.

XVIII.  And,  difperfing  themfelves  in  their  flight,  52  fome
went  into  Crete  ;  others  pofiefled  themfelves  of  fome  of  the
iflands,  called  Cyclades ;  fome  inhabited  the  country,  called
Heftiotis,  near  Olympus  and  Ofla ;  others  went  into  Boeotia,
Phocis,  and  Euboea;  fome,  tranfporting  themfelves  into

S4’  o l  J U£V  K^luv  ct7Tt]\9ov.  CtC.  IwTroOooj  ccyt  <pVKx

The  different  fettlements  of  this  wan-  Tuv  v««W*o»e.

dering  people  are  taken  notice  of  by  d  gtrab0  wh0  quotes  the  authority  of
al  geographers;  efpeciaUy,  by  Homer,  Ho  f  ks  of  their  inhabiting
whofe  authority  in  geography  ,s  little  thofc  COU[ftries  and  many  others°
inferior  to  That  he  has,  fo  defervedly,  ticularl  that  they  fettled  in  the
acquired  m  poetry.  He  mentions  the  ;Qancj  cf  j_,efhos,  which,  from  them,
Pelafgi  in  Crete,  was  canecjpe]afgia.  And,  after  fhewing

n  h  k vhmf,  that  they  lived  alfo  at  Athens,  he  fays,

AopufriwxaHX'flmniiBtoryoiK.  the  Athenians  called  them  nt\agyw.

He  alfo  takes  notice  of  their  inhabiting  Storks,  becaufe  they  wandered  from
the  plains  of  Theffaly  near  LarifTa,  one  place  to  another,

b  Odyf.  r.  177.  c  Iliad.  /3.  f.  840.  d  B.  v.  p.  338.

G  Aha,


VOL.  I.


Book  I,


42  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

Atta,  became  matters  of  many  places  on  the  fea  coaft  near
the  Hellefpont,  and  of  many  of  the  adjacent  iflands,  parti¬
cularly,  of  That,  which  is  now  called  Lelbos,  mingling  with
thofe,  who  compofed  the  firft  colony,  that  was  fent  thither
from  Greece53  under  Macar,  the  fon  of  Cirafms.  54 But  the


53 '  Ayollog  MxKoi^og  ra  Kigctcus.  I
cannot  find  whether  this  Macar  was
the  fan  of  Criafus,  who,  as  Eufebius
fays,  was  the  fifth  king  of  the  Argivi :
But  I  find  in  Stephanus  that  he  was
the  father  of  Erefus,  from  whom  the
city  in  Lefbos,  fo  called,  took  its
name.

54'  To  Si  tx. r\nov  ctvlwv  /M^og  Sun  Tiff
j w-coynx  Tgx7 rojuivoi  TffQog  mg  tv  AoScovt]
notion txvlxg  a-Qcov  <rvfyeveig.  I  fhall  not  de¬
prive  the  reader  of  the  curious  tranf-
jation  le  Jay  has  exhibited  of  this  paf-
fage.  It  is  well  known  that  Dodona
was  a  city  of  the  Molofii,  a  people
of  Epirus  ;  and  that  Theffaly,  from
whence  the  Pelalgi  were  driven  by  the
Curetes,  and  Leleges,  was  feparated
from  Epirus  only  by  mount  Pindus.
So  that,  our  author  fays,  very  properly,
that  the  Pelafgi  paffed  through  the
midland  country  to  Dodona,  Sun  tjk
fjutroyeiv.  This  fentence  le  Jay  has,
unfortunately,  rendered  par  la  Medi¬
terranee.  It  is  fcarce  credible  that  a
man,  who  taught  rhetoric  above  twenty
years  in  Clermont  college,  as  he  him-
lelf  fays,  fhould  be,  lb  perfectly,  unac¬
quainted  both  with  the  Greek  lan¬
guage,  and  with  g-eography :  But  le
Jay,  it  feems,  was  fond  of  navigation.

I  find,  by  the  preface  ofM**  *,  the
other  French  tranfiator,  that  the  jour-
nalilts  ofTrevoux,  the  capital  of  the

B.  v.


principality  of  Dombes,  have  employed
all  their  eloquence  to  extol,  and  adorn
this  tranfiation  of  le  Jay  :  Which  the
reader  will  not  be  furprifed  at,  when
he  is  informed  that  both  the  tranfiator,.
and  the  panegyrifts  are  Jefuits ;  whofe
obftinacy  in  defending  one  another  at
all  events,  joined  to  an  unrelenting
hatred  of  all  their  oppofers,  puts  me  in
mind  of  what  e  Tacitus  fays  of  the
Jews,  apud  ipfos  fides  objlinata,  miferi-
cordia  in  promptu  ;  fed  adverfus  omnes
alios  hojlile  odium.  However,,  I  find
that,  notwithftanding  thefe  pompous
panegyrics,  the  tranfiation  of  le  Jay
has  been  cenfured  in  France  in  fome
critical  letters,  written,  I  prefume,  by
the  other  French  tranfiator;  and,
among  other  errors  obje&ed  to  him,
this  affair  of  the  Mediterranean  was
not  forgotten.  This  produced  an  an-
fwer  from  the  Jefuits,  in  which  they
acknowledge  the  mifiake ;  but  attribute
it  to  an  overfight  in  the  correctors  of
the  prefs,  and  fay,  that  the  tranfiator
had  written  que  ce  nombre  (des  Pelaf-
gues)  vint  par  le  pays  Mediterrane ,  ow
par  la  camp  ague  Mediterranee ,  ou par  la
region  Mediterranee  ;  and  that  the  word
region ,  for  example,  had  been  dropped
by  the  correctors.  The  other  replies
that  this  anfwer  will  be  allowable,  if
two  things  are  granted  :  The  firft,  that
le  pays,  la  camp  ague ,  la  region  Medi-
c.  5* '


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  SS  ENS  IS.  43

greateft  part  of  them,  palling  through  the  midland  country,
took  refuge  among  the  inhabitants  ofDodona,  their  relations
(againft  whom,  as  a  facred  people,  none  would  make  war)
where  they  continued  fome  time.  But,  finding  themfelves
grow  troublefome,  and  the  country  not  being  fufficient  to
fupport  them  all,  they  left  it  in  obedience  to  an  oracle,
which  commanded  them  to  fail  to  Italy,  then,  called  Saturnia :
And,  having  prepared  a  great  many  fhips,  they  pafied  the
Ionian  fea,  endeavouring  to  reach  the  neareft  parts  of  Italy.
But,  the  wind  being  in  the  fouth,  and  they  unacquainted
with  the  coaft,  they  were  carried  off  to  fea,  and  landed  at
one  of  the  mouths  of  the  Po,  called  55  Spines :  In  this  place,
they  left  their  fhips,  and  fuch  of  their  people,  as  were  leaft
able  to  bear  fatigue,  placing  a  guard  there,  to  the  end  that,
if  their  affairs  fucceeded  ill,  they  might  be  fure  of  a  retreat :
Thofe,  who  were  left  behind,  furrounded  their  camp  with  a
wall ;  and,  bringing  in  plenty  of  provifions  in  their  fhips,
when  their  affairs  feemed  to  profper,  they  built  a  city  of  the
fame  name  with  the  mouth  of  the  river.  Thefe  people
arrived  to  a  greater  degree  of  profperity  than  any  others  on

terranee  is  ufed  in  French  to  fignify  that  le  Jay’s  brethren  had  recourfe  to
le  milieu  des  terres  and  the  fecond,  a  mean  fubterfuge,  in  order  to  defend
that  it  is  probable  the  word  region,  a  moft  egregious  blunder.
pays,  or  campagne,  fhou Id  be  dropped  S7nv>j?.  fCluvtr  fhews  this  to

by  the  correctors  of  the  prefs,  and  the  have  been  the  principal  mouth  of  the
tranQator  fay  nothing  of  it  among  his  Po,  which  he  fuppofes  to  be  the  rea-
errata.  fon  why  it  is  called  Primaro  at  this

By  this  abftraCt  of  the  difpute,  the  day.  On  the  left  fide  of  it,  flood
reader  will  fee  that  the  attack  was  Spina,  once  a  confiderable  city,
ftrong,  and  the  defence  weak ;  and

f  Ital.  Antiq.  p.  134.

G  2


the


44  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

the  Ionian  coaft ;  and,  being  mailers  at  fea  for  a  long  time,
they  fent  tenths  to  the  god  at  Delphi,  thofe  ariling  from
their  gains  at  fea,  being,  in  magnificence,  inferior  to  none.
But,  afterwards,  the  Barbarians,  in  the  neighbourhood,
making  war  upon  them  in  great  numbers,  they  left  the  city
(however,  thefe  Barbarians,  in  procefs  of  time,  were  driven
out  by  the  Romans)  and  that  part  of  the  Pelafgi,  left  at
Spines,  was,  thus,  deftroyed.

XIX.  Thofe,  who  bent  their  march  through  the  midland
country,  eroding  the  mountainous  part  of  Italy,  arrived  at
the  territory  of  the  Umbri,  which  borders  on  That  of  the
Aborigines :  The  Umbri  inhabited  a  great  many  other  parts
of  Italy,  and  were  an  exceeding  great,  and  ancient  people*
At  firft,  therefore,  the  Pelafgi  made  themfelves  maflers  of
fome  of  the  lands  belonging  to  the  Umbri,  where  they,  firft,
fettled,  and  took  fome  of  their  fmall  towns :  But,  a  great
army  being  raifed  againft  them,  they  were  terrified  at  the
number  of  their  enemies,  and  betook  themfelves.  to  the
country  of  the  Aborigines :  Thefe,  determining  to  treat  them
as  enemies,  prefently,  gathered  together  out  of  the  adjacent
towns,  in  order  to  drive  them  out  of  the  country.  The
Palafgi,  who  happened,  at  that  time,  to  be  incamped  near
Cotyle,  a  city  of  the  Aborigines,  hard  by  the  Holy  lake,
obferving  the  little  ifland  floating  about  in  it ;  and,  learning,
from  the  captives  they  had  taken  in  the  fields,  the  name  of
the  inhabitants,  concluded  56  they  had  accomplilhed  the

*6'  TsAo?  (r^P,(r,  to  Storeomo*  Jay,  have  rendered  this  as  if  r(pi<n  re-
v7n\oc€ov,  Portus,  and  his  tranflator  le  lated  to  S-eott^othciv,  which  the  Greek

oracle :


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  45
oracle  :  For  That,  which  had  been  delivered  to  them  in
Dodona,  and  which  Lucius  Mamius,  no  obfcure  man,  fays?
he  himfelf,  faw  ingraven,  in  ancient  characters,  upon  one  of
the  Tripods,  Handing  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  was  in  thefe
terms ;  57  “  Go  in  fearch  of  the  Saturnian  land,  inhabited
“  by  the  Siceli,  and  of  Cotyle,  a  city  of  the  Abori-
“  gines,  where  there  is  a  floating  ifland ;  then,  mixing  with


language  will  not  bear :  For,  in  that
cafe,  ^J'ojjUfvov,  or  fomething  analogous
to  it,  would  have  been  inferted.  But
TfXof  c-tpio-i  is  very  elegant  Greek
to  fignify  that  the  oracle  was  accom-
plijhed  with  regard  to  them.  Sylbur-
gius  has  faid,  crediderunt  finem jam  ha¬
bere  fuum  oraculum which  is  fcarce
Latin :  However,  it  ffiews  that  he
made  the  fame  miftake.  The  other
French  tranfiator  has  rendered  it  very
artfully.  Us  crurent  que  V oracle  etoit
accompli.  Thus,  by  leaving  out  cr<pici,
he  has  avoided  the  difficulty  of  con¬
necting  it  with  either.  The  reader
will  determine  which  tranfiator  takes
mofl  pains  for  his  fatisfaCtion;  he,  who
endeavours  to  explain  difficulties,  or
he,  who  avoids  them.

S7*  jucacjuivoi  'Zixthuv  ZoilxgviM

etc.  I  with  our  author  had  given
usthisinfcription  in  the  ancient  charac¬
ters,  in  which  Mamius  fays,  he  faw  it
ingraven  on  the  tripod  at  Dodona :
But  I  fuppofe  Mamius  himfelf  did  not
copy  the  infcription  in  thofe  characters.
However  that  may  be,  it  is  certain
that  an  infcription,  ingraved  fo  many
generations  before  the  Trojan  war,
and  exhibited  in  the  characters  then  in
ufe,  would  give  great  fatisfaCtion  to


the  curious :  For  it  mult  be  allowed
that  this  would  be  the  moft  ancient
infcription  now  in  the  world.  But,
whatever  might  be  the  characters,  the
oracle,  or  rather,  the  priefts,  at  Do¬
dona,  delivered  themfelves  in  very
good  verfe ;  and,  particularly,  took
care  to  be  very  explicit  in  their  in¬
junction  to  the  Pelafgi  to  fend  the
tenths  to  Apollo  ;  which  thews  the
oracle  to  be  genuine  :  For,  notwith-*
ftanding  the  divcrfity  of  opinions  con¬
cerning  the  meaning  of  other  parts  of
this  oracle,  I  obferve,  there  is  none
concerning  That.  There  is  a  paffage
in  this  book,  in  which  our  author  tells
us,  that  Hercules  abolifhed  this  mon-
ftrous  cuftom  of  facri firing  human
victims,  by  directing  the  people  to
offer  pageants  to  Saturn,  inftead  of
men.  All  authors  agree  that  the  Car¬
thaginians,  like  the  Tyrians,  their  an-
ceftors,  thought  human  facrifices  the
moft  effectual  to  appeaft  their  angry
deities.  How  ftrange  a  thing  is  it
that  any  nation  fhould  be  fo  infatuated
by  their  religious  prejudices,  as  to
imagine  that  the  facrifice  of  their  fel¬
low-creatures,  under  the  notion  of  a
delegated  attonement,  could  be  an  ac¬
ceptable  offering  to  their  Creator  !

(C  thcm3


•y


46  HOMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

u  them,  fend  a  tenth  to  Phoebus,  and  heads  to  Jupiter,
a  and,  to  his  father,  a  man/’

XX.  When  the  Pelafgi  faw  the  Aborigines  advancing
with  a  numerous  army,  they  met  them  unarmed  with  olive
branches  in  their  hands,  and  gave  them  an  account  of  their
fortunes,  begging  they  would  receive  them  in  a  friendly
manner,  and  fufier  them  to  cohabit  with  them;  afliiring
them,  at  the  fame  time,  they  would  not  be  troublefome  ;
fince  heaven,  itfelf,  led  them  into  this  country,  as  the  only
one,  that  agreed  with  the  oracle,  which  they  explained  to
them.  When  the  Aborigines  heard  this,  they  refolved  to
obey  the  oracle ;  and,  as  they  laboured  under  a  war,  they
were,  then,  carrying  on  with  the  Siceli,  to  receive  the  af-
fiftance  of  thefe  Greeks  againft  the  Barbarians,  their  enemies.
To  this  purpofe,  they  entered  into  an  alliance  with  the
Pelafgi,  and  granted  to  them  fuch  of  their  lands  as  lay  near
the  Holy  lake,  of  which  the  greateft  part  were  marfhy,
and  which,  according  to  the  ancient  ftyle  of  their  language,
are  now  called  Felia :  For  it  was  the  cuftom  of  the  ancient
Greeks,  generally,  to  place  before  thofe  words,  that  began
with  a  vowel,  the  fy liable  a,  written  with  one  letter :  58  This
was  like  a  gamma,  formed  by  two  oblique  lines  joined  to  one
upright  line,  as  Felene,  Folvoc%>  Fanax,  Fowoe,  Foicus,

and  Fou/Yig>  Faner,  and  many  fuch  words.  Afterwards,  a
confiderable  part  of  them,  as  the  land  was  not  fufficient  to

58 •  T*7o  dents  yoc[xfxu,  etc.  I  man,  and  Greek  characters  were,  ori-

fhall  defer  the  confideration  of  this  ginally,  the  fame.  See  the  forty  firft
Aeolic  letter,  till  I  come  to  the  place,  annotation  on  the  fourth  book.
where  our  author  fliews  that  the  Ro-

fupport


Book  L  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASS  E  NS  IS.  47

fupport  them  all,  prevailed  on  the  Aborigines  to  join  them  in
the  expedition  they  propofed ;  and,,  making  war  upon  the
Umbri,  they  furprifed  Croton,  a  rich  and  large  city;  and
made  ufe  cf  this  city,  as  a  fortrefs  to  annoy  the  Umbri,  which
was,  fufficimtly,  fortified  to  defend  them  in  time  of  war,;
and  had  many  fertil  paftures  lying  round  it.  They  made
themfelves  mailers,  alfo,  of  a  great  many  other  places,
and,  with  great  alacrity,  affilled  the  Aborigines  in  the  war
they  were  then  ingaged  in  againft  the  Siceli,  till  they
drove  them  out  of  their  country :  And  the  Pelafgi  in¬
habited  in  common  with  the  Aborigines  many  cities,  fome
of  which  were,  before,  inhabited  by  the  Siceli,  and  others
they  built  themfelves ;  of  which  number,  is  the  city  of  the
Caeretani,  then,  called  Agylla,  and  Pifa,  Saturnia,  and  Alfion*
and  fome  others,  of  which  they  were,  in  procefs  of  timey
difpoffeffed  by  the  Tyrrhenians.

XXI.  But  Phalerium,  and  Fefcennia  are,  to  this  day,  in¬
habited  by  the  Romans,  and  preferve  fome  fmall  remains  of
the  Pelalgian  nation  ;  which  cities,  formerly,*  belonged  to
the  Siceli.  In  thefe  there  remained,,  for  a  long  time,  many
of  the  ancient  inftitutions,  formerly,,  in  ufe  among  the  Greeks,
fuch  as  the  59  falhion  of  their  arms,  Argolic  bucklers,  and
Ipears ;  and,  when  they  fent  out  an  army  beyond  their  con-

Twv  67r\uv  tmv  Kor/uac..  he  would,  no  doubt,  have  fhewn  us

All  the  tranflators,  both  Latin  and  what  thofe  ornaments  were  :  Whereas,
French,  have  rendered  this,  the  orna-  he  mentions  only  the  fhape  of  thefe
merits  of  their  arms  :■  Their  reafon  was,  arms;  calling  the  firft  an  Argolic
I  imagine,  becaufe  xotr/xof,  fometimes,  buckler,  which  every  one  knew,  at
hgnifies  an  ornament .  Had  Dionyfius  lead  in  his  time,  to  be  round  ;  and
defigned  to  fpeak  of  the  ornaments,  this  the  Romans,  who  had  made  ufe


4S  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book I.

fines,  either  to  begin  a  war,  or  to  refill  an  invafion,  certain
holy  men,  unarmed,  went  before  the  reft,  carrying  with  them
the  conditions  of  peace:  Such,  alfo,  were  the  ftructure
of  their  temples,  60  the  images  of  their  gods,  their  purifica¬
tions,  and  facrifices,  and  many  other  things  of  the  fame  na¬
ture.  But,  the  moft  confpicuous  monument,  by  which  it
appears  that  thofe  men,  who  drove  out  the  Siceli,  formerly,
lived  at  Argos,  is  the  temple  of  Juno  at  Phalerium,  built  in
the  fame  form  with  That  at  Argos ;  where  the  manner  of
the  ceremonies  was  the  fame;  holy  women  ferved  the
temple,  and  61  a  girl  unmarried,  called  Canephoros,  Bajket -
Bearer ,  began  the  facrifice,  befides  .chorus’s  of  virgins,
who  62  hymned  the  goddefs  in  fongs  of  their  country.  Thefe
people  were,  alfo,  mailers  of  a  confiderable  part  of  thofe,
they  call,  the  Campanian  plains,  which  afford  a  moft  pleafing
profpetft,  and  very  fertil  pafture,  having  driven  the  Aurunci,
a  barbarous  nation,  out  of  part  of  them.  There  they  built

'  4  *  _  .  ^  *  *

of  this  buckler,  afterwards,  changed  6o'  Ta  tSy;  rav  uv.  The  tranflators
for  the  s  Scutum ,  which  we  find  by  all  have  rendered  roc,  tJy  chapels ,  altars ,
authors  to  have  been  of  an  oblong  fanftuaries.  But,  as  tfa  fignifies  alfo,
figure ;  as  they,  alfo,  made  ufe  of  the  an  image ,  as  may  be  feen  in  Julius
h  Pilum ,  inftead  of  the  fpear.  If  any  Pollux,  Hefychius,  and  others,  I  have
one  doubts  whether  the  Argolic  buck-  chofen  to  tranflate  it  fo ;  becaufe  the
ler  was  round,  let  him  look  into  Virgil,  chapels ,  etc.  feem  to  be  included  in
who  compares  the  only  eye  of  Poly-  the  ftru&ure  of  the  temples,
phemus,  to  an  Argolic  buckler,  or  the  6l*  Ayvvi  y<xy,uv  uoas.  Admirably,
fun,  which  I  prefume  retains  ftill  the  tranflated  by  le  Jay  *,  me  jeune  vierge
fame  figure  it  had  then :  irreproachable  dans  fes  moeurs.

tclo  lumen  ter ebramus  acuto  6a*  Y/avmtm  t>jv  0gov.  The  reader  will

Ingens ^uodtorvd folumfub front elateb at ,  forgive  my  tranflating  this  hymning ,
Argolici  clypei ,  ant  Pkoebeae  lampadis  when  he  confiders  that  Milton  has  ufed
inftar  \  the  word  in  his  Paradife  loft.

£  Livy,  B.  viii.  c.  8.  fc  Polyb.  B.  vi.  p.  469.  'B.  iii.  635,  ;

feveral


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  SEN  SIS.  49

feveral  cities,  particularly,  Larifia,  giving  to  it  the  name  of
their  metropolis  in  Peloponnefus.  Some  of  thefe  cities  are
Handing  even  at  this  day,  having  often  changed  their  inhabit¬
ants  :  But  Larifla  has  been  long  deferted,  and  fhews,  at  prefent,
no  other  fign  of  its  ever  having  been  a  city,  but  the  name,
and,  even,  this  is  not,  generally,  known :  It  was  not  far
from  6+ Forum  Popilii.  They  were,  alfo,  matters  of  a  great
many  other  places,  as  well  on  the  coaft,  as  in  the  midland
country,  of  which  they  had  difpoffefled  the  Siceli.

XXII.  The  Siceli,  being  warred  upon  both  by  the  Pelafgi,
and  Aborigines,  found  themfelves  incapable  of  making  re-
ttftance ;  and,  taking  with  them  their  wives  and  children,  and
fuch  of  their  effects  as  confifted  in  gold  or  filver,  they  quitted
all  their  country  to  them :  Then,  bending  their  courfe  fouth-
ward,  along  the  mountains,  they  marched  through  all  the  lower
part  of  Italy  ;  and,  being  driven  from  every  place,  they,  at
laft,  prepared  rafts  in  the  Streight ;  and,  taking  the  advantage
of  an  65  ebb-tide,  patted  over  from  Italy  to  the  next  ifland  ;


6*-  A Paufanias  fays  that
the  citadel  at  Argos  was  called  La-
rifla,  from  Larifia,  the  daughter  of
Pelafgus,  from  whom,  alfo,  two  cities
in  Thefialy  were  called  by  the  fame
name  •,  which  tends  very  much  to  con¬
firm  the  account,  given  by  our  author,
of  the  Pelafgi  living  in  Thefialy.

64‘  Aycgote  no7 nKias.  1  Cluver  Ihews
the  name  of  this  town  to  have  been
Forum  Popilii ,  which,  he  fays,  is  now
called  Forlim  populo ,  but  oftener,  Forli
piccolo.

<E>uAa£av7e?  ndhoUx  tov  guv.  I  have
called  this  an  ebb-tide ,  though  I  am


fenfible  that  there  are  no  tides  in  the
Mediterranean,  as  in  the  ocean  :  The
reafon  of  which  may,  pofiibly,  be  that
the  water  in  the  Mediterranean  being
fo  much  lefs  in  bulk  than  That  of  the
ocean,  it  cannot  refill  the  weight  of  the
water  in  the  latter ;  for  which  reafon,
this,  always,  runs  into  the  Mediterra¬
nean  with  great  violence  at  theStreights
of  Gibraltar,  not  to  mention  the  wa¬
ter,  that  comes  in  through  the  H.l-
lefpont ;  and  this  violence  exceeds  the
effedt  of  the  attraction  of  the  moon
upon  the  water  of  the  Mediterranean  :
For  this  feems  to  be  large  enough  for


k  In  Corinth,  p.  165,  Edit.  Lipf.  1  Ital,  Antiq.  p.  295.

H


VOL.  I.


which


/


5o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

which  was  then  poflefled  by  the  Sicani,  an  Iberian  nation  ;
who,  flying  from  the  Ligures,  were,  but  lately,  fettled  there,
and  had  given  the  name  of  Sicania  to  that  ifland,  which,  from


the  moon  to  aft  more  upon  one  part
of  it  than  another,  and,  confequently,
to  make  one  part  fwell  more  than  an¬
other  *,  but,  when  it  fubfides,  it  muft
extend  itfelf  towards  the  Streights,
which  the  fuperior  weight,  and  force
of  the  water,  perpetually,  rufhing  in
there,  will  not  permit.  This  might,
indeed,  be  anfwered  by  the  aflumption
of  an  under-current,  which  may  run
out  of  the  Streights,  at  the  fame  time,
the  upper-current  runs  in.  But,  even,
in  that  cafe,  fo  vaft  a  lake  as  the  Me¬
diterranean  could  neither  receive,  nor
difcharge  water  enough  at  the  Streights,
in  fo  fhort  a  time  as  the  tide  flows  and
ebbs,  to  rife,  or  fall  fenfibly.  I  know
that  m  Ariftotle  fays  the  water,  in  the
Streight  of  Sicily,  ebbs,  and  flows  ac¬
cording  to  the  moon.  n  Strabo  alfo,
quotes  Eratofthenes  to  fhew  that  the
water  in  that  Streight  changes  its  courfe
twice  every  day,  and  as  often  every
night,  like  That  of  the  ocean.  Not-
withftanding  thefe  very  great  autho¬
rities,  I  much  doubt  whether  the  ebb¬
ing,  and  flowing  of  the  water,  in  the
Streight  of  Sicily,  is  fo  regular  as  they
contend  for*  and,  particulary,  whe¬
ther  it  is  governed  by  the  moon.  I
rather  think,  that  it  is  owing  to  the
winds,  which,  fometimes,  blow  into
that  Streight  from  the  Tyrrhene  fea,
that  is,  from  the  north  j  and,  at  other
times,  fiom  the  Sicilian  fea,  which  lies
to  the  fouth  of  it.  And 0  Thucydides,
who  gives  the  fame  account  of  the
Siceli  palling  over  from  Italy  to  Sicily,

*  r hgi  B  B.  i.  p.  59.  0  B.  vi.


then  called  Sicania,  fays  they  crofted
the  Streight  jc«7<ov7o?  tx  with  a

favourable  wind ,  or,  as  Hobbes  has,
very  properly,  tranflated  it,  with  a  fore¬
wind.  But,  there  is  a  difficulty,  that
occurs  in  the  account  given  of  the
Sicani  by  Thucydides,  and  followed
by  our  author:  The  firft  fays,  the
Sicani  were  driven  out  of  their  country
vtto  Aiyvwv  avcifccvle?,  and  our  author
fays  Aiyvotf  cpevyovle?.  Now,  we  find
in  no  hiftory  that  the  Ligures  were
ever  in  pofleflion  of  any  part  of  Spain.
p  Cluver  endeavours  to  folve  this  dif¬
ficulty  by  fuppofing  that  Spain  ought
here  to  be  underflood  in  a  large  fenfe,
fo  as  to  comprehend  France  ;  in  which
cafe,  thofe  Ligures,  who  lived  between
the  Rhone,  and  the  Alps,  would  be
near  neighbours  to  the  Spaniards.
Upon  this  occafion,  I  cannot  help
taking  notice  of  a  great  miftake  com¬
mitted  by  this,  truly,  learned  and  exact
geographer :  He  imagines  that q  Thu¬
cydides,  whofe  words  he  quotes,  ap¬
plied  thofe  words  to  the  paflage  of  the
Sicani  from  Italy  to  Sicily  •,  whereas,
nothing  can  be  plainer  than  that  Thu¬
cydides  applied  them  to  the  Siceli
crofling  the  Streight  on  rafts,  and  not
to  the  Sicani.  As  for  the  Aiyvsr,  who
arefaidby  Thucydides,  and  Dionyfius
to  have  expelled  the  Sicani,  I  fufpeft
they  were  not  the  Ligures,  as  all  the
tranflators  have  called  them,  and  I
myfelf  among  the  reft,  but  fome  other
ancient  people,  whofe  hiftory  we  are
unacquainted  with.

c.  2.  p  In  Sic.  Ant.  p.  26.  9  P,  27.

its


Book I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSEN SIS.  51

its  triangular  figure,  was,  before,  called  Trinacria :  There
were  very  few  inhabitants  in  it  for  fo  large  an  ifland ;  fo  that,
the  greateft  part  of  it  was  defert.  When,  therefore,  the
Siceli  landed  there,  they,  firft,  fettled  in  the  weftern  parts;
and,  afterwards,  in  feveral  others,  and,  from  thefe,  the  ifland
began  to  be  called  Sicely.  In  this  manner,  the  Sicelian  na¬
tion  left  Italy,  according  to  66  Hellanicus,  the  Lefbian,  the
third  generation  before  the  Trojan  war,  and  in  67  the  twenty
fixth  year  of  the  priefthood  of  Alcyone  at  Argos.  For  he
fays  that  two  Italian  colonies  pafted  over  into  Sicely ;  the
firft  confifting  of  the  Elymi,  who  had  been  driven  out  of
their  country  by  the  Oenotri ;  the  fecond,  five  years  after,
of  the  Aufones,  who  fled  from  the  Iapyges.  He  makes
Sicelus  the  king  of  thefe  people,  who,  he  fays,  gave  name
both  to  them,  and  to  the  ifland.  But,  according  to  68  Phi-


66,  EWatviKot  0  As<r£io?.  Ou  de  Milet\
il  fit,  felon  Suidas ,  une  defcription  de  la
terre ,  fays  M  *  *  *  :  But,  here,  again,
he  confounds  Hellanicus,  the  Lefbian,
with  Hellanicus,  the  Milefian:  Suidas,
exprefsly,  fays,  the  m^ioSog  y> j?  was
written  by  the  laft.  There  is  a  re¬
markable  paffage  quoted  by  Gellius
out  of  Tamphila,  by  which,  the  ages
of  Hellanicus,  the  Lefbian,  of  Hero¬
dotus,  and  Thucydides  will,  plainly,
appear  :  In  the  beginning  of  the  Pe-
loponefian  war,  Hellanicus  was  fixty
five  years  old,  Herodotus  fifty  three,
and  Thucydides  forty.

67*  A \KVQVr,S  I tQWfASVYIS  tV  A^ytrt.  OUT

author  follows  the  fame  method  with
s  Thucydides,  who  fays  that  the  firft
year  of  the  Peloponnefian  war  was  the
48th  of  the  priefthood  of  Chryfis  at

rB.  xv.  c.  23.  s  B.  ii.  c.  2.  1 '


Argos.  It  is  fuppofed  that  Hellanicus
of  Lefbos  was  the  firft  hiftorian,  who
introduced  the  method  of  computing
the  years  according  to  thofe  of  the
priefteffes  at  Argos ;  as  Timaeus  was
the  firft,  who  introduced  That  of  com¬
puting  them  according  to  the  olym¬
piads.

68 •  $i\i sot  0  The  age,  in

which  this  hiftorian  lived,  is  very  well
known  by  his  attachment  to  Dionyfius
the  elder,  by  whom  he  was,  afterwards,
banifhed;  a  juft  reward  for  the  af-
fiftance  he  gave  to  the  tyrant  of  his
country.  1  He  writ,  befides  other
works,  of  the  affairs  of  Sicily,  in  ele¬
ven  books.  As  to  his  fentiments,  the
difpofition  of  his  fubjedt,  and  his  ftyle,
they  are  very  particularly,  and  very
beautifully  defcribed  by  our  “author,

,od.  Sicul.  B.  xiii.  p.  387.  “  C.  5.

H  2  liftuSj


52  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

liftus,  the  Syracufian,  the  time,  when  this  colony  pafled  into
Sicely,  was  the  eightieth  year  before  the  Trojan  war;  but
the  people,  who  went  thither  out  of  Italy,  were  neither  the
Siceli,  the  Aufones,  nor  the  Elymi,  but  the  Ligures,  whole
leader  was  Sicelus  ;  who,  he  fays,  was  the  fon  of  Italus ;  and
that,  in  his  reign,  the  people  were  called  Siceli ;  and  that
thefe  Ligures  had  been  driven  out  of  their  country  by  the
Umbri,  and  Pelafgi.  Antiochus,  the  Syracufian,  fixes  no
time  for  their  paflage,  but  fays  the  people,  who  left  Italy,
were  the  Siceli,  who  had  been  forced  to  quit  their  country
by  the  Oenotri,  and  Opici ;  and  that  they  chofe  Sicelus  for
their  leader.  But 69  Thucydides  writes  that  the  people,  who
left  the  country,  were  the  Siceli,  and  thofe,  who  drove  them
out  of  it,  the  Opici  :  And  that  the  time,  when  they  left  it,
was  many  years  after  the  Trojan  war.  Thefe,  therefore,
are  the  relations,  given  by  authors  of  credit,  concerning  the
Siceli,  who  removed  from  Italy,  to  fettle  in  Sicely.

XXIII.  The  Pelafgi,  having  made  themfelves  mafters  of
a  large  and  fertil  trad  of  land,  took  fome  towns,  built  othersj
and,  by  a  fwift  and  great  advance,  rofe  to  power,  riches,  and
every  other  profperity,  which  they  did  not  long  enjoy :  But,
when  all  the  world  looked  upon  them  to  be  in  the  moft
flourifhing  condition,  they  became  the  objed  of  divine

in  his  criticifm  on  the  Greek  hiflo-  him  in  dignity  and  ftrength,  yet  he
rians :  He,  there,  fays,  among  other  imitated  him  in  the  roundnefs,  and
things,  that,  inftead  of  imitating  the  clofenefs  of  his  periods,
freedom,  and  fpirit  of  Thucydides,  he  QxwSiSw  See  his  fixth  book,

was  a  fervile  flatterer  of  tyranny  •,  that,  and  fecond  chapter  ;  great  part  of
like  Thucydides,  he  left  his  fubject  which  paflage  has  been  quoted  in  the
imperfed  j  and,  though  inferior  to  former  notes.

wrath;


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H A LIC AR N A S S EN SI S.  53

wrath  ;  and  fome  of  them  were  deftroyed  by  calamities,  in-
Aided  by  the  hand  of  Heaven,  others  by  their  Barbarian
neighbours :  But  the  greateft  part  of  them  were  again  dif-
perfed  through  Greece,  and  the  country  of  the  Barbarians  ;
concerning  whom,  if  I  attempted  to  give  a  particular  ac¬
count,  it  would  require  a  very  long  difcourfe.  However,
a  few  of  them  remained  in  Italy,  through  the  care  of  the
Aborigines.  The  fir  ft  caufe  of  the  defolation  of  their  cities
feemed  to  be  a  drought,  which  laid  wafte  the  land,  the  fruit
falling  from  the  trees  before  it  came  to  muturity  ;  neither
did  the  corn,  which  came  up,  and  Aowered,  ftand,  as  ufual,
till  the  ear  was  ripe ;  nor  was  there  grafs  fufficient  for  the
cattle :  Some  of  the  waters  were  not  fit  to  drink,  others
ftirunk,  during  the  fummer ;  and  others  were,  totally,  dried
up.  70  The  like  misfortunes  attended  the  offspring  both  of


7°’  ASiKQot,  rxloie  eyivilo  sr?£i  ts
w(>c£<xlct)9  xou  ywtxiKMv  yovoit.  The  reader
will  oblerve  that,  in  this  defcription  of
the  misfortunes,  which  happened  to
the  offspring  both  of  women,  and
cattle,  our  author  has  made  choice  of
fuch  terms,  as  are  applicable  to  both:
In  which,  he  has  been  followed  by  the
Latin  tranflators,  particularly,  by  Por-
tus,  as  publifhed  by  Hudfon,  who,  I
oblerve,  has  made  fome  very  proper
alterations  in  this  place.  Le  Jay,
alfo,  has  fucceeded  very  well  in  ren¬
dering  this  palfage.  But  the  other
French  translator  has  taken  another
courfe  :  He  has  made  two  periods  of
it  ;  one  of  which  he  has  applied  to  the
women,  and  the  other  to  the  cattle ;
which  renders  his  tranflation  tedious


by  the  repetition  of  the  fame  calami¬
ties  in  different  terms.  There  is  one
thing  in  his  tranflation,  that  renders  it
not  only  tedious,  but  ridiculous.  It
is  to  be  obferved  that  our  author,  after
he  has  defcribed  the  corruption,  and
drying  up  of  the  waters,  lpeaks  firlf,
in  general  terms,  of  the  misfortunes,
that  happened  to  the  offspring  of  wo¬
men,  and  cattle;  and  then  goes  on  to
particularife  them  :  This  general  ac¬
count  of  thofe  misfortunes  this  tranl-
lator  has  left  out,  becaufe  Sylburgius,
his  guide,  has  left  it  out  alfo  ;  wliofe
words  are  thefe ;  Nec  feliciores  erant
foeturae  mulierum ;  which  the  other
has  literally  tranflated :  Les  femmes
netoient  'pas  fins  heureufes  dans  leurs
accouchement s.  Now,  the  leaving  out

cattle


Bonk  T.


54  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

cattle,  and  of  women.  For  they  were  either  abortive,  or  died
at  their  birth;  fome,  by  their  death,  deftroying  even  thole
that  bore  them :  And,  if  any  efcaped  the  danger  or  their  de¬
livery,  they  were  either  lame,  or  imperfedl ;  or,  being  hurt
by  fome  other  accident,  were  not  lie  to  be  reared.  The  reft
of  the  people,  alfo,  particularly  thofe,  in  the  vigor  of  their
age,  were  affli&ed  with  various  diftempers,  and  uncommon
deaths.  Upon  their  confulting  the  oracle  what  god,  or  ge¬
nius  they  had  offended,  to  be  thus  afflicted,  and,  by  what
means,  they  might  hope  for  relief,  the  god  anfwered  that,
having  obtained  what  they  defired,  they  had  negle&ed  to
give  what  they  had  promifed,  but  that  the  moft  valuable
things  were  ftill  due  from  them :  For  the  Pelalgi,  in  a  time
of  71  general  fcarcity,  had  made  a  vow  to  offer  up  to  Jupiter,


this  general  account  of  thofe  misfor¬
tunes  has  given  an  air  of  ridicule  to
his  tranflation  of  the  whole  paffage  :
But,  in  order  to  Shew  this  in  a  proper
light,  I  muft  tranferibe  the  period,
which,  immediately,  precedes  this.
Les  fources ,  fays  he,  etoient  prefque
epuifees ,  on  mime  entiremmt  a  fee  par
les  chaleurs  exeeffives.  And,  then,
adds,  Les  femmes  n  etoient  pas  plus
heureufes  dans  leurs  accou-hements.
Now, it  is  plain,  by  the  common  rules
of  grammar,  that  this  laft  fentence
muft  relate  to  That,  which,  imme¬
diately,  precedes  it  •,  becaufe  plus  is  a
comparative-,  and  muft  relate  to  lome-
thing ;  and  there  is  nothing  but  the
preceding  fentence,  to  which  it  can
relate.  The  laft  fentence,  therefore,
muft  mean  nothing,  or  it  muft  mean
this :  Les  femmes  dans  leurs  accouche-

w  h  G»x.


ments  etoient  prefque  epuifees ,  ou  merne
entirement  d  fee  par  les  chaleurs  exeef-
fives.

7l'  Hxiluv  ^pyj^aluv.  This  ufe  of  the
word  %(>y]uoilot  ought  to  convince  the
translators  that  it  does  not  always
fignify  money  though,  I  oblerve,  that
it  is,  generally,  rendered  fo.  Nay,
what  is  ftill  more  extraordinary,  even
w  Ariftotle’s  definition  of  (by

which  he  Shews  that,  inftead  of  Signi¬
fying  money ,  it  fignifies  every  thing,
of  which  the  value  is  mealured  by
money)  is,  however,  rendered  in  the
fame  manner  by  the  Latin  translator,
whoever  he  is.  The  words  of  Ari-
ftotle  are  j  Je  Asyo/uev  zravlocy

ctrav  Yi  vo^is-pcth  p. {IgeJcct.  Thus

translated ;  Pecunias  autem  appellamus
omnia ,  quorum  aefimationem  metitur
nummus.

B.  iv.  c.  i.


Apollo?


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  AS  SEN  SIS.  5S

Apollo,  and  the  72  Cabiri,  the  tenths  of  all  their  future  pro¬
duct.  Their  prayer  being  heard,  they  fet  apart,  and  facri-


ficed  to  the  gods  the  promifed
cattle,  as  if  their  73  vow  had
74  Myrhlus,  the  Lefbian,  relates.

74*  To/?  Ka£«,oo«f.  Much  time,  and
labour  have  been  thrown  away  by
many  men  of  learning  in  order  to  dis¬
cover  the  etymology,  the  origin,  the
names,  and  functions  of  thefe  ridicu¬
lous  heathen  gods,  called  by  the
Greeks,  x  Herodotus  fpeaks

of  a  temple  dedicated  to  them  at
Memphis,  and  fays,  that  their  images
refembled  That  of  Vulcan,  whole
children,  it  feems,  they  were;  and  that
the  image  of  Vulcan  repreiented  a
pygmy.  Upon  this  foundation,  y  Bo-
chart,  and,  after  him,  the  author  z  of
the  hiftory  of  Heaven,  deduce  their
names  from  the  Phoenician  language,
in  which  CDHfDO  fignifies  powerful ,
in  the  plural  number  :  And  the  Phoe¬
nician,  commonly  called  the  Hebrew,,
and  the  Aegyptian  language,  being,
nearly,  the  fame,  it  will  follow  that
this  was  the  fignification  of  the  word
in  Aegyptian.  I  have  (hewn,  in  a
fmall  diftertation  inferted  in  my  trans¬
lation  of  Xenophon’s  Anabafis,  that
there  is  no  fort  of  affinity  between  the
Hebrew,  and  Aegyptian  languages  :
To  which  I  ffiall  now  add  an  obler-
vation  I  have  fince  made,  which  will
put  this  matter  out  of  all  doubt :
When  a  Jofeph’s  brothers  went  into
Aegypt  to  buy  corn,  he  fpoke  to  them
by  an  interpreter.  Our  countryman

x  In  Thai.  c.37.  r  P.  ii.  Geog.  facr.  B.i.
bC.  29.  c  tv  lmrsv.  f.  657,8,9.


portion  of  all  their  fruits,  and
related  to  them  only  :  This,
ufing  almoft  the  fame  words,

Hyde,  in  his  b  hiftory  of  the  religion
of  the  ancient  Perfians,  fays,  Cabiri
funt  Gabri ,  voce  Perjicd  aliquantulum
detortd.  Thefe,  he  fays,  paid  a  civil,
not  a  true  worlhip  to  fire.

73 *  n$  <hj  xoiloi  txIcov  1 uovuv  su%a/Lievoi,.

Cafaubon,  very  juftly,  obferves  that'
ev^scd-ou  x dice  Tivof  fignifies  vovere  illi¬
quid ;  to  Support  which,  he  quotes  a.
paffage  in  Demofthenes.  To  this  I:
ffiall  add  the  authority  of  Ariftophanes, .
who  ufes  iv^v  zrQiwa<&6u  in  the  fame.
fenfe  ;

Tjj  Ay^olt^cc  xoda  zrotgy ve<ro6

’E\)y/yjV  ixoiYicoic&UA  oiv^iov

Ai  &  y£V0t06$'  SKOlloV  T»  ’|6oA«  C„-

y

When  any  one  made  a  vow  to  offer  up
a  number  of  goats,  or  oxen,  the  vow
was  to  be  performed  at  the  expence
of  thofe  poor  animals  :  For  which
reafon,  the  prepofition  xa lot  was  very
proper.  This  cuftom  of  facrificing;
oxen,  by  way  of  thankfgiving  for  a~
vidory,  was,  like  all  other  follies,,
carried  to  an  extravagant  height  by
the  Roman  emperors,  to  one  of  whom
the  white  oxen  are  fuppofed  to  have
fent  a  Greek  epiftle,  in  which  they  are
made  to  fay,  «v  <rv  vjjojtr«r,  cltcoAx—
^£0a;,  if  you  conquer ,  we  die.

7+-  Mv§<r<Aof  0  Aeo-Sw.  This  hiftorian
is  quoted  by  many  ancient  authors.,.

c.  12.  ZC.  27.  a  Genefis,  c.  xlii.  23.

which;


56  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

which  I  now  do,-  only,  that  he  does  not  call  the  people
Pelafgi,  but  Tyrrhenians,  of  which  I  fhall,  prefently,  give

the  reafon.

XXIV.  When  they  heard  the  oracle  was  brought  to  them,
they  were  at  a  lofs  to  guefs  at  the  meaning  of  it.  While  they
were  in  this  perplexity,  one  of  the  elders,  conje&uring  the
fenfe  of  it,  told  them,  they  were  very  much  miftaken,  if  they
thought  the  gods  complained  of  them  without  reafon :  That
they  had,  indeed,  rendered  to  the  gods  the  firft  fruits  of
every  thing  with  punduality,  and  juftice,  except  Thofe  of  the
human  offspring,  a  thing,  of  all  others,  the  moft  precious  in
the  fight  of  the  gods,  which  yet  remained  due  ;  and  that,  if
the  gods  received  their  fhare  of  this  alfo,  the  oracle  would
be  75  fulfilled.  Upon  this,  fome  were  of  opinion  that  he  was
in  the  right,  others  that  there  was  treachery  couched  under
his  difcourfe :  But,  fomebody  propofing  to  afk  the  god,
whether  he  defired  to  receive  the  tenths  of  the  men,  they  fent
their  priefts  a  fecond  time,  and  the  god  ordered  it  fhould  be  fo.
In  confequence  of  this,  a  fedition  arofe  among  them  concern¬
ing  the  manner  of  this  decimation  ;  and  thofe,  who  had  the
government  of  the  cities,  firft  quarrelled  among  themfelves ;
after  that,  the  reft  of  the  people  conceived  a  jealoufy  of  their
magiftrates.  Thence,  followed  diforders,  and  infurre&ions,
fuch  as  might  well  be  expe&ed  from  a  people,  feized  with
a  madnefs,  inflidted  by  the  hand  of  Heaven :  Many  houfes

but  without  any  circumftances,  that  Jived.

can  acquaint  us,  certainly,  either  with  TtXog  <r(piori  to  Koyiov.  See  the

his  writings,  or  the  age,  in  which  he  56th  annotation.

became,


s


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSEN  SIS.  57
became,  intirely,  abandoned,  when,  only,  part  of  the  inha¬
bitants  removed:  For  their  relations  were  unwilling  to
76  for  fake  their  deareft  friends,  and  remain  among  their  greateft
enemies.  Thefe,  therefore,  were  the  fir  ft,  who,  leaving  Italy,
wandered  about  Greece,  and  many  parts  of  the  Barbarians
country :  After  thefe,  others  did  the  fame,  and  this  con¬
tinued  every  year.  For  themagiftratesin  the  cities  ceafed  not
to  feledt  the  firft  fruits  of  the  youth,  as  faft  as  they  arrived
to  manhood,  defiring  to  render  what  was  due  to  the  gods ;
and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  free  themfelves  from  thofe, 77  who,
lurking  in  the  cities,  were  the  moll  likely  to  raife  tumults :
Many,  alfo,  under  fpecious  pretences,  were  fent  away  by  their
enemies  through  hatred.  So  that,  there  were  many 78  emi¬
grations,  and  the  nation  of  the  Pelafgi  was  fcattered  over  the
greateft  part  of  the  earth.

XXV.  They  were  fuperior  to  many  in  the  knowledge  of
military  difcipline,  which  they  had  acquired  by  79  pradtifing
it  in  the  midft  of  dangers,  while  they  lived  among  warlike

764  A7ro\ei7re<&<xi  twv  (pitJalav.  The  carfxvq  sit  ruv  Jtoi\oi%ovluv,  xcti  ovk
generality  of  the  tranQators  have  mif-  Qivlwv  Jefiolsr.

taken  the  fenfe  of  this  paffage  :  «7roA«-  784  En<x.vci?oi<r6i$.  Here  Sylburgius,

7T(&oit  r<vof  fignifies  to  forfake  any  one ,  Portus,  and  Stephens,  with  great  rea-
rather  than  to  be  forfaken  by  others,  fon,  read,  an  wxs  <**&<;.

Many  inftances  of  which  may  be  found  791  Ek  xiv^wuv  ztoihS-cu  Tots

in  Xenophon,  and  other  writers  of  the  jusAs las.  In  this,  our  author  has  imi-
beft  authority.  tated  Thucydides,  who,  in  fpeaking

77*  Ka<  sutnccrfXM  tx  r uv  <&«A «0ov7wv  of  the  experience,  which  the  Lacedae-
Jiholes.  Here  muft  be  fome  error  in  monians,  and  Athenians  had  acquired
the  text.  Sylburgius  thinks  it  ought  in  military  affairs,  before  they  entered
to  be  <h«A<*;£ovIwv.  This  will  certainly  upon  the  Peloponnefian  war,  fays,  pd a
help  the  defeft,  but  not  cure  it.  I  xivJwuv  tccs  ju sAslccy  v>Qi%y.woi d.
ftiould  chufe  to  read  it  thus :  K<#<  s-#<n-

4  B.  i.  c.  18.

I


VOL.  I.


nations ;


Book  I.


58  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

nations;  and,  by  their  cohabitation  with  the  Tyrrhenians^
became,  intirely,  matters  of  fea  affairs :  And,  Necefiity,  alone
fufffcient  to  give  refolution  to  thofe  in  want,  was  their  leader,
and  director  in  every  dangerous  enterprife.  So  that,  whither
foever  they  went,  they  conquered  with  eafe :  And  the  fame
people,  from  the  name  of  the  country,  out  of  which  they
had  been  driven,  and,  alfo,  in  memory  of  their  ancient  ex¬
traction,  were  called  by  the  reft  of  the  world,  both  Tyrrhe¬
nians,  and  Pelafgi ;  which  I  have  mentioned  for  this  reafon,
that,  when  the  poets,  and  hiftorians  call  them  Tyrrhenians,
and  Pelafgi,  none  may  wonder  how  the  fame  people  fhould
have  both  thefe  names.  For  80  Thucydides  fpeaks  of  them  as
living  in  that  part  of  Thracia  called  ACte,  and  of  the  cities
there  as  inhabited  by  men,  who  Ipoke  two  languages :  He,
then,  makes  mention  of  the  Pelafgian  nation  in  the  following
manner :  “  There  are  fome  Chalcidians,  but  the  greateft
“  part  are  Pelafgi,  the  fame  nation  with  the  Tyrrhenians,
“  who,  once,  inhabited  Lemnos,  and  Athens.”  And  Sopho¬
cles  makes  the  chorus,  in  his  drama  of  81  Inachus,  Ipeak  the
following  anapaeftic  verfes,  “  Father  Inachus,  fon  of  the

80  •  ©axv<W>j g.  This  paffage  of  Thu-  But,  as  there  are  Tome  fmall  differences
cydides  relates  to  the  expedition  of  between  the  words,  as  he  quotes  them,
Brandas  againft  the  coaft  of  Thrace,  and  thofe  in  the  prefent  editions  of
called  Afte :  The  firft  part  of  which  Thucydides,  I  fhall  lay  the  paffage
paffage  our  author  does  not  tranfcribe,  before  the  reader.  e  K cu  n  ko u  XxAkiJi-
but  only  gives  the  fenfe  of  fo  much  kov  tvi  to  it  sta«s-cv,  UtAa><ryiKov

of  it,  as  he  thought  neceffary  to  his  t«v  kou  A^yov  svofg  kou  A Qqvus  Tv^o-^yuv
fubjedt  :  The  latter  part  of  it  he  has  ono j<rav7«v.

tranfcribed  in  the  manner,  I  fuppofe,  8l>  Ek  This  tragedy  of  So-

he  read  it  in  his  copy  of  that  author,  phocles  is  loft.

?  Thucyd.  B.  iv.  c.  109.


“  fountains


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN A SSENS IS.  59

u  fountains  of  old  Ocean,  who  art > held  in  great  venera-
<c  tion  in  the  flreets  of  Argos,  and  the  hills  of  Juno,  and
“  among  the  Tyrrhene  Pelafgi.”  The  name  of  Tyrrhenia
was  then  known  throughout  Greece.  And  all  the  weftern
part  of  Italy  was  called  even  by  that  name ;  the  feveral  na¬
tions,  of  which  it  was  compofed,  having  loft  their  refpecftive
appellations :  The  fame  thing  happened  to  many  parts  of
Greece ;  and,  particularly,  to  that  part  of  it,  which  is  now
called  Peloponnefus :  For  the  whole  peninfula,  in  which  are
comprifed  Arcadia,  and  Ionia,  and  many  other  nations,  was
called  Achaia,  from  the  Achaians,  one  of  the  nations,  that
inhabited  it.

XXVI.  However,  the  time,  when  the  calamities  of  the
Pelafgi  began,  was  about  the  fecond  generation  before  the
Trojan  war:  But  this  people  fubfifted,  even,  after  that  war,
till  their  nation  was  reduced  to  a  very  inconftderable  num¬
ber.  For,  befides  Croton,  a  town  of  fome  note  in  Umbria,
and  fome  others  founded  by  the  Aborigines,  all  the  reft  of
the  Pelafgian  cities  were  deftroyed.  But  Croton  preferved
its  ancient  form  a  great  while;  neither  is  it  long,  fince  it
changed  both  its  name,  and  inhabitants,  and  is,  now,  a
Roman  colony,  called  Corthonia.  After  the  Pelafgi  left  the
country,  their  cities  were  feized  by  many  people,  as  each
happened  to  live  near  them  ;  but,  chiefly,  by  the  Tyrrhe¬
nians,  who  made  themfelves  mafters  of  the  greateft  part,
and  the  beft,  of  them.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  Tyr¬
rhenians  are  natives  of  Italy ;  others,  that  they  are  foreigners :
Thofe,  who  maintain  the  firft,  fay  this  name  was  given  them

I  2  from


6o


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

from  the  towers,  which  they  built  before  any  of  the  inhabit¬
ants  of  this  country :  For  covered  buildings,  when  fortified,
are  called  by  the  Tyrrhenians,  as  well  as  by  the  Greeks,

82  T vfcrsiCy  Towers,.  From  this  incident,  they  will  have  it
that  they  received  their  name,  in  like  manner  as  the  Mofy-
noeci  in  Afia:  For  thefe,  alfo,  live  in  a  kind  of  wooden
towers,  raifed  on  high  piles,  which  towers  they  call

83  Motrowsc*

XXVII.  But  thofe,  who,  fabuloufly,  affirm  them  to  be
foreigners  eftablifhed  there,  fay,  that  Tyrrhenus,  who  was
the  leader  of  the  colony,  gave  his  name  to  the  nation  :  That
he  was  a  native  of  Lydia,  and  had,  formerly,  removed  thither
from  the  country,  anciently,  called  Moeonia ;  and  that  he
was  the  fifth  from  Jupiter:  They  fay,  further,  that  Manes
was  thefon  of  Jupiter,  and  Terra,  and  the  firft  king  of  that
country ;  and  that  his  fon  by  Callirhoe,  the  daughter  of
Oceanus,  was  Cotys,  who,  by  Alie,  the  daughter  of  earth-
born  Tullus,  had  two  fons,  Afies,  and  Atys  ;  from  the  laft
of  whom,  by  Callithea,  the  daughter  of  Choraeus,  came
Lydus,  and  Tyrrhenus;  and  that  Lydus,  remaining  there,
inherited  his  father’s  kingdom,  from  whom  the  country  was
called  Lydia :  But  Tyrrhenus,  who  was  the  leader  of  the
colony,  conquered  great  part  of  Italy,  and  gave  the  name


Sz'  Tu£<r«f.  Tvgrtfy  wvgyost  €7r<xA£»f,

■sr^ofMn.xuv'  Hefychius.  This  word  is
ufed  more  than  once,  in  this  fenfe,
by  Xenophon,  in  his  expedition  of
Cyrus.


8j*  MoarvvoiHXS’  Moircrvv,  or  Mocvv.  Ilvg-
yos.  Hefychius.  f  Xenophon  gives  a
very  extraordinary  account  of  thefe
people.


fin,  Ki>g.  AvuG.  B.  v.  p.  393.  Edit,  of  Hatching


of


s


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  ASSENS IS.  61


of  Tyrrhenians  to  his  followers.  However,  84  Herodotus
fays  that  Tyrrhenus  was  the  fon  of  Atys,  who  was  the  fon
of  Manes,  and  that  the  Maeonians  did  not  come,  voluntarily,
into  Italy :  For  he  fays  that,  in  the  reign  of  Atys,  there  was
a  dearth  in  the  country  of  the  Maeonians :  And  that  the
inhabitants,  from  a  fondnefs  for  their  native  country,  con¬
trived  a  great  many  methods  to  rehft  this  calamity :  One
day,  they  allowed  themfelves  but  a  moderate  fuftenance;
the  next,  they  faded :  But,  the  mifchief  continuing,  they
divided  the  people  into  two  parts,  who  were  to  draw  lots
which  fhould  go  out  of  the  country,  and  which  fhould  day
in  it :  That  one  of  the  fons  of  Atys  daid,  and  the  other
went  forth  ;  and  that  the  85  happier  lot  fell  to  that  part  of


®4*  HgcSulu  Si  See  his  firft

book;  chapter  the  94th.

8s*  Aa.%xcti;  Si  rtj?  oifAtt  A vSco  fxoi^ag
ryv  cifAetvco  ix%agy;<roii.  Cafaubon

has,  with  his  ufual  fagacity,  both  dis¬
covered,  and  reformed  the  errors  of
this  pafiage  :  He  has,  very  juftly,  faid
that  tuxagtifcH  can,  by  no  means,  be
applied  to  the  people  under  Lydus  :
He  advifes,  therefore,  to  read  the
pafiage  thus :  r^g  dux  A vSu>

(AQigag  T>jy  [Mv  ivou'

Si  T>jv  £t tgotv,  etc.  or  thus.
Si  r rtf  d[j.ct  AvSco  fxot^xg  ryv  y.tv

T%  y.ivetv  Tl>%vv,  iX%U)gyjiroil  Si  TYJV  iTi^XV.

Either  of  thefe  readings  makes  the
fentence  agreeable  to  the  reft  of  this
hiftory.  I  fhali,  therefore  adhere  to
the  firft  part  of  Cafaubon’s  alteration  •,
and  fupply  the  fecond  from  the  words
of  Herodotus,  many  of  which  it  is


plain  our  author  has  made  ufe  of  in
this  relation,  s  Herodotus  fays',  hx%ov-
rxg  Si  uvluv  mg  iTigxg  i%nvxi  ex.  tjjj  x^^gl
Upon  this  foundation,  I  would  read
the  whole  fentence  thus-:  Kaxxvng  Ss
Tyg  dlAX  AvSlO  [XOljlOiS  T Y}V  Uiv  0i[AH va
petvoLi’  t) c  Se  rv; g  t>;v  in°xv  s%nvxi

u.’KoKa'Xj&GM  TU)V  ^yjfxdluv  tx  y.igv}.  This
makes  the  fenfe  complete ;  and  the
reader  will  obferve  that  the  words  I
have  inferted,  are  thofe  of  Herodotus :
Befides,  by  reading  g*.  Si  r^g  %ufctr,
inftead  of  ix%a(>ti<rai,  there  is  little  vio¬
lence  done  to  the  text ;  and,  as  ntx*>-
twoti,  according  to  the  prefent  read¬
ing,  belongs  to  the  former  fentence,.
there  is  a  verb  wanting  in  the  latter  to
lead  to  the  confequence  of  «^roAa^«ir*v,
the  fenfe  of  which  will,  otherwife,  be
too  much  fufpended  :  And  this  verb
is  fupplied  by  t%nvxi}  the  very  word


s  In  Clio,  c.  94.


the


62  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

the  people,  which  was  under  Lydus,  to  remain  in  the
country  ;  and  the  other  left  it,  after  they  had  received
that  fhare  of  their  fortunes,  which  fell  to  them ;  and  arrived
on  the  weftern  parts  of  Italy,  which  were  inhabited  by  the
Umbri,  where  they  remained,  and  built  thofe  cities,  that
were  in  being,  even,  in  his  time.

XXVIII.  I  am  fenfible  that  feveral  other  authors,  alfo,

have  given  this  account  of  the  Tyrrhenians;  fome,  in  the

fame  terms ;  others,  changing  both  the  name  of  the  leader

of  the  colony,  and  the  time  of  their  migration.  For  fome

have  faid  that  Tyrrhenus  was  the  fon  of  Hercules,  by

Omphale,  the  Lydian ;  and  that  he,  coming  into  Italy,  dif-

poffeffed  the  Pelafgi  of  their  cities,  though  not  of  all,  but

of  thofe  only,  that  lay  on  the  north  lide  of  the  Tiber.

Others  fay  that  Tyrrhenus  was  the  fon  of  Telephus ;  and  that,

after  the  taking  of  Troy,  he  came  into  Italy.  But 86  Xanthus

the  Lydian,  who  was  as  much  acquainted  with  ancient  hiftory

as  any  man  ;  and  whofe  teftimony  87  may  be  as  much  relied

made  ufe  of  by  Herodotus,  which  Lydia,  which  was  taken  by  the  Ionians,
anfwers  the  other  word,  ufed  imme-  and  Athenians  in  his  time,  as  Suidas
diately  before,  both  by  Herodotus,  fays  from  Hefychius.  This  happened
and  our  author,  that  is  in  tt-oAu  rug  in  the  3d  year  of  the  70th  olympiad,
I  find  the  former  makes  the  and  the  4214th  of  the  Julian  period  h.
king,  who  was  Atys,  place  himlelf  at  By  this  it  appears  that  Xanthus  writ
the  head  of  that  part  of  the  people,  before  Herodotus,
which  was  to  ftay  at  home,  and  his  8?*  Ttjg k  zrctlfixxai  faGotiultjg  av  x&voe
fon  Tyrrhenus,  or  Tyrfenus,  as  he  calls  vopi  <&&g.  Notone  of  the

him,  at  the  head  of  That,  which  was  tranfiators  has  taken  the  leaft  notice  of
to  leave  their  country.  the  potential  word  ctv  in  rendering  this

86,  0  AuJof.  This  Lydian  paflage  ;  a  word  peculiar  to  the  Greek

hiftorian  was  the  fon  of  Candaules,  language,  and,  very  elegantly,  made
and  a  citizen  of  Sardes,  the  capital  of  ufe  of  by  our  author  upon  thisoccafion.

b  Uiher,  p.  93.


on


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  63

on  in  That  of  his  own  country,  does  not,  in  any  part  of  his
hiftory,  either  name  Tyrrhenus,  as  a  prince  of  the  Lydians,
or  know  any  thing  of  the  arrival  of  a  colony  of  Maeonians
in  Italy ;  neither  does  he  make  the  leaf!  mention  of  Tyr-
rhenia,  as  a  Lydian  colony,  though  he  takes  notice  of
feveral  things  of  lefs  importance  :  But  fays  that  Lydus,
and  Torebus  were  the  fons  of  Atys ;  that  they,  having
divided  the  kingdom  they  had  inherited  from  their  father,
remained  both  in  Aha,  from  whom,  he  fays,  the  nations,
over  which  they  reigned,  received  their  names;  his  words
are  thefe ;  u  From  Lydus,  the  Lydians,  and,  from  Tore-
“  bus,  the  Torebi  are  fo  called.  There  is  a  little  dif-
“  ference  in  their  language,  and  they  ftill  borrow  many
<c  words  from  one  another,  like  the  lonians,  and  Dorians.55
Hellanicus,  the  Lefbian,  fays,  that  the  Tyrrhenians,  who
were,  before,  called  Pelafgi,  received  the  name  they  are  now
known  by  after  they  had  fettled  in  Italy.  Thefe  are  his
words,  in  his  Phoronis;  “  Phraftor  was  the  fon  of  Pelafgus,
u  their  king,  by  Menippe  the  daughter  of  Peneus ;  his  fon
u  was  Amyntor  ;  Amyntor’s  Teutamides;  whofe  fon  was
“  Nanas:  In  whofe  reign,  the  Pelafgi  were  driven  out  of
c<  their  country  by  the  Greeks ;  and,  leaving  their  fhips  in  the
u  river  Spines  in  the  Ionian  gulph,  took  Croton,  an  inland
iC  town  ;  from  whence,  advancing,  they  88  peopled  the

88-  t»jv  vw  kciM [A? 'jw  Tv^tjviav  txh<rxv.  plied  himfelf,  folely,  to  tr^nflate  the
Ils  batirent  la  Ville ,  qiCon  nomme  Tyr-  Latin  of  Portus,  which  he  has  mif-
rhenie ,  fays  le  Jay  :  I  will  not  fay  that  underftood. :  Earn ,  qiiae  nunc  Tyrrhenia
he  has  miftaken  the  fenfe  of  the  word  vocatur ,  condiderunt ,  does  not  iignify
tlhco tv  in  this  place,  becaufe  I  dare  fay  Us  batirent  la  ville,  qucn  nomme  <Tyr-
he  never  confidered  it  at  all  j  but  ap-  rhenie ,  but,  ils  peuplercnt  le  lays,  qu’cn

“  country.


64  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


<£  country,  now  called,  Tyrrhenian’  But  the  account  Myr-
filus  gives  is  the  reverfe  of  That  given  by  ITelianicus :  T  he
Tyrrhenians,  fays  he,  after  they  had  left  their  own  country,
were,  from  their  wandering,  called  I IsXagyoi,  that  is,  Storks ,
as  refembling,  in  that  refpedt,  the  birds,  called  by  that  name,
that  come  over  in  flocks  both  into  Greece,  and  the  country  of
the  Barbarians ;  and  he  adds,  that  thefe  people  built  the  wall
round  the  citadel  of  Athens,  which  is  called  the  89Pelargian  wall.

XXIX.  But  I  look  upon  it  that  all  thofe,  who  take  the
Tyrrhenians,  and  the  Pelafgi  to  be  one,  and  the  fame  nation,
are  under  a  miftake.  It  is  no  wonder  they  were,  fometimes,
called  by  one  another’s  names;  fince  the  fame  thing  has
happened  to  other  nations  alfo,  both  Greeks,  and  Barbarians ;
as  to  the  Trojans,  and  Phrygians,  who  live  near  to  one
another :  Both  which  nations  many  have  thought  to  have
been  but  one,  differing  in  name  only,  not  in  reality.  And,
of  all  the  nations,  that  have  been  confounded  by  being  called
by  the  fame  names,  thofe,  that  inhabit  Italy,  have  not  been


nomme  ‘Tyrrhenie.  In  this  fenfe,  *  Virgil
has  ufed  the  word  condo ,

T’antae  molis  erat  Romanam  condere
gentem.

Had  le  Jay  been  a  little  more  {killed
in  geography,  he  would  have  known
that  there  never  was  a  city  called  Tyr-
rhenia ;  but,  I  imagine,  he  had  a  mind
to  build  one.  The  other  French  tranf-
lator  has  rendered  it  very  well.

89‘  Ta  IlsAa^jjtov  xxAxfAfvov.  This
muft  be  the  true  reading,  as  Cafaubon
has,  very  well,  oblerved,  who  quotes

'  Virgil,  Aen.  i.  f.  33.


the  Etymologicon  magnum  to  fupport
it.  To  which  I  lhall  add  the  autho¬
rity  of  Ariftophanes,  who  makes  him-
fe If  very  merry  with  his  countrymen
for  reprefenting  Pallas  all  armed,  and
Clifthenes  with  a  fhuttle,

E7 r.  Kai  av  ysvoiT  uv  tvlaxl 0$

Ottu  9(o;  yvvv)  ytyon/x,  cravoTrAian
Er>jx*  e^ucrx,  KhetcrOevrii  xigxtSct  ;

IIEI.  T*{^ay  xa.9s£ei  wAewj  to  Th>\»^yixoiik  }

Upon  which,  the  Greek  fcholiaft,  very
juftly,  obferves  on  Afi>jvjj<ri  to

Tei%QS  tV  T*l  AX£07J-0A«,

k  Ev  jr.  830.

the


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  RN  A  S  SE  N  S I S.  65

the  leaft  fo.  For  there  was  a  time,  when  the  Latines,  the
Umbri,  the  Aufones,  and  many  others,  were  all  called  Tyr¬
rhenians  by  the  Greeks;  the  remotenefs  of  the  countries,
inhabited  by  thefe  nations,  making  the  exatff  diflin&ion  of
them  obfcure  to  thofe  9°,  who  live  at  a  diftance  :  And  many
hiftorians  have  taken  Rome  itfelf  for  a  Tyrrhenian  city.  So
that,  I  am  perfuaded  thefe  nations  changed  their  name,  when
they  changed  the  place  of  their  91  abode  ;  but  cannot  be¬
lieve  they  had  both  the  fame  origin,  for  this  reafon  chiefly,
among  many  others,  that  their  languages  are  different,  and
preferve  not  the  leaf!  refemblance  to  one  another.  <£  For,
“  neither  do  the 92  Crotoniatae,  lays  Herodotus,  nor  the


9°‘  Ten  Tvqoao).  This  feems  very  like
a  tautology,  which  it  was  very  eafy  to
remove,  by  leaving  out  t oig  ■&%o<ru,  as
it  is  in  the  Vatican  manufcript,  or
vgoffu),  as  it  ftands  in  all  the  editions.
But  I  have  not  allowed  myfelf  this
liberty  in  tranflating  it,  though  I
find  the  other  tranflators  have  not  been
fo  fcrupulous.

9 1  ■  Eirtt  Y.oci  I  do  not  think

that  an  alteration  in  the  manner  of
living  of  a  people  is  fufficient  to  give
room  for  an  alteration  in  their  name  :
But  a  removal  from  one  country  to
another  may  have  this  Effect.  And
this  is  the  fenfe  I  have  given  to  /3 iog  in
this  place:  In  which  I  am  juftified
by  the  authority  of  the  Etymologicum
magnum ,  which  gives  this  fignification
to  the  word  among  many  others  :

Y.011  ev  m  rig  SicCl^et.

9“  Ovl i  oil oci.  It  appears,  by

comparing  this  quotation  with  the


words  of  Herodotus,  that  our  author
contented  himfelf  with  expreffing  his
fenfe  without  confining  himfelf  to  his
words.  It  is,  therefore,  no  wonder
that  he  fhould  call  thefe  people  Kfo-
t wviofiat,  in  vulgar  Greek,  inftead  of
the  Ionic  K^s -emtfleti  in  1  Herodotus.
It  is  plain  that  both  Dionyfius,  and
Herodotus  mean  the  inhabitants  of
Croton  in  It&ly.  So  that,  I  fee  no
reafon  to  correct  Herodotus  from  our
author,  notwithllanding  the  authority
of  Glareanus,  and  Cafaubon,  and  even
of  ra  Cluver,  who  all  contend  for  that
correction.  The  reafon  given  by  the
laft  for  it,  is,  that  Herodotus  fpeaks  of
a  town  in  Thrace  called  in  his

feventh  and  eighth  books.  But  this
is  a  miftake  :  For,  in  the  feventh,
Herodotus  calls  this  town  K
or,  as  the  n  Medicean  manufcript  has
it,  •,  and,  in  the  eighth,  he


fpeaks  of  y> ?  K$igf*v<x*  •,  but,  in  neither,


1  In  Clio,  c.  57.


VOL.  I.


m  Ital.  Antiq.  B,  ii.  p.  575.

K


» C.  1 27.


u


Pla


ciani.


ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  I.

“  Placiani,  who  fpeak  the  fame  language,  ufe  the  fame  with
u  any  of  their  neighbours :  By  which,  it  appears  that  they
“  preferve  the  fame  language  they  brought  with  them  into
“  thofe  countries.”  However,  it  is 93  furprifing  that,  not-
withftanding  the  Crotoniatae  fpoke  the  fame  language  with
the  Placiani,  who  lived  near  the  Hellefpont,  fince  both  were,
originally,  Pelafgi,  the  language  of  the  former  fhould  be
quite  different  from  That  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  their  neareft
neighbours :  Becaufe,  if  confanguinity  is  to  be  looked  upon
as  the  caufe,  why  two  nations  fpeak  the  fame  language,  the
contrary  muft  occafion  their  fpeaking  a  different  one:  For
there  is  no  room  to  think  that  both  thefe  caufes  can  produce
the  fame  effedt.  It  may,  indeed,  be,  reafonably,  fuppofed,
that  men  of  the  fame  nation,  living  at  a  diftance  from  one


does  he  call  this  town  in  Thrace
0  Kf vjs-wv,  which  is  the  name,  he  gives
to  this  city  in  Italy  a  few  lines  before
this  pafiage  quoted  by  our  author.

9*’  Kc&tlci  0  IZV/UttO-fttV  OiV  T  etc.

Both  the  French  tranflators  have  ftruck
upon  the  fame  rock  in  rendering  this
pafiage.  The  reader  will  obferve  that
our  author  fays  the  Placiani  lived  near
the  Hellefpont,  in  which  he  has  fol¬
lowed  p  Plerodotus.  This  circum-
ftance  thofe  two  tranflators  have  not
attended  to,  which  has  led  them  into
the  miftakes  they  have  committed.
But  I  fhall  myfelf  be  guilty  of  a  difin-
genuity,  lefs  pardonable  than  a  mif-
take,  if  I  cenfure  them  without  trans¬
cribing  their  words.  Thofe  of  M  *  *  *
are  as  follows  j  or  ne  feroit  il  pas  fur-

°  In  Clio,  c.  57.


prenant  que  les  Crotoniates  et  ceux  do
Placiene ,  qui  habitent  aupres  du  Pelo-
ponnefe ,  par  lament  la  mimelangue  comme
etant  les  uns  et  les  autre s  Pelafgues  d’o-
rigine ,  et  qu'au  contraire  Us  en  eujfent
une  toute  ddfferente  de  celle  des  Tyrrhe-
niens  leurs  voijins?  Here,  this  gentle¬
man,  fir  ft,  makes  the  Placiani  live
near  the  Peloponnefe,  when  our  au¬
thor  fays  they  lived  near  the  Hellef¬
pont  ;  and  then,  he  makes  the  Tyr¬
rhenians  to  be  neighbours  to  the  Cro¬
toniatae,  and  the  Placiani.  Le  Jay,
in  order  to  render  his  miftake  ftill
more  confpicuous,  after  mentioning
the  Crotoniatae,  and  the  Placiani,  calls
the  Tyrrhenians  voifins  des  uns  et  des
autres.

v  In  Clio,  c.  57.

anotlier,


Book L  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  67

another,  may,  by  converfation  with  their  neighbours,  no
longer,  preferve  the  fame  dialect ;  but,  it  cannot  be  imagined
that  people  of  the  fame  nation,  living  in  the  fame  country,
fhould  not,  in  the  lead,  agree  with  one  another  in  their
language.

XXX.  For  this  reafon,  therefore,  I  am  perfuaded  that  the
Tyrrhenians,  and  the  Pelafgi  are  a  different  people.  However,
I  do  not  think  the  Tyrrhenians  were  a  colony  of  the  Lydians :
For  they  do  not  ufe  the  fame  language  with  the  latter;
neither  can  it  be  alledged  that,  though  they  agree,  no  longer,
in  that  refped:,  they,  ftill,  retain  fome  other  indications  of
their  mother  country.  For,  they  neither  worfhip  the  fame
gods  with  the  Lydians,  nor  make  ufe  of  the  fame  laws,  or
inftitutions ;  but,  in  thele,  they  differ  more  from  the  Ly¬
dians,  than  from  the  Pelafgi :  And  thofe  feem  to  come
neareft  to  the  truth,  who  do  not  look  upon  them  as  a
foreign  people,  but  as  natives  of  the  country ;  fince  they  are
found  to  be  a  very  ancient  nation,  and  to  agree  with  no
other,  either  in  their  language,  or  in  their  manner  of  living :
And  there  is  no  reafon  why  the  Greeks  may  not  be  fuppofed
to  have  called  them  by  this  name,  both  from  their  living  in
towers,  and  from  the  name  of  one  of  their  kings.  The
Romans  give  them  different  appellations :  For,  from  the
country,  they,  once,  inhabited,  named  Etrutria,  they  call
them  Etrufci ;  and,  from  their  knowledge  in  the  ceremo¬
nies  relating  to  divine  worfhip,  in  which  they  excel  all
others,  they  call  them,  at  this  time,  though  lefs  accurately,

K  2  Tufci;


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


94  Tufci ;  but,  formerly,  with  the  fame  accuracy,  as  the
Greeks,  they  called  them  Thyfcoi :  However,  they  call
themfelves  from  the  name  of  one  of  their  leaders,  Razenua.
But,  I  fhall  fhew,  in  another  place,  what  cities  the  Tyr¬
rhenians  inhabited  ;  what  forms  of  government  they  eftab-
lifhed ;  how  great  95  power  the  whole  nation  acquired  ;
what  actions,  worthy  of  memory,  they  performed  ;  and
what  fortune  attended  them.  The  Pelafgi,  therefore,  who
were  not  deftroyed,  or  difperfed  in  colonies,  there  being  but
few  left  out  of  a  great  many,  remained  in  thefe  parts,  as
fellow-citizens  to  the  Aborigines ;  where,  in  procefs  of  time,
their  pofterity,  together  with  others,  built  the  city  of  Rome.
And  this  is  the  account  hiftory  gives  of  the  Pelafgi.

XXXI.  Soon  after,  another  colony  of  Greeks  landed  on
this  part  of  Italy  from  96  Pallantium,  a  town  of  Arcadia,


94"  AtTO  Ttjf  (y 7T«£/0d?  TWV  ZtftQl  T X

ci Gxcyulx  \eil xtyicov.  They  called  them
Thufci  a,7ro  tx  $veiv.  It  is  to  be  ob-
ferved  that  the  word  Thufci  is  oftener
found  in  Roman  infcriptions  without
the  afper,  than  with  it.

9S*  Awxy.iv  T  i  OTTOCW  0!  cvy7rxvlts.

It  is  vifible  that  fomething  is  wanting
to  complete  the  fentence  :  For  neither
AeJigavIo  in  the  vulgar  editions,  nor
tiejrfxi'uvlo,  in  the  Vatican  manufcript,
which  is  much  better,  can  be  applied
to  this.  I  would,  therefore  read  wlv-
cxvlc ,  which  the  learned  reader  will,  I
believe,  think  not  improper  in  this
place.  I  am  furprifed  that  the  com¬
mentators,  who,  often,  labour  points
of  lefs  confequence,  have  taken  no
notice  of  this.

1 1n  Arcad


915,  Etc  TIxWxvlix  zroAiuf
'iPaufanias  fays  that  Antoninus  Pius
erected  this  village  into  a  city  in  me**
mory  of  the  Arcadians,  who  came
from  thence,  and  fettled  on  the  fpot,
where  the  city  of  Rome  was,  after¬
wards,  built  i  and  that  he  granted  to
the  citizens  of  Pallantium  their  liber¬
ties,  and  exempted  them  from  paying
tribute.  He,  further,  fays  that  the
town,  built  by  Evander  and  his  people
near  the  Tiber,  afterwards,  changed
its  name  by  the  lols  of  the  two  letters
A.  and  v.  Which,  by  the  way,  fhews
the  correftnefs  of  the  Vatican  manu¬
fcript  in  a  point,  in  which  all  the  edi¬
tions  are  faulty.  M  *  *  *  fays  that  all
the  palaces  of  princes  have  taken  their
name  from  this  town,  for  which  he
c.  43.


about


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  SS  ENSI  S.  69

about  threefcore  years  before  the  Trojan  war,  as  the  Romans
themfelves  fay.  This  colony  had  for  its  leader  Evander,
faid  to  have  been  the  fon  of  Mercury,  and  of  fome  Arcadian
nymph,  whom  the  Greeks  call  Themis,  and  fay  fhe  was
infpired  :  But  the  writers  of  the  Roman  antiquities,  call  her,
in  the  language  of  their  country,  97  Carmenta,  which  implies
the  fame  as  deaTriuftoC,  in  Greek,  a  Prophetefs  in  verfe .  For
the  Romans  call  w Sotc>  verfes ,  Carmina.  However,  they  agree
that  this  woman,  poffefled  by  divine  infpiration,  prophehed,
in  verfe,  to  the  people  of  things  to  come.  This  colony  was
not  fent  out  by  the  common  confent  of  the  nation  ;  but,  a
fedition  having  arifen  among  the  people,  the  fadtion,  which
was  defeated,  left  the  country  of  their  own  accord.  Faunus,
a  defcendant  of  Mars,  happened,  at  that  time,  to  have
98  inherited  the  kingdom  of  the  Aborigines,  a  man,  as  it  is


quotes  Pliny,  B.  iv.  c.  6.  I  have  be¬
fore  me  Haiduin’s  r  Pliny,  and  all  I
can  find  in  that  place  are  thefe  words,
Palantium ,  unde  Palatium  Romae.

97’  Kag/uevlciv  ovo/j.cc£%<nv.  It  appears
by  this,  and  many  other  paffages  in
our  author,  that  he,  and  Virgil  de¬
rived  their  accounts  from  the  fame
authorities.  The  latter  makes  Aeneas
go  to  Evander  to  implore  his  affiflance
againfl  the  Rutuli.  After  Evander
had  promifed  to  affifl  him,  and  given
him  an  account  of  the  ancient  inha¬
bitants  of  the  country,  he  fays s,

Jllepulfumpatria ,  pelagique  extrema  fequentem
Fortuna  ctnnipotens ,  et  ineluSiabile  fatum
His  pofuere  locis  :  matrifque  egere  trernenda
Ca  r  mentis  nymphae  mo  nit  a, ct  ileus  audlor  Apollo.


I  cannot  omit  taking  notice  of  the
truly  poetical  drefs  Virgil  has  given  to
a  plain  hiftorical  fa£t,  viz.  that  Evan¬
der,  and  his  Arcadians  were  fettled  in
the  very  fpot,  where  Rome,  afterwards,
flood,

pajjimque  armenta  videbant
Roman oque  foro ,  et  lautis  mugire  carinis

581  Eru^am  Si  70k  mv  (iotciKe-iotv  -rm
A Goptyivuv  sra^wAj^w?  o  $>xv\os.  M  *  *  *
is  the  only  one  of  all  the  tranflators,
who  has  not  exprelfed  the  fenfe  of  the
word  Thofe,  who  are  well

acquainted  with  the  Greek  language,
know  there  is  a  great  difference  be¬
tween  A«|wS<av«v,  and  zs&oaX<Xfx.G>ot,ve-iv  %
the  firft  fignifies  to  receive  fimply,  and
the  other  to  receive  by  inheritance.  In

*  jr.  360,

faid.


rB.  iv.  c.  6.  *  Virgil,  Aen.  viii.  f.  333,


Book  I.


70  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

faid,  of  a&ivity,  as  well  as  prudence,  whom  the  Romans,
in  their  facrifices,  and  fongs,  honor,  as  one  of  the  gods  of
their  country.  This  man  received  the  Arcadians,  who
were  but  few  in  number,  with  great  friendship,  and  gave
them  as  much  of  his  own  lands  as  they  defined.  And  the
Arcadians,  as  Themis,  by  infpiration,  had  advifed  them,
chofe  a  hill,  not  far  from  the  Tiber,  which  is,  now,  near
the  middle  of  the  city  of  Rome  ;  and,  at  the  foot  of  this
hill,  built  a  fmall  village,  fufficient  for  the  complements
of  the  two  fhips,  in  which  they  came  from  Greece  :  This
village  was  ordained  by  fate  to  excel,  in  procefs  of  time,  all
other  cities,  whether  Greek,  or  Barbarian,  not  only  in  its
extent,  and  the  majefty  of  its  empire,  but,  in  every  other
inftance  of  profperity ;  and  to  be  celebrated,  above  them  all,
as  long  as  human  nature  fhall  fubfift.  This  village  they
called  Pallantium  from  their  mother  city  in  Arcadia  :  How¬
ever,  the  Romans  now  call  it  Palatium,  time  having  intro¬
duced  this  inaccuracy,  which  has  given  occafion  to  many
abfurd  etymologies.

XXXII.  But  fome  have  written,  of  whom  Polybius  the
Megalopolitan  is  one,  that  it  was  called  fo,  from  a  young
man,  named  Palas,  who  died  there ;  that  he  was  the  fon  of
Hercules  by  Dyna,  the  daughter  of  Evander ;  and  that  his
grandfather  by  the  mother’s  fide,  having  raifed  a  monument
for  him  on  the  hill,  called  the  place  Palantium  from  this

this  laft  fenfe,  u  Plato  has  ufed  the  the  latter,  nol^ov,  KstpaAe,  eJv  kskIvo-xi
wordin  the  difcourfe  between  Socrates,  rx  srAeico  ar«££Aa££?,  >j  £7mV«.
and  Cephalus  j  where  the  former  afks

u  In  'ctcTuT.  B.  i.  p.  573.

youth.


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N S I S.  7*


youth.  But  I  have  never  feen  any  monument  of  Palas  at
Rome,  neither  could  I  hear  of  any  facrifices,  or  any  thing
of  that  nature,  performed  in  memory  of  him ;  although  this
family  is  not  unremembered,  or  without  thofe  honors,
with  which  divine  natures  are  worfhipped  by  men :  For  I
find  that  public  facrifices  are  performed,  yearly,  by  the
Romans,  to  Evander,  and  Carmenta,  in  the  fame  manner,
as  to  the  other  heroes,  and  genius’s ;  and  I  have  feen  two
altars  raifed;  one  to  Carmenta,  under  the  Capitoline  hill,
near  the  Carmental  gate ;  and  the  other  to  Evander,  at  the
foot  of  another  hill,  called  the  Aventine  hill,  not  far  from
the  gate  Trigemina.  But  I  know  of  nothing  of  this  kind
done  in  honor  of  Palas.  The  Arcadians,  therefore,  being
fettled  all  together  under  the  hill,  planned  houfes  according
to  the  manner  of  their  country,  and,  alfo,  built  temples.
And,  firft,  they  ere&ed  a  temple  to  the  Lycaean  Pan,  by  the
direction  of  Themis :  For,  among  the  Arcadians,  99  Pan  is


99-  yctg  9-fwv  T s  xai

nputUlot  0  n*v.  w  The  author  of  the
hiftory  of  Heaven  derives  the  name  of
this  god,  who  was  worfhiped  by  the
Egyptians  at  x  Mendes,  from  an  He¬
brew  word  D’JD  Panim,  fignifying
majks,  which  the  perfons,  dreffed  like
Fauns,  ufed  to  hang  upon  trees  alter
the  procefiions  performed  in  honor
of  Bacchus.  This  etymology  depends
upon  a  fuppofed  affinity  between  the
Egyptian  and  Hebrew  languages,
which,  I  dare  fay,  is,  intirely,  ground-
lefs  :  For,  I  think,  I  have  convinced
the  reader,  in  a  former  y  note,  that


thefe  two  nations  did  not  underhand
one  another.  But,  if  we  fhould  read
the  Hebrew  word,  which  that  author
has  brought  to  fupport  this  extraordi¬
nary  etymology,  as  my  truly  learned
friend,  Dr.  Gregory  Sharpe,  in  his
curious  diflertation  on  the  Hebrew
language,  fays  we  ought  to  read  it*
what  will  become  of  this  etymological
word,  Panim?  For  he  plainly  ffiews
that,  in  all  Hebrew  words,  where  no
vowel  occurs,  we  ought  to  fupply  it
by  an  s.  This  he,  very  judjcioufiy*
confirms  by  reading  K“lp  a  partridge y
quera ,  which  all  iportfmen  will  ac-


'v  B.  i.  c,  17.  x  Herod.  In  Euterp.  c.  46.  y  See  72d  Ann,


the


72  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

the  moft  ancient,  and  the  moft  honoured  of  all  the  gods :
Here  they  found  a  proper  place  for  this  purpofe,  which  the
Romans  call  the  Lupercal,  we  fhould  call  it 100  Avxouov,
Lycaeum :  But  the  ground  about  the  temple,  being,  now,
all  built  upon,  the  ancient  difpofition  of  the  place  is  not  eafy
to  be  gueffed  at.  However,  there  was,  as  it  is  faid,  formerly,
a  vaft  101  cavern  under  the  hill,  covered  with  a  grove  of
fpreading  oaks ;  deep  fountains  iffued  from  the  foot  of  the


knowledge  to  be  the  call  of  that  bird.
Inftead  of  Panim ,  therefore,  it  muft  be
read,  and  written  in  Roman  letters, Pe-
nim  t  and  this,  at  once,  deftroys  both
the  etymology,  and  the  fyftem,  that
is  built  upon  it.  But  there  is  another
misfortune,  that  attends  this  etymo¬
logy.  z  Herodotus  tells  us,  that  the
Egyptian  word  Mendes  fignified  both
the  god  Pan,  and  a  goat.  And,  for
this  reafon,  the  Egyptian  painters,
and,  after  them,  the  Greek  painters,
jreprefented  Pan  with  the  face  and  legs
of  a  goat.  By  this,  it  is  plain  that
Pan  was  not  the  Egyptian  name  of
this  god.  Is  it  not,  therefore,  more
natural  to  fuppofe  the  word  to  be  what
it,  plainly,  appears,  a  Greek  word,
and  to  denote  the  univerfe ;  and  that
the  Greeks,  and,  particularly,  the
Arcadians,  in  adoring  Pan,  paid  a
moft  reafonable  worfhip  to  the  great
Creator  and  Preserver  of  all
things  ?

I0°.  Avmiov.  It  is  very  plain  from
this  paftage,  as  well  as  from  many
others  in  the  beft  authors,  that  thofe,
who  derive  the  word  Lupercal  from


the  wolf,  that  fuckled  Romulus,  and
Remus,  are  under  a  great  miftake.
And,  yet,  I  have  met  with  this  deri¬
vation  in  fome  authors,  particularly,
in  Ovid,  who  fays  of  this  wolf a.

Ilia  loco  nomen  fecit  ;  locus  ipfe  Lupercis.

Magna  dati  nutrix  praemia  ladiis  habet.

It  is  true  he  gives  the  true  etymology
prefently  after  ;

Phiid  vet  at  Arcadia  dittos  a  Monte  Lupercos?

Faunus  in  Arcadia  templa  Lycaeus  habet .

There  is  no  doubt  but  the  Lycaean
hill  in  Arcadia,  on  which,  b  Paufanias
fays,  the  temple  of  Pan  flood,  gave
name  to  the  Lupercal ,  as,  I  dare  fay,
the  Lycaean  games,  there  celebrated,
gave  occafion  to  the  Roman  Lupercalia.

I01*  'L-rrVjK oiiov  vtso  to>  fxcyoc-,  etc.

The  reader  will  obferve  this  defcrip-
tion  to  be  a  little  poetical.  It  feems
to  be  introduced  by  our  author  to  in-
liven  his  narration.  Le  Jay,  and  the
two  Latin  tranOators  have  contented
themfelves  with  giving  the  naked  fenfe
of  it.  The  other  French  tranflator  has
rendered  it  with  greater  vivacity.


z  In  Euterp.  c.  46.  3  Faltor.  13.  ii.  it.  421.  b  In  Arcad.  c.  38.

rocks,


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  73
rocks,  and  the  valley  adjoining  to  the  precipices  was  (haded
with  thick  and  (lately  trees.  In  this  place,  they  railed  an
altar  to  this  god,  and  performed  a  facrifice  according  to  the
cuftom  of  their  country,  which  the  Romans  offer  up  to  this
day,  in  the  month  of  February,  after  the  winter  folftice,
without  altering  any  thing  in  the  rites  then  performed.  The
manner  of  this  facrifice  will  be  related  afterwards :  Upon
the  top  of  this  hill,  they  fet 102  apart  a  piece  of  ground,  which
they  dedicated  to  Vidtory,  and  inftituted  annual  facrifices  to
be  offered  up  to  her  alfo,  which  the  Romans  perform,  even,
in  my  time.

XXXIII.  The  Arcadians,  fabuloufly,  fay  this  goddefs
was  the  daughter  of  Palas,  the  fon  of  Lycaon ;  and  that  (he
received  thofe  honors  from  mankind,  which  (he  now  en¬
joys,  at  the  defire  of  Minerva,  with  whom  fhe  had  been  edu¬
cated  :  For  they  fay  that  Minerva,  was  delivered,  as  foon  as
(he  was  born,  to  Palas,  by  Jupiter,  and  that  fhe  was  brought
up  by  him,  till  (he  was  received  into  Heaven.  They  built,
alfo,  a  temple  to  Ceres,  to  whom,  by  the  miniftry  of  women,


,C2’  To  T>JJ  vm J?  Tf^USVO?  I

fliould  have  imagined  that  s|«aov7£?,
which  cannot  be  applied  to  a  temple ,
might  have  taught  Portus,  and  his
follower,  le  Jay,  that  t e(u2vo?,  in  this
place,  does  not  fignify  a  temple.  That
it  often  has  this  fignification  cannot  be
denied  :  But  the  genuine  fenfe  of  the
word,  and  the  only  one  it  can  bear
here,  is  a  place  fet  apart ,  and  confecrated
to  'victory.  Tjjusvo?  is  derived  from
which  fignification  it  preferves,


when  it  is  ufed  in  the  fenfe  our  au¬
thor  has  given  it  upon  this  occafion.
TgjU evof,  Taag  o  to7to?  t m  etg

r/pjv.  Hefychius.  And  this  is  the
fenfe,  and  the  only  fenfe  it  can  bear  in
the  following  paffage  of c  Homer,

o<P£>'  av  uyonv

A[AU?iQdv<r<niogrTEMENO'Z[AifoiK07rgyiaoyi;.

Sylburgius,and  the  other  French  trans¬
lator  have  rendered  it  very  properly.


c  Odyf.  g.  f.  299.

L


VOL.  I.


74  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book I.

they  performed  103  facrifices  without  wine,  according  to
the  cuftom  of  the  Greeks  ;  none  of  which  rites  have  been
changed  by  time  to  this  day.  Befides,  they  dedicated  a
temple  to  the  Hippian  Neptune,  and  inftituted  a  feftival,
called,  by  the  Arcadians,  Hippocratia,  and,  by  the  Romans,
104  Confualia,  during  which,  it  is  cuftomary  among  the  latter,
for  the  horfes,  and  mules  to  reft  from  work,  and  to  have
their  heads  crowned  with  flowers.  They,  alfo,  confecrated
many  other  temples,  altars,  and  images  of  the  gods ;  and
inftituted  purifications,  and  facrifices,  according  to  the  man¬
ner  of  their  own  country,  which,  at  this  time,  are  performed
without  any  alteration.  But  I  fhould  not  wonder  if  fome


103  •  Thefe  facrifices

were  performed  without  any  libations
of  wine,  from  whence  they  had  their
name.  There  is  a  paffage  in  the  Oe¬
dipus  Coloneus  of  Sophocles,  which,
with  the  obfervation  of  the  fcholiaft
upon  it,  will  ferve  to  clear  up  this
fentence.

x  ya,v  uv  zsro7e

tlgwlotiffiv  v[j,uv  oiv1(x.vg<r‘  oJoHtogw

Nrjtpuv  uoivoig  d.

Upon  which,  the  fcholiafl  fays,  he
calls  the  Eumenides  aonm,  on  n  (tttsv-
ch7«j  oivoc  avlctic,  <xAA’  vJug'  Jio  xai
vtlQxhicti  Hcthxvloti  di  <nro\>$  cci  uvluv.
After  this  explanation  of  vkQoiXioi  ftv-
cioci,  the  reader,  I  believe,  will  wonder
as  much  as  myfelf  to  find  this  paffage
tranflated  by  le  Jay,  des  facrifices  qui
lietoient  -point  fuivis  de  repas.

I04*  Ko>»<r««A(a  U7T0  Poopaiuv  A iyof^tvot.

Thefe  were,  afterwards,  called  e  Ludi


Circenfes ,  after  the  Circus  was  built  by
Tarquinius  Prifcus  :  They  are,  gene¬
rally,  fuppofed  to  have  been  inftituted
by  Romulus,  after  the  ravifhment  of
the  Sabine  women.  Though  it  is  very
poffible  that  he  might  only  revive
them.  Every  one,  who  has  read  the
hiftory  of  the  Roman  emperors,  muft
know  with  what  magnificence  thefe
games  were  celebrated,  and  what  heats
the  fondnefs  for  this,  or  that  fa&ion
(that  was  the  term)  created  among  the
fpedlators.  It  is  thought  that  the
chariot  races,  inftituted  by  Oenomaus
at  f  Elis,  gave  the  firft  rife  to  thefe
Circenfian  games.  But,  as  thofe  races
were,  alfo,  celebrated  in  b  Arcadia  fo
early  as  the  funeral  of  Azan,  the  fon
of  Areas,  the  fourth  king  of  that
country;  and,  as  Evander  was  an
Arcadian,  it  is  very  probable  that  he
inftituted  thefe  games  in  Italy  after
Thofe  of  his  own  country.


98.  e  Val.  Max.  B.  ii.  c.  4.  f  Paufaniasin  Eliac,  c.  10.  s  Id.  in  Arcad.  c.  4.

of


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S S  E NS  I S.  75

of  thefe  ceremonies,  from  their  great  antiquity,  were  neglect¬
ed,  and  forgotten  by  their  pofterity.  However,  thofe  that
are  ftill  praCtifed,  are  fufficient  proofs  of  the  cuftoms,  for¬
merly,  in  ufe  among  the  Arcadians,  of  which  we  fhall  fpeak
more  at  large  in  another  place.  The  Arcadians  are  faid,
alfo,  to  have  been  the  firft,  who  brought  into  Italy  the  ufe
of  ,0*  Greek  letters,  which  had,  lately,  appeared  among  them,
and  inftrumental  mufic,  performed  on  the  Lyre,  and  thofe
inftruments,  called  the  106  Trigon,  and  the  Lydian:  For

,os*  FtxfxixotlavEMyviKav %fvj<nv.  This  Arcadians  themfelves  under  Evander,
fubjedt  will  be  treated  at  large  in  the  according  to  him,  had  but  juft  learned
forty  firft  annotation  on  the  fourth  their  language,  before  they  came  into
book.  In  the  mean  time,  it  is  not  Italy.  I  wilh  I  knew  what  language
poffible  for  me  to  pafs  by  the  tranf-  thefe  Greeks  fpoke  before  they  learned
lation  le  Jay  has  given  us  of  this  Greek.  What  would  Dionyfius  have
palfage  :  His  brethren  of  Trevoux  faid,  could  it  have  been  poffible  for
will,  I  believe,  find  great  difficulty  to  him  to  know  that  his  judicious,  learn-
interpret  away  the  abfurdity  of  it :  ed,  and  elegant  hiftory  would,  one  day,
Thefe  are  his  words :  On  dit  qu’ils  ont  be,  thus  wretchedly,  mangled  by  a
apporte  les  premiers  en  ltalie  Fufage  de  man,  who  has  been  celebrated  with  all
la  langue  Grecque ,  qui  pour  eux  mefmes  the  power  of  partial  eloquence  for  his
ejloit  alors  toute  nouvelle.  Nothing  can  tranllation  of  it  ?
be  plainer  than  that  our  author  fays  1061  T giyma,  v,cu  AvSoi.  The  firft  of
the  Arcadians  brought  the  Greek  thefe  mufical  inftruments  is  mentioned
letters ,  and  not  the  Greek  language ,  by  Pollux :  So  that,  we  have  reafon
into  Italy.  Has  he  not  faid  often  to  look  upon  this  as  the  true  reading,
enough  that  the  Aborigines,  who  As  to  the  other,  Cafaubon  refers  us  to
were  Greeks,  came  into  Italy  many  the  following  verfe  of  Ion,  mentioned
generations  before  Evander,  and  that  by  h  Athenaeus,  and  fays  no  more  of
the  Pelafgi,  who  were,  alfo,  Greeks  of  it:

Peloponnefus  came  into  Italy  feme  Avic(  T£  }l!  ai*0f  .  p
generations  before  Evander  r  And,  yet,

if  we  believe  le  Jay,  none  of  thefe  I  am  the  more  inclined  to  think  a vfot
Greeks  brought  their  language  into  the  name  of  this  inftrument,  becaufe
Italy ;  becaufe,  I  fuppofe,  thefe  Greeks  1  Athenaeus  fays,  in  another  place,  that
could  not  fpeak  Greek  :  Nay,  the  the  Peloponnefians  were  taught  mufic

JIb.  c.  5;

L  2


k  B,  xiv.  c.  8.


the


7 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

the  fhepherd’s  pipe  was  the  only  mufical  invention  then
in  ufe.  They  are  faid,  alfo,  to  have  inftituted  laws ;  to
have  brought  mankind  over  from  the  favagenefs,  which,
then,  generally,  prevailed,  to  a  fenfe  of  humanity ;  and
likewife,  to  have  introduced  arts,  and  fciences,  and  many
other  things  conducive  to  the  public  good  :  And,  for  thefe
reafons,  they  were  very  much  cherifhed  by  thofe,  who  had
received  them.  This  was  the  fecond  Greek  nation,  that
came  into  Italy  after  the  Pelafgi ;  and,  living  in  common
with  the  Aborigines,  fixed  their  habitation  in  the  befit  part
of  Rome.

XXXIV.  A  few  years  after  the  Arcadians,  another  colony
of  Greeks  came  into  Italy,  under  the  command  of  Hercules,
then  returned  from  the  conqueft  of  Spain,  and  of  thofe  parts,
that  extend  to  the  weftern  ocean  ;  fome  of  his  followers,
defiring  Hercules  to.difmifs  them  from  his  fervice,  remained
in  this  country  ;  and  built  a  town  on  a  hill,  proper  for  that
purpofe,  diftant  from  Pallantium  about  three  ftadia.  This  is
now  called  the  Capitoline  hill,  but,  by  the  men  of  that  time,
the  Saturnian,  and,  in  Greek,  it  may  be  called  the  Cronian,
hill.  The  greateft  part  of  thofe,  who  ftaid  behind,  were
Peloponnefians,  Pheneatae,  and  Epeii  of  Elis,  who  were,
no  longer,  defirous  to  return  home,  becaufe  their  country

by  the  Phrygians,  and  Lydians,  who  new  inftruments,  and  new  taftes  ;
followed  Pelops  into  Peloponnefus.  which  made  Anaxilas  fay  that  mufic.
As  to  the  mufic  exprefTed  by  thefe  like  Africa,  was  every  year,  producing
inftruments,  it  would  be  a  vain  thing  fome  new  monfter  :

to  inquire  into  it  •,  becaufe  the  mufi-  A/Suy,  sr pog  ruv  Bsuv,

cians,  in  all  ages,  hav^  been  great  in-  T1  lietiVOV  Kcfl‘  iVl0iv'j0V

novators,  and  were,  ever,  inventing  s

had


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  ASSENSIS.  77
had  been  laid  wafte  in  the  war  againft  Hercules.  Some
Trojans,  like  wife,  were  mixed  with  thefe,  who,  in  the  reign  of
Laomcdon,  had  been  taken  prifoners  at  Ilium,  when  Hercules
made  himfelf  mafter  of  that  city.  And  I  am  of  opinion
that  all  the  reft  of  the  army,  alfo,  who  were  either  tired  out
with  labor,  or  weary  with  wandering,  having  obtained  a
difmiflion,  remained  here.  Some  think  this  hill  had,  an¬
ciently,  the  fame  name,  as  I  have  faid,  and  that  the  Epei
were  very  well  pleafed  with  the  fituation  in  memory  of  the
Cronian  hill  in  Elis,  which  ftands  in  the  Pifaean  country,
near  the  river  Alpheus ;  and  which  the  Elei  look  upon  as
confecrated  to  Saturn  ;  and,  aflembling  together  at  certain
times,  they  honour  it  with  facrifices,  and  other  marks  of
reverence.  ButI07Euxenus,  an  ancient  poet,  and  fome  other
Italian  mythologifts,  are  of  opinion  that  the  name  was
given  to  the  place  by  the  Pifaei  themfelves,  from  its  likenefs
to  their  Cronian  hill ;  that  the  Epeii,  together  with  Her¬
cules,  ereded  the  altar  to  Saturn,  which  remains,  to  this  day


i°7*  Ev^vo?.  I  think  Lapus  was  in
the  right  in  reading  E two?  inftead  of
Evgevof,  though  I  find  kVoffius  is  of
another  opinion.  However,  I  do  not
only  think  that  Ennius  was  the  ancient
poet  here  meant  by  our  author,  but
that  the  following  paffage  in  Ennius
is  the  very  place  he  alludes  to  ;

Saturnius  illi
Nomen  erat ,  de  quo  late  Saturnia  terra.

All  authors  agree  that  Saturnus  reign¬
ed  in  Italy  •,  and  that,  in  his  reign,
his  fubjeds  enjoyed  great  profperity.


which  gave  occafion  to  the  poets  to
call  that  aera  the  golden  age  :

Aureaque ,  ut  perhibent ,  illo  fub  regefuere
Saecula-,fic  placiddpopulos  in  pace  regebat^

fays 1  Virgil,  who,  every  where,  fhews
he  was,  perfectly,  verfed  in  the  anti¬
quities  of  his  country.  It  is  no  won¬
der,  therefore,  that  the  fubjeds  of
Saturnus,  in  gratitude  for  the  happi-
nefs  they  enjoyed  under  his  beneficent
government,  fhould  give  his  name  to
their  country.


kDehift.  Graec.  B.  iii.  p.  368.


1  Aeneid  B.  viii.  ji.  324.


at


78  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

at  the  foot  of  the  hill  near  the  afcent,  that  leads  from  the
Forum  to  the  Capitol ;  and  that  they  inftituted  the  facrifice,
which  the  Romans,  even  at  this  time,  perform  after  the
manner  of  the  Greeks.  But,  from  the  bell  conjectures  I
have  been  able  to  make,  I  find  that,  even  before  the  arrival
of  Hercules  in  Italy,  this  place  was  confecrated  to  Saturn,
and  called,  by  the  people  of  the  country,  the  Saturnian  hill ;
and  all  the  reft  of  the  coaft,  which  is,  now,  called  Italy,
was  confecrated  to  this  god,  and,  by  the  inhabitants,  called
Saturnia,  as  may  be  feen  in  the  Sibylline  books,  and  other
oracles  delivered  by  the  gods :  And,  in  many  parts  of  the
country,  there  are  temples  dedicated  to  this  god,  and  many
cities  bear  the  fame  name,  by  which  the  whole  coaft  was
known  at  that  time  :  And  feveral  places  are  called  by  the
name  of  that  god,  particularly  rocks,  and  eminences.

XXXV.  But,  in  procefs  of  time,  it  was  called  Italy,  from
Italus,  103  a  man  of  great  power  ;  who,  according  to  Antio-
chus,  the  Syracufian,  being  both  a  wife  and  good  prince,
and,  having  prevailed  on  fome  of  his  neighbours  by  his  elo¬
quence,  and  fubdued  the  reft  by  force,  he  made  himfelf

I08,  E7t’  ctvfyot  Jvvctl*.  Both  the  Latin  writes  ti u  for  avo.  They  have,  alfo,
tranflators  have  rendered  stti  in  this  milled  M  *  *  *,  who,  in  his  marginal
place,  as  if  it  fignihed  in  the  time ,  or  note,  fays,  ou  fous  le  regne  (Tun  ■prince .
under  the  reign,  as  im  in  The  Latin  tranflators  might  have  con-

Alexander  s  reign  *,  and,  to  exprefs  this  fidered  how  m  Virgil  has  exprefled
lenfe  of  the  prepofition,  they  have  both  himfelf  in  fpeaking  of  the  fame  thing :
faid,  fub  viro  praepotente.  But  they

ought  to  have  confidered  that  Diony-  nunc fama  minor es

lius  often  imitates  Herodotus  in  the  Italiamdixijfe,  duels  de  nomine,  gentem.
ufe  of  this  word,  who  almoft  always


*  Aeneid.  B.  iii.  f.  1 6^.


mafter


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIO  A  RN  A  S  S  E  NS  I S.  79

mafter  of  all  that  country,  which  lies  between  the  109  Lame-
tine  and  Scylletic  bays ;  which  part,  he  fays,  was  the  firft,
that  was  called  Italy  from  Italus.  After  he  had  pofiefled
himfelf  of  this  trad:,  and  had  many  fubjeds  under  his  com¬
mand,  he,  immediately,  aimed  at  fubduing  thofe  nations,
that  lay  contiguous,  and  united  many  cities  under  his  go¬
vernment  ;  he  fays,  alfo,  that  Italus  was  an  Oenotrian.  But
Hellanicus,  the  Lefbian,  fays,  that,  when  Hercules  was  driv¬
ing  Geryon’s  cows  to  Argos,  and,  already,  in  Italy,  a  calf
left  the  herd ;  and,  running  away,  wandered  over  all  that
coaft ;  and  that  it  fwam  over  the  intermediate  ftreight,  and
went  into  Sicily  ;  that  Hercules,  following  the  calf,  inquired
of  the  inhabitants  wherever  he  came,  if  they  had  feen  it ;
and  that  they,  underftanding  but  little  Greek,  and,  from  the
defcription  he  gave  them  of  the  animal,  calling  it  by  the
name  of  110  Vitulus,  by  which  it  is  ftill  known,  he,  from  that
animal,  called  all  the  country  the  calf  had  wandered  over,
Vitalia;  and  he  adds,  that  it  is  no  wonder  the  name  has  been
changed  by  time,  fince  the  like  alteration  has,  alfo,  happened  to

109.  Tg  nou  m  'Z.Mhylivx.  called,  Portus  Herculis.  Here  the

B  Cluver,  plainly,  fhews  that  we  mull  Scylletic  gulph  begins,  and  reaches  to
read  Aapil/va  and  :  The  firft  the  promontory,  anciently,  called  Scyl-

gulph,  here  mentioned  by  our  author,  laeum,  now,  Coda  della  Volpe .
begins  at  the  promontory,  anciently,  ,I0*  Ov/7*Aov.  Timaeus,  according  to
called  Lametum,  or  Lampetes,  from  0  Varro,  fays  that,  in  ancient  Greece,
a  neighbouring  city,  that  was  called  bulls  were  called  :  Graecia  enim

by  both  thefe  names :  This  promon-  antiqua  ( ut  fcribit  Pimaeus)  tauros  vo-
tory,  he  fays,  is  now  called  Capo  So-  cabat  iTaAsf.  Our  author  had  great
•uano  and,  from  thence,  the  Kotoog  reafon  to  reject  this  etymology  of
Ax/uttltvof,  now  called,  GolfodiS.Eu -  Hellanicus,  and  to  conclude  that  Italy
femia ,  extends  to  another  foreland,  received  its  name  from  Italus.

»  In  Ital.  Ant.  B.  iv.  p.  1290,  and  1294.  0  Varro  de  re  ruft.  B.  ii.  c.  5.


many


So


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book!.

many  Greek  names.  But,  whether,  as  Antiochus  fays,  the
country  took  this  name  from  a  commander,  which,  perhaps,
is  the  moft  probable ;  or,  according  to  Hellanicus,  from  the
calf,  yet,  this,  at  leaf!:,  is  manifeft  from  both  their  accounts,
that,  in  Hercules  time,  or  very  little  before,  it  was  called
Italia:  For,  before  this,  the  Greeks  called  it  Hefperia,  and
Aufonia,  and  the  people  of  the  country,  Saturnia,  as  I  faid
before.

XXXVI.  There  is  another  fable  related  by  the  inhabi¬
tants,  that,  before  Jupiter’s  reign,  Saturn  was  king  of  this
country,  and  that  the  celebrated  age  in  his  reign,  “'abound¬
ing  in  the  produce  of  every  feafon,  was  enjoyed  by  none
more  than  by  them.  And,  indeed,  if  any  one,  fetting  afi.de
the  fabulous  part  of  this  account,  will  examine  the  merit  of
any  particular  country,  from  which  mankind,  immediately
after  their  birth,  received  the  greatefi:  enjoyments,  whether
they  fprung  from  the  earth,  according  to  the  ancient  tradi¬
tion,  or  were  formed  by  any  other  means,  he  will  find  none
more  beneficent  to  them  than  this.  For,  if  we  compare  one
country  with  another  of  the  fame  extent,  in  my  opinion,
Italy  is  the  beft,  not  only  of  Europe,  but  even  of  all  others.
Though  I  am  not  ignorant,  that  I  fhall  not  be  believed  by
many,  when  they  reflect  on  Egypt,  Libya,  Babylonia,  and
many  other  '“fruitful  countries.  But  I  do  not  confine  the

jh*  b«o?  uTToau  Jaipifo if,  ovoireig  w%ou  dance.  It  is  hard  to  fay  which  is  moll
Qvwiv.  Thus  has  le  Jay  mandated  this  extraordinary,  fuch  an  age,  or  fuch  a
paffage  •,  ces  Siecles  Ji  connus ,  et  ft  for-  tranflation.

tunez ,  -pendant  lej quels  t  cutes  les  faifons  1I2,  Xu^ot  tvAoupovts.  If,  by  f elicit  as  ^
de  I’annee  prcduifoient  une  egale  abon-  the  Latin  tranflators  meant  fertility ,

richnefs


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  IC  A  RN  A  S  SEN  SI  S.  81


richnefs  of  the  foil  to  one  fort  of  fruits ;  neither  am  I  fond
of  living  in  a  place,  where  there  are,  only,  fat  arable  lands,
and  nothing,  or  little  elfe,  ufeful :  But  I  look  upon  that
country,  as  the  beft,  which  is  the  moft  felf-fufficient,  and,
generally,  Hands  leaf!  in  need  of  foreign  commodities :
Now,  I  am  perfuaded  that  Italy  enjoys  this  univerfal  ferti¬
lity,  and  plenty  of  every  thing  ufeful  beyond  any  other
country  in  the  world.

XXXVII.  113  For  it  contains  a  great  deal  of  good  arable


land,  without  wanting  wood,

which  I  much  doubt,  they  have  ren¬
dered  iv$ouy.Qnq  properly.  It  is  plain
le  Jay  did  not  think  they  took  the
word  in  that  fenfe  ;  becaufe  he  has
tranflated  it,  lieux  fi  celebres  par  les
delices  qu* on  y  goute.  That  tvJcufxuv,
when  applied  to  a  country,  or  to  land,
fignifies  fertile  will  not  be  doubted  by
any  one,  who  has  read  the  beft  Greek
authors,  particularly,  the  poets ;  and
this  fenfe  of  the  word,  the  Latin  wri¬
ters  have,  from  them,  given  to  felix ;
a  remarkable  inftance  of  which  we
have  in  Virgil  ;  who,  in  defcribing  the
fertility  of  valleys,  derives  the  caufe
of  that  fertility  from  the  waters,  which,
in  falling  from  the  neighbouring  hills,
convey  into  thofe  valleys  a  fertilifing
foil;  a  circumftance  which  all  our
farmers  are  very  well  acquainted  with  :

At  quae  pingtiis  humus ,  dulcique  uligine  laeta ,
pulque frequens  herb  'is  et  fertilis  ubere  campus ,
Qualem  faepe  cava  mantis  convalle  folemus
Defpicere:  hue fummis  liquuntur  rupibus  atnncs>
Felicemque  trahunt  limum  p.

p  Virgil,  Gee


like  a  corn-country  :  On  the

Upon  which,  Servius  fays  very  well,
id  eft,  fertilem.  The  other  French
tranflator  has  rendered  it  very  proper¬
ly.  But,  if  there  could  be  any  doubt
whether  our  author  ufed  the  word  in
this  fenfe,  that  doubt  would  be  clear¬
ed  up  by  what  he  fays  in  the  next
fentence.

Ir3*  On  yx(>  ot^a^ois  lyn  atya&aiq,  etc.
This  defeription  of  Italy  is  very  much
laboured  :  The  thoughts  are  fo  juft*
and  the  exprefiions  fo  clofe,  that  I  am
apt  to  believe  it  coft  our  author  fome
pains :  I  am  fure  it  coft  me  a  great
deal  to  tranOate  it  ;  neither  can  I  fay
I  have  fatisfied  myfelf ;  much  lefs,  I
fear,  have  I  fatisfied  the  learned  rea¬
der,  after  he  has  compared  it  with  che
original.  The  Latin  tranflators  have
given  the  fenfe  of  it,  and  that  is  all.
Le  Jay  has  made  a  florid  period,  and
given  us  fomething  like  the  author’s
fenfe  in  very  good  language.  The
other  French  tranflator  has  given  the
whole  fenfe  ;  but  as  he  has  made  three
periods  of  one,  the  clofenefs  of  the

j.  B.  ii.  f.  184.

•  "  M


VOL.  I.


other


82  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


other  fide,  the  foil  is  proper  for  all  forts  of  trees,  without
being  reduced  to  a  fcarcity  of  corn,  like  a  wood-land  ;  or,
by  yielding  plenty  of  both,  rendered  unfit  for  paflure :
Neither  can  it  be  faid  that  it  is  rich  in  corn,  wood,  and  pas¬
ture,  yet  unpleafant  to  live  in ;  but  abounds,  as  I  may  fay,
in  all  forts  of  delights,  and  advantages.  To  what  corn-
country,  114  watered,  not  with  rivers,  but  with  rains  from
Heaven,  do  the  plains  of  Campania  yield  ;  in  which  I
have  feen  land,  that  bears,  even,  115  three  crops  in  a  year,


defcription  is  loft  in  the  length  of  it.
The  reader  will  obferve  that  I  have
extended  the  fignification  of  woAvKotg-
Trof  to  woody  as  well  as  corny  in  order
to  make  this  part  as  comprehenfive
as  the  other,  which  our  author,  cer¬
tainly,  defigned.

Jl4*  a gJoptw  Thus  I  read  it,  after
the  Vatican  manufcript,  inftead  of
u^ojmvoi.  The  Latin  tranflators,  who
had  never  feen  this  manufcript,  are  to
be  excufed :  But  the  French  tranfia-
tors,  who  both  tranflated,  as  they
themlelves  fay,  from  Hudion’s  edition,
in  which  the  readings  of  this  manu¬
fcript  are  all  along  fet  down  at  the  foot
of  every  page,  will  not,  I  believe,  be,
fo  eafily,  excufed  for  having  preferred
a  reading  that,  vifibly,  takes  off  from
the  merit  of  Campania,  which  our
author  is  here  commending.  In  the
firft  place,  there  is  fcarce  any  country,
which  is  not  a  fen,  or  recovered  from
a  fen,  like  Holland,  that  is  watered
with  more  rivers,  than  Campania.
And  fecondly,  I  defire  the  reader’s
opinion,  whether  our  author  would
have  omitted  this  circumftance  fo  fa¬
vorable  to  the  country  he  recommends,

s  B.  v.


and  have  given  it  to  Thofe  with  which
he  compares  it.  Every  one  who  has
travelled  in  the  fummer  through  hot
countries,  that  are  not  well  watered
with  rivers,  muft  remember  how  the
corn  languifhed,  the  grafs  was  burnt
up,  and  the  cattle  pined  for  want  both
of  food,  and  water.  With  thefe  coun¬
tries,  therefore,  our  author  compares
Campania,  and  afks  very  juftly  •,  To
what  corn -countries,  that  are  watered,
only  vftth  rains,  and  not  with  rivers,
do  the  plains  of  Compania  yield  ?

II5*  TeiKKOTnit  ctgxgag.  No  Engliftl
farmer  would  believe  that  any  land
could  bear  three  crops  in  a  year  ;  and
yet  there  are  no  farmers  in  the  world,
who  underftand  agriculture  better,  or
pra&ife  it  with  greater  fuccefs.  How¬
ever,  Strabo  fays  the  fame  thing,
nay  more,  of  the  Campanian  plains :
For  he  fays  that  fome  of  them,  even
bear  a  fourth  crop  of  cabbages,  and
other  things  of  that  nature.  If  Cam¬
pania  is  fo  fertil,  how  comes  it  to  pafs
that  we,  frequently,  fend  corn  thither  ?
— The  foil  is  not  changed,  but  the
government  is.

P-  372.


bringing,


Book I.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN ASSENSIS.  83


bringing,  fucceffively,  to  perfection  the  winter,  fummer,  and
autumnal  grain  ?  To  what  olive-grounds  are  Thofe  of  the
Mefapii,  the  Daunii,  the  Sabines,  and  many  others,  in¬
ferior?  To  what  vineyards,  Thofe  of  Tyrrhenia,  Alba,
and  Falernus ;  where  the  foil  is,  wonderfully,  kind  to  vines,
and,  with  the  leaft  labor,  produces  plenty  of  the  fineft  grapes  ?
Befides  the  land,  that  is  cultivated,  Italy  abounds  in  paftures
for  fheep,  and  goats ;  yet  more  extenfive,  and  more  won¬
derful  are  Thofe  affigned  to  horfes,  and  neat  cattle  :  For,  not
only  the  marfh,  and  meadow  grafs,  which  is  very  plentiful,
but  the  infinite  quantity  of  That,  growing  in  '^unculti¬
vated  places,  on  which  the  cattle  feed  in  fummer,  by  being
dewy,  and  moift,  preferves  them,  always,  in  good  condition.
But,  above  all  thefe  things,  the  woods,  growing  upon  pre¬
cipices,  in  vallies,  and  on  uncultivated  hills,  are  moft  worthy
of  admiration ;  from  which,  the  inhabitants  are,  abundantly,
fupplied  with  117  fine  timber  for  the  building  of  fhips,  and
for  all  other  works.  Neither  are  any  of  thefe  materials  hard
to  be  come  at,  or  at  a  diftance  from  common  ufe,  but  eafy


II6,  TW  To  this  word

the  two  Latin tranflators,  and  M*  **
(for  le  Jay  has  left  it  out)  have  given
the  fenfe  of  cultivated  lands ,  which,  I
think,  it  will  not  bear  in  this  place  •,
becaufe  the  grafs,  growing  on  arable
lands,  in  fo  hot  a  climate  as  That  of
Italy,  can  never  be  called,  with  any
propriety,  fyoaoci  noct  xcclappvlor,  dewy
and  moiji  •,  but  That  growing  in  un¬
cultivated  places  under  the  lhade  of
bufhes,  and  trees,  may,  very  well,  be
called  fo.  And  I  lhall  produce  a  very
great  authority  to  fhew  that  ogyots


fignifies  uncultivated  places  overgrown
with  bufhes  and  trees.  ■  O^yots  xuAe-Hat
rot  KcX'UwSv)  xou  ogeiva  Xcagia,  xoct  OTK
EIIEPrAZOMENA.  0$ev  kou  tj  Meyagixv
o^yotg  zfQocedvoiJ.ot&Y1,.,  TOiavIy  t is  %<roi,  7rs^i
>k  i7roAz/M]<T<xv  A0jjv«ioi  M eyotgtv<rt.  Har-
pocration  *,  who  quotes  Demofthenes,
trwlx liuc  *,  where  it  is  plain  that  he
ufes  the  word  in  this  fenfe.

lx7‘  Kot\yis  vxvTTYiyym/AX.  Cafaubon
has  obferved  that  Jah?  is  wanting  to
complete  the  fenfe  :  But  I  think  it
may,  very  well,  be  underltood.


M  2


to


84  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


to  be  employed,  and  all  ready  at  hand ;  which  is  owing  to
the  multitude  of  rivers,  that  water  all  that  coaft ;  and
make  the  carriage,  and  exchange  of  every  thing  the  country
produces,  very  convenient.  Springs,  alfo,  of  hot  waters  have
been  difcovered  in  many  places,  affording  moil  pleafant
baths,  and  of  fovereign  ufe  in  chronical  diftempers.  There
are  118  mines  of  all  forts,  plenty  of  wild  beafts  for  hunting,
and  variety  of  fea-fifh ;  befides  innumerable  other  things,
fome  ufeful,  and  others  worthy  of  admiration  :  But  the  molt
advantageous  of  all,  is  the  happy  temper  of  the  air,  fuiting
itfelf  to  every  feafon :  So  that,  neither  the  formation  of  fruits,
nor  the  conllitution  of  animals  are,  in  the  leaft,  injured  by
exceffive  cold,  or  heat.

XXXVIII.  It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  ancients


looked  upon  this  country,  as  confecrated  to  Saturn,  lince  they
elteemed  this  god  to  be  the 119  giver,  and  accomplifher  of  all
happinefs ;  whether  he  ought  to  be  called  Cronos,  with  the
Greeks,  or  Saturnius,  with  the  Romans :  But,  by  which


II8'  MilxAKx  Tffxv'ioSuTrcc.  It  is  well
known  that  /udaMov,  in  Greek,  and
metallum  in  Latin,  fignify  both  the
mine,  and  the  metal.  The  French  tranf-
lators  have  taken  the  word  in  the  laft
fenfe  j  I  have  taken  it  in  the  firft.

TI9*  Tlociryn  svdourAOviag  Jolfigx  kou  htAvj-

fcrjlr/v.  M  *  *  *  afks,  how  this  agrees
with  the  poets,  and  aftrologers,  who
thought  that  Saturn,  and  the  planet,
which  bears  his  name,  were  thecaufe  of
evil.  To  this  I  anfwer,  that  our  au¬
thor  v/as  neither  a  poet,  nor  an  aftro-
loger,  but  an  hiftorian  *  who,  with
great  reafon,  thinks  himfelf  obliged


to  inform  his  readers  of  the  traditions,
which  prevailed  among  the  people,
whofe  hiftory  he  writes.  I  have,  in  a
former  note,  Ihewn  that  Saturn  was  a
king  of  Italy,  under  whofe  reign  his
fubje&s  enjoyed  fo  great  a  degree  of
happinefs,  that  their  pofterity  looked
upon  that  aera,  as  the  golden  age.
We  muff,  certainly,  read  Cronos  in
the  firft  part  of  the  following  fentence,
and  Saturnius  in  the  laft  ;  becaufe  our
author  told  us,  a  little  before,  that
Cronos  was  called  by  the  people  of
Italy,  Saturnius .


name


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  EN  SI  S.  85


name  foever  he  is  called,  he  comprehends  univerfal  nature  :
It  is  no  wonder,  I  fay,  if  the  ancients,  feeing  this  country
abounding  with  univerfal  plenty,  and  every  charm  mankind
are  fond  of ;  and,  judging  thofe  places  the  moft  proper  to
be  confecrated  both  to  divine  and  human  natures,  which
are  moft  agreeable  to  them,  dedicated  the  mountains  and
woods  to  Pan ;  the  meadows  and  green  lawns  to  the  nymphs ;
the  fhores,  and  illands  to  the  fea-gods ;  and  all  other  places,,
that  were  moft  agreeable  to  each  deity.  It  is  faid,  alfo,
that  the  ancients  facrificed  human  victims  to  Saturn,  as  it
was  pra&ifed  at  Carthage,  while  that  city  fublifted  ;  and
among  the  Celti,  at  this  day,  and  other  weftern  nations :
And,  that  120  Hercules,  deliring  to  abolifh  the  ufe  of  this
facrifice,  erected  the  altar  upon  the  Saturnian  hill,  and  in-
ftituted  a  facrili.ee  of  unftained  victims  burning  on  a  pure
lire.  And,  left  the  inhabitants  fhould  make  it  a  matter  of
confcience  to  negletft  the  facrifices  of  their  country,  he
directed  them  to  appeafe  the  anger  of  the  god,  by  making
images,  refembling  the  men  they  ufed  to  tie  hand  and  foot?


,2°-  Mot,  it,  etc.  r  Plutarch,
alfo,  attributes  this  inftitution  to  Her¬
cules,  who,  by  this  means,  put  an  end
to  that  deteftable  cuftom  of  facrificing
human  victims  ;  and  adds,  that  the
Romans  called  thefe  pageants,  Argivi  \
either  becaufe  the  Barbarians,  who
lived  in  thofe  parts,,  called  all  the
Greeks,  Argivi ,  and  put  as  many  of
them  to  death  in  this  manner,  as  they
could  take*,  or,  becaufe  the  Arcadians,
under  Evander,  retaining  their  ancient

r  In  Rom.  Quaef.


enmity,  again  ft  their  neighbours,  the
Argivi ,  called  thofe  pageants  by  that
name.  If  any  thing  can  be  ridiculous
in  cruelty,  the  method  of  facrificing
human  victims  by  the  Albani  muft  be
fo.  s  Strabo  fays,  that  the  high-prieft
of  Albania,  a  country  near  the  Cafpian
fea,  pampered  a  man  during  a  whole
year  ;  and,  having  anointed  him  with
precious  oil,  he  facrificed  him,  with
other  victims,  to  the  moon,  who,  it
feems,  was  their  favorite  goddefs.

s  B.  ii.  p.  768.


and


go  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

and  throw  into  the  Tiber ;  and,  drefling  them  in  the  fame
manner,  to  throw  them  into  the  river,  inftead  of  men ;  to
the  end  that,  if  any  fcruple  remained  in  their  minds,  it
might  be  removed,  the  refemblance  of  the  ancient  tragical
fcene  being  ftill  preferved.  This  ceremony  the  Romans
perform,  even,  to  this  day,  a  little  after  the  vernal  aequinox,
on  the  ides  of  May  ;  which  day  they  account  the  middle  of
the  month  :  On  which,  after  the  ufual  facrifices,  the  pontifs,
who  are  the  moft  confiderable  of  their  order,  together  with
the  virgins,  who  have  the  care  of  the  perpetual  fire,  the
praetors,  and  fuch  of  the  citizens  as  are  allowed  to  affift  at
thefe  rites,  throw,  from  the  holy  bridge,  into  the  river  Tiber,
thirty  pageants,  refembling  men,  which  they  call  Argivi.
But,  concerning  the  facrifices,  and  the  other  rites,  which  the
Roman  people  perform,  according  to  the  manner  both  of
the  Greeks,  and  of  their  own  country,  we  fhall  fpeak  in
another  place.  At  prefent,  it  feems  requifite  to  give  a  more
particular  account  of  the  arrival  of  Hercules  in  Italy,  and
to  omit  nothing  worthy  of  notice  that  he  performed  there.

XXXIX.  The  relations,  concerning  this  god,  are,  partly
fabulous,  and,  partly  true.  The  fabulous  account  of  his
arrival,  is  this ;  that  Hercules,  being  commanded  by  Euryf-
theus,  among  other  labors,  to  drive  Geryon’s  cows  from
Erythea  to  Argos,  performed  the  work  ;  and,  having  pafled
through  many  places  of  Italy  in  his  return  home,  came,
alfo,  into  that  part  of  the  country  of  the  Aborigines,  which
lies  near  Pallantium:  Where,  finding  a  great  deal  of  fine
pafture  for  his  cows,  he  let  them  grafe ;  and,  •  being

opprefled


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  87

opprefled  with  labor,  laid  himfelf  down  to  deep.  In  the
mean  time,  a  robber  of  that  country,  whofe  name  was
Cacus,  happened  to  fee  the  cows  feeding  without  a  keeper,
and  longed  to  have  them :  But,  feeing  Hercules  lie  there
afleep,  he  imagined  he  could  not  drive  them  all  away  with¬
out  being  difcovered  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  faw  the  thing
would  be  attended  with  great  difficulty :  So,  he  fecreted  a
few  of  them  in  a  cave  hard  by,  in  which  he  lived,  dragging
each  of  them  thither  by  the  tail,  121  contrary  to  the  natural
gait  of  animals.  This  might  have  concealed  all  proof  of
the  theft,  as  the  way  he  dragged  them,  appeared  contrary


l21*  E/U7raA»v  ms  not!#  (pvmv  to  is  £uois
M  *  *  *  has  thought  fit  to
leave  out  thefe  words,  and  the  reafon
he  gives  for  it,  is,  that  the  phrafe  is
ufelefs,  and  would  be  inexcufable  in
a  Latin  author  j  but  may  be  excufed
in  Dionyfius  by  reafon  of  the  copiouf-
nefs  of  the  Greek  language  ;  and  his
diffufed  ftyle.  But  I  can  no  more
agree  with  him  in  the  excufe  he  makes
for  our  author,  than  in  the  fault  he
imputes  to  him.  For,  in  my  opinion,
the  copioufnefs  of  a  language  can  be  no
excufe  to  a  writer  for  introducing  ufe¬
lefs  phrafes.  ButI,  greatly,  fufpettthat
the  Latin  tranflation  of  Sylburgius,
and  not  the  Greek  text,  gave  that
gentleman  reafon  to  think  this  phrafe
ufelefs.  Sylburgius  has  rendered  t^na-
averfas ,  and  then  adds,  contra  fo-
litum  animalhim  incejfum.  After  M*  *  *
had  tranflated  aver  fas ,  a  reculons ,  I  do
not  wonder  he  looked  upon  what  fol¬
lows  as  not  deferving  to  be  tranflated.


But  I  doubt  not  to  convince  the  reader
that  ty.7rotA iv  does  not  fignify  a  reculons j
and  that  it  is  not  an  adverb,  but  a
prepolition  in  this  place,  and,  elegant¬
ly,  joined  with  a  genitive  cafe,  and
governs  t ■noyaus :  If  it  does  not,  I
would  fain  know  what  does.  I  fay,
then,  that  s^aA <v  here  fignifies  con¬
trary,  which  I  fhall  prove  from  a  fi-
milar  phrafe  in  Herodotus,  who  tells
us,  that  he  inquired  of  the  Egyptian
priefts,  what  might  occafion  the  Nile
to  overflow  its  banks  in  the  fummer,
and  to  run  low  in  the  winter  *,  and,  by
what  power,  that  river  was  of  a  na¬
ture  contrary  to  That  of  other  rivers.
1  Isogiwv  avlas  y'vhvoi  Juvoijuiv  s  N«-

Aof  Ten  EMFIAAIN  srs(pu>c£v£*i  tojv  a AAwv
z?o\u(aoov.  Both  "Livy,  and  w  Virgil
relate  this  adventure  of  Cacus,  the  fir  ft
with  all  the  elegance  of  an  hiftorian
and  the  other  with  all  the  power  0
poetry.


*  In  Euterp.  c.  19.  “  B.  i.  c.  7.  vv  B.  viii.  f.  194.'


to


U  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

to  the  traces  of  their  feet.  But  Hercules,  arifing  from  fleep
foon  after ;  and,  having  counted  the  cows,  and  found  how
many  were  miffing,  he  was,  for  fome  time,  at  a  lofs  to
guefs  whither  they  were  gone ;  and,  fuppofing  them  to
have  ftrayed  from  pafture,  he  fought  them  all  over  the
country :  But,  not  finding  them,  he  came  to  the  cave,  and,
though  he  was  fo  far  123  deceived  by  the  traces,  as  not  to  rely
much  on  their  being  there,  he  determined,  nevertheleft,
to  fearch  the  place.  But  Cacus  flood  before  the  door,  and,
when  Hercules  inquired  after  the  cows,  denied  he  had  feen
them  ;  and,  when  he  defired  to  fearch  the  cave,  would  not
fuffer  him  to  do  it ;  but  called  upon  his  neighbours  for
affiftance,  complaining  of  the  violence  offered  to  him  by  a
ftranger.  Upon  this,  Hercules  found  himfelf  in  great
perplexity  ;  however,  he  thought  of  an  expedient,  which
was  to  drive  the  reft  of  the  cows  to  the  cave.  When  thofe
within  heard  the  well  known  voice,  and  perceived  the  fmell,
of  their  companions,  they  bellowed  to  them  again,  and  their
voice  difcovered  the  theft.  Cacus,  therefore,  when  his
robbery  was  thus  brought  to  light,  put  himfelf  upon  his
defence,  and  called  out  to  his  fellow-fhepherds.  But,
Hercules,  in  a  rage,  killed  him  with  his  club,  and  drove  out
the  cows ;  when,  finding  the  cave  a  convenient  receptacle
for  thieves,  he  demolifhed  it,  and  123  buried  the  robber  under
its  ruins.  Then,  having  purified  himfelf  in  the  river  from

I22,  AteA^coy.svo^  E£*7r«7w£tfvo?.  Suidas;  followed  the  Vatican  manufcript,  be-
who  quotes  this  very  paffage  to  fup-  caufe  I  do  not  think  it  very  probable
port  that  fenfe  of  the  word.  that  Hercules  Ihould  demolifh  this

,23*  E7rntccl<z<rKct7r1et  t w  xKutti.  I  have  cave  with  a  Ihepherd’s  crook.


the


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSEN  SIS.  89
the  murder,  he  erected  an  altar  near  the  place  to  Jupiter
the  difcoverer,  which  is  now  at  Rome,  near  the  gate
Trigemina,  and  facrificed  a  calf  to  the  god,  in  acknow¬
ledgment  for  his  having  found  his  cows.  This  facrifice
the  Romans  perform,  even,  at  this  day ;  in  which,  they
obferve  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  Greeks,  in  the  manner  he
inflituted  them.

XL.  When  the  Aborigines,  and  the  Arcadians,  who  lived
at  Pallantium,  were  informed  of  the  death  ot  Cacus,  and
faw  Hercules,  they  thought  themfelves  exceeding  happy,  in
being  rid  of  the  former,  whom  they  detefted  for  his  rob¬
beries  ;  and  were  truck  with  admiration  at  the  fight  of  the
latter,  whom  they  looked  upon  as  fomething  divine  :  The
poorer  fort,  cutting  branches  of  laurel,  which  grows  there  in
great  plenty,  crowned  both  him,  and  themfelves  with  it :
Their  kings,  alfo,  came,  and  delired  Hercules  to  be  their
gueft.  But,  when  he  informed  them  of  his  name,  his  ex¬
traction,  and  his  achievements,  they  recommended  both
their  country,  and  themfelves  to  his  friendfhip.  And  Evan-
der,  who  had  long  before,  learned  from  Themis,  that  it  was
ordained  by  fate,  that  Hercules,  the  fon  of  Jupiter,  and
Alcmena,  changing  his  mortal  nature,  fhould  become  im¬
mortal  by  his  virtue,  as  foon  as  he  knew  who  he  was,  re-
folved  to  be  the  firft  in  rendering  Hercules  propitious  to
him,  by  paying  him  divine  honors ;  and,  through  hafte,
erected  an  extemporary  altar,  near  which,  he  facrificed  an
unreclaimed  heifer,  having  firfl  communicated  the  oracle  to

Vol.  I.  N  Hercules,


90  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  TIE  S  OF  Book  I.

Hercules,  and  defired  him  to  124  begin  the  facrifice.  Her¬
cules,  admiring  their  hofpitality,  entertained  the  people  with
a  feaft,  having  facrificed  home  of  the  cows,  and  fet  apart  the
tenths  of  the  reft  of  his  booty ;  and,  to  their  kings,  he  gave
a  large  country  belonging  to  the  Ligures,  and  to  fome  others
of  their  neighbours,  the  command  of  which  they  very  much
defired,  and,  from  which  he  had,  before,  expelled  fome
125  lawlefs  perfons.  It  is  faid,  alfo,  that  he  defired  the  in¬


habitants,  fince  they  were  the
his  divinity,  that  they  would

124f  t«i>  Itfiwv  kckI u (>%<%(& on.  I  have
tranflated  this,  generally,  to  begin  the
facrifice  ;  but  that  is  not  fufficient  to
let  the  reader  into  the  fenfe  of  the
word  Kalotqxtc&ut,  which  is  thus  ex¬
plained  by  Hefychius  tx

ieg&x,  t uv  t^i^uv  a7To<rnot.<T(x.i :  It  feems,
this  ceremony  was  not  unknown  to
Homer ;  who,  in  fpeaking  of  the
facrifice  preparatory  to  the  fingle  com¬
bat  between  Paris,  and  Menelaus,  fays
of  Agamemnon,

AtfVttV  t%  XiQuAwV  TCiy-Vi  w.

But  this  is,  more  fully,  explained  by
Virgil  in  the  facrifice  performed  by
the  infernal  prieftefs,

Etjfummas  carpens  media  inter  cornua  fetas ,
Jgnibus  impofuit  facris  libamina  primax.

I25*  t iva:  avjyjc

avQfUTru?.  I  was  wondering  how  M'***
came  to  render  this  paffage,  il  en  chaffa
les  anciens  habitants ,  qui  ri  ayant  ni  loix
ni  police  menoient  une  vie  aujfi  dcreglee  que
leur  taille  etoit  enorme :  I  could  not
conceive,  I  fay,  how  the  Greek  text

w  Iliad,  t.  jfr.  273.


firft,  who  had  acknowledged
perpetuate  the  honors,  they

could  lead  him  to  inform  us,  that  this
country  was  inhabited  by  a  race  of
giants  when,  calling  my  eye  on  this
paffage,  as  tranflated  by  Sylburgius,
I  found  he  had  rendered  it  thus  ;  ex -
pulfis  prius  inde  viris  quibufdam  immani -
bus:  So  that,  he  has  tranflated  the
.  Latin  tranflation  ;  but  with  this  mif-
fortune,  that,  he  has  applied  immanis
to  the  fize  of  thefe  men,  as  well  as  to
their  behaviour,  which  word,  I  am
perfuaded,  Sylburgius  defigned  to  ap¬
ply  only  to  the  latter  :  And  yet  this
gentleman  has  thought  fit  to  conclude
his  preface  with  this  remarkable  pe¬
riod  ;  which,  by  the  way,  vifibJyfquints
at  le  Jay’s  tranflation  •,  fefpere  au  moins
qu on  ne  me  convaincra  pas  d* avoir  tra-
duit  fur  les  verfions  Latines  fans  confulter
le  texte  Grec.  It  is  certain  that,  upon
this  occafion,  he  cannot  be  convibled
of  tranflating  the  Latin  verfion,  be-
caufe  he  has  miftaken  it  *,  but  it  is  as
certain  that  he  never  confulted  the
Greek  text  \  if  he  had,  he  would  not
have  imagined  that  arot^xvo/xoi  otvfyuwot
could  fignify  men  of  an  enormous  Jize.
x  Aeneid.  vi.  jr.  245.


had


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  SSENS  IS.  91

had  paid  him,  by  offering  up,  every  year,  an  unreclaimed
heifer,  and  126  performing  the  facrifice  with  Greek  ceremo¬
nies  ;  and,  that  he  taught  them  thofe  rites,  to  the  end  their
offerings  might,  always,  be  acceptable  to  him,  chufing  two
noble  families  for  that  miniftry :  And  that  thofe,  who  were,
then,  inftrudted  in  the  Greek  difcipline,  were  the  Potitii,  and
Pinarii,  whofe  defcendants  continued,  a  long  time,  in  the
adminiftration  of  thefe  facrifices,  performing  them  in  the
manner  he  had  appointed  ;  the  Potitii  prefiding  at  the  fa¬
crifice,  and  taking  the  firfl:  part  of  the  127  burnt-offering,
while  the  Pinarii  were  excluded  from  tafting  the  intrails,
and  admitted,  only,  to  the  fecond  rank  in  thofe  ceremonies,
which  were  to  be  performed  by  both  of  them ;  and  it  is  faid,
that  this  difgrace  was  fixed  upon  them,  for  having  been
late  in  their  attendance ;  fince,  being  ordered  to  be  prefent,
early,  in  the  morning,  they  did  not  come  till  the  intrails
were  eaten.  Now,  the  pofterity  of  thefe  families  have,
no  longer,  the  fuperintendance  over  thefe  facrifices ;  but
128  flaves,  purchafed  with  the  public  money,  perform  them

J2("  Ayig-ivoileg.  Ta  t>j?  B-va-tocg  stt/Is-  l2,s’  Aaa#  zrctdeg  Jr,y.0'Tix  uvyjloi

Xz<ya.(\i<;.  Suidas.  Le  Jay  has  inverted  fyutnv  avloic.  Tloug  Tottcilcbt  k cu  tm  JVa*.
the  fenfe  of  this  whole  period  :  For,  Hefychius.  But  this  fignification  of
contrary  to  the  exprefs  words  of  the  the  word  vroahs  is  fo  common  in  all
text,  he  has  made  the  Arcadians  de-  Greek  authors,  that  it  was,  almoft,
fire  Hercules  to  perpetuate  the  honors  unneceffary  to  fupport  it  by  a  quota-
they  had  paid  him,  and  to  do  every  tion.  After  the  example  of  the  Greeks,
thing  elfe,  which,  in  the  text,  Hercu-  the  Romans  gave  this  fenfe,  alfo,  to
les  defires  them  to  do.  the  word pueri,  many  inftancesofwhich

I27*  E/un-vgoc,  ra.  k ouofjMu,  It?*.  Hefy-  are  to  be  found  in  their  beft  writers,
chius  *,  whom  Portus  has,  alfo,  quoted  y  Cicero  fays  to  Atticus,  puer  fejiivus
upon  this  occafion.  cinagnoftes  nojier  Sofitheus  decejferat ,

y  B.  i.  Epift.  t  2.

N  2


in


92  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

in  their  room.  For  what  reafons,  this  cuftom  was  changed,
and  how  the  god  manifefted  himfelf  concerning  this  change
of  the  priefts,  I  fhall  relate  when  I  come  to  that  part  of  the
hiftory.  The  altar,  on  which  Hercules  offered  up  the  tenths,
is  called  by  the  Romans,  ara  129  maxima,  the  greatejl  altar :
It  (lands  near  the  market,  called  Boarium,  and  is  held  in  the
greatefl:  veneration  by  the  inhabitants :  For,  upon  that  altar,
oaths  are  taken,  and  agreements  made  by  thofe,  who  are
delirous  to  tranfacl  any  thing  unalterably ;  and  the  tenths
of  different  things  are  there,  frequently,  offered  up,  purfuant
to  vows.  However,  the  (Irudlure  of  it  is  much  inferior  to
its  reputation.  In  many  other  places,  alfo,  in  Italy,  temples
are  dedicated  to  this  god,  and  altars  ere&ed  to  him  in  cities.


meque  plus  quam  fervi  mors  debere  vide-
batur ,  commoverat.  I  am,  therefore,
furprifed  that  Sylburgius  fhould  cor¬
rect  his  own  tranflation,  unleis  he  there
means  to  correct  this  error  inGelenius,
and  fubftitute  pueri,  in  the  room  of
fervi  \  which  fhews  he  did  not  take
pueri  in  the  fenfe  I  have  mentioned.
Livy,  in  fpeaking  of  this  very  affair
of  the  Potitii,  calls  the  men  who  of¬
ficiated  in  their  room,  fervi  publici ;
which  fignifi.es,  literally,  ■arcuJis  t«
Syiuocix  avrfoi.  But  this  is  not  all  :
For  I  obferve  that  the  faults,  and  me¬
rits  of  the  Latin,  communicate  them-
felves  to  the  French,  tranfiators  *,  Syl¬
burgius,  by  fubftituting  pueri  to  fervi
has  mified  M***  who  has  rendered  it,
de  jeunes  gens  •,  and  Portus,  by  faying
Jervi ,  has  conducted  his  tranflator,  le
Jay,  to  the  true  fenfe  of  the  word  :


For  he  has  tranflated  it,  des  ef claves .
Our  author  fays  he  defigns,  afterwards,
to  give  an  account  oftheconfequences,.
that  attended  this  fubftituting  of  (laves
to  officiate  in  the  room  of  the  Potitii  y
as  nothing  of  this  kind  appears  in  the
eleven  books,  that  remain,  it  may,  in
fome  degree,  be  fupplied  by  2  Livy,
who  fays  their  whole  family  became
extinct ;  tradito  fervis  publicis  folenni
familiac  minijierio, genus  o?nne  Totitiorum
inter ii t :  So  their  religious  prejudices
taught  them  to  think.

I29-  Mtyisoq.  This  circumftance,
alfo,  is  taken  notice  of  by  a  Virgil  ;
who,  in  fpeaking  of  Hercules,  when
he  was  in  Italy,  makes  Evander  fay  to
Aeneas  :

Hanc  aram  hico  Jiatuit ;  quae  maxima  femper
Dicctur  nobis ,  et  erit  quae  maxima  femper ,


?  B.  i.  c.  7.  a  Aeneid.  B.  vjii.  f.  271.


and


Bookl.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  93
and  highways,  there  being  fcarce  any  part  of  Italy,  in  which
this  god  is  not  honoured.  And  this  is  the  fabulous  tradition
concerning  him.

XLI.  But  That,  which  comes  nearer  to  the  truth,  and
which  many,  who  have  written  the  hiftory  of  his  actions,
have  imbraced,  is  as  follows :  That  Hercules,  being  the
greateft  commander  of  his  age,  and,  at  the  head  of  a  con-
fiderable  army,  marched  over  all  the  trad:,  that  lies  on
this  fide  of  the  ocean,  deftroying  all  fuch  130  monarchies,  as


I3°*  Tv£< xvvis  fiotgatx,  kxi  Au7rJ)^«  t oig
apxa I  obferve  that  all  the  tranf-
lators  have  rendered  Tu§*w ig  Tyranny,
without  confidering  that  the  word  in
Greek  is  not,  always,  taken  in  a  bad
fenfe,  and  fignifies  no  more  than  the
government  of  a  fingle  perfon,  that  is,
monarchy  :  And,  I  think,  it  is  plain
enough  that  our  author  understood  it
in  this  fenfe  here  ;  otherwife,  he  would
not  have  faid  that  Hercules  deftroy-
ed  fuch  tyrannies,  as  were  fix^eixi  kcu
hv7ry(>oii  TOis  ao^oijt.£voi^,  grievous  and  op -
preftive  to  their  fubjefts  \  becaufe  all
tyrannies  are  fo  in  their  own  nature.
It  has  been  obferved  by  many  writers,
and,  particularly,  by  the  fcholiaft  of
Sophocles  in  the  argument  of  Oedi¬
pus,  the  tyrant,  that  this  word  is  of  a
later  date  than  the  age  of  Homer,
and  Hefiod,  who  never  make  ufe  of  it.
It  is  certain  that  the  b  former,  in  fpeak-
ing  of  Echetus,  the  moft  wicked  of  all
men,  callshim  a  king,  and  not  a  tyrant ;

E«y  E X^ov  /3<*<nA>j«,  oluv  hiKypova  zvoivlav.

In  the  following  verfes  of  c  Euripides,
which  Caefar  had  fo  often  in  his  mouth,
b  OdylT.  £.  jfr.  S4.  c  In  Phoen.  ;


t v^ocwig  muft  be  taken  in  the  fenfe  I
have  here  given  it  •,

Eittbo  yoig  eJiKHv  TVgocvvifos  -srtpi

KesAAiyov  oiSr, ietv,T  #AA oc  J  svcsQen y^ozuiv.

This  is  fard  by  Eteocles  to  his  mother
Jocafta,  who  had,  in  vain,  perfuaded
him  to  refign  the  crown  to  his  brother
purfuant  to  their  agreement.  It  is
well  known  that d  Cicero  has  translated
thefe  verfes,  which,  he  fays,  Caefar
was  often  repeating  :  This  translation
will  prove,  much  better  than  I  can,
that  the  word  ought  to  be  taken  in  the
fenfe  I  am  contending  for,

Namfi  violandum  eft  jus,  regnandi  gratia-
Violandmn  eft  :  aliis  rebus piet at em  colas .

But  I  cannot  omit  the  refleftion  which
Cicero  makes  upon  this  fentiment.  Ca¬
pitals  Eteocles,  lays  lie,  vel potius  Euri¬
pides,  qui  id  unurn,  quod  omnium  feeler atif-
ftmum fuerat,  excepcrit.  This  was  fpoken
like  a  Roman,  to  whom  the  very  nameof
a  king  was  odious.  But,  notwithftand-
ing  his  authority,  and  That  of  all  his
countrymen,  it  is  very  probable  that,  if
Rome  had  been  governed  by  a  limited
monarchy,  She  had  never  felt  a  tyranny.
.527.  d  De  Officiis,  B.  iii,  c.  21.


were


94  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

were  grievous  and  oppreffive  to  the  fubjedt,  and  fuch  com¬
monwealths,  as  infulted,  and  injured  the  neighbouring  ftates,
mankind  living,  at  that  time,  in  a  favage  manner,  and  put¬
ting  Grangers  to  death  without  any  regard  to  juftice ;  and,
in  their  room,  he  conftituted  monarchies,  limited  by  law,
and  well-ordered  commonwealths,  and  introduced  cuftoms
full  of  humanity,  and  univerfal  compafiion  :  Befides  this,
he  mingled  with  Greek  and  Barbarous  nations,  as  well  thofe
living  on  the  fea-coaft,  as  thofe  inhabiting  the  inland  coun¬
try,  who,  till  then,  converfed  with  diffidence,  and  a  diftant
behaviour ;  built  cities  in  defert  places ;  turned  the
courfe  of  rivers,  that  overflowed  the  country  ;  cut  roads
through  inacceffible  mountains ;  and  contrived  other  means,
by  which  every  land,  and  fea  might  lie  open  to  the  ufe  of
all  mankind.  But  he  came  not  into  Italy  alone,  or  driving
a  herd  of  cows ;  for,  neither  is  this  country  in  the  road
from  Spain  to  Argos,  neither  would  fo  great  honors  have
been  paid  to  him,  merely,  for  paffing  through  it :  But,
having,  already,  conquered  Spain,  he  came  hither,  at  the
head  of  a  great  army,  in  order  to  fubdue,  and  reign  over
the  inhabitants  of  this  country  :  And  was  obliged  to  flay
there  the  longer,  both  for  want  of  his  fleet,  which  was  de¬
tained  by  ftormy  weather ;  and,  becaufe  all  the  nations  of
Italy  did  not,  willingly,  fubmit  to  him.  For,  befides  other
Barbarians,  the  Ligures,  a  numerous  and  warlike  people,
feated  in  the  paflages  of  the  Alps,  endeavoured  to  oppofe,  by
arms,  his  entrance  into  Italy :  Upon  which  occafion,  a  very  great

battle


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICA  RN  ASS  E  NS  I S.  95

battle  was  fought  by  the  Greeks,  who  loft  all  their  131  weapons
in  the  fight  This  war  is  taken  notice  of  by  Aefchylus,  one
of  the  ancient  poets,  in  his  Prometheus  releafed  :  For,  there,
Prometheus  is  introduced  foretelling  to  Hercules  every  thing,
that  was  to  befal  him  in  his  expedition  againft  Geryon  ;  and
giving  him  an  account  of  the  difficulties  he  was  to  encounter
in  the  war  with  the  Figures ;  the  verfes  are  thefe  :  “You
<c  will  meet  with  the  intrepid  army  of  the  Ligures;  where,
“  warlike  though  you  are,  you  will  not  find  fault  with  the
“  engagement :  For  it  is  decreed  that,  even,  your  weapons
“  fhall  fail  you.”


13I*  Tcov  (Zihuv.  B«Ao?,  in  Greek,  like
telum,  in  Latin,  Signifies  a  weapon ,
generally.  BaAo?,  a.Ktg.  He-

fychius.  Notwithftanding  this,  both
the  French  tranflators  have  thought  fit
to  render  it  des  fleches ,  arrows ,  as  if
Hercules  had  commanded  an  army  of
Indians.  The  tragedy  of  Aefchylus,
out  of  which  our  author  cites  the  fol¬
lowing  verfes,  is  loft.  e  Strabo,  in
describing  the  coaft  of  Languedoc,
and  Provence,  fays  the  ground,  where
this  battle  was  fought,  lies  between
Marfeilles,  and  the  mouth,  or  rather
mouths  of  the  Rhone  and  adds
Several  other  verfes  of  Aefchylus  to
Thofe  quoted  by  our  author.  It  Seems
this  Spot,  then,  was,  and  now  is,  full
of  ftones,  which  Prometheus  tells
Hercules  fhould  be  Sent  down  from
Heaven  to  Supply  his  army  with
weapons,  after  their  own  had  failed
them.  As  thefe  verfes  are  written  with
a  fpirit  peculiar  to  Aefchylus,  parti¬


cularly,  that  part,  which  mentions  the
cloud  fraught  with  a  fhower  of  ftones  ;
and,  as  Stiabo  is  the  only  author,  that
I  know  of,  in  whom  they  are  to  be
found,  I  fhall  tranferibe  them  for  the
fatisfaeftion  of  the  learned  reader  :

Evl*v9  itec&ai  t»>’  yaws  AjSov

E£«?,  s Tret  nag  Xco£°s  ^  puhQxKOf .

LW  o’  oL[At)Xavxvl ct  <r  o  Zwg,  cixligv,
NetyeAyv  J'‘v7rig<r%av  vttpaJt  ^ofyvKm  ml^uv
Y&t<nuov  ;^$ova,  olg  ETreiJa,  cv

B&Aciiv  Sywcreris  fadiwg  A lyvv  g^alov.

I  remember  to  have  Seen  this  ftony
field  in  Provence,  as  I  went  from
Marfeilles  to  Arles  :  The  people  of
the  country  call  it  in  their  language,
which  is  very  different  from  French,
las  craux.  But  a  man  of  learning  at
Aix  told  me,  the  proper  name  of  it
was  Le  champ  Her culien  ;  which  fhews
that  the  memory  of  this  tradition  is
ftill  preferved.


*  B.  iv.  p.  276.


XL  II.


96  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book!,

XLIL  After  Hercules  had  defeated  this  people,  and
gained  the  pafs,  fome  delivered  up  their  cities  to  him  of
their  own  accord,  particularly,  thofe,  who  were  of  Greek
extraction,  or  had  not  forces  equal  to  his ;  but  the  greateft
part  of  them  were  reduced  by  war,  and  lieges.  Among
thofe  fubdued  by  battle,  was  this  Cacus,  fo  much  celebrated
by  the  Roman  fables ;  a  very  barbarous  prince,  reigning
over  a  favage  people :  He,  they  fay,  oppofed  Hercules,
trufting  to  the  faftneffes,  from  whence,  he  annoyed  the
neighbouring  people ;  and,  as  foon  as  he  heard  that  Her¬
cules  lay  incamped  in  a  plain  not  far  off,  he  furnifhed
himfelf  like  a  robber,  and  fet  upon  him  on  a  fudden  ;  and,
the  army  being  alleep,  he  made  himfelf  mafter  of  all  their
132  cattle,  which  he  found  unguarded,  and  drove  them  away.
Afterwards,  being  belieged  by  the  Greeks,  and  his  forts
being  taken  by  ftorm,  he  was  killed  after  a  ftout  reliftance :
His  caftles  being  demolished,  the  country  round  them  was
divided  among  the  133  followers  of  Hercules,  the  Arcadians
under  Evander,  and  Faunus,  king  of  the  Aborigines.  And
there  is  room  to  believe  that  the  Epei,  the  Arcadians,  who

J32,  A«< xg.  A «>j,  Yi  tuv  133t  Kotlot  ctpxg  There  feems

ayz a»j.  Hefychius.  I  am  fenfible  that'  to  be  fomething  wanting  here  to  com-
he  fays  it  fignifies  alfo,  any  booty  taken  plete  the  fenfe  :  If  we  read  kcu  ere  go/,  I
in  war  \  and  that  this  is  the  fenfe,  in  think  it  will  be  clear  enough.  The
which  many  authors  ufe  the  word,  reader  will  remember  that  the  Trojans,
But,  as  it,  particularly,  fignifies  a  mentioned  in  the  next  lentence,  'were
booty  confiding  of  cattle,  and,  as  our  thofe,  who,  as  our  author,  before,  told
author  has  added  ot7ry\oi<rz,  I  think  the  us,  had  been  taken  prifoners  by  Her-
word  cannot  be  applied,  upon  this  oc*  culcs,  when  he  took  Troy,  and,  after
cafion,  to  any  other.  For  which  rea-  that,  attended  him  in  his  expedition
fon,  butin  in  M  *  *  *  does  not  feem  to  to  Spain:  For  Aeneas,  and  his  Trojans
me  a  proper  tranflation  of  a«*.  were  not  yet  arrived  in  Italy.


came


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL I C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  97

came  from  Pheneus,  and  the  Trojans,  who  all  ftaid  behind,
were  left  to  guard  the  country.  For,  among  other  actions,
which  Hercules  performed,  well  becoming  the  general  of
an  army,  none  was  more  worthy  of  admiration  than  his
employing,  for  fome  time,  in  his  expeditions,  thofe  he  drew
out  of  the  cities  he  had  taken ;  and,  after  they  had,  chear-
fully,  affifted  him  in  his  wars,  fettling  them  in  the  con¬
quered  countries,  and  bellowing  on  them  the  riches  he
had  gained  from  others.  Thefe  adiions,  they  fay,  rendered
the  name  of  Hercules  famous  in  Italy,  and  not  his  paflage
through  it,  which  was  attended  with  nothing  worthy  of
veneration.

»

XLIII.  Some  fay,  that  he  left,  even,  two  fons,  by  two
women,  in  the  places  now  inhabited  by  the  Romans :  One
of  his  fons  was  Palas,  whom  he  had  by  the  daughter  of  Eva  a-
der ;  whofe  name,  they  fay,  was  Launa ;  the  other,  Latinus,
whofe  mother  was  a  certain  northern  girl,  whom  he  brought
with  him  as  an  hoftage,  given  to  him  by  her  father,  and  pre-
ferved,  for  fome  time,  untouched ;  but,  while  he  was  on  his
voyage  to  Italy,  falling  in  love  with  her,  he  got  her  with
child :  And,  when  he  was  preparing  to  go  to  Argos,  he
married  her  to  Faunus,  king  of  the  Aborigines :  And,  for
this  reafon,  Latinus  is,  generally,  looked  upon  as  the  foil  of
Faunus,  not  of  Hercules.  Palas,  they  fay,  died  before  he
arrived  to  puberty ;  but  Latinus,  when  he  came  to  be  a  man,
fucceeded  his  father  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Aborigines ;  and,
being  killed  in  a  battle  againft  his  neighbours,  the  Rutili,
without  leaving  any  male  iflue,  the  government  devolved  on
Vol,  I.  o  Aeneas,


9$  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  I.

Aeneas,  the  fen  of  Anchifes,  his  fen-in-law.  But  thefe
things  happened  at  other  periods  of  time.

XLIV.  After  Hercules  had  fettled  every  thing  in  Italy
according  to  his  delire,  and  his  naval  forces  were  arrived  in
fafety  from  Spain,  he  offered  up  to  the  gods  the  tenths  of
his  booty,  and  built  a  134  fmall  town  of  the  fame  name  with


J34#  avia  xhffots.

This  is  the  unfortunate  town,  that  was
fo  many  hundred  years,  afterwards,
deftroyed  by  that  fatal  eruption  of
mount  Vefuvius,  in  which  Pliny  the
elder  perifhed.  The  particulars  of
which,  as  they  were  feen,  and  felt  at
Mifenum,  are  defcribed  by  his  fnephew
in  his  letter  to  Tacitus.  This  horrible
conflagration  is  mentioned  by  Sue¬
tonius  in  his  life  of  Titus,  in  whofe
reign  it  happened,  and  defcribed  in  all
its  dreadful  circumftances  by  g  Xiphi-
linus,  the  abftradter  of  Dion  Caflius.
Some  learned  men  have  maintained,
that  the  eruption  of  Vefuvius,  by
which  Herculaneum  was  deftroyed,
happened  in  the  laft  year  of  the  reign
of  Titus  :  But,  though  Suetonius  has
not  mentioned  the  particular  year,  yet
it  is  certain,  that  it  happened  in  the
firft  of  his  reign.  We  know  both  by
b  Suetonius,  and  Xiphilinus,  that  he
reigned  two  years,  two  months,  and
twenty  days ;  and,  by  the  latter,  that
the  great  fire,  which  confumed  a  vaft
Number  of  public,  and  private  build¬
ings  at  Rome,  happened  the  year  after
this  eruprion  of  mount  Vefuvius,  while
Titus  was  abfent,  and  making  a  pro-
grefs  through  Campania  to  comfort,
and  relieve  his  afflicted  fubjedts.  The

f  Pliny,  B.  vi.  Epift.  16.  6  p.  225.


year  following,  he  died  on  the  ides  of
September,  in  the  confulfhip  of  Fla¬
vius,  and  Pollio.  But  I  fufpedt  that
either  Xiphilinus,  or  his  tranfcriber
has  miftaken  the  name  of  the  firft
conful :  For,  in  the  Fafti  Confulares ,  he
is  called  M.  Plautius  Silvanus,  and  his
collegue,  M.  Annius  Verus  Pollio,
who  were  confuls  the  834th  year  of
Rome,  which  was  the  year  Titus  died.
Thefe  circumftances,  I  believe,  will
convince  the  reader,  that  the  great
eruption  of  Vefuvius  muft  have  hap¬
pened  in  the  firft  year  of  his  reign.
Whatever  diverflty  of  opinions  there
might,  formerly,  have  been  concerning
the  fituation  of  Herculaneum,  there
can  be  none  now,  fince  the  difcoveries
made  by  his  Sicilian  majefty’s  order:
For,  it,  plainly,  appears  by  the  temple
of  Hercules,  his  ftatues,  and  many
infcriptions  there  found,  that  this  fub-
terraneous  town  was  the  ancient  Her¬
culaneum.  I  have  heard  it  laid,  and,
moft  heartily,  wifli  it  may  be  true,  that,
among  the  many  curious  monuments
of  antiquity,  there  difcovered,  feveral
manufcripts  of  the  ancient  authors
have  been  found  ;  nay,  I  have  heard
it  aflerted,  that  an  entire  Livy  is  among
them  •,  and  why  may  we  not  hope,
one  day,  to  fee  the  nine  laft  books  of

h  Sueton.  Life  of  Titus,  c.  1 1 .

himfelf.


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  99

himfelf,  in  the  place  where  his  fleet  lay  at  anchor  (which,
being  now  inhabited  by  the  Romans,  and  lying  in  the  mid¬
way  between  Pompeii,  and  Naples,  has,  at  all  times,  fecure
havens)  and  having  gained  glory,  worthy  of  135  emulation,
and  received  divine  honors  from  all  the  inhabitants  of  Italy,
he  fet  fail  for  Sicily.  Thofe,  who  were  left  by  him,  both  as
guards,  and  inhabitants,  of  Italy,  and  were  fettled  on  the
Saturnian  hill,  lived,  for  fome  time,  under  a  feparate  govern¬
ment.  But,  not  long  after,  joining  with  the  Aborigines  in
their  manner  of  living,  their  laws,  and  their  religion,  as  the
Arcadians,  and,  before  them,  the  Pelafgi,  had  done ;  and,
partaking  oi  the  fame  136  form  of  government,  they  came  to


our  author  ?  If  fuch  manufcripts  have
been  found,  and  his  Sicilian  majefty
fhould  think  fit  to  make  them  public,
I  will  venture  to  affirm  that  he  will,
from  that  time,  be  looked  upon  as  a
common  benefactor  to  mankind  ;  and
his  name  will  be  celebrated  as  long  as
thofe  great  authors,  thus  reftored  by
him  to  life,  ffiall  be  admired.

J35*  ZyiKx.  This  is  a  very  fignificant
word  in  Greek,  and  not  eafy  to  be
tranfiated  into  Englifh  :  The  reafon
is,  that,  in  Greek,  it  is  ufed  in  a  greater
latitude  than  our  language  will  allow.
For,  though  we  fay^fuch  a  one  deferved
emulation ,  we  cannot  fay,  he  gained
emulation ,  which  the  Greeks  can  ;  for
which,  no  reafon  can  be  given,  but
that  there  is  a  humor  in  all  languages,
which  muft  be  complied  with.  I
cannot  omit  the  fine  definition  given
by  Suidas  of  the  word  £>jAo?,  though
I  think  it  too  philofophical  for  a  grant¬
ing  'sroTu'i.  B.  iii.  c.  6.


marian.  It  is,  fays  he,  uyoch  nva?
€7Ti0V|U»#  <p6ova  t ivos  (?  tvj

\pvxy.  Le  Jay  ffiews  he  faw  the  diffi¬
culty  of  rendering  this  word,  by  leav¬
ing  it  out.  The  other  French  tranf-
lator,  has,  in  my  opinion,  faid  with
great  propriety,  apres  avoir  dome  de ft
beaux  exemples  de  vertu.

J36*  TloKuas  ts  Ttjg  otvlyg  rois  A Gogiyun
y,oivovyj(ToivJ(g.  I  have  given  to  sro A/?,  in
this  place,  the  fenfe  of  aroA/W,  as  it  is,
often,  ufed  by  the  belt  authors,  par¬
ticularly,  by  1  Ariftotle  in  this  pafiage,
Quvtgov  TOivvv  on  >;  IIOAI2  ax  xotvavict,
tom.  And,  in  this  fenfe,  the  Latin
authors,  after  the  example  of  the
Greeks,  have  ufed  the  word  civitas ,
as  k  Cicero  calls  monarchy  regale  civi-
tatis  genus.  For  this  reafon,  it  is  im-
poffible  to  know  in  what  fenfe  the
Latin  tranflators  have  ufed  that  word
in  rendering  this  pafiage;  but  the
French  tranfiator,  lejay,  whofe  lan-

k  De  I, eg.  B.  iii.  c.  15.

O  2


be


Book  I.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

be  looked  upon  as  the  fame  nation.  So  much  I  thought
proper  to  fay  concerning  the  expedition  of  Hercules,  and
the  Peloponnefians,  who  remained  in  Italy.  The  fecond
generation,  and  about  the  fifty  fifth  year,  after  the  departure
of  Hercules,  as  the  Romans  themfelves  fay,  Latinus,  the
fon  of  Hercules,  and  the  fuppofed  fon  of  Faunus,  was  king
of  the  Aborigines,  and  in  the  thirty  fifth  year  of  his  reign.

XLV.  At  that  time,  the  Trojans,  who,  with  Aeneas,  had
fled  from  Troy  after  it  was  taken,  landed  at  137  Laurentum,
upon  the  coaft  of  the  Aborigines,  lying  on  the  Tyrrhene
fea,  not  far  from  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber :  And,  having
received  from  the  Aborigines  fome  land  for  their  habitation,
and  every  thing  elfe  they  defired,  they  built  a  town  on  a
hill,  not  far  from  the  fea,  and  called  it  138  Lavinium.  Soon


guage  leaves  no  room  for  that  doubt,
makes  all  thefe  nations  live  in  the  fame
city,  though  Dionyfius  has,  already,
deicribed  the  particular  parts  of  the
country  inhabited  by  each  of  them.

137*  Aup*%v.  M***  fays  that  Lau¬
rentum  is,  now,  called  San-Lorenzo.
But  1  Cl uver  fays  that  thofe,  who  call
this  town  by  that  name,  are  miftaken-,
the  modern  name  of  it  being  Paterno.
The  fame  tranflator  has  rendered  thefe
words,  to;  TvppV/xw  7nkayn  x. &mvov,
fur  les  cotes  de  la  Tyrrhenie ,  when  it
is  well  known  that  Tyrrhenia  lay  on
the  weft  of  the  Tiber,  and  Lauren¬
tum  on  the  eaft  of  it,  between  Oftia,
and  the  river  Numicius.  But,  if,  by
la  Tyrrhenie ,  he  means  the  Tyrrhene  fea ,
he  has  expreffed  himfelf  ill,  even,  in

'In  Ital.  Ant.  B.  iii.  p.  883.

®  Bailor.  B.  iii.  jfr.  523.


his  own  language  ;  for  he  (hould  have
faid  de  la  mer  Tyrrhenienne.

j38‘  a  xdiviov.  The  hill,  on  which
the  Trojans  built  m  Lavinium,  is  three
Roman  miles  from  the  lea-,  and,  on
this  hill,  were  the  fprings,  that  fed  the
river  n  Numicius,

haec  fontis  Jlagna  Numici.

Thefe  fprings,  and  the  cavern  from
whence  they  flowed,  were,  afterwards,
confecrated  by  the  Romans,  to  a  god-
defs,  called  Anna  Perenna ,  in  whole
honor  there  was  a  feftival  inftituted  *,
the  chearfulnefs  of  which  0  Ovid  fays
he  was  fo  well  pleafed  with,  that  he
thought  it  deferved  to  be  related.
After  he  has  defcribed  this  feftival,  he
tells  us  who  this  Anna  Perenna  was.


m  Cluver,  in  Ital.  Ant.  p.  893.  n  Virgil,  Aen.  vii.  150.

after


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  iom
after  this,  they  changed  their  ancient  name,  and  were,  to-


and  how  fhe  came  to  be  thus  diftin-
guifhed  :  It  feems,  fhe  was  no  other
than  Anna ,  the  filter  of  the  unfortu¬
nate  Dido,  her  confident  in  her  amour
with  Aeneas,  and  a  perfon,  whom
every  one,  who  reads  the  fourth  book
orVirail,  muft  wifh  well  to.  After
the  tragical  end  of  her  filler,  Iarba,  a
Numidian  prince,  whofe  addrelfes
Dido  had  rejected,  took  Carthage,  and
fent  poor  Anna  to  feek  her  fortune  :
The  firft  place  (he  took  refuge  in,  was
the  ifland  of  Malta,  where  Battus,  who
was  then  king  of  the  place,  as  Ovid
fays,  received  her  very  courteoufly  ;
but,  being  threatened  by  Pygmalion,
her  implacable  brother,  he  was  forced
to  difmifs  her.  She  then  went  to  Italy  ;
and,  at  her  landing,  found  her  old
friend  Aeneas,  who,  with  Achates,
was,  then,  walking  by  the  lea  fide.
They  were  both  much  furprifed  at  this
unexpected  meeting.  However,  Ae¬
neas,  after  fome  aukward  excufes  for
his  cruel  ufage  of  her  filter,  takes  her
home,  and  recommends  her  to  his  wife
Lavinia  :  But  fhe,  growing  jealous  of
her,  Anna  was,  again,  forced  to  fly ;
and,  in  her  flight,  the  river  Numicius
fell  in  love  with  her,  and  made  the
partner  of  his  watery  bed.  After  this,
fhe  p  fays  to  thofe,  who  were  fent  in
fearch  of  her,

placidi  fum  nympha  Numici ,
Amna  p  erennelaiens ,  A  nn  a  Pe  ten  n  a  vocor.

But  Anna’s  honors  do  not  end  here  :
For  fhe  has,  fince,  had  the  good  for¬
tune  to  be  canonized  and  there  is,  at
this  inltant,  a  chapel  eredted  to  her
upon  the  fame  fpot  under  the  title  of

p  Faftor.  B.  iii.  jr.  653.  s  Xiph.  in  Nerva,  p.


Santa  Pctronella ,  which  is  no  great
deviation  from  Anna  Perenna.  As  this
place  was  held  in  great  veneration  by
the  old  Romans,  their  fucceffors  would,
by  no  means,  lole  the  benefit  of  that
veneration  *,  but  chofe  rather,  to  diredt
it  to  another  objeCt,  by  the  fame  kind
of  compofltion,  as  they  have  changed
the  deft  1  nation  of  the  Pantheum  at
Rome,  and  dedicated  the  fame  temple
to  all  the  faints,  which  their  predecef-
fors  had  dedicated  to  all  the  gods.
And  I  am  perfuaded  that  the  fame
reafon,  w-hich  induced  them  to  ereCt
a  chapel  upon  a  fpot  of  ground  con-
fecrated  by  the  old  Romans,  induced
them,  alfo,  to  coin  the  name  of  Pe-
tronella,  in  order  to  approach  as  near
to  the  others  in  the  name  of  the  perfon
to  be  worfhiped,  as  they  had  done  in
the  place  where  that  worfhip  had  been
paid  :  And  the  reafon,  that  convinces
me  of  this  is,  becaufe  Santa  Petronella
is  as  fictitious  a  perfon  as  her  prede-
cefior,  Anna  Perenna  ;  and  deferves  as
much  to  be  unniched:  For,  if  the
reader  will  trouble  himfelf  to  look  into
her  life,  among  other  abfurdities,  he
will  find,  that  fhe  is  laid,  without  any
authority  from  fcripture,  to  have  been
St.  Peter’s  daughter,  and  to  have  died
at  Rome  on  the  lalt  of  May  in  the
98th  year  of  Chrilt,  in  the  reign  of
Domitian  ;  when  it  is  well  known  that
Domitian  himfelf  died  in  the  96th  year
of  Chrift  •,  and  that  fi  Nerva,  his  fuc-
cefibr,  after  a  reign  of  one  year,  four
months,  and  nine  days,  was  dead,  and
r  Trajan,  his  adopted  fon,  had  fuc-
ceeded  to  the  empire  before  the  lalt
day  of  May  in  the  year  98.

242.  rPetav.  Ret,  Temp,  B,  v.  c.  4  and  7.

gether


Book  I.


HOMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

gether  with  the  Aborigines,  called  Latines,  from  the  king
of  that  country:  And,  leaving  Lavinium,  they,  in  conjunc¬
tion  with  the  inhabitants  of  thofe  parts,  built  a  larger  city,
which  they  furrounded  with  a  wall,  and  called  it  Alba :
From  whence  they  went,  and  built  many  other  cities  alfo,
called  the  cities  of  the  ancient  Latines ;  of  which,  the  greateft
part  are  inhabited,  even,  to  this  day.  Sixteen  generations
after  the  taking  of  Troy,  they  fent  out  a  colony  to  Pallantium,
and  Saturnia,  where  the  Peloponneftans,  and  the  Arcadians
were,  firft,  fettled,  and  where  there  v/ere  ftill  left  fome  re¬
mains  of  the  ancient  people ;  there  they  built,  and  incom-
paffed  Pallantium  with  a  wall,  which  then,  firft,  received
the  form  of  a  city:  This  city  they  called  Rome,  from
Romulus,  who  was  the  leader  of  the  colony,  and  the  feven-
teenth  in  defcent  from  Aeneas.  But,  concerning  the  arrival
of  Aeneas  in  Italy,  fince  fome  hiftorians  have  been  ignorant
of  it,  and  others  have  related  it  in  a  different  manner,  I
fhall  treat  with  accuracy,  and  make  ufe  of  the  hiftories  of
thofe  writers,  both  Greek,  and  Roman,  who  are  moft  credited.
This  is  the  account  given  of  him.

XL VI.  Troy  being  taken  by  the  Greeks,  either  by  the
ftrategem  of  the  wooden  horfe,  as  Homer  lings,  or,  by  the
treachery  of  the  Antenoridae,  or,  by  any  other  means,  the
greateft  part  of  the  Trojans,  and  of  their  allies,  then  in  the
city,  were  {lain  in  their  beds :  For,  it  feems,  this  misfortune
happened  to  them  in  the  night,  when  they  were  not  upon
their  guard.  But  Aeneas,  and  his  Trojan  forces,  which  he
had  brought  from  the  city  of  Dardanus,  and  Ophrynium,  to


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  103

the  afliftance  of  the  Ilienfes,  and,  as  many  others,  as  had  early
.  notice  of  the  calamity,  while  the  Greeks  were  taking  the
lower  town,  fled  together  to  the  ftrongeft  part  of  Pergamus,
and  poffeffed  themfelves  of  the  citadel,  which  was  fortified
with  a  feparate  wall,  and,  in  which,  were  depofited  the  holy
things  belonging  to  the  religion  of  their  country,  together
with  a  large  quantity  of  money,  as  in  a  fafe  place,  and  here,
alfo,  was  the  flower  of  their  army  :  There  they  repulfed  the
enemy,  who  were  endeavouring  to  force  their  way  into  the
citadel;  and,  fallying  out,  privately,  through  the  narrow
paflages,  with  which  they  were  well  acquainted,  they  fe-
cured  the  retreat  of  thofe,  who  were  efcaping  from  the  taking
of  the  city :  The  number  of  whom  was  greater  than  That
of  the  prifoners.  By  this  difpofltion,  Aeneas  checked  the
firft  fury  of  the  enemy,  who  defigned  to  put  all  139  the  ci¬
tizens  to  the  fword,  and  prevented  them  from  taking  the
whole  city  by  florm.  But,  confidering  what  was,,  reafon-
ably,  to  be  expected,  that  it  would  be  impofiible  to  pre-
ferve  a  city,  the  greateft  part  of  which  was,  already,  in  the
pofleflion  of  the  enemy,  he  thought  of  this  expedient ;  which
was,  to  abandon  the  citadel  to  them,  and  fave  the  people,
the  holy  things  belonging  to  the  religion  of  their  country,
and  all  the  effects  they  could  carry  away  with  them,

x39*  Oa>jv  $ia%c>Yi<rot&oii  t^v  zjtoAjv.  lieve,  will  imagine  that,  by  Sioi^py,<T(nS-ai
Here  arcA^is  taken  for  aroA/J accord-  tjjv  sroA<v,  and  jcalaAjjoOvjvai  to  in
ing  to  that  almoft  proverbial  expref-  the  next  fentence,  our  author  means
fion,  aroA<r,  a  t&i^.  And,  in  the  lame  thing.  The  former,  there-

this  fenfe,  Sylburgius  has  rendered  fore,  plainly,  relates  to  the  deftrudtion
this  paffage,  which  le  Jay  has  thought  of  the  citizens,  and  the  latter  to  the
fit  to  leave  out.  And  no.  body,  I  be-  taking  of  the  city.


ro*  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

Having  thus  refolved,  he,  fir  ft,  fent  out  the  children,  and  the
women,  with  the  140  old  men,  and  all  fuch,  whofe  condition  .
required  much  time  to  make  their  efcape,  with  orders  to
take  the  road,  that  leads  to  Ida,  while  the  Greeks,  intent
on  taking  the  citadel,  would  never  think  of  purfuing  the
people,  who  were  efcaping  out  of  the  city.  One  part  of  the
forces  he  appointed  to  convoy  thofe  he  had  fent  away,  to
the  end  that  their  flight  might  be  as  fecure,  and  as  little
troublefome,  as  the  141  prefen t  conjuncture  would  admit :
Thefe  were  ordered  to  take  pofteflion  of  the  ftrongeft  part
of  mount  Ida:  With  the  reft,  who  were  the  choiceft  men,
he  ftaid  upon  the  walls  of  the  citadel,  and,  while  the  enemy
were  diverted  from  the  purfuit  by  aftaulting  the  walls,  he
rendered  the  retreat  of  thofe  he  had,  before,  fent  out,  the
lefs  difficult :  But  Neoptolemus,  with  his  men,  having
gained  the  afcent  to  part  of  the  citadel,  and  all  the  Greeks
fupporting  him,  he  abandoned  the  place;  and,  opening
142  the  gates,  through  which  the  others  had  efcaped,  he
marched  away  with  the  reft  in  good  order,  carrying  with
him,  in  the  beft  chariots,  his  father,  and  the  gods  of  his
country,  with  his  wife,  and  children,  and  fuch  other  perfons,
and  143  things,  as  were  moft  valuable.

I4°*  Stephens  finds  fault  with  xotloi-  in  all  good  authors,  that  I  think  it
yv^aiu.  I  cannot,  indeed,  lay  that  I  needlefs  to  bring  any  authorities  to
ever  met  with  the  word  before,  but  fupport  the  lenfe  1  have  given  to  it.
Kaihxyyj^ixoict)-,  undned  a  yyi^S  are  Common  :42*  Tag  (fivyuJag  wvhxg.  It  was  not
enough.  pohible  to  tranflate  this  poetical  ex-

I4i*  En  tuv  cvoi/7 uv.  I  can,  by  no  preffion  literally.  And,  indeed,  all
means,  approve  of  e  praefente  calami-  the  translators  have  been  fo  modeft  as
tats  fuga ,  in  Sylburgius,  and  much  lefs,  not  to  attempt  it.
of  le  Jay’s  leaving  out  thefe  words.  J43*  See  the  7  ift  annotation.

This  Greek  exprefiion  is  fo  common


xlvu.


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HA L I C  ARN  A S SE N SI S.  105
XL VII.  I11  the  mean  time,  the  Greeks  took  the  town
by  ftorm ;  and,  being  intent  on  plunder,  gave  thofe,
who  fled,  an  opportunity  of  efcaping  with  great  fecurity.
Aeneas,  and  his  people,  overtook  their  companions  on  the
road  ;  and,  being,  now,  all  together,  they  polled  themfelves
on  the  ftrongeft  part  of  mount  Ida.  They  were  joined  not
only  by  the  inhabitants  of  Dardanus,  who,  feeing  a  great
and  unufual  firebreak  out  at  Troy,  deferted  their  town,  and
all  went  thither,  except  thofe,  who,  under  Ely  mu  s,  and
Aegeftus,  having  prepared  fome  fhips,  had  left  it  before ;
but,  alfo,  by  all  the  inhabitants  of  Ophrynium,  and  of  the
other  Trojan  cities,  who  were  defirous  to  preferve  their  liberty:
And,  in  a  very  fhort  time,  the  numbers  of  the  Trojan  forces,
were,  very  much,  increafed.  Thofe,  who,  with  Aeneas,
had,  thus,  efcaped  from  the  taking  of  the  city,  were,  during
their  flay  here,  in  hopes  of  returning  home,  as  foon  as  the
enemy  fhould  fail  away.  But  the  Greeks,  having  reduced
to  flavery  the  144  inhabitants  both  of  the  city,  and  of  the
neighbourhood,  and  demolifhed  the  ftrong  places,  were  pre¬
paring  to  attack  thofe,  alfo,  who  were  polled  on  the  moun¬
tains:  But  the  Trojans,  fending  heralds  to  treat  of  a  peace,
and  defiring  they  would  not  reduce  them  to  the  necefiity  of
making  war,  they  called  a  council,  and  made  peace  with  them
upon  the  following  terms :  That  Aeneas,  and  his  people
Ihould  tranfport  themfelves  with  all  the  145  effeds  they  had


j44-  TV  stoa iv.  Here,  noA<?  is,  again,
taken  for  uoKtiou.

*45*  To,  xw ualcc.  All  the  tranflators
have  rendered  xgipefl ot  properly  in  this

v  VoL.I.


place.  I  cannot  fay  fo  much  of  their
manner  of  tranflating  k«1«  t«?  o^oXoyiAi
in  the  next  fentence  ;  which,  I  think,
they  have  mifplaced,  I  mean  the  Latin

P  faved


v


io6  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I  T  IE  S  OF  Book  I*


faved  in  their  flight,  out  of  the  territory  of  Troy  within  a
limited  time,  and  deliver  up  to  the  Greeks  the  places  of
ftrength  :  And  that,  after  they  had  left  the  country  in  pur-
fuance  of  thefe  terms,  the  Greeks  fhould  allow  them  a  fafe-
conduct  by  fea,  and  land  throughout  all  their  dominions.
Aeneas,  having  accepted  thefe  conditions,  which  he  looked
upon  as  the  beft  the  prefent  conjuncture  would  admit  of,
fent  away  Afcanius,  his  eldeft  fon,  with  fome  of  the  allies,
the  greateft  part  of  whom  were  Phrygians,  to  the  146  Dafcy-
litic  country,  in  which  lies  the  Afcanian  lake,  he  having
been  invited  by  the  inhabitants  to  reign  over  them,  where
he  ftaid  not  long:  For  147  Scamandrius,  and  the  other
HeCtoridae,  who  had  been  difmifled  out  of  Greece  by
Neoptolemus,  coming  to  him,  he  returned  to  Troy  in  order
to  reftore  them  to  their  paternal  kingdom.  And  this  is  all
the  account,  that  is  given  of  Afcanius.  As  for  Aeneas,
after  his  fleet  was  ready,  he  imbarked  with  the  reft  of  his


tranflators  only,  for  both  the  French
translators  have  left  out  thefe  words.
The  others  have  applied  xalot  race  o/uo-
Koyixg  to  ut<poiXetxv>  when  they,  plainly,
relate  to  umari,  which  they,  imme¬
diately,  follow ;  and,  by  this  wrong
application  of  the  words,  they  have
weakened  the  fenfe  at  lead:,  and  dif-
jointed  the  period.  Le  Jay  has,  not
only,  left  out  thefe  words,  as  I  faid,
but  has  tranflated  the  reft  of  this
Sentence  in  fo  cavalier  a  manner,  that  I
cannot  forbear  tranferibinghis  words ;
Que  les  Grecs  de  leur  cofte  faciliteroient
la  fortie  d'Enee ,  et  lui  preferment  main-
forte  fur  terre  et  fur  mer  ou  Us  efoient

*  Strabo.  B.  xii.  p.  86x .


egalement  puiffants.  All  the  tranflators
have  rendered  tx  rwv  tvovluv,  in  the  next
Sentence,  in  the  fenfe  I  contend  for  in
the  i4ift  annotation.

Ax<rxv\i1tiv  yqv.  r  This  country
is  in  Bithynia,  as  is,  alfo,  the  Afcanian
lake,  near  to  which  ftood  Nicaea,  the
capital  of  thofe  parts.

j47*  SKotpxvfgw.  He  is,  more  ge¬
nerally,  known  by  the  name  of  Aftya-
nax  •,  but  Homer  fays  that  Heftor,
his  father,  gave  him  That  of  Scaman¬
drius  :

Tov  p  Exlwg  ko.7\’ tffXi  e»  aMo*

Arvct'jetxf  *.


fons.


s  II.  z,  f.  40Z1J


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSEN SIS.  107

fons,  and  his  father,  taking  with  him  the  148  images  of
his  gods ;  and,  croffing  the  Hellefpont,  failed  to  the  next
peninfula,  which  lies  before  149  Europia,  and  is  called  Pallene.
This  country  was  150  inhabited  by  a  Thracian  people,  named


*4-8 •  TOV  WO^.t^XKXl  XX  Ib'tJ  TUV  &£UV.

I  have,  before,  obferved,  and  fhall,
often,  have  occafion  to  obferve,  that
Virgil,  and  our  author  followed  the
fame  hiftorians  in  many  things  relating
to  Aeneas  :  The  former  has  ufed  al-
moft  the  fame  words  in  fpeaking  of
this  imbarkation  of  his  hero,

feror  exul  in  altum

Cum fociis ,  natoque^penatibus^  et  magnis  diis f.

I  am  furprifed  that  Dionyfius  made
Aeneas  forget  his  wife,  particularly,
as  he  had  told  us  before  that  he  carried
her,  as  well  as  his  children,  and  his
gods  out  of  Troy.  Virgil,  indeed,
had  a  very  good  reafon  to  difpole  of
Creufa  before  Aeneas  fet  fail,  becaufe
Ihe  would,  moft  certainly,  have  been
a  very  inconvenient  perfon  both  in  his
amour  with  Dido,  and  in  his  addrefles
to  Lavinia.

*49*  H  7rj>o)tei1xi  [Mv  7tff  Eu£W7n>jf.  So
this  word  mull  be  read  as  VolTius,
quoted  by  Hudfon  upon  this  occalion,
has,  plainly,  proved.  This  country,  he
fays,  was  called  Europia  from  Euro¬
pus,  a  town  of  Macedon,  mentioned
by  many  geographers,  which  was  the
capital  of  it.  The  peninfula,  called
Pallene,  was,  at  the  time  our  author
fpeaks  of,  inhabited  by  a  Thracian
people,  calledThrufaeans,  who  are  fup-
pofed  to  be  the  fame  Herodotus  means,
when  he  fpeaks  of  a  country  lying  near
the  Thermean  gulph,  which  he  calls

1  Aeneid.  B.  iii.  p.  n.


K %c<y<rxiYi.  The  fame  author  fays  that
the  fleet  of  Xerxes,  when  they  were
failing  to  Greece,  made  the  promon¬
tory  of  Pallene,  called  Canaftraeum,
and  received  (hips,  and  men,  from  the
cities  of  Pallene,  which,  he  fays,  was,
formerly,  called,  u  Phlegra.  Thefe
cities  he  enumerates  :  Their  names
are,  Potidaea,  Aphytis,  Neapolis,
Aega,  Therambos,  Sciona,  Mendas,
and  Sana.  Voflius  finds  fault  with  our
author  for  u(ing  luch  expreflions,  up¬
on  this  occafion,  as  might  induce  his
readers  to  think  he  meant  the  Thra¬
cian  Cherfonefus  inllead  of  That  called
Pallene.  But  Voflius  ought  to  have
confidered  that  Dionyfius  fays  he  takes
this  account  from  Hellanicus,  and  did
not  allow  himfelf  to  alter  any  part  of
his  relation.  So  that,  if  there  is  any
word  in  it,  that  may  miflead  the  rea¬
der,  and  there  is  but  one,  which  is
it  mull  be  placed  to  the  account
of  Hellanicus,  and  not  to  That  of  our
author.

IS0,  E Qvoe  f  tv  avly.  Thus  wc
mull  read  this  fentence,  with  the  Va¬
tican  manufcript.  Av7>j,  in  the  vulgar
editions,  is  fcarce  fenfe :  For,  if  it
can  be  fuppofed  to  relate  to  Pallene,
it  is  a  very  ftrange  way  of  fpeaking  to
fay  oivlyj  eSvo?,  inllead  of  eOvo?
xdlyjv.  But,  in  order,  to  enter  into  the
accuracy  of  the  Vatican  manufcript,
we  mull  confider  that  s^«v,  in  this
place,  fignifies  tv  inhabit ,  in  which

*  In  Polyh.  c.

P  2  Crufaei.


108  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I:

Crufaei,  who  were  in  alliance  with  the  Trojans,  and  had
aflifted  them,  during  the  war,  with  greater  alacrity  than
any  of  their  confederates.

XL VIII.  This,  therefore,  is  the  moft  credible  account,
concerning  the  flight  of  Aeneas,  which  is  taken  from  Hel-
lanicus,  one  of  the  ancient  writers,  in  his  hiftory  of  the
Trojan  affairs :  There  are  different  accounts  given  of  the
fame  things  by  feme  others  alfo,  which  I  look  upon  as  lefs
probable  than  this.  But,  let  every  reader  judge  as  he  thinks
proper.  Sophocles,  the  tragedy  writer,  in  his  drama,  called
Laocoon,  reprefents  Aeneas,  juft  before  the  taking  of  the
city,  removing  with  his  family  to  Ida,  in  obedience  to  the
orders  of  his  father  Anchifes,  who  remembered  the  injunc¬
tions  of  Venus ;  and,  concluded  from  the  prodigies,  which
had,  lately,  happened  to  the  Laocoontidae,  that  the  ruin  of
the  city  was  not  far  off.  His  iambics,  which  are  fpoken  by
another  perfon,  are  as  follows :  u  Now  Aeneas,  the  fon  of
u  the  goddefs,  is  at  the  gates,  bearing  his  father  on  his
<c  fhoulders,  whole  back,  ftruck  with  thunder,  diftills  on
“  his  linen  garment :  He  carries  with  him,  151  on  chariots^

fenfe,  it  is  is  taken  by  the  beft  authors.  J5*-  K os  zroio-av  oikiIuv
E^wv,  omasv.  Hefychius.  And  this  ufe of  I  am  obliged  to  depart  from  all  the
the  word  the  Latin  writers  have  bor-  translators,  both  French  and  Latin,
rowed  from  the  Greeks  ;  in  rendering  this  verfe.  And,  notwith-

Square  agile,  et,  frimo  leteti  cum  famine  foUs.  mY  8™  Veneration  for

Quae  loca,  ya/o^habeant  homines,  ubi  moenia gentis,  a  (  V’  ®  "*as  taken  great  pains
Vejiigemus w  j  t0  corred  it,  I  think  the  verfe,  as  it

Stands  in  all  the  editions,  carries  with
fays  Aeneas  in  Virgil,  juft  after  he  it  a  very  obvious  fenfe.  Had  Cafau-
landed  in  Italy.  bon  attended  a  little  more  to  the  force

w  Aeneid,  B.  vii.  f.  1 30.

“  all


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  -ic9
C£  all  his  family :  There  follow  a  multitude,  but,  not  fo
<c  many,  as  you  defire,  and  thofe  who  wifh  well  to  this
C£  Phrygian  colony.”  But  152  Menecrates,  the  Xanthian,
fays,  that  Aeneas  betrayed  the  city  to  the  Greeks,  from  his
enmity  to  Alexander;  and  that,  upon  the  flrength  of  this
merit,  he  was  allowed,  by  the  Greeks,  to  fave  his  family.
His  account,  which  begins  from  the  funeral  of  Achilles,  is
delivered  in  thefe  terms  :  “  The  Greeks  were  opprefled

cc  with  grief,  and  thought  the  army  had  loft  its  head :


of  the  word  xuaAw,  he  would  not  have
thought  it  neceflary  to  alter  it  to  xvxAo/,
which  has  obliged  him,  alfo,  to  al¬
ter  the  whole  ftrufture  of  the  verfe.
KvxAhv  fignifies  to  carry  on  chariots ,
which  our  author  has,  himfelf,  ex¬
plained  by  telling  us  that  Sophocles  re-
prefents  Aeneas  oevacKtvci^oy.svQv  i  And
this  is  the  fignification  Hefychius,whofe
authority  is  often  quoted  by  Cafaubon,
gives  to  the  word.  KvxAjjo-o^sv,  stp*
xflAiKjuev.  Neither  can  I  agree
with  x  Plutarch  in  reading  polx  for
v»fti7x,  becauie  polos,  which  lignifies  a
tent ,  is  below  the  dignity  of  tragedy.
This  tradition,  thatAnchifes  was  ftruck
with  thunder,  is  followed  by  Virgil,
who  makes  him  fay  to  his  fon,  when
he  was  preffing  his  father  to  accom¬
pany  him  in  his  flight,

Jampridem  innjifus  di<vis ,  et  inutilis  annos
Demoror ;  en  quo  me  divum  pater,  atque  hominum  rex ,
Fulminis  afflavit  mentis,  et  contigit  igni y.

I  cannot  conceive  what  le  Jay  could,
poflibly,  mean  by  tranflating  the  verfe
before  us  in  this  manner,  fa  robe  de


pourpre  reluit  de  la  lumiere  qui  Penvi-
ronne.  This  has  not  the  lead  pretence
to  a  tranflation,  and  may  be  applied
to  any  other  verfe  in  Sophocles,  as
well  as  to  this.  The  ignorance  we  are
in  concerning  the  perfon  in  this  drama,
who  fpeaks  thefe  verfes,  and  the  per¬
fon,  to  whom  they  are  add  refled,
makes  it  impoflible  to  tranflate  them
with  any  tolerable  beauty  :  So  that,  it
is  hoped  the  reader  will  content  him¬
felf  with  a  literal  verflon  of  them.

r52,  Msvsngdli]?  0  BotvQiof,.  KsCpciA
T sgyyQios,  Hyricnrnoc.  The  2  firfl:  of
thefe  hiftorians  is  feldom  mentioned,
and  all  we  know  of  him  is  that  he
treated  of  the  affairs  of  Lycia.  The
fecond  is  as  little  known.  a  Strabo
fays  he  was  born  in  a  town  near  Cuma,
called  ctl  r^y»j0sf.  He  writ  of  the
Trojan  affairs.  Hegefippus  is  more
known  by  this  paflage  of  our  author
than  by  any  thing  elfe  we  can  find*'
concerning  him.  As  to  Hellanicus,
mentioned  a  little  before,  fee  the  66t[v
annotation.


*  a?el.  xou  xax,  1  Aeneid.  B.  ii.  it.  64,7.  z  VofEus  de  Hid.  Graec.  B.  iii.  p.  387.
a  B.  xiii.  p.  882,  '  '•

*£  Ho\r-


i  10


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

*c  However,  they  folemnized  his  funeral,  and  made  war
“  upon  all  the  country,  till  Ilium  was  taken  by  the
“  treachery  of  Aeneas,  who  delivered  it  up  to  them.  For
cc  Aeneas,  being  difregarded  by  Alexander,  and  excluded
from  the  honours  of  the  priefthood,  ruined  Priamus ;
and,  having  done  this,  he  became  one  of  the  Greeks.’ *
Others  fay,  that  he  refided,  at  that  time,  at  the  fea  port,
where  the  Trojan  fhips  lay :  And  others,  that  he  had  been
fent,  with  a  body  of  forces,  into  Phrygia  by  Priamus,  upon
fome  military  expedition.  Some  give  a  more  fabulous  account
of  his  departure.  But,  let  it  be,  as  every  one  thinks.

XLIX.  What  happened  after  his  departure  creates  ftill  a
greater  doubt  in  moft  people:  For,  fome,  after  they  have
brought  him  as  far  as  Thrace,  fay  he  died  there :  Of  which
number  are  Cephalo  Gergithius,  and  Hegefippus,  who  writ
concerning  Pallene,  both  ancient  hiftorians,  and  of  great
authority.  Others  convey  him,  from  Thrace,  to  Arcadia,
and  fay  he  lived  in  the  Arcadian  Orchomenus,  and,  in  a
place,  which,  though  in  the  midland  country,  yet,  by  reafon
of  the  fens,  and  a  river,  is  called  Nme,  an  ijland:  And,
that  the  town,  called  153  Capyae,  was  built  by  Aeneas,  and
the  Trojans,  and  took  its  name  from  Capys,  a  Trojan.


*53*  YLcntuxu  This  town  is  called
by  the  fame  name  in  b  Strabo,  who
fays  that  it  was  reported  to  have  been
built  by  Aeneas,  and  called  Capuae,
from  Capys  j  and  that  it  flood  near
Mantinea  in  Arcadia.  It  appears,  by


many  paffages  in  Virgil,  that  Capys
was  one  of  the  companions  of  Aeneas ;
and  c  Virgil,  alfo,  fays  that  Capua  in
Italy  received  its  name  from  him:

Et  Capys :  hlnc  nomen  Campanae ducitur urb'u


fc  B.  xiii.  p.  905.  «  Aeneid.  B.  x.  145.

Arifthus,


in


Book!.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS,


rs4  Arifthus,  who  has  written  of  the  affairs  of  Arcadia,
and,  others,  give  this  account.  Some  affirm,  that,  in¬
deed,  he  came  hither ;  but  that  he  died  in  Italy,  and  not
here,  as  many  relate,  particularly,  Agathyllus,  an  Arca¬
dian,  the  poet,  who,  in  an  elegy,  fays  thus :  u  He  came
u  into  Arcadia,  and,  in  Nefus,  married  his  two  daughters
€<  Codone,  and  Anthemone  :  But  he  himfelf  haftened  to  the
“  Hefperian  land,  where  he  begot  Romulus.”  The  arrival
of  Aeneas,  and  the  Trojans  in  Italy,  is  attefted  by  all  the
Romans,  and .  confirmed  by  the  ceremonies,  obferved  by
them,  both  in  their  facrifices,  and  feftivals ;  by  the  155  Sibyl’s
books,  the  Pythian  oracles,  and  many  other  things ;  which
none  ought  to  rejedt,  as  contrived  for  the  fake  of  embellifh-
ment.  Many  monuments,  alfo,  evident  to  this  day,  are
fubfifting,  even  among  the  Greeks,  on  thofe  coafls,  where
they  landed,  and  among  thofe  people,  with  whom  they


*54*  A^iS-cf,  Ay«.bv AAo?.  Ariaethus,
or  Arifthus  is  fcarce  known  but  by
this  paflage  of  Dionyfius  ;  to  which,
alfo,  Agathyllus  is  obliged  for  the
little  we  know  of  him.

IS5*  Zi£vAA>jj  t g  A oyia,  Kcti  %/£y<Tf/.0t
TLuQixot.  d  Thucydides  makes  the  fame
diftindtion  between  prophecies  in  profe,
and  oracles  in  verfe,.  when  he  fpeaks
of  the  ominous  figns,  that  ufhered  in
the  Peloponnefian  war;  sroAA*  fMv
AofaJ  iKiydoy  sroAAos  <Jg  %crt(TfXoMyoivi$ov  :
Upon  which,  the  Greek  fcholiaft,  very
properly,  oblerves,  a oyia  tsi  ra.  vragcc.
ns  AiyojAivob  KoihxAoyaJtiv'  %£Yi<ry.oi
df  0 iTivf{  g^ug Ag yovlaif  t/xtyo (>%(/.& cm
tuv  teyovluv.  This  reafon,  if  there  was

*B.  ii.


no  other,  would  convince  us  that  the
Sibyl’s  books  were  in  profe.  As  for
Thofe  in  Greek  hexameter  verfe,
which  have  been,  often,  quoted  by
men  of  more  zeal  than  learning,  they
are  now  known  to  be  pious  frauds :
For  the  author  of  them  differs  from
all  other  prophets,  not  only  in  fore¬
telling  things,  that  are  paft,  but,  alfo,
in  being,  perfectly, free  from  obfcurity.
The  great  Scaliger  never  mentions  him
without  giving  him  this,  or  the  like
appellation,  pfeudofibyllinus  bariolus.
As  for  the  Pythian  oracles,  it  is  well
known  they  were  delivered  in  verfe,.
at  leaft,  as  long  as  they  were  in  credit
enough  to  maintain  a  poet.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


ftaid,  when  ftorms,  or  contrary  winds  detained  them  in
their  harbours:  In  mentioning  which,  though  they  are
many,  I  fhall  be  as  fhort  as  poffible.  They,  firft,  went  to
Thrace,  and  landed  on  the  peninfula,  called  156  Pallene  :
It  was  inhabited,  as  I  have  faid,  by  Barbarians,  named
Crufaei,  where  they  found  a  fafe  retreat.  There  they  ftaid
the  winter  feafon,  and  built  a  temple  to  Venus  upon  one
of  the  promontories,  and  alfo  a  city,  called  157  Aenea,  where
they  left  all  thofe,  who,  from  fatigue,  were  not  able  to
bear  the  fea,  or  chofe  to  remain  there,  as  in  a  country
they  were,  for  the  future,  to  look  upon  as  their  own.
This  city  fubfifted  to  the  time  of  the  Macedonian  empire
under  the  fucceffors  of  Alexander ;  but  was  deftroyed  in  the
reign  of  Caffander,  when  158  Theffalonica  was  building :
And  the  inhabitants  of  Aenea,  with  many  others,  removed
to  the  new-built  city.

L.  From  Pallene,  the  Trojans  failed  to  Delos,  Anius
being,  then,  king  of  that  ifland :  Here  many  monuments


*s6'  n«AAi?v>f.  M.  *  *  *  fays,  in  his
note  upon  this  paffage,  that  this  penin¬
fula  was  in  Macedon,  and,  entirely,
different  from  That  of  Thrace  called,
alfo,  Pallene  •,  but  that  is  a  miftake  ;
this  is  the  fame  peninfula,  which,
formerly,  belonged  to  the  Thracians,
and,  afterwards,  to  the  Macedonians.
That  gentleman  did  not,  I  believe,
obferve  that  our  author,  before,  gave  a
fummary  account  of  Aeneas’s  voyage,
and  now  enters  into  a  detail  of  it.

*57*  noA/v  A ivetoiv.  This  town  is

*  B.  xliv.  c.  10.  f  B.  xl.  c.  4.


called*  by  e  Livy,  in  one  place,  Aenia,
and,  in  another,  Aenea-,  where, f  he  fays,
an  annual  facriHce  was  performed  to
Aeneas,  the  founder  of  it.

I58-  Qcra-uAoviKyj.  g  Strabo  fays,  alfo,
that  the  inhabitants  of  Aenea,  and  of
the  neighbouring  villages,  were  re¬
moved  to  Theffalonica  by  Caffander,
who  gave  to  his  new-built  city  the
name  of  his  wife  :  She  was  daughter
to  Philip,  and  filter  to  Alexander  the
great.  This  town  is,  now,  called
Saloniki.

•  «

g  Epit,  of  Strabo.  B.  vii,  p.  51.


of


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  113

of  the  arrival  of  Aeneas,  and  the  Trojans,  were  to  be  feen,
while  this  ifland  was  inhabited,  and  159  flourifhed.  Then,
being  arrived  at  Cythera,  another  ifland,  lying  off  Pelopon-
nefus,  they  built  a  temple  there  to  Venus.  While  they  were  on
their  voyage  from  lCo  Cythera,  and  not  far  from  Peloponnefus,
one  of  Aeneas’s  companions,  by  name,  Cinaethus,  died,
whom  they  buried  upon  one  of  the  promontories,  which,
from  him,  is,  to  this  day,  called  16 1  Cinaethion.  And,  hav¬
ing  renewed  their  affinity  with  the  Arcadians,  concerning
which  I  ffiall  treat  afterwards,  and  ftaid  a  fhort  time  in  thefe
places,  where  they  left  fome  of  their  people,  they  came  to
162  Zacynthus.  The  Zacynthii,  alfo,  received  them  in  a
friendly  manner  on  account  of  their  confanguinity  (For
Dardanus,  the  fon  of  Jupiter,  and  Eleftra,  the  daughter  of
Atlas,  had,  as  they  fay,  by  Battea,  two  fons,  Zacynthus,

*59-  H »d«.  Portus,  and  Sylburgius  high-priefts  fhould  be  kings,  but  that
have,  very  juftly,  obferved  that  r'vnccc,  kings  fliould  be  high-priefts,  that  is,
or  ote  is  wanting  before  >jv0«  to  com-  the  heads  of  their  churches.  The
plete  the  fenfe.  The  reader  will  re-  ifland  of  Delos  is  fo  much  celebrated
member  that h  Virgil,  alfo,  carries  Ae-  both  by  the  poets,  and  hiftorians  of  old,
neas  to  Delos,  where  Anius,  then,  and  of  fo  little  confequence  now,  that
reigned,  both  thefe  are  reafons  for  me  to  fay

Rex  Anius,  rex  idem  hotninum  Phoebique  facer  das.  moie  of  it  than  that  the  modem

Greeks,  in  their  half  Barbarous  lan-
This,  I  imagine,  Virgil  defigned  as  a  guage,  call  it  * Sdilous .
compliment  to  his  patron  Augustus,  160.  Ku0#§*.  This  ifland  is,  now,
who,  like  Julius  Caefar,  was  pontifex  called  Cerigo.

maximus,  a  dignity,  which  all  his  fuc-  l6l<  Ktvctdm.  kStrabo,  alfo,  men-
ceflors  injoyed  till  1  Gratian  was  fo  tions  this  place  as  lying  near  Taenaron,
very  wife  as  not  to  accept  it,  which  a  promontory  of  Laconia,
many  emperors  have  fince  had  fuffi-  l6**  E<f  Z*kw$qv.  This  ifland  is  now
cient  caufe  to  lament.  It  was,  no  called  Zante.
doubt,  a  very  wife  inftitution,  not  that

h  Acneid.  B.  iii,  jr.  80.  'Zozimus,  B.  iv.  p.  250.  Edit,  of  Oxf,  11  B.  viii.  p.  552.

Vol.  I.  and


i H  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  L

and  Erichthonius ;  of  whom  one  was  the  anceftor  of  Aeneas,
and  Zacynthus  the  founder  of  the  ifland)  In  memory,
therefore,  of  this  confanguinity,  and  by  reafon  of  the  kind-
nefs  of  the  inhabitants,  they  ftaid  here  fome  time  ;  and,
being,  alfo,  detained  by  ftormy  weather,  they  offered  up  a
facrifice  to  Venus,  in  a  temple,  built  by  themfelves ;  which,
to  this  day,  the  Zacynthii  perform  in  common,  and,  alfo,
celebrate  games,  confiding,  among  other  exercifes,  of  a
courfe  to  be  run  by  young  men,  in  which,  he,  who  comes
firft  to  the  temple,  gains  the  prize :  This  is  called  the  courfe
of  Aeneas,  and  Venus,  and  ftatues  are  ere&ed  there  to  both
of  them.  From  thence,  163  Handing  out  to  fea,  they  came
to  Leucas,  the  place  being,  yet,  in  the  poffeflion  of  the
Acarnanes.  Here,  alfo,  they  built  a  temple  to  Venus,  which
ftands  in  the  little  ifland,  that  lies  between  Diorydtus,  and
the  city:  It  is  called  the  temple  of  the  Aenean  Venus..
From  thence,  they  failed  to  164  A&ium,  their  fleet  lying  at


Em h0?v  Si  zcrihetyiav  zr citj [Mvoi  tov
sj-a*v.  This  fentence  is,  fadly,  tranflated
by  M.***  De  la  ay  ant  levs  Lancre  ils
frirent  terre  a  Leuca.de.  I  do  imagine
that  Aeneas,  and  his  people,  could
fcarce  have  failed,  if  they  had  not
weighed  anchor  ;  but,  what  becomes
of  znKayios  ?  They  were  to  fail  from
Zante  to  the  ifland  of  Leucadia,  now
called,  Santa  Maura ,  and  had  their
choice  either  to  fleer  their  courfe  be¬
tween  Cephalenia,  now  called,  Cefa-
logna ,  and  the  continent,  where  the
ftreight  is  full  of  little  illands  ;  or  to
{land  out  to  fea,  and  leave  Cephalenia


to  the  eaft :  They  chofe  the  latter;  and
this  is,  what  our  author  calls,  very
properly,  artA ayiot  srA In  this  fenfe,
the  word  is  uled  by  Thucydides,  who,,
fpeaking  of  the  Lacedaemonian  fqua-
dron,  that  failed  from  the  cape  Malea
to  attack  IVIelos,  fays,  z^At'iis'cn  yy  a,!
a,7ro  Mcxteccf  sruAotyicu,  which  Hobbes
has,  with  his  ulual  accuracy,  tranflated
in  the  following  manner,  Thefe  gallies
holding  their  courfe  from  Malea  through
the  main  fea.

j64*  a>c7/ov.  This  town  is  now  called
Figolo,  and  Hands  at  the  mouth  of  the
Ambracian  gulph,  known,  now,  by


1 B.  viii.  C.  39.


anchor


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC A  RN  A  S  S E N S I S.  115

anchor  off  a  promontory  of  the  Ambracian  bay.  After  that,
they  came  to  Ambracia,  of  which  city  165  Ambrax,  was,
then,  king :  He  was  the  fon  of  Dexamenus,  the  fon  of
Hercules :  And  monuments  of  their  arrival  are  left  in  both


places;  at  A&ium,  the  temple  of  the  Aenean  Venus,  and,
near  to  it,  That  of  the  great  gods ;  both  which  remain  to
this  day ;  and,  in  Ambracia,  a  temple  of  the  fame  goddefs,
and  a  chapel,  dedicated  to  the  memory  of  Aeneas,  near  the
little  theatre,  in  which  there  is  a  fmall  ancient  ftatue,  faid
to  be  of  Aeneas,  that  was  honoured  with  facrifices  by  the
priefteffes,  called  by  them,  AytpmoXoi.

LI.  From  Ambracia,  Anchifes  with  the  fleet,  (ailing  near
the  fhore,  came  to  166  Buthrotum,  a  fea-port  of  Epirus.


the  name  of  golfo  de  Larta .  Oppofite
to  A&ium,  Auguftus  built  a  town,
which  he  called  Nicopolis,  in  memory
of  the  fignal  victory  he  obtained  off
that  place,  by  the  conduct  of  Agrippa,
againft  his  infatuated  rival,  Marc  An¬
tony.  Ambracia  retains  its  old  name
with  a  fmall  variation,  being,  now,
called  Ambrakia.

l6S*  0  A t^otixeva  Hqomtevs.

I  find,  by  a  note  in  Hudfon,  that  Pal-
merius,  after  taking  great  pains  to  find
out  all  the  fons  of  Hercules,  fays  there
is  no  fuch  man  as  Dexamenus  among
them  ;  for  which  reafon,  he  is  of  opi¬
nion,  that  this  Dexamenus  is  the  per-
fon,  who  was  fo  much  celebrated  for
his  magnificent  entertainment  of  Her¬
cules.

l66*  Ba^ulov.  Aeneas,  in  Virgil,
purfues  the  fame  courfe  ;  and,  having
failed  within  fight  of  Zacynthus,  and


of  feveral  ifiands  lying  near  the  con¬
tinent,  particularly,  Ithaca,  which  had
produced  Ulyffes,  that  formidable  e-
nemy  to  the  Trojans,  he  arrives  at
Buthrotum,  now,  Butrinlo  \  where  he
finds  Helenus  in  poffefiion  of  the  king¬
dom  of  Epirus.  But  Virgil  defcribes
this  voyage  of  Aeneas  fo  much  better
than  I  can,  that  I  fhall  lay  it  before  the
reader  in  his  own  words  m:

Jam  medio  apparet fluff u  nemorofa  Zacynthos,
Dulicbiumque,Sameque,etNerltos  ardua /axis.
Effugimus  fcopulos  Ithacae  Laertia  regna ,

Et  terra??i  altricem  faevi  execramur  Ulyffis,
Mox  et  Leucatae  nimbofa  cacumina  mantis,

Et  formldatus  nautis  aperitur  Apollo.

n  Liter aque  Eplri  leglmus,  per  tuque  fubimus
Cbaonlo ,  et  celfa?n  Buthroti  afeendimus  urbem .
Hie  incredibilis  rerum  fama  occupat  antes,
Priamidem  Helenum  Graias  regna  re  per  urbes ,
Corjuglo  Acacldae  Pyrrbi  fceplrifque  potitum.


m  Aeneid.  B.  iii.  f.  270.  n  p.  292.

Q.2


But


1 16  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  L

But  Aeneas,  with  the  ableft  men  of  the  army,  in  two  clays,
marched  to  Dodona,  to  confult  the  oracle  :  There  they
found  the  Trojans,  who  had  come  thither  with  Helenus :
And,  having  received  anfwers  concerning  their  colony,  and,
among  other  Trojan  offerings,  dedicated  to  the  god  brazen
cups  (fome  of  which  are  ftill  extant,  and,  by  their  infcrip-
tions,  which  are  very  ancient,  fhew  by  whom  they  were
given)  they  joined  their  fleet,  after  a  march  of  about  four
days.  The  arrival  of  the  Trojans  at  Buthrotum  is  made
manifefl:  by  a  hill,  called  Troy,  where  they,  formerly,
incamped.  From  Buthrotum,  they  failed  clofe  to  the
fhore,  and  came  to  a  haven,  which  was,  then,  called  the
haven  of  Anchifes,  but,  now,  its  name  is  more  167  obfcure ;
where  alfo,  they  built  a  temple  to  Venus ;  and,  then,  crofled
the  Ionian  fea,  having  for  guides  in  their  navigation,  fome,
who  accompanied  them  of  their  own  accord,  and  took
with  them  Patron,  the  Thurian,  and  his  men.  The  greatefl:
part  of  whom,  after  the  army  was,  fafely,  arrived  in  Italy,
returned  home  :  But  Patron,  with  fome  of  his  friends,  being
prevailed  on  by  Aeneas  to  ingage  in  the  colony,  ftaid  with

The  oracle  of  Dodona  is  much  cele-  name  of  which,  our  author  fays,  was
brated  by  the  poets,  and  hiftorians  in  become  obfcure,  was  not  Caff  ope ,  but
all  ages*,  and,  for  that  reafon,  it  will  be  Anchefmus  \  which  he  confirms  by  a
a  lafting  monument  both  of  the  kna-  paffage  in  one  of  0  Cicero’s  letters  to
very  of  the  priefts,  and  the  folly  of  Atticus,  where  he  fays,  Brundufiumve-
the  people.  nimus  vn.  kal.  Becemb.  ufi  tud  felicitate

167*  Nuv  Si  ot<roiQt5i(>civ  ovof^actav.  navigandi.  Ita  belle  nobis Jlavit  £>.b  Epiro
Cafaubon  has,  with  great  learning,  and  lenijfimus  Anchefmites.
fagacity,  fhewn  that  this  haven,  the

0  B.  vii.  Epifk  2.


them,


Book!.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L ICA  RN  A  S  S  EN  SIS.  117

them.  Thefe,  according  to  Tome,  inhabited  163  Alontium,
a  town  of  Sicily.  In  memory  of  this  kindnefs,  the  Romans,
afterwards,  bellowed  Leucas,  and  169  Anadtorium  upon  the
Acarnanes,  which  they  had  taken  from  the  Corinthians ;
and  the  former  deliring  to  reinftate  the  170  Oeniadae,  they
gave  them  leave  to  do  it,  and,  alfo,  to  enjoy  the  produce  of
the  iflands,  called  the  171  Echinades,  in  common  with  the
Aetoli.  But,  to  return  to  Aeneas :  His  people  did  not
all  go  alhore  at  the  fame  part  of  Italy,  but  moft  of  them
landed  at  the  172  cape  Iapygia,  which  was,  then,  called  the


l6S*  Ev  AXovT iu.  This  town  ftands
on  the  north  of  Sicily,  not  far  from
the  fea,  near  the  river  Chydas,  and  is
now  called  Alontio.  p  Cicero  accufes
Verres  of  having  robbed  the  inhabi¬
tants  of  all  their  wrought  plate.

i69*  AvkkIo^iov.  q  This  town  ftands
near  to  the  Ambracian  gulph,  not  far
from  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Adtium.
It  is,  now,  called  Vonizza.

170-  o i»iaeT«f.  Near  the  mouth  of  the
riverAchelous,  lay  a  country,  that  was
called,  as  r  Strabo  fays,  Paracheloitis ,
by  its  being  often  overflowed  by  that
river  •,  which  confounded  the  bounda¬
ries  of  the  lands  belonging  to  the  A-
earnanes,  and  their  neighbours,  the
Aetolians  ;  and  this  produced  frequent
wars  between  thole  two  nations.  It  is
faid  that  Hercules,  by  raifing  banks,
put  a  ftop  to  this  inundation  of  the
river,  and  introduced  plenty  into  a
country,  that,  before,  was,  generally,
covered  with  water  •,  which  gave  oc-
caflon  to  the  fable  of  Amalthea’s  horn.


This  fervice  Hercules  did  to  the  coun¬
try  in  favor  of  Oeneus,  who  was  king
of  it  •,  and  whofe  daughter  Dei'anira.
he  had  married.  From  Oeneus,  the
people  were  called  Oeniadae.

I7I*  ExtvaJot?.  Thefe  are  fmall  iflands
lying  at  the  mouth  of  the  Achelous.
s  Pliny  makes  them  nine.  1  Thucy¬
dides,  and,  after  him,  u  Strabo  were  of
opinion  that  thefe  iflands  would,  one
day,  be  joined  to  the  continent  by  the
mud,  continually,  brought  down  by
the  Achelous,  which,  the  former  fays,
is  a  large,  and  turbid  river.  It  is  faid
that  this  has  happened  to  all  thefe
iflands,  but  three,  which  are,  now,,
called,  Curfclari ,  or  Cuzzolari.

Ascfav  la.7rvyiav.  Thus  Cafaubon
reads  it  inftead  of  aK^vIa7rvyiocs,  which
he,  very  properly,  fupports  by  the  au¬
thority  of  w’  Thucydides,  who  calls
this  promontory  by  that  name.  I  find,
alfo,  that x  Strabo  calls  it  Isnrvyiu.
It  is,  now,  called,  Capo  di  S.  Maria  di
Leuca.


p  Fourth  Oration  againft  Verres.  S  Strabo,  B.  x.  p.  691 .  r  B.  x.  p.  703..  #  B.  iv.  e.  12.

*B.ii.  c.  102.  «B.x.  p.703.  yB.  vi.c.  44.  *B.ii.  p.185.


Saientine.


1 1 8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


173  Salentine  cape  :  The  reft  difembarked  at  a  place,  called
*74  Minervium,  where  Aeneas  himfelf  landed  in  Italy.  This
is  a  promontory,  that  forms  a  harbour  in  the  fummer,  which,
from  that  time,  is  .called  the  haven  of  Venus :  After  this,
they  failed  along  the  ftiore  to  the  ftreight,  having  Italy  on
one  hand,  and  left  in  thefe  places,  alfo,  fome  traces  of  their
arrival  ;  among  others,  a  brazen  patera  in  the  temple  of
Juno,  on  which  is  infcribed,  in  ancient  characters,  the  name
of  Aeneas,  who  dedicated  it  to  the  goddefs.

LII.  When  they  came  near  Sicily,  whether  they  had  any
deftgn  of  landing  there,  or  were  forced  from  their  courfe  by
tempefts,  which  are  common  in  thefe  feas,  they  difimbarked
at  that  part  of  the  illand,  which  is  called 175  Drepana  :  Here,


J73*  H  lo  t  Xoi\£v1ivos  txtytio.  We  are
obliged  to  the  Vatican  manufcript  for
this  correction.  The  fouth  weft  part
of  this  peninfula  was  inhabited  by  the
Salentini,  whofe  territories  -y  Strabo
fays,  included  the  promontory  Iapygia.
For  which  reafon,  it  is  called  by 2  Pliny
Salentinum  promontorium .

J74*  a9>j vtf»ov.  This  temple  of  Mi¬
nerva  is  mentioned  by  many  ancient
authors.  It  ftood  to  the  north  of  the
a  cape  Iapygia,  and  was  called  by  the
Romans,  Cajlrum  Minervae ,  Ara  Mi-
nervae ,  znCiMinervium,  and,  now^CaJlro.
Here,  alfo,  Aeneas  lands  in b  Virgil  ;

portufque  patefcit

Jam  propior ,  templumque  apparet  in  arce  Miner  awe:
Vela  legunt  focii,  et  proras  ad  litora  tcrquent.

i75*  Aot-n-xv*.  A  town  on  the  fouth
weft  part  of  Sicily,  not  far  from  Lily-

y  B.  vi.  p.  425.  z  B.  iii.  c.  13.

v  Aeneid.  B.  iii.  530.  c  Cluver,  Sicil.


baeum  :  It  is  now  called  « 'Trapani .
This  town  Hands  in  a  peninfula,  the
fouth  fide  of  which  forms  a  fine  port.
Drepanum  received  its  name  from  its
figure,  which,  being  curved,  was
thought  to  refemble  a  fithe,  in  Greek,
Apt-no ivov ;  which  figure  gave  name,
alfo,  to  Meffana,  another  city  in  Sicily,
which  was  called  Zancle,  from  fry* \yj9
another  Greek  word  for  a  fithe.  In
Drepanum,  Aeneas,  as  d  Virgil  fays,
lofes  his  father  Anchifes,  and,  for  this
reafon  he  calls  it,  a  melancholy  coajl  \

Hinc  Drepani  me  portus  et  illaetahilis  ora
Accipit.

Here,  alfo,  he  finds  his  countryman
Aceftes,  called,  by  the  hiftorians,  Ae-
geftus ;  and  here  was  the  coaft,  where
his  brother  Eryx  had  reigned.

a  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iv.  p.  1240.
Antiq.  B.  ii.  p.  236.  d  Aeneid.  B.  iii.  f.  yQy.


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I S.  n9

they  found  the  Trojans,  who,  with  Elymus,  and  Aegeftus,
had  left  Troy  before  them  ;  and  who,  being  176  favoured
both  by  fortune,  and  the  winds,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  not
over  burthened  with  baggage,  had  a  quick  paffage  to
Sicily,  and  were  fettled  near  the  river  177  Crimefus,  in  the
country  of  the  Sicani,  who,  out  of  friendfhip,  had  bellowed
the  land  upon  them  by  reafon  of  their  relation  to  Aegeftus,
who  had  been  born,  and  bred  in  Sicily  by  the  following
accident :  One  of  his  anceftors,  a  man  of  diftindtion,  and
of  Trojan  extraction,  being  upon  ill  terms  with  Laomedon,,
the  king,  feized  him  for  fome  reafon,  and  put  him  to  death*,
and,  with  him,  all  his  male  children,  left  he  fhould  fuffer
fome  mifchief  from  them;  but,  thinking  it  unbecoming
him  to  put  his  daughters  to  death,  as  they  were  yet  virgins*,


I76,  Oj  T£  JC Otl  TSViV [AOilo ?  A X-

Co/xtvot.  I  cannot  perfuade  myfelf  that
our  author  defigned  as  an  epithet
both  for  and  zvvevy.d]Qc,  though  I

find  the  Latin  tranflators  have  applied
it  to  both  j  and  fo  would  Ovid,  no
doubt,  if  he  had  tranfiated  it,  as  any
one  mayguefs,by  the  following  diftich,
which,  is,  pretty  much,  in  the  fame
tafte,  and  which  I  have  heard  much
admired  :

Demophoon  vent  is,  et  verba,  et  vela  dedijli  :

V da  queror  redituy  verba  car  ere  Jide  e.

This  is  the  language  of  a  witty  poet,
not  of  a  lovefiek  girl,  who  would  have
exprelfed  herfelf  with  lefs  wit,  and
more  paffion.  If  I  have  applied  the
word  favoured  both  to  fortune,  and  the
winds,  it  is  becaule  favourable ,  in  our

e  Phyll.  to  Demoph.  f.


language,  is  applicable  to  both  in  a
figurative  fenfe  :  But  when  ap¬
plied  to  fortune,  is  in  the  figurative  j
and,  when  to  the  wind, in  a  literal  fenfe.
But  this  epigrammatic  way  of  writing
is  much  below  the  dignity  of  hiftory,
and  no  author  defpifes  it  more  than
Dionyfius.  The  only  difficulty  is,  that
j,  without  this  epithet,  may  be
thought  too  general,  and  not  to  fignify
good  fortune :  But  this  difficulty  will
be  removed,  if  we  confider  the  word,
as  explained  by  Hefychius.

177-  K£iy.v<r»v.  This  river,  is,  fome-
times,  called  K^^go-o?,  and,  by  f  Plu¬
tarch,  K^jjo-of :  It  falls  into  the  fea
not  far  from  Lilybaeum,  on  the  fouth
weft  coaft  of  Sicily,  and  is,  now,  called
Balici.

i$.  f  Life  of  TimoX.


and


120  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

and  unfafe  to  fuffer  them  to  marry  any  of  the  Trojans,  he
delivered  them  to  fome  merchants,  with  orders  to  carry
them  to  the  moft  diftant  country :  They  were  attended  in
their  voyage  by  a  noble  youth,  who  was  in  love  with  one
of  the  two  virgins,  whom  he  married  as  foon  as  fhe  arrived
in  Sicily  ;  and,  during  their  flay  among  the  Siceli,  they  had
a  fon,  whofe  name  was  Aegeftus ;  and  who,  having  learned
,the  manners,  and  language  of  the  inhabitants,  after  the  death
■of  his  parents,  Priamus  being,  then,  king  of  Troy,  obtained
leave  to  return  home ;  and,  having  aflifted  him  in  the  war
with  the  Greeks,  178  while  thefe  were  employed  in  taking  the
city,  he  failed  back  again  to  Sicily,  being  accompanied,  in
his  flight,  by  Elymus,  with  the  three  fhips,  which  Achilles
had  with  him,  when  he  plundered  the  Trojan  cities,  and
which,  by  their  ftriking  upon  fome  hidden  rocks,  he  had
loft.  Aeneas,  finding  thefe  men  hefe,  fhewed  them  great
kindnefs,  and  built  two  cities  for  them,  called  179  Aegefta,

x7**  AKicMy,tm  tw  aroAsa?.  I  think  perpetual  alliance,  and  friendlhip,  but,
la  ville  etant  fur  le  point  d'etre  prife^  in  alfo,  by  confanguinity.  This  town
M.  *'**,  does  not  exprefs  the  author’s  flood  near  the  river  Simois,  after  it
fenfe  and  fubmit  it  to  him,  whether  had  been  joined  by  the  Scamander,
pendant  qiion  frenoit  la  ville  would  not  both  Trojan  names,  and  the  ruins  of
be  a  cloler  tranflation  of  it  in  his  lan-  its  fea  port  are  ftill  to  be  feen  at  a
guage.  place  which  b  Cluver  fays  is,  now,

J79*  Aiytruv  aat  EAyuof.  The  firft  of  called  Cajlel  a  mare.  This  place  lies
thefe  towns  was,  afterwards,  called  on  the  fouth  weft  coaft  of  Sicily.  But
Segejla ,  by  the  Romans,  and  looked  this  great  geographer,  very  unjuftly,
upon  by  them  to  have  been  founded  cenfures  1  Virgil  for  making  Ilioneus
by  Aeneas,  s  Cicero  fays  the  inhabi-  fay  to  Dido,
tants  could  prove  this  :  For  which

jeafon,  they  efteemed  themfelves  as  .  fmt  „  S,cul;,  urh,

united  to  the  Romans,  not  only,  by  a  d“m‘

&  Againft  Verres,  fourth  oration.  b  Sic.  Antiq.  p.  265.  f  Aeneid.  B.  i.  f.  549.

and


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H A L I C  ARN  A S  SE N  SI S.  121
and  Eryx,  where  he  left  fome  part  of  his  army ;  which,  I
imagine,  he  did  by  choice,  to  the  end  that  thofe,  who  were
tired  with  fatigue,  or,  otherwife,  difliking  the  fea,  might  in¬
joy  reft,  and  a  fafe  retreat :  But  fome  write,  that  the  lofs  of
part  of  his  fleet,  which  was  burnt  by  fome  of  the  women,
who  were  diflatisfied  with  wandering,  obliged  him  to  leave
thofe  behind,  who  belonged  to  the  fhips,  that  were  burnt ;


before  Aeneas  had  ever  been  in  that
ifiand  :  For,  fays  he,  the  poet  brings
him  thither  after  the  death  of  Dido.
From  whence,  he  concludes  that  Vir¬
gil,  very  much,  forgot  himfelf,  when
he  fpoke  of  the  arrival  of  Aeneas  at
Drepanum  in  Sicily.  But,  if  Cluver
had  confidered  the  feries  of  Virgil’s
narration  with  a  little  more  attention,
he  would  not  have  paffed  this  cenfure
on  him.  Aeneas  lands  at  Drepanum,
where  he  lofes  his  father  ;  from  thence,
he  fets  fail  for  Italy  ;  but  is  driven,
by  a  temped:,  on  the  coaft  of  Africa
near  Carthage  :  And  h  Virgil  begins
his  narration  with  his  hero’s  failing
from  Sicily.

Vix  e  conPpefiu  Siculae  telluris  in  altum

V da  dabant  lacti.

Ilioneus,  therefore,  very  properly,  men¬
tions  Sicily,  and  Aceftes  in  his  fpeech
to  Dido  :  And  it  mud:  be  fuppofed
that  Aeneas,  during  his  firft  ftay  in
Sicily,  had  feen  Aceftes  •,  becaufe,
when  he  came  to  that  coaft  the  fecond
time,  Virgil  makes  Aceftes  furprifed
at  the  arrival  of  his  allies,  who,  he
imagined,  were  in  Italy,  and  1  con¬
gratulating  them  on  their  return ,


Et  pro  cut  excelfo  miratus  njertice  montis
Aduentum  fociafque  rates ,  occurrit  Acejies,

k  Gratatur  reduces.

It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  Aeneas  had
been  in  Sicily  before  he  went  to  Car¬
thage,  and  faw  Dido.  While  he  was
there  the  fecond  time,  he  built  Aegefta;
and,  having  left  the  women  there,  and
thofe  of  his  people,  who  were  not  am¬
bitious  of  a  great  name,  he  failed  to
Italy  with  the  reft,  who  were  few  in
number,  but  eager  for  adtion1 ;

Eranfcrilunt  urli  tnatres,  populumque  rvolentem
Deponunt,  animos  nil  magnae  laudis  egentes.

Ipfi  tranjlra  novant,

Exigui  nnmero,  fed  hello  'vi’vida  njirtus.

Every  reader,  who  admires  Virgil,
will  excufe  this  digredion  in  juftifica-
tion  of  him.  Concerning  the  other
town,  called,  Exyua,  by  our  author,
Cluver,  very  juftly,  contends  that  we
ftiould  read  E ^xjkoc,  which  he  fupports
by  the  authority  of  m  Thucydides,  who
fays  that  E^w|  and  Eyera  were  two
cities  belonging  to  the  Elymi.  Flere
Cluver  fights  with  the  arms  of  geogra¬
phy,  in  which  he  was  better  exerciled
then  in  Thofe  of  criticifm.


h  Aeneid.  B.  i.  f.  34.
111  B.  vi.  c.  2.


VOL.  I.


'Aeneid.  B.  v.  35.  k  f.  40.  1  Aeneid.  B.  v.  f.  750.


and,


R


i22  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book!.

and,  for  that  reafon,  could  fail  no  longer  with  their  com¬
panions.

LIIL  There  are  many  monuments  of  the  arrival  of  Aeneas,
and  the  Trojans,  in  Sicily  ;  but  the  moft  remarkable  are  the
altar  of  the  Aenean  Venus,  placed  on  the  fummit  of  mount
Eryx  and,  a  temple,  dedicated  to  Aeneas,  in  Aegefta  ;  the
firft  being  ere&ed  by  Aeneas  himfelf,  to  his  mother ;  and  the
temple,  by  thofe  left  there  by  the  fleet,  who  confecrated  it  to
the  memory  of  their  deliverer.  The  Trojans,  therefore,  who
came  hither  with  Elymus,  and  Aegeftus,  remained  in  thefe
places,  and  continued  to  be  called  Elymi ;  for  Elymus  was
the  firft  in  dignity,  as  being  of  the  royal  family,  from  whom
they  all  took  their  name.  Aeneas,  and  his  companions,
leaving  Sicily,  crofted  the  Tyrrhene  fea,  and  came,  firft,
to  a  port  of  Italy,  called  180  Palinurus,  which,  they  fay,
took  its  name  from  one  of  the  pilots  of  Aeneas,  who  died
there.  After  that,  they  came  to  an  ifland,  which  they  called
18 '  Leucofia,  from  a  woman,  who  was  a  relation  to  Aeneas,
and  died  at  that  place.  From  thence,  they  came  to  an
anchor  in  a  deep  and  beautiful  haven  of  the  Opici,  which,
from  182  Mifenus,,  a  man  of  figure,  who,  alfo,  died  there,  they

l8°*  n*Ai»K£0f.  When  n  Virgil  faid,  1821  M «njv*..  Mifenus,  the  trumpeter

Aeternumque  locus  Palinuri  nomen  habehit,  of  Aeneas,  who  Was  thrown  into  the

lea  here  by  his  rival,  Triton,  is  much
he  fpoke  like  a  prophet,  as  well  as  a  celebrated  by  Virgil.  Our  country-
poet;  for  this  place  is  Hill  called  Pa-  man,  Dryden,  who  was  a  man  of  great
linuro ,  and  the  cape,  Capo  di  Palinuro.  learning,  and  very  capable  both  of
181  •  Awxotrioi.  This  is  the  name  all  tailing,  and  exprefiing  the  beauties  of
authors  give  to  this  little  rocky  ifland,  poetry,  is  tranfported  with  the  laft  of
called,  now,  la  Licofa.  the  two  following  verfes,  which,  they

B  Aeneid.  B.  vi,  f.  381,


called


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  123


called  by  his  name  :  And,  coming  to  the  ifland,  183  Prochyta,
and  to  the  promontory,  184  Caieta,  they  named  thefe  places
in  the  fame  manner,  defiring  they  fhould  ferve  as  monu¬
ments  of  the  women  who  died  there ;  of  whom  one,  is  faid
to  have  been  a  relation  of  Aeneas,  and,  the  other,  his  nurfe.
At  laft,  they  arrived  at  Laurentum  in  Italy ;  where,  coming
to  the  end  of  their  wandering,  they  threw  up  an  intrench-
ment ;  and  the  place,  where  they  incamped,  is,  from  that
time,  called  185  Troy  :  It  is  diftant  from  the  fea  about  four


fay,  0  Virgil  added,  while  he  was  re¬
citing  the  Aeneid  to  Auguftus,

Mifenum  Aeoliden :  quo  non  praeflantior  alter

Acre  ciere  v'tros ,  Martemque  accendere  cantuW

This  cape  is,  (till,  called  Capo  Mifeno.
I  have  not  followed  the  Vatican  manu-
icript,  where  this  haven  is  called  A/(u>jv
jctf.v.of ;  becaufe,  if  it  had  been  a  bad
haven ,  it  would  not  have  been  the
conftant  ftation  of  the  Roman  fleet,
provided  for  the  fecurity  of  the  Tyr¬
rhene  fea-,  which  ir,  certainly,  was,  as
may  be  feen  in  many  ancient  authors,
particularly,  in  the  letter,  mentioned
in  a  former  note,  which  Pliny  the
younger  writ  to  Tacitus,  giving  him
an  account  of  his  uncle’s  death.

183-  n^o^t A  little  ifland  lying  off
cape  Mifenum,  now,  called  Procita ,
and  Procida.

I^4*  Thus  Cafau-

bon  has,  very  judicioufly,  corre&ed
this  paffage  :  But  I  wifh  he  had  left
out  which,  I  think,  can  have  no
place  here.  For  I  do  not  fee  why  Ae¬
neas,  when  he  was  failing  along  this


coaff,  could  be  faid  to  have  come  to
this  promontory  by  chance  any  more
than  to  any  other.  Caieta,  ftill,  retains
its  name  with  a  fmall  variation,  it  be¬
ing,  now,  called  Gaeta.  Here,  again,
Virgil  has  followed  the  fame  hiftorians
with  our  author,  and  fays,  this  place
received  its  name  from  the  nurfe  of
Aeneas,  who  died  here.

Tu  quoque  litoribus  nojlris,  Aneia  nutrix,

Aeternam  moriens  famam,  Caieta ,  dedijii  S.

l85*  r  Livy  gives  the  fame

account.  Ab  Sicilia  clajje  Laurentum
agrum  tenuijfe :  Lroja  el  huic  loco  nomen
eft.  The  place,  where  Aeneas  formed
his  camp,  muff  have  been  between  the
lake  of  Oftia,  and  the  eaft  fide  of  the
Tiber.  Our  author  fays  he  was  under
a  neceflity  of  making  this  digreffon
concerning  the  arrival  of  Aeneas  in
Italy,  becaufe  many  hiftorians  afferted
that  Aeneas  never  came  thither  at  all.
This  affertion  many  modern  authors
of  great  reputation  have  revived,  and
and  written,  profeffedly,  on  that  fub-
je£t.  For  which  reafon,  I  fhall  follow


•  Preface  to  Frefnoy’s  Art  of  painting.
rB.  i.  C.  1.


r  Aeneid.  B.  vi.  f.  164.


R  2


s  Aeneid.  B.  vii.  p.  i .

ftadia.


I24  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  I.

ftadia.  I  was  under  a  neceffity  of  relating  thefe  things,  and
of  making  this  digreffion ;  fince  fome  hiftorians  affirm  that
Aeneas  did  not,  even,  come  into  Italy  with  the  Trojans;
and  fome,  that  it  was  another  Aeneas,  not  the  fon  of  An-
chifes,  and  Venus ;  others,  that  it  was  Afcanius,  the  fon  of
Aeneas ;  and  others,  that  they  were  fome  other  perfons.
There  are,  who  pretend,  that  Aeneas,  the  fon  of  Venus,
after  he  had  fettled  a  colony  of  his  people  in  Italy,  returned
home,  was  king  of  Troy,  and,  dying,  left  his  kingdom  to
Afcanius,  his  fon,  whofe  pofterity  injoyed  it  for  a  long  time :
Thefe  are,  in  my  opinion,  deceived,  by  miftaking  the  fenfe
of  Homer’s  verfes.  For,  in  the  iliad,  he  reprefents  Neptune,
foretelling  the  future  fplendor  of  Aeneas,  and  his  pofterity,
in  this  manner  ;


186  On  great  Aeneas  Jhall  devolve  the  reign ,

And  fins  fiucceedmg  fions  the  lajling  line  fiujlain .

Pope.


the  example  of  our  author,  and,  alfo,
make  a  digreffion,  to  anfwer  the  ob¬
jections  of  thefe  writers.  But,  I  eafily,
forefee  that  a  diffiertation  of  this  kind,
in  which  many  things  muft  be  anfwer-
ed,  and  many  eftablifhed,  will  be  much
too  long  to  be  inferted  among  the
notes  ;  I  fhall,  therefore,  give  it  a  place
by  itfelf  at  the  end  of  this  book.

1S6.  Aivetoco.  I  have  given

Pope’s  trandation  of  thefe  verfes,  which
1  fhall  always  obferve,  when  any  verfes
of  Homer  are  quoted  in  the  courfe  of
this  work.  For  a  poet  muft  be  tranf-
lated  by  a  poet ;  and  his  tranflation  of
the  Iliad  will  be  admired  as  long  as


the  Engiifh  language  fhall  be  under-
ftood.  He  has  a  long  note  upon  thefe
verfes,  in  which  he  takes  notice  of  the
explication  our  author  gives  of  them
in  the  paffage,  now,  before  us  ;  and,
upon  the  whole,  treats  the  arrival  of
Aeneas  in  Italy,  as  a  chimera,  invented
both  by  Virgil,  and  our  author,  to
compliment  Auguftus.  But,  I  fhall
confider  his  reafons  at  large,  as  alfo,
Thofealledged  by  Bochart  in  his  letter
to  Segrais,  to  which  he  refers.  I  hope
no  critic  will  find  fault  with  his  tranf¬
lation  of  thefe  verfes,  becaufe  he  has
left  out  the  word  Trojans ,  which  is  the
very  point  in  difpute  ;  fince,  as  Homer

Thus,


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS IS.  125
Thus,  fuppofing  that  Homer  knew  thefe  men  reigned  in
Phrygia,  they  invented  the  return  of  Aeneas,  as  if  it  were
not  poffible  that,  if  they  lived  in  Italy,  they  fhould  reign
over  Trojans.  But,  it  was  not  impoffible  that  he  fhould
reign  over  thofe  Trojans  he  had  carried  with  him,  though
fettled  in  another  country.  However,  other  reafons,  alfo,
may  be  given  for  this  miftake.

LIV.  But  if  this  creates  a  difficulty,  that  the  fepulchre
of  Aeneas  is  faid  to  be,  and  is  fhewn,  in  many  places,  it
being  impoffible  for  the  fame  perlon  to  be  buried  in  more
than  one  ;  let  them  confider  that  this  difficulty  is  common
to  many,  particularly  to  men  of  illuftrious  fortunes,  and
wandering  lives ;  and  let  me  inform  them  that,  though  only
one  place  received  their  bodies,  yet,  their  monuments  were
ere&ed  in  many,  through  the  gratitude  of  thofe,  who  had
received  fome  benefits  from  them;  particularly,  if  any  of  their
family,  ftill,  remained,  or  any  city  had  been  built  by  them,
or  if  their  refidence,  among  any  of  thofe  people,  had  been
long,  and  diftinguiffied  by  inftances  of  humanity  :  All  which
agree  with  the  187  account,  we  have  received,  of  this  hero.
For,  having  prefer ved  Troy,  when  it  was  taken,  from  utter

had,  in  the  preceding  verfe,  mentioned  manner,  1  Virgil  has  adapted  them  to
Priam,  the  kingdom,  that  was  to  de-  his  fyftem.

volve  On  Aeneas,  muft  be  underftood  jF/zr  domus  Jleneae  cun&is  dominahitur  oris,

tO  be  i  hat  of  the  Projans.  We  find,  £7  nati  natoru?n,et  aid  nafcentur  abillis.
by  1  Strabo,  that  fome  read  thefe  veri'es  l8?.  See  the  end  of

in  this  manner .  the  37th  annotation.  All  the  tranflators

Nuv  J>1  Aireuto  /3oj  IIANTEIZIN  etva^et..  have  adhered  to  the  vulgar  lenfe  of  the

word,  without  conlidering  the  abfur-
meaning  the  Romans.  And,  in  this  dity,  that,  vifibly,  refults  from  it.

s  B.  xiii.  p,  9 c6,  1  Aeneid.  B,  iii.  f.  97.


de-


X  2  6


ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book!.

deftrudfion,  andfent  away  the  Trojan  allies  fafe  to  Bebrycia  ;
left  his  foil  Afcanius  to  reign  in  Phrygia  ;  built  a  city  of
the  fame  name  with  himfelf  in  Pallene ;  married  his
daughters  in  Arcadia  ;  left  part  of  his  army  in  Sicily ;  and,
during  his  refidence  in  many  other  parts,  vifibly,  behaved
himfelt  with  great  humanity,  he  acquired  the  voluntary
affedtion  of  thofe  people,  and,  for  that  reafon,  was  honoured,
after  his  death,  with  temples,  and  monuments  in  many
places :  What  caufe,  then,  can  be  affigned  for  the  monu¬
ments  eredted  to  him  in  Italy,  if  he  never  reigned  in  thofe
parts,  refided  there,  or  was,  intirely,  unknown  to  the  inha¬
bitants?  But  this  point  fhall  be,  again,  difcuffed,  and  made
manifeft,  as  often  as  the  occafion  fhall  require  it.

LV.  The  reafon  why  the  Trojan  fleet  failed  no  further
into  Europe,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  oracles,  which  were
fulfilled  in  thefe  parts,  and  to  the  will  of  Heaven,  many
ways,  revealed  to  them.  For,  while  their  fleet  lay  at  anchor
off  Laurentum,  and  they  were  incamped  near  the  fhore,
firft,  the  men,  being  oppreffed  with  thirft,  and  there  being
no  water  in  the  place,  (what  I  fay,  I  had  from  the  inhabi¬
tants)  fprings  of  the  fweeteft  water  were  feen  rifing  out  of
the  earth  fpontaneoufly,  of  which  all  the  army  drank,  and
the  place  was  overflowed,  till  the  ftream  ran  down  to  the
fea  from  the  fprings,  which,  at  this  time,  are  not  fo  high  as
to  overflow  ;  but  there  is  a  little  water,  contained  in  a  hol¬
low  place,  which  the  inhabitants  fay  is  confecrated  to  the
fun  ;  and,  near  it,  two  altars  are  to  be  feen,  one  to  the  eaft,
the  other  to  the  weft;  both  of  Trojan  ftrudture;  upon

which,


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICA  RN  ASSENSIS.  327

which,  they  fay,  Aeneas  offered  up  his  firft  facrifice  to  the
god  in  acknowledgement  for  the  water.  After  that,  while
they  were  at  dinner  upon  the  ground,  many  of  them  ftrewed
parfley  under  their  vi&uals,  inftead  of  a  table ;  but,  others
fay,  they  made  ufe  of  wheaten  cakes,  that  they  might  eat
with  greater  cleanlinefs :  When  all  the  vi&uals,  that  were
laid  before  them,  were  eaten,  one  of  them  eat  of  the  parfley r
or  cakes,  that  were  laid  under  their  victuals,  and  then
another ;  and  one  of  Aeneas’s  fons,  as  it  is  faid,  or,  fome  other
of  the  company,  happened  to  fay,  Behold,  we  have  eaten
even  the  table  !  As  foon  as  they  heard  this,  they  all  cried
out,  188  with  joy,  that  the  firft  part  of  the  oracle  was,  now,,
fulfilled.  For,  a  certain  oracle  had  been  delivered  to  them,
as  fome  fay,  in  Dodona ;  but,  as  others  write,  in  Erythrae*
a  town  near  mount  Ida,  where  lived  a  189  Sibyl  of  that  coun-


i3S.  AviOogvCtjiTciv’  OogvGetv  does  not,
always,  fignify  to  aft  diforderly ,  as  it  is
generally,  fuppofed  :  It,  fometimes,
iignifies,  to  applaud:  A  remarkable
inftance  of  which  we  find  in  v  Demof-
thenes  ;  ravla  cuiurxvleg  tK&voi,  KOil  S-o-
cog  ogOeeg  As  yd  oti.

l29-  'Z&vKhx.  This  Erithraean  Sibyl
is  much  celebrated  by  many  authors,
both  ancient  and  modern,  who  have
abufed  their  leifure  in  tranfmitting  the
impoftures  of  one  age  to  the  credulity
of  the  next.  Of  all  the  etymologies
of  the  word  Sibylla,  That,  given  by
Servius,  feems  to  come  neareft  the
truth-,  w he  fays  the  name  is  derived
from  os  the  decree  of  Jupiter ,

of  which,  it  feems,  thefe  ladies  were


the  interpreters.  It  is  certain,  that,
in  the  Aeolic,  or  Doric  dialed!,  <rio?  is
hog ;  from  whence  came  the  oath,  fo
much  ufed  by  the  Lacedaemonians,-
who  fpoke  the  Doric  dialed!,  pa  tw.
hu  -,  by  which  they  meant  the  two
brother  gods,  Caftor,  and  Pollux..
This  very  extraordinary  prophecy,  that
the  Trojans  were  to  ref!  from  their
labors  in  the  place,  where  they  fhould
eat  their  tables, x  Virgil,  who  would
omit  no  tradition,  which  had  any  thing
marvellous  in  it,  puts  into  the  mouth
of  the  Harpy,  who,  we  find,  was,  alfo,
a  prophetefs,

Scd  non  ante  datum  cingetis  nwenibus  urbem,

tpuam  <vos  dira  fames  nofracque  injuria  caedis

Ambefas  fubigat  malis  confumere  menfas.


v  Philip.  2h


w  On  the  third  book,  Aeneid.  f.  452.


x  Aeneid.  B.  iii.  f ,  25^.


128  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

try,  a  prophetic  nymph,  who  ordered  them  to  fail  weftward
till  they  came  to  a  place,  where  they  fhould  eat  the  tables :
And,  when  they  found  this  had  happened,  they  fhould
follow  a  quadruped,  as  their  guide ;  and,  wherever  the
animal,  fpent  with  fatigue,  laid  itfelf  down,  there  they
fhould  built  a  city.  Calling  to  mind,  therefore,  this  pro¬
phecy,  fome,  by  the  order  of  Aeneas,  brought  to  the  place,
appointed  by  him,  the  images  of  the  gods  out  of  the  Chip  ;
others  prepared  190  pedeftals,  and  altars  for  them;  and  the
women  with  fhouts,  and  dancing,  accompanied  the  images :
And  Aeneas,  with  his  companions,  when  the  facrifice  was
ready,  flood  round  the  altar  with  crowns  on  their  heads.

L VI.  While  thefe  were  offering  up  their  prayers,  the  fow,
which  was  the  deftined  vidim,  being  big  with  young,  and  near
her  time,  when  the  priefks  were  191  beginning  the  immola¬
tion,  broke  loofe,  and,  flying  from  thofe  who  held  her,  ran
up  into  the  country.  Aeneas,  underftanding  this  was,  cer¬
tainly,  the  guide  the  oracle  had  pointed  out,  followed  it,
with  a  few  of  his  people,  at  a  fmall  diftance,  fearing  left,

This  prophecy,  which  Teemed  to  threat-  to  Aegina  to  bring  away  the  ftatues
en  To  dreadful  a  famine,  y  he  folves,  of  Damia,  and  Auxefia,  fays  they  en-
alfo,  in  the  fame  harmlefs  manner  deavoured  to  take  them  from  their
with  our  author ;  pedeftals,  ru  ctyuhfxxiot  ruvlot  g*

Heus  !  etiam  menfas  confumimus ,  inquit  lulus .  Tft,v  Gireev.  Le  Jay  feems

Nec  plura  alludens :  ea  vox  audita  laborum  not  to  have  liked  the  word  j  for  which

Prima  tulit Jinem.  icftion5  he  lids  left  it  out.  The  other

French  tranflator  has  faid  des  marche-
,9°'  This  is  the  proper  Greek  peds ,  which  is  not  the  term  in  his
word  for  pedeftals  ;  and,  in  this  fenfe,  language.  Why  not  des piedeftaux  ?
it  is  uled  by  Herodotus,  who,  Ipeak-  191*  Kaloi^o^tyuy.  See  the  124^
ing  of  the  perfons  fent  from  Athens  annotation.


y  Aeneid.  B.  vii.  f.  1 16.  1  In  Terpfich.  c.  85.


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  ASSEN  SIS.  129

difturbed  by  her  purfuers,  fhe  might  be  frightened  from  the
courfe  fate  had  prefcribed  to  her.  The  fow,  having  gone
about  four  and  twenty  ftadia  from  the  fea,  ran  up  a  hill,
where,  being  tired,  fhe  lay  down.  But  Aeneas  (for  the
oracles  feemed,  now,  to  be  fulfilled)  obferving  the  land  to
be  barren,  and  at  a  diftance  from  the  fea,  where,  even,  the
road  was  unfafe,  found  himfelf  in  great  perplexity  whether
they  ought,  in  obedience  to  the  oracle,  to  fettle  there,  where
they  were  to  lead  a  life  of  perpetual  mifery,  without  any
injoyment,  or  go  further,  in  fearch  of  a  better  foil.  While
he  was  in  this  confideration,  accufing  the  gods,  on  a  hidden,
they  fay,  he  heard  a  voice,  which  came  from  a  wood,  the
perfon,  who  uttered  it,  not  appearing,  by  which  he  was
commanded  to  hay  there,  and  build  a  city,  immediately ;
and  not,  by  giving  way  to  the  uncertainty  of  his  prefent
opinion  that  he  was  going  to  fettle  in  a  barren  country,  to
reject  his  future,  and,  in  a  manner,  prefent  happinefs :  For,
it  was  decreed,  that,  iffuing  forth  from  this  barren  and  fmall
habitation,  he  fhould,  in  procefs  of  time,  acquire  a  fpacious
and  fertil  country;  and  that  his  children,  and  pofterity
fhould  be  mafters  of  a  vaft  empire,  which  fhould  laft  for
many  ages ;  that,  for  the  prefent,  therefore,  this  city  fhould
be  a  retreat  for  the  Trojans;  but  that,  after  as  many  years,
as  the  fow  fhould  bring  forth  young  ones,  another  large  and
flourifliing  city  fhould  be  built  by  his  pofterity.  It  is  faid,
that  Aeneas,  hearing  this,  and  looking  upon  the  voice  as
fomething  divine,  did,*  as  the  god  had  commanded.  But,
others  fay,  that,  while  he  was  oppreffed  with  anxiety,  and
Vql.  I.  S  had


130  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  L

had  fo  far  abandoned  himfelf  to  grief,  as  neither  to  come  into
the  camp,  nor  take  any  nourishment,  but  laying  himfelf  down
to  reft  that  night,  where  it  overtook  him,  a  great  and  won¬
derful  phantom  appeared  to  him  in 192  his  fteep,  in  the  fhape  of
one  of  his  houftiold  gods,  and  gave  him  the  advice,  juft  before,
mentioned.  Which  of  thefe  accounts  is  the  trueft,  the  gods,
only,  know.  The  next  day,  it  is  faid,  the  fow  brought  forth

193  thirty  young  ones ;  and  that,  according  to  the  oracle,  as
many  years  after,  another  city  was  built  by  the  Trojans,
concerning  which  I  fhall  fpeak  in  a  proper  place.

LVII.  Aeneas  facrificed  the  fow,  with  her  young,  to
his  houfhold  gods,  in  the  place,  where,  now,  ftands  the

194  wooden  hut,  which  the  Lavinienfes  look  upon  as  holy,
and  preferve  it  inacceflible  to  all  but  themfelves :  Then,
ordering  the  Trojans  to  remove  their  camp  to  the  hill,  he
placed  the  images  of  his  gods  in  the  beft  part  of  it ;  and,
immediately,  began  to  build  the  town  with  the  greateft  ala¬
crity  ;  and,  going  down  to  the  country  round  him,  took


J92*  Ew7tvjo v.  This  word  is,  here,
taken  adverbially,  as  in  the  following
verfe  of a  Homer :

KAvk,  cpiAof,  B-eto;  juo  1  £W7rv<ov  jjA0£v  oveigof.

*93*  T^ioinovlot  Asytlcti  e^c*  This

prophecy,  b  Virgil,  who,  like  our  au¬
thor,  had,  no  doubt,  met  with  it  in  the
old  Roman  hiflorians,  makes  the  river
Tiber  deliver  to  Aeneas  ;

famque  till,  ne  vana  putes  haec  fingere  fomnum ,
Litoreis  ingens  invent  a  fub  i/icibus  fits,

Triginta  capitum  foetus  enixa,  jacebit ;

Alba,  fo!o  recubans,  albi  circum  ubera  nati.

*  II.  f.  56.


Hie  locus  urbis  erit,  requies  ea  cert  a  labor  um:

Ex  quo  ter  denis  urbem  redeuntibus  annis
Afcanius  clari  condet  cognominis  Albam.

*94.  K«A<af.  I  know  this  word,
fometimes,  fignifies  a  chapel ,  but,  of-
tener,  a  wooden  hut ,  from  *aAov,  wood.
Portus,  and  M.  **  *  have  given  it  the
former  fenfe  ;  le  Jay  has  faid  me  pe¬
tite  retraite ,  which  is  fomething  like
the  fenfe.  Sylburgius  is  the  only  one,
who  has  rendered  it  properly,  cafa.
lignea.  If  it  had  been  a  chapel,  our
author  needed  not  to  have  faid  that  it
was  looked  upon  as  holy.

b  Aeneid.  B.  viii.  f.  42,


from


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  i3r

from  thence  fuch  things,  as  were  of  life  to  him  in  building,
the  lofs  of  which  was  likely  to  be  the  moft  grievous  to  the
owners,  fuch  as  iron,  timber,  and  inftruments  of  agriculture.
In  the  mean  time,  Latinus,  who  was,  then,  king  of  the
country,  being  at  war  with  a  neighbouring  people,  called
the  Rutuli ;  and,  having  fought  fome  battles  with  ill  fuccefs,
received  an  account  of  what  had  palled,  in  the  moft  terri¬
fying  manner,  as,  that  all  his  coaft  was  laid  wafte  by  a  foreign
army ;  and,  if  he  did  not,  immediately,  put  a  flop  to  their
depredations,  the  war,  with  his  neighbours,  would  become
more  grievous  to  him.  Latinus  was  ftruck  with  this  news ;
and,  laying  alide  all  thoughts  of  the  prefent  war,  he  marched
againft  the  Trojans  with  a  great  army:  But,  feeing  them
armed  after  the  Grecian  manner,  drawn  up  in  good  order,
and  prepared  to  receive  him  with  refolution,  he  did  not  think
it  prudent  to  hazard  an  immediate  ingagement;  lince  he
faw  no  probability  of  defeating  them  at  the  firft  onfet,
195  as  he  had  expected,  when  he  firft  marched  out  againft
them :  But,  incamping  on  a  hill,  he  found  it  convenient  to
recover  his  troops  from  their  prefent  fatigue,  which,  from
the  length  of  their  march,  and  the  eagernefs  of  the  purfuit,
was  very  great :  And  he  refolved,  after  he  had  palled  the
night  there,  to  attack  the  enemy  by  break  of  day.  Having
taken  this  refolution,  a  certain  genius  of  the  place,  appear¬
ing  to  him  in  his  lleep,  ordered  him  to  receive  the  Greeks,
as  cohabitants  with  his  own  fubjefts ;  adding  that  their  ar-

*95*  Ka0'  >}*v  $a%otv.  The  Vatican  this  fentence,  which  is  very  imperfect
manufcript  has,  wonderfully,  reftored  in  all  the  editions.

S  2  rival


i32  ROMAN  ANTIQJLTITIES  OF  Book  I.

rival  would  be  attended  with  a  great  advantage  to  him,  and
a  common  benefit  to  the  Aborigines.  The  fame  night,  -
Aeneas’s  houfliold  gods,  appearing  to  him,  advifed  him  to
perfuade  Latinus  to  grant  them  a  fettlement,  of  his  own
accord,  in  that  part  of  the  country  they  defired,  and,  to  ufe
the  Greek  forces,  rather  as  allies,  than  as  enemies.  However,
the  dream  hindered  both  of  them  from  beginning  an  ingage-
ment.  As  foon  as  it  was  day,  and  the  armies  were  drawn
up  in  order  of  battle,  heralds  came  to  the  commanders  from
both,  defiring  that  thefe  might  have  a  conference  together ;
which  was  complied  with.

LVIIX.  And,  firft,  Latinus  complained  “  of  the  fudden
“  war,  they  had  .  made  upon  his  fubjedts,  without  any  pre-
“  vious  declaration ;  and  defired  Aeneas  would  let  him  know
“  who  he  was,  and  what  he  meant  by  196  plundering  the
“  country,  without  any  provocation,  fince  he  could  not  be
“  ignorant  that  all,  who  are  attacked,  have  a  right  to  repel
“  the  invader  :  And,  that,  when  he  might  have  obtained,  in
u  a  friendly  manner,  and  by  the  confent  of  the  inhabitants,

“  whatever  he  could,  reafonably,  defire,  he  had  chofen  to
u  take  it  by  force,  contrary  to  the  right  of  all  nations,  and
u  with  greater  difhonor,  than  credit  to  himfelf.”  After
he  had  faid  this,  Aeneas  anfwered;  u  We  are  natives  of

J96,  kyHv.au  fagH  t«  xwZla”  The  enough.  Neither  do  I  think  that  piller
Latin  tranQators  have  rendered  this,  fes  terres ,  in  the  other  French  tranfla-
very  properly,  by  agereet  ferre ,  which,  tor,  though  better  far  than  the  other,
like  many  other  Latin  expreflions,  is,  exprefics  ocynv  <p^av  fo  well  as  the
originally,  derived  from  the  Greek,  expreflion  our  language  has  fupplied
Des  attes  d'h  oft  Hite  qu  on  avoit  exercez ,  me  with,
in  le  jay,  I  think  is  fcarce  ftrong


u  Troy,


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  r33
“  Troy,  a  city  famous  among  the  1,7  Greeks;  of  which


J97-  Ev  EAAutn.  M.  ***,  in  his  note
upon  this  paffage,  blames  our  author,
violently,  for  making  Aeneas  call  the
Greeks  EAAijve?,  which  name,  he  fays,
the  people  of  Greece  were  not  known
by  till  many  ages  after  the  Trojan  war;
and,  even,  not  fo  early  as  in  That,  in
which  Homer  lived,  who  never  calls
all  the  Greeks  Eaa>jv£?,  but  only  gives
that  name  to  the  inhabitants  of  Phthi-
otis,  who  followed  Achilles  to  Troy.

I  have  read  what  c  Thucydides,  and
d  Strabo  have  faid  upon  this  fubjeCt ;
but  I  do  not  think  the  arguments,
alledged  by  the  latter,  fo  conclufive  as
others,  that  may  be  drawn  from  chro¬
nology,  to  prove  that  the  Greeks,  in
general,  were  known  by  the  name  of
EAAjfvaj  many  years,  nay,  fome  ages,
not  only,  before  Homer,  but,  even,
before  the  Trojan  war.  But  I  muft,
previoufly,  obferve  that,  if  the  cenfure,
thrown  upon  our  author  by  that  gen¬
tleman,  is  well  grounded,  Virgil  is,
alfo,  included  in  it;  fince  he  calls
Achaemenides,  Grains ,  in  the  fame
period  of  time,  in  which,  Aeneas,  in
our  author,  calls  the  Greeks  eaavvic  e;

Confertum  tegmen  fpniis  :  at  caetera  Graius.

I  am  very  fenfible,  that f  Homer,  when
he  fays,

O,  t*  ‘J’&ii’iv,  ijS*1  EAAa^a  xa.AAiyvva.ix.Xf

Mv%[Moovo;  y  ezaAuvlo,  xca  E AAyves,  ko.\  A%atoi,

means  only  the  inhabitants  of  Theflfa-
ly  ;  but  I  am  not  fo  clear  that,  when
he  Hays,

t»  *Aso;  iv^v  xub'  EA AaAA,  xcu  Agyoc,

he  means  any  particular  country,  or
city  of  Thelfaly ;  becaufe,  when  he


fpeaks  of  the  city  of  Argos,  that  was
built  by  Pelafgus  in  Theflfaly,  he  di-
ftinguilhes  it  by  the  name  of  ELiAae-yi*
kqv  A gyof,  as  h

oaeroi  ro  YhAacryucoi  A^yo<;  tvxiov.

*

in  which,  he  has  been  followed  by  the-
geographers.  But  I  (hall  leave  con¬
jectures  to  thofe,  who  want  arguments.

I  have  undertaken  to  prove  that  the
general  name  of  the  Greeks  was  ea'ajjvs?
many  years  before  the  Troj  n  war;
and,  confequently,  that  our  author  was
guilty  of  no  anachronifm,  nor  deferved
cenlure  for  calling  them  fo.  In  the
fixth  epocha  of  the  Parian  marble,  the.
time  is  mentioned,  when  Hellen,  the
fon  of  Deucalion,  reigned  in  Phthiotis;
and  the  Greeks,  who  had,  till  then,
been  known  by  the  name  of  T^otaoi,
were  called  EAA>jv£f.  The  year,  there
fet  down,  is  1257.  In  the  25th  epocha,
the  taking  of  Troy  is  mentioned,  and
the  year,  fet  down,  is  945.  If,  there¬
fore,  from  1257,  we  deduCt  945,  it
will  be  found  that  the  people  of  Greece
were  called  Eaahv??,  312  years  before
the  taking  of  Troy.  This  is  confirm¬
ed  by  the  molt  celebrated  chronoio-
gers ;  who  all  agree  that  Troy  was
taken  in  the  3530th  year  of  the  Julian
1  period,  1184  years  before  Thrift ;
and  that  the  flood,  in  the  time  of  Deu¬
calion,  happened  1529  years  before
k  Chrift,  and  in  the  3 185th  year  of  die
Julian  period  :  So  that,  the  interval,
between  the  flood  of  Deucalion,  the
father  of  Hellen,  and  the  taking  of
Troy,  muft,  according  to  them,  con-
fift  of  345  years..


c  B.  i.  c.  3.

£  Gdyff.  «.  f.


d  B.  viii.  p.  c68.  e  Aeneid.  B.  iii.  f.  594.  f  Iliad.  0.  498.

h  Hiad.  j3.  f.  68 1 .  i  U.fher,  p.  26.  k  Petavius,  B.  i.  c.  1 1 .  and  7.

“  being;

©


*3*  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

“  being  deprived  by  the  Achaeans,  after  a  ten  years  war,
u  we  wander  up  and  down,  through  the  want  both  of  a
u  city,  and  a  country,  where  we  may  live  for  the  future ;  and
u  are  come  hither,  in  obedience  to  the  commands  of  the
“  gods:  The  oracles  alluring  us  that  this  land  alone  is  re-
“  ferved  for  us,  as  the  haven  of  our  wandering.  We  have,
u  198  lately,  taken  from  the  country  thofe  things  we  wanted,
u  with  greater  regard,  indeed,  to  our  199  unfortunate  lituation,
“  than  to  decency,  which  we  very  much  condemn  :  But  we
“  will  compenfate  them  with  many  good  fervices,  in  yielding
cc  to  you  our  perfons,  and  our  minds,  well  difciplined  againft
u  dangers,  to  employ  them  as  you  think  proper,  inpreferving
“  your  country  from  the  inroads  of  enemies,  and  in  affifting


T9S-  N tea?!.  This  word  mud,  cer¬
tainly,  have  been  mifplaced  by  the
transcribers  ;  and  I  make  no  doubt  but
our  author  writ psv  veus-i,  etc.
to  which  next

fentence,  anfwers  very  fully.

J99’  Aus v^ezigov  (xcthAov  tj  ev7r£E7Tgs'f£0v.

This  is  oppofed  to  y.xKhov  v\

kxaau 3v,  with  which  Latinus  had  re¬
proached  Aeneas.  But  here  is  an  un¬
common  expreffion,  that,  very  well,
deferved  the  obfervation  of  the  com¬
mentators  •,  and,  that  is,  the  ufe  of
ftuAAov  with  a  comparative  :  However,
I  have  met  with  it  in  the  bed  writers  •,
one  indance  of  which  I  diall  quote
from  Demcdhenes,  with  whofe  manner
of  writing  our  author  fhews,  by  his
critical  works,  that  he  was,  perfeftly
well,  acquainted.  That  great  orator
reproaches  the  Athenians  with  having

1  Olynth.  i.


made  it  dangerous  to  give  them  good
advice  •,  the  confequence  of  which,  he
tells  them,  will  be,  that,  whoever  gave
them  fuch  advice,  would,  not  only,
fuffer,  unjudly,  himfelf  without  doing
them  any  fervice,  but,  alfo,  render  it,
for  the  future,  dill  more  dangerous  to
propofe  fuch  things  to  them,  as  were
mod  for  their  advantage,  1  xaax  xa<
to  hoi7rov  MAAAON  (l i  q  wv  to  tx  /Sca7* s'e*
Aeyeiv  ^OBEPUTEPON  aronjcoc j.  It  is  very
extraordinary  that  the  Latin  writers
fhould  imitate  the  Greeks  in  this  un¬
common  manner  of  fpeaking ;  but  fo
it  is,  and  many  indances  might  be
given  of  this  alfo  ;  I  fhall  content  my-
felf  with  one  from  m  Judin,  who,
fpeaking  of  Lycurgus,  fays,  non  in¬
ventions  ear  urn  (legum)  magis  quam  ex-
emplo  clarior.


you


Bookl.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENS  IS.  n.;,

J  J1

“  you,  with  alacrity,  to  conquer  theirs.  We,  humbly,  intreat
“  you  not  to  refent  what  we  have  done,  alluring  yourfelves,
tc  that  we  did  it  not  through  contempt,  but  neceffity  :  And
u  200  every  thing,  that  is  involuntary,  deferves  forgivenefs:
“  So  that,  you  201  ought  not  to  take  any  refolution  to  the
“  prejudice  of  us,  who  are  your  fuppliants :  If  you  fhoulds,
“  we  muft  beg  the  tutelary  gods,  and  genius’s  of  this  country
“  to  forgive  us  what  we  are,  even,  compelled  to  do  ;  and
“  endeavour  to  defend  ourfelves  againft  you,  who  are  the.
“  aggreffors  in  this  war  ;  which  will  not  be  the  firft,  nor  the
“  greateft  we  have  been  202  ingaged  in.  When  Latinus
heard  this,  he  made  anfwer ;  u  I  can  allure  you,  I  have
“  great  benevolence  towards  the  Greek  nation,  in  general;,
“  and  the  inevitable  calamities  of  mankind  give  me  a  real
“  concern  :  I  fhould  be  very  folicitous  for  your  prefervation,
“  if  I  wrere  convinced  that  you  came  hither  in  fearch  of  a
“  habitation ;  and,  that,  203  contented  with  a  fhare  of  the
“  land,  and  injoy ing  what  is  given  you,  in  a  friendly  manner.


20°*  A7 rotv  Si  c vyvujUYjg  a^ov  to  omxitiov.
Our  author,  often,  adopts  the  ethics  of
n  Ariftotle,  who  fays,  tv  y.tv  to/?  tK^cnoig
tzouvuv,  a oti  \]soywv  yivoy.tvuv,  tv  St  to ig
cuafcioig  <rvfyvct>jut]g.

201‘  K at  Set  v.uotg ,  etc.  The  Latin
tranHators,  and  commentators  have
been,  very  much,  puzzled  to  clear  up
this  period  :  I  imagine  none  of  them
had  feen  the  Vatican  manufcript.

202'  A7T0A<XU<r#»|UfV.  A7T0A#U«,  OVK  i7Tl
T  UV  YlSiUV  T00V  fMOVO  Vy  «AA#  KflCJ  £  TTl  T  CUV

ivotvjiuv  tutIxci.  Suidas.


203*  Ev  n  y\ jj  /uci(>ctg.  I

have  never  met  with  or

as  the  Vatican  manufcript
has  it,  in  any  author,  or  lexicon,  in
this  lenfe;  for  which  reafon,  I  fhali:
venture  to  make  a  fmall  alteration  in
the  text,  or,  rather  to  reftore  it,  as,  I
believe,  our  author  writ  it,
jusvoi  ts  yw  fxoi^ec :  Every  one,  who  has
read  Herodotus,  muft  have  found
UTroy^a&raii  more  than  once,  made  ufe
of  to  fignify  fahat  is  meant  here,  that
is,  to  be  contented.


n  B.  iii.  c.  i.

'£  you


t


136  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

u  you  will  not  endeavour,  by  force,  to  deprive  me  of  the
u  fovereignty ;  and,  if  the  affurances  you  give  me,  are  real,
C£  I  defire  to  give,  and  take  fureties,  which  will  preferve  our
“  league  inviolate.”

LIX.  Aeneas,  having  accepted  this  propofal,  a  treaty  was
made  between  the  two  nations,  and  confirmed  by  oath,  to
this  eiTecd;  that  the  Aborigines  fhould  grant  to  the  Trojans
as  much  land  as  they  defired,  that  is,  the  fpace  of  about  forty
ftadia  round  the  hill ;  that  the  Trojans  fhould  aflift  the
Aborigines  in  the  war  they  were  then  ingaged  in,  and  join
them  with  their  forces,  upon  every  other  occafion,  when
fummoned ;  and  that  both  nations  fhould  aid  one  another,
to  the  utmoft  of  their  power,  as  well  with  their  affi fiance,
as  advice.  After  they  had  concluded  this  treaty,  and  fe-
cured  the  performance  of  it,  by  delivering  their  children  as
hoftages,  they  marched,  with  joint  forces,  againft  the  cities
of  the  Rutuli :  And,  having  foon  fubdued  all  oppofition  there,
they  went  to  the  town  of  the  Trojans,  which  was  half
finifhed ;  and,  haftening  the  work  with  one  mind,  they
fortified  the  town  with  a  wall.  This  town  Aeneas  called
Lavinium,  as  the  Romans  themfelves  fay,  from  the  daughter
of  Latinus,  whofe  name,  according  to  them,  was  Lavinia  ;
but,  as  fome  Greek  hiftorians  have  aflerted,  from  the
daughter  of  Anius,  king  of  Delus,  whofe  name  was,  alfo,
Lavinia ;  and  who,  dying  of  ficknefs,  while  the  firft  city  was
building,  and  being  buried  in  the  place  where  fhe  died,  the
city  was  fo  called,  in  memory  of  her.  She  is  faid,  alfo,  to
-have  imbarked  with  the  Trojans,  and  to  have  been  given  by

ha'


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSEN  SI  S.  137
her  father  to  Aeneas,  at  his  defire,  as  a  prophetefs,  and  a
wife  woman.  While  Lavinium  was  building,  thefe  prodigies
are  faid  to  have  happened  to  the  Trojans.  A  fire  breaking
out,  fpontaneoufly,  in  an  adjoining  wood,  a  wolf,  they  fay,
brought  feme  fuel  in  his  mouth,  and  threw  it  upon  the
fire ;  and  an  eagle,  flying  thither,  fanned  the  flame  with
the  motion  of  his  wings :  In  oppofition  to  thefe,  a  fox,
having  moiftened  his  tail  in  a  river,  endeavoured  to  ex-
tinguifh  the  fire ;  and,  fometimes,  thofe,  that  were  kindling
it,  prevailed ;  and,  fometimes,  the  fox,  that  was  trying  to
put  it  out :  And,  at  laft,  the  former  got  the  better,  and  the
other  went  away,  unable  to  do  any  thing  further.  Which,
Aeneas,  obferving,  faid,  this  colony  would  become  famous,
be  worthy  of  admiration,  and  very  much  celebrated  ;  but,
in  its  increafe,  would  be  envied  by,  and  grievous  to,  its
neighbours :  However,  that  it  would  overcome  its  adver¬
saries  ;  the  favor  of  Heaven  being  more  powerful  to  fup-
port  it,  than  the  envy  of  men  to  oppofe  it.  Thefe  were  the
evident  figns  of  the  incidents,  that  were  to  happen  to  this
city :  Of  which  there  are  monuments,  now,  ftanding  in  the
market-place  of  the  Lavinienfes ;  thefe  are  brazen  images
of  the  animals,  which  have  been  preferved  for  many  ages.

LX.  After  the  city  of  the  Trojans  was  built,  both  nations
were,  extremely,  defirous  of  injoying  the  mutual  benefit  of
their  new  alliance :  And  their  kings  fet  the  example,  and
mixed  the  dignity  of  the  native  and  foreign  families  by  a
contract  of  marriage,  Latinus  giving  his  daughter  Lavinia
to  Aeneas :  After  which,  the  reft,  alfo,  had  the  fame  in-
Vol.  I.  T  clination


1 3  8  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  I.

clination  with  their  kings ;  and,  by  a  fwift  union  of  their
cuftoms,  their  laws,  and  religious  ceremonies ;  by  inter¬
marriages,  and  a  communication  of  the  rights  of  their  cities ;
by  mingling  all  together,  and  by  calling  themfelves  Latines,
from  Latinus,  king  of  the  Aborigines,  they  adhered  fo
firmly  to  their  league,  that  no  time  has,  yet,  fevered  them
from  one  another.  The  nations,  therefore,  which  were


gathered  together  under  one  form  of  government,  and  from
whom  the  Roman  people  derive  their  origin,  before  the
city  they,  now,  inhabit,  was  built,  are  thefe :  Firft,  the
Aborigines,  who  drove  the  Siceli  out  of  thefe  parts,  and
were  Greeks,  originally,  of  Peloponnefus,  the  fame,  who,
with  Oenotrus,  removed  from  the  country,  now,  called
Arcadia,  according  to  my  opinion  :  Then,  the  Pelafgi,  who
came  from 304  Haemonia,  as  it  was,  then,  called,  now,  Thef-


204-  See  the  5F  annotation.

I  do  not  think  that  atranflator  is  under
the  fame  obligation  with  regard  to  his
author,  as  the  lawyers  feem  to  think
themfelves  under  in  relation  to  their
clients  •,  that  is,  that  he  is  to  defend
him  right,  or  wrong.  Dionyfius  is
going  to  prove  that  the  Trojans  were,
originally,  Greeks,  in  which  he  is
juftified  by  hiftorians  of  the  beft  au¬
thority  ;  but  I  doubt  much  whether
that  will  juftify  him  in  faying,  as  he
did  a  few  pages  before,  that  the  Tro¬
jans  were  armed  after  the  manner  of
the  Greeks ;  and,  much  lefs,  in  making
Evander  tell  Aeneas  that  he  had  a  great
affection  for  all  the  Greeks,  even,  after
the  latter  had  inlormed  him  that  they
were  Trojans.  I  do  not,  indeed,  re¬


member  any  paffage  in  Homer,  which
Ihews  that  the  Greeks,  and  Trojans
were  armed  after  a  different  manner
but  he  defcribes  them  as  going  to  the
charge  under  very  different  circum-
ftances ;  the  firft  advancing  with  a
confufed  noife,  like  cranes  going  to
make  war  upon  the  Pygnifes  ;  and  the
other  in  filence  breathing  ardor,  and  a
refolution  to  fupport  one  another  °;

T  g  cos  £  fASV  kA  afyy  r,  ivory  r  i<r<xv,  ogviQig  uq.
Oi  aou  ir&v  viyy  fMvnx,  Kveicvlss  A^ctioi)
Ev  3-UjUw  [My,{ xulsg  oiAt^t(xiv  <xAA>jAcfcrj.

I  believe  no  general  would  defire  that
his  men  fhould  go  on  to  an  attack  with
a  truer  fpirit  than  Homer  has  here  de-
fcribed.


0  Iliad,  r.  2.  f.  8,


faly :


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  A  S  S E N  S  I S.  139


faly :  Thirdly,  thofe,  who  came  over  into  Italy  with  Evan-
der,  from  the  city  of  Pallantium  :  After  thefe,  the  Epei,  and
Pheneatae ;  who  were  part  of  the  PeloponneEan  army,
commanded  by  Hercules,  with  whom  fomeTrojans,  alfo,  were
mixed:  And,  laft  of  all,  the  Trojans,  who,  with  Aeneas,
had  efcaped  from  Ilium,  Dardanum,  and  the  other  Trojan
cities.


LXI.  That  the  Trojans  were  a  nation,  truly  Greek,  which,
formerly,  came  from  Peloponnefus,  has  been,  long  Ence,
aflerted  by  fome  authors,  and  fhall  be,  briefly,  related  by
me  alfo.  The  account  concerning  them  is  this.  Atlas  was
the  firft  king  of  the  country,  now,  called  Arcadia,  who
lived  near  the  mountain,  called  205  Thaumafius :  This  man
had  feven  daughters,  faid  to  be  placed  among  the  Ears,  by
the  name  of  the  Pleiades ;  one  of  whom  Jupiter  married,  and
had  by  her  two  fons,  206  JaEus,  and  Dardanus :  JaEus  lived
unmarried :  But  Dardanus  married  Chryfes,  the  daughter  of
Palas,  by  whom  he  had  two  fons,  Idaeus,  and  Dimas,  who,
fucceeding  Atlas  in  the  kingdom,  reigned  fome  time  in
Arcadia.  Afterwards,  a  great  deluge  happening  in  Arcadia,
the  plains  were  overflowed,  and,  for  a  long  time,  incapable
of  being  tilled.  The  people  (for,  as  they  lived  upon  the


2°5-  QoivpoKnov  o£o?.  This  is  lhewn
by  Glareanus  to  be  the  true  reading,
becaufe  Paufanias  fpeaks  of  a  moun¬
tain  of  that  name  in  Arcadia.  This
mountain,  I  find/ Paufanias  fays  fto  d
i*ear  the  river  Molofius  ;  and  on
the  top  of  it,  there  was  a  cavern  con-
iecrated  to  Rhea,  into  which  none  but


her  prieftefies  were  fufifered  to  enter.

2o6*  Uhtiuv.  This  muft  be  the  true
readings  which  is  confirmed  by'iVir-

S'1-

bine  Dardanus  ortus,

Idf.ufque  pater.

He  is,  alfo,  called  I«m<v  by  r  Strabo.


P  In  Arcad.  c.  36.


<3  Aeneid.  B.  iii,  f.  1 67.


T  2


rEpit.  B.  vii.p.  51 1.


moun~


1 40  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

mountains,  they  laboured  under  a  great  fcarcity  of  provi-
fions)  confidering  that  the  land,  that  remained,  would  not
be  fufficient  for  the  fupport  of  them  all,  they  divided  them-
felves  into  two  parts ;  one  of  which  ftaid  in  Arcadia,  and
created  Dimas,  the  fon  of  Dardanus,  their  king ;  the  other,
left  Peloponnefus  on  board  a  numerous  fleet;  and,  failing
along  the  coaft  of  Europe,  they  came  to  a  gulph,  called
207  Melas,  and  happened  to  land  on  a  certain  ifland  of  Thracia,
but  I  am  not  able  to  fay  whether  it  was,  before,  inhabited,,
or  defer t:  They  called  this  ifland,  Samothrace,  a  name,,
compounded  of  the  name  of  a  man,  and  of  That  of  the
place ;  for  it  belongs  to  Thrace,  and  the  founder  of  it  was
Samon,  the  fon  of  Mercury,  and  of  a  nymph  of  Cyllene,
called  Rhene  :  Here,  they  ftaid  not  long,  becaufe  they  found
themfelves  under  great  difficulties  with  regard  to  their  fup¬
port,  as  having  a  barren  land,  and  a  boifterous  fea  to  contend
with ;  but,  leaving  fome  few  of  their  people  there,  the
greateft  part  of  them,  removing  again,  went  to  Afia,  Dardanus
being  the  leader  of  their  colony,  (for  Jaftus  died  in  the  ifland,
being  ftruck  with  thunder,  for  defiring  to  go  to  bed  with
Ceres)  and,  difimbarking  in  the  ftreight,  now,  called  the
Hellefpont,  they  fettled  in  that  country,  which  was,  after¬
wards,  named  Phrygia.  Idaeus,  the  fon  of  Dardanus,  with
part  of  the  army,  inhabited  the  mountains,  which,  from

2°7‘  E<?  tov  xoKttov'  The  gulph  pofite  to  the  mouth  of  the  Hebrus,

Melas  lies  on  the  north  weft  of  the  known,  now,  by  the  name  of  la  Marifa.
Thracian  Cherfonefus  :  And  the  ifland  s  Strabo  gives  the  fame  account  of
of  Samothrace,  now  called  Samandraki^  Dardanus,  and  Jafion,  and  adds  that
is  at  the  entrance  of  this  gulph,  op-  Samothrace  was,  before,  called  Samos.

s  Epit.  B.  vii.  p.  51 1.


him,


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  AS  SENS  I S.  i4r

him,  are  called  the  Idaean  mountains,  where  he  built  a
temple  to  the  mother  of  the  gods,  and  inhituted  myfteries
and  ceremonies,  which  are  obferved,  to  this  day,  through¬
out  all  Phrygia  ;  and  Dardanus  built  a  city  of  the  fame
name  with  himfelf,  in  a  country,  now,  called  Troas,Teucrus,
who  was  king  of  it,  giving  him  the  land,  from  whom,  that
country  was,  anciently,  named  Teucris.  Many  authors  fay,
and,  particularly,  Phanodemus,  who  writ  the  Attic  anti¬
quities,  that  this  man  came  into  Aha,  from  Attica,  where
he  was  chief  of  the  divifion,  called  208  Xypete ;  and  of  this
they  bring  many  proofs :  They  add  that,  being  mailer
of  a  large  and  fertii  country,  and  but,  thinly,  peopled,  he
was  glad  to  fee  Dardanus,  and  the  Greeks,  who  came
with  him,  in  hopes  both  of  their  affiftance  in  his  wars
againft  the  Barbarians,  and  that  the  land  might  not  be  un¬
cultivated.


208.  eyeing.  This  is,  certainly,  the
true  reading,  and  the  name  of  this
divifion  of  the  tribe  of  Cecropis,  as  we
find  in  Harpocration ;  though  it  is
otherwife  in  all  the  editions,  and  ma-
nufcripts,  and,  alfo,  in  Suidas,  who
calls  this  divifion.  of  that  tribe,

But  there  is  apaffage  in  Strabo,  which,
though  faulty  in  another  refpeCl,  will
lead  us  to  the  true  reading  in  this,
t  Strabo  fpeaks  there  of  this  very  mi¬
gration  of  Teucer  from  Attica  to  Afia;
and  fays,  uAhoi  J’gjc  t>jj  AtIwjj?  a
tivcc  Tsvx^cv  (pacrjv  fyfAV  T os  vvv  o'

BvTriltuv  Aty  foil.  Cafaubon,  in  his  note
upon  this  paffage  of  Strabo,  was  fen-
fible  that  the  word  was  more


than  fufpicious;  and,  therefore,  chang¬
ed  it  into  T /vos  j  and,  to  fupport  his  cor¬
rection,  quotes  this  very  paffage  of  our
author,  which  he  has  accommodated’'
to  the  words  of  Strabo,  as  he  took
them,  and  made  our.  author  fay
Bv7rsi saves,  fuppofing  that  £v7rtleuv,  in
the  former,  was  the  name  of  this  divi¬
fion  of  the  tribe  of  Cecropis  :  But  that
great  man  was  miftaken  in  this,  as  we
have  feen  by  Harpocration ;  who,  in
Bund otiavts,  fays,  alfo,  that  this  was  the
name  of  the  individuals  of  that  divi¬
fion.  Phanodemus,  whom  our  author
quotes  upon  this  occafion,  is,  often,
cited  by  other  authors,  but  that  is  all
we  know  of  him.


*  if  xiii.  p.  901.


LX1L


HOMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  I.


LXIL  But,  it  is,  now,  requilite  to  fhew  how  Aeneas  was
defcended ;  which  I  fhall  do,  alfo,  in  few  words.  Dardanus,
after  the  death  of  Chryfes,  the  daughter  of  Palas,  by  whom
he  had  his  two  firft  fons,  married  Batea,  the  daughter  of
Teucrus ;  and,  by  her,  had  Erichthonius,  who  is  faid  to
have  been  the  moft  fortunate  of  all  men,  having  inherited
both  the  kingdom  of  his  father,  and  That  of  his  grand¬
father  by  his  mother’s  fide.  Of  Erichthonius,  and  Callirhoe,
the  daughter  of  Scamandrus,  was  born  Tros,  from  whom
the  nation  has  received  its  name;  of  Tros,  and  Acallaris,
the  daughter  of  Eumedes,  Affaracus ;  of  him,  and  Lytodora,
the  daughter  of  Laomedon,  Capys ;  of  Capys,  and  a  nymph,
faid  to  have  been  a  Naid,  Anchifes ;  of  Anchifes,  and  Venus,
Aeneas.  Thus,  I  have  fhewn  that  the  royal  family  of  the
Trojans,  were,  originally,  Greeks.

LXIII.  Concerning  the  time,  when  Lavinium  was  built,
there  are  different  opinions ;  but  the  moft  probable  feems
to  be  That,  which  209  places  it  in  the  fecond  year  after  the
departure  of  the  Trojans  from  Troy  :  For  210  Ilium  was


209’  fabler  avltjv.  Cafaubon  has
fhewn,  from  very  good  authorities,
that  is  a  term,  particularly  ufed
by  chronologers,  in  the  fenfe  our  au¬
thor  has  given  it  in  this  place.

2I°*  IAjov  jaw  ya°  jj'aw  t?A ii\u>{]o$  y cty  t«
tot^og.  Thus,  I  am  confident  this  paffage
ought  to  be  read,  contrary  to  the
opinion  of  Portus,  and  of  Dodwell,
who  contend  for  3-e«xr,  in  which  they
are  followed  by  M.  ***  ;  and,  alfo,
contrary  to  the  opinion  of  Sylburgius,
who,  would  have  it  which  read¬


ing  le  Jay  has  followed.  However,  I
have  the  fatisfaflion  of  finding  myfelf
fupported  in  reading  totgos  againft  thefe
great  authorities,  by  a  much  greater,
I  mean  That  of  Cafaubon,  and  Peta-
vius.  But,  before  I  give  my  reafons
for  reading  ea^os  inftead  of  9-8$*?,  I  mud:
take  notice  of  the  glaring  abfurdity  in
faying,  with  M.  *  *  *,  that  Troy  was
taken  on  the  twelfth  of  June  tozvards
the  end  of  fummer.  ■  It  is  well  known
that  the  year  of  the  Greeks  was  luni-
lolar,  and  that  the  Athenians,  whofe

taken


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  NS  I S.  143

taken  at  the  end  of  the  ip  ring,  feventeen  days  before  the
fummer  folftice,  and  the  eighth  of  the  ending  month  Thar-
gelion,  according  to  the  computation  of  the  Athenians  ;
there  ftill  remaining  twenty  days,  after  the  folftice,  to  com¬
plete  that  year.  The  firft  feven  and  thirty  days  after  the
taking  of  Troy,  I  imagine,  the  Greeks  employed  in  regu¬
lating  the  affairs  of  the  city,  in  receiving  embafiies  from
thofe,  who  had  withdrawn  themfelves,  and  in  concluding  a


computation  our  author  fays  he  fol¬
lows,  by  the  dire&ion  of  Solon,  af-
figned  twenty  nine,  and  thirty  days,  al¬
ternately,  to  their  twelve  months  •,  by
which,  it  happened,  that  there  was,
every  year,  a  deficiency  of  eleven  days
between  their  year,  and  the  folar  year u:
To  fupply  this  deficiency,  Meton,  af¬
terwards,  found  out  the  cycle  of  inter¬
calating;  feven  months  in  nineteen
years  Solon,  alfo,  introduced,  among
the  Athenians,  the  method  of  counting
the  ten  laft  days  of  the  month  back¬
wards,  and  called  the  thirtieth  day
ivti  Koii  ve«,  the  old  and  new:  Thereafon
of  which,  1  imagine  to  have  been,  be-
caufe  the  new  moon  becoming  vifible
only  in  the  evening  of  that  day,  part
of  it  was  thought  to  belong  to  the  old
month,  and  part  of  it  to  the  new.
Diony lius  lays  that  Troy  w.as  taken  on
the  eighth  day  of  the  ending  month
Thargelion,  that  is,  the  twenty  third  •,
feventeen  days  before  the  fummer  fol¬
ftice,  after  which,  there  wanted  twenty
days  to  complete  that  year.  Let  us,
now,  fee  how  this  account  agrees  with
the  courfe  of  the  fun,  and  moon,  that
memorable  year.  The  new  moon,  and,
confequently,  the  firft  day  of  the  Attic


month  Thargelion,  fell  out,  that  years
on  the  twenty  firft  of  May,  and  the
fummer  folftice  on  the  twenty  eighth
of  Junew  :  So  that,  the  twenty  third
of  Thargelion  was  the  twelfth  of  June,
which,  as  our  author  fays,  was  feven¬
teen  days,  that  is,  inclufively,  before
the  fummer  folftice  :  And,  from  the
twenty  eighth  of  June,  to  the  nine¬
teenth  of  July,  on  which  day,  the  new
moon  of  their  month  Hecatombaeon
fell  out,  there  are  twenty  days,  which
he,  alfo,  fays,  remained  to  complete
the  year :  For,  it  muft  be  obferved
that  the  Athenians  began  their  year  on
the  firft  new  moon  after  the  fummer
folftice.  The  aera  of  the  taking;  of
Troy  being,  thus  determined,  it  will
be  no  difficult  matter  to  find  the  num¬
ber  of  years  from  that  aera,  to  this
prefent  year  1755.  Dionylius  will
tell  us  from  Cato  that  Rome  was  built
432  years  after  the  taking  of  Troy  :
From  thence,  to  the  birth  of  Chrift,
are  753  years-,  to  which,  if  we  add
1755,  there  will  be  found  2940  years
from  the  twelfth  of  June,  on  which
Troy  was  taken,  to  the  twelfth  of.
June  of  this  prefent  year.


»  Sir  Ifaac  Newton.  Chron.  p.  75  and  76.


w  Petavlus,  B.  ii,  c.  10.  part iii.


treaty


*44


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


treaty  with  them.  The  next  year,  which  was  the  firft  after
the  taking  of  the  city,  the  Trojans,  fetting  fail  about  the
autumnal  equinox,  croffed  the  Hellefpont ;  and,  landing  in
Thrace,  pafled  the  winter  feafon  there;  during  which,  they
received  the  fugitives,  who  were,  continually,  flocking  to
them,  and  prepared  every  thing,  that  was  neceflary  for  their
voyage :  And,  leaving  Thrace,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fpring,
they  failed  as  far  as  Sicily.  While  they  ftaid  there,  that
year  was  accomplifhed ;  and  they  pafled  the  fecond  winter
in  aflifting  the  Ely  mi  to  build  cities  in  Sicily.  They  fet  fail
from  that  ifland,  as  foon  as  the  feafon  would  allow  it ;  and,
crofling  the  Tyrrhene  fea,  arrived,  at  laft,  at  Laurentum,  on
the  coafl:  of  the  Aborigines,  in  the  middle  of  the  dimmer :
And,  having  received  the  ground  from  them,  they  built
Lavinium ;  the  fecond  year  from  the  taking  of  Troy,  being,
now,  completed.  And  this  is  my  opinion  concerning  thefe
events.

LXIV.  Aeneas,  having,  fufHciently,  furnifhed  the  city,
with  temples,  and  other  ornaments,  of  which  the  greateft
part  remain,  even,  to  this  day,  he,  the  next  year,  which  was
the  third  after  his  departure  from  Troy,  reigned  over  the
Trojans  only  :  But  the  fourth  year,  Latirius  being  dead,  he
fucceeded  him  in  his  kingdom  alfo ;  not  only  in  confidera-
tion  of  his  near  alliance  to  him,  Lavinia  being  foie 211  heirefs,


2I1*  E-riKAt]^.  The  fenfe  of  this  uvly  ciJiAQx’  y  ocviy}  K at  tTriKAv^Pw.

word  is,  very  well,  explained  by  Har-  In  this  fenfe,  alfo,  x  Virgil  makes
pocration.  E7nxA>j£0f  [Aiv  i$iv  P  t7n  muvh  Drances  fay  to  Turnus,
zui  xAtjgu  Jt<xlftA£A«/^2v>j,  [tv  ovlog  fi  adeo  dotalis  regia  coral  ejl.

x  Aeneid.  B.  xi.  f.  369.


after


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENSIS.  145

after  the  death  of  Latinus,  but,  alfo,  by  reafon  of  his  being
general  of  the  army,  in  the  war  againft  their  neighbours :
For  the  Rutuli  had,  again,  revolted  from  Latinus,  and  made
choice  of  a  certain  deferter  for  their  leader,  who  was  a  re¬
lation  of  Amata,  the  wife  of  Latinus,  and  whofe  name  was
Turnus.  This  man,  exafperated  at  the  father-in-law  of
Aeneas,  for  marrying  his  daughter  to  a  ftranger,  in  prejudice
to  his  relations,  and,  being  incited  by  212  Amata,  and  in-
couraged  by  others,  went  over  to  the  Rutuli  with  the  forces
lie  commanded.  The  war  being  begun  upon  thele  com¬
plaints,  and  a  fharp  battle  infuing,  Latinus,  Turnus,  and
many  others  were  llain.  However,  Aeneas,  and  his  people,
gained  the  victory :  Upon  which,  Aeneas  fucceeded  his
father-in-law  in  his  kingdom  :  And,  having  reigned  three
years  after  the  death  of  Latinus,  in  the  fourth,  he  loft  his
life-in  a  battle  :  For  the  Rutuli,  railing  an  army  compofed
of  the  joint  forces  of  all  their  cities,  marched  againft  him ;
and,  with  them,  Mezentius,  king  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  who
thought  his  own  country  in  danger.  For  the  great  increafe
of  the  Grecian  power  had,  long  fince,  given  him  offence  :
And  a  fevere  battle  being  fought,  not  far  from  Lavinium,
and  many  llain  on  both  lides,  the  armies  were  parted  by
the  coming  on  of  the  night,  and  the  body  of  Aeneas,  no
where,  appearing,  fome  concluded  that  he  was  tranllated
among  the  gods,  and  others,  that  he  perifhed  in  the  river,


Afi*kTvpof.  This  paflage  fhews
that  Amata,  and  Turnus,  in  Virgil,
are  not  imaginary  perfons,  but  taken

VOL.  I.


from  the  Roman  hiftorians,
works  are,  now,  loft.


whofe


u


near


Book  I.


146  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

near  which  the  battle  was  fought :  And  the  Latines  built
a  chapel  to  him  with  this  infcription  :  u  213  To  the  father,
“  and  god  of  this  country,  wTho  prefldes  over  the  waters  of
u  the  river  Numicius.”  But  fome  fay  this  chapel  was  erected,
by  Aeneas,  to  Anchifes,  who  died  the  year  before  this  war :
It  is  a  fmall  mound,  furrounded  with  trees,  regularly,  planted,
and  deferves  to  be  feen.

LXV.  Aeneas  having  left  this  life,  about  the  feventh  year
after  the  taking  of  Troy,  Euryleon,  who,  in  the  flight,  had
changed  his  name  to  That  of  Afcanius,  fucceeded  him  in
the  government  of  the  Latines :  As  for  the  Trojans,  they
were,  at  that  time,  befieged,  the  forces  of  the  enemy  in¬
creasing  daily  ;  and  the  Latines  were  unable  to  allifl:  thofe,
who  were  Shut  up  in  Lavinium.  Afcanius,  therefore,  firft,
invited  the  enemy  to  a  friendly  and  reafonable  accommo¬
dation  :  But  they,  paying  no  regard  to  him,  he  was  reduced
to  the  necefllty  of  fuffering  them  to  put  an  end  to  the  war
upon  their  own  terms.  But  the  king  of  the  Tyrrhenians,
among  other  intolerable  conditions,  wdiich  he  impofed  upon
them,  as  upon  a  people,  already,  become  his  flaves,  com¬
manding  them  to  carry  to  the  Tyrrhenians,  every  year,  all  the
wine,  the  country  of  the  Latines  produced,  they  looked
upon  this,  as  a  thing  not  to  be  borne,  and,  by  the  advice  of

2I3-  n^oc,  etc.  y  Livy  (peaks,  alio,  who  were  canonized,  to  change  their
of  this  apotheofis,  or  canonization  of  names ;  as  the  popes,  who  call  the.ro-
Aeneas  ;  Situs  eft ,  quemeunque  eitm  did  felves  Chrift’s  vicegerents,  generally,
jus  fafque  eft ,  ftupsr  Numidam  flumen ,  change  their  names  upon  their  eleva-
Jovem  Indigctem  appellant ,  It  was,  it  tion  to  the  papacy,
feems,  the  fafhion  for  thefe  gentlemen,

y  B.  i.  c.  2,  -


Afcanius,


Book  L  DIONYSIUS  H  A L IC  A  R N  A  S  S E  N  S I  S.  147.

Afcanius,  voted  the  fruit  of  the  vine  to  be  faered  to  Jupiter ;
then,  exhorting  one  another  to  fight  bravely,  and  praying
the  gods  to  aflift  them  in  their  dangerous  enterprife,  they
pitched  upon  a  dark  night,  and  fallied  out  of  the  city  :  And,
immediately,  attacked  that  part  of  the  enemy’s  camp,  which
lay  neareft  to  the  city,  and,  being  defigned  as  an  advanced
poft  to  cover  the  reft  of  the  army,  was  ftrongly  fituated,  and
defended  by  the  choiceft  youth  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  who  were
commanded  by  Laufus,  the  fon  of  Mezentius :  Their  attack,
being  unforefeen,  they,  eafily,  made  themfelves  mafters  of
the  place:  While  they  were  employed  in  taking  this  poft,
the  reft  of  the  army,  that  lay  incamped  on  the  plains,  feeing
an  unfeafonable  light,  and,  hearing  the  groans  of  thofe,  who
were  killing,  left  the  flat  country,  and  fled  to  the  mountains :
Upon  this  occafion,  there  was  a  great  hurry,  and  tumult,
their  army  marching  away  in  the  night,  and  expecting  the
enemy  would,  every  minute,  fall  upon  them,  while  they
were  in  diforder,  and  their  ranks  broken.  The  Latines,
after  they  had  taken  the  place  by  ftorm,  and  heard  the  reft
of  the  army  was  in  diforder,  prefled  upon  them,  killing,
and  purfuing  ;  while  the  enemy  were  fo  far  from  endea¬
vouring  to  defend  themfelves,  that  it  was  not,  even,  poflible
for  them  to  know  the  evils  they  were  furrounded  with;
but,  through  confufion,  and  irrefolution,  fome  were  forced
down  the  precipices,  and  dafhed  to  pieces;  while  others,
ingaging  themfelves  in  unpaflable  vallies,  were  taken  pri-
foners :  But  moft  of  them,  through  ignorance,  treated  one
another,  in  the  dark,  like  enemies ;  and  the  greateft  de-
■  U  2  ftrudlion


348  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

ftrudion  of  them  was  occafioned  by  mutual  daughter.
In  the  mean  time,  Mezentius,  with  a  few  of  his  men,  pof-
feffed  himfelf  of  a  hill;  and,  being  informed  of  the  death
of  his  fon,  and  of  the  numbers  he  had  loft ;  and,  finding  how
untenable  the  palce  was,  in  which  he  had  fhut  himfelf  up,
having  no  other  refource,  he  fent  heralds  to  Lavinium  to  treat
of  a  peace:  And  Afcanius,  advifing  the  Latines  to  214  ufe
their  fortune  with  moderation,  he  obtained  liberty  to  retire
in  fafety  with  his  forces,  in  confequence  of  the  treaty  they
concluded  ;  and,  from  that  time,  laying  afide  all  enmity  to
the  Latines,  he  continued  their  conftant  friend,

LX VI.  The  thirtieth  year  after  the  building  of  Lavinium,
Afcanius,  the  fon  of  Aeneas,  according  to  the  oracle,  given
to  his  father,  built  another  city,  and  transferred  both  the
inhabitants  of  Lavinium,  and  the  other  Latines,  who  were
defirous  of  a  better  habitation,  to  his  new-built  city,  which
he  called  215  Alba,  which  word  fignifies,  in  Greek,  Asvxy}>.

214*  T«,ujsu?cS-0ij  t*iv  rv^v.  This  is  a  adverjity ,  to  fubmit  to  nothing ,  that  is
very  happy  expreffion,  and  ufed,  more  mean.

than  once,  by  our  author.  There  is  AhCa.  It  is,  generally,  thought

a  pafTage  in  the  eighth  book  of  this  that  Alba  longa  flood  in  the  fame  place,
hiftory,  which  is  quoted  by  z  Suidas  where  Albano  now  ftands  and,  what
not  fo  much,  1  dare  fay,  for  the  fenti-  is  more  extraordinary,  a  Cluver  fays
ment,  which  molt  deferves  it,  as  for  that  the  inhabitants  of  Albano  were
the  expreffion  •,  sswv  av^w7ruv,  fo  fully  perfuaded  of  this,  that  they

oTav  unroarlciv  Jocutriy  Tct^iiMio^ou  rag  placed  over  the  gate,  that  leads  to
ti 'yjx.g‘  o'rav  J’  eig  Tc&x&vug,  k on  (pav/.ag  Rome,  a  ftone,  on  which  was  repre-
gA0«<ri,  vvofjLiv&v  aytwtg,  As  this  fented  the  fow  with  her  thirty  young
is  tranflated  in  its  proper  place,  I  (hall  ones.  However,  this  great  geogra-
only  give  the  fenfe  of  it  here  ;  It  is  the  pher  has,  plainly,  proved  from  Livy,
fart  of  wife  men ,  when  in  profperity ,  to  Cicero,  and  our  author,  that  Alba  longa
ufe  it  with  moderation  •,  and,  when  in  Rood  two  Roman  miles  to  the  eaft  of

*c.  48.  3  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  p.  201,


White ;


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  149

White:  And,  to  diftinguifh  it  from  another  city  of  the
fame  name,  an  epithet  was  added  to  it,  taken  from  its  figure ;
and  it  is,  now,  called  Alba  longa ,  a  name  compounded  of
both,  that  is,  Asuxtj  potxgoc.  This  city  is,  now  uninhabited.
For,  when  Tullus  Hoftilius  was  king  of  the  Romans,  fhe,
feeming  to  contend  with  her  colony  for  the  fovereignty,
was  demolifhed ;  and  Rome,  having  deftroyed  her  mother-
city,  received  its  citizens.  But  thefe  things  happened  in  after¬
times.  Alba  flood  between  a  mountain,  and  a  lake,  which
ferved  as  fortifications  to  the  city,  and  rendered  it  difficult
to  be  taken :  For  the  mountain  is  extremely  ftrong  and  high ;
and  the  lake,  deep  and  large,  which,  when  the  fluices  are
opened,  is  received  by  the  level,  the  inhabitants  having  it  in
their  power  to  hufband  the  water,  as  they  think  proper.
The  plains,  below  the  city,  are  beautiful  to  the  eye,  and
rich  in  the  produce  of  all  forts  of  fruits,  in  no  degree  in¬
ferior  to  the  reft  of  Italy,  particularly,  of  what  they  call  the
Alban  wine,  which  is  fweet,  and  of  a  beautiful  color  ;  and,
except  the  Falernian  wine,  certainly,  excels  all  others,
LXVII.  While  the  city  wTas  building,  a  great  prodigy  is
faid  to  have  happened  :  For  a  temple  with  a  fancduary  having
been  built  for  the  images  of  the  gods,  which  Aeneas  had

it.  The  Alban  lake,  and  mountain  takebVeii,  till  they  had  let  out  the
make  a  coniiderable  figure  in  the  Ro-  water  of  the  Alban  lake.  The  Alban
man  hiftory,  the  former  having  been  mountain  was  famous  for  the  Ferine
the  fubjedt  of  a  prophecy,  uttered  by  latinae  inftituted  by  Tarquinius  Su-
a  Ve'ian  captive,  and  confirmed  by  no  perbus,  and  celebrated  in  the  temple
lefs  an  authority  than  the  Delphic  of  Jupiter  Latialu ,  that  flood  on  the
oracle,  that  the  Romans  ihould  never  top  of  it.

b  Livy,  B.  v.  c.  1 5.

brought


i5o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  L

brought  with  him  from  Troas,  and  placed  in  Lavinium,  and
the  flatues  having  been  removed,  from  the  temple  at  Lavi-
nium,  into  this  fanfluary,  the  doors  being  then,  particularly,
well  fhut,  and  the  walls,  and  roof  unhurt,  the  flatues  changed
their  flation,  the  following  night,  and  were  found  upon  their
old  pedeftals.  And,  being  brought  thither  again,  with
tupplicatory  and  propitiatory  facrifices,  they  returned,  in
like  manner,  to  the  fame  place.  Upon  this,  the  people  were,
for  fome  time,  in  doubt  what  they  fhould  do,  being  un¬
willing  either  to  live  feparately  from  the  gods  of  their  fathers,
or  to  return  to  their  old  habitation  :  At  laft,  they  found  out
an  expedient,  which  feemed,  well  enough,  to  anfwer  both
thefe  purpofes ;  this  was,  to  let  the  images  remain  where
they  were,  and  to  fend  back  fome  of  their  216  own  people
from  Alba,  to  Lavinium,  to  live  there,  and  take  care  of  them.
Thofe,  who  were  fent  to  Lavinium,  to  perform  this  holy
office,  were  fix  hundred ;  they  removed  thither  with  their
families,  and  Aegeftus  was  appointed  their  chief.  The
Romans  call  thefe  gods,  Penates :  Some,  who  tranflate  the
word  into  the  Greek  language,  render  it  Uoclgme,  The  gods
of  their  fathers ;  others,  revs  fame.  The  gods  y  who  prefide  over
births  \  and  others,  K7 riaias,  The  givers  of  riches  \

Gods  of  the  fan&uary ;  and  E  gxiucj  Gods  of  the  inclofure :
Each  of  thefe  has,  probably,  given  them  their  name  from

21<5>  Etto/kw?.  This  word  is  ufed  in  the  ifland  ;  uvluv  t nouxc.

the  fame  fenfe  by  c  Thucydides,  where  Upon  which  word,  the  Greek  fcholiaii
he  fays  that  the  Athenians,  having  makes  the  following  obfervation  :
ejected  the  inhabitants  of  Aegina,  fent  Attoijc at  ,  o!  sV  to7tw  wepropivoi
fome  of  their  own  people  to  inhabit  cottar  in-oixoi  fo,  oi  sroA a><nno  wv.

c  B.  ii.  c.  27.


fome


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  151

fome  one  of  their  fun£fions :  However,  they  all  feem,  m
fome  degree,  to  exprefs  the  fame  thing.  Concerning  their
figure,  and  appearance,  Timaeus,  the  hiftorian,  gives  this
account  ;  that  the  holy  things,  preferved  in  the  fandluaries
at  Lavinium,  are  iron  and  brazen  Caducei ,  and  a  veffel  of
Trojan  earth:  This,  he  fays,  he  learned  from  the  inhabi¬
tants.  For  my  part,  I  cannot  think  it  right,  in  me,  to  give
an  account  of  thofe  things,  which  it  is  lawful  neither  for  all
to  fee,  nor  to  hear  from  thofe,  who  have  feen  them.  And
I  muft  blame  every  man,  who  is  defirous  of  inquiring  after,
or  of  knowing,  more  than  the  laws  allow.

LXVIII.  But  the  things  which  I  myfelf  know,  by  having
feen  them,  and  concerning  which,  no  fcruple  forbids  me  to
write,  are  as  follows.  They  fhew  you  a  temple  at  Rome
not  far  from  the  Forum  in  the  ftreet,  that  leads,  the  neared:
way,  to  the  Carinae ;  which  is  fmall,  and  darkened  by  the
height  of  the  adjacent  buildings  :  This  place,  is  called,  by
the  Romans,  in  their  own  language,  Veliae  ;  in  this  temple,
are  the  images  of  Trojan  gods,  expofed  to  public  view,  with
this  infcription,  217  A  EM  A  2,  which  fignifies  Penates:  For,

2i7'  Atvut;.  This  is 'the  reading  of  n  that  bears  the  leaft  refemblance  to
all  the  editions,  but,  certainly,  not  the  a  A.  And  I  am  perfuaded  that,  it
true  one.  Scaliger,  in  his  notes  upon  Scaliger  had  feen  the  Venetian  and
the  Chronicon  of  Eufebius,  number  Vatican  manufcripts,  he  would  have
617,  takes  notice  of  this  infcription  *,  rejected  this  reading,  indead  of  endea-
and,  in  order  to  explain  it,  fays  that  vouring  to  explain  it.  Ic  muft  be  ob-
there  muft  have  been  a  n  of  fuch  a  ferved  that  Penates  is  a  Latin  word,
lhape  as  to  referable  a  A.  But  he  does  and  derived,  as  we  know  from  d  Ci-
not  fay  what  kind  of  a  n  this  v/as  •,  cero,  either  from  penus,  or  penit us  :  So
neither  is  there  among  the  many  an-  that,  all  attempts  to  reconcile  this
cient  alphabets  he  has  exhibited,  any  Greek  infcription  with  Penates  muft

A  De  Nat.  Deor.  B.  ii.  c.  27.


According


Book  I.


152  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

according  to  my  opinion,  the  letter  0,  being  not,  yet,  found
out,  the  ancients  expreffed  its  power,  by  the  letter  A.  Thefe
are  two  youths,  in  a  fitting  pofture,  each  of  them  holding  a
fpear ;  they  are  pieces  of  ancient  workmanfhip.  We  have
feen  many  other  itatues,  alfo,  of  thefe  gods  in  ancient  temples ;
and,  in  all  of  them,  they  reprefented  two  youths  in  military
habits.  It  is  lawful  to  fee  thefe,  and  to  hear  what  others
fay  concerning  them  ;  and  to  write  what 213  Calliftratus,


be  vain.  Befides,  as  the  following
words,  now,  Hand  in  all  the  editions,
Dionyfius  is  made  to  fay  that  the  letter
n,  not  being,  as  yet,  found  out,  the
ancients  expreffed  its  power  by  the
letter  A  ;  when  he,  no  doubt,  knew,
and  certain  it  is,  that  the  n,  as  well  as
the  A,  was  among  the  fixteen,  or,  as
others  fay,  the  feventeen  letters  brought
into  Greece,  from  Phoenicia,  by  Cad¬
mus.  The  Venetian  manufcript,  in
Hudfon’s  notes,  has  Asyoct,  on  the
margin  of  which  was  written,  as  he
fays,  ocvli  ra  Seyas'  A  #if7i  0  h rot-
tvouag.  This  is,  further,  explained  by
the  Vatican  manufcript,  which  has
and  the  following  fentence  ftands
thus  •,  ri>  Sbloi  pj 7T«  ygxyyxlos  tv^ysva
1  yjv  (x&vx  ^Ayv  Jvvoiyiv  to  <kA7ct ;  which
I  have  made  no  difficulty  of  following
in  the  text :  For,  whether  the  infcrip-
tion  was  Asymt  or  A syn,  the  reafon,
alledged  by  both  the  manufcripts,  is
juft.  Since  the  letter© was  not,  in  rea¬
lity,  one  of  the  Cadmean  letters,  but
invented,  long  after,  by  Simonides,
together  with  the  two  other  afpirate
letters  <]>  and  X;  which  is  fo  true,  that,
before  the  invention  of  thefe  three  let¬


ters,  the  Greeks  e  made  ufe  of  the  af¬
pirate  H  after  T,  II  and  K  *,  and  writ,
for  example,  THTEAAA,  IIHTAAON,
K  HPT  SO  2,  in  which  they  have  been
followed  by  the  Romans,  as  I  fhail
fhew  in  another  f  place.  The  Carinae
was  a  ftreet  in  Rome,  called  fo,  as
Servius  fays,  from  the  refemblance  of
the  houfes  to  the  keels  of  fhips;  which,
however,  may  be  much  doubted.  I
agree,  intirely,  with  Cafaubon,  in
reading  ovtAiai,  and  fhail  add  to  the
reafons,  given  by  him,  to  fupport  that
reading,  which  may  be  feen  in  Hud-
fon,  that  our  s  author  himfelf  calls
this  hill  Ovshiix,  where  he  fays  that
Valerius  Publicola  built  a  houfe,
which,  from  its  fituation,  gave  um¬
brage  to  the  people  :  And  h  Livy,
fpeaking  of  the  fame  fa6t,  fays  of  Va¬
lerius  aedificabat  in  fummd  Velid,

2lS‘  KaAA<f£#;o?,  Zcclvgo;,  Aqxltvcr.-

I  know  not  that  any  other  author  has
made  mention  of  Calliftratus,  as  the
writer  of  the  Samothracian  hiftory.

1  Satyrus  is  not  much  more  known,
u  rile  fs  he  is  the  fame  with  the  bio¬
grapher,  who  writ  the  life  of  Philip,
the  father  of  Alexander  the  great.


e  Mar.  Viflor.  'See  the  4iftannot.  on  the  fourth  book.  s  B.  v.  c.  19.  h  B.  ii.  c.  7.
‘Voffius  Hilt.  Graec.  B.iii.  p.  410.

the


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENSIS.  153

the  author  of  the  hiftory  of  Samothrace,  and  Satyrus,  who
has  collected  the  ancient  fables,  with  many  others,  have  re¬
lated  ;  among  whom  the  poet,  Ardtinus,  is  the  moft  ancient
we  know  of.  This,  therefore,  is  the  account  they  give:
That  Chryfes,  the  daughter  of  Palas,  when  fhe  was  married
to  Dardanus,  brought,  for  her  dowry,  the  gifts  of  Minerva,
that  is,  the  Palladiums,  and  the*19  images  of  the  great  gods,


That  of  Demofthenes,  and  of  feveral
other  eminent  men.  Suidas  fays  that
Arttinuswas  a  Milefian,  and  a  difciple
of  Homer ;  for  which  he  quotes  Ar-
temon  of  Clazomenae.

2X9'  Ta  ie^ot  t uv  Oewv.  Here  is  a  dif¬
ficulty,  which  the  tranflators  have  either
not  feen,  or  have  diftembled :  It  is
certain  that,  when  our  author  fays  that
Chryfes  brought  with  her, as  her  dowry,
befides  the  Palladiums,  t a  Ugx  t uv
ptyxhuv  £hwv,  he  means  the fiatues  of
the  great  gods,  which  both  the  Latin
tranflators  have  rendered  facra  magno-
rumdeorum ,  and  the  two  French  tranf¬
lators  les  Jlatues  des  grands  dieux  :  And
it  is  as  certain  that,  when  our  author
fays  that  Dardanus,  when  he  went  into
Afia,  left  t x  Uf>&  tuv  &zwv  in  Samo-
thrace,  he  does  not  mean  the  ftatues
of  the  gods  •,  but  only  the  myfteries
relating  to  their  worfhip  :  And  here,
again,  the  Latin  tranflators  have  faid
facra  et  myfteria ,  which  M.  *  *  *  has
rendered  les  myjleres  des  dieux  et  les
chofes  faint es  :  I  wilh  I  knew  what  he
means  by  les  chofes  faint  es.  They  could
rrot  be  the  Palladiums,  nor  the  ftatues
of  the  gods  :  For,  all  thefe  our  author
tells  us,  in  the  next  fentence,  Darda¬
nus  carried  with  him  into  Afia.  Le

k  Fetav.  E.  ii.  c.  io.  pa  t


Jay,  moft  afturedly,  faw  the  difficulty
of  tranflating  thefe  words,  and,  to  avoid
it,  has  left  them  quite  out.  But  this
difficulty  purfues  him :  For,  a  few
lines  after,  our  author  fays  that  Dar^
danus  confulted  the  oracle  ruy
Itgoov  r*jt  <pvA cocjj?:  However,  he  refolves
not  to  be  troubled  any  more  about  it,
and  has,  alfo,  left  out  thefe  words.
The  other  French  tranQator,  has,  moft
certainly, the  merit  of  having  attempted
to  tranfiate  them  j  and  I  am  forry,  for
that  reafon,  that,  fur  le  foin  qu*il  devoit
avoir  du  culte  des  dieux  cannot  be  al¬
lowed  to  exprefs  the  fenfe  of  zst^  r m
tigwv  T>jf  (pvAxKYis :  It  is,  however,  as
well  as  de  affervandis  facris  in  Sylbur-
gius,  or  de  facrorum  cuflodid  in  Forms.
It  is  plain  that  the  oracle  related  to  the
prefervation  of  thefe  ftatues,  upon
which  the  fate  of  the  town,  he  was
going  to  build,  and,  afterwards,  of
I  roy,  was  to  depend.  The  oracle,
that  was  delivered  to  Dardanus,  is,  if
the  authorities,  our  author  quotes,
have  not  milled  him,  of  the  higheft
antiquity  *,  fince  it  was  given  to  him
before  he  founded  the  kingdom  of
Troy,  which  happened  in  the  3234th
year  of  the  Julian  k  period,  about  fif  y
years  after  the  Ifraelites  came  out  of

iii.  ar.d  B,  i.  c.  I  x .  part  i.

X


Vo L.  I.


m


1 54


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

in  whofe  my  Series  flic  had  been  inftru&ed :  That,  when
the  Arcadians,  flying  from  the  deluge,  left  Peloponnefus,
and  fettled  in  the  ifland  of  Thrace,  Dardanus  built  there  a
temple  to  thefe  gods,  whofe  particular  names  he  difclofed  to
none,  and  performed  thofe  ceremonies  to  them,  which  are
obferved,  to  this  day,  by  the  Samothraces :  That,  when  he
tranfported  the  greateft  part  of  his  people  into  Afia,  he  left
the  myfteries,  belonging  to  thefe  gods,  and  the  ceremonies
with  thofe,  who  remained  in  the .  ifland ;  and  carried  with
him  the  Palladiums,  and  the  images  of  the  gods:  And  that,
upon  confulting  the  oracle  concerning  his  fettlement,  among
other  things  he  was  informed  of,  he  received  this  anfwer
relating  to  the  cuftody  of  the  images  of  the  gods ;  “  Re-
“  member  to  eftablifh,  in  the  city,  which  you  fliall  build,
“  perpetual  worfhip  to  the  gods,  and  to  honor  them  with

V

Egypt,  and  a  little  before  the  death  of  Sylburgius  has  faid  much  better  cultum
Jolhua  i  and  296  years  before  that  perpetuum ,  which  is  the  fenfe ;  and  le
city  was  deftroyed  by  the  Greeks,  in  Jay,  whom  I,  always,  commend  with
the  reign  of  Priamus.  It  is  very  re-  pleafure,  when  I  can  do  it  with  juftice,
markable  that  this  oracle  is  in  very  has  given  it  this  fenfe ;  as  the  other
good  hexameter  verfe,  and  the  lan-  French  trandator  has,  alfo,  though
guage,  not  at  all,  different  from  That  more  explicitly  :  This  is  the  fenfe,  in
of  Homer,  who  writ  above  five  hun-  which  1  Homer  applies  thefe  words,
drcd  years  after  this  period ;  nor  from  atpQilov  <*<«,  more  than  once,  to  the
the  language  of  thofe  poets,  who  writ  fcepter  of  Agamemnon,
five  hundred  years  after  Homer.  How-  .  „  n  ,  n  -  ..
ever,  tnere  is  an  exprcffion  in  it,  in  *  '  ?  ?  Y

rendering  which  the  tranfiators,  I  find,  Upon  which  the  Greek  fcholiaft  makes
are  divided :  It  is  this,  a(p0»7ov  «(«,  this  obfervation:  To  ptv  uOuvdlov  nn
which  Portus  has  tranflated  cultum  o!  <pi\o<ro(pci  Ta<r<w<rr  to  &

incorruptum  femper ,  and  Hudfon  has  *7n
altered  it  to  cultum  pururn  femper.

1  Iliad.  (3.  f.  1 86.


“  fafe-


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HA  LICA  RN  ASSENSIS.  155

C£  fafeguards,  facrifices,  and  choirs :  For,  while  thefe  vene-
<c  rable  gifts  of  the  daughter  of  Jupiter  to  your  wife  fhall
“  remain  in  your  country,  your  city  fhall,  for  ever,  be  im-
u  pregnable.”

LXIX.  That,  upon  this,  Dardanus  left  the  images  in  the
city,  which  he  founded,  and  which  received  its  name  from
him:  That,  Ilium,  being,  afterwards,  built,  the  images  were
removed  thither  by  his  defcendants ;  and  that  the  Ilienfes
built  a  temple,  and  a  fanduary  for  them  in  the  citadel,  and
preferved  them  with  all  poffible  care,  looking  upon  them  as
fent  from  Heaven,  and  as  the  pledges  of  public  fafety :
That,  while  the  Greeks  were  employed  in  taking  the  lower
city,  Aeneas,  being  matter  of  the  citadel,  took,  out  of  the
fanduary,  the  images  of  the  great  gods,  and  the  Palladium,
which,  yet,  remained  (for  the  other,  Ulyfies,  and  Diomede,
they  fay,  coming  into  Ilium  by  night,  dole  away)  and,
carrying  them  with  him  out  of  the  city,  brought  them  into
Italy.  But  Ardinus  fays  that  one  Palladium  was  given  by
Jupiter  to  Dardanus,  and  that  this  remained  in  Ilium,  hid
in  the  fanduary,  till  the  city  was  taken:  That,  from  this,  a
copy  was  made,  in  every  refped,  like  the  original,  and  ex-
pofed  to  the  view  of  the  public,  on  purpofe  to  deceive  thofe,
who  might  have  a  defign  to  fteal  it;  and,  that  the  Greeks,
having  formed  this  defign,  took  that  away.  I  fay,  therefore,
upon  the  authority  of  the  perfons  above  mentioned,  that  the
images,  brought  into  Italy  by  Aeneas,  were  Thofe  of  the
great  gods,  to  whom  the  Samothraces,  of  all  the  Greeks,

X  2  '  pay


156  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


pay  the  greateft  worfhip,  and  the  famous2'0  Palladium,
which,  they  fay,  is  kept  by  the  holy  virgins  in  the  temple  of
Veda,  where  the  perpetual  fire  is,  alfo,  preferved:  Concerning
whom,  I  fhall  fpeak  afterwards.  There  may  be  other  things,
befides  thefe,  which  are  kept  fecret  from  us,  who  are  221  not
initiated.  And  fo  far  concerning  the  Trojan  gods.

LXX.  Afcanius  dying  in  the  eight  and  thirtieth  year  of
his  reign,  Silvius,  his  brother,  fucceeded  him :  He  was
born  of  Lavinia,  the  daughter  of  Latinus,  after  the  death  of
Aeneas,  and,  as  they  fay,  brought  up  on  the  mountains  by
the  herdfmen.  For,  upon  the  acceftion  of  Afcanius  to  the
kingdom,  Lavinia,  fearing  left  the  name  of  a  ftep-mother,
might  draw  upon  her  fome  feverity  from  him,  ftie,  beings


220<  TiotWetlev.  Many  authors  have
written  of  this  famous  Palladium,  but
none  of  them  have  taken  fo  much
pains  to  inform  their  readers  of  all  the
circumftances,  relating  to  this  folemn
farce,  as  Dionyfius.  It  feems,  the
pagan  priefts,  early,  underflood  the  art
of  raifing  the  veneration  of  their  vo¬
taries  by  fecreting  the  objedt  of  it.
I  find  Herodian  is  quoted  by  the  com¬
mentators,  upon  the  occafion  of  this
Palladium,  for  faying  that,  in  the  reign
of  Commodus,  the  temple  of  Yefta
was  burnt,  and  the  Palladium  expofed
to  public  view  for  the  firfl  time.  But
m  Tacitus,  who  is  much  more  to  be
credited,  fays,  in  fpeakingof  the  public
buildings,  that  were  confumed  by  fire
in  Nero’s  time,  Aedefque  Statoris  Jovis
vota  Romulo ,  Numaeque  regia ,  et  de-
lubrum  Vejiae  cam  penatibus  popuii  Ro¬
mani  exujta.

m  Annal.  B.  xv.  c.  41.


**’•  This  word  is,  very

properly,  rendered  by  the  Latin  trans¬
lators  profanis:  But  I  think  not  fo  well
by  the  French  tranflators,  nous  autres
profanes :  I  am  fenfible  that,  in  their
language,  des  auteurs  profanes  is  faid  in
oppofition  to  des  auteurs  facrez  ;  but
I  leave  it  to  them  to  confider  whether
they  fay  des  gens  profanes  in  oppofition
to  des  gens  d’eglife  •,  for  that  is  the  fenfe
of  the  word  in  this  place,  which  is
explained  in  Helychius  by  apvrfr.  It
is  well  known  that  Uar  jSefijjAo;,
which  n  Virgil  has  tranfiated

procut,  0  prccul,  ejle3  profani.

were  what  they  call  folennia  verba ,  and
previous  to  their  religious  ceremonies.
The  explication  Servius  gives  of  pro »
fani,  in  this  verfe,  agrees,  exadtly,
with  That  of  Hefychius,  qui  non  ejlis
initiati.

n  Aeneid,  B.  vi.  258,

then.


Book I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENSIS.  157
then,  with  child,  put  herfelf  into  the  hands  of  one  Tyrrhe-
nus,  who  was  fuperintendant  of  the  king’s  fwineherds,  and
whom  fhe  knew  to  have  been,  extremely,  222  devoted  to
Latinus  :  He,  carrying  her  into  the  defer t  woods,  as  one  of
the  vulgar,  and,  taking  care  fhe  was  not  feen  by  any  one,
who  knew  her,  fupported  her,  in  a  houfe  he  built  in  the
wood,  which  was  known  but  to  few  :  And,  when  the
child  was  born,  he  took  care  of  it,  and  brought  it  up,  call¬
ing  it,  from  the  wood,  Silvius,  that  is,  in  Greek,  T t^ouoq  :
But,  in  procefs  of  time,  finding  the  Latines  made  great
fearch  after  the  woman,  and  that  the  people  accufed  Af-
canius  of  having  put  her  to  death,  he  acquainted  them  with
the  whole  matter,  and  produced  the  woman,  and  her  fon
out  of  the  wood.  From  this  incident  Silvius  had  his  name,
which,,  afterwards,  became  common  to  all  his  pofterity.
After  the  death  of  his  brother,  he  fucceeded  him  in  the
kingdom,  though  not  without  a  conteft  with  lulus,  the
eldeft  fon  of  Afcanius,  who  claimed  a  right  to  his  father’s
kingdom.  But  the  people  rejected  his  claim ;  to  which  they
were  induced  by  many  confiderations ;  but,  chiefly,  by  this,
that  his  mother  was  foie  heirefs  to  the  kingdom  :  And  to
lulus,  inftead  of  the  fovereignty,  a  certain  holy  power,  and
honor  was  given,  preferable  to  the  royal  dignity,  both  for

2i2*  n^o <rYiyo%oi'  Hefy-  fignify  orgotniyoqov  Aulivco.  Befides,  I  am

chins.  This  fenfe  of  the  word  will,  I  perfuaded  that  the  reader  will  not  think
dare  fay,  convince  any  one  that  nei-  the  intimacy,  they  have  created  be-
ther  familiar  is,  in  the  Latin-tranflators  i  tween  the  king,  and  the  overfeer  of  his
dans  les  bonnes  graces  de  Latinus ,  in  le  fwineherds,  very  agreeable  to  the  rules
Jay  *,  nor  des  plus  jideles  amis  de  Latinus ,  of  decency,
in  the  other  French  tranQator,,  can


Book  I.


158  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

fecurity,  and  eafe  ;  which223  his  pofterity  enjoy,  even,  to  this
day,  and  are  called  julii  from  him:  This  family  became
the  rnoft  confiderable,  and,  at  the  fame  time)  the  moft  il¬
lustrious  of  any  we  know  of ;  and  has  brought  forth  the
greateft  commanders,  whofe  virtues  have  been  fo  many  proofs
of  their  nobility.  Concerning  whom,  we  flhall  fay  what  is
requiiite  in  another  place.

LXNI.  Silvius,  having  been  in  poffeflion  of  the  kingdom
twenty  nine  years,  was  Succeeded  by  Aeneas,  his  fon,  who
reigned  one  and  thirty  years.  After  him,  Latinus  reigned  fifty
one:  Then,  Albas  thirty  nine :  After  Albas,  Capetus  reigned
twenty  fix ;  then  Capys  twenty  eight :  After  Capys,  Cal-
petus  held  the  kingdom  thirteen  years :  Then  Tiberinus
reigned  eight  years :  The  laSt,  it  is  faid,  was  flain  in  a  battle,
that  was  fought  near  the  river  ;  and,  being  carried  along
with  the  Stream,  gave  his  name  to  the  river,  which  was,  be¬
fore,  called  Albula.  Agrippa,  the  fucceffor  of  Tiberinus,
reigned  one  and  forty  years:  After  Agrippa,  Alladius,  a

~23‘  Hv  ilt  Kern  f/xe  to  au?s  ywoq  has  taken  occafion,  from  this  para-
f5t*£7ra7c.  This  relates  to  Julius  Caefar,  graph  of  our  author,  to  fay  that  he  was
and  his  adopted  fon,  Auguftus,  who,  paid  by  Auguftus  for  writing  his  hi-
were  both  pontifices  maximi,  as  it  is  well  ftory.  I  own  I  fee  no  reafon  for  that
known-,  the  laft  being  inverted  with  fufpicion.  The  warmth  Dionyfius  ex-
that  dignity  upon  the  death  of  Lepi-  preftes  for  the  caufeol  liberty,  through-
dus,  in  the  °confulfhipof  Tiberius,  and  out  his  work,  does  not  look  as  if  he
Quintilius  Varus,  which,  in  the  Fafii  was  paid  by  an  ufurper.  If,  in  de-
confulares ,  is  the  74  year  of  Rome,  fcribing  the  battle  of p  Adtium,  either
This  I  mention,  becaufe  Torrentius,  he,  or  any  other  author  had  tranf-
and  Cafaubon,  in  their  notes  upon  Sue-  formed  the  feather,  on  the  calk  of
tonius,  for  what  reafon  I  cannot  guefs,  Auguftus,’ into  a  blazing  ftar,  they
fay  that  Auguftus  was  created  pontifex  might  well  be  faid  to  have  been  paid
maximus  in  the  year  71 1.  M.  *  *  *  by  that  prince.

0  Dio.  B.  liv.  p.  61 9.  P  See  Boileau’s  Ode  on  the  taking  of  Namur.


tyran-


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  ENS  I  S.  !$<?

224  tyrannical  prince,  and  odious  to  the  gods,  reigned  nine¬
teen.  He,  in  contempt  of  them,  had  contrived  machines
to  imitate  both  thunderbolts,  and  the  noife  of  thunder*
with  which  he  propofed  to  terrify  mankind,  as  if  he  had
been  a  god :  But  a  ftorm,  fraught  with  rain,  and  thunder,
falling  upon  his  houfe,  and  the  lake,  near  which  it  flood,
fwelling,  in  an  unufual  manner,  he  was  drowned  with  his
whole  family.  And,  now,  when  one  part  of  the  lake  is  low
upon  the  retreat  of  the  water,  and  the  bottom  calm,  the
ruins  of  porticoes,  and  other  traces  of  a  habitation  appear.
Aventinus,  from  whom  one  of  the  feven  hills,  that  make
part  of  the  city  of  Rome,  received  its  name,  fucceeded,  and
reigned  thirty  feven  years :  After  him,  Procas,  three  and
twenty  :  Then,  Amulius,  having,  unjuftly,  poffefled  himfelf
of  the  kingdom,  which  belonged  to  Numitor,  his  elder
brother,  reigned  two  and  forty  years.  But  Amulius  being
put  to  death  by  Romulus,  and  Remus,  the  fons  of  a  Veftal,
as  we  fhall,  prefently,  relate,  Numitor,  the  grandfather  of
the  youths  by  the  mother’s  fide,  refumed  the  fovereignty,
which,  by  the  laws,  belonged  to  him.  225  The  next  year,.


224-  t vqoivvniov  t  1  This  is

Attic  elegance,  which  our  author  was,
perfeflly,  mafter  of.  Ariftophanes,
and,  indeed,  all  the  Attic  writers,  often,
ufe  this  kind  of  expreflion  :  One  paf-
fage  of  the  former,  I  fhall  quote,  be-
caufe  the  oblervation  of  the  i  Greek
fcholiaft  upon  it,  will  explain  this  At-
ticifm  ;

TO  TWV  °,<r0V

A  or  egodov.


ESo?  h  to j?  AiliKcig  inaywyvi  %gytc&ca'  olav
'nnro<;  C7 roivwv  t/

zz5‘  Tw  J  g !>;$•  ilet  rijf  Nouil u'gas
etc.  Dionyfius  is,  upon  this  occafion,
cenfured  by  Dodwell,  as  inconfiflent
with  himfelf.  As  M.  *  *  *  has  trans¬
lated  the  reafons,  given  by  Dodwell  in
fupport  of  this  cenfure,  though  with*
out  faying  a  word  from  whence  he  had
them,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  anfwer
Dodwell,  without  taking  notice  of  his


SN  f.  2.


which


Book  L


160  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

which  was  in  the  reign  of  Numitor,  and  the  four  hundred
and  thirty  fecond  after  the  taking  of  Troy,  the  Albans,


tranflator ;  and  doubt  not  to  prove
that  the  reafons,  alledged  by  Dodwell,
are  inconfiftent  with  his  own  chrono¬
logy.  In  the  firft  place,  I  muft  ob-
ferve  that  it  is  a  bold  attempt  in  mo¬
dern  chronologers,  who  are  unpro¬
vided  with  the  necefiary  materials,  to
cenfure  the  approved  authors  of  anti¬
quity,  who  had  all  thefe  materials  be¬
fore  them.  Were  it  poflible  for  our
modern  chronologers  to  have  recourfe
to  Fabius  Pidor,  Cincius,  Cato,  Era-
tofthenes,  and  many  other  authors,  fo
often  quoted  by  Dionyfius,  I  fee  no
reafon  why  they  fhould  not  be  allowed
to  form  as  true  a  judgement  of  chrono¬
logy,  as  Dionyfius  :  But,  when  they
are  deprived  of  every  one  of  thefe
helps,  and  he  had  them  all ;  when  no
author  ever  pretended  to  accufe  him
of  the  want  either  of  diligence  in  con-
fulting  them,  or  of  capacity  in  making
ufe  of  them,  I  mull  think  it  very  un-
reafonable  to  give  more  credit  to  our
modern  chronologers,  under  all  thefe
difficulties,  than  to  him,  with  all  thofe
advantages.  I  will,  indeed,  allow,
that  where  chronology  depends  upon
aftronomy,  the  modem  chronologers
have  the  advantage  over  the  ancient ;
becaufe,  aftronomy,  is  now,  very  much
improved.  This  gave  occafion  to  our
great r  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  to  cor  red  the
chronology  of  the  Greeks,  by  corred-
ingthe  aftronomy  ofPIipparchus,  who,
firft,  difcovered  the  preceffion  of  the
aequinoxes  ;  or,  to  fpeak  more  intel¬
ligibly,  that  the  aequinoxes  had  a  mo¬
tion  backwards  in  refped  to  the  fixed

r  Chron.  p.  25,  and  94.


ftars.  This  difcovery  was  important
to  aftronomy,  but  fatal  to  ancient  chro¬
nology  :  For,  Hipparchus  thought
that  the  aequinoxes  went  backwards
one  degree  in  about  an  hundred  years ;
which  gave  occafion  to  the  Greeks  to
place  the  Argonautic  expedition  three
hundred  years  earlier  than  they  would
have  done,  had  they  known,  what  Sir
Ifaac  Newton  knew,  that  the  aequi¬
noxes  went  back  a  degree  in  feventy
two  years.  The  reader  will  fee  that
this  error  affeds  every  other  great  aera,
fince  the  Argonautic  expedition.  But
this  does  not  belong  to  my  fubjed.  I
am  only  to  reafon  from  hiftorical  fads,
and  to  fhew  that  Dionyfius,  in  fixing
the  aera  of  the  foundation  of  Rome,  is
confident  with  himfelf •,  and,  that  the
reafons  alledged  by  Dodwell  are  not
confiftent  with  his  own  chronology.
In  order  to  eftabliffi  thefe  two  points,
I  do  not  think  it  necefiary  to  confider
whether  the  aera  of  Cato,  or  That  of
Varro,  is  the  beft  founded  ;  becaufe  it
is  impoffible  for  us  to  know  the  rea¬
fons,  that  induced  either  Varro  to  place
the  foundation  of  Rome  in  the  third
year  of  the  fixth  Olympiad ;  or  Cato
to  place  it  two  years  later ;  that  is,  in
the  firft  year  of  the  feventh.  Our  au¬
thor  has  thought  fit  to  follow  Cato,
for  which,  I  dare  fay,  he  had  good
reafons  •,  fince  he  fays  that  he  publilhed
a  treatife  upon  this  fubjed,  which  is,
now,  loft.  Before  I  go  on,  I  cannot
help  taking  notice  that s  Sir  Ifaac  New¬
ton  has  laid  that  Varro  placed  the  budd¬
ing  of  Rome  on  the  f.rjlyear  of  the  feventh

8  Chron.  p.  129.


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  161
having  fent  out  a  colony  under  the  condudl  of  Romulus,
and  Remus,  built  Rome  the  firft  year  of  the  feventh


olympiad.  I  am  perfuaded  that  he  would
have  corrected  this  fmall  miftake,  if
he  had  lived  to  publish  his  chronology.
But,  to  return  to  That  of  our  author  :
He  fays,  then,  that  Rome  was  built
after  the  death  of  Amulius,  and  in  the
reign  of  Numitor,  in  the  432d  year
from  the  deftru&ion  of  Troy,  and  the
firft  of  the  feventh  olympiad,  in  which
Da'icles  of  Mefiene  won  the  prize  of
the  ftadium,  and  Charops  entered  up¬
on  the  firft  year  of  his  decennial  arch-
onlhip.  The  firft  thing,  here,  to  be
confidered  is  the  number  of  years  con¬
tained  between  the  deftrudtion  of  Troy,
and  the  building  of  Rome.  Dionyfius
has,  already,  told  us  that  Troy  was
taken  on  the  twenty  third  of  the  Attic
month  Thargelion,  that  is,  the  twelfth
of  our  June  :  Confequently,  the  432
years  will  not  be  completed  till  the
twenty  third  of  Thargelion  in  the  year,
in  which  the  building  of  Rome  was
begun.  Now,  the  day  of  the  month,
in  which  this  happened,  is  very  well
known ;  becaufe  the  Romans  cele¬
brated  a  feftival  on  that  day,  called
Palilia ,  or  Parilia ,  in  memory  of  that
great  event  ;  which  feftival  was  cele¬
brated  on  the  eleventh  of  the  calends
of  May,  that  is,  the  twenty  firft  of
April.  Another  thing  to  be  confidered
in  our  author’s  chronology,  is,  that,
when  he  lpeaks  of  the  years,  each  of
the  Alban  kings  reigned,  he  computes
according  to  the  old  Roman  method  ;
that  is,  he  begins  the  year  with  the
firft  of  March.  For  Romulus,  who
had  a  mind  to  be  thought  the  fon  of
Mars,  began  the  year  with  that  month:

VOL.  I.


And,  that  this  was  the  old  Roman  way
of  counting,  appears  from  their  calling
June,  which  was  the  fifth  month  from
the  firft  of  March,  Quintilis,  and  Au-
guftyS ex tilis,  and  the  following  months,
according  to  their  place  from  that  day,
September ,  October,  November ,  Decem¬
ber.  Thefe  things  being  premifed,  let
us  fee  how  the  number  of  years,  attri¬
buted  by  our  author  to  Aaneas,  and
to  each  of  the  Alban  kings,  agrees
with  his  computation.  The  Trojans,
he  fays,  built  Lavinium  juft  after  the
expiration  of  the  two  firft  years  after
the  taking  of  Troy  :  The  third  year,
Aeneas  reigned  over  the  Trojans  only  ;
the  fourth,  he  fucceeded  Latinus ;  and,
having  reigned  three  years  after  the
death  of  Latinus,  he  died  the  fourth
year.  This  fame  year,  Afcanius  fuc¬
ceeded  him,  and  died  in  the  thirty
eighth  year  of  his  reign.  Sylvius  fuc¬
ceeded  him,  the  fame  year,  and  reigned
twenty  nine  ;  Aeneas,  his  fon,  thirty
one  ;  Latinus,  fifty  one;  Albas,  thirty
nine ;  Capetus,  twenty  fix  ;  Capys,
twenty  eight ;  Calpetus,  thirteen  ;  Ti-
berinus,  eight ;  Agrippas,  forty  one  ;
Allades,  nineteen;  Aventinus,  thirty
feven ;  Procas,  twenty  three ;  and
Amulius  forty  two.  The  reader  will
find  that  all  thefe  numbers,  added  to¬
gether,  will  make  four  hundred  thirry
two.  This  year  was  a  very  bufy  year:
For,  on  the  fifteenth  of  the  calends  of
March,  the  fifteenth  of  February,  on
which  day,  the  Lupercalia  were  cele¬
brated,  Remus  was  taken ;  and,  about
the  beginning  of  March,  on  the  firft
day  of  which  the  Roman,  not  the  Attic

Y  olympiad,


Book  I.


162  ROMAN  ANT  I QJJ I  TIES  OF

olympiad,  in  which  Daicles  of  Meffene  won  the  prize  of  the
ftadium,  and  the  firft  year  of  the  decennial  archonfhip  of
Charops  at  Athens.


year,  began,  Amulius  was  flain  :  After
whofe  death,  Numitor  fucceeded  j  and,
having,  as  our  author  fays,  employed
a  jhort  time  to  fettle  his  government,
he,  prefently ,  thought  of  founding  a
new  kingdom  for  his  grandfons,  and
of  enabling  them  to  build  a  new  city.
This  city  they  began  to  build,  accord¬
ingly,  on  the  eleventh  of  the  calends
of  May,  the  twenty  firft  of  April  fol¬
lowing  ;  which,  the  reader  fees,  was
feveral  weeks  before  the  twenty  third
of  Thargelion,  on  which  day,  every
year,  from  the  taking  of  Troy,  was
accomplifhed.  After  all  thefe  parti¬
culars  are  explained,  I  believe,  I  need
not  employ  many  words  to  anfwer  the
objections  of  Dodwell.  The  firft  he
makes  to  the  chronology  of  our  au¬
thor,  is  that  Creon  being  the  firft  an¬
nual  archon,  who  was  created  luch  at
Athens  in  the  firft  year  of  the  twenty
fourth  olympiad,  it  cannot  be  that
either  Charops,  or  any  other,  fhould
have  been  in  the  firft  year  of  his  de¬
cennial  archonfhip  in  the  firft  year  of
the  feventh  olympiad.  I  own  I  have
not  comprehenfion  enough  to  fee  that
this  is  a  neceflary  confequence.  For,
though  it  is,  generally,  fuppofed  that
the  feven  decennial  archons  (of  whom
Charops  was  the  firft)  governed  ten
years  apiece,  yet  it  is  well  known  that
our  account  of  the  decennial,  is  not  fo
complete  as  That  of  the  annual,  arch¬
ons  *,  and  it  might  very  well  happen
that  Dionyfius  had  a  more  complete


account  of  the  decennial  archons  be¬
fore  him,  when  he  writ  this  :  If  thefe,,
by  any  accident,  governed  only  fixty
eight  years,  inftead  of  feventy,  it  will
be  found  that  Charops  entered  upon,
the  firft  year  of  his  decennial  archon¬
fhip  in  the  firft  year  of  the  feventh
olympiad.  It  is  well  known  that  Creon
was  created  the  firft  annual  archon  the
firft  year  of  the  twenty  fourth  olym¬
piad  ;  and,  if,  from  twenty  three  olym¬
piads,  we  dedudt  fix  for  thofe  elapfed
before  the  building  of  Rome,  the
remaining  feventeen  will  make  juft
fixty  eight  years.  But,  I  think,  I  have
a  ftronger  objection  againft  his  chro¬
nology,  than  this,  or  any  other  he  has
urged  againft  That  of  Dionyfius.  He
fays  that  Rome  mull  have  been  built
in  the  433d  year  after  the  taking  of
Troy  •,  for  which  he  quotes  Solinus,
and  the  author  of  the  Progenies  Augufti,
under  the  name  of  Mefiala  Corvinus.
Thefe,  he  thinks,  are  authors  fit  to  be
oppofed  to  the  authority  of  Dionyfius
of  HalicarnafiTus.  The  firft  was  a
grammarian,  and  a  wretched  tran-
fcriber  of  other  authors,  particularly,
of  Pliny  ;  and  1  Scaliger,  in  his  notes
on  Eufebius,  calls  him,  with  great  rea-
fon,  fcript or em  levijfimum :  The  other
is  a  fi&itious  writer,  as  every  body?
knows,  and  Dodwell  himfelf  owns.
But,  even  this  fyftem  of  Dodwell  will
not  agree  with  his  own  chronological
tables  :  For,  by  placing  the  building
of  Rome  in  the  firft  year  of  Numitor,


*P.  226.


LXXII.


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H A  LICA  RN  ASS  ENSI S.  163

LXXII.  But,  there  being  great  difputes  concerning  both
the  time  of  the  building  of  the  city,  and  the  founders  of  it,
I  thought  it  incumbent  on  me,  alfo,  not  to  give  a  curfory
account  of  thefe  things,  as  if  they  were,  univerfally,  agreed
on.  For  Cephalon,  the  Gergithian,  a  very  ancient  writer,
fays  the  city  was  built,  22(5  the  fecond  generation  after  the
Trojan  war,  by  thofe,  who  efcaped  from  Troy  with  Aeneas :
That  the  founder  of  it  was  Remus,  who  was  the  leader  of
the  colony :  That  he  was  one  of  Aeneas’s  fons ;  and  that
Aeneas  had  four  fons,  Afcanius,  Euryleon,  Romulus,  and


or,  in  other  words,  by  allowing  no¬
thing  in  his  tables  to  the  reign  of
Numitor,  he  has  made  the  total  of
the  reigns  to  amount  10432  years,  as
they,  certainly,  do.  From  whence,
he  concludes  that  the  forty  fecond  year
of  Amulius  was  the  43  2d  from  the
taking  of  Troy  :  In  this  I  agree  with
him :  Then,  fays  he,  the  firft  of  Nu¬
mitor  was  the  433d  from  the  taking
of  Troy :  This  I  deny  :  And,  I  believe,
the  reader,  from  what  I  have  faid,  will
anticipate  my  reafons  for  denying  it.
Amulius  was  flam,  and  Numitor  luc-
ceeded  him  in  the  fpring  of  this  year :
For,  we  find,  by  our  author,  that
Amulius  was  not  (lain,  till  fome  time
after  the  fifteenth  of  February  ;  and
that  he  was  flain  time  enough  for
Numitor  to  fucceed  him,  to  fettle  his
government,  and  fend  out  Romulus
and  Remus  fo  early,  that  they  began
to  build  Rome  on  the  twenty  firft  of
April  of  this  year  432.  Now,  we  have,
already,  feen,  from  our  author,  that
Troy  was  taken  on  the  twenty  third
of  Thargelion  •,  confequently,  the432d
year  from  the  taking  of  Troy  did  not


end  till  the  return  of  the  twenty  third
of  Thargelion,  which  fell  out  feveral
weeks  after  the  twenty  firft  of  April.
It  will,  therefore,  neceftarily,  follow
that  Rome  was  built  the  43  2 d  year
after  the  taking  of  Troy,  as  our  author
fays,  and  not  the  433d,  as  Dodweli
would  have  it.  The  reader  will  excufe
a  repetition,  which  I  find  I  have  been
guilty  of  in  this  note.  The  neceffity
I  was  under,  firft,  to  ftate  faffs,  and,
then,  to  apply  them,  obliged  me  to  it  j
and  I  chofe  rather  to  be  prolix,  than
obfcure.

226,  Asvlegx  yevex.  I  cannot  conceive
how  Portus  came  to  tranflate  this  anno
fecundo ,  inftead  of  the  fecond  generation ,
as  the  words,  plainly,  fignify.  But,
as  obvious  as  this  miftake  is  in  Portus,
le  Jay,  his  faithful  follower,  has  tranf-
lated  him,  and  faid  la  feconde  annee .
This  is  a  convincing  proof,  if  this
proof  were  wanting,  to  fatisfy  every
one  that  le  Jay,  inftead  of  mandat¬
ing  Dionyfius,  has  mandated  Portus.
Hudfon  cannot  be  excufed  for  not
correfiing  this  miftake  in  his  edition.

Y  2


Remus.


164  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book!.

Remus.  227  Demagoras,  alfo,  Agathyllus,  and  many  others,
aoree  with  him  in  relation  both  to  the  time,  and  the  leader  of
the  colony.  But  the  228  author  of  the  hiftory  of  the  prieftefles
in  Argos,  and  of  what  pafted  under  each  of  them,  fays  that
Aeneas,  coming  into  Italy  from  the  Moloffi,  after  Ulyffes,
was  the  founder  of  the  city,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of
one  of  the  Trojan  women,  who  was  called  Rome  ;  and  that
(lie,  tired  with  wandering,  and  the  reft  of  the  Trojan
women,  by  her  inftigation,  fet  fire  to  the  fhips.  In  this,
229  Damaftes,  the  Sigean,  and  fome  others  agree  with  him.
But,  230  Ariftotle,  the  philofopher,  writes  that  fome  of  the


227’  Avipotyoocf,  Ksa  AyecQvWcc.  u  It  is
not  known  whether  the  firft  of  thefe
was  a  poet,  or  an  hiftorian.  The  o-
ther  was  an  Arcadian  poet  ;  and  our
author,  as  we  fhall  fee,  cites  fome
verfes  of  his.  Concerning  Cephalon,
fee  the  1 5 2d  annotation.

228.  q  rcig  r&s  fv  Agy&j  xcu

rot  x«9’  lxcx,?r;v  c-woeyocywv.

The  author  of  this  hiftory  is  not  men¬
tioned  by  Dionyfius :  It  is  poftibie  that
it  may  be  Hellanicus,  concerning
whom  fee  the  66th  and  67th  annota¬
tions.

229*  0  Sfjeuf.  This  hifto¬

rian  is  faid  by  our  author  to  have  lived
a  little  before  the  Peloponnefian  war.
He  was  of  Sigeum,  a  promontory,
and  a  town  of  Proas,  now,  called,
Janizzari.  Suidas  fays  he  writ  two
books  concerning  the  parents,  and
anceftors  of  thofe,  who  warred  at  T roy,
and  a  catalogue  of  nations,  and  cities  ;
as  alfo,  concerning  poets,  and  philo-


fophers,  with  many  other  things ;  and
that  he  was  a  difciple  of  Hellanicus.

23°*  As  this  account,  taken

from  Ariftotle,  is  in  fome  of  his  works,
that  are  loft,  it  is  not  poffible  to  know
whether  x  Plutarch,  who  tells  this  fto-
ry,  without  faying  from  whom  he  had
it,  and  makes  thefe  people,  who  came
from  Troy,  to  have  been  Trojans  ;  or
whether  our  author,  who  fays  they
were  Greeks,  had  moft  reafon  for  his
aftertion  :  Though,  by  the  fequel  of
the  ftory,  they  muft  have  been  Greeks*
fince  the  Trojan  women,  who  fet  fire
to  the  fleet,  were  their  prifoners.  The
promontory,  formerly,  called  Malea,
now,  Capo  Malio ,  belongs  to  Laconia,
and  forms  the  fouth  eaft  point  of  the
ancient  Peloponnefus,  now,  theMorea.
We  read  of  many  fhips  being  loft  in
doubling  the  cape*  this  dangerous  fea
is  taken  notice  of  by  y  Virgil,

Maleaeqiie  fequacibus  undis.


u  VofT,  Hift.  Graec.  B.  iii.  p.  351 .  wri££»  QhxvS.  x  Twx\k.  a%{],  J  Aeneid.  B.  v.  193.

Greeks,


Eookl.  DIONYSIUS  HA  L I C  ARN  A  S  SE  N  SI  S.  165
Greeks,  in  their  return  from  Troy,  while  they  were  doubling
the  cape  of  Malea,  were  overtaken  with  a  violent  ftorm  ;
and,  being,  for  fome  time,  driven  out  of  their  courfe  by  the
winds,  wandered  over  many  parts  of  the  fea;  till,  at  laft,
they  came  to  this  place,  which  belongs  to  Opica,  called
Latium,  lying  on  the  Tyrrhene  fea:  That,  being  pleafed
with  the  fight  of  land,  they  haled  up  their  fhips ;  ftaid  there
the  winter  feafon,  and  were  preparing  to  fail  in  the  beginning
of  the  fpring  :  But,  their  fhips  being  fet  on  fire  in  the  night,
and  they,  unable  to  fail  away,  neceflity  obliged  them,  againft
their  will,  to  fettle  in  the  place,  where  they  had  landed :
And,  that  this  was  brought  upon  them,  by  the  captive  women
they  were  carrying  with  them  from  Troy  ;  who  burned
the  fhips,  left,  when  the  Greeks  returned  home,  they  fhould
become  flaves..  231  Callias,  who  writ  the  actions  of  Agatho-
cles,  fays  that  one  of  the  Trojan  women,  who  came  into
Italy  with  the  reft  of  the  Trojans,  called  Rome,  married
Latinus,  king  of  the  Aborigines,  by  whom,  fhe  had  two
foils,  Remus,  and  Romulus,  who,  building  a  city,  gave  it
the  name  of  their  mother.  Xenagoras,  the  hiftorian,  writes
that  Ulyffes,  and  Circe  had  three  fons,  Remus,  Antias,  and
Ardeas,  who,  building  three  cities,  called  them  after  their
own  names.  232  Dionyfius,  the  Chalcidean,  owns,  indeed,


23T’  K ocKKiot^  Stvcfyogctf.  The  age
of  the  fir  ft  is  known,  by  his  having
been  a  penfioner,  and  flatterer  of  Aga-
thocles,  the  tyrant  of  Sicily,  as  we
learn  from  z  Suidas,  who  has  tran-
fcribed  Diodorus,  in  every  thing  re¬
lating  to  him.  All  we  know  of  the


other,  is,  that  he  writ  one  treatife  con¬
cerning  chronology,  and  another  con¬
cerning  iflands.

232*  Atowmae  0  XotXKiJius.  W  e  know
no  more  of  this  hiftorian,  than  that
he  writ  five  books  of  the  origins  of
a  cities.


2  VolTius  Hilt.  Graec.  B.  iii.  p.  422.


that


a  Id.  ib.  p.  358.


1 66  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


that  Remus  was  the  founder  of  the  city ;  but,  then,  he  fays,
that  he  was,  according  to  fome,  the  fon  of  Afcanius,  and,
according  to  others,  the  fon  of  Emathion.  There  are  others,
who  affirm  that  Rome  was  built  by  Remus,  the  fon  of
Italus,  and  of  Eledlra,  the  daughter  of  Latinus.

LXXIII.  I  could  quote  many  other  Greek  writers,  who
affign  different  founders  of  the  city  ;  but,  not  to  appear
prolix,  I  ffiall  come  to  the  Roman  hiftorians.  The  Romans
have  not  fo  much  as  one  ancient  hiftorian,  or  233  orator  ;


but  each  of  their  hiftorians  has  taken  fomething  out  of  the

t

ancient  relations,  that  are  preferved  in  the  234  holy  records.
Some  of  thefe  fay  that  Romulus,  and  Remus,  the  founders
of  Rome,  were  the  fons  of  Aeneas :  Others,  that  they  were
the  fons  of  a  daughter  of  Aeneas,  without  determining  who
was  their  father;  and  that  they  were  delivered,  as  hoftages,


*33-  A oyoyzxQcs.  M.  ***,  very  juftly,
cenfures  Gelenius,  and  Portus  for  tranf-
Jating  this,  a  writer  of  fables.  I  do  not
underftand  why  he  has  fpared  Syl-
burgius,  fince  he  has  fallen  into  the
fame  error,  as  well  as  le  Jay.  In  op-
pofition  to  them,  he  has  faid,  a  writer
in  general ;  though,  by  the  very  au¬
thorities  he  quotes,  he  ought  to  have
rendered  it  either  an  orator ,  with  Plu¬
tarch,  or,  an  hijlorian ,  with  Thucy¬
dides.  As  our  author  has,  already,
mentioned  an  hijlorian ,  I  have  chofen
to  tranflate  hoyoygoitpo;,  in  this  place,
an  orator ,  in  which  I  am  fupported,
not  only  by  the  authority  of  Plutarch,
but,  alfo,  by  that  of  Hefychius  j  Aa-
yoygaipo f,  o  bix.oc{  ytjotQwv.

234*  Ey  hgctit  &a7 ois.  I  look  upon

b  B.  iv.  c.  7.


thefe  to  have  been  what  the  Romans
called  libras  linteos ,  which  contained
the  treaties  made  by  them  with  other
nations ;  and,  alfo,  the  names  of  their
magiftrates,  and  the  times  of  their
creation  ;  becaufe,  I  find  that  b  Livy
calls  them  libros  magijlratuum ,  and  li-
bros  linteos  :  Licinius  Macer  aubior  eft ,
et  in  foedere  Ardeatino,  et  in  linteislibris
ad  Monetae  inventa.  And,  again,  quod -
que  magiftratuum  libri,  quos  linteos  in
aede  repofitos  Monetae ,  Macer  Licinius
citat  identidem  aublores c.  The  epithet
made  ufe  of  by  our  author  upon
this  occafion,  inclined  me  to  think
that  he  might  mean  the  libri  pontifi¬
cates ;  but  thefe  related,  purely,  to
religion,  and  to  public  and  private
facrifices.

c  lb.  c.  20.


by


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  $  S  E  N  S  1  S.  167

by  Aeneas,  to  Latinus,  king  of  the  Aborigines,  when  the
treaty  was  made  between  the  inhabitants,  and  the  foreigners :
And  that  Latinus  received  them  kindly,  did  them  many
good  offices,  and,  dying  without  male  children,  left  them  his
fucceflors  in  fome  part  of  his  kingdom.  Others  fay  that,  after
the  death  of  Aeneas,  Afcanius,  having  fucceeded  him  in  the
intire  fovereignty  of  the  Latines,  divided  both  the  country,
and  the  forces  of  the  Latines,  into  three  parts ;  two  of  which
he  gave  to  his  brothers,  Romulus,  and  Remus :  That  he
himfelf  built  Alba,  and  fome  other  towns ;  and  that  Remus
built  a  city,  which  he  called  Capua,  from  Capys,  his  great
grandfather ;  Anchife,  from  his  grandfather  Anchifes ;
Aenea,  which  was,  afterwards,  called  Janiculum,  from  his
father;  and  Rome,  from  his  own  name:  That  this  laft
city  was,  for  fome  time,  deferted  by  the  inhabitants;  but
that,  upon  the  arrival  of  another  colony,  which  the  Albans
fent,  under  the  conduct  of  Romulus,  and  Remus,  it  was
reftored  to  its  former  condition:  So  that,  according  to  this
account,  there  were  two  foundations  of  Rome;  one,  a  little
after  the  Trojan  war;  and  the  other,  fifteen  generations
after  the  firfL  But,  if  any  one  defires  to  look  into  the
earlier  accounts,  even,  a  third  Rome  will  be  found,  more
ancient  than  thefe,  which  was  founded,  before  Aeneas,
and  the  Trojans  came  into  Italy.  This  is  fupported  by
the  teftimony  of  no  vulgar,-  nor  modern  author ;  but  by
That  of  Antiochus,  the  Syracufian,  whom  I  mentioned
before:  He  lays  that,  when  Morges  reigned  in  Italy

(which*,,


1 68  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.


(23S  which,  at  that  time,  comprehended  all  the  fea  coaft  from
Tarentum,  to  336  Poiidonia)  a  man  came  to  him,  who  had
been  banifhed  from  Rome;  his  words  are  thefe  :  “  After
“  I  talus  was  grown  old,  Morges  reigned  :  In  his  reign,
“  there  came  to  him  a  man,  who  had  been  baniihed  from
u  Rome,  andwhofe  name  was  Sicelus.”  According,  there¬
fore,  to  the  Syracufian  hiftorian,  fome  ancient  city,  called
Rome,  is  found,  even,  earlier  than  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war.
But,  as  he  has  left  it  doubtful  whether  it  was  htuated  in  the
fame  place,  where  the  city,  now,  ftands,  or  whether  fome
other  place  was  called  by  the  fame  name,  fo,  neither  can
I  form  any  conjecture  relating  to  it.  Concerning,  there¬
fore,  the  ancient  foundations  of  Rome,  I  think,  what  has
been  faid,  to  be  fufficient.

LXXIV.  As  to  the  laft  reinhabiting,  or  building  of  the
city;  or,  by  what  name  foever  we  ought  to  call  it,  Timaeus,


235‘  Hv  h  role  I ruAioc.  Cafaubon
fays,  upon  this  paffage,  that d  Strabo,
upon  tbe  authority,  alfo,  of  Antio¬
chus,  makes  Italy  much  lefs  extenfive.
I  have  looked  into  that  place  of  Stra¬
bo,  and  find  it  to  be  fo.  Upon  this,
he  alks  whether  the  words  of  Antio-
chus  may  not  be,  lefs  accurately,  quoted
by  Dionyfius,  than  Strabo  ?  To  this
I  anfwer  that  it  is  more  probable  they
did  not  both  quote  the  fame  paffage,
and  that  Antiochus  might,  in  one
place,  fpeak  of  one  defcription  of
Italy,  that  prevailed  at  one  time,  and,
in  the  other,  of  another  defcription,
that  prevailed  at  another  time.  Some¬
thing  like  this  he  himfelf  fee  ms  to
infinuate.  This,  and  many  other  notes,

d  B.  vi.  p.  391.


both  of  Cafaubon,  and  the  other  com¬
mentators  M.  *  *  *  has  taken,  without
giving  the  leaft  hint  from  whom  he
had  them.

2i6-  TIoffifovixt.  This  was  the
Greek  name  of  a  town  in  Lucania,
called  by  the  Romans,  Paeftum,  which
lay  in  the  Sinus  Paeflanus,  now,
called,  Golfo  di  Salerno.  It  is  very
poffible  that  Antiochus,  whofe  words
our  author  quotes,  might  mean  the
promontory  Pofidonium ,  or  Pofidium ,
that  lies  to  the  fouth  of  the  town,  and
is,  now,  called,  e  Capo  di  Licofa ,  as  a
more  remarkable  boundary  on  the
weft,  to  anfwer  the  large  city  of  Ta¬
rentum  on  the  eaft.


•  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  p.  1258.


the


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  A  SS  EN  SIS.  169


the  Sicilian  (by  what 237  computation  I  know  not)  places  it
at  the  fame  time  with  the  building  of  Carthage,  that  is,  in  the
thirty  eighth  year  before  the  firft  olympiad  ;  Lucius  Cincius,
a  Roman  fenator,  about  the  fourth  year  of  the  twelfth  olym¬
piad  ;  and  Quin6lusFabiusin  the  firft  year  of  the  eighth  olym¬
piad.  Cato  Porcius  follows  no  Greek  account ;  but,  being  as
careful,  as  any  writer,  in  collecting  ancient  hiftories,  he
places  the  building  of  Rome  four  hundred  and  thirty  two
years  after  the  taking  of  Troy:  And  this  time,  being  com¬
pared  with  the  chronological  tables  of  238  Eratofthenes,  falls
in  with  the  firft  year  of  the  feventh  olympiad.  I  have
fhewn,  in  another  treatife,  that  the  canons  of  Eratofthenes
are  to  be  depended  on,  and,  in  what  manner,  the  Roman
chronology  is  to  be  reduced  to  That  of  the  Greeks :  For  I
did  not  think  it  fufficient,  like  Polybius  of  Megalopolis,  to
fay,  only,  that  I  believe  Rome  was  built  in  the  fecond  year  of
the  feventh  olympiad  ;  nor  to  leave  the  unexamined  credit
of  this  affertion  upon  a  fingle  infcription  on  a  table,  pre-


a37*  Ouk  0»<r  oral  Kdvovi  %qyicroii usvo?.
Wonderfully  tranflated  by  le  Jay,
fans  alleguer  aucun  auteur.  It  is  well
known  that  k xvai  fignifies  a  workman's
rule  ;  from  whence,  it  was  tranflated
to  chronology,  where  it  fignifies  a
computation  of  time  to  ferve  as  a  rule
for  hiflory.

238*  Efaloo&mc'  He  was  a  man  of
univerfal  learning,  notwithftanding  the
cenfure  of f  Strabo,  who  looked  upon
him  as  a  rival,  though  he  lived  fo
long  before  him,  and,  by  his  bitter-
nefs,  fhews  he  thought  him  a  formid¬


able  one.  s  He  was  a  geographer,  a
chronologer,  a  grammarian,  a  philo-
fopner,  a  poet,  an  aftronomer,  and  an
hiftorian  :  Of  all  thefe  he  gave  ample
proofs  in  his  writings,  which  are,  of¬
ten,  quoted,  with  great  approbation,
by  the  bed:  authors.  He  was  a  Cy-
renaean,  and  fent  for  from  Athens  by
Ptolomy  Euergetes,  who  made  him
his  librarian.  h  He  died  under  Ptolomy
Epiphanes  in  the  firft  year  of  the  146th
olympiad  aged  eighty,  as  we  find  in
Suidas  •,  but  1  Lucian  fays  he  was
eighty  two  when  he  died.


f  B.  i.  in  various  places.  £  Harpocration,  Suidas.  h  Voffius  de  Hift.  Graec.  B.  i.  p.  io8#
*  In  MaX£o£.

Vol.  I.  Z  ferved


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  t


ferved  by  the  Anchifenfes,  and  the  only  one  of  its  kind  ;
but  chofe  rather  to  expofe  the  reafons  I  myfelf  have  pro¬
duced,  to  be  canvafted  by  any  one,  who  thinks  fit  to  examine
them:  In  that  treatife,  therefore,  an  exad  chronology  is
deduced  ;  but  in  this  work,  thofe  things  239  only,  that  are
moft  neceffary,  will  be  taken  notice  of.  The  matter  ftands
thus:  240  The  irruption  of  the  Gauls,  in  which  the  city  of
Rome  wTas  taken,  is  agreed,  almoft,  on  all  hands,  to  have,
happened,  during  the  archonfhip  of  Pyrgion  at  Athens,


239*  Avia  rca  uvayKottorctlx.  I  am
furprifed  that  none  of  the  commen¬
tators  have  explained  the  force  of  the
word  avia,  in  this  place ;  and,  parti¬
cularly,  that  Cafaubon,  who,  certain¬
ly,  underflood  both  the  beauty,  and
ftrength  of  the  Greek  language  as  well
as  any  man  fince  it  has  been  revived,
fhould  be  filent  upon  this  occafion.
Avia ,  here,  fignifies  /uova,  as  may  be
proved  from  many  paffages  out  of  the
befl  writers  •,  but  I  fhall  content  my¬
felf  with  one  from  k  Ariftophanes,
whofe  language  is  full  of  Attic  ele¬
gance  ;

Ov  ya £  jU*  5 tui  vuv  Jia&aAu  K Aswv,  oti
zcragcvlav  t>jv  zvqAiv  y.ax,ug  teyw.

Avlot  yx%

Upon  which,  the  Greek  fcholiaft  fays
very  well,  oiovMONOI  A^vaioi  twd
cvja/aa^wv,  nai  £sva>v.  After  this,  I
wonder  the  Latin  tranflator  of  Arilto-
phanes  fhould  fay,  nam  nos  fumus ,  in-
ftead  of  nam  foli  fumus.

24°-  'h  K tAluv  i<poJof.  Cafaubon,  in
his  annotation  upon  this  paftage  (which
M.  *  *  *  has,  according  to  his  cuftom,

k  f.  501.  1  Life  ofCamillus


tranflated  without  mentioning  him)
fays  that  our  author  did  not,  without
reafon,  mention  this  aera  in  comparing
the  chronology  of  the  Romans,  with
That  of  the  Greeks  •,  becaufe  Plutarch
fays  that,  foon  after  Rome  was  taken
by  the  Gauls,  the  Greeks  had  fome
obfcure  knowledge  of  the  Romans  ^
for  which  he  quotes  Heraclides  Pon-
ticus,  and  Ariftotle.  Upon  looking
into  this  paftage  of  1  Plutarch,  I  was
furprifed  to  find  that,  he  fays  Hera¬
clides  Ponticus  was  not  much  later
than  the  time,  when  Rome  was  taken
by  the  Gauls,  a  srcAv  7cov  ^ovav  zxeivwv
<x7roA«7ro//-svof  •,  when  it  is  well  known
by  other  authors,  as  well  as  by  Laer¬
tius,  who  has  written  the  life  of  this
Heraclides,  that  he  was  a  difciple  of
Ariftotle,  and,  confequently,  could  not
have  lived  near  the  time  when  Rome
was  taken  ;  fince  his  mafter  Ariftotle,
who  muft  be  prefumed  to  have  been,
confiderably,  older  than  his  difciple,
died  aged  no  more  than  m  fixty  three,  in
the  third  year  of  the  1 14th  olympiad,
that  is  fixty  eight  years  after  the  aera*
we  fpeak  oi.

m  Diog,  Laert,  Life  of  Ariftotle.


the


Book  L  DIONYSIUS  II AL  IC  A  RN  A  S  SE  N  SIS.  171

the  firft  year  of  the  ninety  eighth  olympiad  :  Now,  if  the
time  before  the  taking  of  the  city,  be  brought  back  to  Lucius
Junius  Brutus,  and  Lucius  Tarquinius  Collatinus,  the  firft
confuls  at  Rome  after  the  expullion  of  the  kings,  it  will
comprehend  one  hundred  and  twenty  years.  This  appears  by
many  monuments ;  but,  particularly,  by  the 241  records  of  the


24I#  Tfc>v  TijUi{Imcdv  v7rojuvfijuciIc<iv.  Thefe
records  of  the  cenfors  were,  no  doubt,
very  good  materials  for  fupplying  our
author  with  the  dates  of  the  mod
confiderable  events  in  the  Roman  hi-
ftory,  and  as  fuch  he  refers  to  them.
The  difficulty,  therefore,  does  not  con-
fid  in  the  want  of  the  authenticity  of
thefe  records,  but  in  the  poffibility  of
their  having  been  preferved,  when  the
town  was  lacked  by  the  Gauls.  As  I
have,  often,  heard,  men  of  learning
argue  againd  this  poffibility  and,  as
the  late  lord  11  Bolingbroke,  in  one  of
his  letters  on  the  dudy  of  hidory,  has
thought  Ht  to  call  thofe  men,  pedants,
who  would  impofe  all  the  traditions  of
the  four  fird  ages  of  Rome  for  au¬
thentic  hidory,  and  has  made  ufe  of
the  authority  of  Livy  to  fhew  that  the
greated  part  of  all  public  and  private
monuments,  was  dedroyed  in  the  fack
of  Rome-,  I  ffiall,  without  fearing  the
imputation  of  pedantry,  conlider  whe¬
ther  there  is  not  a  neceffity  of  allowing
that  fuch  an  account  of  all  the  re¬
markable  tranfadions  precedents  the
taking  of  Rome,  was,  by  fome  means,
or  other,  preferved  at  that  time,  as  to
furnifh  materials  for  an  authentic  hi¬
dory.  This  is  all  I  contend  for.  I
am  fenfible  that  the  Romans  had  no
hidorians,  nor  any  writers  but  annalids
till  long  after  this  period,  and  that  the

*  Let.  v.


Greek  writers,  who  writ  before,  and
feveral  years  after  this  period,  do  not
ffiew,  in  any  part  of  their  works,  that
they  were  much  acquainted  either  with
the  Romans,  or  their  affairs.  I  have
read  his  lordfhip’s  works  with  fo  much
pleafure  ;  I  have  been  fo  much  charm¬
ed  with  the  vivacity  of  his  dyle,  and
indruded  with  the  variety  of  his  learn¬
ing,  that  it  would  be  a  kind  of  ingra¬
titude  in  me  to  fay  any  thing  in  de¬
rogation  of  either.  The  point  he  has
in  view,  in  this  letter,  is,  to  ffiew  that
the  old  Roman  authors  were  annalids,
and  not  hidorians,  which  I  allow ;  and
I,  alfo,  allow,  that  they  did  not  write
hidory  in  thatfulnefs,  in  which  it  mud
be  written  to  become  a  leffon  of  ethics,
and  politics ;  but  they  might  leave
fufficient  materials  to  enable  others  to
do  fo.  I  am  very  glad  that  0  Livy,
in  fpeaking  of  the  public  and  private
monuments,  that  periffied  at  that  time,
fays  pier aeque  int crier e :  For,  if  he  had
faid  omnia ,  I  am  afraid  it  would  have
been  of  little  fervice  to  me  to  have
ffiewn  the  impoffibility  of  it.  If  all,
or  fo  many  of  the  public  and  private
monuments  peri  Hied  at  that  time,  as
to  leave  no  traces  behind  them,  how

•1  7

came  Livy  to  know  the  number  of  the
kings,  who  reigned  at  Rome  ;  the  re¬
markable  incidents  of  each  reian  ;  all
the  particulars  relating  to  their  expul-
P  B.  vi.  c.  i.

Z  2  cenfors.


j  7  2  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Hook  I.

cenfors,  which  the  fon  receives  in  fucceffion  from  the  father,
and  takes  great  care  to  tranfmit  to  his  poflerity,  like  family
rites.  And  there  are  feveral  illuftrious  men  of  cenforian
families,  who  preferve  thefe  records :  In  which,  I  find  that
the  year  before  the  taking  of  the  city,  there  was  a  cenfus  of
the  Roman  people,  to  which,  as  to  the  reft  of  them,  there
is  affixed  the  date,  which  is  this ;  “  In  the  242  confulftiip  of


fion  •,  the  creation  of  the  tribunes  of
the  people,  and  all  the  circumftances
relative  to  that  great  event ;  the  ap¬
pointment,  and  diffolution  of  the  de¬
cemvirs  ;  the  laws  enabled  by  them
before,  and  obferved  after,  the  taking
of  Rome ;  and  every  other  tranfabtion
he  relates  in  his  firft  five  books  ?  It
may  be  faid  that  he  took  all  thefe  fabts
from  the  hiftorians,  who  writ  before
him.  But  where  had  thefe  old  hifto¬
rians  thofe  fabts  ?  From  none  who
writ  before  the  taking  of  Rome  ;  be-
caufe  there  were  none  :  So  that,  thefe
old  hiftorians  muft  either  have  had
them  from  the  monuments,. and  annals
that  were  then  preferved,  or  they  muft
have  invented  them  :  But  this  no  man
will  fay;  therefore,  I  think,  the  other
muft  be  granted.

242*  Yirxlt  vavlof  Atvxix  OvahEgix  TIoiHx,
yat  Tils  MaAA/g  KctTriluAivx.  p  Livy  lays
nothing  of  this  cenfus,  though  he  men¬
tions  the  death  of  Caius  Julius,  one
of  the  cenfors  :  But  the  elegance,  and
pompous  ftyle  of  that  hiftorian  de¬
fer  ves  more,  to  be  admired,  than  his
exabtnefs.  Thele  confuls,  being  ill  of
a  peftilential  diftemper,  abdicated;
and  fix  confular  tribunes  were  created
the  fame  year.  The  following  year,
alfo,  fix  confular  tribunes  were  chofen,


among  whom  were  the  three  Fabii,
who  had  been  fent  ambafiadors  to  the
Gauls ;  and,  contrary  to  the  laws  of
nations,  had  charged  in  the  army  of
the  Clufini,  when  thefe  engaged  them.
This  was  the  fatal  year,  in  which  Rome
was  taken;  and  thefe  were  the  confular
tribunes,  under  whofe  government  that
calamity  befel  the  Romans.  The  cen¬
fus,  therefore,  which  our  author  fays
was  performed  in  the  confulfhip  of
Lucius  Valerius  Potitus,  and  Titus
Manlius  Capitolinus,  muft  have  been
the  year  before  the  city  was  taken.  I
cannot  end  this  note  without  taking,
notice  of  two  things,  that  furprife  me
in  the  words  quoted  by  our  author  out
of  thefe  cenforian  records  ;  the  firft  is,
that  one  of  the  confuls  of  this  year  is
called  by  Livy,  and  the  Fafti  con/dares,
Marcus,  not  Titus  Manlius  ;  and  the
other,  that  he  was  not  called  Capito¬
linus,  till  the  following  year,  after  he
had  faved  the  capitol  :  And  Livy,  in
fpeaking  of  the  confuls  of  this  year,
fays,  creati  confides  L.  Valerius  Potitus ,
M.  Manlius ,  cui  Capitolina  pojlea  fuit
cognomen.  This  deferved  to  be  taken
notice  of  by  the  commentators  :  But
they  are,  often,  very  liberal  of  their
afilftance,  when  it  is  not  wanted,  and
forfake  the  reader,  when  it  is.


p  B,  v.  c.  31.


<c  Lucius


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  173

“  Lucius  Valerius  Potitus,  and  Titus  Manlius  Capitolinus,

“  the  hundred  and  nineteenth  year  after  the  expulfion  of
“  the  kings.”  So  that,  the  irruption  of  the  Gauls,  which
we  find  to  have  fallen  out  in  the  year,  that  followed  the
cenfus,  happened  when  the  hundred  and  twenty  years  were
accomplifhed.  If,  therefore,  this  interval  of  time  is  found
to  confift  of  thirty  olympiads,  it  muft  be  allowed  that  the
firft  confuls  entered  upon  their  magiftracy  in  the  firft  year  of
the  fixty  eighth  olympiad  ;  the  fame  year  that  Ifiagoras  was
archon  at  Athens.

LXXV.  And  if,  from  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,  the
time  is  brought  back  to  Romulus,  the  firft  king  of  the  city,
that  period  will  be  found  to  comprehend  two  hundred  and
forty  four  years.  This  is  known  by  the  fuccefilons  of  the*
kings,  and  the  number  of  years  each  of  them  reigned  :  For
Romulus,  the  founder  of  Rome,  is  faid  to  have  reigned
thirty  feven  years :  And,  after  his  death,  the  city  was  a  year
without  a  king :  Then,  Numa  Pompilius,  who  was  chofen
by  the  people,  reigned  forty  three  years :  After  Numa,
Tullus  Hoftilius,  thirty  two :  And,  his  fucceftor,  Ancus
Marcius,  twenty  four  :  After  Marcius,  Lucius  Tarquinius,
called  Prifcus,  thirty  eight:  Servius  Tullius,  who  fucceeded
him,  four  and  forty:  And  Lucius  Tarquinius,  a  tyrannical
prince,  and,  from  his  contempt  of  juftice,  called  Superbus,
having  put  Servius  to  death,  extended  his  reign  to  the  twenty
fifth  year.  The  reigns,  therefore,  of  the  kings  completing
the  number  of  two  hundred  and  forty  four  years,  and  of  fixty
one  olympiads,  it  follows,  neceflarily,  that  Romulus,  the  firft


i74  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

king  of  the  city,  began  his  reign  in  the  firft  year  of  the  feventh
olympiad,  and  the  firft  year  of  the  decennial  archonfhip  or
Cliarops  at  Athens :  For  this  the  computation  of  the  years
requires :  And,  that  each  king  reigned  fo  many  years,  I  have
fhewn  in  that  treatife.  This,  therefore,  is  the  account,  given
by  thofe,  who  lived  before  me,  and  adopted  by  me,  con¬
cerning  the  time  of  the  building  of  this  city,  which,  at  pre-
fent,  is  miftrefs  of  the  world.  As  to  the  founders  of  it,  who
they  were,  by  what  turns  of  fortune  they  were  induced  to
lead  out  the  colony,  and  what  other  incidents  are  faid  to
have  attended  the  building  of  it,  has  been  related  by  many,
and,  the  greateft  part  of  them,  by  fome  in  a  different  man¬
ner  ;  and  I,  alfo,  fliall  mention  the  moft  probable  of  thefe
relations :  Thus  it  ftands :

LXXVI.  Amulius,  having,  by  his  power,  excluded  his
elder  brother  Numitor  from  his  paternal  dignity;  and,
thereby,  pofleffed  himfelf  of  the  kingdom  of  Alba,  among
many  things,  done  by  him,  abfolutely,  in  contempt  of  jubilee,
he,  at  laft,  attempted  to  deprive  Numitor’s  family  of 243  iffue,


243*  E twy-ov  ywxs  rov  cmcv  rcvNopilugog

$TTt*%\zv<Ti  tz>Qivt<ra,i.  I  am  obliged  to  de¬
part  from  all  the  tranflators  in  render¬
ing  this  pafiage :  Both  the  Latin,  and,
after  them,  the  French  tranflators,
have  faid,  that  Amulius  refolved  to
deftroy  Numitor’s  whole  family :
Which  fenfe  is  not  to  be  fupported,
either  by  the  Greek  text,  01*  the  rela¬
tion  of  this  tranfa&ion;  For  the  Greek
words  do  not  fignify  to  dcjtroy  Numi¬
tor' s  family ,  but  to  deprive  it  of  iffue.
Had  Numitor  defigned  the  firft,  what


could  have  hindered  him  from  de-
ftroying  his  niece,  as  he  had  deftroyed
his  nephew  ?  But,  inftead  of  that,  he,
only,  fought  to  deprive  her  of  all  hope
of  iflue  by  making  her  a  veftal,  left  flie
might,  one  day,  bring  forth  an  aven¬
ger  of  the  wrongs  done  to  her  family,
/ *.*)  t wy  Tipco{>ov  rco  ytvei,  as  our  author
will  fay  prefently.  The  moft  fpecious
pretence  Amulius  could  make  ufe  of
to  avert  this  danger,  was  to  make  his
niece  a  veftal  under  the  notion  of  do¬
ing  her  honor,  which  is  agreeable  to


m


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  175

in  order  to  fecure  himfelf  not  only  from  the  punifhment,  that
was  due  to  his  usurpation,  but,  alfo,  from  being,  at  anytime,
difpofleffed  of  the  fovereignty.  Having,  long,  refolded  upon
this,  he,  firft,  obferved  the  place,  where  Aegeftus,  the  fon
of  Numitor,  who  was  juft  arrived  to  manhood,  ufed  to  hunt;
and,  having  placed  an  ambufh  in  the  moft  hidden  part  of
it,  he  caufed  him  to  be  affaflinated,  while  he  was  hunting  °r
and,  after  the  fad;  was  committed,  contrived  to  have  it  re¬
ported  that  the  youth  had  been  flain  by  robbers.  However,
the  rumor,  thus  propagated,  could  not  prevail  over  the  truth,
that  was  concealed  :  But  many,  not  without  danger,  ven¬
tured  to  publifh  the  fad.  Numitor  was  informed  of  the
aflaflination ;  but,  his  reafon  being  fuperior  to  his  concern,
he  affeded  ignorance,  refolving  to  defer  his  refentment  to
a  lefs  dangerous  opportunity  :  And  Amulius,  prefuming
the  murder  of  the  youth  was,  ftill,  a  fecret,  made  ufe  of
another  pradice :  He  conftituted  Ilia,  the  daughter  of  Nu¬
mitor,  or,  as  fome  write,  Rhea,  furnamed  Ilia,  who  was,  then,
marriageable,  a  prieftefs  of  Vefta,  left,  if  fhe  were  married,
before  he  had  fo  difpofed  of  her,  fhe  might  bring  forth  an
avenger  of  the  wrongs  done  to  her  family.  Thefe  virgins,
who  are  intrufted  with  the  cuftody  of  the  perpetual  lire,
and  with  the  performance  of  thofe  rites,  that  are  appointed
to  be  adminiftered  by  virgins  for  the  profperity  of  the  com-

the  account  given  of  this  tranfadtion  Sifoiae ,  per  fpeciem  honoris ,  quurn  vefta-
by  s  Livy  :  Pulfo  fratre,  Amulius  r  eg-  lent  earn  legijfet ,  per  pet  ua  virgin  into
nat :  Addit  fceleri  fcelus  :  Stirpem  fra-  fpem  partus  admit,
tris  virilem  intermit:  Fratris  filiaeRheae

s  B.  i.  c.  3,


mon  wealth,.


376  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

monwealth,  were  obliged  to  remain,  not  lefs  than  244  five
years,  unmarried.  Amulius  did  this,  under  fpecious  pre¬
tences,  as  if  his  intention  was,  to  confer  honor,  and  dignity,
on  his  brother’s  family ;  fince  he  was  neither  the  author  of
this  law,  which  was  common  to  all,  nor  his  brother  the  fir  ft
perfon  of  confideration,  whom  he  had  obliged  to  yield  obe¬
dience  to  it:  It  being  both  cuftomary  and  honourable,
among  the  Albans,  for  maidens  of  the  befit  quality  to  be
chofen  prieftefies  of  Vefta.  Numitor,  finding  thefe  practices
of  his  brother  proceeded  from  no  good  intention,  diflembled
his  refen tment,  left  he  fhould  incur  the  ill  will  of  the  people ;
and,  alfo,  ftified  his  complaints,  upon  this  occafion.

LXXVII.  The  fourth  year  after  this,  Ilia,  going  to  a
grove,  confecrated  to  Mars,  to  fetch  pure  water  for  the  ufe
of  the  facriftces,  fome  body  ravifhed  her.  It  is  faid  by  fome,
that  the  fadl  was  committed  by  one  of  her  lovers  to  gratify
his  pafiion ;  others  make  Amulius  himfelf  the  author  of  it,
who,  defigning  to  ruin  her,  rather  than  to  fatisfy  his  defire,
had  fecured  himfelf  with  fuch  armour,  as  might  render
him  the  moft  terrible  to  the  fight,  and,  at  the  fame  time,
difguife  him  in  the  moft  effectual  manner :  But  the  greateft
part  give  this  fabulous  account  of  it ;  that  it  was  a  fpedtre,
reprefenting  the  god,  to  whom  the  place  was  confecrated ;
they  add,  alfo,  that  this  adventure  was  attended,  among

244-  IIev7 atlas  &  xx  %£ovov.  thefe  inftitutions  agree  with  thofe,  as

Niima  .made  many  alterations  in  the  Glareanus,  and  Portus  would  corred
rules  of  the  veftals,  as  our  author  will  it,  whom  M.  *  *  *  has  followed  in  his
tell  us  in  the  next  book.  So  that,  the  trandation.

Greek  text  muft  not  be  altered  to  make


other


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  177

other  heavenly  figns,  with  an  eclipfe  of  the  fun,  and  a  dark-
nefs  fpread  over  the  Heavens :  That  the  fpeddre  far  excelled
the  appearance  of  a  man,  both  in  ftature,  and  in  beauty  ;
and  that  the  ravifher,  to  comfort  the  maiden  (from  whence
they  conclude  he  was  a  god)  commanded  her  not  to  be,  at
all,  concerned  at  what  had  happened,  fince  fhe  had  been
united,  by  marriage,  to  the  genius  of  the  place  ;  and  that,
by  this  violence,  fhe  fhould  bring  forth  two  fons,  who
fhould  far  excel  all  men  in  virtue,  and  military  accom-
plifhments :  And,  having  faid  this,  he  was  wrapped  in  a
cloud,  and,  being  lifted  from  the  earth,  was  borne  upwards
through  the  air.  This  is  not  a  proper  place  to  confider
what  opinion  we  ought  to  entertain  of  thefe  things,  whether
we  fhould  defpife  them,  as  human  frailties,  attributed  to  the
gods ;  fince  God  is  incapable  of  any  function,  that  is  un¬
worthy  of  an  incorruptible,  and  happy  nature;  or  whether
we  fhould  admit,  even,  thefe  relations,  upon  a  fuppofition
that  all  the  beings  of  the  univerfe  are  of  a  mixed  nature  ;
and  that,  between  the  divine  and  human,  fome  third  being
exifts,  which  is  That  of  the  genii,  who,  fometimes,  mingling
with  the  human,  and,  fometimes,  with  the  divine  nature,
beget,  as  it  is  faid,  the  fabled  race  of  heroes.  This,  I  fay,
is  not  a  proper  place  to  confider  thefe  things,  and  what  the
i45  philofophers  have  faid  concerning  them  is  fufficient.

-45*  «  rf  o<r&  (piXoa-otpois  mgt  oivluv  demons,  one  of  whom  he  was  weak

By  thefe  philofophers,  our  au-  enough  to  fay,  at  his  trial,  often,  dif-
thor,  moft  certainly,  means  the  fol-  fuaded  him  from  doing  any  thing,  that
lowers  of  rPlato,  who  had,  often,  heard  might  be  prejudicial  to  him.  If  fo,
his  mailer  Socrates  difcourfe  of  thefe  that  demon  was  very  forgetful  in  not

r  Plato’s  Apol.  of  Socrates.

A  a  llias


VOL.  I.


178  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  L

Ilia,  after  this  violence,  pretending  ficknefs  (for  this  her
mother  advifed  with  regard  both  to  her  own  fafety,  and  to
the  worfhip  of  the  gods)  aftifted,  no  longer,  at  the  facrifices;
but  her  duty  was  performed  by  the,  other  virgins,  who  were
joined  with  her  in  the  fame  miniftry.

LXXVIII.  But  Amulius,  induced  either  by  the  know¬
ledge  of  what  had  happened,  or  by  a  probable  fufpicion,
inquired  what  might  be  the  real  caufe  of  this  long  abfence
from  the  facrifices.  To  fatisfy  himfelf,  he  fent  fome  phy-
ficians  to  her,  whom  he,  chiefly,  confided  in ;  and,  becaufe
the  women  pretended  her  indifpofltion  mull  be  kept  fecret
from  men,  he  left  his  wife  to  obferve  her.  She,  having,  by
womens  conjectures,  difcovered  what  was  a  fecret  to  others,
informed  her  hufband  of  it;  who,  left  fhe  fhould  be  de¬
livered  in  private  (for  fhe  was,  now,  near  her  time)  ap¬
pointed  her  to  be  guarded  by  armed  men :  And,  fummoning
his  brother  to  the  fenate,  he,  not  only,  informed  them  of
the  deflowering  of  his  niece,  with  which,  the  reft  of  the
world  were  unacquainted,  but  accufed  her  parents  of  being

diffuading  him  from  making  that  ac-  followed  it,  s  y.ou  syenlo?  But,

knowledgment.  This  notion  Plato  to  confider  Plato,  in  the  only  light  he
improved;  and,  with  more  poetry,  ought  to  be  confidered  in,  upon  this
than  philofophy,  made  them  the  ne-  occafion,  there  can  be  nothing  more
cefifary  inftruments  of  the  fupreme  poetical,  than  his  defcription  of  Jupi-
Reing,  in  the  creation  of  the  univerfe  ;  ter  riding  through  the  heavens  in  his
for  fear,  it  feems,  that,  if  God  had  winged  chariot  at  the  head  of  the  gods,
created  every  thing  in  it  Himself,  and  demons:  His  words  are  thefe  ;
his  creatures  might  have  been  immor-  lO  piv  yyi^uv  (v  xgavu  Zivr ,

tal,  like  Himself.  How  much  more  sjTvov  eAawwv,  w^dlog  vrc^vtloa

philofophical  is  that  all-creating  word  SiouQ<ry.u\>  vrotflu,  ^7^iiu^Ai^juevo^•  to>
inMofes,  and  the  fwift  obedience,  that  ndcu  rgdluz  Bsav  re  aai  Jatpcvuv.

*  Genefis  i.  f.  j.  f  In


I


her


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  IC  A  RN  A  $  S  E  NS  I  S.  179


her  accomplices,  and  ordered  him  to  conceal  nothing,  but
to  bring  all  to  light.  Numitor  faid  he  was  furprifed  at
what  he  heard  ;  and,  protefting  his  innocence  of  every  thing
that  was  alledged,  defired  time  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of
it.  Having  obtained,  with  difficulty,  this  delay,  and,  being
informed,  by  his  wife,  of  the  whole,  in  the  manner  his
daughter  had,  at  firft,  related  it,  he  acquainted  the  fenate
with  the  violence  committed  by  the  god,  and  alfo,  with
what  he  had  faid  concerning  the  twins,  and  defired  the
credit  of  what  he  had  advanced  might  depend  upon  the
event,  by  which  it  would  appear  whether  the  fruit  of  her
delivery  was  fuch,  as  the  god  had  foretold  :  For  the  time  of
her  246  delivery  being  near  at  hand,  the  fraud,  if  any,  would,
foon,  appear.  To  fupportwhat  he  faid,  he  247  offered  that


246'  yct(>  tyjv  xogyv  oy.%  ri  etvoa  tcv

nxle-tv.  This,  and  the  next  fentence  are
omitted  in  the  Vatican  manufcript,  I
fuppofe,  by  the  fault  of  the  tranfcriber.
Both  Sylburgius,  and  Cafaubon  have
attempted  to  change  the  ftrufture  of
this  phrafe.  I  believe  the  reader  will
think  it  runs  very  well  in  the  manner
I  have  altered  it  from  the  editions  *,
particularly,  fince  I  have  only  changed
the  order  of  the  words,  which,  as  they,
before,  ftood,  were  unharmonious.
Oua  is  very  Attic  Greek  for  zfyvg,  as
will  be  feen  both  from  the  following
paffage  of  Ariftophanes,  and  from  the
Greek  fcholiaft’s  obfervation  upon  it  ;

O  xonoglof  oyhot  avluvy  A  OMOY  ’vr^oa-xei^.ivut  v.

Upon  which  the  fcholiaft  fays,  to  ops
hiyis<riv  Atukoi  oiyh  ra  efyvg.


247*  The  Latin  trandators

have  rendered  this  word,  very  pro¬
perly,  ad  qiiaejiionem  offer eb at.  As  AsAov
is  the  Greek  term  to  deliver
up  a  Jlave  to  be  qiieftioned  by  torments ;
fo  SxAov  is  the  term  to  demand  a

Jlave  for  that  purpofe.  There  is  an
example  of  both  in  this  fentence  of
w  Demofthenes  ;  Et<  to  ■sr^ayj  av
e£eAg y%ou  tylwv,  EsHTHSEN  av  pi  tov
zvcctbot  tov  ygocQovlcx,  rag  potflvgtoigy  <V,  «
I1APEAIAOTN,  priJiv  dmutov  Af y&v  edWv.
Le  Jay  did  not  like  the  word/  and,
for  that  reafon,  he  has  left  it  out.
The  other  French  translator  has  given
fomething  like  the  fenfe  of  it :  Thus  he
has  faid  ;  et  qu  on  procedat  a  V  ex  amen  de
cette  affaire  par  toutes  tes  voies  aid  on
jugeroit  a  propos.


y  1  wit.  y,  245.


w  n £05  a<p°£oj.

A  a  2


the


i8o  ROMAN  ANTIQJJ I  TIE  S  OF  Book  I.

the  women,  who  attended  his  daughter,  might  be  examined
upon  the  rack ;  and  fubmitted  to  every  method,  that  might
lead  to  the  difcovery  of  the  truth.  This  was  approved  of
by  the  fenate :  But  Amulius  infilled  that  his  pretenfions
were,  highly,  unreafonable,  and  endeavoured,  by  all  means,
to  deftroy  his  niece.  While  thefe  things  were  in  agitation,
thofe,  who  had  been  appointed  to  keep  guard  at  the  delivery,
appeared,  and  gave  an  account  that  Ilia  was  brought  to  bed
of  two  male  children.  Numitor,  then,  preffed,  vehemently,
what  he  had,  before,  alledged,  fhewing  the  whole  to  be  the
work  of  the  god ;  and  begged  that  no  violent  fentence  might
pafs  againft  his  daughter,  who  was  innocent.  On  the  other
fide,  Amulius  pretended  that,  even,  in  the  delivery,  there
was  fome  human  contrivance,  and  that  the  women  had
provided  another  child,  either  unknown  to  the  guards,  or
with  their  afiiftance :  And  a  great  deal  was  faid  to  this
purpofe.  When  the  fenators  found  the  king  was  inexorable,
they,  alfo,  determined,  in  the  manner  he  defired,  that  the
law  fhould  be  put  in  execution,  which  provides  that  a  veftal,
who  fuffers  herfelf  to  be  defiled,  fhall  be  whipped  with  rods,
and  put  to  death,  and  her  offspring  thrown  into  the  river.
248  Now,  the  pontifical  law  ordains  that  floe  fhall  be  buried
alive.

LXXIX.  Hitherto,  the  greateil  part  of  the  hiflorians
agree,  or  differ,  very  little,  from  one  another  ;  fome  coming
nearer  to  fables,  and  others  to  probability  :  But  they  differ
in  what  follows.  Some  fay  that  Ilia  was  put  to  death  imme-

248*  Nw  ptyloi,  etc.  See  the  244th  annotation.


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  281

diately ;  others,  that  fhe  remained  in  a 249  fecret  prifon
under  a  guard ;  which  made  the  people  believe  fhe
was  put  to  death  privately :  The  fame  authors  fay,  that
Amulius  condefcended  to  this,  at  the  earneft  defire  of  his
daughter,  who  begged  the  life  of  her  coufin  :  For,  being
brought  up  together,  and  of  the  fame  age,  they  loved  each
other,  like  fillers :  And  that  Amulius,  in  favor  to  her,  a3
fhe  was  his  only  daughter,  faved  Ilia  from  death,  but  kept
her  confined  in  a  fecret  prifon ;  and,  that  fhe  was,  at  length,
fet  at  liberty,  after  the  death  of  Amulius.  Thus,  do  the  an¬
cient  authors  vary  concerning  Ilia :  However,  both  opinions
carry  with  them  an  appearance  of  truth ;  for  which  reafon,  I
have,  alfo,  made  mention  of  them  both.  The  reader  himfelf
will  know  which  to  believe.  But,  concerning  her  children,
Quin&us  Fabius,  called  Pictor,  whom  Lucius  Cincius,  Cato
Porcius,  Calpurnius  Pifo,  and  the  greateft  part  of  the  other
hiftorians  have  followed,  writes  thus ;  “  That,  by  the  order
“  of  Amulius,  fome  of  the  king’s  officers  took  the  children,
“  in  a  250  cradle,  and  carried  them  to  the  river,  diftant  from.

*49*  Ev  et&i\ a).  Portus,  and  le  and  both  the  Latin  tranflators  have.
Jay  have  rendered  this  an  oh f cure  fri-  very  judicioufly,  followed  him.  When.
flon,  which  is  equivocal  :  For  it  was  I  call  it  a  cradle ,  I  do  not  mean  a
not  the  obfcurity,  that  is,  the  darknefs,  wicker,  but  a  wooden  cradle,  which
of  the  prifon,  which  made  the  people  are,  ftill,  very  common  abroad  :  O -
believe  fhe  was  put  to  death  •,  but  the  therwife,  I  fliould  have  fallen  into  the
fecrecy  of  it.  Sylburgius,  and  the  fame  error  with  !e  jay,  who  calls  i'c
other  French  translator,  have  rendered  un  panier,  a  baflket ,  which  is  not  very,
it  very  well.  well  calculated  to  float,  fluitare ,  in

25°-  2> x  Livy,  in  fpeaking  of  Livy,  and  in  our  author.  The*

this  adventure,  calls  this,  alveus  ;  quum  otherFrench  tranflator,  has,  alfo,  call-
fluitantem  alveum,  quo  expoflti  erant  ed  it  un  berceau.
pueri ,  tenuis  in  ftcco  aqua  defltituijjet

31  B.  i.  c.  4.


the


i B 2  ROM  AN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

“  the  city  about  a  hundred  and  twenty  fladia,  with  a  defign
a  to  throw  them  into  it.  When  they  drew  near,  and  per-
u  ceived  that  the  Tiber,  fwelled  by  continual  rains,  had
u  exceeded  its  natural  bed,  and  overflowed  the  plains,  they
“  came  down  from  the  top  of  the  Pallantine  hill,  to  that  part
“  of  the  water,  that  lay  neareft  (for  they  could  advance  no
“  further)  and  fet  down  the  cradle  upon  the  flood,  where  it
u  wafhed  the  foot  of  the  hill :  The  cradle  floated  for  fome
“  time;  then,  as  the  waters  retired  by  degrees  from  the
“  utmoft  verge,  ftriking  againft  a  ftone,  it  overturned,  and
“  threw  out  the  children,  who  lay  crying,  and  wallowing
a  in  the  mud.  Upon  this,  a  flhe-wolf,  that  had  juft  whelped,
<c  appeared ;  and,  her  teats  being  diftended  with  milk,  gave
c<  them  her  paps  to  fuck,  and,  with  her  tongue,  licked
*c  off  the  mud,  with  which  they  were  befmeared.  In
“  the  mean  time,  fome  fhepherds  happened  to  be  driving
<c  their  flocks  to  pafture  (for  the  place  was  now  become
“  paffable)  and  one  of  them,  feeing  the  wolf,  thus,  cherifh-
“  ing  the  children,  was,  for  fome  time,  ftruck  dumb  with
<c  aftonifhment,  and  difbelief  of  what  he  faw:  Then,
“  going  away,  and  getting  together  as  many  as  he  could  of
“  the  fhepherds,  who  kept  their  flocks  near  at  hand  (for
“  they  would  not  believe  what  he  faid)  he  carried  them  to
“  fee  the  light  themfelves :  When  thefe,  alfo,  drew  near,
u  and  faw  the  wolf  cherifhing  the  children,  as  if  they  had
“  been  her  young  ones,  and  the  children  hanging  on  her,
“  as  on  their  mother,  they  imagined  they  faw  fomething
divine,  and  advanced  together,  hallooing,  to  terrify  the

“  creature :


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  ENS  IS.  183

“  creature:  The  wolf,  not  much  frightened  at  the  approach
“  of  the  men,  but,  as  if  die  had  been  tame,  withdrew,  gently,
u  from  the  children,  and  went  away,  greatly,  defpifing  the
“  rabble  of  fhepherds.  For  there  was,  not  far  off,  a  holy
“  place,  covered  with  a  thick  wood,  and  a  hollow  rock,
“  from  whence  fprings  iffued:  This  wood  was  faid  to  be
cC  confecrated  to  Pan,  and  there  was  an  altar,  dedicated  to


cC  that  god  :  When  fhe  came  to  this  place,  die  hid  herfelf.
i  :  This  grove  is,  no  longer,  extant  y  but  the  cave,  from  whence
“  the  fountain  dows,  is  contiguous  to  the  Palatine  buildings,
and  to  be  feen  in  the  way,  that  leads  to  the  Circus y


6C  and  near  it,  ftands  a  tempi
u  reprefenting  this  incident:

as1*  Aujcaiva,  etc.  This  groupe,  re¬
prefenting  the  wolf  giving  fuck  to
Romulus  and  Remus  is,  certainly,  not
the  fame  with  That,  faid,  by  y  Cicero,
to  have  been  (truck  with  lightning  in
the  confulfhip  of  Cotta,  and  Torqua-
tus,  who  were  confuls  two  years  be¬
fore  him,  that  is,  in  the  year  of  Rome
689  •,  becaufe,  he  fays,  That  flood  in
the  capitol,  and  the  other,  we  find,  by
our  author,  was  placed  in  the  temple,
which  (food  near  the  cave,  that  was
joined  to  the  buildings  of  the  Palatine
hill.  This  temple  was  the  temple  of
Romulus,  eredled  near  the  Ficus  Ru-
minalis ,  fo  called,  as  a  Pliny  fays,  quo¬
in  am  fub  ed  invent  a  eft  lupa  inf  antibus ,
praebens  rumen ,  ita  vocabant  matnmam ,
miraculo  exaerejuxta  dicato. This  groupe
of  figures  was  placed  here  in  the  con-
fulfhip  of  Quindtus  Fabius  Rullus,
and  Publius  Decius  Mus,  in  the  446th
year  of  Rome,  as  we  find  by  a  Livy,

y  Cat.  iii.  c.  8,  z  B.  xv.  c.  18.  a


:,  in  which  a  ftatue  is  placed,
It  is  a  251  wolf  fuckling  two

ad  ficum  ruminalem  Jimulacra  infantium
conditorum  urbis  fub  uberibus  lupae  po-
fuerunt ;  he  means  Cneius  and  Quin¬
tus  Ogulnius,  who  were,  then,,  curule
aediles.  The  ftatue,  mentioned  by  Ci¬
cero,  is,  (till,  to  be  feen  in  the  capitol,
with  one  of  the  hinder  legs  hurt  with
lightning ;  and  was  defigned  to  have
been  here  reprefented  :  This  wolf  is
very  unlike  the  common  wolves,  and
feems  to  be  the  kind  of  wolf  they  call
in  France,  un  loup  cervier ,  :

It  is  a  fierce  animal,  and  does  a  vaft:
deal  of  mifchief.  As  there  were,  no
doubt,  many  ftatues  reprefenting  this
very  extraordinary  event,  it  cannot  be
known  which  b  Virgil  refers  to  in  this
fine  delcription  of  it :

genii  no  5  huic  ubera  circum
Ludere  fen  dentes  pueros ,  et  lambere  matrem
Impauidos  :  illam  tereti  cervice  rejlexam
Mulcere  altemos,  et  corpora  fngere  lingua,

1,  x.  c.  23,  b  Aeneid.  B.  viii.  f.  613.

“  children  y


184.  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I*

“  children ;  they  are  in  brafs,  and  of  ancient  workmanfhip :
u  This  place  is  faid  to  have  been  confecrated  by  the  Ar~
u  cadians,  who,  with  Evander,  formerly,  built  their  habi-
u  tations  there.  As  foon  as  the  wolf  was  gone,  the  fhep-
u  herds  took  up  the  children;  and,  as  the  gods  feemed  to
“  intereft  themfelves  in  their  per fervation,  were  very  delirous
“  to  bring  them  up.  There  was,  among  them,  an  overfeer
cc  of  the  king’s  fwineherds,  whofe  name  was  Fauftulus,  a
c<  man  of  humanity,  who  had  been  in  town,  upon  fome
a  necefiary  bufinefs,  at  the  time,  when  the  deflowering  of
“  Ilia,  and  her  delivery  were  made  public :  And,  after  that,
cc  when  the  children  were  carrying  to  the  river,  he,  going
gc  to  Pallantium,  by  divine  appointment,  went  the  fame  road
<c  with  thofe,  who  were  carrying  them :  This  man,  without
CV  giving  the  leaft  notice  to  the  reft  that  he  knew  any  thing
u  of  the  aff  air,  deflred  the  children  might  be  delivered  to  him ;
<c  and,  having  received  them  by  general  confent,  he  carried
“  them  home  to  his  wife  :  Where,  finding  her  juft  brought
“  to  bed,  and  grieving  that  the  child  was  dead,  he  com-
“  forted  her,  and  gave  her  thefe  children  to  fubftitute  in  its
<c  room,  informing  her,  from  the  beginning,  of  all  the  cir-
“  cumfiances  relating  to  them.  And,  as  they  grew  up,  he
<c  gave  to  one,  the  name  of  Romulus,  and  to  the  other,  That
“  of  Remus.  When  they  came  to  be  men,  they  fliewed
“  themfelves,  both  in  dignity  of  afpe<ft,  and  elevation  of
u  mind,  not  like  fwineherds,  and  neatherds,  butfuch,  as  we
“  might  fuppofe  thofe  to  be,  who  are  bom  of  royal  race,  and

looked  upon  as  the  offspring  of  the  gods ;  and  as  fuch

<<


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  ASSENSIS.  185

cc  they  are,  ftill,  celebrated,  by  the  Romans,  in  the  hymns
c<  of  their  country.  But  their  life  was  That  of  herdfmen  ;
“  they  lived  by  their  own  labor,  and,  generally,  on  the
“  mountains  in  cottages  252  of  one  ftory,  wThich  they  built
u  with  wood,  and  reeds :  Of  which, 253  one,  called  the  cot-
“  tage  of  Romulus,  remains,  even,  to  this  day,  in  the  corner,
“  as  you  turn  from  the  Palatine  hill  to  the  Circus ;  which
“  is  preferved  holy  by  thofe,  to  whom  the  care  of  thefe
‘ c  things  is  committed,  who  add  to  it  no  ornaments  to  render
“  it  more  auguft  :  But,  it  any  part  of  it  is  injured  either  by
cc  ftorms,  or  time,  they  repair  that  injury,  and  obferve  to
“  reftore  it,  as  near  as  poffible,  to  its  former  condition.
c<  When  Romulus,  and  Remus,  were  about  eighteen  years
“  of  age,  they  had  fome  difpute,  about  the  pafture,  with
“  Numitor’s  herdfmen,  whofe  oxen  were  Rationed  on  the
cc  Aventine  hill,  which  is  oppofite  to  the  Palatine  hill.  They,
<c  frequently,  accufed  one  another,  either  of  feeding  thofe
“  paftures,  that  did  not  belong  to  them,  or  of  appropriating
“  to  themfelves  Thofe,  that  were  common,  or  of  any  thing


252-  Av7o£o<p*r.  The  Latin  tranfla-
tors  have  rendered  this  very  well ,fine
tdld  contignatione.  Both  the  French
tranflators  have  let t  it  out.

253*  fii1  (It  Y.oci  etg  £//e  yv  t ig.  This  is
not  the  cafa  Romuli ,  that  flood  in  the
capitol,  to  which  c  Virgil  alludes  in
the  following  verfes.

In  fummo  cuftcs  Tarfeiae  Manlius  arcis
Staoat  pro  templo,  et  capitolia  celfa  tenebat,
RomuUci'ue  r teens  hor rebat  regia  culmo.

«  Aeneid,  B.  652.

Vol.  X.


The  laft  was  the  curia  calabria ,  as  Ser-
vius  fays  upon  this  verle,  ad  quam  ca~
labatur ,  that  is,  vocabatur  fenatus.  The
other  flood  in  another  part  of  the  city,
as  we  find  by  Dionyfius.  It  is  very
poffible  that  the  veneration  the  Ro¬
mans  had  for  their  founder,  might
have  ingaged  them  to  erect,  in  the
capitol,  a  cottage  refembling  the  for¬
mer.  This  in  the  capitol  was  burned
in  the  time  of  Caefar,  afeerwards d  Au-
guftus,  and  in  the  7 1 6th  year  of  R ome,

d  Dio,  B.  xlviii.  p.  437.

B  b  “  elie,


1 86  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book I.


“  elfe,  that  offered  itfelf.  From  this  altercation,  they  had  re-
“  courfe,  fometimes,  to  blows,  and,  then,  to  arms.  Numitor’s
<c  men,  having  received  many  wounds  from  the  youths,  and
“  loft  fome  of  their  people,  and  being,  now,  driven,  by  force,
“  from  the  places  in  conteft,  they  formed  a  ftrategem  againft
“  them  :  And,  having  placed  an  ambufcade  in  the  hidden
<£  part  of  the  valley,  and  concerted  the  time  of  the  attack  with
cc  thofe,  who  lay  in  wait  for  the  youths,  the  reft,  in  a  body,
“  affaulted  their  folds.  It  happened  that  Romulus,  at  that
cc  time,  was  gone  to  a  place,  called  Caenina,  together  with
“  the  chief  men  of  the  village,  to  offer  facrifices  for  the
“  public,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  the  country  :  But
“  Remus,  being  informed  of  their  coming,  armed  himfelf
“  in  all  hafte,  and,  with  a  few  of  the  villagers,  who  had,
“  firft,  got  together,  went  out  to  oppofe  them :  But  they,
“  inftead  of  receiving  him,  retired,  in  ~54  order  to  draw  him
sc  to  the  place,  where,  by  facing  about,  they  might  attack
<£  him  with  advantage  :  Remus,  being  unacquainted  with
“  the  ftrategem,  purfued  them  a  great  way,  till  he  paffed


2S4-  Ttt xyofM-voi.  This,  Cafaubon
fays,  very  juftly,  fignifies  hojlemaliicere.
I  mention  this  in  juftice  to  him,  as  I
have,  always,  mentioned  every  author,
whofe  afhftance  I  have  made  life  of.
To  his  authority  I  fhall  add  fome  ob-
fervations  of  my  own.  There  is  a
pafiage  inatreatife  of  Xenophon,  in-
titled  l7T7r affixes,  which,  it  is  fuppofed,
he  writ  for  the  inftruCtion  of  his  fon
Gryllus,  that  feems  calculated  to  ex¬
plain  this  of  our  author :  En  &  r u  [mv

x£\)7il(X.$  pev  Qavigoif

ofayoif  (y.Tr(>o<&iv  rwy  (puAotTlovlas


■zrvoxc $Xt  Ttf?  ZSQXty.ix';  SVsfyctf  TIIA-

TE1N.  It  is  remarkable  that  uVo,  when
placed  before  verbs,  fubltantives  and
adjectives,  generally,  implies  deceit.
I  cannot  put  an  end  to  this  note,
without  taking  notice,  that  le  Jay  is
the  only  tranflator,  who  has  exprefled
the  fenfe  of  this  word  :  He  has  faid
pour  l  cittirer  dans  V ambufcade.  I  with
that,  inftead  of  leaving  out  \J7ro$(>$xl/xvl
he  had  rendered  it  by  an  expreffion,
which  his  language  would  have  fur-
n i£hed  kim  with,  I  mean,  en  faifant
rucite-face.


“  the


I


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LIC A  P.N  A SS E N S I S.  1S7

c<  the  place,  where  the  reft  lay  in  ambufti,  who,  upon  that,
“  rofe  up,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  the  others,  who  had  fled,
u  faced  about ;  and,  having  furrounded  them,  they  over-
“  whelmed  them  with  ftones,  and  took  them  prifonefs :
u  For  they  had  received  orders  from  their  mafters,  to  bring
u  the  youths  to  them  alive.  Thus,  Remus  was  taken,  and
“  carried  away.”

LXXX.  But  Aelius  Tubero,  a  man  of  great  fagacity,  and
very  careful  in  collecting  hiftorical  tranfaCtions,  writes,  that
Numitor’s  people,  knowing,  beforehand,  that  the  youths
were  to  perform  an  Arcadian  facrifice  to  the  god  Pan,
purfuant  to  the  inftitution  of  Evander,  called  255  Luper-


255*  Avx*i(e,  M.  *  *  *  quotes  Plu¬
tarch,  in  his  life  of  Romulus,  to  prove
that  this  feftival,  called  by  the  Romans
Lupcrcalia ,  received  its  name  from  the
fhe-wolf,  that  fuckled  Romulus,  and
Remus.  I  have  that  paflfage  in  Plu¬
tarch,  now,  before  me  •,  and  all,  he  fays
to  favor  this  opinion,  is, that  it  is  pofilble
this  feftival  may  have  received  its  name
from  the  fhe-wolf-,  becaufe  the  Luperci
begin  their  courfe  from  the  place,
where  it  was  faid  that  Romulus  had
been  expofed.  But  he  fays,  in  the
fame  place,  that  the  name  of  this  fe¬
ftival  was  Greek;  and,  for  that  reafon,
the  feftival  leemed  to  be  very  ancient,
and  derived  from  the  Arcadians,  who
came  into  Italy  with  Evander.  And,
indeed,  there  is  no  room  to  doubt  of
its  being  derived  from  them  :  For  we
find,  by  this  pafiage  of  our  author,
that  this  was  a  cuftomary  feftival  cele¬
brated  by  the  inhabitants  of  Pallan-


tium,  long  before  Romulus  and  Remus
were  born.  This  is  confirmed  by  eLivy,
whofe  authority,  joined  to  That  of
our  author,  will  be  fufficient,  I  fhould
think,  to  flop  the  currency  of  this
miftake  ;  he  is  fpeaking  of  the  fame
tranfaftion  :  Jam  turn  in  Palatino  monte
Lupercal  hoc  fuijfe  ludicrum  ferunt ;  et  a
P  allant  eo  urbeArcadica  Pallantium^  deinde
Palatinum  montem  appellatum :  ihi  E-
vandrum,  qui  ex  eo  genere  Arcadum  muU
tis  ante  tempejlatibus  ea  tenuerat  loca ,
folenne  allatum  ex  Arcadia  injlituijje ,  nt
nudi  juvenes ,  Lyceum  Pana  vener antes ,
per  lufum  atque  lafeiviam  currerent.
f  This  Lycaean  Pan,  in  whofe  honor
this  feftival  was  celebrated,  was  called
fo  from  the  Lycaean  mountain  in  Ar¬
cadia,  which  gave  name  to  this  fefti¬
val,  called  by  the  Greeks,  A
which  word  cannot,  with  any  propri¬
ety,  be  derived  from  avkouvx,  a  jhe-
wolf.


B.  i.  c.  5.  f  Paufanias  in  Arcad.  c.  38.

B  b  2


calia }


o

4*


i88  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

call ci)  took  the  opportunity  of  this  facrifice  to  lay  in  wait
for  them  at  the  time,  when  the  youth  of  Pallantium,  were,
after  facriiice,  to  proceed  from  the  Lupercal,  and  run
round  the  village  naked,  wearing  about  their  middle,  a  co¬
vering  made  of  the  fkins  of  the  vidims,  newly,  facrificed.
This  ceremony  implies  a  certain  cuftomary  purification
of  the  inhabitants,  which  is  performed,  even,  to  this  day,
in  the  fame  manner.  Thofe,  therefore,  who  had  a  defign
upon  the  youths,  took  this  time  to  place  themfelves  in
ambufh  in  a  narrow  way,  in  order  to  feize  them :  While
thefe  were  employed  in  the  facrifice,  and,  when  the
firft  band  with  Remus  drew  near,  That  with  Romulus,
and  the  reft,  being  behind,  (  for  they  were  divided  into
three  bands,  and  ran  at  a  diftance  from  one  another )
without  flaying  for  the  others,  they  fet  up  a  fhout,  and  all
fell  upon  the  firft ;  and,  furrounding  them,  fome  threw
darts  at  them,  others,  ftones,  and  others,  whatever  they
had  in  their  hands :  Thefe,  furprifed  at  this  unexpected
attack,  and  at  a  lofs  how  to  behave  themfelves,  unarmed
againft  armed  men,  were,  eafily,  taken.  Re-mus,  being  in
the  power  of  the  enemy,  was  carried  to  Alba  in  the  con¬
dition,  he  was  in,  when  taken;  or,  as  Fabius  relates,  in
chains.  When  Romulus  heard  of  his  brother’s  misfortune,
he  refolved  to  follow,  immediately,  with  the  ftouteft  of
the  herdfmen,  in  hope  to  overtake  Remus  upon  the  road.
But  Fauftulus,  feeing  the  folly  of  the  undertaking,  dif-
fuaded  him  from  it :  For,  being  looked  upon  as  the  father
of  the  youths,  he  had,  hitherto,  kept  every  thing  a  fecret

from


BcokX.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I  C  ARN  A  S  SE  N  S I  S.  189
from  them,  left  they  fhould  venture  upon  fome  hazzard*
ous  enterprife,  before  they  were  in  their  prime.  But,  now,
being  compelled  by  neceflity,  he  took  Romulus  afide,  and
acquainted  him  with  the  whole.  When  the  youth  heard,
from  the  beginning,  every  circumftance  of  their  fortune,
he  was  penetrated  both  with  compaflion  for  his  mother,
and  folicitude  for  Numitor;  and,  having  long  confulted  with
Fauftulus,  he  determined  to  defift  from  the  prefent  under¬
taking,  and,  with  greater  preparation  of  ftrength,  to  free
his  whole  family  from  the  oppreftion  of  Amulius ;  re-
folving  to  ingage  in  the  greateft  dangers  for  the  fake  of
the  greateft  rewards,  but  to  a<ft  in  concert  with  his  grand"
father,  and  to  do,  whatever  he  fhould  direct.

LXXXI.  Thefe  meafures  being  looked  upon  as  the
moft  advifeable,  Romulus  called  together  all  the  inhabi¬
tants  of  the  village,  and  defired  them  to  go,  immediately,
to  Alba,  but  not  all  at  the  fame  gates,  nor  in  a  body,  to
prevent  any  fufpicion  in  the  citizens;  and,  having  ap¬
pointed  them  to  ftay  in  the  market-place,  and  be  ready
to  do  whatever  they  fhould  be  ordered,  he  went,  firft,  into
the  city.  In  the  mean  time,  thofe,  who  had  the  charge
of  Remus,  brought  him  before  the  king,  and  informed
him  of  all  the  abufes  they  had  received  from  the  youths,
producing  their  256  wounded,  and  threatening,  if  they
found  no  redrefs,  to  leave  their  herds.  Amulius,  defiring  to
pleafe  both  the  country  people,  who  were  come  to  him

256.  I  do  not  underftancl  had  written  t However,  both

why  the  Latin  tranflators  have  render-  the  French  tranflators  have  thought
ed  this  word  vulnera ,  as  if  our  author  fit  to  follow  them,


Book  I.


190  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

in  great  numbers,  and  Numitor  (for  he  happened  to  be
prefen t,  and  looked  upon  himfelf  as  injured  in  his  clients)
and  longing  to  fee  peace  reftored  to  the  country,  and,  at
the  fame  time,  fufpedting  the  boldnefs  of  the  youth,  and
the  intrepidity,  that  appeared  in  his  difcourfe,  he  gave
judgement  againft  him :  But  left  his  punifhment  to  Nu¬
mitor,  faying,  u  that  he,  who  had  done  the  injury,  could  be
punifhed  by  none  fo  juftly,  as  by  him,  who  had  received
<c  it.”  While  Numitor’s  herdfmenwere  carrying  away  Re¬
mus,  with  his  hands  bound  behind  him,  and  infulting  him,
Numitor  followed ;  and,  not  only  admired  the  graceful-
nefs,  and  majefty  of  his  perfon,  but,  alfo,  obferved  the
greatnefs  of  his  mind,  which  he  preferved,  even,  in  diftrefs,
not  fuing  for  mercy  (which  all  do  under  fuch  afflictions)
but,  with  a  becoming  filence,  meeting  his  fate.  As  foon
as  they  were  arrived  at  his  houfe,  he  ordered  all  the  reft
to  withdraw ;  and  Remus,  being  left  alone,  he  afked  him,
who  he  was,  and  of  what  parents ;  as  not  believing  fuch
a  man  could  be,  meanly,  born.  Remus  anfwered,  that  he
only  knew,  by  the  account  he  had  received  from  the
perfon,  who  brought  him  up,  that  he,  with  his  twin-
brother,  had  been  expofed  in  a  wood,  as  foon  as  they
were  born;  and  that,  being  taken  from  thence  by  the
herdfmen,  he  was  brought  up  by  them.  Upon  which5
Numitor,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  either  fufpeCting  fomething
of  the  truth,  or  Heaven  defigning  to  bring  the  matter  to
light,  faid  to  him;  “  I  need  not  inform  you,  Remus,  that
u  it  depends  upon  me  to  punifti  you  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  I

“  think


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  E  N  S 1  S.  1 91

u  think  fit;  and,  that  thofe,  who  have  brought  you  hither,
u  having  received  many  dreadful  injuries  from  you,  are,
u  extremely,  defirous  you  fhould  be  put  to  death  :  All  this
“  you  know  :  But,  if  I  fhould  free  you  from  death,  and
“  every  other  punifhment,  would  you  acknowledge  the
<c  obligation,  and  ferve  me,  when  I  defire  your  affiftance,  in
iC  an  affair,  that  will  conduce  to  the  advantage  of  us  both  ?”
The  youth  having,  in  anfwer  to  him,  faid  every  thing
which  the  hopes  of  life  prompt  thofe,  who  are  in  defpair
of  it,  to  fay,  and  promife  to  the  perfon,  on  whom  their
fate  depends,  he  ordered  his  chains  to  be  taken  off ;  and,
commanding  every  body  to  leave  the  place,  he  acquainted
him  with  his  own  misfortunes;  that,  Amulius,  though-
his  brother,  had  deprived  him  both  of  his  kingdom,  and
his  children;  that  he  had  affalfinated  his  fon,  while  he
was  hunting,  and  kept  his  daughter  chained  in  prifon*
and,  in  all  other  refpedts,  treated  him  as  a  mafter  treats
his  Have.

LXXXIL  Having  faid  this,  and  accompanied  his  diff
courfe  with  great  lamentations,  he  intreated  Remus  to
revenge  the  injuries  done  to  his  family.  The  youth,
chearfully,  embracing  the  overture,  and  defiring  his  com¬
mand  to  begin  the  action  immediately,  Mumitor,  after  he
had  commended  his  alacrity,  faid  ;  u  I  will  take  upon
“  me  to  find  a  proper  time  for  the  enterprize  ;  in  the  mean
“  while,  do  you  fend,  privately,  to  your  brother,  and  ac~
<c  quaint  him  that  your  life  is  fafe,  and  that  you  defire  him
tc  to  come  hither  in  all  hafte.”  Upon  this,  a  proper  perfon

was-


i9a  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  I.

was  fent ;  who,  meeting  Romulus  not  far  from  the  city,
delivered  his  meffage ;  with  which  the  other,  being,  ex¬
ceedingly,  rejoiced,  made  hafte  to  Numitor  ;  and,  having
imbraced  them  both,  he  gave  them,  an  account  in  what
manner  they  had  been  expofed,  and  brought  up,  and  of
all  the  other  circumftances  he  had  learned  from  Fauftulus :
T hey,  who  defired  this  relation  might  be  true,  and  wanted
not  many  arguments  to  induce  them  to  believe  it,
heard  what  he  faid  with  pleafure ;  and,  as  foon  as  they
knew  one  another,  they  confulted  together,  and  confidered
what  means,  and  what  time  might  be  the  moft  proper  for
the  execution  of  their  defign.  While  they  were,  thus,  em¬
ployed,  Fauftulus  was  carried  before  Amulius:  For,  being
apprehenfive,  left  the  information  of  Romulus  might  not
be  credited  by  Numitor,  in  an  affair  of  fo  great  moment
without  manifeft  proof,  he,  foon  after,  followed  him  to
town,  taking  the  cradle  with  him  as  a  token  of  the  ex-
pofttion  of  the  children.  While  he  entered  the  gates  in
great  diforder,  taking  all  poftible  pains  to  hide  what  he
carried,  one  of  the  guards  obferved  him  (for  an  incurfion
of  the  enemy  was  apprehended,  and  the  guard  of  the  gates
committed  to  thofe,  who  were  in  the  greateft  truft  with
the  king )  and  laid  hold  of  him ;  and,  infilling  upon
knowing  what  it  was  he  concealed,  by  force,  threw
back  his  garment :  As  foon  as  he  faw-  the  cradle,  and
found  the  man  in  confufion,  he  defired  to  know  the
caufe  of  his  diforder,  and  what  he  meaned  by  carrying,
privately,  an  utenfil,  that  required  no  fuch  fecrecy.  In

the


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  193

the  mean  time,  more  of  the  guards  flocked  to  them,  and
one  of  them  knew  the  cradle,  having  himfelf  carried  the
children  in  it  to  the  river ;  of  which  he  informed  thofe,
who  were  prefent.  Upon  this,  they  feized  Fauftulus ;  and,
carrying  him  to  the  king  himfelf,  acquainted  him  with  all  that
had  pafied.  Amulius,  threatening  the  man  to  put  him  to
the  torture,  if  he  did  not,  willingly,  tell  the  truth,  firft,  aiked
him,  if  the  children  were  alive  ;  and,  finding  they  were,  he
defired  to  know  in  what  manner  they  had  been  preferved.
After  the  other  had  given  him  a  full  account  of  every  thing,
as  it  happened,  “  Well,  fays  the  king,  fince  you  have,  hi-
“  therto,  *57  fpoken  the  truth,  fay,  where,  they  may,  now,  be
c<  found :  For  it  is  not  juft  that  they,  who  are  my  relations,
“  fhould,  any  longer,  live,  inglorioufly,  among  herdfmen;
“  particularly,  fince  the  gods  themfelves  have  taken  care  of
“  their  prefer vation.”

LXXXIII.  But  Fauftulus,  fufpedting,  from  this  unac¬
countable  kindnefs,  that  his  defigns  were  not  agreeable  to
his  profeflions,  anfwered  him  in  this  manner:  “  The  youths
“  are  upon  the  mountains,  tending  their  herds,  according
“  to  their  way  of  life;  and  I  was  fent,  by  them,  to  their
“  mother,  to  give  her  an  account  of  their  fituation  ;  when,
iC  hearing  that  fhe  was  in  your  cuftody,  I  propofed  to  defire
<c  your  daughter  to  bring  me  to  her :  And  I  brought  the
0 1  cradle  with  me,  that  I  might  fupport  my  words  with  a

*57.  Ahrfivtrcig  This  is  Attic  Greek  authors,  will,  eafily,  recoiled
elegance  for  jjA yjGeva-ag.  The  learned  many  examples  of  this  Atticifm.
reader,  who  is  acquainted  with  the  bell

Vol.  I.  C  c


mam-


i94  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

cc  manifeft  proof.  Since,  therefore,  you  have  determined  to
“  have  the  youths  conveyed  hither,  I  not  only  rejoice  at  it,  but
4  £  delire  you  to  fend  fuch  perfons  with  me,  as  you  think  proper:
“  I  will  fhew  them  the  youths,  and  they  fhall  acquaint  them
u  with  your  commands.”  This  he  faid  in  order  to  delay  their
death,  hoping,  at  the  fame  time,  to  make  his  efcape  from
thofe, 258  who  were  to  bring  the  youths  to  the  king,  as  foon
as  he  arrived  on  the  mountains.  Amulius  fent,  immediately,
fome  of  his  guards,  in  whom  he,  chiefly,  confided,  with
private  orders,  to  feize,  and  bring  before  him,  the  perfons,
whom  the  herdfman  fhould  fhew  to  them.  Having  done  this,
he,  prefently,  determined  to  lay  his  brother  under  a 259  gentle
reftraint,  till  he  had  ordered  the  prefent  buflnefs  to  his
latisfa&ion ;  and,  in  that  view,  he  fent  for  him,  upon  fome


258*  ayovla.^.  Both  the  Latin
trandators  have  applied  thefe  words  to
the  men,  who  were  to  be  fent  by  A-
mulius,  in  order  to  conduct  Fauftulus:
Not  a  word  of  which  has  been  men¬
tioned  by  our  author.  On  the  con¬
trary,  Fauftulus  was  to  conduct  them
to  the  place,  where  they  might  fee  the
youths,  in  order  to  bring  them  to  the
king  :  And,  to  them,  in  this  capacity,
I  have  applied  thofe  words.  Both  the
French  tranOators  have  followed  the
others.

z59‘  Ev  (PvAaxy  aSi<r^u>.  This  expref-
fton  is  very  common  in  the  Greek
authors.  And,  thus,  s  Thucydides  fays,
tnat  not^flTTTTiav  tv  (pvXotnv]  ccJe<r[Aw
The  Latin  tranflators  have  rendered
it  in  libera  cnjiodid ,  which  was  the  very


term  in  ufe  among  the  Romans  for
this  kind  of  cuftody  :  The  method  of
which  was,  for  the  perfon  fufpeited  to
be  delivered  to  fome  magiftrate,  or
fenator,  who  was  to  fee  him  forth
coming.  Thus,  we  find,  in  h  Saluft,
that  Catiline’s  accomplices  were  dif-
pofed  of :  Senatus  decernit,  ut ,  abdicato
magiflratu ,  Lent  ulus ,  itemque  caeteri ,  in
liberis  cuftodiis  babeantur  :  Itaque  Len -
tulus,  P.  Lentulc  Spintberi ,  qui  turn
aedilis  erat  •,  Ccthegus ,  LK  Ccnijicio  $
Statilius ,  C.  Caefari  \  Gabinius^M.  CraJfo->
Cep  anus,  Cn.Lerentio  fenatori ,  traduntur .
Lejay  has  rendered  thefe  words,  pretty
well,  le  garden  a  veiie.  His  countryman
has  tranflated  them  very  unfortunately,
le  garden  dans  une  prifon  Hire .


£  B.  iii.  c.  34.


h  De  Bell.  Cat.  c.  47.


other


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENSIS.  195

other  pretence  :  But,  the  meffenger,  induced  both  by  his
affe&ion  to  the  perfon  in  danger,  and  commiferation  of  his
fate,  informed  Numitor  of  the  defign  of  Amulius.  Upon
which,  the  former,  having  acquainted  the  youths  with  their
danger,  and  exhorted  them  to  behave  bravely,  led  them
armed  to  the  palace,  together  with  a  confiderable  number
of  his  clients,  and  friends,  and  fuch  of  his  domeftics,  as  he
could  rely  on  :  Thefe  were  joined  by  a  ftrong  party  of  the
country  men,  from  the  market-place,  who  had,  before,
entered  the  city  with  fwords,  concealed  under  their  clothes :
And,  having,  by  a  general  attack,  forced  the  entrance,  which
was  defended  by  a  few  of  the  guards,  they,  eafily,  flew
Amulius,  and,  afterwards,  made  themfelves  mafters  of  the
citadel.  This  is  the  account  Fabius  gives.

LXXXIV.  But  others,  who  hold  that  every  thing,  which
has  the  appearance  of  a  fable,  ought  to  be  banifhed  from
hiftory,  maintain  that  the  exposition  of  the  children,  by  the
officers,  contrary  to  their  orders,  is  void  of  all  probability,
and  laugh  at  the  tamenefs  of  the  wolf,  that  fuckled  them,
as  an  incident,  fraught  with  theatrical  abfurdity :  Inftead  of
which,  they  give  this  account  of  the  matter :  That  Numi¬
tor,  finding  Ilia  was  with  child,  procured  other  new-born
children;  and,  after  Ihe  was  brought  to  bed,  fubftituted  thefe
in  the  room  of  the  others,  ordering  thofe,  who,  attended  her
delivery,  to  carry  to  Amulius  the  fuppofititious  children
(having  either  fecured  their  fidelity  by  money,  or  contrived
this  exchange  by  the  help  of  women.)  Thefe  children,  being
brought  to  Amulius,  he,  by  fome  means,  or  other,  made

C  c  2  them


196  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  I.

them  away.  As  to  thofe,  that  were  born  of  Ilia,  their
grandfather,  who  was,  above  all  things,  folicitous  for  their
prefervation,  delivered  them  to  Fauftulus :  They  add,  that
this  Fauftulus  was  an  Arcadian  by  extraction,  defcended  from
thofe  Arcadians,  who  came  over  with  Evander  :  That  he
lived  on  the  Palatine  hill,  and  260  had  the  care  of  Amulius’
demains :  That  he  was  prevailed  on  by  his  brother,  named
Fauftinus,  who  had  the  fuperintendence  of  Numitor’s  herds,
that  fed  on  the  Aventine  hill,  to  gratify  Numitor,  in  bring¬
ing  up  the  children :  And  that  the  nurfe,  who  fuckled
them,  was  not  a  fhe-wolf,  but  (as  may  well  be  fuppofed)  a
woman,  who  was  wife  to  Fauftulus,  by  name,  Laurentia,
who,  having,  formerly,  proftituted  her  beauty,  was,  by  the
inhabitants  of  the  Palatine  hill,  furnamed  Lupa\  which  was
an  ancient  Greek  appellation,  given  to  women,  who  pro¬
ftituted  themfelves  for  gain,  who  are,  now,  called,  by  a
more  decent  name,  Friends :  And  that  fome,  who

were  ignorant  of  this,  invented  the  fable  of  the  fhe-wolf ;
that  wild  beaft  being  called,  in  the  Latin  language, 261  Lupa  :


2^°‘  cxvvla  ruv  A y.x\iv

dypuluv.  I  do  not  underftand  why  the
two  French  trandators,  and  Portus,
have  rendered  this  fentence,  having
care  of  the  flocks  of  Amulius  \  that  being
the  fenfe  in  their  refpedtive  languages.
How  much  better  has  Sylburgius  ren¬
dered  it,  res  Amulii  procurajfe  ?  That
xl has  this  extenfive  fignification
may  be  feen  in  Hefychius  j
fays  he,  motvla  ra  lx.

26lt  Avttuv.  M.  ***  fays,  upon  this
occafion,  that  he  does  not  comprehend


what  Dionyfius  means  •,  and  that  Plu¬
tarch  reafons  better,  when  he  fays,  in
the  life  of  Romulus,  that  the  Latines
called  Lupas  not  only  fhe-wolves,  but
women  of  ill  lives.  This  confirms,
rather  than  contradi&s  what  our  au¬
thor  fays.  For  the  Latines,  at  the
time  of  Romulus,  at  leaf,  the  defen¬
dants  of  the  Greek  colonies,  certainly,
fpoke  Greek  ;  which  appears  by  an¬
other  paflage  of  Plutarch,  quoted  by
himfelf  in  the  fame  note,  where  it  is
faid  that  the  Greek  language,  in  the

They


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  ENSIS.  197

They  fay,  alfo,  that,  after  the  children  were  weaned,  they
were  fent  by  thofe,  who  had  the  charge  of  their  education,
to  Gabii,  a  town,  not  far  from  Pallantium,  to  be  inftru&ed
in  Greek  learning ;  and  that,  there,  they  were  brought  up
by  fome  perfons,  with  whom  Fauftulus  had  a  private  inter-
courfe  of  hofpitality,  where  they  employed  their  time,  till
they  arrived  to  manhood,  in  learning  letters,  mufic,  and  the
ufe  of  Greek  arms :  And  that,  after  their  return  to  their
fuppofed  parents,  a  difference  arofe  between  them,  and
Numitor’s  herdfmen  concerning  their  common  paftures :
That,  upon  this,  they  beat  Numitor’s  men,  and  drove  away
their  cattle :  That  they  did  all  this  by  Numitor’s  direction,  to
the  intent  that  it  might  ferve  as  a  foundation  for  his  com¬
plaints,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  the  herdfmen,  as  a  pretence
to  come  to  town  in  great  numbers :  That,  after  this,  Nu-
mitor  raifed  a  clamor  againft  Amulius,  faying  he  was,  fe-
verely,  ufed,  and  plundered  by  the  herdfmen  of  Amulius  ;
defiring,  likewife,  that,  if  he  had  no  fhare  in  the  abufe,  he
would  deliver  up  the  herdfman,  and  his  fons,  to  be  tried  by
the  laws  :  That  Amulius,  being  willing  to  clear  himfelf  of  this*
accufation,  ordered,  not  only,  thofe,  who  were  complained  o fy
but  all  the  reft,  who  were  accufed  of  having  been  prefen t  at

time  of  Romulus,  which  was  fpoken,  from  fome  French  tranflation,  induced
as  he  owns,  by  the  Romans,  and  Al-  him  to  think, that  Plutarch  is  not  con-
bans,  was  not,  yet,  corrupted  by  It  a •  fftent  with  himfelf.  If,  therefore,  the
hart  words  :  For  fo  that  gentleman  Latines  called  a  common  woman  lupay
ought  to  have  rendered  that  paffage  of  it  muft  have  been  an  old  Greek  word,,
Plutarch,  who  does  not  fay  im  A ahvuv,  as  our  author  fays :  And,  that  it  is  fo,
as  he  has  translated  it,  butrwv  ItuXiku*:  appears  from  a  writer  ol  undoubted
And  this  miftake,  which  1  am  afraid  authority,  I  mean  Hefychius,  who  ex-
js  owing  to  his  quoting  this  paiTag&  plains  aw r<«,  by  wo^vrj.

thofe


✓


1 9  8  -  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

thofe  tranfactions,  to  come,  and  take  their  trial  before  Nu-
mitor  :  And  that'  great  numbers  coming  to  town,  together
with  the  accufed,  to  attend  this  trial,  the  grandfather  of  the
youths  acquainted  them  with  all  the  circumftances  of  their
fortune ;  and,  telling  them  that  now,  if  ever,  was  the  time
to  revenge  themfelves,  he,  prefently,  made  the  attempt
upon  Amulius  with  the  band  of  herdfmem  Thefe,  there¬
fore,  are  the  accounts,  that  are  given  of  the  birth,  and
education  of  the  founders  of  Rome.

LXXXV.  As  to  the  events,  that  happened  at  the  very
time  of  its  foundation  (for  this  part  ftill  remains)  I  fhall,
now,  begin  to  relate  them.  After  Numitor  had  recovered
his  kingdom  by  the  death  of  Amulius,  and  had  fpent  a  little
time  in  reftoring  the  city,  from  the  late  ufurpation,  to  its
former  ftate,  he,  prefently,  thought  of  providing  a  particular
fovereignty  for  the  youths,  by  building  another  city.  At
the  fame  time,  the  inhabitants  being  much  increafed  in
number,  he  thought  it  good  policy  to  difpofe  of  fome  part
of  them ;  particularly,  of  thofe,  who  had,  before,  been  his
enemies,  left  he  might  have  caufe  to  fufped  any  of  his  fub-
je&s.  Having,  therefore,  communicated  this  defign  to  the
youths,  and  they,  alfo,  approving  it,  he  gave  them  thofe
territories  in  fovereignty,  where  they  had  been  brought  up  in
their  infancy  ;  and,  for  fubjects,  not  only,  that  part  of  the
people,  which  he  fufpe&ed  of  a  defign  to  raife  new  troubles,
but,  alfo,  fuch,  as  were  willing  to  leave  their  country.
Among  thefe  (as  it,  ufually,  happens,  when  colonies  are  fent
out)  there  were  great  numbers  of  the  common  people;  and*

not


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C  AR  N  A  S  S  E NS  IS.  199

not  a  few,  alfo,  of  diftinguifhed  rank,  and  of  thofe  Trojans,
who  were  efteemed  the  moft  confiderable  for  their  birth
(fome  of  whofe  pofterity  remain  to  this  day)  confifting  of
about  fifty  families.  The  youths  were  fupplied  with
money,  arms,  and  corn,  with  fiaves,  and  beafts  of  burden,
and  every  thing  elfe,  that  was  of  ufe  in  the  build¬
ing  of  a  city.  After  they  had  led  their  people  out  of
Alba,  and  intermixed  them  with  the  inhabitants,  that,,
ftill,  remained  in  Pallantium,  and  Saturnia,  they  divided
the  whole  body  into  two  parts  :  This  they  did,  in  hope
of  railing  an  emulation,  to  the  intent  that,  by  this  contefi
with  each  other,  the  work  might  be  the  fooner  finifhed.
However,  it  produced  the  greateft  of  evils,  difcord  :  For
each  divifion,  celebrating  their  own  leader,  extolled  him,
as  the  proper  perfon  to  command  them  all.  And  they
themfelves,  being,  now,  no  longer,  unanimous,  or  enter¬
taining  brotherly  fentiments  for  one  another,  but,  each
affecting  to  command  the  other,  they  defpifed  equality,
and  aimed  at  fuperiority.  For  fome  time,  their  ambition
lay  concealed ;  but,  afterwards,  broke  out,  on  the  follow¬
ing  occafion  :  They  had  not  both  made  choice  of  the  lame
place  for  the  building  of  the  city  ;  Romulus  chofe  the
Palatine  hill,  to  which  he  was  induced,  among  other
reafons,  by  the  fortune  of  the  place,  where  they  had  been
preferved,  and  brought  up :  Remus  pitched  upon  the
ground,  now,  called  from  him,  Remuria.  This  place  is
very  proper  for  a  city,  being  a  hill,  not  far  from  the  Tiber,
diftant  from  Rome,  about  thirty  ftadia.  From  this  contefi,

their


ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  I*

their  l6a  unfociable  love  of  rule,  prefently,  ftiewed  itfelf:
For  it  was  evident  that,  which  foever  gained  the  afcendant,
on  this  occafton,  he  would  preferve  it,  on  all  others.

LXXXVI.  Some  time  having  been,  thus,  employed,  and
their  difcord,  in  no  degree,  abating,  they  agreed  to  refer
the  matter  to  their  grandfather ;  and,  for  that  purpofe,  went
to  Alba :  He  advifed  them  to  leave  it  to  the  determination
of  the  gods,  which  of  them  fhould  give  name  to,  and  have
the  command  of,  the  colony :  And,  having  appointed  a
day,  he  ordered  them  to  place  themfelves,  early  in  the
morning,  at  a  diftance  -  from  one  another,  in  fuch  ftations,
as  each  of  them  fhould  think  proper :  And,  after  they  had
offered  up  to  the  gods  the  cuftomary  facrifices,  to  obferve
the  aufpicious  birds :  And,  that  he,  to  whom  the  moft
favourable,  firft  appeared,  fhould  have  the  command  of  the
colony.  The  youths,  approving  of  this,  went  away ;  and,
according  to  their  agreement,  appeared  on  the  day  appointed:
Romulus  chofe,  for  his  ftation,  the  Palatine  hill,  where  he
propofed  fettling  the  colony;  and  Remus  the  Aventine  hill,
contiguous  to  it ;  or,  according  to  others,  Remuria  :  A  guard
attended  them  both,  to  prevent  their  reporting  things,
otherwife  than  as  they  appeared.  When  they  had  taken
their  refpe&ive  ftations,  Romulus,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  from

262-  t.  Nothing  can  be  more  that,  when  Livy  calls  the  ambition  of

beautiful  than  the  Ihort  refleftion  of  Rqmulus  and  Remus,  an  hereditary
1  Livy  upon  the  ambition  of  thefe  two  evil,  he  alludes  to  That  of  Amulius,
•brothers,  htervenit  deinde  his  cogita -  which  led  him  to  defeat  Numitor,
tionibus  avitum  malum,  regni  cupido.  I  who  was,  alfo,  his  brother,  and  their
need  not  obferve  to  the  learned  reader,  grandfather,  of  his  right  to  the  crown.

»  B.  i.  c.  6.


eager


ao  i


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H A LICA RN  ASS ENSXS.

eagernefs,  and  envy  to  his  brother  (though,  poffibly,  Heaven
might  have  as  great  a  fhare  in  it  as  envy)  before  he  faw  any
omen,  fent  meflengers  to  his  brother,  defiling  him  to  come,
immediately,  as  if  he  had,  firft,  feen  aufpicious  birds.  In  the
mean  time,  the  perfons  he  fent,  making  no  great  hafte,  as
afhamed  of  the  fraud,  fix  vultures  appeared  to  Remus,
flying  from  the  right :  He,  feeing  the  birds,  greatly,  rejoiced.
And,  not  long  after,  Romulus’  meflengers,  taking  him  from
his  feat,  brought  him  to  the  Palatine  hill :  When  they
were  together,  Remus  alked  Romulus,  what  birds  he  had,
firft,  feen  ?  To  which  he  knew  not  what  to  anfwer.  But,
at  the  fame  time,  twelve  aufpicious  vultures  were  feen  flying.
Upon  feeing  thefe,  he  took  courage ;  and,  fhewing  the  birds
to  Remus,  faid,  “  Why  do  you  defire  to  know  what  happened
“  before?  Since,  you  fee  thefe  birds  yourfelf.”  This  Remus
refented ;  and,  complaining,  violently,  that  he  was  deceived
by  him,  protefted  he  would  never  depart  from  his  right  to
the  colony.

LXXXVII.  This  increafed  their  animofity,  each  of  them,
fecretly,  aiming  at  fuperiority,  and,  openly,  ufing  thefe
arguments,  not  to  yield  to  his  antagonift  :  For  their  grand¬
father  had  determined  that  he,  to  whom  the  moft  favour¬
able  birds,  263  firft,  appeared,  fhould  have  the  Command  of

263*  V*  cov.  I  cannot,  upon  this  obfervation  may  appear  trifling  to  Tome
occafion,  omit  pointing  out  to  the  people  :  But  I  defire  them  to  confider,
reader  both  theexa&nels  of  the  Greek  that  thefe  diftindions  are  the  parents
Janguage,  and  our  author’s  attention  of  elegance,  andperfpicuity.  And,  that
in  obferving  it.  He  is  fpeaking  here  this  diftindion  is  not  imaginary,  may
of  two  perfons  only  •,  confequently,  be  proved  from  Philoftratus  :  to  <mv
sjr^wloi'  would  not  have  been  fo  proper  5 rgohgcv,  lays  he,  stti  c to  Js

as  zsr^cle^ov.  It  is  very  polfible  this  w^ulav  tzi  ■sroAAm,

Vol.  I.  Dd


the


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

the  colony  :  And  the  fame  kind  of  birds  having  been  feen
by  both,  one  had  the  advantage  of  feeing  them  the  firft ;
and  the  other,  That  of  feeing  the  greater  number.  The
people,  alfo,  efpoufed  their  quarrel ;  and,  having  armed
themfelves  without  orders  from  their  leaders,  began  the
war  ;  and  a  fharp  battle  infued,  in  which,  many  were  flain
on  both  fides :  In  this  battle,  Fauftulus,  who  had  brought
up  the  youths,  being  delirous  to  put  an  end  to  the  conteft  of
the  two  brothers,  and,  unable  to  fucceed  in  it,  as  fome  fay,
threw  himfelf,  unarmed,  into  the  middle  of  the  combatants,
feeking  the  fpeedieft  death ;  which  fell  out  accordingly.  It
is  faid,  alfo,  by  fome,  that  the  lion  of  ftone,  which  flood  in
the  principal  part  of  the  Forum,  near  the  roftra,  was  placed
over  the  body  of  Fauftulus,  where  he  fell,  and  had  been  buried
by  thofe,  who  found  it.  Remus  being  flain  in  this  adlion,
Romulus,  who  had  gained  amoft  melancholy  vitftory,  flained
with  the  blood  of  his  brother,  and  the  mutual  daughter  of  his
people,  buried  Remus  at  Remuria,  fince,  when  alive,  he  had
been  fond  of  building  there.  And,  as  to  himfelf,  being  op-
preffed  with  grief,  and  repentance  for  what  had  happened,  he
264  cart  himfelf  upon  the  ground,  and  was  loft  to  all  regard  of
life.  But  Laurentia,  who  had  received  them,  when,  newly,
born,  and  brought  them  up,  and  loved  them  no  lefs  than  a
mother,  intreating,  and  comforting  him,  he  rofe  up,  at  her

*64-  Ux(>&is  iavlov'  Uageic,  iirwodoL-  defcribed  by  our  author,  a  few  lines
Kao  7vxq<Hf  lx tlov  v7ro  av7t»k,  ocftlo.  after,  by  xuraPctt.  For,  as  they  did  not
Suidas.  I  mention  this,  becaufe  the  think  fit,  with  the  text,  to  make  Ro-
French  tranflators  have  left  out  this  mulus  call  himfelf  upon  the  ground,
circumftance,  which  obliged  them,  they  could  not,  pofiibly,  make  him
alio,  to  leave  out  another  circumftance,  rife  up  again.

l'equeft  •


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  203
requeft  ;  and,  gathering  together  the  Latines,  who  had  not
been  flain  in  the  late  battle,  being,  now,  little  more  than
three  thoufand,  out  of  a  very  great  number,  of  which  they,
at  firft,  confifted,  when  he  led  out  the  colony,  he  built  a  city
on  the  Palatine  hill.  This,  therefore,  feems  to  me  the
moft  probable  account  of  the  death  of  Remus.  However,
if  any  other  differs  from  this,  let  That,  alio,  be  related.
Some  fay  that,  having  yielded  the  command  to  Romulus,
though  not  without  refentment,  and  indignation  at  the  im-
pofition,  after  the  wall  was  built,  Remus,  in  order  to  fhew
the  flightnefs  of  the  fortification,  faid ;  ££  Methinks,  any  of
££  your  enemies  might,  aseafily,  leap  over  this,  as  I  do And,
immediately,  jumped  over  it.  That,  upon  this,  Celerius,
one  of  the  men,  who  flood  upon  the  wall,  and  was  furveyor
of  the  works,  faid  ;  “  But  any  of  us  might,  very  eafily,
££  chaftife  that  enemy and,  ftrikinghim  on  the  head,  with
a  pick-ax,  killed  him  on  the  fpot.  This,  therefore,  is  faid
to  have  been  the  265  event  of  the  quarrel  between  the  two
brothers.

LXXXVIII.  There  remaining,  now,  no  obftacle  to  the
building  of  the  city,  Romulus  appointed  a  day,  in  which,
after  atonement  made  to  the  gods,  he  defigned  to  begin  the
work  ;  and,  having  prepared  every  thing,  that  was  neceflary

i6s*  To  />tsv  T?Acf,  etc.  The  fir  ft  Remum  novos  tranfdu^fte  muros :  hide  ab
account  of  the  death  of  Remus  feems  irato  Romulo  ( quum  verbis  qaoque  mere -
the  moft  probable.  However,  k  Livy  ptans  adjecift'et ,  fic  deinde  quicunque
has  followed  the  laft  with  fome  varia-  alius  tranfiliet  moenia  mea )  inter-
tion  :  Vulgatior  fama  eft ,  ludibrio  fratris  feflum.

k  B.  i,  c.  7.

D  d  2  for


o


204  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITrES  OF  Book!,

for  the  facrifices,  and  the  entertainment  of  the  people ;
when  the  day  came,  he,  himfelf,  began  the  facrifice  >  then,
ordering  all  the  reft  to  perform  the  fame  according  to  their
abilities,  he,  firft,  made  ufe  of  the  augury  of  eagles :  After
that,  having  commanded  fires  to  be  made  before  the  tents,
he  caufed  the  people  to  come  out,  and  leap  over  the  flames,
in  order  to  expiate  their  crimes.  When  every  thing  was
performed,  which  he  conceived  to  be  acceptable  to  the  gods,
he  called  all  the  people  to  a  place  appointed,  and  defcribed
a  quadrangular  figure  about  the  hill,  tracing,  with  a  plough,
drawn  by  a  266  bull,  and  a  cow  yoked  together,  one  continued
furrow,  defigned  to  receive  the  foundation  of  the  wall :
From  whence,  this  cuftom  remains,  among  the  Romans,
of  tracing  a  furrow  with  a  plough,  round  the  place,  where
they  defign  to  build  a  city.  After  he  had  finifhed  thefe
things,  and  facrificed  the  bull,  and  the  cow,  and,  alfo,  267  be¬
gun  the  immolation  of  many  other  victims,  he  fet  the  people'
to  work.  This  day,  the  Romans,  even  at  prefen t,  celebrate,
every  year,  as  one  of  their  greateft  feftivals,  and  call  it
l68Parilia.  On  that  day,  which  falls  out  in  the  beginning
of  the  fpring,  the  hufbandmen,  and  fhepherds  offer  up  a

266-  go  uffivog  cty.fr  SviXeux,  rendered  it,  untaureau,  and  not,  unbceuf.

„V  frfolfov.  This  cuftom  is,  often,  §)ui  urbem  novam  condit,  tauro  et  vaccd
mentioned  by  the  Latin  authors  •,  but  aret  :  ubi  ar  aver  it,  murum  faciat :  ubi
no  where,  more  particularly,  defcribed  portam  vult  ejfe ,  aratrum  fujiollat ,  et
than  by  Dionyfius  upon  this  occafion.  portam  vocet.

There  is  a  fragment  of  Cato,  which  I  267’  Kobla^fryivos.  See  the  124th  an"
fhall  lay  before  the  reader,  in  order  to  notation.

lliew  that,  by  |3»?  odpV  is  not  meant  an  2<58,  n^j Ki»,  See  the  225th  an^o-
ox,  but  a  bull ;  and,  confequently,  that  tation.
the  French  tranflators  ought  to  have


facrifice


BookL  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  205

facrifice  of  thankfgiving  for  the  increafe  of  their  cattle.
But,  I  cannot,  certainly  fay,  whether  they  chofe  this  day,  as,
anciently,  a  day  of  public  rejoicing ;  and,  for  that  reafon,
looked  upon  it  as  the  propereft  for  the  building  of  the  city ;
or,  whether  the  building  of  it  having  been  begun  on  that
day,  they  confecrated  it,  and  dedicated  it  to  the  worffiip  of
thofe  gods,  who  are  propitious  to  fhepherds.

LXXX1X.  Thefe,  therefore,  are  all  the  particulars  con¬
cerning  the  origin  of  the  Romans,  which  I  have  been  able
to  difcover,  after  great  application,  and  reading  many  books,
written  both  by  Greek  and  Roman  authors  upon  this  fubjedh
So  that,  from  this  time,  let  every  one,  for  ever,  renounce
the  fentiments  of  thofe,  who  make  Rome  a  retreat  of  Bar¬
barians,  fugitives,  and  vagabonds ;  and  let  him,  confidently,
affirm  it  to  be  a  Greek  city,  the  moft  communicative,  and
humane  of  all  others :  Which  he  will  do,  when  he  confiders
that  the  Aborigines  were  Oenotri,  and  thefe,  Arcadians ;
and  remembers  that  the  Pelafgi,  who  inhabited  the  fame
country  with  the  former,  were  defended  from  the  Argivi ;
and,  having  left  Theflaly,  came  into  Italy  :  And,  on  the
other  hand,  calls  to  mind  the  arrival  of  Evander,  and  of  the
Arcadians,,  who  inhabited  the  Palatine  hill,  which  place
the  Aborigines  had  yielded  to  therh ;  and,  alfo,  the  Pelo-
ponnefians,  who,  coming  into  Italy  with  Hercules,  inhabited
the  Saturnian  hill:  And,  laft  of  all,  Thofe,  who  left  Troy,
and  were  intermixed  with  the  former  :  Since,  he  will  find
no  nation,  that  is  more  ancient,  or  more  Greek,  than  thefe.
For  the  mixture  of  Barbarians  with  the  Romans,  by  which.


206  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

they  loft  many  of  their  ancient  inftitutions,  happened  long
after.  And  this  may  well  feem  a  wonder  to  many,  who
make  proper  reflections  upon  things,  that  they  are  not  be¬
come,  intirely,  Barbarous,  by  receiving  the  Opici,  the  Marfi,
the  Samnites,  the  Tyrrhenians,  theBrutii,  and  many  thoufands
of  Umbri,  Ligures,  and  Iberi;  and,  befldes  thefe,  in¬
numerable  other  nations,  fome  of  whom  came  from  Italy
itfelf,  and  fome  from  other  places,  all  differing  from  one
another  both  in  their  language,  and  manners ;  and  who,
difagreeing  in  every  thing  as  well  as  thefe,  and  being  mixed,
and  collected  into  one  body,  fuch  diffonance  may  well  be
fuppofed  to  have  caufed  many  innovations  in  their  269  ancient
form  of  government :  Since  many  others,  by  living  among
Barbarians,  have,  in  a  fhort  time,  loft  every  thing,  that
characterizes  the  Greek  nation ;  fo  that,  they,  no  longer,
fpeak  the  language  of  the  Greeks ;  obferve  their  inftitutions ;
acknowledge  the  fame  gods ;  ufe  the  fame  humane  laws,  by
which,  chiefly,  the  temper  of  the  Greeks  differs  from  That
of  the  Barbarians ;  or  agree  with  them  in  any  thing  what-
foever,  that  relates  to  the  private  commerce  of  life.  The
270  Achaei,  who  are  fettled  near  theEuxine  fea,  are  a  fufficient

Ta  •fta'kcux  hoc  pa  rye  vroteux;.  27°*  1  Thefe  Achaei  were

Here  aro?w?  is,  again,  taken  for  ztoAjW;  a  colony  of  the  Orchomenii,  who  fet-
concerning  which,  fee  the  136th  an-  tied  near  the  Euxine  fea,  under  Ialme-
notation.  This  fentence,  is,  certain-  nus,  after  the  taking  of  Troy.  Our
]y,  imperfect  in  all  the  editions,  and  author,  very  juftly,  calls  the  Orcho-
manufcripts ;  becaufe  there  is  a  vifible  menii,  from  whom  the  Achaei  were
tautology  in  all  of  them.  I  have  en-  defcended,  Eaa uviKalahs ;  fince  they
deavoured  to  preferve  the  fenfe,  with-  were  a  very  ancient  Greek  people,  and
out  falling  into  that  inconvenience.  fo  wealthy,  that  Homer  makes  Achil-

1  Strabo,  B.  ix.  p.  637.


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  HALI  C  ARN  A  S  SEN  SI  S.  207
proof  of  what  I  advance  ;  who,  though  all  defcended  from
a  nation,  the  mod  Greek,  of  all  others,  are,  now,  become
the  mod  favage  of  all  Barbarians.

XC.  However,  the  language  of  the  Romans  is  neither,
intirely,  Barbarous,  nor,  abfolutely,  Greek;  but  a  mixture
of  both  ;  the  greateft  part  of  which,  is 271  Aeolic ;  and  the


les  fay  to  Ulyffes,  that,  if  Agamem¬
non  would  give  him  as  many  valuable
things,  as  went  to  Orchomenus,  and
the  Egyptian  Thebes,  he  would  not
affift  the  Greeks,

Ov^oV  e(O0%olutYovGrgohvias£y)xd’GC'a@yt£<y,(
Aiyv7ilux;  m.

27T*  H?  ejwv  vj  srA«ft)v  A»oA/f.  Upon
this  occafion,  Hudfon  quotes  a  Ihort
paffage  out  of  n  Quintilian,  to  {hew
that  many  words  in  the  Latin  language
were  derived  from  the  Greek,  and  de¬
clined  after  the  Aeolic  manner.  This
paffage  both  the  French  tranflators
have  rendered  in  French,  which,  I
imagine,  fince  they  laid  no  more,  they
thought  fufficient  to  point  out  to  their
readers  the  fimilitude  between  the
Latin  language,  and  the  Aeolic  dia¬
led!:.  I  wifh  that  either  they,  or  Hud¬
fon,  or  any  other  of  the  commentators,
had  thought  fit  to  explain  this  fimi-
Jitude.  If  they  had,  I  fhould  have
thought  myfelf  obliged  to  them  for
their  affiftance,  and,  moft  chearfully,
have  acknowledged  it.  But,  fince  they
have  all  contented  themfelves  with  this
quotation,  I  muff  perform  this  tafk
myfelf,  in  the  beft  manner  I  am  able.
All  the  grammarians,  whom  I  have
read,  both  ancient  and  modern,  divide
the  Greek  language  into  four  dialeds,

**  Jliad  i.  381 ,  B  JB.  i.  c.  6.


the  Attic,  the  Ionic,  the  Doric,  and
Aeolic.  But  I  fhould  chufe  rather  to
make  them  only  two,  the  Ionic  and
Aeolic  :  In  which,  I  am  fupported  by
the  authority  of  °  Strabo,  who  fays  that
the  Ionic  dialed:  was  the  fame  with  the
old  Attic,  and  the  Doric,  with  the
Aeolic.  Some  lines  after,  he  adds  a
thing,  that  will,  clearly,  account  for
this  fimilitude  between  the  Latin  lan¬
guage,  and  the  Aeolic  dialed: :  which
is,  that  the  Arcadians  fpoke  Aeolic.
Now,  we  have  feen  that  the  Abori¬
gines,  and  Oenotri  were  Arcadians,
as  well  as  thofe,  who  came  into  Italy
with  Evander,  and  lived  on  the  Pa¬
latine  hill,  where  Romulus,  after¬
wards,  built  Rome.  It  is,  therefore,
no  wonder  that  the  Romans  fpoke,
originally,  the  fame  language  with  the
Arcadians,  that  is,  the  Aeolic  ;  and,
always,  retained  a  great  deal  of  it.
Let  us,  now,  bring  this  matter  to  the
tell,  and  compare  a  few  words  of  the
Latin  language  with  others  of  its
mother  tongue,  the  Aeolic  :  Fama ,
(pecptx.  :  Plaga^  zsKxyx  ;  Machine ,  pa-
X<xyx  •,  Malum ,  [axAcv ;  Mater ,  pcilvig  5
Tu,  tu.  The  reader  will  find  many
more  inftances  of  this  fimilitude  in
Theocritus  :  But  thefe,  I  believe,  will
be  fufficient  to  fupport  this  affertion
of  our  author.

?  B.  viii.  p.  513,  and  514.


only


203  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  I.

only  difadvantage  they  have  received  from  their  intercourfe
with  thefe  various  nations,  is,  that  they  do  not  pronounce  all
their  272  vowels  properly  :  But  all  other  indications  of  a  Greek
origin  they  preferve,  beyond  any  other  colony  :  For  it  is
not  lately,  fince  fortune,  by  fhowering  down  her  favors
on  them  with  a  liberal  hand,  has  taught  them  huma¬
nity,  that  they  have  begun  to  pradlife  it ;  nor  fince  they,
firff, 273  aimed  at  the  conqueft  of  countries,  lituate  on  the


272*  '^ofyQn.  I  have  departed  from
all  the  tranfiators  in  rendering  this
word.  Three  of  them  have  faid,  in
their  languages,  words ,  and  le  Jay,
termes.  I  am  not  fo  very  confident  of
my  own  tranflation  as  to  cenfure  theirs  j
becaufe  I  know  that  Qavqfvlat  is  the
word,  generally,  ufed  to  fignify  vowels:
But  I,  alfo,  know  that,  if  bapOofyo?  fig-
nifies  a  double  vowel ,  as  it,  certainly,
does,  <pQofyo$  mull  fignify  a  Jingle  one.
It  is  poflible,  indeed,  that  the  Ro¬
mans  might  not  pronounce  their  con-
l'onants  like  the  Greeks,  which  is,
what,  I  fuppofe,  our  author  calls,
improperly.  But,  I  imagine,  they  dif¬
fered  more  from  them  in  the  pronun¬
ciation  of  their  vowels.  As  the  Ro¬
mans  had  no  >j,  and,  as  their  e  was  a
lhort  vowel,  I  do  not  fee  how  they
could  properly  pronounce  thofe  words,
that  were  derived  from  the  Greek,  in
which  there  was  an  t?.  Their  fihort  o  is
liable  to  the  fame  obje&ion,  when  they
were  to  pronounce  an  &«.  As  to  the  letter
u,  there  is  great  reafon  to  believe  they
pronounced  it,  as  the  Italians  now,
pronounce  it,  00 ,  which  muft  have
been  very  different  from  u,  as  pro¬
nounced  by  the  Greeks  ;  if  thefe  pro¬
nounced  it,  as  I  imagine  they  did,  in


the  fame  manner,  as  we  pronounce  the
«,  in  tube ,  lute ,  etc.  Had  Dionyfius
fufpeded  that  his  hiftory  would  have
outlived  the  Latin  language,  as  a  liv¬
ing  language,  he  would,  probably,
have  told  us  in  what  the  impropriety
of  the  Romans  confifted.  If  he  had
done  this,  I  dare  fay,  it  would  have
been  found,  that  no  nation,  now,  upon
the  face  of  the  earth,  pronounces  Latin
like  the  old  Romans,  and  our  own  lefs
than  any  other  ;  unlefs  we  are  pleafed
to  imagine  that  one  of  the  moft  diflant
provinces  of  the  Roman  empire,  has
retained  the  true  pronunciation  of  that
language,  when  all  the  reft  of  Europe,
and,  even,  the  Italians  themfelves  have
loft  it:  And  yet,  fince  we  pronounce
the  Latin  vowels,  differently,  from  all
other  nations,  we  muft  maintain  this
extraordinary  pofition,  if  we  are  re-
folved  to  maintain  our  own  pronunci¬
ation.

273*  £l^x^'^s'CCv  rw  hortrovlm.  This  is,
indeed,  Badly,  tranflated  by  le  Jay,
qn'ils  eujfent  pafse  la  mer.  The  other
French  tranflator  has  not  faid  much
better,  qitils  fe  font  rendus  maitres  des
pais  d'audeld  de  la  mer.  Oityt&ca
means  no  more  than  to  aim  at.  O^ytlat.
iTriQvpa,  Uefychius.  But  there  is  a

other


Book  I.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  209

other  fide  of  the  fea  ;  the  objed:  of  which  was  the  fubver-
fion  of  the  Carthaginian  and  Macedonian  empires ;  but,
from  the  time  they  were  afiembled  in  the  fame  city,  they
have  lived  like  Greeks ;  *74  and  do  not  attempt  any
thing  more  illufirious  in  the  purfuit  of  virtue  now,  than
formerly.  I  have  innumerable  things  to  fay  upon  this
fubjed,  and  many  arguments  to  alledge  in  fupport  of  what
I  have  advanced,  together  with  the  teftimonies  of  credible
authors ;  but  I  referve  all  thefe  for  that  part  of  this  hiftory,
wherein  I  propofe  to  treat  of  their  government.  I  lhall,
now,  refume  the  thread  of  my  narration,  after  I  have  pre-
mifed,  in  the  following  book,  a  recapitulation  of  what  is
contained  in  this.


great  difficulty,  in  the  next  fentence,
which  I  wonder  Cafaubon  did  not  take
notice  of*,  it  is  this  :  The  word  xalx-
Averavkc  is  to  me  unintelligible,  in  this
place.  Are  we  to  fuppofe  that  the
Romans  did  not  aim  at  the  conqueft
of  the  countries,  lying  on  the  other
fide  of  the  fea,  till  they  had  fubverted
the  Carthaginian,  and  Macedonian
empires,  both  which  empires  lay  .on
the  other  fide  of  the  fea,  with  re-
fpeCt  to  the  Romans  ?  This  cannot
be  *,  and,  yet,  this  is  the  fenfe,  and  the
only  fenfe  of  the  word  KuiaAvravlts.
But,  if,  inftead  of  that,  we  read  xala-
Avcrofcg,  the  difficulty  vaniffies.  As  I
have  no  authority  for  this  alteration,
but  my  own  conjecture,  I  would  not
infert  it  in  the  text,  but  fubmit  it  to
the  determination  of  the  learned  reader.


K xi  ?)C7r£>?;rss*S£ov  tTrPyj^vovleg

vw  >)  I,  verily,  be¬

lieve  him  j  and  hope  this  oblique  re¬
flection  on  the  loft  virtue  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  will  reconcile  M.  *  *  *  to  our
author,  and  convince  him  that  he  did
not  write  his  hiftory  with  a  view  to
flatter  either  Auguftus,  or  his  people:
Since  he  could  not,  confidently  with
decency,  fay,  more  plainly,  that  the
Romans  had  degenerated  from  the
virtue  of  their  anceftors,  than  by  faying
that  they  did  not,  at  all,  diftinguifh
themfelves  in  the  purfuit  of  virtue
more  in  his  time,  than  formerly.  But
his  reflection  does  not  flop  here;  it
reaches,  even,  to  the  throne  of  Au-
guftus  :  Since  the  Romans  could  not
give  a  greater  proof  of  that  degeneracy,
than  by  fubmitting  to  his  ufurpation.


The  end  of  the  firfl:  book.

'  Ee


Vol.  L


A  Dig-


A


DISSERTATION

CONCERNING

The  arrival  of  AENEAS  in  Italy.


I  A  M  fenfible  of  the  many  difadvantages  I  lie  under  in  entering  the
lifts  with  two  of  the  greateft  men  of  the  laft  age,  Cluver,  and
Bochart,  who  have  both  treated  the  arrival  of  Aeneas  in  Italy  as  a
fable,  and  exhaufted  the  whole  ftore  of  their  learning,  which  I  own
to  have  been  very  great,  in  fupporting  this  affertion.  However,  in
this  unequal  conteft,  I  have  the  fatisfa&ion  to  find,  that  the  united
ftream  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  hiftory  runs  in  my  favor  ;  which
makes  me  hope  that  an  affectation  of  Angularity  will  rather  be  imputed
to  them,  for  having  oppofed  the  authority  of  fo  many  great  authors,.,
than  to  me,  for  oppofmg  That  of  the  two  great  men  I  am  to  contend
with.

Bochart,  in  his  letter  to  Segrais,  the  French  tranflator  of  the  Aeneid,
lays  great  ftrefs  upon  a  paffage  in  Homer,  which  I  fhall  confider  pre-
fently,  as  decifive  againft  the  arrival  of  Aeneas  in  Italy  j  and,  after  he
has  employed  all  the  arguments  he  can  find  to  fhew  the  impoffibility
of  it,  juftifies  Virgil  for  having  brought  him  thither:  In  order  to  do
this  the  more  effectually,  he  gives  a  long  lift  of  Greek  and  Roman
authors,  moil  of  them  quoted  by  Dionyfius  of  Halicarnaffus,  to  prove
that  Aeneas  did,  really,  land  in  Italy,  and  was  the  anceftor  of  the
Alban  kings,  from  whom  the  founders  of  Rome  were  defcended.
If  Bochart  did  not  do  this  to  fhew  how  much  learning  he  could  dis¬
play  on  both  fides  of  the  queftion,  he  muft  have  been  very  inattentive
t-o  his  fubjeCt,  not  to  fee  that  the  authorities  he  has  quoted  to  juftify
Virgil,  abfolutely  deftroy  the  arguments  he  had,  before,  made  ufe  of

to


21  I


DISSERTATION,  etc.

to  contradict  the  arrival  of  Aeneas  in  Italy.  The  method  I  fhall  ob-
ferve  in  treating  this  fubjeCt,  will  be,  firft,  to  examine  the  objections
made  by  Cluver,  and  Bochart,  which  are,  nearly,  the  fame  j  and  then,
to  give  my  own  reafons  in  fupport  of  the  fyftem  I  have  adopted.

Their  firft  objection  is  drawn  from  the  verfes  in  Homer,  which
have,  already,  been  taken  notice  of,  and  from  a  Strabo’s  comment  on
them.

To  this  objection  it  may  be  anfwered  that,  if,  as  I  have,  before,
obferved,  we  read, b

Nw  <5e  ^  A tv&uzo  (3it]  I1ANTESXIN  civctfay
K cu  'srctideg  ’sroitfiyv,  rot  xev  {*sJo7ric&e  yevcovjcti,

The  difficulty  vaniffies  at  once :  And,  though  this  reading  is  not  to  be
found  in  any  of  the  manufcripts,  or  editions  of  Homer,  which  are,  now,
extant,  yet  we  know  from  c  Strabo  that  it  was,  formerly,  in  fome  of
them,  Ting  y^ct^atriu  are  his  words.  But,  if,  at  all  events,  we  muft  read
T (juicro-iv,  inftead  of  'zrctvjtvcnv,  the  anfwer  our  author  has  given  to  this
objection  feems,  very  well,  founded  :  The  fenfe  of  which  is,  that
Aeneas,  and  his  pofterity,  might,  as  properly,  be  faid  to  have  reigned
over  the  Trojans,  who  followed  him  into  Italy,  as  if  he,  and  they,  had
{laid  in  Phrygia.  I  am  fenlible  that d  Strabo  fays  it  was  reported ,  Myfiai,
that  the  defendants  of  Scamandrius,  the  fon  of  HeCtor,  and  of  Afcanius,
the  fon  of  Aeneas,  reigned  for  many  ages  in  Scepfis,  a  city  in  Phrygia  :
But,  this  objection  he  himfelf  obviates,  by  faying  that,  if  we  are  to
read  T^uira-iv,  there  is  an  end  of  this  fucceffion  to  the  kingdom  of
Scepfis  in  the  family  of  Scamandrius.  He  fays,  indeed,  in  the  fame
place,  that  thefe  verfes  in  Homer  contradict,  ftill  more,  the  arrival  of
Aeneas  in  Italy  ;  for  which  reafon,  fome  write  •srotvlioviv,  referring  the
word  to  the  Romans.  However,  let  it  not  be  imagined  that  Strabo
treats  the  arrival  of  Aeneas  in  Italy  as  a  fable  ;  fince,  in  giving  an
account  of  that  part  of  Italy,  where  Aeneas  landed,  he  fays,  in  fo
many  words,  that  many  places  there  were  ennobled  by  his  prefence ,
*y<Jc£a  Js  Aiv&x  ytyovev  eTribvjpiav e.

*  See  the  1 86th  annot.  on  the  firft  book.  b  Iliad  v.  ^.307.  ‘B,  xiii.  p.  906.  d  lb,

*£«v.p.  £55.  '

-  Ee  2  It


N


2  12  DISSERTATION  CONCERNING  THE

It  is,  next,  objected  by  Bochart,  that  fFeftus  quote^Agathocles  Cy-
zicenus  for  faying  that  Aeneas  was  buried  in  the  city  of  Berecynthia.
The  reader  will,  I  believe,  think  that  a  quotation  of  three  or  four  words
from  an  author,  whofe  works  are,  now,  loft,  cannot  add  any  great  force
to  his  argument ;  which  is,  ftill,  lefiened  by  this  confideration,  that
Strabo,  in  his  very  accurate  defcription  of  that  country,  makes  no
mention  of  it.

He,  then,  fays  that  Afcanius,  mull  have  remained  in  Phrygia,  be-
caufe  many  places  in  that  country,  as  the  lake  Afcanius,  a  river  of  the
fame  name,  a  part  of  the  country,  and  a  little  ifland  near  adjoining,
received  their  names  from  Afcanius,  the  fon  of  Aeneas.

This  argument  I  have  met  with  in  feveral  authors  of  a  more  modern
date  than  Bochart,  from  whom,  I  believe,  they  took  it.  However,  it
may  be,  eafily,  anfwered.  In  the  firft  place,  this  lake,  and  river,  are
not  in  Phrygia,  but  in  Bithynia,  or,  as  fome  have  thought,  in  Myfia,
as  will  appear,  evidently,  from  the  following  words  of  Euphorion,
quoted  by  s  Strabo,

MTSOIO  '&«,()  vfictrtv  Acntavioio.

This  is  confirmed  by  h  Homer,  quoted,  alfo,  by  Strabo,  upon  this  oc-
cafion,

nuhpw,  AXKANION  re,  Mogctv  S'’  uiov  l7nro]iuvo$y

MY£X1N  <^yxef-lccXuv  “Kyylogct  za^i^o&ufx.ov.

Oi  y  A2KANIHX  e^uActzog  tjA 9ov  apo&oi.

Thefe  verfes,  particularly  the  firft,  will  fupply  me  with  another  anfwer
to  this  objection.  This  Afcanius  was  not  the  fon  of  Aeneas,  but  one
of  the  leaders  of  the  Myfians,  or  of  the  Phrygians,  if  you  pleafe,  for
Myfia,  and  Phrygia  border  on  one  another,  who  came  to  the  affiftance
of  the  Trojans.  And,  by  the  laft  verfe,  it  is  plain  that  this  country,
and,  confequently,  the  lake,  and  river  were  known  by  this  name  in  the
time  of,  and  very  probably,  long  before,  the  Trojan  war.  Afcanius,
therefore,  the  fon  of  Aeneas,  could  not  give  his  name  to  thefe  places,
after  the  taking  of  that  city.  I  laid  it  was  probable  that  the  name  of
Afcania  had  been  given  to  this  country  long  before  the  Trojan  war  j
becaufe,  if  any  confequence  can  be  drawn  from  a  fimilitude  of  names,

|  In  voce  Rcma.  £  B.  xii.  p.  849.  h  Iliad,  r.  792,


it


ARRIVAL  OF  AENEAS  IN  ITALY.  213

it  is  not  improbable  that  foatPK  *  Afchenez,  or,  as  the  Septuagint  calls
him,  A <rxavct£,  the  Ton  of  Gomer,  the  fon  of  Japhet,  the  fon  of  Noah,
might  have  reigned  over  this  country  many  ages  before  the  Trojan
war,  and  have  given  his  name  to  it.  And  this  opinion,  I  find,  Bochart
himfelf  efpoufes,  when  he  is  to  account  for  the  peopling  of  the  earth
by  the  defendants  of  Noah  :  For,  there,  he  derives  the  name  of  this
country  from  k  Afchanaz.  But,  when  he  has  another  objedt  in  view,
and  is  to  fhew  that  Aeneas  never  went  to  Italy,  he  fhifts  the  fcene,
and  fays  that  this  lake,  river,  and  country  received  their  names  from
Afcanius,  the  fon  of  Aeneas.  I  fhall  not  dwell  long  on  the  next
objection,  becaufe  I  think  it  may  be  anfwered  in  a  few  words.  Bochart
fays,  that,  if  Aeneas  had  come  into  Italy,  he  would,  certainly,  have
introduced  there  the  worfhip  of  Venus,  and  Apollo ;  the  firft  being
his  mother,  and  the  other  his  protestor,  according  to  Homer  ;  and  he
fays,  that  both  thefe  deities  were  unknown  to  the  firft  Romans,  and
their  anceftors.

As  to  the  worfhip  of  Venus ;  ’Strabo  tells  us  that  there  was  a  temple
dedicated  to  her  in  Lavinium  :  The  antiquity  of  which  will  appear  by
this ;  that  the  care  of  this  temple  was  derived  to  the  Ardeates  from
their  anceflors ;  ctt  avja  Sia,  •ar poyovuv  A^tocjca.  And  the  anti¬

quity  of  the  worfhip,  paid  by  the  old  Romans  to  Apollo,  is  proved  by
a  paflfage  in  m  Feftus,  where  he  fays,  that  he  was,  formerly,  called
aperta  at  Rome,  quod  patente  cortina  refponfa  cib  eo  dabantur.

I  do  not,  indeed,  find  that  any  worfhip  was  paid  by  the  Romans  to
Cybele  (which  is  the  next  obje&ion)  till  the  year  of  n  Rome  550,
when  this  goddefs,  which,  by  the  way,  was  nothing  but  a  ftone,  was
brought  to  Rome  from  Peffinus,  a  city  in  Phrygia,  with  great  ceremony.
But  it  muff  be  obferved,  that  this  ridiculous  goddefs  was  a  local  deity,
and  worfhiped  at  Peffinus,  not  at  Troy.

His  next  argument,  that  Minerva,  and  Vefta,  who  are  acknowledged
to  have  been  Trojan  deities,  were  not  known  to  the  firlf  Romans,
turns,  flatly,  againft  him :  Becaufe  the  Palladium,  which  Aeneas  is
faid,  by  all  hiftorians,  to  have  brought  with  him  into  Italy  from  Troy,
plainly,  refutes  his  objection  concerning  Minerva  :  And  the  inftitution

*  Genefis,  c.  x.  3.  k  Geogr.  facr.  B.  iii.  c.  9.  1  B.  v.  p.  355.  “  In  vcce  aperta .

“  Livy,  B.  xxix.  c.  u.

2  .  of


214  DISSERTATION  CONCERNING  THE


of  the  Vedals  among  the  Albans,  the  ancedors  of  the  Romans,  as
effectually,  deftroys  the  other  relating  to  Veda.  This  order  of
priedeffes  we  find,  by  °  Livy,  was  derived  from  the  Albans,  Alba ,
criundum  facer dotium.  And  our  author  will  tell  us,  in  the  fecond  book,
that  there  was  an  ancient  temple  of  Veda  at  Alba.

I  come  now  to  the  lad  objection  of  Bochart,  upon  which  he  feems
to  lay  the  greated  drefs ;  though,  in  my  opinion,  it  lead  deferves  it.
ft  is  this:  The  Latin  language,  fays  he,  has  borrowed  many  words
from  the  various  nations,  with  whom  the  Latines  had  any  commerce,
but  none  from  the  Phrygians.  To  prove  this,  he  has  ranfacked  all
the  old  Greek  lexicons,  and  fcholiads,  to  find  Phrygian  words;  of
which  he  has  amaffed  a  reafonable  number.  I  look  upon  it  as  a  very
lucky  circumdance  that  both  the  Phrygian  language,  and  characters
are,  fo  abfolutely,  lod,  that  no  trace  of  either  appears;  otherwife,  it  is
plain,  from  Bochart’s  manner,  that  we  fhould  have  been  overwhelmed
with  an  innundation  of  Phrygian  learning.  In  this  mafs  of  Phrygian
words,  he  owns  that,  though  none  of  them  were  borrowed  by  the
Latines,  many  were  adopted  by  the  Greeks.  This  concefiion,  which  is
fupported  by  the  tedimony  of  many  authors,  is  all  I  defire  :  For,  if
the  Greeks  ufed  any  of  thefe  Phrygian  words,  it  is  certain  that  the
fird  Romans  ufed  them  alfo ;  fince  both  the  language,  and  the  cha¬
racters  of  the  fird  Romans  were  the  fame  with  Thofe.  of  the  Greeks.
That  the  language  of  the  fird  Romans  fhould  be  Greek  will  not  be
wondered  at,  when  it  is  confidered  that  the  inhabitants  of  Latium
were,  for  the  mod  part,  originally,  Aborigines,  an  Arcadian  colony;
and  that  the  people,  who  then  lived  on  the  fpot,  where  Rome  was  after¬
wards  built,  were,  alfo,  Arcadians,  who  had  fettled  there  with  Evander.
This  Dionyfius  has,  already,  informed  us  of,  and  his  account  is  con¬
firmed  by  all  the  Greek  and  Roman  hidorians.  Their  language,  after¬
wards  indeed,  received  an  alteration  by  the  mixture  of  many  Italian
words,  that,  by  degrees,  corrupted  the  Greek  language,  which  the
Romans  had,  originally,  ufed  ;  %7ru  roje  roig  EAA yviKote  ovofxatn  tuv  IraXiKav
,  fays  p  Plutarch,  in  fpeaking  of  the  language,  fpoken  by
the  Romans  in  the  time  of  Romulus.  If  their  language  was  Greek,
the  characters  of  it  mud,  alfo,  have  been  Greek ;  and,  that  they  were

®  B.i,  c.  20.  rLife  of  Romulus.


ARRIVAL  OF  AENEAS  IN  ITALY.  215

fo,  appears  by  a  pafiage  in  our  q  author,  where  he  fays  that  the  terms
of  the  alliance,  entered  into  by  Tullius  with  the  Latin  cities,  were
ingraved  on  a  brazen  pillar  in  Greek  characters,  fuch  as  were,  an¬
ciently,  ufed  in  Greece  j  which  pillar,  he  fays,  flood  in  the  temple  of
Diana,  in  his  time.

Having  anfwered,  I  hope,  all  the  objections  urged  againfl  the  arrival
of  Aeneas  in  Italy,  I  fhall,  now,  offer  fome  proofs  in  fupport  of  it.  If
I  was  to  quote  the  authority  of  Virgil,  the  plan  of  whofe  Aeneid  is
formed  upon  this  faCt,  I  fuppofe  it  would  be  Laid  that  he  is  a  poet,
and,  confequently,  not  tied  down  to  hiftorical  truth.  But,  is  not  Homer
a  poet  alfo,  and  has  not  his  authority  been  infilled  on  to  prove  that
Aeneas,  and  his  poflerity  reigned  in  Phrygia  after  the  taking  of  Troy?
And  why  may  not  Virgil  be  prefumed  to  have  been  as  well  informed
of  what  palled  in  Italy,  his  own  country,  immediately  after  that  event,
as  Homer,  of  what  palfed  in  Phrygia  at  that  time,  a  country,  to  which
he  had  no  fort  of  relation  ?  Let  Homer,  therefore,  and  Virgil  be  laid
out  of  the  cafe,  and  let  the  truth  of  a  point  of  hiftory  be,  as  it  ought
to  be,  tried  by  hiflorians.  The  reader  has,  already,  feen  that  Dio-
nyfius,  and  all  the  Greek  and  Latin  hiflorians  he  has  quoted,  affirm
this  faCl,  and  the  authority  of  Dionyfius,  as  founded  on  That  of  thofe
authors,  ought  to  have  the  greater  weight,  becaufe  he  had  their  works
before  him,  and  the  modern  writers,  who  deny  it,  are  deprived  of
that  advantage.  This  being  the  date  of  the  cafe,  it  feems  to  me  little
lefs  abfurd  in  the  latter  to  cenfure  Dionyfius  for  having  advanced  this
faCl,  on  the  authority  of  thofe  hiflorians,  without  having  read  their
writings,  than  it  would  be  in  a  judge  to  condemn  a  man  without  hear¬
ing  the  proofs  he  had  to  offer  in  his  defence.

If  the  lofs  of  thefe  hiflorians  has  deprived  me  of  many  proofs  in
favor  of  Dionyfius,  it  has,  however,  faved  me  the  trouble  of  quoting  a
long  lift  of  Greek  and  Latin  authors,  wffiofe  reafons  we  may,  and  ought
to  fuppofe,  would  have  the  fame  effeCl  upon  us,  as  they  had  upon
him,  and  all  other  hiflorians,  who  have  written  upon  this  fubjeCl  5  that
is,  they  would  convince  us  of  the  reality  of  a  fad,  which  the  lofs
of  thofe  authors,  and,  poffibly,  the  affeClation  of  ereCting  great  edifices
with  few  materials,  have,  of  late  years,  brought  into  difpute.

9  B.  iv.  c.  26,


I  fhall.


2 1 6  DISSERTATION  CONCERNING  THE

I  fhall,  therefore,  content  myfelf  with  quoting  two  authors,  whom
Dionyfius  might  have  quoted,  and  did  not;  and,  after  them,  fome  of
thofe,  who  writ  after  he  publifhed  his  hiftory.

The  firft  I  (hall  mention  is  Saliuft,  whofe  authority  was  never,  I
think,  called  in  queftion,  though  his  ftyle  has  been  cenfured  by  men  of
more  delicacy,  than  judgement :  Nothing  can  be  more  explicit  than
what  he  fays  in  his  Catilinarian  war;  r urbem  Romani  (ficut  ego  accept)
condidere  atque  habuere  initio  frojani,  qui ,  Aenea  ducet  profugi ,  incertis
fedibus  vagabantur .

The  next  is  Varro,  the  greateft  antiquary  of  an  age,  in  which  Cicero
lived.  He  mentions  the  arrival  of  Aeneas  at  Laurentum  in  Italy,  as
attended  with  a  circumftance  not  heard  of  before,  nor  fmee,  I  believe,
but  once.  s  Ex  quo  die  Lrojd  eft  egreffus  Aeneas  Veneris ,  eum  per  diem
quotidie  Jlellam  vidijfe ,  donee  in  agrum  Laurent em  veniret ,  in  quo  earn
non  viderit  ulterius ;  qua  re  cognovit  terras  effe  fatales .

This  hiftorical  fad;  was  too  remarkable  to  efcape  the  notice  of  1  Livy,
who  relates  it  in  a  manner  peculiar  to  himfelf ;  fed  ad  major  a  initia
rerum  ducentibus  fat  is ,  primo  in  Macedoniam  [Aenea  m]  vemjfe ;  inde  hi
Siciliam  quaerentem  fedes  delatum  ;  ab  Sicilia ,  clajfe  Laurentem  agrum
tenuijje.  He,  then,  mentions  the  marriage  of  Aeneas  with  Lavinia,
the  daughter  of  Latinus,  king  of  the  Aborigines ;  the  building  of  Alba
by  Afcanius,  the  fon  of  Aeneas,  and  all  the  other  incidents,  which
Cluver,  and  Bochart  have  thought  fit  to  treat  as  fabulous.

After  this,  I  would  afk,  whether  any  hiftorical  fad:  of  an  ancient
date  can  be  attefted  by  authors  of  greater  authority  ?  And  whether
an  attempt  to  fubvert  the  credibility  of  a  fad:,  fo  attefted,  by  conjec¬
tures,  forced  conftrudions,  feraps  of  quotations  quoted  by  other  authors,
and  vague  aftertions,  unfupported  by  the  teftimony  of  a  fingle  hifto-
rian,  is  not  an  attempt  to  transform  all  hiftory  into  romance,  to  deftroy
the  ufe,  by  deftroying  the  credit,  of  it,  and  to  deprive  mankind  of  the
beft  guides  both  in  public  and  private  life,  examples  ?

We  have  feen  what  the  opinion  of  the  Roman  hiftorians  was  con¬
cerning  the  arrival  of  Aeneas  in  Italy,  and  the  defeent  of  the  Romans
from  the  Trojans.  Let  us,  now,  examine  what  opinion  the  leading
men  among  the  Romans,  and  the  Roman  fenate  itfelf,  entertained  of

r  C.  6.  *  Rer.  divin.  B.  ii.  *  B.  i.  c.  j.


thele


ARRIVAL  OF  AENEAS  IN  ITALY.  217

thefe  events.  In  the  564th  year  of  Rome,  Lucius  Scipio,  and  Caius
Laelius  being  confuls,  the  former,  who  was  brother  to  the  fir  ft  Scipio
Africanus,  palled  the  Hellefpont  with  his  army  in  order  to  carry  on
the  war  againft  Antiochus.  In  his  march,  he  came  to  Ilium,  the
ancient  Troy,  where  the  llienfes,  and  the  Romans  congratulated  one
another  j  the  former  faying  that  Aeneas,  and  his  generals  went  from
thence  j  and  the  latter,  that  they  were  defcended  from  the  llienfes :
And  the  joy  of  both  was  as  exceffive  as  That  between  parents,  and
their  children  after  a  long  abfence.  The  llienfes  were  delighted  to  fee
their  defendants,  after  they  had  conquered  the  well;,  and  Africa,
come  to  claim  Afia,  as  their  hereditary  kingdom  ;  adding,  that  the
deftrudion  of  Troy  was  a  defirable  event,  fince  it  was  followed  by  fo
happy  a  refurredion.  The  Romans,  on  the  other  fide,  could  not
fatisfy  their  defire  of  vifiting  their  paternal  habitation,  the  nurfery  of
their  anceflcrs,  and  the  temples,  and  images  of  their  gods.  u  Cum
ingrejji  AJiam  Romani  Ilion  veniffent ,  mutua  gratulatio  Ilienjium  ac
Romanorum  fuit.  Ilienfibus  Aeneam ,  caeterofque  cum  eo  duces ,  a  fe  pro¬
ject  os  ;  Romanis  fe  ah  his  procreatos  refer entibus .  T’antaque  laetitia

omnium  fuit ,  quanta  ejfe  pcji  longum  tempus  inter  parentes  et  liberos  folet.
fire  ah  at  llienfes  nepotes  fuos ,  occidente  et  Africa  domitd ,  AJiam  ut  are  it  um
regnum  Audi  care ;  optabilem  T’rojae  ruinam  fuiffe,  dicentes ,  ut  tarn
fcliciter  renafceretur  :  Contra ,  Romanos ,  a-vilos  lares ,  et  incunabula  ma¬
jor  um,  templaque  ac  deorum  Jimulacra  inexplebile  defiderium  videndi  tene -
bat .  After  the  defeat  of  Antiochus,  the  Roman  fenate  fent  ten  perfons,
the  moft  confiderable  of  their  body,  into  Afia  with  particular  inftruc-
tions  concerning  the  terms  of  the  peace,  which  Antiochus  had  folicited,
and  with  full  powers,  w  libera  mandat  a,  with  regard  to  every  thing  elfe..
After  their  arrival  in  Afia,  they  rewarded,  or  punifhed  the  cities  in
that  country  according  to  their  merit  towards,  or  their  offences  againfir,
the  Roman  people.  And,  as  none  of  their  ads  were,  afterwards,
refcinded,  or,  even,  altered  by  the  fenate  of  Rome,  they  muft  be
looked  upon  as  the  ads  of  the  fenate  itfelf.  Among  others,  who;
received  marks  of  favor  from  thefe  embafiadors,  the  llienfes  were
diftinguifhed,  not  fo  much,  as  x  Livy  fays,  on  account  of  any  late  fer-
vices  they  had  done  to  the  Romans,  as  in  memory  of  their  origin
“  Juftin.  B.  xxxi.  c.  8.  v  Livy,  B.  xxxvii.  c.  56.  *  I>.  xxxviii.  c.  39.

F  f


In


21 8  DISSERTATION  CONCERNING  THE

In  conflderation  of  which,  they  added  Rhoeteum,  and  Gergithum  to
their  territories.  For  the  fame  reafon,  they  made  the  inhabitants  of
Dardanum  free  j  Ilienjibus  Rhoeteum ,  et  Gergithum  addiderunt ;  non  tam
ob  recentia  merita ,  quam  originum  memoria.  Eadem  et  Dardanum
liberandi  caufa  fuit.  It  is  remarkable  that  one  of  tbefe  ten  embaffadors
was  Lucius  Aemilius  Paullus,  ythe  worthy  fon  of  Aemilius  Paullus,
who  loft  his  life  in  the  fervice  of  his  country,  at  the  unfortunate  battle
of  Cannae.  zHis  fon,  twenty  two  years  after  this  embafty,  being
conful  for  the  fecond  time,  overcame  Perfeus,  and  reduced  Macedon
to  a  Roman  province.  a  He  was  mailer  of  all  the  Latin  and  Greek
learning,  and  took  particular  care  to  inftrudt  his  fons  in  both  :  He
had,  alfo,  a  great  tafte  for  fculpture,  painting,  and  all  the  liberal  arts.
Thefe  things  are  mentioned  to  let  the  reader  fee  the  improbability,  that
a  man  of  fuch  qualifications  could  be  impofed  upon  in  fo  effential  a
point  of  the  Roman  hiftory,  as  That,  which  deduced  the  defcent  of
the  Romans  from  the  Ilienfes.  The  reader  will  remember  that  the
Roman  fenate,  when  they  granted  thefe  favors  to  this  people,  were  an
affembly  of  the  wifeft,  braveft,  and  moft  learned  men,  then,  in  the
known  world,  unawed  by  any  power,  either  foreign,  or  domeftic,  and
could  be  influenced,  in  this  determination,  by  nothing  but  the  notoriety
of  the  fa£t,  and  their  piety  to  their  anceftors.  This  was  not  the  only
decree  of  the  Roman  fenate  in  favor  of  the  Ilienfes,  though  we  are
not  acquainted  with  the  particulars  of  the  reft:  But,  that  there  were
others  of  the  like  tendency,  appears  by  the  following  words  of  Cal-
liftratus :  b  lliejifibus  et  propter  inclytam  nobilitatem  civitatis,  et  propter
conjun&ionem  originis  Romanae,  jam  antiquitus ,  et  fenatus-confultis,
et  conftitutionibus  principum  plenijjima  immunitas  tributa  eft.

I  lay  not  the  leaft  ftrefs  on  the  conftitutions  of  the  Roman  emperors;
the  firft  of  whom,  Julius  Caefar,  had  a  mind  to  have  it  thought  that
he  derived  his  defcent  from  lulus,  one  of  the  followers  of  Aeneas,  if
not  his  fon :  I  fay,  I  lay  no  ftrefs  on  the  conceffions  made  to  the
Ilienfes  in  Caefar’s  time,  becaufe  the  Roman  fenate  were,  then,  fo  far
awed  by  his  illegal  power,  and  had  fo  far  degenerated  from  the  noble
freedom  of  their  anceftors,  as  to  beftowthe  grofleft  flattery  upon  every
whim,  which  the  wantonnefs  of  his  exaltation  could  fuggeft  to  him  :
y  Paterc.  B.  i.  c.  9.  z  Plutarch’s  life  of  Aemilius.  aId*  ib,  b  In  lege.  17.

And/


ARRIVAL  OF  AENEAS  IN  ITALY.  219

And,  as  he  had  free  liberty  to  derive  his  defcent  from  any  hero  of
antiquity  he  pleafed,  if  he  had  thought  fit  to  derive  it  from  Alexander,
or  his  horfe  Bucephalus,  they  would  have  decreed  him  to  be  defcended,
in  a  right  line,  from  either  of  thofe  heroes.

I  have,  already,  lamented  the  lofs  of  the  many  Greek  and  Roman
hiftorians,  whom  Dionyfius  has  quoted  to  prove  the  arrival  of  Aeneas
in  Italy ;  and  muff,  now,  lament  the  lofs  of  Sifyphus  Cous,  Corinnus,
Dares  Phrygius,  DiCtys  Cretenfis,  and  Syagrus,  whom  he  has  not
quoted;  and  of  whom  the  four  firft  lived  in  the  time  of  the  Trojan
war,  and  writ  the  hiftory  of  it ;  and  the  lafh  treated  the  fame  fubjeCt
in  verfe  many  years  before  Homer.  As  their  writings  were,  probably,
in  being  at  the  time  Dionyfius  writ  his  hiftory,  if  they  had  contradicted
the  authors  he  quotes,  he  could  not  have  failed  to  mention  this  con¬
tradiction  ;  though  he  was  under  no  neceflity  of  mentioning  their
conformity.


F  f


T  H  E


THE


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES

O  F

DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSENSIS.


THE  SECOND  BOOK,


E  city  of  Rome  is  fituated  in  the  weftern  parts  of
Italy,  clofe  to  the  river  Tiber,  which  falls  into  the
Tyrrhene  fea  about  the  middle  of  the  coafi: ;  from
which  fea,  the  city  is  diftant  one  hundred  and  twenty
ftadia.  The  firft  known  pofteffors  of  this  fpot  were  certain
Barbarians,  natives  of  the  country,  called  Siceli,  who  were,
alfo,  matters  of  many  other  parts  of  Italy,  and  of  whom  not
a  few  vifible  monuments  remain  to  this  day ;  among  which
are,  even,  fome  names  of  places,  faid  to  be  Sicelian  names,
which  fhew  they,  formerly,  inhabited  this  country.  The
Aborigines,  defcended  from  the  Oenotri,  who  inhabited
1  the  fea  coaft  from  Taras  to  Pofidonia,  drove  out  this  people,
and  poffefled  themfelves  of  the  place.  Thefe  were  the  holy

Annotations  on  the  Second  Book,

*•  T>iv  ui to  Txgotvlos  ncureiJ'wvi^f  iv.  See  the  235th  annotation  on
the  firft  book.

youth,


Book  II.  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I  TIE  S,  etc.

youth,  confecrated  to  the  gods,  according  to  their  cuPcom,
and  Pent  out  by  their  parents,  as  it  is  Paid,  to  inhabit  that
country,  which  2  the  god  fliould  give  them.  The  Oenotri
were  an  Arcadian  nation,  who  lePt  the  country,  then,  called
Lycaonia,  and,  now,  Arcadia,  op  their  own  accord,  in  Pearch
op  a  better  under  the  condud:  oP  Oenotrus,  the  Fon  oFLycaon,
Prom  whom  the  nation  received  its  name.  While  the  Abo-,
rigiaes  were  in  pofleilion  op  thefe  parts,  the  firft,  who  co¬
habited  with  them,  were  the  PelaPgi,  a  wandering  people,
who  came  Prom  a  country,  then,  called  Haemonia,  and,
now,  Theflaly,  where  they  had  lived  Pome  time.  APter  the
PelaPgi,  came  the  Arcadians  Prom  the  city  oP  Pallantium,
who  had  choFen  For  their  leader,  Evander,  the  Pon  oP  Mer¬
cury,  and  oP  the  nymph  Themis :  ThePe  built  a  village  upon
one  oP  the  Peven  hills,  that  ftands  near  the  middle  of  Rome,
calling  the  place  Pallantium,  Prom  their  mother  city  in
Arcadia.  Not  long  aPter,  Hercules,  coming  into  Italy,  in
his  return  home,  with  his  army  Prom  Ery  thea,  Pome  part  op  it,
which  was  lePt  behind,  confifting  oP  Greeks,  Fettled  near
Pallantium,  upon  another  oP  the  hills,  that,  now,  make  part


*•  T 7ro  tx  Axiy.ovix.  Sure  the  Latin
tranflators  had  forgotten  what  our
author  faid  in  the  firft  book,  concern¬
ing  this  cuftom  of  confecrating  the
youth  to  fome  god,  and  then  fending
them  out  in  fearch  oftlfe  country  that
god  fliould  give  them  ^  otherwife,  they
would  never  have  rendered  this  paffage,
qJhe  country ,  which  fortune  Jhould  give
them .  However,  M.  ***  has  followed
them-,  and  le  Jay  has  not  fucceeded
much  better  in  faying  fins  la  pro  teuton


des  dieux ,  generally.  Axipovuv  or  Aat-
/jioiv  is  explained  by  our  author  himfelf
in  the  place  before  mentioned,  6  S-so?  »

KcflovOfAOlC&ettV  CiTTf^XVlOfXiVOl,  the  god,  to

whom  they  had  been  confecrated ,  before
they  were  fent  out.  As  inoft  of  the
remarkable  things,  relating  to  the  ori¬
ginal  hiftory,  of  which  this  is  only  a
recapitulation,  have  been,  already,  ex¬
plained  in  the  firft  book,  the  reader
will  give  me  leave  to  refer  him  to  thofe
annotations.

of


222  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

of  the  city  of  Rome:  This  was,  then,  named,  by  the  in¬
habitants,  the  Saturnian  hill ;  but  is,  now,  called  the  Capi-
toline  hill,  by  the  Romans.  The  greateft  part  of  thefe  were
Epei,  who  abandoned  the  city  of  Elis,  after  their  country
had  been  laid  wafte  by  Hercules.

II.  The  ftxteenth  generation  after  the  Trojan  war,  the
Albans  3  built  upon  both  thefe  places,  and  furrounded  them
with  a  wall,  and  a  ditch :  For,  till  then,  there  were  only
cottages  of  neatherds,  and  fhepherds,  and  huts  of  other
herdfmen ;  the  land  thereabouts  yielding  plenty  of  grafs,  not
only,  forwinter,but,alfo,for  fummer  pafture,  by  reafon  of  the
rivers,  that  refrefh,  and  water  it.  The  Albans  were  a  mixed
nation,  compofed  of  Arcadians,  of  Pelafgi,  ofthofe  Epei,  who
came  from  Elis,  and,  laft  of  all,  of  the  Trojans,  who,  with
Aeneas,  the  fon  of  Anchifes,  and  Venus,  came  into  Italy
after  the  taking  of  Troy.  It  is  probable  that  fome  Bar¬
barians,  alfo,  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood,  or  the  re¬
mains  of  the  ancient  inhabitants,  were  mixed  with  thofe
Greeks.  But  all  thefe  nations,  having  loft  their  national
appellations,  were  called,  by  one  common  name,  Latines,
from  Latinus,  who  had  been  king  of  this  country.  The
city,  therefore,  was  built  by  thefe  nations,  the  four  hun¬
dred  and  thirty  fecond  year  after  the  taking  of  Troy,
and  in  the  feventh  Olympiad.  The  leaders  of  this  colony
were  twin  brothers,  and  of  the  royal  family ;  Romulus  being¬
s'  Xwomfytn.  This  word  is  rendered  For  the  Albans  did  not  only  inhabit
by  all  the  tranflators,  except  le  Jay,  thefe  two  hills,  but  inclofed  them  within
who  has  left  it  out,  as  if  our  author  the  walls  of  their  new  city.  And  this
had  faid  <rwoiw<n,  which  is  not  enough :  is  the  fenfe  of  the  word  ewoiKify.

the


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  ARN  A  S  SEN  SI  S.  223
the  name  of  one,  and  Remus  of  the  other :  By  the  mother’s
fide  they  were  defcended  from  Aeneas,  and,  confequently,
Dardanidae.  It  is  hard  to  fay,  with  any  certainty,  who  was
their  father :  However,  the  Romans  believe  them  to  have
been  the  fons  of  Mars.  But  a  conteft  arifing  between  them
about  the  command,  they  did  not  both  continue  leaders  of
the  colony  :  For,  one  of  them  being  flain  in  the  battle,
Romulus,  who  furvived,  became  the  founder  of  the  city,
and  called  it  after  his  own  name.  The  great  numbers  of
which  this  colony  had,  originally,  confifted,  when  fent  from
Alba,  being,  now,  reduced  to  a  few,  the  remainder  amounted
to  no  more  than  three  thoufand  foot,  and  three  hundred
horfe.  :

III.  After  the  ditch,  therefore,  was  finifhed,  the  wall
perfected,  the  necefiary  ftrudture  of  the  houfes  completed,
and  the  juncture  required  they  fliould  confider,  alfo,  what
form  of  government  they  were  to  eftablifh,  Romulus  called
the  people  together  by  the  advice  of  his  grandfather,  who
had  fuggefted  to  him  what  he  was  to  fay,  and  told  them  that,
indeed,  “  the  city,  confidering  it  was,  newly,  built,  was,  fuf-
“  ficiently,  adorned  both  with  public  and  private  edifices :
“  But  he  defired  they  would  all  confider  that  thefe  were
“  not  the  moll  valuable  things  in  cities :  For,  neither,  in
a  foreign  wars,  are  deep  ditches,  and  high  walls  fufficient
<<  to  give  the  inhabitants  an  4  undifturbed  aflurance  of  their

D

+•  Ar^xy^ovoi  calvi^iug  uVoA» j4"v  vrctoa.-  afraid,  is  as  little  exadt  with  regard  to
The  tranflators  have  exprefled  the  thought,  as  to  the  Greek  words,
this  fentence  differently.  Sylburgius  Un  remp  art  entierement  fur  pour  metre  les
has  faid  certam  fpem  afferre ,  which  I  am  Bourgois  a  convert ,  in  M.  ***,  is  liable

“  own


224  ROMAN  ANT  I  QJJ  I  TIES  OF  Rook  II

u  own  fafety,  but  only  to  fecure  them  from  being  furprifed
C£  by  a  fudden  incurfion  of  the  enemy  ;  neither,  in  civil
“  commotions,  can  private  houfes  afford  a  fafe  retreat ;
tc  thefe  being  contrived  for  the  comfort  of  leifure,  and
“  tranquillity,  and  neither  prevent  mifchief  in  thofe,  who
u  spracHfe  it  againd  their  neighbours,  nor  give  confidence
t£  to  thofe,  againfl;  whom  it  is  praCHfed:  That  no  city,
£c  hitherto,  fupported,  alone,  with  thefe  decorations,  ever
“  attained  to  greatnefs,  and  a  lading  happinefs ;  nor,  from  a
“  want  of  magnificence,  either  in  public,  or  private  build-
“  ings,  was  ever  hindered  from  being  great  and  happy :
u  But,  he  told  them,  there  were  other  things,  that  pre-
“  ferve,  and  aggrandize  cities  :  In  foreign  wars,  drength  in
ct  arms ;  which  is  acquired  by  courage,  and  exercife  ;  and,
“  in  civil  commotions,  unanimity  among  the  citizens.  This,
“  he  faid,  the  temperance,  and  judice  of  each  particular
cc  citizen  would,  mod  effectually,  adminider  to  the  whole
“  body:  That  thofe,  who  employ  themfelves  in  the  exercife
<c  of  arms,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  are  maders  of  their  paf-
u  dons,  are  the  greated  ornaments  to  their  country  ;  and


to  the  laft  of  thofe  exceptions.  On  ne
devcit  'pas  compter  d'etre  en  feurete ,  is
better  in  le  Jay.  It  is  certain  that
ffeohffias  v7ro\ijrlit  fignihes  more  than
fafety  ;  it  fignifies  fecnrity.

s'  To  i?n^Aivov,  etc.  Stephens,  Ca-
faubon,  and  Portus,  after  great  pains
to  reftore  this  fentence,  have  left  it
out  of  joint.  The  reafon  is,  they  had
never  feen  the  Vatican  manufcript,
which,  by  reading  e7n€*A6vov,  inftead


of  t7nGxAiv<Hv,  as  it  ftands  in  all  the
editions,  has,  in  a  great  meafure,
cleared  up  the  fenfe.  But  there  is  one
word,  which  that  manufcript  has  fuf-
fered  to  remain,  and  which  none  of
thofe  learned  men  have  thought  of
altering,  that  is,  which  can

have  nothing  to  do  here  :  For  which
reafon,  I  would  lubftitute  fiiZimivoii  in
its  room.


c<  thefe


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  ICA  RN  A  S  SEN  SIS.  225

u  thefe  are  the  men,  who  provide  both  the  commonwealth
<£  with  impregnable  walls,  and  themfelves  with  a  fafe  retreat.
“  That  the  form  of  government  fupplies  thofe,  who  have,
“  prudently,  infiituted  it,  with  6  men  of  bravery,  and  juftice,
u  and  who  pradtife  every  other  virtue ;  while,  on  the  other
<c  fi.de,  bad  inftitutions  render  men  cowardly,  and  rapacious,
“  and  the  flaves  of  foul  defires.  He  added,  that  he  had
“  been  informed  by  men  of  age,  and  great  knowledge  in
<£  hiftory,  that  of  many  numerous  colonies,  planted  in  fruitful
*£  countries,  fome,  by  falling  into  feditions,  had  been,  im-
*c  mediately,  defiroyed;  others,  after  a  fhort  refiftance,  forced
££  to  become  fubjedl  to  their  neighbours,  and  7  to  exchange
££  both  their  fruitful  country  for  a  barren  land,  and  their
££  liberty  for  flavery :  While  others,  lefs  numerous,  fettled
<£  in  places,  not  altogether  fertil,  have,  in  the  firft  place,
££  continued  to  be  free  themfelves,  and,  afterwards,  to  com-
“  mand  others :  And  that  the  misfortunes  of  the  numerous


6*  etc.  Hudfon  has

given  us  various  Latin  translations  of
this  fentence  •,  two  of  which  have  been
followed  by  the  French  tranflators.
But  every  one  of  thefe  verfions  fup-
pofes  that  our  author  intended  to  make
the  men  of  bravery,  and  juftice  ferve
as  models  to  the  legiftators :  Whereas,
1  underftand  his  fenfe  to  be  that  the
form  of  government,  inftituted  by
thefe  legiQators,  will  infpire  the  others
with  bravery,  and  a  love  of  juftice.
And  this,  I  think,  is  confirmed  by
what  he  fays  prefently  after,  that  the
happinefs,  or  unhappinefs,  of  colonies
is  owing  to  nothing  fo  much  as  to
their  different  forms  of  government.
But  the  reader  will  determine  which

VOL.  I.


of  thefe  interpretations  is  beft  fupport-
ed  by  the  words  of  the  text.

7'  TV  TUtyv  Jnx\\oc%a&oit>

I  have  taken  a  liberty  in  this  place,
which  I  have,  very  feldom,  allowed
myfelf.  There  is  fuch  a  falfenefs  in
this  expreffion,  avh  tsjj  naenlovo;

T w  ^eigovot  3ici\Koc%x<&cii,  that  I

cannot  think  our  author,  who  was  fo
juft  a  critic,  as  well  as  fo  accurate  a
writer,  could  ever  fuffer  this  expreffion
to  efcape  from  his  pen.  The  fmali
alteration  I  would  make  in  reading

oty.oi  ry  T\J%y

will,  I  hope,  be  thought  to  correct
this  inaccuracy  of  expreffion,  without
making  any  alteration  in  the  fenfe.

G  g  (£  colonies,


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.


“  colonies,  and  the  happinefs  of  thofe,  that  were  lefs  fo,
“  flowed  from  no  other  caufe  than  th£  form  of  their  re-
££  fpective  governments.  If,  therefore,  there  was  but  one
“  fort  of  government  received  by  all  men,  and  calculated  to
“  render  cities  happy,  the  choice  would  not  be  difficult:  But
“  he  was  told,  he  faid,  there  were  various  forms  of  govern-
<£  ment  both  among  the  Greeks,  and  Barbarians  ;  of  all
££  which,  three  were,  chiefly,  commended  by  thofe,  who
££  had  experienced  them :  However,  that  8  none  of  them
££  was  perfect,  each  having  fome  inbred  evils,  that  accom-
££  pany  it,  which  created  great  difficulty  in  the  choice.  He,
££  therefore,  defired  them  to  deliberate  at  leifure,  and  let  him
££  know,  whether  they  would  be  governed  by  a  Angle  perfon,
££  or  by  a  few;  or,  whether  they  would,  9 under  proper
C£  laws,  commit  the  adminiftration  of  the  commonwealth  to
££  the  whole  body  of  the  people  :  And,  which  form  of  go-
££  vernment  foever  you  fliall  think  fit  to  eftablifh,  fays  he,  I


8’  Kcil  Txlwv  'ddif.UXV  &VSil  TCdV  ZVOhil&UV

«Aix£<vvj,  ■&(>o<retvoti  Js  nvoa  wotty  x>?£a?
< rvp<Dv%f .  I  do  not  fo  much  wonder
that  the  other  commentators  have  not
taken  notice  of  the  analogy  between
our  author,  and  a  Polybius,  in  treating
this  fubjedf,  as  that  Cafaubon,  who  has
publilhed  a  very  fine  edition  of  the
latter,  fhould  not  remember  it :  How¬
ever,  as  I  have  tranfiated  that  frag¬
ment  of  Polybius,  it  would  be  inex-
eufable  in  me  not  to  lay  that  paffage
before  the  reader,  that  he  may  fee  in
what  manner  our  author  bus  taken  the
fenfe,  without  taking  the  words.  Po¬


lybius  fays,  Tluv  aroAJ««?  ecV Ayv,

HXl  xotloi  [J.I0CV  <TVV£$Y!'/.U<;  JwotfJUV  £TJC(paA{J

yiyvflxi.  And,  again,  T m  zvohileiuv
cvfyntloti  nofi  x  $v<nv  motry,  kcu  zragETrelott

r i?  kockix.  I  believe  the  reader  will  find
that,  notwithftanding  the  thought  in
both  is  the  fame,  our  author  has  much
the  advantage  in  the  expreffion.

9‘  E fa  vofMsg  KofastitrxfAivoi)  etc.  If  the
reader  pleafes  to  compare  the  text,  as
it  Hands  in  the  Vatican  manufcript,
with  the  reading  of  the  editions,  he
will  fee  how  much  we  are  beholden  to
that  manufcript  for  the  reftitution  of
this  period.


8  B.  vi.  p.  458.


C£  fhall,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  SSENSIS.  227

“  fhall,  readily,  comply  with  it,  and  neither  think  myfelf
<c  unworthy  to  command,  nor  refufe  to  obey.  I  am  fatisfied.

“  with  the  honors  you  have  conferred  on  me,  fir  ft,  by  ap-
“  pointing  me  leader  of  the  colony,  and,  afterwards,  by
“  giving  my  name  to  the  city  :  For,  of  thefe,  neither  a
“  foreign  war,  nor  a  civil  diflenfion,  neither  time,  that
<c  deftroyer  of  all  great  things,  nor  any  other  ftroke  of  angry
“  fortune  can  deprive  me :  But,  thefe  honors,  both  living,
a  and  dead,  I  fhall  enjoy  for  ever.”

IV.  This  was  the  fpeech,  that  Romulus,  by  the  direction,
as  I  have  faid,  of  his  grandfather,  made  to  the  people :  And
they,  having  confulted  together  by  themfelves,  returned  this
anfwer  :  “  We  do  not,  at  all,  defire  a  new  form  of  govern-
“  ment,  nor  to  change  That,  which  our  anceftors  have  ap-
“  proved  of  as  the  beft,  and  delivered  down  to  us :  In  this,  we
“  fhew,  both  a  deference  for  the  fenfeof  our  elders,  whofe  great
“  prudence  we  admire  in  eftablifiiing  it,  and  our  own  fatif-
“  fadlion  in  our  prefent  condition:  For  we  could  not,  with
“  reafon,  find  fault  with  an  inftitution,  that  has  afforded
“  us,  under  our  kings,  the  greateft  of  human  bleffings,
“  liberty,  and  the  command  of  others.  This,  therefore,
u  is  our  refolution  concerning  the  form  of  government :
“  And  this  honor,  we  conceive,  none  has  fo  good  a  title  to,
“  as  yourfelf,  by  reafon  of  your  being  of  the  royal  family,
as  well  as  of  your  virtue;  but,  above  all,  becaufe  you  have
“  been  the  leader  of  our  colony,  and  have  convinced  us  of
“  your  great  fpirit,  and  great  prudence ;  not  fo  much  by
your  words,  as  by  your  a&ions.”  Romulus,  hearing  this,

G  g  2  -  faid;


228  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  T  I  E  S  OF  Book  II.


faid  ;  “  It  was  a  great  fatisfa&ion  to  him  to  be  judged
<c  worthy  of  the  kingdom  :  But  that  he  fhould  not  accept
“  that  honor  until  the  gods  fhould,  by  favourable  omens,
u  confirm  their  choice.”


V.  And  they,  alfo,  approving  of  this,  he  appointed  a  day,
in  which  he  defigned  to  confult  the  gods  concerning  the
command  they  had  offered  him :  And,  when  the  time  was
come,  he  rofe  by  break  of  day,  and  went  out  of  his  tent :
Then,  ftanding  abroad,  10  in  a  void  place,  after  the  cuftomary
facrifice,  he  prayed  to  Jupiter,  the  king,  and  to  the  reft  of  the
gods,  whom  he  had  chofen  for  the  patrons  of  this  colony,
that,  if  it  was  their  pleafure  he  fhould  be  king  of  the  city,
they  would  reveal  it  by  fome  heavenly  figns :  This  prayer
being  ended,  a  flafh  of  lightning  ran  from  the  left  to  the
right.  The  Romans,  upon  the  information,  either  of  the
Tyrrhenians,  or  of  their  anceftors,  “look  upon  the  lightning.


10*  Ev  I  much  doubt

whether  this  fignihes  en  tin  lieu  pur ,  as
M.  *  *  *  has  rendered  it,  after  the  ex¬
ample  of  the  Latin  tranflators  ;  be-
caufe,  our  author  fays  nothing  con¬
cerning  the  confecration  of  the  place.

I  have  chofen  rather  to  render  it  a  void
place ,  that  is,  a  place  free  from  any  ob-
ftruftion  ;  in  the  fame  manner  as  b  A-
riftophanes  fays  ev  ;  and  as  c  Li¬

vy  ufes  the  word  pur  us ,  Poftero  die
f ignis  collatis  dimicaturum  puro  ac  pa-
tenti  campo.

11  •  T*0fv7 ott  S'c  Pa/jtoiiot,  etc.  The
reafon,  given  by  our  author,  why  the
Romans  looked  upon  the  lightning,
that  appeared  on  the  left  hand,  to  be

b  E xxto.  f.  320.  CB.  xxiv.  c.  14.


an  aufpicious  omen,  is  much  more
plaufible  (according  to  the  aftrono-
my  then  received)  than  that  gram¬
matical  reafon,  given  by  d  Plutarch,
who  fays  that  fmijler  is  derived  from
f here .  It  muft  be  obferved  that  the
Romans  looked  upon  the  figns,  that
appeared  on  their  left,  to  be  favourable;
and  that  the  Greeks  looked  on  Thofe,
that  appeared  on  their  right,  to  be  fo  :
The  reafon  of  which  difference,  was,
that  the  former  turned  their  faces  to
the  eaft  in  performing  thefe  augural
ceremonies ;  and  the  latter,  to  the
north.  This  paffage  of  our  author
proves  the  firft;  to  which  I  fhall  add
another,  out  of e  Livy,  relating  to  the

d  Rom.  Qiiaef.  eB.  i.  c.  18.


that


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSEN  SIS.  229

that  pafles  from  the  left  to  the  right,  as  a  happy  omen  :
Their  reafon  is,  according  to  my  opinion,  that  the  belt  feat,
and  ftation  for  thofe,  who  make  augural  obfervations,  is
That,  which  looks  towards  the  eaft ;  from  v/hence,  both
the  fun,  and  moon  rife,  as  well  as  the  planets,  and  fixed  ftars;
and  the  revolution  of  the  heavens,  by  which  all. things  con¬
tained  in  them  are,  fometimes,  above  the  earth,  and,  fome-
times,  beneath  it,  from  thence  begins  its  circular  motion  :
Now,  to  thofe,  who  turn  their  faces  to  the  eaft,  the  northern
parts  of  the  world  are  on  the  left ;  and  the  fouthern,  on  the
right ;  and  the  former  are  looked  upon  as  more  honourable
than  the  latter  :  For,  in  the  northern  parts,  the  pole  of  the
axis,  upon  which  the  earth  turns,  is  elevated ;  and,  and  of
the  five  circles,  which  incompafs  the  fphere,  That,  called
the  ardlic  circle,  always  appears  on  that  fide ;  while,  in  the
fouthern  parts,  the  other,  called  the  antardlic  circle,  is
deprefied,  and  invifible  to  us.  There  is  reafon,  therefore,  to
look  upon  thofe  figns  in  the  heavens,  and  the  air,  to  be  the
beft,  which  appear  on  the  beft  fide  :  And  fince,  thofe  parts,
that  are  turned  towards  the  eaft,  have  the  pre-eminence


inauguration  of  Numa  Pompilius  :
Augur  ad  lacvam  ejus ,  capite  velato ,
fedem  cepit ,  dextrd  manu  baculum  fine
nodo  aduncum  tenens ,  quern  lituum  appel-
laverunt.  Inde  ubi  projpeffu  in  urbem
agrumque  capto ,  deos  precatus ,  regionem
ab  oriente  ad  occafum  ■  determinavit ;
dextras  ad  meridiem  partes ,  laevas  ad
j'eptentrionem  ejje  dixit.  By  this,  it
appears  that  his  face  was  turned  to  the


eaft.  And,  that  the  Greeks  turned
their  faces  to  the  north,  upon  thefe
occafions,  may  be  proved  by  many
paftages  out  of  their  moft  approved
writers  but  I  fhall  content  myfelf
with  This  of  f  Homer,  who  makes
Hebtor  fay  thus  to  Polydamas.

Tuvalt  ju(1d!g£7T0fdy  aS  uKiyi^u?,
E/t’  tTTl  ICOtTl  T  J^jAiCy  T2,

E<t’  €7r’  ccpifiga  TOij'fySrch  £b<£ov


f  Iliad  /x.  f.  238.


over


230  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

over  the  weftern  parts,  and  of  the  eaftern  parts  them  felves,
the  north-eaft  are  higher  than  the  fouth-weft,  thofe  ought
to  be  efteemed  the  beft.  But  fome  write  that  the  anceftors
of  the  Romans  long  ago,  and,  before  they  had  learned  it
from  the  Tyrrhenians,  looked  upon  the  lightning,  that  came
from  the  left,  as  a  happy  omen :  For,  they  fay,  that,  when
Afcanius,  the  fon  of  Aeneas,  was  warred  upon,  and  befieged
by  the  Tyrrhenians  under  the  command  of  Mezentius,  their
king,  and  upon  the  point  of  fallying  out  of  the  town  for  the
laft  time,  his  affairs  being,  now,  defperate,  he  prayed  to
Jupiter,  and  to  the  reft  of  the  gods,  with  lamentation,  to
incourage  this  fally  with  fome  happy  omens ;  and,  12  the
fky  being  clear,  it  lightened  on  the  left ;  and  that  this  battle,
being  attended  with  a  moft  happy  event,  his  pofterity,  ever
after,  looked  upon  this  lign  as  fortunate.

VI.  After  Romulus,  therefore,  had,  upon  that  occalion,
received  the  fandtion  of  heaven,  he  called  the  people  toge¬
ther  ;  and,  having  given  them  an  account  of  the  aufpicious
omens,  he  was  chofen  king  by  them,  and  inftituted  this
cuftom  to  be  obferved  by  all  his  fucceffors,  that  none  of
them  fhould  accept  the  dignity  of  king,  or  any  other  ma-
giftracy,  until,  even  the  gods  had  given  a  fign  of  their  ap¬
probation:  And  this  cuftom,  relating  to  the  aufpices,  con¬
tinued  to  be,  long,  obferved  by  the  Romans,  not  only,  under

12>  AiOgtccf  Hc>jf  oc  tuv  ctgisigvv  byRemulus.  Afcanius  addrefies  his

rov  v(>oivQv.  This  tradition  Virgil  has  prayers  to  Jupiter,  after  which,  sVirgil
adapted  to  the  coup  d’ejfay  of  Afcanius,  fays,

when  he  was  befieged  by  the  Rutuli,  Audilt ,  et  cadi  genii  or  de  parte  ferend

commanded  by  Turnus,  and  infulted  Intonuit  laevum.

£  Aen.  ix.  ji.  630.


their


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HA  LICA  RN  ASSENSIS.  231

their  kings,  but,  alfo,  after  the  diflolution  of  monarchy,  in
the  elections  of  their  confuls,  praetors,  and  other  legal
magiftrates :  But  it  is  aifufed  at  this  time,  the  appearance
of  it  being  preferved  only  for  form  fake:  For,  thofe,  who
are  defigned  magiftrates,  pafs  the  night  in  tents,  and,  riling
by  break  of  day,  perform  their  prayers  in  the  open  air ;
then,  13  fome  of  the  augurs  prefent,  who  are  paid  by  the
public,  declare  that  a  flafh  of  lightning  from  the  left,  which
had  not  happened,  fignifies  the  approbation  of  the  gods ;
and  they,  having,  by  this  report,  received  the  omen,  depart,
in  order  to  enter  upon  their  magiftracies.  Some  looking
upon  this  alone  as  fufficient,  that  no  contrary,  or  forbidding
omens  had  appeared ;  others,  even,  in  oppolition  to  the  will
of  heaven  prohibiting  their  election,  and,  fometimes,  by
violence,  rather  feize,  than  receive  their  dignities :  By  which
means,  many  armies  of  the  Romans  have  been,  utterly,  de-


J3*  Toiv  <$£  7Td^0v]u)V  Tlv£?  O£Vi00<nCOTfc>V,
etc.  This  function  of  the  augurs  to
obferve  the  heavenly  figns,  was  called,
by  the  Romans,  fervare  de  coelo  :  The
difufe  of  which  is  cenfured,  with  great
fpirit,  by  h  Lucan,

Nec  coelum  fervare  licet :  tonat  angure  furdoy
Et  laetae  jurantur  aves,  bubone  jinifiro.

The  difufe  of  this  farce  was,  indeed,  of
no  great  confequence :  But  the  vio¬
lence,  ufed  in  elections,  which  our  au¬
thor,  prefently,  complains  of,  proved
fatal  to  the  liberty  of  Rome  •,  as  it
muff  be  to  That  of  every  country,
where  it  is  prabtifed.  By  this  time,  I
hope,  the  reader  will  acquit  our  author


of  any  defign  to  flatter  Auguftus,  fince
no  man  ever  ufed  greater  violence  than
he,  in  extorting  his  firft  confuilhip
from  the  fenate.  He  was  at  the  head
of  an  army,  raifed  by  his  country  to
oppofe  the  ambitious  defigns  of  Marc
Antony,  when  he  fent  fome  of  his
officers  to  the  fenate  to  demand,  rather
than  todefire  the  confuilhip.  This  im¬
perious  manner  of  applying  to  the  fe¬
nate,  being  received  with  the  indignat¬
ion  it  deferved,  1  one  of  thefe  officers
laid  his  hand  upon  his  fword,  and  had
the  infolence  to  fay  to  the  fenate,  “  k  If
“  You  will  not  give  the  confuilhip  to
“  Caefar,  This  (ball.”


h  E.  v.  f.  395.  j  Sueton.  life  of  Auguftus,  c.  z 6.  k  Dion  Caflius,  E.  xlvi.  p.  363.

ftroyed


232  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

ftroyed  at  land ;  many  fleets  have  been  loft,  with  all  their
people,  at  fea;  and  other  great  and  dreadful  calamities
have  befallen  the  commonwealth;  fome  in  foreign  wars,
and  others  in  civil  diflenflons :  But  the  moll  remarkable


and  the  greatell  happened,  even,  in  my  time,  when  Licinius
Crafliis,  a  man  inferior  to  no  commander  of  his  age,  led  his
army  againll  the  Parthians,  contrary  to  the  will  of  heaven,
and  in  contempt  of  the  innumerable  omens,  that  oppofed  his
expedition.  But  a  great  deal  might  be  faid  concerning  the
contempt  of  the  gods,  that  prevails  among  fome  people  at
this  time.

VII.  Romulus,  who  was,  thus,  chofen  king  by  the  con¬
currence  both  of  gods,  and  men,  is  allowed  to  have  been  a
man  of  great  military  accomplifhments,  and  perfonal  bravery,
and,  14  extremely,  capable  of  inftituting  the  moll  perfedl  fort


74*  TloXileixv  t&ytjir&c&cti  t r,v  Kguliryv

<p§o viuulalos.  Portus,  and  the  two
French  tranflators  have  given  this  fenfe
to  thefe  words,  Of  great  prudence  in  the
government  of  the  fate.  This  I  do  not
take  to  be  the  fenfe  of  this  paffage ;
though  I  know  that  i^yeuh-ou  rqv  Ht-
fioTcwyo-ov  in  the  firft  book  of  Thucy¬
dides  fignifies  to  govern  Peloponnefus
But,  if  we  are  to  give  that  fenfe  to  the
word  in  this  place,  what  becomes  of
ryjv  rtfuh s-jjv  ?  I  have,  therefore,  tranf-
lated  it  according  to  the  explication
Suidas  gives  of  the  word ;  to  e&yqtru-

t&x  1,  d[A0i  Kiyeiv  n  uv  ayvoxciv  01

cckxovIk,  noil  thJacrxau  onlac  m  sruv-

Qxvovl oil.  Sylburgius  has  faid  in  repub¬
lics  op  time  infituendd  prudenlijfmus  •,


which,  though  it  does  not  quite  come
up  to  our  author’s  fenfe,  is,  vaftly,
nearer  to  it,  than  the  other  tranflations.
The  reader  will  obferve,  I  dare  fay,
with  fatisfadtion,  that  our  author  calls
the  government,  inftituted  by  Romu¬
lus,  the  mod  perfedt  fort  of  govern¬
ment  ;  and  this  we  find  to  have  been
a  mixed  government,  compofed  of
monarchy,  ariftocracy,and  democracy.
This  is  the  conftitution  fo  much  ex¬
tolled  by  1  Polybius,  and  other  great
writers  of  antiquity,  and  is,  nearly,  the
fame  with  That  inftituted  by  Lycurgus
at  Sparta,  about  a  hundred  years  be¬
fore,  which  lafted  no  lefs  than  feven
hundred,  without  any  confiderable  al¬
teration.


1 JB.  vi.  458.


of


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALI CARN A SS ENS I S.  233

of  government.  I  fhall  relate  fuch  of  his  civil,  and  military
actions,  as  may  be  thought  worthy  of  hiftory :  And  final),
firft,  fpeak  of  the  form  of  government  he  inftituted,  which
I  look  upon,  of  all  others,  to  be  the  moft  felf-fufficient,  to
anfwer  all  the  ends  both  of  peace,  and  war.  This  was  the
plan  of  it :  After  he  had  divided  all  the  people  into  three
parts,  he  appointed  a  perfon  of  the  firft  rank  to  be  the
chief  of  each  of  them  :  Then,  he  fubdivided  each  of  thefe
three  parts  into  ten  others,  and  appointed  as  many  of  the
braveft  men  to  be  the  leaders  of  thefe  alfo :  The  greater
divifions  he  called  tribes  \  and  the  leffer,  curiae ;  as  they
are  called,  even,  at  this  day.  Thefe  names  may  be,  thus,
tranflated  into  Greek ;  a  Tribe ,  by  15  <£>uAjj  and  Tgifjvg  3  and


I5*  km  t There  is  no
doubt  but  (pvx y  fignihes  a  tribe.  But
revive  fignifies  a  third  part  of  a  tribe :
Tgnlvf  tsi  to  r gilov  t>j?  (pvAyg.

Harpocration.  So  that,  our  author
muft  have  taken  this  word  for  the
third  part  of  the  Roman  people,
which  it,  certainly,  was.  I  find  a  note
in  Hudfon,  upon  this  occafion,  in
which  m  Graevius  is  quoted  to  prove
that  the  Aeolians  faid  t^/7 rorvf,  inftead
of  t§zt7u?,  from  whence,  the  Romans
had  their  word,  tribus .  To  confirm
this,  M.  *  *  *,  after  mentioning  this
obfervation  of  Graevius,  quotes  Plu¬
tarch  to  fhew  that  the  Aeolians  made
ufe  of  |3  inftead  of  <7.  I  have  this  place
of  Plutarch,  now,  before  me,  and  find
he  fays  juft  the  contrary,  viz.  that  the
Aeolians  ufed  7 r  inftead  of  / 3  ;  his  words
are  thefe,  n  r./xiv  to/?  A/oA£u<r<v,  ctvh

m  Rom.  ant.  Praef.  n  Si^ocr .  B.  vi,  p.  694.

P  B.  i.  c.  12.  s  B.  i,  c,  36,

VOL.  I.


ns  /3  toj  7T  Xfaumif,  I  am  afraid  That
gentleman  quoted  this  pafiage  of  Plu¬
tarch,  as  well  as  another,  already,
taken  notice  of  by  me  in  a  former
0  note,  from  fome  French  tranflation,
and  not  from  the  Greek  text,  which
he  could  not,  poftibly,  have  miftaken.
$e<xi£icc,  which  follows,  is,  beyond  all
doubt,  the  third  part  of  a  tribe.  a

erz  to  t (>t1ov  ft ifos  t>j?  <£>vAjj?.  Plarpocra-
tion.  But  this  muft  be  underftood  of
the  Athenian  tribes  :  For  it  is  certain
that  a  Curia ,  which  our  author  has
explained  by  the  word  Qfctlpa,  was
the  tenth  part  of  a  Roman  tribe.  This
fubdivifion  of  the  tribes  into  Curiae
admits  of  no  doubt.  The  firft  divi-
fion  of  the  people  into  tribes  is  not,  fo
generally,  allowed;  becaufe  pLivy  calls
them  centurias  equitum:  s  He  calls
them,  again,  by  that  name  in  relating

0  See  the  261*  annot.  on  the  firft  book.

•  ■  *  .

H  h  a  Curia ,


234  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

a  Curia ,  by  tygoclgiot  and  Aoyo$ ;  the  commanders  of  the  Tribes ,
by  $vha(>xPL  an(a  1 whom  the  Romans  call  Tribuni ;
and  the  commanders  of  the  curiae ,  by  and  Aoyocyotj

whom  they  call  Curiones ;  16  thefe  curiae  were,  again,  divided


the  affair  of  Attius  Navius.  But,  we
are  not  to  wonder  that  Livy  contra¬
dicts  our  author,  when  he  contradicts
himfelf :  For,  in  fpeaking  of  the  Jaw,
promoted  by  the  tribunes  concerning
the  creation  of  four  pontifs,  and  five
augurs,  all  plebeians,  r  he  calls  them
tres  anti quae  tribus ,  Ramnenfes ,  Titienfes ,
Luceres.

l6‘  Aiygyvlo  h  Kdi  SzkolSoh;  at  (p^xl^oa
7r% 0?  avia.  There  is  a  note  in  Hudfon,
in  which  s  Graevius  is,  alfo,  quoted,
upon  this  occafion,  for  faying  that  our
author  aliquid  humani pajfus  eft ,  and  that
no  hiftorian  but  himfelf  mentions  this
divifion  of  the  curiae  into  decuriae ;
and  that  Polybius,  and  Varro,  fay  the
turmae  were  divided  into  decuriae.
This  note  M.  *  **  has  tranflated  lite¬
rally.  I  will  fuppofe  that  no  other
author  mentions  this  divifion  of  the
curiae.-  Is  he  not  the  only  author,
alfo,  who  mentions  many  other  parti¬
culars  relating  to  the  original  confti-
tution  of  the  Romans  ?  And,  are  any
of  thefe  difbelieved  becaufe  he  alone
relates  them  ?  Certainly  not.  Even
Graevius  himfelf  mentions  many
things,  that  rely,  folely,  on  his  au¬
thority.  I  know  no  author,  from
whom  we  could  have  expected  an  ac¬
count  of  this  original  divifion  of  the
Roman  people,  but  Livy,  and  Plu¬
tarch  in  his. life  of  Romulus.  As  to
the  firft,  we  have  feen  in  the  preceding
note,  what  a  contradictory  account  he

r  B.  x.  c.  6.  $  Praef.  to  Vol.  i.  Ant.  Rom.


gives  of  it.  And  Plutarch  fays,  only,
that  Romulus  divided  all  the  people,
who  were  of  an  age  to  bear  arms,  into
legions ;  and  that  each  legion  confifted
of  three  thoufand  foot,  and  three  hun¬
dred  horfe.  As  Graevius  has  not  men¬
tioned  the  place  in  Polybius,  to  which
he  refers,  itmuft  be  in  the  Tixth  book,
where,  in  fpeaking  of  the  military
conftitution  of  the  Romans,  he  fays
they  divide  the  horfe  into  ten  turmae ,
which  he  calls  thou  and,  after  he  has
given  an  account  of  their  method  of
chufing  their  officers,  he  fhys  thefe
officers  are  called  decuriones ;  from
whence,  I  fuppofe,  Graevius  concluded
that  the  turmae  were  divided  into  de¬
curiae  ^  which,  I  dare  fay,  was  fo.  But
Polybius  fpeaks,  all  along,  of  the  mi¬
litary  inftitutions,  that  were  in  ufe  in
his  time  ;  and  this  can  have  nothing
to  do  with  the  original  divifion  of  the
people  made  by  Romulus.  The  paf-
fage  Graevius  refers  to  in  Varro,
though  he  has  not  mentioned  it,  can
be  no  other  than  this  ;  u  Turma ,  terma
eft .  E  in  U  abiit :  ftfuod  ter  deni  equites  ex
tribus  tribubus  A?  1 1  enfium,  Rhamnenfium^
et '  Lucerum  Jiebant .  Itaque  priniijingulci-
rium  decuriarum  decuriones  dim :  qui  ab

Jj&dis  turmis  funt  etiam  nunc  terni.
This  paffage  of  Varro  proves  that  the
turmae  were  divided  into  decuriae ;
but  it  does  not  prove  that  the  curiae
weie  not,  alfo,  divided  into  decuriae :
However,  it,  plainly,  fhews  that  the

fP.  471.  “De  ling.  Lat.  B.  iv.  c.  16.

by


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  235


by  him  into  ten  parts,  each  having  its  own  leader,  called,  in
the  language  of  their  country,  Decurio .  The  people  being,
thus,  diftributed  into  tribes,  and  curiae,  he  divided  the
land  into  thirty  equal  portions,  and  gave  one  of  them  to
each  curia,  having,  firft,  let  apart  as  much  of  it,  as  was
fufficient,  for  the  facrifices,  and  temples,  and,  alfo,  referved
fome  part  of  the  land  for  the  ufe  of  the  public.  This  was
one  divifion,  made  by  Romulus,  both  of  the  men,  and  the
land,  which  eftabliffied  the  greateft  equality  among  them
all.

VIII.  The  other  was  of  the  men  only,  and  diftributed  the
good  offices,  the  honors,  and  dignities,  of  which  I  lhall,  now,
give  an  account :  He  diftinguiffied  thofe,  who  were  eminent
for  their  birth,  and  celebrated  for  their  virtue,  and  whom
he  knew  to  be  rich  in  the  account  of  thofe  times,  and  had
children,  from  the  obfcure,  the  mean,  and  the  poor.  Thofe
of  the  lower  rank,  he  called  Plebeians ,  whom  the  Greeks


would  call  Aripdjixot,  common  people  $  and  thofe  of  the  higher,
Fathers ;  either  becaule  they  were  elder  than  the  others,  or
becaufe  they  had  children,  or  from  their  high  birth,  or  for


S’ atienfes ,  Rhamnenfes ,  and  Luceres  were
not  centuriae  equitum ,  as  Livy  calls
them,  but  tribes.  We  have  feen  from
our  author,  and  Plutarch,  that  the
number  of  men,  originally,  confifted
of  3300:  Three  hundred  of  which
were  horfe.  Now,  this  precife  num¬
ber  of  three  hundred  horfe  feems  to
have  been  derived  from  the  divifion
of  the  curiae  into  decuriae.  I  fhall  ex¬
plain  myfelf.  Romulus  divided  thefe
3300  into  three  tribes;  confequently,


each  tribe  confifted  of  1100  men;
Each  of  thefe  tribes  he,  again,  divided
into  ten  curiae ;  every  curiae ,  there¬
fore,  confifted  of  no  men:  Thefe,
he  fubdivided  into  ten  ducuriae ,  con¬
fiding  each  of  1 1  men  :  Now,  as  the
number  of  horfe  amounted  to  300,
take  one  man  out  of  each  decuriae ,
and  you  have  the  300  horfemen.

3  tribes,  each  1100  =  3300.

30  curiae,  each  1 10  —  3300.

300  decuriae,  each  11  =  3300.

H  h  2  all


236  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book II.

all  thefe  reafons ;  having,  probably,  taken  the  example  from
the  fyftem  of  government,  which,  at  that  time,  prevailed  at
Athens.  For  the  Athenians  divided  their  people  into  two
parts,  and  called  thofe,  wTho  were  diftinguifhed  by  their
birth,  and  fortunes,  Ev7toc]gi$oti,  well-born ;  to  whom  the  ad¬
ministration  of  the  government  was  committed  ;  and  the
reft  of  the  people,  who  had  no  fhare  in  it,  A ygoixo^  Hufband-
men :  But,  in  procefs  of  time,  thefe,  alfo,  were  admitted  to
the  magiftracy.  Thofe,  who  give  the  moft  probable  ac¬
count  of  the  Roman  government,  fay,  that,  for  thefe  reafons,
thofe  perfons  were  17  called  Fathers ,  and  their  pofterity.
Patricians :  But  others,  conftdering  the  thing  in  the  light
their  own  envy  places  it,  in  order  to  calumniate  the  Romans,
as  if  they  were,  ignobly,  defcended,  fay  they  were  not  called
Patricians,  for  the  reafons  I  have  alledged,  but,  becaufe  thefe
only  could  name  their  fathers ;  as  if  all  the  reft  were  fugitives,
and  unable  to  fhew  that  their  fathers  were  free  men.  To
prove  which,  they  fay  that,  whenever  their  kings  thought
proper  to  aflemble  the  Patricians,  the  cryers  called  them
both  by  their  own  names,  and  the  names  of  their  fathers  ;
while  officers,  appointed  for  that  purpofe,  fummoned  the
Plebeians  all  at  once  to  the  affemblies,  by  the  found  of  oxens
horns.  But  neither  is  the  calling  of  the  Patricians,  by  the
cryers,  any  argument  of  their  nobility,  nor  the  found  of  the
horn,  any  mark  of  the  ignoblenefs  of  the  Plebeians :  The

a7‘  <pa<ri  th$  otvJpct?  f««» as  braced,  Patres  certe  ab  honore ,  patri-

> toil  T8f  (K  ytvxf  ctvlcovi  vr ciitpuc  pvog CW6S  CQYU1YI  uppcllciti.

This  opinion  w  Livy  has,  alfo,  im-

w  B.  i.  e.  8,


former


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  '237

former  being  defigned  for  an  honor,  and  the  latter  for  ex¬
pedition.  Since  it  was  not  poffible,  in  a  fhort  time,  to  call
every  one  of  the  plebeians  by  name.

IX.  After  Romulus  had  diftinguifhed  thole  of  fuperior
rank  from  their  inferiors,  he  inlHtuted  laws,  by  which  the
duty  of  each  was  prefcribed.  He  appointed  the  patricians
to  be  priefts,  magiftrates,  and  judges,  to  affift  him  in  the
adminiftration,  and  dedicate  themfelves  to  the  government
of  the  city.  The  plebeians  were  excufed  from  thefe  duties,,
as  unacquainted  with  them,  and,  from  their- fmall  fortunes,
wanting  leifure  to  attend  them;  but  directed  to  apply
themfelves  to  agriculture,  feeding  of  cattle,  and  the  exercife
of  gainful  trades ;  left  they  fhould  raife  feditions,  as  it
happens  in  other  cities,  when  either  the  magiftrates  abufe
their  inferiors,  or  the  common  people,  and  poorer  fort,  envy
their  fuperiors.  He  placed  the  plebeians  as  a  truft  in  the
hands  of  the  patricians,  by  allowing  every  plebeian  18  to
ehufe  any  patrician  he  himfelf  thought  fit  for  his  patron  :  In


l8*  Nejuwv  Tt^a^ulviv.  This  was  the
term  in  ufe  among  the  Athenians,
lignifying  to  ehufe  a  patron.  Avix.yKa.iov
yaq  jjv  iKci?u>  tuv  puloiKCtiv  aroA<?>jv  nvoi
AOyvotutiv  veyeiv  lyv.  Harpocration.
In  default  of  which,  they  were  liable
to  an  aftion,  called,  Air^u<nov.  I  am
fenfible  that  Dionyfius  does  not  com¬
pare  the  Melonwi  at  Athens  with  the
Roman  clients,  but  the  ®tjk? ;  and,
becaufe  we  find  nothing  in  the  Attic
writers  to  convince  us  that  the
were,  in  later  times,  obliged  to  have

*  A&.  v.  !


patrons,  as  well  as  the  M ttoikoi,  we
we  ought  not,  from  thence,  to  con¬
clude,  with  fome  learned  men,  that
they  were  not,  originally,  under  that
obligation  ;  which  is  all  that  our  au¬
thor  fays.  This  I  know,  that,  if  there
had  been  no  fuch  cuftom  at  Athens,
x  Terence  would  have  been  guilty  of  a
great  incongruity  in  making  Chaerea
fay  in  the  Eunuch,  the  lcene  of  which
is  laid  at  Athens,

Thais  patri  fe  cotnmendavit,  in  client  el  am  et  fidem ;
Nobis  dedit  fe.

ene  9.

tliis.


238  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

this,  he  improved  an  ancient  Greek  cuftom,  long  in  ufe
among  the  Theffali,  and,  originally,  among  the  Athenians.
For  the  former  treated  their  clients  with  haughtinefs,  im-
poiing  on  them  offices  unbecoming  the  condition  of  free¬
men  ;  and,  if,  at  any  time,  they  difobeyed  their  commands,
they  beat  them,  and  abufed  them,  in  all  other  refpe&s,  as  if
they  had  been  flaves  they  had  purchafed.  The  Athenians
called  their  clients,  ©jjg£,  fervants ,  from  their  fervitude :  And
the  Theffali  called  theirs,  n svseou,  poor  men ,  plainly,  reproach¬
ing  them,  by  this  name,  with  their  condition.  But  Ro¬
mulus  recommended  the  thing  by  a  handfome  appellation,
calling  this  pre-eminence  over  the  poor,  and  meaner  fort,
a  Patronage :  And,  by  propofing  good  offices  to  each  of
them,  he  rendered  their  connexion  full  of  humanity,  and
fuch  as  became  fellow-citizens.

X.  The  laws,  then,  inftituted  by  him  concerning  pa¬
tronage,  have,  long,  continued  in  ufe  among  the  Romans,
and  are  as  follows  :  The  duty  of  the  patrons  was  to  explain
to  their  clients  thofe  laws  they  were  ignorant  of ;  to  take
the  fame  care  of  them,  when  abfent,  as  prefent ;  doing
every  thing  for  them,  that  parents  do  for  their  children,
with  regard  both  to  money,  and  the  contra&s,  that  relate  to

it ;  to  fue  for  their  clients,  when  injured,  and  defend

•

I9*  Et  t/?  (SKonJoflo  z<rt(>i  tci  <rvfxGo\etiu.  which  it  is  often  ufed,  and  not  faid,
I  am  convinced  that  this  fentence  was  generally,  their  accufers,  as  all  the
inferted  by  fome  tranferiber  to  explain  other  -tranflators  have  rendered  it.
aJiKXfMvw  in  the  former.  It  is  a  plain  And,  in  this  fenfe,  I  think,  it  anfwers
tautology  ;  and  I  wonder  none  of  the  better  to  iveir,  that  pre¬

commentators  obferved  it.  I  have  cedes  it.
confined  tywKwiv  to  a  legal  fenfe,  in

t  '  them,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN A S S EN SIS.  239

them,  when  fued ;  and,  to  fum  up  many  things  in  few
words,  to  procure  them,"  both  in  private,  and  in  public  af¬
fairs,  all  that  tranquillity  they,  chiefly,  flood  in  need  of.
The  duty  of  the  clients  was  to  aflift  their  patrons  in  providing
fortunes  for  their  daughters,  if  the  fathers  wanted  money;
to  pay  their  ranfom  to  the  enemy,,  if  any  either  of  them,  or
of  their  children,  were  taken  prifoners ;  to  bear  their  pa¬
trons  lofles  in  private  fuits,  and  difcharge,  out  of  their  own
purfes,  the  fines,  payable  to  the  public  by  thofe,  who  were
condemned,  which  the  clients  were  to  look  upon  as  a  benevo¬
lence,  not  a  loan ;  to  aflift  their  patrons  in  fupporting  the  charge
of  their  magiftracies,  and  dignities,  and  all  other  public
expences,  in  the  fame  manner  as  if  they  were  their  relations.
It  was  impious  and  illegal  both  for  patrons,  and  clients  to
accufe  each  other  in  courts  of  juftice,  to  bear  witnefs,  or
give  their  votes  againft  each  other,  20  or  to  be  found  among
each  others  enemies :  And,  whoever  was  convi&ed  of  any
of  thefe  crimes,  he  was  guilty  of  21  treachery  by  virtue  of  a


Mila  T  CilV  I  Have

palled  by  in  Silence  many  odd  tranf-
lations  ot  lejay-,  but  his  verfion  of
this  fentence  is  too  extraordinary  to  be
omitted;  this  it  is,  derien  fairequifift
foupfonner  des  inimitiez  entre  eux.  The
other  French  tranfiator  has  laid  very
well,  fe  ranger  du  parti  des  ennemis :
I  wifh  he  had  fupported  his  tranflation
in  any  other  manner  than  by  trans¬
lating,  literally,  the  note  in  Hudfon
without  any  acknowledgment.

*«•  n goJoo-iosf.  Both  the  French
tranflators  have  rendered  this,  Trahi-
fon ,  I  think,  very  properly  ;  becaufe


that  word,  in  their  language,  fignifies
treachery ,  not  treafon ,  which  they
exprefs  by  leze  majefte.  FI ad  Livy
thought  fit  to  mention  this  fine  infti-
tution,  in  his  account  of  the  a&ions  of
Romulus,  we  fhould,  certainly,  have
known  whether  proditio,  which  is  the
word  made  ufe  of  by  the  Latin  tranf¬
lators,  was  the  name  given  by  the
Romans  to  this  crime.  So  far  is  cer¬
tain,  that  proditio  was  the  name  they
gave  to  a  private  correspondence  with
an  enemy.  This  crime  the  citizens
of  Nola  had  been  guilty  of ;  for  which
reafon,  Marcellus  caufed  many  of  them

law


f4o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

law  mftituted  by  Romulus,  and  might  be,  lawfully,  put  to
death  by  any  man,  as  a  vi&im  devoted  to  the  infernal  Ju¬
piter:  For  it  was  the  cuftom  among  the  Romans,  to  devote
thofe  perfons  they  had  a  mind  £hould  be  put  to  death  with
impunity  to  feme  divinity,  and,  particularly,  to  the  infernal
gods :  Which  Romulus  put  in  pradtice  upon  thofe  occafions.
By  this  means,  the  connexion  between  the  patrons,  and  their
clients  continued  for  many  generations,  differing  in  nothing
from  the  ties  of  blood,  and  defeended  to  their  childrens
children :  And  it  was  a  matter  of  great  praife  to  men  of
illuftrious  families  to  have  numerous  clients,  and,  not  only
to  preferve  the  fucceffion  of  hereditary  patronages,  but  alfo,
by  their  own  virtue,  to  add  the  acquifition  of  others.  It
is  incredible  how  great  a  conteft  there  was  between  the
patrons,  and  clients,  each  ftriving  to  furpafs  the  other  in
benevolence,  and  not  to  be  outdone  in  good  offices;  the
clients  being,  ever,  ready  to  render  all  poffible  fervice  to
their  patrons ;  and  the  patrons  avoiding,  by  all  means,  to
give  their  clients  any  trouble ;  and  admitting  of  no  pecuni¬
ary  prefents.  So  much  was  their  behaviour  fuperior  to  all
pleafure ;  and  virtue,  not  fortune,  was  the  meafure  of  their
happinefs.


to  be  put  to  death ;  y  fupr a  feptuaginta
damnatos  Proditionis  fecuri  percuffit.
*  Virgil  has,  alfo,  ranked  the  delin¬
quents,  mentioned  byDionyfius, among
the  greateft  criminals ;

et  fraus  innexa  clientu  „


Upon  this  occafion,  Servius  fays,  ex
lege  duodecim  tabularum  venit ;  in  quibus
feriptum  ejl ,  Pair  onus ,  ft  clienti  fraudem
fecerity  facer  ejio.  But  it  is  well  known,
that  the  decemvirs  enaded  many
things  confirmatory  of  old  laws,  as
well  as  introdudory  of  new  ones.

Aen.  B,  vi.  f.  60.9.

XI.  It


y  B.  xxiii.  c.  17.


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  I*IC  A  R  N  A  S  SEN  SIS.  241

XI.  It  was,  not  only,  in  the  city  itfelfthat  the  plebeians
were  under  the  patronage  of  the  patricians,  but  every  Ro¬
man  colony,  and  every  city  in  alliance,  and  friendihip  with
them,  and,  aifo,  “every  conquered  town  chofe  fuch  pro¬
testors,  and  patrons  among  the  Romans  as  they  thought  fit.
And  the  fenate  has,  often,  referred  matters  in  difpute,  in
thefe  cities,  and  provinces,  to  their  patrons,  and  confirmed
their  determination.  And,  indeed,  fo  firmly  was  this  har¬
mony,  which  owed  its  birth  to  thefe  inftitutions  of  Romu¬
lus,  eftablifiied  among  the  Romans,  that,  though,  as  it  often
happens,  in  all  cities,  both  great  and  fmall,  many  great
political  contefts  have  arifen  between  the  people,  and  their
magistrates,  they  never,  23  within  the  courfe  of  fix  hundred
and  twenty  years,  proceeded  to  bloodfhed,  and  mutual


zz'  a  Kou  t uiv  ex.  'KQtey.x  xexgdlv/Lievav
Ikxm.  In  proportion  as  the  Romans
extended  their  conquefts,  thefe  clien-
telae  became  more  extenfive.  Thus,
the  Bononienfes  were  clients  of  the  An¬
ton  ii  -,  the  Lacedaemonians  of  the  Clau-
dii  the  Syracuftans  of  the  Marcelli ;
and  the  Puteolani  of  Cajfius ,  and  Brutus.

23*  Evlog  t^aK0<nuv  kou  etxociv  truv.
Our  author,  moft  certainly,  knew  that
Tiberius  Gracchus  was  tribune  of  the
people,  and  (lain  during  his  tribune-
fhip  in  the  year  of  Rome  62 1  in  the
confulfhip  of  P.  Minucius  Scaevola,
and  L.  Calpurnius  Pifo  ;  and  that  his
brother,  Caius  Gracchus,  was  killed
ten  years  alter  :  So  that,  he  could
neither  fay  that  no  civil  blood  was
drawn  in  any  political  conteft  at  Rome,
till  the  year  63a;  nor  date  the  begin¬
ning  of  thefe  barbarities  from  the  tri-


bunefhip  of  Caius  Gracchus.  We
muft,  therefore,  read  tutor  1,  inftead  of
Tgictnovla,  and  Tiberius,  inftead  of
Caius  Gracchus.  M.  *  *  *  feems  to
triumph  in  having  difcovered  that  this
cuftom  of  the  Romans,  in  making  an
amicable  end  of  their  contefts,  did  not
laft  above  620  years.  I  wifh  he  would
let  us  know  what  nation,  what  govern¬
ment  ever  fubfifted  half  that  time,
without  being  ingaged  in  civil  wars,
and  mutual  daughter.  This  is  not  the
place  to  enter  into  the  merits  of  the
Agrarian  law:  I  fhall  referve  That
till  we  come  to  the  affair  of  Spurius
Caftius,  who,  firft,  propofed  it-,  or,  ra¬
ther,  firft  attempted  to  reftore  the  ob-
fervance  of  a  law,  as  old  as  their  con-
ftitution,  but,  long  fince,  filenced  by
power.


Suet,  in  Aug.  c.  17.  id.  in  Tib.  c.  6.  Liv.  B.  xxv.  c.  29.  Cic.  Phil.  ii.  c.  41:

Vol.  I.  I  i  flaughter;


242  ‘  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  II.

/laughter ;  but,  by  perfuading,  and  informing  one  another ;
by  fubmitting  in  fome  things,  and  receiving  a  voluntary
fubmiflion  in  others,  they  put  an  end  to  their  difputes  in
fuch  a  manner,  as  became  fellow  citizens.  But,  from  the
time  that  Tiberius  Gracchus,  while  tri  une  of  the  people,
diflolved  the  harmony  of  the  government,  they  have  been,
perpetually,  deftroying,  and  banifhing  one  another,  and
refraining  from  no  excefs  to  gain  the  fuperiority.  But  the
relation  of  thefe  events  fhall  be  referved  to  a  more  proper
place.

XII.  As  foon  as  Romulus  had  regulated  thefe  things,
he  determined  to  form  a  fenate  in  order  to  afiift  him  in  the
adminiftration  of  the  government.  With  this  view,  he
chofe  a  hundred  perfons  out  of  the  patricians,  according  to
the  following  defignation:  He  himfelf  chofe  one  out  of
their  whole  body,  whom  he  judged  to  be  the  moft  worthy
of  that  diftindtion,  and  whom  he  thought  fit 24  to  intruft
with  the  government  of  the  city,  whenever  he  himfelf
fhould  be  obliged  to  lead  the  army  out  of  the  Roman  ter¬
ritories  :  He,  then,  ordered  each  of  the  tribes  to  chufe
three  perfons,  who  were  of  an  age  the  beft  qualified  for
prudence,  and,  alfo,  diftinguifhed  by  their  birth.  After
thefe  nine  were  chofen,  he  ordered  each  curia,  likewife,  to

24*  T<#?  x«U  ktoAiv  ciKovojuia?.  This  Vraefeftus  urbis  by  Tullus  Hoftilius  ;
magiftrate  was  called,  by  the  Romans,  and  Spurius  Lucretius  by  Tarquinius
Praefefius  urbis  \  and  b  Tacitus  fays  Superbus  :  Maecenas,  every  body
that  Denter  Romulius  was  the  perfon  knows,  injoycd  this  poft  under  Au-
invefted  with  this  dignity  by  Romulus:  guftus.

That  Numa  Marcius  was  appointed

b  Ann.  B.  vi.  c.  u.


chufe


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  243

chufe  three  patricians,  the  moft  deferving  of  that  truft  :
Then,  adding  to  the  firft  nine,  who  had  been  ele&ed  by  .
the  tribes,  the  ninety,  who  were,  then,  chofen  by  the  curiae,
and  appointing  the  perfon,  he  himfelf  had,  firft,  chofen,

*5  to  be  their  prefident,  he  completed  the  number  of  a
hundred  fenators.  The  name  of  this  council  may  be  ex-
prefled,  in  Greek,  by  Ts^aioCy  a  Sejiate ,  and  is  called  fo  by


25*  Hyz^ovot.  This  perfon  was  prince
of  the  fen  ate  *,  and,  purfuant  to  this
inftitution  of  Romulus,  was  the  firfb
fenator  •,  his  name  being  firfb  called
over  by  the  cenfors  after  their  creation.
We  find  he  was,  upon  this  occafion,
Chofen  by  Romulus  himfelf ;  c  after¬
wards,  the  two  cenfors  drew  lots  for
this  choice,  and  he,  to  whofe  lot  it
fell,  generally,  chofe  the  oldeft  cen-
forian  ;  though,  if  he  thought  fit,  he
might  name  any  other  fenator.  He
was,  never,  removed  from  this  dignity,
nnlefs  he  was  expelled  the  fenate.  dHe
delivered  his  opinion  the  firft  of  all
the  confular  fenators  :  For,  I  believe,
the  prince  of  the  fenate  was,  always,  a
oonlular  fenator;  and,  by  the  firft
paffage  of  Livy,  referred  to  in  this
note,  it  appears  that  Q^Fabius  Maxi¬
mus  was,  actually,  conful,  when  he
was  chofen  prince  of  the  fenate.  I
•obferve  that  Cicero,  generally,  calls
the  prince  of  the  fenate  princeps  fenatus\
-and  Livy,  princepsin  Jenatu.  By  a  note
■of  Dr.  Chapman,  in  his  very  learned
cffay  on  the  Roman  fenate,  I  find,  that
he  interprets  with  Zamofcius,  rov  agisov
in  our  author,  he  appointed  one
■to  be  prince  of  the  fenate :  I  grant,  in-

c  Liv.  B.  xxvii.  c.  u.

I  i


deed,  that  Romulus  appointed  the
fame  perfon  to  be  prince  of  the  fenate,
whom  he  had,  before,  named  for  a
fenator,  and  to  whom  he  propofed  to
commit  the  government  of  the  city,
when  he  himfelf  fhould  be  in  the  field  ;
But  I  deny  that,  when  he  chofe  him  a
fenator,  he  made  him  prince  of  the
fenate  :  For  we  find  that,  before  this
appointment,  he  chofe  this  perfon
fenator,  and  ordered  the  three  tribes
to  chufe  nine  fenators, .  and  the  thirty
curiae  ninety :  Then ,  S7r«7a,  having
added  the  ninety,  chofen  by  the  curiae,
to  the  nine,  chofen  by  the  tribes,  and
appointed  the  fenator  he  himfelf  had
chofen  to  be  prince  of  the  fenate,  he
completed  the  number  of  three  hun¬
dred.  By  this,  it  appears,  I  think,
very  plainly,  that  this  appointment
was  fubfequent  to  all  thefe  elections  :
And,  to  fuppofe  our  author  meant  the
fame  thing  when  he  faid  rov  ao^cv
cc7rt$ei(;iv,  as  when  he  laid  4 ye/Aovx
■zzotyrcis,  is  to  fuppofe  him  guilty  of  a
repetition ;  and,  what  is  worfe,  to
make  the  appointment  of  the  prince
of  the  fenate  both  to  precede,  and
follow  the  election  of  the  reft  of  the
fenators.

d  Varro  ii>Gell.  B.  xiv.  c.  7.

the


Book  II.


244  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

the  Romans  to  this  day  :  But,  whether  from  the  advanced
,  age  of  the  perfons,  who  were  admitted  into  it,  or  from  their
virtue,  it  obtained  this  appellation,  I  cannot,  certainly,  -fay  :
For  the  ancients  ufed  to  call  perfons  of  great  age,  and  great
merit,  rsgovjee,  Old-men  :  Thofe,  who  compofed  the  fenate,
were  called  26  Cmfcript-fathers  ;  and,  to  this  day,  they  re¬
tain  that  name.  This,  alfo,  was  a  Greek  cuftom :  For  it
is  certain  that  kings,  as  well  fuch,  as  inherited  the  king¬
doms  of  their  anceftors,  as  thofe  ele&ed  by  the  people,
had  a  council  compofed  of  the  moft  virtuous  men,  as
Homer,  and  27  the  moft  ancient  of  the  poets  teftify ;  nei-


z6'  nothin  efygaQoi.  Patres  confcripti.
And,  thus,  the  fenate  was,  certainly,
called  in  his  time,  as  appears  by  the
teftimony  of  all  authors.  Livy  fays
they  were  called  fo,  originally,  upon
this  occafiori :  Tarquinius  Superbus
had,  under  vari  us  pretences,  put  many
of  the  fenators  to  death.  After  his
expulfion,  Brutus  chofe,  or,  rather,
recommended  to  the  people  to  chufe,
the  mod;  confiderable  of  the  knights
to  fupply  their  places  ;  from  whence,
they  were  called  Confcripti:  e  Tradi-
tumque  inde  fertur ,  ut  in  fenatum  voca-
rentur ,  quiPatres ,  quiqueConfcripti  ejfent:
Confcriptos  videlicet  in  novum  fenatum
appellabant  leffios.  Feftus  fays  pretty
much  the  fame  thing  ;  and  adds,  that
the  .  number  of  thefe  new  fenators  a-
mounted  to  164.  But  he  nii  Hakes
in  faying  that  P.  Valerius  did  this,
when  Livy,  exprefly,  fays  it  was  Bru¬
tus,  his  collegue.  Dionyfius  lays  great
itrefs  upon  the  advanced  age  of  the

f  Bell.  Cat,  c.  6.  s


fenators ;  and  f  Salluft,  on  the  fame
occafion,  makes  a  noble  obfervation  ;
Delebti,  quibus  corpus  annis  infrmum ,
ingenium  fapientid  validum ,  reipublica3
confultabant.

27 '  K at  oi  zraAaiolalot  ruv  Tsroiviluv

This  is,  alfo,  confirmed  by
the  hiftorians.  s  Thucydides  fays,  that
the  ancient  governments  in  Greece
were  hereditary,  limited,  monarchies  •,

Tzoolifiov  St  r,<rav  nrt  prilctf  ytgstirt  ztod,(>nioti

{dczciAeioii ",  and  luch  was  the  govern¬
ment  inftituted  by  Romulus,  not  un¬
like  That  of  Sparta,  which  lafled  feven
hundred  years,  as  has  been,  already,
faid  :  The  caufe  of  which  duration,
h  Ariftotle  afcribes  to  the  limitations
of  the  kingly  government :  Upon
which  occafion,  he  fays,  that  Theo-
pompus,  a  prince  of  great  moderation,  •
which  he  fhewed  by  inftituting  the
ephori,  being  afked  by  his  wife,  whe¬
ther  he  was  not  afhamed  to  leave  the
kingdom  more  limited  to  his  fons,

.  i.  C.  13.  h  Dsp  otoXst.  B.  V.  C.  II.

ther


•B.ii.  c.  j.


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENSI  S.  245

ther  was  the  power  of  the  ancient  kings  arbitrary,  and  with¬
out  controle,  as  it  is  at  this  day.

XIII.  After  Romulus  had  inftituted  the  fenate,  confut¬
ing  of  a  hundred  elders,  he  concluded,  very  reafonably,
that  he  fhould,  alfb,  Hand  in  need  of  a  body  of  young  men,
both  for  the  guard  of  his  perfon,  and  for  fudden  fervices,
and  formed  a  corps  of  three  hundred  men,  the  moftrobuft,
and  of  the  moft  illuftrious  families,  whom  the  curiae  chofe
in  the  fame  manner  they  had  chofen  the  fenators,  each  curia
electing  ten  >  and  thefe  he  had  always  about  his  perfon :  They
were  ail  called  by  one  common  name,  2g  Celeres  y  according  to


than  he  had  received  it  from  his  father,
anfwered,  that  he  was  not  at  all  a-
fhamed  of  it,  becaufe  he  fhould  leave
it  much  more  lading-,  yag

vox ;  and  the  event  judified
his  prediction.

*8,  1  Plutarch  gives  the

fame  reafon,  and,  almod,  in  the  fame
words,  for  this  appellation  ano
roi(  vna^'yia.f  rjof  j  which  he,
vifibiy,  took  from  our  author  among
many  other  things.  Fedus  thinks  this
body  of  horfe  received  their  name  from
Celer ,  who  killed  Remus,  and  was  their
fird  commander.  The  commander
of  thefe  celeres  was  called  Tribunus
Celerum :  This  pod  was  injoyed  by
Brutus,  when  Tarquinius  was  expell¬
ed,  and  gave  him  a  right  to  ademble
the  people  ;  as  we  fhall  fee,  when  we
come  to  that  part  of  the  hidory.  All
thefe  circumdances,  I  think,  deferved
the  attention  of  the  commentators  •,
particularly,  the  following  one,  which


is  attended  with  a  difficulty,  that  I  can
eafier  date,  than  explain.  Livy,  as  I
have  faid  in  a  former  note,  calls  the
Ramnends,  Titienfes,  and  Luceres,
centuries  of  horfe,  in  two  places,  and
tribes  in  another  :  Thefe  cenuries,  khe
fays,  Romulus  created,  jud  after  the
peace  with  the  Sabines ;  and,  after¬
wards,  he  fays  of  Romulus,  that  he
indicuted  thefe  300  celeres;  1  trecen-
tofque  arm  at  os  ad  cujlodiam  corporis,  quos
Celeres  appellavit ,  non  in  hello  folum ,
fed  etiam  in  pace  habuit.  Are  thefe
300  celeres  the  fame  with  the  three
centuries  of  horfe  he  fird  mentioned?
Certainly  not.  The  fird,  therefore,
were  tribes,  and  fo  they  are  called  by
Varro -,  m  ager  Romanics  primum  divifns
in  partes  tres ,  a  quo  tribus  appellate,
Tatienfium,  Ramnenfium,  Lucerum.
This  will,  diffidently,  fhew  the  error,
into  which  almod  all  the  men  of  learn¬
ing  have  fallen  in  treating  this  fubjeCt:
They  derive  the  equedrian  order  from


‘Life  of  Romulus.  k  B.  i.  c.  13.  ]  lb.  c.  15.  81  De  Ling.  Lat.  B.  iv.  c.  9.

moil


2*6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IL

moft  writers,  from  the  Celerity  of  their  fervice  :  For  thole,
who  are  ready,  and  quick  in  performing  any  thing,  the


the  inftitution  of  thefe  tribes.  As
little  do  I  think  thofe  in  the  right,
who  derive  this  order  from  the  celeres,
'who  were  foot,  as  well  as  horfe  ;  fince
our  author  lays  that,  according  to  the
ground,  they  fought  either  on  horfe-
back,  or  on  foot:  For  I  think  it  plain
that,  though  Romulus  made  ufe  of
horfe  in  his  armies,  the  inftitution  of
the  equeftrian  order,  as  diftinguifhed
from  the  fenate,  and  people,  was  ow¬
ing  to  Servius  Tullius,  who,  as  our
11  -author  will  inform  us  at  large,  di¬
vided  the  whole  body  of  the  people
into  lix  clalfes  ;  into  the  firft  of  which
he  threw  all,  whofe  fortunes  amounted
to  no  lefs  than  a  hundred  minae,  about
322/.  i8r.  4-d.  fterling;  of  thefe  he
formed  eighty  centuries  of  foot.  He,
then,  chofe  eighteen  centuries  of  horfe,
and  added  them  to  the  eighty  centuries
of  foot  •,  fo  that,  the  firfb  clafs  conflict¬
ed  of  eighty  centuries  of  foot,  and  of
eighteen  centuries  of  horfe.  But,  even
here,  the  equeftrian  cenfus  is  not,
plainly,  diftinguifhed  from  That  of
the  foot :  For,  in  fpeakingof  the  for¬
mer,  he  fays  they  confided  of  thofe,
who  had  the  greateft  property,  not  lefs
than  a  hundred  minae,  fa  to  ptyisov

•uy,Yiy,x  »jv  tks  xmAaTlcv  exalov  fA.vuv,

and,  when  he  fpeaks  of  the  horfe,  he
fays,  they  had  the  greateft  fortunes,
and  were  of  illuftrious  families,  0  m  Tm

f^ovluv  TO  [XiyiSOV  T IfMlUX,  Y.KI  Kulx  yiVOS

iTnipoivuv.  Here,  therefore,  we  do  not
find  that  the  equeftrian  cenfus  was
different  from  That  of  the  foot,  who
•compofed  the  eighty  centuries,  which

“  B.iv.  c.  16.  °lb.  c.  18.  r  B.  i.  c.  43.


confided  both  of  patricians,  and  ple¬
beians.  The  only  difference,  that  ap*
pears  here  between  the  horfe,  and  the
foot  of  the  firft  clafs,  is,  that  the  for¬
mer  were  of  illuftrious  birth.  And
t  Livy,  fpeaking  of  the  fame  thing,
fays  they  were  ex  primoribus  civitatis:
He  fays,  alfo,  that  they  were  called  to
give  their  votes,  before  the  eighty
centuries  of  foot  ;  q  Equites  enim  voca -
bantur  primi  ;  ocioginta  inde  primae
clajfis  centuriae.  This  being  fo,  when
fhall  we  fay  the  equeftrian  cenfus  was
inftituted,  I  mean  fuch  a  cenfus,  as  to
intitle  the  poffefior  of  it  to  be,  ipfo
fablo,  a  knight  ?  The  firft  mention  I
find,  any  where,  of  the  equeftrian  cen¬
fus  is  in  Livy;  where,  after  he  has
given  an  account  of  the  check,  which
the  Roman  army  received  before  Veii,
and  of  the  confternation  the  news  of
it  occafioned  at  Rome,  he  fays,  r  quum
repent  e,  quibus  cenfus  equejler  erat ,
equi  publici  non  erant  affignati ,  confilio
prim  inter  fefe  habito, ,  fenatum  adeunt  ;
fabidque  dicendi  potejiate  ;  equis  fe  fuis
ftipendia  fa&uros  ■promittunt.  This
was  the  in  year  of  Rome  351,  when
eight  confular  tribunes  were  created,
as  Livy  fays,  though  the  fafii  confm
lares  mention  but  fix  for  that  year.
Now,  k  muft  be  remembered,  that  th6
cenforfhip  had  been  created  forty
years  before,  in  the  confullhip  of  T.
Quindiius  Capitolinus,  for  the  fifth
time,  and  of  M.  Geganius  Maceri-
nus,  for  the  fecond  time.  And 3  Livy
tells  ns,  in  the  fame  place,  that,-  in
procefs  of  time,  the  fenate,  and  the

S  Id.  ib.  r  B.  v.  c.  7.  s  Id.  B.  iv.  c.  8.

Romans


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENS  TS.  247

Romans  call  Celeres :  But  Valerius  Antias  fays  they  had  this
name  from  their  commander :  For  the  mold  confiderable
man,  alfo  among  them,  was  their  captain,  who  had  three
centurions  under  him,  and  thefe,  again,  had  others  under
them,  who  had  inferior  commands.  Thefe  celeres,  con-
ftantly, 29  attended  Romulus  in  the  city,  armed  with  pikes,


centuries  of  knights  became  fubjedt  to
the  jurifdi&ion  of  this  magistracy,
fenatus ,  equitumque  centuriae ,  decoris ,
dedecorifque  difcrimen  fub  ditione  ejus
magiftratus.  From  ail  thefe  circum-
ftances,  I  think  it  probable,  that  the
cenfors,  when  they  reviewed  the  cen¬
turies  of  horfe  at  every  luftrum,  had
power  to  grant  a  -public  horfe  to  every
perfon  poffclTed  of  the  qualifications
inftituted  by  Tullius,  that  is,  the  cen-
fus,  before  mentioned,  and  who  were
of  illuftrious  birth.  Thefe  were  the
only  cavalry  the  Romans,  anciently,
made  ufeof.  Afterwards.,  indeed,  their
horfe  was  raifed  not,  only,  in  Italy,
but  in  the  provinces  ;  and  the  divi-
lions  of  it  were,  then,  called  Jlae,  not
Yurmae-y  which  laft  term  was  pecu¬
liar  to  the  divifions  of  the  Roman
horfe.  Of  this  diftindlion  many  in-
ftances  may  be  found  in  Caefar.  It
is  not  certain,  therefore,  when  the
kn’ghts  b,  gan  to  be  diftinguifhed
from  the  plebeians  by  the  pofleflion
of  four  hundred  thoufand  feftertium,
or  3229/.  3  s.  4  d.  fterling,  and  by
the  golden  ring.  I  know  it  is  thought
that  both  thefe  were  inftituted  by  Ti¬
berius  in  the  ninth  year  of  his  reign  :
To  fup port  which,  the  authority  of
Pliny  is  alledged,  who  fays,  c  ‘Tiberii
demum  principals  anno  nono  in  unit  a -

1  B.  xxxiii.  c.  2,


tem  venit  equefter  ordo ;  annidorutnqut

auciontati  forma  conftituta  eft _ Hac  de

caufa  conftitutum  ne  cut  jus  id  ejfety  niji
cui  ingenuo  ipfi,  patri ,  avoque  materno
feller  Hum  cccc  cenfus  fuiftety  et  lege  Julia
theatrali  in  xiv  ordinibus  fedendi.  But
this  law  of  Tiberius  can  only  be  un-
derftood  to  make  it  neceffary  that  the
father,  and  grandfather  ihould  have
thole  qualifications'  as  well  as  the
perfon  who  claimed  the  benefit  of  it  r
For,  by  the  paflage,  already  quoted
from  Livy,  it  is  plain  there  was  a
cenfus  equeftris  eftablifhed,  even,  be¬
fore  the  fiege  of  Veii :  And,  as  to  the
gold  ring,  it  appears  by  another  paf-
fage  of  Livy,  that,  it  was  worne  by  the
knights  at  the  time  of,  and  probably
befoie,  the  fecond  Punic  war.  We
find,  by  him,  that  Annibal,  after  the
battle  of  Cannae,  fent  his  brother
Mago  to  Carthage,  to  carry  the  news
of  his  vidlory  ;  who,  in  order  to  con¬
vince  the  Carthaginian  fenate  of  the
number  of  Romans  (lain  in  that  battle,
produced  three  bufhels  of  gold  rings  j
and  told  them  that  thefe  were  vvorr.e  only
by  the  knights,  neminem ,  niji  equiiem ,
atque  eorum  ipforum  primoresy  id  gerere
inftgne  u.

29-  Avft  woXaQisv.  Suivoient  leur  capi-
taine ,  favs  M.  *  *  *  *,  when  it  is
paft  all  difpute,  that  this  mull  be  un-

u  B.  xxiii.  c.  12,


248  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklT.

and  executed  his  orders :  and,  in  a  day  of  battle,  they
charged  before  him,  and  defended  his  perfon.  Thefe,  ge¬
nerally,  had  the  advantage  in  every  adlion,  ingaging  hrft,
and  retreating  laft :  They  fought  on  horfe-back,  where  the
ground  was  proper  for  it ;  and  on  foot,  where  it  was  rough,
and  inconvenient  for  the  horfe.  This  cuftom  Romulus  feems
to  have  borrowed  from  the  Lacedaemonians ;  being  inform¬
ed  that,  among  them  alfo,  three  hundred  of  the  braved:
youth  attended  the  kings,  as  their  guards,  and  defenders
in  war,  and  fought  both  on  horfe-back,  and  on  foot.

XIV.  Having  made  thefe  regulations,  he  diftinguifhed
the  honors,  and  prerogatives,  which  he  thought  proper
that  each  of  the  orders  fhould  injoy.  The  particular  func¬
tions  of  the  king  Were  thefe :  In  the  firft  place,  the  fupre-
macy  in  religious  ceremonies,  and  facrifices,  and  the  perfor¬
mance  of  every  thing  relating  to  divine  worfhip  :  fecondly,
the  guardianfhip  of  the  laws,  and  cuftoms  df  the  country,
and  the  adminiftration  of  juftice,  in  all  cafes,  whether
-founded  on  the  law  of  nature,  or  the  civil  law :  He  was,
alfo,  to  take  cognizance,  in  perfon,  of  the  greateft  crimes,
leaving  the  lefier  to  the  fenate  ;  and  to  obferve  that  no  er-

his  countryman,  by  applying  this  word
to  the  defence  of  Romulus;  but,  then,
he  has  left  OUt  tuv  wAivo/xii/uv  uV^flat,
and  ^^ouoi^oi.  The  example  our  au¬
thor,  prefently,  makes  ufe  of,  I  mean,
theguardsof  the  Lacedaemonian  kings,
leaves  no  room  to  doubt  that  thefe
celeres  were  the  guards  of  Romulus,
and  not  of  their  fellow-loldiers.


derftood  of  Romulus,  not  of  their  cap¬
tain,  as  le  Jay  has  tranflated  it.  Again,
when  the  former  comes  to  vra^ounnsui.,
lie  fays  avec  leurs  boucliers  ils  mettoient
les  autre s  foldats  a  convert ;  whereas
the  fenfe  is,  ils  mettoient  Romulus  a  con¬
vert  ;  unlefs  it  can  be  fuppofed  that
three  hundred  men  can  cover  a  whole
army  with  their  bucklers  :  And,  here
alfo,  le  Jay  has  the  advantage  over


rors


Book  II.  .DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  249

rors  were  committed  in  their  judgements :  He  was  toaffem-
ble  both  the  fenate,  and  the  people  ;  to  deliver  his  opinion
firft,  and  purfue  the  refolutions  of  the  majority.  Thefe
fun&ions  he  affigned  to  the  king,  and,  with  thefe,  the  ab-
folute  command  in  war.  The  honor,  and  power  he  at¬
tributed  to  the  fenate  were  thefe ;  to  deliberate,  and  give
their  votes  concerning  every  thing  the  king  propofed  to
them  ;  and  all  queftions  to  be  determined  by  the  ma¬
jority.  This,  alfo,  Romulus  took  from  the  conftitution
of  the  Lacedaemonians :  30  For  neither  were  their  kings
arbitrary,  but  the  whole  power  of  the  government  was
vefted  in  the  fenate.  To  the  people  he  granted  thefe  three
privileges ;  to  chufe  magiftrates  ;  to  enadt  laws ;  and  to  de¬
termine  concerning  war,  when  propofed  by  the  king  :  But,
even,  in  thefe  points,  their  power  was  not  without  con-
troll,  the  concurrence  of  the  fenate  being  neceflary  to
give  a  fandtion  to  their  determinations.  The  people  did  not
give  their  votes  promifcuoufly,  but  were  called  in  their  curiae;


3°*  OvJs  yug  ci  Aaxe$ai(ji.o\’icdv  (2 <x<r»A«?,
etc.  Theconftitution  of  the  Lacedae¬
monians  has  been,  defervedly,  praifed
by  the  great  authors  of  antiquity  5  par¬
ticularly,  by  ^Polybius,  and  Xenophon;
which  (hews  that,  notwithftanding  the
rants  of  the  Roman  writers,  liberty
may  be  enjoyed  in  its  utmoft  extent
under  a  kingly  government,  properly,
limited  ;  I  wifh  I  might  fay  that  li-
centioufnefs  could  not.  The  Lacedae¬
monians,  it  feems,  had  a  cuftom  of
renewing  their  oaths  of  allegiance  to
their  kings  every  month,  and  their

w  B.  vi.  p.  459.  *  Xenophon  Ilegi

VOL.  I.


kings  of  renewing  their  oaths  to  the
Ephori,  as  the  reprefen tatives  of  the
people.  The  oath  of  the  king  was  to
govern  according  to  law  ;  and  That
of  the  Ephori  to  preferve  his  power
unfhaken,  as  long  as  he  preferved  his
oath  inviolate:  xO  h  qcy.os  ru>  y.-cv
(2a,<riXei,  k&Ic i  -m  ty,s  sjoAewf  vcpxe

/SiXcrtAsvc-eiy’  Tp  Je  tsroA«,

oi^v^iXikJqv  r Yiv  $oi<nXeiav  zraet^&v.
The  intention  of  thefe  oaths  was,  only,
to  explain  what  muff,  neceflarily,  be
underftood  in  all  limited  monarchies.

Gfc/Xil.  A<xxt$.  p.  690.  Edit.  Leunclav.

K  k  and.


250  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

and,  whatever  was  refolded  upon  by  the  majority  of  the
curiae,  was  carried  up  to  the  fenate :  But  this  cuftom  is,
now,  inverted :  For  the  fenate  does  not  deliberate  upon  the
refolutions  of  the  people,  but  the  people  have  full  power
over  Thofe  of  the  fenate.  I  fhall  leave  it  to  others  to  ex¬
amine  which  of  thefe  cuftoms  is  the  beft.  By  this  diftri-
bution,  not  only  the  civil  affairs  were  adminiftred  with
prudence,  and  regularity,  but,  alfo,  Thofe  relating  to  war
were  carried  on  with  difpatch,  and  obedience  :  For,  when¬
ever  the  king  thought  proper  to  lead  out  his  army,  there
was,  then,  no  neceffity  for  the  tribunes  to  be  chofen  for  the
tribes,  or  the  centurions,  for  the 3 'centuries,  or  the  command¬
ers  of  the  horfe ;  neither  was  it  neceffary  to  take  an  ac¬
count  of  their  numbers,  to  divide  them  into  centuries,  or
for  every  man  to  take  his  poft :  But  the  king  gave  his  orders
to  the  tribunes,  they  to  the  centurions,  and  thefe  to  the
decurions,  each  of  whom  drew  out  thofe,  who  were  under
their  command  :  And,  whether  the  whole  army,  or  part  of
it  were  called,  they,  at  one  command,  prefented  themfelves
ready  with  their  arms  at  the  place  appointed.

XV.  By  thefe  inftitutions,  Romulus,  fufficiently,  regu¬
lated,  and,  properly,  aifpofed  the  city  both  for  peace,  and
war  :  He  rendered  it  confiderable,  and  populous  by  thefe :
In  the  fir  ft  place,  he  obliged  the  inhabitants  to  bring  up  all
their  male  children,  and  the  ftrft  born  of  the  female  ;  and
forbid  them  to  deftroy  any  under  three  years  of  age,  unlefs

3 1  *  Kola  I  was  wondering  render  it  par  curies ,  when  I  caff  my

how  the  French  tranflators  came  to  eye  upon  the  tranflation  of  Sylburgius,
miftake  the  fenfe  of  this  word,  and  to  and  found  he  had  faid  per  curias.


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LIC  A  RN  ASS  E  NS  I S.  251

they  were  lame,  or  monftrous  from  their  birth :  Thefe  he
allowed  their  parents  to  expofe,  provided  they,  firft,  (hewed
them  to  five  of  their  neighbours,  and  thefe,  alfo,  approved
of  it :  And,  befides  other  penalties,  he  punifhed  thofe,  who
difobeyed  this  law,  with  the  confifcation  of  half  their  fortunes.
After  this,  finding  that  many  cities  in  Italy  were  very  ill
governed,  both  by  tyrannies,  and  oligarchies, he  propofed  to
give  entertainment  to,  and  attract,  the  fugitives  of  thefe
cities,  who  were  very  numerous,  32  without  diftinguifhing
either  their  calamities,  or  their  fortunes,  provided,  only,

they  were  freemen :  This  he  did  with  a  view  both  of  in-

#

creafing  the  power  of  the  Romans,  and  of  leflening  That
of  their  neighbours ;  though  he  covered  his  defign  with  a
fpecious  pretence,  aferibing  it  to  the  honor  of  the  gods :
For  the  place  between  the  capitol  and  the  citadel  (which,
in  the  Roman  language,  is,  now,  called  Inter  duos  lucos  33,
Ihe  fpace  between  the  two  groves  ;  and  was,  then,  called  fo
from  its  fituation,  the  valley  being  Jfhaded  by  thick  woods
on  both  fides,  where  it  joins  to  the  hills)  he  confecrated,
and  made  it  an  34  afylum  for  all  fupplicants ;  and,  building

32*  Aiaxgtvuv  ale  trufipofcts,  ale  tux in  his  time,  is  given  by  z  Dion  Caflius,
There  is  great  reafon  to  gather  from  in  whom  we  find  that  this  afylum  of
thefe  words,  that,  if  fome  of  thefe  fu-  Romulus  was  only  nominal,  flnee  it
gitives  fled  from  perfecution,  others  was  inclofed  in  fuch  a  manner  as  not
fled  from  juftice.  to  be  entered;  aru  yao  &t(>ie(pgu%Qiu

33*  MeQogiov  tvs  tv  t^v/uav.  This  will  wj-g  [xqtevn  th  TOTTotgonroiv  «<reA0«v  av]j
be  belt  explained  by  the  words  of  Livy,

upon  the  fame  occafion,  Locum ,  qui  34-  Ao-vAov.  This  inflitution,  alfo,
nunc  feptus  defeendentibus  inter  duos  Romulus,  in  all  probability,  took  from
lucos  eft,  afylum  aperit.  The  reafon  the  Athenians,  in  whofe  city,  the  de-
why  y  Livy  fays  that  place  was  feptus ,  feendants  of  Hercules  inftituted  the

J  B.  i.  c.  8.  ZB,  xlvii.  p.  385.

K  k  2


a  temple


I


252  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

a  temple  there  (but  to  what  god,  or  genius  he  dedicated  it,
I  cannot  certainly  fay)  under  the  color  of  religion  he  in-
gaged  to  proted  thofe,  who  fled  to  it,  from  their  enemies ;
and,  if  they  chofe  to  remain  with  him,  he  communicated
to  them  the  rights  of  Roman  citizens,  and  promifed  them
a  fhare  of  the  lands  he  fhould  take  from  the  enemy.  This
encouragement  drew  thither,  from  all  parts,  a  confluence
of  people,  who  fled  from  their  private  calamities :  Neither
had  they,  afterwards,  any  thoughts  of  removing  to  any
other  place,  being  detained  there  by  daily  inftailces  of  hi$
affability,  and  favor.

XVI.  Befides  thefe  inftitutions,  Romulus  introduced  a
third,  which  the  Greeks,  of  all  others,  ought  to  have
pradifed,  it  being,  in  my  opinion,  the  beft  of  all  inftitu¬
tions,  as  it  has  laid  the  moft  folid  foundation  for  the  liberty
of  the  Romans,  and  not  a  little  contributed  to  raife  them
to  the  empire  they  have  acquired.  It  was  this :  Not  to  put
to  death,  or  make  flaves  of,  the  men  taken  in  the  con¬
quered  cities,  or  35  lay  wafte  their  territories :  But  to  fend
inhabitants  thither  to  pofiefs  fome  part  of  the  country  by

firft  afylum,  which  was  a  temple  de-  moremque  afylorum>  quae  ufquam  erant ..
dicated  to  Mercy.  The  abufes  of  thefe  However,  that  may  be,  the  church  of
afyla,  which  were  very  common  in  the  Rome  has  retained  this  Pagan  inftitu-
Greek  cities,  were  much  complained  tion  with  all  its  abufes,  which,  now,
of  in  the  fenate,  in  the  reign  of  Ti-  are,  and,  for  many  ages,  have  been,
berius  who,  as  a  Tacitus  fays,  re-  carried  to  a  greater  height  than  they,
formed  them,  modus  praefcribebatur :  ever,  were  by  thofe,  from  whom  they
For  which  reafon,  among  many  others,  derived  it.

I  believe b  Suetonius  is  miftaken,  when  35-  M^AoSoto?  vVo  srcAouw*

he  fays  that  Tiberius  abolevit  et  jus ,  Suidas.

a  Annal.  B.  iii,  c.  63.  b  Life  of  Tiberius,  c.  37.

lot,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  253

lot,  and  to  make  thefe  conquered  cities  Roman  colonics ;
and,  even,  to  communicate  to  fome  of  them  the  privileges
of  Roman  citizens.  By  thefe,  and  the  like  inftitutions,  he
aggrandized  this  colony  (as  the  event  fhewed)  which,  in  its
infancy,  was  very  inconfiderable :  For,  the  number  of  thofe,
who,  with  him,  were  the  firft  founders  of  Rome,  did  not
amount  to  more  than  three  thoufand  foot,  nor  quite  to  three
hundred  horfe  :  Whereas,  he  left  behind  him,  when  he
difappeared,  forty  fix  thoufand  foot,  and  near  a  thoufand
horfe.  Romulus  having  been  the  author  of  thefe  inftitutions,
the  kings  of  Rome,  who  fucceeded  him,  and,  after  them,
the  annual  magiftrates,  purfued  the  fame  meafures,  with
fuch  additions,  as  rendered  the  Roman  people,  not  at  all,
inferior  in  number  to  thofe  nations,  that  are  accounted  the
moft  populous.

XVII.  36  When  I  compare  the  cuftoms  of  the  Greeks
with  thefe,  I  can  find  no  reafon  to  extol  either  Thofe  of  the


36,  Tot  <5g  EAA>jv&)v  £$> 1  zraqx  txvIoc
tZilaguv,  etc.  Our  author  has  great
reafon,  when  he  compares  the  inftitu¬
tions  of  the  Greeks  with  Thofe  of  the
Romans,  to  give  the  preference  to  the
latter.  The  Romans  knew  that  nei¬
ther  power,  nor  riches  could  be  ac¬
quired,  or  preferved,  but  by  numbers
of  people  ;  and,  for  that  reafon,  com¬
municated  the  rights  of  their  city  to
all  men,  even  to  thofe,  who  had  been
their  enemies.  There  is  fomething  fo
noble,  fo  humane,  as  well  as  politic  in
this  proceeding,  that  the  refervednefs,
and  jealoufy  of  the  Greek  cities,  with
regard  to  their  privileges,  when  com¬


pared  to  That,  muft  appear  mean,  il¬
liberal,  and  weak;  but  the  expulfion  of
foreigners  from  Sparta,  was  deteftable.
Thefe  principles  of  governm  nt  muft
difpeople  every  country,  and,  by  dis¬
peopling  it,  make  its  fate  depend  upon,
the  event  of  every  battle.  The  obfer-
vation  our  author  makes  upon  the
weaknefs  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  af¬
ter  their  defeat  at  Leu&ra,  was  made,
before,  by  cAriftotle,  who,  though  he
does  not  mention  that  battle,  can  mean
no  Other  ;  iaiocv  yotg  w\Yiyrjv  *x,  vVijvfjoiew

»)  aroA <?,  efAA’  a.7ru\ilo  Six  rytv  ohifxv§pu>7rioiv..

Their  city  could  not  fupport  itfelf  under
a  Jingle  Jlroke ,  but  was  dejlroyed  through


C  'Z70 A,  Axx,


Lace-


*54  HOMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book II.

Lacedaemonians,  or  of  the  Thebans,  or,  even)  of  the  Athe¬
nians,  who  value  themfelves  the  moft  for  their  wifdom ;  all
who,  jealous  of  their  nobility,  and,  communicating  to  none,
or  to  very  few,  the  privileges  of  their  cities  (for  I  fay  no¬
thing  of  thofe,  who  expel  foreigners)  were  fo  far  from  re¬
ceiving  any  advantage  from  this  haughtinefs,  that  they  be¬
came  the  greateft  fufferers  by  it.  The  Spartans,  after  their
defeat  at  Leuctra,  where  they  loft  feventeen  hundred  men,
were  not  only  unable,  afterwards,  to  recover  themfelves
from  that  calamity,  but,  fhamefully,  abandoned  the  com-


the  want  of  people.  The  battle  of
Leuftra,  a  village  in  Boeotia,  was
'fought  in  the  archonfhip  of  Phrafi-
clides  at  dAthens,  that  is,  in  the  fecond
year  of  the  i02d  Olympiad.  The
Thebans  were  commanded  by  the
greateft  man  of  his  age,  Epaminon-
das  ;  and  the  Lacedaemonians  by
‘Cleombrotus,  who  was  flain  in  the
adtion,  or  died,  prefently  after,  of  his
wounds.  Hud  Ton  fays  in  a  note  upon
this  occafion  (which  M.  *  *  *  has
■tranflated)  that  our  author  has  dimi-
nifhed  the  number  of  the  Lacedae¬
monians,  who  were  flain  in  that  battle ;
and  adds  that  they  amounted  to  four
thoufand  men ;  for  which,  he  quotes
Xenophon.  I  have  the  paflage  of  Xe¬
nophon,  now,  before  me,  and,  by  that,
it  appears  that  the  e  Lacedaemonians
loft  near  a  thoufand  men,  and  the
Spartans  about  four  hundred.  Xe¬
nophon’s  words  are  thefe  *,  cl  h  xoa s-
oguvlec  fxtv  tocv  <rvfA7ixv\w  Axks-

cvtujv  t tMctc  eitts  xiAiorr,

Oguvleg  J’avlav  £7 rxflixluv  ovluv  t ctiv  skh  wf

A  Diod.  Sicul.  B.  xv.  p,  484.  Edit,  Steph.

f  In  Agefil.  p.  662.


ZTrlcuoinm  ttOvyjKolx?  IIEPI  TETPAKO-
ZIOTS.  So  that,  Dionyfius,  inftead
of  diminifhing  the  numbers  of  the
flain,  has  increafed  them ;  which
fhould  convince  modern  authors  how
cautious  they  ought  to  be  in  cenfuring
the  great  writers  of  antiquity.  The
fame  French  tranflator  has  rendered
tjjv  7roKiv  avx\xQetv,  fe  relever ,  ni  rebdtir
lean  ville :  He  fliould  have  contented
himfelf  with  the  firft,  which  is  the
fenfe  of  the  Greek  words  :  For,  by
adding  the  other,  he  has  let  his  rea¬
ders  fee  that  he  imagined  the  city  of
Sparta  was  demoliflied  by  the  The¬
bans  after  the  battle  of  Leudlra;
which  is  fo  far  from  being  true,  that,
when  the  Thebans,  and  their  allies
made  an  irruption  into  Laconia  fome-
time  after  that  battle,  and  approached
Sparta,  Agefilaus  obliged  them  to  re¬
tire,  and  preferved  the  city,  though  it
Was  without  walls  ;  opug  Af<pvAa|g  tjjii
sroA/r,  xxi  rxvjx  alci^sov  mrur,  as  f  Xe¬
nophon  fays.

f  B.  vi.  p.  59 7.  Edit,  Leunclav.

mand


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  255

mand  of  Greece.  The  Thebans,  and  Athenians,  37  by  a.
fingle  misfortune  at  Chaeronea,  were  deprived,  not  only,  ot
the  government  of  Greece  by  the  Macedonians,  but,  alfo,
of  the  liberty  they  had  inherited  from  their  anceftors.  But
the  Romans,  though  ingaged  in  great  wars  both  in  Spain,
and  Italy,  and  employed,  at  the  fame  time,  in  recovering
Sicily,  and  Sardinia,  which  had  revolted,  Macedon,  and
Greece  being,  then,  in  arms  againft  them,  and  Carthage  con¬
tending,  again,  for  empire,  while  the  greateft  part  of  Italy,
was,  not  only,  in  open  rebellion,  but,  alfo,  drawing  upon
them  the  Hannibalic  war ;  though  furrounded  with  fo
many  dangers  at  the  fame  time,  they  were  fo  far  from  be¬
ing  oppreffed  by  thefe  misfortunes,  that  they  derived,  even,
an  additional  ftrength  from  thence,  the  number  of  their
foldiers  enabling  them  to  encounter  every  danger,  and  not,
as  feme  imagine,  the  benevolence  of  fortune :  Since,  for  all
her  afliftance,  they  had  been,  utterly,  ruined  38  by  the  fmgk


37*  E£  bos  tx  srf^J  Xxigav&uv

We  find,  by  &  Diodorus  Siculus,
that  the  battle  of  Chaeronea  was  fought
the  year  Charondas  was  archon  at
Athens,  which  was  the  third  year  of
the  1 10th  olympiad.  Philip,  who  com¬
manded  the  Macedonians,  was,  not
on!y,  fuperior  to  the  Athenians,  and
Thebans,  in  the  number  of  his  forces,
but,  alfo,  in  military  fkill  •,  the  former
having,  before,  loft  their  beft  generals,
Iphicrates,  Chabrias,  and  Timotheus.
It  is  remarkable  that  Philip,  in  re¬
joicing  for  this  victory,  got  very
drunk,  which  was  no  unufual  thing


with  him  *,  and,  in  that  condition,
infulted  his  prifoners*,  whenDemades,
an  Athenian  orator,  who  was  one  of
them,  afked  him  if  he  was  not  a  (harri¬
ed,  when  fortune  had  given  him  an
opportunity  of  afting  the  part  of  A-
gamemnon,  to  a 61  That  of  Therfites  ?
This  reproach  chaftifed  Philip,  who,
not  only,  ceafed  to  infult  his  priloners,
but  gave  them  their  liberty  without
ranfom.

3s’  E£  bos  xx  zvigi  K oowus  7aflu)y.x  os.
It  is  plain  that  our  author  followed
Polybius  in  the  account  he  gives  oi
the  lols  fuftained  by  the  Romans  at


s  B,  xvi.  p.  553.


defeat


256  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  IT.

defeat  they  received  at  Cannae,  where  of  fix  thoufand  horfe,
only  three  hundred  and  feventy,  and,  of  fourfcore  thoufand
foot,  of  which  the  infantry  of  the  commonwealth  confifted,
little  more  than  three  thoufand  efcaped.

XVIII.  I  admire,  therefore,  thefe  inftitutions  of  the
man;  and,  alfo,  Thofe  I  am  going  to  relate:  He  was  per-
fuaded  that  the  good  government  of  cities  was  owing  to
thefe  caufes,  which  all  politicians  boaft  of,  but  few  eftablifh;
firft,  the  favor  of  the  gods,  the  enjoyment  of  which  gives
fuccefs  to  every  every  enterprife ;  next,  temperance,  and
juftice,  by  which  the  citizens,  being  lefs  difpofed  to  injure
one  another,  are  more  inclinable  to  unanimity,  and  make
virtue,  not  fhameful  pleafures,  the  meafure  of  their  happi-
nefs ;  and  laftly,  military  courage,  which  renders,  even,
the  other  virtues  ufeful  to  their  pofTeffors :  He  was  fenfible
that  none  of  thefe  advantages  are  the  effedts  of  chance;  but
that  good  laws,  and  the  emulation  of  worthy  purfuits  render  a
commonwealth  pious,  juft,  temperate,  and  warlike.  He


the  battle  of  Cannae  *,  and  yet,  which
is  very  ftrange,  Polybius  is  quoted  by
M.  ***,  in  his  note  upon  this  pafiage,
to  difprove  what  our  author  aflerts.
This  will  lay  me  under  an  obligation
of  quoting  the  words  of  Polybius,
which  agree,  exadtly,  with  Thofe  of
Dionyfius.  As  to  the  numbers  of
foot,  and  horfe,  of  which  the  Roman
army  confifted,  h  Polybius  fays,  » i<rav

(h  <rv y  roig  [jlv-

^ladcig^  iV/Ttt?  ds  srA«*?  r uiv  s£a-

xt^Kiuv.  Then,  after  defcribing  the
battle,  and  the  defeat  of  the  Romans,

h  B.  iii.  p.  263.


;  he  gives  this  account  of  the  lofs  they
fuffered  in  their  horfe  •,  r m  y, gv  y&e>
i^dKttr^hiuv  iQSouyiKOvla  etg

Ovi vxeixv  fAila  Tans  JttQvyov,  rgiot-

y.o<Tixg  Jg  tu'v  cvy.y.aywv  cr7 TOgahg^  &g  rag

7toa«?  £o-o)0«<r«v.  And,  in  fpeaking  of
the  lofs  they  fuftained  in  their  foot,
k  he  fays,  Js  m  kivJ'wx,  r^icr^iAtoi

/uovov  io-&(  ag  rag  •uTa^anei/Mvoc.g  zvoA&g

£n®wyov.  I  fhali  not  tranflate  thefe
paftages  of  Polybius  in  this  note,  be-
caufe  I  think  I  have  done  that  already
in  tranflating  the  account  given  by  our
author  in  the  text.

k  P.  267.


1  P.  266.


took


Book  II.  DIONYSLUS  HALICARN  A  SSENSIS.  257

took  great  care,  therefore,  to  encourage  thefe,  beginning
with  the  worfhip  both  of  the  gods,  and  genius’s ;  and,  ac¬
cording  to  the  moft  approved  rites  in  ufe  among  the  Greeks,
he  appointed  temples,  places  confecrated,  altars,  the  eretft-
ing  of  images,  the  reprefentations,  and  fymbols  of  the  gods,
and  declared  their  power,  the  beneficent  prefents  they  made
to  mankind,  the  particular  holidays  appropriated  to  each
god,  or  genius,  the  facrifices,  which  are  moft  acceptable  to
them,  the  feftivals,  public  games,  and  days  of  reft,  and  every
thing  of  that  nature:  But  he  rejected  all  fuch  traditional
fables  concerning  the  gods,  as  are  mixed  with  blafphemies,
or  calumnies,  looking  upon  them  as  wicked,  ufelefs,  and
indecent,  and  unworthy,  not  only  of  the  gods,  but,  even,  of
good  men  :  And  accuftomed  his  people  to  think,  and  fpeak  %
of  the  gods  with  the  greateft  reverence,  and  to  attribute  no
paflions  to  them  unbecoming  their  happy  nature.

XIX.  For  this  reafbn,  it  is  not  faid,  among  the  Romans,
either  that  Caelus  was  gelt  by  his  own  fons ;  that  Saturn  de-
ftroyed  his  own  children  •  to  fecure  himfelf  from  their  at¬
tempts  ;  or  that  Jupiter  dethroned  Saturn,  and  confined  his
own  father  in  the  dungeon  of  Tartarus :  There  is  no  men¬
tion  made,  among  them,  of  the  wars,  wounds,  or  bonds  of
the  gods,  or  of  their  fervitude  among  men:  Neither  are
there,  among  them,  any  proceflions,  performed  in  mourning
habits,  with  expreftions  of  forrow,  and  attended  with  the
plaints,  and  lamentations  of  women  bewailing  the  difappear-
ance  of  deities ;  fuch  as  the  Greeks  perform  in  commemo¬
rating  the  rape  of  Proferpine,  and  the  adventures  of  Bacchus,

Vol.  I.  '  LI  with


258  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

with  many  other  things  of  the  like  nature.  There  is  no
fuch  thing  to  be  feen  among  them  (though  their  manners
are,  now,  corrupted)  as  enthuftaftic  tranfports,  or  Corybantic
phrenfiesj  no  begging  under  the  color  of  religion,  no
Bacchanals,  or  fecret  myfteries,  no  promifcuous  watchings
of  men,  and  women  in  the  temples ;  nor  any  other  extra¬
vagance  of  this  kind :  But  all  reverence  is  {hewn  to  the  gods,
both  in  their  words,  and  actions,  beyond  what  is  pracftifed
either  among  the  Greeks,  or  Barbarians :  And,  what  I
admire  above  all  things,  notwithftanding  the  refort  of  in¬
numerable  nations  to  Rome,  who  are  all  under  a  neceility
of  worfhiping  their  own  gods  according  to  the  cuftoms  of
their  refpedivre  countries;  the  commonwealth  has  never,  by
public  authority,  adopted  any  of  thofe  foreign  inftitutions ;
a  misfortune  many  other  cities  have  fallen  into :  But,  if,
purfuant  to  fome  oracle,  any  images  of  the  gods  have  been
brought  thither  from  foreign  nations,  39  they  honor  them
according  to  their  own  rites,  banifhing  all  fabulous
impoftures;  and,  in  this  manner,  they  worfhip  the  image
of  the  Idaean  goddefs :  For  the  praetors  perform  annual
facrifices,  and  celebrate  annual  games  in  honor  of  her,
according  to  the  Roman  cuftoms:  But  the  prieft,  and

?9*  Ton  UvVn  aulx  ny.cc  \oyon.  This  are  erefled,  the  fame  pofition  to  the
adherence  of  the  Romans  to  their  own  eaft,  their  ftatues,  pictures,  incenfe,
rites,  and  ceremonies,  upon  their  ad-  holy  water,  proceffions,  and  all  the
opting  any  foreign  object  of  worfhip,  gaudy  apparatus  of  their  former  wor-
appeared,  remarkably,  when  they  re-  fhip  :  So  that,  they  ftill  preferve  their
ceived  Chriftianity:  For  they  retained,  old  religion,  and  have,  only,  changed
and  ftill  retain  their  own  rites,  and  the  objebt  of  it.
their  old  temples  j  and,  when  new  ones


prieftefs


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC ARN  ASSENSIS.  259

prieftefs  of  this  goddefs  are  Phrygians.  Thefe  carry  her
image  in  proceflion  about  the  city,  afking  alms  in  her  name,
according  to  their  cuftom,  and  wearing  figures  upon  their
breaft,  and  ftriking  their  tymbals,  while  their  followers  play
tunes  upon  their  flutes  in  honor  of  the  mother  of  the  gods :
But  no  Roman  born  is,  by  any  law,  or  ordinance  of  the
fenate,  obliged  to  walk  in  proceflion  through  the  city  to
the  found  of  flutes ;  to  aik  alms,  or,  drefled  in  a  party
coloured  habit,  to  worfhip  the  goddefs  with  Phrygian  cere¬
monies  :  So  fearful  are  they  of  admitting  any  foreign
cuftoms  in  religion  ;  and  fo  great  is  their  averfion  to  all
indecent  fables.

XX.  However,  let  no  one  imagine  I  am  not  fenfible  that
fome  of  the  Greek  fables  are  of  ufe  to  mankind ;  fome
being  defigned  to  explain  the  works  of  nature  by  allegories ;
others,  to  adminifter  comfort  to  people  in  diftrefs ;  thefe  to
free  the  mind  from  agitations,  and  terrors ;  thofe  to  remove
ill-grounded  opinions,  and  feveral  invented  for  fome  other
ufeful  purpofe :  Though,  I  fay,  I  am  not  lefs  acquainted
with  thefe  things  than  the  reft  of  the  world,  yet  I  am
cautious  of  receiving  them  as  a  part  of  religion ;  and  much
more  inclined  to  the  theology  of  the  Romans,  when  I
confider  that  the  advantages,  flowing  from  the  Greek
fables,  are  final!,  and  extend  only  to  thofe,  who  have  exa¬
mined  the  end,  for  which  they  are  defigned;  and  this
philofophy  few  are  acquainted  with  ;  while  the  vulgar,  who
are  ignorant  of  it,  generally  take  thefe  fables  in  the  worfe
fenfe,  and  fall  into  one  of  thefe  two  errors ;  they  either  de-

L  1  2  ipife


26o


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

fpife  the  gods,  as  fubjedt  to  many  misfortunes ;  or  abandon
themfelves  to  the  molt  fhameful  exceffes,  which  they  fee  are
attributed  to  the  gods.

XXL  But  I  leave  thefe  confederations  to  thofe,  who
make  the  fpeculative  part  of  philofophy  only  their  ftudy.
As  to  the  conftitution,  eftablifhed  by  Romulus,  I  think,
thefe  things,  alfo,  are  worthy  the  notice  of  hiftory  i  Firft,
that  he  appointed  a  great  number  of  perfons  to  perform  di¬
vine  fervice.  And,  indeed,  no  man  can  name  any  new-
built  city,  in  which  fo  many  priefts,  and  minifters  of  the
gods  were  ordained  from  the  beginning:  For,  without
mentioning  thofe, 40  who  are  inverted  with  family  priefthoods,
threefcore  were  appointed  in  his  reign  to  perform  divine
fervice  for  the  profperity  of  the  commonwealth,  both  in  the
tribes,  and  the  curiae :  I  only  repeat  what  41  Terentius
Varro,  the  moft  learned  man  of  his  age,  has  written  in  his
antiquities.  In  the  next  place  ;  whereas  others,  generally,
make  choice  of  fuch,  as  are  to  prertde  over  religious  matters,
in  a  mean,  and  inconrtderate  manner  ;  fome  thinking  fit  to

IvfymKAg  M.  ***  inftance  in  m  Livy,  where  Fabius  came

has  tranflated  this,  qui  fuccedoient  aux  out  of  the  capitol,  then  befieged  by
dignitez  facerdotales  de  leurs  peres  the  the  Gauls,  and  pafied  through  their
fenfe  of  which  is  that  the  priefthood  army  to  the  Quirinal  hill,  which  was
was  hereditary  at  Rome  •,  whereas  the  the  particular  place  appointed  for  the
contrary  of  this  is  very  well  known  to  performance  ot  his  family  rites  j  fa~
all  men  of  learning.  The  priefts  men-  crificium  erat  Jlatum  in  Quirinali  colie
tioned  here  by  our  author  were  thofe,  genii  Fabiae.

who  performed  the  facrifices  peculiar  4i-  TsgtvhosQvctffeov.  This  author  is,
to  their  families,  which  1  Cicero  calls  often,  quoted  by  Dionyfius,  and,  often,
facrijicia  gentilia ,  and  in  a  particular  mentioned  by  me  in  the  notes,  as  the
place.  Of  this  we  find  a  remarkable  greateft  antiquary  Rome  ever  produced,

1  De  harufp,  refpQn.  c.  15.  m  B.  v.  c.  46.

make


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  261
make  public  fale  of  this  honor;  others,  difpofing  of  it  by
lot ;  he  would  not  fuffer  the  priefthood  to  be  either  venal,  or
diftributed  by  lot ;  but  made  a  law,  that  each  curia  fhould
chufe  two  perfons,  both  above  fifty  years  of  age,  of  diftin-
guifhed  birth,  and  virtue,  competent  fortune,  and  without
any  bodily  defe<ft:  Thefe  were  not  to  enjoy  their  honors
during  any  limited  time,  but  for  life,  freed  from  military
employments  by  their  age,  and,  from  the  cares  of  civil
government,  by  this  law.

XXII.  And,  becaufe  fome  rites  were  to  be  performed  by
women,  others  by  boys,  whofe  fathers,  and  mothers  were
living,  to  the  end  that  thefe,  alfo,  might  be  adminiftred  in
the  beft  manner,  he  ordered  that  the  wives  of  the  priefts
fhould  be  affociated  to  their  hufbands  in  the  priefthood  ;
and,  if  any  functions  were  forbidden  by  the  laws  of  the
country  to  be  adminiftred  by  men,  thefe  women  were  to
perform  them  ;  and  their  fons  to  exercife  Thofe,  that  belonged
to  them  ;  and,  that  the  priefts,  who  had  no  children,  fhould
chufe  out  of  the  other  families  of  each  curia,  the  moft
beautiful  boy,  and  girl ;  the  firft  to  be  affiftant  in  the  holy
functions,  till  the  age  of  manhood ;  and  the  girl  to  be  fo,
as  long  as  fhe  continued  unmarried  :  Thefe  inftitutions,
alfo,  in  my  opinion,  he  borrowed  from  Thofe  of  the  Greeks:
For,  whatever  functions  are  adminiftred  in  the  Greek  cere¬
monies  by  thofe  they  call 42  KavriQogoi,  Bajket -bearers ^  the  fame

42*  Kxvy®o(>oi.  I  fee  no  reafon  to  Cicero  calls  the  two  brazen  ftatues  of

fufpedt  this  reading ;  fince  it  is  certain  Polycletus,  which  Yerres  took  from

that  they  were  called  Canephorae  by  Hejus  of  Mefiana  :  I  fhall  quote  the

the  Romans.  And,  by  that  name,  palfage,  becaufe,  by  that,  it  will  ap-
%

are


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.


are  performed  by  thofe,  whom  the  Romans  call  by  the  fame
name :  During  thefe  ceremonies,  they  wear  on  their  heads
the  fame  kind  of  crowns,  with  which  the  ftatues  of  the
Ephefian  Diana  are  adorned  among  the  Greeks.  And  the
fundlions,  which,  among  the  Tyrrhenians,  and  before,  among
the  Pelafgi,  were  adminiftered  by  thofe,  they  called, 43  Cadoli,
in  the  rites  of  the  Curetes,  and  in  Thofe  of  the  great
gods,  were  performed,  in  the  fame  manner,  by  thofe  mini-
fters  to  the  priefts,  who  are,  now,  called,  by  the  Romans,
Camilli.  Befides,  Romulus  ordered  one  foothfayer  out  of
each  tribe  to  affift  at  the  facrifices:  This  foothfayer  we  call
IzPoaxoTtcG)  an  infpeBor  of  the  viEUms  ;  and  the  Romans,  pre¬
ferring  fomething  of  the  ancient  appellation,  Arufpex  :  He,
alfo,  made  a  law  that  all  the  priefts,  and  minifters  of  the  gods
fhould  be  chofen  by  the  curiae ;  and  that  their  election
fhould  be  confirmed  by  thofe,  who,  by  their  prophetic  art,
interpret  heavenly  omens.


pear  in  what  altitude  both  painters,
and  fculptors  ought  to  reprefent  the
Canephoraej  aErant  aenea  praeterea  duo
figna ,  non  maxima. ,  verum  eximid  venu-
Jiate ,  virginali  habitu  atque  vejlitu ,  quae
manibus  fublatis  facra  quaedam ,  more
Athenknfium  virginum ,  repofita  in  capi-
iibus  fujlinebant :  Canepnorae  ipfae
vocabantur.  Sed  earum  artificem  —
Polycletum  ejfe  dicebant.

43-  k«<L>Ao<.  I  can  make  nothing
of  this  word.  The  commentators,
though  they  differ  with  regard  to  the
word,  that  fhould  be  fubftituted  in  its
room,  yet  all  agree  in  difcarding  this.
Under  thefe  difficulties,  I  fhall  offer  a
conjecture  of  my  ow.n  *,  I  would  read


Ka<r[M\\oi  :  My  reafon  is,  that  Varro
fays  the  minifter  of  the  great  gods
is  called,  in  Samothrace,  Cafmillus,
which,  he  fays,  is  a  Greek  word  ;  and
that  he  found  it  in  0  Callimachus.
Hinc  Cafmillus  nominatnr  in  Samothra-
ciis  myfteriis  deus  quidam ,  adminijler  diis
magnis .  Verbum  Graecum  arbitror ,  quod
apud  Callimachum  inpoematis  ejus  inveni .
And  I,  really,  think  that  pVirgil,  who,
every  where,  fhews  himfelf  to  have
been,  perfectly,  acquainted  with  the
antiquities  of  his  country,  alludes  to
this  change  of  the  word  Cafmillus  to
Camillus,  when  he  fays,


matrifque  'vocavit

"Nomine  Cafmillae,  mutilata  parte^  Camillam.


D  In  Verr.  B.  iv.  c.  3  ?  B.  vi.  De  Ling.  Latin.  p  Aen.  B.  xi.  f.  543.

XXIII.


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S S E N S  I S.  263

XXIII.  After  he  had  inftituted  thefe  regulations  con¬
cerning  the  minifters  of  the  gods,  he  afilgned  the  proper
facrifices  to  each  curia,  as  I  laid,  appointing  gods,  and
genius’s  for  each,  whom  they  were,  always,  to  worfhip;  and
limited  the  expencesof  the  facrifices,  which  were  to  be  paid  by
the  public.  The  curiae  performed  their  appointed  facrifices
with  their  own  priefts ;  and,  on  holy  days,  they  feafted
together  in  the  dining-room  belonging  to  the  curia;  for
each  curia  had  its  own :  Adjoining  thereto  a  chapel 44  is
confecrated,  which  is  common  to  all  the  curia,  like  the
Prytanea  of  the  Greeks :  Thefe  dining-rooms  were,  alfo,
called  curiae;  which  name  they,  ftill,  retain.  This  inftitu-
tion  Romulus  feems  to  have  taken  from  the  difcipline  of
the  Lacedaemonians,  among  whom  the  focieties,  called
45  Phiditia,  were,  then,  in  great  requeft ;  which  inftitution


44*  K atiucioP.o.  I  approve,  intirely,
of  the  correction  of  Sylburgius,  who
thinks  it  ought  to  be  jco0w<ncJ]a< ;  be-
caufe  our  q  author  fays,  pofitively,  in
fpeaking  of  the  inftitutions  of  Numa,
that  he  ereCted  this  chapel,  and  that
Romulus  did  not  build  a  common
temple  to  Vefta  ;  for  which,  he  there
gives  a  very  good  reafon.  I  obferve
that  M.  *  *  *  takes  the  u^vlavei»,  here
mentioned  by  our  author,  to  fignify
the  houfes,  where  thole,  who  had  de-
ferved  well  of  the  Athenians,  were
maintained  at  the  public  expence,  and
deduces  the  etymology  of  the  word
trom  zvvgof  Toi/uaov ,  the  place  where  they
kept  the  fire.  But,  though  &r{v7«v«a
has  that  fignification,  it,  alfo,  fignifies


public  dining-rooms,  likeThofe ereCted
by  Romulus,  and  called,  by  the  Ro¬
mans,  Curiae  ;  and,  in  this  fenfe  alone,
they  are  analogous  to  the  latter.  And
as  to  hisetymol6gy,I  muft  beg  leave  to
think  that  xyetov,  more  naturally,
accounts  for  the  name  of  thofe  public
houfes ;  which  I  fhall  fupport  by  the
authority  ol  the  Etymclogicum  magnum ;
rT£v7*»«ov,  fays  the  author  of  it,  Tones

AO^vaioK,  ev  to  j toivcti  tch

Jyi[AO(rH)iS  fUi(>yiluiS  6<h<fov7o*  006V  KMt
r otveiov  6k«A«7o,  oiwet  zcrvgolayetov  (zrvgcf
yocg  0  aaoi)  t«7  ffi  tx  Jv.yonx  crtlx  TUyetov.

45-  (Ptfiliot.  Thus  they  are  called  by
r  Ariftotle,  who  explains  the  word  by
<rv<r<rfl ix  ;  and  gives  the  preference  to
Thofe  of  the  Cretans,  from  whom,  he


s  C.  65.  of  this  book.


rn&A‘7i#.  c.  7,  et  8,


Lycurgus,


264  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

Lycurgus,  who  had  learned  it  from  the  Cretenfes,  feems  to
have  introduced  to  the  great  advantage  of  his  country  ;  in
peace,  by  promoting  frugality,  and  temperance  in  their  daily
repafts ;  and  in  war,  by  infpiring  every  man  with  fhame,
and  repugnance  to  forfake  his  companion,  with  whom  he
had  lived  in  a  communion  of  libations,  facrifices,  and  holy
rites.  Romulus  does,  not  only,  deferve  praife  for  the  wifdom
of  thefe  inflitutions,  but,  alfo,  on  account  46  of  the  frugality
of  the  facrifices  he  appointed  to  be  offered  up  to  the  gods ;
the  greateft  part,  if  not  all,  of  which  remain  to  this  day,
and  are  performed  in  the  ancient  manner.  I  myfelf  have
feen,  in  the  temples,  repafts  prepared  for  the  gods,  upon
wooden  tables  pf  ancient  workmanfhip  ;  and  barley  cakes,
wafers,  and  fpelt,  with  the  primitiae  of  fome  fruits  in
bafkets,  and  ftnall  earthen  plates,  and  other  things  of  the
like  nature,  all  fimple,  cheap,  and  void  of  all  oftentation.
I  have  feen,  alfo,  the  libation  wines  mixed,  not  in  filver  and
gold  veflels,  but  in  little  earthen  chalices,  and  ewers ;  and,
greatly,  admired  the  men  for  adhering  to  the  cuftoms  of

fays,  the  Lacedaemonians  took  this  as  an  offering  to  Jupiter  by  the  La-
inftitution  :  The  reafon  he  gives  for  tines,  and  Hernici,  when  they  con-
this  preference  is,  that,  among  the  gratulated  the  Romans  upon  the  ex-
latter,  every  member  of  thefe  focieties  tindtion  of  the  decemvirate  ;  s  coleban-
was  obliged  to  furniih.  a  certain  fumof  tur  religiones  pie  magis  quam  magnifice.
money  towards  their  entertainments ;  Afterwards,  when  this  magnificence
whereas,  the  expence  of  the  Cretan  prevailed  in  their  public  worlhip,  when
locieties  was  fupplied  by  the  public,  their  temples  were  imbellilhed  with
which,  he  fays,  was  more  popular.  filver,  gold,  and  precious  ftones,  and
46 ■  tv  ruv  Svffim.  Livy  adorned  with  ftatues  of  the  moft  ex¬

makes  a  fine  obfervation  in  relation  to  quifite  workmanfhip,  they  paid  no
a  crown  of  gold  of  fmall  weight,  fent  regard  either  to  religion,  or  morality.

5  B.iii.  c.  57.


their


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  SE  N  S I  S.  265

their  anceflors,  alnd  not  degenerating,  from  their  ancient
rites,  into  a  vain  magnificence.  There  are,  alfo,  fome  other
inftitutions,  worthy  to  be  both  remembered,  and  related,
which  owe  their  birth  to  Numa  Pompilius,  the  fucceffor  of
Romulus,  a  man  of  confumrnate  wifdom,  and  of  a  rare
fagacity  in  interpreting  the  will  of  the  gods  :  But  of  thefe  I
fhall  fpeak  afterwards.  Others  were  added  by  Tullus
_  Hoftilius,  the  third  king  after  Romulus,  and  by  every  fuc-
ceeding  king :  But  the  feeds  of  them  were  fown,  and  the
foundations  laid  by  Romulus,  who  eftablifhed  the  principal
rites  of  their  religion.

XXIV.  Romulus,  alfo,  feems  to  have  been  the  author  of
that  good  difcipline  in  other  things,  by  the  obfervance  of
which  the  Roman  commonwealth  has  flourifhed  for  many
generations ;  he  having  enabled  many  good  and  ufeful  laws,
the  greateft  part  unwritten,  but  fome  committed  to  writing:
All  of  which  I  do  not  think  neceflary  to  mention,  but  fhall,
only,  give  a  fhort  account  of  thofe  I,  chiefly,  admire,  and  look
upon  as  proper  to  illuftrate  the  tenor  of  his  other  laws,  and
to  (hew  how  auftere  they  were,  how  averfe  to  vice,  and  how,
nearly,  refembling  the  lives  of  the  heroes:  However,  I
muft,  firft,  obferve,  that  all  legiflators,  as  well  Barbarians,
as  Greeks,  feem,  in  general,  to  have  been,  rightly,  fenfible
that  all  cities,  as  they  confift  of  many  families,  are  moft
likely  to  injoy  tranquillity,  when  the  lives  of  private  men
are  47  calm ;  and  to  be  agitated  with  many  tempefts,  when

47*  Otxv  0!  twv  t J 'uJuv  evraQum  fiioi.  miftaken  the  fenfe  of  this  expreflion.
All  the  tranflators  have, in  my  opinion,  M.  *  *  *  has  faid  me  vie  reglee ;  and

Vol.  I.  Mm  '  they


ROMAN  ANTIQJJITXES  OF  Book  II.

they  are  ruffled  ;  and  that  every  able  politician,  whether  he
is  a  legislator,  or  a  king,  ought  to  introduce  fuch  laws,  as
will  render  private  men  juft  and  temperate.  But  they  do
not  all  feem,  equally,  to  have  underftood  by  what  institu¬
tions,  and  by  what  laws,  this  may  be  affe&ed ;  and  Some  of
them  have  committed  very  great,  and,  I  may  fay,  eflential
errors  in  the  principal,  and  chief  parts  of  legislature.  Firft,
concerning  marriages,  and  the  commerce  with  women,  from
which  a  lawgiver  ought  to  begin  (as  nature  has  begun  from
thence  to  form  our  lives)  fome,  taking  example  from  wild
beafts,  have  allowed  men,  and  women  48  to  converfe  together
promifcuouSly,  and  without  reftraint,  as  the  proper  means  to
free  mankind  from  the  rage  of  love  ;  to  baniSh  jealou fy,  the
parent  of  mutual  Slaughter  ;  and  prevent  many  other  mis¬
chiefs,  which  both  private  families,  and  whole  cities  are,  often,

expofed  to  through  women :  Others,  by  joining  one  man  to

•  *

le  Jay,  bonne  conduits.  I  believe  the  thought  fit  to  exprefs,  figuratively,
Latin  tranfiators  milled  them  by  by  ooQ^v  arA«v,  and  to  fay,  afterwards*
rendering  it  vivendi  rationem  ex  act  am.  ay&vj  to  which  eufaSan  @101

There  is  no  doubt  but,  if  every  in-  correlponds  in  the  fame  figure,  they
dividual  lives  regularly,  the  city  will  being  all  terms  of  navigation  ;  and
be  exceeding  regular.  1  his  is  not  none  more  lo  than  ivgxbxi’  stsa xyog,
fuch  a  fecret  in  politics,  as  to  have  in-  fo  often,  ufed  by  the  beft  authors,
duced  our  author  to  quote  the  autho-  .  This  figure  none  of  the  tranfiators
rity  of  all  the  legiflators  to  fupport  it.  feem  to  have  had  the  leaf!;  fufpicion  of.
His  meaning  is,  that  every  city  will  4s-  Koiv«?  This  was  Pla-

contmue  quiet,  as  long  as  the  indivi-  to’s  fyftem  ;  and  a  very  extraordinary
duals  live  with  eafe :  For,  nothing  fyftem  it  is ;  His  words  are  thele  v
tempts  men  to  difturb  the  quiet  of  any  1  r«?  ywcuKug  ruvlag  tu>v  avJ^uiv  t fLv
government  fo  much,  as  domeftic  un-  arav7wv  a rutras  eiv«i  Kotvxg.  iStx,  ot  pyjtvi
cafinefs,  from  what  caufe  foever  it  ^i^toev  cwomeiv  •,  tor  which  whim,  he
flows.  This  fenfe  our  author  has  is,  delervedly,  cenfured  by  v  Ariftotle.

1  Dip  •nrcAir.  B.  v,  p.  655.  v  EbA»r.  B.  ii.  C.  I.


one


Book  It.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  AS  SEN  SIS.  267

one  woman,  have  expelled  this  rude  and  favage  commerce  ;
however,  concerning  the  obfervance  of  the  marriage-rites,
and  the  chaftity  of  women,  they  never  attempted  to  make
any  regulations  whatfoever ;  but  gave  up  the  thing,  as  im¬
practicable  :  Others  have  neither  allowed  the  ufe  of  women
without  marriage,  like  fome  Barbarians ;  nor  negleCted  the
care  of  them, 49  like  the  Lacedaemonians ;  but  have  infti-
tuted  many  laws  to  keep  them  within  bounds  :  And  fome
have,  even,  50  appointed  a  magiftrate  to  infped:  the  conduct
of  women  :  However,  this  provifion  was  found  infufficient
to  reftrain  them,  and  too  remifs  to  reduce  women  of  bad
difpofitions  to  the  neceffity  of  a  modeft  behaviour.

XXV.  But  Romulus,  without  giving  either  to  the  huf-
band  an  aCtion  againft  his  wife  for  adultery,  or  elopement


49*  n<nrtp  Aout$xipovioi.  Ariftotle,
alfo,  finds  great  fault  with  the  Lace¬
daemonian  women,  who,  he  fays,
abandoned  themfelves  to  all  forts  of
excefs  ;  yug  cu oAotgcog  vrgog  dntx.sa.v
<xKoAa.<riex,v,  kou  •  It  feems  Ly-

curgus  endeavoured  to  bring  them  un¬
der  fome  government,  but  they  refill¬
ing,  he  gave  it  over :  So  that  they,
not  their  lawgiver,  were  the  caufe  of
thefe  irregularities.  Bur,  continues
Ariftotle,  we  do  not  confider  who
ought  to  be  excufed,  and  who  not;
but,  what  is  right,  and  what  not ;
w  a KK  «‘a«f  x  txIo  crKOTTxyiv  t m  Set  c rvy-
yvuy jjv  y\  p;  eXP*  aKKot.  vrtgi  tx

y.cu  p j  o^ug.

5°‘  rivcA  ?7npA>j<ropv>jv

ivMCfMois  ywaiKoov.  Thefe  magiftrates
were  called  by  the  Athenians  ywouno-


vo{ioi :  Their  duty  was,  not  only,  to
infpedt  the  condufl  of  the  women,
(which,  one  would  think,  might  have
given  them  full  employment)  but,  al¬
fo,  to  enter  the  houfes  of  thofe,  who
gave  entertainments,  and  to  count  the
guefts  :  The  mailer  of  the  houfe  being
finable,  if  their  number  exceeded  thirty.
x  Athenaeus,  from  whom  I  have  this
account,  quotes,  upon  this  occafion,
fome  verfes  of  Menander,  whofe  pre¬
cious  remains  cannot  be  too  often
tranfcribed,

n^^TOIS  rYNAIKONOMOII  Si  T*g
tv  t 01$  yayoig
A(a? lovxvlocg  oczroytyguQQai
Tlou/loig  yayet^xg  ndloi  voyov  kcuvqv  tivU,
Ivol  vrvvQcivwvlui  mg  KtKAyysvxg  tctv
TlAetxg  rig  uv  zfygiv  egiwv
EaQmv.

*  B.  vi.  c.  1 1.

M  m  2


?  lb.  c.  7.


without


268  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

without  caufe ;  or  to  the  wife  an  action  againft  her  hufband
for  wafting  her  fortune,  or  for  divorcing  her  without  reafon ;
without  making  any  laws  for  the  returning,  or  recovery  of
the  portion,  or  regulating  any  thing  of  this  nature  ;  by  a
fingle  inftitution,  which,  effe&ually,  provides  for  all  thefe
things,  as  experience  fhews,  he  brought  the  married  wo¬
men,  even,  chearfully,  to  behave  themfelves  with  great  order,
and  modefty:  The  law  was  this,  “  That  a  woman,  married
“  to  her  hufband  by  the  holy  laws,  fhall  partake  of  all  his
<c  fortunes,  and  facrifices.”  The  ancients  called  holy  and
lawful  marriages,  by  a  Roman  appellation,  51  Farracia ,  from
the  communion  of  Far ,  Spelt ;  which  we  call  Z sa,  ;  for  this
was  the  ancient,  and,  for  a  long  time,- -the  ordinary  food  of  all
the  Romans ;  their  country  producing  great  plenty  of  ex¬
cellent  fpelt.  And,  as  we  Greeks  look  upon  barley  to  be
the  moft  ancient  grain;  and,  for  that  reafon,  begin  our
facrifices  with  barley-cakes  mixed  with  fait,  which  we  call
OvXou :  So  the  Romans,  from  an  opinion  that  fpelt  is  both

51*  <C>j£ppVjt  10c.  I  do  not  remember  the  bread,  made  of  it,  is  thought  to-
to  have  met  with  Farratia  in  any  Latin  be  lets  nouiifhing.  It  is,  generally,
author  for  this  kind  of  marriage:  The  fuppofed  that  thefe  kinds  of  marriages
word  ufed  by  them,  upon  that  occa-  were,  totally,  abrogated  oy  the  inftitu-
fion,  is,  Confarreatio ,  derived  from  Far^  tion  of  Thofe  of  another  kind,  called,
as  our  author  fays,  a  Cake ,  which  was  Coemption  which  was  a  fictitious  pur-
ufed  in  that  ceremony.  Far  is  called  chafe;  the  married  couple  being  fup-
Spelt  in  our  language,  though  I  never  pofed  to  purchafe  each  other.  But  w'e
faw  any  of  it  in  England  ;  but  I  have  find,  by  a  fpeech  of  Tiberius,  in  y  Ta-
feen  it  growing  in  Germany,  where  cirus,  that  they  were  not,  wholly,  dif-
they  make  bread  of  it,  which  is  as  ufed,  even,  in  his  time  ;  Omijja  confer-
white  as  wheat  bread  ;  and,  indeed,  it  reandi  adfuetudine ,  aut  inter  paucos  re-
refembles  wheat  in  every  th.ng,  but  the  tentd—accedere  ipjius  caeremoniae  dijfi-
fize  of  the  grain,  which  is  lefs ;  and  cultates ,  quae  confulto  vitarentur .

y  Ann.  B.  iv.  c.  1 6.


the


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALI  C  ARN  ASSEN  SI  S.  269
the  moft  valuable,  and  moil:  ancient  of  grains,  in  all  burnt-
offerings,  begin  the  facrifice  with  That ;  and  this  cuftom
remains  to  this  day,  without  deviating  into  firft- offerings
of  greater  expence.  The  participation  in  the  moft  holy
and  firft  food  of  the  women  with  their  hufbands,  and  their
union  with  them,  founded  on  their  fharing  in  all  their-
fortunes,  took  its  name  from  this  participation  of  fpelt,  and,
neceflarily,  produced  an  indifloluble  connexion,  nothing
being  capable  of  diffolving  thefe  marriages.  This  law  ob¬
liged  both  the  married  women,  as  having  no  other  refuge,,
to  conform  themfelves,  intirely,  to  the  temper  of  their  huf¬
bands,  and  the  hufbands  to  retain  their  wives,  as  necefiary,.
and  infeparable  companions :  For,-  if  fhe  was  virtuous,  and,
in  all  things,  obedient  to  her  hufband,  fhe  was  miftrefs  of
the  houfe,  as  much  as  he  was  mafter  of  it ;  and,  after  the
death  of  her  hufband,  fine  was  heir  to  his  fortunes,  in  the
fame  manner  as  a  daughter  was  to  Thofe  of  her  father  ;
if  he  died  without  children,  and  inteftate,  (lie  was  his  foie
heir ;  and,  if  he  left  children,  fhe  had  an  equal  fhare  of  his
fortunes  with  them.  But,  if  fhe  committed  any  fault,
52  the  injured  perfon  was  her  judge,  and  determined  the


52*  t cv  aoiKUfAfvov

xcti  t a  lAtyibx?  7*1?  rifjiwqias  wgiov.  Lip-

fiu's,  who  was  a  man  of  great  learning,
has  gben  us  t  e  laws  made  by  feveral
of  the  Roman  kings,  collected,  as  he
fays,  chiefly,  from  our  author ;  in
which,  he  has  been  followed  by  many
writers,  who  fuppole  the  words,  given
by  Lipfius,  to  have  been  the  very
words,  in  which  thefe  old  laws  were


ena&ed  :  For  example,  he  has  tranf-
lated  this  law,  mentioned  by  our  au¬
thor,  into  the  language,  ufed  in  the
age  of  Auguftus  ;  Si  fiuprum  commifit ,•
aliudve  quid  peccajfet ,  maritus  judex  et
v'mdex  efto.  But  the  infeription  in
honor  of  Duillius  tor  the  firft  naval
victory  the  Romans,  ever,  obtained,
and  his  otiier  fucceffes  againft  the
Carthaginians,  which  is  ftill  extant,

degree


Book  II.


-70  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

degree  of  her  punifhment.  In  the  cafe  of  adultery,  or,
where  it  was  found  that  file  had  drank  wine  (which  the
Greeks  would  look  upon  as  the  leaf!:  of  all  crimes)  her  re¬
lations,  together  with  her  hufband,  were  appointed  her
judges ;  who  were  allowed  by  Romulus  to  punifli  both  thefe
crimes  with  death,  as  the  greatefl  offences  women  could  be
guilty  of:  For  he  looked  upon  adultery  as  the  fource  of
Impudence ;  and  drunkennefs,  of  adultery :  Both  thefe
crimes  continued,  for  a  long  time,  to  be  punifhed  by  the
Romans  without  mercy.  And  the  length  of  time  has  fhewn
the  goodnefs  of  this  law  concerning  women  :  For  it  is  al¬
lowed  that,  during  the  fpace  of  five  hundred  and  twenty
years,  no  marriage  was,  ever,  diffolved  at  Rome.  But,  in  the
hundred  and  thirty  feventh olympiad,  and 53  in  the  confulfhip


will  convince  any  one  that  the  Latin
language,  which  changed  fo  much
from  the  year  493,  or  494,  in
which  Duillius  was  conful,  as  appears
by  this  infeription,  though  his  name
is  not  in  the  Fafti  confulares ,  and  ob¬
tained  this  vidtory,  to  the  time  of
Auguftus,  or  about  half  a  century
before,  muft,  in  all  probability,  have
changed  much  more  from  the  time  of
Romulus,  to  That  of  Duillius,  that  is,
in  the  fpace  of  494  years.  I  fhall
tranfci  ibe  a  few  lines  of  this  infeription,
for  two  reafons ;  the  firft,  to  fhew
what  the  Latin  language  was  in  thofe
days ;  and  the  other,  to  do  juftice  to
the  fidelity  of  Polybius,  by  laying  be¬
fore  the  reader  fome  particulars,  in
which  the  account,  given  by  that
author  of  this  naval  battle,  agrees,


furprizingly,  with  That,  preferved  in
this  authentic  infeription.  presented.

MAXVMOD.  DICTATORED.  OLORVM.  IN.
ALTOD.  MARID.  PVGNANDOD.  VICET.
XXXQVE .  N  A VE IS.  CEPET.  CVM.  SOCIEIS.
SEPTEMRESMOMQVE.  DVCIS.  QVIN-
RESMOSQVE.  TRIRESMOSQVE.  NAVEIS.
XX.  DEPRESET.  z  Hyetlo  J'AwiGxg  Oivluv
— ■ rgiotKQvla  fAiv  rag  w^edag  trv/xGaA x<rag
vavg  avlavJgxg  xtt&xAw,  <rvv  dig  tytvtlo
cu%/xahd\ov  YuXi  to  Ttf  gpctlvya  zrAGiov-—
ipvyov  ol  Ka^yJovioi  — -  £ v7 yjKQiPix  vavg

X7ro£aAovleg.

53*  Y7rdievovlct>v  Mxgnx  nopncvix,  xai

rdia  nam^ix.  Valerius  Maximus,  and
Gellius  are  quoted,  upon  this  occafion ;
but  both  of  them,  or  their  tranferibers,
have  miflaken  the  year.  Our  author
fays  the  firft  divorce  happened  in  the
137th  olympiad,  that  is,  the  firft  year

23,  et  24.


z  B.  i.  p.


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  ENS  IS.  27  r

of  Marcus  Pomponius,  and  Caius  Papirius,  Spurius  Carvilius,
no  obfcure  per  foil,  is  faid  to  have  been  the  firft  man,  who
divorced  his  wife,  the  cenfors  obliging  him  to  fwear  that  he
took  another  with  a  viewr  ol  having  children,  his  own  being
barren  :  However,  he  was,  by  reafon  of  this  a&ion,  though
founded  in  neceffity,  ever  after  hated  by  the  people.

XXVI.  Thefe,  therefore,  are  the  good  laws,  which  Ro¬
mulus  enabled  concerning  women ;  by  which  he  rendered
them  more  obfervant  to  their  hufbands.  But  Thofe  he
eftablifhed  to  infpire  children  with  reverence,  and  £4  piety  to
their  fathers,  and  to  oblige  them  to  honor,  and  obey  them
in  all  things,  both  in  their  words,  and  a&ions,  are  ftill
more  auguft,  and  of  greater  dignity,  and,  vaftly,  fuperior  to
our  laws:  For  the  Greek  legiflators  limited  a  very  fhort
time  for  the  fon  to  be  under  the  government  of  his  father ;
fome,  till  the  expiration  of  the  third  year  after  he  wTas  arrived
to  manhood  :  Others,  as  long  as  he  continued  unmarried  :
And  fome,  till  their  names  were  regiftered  in  the  collep-es


of  this  olympiad  :  For  That  muft  be,
always,  und^rltood,  when  the  year  is
not  mentioned  :  iNow,  the  firft  year  of
the  137th  olympiad  was  the  52iftycar
of  Rome  j  and,  though,  I  find,  iome
accounts  of  .he  fucceliion  of  the  con-
fuls  place  the  confuifhip  of  Pomponius,
and  Papin  us  the  year  after,  yet  they
were,  according  to  our  author,  and,  in
my  opinion,  according  to  truth,  con-
fuls  this  year.

54-  a* Our  author  ufes  this
word,  here,  in  a  philofophical  fen'e;
in  which,  Jacciecui^  figntfi^s  Vstue^


generally  ;  as  etiwei  fignifies  Vice.  The
former,  therefore,  muft  notbe  confined,
in  this  place,  to  jujlice ,  which  is  only
one  fpecies  of  Virtue,  as  the  piety  of
children  to  their  parents  is  another.
This  is  the  doftiine  of  that  great  mo*
ralift,  Ariftotle,  whofe  ethics  I  have,
already,  obierved,  and  fhall,  often,  have
occafion  to  obierve  our  author,  fre¬
quently,  alludes  to  with  approbation,
a  iOiKi  Si  VS'KiO\ Ctyj/H.  Atyi&CU  S  S  IKP.ltjffVVYy
y,  ocSikkx,  are  the  words  of  that  phi-
lofopher.


*  Ethei.  B.  v,  c.  i.


ef


t.jz  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  -  Book  II.

of  the  magiftrates ;  as  they  had  learned  from  the  laws  of
55  Solon,  56  Pittacus,  and  57  Charondas,  in  which  there  is
acknowledged  to  be  great  wifdom.  The  punishments,  alfo,
they  ordered  for  difobedience  in  children  were  not  grievous ;
allowing  their  fathers  to  turn  them  out  of  doors,  and  to
disinherit  them,  and  nothing  further.  Whereas,  gentle
punifhments  are  not  Sufficient  to  reftrain  the  folly,  and  info-
lence  of  youth,  or  to  reftore  thofe,  who  defpife  their  duty,
to  a  fenfe  of  it :  For  which  reafon,  among  the  Greeks,  great
indecencies  are  committed  by  children  againSt  their  parents.
But  the  lawgiver  of  the  Romans  gave  full  power  (as  one

55*  2o\uv.  The  learned  world  is  fo  of  whom  one,  furnamed  Mnt^o?,  was  a
much  acquainted  with  Solon,  that  I  lawgiver,  and  flourifhed  at  the  fame
(hall  fay  no  more  of  him  than  that  he  time  with  Croefus  ;  becaufe  c  Laertius
was  not  an  Athenian,  though  he  was  .  tranfcribes  a  letter  from  him  to  that
their  legifiator,  but  of  Salamis,  and  prince.

.flourifhed  about  the  46th  olympiad.  57*  Xa^ov^r.  d  Ariftotle  calls  him  a
b  He  died  at  Cyprus,  aged  eighty  Catanaean  ;  and  fays  that  he  gave  laws
years,  and  ordered  his  afhes  to  be  both  to  his  fellow  citizens,  and  to  other
carried  to  Salamis,  and  fcattered  a-  Chalcidic  cities.  We  find,  by  our
bout  that  ifiand.  This,  Plutarch,  in  author,  that  all  thefe  three  lawgivers
his  life  of  Solon,  treats  as  fabulous,  gave  power  to  the  father  over  his  fon
though,  he  fays,  many  writers  of  great  no  longer  than  till  he  was  chofen  a
credit,  and  Ariftotle,  amongft  the  reft,  magiftrate  :  For  we  muft  read
have  affirmed  it.  However,  the  au-  with  the  Vatican  manufcript,  inftead
thority  of  Ariftotle  is,  certainly,  much  cf  a^xiot  in  all  the  editions  ;  fince  we
more  to  be  depended  upon  than  That  find  to  tuv  ov  in  e  Ariftotle;

of  Plutarch,  which  is,  abfolutely,  con-  and  to  -xm  fo [mx^xuv  #zx*10v  more  than
futed  by  thefe  verfes,  quoted  from  once  in  our  author  ;  who  juftifies  this
Cratinus  by  Laertius  ;  reading  by  what  he  fays,  prefently  af-

_  .  <  .  terwards,  that  Romulus  gave  abfolute

„  \  r  *  «  '  power  to  the  ratherover  his  Ion,  though

EtnroiPUivog  kcc  ct  tfoccrxv  Aiavlos  ctoaiv.  f  n  j  .u  c.  n.  j-  c  u

invelted  with  the  firit  dignity  or  the

56*  III t\ocko<.  There  were  two  men  of  commonwealth;  kkv  iv  a^co;

;itote  of  this  name,  both  Mitylenaeans,  [xtyisctis

b  Laert.  life  of  Solon.  cLife  Qf  Pjttacus.  d  OoAflix.  B.  ii.  c.  io.


eId.  ib.  c.  6.


may


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  273

may  fay)  to  the  father  over  his  fon,  even,  during  his  whole
life  ;  whether  he  thought  proper  to  expel  him  his  houfe,  to
whip  him,  to  load  him  with  chains ;  and,  in  that  condition,  to
employ  him  in  agriculture,  or  to  put  him  to  death ;  though
his  fon  were,  actually,  in  the  adminiftration  of  the  public
affairs,  though  inverted  with  the  greateft  offices  of  the  ftate,
and  dirtinguiffied  by  his  zeal  for  the  commonwealth.  In
virtue  of  this  law,  men  of  diftinCtion,  while  they  were  ha¬
ranguing  from  the  roftra  in  oppofition  to  the  fenate,  and  in
favor  of  the  people;  and,  on  that  account,  gaining  great
popularity,  have  been  pulled  down  from  thence,  and  carried
away,,  by  their  fathers,  to  undergo  fuch  puniffiment,  as  they
thought  fit ;  and,  while  they  were  leading  away  through
the  forum,  none  prefent,  neither  conful,  tribune,  nor  the
people  themfelves,  who  were  flattered  by  them,  and  thought
all  power  inferior  to  their  own,  could  refcue  them.  I  for¬
bear  to  mention  how  many  brave  men,  urged  by  their  valor,
and  ardor  to  perform  fome  great  aCtion  contrary  to  their
fathers  command,  have,  by  them,  been  put  to  death ;  as
Manlius  Torquatus,  and  many  others  are  faid  to  have  put
their  fons  to  death.  Concerning  whom,  I  fliall  fpeak  in  a
proper  place.  ,  ;

XXVII.  However,  the  power,  given  to  fathers  by  the
Roman  lawgiver,  did  not,  even,  flop  here ;  but  he  allowed  the
father,  alfo  to  fell  his  fon,  without  regarding  the  imputation
of  cruelty,  and  of  a  feverity,  inconfirtent  with  natural  af¬
fection,  which  this  allowance  might  be  liable  to ;  and  (.what
any  one,  who  has  been  educated  in  the  loofe  manners  of
Vol,  I.  N  n  the


274  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

the  Greeks  may  wonder  at  above  all  things,  and  look  upon
as  harfh  and  tyrannical)  he,  even,  gave  leave  to  the  father
to  make  an  advantage  of  felling  his  fon,  as  far  as  three
times ;  giving,  by  this  means,  a  greater  power  to  the  father
over  his  fon,  than  to  the  matter  over  his  flave :  For  a  Have,
who  has  once  been  fold,  and,  afterwards,  obtains  his  liberty,
is  his  own  matter  ever  after :  But  a  fon,  when  fold  by  his
father,  if  he  ftiould  become  free,  returned  to  his  father’s
power  ;  and,  if  he  was,  a  fecond  time,  fold,  and,  a  fecond
time,  freed,  he  was,  ftill,  as  at  firft,  his  father’s  Have  ;  but,
after  the  third  fale,  he  was  difcharged  from  his  father.  This
law,  whether  written,  or  unwritten  (for  that  I  cannot,  cer¬
tainly,  affirm)  the  kings  obferved  in  the  beginning,  looking
upon  it  as  the  beft  of  all  laws.  And,  after  the  diflolution
of  the  monarchy,  when  the  Romans,  firft,  thought  proper  to
propofe  in  the  forum  to  the  confederation  of  the  whole  body
of  the  people  all  the  cuftoms,  and  laws  of  their  own  country,
together  with  Thofe  of  foreign  inftitution,  to  the  end  that
the  rights  of  the  public  might  not  be  changed  as  often  as
the  power  of  the  magiftrates,  the  decemvirs,  who  were  au-
thorifed  by  the  people  to  coiled:,  and  tranfcribe  thefe  laws,
inferted  This  among  the  reft  ;  and  58  it  now  ftands  in  the
fourth  of  the  twelve  tables,  which  they  expofed  in  the  forum.

s8*  Ken  sfiv  tv  tjj  te7 ufivi  toiv  XiyojMvm  to  that  place,  I  fhall  give  the  words  of
Jwdsxa  This  law  of  Romulus,  it  here  ;  patrei.  endo.  fidiq.  vitae.

which  our  author  fays  was  confirmed  necisqve.  potestas.  estod..terqve.
by  the  decemvirs,  is  explained  among  im.  venom,  darier.  iovs.  estod.sei.
the  other  laws  of  the  twelve  tables  in  pater,  fidiom.  ter.  venom,  dvit.
a  note  on  the  eleventh  book  :  But,  to  fidiqs.  a.  patre.  leber.  estod.
fave  the  reader  the  trouble  of  turning


How


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LICA  RN  ASS  ENSIS.  275

However,  that  the  decemvirs,  who  were  appointed,  three
hundred  years  afterwards,  to  tranfcribe  thefe  laws,  did  not,
firft,  introduce  This  among  the  Romans;  but  that,  finding
it,  long  before,  in  ufe,  they  durfl:  not  repeal  it,  we  are
allured  by  many  reafons ;  but,  particularly,  by  the  laws
of  Numa  Pompilius,  the  fucceffor  of  Romulus,  among
which  there  is  this ;  “  If  a  father  gives  his  fon  leave  to
iC  marry  a  woman,  who,  by  law,  is  to  partake  of  his  facrifices,
u  and  fortunes,  he  fhall,  no  longer,  have  the  power  of  felling
<c  his  fon.”  Which  he  would  never  have  ena&ed,  unlefs
the  father  had,  by  all  former  laws,  been  allowed  to  fell  his
fon.  But  enough  has  been  faid  concerning  thefe  things.
I  fhall,  in  a  few  words,  give  an  account,  alfo,  of  another
inftitution,  by  which  Romulus  regulated  the  lives  of  private

♦  j

XXVIII.  For,  being  fenfible  that  the  means,  by  which
a  whole  people  (the  greatefi:  part  of  whom  are  hard  to  go¬
vern)  can  be  induced  to  embrace  a  life  of  fobriety,  to  prefer
juftice  to  gain,  to  cultivate  a  perfeverance  in  labor,  and  to
look  upon  nothing  more  valuable  than  virtue,  is  not  in-
ftru&ion,  but  the  habitual  practice  of  fuch  employments,  as
lead  to  each  virtue;  and  that  thofe,  who  pradtife  them
through  neceflity,  rather  than  choice,  as  foon  as  they  are
free  from  that  reftraint,  return  to  their  natural  difpofition :
For  thefe  reafons,  he  appointed  flaves,  and  foreigners  to
exercife  thofe  trades,  that  are  fedentary,  and  mechanic,  and
promote  fhameful  appetites,  looking  upon  them  as  the
deftroyers,  and  corrupters  both  of  the  bodies,  and  minds

N  n  2  of


276  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

of  all,  who  pra&ife  them ;  and  thefe  trades  were,  for  a  long
time,  held  ignominious  by  the  Romans,  and  exercifed  by
none  of  them.  The  only  employments  he  left  to  freemen
were  thefe  two,  agriculture  and  warfare :  For  he  obferved
that  men,  fo  employed,  are  temperate,  lefs  intangled  in  the
purfuits  of  forbidden  love,  and  fubject  to  that  kind  of  ava¬
rice  only,  which  leads  them  not  to  injure  one  another,  but
to  inrich  themfelves  at  the  expence  of  the  enemy  :  But,
finding  that  each  of  thefe  occupations,  feparate  from  the
other,  is  imperfect,  and  produces  murmurs,  inftead  of  ap¬
pointing  one  part  of  the  men  to  till  the  earth,  and  the  other
to  lay  wafte  the  enemy’s  country,  according  to  the  inftitu-
tion  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  he  ordered  the  fame  perfons  to
exercife  the  employments  both  of  hufbandmen,  and  foldiers ;
and  accuftomed  them,  in  time  of  peace,  to  live  in  the  coun¬
try,  and  cultivate  the  land,  59  except  when  it  was  neceflary
for  them  to  come  to  market ;  upon  which  occafions,  they
were  to  meet  in  the  city,  in  order  to  traffic ;  and,  to  that
end,  he  appointed  a  market  to  be  held  every  ninth  day :
And,  in  time  of  war,  he  taught  them  the  duty  of  foldiers,
and  not  to  yield  to  any,  either  in  the  fatigues,  or  advantages,
that  attend  it.  For,  by  dividing,  equally,  among  them  the

59*  Ha>ju  etzoli  hyjQmiv  ayopus.  The  what  they  want.  Indeed,  the  Roman
reader,  I  dare  fay,  will  wonder  to  find  hufbandmen,  often,  went  to  Rome  to
this  tranflated  by  le  Jay  excepts  les  tranfadt  affairs  of  much  greater  im-
negetiants.  Thefe  merchants ,  as  he  calls  portance  :  For,  upon  their  refolutions,
them,  were  the  hufbandmen,  who  went  the  fate  of  their  own  country,  at  firft,
to  Rome  every  ninth  day  •,  as  our  far-  and,  afterwards,  of  ail  mankind  de-
mers  go  to  the  next  market  town  to  pended,
fell  the  product  of  their  lands,  and  buy

lands,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  277-

lands,  Haves,  and  money  they  had  taken  from  the  enemy,
he  infpired  them  with  a  chearfulnefs  to  ingage  in  his  mili¬
tary  expeditions.

XXIX.  If  any  of  the  citizens  had  injured  one  another,
inftead  of  delay,  he  ufed  difpatch  in  determining  their  dif¬
ferences  ;  fometimes,  taking  cognizance  of  them  himfelf,
and,  fometimes,  referring  them  to  others ;  and,  always,  pro¬
portioned  the  punifhment  to  the  greatnefs  of  the  crime  :
Finding,  alfo,  that  nothing  reftrains  men  from  all  evil  actions,
fo  effectually  as  fear,  he  contrived  many  things  to  create  it ;
as  the  erecting  a  tribunal,  where  he  fate  in  judgement,  in  the
molt  confpicuous  part  of  the  Forum ;  the  moft  formidable
appearance  of  the  foldiers,  who  attended  him,  being  three
hundred  in  number,  and  the  rods,  and  axes,  borne  by  twelve
liCtors,  who  whipped  thofe  in  the  forum,  whofe  offences  de¬
fer  ved  it,  and  beheaded  others  in  public,  whofe  crimes  were
of  the  greateft  magnitude.  This  was  the  conftitution  of  the
government  eftablifhed  by  Romulus :  For  the  things,  I  have
mentioned,  fufficiently,  enable  us  to  form  a  judgement  of
the  reft.

XXX.  His  other  aCtions,  both  in  war,  and  peace,  which,
alfo,  deferve  the  notice  of  hiftory,  are  as  follows.  The
neighbouring  nations  being  very  confiderable  both  for  their
numbers,  and  their  ftrength,  and  none  of  them  friends  to
the  Romans ;  he  propofed  to  gain  their  affeCtion  by  mar¬
riages  (which,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  ancients,  was
the  firmeft  bond  of  friendfnip)  but,  confidering  that,  as  the
Romans  were,  newly,  fettled,  and  neither  powerful  in  riches,,

nor


zyS  ROMAN  A  N  T  I  QJJ I T  IE  S  OF  Book  II.

nor  fupported  by  the  reputation  of  any  great  achievement,
thofe  cities  would  not,  of  their  own  accord,  unite  with  them ;
but  that,  if  violence,  without  abufe,  were  employed,  they
would  fubmit  to  it,  he  determined,  with  the  approbation  of
Numitor,  his  grandfather,  to  effetft  thefe  marriages  60  by
feizing,  at  once,  a  number  of  virgins.  After  he  had  taken
this  refolution,  he  firft  made  a  vow  to  the  god,  who  prefides
over  fecret  counfels,  to  celebrate  annual  facrifices,  and  feftivals,
if  his  enterprife  fucceeded  :  Then,  having  laid  his  reafons
before  the  fenate,  and  they  approving  the  defign,  he  pro¬
claimed  a  feftival,  and  public  games  in  honor  of  Neptune ;
and  gave  notice  to  the  neighbouring  cities,  inviting  all,  who
were  willing,  to  be  prefent  at  the  afiembly,  and  partake  of
the  games :  For  he  gave  out  that  there  would  be  prizes  of
all  forts  to  be  contended  for  both  by  horfes,  and  men.  The
concourfe  of  ftrangers,  who  came  with  their  wives,  and
children  to  aflift  at  the  feftival,  being  very  great,  after  he
had  performed  the  facrifices,  and  games  in  honor  of  Neptune,

6o*  Ai’  cl^irctyvn  Livy  fays  not  opened  an  afylum  for  women  alfo?

that  Romulus,  by  the  advice  of  the  That  being  the  only  means  to  pro-
fenate,  fent  embaffadors  to  the  neigh-  vide  them  felves  with  fuitable  matches;
bouring  nations  to  propofe  an  alliance,  f  Ecquid  non  foeminis  quoque  afylum
and  to  defire  wives  for  his  new  people  :  aperuiffent  ?  Id  enim  demum  cornpar
This  embalfy,  he  lays,  was  not  well  connubium  fore.  Whether  this  ineer,
received  by  any  of  his  neighbours,  which  feems  not  ill  applied,  was  hand-
who  defpiled  the  Romans  ;  and,  at  ed  down  to  Livy  by  the  old  hiftorians,
the  fame  time,  apprehended  left  this  or  was  the  creature  of  his  own  inven-
power,  rifing  up  in  the  middle  of  them,  tion,  cannot  now  be  known  :  But  it
might  prove  fatal  to  themfelves,  and  muft  be  allowed  to  come  with  a  better
their  pofterity  ;  and  fome  of  them  grace  from  a  Roman,  than  a.  Grlekj
afked  the  embaffadors,  why  they  had  hiftorian.

{ B.  i.  c.  9.


the


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC A R N  A  S  $E N S  I S.  279

the-laft  day,  on  which  he  was  to  difmifs  the  aflembly,  he
ordered  the  young  men,  when  he  fhould  give  the  fignal,  to
feize  all  the  virgins,  who  were  prefent  at  the  £hew,  each
taking  the  firft  he  met  with ;  to  keep  them  that  night  with¬
out  violating  their  chaftity,  and  bring  them  to  him  the  next
day.  The  young  men  divided  themfelves  into  feveral  bodies,
and,  as  focn  as  they  faw  the  fignal,  feized  the  virgins :  Upon
this,  the  ftrangers  were  in  an  uproar,  and,  immediately,  fled,
fufpedting  fome  greater  mifchief.  The  next  day,  when  the
virgins  were  brought  before  Romulus,  he  comforted  them
in  their  diftrefs  with  this  aflurance,  that  his  people,  in  feizing
them,  had  no  defign  to  infult,  but  to  marry  them ;  and  told
them  that  this  was  an  ancient  Greek  cuftora,  and  this  me¬
thod  of  contracting  marriages,  of  all  others,  the  moft  illuf-
trious ;  exhorting  them  to  cherifh  thofe,  whom  fortune  had
given  them  for  their  hufbands :  Then,  taking  an  account
of  their  number,  which  was  found  to  amount  to  fix  hundred
and  eighty  three,  he  chofe  an  equal  number  of  unmarried
men,  to  whom  he  married  them,  each  according  to  the
cuftoms  of  their  refpedfive  countries ;  which  he  confirmed
by  granting  to  them  61  a  communion  of  fire,  and  water,  in

61  •  Ett*  vrvoog  x,ca  vJoclog.  fire,  and"  water  in  marriages,  was,  he

g  Plutarch  endeavours,  by  various  rea-  fays,  pour  marquer  me  parfaite  union  ;
fons,  to  account  for  the  cuftom,  that  I  fuppofe,becaufe  fire,  and  water  agree
prefcribed  to  the  bride  to  touch  fire,  fo  well  together  •,  as  well,  indeed,  as
and  water :  But  they  are  all  fo  trifling,  many  men,  and  their  wives.  Without
that  I  fhall  not  mention  them.  How-  entering  into  the  reafons,  therefore,  of
ever,  I  muft  not  omit  the  reafon,  this  cuftom,  I  fhall  only  fay  that,  as
given  by  M.  ***  in  his  note  upon  this  marriages  were  contracted  by  the  ufe
paffage  •,  the  defign  of  making  ufe  of  of  fire,  and  water,  fo,  when  a  man  was

e  Roman.  Quaefh.i,

the


28o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

the  fame  manner  as  marriages  are  performed,  even,  to  this


XXXI.  Some  write  that  thefe  things  happened  in  the  firft
year  of  Romulus’  reign  ;  but  62  Cneius  Gellius  fays  it  was
in  the  fourth,  which  is  more  probable;  for  it  is  not  likely
that  the  chief  of  a  new-built  city  would  undertake  fuch  an
enterprife,  before  he  had  eftabliffied  the  government  of  it.
Some  afcribe  the  caufe  of  this  ravifhment  to  a  fcarcity  of
women  :  Others,  to  his  feeking  a  color  for  a  wtar  :  But  thofe,
who  give  the  moft  rational  account  of  it,  and  to  whom,
alfo,  I  affent,  attribute  it  to  a  defign  of  contradling  a  friend-
fhip  founded  on  affinity  with  the  neighbouring  cities.  The
Romans,  even,  to  this  day,  continue  to  celebrate  the  feaft, v
then  inftituted  by  Romulus,  calling  it,  Confualia ,  in  which
a  fubterraneous  altar,  placed  near  the  greateft  circus,  the
ground  being  funk  for  that  purpofe,  is  honoured  with  facri-
hces,  and  burnt-offerings  of  firft- fruits,  and  a  courfe  is  run
both  by  horfes  in  chariots,  and  by  Bngle  horfes :  The  god,
to  whom  thefe  honors  are  paid,  is  called  Confus  by  the  Ro¬
mans  ;  which  name,  according  to  fome,  fignifies,  in  our
language,  TIoo-siwv  <Tei<TiyfiuVj  Neptune ,  who  Jhakes  the  earth  ;
and  they  fay  that  he  was  honoured  with  a  fubterraneous
altar,  becaufe  this  god  has  the  command  of  the  earth.  I  am

banifhed,  he  was  faid  to  be  interdicted  M.  fullio  aqua  et  igni  inter dicatur?
fire,  and  water.  The  moft  remarkable  Or,  as  Cicero  fays  it  was  drawn,  ut
inflance  I  ever  met  with  of  this  inter-  interdifflum  fit ,  which  he,  juftly,  cen-
didtion,  is  the  Rogation,  as  the  Romans  fured  as  an  abfurd  expreffion.
called  it,  drawn  up  by  Sextus  Clodius  6*-  TvmosTikkw.  Seethe  25th  an-
againft  h  Cicero  j  Velitis ,  jubeatis ,  ut  notation  on  the  firft  book,

h  Pro  Dom.  c.  18.


fenfible


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  281

fenfible  there  is  another  report ;  that  the  feftival  is,  indeed,
celebrated,  and  the  courfe  of  the  horfes  performed  in  honor
of  Neptune ;  but  that  the  fubterraneous  altar  was,  afterwards,
erected  to  feme  63  ineffable  genius,  who  preiides  over,  and  is
the  guardian  of,  hidden  counfels ;  and  that  a  fecret  altar  was
never  ere&ed  to  Neptune,  in  any  part  of  the  world,  either
by  the  Greeks,  or  Barbarians :  But  it  is  hard  to  aflat  which
of  thefe  opinions  is  the  trueft.

XXXII.  As  foon  as  the  report  of  the  ravifhment  of  the
virgins,  and  of  their  marriage,  was  fpread  about  the  neigh¬
bouring  cities,  fome  refentecl  the  proceeding ;  others,  con-
fidering  the  motive,  from  whence  it  flowed,  and  the  event
it  was  attended  with,  bore  it  with  moderation.  But,  in
time,  it  occafloned  feveral  wars,  of  which,  fome  were  of
fmall  confequence,  but  That  againft  the  Sabines  was  very
confiderable,  and  full  of  difficulty  :  All  which  ended  hap-
Pi]y>  as  the  oracles  had  foretold  to  Romulus,  before  lie
made  the  attempt,  fignifying  that  he  fhould  undergo  great
difficulties,  and  dangers,  but  that  the  event  of  them  would
be  profperous.  The  firft  cities,  that  made  war  upon  him,


63*  A oiifxou  afp'Ju).  The  tranflators
are  divided,  asufual,  in  rendering  this.
Portus,  and  le  Jay  have  given  to  ccffylo?
the  fenfe  of  unknown ,  which  is  ayvmot,
as  1  Paul  calls  the  unknown  god,  to
whom  the  altar  was  ere&ed  at  Athens.
Sylburgius,  and  M.  *  *  *  have  trans¬
lated  it  properly.  The  ancients,  it
Seems,  worfhipped  Some  divinities,
whoSe  names  they  held  it  impious  to

‘  Adis,  c.  xvii.  23.


pronounce  *,  and,  for  that  reafon,  called
them  app'daj  S-exe,  one  of  thefe  was
Proferpine,  who  is  called  affiflof  v.o ^  by
k  Euripides  in  that  truly  poetical  de¬
scription  of  the-  wandering  of  Ceres  in
Search  of  her

n o9w  t as  cnrQi'Xfiy.ii&is
Affrjx  Kxgtxc.


VoL,  I.


k  In  Helena,  f.  1322.

O  o  <


were


I


282  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book II.

were  64  Caenina,  65  Antemna,  and  66  Cruftumerium :  Their
pretence  was  the  ravifhment  of  the  virgins,  and  the  defire  to
revenge  it :  But  their  real  motive  was  a  jealoufy  of  the  rife,
and  fvvift  increafe  of  Rome,  and  a  refolution  not  to  fuffer  a
common  evil  to  grow  up,  and  become  formidable  to  all  its
neighbours.  Thefe  cities,  therefore,  fending  embaffadors  to
the  Sabines,  defired  that,  as  they  were  poffeffed  both  of  the
greateft  flrength,  and  greateft  riches,  and  thought  themfelves
worthy  of  the  empire  over  their  neighbours,  and  had  not
the  leaft  fhare  in  the  late  abufe,  they  would  take  upon  them
the  command  of  the  war :  For  the  greater  part  of  the  vir¬
gins  belonged  to  them.

XXXIII.  When  they  could  not  prevail,  the  embafladors
fent  from  Romulus  oppofing  them,  and  courting  that
people  both  by  their  words,  and  actions,  they  grew  uneafy
at  the  lofs  of  time  (the  Sabines,  for  ever,  affedf  ing  delays,  and
putting  off  to  a  long  day  the  deliberation  concerning  the
war)  and  refolved  to  make  war  upon  the  Romans  by  them¬
felves,  not  doubting  but  their  own  flrength,  if  the  three
nations  united  their  arms,  would  be  fufficient  to  conquer
one  inconfiderable  city.  This  was  their  refolution  :  But
they  did  not  ufe  the  necefiary  expedition  to  aflemble  all

Ktf/vijvjj'  liroTwf  Tu&ivuv.  1  Feftus  Cruftumerium,  and  Cruftumeria,  both
writes  it  Cenena.  This  town  flood  by  Livy,  and  Pliny.  It  flood  between
near  to  Rome,  but  its  fituation  is  not,  the  Tiber,  and  the  Anio,  about  a  mile
certainly,  known.  north  of  Fidenae.  m  Cluver  thinks  that

65‘  Avhp«,  or  Antemnae,  lay  be-  Cruftumerium  flood  upon,  or  near  the
tween  Rome,  and  the  confluence  of  the  hill,  on  which  there  is;  now,  a  tower,
Amo,  and  the  Tiber.  called,  Maringliano  Vecchio.

66,  K fxfopsfiov.  This  town  is  called

1  Steph.  Epitom,  81  Ital,  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  3.

together


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENSIS.  2S3

together  in  one  camp,  which  was  owing  to  the  eagernefs  of
the  Caeninenfes,  who  led  out  their  forces  before  the  reft,
and  feemed  the  greateft  promoters  of  the  war.  This  peo¬
ple,  therefore,  having  taken  the  field,  and  wafting  the
country,  that  lay  neareft  to  their  own,  Romulus  led  out  his
army ;  and,  unexpectedly,  falling  upon  the  enemy,  while
they  were,  as  yet,  unprepared  to  receive  him,  he  made
himfelf  mafter  of  their  camp,  which  was,  but  newly,
formed ;  then,  following  clofe  thofe,  who  fled  into  the
city,  where  they  had,  as  yet,  received  no  account  of  the
defeat  of  their  people ;  and,  finding  the  walls,  unguarded,  and
the  gates  open,  he  took  the  town  by  ftorm,  and  the  king
of  the  Caeninenfes  meeting  him  with  a  ftrong  body  of  men,
he  charged  him,  and,  killing  him  with  his  own  hands,  took
off  his  fpoils.

XXXIV.  The  town  being  taken  in  this  manner,  he
ordered  the  inhabitants  to  deliver  up  their  arms ;  and,  taking
as  many  of  their  fons  for  hoftages,  as  he  thought  fit,  he
marched  againft  the  Antemnates.  Their  forces,  alfo,  he
defeated,  in  the  like  manner,  by  falling  upon  them  unawares,
while  they  were,  yet,  difperfed  in  foraging;  and,  having
treated  the  prifoners  like  the  others,  he  returned  home  with
his  army,  carrying  with  him  the  fpoils  he  had  taken  in
battle,  and  the  choiceft  part  of  the  booty,  as  an  offering  to
the  gods;  to  whom,  together  with  thefe,  he  offered  many
facrifices.  Romulus  himfelf  came  laft  in  the  proceftion,
clad  in  a  purple  robe,  his  hair  bound  with  a  crown  of
laurel,  and,  that  he  might  maintain  the  royal  dignity,

.  O  o  2  in


284  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II,

67  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  four  horfes.  The  reft  of  the  army
both  foot  and  horfe  followed,  ranged  in  their  feveral  divi-
ftons,  hymning  the  gods  in  fongs  of  their  country,  and
celebrating  their  general  with  extemporary  verfes.  They
were  met  by  the  citizens  with  their  wives,  and  children ;
who,  ranging  themfeives  on  each  fide  of  the  way,  congra¬
tulated  them  upon  their  vi&ory,  and  exprefied,  in  every
other  inftance,  the  greateft  affedtion  for  them.  When  the


67*  TsS girnru  n  Plu¬

tarch  has  thought  fit  to  cenfure  Dio-
nyfius  for  faying  that  Romulus  tri¬
umphed  in  a  chariot  ;  which  cuftom,
he  lays,  was,  afterwards,  introduced,
as  fome  authors  write,  by  Tarquinius,
the  fon  of  Damaratus  •,  and,  as  others,
by  Poplicola.  However,  he  has  not
thought  fit  to  name  thefe  authors.  If
he  had,  we  fhould  have  been  able  to
judge  whether  their  authority  deferved
better  to  be  oppofed  to  That  of  our
author,  than  his  own.  I  believe,  the
reafon  he  gives,  a  few  lines  before,  for
contradi&ing  Varro,  the  greateft  anti¬
quary  the  Romans  ever  had,  will  not,
greatly,  recommend  his  authority  to
the  reader.  Varro  had  derived  Opima
fpolia ,  Spoils  taken  from  a  general  by  a
general ,  fuch  as  Thofe  Romulus  took,
from  Opis>  which  fignifies  Riches :
This  derivation  Plutarch  finds  fault
with,  and  fays,  very  abfurdly,  that
Opima,  fpolia  may,  with  greater  propri¬
ety,  be  derived  from  opus.  Cafaubon
obferves,  upon  this  occafion.  That
Dionyfius,  being  a  Greek,  and  unac¬
quainted  with  the  Latin  language,  as
he  fuppofes,  in  reading  the  account,
given  of  this  triumph  of  Romulus  by


0  Livy,  who  fays,  fabricate  ad  id  aplc
ferculo ,  miftcodk  ferculum,  for  a  chariot.
This  note  both  le  Jay,  and  M.  *  *  *
have  translated ;  the  former  owning
from  whom  he  had  it,  and  the  other
not.  Cafaubon’s  fancy  fuppofes  two
things;  the  firft,  that  Dionyfius  had
read  Livy,  which  I  do  not  believe  ;
becaufe  he  never  mentions  him  among
the  other  Latin  hiftorians,  whom  he,
often,  quotes ;  and  I  have,  upon  an¬
other  occafion,  fliewn  p,  I  think,  that
it  is  probable  Livy’s  hiftory  did  not
appear  before  That  of  our  author  :
The  other  fuppofition  is,  that  Dio¬
nyfius,  being  a  Greek,  did  not  under¬
stand  Latin  enough  to  know  that  fer-
culum  did  not  Signify  a  chariot.  In
eppofition  to  this,  we  muft  remember
what  our  author  has  told  us  in  his
preface,  that  he  had  lived  twenty  two
years  at  Rome,  and  made  himfelf  ma¬
tter  of  the  Latin  language  :  After
which,  it  is  ridiculous  to  imagine  that
a  man  of  his  parts,  and  application,
fhould  not,  in  fo  long  a  time,  have
underftood  Latin  as  well  as  an  Eton,
or  Weftminfter  Scholar;  moft  of  whom,
I  dare  fay,  know  the  Signification  of
ferculum.


n  Life  of  Romulus.


0  B.  i.  c.  10.  r  See  the  eighth  annotation  on  the  firft  book.


army


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENSI  S.  28$
army  entered  the  city,  they  found  63  bowls  full  of  wine,  and
tables  fpread  with  all  forts  of  vi&uals,  which  were  placed
before  the  houfes  of  the  moft  confiderable  perfons,  to  the
end  that  all,  who  pleafed,  might  fatisfy  themfelves.  Such
was  the  victorious  proceffion,  in  which  trophies  were  carried,
and  facrifices  offered  up,  called,  by  the  Romans,  a  Triumph,
which  was  firft  inftituted  by  Romulus.  But,  in  our  time,
thefe  triumphs  are  become  very  expenfive  and  oftentatious,
and  attended  with  a  theatrical  pomp,  that  feems  calculated
to  fhew  their  riches,  rather  than  their  virtue;  and,  in  which,
they  have  departed,  in  all  refpeCts,  from  their  ancient  fru¬
gality.  After  the  proceffion,  and  the  facrifice,  Romulus
built  a  fmall  temple,  on  the  top  of  the  Capitoline  hill,  to
Jupiter,  whom  the  Romans  call 69  Feretrius:  For  the  ancient
traces  of  it  ftill  remain,  of  which  the  longeft  fides  are  lefs
than  fifteen  feet:  In  this  temple,  he  confecrated  the  fpoils
of  the  king  of  the  Caeninenfes,  whom  he  had  killed  with
his  own  hand.  Jupiter  Feretrius,  to  whom  Romulus  de-


68,  IC oivct)  jj (Kgot/juvais.  K«£«v
is  ufed  here  by  our  author  in  the  fame
fenfe  the  poets  ufe  the  word,  that  is,
to  Jill,  without  any  regard  to  mixture  j
thus,  *  Homer  fays,

xicaffa  Si  vsxlocg  cgvQosv.

Upon  which,  the  Greek  fcholiaft,  very
well,  obferves,  yvy  (ve%itv  <x7ro  ty\ ?  arenas

cvvyjO eiai’  ya(j  ryvzcvlif  i7nvov.

rNewv — A/o?  This  temple

Auguftus  repaired  ;  and,  what  is  very
extraordinary,  he  repaired  it  by  the
advice  of  Atticus,  who  was  an  Epicu¬


rean  *,  and,  by  his  principles,  ought
not  to  have  been  folicitous  about  the
reparation  of  temples.  The  philofo-
phy  of  Epicurus  gained  ground  among
the  Romans  in  proportion  as  they
were  lofing  their  liberty,  and,  the  pa¬
rent  of  that  liberty,  their  virtue  :  It
being  very  natural- for  men,  who  were
plunging  their  country  into  flavery,and
vice,  firft  to  wifh,  and  then  to  believe,
that  their  aftions  were  fecure  from  the
obfervation,  and  chaftifement  of  Pro¬
vidence  1


s  OoW,  E,  93,  r  Corn.  Nep.  Life  of  Atticus.


d  leafed.


ZU  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

dicated  thefe  arms,  may,  without  deviating  from  the  truth,
be  called  either  T ooTrouxyys,  The  Trophy-bearer  \  ZxvXotpoooc,
The  Spoil-bearer^  as  fome  are  of  opinion  ;  or  Trs^s^iJriCy
Excellent ;  becaufe  he  excels  all  things,  and  comprehends
univerfal  nature,  and  motion.

XXXV.  After  the  king  had  performed  the  facrifices  to
the  gods  in  thankfgiving  for  his  vi&ory,  and  offered  up  the
choiceft  of  the  booty,  before  he  entered  upon  any  other
buflnefs,  he  aflembled  the  fenate  to  deliberate  with  them  in
what  manner  the  conquered  cities  were  to  be  treated  ;  he
himfelf  firft  delivering  the  opinion  he  thought  the  beft.
After  all  the  fenators,  who  were  prefent,  had  approved  of
the  counfels  of  their  chief,  as  fafe  and  generous,  and  given
great  applaufe  to  all  the  other  advantages,  that  were  likely
to  flow  from  them  to  the  commonwealth,  not  only  for  the
prefent,  but  for  ever  after,  he  called  together  all  the  women,
who  belonged  to  the  Antemnates,  and  Caeninenfes,  and  had
been  feized  with  the  reft :  And,  when  they  appeared  before
him  lamenting,  throwing  themfelves  at  his  feet,  and  bewail¬
ing  the  calamities  of  their  country,  he  commanded  them
to  ceafe  their  lamentations,  and  be  fllent ;  then,  fpoke  to
them  as  follows :  “  Your  fathers,  and  brothers,  together
u  with  all  the  cities,  to  which  you  belong,  defer ve  to  meet
iC  with  every  kind  of  feverity,  for  having  preferred  an  un-
<c  neceflary  and  difhonourable  war  to  our  friendfhip  :  How-
£C  ever,  we  have  refolved,  for  many  reafons,  to  treat  them
“  with  moderation ;  to  which  we  are  induced  both  by  our
^  fear  of  the  indignation  of  the  gods,  ever  ready  to  punifli

“  the


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  1  S.  287

a  the  arrogant,  and  by  our  apprehenfion  of  the  envy  of
“  men  ;  and  are,  alfo,  perfuaded  that  mercy  does  not,  a
<c  little,  contribute  to  alleviate  the  common  evils,  to  which
<c  mankind  are  fubjedt,  as  we  ourfelves  have,  formerly,
u  flood  in  need  of  That  of  others :  And  your  behaviour  to
“  your  hufoands  having  been,  hitherto,  blamelefs,  we  are
cc  of  opinion  that  this  will  be  no  fmall  honor,  and  return
“  for  it :  We  fuffer  their  offence,  therefore,  to  go  unpunifh-
£C  ed,  and  take  from  your  fellow-citizens  neither  their  liberty,
c<  their  pofleflions,  nor  any  other  advantages  they  enjoy:
“  And  to  thofe,  who  chufe  to  flay  there,  as  well  as  to  fuch,
u  as  are  deflrous  to  remove  hither,  we  grant  full  liberty  to
iC  make  their  option;  not  only  without  danger,  but  with-
“  out  fear  of  repenting.  But,  to  the  end  they  may  never
u  repeat  their  fault ;  and,  that  no  occafion  may  be  found
“  to  induce  the  cities  to  break  with  us,  the  beft  remedy,,
“  and  That,  which  will,  at  the  fame  time,  conduce  to  the
“  reputation,  and  fecurity  of  both,  will  be,  to  make  thofe
<{  cities  colonies  of  Rome,  and  to  fend  a  proper  number  of
“  our  own  people  from  hence  to  inhabit  them,  jointly,  with
“  your  fellow- citizens.  Go  away,  therefore,  fatisfied ;  and
“  redouble  your  love,  and  regard  for  your  hulbands,  to
“  whom  your  parents,  and  brothers  owe  their  prefervation,
“  and  your  countries  their  liberty.”  The  women,  hearing
this,  were  greatly,  pleafed,  and,  fhedding  tears  of  joy,  left  the
forum.  Romulus  fent  a  colony  of  three  hundred  men  into
each  city,  to  whom  thefe  gave  a  third  part  of  their  lands  to
be  divided  among  them  by  lot ;  and.  thofe  Caeninenfes,  and

Antemnates,


288  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

Antemnates,  who  defired  to  remove  to  Rome,  he  conveyed
thither  together  with  their  wives,  and  children,  they  re¬
taining  the  poffefiion  of  their  lands,  and  bringing  with  them
all  their  effeCts.  Thefe,  who  were  not  lefs  than  three  thou-
fand,  the  king,  immediately,  incorporated  with  the  tribes,
and  the  curiae  :  So  that,  the  Romans  had  then,  for  the  firft
time,  fix  thoufand  foot,  in  all,  upon  the  regifter.  Thus,
Caenina,  and  Antemna,  no  inconsiderable  cities,  whofe  in¬
habitants  were  of  Greek  extraction  (for  they  were,  then,
inhabited  by  the  Aborigines,  who  had  taken  them  from  the
Siceli,  and  who,  as  I  laid  before,  were  part  of  thofe  Oenotri,
who  came  out  of  Arcadia)  after  this  war,  became  Roman
colonies.

XXXVI.  Romulus,  having  finifhed  thefe  things,  led  out
his  army  againft  the  Cruftumeri,  who  were  better  prepared
than  the  former  to  receive  him  :  And,  after  he  had  reduced
them  both  in  a  pitched  battle,  and  in  an  afiault  upon  their
city,  they  having  behaved  themfelves  with  great  bravery,
he  did  not  think  fit  to  punifh  them  any  farther,  but  made
this  city,  alfo,  a  Roman  colony,  like  the  two  former.
Cruftumerium  was  a  colony  of  the  Albans,  planted  many
years  before  the  building  of  Rome.  The  fame  of  the  ge¬
neral’s  valor  in  war,  and  of  his  clemency  to  the  conquered
being  fpread  through  many  cities,  Several  brave  men  joined
him,  bringing  with  them  confiderable  powers,  together
with  their  whole  families :  From  one  of  thefe  leaders,  who
came  from  Tyrrhenia,  and  whofe  name  was  Caelius,  one  of
-the  hills,  on  which  he  fettled,  is,  to  this  day,  called  Caelius  :

Whole


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  SIS.  289

Whole  cities,  alfo,  fubmitted  to  him,  after  the  example  of
70  Medullia,  and  became  Roman  colonies.  The  Sabines,
feeing  thefe  things,  grew  unealy,  and  accufed  one  another
for  not  having  crufhed  the  power  of  the  Romans,  while  it
was  in  its  infancy ;  inftead  of  which,  they  were,  now,  to
contend  with  it,  when  it  was,  greatly,  increafed :  They
determined,  therefore,  to  correct  their  former  error,  by
fending  a  confiderable  army  into  the  field.  And,  foon  after,
afiembling  a  general  council  in  the  greateft  and  moft  dig¬
nified  city  of  the  nation,  called  71  Cures,  they  all  gave  their
votes  for  the  vvar,  and  appointed  Titus,  furnamed  Tatius,
king  of  the  Curetes,  to  be  their  general.  After  the  Sabines
had  come  to  this  refolution,  the  afiembly  broke  up,  and
every  one,  returning  home,  made  preparations  for  the  war,
defigning  to  advance  to  Rome,  with  a  great  army,  the
following  year.

XXXVII.  In  the  mean  time,  Romulus,  alfo,  made  the
belt  preparations  he  was  able  to  receive  them ;  being  fenfible
that  he  was  to  defend  himfelf  againft  a  warlike  people.


7°*  MseTvATwas.  This  town  ftood  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Rome,  and  near
the  confines  of  the  Sabines  •,  and  was
a  colony  df  the  Albans.  It  belonged
to  the  Latines,  as  our  author  informs
us  in  the  third  *  book  ;  Mj«v  h  wo hiv
w  tx  Adlivoov  tQvxs  MeJuAA ioiv.

7 *•  Kv£i?.  This  city,  the  capital  of
the  Sabines,  has,  long  fince,  lain  in
ruins :  But  it  is  fuppofed  to  have  ftood
on  thefpot,  where  there  is,  now,  a  fmall
monaftery,  called, 1  il  Vefccvio  di  Sabina ,


not  far  from  the  river  Himella,  now
called U Aia,  and  fomething  more  than
twenty  five  Roman  miles  north  from
Rome.  This  city  gave  two  kings  to  the
Romans, Tatius,  and  Numa,  and,  alfo,
gave  name  to  the  Romans  themfelves,
who,  from  thence,  were  called Qui rites.

u  Kvflf,  s|  Yii  togpijvlo  0 i  T)Jf  $«cri-

Asv<rtfv7£rT<7of  Taho?,xa<N#ju«fncjM,7nAior.
Ev/svOsi'  bz  Y.CU  Kvpflus  ovopctfatriv  ol  iy.prr
yogxyles  ms  PoofAocHss.


5  C.  34.  1  Cluver,  Ital.  Ant.  B.  ii.  c.  9.

VOL.  I.  P  p


u  Strabo,  B.  v.  p.  349.


With


290  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.


With  this  view,  he  raifed  the  wall  of  the  Palatine  hill,  by
building  higher  works  upon  it,  as  a  farther  fecurity  to  the
inhabitants,  and  furrounded  the  adjacent  hills,  the  72  Aventine,
and  That,  now,  called  the  Capitoline  hill,  with  ditches,  and
ftrong  palifades :  Upon  thefe  hills,  he  ordered  the  hufbandmen,
with  their  flocks,  to  pafs  the  nights,  fecuring  each  of  them  by
a  fufficient  guard  ;  and,  if  any  other  place  could  contribute
to  their  fecurity,  he  fortified  That,  alfo,  with  ditches,  and
palifades,  and  placed  a  guard  there.  In  the  mean  time,  there
came  to  him  a  man  of  adtivity,  and  reputation  for  military
achievements,  whofe  name  was  Lucumo,  lately,  become  his
friend ;  who  brought  with  him,  out  of  the  city  of 73  Solonium,


72*  Tov  Ausvl <vov.  M.  ***,  in  his  note
upon  this  paffage,  fays  that  Dionyfius
contradicts  hirnfelf  by  faying,  in  the
third  book,  that  Ancus  Martius  fortifi¬
ed  this  hill.  However,  the  contradiction
is  not  owing  to  our  author,  but  to  his
mifreprefentation  of  our  author’s  fenfe ;
which  will,  plainly,  appear  by  com¬
paring  the  terms  made  ufe  of  by  Dio¬
nyfius  in  thefe  two  places.  In  this
before  us,  he  fays  that  Romulus  fur-
rounded  the  Aventine  hill  with  a  ditch,
and  ftrong  palifades  •,  Tov  Avivhvov  azo-

*■  TflKPjseuwv,  notgiegoig

hup&mm.  In  the  other  paffage,  he  fays
that  Ancus  Martius  made  no  fmall
addition  to  the  city  by  inclofing  the
Aventine  hill  within  its  walls  •,  tjj
p,o/§c6v  x  [Mxgotv  svlei^nrag  tcv

Myoy-ivov  AvevJivov.  The  firft,  therefore,
vifibly,  relates  to  the  extemporary  for¬
tification  made  by  Romulus  to  repulfe
the  Sabines  ;  and  the  other,  to  the

y  B.  ii.  c.  2 .


making  this  hill  a  part  of  the  city.

73'  e>c  XoAwy/x  zsoKiug.  There  is  a
note  in  Hudfon  upon  this  occafion,
which  M.  ***  has  tranflated,  whereby
it  appears  that  there  muft  be  fome
miftake  in  the  name  of  this  city,  there
not  having  been  any  city  fo  called  in
Tyrrhenia.  w  Cluver  is  there  cited  for
reading  Vetulonium  inftead  of  Solo¬
nium,  which  is  a  very  reafonable  con¬
jecture;  fince  Vetulonium  was  one  of
the  twelve  principal  cities  of  Etruria,
and  io  confiderable,  that  the  enfigns
of  magiftracy,  afterwards,  in  ufe  at
Rome,  were  thought  to  have  been  in¬
vented  there  ;  which  gave  occafion  to
Silius  Italicus,  quoted,  alfo,  by x  Clu¬
ver,  to  fay,

Maeoniaeque  deem  quondam  Vetulonia  gent  is  :

■  Bis  fen. os  haec  pritna  dedit  praecedere  fafees ,
Etjunxit  tot  idem  tael  to  terrore  Jeeuves  t
haec  altas  eboris  decoravit  honore  curules,

Et  princeps  Tyrio  evejieni  praetexuit  ojlro.

x  B.  viii.


a  con-


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  291

1  •.  '

a  confiderable  number  of  auxiliary  forces  confifting  of
Tyrrhenians.  There  came  to  him  alfo,  from  the  Albans,
fent  by  his  grandfather,  a  good  number  of  foldiers  with  their
attendants,  and,  with  them,  artificers  for  making  warlike
engines :  Thefe  men  were  fupplied  with  provifions,  arms,  and
all  other  neceflaries.  When  every  thing  was  ready  for  the  war
on  both  fides,  the  Sabines,  defigning  to  take  the  field  in  the
beginning  of  the  fpring,  refolved,  firft,  to  fend  embaffadors
to  the  enemy,  with  orders  both  to  require  the  women  to  be
fent  home,  and  to  demand  fatisfa&ion  for  feizing  them  ;  to
the  end  that,  being  denied  it,  they  might  feem  under  a
necefiity  to  enter  upon  the  war :  With  this  view,  therefore,
they  fent  embaffadors.  But  Romulus  thought  it  reafonable
that  the  women,  fince  they  themfelves  were  not  unwilling
to  live  with  their  hufbands,  fhould  be  fuffered  to  remain
with  them ;  but  confented  to  grant  them  any  thing  elfe  they
defired,  provided  they  applied  to  him  in  a  friendly  manner,  and
did  not  begin  the  war :  However,  they,  agreeing  to  nothing
he  propofed,  marched  out  with  their  army,  which  confifted
of  twenty  five  thoufand  foot,  and  near  a  thoufand  horfe.
The  Roman  army  was  not  much  inferior  in  number,  74  the

74-  Auw  jw-sv  xl  toov  ixi&v  jULVfixJes,  that  Caelius,  the  Medullini,  and  the
c^xy.omot  hr ?r«f.  M.  ***  thinks  it  other  cities  could  have  fupplied  him
is  not  credible  that  the  army  of  Ro-  with  fourteen  thoufand  more.  But  he
mulus  Ihould  be  fo  numerous ;  fince,  feems  to  have  forgotten  that  our  au~
after  he  had  incorporated  the  Caeni-  thor  has,  already,  told  us  that  many
nenfes,  and  Antemnates  with  his  own  brave  menhad,  before,  joined  him  with
people,  the  whole  number  did  not  ex-  confiderable  forces,  befides  Caelius  •,
ceed  fix  thoufand,  as  we  have  feen  ;  that  many  cities  had  fubmitred  to  him,
and  it  is  not  to  be  believed,  he  fays,  befides  Medulliaj  that  Lucumo  had

P  p  2  foot


29z  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

foot  amounting  to  twenty  thoufand,  and  the  horfe  to  eight
hundred.  This  army,  being  divided  into  two  bodies,  in-
camped  before  the  city  :  One  of  which  bodies,  commanded
by  Romulus  himfelf,  was  pofted  on  the  Efquiline  hill ;  the
other,  on  the  Quirinal  hill,  which  was  not,  then,  known
by  that  name :  This  divilion  was  under  the  command  of
Lucumo,  the  Tyrrhenian.

XXXVIII.  Tatius,  king  of  the  Sabines,  being  informed
of  their  preparations,  decamped  in  the  night,  and  marched
through  the  country  without  doing  any  damage  to  the  in¬
habitants,  and,  before  fun  rife,  incamped  on  the  plain,  that
lies  between  the  Quirinal,  and  Capitoline  hills:  But,  ob-
ferving  all  the  polls  to  be,  ftrongly,  guarded  by  the  enemy,
and  no  place  of  ftrength  left  for  his  army,  he  found
himfelf  under  great  perplexity,  not  knowing  how  to
employ  his  troops  while  he  remained  there.  But  he  was
relieved  from  this  anxiety  by  an  unexpected  piece  of  good
fortune;  the  ftrongeft  of  the  fortrefies  being  delivered  up

joined  him,  alfo,  with  a  good  number  and  Dionyfius,  among  the  reft,  gene-
of  forces,  befides  the  Alban  foldiers,  rally  give  it  a  dative  cafe  upon  thoffe
and  the  artificers  fent  by  his  grand-  occafions.  However,  Herodotus,  who
father  :  And  I  cannot  think  it  incre-  was  much  admired  by  our  author,  as
dible  that  all  thefe  together  might  we  find  in  his  critical  works,  ufes  this
amount  to  fourteen  thoufand  men.  prepofition  in  the  fame  manner  j
There  is  an  expreflion,  madeufe  of  by  where,  fpeaking  of  the  erroneous  opt-
our  author  a  few  lines  before,  which  nion  the  Aegyptians  entertained  that
well  deferved  the  attention  of  the  Cambyfes  was  the  fon  of  the  daughter
commentators  •,  it  is  this,  emp-  of  Apries,  he  fays,  y  «vai

rrov  itn  ruvlx-,  here  we  find  the  pre-  rov  uiju\Pxtlx  vsu^x  Apxmv  EI1I  THN
pofition  £?r i  ufed  for  a  caufe  with  an  ©rrATEPA,  #aa’  *  K#^£v<rf«.
accufative  cafe*,  whereas,  molt  authors,

y  In  Thalia,  c.  z.


to


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  293

to  him  by  the  following  adventure.  For,  while  the  Sabines
were  palling  by  the  foot  of  the  Capitoline  hill,  to  view  the
place,  and  fee  whether  any  part  of  the  hill  could  be  taken
either  by  furprize,  or  force,  they  were  obferved  from  the
eminence  by  a  virgin,  whofe  name  was  Tarpeia,  the  daugh¬
ter  of  a  man  of  diftin&ion,  who  commanded  in  the  place
This  virgin,  as  both  Fabius,  and  Cincius  write,  75  had  a
mind  to  the  bracelets,  which  they  wore  on  their  left  arms,,
and  to  their  rings  :  For,  at  that  time,  the  Sabines  wore
ornaments  of  gold,  and  were,  in  no  degree,,  inferior  to  the
Tyrrhenians  in  elegance.  But,  according  to  the  account
given  by  Lucius  Pifo,  the  cenforian,  in  his  hiftoryr  the  delire
of  doing  a  great  a&ion  led  her  to  deprive  the  enemy  of  their
defenlive  arms,  and,  in  that  condition,  to  deliver  them  up
to  her  fellow- citizens.  But  which  of  thefe  accounts  is  the

trueft,  may  be  conje&ured  by  what  happened  afterwards.
This  virgin,  therefore,  fending  out  one  of  her  maids  by  a
little  gate,  which  was  not  known  to  be  open,  delired  the
king  of  the  Sabines  to  come,  and  confer  with  her  in  private,
as  having  an  affair  of  neceflity,  and  importance  to  commu¬
nicate  to  him  :  Tatius,  in  hope  of  having  the  place  betrayed
to  him,  accepted  the  propofal,  and  came  to  the  place  ap¬
pointed;  when  the  virgin,  approaching  76  as  near  as  the

75*  E tuf  etftfX'tlai  rm  $eMiuv.  zLivy  fecure  himfelf  under  the  authority  of
treats  this  account  as  a  fable,  and  ra-  Fabius,  and  Cincius.
ther  thinks  flie  was  bribed  by  Tatius  76*  e ig  sQutlov.  Sylburgius  has  tranf-
to  admit  the  Sabines :  However  that  lated  this,  quampotuit  latentijfime.  This
may  be,  our  author  has  taken  care  to  is  not  the  fenfe  of  the  word,  which  has

*  B.  i.  c.  11.


nature


294  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  II.

nature  of  the  place  would  allow,  informed  him  that  her  father,
was,  upon  fome  occalion,  gone  out  of  the  fortrefs  that  night,
but  that  fhe  kept  the  keys  of  the  gates ;  and,  if  they  came  in
the  night,  fhe  would  deliver  up  the  place  to  them  upon
condition  that  they  gave  her,  as  a  reward  for  the  treachery,
thofe  things,  which  all  the  Sabines  wore  on  their  left  arms.
This  being  confented  to  by  Tatius,  fhe  received  his  affurance
on  oath  for  the  performance  of  this  agreement,  and  gave  the
fame  to  him ;  then,  having  appointed  the  ftrongeft  part  of
the  fortrefs,  to  which  the  Sabines  were  to  repair,  and  the
moffc  unguarded  hour  of  the  night  for  the  enterprize,  fhe
returned  without  being  difcovered  by  thofe  within.

XXXIX.  So  far  all  the  Roman  hiftorians  agree,  but  not
in  what  follows.  For  Pifo,  the  cenforian,  whom  I  men¬
tioned  before,  fays,  that  a  mefienger  was  fent  out  of  the
place  by  Tarpeia  in  the  night  to  give  intelligence  to  Ro¬
mulus  of  the  agreement  made  by  her  with  the  Sabines  (in
confequence  of  which  fine  propofed,  by  taking  advantage
of  the  ambiguity  of  the  expreffion  in  that  agreement,  to
demand  their  defenhve  arms)  deiiring  him,  at  the  fame  time,
to  fend  a  reinforcement  to  the  fortrefs  that  night,  by  the
alliftance  of  which,  the  enemy,  77  together  with  their  com-

nothing  to  do  with  fecrecy.  E(pntlov,  ment  qu'elle  put.  Portus,  and,  confe-
Jwalov.  Hefychius.  The  fidelity  of  quently,  le  Jay,  have  tranflated  it  very
M.  '*  *  *,  in  tranflating  Sylburgius.  properly.

though  it  is,  often,  of advantage  to  him,  77*  Au7«  tw  ^«7>j\a7|j.  Cafaubon,
fometimes  leads  him  into  a  fnare  ;  as  very  juftly,  obferves  that  Portus,  by
it  has  done  upon  this  occafion  :  For  defiring  to  add  the  praepofition  c rw,
he  has  rendered  his  miftake  literally  ;  did  not  confider  that  this  Atticifm  is,
Tarpeia  s' y  rendit  aujji  le  plus  fecrette -  often,  to  be  met  with  in  the  Greek

mander,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC A RN  A  S  S  E N  S  I  S.  295


mander,  being  deprived  of  their  arms,  might  be  taken  pri-
foners :  But,  that  the  meffenger,  deferting  to  the  king  of
the  Sabines,  acquainted  him  with  the  defign  of  Tarpeia.
However,  Fabius,  and  Cincius,  fay  there  was  no  fuch  thing ;
on  the  contrary,  they  affirm  that  the  virgin  obferved  her
treacherous  compact :  But  they  all  agree,  again,  in  what
follows.  For  they  fay  that,  upon  the  approach  of  the  king
of  the  Sabines  with  a  detachment  of  his  beft  troops,  Tarpeia,.
in  execution  of  her  promife,  opened  the  gate  agreed  upon,
to  the  enemy ;  and,  calling  up  the  garrifon,  defired  they
would  fave  themfelves,  immediately,  by  other  outlets  un¬
known  to  the  enemy,  as  if  the  Sabines  had,  already,  been
mailers  of  the  place:  That,  after  the  retreat  of  the  garrifon,
the  Sabines,  finding  the  gates  open,  and  the  place  deferted,
poffeffed  themfelves  of  it :  And  that  Tarpeia,  alledging  that
fhe  had  performed  her  part  of  the  agreement,  infilled  upon
receiving  the  reward  of  her  treachery,  according  to  their
oaths.

XL.  Here,  again,  Pifo  fays  that  the  Sabines  being  ready
to  give  the  virgin  the  gold  they  wore  on  their  left  arms,
Tarpeia  demanded  their  ffiields,  not  their  ornaments :  That
Tatius  refented  the  impofition,  and,  at  the  fame  time,
thought  of  an  expedient  not  to  violate  the  agreement ;  which
was  to  give  her  the  fhields,  as  the  maid  defired,  but  to  find


authors.  This  is  fo  true,  that  I  fcarce
know  a  good  writer,  who  does  not,
often,  ufe  it.  I  fhall,  therefore,  con¬
tent  myfelf  with  quoting  one  inftance
of  this  Atticifm  from  a  Homer,


<ov7’  fiowcrtv
A vfyoiS  CthhoJxTrXC.

Upon  which,  the  Greek  fcholiaft  fays..
<rvv  avl ctif  retig  (3aci,


*  Octvao’.  v.  f,  219,


means


296  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  II.

means  that  fhe  flhould  make  no  ufe  of  them;  and,  imme¬
diately,  threw  his  fhield  at  her  with  all  his  force,  and  ordered
the  reft  to  do  the  fame  :  And  that  Tarpeia,  thus  pelted  on
all  fides,  fell  under  the  number,  and  force  of  the  blows,
and  died  overwhelmed  with  their  ftiields.  But  Fabius  at¬
tributes  this  collufion  in  the  performance  of  the  agreement
to  the  Sabines :  For  they,  being  obliged,  by  their  contract,
to  give  her  the  ornaments  of  gold,  as  fhe  defired,  repined  at
the  greatnefs  of  the  reward,  and  threw  their  fhields  at  her,
as  if  they  had  ingaged  themfelves  by  their  oaths  to  give  her
thefe.  But  what  followed  gives  the  greater  appearance  of
truth  to  the  opinion  of  Pifo :  For  fhe  was  honoured  with  a
^monument  in  the  place  where  (he  fell,  and  lies  buried  on
the  moft  facred  hill  of  the  city  :  And  the  Romans  every
year,  perform  libations  to  her  (I  relate  what  Pifo  writes)
whereas,  if  fhe  had  loft  her  life  in  betraying  her  country  to
the  enemy,  it  is  not  probable  fhe  would  have  received  any
of  thefe  honors  either  from  thofe  fhe  had  betrayed,  or  from
thofe,  by  whom  fhe  was  killed ;  but,  if  there  had  been  any
remains  of  her  body,  they  would,  in  procefs  of  time,  have
been  dug  up,  and  caft  out  of  the  city,  in  order  to  78  deter,
and  warn  others  from  committing  the  like  crimes.  But  let
every  one  judge  of  thefe  things  as  he  pleafes.

XLI.  However  Tatius,  and  the  Sabines,  being  mafters  of
a  ftrong  fortrefs,  and  having,  without  any  trouble,  taken
the  greateft  part  of  the  Romans  baggage, 79  carried  on  the

The  reader  will  obferve  79-  Tov  srcAf^ov  Aep^ov.  I  am  very
that  (poGot  is  ufed  a&ively  in  this  place,  glad  I  can  do  M.  *  *  *  the  juftice  to
and  fignifies  ten  or ,  not  feciv .  lay  that  he  is  the  only  one,  of  the  four

war


BookIT.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSEN  SI  S.  297

war,  now,  with  fecurity:  And,  as  the  armies  lay  incamped
at  a  fmall  diftance  from  each  other,  federal  attempts  were
made,  and  Ikirmifties  happened  on  many  occasions,  which
were  not  attended  with  any  great  advantages,  or  Ioffes  to
either  party.  Afterwards,  two  pitched  battles  were  fought,
in  which,  all  the  forces  on  both  fides  ingaged  with  the
greateft  animofity ;  and  each  of  them  loft  a  conftderable
number  of  men.  While  the  time  was  thus  prolonged,  they
both  came  to  the  fame  refolution,  which  was,  to  decide,  by
a  general  ingagement,  the  fortune  of  the  war  :  Whereupon,
the  leaders  of  both  armies,  confummate  in  the  art  of  war,
and  the  folders  ufed  to  atftion,  advancing  to  the  plain,  that
lay  between  the  two  camps,  performed  many  memorable
adtions,  as  well  in  attacking,  as  in  receiving  the  enemy ;  in
rallying,  and  renewing  the  fight  with  equal  advantage.
Thofe,  who,  from  the  ramparts,  were  fpedlators  of  this
doubtful  battle,  which,  often  varying,  alternately  inclined  to
each  fide,  when  their  own  people  had  the  advantage,  in-
fpired  them  with  frefb  courage  by  their  exhortations,  and
ihouts ;  and,  when  they  were  prefled,  and  purfued,  prevented
a  total  mifbehaviour,  by  their  prayers,  and  lamentations :
By  which,  both  armies  were  compelled  to  fupport  the
dreadful  incidents  of  the  battle,  even  beyond  their  ftrength.
The  ingagement  having,  in  this  manner,  lafted  all  that  day,

tranflators,  who  has  rendered  this  paf-  limply,  faire  la  guerre.  And  this  is
iage.  with  propriety  :  All  the  reft  have  the  fenfe  b  Herodotus  has  given  to
given  it  this  fenfe  ;  that  they  protracted  r ov  aiuvot,  to  live,  in  the  letter,

the  war  *,  whereas,  he  has  tranflated  it  he  fays,  Amafis  writ  to  Polycrates.

b  In  Thalia,  c.  40.

'•  Vol.  I.  Qj]  without


29S  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book II.

without  any  advantage  on  either  fide,  and  night  coming
on,  they  both,  willingly,  retired  to  their  own  camps.

XLII.  The  following  days,  they  buried  their  dead,  took
care  of  the  wounded,  reinforced  their  armies,  and,  refolving
upon  another  battle,  met,  again,  in  the  fame  plain;  and
fought  ti  1  night,  when  the  Romans  had  the  advantage  in
both  wings ;  the  right  being  commanded  by  Romulus
himfelf ;  and  the  left  by  Lucumo,  the  Tyrrhenian :  But,  in
the  center,  the  battle  remained  as  yet  undecided  ;  one  man
preventing  the  intire  defeat  of  the  Sabines ;  and,  by  rallying  the
troops,  that  gave  way,  he  brought  them,  again,  to  difpute  the
victory  with  the  conquerors :  His  name  was  Metius  Curtius,
a  perfon  remarkable  for  his  ftrength,  and  perfonal  courage  ;
but,  chiefly,  celebrated  for  his  contempt  of  every  danger,
and  every  fear.  This  man  commanded  in  the  center,  and
had  overcome  thofe,  who  oppofed  him  :  But,  being  deflrous
to  reftore  the  battle  in  the  wings  alfo,  where  the  Sabine
troops  were,  already,  prefled,  and  their  lines  forced,  he
encouraged  thofe  about  him  ;  and,  purfuing  that  part  of  the
enemy’s  forces,  that  fled,  and  was  difperfed,  drove  them  to
the  gates  of  Rome:  This  obliged  Romulus  to  leave  the
victory  imperfect,  and,  returning  from  the  purfuit,  to  haften
to  that  part  of  the  enemy,  that  was  victorious.  This  de¬
parture  of  Romulus  with  his  forces  gave  an  opportunity  to
the  Sabines,  who  had  been  difordered,  to  renew  the  fight
upon  equal  terms;  and  the  whole  danger,  now,  fell  upon
Curtius,  and  his  victorious  troops.  For  fome  time,  the
Sabines  received  the  onfet  of  the  Romans,  and  fought  with

great


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  299

great  gallantry :  But,  being  attacked  by  greater  numbers,
they  gave  way,  and  faved  themfelves  by  retiring  to  their
camp ;  Curtius  fecuring  their  retreat,  and  preventing  their
being  purfued,  while  they  were  in  diforder  ;  which  gave
them  an  opportunity  of  retiring  without  precipitation  :  For
he  flood  his  ground,  and  fought,  and  received  Romulus,
when  he  attacked  him  in  perfon.  Here,  infued  a  great  and
glorious  ingagement  between  the  leaders  themfelves;  But
Curtius,  having  received  many  wounds,  and  loft  much  blood,
retired  by  degrees,  till  he  came  to  a  deep  lake,  round  which
it  was  difficult  for  him  to  advance,  the  enemy  being  polled
on  all  ftdes  of  it ;  and  impoffible  to  pafs  through  it  from
the  quantity  of  mud,  that  furrounded  it,  and  the  depth  of
waters,  that  were  gathered  together  in  the  middle :  When
he  came  to  the  lake,  armed  as  he  was,  he  threw  himfelf
into  the  water:  And  Romulus,  fuppoftng  he  would,  im¬
mediately,  periffi  in  the  lake,  and  not  being  able  to  purfue
him  through  fo  much  mud,  and  water,  turned  upon  the  reft
of  the  Sabines :  But  Curtius,  with  great  difficulty,  got  fafe,
at  laft,  out  of  the  lake,  without  quitting  his  arms,  and  was
led  away  to  the  camp.  This  place  is  now  filled  up;  but  is
called,  from  this  adventure,  the  Lake  Curtius ,  being  about
the  middle  of  the  Roman  forum.

XLIII.  Romulus,  while  he  purfued  the  reft,  advanced
near  the  capitol,  and  had  great  hopes  of  making  himfelf
mafter  of  the  place ;  but,  being  weakened  by  many  wounds,
and  hurt  by  a  fevere  ftroke  with  a  ftone,  which,  having  been
thrown  at  him  from  a  high  place,  had  hit  him  on  the  temple,

Q^q  2  he


3oo  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

he  was  taken  up  half  dead  by  thofe  about  him,  and  carried
into  the  city.  When  the  Romans,  no  longer,  faw  their
leader,  they  were  feized  with  fear,  and  the  right  wing  fled :
But  the  troops,  that  were  ported  on  the  left  commanded
by  Lucumo,  encouraged  by  their  leader,  a  man  much  cele¬
brated  for  military  achievements,  and  who  had  performed
many  great  actions  during  the  courfe  of  this  war,  flood  their
ground  for  fome  time :  But  he  himfelf  being  pierced  through
the  fldes  with  a  javelin,  and  falling  through  weaknefs,  they
gave  way  alfo :  Upon  which,  the  whole  Roman  army  fled ;
and  the  Sabines,  imboldened  by  their  flight,  purfued  them
to  the  city :  But,  when  they  approached  the  gates,  they
were  repulfed;  the  youth,  whom  the  king  had  appointed
to  guard  the  walls,  fallying  out  upon  them  with  frefli  forces ;
and  Romulus,  who,  by  this  time,  was,  in  fome  degree,
recovered  of  his  wound,  coming  out  to  their  afliftance  with
all  poflible  expedition,  the  fate  of  the  battle  turned,  and,
greatly,  changed  in  favor  of  the  Romans :  For  thofe,  who
fled,  recovered  themfelves  from  their  late  fear  at  the  un¬
looked-for  appearance  of  their  leader ;  and  forming,  that
inftant  attacked  the  enemy ;  while  the  Sabines,  who  were,
then,  80  driving  the  others  into  the  city,  and 81  made  no  doubt

KaJeigyovIzs  avlnc.  Kotl&ty/uevot,  xa-  to  m  etc.  This  expreffion  has  great
t uxzxhenrutvo?.  Hefychius.  And  this  elegance,  and  is  taken  from  Herodo-
is  the  fenfe  the  tranflators  ought  to  tus,  whofe  ftyle  our  author  fo  often
have  given  to  this  word  ;  which  Syl-  imitates,  that  I  may  venture  to  affirm
burgius,  and  k  Jay  have  done.  Portus  no  man  can  be  qualified  to  tranflate
has  faid,  qui  vero  tunc  intra  moenia  fe  the  latter,  who  has  not,  in  a  good
continebant  which  would  be  very  well,  rneafure,  acquainted,  himfelf  with  the
if  our  author  had  faid  xu1ei$yov1(g  having,  manner  of  the  former.  Cyrus  (I  mean
8l*  K«n  oiopivoi  emeu  the  founder  of  the  Perfian  empire)  had  a

of


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  ARN  A  S  SEN  SI  S.  301
of  taking  it  by  ftorm,  when  they  faw  this  fudden  and  un¬
expected  change,  thought  of  providing  for  their  own  fafety :
But  they  found  it  no  eafy  matter  to  retreat  to  their  camp,
being  pur fued  from  an  eminence,  and  through  a  hollow  way ;
and,  in  this  rout,  happened  82  the  great  lofs  they  fuftained.
After  they  had  thus  fought  a  doubtful  battle  that  day,  and
both  met  with  unexpected  turns  of  fortune,  the  fun,  now,
being  near  his  fetting,  they  parted.

XLIV.  The  following  days,  the  Sabines  held  a  council,
in  which  they  deliberated  whether  they  fhould  return  with
their  forces,  after  they  had  done  all  poffible  damage  to  the
enemy’s  country,  or  fend  for  another  army  from  home,  and
profecute  the  war  with  conftancy,  till,  by  a  victory,  they


jealoufy  of  Darius,  the  fon  of  Hyflafpes,
and  then  adds, c  wow  a? ro  t> ??

pios  T&vlqf  to  (ayi  neivov  i7Ti£isAsveiv

ipoi.  I  need  not  point  out  to  the
learned  reader  the  analogy  between
this  expreflion,  and  That  our  author
has  made  ufe  of  upon  this  occafion.
The  Latin  tranflator  of  Herodotus  has
rendered  this  very  properly,  though
not  very  elegantly,  by  nulla  dubitatio.
Our  English  tranflator  of  that  author,
Littlebury,  I  find,  has  left  out  the
whole  lentence.  Had  Sylburgius  con-
fidered  this  paflage  of  Herodotus,  he
could  not  have  rendered  That,  before
us,  nec  ullum  objlare  machinamentnm
putabant  quo  minus ,  etc.  However,  he
has  been  followed,  in  his  error,  by
M.  ***,  who  has  faid  que  rien  ne  pou-
voit  les  empecher  de  prendre  leur  ville.
This  paflage  of  Herodotus,  alfo,  fhews


that  Sylburgius  had  no  reafon  to  change
to  (Ay  into  ts  ^>7,  notwithstanding  the
authority  of  the  Vatican  manufcript,
which,  though  it  has  reftored  number-
lefs  paffages,  is,  certainly,  defe&ive
in  this.

82<  O  Tffohvs  (povof.  This  particle  0,
which  is  very  expreflive  in  Greek,
makes  a  great  alteration  in  the  fenfe:
For,  aroAuf  (poi/o?  y-nHou,  which  all  the
tranflators  have  expreffed  in  their  fe-
veral  verfions,  differs,  widely,  from
0  sroAv?  Qovof  yivslcu  the  firft  fignifying
a  great  J, laughter ,  and  the  other,  that
the  great  Jlaughter  happened  upon  that
occafion.  I  know  there  is  a  great  dif¬
ficulty  in  rendering  thefe  powers  of  the
Greek  language,  in  any  other  :  But,
every  reader  experts  that  a  tranflator
fhould,  at  leaff,  attempt  it.


c  In  Clio,  c.  209.


fhould


302  ROMAN*  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

fhould  put  an  end  to  it  in  the  moft  honourable  manner.
They  coniidered  that  it  would  be  of  bad  confequence  to
them,  both  to  return  home  with  the  fhame  of  having  effe&ed
nothing,  and  to  flay  there,  when  none  of  their  attempts
fucceeded  to  their*  expectation.  As  tg  a  treaty  with  the
enemy  concerning  an  accommodation,  which  they  looked
upon  as  the  only  honourable  means  of  putting  an  end  to  the
war,  they  thought  it  not  more  convenient  to  them,  than  to
the  Romans.  On  the  other  fide,  the  Romans  were,  not  lefs,
but,  even  more,  perplexed  than  the  Sabines,  what  courfe  to
take  in  the  prefent  juncture :  For  they  could  refolve  neither
to  reftore  the  women,  nor  to  retain  them ;  looking  upon
the  firft  to  be  attended  with  an  acknowledgement  of  their
defeat,  and  with  a  neceflity  of  fubmitting  to  every  thing
elfe,  that  fhould  be  impofed  upon  them ;  and  the  other  with
many  difmal  fcenes  in  the  defolation  of  their  country,  and
the  deftru&ion  of  the  flower  of  their  youth :  And,  if  they
fhould  offer  to  treat  of  peace  with  the  Sabines,  they  defpaired
of  obtaining  any  favourable  conditions,  for  many  reafons ;
but,  chiefly,  becaufe  haughty  men  treat  an  enemy,  who
courts  them,  with  feverity,  rather  than  moderation.

XLV.  While  both  were  confuming  the  time  in  thefe
confiderations,  daring  neither  to  renew  the  fight,  nor  treat  of
peace,  the  wives  of  the  Romans,  who  were  Sabines,  and  the
caufe  of  the  war,  aflembling  together,  without  their  hufbands,
after  confultation  among  themfelves,  determined  to  make
the  firft  mention  of  an  accommodation  to  both  armies.
The  perfon,  who  propofed  this  meafure  to  the  reft  of  the

women,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENS  IS.  303

women,  was  called  Herfilia,  a  woman  of  no  obfcure  birth
among  the  Sabines.  Some  have  faid  that,  being  already
married,  fhe  was  feized  with  the  virgins  as  a  maid  :  But
thofe,  who  give  the  moft  probable  account,  fay,  that  fhe
ftaid  with  her  daughter  by  her  own  confent:  For,  according
to  them,  her  only  daughter  was,  alfo,  ravifhed  among  the
reft.  After  the  women  had  taken  this  refolution,  they  came
to  the  fenate ;  and,  having  obtained  audience,  they  made  a
long  harangue,  in  which  they,  earneftly,  defired  leave  to  go
their  relations ;  exprefting  great  hopes  of  uniting  the  two
nations,  and  of  eftablifhing  friendfhip  between  them.
When  the  fenators,  who  were  prefent  with  the  king  in
council,  heard  this,  they  were,  exceedingly,  pleafed,  and
looked  upon  it  as  the  only  expedient  in  their  prefent  diffi¬
culties.  Upon  which,  a  decree  of  the  fenate  was  made  to  this
effect ;  That  thofe  Sabine  women,  who  had  children,  fhould,
upon  leaving  them  with  their  hufbands,  have  permiffion
to  go,  in  the  quality  of  embafladors,  to  their  countrymen ;
and  that  thofe,  who  had  many  children,  fliould  take  fome
of  them,  and  ufe  their  endeavours  to  reconcile  the  two
nations.  After  this,  they  went  out,  dreffed  in  mourning;
fome  of  them,  alfo,  carrying  their  fmall  children.  When
they  arrived  in  the  camp  of  the  Sabines,  lamenting,  and
falling  at  the  feet  of  every  one,  they  raifed  great  com-
paffion  in  all,  who  faw  them,  none  being  able  to  refrain
from  tears.  The  council  being  aflembled  on  this  occafion,
and  the  king  commanding  them  to  give  an  account  of  the
reafons,  that  brought  them  thither,  Herfilia,  who  had  advifed

this


304  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

this  refolution,  and  was  at  the  head  of  the  embafly,  befought
them,  in  a  long  and  pathetic  difcourfe,  to  give  peace  to
thofe,  who  were  interceding  for  their  hufbands,  and  for
whole  fake,  they  profeffed  to  have  undertaken  the  war.
As  to  the  conditions  of  that  peace,  fhe  faid,  the  chiefs,
afiembling  together  by  themfelves,  migh:  fettle  them  with
a  view  to  the  advantage  of  both  parties.

XL VI.  After  fhe  had  faid  this,  all  the  women,  with  their
children,  threw  themfelves  at  the  feet  of  the  king,  and  re¬
mained  proftrate,  till  thofe,  who  were  prefent,  raifed  them
from  the  ground,  promiling  to  do  every  thing,  that  was
reafonable,  and  in  their  power  :  Then,  having  ordered  them
to  withdraw,  and  confulted  together,  they  determined  to
make  peace.  And  firft,  a  truce  was  agreed  upon  between
the  two  nations :  After  that,  the  kings  had  an  interview,
and  a  peace  was  concluded.  The  terms  agreed  upon,  which
they  confirmed  by  their  oaths,  were  as  follows :  That
Romulus,  and  Tatius  fhould  be  kings  of  the  Romans,  with

equal  right  of  fuffrage,  and  equal  honors  :  That  the  city,
preferving  its  name,  fhould,  from  its  founder,  be  called
Rome:  And  that  each  particular  citizen  fhould,  as  before,

83*  I<rovL<P*?-  I  am  furprifed  at  the  an  equal  right  of  fuffrage  •,  and,  in  this
inaccuracy  of  the  tranflators  in  render-  fenfe,  Thucydides  ufes  the  word  in  that
ing  this  word.  Portus,  and  Sylbur-  noble  fpeech,  in  which  Pericles  en-
gius,  by  faying  pari  pot  eft  ate ,  have  courages  the  Athenians  not  to  fubmit
milled  the  two  French  translators,  who,  to  the  Peloponnefians,  who,  he  fays,
certainly,  never  thought  of  the  Greek  labor  under  many  difadvantages  ;  and,
text,  when  they  rendered  it  un  pouvoir  among  the  reft,  mentions  this,  that
egal,  une  puijjance  egale.  Irofapot,  un~  d  a-*v7ey  rt  ITO'FH^OI  ovhs,  km
doubtedly,  fignifies  a  perfon,  who  has  o^o^uAo/,  to  tp'  iavlev  hx?os  a? r£veF«.

d  B.  i.  c.  141.  ■


be


EooklL  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN ASSENSIS.  305

be  called  a  Roman :  But  that  the  people,  colle&ively,  (hould
be  comprehended  under  one  general  appellation,  and,  from
the  country  of  Tatius,  be  called  s*  Quirites :  And  that  all
the  Sabines,  who  were  willing,  might  fettle  at  Rome,  and
bring  with  them  the  images  of  their  gods ;  and  that  they
fhould  be  incorporated  with  the  tribes,  and  the  curiae.
After  they  had  fworn  to  the  obfervance  of  this  treaty,  and
ere&ed  altars 85  in  memory  of  their  oaths,  about  the  middle
of  the  holy  way,  as  it  is  called,  they  mingled  together,  and
all  the  generals  returned  home  with  their  forces,  except
Tatius,  the  king,  and  three  perfons  of  the  moft  coniiderable
families,  who  ftaid  at  Rome,  and  received  thofe  honors,
which  their  pofterity  after  them  enjoyed  :  Thefe  were
Volufus  Valerius,  and  Tullus,  furnamed  Tyrannus,  with
Metius  Curtius,  who  fwam  crofs  the  lake  with  his  arms  :
Others  ftaid,  alfo,  with  their  relations,  and  clients,  not  lefs
in  number  than  the  former  inhabitants.

XLVII.  Every  thing  being  fettled,  the  kings  thought
proper,  lince  the  city  had  received  a  great  encreafe  of  people,
to  double  the  number  of  the  patricians,  by  adding  to  the
former  illuftrious  families,  as  many  of  the  new  inhabitants;

24*  K vgtlut.  e  Livy  affigns  the  fame  out  confidering  that  our  author  fays
reafon  for  this  appellation  :  It  a  gemi-  they  fwore  to  perform  the  treaty  be-
natd  urbe ,  ut  Sabinis  tamen  aliud  dare-  fore  he  mentions  the  altars  :  So  that,
tur ,  Quirites  a  curibus  appellati.  I  think,  we  mull  conclude  that  the

85*  Em  -rots  ogKoie.  The  tranflators  altars  were  eredted  to  perpetuate  the
are  unanimous  in  fuppofing,  in  their  memory  of  this  treaty,  which  was  con-
feveral  veriions,  that  they  ereded  thefe  firmed  in  fo  folemn  a  manner  ;  and,
altars  in  order  to  fwear  to  the  obfcrv-  by  which  the  two  nations  were  united,
ance  of  the  treaty  upon  them  ;  with-

•  B.  i.  c,  13.

Vol.  I.  R  r  which


3o6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IT,

which  addition  they  alfo  called  patricians :  Of  thefe,  a  hundred
perfons,  previoufly  chofen  86  by  the  curiae,  were  incorporated
with  the  ancient  fenators.  Concerning  thefe  things,  almoft
all  the  authors  of  the  Roman  hiftory  agree :  But  fome  few
differ  in  the  number  of  the  additional  fenators  :  For  they
fay  that  not  a  hundred,  but  fifty  only  were  admitted  into
the  fenate  upon  this  occafion.  Concerning  the  honors
alfo,  which  the  kings  conferred  on  the  women,  in  return  for
their  mediation,  all  the  Roman  hiftorians  do  not  agree:
For  fome  of  them  write  that,  befides  many  other  confider-
able  grants,  they  gave  their  names  to  the  curiae,  which
were  thirty,  as  I  have  faid,  That  being  the  number  of  the
women,  who  went  upon  the  embafiy.  But  Terentius  Varro
does  not  agree  with  them  in  this  particular :  For  he  fays
that  Romulus  gave  the  names  to  the  curiae  earlier  than  this,
when  he,  iirft,  divided  the  people;  fome  of  thefe  names,
being  taken  from  their  chiefs  ;  and  others  from  the  87  places

86,  fycilgiou.  The  French  tranflators  mans,  the  dignity  of  fenator,  as  well
are  unfortunate  in  rendering  this  pe-  as  all  the  magiftracies,  could  only  be
riod.  M.  ***  has  thought  fit  to  call  enjoyed  by  patricians  :  Thus,  we  lhall
thefe,  les  tribus ,  inftead  of  les  curies ,  find,  that  f  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  when
which  he  fhould  have  faid.  And  le  he  added  another  hundred  perfons  to
Jay  has  confounded  the  patricians  with  the  fenate,  firft  made  them  patricians,
the  fenators,  and  made  the  hundred  and  then  fenators.
men,  chofen  by  the  curiae,  to  have  s7-  Atto  srxvlw.  Here  is,  certainly,
been  ele&ed  into  the  number  of  the  a  fault  in  the  text,  which  runs  through
patricians,  inftead  of  the  fenators,  ■pour  all  the  editions.  This  the  tranflators
prendre ,  comme  les  autres ,  le  nom ,  et  have  been  fo  fenfible  of,  that  they  have
la  qualite  de  patrices.  Patricians  they  followed  Gelenius,  who,  upon  what
were,  to  be  fure,  but  they  were  fenators  authority  I  know  not,  has  read  cctto
alfo ;  which  lafb  quality  he  has  omitted,  tuv  zsaXcu  But  the  rnisfor-

By  the  original  conftitution  of  the  Ro-  tune  is,  that  the  names  of  the  curiae

f  B.  ii.  c.  67,


inhabited


BookIL  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  307

inhabited  by  the  curiae :  He  fays,  alfo,  that  the  number  of
the  women,  who  went  upon  the  embafly,  was  not  thirty,  but
three  hundred  and  twenty  feven ;  and  does  not  think  it  pro¬
bable  that  the  kings  would  have  deprived  fo  many  women
of  this  honor,  to  bellow  it  only  upon  a  few  of  them.  I
thought  it  became  me  neither  to  omit  thefe  things,  nor  to
fay  more  of  them,  than  was  proper.

XL VIII.  Concerning  the  city  of  the  Quirites,  from
whence  Tatius,  and  his  followers  came  (for  the  courfe  of
this  narration  requires  that  I  fhould  fpeak  of  them  alfo,  and
fay  who  they  were,  and  from  whence)  we  have  received  the
following  account.  In  the  territory  of  Reate,  when  the
Aborigines  were  in  pofieffion  of  it,  a  certain  virgin  of  that
country,  who  was  of  the  firft  quality,  dancing  with  others
of  her  fex,  went  into  a  temple  of  Enyalius :  The  Sabines,
and,  from  them,  the  Romans  give  to  Enyalius  the  name  of
Curinus;  without  being  able  to  affirm  for  certain,  whether
he  is  the  god  Mars,  or  fome  other,  enjoying  the  fame  honors :
For  fome  are  of  opinion  that  each  of  thefe  names  is  at¬
tributed  to  the  fame  god,  who  prehdes  over  combats:
Others,  that  thefe  names  belong  to  two  feveral  gods  of  war.
However,  this  maid,  while  ffie  was  dancing  in  the  temple,

were  not  taken  from  .the  countries,  from  the  women  ;  which  he  treats  as
from  whence  the  people,  who  com-  an  error  :  And  the  reafon  he  affigns
pofed  them,  originally,  came ;  but  for  it,  may,  very  probably,  help  us
from  the  places  they  inhabited:  Which  to  the  right  reading  of  this  paflage  ;
is  confirmed  by  Plutarch,  who,  in  his  sroA/uaj  a<nv  ocno  XX2.PIX2N  t#?

life  of  Romulus,  has,  plainly,  taken  zr$oniyogtetf.  I  would,  therefore,  read,
many  things  from  our  author ;  and,  with  a  fmall  alteration,  inftead  of
like  him,  mentions  this  opinion,  that  «7ro  sravlav,  <m to  tovuv*
the  names  of  the  curiae  were  taken


R  r  2


was.


3o8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

was,  on  a  fudden,  feized  with  divine  infpiration ;  and,  ceafing
to  dance  with  her  company,  ran  into  *the  fandtuary  of  the
god  :  Alter  which,  being  with  child  by  this  genius,  as  every
body  believed,  fhe  brought  forth  a  fon,  whofe  name  was
Medius,  and  his  furname  Fidius,  who  being  arrived  to
manhood,  had  not  a  human,  but  a  divine  form ;  and  was,
of  all  men  the  mold  renowned  for  military  achievements ;
and,  being  delirous  to  build  a  city,  88  at  his  own  expence,
he  gathered  together  a  great  number  of  people  of  the  neigh¬
bourhood,  and,  in  a  very  fhort  time,  built  the  city,  called
Cures:  Which  he  called  by  that  name,  as  fome  fay,  from
the  genius,  who  was  reputed  to  have  been  his  father  ;  or,  as
others  write,  from  a  {pear ;  for  the  Sabines  call  fpears,
Cures .  This  is  the  account  given  by  Terentius  Varro.

XLIX.  But  S9Zenodotus  of  Troezene,  who  has  written
the  hiftory  of  the  Umbri,  fays  that  the  Sabines,  firft,  dwelt,
in  the  Reatine  territory,  as  it  is  called,  of  which  they  were'
the  original  inhabitants;  and  that,  being  driven  from  thence
by  the  Pelafgi,  they  came  into  the  country  they  now  inhabit ;
and,  changing  their  name  with  their  habitation,  from  Umbri,
were  called,  Sabines.  But  Fortius  Cato  fays  that  the  Sabines

£8*  A<p‘  itxvJa.  Portushas  led  the  two  gins  faw  this  difficulty,  by  his  leaving
French  tranfiators  into  an  error  by  ifout.  A<p*  luvh,  plainly,  fignifies,  at'
rendering  this  de  fuo  nomine  \  which  his  own  expence ,  and  the  Latin  tranf-
they  have  tranfiated  without  confider-  Jators  ought  to  have  rendered  it,  fuis
ing  that  the  name  of  this  man  was  fumptibus.

Medius  Fidius,  and  That  of  the  city  Zwohlof,  I  can  find  nothing.

Cures,  which  name  cannot,  poffi-  worth  relating  concerning  this  liifto*
bly,  be  derived  from  the  other.  We  rian.
may,  certainly,  conclude  that  Sylbur-


received


Bookir.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  359

received  their  name  from  90  Sabinus,  the  fon  of 91  Sancus,  a
genius  of  that  country ;  and  that  this  Sancus  was,  by  fome?


9°*  ZuStvx.  I  fee  no  reafon  to  fub-
ftitute  Sabus,  with  Sylburgius,  in  the
room  of  Sabinus,  contrary  to  the  au¬
thority  of  all  the  manufcripts,  and
editions,  fince  g  Virgil,  alfo,'  calls  him
Sabinus,

Italufque ,  paterque  Sabinus

Vitifator.

91*  XotyKov.  This  is  the  true  read¬
ing  ;  and  thus  it  muft  be  reftored  in
h  Livy,  where  he  fays,  in  fpeaking  of
Vitruvius,  bona  ejus  Semoni  Sanco
cenfuerunt  confecranda .  For  this  divi¬
nity  of  the  Sabines  was  called  iSemo,
Sancus,  Sangus,  and  Fidius  •,  the  laft
of  which  I  look  upon  to  be  a  Roman
name,  and  the  other  three  to  have  been
the  name  of  that  god,  as  they  called
him,  in  the  Sabine  language,  which
was  not,  like  the  Latin,  originally,
Greek,  notwithstanding  the  fmall  co¬
lony  of  Lacedaemonians,  who  came
to  fettle  among  the  Sabines :  And,
that  their  language  was  not, originally,
Greek,  appears  from  the  following
p adage  of  Livy,  where  he  refutes  the
opinion  of  thofe,  who  held  that  Numa
had  been  inftru&ed  by  Pythagoras,
which,  he  abferves,  could  not  be,  fince
the  latter  lived  in  the  time  of  Servius
Tullius,  above  a  hundred  years  after
Numa,  and  refided  at  Croton,  in  a
diftant  part  of  Italy  :  After  which,  he
afks  this  queftion,  k  Ex  quibus  loots ,
etji  ejufdem  aetatis  fuiffet  (Pythagoras)
qua  famd  Sabinos ,  ant  quo  linguae
commercio  quenquam  ad  cupiditatem


difcendi  excivijfet  ?  If  Juft  in  had  read
either  Dionyfius,  or  Livy,  or,  even,
converfed  with  any,  who  had  read
them,  he  would  never  have  fallen  into
the  ridicule  of  charging  the  Romans
with  having  eredted  a  ftatue  to1  Simon  .
Magus,  upon  no  other  foundation  than
this  infcription  on  the  ftatue  of  this
Sabine  god,  semoni.  sango.  deo.
fidio.  which  he  fuppofes  to  have  been
Simoni  deo  fantio.  My  learned  friend
“Dr.  Gregory  Sharpe,  fays,  in  his
juftification,  that,  in  this ,  he  did  not
intend  to  deceive  any  one.  This  I  am  •
very  willing  to  allow ;  but  hope  he
will,  alfo,  allow  that,  if  his  ftncerity
acquits  him  of  any  defign  to  deceive,  -
his  ignorance,  and  credulity  render
him  a  poor  guide  to  follow.  I  wonder
what  the  Roman  Senate,  to  whom  he
addreftes  his  apology,  thought  of  this
extraordinary  difco very :  But  I  fuppofe'
they  had  never  heard  either  of  him,  or
his  writings.  I  obferve,  in  reading
this  apology  of  n  Juftin,  that  he  ad-'
dreftes  it,  not  only,  to  the  Roman  fe-
nate,  whom  he  flatters  with  the  title
ot  h°cx.  cvyyj^ocy  holy  fenate  (a  ftrano-e-
title  to  be  given  by  a  father  of  the
Chriftian  church  to  an  aflembly  of.
heathens)  but,  alio, ,  to  the  emperor
Antoninus  Pius,  and  to  the  people  oft
Rome.  The  ftatue,  here  taken  notice
of  by  Juftin,  was,  I  find,  not  a  great-
many  years  ago,  dug  up  in  an  ifland.
of  the  Tiber,  with  the  very  infcriptiom
before  mentioned,  which  had,  fo  un¬
fortunately,  milled  Juftin.


s  Aen.  B.  7.  f.  1 78.  h  B.  viii.  c.  20.  ‘Ovid.  Faftorum.  B.  vi.  f.  213.  k  B.  i.  c»  18/

*  ift  .Apology,  p.  51.  Edit.  Oxon.  ™  Apol,  for  the  Chriit.  fathers,  p.  134,  CP,  ift  andz1*,

called  i


3 1  o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

called  Jupiter  Fidius :  He  fays,  alfo,  that  their  firft  habita¬
tion  was  in  a  certain  village,  called  92  Teftrina,  fttuated  near
the  city  Amiternum :  That,  from  thence,  the  Sabines  made
an  incurfion  into  the  Reatine  territory,  which  was,  at  that
time,  inhabited  by  the  Aborigines ;  and,  having,  by  force  of
arms,  taken  their  molt  confiderable  city  called  93  Cotyna,
they  continued  in  poffeffion  of  it :  That,  fending  colonies
out  of  the  Reatine  territory,  they  built  many  cities,  in  which
they  lived  without  fortifying  them ;  and,  among  the  reft,
the  city  called  Cures :  And  that  the  country  they  were  in
pofieffion  of,  is  diftant  from  the  Adriatic  about  two  hundred
and  eighty  ftadia,  and,  from  the  Tyrrhene  fea,  two  hundred
and  forty ;  and  he  fays  that  the  length  of  it  was  little  lefs
than  a  thoufand  ftadia.  There  is,  alfo,  another  account
given  of  the  Sabines  in  the  hiftories  of  that  country,  which
fays  that  a  colony  of  Lacedaemonians  fettled  among  them,
when  Lycurgus,  being  guardian  to  his  nephew  94  Eunomus,


9Z‘  Tf rgtvetv.  °  Cluver  places  this
village  near  the  city  of  Amiternum,
and  the  river  Aternus,  now  called,
Pefcara.  Amiternum  Food  between
the  head  of  this  river,  and  Aquila,
near  to  a  fmall  town,  known,  at  this
time,  by  the  name  of  S.  Vittorino.

93-  Kolwas.  As  there  is  a  great  va¬
riety  of  opinions  concerning  the  true
reading  of  this  word,  I  fhall  not  trouble
the  reader  with  any  conjectures  relating
to  the  fituation  of  this  controverted
town.

94-  Ewopov.  The  hiftorians  vary
concerning  the  name  of  this  man  :
p  Herodotus  calls  the  nephew  of  Ly-

0  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  8.


curgus  Leobotes,  AvkxpFov  e7rflgo7revarocvl<»
AicoQuItco  uStAQiSw  [mv  kavTx.  Lycurgus
gave  laws  to  Sparta  about  the  fame
time  that  Carthage  was  built  by  Dido,
and  about  116  years  before  Romulus
built  Rome.  No  man  was  ever  a
greater  benefactor  to  his  country  than
Lycurgus  •,  fince,  having  found  it
aim  oft  the  worft  governed  nation  of
all  the  Greeks,  he  reformed  it  by  fuch
a  fyftem  of  laws,  as  the  beft  judges
have,  always,  admired,  and  the  wifeft
nations  imitated.  The  Lacedaemoni¬
ans,  before  Lycurgus,  were  fo  little
difpofed  to  receive  good  laws,  that  he
defpaired  of  their  prevailing  among

pin  Clio,  c.  65.


gave


i


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  ENSIS.  311

gave  laws  to  Sparta:  That  fome  of  them,  diftiking  the
feverity  of  his  laws,  and  feparating  from  the  reft,  quitted
the  city  intirely  ;  and,  after  95  a  long  navigation  in  the  main
fea,  made  a  vow  to  the  gods  (for  they  were  defirous  to  land
any  where)  to  fettle  in  the  hr  ft  place  they  fhould  arrive  at :
That,  at  laft,  they  made  that  part  of  Italy,  which  lies  near
the  96  Foment ine  plains,  and  called  the  place,  where  they  firft
landed, 97  Feronia,  in  memory  of  their  being  carried  through
the  main  ;  and  built  a  temple  to  the  goddefs  Fsronia,  to
whom  they  had  addrefled  their  vows ;  which  goddefs,  by
the  alteration  of  one  letter,  they,  now,  call  Feronia:  That
fome  of  them,  going  from  thence,  cohabited  with  the  Sabines :
And,  for  this  reafon,  many  of  their  inftitutions  are  Laconic ;
particularly,  their  inclination  to  war,  their  frugality,  and  a


them  by  their  own  merit ;  which  ob¬
liged  him  to  have  recourfe  to  the
Delphic  oracle,  and  to  prevail  on  the
prieftefs  to  recommend  them  to  his
country  by  her  authority,  which  was
then,  univerfally,  obeyed.  This  fhe
did  effe&ually,  by  recommending  the
9  author  of  them,

H )t«f,  a  Avxoogys  ijxov  urolt  vrtovu  vyov,

Z y,vt  <p<Aof,  xui  truer ivO\V[X7rici  $wy>ci\  tpQitrt,
Alfa  > I  <re  y,av\rcV<ro[uuii  yj  uv^ottov.

AAA’jI/  xumuhhov  D-ecv  eA nopai, u  Avxoofa.

The  Delphic  prieftefs  mull  have  had  a
great  dependance  upon  the  credulity
of  mankind  to  make  Apollo  firft,
gravely,  doubt  whether  Lycurgus  was
a  god,  or  a  man-,  and  then,  wifely,  de¬
termine  that  he  rather  believed  him  to
be  a  god.

a  In  Clio,  c.  65.  r  Strabo,  B.  v.  p.


95*  A  iu  zviXuyxg  srcAA*.  Seethe  163d
annotation  on  the  firft  book.  The  an¬
cients,  at  leaft,  the  Greeks,  and  Ro¬
mans,  were  fo  little  acquainted  with
navigation,  that  they  called  crofting
the  Mediterranean,  for  example,  from
Laconia  to  Italy,  Stu  irnKuyug  Qegst&uiy
to  fail  through  the  main  fca ,  which  ap¬
pellation  modern  feamen  fcarce  allow
to  any  other  navigation,  than  to  the
eaft,  or  weft  Indies.

96,  Thdfusvhvu  Tffihoi'  r  Thefe  plains
received  their  name  from  Pometia,  the
capital  of  the  Yolfci.  s  They  lay  be¬
tween  the  rivers  Aftura,  and  Ufens ;
and,  in  thefe  plains,  flood  the  temple
of  Feronia ,  at  the  diftance  of  three
Roman  miles  from  Farracina.

97*  <r>2£0Via.  A7T0  T$#

355.  s  Cluver,  Ital.  Ant.  B.  ii.  c.  8.

feverity


312  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

feverity  in  all  their  actions.  But  this  is  fufficient  concerning
the  Sabines.

L.  Romulus,  andTatius,  immediately,  enlarged  the  city,
by  adding  to  it  two  other  hills,  the  Quirinal  and  Caelian  ;
and  feparating  their  habitations,  each  of  them  had  their
particular  place  of  refidence.  Romulus  chofe  the  Pallantine
and  Caelian  hills,  the  latter  being  contiguous  to  the  Pallantine;
and  Tatius  the  Capitoline,  which  he  had,  at  firft,  poflefled
himfelf  of,  and  the  Quirinal,  hills.  And,  cutting  down  the
wood,  that  grew  on  the  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  Capitoline
hill,  and  filling  up  the  greateft  part  of  the  lake,  which,  by
lying  in  a  hollow  place,  always  abounded  with  the  water,  that
came  down  from  the  hills,  they  converted  this  plain  into  a
market  place,  which  the  Romans  continue  to  make  ufe  of,
even,  to  this  day  :  There  they  held  their  affemblies,  tranf-
adting  their  affairs  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  which  ftands  a
little  above  the  forum.  They  built  temples,  allb,  and  con-
fecrated  altars  to  thofe  gods,  to  whom  they  had  addrefled
their  vows  during  their  battles ;  Romulus,  to  98  Jupiter  Stator,
near  the  gate  called  99  Mugionia,  which  leads  to  the  Palatine
hill  from  the  holy  way,  becaufe  this  god  had,  in  confequence
of  his  vow,  flopped  his  army  in  their  flight,  and  brought
them  to  renew  the  battle  ;  and  Tatius  to  the  fun,  and  moon,
to  Saturn,  and  to  Rhea;  and,  befides  thefe,  to  Vefta,  Vulcan,

98*  o^Sci nw  A 11.  This  is  a  tranflation  99'  Mvx.uvi<n  zvvAcos.  This  was  the
of  Jupiter  Stator.  He  is  reprefented  Porta  Mugionia ,  fo  called  from  Mu -
in  the  coins  of  Antoninus  Pius,  and  gius,  who  had  the  guard  of  it :  Porta
Gordian,  in  a  {landing  pofture,  his  Mugionia  Romae  diet  a  eji  a  Mugio
right  hand  leaning  on  a  fpearj  and,  in  quodam,  qui  eidem  tuendae  praefuit.
his  left,. he  holds  a fulmen.  Feftus.

Diana,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  313

Diana,  and  Enyalius,  and  to  other  gods,  whofe  names  are
difficult  to  be  exprefled  in  the  Greek  language.  And,  in
every  curia,  they  dedicated  tables  to  Juno,  called  100  Quiritia,
which  are  extant,  even,  to  this  day.  They  reigned  five
years  together  in  perfect  harmony ;  during  which  time,  they
undertook  a  joint  expedition  againft  the  101  Camerini :  For
thefe  people,  having  fent  out  bands  of  robbers,  and  done
great  mifchief  to  the  country  of  the  Romans,  negle&ed,
though  often  called  upon,  to  give  them  fatisfa&ion :  Having,
therefore,  overcome  the  Camerini  in  a  pitched  battle  (for
thefe  did  not  decline  the  ingagement)  and,  afterwards,  taken
their  town  by  ftorm,  they  difarmed  the  inhabitants,  and
took  from  them  a  third  part  of  their  country ;  which  when
the  Camerini  were  laying  wafte,  they  marched  out  againft
them  the  third  day,  and,  having  put  them  to  flight,  they
divided  all  their  pofieflions  among  their  own  people;  but
fuftered  as  many  of  the  inhabitants  as  were  willing  to  live
at  Rome  :  Thefe  amounted  to  about  four  thoufand,  whom
they  diftributed  among  the  curiae,  and  made  their  city  a
Roman  colony.  Cameria  was  a  colony  of  the  Albans,
planted  long  before  the  building  of  Rome ;  and,  anciently,
one  of  the  moft  celebrated  habitations  of  the  Aborigines.

io°.  Kue,V  I  upon  this  in  templo  Junonis  Populoniae  augujla
to  be  a  trandation  of  Juno  Populonia ;  menfa  ejl.

becaufe  11  Macrobius  mentions  a  table  I0X*  K<x//e§»v*<r.  "Cameria  flood  in
-dedicated  in  the  temple  of  this  Juno;  the  confines  of  the  Latines,  and  Sa-
in  Papiriano  jure  etiam  relatum  ejl,  arae  bines,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of
vicem  praejiare  pojfe  menfam  dicat  am ;  ut  Rome.


VOL.  I.


rSat.  B.  iii.  c.  1 1.


“  Cluver,  Ital.  Ant.  B.  ii.  c.  8.

S  s


1,1.  The


3i4  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  II.


LI.  The  fixth  year,  the  foie  government  of  the  city
returned  to  Romulus,  Tatius  having  loft  his  life  by  a  con-
fpiracy,  which  the  principal  men  of  10~  Laurentum  had
formed  againft  him  upon  this  occafion :  Some  friends  of
Tatius,  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  robbers,  had  made  an  in-


curfion  into  the  territory  of  the  Laurentes,  where  they  took
a  great  many  of  their  effects,  and  drove  away  their  herds
of  cattle,  killing,  and  wounding  thofe  who  oppofed  them.
Upon  the  arrival  of  embaffadors  from  the  injured  to  demand
juftice,  Romulus  was  of  opinion  that  the  authors  of  the
injury  ought  to  be  delivered  up  to  the  fufferers :  However,
Tatius,  efpoufing  the  caufe  of  his  friends,  would  not  confent
that  any  perfons  fhould  be  delivered  up  to  their  enemies
before  judgement ;  particularly,  that  Roman  citizens  fhould
be  delivered  up  to  Grangers ;  but  ordered  thofe,  who  com¬
plained  they  had  been  injured,  to  come  to  Rome,  and  pro¬
ceed  againft 103  them  according  to  law.  The  embaffadors,
having  obtained  no  fort  of  juftice,  went  away  full  of  re-
fentment :  And  fome  of  the  Sabines,  incenfed  at  their  pro¬
ceeding,  followed  them,  and  fet  upon  them  while  they  were


I02,  AxSivialuiv.  There  is  a  note  of
Cafaubon  upon  this  occafion,  in  which
he  contends,  with  great  reafon,  that
we  muft  read  Axv(ivhav,  inftead  of
A aQtnetluvi  becaufe,  though  Tatius  was
fain  at  Lavinium,  the  fadt  was  com¬
mitted  by  the  Laurentes  ;  which  is
confirmed  both  by  w  Livy,  and  x  Plu¬
tarch.

103*  Atloif.  I  cannot  agree  with
Portus  in  reading  ctvlxr,  inftead  of


uvloif,  which  muft  not  be  referred  to
roig  aJntvjSttir/,  but  to  zvehilaig,  that,  im¬
mediately,  precedes  it.  And,  that
diKccfy&cu  t m  is  elegant  Greek,  figni-
fying  to  fue  any  oney  may  be  proved
from  the  beft  writers  *,  particularly,
from  y  Ariftophanes,  who  makes  Stre-
pftades  thus  complain  of  his  creditors,

olXKx  jus,

Slsot&KQs  «|U<,>cfloAIKA2E20AI  MOI.


>v  B.  i.  c.  14.  *  Life  of  Romulus.


y  Nip.  f.  1138.


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS IS.  315

afleep  in  their  tents,  which  they  had  pitched  near  the  road
(for  they  were  overtaken  by  the  night)  and,  not  only,  robbed
them,  but  killed  all  they  found  in  their  beds  :  Thofe,  who
had  early  notice  of  the  attempt,  and  an  opportunity  of
making  their  efcape,  retired  to  their  city.  After  this,  em¬
bafladors,  fent  both  from  Laurentum,  and  many  other  cities,
complained  of  this  breach  of  the  law  of  nations,  threatening
war,  if  they  could  not  obtain  juftice.

LII.  This  outrage,  committed  on  the  perfons  of  the
embafladors,  appeared  to  Romulus,  as  it  really  was,  a  mold
heinous  offence,  and  fuch  a  violation  of  a  lacred  law,  as
called  for  a  fpeedy  expiation  ;  and,  finding  Tatius  neglected
it,  he  himfelf,  without  further  delay,  ordered  thofe,  who  had
been  guilty  of  this  outrage,  to  be  feized,  and  delivered  up  in
chains  to  the  embafladors  to  be  punifhed.  Tatius  was  not
only  offended  at  the  indignity,  which  he  complained  he  had
received  from  his  collegue  in  delivering  up  the  men,  but
alfo,  moved  with  compafiion  for  their  fituation  (for  one
of  the  guilty  perfons  was  even  his  relation)  and,  immediately,
taking  a  body  of  foldiers  with  him,  he  went  in  all  hafte  to
their  afliftance ;  and,  overtaking  the  embafladors  on  the  road,
refcued  the  prifoners.  Not  long  after,  as  fome  fay,  go¬
ing  with  Romulus  to  Lavinium,  in  order  to  perform  a
facrifice,  which  was  to  be  offered  up  by  the  kings  to  the
gods  of  their  anceftors  for  the  profperity  of  the  city,  the
friends,  and  relations  of  the  embafladors,  who  had  been
murdered,  having  confpired  againft  him,  flew  him  at  the
altar  with  the  knives,  and  fpits,  ufed  in  cutting  up,  and

S  s  2  roaffing


3 16  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

roafting  the  oxen,  which  had  been  killed  for  the  facrifice.
But  Licinius  writes,  that  he  did  not  go  with  Romulus,  nor
with  a  defign  to  offer  facrifice ;  but  alone,  and  with  an
intention  to  perfuade  thofe,  who  had  received  the  injuries,
to  forgive  the  authors  of  them ;  and,  that  the  people,  being
in  a  rage  that  the  men  had  not  been  delivered  up  to  them
in  purfuance  of  the  determination  both  of  Romulus,  and  of
the  Roman  fenate,  and  the  relations  of  the  dead  afiaulting
him  in  great  numbers,  he,  being,  no  longer,  able  to  efcape
their  violence,  was  ftoned  to  death.  This  was  the  end  of
Tatius,  after  he  had  been  at  war  with  Romulus  three  years,
and  his  collegue  five.  His  body  was  brought  to  Rome,
where  it  was  buried  with  great  pomp,  and  the  city  performs
every  year  public  libations  to  him.

LIII.  Romulus,  being  a  fecond  time,  inverted  with  the
foie  government  of  the  city,  expiated  the  crime  committed
on  the  perfons  of  the  embafladors,  by  forbidding  thofe,  who
had  committed  that  outrage,  the  ufe  of  fire  and  water:
For,  upon  the  death  of  Tatius,  they  had  all  fled  out  of  the
city.  After  that,  he  acquitted  the  Laurentes,  who  had  con-
fpired  againft  Tatius,  and  who,  being  delivered  up  by  their
citizens,  and  brought  by  him  to  a  trial,  were  thought,  with
great  juftice,  to  alledge  in  their  defence  that  they  had
punifhed  violence  by  violence.  After  Romulus  had  finifhed
thefe  affairs,  he  led  out  his  army  againft  the  city  of  the
Fidenates,  which  is  diftant  from  Rome  forty  ftadia,  and
was,  at  that  time,  both  a  large  and  populous  city  :  For  the
Cruftumerini.  having  fent  provifions  to  Rome  in  boats,  while

the


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HA  LI  C  ARN  A  S  SEN  SI  S.  317
the  Romans  were  affli&ed  with  a  famine,  the  Fidenates
attacked  the  boats  in  great  numbers,  feized  the  provilions,
and  killed  fome  of  the  men,  who  defended  them  :  And,
being  called  upon  to  make  fatisfacftion,  they  refufed  it.
Romulus,  incenfed  at  this,  made  an  incurlion  into  their
country  with  a  conftderable  force ;  and,  having  made  him-
felf  matter  of  a  great  booty,  prepared  to  return  with  his
army :  But  the  Fidenates  marching  out  againft  him,  he  gave
them  battle  •>  and,  the  atftion  being  very  warm,  and  many
falling  on  both  fides,  the  Fidenates  were  overcome,  and
put  to  flight.  Romulus,  purfuing  them  clofe,  entered  the
gate  together  with  thofe,  who  fled.  The  city  being  taken
by  ftorm,  he  punifhed  a  few  of  them  ;  and,  leaving  a  guard
of  three  hundred  men  there,  and,  taking  from  the  inhabitants
a  part  of  their  territory,  which  he  divided  among  'his  own
people,  he  made  this  city,  alfo,  a  Roman  colony.  This  city
was  founded  by  the  Albans  at  the  fame  time  with  104  No-
mentum,  and  105  Cruftumerium,  three  brothers  being  the
leaders  of  that  colony,  of  whom  the  eldeft  built  Fidenae.

LIV.  After  this  war,  Romulus  undertook  another  againft
the  106  Camerini,  who  had  fallen  upon  the  Roman  colony,
that  was  fettled  among  them,  whilft  the  city  of  Rome  la¬
boured  under  a  peftilential  diftemper ;  by  which,  the  Came-

l04'  No^,£v7w.  So  it  muft  be  read,  to  the  north  of  Rome,  and  is,  now,
not  NoptvUa  with  the  Vatican  inanu-  called  Lament ano,
fcript ;  fince  Ncmentum  was  the  name  io5-  K gxroptgi#.  See  above  *  note
of  this  town,  which  belonged,  ancient-  the  66th.

ly,  to  the  Latines.  z  Nomentum  lay  I0^  See  above  j  note

beyond  Fidenae,  about  twelve  miles  the  ioift.

z  Cluver,  Ital.  Ant.  B.  ii.  c.  8,

rini


3 1 8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

rini  were,  chiefly,  incouraged ;  and,  imagining  the  Roman
nation  would  be,  totally,  deftroyed  by  this  calamity,  killed
fome  of  the  colony,  and  expelled  the  reft.  In  revenge  for
this  outrage,  Romulus,  after  he  had,  a  fecond  time,  made
himfelf  matter  of  the  place,  put  to  death  the  authors  of  the
revolt ;  and,  not  only,  gave  his  foldiers  the  plunder  of  the  city,
but,  alfo,  took  from  the  citizens  half  their  lands,  beftdes  that
part,  which,  had  been,  before,  divided  among  the  Romans
fettled  there ;  and,  having  left  a  garrifon  in  the  city,  fuffi-
cient  to  quell  any  future  motion  of  the  inhabitants,  he  re¬
turned  with  his  forces.  Upon  the  fuccefs  of  this  expedition,
he  triumphed  a  fecond  time,  and  out  of  the  fpoils  he  con-
fecrated  a  chariot  with  four  horfes  in  brafs  to  Vulcan ;  and,
near  it,  he  placed  his  own  ftatue,  with  an  infcription
in  Greek  characters,  fetting  forth  his  actions.  The  third
war  Romulus  ingaged  in,  was  againft  a  city,  at  that
time,  107  the  moft  powerful  of  Tyrrhenia,  called  Veii,

'I07*  E§va? TvppVoca  [Atyisov  itfcvxrav  Dionyfius,  that  Veii  was  the  moft
toll  sroAiv.  M.  *  *  *  has  faid,  la  -plus  powerful  city  of  Etruria  *,  and  we  find
forte  place  de  tout  lepdis  des  Tyrrheniens  *,  that,  after  Rome  had  been  laid  in
and  le  Jay.,  me  ville  tres- for  iff  ante  *,  ruins  by  the  Gauls,  the  Romans  were
neither  of  which  is  a  tranflation  of  the  with  great  difficulty  prevented  from
Greek  text,  in  which  i%vxc#  fignifies,  removing  to  Veii :  Upon  which  oc-
powerful.  I  find  a  Cluver  is  of  opinion  cafion,  b  Livy,  very  reafonably,  ac-
that  we  ought  to  read  $iJ>ivcu  inftead  counts  for  their  earneftnefs  *,  Quum
of  aQ/jv«i  ;  his  reafon  is,  that  our  au-  pulcherrima  urbs  Veii ,  agerque  Veienta-
thor,  afterwards,  compares  Rome,  nus  in  confpettu  fit ,  uberior ,  amplioyque
under  Servius  Tullius,  with  Athens ;  Romano  agro.  Urbem  quoque  urbi  Ro-
and  he  thinks  it  not  probable  that  V eii  mae,  vel fitu ,  velmagnificentid publicorum ,
ffiould  have  been  fo  large  as  Rome,  privatorumque  teblorum,  ac  locorum prae-
But  I  cannot  be  of  his  opinion,  be-  ponebant.  This  ffiews,  fufficiently,
caufe  it  appears,  by  this  paffiage  of  thatVeii  might, very  well,  be  compared

3  Ital.  Ant.  B.  ii.  c.  3.  b  B.  v.  c.  24.


diftant


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  31$

diftant  from  Rome  about  a  hundred  fladia  :  This  city  is
lituated  on  a  high  and  craggy  rock,  and  is  as  large  as  Athens.
The  Veientes  made  the  taking  of  Fidenae  the  pretence  of
this  war  ;  and,  fending  embaffadors,  they  fummoned  the
Romans  to  withdraw  their  garrifon  from  that  city,  and  re-
ftore  the  territories  they  had  taken  from  the  Fidenates,  and
ftill  retained,  to  the  former  pofieflors.  But,  not  prevailing,
they  took  the  field  with  a  great  army,  and  incamped  on  an
108  eminence  near  Fidenae  :  However,  Romulus,  having,  be¬
forehand,  received  information  of  their  motions,  had  marched
out  with  the  flower  of  his  army,  and  lay  ready  at  Fidenae  to
receive  them.  When  every  thing  was  difpofed  for  the  battle,
both  armies  advanced  into  the  plain,  and  came  to  an  ingage-
ment ;  and  continued  fighting  for  a  long  time  with  great
animofity,  till  night,  coming  on,  parted  them,  after  they


to  Athens,  and,  confequentjy,  to  Rome
according  to  the  reafoning  of  our  au¬
thor.  c  Cluver  thinks  that  a  town  now
called  Scrofano  Hands  on,  or  near  the
ruins  ofVeii.  This  city  was  in  Etru¬
ria,  and,  confequently,  lay  on  the  weft
of  the  Tiber,  and  about  twelve  miles
from  Rome.  d  Florus,  whofe  authority
I  fhould  not  quote,  if  it  were  not  con¬
firmed  by  other  authors,  defcribes  the
condition  ofVeii,  in  his  time,  that  is,
in  the  latter  end  of  Trajan’s  reign,
laborat  annalium  jides ,  ut  Veios  fuiffe
credamus.

lo8*  Ev  a7ro7r1oj.  The  tranflators  are
divided,  as  ufual,  in  rendering  this  :
Sylburgius  has  faid,  in  edito  loco ,  and
M.  *  *  *,  fur  une  eminence  5  Portus,  in

f  B.  ii.  c.  3.


loco  occult 0,  and  le  Jay,  dans  un  lieu
fort  convert.  If  the  reader  has  fo  much
indulgence  for  thefe  gentlemen,  as  to
think  they  tranflated  from  the  Greek
text,  and  that  each  of  them  followed
the  fenfe  of  that  Latin  tranflator  he
feems  mod  to  admire  by  mere  accident,
I  fhall  fay  nothing  to  defeat  the  opera¬
tion  of  fo  much  good  nature.  The
following  explanation  of  the  word
oc7ro7i\'0f  is  fupported  by  the  example  of
the  beft  writers,  who  ufe  it  in  both
thefe  fignifications ;  uno t/Jov,  Txoffwhv
oqufAtvov,  Yj  aQiw^vJov.  Suidas.  But,  if  our
author  had  defigned  to  fpeak  of  an
ambufeade,  he  would,  furely,  have
given  an  account  either  of  the  fuccefs,
or  difappointment  of  it.

d  B.  i.  c.  tz,

bad


3^o  ROMAN  ANTIQJLJITIES  OF  Book  II.

had  fought  with  equal  bravery,  and  fuccefs.  This  was  the
event  of  the  firft  battle.

LV.  But  a  fecond  being  fought  not  long  after,  the  Ro¬
mans  obtained  the  victory  by  the  conduct  of  their  general ;
who,  in  the  night,  had  poflefled  himfelf  of  an  eminence,  not
far  diftant  from  the  enemy’s  camp,  and  placed  there  in
ambufh  the  choiceft  both  of  the  horfe  and  foot,  who,  iince
the  laft  a&ion,  came  to  him  from  Rome :  And  both  armies
meeting  in  the  plain,  and  engaging  in  the  fame  manner  as
before,  when  Romulus  gave  the  fignal  to  the  troops,  that
lay  in  ambufh  on  the  eminence,  thefe,  fhouting,  attacked  the
Veientes  in  the  rear ;  and,  being  frefih,  and  the  enemy  fatigued
with  the  labor  of  the  day,  they  foon  put  them  to  flight  :
Some  few  of  them  were  flain  in  the  battle ;  but  the  greateft
part,  throwing  themfelves  into  the  Tiber,  which  runs  near
Fidenae,  with  intent  to  fwim  over  the  river,  were  drowned :
For,  being  wounded,  and  fpent  with  labor,  they  were  unable
to  fwim  over  :  While  others,  not  knowing  how  to  fwim,
and,  from  a  view  of  the  danger,  loflng  all  prefence  of  mind,
were  fwallowed  up  in  the  eddies  of  the  river.  If,  therefore,
the  Veientes  had  been  fenflble  of  their  firft  error,  and  kept
themfelves  quiet  after  this,  no  greater  mifcliief  had  befallen
them :  But,  hoping  to  repair  their  former  lofies,  and  ima¬
gining  that,  if  they  109  applied  themfelves  to  reinforce  their

I09*  Et  tTr&xhoM*  all  feem  to  be  fo  fenflble  of,  that  they

All  the  tranflators  have  agreed  in  giv-  are  obliged  to  fupply  the  fenfe  by  the
ing  this  fenfe  to  thefe  words,  if  they  word  enemy,  or  Romans :  I  have  rather
attacked  the  Romans  with  a  greater  forces  chofen  to  give  to  m the  fenfe  of
without  confidering  that  the  verb  £«•<-  f7r<^«^o<gv,  according  to  which,

GolAqizv,  in  that  cafe,  will  Hand  fingle,  sragamvjj  is,  very  properly,  governed
and  govern  nothing ;  which  I  do  not  by  it.

think  very  grammatical:  This  they  army,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSEN  SIS.  321

army,  they  fhould,  with  eafe,  have  the  advantage  in  the
war,  they  levied  numerous  forces,  confifting  both  of  their
own  troops,  and  of  Thofe  of  their  countrymen,  who,  in  virtue
of  their  league,  came  to  their  affiftance,  and,  a  fecond  time,
marched  againft  the  Romans.  Upon  this,  another  fharp
battle  was  fought  near  Fidenae,  in  which  the  Romans  were
Victorious,  killing  many  of  the  Veientes,  and  taking  more
of  them  prifoners.  Even  their  camp  was  taken,  which  was
full  of  money,  arms,  and  Haves ;  as,  alfo,  their  boats,  which
were  laden  with  great  flore  of  provilions,  and,  in  which,
the  prifoners,  being  very  numerous,  were  carried  down  the
river  to  Rome.  This  victory  gave  occafion  to  the  third
triumph  of  Romulus,  which  was  much  more  magnificent
than  either  of  the  former :  And,  not  long  after,  embaffadors
being  fent  by  the  Veientes  to  put  an  end  to  the  war,  and  to
afk  pardon  for  their  offences,  Romulus  impofed  this  penalty
upon  them  :  To  deliver  up  to  the  Romans  the  country,
that  lies  contiguous  to  the  Tiber,  called 110  Afe  feven  villages ;
and  to  quit  111  the  falt-pits,  that  lie  near  the  mouth  of  the
river ;  and,  alfo,  to  bring  fifty  hoftages,  as  an  affurance  of
their  attempting  no  innovations  for  the  future.  The  Veientes

110#  EttIx  vrayuf.  d  Cluver  thinks  the  lands  lying  on  the  Roman  fide  of
■this  place  lay  between  Veii,  and  the  the  Tiber;  which  lands  feem  to  be
lea,  and  between  the  Tiber,  and  the  Thofe  ceded  by  the  Veientes,  in  pur-
river  Aro,  which  rifes  from  the  Saba-  fuance  of  the  treaty,
tine  lake,  now  called, Lago  diBracciano.  lri*  Tm  dkm.  c  This  place  was,
JBut  I  do  not  know  how  this  fituation  anciently,  called,  Salinae ;  and  the  ad-
-•of  the  place  can  be  reconciled  to  what  jacent  territory  is,  {till,  called,  from
jour  author  fays  prefently,  that  Romu-  thence,  Campo  di  Saline.
lus  divided  among  thefe  new  citizens

d  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.c.  2.  e  Cluver,  ib.

T  t


Vol.  I.


fubmittine

O


Book  II.


322  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

fubmitting  to  all  thefe  things,  he  made  a  league  with  them
for  one  hundred  years;  and  ingraved  the  terms  of  it  on
pillars.  He,  then,  difmiffed,  without  ranfom,  all  the  pri¬
soners,  who  were  defirous  to  return  home :  But  thofe,  who
chofe  to  remain  there,  and  who  were  by  much  the  greateft
part,  he  made  citizens  of  Rome,  and  diftributed  them
among  the  curiae,  and  divided  among  them,  by  lot,  the
lands  lying  on  this  fide  of  the  Tiber.

LVI.  Thefe  are  the  memorable  wars,  in  which  Romulus
was  ingaged.  The  reafon  why  he  conquered  no  more  of
the  neighbouring  nations  feems  to  be  owing  to  his  fudden
death,  which  took  him  away  while  he  was  yet 112  in  the
vigor  of  his  age  for  warlike  achievements;  concerning
which,  there  are  many  different  relations :  Thofe,  there¬
fore,  whofe  accounts  of  his  adlions  are  rather  fabulous,  fay,
that,  while  he  was  haranguing  his  men  in  the  camp,  the  fky,
which  was,  before,  clear,  changing  to  a  fudden  darknefs,
and  a  violent  tempeft  burfting  from  the  clouds,  he  difap-
peared;  and  thefe  believe  that  the  man  was  taken  up  into
heaven  by  his  father  Mars.  But  thofe,  who  write  the  moft
probably,  fay,  that  he  was  put  to  death  by  his  own  people  ;

1I2*  e7<  axfAxfa'U  av\u)  ra  zsoXttMoi  verb,  in  the  infinitive  mood,  denotes
zrgccrleiv.  This  does  not  fignify  in  the  the  dire&ion  of  the  adjedtive,  or  par-
h eight  of  his  glory  for  military  exploits,  ticiple,  that  precedes  it.  The  Romans,
which  is  the  fenfe  all  the  tranfiators  alfo,  inriched  their  language  with  this
give  to  this  pafifage.  I  fhould  not  find  piece  of  Greek  elegance,  of  which
fault  with  this  verfion  if  it  were  not  for  many  examples  might  be  brought
that  unlucky  verb  at  the  end  from  their  bell  writers.  To  this

of  this  fentence,  which  gives  a  very  Grecifm,  f  Horace  is  obliged  for  his,
different  fenfe  to  the  whole  :  For  this  Audax  omnia  perpeti.

*  L.  i.  Ode  3.  f.  25.


and


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  $.  323

and  the  reafon  they  alledge  for  his  murder  is,  that  he  re¬
leafed  the  hoftages  of  the  Veientes,  without  the  common
confent,  contrary  to  cuftom ;  and  that  he  did  not  behave
himfelf  in  the  fame  manner  to  the  ancient  citizens,  and  to
Thofe,  who  were,  newly,  admitted,  doing  greater  honor  to  the
former,  and  defpiflng  the  latter  ;  and,  alfo,  that  he  fhewed
great  cruelty,  and  haughtinefs  in  the  punifhment  of  delin¬
quents  :  For  he  ordered  fome  conflderable  men,  and  thofe
not  a  few  in  number,  113  accufed  of  having  robbed  their
neighbours,  to  be  thrown  down  the  precipice  appointed  for
that  purpofe,  affuming  to  himfelf  alone  the  cognizance  of
their  crimes :  But,  chiefly,  becaufe  he  was,  now,  become
haughty  and  grievous  to  his  people,  and  extended  his  power,
governing  more  like  a  tyrant,  than  a  king.  For  thefe  rea-
fons,  they  fay,  the  patricians  formed  a  confpiracy  againft
him,  and  refolved  to  put  him  to  death;  and,  having  exe¬
cuted  their  refolution  in  the  fenate,  they  divided  his  body
into  feveral  pieces,  that  it  might  not  be  feen ;  then,  came
out  of  the  fenate,  every  one  hiding  his  part  of  him  under
his  robes,  which  they,  afterwards,  buried  privately.  Others
fay,  that  he  was  killed,  while  he  was  haranguing  the  people,
by  the  new  citizens ;  and  that  they  took  the  time  of  the
darknefs  abovementioned,  to  commit  the  murder,  the  af-
fembly  of  the  people  being,  then,  difperfed,  and  their  chief

”3*  E  tci  Kyi  suet  I  can-  I  have  great  pleafure  in  doing  juftice

;not  underftand  how  Sylburgius  came  to  M.  *  *  *,  who  has  faid,  very  pro¬
to  render  this,  Latrocinii  conviftos  \  perly,  ay  ant  ete  accufcs  d' avoir  fait  des
but  I,  eafily,  underftand  why  le  Jay  brigandages .
tranftated  it  fo.  Upon  this  occafton,


T  t  2


left


324  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II-

left  without  a  guard:  And,  for  this  reafon,  they  fay,  the
day,  on  which  this  a£t  was  committed,  took  its  name  from
the  flight  of  the  people,  and  that,  at  this  time,  it  is  called
114  Populifugia :  And,  indeed,  the  incidents,  prepared  by
the  gods,  with  which  115  the  conception,  and  diffolution  of
this  man  were  attended,  feem  to  give  no  fmall  authority  to
the  fyflem  of  thofe,  who  make  the  apotheofes  of  mortal  men,
and  place  the  fouls  of  illuftrious  perfons  in  heaven.  For
they  fay  that,  at  the  time  when  his  mother  was  violated,
whether  by  fome  man,  or  by  a  god,  there  was  a  total'
eclipfe  of  the  fun;  that  a  general  darknefs,  as  in  the  night,,
covered  the  earth  :•  And  that,  at  his  death,  the  fame  thing'
happened.  This  is  reported  to  have  been  the  death  of
Romulus,  who  built  Rome,  and,  by  her  citizens,  was-
chofen  their  firft  king.  He  left  no  iffue;  and,  having
reigned  thirty  feven  years,  died  in  the  fifty  fifth  year  of  his
age  :  For  he  was  very  young  when  he  obtained  the  govern¬
ment  ;  being  no  more  than  eighteen  years  old,  as  it  is
agreed  by  all,  who  have  written  his  hiftory.

LVII.  The  following  year,  there  was  no  king  of  the
Romans  eledled  ;  but  a  certain  magiftracy,  called  by  them,

”4-  <puy»j.  Varro  gives  a  much  ffuyxfms,  and  called  it,  his  birth:  But
better  reafon  for  this  name,  than  That  it  is  plain  that  it  fignifies  his  conception ,
founded  on  the  opinion  of  thcfe  writers  by  what  our  author  adds  prefently,
our  author  refers  to.  £  He  fays  it  was  viz.  that,  at  the  time  his  mother  was
called  fo,  becaufe  the  Romans  were,  violated,  there  happened  a  total  eclipfe
then,  put  to  flight  by  the Tufcans.  of  the  fun:  Now,  though  Romulus

JI5'  ll££<  t»jv  o-vyx^cnv  t«  All  might  be  conceived,  he,  certainly,

the  four  tranflators  have,  with  great  could  not  come  into  the  world  at  the
unanimity,  miftaken  the  lenfe  of  time  his  mother  was  ravilhed,.

s  Deling.  Lat.  B.  v.  c.  3.


an


Book  II.  DIONYS  IUS  H  ALICARN  ASSEN  SIS.  3*5

an  Interregnum ,  had  the  care  of  the  commonwealth  ;  which
magiftracy  was  created  in  this  manner  :  The  patricians,
who  had  been  elected.  into  the  fenate  under  Romulus,  being,
as  I  laid,  two  hundred  in  number,  were  divided  into  de-
curiae;  then,  drawing  lots,  the  firft  ten  perfons,  upon  whom
the  lot  fell,  were  inverted  by  the  reft  with  the  abfolute
command  of  the  city.  However,  “They  did  not  all  reign
together ;  but,  fucceflively,  each  reigning  five  days ;  during
which  time,  he  had  both  the  rods,  and  the  other  enfigns  o£
the  royal  power.  The  firft,  after  his  power  was  expired,
delivered  over  the  government  to  the  fecond  ;  and  he,  to.


Ekhvoi  Pax  zcxvlig  t€a,<nXivov.
Livy,  who  took  no  notice  of  the  ad¬
dition  made  to  the  fenate  by  the  ad-
miffion  of  a  hundred  Sabines,  when
the  two  nations  became  united,  dill
calls  the  fenators,  centum  Patres. .
However,  it  is,  I  believe,  univerfally,
allowed  that  the  fenate,  after  the  peace
with  the  Sabines,  confided  of  two
hundred  :  For,'  though  h  Plutarch,  in
fpeaking  of  this  interregnum ,  fays  it
confided  of  one  hundred  and  fifty
fenators  ;  yet,  he  himfelf  had,  before,
told  us,  in  his  life  of  Romulus,  that
a  hundred  Sabines  were  added  to  the
fenate  ;  iKodov  [Mv  u  'ZxSivav  zraJgiiuot

zrqQ<rKxleitex^<rolv >  anck  before  that,  in

the  fame  life,  Uxloybe  mg  ugimc
fixtevlag  (PwfcvAoj)-  But  to  return  to
i  Livy  j  his  account  of  this  interreg¬
num  is  this  :  Decern  imperitabant ,  urns
cum  infignibus  imperii ,  et  lift  or  thus  erat :
quinquedierum  f patio  fmiebatur  imperium,
ac  per  omnes  in  orbem  ibat.  It  is  plain
that  kPlutarch  had  this  paffage  of  Livy


before  him,  when  he  mentioned  this'
tranfadtion,  becaufe  he  has  tranflated
it ;  and  as  plain,  that  he  has  midaken
the  fenle  of  it  :  He  has  applied  thefer
words,  quinque  dierum  fpatio  fmiebatur
imperium ,  not  to  the  perfon  who  pre-
fided,  as  he  ought  to  have  done  but
to  the  whole  decury  :  So  that,  accord¬
ing  to  him,  each  decury  governed  but
five  days  :  The  confequence  of  which
mud  be,  as  he  fays,  that  every  mem¬
ber  of  the  decury  governed  twelve
hours,  which  he  has  divided  into  fix.-
hours  of  the  night,  and  fix  of  the  day
piv  cooxg  r yg  wnjog ,  Jg  ry,g  Yjy.i%ag,
This  is,  I  believe,  the  mod  extraor¬
dinary  fydem  of  government  that  ever
was  invented,  and  worthy  the  fertil
brain  of  a  Delphic  pried.  But  the-
words  of  Livy,  plainly,  import,  that
the  prefidentof  every  decury  governed
five  days-,  and,  confequently,  the  whole
decury,  fifty  ;  as  our  author  will,  pre-
fently,  tell  us.

17.  kLife  of  Numa.


J


326  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

I

the  third ;  and,  fo  on,  to  the  laft.  After  the  ten  firft  kings
had  reigned  their  appointed  time  of  fifty  days,  ten  others
received  the  government  from  them  ;  and,  from  thofe,  in
like  manner,  others.  Afterwards,  the  people  thought  fit
to  aboiifh  thefe  decemviral  governments,  being  uneafy  at
the  changes  of  power,  becaufe  all  of  them  had  neither  the
fame  views,  nor  the  fame  difpofitions.  Upon  which,  the
fenators,  calling  the  people  together  in  their  tribes  and
curiae,  propofed  to  them  to  confider  of  the  form  of  govern¬
ment,  and  to  determine  whether  they  thought  fit  to  commit
the  care  of  the  commonwealth  to  a  king,  or  to  annual
magiftrates.  However,  the  people  did  not  take  that  deter¬
mination  upon  themfelves ;  but  referred  it  to  the  fenators,
with  intention  to  reft  fatisfied  with  whichfoever  form  of  go¬
vernment  they  fhould  approve  of.  The  fenators  were  una¬
nimous  for  monarchy ;  but  did  not  agree  from  which  of
117  the  two  nations  the  future  king  fhould  be  chofen:  For
fome  thought  that  the  perfon,  to  whom  the  admini-
ftration  was  to  be  committed,  ought  to  be  taken  out
of  the  ancient  fenators :  And  others,  that  he  ought  to  be
chofen  out  of  thofe,  who  were,  afterwards,  admitted,  and
whom  they  called  the  new  fenators.

LVIII.  The  conteft  being  drawn  out  to  a  great  length,
they,  at  laft,  agreed  to  this  alternative,  either  that  the  old

117*  e£  oTroltpais  redrew.  Exutra  claffe,  order,  that  is,  whether  out  of  the  pa¬
in  Sylburgius,  is  very  near  the  fenfe  ;  tricians,  or  plebeians,  the  king  fhould
and,  in  my  opinion,  better  than  ex  utro  be  chofen  :  Whereas,  the  difpute  lay
or  dine  in  Portus,  whom  M.  *  **  has  between  the  fenators  of  the  two  nations,
followed  •,  becaufe  this  feems  to  infi-  the  Romans,  and  Sabines,
nuate,  that  the  conteft  lay  out  of  which

fenators


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  A  S  S  E N S  I  S.  327

fenators  fhould  chufe  none  of  their  own  body  to  reign  over
them,  but,  of  the  others,  whomfoever  they  fhould  think  the
fitted:  perfon ;  or  that  the  new  fenators  fhould  do  the  fame.
The  ancient  fenators  accepted  the  choice  ;  and,  after  a  long
confultation  among  themfelves,  came  to  this  refolution:
That,  fince,  by  their  agreement,  they  themfelves  were  ex¬
cluded  from  the  fovereignty,  they  would  not,  at  leaft,  confer
it  on  any  of  the  competitors ;  but  find  out  forne  foreigner,
who  fhould  efpoufe  neither  party,  and  declare  him  king  ;
this  being  the  moft  effectual  means  to  put  an  end  to  fadlion.
After  they  had  come  to  this  refolution,  they  chofe  a  man,
by  birth,  a  Sabine,  the  Ton  of  Pompilius  Pompon,  a  perfon
of  difiindion,  whofe  name  was  Numa :  118  He  was  in  that
ftage  of  life,  being  near  forty,  in  which  prudence  is  the
moft  confpicuous,  and  of  an  afpe£t  full  of  royal  dignity.
The  reputation  of  his  great  wifdom  was  not  confined  to
the  Quirites  only,  but  extended  itfelf,  alfo,  to  all  the
neighbouring  nations.  After  this  election,  they  afiembled
the  people,  and  one  of  the  fenators,  who  was,  at  that  time,
the  interrex,  advancing,  told  them,  that  the  fenators  had,
unanimoufly,  refolved  to  adhere  to  a  monarchical  form  of
government,  and  that  he,  having  power  to  nominate  the
future  king,  created  Numa  Pompilius  king  of  the  Romans.
After  this,  he  appointed  embaffadors  of  the  patrician  order,
and  fent  them  to  condud  him  to  Rome,  that  he  might  be  in-
veiled  with  the  royal  dignity.  This  happened  in  the  third  year

I  intirely  agree  with  Portus,  that  from  the  margin  •,  x^  Jwlegar

the  following  parenthefis,  by  fome  <tvAA#6»jv  SKleivoflac  fiagvloveiv,
means  or  other,  crept  into  the  text


of


32B  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

of  the  lixteentli  Olympiad,  in  which  Pythagoras,  a  Lace¬
daemonian  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium.

LIX.  Hitherto,  I  have  nothing  to  alledge  in  contradi&ion
to  thofe,  who  have  publifhed  the  hiftory  of  this  perfon ;
but,  in  regard  to  what  follows,  I  am  at  a  lofs  what  to  fay.
For  many  have  written,  that  Numa  was  a  difciple  of  Pytha¬
goras  ;  and  that,  when  he  was  chofen  king  of  the  Romans,
he  was  ftudying  philofophy  at  Croton.  But  the  time,  in
which  Pythagoras  lived,  contradicts  this  account  :  For  he
was  not  a  few  years,  but  119  four  whole  generations  later
than  Numa,  as  we  are  informed  by  general  hiftory  :  Since
the  latter  began  his  reign  in  the  middle  of  the  lixteenth
Olympiad ;  whereas,  Pythagoras  reftded  in  Italy  120  after  the


IT9*  Teir<rag<ri  ^eveoiis  o'hoiie  efuelo

IhiQocyoqus  N vpa.  I  have,  already,
fhewn l,  upon  another  occafion,  that
'Livy  makes  Pythagoras  to  have  lived
•above  a  hundred  years  after  Numa.
(Our  author  has  treated  the  chara&er
of  Numa  fo  fully,  that  I  (hall  only
add  an  obfervation  of  Livy,  who,  after
he  has  proved  the  impoffibility  of  his
having  been  a  difciple  of  Pythagoras,
fays,  that  Numa  had  a  mind  fraught
with  native  virtue,  and  rather  formed
by  the  fevere  difciplineof  the  Sabines*
which  he  calls  m  tetri  cam,  and  trijiem ,
than  inftrudted  in  foreign  fciences.

I2°*  TlvOciyogas  df  |Ut7c4  rqv  ^rsv1tjnos'Kv
oAvju7riaJa  Jitlgn z\  ItmXicc.  There  is
a  note  in  Hudfon  upon  this  occafion,
in  which  it  is  contended  that  we  fhoulcl
read  inftead  of  wivlqx.o?)iv  :

This  reading  is,  I  find,  fupported  by

!  See  the  88th  annot.  m  B.  i.  c.  1 8.

r  B.  iv.  c.  i.  1  lb.  c.  41,


great  authorities ;  by  That  of  our  Dod-
well  in  particular.  I  cannot,  however,
acquiefce  in  the  opinion  of  Gellius,  on
which,  it  is,  in  part,  founded.  n  He
fays  that  Pythagoras  came  into  Italy
in  the  reign  of  Tarquinius  Superbus  :
But,  we  have  feen0,  from  Livy,  whofe
authority  no  man  will  let  down  fo  far
as,  even,  to  compare  it  with  That  of
Gellius,  that  Pythagoras  taught  in
Italy  in  the  reign  of  Servius  Tullius.
Now,  Servius  Tullius,  as  we  find  by
our  p  author,  fucceeded  Tarquinius
Prifcus,in  the  fourth  year  of  the  fiftieth
Olympiad,  and  was  Gain  by  Tarqui¬
nius  Superbus  in  the  fourth  year  of
,the  ^fixty  firft  Olympiad.  Between
thefe  two  periods,  therefore,  Pytha¬
goras  muft  have  come  into  Italy.  I
know  that  Diogenes  Laertius,  in  his
life  of  Pythagoras,  fays  he  flourifhed

K  B.  xvii.  c.  2 1 .  0  See  the  88th  annot.

fiftieth


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  $.  329

fiftieth  Olympiad.  But  I  have  yet  a  ftronger  argument  to
prove  that  the  periods  of  time,  in  which  they  lived,  are
incompatible  with  the  relations  given  of  this  perfon  ;  which
is,  that,  at  the  time  Numa  was  called  to  the  fovereignty  by
the  Romans,  the  city  of  Croton  was  not  yet  in  being:  For
Myfcelus  built  it  in  the  third  year  of  the  feventeenth  Olym¬
piad,  which  was  four  whole  years  after  Numa  had  been
chofen  king  of  the  Romans :  So  that,  it  was  neither  pofiible
that  Numa  fhould  ftudy  philofophy  under  Pythagoras  the
Samian,  who  flourifhed  four  generations  after  him;  nor
that  he  fhould  refide  in  121  Croton,  a  city  not  then  in  being,


about  the  fixtieth  Olympiad.  But  this
rather  confirms,  than  contradicts,  the
authority  of  Livy  :  For  Pythagoras
was,  certainly,  in  higher  efteem  after
he  had  opened  a  fchool  of  philofophy
in  Italy,  than  ever  lie  had  been  before ;
and  the  fixtieth  Olympiad  falls  in  with
the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  Servius
Tullius.  But  it  is  time  to  confider  the
words  of  this  pafiage.  All  the  tranf-
lators,  except  Portus,  have  rendered
8V  It he  taught  in  Italy  ;
and,  when  they  come  to  ?v  Koolun  hx-
TfiGetv  prefently  after,  and  to  TlvOxyogis
JialftGqv,  they  have  all  given  to  both
the  fenfe  of  reft  ding ,  which  is  the  only
fenfe,  in  my  opinion,  the  word  will
bear  in  all  the  three  paffages  :  For
though  Hudfon,  in  a  note  of  one  line
upon  this  occafion,  has  fent  us  to  Sui-
das  for  the  fenfe  of  the  word
which,  no  doubt,  fignifies,  as  he  fays,
a  philofophic  exercife ,  and  even  a  fchool ;
yet,  neither  Suidas,  nor  any  other
author,  I  believe,  ever  ufed  Sixl^nv,

r  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iv.  c.


in  the  fenfe  they  have  firft  given  to  it,
that  is,  to  teach.

12  *•  K £oluv.  This  city,  now  called
Crotone ,  ftands  near  the  fea  \  and  was,
anciently,  much  celebrated  for  its
magnificence.  r  It  lay  in  the  territory
of  the  Brutii,  now  Calabria ,  in  the
fouth-eaft  part  of  Italy,  the  river
Aefarus,  now  Efaro ,  running  through
it.  The  famous  temple  of  Juno  Laci~
nia,  built  on  the  northern  part  of  the
promontory  Lacinium ,  now  Capo  della
Colonne ,  flood  about  fix  Roman  miles
from  it.  It  is  pofiible  this  cape  might
have  received  its  modern  name  from
the  gold  column,  that  was  in  the
temple  of  Juno  Lacinia,  which  Cicero
fays,  Annibal,  whilft  he  was  mafter  of
that  country,  had  a  great  mind  to  take
away :  But  firft  he  ordered  it  to  be
bored  through,  that  he  might  fee  whe¬
ther  it  was  gold,  or  only  gilt  •,  and
finding  it  was  folid  gold,  he  defigned
to  take  it,  when  Juno  threatened  him
in  his  fleep,  that,  if  he  did,  fhe  would

25.  sDivinat.  B.  i.  c.  24.

Uu


VOL.  I.


when


330  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

when  the  Romans  called  him  to  the  fovereignty.  But,  if
I  may  give  my  own  opinion,  thofe,  who  have  written  his
hiftory,  feem  to  have  laid  hold  of  thefe  two  things,  which
are  confefled  on  all  hands,  I  mean  the  refidence  of  Pytha¬
goras  in  Italy,  and  the  wifdom  of  Numa  (lor  he  is  allowed
by  every  body  to  have  been  a  wife  man)  and  to  have  blended
them  together;  and,  without  examining,  as  I  have  now  done,
the  periods  of  time,  in  which  they  both  flourilhed,  to  have
made  Numa  a  difciple  of  Pythagoras.  Unlefs  any  one  will
fuppofe  there  was  another  Pythagoras,  who  taught  philo-
fophy  before  the  Samian,  with  whom  Numa  converfed.
But  I  do  not  know  how  this  can  be  proved ;  fince  it  is  not
fupported  (as  far  as  I  know)  by  the  teftimony  of  any  author
of  note,  either  Greek,  or  Roman.  But  I  have  faid  enough
of  thefe  things.

LX.  When  the  perfons  I  have  mentioned,  came  to  Numa
to  invite  him  to  the  fovereignty,  he,  for  fome  time,  refufed,
it,  and  perfifted  long  in  his  refolution  not  to  accept  the  invi¬
tation  :  But,  at  the  preffing  inftance  of  his  brothers,  and,  at
laft,  of  his  father,  who  would  not  fuller  him  to  rejed  the  offer
of  fo  great  an  honor,  he  contented  to  be  a  king.  As  foon  as
the  Romans  were  informed  of  all  this  by  the  embafladors,
they  conceived  a  great  affedion  for  him,  before  they  faw

take  care  he  fhould  lofe  his  other  eye  :  However,  ‘Ovid,  in  fpeaking  of  the
For  he  had,  already,  loft  one  at  his  building  of  this  city,  calls  him  Myf-
lirft  entrance  into  Italy.  The  name  celus  with  our  author ;
of  the  founder  of  Croton  is  written  Nam  fuil  Ahmnl

different  ways,  by  different  authors.  Myfcelus,  Him  Diis  aueptijjimus  ami.

l  JMet2mor.  B.  xv.  f.  ig.

him,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  AS  SENS  IS.  33r
him,  efteeming  it  as  a  fufficient  argument  of  his  wifdom,
that,  while  others  valued  royalty  beyond  meafure,  looking
upon  it  as  the  fource  of  happinefs,  he  alone  defpifed  it,  as  a
thing  of  fmall  value,  and  unworthy  his  attention :  And,
when  he  approached  the  city,  they  met  him  upon  the  road  ;
and,  with  great  applaufe,  falutations,  and  other  honors,
conduced  him  into  the  city.  After  that,  there  was 122  an
affembly  of  the  people,  in  which  the  tribes,  divided  into


1ZZ‘  E>oc\ii<ri<xc  Je  fji.il a  t»1o  c,

etc.  In  this  eledion  ofNuma,  we
have  all  the  formalities  of  enading
laws,  anciently,  pradifed  at  Rome.
At  the  eledion  of  Romulus,  thefe
could  not  be  obferved,  becaufe  the
people  were  not  divided  by  him  into
tribes,  and  curiae,  till  he  was,  adually,
chofen  king.  The  reader,  therefore,
will  give  me  leave  to  examine  thefe
requifites  in  palling  laws ;  which  I
fhall  do  the  rather,  becaufe,  in  this
examination,  I  fnall  have  the  aflidance
of  Livy,  who,  contrary  to  his  cuftom,
is  very  particular  in  every  thing  re¬
lating  to  the  eledion  ofNuma.  The
fird,  and,  indeed,  the  principal,  ob-
jed,to  which  I  fhall  apply  this  inquiry,
will  be  to  confider  what  the  Roman
hidorians  underdand  (I  fpeak  of  the
original  conditution  of  the  Romans)
when  they  fay,  Patres  auflores  fiunt.
All  the  modern  writers,  at  lead,  all  I
have  feen,  who  have  treated  this  fub-
jed,  unanimoudy,  agree,  that  thele
words  fignify  a  decree,  palled  by  the
fenate,  which  was,  upon  that,  fent  to
the  people  to  be  confirmed,  or  rejeded,
as  they  fliould  think  fit  in  the  fame

u  P.  29S.


manner,  as  with  us,  a  bill,  palled  by
the  Lords,  is  fent  down  to  the  Com¬
mons.  This  opinion,  I  find,  is,  alfo,
efpoufed  by  "Dr.  Chapman,  in  his  ef-
fay  on  the  Roman  fenate,  in  which,
he  treats  this  fubjed  in  a  greater  detail,
than  any  other  author,  who  has  written
upon  it.  I  am  fenfible  that  the  words,
patres  auclcres ,  are  very  impofing,  and
feem  to  imply,  that  the  fenate  firft
paffed  the  bill  (if  I  may  ufe  that  ex-
preldon)  which,  it  is  fuppofed,  was,
after  that,  fent  down  to  the  people:
But  I  am  miftaken,  if  I  do  not  con¬
vince  the  reader,  that  all  laws,  I  dill
mean  originally,  were  fird  palled  by
the  people,  and  then  fent  up  to  the
fenate.  The  fird  authority  I  fhall
quote,  which  I,  really,  think  decifive,
lhall  be  That  of  our  author,  where,  as
we  have  feen,  he  fays,  in  fpeaking  of
the  rights  of  the  people,  as  edablifhed
by  Romulus,  that,  whatever  was  paded
by  a  majority  of  the  curiae,  was  fent
up  to  the  fenate  :  Which  cudom,  w  he
fays,  was  inverted  in  his  time  :  For
then,  the  fenate  did  not  take  cogni¬
zance  of  the  votes  of  the  people  ;  but
the  people  had  an  abfolute  power

B.  ii.  c.  14.

U  u  2


their


332  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

their  curiae,  pafled  a  vote  in  his  favor ;  and  the  refolution
of  the  people  being  confirmed  by  the  patricians  ;  and,  laft


#


over  Thofe  of  the  fenate.  What,  then,
is  the  fignification  of  theie  words,
patres  auttores  fiunt?  To  this  I  /hall
anfwer,  firft,  that,  whatever  the  gram¬
marians  may  think,  audor  fignifies,
very  properly,  a  fupporterof  any  thing,
without  being  the  propofer  of  it.  This
I  could  prove  by  many  authorities  from
the  belt  writers  •,  but,  I,  dare  fay,  That
of  Livy  will  be  thought  fufficient  :
The  paffage  I  /hall  quote  relates  to  a
tranfadion,  which  I  fhall,  prefently,
be  obliged  to  take  notice  of  upon  an¬
other  occafion.  The  words  ofx  Livy,
that  concern  the  prefent  queftion,  are
thefe ;  fed^  ut  inventor  legis  Volero ,  Jic
Laetorius ,  collega  ejus ,  audor  quum  re¬
cent  ior^  turn  acrior  erat.  Volero  had
propofed  this  law  the  year  before,  and
Laetorius  fupported  it,  in  conjundion
with  him,  the  year  after.  This  verbal
difficulty  being  removed,  I  fhall  pro¬
ceed  to  confirm  what  I  have  laid,  by
the  form  ufed  at  the  eledion  of  Numa,
which  I  fhall  lay  before  the  reader  in
Livy’s  own  words,  in  order  to  ffiew,
that  the  original  method  of  palling
laws  was,  firft,  for  the  fenate  to  make
an  order  that  fuch  a  thing  fhould  be
laid  before  the  people  ;  then,  if  the
people  willed ,  and  ordered  it ,  fi  vellent ,
juberentque ,  it  was  carried  up  to  the
fenate  for  their  confirmation  •,  which
confirmation  the  Latin  authors  exprefs
by  patres  anti  ores  fiunt ,  and  the  Greek
writers,  by  e? njcvf*<ri.  This  form  of
proceeding  is  delcribed,  in  all  its
branches,  by  yLivy  upon  this  occa¬


fion  ;  Turn  interrex ,  condone  advocata ;
Quod  bonum ,  fauftum ,  felixque  fit ,  in-
quit,  Quirites ,  Regem  create ;  it  a  patri -
bus  vifum  eft.  Patres  deinde^fi  dignum,
qui  fecundus  ab  Romulo  numeretur ,  ere  a-
rids ,  audores  fient.  Agreeably  to  this
method  of  enading  laws,  mull  be
underftood  all  the  paflfages  in  our  au¬
thor,  where  he  mentions  a
of  the  fenate,  which  means  no  more
than  the  original  order,  made  by  the
fenate,  to  refer  the  matter  to  the  people^
ferre  ad  plebem ;  and  not  the  adual
palling  a  decree  to  be  confirmed  by
the  people,  as  Dr.  Chapman,  all  along,
fuppofes.  This  method  of  palling  all
ads  continued  till  the  inftitution  of
the  Tributa  comida ,  that  were  held
without  any  previous  order  of  the  fe¬
nate,  or  the  ceremonies  of  the  augurs  ;
which  iaft  had  no  other  end  but  to
impofe  upon  the  people,  and  keep
them  in  a  dependance  upon  the  fenate.
The  firft  time  thefe  comitia  were,  ever,
held  was  in  the  affair  of z  Coriolanus,
in  the  year  of  Rome  2 63,  and  not  in
the  281%  which  Dr.  Chapman  fays
gave  the  firft  rife  to  them.  The  law,
that  gentleman,  I  believe,  refers  to,
was,  indeed,  propofed  by  Volero  in
the  year  282,  when  Lucius  Pinarius,
and  Publius  Furius  were  confuls :
This  year,  Publius  Volero  was  chofen
one  of  the  tribunes,  and  a  rcgationem
tulit  ad  populum  ut  plebeii  magiftratus
tributis  comitiis  fierent  ;•  or  as  a  Dio-
nylius  exprelies  it,  voy,ov  eio(pt^et  zmgi

tuv  *g%#tftrtwv9  ptluyav  uvlx


*  B.  ii.  c.  56.  yB.i.  c.  17. '  z  Dionyf.  B.  vii.  c.  59.  p.  zg8.  a  Livy,  B.  ii.  c.  56.
b  B.  ix.  c.  41.


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENSf  $.  333

of  all5  the  augurs  having  reported  that  the  heavenly  figns
were  aufpicious,  he  entered  upon  the  government.  The


£jc  r m  Qfidlgiowy, 1$  QKQogiafy  W  ol  Yu^onoi

xxgiechv  KctA x<nv,  S7ri  THN  <£>YAET1KHN.
There  is  nothing  here,  that  tends  to
introduce  the  tributa  comitia  ;  the  view
of  this  rogation  being  no  more  than
that  the  plebeian  magiftrates  Ihould
be  chofen  at  thofe  comitia;  which,  of
itfelf,  feems  to  fuppofe  them  to  have
been,  before,  ufed,  as  I  have  {hewn
they,  actually,  were  at  the  trial  of
Coriolanus.  However,  the  fenate,  and
patricians  gave  fo  great  an  oppofition
to  this  rogation  of  Volero,  that  it
dropped  for  that  year.  The  next  year,
Volero  was  re-ele£ted,  and  one  of  his
collegues  was  Laetorius,  before-men¬
tioned,  Appius  Claudius,  and  Titus
Quintius  being  confuls:  And,  not-
withftanding  the  violence  of  Appius,
the  law  was  enadted ;  and,  c  as  Livy
fays,  turn  primum  trib-utis  comitiis  creati
tribuni  funt ;  and  d  Dionyfius,  more
fully  ,  <x.%  inetvis  Xgovx  r a  rwv

non  uyogoivofjutiv  ugX'Cagivioi  piX$l  TiS

nfXU f  ^XA  OlUVUV  T£  K CU  T>Jf  OlK Aljf

orletott  oiTroKrtji  a!  QvKilinoa  ^(pyi^o^aciv
€JoA»j<n«i.  Nothing  could  be  more
reafonable  than  this  law  :  For,  as  the
tribunes  were  the  reprefentatives  of  the
people  in  all  tranfa&ions  between  them
and  the  fenate,  all  pofiible  care  was
to  be  taken  to  render  the  election  of
them  independent  on  the  fenate.  This
could  only  be  effected  by  their  being
chofen  in  the  tributa  comitia ,  in  which,
neither  the  previous  vote  of  the  fenate,
nor  the  farce  of  the  augurs,  who  were
all  patricians,  were  necefiary,  and  the.
vote  of  the  meaneft  citizen  was  of

c  B.  ii.  c.  58.  d  B.  ix.  c.  49.


equal  weight  with  That  of  the  greateft
patrician  ;  which  was  a  right  derived
down  to  the  people  from  the  firft  efta-
blifhment  of  their  government,  when
every  private  citizen  enjoyed  the  fame
privilege  in  the  curiata  comitia ,  as  they,
now,  did  by  this  law,  which  enabled
them  to  chufe  their  plebeian  magi¬
ftrates  in  the  tributa  comitia.  This
original  right  the  people  had  been
deprived  of  by  the  eftabliihment  of
the  centuriata  comitia ,  by  Servius  Tul¬
lius,  as  our  author  will,  at  large,  in¬
form  us.  So  that,  this  law  rather  con¬
firmed  the  people  in  the  right  their
anceftors  had,  before,  enjoyed,  than
granted  them  any  new  privilege.  And,
as  to  the  reafonablenefs,  and,  even,
necefiity  of  this  law, e  Livy  will  explain
it  better  than  I  can  ;  Hand  parva  res ,
fub  titulo  primd  J'pecie  minime  atroci
ferebatur ;  fed  quae  patriciis  omnem  pc-
tejiatem ,  per  clientium  fuffragia ,  creandi
quos  client  tribunes ,  auferret.  Dr.
Chapman  feems  fenfible,  that,  by  this
law,  the  people  were  reftored  to  that
equality,  they  were,  conftitutionally,
intitled  to  ;  and  yet  contends  that,
f  though  this  practice  of  pajfing  laws  in
the  tributa  comitia  was  as  unreafonable ,
as  it  was  unprecedented ,  upon  the  footing
it  firft  flood ,  that  is ,  as  long  as  thefe  were
affemblies  of  the  commons  of  Rome  only ,
from  which  the  patricians ,  or  nobles ,
were  quite  excluded ,  it  was  far  from  be -
ing  fo ,  when  they  were  admitted  after¬
wards.  I  wifh  the  Docftor  had  told  us
when,  and,  upon  what  occafion,  the
patricians,  or  nobles,  as  he  calls  them*

CB.  ii.  c.  56.  *  P.  312.


Romans


334  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

Romans  fay  this  perfon  undertook  no  military  expedition  ;
but  that,  being  a  pious  and  juft  man,  he  paffed  his  whole
reign  in  peace  ,  and  eftablifhed  the  beft  inftitutions  for  the
government  of  the  city.  They  relate,  alfo,  many  furpriftng
things  of  him  ;  attributing  the  effects  of  human  wifdom  to
the  fuggeftions  of  the  gods :  For  they,  fabuloufly,  affirm
that  a  certain  nymph,  called  I23Egeria,  frequently  vffited


were  admitted  into  thefe  aflemblies  of
the  commmons,  called  comitia  tributa,
from  which,  he  fays,  they  were  firft
quite  excluded:  But  this,  I  conceive,  he
will  find  it  impoflible  to  fliew,  for  this
reafon,  becaufe  in  faCt,  they  never  had
been  excluded  from  thefe  aflemblies
of  the  commons,  which  were  not,  in
their  own  nature,  aflemblies  of  the
commons  only,  but  aflemblies  of  all
the  Roman  citizens,  patricians  as  well
as  plebeians ;  as  were  alfo  the  comitia
curiata ,  and  centuriata:  In  the  firft  of
thefe,  the  Roman  citizens  voted  in
their  curiae  \  in  the  latter,  in  their
centuries  •,  and,  in  the  tributa  comitia ,
they  voted  in  their  tribes ;  and  the
majority  of  the  tribes  carried  it  in
thefe  comitia ,  as  the  majority  of  the
curiae,  and  of  the  centuries  carried  it
in  the  other  two  comitia.  Now,  it  is
certain,  that  every  Roman  citizen,  pa¬
trician,  and  plebeian,  belonged  to
fome  tribe,  or  ether  *,  and,  confe-
quently,  every  Roman  citizen,  whether
he  was  a  patrician,  or  a  plebeian,  had
a  right  to  vote  in  his  own  tribe,  when
the  tributa  comitia ,  were  held.  Thefe
■fads  are  inconteftable.  The  reafon,
•therefore,  that  induced  the  people  to
-pafs  this  law  was,  not  to  prevent  the

5  Dionyf.  B


patricians  from  being  prefent  at,  and
voting  in,  the  tributa  comitia  \  which,
by  their  conftitution,  was  impracti¬
cable  ;  but,  to  fecure  the  election  of
their  plebeian  magiflrates  from  the
influence,  not  the  prefence,  of  the  pa¬
tricians  j  as  they  had,  before,  tranf-
ferred  the  trial  of  Coriolanus  from  the
centuriata  comitia ,  to  the  tributa  ;  fince,
as  the  patricians,  and  the  equites,  to¬
gether  with  the  richeft  plebeians,  com-
pofed  the  98  centuries  of  the  firft  clafs,
that  is,  a  majority  of  the  whole  num¬
ber  of  193  8  centuries,  they  might,  if
they  had  agreed,  have  acquitted  Co¬
riolanus,  had  his  crimes  appeared  ever
fo  flagrant.

I23‘  H yz^ioi.  No  fyftematical  reli¬
gion,  ever,  pretended  to  make  its  for¬
tune  without  the  afliftance  of  miracles:
This  has  been,  very  well,  underftood
from  the  Aegyptians,  and  all,  who
borrowed  their  religion  from  them,
either  in  whole,  or  in  part,  down  to  the
French  prophets,  in  the  beginning  of
this  century.  No  miracles  are  requifite
to  prove  the  exiftence,  the  infinite  pow¬
er,  the  infinite  wifdom,  and  the  infinite
goodnefs  of  the  great  creator,  and
preserver  of  all  things*.  Infinite
perfections!  which  our  faculties  are

.  vii.  c,  59.

him,


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  ENS  I  S.  335

him,  and  inftrudted  him  in  the  124 art  of  reienino-.  Others
affert,  that  it  was  not  a  nymph,  hut  one  of  the  Mules;  and
that  this  was  manifeft  to  every  one :  For  they  lay,  that
mankind  being,  as  may  well  be  fuppofed,  incredulous  at
firft,  and  looking  on  the  account  relating  to  the  goddefs,
as  fictitious,  he,  with  intent  to  give  the  unbelievers  an
evident  proof  of  his  commerce  with  this  divinity,  purfuant
to  her  direction,  made  ufe  of  the  following  device:  He  in¬
vited  to  his  houfe  a  great  many  of  the  Romans,  all  men  of
worth;  and,  having  fhewn  them  his  apartments  very  ill
provided  with  furniture,  but,  particularly,  with  every  thing,
that  is  neceflary  to  entertain  a  numerous  company,  he
ordered  them  to  depart  at  that  time,  but  invited  them  to
fupper  in  the  evening;  and,  when  they  came  at  the  ap¬
pointed  hour,  he  fhewed  them  rich  125  beds,  and  fide  boards
covered  with  cups  of  exquifite  workmanfhip  ;  and,  when


too  limited  to  comprehend,  but  not  to
acknowledge :  The  wonderful  order
of  nature  alone  leads  us,  irrefiftibly,  to
this  acknowledgment  *,  and  miracles,
which  are  underftood  to  be  fo  many
interruptions  of  this  order,  can  prove
nothing  they  are  defigned  to  prove,
lo  effectually,  as  the  continuance  of
this  admirable  frame  proves  its  great
author.  And  Chriftians  ought  not  to
lay  too  great  a  ftrefs  on  miracles,  fince
they  are  taught,  by  the  h01d  teftament,
that  they  have  been  wrought,  and,  by
the  1  New,  that  they  will  be  wrought,
by  impoftors.

I2+*  BotcnAuoj  <rocp ia.  This  wifdom  of
kings,  or  the  art  of  reigning,  is  a


fcience,  above  all  others,  of  the  great-
eft  confequence  to  mankind ;  fince
their  happinefs  will  be,  always,  pro¬
portionate  to  the  degree,  in  which  this
fcience  is  pofleffed  by  their  chief  ma-
giftrates.  This  fpirit  k  David  prays
for,  according  to  the  Septuagint,  and
the  Vulgate  ;  -avivyobu  ‘HFEMONIKX2
y.f,  bp/r//«principali  confirma  me:
In  Hebrew,  nfrTQJ  which  figni-
fies  a  -prophetic ,  or,  rather,  a  prophet ,
fpirit.  I  am  forry  to  fee  this  noble
prayer  from  a  prince  debafed  in  our
tranflation  of  the  Bible  ;  Stablijh  me
with  thy  free  fpirit.

J95*  'Zr^ony.VYi'  HefychillS.


*  Exod.  c,  vii.  f.  11.  and  zz.  c.  viii.  f.  7.


k  Pfalm  i2.


‘Mat.  c.  xxiv.  f.  24.


336  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  .  Book  II.

they  were  at  table,  he  gave  them  an  entertainment  confift-
ing  of  all  forts  of  meats,  fuch  a  one  as  it  was  not  eafy  for
any  man  in  thofe  days  to  have  prepared  in  a  long  time.
The  Romans  were  aftonifhed  at  every  thing  they  faw ;  and
from  that  time,  they  entertained  a  firm  belief  that  fome
goddefs  converfed  with  him.

LXI.  But  thofe,  who  banifh  every  thing  that  is  fabulous
from  hiftory,  fay  that  the  report  concerning  Egeria  was
devifed  by  Numa,  to  the  end  that,  when  once  the  people
were  pofiefied  with  a  fear  of  the  gods,  they  might  pay
a  greater  regard  to  him  ;  and,  willingly,  receive  the  laws
he  was  enabling,  as  derived  from  them:  They  add,  that,
in  this,  he  followed  the  example  of  the  Greeks ;  and  imi¬
tated  the  wifdom  both  of  Minos,  the  Cretan,  and  of  Ly-
curgus,  the  Lacedaemonian.  Of  whom  the  firlt  faid  he
converfed  with  Jupiter;  and,  going,  frequently,  to  the
Didtaean  mountain,  in  which  the  Cretan  fables  fay,  that
Jupiter,  newly  born,  was  brought  up  by  the  Curetes,  he
ufed  to  defcend  into  a  holy  cave ;  and,  having  compofed
his  laws  there,  he  produced  them,  affirming  that  he  had
received  them  from  Jupiter :  And  Lycurgus,  going  to
Delphi,  faid  he  formed  his  fyftem  of  laws  by  the  direction
of  Apollo.  But,  being  fenfible  that  an  accurate  account  of
the  fabulous  hiftories,  and,  particularly,  of  fuch  as  are  at¬
tributed  to  the  gods,  would  require  a  long  difcuffion,  I  fhall
omit  it,  and  lay  before  the  reader  the  benefits,  which  the
Romans  feem  to  have  received  from  the  government  of  this
perfon,  according  to  the  information  I  have  procured  from

the


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSEN  SIS.  337

the  hiftories  of  their  country.  But  I  fhall,  firfl,  give  an
account  of  the  great  difturbances,  with  which  the  city  of
Rome  was  agitated  before  his  acceffion  to  the  throne.

LXII.  After  the  death  of  Romulus,  the  fenate  being  in
pofleffion  of  the  whole  power  of  the  commonwealth,  and,
having  retained  it  during  one  year,  as  I  have  faid,  began  to
difagree  among  themfelves,  and  fall  into  factions ;  while  one
part  of  them  contended  for  pre-eminence,  and  the  other  for
equality:  For  the  Alban  fenators,  who,  together  with  Ro¬
mulus,  had  planted  the  colony,  pretended,  not  only,  upon
delivering  their  opinions  firft,  and  enjoying  the  greateft
honors ;  but,  alfo,  on  being  courted  by  the  new  comers  :  On
the  other  fide,  fuch  of  thefe,  as  had  been  afterwards  admitted
among  the  patricians,  infilled  that  they  ought  not  to  be
fhut  out  from  any  honors,  or  be  in  a  worfe  condition  than
the  others:  This  was,  particularly,  urged  by  the  126  Sabines,
who,  in  virtue  of  the  treaty,  entered  into  between  Romulus,
and  Tatius,  were,  equally,  intitled  to  all  the  privileges  of
the  city  with  the  ancient  inhabitants,  for  which  they  had
made  an  ample  return.  The  fenate  being,  thus,  divided,
their  clients,  alfo,  formed  themfelves  into  two  parties,  and
each  joined  their  refpe&ive  factions.  There  were  among
the  common  people  not  a  few,  lately,  admitted  into  die
number  of  the  citizens  3  who,  having  never  aflifled  Ro¬
mulus  in  any  of  his  wars,  had  been  neglected  by  him,  and

t

I26,  dcr 01  IctGivav,  etc.  mentators  to  reftore  it,  have  proved

This  period  is  fo  much  corrupted,  ufelefs.
that  all  the  endeavours  of  the  com-

Vol.  I .  X  X


not


333  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

not  fuffered  to  partake  either  in  the  diftribution  of  lands,  or
in  the  booty  he  had  taken.  Thefe,  having  no  fettlement,
but,  being  poor,  and  vagabonds,  were,  by  neceftity,  enemies
to  their  fuperiors,  and  ripe  for  innovation.  Numa,  having
found  the  city  in  this  ferment,  firft  relieved  the  poor,  by
diftributing  among  them  fome  fmall  part  both  of  thofe
lands,  which  had  been  in  the  pofteftion  of  Romulus,  and  of
thofe,  that  belonged  to  the  public :  After  that,  he  reconciled
the  patricians ;  not  by  depriving  the  founders  of  the  city  of
any  thing  they  were  in  pofleflion  of ;  but,  by  beftowing
fome  other  honors  on  the  new-comers :  And,  having  adapted
the  whole  body  of  the  people,  like  an  inftrument,  to  the
foie  confideration  of  the  public  good;  and  enlarged  the
circuit  of  the  city,  by  the  addition  of  the  Quirinal  hill  (for,
till  that  time,  it  was  not  inclofed  with  a  wall)  he  turned
his  thoughts  to  other  inftitutions,  labouring  to  inculcate  thefe
two  things,  by  the  advantage  of  which  he  conceived  the
city  would  become  flourifhing  and  great :  The  firft,  Piety  ;
by  informing  his  fubjedts  that  the  gods  are  the  givers,  and
prefervers  of  all  good  things  to  mortal  men :  And  the  other,
juftice ;  from  which  he  fliewed  them,  that  the  pofleflors
even  of  thofe  advantages  the  gods  beftow,  derive  an  honeft
enjoyment  of  them.

LXXII.  But  I  fhall  not  enter  into  the  detail  of  every  law,
and  every  inftitution,  by  which  he  carried  each  of  thefe  to
a  great  perfection  ;  as  fearing  the  length  of  fuch  a  difcuftion  ;
and,  at  the  fame  time,  not  finding  it  neceflary  to  a  Greek
hiftory.  However,  I  flhiall  give  a  fummary  account  of  the

prin-


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSE  NS  I S.  339

principal  things;  and  of  fuch,  as  are  proper  to  unfold  the
whole  defign  of  this  perfon,  beginning  with  the  regulations,
that  concern  divine  worfhip.  Thofe  rites,  therefore,  which
he  found  eftablifhed  by  Romulus,  whether  fupported  by
cuftoms,  or  laws,  he  left  untouched,  looking  upon  them  all
as  the  beft  inftitutions :  But,  whatever  he  thought  omitted
by  him,  he  added  ;  confecrating  many  places  to  thofe  gods,
who  had,  hitherto,  received  no  honors ;  erecting  many
altars,  and  temples,  and  inftituting  feftivals  in  honor  of  each ;
appointing  priefts  to  take  care  of  thofe  feftivals;  and  ena&ing
laws  concerning  purifications,  ceremonies,  and  expiations ;
and  many  other  rites,  and  honors,  in  greater  number  than
are  to  be  found  in  any  other  city,  either  Greek,  or  Barba¬
rian,  even  in  Thofe,  that  value  themfelves  the  moft  upon
their  piety.  He,  alfo,  ordered  that  Romulus  himfelf,  as  one,
who  had  been  above  the  condition  of  mortal  men,  fhould
be  honoured,  under  the  name  of  Quirinus,  with  a  temple,
and  annual  facrifices :  For,  while  the  Romans  were  yet  in
doubt,  whether  the  will  of  heaven,  or  human  treachery
had  been  the  caufe  of  his  difappearing,  a  certain  perfon,
whofe  name  was  Julius,  defeended  from  Afcanius,  who
employed  himfelf  in  agriculture,  and  a  man  of  an  irrepre-
henfible  life,  and  above  the  fufpicion  of  telling  an  untruth
for  the  fake  of  his  private  advantage,  going  into  the  forum,
faid,  that,  as  he  was  coming  to  town,  he  faw  Romulus  de¬
parting  from  the  city  all  armed  ;  and  that,  drawing  near  to
him,  he  heard  him  fay  thefe  words,  “  Julius,  acquaint  the
“  Romans  with  this  from  me ;  that,  having  finifhed  my

X  x  2  “  mortal


34°


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.


“  mortal  life ;  the  genius,  to  whom  I  was  allotted  at  my
<c  birth,  is  conducing  me  to  the  gods,  and  that  I  am
^  Quirinus.”  Numa,  having  reduced  his  whole  fyftem  of
religious  laws  into  writing,  divided  them  into  eight  parts- ;
that  being  the  number  of  the  different  clafles  of  religious
rites.


LXIV.  The  firft  divifion  of  thefe  holy  rites  he  affigned
to  the  thirty  Curiones,  who,  as  I  faid,  performed  the  public
facrifices  for  the  members  of  the  curiae.  The  fecond,  to


thofe  the  Greeks  call,  %T£<potvri<po(joi,  Crown-bearers ,  and  the
Romans,  Flamines ;  to  whom,  from  their  wearing  caps,  and
veils,  which  they  wear  to  this  day,  and  call  them,  127  Flam¬
med ,  they  give  the  name  beforementioned.  The  third,  to
the  commanders  of  the  Celeres,  who,  ferving  in  the  quality
both  of  Korfe,  and  foot,  compofed,  as  I  faid,  the  king’s
guard  :  For  thefe,  alfo,  performed  certain  appointed  rites.
The  fourth,  to  the  interpreters  of  heavenly  figns,  whofe
province  it  is  to  determine  what  they  portend,  both  to


l27*  This,  I  dare  fay,  is

the  true  reading  •,  becaufe  flammeuni
was  the  name  of  the  flame- coloured  veil
worneboth  by  the  Flamines ,  and  brides.

1  Varro,  like  our  author,  derives  the
name  of fiamen ,  from  this  veil  ;  quod
in  Latio  capite  vela  to  erant  femper.  The
snAcr,  here  faid  to  have  been  worne  by
the  flamines ,  was  called,  in  Latin,  a-
pex.  m  Lucan,  in  fpeaking  of  the  pro-
ceflion,  performed  by  the  feveral  priefts
at  Rome  by  the  dire&ion  of  Aruns,  to
expiate  the  horrid  omens,  that  por¬


tended  the  civil  war  between  Pompey,
and  Caefar,  when  he  comes  to  the
flamines ,  fays,

Eitollens  apicem generofo  vert  ice  fiamen.

Thefe  apices  were  in  fhape  very  like
a  mitre.  If  Sr.  Peter  was  ever  at
Rome,  he  muft  have  feen  thefe  mitres
upon  the  heads  of  the  flamines  ;  which
was,  no  doubt,  a  good  reafon  for  him,
and  might  have  been  a  good  reafon
for  his  fucceffors,  never  to  wear  one.


]  L.  iv.  De  Ling.  Lat.


*'  B.  i.  604.


private


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  341

private  perfons,  and  to  the  public  ;  whom,  from  one  branch
of  the  fpeculations  belonging  to  their  art,  the  Romans  call
Augur es ;  and  we  fliould  call  them,  Oioovozo^c,  Soothfayers
by  the  means  of  birds :  Thefe  are  {killed  in  all  forts  of  divi¬
nation  in  ufe  among  them  ;  whether  founded  on  figns
appearing  in  the  heavens,  the  air,  or  on  the  earth.  The
fifth,  he  afligned  to  the  virgins,  who  are  the  guardians  of
the  holy  fire,  and  who  are  called  by  them,  from  the  goddefs
they  ferve,  Vejlals  ;  Numa  being  the  firft  perfon,  who  built
a  temple  at  Rome  to  Vefta,  and  appointed  virgins  to  be  her
priefteftes :  Concerning  whom  my  fubje<ft  requires  that  I
fhould  give  an  account,  which  fliall  be  fhort,  and  contain,
only,  fuch  things,  as  are  mod  neceffary  to  be  known  :  For
this  matter  deferves  an  inquiry,  and  many  Roman  hiftorians
have  thought  it  worthy  to  be  inquired  into  in  this  place  ;
but  thofe  authors,  who  have  not,  diligently,  examined  the
caufes  of  this  inftitution,  have  publiftied  trifling  accounts
concerning  it.

LXV.  Some  afcribe  the  building  of  this  temple  to  Ro¬
mulus,  looking  upon  it  as  a  thing  not  to  be  imagined  that
a  public  temple  of  Vefta  fliould  not,  at  firft,  be  built  in  a
city,  founded  by  a  man  {killed  in  divination,  particularly,
fince  the  founder  had  been  brought  up  at  Alba,  where  there
was  an  ancient  temple  of  this  goddefs,  and  that  his  mother
had  been  her  prieftefs :  They  add,  that  religious  worfliip
being  of  two  forts,  the  firft  public,  and  common  to  all  the
citizens ;  and  the  other,  private,  and  appropriated  to  parti¬
cular  families,  Romulus  was,  on  both  thefe  accounts,  under  a

necef-


342  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

neceflity  of  worfhiping  this  goddefs  :  For  they  fay,  that
nothing  is  more  neceffary  to  men  than  a  public  temple  of
Vefta ;  nor  any  thing  more  nearly  concerning  Romulus,  as
the  heir  ol  his  family,  he  being  defcended  from  thofe,  who
brought  the  worfhip  of  this  goddefs  from  Ilium,  and  his
mother  having  been  her  prieftefs.  Thofe,  therefore,  who,
for  thefe  reafons,  afcribe  the  building  of  this  temple  to
Romulus,  rather  than  to  Numa,  feem,  in  general,  to  have
reafon  to  fay  that,  when  the  city  was  building,  a  temple  of
Vefta  ought,  firft  of  all,  to  have  been  erefled  ;  particularly,
by  a  man,  not  unfkilled  in  religious  knowledge.  But,  as
to  thefe  particulars,  which  relate  to  the  building  of  the
prefent  temple,  and  to  the  virgins,  who  are  the  prieftefles
of  this  goddefs,  they  feem  to  have  been  ignorant.  For  nei¬
ther  did  Romulus  confecrate  to  the  goddefs  this  place,  where
the  holy  fire  Is  preferved  ;  of  which  this  is  a  ftrong  proof,
that  it  is  without  the  city  of  Rome,  called  four  fquare,
which  he  furrounded  with  a  wall ;  whereas,  all  men  place
the  common  temple  of  Vefta  in  the  beft  part  of  the  city,
but  none  without  the  walls :  Neither  did  he  appoint  the
fervice  of  the  goddefs  to  be  performed  by  virgins  ;  remem¬
bering,  in  my  opinion,  the  adventure,  that  befel  his  mother,
who,  while  fhe  was  ferving  the  goddefs,  loft  her  virginity  ;
as  if  he  was  fenfible  that  the  remembrance  of  this  domeftic
misfortune  would  render  him  an  improper  perfon  to  punifh,
according  to  the  laws  of  his  country,  any  of  the  prieftefles
he  fhould  find  to  have  been  deflowered.  For  this  reafon,
therefore,  he  did  neither  build  a  common  temple  to  Vefta,

nor


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICA RN  A  S  S E N S  I  S.  343

nor  appoint  virgins  to  be  her  prieftefles :  But,  having  erected
a  temple  for  each  of  the  thirty  curiae,  in  which  the  members
of  it  facrificed,  he  appointed  the  chiefs  of  the  curiae  to  be
the  priefts  of  thofe  temples;  in  which,  he  imitated  the
cuftoms  of  the  Greeks,  that  are  ftill  obferved  in  the  moft
ancient  cities :  For  their  n gvjotveioi  are  temples,  which  are
ferved  by  the  chief  magirtrates  of  the  cities.

LX VI.  Numa,  after  his  acceflion  to  the  government,  did
not  remove  the  particular  temples  belonging  to  the  curiae,
but  erected  one  temple  common  to  them  all,  between  the
Capitoline,  and  Pallantine  hills :  For  both  thefe  hills  had,,
already,  been  incompaffed  with  one  wall ;  the  forum,  in
which  this  temple  was  built,  lying  between  them:  He,
alfo,  enacted,  that  the  keeping  of  the  holy  things,  according
to  the  cuftom  eftablifhed  among  the  Latines,  fhould  be
committed  to  virgins.  There  is  fome  doubt  what  it  is,
that  is  kept  in  this  temple  ;  and,  for  what  rcafon,  the  care
of  it  is  given  to  virgins :  Some  affirming  that  nothing  is  pre¬
ferred  there  but  the  fire,  which  is  vifible  to  all  the  world ;  and
thev,  very  reafonably,  make  the  cuftody  of  it  to  be  committed
to  virgins,  rather  than  to  men  ;,  becaufe  fire  being  incorrupt,
and  a  virgin  undefiled,  the  charted:  of  all  mortal  things
muft  be  agreeable  to  the  pureft  of  thofe,  that  are  divine :
And  they  look  upon  the  fire  to  be  confecratcd  to  Vert  a  ;
becaufe  that  goddefs  being  the  earth,  and  128  placed  in  the

i

123.  Qri  yy\  t?  x<ra  >/  3 io^’Aou  tov  petrov  Copernicus  was  not  the  author  of  his
kccI ra  T07rov.  I  cannot  con-  fyftem,  which,  he  fays,  was  known
ceivehow  le  Jay  could  find  any  reafon  long  before  him  in  Italy.  It  is  piain
to  conclude  from  this  pafifage  that  that  the  fyftem,  here  fpoken  of,  which

center


344  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

center  of  the  univerfe,  fhe  lights  up  thofe  fiery  meteors,  that
are  feen  in  the  air.  However,  fome  fay  that,  befides  the
fire,  there  are  fome  holy  things  in  the  temple  of  this  goddefs,
which  are  kept  fecret  from  the  vulgar,  and,  with  which,
both  the  priefts,  and  the  virgins  are  acquainted :  This  they
fupport  with  no  fmall  probability,  by  what  happened  at  the
burning  of  the  temple,  during  the  firft  Punic  war  between
the  Romans,  and  the  Carthaginians  concerning  Sicily :  For
the  temple  being  on  fire,  and  the  virgins  flying  from  it,  one
of  the  pontifs,  Lucius  Caecilius,  called  Metellus,  a  confular
perfon,  the  fame,  who  adorned,  with  a  hundred  and  thirty
eight  captive  elephants,  that  memorable  triumph,  with  which
lie  had  been  honoured  for  having  defeated  the  Carthaginians
in  Sicily,  negle&ing  his  own  fafety  for  the  fake  of  the  public
good,  ventured  to  force  his  way  through  the  flames;  and,
{hatching  up  the  holy  things,  which  the  virgins  had  aban¬
doned,  faved  them  from  the  fire :  For  which,  he  received
great  honors  from  his  fellow-citizens ;  as  the  infcription
upon  his  ftatue  in  the  capitol  teftifies.  Upon  the  founda-

places  the  earth  in  the  center  of  our  help  taking  notice  of  an  Opinion  con-
planets,  was,  afterwards,  embraced  cerning  comets,  afcribed  by  n  Plutarch
by  Ptolemy,  not  by  Copernicus,  who  to  the  Pythagoreans,  which  the  great
places  the  fun  there.  There  is  no  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  has  adopted.  Thefe
doubt  but  the  opinion,  prefently,  philofophers,  he  fays,  held  that  comets
mentioned,  that  fiery  meteors  are  pro-  were  ftars,  or  planets,  that  did  not
duced  by  the  exhalations  of  the  earth  appear  always,  but  periodically,  and
is  very  philofophical  •,  much  more  fo  at  fbated  times.  Tm  mtto  nvQayogx  rm?
than  That  of  Ariftotle,  who  attributes  jugv  ecj-g^o.  (puav  «va<rov  xo^yjltjv  tuv
the  birth  ot  comets  to  thofe  exhala-  (pchvof/,ivuvy  Jim  tivop  tig  wpicutvx
tions,  tks  uvM^fMMctug  tfsgioJiKug  avuliAAoSIm.

itawfov  cvs -oicnv.  And  here  I  cannot


n  nsg»  r m  ro»;  <pi7\o?'  B.  iii.  C,  z.


tion


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  AS  SENS  IS.  345

tion  of  this  fact,  which  is  allowed,  they  build  feme  conjec¬
tures  of  their  own  :  Some  affirming  that  thefe  holy  things
are  part  of  Thofe,  which  were  preferved  in  Samothrace  ;
Dardanus  having  removed  them,  out  of  that  iiland,  into  the
city  he  himfelf  built ;  and  that  Aeneas,  when  he  fled  from
Troas,  brought  them,  together  wTith  the  other  holy  things,
into  Italy.  But  others  fay  it  is  the  Palladium,  that  fell  from
heaven,  the  fame  that  was  in  the  pofieffion  of  the  Uienfes,
which  Aeneas,  being  acquainted  with  it,  brought  into  Italy,
the  Achaians  having  ftolen  away  the  counterfeit :  Concern¬
ing  which,  a  great  deal  has  been  faid  both  by  poets,  and
hiftorians.  Plowever,  I  find,  by  very  many  circumftances,
that,  not  only  the  fire,  but  feme  other  holy  things,  unknown
to  the  vulgar,  are  kept  by  the  virgins :  But,  what  they  are,
I  fhall  neither  give  myfelf  leave,  curioufly,  to  inquire,  nor
advife  any  other  perfon  to  do  fo,  who  is  defirous  to  preferve
the  religious  reverence  he  owes  to  the  gods.

LXVXI.  The  virgins,  who  ferve  the  goddefs,  were,  ori¬
ginally,  four;  and  ele&ed  by  the  kings,  according  to  the
laws  eftablifhed  by  Numa  :  But,  afterwards,  from  the  mul¬
tiplicity  of  their  fun&ions,  their  number  was  encreafed  to
129  fix,  and  has  fo  remained  to  this  day :  They  live  in  the
temple  of  the  goddefs,  into  which  none  are  hindered  from
entering  in  the  day  time ;  but  it  is  not  lawful  for  any  man

»  4

129* -e|.  Thefe  nuns,  who  have  temples.  The  reafon  I  have  to  think
multiplied  fo  much  fince,  never  ex-  their  number  was  never  encreafed  be-
ceeded  the  number  of  fix  to  the  time  yond  fix  is  drawn  from  a  medal  of
of  their  abolition  by  Theodofius,  who,  Fauftina  the  younger,  and  Julia,  the
it  is  well  known,  drove  thefe  priefteffes,  wife  of  Severus,  in  which,  no  more
and  all  the  heathen  priefts  out  of  their  than  fix  veftals  are  reprefented.

Vol.  I.  Y  y


to


Book  IL


346  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

to  remain  there  in  the  night:  They  are  under  a  neceffity
of  continuing  unmarried  during  the  fpace  of  thirty  years ;
which  time  they  employ  in  offering  facrifices,  and  perform¬
ing  other  rites,  ordained  by  the  law  :  During  the  firft  ten
years,  their  duty  was  to  learn  their  functions ;  in  the  fecond
ten,  to  perform  them ;  and,  during  the  remainder  of  their
time,  to  teach  others.  After  the  expiration  of  the  term  of
thirty  years,  nothing  hindered  fuch  as  defired  it  from  marry¬
ing,  upon  quitting  their  130  veils,  and  the  other  enfigns  of
their  priefthood :  And  fome,  though  very  few,  have  done
this,  the  end  of  whofe  lives  has  not  been  fo  very  happy,  as
to  tempt  others  to  imitate  them :  So  that,  the  reft,  looking
upon  their  calamities  as  ominous,  remain  virgins  in  the
temple  of  the  goddefs  till  their  death ;  and,  then,  the
pontifs,  again,  131  chufe  another  to  fupply  the  vacancy.


13°*  'Ert/xy-oclx.  I  have  tranflated
thvfe,  Veils  \  becaufe  the  veftals,  really,
wore  veils,  called  in  Latin,  fuffibula ,
which  are  thus  defcribed  by  Feftus :
Suffibulum  ejl  veftimentum  album ,  prae-
textum ,  quadrangulum ,  oblongum ,  qucd
in  capite  virgines  vejlales ,  cum  facrifi-
cant ,  femper  habere  folent ;  idque  fibula
ccmprehenditur.  Almoft  all  nuns  wear
thele,  or  fomething,  very  nearly,  an-
fwering  this  defcription.  0  Gellius
quotes  Antiftius  Labeo,  a  man  of
great  learning,  in  the  time  of  Augus¬
tus,  for  many  particulars  relating  to  the
veftals ;  among  the  reft,  that  they  could
not  be  admitted  under  fix,  nor  above
ten  years  of  age.  I  imagine,  becaufe  it
was  neceffary  they  fhould  be  virgins.

13*'  A7rsbeiKvv1  cci-  Capitur  was  the
®  B.  i,  c.  12.  r  Id.  ib.


term  appropriated  to  this  ele&ion,
which  was  performed  in  the  following
manner  :  p  The  pontifex  maximus
chofe  twenty  virgins,  who,  in  an  af-
fembly  of  the  people,  drew  lots  which
of  them  fhould  fucceed  the  deceafed
veftal  ;  and  the  virgin,  upon  whom
the  lot  fell,  was  taken  by  the  pontifex
maximus,  capiebatur.  Among  the  o-
ther  honors  enjoyed  by  the  veftals,
each  had  a  li&or  to  attend  her,  when
flie  went  out;  one  of  them  having
been  infulted,  as  fhe  was  going  home.
This  honor,  and  fecurity  they  received
in  the  triumvirate  of  Oftavianus,  An¬
tony,  and  Lepidus.  cuq  ts

Q&OIS  (iJuiKCiv)  ivi  ixary  Xgqo&Ul’

oti  Tif  avluv  oc7ro  Awry*  icTrigav  uKafo
i7rxvM<roi  r,yvoi re  xai  vQQi&y;.

S  Dion,  B.  xlvii.  p.  385.

They


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  347

They  receive  many  diftinguifhing  honors  from  their  country,
by  which  the  defire  of  children,  and  of  marriage  is  taken
£  way :  They  are,  alfo,  fubjedl  to  great  punifhments  in  cafe
of  delinquency;  which,  by  the  law,  the  pontifs  are  ap¬
pointed  both  to  inquire  into,  and  punifh:  Thofe  veftals,
who  commit  leffer  crimes,  they  whip  with  rods :  But,  if
they  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  debauched,  they  are  delivered
up,  by  the  pontifs,  to  the  mod  fhameful,  and  the  mod
miferable  death.  For,  while  they  are  yet  alive,  they  are
carried  upon  a  bier,  with  all  the  formality  of  a  funeral,  their
friends,  and  relations  attending  them  with  lamentations :
Being  arrived  at  the  gate,  Collina,  they  are  placed  in  a
132  fubterraneous  cell,  prepared  within  the  walls,  in  their


I32*  E IS  CTJJKGV  V 7T0  yy ]V  XodtCY^VOKrpiVOV.

Plutarch,  in  his  life  of  Numa,  fays
that,  in  this  cave,  there  was  a  bed,  a
burning  lamp,  a  little  bread,  water,
milk,  and  honey  :  For  which  he  gives
this  reafon  •,  that  they  left  thefe  fmall
fupports  of  life  there,  to  avoid  the
abomination  of  ftarvinga  perfon,  who
had  been  confecrated  with  the  greateft
formalities.  But  the  Greeks,  from
whom  this  notion  is  fuppofed  to  have
been  derived,  looked  upon  the  ftarving
any  perfon,  whether  confecrated,  or
not,  to  bring  a  curfe  upon  the  public:
And  this  is  the  reafon,  given  by  Creon,
for  a  fmall  fupportof  life,  to  the  chorus
in  Sophocles,  when  he  declares  his  de-
fign  of  putting  to  death  his  niece  An¬
tigone  in  the  fame  manner,  for  having
performed  funeral  rites  to  her  brother
Polynices,  contrary  to  his  edifl r.

A yuv  ev6’  av  >j  ftgolwv  <gt€os,

^0-OiV

1  In  Antigone,  f.  784.


r offxlov  as  ayog  (xovov  zsrtjc
Onus  ixixfffxa.  zucar  vneK^vyoi  stcAj?.

The  crime,  for  which  thefe  poor  crea¬
tures  were,  fo  dreadfully,  punifhed,
was  called  Incejl.  Notwithftanding  the
feverity  of  the  punifhment,  many  of
the  veftals  were  tried,  and  found  guilty
of  a  crime,  which  the  fuperftition  of
their  country,  not  nature,  had  made
fo  heinous.  One  inftance  of  this  kind
I  fhall  mention  from  3  Livy,  becaufe
it  gives  great  light  to  the  palfage  now
before  us :  Eo  anno ,  Minuet  a ,  vejtalis —
faclo  judicio,  viva  fub  t  err  am ,  ad  portam
Ccllinam ,  dextra  via  fir  at  a ,  defojja  See-
lerato  campo.  Credo  ab  incefto  id  ei
loco  nomen  faftum.  The  reader  will
obferve  that  this  place,  though  called
campus ,  was  within  the  walls  of  the
city,  svlos  as  our  author  fays  j

which  is  confirmed  by  the  teftimony
of  many  other  writers.

s  B.  viii.  c.  1  5,

Y  j  2


funeral


348  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IE


funeral  attire,  without  any  fepulchral  column,  funeral  rites,
or  other  cuftomary  folemnities.  There  feem  to  be  many
indications  of  the  prieftefs,  who  does  not  perform  the  holy
functions  with  purity ;  but  the  principal  is  the  extinction
of  the  fire,  which  the  Romans  dread  above  all  misfortunes,
looking  upon  it,  from  whatever  caufe  it  proceeds,  as  an
omen,  that  portends  the  deftruCtion  of  their  city;  and
133  they  bring  fire  again  into  the  temple  with  many  expiatory
rites ;  but  concerning  thefe,  I  fhall  fpeak  in  a  proper  place.

LXVII.  However,  it  is,  alfo,  well  worth  relating,  in
what  manner  this  goddefs  has  manifefted  herfelf  in  favor  of


*33*  Kalxyycri  j tf&Aiv  eig  to  ;S£ov.

t  Plutarch  fays  that,  when  this  fire
happened  to  be  extinguifhed,  they
held  it  unlawful  to  fupply  it  with -com¬
mon  fire,  but  made  ufe  of  vefiels,
which  had  the  fame  effect  with  burn¬
ing  glaffes  *,  and,  thus,  they  procured
this  new  fire  from  the  fun.  This  is
what  the  emperor  v  Julian  calls  rlA/y
GAoyx  in  his  oration  in  praife  of  the
fun,  which  he  erefts  into  a  divinity ;
which  oration  is  written,  like" all  his
works,  with  great  elegance,  great
learning,  and  great  fuperltition.  And
it  may  well  be  wondered  that  a  Ro¬
man  emperor,  fo  bigotted  to  the  mpft
ridiculous  tenets  of  the  Pagan  fyftem,
and,  perfonally,  abufed  by  the  Chri-
Itian  writers,  contented  himfelf  with
forbidding  them  to  keep  open  fchools  :
But  it  Teems,  he  fuffered  his  philofo-
phy,  in  which  he  Thews  himfelf  a  great
proficient,  to  influence  his  conduct,
though  it  could  not  influence  his  re¬


ligion  ;  and  was  fo  far  from  reviving
the  dreadful  perlecutions  of  his  pre-
decefiors,  that,  in  a  letter  to  Arfacius,
the  high  prieft  of  Galatia,  among  o-
ther  orders  relating  to  his  condud,
and  to  That  of  the  priefts  under  his
jurifdidtion,  he  commands  him  to  ered:
public  houles  in  every  city  for  the
reception  of  Arrangers  of  all  religions,
as  well  as  his  own  :  w  xaO’

weis-tjv  3 rohrj  Kuloisvcrcv  zrvxva,  iv"  «7roA«u-
GWiv  oi  %zvoi  zffKg  tfAwv  <$iAa\Q(>W7riuqy
a  TCDV  y/xilsgcav  juovov,  ctAAa  nai  aAAuv

flV/ff  otv  Sty xfiKjuoilw.  It  muft  be  ob-
ferved  that  the  others ,  he  fpeaks  of
here,  who  were  to  have  an  equal  benefit
of  this  charity  with  the  Pagans,  mutt
relate  to  theChriftians,  and  Jews,  both
which  he  mentions  a  few  lines  after  ;
becaufe  there  were  only  three  religions
profefled  by  the  Tub] efts  of  the  Roman
empire ;  that  is,  Chriftianity,  Pagan-
ifm,  and  Judaifm.


*  Life  of  Numa.  *  Oration  4.  w  Epift.


thofe


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  ENS  IS.  349

thofe  virgins,  who  have  been,  falfely,  accufed  :  For  thefe
things,  however  incredible  they  may  be,  meet  with  credit
among  the  Romans ;  and  their  hiftories  are  full  of  them.
I  am  fenftble  that  the  profeftbrs  of  the  atheiftical  philofophy,
if  that  deferves  the  name  of  philofophy,  who  turn  all  the
manifeftations  of  the  gods,  which  have  happened  either
among  the  Greeks,  or  Barbarians,  into  ridicule,  will,  alfo,
laugh  at  thefe  relations,  and  attribute  them  to  the  134  fictions
of  men ;  as  if  none  of  the  gods  concern  themfelves  in  any  thing
relating  to  mankind :  However,  thofe,  who  do  not  dilcharge
the  gods  from  the  care  of  human  affairs ;  but,  after  many
inquiries,  hold  that  they  are  favourable  to  the  good,  and
averfe  to  the  wicked,  will  not  look,  even,  upon  thefe  ma¬
nifeftations,  as  incredible.  It  is  faid  that,  once,  the  fire
being  extinguiftied  through  fome  careleflnefs  of  Aemilia*
who  had,  then,  the  care  of  it,  and  had  intrufted  it  to  an¬
other  virgin,  who  was,  newly,  chofen  into  their  number,
and,  then,  learning  her  duty;  the  whole  city  was  in  great
diforder,  and  an  inquiry  made  by  the  pontifs,  whether
fome  defilement  of  the  prieftefs  might  not  have  occafioned
the  extinction  of  the  fire.  Upon  this,  they  fay  that  Aemilia,
who  was  innocent,  but  diftraCted  at  what  had  happened,
ftretched  out  her  hands  to  the  altar,  and,  in  the  prefence  of
the  priefts,  and  the  reft  of  the  virgins,  faid,  “  O  Vefta3
cc  tutelary  goddefs  of  this  city,  if,  during  the  fpace  of  near
<c  thirty  years,  I  have  performed  the,  holy  functions  to  thee,
<c  with  holinefs  and  juftice,  and  have  preferved  a  pure  mind,

,  J34*  Ahoi^ovetoiu.  AA^^W,  Hefychius.


u  and


350  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Bookll,

a  and  a  chafte  body,  appear  in  my  defence,  and  aflift  me ;
“  and  do  not  fuller  your  prieflefs  to  die  the  moft  miferable
u  of  all  deaths :  But,  if  I  have  been  guilty  of  any  impiety,
cc  let  my  punifhment  expiate  the  guilt  of  the  city.”  Having
faid  this,  die  tore  off  a  piece  of  the  linen  garment  fhe  had
on,  and  threw  it  upon  the  altar :  After  this  prayer,  they  fay,
that,  from  the  allies,  which  had  been  long  cold,  and  re¬
tained  no  fpark  of  fire,  a  great  flame  Aione  forth  through
the  linen ;  fo  that,  the  city  did  not  ftand  in  need  either  of
expiations,  or  of  a  new  fire.

LXIX.  But,  what  I  am  going  to  relate,  is  ftill  more
wonderful,  and  more  like  a  fable.  They  fay  that  fome-
body,  having,  falfely,  accufed  one  of  the  virgins,  whole
name  was  Tucia;  and  being  unable  to  object  to  her  the
extinction  of  the  fire,  he  fupported  his  accufation  by  falfe
inductions  drawn  from  probable  conjectures,  and  teftimonies :
And  that  the  virgin,  being  ordered  to  make  her  defence,
faid,  only,  this,  that  fhe  would  clear  herfelf  from  the  ac¬
cufation  by  her  aCtions;  and,  having  faid  this,  and  called
upon  the  goddefs  to  be  her  guide,  fhe  proceeded  to  the
Tiber,  the  pontifs  confenting,  and  all  the  citizens  attending
her  :  When  fhe  came  to  the  river,  fhe  was  fo  hardy  as  to
undertake  a  thing,  which,  of  all  others,  is  looked  upon  as
impoflible,  even,  to  a  135  proverb  ;  and,  having  taken  water
out  of  the  river  in  an  empty  fieve,  and  carried  it  as  far  as

*35’  To  arcigoiuia£ou.wcv.  The  Greek  by  x  Plato ;  xotrxna  (pegeiv,  To

-proverb,  here  alluded  to,  is  mentioned  carry  water  in  a  fieve .

x  B.  ii.


the


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  BA  LI  C  ARN  A  $  SE  N  SI  $.  35*

the  forum,  fhe  poured  it  out  at  the  feet  of  the  pontifs.
After  which,  they  fay,  her  accufer,  though  great  inquiry
was  made  after  him,  could  never  be  found,  either  alive,  or
dead.  But,  though  I  have,  yet,  many  things  to  fay  con¬
cerning  the  manifeftations  of  this  goddefs,  I  look  upon'
what  has  been,  already,  faid,  as  fufficient.

LXX.  The  lixth  branch  of  his  religious  inftitutions  was

CD

attributed  to  Thofe  the  Romans  call  Salii,  whom  Numa
himfelf  appointed  out  of  the  patricians,  chufing  twelve
young  men  of  the  moft  graceful  appearance.  The  holy  things,,
belonging  to  their  order,  are  depoiited  on  the  Palatine  hill,,
and  they  themfelves  are  called  Palatini :  For  the  Agonenfes,.
by  fome,  called  the  Collini  Salii ,  the  repolitory  of  whofq
holy  things  is  on  the  Colline  hill,  were  inftituted  after
Numa,  by  Hoftilius,  king  of  the  Romans,  in  purfuance  of
a  vow  he  had  made  in  the  war  againft  the  Sabines.  All
thefe  Salii  are  a  kind  of  dancers,  and  lingers  of  hymns,  in
praife  of  the  gods  of  war.  Their  feftival  falls  out  about  the
time  of  the  Panathenaea,  in  what  they  call  the  month  of
March,  being  performed  at  136  the  expence  of  the  city,  and

u6*  Eofa  Jvfxclt Ajjj.  Here  again,  the  lie  ;  and,,  according  to  this  fignifica-
Latin  tranflators  have  milled  their  tion,  the  word  hpolchw  is  explained
followers:  Portus  has  faid  a  toto  po-  by  Hefychius  :  AruonAn  itgx,  d  £h>-
pulo  publice  celebrantur  •,  and  le  Jay,  <heJWiv  k  zzoaic.  This  feltival  of

que  tout  le  peuple  celebre :  Sylburgius,  the  Ancilia  ftands  in  the  old  Roman
agiturque  publice,  and  M.  ***,  die  fe  calendar  on  the  kalends  of  March.
fait  publiquement .  But  the  misfortune  There  were  two  feftivals  at  Athens
is,  that  none  of  thefe  verfions,  or  rather,  called  y  one  celebrated

neither  of  them,  gives  the  fenfe  of  every  year,  and  the  other,  every  fifth
hpoltht which  fignifies  a  fefii-  year;  thefe^were  called  ptyoiAot  nav*-
val  performed  at  the  expence  of  the  pub-  Avouch.

y  Harpocration  in  llcctciQwcuu.


o


conr-


352  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II,

continues  feveral  clays ;  during  which,  they  proceed  dancing
through  the  city  to  the  forum,  and  the  capitol,  and  to
many  other  private,  and  public  places.  They  wear  em¬
broidered  veils,  on  which,  are  girded  137  brazen  bread- plates,
and,  over  thefe  veils,  are  buttoned  robes,  135  ftriped  with
fcarlet,  and  bordered  with  purple,  which  they  call  1 habeas :
This  garment  is  peculiar  to  the  Romans,  and  a  mark  of
great  honor.  On  their  heads,  they  wear  what  they  call,
Apices.)  which  are  high  caps,  contracted  into  the  fhape  of  a
cone ;  which  the  Greeks  call 139  KvgSccwxi,  High-crowned-
caps.  They  have  each  of  them  a  fword  hanging  at  their
girdle ;  and,  in  their  right  hands,  they  hold  a  fpear,  or  a
wand,  or  feme  fuch  thing  ;  and,  in  their  left,  a  Thracian


J37*  us.  So  it  muft  be

read  with  the  Vatican  manufeript,  and
not  pjlfflew,  as  it  Hands  in  all  the  edi¬
tions.  The  fenfe  of  juflga  will  be  ex¬
plained  by  Livy,  whofe  delcription  of
the  drefs  of  thefe  Salii  is,  word  for  word,
the  fame  with  That  given  by  our
2  author  :  Tunic aeque  pidtae  injigne  de-
dit ,  et  fuper  tunicam  aeneum  peffiori
tegumen.  The  Latin  tranflators  have
rendered  plgai,  in  this  place,  halted
whom  le  Jay  has  followed,  and  called
them ,des  baudriers.  But  it-appears  from
a  Homer  that  thefe  belts  were  different
from  bread  plates  •,  the  lower  part  of
which  laft  was  fattened  by  firings,  that
went  round  the  middle.  Thus  Mene-
laus,  after  he  was  wounded  by  Pan-
darus,  fays  to  his  brother  Agamem¬
non,

z  B.  i.  c.  20.


aAAcc  zragciQ tv

Elgvtrdlo  fast te  sraivsaoAof,  yS’  v7revegQev
Zcti^ca  %<z\ hms KMp,ov  etvfycs.

Upon  which  occafion,  /uil^  is  thus  de-
feribed  by  the  Greek  fcholiaft  •,  %<xa>oj

A gJT/?,  y’v  fawvvlttl  TOV  XtVtUlVU

z<rAeiovo(  acr(p<xAeic(s.  M.  ***  has  tranl-
lated  the  word  with  great  propriety  ;
une  plaque  de  cuivre  fur  la  poi trine.

J38*  $om>co7ra§i/(p«c.  Po»  tus,  and  Syl-
burgius  are  of  opinion  that  this  word
is  fuperfluous  ;  in  which,  I  differ  from
them;  and  think  that,  if  it  was  thrown
out,  we  fhall  have  the  defeription  of
the  toga  praetexta ,  not  of  the  trabea :
The  difference  between  which  I  ima¬
gine  to  have  been  the  fcarlet  ftripes,
fignified  by  ^otvinoTra^pag.

139’  Kvg£x<r/cc,  Tn/ga’  Tavltj  St  cj
Iltgccov  fiamAeis  ] uovov  tyg uvlo.  ITefychius.

a  Iliad.  A.  f.  185.


buckler,


Bookll.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  A  SSENSIS.  353

buckler,  which  refembles  a  target,  fhaped  like  H°a  lozenge,
and  fcalloped  between  the  points;  fuch  as  thofe  are
faid  to  carry  who,  among  the  Greeks,  perform  the  holy
functions  belonging  to  the  Curetes :  And,  in  my  opinion,
the  Salii,  if  the  word  is  tranllated  into  Greek,  are  Curetes ;
whom,  becaufe  they  are  K bpoi,  Young-men ,  we  call,  by  that
name,  from  their  age :  And  the  Romans  call  them  Salii,
from  their  violent  motion  :  For,  what  we  call  E ZotXteaQoii,
and  to  leap ,  and  dance ,  is,  by  them,  called,  Saline :

And,  for  the  fame  reafon,  they  call  all  other  dancers,  Salta -
tores,  becaufe  their  dancing,  alfo,  is  attended  with  frequent
fpringing,  and,  derive  their  name  from  the  Salii :  But,
whether  I  have  given  them  this  appellation  with  propriety,
or  not,  any  one,  who  pleafes,  may  gather  from  their  aCtions  :
For,  in  the  motions  they  perform  in  arms,  keeping  time  to
a  flute,  fometimes,  they  move  all  together,  fometimes  by
turns ;  and,  in  dancing,  ling  certain  hymns,  after  the  man¬
ner  of  their  country.  Now,  this  dance,  and  motion,  per¬
formed  by  armed  men,  with  the  noife  they  make  by  finking
their  bucklers  with  daggers,  if  we  may  draw  any  conjectures
from  ancient  accounts,  were  inftituted  by  the  Curetes.  I
need  not  mention  the  fable,  which  is  related  concerning
them,  flnce  almofi:  every  one  is  acquainted  with  it.

J4°-  Poy.£oeitei.  This  is  from  the  Va-  From  this  epithet  lunatis ,  and  the
tican  manufcript  •,  and  is,  no  doubt,  defcription  of  thefe  bucklers  by  our
the  true  reading.  b Virgil,  in  fpeaking  author,  I  am  apt  to  believe  they  re-
of  Penthifelea,  lays,  fembled  two  crefcents  placed  back  to

D  ucit  Amazomdum  lunatis  agminapeltis.

b  Aen.  B.  i.  jr.  49Q.

Z  z


VOL.  I.


LXXI.


354  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

LXXI.  Among  the  bucklers,  which  both  the  Salii,  and
fome  of  their  fervants  carry  hanging  by  their  141  handles,
being  very  many  in  number,  they  fay,  there  is  one,  that  fell
from  heaven  ;  and  that  it  was  found  in  the  palace  of  Numa,
no  one  having  brought  it  thither ;  nor  any  buckler  of  that
make  having,  ever  before,  been  known  among  the  Italians :
That,  from  both  thefe  reafons,  the  Romans  concluded  this
buckler  was  fent  by  the  gods;  and  that  Numa,  being  de-
firous  to  have  it  carried  through  the  city,  with  refpedt,  by
the  moft  diftinguifhed  young  men  on  holy  days,  and
honoured  with  annual  facrifices ;  but,  at  the  fame  time,
apprehenfive  both  of  the  contrivances  of  his  enemies,  and
of  its  being  ftolen  away,  he  caufed  many  other  bucklers
to  be  made  refembling  That,  which  fell  from  heaven,  one
Mamorius,  an  artificer,  having  undertaken  the  work;  fo
that,  the  fhape  of  the  buckler,  which  was  fent  by  the  gods,
was,  by  the  exa<ft  fimilitude  of  human  workmanfhip,  ren¬
dered  indifcernible,  and  difficult  to  be  diftinguifhed  by  thofe,
who  might  have  a  defign,  fraudently,  to  pofiefs  themfelves
of  it.  That  this  dance,  after  the  manner  of  the  Curetes,


J41*  Hflyjutvots  &7T0  KOiVOVUV.  All  the
four  translators  agree  in  rendering
xsfvcvfjj  bacilli ,  conh,  baguettes,  pi?  che
whereas,  the  word  fignifies  the  handles
of  a  fhield.  And,  here  again,  I  fhall
fupport  my  translation  by  the  autho¬
rity  of  c  Homer,  who  makes  Hedlor
give  this  account  of  Neftor’s  Shield,


And  thus  the  word  y.avovsg  is  explained
by  the  Greek  fcholiafl  ;  p t&QSm  dig
iK^cclav  rag  uciuSug.  To  thefe  handles
was  faftened  a  thong,  by  which  they
hung  up  their  Shields  in  their  tents,
or  Slung  them  crofs  their  Shoulders  in
a  march  ;  which  is  confirmed  by  He-
fychius,  who  explains  k xvong  in  this
manner,  cel  Tv\g  oicntJog  afy'  uv  o

Tthaum  (fynlo.


Aaicitu  Nsroff*!'',  tj;?  *vv  *X£o;  a^aevo v  htet,

XPVfeiW  KANONAS  t i  *«»  etvlw.

f  Iliad,  0.  f.  193.


was


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  355

was  cuftomary  among  the  Romans,  and  held  in  great  honor
by  them,  I  gather  from  many  things ;  but,  chiefly,  from
what  is  pra&ifed  by  them  in  their  proceflions  both  in  the
circus,  and  in  the  theatres :  For,  in  all  of  them,  young  men,
clad  in  handfom  veils,  with  helmets,  fwords,  and  142  bucklers,
march  in  time :  Thefe  are  the  leaders  of  the  proceffion,
and  are  called,  by  them,  from  a  game,  of  which  the  Lydians
feem  to  be  the  inventors,  Ludiones ,  reprefen  ting,  in  my
opinion,  the  Salii:  Since  they  do  not  imitate  the  Curetes,
in  any  thing,  as  the  Salii  do,  either  in  their  hymns,  or  dances :
And  it  was  neceflary  that  the  Salii  fliould  be  free  men,  and
natives  of  the  country,  and  that  both  their  fathers,  and
mothers  fhould  be  living;  whereas  the  others  are  of  any  condi¬
tion.  But  to  what  purpofe  fhould  I  fay  any  more  of  them  ?

LXXII.  The  feventh  part  of  his  religious  inftitutions  was
allotted  to  the  college  of  the  Feci  ales  :  Thefe  may  be  called,
in  Greek,  Eignyohmi-,  Judges  in  matters  relating  to  peace  :
They  are  chofen  out  of  the  beft  families,  and  exercife  their
holy  office  during  life ;  Numa  being  the  firft,  who  infti-
tuted  this  holy  magiftracy,  alfo,  among  the  Romans :  But,
whether  he  took  the  example  from  thofe,  called  the
143  Aequicoli,  according  to  the  opinion  of  fome  ;  or  from

J42,  g%ov7??.  M.  ***  has,  in  des  Palmes  a  la  main.  Had  he  call  his

his  preface,  defervedly,  cenfured  le  eye  on  the  Greek  text,  which,  I  dare
Jay  for  copying  even  the  faults  of  the  fay,  he  never  did,  he  could  not,  pofll-
printer,  who  printed  the  tranllation  of  bly,  have  fallen  into  this  ridiculous
Portus,  in  which  it  Hands  Palmas  ge-  error.

jiantes ,  inftead  of  Parmas  :  This  error  H3*  Ah uk\uv.  This  corre&ion  is
le  Jay  has,  fervilely,  copied,  and  faid,  owing  to  d  Cluver,  who  has,  plainly,

d  Ital.  Ant.  B.  ii.  c.  16.

Z  Z  2


the


356  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

the  city  of  the  Ardeates,  as  Gellius  writes,  I  cannot  fay  :
It  is  fufficient  for  me  to  give  notice  that,  before  Numa’s
reign,  the  college  of  the  Feciales  was  not  in  being  among
the  Romans.  It  was  inftituted  by  Numa,  when  he  was
upon  the  point  of  making  war  with  the  Fidenates,  who  had
made  incurfions  into,  and  ravaged,  his  territories,  in  order
to  try,  whether  they  would  come  to  an  accommodation
with  him  without  entering  into  a  war,  which,  being  under
a  necefiity,  they  fubmitted  to.  But,  fince  the  college  of
the  Feciales  is  not  in  ufe  among  the  Greeks,  it  is  incumbent
on  me  to  relate  how  many,  and  how  great  affairs  fall  under
its  jurifdidtion ;  to  the  end  that  thofe,  who  are  unacquainted
with  the  piety  of  the  men  of  thofe  times,  may  not  be  fur-
prifed  to  find  that  the  event  of  all  their  wars,  was  moft
fuccefsful :  For  it  will  appear  that  the  fprings,  and  motives
of  them  all  were  moft  pious ;  and,  for  this  reafon,  chiefly,
the  gods  were  propitious  to  them  in  all  the  dangers,  that  at¬
tended  them.  The  multiplicity  of  the  affairs,  that  fall  within
the  province  of  thefe  Feciales,  makes  it  no  eafy  matter  to
enumerate  them  all;  but  the  fubftance  of  them  is,  as  follows :
To  take  care  that  the  Romans  do  not  enter  into  an  unjuft
war  againft  any  confederate  city :  And,  if  others  begin  the
violation  of  their  treaties,  to  go  as  embafladors,  and  demand
juft  ice,  in  the  fir  ft  place ;  but,  if  they  refufe  to  comply  with

ihewn  that  thefe  were  the  people,  called  cius,  derives  their  origin  from  the
by  the  Roman  authors,  Aequicoli.  Aequicoli  •,  Jus  ab  antiqua  gente  Aequi-
They  lived  on  both  fides  of  the  Anio.  colis,  quod  nunc  Feciales  habent ,  defcrip -
And e  Livy,  though  he  afcribes  the  in-  fit ,  quo  res  repetuntur.
ftitution  of  the  Feciales  to  Ancus  Mar-

f  B.  i,  c.  32.


their


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  357

their  demands,  then,  to  give  their  fan&ion  to  the  war.  In
like  manner,  if  any,  in  alliance  with  the  Romans,  complain
of  having  been  injured  by  them,  and  demand  jufiice,  thefe
men  are  to  inquire  whether  they  have  fuffered  any  thing  in
violation  of  their  alliance  ;  and,  if  they  find  their  complaints
well  grounded,  to  feize  the  guilty,  and  deliver  them  up  to
the  fufferers.  They  are,  alfo,  to  take  cognizance  of  the
crimes  committed  againft  embaftadors ;  to  take  care  that
treaties  are,  religioufly,  obferved;  to  make  peace;  and,  if
they  find  it  entered  into,  contrary  to  the  holy  laws,  to  fet  it
afide ;  to  inquire  into,  and  expiate,  the  tranfgreffions  of  the
generals,  as  far  as  they  relate  to  oaths,  and  treaties,  con¬
cerning  which  I  fhall  fpeak  in  a  proper  place.  As  to  the
fun&ion  they  perform  in  quality  of  heralds,  when  they  go
to  demand  jufiice  of  any  city  thought  to  have  injured  the
Romans  (for  thefe  things,  alfo,  are  worthy  of  our  knowledge,
being  tranfa&ed  with  great  regard  both  to  religion,  and
jufiice)  I  have  received  the  following  account.  One  of  thefe
Feciales,  chofen  by  his  collegues,  being  clad  in  his  robes,
and  bearing  the  enfigns  of  his  holy  dignity  to  diftinguifh
him  from  others,  proceeds  towards  the  city,  whofe  inhabi¬
tants  have  done  the  injury ;  and,  ftanding  on  the  confines,
calls  upon  Jupiter,  and  the  reft  of  the  gods  to  witnefs  that
he  is  come  to  144  demand  jufiice  on  the  behalf  of  the  Ro-

M4*  Or«  Jmcu  aflw.  The  form  of  are  all  fet  forth  by  fLivy  in  the  very
demanding  juftice  by  the  Fecialis ,  to-  words,  in  which  they  were  fpoken  by
gether  with  his  proteftation,  in  cafe  of  him  :  Audi,  Jupiter ,  inquir,  audit  e*
refufal,  and  the  declaration  of  war,  fines  ^  (cujufque  gentis  funt,  nominat)

fB.i.  c.  32.


mans :


353  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.


mans :  A  fter  which,  he  takes  an  oath  that  he  is  going  to  a
city,  that  has  done  an  injury;  and,  having  made  the  moft
dreadful  imprecations  againft  himfelf,  and  his  country,  if,
what  he  averred  was  not  true ;  he  then,  enters  their  con¬
fines  :  Afterwards,  he  calls  to  witnefs  the  firft  man  he  meets,
whether  he  was  an  inhabitant  of  the  country,  or  of  the  city ;
and,  having  repeated  the  fame  imprecations,  he  advances
towards  the  latter ;  and,  before  he  enters  it,  he  calls  the
keeper  of  the  gate,  or  the  firft  perfon  he  finds  there  to
witnefs,  in  the  fame  manner :  Upon  which,  he  proceeds  to
the  market- place;  and,  being  there,  he  informs  the  magiftrates
of  the  reafons  of  his  coming,  adding,  every  where,  the  fame
oaths,  and  imprecations.  If  they  are  difpofed  to  make  fatif-
fadtion  by  delivering  up  the  guilty,  he  leads  them  away,  and
returns  as  from  friends,  he  himfelf  being  now  their  friend  :
If  they  defire  time  to  deliberate,  he  allows  them  ten  days,


audiat  fas.  Ego  fum  publicus  nunctus
populi  Romani ,  jufte  pieque  legatus  venio ,
' verbifque  meis  jides  fit.  Peragit  deinde
poftulata.  Inde  Jovem  teftem  facit :
Si  ego  injufte  impieque  illos  homines ,  il~
lafque  res  dedier  nuncio  populi  Romani
mihi  expofco ,  turn  patriae  compotem  me
nunquam  firis  ejfe.  Then,  if  juftice  is
refufed,  after  three  and  thirty  days,  he
makes  this  proteftation ;  Audi,  Jupiter,
et  Eu  Juno  \  Quinine,  Diique  omnes  cae-
lejles,  Vofque  terrejlres,  Vofque  infcrni ,
audite.  Ego  vos  t  eft  or,  populum  ilium
(quicunque  eft,  nominat)  injuftum  ejfe ,
neque  jus  perfolvere.  Sed  de  iftis  rebus  in
patrid  majores  natu  confulemus ,  quo  paSto
jus  noftrum  adipifcamur.  After  that,  if
the  Roman  people  refoived  upon  the


war,  and  the  fenate  gave  their  confent,
the  Fecialis  returned  to  the  frontiers  of
the  people,  againft  whom  the  war  had
been  decreed ;  and,  carrying  a  fpear  in
his  hand  pointed  with  iron,  or  ftained
with  blood,  and  burnt  at  the  head,  he
declared  war  againft  them  in  the  fol¬
lowing  words,  after  reciting  the  refo-
lution  of  the  people,  and  fenate,  Ob
earn  rem  ego  populufque  Romanus  populo
hominibufque  (naming  them)  helium  in-
dico  facioque.  Having  faid  this,  he
threw'  the  fpear  within  their  frontiers.
M.***,  very  well,  oblerves,  that  Livy,
in  computing  thirty  three  days,  in¬
cludes  the  three  days  employed  in  de¬
manding  juftice,  and  declaring  war.


after


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C A RN  A  S  S  E N S  I  S.  359

after  which  he  returns,  and  waits  till  they  have  alked  this
three  times  :  But,  after  the  expiration  of  the  thirty  days,  if
the  city  ftill  perfifts  in  refuling  to  do  him  juftice,  he  call?
both  the  celeftial  and  infernal  gods  to  witnefs,  and  goes  away,
faying  no  more  than  this,  that  the  Romans  will  deliberate
concerning  them  at  their  leifure.  After  his  return  to  Rome,
he,  together  with  the  reft  of  the  Feciales,  make  their  report
to  the  fenate,  that  they  had  done  every  thing,  that  was
ordained  by  the  holy  laws  ;  and,  if  they  thought  proper  to
refolve  upon  a  war,  there  was  no  obftacle  on  the  part  of
the  gods.  But,  if  any  of  thefe  things  were  omitted,  neither
the  fenate,  nor  the  people  had  the  power  of  refolving  upon
a  war.  This,  therefore,  is  the  account  we  have  received  con¬
cerning  the  Feciales.

LXXIII.  The  laft  branch  of  the  religious  inftitutions  of
Numa  was  That,  which  related  to  thofe,  who  are  inverted
with  the  chief  pontificate,  and  greateft  power,  among  the
Romans.  Thefe,  from  one  of  their  duties,  which  concerns
the  reparation  of  the  wooden  bridge,  are,  in  their  language,
called  145  Pontifices  :  Affairs  of  the  greateft  moment  are  fub-
je<ft  to  their  jurifdi&ion.  For  they  are  the  judges  in  all

j45*  novice.  g  Varro  gives  the  pontifices  at  the  time  of  their  inftitu-
fame  etymology  of  this  word  with  our  tion;  becaufe,  the  pons  Sublicius ,  from
author ;  and  their  authority  ought  to  the  repairing  of  which  they  derived
have  fcreened  this  etymology  from  the  their  name,  was  built  by  Ancus  Mar-
ridicule,  with  which  Plutarch  treats  it  *,  cius,  the  fecond  king  after  Numa, as  we
though,  at  the  fame  time,  he  owns  find  by  h  our  author,  and  1  Livy.  So
that  it  was  received  by  the  generality  that,  after  this  bridge  was  built,  and
of  the  Romans.  However,  this  is  the  care  of  it  became  one  of  their
certain,  that  they  could  not  be  called  functions,  they  were  called  Pontifices.

A

6  De  Ling.  Lat.  B.  iv.  hB.  iii.  c.  45.  1  B.  i.  c.  3  j.

religious


36o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

religious  caufes,  wherein  private  men,  magiftrates,  or  the
minifters  of  the  gods  are  concerned:  They  enact  laws
relating  to  religion,  where  there  are  none  either  written,  or
fupported  by  cuftom  ;  and,  where  there  are  laws,  and
cuftoms,  they  adopt  fuch,  as  they  think  mod  proper  to  be
obferved  :  They  inquire  into  the  conduct  ol  all  magiftrates,
to  whom  the  performance  of  any  facrifices,  or  any  fervice  of
the  gods  is  committed  ;  and,  alio,  into  That  of  all  the
priefts :  They  take  care  that  their  fervants,  and  minifters,
whom  they  make  ufe  of  in  religious  matters,  do  nothing  in
violation  of  the  holy  laws :  They  are  the  teachers,  and  in¬
terpreters  of  every  thing  relating  to  the  worfhip  of  the  gods,
and  genius’s,  to  private  perfons,  who  are  unacquainted  with
it ;  and,  if  they  find  that  any  difobey  their  orders,  they
inflidt  a  punifhment  on  them  proportionable  to  every  of¬
fence  :  They  are  alfo,  exempt  from  all  judgement,  and
punifhment ;  neither  are  they  accountable  to  the  fenate,  or  the
people.  Concerning,  therefore,  thefe  priefts,  if  any  one  will
call  them  Is^o^JWa'# Aac,  the  'Teachers ,  Isjovoyac,  the  Minifters ,
legoQvhaxoiCj  the  Guardians ,  or,  as  we  call  them,  I e^o(pxvja;y
the  interpreters  of  holy  things ,  he  will  not  deviate  from  the
truth.  When  any  one  of  them  dies,  another  is  appointed
in  his  place  ;  who  is  146  not  eledfed  by  the  people,  but  by

Ovx  « no  ra  Jlj^a  diftOetf,  By  for  the  third  time,  and  Lucius  Aure-
the  Domitian  law,  the  Pontifices  were  lius  being  confuls.  This  k  Velleius
chofen  by  the  people.  This  law  was  Paterculus,  pofitively,  aliens  •,  quo
brought  in  by  Cn.  Domitius,  then.  Anno  Cneius  Do  mi  tins,  tribunus  plebis ,
one  ol  the  tribunes,  and  palled  in  the  legem  tulit ,  ut  facerdotes ,  quos  antea
65  ift  year  of  the  city,  Caius  Marius  collegae  fufficiebant ,  populus  crearet.

kB.  ii.  c.  1 2.


the


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  3<5r
the  pontifices  themfelves,  who  chufe  the  perfon  they  think
the  beft  qualified  among  their  fellow-citizens.  Being,  thus,
approved  of,  he  receives  the  priefthood,  provided  the  au¬
guries  are  favourable  to  him.  Thefe,  not  to  {peak  of  others
lefs  confiderable,  are  the  greateft,  and  the  moft  remarkable
laws,  enabled  by  Numa  concerning  divine  worffiip,  and
divided  by  him  according  to  the  different  branches  of  his
religious  inftitutions,  by  which  the  city  encreafed  in  piety.

LXXIV.  Among  the  many  regulations  of  Numa,  tending
to  infpire  frugality,  and  temperance,  and  to  eftabliffi  a  love
of  juftice,  the  guardian  of  concord,  fome  are  comprehended
in  written  laws,  others  unwritten,  and  preferved  by  cuftom,
and  long  ulage :  To  treat  of  all  which  would  be  a  work  of
great  difficulty  :  I  ffiall,  therefore,  mention  only  two  of
them,  which  have  been  the  moft  extolled,  and  which  will
be  fufficient  for  any  one  to  form  a  judgement  of  the  reft.
The  law,  that  appoints  boundaries  to  every  man’s  poffeffion,
renders  the  people  content  with  their  own,  and  hinders
them  from  coveting  what  belongs  to  others :  For,  having
ordered  every  one  to  circumfcribe  his  own  poffeffion,  and
to  place  ftones  on  the  bounds,  he  confecrated  thefe  ftones  to
Jupiter  Terminalis ;  and  appointed  all  to  aflemble  at  the

This  law  was  enacted  about  ninety  four  more  probable  than  that  he  fhould  be
years  before  our  author  publifhed  his  uninformed  in  any  point  of  the  Roman
hiftory  •,  and  how  he  came  to  be  un-  hiftory,  with  which  any  of  us  are  ac-
acquainted  with  it  I  cannot  underftand;  quainted.  What  could  poftefs  le  Jay
unlefs  it  may  be  faid  that,  in  fpeaking  to  tranflate  fo  plain  a  paftage,  in  this
of  the  laws  inftituted  by  Numa,  he  abfurd  manner,  onlechoifit ,  non  parmi
thought  it  fufficient  to  treat  of  them  in  le  peuple ,  mais  parmi  ce  qiCily  a  de  plus
the  form,  in  which  they  were  enabled  confiderables  citoyens  ?
by  him :  This,  to  me,  feems  much  .  •  ■

•  Vol.  L  A  a  a  place*


362  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

place,  every  year,  on  a  certain  day,  and  offer  facrifices  to
them ;  inftituting  a  folemn  feftival,  alfo,  in  honor  to  the
gods,  who  prefide  over  thefe  boundaries :  This  feftival  the
Romans  call  147  I’erminalia  from  T £gpoitec>  Bounds ,  and  the
bounds  themfelves,  by  the  change  of  one  letter,  in  imitation
of  our  language,  they  call  Termines .  He,  alfo,  enadted,  that,
if  any  perfon  demolifhed,  or  difplaced  thefe  bound-ftones*
he  fhould  be  looked  upon  as  devoted  to  this  god,  to  the
end  that  any  one  might  kill  him,  as  a  facrilegious  perfon,
with  impunity,  and  without  being  defiled  with  guilt.  This
law  did,  not  only,  take  place  in  private  pofleflions,  but,  even,
in  Thofe  belonging  to  the  public :  For  he  circumfcribed
thefe,  alfo,  with  boundaries,  to  the  intent  that  the  Terminal
gods  might  feparate  the  lands  of  the  Romans  from  Thofe
of  their  neighbours,  and  the  public  lands  from  fuch,  as  be¬
longed  to  private  perfons.  This  cuftom  is  obferved  by  the
Romans  to  this  day,  as  a  monument  of  part  ages,  and  a
point  of  religion :  For  they  look  upon  thefe  bound-ftones
as  gods,  and  facrifice  to  them  ftill,  offering  up  no  kind  of


ht  T(^y.ivx\ia.  This  feftival  was
celebrated  by  the  Romans  on  the
feventh  of  the  kalends  of  March,  the
twenty  third  of  February.  From  the
defcription,  given  by  k  Ovid  of  this
feftival,  it  appears  that  this  Pagan  di¬
vinity  was,  generally,  nothing  elfe  but
a  ftone,  or  a  poft,  placed  on  the  boun¬
daries,

Termine,y?w  lapis, five esdefojfus  in  agro
Stipes, abaniiquis  fie  quoque  nomen  habes.


Thefe  ancients  were  the  Greeks,  among
whom  T i^fxova,  as  our  author  fays,
fignifies  the  fame  thing  with  termen ,
which  was,  vifibly,  derived  from  it :
For  we  find  by  1  Varro,  that  the  old
Romans  ufed  the  word  termen  inftead
of  terminus  ;  Apud  Accium ,  non  termi¬
nus  dicitur ,  fed  termen.  But,  to  pre-
ferve  the  analogy  between  the  two
languages, here  alluded  to,  termen  muft
be  of  the  mafculine  gender.


k  Faftorum,  B.  ii.  f.  641.  j  De  Ling.  Lat.  B.  iv.  c.  4.


animal


Book  II.  DIONYSIUS  H A L I C A R N A S S E'N SIS.  363

animal  (for  it  is  irreligious  to  ftain  thefe  ftones  with  blood)
but  cakes  made  with  flour,  and  other  firft-fruits  of  the  earth :
But  they  ought  ftill  to  obferve  the  motive  itfelf,  in  confl-
deration  of  which  it  was  ordered  that  thefe  bound-ftones
fhould  be  called  gods,  and  content  themfelves  with  their
own  pofleflions,  without  invading  Thofe  of  others,  either  by
violence,  or  fraud:  Whereas,  now,  there  are  fome,  who
without  confulting  their  duty,  or  the  example  of  their  an-
ceftors,  inftead  of  feparating  their  own  pofleflions  from
Thofe  of  others,  make  their  deflre  of  every  thing,  not  the
law,  the  boundary  of  their  pofleflions ;  which  reflects  great
difhonor  on  them.  But  we  leave  thefe  conflderations  to
others.

LXXV.  By  thefe  laws,  Numa  formed  the  city  to  fruga¬
lity,  and  temperence:  Juftice  in  contracts  he  introduced  by
inventing  a  regulation,  which  was  unknown  to  all,  who
inftituted  the  moll  celebrated  commonwealths :  For,  ob-
ferving  that  contra&s,  made  in  public,  and  before  witnefles,
are,  from  a  regard  to  the  perfons  prefent,  generally,  per¬
formed,  and  that  few  are  guilty  of  any  violation  of  them ;
but  that  thofe,  which  are  tranfa&ed  without  witnefles,  being
many  more  in  number  than  the  former,  reft  on  no  other
fecurity  than  the  faith  of  the  contradlors,  he  thought  it
incumbent  on  him  to  make  this  faith  the  chief  object  of  his
care,  and  to  render  it  worthy  of  divine  worfhip.  For  he
found  that  Juftitia,  Themis,  Nemefls,  and  Thofe  the  Greeks
call  Erinnyes,  with  others  of  that  kind,  had  been,  fufliciently,
honoured  by  the  ancients,  in  being  eredted  into  divinities,

A  a  a  2  and


364  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  II.

and  confecrated;  but  that  Faith,  than  which  there  is  no
greater,  nor  more  facred  virtue  among  men,  was  not  yet
worfhiped,  either  by  ftates  in  their  public  capacity,  or  by
private  perfons  :  Having  confidered  thefe  things,  he,  fir  ft
of  all  men,  eredled  a  temple  to  public  Faith,  and  inftituted
facrifices  to  be  performed  to  her,  at  the  public  expence,  in
the  fame  manner  as  to  the  reft  of  the  gods.  By  this  means,
the  public  faith  of  the  city,  which  was  preferved  inviolate
to  all  men,  could  not  fail,  in  time,  to  communicate  the
fame  fidelity  to  the  behaviour  of  private  men :  And,  indeed,
fo  facred,  and  inviolable  a  thing  was  faith  in  their  eftima-
tion,  that  the  greateft  oath  a  man  could  take  was,  By  his
own  faith;  and  more  depended  upon  than  any  other  tefti-
mony:  And,  if  there  happened  any  conteft  between  two
perfons  concerning  the  performance  of  a  contract  entered
into  without  witnefles,  the  faith  of  either  of  the  parties  was
fufficient  to  decide  the  controverfy,  and  not  fuffer  it  to
proceed  any  further:  And  the  magiftrates,  and  courts  of
juftice  founded  their  decrees,  in  moft  caufes,  on  the  oaths
of  the  parties  attefting  by  their  faith.  Thefe  regulations,
then  invented  by  Numa,  which  perfuaded  to  temperance,
and  inforced  juftice,  rendered  the  city  of  Rome  more  orderly
than  the  beft  regulated  family.

LXXVI.  Thofe  I  am  going  to  relate,  rendered  it  both
careful  to  provide  itfelf  with  neceflaries,  and  induftrious  to
acquire  the  advantages,  that  flow  from  labor :  For  this
perfon,  confidering  that  a  city,  formed  to  the  love  of  juftice,
and  to  habitual  temperance,  ought  to  abound  with  all  things

neceflary


BookIL  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  365

neceflary  to  the  fupport  of  life,  divided  the  whole  country
into  what  they  call  Pagi,  Villages  ;  and  over  each  of  thefe
villages  he  appointed  a  magiftrate,  whofe  duty  it  was  to  in-
fpedt,  and  vifitthe  lands  lying  in  his  own  divilion  :  Thefe,
going  their  rounds  frequently,  took  an  account  in  writing
of  the  lands,  that  were  well,  and  ill  cultivated,  and  laid  it
before  the  king ;  who  repaid  the  diligence  of  the  careful
hufbandmen  with  commendations,  and  favor ;  and,  by
reprimanding,  and  fining  the  flothful,  excited  them  to  cul¬
tivate  their  lands  with  greater  attention :  By  which  means,
the  people,  being  freed  from  wars,  and  exempt  from  any
attendance  on  the  affairs  of  the  city  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,
difgraced,  and  punifhed,  for  idlenefs,  and  floth,  became  all
laborious  hufbandmen,  and  looked  upon  the  riches,  which  the
earth  yields,  and  which,  of  all  others,  are  the  moft  innocent,
as  more  agreeable  than  the  precarious  affluence  of  a  military
life :  And,  by  the  fame  means,  Numa  became  the  darling
of  his  fubjedls,  the  example  of  his  neighbours,  and  the  theme
of  pofterity.  It  was  owing  to  him,  that,  neither  civil  dif-
fenfion  broke  the  harmony  of  the  city,  nor  foreign  war
interrupted  the  obfervance  of  thefe  wife,  and  admirable
inftitutions :  For  their  neighbours  were  fo  far  from  looking
upon  the  peaceful  tranquillity  of  the  Romans,  as  an  oppor¬
tunity  of  invading  them,  that,  if,  at  any  time,  they  were
at  war  with  one  another,  they  chofe  the  Romans  for  me¬
diators,  and  were  willing  to  put  an  end  to  their  contefts
under  the  arbitration  of  Numa.  I  fhould,  therefore,  make
no  difficulty  in  placing  this  perfon  among  the  firft  of  thofe,

who


Book  IL


366  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

who  arc  the  moft  celebrated  for  their  happinefs :  For  he
was  of  a  royal  family,  had  a  majeftic  afpedt,  and  cultivated
that  kind  of  literature,  which,  inftead  of  ufelefs  eloquence,
formed  his  mind  to  piety,  and  every  other  virtue :  When  he
was  young,  he  was  thought  worthy  to  be  king  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  who,  upon  the  reputation  of  his  virtue,  invited  him
to  that  dignity,  which  he  exercifed,  during  his  whole  life,
over  an  obedient  people.  He  lived  to  be  very  old,  without
any  infirmity,  or  misfortune,  and  died  the  eafieft  of  all
deaths,  being  worne  out  with  age  ;  the  genius,  who  had
been  allotted  to  him  from  his  birth,  having  continued  the
fame  favor  to  him  till  he  was  no  more.  He  lived  above
fourfcore  years,  and  reigned  forty  three ;  leaving  behind
him,  according  to  moft  hiftorians,  four  Tons,  and  one  daugh¬
ter,  whofe  pofterity  remain  to  this  day  ;  but,  according  to
Cneius  Gellius,  only  one  daughter,  who  was  the  mother  of
Ancus  Marcius,  the  third  king  of  the  Romans  after  him.
His  death  was,  exceedingly,  lamented  by  the  city,  who  made
a  moft  fplendid  148  funeral  for  him :  He  lies  buried  upon

*48*  t etQcif,  Here  again,  thetranf-  and  contents  himfelf  with  the  monu-
lators  are  ranged  in  their  ufual  order  :  ment,  infigni  monumento  decoravit  ci-
Portus  was  refolved.to  give  the  fenfe  vitas  ;  and  M.  ***  has  copied  his
of  this  word  •,  and,  for  that  reafon,  he  modefty  in  copying  his  words,  on  lui
has  rendered  it  both  a  funeral,  and  a  erigea  un  fuperbe  tombeau.  Now,  I  can-
monument,  funere  fplendidififimo ,  et  mo-  not  agree  with  Sylburgius  (for  his
numento  maytime  infigni  decoravit  \  le  tranflator  is  not  concerned  in  the  text)
Jay  fcorned  to  do  lefs  honor  to  Numa,  that  rctQcti  fignifies  a  monument ,  for
than  his  guide,  and  has  faid,  word  for  which  the  Greek  word  is  T*cf>or.  This
word,  on  lui  fit  de  fuperbes  funerailles ,  will  be  feen  by  m  Julius  Pollux,  a
:et  Von  drefij'a  a  fa  memoire  un  magnifique  .writer  of  great  authority,  and  of  great
tombeau .  Sylburgius  is  more  modeft,  ufe,  who  gives  us  every  thing  relating

K1  B.  viii.  c.  14.


the


Book II.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSEN SIS.  367

the  Janiculum,  on  the  other  fide  of  the  Tiber.  And  this
is  the  account  we  have  received  concerning  Nurna  Pom-

to  funeral  honors  in  their  proper  order,  that  r fhould  fignify  a  monument,.

tvloiQioiy  fjLVYifxot,,  rcctpof,  he  would  have  faid  x«v7#/,  inftead  of
Xu>/ucc,  ryAtj.  Here,  Ta(p«  precedes  T»(pog,  which  can  relate  only  to  the

and  is,  plainly,  diftinguifhed  from  it.  body  of  Numa.

Befides,  if  our  author  had  defigned


The  end  of  the  fecond  book.


THE


.  ;  r  -  ‘  -  ,'V

*

■

:  •  '  ; ;  ?i|

.


■  ’  •  *'  ••  .  !  ■  ■ :

5,  ^  1  •  '  *  «F”  f w T1


.  i,

-  .  ■  •  •  f  -»


.


r

4.’


.  .  V  .  ,


.


'  {


.  in


A


F  R  A  G  M  E  N  T


Out  of  the


SIXTH- BOOK


m


.!£({}


(10  .  .1


am


O  F


,f..;


n  7(i


.((>


-It


T  B  I  U


!


Containing  a  DifTertation  upon  Government  in  general,  particularly
applied  to  that  of  the  Romans,  together  with  a  Defcription  of  the
feveral  Powers  of  the  Consuls,  Senate,  and  People  of  Rome,


IK  ill


Translated  from  the  Greek  with  Notes.

•*  >  ,  i  i  *  *  .  f  t

To  which  is  prefixed  a  Preface,  wherein  the  Syftem  of  Polybius  is
applied  to  the  Government  of  'England:  And,  to  the  above-mentio¬
ned  Fragment  concerning  the  Powers  of  the  Senate,  is  annexed  a
DifTertation  upon  the  Confutation  of  it.

It  a  demum  lib  cram  Civitatem  fore -—ft  fua  quifque  jura  or  do,  fuam  Majejlatem
teneat .  Liv.  B.  iii.  c.  63.


Affietv  mi  0Lg%z<r6cu*


Vol.  I.


B  b  b


THE


A


•  /


THE  tranilation  of  this  fragment  of  Polybius  with  the  preface,
and  the  differtation  on  the  Roman  fenate  annexed  to  the  tranila¬
tion,  was  publilhed  by  me  in  1743  ;  which  I  mention  to  the  end  that,
if  the  reader  finds  the  fame  quotations,  and  the  fame  confequences
drawn  from  them  in  Dr  .Middleton's  Treat  if e  on  the  Roman  Senate ,  and
Dr.  Chapman  s  Ejfay ,  both  on  the  fame  fubjedl,  and  both  publilhed
fever^l  years  after  mine,  he  may  acquit  me  of  plagiarifm.  I  had,  then,
my  reafons  for  not  putting  my 'name  to  the  book,  though  my  book-
feller  thought  fit  to  affix  my  name,  or  fomething  like  my  name,  to
what  he  called  a  fecond  edition,  without  my  knowledge,  and  to  add
to  it  a  moll  impertinent  title  page  of  his  own.  '

I  have  inferted  this  little  book,  which  has  been  many  years  out  of
print,  in  my  tranilation  of  Dionyfius,  becaufe  I  look  upon  it  that  the
defcription  of  the  feveral  powers  of  the  confuls,  fenate,  and  people  of
Rome,  given  by  fo  great  an  author  as  Polybius,  will  ve.ry  much  tend  to
explain,  and  confirm  many  p adages  in  this  hiltory,

=  ' .  ~  } r  ' i  ■  . '  ■  .  •*  1  -  .


;o  ruv/o-  )df  *r

(j  '


roitt


3’.  *-  A  i\

■)  .)  A


if


.  uri:


f  T  V  t  f  *  1

all  I


a  r  rv

'-J  A  t


THE


PREFACE.

'  '  A  '  “  4  ~  C  *  \  *  ••  i  ■'  '  A  s  j  ■  '•  jAA  .  '»

^  Ever al  confederations  led  me  to  lay  before  the  public  a  tranfl
lation  of  the  following  fragment  of  Polybius  :  ‘The  prin¬
cipal  of  which  was ,  the  very  great  fatisfaEUon  I  received ,  as
an  Englifman^  in  fending  the  whole  reafonmg  ofe  that  excellent
author  as  applicable  to  our  own  conftitution ,  as  to  That ,  for
which  it  was  hit  ended.

The  great  advantages  flowing  from  the  happy  temper ,  a?id
equal  mixture  of  the  three  orders ,  for  which  he  fo  juflly  cele¬
brates  the  Roman  government ,  are  all  to  be  found  in  our  own  ;
with  this  circumflance  in  our  favor ,  that  our  ftuation ,  as  an
if  and ^  forbids  us  either  to  fear ,  or  aim  at ,  conquefs  \  by  the
gaining ,  as  well  as  the  fuffermg  of  which ,  that  political  har¬
mony  is  in  danger  of  being  deferoyed.  By  the  fpoils  of  conquered

*  •  •.

nations  Ccefar  was  enabled  to  corrupt  the  Roman  people ,  and
bribe  them  to  be  the  infruments  of  their  own  rum ,  by  ereSlmg
an  abfolute  nwiarchy  in  his  favor ;  which ,  growing ,  afterwards ,
wanton  for  want  of  a  check  from  the  other  two  orders ,  and
weak  for  want  of  their  ajflflance ,  became ,  at  lafl ,  ^  prey  to

a  bar -


PREFACE.


a  barbarous  invader ,  often  vanquijhed ,  and  always  defpifed,
while  the  ballance  of  all  three  was  preferved \

If  my  countrymen  will  attentively  confider  every  argument,
made  ufe  of  by  Polybius,  to  few  the  excellence  of  a  goverri-
ment  founded  on  unequal  mixture  of  monarchy,  arifocracy ,
and  democracy,  they  will,  1  dare  fay,  have  the  fame  fatisfaSHon
I  enjoyed ;  that  is,  they  will find  the  fyflem  of  policy,  laid  down
by  that  great  man,  in  the  following  differtation  on  the  conflitu -
tion  of  the  Romans,  to  be  a-  defcription  of  the  advantages  enjoyed
under  'That  of  England.

I  woidd  not  be  thought  to  fay  this  in  flattery  to  the  govern -
ment,  imder  which  I  was  born,  and  hope  to  pafls  the  re??iain~
der  of  my  life ;  not  only  tty  own  re'afon,  but,  what  is  of  much
greater  weight,  even  to  myfelf. \  the  authority  of  the  greatefl
men  of  antiquity,  convinces  me  that  a  government  mixed  like  Thofe
of  Sparta ,  Rome,  anil  England,  is,  of  all  others,  the  eafief,
thefecuref,  and  the  happief  to  live -under.  1  If'anyofus  are
infenfihle  of  the  blefjngswe  enjoy,  Imujl  think  it  owing  to  our  being
accufomed  to  them.  Cuflom,  I  know,  can  both  deaden  the  jenfe
of  the  greatejl  misfortunes,  and  pall  the  enjoyment  of  the  greatejl
blefjngsy  and  cufom  may,  pojfbly,  make  us  view  that  fate
with  indifference,  which  all  other  stations  look  upon  with  envy.
But  this  indifference  is  far  from  being  epidemical ;  the  fears
the  jealoufres  of  innovations  >  all  pardonable  in  a  free  fate \

however


PREFACE.


however  grouridlefs,  are  to  me  a  proofs  beyond  contradiBion,
that  we  love  what  we  fo  much  fear  to  lofe  :  and  how  general
mujl  thofe  fears  be,  when  it  is  popular  only  to  pretend  to  fear  f
In  all  free  governme?tts  there  ever  were ,  and  ever  will  be,
parties:  we  find  that  Sparta,  Rome,  Athens,  and  all  the
Greek  colonies  in  Afia  Minor  had  their  ar'iflocratical,  and  de-
mocratical  parties ;  while  the  only  co?itef  among  the  fubjeBs  of
the  kings  of  Per  fa  was,  who  fhoidd  be  the  great  ef  faves.  The

truth  is,  different  underfandings,  different  educations,  and
different  attachments  muft  neceffarily  produce  different  ways  of
thinking  every  where ;  but  thefe  will  fhew  themfelves  in  free  go~
vernments  only,  becaufe  there  only  they  can  ffew  themfelves  with
impunity .  However,  it  was  not  the  exiflence  of  the  two  parties

I  have  mentioned,  that  deflroyed  the  liberties  of  any  of  thofe
cities,  but  the  occafional  extinBion  of  one  of  them,  by  the  fupe-
riority  the  other  had  gamed  over  it :  and,  if  ever  we  ffould
be  fo  unhappy  as  to  have  the  ballance  between  the  three  orders
deflroyed ;  and  that  any  one  of  \  the  three  floould  utterly  extin -
guifh  the  other  two,  the  name  of  a  party  would,  from  that  mo¬
ment,  be  unknown  in  England,  and  we  fhoidd,  unanimoufly  agree

r  *■ ,

in  being  Jlaves  to  the  conqueror .

Parties,  therefore,  are  not  only  the  effeB,  but  the  fupport ,
of  liberty :  I  do  not  at  all  wonder  that  they  are  perpetually  ex-

w  *

claimed  at  by  Thofe  in  power :  they  may  have,  fometimes ,  rea-

fon


PREFACE.


fon  to  bo  diffatisjied  with  the  parties  themf elves ,  but  have  much
more  to  be  fo  with  the  heads  of  them ;  for  \ Thefe  are  properly
their  rivals :  the  bulk  of  the  party  aims ,  generally ,  at  no  more
than  a  reformation  of  what  they  think  an  abufe  of  power ;  the
others ,  at  the  power  if  elf  without  cmfi dering  the  abufe ,  unlefs
it  be  to  continue  it :  2 he  party  quarrels  with  things ,  and  the
leaders  with  perfons  \  confequently ,  a  change  of  7neafures  may
appeafe  the  firfi ;  but  nothing  lefs  tha?t  a  change  of  miniflers
can  fatisfy  the  laft .  However ,  in  one  refpeEl^  thefe  leaders
often  give  fome  eafe  to  miniflers  without  defigning  it  •  for ,  as
they  generally  attack  them  upon  perfonal ,  rather  than  7iational
points ,  their  followers  are  unconcerned  in  the  contef ;  and^
coiftdering  themf elves  as  fpeSlators ,  rather  than  parties ,  do  not
think  it  mcumbent  on  them  to  go  great  lengths  for  the  choice  of
miniflers  \  efpecially ,  fence  by  the  indifference  their  leaders  fhem
for  national  point s,  when  they  are  aiming  at  power  (which  is
the ffeafon  for  giving  hopes ,  as  the  gaming  it  is  for  difappomt -
ing  thetn )  their  followers  have  but  little  reafon  to  expecl  they
will  fhew  a  greater  wamnth  for  them ,  when  they  have  attained
the  poffeffeon  of  it.

But ,  whatever  may  be  the  Juccefs  of  the  oppofers ,  the  public
reaps  great  benefit  from  the  oppofition ;  fence  This  keeps  miniflers
upon  their  guards  and ,  often,  preve?its  thetn  from  purfuing
bold  meafures ,  which  an  uncontrolled  power  77iight ,  otherwife ,
4  tempf


PREFACE.


tempt  them  to  ingage  in:  they  mujl  aEi  with  caution ,  as  well
as  fidelity ,  when  they  confider  the  whole  nation  is  attentive  to
every  fiep  they  take ,  and  that  the  errors  they  may  commit ,
will  not  only  be  expofied ,  but  aggravated :  in  the  mean  time ,  <2
thirfi  op  power ,  irritated  by  difiappointment ,  animates  the  ap¬
plication  of  the  oppofiers  of  public  affairs ,  infinitely  more  than

*9

the  languid  wipulfie  of  7iational  confider ations :  By  this  means ,
they  grow  able  flatefmen ,  when  they  co77te  to  be  miniflers ,

not  only  capable  of  defe77ding  bad  fichemes ,  but ,  when  they
pleafie ,  of  f owning  good  ones.

Another  great  advantage ,  that  accrues  to  the  people  from
this  oppofition ,  zx,  that  each  party ,  appealing  to  them  upon

all  occafions ,  conflitutes  them  judges  of  every  contefi ;  and ,  indeed \
to  whom  fhould  they  appeal,  but  to  thofie ,  whofie  welfare  is  the
defign,  or  pretence ,  of  every  meafiure  ?  And  for  whofie  happi-
nefs  the  majefiy  of  kings ,  dignity  of  peers ,  the  power  of

the  commons  were  finally  infiituted.  ‘This  is,  undoubtedly ,  the
end  of  their  infiitution ,  z/  /x  their  glory ,  as  well

as  duty ,  to  accomplifh :  For ,  what  greater  honor  ca7i  be  done
to  the  three  orders ,  of  which  our  government  is  fio  happily  C0771-
pofied,  than  to  look  upon  them  as  they  really  are,  that  is,  as  the
channels,  through  which  eafie,  plenty ,  and  fiecurity  are  derived
to  millions  of  people?


I  would


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.


I  would  not  willingly  do  injujlice  to  perfons  fo  ufeful ,  at  all
times,  to  the  public,  whatever  they  may  be  to  themf elves,  as  the
heads  of  an  oppofing  party  \  but  fhall  mention  one  point ,  to
which  I  will  appeal,  as  to  a  t ouch f  one  of  their  conduEl,  and,
by  which,  it  will  evidently  appear  whether  it  is  influenced  by
perfonal,  or  national,  conflderations ;  it  is  ‘This:  There  is  not,  I

believe,  in  Great  Britain,  a  man,  who  is  not  convinced,  nor
a  man,  not  aBually  in  the  adminiflration,  or  not  expe&ing  one
day  to  be  in  it,  who  will  not  own,  that  annual  parliaments  are
an  effectual  cure  for  all  the  evils,  that  are  felt,  feared,  or
complained  of:  If  this  is  fo  evident  a  truth,  how  comes  it
to  pafs  that,  for  this  lafl  century,  that  is,  ever  flnce  an  oppo -
fltion  to  a  miniflry  was  made  the  road  to  a  fuccejfiGn  in  it,  that,
fo  national  a  point  has  been  negleSiedf  How  comes  it  to  pafs,
I  fay,  that  fo  many  fuccefflve  oppofltions  have  ?iever,  in  the
warmeft  feafon  of  their  contefl,  taken  one  flep  to  reflore  the
people  to  a  right  confirmed  to  them  by  more  than  one  a8l  of
parliament  ( i )  and  fupported  by  the  enjoyment  of  fome  hundred
years  f  Are  the  heirs  apparent  to  miniflers  to  be  looked  upon  as
the  only  perfons  in  the  nation,  who  are  unacquainted  with  the
rights  of  the  people  ?  Or  the  champions  of  liberty  the  only  per¬
fons  unconcerned  in  the  defence _  of  it  f  The  truth  is,  they  all

(1)4  Edw.  III.  36  Edw.  III.

>  -  r  t  4  *

expeEl


P  R  E  FACE.


expect  to  be ,  one  day ,  miniflers  themj\ elves ,  fenfible  that

annual  parliaments  are  fo  much  the  ancient  right  of  the  people ,
fo  obvioufy  conducive ,  if  ?iot  effential ,  to  their  fecurity ,  their
dignity ,  and  powers  that  they  are  afraid  any  attempt  to  ref  ore
them  fljould  prove  fuccefsful ;  #/%/,  confequently,  that ,
breakmg  the  peoples  chains  afunder ,  to  difrefs  the  mi -

niflers j  they  floould  forge  others  for  themfelves  when  they  come
to  fucceed  them .  Whenever  there  has  been  any  attempt  to
enaB ,  ref  ore  triennial  parliaments ,  ob-

jeBed  that  triennial  parliaments  would  produce  triennial  mi¬
nifries  ;  they  are  afraid  that  annual  parliaments  foould
alfo  produce  annual  minifries:  Hinc  illas  lachrymae.  /

^  reafoti  for  thefe  fears ;  w  do  not  find  that ,  during  the
long  traB  of  time  the  people  enjoyed  annual  parliaments ,  the
reign  of  good  miniflers  was  fhorter  than  fince  they  have  been  de¬
prived  of  that  right :  And  if  \  during  that  period ,  reign

of  bad  miniflers  was  fo ,  becomes  an  accejf  onal  reafon  for

their  being  refiored  to  it .  jS&tf,  y2zy  they ,  thing  will

bo  fo  fluBuating  under  annual  parliaments ,  that  no  nation
will  treat  with  you ,  jw  be,  profecuted  with  fuccefs  ;

Have  they  then  forgotten  that  the  treaties  ofBretigny ,
were  concluded ,  a?id  the  viBories  of  Crecy ,  Azincourt
ained ,  under  the  aufpices  of  annual  parliaments  f
Vol.  I.  C  c  c  It


S


PREFACE.


It  is  thought  by  many  people  that  the  feptennial  abl  was  the
fever  ejl  fab  the  liberties  of  the  people  of  England  ever  received:
Indeed  the  circumfances  of  the  nation  at  the  time  of  its  being
enabled)  were  fome  juf if  cation  of  it :  'There  had  lately  been
an  ablual  rebellion  raifed  againf  a  prince ,  who,  without
flattery y  (which  is  feldom  beflowed  upon  dead  princes)  wanted
nothing  to  be  admired  by  his  fubjebls ,  but  to  be  known  to  them ;
and  whoy  by  a  peculiar  caft  of  good  qualities ,  feemed  formed  by
nature  to  reign  over  a  free  people .  This  rebellion  was  indeed.
extinguifhed,  but  though  the  form  was  laid ,  the  heaving  of
the  fea  continued. .  However ,  if  thefe  circumfances ,  while  they
fubfifled,  were  a  reafon  for  enabling  that  lawy  now  they  are.
removed ,  they  can  be  none  for  continuing  it .  I  mufl,  indeed \
do  one  fet  of  men  the  juflice  to  allow  that  they  have  floewn
themfelves  of  that  opinion.)  by  endeavouring  to  reflore  triennial
parliaments  :  But  that  attempt ,  if  it  had  fucceeded \  would
have  proved  a  palliative  remedy  only ,  not  a  cure *  Have  not-
triennial  parliaments  been  already  tried \  and  found  me ffeblualf
Were  not  fever al  ejfential  claufes  in  the  abP  of  fettlement  re¬
pealed)  the  peace  of  Utrecht  confirmed \  and  the  fchifm  abi
paffed  by  trie7inial  parliaments  f

It  mufl  be  allowed  that y  in  all  free  governments y  the  oftener
the  colleblive  body  of  the  people  is  refor ted  to,  the  oftener  they
will  have  legal  opportunities  of  reforming  thofe  grievancesy

that


PREFACE.


that  will,  from  time  to  t'mie,  unavoidably,  fieal  into  the  le-
giflative,  as  well  as  the  executive  part  of  every  government ;
and,  while  they  have  legal  methods  of  redrefs,  they  will  never
fly  to  "Thofe,  that  are  not  fo .  "This  would  be  the  great  advan¬
tage  of  annual  parliaments :  For,  to  fuppofe  that  the  repre¬
fentatives  of  the  people  will,  at  all  times,  be  as  vigilant  to  dif-
cover,  and  as  zealous  to  reform,  thofe  grievances,  or  as  careful
of  their  conduEl  in  every  other  refpeEl,  when  they  are  inde¬
pendent  of  their  confiituents  for  feven  years,  as,  when  they  an¬
nually  depend  upon  their  approbatim,  is  to  fuppofe  that  hopes,
and  fears  have  lojl  their  influence  on  the  minds  of  men.  On
the  other  fide,  if  it  fhould  ever  happen  that  the  reprefentatives,
encouraged  by  this  independence,  fhould,  inftead  of  reforming
grievances,  encreafe  their  number,  and  become  themfelves  the
great  eft  grievance ;  the  people  will,  in  that  cafe,  have  no  legal
remedy,  which  is,  in  itfelf,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  govern -
Went',  it  being  ridiculous  to  imagine  that  the  fame  law,  which
provides  a  remedy  for  every  private  wrong,  fhould  provide  no?ie
for  Thofe  of  the  public ;  or,  that  the  whole  body  of  the  people,
for  whofe  fake  the  law  itfelf  was  mfiituted,  fhould  ever  find
themfelves  hi  finch  circumfiances,  as  to  lofie  the  benefit  of  it.  Tet,
this  mufi  happen ,  if  it  be  received  as  a  fiatiding  maxim  of  law
and  jufiice,  that  their  reprefentatives,  when  once  chofen  for  any
number  of  years,  let  their  abufe  of  power  be  never  fo  glaring,

C  c  c  2  have


380  P  R  E-  F  A  C  E>

have  ft  ill  cb  right  to  ft  out  their  term ,  and,  what  is  worfe ,  to
extend  it  as  far  as  the  affairs  of  the  nation ,  or  their  own  may
require .  If  this  he  admitted ,  it  muff  alfo  be  admitted  that  no
term  can,  by  law ,  be  prefer ibed  to  their  fitting ,  becaufe  they
have  fill  a  power,  by  law,  of  extending  that  term,  and,  con-
fequently,  of  perpetuating  themf elves :  This,  however  improba¬
ble,  mufl,  upon  a  fuppoftion  of  the  legality  of  the  firfl  exten¬
sion  of  the  original  term,  be  allowed  to  be  equally  legal.  From
hence  it  appears  how  dangerous  it  is  to  remove  the  corner  fones
of  government ;  and  that,  whenever  they  have  been  removed y
either  through  neceffity,  or  convenience,  the  firfi  opportunity
ought  to  be  laid  hold  on  to  ref  ore  them  to  their  former  filia¬
tion.

f  •  \>  )  \\  •  '  \  4 * -A  <  '  -*  { **  1  \  <  *  -  \

There  is  fomething  fo  bewitching  in  power,  that,  without
very  compulfve  laws,  men  are  not  eafily  brought  to  refgn  it:
This  tenacioufnefs  of  power  has  filled  all  hifories,  both  ancient
and  modern ,  with  attempts  made  to  extend  it  beyond  the  term,
for  which  it  was  originally  delegated.  Thus,  the  lafi  Roman
decemvirs,  though  chofen  by  their  country  but  for  a  year,  pro¬
longed  their  term  by  their  own  aft,  and  retained  the  power  they
had  ufurped,  till  the  people  forced  it  out  of  their  hands,  and
punifhed  them  fever ely  for  their  ufur pat  ion,  and  their  memory
fiands  branded  in  hifiory  (2)  with  all  the  infamy  it  defer ves :

(2)  Liv.  B.  iii.  Dionyf.  Hal.  B.  xi.


While


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.  381

While  the  names  of  Valerius ,  and  Horatius ,  under  whofe
conduB  the  people  recovered  their  right  of  eleBing  annual  ma-
gif  rates ,  are  celebrated  by  their  hiforians  with  all  the  praifes,
that  gratitude  can  yields  or  merit  claim  \  monuments  more
lafing  than  brafs ,  or  marble  :  Thofe  no  forms  can  overturn ,
noflkht  of  time  deface ;  fill  are  their  praifes  read  by  applaud¬
ing  nations ,  who  look  upon  thofe  worthy  patriots ,  as  the  bene-
faBors ,  not  of  their  own  country  only ,  but  of  all  mankind.

Tide  fame  attempt  met  with ,  I  will  not  fay ,  deferved, \  a

better  fate  at  Venice,  (3)  the  year  1298,  an  aB

pa  Bed  in  the  great  council,  which,  till  then,  was  a?mually
chofen  by  the  people,  that  all  thofe,  of  which  it  was  that  year
comp  fed,  or 'who  had  been  members  of  it  for  the  four  l af  years,
fjould,  upon  their  obtaining  twelve  voices  in  the  council  of  forty %
be  themf elves,  and  their  poflerity ,  ever  after,  members  of  it
and  that  all  the  other  citizens  ffould  be,  for  ever,  excluded
from  the  adminif  ration  of  public  affairs.  From  this  time,  the
people  of  Venice,  like  all  others  tmder  the  like  circumflances,
have  found  how  dangerous  it  is  to  be  ufelefs,  and  that ,  to  have
no  fare  in  the  government,  is  to  be  a  prey  to  Thofe  who  have .

Many  are  the  expedients  gentlemen  have  been  driven  to,  in
order  to  fupply  the  want  of  a?mual  parliaments ;  fuch  as  th&
penfion  aB,  the  aB  for  difabling  thofe,  who  have  accepted  em-
(3)  Amdot  de  la  Houffaie.  Hift.  du  Gouvern.  de  Ven.

ploymentsi)


3$2  P  R  E  F  A  C  fe.

**  r  •  T  f  t  #  r  T  r  _

ployments ,  from 'fitting  in  the  houfe  unlefs  they  are  re-eleEled ,
and  fome  others  of  the  like  tendency:  All  which  are ,  710  doubt ,
very  well  calculated  to  at  fewer  the  ends ,  for  which  fitch  bills  are
generally  brought  in ,  that  is ,  to  defame  the  mmiflry ,  Z/'  they
not  pafied ,  <2;%/  to  diflrefs  them ,  if  they  are .  J  be¬

lieve ,  the  people  have  received  no  great  benefit  from  any  of  thefe
expedie?2ts.  In  this  I  am  the  more  confirmed ,  becaufe  the  pro¬
moters  oj  thetn  are  fo  loud  in  their  complaints  of  fuch  abufes ,
could  not)  poffibly ,  be  committed)  if  thefe  laws  were  effectual:
'Their  complaints ,  therefore)  muft  be  looked,  upon  as  an  acktiow-
ledgement  that  they  are  not  fo  \  and)  if  thefe  gentlemen  petfifi
in  applying  remedies ,  which  they  themf elves  know  to  be  m-
ejfeElual)  the  nation  will  have  reafon  to  complain  in  their  turn ,
and  to  fay  that  they  treat  them  as  fo7ne  phyficians  treat  their
patients ,  that  is ,  they  chufe  rather  to  prefcribe)  than  cure .
to  the  place  bill \  the  people  have  a  right  to  have  That  go  ha?td  in
hand  with  the  bill  for  annual  parliaments ;  fence)  among  other
claufes  of  Nolumus  (4)  formerly  infer  ted  in  the  writs  of fum-
monS)  we  find  the  following  one ,  Nolumus  autem  quod  ali-
quis  de  retinentia  domini  noftri  regis  aliqualiter  {it  ele&us.

The  people  of  Rome ,  Sparta ,  and  Athetts  were  not  repre-
fented ;  but  appeared  in  a  colleSlive  body)  whenever  any  thing
was  to  be  laid  before  them .  This  method  of  taking  the  fenfe  of

(4)  Whitelock’s  Memo.  p.  432.


the


PREFACE.


the  whole  body  of  the  people ,  upon  every  occafion ,  might  not  be
fubjeSl  to  great  inconveniences  either* at  Sparta ,  or  Athens ,  by
reafon  of  the  fnall  extent  of  their  refpeSlive  territories ,  which ,
though  very  populous ,  contained  but  few  inhabitants :  But ,  <2/
Rome ,  dominions  were  fo  extenfve ,  citizens  fo

numerous ,  I  thmk  it  muft  have  been  fubjeSl  to  many,  particu¬
larly ,  to  one  of  theje  two ;  either  all  the  Roman  citizens ,  who
were  not  actually  ingaged  in  the  fervice  of  the  commonwealth ,

yZw/z  the  mofl  difiant  parts  of  the  world  at
every  meeting  of  the  people ,  or  the  whole  power  muft  have  de¬
volved  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  city ,  arid  neighbourhood  of
Rome  :  I  own,  I  have  never  met  with  any  complaints  of  either
of  thefe  inconveniences  in  any  of  their  authors,  and  yet  the
alternative  feems  unavoidable .  For  which  reafon,  notwith-
flanding  the  great  deference,  which  is  undeniably  due  to  the
wifdom  of  their  inftitutiom,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  a  re-
prefentative,  under  proper  regulations ,  anfwers  all  the  purpofes
of  the  peoples  voting  in  a  collective  body,  and  is  fubjeSl  to  nous
of  the  inconveniences  of  it .  But,  to  ejfeSl  this ,  two  things feent
to  be  necejfary,  the  fir  ft,  that  the  people  be  annually  reprefented* ,
to  the  end  they  may  have,  annually,  an  opportunity  of  confirm¬
ing,  or  reforming  their  choice ;  the  fecond  isy  that '  they  be
equally  reprefented ;  for  a  people  unequally  reprefented,  will,  of
courfe ,  be  unequally  taxed .  This  is  a  mifcbiefi  which  all  tne-

dern


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.


3«4

dern  governments  are  more ,  or  lefs ,  fubjeEl  to,  becaufe  none  of

O  ■  ,

them  have  been  fo  wife  as  to  follow  the  example  of  the  Romans ,
in  eflablijhmg  a  general  regifter :  This,  perhaps,  may  not  be
practicable,  at  leaf,  not  advifeable,  in  a  trading  country ;
fnce  credit,  which  is  the  life  of  commerce,  and fubffls  by  opi¬
nion,  wotdd  be  very  much  impaired,  if  not  deftroyed,  by  cer¬
tainty,  and,  if  every  mans  circumflances  were  known,  a
merchant  would,  no  longer,  have  it  in  his  power,  by  making
ufe.  of  other  peoples  for  time,  to  raife  his  oven,  and  to  grow  rich,
by  being  thought  fo.  But,  to  apply  what  I  have fiaid,  in  a  par¬

ticular  manner,  to  our  own  affairs,  I  will  appeal  even  to  thofe
gentlemen,  who  find  their  advantage  in  this  national  misfortune,
I  mean  the  inequality  of  the  land  tax }  whether  it  has  not,  in
a  great  meafure,  been  the  occafion  of  this  immenfe  load  of  debts ,
under  which  we,  at  prefent,  labour ;  I  think  it  pafi  difpute
that  this  inequality  has  contributed  to  it  more  ways  than  one ;
in  the  firfi  place,  it  has,  frequently,  made  it  necejfary  to  have
recourfe  to  other  funds,  in  order  to  raife  thofe  fums,  which  the
land  tax  alone,  if  equally  levied,  would  have  annually  produced.
Secondly,  this  inequality  in  levying  the  land  tax  has  often  put
miniflers  upon  raifing  money  by  more  equal  methods ;  that  is,
finding  it  impraBicable  to  raife  the  fums  required  by  fuch
means,  as  all  people  ought  to  contribute  to  in  proportion  to  their
pofj'ejfion,  they  have  been  obliged  to  raife  them  by  fuch,  as  alq


PREFACE.


.  3^5

mufi  contribute  to  in  proportion  to  their  confumption .  This  has
obliged  them  to  create  new  funds ,  to  extend  the  old ,  and  tpply
the  finking  fund ,  the  nation  s  07ily  hope ,  to  purpofes  very  diffe¬
rent  from  Thofe ,  to  which  it  was  originally  appropriated
Thefe,  and  many  more  mifchiefs  would  be  cured ,  if  the  people
of  England  were  annually ,  and  equally  reprefented ;  and ,  if
ever  we  are  fo  happy  as  to  fee  the  promifes ,  made  by  gentlemen ,
while  they  are  oppofimg  public  meafures ,  performed ,  when  they
come  to  have  the  conduB  of  them ;  and  power  adminiftred  with

the  fame  fpirit,  by  which  it  was  acquired ,  the  nation  then  will,
7io  doubt ,  have  jufi  ice  done  them  in  thefe  two  important  points ;
the  obtaining  of  which  would ,  in  my  opinion ,  render  our  confii-
tution  more  perfeB  than  any ,  that  has  yet  appeared  either  in
the  a?icient ,  or  modern  world.  In  the  mean  time ,  and  until
thefe  two  accomplijhing  regulations  fid  all  take  place ,  we  may
have  the  fatisfaSlion  of  confidering  both  how  7iear  our  govern-
7nent  is  arrived  to  perfeElion ,  and  how  fair  a  profpeSl  it  has
of  attaining  it.

The  following  reafon  alfo  did  7iot  a  little  contribute  to  my  pub -
lifioing  this  tra7ifiation :  I  obferved  with  pleafure  the  great
fuccefs ,  which  the  life  of  Cicero  has  defervedly  met  with ,  and
the  happy  turn  it  has  given  to  converfatmi  by  banijhing  the
trifles,  that  were ,  before ,  the  unworthy  fubjeSls  of  it,  and  fub-
Jlituting  hi  their  room  a7i  mquiry  into  the  confutation,  the  lan-
^  Vol.  I.  D  (1  d  ZuaZe>


PREFACE.


guage ,  and  cuftoms  of  a  people ,  whofe  view  was  to  conquer ,
polifi, b,  and  inftruCl  mankind.  As  a  tafte  for  learning  does
honor  to  every  nation ,  where  it  flour ifhes ,  //  is  the  duty  of  all
perfons  to  endeavour  to  revive  that  tafte ,  where  it  is  loft ,

/p  preferve ,  improve  it ,  where  it  fubftfts ;  dm/  nothing  can
contribute  fo  effectually  towards  thofe  ends  as  a  co?iftant  fupply
of  frefh  materials ;  but  on  the  choice  of  thefe  ■  depends  the  fuccefs :
Scarce  any  thing  has ,  0/*  late,  been  offered  to  the  public  upon
this  fubjeCl ,  but  mean  tranjlations  of  French  performances ,
which,  though  eveiy  bra?2ch  of  learning  is  much  indebted  to  the
productions  of  that  nation,  have  generally  more  vivacity,  than
folidity :  This  vivacity,  the  property  of  which  is  to  entertain,
rather  than  to  inftruCt,  has  rendered  their  tranjlations  of  the
ancient  authors  fo  loofe,  they  hardly  defeiwe  that  name  :  One  of
the  beft,  and moft  efteemed is  that  ^Polybius  by  Dom  V incent
Fhuillier :  V  i  have  found  myfelf  obliged  to  take  t notice  of  fome
inaccuracies,  that  have  efcaped  him,  it  has  been  lefs  with  a  view,
of  cenfuring  his  tranflation,  than  of  juftifying  my  own .  The
difficulty  of doing juft  ice  to  the  great  authors  of  antiquity,  by  a
iranftation  of  their  works  into  a  modern  language,  is  fo  great,
that  I  am  infinitely  more  difpofed  to  admire  his  work  for  the
many  excellences,  with  which  it  abounds,  than  to  cenfure  it
a  few  faults,  which  may  be  owing  to  a  little  inattention,  or  to
the  condition  of  human  nature,  whofe  fate  it  is  never  to  be  per -


fettx


I


PREFACE,


fe&\  but  thefe  errors  are  fo  rarely  to  be  met  with  in  that  per-
formance ,  that  they  lie  among  the  many  beauties  of  it ,  like  a  few
pebbles ,  wantonly  fcattered  by  the  hand  of  nature ,  in  a  mine  of
diamonds .

But  there  is  another  difjicidty ,  <3  tra?fator  of

Polybius  has  particularly  to  encounter ,  0/0/  / fall

mention  more  for  my  own  fake ,  for  'That  of  the  French

tranfator ,  becaufe  I  may ,  pofftbly ,  have  greater  occafon  for

the  excufe :  Tfe  difficulty  arifes  from  the  ffyle  of  that  author ;

which ,  riotwithfanding  the  unwillmgnefs  of  Cafaubon ,  ^

the  French  tranfator  to  own  it,  is  ?iot  fo  elegant ,  perfpicu -

£&.$•  might  be  wijhed :  It  is  very  well  known  that  he  has  been

cenfured  for  a  want  of  attention  to  the  beauties  of  flyle  by  one  of

the great efi  critics ,  well  as  one  of  the  great eff  hiforians,  of

antiquity,  I  mean  Dionyfius  of  Halicarnaffus  (5) ;  and  it  is

certain  there  are  many  words  made  ufe  of  by  Polybius,  that  are

not  to  be  met  with  in  any  other  author,  and  many  words  made

ufe  of  by  him  in  a  fenfe,  which  no  other  author  gives  to  them :

This,  jomed  to  an  obfeurity,  either  natural,  or  affe&ed,  makes

the  readmg  him  very  difficult ,  and  the  tranfating  him  much

more  fo.  I  have  often  wiffed  that  fo  complete  an  hifforum  in

all  other  refpeEls,  and  one,  whofe  fenfe  is  fo  frong,  atid  cotnpafs
Av  ^  •  1

of  learning  fo  great,  had  written  with  as  great  elegance,  and

<i  u.»  v  (V\  *  hvw-  .

(5)  Tligi  trvyB'iiriuif  ovcpcncov,  C.  4.

D  d  d  2  harmony


v. .  r


388  P  R  E  F  A  C  E.


harmony  of  flyle>  as  the  author ,  who,  in  my  opinion ,  fo  juflly
cenfures  him  for  the  want  of  them .

i/2  my  notes  upon  the  fragment  of  Polybius ,  /  have  not

taken  any  notice  of  an  Englifh  tranfation  of  that  author  by  Sir

*

H.  S.  becaufe ,  upon  comparing  it  with  the  Greek  text>  and
Cafaubon s  latin  verfion ,  which  is  by  much  the  bejl ,  I  found  it
to  be  a  tranfation  of  neither ;  for  which  reafon ,  I  violently
fufpeSi  the  author  has  tranfated fome  old  tranfation  publifhed
before  Ccfaubon  s  edition  appeared ;  which  I  am  the  rather  in¬
clined  to  believe ,  becaufe  there  are  two.  hiatus's  in  the  Englifh
tranfation  of  this  fragment ,  which  are  not  in  the  Greek  texty
one  anfwering  to  page  462,  in  Cafaubon  s  edition y  of  two  lines ,
and  the  other  to  page  464,  of  no  lefs  than  56  lines .

In  the  dijfertation  upon  the  confitution  of  the  Roman  Senatey
I  have  taken  notice  of  the  many  difficulties  I  met  with  in  treating
that  fubjeSi :  "To  what  is  there  obfervedy  I  beg  leave  to  add
the  following  co?if  deration.  Every  one ,  who  reads  at  ally  ?nufi
have  read  the  memorial  written  by  the  late  Earl  Stanhope  to
the  Abbe  de  Vertoty  author  of  the  Roman  revolutions :  In  that
memorial \  his  lordfhip  fates  fever al  difficulties  relative  to  the
perfons ,  of  whom  the  Roman  fe?mte  was  compofed :  This  memo¬
rial  that  gentleman  anfwers  in  fuch  a  manner ,  as  fhews  that ,
ifhe  did  not  think  thofe  difficulties  unanfwerabley  he  left  themy


PREFACE.  389

that  memorial ,  will,  I  believe ,  receive  very  little  fatisfaSlion ,
unlefs  it  be  in  refleEling  that  the  praifes  fo  liberally  bejlowed ,
upon  that  occajion ,  by  the  writer  of  that  anfwer,  were  as  emi¬
nently  deferved  by  the  noble  lord,  to  whom  it  was  written .  What
I  would  infer  from  this,  is,  that,  if  a  perfon,  who  was  fo
perfeftly  acquainted  with  the  civil,  as  well  as  military  injlitu-
tions  of  the  ancients,  as  the  late  earl  Stanhope,  and  who  had
paffed  his  life  in  fludying  the  aElions,  or  following  the  examples ,
of  the  great efl  men  of  antiquity ;  if  a  perfon,  I  fay,  fo  well
qualified  to  decide,  could  doubt,  and  the  author  of  the  Roman
revolutions  not  fatisfy  thofe  doubts  ;  I  hope  I  may  be  intitled  to
fome  indulgence,  jhould  not  every  difficulty,  which  a  curious
reader  ?nay  form  to  himfelf,  be  fully  anfwered  in  that  differ-
tat  ion,.


TcLTCe)V7foAllzV/UClTCit)V  ZtJt)'  Y]  yzVZVig  XCU  XOtict  (pVTlV  (AzIcI&oAy)
tm  7roA?tziav  z ig  aAAYiActg,  on  ctpiTH  7toAiIzici  y>  ex  wanm
TCt)V  ZlSodV  GWSWflt.  XCU  OTl  Y)  T6t)V  PUfA&ltoV  ZTl  TQKXVTY).

TUN  (AZV  yctp  EAA YjHXOdV  7T0AlTZV[A(XT6d])  OCTOL  7T0A-
A OLXig  [AZV  Y}V%Y)TCLlx  TTOAAcLXig  Sz  TY\g  g iq  TCtVUVTlCt
/azIolGoAk  oAoyz^g  nzigciv  ziA pctSictv  zivou  cv/aS cuvzi
Tiournv  V7r:%  tm  npoEzPovoTOdv  zfyfiio'iv,  xcutyiv  vttz%  tx  [azAAoPo;
CLTTotyoLtriv.  TOyTe  yci%  z^ayfziAAi  rot  yivGxrxofAzva  p&Siov'
TOyTZ  7r%0Zl7TZlV  V7TZp  TX  [ IZAAoPoq ,  TO^Ct^OfAZVOV  ZX  TCt)V  Y)Sy)
yzFovoTtov,  zv[acl%zq*  7rz%i  S'z  t Y\g  PcofAcuteV  xS’  oAodg  zv%z%zg}

XT  Z  7TZ%1  T  (jdV  7TCtp0VT&)V  Z%nfha’CLO‘dai,  Sid  TY\V  7T0lXlAldV  T  Y)q
TroAtiZtCtg  ’  XTZ  7TZ£l  TX  [AZAAoi/TOg  7Tp0Zl7TZlV}  ^  o' l Cl  TY}V
CtP/QlClV  TtoV  7T%ofzfoilOTCt)V  7TZ%1  OLVTXS  iSlQfACLTM  XOU  XOIVY)  XCU  XOLT

iSidV.  Aiottz%,  x  TY\g  TV^xtryig  z m<?ci<rmg  7T^oorSziTdi,  xcu
S-zMgiag,  zi  [azAAo’,  Tig  tcl  Sid(pz$ovTd  xafidgiug  zv  avry  <rvv-
q^ztOui.

TLvfA^dim  Sn  rxg  7tA ziTxg  tm  fixA o/mzmv  SiSdcrxdAixug

Y)[AIV  V7ToSziXmiV  7TZpl  TCdV  TOIXTtoV,  TplOL  yZVY)  AzfziV  7T0AtZlW
CdV  TO  [AZV  XdAXTl  (ZcKTlAZtClV,  TO  S'  CLglTOXg&hcLVy  TO  S'z  T^ilov  JV
l AOXgdkdV .  SoXZl  Sz  [A017TCLVV  Tig  ZtXoltog  CUI  ZTTUTro^YjTCU  npog  ctv-

W  At X,  tv,v  ufvototvTm  ztr^oftfovc tuv  vt^t  affaires  generates,  foit  dans  les  parti  cu-
avTisi  thwfxoiTuv  Kai  navy  non  k»V  ihocv. J  lieres,  which  I  do  not  take  to  be  the
Dom  Vincent  Thuillier,  the  French  fenfe  of  the  author,  fince  ,W*7*
Tranflator,  has  rendered  this,  parce  mud,  I  believe,  be  underftood  to  re-
quel'on  ne  connoit  point  affez  comment  late  to  the  peculiar  frame  of  the  con-
elle  fe  conduifoit  autrefois ,  foit  dans  les  ftitution  of  the  Romans,  and  not  to

Txg>


Of  the  feveral  FORMS  of  GOVERNMENT:  Of
the  origin ,  and  natural  tranftion  of  thofe  governments  to
c?ie  another :  That  the  heft  confitution  is  Thaty  which  is  com¬
pounded  of  all  of  them ;  and  that  the  co?iftitution  of  the
Romans  is  fuch  a  one .

Concerning  thofe  Greek  commonwealths,  which  have
often  encreafed  in  power,  and  often,  to  their  ruin,,
experienced  a  contrary  turn  of  fortune,  it  is  an  eafy  matter
both  to  relate  paft  tranfa&ions,  and  foretel  Thofe  to  come;
there  being  no  great  difficulty  either  in  recounting  what  one
knows,  or  in  publiffiing  conjectures  ot  future  events,  from
Thofe  that  are  paft.  But,  concerning  the  Roman  com¬
monwealth,  it  is  not  at  all  eafy  either  to  give  an  account  of
the  prefent  ftate  of  their  affairs,  by  reafon  of  the  variety  of
their  inftitutions ;  or  to  foretel  what  may  happen  to  them,,
through  the  ignorance  of  the  peculiar  frame  of  their  ancient
government,  both  public  and  private,  upon  which  fuch  con¬
jectures  muft  be  founded.  For  which  reafon,  an  uncom¬
mon  attention  and  inquiry  feem  requifite,  to  form  a  clear
idea  of  the  points,  in  which  the  Roman  commonwealth
differs  from  Thofe  of  Greece.

It  is,  I  find,  cuftomary  with  thofe,  who  profeftedly
treat  this  fubjedt,  to  eftablifh  three  forts  of  government;,
kingly  government,  ariftocracy,  and  democracy :  Upon
which,  one  may,  I  think,  very  properly  afk  them,

the  conduit  of  their  affairs.  But,  the  peculiar  frame  of  their  government ,
beft  way  of  illuftrating  an  author’s  where  he  makes  ufe  of  almoft  the
meaning  is  to  explain  him  by  himfeif:  fame  word  he  employs  upon  this  oc-
Towards  the  end  of  this  differtation,  caHon  ;  t>jv  < J'/or»jT<a6  t«  aroA^svusi-ro?.  In
Polybius  fays,  the  Romans  attained  this  1  am  fupported  by  Cafaubon’s
whatever  they  propofed,  through  the  tranflation.

whether


(  392  )

T8£,  7T0n$0V  (is  fJ-OVOLS  TOLVTOLS ,  »  K0M  W  Af*  6)£  Cl%lTUS  YifJUV
€t(rnfePTCLl  T(t)P  7T0AtizMdP.  XCLT  CL/ULtyOTZgCL  yOL$  CtfioW  fJLQl  (Fo*
xdtrr  JVjAoi/  yet. «V  ctffsw  yjftrgov  noAdztav  mv  zx  7rav-

TOd  1/  Tto V  7TgOUgY}(JLZWV  iS'lGdfJLCLTMV  (TVVtS'&G’CtV.  TdTd  yctp  Td
(JLZOdS  d  Ao/fc)  (ULOVCV ,  <XAA’  g£/&)  7Tg^ai/  g l7\Y)<$CJL[JLZV  AvXdgfd
c tv sv, crams  ftpoord  xcilct  Tdrov  tov  t%o7tov  to  Aaxz^ctifJLovKdV
TTo/iPevfia.  K at  roi  dS*'  m  fjiovcts  tclvtcls  TrgocrJ'zxIzop'  xcu
ya f  fjLovoLgxutag  xcu  rvpctvnxas  n<Pn  tivcls  tz^zcl(jlz^cl  7ro7\iizictc,
>ai  nAzirov  <Pict(pz%d(rcti  fioLciAzicts,  7rapcL7rAtj(riov  .z%&p  n  ravin
(PoXdFlV  W  XCU  (TVfJL^/tvS'OVTCtlXOU  Ovfy&vlctl  KCllliS  ci  (jLQlCt$%0l,
XCt(j  Q(TQV  OlOi  T  ZiOTly  TOd  ms  ficLTlMiac  OVOfJLCth.  I\CtJ  fJLYl V
0?\ifkg%iXCl  7TOAt]eVjUUTOt  XCU  7TfalGd  yzfoVZ,  i^OXdflct  TfU^OfLiOlOV
zy^ziv  TL  TOIS  CtgtTOXpOLTlXOlSy  cl  TTfalfOV,  (is  Z7T0S  ZiKZlV,  fot-
<TOL(TlV.  0  CLVTOS  hoy (&  XCU  7TZ%t  (P^UOXgdliClS.

O Tl  CIAyiQzS  TO  MfcfJLZVOh  M  TdTCdV  (TVfJLtyOLVZS.  dTZ

ya°  TcaacLV  S'md  (jlovcl§%iclv  zvOzms  (ZcmtiAziolv  pnrzov'  a7\ Act
fjLovnv  ty]V  g^  exovlav  (rv^M^d/uzm,  ^  xau  m  ypttfJLi)  to  ■
nMiov,  n  xcu  fact  xv&gpajum v.  dJ'e  junv  tkjltcu  oAi~

yct^iav  ct^iTox^dLTicLV  vofjurzor  aKhct  tolvtyiv  yi  tis  av  xctr

€X?\oFy)V  VITO  TCd V  J'lKCllOTOLTMV  XCU  (PQOVlfJLtoTCLTWV  CtV^OdV  @%Ci-

GzvyUcu.  ^  Uci^aTAY)(n(t)s  dJ"e  J'vfjLoxpaJitciv,  zv  «  7rav

K  at  tjj  y\ ay,y  to  ?rA«/ov,  jj  £poCo>  y.ou  lence.  In  the  fir  ft  place,  I  doubt  whe-
(3n»  kv^v&yasi/jiv.]  I  am  obliged  to  ther  yva/xvi  is  to  be  met  with  in  the
differ  both  from  Cafaubon,  and  the  fenfe  they  have  given  to  it,  in  any  good
French  tranflator,  in  rendering  this  author  j  whereas  there  is  nothing  fo
paffage.  The  fo;  mer  has  faid,  et  qua  common  as  to  find  the  word  made
confilio  pGtius  quam  metu  cut  vi  regitur  ufeof  for  corifent  or  approbation^  whence
and  the  latter,  et  ou  tout  fe  fait  plutot  come  thefe  phrafes,  x«7«  ac-

par  raifon  que  par  crainte ,  et  par  vio-  cording  to  one's  define ;  sro^a  yvwpqv,

TrAnQos


(  393  )

whether  they  lay  thefe  down  as  the  only  forms  of  govern¬
ment,  or,  as  the  beft:  For,  in  both  cafes,  they  feem  to
be  in  an  error ;  fince  it  is  manifeft  that  the  beft  form  of
government  is  That,  which  is  compounded  of  all  three.
This  we  find  to  be  founded  not  only  in  reafon,  but  alfo  in
experience ;  Lycurgus  having  fet  the  example  of  this  form
of  government  in  the  inftitution  of  the  Lacedaemonian  Com¬
monwealth.  Befides,  thefe  three  are  not  to  be  received  as
the  only  forms;  fince  we  may  have  obferved  fome  monar¬
chical  and  tyrannical  governments,  which,  though  widely
different  from  kingly  government,  feem  ft  ill  to  bear  fome
refemblance  to  it.  For  which  reafon,  all  monarchs  agree  in
ufing  their  utmoft  endeavours,  however  falfely,  or  abufively,
to  be  ftyled  kings.  We  may  have  alfo  obferved  ftill  more
oligarchies,  which  feemed,  in  fome  degree,  to  refemble  arifto-
cracies,  though  the  difference  between  them  has  been  extreme¬
ly  great.  The  fame  thing  may  be  faid  alfo  of  democracy.

What  I  have  advanced  will  become  evident  from  the  fol¬
lowing  confederations :  For,  every  monarchy  is  not  pre-
fently  to  be  called  a  kingly  government,  but  only  That,
which  is  the  gift  of  a  willing  people,  and  is  founded  on
their  confent,  rather  than  on  fear,  and  violence.  Neither,
is  every  oligarchy  to  be  looked  upon  as  an  ariftocracy,  but
only  That,  which  is  adminiftred  by  a  feledl  number  of  thofe,
who  are  moft  eminent  for  their  juftice,  and  prudence.  In
the  fame  manner,  that  government  ought  not  to  be  looked

contrary  to  one's  dejire  *,  and,  particu-  (3)  Tlxooi7r\^<uu>g  tv

larly,  t*  [xtccg  yyccy.; jc,  nnanimoujly .  Se-  jj  srav  arA^Oo?  xv^iev  ffi  arctfiv  o',ti  zed’
condly,  this  lenfe  of  the  word  y\u>uv[  otv  avro  flaftyjOp  non  h  u

feems  to  agree  better  with  what  im-  arar^jov  «$-i  <nm jSe?  d-evs  <rs6f<70js<,  yo-
mediately  precedes  it,  kovTcov  e-ufoa-  vug  3 vo-
^[xtvyjv,  and  to  be  more  properly  op-  j uoig  vreiQttrQoti.]  The  French  translator
pofed  to  what  immediately  follows  it,  has  ftrangely  miftaken  this  paffage;
(piGa,  k<xa  (3 ix.  he  has  not  attended  to  the  force  of  the

Vol.  I.  E  e  e  upon


(  394  )

7ThwOf  wpov  Zfl  7F0161V  OyTl  7T0T  UV  CLVTO  jZxA Ylfy  KCU  7Tgodv}cU*

irufcjc  h  to  nciTtLov  edi  kcu  dWYiQeg  S-exg  de&ed(iab  yovetg  $e%a-
rnvuv,  7T%edEvTe$xg  athidbaty  vofjioig  7T€i6ear6ar  aXKa  na^ct

TOi$  TOiXTQtg  dVdYlfJiadlV,  OTCiV  TO  TOig  7TtelO(Tl  hcgUV  HKCty
txto  hi  mMiv  h/uoxpaltav.

Ato  kcu  ym  [xev  tivou  prileov  7roAireitovm  rgta  /ue v  d
vrafl eg  3-puA Ascn,  kcu  vvv  7rgoeigvlai  *  rgtu  h  tci  rxrotg  dvp-
cpvv,  My  to  h  (LLovagyiav,  oKilhgxtav,  o%Mxpctliuv.  ngtorn
fjLtv  xv  axaludKevtog  kou  (pvt nmg  dwigralai  /uovag%tcr  ravrvi  h
brelai  kcu  exTavmgyevvarai  /uelct  Kuradxevvg  kcu  hogdtodetog
fiadiheia.  /ae}a£ah7\XdYig  h  ravmg  etg  ra  dvjupvy]  Kcixcty
Asf&  h  etg  Tvgavvtda’  ^  avdtg  ex  mg  rxrtov  Karaev  detog,
agidoxpahu  (pvelai .  kcu  [jly\v  ravryjg  etg  oMragyiaj  exIgvtTrudng.
xctla  ( pvdiv ,  rx  h  nM^xg  o^yv)  (JLere7\^ov\@j  rag  Ttov  7r%o-
zstoTtov  ahKtagyyevvaTathfJc@h\  exh  mg  txtx  Trahtvibee&gy
kcu  7Tct%cLvo(JUCig>  a7rox7\Yi%xrai  dvv  %povotg  oyAoK^anci,

Tvolyi  h  av  Tig  da(pedara  i vegt  rxTMy  dg  a M&ag  edtvr
olci  hi  vvt i  emM,  em  rag  Uadton  xctla  c pvdiv  cifyag  xat  yeve-


particle  Si,  by  which  Polybius  has
placed  the  latter  part  of  this  period
in  oppofition  to  the  former;  but,  the
only  way  to  make  the  reader  fcnfible
of  this  miftake,  is  to  quote  the  words
of  the  French  tranflation.  En  vain
aufji ,  fays  he,  donneroit-cn  le  ncm  de
democratic  a  un  etat ,  oil  la  'populace  fe¬
ral  maitrejfe  de  faire  tout  ce  qidil  lui
plairoit ,  &  cu  Ton  feroit  depuis  long
terns  dans  Pufage  de  rev  ever  les  diem ,
d’etre  founds  a  ceux  dont  on  tient  le  jour,

I


de  rcfpecler  les  antiens ,  id  cP  cbeir  ai:x
loix  :  on  ne  dcit.appeller  democratic  qu’un
etat,  oil  k  fentiment  qui  P import e  Jur  les
autre s  eft  celui  du  plus  grand  nembre.
So  that,  according  to  him,  religion,
a  refpedt  to  parents  and  eldejs,  and
obedience  to  the  laws,  are  as  repug¬
nant  to  a  democracy  as  licentioulnels:
But  this  is  far  from  being  the  fenfe  of
Polybius,  as  the  reader  will  find,  if
he  pleafes  to  compare  the  French  tran-
fiation  with  the  original.

dug


(  395  )

upon  as  a  democracy,  where  the  multitude  have  a  power
of  doing  whatever  they  defire,  and  propofe ;  but  That  only,
in  which  it  is  an  eftablifhed  law  and  cuftom  to  worfhip
the  gods,  to  honour  their  parents,  to  refpedl  their  elders,
and  obey  the  laws :  When,  in  aflemblies  fo  formed,  every
thing  is  decided  by  the  majurity,  fuch  a  government  de-
ferves  the  name  of  a  democracy.

So  that,  fix  kinds  of  government  mull  be  allowed  ;  three,
which  are  generally  eftablifhed,  and  have  been  already
mentioned;  and  three,  that  are  allied  to  them,  namely,
monarchy,  oligarchy,  and  the  government  of  the  multitude.
The  firft  of  thefe  is  inftituted  by  nature,  without  the  afti-
ftance  of  art:  The  next  is  kingly  government,  which  is
derived  from  the  other  by  art  and  improvement;  when  this
degenerates  into  the  evil,  that  is  allied  to  it,  I  mean,  ty¬
ranny,  the  deftrudlion  of  the  tyrant  gives  birth  to  arifto-
cracy  ;  which  degenerating  alfo,  according  to  the  nature
of  things,  into  oligarchy,  the  people,  inflamed  with  anger,
punifli  the  injuftice  of  their  magiftrates,  and  form  a  de¬
mocracy  ;  from  the  infolence  of  which,  and  their  contempt
of  the  laws,  arifes,  in  time,  the  government  of  the  multitude.

Whoever  examines,  with  attention,  the  natural  princh

pies,  the  birth,  and  revolution  of  each  of  thefe  forms  of

%

(4)  a tx.  rye  t*t m  x,MTOL\v<riw<;  x(>t-  birth  to  ariftocraey  ;  but,  this  is  not
soxcccTta  (pusTou.]  De  la  monarchic  vient  the  gradation  fet  forth  by  Polybius:
la  royaute ,  lorfqu'on  y  ajoute  V art  Firft,  monarchy  is  improved  into
quon  en  corrige  les  defauts  ;  &  quand  kingly  government,  which  afterwards
elle  degenere  en  tyrannie ,  dont  elle  ap-  degenerates  into  tyranny ;  then,  the
proche  beaucoup ,  fur  les  mines  de  I’une  deftruftion  of  tyranny  gives  birth  to
&  de  T  autre  s' eleve  Faridocracie.  The  ariftocraey;  thus,  ic  is  vifible  that
French  tranftator  has  rendered  this,  according  both  to  the  fenfe,  and  the
as  if  txtuv  related  both  to  kingly  go-  conftruction,  txtwv  can  relate  to  cv^-
vernment  and  tyranny,  the  deftrudtion  x.xkx  only,  that  is,  as  our  author

of  both  which  gives,  according  to  him,  himfelf  explains  it,  to  tyranny.

E  e  e  2  govern-


(  396  )

creig  xcu  fjLsIu&oKcts  $7 nmarctg.  o  yap  crvvif'uv  Ixagov  uvtup  dg
(bvileuy  fjLov@~>  cl v  £t(&  <Fvpui!o  ovvtfeiv  kcutyiv  cLvfycrtv,  xcutyiP
ax/JMih  kou  ty\p  fJidci^oMv  ixaguvy  xcu  to  ts7\(&,  7torz,  xcu  nug>
^  xcu  7T&  xcLTavlimi  na'hiv.  MclKitol  cTg  sth  tyis  Fuy.atup  no-
?\flsias  txtop  d^fjcoasiv  top  T^onov  vmiTwtycL  tyis  efylhcreag,  cFta
to  xclIcl  cpvcriv  clvtk p  an  agp^ng  siMtyzvai  tyiv  ti  crvgacriv  xcu
ctv%n<rtv*

Axg&sgtgop  fJLtv  up  ictus  o  tts^i  tvs  xcltcl  eft mv  [xslafcoMs
TUP  7T0?\l1uUV  SIS  CtAA«Aa£,  J'lZVXglVtlTCLL  A  o/©-*  7TapCL  DAoC-
TMh  xcjli  Titriv  stsqois  tup  (pihocrocpuv  ^  noixi7\©j  d's  up
xcu  <Fta  nMtovuP  Asyo/usp&’y  oAifots  scpixlog  sgiV'  <Flotts%  otop

CLVYIMI V  V7ro?\CttJL&aVO(JLiV  CLVTX  7t%0g  TYIV  7r%aF[jLCiTlXYlV  igogiav,
XCU  TY]V  XQlVYjP  S7TiPOiaV,  TXTO  nSL^UCTOfJLS^a  XSCpUhCtLuS'US  (FlS A-

&mv.  xcuyae,  avsKKsmsiPTi  Jofy  <Fia  tm xaSoAixns  iftepaosusy

6  XCLTCL  (CLS p(§P  A oytSy  TUP  B%tjg  pnOncro [lev Ct)V  ixcLlM  CLvlcL7T0O)0(TlV
7 TOtY)(TSi  TUP  PVP  STTanO^SPTUV.

Flouts  %v  ct^ycts  AsFu)  xcu  noSsp  (p^uKpvscdatTag  noAiistag
nqmov  5  Otolv  n^ict  xuTaxhvcr/Ltxsy  n  J'ta  A oiysxag  nspiga-
cmSyYi  (Ft  cL(pogias  xagnuv,  y)  dY  a7\7\as  ToiavTcts  cuticls  (pQopct
ytVYiTcu  ra  tup  avQpunup  yews,  oicts  ysfopspat  naeuM-
( pa/uev ,  xou  na'hiv  noAhaxis  ecrecrQcu  o  A  of©-'  aigST  tots  <Fyi

(TVfJiCp^O/ULSPUV  7TCLvl(t)V  TUP  S7rfiY)<FiVjUaTUP>  XCU  TSyPU P,  OTCtP

sx  tup  TrtgiMKpQePTUP  olopst  (T7r£^(LicLT(t)V  avdig  av%n$n  <tvp
X$opu  ttAkjC^  av^unuv,  tots,  JW&,  xatans%  zm  tup  aAA&v

K«<  ti*  noiTtxvT^ffu  craAfv.]  En  general,  in  my  opinion;  Polybius
quelle  forme  il  fe  changera ,  is  much  too  Jpeaks  of  the  rotation  of  governments,


(  397  )

government,  will  be  convinced  of  the  truth  of  what  I  have
advanced:  For  he  alone,  who  knows  in  what  manner
each  of  them  is  produced,  can  form  a  judgement  of  the  en-
creafe,  the  perfection,  the  revolution,  and  end  of  each ;
and  when,  by  what  means,  and  to  which  of  the  former
ftates  they  will  return.  I  thought  this  detail,  in  a  parti¬
cular  manner,  applicable  to  the  Roman  government,  be-
caufe  the  eftablifhment  and  encreafe  of  That  was,  from  the
beginning,  founded  on  nature.

Poffibly,  the  natural  revolution  of  governments  into  one
another,  may  be  more  accurately  determined  by  Plato,
and  fome  other  philofophers ;  but  thofe  difcourfes,  being
full  of  variety,  and  of  a  great  length,  few  are  capable  of
underftanding  them ;  for  which  reafon,  we  fhall  endeavour
to  give  a  fummary  account  of  fo  much  of  them,  as  is  con¬
fident  with  hiftory  (whofe  objeCt  is  adlion)  and  the  general
underftanding  of  mankind :  For,  if,  by  reafon  of  the  univer-
fality  of  this  diflertation,  any  thing  fhould  feem  to  be  omitted,
the  particular  detail  we  fhall  afterwards  enter  into,  will  make
fufficient  amends  for  what  may  now  appear  doubtful.

What,  therefore,  are  the  beginnings  of  governments,
and  from  whence  do  they  originally  fpring?  When,  either
by  a  deluge,  a  peftilence,  a  famine,  or  the  like  calamity,
fuch  as  we  know  have  happened,  and  reafon  teaches  us  will
often  happen  again,  the  race  of  mankind  is  well  nigh  de-
ftroyed,  and  all  their  inftitutions,  and  arts  deftroyed  with
them;  from  the  few  that  are  left,  as  from  fo  many  feeds,,
a  new  generation,  in  procefs  of  time,  encreafes  to  a  multi-

and  of  their  return  to  the  fame  point,  the  French  tranflator  has  again  ren-
from  whence  they  fet  out.  This  he  dered  generally  by  changement  des
exprelfes  a  few  lines  after  in  other  etats.

words,  viz.  7 rt^i  tjj?  kxtx  <Qv<rtv  jugT<*£o-  Tlonu\of  h  ay.]  Left  out  by  the

Aw  twv  aroAmiftiv  m  <#AA>jA#f  j  which  French  tranflator.

tude  ;


(  398  )

?totoh  KOU  Z7TI  TUTtoV  <TVVCt6§0lfyfJUlltoV,  07TZ$  ZtKOg  KOLT&  TUTO

to  o/jloQvAov  rwcLyzhct^zructi  Ptct  rnv  rug  (pure®?  cutQzvziolv
avoLyw  tov  tw  tm/ulcltim  ptojuon  kcu  ty\  to7\(jly\  ^ictipz-

gOVTOL)  TUTtoV  Y}yZtCr()oLt 5  KCU  KgOLTZlV  *  m$CLm%  KOU  Z7VI  TtoV
CUTdhOdV  yzVtoV  ^  TtoV  a£o%07TOWOdV  £toCi)V  Szto^UfJLZV.  THTO
%pn  (pvrztog  zeyov  cOwdimroLkit  vofju^zir  7 rag  oig  o[j.o7\oyu-
fjLtmg  rag  i^y^oTorug  o$to[JLzv  yyufjiz  vug*  fay  a  £z  Tctvgxg,
xctTrpug,  ctfaKlgvovag,  kou  tcl  ruroig  7ra$ct7rfa<ricL>  rag  /jlw  uv
cney/Jig  zmg  roturug  zivoa  kcu  rug  rm  cw^mm  @tvg  Cpn^ov
<rvva6goi£p(JLem>9  roig  afaifJLtorcjLToig  kou  SwoLfULimTctroig  Z7ro-
fxzvtov.  oig  c%(&  (jlz v  rug  agyng  i%vg‘  ovo/uct  <T  a v
€i7roi  rig  {jLova%xiciv.  zneiS'civ  H  Toig  <tvty>(j.cl<ji  S'icl  tov  x$0V0V
VTroyzi/nTCLi  rvnpo(pioL  kcu  (Tvv/jziciy  tots  apyy\  (Zcunfatag
(pVZTCtl •  KCU  TOTZ  7T£toTtog  ZWOlCt  yiUTOU  TX  KUfa  KOU  JlKCUX
Toig  ctvS-gMTToig,  o/uotag  S'z  kou  tmv  ivctvnm  Txroig.  ^  0  $z
T^ontsy  Tr,g  ctQ’xyg-)  kou  rug  yzvzrztog  rocv  zi^uzvtov  rotor  fa.

Ilancov  yci.%  np og  rug  rvvovnag.  ogfjLtovrtoV  kcltol  cpvrtv,
zk  fa  tut  to  v  ncitfanoiidg  oLTTOTzfajULAm'  cnorz  rig  rtov  zkt^ol-


( 7 )  TftlV  «J'o|o7rO<»JT«V  £lt)WV.’\  This

word,  like  many  others  in  Polybius,
is  not  to  be  found  in  any  lexicon,  ei¬
ther  ancient,  or  modern,  that  I  have
feen  j  nor,  I  believe,  in  any  other  au¬
thor-,  but,  as  it  is  formed  from  So%x
and  sjoijw,  with  the'  negative  particle
placed  before  it,  it  can  mean  nothing
but  thole  animals,  that  are  not  go¬
verned  in  their  adtions  -by  opinions
which  fenfe,  I  think,  the  French  tran-
flator  ought  to  have  expreffed,  and
not  to  have  contented  himfelf  with


faying  negatively,  qui  certainement  ne
fuivent  que  fes  loix  \  that  is,  celles  de  la
nature ,  which  immediately  precedes  it.

1^1  O  Si  T^OTJ’©'’  T>J?  XOI  -IVIS

’ppicivs  tmv  eiPr.fArjuiv  ■rciocSi.']  1  hus  ren¬
dered  by  the  French  tranflator,  c'eft
done  de  cette  forte  que  les  republiques ,  ou
les  focietez  civiles  ont  pris  naijjance:  If
he  had  attended  clofely  to  the  chain  of
reafoning,  which  our  author  has  pur-
fued  in  treating  'his  lubjedl,  he  would
have  been  lenhble  that  TCtlV  &  P(T  fAiV  UV  ^
in  this  place,  relates  to  the  formation

C pZVTtoV


(  399  )


tude ;  then  it  comes  to  pafs,  as  in  other  animals,  fo  in
men,  when  they  are  got  together  (which  it  is  reafonable
to  fuppofe  they  would  be,  as  they  are  of  the  fame  kind,  by
reafon  of  their  natural  weaknefs)  that  he,  who  excels  in
ftrength  of  body,  and  courage,  muft,  of  neceffity,  gain  the
command,  and  authority  over  the  reft  :  And,  as  in  animals
of  other  kinds  alfo,  which  are  not  influenced  by  opinions,
we  obferve  the  fame  thing  commonly  falls  out,  this  ought
to  be  looked  upon  as  the  moft  genuine  work  of  nature  :
Among  thefe,  the  ftrongeft  are,  by  common  confent,  allowed
to  be  the  mafters ;  fuch  as  bulls,  wild  boars,  cocks,  and
animals  of  the  like  nature:  In  the  fame  manner,  it  is
probable  that  men  alfo,  when  they  firft  get  together,  like
a  herd,  are  governed  by  thofe  of  the  greateft  ftrength  and
courage ;  the  meafure  of  whofe  power  is  ftrength,  and  their
government,  monarchy.  When  the  individuals,  thus  af-
fembled,  by  living  together,  become,  through  time,  habi¬
tuated  to  one  another,  then  is  the  foundation  laid  of  kingly
government;  and  then  do  mankind  receive  the  firft  tin&aire
of  honor  and  juftice,  and  of  their  oppolites:  The  notions
of  which  are  firft  formed  in  the  following  manner.

Every  one  having  a  natural  impulfe  to  copulation,  the
confequence  of  which  is  procreation,  when  a  child,,  who,


of  the  notions  of  honor  and  juftice ,  th
noth*  Kocihuouis,  which  immediately  pre¬
cedes  it,  and  not  to  That  of  com¬
monwealths,  and  civil  focieties  :  For,
after  he  has  fet  forth  the  undutifulnefs
of  children  to  their  parents,  and  the
ingratitude  of  the  obliged  to  their
benefactors,  he  makes  the  indignation
arifing  in  the  breads  of  thofe,  who  are
witneffes  to  the  inftances  he  gives  of
both,  to  produce  the  fhft  imprcfiion
of  the  power  of  duty,  which,  he  fays,,
is  the  beginning,  and  end  of  juftice.
He  goes  on  to  fhew  that,  the  applaufe


which  valor  meets  with,  and  the  con¬
tempt,  with  which  a  contrary  beha¬
viour  is  treated,  create  in  the  minds
of  men  the  notions  of  honor  and  dif-
honor ,  and  of  the  difference  between
them.  So  that,  I  believe,,  the  reader
will  agree  with  me,  that  this  paiiagp.
is  not  applicable  to  the  formation  of
commonwealths,  and  civil  focieties,
as  the  French  trandator  has  rendered
it,  but  to  That  of  the  notions  of  honor
and juftice  ;  and  that  r oioo-Je  plainly  re¬
lates  to  what  follows,  and  not  to  what
precedes.


(  400  )

tyiVTMV  iig  Yi AiXldV  Uo/LtZV®-',  (dY]  Ve/dOl  XU?lV>  CtfJLVVUl

Txroig  dig  exfgotipein*  aAA<x  7rov  rdvamct  xdXMg  XeFeiv  n  dgct v
rxroig  efyeigoiY)'  J'wA ov  Mg  dvcdgereiv  xcu  71  gocxo7fleiv  eixog  mg
evovtctg  xcucvvidovrdg  tyiv  yeFevYifdevvv  ex  tmv  yewYicdVTMv  eni-
jueMidh  xcu  xdxondd-eidv  %e gi  Td  Text id  xcu  tyiv  tut® v  3-e$a-
Tteidv  xcu  T%o(pYiv.  m  ydg  ye  vug  tmv  uvSgM7TMV  tuvtyi  did(pe-
govl&TM v  dh7\ct)v  tyavy  w  fjiomg  dvroig  [Merest  vx  xcu  Aofir/ux9
(pdvepov  dg  &x  eixog  7TdgdTge%eiv  dvrxg  tyiv  7r$oeigv{deVY]V  did*
(popdv,  Xd0d7re§  em  tm v  d7\KMV  FFmmv9  ctAA  e7riCY)jddive&6di
to  yivojdevov 3  xcu  dvcdgeceicQdi  roig  7rapxcr  7TgoogM(devxg  to
(JLe7\hov,  xcu  cvTKhoyiFpfdev^g^  on  to  7Cdgdn7\Y\ciov  exdcoig  dv-
TCdv  orvfkvgnrei.  Kdi  fdYiv  ordv  7T&  7tdT\iv  ZTe%(&  inro  S-ctlegx
Ti>x<t)V  e7rtx&gidg  n  (ZonB-eidg  ev  roig  deivoig,  (dY)  vejuy  tm  cm-
cdvnxd^Vy  a?\7\d  wore  xcu  (2>7\d7rleiv  efyeign  txtov'  (pdvegov
dg  eixog  tm  toixtm  dvcdgereicQcu  xcu  7rgocxo7pieiv  mg  eidolag,
cvvdFdVdxlxvTdg  /dev  tm  7te7\dg ,  avdCpe^ovTdg  J*  en  dvmg  to
7rd%d7rM<riov'  ^  eFFg  dv  vnoyiFveTdi  rig  evvoid  7idg  zxucm
TY\g  m  xdtjYixovTog  dvvdfdeMg  xcu  Seeded'  om$  eciv  ug^n  xcu
re  A©-'  dixaiocvvYig.

O/doitog  7rd?\LVy  ordv  dfdvvvi  (dev  rig  n^o  uclvtmv  ev  ro:g
deivoig,  vQityitcli  de  xcu  (defrag  evntyc^ag  tmv  ochxifdoddTMV
Imm v'  eixog  /dev  rov  toiztovvtto  t«  TrM^g eniCY](ddcioLg

(9)  E|  wvvi -oytfvz'O  ti$  twoix  •zxcr.Q  wet-  not  followed  this  fenfe  in  h's  tranda-
yw  r>jf  rv  jt«0tjjcovro?  $ujuxij.tooi  kou  Sicv&u.]  tion  *,  I  have  altered  it  to
Cafaubon’s  edition  of  Polybius,  which  is  more  agreeable  both  to
which  is  by  much  the  beft,  has  the  fenfe,  and  to  the  conftru&ion,

which  I  imagine  to  be  a  fault  in  the  fince  twonz  rig  Stupa?  is  Icarce  intel-
impreffion,  particularly,  fince  he  has  ligible.

TvFxdvuv


(  A-Ol  )

by  the  care  of  his  parents,  has  attained  the  age  of  difcre-
tion,  makes  no  grateful  return,  nor  yields  any  affiftance,
to  thofe,  by  whom  he  was  brought  up  ;  but,  on  the  con¬
trary,  endeavours  to  abufe  them  by  his  words,  or  actions,
it  is  plain  that  thofe,  who  are  witneffes  of  it,  and  know  the
pains  and  hardfhips  their  parents  underwent  in  taking  care
of,  and  bringing  up,  their  children,  mult  be  difpleafed,  and
offended  at  this  behaviour  :  For,  as  there  is  this  difference
between  mankind,  and  other  animals,  that  the  former  are
indued  with  underftanding  and  reafon,  it  is  plain,  they
will  not  negleCt  the  ufe  of  thefe  faculties,  by  which  they  are  fo
much  diftinguifhed  from  thofe  animals,  but  obferve  what
pailes  upon  this  occafion,  and  be  difpleafed  with  it ;  parti¬
cularly,  when  they  look  forward,  and  confider  that  the  like
misfortune  may  happen  to  each  of  them.  Again,  when
any  one,  who  has  been  aflifted,  and  relieved  by  another  in
diftrefs,  inftead  of  being  grateful,  endeavours  to  injure  his
benefactor,  it  is  manifeft  that  thofe,  who  are  acquainted
with  fuch  a  proceeding,  muft  be  difgufted,  and  offended
at  it,  not  only  becaufe  they  compaflionate  the  fufferings  of
their  neighbour,  but  alfo  becaufe  they  themfelves  expeCt  to
meet  with  the  like  treatment:  From  whence  fome  notion,
and  confederation  of  the  power  of  duty  is  introduced  into  every
man’s  mind ;  which  is  the  beginning,  and  end  of  juftice.

In  like  manner,  when  any  one  runs  the  hazard  of  his
life  in  the  defence  of  the  community,  refills,  and  withftands
the  moft  violent  attacks  of  wild  beafts,  it  may  be  expeCted
that  fuch  a  one  will  meet  with  the  acclamations  of  the

(io)  Eix@-‘  juev  tbv  tvix'jvv  \Jznv  m  zsrKfj-  tion  of  every  thing  that  follows.  Pour-

£7n<Tvl[Acio'ixs  Tvf%txvav  evyoiKyg  non  3TgQ-  quoi  ciu.  coYitvciiYd  donne-t-on  tant  d’ cip-
s-a7«c>j?.]  The  French  translator  has  left  plaudijjements  a  celui  qui  &c.  are  his
out  the  moll  material  part  of  this  fen-  words ;  whereas  Polybius  fays,  that
tence,  which  ferves  as  the  founda-  fuperior  ftrength  and  valor  are  the  qua-

Vol.  I.  F  f  f  People,


(  402  )

TvI%U1l€lV  WI/oixM  KCU  7T$  OfcO.MW  TOV  fa  TCiVCi'PilCL  Tblto  TTgCLrloilct
mrctfi/etHrew  kcu  7F§o<r>to7rw  £  kcjlTuv  zv7\ofo v  vncFinc-Qai  Tiva
S-zoogiav  7ra%ct  Toig  noKKoig  cu%g\i  kcu  kuAx?  kcu  rr,g  TX.&vngog
cL?\7\YiKa  faaQogug.  kcu  to  /uzv  (y\ Ab  kcu  (ja^crzodg  Tvy^dniv,.
faaTO  (TVfJLtpZgOV  TO  fa  tpvfa,  OTCU  Zl)  0(V  0  7T%0ZT0t)g  KCU  Tr,V  JUzIicr-
TYIV  fajVCtfJU v  S%GdVy  CLSl  GVH7FKTXyn  TCtg  7T%0Zlt?Yl(JZV0ig  KCtTOL  rug

rav  TtoAAttV  faaAz^zig,  kcu  fa%yToig  moTUTio/uzvotg  faavzpim-
Kogzimi  Tb  kclt  afyav  emroig*  bKzn  tm  fiiav  fafacTzg,  m  fa
yvteuy  to  IrAzm  zv£ oKovflzg,  molarlovlai  kcu  vvoratjum  ryv  a^yw
avlb,  kclv  oA odg  m  yngoLiog*  o/uoSv/uafa v  Z7rafjivvoflzg  kcu  faaFodn.
(Fofxzvoi  7r§og  rug  zmGxMvoVTctg  dvru  rn  favarzia'  kcu  fa  to*

TOlbTte  TQO7T0d  ficUTltevg  ZK  fULQl/CL%X'd  A OLvftcLVet  yZV0{JLZV(&'

otuv  cafec/L  Tb  S-vjab  kcu  mg  iyy(&  fa^aAafa  rnv  vyz/aonctv
6  7\oyi(T[jLog.  Avm  mAb  kcu  faKcub  ticjl%  avdpdTTOig

Kctlct  (pvcn v  zvvoia  kcu  toov  zvcLvhm  rbToig'  otvrn  ficuritoict-s
ctMdmg  ap%n  kcu  yzvzng.  b  yag  (aovov  cwToig, ,  aAKa  kcu

TOig  ZK  TbTOdV  Z7TI  7To7\V  fauQvACLTlbCTl  TCtg  CtZyCLg'  7TZ7TZlCr~
pizvob  Tbg  zk  Toixrtov  yzyovoTctg ,  kcu  T^aC^znag  mo  Toib-
Toig ,  (z$oy,7r7\Y\(Tiodg  z^etv  kcu  rag  Tr^oai^zcrug.  Eav  fa  7totz
roig  zKyovotg  fara^zmcrmi,  ftoiovvlcU  /azla  touutcl  tyiv  cupzrcv
row  a%%oFj&)v  kcu  (ZctnMtev,  bK  zti  Kola  Tag  ctojactltKag
Kat  SvjcuKcig  famfjueig9  aAA a  mi  kola  Tag  mg  yw/uvg,
kui  Tb  7\oyi(rfjLb  faatpogag'  tfei&tv  eitotyorzg  ztt  ofcjTm  tmv
tt>yw  TY\g  ajutpotv  cz^cAAayyig.

lities,  that  firft  ingage  the  people  to  perly  exprefTed  by  the  word  ar^s’cmjcjj?,
chufe  the  perfon,  who  is  poiTeifed  of  and  ought  to  have  been  preferred  in
them,  for  their  commander :  This  is  pro-  the  tranflation.


To


(  403  }

people,  teftifying  their  good  will  to,  and  defire  to  be  go¬
verned  by,  him ;  while  the  man,  who  adds  in  a  contrary
manner,  will  be  cenfured,  and  difiiked :  From  whence,
again,  it  is  reafonable  to  believe  that  fome  confideration  of
honor  and  difhonor,  and  of  the  difference  between  them,
will  be  produced  in  the  minds  of  the  people ;  and  that  the
former  will  be  admired  and  imitated,  through  the  advantage
that  flows  from  it,  and  the  latter  avoided.  When  therefore,
the  perfon,  who  has  the  command  over  the  reft,  and  is
indued  with  fuperior  ftrength,  in  his  harangues  to  the
people,  for  ever  countenances  the  men  I  have  mentioned,
and  has  created  in  his  fubje&s  an  opinion,  that  he  conftantly
treats  every  one  according  to  his  merit ;  they  are  no  longer
afraid  of  violence,  but  rather  willingly  fubmit  to  him,  and
unite  in  fupporting  his  government,  even  though  he  is  far
advanced  in  years,  unanimoufly  defending,  and  maintaining
him  againft  all  thofe,  who  endeavour  to  ftipplant  him  in  the
command.  By  this  means,  a  monarch  infen hbly  becomes  a
king,  that  is,  when  the  power  is  transferred  from  courage
and  ftrength,  toreafon:  This  is  the  firft  natural  notion  of
honor  and  juftice  among  men,  and  of  their  contraries ;  and
this  the  beginning,  and  origin  of  true  kingly  government :
For  the  people  preferve  the  command  not  only  to  them,
but  to  their  defendants  long  after  them;  being  perfuaded
that  thofe,  who  have  received  their  birth,  and  education
from  fuch  men,  will  referable  them  alfo  in  their  principles.
But,  if,  at  any  time,  they  are  diflatisfied  with  their  defen¬
dants,  they  then  chufe  magiftrates  and  kings,  with  regard
•only  to  fuperior  fenfe  and  reafon,  and  not  to  bodily  ftrength
and  courage ;  having,  by  experience  been  convinced  of  the
difference  between  them.

F  f  f  2


Formerly,

J  *


(  404  )

To  (JLZ V  XV  TTdAoUOV  eVeyV^CCTXOV  TUig  (idTlAeiCUg  01  xe/~
Sevleg  dna.^  xcu  Tvyovreg  Tvg  e^xcriag  tcwtw  Torng  Te  fad-
(pegovlag  oyv^x(jcevoiy  kcu  Teiyifyvreg,  xcu  y od^cv  xotlaxla-
fjavoi*  to  f/ev  rng  acr(paAetag  yae/v>  to  fa  Tvg  faa^iAeiag

TOdV  67TiliJ^€i&) V  TOig  V7r0Teluy(ieV0ig'  d(Ld  fa  TTefl  TOUUTd  00CTX-

faafyvleg  exlog  v<ruv  Tracrvg  faafioAvg  kou  C pSovov ,  fact  to  (/.vie
Tree/  tvv  stQvtci  (/.eyaAag  TroimQcu  Tag  ccfa^tAAciydg,  (/.me
Tree/  Tvv  fycdcri y  xcu  Trotnr  dKAd  cz^tTrAvcriov  eyuv  tvv
(hioleiav  TOig  ctAAoig ?  of/ocre  Troixjuevoi  TOig  TroKKoig  aei  ty\ v
faouTctv'  ei ret  fa  ex  faafayvg  xcu  xutcl  yevog  rag  a%ya ig
tsfycAcL(/.£ctvov1eg,  moif/a  /uev  eiyov  vfa  tcl  Trgog  tvv  cjlt-

<PoL?\etOLV,  eTOlfJLCL  fa  XCU  TTAettt  TOdV  IxdVOdV  TCL  TT^Og  TVV

<i %o(pvv  TOTe  fa  Tcug  tmQv/JUcug  brofievoi  fad  tvv  Tregixcriav,
e^dKAovg  (lev  e  fa  via g  vTreAa&ov  faetv  eyuv  Tovg  vyov/uevovg
TOdV  VTroldTiO(/.eva)Vy  e^aAAxg  fa  xcu  noixiAag  Tag
tvv  T^oCpvv  UTroAouucretg  kcu  (ufy.<jx&jagy  avavlippvTovg  fae  xcu
cfafyc  toov  (tv  TrgocvxovTCdv  Tag  tmv  A cp^ofacriodv  y%uag  xcu
crvvxcriag'  edp  cig  (lev  Cpdovx  yevo/uevx  xcu  TrgocrxoTrvg,  eCp
oig  fa  (/Krug  exxcuof/evx ,  xcu  fao-(ievixvg  ogyvg,  eyevero  f/ev
ex  Tvg  fiapiAetag  Tvgppptg'  agyv  fa  xdTdAvcreodg  eyevvuTo >
xcu  cvgcicrig  e7ri&x?\vg  TOig  vyx(/e\Qig%  vv  xx  ex  toov  yete/god vy
aA?\  ex  TOdV  yevvcuoTdTtov  xcu  f/eyaAo^vyrndTOdv^  eTt
fa  $-appctA€6)roLTG) v  avfaodv  cvn&cuve  ysvecrQcu'  fad  to  Txg
toixtxs  wig  a  favcurdcu  (peguv  Tdg  tmv  e(pegmodV  v£mg.  tx


e£«aa*?  (Js  v.ou  noiKihai  ixs  u£&  Plus pompeufement  fervi  que  fes  fujets ,
tv  'tiaQiiv  &7To\cuj<rei$  kou  sr#§#rKsv#f.]  fays  the  French  tranflator  j  which,  in

fa


(  405  ;)

Formerly,  therefore,  thofe,  who  were  once  chofen  kings,
and  inverted  with  this  dignity,  grew  old  in  the  enjoyment
of  it :  In  the  mean  time,  they  fortified  advantageous  ports,
furrounding  them  with  walls,  and  poflefled  themfelves  of  a
territory ;  by  the  former,  they  confulted  the  fecurity  of
their  fubjedts;  and,  by  the  latter,  they  fupplied  them  with
plenty  of  provifions.  While  they  employed  themfelves  in
this  manner,  they  continued  blamelels  and  unenvied,  be-
caufe  they  differed  very  little  either  in  their  clothes,  their
table,  or  their  manner  of  living,  from  the  reft  of  the  people,
with  whom  they  paffed  their  lives :  But  afterwards,  their
pofterity  fucceeding  to  the  government  by  right  of  inheri¬
tance,  and  finding  every  thing  provided  for  them,  that
was  neceflary  for  their  fecurity,  and  more  than  was  ne-
ceflary  for  their  fupport ;  they  were  led  by  fuperfluity  to
indulge  their  appetites,  and  to  imagine  that  it  became  princes
to  appear  in  a  different  drefs  from  their  fubje&s,  to  eat  in  a
different,  and  more  luxurious  manner,  with  greater  variety,
and  preparation,  and  to  enjoy,  without  contradi&ion,  even
the  forbidden  pleafures  of  love ;  the  firft  of  which,  pro¬
duced  envy  and  diflike,  and  the  other,  hatred  and  resent¬
ment;  by  which  means,  kingly  government  degenerated
into  tyranny  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  a  foundation  was  laid,
and  a  confpiracy  formed  for  the  deftrucrtion  of  thofe  who
exercifed  it:  The  accomplices  of  which,  were  not  men  of
inferior  rank,  but  perfons  of  the  moft  generous,  the  moft
exalted,  and  alfo  the  moft  enterprifing  fpirit ;  becaufe  fuch
men  can  leaft  bear  the  infolence  of  thofe  in  power.  The

my  opinion,  is  much  too  general  an  riety  both  of  the  meats,  and  drefiing.
expreffion,  fince  it  leaves  out  the  va-


people,.


(  4°  6  )

h  oral)  A a&n  ovvmyyovjoi  mra  tw

vyxfdtvm  fict  rets  7r%ooipv[JLZVd;  curw  to  (ulzv  tyi;  (Zdcrt-
A  eta;  xca  {xovd^yid;  afro;  dphv  dVvpeiTo,  (I2)  to  h  tv;  cie/-
fotcgcLTiot;  cuuQi;  d%yvv  sA ctf/Joctn  xou  ytvzwv.

T oig-  yd%  mttOwrdvt  tx;  /uovdpx%;>  oiow%u&w  ^I2)  ex
yu^o;  ctKoMone;  ol  7roAAo;>  txtoi;  vygMTO  7rpoTdTout;,  xcu
tztol;  tmTpmov  ctpuv.  ol  fa9  to  {dev  ngmov  aT/men-
tyvre;  tw  emT%07rvvy  aJW  7r%ov%yicuTeeov  emixuo  t&  xotv
(TV[£(pz%oVTo;,  xcu  WifefjLQHM);  xcu  <pv7\d%Tixod;  hctTCt  yeie/>-
fyvtt;>  xcu  t%;  xdT  than,  xcu  rot  xotvd  r«  7tA»j9«£.  oYs  JV3
flCth'ZoUVTO  %d7\lV  Kcufo;  KOLTSOV  TVV  CWTVV  e^HTidV

ci7Tet%oi  (dev  one;  mmv,  dTetpot  $e  xd§o7\%  7roAmxv;  ictotyi-
t&  xcu  7 rdppvTid;y  TeS-Qtju/uevoi  <T  g|  ctgyv;  ev  tcu g  TOdV
7rcirep&) v  e^ztricu;,  xcu  TrgoaytoFcUs  •  og/dvcdne;  ol  (de v  em
nheove^idv  xcu  (pihdgyu&czv  ctilxo v,  ol  cT  evn  (aeOd;  xcu  tu;
d[Jia  tcwtou;  d7s7\VT%;  evotyid;'  ol  f  ztti  ra;  tu v  yvveu-
x&)v  v£%et;  xcu  wcu^m  dp7Tdya {dereTvcrdv  {dev  tvv  aeuTo-


(lz)  To  de  TJf?  Ct(lAirioK°0tll<SiG  AY0IS
(A CtUbXVi  Y.OU  yfveiuv.j  Both  the
Latin  and  French  tranflators  have  very
properly  avoided  an  abfurdity,  which
the  rendering  »u9 iq  in  the  common  ac¬
ceptation  of  the  word  mtift  neceffarily
have  led  them  into  •,  though  I  wifh
they  had  given  it  the  fenfe,  in  which
Polybius  has  taken  it  upon  this  oc-
cafion,  which  is,  thereupon,  after  that,
or  fomethinjr  to  thiteffedt.  There  is

u  .

a  pafFage  in  Homer,  in  which  that
word  can  be  ufed  in  no  other  fenfe  :
it  is  in  the  dialogue  between  Ulyffes,


and  Eumaeus,  where  the  latter  fays.
Hew  could  I  expedl  to  live  in  reputation
among  men,  or  implore  the  affiance  of
Jupiter  with  any  confidence,  if,  having
brought  you  to  my  houfe,  and  treated  you
in  a  hofpitable  manner ,  I  fijoidd,  after
that,  put  you  to  death?

B«v’,  STO)  Y.iV  <0,01  SVKXetY,  T* ,  OiOtiyj  T£,

•Eitj  £7 r  ai'j-couTr&c  du ad  env!:aa,  <xi  vtt c-Cx,

O;  c‘  inn  ?;  /cAktjvjv  ayafov,  y*ou  dWtf,

AT012  de  x leivoojui,  (ptAov  3’  ano  hvuov
i\ oty.r,\>,

Tlpop^wi  $/j  xty  itp-ttla  A>ct  K(o-viwvc&  A?ci-f*r,v  •,

Odyff.  s.  ver.  402.

XpfiTidh


(  407  )

people,  therefore,  having  thefe  to  lead  them,  and,
for  the  reafons  before  mentioned,  uniting  againft
their  rulers,  kingly  government,  and  monarchy  were
extirpated,  and  ariftocracy  thereupon  began  to  be  efta-
blifhed.

For  the  people,  as  an  immediate  acknowledgement  to
thofe  who  had  destroyed  monarchy,  chofe  thefe  leaders  for
their  governors,  and  left  all  their  concerns  to  them.  Thefe,
at  firff,  chearfully  accepting  the  truft,  preferred  the  advan¬
tage  of  the  public  to  all  other  confederations,  and  admi-
niftred  all  affairs,  both  public  and  private,  with  care  and
vigilance:  But  here  again,  the  fons  of  thefe,  having  fuc-
ceeded  their  parents  in  the  fame  power,  they,  being  unac¬
quainted  with  evils,  abfolute  ftrangers  to  civil  equality  and
liberty,  and  educated,  from  their  infancy,  in  the  fplendor
of  the  power,  and  dignities  of  their  parents,  and  fome  ot
them,  giving  themfelves  up  to  avarice,  and  the  defire  of
unjuft  gain,  others,  to  drunkennefs,  and  intemperate  en¬
tertainments,  and  others,  to  the  abufe  of  women,  and  ra-
vifhment  of  boys,  by  this  behaviour,  changed  the  arifto-


OlCVtl  t'A  Ct7ro£lMiS  cl

•EroAAci.]  The  French  tranfiator  has
faid,  Le  peuple ,  fenfible  au  bienfait  de
ceux  qui  I’avoient  deUvre  des  monarques,
miet  ces  genereux  citoiens  a  fa  tete  &  fe
foumit  aleur  conduite.  So  that,  he  has
left  out  £jc  which  gives  great

beauty  to  this  pafifage,  and  which  Ca-
faubon  has  very  properly  rendered  by  e
vebligio.

(*4)  Airti^ci  y.iv  cvlsf  Gens  peu.

accbutumez  au  travail  is,  furely,  not
the  fenfe  of  this  pafifage;  Polybius


means  the  evils,  which  the  people  had
buffered  under  their  tyrants,  and  with
which  thefe  fuccefiors  of  their  deli¬
verers  were  unacquainted.  This  he
afterwards  explains,  when,  fpeaking
of  the  infancy  of  democracy,  he  fays
that,  while  any  are  livings  who  felt  the
power  and  domination  of  the  few ,  they
acquiefce  under  the  prefent  eflablifhment ,

sn  cu^micu  Tivjf  <r uv

Y.cu  jMccretoig  eiA^tpcrcuv,  which
is  the  fame  thing  he  fays  here,  only  in
more  words.


cracy


(  4°8  )

X^LTIOLV  tig  o7\iyct%Xlci))  *  ^  MTWMVCLCrctV  tV  TOig

7T7w3t(ri  7TOL7\lV  TOL  Y^U7f7\WlCL  TQig  CLgk  p«.$Wf.  SlO  XCU

cff^7rM<riov  crvvt&cuvs  to  tsA®-'  cw\m  yivtcdcu  mg  kolIol-
?go@vg  Toig  ntgi  rxg  TVpoLWxg  GLTvxvfxoLcriv.  tnetScLV  yot%  Tig
xrvv6taL<rct[JLmg  tov  (pQovov  x cu  to  (jlkt©*  holt  cwtm,  to
7ra^L  Toig  7roAiTcug  v7rcL§xov’  kmcwcil  Sappncry  7\tyeiv  v

7f§0LTltlV  Tl  XOLTOL  TOdV  TTgOtTMTUV,  7T0LV  tTOlfJLOV  XCJUL  CVVtgyOV

AaiuL&ctm  to  7t7\Y\b(&>'  ?\oi7rov ,  ig  (utv  tponvcrcumg,  ig  St
(pvfoLStvoroLVTtg,  •  •  •  %Tt  (ZcanKtoL  7r%oi<goLoScit  To7\(JLmir  tn
StSlOTtg  TYjV  TCdV  7T%0Tt$C*)V  OlSiKIOLV'  UTt  7C7\eiO(TlV  t7flT^t7TtlV
tol  xoivol  Stappuov  nci^OL  vroSag  ouuToig  xvvg  Trig  7r$oTt%ov
ayvoiug'  ^  fJLovvg  St  (r<$m  xctrdheiwofjLtvv?  thmSog  axt-
(mix  mg  tv  avTOig ,  tm  touutyiv  mTCLfitgoVTow  xou  tv v  fjLtv
TToAlTHOLV  t%  oAtyOL%XlW$  SvfJLOX^LTlOLV  tTTOlVCTCLV,  TYiV  St  TtoV
xoivodv  7T$ovoiclv  xou  m$iv  tig  <r<pctg  olutw  cLVtha&ov.

Kou  /Utxpt  fJLtV  av  tTl  ffto^toVTCU  TIVtg  TOdV  V7TtgO%Ug  xou
Svvctg-eictg  7ret£$tv  tiAntyoTtoV,  curpjLtufavTtg  tv  vapoury  xclIol-
Zcurei,  7 rtgi  7t7\ht%  voixvtcu  ty\v  icmyogictv,  xcu  mv  vappmav .
OTCtV  S'  t7TiytmVTCtl  VSOly  XOU  VOUCH  VOtSfdV  VOLAlV  «  Sy\[JLO-
X^tTlCL  rtfylSofaj  TOT  XX  tTl  SlCl  TO  (TVVYiOtg  tV  /UtyOLhcp  Tl -
Qtfjttvoi  to  mg  imyopctg  xcu  vappvnag,  fyrxn  vMov  t^eiii
TCtiV  TToAAft)!/’  fJLOL7\lTd  S  tig  TXT  tfXm7flii(riV  01  Tctig  xnaig
♦

(*s)  Movjjj  St  <r<pici  xoiTotKeixopivtis  t\-  culty  of  rendering  unions  properly,
tiSos  ctKt&ix  -w  tv  av tok.]  II  ne  rejloit  prevailed  upon  the  French  tranflator
done  plus  au  peuple  d’ autre  efperance  que  to  leave  it  out  •,  though  he  muft  have
dans  lui-meme.  I  imagine,  the  diffi-  been  fenfible  that  the  energy  of  the

v7Ttptxov1tg.


(  4°9  )

cracy  into  an  oligarchy;  and  foon  infpired  the  people  with
the  fame  paffions  they  were  before  pofiefted  with ;  by  which
means,  their  cataftrcphe  became  the  fame  with  That  of  the
tyrants  :  For,  if  any  perfon,  obferving  the  general  envy  and
hatred,  which  thefe  rulers  have  incurred,  has  the  courage  to
fay,  or  do  any  thing  again  ft  them,  he  finds  the  whole  body
of  the  people  ready  to  aflift  him  :  Thereupon,  they  put  fome
of  them  to  death,  and  banifh  others ;  but  dare  not,  after
that,  appoint  a  king  to  govern  them,  being  ftill  afraid  of
the  injuft  ice  of  the  firft  ;  neither  dare  they  intruft  the  go¬
vernment  with  any  number  of  men,  having  ftill  before  their
eyes  the  errors,  which  thefe  had  before  committed  :  So  that,
having  no  hope  unallayed,  but  in  themfelves,  they  lay  hold
on  that ;  and,  by  converting  the  government  from  an  oli¬
garchy  to  a  democracy,  take  upon  themfelves  the  care,  and
charge  of  the  public  affairs.

And,  as  long  as  any  are  living,  who  felt  the  power,  and
domination  of  the  few,  they  acquiefce  under  the  prefent
eftablifhment,  and  look  upon  equality,  and  liberty  as  the
greateft  of  bleflings.  But,  when  a  new  race  of  men  grows
up,  and  the  democracy  falls  into  the  hands  of  their  chiT
drens  children,  thefe,  no  longer  regarding  equality  and  li¬
berty,  from  being  accuftomed  to  them,  aim  at  a  greater
fhare  of  power  than  the  reft,  particularly  thofe  of  the
greateft  fortunes ;  who,  grown  now  ambitious,  and,  being

whole  fentence  turns  upon  the  force  intruded  with  the  government,  were
of  that  word,  which  will  plainly  ap-  equally  afraid  of  both  •,  fo  that,  they
pear  upon  confidering  the  context  •,  had  no  hope  that  was  not  mixed  with
Polybius  fays  that  the  people,  having  very  juft  apprehenfions,  but  in  them-
been  abufed  both  by  their  kings  and  felves.
the  few,  whom  they  had  fucceflively


VOL.  I.


G  g  g


unable


(  )

v7reg6X°vl&'  Mtnov  orav  c^fayvodTiv  ziti  to  <piActg%etP,  ^l6y)  kcu
(JLY)  SvVtoflai  S'  CLVTQdV  KCU  SlCL  TV  iSiag  GL$£yi$  TvfyoLHlV  TbltoV,
Sia(p9zi%bcri  Tag  bcriag,  SzMafyvlzg.  kcu  A vfaaivofizvoi  r a  nAnOn

KCtla  7TClfia  TgOTTOV.  2^  to V  GTCtV  StogoSoKbg  KCU  Stop otf)OL-

yxg  XOLTOLCrxeVCUTto(ri  TXS  7T0A Atff,  SlCL  TV  Ct(p%0VCL  CO^otbcL-
yiuv,  TOT  Y]Sn  7tcO\lV  TO  fJLZV  TY\g  SvfAoK^dLTiag  mrctTWiTOU.
(iSlSCLTCU  S'  US  (3 ICLV  KOU  %6lgOXgCtliCtV  J)  Snftox.ga.Ttct.  CVPSlQtcr-
fjiivo’v  ya§  to  ttAhS©^  zvdiziv  tci  ctAA orgioty  kcu  Tag  sA mSag
e^eiv  t%  fyv  €7n  Toig  Ttov  7rsA ag>  orav  Aci&j  TrgoTamv  (uzfa-
7\o(p%ova  kcu  to?\[jlv%ov,  &kkMio(jlwv  Sz  Sia  mvtav  tm  zv  m

%07\LTZICL  TlfJUtoV  TOTZ  Sy)  %Zl%OK%UTiaV  a%0TZ7\Zh  KCU  TOTZ

(rvva9%oi^o[j.Z'.ov  now  crtpayag,  cpvyag,  yng  avaSacrfK.bg9  mg
av  ct7roTtQr)§ito[JLMV  7ra?\tv  evgy  Szcmomv  kcu  (Kovalev.

Avtv  7fo?\ileict}v  avawxhtow  ^  avm  (pvrztog  ouiovofjuot,  kuS
yiV  /azIaSaAMt  kcu  (az(h?alai,  kcu  naAiv  zvg  avra  Karavrct  ra
Kara  Tag  TroAirziag.  Tcivra  Tig  cradptog  zmyvtoKtog,  X?°~
voig  fjiiv  icrtog  Siafia^mazai  A zytov  vyrze  tb  /us AAcvt( &  ?rep
7ro7\?ziag‘  to  Sz  mg  av^ncrztog  sm?ov  z?iv  -/>  mg  (pvogpig,  v
7 rb  fJLzramrSaii  crizavitog  av  Sia<r(paA?\o?o,  ’Xtopg  ogyv  n
CpcOPb  7T0l'$/UZV@J  TYiV  aTTO^UCTiV.  Kcu  (UrtV  TTZgi  yz  Tug  Pto-


(*6)  K on  pvt  SwtoVTOU  cT  MVTCOV  KOU  TJJ?

j Slot.?  ccgeTtjf  r vy^ocvav  t«t&;v.]  I  have  ta¬
ken  the  liberty  to  make  two  altera¬
tions  in  the  text  with  regard  to  this
fentence  •,  the  nrft  is  very  obvious,  all
the  editions  have  avra*,  for  which  I
have  fubftituted  dorm  :  The  fecond,
though  not  fo  obvious,  may,  poffibly,
appear  as  well  founded.  All  the  edi¬


tions  (not  excepting  Cafaubon’s)  join
t*t»v  to  ^tiz(p(lei^<n  ;  fo  that,

according  to  them,  the  conftrubtion
will  run  thus,  ol  oputjff&vlis  tm  to  (pihx^~
^e<v,  txtwv  JiaCpQstgxcri  tocs  mean¬

ing  their  own  fortunes,  which  mull,
no  doubt,  be  the  fenfe,  but  cannot  be
fupported  by  this  conftruction  ;  to  a-
void  this  difficulty,  therefore,  I  think

fJLCllto-V


(  4l  1  )

unable  to  obtain  the  power  they  aim  at,  by  themfelves,  and
their  own  merit,  diffipate  their  wealth  in  alluring,  and  cor¬
rupting  the  people  by  every  method  :  And  when,  to  ferve
their  wild  ambition,  they  have  once  taught  them  to  receive
bribes  and  entertainments,  from  that  moment  the  demo¬
cracy  is  at  an  end,  and  changes  to  force  and  violence.  For
the  people,  being  accuftomed  to  live  at  the  expence  of  others,
and  to  place  their  hopes  of  a  fupport  in  the  fortunes  of  their
neighbours,  if  headed  by  a  man  of  a  great  and  enterprifing
fpirit,  but  who,  through  his  poverty,  is  excluded  from  pub¬
lic  offices,  will  then  have  recourfe  to  violence ;  and,  getting
together,  will  murder,  banifh,  and  divide  among  themfelves
the  lands  of  their  adverfaries,  till  grown  wild  with  rage,  they
again  find  a  mafter,  and  a  monarch.

This  is  the  rotation  of  governments,  and  this  the  order
of  nature,  by  which  they  are  changed,  transformed,  and  re¬
turn  to  the  fame  point.  Whoever,  therefore,  is  perfectly
acquainted  with  thefe  things,  may,  poffibiy,  be  miltaken  in
point  of  time,  when  he  fpeaks  of  the  future  ftate  of  any
government ;  but,  if  he  gives  his  opinion  without  paffion,
or  envy,  he  will  feldom  mifiake  in  the  degree  of  the  encreafe,
or  corruption  of  each,  or  in  the  change  that  attends  them.
This  confideration,  above  all  others,  will  lead  us  to  the

there  is  a  necefllry  of  fjppoHng  manner  of  rendering  an  exprefiion  of

to  be  underftood  •,  to  which  tstwv  may  the  fame  import  has  been  already  ta-
very  naturally  be  referred  ;  unlefs  the  ken  notice  of  in  the  5th  annotation  :
reader  chafes  rather  to  read  tots  in-  Upon  this  occafion,  I  fhall  only  fay
(lead  of  that  neither  revolution ,  nor  changement

(*7)  Ai/rq  (pvazcvq  onicvouiX)  nu^‘  vy  [J.£-  expreffes  the  fenfe  of  a r&Aiv  fjf  xvTd
TaSaAAfj  kxa  d\ ar«A<v  nq  av-  iiciTavTM,  which  imphes  a  return  to  the
KatTMTx.  rx  kaIo.  rxq  ziroAnHot4.~\  Thus  former  State ,  fince  there  may  be  a  rtf-
rendered  by  the  French  tranflator  *,  volution ,  a  change ,  without  fuch  a  re-
Telie  ejl  la  revolution  des  etats ,  tel  eft  turn.

for  dr  e  fuivant  lequel  la  nature  change  la  (,s?)  X&>£j?  ocyyiq  y  All  the  edi-

forme  des  republiques .  This  general  tions  have  ooyw  which  is

G  g  g  2  knowledge


(  412  )

fJLCUOdV  7T07\tTilCig  XCLCt  TOLVTYlV  TY)V  tTUTCLClV  fLcO\l$  CtV  £km[JL&

as  yvodcriv  xcu  vis  rvsrctoreas,  xcu  tvs  olv^vtzus,  xcu  tvs
CMUYlS*  OfJLOlGdS  XCU  TVS  US  T^(JL7ia.ALV  IVOfJLiVVS  SX  TXT6)V  /US-
TO&oTwS.  Si  ya§  TiVCL  XCU  irtgCLV  7ro/\lTZLCLV->  (is  CtgTlttS  anoc-,
KCti  T CLVTYlV  (. TV(Jl£oUM  XClIct  Qv<JlV  CL7T  Up'fVS  V)V  TV¬

S'  cur iv,  xcu  tvv  av^vTiVy  xulct  (pvTiv  i‘£av  xcu  tvv  as  Tctvavltct
/UsIttSoLvV-  TXOniLV  F  6?CU  foot,  TtoV  fJLSTCt  TCLVTCt  pvQmOfJLZWV.

Nuy  cT  «7T^  fi%ctxv  KomofJLtQu  fjLVnfJLW  v7tz%  tvs  Avxxp y%  vo-
(jloQ&ticils*  sti  ycn%  zx  avoixaos  o  7\cyos  tvs  7rgcus(T£tos.

Exavos  yu%  ixoL<rci  tm  7rgo&giifMmv  twvovtcls  avcLyxctws

XCU  @VClXCt)S  STliTSK XjUSlCL,  XCU  <rvKAoyi<rOLfJUV©J  OTL  7TCLV
TTOfaractS  OLTTfiM  XCU  XUTCL  (JLIOLV  TVVZSVXOdS  fvVCLfJUV,  S7TlT(pCi-

A is  ytfvScth  Act  to  to-X^s  as  tv v  axaav  xcu  (pvra  napene-

fJLZVW  ZXTgi7T€<r&CLi  XOLXiCLV.  ^  XCtQctTTZg  yotg  Vlfrvgto  pLW  l@->,

^vLois  ^s  S-%L7izs  xcu  Tspv^oves  <rvfjL$vus  sicn  A vfiou,  oi  civ  xciv
7facrcts  Tcis  s^oo&s v  J'tcKpvf&xri  ;GAa£W,  im'  clvtov  fyQagc’Picu

TMV  (TVyfevojULWtoV  TOV  CLVTCV  TgOTTQV  XCU  T&V  7T0AlTUCM  TvyH-

vtlcu  xcP:ct  (pvcrii  ixasv  xcu  7rcigt7r£cti  Tis  xaxtct'  ficunMtct  fxev


fcarce  to  be  underhood  ;  for  which
reafon,  I  have  ventured  to  read  jj  c p6ov«
inhead  of  uipScva.  Sans  prejugez,  fays
the  French  tranflator,  which  is  a  tranf-
lation  of  neither.

(*9)  k ca  Tiis  rtHjUJK*]  La  [plendeur,  in
my  opinion,  does  not  exprels  ay-w,
fince  a  thing  may  be  in  fplendor ,  and
not  in  its  perfeflicn  j  this  may,  I  think,
with  great  propriety,  be  faid  of  the  very
commonwealth  our  author  is  here
fpeaking  of,  I  mean  That  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  which,  it  is  well  known,  was  in


great  fplendor,  both  before  it  had  ar¬
rived  to  its  perfection,  and  after  it  was
pail  it  :  This  is  fo  true  that  no  other
hate  ever  attained  fo  great  power  as
the  Roman  commonwealth  w?as  pof-
fefied  of  above  a  century  before  it  w as
in  its  perfection,  and  as  long  alter  it
had  palfed  it.  So  that,  though  its
fplendor ,  at  both  thofe  periods,  out-
fhone  thar  of  all  other  hates,  when  in
their  meridian,  yet  it  was  far  outlhone
by  itfelf,  when  arrived  to  that  point..

(2C)  K oiQuTrsg  ya.g  (nJ»j§w  y.fv  coy,  |vAo<f

C


(  4i3  )


knowledge  not  only  of  the  eftablifhment,  the  encreafe,  and
perfection  of  the  Roman  commonwealth,  but  alfo  of  its  fu¬
ture  return  to  its  former  ftate :  For,  as  the  original  inftitu-
tion,  and  encreafe  or  this  commonwealth  is,  as  much  as  any
other,  as  I  faid  before,  founded  on  nature,  fo  its  future  re¬
turn  to  its  former  ftate  is  alfo  founded  on  nature.  This
will  appear  from  the  following  difcourfe :  At  prefent,  we
fliall  juft  take  notice  of  the  laws  of  Lycurgus ;  the  confi-
deration  of  which  will  not  be  improper  to  the  prefent  pur¬
ple,  therefore,  obferving  that  every  thing,  that  has  been
faid,  was  founded  on  neceffity,  and  the  laws  of  nature,  con¬
cluded  that  every  form  of  government  that  is  iimple,  and
confifts  but  of  one  kind,  by  foon  degenerating  into  that
vice,  that  is  allied  to  it,  and  naturally  attends  it,  muft  be
unftable :  For,  as  ruft  is  the  natural  bane  of  iron,  and
worms  of  wood,  by  which,  as  by  inbred  evils,  though  they
efcape  all  foreign  mifchief,  they  are  fure  to  be  deftroyed ;
fo,  in  like  manner,  there  is  a  certain  vice  implanted  by  the
hand  of  nature  in  every  form  of  government,  and  by  her


tJe  7TS?  KM  T «<r<  Au-

fxxi.J  This  fine  thought  has  fuffered
very  much  in  the  hands  of  the  French
tranflator  ;  he  feems  to  have  been  mif-
ied  by  the  word  which  figni-

fies  natural  or  allied  to ,  as  well  as  born
with  •,  and,  by  taking  it  in  the  laid
fenfe,  has  made  Polybius  betray  an
ignorance  in  French,  which  I  am  per-
fuaded  he  was  very  incapable  of  in  his
own  language  :  But,  before  I  go  any
farther,  let  us  hear  what  he  fays-,  this
it  is,  comme  la  Rouille  nait  avec  le  fer ,
&  les  vers  avec  le  hois  :  Now,  it  is  cer¬
tain  that  neither  ruft  is  born  with  iron,
nor  worms  with  wood  ;  the  firft  being


the  effeft  of  fome,  or  of  all  the  cor-
rofive  acid  falts,  v/ith  which  the  air  is
impregnated,  and  which  are  perpetu¬
ally  floating  about  in  it,  together  with
the  attenuated  particles,  that  are  con¬
tinually  flying  off  from  all  other  bo¬
dies-,  all  which  particles  form  a  chaos,
wherein  I  am  perfuaded  every  produc¬
tion  of  nature  has  its  rep  re  tentative.
And,  as  for  worms,  they  are  no  more
born  with  wood,  than  ruft  is  with  iron  ;
worms  make  ule  indeed  of  wood  for
their  proteblion,  and,  poffibly,  for  their
nourifh ment ;  but,  if,  from  the  tough-
nefs  of  its  parts  it  is  improper  for  the
former,  as  the  heart  of  oak,  or  from

ordained


(  4i4  )

0  7iiIo/U£V(&i  Tp07T©-’5  OL*lC0X%CillCi  h  0  TVS  0A<ftfp-

yicig,  <h)ftOX.$ctTLCL  h  o  S'YigitoJfyg  kcu  &g  ig

olov  re  fjin  v  7Tclucl  tcl  7F§osigm(isvct  cvv  x?0VV  rag

(ULtTCtS‘CL<rW  K&ICL  TOV  CL$Tl  ?\cfoV.  CJL  7FgotfojJL£)l(&’  AVKHg^y
CL7T Ktih  GVViMCTCL.O  T))V  TTOhlTUCU'  aK7\&  ncumg

QfjLX  crvvnboi  ri  rag  agdctg,  kcu.  rag  tS'tor rHag  rm  agirow  no7\i-
revfjLOLittv'  ivci  fjunfov  ctu^ctvofievov  V7i ep  to  S'eov  tig  rug  gv(jlQv-
ug  e^gemlai  xouictg'  uHicw^mg  ce  mg  heard  Svvajuucdg  v%

CiAAflAO)!/  fJLr}OCL(JLd  VSVV,  fJLYjS'  Z7Tt  ZOAv  KoCiappeTTY)  fUilfev  aVTOdV
aAA’  KTOppOTTdV  XCU  (vforoil&f/.evov,  B7Tt  7ToAv  J'tCtfJLtVr)  ^  xaiot.
rov  mg  ctvli7T?\oicig  A cfov  aei  ro  no7\m:vfia*  mg  fie v  (Zanheiag
x&)A vofumg  vnegntpciveiv  JW  tov  aivo  Td  <fnfid  (po&ov,  S'efofaevYig
kcu  TdTO)  ham  ev  m  7ro7\ireicc  rd  £e  S'vfid  7tci7\lv

fit)  S-ot.ppdPT®-'  Kcircupgovetv  tmv  ft>mttewvy  top  ano  tup
yegontov  Golov*  ot  kclt  exhofcv  agtgnvfnv  xexgifjLevot  Trcireg  g-
fieK7\0P  aei  rep  JtKoua  TT^ocrvejueiv  eavrdg*  oire  mv  ru v  eharld-
fievtov  fiegi^a  £ia  to  roig  edenv  tfjLjuLevziv,  rctvmv  ctei  yiiB&ai
fjLeiL(t)>  kcu  (ba.%vle$cLV  ty\  to6V  ye^ovroav  TT^omlxirei  kcu  po7rw.
Totyctgxv  drod  rvgwjcifjLev&i  7tA etrov  dv  rifieig  icr/uev  XZQV0V
J'leGvha^e  roig  A catt&uifiovioig  mv  etevOegiav.  Eksiv©-'  fiev


its  bitter  tafle,  for  the  latter,  as  the
cedar,  the  worm  feldom  attacks  it:
So  that,  wood  may  be,  and  frequently
is  without  worms  ;  they  are  confe-
quenily  not  effential  to,  nor  born  with,
it :  And,  that  ruft  is  not  more  eifen-
tial  to  iron,  nor  born  with  it,  appears
from  this  ;  let  a  piece  of  iron  be  kept
in  a  recipient  inacceffible  to  all  air,  and


to  the  corrofive  falts,  with  which  it  a-
bourids,  and  it  will  be  no  more  elfe di¬
ed  with  ruft,  than  gold,  on  which  thofe
faits  have  no  power.  As  our  language
has  no  word  to  exprefs  either  B^mg  or
Ti^fovtg,  I  have  b.  en  obliged  to  com¬
prehend  them  both  under  the  general
name  of  worms  if  the  reader  pleafes
to  turn  to  the  5th  chapter  of  the  5th


(  415  )

ordained  to  accompany  it :  The  vice  of  kingly  government
is  monarchy,  that  of  ariftocracy,  oligarchy  ;  and  of  demo¬
cracy,  rage  and  violence  ;  into  which  all  of  them,  in  procefs
of  time,  muft  neceflarily  degenerate,  in  the  manner  I  have
mentioned.  Thefe  inconveniences  were  forefeen  by  Lycur-
gus ;  who,  to  avoid  them,  formed  his  government  not  of  a
fimple  nature,  and  of  one  fort,  but  united  in  one  all  the
advantages,  and  properties  of  the  beft  governments ;  to  the
end  that  no  branch  of  it,  by  fwelling  beyond  its  due  bounds,
might  degenerate  into  the  vice  which  is  congenial  to  it ;  and
that,  while  each  of  them  were  mutually  added  upon  by  op-
pofite  powers,  no  one  part  might  incline  any  way,  or  out¬
weigh  the  reft  ;  but  that  the  commonwealth,  being  equally
poifed  and  ballanced,  like  a  fhip  acded  upon  by  contrary
powers,  might  long  remain  in  the  fame  iituation  ;  while  the
king  was  reftrained  from  exccfs  by  the  fear  of  the  people,
who  had  a  proper  fhare  in  the  commonwealth  ;  and,  on  the
other  fide,  the  people  did  not  dare  to  difregard  the  king
from  their  fear  of  the  fenate,  who,  being  all  deeded  for
their  virtue,  would  always  incline  to  the  jufteft  fide;  by
which  means,  that  branch  which  happened  to  be  opprefled,
this  inftitution  being  obferved,  became  always  fuperior,  and,
by  the  acceftional  weight  of  the  fenate,  out-bailanced  the
other.  Lycurgus,  therefore,  having  formed  his  common¬
wealth  according  to  this  fyftem,  preferved  the  Lacedserno-

book  of  Theophraftus,  he  will  there  many  other  words  in  Polybius,  a  term
find  thefe  in  feds  not  only  diftinguifh-  of  his  own  coining,  or,  rather,  of  his
ed,  but  deferihed.  I  am  afraid  conge-  own  compounding  :  The  Latin  and
mt<e  peftes  in  Cafaubon  is  liable  to  the  French  tranflators  have  underltood  it
fame  exception.  of  a  fhip  equally  aded  upon  by  con-

(2I)K a-r#  tov  rns  dvr ittKcim  Aoj-ov]  I  trary  winds,  which,  I  believe,  the  fea-
do  not  remember  ever  to  have  met  men  will  not  allow  ever  to  happen:  1,
with  otvTtnKoia  in  any  other  author;  at  firft  thought  it  might  fignify  a  fhip
poflibly,  therefore,  it  may  be,  like  a£ted  upon  by  contrary  currents, which,

nians


(  4*6  )


MV  7\oFu>  TiVl  T^'lSo/UiVO^  ^  7ToOiV  WOLfCt  KCU  7 TVS  7T£(pVK6

(rv^ctivtiv,  clSaolSo);  cvviTvcralo  tv v  7Tgoeigvjumv  ToXmiav .

FOOLLCUOI  St  TO  fJLi V  T£/\@-"  TCLVTO  TTiTTOlVvlcU  TVS  tV  TV  7T&-
TplSt  KCLictSrcMrZOdS,  M  fJLVV  SlCL  Ao/a*  SlCL  Si  T07O\(dV  CiFttVCtV  KM
TrgClFjLLCLTGdV)  £%  OUUTVS  CLU  TVS  tV  TOLLS  7T^i7T€T UCUS  iTTlFvOdVWS
OA^fJLiVOl  TO  fizATlOV'  XT®g  V^doV  i7Tl  TCLVTO  jULZ V  A VKXgFo)  TZ-
A©-’,  KOKKlTOV  Si  QrVTV(LtCL  TOd V  KCtd  VUCtS  TOKFziOdV.

An  St  tov  ctFadov  k%itvv  Tm  7rct§ctMi7ro/jLtmv  Soki-

fJLctCeiv  txs  ygatpoVTcts,  cl?0\  u  tcv p  mFo/uswv.  kclv  /utv  zv
TXTOIS  Tl  'KCLfJL^ClVV  \]/guJs©-,  ZlSiVCU  SlOTl  kcIkuvcl  (SS^KUlTzicU
Si  aFvQLCLV'  ICJLV  Si  7TCLV  TO  KzFojULZVOV  CtTwdiS  W,  CTvF^Ot) %CiV ,  Stoll
KCLKZIVCL  (ftfyvitoTCLTCU  KCLTCL  K^KTlVj  UK  ClFvOlOLV .

Hi/  [Kill  Sv  ^  T§lOL  y.zev  TCL  KgOiTZvlcL  TVS  7TOKlT€ICLS,  OL7TZ$
UTCL  TgOTZ^OV,  OL7TCLv\cL'  ^  MTOd  Si  7TCLVTCL  KCtTCt  ITUS

KM  7TfiWo{\odS  (TVVGTSTOLJcIo  KCU  SlOdMTO  SlCL  TXTCtiV,  toft  fJLvStVCL
tot  clv  tintiv  Svvcardca  {SzSclmvc,  (jlvSz  rodv  zF^agtav,  ttotz^

a^lTOK^CillKOV  TO  7TO?,lTiVfJLOL  OVfJLTCLV,  V  Sv/HOKOcSlKOV ,  V  jJLO-
VCieXlKOr  KOI  TXT  zhStoS  vv  TTCLT^itV,  OTl  (JLiV  ya§  US  TV V  TO t)V


though  pofiible,  is  too  uncommon  to
ferve  lor  a  companion  *,  I  would,  there¬
fore,  fuppofe  the  fhip  to  be  rowed  a-
gainft  the  wind,  or  tide,  or,  rather,  a-
gainft  both,  which  will  have  the  effeft
here  intended  by  Polybius,  that  is,  to
keep  it  in  the  fame  wonderful  fituation  :
However,  as  the  Greek  text  does  not
particularly  defcribe  the  contrary  pow¬
ers,  by  the  force  of  which  the  fhip  is
kept  in  the  fame  place,  I  have  not
thought  it  neceffary  to  enter  into  that


particular  in  the  tranQation.

(2z)  rioQev  iKOt^OC,  ) 10U  ZTlAlt,  Trt<$VKt  evtjl-

€<x<ifjv.]  This  is,  I  think,  rendered  too
generally  by  the  French  tranflator,
prevoyant  la  caufe  &  le  temps  de  certains
evenements.

(23)  T giot  [Atgyi  t x  xgxrxvTCi  ryjc  zroKi-
Tn«ff.]  Lcs  trois  fortes  de  governments
dont  fay  parle  compofoient  la  republi^ue
Romaine ,  fays  the  French  tranflator,
who,  by  rendering  it  thus,  has  left  out
r a  KgoiTxwoc.  Ttj?  sroA i1e/sec9  which  is  the

t J7TcSa)V


[417  ]

Ilians  in  liberty  longer  than  any  other  people  we  have  heard
of,  ever  enjoyed  it :  So  that,  he,  by  forefeeing  from  a  cer¬
tain  way  of  reafoning,  from  whence,  and,  by  what  means,
every  thing  naturally  proceeds,  guarded  that  commonwealth
againft  every  danger.

The  Romans  have  arrived  at  the  fame  end  in  forming
their  commonwealth,  not  indeed,  by  any  chain  of  reafoning,
but  by  weighing  every  incident,  that  offered  itfelf  in  the
many  ftruggles,  and  difficulties  they  were  ingaged  in,  and
always  embracing  that  meafure,  which  was  moft  advantage¬
ous.  By  this  means,  they  arrived  at  the  fame  end,  which
Lycurgus  attained,  and  formed  the  moft  glorious  fyftem  of
government  now  in  being.

A  gcod  critic  ought  not  to  judge  of  a  writer  by  thofe
things  he  omits,  but  by  thofe  he  relates ;  and,  if  he  difco-
vers  any  untruth  in  the  latter,  conclude  that  the  former  were
omitted  through  ignorance :  But,  if  every  thing  he  relates
be  found  true,  let  him  grant  that  the  others  were  omitted
through  choice,  not  ignorance.

All  the  three  principal  orders  of  government  I  have  men¬
tioned,  were  found  in  the  Roman  commonwealth  ;  but
every  thing,  in  particular,  was  conffituted  and  adminiftred
with  that  equality  and  propriety  by  thefe  three,  that  it  was
not  poffible  for  any  perfon,  not  even  for  a  Roman  citizen,
to  affert  pofitively,  whether  the  government,  in  the  whole,
was  ariftocratical,  democratical,  or  monarchical  ;  neither
was  this  doubt  ill  founded :  For,  when  we  cafl:  our  eyes

proper  character  of  the  three  branches  from  being  the  fenfe  of  the  original,
of  government  our  author  has  been  that,  had  I  not  met  with  it  in  this
treating  of.  place,  I  fhould  not  have  imagined  it

(24)  Out w  'stocvtoc  xonoc  nou  was  intended  for  a  tranflation  of  it.

sr«E7rcvTO/f  (tuv'£t€t«>cto  x oli  ^iccy.suo  Stot.  t»-  2 Vjtt7T ay . J  The  French  tranflator

TJv.]  Toutes  trots  etoient  tellement  ba-  fays,  que  perfonne ,  mime  par  mi  les  Ro-
lancees  I'une  par  V autre.  This  is  fo  far  mains,  ne  powuoit  affurer,  fans  crainte

Vol.  I.  H  h  h  on


(  4*8  )

v7rciTCt) v  cttmrctifJLtv  rtctv ,  rstot&s  [jlqm$%ikov  ttytiuvtl'  etpeu

kcu  j3acriAhcoi/'  ots  cT «  *njv  tvs  irvyuMtu,  7fcl?\iv  cl%i<?ok$<x.-

Tl/tOV.  XCU  /UVl I  U  TV V  TO) V  noKktoV  tfy&CTKLV  ‘.SitigOM  T(S>  sJ'OXOt

crct<p o)s  etvcu  S)fifjLOK§anitov.  cSv  F  hctroti  no®*  y.tpotv  tvs  ko-

?\iTSlCLS  STTfldp CLTZh  XCU  TOTS,  KCU  VVV  ZTl,  7r7\VV  0?\iy0)V  TlltiV,
TCLVT  £<TIV.

O l  (jC(V  y&%  V7T Oil 01  7 T£0  Td  [At V  S^afttV  TCt  Se>OLT07tS§CJL

na^oFss  ev  P odjuv,  ncLtruv  etcri  xvgioi  to)v  S'vfJLocitov  %\a%£w.
oi  ts  ya%  afflovles  oi  Mmoi  navas  v7TotcltIovtcu  kcu  7retQag-
yvc'i  TdTots ,  ttMv  Ttov  cftyua^air  zts  rs  tvv  crvyxKv/ov  Ftol
tcls  7rp zaGetcLS  ay  dorr  7rgos  Ss  tois  n^oepvptsvoi's-,  dTot  tcl
ZClTS7T6iyovlci  TO)]/  <PlOL&d7\lCt)V  CLVClA ifoctHV'  ^  dTOi  TO]/  0?\0V
%etgl<T{JLOV  TO)]/  (PoypjLCLTO)]/  S7TlTt7\dCl.  XCU  fJLYiV  OTCt  Jtt  S'lCL  Td
$V(JLd  CTUVTetel&eU  TO)!/  7T£0S  TCLS  XOIVCLS  Ttgyfe&S  CLVMOVT 0)V,

TdTois  xaQvw  (ppovh^eii/,  xcu  <rvvayei v  act  tcl g  g xxTwrtas'  ^
TdTOig  et(r(pz%eiv  tcl  (PoF/uctTct,  TdTOis  (Zgctfevetv  tcl  S'cxdna

TOLS  7?7\et0(rt,  XOU  (JLVV  7TS%1  7T0M[JLd  XCLTCLCrXSVYlS,  xcu  xaGoAd

tvs  sv  vncufigois  oiKovo/juag,  vyifrov  avToxpalogci  tvv  s^doriav


de  fe  tromper,fi  le  governement  y  etoit  a-
rijlocratique ,  ou  populaire ,  cu  monar-
chique.  Thus,  by  leaving  out  evy. nxv,
the  French  tranflator  has  maimed  this
fentence  ;  for,  in  reality,  the  Roman
government  was  ariltocratical,  popular
and  monarchical,  in  its  parts-,  but,  in
the  whole ,  it  was  none  of  the  three.

(z6)  Out  oi  tov  o’Aov  ^a^tc/ooov  tuv  Jofjua-

ruv  (7rneAx<n.]  Le  droit  de  faire  les  fena-
tus-confultes  leur  appartient.  Whoever
reads  this,  will,  I  dare  fay,  conclude
that  the  right  of  making  the  decrees  of


the  fenate  belonged  to  the  confuls  ;
which  every  body  knows  was  not  the
cafe  j  neither  does  Polybius  fay  any
more  than  that  the  confuls  were  folely
intruded  with  the  execution  of  the  de¬
crees  of  the  fenate .

(27)  Tarots  «<r(p  tgav  too  Soy  pool  a."]  D’y
propofer  ce  dont  il  s'agit.  This  is  fo
loofe  a  tranflation,  and,  at  the  fame
time,  feems  to  imply  fo  great  an  igno¬
rance  of  the  Roman  conftitution,  that
I  am  furprifed  a  man  of  fo  great  learn¬
ing  as  the  French  tranflator,  could


(  4*9  )

v..  4

on  the  power  of  the  confuls,  the  government  appeared  in-
tirely  monarchical  and  kingly  ;  when  on  That  of  the  fenate,
ariftocratical ;  and,  when  any  one  confidered  the  power  of
the  people,  it  appeared  plainly  democratical.  The  feveral
powers,  which  each  of  thefe  orders  then  obtained,  and  ftill
continues  to  obtain,  with  fome  few  exceptions,  are  as
follows.

The  confuls,  when  they  are  at  Rome,  and  before  they
take  the  field,  have  the  adminiftration  of  all  public  affairs :
For  all  other  magiftrates  are  fubjedt  to,  and  obey,  them,
except  the  tribunes  of  the  people:  They  introduce  embaffa-
dors  into  the  fenate  :  They  alfo  propofe  to  the  fenate  thofe
fubjedts  of  debate,  that  require  immediate  difpatch  ;  and
are  folely  intruded  with  the  execution  of  their  decrees:  To
them  belongs  the  confideration  of  all  public  affairs,  of  which
the  people  have  cognizance  ;  whom  they  are  to  aflemble
upon  all  occafions,  and  lay  before  them  the  decrees  of  the
fenate,  then  purfue  the  refolutions  of  the  majority.  Befides
this,  the  confuls  have  almoft  an  abfolute  power  in  every
thing,  that  relates  either  to  the  preparations  of  war,  or  to
the  condudt  of  it  in  the  field:  For  they  may  give  what

fuffer  it  to  efcape  from  his  pen.  It  is  the  Roman  foldiers  to  furprife  Capua,
very  well  known  that  ail  laws  were  and  very  pathetically  delcrihed  their
firft  propofed  in  the  fenate,  before  they  reconciliation  with  their  fellow  citizens,
were  laid  before  the  people,  when  af-  at  the  head  of  whom  Valerius  Corvus,
fembled  in  the  comitia  curt  at  a ,  or  cen-  as  didftator,  was  fent  to  reclaim  them  :
turiala ,  though  not  in  the  tributa  \  for  For  it  feems,  the  Romans  were,  at  that
which  reafon,  Dionyfius  of  Halicar-  time,  unacquainted  with  civil  (laughter,
naflus,  and  the  reft  of  the  Greek  au-  and  unexperienced  in  all  other  wars
thors,  who  have  written  the  Roman  but  in  Thofe  againft  a  foreign  enemy  :
hiftory,  call  a  previous  order  of  the  After  this  reconciliation,  Valerius  Cor-
fenate,  vpfyh&p* ;  The  phrafe  made  vus  returned  to  Rome,  where  he  got
ufe  of,  upon  thefe  occafions,  by  the  an  adit  propofed  in  the  fenate,  and,  af-
Latin  authors,  alludes  to  the  fame  terwards,  palled  by  the  people,  for  the
cuftom  :  Thus,  after  Livy  has  given  impunity  of  the  foldiers,  who  had
an  account  of  the  delign  formed  by  formed  the  deffgn  upon  Capua.  Livy’s

FI  h  h  2  orders


[  420  ]

kcu  yd$  emrurletv  Toig  ovfjLfjLci%Moig  to  Sokx v9  kcu  vdg
XiAiOLgXpg  mQircivcu,  kcu  SidF&Cpetv  T%g  fggtTiMTdgy  kcu  Sid^
fafetv  rug  zniTYiSeixg,  rxroig  g|$sv  n%og  Ss  roig  agYiuzvoig,
fyijuuddcrcu  tmv  VTTOTdrlofJLivedV  iv  roig  v7rcuQ%oig>  ov  civ  fixAn*
domy  Kv^iot  Kd^eTci(rir  e^XTidv  'S'  tXH<r^  Kcu  ^ctncLvctv  tm

C hfJLOTlMV  OVd  7T%oQtlVTO>  7rd$Z7T0(JLZV%  TCLfJUV,  KCU  7TdV  TO  7T%G-

fd^w  iToifjLtog  7foiWT©j.  ut  eiKOTCcg  zivrziv  dVy  ots  Tig  eig
TdJUTYlV  d'KO&KV^eii  TY\V  (JLtQlSdy  SlOTL  [10Vd$Xl>LoV  dTTAhig  KCU
fidTlAlKOV  ZTl  TO  7ro7\lTZV(JLd.  Oi  Si  TLVd  TXTWV  Yl  TCdV  Mfe&CU
/ulzAAovtmv  A n^iTcu  {dZTdOzciv  y]  KdTd  to  ffdgoVy  yi  fJUTd  nvd
XpovoVy  %Szv  dv  ciyi  7T%og  ty\v  wv  vtp  v^mv  mFouzvm  d7ro<pd<rw.

K OU  fJLY\V  Yl  (TVyKAY1T@J  7T%(t)T0V  ptiV  T M  T%  TdfJLieiH

KVgidv.  kcu  yd%  t»c  etcoSx  % dVYig  cuutyi  k^tm,  kcu  rug  t^oSa,
(ZZ^dnAYiTtodg.  htz  yap  eig  Tdg  KdTd  pile®*  ygeidg  xSzpudV:
pcoieiv  z^oSov  oi  Tdjdicu  SwdVTcu  Xttgtg  tccv  nig  (tv/kAyitx  Sol -
(jLdTOdV,  7rMv  tyiv  ug  T*g  v7TdT%g.  Trig  Se  r S?£a  noAv  tm  dAAw
oAodx^TciTY\g  kcu  fizyig-Yig  Sdudngy  M  oi  ti^uyitcu  7roibcriv.

eig  Tdg  z7ti<rKzvdg  kcu  KdTdCKzvdg  tm  Syifdocrim  KdTd

words  are  thefe,  B.  vii.  c.  41.  di  flat  or
equo  citato  ad  urbem  reveflus ,  audtori-
bus  patribus  tulit  ad  populum  ne  cut
mili turn  frau di  fecejfio  ejfet.  It  is  true
that,  at  other  times,  he  applies  thefe
words  to  the  confirmation  given  by
the  fenate  to  the  a£ts  pafied  by  the
people.  But,  whoever  has  read  Livy
with  attention,  muft  be  fenfible  that
this  phrafe  is,  upon  many  other  occa-
fions,  made  ufe  of  by  him  to  exprefs
what  the  Greek  Hiftorians  call  &go€x-
K&pci  5  and  it  is  very  pofiible  that,  if


he  had  tranfiated  this  paflage  of  Poly¬
bius,  as  he  has  many  others,  he  would
have  faid  bis,  quorum  patres  auflores  fu~
erant ,  ferre  ad  populum,  for  t*7o<?  etcpi-
(> etv  tci  Joypctroi.  I  am  fenfible  that'
Dion  Caflius,  B.  lv.  diftinguifhes  $0[-
y.x  from  cmsKToo^nu?,  which  word  he
makes  ufe  of,  becaufe,  as  he  fays,  it  is
not  pofiible  to  tranflate  it  into  Greek  ;
this  aufloritas  was  a  refolution  of  the
fenate  pafied  when  there  was  not  a  full
houfe,  that  is,  as  many  as  the  law  re¬
quired  for  the  paflinga  fenatus-conful-

mvldZTWCUl'


C  421  ]

orders  they  pleafe  to  their  allies ;  and  appoint  the  tri¬
bunes  :  They  may  raife  forces,  and  inlift  thofe  who  are
proper  for  the  fervice  :  They  alfo  have  a  power,  when
in  the  field,  of  punifhing  any  who  lerve  under  them  ;  and
of  expending  as  much  as  they  pleafe  of  the  public  money,
being  always  attended  by  a  quaeftor  for  that  purpofe,  whofe
duty  it  is  to  yield  a  ready  obedience  to  all  their  commands :
So  that,  whoever  cafts.  his  eyes  on  this  branch,  may,  with
reafon,  affirm  that  the  government  is  merely  monarchical,
and  kingly.  But,  if  any  thing  I  have  already  mentioned,
or  may  hereafter  mention,  ffiall,  either  now,  or  after  fome
time,  be  altered,  this  ought  not  to  affedl  the  prefent  re¬
lation.

The  fenate  have,  in  the  firfc  place,  the  command  of  the
public  money :  For  they  have  the  conduct  of  all  receipts,
and  difburfements :  Since  the  quaeftors  cannot  iffue  money
for  any  particular  fervice,  without  a  decree  of  the  fenate,
except  thofe  fums  they  pay  by  the  direction  of  the  confuls.
The  fenate  have  alfo  the  power  over  all  thofe  diiburfe-
ments,  that  are  made  by  the  cenfors  every  fifth  year  in


turn,  which,  with  Polybius,  he  calls
SoyiAU :  But  this  will  not  invalidate
any  thing  that  has  been  faid,  when  it
is  confidered  that  the  law  he  fpeaks
of  was  inftituted  by  Auguftus,  who,
as  Dion  tells  us  in  the  fame  place,
when  he  fixed  the  number  of  fenators,
whofe  prefence  fhould  be  necefiary  for
enadting  decrees  of  every  kind,  ap¬
pointed  the  particular  days,  on  which
they  were  to  aflemble  •,  and,  in  order
to  oblige  the  fenators  to  be  prefent  on
thofe  days,  encreafed  the  fine,  to  which
fuch  as  abfented  themfelves  without
a  lawful  excufe,  were  before  liable.
This  was  in  the  year  of  Rome  743,


Claudius  Nero  Drufus,  and  T.  Quin-
tius  Crilpinus  being  confuls  ;  the  fame
year  Drufus  died,  which  fome  will  have
to  have  been  the  year  74 1  of  Rome.

(-8)  ziriffuiugig  km  x,ocTct<rxdja$.~]

Aux  reparations ,  in  the  French  tranf-
lator,  very  well  expreffes  the  fir  ft;  but
what  becomes  of  nxTctcKtuus  ?  that,  it
feems,  is  omitted  :  This  defer ves  the
more  to  be  taken  notice  of,  becaufe,
when  the  fame  expreffion  is  afterwards
repeated  by  our  author,  the  fame  tranf-
lator  fays  very  properly, .  ere  ft  ion  de
nouveanx  edifices ,  reparation  des  anciens :
So  that,  I  muft  look  upon  the  former
in  the  fame  light  every  candid  reader

repairing


(  .422  )

TriV7MTYi£ia.r  tcuutvis  ti  <%uyx.MT@J  Sri  xvpat?  km  J'ta.  racing
yiHTcu  to  G-vyx^ma  Totg .  Ti/JWTcug.  opcoitog  you  fact  tm  a-
J>MniU%TMV  TtoV  YCLT  I TCthlCtY  ^  ITpOdSetTCJU  fafJLO(TlCtg  Z7TICTKZ-
*  A  eyed  fa  oiov  7T%ofa<?ictg>  (rvvto[Aocruxg,  (§ctefiptmctgy  faoAo-
( ponotg 5  rw  crwy>cA«r6)  (ttzAet  zrgpj  Tdrm.  vr^og  fa  TdToig,  et  rig
ifaalrjg  Y)  nohig  tcov  ycltcl  tw  h'ctAtctv  factAvtrws  yi  ZTriTiimtrmsi
Y)  fZovQetctg,  yi  (pvAeL'YYigTTgorfaetlcu,  Tdlfao  7rm\m  m/uuMg  m  tyi
crvy>cAY)Tk).  you  (jlyi v  et  tm  wrog  iTciMctg  vr^og  Ttmg  z%ctiro-
$rgAA«v  fact  7T%t(r£eiciV  Tim ,  yi  factTivxerciv  Ttmg,  «  c&^iyclAz-
<rv<rGtv,  Y)  you,  vn  A  tot  ZTnra^dcrav,  yi  roe^A«\J/G(*4£W^>  «  TroAg-
znctyfeKAdvav,  coJr^  7Toihtcu  tyiv  7r$ovoictv.  faioiodg  fa  you
TOdv  c&fepymfJLZWV  etg  Em/ulyiv  Tr^zi^etm  dg  faov  zg-iv  zYctqoig
X§v<&ui)  you  dg  faov  cLTTMgidavui,  7raflct  touuIci  xh^i^tcu  fact
TYig  crvyKtoTX.  7 r$og  fa  toy  fajttov  YctQct7ra%  a  fay  z<?i  too  v  7t%q-
et%Y)jjL<svu)V.  z%  m  vrctAiv  o7totz  Tig  znifaiYYinou  /jlyi  7m^oYlog  met -
tv,  TzAetttg  etgifOKgcLTMYi  (patvzTcu  yi  7roA?etct.  o  fa  you  noA-
A oi  tqv  EAA»Wj  oftoiodg  fa  you  t®v  ficteriAztov  7rz7retcrftzvoi
TVyXCtVXPl,  fact  TO  TCL  VtytiV  WgOLyfJLCtlci  (JX^fav  TTOLViCt  TTPQg
TYlV  avyKArSov  YVpdV.

Ey  fa  TXTtoV  Tig  dY  ctv  et'toTtog  zm^TYiTetz  ttoici  you  Tig
7T0TZ  gf IV  YI  TOd  fafJLCp  KCtlciAet7T0ftm  ft€glf  ZV  TO)  KOAlTiV^cDl'
Tvg  uzv  crvyYAYird  tmv  YoU.ct  ftzgog,  m  zi^mctfjaY  yjvgictg  V7ra%~
XdFYig>  to  fa  tazyiTov0  far  ouuTYig  you  Tng  zicofad  you  TYig  z^ofad
%etpifyfjLmg  cL7rct<rYi.g  $  tom  fa  gpcmiyav  fairctrodv  ttciAiv  cwto-
Y^TOocr.  ftzv  z%ovl&v  favetftty  nz^i  Tctg  tv  noM/ux  os^c/l-

ought  to  view  it,  that  is,  as  a  Hip  of  the  memory  only.


< TYZVCig, ,


(  423  )

repairing,  and  erecting  public  buildings,  which  are  of  all
others  the  greateft,  and  the  moft  confiderable ;  and,  for
which,  the  cenfors  muft  have  the  allowance  of  the  fenate.
This  order  alfo  takes  cognizance  of  all  crimes  committed
in  Italy,  that  require  a  public  infpedtion,  fuch  as  treafons,
confpiracies,  poifonings,  and  aflaflinations.  Moreover,  if
any  private  perfon,  or  city  in  Italy  Hands  in  need  of  an  ac¬
commodation,  animadverfion,  relief,  or  defence,  all  thefe
are  within  the  province  of  the  fenate  :  And,  if  it  is  necef-
fary  to  fend  an  embafty  out  of  Italy  to  reconcile  differences,
to  ufe  exhortation,  or,  indeed,  to  fignify  a  command,  to
admit  an  alliance,  or  declare  war,  the  fenate  has  the  care  of
thefe  things.  In  like  manner,  when  embaftadors  come  to
Rome,  the  fenate  determines  in  what  manner  they  are  to  be
treated,  and  what  anfwer  is  to  be  given  to  them.  Nothing
that  has  been  mentioned  belongs  to  the  people  :  For  thefe
reafons,  again,  when  a  foreigner  comes  to  Rome  in  the  ab-
fence  of  the  confuls,  the  government  appears  to  him  purely
ariffocratical :  Which  opinion  prevails  with  feveral  of  the
Greeks,  and  alfo  with  feveral  kings,  becaufe  almoft  all  their
tran factions  with  the  Romans  are  ratified  by  the  fenate.

From  what  has  been  faid,  who  would  not  have  reafon  to
afk  what  fhare  in  the  government,  and  of  what  nature  that
fhare  is,  which  is  left  to  the  people  ?  Since  the  fenate  is  in¬
verted  with  all  the  particular  powers  already  mentioned,
and  with  the  greateft  of  all,  the  condudl  of  all  receipts  and
difburfements ;  and  fince,  on  the  other  fide,  the  confuls,  as
generals,  have  an  abfolute  power  in  regard  both  to  the  prepa-

(29)  Ocrtf—  $/,y.otnx$  t7ritr>u-  of  this  paflage  j  becaufe  it  confounds

<],€&>?.]  Qui  meritent  une  Munition  pub -  the  inquiry  into  a  crime  with  thepunifo-
lique j  is  not,  in  my  opinion,  the  fenfe  merit  of  it.


rations


[  424  ]


€ HiZVcLSy  OUUTOX^tTO^t  cTg  TV  V  ZV  TOig  V7TCLl$‘g0ig  Z^OVCTIUV  $
^  OV  (JLVV  CLKKct  XCtluMmzIcU  (ULZgig  XCU  T(d  dvfMp,  XCU  XCtlcl-

A  untied  yz  [Zagvlofiv.  ^  Tifxvg  yct$  zgi  xcu  TifjLCdpiag  zv
tv  noTsslzia.  fJLov@^  o  xy^it^y  oig  crvvzxovJcu  (uovoig  xcu

d'vi iutzicu,  xcu  7ro7\iTZicu,  xcu  crt/AAw&ft)i/  7iag  o  TCdV  av^odnodv
(Zi©->.  7ra§  oig  ya%  r\  (jlv  yivaxrxz&cu  vvfjt&aivzi  tvv  toiouutvv
SiaQo^yv,  v  yimvxofJLzm  y^zi^Cz^rcu  xxxwg,  na^a  rovroig
ovfov  oiov  tz  xolIu  A oyov  J'loixzi&cu  tmv  v(pz<godT(t)v.  7r&)g  yap
zixoc  5  ^  zv  urn  TifJLV  ovtcov  tmv  ayadotv  rotg  xaxoig.  x^ivzi
uzv  vv  o  <$'y\(x.©j  xcu  (PicKpopx  7roAKotxig,  crav  cl%iox%zmv  v  to
Tiy.vfJLd  Tvg  afixiag,  xcu  (xciAitcl  T%g  rag  zmcpaveig  zvy/ixo-
rag  ctexcig.  3-clvcltx  S'z  xpfvzi  /movog.  xcu  ytvzTcu  ti  7rzpi  touu-

77)1/  TW  XpZtOLV  7TCl%  CUUTQig  U%10V  Z7T0UVH  XCU  pLl lYlfAVg.  TOig

ya.%  S-civctlov  xgLVofAzvoig  znctv  xctlctJ'ixafavlab  Mmci  tvv
z^ovnav  to  na%  avroig  z6&’  cl7TcO\7\cilt)z&cu  tpavzgag,  xdv
zti  fjuct  7\zi7rvlcu  (pvM  Ttov  zmxvgovcrMV  tvv  x&uriv  (v\ /t)(pO(po-
gvr@J,  zxxcriov  ictvtov  xctlayvovlct  (pvya^ziav.  zti  ao-QaMia.


f3°)  Ou  jwjjv  «A \ot  Kottuhti7nrui
y.ou  rw  $v\ ucc-)  v.ou  Honothtintlcu  yt  fiagvlot-
t >}.]  Cependant  le  peuple  a  fa  part ,  (s’
une  part  tres-ccnfiderable  *,  not  only
tres- conjiderable ,  but  la  plus  conft dura¬
ble  ;  which  is  the  plain  import  of  the
text,  and  ftands  confirmed  by  the  whole
tenor  of  the  Roman  hiftory,  but  more
fo  by  their  conquefts.

(31)  T ifjtyji  ya(>  £f<  kcu  7i[ta(>ia,s  tv  tv\
7roXntioc  [xovog  o  <hj [tog  II  cjl  feul

maitre  des  recompences  &  des  peines ,  fays
the  French  tranflator.  Cafaubon  has
rendered  it  in  the  fame  fenfe,  folus  in
civitate  populus  pr.amii  &  poena  eft- ar¬


biter.  I  am  forry  I  am  obliged  to
differ  from  them  both.  In  the  firfl
place,  I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have
met  with  the  word  npivi  for  a  reward  \
2dly,  I  think  it  manifeft  that  it  cannot
be  taken  in  that  fenfe  upon  this  occa-
fion,  if  one  eonfiders  what  follows  ;
which,  in  my  opinion,  is  always  the
fureft  method  of  coming  at  the  fenfe
of  an  author  :  Polybius  then,  after
he  has  told  us  that  the  people  have  the
foie  power  of  honors ,  and  of  punifh-
ments,  gives  the  particular  inffanccs,
wherein  they  exercife  that  power ;  he
begins  with  punifhments,  and  tells  us


TOig


(  42  5  )


rations  of  war,  and,  when  in  the  field,  to  the  management
of  it.  Notwithftanding  all  this,  there  is  ftill  a  Share  in  the
government  left  for  the  people,  and  that  the  moft  consider¬
able:  For  they  only  have  the  power  of  diftributing  honors,
and  punifhments ;  to  which  alone  both  monarchies  and
commonwealths,  and,  in  a  word,  all  human  inflitutions  owe
their  (lability :  For,  wherever  the  difference  between  thofe
two  is  not  underftood,  or,  being  underflood,  is  injudicioufly
applied,  there  nothing  can  be  properly  adminiftred.  How
Should  it,  fince  the  worthy,  and  unworthy  are  equally  ho¬
noured  ?  The  people,  therefore,  often  take  cognizance  even
of  thofe  caufes,  where  the  fine  to  be  impofed  is  considerable,
particularly,  where  the  criminals  are  perfons,  who  have  ex-
ercifed  great  employments :  But,  in  capital  cafes,  they  alone
have  jurifdi&ion  ;  concerning  which,  there  is  a  cuftom
among  them  worthy  to  be  remembered  with  commenda¬
tion  :  This  cuftom  gives  to  thofe,  who  are  tried  for  their
lives,  the  power  of  departing  openly,  and  of  condemning
themfelves  to  a  voluntary  banifhment  pending  the  trial,  pro-
vided  there  remains  one  tribe,  that  has  not  yet  given  its
vote  ;  and  the  baniftied  perfon  may  live  in  Safety  either  at


that  they  take  cognizance  of  thofe
caufes,  where  the  fine  is  confiderabie,
particularly,  where  the  criminals  have
exercifed  great  employments  j  and  that
they  alone  have  the  power  of  life  and
death.  He  then  fays  that  the  people
have  alfo  the  right  of  conferring  the
rfiagiftracy  on  thofe  they  think  worthy
of  it,  ft x*  fxyiv  t as  o'  hpoc  hSuei  to/?

Where,  I  think  it  is  evident
that  oc^xca  is  defigned  by  our  author  to
explain  t/,u>?  before  mentioned,  and
which  immediately  follows,  to
fignify  des  recommences.

(32)  Ev  nry  t/^  ovrcoy  tuv  ccyodlwv  to/?

VOL.  I.


ftotfto/?.]  This  feems  to  be  a  paraphrafe
of  the  following  verfe  of  Homer,  who
puts  this  complaint  into  the  mouth  of
Achilles,

Ev  ii  /ij  t iy.y  yyitv  ft«;to?,  y,ch  noil  fa9-Ao?.

Ia.  I.  ver.  319.
Whoever  has  read  Polybius  with  at¬
tention  mu  ft  be  fenfible  thar,  upon
many  occafions,  he  fhews  himftlf  very
well  acquainted  with  Homer.  It  is
aftonifhing  with  what  refpebV,  I  may
fay,  veneration,  the  greateft  authors  of
antiquity  fpeak  of  that  great  man  •,
and  that  not  only  poets,  but  orators,
and  hiftorians  propofe  him  as  their

I  i  i  Naples,


(  426  )

roig  tytv&nv  zv  rz  NgotTroArnai/  xou  Upcuxzfixav,  zti
Ti&xgtimv  7toMi,  xou  toll ;  cOdKoug  7r§og  ctg  g j^aow  ogxicL.
I \ai  fJLYiv  rag  ct^ag  d  J'nyog  Maori  roig  ct^icig*  on z%  gg-j
xaAAigov  <x3aoj/  €£/  ttoXitzici  mAomFctdittg.  zyzi  oz  tyiv  xvgtav
kcu  7rz%i  ty)S  rax  voyav  Mt [/.cur lag.  ^  mi  to  yzyi^ov,  virzg
zi%mg  ovTog  fZxMvzIcu  xcu  ttoMux,  Ka<  yw  TtztK  cvyyci-
yicug-i  mi  J'tctTwtrzw,  mi  (rvxQwax,  irog  zgiv  d  (2>z£oLiav
ImgcJL  r'drav,  mi  xvgici  noiax  y\  tvvolxIiox*  dgz  ttclXiv  zx

TbTM  ZIXOTOdC  (XX  TlXCt  Z171ZIX  OTI  (XZyiTYlJ  0  <?Yl[JL(&J  ZyZl  jLlZgl-

M  mi  fyjuoxeylixox  zgt  to  %o7\iTzvya.


model  in  their  refpe&ive  kinds  of
writing.  And,  indeed,  the  fentiment,
which  is  the  fubjedt  of  this  annotation,
was  long  before  copied  from  Homer
by  Xenophon,  who  makes  Chryfantas
lay,  K oa  toi  tyuye  xvicun^ov  vopi^ca

TU1V  £t»  OiV^U7TOtg  HVCCl,  Tg  TO>V  tffCOV  TOV  T6
KOiHOV  KXl  TOV  xyx&ov  #|<8o S-OU.  Ev

vroiifeiu.  B.  2.  p.  128.  Ed.  of  Hutch.

(33)  K oti  TO  ptytSOVy  V7TS£  iST(^

/S«Af viroit  aou  sroAfju.^.]  As  the  French
tranflator  has  differed  from  Cafaubon
in  rendering  this  pafiage,  and  I  from
both  ;  and,  as  not  only  a  point  of  cri-
ticifm,  but  the  molt  important  branch
of  the  power  of  the  Roman  people  is
concerned  in  this  queftion,  I  hope  I
fhail  be  allowed  to  extend  this  anno¬
tation  to  a  more  than  ordinary  length,
in  order  to  prove,  ift.  That |3kaXs1«/,
in  this  place,  does  not  fignify,  with
Cafaubon,  deliberate  nor,  which  the
French  tranflator,  on  le  confulte ,  but
that  they  determine  \  2tiiy,  That  the
people  of  Rome  had  the  power  of
making  peace  and  war.  As  to  the
firfl,  though  I  could  prove  the  word


to  have  that  fenfe  by  many  pafiages
out  of  the  befit  authors,  yet  I  lhall
content  myfelf  with  the  following  one
from  Thucydides,  not  only  becaufe  it
plainly  proves  that  fignifies

to  determine  or  refolve ,  but  alfo  becaufe
it  conveys  a  fentiment  very  agreeable
to  the  exalted  genius  of  the  people,  to.
whom  it  was  delivered,  and  to  the  en¬
vied  fuuation  of  the  perfon,  who  de¬
livered  it.  The  pafiage  I  mean  is  at
the  clofe  of  that  fine  ipeech,  which
Thucydides  puts  into  the  mouth  of
Pericles,  when  he  exhorts  the  Atheni¬
ans  to  fupport  themfelves  with  magna¬
nimity  under  the  twofold  evils,  with
which  they  were  then  opprefifed,  name¬
ly,  the  Peloponnefian  war,  and  the
plague ;  it  is  this,  ocjig  &'  67T*  [xiytscig

TO  67 TltpSoVflV  hUuQxvl  I,  O^hug  (3*A5e6T«/,

whoever  incurs  envy  for  things  of  tJfe
greatejl  moment ,  wifely  determines  •,  or,
if  the  reader  prefers  the  tranflation  of
Hobbes,  he  does  well  that  under goeth
haired,  for  matters  of  great  confluence ;
but  the  reafon  Pericles,  or,  rather,
Thucydides  gives  for  this  is  fo  fitrong,

T  IV  CL


(  42?  )

Naples,  Pnenefte,  or  Tibur,  or  in  any  other  city  in  alliance
with  the  Romans.  The  people  alfo  have  the  power  of
conferring  the  magiftracy  upon  thofe  they  think  worthy  of
it  ;  which  is  the  mofl  honourable  reward  of  merit  any  go¬
vernment  can  beftow.  Behdes  this,  they  have  the  power  of
rejecting,  or  confirming  laws ;  and,  what  is  the  moft  con-
fiderable  of  all,  they  determine  concerning  peace  and  war ;
and  alfo,  concerning  alliances,  accommodations,  and  con¬
ventions  ;  every  one  of  thefe  the  people  may  either  ratify,
or  annul  :  So  that,  from  hence  again,  one  may,  with  rea-
fon,  affert  that  the  people  have  the  greateft  fhare  in  the
government,  and  that  the  commonwealth  is  democratical.


and  fo  beautifully  exprefied,  that  I
cannot  help  tranfcribing  t,  though  it
is  nothing  to  the  point  I  am  treating

of-,  [mcoc  jusv  yoif)  bjc  tm  sroAv  ctbiyyi’  tj
it  sra^izvTDta.  re  Act/UTTgoiyg,  kui  u  to  tira-

T a  oo|( ji  afijUVtyS'OC  KarciAuTvil  ou  for  the
hatred  flowing  from  it  does  not  laft  long ,
while  both  the  prefent  luftre ,  and  the  fu¬
ture  glory  remain  for  ever  to  be  celebrat¬
ed  :  But,  for  the  fake  of  thofe  who  de-
fervedly  admire  Hobbes,  I  fhall  add
alfo  his  tranflation  ;  for  the  hatred laft-
eth  not ,  and  is  recompensed  both  with
a  prefent  fplendor ,  and  an  immortal  glory
hereafter.  I  fhall  next  endeavour  to
fhew  that,  by  the  Roman  conftitution,
the  power  of  peace  and  war  was  in  the
people  ;  the  authority  I  (ball  quote,
upon  this  occafion,  will  be  that  of  Di-
onyfius  of  Halicarnaflus,  B.  vi.  and  of
Livy,  who,  with  Polybius,  are  of  all
other  hiflorians,  the  mod  to  be  de~
pended  on.  The  nrft  then,  when  the
fecefiion  of  the  people,  which  ended
in  the  edablifhment  of  their  tribunes,
was  agitated  in  the  fenate,  makes  the
confuls  of  the  year  fpeak  to  that  af-


fembly,  in  the  following  manner  ;  s

dij  z»r«  vo/xov  Y,p.tv  v/rag^ovTa  e|  x  ryibe  oi-
ty\v  zvoAiv,  zffcci'luv  eivau  nvgiocv  r la/
ftxAyv,  za Aviv  affiotg  «7roL£«/,  xai  \o^s
vj/vjc£<<ri3M  kcu  zffoAfj uov  ei-tveyi cejv,  y  t ov  trvv-
tguroc  Kot]otAv<rcc&<xi.  tutcxjv  h  t uv  tqiwv  t ov
Jr.fAcv  t Iw  g£*cr/«v  'JsY,(po v  tTritysccvTCi.

Ton  are  fenflble  that  we  have  a  law  as
old  as  the  city  we  inhabit ,  by  which  the
fenate  have  the  power  of  every  thing  be -
fldes  the  creation  of  magifirates ,  the  en¬
abling  of  laws ,  and  declaring  of  war,
or  putting  an  end  to  it,  when  declared  ;
which  three  things  the  people  have  a
right  to  determine  by  their  fuflrages.
And,  that  this  right  was  not  nominal
only,  but  fully  exercifed  by  the  peo¬
ple  upon  all  occafions,  appears  from  as
many  inltances  in  thetr  luftory,  as
there  are  examples  of  their  having
declared  war  with  prudence,  profecut-
ed  it  with  courage,  and  concluded  it
with  fuccefs.  However,  I  fhall  feledt
two  of  them,  not  only  becaufe  they
will,  beyond  all  contradiction,  eftablifh
the  truth  of  what  I  have  advanced,
but  alfo,  becaufe  the  two  wars  I  fhall

I  i  i  2  Having


(  428  )

T IVCJL  [W  bV  TgWOV  hngyjloU  TCi  TY\$  7T07\lTSlCtg  Sig  SKCtfOV
ahg,  g^wW  m id  h  rgonov  ani7rgoL,fl,siv  fibfivQsvla,  mi  cvvzp-
yuv  ct7J\Y\7\oig  %a7\iv  ware*.  tmv  fxsgtov  fvvcRoLh  vvv  pyi%(rsTcu„
O  /usv  yag  mod®'  sneifrcLV  rvya v  rug  ngosig^i vug  e%b-
cictg  ogfim  fjiiTct  rug  J\> vajutsag,  fom  (lev  avroxgaredg  ami

7 TgOg  TY\V  TOM  7Tg0XSlfJLSV0dV  (TVvIzMlCtV'  7TgOO‘S'€lTai  h  Tb  hfJLby
xcu  rwg  (rvyxMrb,  xcu  yodgig  rbrm  ini  rs7\(&  aysiv  rug
7 Tgu^sig  by;  ixavog  in*  JyiTkov  yag,  tig  hi  (usv  z7wtz(A.m&cu-
roig  rgcaronshig  an  rag  yoguyiag'  cmv  hr#  rr,g  cvyx7\Y[ib
fZbKyftct  og  biz  crilog >  bis  i/uaher/uog,  bis  o^&via  hvotlai  yogtj-
ysi&ai  roig  rgaromhig'  tir  cw rgaxrbg  yin&ou  rag  tm£o-
?\ag  rod v  vybfjLsvw,  ^  sOsAoxaxeiv  xcu  rnhwie^yw  7rgoQz(ue-
vng  mg  (tvUcTwtm.  Kai  {ur,v  to  y  smrsMig  jo  [jlyi  ymSrcu  rag
smvoiag,  xcu  7Tgovs<reig  rm  rgalnym,  zv  m  avyzhrira  xsirai,
rb  yctg  snanogzi7\ai  rgctfiyo p  srsgov,  snsiS'av  sviavtnog  hsAQv


mention  were  of  the  greateft  confe-
quence  to  the  Romans,  the  conclufion
of  the  firft  having  freed  them  from  the
fears  of  a  dangerous  rival,  I  mean  Car¬
thage  ;  and  the  fecond  having  been
undertaken  againfl:  Philip  of  Macedon,
a  kingdom,  which  a  long  pofftflionof
power  had  rendered  venerable,  and  a
great  encreafe  of  it  formidable.

After  the  fuccefles  of  Scipio  in  A.-
frica  had  extorted  a  fubmiffion  from
the  Carthaginians,  Livy,  Book'xxx,
chap.  43,  tells  us  the  Romans  were
inclined  to  peace  ;  upon  which  oc-
cafion  he  fays  ;  Turn  Man.  Acilius
&  Q.  Minucius  tribuni  plebis  ad  popu-
lum  tulerunt,  vellent,  juberentne  lena-
tum  decerncre,  ut  cum  Carthaginien-
fibus  pax  fieret ;  &  quem  earn  pacem


dare,  quemque  ex  Africa  exercitus  de-
portare  juberent :  de  pace  uti  rogaflent,
omnes  tribus  jufferunt :  pacem  dare
P.  Scipionem,  cundern  exercitus  de-
portare.  Then  Man.  Acilius ,  and  fih
Minucius ,  tribunes  cf  the  people,  ajked
the  opinion  of  the  people  whether  they  de¬
fined  and  commanded  the  fenate  to  decree
that  peace  Jhould  be  made  with  the  Car¬
thaginians  ;  and  whom  they  thought  fit
to  order  to  make  that  peace,  and  whom  to
tr  an  [port  the  armies  out  of  Africa  :  Con¬
cerning  the  peace ,  all  the  tribes  voted  for
the  affirmative ,  and  ordered  P.  Scipio  to
make  the  peace ,  and  tranfpert  the  armies.
This  paffage  wants  no  comment,  the
next  will  as  little  (land  in  need  of
one.

The  fame  author  tells  us,  Book

ypovog?


(  429  )

Having  flbewn  in  what  manner  the  commonwealth  is
divided  into  the  feveral  orders,  we  fhall  now  fliew  in  what
mariner  each  of  thefe  orders  may  oppofe,  and  affift  one
another.

The  cotiful,  being  invefied  with  the  command  I  have
mentioned,  and  in  the  field  at  the  head  of  the  army,  feems
to  have  an  abfolute  power  to  carry  every  thing  he  propofes
into  execution  ;  yet  he  ftill  ftands  in  need  of  the  people,
and  fenate,  and,  without  their  affiftance,  can  affedt  nothing  :
For  it  is  manifeft  that  fupplies  of  all  kinds  muff  from  time
to  time  be  fent  to  the  army,  which,  without  the  confent  of
the  fenate,  can  be  furnifhed  neither  with  corn,  clothes,  nor
their  pay  :  So  that,  the  defigns  of  the  generals  muft  prove
abortive,  whenever  the  fenate,  by  wilfully  negledling  their
duty,  oppofe  the  execution  of  them.  It  is  alfo  in  the
bread:  of  the  fenate  whether  the  fchemes  and  plans  of  the
general  fhall  be  accompliilied,  or  not :  For  the  fenate  has  the
power  of  fending  another  general  to  fucceed  him,  as  foon


xxxi,  chap.  6,  that  P.  Sulpicius,  one
of  the  confuls  for  the  year,  afked  the
opinion  of  the  people,  vellent,  ju-
berent  Philippo  regi  Macedonibufque,
qui  fub  regno  ejus  efTent,  ob  injurias,
armaque  iliata  fociis  populi  Romani,
be  1 1  u  m  i  n d  i c i .  Whether  they  were  wil¬
ling  and  ordered  that ,  in  confideration  of
the  injuries ,  and  hodilities  committed  a-
gainfl  the  allies  of  the  people  of  Rome ,
war  he  declared  ogainft  king  Philip ,  and
the  Macedonians  his  fubjecls.  Upon
which,  Livy  fays  that  the  people,  be¬
ing  then  tired  out  with  the  length  and
dangers  of  the  Carthaginian  war,  al-
moft  all  the  centuries  rejected  the  mo¬
tion  the  firfb  time  they  were  afiembled
upon  that  occafion :  But,  upon  the
eonfuls  reprefenting  how  great  a  da¬


mage  and  difgrace  a  delay  in  declaring
the  war  would  prove  to  them,  they
gave  their  affirmative  for  it.  Ab  hac
oratione  in  fuffragium  miffi,  uti  roga-
rat,  bellum  juflerunt.  Thefe  inftances
prove,  beyond  contradidlion,  that  the
people  of  Rome  did  fomething  more
than  deliberate  concerning  peace  and
war.

(34)  Eh\o'/.sCKHv  kcu  KU)K\J<Ti?gytiv  zrgoQi-

fAivyjs  r*ig  Si  le  fenat  n  entre

pas  dans  leurs  vues ,  on  y  met  oppofition .
The  firft  part  of  this  translation  does
net,  in  my  opinion,  exprefs  the  fenfe
of  ediAortaxstv,  which  implies  a  volun¬
tary  neglebl  of  duty ,  as  Suidas  explains
it  -3  EGsAc HKKijircu'  i*x<riu)g  iAtc&cci  to  kxxov.
And,  indeed,  this  is  the  fenfe,  in  which
all  authors  ufe  the  word.


as


(  43°  )

X?oVo$>  W  T0V  V7TCt^o{ilct  7T0teiV  67TlfJL0y0V,  $Xei  ™  M&CW
tyi.  Kcu  (jly\v  rag  t7rilv%tcLS  rcev  nfd/uevav  eKl^FcpSncrai  nut
crwav^vrcu,  kcu  naAtv  u/dcwgavcu,  kcu  TCL7retva<rcu9  to  cvv-
eS&ov  eyu  ty)V  Sv\ ictfjuv.  Tdg  ya%  7r%o(rayo%zvo/jLevdg  Trap’  avToig
S-giot/zGxg,  St  m  vto  tyiv  o\ytv  aF&Tcu  roig  noAtTcug  vno  touV
f&tTfl&V  Y)  T OdV  KcFeipfotT/UBVCdV  TT^aFfJLCtlotiV  tvagfuct'  TdTdg  d  Sv-
VCtvloU  XM&^PV  M  7TgZ7T£i>  7T0TS  Se  T07TCLQfl7TCtV  dSe  GvfitA&tVy
ectv  (jly\  to  crvnS&Lov  (rvFmlaQnlut,  kcu  Sep  tyiv  tig  Tavict  Sct-
7TUVY1V.  Td  yrs  [JLilV  SvifJLd  TO  StClTWZoScU'  KCU  AlCLV  CtvJoig  ClVCtF-
Kcuov  e?i>  kclv  oAtog  ano  Tug  omag  tvx®*1  ^oAvv  to7tov  a(p -
egwrzg.  o  yag  Tag  StaAvtretg  kcu  crvvSrtKctg  cucvgxg  kcu  kv-
eiag  7roi(t)Vy  m  wava  7r%oei7rov,  dTog  g tiv.  to  Se  fiefoov,  a-
TTorthfjLiVdg  ty)V  agxw>  ^  TUg  vm%€tv

TM  7re7rgaF/aevct)V.  me  Kotict  /urjSeva  t%o7tov  aa(paAeg  ZlVCit
Toig  TgctTYiFotg  oAiFvgeiv  /uyjTB  TYig  crvFcAvTd,  /uiu  TYig  Td  i rAv-
$-dg  evvotag.

H  yi  /JLYlV  TvFiAlllog  KOLAlV  Y1  TYlAlKCLVTYlV  iX*™  Suva/atv,
TTgtoTOV  (JLiV  iV  TOtg  KOtVOtg  TT^dF/ULUCrtV  CLVCtFKCl'FzTai  TT^OTiXUV
Totg  7 ro?\Aoig,  kcu  zoxctfy&cu  Td  Sn/JLd9  Tag  S'  oAo^gfgfot-
Tag  kcu  /aeFtsag  fyiTYKretg,  kcu  Sto^ceoreig  TOdv  duafavo/aevav
Kcta  TYig  7roAtTuag,  olg  Saia.og  anoAdfiei  to  npoTi/aov,  d
Swa’ca  avvleAeiv'  a v  /an  vvvz7rtKV%m)i  to  7r§o£e£dMv(jLevov  o
Syi/jLog .  oy.ottog  Se  kcu  cre^t  tm  etg  tuvtyiv  aiwovTtoV  eav
ya £  Tig  et<r$ een  vo/jlov  y\  TYig  e^dcnac  a(pai§dtuevog  ti  rug
VTrapycvcwg  tyi  uvFkKyitq  ncFia  Tovg  eOia/aovg,  r,  Tag  TrpoeSptag
KCU  Ti(ULCtg  KUl  Cl?\VCu]/  CtvIttVy  Y]  KUl  VY1  Aid  ffOlM  €Aa.T%fJLCLTCL


/


(  43 1  )

as  the  year  is  expired,  or  of  continuing  him  in  the  com¬
mand.  Again,  the  fenate  may  either  magnify,  and  extol,
or,  on  the  other  fide,  obfcure,  and  extenuate  the  victories
of  the  generals :  For  thefe  cannot  celebrate  their  triumphs,
as  they  call  them,  (in  which  the  reprefentations  of  their
fuccefles  are  carried  in  pomp  before  the  eyes  of  the  people)
with  proper  magnificence,  fometimes,  not  even  at  all,  unlefs
the  fenate  confents  to  it,  and  furniilies  the  neceflary  ex¬
pence.  Then,  as  the  power  of  putting  an  end  to  the  war
is  in  the  people,  the  generals  are  under  a  neceflity  of  hav¬
ing  their  approbation,  though  they  happen  to  be  never  fo
far  from  home  :  For,  as  I  faid  above,  the  people  have  the
right  of  ratifying,  and  annulling  all  accommodations,  and
conventions ;  and,  which  is  of  the  greateft  importance,  it  is
to  the  people  that  the  generals,  after  the  expiration  of  their
command,  give  an  account  of  their  conduct :  So  that,  it  is,
by  no  means,  fafe  for  them  to  difregard  the  favor  either
of  the  fenate,  or  of  the  people.

On  the  other  fide,  the  fenate,  though  veiled  with  fo  great
power,  is  under  a  neceflity  of  fhewing  a  regard  to  the  people
in  the  firft  place,  and  of  aiming  at  their  approbation  in  every
thing  relating  to  the  public;  as  not  having  the  power  to  take
cognizance  of  crimes  of  the  firft  magnitude,  or  to  punifh
thofe,  which  are  committed  againft  the  ftate,  with  death,
unlefs  the  people  confirm  the  previous  decree  they  make
for  that  purpofe.  In  like  manner,  the  regulation  even  of
thofe  things,  which  particularly  affedt  the  fenate,  belongs
alfo  to  the  people  :  For,  if  any  perfon  propofes  a  law,  by
which  part  of  their  power,  as  founded  on  cuftom,  is  to  be

taken


(  43 2  )

7 T€§1  TM  (ZlXC,  7TCimV  0  $Yi[AOg  yiHTCU  TttV  TOlxItiV  XUl  SUVCU,
Ml  fJLY),  XVplog.  TO  h  (TVH%OV,  ZCLV  tU  tl/lfYITUl  TtoV  ^{JUX^OdV

%X  oiov  Z7ti  TiKog  afeiv  ti  <Pvi/cilaf  rod v  fia&xAitov  yi  vvyTwir®-'
aKA  voe  cvveJ'geveiv  fj  <jV(jL7to%ivi£rcJLi  T07rapanav.  O (pei-
hovn  S'e  aei  7roizi\)  oi  J'nyagX01  to  S'oxov v  tm  S^fiQy  mi  ya-
7\i<ra  soyoZz&cJLi  ty\q  tovtov  (icvMvztog.  S'io  7ruflap  to)V  tvqo-
ei^yevodv  xagiv  Mis  tov;  noAAovgy  mi  n^oTzy^i  top  vgvv  tco
<S \yco  Y)  (rvMog.

Qyoitog  ye  yw  i tciKiv  o  fayog  v7ro%psag  e$i  tyj  orvfXtjT&y

Ml  SO'/jxCz&CLl  Tcwl’/ig  OtpZtAtol',  Ml  XOIPY]  Ml  XCtf  lilCL V.
7T0AAtoV  ya%  zfav  Oplct) V  TCtiV  ZxMoyt VUV  VI TO  TUV  TI(JlQm  $10L

7 TdTYig  I TCtAiag  eig  Tag  enicxevag  xai  xalatncevag  tm  friyu-
<riaVy  cl  Tig  ovx  av  e^agidyntrailo  p aft®?  7toAAmv  Se  Trolajuav,
Aiyevm,  KYiwiMy  yelaAAm,  x®S&m  <™AAw£JV  ocra  ne7?\Gd-
xev  V7T0  tyi'j  P ujLiatw  JvvctreicL V'  7rafla  x^tCi^raL  fvy&ouvei
Ta  7T(;0Zl%Y){JLZ\)a  M  TOV  7TA*)6<5tlS4  XUl  C TX^OV,  cog  snog  Z17TZIV,
navlag  evMe&at  Taig  ®vaig  mi  Taig  e^aciaig  Taig  ex  Tov\m%
oi  yev  yae,  afoga^ovon  7tat>a  tm  TiynTOM  avioi  mg  exhtreigy
oi  S'e  xoivuvowri  TovToig'  oi  eyfvwvlai  Tovg  yfopaxoTag*  oi  S'e
Tag  ovaiag  Moacrtv  ne^i  tovImv  eig  to  <hyo(riov.  ex s*

7re§i  7rcLv\m  tqv  7r%oemyevttv  tup  xvgiav  to  tvi itfyiov,  mi  ya%
Xpovov  Povvaiy  xa t  crvy7rl®ycu@-'  yevoyevov  xcvtpicrah  xai
TOTragciTrav  aJvpctiov  tiv(&  crvy£aij&  uTfoAvcat  TYig  egfopiag.
xai  noKha  in  tivcl  eg'iv  ev  oig  xai  (iAan'izi  yefaTia,  xai  na-
Am  toQeAei  Tovg  ra  faya^a  p/^p/^W  »  avyA^l^.  h  ya%
ava(po§a  to)v  7r§Q&pnfJL&itM  yivelai  7r*og  tclvIw'  to  Se  ye-

yiTovy


[-433  ]

taken  away,  or  their  preeminence,  or  dignities  to  beabolifhed,
or  even  their  fortunes  to  be  diminifhed,  every  thing  of  this
kind,  I  fay,  the  people  have  it  in  their  power  either  to  receive,
or  reject:  And  farther,  if  one  of  the  tribunes  of  the  people
oppofes  the  palling  of  a  decree,  the  fenate  are  fo  far  from  be¬
ing  able  to  enact  it,  that  it  is  not  even  in  their  power  to  con-
fult,  or  aflemble  at  all :  And  it  is  the  duty  of  the  tribunes
to  act  agreeably  to  the  fenfe  of  the  people,  and  to  obferve
their  pleafure.  For  all  thefe  reafons,  the  fenate  ftands  in
awe  of  the  people,  and  pays  a  regard  to  them.

In  like  manner,  the  people  are  alfo  (object  to  the  power  of
the  fenate,  and  under  an  obligation  of  cultivating  the  good
will  of  all  the  fenators  in  general,  and  of  every  one  of
them  in  particular  :  For,  there  being  many  works  put  out
by  the  cenfors  throughout  all  Italy,  relating  to  the  repairing,
and  erecting  of  public  buildings,  of  which  it  is  not  eafy  to
give  an  account,  and  alfo  many  rivers,  ports,  gardens,  mines,
and  lands  let  out  by  them,  and,  upon  the  whole,  whatever
falls  under  the  power  of  the  Romans :  It  happens  that  all
thefe  are  undertaken  by  the  people ;  and,  confequently,  that
almoft  all  of  them  are  ingaged  either  in  thefe  undertakings,
or  in  the  works,  that  are  confequent  to  them :  For  fome
are  themfelves  the  purchafers  of  thefe  undertakings  from
the  cenfors ;  others  are  their  partners ;  fome  are  fureties  for
the  purchafers  ;  and  others  make  alignments  to  the  public
of  their  fortunes  for  the  performance  of  thefe  contracts  ;
now,  all  thefe  things  are  under  the  controll  of  the  Senate,
which  has  power  to  give  time,  or,  in  cafe  of  misfortune,  to
mitigate  the  fum  due ;  and,  if  any  thing  has  happened  to
render  the  performance  of  the  contract  impracticable,  abfo-
lutely  to  cancel  it :  So  that,  the  fenate  has  many  opportu-
Vol.  I.  K  k  k  nicies


(  434  )

yi?ov7  zx  Tatung  cmoMovtcu  x&tcu  tm  nhetTOdV  xcu  tm

fo/UOFtOdV  XCU  TM  ifrltoTlXtoV  (rWcO^uF/JiCtTOdV-,  CG’OL  (JizFz§©J
Z%ei  TO)V  zFxM{t(tT®V  $10  ncivlzg  Cig  TY)V  TCUJTY\g  niTlV  zvdzdz-

[tzvoi,  xcu  hdmzg  to  tk  Xgeictg  ad'yi 7\ov,  zv7\a^®g  zy^xcri
npog  rag  zVTU<yzig->  xcu  rug  aVTinga^eig  t®v  ryg  ctv[x7\y\th
f&XMftetTM.  OjULOiag  Sz  XCU  7T$og  TCtg  T&V  VnctTOdV  Zn&O-
7\ag  S\)tr)(t$Qg  ciVTm%ctTlx(rLV,  dia  to  xolt  iJ'iotv  xcu  xoivn
navrzg  zv  Toig  vnaiQgotg  vno  tyv  zxumv  nmlziv  z%x<nav.

T oicwTY\g  S'*  ovcrng  Tng  zxct5%  toiv  [tzpov  J'vvafjLZtog,  e\g  to
xcu  (&AoL7rleiV  xcu  <rv\/z%f& v  ctKhnXotg'  ngog  nacrcig  ■  av/uSoum
Tag  nzp^ctcreig  foonotg  z%etv  tyiv  dgfjioyw  avTwr  ®<gz  ftn

OiOV  T  etVOU  TOLVTYig  ZVgeiV  CtfJLeiVO)  7T07\iT€iCig  (rvg-CLCTlV.  CTCLV

fizv  yct§  Tig  z^®Szv  xoivog  (po£og  zmsag  avafxaori  crCpctg  cruft-
(p%omv  xcu  crwz^feiv  aAA YiKoic^  tyiKixclvtyiv  xcu  toiclutw  crv/tt-
€aiy'ei  ytvz&cu  tyiv  fvvctfjuv  tx  no'ktTZV.ftal©* ,  mz  (ulyi^z  net-
gciMinz&ou  to) v  JWW v  ftnS'zh  cjltz  nzpi  to  npocrnzcrov  ciet,
navi® v  ofjix  Tctig  znivoiaig  dfti7\7\®ftzv®r  ftvjTZ  to  x&Qzv  v<tz-
guv  th  xai^y  xoivv,  xcu  xolt  i^tctv  zxctfu  crvvzgyxvl®-’,  npog
tyiv  T'd  ngoxeiftzvv  crvvrzMiav.  dtonz%  ctvvnoTcSov  crvft&cu-
vet  yivzcr&ctb  xcu  nav'og  ztfitxvea&cti  tx  xgiOzvIog  tyiv  iciotyitcl
noAirzvftctlog.  qtclv  yz  (jew  naAiv  cmo\v§zvrzg  t&v  zxrog
Cpo£ ®v  zvJiciTgi&oxrt  Tctig  zvrv%i.ai.g  xcu  nsgiktcnctig  Tctig  zx  t®v


(35)  AiCttS^  UVVTO?CtlOV  ffVtj£sUVil  ,yiVtl&CUi
nau  zravToc  i^noeioS-ca  tx  rt gtQtvlos  tj;v  i$i~

ottiToc  tx  ■aoAn&y.tt.TOf.  J  Cc Ji  pouv  cela
que  cette  republique  eft  invincible ,  ts?
qitelle  vieni  a  bout  de  tout  ce  qu’e/le  en-


treprend.  By  this  means,  the  French
tranOator  has  left  out  the  very  thing
Polybius  has  been  ail  along  contend¬
ing  for,  which  is,  that  the  great  ad¬
vantages  the  Roman  commonwealth

XC&OgfktfJLCtlaV  ?


(  435  )

nities  both  of  prejudicing  confiderably,  and  of  advantaging
thofe,  who  have  the  management  of  thefe  public  undertak¬
ings  :  For  the  report  of  all  thefe  things  is  made  to  the  fe-
nate :  And,  what  is  ftill  of  the  greateir  moment,  judges  are
appointed  out  of  the  fenate  in  mofc  of  the  caufes,  that  re¬
late  either  to  public,  or  private  contrads,  when  the  action  is
of  importance  :  For  which  reafon,  all  the  people,  being  in-
gaged  in  a  dependence  upon  the  fenate,  and  apprehending
the  uncertainty  of  the  occafions,  in  which  they  may  ifand
in  need  of  their  favor,  they  dare  not  refift,  or  oppofe  their
will.  In  like  manner,  they  are  not  eafily  brought  to  ob-
ftrud  the  defigns  of  the  confuls,  becaufe  all  of  them  in  ge¬
neral,  and  every  one  in  particular,  become  fubjedj;  to  their
authority,  when  in  the  field.

Such,  therefore,  being  the  power  of  each  order,  both  to
hurt,  and  aflift  one  another,  it  follows  that  their  union  is
fufficiently  adapted  to  all  contingencies ;  for  which  reafon,
it  is  not  poffible  to  invent  a  more  perfect  fyftem  of  govern¬
ment  :  For,  when  the  common  fear  of  a  foreign  enemy  com¬
pels  them  to  a6t  in  concert,  and  aflift  one  another,  fuch,  and
fo  great  is  the  ftrength  of  the  government,  that  nothing  is  ei¬
ther  omitted,  that  is  necefiary ;  fince,  upon  every  occafion,  all
vie  with  one  another  in  direding  their  thoughts  to  the  good
of  the  public,  or,  being  once  refolved,  comes  too  late  for
the  end  propofed  ;  fince  all  of  them  in  general,  and  every
one  in  particular,  unite  their  endeavours  in  carrying  their
defigns  into  execution  :  For  thefe  reafons,  their  common¬
wealth,  from  the  peculiar  frame  of  it,  becomes  irrefiftible,
and  attains  whatever  it  propofes.  On  the  other  fide,  when

was  pofiefied  of,  were  owing  to  the  would  think  not  to  be  overlooked,  by
peculiar frame  of  its  conftitution,  which  rr,v  jJtor»jTC4  ts
he  has  expreffed,  in  a  manner  one

Kkk  2


free


[  436  ]

XCLT0$6*(JLCL Ct7T07\ClV0vlzg  TY\r,  SVpOUfJLOVlCig,  mi  VKOKOhOLKW *

ofjitvoi  mi  paQvjULxnsg  T^sn^ilcti  7t%og  v£giv,  mi  7rgog  vTregtj-
(poLUctv,  o  S)o  (piAei  yifvsvbai'  tots  mi  (jlclKitcl  c rvvifoiv  z$i

CLVTO  7TCt$  CWT'd  7TO%lfy(JLSVOV  TO  7T  0?\lT  iV  fjLOL  TY\V  fcoY&SlCLr  S7tei-
S'CLV  ya%  et'OlJ'w  Tl  Tk)V  (ULSgMV  QlXoi/SlKY),  mi  7r7\2GV  th  JW-

Tog  s7ri^oLTYiTctr  J\jAov  &)V  xfevog  ct%TiTs7\ng  onog ,  actlct  tov
cl$i  7\oyov,  cLHKnrct^rcti  S's  mi  7ra$oL7ro<f'ify&cii  ^vvctfjLsvng
Trig  w&s'd  7 rgoQsre&g  m  aAA»A&)P,  ufov  s^oihi  tm  (jls%q ji/3
fc/  V7Tt§(p§0V€lm  7TCtv\ct  yctp  SfJLfJLSVSl  TOig  mOKSlfJLil/Oig,  TCI  (JLSV

mTwofxsvd  Tyjg  og/urjg,  ret  h  &§%*)$  fehoTCL  ty\v  sk  ra  7T2-

Atf£  S7flTd(TlV.


0*


fj/j  -  * ;  JlVV'  CJi.

v  r  s  > f ! 7  . 1

f  •  i  <  »  '  ■ « r  I

'  '  .  _  i  ■  *

•'  .L  llV.  ' !  J  f. :  UK
yj.o  ’_'.i lii  i'.  ..  t

ft  rr:  oil  « rills:  7

cii  ?nif  •  U;


70  ! -  >•»'

irifisca  j  nt


b


[  437  ]

free  from  the  fear  of  a  foreign  enemy,  they  live  in  profperity
and  affluence,  the  confequences  of  victory,  enjoying  their
good  fortune,  and,  through  flattery  and  eafe,  grow  infolent
and  proud,  which  ufually  happens  ;  then,  is  their  common¬
wealth  chiefly  obferved  to  relieve  itfelf:  For,  when  any
branch  of  it,  fwelling  beyond  its  bounds,  becomes  ambiti¬
ous,  and  aims  at  unwarrantable  power,  it  is  manifefl:  that,  no
one  of  them  being,  as  I  have  faid,  abfolute,  but  the  defigns
of  each  fubjeCt  to  the  contradiction,  and  controll  of  the  other
two,  no  one  can  run  into  any  excefs  of  power,  or  arrogance :
But  all  three  muft  remain  in  the  terms  prefcribed  by  the
conftitution,  either,  by  being  defeated  in  their  attempts  to
exceed  them,  or,  by  being  prevented,  through  the  fear  of  the
other  two,  from  attempting  it.


A  DIS-


-

-

•  r»  :  x

'

*

•  ; \i

•j,  *..l  ),j  rtjr  I.  U;  .  -  orl:  c>  -  -  ;  :  io

-

.

■

.

.


.  >  L  A


'  '


(  437  )


A

DISSERTATION

UPON  THE

CONSTITUTION

O  F  T  H  E

ROMAN  SENATE.

IT  were  to  be  wifhed  that  Polybius  had  looked  upon
the  conftitution  of  the  Roman  fenate  to  have  as  proper¬
ly  belonged  to  his  fubjedt,  as  the  powers  of  it :  Had
he  been  of  that  opinion,  there  is  no  room  to  doubt,  but  he
would  have  given  us  fuch  an  exadt  account  of  it,  as  would
have  cleared  up  all  the  difficulties,  that  occur  in  reading  the
ancient  authors.  It  is  very  probable  that  he  looked  upon
this  fubjedt  as  too  well  known  to  ftand  in  need  of  a  difcuf-
fion ;  in  the  fame  manner  as  an  Engliffi  hiftorian  would
poffibly  judge  it  needlefs  to  give  an  account  of  the  qualifi¬
cations  required  by  our  laws  and  cuftoms,  to  intitle  a  per-
fon  to  a  feat  in  either  houfe  of  parliament,  though  he  might
very  reafonably  think  a  particular  detail  of  the  powers  of
each  well  worth  the  attention  of  the  public.

This  omiffion  in  Polybius,  if  it  deferves  that  name,  has
been  endeavoured  to  be  fupplied  by  feveral  modern  authors,
in  feveral  languages ;  but  without  giving  that  fatisfadlion,
which,  from  the  great  reputation  thofe  authors  had  deferv-


[  44°  ']

edly  acquired  in  other  branches  of  learning,  the  public  had
reafon  to  expecft.  Whether  this  proceeded  from  the  diffi¬
culty  of  the  fubjed,  or  from  their  want  of  attention  in
treating  it,  I  final!  not  pretend  to  determine ;  but  mull  be
fo  juft  to  their  memory,  as  to  own  that  I  attribute  it,  in  a
great  rneafure,  to  the  former ;  particularly,  fince,  though  I
have  provided  my  felf  with  many  more  materials,  than
have  been  made  ufe  of  by  any  of  thofe  writers,  yet  there
are  fome  points,  which  I  cannot  dear  up  by  the  authority
of  the  ancient  authors  ;  for  which  reafon,  I  chufe  rather  to
fubmit  them  to  the  conftderation  of  the  learned,  than  en¬
deavour  to  eftabliffi  any  fyftem  of  my  own  upon  unfup-
ported  conjedures.

Concerning  the  original  inftitution  of  the  Roman  fen  ate,
this  is  the  fubftance  of  the  account  given  of  it  by  Diony¬
sius  of  Halicarnaftus,  who  is  much  more  particular  than
Livy  in  every  thing  relating  to  this  fubjed.

I.  After  Romulus  had  divided  all  the  people  into  three
tribes,  and  fubdivided  each  of  thefe  into  ten  curias,  he
formed  the  fenate  in  the  following  manner:  Their  body
was  to  conlift  of  one  hundred  perfons,  all  patricians ;  of


I.  vsiyctg  t*jv  7rA>j£vv  drra <rxv  —

tnurot  rav  rgutiv  iraAiv  yoi^av  Ixxdhtv  ug
JtKct  [xoigois  iitAwv  —  iKottei  is  r as  ysv
yu^ag  yoipatg?  't&Cxs'  rag  i’  tAarlag,  xa-

>tX  T  UV  7TUT  (31KIUV  UviyefS  SXXTOV  £7 Tl~

As<'ctytv@r,—oouTQq  ytv  di ravlav  sva  tov

agtgcv  onriSui'Zx- — t wv  it  <f>uA uv  hoc,? jj  7 rqotr-
Tgsig  otvigaq  \Aschai  — —  Ixcisy  (pgx-
t zraAiv  txtKsvcrt  t {ug  sx  tuv  zrdlgixtav

- -  TOV  T  MV  iXOlTOV  £%snh  Y<0UCt  j3n~

Atvruv  cifiiQyov —  uv  bixrov  avi^aq  •ig
a!  Qgcflgoit  wgos%ugitrav7o,  r otq  a^aioig

fitAtvTXis  ztrjicctygat^/ctv.  Dionyf.  Hal.
B.  ii.  EuGvs  yap  dy.x  rw  u x^aAa^uv  Tvtv


tov  iyyoltnov  c%Aov  oixs/ov  lavra  7toi-
tjcra*  7rgoQvjUvi(leig- — tmAt^xg  avi^aq  Ixdjov  tx
nsavlav  t av  iv\ yohxuv  —  saar^ixi^g  tirouqirs.,
xai  xar zra^tv  sis  tov  tuv  (3aAtvrav  cigiQ-
yov,  {Ta^xwit^  H(>i<rK&‘)  xxi  rort  zrqulov
tytvovlo  Fayaioig  rpiaxoffioi  (ZgAtvr oti  nag
oyltq  Siay.ocici.  id.  B.  ill.  ESaAevcalo  ysv
yxg  Tgtaxccixg  avrxg  k ala  to  ag%ai sv  7 toi-

Yi<rxt  (0  Avy%g(§y.)  Dion  Caff.  B.  liv.

Tlapa^ayGavti  rv,v  fixtriAuav  tviavra  izv-
Ttga  yxAtgx  Tv,g  uiag  xai  Tsrla^aKogvig
oAvyrnai^  0  Ta^xvvi ©•*.  Dion.  Hal.
B.  iii.  L.  Sulla  11.  and  CL  Metelius
confute  for  the  year  674.  Fafti  con-

thefe


(  44i  )

thde  he  hlmfelf  chofe  one,  and  ordered  each  of  the  tribes,
and  each  of  the  curias,  to  chufe  three  :  All  thefe  together
amounted  to  the  number  required  :  So  that,  the  fenate,  in
its  original  inftitution,  confifted  of  one  hundred  patricians,
ninety  nine  of  whom  owed  their  feats  there  to  the  choice
of  the  people.  This  was  alfo  obferved  in  the  addition  of
the  hundred  Sabines  made,  fome  time  after,  by  Romulus,
and  Tatius,  who  were  all  chofen  by  the  curiae :  Thefe  were
alfo  patricians,  which  then  was,  and,  for  many  years  after,
continued  to  be,  a  neceflary  qualification  for  all,  who  were
admitted  into  the  fenate;  fiuce  we  find  that  Tarquinius
Priscus,  in  order  to  ingratiate  himfelf  with  the  people  at
his  accefiion,  chofe  out  of  their  body  one  hundred  perfons,
whom  he  firft  made  patricians,  then  fenators.  From  this
time,  the  complement  of  the  fenate  was  three  hundred,  and,
in  all  probability,  continued  fo  till  Sylla’s  time,  that  is,


fu lares.  Autjj  h  ry  /3 tXy,  ot  xx?  sottrus
xou  oAiyoivJgxs'y,

zrgo<TK<XTiAfl;tv  (o  SvAAce)  ciy.$i  tus  t gix-
xc<r/xf  ex,  t uv  ImreuV)  rocii

m  v|/»j <p o v  Tiregi  Ixu^n.  Appian,  B.  i.
Civ.  W.  There  is  a  paffage  in  the
epitome  of  the  89th  book  of  Livy,
which  is  thought  to  relate  to  this  addi-
tion  made  to  the  fenate  by  Sylla  *,  the
paffage  is  as  follows  :  Senatum  ex  e-
quejin  or  dine  fupplevit :  The  fen  fe  of
which  feems  to  be,  that  he  filled  up
the  vacancies  of  the  fenate  with
knights,  not  that  he  made  any  addi¬
tion  to  it*,  but,  it  plainly  appears  by
the  pafTage  of  Appian  beforemention-
cd,  that  he  encreafed  their  number.
However,  the  author  of  the  epitome,
who,  certainly,  was  not  Livy,  is  not
much  to  be  depended  upon  ;  for,  in
the  epitome  of  the  doth-  book,  he  fays
that  C.  Gracchus  added  fix  hundred
knights  to  the  three  hundred  fenators ,  ut

VOL.  I.


fexcenti  equites  trecentis  fenatoribug
admifcerentur :  id  eft,  ut  equefter  ordo
bis  tantum  virium  in  fenatu  haberet;
to  the  end  that  the  order  of  knights  might
have  twice  as  much  power  in  the  fenate.
This  is  fo  worded,  that  it  cannot  be
conltrued  to  relate  to  the  Sempronian
law,  concerning  the  judges :  For,  by
that  law,  the  judicature  was  totally
transferred  from  the  fenate  to  the
knights,  as  may  be  feen  at  large  in
Appian,  B.  i.  Civ.  W.  and,  very  par¬
ticularly,  'in  Velleius  Paterculus,  B,
ii.  c.  32.  who  fays  that  Cotta  divi¬
ded  the  judicature ,  which  C.  Gracchus
had  transferred  from  the  fenate  to
the  knights ,  and  Sylla  from  the
knights  to  the  fenate ,  equally  between
the  two  orders:  Cotta  judicandi  mu-
nus,  quod  C.  Gracchus  ereptum  fena-
tui  ad  equites,  Sylla  ab  illis  ad  fena-
tum  tranftulerant,  requaliter  inter  u-
trumque  ordinem  partitus  eft.  And

L  1  1  about


(  442  )


about  five  hundred  and  thirty  four  years,  which  is  the  num¬
ber  of  years  comprifed  between  the  firft  year  of  Tarqui-
nius  Priscus,  and  the  fecond  confulfhip  of  Sylla  ;  who,
to  ftrengthen  his  party  in  the  fenate,  and,  at  the  fame  time,
to  repair  the  Ioffes  it  had  fuftained  by  the  death  of  many
of  its  members  in  the  late  commotions,  encreafed  their  num¬
ber,  probably,  to  more  than  four  hundred  :  Thefe  addi¬
tional  fenators  were,  like  the  former,  chofen  by  the  people.

II.  From  this  time,  to  the  fourth  confulfhip  of  Caesar,
that  is,  during  the  fpace  of  thirty  four  years,  I  fliall  not
pretend  to  afcertain  the  precife  number  of  which  the  fenate
confifted :  It  is  certain,  however,  that  it  exceeded  four  hun¬
dred  ;  and,  probably,  the  complement  v/as  the  fame  that
Sylla  left.

III.  CjE  sar,  the  year  before  his  death,  and  after  he  had
overcome  all  oppofition,  among  the  various  methods  made
ufe  of  by  him  to  reward  thofe,  who  had  preferred  his  caufe
to  That  of  their  country,  introduced  lo  many  of  his  crea¬
tures  into  the  fenate,  that  the  number  of  fenators  amount-


here,  by  the  way,  I  cannot  help  taking
notice  of  an  error  in  Plutarch,  in  his
life  of  C.  Gracchus,  where  he  fays,
that  he  committed  the  judicature  to  three
hundred  fenators ,  and  as  many  knights,
o  Si  tiov  Irnnuiv  7r^offncilfAi^tv

&v~o>s  TpaxocnoK,  xqtciif  xoivxt

iuv  f£ctxc<r io.v  nroiytri.

II.  The  interval  between  the  fecond
confulfhip  of  Sylla,  and  the  fourth  con¬
fulfhip  or  Ctsfar,  particularly,  the  lat¬
ter  part  of  it,  is  fo  much  iiluftrated  by
Cicero’s  writings,  that  I  am  furprifed
we  fhould  not  be  able  to  gather  out  of
them  what  the  complement  of  the  fe¬
nate  was,  during  that  period.  All  I
can  find  is,  that  they  were  above  four


hundred  *,  fince  in  his  14th  letter  of
the  firft  book  to  Atticus,  he  gives  an
account  of  a  certain  divifion  ot  the  fe¬
nate,  in  which  there  were  four  hundred
for  the  affirmative ,  and  fifteen  for  the
negative  •,  homines  ad  quindecim  curi-
oni  nullum  fenatus-confultum  facienti
afienferum  :  ex  altera  parte  facile  qua-
dringenti  fuerunt.  There  is  another
paflage  to  the  fame  purpofe*  in  his
fpeech  to  the  fenate,  after  his  return
from  banifhment ;  he  there  tells  them,,
that  there  were  four  hundred  and  ten  fe¬
nators  prefent :  quo  quidem  die  cum
quadringenti  &  decern  lenatores  effe-
tis.

III.  Mijtffv  SiocKgivuv  [AyjT  a  nt  fgodiu-

ed


(  443  )

ed  even  to  nine  hundred.  It  will  be  eafily  believed  that
this  recruit  proved  a  greater  addition  to  his  power,  than  to
the  dignity  of  the  fenate ;  particularly,  when  it  is  confider-
ed  that  they  confided  of  new-made  citizens,  half-barbarous
Gauls,  foldiers,  and  the  fons  of  freed-men.  But  Caesar
was  outdone  in  this,  as  in  every  other  excefs,  by  the  trium¬
virs  ;  for  they,  it  feems,  brought  flaves  into  the  fenate.  By
thefe  additions,  the  number  of  fenators  came  to  exceed  a
thoufand.  The  hiftory  of  the  Roman  fenate,  under  the
emperors,  is  fo  difagreeable  a  fubjeCt,  that  I  fhall  not  purfue
it :  For,  what  can  be  more  afflicting,  than  to  behold  a  wife,
a  virtuous,  and  a  venerable  afiembly,  become  weak,  aban¬
doned,  and  defpicable  ?  transformed  from  all  that  is  great,
and  glorious,  to  all  that  is  mean,  and  infamous ;  from  be¬
ing  the  fcourge  of  tyrants,  to  become  their  flatterers,  and
wretchedly  fubmitting  to  be  not  only  flaves,  but  the  inftru-
ments  of  flavery.  Let  us  turn  our  eyes,  therefore,  from
the  ruins  of  this  fair  building  to  the  qualifications,  that
were  required  in  a  Roman  fenator,  when  the  fenate  deferv-
ed  to  be  called  by  Cine  as,  the  ambafiador  of  Pyrrhus,
an  afiembly  of  kings.

IV.  Before  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,  the  vacancies  in
the  fenate  were  filled  up  by  them ;  and,  after  their  expul-

t>k,  jM.jjr  u  t if  worn  yv,  ivi-  IV.  Hoc  fi  polluit  ncbilitatem  ijiam

u$e  xui  ivvccKotria?  to  vejlram^  quam  plerique  oriundi  ex  Alba-

&\jtuv  ytvicQxi.  Dion  Caff.  B.  xliii.  nis  et  Sabinis ,  non  genere  nec  fanguine ,
Cafar  dictator  legit  in  fenatum  civitate  fed  -per  covptatio?iem  in  patres  habetis ,
donatos ,  et  quofdam  e  femi-barbaris  Gal-  aut  ab  regibus  ledli,  aut ,  pojl  reges  ex-
forum.  Sueton.  Life  of  Caf  E?  ts  t o  affos,  jujfu  populi.  Liv .  B.  iv.  c.  4.  P.
(ixtevlr.ftov  kou  (JovAouj  (veyftz-fccv.  Dion  Licinius  Calvus  tribunus  militum  confu -

Caff.  B.  xlviii.  Erant  enim fuper  milley  lari  potejlate - vir  nullus  ante  bono-

et  qnidem  indignijftmi ,  pojl  necem  Cafa-  ribus  ufus ,  veins  tan  turn  fenator ,  et
ris ,  per  gratiam  et  premium  adlebli ,  at  ate  jam  gravis.  Id.  B.  v.  c.  12.  Ma-
quos  orcinos  vulgus  vocabat.  Sueton.  jores  noflri ,  cum  regum  potejlatem  non
Life  of  Aug.  tulijfent ,  it  a  magijlratus  annuos  crea-

L  1  1  2  fion,


(  444  )

fion,  thofe  fenators,  who  had  not  a  right  to  a  feat  in  the
fenate,  by  virtue  of  fome  magiftracy,  were  chofen  by  the
people :  So  that,  though  the  magiftracy  was  the  feminary
of  the  fenate,  out  of  which  it  was  annually  fupplied,  yet
there  were  other  fenators  (probably  chofen  when  the  vacancies
were  too  many  to  be  filled  up  by  the  magiftrates  of  the
year)  who  were  invefted  with  that  dignity  by  the  people,
without  having  borne  any  magiftracy  at  all.  Thefe  fena¬
tors  were  chofen  promifcuoufiy  out  of  the  plebeians,  as  well


as  the  patricians,  even  before

*; verunt ,  ut  concilium  fenatus  reipublica
pr<eponerent  fempiternum  •,  deligerentur
autem  in  id  concilium  ab  univerfo  popu-
lo ,  aditufque  in  ilium  fummum  ordinem
omnium  avium  induff  ria  ac  virtuti  pa¬
ter  et.  Cic.for  Sext.  I  have  faid  that  the
time,  when  the  people  obtained  the
privilege  of  being  chofen  immediately
into  the  fenate,  iriuft  have  been  be¬
tween  the  years  263  and  314;  becaufe
it  is  plain,  from  Dionyfius  of  Hali-
carnaffus,  that  it  was  after  the  affair
of  Coriolanus,  which  happened  in  the
firft  of  thofe  years  •,  for  he  fays  that,
from  that  time ,  the  democracy  gained
ground  upon  the  arifiocr.acy ,  by  the
peoples  being  made  eligible  into  the  fe¬
nate ,  and,  by  feveral  oiher  conceffions
made  in  their  favor,  of  which  he  there
gives  a  particular  account,  x««  svSsnh

ttf&aptyos  b  cfi jjWflf,  fAtyug'  y  J e  oc^i-

SQXScbncX.,  7TG.AXiX.  T*  Oi^lU^XoClOg  OL7Ti~

£,  KS.  fxeli%eiv  (7riT^£7raa-ci  roif

JupfltKoig,  &c.  Dion.  Hal.  B.  vii.  The
year  314  was  remarkable  for  the  pu-
niihment  of  Sp.  Maelius,  who. was,  as
it  appears,  a  plebeian  j  which  is  not
at  all  contradided  by  Livy’s  faying  he
was  ex  equejlri  or  dine ;  for  the  order
of  knights  was  common  both  to  the


the  people  were,  by  law,  ca-

patricians,  and  plebeians  ;  fince,  not.
birth,  but  the  poffeffion  only  of  four
hundred  thoufand  feftertii,  that  is,  of
3  229  /.  3  j.  4 d.  fterling  gave  a  title  to
it.  After  Maelius  had  received  the
punifhment  he  deferved,  Livy  makes
L.  Quintius  Cincinnatus,  the  didator,
tell  the  people,  that  it  was  mo  nitrous
in  Maelius  to  imagine  that  the  city,
which  could  fcarce  digeft  his  being  a  js-
natory  would  fuffer  him  to  be  their
king ,  ut  quern  Jenatorem  concoquere  civi-
tas  vix  poffety  regem  ferret .  B.  iv.  c.  15.
Sp.  Maelius  therefore,  though  a  ple¬
beian,  might  have  been  elected  into
the  fenate  :  It  is  alfo  certain  that  we
find  the  people  in  pofieflion  of  this
privilege  in  the  year  353,  when  P.  Li-
cinius  Calvus  was  chofen  confular  tri¬
bune.  Upon  the  whole,  as  the  affair
of  Coriolanus  fuggefted  the  reflexion
1  have  mentioned  to  Dionyfius  of  Ha-
licamaffus,  and,  as  that  affair  happen¬
ed  only  two  years  after  the  inftitution
of  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  by
which  the  people  were  admitted  into
the  fenate  by  virtue  of  that  magiftra¬
cy,  it  is  very  probable  they  foon  after
obtained  the  right  of  being  eleded
immediately  into  that  aftembly.

pable


i  445  ')

pable  of  being  either  confular  tribunes,  or  confuls.  When
the  people  obtained  the  privilege  of  being  chofen  fenators
in  this  manner,  I  cannot  determine ;  but  fhall  obferve  that
it  muft  have  been  between  the  years  of  Rome  263,  and
314.  This,  however,  is  certain,  that  the  fenators  of  both
kinds  were  chofen  by  the  people,  with  this  difference,  that
one  fort  of  them  were  eledfed  immediately  into  the  fenate ;
and  the  others,  into  thofe  magiftracies,  that  gave  them  a
right  to  a  feat  there.

V.  All  magiftrates,  fuch  as  confuls,  prastors,  cenfors,
rediles,  tribunes  of  the  people,  and  quzeftors  had  a  right  to
a  feat  in  the  fenate,  during  their  magiftracy ;  after  the  ex-


V.  Turn  C.  Canuleius  pauca  in  fenatu
vociferatus.  Liv.  B.  iv.  c.  i.  kcu  tut o
muexv  rpxg  0 1  to  xwuov  (to

t uv  J'yjjua^cfv)  toitrai  zvx(>tKt)uv  tig

(oxhiiv.  Dionyf.  Hal.  B.  vii.  tirtllx  crw-

tig  TO  3ijA£OT>J£<OV  oi  cwtSgoi,  nsx-
gjvlwv  kxi  Twv  SvjfXX^iov,  uVf £  uapxkeixg
rt  kxi  cwlv^ixg  zvtg  zroMcog  E<rx07rxv.  Id.
B.  X.  Outs  yotg  tt^urog  Tig  xvt^Yj  twv  cruv-
X^OVTCtiV  ng  TO  TUptlQV  K«TO.'VOf,  XT  t  U  3*  I  -

gog  «7T»jA9gv.‘  tMhr.rixv  St  kcu  fixJojv  aStfM-
xv  zrx^Ktv.  Pint.  Life  of  Cat.  ofUt.
The  curule  magifcrates  were  the  con¬
fuls,  praetors,  cenfors,  and  curule  re-
d iles  no  authorities  are  brought  to
fhew  that  ihefe  fate  in  the  fenate,  du¬
ring  their  magiftracy,  it  being  a  thing
fo  well  known.  Odloginta  prat  ere  a
aut  fena  tores,  ant  qui  eos  magijlratus
geffiffent ,  unde  in  fenatum  legi  debercnt.
Liv.  B.  xxii.  c.  49.  It  is  rnoft  proba¬
ble  that  the  cenfors  obferved  the  fame
order  in  calling  over  the  fenate,  with
regard  to  thofe,  who  had  been  magi-
ftrates  fmce  the  laft  time  it  had  been
called  over,  that  was  followed  by  M.
Buteo,  who,  being  the  oldtft  cenfo-


rian,  was  created  dictator  to  perform
the  duty  of  the  cenfors,  in  reading
over  the  names  of  the  fenators,  and
to  fupply  the  vacancies  occafioned
by  the  death  of  great  numbers  of
them,  who  had  loft  their  lives  dur¬
ing  the  fecor.d  Punic  war :  Here
the  curule  magiftrates  are  fir  ft  called
over,  in  the  order  they  had  been  cre¬
ated  magiftrates  then  the  plebeian
aediles,  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  and
the  quaeftors ;  recitato  vetere  fenatu,
inde  primos  in  demortuorum  locum  legit,
qui  pofi  M.  AL milium  et  C.  Flamnium
cenfores  curulem  magijlratum  cepiffent,
necdum  in  fenatum  l edit  effent ;  nt  quif-
que  eorum  magifratus  primus  creatus
erat :  turn  legit  qui  adiles ,  tribuni  pie -
beii,  qu after e fv e  fuer ant.  Liv.  B.  xxii?.
c.  23.  This,  therefore,  feems  to  have
been  the  order  obferved  by  the  cenfors,
in  calling  over  the  names  of  thofe,
who  had  been  magiftrates  fince  the  laft
call  of  the  fenate.  As  to  the  right  I
have  faid  thofe,  who  had  been  curule
magiftrates,  enjoyed,  of  being  admit¬
ted  into  the  fenate  during  the  interval

piratiou


(  446  )

r

piration  of  which,  thofe,  who  were  not  before  in  the  cen¬
fors  lift,  ceafed  to  be  fenators,  till  the  next  time  the  fenate
was  called  over  by  the  cenfors ;  when,  if  their  names ’  were
not  omitted,  they  became  fenators  :  And,  during  the  inters
val  between  the  expiration  of  their  magiftracy,  and  the  next


between  the  expiration  of  their  magi¬
ftracy,  and  the  next  call  of  the  fenate  ;
and  the  exclufion  of  thofe,  whofe  ma¬
giftracy  had  not  been  of  that  fort,  I
hope  the  following  authorities  will  be
thought  fufficient  to  fupport  what  I
have  advanced  upon  that  fubjedt.
There  is  a  paflage  in  Valerius  Maxi¬
mus,  B.  ii.  c.  2.  where  he  fays  that
Fabius  Maximus,  as  he  was  going  in¬
to  the  country,  met  upon  the  road  P.
Craffus,  who,  he  knew,  had  been
quaeftor  three  years  before,  and  dif-
courfed  with  him  of  what  had  palled
in  the  fenate  *,  not  knowing  that  he
not  yet  been  called  by  the  cenfors  to
the  degree  of  a  fenator,  by  which
means  alone,  thofe,  who  had  been  ma-
giftrates,  could  become  fenators.  Me-
mor  eum  triennio  ante  qiixftorem  faffum ,
ignarufque  nondum  a  cenfcribus  in  erdi-
nem  fenatorium  al tedium  :  quo  uno  mo  do
his ,  qui  jam  honores  gejjerant ,  adit  us  in
curiam  dabatur.  The  quaeftorlhip,
therefore,  not  being  a  curule  magi¬
ftracy,  thofe,  who  had  been  invefted
with  it,  had  no  right  of  coming  into
the  fenate,  during  that  interval ;  which
right  thofe,  who  had  been  curule  ma-
giftrates,  enjoyed,  though  they  were
not  actually  fenators  till  their  names
were  called  over  by  the  cenfors  :  This
appears  by  the  terms  of  the  confular
edidt,  in  which  they  are  always  fum-
moned,  and  always  diftinguilhed  from
the  fenators.  This  edidt  is  often  men¬
tioned  by  Livy,  and  conftantly  runs  in


this  form,  uti  fenatores ,  quibufque  in

fenatu  fchtentiam  die  ere  licet ,  ad -

convenient.  Here  thof:,  who  had  a
right  of  delivering  their  opinions  in
the  fenate,  are  diftinguilhed  from  the
fenators :  In  the  following  palfage,
Cicero,  in  his  lpeech  for  Cluentius,
diftinguilhes  them  from  the  quaeftors,
and  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  quive
quajlor ,  tribunus  plebis ,  quive  in  fena¬
tu  fententiam  dixit.  There  is  an  ap¬
pellation  often  applied  by  the  ancient
authors  to  fome  of  the  fenators,  which
has  occafioned  great  variety  of  opini¬
ons,  and,  confequently,  great  difficul¬
ties  thefe  have  been  encreafed,  if  not
created,  by  what  Gellius  has  advanced
upon  this  fubjedt :  The  appellation  I
mean  is  that  of  Pedarii ,  which  that
author  has  endeavoured  to  explain  in  a
manner  fo  inconfiftent  with  the  tefti-
mony  of  all  writers  of  the  beft  authority,
and,  indeed,  with  what  he  himfelf
has,  upon  other  occafions,  aflerted,
that  I  do  not  think  it  worth  while  to
confute  him  any  otherwife,  than  by
producing  fome  paftages  out  of  thole
authors,  which  the  reader  may,  if  he
pleafes,  confront  with  what  Gellius
has  faid  upon  this  fubjedt.  Bur,  to
explain  this  matter  :  According  to  my
opinion,  there  were  three  methods,  by
which  the  fenators  declared  their  fenfe
of  what  came  before  them  ;  the  firft
was  by  their  affent,  or  approbation,
which  they  fignified  as  they  fate  in
their  places ;  and  this  is  what  Cicero

call


{  447  )

call  of  the  fenate,  if  they  had  been  curule  magiftrates,  they
had  a  right  of  coming  into  the  lenate,  and  of  delivering
their  opinion  there,  though  not  of  voting.  But,  if  they
had  not  been  curule  magiftrates,  they  had  no  right  of  com¬
ing  into  the  fenate  during  that  interval.

VI.  This  power  of  the  cenfors  was  fo  great,  that  Cicero
thinks  it  ought  to  have  been  abrogated.  However,  great  as


means,  when  he  tells  MereJIus,  nulla
eft  a  me  unquam  fententia  ditla  in  fra-
trem  tuum ,  quot'tefcunque  aliquid  eft : ac¬
tum,  fedens  Us  affenji,  qui  mihi  lenijftme
/entire  vifi  funt.  B.  v.  Ep.  2.  The  fe-
cond  was,  by  delivering  their  opini¬
ons,  with  their  reafons,  which  they
did  (landing  up  in  their  places :  This
requires  neither  proof,  nor  explanation.
The  third  method  was,  by  dividing,
without  giving  their  reafons,  that  is,
by  going  over  either  to  this,  or  that
fide  of  the  houfe  •,  and  this  was  called
pedibus  in  fententiam  ire ,  from  whence
came  the  appellation  of. pedarii  fenato-
res  *,  and  this  is  the  fenfe  Feftus  has
given  to  the  word,  pedariitm  fenatorem

- ita  appellatur ,  quia  tacitus  tranf-

eundo  ad  eum ,  cujus  fententiam  probat ,
quid  fentiat ,  indicat.  All  thefe  three
methods  are  particularly  mentioned  in
the  following  paffage  of  Livy,  B.
xxvii.  c.  34.  It  relates  to  M.  Livius
Salinator,  chofen  conful  with  C.  Clau¬
dius  Nero,  in  the  547th  year  of  Rome,
whofe  conful  (hip  was  illuftrated  by  the
defeat  of  Afdrubal :  That  author  there
fays  of  the  former,  who,  after  a  long
abfence  from  puolic  affairs,  had  been
obliged,  by  the  cenlors,  to  give  his
attendance  in  the  fenat t,  fed  turn  qttoque
aut  verbo  ajfentiebatur ,  aut  pedibus  in
fententiam  ibat ,  donee  cognati  eum  ho-
minis  cflifa ,  M.  Uvii  Macati ,  quum


fama  ejus  ageretur,  Jlantem  coegit  in  fe¬
nat  te  fententiam  dicer e.  The  fenfe  of
this  paffage  Sigonius,  milled  byGellius,,
has  ftrangely  miftaken  ;  which  I  men¬
tion  the  rather,  becaufe  Gronovius,
who,  in  his  edition  of  Livy,  frequent¬
ly  animadverts  upon  the  errors  of  Si¬
gonius,  not  only  fuffers  this  to  efcape'
without  cenfure,  but  inferts  his  anno¬
tation  among  his  own.  By  this  paf-
fage  of  Livy,  it  plainly  appears,  con¬
trary  to  the  opinion  of  Gellius,  and  of
all  the  modern  writers,  that  thofe  fe-
nators,  who  were  called  pedarii ,  were
not  diftinguifhed  from  the  reft  of  their,
body,  any  otherwife,  than  by  their
behaviour  upon  that  particular  occa^
fion ;  that  is,  they  were  called  fo,  be¬
caufe  they  then  divided  without  giving
their  reafons  •,  for  it  muff  be  obftrved,
that  Livius  Salinator,  whofe  manner  of
voting  is  here  taken  notice  of  by
Livy,  was,  at  that  time,  a  confular  fe-
nator,  and,  confequently,  enjoyed,  in.
an  eminent  degree,  all  the  rights  an¬
nexed  to  the  dignity  of  a  fenator.

VI.  Ex  iis  autem  qui  magiftratum  ce¬
pe  runt,  quo  fenat  us  conftituitur ,  popular  e
eft  fane  neminem  in  fummum  locum  nifi
per  populum  venire ,  fublatd  coopt atione
cenforid.  Cic.  B.  iii.  of  Laws.  When
the  decemvirs  were  fuppreffed,  it  was
made  capital,  by  two  feveral  laws,  to
create  any  magiflrate  without  an  ap-

it


(  44-8  )

it  was,  it  was  not  without  controll ;  for  the  cenfured  perfon
had  a  right  of  appealing  from  the  cenfors  to  the  people  ;
to  whom,  from  the  fuppreffion  of  the  decemvirs,  there  lay
an  appeal  even  from  the  di&ators.  This  relief,  therefore,
the  cenfured  perfon  was  intitled  to,  when  both  the  cenfors
concurred  in  expelling  him  ;  but,  if  only  one  of  them
thought  he  deferved  this  animadverfion,  the  other  might
acquit  him  of  it.

VII.  It  mull,  however,  be  confrdered  that  this  expul  fion
did  not  amount  to  a  difability  ;  for  the  perfon  expelled
might  be  rechofen  into  any  magiftracy,  that  gave  right  to  a
feat  in  the  fenate  ;  and,  confequently,  be  readmitted  to  the
degree  of  a  fenator.

VIII.  No  priefts,  as  fuch,  were  admitted  into  the  fenate,
except  the  jlcijjien  dialis  ;  But,  as  the  dignities  of  the  feveral


peal  to  the  people  ;  both  thofe  laws
are  mentioned  by  Livy  ;  the  words  of
the  fifft  are,  ne  quis  ullum  magijlraturn
fine  provocations  crearet :  qui  creajjet ,
eum  jus  fafque  ejjet  occidi :  neve  ea  ca¬
des  capi tails  noxa  haberetur.  B  iii.  c.
55.  Thofe  of  the  other  are  as  follows,
qui  magijlraturn fine  provocations  creajjet ,
ter  go  ac  capite  puniretur.  id.  ib.  In
conlequence  of  thefe  laws,  we  find  by
Plutarch,  in  his  Life  of  T.  Flamini-
nus,  that  his  brother,  L.  FlamininUs,
being  defervedly  expelled  the  fenate
by  the  cenfors,  M.  Porcius  Cato,  and
L.  Valerius,  appealed  from  them  to
the  people,  who  affirmed  the  fentence
of  the  cenfors.  I  know  it  is  generally
thought  that  there  lay  no  appeal  to  the
people  fiom  the  dictators,  even  after
the  affair  of  the  decemvirs ;  but  the
contrary  is  manifeft  from  thofe  two
laws,  and  will  appear  mbch  more  fo
by  the  fpeech  of  M.  Fabius,  in  favor


of  his  fon  Fabius,  mafter  of  the
horfe  to  L.  Papirius  Curfor,  the  dicta¬
tor,  who,  without  any  regard  to  the
interceffion  either  of  the  fenate,  or  ar¬
my,  defigned  to  put  the  mafter  of  the
horfe  to  death  for  ingaging  the  Sam-
nites  in  his  abfence,  contrary  to  his
orders,  though  he  had  gained  a  com¬
plete  vidtory,  in  which  twenty  thou-
fand  of  the  enemy  were  flain  :  To
avert  the  effeCts  of  this  feverity,  M.
Fabius  appeals  from  the  dictator  to
the  people,  as  to  the  fovereign  judge
of  his  conduCt,  wbofe  power^  he  tells
him,  is  fuperior  to  That  of  his  dictator-
fhip  ;  provoco  ad  pbpulum  ;  eumque
tibi  fugienti  exercitus  tui,  fugienti  fe-
natusjudicium,  judicem  fero,  qui  certe
unus  plus  quam  tua  diCtatura  potelt
polletque.  Liv.  B.  viii.  c.  33.  Tres
ejeCti  de  fenatu  :  retinuit  quofdam  Le-
pidus  a  collega  prccteritos.  Liv.  B.  xl,'
c.  51.

prieft-


(  449  )


priefthoods  were  generally  conferred  upon  the  principal  per-
fons  of  the  commonwealth,  thefe  were  intitled  to  a  feat
there,  by  virtue  of  the  magiftracies  they  had  borne :  It  be¬
ing  a  fundamental  maxim  among  the  Romans,  not  to  look
upon  the'law,  the  fword,  and  the  priefthood,  as  incompatible
profeffions  :  So  that,  every  perfon,  who  pretended  to  diftin-
guifh  himfelf  in  the  commonwealth,  was  under  an  indifpen-
fable  obligation  of  qualifying  himfelf  for  all  of  them.  By
.  this  means,  thefe  three  profeffions,  whofe  different  interefts
ever  muft  divide  the  world  under  any  other  regulation,  be¬
ing  exercifed  by  the  fame  perfons,  had,  of  courfe,  the  fame
interefts.

IX.  The  power  of  the  tribunes  of  the  people  was  very
great,  even  in  the  fenate;  fo  great,  that,  if  only  one  of
their  college  interpofed,  no  decree  could  be  made.


VII.  AsvrtfA©-*  o  IhS7rKi(Gr,  o  pila  ryv

vTraleiav  ik  rye  ys^xcias  £*7r£<rwv  (eiTTgulyyst

yxf>07ru(  t>jv  pxAactv  xvxAa£yj.)  Dion  Call.
B.  xxxvii.

VIII.  Habetur  fenatus  frequens  :  ad-
hibentur  omnes  pontifices ,  qui  erant  fiena-
tores :  a  qiiibus  Marcellinus ,  qui  erat
cupidiffimus  mei,  fententiam  primus  roga-
tus ,  quafivit  quid  ejfent  in  decernendo
fecuti.  cTum  M.  Lucullus  de  omnium
collegarum  fententid  refipondit  religionis
judices  pontifices  fuiffie ,  legis  fenatum  :
fie,  et  collegas  fuos  de  religione  JlatuifiJe ,
in  fenatu  de  lege Jlatuturos.  Cic.  Ep.  2 .
to  Att.  B.  iv.  cum  omnes  pontifices ,  qui
erant  hujus  ordinis ,  adefifient.  id.  ot  the
Anf.  of  the  Harulp.  C.  Valerius  Flaccus ,

fiamen  dialis - rem  intermijfiam  per

multos  annos  ob  indignitatem  fiami-
num  priorum  repetivit,  ut  in  fenatum  in -
troiret.  Ingrejfium  eum  curiam  quum
Licinius  praetor  inde  eduxijfet ,  tribunos
plebis  appellavit  fiamen  — —  tribuni  rem

VOL.  I.  IN


inertia  flaminum  obliteratam ,  ipfis ,  non
fiacerdctio  damno  fuijfie ,  quum  a  quum  cen-
fiuifient ,  ne  ipfio  quulem  contra  tendente
prat  ore,  magno  afifenfu  patrum  plebifique ,
Jlaminem  in  fenatum  introduxerunt.  Liv.
B.  xxvii.  c.  8.

IX.  Neque  pojfiet  per  inter cefiiones

tribunicias  fenatus  confultum  fieri.  Liv.
B.  iv.  C.  43.  W&  yap  ruiv  %$ev

Kiycti,  on  £v  avxy ay  rim  jxdxryvat

inoiYjcrado,  an  xxt  t^eixv  ene

sSxAodo  nva  yvw/uyv  trvpGxAti r§xi,  etrt  kxa

pj.  Dion  Cafi\  B.  xli.  Cum  fieret  fe¬
natus  confultum  in  fententiam  Marcellini ,
omnibus  prater  unum  ajfientientibus ,  Ser-
r anus  inter cefifiit.  Cic .  Ep.  2.  B.  iv.  to
Att.

X.  Sempronii  lectio  erat ;  cateruni
Cornelius  morem  traditum  a  patribus
fequendum  aicbat ,  ut  qui  primus  cenfior
ex  iis  qui  viverent ,  fuififet ,  eum  princi-
pem  legerent :  is  L.  Manlius  Lor qua t us
erat.  Sempronius ,  cui  dii  for  tern  legendi

[mm  X.  The


(  45°  )


X.  The  firft  perfon  of  this  affembly  in  dignity  was  the
prince  of  the  fenate  ;  who  by  cuftom  was  the  oldeft  cenfori-
an  ;  but,  if  it  was  inflated  upon  by  the  cenfor,  to  whofe  lot
it  fell  to  chufe,  he  might  name  any  other  fenator.  The
nomination  of  the  prince  of  the  fenate  preceded  the  calling
over  the  fenators.

XL  That  the  prefence  of  a  certain  number  of  fenators
was,  at  all  times,  neceffary  to  the  palling  of  decrees,  cannot
be  denied  ;  lince  we  often  find  that,  for  want  of  the  num¬
ber  required,  no  decree  could  be  made ;  and  often  meet  with
complaints  againft  furreptitious  decrees,  that  is,  decrees


dediffent ,  ei  jus  liberum  eofdem  dedijfe
deos ,  fe  id  fuo  arbitrio  fabiurum  ;  lebtu
rumque  Q.  Fabium  Maximum  —  Quum
diu  certatum  ejjet  verbis ,  eoncedente  col-
lega ,  left  us  a  Sempronio  princeps  in
fenatu  Fabius  Maximus  conful :  inde
alius  fenatus  lebtus.  Liv.  B.  xxvii. c.  1 1.

XI.  Nec  agi  quicquam  per  infrequen-
tiam poterat fenatus.  Liv.  B.  ii.  c.  23.
Quidabeo  quemquam  pojfe  <equi  expeblare ,
quiper  infrequentiam  furtim  fenatus  con-
fultum  fabium  ad  <erarium  detulerit.  id.
B.  xxxix.c.  4.  Cupivi ,  inquit ,  ex  fenatus
confulto  furrepto.  Cic.  B.  x.  Ep.  4.
to  Att.  It  is  generally  thought  that,
while  the  complement  of  the  fenate
was  three  hundred,  the  prefence  of  one
hundred  fenators,  and  no  more,  was
neceffary  to  the  paffing  of  all  decrees :
I  am  fenfible  that  there  are  feveralpaf-
fages  in  Livy,  where  mention  is  made
of  the  neceflky  of  fo  many  fenators
being  prefcnr,  when  a  report  of  fome
particular  matter  was  to  be  made  to  the
fenate  :  But  this  feems  to  have  been  in
confequence  of  fome  order  made  for
that  purpofe,  Senatus  confulto  cautum
eft - ut  prat  or  fenatum  confuleret — ■


quum  in  fenatu  centum,  non  minus  effent,
Liv.  B.  xxxix.  c.  18.  And,  if  fo,  this
order  is  fo  far  from  being  a  proof  that
the  prefence  of  fo  many  fenators,  and
no  more,  was  neceffary  to  the  paffing.
of  every  decree,  that  it  proves  quite
the  contrary;  particularly,  fince men¬
tion  is  alfo  made  by  the  fame  author  of
no  lels  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  fena¬
tors  being  prefent,  when  a  public  vow
was  made  for  the  profperity  of  the
commonwealth,  Quum  centum  et  quin-
quaginta  non  minus  adejfent ,  pr<eeunte
verba  Lepido  pontifice  maxima ,  id  vo-
tum  fufceptum  eft.  Liv.  B.  xlii.  c.  28..

I  find,  befides,  that,  upon  occafions
of  great  moment,  the  fenate  were,,
fworn,  before  they  gave  their  votes ; .
but  this  was  alfo  in  confequence  of  fome
order  made  for  that  purpofe  ;  which,
like  the  orders  before  mentioned,  was
occafional.  Patres  jurati  (it a  conve -
nerat )  cenfuerunt.  Liv.  B.  xxx.  c.  40.

A 7 roan  <Te  •sr^oAlarlilo  Y.cx.bu'Kt^  tv

dlKOtSViejU),  I Ut6’  QgKX  Tt}V  QOV  t7Tl(pt()eiV .

Dionyf.  Hal.  B.  vii.  There  is  a  paf-
fage  in  the  xxvi  B.  c.  33.  of  Livy,
which  deferves  more  than  ordinary

*  made.


[  45 1  ]

made,  when  the  number  required  were  not  prefent.  But,
I  am  apt  to  believe  that  the  number  of  fenators  requilite  va¬
ried,  according  to  the  importance  of  the  decrees ;  in  this  I
am  confirmed  by  a  regulation  of  Auguftus,  who,  as  I  have
obferved  upon  another  occafion,  appointed  the  particular
number  of  fenators,  whofe  prefence  fhould  be  neceflary  to
the  enabling  decrees  of  every  kind  :  And  it  is  probable  this
regulation  was  rather  declaratory  of  the  (landing  order  of
the  fenate,  than  introductory  of  a  new  one.  This  was  in
the  744th,  or  745th  year  of  Rome  :  He  had  nine  years
before  fixed  the  whole  number  of  fenators  at  fix  hundred,
when  the  prefence  of  four  hundred  was  neceflary  to  the
pafling  of  decrees  ;  which  number  he  eight  years  after  re¬
duced  ;  for  he  found  the  fenators  not  very  fond  of  giving
their  attendance  in  the  fenate,  where  they  were  conftantly
obliged  to  applaud,  without  approving;  which,  though
they  fubmitted  to  in  the  mod  fervile  manner,  yet  they
could  not  help  remembering  they  had  once  been  free ;  they


attention,  not  only  as  it  thews  that,
upon  the  occafion  there  mentioned,  a
particular  order  was  made  by  the  peo¬
ple  that  the  fenate  fhould  be  fworn  be¬
fore  they  gave  their  votes,  but  alfo  be-
caufe  it  was,  at  the  fame  time,  refolved
by  the  people  to  ftand  to  what  fhould
be  determined  by  the  major  part  of  the
fenators,  who  fhould  be  prefent  at  the
deliberation  of  that  affair,  without  re¬
quiring  the  prefence  of  any  certain
number  of  them.  The  confideration
related  to  the  fate  of  the  Campani,  and
others,  who  had  fubmitted  to  the  Ro¬
mans  •,  upon  which,  Livy  fays,  the
people  came  to  the  following  refolution :
Plebes  fic  jujfit ,  quod  fenatus  juratus
maxima  pars,  qui  adfederint ,  cenfeat ;  id

M


volumus jubemufque .  Thefe  confidera-
tions  make  me  fearful  of  afferting,
with  the  generality  of  thofe,  who  have
treated  this  fubjedt,  that,  while  the
fenate  confifted  of  three  hundred,  the
prefence  of  one  hundred,  and  no  more
was  neceffary  to  the  pafling  of  every
decree.  Tov  re  a&Qyov  tcv  etf  tjjv  Kvgucriv
tcov  Soyfxot, tuv  avxfcouov,  xoS  Layov  dSog
cujtwv,  cocryt  tv  nt^xhouan  «7rc-jv,  SitvoyoQe-
t >j<re  (0  Awy%s@r.')  Dion  Cafl.  B.  Iv.
Auc^sy^vcivluv  St  wocvluv  6y.oi40f—TVf  t%x-
xo<rtX(  xacltAt^dJo.  id.  B.  Jiv.  O^uv  Si  on
an.  xet  euyvoi  awthtyovlo,  tneAtvat  ix  Soyyx-
ra  auiTYii  non  tv  tAxiloaiv  t]  TSTg^Kcnoif
yiyvttr^rou'  a  yug  ffiju  nvx  in  ts  org/u  #A-

Awf  xvgaofy.  id.  B.  liv,
mm2


could


[  452  ]

could  command  their  words  and  actions,  and  even  their
looks,  but  not  their  memories.

XII.  The  Romans  were  not  a  mercantile  people  :  Their
view  was  to  conquer,  and  to  govern  ;  to  Spare  Submitting,
and  fubdue  refilling  nations.  For  this  reafon,  though,  per¬
haps,  not  for  this  reafon  only,  commerce  of  every  kind  was
thought  unbecoming  a  Roman  fenator.  But,  that  their
dignity  might  be  Supported  by  law,  as  well  as  cuftom,  it
was  made  unlawful  either  for  a  Roman  fenator,  or  his  fa¬
ther,  to  have  a  fhip  of  greater  burden,  than  was  necefiary
to  convey  the  product  of  their  farms  to  Rome.

XIII.  As  the  magiftracy,  according  to  the  common
courfe,  gave  admittance  into  the  fenate,  fo  it  regulated  the
ranks  of  the  fenators :  The  magiftrates  of  the  year  had  the
precedency  of  all ;  and  of  one  another,  according  to  their
refpe&ive  dignities ;  according  to  which  alfo,  the  confular,
the  praetorian,  the  cenforian,  the  aedilician,  the  tribunician,
and  the  quaeftorian  fenators  were  placed  :  Of  thefe  the
quaeftorShip  was  the  firft  conferred,  and  qualified  the  perfon
invefted  with  it  for  a  feat  in  the  fenate,  as  a  magistrate,
during  the  year,  and,  as  a  fenator,  the  firft  time  the  fenate
was  called  over  by  the  cenfors :  But  no  one  was  capable,
even  of  this  magiftracy,  till  he  had  ferved  ten  campaigns.
And  here  I  cannot  help  flopping  a  while,  to  take  a  Survey
of  this  auguft  body,  which  was  conipofed  of  thofe,  who,
befides  the  merit  and  experience  of  ten  years  fervice,  actu-

XII.  Legem  Claudius  tribunus  pie-  qua  ft  us  omnis  patribus  indecorus  vifus .
bis  adverfus  fcnatum ,  uno  patrum  ad-  Liv.  B.  xxi.  c.  63.
javante  C.  Flaminio  tulerat  *,  ne  quisfe-  XIII.  Hoc  igitur  fretus  fenatu ,  Pom-
nator ,  quive  fenatoris  pater  fuijfet ,  ma-  peianum  fenatum  defpicit ,  in  quo  decern
ritimam  navem  qua  plus  quam  trecenta-  fuimus  confular es — quiver  0  prcetorii? —
rum  amphorarum  effet,  haberet :  id  fat  is  qui  adilicii?  qui  tribunicii?  qui  quaftorii ?
habit  urn  ad  frublus  ex  agris  veftandos  :  Cic.  Philip.  1 3.

ally


[  453  ]

o

ally  were,  or  had  been  treafurers,  guardians  of  the  peoples
liberties,  fuperintendents  of  the  temples  of  their  gods,  and
the  entertainments  of  the  public,  controllers  of  manners,
judges,  and  generals.  An  afiembly  fo  conftituted  de¬
ferred  to  be  what  they  really  were,  the  conquerors,  and
governors  of  the  world.

XIV.  As  the  military  age  commenced  at  the  taking  the
manly  gown,  that  is,  at  the  age  of  feventeen ;  and,  as  ten
years  fervice  were  neceftary  to  qualify  a  perfon  for  the  firft
office,  that  gave  admittance  into  the  fenate,  I  mean,  the
quaeftorfhip ;  it  follows  that,  if  the  fenate  happened  to  be
called  over  the  year  after,  the  quaeftors,  provided  their  names
were  not  omitted,  became  fenators,  at  the  age  of  twenty
eight  years :  This  age,  therefore,  was  the  earlieft  any  per¬
fon,  according  to  the  common  courfe,  could  become  a  fe-
nator ;  but,  as  the  time  for  calling  over  the  fenate  was  on¬
ly  every  fifth  year,  and,  upon  many  accounts,  was  often
poftponed,  it  frequently  happened  that  there  was  an  inter¬
val  of  one,  two,  three,  or  four  years,  and  fometimes  more,
between  the  quaeftorfhip,  and  the  ele&ion  of  the  quseftors
into  the  fenate.

XV.  The  fame  magiftrates,  who  aflembled  the  fenate,
whether  confuls,  praetors,  or  tribunes  of  the  people,  ac-

XIV.  Je  Ax£etv  <x?x>iv  vy.&Zisi  Januarias  tribuni  plebis  vocavijfent.  Cic.

aJ tvi  firgolEgov,  tuv  fAV)  diKx  c galtiois  svicu>“  B.  x.  ILp.  28.  PubliUus y  penes  quem
avs  y  TSTiAiKcof.  Polyb.  B.  vi.  Esggtltv-  fafees  erant ,  die ,  Spurt  Pojlumi,  inquit.
Qcti  yag  g (pq  SoufitKoc,  gr>j,  raw  uAAav  bmcc  Liv.  B.  ix.  c.  8.  Ac,  poft  novam  ajfni-'
s'^Tivofxtvm  evuvecyaxts.  PJut.  Life  of  tatem ,  Pompeium  primum  regare  fenten-
C.  Gracchus.  tiam  ccepit  \  cumCraffum  foleret,  ejfetque

XV.  pfuum  confutes,  tumulto  repen-  confuetudo  ut ,  quern  ordinem  interrogandi
tino  coaffiy  fenatum  vocarent.  Liv.  B.  fententias  conjul  kalendis  Januariis  in-
viii.  c.  28.  P.  Furius  Philus,  &  M.  Jlituijfet ,  eum  toto  anno  confervaret.
Pomponius  protores,  fenatum  in  curiam  Sueton.  Life  of  Csefar.  D.  Junius
Hojtiliam  vocaverunt.  Id.  B.  xxii.  c.  55.  Silanus  primus  fententiam  rogatus ,  quod
JSamt  cum  fenatum  a.  d.  13.  kalendas  eo  tempore  conful  defignatus  erat.  Sail.

quainted


[  454-  ]

©

quamted  them  with  the  reafons,  for  which  they  were  affem-
bled  :  If  the  fenate  were  fummoned  by  the  firft,  the  conful
who  then  had  the  rods,  asked  the  opinion  of  the  fenators
upon  what  he  had  propofed,  beginning,  generally,  with  the
prince  of  the  fenate,  and  fo  on,  according  to  their  ranks ;
and,  fometimes,  with  a  relation,  ora  friend;  but,  whatever
order  they  purfued  on  the  firft  of  yanuary ,  the  day  they
entered  upon  their  office,  it  was  cuftomary  for  them  to  ob-
ferve  the  fame  afterwards,  till  the  election  of  the  confuls
for  the  next  year,  which,  commonly,  fell  out  in  July ,  or
Augujl ;  from  which  time,  the  firft  conful  eledt  was  firft
asked  his  opinion.  Upon  a  divifion,  the  conful,  or  other
magiftrate,  by  whom  the  fenate  was  aflembled,  directed
thofe,  who  were  for  the  affirmative,  to  go  to  one  fide  of  the
houfe,  and  thofe,  who  were  for  the  negative,  to  go  to  the
other.  This  they  often  did,  without  delivering  their  opinions,


Cat.  confp .  So  that,  what  Suetonius
calls  toto  anno ,  mull  be  underftood  to
fignify  only  till  the  election  of  the  con-
l'uls  for  the  infuing  year.  Quatenus  de
religione  dicebat ,  cui  rei  quia  jam  obfijii
nonpoterat ,  Bibulo  ajfenfum  eft :  de  tribus
legatis ,  freqaentes  ierunt  in  omnia  alia.
Cic.  B.  i.  Ep.  2.  Ire  in  omnia  alia  was,
it  feems,  the  fenatorian  language,  im¬
plying  to  divide  for  the  negative ,  and
cenfere  omnia  alia ,  to  be  of  a  contrary
opinion.  Qui  hoc  cenfetis ,  illuc  tranfite ;
qui  omnia  alia ,  in  hanc  partem.  Feftus.
Thefe  were  the  words  made  ufe  of  by
the  conful,  or  other  magiftrate,  who
prefided  upon  that  occalion.  In
this  manner,  Thucydides  fays  that
Sthenela'fdas,  one  of  the  ephori,  took
the  opinion  of  the  Lacedaemonians  up¬
on  that  important  queftion,  whether  the
thirty  years  truce  with  the  Athenians
was  broken  yin  reality,  whether  they


fhould  declare  war  againft  the  Atheni¬
ans,  or  not :  His  manner  of  putting
the  queftion  was  very  like  That  pra&i-
fed  in  the  Roman  fenate ;  Thofe ,  fays
he,  who  are  of  opinion  that  the  truce  is
broken ,  and  that  the  Athenians  have
ailed  unjuftly ,  let  them  rife ,  and  go  to
that  fide  (pointing  to  a  certain  place)
and  thofe ,  who  are  of  a  contrary  opini¬
on ,  to  the  other.  Upon  which,  the
aftembly  rofe,  and  divided  ;  and  thofe,
who  were  of  opinion  that  the  truce  was
broken,  carried  it  by  a  great  majority.

Otoj  i uev  u'/xav,  u  Aocxebaxfxovioi^  boKxcri  As-
AvJ%  ax  carcvbxx,  not  ol  A^vaxoi  abntety,

aVOiftlTU  tf  IKUVQ  "10  ^CtiglOV'  ■U'XJA-

&ov  avTOit)  otw  Jg  fxij  bsxxciv,  e;  t a  t7Ti
SotTtpyi’  uvaravjef  be  btervcrav,  xxx  zxoAAm
zrAetag  syevovTo  olg  eboxxv  ou  carovbxx  AeAvtr-

Qai.  fhuc.  B.  i.  c.  8  J.  bia'pvipnrew f

be  g7TJ  Tarots  x  xar’  avbgx  (y.yj  xou  bi
Xlbtf,  Yj  KXi  (poGoy  TIVX  ZTXgX  tot,  boxxvlx

much


O


(  455  )

much  lefs,  their  reafons,  if  the  queftion  happened  to  be  of
fuch  a  nature,  as  to  lay  them  under  any  reftraint  in  deliver¬
ing  them.  If  one,  or  more  tribunes  of  the  people  oppofed
the  paffing  of  any  decree,  the  fenfe  of  the  houfe  was,  how¬
ever,  recorded,  and,  inftead  of  a  fenatufconfultum,  was  call¬
ed  an  authority  of  the  fenate.

XVI.  It  was  the  opinion  of  a  very  wife  man  among  the
Romans,  who  has  profefiedly  treated  of  the  government  of
that  commonwealth,  that  it  would  have  added  great  weight
to  the  authority  of  the  fenate,  if  they  had  voted  by  ballot ;
which  I  am  not  at  all  furprifed  at,  fince  the  laws,  relating  to
the  ballot,  in  which  manner  the  people  gave  their  votes  up¬
on  all  occaftons  of  importance,  were  ever  looked  upon  as
the  fource,  and  fupport  of  liberty.

XVII.  The  fenatorian  cenfus,  or  fortune  required  to
qualify  a  perfon  for  a  feat  in  the  fenate,  was  eight  hundred
thoufand  feftertii,  or  6458/.  6  s.  8  d.  fterling:  This  fum  Au¬
gustus  raifed  to  twelve  hundred  thoufand  feftertii,  or  9687/.


pQuriv  ct7T0$>]vtt)vh)ii)  aAA’  (7 n  raj'f,  y.ou

iTl  «Jt<rlV&  TS  joxAiVTK&X  f/ST  0C(T~' Civil

yivof/.ivm .  Dion  Caff.  B.  xli.  Si  quis
intercedat  fenatufconfvdto,  aufforitate  fe
fore  contentum.  Liv.  B.  iv.  c.  57.  This
authority  of  the  fenate,  as  I  have  faid
in  the  27th  annotation,  Dion  Calfius
applies  to  a  law  made  by  Auguftus,  but,
at  the  fame  time,  fays,  which  is  very
true,  that  the  diftindtion  between  an
authority  of  the  fenate,  and  a  fenatuf¬
confultum  was  very  exactly  obferved,
for  a  long  while,  by  the  Romans  of
old,  though,  in  his  time,  it  was  grown
obfolete,  t*t 0  ts  av  iffftVjiug  im  arA etvlov
TQig  uotAcu  TygvOiv,  t^ny]Aov  rgoirov  tivx

1  ytyon.  B.  lv.  This  authority  of
the  fenate  differed  from  a  fenatufconful¬
tum  in  another  refpedl  ;  it  was  nor.


like  that,  fubject  to  be  defeated  by  the
interpofition  of  the  tribunes  of  the  peo¬
ple;  de  his  rebus,  pridiequam  fcripji,fe-
?iatns  audloritas gravijfima  inter cejfu ;  cut,
cum  Cato ,  &  Caninius  intercefftftent ,  ta~
men  eft  perfcripta.  Cic.  B.  i.  Ep.  2.
Eaque ,  qua  de  ed perfcripta  eft,  audiori -
tas,  cui  fcis  intercejfum  efte — cftenfionem
effe  periculofam ,  propter  interpofitam
auEloritatem — video,  id.  B.  i.  Ep.  7.

XVI.  Duabus  rebus  poffe  confirmari
fenatum  puto  ;  ft  numerus  audlus  per  ta-
bellam  fententiam  feret.  T abella  obtentui
erit ,  quo  magis  ammo  libero  facer e  audeat.
Fragm.  fuppofed  of  Salluft  toC.Csefar.
LexCaffta  tabellariaprincipium  juftijftma
libertatis.  Cic.  in  Cornel.  Eabellavin-
dex  tacit  a  libertatis .  Id.  2d  Agr.


IOJ.


_  (  456  )

io s.  fterling;  which,  if,  by  any  accident,  a  fenator  had
impaired,  he  loft  his  feat  in  the  fenate.

XVIII.  If  a  fenator  neglected  to  give  his  attendance  in
the  fenate,  without  being  able  to  aflign  a  lawful  caufe  of  ab-
fence,  he  was  liable  to  a  fine,  and  obliged,  immediately,  to
find  fecurity  for  the  payment  of  it.

There  are  fome  other  particulars  relating  to  the  conftitu-
tion  of  the  Roman  fenate,  which  I  have  not  thought  worth
taking  notice  of;  fuch  as  the  facrifices,  and  other  religious
ceremonies  neceffary  to  be  performed  previoufly  to  any  de¬
liberation  ;  as  alfo  the  robes  peculiar  to  the  dignity  of  a  Ro¬
man  fenator :  The  firft  of  thefe  are  rendered  as  ridiculous
by  our  prejudices,  as  they  were  made  venerable  by  theirs  ;
and  the  other,  though  fome  learned  men  have  thought  fit
to  beftow  a  great  deal  of  criticifm  upon  that  inquiry,  feems
to  be  a  fubjed  rather  of  curiofity,  than  inftrudion.


XVII.  Senatoriim  cenfum  ampliavit ,
ac  pro  opt  ingen  t  or  um  millium  fumma ,  du-
odecies  H.  S.  taxavit.  Sueton.  Life  of
Aug.  I  have  followed  Arbuthnot  in  re¬
ducing  the  feftertii  to  fterling  money;
he  fays,  and  I  think  with  great  proba¬
bility,  that  milk  fefiertium  amounted  to
8 — i — 5  \  fterling  ;  confequently  cen¬
tum  millia feftertium^mW  amount  to  807-
--5 —  1  o,  oflingenta  millia  fefiertium ,  the
old  fenatoriancenfus,  to  6458  —  6 — 8,
andduodecies  H.  S.  the  Auguftan  cen-
fus,  to  9687— .10— -o.  Cur  tins  habet  in


Volaterranopojfeffionem — hoc  autem  tem¬
pore  Ccefar  cum  in  fenatum  legit ,  quern
ordinem  ilk  ijlapojfeffione  amijfd  vix  tueri
poteji.  Cic.  B.  xiii.  Ep.  5.

XVIII.  Quis  unquam  tanto  damno  fe¬
nator  em  ccegit  ?  Aut  quid  eft  ultra  pignus,
aut  mult am  ?  Cic.  Philip.  1.  Pojt-
quamcitati  nonconveniebant ,  dimiffi  circa
domes  apparitor es  fimul  ad  pignora  capi -
enda^  fcifcitandumque ,  num  confulto  de-
treflarent  ?  Liv.  B.  iii.  c.  38.  Sena¬
tor^  qui  non  aderit ,  aut  caufa ,  aut  culpa
efio.  Cic.  B.  iii.  of  Laws.


&.P.


in  V  O  L.  I.


ERRATA

To  the  Preface.

AGE  xx.  line  17.  for  megarenfes ,  read  Megarenfes.
P.  xxi.  1.  1.  dele  of.

P.  xxxi.  I.  17.  f.  are,  r.  ft  and.

P.  xxxvi.  1.  a.  f.  in.  r.  of.

VOL.  I.

P.  a.  Note  2.  Column  1.  Line  ti.  f.  character,  read,
characters.

Ibid.  C.  2.  L.  19.  f.  defigns.  r.  defign.

P.  3.  L.  14.  f.  or.  r.  nor.

P.  4.  L.  18.  f.  exceeded,  r.  furpafled.

P.  4.  N.  8.  f.  As  (in  Roman)  r.  A?  (in  Greek)

P.  5.  N.  8.  C.  2.  L.  22.  f.  only  /hut.  r.  /hut  only.

lb.  L.  25  no  comma  after  put.

P.  6.  N,  8.  C.  1.  L.  4.  f.  744th,  r.  743d  year.

P.  9.  N.  14.  C.  x.  L.  19.  after  A/Tyrians,  dele  under:

and  read.  And  afterwards  cboje  for  their  king.

P.  10.  N.  14.  C.  1.  L.  16.  f.  Gonatus.  r.  Gonatas.

P.  n.  N.  14.  C.  X.  L.  28.  no  comma  after  power.

P.  13.  N.  15.  C.  1.  L.  5.  f.  contended,  r.  contend,
lb.  L.  12.  f.  ot.  r.  ci.

P.  17.  laft  line.  f.  confideration.  r.  contemplation.

P.  19.  N.  24.  C.  1.  L.  2®.  no  pundlum  after  Dion.

Ib.  N.  25.  C.  2.  L.  17.  f.  pertius.  r.  peritus.

P.  2®.  C.  1.  L.  7.  f.  620th.  r.  621ft.  year.

P.  21.  N.  28.  C.  2.  L.  2.  f.  author,  r.  authors.

P.  23.  N.  29.  C.  1.  laft  line.  f.  w.  *iV.

lb.  N.  30.  L.  1 1,  f.  Sicanian9.  r,  Sicani.

P.  26.  L.  5.  no  comma  after  are.

P.  29.  C.  1.  L.  12.  after  colony,  r.  which.

lb.  L.  18.  f.  Lycaon.  r.  Cecrops.

P.  30.  N.  37,  C.  1.  L.  3.  f.  gnlnoft.  r.  prflngfc
P.  31.  L.  16.  and  20.  f.  Oenotrians.  r.  Oenotri.

P.  37,  L.  14.  F.  Amiterna.  r.  Amiternum.

P.  48.  N.  60.  f.  s in  and  sJ&f.  r,  sS»  and

lb.  N.  61.  f.  irreproachable,  r.  irrcprochable,

P.  49.  N.  65.  f.  r.  pnv.

P.  t;  6,  L.  4,  after  oracle,  r.  that.

P.  63.  L.  12.  after  it.  ftrike  out  a.

P.  83.  N.  1 16.  C.  2.  L.  4.  f.  ».  r.  a.

P.  85  L.  12.  f.  Celti.  r.  Celtae.

P.  90.  laft  line,  no  comma  after  honors.

P.  91.  laft  line  but  one.  f.  fuperintendance,  r,  fuperinten-
dence.

,  96.  L.  16.  ftrike  out  being.

.  lor.  C.  1.  L.  8.  f.  Jarba.  r.  Jarbas.

Ib.  L.  30.  after  made.  r.  her.

Ib.  L.  35.  f.  Amna.  r.  Amne.

P.  108.  L.  14.  no  comma  after  and.

P.  IO9.  N.  I  51.  C-  I.  L.  12.  f.  KOXlVfAi*  r.  XOfXlKfMVt
Ib.  L.  22.  f.  en.  r.  ex.

P.  in'.  N.  155.  L.  7.  f.  xgoafxo\oyoiASoi,  r.
aJov.

P.  1 13.  laft  line.  f.  Battca.  r.  Batea.

P.  1 19.  L.  11.  no  comma  after  king.

P.  I2i-  C.  2.  laft  line.  f.  then.  r.  than.

P.  125.  laft  line  but  one.  no  commas  before,  or  after  we
have  receiued.

P.  133.  C.  1.  L.  33.  f.  Muj/utSivof  r.

P.  135.  N.  201.  f.  0|Uit;  r.  d/ua$.

Ib.  N.  202.  after  tlhus  ftrike  out  r«y.

P.  136.  L.  24.  f.  Delus.  r.  Delos.


P.  145.  N.  zl2.  between  Kpuln  Tu^vot  put  a  line;

P.  146.  laft  line  but  one.  no  comma  after  wine.

P,  148.  L.  5.  f.  palce.  r.  place.

P.  15 1.  laft  line  but  one.  f.  of  Trojan,  r.  of  the  Trojan.
P.  152.  C,  1.  laft  line  but  three,  f.  Simonides,  r.  PaU*
medes.

P.  161.  C.  2.  L.  10.  f.  Aaneas.  r.  Aeneas.

P.  162.  L.  1.  f,  in  which,  r,  at  which.

P.  163.  L.  5.  f.  Cephalon,  r.  Cephalo.

P.  168.  L,  7.  f.  Syracufian.  r.  Syracufan.

P.  192.  L.  18.  f.  While  he  entered,  r.  While  he  was
entering.

P.  209.  N.  274.  L.  2.  f. r.  n.

P.  zu.  L.  15.  after  them  inflead  of  a  comma  put  a  fenti-
colon.

P.  229.  L.  13.  f.  and,  and  of  dele  the  latter  and,

P.  243.  L.  4.  no  comma  after  perfon.

Ib.  C.  z.  L,  18.  f.  three  hundred,  r,  one  hundred.

P.  245.  L.  2.  F.  controle.  r.  controll.

Ib.  N.  28.  C.  2.  L.  6.  F.  cenuries.  r.  centuries,

P.  246.  C.  2.  L.  28.  f.  the  in.  r.  in  the.

P.  253.  L.  13.  no  comma  before  nor  after  all.

P.  255.  N.  37.  C.  2.  L.  8.  f.  chaftifed.  r.  chaftened,

P.  256.  L.  1®.  f,  every  every,  r.  every.

P.  259.  L.  4.  f.  tymbals.  r.  tymbrels.

P.  262.  L.  6.  f.  adminiftered,  r.  adminiftred.  and  ftrike
out  the  comma  after  thofe.

P.  263.  L.  10.  f.  curia,  r.  curiae.

lb.  C.  1,  L,  3.  f.  xoSutcriaflai  r.  xaSxaiuil'U,

P.  265.  L.  17.  after  think  r.  it.

P.  266.  C.  1.  L.  12.  f.  with  eafe.  r.  at  eafe.

P.  268.  L.  7.  no  comma  after  even.

Ib.  N.  51.  L.  2.  f.  Farratia.  r.  Farracia.

P.  269.  N.  52.  C.  2.  L.  7.  f.  Duillius.  r.  Duilius.

P.  270.  C.  2.  L.  2.  f.  PRESENTED,  r.  PRAE*
SENTED.

Ib.  L.  3.  f.  OLORUM.  r.  OLOROM.

Ib.  L.  4.  f.  PUGNANDOD,  r.  PUCNANDOD.

P.  277.  L.  18.  no  comma  after  things.

P.  283.  L.  11.  no  comma  after  walls.

P.  285.  L.  6.  no  comma  after  called.

Ib.  N.  68.  L.  1.  f.  »sxja,usvaif  r.  xex^afxevatt.

P.  287.  L.  25.  no  comma  aft cr  greatly.

P.  296.  L.  7.  no  comma  after  obliged.

P.  304.  C.  2.  L.  8.  f.  lTO'PH<t>OI  r.  I20'PH<K>N
P.  308.  L.  16.  no  comma  after  dwelt.

P.  311.L.  7.  f.  Pomentine.  r.  Pometine.

P.  316.  laft  line.  f.  Cruftumerini.  r.  Cruftumeri,

P.  328.  L.  1.  f.  in  which,  t.  at  which,

P.  33©.  L.  3.  f.  of.  r.  on.

P.  348.  L.  10.  f.  LXVII.  r.  LXVill.

P.  352.  C.  I.  L.  I.  f.  XaXxn/uaic.  r.  XaXxSdti;.

P.  373.  L.  12.  after  fpringing.  r.  and  leaping.

P.  365.  L.  13,  no  comma  after  puni/hed.

In  the  title  page  to  Polybius,  dele  Hyphen  between  Sixth>
Book.

P.  375.  L.  9.  f.  not  only  capable,  r.  capable  not  only,

P.  381.  L.  15.  after  it,  infert  a  comma.

P.  396.  L.  2.  f.  <pvfl«(.  r.  (puslu.

P.  407.  N.  13.  L.  5,  f.  miet.  r.  mit.

P.  414.  E.  5.  f.  juovfiJw.  r.  poovo^n.

P.  416.  C.  1,  L.  7.  ftrike  out  wonderful,

P.  420,  L.  11.  f.  upoxv.  r.  nfiorj.

P.  443.  §.  IV.  L.  8.  f.  nullus,  r.  nullis.
