Dionysius of Halicarnassus: Roman Antiquities, Vol. 3 (Books VI-VIII; Spelman, 1758)
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (Edward Spelman, trans.)

Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/romanantiquities03dion
Edition: Edward Spelman's English translation (London, 1758), via Internet Archive scan. The standard public-domain English Dionysius; complete with translator's preface, notes, and dissertations. (Note: 18th-century orthography; the scan renders the long s as f.)
Public domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel library, 2026-10-09.

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS?

T ranflated  into  English;

WITH

NOTES  and  DISSERTATIONS.


E  D  W  A  R  D  S  P  E  L  M  A  N,  Efq.

V  O  L.  III.

LONDON,

Printed,  and  fold  by  the  Bookleliers  of  London  and  Wejiminjler ..

MDCCLVIIL


r  *  ■  «

Sri


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES


DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSI&

THE  SIXTH  BOOK.

TH  E  confuls  of  the  following  year,  who  were  Aulus
Sempronius  Atratinus,  and  Marcus  Minucius,  en¬
tered  upon  their  magiftracy  in  the  feventy  firft
Olympiad,  in  which  Tidcrates  of  Croton  won  the  prize  of
the  ftadium,  Hipparchus  being  archon  at  Athens ;  and,
during  their  confulfhip,  performed  no  action  either  of  a
military,  or  civil  nature,  worthy  the  notice  of  hiftory  (for
the  truce  with  the  Latines  gave  them  a  long  refpite  from
foreign  wars ;  and  the  injunction,  decreed  by  the  fenate,
againft  the  exaction  of  debts,  till  the  war,  that  was  expected,
fhould  be,  fecurely,  terminated,  quieted  the  difturbances
raifed  in  the  city  by  the  poor,  who  dedred  to  be  difcharged
of  their  debts  by  a  public  act.)  However,  they  procured  a
decree  of  the  fenate  to  be  paffed,  granting  power  both  to
the  Latin  women,  who  were  married  to  men  of  worth,
and  diftinction  among  the  Romans,  and  to  the  Roman
Vol.  Ill,  B  women


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.
women  married  to  Latines,  either  to  flay  with  their  huf-
bands,  or  to  return  home ;  and  it  was,  alfo,  ordered  that  the
male  children  fhould  remain  with  their  fathers,  and  the
female,  and  unmarried  fhould  follow  their  mothers  :  For  it
happened  that  a  great  many  women,  through  the  affinity;,
and  friendfhip  fubflffing  between  the  two  nations,  had  con-
traded  marriages  in  one  another’s  cities.  The  women,
having  this  liberty  granted  to  them  by  the  decree  of  the
fenate,  (hewed  how  fond  they  were  of  living  at  Rome  :
For  almofl  all  the  Roman  women,  who  lived  in  the  Latin
cities,  left  their  huibands,  and  returned  to  their  fathers  ;
and  all  the  Latin  women,  who  were  married  to  Romans,
except  two,  defpifed  their  country,  and  ffaid  with  their
huibands :  A  happy  omen  foretelling  which  of  the  two
nations  fhould  be  victorious  in  the  war.  Under  thefe  con-
fuls,  they  fay,  the  temple  was  confecrated  to  Saturn,  upon
the  afcent,  leading  from  the  forum  to  the  capitol,  and
annual  1  feflivals,  and  facrifices  were  appointed  to  be  per¬
formed  at  the  public  expence:  They  add  that,  before  this,
the  altar,  built  by  PXercules,  flood  there,  upon  which,  the
perfons,  who  had  the  fuperintendance  of  thefe  holy  cere-

Annotations  on  the  Sixth  Book.

*•  Eafas.  Thefe  were  the  Saturnalia,  called  Juvenalis.  b  Livy,  alfo,  places
which,  after  the  reformation  of  the  the  dedication  of  the  temple  of  Saturn,
calender  by  Julius  Caefar,  were  cele-  and  the  inftitution  of  the  Saturnalia ,
brated  on  the  fixteenth  of  the  calends  under  thefe  canfuls  ;  his  confulibus  (A.
of  January  (the  feventeenth  of  Decern-  Sempronio ,  et  M.  Minucio )  cedes  Sa¬
ber)  They  confifted  of  four  days  only,  turno  dedicata  :  Saturnalia  injtitutus
till a  Caligula  added  a  fifth,  which  he  f eft  us  dies.

a  Sueton.  Life  of  Caligula,  c.  17.  bB.  ii.  c.  21.


monies


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  3

monies  committed  to  them  by  Hercules,  facrificed  burnt-
offerings,  as  firft  fruits,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  the  Greeks.
Some  hiftorians  write  that  this  temple  was  infcribed  with  the
name  of  Titus  Lartius,  theconful  of  the  former  year;  others,
with  That  of  Tarquinius,  who  was  expelled  the  kingdom  :
And  that  Poftumus  Cominius  confecrated  the  temple  purfu-
ant  to  a  decree  of  the  fenate.  Thefe  confuls,  therefore,  as  I
faid,  had  the  opportunity  of  enjoying  a  profound  peace.

II.  They  were  fucceeded  in  the  confuhhip  by  Aulus
Poftumius,  and  Titus  Virginius :  Under  whom,  the  truce
for  a  year  with  the  Latines  expired:  And  great  prepara¬
tions  for  the  war  were  made  by  both  nations.  All  the
common  people  of  Rome  entered  into  the  war  willingly,
and  with  great  chearfulnefs  :  But  the  greateft  part  of  the
Latines  fliewed  a  coldnefs  to  the  undertaking,  and  were
forced  into  it ;  the  men  of  power  in  the  cities,  being  almoft
all  corrupted  with  bribes,  and  promifes  by  Tarquinius,  and
Mamilius ;  and  thofe  among  the  common  people,  who  were
diffatisfied  with  the  war,  excluded  from  a  Ihare  in  the  public
counfels:  For  fuch  of  them,  as  defired  to  be  heard  in  their
affemblies,  could  not,  even,  obtain  it.  Upon  which,  many,
refenting  this  ufage,  left  their  cities,  and  deferted  to  the
Romans :  For  the  men,  who  had  poffeffed  themfelves  of
the  power  in  every  city,  did  not  chufe  to  put  a  flop  to  this;
but  thought  themfelves  much  obliged  to  their  adverfaries
for  fubmitting  to  a  voluntary  banifhment.  Thefe  the  Ro¬
mans  received,  and  fuch  of  them,  as  came  with  their  wives,
and  children,  they  employed  in  defending  the  city,  difhi-

B  2  buting


4  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  VI.

buting  them  among  the  centuries  appointed  for  that  purpofe :
And  the  reft  they  fent  into  the  fortreftes  near  the  city ;  and,
dividing  them  among  their  colonies,  took  care  they  ftiould
create  no  difturbance.  All  men  being  of  opinion  that  the
prefent  juncture,  again,  required  the  adminiftration  of  a
fingle  perfon  at  liberty  to  ad  according  to  his  own  fenfe  of
things,  and  fubjed  to  give  no  account  of  his  adions,  Aulus
Poftumius,  the  younger  of  the  confuls,  was  appointed  dida-
tor  by  his  collegue  Virginius:  And,  according  to  the  ex¬
ample  of  the  former  didator,  created  Titus  Aebutius  Elva
his  general  of  horfe.  And,  having,  in  a  fhort  time,  lifted
all  the  Romans,  who  were  arrived  to  the  age  of  manhood,
he  divided  his  army  into  four  parts ;  one  of  which  he  himfelf
took  the  command  of ;  another  he  gave  to  his  collegue
Virginius ;  the  third,  to  Aebutius,  general  of  the  horfe ;
and  left  the  command  of  the  fourth  to  Aulus  Sempronius,
whom  he  appointed  to  guard  the  city.

III.  After  the  didator ,  had  prepared  everything,  that
was  neceftary  for  the  war,  his  fcouts  brought  him  word  that
the  Latines  had  taken  the  field  with  all  their  forces :  And,
prefently,  others  informed  him  that  they  had,  by  ftorm,
poflefled  themfelves  of  a  ftrong  place,  called  2  Corbio,  in
which  there  was  a  fmall  garrifon  of  the  Romans ;  all  of
whom  they  put  to  the  fword ;  and,  being  mafters  of  the
place,  they  made  it  the  feat  of  the  war.  But  the  number
of  flaves,  and  cattle  they  found  in  the  country,  except  Thofe-
taken  at  Corbio,  was  not  anfwerable  to  their  expedation;

*•  Ko^iwx.  In  Latin,  Corbio ,  a  town  lying  to  the  north  of  mount  Algidus .  '

the


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  R  N  A  SS  EN  SIS.  5

the  hufbandmen  having,  long  before,  removed  all  they  could  of
both  into  the  neighbouring  fortrefies :  However,  the  enemy
fet  fire  to  the  houfes  they  had  abandoned,  and  laid  wafte
the  country.  After  they  had  taken  the  field,  a  frefh  army
arrived  at  their  camp  from  3  Antium,  the  moft  confiderable
city  of  the  Volfcian  nation,  with  arms,  corn,  and  every  thing,
elfe,  that  was  necefiary  for  carrying  on  the  war.  This  raifed
their  confidence  to  a  great  degree,  and  gave  them  room  to
hope  that*  now  the  city  of  Antium  had  fet  the  example,  all
the  Volfci  would  join  them  with  their  forces.  Poftumius,
being  informed  of  thefe  things,  marched  out,  prefently,
againft  the  enemy,  with  a  defign  to  fall  upon  them  before
all  their  forces  were  affembled  :  And,  having  made  a  forced
march  in  the  night,  advanced  near  the  Latines,  who  lay
incam ped  in  a  ftrong  poft,  near  the  lake,  called  4  Regillus ;
and  he  himfelf  incamped  above  them  on  a  hill,  that  was
high,  and  difficult  of  accefs  :  Where,  if  he  continued,  he
was  fure  to  have  great  advantages  over  the  enemy.

IV.  The  generals  of  the  Latines,  O&avius  of  Tufculum,
the  fon-in-law,  or,  as  fome  write,  the  fon  of  the  fon-in-law
of  Tarquinius,  the  late  king,  and  Sextus  Tarquinius  (for
they  happened,  at  that  time,  to  be  incamped  afunder)  joined
their  forces ;  and,  affembling  the  tribunes,  and  centurions,
they  confidered  with  them  in  what  manner  they  fhould

3>  E|  Av7<*.  See  the  fifty  feventh  an-  it  lay  in  the  territory  of  the  Tufculani ;
notation  on  the  fourth  book.  ad  Lacum  Regillum,  in  agro  Tufcu-

4>  n agct  Aipvy  This  is- the  lano,  agmini  hojlium  occurrerunt.  It  is,

Lacus  Regillus ,  near  which  this  remark-  now,  called, d  Lago  di  S.  Prajfeda.
able  battle  was  fought :  c  Livy  fay3

c  B.  ii.  c.  19.  d  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  4.


carry


6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

carry  on  the  war.  And  many  opinions  were  delivered  :  For
fome  advifed  to  attack  the  troops,  which,  under  the  dictator,
had  poffeffed  themfelves  of  the  hill,  while  their  fear  con¬
tinued;  looking  upon  their  taking  that  ftrong  poft,  as  a
fign  of  their  fear,  rather  than  of  their  caution :  Others,  to
draw  a  line  of  contravallation  round  the  camp  of  the  Ro¬
mans;  and,  leaving  a  fmall  body  of  men  to  fhut  them  up
there,  to  march  with  the  reft  of  the  army  to  Rome,  which,
as  the  beft  of  their  youth  were,  now,  in  the  field,  might,
eafily,  be  taken.  And  others  advifed  to  wait  the  arrival  of
the  auxiliary  troops  both  from  the  Vollci,  and  their  other
allies,  and  to  prefer  fafer,  to  bolder  meafures:  For,  they  faid,
the  Romans  would  reap  no  benefit  from  a  delay  :  whereas,
their  condition  would  be  improved  by  it.  While  they  were
debating,  the  other  conful,  Titus  Virginius,  having  marched,
fuddenly,  from  Rome  the  night  before,  came  up  with  his
army ;  and  incamped  apart  from  the  dictator  upon  another
ridge  of  a  mountain,  that  was  exceeding  craggy,  and  ftrongly
fituated  :  So  that,  both  the  pafies,  through  which  alone  the
Latines  could  make  an  irruption  into  the  enemy’s  country,
were,  effectually,  fecured  :  The  conful  incamping  before
the  pafs  on  the  left,  and  the  dictator  before  That  on  the
right.  This  encreafed  the  confufion  of  the  commanders,
who  had  nothing  more  in  view  than  the  fafety  of  the  army,
and,  alfo,  their  fear,  lefc  they  fhould  be  obliged,  by  lying
ft  ill,  to  live,  folely,  upon  their  own  proviiions,  of  which
they  had  not  great  plenty.  When  Poftumius  obferved  the
inexperience  of  thefe  commanders,  he  fent  Titus  Aebutius,

general


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  7

general  of  the  horfe,  with  a  cho fen  body  both  of  horfe,  and
light  armed  men,  to  poffefs  himfelf  of  a  hill,  which  com¬
manded  the  pafs,  through  which  the  provifions  were  brought
to  the  Latines  from  their  own  territories :  And  the  forces,
fent  with  the  general  of  the  horfe,  paffed  by  the  enemy’s
camp  in  the  night;  and,  marching  through  the  untrodden
paths  of  a  wood,  gained  the  hill,  before  the  enemy  was
aware  of  it.

V.  The  generals  of  the  enemy,  finding  that  the  ftrong
places,  which  lay  behind  them,  were,  alfo,  poffeffed  by  the
Romans,  and  almoft  defpairing  of  receiving  any  more  pro-
vifions  from  home  with  fecurity,  refolved  to  drive  them  from
the  hill,  before  they  had  time  to  fortify  it  with  a  ditch,  and
palifades.  And  Sextus,  one  of  the  generals,  taking  the  horfe
with  him,  rode  up  to  them  full  fpeed,  in  expectation  that  the
Roman  horfe  would  not  Hand  their  ground  :  But  thefe,  re¬
ceiving  the  charge  with  bravery,  he  maintained  the  fight  for
fome  time,  retiring,  and  renewing  the  attack.  But  the  nature
of  the  ground  giving  great  advantages  to  thofe,  who  were
once  mafters  of  the  hill,  and  affording  to  thofe,  who  attacked
from  below,  nothing  but  wounds,  and  ineffectual  labor  ;
and  frefli  forces  of  chofen  foot,  fent  by  Poftumius  to  follow
clofe  the  firft  detachment,  coming  up  to  the  affiflance  of
the  Romans,  Sextus  returned  to  the  camp  without  being
able  to  effeCt  any  thing :  And  the  Romans,  now  fecure  in
the  poffeffion  of  the  place,  openly  fortified  it.  After  this
aCtion,  Mamilius,  and  Sextus  determined  not  to  fuffer  a  long
delay,  but,  prefently,  to  decide  the  affair  by  a  battle.  The

Roman


8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

Roman  di&ator,  who  had,  at  firft,  propofed  to  put  an  end
to  the  war  without  an  a&ion,  and  founded  his  hopes  of
effecting  it  on  the  incapacity  of  the  generals  he  had  to  deal
with,  now  refolded  to  ingage :  For  the  horfe,  that  patroled
in  the  roads,  had  taken  fome  couriers  with  letters  from  the
Volfcito  the  Latin  generals;  by  which  the  former  acquainted
them  that  great  numbers  of  auxiliary  forces  would  join  them
within  three  days  at  fartheft  ;  and,  after  that,  another  body
from  the  Hernici.  Thefe  were  the  confiderations,  that
reduced  the  Roman  generals  to  an  immediate  neceflity  of
fighting,  which,  till  then,  they  had  propofed  to  decline.
After  the  fignals  for  the  battle  were  given  on  both  hides,  the
two  armies  advanced  to  a  plain,  that  lay  between  their
camps,  and  drew  up  in  the  following  manner :  Sextus
Tarquinius  was  on  the  left  wing  of  the  Latines,  and  Odtavius
Mamilius  on  the  right:  Titus,  the  other  fon  of  Tarquinius,

was  in  the  center,  where,  alfo,  the  Roman  deferters,  and

*

exiles  were  pofted.  And  all  their  horfe  being  divided  into
three  bodies,  two  of  thefe  were  placed  in  the  wings,  and
one  in  the  center.  The  left  of  the  Roman  army  was  com¬
manded  by  Titus  Aebutius,  general  of  the  horfe,  who  flood
oppofite  to  O&avius  Mamilius :  The  right,  by  Titus  Vir¬
ginia,  the  5conful,  facing  Sextus  Tarquinius :  The  center

s-  O  vttoIo r.  Portus,  and,  after  him,  ful,  when  eour  author  faid,  before,  that
M.  *  *  *,  have  thought  it  worth  their  the  di&ator  ordered  his  ccllegue  in  the
while  to  obferve  that  Virginius  was  confulfhip,  Virginius,  to  command
not,  aftually,  conful  *,  fince,  upon  the  one  of  the  four  bodies,  |T  TON
creation  of  a  diftator,  the  confulfhip  2TN  T  FLA  TON  Oui^fiviov  sl»^v
was  fuperfeded  ;  Neither  was  he  con-

•  2*.


was


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICA  RN  AS  SENSIS.  9

was  commanded  by  Poftumius,  the  di&ator,  in  perfon,  who
propofed  to  encounter  TitusTarquinius,  and  the  Roman  exiles*
The  numbers  of  each  army,  when  drawn  up,  were,  on  the
the  fide  of  the  Romans,  twenty  three  thoufand  feven  hun¬
dred  foot,  and  one  thoufand  horfe  ;  and  on  That  of  the
Latines,  and  their  allies,  near  forty  thoufand  foot,  and  three
thoufand  horfe.

VI.  When  they  were  going  to  ingage,  the  Latin  generals
called  their  men  together,  and  faid  many  things  tending  to
incite  them  to  fight  bravely,  and  repeated  their  intreaties  to
that  purpofe:  And  the  Roman  dictator,  feeing  his  people
poflefled  with  fear,  becaufe  they  were  going  to  encounter  an
army  greatly  fuperior  in  number  to  their  own,  and  defiring
to  difpel  that  fear,  aftembled  his  foldiers ;  and,  placing  near
him  the  fenators  of  the  greateft  age,  and  the  greateft  dignity,
he  fpoke  to  them  in  the  following  manner :  <c  The  gods,  by
“  omens,  facrifices,  and  other  auguries,  promife  to  grant  to
“  our  commonwealth  liberty,  and  a  happy  victory,  in  return
“  for  the  piety,  and  the  juftice  we  have  fhewn  during  the
u  whole  courfe  of  our  lives,  and  from  a  juft  refentment
“  againft  our  enemies ;  who,  having  received  many  great
“  benefits  from  us,  being  both  our  relations,  and  friends,
<c  and,  having  fworne  to  look  upon  all  our  enemies,  and
<c  friends,  as  their  own,  have  defpifed  all  thefe  obligations,  and
<c  brought  an  unjuft  war  upon  us,  not  with  a  view  to  dif-
cc  pute  the  fovereignty,  and  dominion  (for  this  would  belefs
iC  afflicting)  but  in  fupport  of  the  tyranny  of  the  Tarquinii,
u  and  to  compel  us,  from  being  free,  to  become  flaves  to  them.
Vol.  III.  C  “  You,


Book  VI.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

“  You,  therefore,  ought,  both  officers,  and  foldiers,  fince
£c  you  are  fenfible  you  have  the  gods  for  your  allies,  who
“  always  preferve  our  city,  to  behave  yourfelves  with  bravery
“  in  this  battle;  remembering  that  they  give  their  affiftance
<c  to  thofe,  who  fight  bravely,  and,  chearfully,  contribute
ct  every  thing  in  their  power  to  the  vi&ory ;  not  to  thofe,
“  who  fly  from  danger;  but  to  fuch,  as  expofe  themfelves
“  to  it  with  perfeverance.  You  have  many  other  advantages,
££  alfo,  conducive  to  victory,  already  prepared  for  you  by
££  fortune,  but,  chiefly,  three,  which  are,  of  all  others,  the
££  moft  confiderable,  and  the  moft  obvious.

VII.  ££  Firft,  the  confidence  you  have  in  one  another,
££  which  is  a  thing,  abfolutely,  neceffary  to  gain  the  victory  :
££  For  you  are  not  to  look  upon  yourfelves,  as  beginning,
££  this  day,  to  be  firm  friends,  and  faithful  allies  to  one
££  another,  but  your  country  has,  long  fince,  prepared  this
££  happinefs  for  you  all ;  you  have  been  brought  up  together,
££  and  have  received  one  common  education ;  you  have
££  facrificed  to  the  gods  upon  the  lame  altars ;  you  have
££  enjoyed  many  common  advantages,  and  have  experienced
££  many  common  evils ;  by  which,  ftrong,  and  indifloluble
££  friendfhips  are  formed  among  all  men ;  which  friendffiips
££  fhew  themfelves  when  a  battle,  common  to  all,  is  to  be
££  fought,  in  which  the  greater!:  interefts  are  at  flake  :  For,
££  if  you  are  overcome  by  the  enemy,  the  confequence  will
££  not  be  that  fome  of  you  will  be  treated  with  no  feverity,
££  and  others  Puffer  the  laft  of  punifhments ;  but  all  of  you
i£  will,  equally,  lofe  your  dignity,  your  fovereignty,  your


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENS  IS.  u

££  liberty,  and,  no  longer,  poffefs  your  wives,  your  children,
“  your  fortunes,  or  any  other  happinefs  you,  now,  enjoy  ;  and
££  all  the  men  of  dignity,  and  authority  among  us  will  fuller  a
u  mod:  iniferable  death  in  the  midft  of  ftripes,  and  torments :
u  For,  if  our  enemies,  without  having  received  any  land  of
££  injury,  have  accumulated  on  all  of  us  indignities  of  every
££  fort,  what  ought  we  to  expeCi  from  them,  if  they,  now,
££  overcome  us;  when  they  will  refent  our  having  driven
££  them  from  their  cities,  deprived  them  of  their  fortunes,  and
“  not  buffered  them,  even,  tofet  afoot  upon  the  lands  of  their
££  anceftors?  The  laft  advantage  we  have  over  our  enemies
C£  cannot  be  thought  lefs  than  either  of  Thofe  I  have  men-
£C  tioned,if  you  confider  it  properly  ;  which  is,  that  the  forces,
££  we  are  to  encounter,  are  not  fo  formidable  as  we  conceived
££  them  to  be,  but  far  fhort  of  the  opinion  we  had  entertained
££  of  them  :  For,  except  the  auxiliary  forces  of  the  Antiates,
££  you  fee  no  other  allies  prefent  with  them  :  While  we  ex-
££  pe&ed  that  all  the  Volfci,  and  many  of  the  Sabines,  and
££  Hernici  would  have  joined  them;  belides  a  thoufand  other
££  vain  fears  we  formed  to  ourfelves.  But  all  thefe  things
££  were,  only,  the  dreams  of  the  Latines,  founded  on  delufive
££  promifes,  and  ineffectual  hopes :  For  fome  of  their  allies
££  have  given  over  all  thoughts  of  affifting  them,  from  a  con-
C£  tempt  of  the  incapacity  of  their  generals :  Others,  inftead  of
££  affifting  them,  will  pretend  to  doit,  and  confume  the  time
C£  in  feeding  them  with  hopes:  And  thofe,  who  are,  now,
££  preparing  to  aflift  them,  wall  flay  till  the  battle  is  over,
££  and,  then,  be  of  no  further  ufe  to  them.

C  2


VIII.


Book  VI.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

VIII.  <c  But,  if  any  of  you  are  convinced  of  the  reafon-
“  ablenefs  of  what  I  have  advanced,  yet  fear  the  numbers
<c  of  the  enemy,  a  fhort  inftrudtion,  or  rather  their  own
u  remembrance,  will  teach  them  that  they  fear  things  not
cc  formidable.  Let  them  confider,  in  the  firft  place,  that  the
cc  greateft  part  of  them  are  forced  to  take  arms  againft  us,
<c  as  they  have,  often,  fhewn  both  by  their  a&ions,  and  their
“  difcourfes;  and  that  the  number  of  thofe,  who,  willingly,
“  and,  chearfully,  fight  for  the  tyrants,  is,  extremely,  finally
“  and  not,  in  any  degree,  equal  to  our  army.  Secondly,  that,
“  in  all  ingagements,  the  braveft,  not  the  moft  numerous
<c  forces,  gain  the  vidlory.  It  would  be  tedious  to  alledge,
c<  as  examples,  how  many  vaft  armies  of  Barbarians  have
<c  been  overcome  by  very  fmall  numbers  of  6  Greeks,  fo  as  to
<c  render  the  relations  of  thofe  victories,  even,  incredible  to
cc  the  generality  of  mankind.  But,  to  omit  other  things,
“  how  many  battles  have  you  yourfelves  gained  with  fewer
<c  forces,  than  your  prefen t  army  confifts  of,  againft  enemies

Ea Ayvuv.  I  look  upon  this  word  mination,  that  the  battle  of  Marathon
to  have  been  mifplaced  by  the  tran-  happened  above  five  years  after  this,,
fcribers,  and  am  convinced  that  the  viz.  in  the  third  year  of  the  feventy
fentence  ought  to  be  read  thus;  oca  fecond  Olympiad  :  But  no  hiftory  that
B a^aoav  s£altvy.ala  vVs§£<xAAo via  I  know  of  informs  us  that  vaft  armies.

fxfKoai  zcaw  EAAtjvwy  x.oolyfavicctvJo  of  Greeks  were  ever  defeated  by  others

I  thought  this  might  allude  to  the  vie-  confiderably  lefs  numerous;  which
tory  gained  by  the  Greeks  at  f  Mara- .  muft  be  the  fenfe,  if  we  read  the  texc
thon  with  10,000  men,  over  the  Per-  as  it  ftands  in  all  the  editions,  and
fians,  whofe  army  confifted  of  no  lels  manuferipts  ;  oca  B a^a^uv  rt  nat  Ea-
than  300,000  ;  a  victory,  which  our  Atj \/uv  ffttltvpcflct  vV^GxAAoiUa  srA>jS«
author  might,  juftly,  fay  was  fcarce  juw^a/  a raw  xctlqfwvHravlo  JwajAei f.
credible:  However,  I  find  upon  exa-

1  Ufher,  p.  96.  Petavius,  part.  prim.  B,  iii.  c.  1.  Valerius  Maxim.  B.  v.  e.  3.  Plutarch  in  Parall.

<£  more


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I  S.  13

££  more  numerous,  than  Thofe  you  are,  now,  going  to  en-
u  counter  ?  It  may  be  faid  that  you  have,  indeed,  continued
“  to  be  formidable  to  thofe  you  have,  once,  overcome  in
“  battle ;  while  you  may  be  defpifed  by  thefe  Latines,  and.
C£  their  allies,  the  Volfci,  becaufe  they  have  never  experienced
<£  your  bravery :  But  you  all  know  that  your  fathers  have
“  overcome  both  thefe  nations  in  many  battles.  Can  it,
“  then,  be,  reafonably,  fuppofed  that  the  condition  of  the
<£  conquered  is  improved  by  fo  many  defeats,  and  That  of
u  the  conquerors  impaired  by  fo  many  victories  ?  What
c£  man  of  fenfe  will  fay  this?  I  fhould  wonder,  indeed,  if
££  any  of  you  looked  upon  the  numbers  of  the  enemy,  in
<£  which  there  are  few  brave  men,  with  terror,  and  with
“  contempt  upon  their  own  army,  which  is  fo  numerous,
<c  and  fo  brave,  that  none,  exceeding  it  either  in  courage,
<£  or  in  numbers,  was  ever  brought  into  the  field  in  any  of
££  our  former  wars.

IX.  ££  This,  alfo,  citizens,  ought  to  be  the  greateft  in-
u  cite  men  t  to  you  neither  to  apprehend,  nor  avoid  the
££  dangers  of  the  field,  that  the  principal  fenators  are  all
££  prefent,  as  you  fee,  ready  to  fhare  the  common  fortune
££  of  the  war  with  you ;  whom  both  their  age,  and  the  law
<£  have  difcharged  from  the  fervice.  Would  it  not,  then,
££  be  fhameful  for  you,  who  are  in  the  vigor  of  your  youth,
“  to  fly  from  danger,  while  thefe,  who  are  paft  that  age,
££  purfue  it  ?  That  the  alacrity  of  the  old  men,  though
££  unable  to  kill  any  of  the  enemy,  fhould  lead  them  to  die,
££  at  leaft,  for  their  country ;  and  that  your  youth,  which

u  may


14  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

c  c  may  enjoy  the  double  advantage  of  fecuring  your  own  fafety ,
i£  and  gaining  the  victory,  or,  if  that  cannot  be,  of  acting,  and
“  differing  with  bravery,  fhould  not  induce  you  either  to  try
«  fortune,  or  leave  behind  you  a  glorious  reputation  ?  Is  it  not
“  true,  Romans,  that  there  have  been  many  great,  and  won-
cc  derful  actions  performed  by  others,  before  your  time,  which
“  no  words  can,  fufficiently,  celebrate;  and  that  your  pofterity
<£  will  hear,  with  improvement,  many  illuftrious  actions  per-
C£  formed  by  their  own  anceftors,  if  you  gain  this  vi&ory  ?  To
4C  the  end,  therefore,  that  neither  the  bravery  of  thofe  among
££  you,  who  are  refolved  to  do  their  duty,  may  be  unprofl-
u  table,  nor  the  fears  of  fuch,  as  apprehend  danger  more  than
cc  becomes  them,  go  unpunished,  learn  from  me,  before  we
“  ingage,  what  each  of  them  are  to  expedt  :  Whoever  flaall
a  perform  any  great,  or  brave  adtion  in  this  battle,  and  proves
C£  it  by  the  teftimony  of  perfons  acquainted  with  that  action,
u  I  will, -not  only,  reward  him,  immediately,  wTith  the  honors,
u  which  every  man,  upon  thefe  occafions,  isintitled  to  by  the
cc  cuftom  of  his  country,  but  will,  alfo,  add  to  thofe  rewards  a
u  part  of  the  public  lands,  and  put  him  in  a  condition  above
“  wanting  any  thing,  that  is  neceffary  for  hisfubflftance.  But,
u  if  a  cowardly,  and  accurfed  mind  Shall  fuggeft  to  any  one  an
C£  inclination  to  a  fhameful  flight ;  to  this  man  I  will  prefent
c£  before  his  eyes  the  death  he  endeavoured  to  avoid :  For
C£  death  is  better  than  life  to  fuch  a  citizen,  both  for  his
“  own,  and  his  country’s  fake.  And  whoever  is  put  to  death
“  in  fuch  a  manner,  Shall  be  honoured  neither  with  burial,
Ci  nor  any  other  funeral  rites ;  but,  unregarded,  unlamented,

“  be


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  15
“  be  devoured  by  birds,  and  beafts  of  prey.  Apprized,
“  therefore,  of  thefe  things,  go  all,  chearfully,  to  the  ingage-
£C  ment,  with  fanguine  hopes,  the  guides  to  glorious  addons,
tc  that,  by  this  one  battle,  if  attended  with  the  fuccefs  we
“  all  wifh  for,  you  will  obtain  the  greateft  of  all  advantages ;
“  you  will  free  yourfelves  from  the  fear  of  the  tyrants ;
a  repay  to  your  country,  that  gave  you  birth,  the  obliga-
“  tions  fhe,  juftly,  requires  of  you  for  your  education;
<c  preferve  your  children,  who  are  yet  infants,  and  your
<c  wives  from  the  irreparable  treatment  of  your  enemies ;
“  and  render  the  fhort  time  your  aged  fathers  have  yet  to
“  live  moft  agreeable  to  them :  Happy  thofe  among  you,
“  to  whom  it  will  be  given  to  celebrate  the  triumph  for
“  this  vidory,  while  your  children,  your  wives,  and  fathers
“  receive  you !  But  glorious,  and  admired  for  their  bravery
“  will  thofe  be,  who  fhall  facrifice  their  lives  for  their  country  !
u  For  death  is  decreed  to  all  men,  both  to  the  cowardly,
“  and  the  brave ;  but  an  illuferious,  and  a  glorious  death
u  to  the  7  brave  alone.”

X.  While  he  was  difplaying  thefe  incentives  to  valor,  a
kind  of  confidence,  fent  from  heaven,  feized  the  army,  and
they  all,  as  ifaduated  with  one  foul,  cried  out  together,  Fear
not ,  and  lead  us  on.  Upon  which,  Poftumius  commended  their

7-  M cvois  t o/f  afaOot?.  This  is  the  only  only  point  to  be  confidered  is,  whether
fpeech  in  our  autfor,  that  I  could  wifh  it  can  be  fuppofed  that  he,  or  any  other
fhorter.  When  I  fay  this,  I  own  that  general,  ever  made  a  fpeech  of  this
all  the  powers  of  eloquence  are  dif-  length,  when  his  army  was  upon  the
played  in  it.  But  I  am  afraid  it  will  point  of  ingaging.  I  cannot  help
be  laid,  ncn  erat  his  Icons.  It  fignifies  thinking  that  the  imperatoria  brevitas
little  whether  this  fpeech  was,  really,  is  full  as  effedtual  to  animate  the  lbl-
fpoken  by  the  dictator,  or  npt :  The  diers,  and  more  becoming  the  general.

alacrity^..


1 6


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

alacrity,  and  made  a  vow  to  the  gods,  if  the  battle  was  at¬
tended  with  a  happy,  and  glorious  event,  to  perform  great,
and  coftly  facrifices,  and  to  inflitute  magnificent  games  to
be  celebrated,  annually,  by  the  Roman  people  :  After  which,
he  difmiffed  his  men  to  their  ranks ;  andv  as  foon  as  they
had  received  the  word  from  their  officers,  and  the  trumpets
founded  a  charge,  they  gave  a  fhout,  and  fell  on  :  Firft,  the
light  armed,  and  the  horfe,  on  each  fide  ;  then  the  lines
of  the  heavy  armed  men,  both  armed,  and  drawn  up
alike  ;  and  all  mingling,  a  fevere  battle  infued,  in  which
every  man  fought  hand  to  hand.  However,  both  fides  were,
extremely,  deceived  in  the  opinion  they  had  entertained  ot
each  other:  For,  neither  of  them  thought  a  battle  would
be  neceffary,  but  expedted  to  put  the  enemy  to  flight  at  the
firft  onfet.  The  Latines,  confiding  in  the  number  of  their
horfe,  concluded  That  of  the  Romans  would  not  be  able,
even,  to  fuftain  their  fhock :  And  the  Romans  imagined
that,  by  ruffling  into  the  midft  of  danger  in  a  daring,  and
inconfiderate  manner,  they  fhould  terrify  their  enemies.
Having  formed  this  opinion  of  one  another  in  the  begin¬
ning,  every  thing  they  faw  contradi&ed  it.  Each  fide,
therefore,  founding,  no  longer,  their  hopes  of  prefervation,
and  of  victory  on  the  fear  of  the  enemy,  but  on  their  own
courage,  fhewed  themfelves  brave  foldiers,  even  beyond
their  power.  Various,  and  fluctuating  was  the  fortune  of  the

day.

XI.  Firft,  the  Romans  polled  in  the  center,  where  the
dictator  Poflumius  flood  with  a  chofen  body  of  horfe

about


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  17

about  him,  he  himfelf  fighting  among  the  foremoft,  forced
that  part  of  the  enemy,  that  flood  oppofite  to  them,  Titus,
one  of  the  fons  of  Tarquinius,  being  wounded  in  the  right
fhoulder  with  a  javelin,  and,  no  longer  able  to  ufe  his  hand
(for  3  Licinnius,  and  Gellius,  without  inquiring  into  the  pro¬
bability,  or  pofiibility  of  the  thing,  introduce  king  Tarqui¬
nius  himfelf,  a  man,  then,  near  ninety  years  of  age,  fighting
on  horfeback,  and  wounded)  Titus  falling,  thofe  about  him,
having  fought  a  little  while,  and  carried  him  off  while  he
was  yet  alive,  fhewed  no  bravery  after  that ;  but  retired,  by
degrees,  as  the  Romans  preffed  them.  Alter  this,  Sextus,
the  other  fon  of  Tarquinius,  coming  to  their  relief  with  the
Roman  exiles,  and  a  body  of  chofen  horfe,  they,  again,
flood  their  ground,  and  attacked  the  enemy  :  Thefe,  there¬
fore,  recovering  themfelves,  fought  again.  In  the  mean  time,
Titus  Aebutius,  and  Mamilius  Odlavius,  the  commanders
of  their  refpedtive  wings,  fought  in  the  moft  diftinguifhed
manner,  driving  their  enemies  before  them  wherever  they
charged,  and  rallying  their  men  when  difordered;  then,
challenged  one  another,  and  fought :  And,  in  the  conflict,
gave  one  another  grievous  wounds,  but  none  mortal ;  the
general  of  the  horfe,  piercing  the  corfiet  of  Mamilius  with
his  fpear,  lodged  the  point  of  it  in  his  breaft ;  and  Mamilius
running  the  other  through  the  middle  of  his  right  arm,
they  fell  from  their  horfes.

*•  Aouw/c?,  Kut  6i  Tihhiov.  See  done,  in  order  to  produce  inflances  from
the  twenty  fifth  annotation  on  the  firft  hiftory  of  feveral  perfons,  who  have  en-
book.  I  do  not  think  it  neceffary  to  joyed  great  vigor  at  ninety  years  of  age.
tranflate  a  note  of  Cafaubon  upon  this  But  this  I  know,  that,  if  I  had  tranf-
occafion,  as  M.  *  *  *,  and  le  Jay  have  lated  his  note,  I  fhould  have  owned  it.

Vol.  III.  D  XII.


Book  VI.


18  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

XII.  Both  of  them  being  carried  out  of  the  field,  Marcus
Valerius,  who  had  been  appointed  9  legate,  took  upon  him-
felf  the  command  of  the  general  of  the  horfe,  and  attacked
Thofe  of  the  enemy  in  front ;  and,  after  a  fhort  refiftance,
was  driven  far  out  of  the  line  :  For  this  body  of  the  enemy
had  been,  alfo,  reinforced  by  a  detachment  of  horfe,  con¬
fiding  of  the  Roman  exiles,  and  by  light  armed  men :
And  Mamilius,  having  recovered  himfelf  from  his  wound,
appeared  in  the  field  again,  and  was  come  up  with  a  ftrong
body  both  of  horfe,  and  light  armed  foot.  In  this  a&ion,
fell  Marcus  Valerius,  the  legate,  wounded  with  a  fpear  ;
the  fame  perfon,  who  firft  triumphed  over  the  Sabines,  and
raifed  the  fpirit  of  the  commonwealth,  funk  by  the  defeat
fhe  had  received  from  the  Tyrrhenians ;  and,  round  him,  fell
many  other  worthy,  and  brave  Romans.  Both  fides  endea¬
vouring  to  carry  off  his  body,  a  fharp  conflict  infued,  while
Publius,  and  Marcus,  the  fons  of  Poplicola,  protected  their
uncle  with  their  fhields  :  However,  thefe  carried  him  off
unfpoiled ;  and,  delivering  him  to  their  fhield-bearers,  while
he  yet  breathed  a  little,  they  fent  him  to  the  camp :  Then,

9-  ngcrGtvItif.  I  muft  defire  leave  of  tranflate  Legatus^  a  Lieutenant  general^
the  reader  to  tranflate  this  word,  Legate^  which  is  more  anfwerable  to  his  poft.
■whenever  I  meet  with  it.  I  find  the  It  is  well  known  that  there  were  two
French  translators  have  faid  Lieutenant^  forts  of  Legati  among  the  Romans;
and  Lieutenant  Colonel ,  which,  by  the  the  firft,  embaffadors,  and  the  other,
way,  does  not  give  the  fignification  of  military  officers.  The  popes  have
Legatus ;  fince  it  fuppofes  this  officer  preferved  the  name  of  the  firft  with
to  be  inferior  to  the  Lribuni ,  which  he,  the  addition  of  a  latere  ;  vainly  ima-
certainly,  was  not.  Ifl  thought  myfelf  gining  that  this  pretence  can  intitle
juftified  in  giving  modern  names  to  all  them  to  the  fame  confideration  as  the
the  Roman  officers,  I  ffiould  rather  embaffadors  of  ancient  Rome.

throwing

o


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  19

throwing  themfelves  into  the  midft  of  the  enemy  through  fury,
and  ardor ;  and,  having  received  many  wounds  from  the  Ro¬
man  exiles,  who  attacked  themfclofely,  on  all  ftdes,  dieydied
together.  After  this  misfortune,  the  line  of  the  Romans  was
forced  to  give  way;  and  the  whole  left  wing  was  broken,  even,
to  the  center.  When  the  di&ator  obferved  the  flight  of  his
men,  he  flew  to  their  aftiftance  with  all  the  horfe  he  had  about
him;  and  ordered  the  other  legate,  Titus Herminius,  to  take
a  troop  of  horfe;  and,  palling  behind  their  own  lines,  to  force
the  men,  who  fled,  to  face  about ;  and,  if  they  refufed  obe¬
dience,  to  kill  them;  and  he  himfelf,  with  the  beft  of  his  men,
pufhed  on  towards  the  body  of  the  enemy :  And,  when  he
came  near  them,  he  clapped  fpurs  to  his  horfe  beforeany  of  the
reft,  and  charged  them  with  a  loofe  rein  ;  and  all  his  men
falling  on  together  in  this  terrible  manner,  the  enemy,  unable
to  fuftain  the  wild,  and  favage  fhock,  fled,  and  many  of  them
fell.  In  the  mean  time,  the  legate,  Herminius  alfo,  having
rallied  thofe,  who  fled,  brought  them  up,  and  attacked  that
part  of  the  enemy,  that  flood  formed  under  Mamilius ;  and
encountering  this  general,  who,  both  for  his  ftature,  and  his
ftrength,  was  the  moft  remarkable  man  of  his  time,  he
killed  him ;  and  he  himfelf,  while  he  was  fpoiling  the  body,
received  a  wound  in  his  flde  with  a  fword  by  fome  perfon,
and  fell  dead.  Sextus  Tarquinius,  who  commanded  the  left
wing  of  the  Latines,  maintained  his  poft  all  this  while  in  the
midft  of  dangers,  and  forced  the  right  wing  of  the  Romans
to  give  way :  But,  when  he  faw  Poftumius  advancing
with  the  chofen  horfe,  he  gave  over  all  hopes,  and  rufhed

D  2  into


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

into  the  midft  of  the  enemy’s  ranks ;  where,  being  furrounded
by  the  Romans,  both  horfe,  and  foot,  and,  like  a  wild  beaft
affaulted  on  all  fides  with  miffive  weapons,  he  fell ;  but  not
before  he  had  killed  many  of  thofe,  who  attacked  himfword
in  hand.  The  generals  being  flain,  all  the  Latines  fled  at
once;  and  their  camp,  abandoned  by  the  men,  who  had
been  left  to  guard  it,  was  taken :  In  which  the  Romans
found  a  very  confiderable  booty.  This  was  the  greateft
defeat  the  Latines  had  ever  fuffered ;  the  ill  effects  of  which
lafted  very  long,  and  their  lofs  was  greater  than  any  they
had,  before,  fuftained:  For,  of  forty  thoufand  foot,  and
three  thoufand  horfe,  as  I  faid,  not  ten  thoufand  men  re¬
turned  home  in  fafety.

XIII.  It  is  faid  that,  in  this  battle,  two  men,  on  horfe-
back,  far  excelling  the  offspring  of  human  nature,  both  in
beauty,  and  in  ftature,  and  juft  in  their  prime,  appeared  to
Poftumius,  and  to  thofe  about  him,  and  charged  at  the  head  of
the  Roman  horfe,  wounding  with  their  fpears  all  they  encoun¬
tered,  and  driving  the  Latines  before  them  :  And,  after  thefe
were  put  to  flight,  and  their  camp  taken,  the  battle  being,  now,
over,  two  youths  are  faid  to  have  appeared  in  the  fame  man¬
ner,  about  the  beginning  of  the  night,  in  the  Roman  forum,
attired  in  military  habits,  very  tall,  and  beautiful,  and  of
the  fame  age,  themfelves  retaining  the  looks  of  combatants
juft  coming  from  a  battle,  and  the  horfes  they  rode  being  all
in  a  fweat.  When,  each  of  them  difmounting,  and  wafhing
themfelves  in  the  fountain,  which,  riling  near  the  temple  of
Vefta,  forms  a  final!,  but  deep  bafon,  many  people  Handing

about


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALI  C  ARN  A  SSENSI  S.  ar


about  them,  and  inquiring  if  they  had  brought  any  news
from  the  camp,  they  related  the  particulars  of  the  battle,
and  that  the  Romans  had  gained  the  victory.  They  add
that,  after  they  left  the  forum,  they  were  no  more  feen,
notwithftanding  the  great  fearch,  that  was  made  after  them
by  the  governor  of  the  city.  The  next  day,  when  the  per-
foils  intrufted  with  the  care  of  the  commonwealth,  received
the  letters  fent  by  the  dictator,  by  which,  among  the  other
circumftances  oi  the  action,  they  were  informed,  alfo,  of  the
apparition  of  thefe  gods,  they  concluded  that  the  fame  had
appeared  in  both  places,  as  might  reafonably  be  imagined,
and  believed  that  the  divinities,  who  had  fo  appeared,  were
Caftor,  and  Pollux.  Of  this  extraordinary,  and  wonderful
apparition  of  thefe  gods  there  are  many  monuments  at  Rome,
as  the  temple  of  Caftor,  and  Pollux,  which  the  Roman
people  eredted  in  the  forum,  where  they  had  appeared;  and
the  fountain  near  it,  faid  to  be  confecrated  to  them,  and
thought  to  be  fo  to  this  day;  and  alfo  the  magnificent
facrifices,  which  the  people  offer,  every  year,  by  the  miniftry
of  the  moft  confiderable  knights,  10  on  the  ides  of  the
month,  called  Quintilis,  which  was  the  day,  on  which  they
gained  this  victory :  But,  above  all  thefe  things,  the  memory

I0>  Ev  p]Vi  KvTvIiAiw.  Aux  ides  du  mots  fifteenth)  of  which  was  celebrated  this
appelle  Quintilius,  fays  M.  ***.  There  proceffion,  called  by  the  Romans,  tranf-
never  was  fuch  a  month  in  the  Roman  veftio  equitum  Romanorum.  h  Livy  at-
calendar  as  Quintilius  :  He  fhould  have  tributes  the  inftitution  of  this  procef-
faid  Quintilis  ;  afterwards  called  Julius,  fion  to  Fabius  Maximus;  ab  eodem
ih  flattery  to  Julius  Caefar,  who  was  injlitutumdicitur^  ut  equites  Idibus  Quin-
born  in  that  month  :  On  the  ides  (the  tilibus  tranfveherentur.

h  B.  ix.  c.  <4.6.

»


of


2  2


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

of  it  is  perpetuated  by  a  proceffion,  performed  after  the
fiicrifice,  by  thofe,  who  have  a  11  horfe  maintained  by  the
public;  and  who,  being  difpofed  in  their  tribes,  and  centu¬
ries,  ride  all  in  their  ranks,  as  if  they  came  from  battle,
crowned  with  olive  branches,  and  attired  in  robes  with
12  purple  borders,  and  ftripes  of  the  fame  color,  which  they
call  7 rabeae :  They  begin  their  proceffion  from  a  certain
temple  of  Mars,  that  ftands  without  the  walls ;  and,  going
through  feveral  parts  of  the  city,  and  the  forum,  they  pafs
by  the  temple  of  Caftor,  and  Pollux,  fometimes  to  the  num¬
ber,  even,  of  five  thoufand,  carrying  all  the  ornaments  they
have  received  from  their  generals,  as  the  rewards  of  the  valor
they  have  ffiewn  in  battle :  A  fine  fight,  and  worthy  the
greatnefs  of  their  empire.  Thefe  are  the  things  I  find  to  be
related,  and  performed  by  the  Romans  in  memory  of  the
apparition  of  Caftor,  and  Pollux ;  by  which,  among  many
other  inftances  of  great  moment,  one-may  judge  how  much
the  men  of  thofe  times  were  cherifhed  by  the  gods.

n*  Tov  Sryomov  Imfov.  Inftead  of  re¬
peating  what  I  have,  already,  laid  con¬
cerning  the  Roman  knights,  I  fhall
refer  the  reader  to  the  twenty  eighth
annotation  on  the  fecond  book.  How¬
ever,  I  cannot  omit  taking  notice  of
a  miftake  committed  by  M.  *  *  *  in
his  note  upon  this  paffage.  I  think
xnyfelf  obliged  to  quote  his  words  ;
les  chevaliers  s’ appelloient  en  Latin
equites,  de  mime  que  les  foldats  qui
compofoient  la  cavalerie  Romaine  :  mais
H  y  avoit  cette  difference ,  que  ceuxci  en-
tretenoient  a  leursfrais  le  cheval ,  dont  ils
fe  fervoient  dans  les  hat  allies ,  m  lieu  que


celui  des  premiers  etcit  enlretenu  aux
depens  da  public.  \  his  difference  is,
abfolutely,  chimerical.  From  the  time
of  Romulus,  to  Marius,  the  Romans
had  no  other  cavalry  but  the  knights,
whofe  horfes  were  maintained  by  the
public,  and  who  conftituted  the  eque-
ftrian  order.  This,  I  think,  I  have
proved,  in  the  annotation  referred  to,
by  feveral  authorities  j  particularly  by
That  of  Livy,  from  whom  I  have
there  quoted  a  paffage,  which,  to  me,
appears  decifive.

12,  <J>otviK07ragv<Piif.  See  the  138th
annotation  on  the  fecond  book.


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  23

XIV.  Poftumius  incamped  that  night  in  the  field;  and,
the  next  day,  he  crowned  thofe,  who  had  diftinguifhed
themfelves  in  the  battle;  and,  having  appointed  guards  to
take  care  of  the  prifoners,  he  facrifieed  to  the  gods  in  thanks¬
giving  for  the  victory  :  While  he  had  yet  his  crown  on  his
head,  and  was  laying  the  firffc  offering  on  the  altar  to  be
confumed  with  fire,  fome  fcouts,  running  down  from  the
eminences,  brought  him  word  that  an  army  of  enemies
was  marching  againft  him:  This  confifted  of  the  chofen
youth  of  the  Volfcian  nation,  who  had  been  lent  out,  as
auxiliaries,  to  the  Latines  before  the  battle  was  ended.
Upon  this  information,  he  ordered  all  his  men  to  their  arms,
and  that  every  one  Should  flay  in  the  camp  under  his  proper
enfigns,  keeping  themfelves  upon  their  guard,  and  in  their
ranks,  till  he  himfelf  Should  order  them  what  to  do.  On
the  other  fide,  the  generals  of  the  Volfci,  incamping  in
a  place,  where  they  could  13  not  be  obferved  by  the
Romans,  when  they  faw  the  field  covered  with  dead  bodies,
and  the  tents  in  both  camps  Standing,  and  that  none  of
their  enemies,  or  friends  ftirred  out  of  their  intrenchments,
they  were,  for  fome  time,  amazed,  and  at  a  lofs  to  guefs
what  turn  of  fortune  had  produced  this  fituation  of  affairs :
But,  being  informed  by  thofe,  who  had  efcaped  from  the
defeat,  of  all  the  circumftances  of  the  battle,  they  confulted
with  their  officers  what  was  to  be  done.  The  boldeft  of
them  were  of  opinion,  that  the  beft  thing  they  could  do  was

J3*  e£  cc7T07r1a.  As  this  word  fignifies  given  it  the  firft  fenfe,  which  Teems  to
inviftble ,  as  well  as  conspicuous ,  the  imply  greater  caution,
tranflators  had  their  choice.  I  have


to


24  ROMAN  ANTI  QJj  I  T  I  E  S  OF  Book  VI.

to  attack  the  camp  of  the  Romans,  while  many  of  them
were  yet  difabled  with  their  wounds,  and  all  tired  with  the
labor  of  the  day,  their  arms  ufelefs,  fome  being  blunted,  and
others  broken,  and  no  frefh  forces  from  Rome  yet  at  hand
to  relieve  them.  On  the  other  fide,  they  faid  their  own
army  was  numerous,  full  of  courage,  bravely  armed,  expe¬
rienced  in  war,  and,  by  appearing  unexpectedly,  was  fure  to
aftonifh,  even,  the  boldeft.

XV.  But  the  moft  prudent  among  them  did  not  think  it
fafe,  without  allies,  to  run  the  hazard  of  attacking  men  well
acquainted  with  military  difcipline,  who  had  juft  defeated
fo  great  an  army  of  the  Latines;  or  to  commit  their  greateft
interefts  to  the  danger  of  an  ingagement  in  a  foreign
country,  where,  if  any  misfortune  happened,  they  had  no
place  of  fafety  to  retire  to.  Thefe  advifed,  therefore,  to
provide  rather  for  a  fafe  retreat  to  their  own  country  as  foon
as  poffible,  and  to  look  upon  it  as  a  great  advantage,  if  they
fuftained  no  lofs  in  this  expedition.  But  others  difapproved
of  both  thefe  meafures,  and  {hewed  that  the  eagernefs  for  an
ingagement  was  juvenile,  and  the  ridiculous  flight  to  their
own  country,  fhameful ;  and  that  either  of  thefe  was  the
objeCt  of  the  enemy’s  wifhes :  Their  opinion,  therefore,
was,  that,  at  prefent,  they  ought  to  fortify  their  camp,  and
prepare  every  thing  for  a  battle  ;  and  that,  dilpatching
rneftengers  to  the  reft  of  the  Volfci,  they  fhould  defire  them
to  do  one  of  thefe  two  things,  either  to  fend  another  army  of
equal  ftrength  to  That  of  the  Romans,  or,  recal  the  forces
they  had,  already,  fent  out.  But  the  opinion,  that  prevailed

with


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENS  IS.  25

with  the  greateft  part,  and  received  the  fandtion  of  the
men  in  power,  was  to  fend  fpies  to  the  Roman  camp,
fecured  by  the  quality  of  embaffadors,  to  falute  the  ge¬
neral,  and  acquaint  him  that,  as  allies  oi  the  Romans,
fent  by  the  Volfcian  nation,  they  were  forry  they  came  too
late  for  the  battle,  as  being  intitled  to  little,  or  no  thanks
for  their  zeal :  However,  that  they  congratulated  the  good
fortune  of  the  Romans,  in  having  gained  a  great  vidtory,
without  the  affiftance  of  their  allies.  After  the  embaffa-
dors  had  impofed  upon  the  Romans  by  this  officious  dif-
courfe,  and  prevailed  on  thefe  to  confide  in  them,  as  in  their
friends,  they  were  to  examine  every  thing,  and  acquaint  the
generals  of  the  Volfci,  at  their  return,  with  their  numbers,
the  condition  of  their  arms,  and  their  preparations,  and
whether  they  propofed  to  execute  any  defign :  And  that,
after  they  were,  thoroughly,  acquainted  with  thefe  things,
they  would  deliberate  whether  it  were  expedient  to  fend  for
frefh  forces,  and  attack  the  Romans,  or  to  return  home
with  the  army  they  had  with  them.

XVI.  After  they  had  taken  this  refolution,  the  embaffa-
dors  they  had  chofen  went  to  the  dictator;  and,  being
introduced  to  the  afiembly,  they  fpoke  in  the  deceitful
manner  th^y  had  been  inftrudled.  When  Poftumius,  after
a  iffiort  paufe,  faid;  “  You  have  brought  with  you,  Volfci,
“  evil  defigns  clothed  with  good  words ;  and,  while  you  adt
“  like  enemies,  you  defire  to  appear  like  friends:  For  you
“  were  fent  by  your  nation  to  affift  the  Latines  againfl:  us ;
u  but,  arriving  after  the  battle,  and  feeing  them  overcome,
Vol.  III.  E  u  vou


26  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

“  you  want  to  deceive  us,  by  pretending  defigns  contrary  to
*  Thofe  you,  really,  entertained:  And  neither  the  good-
u  will  you  exprefs,  which  you  have  calculated  for  the  prefent
u  juncture,  nor  the  pretence,  under  which  you  are  come
“  hither,  have  any  fincerity  in  them  ;  but  are  full  of  fraud,
and  deceit:  For  you  were  not  fent  to  congratulate  our
“  good  fortune,  but  to  examine  into  theweaknefs,  or  flrength
cc  of  our  condition ;  and  you  are  embafiadors  in  appearance,
a  but  fpies  in  reality.’5  And,  when  the  others  denied  every
thing  he  had  charged  them  with,  he  faid  he  would  foon
convince  them  of  the  truth  of  it  :  And,  prefently,  fhewed
them  their  letters,  which  he  had  intercepted  before  the
battle,  to  the  generals  of  the  Latines,  in  which  they  promifed
to  fend  forces  to  their  affiftance ;  and  produced  the  perfons,
who  were  carrying  thofe  letters.  After  thefe  were  read,  and
the  prifoners  had  given  an  account  of  the  orders  they  had  re¬
ceived,  the  common  foldiers  were  going  to  rtone  the  V olfci,
as  fpies  taken  in  the  fad  :  But  Foftumius  thought  that  good
men  ought  not  to  imitate  the  wicked;  faying,  it  would
become  them  more,  and  fhew  more  greatnefs  of  mind  to
referve  their  anger  againft  the  fenders,  rather  than  againft
the  fent ;  and  to  difmifs  the  men,  in  confideration  of  their
apparent  title  of  embafiadors,  rather  than  to  put  them  to  death
In  confideration  of  their  difguifed  quality  of  fpies ;  left  they
fhould  give  a  fpecious  color  either  of  war  to  the  Volfci,
while  they  pretended  their  embafiadors  were  put  to  death,
contrary  to  the  right  of  nations,  or  to  their  other  enemies  of
propagating  reports,  which,  though  falfe,  would  appear
neither  ill-grounded,  nor  incredible.  XVII.


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN ASSENSIS.  27

XVII.  Having,  thus,  put  a  flop  to  the  fury  of  the  foldiers,
he  commanded  the  men  to  be  difmiffed,  and  to  return
'  14  without  looking  back ;  and  ordered  them  a  guard  of  horfe,
who  conduced  them  to  the  camp  of  the  Volfci.  After  he
had  fend  away  the  fpies,  he  commanded  the  foldiers  to
prepare  for  battle,  as  defigning,  the  next  day,  to  ingage.
But  there  was  no  occalion  for  a  battle  :  For  the  generals  of
the  Volfci  decamped  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  re¬
turned  home.  All  things  having  fucceeded  to  his  wi£h,  he
buried  his  own  dead ;  and,  having  purified  his  army,  re¬
turned  to  the  city,  and  celebrated  a  magnificent  triumph,
carrying  with  him  heaps  of  arms  on  many  carts,  together
with  a  great  quantity  of  military  ftores,  followed  by  five
thoufand  five  hundred  prifoners,  taken  in  the  laft  battle.
And,  having  fet  apart  th'e  tenths  of  the  fpoils,  he  employed
15  forty  talents  in  performing  games,  and  facrifices  to  the
gods ;  and  contracted  for  the  building  temples  to  Ceres,
Bacchus,  and  Proferpine,  in  performance  of  his  vow :  For,
in  the  beginning  of  the  war,  there  had  been  a  fcarcity  of
provifions  for  the  army,  a  failure  of  which  was,  greatly,
apprehended,  the  land  having  lain  uncultivated,  and  the
importation  of  provifions  been  flopped,  by  reafon  of  the  war :
Induced  by  this  apprehenfion,  he  had  ordered  the  guardians
of  the  Sibylline  books  to  confult  them  ;  and,  finding  that  the

h-  Autletfftvlt,  The  Latin  tranf-  Quintius  Flamininus,  Rex prirno  effufe ,
lators  might  have  rendered  this  word  ac  fine  refpedtu  fugit .
much  better  than  they  have  done,  by  *5*  Terh^acKovlct  Ta\xvl<x.  In  our
fine  refpeftu,  as  5Livy  fays  of  Philip,  money,  7750  pounds,
when  he  received  a  check  from  T.

‘B.  xxxii.  c.  I  2.

E  2


oracles


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

oracles  ordered  thefe  gods  to  be  rendered  propitious,  he  made  a
vow  to  them,  when  he  was  going  to  take  the  field,  that,  if
there  was  the  fame  plenty  of  provifions  in  the  city,  during
the  time  of  his  magiftracy,  as  before,  he  would  build  temples,
and  appoint  facrifices  to  be  performed  to  them  every  year.
Thefe  gods,  hearing  his  prayer,  caufed  the  land  to  produce
abundant  crops,  not  only,  of  corn,  but,  alfo,  of  fruit;  and  all
foreign  provifions  to  be  imported  in  greater  plenty,  than
before.  Which  when  Poftumius  himfelf  faw,  he  ordered  the
temples  to  be  built.  The  Romans,  therefore,  having,  through
the  benevolence  of  the  gods,  repelled  the  war,  brought  upon
them  for  the  reftoration  of  the  tyrants,  employed  their  time
in  feafts,  and  facrifices.

XVIII.  A  few  days  after,  embaffadors  came  to  them  from
the  Latin  nation,  chofen  out  of  all  their  cities  (being  the
16  fame  perfons,  who  had,  all  along,  declared  againft  the
war)  holding  up  17  olive  branches,  and  other  marks  of  fup-
pliants.  Thefe,  being  introduced  into  the  fenate,  firft,  ac-
cufed  the  men  of  power,  in  every  city,  of  having  been  the

l6*  Onyjv  ivuvhav  ns  Tvotey.x  power  thefe  embaffadors  had  oppofed.

yvuyvjv.  The  two  French  tranflators  *7*  k  Livy  will  explain  this

have  faid,  qui  s'etoient  oppofees  a  la  Greek  cuftom  :  In  giving  an  account
guerre.  This  every  body,  who  under-  of  the  fuppliant  manner,  in  which  the
ftands  French,  will  fee  relates  to  the  Locrenfian  embaffadors  addreffed  their
cities,  not  to  the  embaffadors  ;  which  complaints  to  the  Roman  confuls  a-
is  contrary  to  the  Greek  text,  where  gainft  Pleminius,  he  fays  ;  decern  legati
it  ftands  bi  not  di  And  Locrenjium  obfiti  fquallore  et  for  dibus,  in

thefe  embaffadors  fay,  in  excufe  of  the  Comitio  fedentibus  confulibus ,  velamenta
Latines,  that  their  cities  were  influenced  fupplicum ,  ramos  oleae  (ut  Graecis  mos
by  the  men  of  power,  when  they  de-  eft)  porrigentes ,  ante  tribunal  cum  flebili
dared  for  the  war ;  which  men  of  vociferatione procubuerunt.

k  E.  xxix.  c.  16.


caule


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  29

caufe  of  the  war;  and  that  the  people  had  been  guilty  but
of  one  fault,  which  was,  of  having  been  deluded  by  their
corrupt  demagogues,  who  had  nothing  elfe  in  view  but  their
private  advantages.  And,  for  this  delulion,  in  which  neceffity
had  thegreateft  fhare,  they  faid,  every  city  had,  already,  been,
feverely,  puniffied  by  the  lofs  of  the  belt  of  their  youth ;
fo  that,  it  was  not  eafy  to  find  a  (ingle  family,  that  was  not
in  mourning.  They  defired  the  Romans  would  receive
thofe,  who,  willingly,  fubmitted  to  them,  and  had  no  in¬
tention,  any  longer,  either  to  conteft  the  fovereignty  with
them,  or  to  pretend  to  an  equality ;  but  were  refolved  to
continue,  ever  after,  to  be  their  allies,  and  fubjedls,  and  to
add  to  the  happinefs  of  the  Romans  all  that  dignity,  which
fortune  had  taken  from  the  Latines.  At  the  end  of  their
fpeech,  they  called  upon  the  affinity,  that  fubiifted  between
the  two  nations,  and  put  them  in  mind  of  the  many  occa-
fions,  where  they  had,  formerly,  affifted  them  without  ever
excufing  themfelves,  and  bewailed  the  misfortunes,  that
would  fall  on  the  innocent,  who  were  many  more  in  num¬
ber,  than  the  guilty ;  accompanying  every  thing  they  faid
with  tears;  embracing  the  knees  of  all  the  fenators  ;  and
laying  the  enfigns  of  fuppliants  at  the  feet  of  Poftumius :
So  that,  the  whole  fenate  were  affe&ed,  in  fome  degree,
with  their  tears,  and  intreaties.

XIX.  After  the  embafladors  withdrew,  and  liberty  was
given  to  the  fenators,  who,  ufually,  delivered  their
opinions,  Titus  Lartius,  who  had  been  the  firft  didator,

three


30  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  VI.


1 '  three  years  before,  advifed  them  to  ufe  their  good  fortune
with  moderation,  faying,  that  the  greateft  praife,  that  could
be  given  to  a  whole  people,  as  well  as  to  individuals,  was
not  to  be  corrupted  with  profperity,  but  to  bear  good  for¬
tune  with  temperance,  and  moderation :  For  all  profperity
was  envied,  particularly,  That,  which  was  attended  with
arrogance,  and  rigor  to  the  humbled,  and  fubdued.  That
they  ought  not  to  rely  on  fortune,  they,  who,  by  their  own
adverfity,  and  profperity,  had  experienced  how  inconftant
fhe  is,  and  fubjedt  to  fudden  changes :  Neither  ought  they
to  reduce  their  adverfaries  to  a  neceffity  of  running  the
greateft  hazards,  which  neceffity  renders  men  19  daring  beyond
their  judgement,  and  brave  beyond  their  power.  He  faid,
they  had  reafon  to  be  afraid  of  drawing  upon  thernfelves  the
general  hatred  of  all  they  propofed  to  command,  if  they


l8,  TwzreifehQovlievietvfy.  Sylburgius,
and,  after  him,  M.  ***,  have  obferved
that  Lartius  had  been  didlator  three
years  before.  This  muft,  therefore,  be
an  error  in  the  tranfcriber.

19‘  Tlccgoi  yvufjLv\v  Tohjutfiai——  y.ai  vnzg

oWpv  Whoever  has  read

Thucydides  with  attention  will  fee,  at
firft  fight,  that  our  author  has  imitated
him  upon  this  occafion.  The  Corin¬
thian  embafifadors,  in  comparing  the
character  of  the  Athenians  writh  That
of  the  Lacedaemonians,  fay  of  the  for¬
mer,  or  rather,  1  Thucydides  fays  for
them,  ot  juev,  yui  zraoco  Jwxutv
aai  Trotoo t  yvuuyv  xivJvvsvl  xi,  etc.  I  was
furprifed  to  find  that  Valla  has  tranf-
lated  yvui ajjv,  praeter  hominum


opinionem.  This  I  do  not  take  to  be
the  lenfe  of  the  Greek  words  either  in
Thucydides,  or  in  our  author,  though
I  obferve  that  Portus  has  given  this
fenfe  to  them,  when  he  fays,  praeter
omnem  expert ationem.  As  for  the  French
tranfiators,  their  verfions  of  this  paf-
fage  are  nothing  but  loofe  paraphrafes,
which  deferve  not  to  be  tranlcribed.
But,  to  return  to  this  expreffion,  I  have
rendered  it,  as  if  the  words  were,  «r

rt]V  savlav  yvw/uijv,  not  zsucoo  Ttjv  ttuvluv

j'VWjMiiv,  which  laft  is  the  ienfe  the  two
Latin  tranfiators  I  mentioned,  have
given  to  this  pafiage ;  and  the  former
is  the  fenfe,  I  find,  Hobbes  has  given
to  the  words  of  Thucydides,  when  he
fays,  adventurous  above  their  own  reafon.


1B.  i.  c.  70.


puniffied


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  31

punifhed  the  guilty  in  a  fevere,  and  inexorable  manner,  as  if
they  had  abandoned  their  ufual  maxims,  forgetting  they
owed  to  them  their  prefen t  h litre,  and  transformed  their
fovereignty  from  a  command,  and  a  preeminence,  which
it  was  before,  to  a  tyranny.  He  added  that  errors  are  mo¬
derate,  and  do  not  deferve  indignation,  when  a  people,  zea¬
lous  for  liberty,  and,  formerly,  accuftomed  to  command,
are  tenacious  of  their  ancient  dignity:  And,  if  thofe,  who
aim  at  the  greateft  things,  are  to  be  punifhed  in  an  irrepa¬
rable  manner,  when  they  are  difappointed  of  their  hopes,
nothing  can  hinder  the  whole  race  of  men  from  being  de-
Ifroyed  by  one  another  :  For  all  men  have  an  innate  defire
of  liberty.  He  (hewed  that  the  government,  which  fought
to  fubdue  its  fubje&s  by  benefits,  was  far  better,  and  more
firmly  eftablifiied,  than  That,  which  fought  to  fubdue  them
by  punifhments;  the  former  producing  love,  and  the  latter,
terror.  And  there  was  a  neceffity,  founded  on  nature,  that
everything,  that  was  terrible,  fhould  be,  particularly,  detefted.
At  the  end  of  his  fpeech,  he  defired  they  would  take  example
from  the  bell  actions  of  their  anceftors,  by  which  they  gained
commendation ;  and  he  recounted  the  many  cities  they  had
taken  by  ftorm,  which  they  had  not  demolifhed ;  neither
had  they  killed  the  inhabitants,  who  were  men  grown,  nor
inflaved  them ;  but,  by  making  thofe  cities  Roman  colonies,
and  by  communicating  the  privileges  of  Roman  citizens  to
fuch  of  the  conquered,  as  defired  to  live  at  Rome,  they  had
aggrandized  their  city.  The  fiibftance  of  his  opinion  was,
to  renew  the  treaties  they  had,  before,  made  with  the

Latin


32  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

Latin  nation,  and  to  retain  no  refentment  againft  any  of  the
cities  for  the  errors  they  had  been  guilty  of.

XX.  Servius  Sulpicius  oppofed  nothing  the  other  had  faid
concerning  the  peace,  and  the  renewal  of  the  treaties ;  but
faid  his  opinion  was  (fines  the  Latines  had  firft  violated  thofe
treaties,  and  that  this  was  not  the  firft  time  they  had  done
fo,  which  might  deferve  fome  forgivenefs,  as  they  pretended
neceflity,  and  delufion,  but  they  had,  often,  broken  them  be¬
fore,  which  deferved  correction]  that  impunity,  and  liberty  be
granted  to  all  of  them,  by  reafon  of  their  affinity ;  but  that
one  half  of  their  lands  be  taken  from  them,  and  a  Roman
colony  fent  thither,  among  whom  they  fhould  be  divided  by
lot,  who  would  enjoy  the  produce  of  thofe  lands,  and  pre¬
vent  the  Latines  from  railing  further  difturbances.  Spurius
Caffius  advifed  to  rale  their  cities,  faying  he  wondered  at
the  folly  of  thofe,  who  delired  their  crimes  might  go  un-
punifhed ;  and  who  could  not  fee  that,  through  the  inbred,
and  unalterable  envy,  with  which  they  were  animated  againft
the  riling  power  of  Rome,  they  were,  ever,  contriving  to
raife  fucceffive  wars  againft  them,  and  that  they  would
never,  willingly,  give  over  their  treacherous  deiigns,  while
they  were  poffelled  with  this  unfortunate  pallion:  That
they  had,  lately,  endeavoured  to  reduce  a  people,  related  to
them,  under  the  power  of  tyrants,  more  favage  than  any  wild
beafts,  and  had  trampled  upon  $\\  the  treaties  they  had
fworne  by  the  gods  to  obferve,  being  induced  to  it  by  no
other  hopes  than  that,  if  the  war  did  not  fucceed  according
to  their  expectation,  they  fhould  incur  either  no  punifhment

at


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  33

at  all,  or  a  very  flight  one.  And  he,  alfb,  deflred  them  to
take  example  from  the  actions  of  their  anceftors,  who,  when
they  obferved  the  city  of  Alba,  of  which  they  themfelves,
and  all  the  other  Latin  cities  were  colonies,  to  envy  their
profperity,  and  to  have  made  ufe  of  the  impunity  they  had
obtained  for  their  flrft  tranfgreflions,  as  an  opportunity  of
multiplying  their  treacheries,  they  refolved  to  deftroy  it  in
one  day ;  looking  upon  it  that  there  was  no  difference  be¬
tween  pitying  none,  who  had  committed  fmall  faults,  and
punifhing  none,  who  had  committed  the  greateft,  and  the
moft  incorrigible  crimes :  And  that  it  would  be  an  a <ft  of
great  folly,  and  infenflbility,  not  of  humanity,  and  modera¬
tion  in  thofe,  who  could  not  bear  the  envy  of  their  mother
city,  when  it  appeared  beyond  meafure  grievous,  and
intolerable,  to  fubmit  to  That  of  their  relations;  and
who  had  punifhed  enemies  convicted  of  being  fo  in  fewer
inftances,  by  depriving  them  of  their  country,  to  exadl  no
punifhment  from  fuch,  as  had,  often,  fhewn  their  irrecon-
cileable  hatred  to  them.  Having  faid  this,  and  enumerated
all  the  rebellions  of  the  Latines,  and  put  the  fenate  in  mind
of  the  vaft  number  of  Romans,  who  had  loft  their  lives  in
the  wars  againft  them,  he  advifed  to  treat  them  in  the  fame
manner  they  had,  formerly,  treated  the  Albans ;  to  rafe
their  cities,  and  add  their  territories  to  Thofe  of  the  Romans ;
to  grant  the  rights  of  Roman  citizens  to  fuch  of  the  inha¬
bitants,  as  had  fhewn  any  affedlion  towards  their  common¬
wealth,  and  to  fuffer  them  to  enjoy  their  fortunes ;  to  put  to
death,  as  traitors,  the  authors  of  the  revolt,  by  whom  the
Vol.  III.  F  treaties


34  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

treaties  had  been  diffolved ;  and,  as  to  the  poorer  fort  of  the
people,  the  lazy,  and  the  ufelefs,  to  make  them  ilaves.

XXL  Thefe  were  the  opinions  of  the  leading  men  of  the
fenate :  But  the  di&ator  giving  the  preference  to  That  of
Lartius,  and  no  further  opposition  being  made  to  it,  the
embaftadors  were  called  in  to  receive  their  anfwer  :  When
Poftumius,  after  reproaching  them  with  an  evil  difpofition
never  to  be  reformed,  faid ;  “  We  fhould  do  an  a<ft  of  juftice,
“  if  we  treated  you  with  the  utmoft  feverity,  a  treatment
“  you  had  prepared  for  us,  if  the  many  attempts  you  have
“  made  againft  us  had  fucceeded.  However,  the  Romans
“  have  refolved  not  to  prefer  juftice  to  clemency;  becaufe
“  they  conftder  that  the  Latines  are  their  relations,  and  have
“  had  recourfe  to  the  mercy  of  thofe  they  had  injured  ;  but
“  to  acquit  them  of  the  punifhment  due  to  thefe  offences
“  alfo,  as  well  from  a  regard  to  the  gods,  who  prefide  over
“  confanguinity,  as  to  the  inftability  of  Fortune,  to  whom
“  they  owe  their  victory.  At  prefent,  therefore,  return,
<c  fays  he,  perfectly  free ;  and,  after  you  have  releafed  the
“  prifoners;  delivered  up  the  defer ters,  and  expelled  the
u  exiles,  then  fend  embaftadors  to  us  to  treat  of  friendship,
<£  and  of  an  alliance,  with  this  affurance  that  they  fhall
“  obtain  every  thing,  that  is  reafonable.”  The  embaftadors,
having  received  this  anfwer,  departed :  And,  a  few  days
after,  returned,  having  releafed  the  prifoners,  and  fent  away
Tarquinius,  and  the  exiles;  bringing  with  them  all  the  de-
ferters  they  could  find,  in  chains.  In  confideration  of  which,
they  obtained  of  the  fenate  a  treaty  of  friend  fhip,  and  alliance

upon


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  3  5

upon  the  fame  terms  with  the  former ;  and  renewed  the  oaths,
before  taken  concerning  it,  by  the  interpofition  of  the  Feciales.
Thus  ended  the  war,  which  the  Romans  had  carried  on  againft
the  tyrants,  after  it  had  lafted  fourteen  years  from  their  ex-
pul  fi  on.  After  this,  Tarquinius  (for  he  (till  furvived  his  fa¬
mily)  being,  now,  near  ninety  years  of  age,  and  having  loft
his  children,  and  his  fon-in-law,  paffed  a  miferable  old  age
among  thofe,  who  hated  him ;  and,  when  neither  the  Latines,
the  Tyrrhenians,  the  Sabines,  nor  any  other  free  people
in  thofe  parts,  would  fuffer  him  to  refide  in  their  cities,  he
retired  to  Cumae  in  Campania,  and  was  received  by  Arifto-
demus,  furnamed  Malachus,  who  was,  at  that  time,  tyrant
of  the  Cumaeans :  And,  having  lived  a  few  days  there,  he
died,  and  was  buried  by  him.  Some  of  the  exiles,  who  had
followed  his  fortunes,  remained  at  Cumae ;  and  the  reft,
difperfing  themfelves  in  other  cities,  ended  their  days  in
banifhment.

XXII.  After  the  Romans  had  put  an  end  to  the  foreign
wars,  the  civil  fedition  fprung  up  again  :  For  the  fenate
ordered  the  courts  of  juftice  to  fit,  and  that  all  fuits,  which
they  had  refpited  on  account  of  the  war,  fhould  be  deter¬
mined  according  to  the  laws.  The  contefts,  arifing  from
the  contra&s,  produced  great  ftorms,  and  terrible  inftances
of  an  infolent,  and  fhamelefs  behaviour;  the  common  people
pretending  that,  as  the  country  had  been  laid  wafle  by  a
long  war,  their  cattle  deftroyed,  the  number  of  their  flaves
reduced  by  defertion,  and  the  incurfions  of  the  enemy,  and
the  fortunes  they  had  in  the  city,  confumed  by  their  expences

F  2


in


Book  VI.


36  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

in  the  war,  they  were  under  an  impoffibility  of  paying  their
debts:  And,  on  the  other  fide,  the  creditors  alledged  that
thefe  calamities  had  been  common  to  all,  and  not  confined
to  the  debtors  only,  and  thought  it  was  infufferable  for  them
to  lofe,  not  only,  what  they  had  been  deprived  of  in  the
war  by  the  enemy,  but,  alfo,  what  they  had  lent,  during  the
peace,  to  fome  of  the  citizens,  who  wanted  their  afliftance.
So  that,  the  creditors  fubmitting  to  nothing  that  was  rea-
fonable,  and  the  debtors  to  nothing  that  was  juft,  and  the
former  refilling  to  abate  even  the  intereft,  and  the  latter  to
pay  even  the  principal  itfelf,  frequent  meetings  were  held
by  thofe,  who  were  in  the  fame  circumftances,  and  the
oppofite  parties  faced  one  another  in  the  forum  ;  and,  fome-
times,  fkirmifhes  infued  ;  by  all  which,  the  whole  lyftem  of
the  civil  government  was  difordered.  Poftumius,  who  was,
ftill,  revered  by  men  of  all  ranks,  feeing  this,  thought  it  an
advantageous  meafure  to  refcue  the  commonwealth  from
thefe  civil  ftorms  by  a  difficult  war  ;  and,  before  he  had
finifhed  the  whole  time  of  his  fovereign  magiftracy,  he  ab¬
dicated  the  di&atorfliip ;  and,  having  fixed  a  day  for  the
election  of  confuls,  he,  together  with  his  collegue,  appointed
the  ufual  magiftrates.

XXIII.  The  confuls,  invefted,  again,  with  the  annual,
and  legal  magiftracy,  were  Appins  Claudius  Sabinus,  and
Publius  Servilius  Prifcus;  who,  judging,  rightly,  that  the
greateft  of  all  fervices  they  could  do  to  the  commonwealth,
was  to  divert  the  civil  tumult  to  a  foreign  war,  were
contriving  that  one  of  them  fhould  march  with  an  army

again  ft


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALT C ARN  A  S  S E N S I  S.  37

againft  the  Volfci ;  as  well  to  take  revenge  of  them  for  the
fuccours  they  had  fent  to  the  Latines  againft  the  Romans,
as  to  prevent  their  preparations,  which,  as  yet,  were  not  far
advanced :  For  they,  alfo,  were  reported  to  be  railing  an
army  with  the  greateft  activity,  and  fending  embaffadors  to
the  neighbouring  nations  to  folicit  them  to  enter  into  their
alliance ;  being  induced  to  take  thefe  fteps  from  the  account
they  had  received  that  there  was  a  divilion  between  the
plebeians,  and  the  patricians,  and  from  an  opinion  that  it
would  be  no  difficult  matter  to  make  themfelves  mafters  of
a  city  weakened  by  a  domeftic  war.  The  confuls,  therefore,
having  refolved,  for  thefe  reafons,  to  lead  out  an  army,  and
their  refolution  being  approved  of  by  the  whole  fenate,  they
ordered  all  the  youth  to  prefent  themfelves  on  the  day  they
had  appointed  to  make  their  levies.  But  the  plebeians,
though,  often,  called  to  take  the  military  oath,  not  obeying
the  confuls,  thefe  were,  no  longer,  unanimous.  But,  begin¬
ning  from  hence,  they  divided,  and  continued  to  oppofe  one
another  all  the  time  of  their  magiftracy.  For  Servilius  was
of  opinion  that  they  ought  to  take  the  milder  way,  and
adhere  to  the  maxims  of  Marcus  Valerius,  a  moft  popular
man,  who  advifed  to  apply  a  remedy  to  the  caufe  of  the
fedition,  by  decreeing,  above  all  things,  an  abolition,  or,  at
leaft,  a  diminution  of  the  debts ;  but,  if  That  could  not  be
obtained,  to  forbid,  for  the  prefent,  the  carrying  to  prifon
any  of  the  debtors,  who  had  exceeded  the  day  appointed  for
the  payment  of  their  debts ;  and,  by  exhortation,  rather
than  force,  to  induce  the  poor  to  take  the  military  oath,

and


3 8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

and  not  to  punifh  the  difobedient,  as  in  a  city  where  concord
reigned,  in  a  fevere,  and  inexorable  manner,  but  with  mo¬
deration,  and  mildnefs :  For,  he  faid,  there  was  reafon  to
apprehend  that  men,  in  want  of  the  daily  necefiaries  of  life,
if  compelled  to  ferve  at  their  own  expence,  when  met  to¬
gether,  might  commit  fome  defperate  aft.

XXIV.  On  the  other  fide,  the  opinion  of  Appius,  the
moft  confiderable  perfon  among  the  patrons  of  the  arifto-
cracy,  was  fevere  and  haughty ;  he  advifed  to  indulge  the
people  in  nothing,  but  even  to  allow  the  creditors  to  compel
the  payment  of  the  obligations,  upon  the  terms  they  were
intitled  to,  and  that  the  conful,  who  remained  in  the  city,
fhould  appoint  the  courts  of  juftice  to  fit  according  to  the
eftablifhed  cuftoms ;  that  the  puniftiments,  ordained  by
law,  again  ft  thofe,  who  declined  the  fervice,  be  in  Aided,
and  that  they  ought  to  yield  to  the  people  in  nothing,  that
was  not  founded  in  jufiice,  or  join  with  them  in  eftabliihing
a  deftrudive  power :  For,  fays  he,  they  are,  now,  grown
wanton  beyond  all  meafure,  by  being  difcharged  of  the
tributes  they,  formerly,  paid  to  the  kings,  and  freed  from  the
corporal  punifhments  they  fuffered  from  them,  when  they
did  not,  prefently,  yield  obedience  to  all  their  commands.
But,  if  they  go  further,  and  attempt  any  alteration  in  the
conftitution,  or  to  exalt  themfelves,  let  us  make  ufe  of  the
fober,  and  found  part  of  the  citizens,  who  will  be  found
more  numerous  than  the  difafieded,  tofupprefs  them.  We
are  provided  with  no  fmall  ftrength  to  effed  this,  and  the
patrician  youth  is  ready  to  obey  our  commands :  But  the

moft


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALI  C  ARN ASSENSIS.  39

moft  formidable  weapon  of  all,  and  the  moft  difficult  to  be
refilled,  is  the  power  of  the  fenate ;  armed  with  which  we
ffiall  fubdue  the  plebeians,  and  ftrike  them  with  terror,  while
we  fupport  the  laws :  Whereas,  if  we  relax,  and  grant  their
demands,  in  the  firft  place,  we  ffiall  difgrace  ourfelves  by
giving  up  the  government  to  the  people,  when  we  had  it  in
our  power  to  live  under  an  ariftocracy  ;  and, in  the  next,  we
ffiall  be  expofed  to  the  greateft  danger  of  lofing  our  liberty
again,  if  any  man,  aiming  at  tyranny,  ffiould,  by  courting
them,  acquire  a  power  fuperior  to  the  laws.  The  confuls
conteffing  in  this  manner,  as  well  in  private,  as  when  the
fenate  was  affembled,  and  many  fiding  with  each,  that  af-
fembly,  tired  with  their  altercation,  and  noife,  and  the  in¬
decent  fpeeches,  with  which  they  abufed  one  another,  was
difmiffed,  without  coming  to  any  falutary  refolution.

XXV.  Much  time  being  confumed  in  thefe  things,  the
other  conful,  Servilius  (for  it  had  fallen  to  his  lot  to  command
the  army)  having,  by  great  intreaties,  and  conciliating  the
affe&ions  of  the  people,  prevailed  with  them  to  aflift  in  the
war,  took  the  field  with  an  army  not  raifed  by  compulfion,
but  confifting  of  voluntiers,  as  the  prefent  juncture  required,
while  the  Volfci  were  yet  employed  in  their  preparations,
and  expedled  that  the  Romans,  thus  divided,  and  ingaged
in  mutual  animofities,  would  neither  march  againft  them
with  an  army,  nor  dare  to  refift  them,  if  attacked ;  and
that  they  ffiould  be,  intirely,  at  liberty  to  begin  the  war,  when¬
ever  they  thought  fit :  But,  when  thofe,  who  were  defigned
to  be  attacked,  became  the  aggrefiors,  the  moft  refpe&able

for


4o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

for  their  age  among  the  Volfci,  ftruck  with  the  expedition
of  the  Romans,  went  out  of  their  cities  with  olive  branches ;
and,  delivering  up  themfelves  to  Servilius,  fubmitted  to  fuch
treatment,  as  he  fhould  think  fit  to  infliCt  on  their  offences :
Who,  taking  from  them  provisions,  and  clothes  for  his  army ;
and,  chufing  out  of  the  moft  confiderable  families  three
hundred  hoftages,  departed,  looking  upon  the  war  as  at  an
end.  However,  this  did  not  prove  an  end  of  the  war,  but
rather  a  delay,  and  an  opportunity  of  making  preparations
to  thofe,  who  had  been  furprifed  by  the  unexpected  in-
vafion.  For  the  Roman  army  was  no  fooner  gone,  but  the
Volfci,  again,  prepared  for  war,  by  fortifying  their  towns,
and  reinforcing  the  garrifons  of  fuch  places,  as  were  proper
to  fecure  them  againft  the  enemy.  The  Hernici,  and  the
Sabines  efpoufed  their  quarrel  openly,  and  many  others
privately :  But  the  Latines,  when  embaffadors  were  fent  to
them  to  defire  their  afliftance,  bound  the  men,  and  carried
them  to  Rome.  The  fenate,  in  return  for  their  firm  ad¬
herence  to  their  alliance,  and,  yet  more,  for  the  alacrity
they  fhewed  to  take  a  fhare  in  the  war,  (for  they  were
ready  to  affift  them  of  their  own  accord)  granted  to  them  a
favor  they  knew  they  defired  above  all  things,  but  were
afhamed  to  afk  it,  which  was  to  releafe  the  prifoners  they
had  taken  from  them,  during  the  wars,  without  ranfom,
the  number  of  whom  amounted  to  near  fix  thoufand  ;  and,
in  order  to  give  fuch  a  luftre  to  the  prefent,  as  mod:  became
their  affinity,  they  clothed  them  all  with  the  apparel  proper
to  free  men.  As  to  the  offer  of  their  afliftance,  the  fenate


told


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A S S  EN  S  I  S.  41

told  them  they  did  not  ftand  in  need  of  it ;  and  that  the
national  forces  of  Rome  were  fufficient  to  chaftize  thofe,
who  had  revolted  from  them.  After  they  had  given  this
anfwer  to  the  Latines,  they  pafied  a  vote  for  the  war  againft
the  Volfci,

XXVI.  While  the  fenate  was  yet  fitting,  and  confidering
what  forces  fhould  be  fent  into  the  field,  a  man,  advanced
in  years,  appeared  in  the  forum :  He  was  dreffed  in  rags,
with  his  beard,  and  hair  grown  long ;  and,  crying  out,  called
upon  the  people  for  aftlftance.  And  all,  who  were  near,
flocking  to  him,  he  placed  himfelf  in  a  confpicuous  part  of
the  forum,  and  faid ;  “  I  was  born  free,  and  have  ferved
“  the  whole  time  appointed  by  law;  been  prefentin  twenty
“  eight  battles,  and  have,  often,  received  the  cuftomary
cc  rewards  for  the  fuperior  bravery  I  have  fliewn  in  the  wars;
“  and,  when  the  commonwealth  was  reduced  to  the  laft
“  ftreights  by  the  fe verity  of  the  times,  I  was  forced  to
<£  contract  a  debt  to  pay  the  contributions  levied  upon  me :
<c  My  lands  being  laid  wafte  by  the  incurfions  of  the  enemy,
u  and  my  fortunes,  in  the  city,  exhaufted  by  the  fcarcity  of
<£  proviflons,  I,  for  thefe  reafons,  unable  to  difcharge  the
“  debt,  was  carried  away,  as  a  flave,  by  my  creditor,  with  my
C£  two  fons ;  and  my  mafter  ordering  me  to  do  fome  difficult
££  work,  and  I,  refufing  to  do  it,  was,  feverely,  fcourged.”
After  he  had  faid  this,  he  threw  oft  his  rags,  and  fhewed
his  bread  covered  with  fears,  and  his  back  bleeding  with  the
ftripes.  This  railing  a  general  clamor,  and  lamentation  in
all  prefent,  the  fenate  broke  up,  and  the  poor  ran  through

Vol.  III.  G  every


Book  VI.


42  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

every  Areet,  each  bewailing  his  own  misfortunes,  and  im¬
ploring  the  affiftance  of  his  neighbour.  At  the  fame  time,
all,  who  were  in  flavery  for  their  debts,  ruflaed  out  of  the
houfes  of  their  creditors,  with  their  hair  grown  long,  and
moft  of  them  in  chains,  and  letters,  none  daring  to  lay  hold
(.  them  ;  and,  if  any  offered  to  touch  them,  they  were,
.olently,  torn'e  in  pieces :  Such  a  madnefs  poflefied  the
eople  at  that  time  !  and,  prefently,  the  forum  was  full  of
debtors,  who  had  broken  loofe  from  their  chains.  Appius,
there  lore,  fearing  fome  attempt  from  the  people,  fince  he
Had  been  the  caufe  of  this  mifchief,  fled  from  the  forum.
But  Servilius,  throwing  off  his  robe  bordered  with  purple,  and
calling  himfelf  in  tears  at  the  feet  of  everyone  of  the  plebeians,
with  difficulty  prevailed  upon  them  to  be  quiet  that  day,
and  to  come  the  day  after ;  alluring  them,  the  fenate  would
take  fome  care  of  their  intereft.  Having  faid  this,  he  ordered
the  cryer  to  make  proclamation  that  no  creditor  ffiould  be
at  liberty  to  carry  any  of  the  citizens  to  prifon  for  his  debt,
till  the  fenate  fliould  come  to  a  refolution  concerning  them ;
and  that  all  prefent  might  go,  with  impunity,  whitherfoever
they  pleafed:  By  which  means,  he  appeafed  the  fedition.

XXVII.  Upon  this,  they  left  the  forum  for  that  time:
But  the  next  day,  there  appeared,  not  only,  the  inhabitants
of  the  city,  but  all  the  people  of  the  neighbouring  country,
and  the  forum  was  crowded  by  break  of  day.  The  fenate
being  aflembled  to  confider  what  was  to  be  done,  Appius
called  his  collegue  a  flatterer  of  the  people,  and  the  ring¬
leader  in  their  madnefs :  On  the  other  fide,  Servilius  called

him


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  4-

him  a  fevere,  and  haughty  man,  and  the  caufe  of  the  prefent
mifchiefs.  And  there  was  no  end  of  their  contefts.  In  the
mean  time,  fome  horfemen,  fent  by  the  Latines,  came  riding
full  fpeed  to  the  forum,  and  gave  notice  that  the  enemy
had  taken  the  field  with  a  great  army,  and  were,  already,
upon  their  confines:  This  was  the  account  they  brought.
Upon  which,  the  patricians,  and  the  whole  body  of  the
knights,  together  with  all  thofe,  who  were  diftinguifhed
either  by  their  fortunes,  or  the  luftre  of  their  anceftors,  as
having  a  great  deal  at  flake,  armed  themfelves  in  all  hafte.
But  the  poor,  and,  particularly,  fuch,  as  laboured  under
debts,  neither  meddled  with  amis,  nor  gave  any  other  af-
fiftance  to  the  commonwealth  :  But  were  pleafed,  and  re¬
ceived  the  news  of  a  foreign  war,  as  a  thing,  that  fell  out
to  their  wifh,  looking  upon  it  as  a  cure  for  their  prefent
evils.  To  thofe,  who  defired  them  to  take  arms,  they  fhewed
their  chains,  and  fetters,  and  afked  them,  inderifion,  whether
it  were  worth  their  while  to  make  war,  in  order  to  preferve
thofe  blefimgs.  And  many  went  lb  far  as  to  fay  that  it  was
better  for  them  to  be  Haves  to  the  Volfci,  than  to  bear  the
abufes  of  the  patricians.  And,  now,  the  city  was  filled  with
wailings,  tumult,  and  all  forts  of  womanifh  lamentations.

XXVIII.  The  fenators,  feeing  thefe  things,  begged  of  the
other  conful,  Servilius,  who  feemed,  in  the  prefent  jundlure,
to  have  greater  credit  with  the  people,  to  relieve  his  country.
Who,  calling  the  people  together,  fhewed  them  that  the
necefiity  of  the  times  did  not  admit  of  civil  contefts,  and  be-
fought  them  to  march,  at  that  time,  againft  the  enemy  with

G  2  unanimity,


44  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  VI.

unanimity,  and  not  fuffer  their  country  to  be  fubverted,
in  which  were  the  gods  of  their  fathers,  and  the  fepulchres
of  their  ancedors,  both  mod  precious  in  the  eyes  of  all  men  ;
to  refpeCt  their  parents,  unable,  through  age,  to  defend
themfelves ;  to  compaffionate  their  wives,  who  mud:,  pre-
fently,  be  expofed  to  dreadful,  and  unutterable  abufes ;  and,
particularly,  to  pity  their  infant  children,  who,  though
brought  up  with  better  expectations,  would  be  treated  in  the
mod  injurious,  infulting,  and  cruel  manner :  And,  after
they  had,  by  a  general  effort,  freed  their  country  from  the
prefen t  danger,  then  he  advifed  them  to  confider  in  what
manner  they  fhould  conditute  an  equal,  common,  and  falu-
tary  form  of  government,  in  which  neither  the  poor  might
defraud  the  rich  of  their  fortunes,  nor  thefe  infult  the  low
condition  of  their  inferiors ;  neither  of  which  became  fellow-
citizens  ;  and,  alfo,  what  legal  protection  diould  be  edablifhed
on  behalf  of  the  poor,  and  what  moderate  relief  given  to  the
creditors.  By  this  means,  the  Roman  commonwealth  would
not  be  the  only  one,  from  which  the  faith  of  contracts,
which  is  the  greated  of  all  human  benefits  to  the  injured,
and  the  guardian  of  concord  in  all  governments,  would  be,
totally,  and,  for  ever,  banifhed.  After  he  had  faid  this,  and
every  thing  elfe  the  occafion  required,  he  put  them  in  mind
of  the  affeCtion,  which  he  himfelf  had  ever  fhewn  to  the
people,  and  defired  them  to  ferve  under  him  in  this  expe¬
dition  in  return  for  that  affeCtion,  the  government  of  the
city  being  committed  to  his  collegue,  and  th?  command  of
the  army  conferred  upon  himfelf,  the  lot  having,  thus,  deter¬
mined


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  45
mined  their  refpedtive  functions.  He  faid,  alfo,  that  the
fenate  had  promifed  him  to  confirm  whatever  conceffions  he
fliould  make  to  the  people ;  and  that  he  had  promifed  the
fenate  to  perfuade  the  people  not  to  betray  their  country  to
the  enemy.

XXIX.  Having  faid  this,  he  ordered  the  cryer  to  make
proclamation  that  no  perfon  fliould  be  at  liberty  to  feize,
fell,  or  retain  as  pledges  the  houfes  of  thofe  Romans,  who
fhould  march  out  with  him  againfc  theVolfci,  or  carry  their
children  to  prifon  for  any  debt,  and  that  none  fliould  hinder
any,  who  defired  it,  from  entering  into  the  fervice :  But,
with  regard  to  thofe,  who  fhould  decline  it,  their  creditors
fliould  have  power  to  compel  them  to  pay  their  debts,  upon
the  terms  each  of  them  had  advanced  their  money.  When
the  poor  heard  this,  they,  prefently,  relaxed,  and  all  fliewed
great  ardor  for  the  war ;  fome,  induced  to  it  by  the  hopes
of  booty ;  others,  by  their  affection  to  the  general ;  but  the
greatefl:  part,  to  avoid  the  fury  of  Appius,  and  theabufive  treat¬
ment,  to  which  thofe,  who  (laid  in  the  city,  would  be  expofed.
Servilius,  putting  himfelf  at  the  head  of  the  army,  loft  no
time;  but  marched  with  great  expedition,  that  he  might
ingage  the  enemy,  before  they  entered  the  Roman  territories.
And,  finding  them  incamped  in  the  Pometine  plain,  and
foraging  the  country  of  the  Latines,  becaufe,  when  folicited
by  them,  they  had  refufed  to  affift  them  in  the  war,  he
incamped,  in  the  beginning  of  the  night,  upon  a  hill,  diftant
about  twenty  ftadia  from  the  enemy.  And,  in  the  night,  his
army  was  attacked  by  the  Volfci,  who  thought  they  were

few


46  ROMAN  ANT  I  QJJ  I  TIES  OF  Book  VI.

few  in  number,  tired  with  a  long  march,  and  in  no  difpo-
fition  to  fight,  by  reafon  of  the  commotions  raifed  by  the
poor  concerning  their  debts,  which  feemed  then  to  be  at
their  height.  Servilius  maintained  the  fight  in  his  camp,
as  long  as  the  night  lafted ;  and,  as  foon  as  it  was  day,  when
he  faw  the  enemy  employed  in  plundering  the  country
without  obferving  any  order,  he  commanded  feveral  gates
of  the  camp  to  be  opened  privately,  and,  at  one  fignal,
fallied  out  with  his  army  againft  them.  The  attach  being
fudden,  furprifed  the  Volfci ;  fome  few  of  whom,  making
refiftance,  were  killed  fighting  near  the  intrenchments.
And  the  reft,  flying  with  precipitation,  after  the  lofs  of
many  of  their  companions,  faved  themfelves  in  their  camp,
the  greateft  part  of  them  being  wounded,  and  having  loft
their  arms.  The  Romans,  purfuing  them  clofe,  inverted
them  in  their  intrenchments ;  and,  after  a  fhort  defence,
thefe delivered  up  their  camp,  which  was  full  of  flaves,  cattle,
arms,  and  all  forts  of  military  ftores.  There  were,  alfo,  many
free  men  taken  in  it,  fome  of  them  being  of  the  Volfcian
nation,  and  others,  belonging  to  the  cities,  which  had  aflifted
them  :  And,  with  thefe,  as  great  a  quantity  of  money  both
in  gold,  and  filver,  and  of  apparel,  as  if  the  richeft  city  had
been  taken:  All  which  Servilius  ordered  to  be  divided
among  the  foldiers  that  every  man  might  be  benefited  by  the
booty,  and  no  part  of  it  brought  into  the  treafury  ;  and,
having  fet  fire  to  the  camp,  he  marched,  with  his  army,  to
20  Suefla  Pometia,  being  the  city,  that  lay  neareft:  Which,

Xxtrc*.  See  the  fifty  ninth  annotation  on  the  fourth  book.

for


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  47

for  its  extent,  the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  and,  alfo,  for
its  glory,  and  riches,  was,  by  far,  the  moil  confiderable  city
belonging  to  the  enemy,  and  as  the  capital  of  the  nation.
This  place  he  inverted ;  and,  attacking  it  night,  and  day,
without  intermiflion,  in  order  to  tire  the  enemy  out  with
want  of  fleep,  and  conftant  fervice,  he  fubdued  the  berteged
by  famine,  defpair,  and  fcarcity  of  men  ;  took  the  town  in  a
fhort  time,  and  put  to  death  all  the  inhabitants,  who  were
men  grown  :  And,  having  given  the  effects,  that  were  found
there  alfo,  to  the  foldiers,  he  marched  againft  the  reft  of
the  enemy’s  cities,  none  of  the  Volfci  being,  now,  in  a  con¬
dition  to  oppofe  him.

XXX.  The  Volfci  being,  thus,  humbled  by  the  Romans,
the  other  conful,  Appius  Claudius,  caufed  their  hoftages,  to
the  number  of  three  hundred,  to  be  brought  into  the  forum  ;
and,  to  the  end  that  all  thofe,  who  had  furrendered  to  the
Romans,  and  given  hoftages  for  their  fidelity,  might  be
afraid  of  violating  their  treaties,  he  ordered  them  all  to  be,
publicly,  whipped,  and  then  beheaded.  And,  when  his
collegue,  a  few  days  after,  returned  from  his  expedition,  and
demanded  of  the  fenate  the  honor  of  a  triumph,  ufually
granted  to  generals,  who  had  diftinguiflhed  themfelves  by
their  glorious  exploits,  he  oppofed  it,  calling  him  a  factious
man,  and  the  favourer  of  a  deftru&ive  form  of  government ;
and  charged  him,  particularly,  with  having  brought  no  part
of  the  fpoils  into  the  treafury,  but  given  the  whole  to  thofe
he  thought  fit :  And,  by  this  means,  he  prevailed  upon  the
fenate  not  to  grant  him  the  triumph.  Servilius,  looking

upon


43  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

upon  himfelf  to  be  abufed  by  the  fenate,  behaved  with
an  arrogance  unufual  to  the  Romans:  For,  having;  affem-
bled  the  people  in  the  field  before  the  city ;  enumerated
the  abfions  he  had  performed  in  the  war,  and  acquainted
them  both  with  the  envy  of  his  collegue,  and  the  infult  he
had  received  from  the  fenate,  he  told  them  that,  from  his
own  a&ions,  and  the  army,  which  had  a  fhare  in  them,  he
derived  a  power  of  triumphing  for  the  glorious,  and  for¬
tunate  fuccefs,  with  which  thofe  a&ions  had  been  attended.
And,  having  faid  this,  he  ordered  the  li&ors  to  be  crowned  ;
and  he  himfelf,  wearing  a  crown,  and  attired  in  a  triumphal
robe,  entered  the  city,  attended  by  all  the  people ;  and,
afcending  the  capitol,  performed  his  vows,  and  confecrated
the  fpoils.  By  which  abfion,  he  encreafed  the  envy  of  the
patricians,  but  gained  the  favor  of  the  plebeians.

XXXI.  While  the  commonwealth  was  in  this  unfettled
condition,  a  kind  of  truce  intervened,  caufed  by  the  cufto-
mary  facrifices ;  and  the  feftivals  infuing,  which  were  cele¬
brated  at  a  great  expence,  appeafed  the  fedition  of  the  people
for  the  prefent.  During  the  celebration  of  thefe  feftivals,
the  Sabines  invaded  them  with  a  great  army,  having,  long
fince,  waited  for  this  opportunity:  They  began  their  march
as  foon  as  it  was  dark,  to  the  end  that,  before  the  Romans
were  apprized  of  it,  they  might  approach  the  city :  Which
they  might,  eaftly,  have  taken,  if  fome  of  their  light-armed
men  had  not  ftraggled  from  the  army  ;  and,  by  plundering
the  country  houfes,  given  the  alarm.  Upon  which,  an  out¬
cry  infued,  and  the  hufbandmen  ran  into  the  city  before  the

enemy


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  49

enemy  arrived  at  the  gates.  Thofe  in  the  city  were  informed
of  this  invafion,.  while  they  were  feeing  the  public  enter¬
tainments,  and  crowned  with  garlands  ;  when,  leaving  the
games,  they  ran  to  arms :  And  an  army  of  voluntiers,
prefently,  offered  themfelves  to  Servilius:  Which  he  drew
lip ;  and,  with  them,  fell  upon  the  enemy,  who  were  tired
both  with  want  of  deep,  and  the  length  of  their  march,  and
did  not  expedt  to  be  attacked  by  the  Romans.  When  the
armies  clofed,  a  battle  infued ;  in  which,  neither  fide,
through  eagernefs,  obferved  any  order,  or  difeipline :  But,
as  if  guided  by  fortune,  whole  lines,  companies,  or  fingle
men  ingaged,  and  the  horfe,  and  foot  fought  promifeuouily  :
And,  as  the  two  cities  were  not  far  afunder,  fuccours  arrived
from  both:  Who,  by  encouraging  the  forces,  that  fuffered,
made  them  fuftain  the  fatigues  of  the  ingagement  for  a  long
time.  After  that,  a  body  of  horfe  coming  to  the  afliftance
of  the  Romans,  they,  again,  overcame  the  Sabines ;  and,
having  killed  many  of  them,  returned  to  the  city  with  a
great  number  of  prifoners.  Then,  difeovering  the  Sabines,
who  had  come  to  Rome  under  the  pretence  of  feeing  the
entertainments,  and  defigned  to  have  pofleffed  themfelves  of
the  ftrong  places  of  the  city,  in  order  to  favor  the  attempt
of  their  countrymen,  as  it  had  been  concerted  between  them,
they  threw  them  into  prifon :  And,  having  voted  that  the
facrifices,  which  had  been  interrupted  by  the  war,  fhould
be  performed  with  double  magnificence,  they,  again,  pafied
their  time  in  exultation.


VOL.  III.


H


XXXII.


Book  VI.


So  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

XXXII.  While  they  were  celebrating  thefe  feftivals,
embaffadors  came  to  them  from  the  21  Aurunci,  who  inha¬
bited  the  fineft  olains  of  Campania  :  Thefe,  being  introduced
into  the  fenate,  defired  the  Romans  would  reftore  the  country
to  the  Volfci,  called  Echetrani,  which  they  had  taken  from
them,  and  divided  among  thofe  of  their  own  people,  whom
they  had  fent  thither  as  a  colony,  to  fecure  the  poffeflion  of
that  country ,  and  that  they  would  withdraw  the  guard :
Which  if  they  refufed  to  do,  the  embaffadors  faid  the  Aurunci
would,  foon,  invade  the  territories  of  the  Romans,  and  take
revenge  for  the  injuries  they  had  done  to  their  neighbours.
To  thefe  the  Romans  gave  this  anfvver  :  “  Embaffadors,  let
“  the  Aurunci  know  we  Romans  think  it  juft  that,  what-
“  ever  any  one  has  acquired  from  an  enemy  by  his  valor,
“  he  fhould  leave  it  to  his  pofterity,  as  his  own:  That  we
u  are  not  afraid  of  a  war  from  the  Aurunci,  which  will
“  be  neither  the  fir  ft,  nor  the  moft  formidable  we  have  been
u  ingaged  in ;  it  being  cuftomary  for  us  to  fight  with  all
“  men  for  command,  and  glory:  And,  when  we  fee  the
£C  war  come  to  an  adtion,  we  fhall  receive  it  with  intrepidity.”
After  this,  the  Aurunci,  who  were  come  out  of  their  own
territories  with  a  great  army,  and  the  Romans,  with  their
national  forces  under  the  command  of  Servilius,  met  near  the
city  of  22  Aricia,  which  is  diftant  one  hundred  and  twenty
ftadia  from  Rome.  And  each  of  them  incamped  on  hills,

A^fit «v.  Thefe  were  the  Au-  called,  m  Sejfe.
runci ,  a  people  of  Campania,  whofe  22*  noAs&i?  See  the  thirtieth

principal  city  was  Suejfa  Aurunca ,  now  annotation  on  the  filth  book.

111  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iv.  c.  5.

-  Wrongly,


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A SS  EN  S  I  S.  5 1

ftrongly,  fituated,  not  far  from  one  another.  After  they
had  fortified  their  camps,  they  advanced  to  the  plain,  in
order  to  a  battle :  And,  ingaging  early  in  the  morning,  they
maintained  the  fight  till  noon  :  So  that,  many  were  killed
on  both  fides:  For  the  Aurunci  were  a  warlike  nation;
and,  by  their  feature,  their  ftrength,  and  the  fiercenefs  of
their  looks,  in  which  great  favagenefs  appeared,  they  were
exceeding  formidable.

XXXIII.  In  this  battle,  the  Roman  horfe,  and  their
commander,  Aulus  Poftumius  Albus,  who  had  been  di&ator
the  year  before,  are  faid  to  have  behaved  themfelves  with
the  greateft  bravery  :  For  the  place,  where  the  battle  was
fought,  was  not,  at  all,  proper  for  the  horfe,  being  full  of
rocky  hills,  and  deep  valleys ;  fo  that,  the  horfe  could  be
of  no  advantage  to  either  fide.  Upon  which  occafion,
Poftumius,  having  ordered  the  horfe  to  difmount,  and  formed
a  body  of  fix  hundred  men,  obferving  where  the  Roman  foot
buffered  moft,  being  forced  down  a  hill,  there  he  charged  the
enemy,  and,  prefently,  flopped  their  purfuit.  The  Barbarians
being,  once,  repulfed,  the  Romans  grew  bold,  and  the  foot
emulated  the  horfe :  And  both  forming  one  compact  body,
they  drove  the  right  wing  of  the  enemy  to  the  hill :  Some
purfued  that  part  of  them,  which  fled  towards  their  camp,
and  killed  many :  While  others  attacked  in  the  rear  thofe,
who,  ftill,  maintained  the  fight.  When,  having  forced
thefe,  alfo,  to  fly,  they  followed  them  in  their  difficult,  and
flow  retreat  up  the  fieep  places,  cutting  afunder  the  finews
both  of  their  legs,  and  hams  with  fide  blows  of  their  fwords,

H  2  till


Book  VI.


52  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

till  they  came  to  their  camp ;  and,  having  forced  the  guards
of  this  alfo,  who  were  not  numerous,  they  made  themfelves
mafters  of  their  camp,  and  plundered  it.  However,  they
found  no  great  booty  there,  but  only  arms,  horfes,  and  other
things  proper  for  the  war.  Thefe  were  the  adlions  of  Ser-
vilius,  and  Appius,  during  their  confulfhip.

XXXIV.  They  were  fucceeded  by  23  Aulus  Virginius
Coelimontanus,  and  Titus  Veturius  Geminus,  24  Themiftocles


23*  AvAof  Ovegfrjios  KoiAifjt.ovla.vog.  Si-
gonius  has,  certainly,  great  reafon  to
read  this  conful’s  name  Coelimonta¬
nus,  inftead  of  Montanus,  as  it  Hands
in  the  editions,  and  manufcripts  •,  be-
caule  we  find  he  is  called  lb  in  the
Fajii  confulares.

24'  A(>%ovloe  AG I
find  M.  *  *  *  is  of  opinion  that  this
Athenian  archon  cannot  be  the  great
Themiftocles  :  The  reafon  he  gives
for  it,  is,  that  he  was  too  young  to  be
archon  at  this  time,  that  is,  in  the
fourth  year  of  the  feventy  firft  Olym¬
piad.  I  am  of  a  different  opinion  :  For
which  I  fhall  give  my  reafons  ;  and
then  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  determine
between  us.  In  the  firft  place,  among
all  the  Athenian  archons,  we  find  no
other  Themiftocles,  till  the  fecond  year
of  the  one  hundred  and  eighth  Olym¬
piad  ;  and  it  is  not  probable  that  The¬
miftocles,  who  faved  Athens,  and  all
Greece  from  being  inflaved  by  the
Perfians,  fhould  never  have  been
chofen  archon  by  his  country.  In  the
next  place,  I  fhall  confider  the  reafon,
given  by  that  gentleman  in  fupport  of

"Life  ofThemilL  °In  Laelio,  c.  12.

rB .  ix,  c.  1.  s  B.  i.  c.  93.


his  opinion;  and  fhew  that  Themi¬
ftocles  was  far  from  being  too  young
to  be  chofen  archon  at  this  time.
n  Plutarch  tells  us  that  he  was  fixty
five  years  of  age,  when  he  died.
Now,  it  appears  by  0  Cicero,  and  by
p  Eufebius,  that  Themiftocles  died
in  the  third  year  of  the  feventy  eighth
Olympiad :  From  the  fourth  year  of
the  feventy  firft  Olympiad,  to  the
third  of  the  feventy  eighth,  are  juft
twenty  fix  years  :  So  that,  Themifto¬
cles  muft  have  been  about  thirty  nine
years  of  age  in  the  fourth  year  of  the
feventy  firft  Olympiad  ;  and,  confe-
quently,  he  was  not  too  young  to  have
been  archon  that  year.  Befides,  there  is
great  reafon  to  believe  that  Themi¬
ftocles  had  been  archon  long  before
he  diftinguifhed  himfelf  fo  much  when
the  Perlians  invaded  Greece,  which
was  in  the  firft  year  of  the  feventy  fifth
Olympiad, Calliades  being  then  archon
at  Athens,  as  we  find  both  in  ^  Hero¬
dotus,  and  in  r  our  author  ;  becaufe
s  Thucydides,  in  fpeaking  of  the  port
of  Piraeeus,  which  was  finifhed  by  the
advice  of  Themiftocles,  after  the  re-

P.In  Chronic,  mdl.  <3  In  Urania,  c.  51.


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  53

being  archon  at  Athens,  the  two  hundred  and  (Sixtieth  year
after  the  foundation  of  Rome,  and  the  year  before  the  feventy
fecond  Olympiad,  in  which  25  Tificrates  of  Croton  won  the
prize  for  the  fecond  time.  In  their  confulfhip,  the  Sabines
prepared  to  invade  the  Romans  with  a  greater  army  than
before;  and  the  2<5Medullini,  revolting  from  the  latter,  en¬
tered  into  a  treaty  of  confederacy  with  the  Sabines,  confirmed
by  their  oaths.  The  patricians,  having  intelligence  of  their
defigns,  were  preparing  to  take  the  field,  immediately,  with
all  their  forces :  But  the  plebeians  refufed  to  obey  their  orders,
remembering,  with  refentment,  the  breach  of  promife  they
had,  often,  been  guilty  of  in  relation  to  thofe  poor,  who
wanted  relief;  and  that  the  votes  of  the  fenate  paiTed  in
their  favor,  were,  always,  defeated  by  contrary  votes.  And,
affembling  together  by  degrees,  they  bound  one  another  by
oath,  no  longer,  to  afiift  the  patricians  in  any  war  ;  and  that
they  would  fupport  all  the  poor  in  general,  and  every  one
of  them  in  particular,  againft  any  perfon,  who  fhould  offer
violence  to  them.  This  confpiracy  appeared  upon  many
occafions,  both  in  contefts,  and  fkirmifhes ;  but  the  confuls

treat  of  the  Perfians,  fays  that  it  had  of  the  feventy  firft  Olympiad,
been  begun  before,  during  his  annual  25‘  So  this

magiftracy  ;  uVt ipxIo  J'  ccv la  vrfoltfov  tm  name  muft  be  read  •,  and  not  2/r>?m£«7c£
t>k  wetvx  u(>x,Wi  w  y.al‘  eviuvlov  AQyivaioic  with  the  Vatican,  nor  with

np%e.  This,  in  my  opinion,  plainly  the  Venetian  manufcript ;  becaufe  we
relates  to  the  time,  when  he  was  ar-  1  find  this  man  won  the  prize  of  the
chonj  and,  among  the  Athenian  ar-  ftadium  at  the  preceding  Olympiad,
chons,  no  perfon  of  that  name  is  to  26,  MjJvAAivo/.-  See  the  feventieth
be  found  near  that  time,  as  I  have  annotation  on  the  fecond  book,
faid,  but  the  archon  of  the  fourth  year

'B.v.  c.  77.


had


54  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

had  the  greateft  proof  of  it :  For,  when  they  ordered  any  of
the  people  to  be  feized  for  not  entering  into  the  fervice,
when  fummoned,  the  poor  affembled  in  a  body,  and  en¬
deavoured  to  refcue  the  perfon,  as  he  was  carrying  to  prifon ;
and,  when  the  officers  of  the  confuls  refufed  to  releafe  him,
they  beat  them,  and  drove  them  away  ;  and,  if  any  either
of  the  knights,  or  patricians,  who  were  prefent,  attempted
to  put  a  flop  to  thefe  proceedings,  they  forbore  not  to  ftrike
them :  Thus,  in  a  ffiort  time,  the  city  was  full  of  diforder,
and  tumult.  As  the  fedition  encreafed  in  the  city,  the  pre¬
parations  of  the  enemy  encreafed  alfo.  And  the  Volfci,  and
the  Aequi  forming  a  defign  to  revolt,  embafladors  came
from  all  the  people,  who  were  fubje&s  of  the  Romans,  to
defire  that,  as  their  territories  lay  in  the  paffage  of  the  war,
they  would  fend  them  fuccours :  For  the  Latines  complained
that  the  Aequi  had  made  an  incurflon  into  their  country,
and,  were  then,  laying  wafte  their  lands,  and  had,  already,
plundered  fome  of  their  cities.  And  the  garrifon  in  Cruftu-
meria  ffiewed  that  the  Sabines  were  advanced  near  that
fortrefs,  and  ready  to  beflege  it.  Others  gave  an  account  of
other  mifchiefs,  which  either  had  happened,  or  were  like  to
happen,  and  defired  immediate  affiftance.  Embafladors
from  the  Volfci,  alfo,  came  to  the  fenate  to  demand  before
they  began  the  war,  that  the  lands,  taken  from  them  by  the
Romans,  might  be  reftored.

XXXV.  The  fenate  being  affembled  to  conflder  of
thefe  things,  Titus  Lartius,  efteemed  a  man  of  fuperior
dignity,  and  confummate  prudence,  was  firfl:  called  upon  to

deliver


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.

deliver  his  opinion  ;  when,  rifing  up,  he  laid:  “Tome,
“  fathers,  the  things,  which,  to  others  feem  terrible,  and  to
cc  Band  in  need  of  a  fpeedy  relief,  do  appear  neither  terrible,
“  nor  very  urging,  that  is,  in  what  manner  we  are  to  afliffc
“  our  allies,  and  repulfe  our  enemies :  But  thofe  things,
“  which  they  look  upon  neither  as  the  greateft  of  evils,  nor
“  necefiary  to  be  confidered  at  prefen t,  but  neglect  them  as
“  not  likely,  in  any  degree,  to  hurt  us,  appear  moft  terrible
“  to  me ;  and,  if  we  do  not,  foon,  put  a  flop  to  them,  they

“  will  caufe  a  total  fubverfion,  and  confufion  of  the  com-

*  -  #

“  monwealth:  Thefe  are,  the  difobedience  of  the  plebeians
“  to  the  orders  of  the  confuls,  and  our  own  feverity  againft
“  that  difobedience,  and  the  liberty  they  take.  I  am  of
“  opinion,  therefore,  that  you  ought  to  confider  nothing  elfe
“  at  prefent,  than,  by  what  means,  you  may  eradicate  thefe
“  evils  out  of  the  commonwealth,  and,  all,  with  one  confent
“  prefer  public  to  private  conhderations,  in  every  meafure
“  we  purfue:  For  the  power  of  the  commonwealth,  when
“  unanimous,  is  fufficient  to  give  both  fecurity  to  our  allies,
“  and  fear  to  our  enemies :  But,  when  divided,  as  at  prefent,
“  it  can  effect  neither.  And  I  fhould  wonder,  if  it  did  not,
“  even,  deftroy  itfell,  and  yield  the  victory  to  the  enemy
“  without  any  trouble  :  Which,  by  Jupiter,  and  all  the
“  other  gods,  will,  foon,  happen,  if  we  continue  to  purfue
“  the  fame  principles  of  government.

XXXVL  “  For  we  are  divided,  as  you  fee,  from  one
“  another,  and  inhabit  two  cities;  one  of  which  is  governed
“  by  poverty,  and  necefllty,  and  the  other  by  fatiety,  and

“  pride  ;


56  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

“  pride;  while  modefty,  order,  and  juftice,  by  which  alone
“  every  civil  community  can  be  preferved,  is  to  be  found  in
u  neither:  For  which  reafon,  we  exaCt  juftice  from  one
“  another  by  violence,  and  make  fuperior  ftrength  the
<c  meafure  of  that  juftice;  chuftng  rather,  like  wild  beafts,
“  to  deftroy  our  enemy,  though  we  perifti  with  him,  than,
cc  by  confulting  our  own  fafety,  to  be  preferved  together
<c  with  our  adverfary.  Thefe  things  I  delire  you  will,  feri-
“  oufly,  conftder,  and  deliberate,  particularly,  concerning
“  them,  as  foon  as  you  have  difmified  the  embafladors.
w  As  to  the  anfwers,  to  be,  now,  given  to  them,  This  is  what
u  I  have  to  advife :  Since  the  Volfci  demand  reftitution  of
“  what  we  are  in  pofleftion  of  by  the  right  of  conqueft,  and
“  threaten  us  with  a  war,  if  we  refufe  to  reftore  it,  let  our
“  anfwer  be,  that  we  Romans  look  upon  thofe  acquifitions
cc  to  be  the  moft  honeft,  and  the  moft  juft,  which  we  have
“  acquired  by  the  laws  of  war ;  and  will  not  endure  to  ob-
cc  literate  valor  with  folly,  in  reftoring  them  to  thofe,  who
cc  could  not  keep  them  :  And  that  we  will  endeavour,  by
“  force  of  arms,  both  to  fecure  the  pofleftion  of  them  to  our-
c£  felves,  and  to  leave  it  to  our  pofterity :  Whereas,  if  we  did
a  otherwife,  we  fhould  treat  ourfelves  with  the  feverity  of
“  an  enemy.  As  to  the  Latines,  we  ought  to  commend  their
“  affections,  and  difpel  their  fears,  by  alluring  them  that  we
££  will  not  abandon  them  in  any  danger  they  flhall  expofe
“  themfelves  to  upon  our  account,  while  they  continue
“  faithful  to  us ;  but  will,  fhortly,  fend  a  force  fuflicient  to
“  defend  them.  Thefe  anfwers,  I  judge,  will  be  the  belt,

“  and


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  57

“  and  the  moll  agreeable  to  juftice.  After  the  embaffadors
“  are  difmiffed,  I  think,  we  ought  to  dedicate  the  iirft
£C  meeting  of  the  fenate  to  the  confederation  of  the  tumults
“  in  the  city,  and  that  this  meeting  ought  not  to  be  deferred,
cc  but  appointed  for  to-morrow.”

XXXVII.  Lartius  having  delivered  this  opinion,  and
every  one  applauding  it,  the  embaffadors  received  the  an-
fwers  he  had  advifed,  and  departed.  The  next  day,  the
confuls  affembled  the  fenate,  and  propofed  to  them  to  take
into  confideration  the  means  of  appeafmg  the  civil  diffentions:
When  Publius  Virginius,  a  popular  man,  being  firft  afked
his  opinion,  took  a  middle  way,  and  faid ;  “  Since  the
“  people,  laft  year,  fhewed  the  greateft  earneftnefs  to  ferve
<£  the  commonwealth,  and,  in  conjunction  with  us,  ingaged
“  the  Volfci,  and  Aurunci,  when  they  invaded  us  with  great
“  armies,  I  think  that  all,  who,  then,  aflifted  us,  and  took
<c  their  fhare  in  thofe  wars,  ought  to  be  difcharged  of  their
cc  debts ;  and  that  neither  their  perfons,  nor  fortunes  ought  to
“  be  fubjeCt  to  their  creditors:  That  the  fame  immunity  ought
“  to  extend  to  their  parents,  as  far  as  their  grandfathers ;
“  and  to  their  pofterity,  as  far  as  their  grandchildren  :  And
“  that  all  the  reft  ought  to  be  liable  to  imprifonment  at  the
tc  fuit  of  their  creditors  upon  the  terms  of  their  refpedtive
“  obligations.”  After  him,  Titus  Lartius  faid  ;  “  My  opi-
“  nion,  fathers,  is,  that,  not  only,  thofe,  who  fought,  bravely,
“  in  the  wars,  but  all  the  reft  of  the  people,  alfo,  be  dif-
cc  charged  of  their  debts:  For  this  is  the  only  means  of  re-
“  ftoring  harmony  to  the  whole  city.”

VOL.  III.  I


XXXVIII.


Book  VI.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

XXXVIII.  The  third  perfon,  who  fpoke,  was  Appius
Claudius,  the  conful  of  the  former  year,  who  rofe  up,  and
faid  ;  “  As  often  as  thefe  matters  have  been  debated,  fathers,
“  I  was,  always,  of  the  fame  opinion,  that  is,  never  to  yield
“  to  the  people  in  any  thing,  that  is  not  founded  on  law,
<f  and  juftice;  nor  to  debafe  the  dignity  of  the  common-
“  wealth :  Neither  do  I,  even  now,  change  the  opinion,
<c  which  I,  firft,  entertained:  Fori  fhould  be  the  weakeft  of
“  all  men,  if,  laft  year,  when  I  was  conful,  and  my  collegue
“  oppofed  me,  and  inflamed  the  people  againft  me,  I  reflfted,
“  and  adhered  to  my  refolutions,  unfhaken  by  fear,  and
“  unmoved  by  intreaties,  or  favor ;  and,  now,  when  I  am
“  a  private  man,  I  fhould  demit  myfelf,  and  betray  that
“  liberty  I  contended  for.  I  know  not  whether  you  will
“  call  this  liberty  of  my  mind,  generality,  or  pride;  but,  as
u  long  as  I  live,  I  will  never  depart  from  the  honeft  refo-
“  lution  I  have,  long  fince,  taken,  never  to  introduce  an
“  abolition  of  debts,  myfelf,  in  favor  of  wicked  men ;  but,
ct  even,  to  oppofe,  with  all  my  power,  thofe,  who  endeavour
“  to  introduce  it;  convinced  as  I  am  that  an  abolition  of
tc  debts  is  the  fource  of  all  vice,  and  corruption ;  and,  in  a
u  word,  of  the  total  fubverflon  of  every  commonwealth.
c<  And,  whether  any  one  fhall  think  that  what  I  fay  proceeds
“  from  prudence,  or  madnefs  (fince  I  confider  not  my  own
“  fecurity,  but  That  of  the  commonwealth)  or  from  any
“  other  motive,  I  give  him  free  leave  to  think  as  he  pleafes :
“  But  I  will,  ever,  oppofe  thofe,  who  fhall  introduce  inno-
vations.  And,  fince  the  times,  inftead  of  an  abolition  of

“  debts,


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  II A  L  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  59


cc  debts,  require  a  great  relief,  I  will  acquaint  you  with  the
“  only  remedy  for  the  prefent  fedition,  which  is,  imme-
“  diately,  to  create  a  dictator;  who,  fubjed  to  no  account
ct  for  the  ufe  he  fhall  make  of  his  authority,  will  force  both
cc  the  fenate,  and  the  people  to  entertain  fuch  fentiments,  as
“  are  moft  advantageous  to  the  commonwealth  :  For  no
cc  other  can  be  applied  to  fo  great  an  evil.”

XXXIX.  This  fpeech,  and  motion  of  Appius  was  received
by  the  young  fenators  with  a  tumultuous  applaufe,  when
Servilius,  and  fome  others  of  the  ancient  fenators  rofe  up  to
oppofe  it :  But  they  were  overcome  by  the  young  men,  who
came  thither  for  that  purpofe,  and  ufed  great  violence;
and,  at  laft,  the  motion  of  Appius  carried  it.  After  this,  the
confuls,  ading  in  concert,  when  moft  people  expeded  that
Appius  would  be  declared  didator,  as  the  only  perfon
capable  of  governing  with  the  vigor  requilite  upon  that
occahon,  they  excluded  him,  and  created  "7  Manius  Valerius,


Mi xviov  OooiKt^ov.  Sigonius  has
{hewn,  in  a  note  upon  Livy,  that  we
muff  read  Manius,  and  not  Marcus.
His  brother  Marcus  was  flain  in  the
battle,  that  was  fought  near  the  lake
Regillus,  as  v  our  author  has,  already,
-told  us.  The  confuls  fhewed  more
moderation,  upon  this  occafion,  than
the  fenate,  and,  probably,  faved  their
country  by  it :  For  no  body  can  fay
what  might  have  been  the  confequence
if  the  latter  had  conferred  the  didtator-
fhip  on  a  man  of  fo  imperious  a  tem¬
per  as  Appius, whom  the  people  looked
upon  as  their  capital  enemy,  and  the
author  of  the  breach  of  promife,  which

v  C.  iz.


the  fenate  had  been  guilty  of:  But  wLivy
will  explain  the  reafon,  that  induced
the  fenate  to  prefer  the  violent  advice
of  Appius  to  the  moderate  advice  of
Virginius  :  Medium  maxims,  et  mode-
ratum  utrcque  confilium  Virginii  habe-
batur.  Sed,  fadtione,  refpedtuque  re¬
rum  privatarum,  quae  femperoffecere,
officientque  publicis  confiliis,  Appius
vicit :  ac  prope  fuit  at  dictator  ille  idem
crearetur.  quae  res  utique  alienaffet  ple-
bem  periculofijfimo  tempore ,  quum  Volfci ,
Aequique ,  et  Sabini  forte  ana  omnes  in
armis  eJJ'ent.  Sed  curae  fait  confulibus  et
fenioribiLS  pat  rum,  at  imperiwn ,  fuo  ve~
hemens,  manfueto  permitteretur  ingenio.

w  B.  ii.  c.  30.

I  2  a  bro-


»


60  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

a  brother  of  Publius  the  firft  conful,  di&ator  ;  a  perfon  in
years,  and  like  to  approve  himfelf  a  moft  popular  man  :
For  they  looked  upon  the  terror  alone  of  this  magiftracy  to
be  fufficient ;  and  that  the  prefent  fituation  of  affairs  required
a  perfon  mild  in  all  refpedts,  that  he  might  occafion  no  frefh
difturbances.

XL.  After  Valerius  was  inverted  with  this  magiftracy,  he
appointed  Quintus  Servilius,  brother  toServilius,  who  had  been
the  collegue  of  Appius,  to  be  his  general  of  the  horfe,  and
fummoned  the  people  to  an  affembly.  And  great  numbers
aftifting  for  the  firft  time  fince  Servilius  had  refigned  his
magiftracy,  and  the  people,  by  being  forced  into  the  fervice,
had  been  driven  to  open  defpair,  he  afcended  the  tribunal,  and
faid ;  “  Citizens,  we  are  very  fenftble  that  you  take  a  pleafure
cc  in  being,  always,  governed  by  fome  of  the  Valerian  fa-
<c  mily  ;  by  whom  you  were  freed  from  a  fevere  tyranny,  and
“  never  failed  of  obtaining  any  thing,  that  was  reafonable,
“  when  you  placed  your  confidence  in  thofe,  who  are  looked
“  upon,  and  are,  the  moft  popular  of  all  men.  So  that,  I
“  need  not  inform  you  that  we  fhall  fecure  to  you  that  liberty,
“  which  we,  at  firft,  beftowed  upon  you ;  but  only  exhort
£C  you,  in  few  words,  to  be  afiured  that  we  fhall  perform
cc  whatever  we  promife  you  :  For  I  am  arrived  to  that
“  maturity  of  age,  which  is  the  leaft  capable  of  impofition,
<£  and  to  that  fufficiency  of  dignity,  which  abhors  the  leaft
a  appearance  of  deceit :  Add  to  this,  that  I  fhall  pafs  the
“  remainder  of  my  life  among  you,  accountable  to  you  for
u  any  practice  you  may  think  I  have  made  ufe  of  to  infnare

“  you.


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC AH NASSENSIS.  in
££  you.  Thefe  things  I  fliall  omit  as  requiring  not  many
“  words,  as  I  faid,  becaufe  I  fpeak  to  thofe,  who  are  ac-
££  quainted  with  them.  But  there  is  one  thing,  which,
££  having  buffered  from  others,  you  feem,  with  reafon,  to
££  fufped  of  all ;  you  have,  ever,  obferved  that  the  confuls,
cc  when  they  want  to  ingage  you  to  march  againft  the
££  enemy,  promife  to  obtain  for  you  what  you  defire  of  the
££  fenate;  but  never  perform  any  thing  they  have  promifed :
££  That  you  can  have  no  reafon  to  entertain  the  fame  fufpi-
“  cions  of  me  alfo,  I  will  convince  you,  chiefly,  by  thefe
££  two  confederations ;  the  firft,  that  the  fenate  would  never
“  haveabufed  my  perfon,  who  am  looked  upon  as  the  greateft
<c  patron  of  the  people,  by  impofing  this  office  upon  me,
C£  when  there  are  others  fitter  for  it ;  and  the  other,  that
££  they  would  not  have  honoured  me  with  this  fovereign
<£  magiftracy,  by  which  I  am  inverted  with  a  power  of  en-
£C  ading  whatever  I  think  bert,  even  without  their  parti-
££  cipation.

XLI.  ££  Imagine  not,  then,  that  I  am  capable  of  joining
C£  with  them  to  deceive  you,  or  that  I  have  concerted  with
££  them  any  criminal  defign  againft  you:  For,  if  you  enter-
££  tain  thefe  thoughts  of  me,  as  if  I  was  the  rnoft  deceitful
££  of  all  men,  treat  me  as  you  pleafe;  but  believe  what  I
£<  I  fay,  and  banifh  this  fufpicion  from  your  minds :  Turn
£C  your  anger  from  your  friends  to  your  enemies,  who  are
££  coming  with  a  defign  to  take  your  city,  to  transform  you,
££  from  free  men,  to  flaves,  haftening  to  inflid  every  other
££  fe verity  on  you,  which  mankind  ftands  moft  in  fear  of,  and

££  are,


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

u  are,  now,  faid  to  be  not  far  from  your  confines.  Receive
“  them,  therefore,  with  alacrity,  and  fhew  them  that  the
“  power  of  the  Romans,  though  agitated  with  fedition,  is
“  fuperior  to  any  other,  when  unanimous ;  and  be  allured
u  they  will  either  not  fuftain  our  united  attack,  or  fuller
Cl  condign  punifhment  for  their  boldnefs.  Confider  that
“  thefe  men,  who  invade  you,  are  Volfci,  and  Sabines,  whom
ct  you  have,  often,  overcome  in  battle;  who  have  neither
“  larger  bodies,  nor  braver  minds  now,  than  thofe  you,  be-
cc  fore,  conquered,  and  only  defpife  you,  becaufe  they  think
u  you  divided.  When  you  have  taken  revenge  on  your
<c  enemies,  I  myfelf  undertake  that  the  fenate  will  reward
u  you,  both  by  compofing  thefe  contefts  concerning  the
(C  debts,  and  by  granting  every  thing  elfe  you  can,  reafon-
cc  ably,  defire  of  them,  in  a  manner  adequate  to  the  valor
“  you  fhall  fhew  in  the  war.  And,  till  then,  let  all  the
“  pofleffions,  all  the  perfons,  and  all  the 2S  families  of  every

nacra  Si  < rvfyivoia.  The  editions,  fenfe,  which  it  will  alfo  bear,  I  mean
and  manufcripts  have  txclgo.  Si  t7rihfAta,  That  of  a  Fine ,  the  expreffion  will  be,
which  all  the  tranflators  have  endea-  equally,  abfurd  :  For  it  will  then  fig-
voured  to  make  fomething  of,  except  nify,  Let  their  Fines  he  difcharged  of
]e  Jay,  who  has  left  it  out.  The  others  debts.  Reduced,  therefore,  to  this  al-
have~  rendered  it.  Honor ,  Reputation ,  ternative,  either  to  write  nonfenle,  or
or  fomething  equivalent.  This  is,  to  make  an  alteration  in  the  text,  I
certainly,  the  fenfe  of  the  word  ;  but,  have  chofen  the  latter,  and  fubftituted
how  will  this  fenfe  agree  with  the  con-  cvfyivnoi  to  n rHi[jucc.  But,  in  order  to
ftrudtion  ?  Valerius  fays,  according  to  juftify  this  alteration,  I  fhall  lay  before
the  text,  as  it  ftands,  aCpeichu  xxaGct  the  reader  the  declaration  made  by
nnlivua,  #ppv<ri«s’Cf  «tto  t s  Sav&x,  etc.  Servilius  not  long  before,  which  very
.that  is,  let  all  the  reputations  of  the  much  refembles  this  :  x  He  there  fays;
Romans  he  difcharged,  of  debts  without  tag  txIuv  omiotg  fa^Siva  t^etvai  Kali-
fecurity.  It  be  taken  in  another  U  araAftv,  fAyjU  lyiyv^a^av^  jw»j7g

*  C.  29.


“  Roman


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I  S.  63

cc  Roman  citizen  be  difcharged  without  fecurity  both  from
“  debts,  and  every  other  obligation  :  And  to  thofe,  who
cc  fhall  fight  bravely,  the  mod  glorious  crown  of  victory
“  will  be  the  prefervation  of  their  country,  which  gave  them
iC  birth  ;  and  glorious  will  be  the  praife  they  will  receive
<£  from  their  fellow-foldiers,  together  with  the  ornaments
“  to  be  bellowed  by  us,  which  will  be  fufficient  both  to
££  redore  their  fortunes  by  their  value,  and  to  illuflrate
££  their  families  by  their  honors.  I  defire,  alfo,  that  my
££  alacrity,  in  expofing  myfelf  to  danger,  may  be  your  ex-
££  ample  :  For  I  will  fight  for  my  country  with  the  fame
££  fpirit,  as  the  mod  robud  among  you.”

XLII.  While  he  was  fpeaking,  the  people  heard  him  with
great  pleafure,  as  fearing  no  more  to  be  impofed  upon  ;
and  promifed  their  afliftance  in  the  war :  Ten  legions  were
raifed,  every  one  of  which  confided  of  four  thoufand  men  :
Of  thefe  each  of  the  confuls  took  three,  and  as  many  of  the
horfe,  as  belonged  to  the  three  legions  :  The  other  four,  to¬
gether  with  the  red  of  the  horfe,  were  commanded  by  the
dictator :  And,  having  got  every  thing  ready,  they  took  the
field  immediately,  Titus  Veturius  marching  againd  the
Aequi,  Aulus  Virginias  againd  the  Volfci,  and  the  dictator
himfelf  againd  the  Sabines.  The  city  was  guarded  by  Titus

r  EN  O  £  avlcdv  ot7Tc/Seiv  ptvjiv  trvu&o-  mis,  if  we  read  befides  tire

Aotiov.  By  this,  it  appears  that  the  fa-  inconvenience,  already,  mentioned:
milies  of  the  debtors  were  liable  to  be  Whereas,  if  we  read  a-vfycvHoi,  this
carried  to  prifon  for  the  debts  of  the  immunity  will  be  provided  for,  and
mafters  of  them.  This  exemption,  that  word  will  have  the  fame  fignin-
which  was  a  very  material  one,  will  cation  in  the  declaration  of  Valerius
be  omitted  in  the  declaration  of  Vale-  with  ytvi?  avluv  in  That  of  Servilius.

Lartius


64  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

Lartius  with  thofe  of  a  more  advanced  age,  and  a  fmall  body
of  the  younger  fort.  The  Volfcian  war  was  foon  determined  :
For,  looking  upon  themfelves  as  much  fuperior  in  number,
and  forgetting  their  former  defeats,  they  were  forced  to  fight
with  greater  hafte,  than  prudence  ;  and  firft  attacked  the
Romans,  which  they  did,  as  foon  as  they  had  incamped
within  fight  of  one  another  :  And  a  fharp  battle  infuing,  in
which  they,  having  performed  many  brave  actions,  and
fuffered  greater  Ioffes,  were  put  to  flight :  Their  camp  was
taken,  and  a  city  of  note  reduced  by  a  fiege  :  The  name  of
which  was  29  Velitrae.  In  the  fame  manner,  the  pride  of  the
Sabines  was,  alfo,  humbled  in  a  very  fhort  time,  the  two
nations  defiring  to  decide  the  fate  of  the  war  by  one  battle.
After  which,  their  country  was  laid  wafte,  and  fome  fmall
towns  were  taken,  in  which  the  foldiers  found  many  flaves,
and  great  riches.  The  Aequi,  who  fufpe&ed  their  own
weaknefs,  being  informed  of  the  event  of  the  war  with  their
allies,  incamped  in  their  faftneffes,  declining  an  ingagement ;
and,  retreating,  as  they  could,  through  woods,  and  over  the
tops  of  mountains,  they  deferred  the  conclufion  of  the  war
for  fome  time  :  But  were  not  able  to  preferve  their  army
unhurt  to  the  laft,  the  Romans,  boldly,  falling  upon  them,
though  defended  by  fteep  places,  and  taking  their  camp  by
fiorm.  After  which,  they  fled  out  of  the  territories  of  the
Latines ;  and  the  cities  they  had  taken  in  their  firft  irruption,
were  furrendered,  and  Thofe,  of  which  they,  obftinately,
defended  the  citadels,  were  taken.

29*  Ouf*i7o«i.  See  the  thirty  eighth  annotation  on  the  third  book.

XLIII.


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  65

XLIII.  Valerius,  having  fucceeded  in  this  war  accord-
ing  to  his  delire,  triumphed,  in  the  ufual  manner,  on  account
of  his  victory,  and  aifcharged  the  people  from  the  fervice,
which  the  fenate  looked  upon  as  premature,  fearing  the
poor  might  demand  the  execution  of  their  promifes.  After
this,  he  fent  a  colony  to  pofiefs  the  lands  they  had  conquered
from  the  Volfci,  chufing  out  the  poorer  fort  for  this  purpofe,
to  the  intent  they  might,  not  only,  fecure  the  conquered
country,  but,  alfo,  leffen  the  number  of  feditious  citizens.
Having  done  this,  he  defired  the  fenate  to  perform  the  pro¬
mifes  they  had  made  to  him,  fince  they  had,  now,  received
the  fruits  of  the  alacrity  the  people  had  (hewn  in  the  late
ingagements.  However,  the  fenate  paid  no  regard  to  him ;
but,  as  before,  the  young,  and  violent  men,  who  were  fu-
perior  to  the  others  in  number,  had  formed  a  fa&ion  to
oppofe  that  motion,  fo  they,  now,  oppofed  it  in  the  fame
manner,  and  clamoured,  violently,  againft  him,  calling  his
family  the  flatterers  of  the  people,  and  the  authors  of  dc-
ftrudtive  laws.  And  Valerius,  being  informed  that  thefe  men,
particularly,  complained  of  the  appeal  from  the  courts  of
juftice,  given  by  the  Valerian  law,  as  of  an  inftitution,  by
which  the  power  of  the  patricians  was,  totally,  fub verted,
he,  greatly,  lamented  his  misfortune;  and,  reproaching  them
with  having  3°expofed  hirn  to  the  unjufl:  refentment  of  the

3°*  vV  ctvluv  tov  have  encouraged  fuch  an  accufation.

Jvpov.  The  tranflators  have  underftood  Valerius  complains  that  the  fenate,  by
this  as  if  the  enemies  of  Valerius  had  violating  the  promife  they  had  made
accufed  him  to  the  people  :  But  this  to  him,  and  he,  by  their  direction,  to
is  not  the  fcnfe-,  the  people  would  not  the  people,  had  expofed  him  to  their  ro-

Vol.  III.  K  people,


66  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VI.

people,  he  bewailed  the  unfortunate  events,  with  which  their
refolutions  would  be  attended ;  and,  as  it,  often,  happens
in  fuch  diftrefs,  having  foretold  fome  things  from  the  emo¬
tion  he  was  then  under,  and  others  from  his  fuperior
fagacity,  he  went  out  of  the  fenate  ;  and,  affembling  the
people,  he  faid ;  “  Citizens,  finding  myfelf  under  great
“  obligations  to  you  for  the  alacrity  you  have  exprefled
“  in  giving  your  voluntary  afliftance  in  the  war  at  my
u  defire,  and  (till  more  for  the  bravery  you  have  Ihewn
“  in  the  feveral  ingageinents,  I  was  very  defirous  of  making.
<£  a  return  to  you  in  all  things,  particularly  in  not  difap-
££  pointing  the  hopes  I  gave  you,  in  the  name  of  the  fenate ;
££  and,  as  an  advifer,  and  umpire  between  the  fenate,  and
££  you,  in  changing,  at  laft,  the  divifion,  that,  now,  fubfifts
££  between  you,  into  a  perfect  harmony.  I  am  hindered
££  from  effecting  thefe  things  by  thofe,  whofe  fentiments  are
££  not  the  moft  advantageous  to  the  commonwealth  ;  who
“  prefer,  upon  this  occafion,  the  gratification  of  their  own
“  defires  to  its  interefl: ;  and  who,  being  fuperior  to  the
t£  others  both  in  number,  and  the  power  they  derive
££  from  their  youth,  rather  than  from  their  caufe,  have
££  prevailed  :  While  I  myfelf,  as  you  fee,  am  old,  and  fo
££  are  all  my  affiftants,  whofe  ftrength  confifts  in  counfel,
u  which  they  are  incapable  of  fupporting  by  action ;  31  and

fentment,  which,  with  great  reafon,  3**  K mi  etc.  H.  Stephens

he  calls  unjuft,  fince  it  ought  to  have  has  obferved  that  our  author  has  imi-
been  dire&ed  againft  the  fenate,  and  tated  Thucydides  upon  this  occafion.
not  againft  him-,  as  it,  really,  hap-  The  paftage  he  has  imitated  is  in  the
pened  afterwards.  fpeech  of  the  Corcyraeans  to  the  Athe-

a  our


Book VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARNASSENSIS.  67

tc  our  known  zeal  for  the  commonwealth,  in  general,  has
u  ended  in  drawing  upon  us]  the  private  refentment  of  both
“  parties:  Fori  am  cenfured  by  the  fenatefor  courting  you,
“  and  by  you  for  (hewing  greater  aftedfion  to  them.

XLIV.  a  If,  therefore,  the  people,  after  they  had  received
C£  the  favors  they  afked,  had  violated  the  promifes  made  by
££  me  to  the  fenate  in  their  name,  my  apology  would  have
££  been,  that  you  were  the  deceivers,  but  that  I  myfelf  was
££  guilty  of  no  deceit.  Now,  fince  the  promifes,  made  to
“  you  by  the  fenate,  have  not  been  performed,  I  am  under
“  a  neceflity  of  making  it  appear  to  the  people,  that  I  am
“  fo  far  from  having  any  hand  in  the  treatment  you  have
“  met  with,  that  both  you,  and  I  are,  equally,  impofed
C£  upon,  and  circumvented  ;  and  I  fo  much  more  than  you,
££  as  I  am,  not  only,  injured  in  being  deceived  in  common
<£  with  you  all,  but  am,  alfo,  hurt  in  my  own  reputation,
cc  in  being  accufed  of  having  given  leave  to  the  poorer  fort
“  to  convert  the  fpoils  taken  from  the  enemy  to  their  private
ct  advantage,  without  the  confent  of  the  fenate;  which  is
€£  interpreted  to  be  taking  upon  myfelf  to  divide,  as  I  think
“  fit,  the  property  of  the  citizens ;  and  of  having  difcharged

nians,  where  they  fay;  y  k  ai  tfigu-wiv  make  ufe  of  another  word  of  the  fame
jj*  Jskxvoc  Yiy.m  srfolgjov  ccoQ(>c<r\j\‘ k,  to  import.  I  am  very  far  from  being
gv  cth.Aol(itxZv[AuciXKx,  T_vj  ta  fond  of  my  tranflation  oi‘  this  paiTage;

vw  a£%hix  jc ai  a&wa  but  I  hope  the  reader  will  be  better
(poavcyAvYj.  Sylburgius  advifes  to  change  plealed  with  my  attempt  to  tranflate
©gjojugyv:,  in  our  author,  to  it,  than  if,  in  imitation  of  my  brother

becaufe  it  is  fo  in  Thucydides.  But  tranflators,  I  had  given  him  a  para-
this  I  look  upon  to  have  been  the  phrafe  of  it.
very  reafon,  that  induced  Dionyfius  to

r  B.  i.  c.  32.

K  2


you


Book  VI.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

tc  you  from  the  fervice,  contrary  to  law,  and  to  32  their  de-
“  fire,  when  I  ought  to  have  kept  you  in  the  enemy’s  coun-
“  try,  and  employed  you  in  ineffectual  incampments,  and
“  marches.  I  am,  alfo,  reproached  with  having  fent  a  colony
“  into  the  territories  of  the  Volfci,  and  with  having  granted
“  a  large,  and  fertil  country,  not  to  the  patricians,  and  the
££  knights,  but  to  thofe  among  you,  who  wanted  relief.
“  But  the  thing,  which  has  excited  the  greateft  indignation
“  againft  me,  is,  that,  in  railing  the  army,  more  than  four
“  hundred  plebeians  of  good  fortunes  have  been  added  to  the
<£  knights,  If,  therefore,  I  had  been,  thus,  treated,  when  I
“  was  in  the  vigor  of  my  youth,  I  fhould  have  fhewn  them
<£  what;  kind  of  a  man  they  had  abufed  :  But,  as  I  am,
C£  now,  above  feventy  years  old,  and  incapable  of  doing
££  myfelf  juftice,  and  find  that  your  divifions  can  be,  no
££  longer,  healed  by  me,  I  refign  my  power,  and  fubmit  my
“  perfon  to  be  treated  by  thofe,  who  may  think  I  have  de-
u  ceived  them,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  they  fhall  think  fit.”

XLV.  This  fpeech  raifed  a  general  compaffion  in  the
people,  who  accompanied  Valerius,  when  he  left  the  forum ;
but  encreafed  the  refentment  of  the  fenate  againft  him.
Immediately,  the  following  events  happened:  The  poorer
fort,  no  longer  privately,  and  in  the  night  as  before,  but,
openly  now,  affembling,  confulted  together  concerning  a
feceffion  from  the  patricians :  To  prevent  which,  the  fenate
ordered  the  confuls  not  to  difband  the  armies  as  yet For

32*  Hf  yt  I  am,  intirely,  of  Cafaubon’s  opinion,  who  thinks  the

text  corrupted  in  this  place.

thefe


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNA  S  SENS  I  S.  69

thefe  had,  Hill,  a  power  over  the  legions,  who  were  under
the  obligation  of  their  military  oaths,  and,  for  that  reafon,
deemed  holy,  and  none  of  the  foldiers  ventured  to  defert
their  enhgns :  So  far  did  the  fear  of  violating  their  oaths
prevail  with  all  of  them.  The  pretence,  contrived  for
leading  out  the  forces,  was,  that  the  Aequi,  and  Sabines,  had
entered  into  an  union  with  a  defign  to  make  war  upon  the
Romans.  After  the  confuls  had  marched  out  of  the  city
with  the  armies,  and  incamped  near  to  one  another,  the
foldiers  of  both  camps  aflembled  together;  and,  having
feized  both  the  arms,  and  the  enhgns,  they  carried  away  the
latter,  at  the  inftigation  of  Sicinnius  Bellutus,  and  feceded
from  the  confuls  (for  thefe  enfigns  are  held  in  the  greateft
honor  by  the  Romans  in  time  of  war,  and,  like  ftatues  of
the  gods,  are  accounted  holy)  and,  having  apppointed  other
officers,  and  Sicinnius  their  commander  in  chief,  they  pof-
feffed  themfelves  of  a  33  certain  mountain,  near  the  river
Anio,  not  far  from  Rome,  which,  from  thence,  is,  ftill,
called  the  holy  mountain.  And,  when  the  confuls,  and  the
reft  of  the  officers  perfuaded  them  to  return  with  prayers,
tears,  and  many  promifes,  Sicinnius  anfwered ;  “  To

C£  what  purpofe,  patricians,  do  you,  now,  recal  thofe,  wrhom
“  you  have  driven  from  their  country,  and  transformed
“  from  free  men  to  flaves  ?  What  affurances  will  you  give

33*  Ogog  ri  jc xIxAet/uCavovlai.  This  Sacrum  Montem  fecejjijje  tram  Antenem
mountain  was  three  Roman  miles  Anmem ,  tria  ab  urbe  millia  pajfuum.
from  Rome,  on  the  other  fide  of  the  On  this  hill,  there,  now,  Hands  a
Anio,  as  we  learn  from  z  Livy  :  In  caftle,  called,  a  Caftello  di  S,  Silvejiro.

ZB.  ii.  c.  32,.  aCIuver,  Ital.  Antiq,  B,  ii,  c-  9,


I


70  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

“  us  for  the  performance  of  thofe  promifes,  which,  it  is
“  plain,  you  have,  already,  fo  often  violated  ?  But,  fmce
<c  you  defire  to  have  the  foie  pofteffion  of  the  city,  return
“  thither  undifturbed  by  the  poor  and  the  obfcure:  We
“  fhall  be  content  to  live  in  any  part  of  the  world,  in  which
“  we  may  enjoy  our  liberty ;  and,  wherever  it  may  be,  we
“  fhall  look  upon  that  place,  as  our  country/ *

XL VI.  When  thofe  in  the  city  were  informed  of  thefe
things,  there  was  a  great  tumult,  and  lamentation,  and  a
concourfe  in  every  ftreet ;  the  people  preparing  to  leave  the
city,  and  the  patricians  endeavouring  to  difluade  them,
and  offering  violence  to  thofe,  who  relufed  to  obey.  And  a
great  clamor,  wailing,  and  hoftile  words  were  heard  at  the
gates,  and  hoftile  actions  committed,  while  none  diftinguifhed
either  age,  friendfhip,  or  the  dignity  due  to  virtue.  When
the  guards,  appointed  by  the  fenate  to  prevent  the  people
from  going  out  of  the  city,  being  few  in  number,  were  un¬
able,  any  longer,  to  refift  them,  and  forced  from  their  poft,
the  people  rufhed  out  in  great  multitudes,  and  the  face
of  things  appeared  like  a  city  taken  by  ftorm;  and  the
lamentations  of  fuch,  as  were  left  behind,  and  the  mutual
accufations  were  heard  of  thofe,  who  faw  the  city  upon  the
point  of  being  deferted.  After  this,  there  were  frequent
confultations  in  the  fenate,  where  the  perfons,  who  had  given
occaffon  to  the  feceffion,  were,  feverely,  cenfured.  At  the  fame
time,  their  enemies,  alfo,  invaded  them,  laying  wafte  their
territories  to  the  gates  of  Rome.  However,  the  feceders,
taking  the  necefiary  proviffons  from  the  country,  that  lay

near


>


Book VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENSIS.  71

near  them,  without  doing  any  other  mifchief  to  it,  remained
in  the  field,  and  received  liich,  as  reforted  to  them  from,
the  city,  and  the  neareft  fortreftes,  who  were,  already,  come
to  them  in  great  numbers  :  For,  not  only,  thofe,  who  were
defirous  to  fly  from  their  debts,  judgements,  and  other
feverities  they  expected,  flocked  to  them,  but  many  others
alfo,  who  led  lazy,  or  difiolute  lives,  or  whofe  fortunes  were
not  fufficient  to  gratify  their  paftions ;  or  men  of  bad
principles,  or  envious  of  the  profperity  of  others ;  or,
through  any  calamity,  or  other  caufe,  enemies  to  the  prefent
eftablifhment.

XLVII.  The  patricians,  at  firft,  were  full  of  diforder,
and  aftonifhment,  fearing  left  the  feceders  fhould  join  with
their  foreign  enemies,  and,  prefently,  beflege  the  city.
After  that,  they  took  arms  at  once,  as  if  the  fignal  had  been
given ;  and,  being  attended  with  their  clients,  fome  ported
themfelves  in  the  roads,  by  which  they  expedted  the  enemy
would  approach;  others  marched  to  the  fortrefies  in  order
to  fecure  them  ;  and  others  incamped  in  the  fields  before
the  city :  And  thofe,  who,  by  reafon  of  their  age,  were
unable  to  do  any  thing  of  this  kind,  placed  themfelves  upon
the  walls.  But,  when  they  heard  that  the  feceders  did
neither  join  the  enemy,  lay  wafte  the  country,  nor  do  any
other  mifchief  worth  fpeaking  of,  they  were  freed  from
their  fears;  and,  changing  their  refolutions,  confidered,
upon  what  terms,  they  fhould  come  to  an  agreement  with
them  :  And  fpeeches  of  every  kind,  diredtly  oppofite  to
one  another,  were  made  by  the  leading  men  of  the  fenate ;

but


72  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

but  the  mod  moderate,  and  the  beft  adapted  to  the  prefent
juncture,  were  Thofe  of  the  oldeft  fenators,  who  fhewed
that  the  people  had  not  made  this  feceffion  from  them  with
any  malicious  deiign,  but,  partly,  compelled  by  irrefiftible
calamities,  and,  partly,  deluded  by  their  advifers,  and  judging
of  their  intereft  by  paffion  rather  than  reafon  ;  a  misfortune
ignorance  is  liable  to:  And  that  the  greateft  part  of  them
were  confcious  to  themfelves  of  having  taken  wrong  mea-
fures,  and  feeking  an  opportunity  of  redeeming  their  offences
with  decency.  As  a  proof  of  which,  they,  already,  acted
like  men  repenting;  and,  if  encouraged  with  favourable
hopes  by  a  vote  of  the  fenate  for  their  impunity,  and  by
propofals  for  an  honourable  accommodation,  they  would,
chearfully,  return  home.  The  fenators,  who  advifed  this,
defired  that  men  of  the  greateft  worth  would  not  be  more
implacable  than  Thofe  of  inferior  merit,  nor  defer  an  ac¬
commodation  till  mad  men  fhould  be  either  taught  wifdom
by  neceflity,  or  induced  by  it  to  cure  a  fmaller  evil  by  a
greater,  in  depriving  themfelves  of  liberty,  by  delivering  up
their  arms,  and  furrendering  their  perfons  at  difcretion  :
For  thefe  things  were  next  to  impofiible.  They  ought,
therefore,  to  treat  the  people  with  moderation ;  to  fet  the
example  of  falutary  counfels,  and  to  be  the  firft  to  propofe
an  accommodation ;  wThen  they  confidered  that,  as  patricians,
their-  duty  was  to  govern,  and  take  care  of  the  common¬
wealth,  and,  as  good  men,  to  promote  friendfhip,  and  peace :
That  the  dignity  of  the  fenate  would  not  fuffer  any  dimi¬
nution  by,  generoufly,  fupporting  unavoidable  calamities  in

order


i


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  73

order  to  fecure  the  government ;  but  by  preferving  an  un-
feafonable  refentment  under  their  misfortunes,  which  tended
to  fubvert  it :  And  that  it  was  folly  to  aim  at  decency,  and
neglect  fecurity  :  That  both,  indeed,  were  to  be  wifhed ;
but,  if  one  of  them  mu  ft  be  given  up,  fecurity  was  a  more
neceffary  thing,  than  decency.  They  ended  their  advice
with  defiling  that,  as  the  feceders  had,  hitherto,  been  guilty
of  no  irreparable  offence,  embaffadors  might  be  fent  to  them
to  treat  of  an  accommodation.

XLVIII.  This  was  approved  of  by  the  fenate:  After
which,  they  chofe  the  moft  proper  perfons,  and  fent  them
to  the  people  in  the  camp,  with  orders  to  inquire  of  them
what  they  defired  ;  and,  upon  what  terms,  they  thought  fit
to  return  to  the  city :  For,  if  their  demands  were  moderate,
and  pofiible  to  be  complied  with,  the  fenate  would  not
oppofe  them.  If,  therefore,  they,  now,  laid  down  their  arms,
and  returned  to  the  city,  they  fhould  be  intitled  to  an  im¬
punity  for  their  offences,  and,  from  henceforward,  to  an
amnefty.  And,  if,  they  fhall,  hereafter,  entertain  the  beft
affections  for  the  commonwealth,  and,  chearfully,  expofe
themfelves  for  the  fervice  of  their  country,  they  fhall  receive
honourable,  and  advantageous  returns.  The  embaffadors,
having  received  thefe  inftruCtions,  communicated  them  to
the  people  in  the  camp,  and  fpoke  in  conformity  to  them.
But  the  feceders,  rejecting  thefe  invitations,  reproached  the
patricians  with  haughtinefs,  feverity,  and  34  great  diffimula-
tion  in  pretending  to  be  ignorant  of  the  demands  of  the

34*  E^umxv.  See  the  forty  fixth  annotation  on  the  fourth  book.

Vol.  III.  .  L  people,


Book  VI.


74  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF

people,  and  of  the  neceffity,  which  had  compelled  them  to
fecede  :  That  they  grant  them  an  impunity  for  their  fecef-
hon,  as  if  they  were,  ftill,  mafters,  when  they  themfelves
ftand  in  need  of  the  affiftance  of  their  fellow-citizens  againft
their  foreign  enemies,  who  will,  foon,  invade  them  with  all
their  forces  ;  which  they  will  not  be  in  a  condition,  even,  to
face,  though,  now,  they  look  upon  their  prefervation  to  be
not  fo  much  the  advantage  of  themfelves,  as  the  good  fortune
of  thofe,  who  fhall  affift  them.  They  ended  their  anfwer
with  telling  them  that,  when  they  fhould  be  better  acquaint¬
ed  with  the  difficulties  which  the  commonwealth  laboured
under,  they  would  know  what  kind  of  adverfaries  they  had
to  deal  with ;  and  added  many  violent  threats  :  To  all  which
the  embafladors  making  no  anfwer,  departed,  and  informed
the  patricians  of  the  difpofition,  in  which  they  had  found
the  feceders.  When  thofe  in  the  city  were  informed  of  thefe
anfwers,  their  confuiions,  and  fears  encreafed  ;  and  the  fenate,
unable  either  to  extricate  themfelves  out  of  thefe  difficulties,
or  to  delay  their  operation,  and  being  tired  with  the  abufes,
and  accufations,  which  the  leading  men  threw  out  againft
one  another  for  many  days  together,  was  difmiffed.  Neither
were  the  plebeians,  who  had  been  induced  by  their  afte&ion
to  the  patricians,  or  their  fondnefs  for  their  country,  to  ftay
in  the  city,  in  the  fame  difpofition  as  before ;  but  great  part,
even,  of  thefe,  both  openly,  and  privately,  ftole  away,  and
there  feemed  to  be  no  dependance  upon  thofe,  who  were
left.  In  this  fttuation  of  affairs,  the  confuls  (for  the  remain-
inn  time  of  their  magiftracy  was  not  long)  appointed  a  day
for  the  ele&ion  of  magiftrates.  XL IX.


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  EM  SIS.  75

XLIX.  When  the  time  came,  in  which  the  aflembly  was
to  be  held  in  the  field,  in  order  to  their  election,  no  perfon
either  offering  himfelf  for  the  confulfhip,  or  venturing  to
accept  it,  if  conferred  upon  him,  the  people  themfelves
created  two  confuls,  who  had,  before,  been  inverted  with
that  magiftracy,  and  who  were  acceptable  both  to  the  people,
and  to  the  ariftocracy :  Thefe  were  Poftumus  Cominius,
and  Spurius  Caffius,  under  whom  the  Sabines,  fubdued  by
their  arms,  had  refigned  the  fovereignty :  They  were  re-
chofenin  the  3Sfeventy  fecond  Olympiad,  in  which  Tificrates
of  Croton  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium,  Diognetus  being
then  archon  at  Athens.  Thefe,  having  entered  upon  their
magiftracy  on  the  calends  of  September,  fooner  than  had
been  cuftomary  for  the  former  confuls,  the  firft  thing  they
did,  was  to  aflemble  the  fenate,  in  order  to  take  their  opinion
concerning  the  return  of  the  plebeians:  The  firft  fenator
they  called  upon  to  deliver  his  fentiments,  wras  Agrippa  Me-
nenius,  a  man,  then,  in  the  maturity  of  his  age,  and  looked
upon  as  a  perfon  of  fuperior  wifdom :  Fie  was,  particularly,
commended  for  his  principles  of  government,  and  for  taking
a  middle  courfe ;  being  inclined  neither  to  encreafe  the  pride
of  the  ariftocratical  party,  nor  to  fuller  the  licentioufnefs  of
the  people.  This  perfon  advifed  the  fenate  to  an  accommo¬
dation  by  the  following  fpeech  :  “  Fathers,  if  all,  who  are
“  prefent,  were  of  the  fame  opinion ;  if  no  man  would  oppole
“  an  accommodation  with  the  people ;  and  that  the  terms

35*  E TTi  TJj?  OAv^tiWo?  Jtvlefue.  So  and  Sylburgius  •,  and  not  iSJopw,  as  it
we  mult  read  it  with  Lapus,  Gelenius,  Hands  in  the  editions,  and  manuferipts.

L  2  “of


Book  VI.


76  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

££  of  it,  whether  they  are  juft,  or  unjuft,  were  only  to  be
u  confidered,  I  fhould  deliver  my  fentiments  in  few  words:
t£  But,  fince  fome  look  even  upon  this,  as  a  matter  of
“  confultation,  whether  we  ought  to  agree  with  the  feceders,
u  or  go  to  war  with  them,  I  do  not  think  it  eafy  for  me  to
<£  fupport  the  advice  I  fhall  give  you,  by  a  ihort  difcuffion:
“  On  the  contrary,  it  is  neceffary  for  me  to  extend  my
“  difcourfe  to  a  greater  length,  in  order  to  convince  thofe
u  among  you,  who  oppofe  an  accommodation,  that  they
cc  contradict  themfelves,  when  they  go  about  to  frighten  us
u  with  thofe  evils,  that  are  moft  inconfiderable,  and  ea  fily
u  reformed  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  carelefily  enough  negleCt
<£  the  greateft,  and  Thofe,  that  are  incurable.  This  contra-
“  diCtion  they  fall  into  for  no  other  reafon,  than  becaufe
££  they  do  not  judge  of  what  is  expedient  by  reafon,  but  by
C£  paflion,  and  fury:  For  how  can  thefe  men  be  faid  to
££  forefee  what  is  expedient,  or  poffible,  who  imagine  that
“  fo  powerful  a  commonwealth,  miftrefs  of  fo  extenhve  an
u  adminiftration,  already  envied  by,  and  grievous  to,  her
<c  neighbours,  will  be  able  either  eafily  to  reftrain,  and  pro-
C£  teCt  the  nations  in  fubjeCtion  to  her  without  the  plebeians,
u  or  to  bring  another  lefs  wicked  people  into  the  city,  in  the
££  room  of  this,  who  fhall  fight  for  their  fovereignty,  and
“  live  with  them  under  the  fame  government,  in  profound
*£  quiet,  behaving  themfelves  with  modefty  both  in  peace,
iC  and  war?  For  they  can  alledge  nothing  elfe  in  fupport  of
<£  their  opinion,  when  they  defire  us  not  to  receive  an  ac-
“  commodation.


L.  ££  How


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  SI  S.  77

L.  £<  Flow  weak  either  of  thofe  two  expedients  is,  I  defire
cc  you  will  confider  from  the  facts  thernfelves,  and  refled;  that,
££  when  the  lower  fort  among  the  people  grew  difaffe&ed  to
££  you  by  reafon  of  thofe,  who  treated  their  misfortunes,
££  neither  like  fellow-citizens,  nor  like  moderate  men,  and,
££  afterwards,  withdrew,  indeed,  from  the  city,  but  neither
££  do,  nor  have  any  thought  ofdoingyou,  any  other  mifchief,
C£  and  confider  only,  by  what  means,  they  may  be  re-
££  conciled  to  you  without  difhonor,  many  of  thofe,  who
££  are  not  well  difpofed  to  you,  joyfully,  feized  this  incident
££  prefented  to  them  by  Fortune;  and,  exulting  in  their
££  thoughts,  looked  upon  this,  as  the  juncture  they  had  long
££  wifhed  for  to  deprive  you  of  the  fovereignty.  For  the
££  Aequi,  the  Volfci,  the  Sabines,  and  the  Hernici,  who  have,
££  never,  ceafed  to  make  war  againfl:  us,  are,  now,  exafpe-
£C  rated  at  their  late  defeats,  and,  already,  divide  among
££  thernfelves  the  territories  we  are  poffelled  of.  As  to  the
££  people  of  Campania,  and  Tyrrhenia,  whom  we  left  waver-
££  ing  in  their  affections  towards  us,  fome  of  them,  openly,
££  revolt  from  us,  and  others  are,  privately,  preparing  to  do
££  the  fame.  The  Latines,  alfo,  our  relations,  feem,  no  longer,
££  to  retain  for  us  that  friend fhip  they  had  affured  us  of,  but
££  many,  even,  of  thefe  are  faid  to  labor  under  the  general
££  diftemper,  a  fondnefs  for  a  change.  While  we,  who  ufed
££  to  befiege  the  cities  of  others,  are  now  fhut  up  in  our  own,
££  leaving  our  lands  uncultivated,  and  feeing  our  country
££  houfes  plundered,  our  cattle  driven  away,  and  our  Haves
££  deferting,  without  knowing  what  refolutions  to  take  under

££  thefe


78  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

££  thefe  misfortunes.  And  thefe  things  we  fuffer  ftill  expedt-
cc  ing  the  people  fhould  fue  to  us  for  an  accommodation,
<c  when  we  know  it  is  in  our  own  power  to  put  an  end  to
u  the  fedition  by  a  fingle  vote.

LI.  ££  While  our  affairs  are  in  this  unhappy  poflure
“  abroad,  Thofe  in  the  city  are  in  no  lefs  terrible  a  condition.
££  For  we  have  not  provided  ourfelves  with  allies  before-
C£  hand,  as  if  we  expedted  to  be  befieged,  neither  are  our
££  numbers  fufficient  to  relift  fo  many  nations  of  enemies :
££  The  greateft  part  of  our  final!,  and  weak  army  confifts  of
££  plebeians,  of  our  own  fervants,  and  clients,  and  of  artificers;
C£  feeble  fupports  of  a  fhaken  ariftocracy.  And  the  continual
££  defertions  of  thefe  to  the  feceders  have  rendered  all  the
££  reft  liable  to  fufpicion.  But,  above  all  thefe  things,  the
££  impoflibility  of  bringing  in  provifions,  while  the  country
££  is  in  the  power  of  the  enemy,  threatens  us  with  a  famine;
££  and,  when  we  are  once  in  want,  will  threaten  us  ftill  more.
££  But,  befides  this  war,  which  gives  us  no  reft,  it  furpaftes
££  every  thing,  that  is  dreadful,  to  fee  the  wives,  the  infant
££  children,  and  aged  parents  of  the  feceders  running  about
££  the  forum,  and  through  every  ftreet,  their  habits  mournful,
£C  and  their  looks  diftrefled,  with  tears  in  their  eyes,  fuppli-
<£  eating,  embracing  the  hands,  and  knees  of  every  one,  and
££  bewailing  the  forlorn  condition  they  are  reduced  to,  and  ftill
££  more,  That,  which  threatens  them ;  a  cruel,  and  intolerable
£C  fight!  None,  fore,  are  fo  inhuman,  as  not  to  be  moved,
££  when  they  fee  thefe  things,  nor  to  compaffionate  the  mif-
££  fortunes  of  their  fellow-creatures.  So  that,  if  we  are  to  place

££  no


/


/

Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  79

u  no  confidence  in  the  plebeians,  we  muft  fend  away  all  thefe
<c  alfo,  fome  of  them  being  of  no  ufe  in  a  fiege,  and  others,
£C  not  to  be  relied  on.  And,  when  thefe  too  are  fent  away,
“  what  forces  will  be  left,  to  defend  the  city  ?  And  what  af-
££  hftance  can  we  depend  upon  to  dare  to  encounter  thefe  ter-
££  rors?  For  the  natural  refuge,  and  the  only  hope  to  be  con-
C£  fided  in,  the  patrician  youth,  is  inconfiderable,  as  you  fee,
“  and  not  worth  our  glorying  in.  What!  are  thofe,  who  advife
£C  us  to  fuftain  a  fiege,  triders,  and  do  they  impofe  upon  us,
u  or  do  they  not  rather,  openly,  advife  us  to  deliver  up  the  city
u  at  once  to  our  enemies  without  blood,  and  without  trouble?

LII.  u  But  I  myfelf,  perhaps,  magnify  thefe  appreheniions,
££  and  would  have  you  fear  things,  that  are  not  formidable  :
cc  The  commonwealth  may  be  threatened  with  no  other  dan-
££  ger,  than  a  change  of  inhabitants,  a  thing  of  no  great  com
“  fequence :  And  we  may,  writh  great  eafe,  bring  hither  a  num-
<c  ber  of  fervants,  and  clients  from  every  nation,  and  every
££  place.  For  this  is  what  many  of  the  oppofers  of  the  plebeians
t£  throw  out,  and  thefe  are,  certainly,  not  the  lead  confider-
£C  able  among  us :  Some  being  arrived  to  that  pitch  of  folly,
<£  as  to  deliver  impoflible  wifhes,  inftead  of  falutary  opinions.
££  Thefe  I  would,  willingly,  afk  what  leifure  we  fhall  have
££  to  execute  this  project,  when  the  enemy  is  fo  near  the
££  city  ?  What  allowance  will  be  made  for  the  delay  of  future
££  afliftance,  when  we  are  in  the  midft  of  adtual,  and  prefen t
££  evils?  And  what  man,  or  what  god  will  grant  us,  quietly,
C£  to  raife  fuccours  from  all  parts,  and,  lately,  condudf  them
££  hither?  Befides,  who  are  the  people,  who  will  leave  their

££  own


Bo


ROMAN  ANT  IQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

own  countries,  and  remove  to  us  ?  Are  they  fuch,  as  have
£C  habitations,  families,  fortunes,  and  are  refpedted  by  their
u  fellow- citizens  for  the  luflre  of  their  anceftors,  or  the
££  reputation  of  their  own  virtue?  And  who  would  fubmit
cc  to  leave  the  enjoyment  of  his  own  happinefs,  in  order  to
££  fhare,  with  indignity,  the  misfortunes  of  others?  For  they
££  will  not  come  hither  to  partake  of  peace,  and  luxury,  but
“  of  dangers,  and  of  war,  the  event  of  which  is  doubtful.
C£  Or,  fhall  we  bring  hither  a  mean  fort  of  people,  who
£C  have  no  habitations,  like  thofe  driven  from  hence,  who,
££  to  avoid  their  debts,  judgements,  and  other  calamities  of
£t  that  nature,  are  glad  to  remove  to  any  place  Fortune  throws
£C  in  their  way  ?  Thefe,  though  otherwife  of  a  good,  and
££  moded:  difpofition,  that  we  may  grant  them  this  alfo,  yet,
£C  from  their  being  neither  born  here,  bred  here,  nor  ac-
£C  quainted  with  our  cuftoms,  laws,  and  education,  would
££  be  far,  nay,  in  every  refpedt,  worfe  than  our  own.

LIII.  “  The  natives  have  their  wives,  children,  parents,
££  and  many  other  friends  among  us,  as  pledges,  and  a  fond-
C£  nefs,  without  doubt,  for  the  place,  where  they  have  been
£C  bred,  which  is  an  innate  paflion,  and  not  to  be  eradicated  :
£C  While  the  others  we  propofe  to  bring  hither,  this  people
££  without  houfe,  or  home,  if  they  fhould  live  among  us,  hav~
££  ing  none  of  thefe  pledges  here,  in  defence  of  what  advan-
££  tages  fhould  they  expofe  themfelves  to  dangers,  unlefs
cc  we  were  to  promife  them  a  part  of  the  lands,  and  of  the
£C  city,  and  difpoffefs  the  prefent  owners  of  both,  which  are
a  things  we  refufe  to  grant  to  our  own  citizens,  who  have,

•  “  often.


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  RN  A'S  SEN  S  IS.  81

44  often,  fought  in  their  defence.  And,  poffibly,  they  might
44  not  be  content  even  with  thefe  grants  alone,  but  would,
44  alfo,  infill:  upon  an  equal  fhare  of  honors,  of  magiftracies,
44  and  of  all  other  advantages  with  the  patricians.  If,
44  therefore,  we  do  not  grant  them  every  one  of  their  de-
44  mands,  they  will  be  our  enemies,  becaufe  they  have  not
44  obtained  them.  And,  if  we  grant  their  demands,  our
44  country,  and  our  confcitution  will  be  deftroyed,  and  de-
44  ftroyed  by  our  own  hands.^  I  do  not  add,  here,  that  we
44  want  well  difciplined  men  at  this  juncture,  not  hulband-
44  men,  fervants,  merchants,  or  artificers,  who  will  be  obliged
44  to  learn  military  difcipline,  and  put  it  in  practice  at  the
44  fame  time :  And  the  practice  of  every  thing  is  difficult  to
44  thofe,  who  are  not  accuftomed  to  it  :  And  fuch  muft,
44  neceflarily,  be  men  collected,  and  reforting  hither,  from
44  every  nation.  As  for  foldiers,  I  neither  fee  any  raifed  by
44  your  allies  to  afiifl;  you,  neither,  if  any,  unexpectedly,  ap-
44  peared,  fhould  I  advife  you  to  admit  them,  inconfiderately,
44  within  your  walls,  fince  we  know  that  many  cities  have
44  been  infiaved  by  troops,  introduced  to  defend  them.

LTV.  44  When  you  confider  thefe  things,  and  what  I
44  have,  before,  faid,  and,  alfo,  recolleCt  the  motives,  which
44  invite  you  to  an  accommodation,  that  we  are  not  the  only,
44  nor  the  firft,  people,  among  whom  poverty  has  quarrelled
44  with  riches,  and  obfcurity  with  luftre ;  but,  in  all  cities,
44  as  I  may  fay,  both  great,  and  fmall,  the  inferiors  are,
44  generally,  enemies  to  their  fuperiors :  In  all  which  cities,
44  the  men  in  power,  when  they  a&ed  with  moderation,
Vol.  III.  M  44  faved


8  2


ROMAN  ANT  IQJJI TIES  OF  Book  VI.

“  faved  their  countries ;  but,  when  with  pride,  they  loft
“  their  lives,  together  with  all  the  other  advantages  they
“  had  ftruggled  for  :  And,  when  you  remember  that  every
“  thing,  compofed  of  many  parts,  is,  often,  affecfted  with  a
“  diforder  in  fome  one  of  them  :  And,  befides,  that  neither
u  the  affected  part  of  a  human  body,  ought,  always,  to  be
<c  cut  off;  for,  that  would  be  to  render  the  reft  deformed,
“  and  of  fhort  duration;  nor  the  difordered  part  of  a  civil
tc  fociety  to  be  driven  out;  for,  by  that  means,  the  whole
u  would,  in  time,  affuredly  be  deftroyed  by  the  lofs  of  its
“  particular  parts :  And  conftder,  alfo,  the  power  of  necef-
“  fity,  to  which  alone  the  gods  fubmit,  quarrel  not  with
u  your  misfortunes,  nor  fuffer  yourfelves  to  be  filled  with
“  pride,  and  ignorance,  as  if  every  thing  were  to  fucceed
cc  according  to  your  wifhes ;  but  relent,  and  yield,  deriving
“  examples  of  prudence,  not  from  the  actions  of  others,
<c  but  from  your  own.

LV.  “  For  every  man,  and  every  community  ought  to
“  emulate-  the  moft  illuftrious  of  their  own  a&ions,  and
u  to  endeavour  that  all  the  reft  may  correfpond  with  them.
“  Thus,  you  yourfelves  have  fubdued  many  of  your  enemies,
“  by  whom  you  had  been  injured  in  the  higheft  degree ;
“  but  you  defired  neither  to  deftroy  them,  nor  drive  them
“  out  of  their  poffeffions :  On  the  contrary,  you  reftored
<£  their  houfes,  and  lands  to  them,  and  fuffered  them  to
“  live  in  the  countries,  that  gave  them  birth  ;  and  have,
u  already,  granted  the  rights  both  of  fuffrage,  and  of  Roman
«  citizens  to  fome  of  them.  But  I  have  yet  a  more  wonderful

“  adtion


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENS  IS.  83

££  adion  of  yours  to  relate  ;  which  is,  that  you  have  fuffered
u  offences  of  a  high  nature,  committed  by  many,  even,  of
u  your  own  citizens,  to  go  unpunifhed,  while  the  authors
“  of  them  alone  felt  the  weight  of  your  refentment :  Of
“  this  number  were  the  colonies  fent  out  to  Antemnae,
<£  Cruftumerium,  Medullia,  Fidenae,  and  to  many  other
££  places:  For,  to  what  purpofe  fhould  I,  now,  enumerate
££  all  thofe,  whom,  after  you  had  taken  their  towns  by  ftorm,
£C  you  correded  with  moderation,  and  as  became  fellow-
££  citizens?  And  the  commonwealth  has  been  fo  far  from
“  incurring  either  danger,  or  cenfure  by  this  condud,  that
u  her  clemency  is  applauded,  and  her  fecurity  not  at  all
“  diminifhed.  After  that,  will  you,  who  fpare  your  enemies,
<£  make  war  upon  your  friends?  Who  fuffer  the  conquered
££  to  go  unpunifhed,  punifh  thofe,  by  whofe  affiftance  you
“  have  conquered  ?  Who  allow  your  city  to  be  a  fafe  refuge
££  for  all,  who  Hand  in  need  of  it,  refolve  to  drive  out  of
“  that  city  the  natives,  with  whom  you  have  been  bred,
££  and  educated,  and  with  whom  you  have  fliared  many
££  good,  and  bad  events,  both  in  peace,  and  in  war  ?  No,
££  you  will  not,  if  you  defire  to  ad  with  juftice,  and  in  a
££  manner  agreeable  to  your  former  behaviour,  and  judge  of
<£  your  intereft  without  paffion.

LVI.  ££  But,  fome  may  fay,  we  are  not  lefs  convinced
££  than  you  that  the  fedition  ought  to  be  appeafed,  and  we
££  have,  earneftly,  defired  it :  It  is,  now,  incumbent  on  you
c£  to  fhevv,  by  what  means  we  may  appeafe  it :  For  you  fee
<c  how  imperious  the  people  are  grown ;  who,  though  they

M  2  ££  them-


84  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  T  IE  S  OF  Book  VI.

“  themfelves  are  the  offenders,  neither  fend  to  us  to  treat  of
“  an  accommodation,  nor  return  fuch  anfwers  to  thofe  we
c‘  have  lent  to  them,  as  become  men,  or  fellow-citizens ;
“  but  affume  an  exceflive  haughtinefs,  and  threaten;  fo
“  that,  it  is  not  eafy  to  guefs  what  they  aim  at.  Hear,  then,
<£  in  what  manner  I  advife  you  to  adt  in  this  fituation  :  For
u  my  own  part,  I  do  not  look  upon  the  people  to  be  irre-
C£  concilable  to  us,  neither  do  I  think  they  will  execute  any
u  of  their  threats:  My  reafon  is,  that  their  actions  do  not
C£  agree  with  their  words ;  and  I  am  of  opinion  that  they
<c  are  far  more  earneft  than  weourfelves  are  to  bring  matters
££  to  an  accommodation  :  For  we  live  in  our  own  country,
££  which  is  moft-dear  to  us,  and  have  in  our  own  power
££  our  fortunes,  our  houfes,  our  parents,  and  every  thing  we
<£  moft  efteem :  While  they  are  banifhed  from  their  city,
<£  and  from  their  habitations,  are  deprived  of  their  neareft
££  relations,  and  ftraitened  in  their  daily  fupport.  If  any
<£  one  fhould  afk  me,  for  what  reafon,  then,  do  not  the
<£  people,  even  under  thefe  miferies,  accept  our  invitations,
££  and  why  do  they  themfelves  not  fend  to  treat  with  us?
t£  I  fhould  affuredly,  anfwer,  becaufe  they  are  amufed  with
££  fair  words  by  the  fenate,  but  fee  no  adfc  of  benevolence,
u  or  moderation  flow  from  thofe  words,  and  look  upon
££  themfelves  to  have  been,  often,  deceived  by  us,  while  we,
<£  always,  promife  to  give  them  fome  relief,  and  give  them
C£  none.  They  cannot  refolve  to  fend  deputies  to  us,  from
<c  their  apprehenfion  of  thofe,  who  are  accuftomed  to  inveigh
u  againft  them  here,  and,  alfo,  left  their  defires  fhould  be

££  reje&ed  :


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  85

“  rejeded:  Pofiibly  too,  they  may  be  poflefled  with  fome
££  foolifh  pride  ;  no  wonder  :  Since  there  are  fome  even
££  among  us,  who  are  influenced  by  the  fame  litigious,  and
££  and  contentious  fpirit ;  and,  like  the  vulgar,  cannot  bear
££  to  be  overcome  by  their  adverfaries;  but,  always,  feek  to
££  conquer  by  any  means  whatever,  and  never  confer  a  favor,
££  before  they  have  fubdued  thofe,  who  are  to  have  the
“  benefit  of  it.  When  I  confider  thefe  things,  I  think  we
“  ought  to  fend  an  embafly  to  the  plebeians,  confiding  of
“  fuch  perfons,  as  they  can  moft  confide  in  :  And  that  the
u  perfons,  fo  to  be  fent,  be  inverted  with  a  difcretionary
“  power  to  put  an  end  to  the  fedition  upon  fuch  terms,  as
££  they  themfelves  fhall  think  fit,  without  any  further  appli-
C£  cation  to  the  fenate :  For  the  people,  who,  now,  feem
££  haughty,  and  intradable,  will  be  fenfible  of  this;  and,
a  finding  that  you  promote  an  accommodation  in  earneft,
££  will  defcend  to  more  moderate  conditions,  and  demand
££  nothing  of  us,  that  is  either  difhonourable,  or  impoflible :
££  For  all  men  inflamed  with  anger,  particularly  thofe  of  a
££  low  condition,  when  treated  imperioufly,  are  inraged  ;  and,
££  when  courted,  appeafed.”

LVII.  When  Menenius  had  done  fpeaking,  a  general
murmur  ran  through  the  fenate,  and  each  party  held  con-
fultations  together :  The  patrons  of  the  people  exhorting
one  another  to  exert  themfelves,  in  order  to  bring  back  the
plebeians  to  their  country,  fince  they  had  now,  at  their  head,
the  moft  confiderable  man  of  the  ariftocratical  party  :  And
thofe  of  this  party,  who  made  it  a  point  to  fufter  no

altera-


86  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

alteration  in  the  eftablifhed  form  of  government,  were  at  a
lofs  how  to  behave  themfelves  in  the  prefent  juncture,  being
unwilling  to  change  their  opinion,  and  unable  to  perlift  in
it.  While  thofe,  who  were  uningaged  in  either  party,  and
entered  into  the  contefts  of  neither,  delired  to  fee  peace
reftored,  and  that  the  fenate  would  conlider  of  the  proper
means  to  prevent  the  city  from  being  befteged.  When  all
were  blent,  the  elder  of  the  confuls  celebrated  the  generality
of  Menenius,  and  recommended  to  the  reft  to  fhew  the  fame
zeal  for  the  public,  and,  not  only,  to  fpeak  their  fentiments
with  freedom,  but  to  execute  their  refolutions  without  fear;
and  called  upon  another  fenator  by  name,  in  the  fame
manner,  to  deliver  his  opinion :  This  was  Manius  Valerius,
a  brother  of  the  perfon,  who  had  aftifted  in  delivering  his
country  from  the  kings ;  a  man,  of  all  the  ariftocratical
party,  the  moft  acceptable  to  the  people.

LVIII.  Who,  riling  up,  firft  put  the  fenate  in  mind  of
the  meafures  he  himfelf  had  purfued,  when  a  magiftrate,
and  that  he  had,  often,  foretold  the  dangers  they  would  be
expofed  to,  and  they,  as  often,  neglecfted  his  predictions.
He,  then,  deftred  that  thofe,  who  oppofed  an  accommoda¬
tion,  would  not,  at  this  time,  conlider  the  reafonablenefs  of
the  terms ;  but,  lince  they  would  not  fuffer  the  fedition  to
be  appeafed,  while  it  was  yet  in  its  infancy,  now,  at  leaft,
to  confider,  by  what  means  a  fpeedy  end  might  be  put  to  it,
left,  by  making  a  further  progrefs,  it  might,  infenlibly,  be¬
come  perhaps  incurable,  or,  at  leaft,  hard  to  be  cured,
and  produce  great  evils :  He  told  them  that  the  demands

of


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  87
of  the  plebeians  would,  no  longer,  be  the  fame  as  before  ;
neither  did  he  think  they  would  agree  with  them  upon  the
fame  terms,  or  be  contented  with  an  abolition  of  their  debts ;
but  that  they  would,  poflibly,  infift  even  upon  fome  pro¬
tection,  under  which  they  might,  for  the  future,  live  fecurely  :
For  that,  fince  the  inftitution  of  the  di&atorfhip,  the  guar¬
dian  law  of  their  liberty  was  abolifhed  ;  which  law  allowed
no  citizen  to  be  put  to  death  by  the  magiftrates  without  a
trial,  nor  any  of  the  plebeians,  who  had  been  condemned  by  the
patricians,  when  tried,  to  be  delivered  up  to  the  magiftrates,
who  condemned  them  ;  but  granted  to  thofe,  who  deftred
it,  a  right  of  appealing  from  the  patricians  to  the  people ;
and  that  the  determination  of  thefe  fhould  be  final.
He  added  that  almoft  all  the  other  privileges,  before  en¬
joyed  by  the  plebeians,  had  been  taken  away,  fince  they
could  not  obtain  from  the  fenate  even  a  triumph  in  favor  of
Publius  Servilius  Prifcus,  who  had  deferved  this  honor  more
than  any  man  :  For  which  reafons,  it  was  probable  the
people  were  difheartened,  and  entertained  fmall  hopes  of
their  future  fecurity  ;  fince  neither  a  conful,  nor  a  dictator
were  at  liberty  to  take  care  of  their  intereft,  when  they
defired  to  do  it ;  but  the  concern,  and  care  they  fiiewed  for
the  people  drew  upon  them  abufes,  and  ignominy  from  the
fenate.  That  thefe  things  were  effected  by  a  combination,
not  of  the  moil  confiderable  perfons  among  the  patricians,  but
of  fome  infolent,  and  avaritious  men,  eagerly,  aiming  at  an
unjuft  gain,  who,  having  advanced  large  fumsatahigh  intereft,
and  made  flaves  of  many  of  their  fellow-citizens,  had,  by

treating


Book  VI.


ROMAN  AN  T  I QJU  I  T  I E  S  OF

treating  thefe  in  a  cruel,  imperious,  and  fevere  manner,
alienated  the  whole  body  of  the  plebeians  from  the  arifto-
cracy ;  and,  having  formed  a  fa&ion,  and  placed  at  the
head  of  it  Appius  Claudius,  an  enemy  to  the  people,  and  a
favourer  of  oligarchy,  they,  under  his  patronage,  had  ruined
all  the  affairs  of  the  commonwealth  :  Which,  if  the  fober
part  of  the  fenate  did  not  oppofe  their  attempts,  was  in
danger  of  being  inflaved,  and  fubverted.  He  ended  with
faying  that  he  was  of  the  fame  opinion  with  Menenius,  and
deftred  that  embaffadors  might,  immediately,  be  fent ;  and
that  thefe  fhould  endeavour  to  appeafe  the  fedition  upon
fuch  terms,  as  they  thought  proper  :  But,  if  thefe  were  not
confented  to,  that  they  accept  fuch,  as.  are  offered.

LIX.  After  he  had  done  fpeaking,  Appius  Claudius,  who
was  of  the  faction,  that  oppofed  the  people,  being  called
upon  to  deliver  his  fentiments,  rofe  up;  a  man  who  fet  a
great  value  upon  himfelf,  and  not  without  juft  caufe:  For,
in  his  private  life,  he  was  temperate,  and  folemn,  and  his
political  principles  were  noble,  and  tending  to  preferve  the
dignity  of  the  arifto.cracy :  He  took  occafion,  from  the  fpeech
of  Valerius,  to  fpeak  as  follows:  cc  Valerius  would  have  de-
“  ferved  lefscenlure,  if  he  had,  only,  delivered  his  own  fen-
“  timents,  without  inveighing  again  ft  thofe,  who  are  of  a
“  contrary  opinion :  For,  by  that  means,  he  would  have  had
“  the  advantage  of  not  hearing  an  expofition  of  his  own
“  faults.  However,  fince  he  has  not  been  contented  withde-
“  livering  fuch  an  opinion,  as  can  end  in  nothing  elfe,  than
in  making  us  flaves  to  the  moft  profligate  of  the  citizens,

“  but


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN AS  SENS  I  S.  89

££  but  has,  a Ifo,  caft  reflexions  upon  thofe,  who  differ  from
££  him,  and  attacked  me  perfonally,  I  And  it,  abfolutely,

£:  neceflary  for  me,  alio,  to  fpeak  to  thefe  things  ;  and,
cc  firft,  to  clear  my  fell  o(  the  charge  he  has  brought  againft
££  me  :  For  he  has  reproached  me  with  a  conduct  becoming
££  neither  a  citizen,  nor  a  man  of  worth,  that,  defiring  to
££  get  money  by  every  method,  I  have  deprived  many  of
££  the  poor  of  their  liberty,  and  that  the  feceflion  was,  chiefly,
££  occafioned  through  my  means.  Now,  it  is  an  eafy  matter
££  to  convince  you  that  neither  of  thefe  allegations  is  true,
££  and  well  grounded :  For,  fay,  Valerius,  who  are  thofe  I
££  have  inflaved  on  account  of  their  debts?  Who  are  thofe  I
££  ever  kept,  or  now  keep,  in  prifon  ?  Which  of  thefeceders
££  is  deprived  of  his  country  through  my  cruelty,  or  avarice  ?
££  You  can  name  none.  For  I  am  fo  far  from  having  in-
£C  flaved  any  one  of  the  citizens  for  debt,  that,  having  ad-
££  vanced  my  own  money  to  very  great  numbers,  I  have
££  caufed  none  of  thofe,  who  did  not  make  good  their  pay-
“mients,  to  be  either  furrendered  to  me,  or  difcredited ;  but
££  all  of  them  enjoy  their  liberty,  and  all  look  upon  them-
££  felves  to  be  under  the  fame  obligations  to  me  with  my
££  friends,  and  clients,  and  are  confidered  by  me  in  the  fame
££  light.  When  I  fay  this,  I  mean  not  to  accufe  any,  who
<£  have  not  acffed  like  me  in  this  refpedt ;  neither  do  I  think
££  any  man  guilty  of  injuftice,  if  he  has  done  what  the  law
u  allowed  him  to  do ;  but  I  fay  it  only  to  acquit  myfelf  of
6£  the  accufations  brought  againft  me.


VOL.  III.


N


go  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VI.

LX.  “  As  to  the  feverity,  and  patronage  of  wicked  men,
<c  with  which  he  has  reproached  me,  calling  me  an  enemy
“  to  the  people,  and  a  favourer  of  oligarchy,  becaufe  I
<c  adhere  to  the  ariflocracy,  thefe  accufations,  equally,  affect
“  all  thofe  among  you,  who,  being  men  of  fuperior  worth,
“  think  it  beneath  you  to  be  governed  by  your  inferiors,
“  or  to  fuffer  the  form  of  government  you  have  in-
tc  herited  from  your  anceflors,  to  be  transformed  into  the
ic  worft  of  all  conftitutions,  a  democracy.  For,  if  this  man
u  fliall  think  fit  to  call  the  government  of  the  bed:  men,  an
<c  oligarchy,  it  does  not,  therefore,  follow,  that  the  thing
“  itfelf,  becaufe  it  is  traduced  by  that  appellation,  will  be
<c  impeached.  While  we  can  fix  a  much  jufter,  and  a  truer
u  reproach  upon  him  for  flattering  the  people,  and  aiming
<c  at  tyranny.  Since  all  the  world  knows  that  every  tyrant
“  Tarings  from  a  flatterer  of  the  people  :  And  that  the  fhort
“  way  for  thofe,  who  defign  to  inflave  their  country,  is  That
<c  which  leads  to  domination  through  the  favor  of  the  mod
u  profligate  citizens,  whom  he  himfelf  has  ever  courted,
“  and  courts  even  to  this  day :  For  you  are  very  fenfible  that
<£  thefe  vile,  and  mean  wretches  would  never  have  dared  to
“  commit  fuch  crimes,  if  they  had  not  been  encouraged  by
<{  this  venerable  man,  this  lover  of  his  country,  and  told

that  the  adtion  fhouid  be  attended  with  no  danger  ;  and
“  that  it  fhouid,  not  only,  go  unpuniflied,  but  their  condi-
iQ  tion  fhouid  even  be  improved  by  it.  You  will  be  convinced
u  of  the  truth  of  what  1  fay,  when  you  remember  that,
u  while  he  was  frightening  you  with  a  war,  and  fihewing

“  the


Book VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENS1S.  91

“  the  necefllty  of  an  accommodation,  he  told  you,  at  the
«  fame  time,  that  the  poor  will  not  be  contented  with  an
«  abolition  of  their  debts,  but  will,  alfo,  infift  upon  fome
“  protedion,  and,  no  longer,  fubmit  to  be  governed  by
“  you,  as  before :  And,  at  laft,  he  exhorted  you  to  acquiefce
<c  under  the  prefent  fituation  of  affairs,  and  to  grant  every
u  thing  the  people  fhould  think  fit  to  demand  as  the  con-
cc  ditions  of  their  return,  without  diftinguifiiing  whether
u  thofe  demands  were  honourable,  or  difhonourable,  juft,
“  or  unjuft.  With  fo  much  arrogance  have  the  fenfelefs
“  people  been  infpired  by  this  old  man,  who  has  enjoyed
“  every  honor  we  could  confer  upon  him.  Did  it,  then,
“  become  you,  Valerius,  to  charge  others  with  the  reproaches
“  they  have  not  defer ved,  when  you  yourfelf  lie  open  to  fuch
“  accufations?

LXI.  “  What  I  have  faid  is  fufficient  to  refute  the  ca-
«  lumnies  this  man  has  brought  againft  me.  Concerning
“  the  fubjed  of  your  prefent  debate,  I  am,  not  only,  of
“  opinion  that  what  I  firft  propofed  was  juft,  worthy  of  this
£C  commonwealth,  and  advantageous  for  yourfelves,  but  I  ftill
<<  continue  in  the  fame  fentiments,  and  advife  you  not  to
“  confound  the  order  of  the  government,  not  to  alter  the
“  unalterable  cuftoms  of  your  anceftors,  not  to  banifti  public
“  faith,  a  facred  thing,  from  human  fociety,  on  which  the
“  fecurity  of  every  city  is  founded,  nor  to  give  way  to  a
“  thoughtlefs  people,  who  defire  unjuft,  and  unlawful  things :
<c  And  I  am  fo  far  from  retrading  any  part  of  my  opinion,
(C  through  the  fear  of  my  adverfaries,  who  endeavour  to

N  2  u  frighten


Book  VI.


92  -  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

€C  frighten  me  by  exciting  the  plebeians  again  ft  me,  that  I
C£  am  much  more  than  ever  confirmed  in  my  refentment;
c£  and  my  indignation  at  the  demands  of  the  people  is
££  doubled.  And  I  wonder,  fathers,  at  the  extraordinary
££  turn  of  your  difpofttion,  that  you,  who  refufed  to  grant
££  to  the  people  an  abolition  of  their  debts,  and  a  difcharge
££  from  their  judgements,  before  they  were  in  open  war
££  againft  you,  fhould  now,  when  they  are  in  arms,  and
<£  commit  a<fts  of  hoftility,  feem  willing,  not  only,  to  make
t£  thefe  conceftions,  but,  alfo,  to  grant  them  every  thing
££  elfe  they  deftre :  And  they  will  defire,  and  the  firft  of
C£  their  demands  will  be,  to  have  an  equal  fhare  of  honors
££  with  you,  and  to  enjoy  the  fame  privileges.  Will  not  that
t£  be  to  transform  the  government  into  a  democracy,  which,
££  of  all  conftitutions,  as  I  faid,  is  the  moft  fenfelefs,  and  the
££  leaft  expedient  for  you,  who  aim  at  commanding  others?
££  This,  if  you  are  wife,  you  will  not  do:  Otherwife,  it
££  would  be  a  moft  glaring  abfurdity,  if  you,  who  looked
££  upon  it  as  a  thing  intolerable  to  be  governed  by  one  tyrant,
££  fhould,  now,  deliver  up  yourfelves  to  the  people,  a  many-
££  headed  tyrant,  and  fubmit  to  this  without  conferring  an
££  obligation,  or  being  perfuaded  to  it,  but  forced  by  nccef-
<£  fity,  and  as  if  you  had  it  not  in  your  power  to  do  any
<£  thing  in  your  prefent  circumftances,  but  to  yield  contrary
££  to  your  inclination.  And,  when  this  fenfelefs  multitude,
££  inftead  of  being  punifhed  for  their  offences,  fhall  even
££  obtain  honors,  as  a  reward  for  thofe  offences,  how  proud

and  imperious  do  you  think  this  will  render  them?  For

■  /

“  you


(C


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  SENS  I  S.  93

“  you  are  not  to  flatter  yourfelves  with  the  hope  that  the
££  people  will  moderate  their  demands,  if  they  know  that
££  you  all  concurred  in  this  refolution.

LXIL  ££  But,  in  this  refpect,  Menenius,  who  is  a  worthy
££  man,  and  judges  of  the  good  intentions  of  others  by  his
££  own,  is  very  much  miftaken :  For  they  will  urge  you  with
££  an  importunity  grievous  beyond  all  meafure,  encouraged
££  both  by  the  pride  which,  always,  accompanies  victory,
££  and  by  their  folly,  of  which  they  have  fo  great  a  fhare.
££  And,  if  not,  at  firft,  they  will,  afterwards,  upon  every
££  occaflon,  when  their  demands  are  not  granted,  take  arms,
££  and  fly  in  your  faces  with  the  fame  infolence.  So  that,
££  if  you  yield  to  their  firft  demands,  as  expedient,  you  will,
££  prefently,  have  fomething  v/orfe  impofed  upon  you;  and
££  after  that,  fomething  elfe  ftill  more  intolerable  than  the
££  former,  upon  a  fuppofltion  that  your  firft  conceffions
££  flowed  from  fear;  till,  at  laft,  they  drive  you  out  of  the
££  city,  as  it  has,  already,  happened  in  many  others,  and,
££  lately,  at  Syracufe,  where  the  30  landed  men  were  expelled
££  by  their  clients.  If,  then,  your  indignation  at  their  demands
££  will  induce  you,  at  laft,  to  rejedf  them,  why,  do  you  not,
££  from  this  inftant,  begin  to  afllime  the  fpirit  of  free  men  ?

36-  O;  yev/uogoi.  Sylburgius  has  taken  to  our  author,  becaufe  the  books,  in
notice  that  Herodotus  calls  thefe  ya-  which  Diodorus  Siculus,  very  proba-
according  to  the  Doric  dialed,  bly,  gave  an  account  of  this  tranfadion,
which  was  fpoken  at  Syracufe.  We  are  loft.  But  this  we  know  from  b  He-
know  nothing  of  the  manner,  in  which  rodotus,  that  Gelon  reftored  them  to
thefe  landed  men  were  driven  out  of  their  country,  and,  by  reftoring  them,
that  city  by  their  (laves,  as  Herodotus  made  himfelf  mafter  of  Syracufe.
calls  them,  or  their  clients,  according

b  In  Polymnia,  c.  i


u  For


94  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

“  For  it  is  better  to  ad  with  courage  upon  a  fmall  provo-
“  cation,  before  any  damage  is  received,  than,  after  fuffering
“  many  ads  of  injuftice,  to  complain  of  what  is  paft,  refufe
“  the  reft,  and  begin  late  to  grow  wife.  Let  none  of  you
“  be  terrified  either  with  the  commotion  of  the  revolters,
<c  or  with  a  foreign  war  ;  nor  diftruft  our  domeftic  forces,
£C  as  infufficient  to  preferve  the  city:  For  the  ftrength  of
“  the  fugitives  is  fmall,  and  they  cannot  long  continue  in
“  huts  during  the  winter,  with  the  fame  eafe  as  they  now
(C  incamp  in  the  open  air  ;  and  they  will  be  fo  far  from
“  getting  provifions  by  plunder,  when  they  have  confumed
“  their  prefent  ftock,  that  they  will  not  be  able  even  to
“  purchafe  any  from  other  places,  and  convey  them  to  their
cc  camp,  by  reafon  of  their  poverty,  as  having  no  money,
cc  either  public,  or  private  :  Whereas,  wars  are,  generally,
<c  fupported  by  plenty  of  money.  Befides,  anarchy,  as  may
iC  well  be  imagined,  and  fedition,  flowing  from  anarchy,
u  will  feize  them,  and  foon  diflipate,  and  difconcert  their
u  counfels:  For  they  will  not  fubmit  to  deliver  up  them-
“  felves  either  to  the  Sabines,  or  the  Tyrrhenians,  and
“  become  flaves  to  thofe,  whom  they  themfelves,  in  con-
cc  jundion  with  you,  formerly  deprived  of  their  liberty;
“  and  the  men,  who  have,  wickedly,  and  ftiamefully,  en-
<c  deavoured  to  deftroy  their  own  country,  will,  leaft  of  all,
“  be  trufted  by  them,  left  they  treat  the  country,  that  re-
“  ceives  them,  in  the  fame  manner  :  For  all  the  nations
cc  round  us  are  governed  by  ariftocracies,  and  the  people,
“  in  every  city,  are  excluded  from  an  equal  fhare  in  the

“  govern-


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  95

C£  government.  So  that,  the  leading  men  in  every  city,
££  who  do  not  fuffer  their  own  fubjedts  to  attempt  any
“  alteration  in  the  commonwealth,  will  never  receive  this
“  foreign,  this  feditious  people  into  their  country  ;  left,  by
“  admitting  them  to  afnare  in  the  privileges  of  their  fubjedls,
££  they  themfelves  fhould,  one  day,  be  deprived  of  their  own
“  fhare  in  the  adminiftration.  But,  if  I  am  miftaken,  and
££  any  city  fhould  receive  them,  they  will,  prefently,  dif-
u  cover  themfelves  there  to  be  enemies,  and  deferve  to  be
“  treated  as  fuch.  We  have  here  their  wives,  parents,  and
“  the  reft  of  their  relations,  as  hoftages ;  and  better  we
“  could  not  delire  the  gods  to  give  us;  all  whom  we  will
<£  place  in  the  fight  of  their  relations;  and,  if  they  dare  to
“  attack  us,  we  will  put  them  to  death  under  the  moft
<£  fevere,  and  the  moft  ignominious  tortures.  And,  when
“  they  know  this,  be  allured  they  will  intreat,  lament,  and
£C  deliver  up  themfelves  to  you  unarmed,  and  ready  to  fub-
“  mit  to  every  thing  you  defire  :  For  fuch  diftrefies  have
u  an  i  refiftible  power  to  break  the  moft  haughty  fpirits,
C£  and  annihilate  their  refolution.

LX  ill.  ££  For  thefe  reafons  I  affirm  that  a  war  from  the
*£  fugitives  is  not  to  be  feared.  As  to  the  dangers  of
“  foreign  wars,  this  is  not  the  firft  time  thofe  dangers  have
i£  been  formidable  only  in  difcourfe  ;  but,  even  before  this,
“  as  often  as  we  have  experienced  them,  they  have  been
<£  found  lefs  terrible  than  we  apprehended.  And,  let  thofe,
<£  who  think  our  domeftic  forces  not  fufficiently  ftrong,
<£  and,  for  this  reafon  chiefly,  apprehend  a  war,  know  that

they


96  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.
“  they  are.  not  enough  acquainted  with  them.  We  fhall
C£  have  a  body  37  of  citizens  equal  in  ftrength  to  the  revolters,
-<c  if  we  think  fit  to  chufe  out  the  ftoutefl:  of  our  flaves,  and
££  give  them  their  liberty  :  For,  it  is  better  to  grant  liberty
cc  tothefe,  than  to  be  deprived  of  our  authority  by  the  others.
££  The  former  are,  already,  fufficiently  inftrudted  in  mi-
£C  litary  difcipline,  by  having  attended  us  in  many  expedi-
££  tions.  And  againft  our  foreign  enemies  let  us  march
££  ourfelves,  with  all  poffible  alacrity,  at  the  head  of  all  our
££  clients,  and  of  the  people,  who  are  left :  And,  in  order
££  to  ingage  thefe  to  light  chearfully,  let  us  grant  them  an
£C  abolition  of  their  debts,  not  generally,  but  to  every  one  in
££  particular :  For,  if  we  are,"  by  yielding  to  the  times,  to
££  fhew  fome  moderation,  let  not  that  moderation  exert  itfelf
££  towards  fuch  of  the  people,  as  are  our  enemies,  but  to-
£t  wards  fuch  of  them,  as  are  our  friends ;  on  whom  we  may
££  feem  not  compelled,  but  perfuaded,  to  beftow  favors.
££  And,  if  more  fuccours  fhould  ftiil  be  wanting,  thefe  being
££  infufiicient,  let  us  fend  for  the  garrifons  of  ail  the  fortreffes,
C(  and  recal  our  colonies.  And  how  many  the  number  of
cc  thefe  will  amount  to,  may  be,  eafily,  learned  from  the  laft

37-  n^o?  fx?v  ye  me  aQewKolae  rm  been  Roman  citizens  the  moment  they
vrohfluv  oivltnuKcv  l%o[Aiv.  TheLa-  had  been  manumitted.  Whereas,  if
tin  tranflators,  and,  after  them,  the  we  adhere  to  the  connexion  they  have
French,  have  rendered  this  fentence,  adopted,  tm  zroAilwv  will  be  inactive,
as  it  they  underttood  that  rm  sroAilav  and  fignify  no  more  than  me  x(ptemclxe
was  joined  by  our  author  to  a<pfsW<#?:  without  that  addition  •,  as  Appius  faid,
I  own  that  the  text  will  bear  this  con-  before,  in  this  very  fpeech,  t is  TON
ftrudion  •,  but  I  think  the  fenfe  will  A <J>E XTH KOTO.N  t>;v  co/AoiqlsCy
be  much  ftronger,  if  we  conned  twv  etc.  and,  afterwards  fays,  p«7t  srgErgaav
vroAilm  with  ocvliTrxAov  :  For  •  are^?r«v  TOTS  A^EXTHKOTAX,

thefe  flaves  would,  certainly,  have  etc.

u  cenfus ;


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  97

“  cenfus;  when  there  were  regiftered  one  hundred  and  thirty
££  thoufandmen  grown;  of  thefe  the  fugitives  do  not  make
“  a  feventh  part.  I  aver,  alfo,  that  the  thirty  cities  of  the
££  Latin  nation  would  delire  nothing  more  than  to  fight
cc  our  battles,  by  reafon  of  their  relation  to  us,  if  you  would
££  only  grant  them  the  fame  privileges  with  our  own  citizens,
“  which  they  have  ever  defired.

LXIV.  “  But  the  advantage  the  moft  confiderable  in
£  war  is  That,  which  neither  you  yourfelves  have  yet  thought
£  of,  nor  any  of  your  advifers  fuggefted  :  This  I  fhall  add
c  to  what  I  have  faid,  and,  then,  make  an  end.  There  is
c  nothing  fo  necefiary  to  fuccefs  in  war,  as  good  generals :
c  With  thefe  our  city  abounds ;  while  there  is  a  fcarcity  of
£  them  among  our  enemies :  For  numerous  armies,  when
£  commanded  by  unfkilful  generals,  difgrace  themfelves,

£  and,  very  often,  occafion  their  own  defeat ;  and  the  more
£  numerous  they  are,  the  more  they  are  expofed  to  this
£  misfortune :  Whereas,  good  generals,  although  the
£  armies  they  receive  are  fmall,  foon  augment  them  to
£  great  numbers.  So  that,  as  long  as  we  have  generals
£  able  to  command,  we  fhall  never  want  men  defirous  to
£  obey.  Confider,  therefore,  thefe  things ;  reflect  on  the
£  actions  of  this  commonwealth,  and  determine  nothing
£  mean,  ungenerous,  or  unworthy  of  yourfelves.  What,

£  then,  if  any  one  fhould  alk  me,  do  I  advife  ?  (For,  in  all
£  probability,  you,  long  fince,  earneftly  defire  to  know  this)

£  Neither  to  fend  embafladors  to  the  revolters,  to  decree  an
£  abolition  of  their  debts,  nor  do  any  other  ad:,  that  may

Vol.  III.  O  ££  betray


Book  VI.


9$  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I T I E S  OF

u  betray  fear,  or  perplexity:  But,  if  they  lay  down  their
“  arms,  return  to  the  city,  and  fubmit  their  interefts  to  be
“  difcuffed  by  you  at  leifure,  I  advife  you  to  treat  them
u  with  moderation,  as  you  well  know  that  all  fenfelefs  men,
“  particularly,  the  populace,  behave  themfelves  with  impe-
“  rioufnefs  to  the  fubmiffive,  and  with  fubmiflion  to  the
u  imperious.”

LXV.  When  Claudius  had  done  fpeaking,  there  was  a
great  clamor,  and  prodigious  tumult  in  the  fenate,  which
lafted  a  coniiderable  time :  For  thofe,  who  feemed  to  be  of
the  ariftocratical  party,  and  thought  themfelves  obliged  to
prefer  the  conllderation  of  juftice  to  That  of  injuftice,  ad¬
hered  to  the  opinion  of  Claudius ;  and  dertred  the  confuls
particularly  to  join  the  better  fide,  and  to  conlider  that
they  were  inverted  with  a  regal,  not  a  popular,  power  ;  or,
at  leaft,  to  keep  themfelves  neuter,  and  not  to  overbear  either
party,  but  to  count  the  opinions  of  the  fenators,  and  declare
for  the  majority :  But,  if  they  negledled  both  thefe,  and
aflumed  to  themfelves  the  foie  power  of  concluding  the  ac¬
commodation,  they  faid  they  would  not  fuffer  it ;  but  would
oppofe  them  to  the  utmoft,  with  words,  as  far  as  they
might,  and,  if  neceflary,  with  arms.  Thefe  were  a  conrtder-
able  body,  and  almoft  all  the  young  patricians  adhered  to
this  party  :  But  all  the  lovers  of  peace  efpoufed  the  opinion
of  Menenius,  and  Valerius,  particularly,  the  ancient  fenators,
who  confidered  the  calamities,  which  all  governments  are
expofed  to,  by  civil  wars :  But,  being  overborne  by  the
clamor,  and  diforderly  behaviour,  of  the  young  men,  and,

fulpetrting


Bookvr.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  ENS  I  S.  99

fufpecting  the  confequences  of  their  ambition,  and,  alfo,
fearing  left  the  haughtinefs,  with  which  they  had  treated  the
confuls  might  end  in  violence,  unlefs  fome  kind  of  fubmiffion
were  made  to  them,  they,  at  laft,  had  recourfe  to  tears,  and
intreaties,  with  which  they  endeavoured  to  foften  their  op-

LXVI.  The  tumult  being  appeafed,  and  every  one  filent
at  laft,  the  confuls  conferred  together,  and  pronounced  their
final  determination,  which  was  to  this  effedt;  “  Fathers,
“  the  thing  in  the  world  we  defire  moft,  is,  that  you  would
u  all  be  unanimous,  particularly,  when  the  public  fafety  is
“  the  fubjedt  of  your  debate;  but,  if  that  cannot  be,  that
“  the  younger  fenators  would  yield  to  their  feniors,  and
<£  not  contend  with  them ;  but  confider  that,  when  they
££  are  arrived  to  the  fame  age,  the  fame  deference  will
££  be  paid  to  them  by  their  juniors :  But  we  obferve  that
££  a  fpirit  of  contention,  the  moft  deftrudtive  of  all  dif-
£C  eafes  incident  to  mankind,  has  feized  you;  and  that  the
££  young  men  among  you,  behave  themfelves  with  great
“  arrogance :  And,  fince  the  remaining  part  of  the  day  is
“  fhort,  and  there  is  not  time  to  perfedt  your  refolutions,
££  depart  for  the  prefent ;  and  bring  with  you  to  the  next
“  affembly  greater  moderation,  and  a  better  difpofition :
“  But,  if  you  fhould  preferve  the  fame  contentious  humor,
“  we  fhall  not,  for  the  future,  make  ufe  of  young  men,
“  either  as  judges,  or  counfellors;  but,  from  henceforward,
£C  we  will  reftrain  their  diforderly  behaviour  by  a  law,

O  2  <c  which


100  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookVI.

“  3?  which  fhall  fix  the  age  required  in  a  fenator.  As  to  the
“  fenior  members,  we  fhall,  again,  give  them  an  opportunity
u  of  delivering  their  opinions  ;  and,  if  they  do  not  agree,
“  we  fhall  put  an  end  to  their  contefts  by  a  fhort  method,
<£  which  it  is  proper  you  fhould  be  apprized  of  beforehand :
“  You  are  fenfible  that  we  have  a  law,  as  ancient  as  the  city
“  we  inhabit,  by  which  the  fenate  is  inverted  with  a  fovereign
“  power  in  every  thing,  except  the  election  of  magiftrates,
“  the  enabling  of  laws,  and  the  declaring,  or  putting  an  end
“  to,  wars ;  and  that  the  people  have  the  power  of  deter-
“  mining  thefe  three  things  by  their  votes :  Now,  the  prefent
“  debate  has  no  other  objedt,  but  war,  or  peace:  So  that,


3s'  agiQ'UO v  ilcov  ov  Jtyicrc-t  rat

0aAevov7af  «x«».  It  does  not  appear  that
this  threat  was  carried  into  execution  ;
at  leaft,  not  till  many  ages  after,  that
is,  in  the  year  of  Rome  575  *,  when,
by  the  Viliian  law,  the  ages  of  all
magiftrates  was  fixed.  c  Fulvius
Flaccus  conful  eft  creatus  cum  L.  Manlio
Acid/no.  —  Eo  anno  rogatio  primum  eft
lata  a  L.  Villio  tribuno  plebis,  quot  annos
nati  quemque  magijlratum  peterent ,  ca-
perentque.  This  law,  indirectly,  fixed
the  age  required  in  a  Roman  fenator ;
becaufe  the  magiftracy  was  the  femi-
nary  of  the  fenate,  into  which  all  ma¬
giftrates  had  a  right  to  be  admitted,
as  fenators,  upon  the  firft  call  ot  the
fenate  after  the  expiration  of  their  ma¬
giftracy,  unlefs  the  cenfors  could  ob¬
ject  to  their  behaviour.  ThoughLivy
fays  this  law  was  firft  enabled  by  Vil-
lius,  yet  he  himfelf,  in  another  place,
gives  us  reafon  to  think  that  fome  law


of  that  nature  was  before  in  being  ;
becaufe  he  tells  us  that  the  firft  Scipio,
afterwards  called  Africanus,  was  op-
pofed  by  the  tribunes  of  the  people,
when  he  flood  for  the  curule  edile-
fhip,  for  this  reafon,  that  he  had  not
the  age,  required  by  law,  for  that
magiftracy,  d  quod  nondum  ad petendum
legitima  aetas  effet.  This  happened  in
the  confulfhip  of  Fulvius  Flaccus
for  the  third  time,  and  of  Ap.  Claudius
Pulcher,  and  in  the  year  of  Rome  542,
that  is,  33  years  before  the  Viliian  law
was  enabled.  Whenfoever  the  law,
upon-  which  the  tribunes  grounded
their  oppofition  to  Scipio,  was  pafled,
certain  it  is  that  there  was  no  fuch  law
in  the  early  times  of  the  common¬
wealth.  This  we  know  from  e  Cicero,
who  fays  ;  Majores  noftri ,  veteres  illi ,
admodum  antiqui ,  Leges  an n ales  non
habebant.


“  it


c  Livy,  B.  xl.  c.  44.  11 B.  xxv.  c.  2.


e  Philippic,  v.  c.  1 7.


IOI


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.

“  it  is,  abfolutely,  necefiary  that  the  people  (hould,  by  their
“  votes,  give  a  fan&ion  to  our  refolutions.  We  (hall,  there-
“  fore,  fummon  them  to  be  prefent  in  the  forum,  purfuant
u  to  this  law;  and,  after  you  have  delivered  your  opinions,
“  we  (hall  take  their  votes,  as  the  only  means  to  put  an  end
“  to  your  contefts :  And,  whatever  the  majority  of  the
C£  people  fhall  determine,  we  (hall  efteem  That  as  valid.
u  Thofe,  who  have  continued  faithful  to  the  commonwealth,
u  and  are  to  fhare  both  our  good,  and  bad  fortune,  well
<c  deferve  this  honor.”

LXVII.  Having  faid  this,  they  difmifled  the  affembly.
The  following  days,  they  ordered  ad  the  citizens,  who  were
in  the  country,  and  in  the  fortreflfes,  to  be  prefent;  and,
having  given  notice  to  the  fenate  to  affemble  the  fame  day,
when  they  found  the  city  was  full  of  people,  and  that  the
refolution  of  the  patricians  was  fubdued  by  the  intreaties,
tears,  and  lamentations  both  of  the  parents,  and  infant
children,  of  the  feceders,  they  went,  on  the  appointed  day,
to  the  forum,  which  was  crowded  with  a  concourfe  of  all
forts  of  people,  who  were  there  long  before  it  was  light :
And,  going  into  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  where  it  was  cufto-
mary  for  the  people  to  hold  their  ailemblies,  they,  firft,
commended  them  for  the  earn  eft  nefs,  and  alacrity  they  (hewed
by  a  (lifting  in  fo  great  numbers :  Then  advifed  them  to  wait
quietly,  till  the  previous  decree  of  the  fenate  was  palled;
and  exhorted  the  relations  of  the  feceders  to  comfort  them-
felves  with  the  hopes  of  feeing  thofe,  who  were  deareft  to
them,  in  a  (hort  time.  After  that,  they  went  to  the  fenate ;

and


I  02


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

and,  not  only,  fpoke  themfelves  with  gentlenefs,  and  mode¬
ration,  but,  alfo,  defired  the  reft  to  deliver  mild,  and  hu¬
mane  opinions.  They,  firft,  called  upon  Menenius  ;  who,
rifing  up,  fpoke  in  the  fame  manner  as  before,  exhorting
the  fenate  to  an  accommodation ;  and,  delivering  the  fame
opinion,  defired  that  embaftadors  might,  immediately,  be
fent  to  the  feceders,  with  difcretionary  powers  to  make  fuch
an  accommodation  as  they  fhould  think  proper.

LXVIII.  After  him,  other  confular  fenators,  being  called
upon  according  to  their  age,  rofe  up,  and  were  all  of  the
fame  opinion  with  Menenius,  till  it  came  to  the  turn  of
Appius  to  fpeak,  who,  rifing  up,  faid ;  “I  find,  fays  he,
“  fathers,  that  it  is  the  pleafure  both  of  the  confuls,  and  of
u  almoft  all  the  fenate,  to  bring  back  the  people  upon  their
cc  own  terms;  I  am  the  only  perfon  left  of  all  thofe,  who
cc  oppofed  the  accommodation,  and  I  remain  expofed  to  the
cc  refentment  of  the  people,  and  can  be,  no  longer,  of  any
<£  ufe  to  you:  However,  Ifhall  not,  for  thefe  reafons,  depart
u  from  my  former  opinion,  nor,  willingly,  defert  my  fyftem
“  of  government :  But,  the  more  I  am  abandoned  by  thofe,
<c  who,  before,  efpoufed  the  fame  fentiments,  the  more  I
£C  fhall,  one  day,  be  efteemed  by  you ;  while  I  live,  I  fhall  be
tc  praifed  by  you  ;  and,  when  dead,  remembered  by  pofterity :
C£  And  you,  O  Capitoline  Jupiter,  you  guardian  gods  of  this
“  city,  you  heroes,  and  tutelary  genius’s  of  the  Roman  land,
“  grant  that  the  return  of  the  fugitives  may  be  honourable,
<c  and  advantageous  to  all,  and  that  I  may  be  miftaken  in
“  my  prefages  of  futurity  :  And,  if  any  misfortune  fhould

“  redound


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  A  SSENS  IS.  103
“  redound  to  the  commonwealth  from  thefe  counfels  (for
“  this  will  foon  be  manifeft)  may  yon,  fpeedily,  reform
u  them,  and  infure  the  fafety  of  the  commonwealth  !
“  And,  to  me,  who  neither,  upon  any  other  occafion,  ever
“  chofe  to  fay  thofe  things,  that  were  moft  agreeable,  inftead
cc  of  thofe,  that  were  moft  profitable,  nor,  upon  this,
“  betray  the  public  to  fecure  myfelf,  may  you  be  favourable
tc  and  propitious!  Thefe  are  the  prayers  I  addrefs  to  the
u  gods:  For  words  are  of  no  further  ufe:  But  my  opinion
u  is  the  fame  it  v/as,  that  is,  to  difeharge  the  people,  who
“  continue  in  the  city,  of  their  debts,  and  to  make  war
“  upon  the  revolters  with  the  utmoft  vigor,  as  long  as  they
remain  in  arms.”

LXIX.  Having  faid  this,  he  ended.  When  the  opinions
of  the  fenior  fenators  were  found  to  agree  with  That  of
Menenius,  and  it  came  to  the  turn  of  the  juniors  to  fpeak,
the  whole  fenate  being  in  fufpence,  Spurius  Nautius  rofe  up,
the  heir  of  a  moft  illuftrious  family  (for  Nautius,  the
author  of  his  race,  was  one  of  the  colony,  that  came  over
with  Aeneas,  and  a  prieft  of  Minerva,  the  tutelary  goddefs
of  Troy;  and,  when  he  removed  from  thence,  he  brought
with  him  the  ftatue  of  that  goddefs,  which  the  family  of
the  Nautii  had  the  cuftody  of  fuccefhvely)  This  perfon
was  efteemed  the  moft  illuftrious  of  all  the  young  fenators
for  his  perfonal  virtue  ;  and  it  was  expected  that  he  would
foon  be  honoured  with  the  confulfhip.  He  began  by  making
the  apology  of  all  the  young  fenators,  and  faid  that  neither
a  fpirit  of  contention  towards  their  feniors,  nor  pride  had

induced


io4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

induced  them  to  differ  from  the  latter  in  opinion  at  the  laft
meeting  of  the  fenate  ;  and,  if  they  had  committed  an  error,
it  was  an  error  of  judgement,  incident  to  their  youth:  And
he  ended  with  faying  that  by  changing  their  opinion  they
would  convince  them  of  this:  They  confented,  therefore,
that  their  feniors,  as  men  of  better  judgement,  might  decree
whatever  they  thought  molt  conducive  to  the  good  of  the
public,  and  declared  they  fhould  meet  with  no  oppofition
from  them  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  an  intire  fubmiffion  to
their  determinations.  And  all  the  other  young  men  making
the  fame  declaration,  except  a  very  fmall  number,  who  were
related  to  Appius,  the  confuls  commended  their  orderly
behaviour,  and  exhorted  them  to  behave  themfelves  in  the
fame  manner  upon  all  public  occafions ;  and,  then,  proceeded
to  the  choice  of  the  deputies,  who  were  ten  in  number,
being  the  moft  illuftrious  of  the  fenior  fenators,  all  of  whom
had  been  confuls,  except  one.  The  deputies  were  thefe  ;
Agrippa  Menenius  Lanatus  the  fon  of  Caius,  Manius  Vale¬
rius  the  fon  of  Volufus,  Publius  Servilius,  Publius  Poftumius
the  fon  of  Quintus,  Tubertus  Titus,  Aebutius  the  fon  of
Titus,  Flavius  Servius,Sulpicius  Camerinus  the  fon  of  Publius,
Aulus  Poftumius  the  fon  of  Publius,  and  Balbus  Aulus.
After  this,  the  fenate  being  difmiffed,  the  confuls  went  to
the  affembly  of  the  people ;  and,  having  ordered  the  decree  of
the  fenate  to  be  read,  prefented  the  deputies  :  And,  every  one
defiring  to  be  informed  of  the  inftrudtions,  which  the  fenate
had  given  them,  the  confuls  faid  publicly,  that  they  had  ordered
them  to  reconcile  the  people  to  the  patricians,  by  any  means


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN AS  SE NS  I S.  105

they  could,  without  fraud,  or  deceit,  and  to  bring  home
the  fugitives  immediately.

LXX.  The  deputies,  having  received  thefe  inftrudions,
went  out  of  the  city  the  lame  day.  But  the  news  of  this
deputation,  and  of  every  thing,  that  had  palled  in  the  city,
arrived  at  the  camp,  before  the  deputies :  And,  prefently,
all  the  plebeians  came  out,  and  met  the  deputies  upon  the
road.  There  was  in  the  camp  a  man,  extremely,  bufy  and
feditious,  39  quick  in  forefeeing  things  at  a  great  diftance ;
and,  being  a  man  of  many  words,  and  talkative,  not  in¬
capable  of  exprelling  his  thoughts :  His  name  was  Lucius
Junius,  the  name  of  the  perfon,  who  had  deftroyed  mo¬
narchy  ;  and,  deliring  to  complete  the  limilitude  of  their
names,  he  would,  alfo,  be  called  Brutus  :  The  generality  of
the  people  laughed  at  the  vanity  of  the  man ;  and,  when
they  had  a  mind  to  make  themfelves  merry  with  him,  they
gave  him  the  additional  name  of  Brutus.  This  perfon  in¬
formed  Sicinnius,  who  commanded  in  the  camp,  that  it  was
not  the  intereft  of  the  people  to  fubmit  eafily  to  the  propofals,
that  were  to  be  offered,  left,  by  demanding  things  of  fmall
confequence,  their  return  might  be  the  lefs  honourable  ;  but  to
oppofe  them  for  a  long  time,  and  to  ad  a  part  in  this  nego-

39*  0|uf  tjj  yvufAy  sr^o'idViv  n  twv  tiro-  tx  yevyropevv  a^iqoq  etxoiqt ??*  d  y.iv

I uivuv  ex  z: roAAsf,  etc.  It  may  feem  odd,  juju  f^oi,  jc<*i  oiog  n.

but  it  is  true,  that  fome  parts  in  this  I  cannot  very  well  underftand  how
character  of  Lucius  Junius  bear  a  near  both  the  French  trandators  came  to
jefemblance  to  the  great  qualities  a-  render  «to?  0  at  avanturier ,  this

fcribed  by  f  Thucydides  to  Themifto-  adventurer.
cles,  who  was  t uv  (mAMvIuv  i7n7r\eiqov

f  B.  i.  c.  138.

P


VoL.  III.


tiation ;


Book  VI.


1 06  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

tiation ;  and  he  promifed  to  take  upon  himfelf  the  defence
of  the  people ;  and,  having  fuggefted  every  thing  elfe,  that
was  to  be  done,  and  faid,  he  prevailed  upon  Sicinnius.  After
which,  the  latter,  afiembling  the  people,  defired  the  deputies
to  acquaint  them  with  the  caufe  of  their  coming.

LXXI.  When  Manius  Valerius,  who  was  the  moft  an¬
cient,  and  the  moft  popular  man  of  all  the  deputies,  prefented
himfelf ;  the  people  teftifying  their  affedion  for  him  by  the
moft  endearing  expreftions,  and  appellations ;  and,  after
they  were  filent,  he  fpoke  as  follows ;  “  Nothing,  now,
“  hinders  you,  citizens,  from  returning  home,  and  being
“  reconciled  to  the  fenate  :  For  they  have  voted  you  an
“  honourable,  and  advantageous  return,  and  granted  you  an
“  amnefty  for  all  that  is  pafled  :  They  have,  alfo,  fent  us,
u  as  deputies,  whom  they  knew  to  be  the  greateft  patrons
“  of  the  people,  and,  defervedly,  reipeded  by  you,  with
“  difcretionary  powers,  to  conclude  an  accommodation  ;  to
“  the  end  we  may  not  judge  of  your  fentiments  by  ap-
u  pearances,  or  conjectures,  but  may  learn  from  yourfelves
“  upon  what  terms  you  think  fit  to  put  an  end  to  the  fedition  ;
“  that,  if  there  is  any  moderation  in  your  demands,  and  they
“  are  not  impoflible  in  themfelves  to  be  granted,  or  rendered
<c  fo  by  fome  infuperable  difhonor  annexed  to  them,  we
“  may  grant  them,  without  expeding  the  opinion  of  the
“  fenate,  or  expofing  the  fuccefs  of  our  negotiation  to  the
“  danger  of  long  delays,  or  to  the  envy  of  your  adverfaries.
“  The  fenate  having  decreed  thefe  things,  receive  their
c<  favors,  citizens,  with  joy,  and  with  all  alacrity,  and  ear-

“  neftnefs ;


Book VI.  DIONYSIUS  HiVLICARNASSENSIS.  107

“  neftnefs ;  fetting  a  value  upon  fo  great  a  happinefs,  and
“  returning  the  greateft  thanks  to  the  gods  that  the  Roman
(<  commonwealth,  which  commands  fo  many  nations,  and
“  the  fenate,  which  has  the  difpofal  of  all  her  honors,  with
“  whom  it  is  an  eftablifbed  cuftom  to  yield  to  none  of  her
“  adverfaries,  willingly  departs  from  her  dignity  in  favor  of
“  you  alone,  and  neither  thinks  fit  to  enter  into  fuch  an
“  exacd  difcuflion  of  what  belongs  to  each,  as  might  be
“  expe&ed  from  fuperiors,  who  treat  with  their  inferiors,
“  but  they  themfelves  have  firft  fent  deputies  to  propofe  an
“  accommodation  ;  neither  have  they  received  the  imperious
“  anfwers  you  gave  to  their  former  deputies,  with  anger  ;
“  but  have  fufFered  this  forbidding,  and  juvenile  exertion  of
<c  your  pride,  like  good  parents  That  of  their  though tlefs
“  children;  and  judged  proper  to  fend  another  deputation,
“  to  depart  from  their  right,  and  to  fubmit  to  every  thing,
“  citizens,  that  is  reafonable.  Pofieffed  of  fo  great  a  felicity,
“  delay  not  to  acquaint  us  with  what  you  defire,  and  do  not
cc  amufe  us :  And,  when  you  have  put  an  end  to  the  fedi-
“  tion,  return,  with  joy,  to  your  country,  in  which  you
“  have  received  your  birth,  and  education,  and  for  this
a  you  have  made  her  no  good  return,  in  having  left  her,

as  far  as  in  you  lay,  defolate,  and  a  pafture  for  cattle.
“  If  you  let  flip  this  opportunity,  you  will,  often,  wifh  for
cc  fuch  another.”

LXXII.  When  Valerius  had  done  fpeaking,  Sicinnius
prefented  himfelf  to  the  afiembly,  and  faid  that  thofe,  who
deliberated  properly,  ought  not  to  form  a  judgement  of  the

P  2  “  expe-


Book  VI.


1 08  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

expediency  of  any  meafure  from  a  fingle  reprefentation  of  it ;
but  that  arguments  of  a  contrary  nature  fhould,  alfo,  be
fuggefted,  particularly,  when  affairs  of  fo  great  moment  were
under  their  confideration.  Then  he  declared  that  any  perfon,
who  pleafed,  might  anfwer  thefe  reafons,  without  being  at
all  afhamed,  or  afraid  :  For  the  fituation  of  their  affairs,
and  their  prefent  diftrels  did  not  allow  them  to  be  influenced
either  by  fear,  or  bafhfulnefs.  All  being  filent,  and  looking
upon  one  another  to  find  out  the  man,  who  would  defend
the  common  caufe,  40  none  appeared,  though  Sicinnius,  often ^
repeated  the  fame  thing.  At  laft,  Lucius  Junius,  the  fame
perfon,  who  defired  to  be  furnamed  Brutus,  prefented  him-
felf,  as  he  had,  before,  promifed ;  and,  being  received  with
the  general  acclamations  of  the  people,  he  fpoke  in  the
following  manner  :  “  It  feems,  citizens,  that  the  dread  of  the
u  patricians,  is  fo  far  rooted  in  your  minds,  that  it  aftonifhes
“  you  :  And,  cafi:  down  by  that,  you  dare  not,  publicly?
“  avow  thofe  difcourfes,  which  are  the  common  topics  of
“  your  converfation.  For  every  one  of  you,  poflibly,  thinks
“  that  the  next  man  to  him  will  plead  the  common  caufe,

+0,  Epaivtlo  <T  »5t*r.  This  puts  me  in  feems,  the  decemvirs  pretended  to  be
mind  of  a  juft  reflexion  made  by  Livy  ignorant  of  the  caufe  of  their  feceffion,
upon  the  behaviour  of  the  feceders,  and  fent  deputies  to  them  to  know
when  they  left  the  decemvirs,  and  in-  what  they  meant  by  it :  Upon  which,
camped  on  the  Aventine  hill.  As  the  Livy  obferves  that  the  people  were  not
firft  feceffion  ended  in  the  creation  of  at  a  lofs  for  an  anfwer:  They  were  at
the  tribunes  of  the  people  ;  fo  This  a  lofs  for  a  perfon  to  give  that  anfwer.
ended  in  the  fubverfion  of  the  decern-  But  E  Livy  has  expreffed  this  better
virate:  The  firft  eftablifhed  liberty;  than  I  can;  Non  defuit  quid  refpondere*
and  the  laft  abolifhed  tyranny.  It  tur  ;  deer  at  qui  daret  refponfum .

£  B.  iii.  c.  jo.


“  and


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C AR N  A  S S E N S  I  S.  109

tc  and  had  rather  41  That  man  Should  undergo  the  danger,
“  if  any ;  while  he  himfelf,  (landing  Secure,  experts  to  enjoy,
“  in  fafety,  his  fhare  of  the  benefit  arifing  from  the  boldnefs
“  of  the  other.  But  in  this  he  is  miftaken :  For,  if  we  were
“  all  of  this  opinion,  the  backwardness  of  every  individual
“  would  prove  a  general  mifehief;  and,  while  every  man
cc  confulted  his  own  fafety,  he  would  deftroy  That  of  the
“  public  :  But,  it  you  did  not  know,  before,  that  you  are
“  freed  from  that  dread,  and  that  you  Secured  your  liberty,
“  at  the  fame  time  you  took  up  arms,  learn  it  now  at  lead,
u  and  learn  it  from  them:  For  they  come  not  with  pride,
cc  and  feverity,  to  command,  as  before,  or  to  threaten ;  but
“  to  beg,  and  invite  you  to  return  home,  and  now  begin  to
“  converfe  with  you,  as  with  free  men,  upon  equal  terms.
u  Why  then  are  you,  any  longer,  afraid  of  them,  and  why
“  are  you  filent  ?  Why  do  you  not  aflume  the  Spirit  of  free
“  men  ;  and,  having,  at  lafl,  broken  your  chains,  publifh
“  the  injuries  you  have  received  from  thefe  ?  Unhappy  men  !
“  What  are  you  afraid  of,  when  you  follow  me  as  your
“  leader  in  Speaking  freely  ?  For  I  Shall  expofe  myfelf  to
“  the  danger  of  difplaying  the  juftice  of  your  caufe  before
“  them  with  freedom,  and  Shall  hide  nothing.  And,  Since
“  Valerius  has  Said  that  nothing  hinders  you  from  going
tc  home,  the  Senate  having  given  you  leave  to  return,  and
“  having,  befides,  granted  you  an  amnefty,  I  Shall  give  him
“  this  anfwer,  which  is  true,  and  necefiary  to  be  infifted  on.

4**  Avlov  fxaK Acv.  This,  I  think,  the  which  ftands  in  all  the  editions,  and
fenfe  requires,  infteadof  paMov,  manuferipts.


LXXIIL


I  10


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

LXXIII.  “  There  are  many  other  reafons,  Valerius,  that
“  hinder  us  from  laying  down  our  arms,  and  putting  our-
£C  felves  in  your  power;  but  thefe  three  are  the  moft  con-
<c  fiderable,  and  the  moft  notorious:  The  firft,  becaufeyou
<£  come  to  accufe  us,  as  if  we  had  offended,  and  think  that,
16  when  you  give  us  leave  to  return,  you  confer  a  favor  on
<£  us :  The  next,  that,  when  you  invite  us  to  an  accommo-
cc  dation,  you  do  not,  at  all,  explain  yourfelves  upon  what
<£  terms  of  juftice,  and  humanity  we  are  to  enter  into  it :
££  And,  laftly,  becaufe  we  can  find  no  fecurity  in  any  thing
“  you  promife  us ;  fince  you  have,  alwaysr  deceived,  and
££  impofed  upon  us.  I  fhall  fpeak  to  each  of  thefe  points
<c  feparately,  beginning  with  That,  which  relates  to  juftice:
££  For  it  is  the  duty  of  all,  who  fpeak  either  in  private,  or  in
££  public,  to  begin  from  thence.  If,  then,  we  injure  you  in
££  any  thing,  we  defire  neither  an  impunity,  nor  an  amnefty  ;
£C  we  do  not  defire,  even,  to  partake,  any  longer,  of  the
“  fame  city  with  you ;  but  will  live  in  whatever  place  Fate
££  fhall  lead  us  to,  leaving  it  to  Fortune,  and  to  the  gods  to
££  to  dired  our  courfe.  But,  if,  injured  by  you,  we  have
££  been  compelled  to  make  trial  of  the  condition  we  are,  now,
££  reduced  to,  why  do  you  not  acknowledge  that  you  your-
£C  felves  have  wronged  us,  and  ftand  in  need  of  pardon,  and
C£  an  amnefty?  Whereas,  you  pretend  to  grant  the  pardon
<£  you  afk,  and  magnify  your  acquitting  us  of  the  refen t-
££  ment  you  yourfelves  defire  to  be  acquitted  of :  This  is  to
££  confound  the  nature  of  truth,  and  invert  the  claim  of
“  juftice.  That  you  are  not  the  injured,  but  the  injurers ;

££  and,


3  I  I


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.

££  and,  that  you  have  not  made  handfom  returns  for  the
££  many  great  fervices  you  have  received  from  the  people,
£  in  refpecfi  both  to  your  liberty,  and  your  fovereignty,  learn
c  from  what  follows.  I  fhall  begin  from  thofe  tranfa&ions
£  you  yourfelves  are  acquainted  with  ;  and  I  beg  of  you,
c  by  the  gods,  if  I  advance  any  thing  untrue,  that  you  will
£  not  bear  it,  but,  prefently,  refute  me.

LXXIV.  ££  Our  ancient  government  was  monarchy,
£  under  which  conftitution  we  lived,  till  the  feventh  gene-
c  ration  :  And,  in  all  thefe  reigns,  the  people  never  fu fibred
c  any  hardfhip  from  their  kings ;  and  leafi  of  all  from  thofe,
£  who  reigned  laft  :  For  I  omit  the  many  confiderable  ad-
c  vantages  they  enjoyed  under  them ;  fince,  befides  the  other
£  methods  they  ufed  of  courting,  and  flattering  the  people,
£  in  order  to  gain  their  affe&ions,  and  make  them  enemies  to
£  you  (which  is  the  pra&ice  of  all  kings,  who  aim  at  extend-
c  ing  their  power  to  tyranny)  after  they  had  made  themfelves
£  mafters  of  Suefia,  a  very  opulent  city,  by  a  long  fiege,
£  and  had  it  in  their  power  to  grant  no  part  of  the  fpoils  to
c  any  one,  but  to  appropriate  the  whole  to  themfelves,  and
c  furpafs  all  other  kings  in  riches,  they  did  not  think  fit  to
c  do  fo,  but  gave  all  the  booty  to  the  army :  So  that,  be-
£  fides  the  flaves,  cattle,  and  the  other  fpoils,  which  were
£  many,  and  of  great  value,  every  man  had  five  minae  of
£  filver  for  his  fhare :  All  which  we  negledfed,  when  they
£  ufed  their  power  like  tyrants,  by  the  excefies  they  com-
c  mitted  not  againft  us,  but  againft  you,  and  refented  their
c  behaviour ;  and,  revolting  from  our  affection  to  our  kings,

££  we


I  12


ROMAN  ANTIQJJIT  IE  S  OF  Book  VI.

<£  we  joined  you  :  And,  entering  into  the  confpiracy  you
C£  had  formed  againft  them,  both  thofe  of  us,  who  were  in
cc  the  city,  and  thofe  in  the  camp,  we  expelled  them,  and
“  inverted  you  wdth  their  power  :  And,  though  it  depended,
“  often,  on  us  to  transfer  that  power,  again,  from  you  to
££  the  expelled  kings,  and  we  were  invited  to  it  by  promifes
££  of  great  rewards,  yet,  not  to  violate  our  faith  to  you,  we
“  refufed  to  do  it,  and  underwent  many  great,  and  continual
“  dangers,  and  wars  for  your  fake  :  And,  at  this  time,  which
“  is  the  feventeenth  year,  we  are  worne  out  with  fighting
££  againft  all  mankind  for  our  common  liberty.  For  the
££  government  being  unfettled  (as  it,  often,  happens  infudden
££  revolutions)  we  ingaged  the  numerous  forces  of  two  very
££  confiderable  cities  of  Tyrrhenia,  Tarquinii,  and  Veii,  that
<£  fought  to  reftore  the  kings,  with  an  army,  vaftly,  inferior
££  in  number;  and,  fighting  with  the  greateft  alacrity,  we,
££  not  only,  overcame  our  enemies,  but  prelerved  the  power
££  for  the  furviving  conful.  Not  long  after,  when  Porfena,
££  king  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  was,  alfo,  endeavouring  to  reftore
££  the  exiles  with  the  united  forces  of  all  Tyrrhenia  command-
t£  ed  by  himfelf,  and  Thofe,  which  the  others  had,  long  be-
££  fore,  raifed,  we,  though  unprovided  with  an  army  of  equal
“  ftrength,  and,  for  that  reafon,  befieged,  and  reduced  to
££  difficulties,  and  to  the  want  of  every  thing,  by  fupporting
<£  ourfelves  under  all  thefe  terrors,  we  forced  him  to  depart  in
<£  friendfhip.  And,  laft  of  all,  when  the  kings,  for  the  third
<£  time,  fought  to  effedl  their  reftoration  by  the  aftiftance  of
u  the  Latin  nation,  and  brought  againft  us  the  forces  of

“  thirty


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  113

“  thirty  cities,  we,  feeing  you  humbly  intreating,  lamenting,
“  calling  upon  every  one  of  us,  and  putting  us  in  mind  of
u  our  friendfhip,  our  common  education,  and  our  common
cc  warfare,  could  not  bear  to  abandon  you  :  But,  looking
“  upon  it  as  a  moft  honourable,  and  glorious  thing  to  fight
“  your  battles,  we  rufhed  into  the  midft  of  terrors,  and
“  expofed  ourfelves  to  a  greater  danger,  than  we  had,  ever
C£  before,  encountered;  in  which,  after  we  had  received
££  many  wounds,  and  loft  many  of  our  relations,  of  our
££  friends,  and  fellow-foldiers,  we  overcame  the  enemy,
cc  killed  their  generals,  and  deftroyed  the  whole  royal  family.

LXXV.  ££  Thefe  are  the  adtions  we  have  performed  to
C£  aftift  you  in  freeing  y ourfelves  from  the  tyrants,  in  which
££  our  alacrity  has  exceeded  our  power,  and  in  which  we
£C  ingaged  rather  through  virtue,  than  neceftity.  Nov/
c£  hear  what  we  have  done  to  obtain  for  you  the  refpedt,  and
u  command  of  others ;  and  alfo  to  acquire  for  you  a  power
££  greater  than  was,  at  firft,  expedled ;  and,  as  I  faid  before,
<£  if,  in  any  degree,  I  fwerve  from  the  truth,  objedt  to  what
££  I  fay.  When  you  thought  you  had  fecured  your  liberty,
££  you  were  not  contented  to  ftop  there;  but  ingaging  in
u  bold,  and  new  attempts,  perhaps  looking  upon  every  man
££  as  your  enemy,  who  defired  to  preferve  his  liberty,  and
*£  declaring  war  almoft  againft  all  the  world,  in  all  thefe
C£  perils,  and  in  all  thefe  battles,  fought  to  fupport  that
C£  ambition,  you  thought  fit  to  lavifh  our  blood.  I  omit  the
<c  number  of  cities  that,  fometimes  fingly,  fometimes  two
*c  jointly,  made  war  upon  you  in  defence  of  their  liberty  ;
Vol.  III.  “  the


1 14  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  VI.

44  the  forces  of  fome  we  overcame  in  pitched  battles,  and
44  others  we  took  by  florm,  and  compelled  them  to  become
44  fubje&s  to  you.  Why  fhould  we  particularize  the  a&ions,
44  when  the  fubjed  is  fo  ample  ?  But,  who  were  they,  who
44  aflifted  you  in  fubje&ing  all  Tyrrhenia,  which  was  divided
44  into  twelve  dynafties,  and  exceeding  powerful  both  at
44  land,  and  fea?  Whofe  fuccours  rendered  the  Sabines,  a
44  nation  of  fuch  ftrength,  who  had  ever  contended  with
44  you  for  the  fuperiority,  unable,  any  longer,  to  contend
44  with  you  for  an  equality  ?  Who  were  they,  who  fubdued
44  the  thirty  cities  of  the  Latines,  who,  not  only,  were
44  elated  with  the  fuperiority  of  their  forces,  but  derived
44  magnificent  hopes  from  the  fuperior  juftice  of  their  de-
44  rnands,  and  compelled  them  to  fly  to  you  to  deprecate
44  flavery,  and  the  demolition  of  their  cities  ?

LXXVI.  44 1  omit  the  other  dangers,  in  which  we  ingaged
44  with  you,  before  we  were  difunited,  and  while  we  our-
44  felves  entertained  the  hopes  of  fome  advantages  under  the
44  government.  But,  when  it  appeared  you  had  converted  that
44  government  into  a  tyranny,  that  you  treated  us  like  flaves,
44  and  that  we,  no  longer,  continued  in  the  fame  difpofition
44  towards  you,  then  it  was  that  almoft  all  your  fubje&s
44  revolted,  the  Volfci  fetting  the  example,  which  was  fol-
44  lowed  by  the  Aequi,  the  Hernici,  the  Sabines,  and  many
44  others ;  and  an  opportunity  feemed  to  be  offered,  the  like
44  to  which  had,  never  before,  happened,  if  we  had  coun-
44  tenanced  it,  to  efledl  one  of  thefe  two  things,  either  to
44  fubvert  you  ^government,  or  to  render  it  more  moderate

44  for


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  n  5

“  for  the  future  :  Do  you  remember  to  what  a  defpair  of
<c  your  fovereignty,  and  to  what  a  degree  of  diftrefs  you
“  were  then  reduced,  left  we  fhould  either  not  aftift  you
“  in  the  war,  or,  indulging  our  refentment,  join  the  enemy ;
“  and  to  what  intreaties,  and  promifes  you  had  recourfe  ?
“  What  did  we  do  then,  mean  citizens  though  we  are,  and
“  abufed  by  you?  We  fuffered  ourfelves  to  be  overcome  by
“  the  intreaties,  and  prevailed  upon  by  the  promifes,  which
c<  Servilius,  the  beft  of  men,  then  conful,  made  to  the  people ;
u  and  retained  no  refentment  of  your  former  ill-ufage  ;  but,
conceiving  good  hopes  of  your  future  behaviour,  we  gave
<£  ourfelves  up  to  you  ;  and,  having  fubdued  all  your  ene-
“  mies  in  a  fhort  time,  we  prefen  ted  ourfelves  to  our  country
i:  with  many  prifoners,  and  a  fine  booty.  What  return  did
“  you  make  to  us  for  thefe  fervices  ?  Did  you  make  us  a
cc  return,  that  was  juft,  and  worthy  of  the  dangers  we  had
“  expofed  ourfelves  to  ?  Far,  far  from  it :  You  violated  even
“  the  promifes,  which  you  had  ordered  the  conful  to  make
“  to  us  in  the  name  of  the  commonwealth :  And  this  very
“  perfon,  this  beft  of  men,  whom  you  had  made  ufe  of  to
«  deceive  us,  you  deprived  of  a  triumph,  though,  of  all
“  others,  he  moft  defer ved  that  honor ;  and  fixed  this  dif-
“  grace  upon  him  for  no  other  reafon,  than  becaufe  he
“  defired  you  to  do  that  juft  ice  you  had  promifed,  and  was
“  known  to  refent  the  impofition.

LXXVII.  “  And,  very  lately  (for  I  fhall  add  one  in-
“  fiance  more  to  that  part  of  my  difcourfe,  which  relates  to
a  juftice,  before  I  make  an  end)  when  the  Aequi,  the  Sabines,

0^2  <c  and


1 1 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

“  and  the  Volfci,  uniting  their  counfels,  themfelves  took  arms
££  againft  you,  and  invited  others  to  do  the  fame,  were  not
££  you,  who  are  fo  awful  and  imperious,  obliged  to  fly  to  us,
u  who  are  mean  and  defpifed,  and  to  promife  every  thing  in
££  order  to  ingage  us  in  your  defence?  And,  that  you  might
££  not  feem  to  have  an  intention  to  deceive  us  again,  as  you
££  had  often  done  before,  you  made  ufe  of  Manius  Valerius,
<£  the  greateft  patron  of  the  people,  as  a  cover  for  your
“  deceit;  in  whom  we  confiding,  and  thinking  ourfelves
<£  in  no  danger  of  being  impofed  upon  by  a  dictator,  and,
££  leaft  of  all,  by  a  man  who  loved  us,  we  aftifted  you  in  this
££  war  alfo ;  and,  having  fought  not  a  few  battles,  nor  thofe
c  c  either  inconfiderable,  or  obfcure,  we  overcame  your  enemies :
££  But,  the  war  being  ended  in  a  mod  glorious  manner,  and
££  fooner  than  it  was,  generally,  expected,  you  were  fo  far  from
££  rejoicing,  and  thinking  yourlelves,  greatly,  obliged  to  the
££  people  for  the  fuccefs  of  it,  that  you  defired  ftill  to  keep
<£  us  in  arms  againft  our  will,  and  under  our  enfigns,  that
££  you  might  violate  your  promifes,  as  you  had,  at  fir  ft,  deter-
££  mined:  However,  this  perfon  not  fubmitting  to  the  im-
££  pofition,  nor  to  the  indignity  of  the  adtion  ;  but  bringing
££  the  enfigns  into  the  city,  and  difbanding  the  forces,  you
££  made  ufe  of  this  as  a  pretence  for  not  doing  us  juftice;  you
££  abufed  him,  and  performed  not  a  fingle  thing  you  had  pro-
C£  mifed  us;  but,  at  one  and  the  fame  time,  you  committed
££  three  crimes  of  the  blackeft  dye;  you  debafed  the  dignity
££  of  the  fenate  ;  you  deftroyed  the  credit  of  this  perfon ;  and
££  deprived  your  benefa&ors  of  the  recompence,  that  was  due

££  to


$


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASS  EN  SIS.  1 17

“  to  their  labors.  Since,  therefore,  patricians,  we  have  thefe,
u  and  many  other  things  of  the  like  nature  to  alledge  againft
“  you,  we  did  not  think  fit  tofolicityou  byfupplications,  and
c<  intreaties ;  nor,  as  if  guilty  of  heinous  crimes,  to  accept  of
“  our  return  upon  the  terms  of  an  impunity,  and  an  am-
<c  nefty :  Neither  do  we  think  proper  to  enter  into  an  exad:
“  difcuffion  of  thefe  things  at  prefent,  fince  we  are  met  to  treat
“  of  an  agreement;  butare  willing  to  overlook,  and  forget  them.

LXXVIII.  “  But  why  do  you  not  explain  the  fubjed:  of
<c  your  deputation,  and  fay,  plainly,  what  you  are  come  to  alk  ?
£C  Upon  what  hopes  do  you  defire  us  to  return  to  the  city  ?
“  And  what  kind  of  fortune  would  you  have  us  take  for  our
“  guide?  What  is  the  alacrity,  or  joy,  that  is  to  receive  us?
“  For  we  have  not,  hitherto,  heard  you  propole  any  thing
“  humane,  or  benevolent;  no  honors,  no  magistracies,  no
“  relief  of  our  poverty,  nor  any  thing  elfe,  no,  not  the  leaft.
“  Though,  in  reality,  you  ought  not  to  tell  us  what  you
“  defign  to  do,  but  what  you  have  done;  to  the  end  that,
<c  having  beforehand  tailed  fome  effect  of  your  benevolence,
“  we  might  conclude  that  your  future  favors,  alfo,  would
“  be  of  the  fame  nature.  I  exped:  they  will  anfvver  to  this,
“  that  they  are  come  with  difcretionary  powers  in  all  things :
<c  So  that,  whatever  we  can  perfuade  one  another  to  agree
“  to,  That  is  to  be  valid.  I  fuppofe  this  to  be  fo  :  Let  the
u  event juftify  it ;  I  contradid:  it  not:  But,  I  defire  to  know
“  from  them  what  is  to  follow  upon  this ;  and,  after  we
“  have  fignified  the  conditions,  upon  which  we  think  fit  to
u  return,  and  thefe  conditions  are  agreed  to,  who  will

u  under-


1 1 3


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

“  undertake  for  the  performance  of  this  agreement?  What
“  fecurity  fhall  we  truft  to,  if  we  lay  down  our  arms,  and
“  put  ourfelves  again  in  the  power  of  thefe  men  ?  Shall  we
“  truft  to  the  votes  of  the  fenate,  that  are  to  pafs  upon  this
££  fubjed  ?  For  they  are  not  yet  palled  :  And  what  fhall
££  hinder  thefe  from  being,  again,  repealed  by  other  votes,
££  when  Appius,  and  thofe  of  his  fadion  fhall  think  fit  ?
<£  Or  fhall  we  truft  to  the  dignity  of  the  deputies,  who
“  ingage  their  own  faith?  But  the  fenate  have,  already,
££  made  ufe  of  thefe  men  to  deceive  us.  Or  fhall  we  truft
“  to  an  agreement,  entered  into  under  the  fandion  of  the
“  gods,  and  allure  to  ourfelves  the  performance  of  it  by  oaths?
u  For  my  own  part,  I  am  more  afraid  of  relying  on  this,
££  than  on  any  other  affurance  mankind  can  give;  becaufe
“  I  fee  it  defpifed  by  the  men  in  power ;  and,  becaufe  I
“  have  obferved,  upon  many  other  occalions,  as  well  as  this,
££  that  involuntary  agreements,  entered  into  by  men  defirous
££  to  command,  with  thofe,  who  delire  to  be  free,  laft  no
t£  longer,  than  the  power  of  that  neceflity,  which  formed
££  thofe  agreements.  What  kind  of  friendfhip,  therefore,  and
“  affurance  is  that,  under  which  we  fhall  be  obliged  to
££  court  one  another  againft  our  will,  while  each  of  us  are
<£  watching  our  own  opportunities  to  furprife  one  another  ?
C£  This  lituation  will  be  fucceeded  by  fulpicions,  and  con-
*£  tinual  accufations  of  one  another,  by  envy,  and  hatred,
££  and  evils  of  every  kind;  and  by  an  eternal  conteft  which
<£  of  us  fhall  lirft  effed  the  deftrudion  of  his  adverfary,  left
<c  a  delay  may  prove  the  means  of  his  own.


LXXIX.


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  119
LXXIX.  “  And  all  know  there  is  not  a  greater  mifchief,
<c  than  a  civil  war,  in  which  the  conquered  are  unfortunate,
“  and  the  conquerors  criminal ;  and  in  which  the  former
ic  are  deftroyed  by,  and  the  latter  deftroy,  their  deareft
“  friends.  To  fuch  misfortunes,  and  to  fuch  abhorred  cala-
“  mities  invite  us  not,  patricians ;  neither  let  us  yield  to
“  their  invitations,  citizens :  But  let  us  acquiefce  under  that
“  fortune,  which  has  feparated  us.  Let  them  have  the  whole
“  city  to  themfelves,  and  enjoy  it  without  us ;  and  let  them
“  poflefs  alone  every  other  advantage,  after  they  have  driven
“  the  mean,  and  obfcure  plebeians  from  their  country.
“  Let  us  depart  to  whatever  place  Fortune  fhall  conduct  us ;

and  look  upon  That  we  leave,  as  a  foreign  country,  not
<c  our  own  :  For  none  of  us  leave  there  either  his  lands,  his
“  paternal  habitation,  common  facrifices,  or  the  dignity  every
“  man  is  intitled  to  in  his  own  country ;  the  ddire  of  which
“  things  might  induce  us  to  be  fond  of  flaying  there,  even
<c  contrary  to  our  refolutions;  we  have  not  there  even  the
“  liberty  of  our  own  perfons,  which  we  have  purchafed
“  with  our  arms,  and  with  many  labors:  Since  fome  of
“  thofe  have  been  deftroyed  by  the  enemy,  fome  confumed
u  by  the  fcarcity  of  daily  neceffaries,  and  others  we  have
“  been  deprived  of  by  thefe  imperious  creditors :  For  whom
<c  we,  miferable  men,  are,  at  laft,  obliged  to  till  our  own
c{  lands,  digging,  planting,  plowing,  tending  flocks  of  flieep,
becoming  fellow -fervants  to  our  own  flaves  taken  by  us  in
a  war ;  fome  of  us  being  bound  with  chains,  fome  with
6C  fetters,  and  others,  like  the  moft  mifchievous  of  all  wild

“  beafts.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

u  beafts,  with  wooden,  and  iron  collars:  I  fay  nothing  of
u  the  blows,  outrages,  ftripes,  the  continual  labors,  and  every
“  other  cruelty,  abufe,  and  infolence  we  have  undergone.
“  Freed  by  heaven  from  fo  many,  and  fo  great  evils,  let  us,
“  joyfully,  fly  from  them  with  all  the  fpeed,  and  power  we
“  are  able;  and,  following  Fortune,  and  that  god,  who
<c  preferves  us,  as  our  guides,  look  upon  our  liberty  as  our
u  country,  and  our  courage  as  our  riches.  For  every  nation
u  will  receive  us  into  their  community,  becaufe  we  fhall  be,
“  in  fome  refpedls,  inoffenflve  to  thofe,  who  will  receive  us,
<c  and,  in  others,  ufeful.

LXXX.  “  Of  this  let  many  Greeks,  and  many  Barbarians
“  be  examples  to  us,  particularly  the  anceftors  both  of  thefe
“  men,  and  our  own :  Some  ol  whom,  leaving  Afia  with
u  Aeneas,  came  into  Europe,  and  built  a  city  in  the  country
“  of  the  Latines;  and  others,  coming  from  Alba,  under  the
tc  condudl  of  Romulus,  as  chief  of  the  colony,  built,  in  thefe
u  parts,  the  city  we  are,  now,  leaving.  We  have  with  us
u  forces  more  numerous  than  they  had,  even  three  times
“  their  number,  and  a  more  juft  caufe  of  removing:  For
<£  thofe,  who  left  Troy,  were  driven  out  by  their  enemies ;
“  but  we,  by  our  friends ;  and  there  is  more  compaflion
“  due  to  fuch,  as  are  expelled  by  their  own  people,  than  to
“  thofe,  who  are  expelled  by  foreigners.  The  colony  under
“  Romulus  defpifed  the  country  of  their  anceftors,  in  hopes
“  of  acquiring  a  better ;  but  we,  who  quit  a  life  attached
* c  to  no  city,  and  to  no  habitation,  ingage  in  a  colony,  that
“  will  be  neither  envied  by  the  gods,  troublefome  to  men,

u


nor


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  ENS  IS.  121

u  nor  grievous  to  any  country.  We  have  neither  fpilled  the
££  blood  of  our  fellow-citizens  who  expel  us,  laid  wafte  the
<£  country  we  quit,  with  fire,  and  fword,  nor  left  any  other
££  monument  of  an  everlafting  hatred,  according  to  the
££  cuftom  of  all  nations,  who  have  been  abufed  by  a  viola-
<£  tion  of  treaties,  and  reduced  to  unavoidable  necefllty  :
tc  But,  calling  upon  the  gods,  and  genius’s,  who  dired  all
££  human  affairs  with  juftice,  as  witneffes  to  our  complaints;
*£  and,  leaving  it  to  them  to  revenge  our  wrongs,  we,  only,
££  defire  this  favor,  that  you  will  reftore  our  infant  children,
C£  and  parents,  and  fuch  of  our  wives,  as  are  willing  tofliare
<£  our  fortune :  Thefe  will  fuffice ;  and  we  defire  nothing
££  elfe  from  our  country:  May  you  be  happy,  and  lead  the
<£  life  you  chufe  ;  fince  your  fentiments  are  fo  inconfiftent
££  with  civil  government,  and  fo  incommunicative  to  your
u  inferiors.”

LXXXI.  Brutus  thus  ended  his  fpeech  :  When  all,  who
were  prefent,  looked  upon  every  thing  he  had  advanced  in
relation  to  juftice  to  be  well-grounded,  asalfo  what  he  alledged
againft  the  pride  of  the  fenate ;  particularly  what  he  faid  to
{hew  the  aflurance,  offered  for  the  performance  of  the  agree¬
ment,  to  be  full  of  fraud,  and  deceit:  But,  when,  laftly,  he
defcribed  the  abufes  which  the  people  had  differed  from  their
creditors,  and  put  every  man  in  mind  of  his  own  misfor¬
tunes,  none  were  fo  obdurate,  as  not  to  fhed  tears,  and  to
bewail  their  common  calamities ;  and,  not  only,  the  people
were  affeded  in  this  manner,  but  the  deputies  of  the  fenate
alfo  :  For  even  thefe  could  not  refrain  from  tears,  when  they

Vol.  III.  R  coil-


Book  VI.


122  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

confidered  the  misfortunes,  that  would  flow  from  a  fepa-
ration  of  the  people  :  And  they  continued,  a  long  time,
confounded,  pouring  forth  tears,  and  at  a  lofs  what  to  fay.
But,  after  this  great  lamentation  ceafed,  and  the  aflembly
was  filent,  Titus  Lartius  prefen  ted  himfelf  to  anfwer  thefe
accufations ;  a  man,  who  feemed  to  excel  the  reft  of  the
citizens  by  his  dignity  as  well  as  age,  and  had  been  twice
conful ;  and  had,  of  all  men,  made  the  beft  ufe  of  the
di&atorial  power,  and  caufed  that  invidious  magiftracy  to
be  looked  upon  as  facred,  and  refpeftable.  He  fpoke  firft
to  the  point  of  juftice;  and,  fometimes,  cenfured  the  credi¬
tors  for  having  adled  with  cruelty,  and  inhumanity;  and,  at
others,  glanced  at  the  poor  for  defiring  things  unjuft,  and
aiming  at  being  difcharged  of  their  debts  by  violence,  rather
than  favor ;  and  told  them  they  were  in  the  wrong  to  quarrel
with  the  fenate  for  refilling  to  grant  them  what  was  reafon-
able,  rather  than  with  thofe,  who  were  the  caufe  of  that
refufal :  He,  alfo,  endeavoured  to  fhew  that  there  was  a
fmall  part  of  the  people,  whofe  offence  was  involuntary,  and
who  were  forced,  by  the  excefs  of  their  poverty,  to  demand
an  abolition  of  their  debts ;  but  that  the  greateft  part  of
them  were  abandoned  to  libertinifm,  and  infolence,  and  to
a  life  of  pleafure,  and  prepared  to  gratify  their  paflions  by
robbing  others ;  and  he.  thought  a  difference  ought  to  be
made  between  the  miferable,  and  the  wicked,  and  between
thofe,  who  deferved  favor,  and  thofe,  who  deferved  hatred:
And,  faying  fome  other  things  to  the  fame  purpofe,  that
were  true  indeed,  but  not  grateful  to  all  who  heard  him,

he


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  A  S  SEN’SIS.  123

he  did  not  gain  their  approbation ;  but  every  thing  he  faid
was  received  with  a  great  murmur,  fome  being  difcon-
tented  at  his  renewing  the  memory  of  their  forrows ;  and
others  owning  that  he  concealed  no  part  of  the  truth.  But
thefe  were,  greatly,  inferior  to  the  former,  and  being  drowned
with  numbers,  the  clamor  of  the  difcontented  prevailed.

LXXXII.  After  Lartius  had  added  a  few  things  to  what
he  had,  before,  faid,  and  touched  upon  their  revolt,  and  the
precipitancy  of  their  refolutions ;  Sicinnius,  who  was  then
at  the  head  of  the  people,  replied,  and  inflamed  them  frill
more,  faying  that,  ££  by  what  Lartius  had  advanced,  they
“  might  learn  what  honors,  and  favors  were  like  to  receive
££  them,  when  they  returned  to  their  country:  For,  if  thofe,
“  who  are  in  the  height  of  their  apprehenflons,  who  im-
££  plore  the  afliftance  of  the  people,  and  are  come  hither  for
“  that  purpofe,  cannot,  even  now,  prevail  upon  themfelves
££  to  fpeak  to  them  with  moderation,  and  humanity,  what
“  fentiments  are  you  to  exped  they  will  entertain,  when
“  every  thing  fhallhave  fucceeded  according  to  their  wifhes;
“and  that  thofe,  who  are,  now,  abufed  by  their  words,
“  fhall  become  fubjed  to  their  adions?  What  pride,  what
C£  ftripes,  what  tyrannical  cruelty  will  they  forbear  ?  If  you
££  are  contented  to  be  flaves  all  your  lives,  to  be  bound,
“  fcourged,  and  deftroyed  by  fire,  fword,  famine,  and  every
££  other  abufe,  defer  it  not ;  but  throw  down  your  arms,
<£  and  follow  them  with  your  hands  tied  behind  you :  But,
££  if  you  have  any  love  for  liberty,  bear  not  this  ufage.  And,
“  as  for  you,  deputies,  either  explain  the  terms,  upon  which

R  2  ££  you


124  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

u  you  defire  to  recal  us ;  or,  it  you  do  not  explain  them,
“  withdraw  from  the  afiembly:  For,  after  this,  we  fhall  not
“  allow  you  to  fpeak.”

LXXXIII.  When  he  had  faid  this,  all  prefent  teftified,
by  their  acclamations,  that  they  approved  of  his  reafons*
After  they  were  filent,  Menenius  Agrippa,  the  fame  perfon,
who  had  pleaded  the  caufe  of  the  people  in  the  fenate  ;  and,
having  moved  that  deputies  might  be  fent  with  difcre-
tionary  powers,  had  been  the  chief  caufe  of  that  deputation,
fignified  that  he,  alfo,  had  a  defire  to  fpeak.  The  people
looked  upon  this,  as  the  thing  they  had  wifhed  ;  and,  now
at  leaft,  expe&ed  to  hear  propofals  tending  to  a  fincere
accommodation,  and  to  the  fecurity  of  both  parties :  And
firft  they  encouraged  him  with  a  great  fhout,  and  called  out
to  him  to  fpeak :  After  that,  they  were  quiet,  and  fo  great
a  filence  prevailed  in  the  aflembly,  that  the  place  refembled
a  folitude.  He  feemed,  in  all  refpe&s,  to  fpeak  in  the  mofc
perfuafive  manner,  and  the  belt  fuited  to  the  inclinations  of
his  audience :  And,  at  the  end  of  his  fpeech,  it  is  faid  he
made  ufe  of  a  kind  of  fable,  like  Thofe  of  Aefop,  which
bore  a  near  refemblance  to  the  prefent  occafion ;  and,  by
this  means  chiefly,  prevailed  with  them:  For  which  reafon,
it  has  been  thought  worthy  to  be  recorded,  and  is  cele¬
brated  in  all  the  ancient  hiftories.  The  difcourfe  made
by  this  perfon,  as  chief  of  the  deputies,  was  to  this
purpofe:  We  were  fent  to  you  by  the  fenate,  citizens,

“  neither  to  excufe  them,-  nor  to  accufe  you  :  For  thefe
<c  things  were  not  thought  feafonable,  or  expedient  in  the

“  prefent


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  125
££  prefen t  diftreiTed  condition  ol  the  commonwealth  ;  but,
££  to  put  an  end  to  the  fedition  with  all  poiiible  zeal,  and
“  by  all  methods ;  and  to  reftore  the  government  to  its
££  former  ftate :  And,  for  that  purpofe,  we  are  invefted  with
“  full  powers.  So  that,  we  do  not  think  ourfelves,  at  all5
££  obliged,  like  Junius,  to  fpend  a  long  time  in  debating  the
££  point  of  right:  But  we  fhall  acquaint  you  with  the  hu-
££  mane  conditions,  upon  which  we  think  fit  to  put  an  end
££  to  the  fedition ;  what  affurance  we  fhall  give  you  for  the
££  performance  of  our  convention ;  and  the  refolutions  we
<£  are  come  to  concerning  both.  When  we  confidered  that
“  every  fedition  is  then  cured  in  all  cities,  when  the  caufes,
££  that  produced  the  difagreement,  are  removed,  we  thought
££  it  neceffary  both  to  difcover,  and  put  an  end  to,  the  primary
££  caufes  of  this  diflention:  And,  having  found  that  the
££  fprings,  from  whence  the  prefent  evils  flowed,  have  been
££  the  fevere  exactions  of  debts,  thus  we  reform  thofe  ex-
c£  actions;  we  think  it  juft  that  all  thofe,  who  have  con-
c£  tradted  debts,  and  are  unable  to  pay  them,  be  difcharged
££  of  thofe  debts :  And,  if  the  perfons  of  any,  who  have
“  buffered  the  day  appointed  for  the  payment  of  their  debts,
££  to  elapfe,  are,  already,  confined  by  legal  proceedings
££  thereupon,  we  determine  that  thofe,  alfo,  be  free.  And,
££  as  to  fuch,  as  have  had  judgement  paffed  againft  them,
C£  and  have,  already,  been  delivered  over  to  the  perfons,  who
<£  fued  them  to  judgement,  we  order  that  thefe,  alfo,  be
££  enlarged,  and  we  reverfe  thofe  judgements.  Concerning
££  your  paft  debts,  therefore,  on  account  of  which  you  thought

££  fit


126  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  VI.

££  fit  to  fecede,  we  redrefs  them  in  this  manner.  And,  as  to
u  future  debts,  whatever  fhall  be  approved  of  both  by  you,
“  who  are  the  people,  and  by  the  fenate,  after  a  law  has
££  paffed  for  that  purpofe,  let  it  be  fo  ordered.  Are  not  thefe
££  the  things,  citizens,  that  divided  you  from  the  patricians?
££  And,  if  you  could  have  obtained  them,  would  you  not
££  have  been  contented,  and  aimed  at  nothing  elfe  ?  They
££  are  now  granted  to  you.  Return  then  to  your  country
££  with  joy.

LXXXIV.  £C  The  affurances,  which  fhall  confirm  this
cc  convention,  and  fecure  to  you  the  performance  of  it,  fhall
“  be  fuch,  as  are  founded  both  on  law,  and  on  the  pradlice
“  of  all  men,  who  put  an  end  to  their  enmities  :  For  the
C£  fenate  will  confirm  thefe  things  by  a  vote,  and  give  the
££  force  of  a  law  to  the  conditions,  that  fhall  be  drawn  up.
££  But  rather  let  the  conditions  agreed  upon,  be  drawn  up
££  here,  by  us,  and  the  fenate  will  ratify  them.  That  the
££  conceffions,  now,  made  to  you,  may  remain  firm  ;  and  that
l£  nothing  contrary  to  them  may,  for  the  future,  be  enabled
<£  by  the  fenate,  firft,  we,  the  deputies,  are  your  fureties,
££  and  give  you  our  perfons,  our  lives,  and  our  families,  as
££  pledges.  And,  in  the  next  place,  the  fenators,  42  whofe

42,  b atevlat,  ocoi  t«  vfvj $i<ru.oC!i  cuvtf-  fenate.  I  he  fenfe,  therefore,  of  the
ygci$Y]<ro\loii.  lam  afraid  the  French  Greek  words  I  take  to  be  this  :  It  was
tranflators  have  miftaken  the  fenfe  of  ufual  to  infert  in  the  decrees  of  the
thefe  words.  Le  Jay  has  faid  ;  tout  ce  fenate,  before  the  enabling  part,  the
qu’il  y  a  de  Jenateurs ,  en  fignant  V arrefi  names  of  thofe  fenators,  who,  to  tcftify
du  ftnat  and  M.  ***,  les  autres  Jena-  their  approbation  of  that  decree,  affift-
t-eurs  qui  figneront  le  Jmatus-confulte.  ed  at  the  drawing  it  up  ;  which  was
I  do  not  think  it  was  the  cuftom  for  fignified  by  thefe  words,  fcrib.  affue-
the  fenators  to  fign  the  decrees  of  the  runt  j  that  is yfcribendo  affuerunt:  After

££  names


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  127

“  names  will  be  inferted  in  the  decree  of  the  fenate,  fhall
“  enter  into  the  fame  ingagement :  For  nothing  can  be
cc  mentioned  in  'it  contrary  to  the  intereft  of  the  people,
iC  while  we  oppofe  it ;  fince  we  are  the  leading  members  of
“  the  fenate,  and,  always,  deliver  our  opinions  firft.  The
C£  laft  affurance  we  fhall  give  you  is  That  in  ufe  among  all
“  men,  both  Greeks,  and  Barbarians,  which  no  time  fhall
“  ever  abolifh,  and  which,  by  the  interpolation  of  oaths,
cc  and  libations,  makes  the  gods  fureties  for  the  performance
“  of  agreements ;  under  this  affurance,  many  great  enmities
u  between  private  men,  and  many  wars,  arifen  between  na-
“  tions,  have  been  compofed.  Receive,  then,  this  affurance
“  alfo,  and  confider  whether  you  will  allow  a  few  of  the
“  principal  members  of  the  fenate  to  give  you  their  oaths  in
“  the  name  of  their  whole  body,  or  infill  upon  it  that  all  the
“  fenators,  whofe  names  will  be  inferted  in  the  decree,  fhall
“  fwear,'  by  every  thing  that  is  facred,  that  they  will,  in**
“  violably,  obferve  the  agreement.  Traduce  not,  Brutus,
C£  affurances,  given  under  the  fandion  of  the  gods,  and  con-
“  firmed  by  pledging  hands,  and  by  libations;  nor  deftroy
u  the  moft  illuftrious  of  all  human  inftitutions :  Neither  do
“  you,  citizens,  fuffer  him  to  mention  the  impious  violations
£C  of  oaths,  committed  by  wicked,  and  tyrannical  men;
<£  adions  far  diftant  from  the  Roman  virtue.

which  words,  the  names  of  thefe  fe-  Coelius  fends  a  copy  to  h  Cicero,  will
nators  were  inferted.  The  famous  de-  explain  whatl  have  faid.  It  there  ap-
cree  of  the  fenate,  relating  to  the  con-  pears  that  thirteen  fenators  attended
fular  provinces,  which  tended  to  recal  at  the  drawing  up  of  that  decree.
Caefar  from  Gaul,  and  of  which

h  Cicero’s  Epifiles,  B.  viii.  Epifi.  8.


LXXXV.


128  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

LXXXV.  “  I  ffiall  mention  one  affurance  more,  which
“  no  man  is  ignorant,  or  doubts,  of,  and  then  have  done.
“  What  is  That?  It  is  the  affurance,  that  introduces  the
<£  common  advantage,  and  prefer ves  both  parts  of  the  con-
“  ffitution  by  their  mutual  affiftance.  This  was  the  firft,
i£  and  only  motive,  that  brought  us  together,  and  will  never
££  fuffer  us  to  be  afunder :  For  the  ignorant  multitude  will,
C£  always,  want,  and  never  ceafe  to  want,  prudent  leaders ;
<£  and  the  fenate,  who  are  capable  of  governing,  will  never
“  ceafe  to  want  a  multitude  willing  to  obey.  This  we  know
<£  by  experience,  and  not  by  fpeculation,  and  conjecture  alone.
C£  Why,  therefore,  do  we  terrify,  and  difquiet  one  another  ?
C£  Why  do  we  treat  one  another  with  ill  language,  when  it
££  is  in  our  power  to  do  good  offices  to  one  another  ?  Why
c£  do  we  not  rather  open  our  arms,  embrace  one  another,
<c  and  return  to  our  country,  to  tafte  the  pleafures  we,
<c  formerly,  enjoyed,  and  gratify  defires,  of  all  others,  the
<£  moft  agreeable  ?  Inftead  of  that,  we  are  feeking  frail  fe-
C£  curities,  and  faithlefs  affurances ;  like  thofe  who  are  the
u  greateft  enemies,  and  fufpeCt  the  worft  of  every  thing.
££  As  for  us  fenators,  we  want  no  other  affurance,  citizens,
££  that  you  will  never,  if  you  return,  behave  yourfelves  ill  to
C£  us,  than  the  knowledge  we  have  of  your  good  education,
££  of  your  adherence  to  the  laws  of  your  country,  and  of
“  every  other  virtue,  of  which  you  have  given  many  proofs
t£  both  in  peace,  and  war.  But,  if  there  fhould  be  a  necef-
<c  fity  of  a  further  affurance  from  an  expectation  of  a  benefit
c£  by  reforming  the  joint  agreement,  now  entered  into,  we

££  are


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  129

“  are  fo  far  convinced  of  your  good  difpolition  in  every
<c  thing  that  we  fhall  require,  from  the  people,  neither
“  oaths,  nor  hoftages,  nor  any  other  affurance.  How-
“  ever,  we  fhall  oppofe  nothing  you  delire.  And  fo  much
“  concerning  our  fidelity,  upon  which  fubjedt  Brutus  en-
u  deavoured  to  impeach  us.  But,  if  any  groundlefs  envy
“  poffelles  you  with  an  ill  opinion  of  the  fenate,  I  delire  to
“  fpeak  to  that  point  al fo,  citizens ;  and  I  beg  of  you,  in
(C  the  name  of  the  gods,  that  you  will  hear  me  with  lilence,
cc  and  attention.

LXXXVI.  “  A  commonwealth  refembles,  in  fome  mea-
“  fure,  a  human  body  :  For  each  of  them  is  compofed  of
u  many  parts;  and  each  of  thefe  neither  has  the  fame
“  powers,  nor  is  applicable  to  the  fame  ufes :  And,  if  thefe
“  parts  of  the  human  body  fhould  each  of  them  be  indued
“  with  a  particular  fenfe,  and  voice,  and  then  a  fedition
“  fhould  arife,  and  all  of  them  unite  againft  the  belly  ;  and
“  the  feet  fhould  fay  that  the  whole  body  refts  on  them  ;
“  the  hands,  that  they  -exercife  arts,  get  provilions,  fight
“  v/ith  the  enemy,  and  lupply  the  community  with  many
“  other  advantages  ;  the  fhoulders,  that  they  bear  ait
“  burdens ;  the  mouth,  that  it  fpeaks;  the  head,  that  it  fees,
“  and  hears,  and  comprehends,  in  itfelf,  all  the  other  fenfes,
“  by  which  the  body  is  preferved;  and  then  fhould  fay  to
“  the  belly  ;  and  you,  good  creature,  which  of  thefe  things
“  do  you  do  ?  What  return  do  you  make,  and  what  advan-
“  tage  are  you,  to  us  ?  You  are  fo  far  from  doing  any  thing,
u  and  from  allifting  us  in  effe&ing  any  good  for  the  com-

Vol.  III.  S  u  nuinity.


1 3 o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VI.

££  munity,  that  you  are  a  hindrance,  and  a  trouble  to  us,
££  in  impofing  on  us  an  intolerable  drudgery,  and  in  com-
“  pelling  us  to  bring  to  you,  from  all  parts,  fupplies  for  your
“  luxury.  Come,  let  us  aflert  our  liberty,  and  free  ourfelves
££  from  the  many  troubles  we  undergo  for  the  fake  of  this
££  indolent  creature.  If  they  fhould  refolve  upon  this,  and  none
<£  of  the  parts,  any  longer,  perform  their  offices,  is  it  poffible
“  that  the  body  fhould  fubfift  for  any  confiderable  time,  and
££  not,  in  a  few  days,  be  confumed  by  the  worft  of  all  deaths,
<£  famine  ?  None  can  fay  otherwife.  Now,  confider  the
££  commonwealth  in  the  fame  light :  For  this,  alfo,  is  com-
££  pofed  of  many  ranks  of  people,  not  at  all,  refembling  one
££  another :  Every  one  of  which  affords  fome  particular  ufe  to
££  the  commonwealth,  like  the  members  to  the  human  body:
££  For  fome  cultivate  the  lands ;  fome  fight  againft  the  enemy
C£  in  defence  of  thofe  lands;  others  carry  on  a  beneficial
££  trade  by  fea ;  and  others  exercife  neceflary  arts.  If,  then,
££  all  thefe  different  ranks  of  people  fhould  rife  againft  the
££  fenate,  which  is  compofed  of  the  beft  men,  and  fay,  What
££  good,  fenate,  do  you  do  us  ?  And,  for  what  reafon,  do  you
££  pretend  to  govern  others  ?  For  you  can  alledge  none.  And
££  fhall  we  not,  at  laft,  free  ourfelves  from  your  tyranny,  and
££  live  without  a  governor?  If,  then,  they  fhould  take  this
££  refolution,  and  quit  their  ufual  employments,  what  could
“  hinder  this  miferable  city  from  perifhing  miferably  by
££  famine,  war,  and  every  other  evil  ?  Be  affured,  therefore,
££  citizens,  that,  as  in  our  bodies,  the  belly,  thus  reviled  by
££  the  members,  while  it  is  nourifhed,  nourifhes  the  body,

££  and.


Book VI.  DIONYSIUS  H AL ICARNASSEN SIS.  13 1

“  and,  while  it  is  preferved,  preferves  it;  and,  like  a  common
“  ftorehoufe,  diftributes  that,  which  is  beneficial  to  them
<c  all,  and  maintains  their  harmony  :  So,  in  commonwealths,
£C  the  fenate,  which  adminifters  the  affairs  of  the  public,
£C  and  confiders  what  is  expedient  for  every  one,  preferves,
C£  guards,  and  reforms  all  things:  Ceafe,  therefore,  to  throw
“  out  invidious  expreflions  againft  her,  and  to  complain
tC  that  you  are  driven  out  of  your  country  by  her :  and  that,
££  by  her  means,  you  wander  about,  like  vagabonds,  and
“  beggars :  For  fhe  neither  has  done  you  any  harm,  nor
££  defigns  to  do  you  any ;  but  fhe  calls  you,  fhe  in  treats  you ;
££  and,  43  opening  her  arms,  together  with  her  gates,  is  de-
££  firous  to  receive  you.”

LXXXVII.  While  Menenius  was  fpeaking,  many  and
various  were  the  expreflions  of  the  audience  throughout  his
whole  fpeech.  But,  when,  at  the  clofe  of  it,  he  had  recourfe
to  lamentations ;  and,  enumerating  the  calamities,  that  would
befal  thofe,  who  remained  in  the  city,  and  thofe  who  were
driven  out  of  it,  bewailed  the  misfortunes  of  both,  tears
flowed  from  all,  and  they  cried  out  to  him,  with  one  voice,
to  lead  them  back  to  the  city,  without  lofs  of  time  :  And
they  were  very  near  quitting  the  aflembly  that  moment,
and  leaving  all  their  concerns  to  the  deputies,  without  fettling
any  thing  relating  to  their  fecurity,  if  Brutus  had  not  flood

43’  T#s  x&g&s  vfAtv  clfMi  ran  srvA#/?  feafonable  at  the  winding  np  of  a
fcv«7r£ia<r«<r<*.  Afking  our  author’s  fpeech  made  upon  fo  interefting  an
pardon,  this  prettinefs,  which  might  occafion.  However,  this,  I  believe,
do  well  enough  in  a  comedy  of  Ari-  is  the  only  time  he  has. indulged  his
ftophanes,  is,  in  my  opinion,  below  imagination  at  the  expence  of  his
the  dignity  of  hiftory  j  and  very  un-  judgement.

•  S  2


up,


132  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

up,  and  reftrained  their  eagernefs,  faying,  that  the  promifes,
made  by  the  fenate,  were,  indeed,  advantageous  to  the
people  ;  and  he  defired  that  great  thanks  might  be  returned
to  them  for  thofe  conceffions :  But  he  faid  that  he  was  afraid
of  what  might  happen  in  future  times ;  and  that  tyrannical
men  might,  one  day,  (if  an  occafion  offered)  attempt  to  make
the  people  feel  their  refentment  for  what  they  had  done  :
And  that  the  only  fecurity  to  thofe,  who  were  afraid  of  their
fuperiors,  was,  for  the  former  to  be  convinced,  that,  if  the
others  had  the  will  to  injure  them,  they  fhould  not  have  the
power  :  For,  as  long  as  ill  men  had  the  power,  they  would
never  want  the  will.  If,  therefore,  they  could  obtain  this
fecurity,  they  fhould  want  nothing  more.  And  Menenius
having  replied,  and  defired  him  to  name  the  fecurity  he
thought  the  people  yet  flood  in  need  of ;  the  other  faid  ;
Give  us  leave  to  chufe,  out  of  our  own  body,  every  year,  a
certain  number  of  magiflrates,  who  fhall  be  inverted  with
no  other  power,  than  to  relieve  thofe  plebeians,  to  whom  any
injury,  or  violence  is  offered  ;  and  to  fuffer  none  of  them
to  be  deprived  of  their  rights.  This  favor  wTe  intreat,  and
beg  you  to  add  to  Thofe  you  have,  already,  granted  us,  if
our  accommodation  is  not  defigned  to  end  in  words  only,
without  effetrt.

LXXXVIII.  When  the  people  heard  this,  they  gave  great,
and  long  acclamations  to  Brutus,  and  defired  the  deputies
to  grant  this  alfo.  Thefe,  having  withdrawn  from  the  af*
fembly,  and  conferred  together,  returned  not  long  after.
And,  all  being  filent,  Menenius  prefented  himfelf,  and  faid ;

“  This


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  ENS  I  S.  133

“  This  is  a  matter  of  great  moment,  and  full  of  ftrange
“  fufpicions :  And  we  are  difquieted  with  fear,  and  anxiety,
4<  left  we  fhould,  by  this,  form  two  commonwealths  in  one
“  city.  However,  as  for  ourfelves,  we  do  not  oppofe  your
“  defire  even  in  this :  But  grant  this  to  us,  which  is,  alfo,  for
tc  your  own  intereft  ;  Allow  fome  ofthedeputies  to  go  to  the
“  city,  and  inform  the  fenate  of  thefe  things:  For,  though
“  we  have  a  power  from  them  to  conclude  an  accommoda-
“  tion  in  fuch  a  manner  as  we  think  fit,  and  can,  at  our
“  own  difcretion,  make  fuch  promifes  in  their  name,  as  we
<c  pleafe,  yet  we  do  not  think  proper  to  take  this  upon  our-
“  felves:  But,  fince  a  new  matter  has  been,  unexpectedly,
<c  propofed  to  us,  we  defign  to  abrogate  our  own  power,
“  and  refer  it  to  the  fenate  :  However,  we  are  perfuaded  the
<c  fenate  will  be  of  the  fame  opinion  with  us  in  this  refpeCh
“  I,  therefore,  {hall  flay  here,  and,  with  me,  fome  of  the
(C  deputies :  And  Valerius,  with  the  reft,  (hall  go  to  the
“  fenate.”  This  was  refolved  upon  ;  and  the  perfons,  ap¬
pointed  to  inform  the  fenate  of  what  had  happened,  rode  in
all  hafte  to  Rome.  The  confuls  having  propofed  the  affair
to  the  fenators,  Valerius  was  of  opinion  to  grant  this  favor,
alfo,-  to  the  people.  On  the  other  fide,  Appius,  who,  from
the  beginning,  had  oppofed  the  accommodation,  did  not
fail  to  oppofe  this  demand  alfo ;  crying  out,  calling  the  gods
to  witnefs,  and  foretelling  what  feeds  of  future  evils  they
were  fowing  in  the  commonwealth.  But  he  was  not  able  to
prevail  with  the  majority  of  the  fenate,  who,  as  I  faid,  had
refolved  to  put  an  end  to  the  fedition.  They  pafled  a  decree,

by


Book  VI.


134  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

by  which  they  ratified  all  the  promifes,  made  by  the  depu¬
ties  to  the  people ;  and  granted  the  fecurity  they  defired.
The  deputies,  having  tranfatfted  thefe  things,  returned  to  the
camp  the  next  day  ;  and  made  known  the  refolutions  of
the  fenate.  After  which,  Menenius  advifed  the  plebeians  to
fend  fome  perfons  to  receive  the  affurances,  which  the  fenate
was  to  give  :  And,  purfuant  to  this,  Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  of
whom  I  before  made  mention,  Marcus  Decius,  and  Spurius
Icilius  were  fent :  With  thefe,  one  half  of  the  deputies  re¬
turned  to  the  city ;  and  Agrippa,  with  the  reft,  remained  in
the  camp,  being  defired  by  the  plebeians  to  draw  up  the  law
for  the  creation  of  their  magiftrates.

LXXXIX.  The  next  day,  Brutus,  and  thofe,  who  had  been
fent  with  him,  having  completed  the  agreement  with  the  fe¬
nate,  by  the  intervention  of  the  E igwoSixoti,  called  by  the  Ro¬
mans,  Fedales ,  returned  to  the  camp :  And  the  people  divid¬
ing  themfelves  into  the<I>^7f/a;,  confiding  of  the  citizens  then
in  the  camp,  or,  however  they  may  be  termed,  which  the  Ro¬
mans  call,  Curiae ,  they  chofe  for  their  annual  magiftrates  the
following  perfons,  Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  and  Caius  Sicinnius
Bellutus,  who,  to  that  time,  had  been  their  leaders :  And,  to
thefe,  they  added  Caius,  and  Publius  Licinnius,  and  Spurius
Icilius  Ruga. 44  Thefe  five  perfons  were  the  firft,  who  received


44*  Ovjot  zrguloi

zragiha£ov  ol  sm7s  1  Livy  does

not  feem  to  contradict  our  author  con¬
cerning  the  number  of  the  firft  tri¬
bunes  fo  much  as  to  doubt  whether
two,  or.  five,  were,  at  firft,  created.

*B.  ii.  c.  33.


However,  there  is  great  reafon  to  be¬
lieve,  with  Dionyfius,  that  their  num¬
ber  was,  originally,  five ;  becaufe
k  Livy  himfelf  fays  that,  when  ten  tri¬
bunes  were  created  thirty  fix  years
after,  two  were  chofen  out  of  each

k  B.  iii.  c.  30.

the


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN  AS S E N  S IS.  135

the  tribunitian  power,  with  which  they  were  invefted  on  the
fourth  day  before,  the  ides  of  December,  as  it  is  praclifed


clafs ;  the  laft  being  not  confidered  •,
tricejimo  fexto  anno  a  primis  tribunis
plebis ,  decern  creati  funt  ;  Uni  ex  fingnlis
claffibus.  It  is,  therefore,  probable  that
the  fame  rule  was  obferved  in  the  cre¬
ation  of  the  firft  tribunes,  and  that
one  was  then  chofen  out  of  every  clafs.

I  obferve,  not  without  fome  indigna¬
tion,  that  all  modern  writers,  whofe
works  have  fallen  into  my  hands,  treat
the  tribunes  of  the  people,  as  incen¬
diaries,  and  difturbers  of  the  public
peace  ;  not  confidering  that  the  efta-
blifhment  of  the  tribunelhip  was,  not
only,  the  fource,  but  the  fupport,  of
liberty ;  and  that,  if  the  Romans  had
not  been  a  free  people,  they  would
have  figured  in  the  world  as  little  as
any  of  their  neighbours,  and  would
never  have  eredted  fo  immenfe  a
power,  which  liberty  alone  could  raife,
as  the  lofs  of  that  liberty  fubverted  it.
When  I  fay  this,  I  do  not  mean  to
juftify  the  extravagance  of  every  hot
brained  tribune  ;  but  only  to  fhew  that
the  liberty  of  the  Romans  was  owing
to  this  inftitution  ;  and  that  the  formed
defign  of  the  fenate,  after  the  expulfion
of  the  kings,  and,  particularly,  after
the  death  of  the  laft,  was  to  render  the
people  as  great  flaves  to  ariftocracy,
as  they  had,  before,  been  to  monarchy,
and  not  to  free  them  from  tyranny,
but,  only,  to  make  them  change  their
tyrants.  This  I  (hall  (hew,  not  from
our  author,  whofe  hiftory  will  fupply
the  reader  with  numberlefs  inftances
of  what  I  have  advanced  •,  but  from
Livy,  whofe  diligence  in  fearchin

]B.  ii.  c.  21.


into  the  ancient  hiftory  of  his  country
I  wifh  I  could  commend  as  much  as
his  impartiality  in  ftating  the  fubjedts
of  difpute  between  the  fenate,  and
people,  his  juft  reflexions  on  thofe
difputes,  and  his  eloquence  in  expref-
fing  thofe  reflexions.  1  Livy,  there¬
fore,  will  tell  us  that  the  news  of  the
death  of  the  laft  Tarquin  tranfported
the  fenate  with  too  luxurious  a  joy,
the  firft  effedf  of  which  was  to  injure
the  people,  whom,  till  then,  they  had
courted  :  Eo  nuncio  erecii  patres ,  erefta
plebs ;  fed  patribus  nimis  luxuriofa  ea
fuit  laetitia :  Plebi ,  cui  ad  earn  diem
fummd  ope  infer vitum  erat ,  injuriae  a
primoribus fieri  coepere.  The  people,  in
expelling  their  tyrant,  defigned  to  ex¬
pel  tyranny  too*,  againft  the  return  of
which,  in  another  fhape,  they  could
find  no  fecurity,  after  the  fenate  had,
fo  often,  deceived  them,  but  in  the
inftitution  of  their  own  magiftrates.
Thefe  m  Cicero  compares  with  the
Lacedaemonian  ephori,  and  thinks  it
was  not  without  reafon  that  the  ephori
were  oppofed  to  the  kings  at  Sparta,
and  the  tribunes  to  the  confuls  at
Rome,  bfiiiare  nec  ephori  Lacedaemone
fine  caufii  a  ‘Theopompo  oppofiti  regibus  ;
nec  apud  nos  confiulibus  tribuni.  This
was  the  opinion  that  great  man  enter¬
tained  of  the  inftitution  of  the  tribunes;
which  has  been  traduced  with  fo  much
virulence  by  fiavifh  writers,  who,  no
doubt,  underftood  government  in  ge¬
neral,  and  the  Roman  conftitution  in
particular,  much  better  than  Cicero.

De  Legibus,  B.  iii.  c.  7.


even


136  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

even  to  this  time.  The  election  being  over,  the  deputies  of
the  fenate  looked  upon  every  thing,  contained  in  their  in-
ftru&ions,  to  have  been  performed  :  But  Brutus,  calling  the
plebeians  together,  advifed  them  to  render  this  magiftracy
facred.  and  inviolable ;  and  to  eftablifh  the  fecurity  of  it  both
by  a  law,  and  an  oath.  This  was  approved  of  by  all ;  and
the  following  law  was  drawn  up  by  him,  and  his  collegues :
u  Let  none  compel  a  tribune  of  the  people,  like  a  private
c<  perfon,  to  do  any  thing  againft  his  will  :  Let  none  whip
“  him,  or  order  another  to  whip  him :  Let  none  kill  him,
lC  or  order  another  to  kill  him :  And,  if  any  perfon  fhall
u  act  contrary  to  any  one  of  thefe  injunctions,  let  him  be  ac-
<c  curfed,  and  his  goods  confecrated  to  Ceres:  And,  if  any
“  one  kills  the  perfon,  who  has  committed  thefe  things,  let
“  him  not  be  guilty  of  murder.”  And  to  the  end  the  people
might  not,  even  in  future  times,  be  at  liberty  to  repeal  this
law,  but  that  it  might,  for  ever,  remain  unalterable,  it  was
ordained  that  all  the  Romans  fhould  fwear,  by  every  thing
facred,  that  both  they,  and  their  pofterity  would,  ever  after,
moft  affuredly  preferve  it.  And  this  45  prayer,  and  impre¬
cation  was  added  to  the  oath  :  That  the  heavenly,  and
infernal  gods  might  be  propitious  to  the  obfervers  of  it,  and


45*  A This  is  an  unlucky  word
for  us  tranflators.  It  fignifies  both  a
prayer,  and  a  curfe  \  and,  the  follow¬
ing  fentence  containing  both,  the  word
is  no  doubt  exceeding  proper  in  this
place  :  But,  what  are  Latin,  French,
and  Englifh  tranflators  to  do,  whole
language  cannot  fupply  them  with  a


word  of  this  double  import  ?  Portus
has  faid  Precatio ,  and  his  follower,  le
Jay,  Prieres ;  Sylburgius,  Imfrecatio ,
and  M.  *  *  *,  Imprecation .  I  have  ufed
both  becaufe  it  is  as  abfurd  to  apply
an  imprecation  to  a  prayer,  as  it  is  to
apply  a  prayer  to  an  imprecation.


chaftife


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENSIS,  137

chaftife  the  tranfgreilbrs  of  it,  as  perfons  guilty  of  the  moft
execrable  impiety.  This  gave  birth  to  the  cuftom  eftablifhed
among  the  Romans  of  looking  upon  the  perfons  of  the
tribunes  of  the  people  to  be  all-facred:  Which  cuftom  con¬
tinues  to  this  day.

XC.  After  they  had  voted  thefe  things,  they  ereded  an
altar  upon  the  fummit  of  the  hill,  where  they  had  incatmped,
which  they  named,  in  their  own  language,  the  altar  of
yupiter  \ TerfibiliSj  from  the  terror  with  which,  at  that
time,  they  were  poilefled:  To  whom  they  performed  fa-
crifices ;  and,  having  confecrated*  the  place,  which  had
received  them,  they  went  down  to  the  city  with  the  de¬
puties.  After  this,  they,  alfo,  returned  thanks  to  the  gods
worfhipped  in  the  city;  and  prevailed  upon  the  patricians  to
pals  a  vote  for  the  confirmation  of  their  new  magiftracy :
And,  having  obtained  this  alfo,  they  defired  further  that  the
fenate  would  allow  them  to  create,  every  year,  two  perfons
out  of  their  own  body,  to  ad:  as  minifters  to  the  tribunes
in  every  thing  they  fhould  ftand  in  need  of ;  to  determine
fuch  caufes,  as  the  others  fhould  refer  to  them;  and  to
take  care  of  the  confecrated,  and  public  places ;  and  that
the  market  be  fupplied  with  plenty  of  provifions.  Hav¬
ing  obtained  this  conceflion,  alfo,  from  the  fenate,  they
chofe  thofe  perfons,  whom  they  called  the  minifters,  and
the  collegues  of  the  tribunes,  and  judges :  However,  they
are,  now,  called,  in  their  language,  from  one  of  their  func¬
tions,  Aediles ,  that  is,  46  Superintendants  of  the  holy  edifices ;

46*  r^wvTOTrwv  tTrtjAthjlott.  Thefe  were  ferent  from  the  curule  aediles,  who
the  plebeian  aediles.  They  were  dif-  were  not  inftituted  till  the  year  of

Vol.  III.  T  and


Book  VI.


138  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

and  dill  retain  a  power  fubordinate  to  other  magidrates,
which  they  were,  before,  poffeffed  of :  Many  affairs  of  great
moment  are  intruded  to  them  ;  and,  in  mod  things,  they
refemble  thofe  magidrates,  among  the  Greeks,  called
AFoPttvo(j.oi>  Superintendants  of  the  markets .

XCI.  When  affairs  were  fettled,  and  the  commonwealth
was  redored  to  its  former  date,  an  army  was  raifed,  by  the
generals,  to  be  employed  in  foreign  wars  :  In  this  the
people  ingaged  with  great  chearfulnefs ;  and,  in  a  fhort
time,  got  every  thing  ready,  that  was  neceffary  for  the  war.
The  confuls,  having  drawn  lots  for  their  adminidration,
according  to  cudom,  Spurius  Caflius,  to  whom  the  govern¬
ment  of  the  city  was  allotted,  kept  with  him  as  many  of  the
forces,  which  had  been  raifed,  as  were  necefiary,  and  gave
the  red  to  his  collegue.  With  thefe  Podumus  Cominius
took  the  field,  having  with  him  a  confiderable  number  both
of  the  Romans  themfelves,  and  of  the  Latin  auxiliaries.
And,  defigning  to  fall  upon  the  Volfci  fird,  he  took  by
dorm  a  city  belonging  to  them,  called  Longula,  notwith-
danding  the  inhabitants  fhewed  an  appearance  of  bravery,
and  fent  fome  forces  into  the  field,  in  hopes  of  forcing  the
enemy  to  retire  :  But  thefe  being  put  to  a  fhameful  flight,
before  they  had  performed  any  remarkable  a&ion,  the  others
did  not  behave  themfelves  with  the  lead  courage  in  the

Rome  388  •,  which  year  was  remark-  n  annus  hie  crit  infignis  noviheminis  con-
able  for  three  things  •,  the  firft  plebeian  fulatu ,  infignis  novis  duobns  magifira-
conful,  the  inftitution  of  the  praetor-  tibus,  praeturd  ct  curnli  aedilitate.
fhip,  and  That  of  the  curule  aediles;

n  Livy,  B.  vii.  c.  1.


affault :


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI C  AR  N  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  139

afiault :  So  that,  the  Romans,  in  one  day,  and  without
trouble,  poflefled  themfelves  of  their  country  ;  and  alfo,
took  their  city  by  ftorm,  without  much  difficulty.  The
Roman  general  granted  all  the  booty  to  the  foldiers ;  and,
having  left  a  garrifon  there,  he  led  his  army  againft
another  city  of  the  Volfci,  called  47  Polufca,  not  far
diftant  from  Longula ;  and,  none  daring  to  oppofe  him,  he
marched  through  the  country  with  great  eafe,  and  affaulted
the  walls ;  when,  fome  of  the  foldiers  forcing  open  the
gates,  and  others  fcaling  the  walls,  they  made  themfelves
matters  of  this  city  alfo,  the  fame  day  they  attacked  it.
After  the  conful  had  taken  the  city,  he  caufed  a  few  of  the
inhabitants,  who  had  been  the  authors  of  the  revolt,  to  be
put  to  death  ;  and,  having  punifhed  the  reft  by  taking
away  their  efledts,  and  difarmed  them,  he  obliged  them  to
be  fubjedt  to  the  Romans  for  the  future.

XCII.  He  left,  in  this  city  alfo,  a  fmall  part  of  the  army,  as
a  garrifon ;  and,  the  next  day,  marched  with  the  reft  to  AJ-  Co-
rioli,  a  city  of  very  great  note ;  and  looked  upon  as  the  metro¬
polis  of  the  Volfci.  In  which  city,  there  was  a  ftrong  garrifon ;
the  walls  were  not  eafy  to  be  fcaled ;  and  every  thing  necefiary
for  a  liege  had  been,  long  before,  prepared  by  the  inhabitants.
The  conful  ordered  an  attack  to  be  made  upon  the  walls ;

47*  no\x<TKUf  to  $ia?v]uoi,  etc.  0  Clu-  of  the  towns  taken  by  Cominius  this
ver  has  fhewn  that  we  muft  read  thefe  campaign,  fays ;  inde  Po luf cam ,  item
words  in  this  manner,  inftead  ofaroAsc-,  Volf  corum ,  cepit.
notice  as  it  hands  in  all  the  edi-  48*  Eth  Ko^oAav.  In  Latin,  Corioli.

tions,  and  manuferipts.  This  is  con-  See  the  fifty  fourth  annotation  on  the
firmed  by  p  Livy,  who,  in  fpeaking  fourth  book.

0  leal.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  8.  P  B.  ii.  c.  33.

T  2


and,


140  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

and,  having  continued  the  attack  till  late  in  the  evening,  he
was  repulfed  with  great  lofs.  The  next  day,  he  got  ready
the  49  battering  rams  with  their  coverings,  and  fcaling  lad¬
ders,  and  was  preparing  to  give  a  general  affault  to  the  city  ;
but,  receiving  intelligence  that  the  Antiates  defigned  to  come
with  numerous  forces  to  the  affiftance  of  the  Coriolani,  by
reafon  of  their  affinity  to  them  ;  and  that  they  were,  al¬
ready,  upon  their  march,  he  divided  his  army,  and  refolved,
with  one  half  of  it,  to  affault  the  city,  leaving  the  command
of  it  to  Titus  Lartius;  and,  with  the  other,  to  flop  the
march  of  the  auxiliaries.  By  this  means,  there  were  two
actions  the  fame  day ;  and  the  Romans  gained  the  victory
in  both  ;  all  of  them  having  fought  with  great  ardor :  And
one  of  them,  in  particular,  fhewed  an  incredible  bravery*
and  performed  actions,  that  exceed  all  relation:  This  perfori
was  a  patrician,  and  of  no  obfcure  parents ;  his  name
Caius  Marcius :  He  was  a  man  of  fobriety  in  his  private  life,
and  of  a  free  fpirit.  The  circumftances  of  both  adtions  were
thefe :  Lartius,  having  marched  out  of  the  camp  with  his

49*  KjJia? te  Koa  ysppot.  Harpocration  hides  of  oxen.  Under  this  roof,  the
fays  that  yipfov  fignifies  any  kind  of  battering  ram  was  fufpended,  and
cover,  whether  made  of  fkins,  or  of  played  againft  the  walls  of  a  town,
any  other  matter  *,  dnav  <rKi7ra<ry.ct,  c-tlz  I  doubt  much  whether  Mantelets,  in  le
Stqfjialivov  «n,  die  tivo;  yeppov  Jay,  or  Gabions ,  in  M.  ***,  are  proper
ihtyslo.  This  is  a  general  explication  of  tranflations  of  ytppov ;  becaufe  neither
the  word  :  But  I  take  yspfov  to  fignify,  of  thefe  are  covered  ;  and,  though
in  this  place,  what  the  Romans  called,  both  may  be  a  good  defence  againft
<Tejludo\  fuch  a  one  as  is  defcribed  by  fhot,  which  flies  in  a  horizontal  line,
q  Vitruvius*,  which  was  a  fmall  move-  yet  they  cannot  defend  the  men  from
able  houfe  of  carpenter’s  work,  the  any  thing,  that  comes  from  above,
roof  of  which  was  covered  with  the

s  B,  x.  c.  19.


army


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  141

army  by  break  of  day,  advanced  to  the  walls  of  Corioli,
and  aftaulted  the  city  in  many  places :  On  the  other  fide,
the  Coriolani,  elated  with  the  expectation  of  fuccours  from
the  Antiates,  which  they  concluded  would  foon  arrive,
opened  all  their  gates,  and  made  a  general  fally  upon  the
enemy.  The  Romans  fuftained  their  firft  attack,  and
wounded  many  of  thofe,  who  charged  them:  After  which,
the  numbers  of  the  afiailants  encreaftng,  they  were  forced
down  a  defcent,  and  fled.  Marcius,  whom  I  before  mentioned,
feeing  this,  flood  his  ground  with  a  few  men,  and  fuftained  the
attack  of  the  whole  body  of  the  enemy;  and,  having  killed
many  of  them,  and  the  reft  giving  way,  and  flying  to  the  city ?
he  purfued  them,  killing  all  he  could  overtake  ;  and  called
out,  without  intermiflion,  to  thofe  of  his  own  men,  who
fled,  to  face  about,  to  take  courage,  and  follow  him:  Thefe,
afhamed  of  their  acftion,  rallied,  and  prefled  upon  all  before
them,  wounding,  and  purfuing  them :  In  a  ftiort  time,
every  man  put  to  flight  thofe  he  was  ingaged  with,  and
pufhed  on  to  the  walls  of  the  city :  And  Marcius,  expoftng
himfelf,  now,  with  greater  boldnefs,  advanced  ftill ;  and,
coming  to  the  gates,  entered  them  together  with  thofe,  who
were  flying  before  him  :  And  many  others  alfo,  forcing
their  way  into  the  city  in  various  places,  great  numbers  were
flain  on  both  ftdes ;  fome  fighting  in  the  ftreets,  and  others
in  the  houfes  they  were  taking.  The  women,  alfo,  aflifted
the  inhabitants,  by  throwing  down  tiles  upon  the  enemy
from  the  roofs.  And  every  one,  according  to  his  ftrength,
and  power,  bravely  defended  his  country.  However,  they

did


142  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

did  not  long  refift  thefe  terrors,  but  were  obliged  to  fur-
render  to  the  conquerors.  The  city  being  taken  in  this
manner,  mofc  of  the  Romans  employed  themfelves  in
plundering,  and  continued  for  a  long  time  intent  on  the
booty  ;  *  there  being  found  in  the  city  a  large  quantity  of
money,  and  a  great  number  of  Haves.

XCIII.  But  Marcius,  who  had  firft  fuftained  the  fhock
of  the  enemy,  and  diftinguifhed  himfelf  above  all  the  Ro¬
mans,  both  in  the  attack  of  the  city,  and  in  the  feveral
actions,  which  had  happened  within  the  walls,  gave  Hill
more  illuftrious  proofs  of  his  valor  in  the  fecond  battle
againft  the  Antiates :  For  he  refolved  to  have  a  fhare  in
this  adtion  alfo :  And,  as  foon  as  the  city  was  taken,  he
took  with  him  a  fmall  number  of  men,  who  wxre  able
to  follow  him ;  and,  running  in  all  hafte,  found  the  two
armies,  already,  drawn  up,  and  going  to  ingage.  He  was
the  firft  man,  who  informed  the  Romans  that  the  city  was
taken ;  and,  as  a  proof  of  it,  fhewed  them  the  fmoke,  which
broke  out,  in  great  abundance,  from  the  houfes,  that  were
on  fire ;  and,  having  obtained  leave  of  the  conful,  he  drew
up  his  men  oppofite  to  the  ftrongeft  body  of  the  enemy.
As  foon  as  the  fignal  for  the  battle  was  given,  he  charged
firft ;  and,  having  killed  many  of  thofe  he  encountered,  he
forced  his  way  into  the  middle  of  their  army.  The  Antiates
durft,  no  longer,  ingage  him  hand  to  hand ;  but,  leav¬
ing  their  ranks,  where  he  attacked,  they  furrounded  him
in  a  body;  and,  retreating  as  he  advanced  upon  them,  af-
failed  him  with  mifiive  weapons.  Poftumus,  being  informed

of


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICAUN ASSENS  IS.  143
of  this,  and  fearing  left  the  man,  thus  left  alone,  might
meet  with  fome  misfortune,  fent  fome  of  the  braveft  youth
to  his  relief :  Thefe,  doubling  their  files,  charged  the  enemy ;
and  the  firft  line  not  fuftaining  their  charge,  but  flying  be¬
fore  them,  they  prefled  forward,  and  found  Marcius  covered
with  wounds,  and  many  lying  round  him,  fome  dead,  and
others  expiring.  After  which,  they  joined  their  forces ;  and,
led  on  by  Marcius,  attacked  thofe  of  the  enemy,  who  ftill
kept  their  ranks,  killing  all,  who  made  any  refiftance,  and
treating  them  like  flaves.  Many  Romans  gained  great  re¬
putation  by  their  behaviour  in  this  adtion  ;  but  thofe,  who
defended  Marcius,  greater  than  the  reft  ;  and  Marcius  him-
felf  the  greateft  of  all ;  who  was,  without  any  doubt,  the
chief  caufe  of  the  vidlory.  When  it  grew  dark,  the  Romans
retired  to  their  camp,  greatly  exulting  in  the  advantage  they
had  gained,  having  killed  many  of  the  Antiates,  and  carry¬
ing  with  them  a  great  number  of  prifoners.

XCI V.  The  next  day,  Poftumus,  having  affembled  the  army,
gave  great  commendations  to  Marcius ;  and  crowned  him  with
the  crowns,  ufually,  given  to  the  perfon,  who  has  fhewn  the
greateft  bravery,  as  rewards  for ,  his  behaviour  in  both  the
adtions :  He  prefented  him,  alfo,  with  a  war  horfe,  adorned
with  all  the  enfigns  belonging  to  That  of  a  general ;  together
with  ten  captives,  fuch  as  hefhouldchufe;  and  as  much  filver,
as  he  himfelf  fhould  be  able  to  carry ;  and  many  other  valuable
things,  as  the  firft- fruits  of  the  booty.  This  being  followed
by  great  acclamations  of  the  army,  in  token  of  their  ap-
plaufe,  and  congratulation,  Marcius  advanced,  and  faid,  that

he


i44  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VI.

he  returned  great  thanks  both  to  the  conful,  and  to  all
prefent,  for  the  honors  they  did  him :  However,  that  he
fhould  not  accept  them  ;  but  would  be  contented  with  the
war  horfe  for  the  fake  of  the  illuflrious  enfigns ;  and  with
one  captive,  with  whom  he  happened  to  have  an  intercourfe
of  hofpitality.  The  foldiers,  who  had,  before,  admired  the
man  for  his  valor,  now  admired  him  flill  more  for  his  con¬
tempt  of  riches,  and  for  his  moderation  in  fuch  profperity.
From  this  action,  he  was  furnamed  Coriolanus  ;  and  be¬
came  the  moft  illuflrious  man  of  his  age.  This  having  been
the  event  of  the  battle  with  the  Antiates,  the  reft  of  the
Volfcian  nation,  together  with  all  thofe,  who  had  efpoufed
their  refen tments,  made  peace  with  the  Romans ;  and  fuch
as  were,  already,  in  arms,  or  preparing  for  war,  laid  aftde
the  thoughts  ol  it :  All  of  whom  Poftumus  treated  with
humanity ;  and,  returning  home,  difbanded  the  army.
Caftius,  the  other  conful,  who  had  been  left  at  Rome,  in  the
mean  time  confecrated  the  temple  of  Ceres,  Bacchus,  and
Proferpine,  which  ftands  at  the  end  of  the  great  circus,  and
is  built  over  the  ftarting  places ;  and  which  Aulus  Poftu-
mius,  the  dictator,  made  a  vow  to  dedicate  to  the  gods,  in
the  name  of  the  commonwealth,  when  he  was  upon  the
point  of  ingaging  the  army  of  the  Latines ;  and  the  fenate,
after  the  victory,  having  decreed  that  this  temple  fhould
be  built,  intirely,  out  of  the  fpoils,  the  work  was,  then,
finifhed.

XCV.  At  the  fame  time,  the  treaties  of  peace,  and  friend-
fhip  were  renewed  with  all  the  Latin  cities  upon  oath  :  The

reafon


Book  VI.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  145

reafon  of  which  was,  that  they  had  not  attempted  to  raife
any  commotions  during  the  fedition;  and  had,  not  only,
made  public  rejoicings  for  the  return  of  the  people,  but  had,
alfo,  fhewn  great  readinefs  to  affift  the  Romans  in  reducing
thofe  nations,  which  had  revolted  from  them.  The  articles  of
thefe  treaties  were  as  follows :  “  Let  there  be  peace  between
££  the  Romans,  and  all  the  Latin  cities,  as  long  as  the  heavens,
££  and  the  earth  fhall  remain  in  the  fame  fituation :  Let
“  them  neither  make  war  upon  one  another  themfelves,
u  bring  in  foreign  enemies,  nor  grant  a  fafe  paflage  to  thofe,
££  who  fhall  make  war  upon  either:  Let  them  affift  one
££  another,  when  warred  upon,  with  all  their  forces;  and
££  let  both  have  an  equal  ffiare  of  the  fpoils,  and  booty,  taken
££  in  their  common  wars :  Let  fuits,  relating  to  private  con-
££  tradts,  be  determined  in  ten  days  among  that  people,
££  where  the  contract  was  made  :  And  let  nothing  be  added
££  to,  or  taken  away  from,  thefe  treaties,  but  by  the  joint
££  confent  both  of  the  Romans,  and  of  all  the  Latines.”
Thefe  were  the  articles  of  the  treaties  entered  into  by  the
Romans,  and  the  Latines,  and  confirmed  by  their  oaths.  The
fenate,  alfo,  decreed  that  facrifices  ffiould  be  offered  up  to
the  gods,  in  thankfgiving  for  their  reconciliation  with  the
people,  and  added  a  third  day  to  the  50  Latin  feftivals :  The
firft  of  which  was  appointed  by  Tarquinius,  when  the  Ro¬
mans  overcame  the  Tyrrhenians:  The  fecond  the  people
added,  after  they  had  freed  the  commonwealth  by  the
expulfion  of  the  kings:  To  which  the  third  was,  now,

s°*  Axlivous  Ionian.  See  the  fifty  eighth  annotation  on  the  fourth  book.

Vol.  III.  L  added.


146  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VI.

added,  on  account  of  the  return  of  the  feceders.  The  fuper-
intendance,  and  care  of  the  facrifices,  and  games,  performed
during  thefe  feflivals,  was  committed  to  the  minifters  of  the
tribunes  of  the  people,  who  are,  now,  as  I  faid,  in  veiled
with  the  agoranomical,  or  aedilitian  power ;  and  they  were
honoured  by  the  fenate  with  a  purple  robe,  an  ivory  chair,
and  the  other  enfigns,  before,  made  ufe  of  by  the  kings.

XCVI.  Not  long  after  this  feftival,  Menenius  Agrippa,
one  of  the  confular  fenators,  died:  This  perfon  had  over¬
come  the  Sabines,  and  triumphed  in  a  rnoft  glorious  manner
for  that  vidlory  :  By  his  perfuafion,  the  fenate  allowed  the
feceders  to  return  ;  and  the  people,  through  the  confidence
they  placed  in  him,  laid  down  their  arms :  He  was  buried
at  the  expence  of  the  public  ;  and  his  funeral  was,  of  all
others,  the  mofl  honourable,  and  the  more  fplendid.  The
fortunes  of  this  perfon  were  not  fufficient  to  defray  the
expence  of  a  magnificent  funeral,  and  interment :  So  that,
the  truflees  of  his  children  relolved,  after  confultation,  to
carry  him  out  of  the  city,  and  bury  him  like  one  of  the
vulgar,  without  any  expence.  This  the  people  would  not
fuffer;  but  the  tribunes  having  affembled  them,  and,  with
great  commendations,  difplayed  both  the  military,  and  po¬
litical  virtues  of  the  man,  his  temperance,  and  the  limpli-
city  of  his  life ;  and,  above  all  things,  celebrated,  with  the
highefl  praifes,  his  abflinence  from  every  method  of  amafling
riches,  they  faid  it  would  be  the  mofl  difhonourable  thing
imaginable,  that  fuch  a  man  fhould  be  buried  in  an  obfeure,
and  ignoble  manner,  by  reafon  of  his  poverty :  And  they

advifed


Book VI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENStS.  147

advifed  the  people  to  take  the  expence  of  his  funeral  upon1
themfelves,  and  every  man  to  contribute  towards  it  in  fuch
a  proportion  as  they  -  fhould  order.  The  people  received
this  propofal  with  joy  :  And  each  citizen,  prefently,  bring¬
ing  in  the  proportion  he  was  taxed  at,  the  contribution
amounted  to  a  large  fum.  The  fenate,  being  informed  of
this,  were  afhamed  of  the  thing,  and  refolved  not  to  fuffer
the  moft  illuftrious  perfon  of  all  the  Romans  to  be  buried
by  a  private  contribution,  but  thought  it,  highly,  reafon-
able,  that  the  expence  fhould  be  defrayed  by  the  public,
and  committed  the  care  of  it  to  the  quaeftors.  Thefe,
having  given  a  very  large  fum  of  money  for  the  exhibition
of  his  funeral,  decorated  his  body  with  the  moft  fumptu-
ous  ornaments ;  and,  furnifhing  every  thing  elfe,  that  could
tend  to  magnificence,  interred  him  in  a  manner  worthy  of
his  virtue.  Upon  which,  the  people,  in  emulation  of  the
fenate,  refufed  even  to  receive  the  fum  they  had  contri¬
buted,  which  the  quaeftors  offered  to  return,  but  prefented
it  to  the  children  of  the  deceafed  in  compaflion  to  their
poverty,  and  to  prevent  them  from  ingaging  in  any  purfuits
derogatory  to  their  father’s  virtue.  There  was  alfo,  at  this
time,  a  cenfus  performed  by  the  confuls  :  According  to
which,  the  number  of  the  citizens  was  found  to  amount  to
above  one  hundred  and  ten  thoufand.  And  thefe  were  the
actions  of  the  Romans  under  the  confuls  of  this  year.


The  end  of  the  Sixth  book.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES

O  F

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.

THE  SEVENTH  BOOK.

TITUS  Geganius  Macerinus,  and  Publius  Minucius
having  entered  upon  their  confulfhip,  a  great
fcarcity  of  corn  was  felt  at  Rome,  occalioned,  ori¬
ginally,  by  the  feceffion:  For  the  people  feceded  from  the
patricians  about  the  autumnal  equinox,  at  the  beginning  of
feed  time :  And  the  hufbandmen  left  the  country  upon  this
commotion ;  and,  dividing  themfelves,  thofe,  who  were
eafieft  in  their  fortunes,  joined  the  patricians  ;  and  their
fervants,  the  plebeians :  From  that  time,  they  remained
afunder,  till  the  commonwealth  was  compofed,  and  reunited,
the  reconciliation  not  being  effe&ed  long  before  the  winter
folftice :  And,  during  that  interval,  which  is  the  proper
feafon  for  lowing  all  forts  of  winter  corn,  the  country  was
deftitute  of  people  to  cultivate  the  land,  and  remained  fo
for  a  confiderable  time :  So  that,  even  when  the  hu (band-
men  returned,  it  was  not  eafy  for  them  to  repair  this  damage,

par-


Book  VII.  ROMAN  A  N  T  I  QU  I  T  I E  S,  etc.  149

particularly  as  they  had  been  great  fufferers  both  by  the
defertion  of  their  flaves,  and  the  lofs  of  their  cattle,  with
which  they  were  to  cultivate  their  land ;  and  that  few  of
them  had  made  any  provilion,  for  the  next  year,  of  corn
either  for  feed,  or  for  their  fupport.  The  fenate,  being  in¬
formed  of  thefe  things,  fent  embafladors  to  the  Tyrrhenians,
and  to  the  Campanians,  and  alfo  to  the  Pornetine  plain,  to
buy  up  all  the  corn  they  could.  'Publius  Valerius,  and


Annotations  on  the  Seventh  Book.


*•  n<37rA*o?  Ou«A££(s?.  Glareanus,
and,  after  him,  M.  *  *  *,  cenfure  two
points,  mentioned  by  our  author,
concerning  the  Valerian  family.  The
firft  relates  to  Marcus  Valerius,  who,
they  fay,  was  {lain  at  the  battle  near
the  lake  Regillus,  and,  afterwards,
created  dictator.  And  the  other,  that
Dionyfius  makes  Publius,  and  Marcus
Valerius,  the  fons  of  Poplicola,  to
have  been  killed  at  the  fame  battle  •,
and,  here,  introduces  Publius,  as  one
of  the  two  embaffadors,  who  were  fent
to  Sicily.  The  firft  of  thefe  objections
is,  eafily,  anfwered,  and  would  not
have  been  made,  if  they  had  read,  as
they  ought  to  have  done,  Manius
Valerius,  and  not  Marcus,  for  the
name  of  the  dictator.  Concerning
which,  I  fhall  not  repeat  what a  I  have,
already,  faid  upon  that  occafion.  As
to  the  fecond,  Ido  not  think  it,  at  all,
probable  that  Poplicola  fhould  have
had  two  fons,  whole  names  were  Pub¬
lius,  which  is  the  expedient  M.  *  *  *
has  recourfe  to  :  I  rather  think  that
the  name,  or  rather  praenomen  of
his  fon,  who  was  (lain  near  the  lake


Regillus,  was  not  Publius,  pofiibly-
Manius,  like  That  of  his  uncle,  who
was,  afterwards,  dictator  ;  which  is
the  more  probable,  becaufe  his  brother
Marcus,  who  was  killed  at  the  fame
time,  had  the  fame  name  with  his
uncle,  in  whofe  defence  he  loft  his  life.
As  for  the  perfon,  who  was  fent  to
Sicily,  his  name  was  Publius :  Pie
was  conful  in  279  with  Caius  Nautius,
under  the  name  of  Publius  Valerius
Poplicola.  Plowever,  as  great  miftakes
are  imputed  to  our  author  by  Glare-
anus,  and,  after  him,  by  M.  *  *  *,  in
relation  to  the  Valerian  family  j  and,
as  no  family,  ever,  produced  a  fuc-
ceffion  of  greater,  and  better  men,
I  fhall  beg  leave  of  the  reader,
to  lay  before  him  a  pedigree  of  it,
as  far,  at  leaft,  as  thefe  remaining
books  of  our  author  will  carry  it  •,  by
which,  I  hope,  his  great  exaCtnefs,
rather  than  his  inaccuracy,  will  appear.
The  reader  will  find  this  pedigree  oi
the  Valerian  family  to  be,  totally,  dif¬
ferent  from  That  given  of  it  by  Sigo-
nius  in  his  notes  upon  the  third  book
of  Livy.


*  See  the  twenty  feventh  annotation  on  the  fixth  book.


Lucius


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIL


Lucius  Geganius  were  fent  to  Sicily :  Of  whom,  Valerius
was  a  fon  of  Poplicola,  and  Geganius,  brother  to  one  of  the
confuls.  At  that  time,  the  cities  of  Sicily  were  governed  by
kings,  the  mod  illuftrious  of  whom  was  2  Gelo,  the  fon  of


r


Volusus.

-


Publius  Valerius  Poplicola.


c


^MarcusValerius.  ManiusValerius;


PubliusValerius  Marcus  Valerius.  ManiusValerius)  LuciusValerius


Poplicola.

'  Lucius  Valerius  Potitus.

i

We  know  nothing  more  of  Volufus,
than  that  he  was  the  father  of  Publius
Valerius  Poplicola,  Marcus  Valerius,
and  Manius  Valerius.  Of  the  firft  our
author  has  laid  a  great  deal :  b  He  was
four  times  conful.  c  His  brother  Mar¬
cus  was  conful  with  Publius  Poftumius
Tubertus,  in  the  year  249,  the  fifth
year  after  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,
and  d  loft  his  life  at  the  battle  near  the
lake  Regillus  in  258.  e  His  brother
Manius  was  dictator  in  the  year  260.
Publius  Valerius  Poplicola,  the  eldeft
fon  of  PubliusValerius  Poplicola,  was
fent  fembaflador  to  Sicily  in  262,
s  was  conful  in  279  with  Caius  Nau-
tius-,  and,  alfo,  in  h  294  with  Caius
Claudius  Sabinus  *,  and,  during  his
confulfhip,  loft  his  life  at  the  attack
of  the  capitol,  then  in  the  poffeffion  of
Appius  Herdonius.  1  His  two  bro¬
thers,  Marcus,  and  Manius,  as  I  would
read  his  name,  loft  their  lives  in  de¬
fending  their  uncle  Marcus  in  258.
The  fon  of  this  Publius  Valerius  Pop¬
licola  was  k  Lucius  Valerius  Potitus,
who,  with  Marcus  Horatius  Barbatus,

bB.v.  c.  40.  cIb.  c.  37.  dB.  vi.c.  12.
1>B.  x.  c.  9.  ‘B.  vi.c.  12.  kB.  xi.  c

n  B.  viii.  c.  87.  °B.  ix.c.  51,  P  B.  x.  c.


Poplicola.

made  fo  noble  a  ftand  againft  the  ty¬
ranny  of  the  decemvirs  in  305,  and,
after  their  abolition,  was, *  1  with  him,
chofen  conful  the  fame,  or  the  follow¬
ing  year.  As  for  Marcus,  the  fecond
brother  of  the  firft  Poplicola,  I  find
he  had  a  fon,  called  Lucius  Valerius
Poplicola,  who,  m  being  quaeftor  in
269,  accufed  Spurius  Caflius  for  aim¬
ing  at  tyranny,  and  was  very  inftru-
mental  in  bringing  him  to  punifhment.
He  was  "chofen  conful  in  271  with
Marcus  Fabius ;  and,  alfo,  0  in  284,
with  Tiberius  Aemilius.  I  cannot  find
any  thing  relating  to  the  defcent  of
Marcus  Valerius,  who  was  p  conful
with  Spurius  Virginius  in  298.

2'  0  AetVOJASVX?  T YIV  I7T7T0-

y-gotixs  zza.i$oiv  TVgxvviJa  z vxg&Ayt(pug.  It
is  aftonifhing  that  both  the  French
tranflators  fhould  have  taken  their
notes  upon  this  paffage,word  for  word,
from  a  Latin  note  of  Cafaubon,  without
taking  the  leaft  notice  of  him.  The
latter  has,  juftly,  obferved  that  Gelo
was  not  the  brother  of  Hippocrates,
as  our  author  makes  him,  if  we  read

eIb.c.  39.  1  B.vii.c.  1.  sB-  ix.  c.  28.

4*  1  B.  xi.c.  45.  m  B.  viii.  c.  77*

3»-


Dino-


BookVII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENSIS.  151


Dinomenes,  who  had,  lately,
the  Ions  of  Hippocrates,  and

m  aSi A<p*,  as  it  Hands  in  all  the  edi¬
tions,  and  manufcripts.  For  which
reafon  I  have  fubftituted  sr cctfcav,  the
very  word  made  ufe  ol  by  Herodotus,
in  the  room  of  ts?  ccfi\q>x  :  Since  it  is
not  poffible  to  imagine  our  author
did  not  know  that  Gelo  was  not  the
brother  of  Hippocrates  •,  particularly,
fince  his  favourite  author,  Herodotus,
has  fhewn  who  Gelo  was,  and,  by
what  means,  he,  firft,  made  himfelf
king  of  Geia,  and,  afterwards,  of  Sy-
racufe.  It  is  a  misfortune  that  the
whole  five  books  between  the  fifth,
and  the  eleventh,  in  which  laft  Dio¬
dorus  Siculus  treats  of  the  death  of
Gelo,  are  loft  ;  otherwife,  we  fhould
be  much  better  informed  than  we  are,
now,  of  many  things  relating  to  Hip¬
pocrates,  and  Gelo.  However,  I  (hall
lay  before  the  reader  a  fhort  account
of  both,  not  from  Cafaubon,  but  from
Herodotus  ;  and  add  to  it  the  number
of  years  Gelo  reigned  at  Syracufe  •,
and  the  time,  when  he  died,  from  Dio¬
dorus  Siculus.  Cleander,  kingolGela,
being  fiain  by  Sabyllus,  after  a  reign
of  feven  years,  his  brother  Hippocrates
fucceeded  him.  In  his  reign,  Gelo,  a
defcendant  of  Telines,  prieft  of  the
infernal  gods,  having  given  q  many
inftances  of  his  condud,  and  bravery,
was  made  general  of  the  horfe  ;  and
Hippocrates  being  killed  at  the  fiege
of  Hyb!a,  after  a  reign  of  feven  years,
and  the  inhabitants  of  Gela  growing
uneafy  under  the  government  of  Eu-
clides,  and  Cleander  (or  Caffander,  ac-


fucceeded  in  the  kingdom  to
not  Dionyfius  the  Syracufan,

cording  to  the  Medicean  manufcript)
the  fons  of  Hippocrates,  Gelo,  under
the  pretence  of  fupporting  thefe,  over¬
came  the  inhabitants  of  Gela  in  battle,
and  made  himfelf  king  of  that  city.
Some  time  after  this,  he  poffeffed  him¬
felf  of  Syracufe  alfo,  by  reftoring  the
Gamori,-  as  has  been,  already,  r  faid  :
So  far  Herodotus.  "Diodorus  Siculus
fays  that  Gelo  died  in  the  archonfhip
of  Timofthenes,  after  he  had  reigned
feven  years  at  Syracufe.  Timofthenes
was  archon  at  Athens  in  the  third  year
of  the  feventy  fifth  Olympiad  :  So
that,  he  muft  have  begun  his  reign  at
Syracufe  in  the  firft  year  of  the  feventy
fourth  Olympiad,  when  Leoftratus
was  archon  at  Athens.  From  this,  it
appears  that  the  two  embaffadors,  who
went  to  Sicily  to  buy  corn  in  the  fe-
cond  year  of  the  feventy  fecond  Olym¬
piad,  were  fent  thither  fix  years  before
Gelo  was  king  of  Syracufe.  This  af¬
fords  le  Jay,  who  has  miftaken  Cafau¬
bon,  matter  of  great  cenfure,  as  he
thinks,  againft  our  author,  who  does
not  fay  that  Gelo  was  king  of  Syra¬
cufe,  when  the  Roman  embaffadors
went  to  Sicily;  on  the" contrary,  he
fays,  plainly,  that  he  had  then,  lately,
fucceeded  to  the  kingdom  of  the  fons
of  Hippocrates:  Now,  thefe  were  not
kings  of  Syracufe,  but  of  Gela  :  Con-
fequently,  Gelo  had  then,  lately,  fuc¬
ceeded  to  the  kingdom  of  Gela  ;  vswc*

t v,v  l7r7roxecilxc  zsotiSuv  ivgocvviJtz  uage-i-

AvQug.  Gelo  fucceeded  to  the  kingdom
of  Hippocrates,  not  to  Hippocrates.


q  In  Polym.  c.  154  and  155.  r  See  the  thirty  fixth  annot.  on  the  fixth  book.  8B,  xi.  c.  38.

as


152  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

as  Licinnius,  and  Gellius  have  written,  and  many  other  Ro¬
man  hifliorians,  without  examining  the  circumftances  of  the
time  with  accuracy,  as  the  thing  itfelf  (hews,  but,  rafhly,
relating  the  firft  account,  that  offered  itfelf:  For  the  em-
baffadors,  appointed  to  go  to  Sicily,  fet  fail  for  that  ifland  in
the  fecond  year  of  the  feventy  fecond  Olympiad,  Hybrilides
being,  that  year,  archon  at  Athens,  feventeen  years  after  the
expulfion  ol  the  kings,  as  thefe,  and  almoft  all  other  hifto-
rians  agree:  Whereas  Dionyfius,  the  elder,  having  invaded
the  liberties  of  the  Syracufans  the  eighty  fifth  year  after
this,  poffefied  himfelf  of  the  tyranny  in  the  third  year  of
the  ninety  third  Olympiad,  Callias  being,  then,  archon  at
Athens,  after  Antigenes.  Thofe,  who  write  the  hiftories  of
early  times,  and  fuch  as  contain  the  tranfadlions  of  many
ages,  may,  indeed,  be  forgiven  an  error  of  a  few  years ;  but
not  a  deviation  from  the  truth  of  two,  or  three  intire  gene¬
rations  :  However,  it  is  probable  that  the  firft,  who  gave
this  fad:  a  place  in  his  account  of  thofe  times,  whom  all  the
reft  have  followed,  finding  only  this,  in  the  ancient  writings,
that  embaffadors  were  fent,  under  thefe  confuls,  to  Sicily  to
buy  corn,  and  returned  from  thence  with  the  prefen  t  of  corn,

If  I  fhew  this,  I  hope  it  will  recom-  their  domination,  a  |S*A cpivuv  tuv  sro-
mend  the  alteration  I  have  made  of  Anj?f«v  kolIwouv  t u  $^fu  :  They

T*  ufo A$s?,  into  sjWwv,  to  the  appro-  had,  therefore,  fubmitted  to  it.  This
bation  of  the  reader.  1  Herodotus  fays  is  the  force  of  the  word  «7<  •,  which  is
that  the  pretence  of  Gelo,  when  he  fo  very  fignificant,  fo  often  uled  by
took  arms  againft  the  inhabitants  of  the  beft  writers,  and  fo  often  left  out
Gela,  was  to  affift  the  fons  of  Hippo-  by  their  tranflators,  that  I  would  de¬
crates  ;  to<ct<  I mroKoa  soi  wccitn,  becaufe  fire  every  gentleman,  who  reads  thofe
the  former  would,  no  longer ,  fubmit  to  writers,  to  pay  a  particular  regard  to  it.

1  In  Polym.  c.  155.


which


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALI C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  153

I

which  the  tyrant  had  given  them,  never  informed  them^
felves  further  from  the  Greek  hiftorians,  who  was,  at  that
time,  tyrant  of  Sicily,  but,  without  examination,  and,  as  it
happened,  called  him  Dionyflus.

II.  The  embaffadors,  therefore,  who  imbarked  for  Sicily,
having  met  with  a  ftorm  at  fea,  and,  being  obliged  to  fail
round  the  illand,  were  a  long  time  before  they  arrived  at
the  king’s  court ;  and,  having  ftaid  the  winter  there,  re¬
turned  to  Italy  in  the  fpring,  bringing  with  them  a  great
quantity  of  provifions.  But  thofe,  who  had  been  fent  to
the  Pometine  plain,  were  very  near  being  put  to  death  by
the  Volfci,  as  fpies,  the  Roman  exiles  having  accufed  them
of  being  fuch  :  And,  having,  with  very  great  difficulty,
been  able  to  fave  their  perfons,  for  which  they  were  obliged
to  the  activity  of  their  own  guefts,  they  returned  to  Rome
with  the  lofs  of  their  money,  and  without  having  effected
any  thing.  The  fame  misfortune  happened  to  thofe,  who
went  to  3  Cumae  in  Italy :  For  many  Roman  exiles,  who
had  fled  with  Tarquinius  out  of  the  laft  battle,  refiding  in
that  city,  they,  at  firft,  endeavoured  to  prevail  upon  the
tyrant  to  deliver  up  the  embafladors  to  them,  to  the  end
they  might  put  them  to  death  :  But,  not  fucceeding  in  this,
they  deflred  they  might  detain  their  perfons,  as  pledges,  till
they  fliould  receive,  from  the  city  that  fent  them,  their
fortunes,  which,  they  faid,  had  been,  unjuftly,  confifcated
by  the  Romans ;  and  thought  it  reafonable  that  the  tyrant

Kvjuij  UxXt u\k.  Our  author  has  See  the  thirty  firft  annotation  on  the
added  the  laft  word  to  diftinguifh  it  fifth  book,
from  Kv^  in  Aeolis  in  the  lefier  Afia.

VOL.  III.


X


fhould


154  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  T I E  S  OF  Book  VII.

fhould  be  the  judge  in  this  caufe.  Ariftodemus,  the  fon  of
Ariftocrates,  was,  at  that  time,  tyrant  of  Cumae,  a  man  of
no  obfcure  birth,  who  was  called,  4  Ma Effeminate ,  by
the  citizens,  which  appellation  came  to  be  more  known  in
time  than  his  own  name ;  either  becaufe,  when  a  boy,  he
was  effeminate,  and  fuffered  that  treatment,  which  is  ap¬
propriated  to  women,  as  fome  relate ;  or  becaufe  he  was  of
a  mild  nature,  and  of  a  difpofition  too  foft  to  be  incenfed,
as  others  write  :  I  look  upon  it  not  to  be  unfeafonable  to
fufpend  the  relation  of  the  Roman  affairs  for  a  flhort  time*
in  order  to  give  an  account  of  the  opportunities,  by  which
he  was  encouraged  to  aim  at  the  tyranny,  and  of  the
meafures  he  purfued  to  obtain  it ;  of  the  manner  in  which
he  governed,  and  of  the  cataftrophe  he  met  with.

III.  In  the-  fixty  fourth  Olympiad,  when  Miltiades  was
archon  at  Athens,  the  Tyrrhenians,  who  inhabited  the
country  lying  near  the  Ionian  gulph,  and  were  driven  from


4‘  Of  moiXeilo  [AathuKos  vVo  r uv  u?uv.
Cafaubon  has  a  note,  alfo,  upon  this
occaHon,  which  the  French  tranftators
have  rendered  in  their  language,  like
the  other,  without  the  leaft  acknow¬
ledgement.  In  this  note,  u  Plutarch  is
quo.ed  for  faying  that  Ariftodemus
was  not  caked  juaAaxcf  for  any  igno-
min  ous  reafon,  but  that  he  was  called
fo  by  the  Barbarians,  in  whofe  lan¬
guage,  that  word  ftgnifies  a  youth.  -I
with  Plutarch  had  told  us  who  thefe
Barbarians  were,  who  gave  him  this
name.  They  could  not  be  his  fellow-
citizens  of  Cumae,  becaufe  thefe  were


Greeks  •,  and,  in  their  language,  every
one,  who  underftands  it,  knows  the
fignification  of puh ouog.  But  Plutarch,,
prefently  after,  gives  us  great  reafon
to  believe  that  this  name  was  given
him,  by  the  citizens  of  Cumae,  for
his  infamous  vice  :  For  he  fays  that,
alter  Ariftodemus  had  prevailed  upon
the  army  to  afllfb  him  in  banifhing  the
fen  ate,  and  he  had  obtained  the  ty¬
ranny,  he  furpafied  himfelf  in  that
very  vice,  from  which  he,  probably,
derived  his  name  :  >jv  [mv  tv  tcu?  zregi
yvvuiKd?  kou  ITAIAA2  olSmiouz

a.e’los  zavlx  juo%6t]gol<x1oZ'

thence*


u  TvmiK.  p.  261.


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  AS  SEN  SIS.  155

thence,  in  procefs  of  time,  by  the  Celtae,  together  with  the
Umbri,  the  Daunii,  and  many  other  Barbarians,  endeavoured
to  fubvert  Cumae,  a  Greek  city,  fituated  in  the  country  of
the  Opici,  and  built  by  the  citizens  of  Eretria,  and  Chalcis,
without  being  able  to  alledge  any  other  juft  caufe  of  their
animoftty,  than  the  profperity  of  the  city  :  For  Cumae  was,
at  that  time,  celebrated  throughout  all  Italy  for  its  riches,
power,  and  many  other  advantages,  as  poffefting  the  moft
fertil  part  of  the  Campanian  plain,  and  being  miftrefs  of  the
moft  convenient  havens  round  the  promontory  5  Mifenum.
The  Barbarians,  therefore,  inticed  by  thefe  advantages,
marched  againft  this  city  with  an  army,  conftfting  of  no  lefs
than  five  hundred  thoufand  foot,  and  eighteen  thoufand
horfe.  While  they  lay  incamped  not  far  from  the  city,  a
prodigy  happened  to  them,  of  fo  wonderful  a  nature,  that
nothing  like  it  is  recorded  to  have  fallen  out  at  any  time,
or  in  any  place,  either  among  the  Greeks,  or  Barbarians :
For  the  rivers,  that  ran  near  their  camp,  one  of  which  is
called  the  6Vulturnus,  and  the  other,  the  Glanis,  leaving
their  natural  courfe,  flowed  back,  and,  for  a  long  time,

s*  Mitfjjvov.  See  the  one  hundred  and  Volturno ,  is,  now,  to  be  feen.  The
eighty  fecond  annotation  on  the  firft  other  river  was  called  Glanis ,  Clanis ,
boo]^  Glanius ,  and  Lit  emus,  now,  il  Lagno.

6.  ovAlxgvos _ rA*vK.  The  firft  of  On  the  right  of  this  river,  and  near

thefe  is  the  moft  confiderable  river  of  the  mouth  of  it,  flood  the  city  of
Campania,  and,  ftill,  retains  its  name,  Liternum ,  famous  for  the  voluntary
being  called,  by  theltalians,  w  Volturno,  exile  of  the  firft  Scipio  Africanus,
and  Volt  or  no.  At  the  mouth  of  this  whofe  country  houfe  was  here  ;  on  the
river,  and  on  the  left  of  it,  flood  a  ruins  of  which,  a  watch  tower,  called
town,  which,  from  the  river,  was  call-  la  Lorre  di  P atria,  was,  afterwards,
ed  Vulturnum ,  where  Cajlello  a  mar  di  eredled.

w  Cluver,  leal.  Antiq.  B.  iv,  c.  2.

X  2


con-


156  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

continued  to  run,  from  their  mouths,  to  their  fources.  The
Cumaeans,  being  informed  or  this  prodigy,  were  encouraged
by  it  to  fight  the  Barbarians,  in  confidence  that  Heaven  de-
figned  to  deprefs  the  elevated  condition  of  the  latter,  and
to  raife  their  own,  which  then  feemed  low.  And,  having
divided  all  their  youth  into  three  bodies,  they  appointed
one  of  them  to  defend  the  city,  another  to  guard  the  fhips,
and  the  third  they  drew  up  under  the  walls  to  receive  the
enemy:  Thefe  confided  of  fix  hundred  horfe,  and  of  four
thoufand  five  hundred  foot.  And,  though  fo  few  in  number,
they  fudained  the  attack  of  fo  many  myriads.

IV.  When  the  Barbarians  heard  they  were  refolved  to
fight,  they  came  on  fhouting,  according  to  the  cuftom  of
Barbarians,  without  order,  the  horfe  intermixed  with  the
foot,  in  expectation  of  cutting  them  all  in  pieces.  The  place,
where  they  ingaged,  lay  before  the  city,  being  a  narrow
valley,  furrounded  with  mountains,  and  lakes,  which  was  a
friend  to  the  valor  of  the  Cumaeans,  and  an  enemy  to  the
multitude  of  the  Barbarians  :  For,  being  thrown  down,  and
trampled  upon  by  one  another,  particularly  in  the  boggs
near  the  lake,  the  greated  part  of  them  were  dePcroyed  by
their  own  people,  without,  even,  ingaging  the  army  of  the
Creeks.  By  this  means,  their  foot,  confiding  of  fuch  num¬
bers,  defeated  itfelf;  and,  without  performing  any  brave
adion,  difperfed  themfelves  every  way,  and  fled.  However,
the  horfe  ingaged,  and  gave  the  Greeks  great  trouble  :  But,
being  unable  to  furround  them,  by  reafon  of  the  narrownefs
of  the  ground,  and  the  gods  afliding  the  Greeks,  in  fome

meafure,


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  AS  SENS  I S.  157

meafure,  with  lightning,  rain,  and  thunder,  the  others  were
feized  with  fear,  and  ran  away.  In  this  a&ion,  all  the
Cumaean  horfe  fought  with  remarkable  bravery ;  and  were
allowed  to  have  been  the  chief  caufe  of  the  vidtory.  But
Ariftodemus,  furnamed  Malacus,  diftinguifhed  himfelf  above
all  the  reft :  For,  he  alone  fuftained  the  attack  of  the  enemy,
and  killed  their  general,  and,  with  him,  many  other  brave
men.  The  war  being  at  an  end,  the  Cumaeans,  having
offered  facrifices  to  the  gods  in  thankfgiving  for  their  victory,
and  buried,  in  a  fumptuous  manner,  thofe,  who  had  been
fiain  in  the  battle,  entered  into  great  contefts  to  whom  they
ought  to  give  the  fir  ft  crown,  as  a  reward  for  his  fuperior
bravery :  For  the  impartial  judges  were  defirous  to  beftow
this  honor  upon  Ariftodemus,  who  was,  alfo,  fupported  by
the  favor  of  all  the  people.  On  the  other  fide,  the  men  in
power  defired  to  confer  it  upon  Hippomedon,  the  general
of  the  horfe ;  and,  in  this,  the  whole  fenate  concurred  :
The  Cumaeans  were,  at  that  time,  governed  by  an  arifto-
cracy,  and  the  people  had  not  the  difpofal  of  many  things.
A  fedition  arifing  from  this  conteft,  the  men  of  a  more  ad¬
vanced  age,  being  afraid  left  this  emulation  fhould  proceed
to  arms,  and  murders,  prevailed  on  both  the  parties  to  con-
fent  that  each  of  the  pretenders  fhould  receive  an  equal
fhare  of  the  honors.  From  this  beginning,  Ariftodemus
Malacus  became  a  leader  of  the  people ;  and,  having  ac¬
quired  a  faculty  of  fpeaking  upon  political  fubje&s,  he  fe-
duced  them  by  his  harangues,  improved  their  condition  by
popular  laws,  difcovered  the  depredations  of  the  men  in

power.


158  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

power,  and  relieved  many  of  the  poor  with  his  own  money.
By  this  means,  he  became  both  odious,  and  formidable,  to
the  leading  men  of  the  ariftocracy.

V.  The  twentieth  year  after  the  ingagement  with  the
Barbarians,  embafladors  from  the  Aricini  came  to  the  Cu~
maeans  with  the  enfigns  of  fuppliants,  to  beg  their  afliftance
againft  the  Tyrrhenians,  who  made  war  upon  them  :  For,
as  7 1  related  in  a  former  book,  Porfena,  king  of  the  Tyr¬
rhenians,  having  made  peace  with  the  Romans,  fent  his  fon
Aruns  with  one  half  of  the  army,  at  his  delire,  to  acquire  a
fovereignty  for  himfelf.  His  fon  was,  then,  befieging  the
Aricini,  whom  he  had  forced  to  fly  to  their  city  for  refuge,
and  expected  to  take  it,  foon,  by  famine.  When  thefe
embafladors  arrived,  the  leading  men  of  the  ariftocracy,
hating  Ariftodemus,  and  fearing  he  might  do  fome  prejudice
to  the  eftablifhed  government,  thought  they  had  the  faireft
of  all  opportunities  to  get  rid  of  him,  under  a  fpecious  pre¬
tence  :  And,  having  prevailed  upon  the  people  to  fend  two
thoufand  men  to  the  relief  of  the  Aricini,  and  appointed
Ariftodemus  to  be  their  general,  as  a  man  famous  for  his
military  achievements,  they,  after  that,  took  fuch  meafures,
as  gave  them  room  to  expecft  that  he  would  either  be  de-
ftroyed  in  battle  by  the  Tyrrhenians,  or  perifti  at  fea  :  For,
being  impowered  by  the  fenate  to  raife  the  forces,  that
were  to  be  fent  as  auxiliaries,  they  employed  no  men  of
family,  or  reputation ;  but,  chilling  out  the  pooreft,  and
the  moft  profligate  of  the  common  people,  from  whom  they

£  v  Toif  nsla  JifyAuxa  tofoif.  See  the  thirty  fixth  chapter  of  the  fifth  book.

were


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  159
were  under  continual  apprehenfion  of  fome  innovations,
they,  with  thefe,  made  up  the  complement  of  men,  who
were  to  be  fent  upon  this  expedition  ;  and  having  brought
out  of  the  docks  ten  old  fhips,  the  worft  failors  they  had,
and  appointed  the  pooreft  of  all  the  Cumaeans  to  command
them,  they  imbarked  the  forces  on  board  thefe  fhips,  threa¬
tening  with  death  every  one,  who  fhould  defert  the  fervice.

VI.  Upon  which,  Ariftodemus,  having  only  faid  that  he
was  not  ignorant  of  the  defign  of  his  enemies,  who  were
fending  him,  in  appearance,  to  the  afliftance  of  the  Aricini,
but,  in  reality,  to  manifeft  deftruCtion,  accepted  the  com¬
mand,  and,  immediately,  fet  fail  with  the  embafladors  of
the  Aricini  ;  and,  having  performed  the  voyage  with  great
difficulty,  and  danger,  he  arrived  on  the  coaff  near  to  Aricia ;
and,  leaving  a  fufficient  number  of  men  to  guard  the  fhips,
he  marched,  the  firft  night,  from  the  fea,  to  that  city,  which
was  not  far  diffant,  and,  unexpectedly,  appeared  the  next
morning  early  within  fight  of  the  inhabitants  :  Then,  in¬
camping  near  the  city,  and  having  prevailed  upon  the  citi¬
zens,  who  had  fled  to  Aricia,  to  come  out  into  the  field,
he,  prefently,  invited  the  Tyrrhenians  to  an  ingagement.
And,  a  fharp  battle  infuing,  the  Aricini,  after  a  very  fliort
refiftance,  all  gave  way,  and,  again,  fled  to  the  city :  But
Ariftodemus,  with  a  fmall  body  of  Cumaeans,  who  were
chofen  men,  fuftained  the  united  fhock  of  the  enemy  ;  and,
having  killed  the  general  of  the  Tyrrhenians  with  his  own
own  hand,  he  put  thefe  foreigners  to  flight,  and  gained  the
moft  glorious  of  all  victories.  After  he  had  performed  thefe

tilings.


1 60  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

things,  and  been  honoured  with  many  prefents  by  the  Ari-
cini,  he  failed  away  immediately,  deflring  to  be  himfelf  the
meffenger  to  the  Cumaeans  of  his  own  victory.  He  was
followed  by  a  great  number  of  merchant  fhips  belonging  to
the  Aricini,  laden  with  the  fpoils,  and  prifoners,  taken  from
the  Tyrrhenians.  When  they  were  arrived  near  Cumae,  he
brought  his  fhips  to  the  fhore ;  and,  aflembling  his  army,
inveighed,  vehemently,  againft  the  chief  men  of  the  city,
and  gave  great  commendations  to  thofe  foldiers,  who  had
diftinguifhed  themfelves  in  the  late  ingagement ;  and,  hav-
ing  given  money  to  every  one  of  them,  and  divided  the
prefents  he  had  received  from  the  Aricini  among  them  all,
he  defired  they  would  remember  thefe  favors,  when  they
returned  home ;  and,  if  he  fhould  be  threatened  with  any
danger  from  the  oligarchy,  that  every  one  of  them  would
affift  him  to  the  utmoft  of  his  power.  All  the  foldiers  ac¬
knowledged  themfelves  to  be  under  great  obligations  to  him,
not  only,  for  their  unexpected  prefervation,  for  which  they
were  indebted  to  him,  but,  alfo,  for  their  not  returning
home  with  empty  hands ;  and  promifed  to  facrifice  their
own  lives,  fooner  than  to  abandon  him  to  his  enemies  :
Upon  which,  he  commended  their  zeal,  and  difmifled  the
aflembly.  After  this,  he  called  into  his  tent  thofe  among
them,  who  were  the  moft  profligate,  and  the  moil  daring  in
their  own  perfons ;  and,  having  corrupted  them  with  pre¬
fents,  fair  words,  and  hopes,  the  feducers  of  all  men,  he
ingaged  them  to  aflift  him  in  fubverting  the  eftablifhed
government.


I


VII.


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  161

VII.  After  he  had  fecured  the  concurrence,  and  af-
fiftance  of  thefe  men,  and  acquainted  every  one  with  the
part  he  was  to  a 61,  he  fet  at  liberty  all  the  prifoners  he  had
brought,  without  ranfom,  in  order  to  gain  their  aftedtion
alfo,  and  failed  into  the  ports  of  Cumae,  his  fhips  carrying
the  enftgns  of  vidtory.  When  the  foldiers  diftmbarked,  they
were  met  by  their  fathers,  mothers,  the  reft  of  their  rela¬
tions,  their  children  and  wives,  who,  embracing  them  with
tears,  and  kilTes,  faluted  each  of  them  with  the  moft  tender
appellations :  And  all  the  other  citizens,  receiving  the  ge¬
neral  with  joy,  and  applaufe,  condudted  him  to  his  houfe.
The  chief  men  of  the  city,  particularly  thofe,  who  had
given  him  the  command,  and  concerted  the  other  meafures
for  his  deftrudtion,  were  grieved  at  this,  and  full  of  appre-
henftons  for  their  future  lafety.  After  a  few  days  were
palled,  in  which  Ariftodemus  employed  himfelf  in  per¬
forming  his  vows  to  the  gods,  and  in  waiting  for  the  mer¬
chant  fhips,  that  were  not  yet  arrived,  when  the  time  was
come,  he  faid  he  deftred  to  give  the  fenate  an  account  of
the  circumftances  of  the  battle,  and  fhew  them  the  fpoils.
The  fenators  aftembling  in  great  numbers,  he  prefented
himfelf,  and  made  a  fpeech  to  them,  in  which  he  related
every  thing,  which  had  palled  in  the  ingagement.  While
he  was  fpeaking,  his  accomplices  in  the  confpiracy  rufh-
ed  into  the  fenate,  in  a  body,  with  fwords  under  their
garments,  and  killed  all  the  partifans  of  the  ariftocracy*
Upon  this,  all,  who  were  in  the  forum,  except  thofe,
privy  to  the  confpiracy,  faved  themfelves  by  flight  ;  fome

Vol.  III.  Y  running


1 62  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

running  into  their  houfes,  and  others  out  of  the  city  :  In
the  mean  time,  the  confpirators  poflefied  themfelves  of  the
citadel,  and  the  docks,  and  the  other  ftrong  places  of  the
city.  The  following  night,  he  releafed  out  of  prifon  all
under  fentence  of  death,  who  were  many;  and,  arming
them,  together  with  his  friends,  among  whom  were  the
Tyrrhenian  prifoners,  he  formed  of  all  thefe  a  guard  for
the  fecurity  of  his  perfon.  When  it  was  day,  he  aflembled
the  people ;  and,  after  many  invedtives  againft  the  citizens,
who  had  been  put  to  death  by  his  orders,  he  faid  that,  hav¬
ing  often  fought  his  life,  they  had  been  juftly  punifhed
by  him,  and  that  he  was  come  to  give  liberty,  equality,  and
many  other  advantages  to  all  the  reft  of  the  citizens.

VIII.  Having  faid  this,  and  filled  all  the  people  with
wonderful  hopes,  he  eftablifhed  two  inftitutions,  which  are,
of  all  others,  the  moft  deftrudtive,  and  the  prologues  to
every  tyranny,  a  divifion  of  lands,  and  an  abolition  of  debts ;
and  promifed,  that  he  would  take  upon  himfelf  the  care  of
both  thefe  things,  if  he  were  appointed  general  with  abfo-
lute  power,  till  the  public  tranquillity  Ihould  be  fecured,  and
they  had  eftablifhed  a  democracy.  The  populace,  and,
particularly,  the  moft  profligate  part  of  it,  joyfully  receiving
a  propofal,  which  expofed  the  fortunes  of  other  men  to  their
rapine,  Ariftodemus  inverted  himfelf  with  the  abfolute
command,  and  propofed  another  meafure,  by  which  he
deceived  them,  and  deprived  them  all  of  their  liberty  :  For,
pretending  to  fufpedt  that  the  rich  would  raife  difturbances,
and  infurre&ions  againft  the  common  people,  on  account

of


Book VII.  DIONYSIUS  HAL ICARNASSENSIS.  163

of  the  divifton  of  lands,  and  the  abolition  of  debts,  he  faid
the  only  means  he  could  think  of  to  prevent  a  civil  war,
and  the  (laughter  of  citizens,  and  to  guard  againft  thefe
miferies  before  they  happened,  was,  for  all  of  them  to  bring
their  arms  out  of  their  houfes,  and  to  confecrate  them  to
the  gods,  that  they  might  make  ufe  of  them  againft  the
invaftons  of  a  foreign  enemy,  whenever  there  fhould  be  a
neceflity  for  it,  and  not  againft  one  another  ;  and  that,  in
the  mean  time,  they  would  be,  properly,  difpofed  of,  when
placed  in  the  temples  of  the  gods.  They  being  prevailed
upon  to  agree  to  this  alfo,  he  difarmed  all  the  Cumaeans
the  fame  day,  and,  the  following  days,  he  fearched  their
houfes ;  where  he  put  to  death  many  worthy  citizens,  pre¬
tending  they  had  not  delivered  up  all  their  arms  to  be  con-
fecrated  to  the  gods:  After  which,  he  ftrengthened  his
tyranny  by  three  forts  of  guards ;  the  xirft  confifted  of  the
meaneft,  and  the  mo  ft  abandoned  of  the  citizens,  by  whofe
means  he  had  deftroyed  the  ariftocracy  ;  the  fecond,  of  the
moft  impious  (laves,  whom  he  himfelf  had  manumitted  for
having  killed  their  mafters ;  and  the  third,  of  the  moft  favage
Barbarians,  hired  by  him  as  mercenary  troops :  Thefe  did
not  amount  to  lefs  than  two  thoufand,  and  were  far  better
foldiers  than  any  of  the  reft.  He  removed  the  ftatues  of
thofe  he  had  put  to  death,  from  all  places,  both  facred  and
profane,  and  placed  his  own  in  their  room ;  and,  feizing
their  houfes,  and  their  eftates,  and  the  reft  of  their  fortunes,
he  referved  for  himfelf  the  gold,  and  (liver,  and  every  thing
elfe,  that  was  not  too  mean  for  the  dignity  of  a  tyrant,  and

Y  2  divided


1 64  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

divided  the  remainder  among  the  inftruments  of  his  nfur-
pation:  But  the  greateft  part  of  thefe  prefents,  and  the
moft  valuable  he  gave  to  the  ilaves,  who  had  killed  their
matters :  However,  thefe  inttfted,  alfo,  to  marry  their  wives,
and  daughters.

IX.  At  firft,  he  made  no  account  of  the  male  children
of  thofe,  who  had  been  put  to  death  ;  but  afterwards,  either
by  the  direction  of  fome  oracle,  or  from  the  reflexion  he
might,  naturally,  make,  that,  in  them,  no  fmall  danger  was
breeding  up  againft  him,  he  refolved  to  murder  them  all
in  one  day :  But,  as  all  the  men,  to  whom  their  mothers
were  married  after  the  death  of  their  former  hufbands,  and
by  whom  the  children  themfelves  were  bringing  up,  begged,
earneftly,  of  him  to  fpare  them,  he  was  willing  to  grant
them  this  favor  alfo;  and,  contrary  to  his  refolution,  did  not
put  them  to  death  :  However,  to  prevent  their  entering  into
any  confpiracy  againft  the  tyranny,  he  took  this  precaution ;
he  ordered  them  all  to  depart  the  city,  and  live  in  the
country  difperfed  here  and  there,  and  to  be  inftru&ed  in  no
fcience,  or  difcipline  becoming  the  children  of  freemen ;
but  to  tend  flocks,  and  perform  other  works  of  agriculture  ;
threatening  with  death  every  one  of  them,  who  fliould  be
found  in  the  city.  Upon  which,  thefe  children,  being  turned
out  of  the  houfes  of  their  anceftors,  were  brought  up  in  the
country  like  flaves,  and  ferved  the  murderers  of  their  fathers..
And,  to  the  end  that  no  generous,  or  manly  fpirit  might
fpring  up  in  the  reft  of  the  citizens,  he  refolved  to  effemi¬
nate,  by  education,  the  whole  race  of  the  youth,  then

bringing


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C A RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  165
bringing  up  in  the  city ;  and,  with  that  view,  he  fupprefled
the  fchools,  and  the  exercife  of  arms;  and  changed  the
manner  of  living,  before  in  ufe  among  the  youth  :  For,
he  ordered  the  boys  to  wear  their  hair  long,  like  girls,  to
8  dye  it  yellow,  to  curl  it,  and  fallen  thofe  curls  to  cauls  of
net- work,  and  to  wear  imbroidered  vefts,  that  reached  down
to  their  feet,  and,  over  thefe,  thin,  and  foft  mantles,  and  to
pafs  their  lives  in  the  fhade :  And,  when  they  went  to  the
fchools,  where  dancing,  playing  on  the  flute,  and  fuch  kinds
of  mufical  allurements  were  taught,  their  governefles  at¬
tended  them  with  umbreilos  and  fans,  wafhed  them  with
their  own  hands,  when  they  bathed,  and  fupplied  them
with  combs,  alabafter  pots  full  of  precious  ointments,  and
looking-glafles.  By  this  education,  he  continued  to  enervate
the  youth,  till  they  had  completed  their  twentieth  year ;
and,  from  that  time,  buffered  them  to  be  confidered  as  men.
Having  by  thefe,  and  many  ether  methods,  abufed,  and
infulted  the  Cumaeans,  without  refraining  from  any  kind  of
luft,  or  cruelty,  when  he  thought  himfelf  fecure  in  the  pof~
fefiion  of  the  tyranny,  being  now  grown  old,  he  was
punifhed  to  the  fatisfa&ion  both  of  gods,  and  men,  and
extirpated  with  all  his  family.

8-  I  am  afraid  Cafau-  ArifFophanes,  x  ai

bon  is  miftaken  in  interpreting  this  rmg  Si  non  to  e%ou(ii£eiv  ?[tx/uSoivy<riv  avh  t%
word  avQuri  srar7e(u£vj?f  :  bor  I  cannot  cIttK &  tuT  ^ctvQov  zsotetv.  For

find  it  ufed  in  thatfenie  in  any  author,  this  reafon,  I  do  not  think  it  necef-
But  I  find  taken  in  the  fame  fary,  with  Stephens,  to  fubflitute

fenfe  with  againft  which  Ca-  in  the  room  of

faubon  cautions  his  readers.  However,  7  Julius  Pollux,  in  fpeaking  of  thofe,
the  Greek  fcholiaft  makes  the  follow-  whofe  hair  was  dyed  yellow,  or  black,
tng  obfervation  upon  thefe  words  of  fays,  %<xv$t£i<&<u  tw  xo[a,y]v>kui  iMhouvt&oii.


*  Avjir.  v.  43.  y  B.  ii.  Segm.  33.


X.  The


1 66  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

X.  The  perfons,  who  rofe  againft  him,  and  freed  their
country  from  the  tyranny,  were  the  fons  of  the  citizens  he
had  murdered :  All  of  whom  he  had,  at  firft,  refolved  to
put  to  death  in  one  day  ;  but,  being  prevailed  upon  by  the
intreaties  of  his  life  guards,  to  whom  he  had  given  their
mothers  in  marriage,  he  changed  his  refolution,  as  1  faid,
and  ordered  them  to  live  in  the  country.  A  few  years
after,  as  he  was  making  a  progrefs  through  the  villages,  he
faw  a  great  number  of  thefe  youths,  who  made  a  brave
appearance  ;  and,  fearing  they  might  concert  an  infurrec-
tion  againft  him,  he  refolved  to  prevent  it,  by  putting  them
all  to  death,  before  any  one  of  them  fhould  be  aware  of  it :
And,  aflembling  his  friends,  he  confidered  with  them  by
what  means,  they  might,  with  the  greateft  eafe,  and  expe¬
dition,  be,  privately,  put  to  death.  The  youths,  being  ap¬
prized  of  this,  either  by  the  information  of  fome  perfon,
who  was  acquainted  with  the  deftgn,  or  fufpedting  it  from
well-grounded  conje&ures,  fled  to  the  mountains,  taking
with  them  the  iron  inftruments  they  ufed  in  hulbandry.
They  were,  prefently,  joined  by  the  Cumaean  exiles,  who
reftded  in  Capua ;  the  moft  conftderable  of  whom,  and
thofe,  who  brought  with  them  the  greateft  number  of
Campanians,  their  guefts,  were  the  fons  of  Hippomedon,
who  had  been  general  of  the  horfe  in  the  Tyrrhenian  war  :
Thefe  came  well  armed  themfelves,  and  brought  with  them
arms  for  the  youths,  and  alfo,  a  good  body  of  Campanian
mercenaries,  and  of  their  own  friends,  which  they  had  railed.
When  they  were  all  joined,  they  came  down  from  the


moun-


(


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  167

mountains,  and  plundered  the  lands  of  their  enemies ;  in¬
deed  the  flaves  from  their  matters ;  releafed  the  prifoners
everywhere,  and  armed  them ;  and  the  effects,  and  cattle
they  could  not  carry  off,  they  either  burnt,  or  killed.  While
the  tyrant  was  at  a  lofs  to  refolve  in  what  manner  he  fhould
make  war  upon  them,  becaufe  they  neither  made  their
attempts  openly,  nor  ftaid  long  in  the  fame  places,  but
meafured  their  incurfions,  either  from  the  coming  on  of  the
night,  to  the  break  of  day,  or,  from  thence,  to  the  return
of  the  night;  and,  after  he  had,  often,  fent  out  forces  to
the  relief  of  the  country  in  vain,  one  of  the  fugitives,  fent
by  the  reft  as  a  defer  ter,  his  body  being  torne  with  whips,
came  to  him;  and,  after  fuing  for  impunity,  promifed  the
tyrant  to  conduct  the  troops  he  fhould  think  fit  to  fend  with
him,  to  the  place,  where  the  fugitives  propofed  to  incamp
the  following  night.  The  tyrant,  being  induced  to  truft
this  man,  who  afked  nothing,  and  offered  his  own  perfon  as
an  hoftage,  fent  thofe  of  his  commanders,  whom  he,  chiefly,
confided  in,  with  a  great  number  of  horfe,  and  the  band  of
mercenaries,  with  orders  to  bring  all  the  fugitives,  if  poflible,
if  not,  the  greateft  part  of  them,  to  him  in  chains.  The
pretended  deferter  led  the  army,  during  the  whole  night,
through  untrodden  paths,  and  defert  woods,  where  they
fuffered  exceedingly,  to  thofe  parts,  that  were  fartheft  from
the  city.

XL  In  the  mean  time,  the  revolters,  and  the  fugitives,
who  lay  in  ambufeade  on  the  hills,  with  which  the  lake

Avernus


1 68  ROMAN  ANTI  QU I  T  I E  S  OF  Book  VII.

9  Avernus  is  furrounded,  not  far  from  Cumae,  being  in¬
formed  by  the  fignals,  made  by  their  fcouts,  that  the  tyrant’s
army  was  marched  out  of  the  city,  fent  thither  about  fixty
the  moil  refolute  among  them,  drefied  in  leather  doublets,
with  faggots  of  brufh  wood  upon  their  fhoulders  :  Thefe
found  means  to  get  into  the  city  about  the  clofe  of  the
evening,  like  labourers,  fome  at  one  gate,  and  fome  at  an¬
other,  without  being  taken  notice  of:  When  they  were
there,  they  drew  out  the  fwords  they  had  concealed  in  the
faggots,  and  all  met  in  the  fame  place.  Marching  from
thence,  in  a  body,  to  the  gates,  that  led  to  the  lake  Avernus,
they  killed  the  guards,  while  they  were  afleep  ;  and  their
own  army  being,  by  this  time,  arrived  near  the  walls,  they
opened  the  gates,  and  received  them  all  into  the  city  ;  and,  in
doing  this  alfo,  they  were  not  difcovered  :  For,  that  night,
there  happened  to  be  a  public  feftival,  and  all  the  citizens
were  drinking,  and  employed  in  other  diverfions,  which
gave  the  others  an  opportunity  of  marching  through  all  the
ftreets,  that  led  to  the  tyrant’s  palace,  without  being  di-
fturbed :  Neither  did  they  find,  even  at  the  gates,  any


9*  a ogvov.  This  was  the  Greek  name
for  the  ylvernus  lacus .  The  reafon  of
this  Greek  appellation  is,  thus,  given
by  z  Virgil  ;

Shtam  fuper  baud  ullae  poterant  impune  r volantes
lender e  iter  pennis  ;  talis  fefe  balitus  atris
Faucibus  effundens  fuper  a  ad  con<vexa  ferebat :
Unde  locum  Graii  dixerunt  nomine  Aornum.

The  peftiferous  quality  of  the  air,
?  Aeneid,  B.  vi.  f.  239.  » Strabo,  B.  v.


ftagnating  over  this  lake,  which  was
fo  a  noxious  to  birds,  was  owing  to
the  hills  covered  with  wood,  that
furrounded  it,  as  all  authors  agree  ;
and  as  it  appeared,  whenAgrippa,  by
the  order  of  Auguftus,  cut  down  thefe
woods :  For,  after  that,  the  air  loft  its
ill  quality.  This  lake,  now,  called,
b  il  lago  TAverno,  and  il  lago  di  Tre-
fergole ,  lies,  nearly,  eaft  of  Cumae.

375.  b  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iv.  c.  2.

number


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  169

number  of  guards  upon  duty ;  but,  here  alfo,  fome  were
afieep,  and  others  drunk,  whom  they  killed  without  any
difficulty;  and,  ruffiing  into  the  palace  in  a  body,  they
found  all  the  reft  infeebled  both  in  body,  and  mind,  with
drunkennefs,  and  ftabbed  them  like  fheep  :  And,  having
feized  Ariftodemus  himfelf,  with  his  fons,  and  the  reft  of
his  relations,  they  tore  their  bodies  with  whips,  and  tortures,
during  a  great  part  of  the  night ;  and,  after  they  had  in-
Aided  on  them  all  kinds  of  puniffiments,  they  put  them  to
death.  Having  extirpated  the  whole  family  of  the  tyrant,
fo  as  to  leave  neither  children,  wives,  nor  any  one  related
to  them,  and  fpent  the  whole  night  in  finding  out  all  the
inftruments  of  the  tyranny,  as  foon  as  it  was  day,  they  pro¬
ceeded  to  the  forum  :  Then,  calling  the  people  together,
they  laid  down  their  arms,  and  reftored  the  ancient  go¬
vernment.

XII.  Before  this  Ariftodemus,  who  was,  at  that  time,  in
the  fourteenth  year  of  his  tyranny  over  the  Cumaeans,  the
Romans,  who  had  been  banifhed  with  Tarquinius,  prefen  ted
themfelves,  and  defired  him  to  fit  in  judgement  againft
their  country.  The  Roman  embaftadors  oppofed  this  for
fome  time,  alledging  that  they  were  not  come  to  enter  into
this  conteft,  nor  furnifhed  with  any  other  powers  than  thofe
they  had  received  from  the  fenate,  which  did  not  extend  to
a  defence  of  the  commonwealth :  But,  when  this  made  no
impreftion,  and  they  faw  the  tyrant,  through  the  earneftnefs,
and  folicitations  of  the  exiles,  inclined  to  the  other  fide,
they  defired  time  to  prepare  for  their  defence;  and,  having
Vol.  III.  '  Z  .  depofited


i  jo  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

depoflted  a  fum  of  money,  as  a  pledge  for  their  appearance,
while  thefuit  was  depending,  and  they  were,  no  longer,  guard¬
ed,  they  fled.  Upon  which,  the  tyrant  feized  their  domeftics,
their  fumpter  horfes,  and  the  money  they  had  brought  with
them  to  purchafe  corn.  Thefe  feveral  embafladors,  there¬
fore,  having  been  treated  in  the  manner  I  have  mentioned,
returned  without  effecting  any  thing.  But  thofe,  who  had
been  fent  to  Tyrrhenia,  bought  up  a  quantity  of  millet,
and  fpelt  in  that  country,  and  brought  it  to  Rome  in  boats.
This  fupply  maintained  the  Romans  for  a  fhort  time  :  But,
when  confumed,  left  them  in  the  fame  want  as  before.  And
there  was  no  fort  of  food  mankind  were,  ever,  reduced  to
through  necefiity,  which  they  did  not  attempt  to  eat.  By
which  it  happened  that  not  a  few  of  them,  as  well  by  want,
as  by  the  mifchief  arifing  from  unaccuftomed  food,  were
thrown  into  difeafes ;  or,  by  being  negle&ed  by  reafon  of
their  poverty,  were,  intirely,  unable  to  help  themfelves.
When  the  Volfci,  who  had  been  lately  overcame,  heard
this,  they  folicited  one  another,  by  private  embaflies,  to
enter  into  a  war  againft  the  Romans,  upon  a  fuppofltion,
that,  if  any  one  attacked  them,  while  they  were  diftrefled
both  by  war,  and  famine,  they  would  be  unable  to  refifL
But  the  benevolence  of  the  gods,  who  were,  always,  careful
net  to  fuller  the  Romans  to  be  fubdued  by  their  enemies,
flic  wed  her  power  upon  this  occaflon,  alfo,  in  a  moft  con-
fpicuous  manner  :  For,  fo  great  a  peftilence  feized,  at  once,
the  inhabitants  of  the  Volfcian  cities,  that  the  like  to  it  had
never  been  heard  of  in  any  other  parts,  either  among  the

Barbarians,


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  RN  A  S.  S  EN  SIS.  171

Barbarians,  or  Greeks,  and  deftroyed  them  without  diftinc-
tion  of  age,  condition,  or  fex,  or  of  ftrong,  or  weak  confti-
tutions.  Velitrae,  a  confiderable  city  of  the  Volfci,  of  large
extent,  and,  till  then,  very  populous,  was  an  inftance  of  the
greatnefs  of  this  calamity  ;  of  whofe  inhabitants  the  plague
left  but  one  part  out  of  ten,  and  carried  off  all  the  reft.
At  laft,  thofe,  who  furvived  this  misfortune,  fent  embaffadors
to  the  Romans,  to  inform  them  of  their  defolation,  and  to
deliver  up  their  city  to  them:  For  they  had,  even  before
that  time,  received  a  colony  from  Rome ;  for  which  reafon,
they,  now,  defired  a  fecond  to  be  fent  to  them.

XIII.  When  the  Romans  were  informed  of  thefe  things,
they  compaffionated  their  misfortune  ;  and  thought  them-
felves  obliged  to  retain  no  refentment  againft  their  enemies,
when  under  fo  fevere  an  affliction  ;  fince  the  gods  had,
fufficiently,  punifhed  them  for  the  defigns  they  had  formed
againft  their  commonwealth.  As  to  the  city  of  Velitrae,
they  thought  proper  to  receive  it,  and  to  fend  a  numerous
colony  thither,  in  confederation  of  the  many  advantages,
that  would  refult  to  them  from  that  meafure :  For  the  place
itfelf,  when  ftrongly  garrifoned,  feemed  very  proper  to
check,  and  obftruCt  the  defigns  of  thofe,  who  might  be  dif-
pofed  to  innovate,  or  raife  commotions  :  And  it  was  ex¬
pected  that  the  fcarcity  of  provifions,  under  which  the  city,
then,  laboured,  would  be  far  lefs  fenfible,  if  any  confiderable
number  of  the  citizens  were  removed.  But,  above  all  other
confederations,  the  frefh  fedition,  which  was,  then,  breaking
out,  before  the  former  was  quite  appeafed,  induced  them

Z  2  to


j72  ROMAN  A  NT  I  QJJ  I  TIES  OF  Book  VII.

to  order  the  colony  to  be  fent  to  Velitrae  :  For  the  people
began,  again,  to  be  inflamed,  as  before,  and  to  be  exafperated
againfl:  the  patricians :  And  many  fevere  reflexions  were
thrown  out  againfl:  them,  fome  accuflng  them  of  negledf,
and  indolence,  in  not  having,  long,  forefeen  the  fcarcity  of
corn,  and  taken  the  neceffary  precautions  to  avert  that
calamity  ;  and  others  giving  out  that  this  fcarcity  was  oc-
cafloned  by  their  contrivance,  and  flowed  from  their  refen  t-
ment,  and  a  defire  to  diftrefs  the  people,  in  remembrance  of
their  feceflion :  For  thefe  reafons,  the  colony  was,  prefently,
fent^  10  three  perfons  being  appointed  by  the  fenate  to  be
the  leaders  of  it.  At  firft,  the  people  were  pleafed  that
lands  were  to  be  allotted  to  fome  of  their  number,  who,  by
that  means,  would  be  freed  from  the  famine,  and  inhabit
a  fertil  country  :  But,  afterwards,  when  they  confldered  that
the  peftilence  had  raged  violently  in  the  city,  that  was  to
receive  them,  and  deftroyed  the  inhabitants,  and  gave  room
to  fear  that  it  would  treat  the  colony  in  the  fame  manner,
they,  by  degrees,  entertained  contrary  fentiments  :  So  that,
not  many  offered  themfelves  to  partake  of  the  colony,  but
fewer,  by  many,  than  the  fenate  had  decreed  :  And  thefe,
already,  blamed  themfelves  for  having  taken  an  imprudent
refolution,  and  declined  going  out.  However,  they  were


I0,  Tgiwv  uvS-gm.  Thefe  were  called,
by  the  Romans,  ’Triumviri  Agrarii ,  or
‘Triumviri  coloniae  deducendae.  Thefe
triumvirs,  le  Jay  fays,  were  created  by
the  people,  in  the  Comitia  tributa.  Les
triumvirs  fe  creoient  dans  une  ajfemblee  au
peuple  par  tribus .  Here  is  a  double  error.
In  the  firft  place,  our  author  fays,  ex¬


prefly,  that  thefe  triumvirs  were  created
by  the  fenate :  And  fecondly,  there
were,  as  yet,  no  tributa  comitia  ;  the
trial  of  Coriolanus  having  given  oc-
cafion  to  the  tribunes  of  the  people  to
inftitute  thefe  comitia.  The  reafons  of
which  will  be  explained  by  our  author
in  the  fifty  ninth  chapter  of  this  book.

taken


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSEN  S  IS.  173

taken  into  it,  and  fo  were  the  others,  who  did  not,  willingly,
join  them  ;  the  fenate  having  ordered  that  all  the  Romans
fhould  draw  lots  for  completing  the  colony  ;  and  that  all
thofe,  upon  whom  the  lot  fell,  fhould  be  punifhed  in  a
fevere,  and  inexorable  manner,  if  they  did  not  go.  This
colony,  therefore,  was  fent  to  Velitrae  by  a  fpecious  com-
pulfion.  And,  not  many  days  after,  another  colony  was
fent  to  11  Norba,  which  is  no  inconfiderable  city  of  the
Latines.

XIV.  However  the  defign  of  the  patricians,  as  far  as  it
related  to  the  appealing  of  the  fedition,  was,  intirely,  difap-
pointed  :  For  the  people,  who  were  left  at  home,  were,  now,
more  exafperated  than  before,  and  clamoured,  violently,
againft  the  fenators :  They  affembled,  at  .fir ft,  in  fmall
numbers,  and  held  meetings  with  their  friends ;  but,  af¬
terwards,  as  the  famine  encreafed,  they  met  in  a  body ;  and,
running  into  the  forum,  called  upon  the  tribunes.  And
thefe  having  aftembled  the  people,  Spurius  Icilius,  who  was,
then,  at  the  head  of  the  college  of  the  tribunes,  rofe  up,
and,  not  only,  ufed  many  invedtives  againft  the  fenate  him-
felf,  inflaming,  by  all  pofiible  means,  the  envy  of  the  people
againft  them,  but,  alfo,  called  upon  others  to  deliver  their
fentiments  in  public ;  and,  particularly,  upon  Sicinnius,  and
Brutus,  who  were  then  ediles  (calling  each  of  them  by  their
name)  and  had  been  the  authors  of  the  firft  feceffion  of  the
people ;  and,  having  introduced  the  tribunitian  power,  had,

”•  Ei?  sroAiv.  c  Norba,  now  of  the  Latines,  after  Latium  extended

called,  Norma ,  and  Nor  me ,  was  a  city  eaftward  as  far  as  the  Litis.


'Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.iii,  c.  8.


firft,


174  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

firft,  been  inverted  with  it.  Thefe,  having,  long  before,
prepared  themoft  malicious  fpeeches,  rofeup,  and  enlarged
upon  thofe  points,  that  were  grateful  to  the  generality  of
the  people,  alledging  that  the  want  of  corn  was  occartoned
by  the  contrivance,  and  treachery  of  the  rich,  againft  whofe
will  the  people  had  acquired  their  liberty  by  the  feceffion.
And  they  fhewed  that  the  rich  had  not,  in  the  leaf!;  degree,
an  equal  fhare  of  this  calamity  with  the  poor ;  the  former
having  provirtons,  privately,  hoarded  up  *,  and,  wanting  no
money  to  purchafe  Thofe,  that  were  imported,  they  laughed
at  the  famine  :  Whereas  the  plebeians  were  in  want  of  both.
They  added,  that  they  had  fent  the  colony,  which  was  de-
ftined  to  breathe  a  peftilential  air,  to  a  manifeft,  and  much
worfe  deftrudion ;  and,  exaggerating,  with  all  their  power,
the  terror  of  thefe  things,  afked,  What  end  there  was  to  be
of  their  miferies  ?  They  put  them  in  mind  of  the  ftripes
they  had,  formerly,  received  from  the  rich,  and  laid  open
many  other  things  of  this  nature  with  great  freedom.  And
Brutus  clofed  his  fpeech  with  this  threat,  that,  if  they  would
follow  his  advice,  he  would,  foon,  compel  thofe,  who  had
kindled  this  mifchief,  to  extinguifh  it.-  After  which,  the
affembly  was  difmifled.

XV.  The  next  day,  the  confuls,  being  terrified  with
thefe  new  commotions,  and  looking  upon  the  popularity  of
Brutus  to  threaten  the  commonwealth  with  fome  great  evil,
affembled  the  fenate  :  Where  many,  and  various  things  were
propofed,  both  by  the  confuls  themfelves,  and  by  the  reft  of
the  ancient  fenators :  Some  being  of  opinion  that  they  ought

to


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  175

to  court  the  people  by  all  poflible  expreflions  of  kindnefs,
and  by  promifes  of  effectual  relief,  and  to  moderate  the  heat
of  their  leaders  by  communicating  their  counfels  with  them,
and  by  inviting  them  to  deliberate,  jointly  with  themfelves,
on  the  public  utility  :  But  others  advifednot  to  yield,  or  relax,
in  any  thing,  to  an  imperious,  and  ignorant  multitude,  and
to  the  bold,  and  infufferable  madnefs  of  the  flatterers  of  the
people ;  but  to  clear  themfelves  of  their  accufations,  by
alluring  the  plebeians,  that  the  patricians  were,  in  no  refpedf,
the  occaflon  of  what  had  happened  ;  and  that  they  would
take  all  poflible  care  to  remedy  this  evil;  and,  alfo,  to
reprimand  the  difturbers  of  the  people,  and  to  let  them
know,  that,  if  they  did  not  deflfl:  from  inflaming  the  fedition,
they  fhould  be  brought  to  condign  punifhment.  Appius
was  at  the  head  of  thofe,  w7ho  were  of  this  opinion,  which
carried  it,  after  very  great  contefts  among  the  fenators :  So
that,  even  the  people,  hearing  the  clamor  at  a  great  diftance,
ran,  in  diforder,  to  the  fenate,  and  the  whole  city  was
alarmed.  Alter  this,  the  confuls,  going  into  the  forum,
called  the  people  together  (the  day  being  almoA  fpent)  and
were  going  to  inform  them  of  the  refolutions  of  the  fenate:
But  the  tribunes  oppofed  it.  Upon  which,  they  neither
fpoke  in  their  turns,  nor  obferved  any  decency  in  their  de¬
bate  :  For  they  cried  out  together,  and  endeavoured  to  12  ex¬
clude  one  another  from  the  aflembly  :  So  that,  it  was  not

,2>  E£f*A«ov.  I  cannot  fin'd  this  word  ever,  obferved  it  to  be  taken  in  is  That
ufed  in  the  fenfe,  which  all  the  tranf-  of  ex  elude  bant  ^  which,  for  that  reafon,
lators  hive  given  to  it  *,  that  is  obftre -  I  think  myfelf  obliged  to  adhere  to.
pebant.  The  only  fignification  I  have,

eafy


/


176  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.
cafy  for  tliofe,  who  were  prefent,  to  underftand  what  they
meant.

XVI.  The  confuls  thought  it  reafonable  that,  as  they  had
the  fuperior  power,  they  fliould  have  the  foie  command  in
the  city  :  On  the  other  fide,  the  tribunes  infilled  that  the
afiembly  of  the  people  was  their  peculiar  fphere,  as  the  fenate
was  That  or  the  confuls ;  and  that,  whatever  the  people  had
the  authority  to  judge,  and  determine,  was  fubjedl  to  their
power  alone.  The  people  fupported  thefe  by  their  accla¬
mations  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  were  prepared  (if  neceflary)
to  attack  their  oppofers :  On  the  other  fide,  the  patricians^
gathering  round  the  confuls,  encouraged  them  ;  and  a  violent
conteft  infued,  each  fide  infilling  upon  not  yielding  to  the
other,  as  if,  by  this  fingle  defeat,  the  claim  of  each  was,
for  the  future,  to  be  given  up.  The  fun,  now,  declining,
the  reft  of  the  people  ran  out  of  their  houfes  to  the  forum ;
and,  if  the  night  had  not  put  an  end  to  the  conteft,  they
had  proceeded  to  blows,  and  throwing  of  ftones.  But,  to
prevent  this,  Brutus  prefen  ted  himfelf,  and  defired  the  con¬
fuls  to  give  him  leave  to  fpeak,  promifing  to  appeafe  the
tumult :  And  they,  looking  upon  this  as  a  yielding  to  them,
becaufe,  when  the  tribunes  were  prefent,  that  patron  of  the
people  had  not  afked  this  favor  of  them,  gave  him  leave.
And  all  being  filent,  Brutus  made  no  fpeech,  but,  only,
afked  the  confuls  the  following  queftion ;  Do  you  remem¬
ber,  faid  he,  that,  when  we  put  an  end  to  the  fedition  by  an
accommodation,  this  right  was  granted  to  us,  that,  when  the
tribunes  fliould  affemble  the  people  upon  any  account  what¬
ever,


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  177

ever,  the  patricians  fhould  not  be  prefent  at  the  aflembly,
or  create  any  difturbance  there  ?  We  remember  it,  an-
fvvered  Geganius.  Then,  Brutus  added,  ££  V/hy,  therefore,
££  do  you  oppofe  us,  and  not  fuffer  the  tribunes  to  fay  what
££  they  pleafe  ?  ”  To  this  Geganius  replied  ;  “  Becaufe  the
C£  tribunes  did  not  affemble  the  people,  but  the  confuls :  If,
£C  therefore,  the  people  had  beenaffembled  by  them,  we  fhould
£C  have  neither  oppofed,  nor  inquired  into  what  they  were
“  doing;  but,  fince  we  ourfelves  have  afiembled  them,  we  do
££  not  hinder  the  tribunes  from  fpeaking,  but  complain  that
££  we  ourfelves  are  hindered  by  them.”  Then,  Brutus  faid  ;
££  We  have  conquered,  citizens ;  and  our  adverfaries  have
££  yielded  every  thing  to  us  we  defired.  Now,  therefore,  de-
<£  part,  and  ceafe  to  contend :  And  I  promife  you  that,  to
££  morrow,  I  will  fhew  you  your  ftrength.  And  you,  tribunes,
££  yield  the  forum  to  them,  for  the  prefent :  You  will  not,  al-
C£  ways,  yield  it,  when  you  know  how  great  a  power  your  ma-
£  £  giftracy  is  poffefled  of :  This  you  will  be  informed  of  fhortly ;
££  and  I  myfelf  ingage  to  make  it  appear  to  you  ;  and,  at  the
££  fame  time,  to  humble  the  pride  of  thefe  men:  And,  if  you
££  find  I  have  impofed  upon  you,  treat  me  as  you  think  fit.”

XVII.  None  having  oppofed  this,  both  parties  left  the
aflembly  ;  but  not  with  the  like  impreflions :  For  the  poor
were  of  opinion  that  Brutus  had  found  out  fomething  ex¬
traordinary,  and  that  he  had  not,  rafhly,  made  a  promife
of  that  nature.  On  the  other  fide,  the  patricians  defpifed
the  levity  of  the  man,  and  thought  the  boldnefs  of  his
promifes  would  go  no  farther  than  words :  They  imagined
Vol.  III.  A  a  that


178  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

that  no  other  power  had  been  granted  by  the  fenate  to  the
tribunes,  than  That  of  relieving  the  plebeians,  when  oppreffed.
However,  this  inattention  to  the  importance  of  the  affair
did  not,  equally,  poffefs  all  the  fenators,  and,  lead  of  all,
Thofe  of  a  more  advanced  age,  who  were  upon  their  guard,
left  the  madnefs  of  this  man  might  occafion  fome  irreparable
mifchief.  The  following  night,  Brutus,  having  communi¬
cated  his  thoughts  to  the  tribunes,  and  prepared  a  good
number  of  the  plebeians  to  fupport  him,  went  with  them
to  the  forum  ;  and,  before  fun-rife,  they  pofieffed  themfelves
of  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  where  the  affemblies  of  the  people
were,  ufually,  held,  and  the  tribunes  called  the  citizens
together:  And  the  forum  being  crouded  (for  greater  mul¬
titudes  appeared  upon  this  occafion,  than  had  ever  been
known  before)  Icilius,  the  tribune,  rofe  up,  and  made  a  long
fpeech  againft  the  patricians,  putting  the  people  in  mind  of
all  they  had  fuffered  from  them  :  After  which,  he  told
them  that,  the  day  before,  he  had  been  hindered  by  them
from  fpeaking,  and  deprived  of  the  power  of  his  magiftracy.
“  What  other  power,  fays  he,  (hall  we  have  after  this,  if  we
££  are  not  allowed  even  That  of  fpeaking  ?  How  jfhall  we
“  be  able  to  relieve  any  of  you,  when  oppreffed  by  them,
u  if  we  are  deprived  of  the  authority  of  affembling  you  ?
“For  all  actions  are  governed  by  words ;  and  it  is  manifeft
££  that  thofe,  who  are  not  allowed  to  fay  what  they  think,
“  will  not  be  allowed  to  execute  what  they  pleafe.  Refume,
££  therefore,  the  power  you  have  giveh  us,  fays  he,  unlefs
££  you  defign  to  fecure  that  power;  or  enact  a  law  to  prevent

££  all


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSE  N  S  IS.  179

“  all  oppofition  to  us  for  the  future.”  Having  faid  this,
the  people  cried  out  to  him  with  great  acclamations,  to
bring  in  the  law  :  Which  Icilius,  who  had  it  ready  drawn
up,  read  to  them  ;  and,  immediately,  put  it  to  the  vote  :
For  the  affair  feemed  to  admit  of  no  delay,  left  fome  oppo-
fttion  might  be  made  to  it  by  the  confuls.  The  law  was  as
follows :  “  When  a  tribune  is  fpeaking  to  the  people,  let  no
“  man  oppofe,  or  interrupt,  him :  Whoever  fhall  act  con-
“  trary  to  this,  let  him,  if  required,  give  fureties  to  the  tri-
“  bunes  for  the  payment  of  the  fine  they  fhall  impofe  upon
“  him :  If  he  refufes  to  give  fureties,  let  him  be  punifhed
“  with  death,  and  his  goods  be  confecrated:  And  let  the  con-
“  tefts,  relating  to  thefe  fines,  be  determined  by  the  people.”
After  the  tribunes  had  taken  their  votes  in  favor  of  this
law,  they  difmiffed  the  aftembly  :  And  the  people  departed
full  of  joy,  and  gave  great  thanks  to  Brutus,  whom  they
looked  upon  as  the  inventor  of  the  law.

XVIII.  After  this,  there  happened  many  contefts  upon
various  fubje<fts  between  the  tribunes,  and  the  confuls ;  and
neither  did  the  people  efteem  valid  what  the  fenate  had  de¬
creed,  nor  the  fenate  approve  of  what  the  people  had  deter
mined  :  But  both  of  them  perfifted  in  their  oppofition  to,  and
fufpicions  of,  one  another.  However,  their  hatred  did  not
break  out  into  any  irreparable  mifchief,  as  it  often  happens  in
the  like  diforders.  For  the  poor  did  not  attack  the  houfes  of
the  rich,  where  they  might  expecft  to  find  pro vifions  laid  up,
nor  attempt  to  rob  the  markets ;  but  fubmitted  to  buy  fmall
quantities  of  victuals  at  a  great  price ;  and,  when  they  wanted

A  a  2  money,


180  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

money,  they  fed  patiently  on  roots,  and  herbs :  Neither
did  the  rich,  in  confidence  of  their  own  ftrength,  and  of
the  ftrength  of  their  clients,  who  were  very  numerous,  oiler
violence  to  the  weaker  fort ;  and  aim  at  making  themfelves
mafters  of  the  city,  by  driving  out  fome  of  the  poor,  and
killing  others  :  But,  like  fathers,  who  treat  their  fons  with
the  greateft  prudence,  they  continued  to  bear  their  errors
with  a  13  difpofition  full  of  benevolence,  and  folicitude  for
their  happinefs.  While  Rome  was  in  this  fituation,  the
neighbouring  cities  invited  fuch  of  the  Romans  as  defired  it,
to  live  among  them,  alluring  them  by  a  communication  of
the  privileges  of  their  cities,  and  the  hopes  of  other  good
ufage ;  fome,  from  the  beft  of  motives,  friendfhip,  and
compaflion  for  their  misfortune ;  but  the  greateft  part,
through  envy  of  their  fgrmer  profperity.  And  very  great
numbers  removed  with  their  whole  families  ;  fome  of  whom
returned,  when  the  affairs  of  the  city  were  compofed  ;  and
others  remained  where  they  were.

XIX.  Theconfuls,  feeing  thefe  things,  thought  fit  to  raifc
forces,  in  which  the  fenate  concurred,  and  to  march  with
them  out  of  the  city.  Their  defign  was  favoured  by  the
frequent  incuriions,  and  depredations  of  their  enemies,  by

rv  Euvoycf?  jc y,Srey.cvi  tjj  cgfy.  I  occafion,  in  the  fame  flgnification,  in
fhould  have*  imagined  thefe  two  epi-  which  d  Thucydides  uies  the  word,
thets  might  have  taught  the  tranflators  when  Pericles  fays  to  the  Athenians
that  c^Jij,  in  this  place,  does  not  fignify  K««re§  aJw  ts 5?  uv^uttv;  a  rtj  avly  oprjjl
Anger.  Yet  Sylburgius,  and  the  two  ctvonr&QofAeviss  n  5roA?(u«v,  k ou  tv  tw
French  tranflators,  have  given  it  that  :  Where  the  Greek  fcholiaft

fenfe.  Portus  has  avoided  the  miftake.  explains  ogfrti  by  gkohm-

Ofa  is  uled  by  our  author,  upon  this

d  B.  i.  c.  140;


which


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  181
which  their  country  was  laid  wafte  ;  and  they,  alfo,  confi-
dered  the  other  advantages,  that  would  refult  from  fending
an  army  into  the  field ;  that  thofe,  who  were  left,  being
fewer  in  number,  would  enjoy  a  greater  plenty  of  provifions ;
that  the  army,  by  fupporting  themfelves  in  the  enemy’s
country,  would  live  in  greater  abundance ;  and  that  the
fedition  would  be  appeafed,  as  long  as  the  expedition  lafted :
But,  above  all,  it  feemed,  that  if  the  patricians,  and  plebeians
ferved  together,  an  equal  fhare  both  of  good,  and  ill  fortune,
in  all  the  dangers  of  the  war,  would,  effectually,  confirm  their
reconciliation.  But  the  people  did  not  obey  them,  nor
willingly,  as  before,  offer  themfelves  to  lift  in  the  fervice :
And  the  confuls  did  not  think  fit  to  inforce  the  law  againft
thofe,  who  were  unwilling  to  ferve.  But  fome  patrician
voluntiers,  together  with  their  clients,  were  inlifted  :  And,
when  they  marched  out  of  the  city,  they  were  joined  by  a
fmall  number  of  the  people.  This  army  was  commanded
by  Caius  Marcius,  who  had  taken  the  city  of  Corioli,  and
diftinguifbed  himfelf  above  all  others  in  the  battle  againft
the  Antiates.  The  greateft  part  of  the  plebeians,  who  affifted
in  this  expedition,  feeing  him  take  the  field,  were  induced
to  it  from  affeCtion,  and  others,  from  the  hopes  of  fuccefs :
For  this  man  was,  already,  famous,  and  the  enemy,  greatly,
afraid  of  him.  This  army,  having  marched  as  far  as  the
city  of  Antium,  made  themfelves  mafters,  not  only,  of  a
great  deal  of  corn  they  found  in  the  fields,  but,  like  wife,  of
a  great  number  of  flaves,  and  cattle  ;  and,  after  a  fhort
time,  returned  better  fupplied,  than  before,  with  all  the

necef-


182  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

neceffaries  of  life  :  So  that,  thofe,  who  had  declined  the
fervice,  were  full  of  confufion,  and  of  refen tment  againft
their  demagogues,  by  whofe  means  they  looked  upon  them-
felves  to  have  been  deprived  of  the  fame  felicity.  Thus  Ge-
ganius,  and  Minucius,  the  confuls  of  this  year,  after  great,
and  various  ftorms,  in  which  they  were,  often,  in  danger  of
fubverting  the  commonwealth,  occafioned  no  misfortune  to
it;  but  preferved  it  intire,  by  ading,  upon  every  occafion,
in  fuch  a  manner,  that  their  prudence  was  more  confpicuous
than  their  good  fortune.

XX.  The  following  confuls,  Marcus  Minucius  Augurinus,
and  Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus,  who  were  both  inverted
with  this  magiftracy  for  the  fecond  time,  being  not  unbilled
either  in  military  affairs,  or  in  fpeaking,  took  great  care  to
fupply  the  city  with  plenty  both  of  corn,  and  of  all  other
provirtons,  looking  upon  the  union  of  the  people  with  the
fenate  to  depend  upon  that  abundance.  However,  they  had
not  the  good  fortune  to  obtain  both  thefe  ends  at  the  fame
time ;  but  the  fatiety  of  thefe  advantages  was  attended  with
the  infolence  of  thofe,  who  had  the  benefit  of  them.  Upon
which  occafion,  Rome  was,  again,  expofed  to  the  greateft
danger,  when  it  was  leaf!:  expeded :  For  the  embafiadors,
fent  to  buy  corn,  brought  all  they  had  purchafed,  both  in
the  maritime,  and  inland  markets,  to  the  city  for  the  ufe  of
the  public:  And  the  merchants  alfo,  who  ufed  to  import
corn,  flocked  thither  from  all  parts :  Of  whom  the  com¬
monwealth  bought  their  lading  with  the  public  money,  and
preferved  it  carefully.  At  the  fame  time,  Geganius,  and

Valerius,


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSEN  SIS.  183

Valerius,  who  had,  before,  been  fent  embaffadors  to  Sicily,
arrived  with  many  merchant  fhips,  in  which  they  brought
fifty  thoufand  14  Sicilian  bufhels  of  wheat;  one  half  of  which
was  purchafed  at  a  very  low  price,  and  the  reft  the  king
had  made  the  Romans  a  prefent  of,  and  fent  it  at  his  own
expence.  When  it  was  known  at  Rome  that  the  fhips  were
arrived  from  Sicily  laden  with  corn,  the  patricians  deliberated,
a  long  time,  concerning  the  difpofal  of  it :  For  thofe  among
them,  who  were  moft  humane,  and  the  greateft  favourers
of  the  people,  reflecting  on  the  public  neceflity,  advifed  them
to  diftribute  the  corn,  given  them  by  the  king,  among  all
the  plebeians ;  and  to  fell  That,  which  had  been  purchafed
with  the  public  money,  to  them  at  a  low  price;  fhewing
that,  by  thefe  favors,  more  than  by  any  other  means,  the
animofity  of  the  poor  againft  the  rich  would  be  foftened.
On  the  other  fide,  thofe,  who  were  of  a  more  haughty
difpofition,  and  more  zealous  for  the  oligarchy,  were  of
opinion  that  they  ought  to  employ  all  their  endeavours,  and
every  method,  to  opprefs  the  plebeians ;  and  thefe  advifed
to  fell  the  corn  to  them  at  the  higheft  price  poflible  ;  to
the  end  they  might,  through  neceflity,  become  more  modeft,
and  more  obfervant  of  the  rules  prefcribed  by  their  confti-
tution.

XXI.  One  of  thefe  oligarchical  patricians  was  that  Mar-
cius,  furnamed  Coriolanus,  who  did  not,  like  the  reft,

h*  Suidas,  from  was  the  AtImos,  But  there  was

Harpocration,  fays  that  the  another called  ytaeftws,  which,

contained  forty  eight  choenix’s,  that  I  believe,  was  the  fame  with  the  pi&uvot
is,  according  to  Arbuthnot,  four  pecks,  SuwAoeof :  This  contained  fix  Roman
and  fix  pints,  Englifh  meafure  :  This  Modii ,  that  is,  fix  Englifh  pecks.

deliver


1 84  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.
deliver  his  opinion  with  fecrecy,  and  caution,  but  with  fo
much  opennefs,  and  boldnefs,  that  many,  even  of  the  ple¬
beians,  heard  him.  Befides  his  complaints  againft  them,
which  were  of  a  public  nature,  he  had,  lately,  received  fomc
perfonal  provocations,  that  feemed  to  juftify  his  hatred  of
the  plebeians :  For,  having  offered  himfelf  as  a  candidate
for  the  confulfhip  at  the  laft  election,  and  being  fupported
by  the  patricians,  the  people  oppofed  him,  and  would  not
fuffer  that  magiftracy  to  be  conferred  on  him  :  To  which
they  were  induced  by  their  apprehenfions,  left  a  man  of  his
reputation,  and  boldnefs,  might  attempt  fome  innovation
to  the  fubverfton  of  the  tribunefhip  ;  and  they  were  the
more  afraid  of  him,  becaufe  the  whole  body  of  the  patri¬
cians  promoted  his  intereft  with  a  zeal  they  had,  never
before,  fhewn  for  any  other  candidate.  The  man,  therefore,
being  exafperated  with  this  ignominy,  and,  at  the  fame
time,  defirous  to  reftore  the  government  to  its  15  ancient
form,  he,  not  only,  endeavoured  openly,  as  I  faid,  to  fubvert
the  power  of  the  people  himfelf,  but,  alfo,  fought  to  ingage
the  reft  of  the  patricians  in  the  fame  deftgn. '  He  was  fup¬
ported  by  a  ftrong  faction  of  young  men  of  great  birth,
and  of  the  greateft  fortunes,  and  by  many  dependants,
ingaged  by  the  booty  they  had  gained  under  him  in  the
wars.  Elevated  with  thefe  advantages,  he  exulted,  be¬
came  confpicuous,  and  arrived  to  the  greateft  degree  of

js*  E|  cto^vii.  I  fliould  rather  read  which  two  fynony-

adverbially,  for  zvoiAiv,  to  mous  adverbs  have  the  fame  fenfe  with
which  it  is,  often,  joined  by  Arifto-  cr«A»v  which  he  had  joined  to-

phanes:  As  he  fays  inPlutus;  e«ar»A<y  gether  a  few  lines  before.

867.


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  185

fplendor.  But  all  this  could  not  preferve  him  from  a  fatal
cataftrophe  :  For  the  fenate  being  aiTembled  upon  this  oc~
cafion,  and  the  elder  fenators  having,  according  to  cuftom,
firft  delivered  their  opinions,  of  whom  there  were  not  many,
who,  openly,  declared  againft  the  people,  when  it  came  to
the  turn  of  the  younger  fenators  to  fpeak,  Marcius  afked
leave  of  the  confuls  to  fay  what  he  thought  proper  ;  and,
meeting  with  great  encouragement,  and  attention,  he  made
the  following  invedive  againft  the  people.

XXIL  ££  Fathers,  I  am  confident  that  alrnoft  all  of  you,
££  when  you  conftder  the  advantages,  which  the  people  gained
££  by  the  accommodation,  are  fenfible  that  they  did  not  revolt
££  through  neceflity,  and  want,  but  were  induced  to  it  by
££  the  unjuftifiable  hope  of  deftroying  your  ariftocracy,  and
of  making  themfelves  mafters  of  the  commonwealth :
Since  they  were  not  fatisfied  with  abolifhing  the  faith  of
££  contrads,  and  the  laws  made  to  fecure  that  faith,  without
C£  carrying  their  views  any  farther  ;  but  they  introduced  a
££  new  magiftracy  with  a  deftgn  to  fubvert  That  of  the  con-
££  fuls,  which  magiftracy  they  made  facred  and  inviolable
££  by  law ;  and  have  now,  unobferved  by  you,  fathers,  ac-
££  quired  a  tyrannical  power  by  the  law,  lately,  enaded  :  For,
£C  when  the  leaders  of  the  people,  deriving,  from  the  great
££  power  they  are  in  veiled  with,  the  fpecious  pretence  of
££  relieving  the  plebeians,  when  opprefted,  l6ruin,  anddeftroy


cc


££


I^*  Ayucri  xcu  1  his  military

exprefiion  is,  fometimes,  applied  to
civil 'affairs,  as  we  find  it  here.  The
Romans,  who  inriched  their  language
with  many  Greek  turns,  tranfplanted
this,  aifo,  into  their  own  foil.  An  in-

VOL.  III.


ftance  of  which  we  fee  in  Cicero’s  letter
to  Odtavius,  which,  if  not  genuine,  con¬
tains,  at  leaft,  many  of  his  expreffions ;
there  we  find,  eum  agere,  rapere
blicam ,  cut  nulla  virtus ,  nullae  hello  fuh-
aciaeetad  imperium  adjunElaeprovinciae .

B  b  ££  whom


Book  VII.


1 86  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

<£  whom  they  pleafe  by  virtue  of  that  power,  and  that  no
<£  man,  whether  a  private  perfon,  or  a  magiftrate,  dares
“  oppofe  their  violence  for  fear  of  this  law,  which,  at  once,
££  deftroys  the  liberty  both  of  your  words  and  actions,  by
“  impofing  the  punifhment  of  death  on  all  thofe,  who  fpeak
“  the  language  of  freemen,  what  other  name  ought  to  be
££  given  by  all  men  of  fenfe  to  this  domination,  but  That,
“  which  is  the  true  one,  and  which  you  will  all  own  to  be
C£  fo,  a  tyranny?  And,  what  is  the  difference  whether  we
££  fuffer  the  tyranny  of  one  man,  or  of  a  whole  people?
££  For  the  effect  of  both  is  the  fame.  The  beft  thing,
££  therefore,  we  could  have  done  was,  not  to  have  buffered,
££  even,  the  feed  of  this  power  to  have  been  fown,  but  rather
££  to  have  undergone  every  thing,  as  Appius,  the  beft  of
££  men,  who  forefaw  thefe  mifchiefs  from  afar,  advifed:
££  But,  lince  that  was  not  done,  we  ought,  now  at  leaft,
<£  unanimoufly  to  pluck  it  up  by  the  roots,  and  caft  it  out
u  of  the  city,  while  it  is  yet  weak,  and  eafy  to  be  deftroyed.
££  Neither  fliall  we  be  the  firft,  or  the  only  perfons,  to
££  whom  the  fame  thing  has  happened  ;  but  many,  and
££  frequent  have  been  the  infhnces  of  men,  who,  being  re-
££  duced,  by  involuntary  neceffity,  to  commit  errors  in  things
££  of  the  greateft  confequence,  though  unable  to  give  a  check
££  to  evils  in  their  infancy,  have  endeavoured  to  prevent
*  ££  their  growth  :  And  the  repentance  of  thole,  who  begin
<£  late  to  grow  wife,  though  inferior  to  forefight,  yet,  when
<£  feen  in  another  light,  appears  not  lefs  valuable  in  effacing
££  an  original  error,  by  preventing  its  confequences.


XXIIT


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  ICA  RN  ASSEN  S  IS.  187

XXIII.  “  But,  if  any  of  you  look  upon  the  a&ions  of
££  the  people  to  be  outrageous,  and  that  they  ought  to  be
u  hindered  from  running  into  farther  exceffes,  but  are  afraid
u  left  they  fhould  feem  firft  to  violate  the  agreement,  and
£C  tranfgrefs  their  oaths,  let  them  know  that  they  are  not
££  the  aggreflbrs,  when  they  repel  an  injury,  nor  violate  the
“  agreement  in  doing  this,  but  chaftife  the  violaters  of  it ;
££  and  that  they  will  be  guiltlefs  in  refpedf  to  the  gods,  and
££  ad;  with  juflice,  while  they  confult  their  own  intereft.
££  And  let  this  be  a  ftrong  argument  to  convince  you,  that
££  not  yourfelves,  but  the  plebeians  firft  began  to  violate  the
££  agreement,  and  the  treaty,  by  not  obferving  the  condi-
££  tions,  upon  which  they  obtained  their  return :  For  they
££  defired  the  tribunitian  power,  not  to  opprefs  the  fenate,
££  but  to  fecure  themfelves  from  their  oppreffion :  And  they,
££  no  longer,  employ  this  power  in  the  things  they  ought,
££  or  within  the  terms  they  obtained  it,  but  to  the  corrup-
£C  tion,  and  confufion  of  the  eftablifhed  government.  You
“  remember  the  late  aflembly  of  the  people,  and  the  ha-
££  rangues  there  made  by  their  demagogues ;  what  arrogance
<£  and  indecency  they  fhewed ;  and,  now,  how  thefe  dan-
C£  gerous  men  are  elated,  fince  they  have  difcovered  that
££  the  whole  ftrength  of  the  commonwealth  confifts  in  votes,
£C  of  which,  as  the  people  exceed  us  in  numbers,  they  are
££  fure  to  have  a  majority.  What,  therefore,  remains  for  us
££  to  do,  fince  they  have  begun  to  violate  the  treaty,  and
££  the  law,  but  to  repel  the  attacks  of  the  aggrefiors,  juftly
££  to  deprive  them  of  what  they  are,  now,  unjuftly,  poffefied

B  b  2  £C  of,


1 88  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

££  of,  and  put  a  flop  to  their  ambitious  views  for  the
u  future  ?  While  we  return  thanks  to  the  gods,  for  not
“  having  fuffered  them,  when  they  had  gained  an  uncon-
£C  ftitutional  advantage,  to  ad,  after  that,  with  modefty,  but
£C  for  having  infpired  them  with  this  impudence,  and  thefe
u  various  aims,  by  which  you  are  reduced  to  a  neceflity  of
££  endeavouring  both  to  recover  the  rights  you  have  loft,
<£  and  to  preferve  Thofe,  that  remain,  with  all  the  care  they
££  deferve.

XXIV.  ££  The  prefent  opportunity  is,  of  all  others,  the
££  moft  favourable,  if,  now  at  leaft,  you  will  begin  to  grow
££  wife,  when  the  greateft  part  of  the  people  are  reduced  to
££  the  utmoft  extremity  by  the  famine,  and  the  reft  cannot,
££  long,  hold  out  through  the  want  of  money,  if  corn  is
££  fcarce,  and  they  are  forced  to  give  a  great  price  for  it;
£C  by  which  means,  the  moft  profligate,  and  thofe,  who  were
££  never  pleafed  with  the  ariftocracy,  will  be  forced  to  leave
<£  the  city,  and  the  more  modeft,  to  behave  themfelves  with
££  decency,  without  giving  you  any  farther  trouble.  Place  a
££  guard,  therefore,  upon  the  com,  and  abate  nothing  of  the
££  price  ;  but  pafs  an  order  that  it  fhall,  now,  be  fold  at  as
££  high  a  price,  as  ever;  for  which  you  have  juft  reafons,
££  and  plauflble  pretences,  fuch  as  the  ungrateful  clamor  of
££  the  people,  as  if  the  fcarcity  of  corn  was  contrived  by  you,
££  when  it  was  occafloned  by  their  own  revolt,  and  the  de-
££  folation  of  the  country,  which  they  ravaged  with  the  fame
££  fiercenefs,  as  if  it  had  belonged  to  an  enemy ;  to  which
££  may  be  added  the  money,  paid  out  of  the  treafury  to  the

££  perfons


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICA  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  1S9
£C  perfons  Sent  to  purchafe  corn  ;  and  many  other  inftances,
££  in  which  you  have  been  wronged  by  them:  By  this  means
££  alfo,  we  Shall  know  at  laft,  what  grievous  punishment  it
££  is  they  defign  to  inflidi;  upon  us,  if  we  reiufe  to  gratify
££  the  people  in  every  thing,  as  their  demagogues  threatened,
££  in  order  to  frighten  us.  But,  if  you  let  flip  this  opportu-
£C  nity  alfo,  you  will,  often,  wifh  for  fuch  another.  And,  if
££  the  people  hear  that  you  defired  to  fubvert  their  authority,
££  but  delifted  through  fear,  they  will  bear  much  harder
cc  upon  you,  and  look  upon  that  defire  to  proceed  from
££  enmity,  and  your  want  of  courage  from  your  want  of
££  power.”

XXV.  After  this  fpeech  of  Marcius,  the  opinions  of  the
Senators  were  divided ;  and  a  great  tumult  arofe  among
them  :  For  thofe,  who,  from  the  beginning,  had  oppofed
the  plebeians,  and  Submitted  to  the  accommodation  againfl:
their  will,  among  whom  were  almoft  all  the  youth,  and  the
richeft,  and  moft  ambitious  of  the  elder  Senators,  who
refented  the  impudence  of  the  people,  Some  from  the  lofs
they  had  fuftained  in  their  contra&s,  and  others,  from  being
rejected  when  they  Sued  for  honors,  applauded  Marcius,  as
a  man  of  Spirit,  and  a  lover  of  his  country,  whofe  advice
was  of  the  greateft  advantage  to  the  commonwealth.  On
the  other  fide,  the  Senators  of  popular  principles,  who  Set
no  greater  value  on  17  honors,  and  riches,  than  they  deferved,

K«j  tv,v  Tipvjv.  Thefe  words  I  have  which  reafon,  he  changed  it  to  n^o1ovr
taken  the  liberty  to  fubftitute  in  the  meaning  the  applaufe  of  the  fenate.
room  of  rev  T^onov,  which  Sylburgius  Cafaubon  would  read  kui  rovT^onoy,  and
faw  could  not  have  a  place  here  j  for  conned  thefe  words  with

'  -  and


I90  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

and  looked  upon  nothing  to  be  more  neceflary  than  peace,
were  offended  at  his  fpeech,  and  reje&ed  his  advice  :  Thefe
defired  they  would  not  think  of  overcoming  their  inferiors
by  violence,  but  by  humanity ;  and  that  they  would  not
efteem  moderation,  as  unbecoming,  but  neceflary ;  particu¬
larly,  when  exerted  towards  their  fellow-citizens  from  a
principle  of  benevolence  :  And  they  fhewed  that  his  advice
was  madnefs,  not  freedom  of  fpeech,  nor  liberty.  But  thefe
were  few ;  and,  being  unfupported,  were  overborne  by  the
violence  of  the  others.  The  tribunes,  feeing  this  (for  they
were  prefent  in  the  fenate,  being  called  in  by  the  confuls)
cried  out,  and  were  in  a  great  agitation,  calling  Marcius  the
peft,  and  bane  of  his  country,  for  having  uttered  malicious
words  againfl:  the  people ;  and,  unlefs  the  patricians  pre¬
vented  his  deflgn  of  kindling  a  civil  war  in  the  city,  by
punifhing  him  either  with  death,  or  banifliment,  they
threatened  to  do  it  themfelves.  Thefe  words  of  the  tribunes
having  encreafed  the  tumult,  particularly  on  the  part  of  the
younger  fenators,  who  bore  their  threats  with  impatience,
Marcius,  animated  by  their  refentment,  now  attacked  the
tribunes  with  greater  arrogance,  and  boldnefs,  faying  to  them;
“  If  you  do  not  ceafe  to  difturb  the  commonwealth,  and
“  to  inflame  the  poor  by  your  harangues,  I  fhall,  no  longer,
“  oppofe  you  with  words,  but  with  actions.”

I  can  approve  of  neither  of  thefe  altera-  then,  be  a  very  natural  antithefis,  if
tions.  The  reafon,  that  induced  me  to  we  fay  that  o <  tvv  nptjv  km  tov  &\*1ov  x
read  t^v  is  this  ;  our  author  has  tx  Jtovlos  gjtlthjujjjccikj  rejedled  his

told  us  that  oi  zo-^amcJJoiJoi,  xat  (piAohjuo-  advice  ?
t so, oi  applauded  Marcius  :  Will  it  not,


XXVI.


BookVir.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSENSIS.  191

XXVI.  The  fenate  being,  now,  in  a  flame,  and  the  tri¬
bunes,  finding  that  thofe,  who  defired  to  take  away  the
power  granted  to  the  people,  were  fuperior  in  number  to
the  fenators,  who  advifed  to  adhere  to  the  agreement,  ran
out  of  the  fenate,  crying  out,  and  calling  upon  the  gods,
who  were  witnefles  to  their  oaths :  After  which,  they  af-
fembled  the  people  ;  and,  having  acquainted  them  with  the
fpeech  made  by  Marcius  in  the  fenate,  they  fummoned  him
to  make  his  defence.  But  he,  paying  no  regard  to  them,
and  repulling  the  officers,  by  whom  he  was  fummoned,  with
abufive  words,  the  tribunes  grew  the  more  inraged  ;  and,
taking  with  them  the  ediles,  and  many  other  citizens,  ran
to  feize  him.  Marcius  happened  to  be,  yet,  Handing  before
the  fenate  houfe,  attended  by  a  great  number  of  the  patricians,
and  by  the  reft  of  his  faction.  When  the  tribunes  faw  him,
they  ordered  the  ediles  to  apprehend  him ;  and,  if  he  re-
fufed  to  follow  them,  to  bring  him  away  by  force.  The
ediles,  at  that  time,  were  Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  andSpurius
Icilius  Ruga:  Thefe  advanced  with  a  defign  to  feize  him.
On  the  other  fide,  the  patricians,  looking  upon  it  as  an  in-
fufferable  thing,  that  any  one  of  their  body  fhould  be,  for¬
cibly,  carried  away  by  the  tribunes,  before  he  was  tried,
placed  themfelves  before  Marcius;  and,  ftriking  all,  who
approached  him,  drove  them  away.  The  news  of  this  addon
being  fpread  through  the  whole  city,  all  ran  out  of  their
houfes ;  the  magiftrates,  and  the  men  of  fortune,  with  a
defign  to  affift  the  plebeians  in  proteding  Marcius,  and  to

recover  the  ancient  form  of  government;  and  thofe  of  low

con-


i g 2  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

condition,  and  narrow  circumftances,  with  a  view  to  aflift  the
tribunes,  and  to  obey  their  orders ;  and  that  modefty,  which
had,  hitherto,  withheld  them  from  daring  to  commit  any
exceftes  againft  one  another,  was,  then,  banifhed :  However,
their  conteft  did  not,  that  day,  break  out  into  any  irreparable
mifchief ;  but,  in  deference  to  the  advice,  and  exhortations  of
the  confuls,  they  deferred  the  decifion  of  it  to  the  day  after.

XXVII.  The  next  day,  the  tribunes  came  firft  to  the
forum  ;  and,  affembling  the  people,  they,  fucceflively,  made
many  invedtives  againft  the  patricians,  as  againft  men,  who
had  violated  their  treaties,  and  tranfgrefled  the  oaths,  by
which  they  had  promifed  the  people  to  forget  all,  that  was
palled;  and,  to  fhew  that  they  were  not,  ftncerely,  recon¬
ciled  to  the  plebeians,  they  alledged  the  fcarcity  of  corn,
which  they  had  contrived,  the  two  colonies  they  had  fent
out,  and  many  other  things  they  had  practifed  with  a  view
to  leffen  the  number  of  the  people:  After  that,  they  in¬
veighed,  violently,  againft  Marcius,  repeating  the  words  he
had  fpoken  in  the  fenate,  and  told  them  that,  when  he  was
fummoned  to  make  his  defence  before  the  people,  he  had,
not  only,  not  vouchfafed  to  come,  but  had,  alfo,  with  blows,
driven  away  the  ediles,  who  v/ere  fent  to  him.  They  called
upon  the  fenators  of  the  greateft  dignity  to  give  their  tefti-
mony  of  what  paffed  in  the  fenate;  and,  to  prove  the  in¬
ful  t  offered  to  the  ediles,  upon  all  the  plebeians,  who  were,
then,  prefent  in  the  forum.  Having  faid  this,  they  gave  leave
to  the  patricians  to  make  their  defence,  if  they  thought
proper ;  and,  for  that  purpofe,  kept  the  people  together,

till


Book  VIL  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LIC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  193

till  the  fenate  fhould  be  difmifled  :  For  it  happened  that  the
fenate  were,  at  that  time,  confulting  upon  this  very  affair,
and  confldering  whether  they  fliould  clear  themfelves  to  the
people  of  the  crimes  they  were  accufed  of,  or  remain  quiet :
And  the  majority  inclining  to  humane,  rather  than  to  im¬
perious,  meafures,  the  confuls  difmifled  the  fenate,  and  came
to  the  forum,  with  a  deflgn  both  to  juftify  the  patricians  in
regard  to  the  accufations  brought  againfi:  their  whole  order,
and  to  intreat  the  people  not  to  come  to  any  fevere  refolu-
tion  againft  Marcius :  And  Minucius,  the  fenior  conful,
fpoke  in  the  following  manner  :

XXVIII.  ££  Our  defence,  in  relation  to  the  fcarcity  of
££  corn,  is  very  fnort,  citizens,  and  we  fliall  call  no  other
££  witnefles  to  prove  the  truth  of  what  we  alledge,  than
££  yourfelves:  For,  even,  you  you rfelves  know  that  the  land
££  bore  no  corn,  becaufe  it  was  not  fown  ;  and  you  have
££  no  occaflon  to  be  informed  by  others,  from  what  caufe
<£  the  feveral  devaftatations  of  the  country  have  proceeded,
£C  and  by  what  means,  at  laft,  the  greateft,  and  moft  fruitful
££  part  of  the  land  came  to  want  all  forts  of  grain,  flaves,
££  and  cattle  ;  partly,  becaufe  it  was  laid  wafte  by  the  enemy,
££  and  partly,  becaufe  it  is  incapable  of  fupplying  you,  who
££  are  fo  numerous,  and  have  no  other  refource  :  So  that,
££  concluding  the  famine  was  not  occafioned  by  what  your
££  demagogues  charge  us  with,  but  by  what  you  yourfelves
££  are  fenflble  of,  ceafe  to  attribute  this  misfortune  to  our
££  contrivance,  and  to  be  angry  with  us,  when  we  do  you
c£  no  injury.  As  to  the  colonies,  there  was  a  neceflity  for

Vol.  III.  Cc  ££  fending


1 94  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

“  fending  them  out,  fince  it  was  the  unanimous  opinion  of
££  you  all  to  garrifon  places,  that  will  be  of  ufe  in  time  of  war :
<£  And,  being  fent,  when  the  occafion  was  fo  very  urging,
££  they  have  proved  of  great  advantage  both  to  thofe,  who
££  went  out,  and  to  you,  who  remain  at  home  :  For  the
££  former  will,  by  this  means,  enjoy  there  a  greater  plenty  of
££  all  neceflaries,  and  thofe,  who  remain  here,  will  fuffer  the
<£  lefs  from  the  fcarcity  of  provifions.  And  the  equality  of
££  fortune,  to  which  we  patricians  fubmitted  like  you,  in
££  fending  out  the  colony  by  lot,  deferves  no  cenfure.

XXIX.  ££  What,  therefore,  can  provoke  the  demagogues
<£  to  find  fault  with  us  for  thofe  things,  in  which  both  our
££  opinions,  and  our  fortunes  are  the  fame,  whether  they  are
<£  hurtful,  as  they  fay,  or  advantageous,  as  we  think  :  As  to
££  the  accufations,  with  which  they  charge  us,  in  relation  to
££  what  palled  in  the  laft  afiembly  of  the  fenate,  that  we  did
££  not  think  fit  to  moderate  the  price  of  corn  ;  that  we  were
££  forming  defigns  to  abolifh  the  tribunitian  power ;  that
“  we,  ftill,  refented  your  feceffion,  and  were  defirous,  by
££  every  method,  to  diftrefs  the  plebeians ;  thefe,  and  all
f£  fuch  accufations  we  fhall,  foon,  clear  ourfelves  of  by  our
££  actions ;  by  hurting  you  in  no  degree ;  by  confirming,  even
££  now,  the  tribunitian  power  upon  the  fame  terms  we,  then,
££  granted  it  to  you,  and  by  felling  the  corn  at  the  price  you
££  fhall  all  of  you  appoint.  Have  patience  therefore  ;  and,
££  if  all  thefe  things  are  not  performed,  then  accufe  us.  But,
££  if  you  will,  carefully,  examine  our  contefta,  you  will  find
<£  that  we  patricians  have  greater  reafon  to  accufe  the  people,

££  than


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  II A  L  I C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I S.  195

C£  than  you  to  complain  of  the  fenate  :  For  you  wrong  us,
c<  citizens;  and  be  not  offended  at  being  told  of  it;  fince,
w  without  waiting  the  event  of  our  counfels,  you  think  fit  to
“  find  fault  with  them  already.  But,  who  knows  not  that
“  it  is  the  eafieft  of  all  things  for  a  man  to  confound,  and
“  baniffi  harmony  from  a  city,  by  charging  others  with  de-
tc  figns,  of  which  the  proof  being  in  fufpence,  and  not  yet
“  manifeft,  is  no  guard  to  the  accufed  againft  fuffering  fome
“  prejudice,  but  rather  a  pretence  to  the  accufer  to  juftify
“  his  accufation  ?  And,  not  only,  your  leaders  deferve  cenfure
“  for  accufing,  and  calumniating  the  fenate,  but  you  your-
“  felves  deferve  it  no  lefs  for  giving  credit  to  them,  and
“  refenting  injuries,  before  you  feel  them :  For,  if  the  in-
u  juries  you  were  afraid  of  were  future,  your  refentment
“  ought  to  have  been  future  alfo  :  Whereas,  it,  now,  ap-
“  pears  that  you  haveaded  with  greater  hafte,  than  prudence,
<£  and  placed  your  fafety  in  your  malice.

XXX.  “  Concerning  the  crimes,  with  which  the  tri—
“  bunes  have  charged  the  fenate  in  general,  I  think  what  I
<£  have  faid  fufficienf  But,  fince  they  calumniate  everyone
££  of  us,  in  particular,  for  what  we  faid  there,  and  com-
“  plain  that  we  divide  the  city,  and  are,  now,  endeavour-
u  ing  to  put  to  death,  or  baniffi,  Caius  Marcius,  a  man,
<£  who  loves  his  country,  and  who  fpokeof  the  public  affairs
C£  with  freedom,  I  defign  to  treat  this  fubjed,  alfo,  with  all
“  the  regard,  that  is  due  to  juftice;  and  do  you  confider
<£  if  what  I  (hall  fay  is  founded  on  moderation,  and  truth.
“  When  you  were  treating  of  your  reconciliation  with  the

C  c  2  w  fenate?


io6  ROMAN  ANTI  Q_U  I  T I E  S  OF  Book  VII.

I

u  fenate,  citizens,  you  thought  it  enough  for  you  to  be  dif-
<c  charged  of  your  debts ;  and  you  defired  leave  to  chufe  ma-
“  giftrates  out  of  your  own  body,  to  protedl  the  poor  from
“  opprefiion  :  Both  thefe  things  you  obtained,  for  which  you
“  thought  yourfelves  under  great  obligations  to  us:  But,  to
“  abolifh  the  confular  power,  to  render  ineffectual  the  authority
“  of  the  fenate  inprefiding  over  the  commonwealth,  or  to  fub-
t£  vert  the  eftablifhed  government,  you  neither,  then,  defired,
cc  nor  will  you,  ever,  defire:  What,  therefore,  provokes  you
“  to  attempt,  now,  to  confound  all  thefe  things  ?  Or,  by
<c  what  right  do  you  feek  to  deprive  us  of  our  honors  ?
lc  For,  if  you  deter  the  fenators  from  fpeaking  their  fenti-
“  ments  with  freedom,  what  moderation  is  to  be  expe&ed
u  from  the  language  of  your  leaders  ?  Or,  by  what  law,  will
“  they  pretend  to  punifh  any  of  the  patricians  with  death,
u  or  banifhment  ?  For,  neither  the  old  laws,  nor  the  agree-
c<  ments,  lately,  made  with  the  fenate,  give  you  this  power.

“  But,  to  tranfgrefs  the  bounds  prefcribed  by  the  laws,  and
“  to  render  violence  fuperior  to  juftice,  is,  no  longer,  popu-
u  lar,  but,  if  you  defire  to  hear  the  truth,  tyrannical.  For
*c  my  part,  I  fhould  advife  you  neither  to  give  up  any  one
<c  of  the  advantages  you  have  obtained  from  the  fenate,  nor
“  to  claim  any  you  did  not  defire,  when  you  were  treating  .
u  of  a  reconcilation  with  them.

XXXI.  “  But,  in  order  to  make  it  dill,  more  plainly,

<c  appear  to  you  that  your  demagogues  defire  a  thing  incon-
“  fiftent  both  with  moderation,  and  juftice,  and  that  their
u  aims  are  illegal  and  impradicable,  transfer  this  queftion

“  from


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  197
cc  from  the  fenate  to  yourfelves,  and  confider  it  in  this  light :
“  Imagine  the  fenators  accufed  your  magiftrates  of  ufing,
“  in  your  aflembly,  malicious  expreffions  again  ft  the  fenate,
cc  of  endeavouring  to  fubvert  the  eftabliihed  ariftocracy,
“  and  of  railing  a  fedition  in  the  city  (all  which  they  may
“  aflert  with  truth,  for  they  are  guilty  of  thefe  things)  and,
“  which  is  the  mod:  heinous  crime  of  all,  that  they  aim  at
“  a  greater  power,  than  was  granted  to  them,  in  attempting
“  to  put  one  of  our  order  to  death  without  a  trial  :  And,
“  then,  imagine  the  fenate  refolved  that  the  perfons,  guilty
“  of  thefe  crimes,  fhould  be  put  to  death  with  impunity :
“  How  would  you  bear  this  arrogance  of  the  fenate  ?  And
“  what  would  you  fay  ?  Would  you  not  be  out  of  patience,
“  and  complain  you  were,  feverely,  treated,  if  any  one  fhould
<£  deprive  you  of  the  freedom  of  fpeech,  and  of  your  liberty,
“  by  threatening  with  the  fevered:  punifhment  thofe,  who
“  fpoke,  freely,  in  favor  of  the  people?  This  you  mud:
<c  grant.  And,  do  you  think  it  reafonable  that  others  fhould
u  bear  what  you  yourfelves  would  not  fubmit  to?  Do  thefe
cc  fentiments  of  yours  become  citizens,  and  flow  from  mo-
<c  deration  ?  Do  you  not,  by  infilling  on  fuch  things,  juftify
“  the  accufations  you  are  charged  with,  and  fhew  that  thofe,
cc  who  advife  us  not  to  fuffer  your  lawlefs  domination  to
“  o-ain  new  ftrength,  confult  the  good  of  the  common-
u  wealth?  For  my  part,  I  think  fo.  But,  if  you  defire  to
“  confute  thefe  accufations  by  a  contrary  behaviour,  follow
<c  my  advice,  moderate  your  fentiments,  and  bear  the  fpeech,
“  with  which  you  are  offended,  like  citizens,  and  with

“  temper.


i  98  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

<c  temper.  And,  if  you  do  this,  you  will  gain  a  double  ad-
u  vantage ;  you  will  appear  good  men,  and  your  enemies
“  will  repent.

XXXII.  “  Having,  now,  juflified  ourfelves  in  a  convincing
u  manner,  as  we  think,  weadvife  you  to  run  intonoexcefs ;
“  we  have  no  defign  to  reproach  you  with  the  benefits,
“  and  favors,  we  have  conferred  on  you,  as  well  formerly,
<£  as  at  your  return,  but  only  to  moderate  your  anger;
“  which  benefits  we  are  willing  to  forget,  but  you  ought  to
“  remember.  However,  we  are  under  a  neceffity  of  men-
<c  tioning  them  at  this  time,  when  we  defire  that,  in  return
u  for  the  many  great  favors  we  have  bellowed  upon  you  at
u  your  requefl,  you  will  grant  us  this,  neither  to  put  to
<c  death,  nor  banifh  a  man,  who  loves  his  country,  and
cc  excels  all  others  in  the  art  of  war:  For  it  will  be  no  fmall
“  lofs  to  us,  as  you  well  know,  citizens,  if  we  deprive  the
“  commonwealth  of  fuch  valor.  You  ought,  therefore,
“  particularly  on  his  account,  to  relent,  when  you  call  to
<c  mind  how  many  of  you  he  has  faved  in  the  wars ;  and,
“  inflead  of  retaining  any  refentment  for  his  unguarded
“  words,  to  remember  his  glorious  actions:  For  his  words
“  have  done  you  no  mifchief ;  but  his  addons  have  done  you
“  great  fervice :  Flowever,  if  you  are  irreconcilable  to  this
“  man,  at  the  interceflion  of  us  at  leaft,  and  of  the  fenate,
“  forgive  him;  be,  at  laft,  lmcerely  reconciled  to  us,  and
“  reftore  unanimity  to  the  commonwealth:  Whereas,  if
“  you  yield  not  to  our  perfuafions,  be  allured  that,  on  our
“  part,  we  fhall  not  yield  to  your  violence';  but  this  trial  of

“  the


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  199

“  the  people’s  affedtion  will  prove  to  all  the  fource  either  of
“  a  fincere  friend  fhip,  and  of  ftill  greater  kindnefs,  or  of  civil
“  war,  and  irreparable  evils.”

XXXIII.  After  Minucius  had  fpoken  in  this  manner,  the
tribunes,  feeing  the  people  moved  with  the  moderation  of
his  fpeech,  and  the  humanity  of  his  promifes,  were  offended,
and  difpleafed ;  particularly,  Caius  Sicinnius  Bellutus,  the
fame  perfon,  who  had  prevailed  upon  the  poor  to  fecede
from  the  patricians,  and  been  appointed  by  them  to  be  their
general,  while  they  were  in  arms ;  a  man,  the  moft  inveterate
againft  the  arirtocracy,  and,  for  that  reafon,  raifed  by  the
citizens  to  dignity  ;  and,  being  inverted  with  the  tribunitian
power  for  the  fecond  time,  he,  lead  of  all  the  demagogues,
thought  it  his  intereft  that  the  commonwealth  fhould  be
united,  and  reftored  to  its  former  ftate :  For  he  was  fo  far
from  expecting  to  enjoy  the  fame  honors,  and  power  under
an  ariftocracy,  as  he  was  a  bad  man  in  his  nature,  obfcurely
educated,  and  had,  never,  diftinguifhed  himfelf  either  in
war,  or  in  peace,  that  he  knew  he  fhould,  even,  be  expofed
to  the  greateft  danger  for  having  occartoned  the  fedition,
and  many  other  evils  to  the  commonwealth.  After  he  had
conlidered,  therefore,  what  he  was  to  fay,  and  do,  and  con-
fulted  with  his  collegues,  and  they  concurred  with  him,  he
rofe  up ;  and,  having,  fliortly,  lamented  the  misfortunes  of
the  people,  he  commended  the  confuls  for  vouchfafing  to
give  them  an  account  of  their  actions,  without  defpirtng  their
low  condition  ;  and,  likewife,  faid  he  returned  thanks  to
the  patricians  for  taking  feme  care,  at  laft,  of  the  prefervation

ot


2  00


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

of  the  poor  ;  and  that  he  fhould,  Fill  more  willingly,  join
with  all  his  fellow-citizens  in  publifhing  this,  if  they  would
confirm  their  words  by  their  a&ions.

XXXIV.  Having  faid  this,  and  thereby  feemed  moderate
in  his  18  difpofition,  and  inclining  to  an  accommodation,  he
turned  to  Marcius,  who  flood  near  the  confuls,  and  faid ;
“  And  you,  valiant  man,  why  do  you  not  clear  yourfelf  to
“  your  fellow-citizens,  of  what  you  faid  in  the  fenate  ?
“  Rather,  why  do  you  not  make  fupplication  to  them,  and
u  deprecate  their  anger,  to  the  end  they  may  punifh  you
u  with  lefs  rigor  ?  For  I  would  not  advife  you  to  deny  the
“  fadl,  as  fo  many  are  acquainted  with  it,  or  to  have  re-
a  courfe  to  fhamelefs  apologies,  as  you  are  Marcius,  and
“  have  a  fpirit  above  That  of  a  private  man  :  Unlefs  you
“  think  that  it  becomes  the  confuls,  and  the  patricians,  to
cc  intercede  for  you  to  the  people,  but  that  it  does  not  be-
u  come  you  to  do  the  fame  thing  for  yourfelf.”  This  he
faid,  well  knowing  that  a  man  of  his  great  fpirit  would  never
fubmit  to  be  his  own  accufer,  and  to  deprecate  his  punifh-
ment,  as  if  he  had  tranfgrefied  ;  or,  contrary  to  his  chara&er,
have  recourfe  to  lamentations,  and  intreaties;  but,  that
he  would  either  not  vouchfafe  to  make  any  defence  at  all,
or,  preferving  his  inbred  haughtinefs,  make  no  fubmiflions
to  the  people,  nor  fpeak  to  them  with  moderation :  Which
happened  accordingly  :  For  there  being  a  general  filence,
and  almoft  all  the  plebeians,  earneftly,  defiring  to  acquit  him,

l8‘  o^r.  See  the  thirteenth  anno-  again,  miftaken  the  fenfe  of  this  word,
tation  on  this  book.  M.  ***  has,  and  fai  d,  plus  modere  dans  fa  colere.

if


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  ENS  I  S.  201

if  he  had  availed  himfelf  of  the  prefent  opportunity,  he  fpoke
to  them  in  fo  haughty  a  manner,  and  fhewed  fo  great  a
contempt  of  them,  that  he  did  not  deny  a  fingle  thing  he
had  faid  in  the  fenate  againft  the  people ;  nor,  as  if  he  had
repented  of  what  he  had  faid,  endeavour  to  raife  their  com-
paffion,  or  deprecate  their  anger.  He  would  not,  even,
allow  them  to  be  his  judges  in  any  cafe,  as  having  no  lawful
authority  :  But,  if  any  one  thought  fit  to  accufe  him  before
the  confuls,  or  to  require  an  account  either  of  his  words,
or  his  actions  in  a  place  appointed  by  law,  he  was  ready  to
fubmit  to  his  trial.  He  faid  that  he  prefented  himfelf  to  the
people,  fince  they  themfelves  had  fummoned  him,  with  a
defign,  not  only,  to  reprimand  them  for  the  illegal  proceed¬
ings,  and  excefies  they  had  been  guilty  of,  as  well  during
their  revolt,  as  after  their  return ;  but,  alfo,  to  advife  them,
now  at  leaft,  to  put  a  Hop  to,  and  reftrain,  their  unwarrant¬
able  defires.  After  which,  he  inveighed  againfi  them  all
with  great  feverity,  and  boldnefs ;  and,  particularly,  againft
the  tribunes.  In  his  fpeech,  there  was  no  prudent  refpedt,
becoming  a  citizen,  who  informs  the  people;  no  modeft
fear,  oppofing  itfelf  to  the  refentment  of  the  powerful,  fuch
as  might  be  expe&ed  from  a  private  perfon  under  a  general
difpleafure;  but  the  ungovernable  fury  of  an  enemy,  in-
fulting  the  fubdued  with  impunity,  and  a  fevere  contempt
of  their  fufferings.

XXXV.  For  thefe  reafons,  while  he  was  yet  {peaking,
there  arofe  a  great  tumult,  the  people,  frequently,  chang¬
ing  their  opinion,  as  it  happens  in  aftemblies  of  different
Vol.  III.  D  d  fenti-


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

fentiments,  and  different  inclinations ;  fome  being  pleafed
with  his  fpeech,  and  others  offended  at  it.  And,  when  he
had  done  (peaking,  the  clamor,  and  tumult  encreafed :  For
the  patricians,  calling  him  the  braveft  of  men,  commended
him  for  his  liberty  of  fpeech,  and  faid  he  was  the  only  free
man  of  their  whole  number,  who  neither  feared  the  attacks
of  a  numerous  enemy,  nor  flattered  the  infolent,  and  illegal
attempts  of  his  fellow-citizens.  On  the  other  flde,  the
plebeians,  impatient  of  his  reproaches,  called  him  haughty
and  fevere,  and  thegreateft  of  all  their  enemies:  And  fome
of  them  were,  already,  difpofed  to  have  put  him  to  death
by  an  a<5t  of  violence,  which  they  could,  eafily,  have  ac-
complifhed.  In  this  they  were  afiifted,  and  abetted  by  the
demagogues;  and  Sicinnius,  in  particular,  gave  a  loofe  to
their  paflion.  At  laft,  therefore,  after  he  had  ufed  many
invedlives  againft  him,  and  inflamed  the  minds  of  the
plebeians  by  miniftring,  largely,  to  their  fury,  he  clofed  his
accufation  with  faying,  “  That  the  college  of  the  tribunes
cc  condemned  him  to  death  for  infulting  the  ediles,  whom
u  he  had,  the  day  before,  driven  away  with  blows,  when
“  they  were  ordered  by  the  tribunes  to  bring  him  before
l£  them  :  For  they  alledged  that  the  infult,  committed  by
“  him  againft  their  minifters,  could  be  levelled  at  no
“  other  perfons,  but  at  thofe,  who  had  given  thofe
c<  orders.”  Having  faid  this,  he  commanded  him  to  be
carried  to  the  hill,  that  overlooks  the  forum:  This  is  an
exceeding  high  precipice,  from  whence  they  ufed  to  throw
down  thofe,  who  were  condemned  to  die.  The  ediles,

there-


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  203

therefore,  advanced  in  order  to  lay  hold  of  him;  but  the
patricians,  crying  out  with  a  loud  voice,  rufhed  upon  them
in  a  body  :  Upon  which,  the  plebeians  fell  upon  the  pa¬
tricians  ;  and  great  indecency  of  a&ion,  and  mutual  infults
pafled  between  them,  both  fides  pufhing,  and  laying  hold
of  one  another.  However,  the  authors  of  this  tumult  were
compelled  to  be  quiet,  and  to  a<fl  with  more  temper  by
the  confuls,  who  forced  their  way  into  the  midft  of  the
contending  parties,  and  ordered  their  lidlors  to  quell  the
multitude :  So  great  a  refpedt  did  the  men  of  thofe  times
bear  to  this  magiftracy,  and  fo  much  did  they  honour  the
royal  dignity.  Upon  which,  Sicirinius,  being  perplexed,
and  difturbed,  was  afraid  of  obliging  his  adverfaries  to  repel
force  with  force ;  but  difdained  to  deUft  from  his  attempt,
after  he  had,  once,  ingaged  in  it ;  and,  finding  himfelf
unable  to  purfue  his  refolution,  he  confidered,  long,  what
he  had  to  do.

XXXVI.  Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  that  popular  orator,
who  had  contrived  the  terms  of  the  accommodation,  a  man
of  great  fagacity  in  every  thing,  but,  particularly,  in  finding
expedients  in  difficulties,  feeing  him  in  this  perplexity,  came
to  him  ;  and,  taking  him  afide,  advifed  him  not  to  perfift  in  a
warm,  and  illegal  yndertaking,  when  he  faw,  not  only,  the
whole  body  of  the  patricians  in  a  flame,  and  ready,  if  the
confuls  called  upon  them,  to  run  to  arms,  but,  alfo,  that  part
of  the  people,  which  was  moft  able  to  defend  their  caufe,  he-
fitating,  and  not,  willingly,  receiving  his  propofal  to  put  the
jnoft  iiiuftrious  perfon  of  the  city  to  death,  and  that  without

D  d  2  a  trial.


204  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  VII.

a  trial.  Fie,  therefore,  advifed  him  to  yield  for  the  p  refen  t,
and  not  to  ingage  with  the  confuls,  left  he  fhould  be  the
caufe  of  fome  greater  mifchief ;  but  to  bring  the  man  to  a
trial  upon  a  day  appointed  ;  to  take  the  votes  of  the  citizens
in  their  tribes,  and  to  a  (ft  purfuant  to  the  determination  of
the  majority  ;  frying  that  his  prefent  attempt  was  tyrannical
and  violent,  tending  to  conftitute  the  fame  perfon  both  his
accufer,  and  judge,  and,  alfo,  the  ordainer  of  the  degree
of  his  punifhment:  But  that  it  was  agreeable  to  the  fpirit
of  all  civil  government,  that  a  criminal  fhould  have  liberty
to  make  his  defence  according  to  the  laws,  and  Buffer  fuch
punifhment  as  the  majority  of  his  judges  fhould  determine.
Sicinnius  yielded  to  thefe  arguments,  finding  he  could  take
no  better  refolution  ;  and,  prefenting  himfelf  to  the  people,
faid,  “  You  fee,  citizens,  the  eagernefs  of  the  patricians  for
“  murder,  and  violence,  which  induces  them  to  prefer  one
“  man,  who  wrongs  the  whole  commonwealth,  to  you  all.
“  Flowever,  we  ought  not  to  refemble  them,  and  run  head-
“  long  to  our  ruin,  either  in  attacking  them,  or  in  defend-
“  ing  ourfelves  from  their  attacks.  But,  fince  fome  people
<c  make  ufe  of  a  fpecious  pretence,  and  fcreen  him  from
“  punifhment  by  fupporting  the  law,  which  allows  no
“  citizen  to  be  put  to  death  without  a  trial,  let  us  grant
C£  them  the  benefit  of  this  law,  though  we  ourfelves  have
“  not  been  treated  by  them  either  in  a  legal,  or  juft  manner;
<c  and  make  it  appear  that  we  chufe  to  overcome  our  fellow-
“  citizens,  who  injure  us,  in  lenity,  rather  than  in  violence.
“  Do  you,  therefore,  depart,  and  wait  for  the  approaching

“  time.


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  205
“  time.  In  the  mean  while,  we  will  prepare  every  thing
“  that  is  neceffary;  and,  having  appointed  a  day  for  Marcius
<£  to  make  his  defence,  we  will  manage  the  trial,  and  you
cc  fhall  be  his  judges.  And,  when  you  are,  legally,  pofleffed
<c  of  the  right  of  giving  your  votes,  inflid  fuch  punifliment
u  on  him,  as  you  fhall  find  he  deferves.  So  much  for  this.
u  As  to  the  fale,  and  diftribution  of  the  corn,  if  thefe  men,
C£  and  the  fenate  do  not  take  fome  care  that  this  affair  be
“  ordered  in  the  moft  equitable  manner,  we  fhall  take  That
“  care  upon  ourfelves.”  Having  faid  this,  he  difmiffed  the
affembly.

XXXVII.  The  confuls,  prefently,  affembled  the  fenate,
and  confidered  with  them,  at  leifure,  by  what  means  the
prefent  difturbance  might  be  appeafed  :  And  the  firft  refo-
lution  they  came  to,  was  to  court  the  plebeians,  by  felling
the  provifions  to  them  at  a  very  cheap,  and  low  price  :  In
the  next  place,  to  endeavour  to  prevail  upon  their  leaders
to  defift  from  their  purpofe  in  favor  of  the  fenate,  and  not
to  bring  Marcius  to  his  trial ;  and,  if  they  could  not  prevail,
to  put  it  off  to  the  longeft  time  poffible,  till  the  refentment
of  the  people  flhould  grow  languid.  Having  come  to  thefe
refolutions,  they  laid  their  decree,  relating  to  the  provifions,
before  the  people,  by  whom  it  was  confirmed  with  a  gene¬
ral  applaufe.  This  was  the  fubftance  of  the  decree:  “  That
<£  the  prices  of  fuch  provifions,  as  are  neceffary  for  the  daily
u  fupport  of  the  people,  be  the  loweft  they  were,  ever,
“  at  before  the  civil  commotion.”  As  to  their  application
to  the  tribunes  in  favor  of  Marcius,  the  effed  of  it  was  this :

They


206  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

They  could  not,  by  any  intreaties,  prevail  upon  them  to  remit
him  abfolutely :  However,  they  obtained  of  them  a  delay  for
as  long  a  time  as  they  deftred.  And  they  themfelves  contrived
another  delay,  by  laying  hold  on  the  following  occafion  :  It
happened  that  the  embafladors,  fent  from  Sicily  by  the  king,
as  they  were  returning  home  by  fea  after  landing  the  prefent
of  corn  he  had  given  to  the  people,  were  taken  by  fome
pirates,  fent  out  by  the  Antiates,  while  they  lay  at  anchor
not  far  from  their  ports,  who  ordered  their  fhips  to  be
brought  in ;  and,  not  only,  made  the  fame  advantage  of
their  effedts,  as  if  they  had  belonged  to  an  enemy,  but,  alfo,
fecured  their  perfons.  The  confuls,  being  informed  of  this,
refolved  to  march  againft  the  Antiates ;  fince,  upon  fending
embafladors  to  them,  they  refufed  to  do  them  any  fort  of
juftice  :  And,  having  raifed  an  army  confiding  of  all  their
youth,  and  procured  a  decree  of  the  fenate  for  the  fufpenfion
of  all  private,  and  public  fuits,  as  long  as  they  fhould  con¬
tinue  in  arms,  they  both  took  the  field.  However,  this  war
did  not  laft  near  fo  long,  as  they  expedted  :  For  the  Antiates,
hearing  the  Romans  were  marching  againft  them  with  all
their  forces,  made  not  the  leaft  refiftance ;  but,  having
recourfe  to  prayers,  and  intreaties,  they  reftored  both  the
perfons  of  the  Sicilian  embafladors,  whom  they  had  taken,
and  their  effedts  alfo  :  So  that,  the  Romans  were  under  a
necefiity  of  returning  to  the  city.

XXXVIII.  The  army  being  difbanded,  Sicinnius,  the
tribune,  affembled  the  people,  and  acquainted  them  with  the
day  he  had  appointed  for  the  trial  of  Marcius  5  at  the  fame

time,


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I  S.  207

time,  he  exhorted  the  citizens,  who  lived  at  Rome,  to  come
every  one,  and  take  cognizance  of  this  caufe  ;  and  thofe
alfo,  who  redded  in  the  country,  to  leave  their  buflnefs,  and
attend  that  day,  fince  their  liberty,  and  the  prefervation  of
the  whole  commonwealth  depended  upon  their  votes.  He
fummoned  Marcius,  alfo,  to  appear,  and  make  his  defence,
alluring  him  that  he  fhould  be  deprived  of  no  advantage
the  law  allowed  him.  In  the  mean  time,  the  confuls,
after  they  had  confulted  the  fenate,  refolved  not  to  fuller
the  people  to  poftefs  themfelves  of  fo  great  a  power.
They  had  found  out  a  juft,  and  legal  method  of  oppofttion,
by  which  they  expected  to  defeat  all  the  deftgns  of  their
adverfaries.  After  this,  they  invited  the  leaders  of  the
people  to  a  conference,  at  which  their  friends  afiifted,  when
Minucius  fpoke  as  follows :  “  It  is  our  opinion,  tribunes,
<c  that  we  ought  to  ufe  all  our  endeavours  to  banilh  fedition
“  from  the  city,  and  not  to  contend  with  the  people  in  any
“  thing ;  particularly,  when  we  fee  you  fly  from  violent
“  methods,  to  Thofe,  that  are  founded  on  juftice,  and  rea-
C£  fon.  But,  however  commendable  we  think  your  refolu-
“  tions,  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  fenate  ought  to  lead  the
“  way  by  making  a  previous  order,  as  it  has,  always,  been
<c  pradtifed  among  us :  For,  you  yourfelves  can  teftify  that,
u  from  the  time  our  anceftors  founded  this  city,  the  fenate
<c  have,  always,  been  poflefledof  this  privilege,  and  19  that  the

19<  Kaw  vQsv  OTwola  o  o  r i  y,v)  to  contradidt  what  our  f  author  has,

«  (8«a> u  Jz  £7T£>c giviv,  before,  told  us,  viz.  that  the  refolu-
tn This  feems,  at  firft  fight,  tions  of  the  people  were,  originally,

fB.  ii.  c.  14.


/


“  people


2o  8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

u  people  never  determined,  nor  voted  any  thing  without  a
“  previous  order  of  the  fenate,  not  only  now,  but,  even,
<c  under  the  kings,  who  laid  before  the  people  the  refolu-
<c  tions  of  the  fenate,  and  received  their  concurrence.  Do
cc  not,  therefore,  deprive  us  of  this  right,  nor  abolifli  this


laid  before  the  fenate  for  their  appro¬
bation.  In  order  to  reconcile  thefe  two
aflertions,  I  fhall  not  have  recourfe  to
agrammatical  criticilm  upon  the  words
and  which,  in  rea¬

lity,  fignify  a  confirmatory  judgement:
For  this  would  be  to  get  over  the  dif¬
ficulty  by  making  our  author  talk  non¬
fen  fe  ;  fince,  if  a  previous  order  of  the
fenate  was  not  paffed,  it  would  be  im-
poffible  for  the  people  to  confirm  that
order.  The  only  way  I  can  think  of  to
folve  the  difficulty  is  this :  I  look  upon
it  that  the  people,  in  their  curiata,  and
centuriata  comitia,  could  not  take  cog¬
nizance  of  any  thing,  till  it  was  laid
before  them  by  the  magiftrates,  as  the
confuls,  or  the  tribunes  of  the  people,
after  their  inftitution  :  Neither  could
the  magiftrates  lay  any  thing,  regular¬
ly,  before  the  people,  without  a  pre¬
vious  order  of  the  fenate,  fignified  by
thefe  words,  ferrent  ad  ■plebem.  This
previous  order  I  take  to  be  what  the
Greek  writers  call  a which
was  not  fo  much  a  declaration  of  the
fenfe  of  the  fenate  upon  the  queftion,
as  an  impowering  the  people  to  take
cognizance  of  it :  And,  after  the  peo¬
ple  had  declared  their  approbation  of
the  matter  propofed  to  them,  their  re-
folution  was  carried  up  to  the  fenate
for  their  concurrence  •,  which  I  think


they  might,  legally,  refufe,  if  they
thought  fit :  My  reafon  for  it  is,  that,
in  the  year  of  Rome  388,  the  fenate,
and  people,  after  a  great  con teft,  en¬
tered  into  a  kind  of  compromife,  the
terms  of  which  were,  that  two  curule
ediles  fhould  be  chofen  among  the
former,  and  that,  in  return,  the  fenate
lliould  confirm  all  the  refolutions  the
people  fhould,  that  year,  pafs  in  their
comitia  :  For  fo  I  underftand  thefe
words  of g  Livy,  Patres  auftores  omni¬
bus  ejus  anni  comitiis  fierent :  And  that
they  are  to  be  taken  in  this  fenfe,  I
think,  h  I  have,  already,  proved.  If,
therefore,  the  fenate,  in  confideration
of  an  advantage  to  themfeives,  agreed
to  ratify  all  the  refolutions  of  the  peo¬
ple  for  that  year,  it  is  plain  they  had
a  power  of  rejecting  them  before  that
time,  and  after  the  expiration  of  it.
However,  this  negative  voice  of  the
fenate  was  fubjedt  to  reftridtions  •,  and
the  people  had,  conftitutionally,  a  fo-
vereign  power  in  three  very  eftential
1  points,  in  which  the  fenate  could  not
controllthem  :  Thefe  were  the  election
of  magiftrates,  the  enadting,  or  repeal¬
ing  laws,  and  the  declaring  war,  or
making  peace.  Upon  thefe  occafions,
they  fpoke  with  an  authority,  that  be¬
came  their  fovereign  power;  Volumus ,
et  jubemus.


?  B.  vi.e.  42.  h  See  the  izzd  annotation  on  the  fecond  book,  ‘Dionyfius,  B.  iv.  c.  20.

“  ancient,


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNAS  SENS  IS.  209

c£  ancient,  and  well  grounded  cuftom;  but  inform  the
<£  fenate  that  you  defire  a  juft,  and  reafonable  thine ;  and,
t£  whatever  they  fhall  refolve  upon,  do  you  refer  That  to
<£  the  determination  of  the  people.”

XXXIX.  While  the  confuls  were  faying  this,  Sicinnius
grew  impatient  at  their  difcourfe,  and  would  leave  nothing
to  the  decifion  of  the  fenate:  But  his  collegues,  purfuant
to  the  advice  of  Lucius,  confented  that  the  fenate  fhould
make  the  previous  order,  after  they  themfelves  had  made  a
juft  requeft,  which  the  confuls  could  not  deny:  For  they
defired  that  the  fenators  would  allow  liberty  of  fpeech  as
well  to  thofe,  who  were  concerned  for  the  people,  as
to  thofe,  who  fupported  the  fame  intereft,  or  defired  to
oppofe  it ;  and  that,  after  they  had  heard  all  parties,  they
would,  then,  decree  what  they  thought  juft  and  advantage¬
ous  to  the  public:  That  the  fenators  fhould  all  give  their
opinions,  as  in  a  court  of  juftice,  after  taking  the  oath  ap¬
pointed  by  law;  and  the  queftion  be  determined  by  a
majority  of  votes.  The  tribunes  having  confented  that  the
fenate  fhould  make  the  previous  order,  as  the  confuls  defired,
the  conference  ended.  The  next  day,  the  fenate  met,  when
the  confuls  acquainted  them  with  the  terms  of  the  agree¬
ment  they  had  made  with  the  tribunes,  and  called  upon  the
latter  to  offer  what  they  had  to  fay.  Upon  which,  Lucius,
who  had  confented  that  the  fenate  fhould  make  the  pre¬
vious  order,  prefented  himfeli,  and  fpoke  in  the  following
manner.


E  e


Vol.  III.


XL.


2io  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

XL.  u  You  are  not  ignorant,  fathers,  of  the  confequence
“  of  our  application  to  you,  for  which,  as  well  as  for
c<  yielding  to  your  previous  order,  we  fhall  be  accufed  be-
£  fore  the  people  upon  fuch  grounds,  as  we  are  no  ftrangers
£  to,  by  a  perfon,  who  is  pofieffed  of  the  fame  power  with
£  ourfelves ;  and  who  did  not  think  that  we  ought  to  afk
c  That  of  you,  which  the  law  gives  us,  or  to  receive  a
c  right,  as  a  favor.  And,  if  we  are  tried  for  this,  we  are
c  fenfible  we  fhall  run  no  fmall  hazard,  but  be  condemned
£  as  deferters,  and  traitors,  and  fuffer  the  worft  of  punifh-
£  ments.  But,  though  fenfible  of  thefe  things,  we  have  re-
£  folved  to  apply  to  you,  in  confidence  of  our  right,  and  of
£  the  oaths,  under  the  obligation  of  which  you  will  deliver
£  your  opinions.  We  are,  indeed,  inconfiderable  men  to
£  treat  of  fuch  important  fubjedls,  and  of  much  lefs  confe-
c  quence  than  they  require  ;  but  the  fubje&s  we  fhall  treat
£  of,  are  not  inconfiderable.  Attend,  therefore,  to  thefe ;

£  and,  if  they  fhall  appear  juft  and  advantageous  to  the
£  public  (and  I  may  add,  even,  neceffary)  allow  us,  volun-
c  tarily,  to  obtain  them.

XL  I.  C£  I  fhall  firft  fpeak  to  the  point  of  right.  After
£  you  had  expelled  the  kings  by  our  affiftance,  fathers,  and
£  fettled  our  prefent  conftitution,  which  we  find  no  fault
£  with,  you  obferved  that  the  plebeians  had,  always,  the
£  aifadvantage  in  their  fuits,  whenever  they  had  any  dif-
£  ference  with  the  patricians,  which,  frequently,  happened ;

£  and  paffed  a  law,  by  the  advice  of  Publius  Valerius,  one  of
£  the  confuls,  by  which  it  was  made  lawful  for  the  plebeians,

££  when


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  II ALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  211

cc  when  oppreffed  by  the  patricians,  to  appeal  to  the  people:
“  And,  by  the  means  of  this  law,  more  than  by  any  other
“  meafure,  you  both  preferved  the  union  of  the  comrnon-
u  wealth,  and  repulfed  the  attacks  of  the  kings.  It  is  in  virtue
“  of  this  law,  that  we  cite  Caius  Marcius  to  appear  before
<£  the  people,  on  account  of  the  injuftice,  and  oppreffion  we
“  fay  he  has  been  guilty  of  towards  them  all,  and  call  upon
“  him  to  make  his  defence  before  them.  And,  in  this  cafe,
“  a  previous  order  of  the  fenate  is  not  neceffary :  For,  with
“  regard  to  thofe  things,  which  are  left  at  large  by  the  laws,
“  you  have  a  right  to  make  a  previous  order,  and  the  people
“  to  confirm  it :  But,  when  there  is  an  inviolable  law,  though
<c  you  fhould  make  no  previous  order,  that  law  muft  be
“  obferved :  For  it  cannot  be  faid  that,  to  private  perfons,
cc  when  aggrieved  by  any  judgement,  this  appeal  to  the  people
<c  is  allowed,  but  not  to  their  tribunes.  Supported,  there-
“  fore,  by  this  conceffion  of  the  law ;  and,  for  that  reafon,
u  expofed  to  the  danger  of  fubmitting  to  your  determina-
cc  tion,  we  come  before  you.  Nor  lefs  fupported  are  we  by
£C  this  unwritten,  and  unena&ed  law  of  nature,  when  we
“  requeft  of  you,  fathers,  that  the  condition  of  the  people
“  may  be  neither  better,  nor  worfe  than  your  own,  at  leaft
cc  in  point  of  right;  fince  they  have  affifted  you  in  carrying
u  on  many  confiderable  wars ;  havefhewn  thegreateft  zeal
“  in  putting  an  end  to  thofe  wars,  and  have  had  no  fmall
“  flhare  in  enabling  the  commonwealth  to  receive  laws  from
<c  none,  but  to  give  laws  to  others.  Now,  the  moft  effectual
“  means  you  can  take,  fathers,  to  put  us  in  no  worfe  a  con-

E  e  2  “  dition


212  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

“  dition  than  yourfelves  in  point  of  right,  will  be,  to  prevent
££  the  illegal  attempts  of  men  againft  our  perfons,  and  liberties,
££  by  placing  before  their  eyes  the  terror  of  a  condemnation.
“  We  look  upon  it  as  our  duty  to  confer  magiflracies,  pre-
“  cedence,  and  honors  upon  thofe  among  you,  who  are
££  diftinguifhed  by  their  virtue ;  but,  at  the  fame  time,  we
££  think  it  reafonable  that  to  fuffer  no  injury,  and  to  receive
££  juflice  adequate  to  the  wrong  fuftained,  fhould  be  equal
C£  and  common  to  all  thofe,  who  live  under  the  fame  go-
££  vernment.  As,  therefore,  we  give  up  to  you  the  things,
££  that  are  illuftrious  and  great,  fo  we  mean  not  to  depart
££  from  Thofe,  that  are  equal  and  common.  This  is  enough
££  concerning  the  point  of  right,  though  many  other  argu-
££  ments  might  be  ufed  to  fupport  it.

XLII.  “  Suffer  us,  now,  to  fhew  you,  in  few  words,  that
££  the  demands  of  the  people  will  be,  even,  advantageous  to
££  the  public  :  For,  if  any  one  fhould  a  Ik  you  what  you  look
££  upon  to  be  the  greateft  mifchief  a  commonwealth  can
££  labour  under,  and  the  caufe  ofthefwifteff  of  all  deftrudt ions,
££  would  you  not  fay  it  is  dilcord  ?  I  own,  I  think  fo.  Who
££  is  there  among  you,  then,  fo  weak,  fo  perverfe,  and  fo
££  immoderate  an  enemy  to  equality,  as  not  to  know,  that,
££  if  the  people  are  allowed  to  exercife  their  jurifdidtion  in
<£  caufes,  of  which  the  law  gives  them  cognizance,  we  fhall
££  live  in  harmony  ?  But,  if  you  fhould  determine  other  wife,
££  and  refolve  to  deprive  us  of  our  liberty  (for  you  will,
£C  really,  deprive  us  of  liberty,  if  you  deprive  us  of  juflice,
££  and  law)  you  will  drive  us,  again,  into  fedition,  and  a

“  civil


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  A  SS  ENS  I  S.  213
c<  civil  war  :  For,  if  juftice,  and  law  are  banifhed  from  a
u  commonwealth,  fedition,  and  war  will  enter  there.  It  is
££  no  wonder,  indeed,  if  thofe,  who  have  never  experienced
“  the  calamities  of  a  civil  war,  are  neither  affeCted  with  paft
“  misfortunes,  nor  take  early  precautions  to  prevent  the
<c  future :  But,  to  thofe,  who,  like  you,  when  expofed  to
“  the  fmalleft  dangers,  thought  themfelves  happy  to  find
“  relief  by  feafonable  conceflions,  what  fpecious,  or  reafon-
cc  able  excufe  is  left,  if  they  fall,  again,  under  the  fame  mif-
iC  fortunes?  Who  is  there,  who  would  not  accufe  you  of
u  great  folly,  and  madnefs,  when  he  confiders  that,  very
“  lately,  you  fubmitted  to  many  things  againft  your  incli-
u  nation,  fome  of  which,  poflibly,  were  neither  very  hon-
<c  ourable,  nor  very  advantageous,  in  order  to  appeafe  a
“  fedition  of  the  people ;  and  now,  when  neither  your
“  private  fortunes,  your  reputation,  nor  any  other  public
c<  mtereft  is,  in  any  degree,  concerned,  you  refolve  to  ex-
“  afperate  the  plebeians  again,  in  order  to  oblige  their
“  enemies?  This  you  will  not  do,  if  you  are  wife.  But  I
“  would,  willingly,  alk  you,  what  motive,  then,  induced
“  you  to  confent  to  our  return  upon  the  terms  we  defired  :
<c  Were  you  influenced  by  your  forefight  of  what  was  mod
cc  eligible,  or  by  your  fubmiflion  to  what  was  mod  neceflary  ?
u  For,  if  you  thought  thofe  conceflions  to  be  of  the  greatefl
“  advantage  to  the  commonwealth  at  that  time,  why  do
“  you  not  adhere  to  them  at  prefent?  And,  if  they  were
“  neceflary,  and  every  other  meafure  impracticable,  or  if
u  they  flowed  from  true  reafoning  directed  to  the  public

“  good.

JD  >


214  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

“  good,  why  do  you  complain  of  having  made  them?
u  Poffibly  you  ought  not  to  have  granted  them,  at  firft,  if
<c  you  could  have  avoided  it ;  but,  fince  you  have  granted
“  them,  you  ought,  no  longer,  to  find  fault  with  your  own
“  concefiions.

XLIII.  “  For  my  part,  fathers,  I  think  you  acfted  with
“  the  greateft  prudence  in  regard  to  the  accommodation,
“  to  which  you  are  obliged  to  yield,  in  order  to  obfervethe
“  terms  of  it :  for  you  have  given  us  the  gods  as  furetiesfor
“  the  performance  or  the  agreement,  by  loading  with  many
££  grievous  imprecations  both  thofe,  who  fhould  violate  any
“  part  of  it,  and  their  pofterity  for  ever.  But  I  do  not
“  think  it  necefiary  to  trouble  you  with  faying  any  more  in
“  order  to  convince  you  that  our  demands  are  juft  in  them-
<c  felves,  and  advantageous  to  you;  and  fuch  as,  when  you
t£  confider  your  oaths,  you  will  all  be  confcious  that  you
“  are  under  the  greateft  neceffity  of  confenting  to.  Learn
<c  now,  fathers,  or  rather  call  to  mind,  the  grievous  outrages
u  we  have  buffered  from  this  man,  which  have  made  it  a
“  point  of  no  fmall  importance  to  us  not  to  be  either  com-
££  polled  by  fear,  or  deluded  by  artifice,  to  relinquifh  this
C£  conteft,  which  nothing  but  the  greateft  neceffity  could
££  have  prevailed  upon  us  to  undertake:  For  Ifhall  advance
<£  nothing  you  are  not  all  acquainted  with;  and  I  beg,  at
cc  the  fame  time,  that  you  will  apply  what  I  fay  to  your-
“  felves.  If  any  of  our  plebians  had  attempted  to  fay,  or
t£  do  fuch  things  againft  your  order  in  an  aflembly  of  the
C£  people,  as  Marcius  has  dared  to  advance  to  this  place,

££  what


I


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL ICARN  ASSEN  SIS.  215

£C  what  refentment  would  you  have  been  fired  with  againft
££  him?

XLIV.  ££  ForMarcius  was  the  firft  man  among  you,  who
C(  endeavoured  to  difiolve  the  unalterable,  and  almoft  ada-
<c  mantine  bonds  of  our  agreement,  entered  into  not  quite
a  four  years  fince,  which  neither  you,  who  fwore  to  the  ob-
C£  fervance  of  it,  nor  your  pofterity  can  violate  without  a
£C  crime,  as  long  as  this  city  fhall  be  inhabited  :  This  agree-
u  ment  he  did  not  feek,  privately,  to  undermine,  or  cover
c£  his  defign  by  the  fecrefy  of  the  place,  but,  openly,  de-
£C  dared  his  opinion  here,  in  the  hearing  of  you  all,  that  you
££  ought,  no  longer,  to  allow  us  the  exercife  of  the  tribuni-
<£  tian  power,  but  to  abolifh  the  firft,  and  only  guardian
C£  of  our  liberty,  in  confidence  of  which  we  confented  to
<£  the  accommodation:  Neither  did  his  prefumption  ftop
“  here;  but,  traducing  the  liberty  of  the  poor  with  the
<c  name  of  infolence,  and  equality  with  That  of  tyranny,  he
“  advifed  you  to  deprive  us  of  both.  Call  to  mind,  fathers,
££  the  moft  wicked  of  all  his  fuggeftions  at  that  time,  when
££  he  declared  this  to  be  the  proper  feafon  for  you  to  revive
<c  your  refentment  againft  the  plebeians  for  their  former  often-
£C  ces;  and  advifed  you,  while  they  were  diftrefted  for  want
££  of  money,  and  had,  long,  been  ftreightened  in  their  ne~
££  ceffary  fubfiftence,  to  leave  the  whole  to  him,  and  to
££  find  means  that  the  fame  fcarcity  might  continue  :  For
£C  it  was  not  to  be  expected,  he  faid,  that,  being  poor,  and
££  obliged  to  pay  an  excefiive  price  for  a  fmall  quantity  of
££  corn,  we  could,  long,  hold  out ;  but  that  fome  of  us

££  would


2 1 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

u  would  leave  the  city,  and  thofe  who  ftaid,  be  deftroyed
££  by  the  moft  miferable  of  all  deaths.  But  he  was  fo  infa-
££  tuated,  and  deprived  of  his  reafonin  giving  you  this  ad-
£C  vice,  as  not  to  be  able  to  fee  even  this,  among  many  other
££  mifchiefs,  of  which  the  advice  he  gave  the  fenate  to  break
££  through  the  accommodation,  was  productive,  that  fuch  a
“  number  of  poor,  when  deprived  of  neceffary  fubfiftence,
££  would  be  compelled  to  fall  upon  the  authors  of  their
C£  calamity,  without  diftinguifhing  their  friends.  So  that,
u  if  you  had  been  fo  mad,  as  to  purfue  his  advice,  it  muft,
€£  infallibly,  have  ended  in  this  alternative,  either  the
££  whole  body  of  the  people  muft  have  perifhed,  or  That  of
££  the  patricians  been  deftroyed :  For  we  fhould  not  have
££  buffered  ourfelves  to  be  banifhed,  or  put  to  death  in
££  fo  flavifh  a  manner  ;  but,  having  called  upon  the  gods,
££  and  genius’s  to  be  witneftes  to  our  bufferings,  be  affured,
££  we  fhould  have  filled  the  forum,  and  the  ftreets  with
££  dead  bodies ;  and,  having  made  a  lake  of  civil  blood,
££  we  fhould,  in  that  condition,  have  received  our  deftined
££  fate.  Of  fuch  impious  aClions,  fathers,  was  he  the  pro-
C£  moter,  and  fuch  things  did  he  think  fit  to  make  the
££  fubjeCf  oi  his  harangue.  .

XLV.  ££  Neither  can  it  be  faid  that  the  words  of  Marcius
££  tended,  indeed,  to  divide  the  city,  but  that  his  a&ions
££  had  no  fuch  tendency :  For,  being  furrounded  with  a
££  body  of  men,  ready  to  obey  him  in  any  thing,  he  relufed
££  to  appear  before  our  magiftrates,  when  called  upon,  and
*£  ftruck  our  officers,  when,  by  our  orders,  they  endeavoured

££  to


\


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  217

££  to  bring  him  away ;  and,  at  laff,  did  not,  even,  refrain
“  from  offering  violence  to  our  own  perfons.  The  confe-
“  quence  of  which  will  be,  that,  as  far  as  in  him  lies,  we
“  fhall  bear  the  fpecious  name  of  an  inviolable  magiftracy,
££  given  in  ridicule,  but  perform  no  part  of  the  functions
C£  appropriated  to  that  magiffracy.  For  how  fhall  we  give
“  relief  to  others,  who  complain  they  are  injured,  when  we
“  ourfelves  cannot  enjoy  fecurity  ?  When,  therefore,  we,
u  who  are  poor,  have  been,  thus,  infulted  by  one  man,  not
“  yet  a  tyrant,  but  aiming  at  tyranny  ;  when  we  have,  al-
u  ready,  fuffered  many  outrages  ;  and,  if  the  major  part  of
“  you,  fathers,  had  not  prevented  it,  were  near  fuffering
“  more,  have  we  not  reafon  to  refen t  this,  and  to  expedf
££  fome  relief,  not  without  the  hope  of  your  efpouffng  our
££  refentment,  when  we  call  him  to  a  fair,  and  legal  trial,
££  fathers,  in  which  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  in  their
££  tribes,  after  every  man,  who  defires  to  fpeak,  has  been  heard,
££  will  give  their  fuffrages  on  oath  ?  Go  thither,  Marcius,
“  and,  what  you  defigned  to  fay  here,  fay  it  before  all  your
“  fellow-citizens,  for  your  juftification  ;  alledge  that,  with
££  the  belt  intention,  you  gave  the  beft  advice  to  thefe  fe-
££  nators ;  or  that,  even,  your  advice,  if  followed,  would
££  have  been  advantageous  to  the  commonwealth ;  that  it  is
‘  £  inconfiftent  with  juftice  that  thofe,  who  deliver  their  opinions
“  in  this  place,  fhould  give  an  account  of  their  words;  that
££  it  was  not  with  a  premeditated,  or  a  treacherous  defign,
“  but,  through  paffion,  that  you  offered  this  abominable
u  advice ;  or  fly  to  any  other  defence  you  can  :  Defcend,
Vol.  III.  F  f  ££  unhappy


2 1 8  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  T I E  S  OF  Book  VII.

“  unhappy  man,  from  that  overbearing,  and  tyrannical
“  haughtinefs,  to  a  popular  behaviour;  become,  at  laft,

<£  like  other  men ;  affume  the  appearance  of  a  perion,  who
“  has  erred,  and  deprecates  anger ;  an  appearance  calculated
<c  to  exprefs  humility,  and  excite  companion  ;  fuch  a  one,
“  as  calamities  require;  and  feek  not  your  prefervation  by
<c  offering  violence  to  thofe  you  have  injured ;  but  by
“  fubmitting  to  their  pleafure.  Let  the  conducft  of  thefe
“  worthy  men  be  an  example  of  moderation  to  you,  which
“  if  you  imitate,  your  fellow-citizens  will  have  no  caufe  to
u  complain  of  you.  Though  fupported  by  fuch  numbers,
<c  as  you  fee  here  prefen t,  and  adorned  with  fo  many  military,
“  and  civil  accomplifhments,  which  I  could  not,  eafily,
£C  enumerate,  though  I  fhould  take  up  a  great  deal  of
£C  time  ;  yet  thefe  refpedtable,  thefe  great  perfons  came  to
“  no  cruel,  no  haughty  refolutions  againft  us,  who  are  in-
“  conffderable,  and  obfcuremen  ;  but  they  themfelves,  even
<c  firft,  propofed  a  treaty,  and  invited  us  to  an  accommo-
“  dation,  when  Fortune  had  divided  us  ;  and  confented  to
“  fuch  conditions,  as  we  deffred,  not  to  fuch,  asthey  thought
“  moil  advantageous  to  themfelves;  and  thefe  laft  jealoufies
<c  we  had  entertained  againft  them  on  account  of  the  diftri-
“  bution  of  corn,  they  took  great  pains  to  remove.

XLVL  C£  I  omit  other  things  :  But,  in  favor  of  yourfelft
a  and,  to  deprecate  the  punifhment  due  to  your  madnefs,
cc  v/hat  interceffions  did  they  not  employ  with  all  the  pie-
*£  beians  both  in  their  public,  and  private  capacity  ?  Since
u  the  confuls,  and  the  fenate,  who  have  the  government  of

“  fo


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  219

££  fo  confiderable  a  city,  have  thought  it  no  difhonor  to
££  them,  Marcius,  to  fubmit  to  the  judgement  of  the  people,
cc  in  relation  to  what  they  were  charged  with,  will  it  be  any
££  to  you  to  fubmit  to  the  fame  tribunal  ?  All  thefe  have
££  thought  it  no  difgrace  to  intreat  the  people  to  acquit  you,
££  and  do  you  think  the  fame  thing  a  difgrace  to  yourfelf  ?
££  However,  this  is  not  enough  for  a  man  of  your  fpirit;
££  but,  as  if  you  had  performed  fome  great  achievement,
££  you  appear  with  an  exalted  mien,  and  magnify  your  addons,
££  refolving  -  to  abate  nothing  of  your  pride  ;  I  might  add
££  your  reviling  alfo,  accufing,  and  threatening  the  people.
££  And,  do  you  not  refent  his  arrogance,  fathers,  for  fetting
££  a  greater  value  upon  himfelf  alone,  than,  even,  all  of  you
££  fet  upon  yourfelves  ?  And  yet  it  is  his  duty,  though  you
££  fhould  be  unanimous  in  your  votes  to  ingage  in  a  war  for
££  his  fake,  to  be  fatisfied  with  this  proof  of  your  benevolence,
££  and  zeal,  and  not  to  accept  a  private  favor  at  the  expence
££  of  the  public ;  but  to  fubmit  to  make  his  defence,  even
££  to  be  condemned,  if  that  fhould  happen  to  be  his  cafe,
££  and  to  fuffer  any  punifhment :  For  fuch  would  be  the
££  behaviour  of  a  good  citizen,  and  of  one,  who  pradtifes  virtue
<£  in  his  adtions,  rather  than  in  his  words.  But,  what  courfe
££  of  life,  what  defigns  does  the  violence,  which  this  man
££  now  makes  ufe  of,  difcover?  Does  it  not  difcover  a  delign
££  to  violate  oaths,  to  break  through  folemn  ingagements,
<£  to  abolifh  treaties,  to  make  war  upon  the  people,  to  abufe
<£  the  perfons  of  magiftrates,  and  to  refufe  to  give  an  account
<c  of  any  one  of  thefe  adtions ;  but,  untried,  undefended,

F  f  2  ££  courting


/


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

“  courting  no  man,  fearing  no  man,  and,  difdaining  an
“  equality  with  any  one  citizen  among  fo  many,  to  walk
“  about  with  impunity?  Are  not  thefe  the  indications  of  a
“  tyrannical  difpofition  ?  They  are,  in  my  opinion  :  And
<c  yet  this  man  is  encouraged,  and  applauded  by  fome  of
u  your  own  order,  who  are  poffeffed  with  an  implacable
“  hatred  againft  the  plebeians,  and  cannot  fee  that  the  birth
u  of  this  evil  threatens  the  moft  dignified  citizens,  not  lefs
“  than  thofe  of  an  inferior  rank;  but  imagine  that,  when
“  their  natural  adverfaries  are  inflaved,  they  themfelves  fhall
“  be  fecure :  But  this  is  not  fo  in  reality,  O  men  of  miftaken
“  notions  !  For  you  may  learn  from  the  experience  Marcius
u  exhibits  to  you,  and  by  time,  by  foreign,  and  domeftic
“  examples,  that  tyranny,  20foftered  againft  the  people,  is
“  foftered  againft  the  whole  commonwealth  ;  at  prefen t,
“  indeed,  it  begins  with  us ;  but,  after  it  has  gained  ftrength,
u  it  will  not  fpare  even  you.”

XL VI I.  After  Lucius  had  fpoken  in  this  manner,  and
the  reft  of  the  tribunes  had  fupported  him  by  adding  what


20*  Mo^«vojuev>j.  I  do  not  think  it
fufficient  to  tranOate  this  word  ;  I  think
it,  alfo,  neceffary  to  explain  it.  M 03/0?
fignifies  a  young  plant  ;  it  fignifies  alfo
a  young  boy ,  and  the  young  of  every  kind .
"When  Agamemnon  is  going  to  fet  fail
from  Aulis  to  Troy,  k  he  fays  to  Cly-
taemneftra,

bi  <T2  KX&yCCiX  T OV$e  MOSXON  vtotyzwi
zv^oe  oik  as.

Here  fignifies  his  fon  Orefles,

then,  very  young.  If  is


taken  in  the  firft  fenfe  I  have  given  to
jwo^of,  I  own  I  can  fee  no  analogy  be¬
tween  tyranny,  and  a  young  plant;
but,  if  the  word  is  taken  in  the  other
fenfe,  the  comparifon  between  encou¬
raging  tyranny,  and  nurfmg  up,  for
example,  a  lion’s  whelp,  will  be  very
natural.  I  am  the  more  inclined  to
think  that  Jour  author  had  this. in  his
view,  becaufe  he  makes  Brutus  fay
fomething  very  like  it,  when  he  fpeaks
of  Tarquin’s  Ions  ;  Ivx  Je  pMe  oms
cm  A otKots  v(aiv  >jT<%gKVviinvg(Xvvi(V7ro']ge<pei.

they


Eurip,  Iphi,  in  Aul.  f.  1623.  !B.  iv.  c.  81.


22  1


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  II ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.

they  thought  he  had  omitted,  and  it  was  time  for  the  fe-
nators  to  deliver  their  opinions,  firft  the  moll  ancient,  and
the  mod;  dignified  of  the  confular,  fenators,  being  called
upon  by  the  confuls  in  their  cuftomary  order,  rofe  up  ;  and,
after  them,  thofe  who  were  inferior  to  them  in  both  thefe
refpedls ;  and,  laft  of  all,  the  youngeft  fenators,  who  made
no  fpeech  (for  that  would  have  been  looked  upon  as  a  want
of  modefty  in  the  Romans  of  thofe  times,  and  no  young
man  thought  himfelf  wifer  than  thofe  of  an  advanced  age)
but  aflented  to  the  opinions  delivered  by  the  confular  fenators  *
There  had  been  an  order  that  all  the  fenators  prefent  fhould
give  their  votes  upon  oath,  as  in  a  court  of  juftice.  Then
Appius  Claudius,  whom  I  mentioned  before,  as  the  greateft
enemy  to  the  plebeians  of  all  the  patricians,  and  who  could,
never,  relifh  the  agreement  they  had  entered  into  with  the
people,  oppofed  the  palling  of  the  previous  order  in  the
following  fpeech.

XLVIII.  “  I  have  wifhed,  and,  often,  prayed  to  the  gods
cc  that  I  might  be  miftaken  in  the  opinion  I  entertained
<c  concerning  the  accommodation  with  the  people,  when  I
“  thought  that  the  return  of  the  fugitives  would  be  neither
“  honourable,  juft,  nor  advantageous  to  you;  and,  during
“  the  whole  courfe  of  that  tranfa&ion,  whenever  any  thing
cc  relating  to  this  fubjed;  was  propofed  to  our  confideration,
<c  I  was  the  firft,  and,  at  laft,  the  only  perfon,  after  the  reft
“  had  deferted  me,  who  oppofed  it ;  and  I,  alfo,  wifhed
u  that  you,  fathers,  who  entertained  better  hopes,  and,
“  chearfully,  came  into  every  conceffion  both  juft,  and

“  unjuft


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

“  unjuft  in  favor  of  the  people,  might  appear  to  have  a&ed
££  with  greater  prudence  than  myfelf.  But,  fince  your
“  affairs  have  taken  a  turn  contrary  to  my  wifhes,  and
cc  prayers,  but  not  contrary  to  my  expectations,  and  that
<£  your  favors  have  been  returned  with  envy,  and  hatred,  I
££  fhall  forbear  to  cenfure  you  for  your  paft  errors,  and  to
££  give  you  a  fruitlefs  uneafinefs  (which  is  a  very  eafy
C£  talk,  and  a  very  common  practice)  as  a  thing  altogether
££  unfeafonable  at  this  juncture  :  However,  I  fhall  endeavour
££  to  fuggeft  to  you  the  means  of  correcting  fuch  of  your  paft
££  errors,  as  are  not,  abfolutely,  incurable,  and  of  aCting  in
C£  the  affairs,  now,  before  you  with  greater  prudence.  I  am
<c  not  ignorant  that  I  fhall  appear  to  fome  of  you  to  have
££  loft  my  fenfes,  and  to  court  deftruCtion,  in  delivering  my
££  opinion,  freely,  concerning  thefe  things,  when  I  confider
££  how  great  dangers  a  liberty  of  fpeech  is  expofed  to,  and
££  reflect  on  the  calamities  of  Marcius,  who  is,  this  minute,
££  in  danger  of  lofing  his  life  for  no  other  reafon.  But  my
££  opinion  is,  that  I  ought  not  to  be  more  anxious  for  the
££  fecurity  of  my  own  perfon,  than  for  the  advantage  of  the
££  public  :  For  the  former  has,  long  fince,  been  dedicated  to
££  the  perils,  that  attend  your  caufe,  fathers,  and  devoted  to'
££  contefts  in  defence  of  the  commonwealth.  So  that,  what-
££  ever  Heaven  pleafes  to  ordain,  I  fhall  fuffer  it,  refolutely,
££  with  all  of  you,  or  with  a  few,  or,  if  neceflary,  alone.
££  But,  while  I  have  life,  no  fear  fhall  deter  me  from  fpeak-
£C  ing  what  I  think.


XLIX.


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  II A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  223

XLIX.  “  In  the  firft  place,  I  defire  you  will,  now  at
££  laft,  be  convinced  of  this,  that  the  body  of  the  people  are
££  difaffedted,  and  enemies  to  the  prefent  eftablifliment,  and
c<  that  all  the  conceflions  you  have,  through  foftnefs,  made  to
££  them  are,  not  only,  thrown  away,  but  have  expofed  you  to
££  contempt,  as  granted  by  you  through  neceflity,  and  not
££  flowing  from  good  will,  and  choice  :  For  I  defire  you  to
££  confider  that  this  people,  when,  revolting  from  you,  they
££  took  arms,  and  had  the  boldnefs  to  declare  open  war
££  againft  you,  had  received  no  injury,  but  pretended  their
“  inability  to  pay  their  creditors :  And,  after  you  had  granted
££  them  an  abolition  of  their  debts,  and  an  impunity  for  the
££  crimes  they  had  committed  in  their  revolt,  they  declared
££  they  would  make  no  farther  demands :  Upon  which
££  occafion,  21  the  greateft  part  of  you,  though  not  all,  milled
££  by  thefe  counfellors  (which  I  wifh  had,  never,  happened)

of  by  Cafaubon  to  juftify  this  expref-
fion,  ug  a> j  noli  «<psAov,  becaufe  every-
perfon,  who  has  read  the  bed:  Greek
authors,  particularly  the  poets,  mult
have  met  with  it  frequently.  The
Latin,  and,  confequently,  the  French
translators,  have  made  Strange  work
with  this  period.  By  fuppofing,  with
Gelenius,  that  ought  to  be  pre¬

fixed  to  ifvu'<roiv,  which  Hudfon,  alfo,
approves  of,  the  former  have  made
our  author  fay  that  the  Senate  voted  an
abolition  of  debts,  and  an  amnefty,
notwithstanding  the  majority  w'ere  of
opinion,  xouniQ  ot  nrA etxg  tfvucoiv,  that
neither  of  them  were  proper  to  be
ena&ed.


21  •  E fvaxrav  oi  «rA <msg  vuuv.  I  have
followed  Cafaubon  in  reftoring  this
paffage  with  the  addition  of  two  words
to  connedt  it  with  That,  which  goes
before.  This  addition  Cafaubon  thinks
neceffary,  though  he  added  nothing
himfelf.  I  have,  therefore,  laid  -re h  <5ij ;
which  the  reader  will,  I  hope,  think  a
Sufficient  connexion.  In  this  manner,
therefore,  I  would  read  the  paffage,
and,  according  to  this, I  have  tranflated

it  •,  tcJs  St]  syvucmv  oi  wA&xg  J(uwv  (a

oy  sroev??^)  zs’ciguxgxcSi'Flzg  Grorwv

(ug  [j.y\  zffole  u$iAov)  aY,\jQutroa  mg  tm  tv\

t iQsFLxg  votuxg'  1  have,  alfo,  added
Si  after  t}Fxirti<re,  in  the  next  paragraph,
which  is,  vifibly,  wanting.  I  ffiall  not
repeat  any  of  the  authorities  made  ufe


came


224  ROMAN  ANTI  QUIT  I  E  S  OF  Book  VII.

/

“  came  to  a  refolution  to  abrogate  the  laws  calculated  to
cc  fupport  public  faith,  and  to  grant  an  amnefty  for  all  the
“  outrages  they  had  been  guilty  of.  However,  they  were
££  not  fatisfied  with  this  favor,  the  obtaining  of  which  alone
££  they  faid  was  the  aim  of  their  revolt,  but,  prefently,
“  deftred  another  ftill  greater,  and  more  illegal ;  they  deftred
£C  leave  to  be  granted  them  to  chufe  tribunes  out  of  their
u  own  body  every  year,  making  our  power  the  pretence  of
££  this  demand,  to  the  end,  truly,  that  fome  relief,  and  refuge
££  might  lie  open  to  the  poorer  citizens,  who  were  injured,
££  and  opprefied  ;  but,  in  reality,  with  an  inftdious  defign
cc  againft  our  conftitution,  and  a  view  to  change  it  to  a
££  democracy.  This  magiftracy,  alfo,  the  counfellors,  I
££  before  mentioned,  prevailed  upon  you  to  introduce  into
“  the  commonwealth;  the  introduction  of  which  mu  ft  ruin
££  the  ftate,  and  create  envy  to  the  fenate  in  particular  ;
££  while  I,  if  you  remember,  exclaimed  againft  it,  and  called
££  both  gods,  and  men  to  witnefs  that  you  would  bring  into
££  the  commonwealth  an  everlafting  civil  war,  and  foretold
££  every  thing,  that  has,  ftnce,  befallen  you.

L.  ££  What  then  did  this  grateful  people  do,  after  you  had
££  granted  them  this  magiftracy  alfo  ?  They  retained  no
££  gratitude  for  fo  great  a  favor,  nor  received  it  with  refpeCt,
££  and  modefty  ;  but  as  if  they  had  extorted  it  from  your
££  dread  of  their  power,  and  from  your  confternation.  After
££  that,  they  faid  this  magiftracy  ought  to  be  declared  facred
££  and  inviolable,  and  fecured  by  oaths,  deftring  that  a
££  greater  honor  might  be  annexed  to  it  than  you  yourfelves,

t£  ever,


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNAS-SENS  IS.  225

“  evef,  conferred  upon  the  confuls:  This,  alfo,  you  fub-
“  mitted  to;  and,  ftanding  by  the  victims,  you  curfed  both
<c  yourfelves,  and  your  pofterity,  if  you  violated  the  oath
££  you,  then,  took.  What  did  they  do,  when  they  had  oh-
££  tained  this  alfo?  Inftead  of  acknowledging  the  favor,  and
££  maintaining  the  form  of  government  delivered  down  to
££  them  from  their  anceftors,  they  began  from  thefe  advan-
££  tages,  and  made  thefe  illegal  fuccefies  the  fteps  to  future
££  enterprifes,  and,  not  only,  bring  in  laws  without  a  pre-
£C  vious  order  of  the  fenate,  but  enad  them  without  your
££  concurrence :  They  pay  no  regard  to  the  decrees  you
££  publifh,  and  accufe  the  confuls  of  male  adminiftration ;
££  and,  if,  by  chance,  any  thing  happens  contrary  to  the
C£  agreement  you  made  with  them  (as  there  are  many  things,
££  which  human  reafon  cannot  provide  againft)  they  attribute
££  it  not  to  chance,  as  I  faid,  but  to  a  premeditated  defign
c£  in  you :  And,  while  they  pretend  that  fnares  are  laid  for
££  them  by  you,  and  that  they  are  afraid  you  fhould  either
££  deprive  them  of  their  liberty,  or  expel  them  their  country,
££  they  themfelves  are,  continually,  forming  the  fame  defigns
“  againft  you;  and  they,  plainly,  fhew  that  they  guard
“  againft  the  mifchief,  they  fay,  they  apprehend,  by  no
££  other  means,  than  by  firft  infliding  it:  This  they  have,
££  often,  made  apparent,  even  before,  and  upon  many  oc-
££  cations,  which  I  muft  not  mention  at  prefent ;  but,  par-
££  ticularly,  by  their  treatment  of  Marcius,  a  lover  of  his
££  country,  a  man  of  no  obfcure  birth,  and  who  himfelf  is
C£  inferior  to  none  of  us  in  courage;  whom  they  accufed  of
Vol.  III.  G  g  ££  forming


226  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Eook  VII.

u  forming  defigns  againft  them,  and  of  giving  evil  advice
u  in  this  place,  and  attempted  to  put  to  death  without  a
£C  trial :  And,  if  the  confuls,  and  thofe  of  the  beft  fentiments
“  among  you  had  not  aflembled  in  a  body,  and  reftrained
u  their  illegal  attempts,  you  had  been  deprived,  in  one
a  day,  of  every  thing  your  anceftors  acquired  for  you
a  with  many  labors,  and  of  every  thing  you  yourfelves,
ct  after  as  many  contefts,  are  poffefled  of,  your  dignity,  your
fovereignty,  and  your  liberty :  While  thofe  among  you,
u  who  had  more  fpirit,  and  would  not  have  been  con-
tented  with  life  alone,  unlefs  they  could  have  lived  to
“  enjoy  thofe  advantages,  would  either  then,  or,  foon  after,
have  loft  their  lives  rather  than  have  been  deprived  of
<£  them  :  For,  if  Marcius  had  been  buffered  to  be  feized  in
u  fo  fhameful,  and  daftardly  a  manner,  as  in  a  folitude,
<£  what  could  have  hindered  me  alfo,  after  him,  and  all  of
cc  you,  who  ever  had  oppofed,  or  were  like  to  oppofe,  the
<c  unwarrantable  attempts  of  the  people,  from  being  torne
<c  in  pieces  by  our  enemies?  For  they  would  not  have  been
<c  fatisfied  with  taking  off  us  two  only,  neither  would  they,
<c  after  they  had  gone  fo  far,  have  flopped  in  their  career  of
“  wickednefs,  il  any  conjecture  can  be  formed  of  their
<c  future  behaviour  by  That  which  is  paffed;  but,  having
“  begun  with  us,  they  would  have  rufhed,  like  a  torrent,
<c  upon  all  their  adverfaries,  and  upon  all  thofe,  who  did
<c  not  fubmit  to  them,  and  would  have  borne  them  down,
cs  and  overwhelmed  them,  without  fparing  birth,  virtue,
“  or  age.


LI.


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  227

LI.  cc  Thefe,  fathers,  are  the  grateful  returns,  which  the
<£  people  have,  already,  made,  and,  if  you  had  not  oppofed
€£  them,  would  have  made,  for  the  many  fignal  benefits  they
££  have  received  from  you.  Nowconfider,  alfo,  in  what  man-
£C  ner  they  behaved  themfelves,  afteryou  had,  upon  thisocca-
C£  fion,  adled  with  fo  much  refolution,  and  prudence,  to  the
a  end  you  may  learn  from  thence  how  you  ought  to  treat
££  them.  As  foon,  therefore,  as  they  found  you  refolved,  no
££  longer,  to  bear  their  infolence,  but  v/ere  prepared  to  attack
<£  them,  they  were  ftruck  with  terror,  ai*d  foon  recovering
c£  themfelves,  as  from  a  fit  of  drunkennefs,  or  madnefs,  they
C£  defcended  from  violence,  and  had  recourfe  to  law;  and,
££  appointing  a  day,  they  cited  Marcius  then  to  appear,  and
££  take  his  trial,  in  which  they  themfelves  were  to  be  the
C£  accufers,  the  witneffes,  and  the  judges,  and  to  determine
€£  the  degree  of  the  punifhment:  And,  when  you  oppofed
££  this  alfo,  becaufe  you  thought  that  he  was  called  upon  not
<£  to  be  tried,  but  to  be  punifhed,  the  people,  who  know
££  they  have,  upon  nooccafion,  an  abfolute  power,  but  only
££  That  of  ratifying  your  previous  orders  by  their  fuffrages,
C£  now  abate  of  the  arrogance  they  were,  before,  poflefled
££  with,  and  are  come  to  requeft  that  you  will  grant  them
this  favor  alfo.  Reflect,  therefore,  upon  thefe  things;  learn,
<£  at  laft,  and  know  that  all  the  favors  you  have,  hitherto,
££  granted  them,  with  greater  weaknefs  than  prudence,  have
££  brought  calamities,  and  mifchiefs  upon  you ;  and  that  every
££  vigorous  opposition  you  have  given  to  their  illegal,  and
a  violent  proceedings,  has  turned  to  your  advantage.  What

G  g  2  ££  advice?


228  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

“  advice,  therefore,  do  I  give  you  now  you  are  fenhble  of
“  thefe  things  ?  And  what  opinion  do  I  deliver  upon  the
<c  prefen t  queftion  ?  It  is  this ;  that,  whatever  favors,  and
u  conceffions  you  made  to  the  people  at  the  time  of  your
“  reconciliation,  however  you  came  to  make  thofe  con-
“  ceffions,  you  adhere  to  them  as  valid;  and  violate
“  none  of  the  articles  you,  then,  granted  to  them  ;  not
“  becaufe  they  are  honourable  in  themfelves,  and  worthy
“  the  dignity  of  the  commonwealth;  how  fhould  they?
<c  But  becaufe  they  are  neceffary,  and  without  remedy.  As
<£  to  any  thing  beyond  this,  which  they  may  endeavour  to
<c  extort  from  you  againft  your  will  by  violence,  and  illegal
cc  means,  I  advife  you  not  to  grant,  or  allow  it;  but  all  of
“  you  in  general,  and  every  one  in  particular,  to  oppofe
“  them  both  by  your  words,  and  actions:  For,  if  a  perfon
“  has  committed  one  error,  either  through  delufion,  or  ne-
a  ceffity,  ought  he,  for  that  reafon,  to  aft  in  the  like  manner
u  in  every  thing  elfe;  on  the  contrary,  he  ought  to  remem-
“  ber  that  error,  and  to  conftder  by  what  means  his  future
u  condudl  may  not  refemble  his  former.  Thefe  are  the
u  refolutions  I  think  you  ought  all  of  you  in  general  to  take ;
iC  and  I  advife  you  to  be  prepared  againft  the  unwarrantable
“  deftres  of  power  in  the  people.

LII.  u  That  this  affair,  which  is  the  fubjedl  of  your
<c  prefent  coniideration,  is,  alfo,  of  the  fame  caft  with  their
u  other  unjuft,  and  illegal  attempts,  and  not,  as  the  tribune
“  endeavoured  to  prove  in  order  to  deceive  you,  a  juft,  and
“  reafonable  requeft,  let  thofe  among  you,  now,  learn,  who

“  are


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  E  NS  I  S.  229

“  are,  not  yet,  convinced  of  it.  The  law,  therefore,  relating
“  to  popular  judgements,  upon  which  Lucius  laid  the  greateft
£C  ftrefs,  was  not  enadted  againft  the  patricians,  but  for  the
“  fecurityof  fuch  plebeians,  as  are  oppreffed,  as  the  lawitfelf,
££  plainly,  fhews;  the  terms  of  which  admit  of  no  doubt :
££  And  you  yourfelves,  who  are,  perfectly,  acquainted  with
££  the  fenfeofthis  law,  with  great  unanimity,  always,  declare
££  it  to  be  fo.  And  this  is,  clearly,  evinced  by  time,  the  bed:
££  interpreter  of  every  ambiguous  law,  nineteen  years  being,
££  now,  paffed  fince  this  was  enabled  ;  during  all  which,
££  Lucius  cannot  produce  one  inftance  of  a  trial,  either
££  public,  or  private,  attempted  againft  any  patrician  in  virtue
££  of  this  law:  But,  if  he  will  fay  he  can,  let  him  produce  it,
££  and  the  debate  is  at  an  end.  As  to  the  late  agreement
“  you  entered  into  with  the  people,  it  is  necefiary  you  fhould
u  be  informed  of  its  tenor;  fince  the  tribune  has  fhewn
££  himfelf  an  ill  interpreter  of  it:  This  agreement  compre-
<c  hends  thefe  two  conceflions ;  that  the  plebeians  be  dif-
££  charged  of  their  debts,  and  that  this  magiftracy'  be,  an-
££  nually,  created  for  the  relief  of  the  opprefted,  and  the
££  prevention  of  injuftice,  and  for  no  other  purpofe  whatever,
££  But,  let  the  prefen t  condudl  of  the  people  themfelves  be
££  the  greateft  proof  to  you  that,  neither  the  law  before
££  mentioned,  nor  the  agreement,  have  given  them  the  power
£C  of  trying  a  patrician  :  For  they  afk  this  power  of  you  now,
££  as  not  being,  before,  intitled  to  it :  And  no  man  would
££  condefcend  to  receive  That  from  others  as  a  favor,  to
££  which  he  has  a  right  by  law.  And  how  can  this,  fathers,

££  be


cc


cc


230  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

“  be  an  unwritten  law  of  nature  (for  in  this  light,  alfo,

“  Lucius  defired  us  to  confider  it)  that  the  people  fhall  try
“  all  caufes,  in  which  the  plebeians  are  concerned,  whether
the  actions  are  brought  againft  them  by  the  patricians ;
££  or,  by  them,  againft  the  latter  :  And  that  the  patricians,
whether  plaintifs,  or  defendants  in  any  fuit  with  the
plebeians,  fhall  have  no  power  to  determine  thefe  contefts ;
“  but  that  the  advantage,  in  both  cafes,  be  given  to  the
u  people,  and  we  have  no  fhare  in  either  ?  If  Marcius,  or
u  any  other  patrician,  whofoever  he  be,  has  injured  the
C£  people,  and  deferves  either  death,  or  banifhment,  let  him
<£  be  punifhed  for  the  injury  he  has  done  them  ;  but  let  him
£C  not  be  tried  by  them,  but  in  this  place,  as  the  law  directs.
Unlefs  you  are  pleafed  to  fay,  Lucius,  that  the  people  will
act  the  part  of  an  impartial  judge,  and  fhew  no  favor  to
u  themfelves,  when  they  give  their  votes  againft  an  enemy ;
££  and  that  thefe,  if  they  are  fuffered  to  vote  in  his  cafe,  will
fhew  more  favor  to  the  guilty  man,  than  to  the  common¬
wealth,  that  fuffers  by  his  guilt,  when,  by  their  fentence,
€£  they  are  fure  to  draw  upon  themfelves  a  curfe,  the  infamy
€£  of  perjury,  the  deteftation  of  mankind,  and  the  anger  of
€£  the  gods,  and  to  live  in  expe&ation  of  mifery.  It  is  un-
££  worthy  of  you,  citizens,  to  entertain  thefe  thoughts  of  the
£  £  fenate,  to  whom  you  own  you  refign  honors,  magiftracies,
C£  and  the  greatefl  dignities  in  the  commonwealth,  on  ac-
t£  count  of  their  virtue,  and  fay  you  think  yourfelves  much
c£  obliged  to  them  for  the  zeal  they  expreffed  for  your  return :
u  Thefe  things  are  not  confiftent ;  neither  is  it  reafonable  that


sc


cc


fC


CC


cc


you


Book VIL  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARNASSENSIS.  231

<c  you  fhouldfear  thofe  you  commend,  and  intruft  the  fame
“  perfons  with  things  of  the  greateft  moment,  while  you
“  fufped  them  in  Thofe  of  lefs  confequence.  Why  do  you
<£  not  rather  all  agree  to  truft  them  with  every  thing,  or  to
cc  fufped  them  in  every  thing  ?  You  think  them  capable  of
“  making  a  previous  order  with  juftice,  but  not  of  judging
“  in  confequence  of  that  order.  I  had  many  other  things
“  to  fay  concerning  the  point  of  right,  fathers,  but  let  this
<c  fuffice.

L1II.  “  But,  fince  Lucius,  in  order  to  convince  us  of  the
<(  utility  of  this  meafure,  has  (hewn  how  advantageous  a
“  thing  union  is,  and  how  deftrudive,  fedition  ;  and  that,
cc  if  we  cultivate  the  people,  we  fhall  live  together  in  har-
“  mony  ;  but,  if  we  hinder  them  from  banifhing,  or  mur-
cc  dering  any  of  the  patricians  they  think  fit,  we  fhall  be
<c  involved  in  a  civil  war  ;  though  I  have  many  things  to
<c  fay  upon  this  head,  I  fhall  content  myfelf  with  very  few*
“  And  firft,  I  cannot  help  admiring  the  vanity  of  Lucius
a  (not  to  call  it  folly)  for  thinking  himfelf  a  better  judge  of
“  the  intereft  of  the  ftate,  though  juft  come  into  the  ad-
<c  miniftration  of  the  public  affairs,  than  we,  who  are  grown
“  old  in  it,  and  haveraifed  the  commonwealth,  from  being
<c  inconfiderable,  to  the  greatnefs  fhe,  now,  enjoys :  And,  in
<c  the  next  place,  for  imagining  he  could  perfuade  you  to
<c  deliver  up  any  man  to  his  enemies  to  be  punifhed  :  and,
“  particularly,  your  fellow-citizen,  a  perfon  of  no  fmali
“  diftindion,  or  merit;  but  one,  whom  you yourfelves  look
u  upon  as  famous  for  his  military  exploits,  moft  exemplary

“in


232  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.
u  in  his  private  life,  and  inferior  to  none  in  his  abilities  for
C£  civil  affairs.  And  thefe  things  he  has  dared  to  advance,
“  when  he  knows  you,  always,  fhew  the  greateft  refped  to
C£  fupplicants,  and  do  not,  even,  exclude  your  enemies,  who
££  fly  hither  for  refuge,  from  this  inftance  of  your  huma-
cc  nity.  If  you  knew  we  pradifed  the  contrary  of  all  thefe,
t£  Lucius;  entertained  impious  fentiments  concerning  the
££  gods;  were  guilty  of  injuftice  towards  men ;  what  adion
C£  more  infamous  than  this  could  you  have  advifed  us  to
££  fubrnit  to,  by  which  we  muft  incur  the  hatred  both  of
££  gods,  and  men,  and  be,  utterly,  and,  totally,  deftroyed?
££  We  want  not  your  advice,  Lucius,  either  in  delivering  up
££  any  of  our  citizens,  or  in  any  other  affair  we  have  to
<£  tranfad ;  neither  do  we,  who,  at  this  age,  have  had  fo
££  long  an  experience  both  of  good  and  bad  fortune,  think  we
££  ought  to  be  direded,  in  forming  a  judgement  of  our  own
<£  intereft,  by  the  prudence  of  young  men,  who  are  not  of
cc  our  own  body;  nor  do  we  fear  the  threats,  with  which  you
££  endeavour  to  terrify  us,  which  are  not,  now,  employed  by
££  you  for  the  firfl:  time  ;  but,  having  experienced  them
££  many  times,  and  urged  by  many  perfons,  we  fliall  treat
u  them  with  our  ufual  mildnefs,  and  bear  them  with  in-
££  trepidity:  And,  if  you  carry  your  threats  into  execution,

££  we  fhall  defend  ourfelves  with  the  afliftance  both  of  the

\

<£  gods,  who  are,  always,  enemies  to  the  aggreflbrs  in  an
£C  unjufi:  war,  and  of  men,  no  fmall  number  of  whom  will
££  fupport  our  caufe :  For,  all  the  Latines,  to  whom  we,
c£  lately,  granted  the  rights  of  Roman  citizens,  will  declare

££  for


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  233

“  for  us,  and  fight  for  this  city,  as  for  a  country,  now,  their
<c  own ;  and  the  many  fiourifhing  colonies  we  have  planted,
u  zealous  for  the  prefervation  of  their  mother  city,  will  fly
cc  to  her  defence.  And,  if  you  reduce  us  to  the  neceffity  of
<c  embracing  every  kind  of  afliftance,  we  will  fubmit,  Lucius,
“  to  invite  even  our  fiaves  to  liberty ;  our  enemies  to  friend-
“  fhip ;  and  all  mankind  to  a  fhare  in  our  hopes  of  victory ;
u  and  then  ingage  you:  But,  O  Jupiter,  and  all  ye  gods,
“  who  guard  this  city,  may  there  be  no  occafion  for  any
“  thing  of  this  kind ;  may  thefe  terrible  threats  go  no  far-
“  ther  than  words,  and  produce  no  difagreeable  effetft !  ”

LIV.  Thus  Appius  fpoke  ;  when  Manius  Valerius,  who
was  the  greateft  friend  to  the  people  of  all  the  fenators,  and
had  fhewn  the  greateft  zeal  for  the  accommodation,  upon
this  occafion  alfo,  openly,  efpoufed  their  intereft ;  and  made
a  ftudied  fpeech,  in  which  he  cenfured  thofe  fenators,  who
would  not  fuffer  the  commonwealth  to  remain  united,  but
fought  to  divide  the  plebeians  from  the  patricians ;  and,
for  trifling  caufes,  to  rekindle  the  fire  of  a  civil  war  :  He,
then,  commended  thofe,  who  looked  upon  the  only  advan¬
tage  in  queftion  to  be  22  That  of  the  public,  and  thought
every  confideration  fliould  give  way  to  an  union  of  all  the
citizens ;  and  told  them  that,  if  the  people  obtained  the
power  they  defired  of  trying  this  man,  and  received  this
favor,  alfo,  from  the  confent  of  the  fenate,  they  would,
poflibly,  not  even  proceed  to  extremities;  but,  fatisfied

**•  To  jcoivov.  Inftead  of  ftrikingout  if  he  had  feen  the  Vatican  manufcript,
r^i,  with  Portus,  I  have  fubftituted  to  which  has  h  to  o-v^e^ov,  he  would
in  its  place ;  and  am  apt  to  think  that,  have  done  the  fame.

Vol.  III.  H  h  -  with


234  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I T I E  S  OF  Book  VII.

with  having  him  in  their  power,  would  treat  him  with  lenity,
rather  than  feverity  :  However,  if  the  tribunes  fhould,  by
all  means,  infift  on  their  proceeding  to  judgement,  and  put
it  in  their  power  to  give  their  votes,  they  would  acquit  him,
as  well  from  their  refped:  to  the  perfon  himfelf,  then  in  dan¬
ger,  whofe  many  brave  actions  they  might  remember,  as
to  return  the  favor  of  the  fenate,  who  had  granted  them  this
power,  and  had  oppofed  them  in  nothing,  that  was  reafon-
able:  And  he  advifed  the  confuls,  and  all  the  fenators,
together  with  the  reft  of  the  patricians,  to  be  prefent,  in
a  body,  at  the  trial,  and  to  affift  Marcius  in  making  his
defence,  and  intreat  the  people  to  come  to  no  fevere  refo-
lution  againft  him  (for  he  affured  them  that  the  prefence
of  thefe  would  be  of  no  frnall  weight  to  facilitate  his
acquittal)  and  that  they  fhould  affift  him,  not  only,  in  their
own  perfons,  but  that  each  of  them  fhould  ingage  their  own
clients,  and  affemble  their  friends ;  and,  if  they  thought
that  any  of  the  plebeians  were  attached  to  them  from  the
obligations  they  had  received  from  them,  they  fhould  folicit
thefe,  and  defire  they  would  ffiew  their  gratitude  for  former
favors,  when  they  came  to  give  their  votes.  He  told  them,
alfo,  there  would  be  many  among  the  people,  who  were
lovers  of  their  country,  enemies  to  all  injuftice,  and  men  of
worth;  and  frill  more,  who  would  be  moved  with  the
viciffitude  of  human  affairs,  and  know  how  to  compaffionate
men  of  dignity,  when  humbled  by  fortune.  But  the  greateft
part  of  his  difcourfe  was  addreffed  to  Marcius  himfelf,  in
which  he  joined  an  exhortation  to  a  re mon (trance,  and

intreaty


BookVir.  DIONYSIUS  HA  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  235

in  treaty  to  neceftity  :  For  he  begged  of  him,  iince  he  was
accufed  of  dividing  the  people  from  the  fenate,  and,  alfo,
charged  with  being  tyrannical  by  reafon  of  his  haughty
behaviour,  and  that  all  men  were  afraid  left,  through  his
means,  caufe  fhould  be  given  for  fedition,  and  for  all  the  irre¬
parable  mifchiefs,  which  flow  from  civil  wars,  that  he  would
not  verify,  and  give  a  fandtion  to,  thefe  accufations  againft
himfelf,  by  perfevering  in  his  invidious  behaviour,  but
change  it  to  an  humble  deportment ;  fubmit  his  perfon  to  the
power  of  thofe,  who  complained  of  being  injured,  and  not
decline  to  clear  himfelf  of  an  unjuft  charge  by  a  juft  defence  :
For  thefe  meafures,  he  told  him,  were  the  moft  fafe  with
regard  to  his  prefervation ;  and,  with  regard  to  the  glory
he  aimed  at,  the  moft  illuftrious,  and  of  the  fame  tenor  with
the  great  adtions  he  had,  already,  performed  :  Whereas,  if
he  fhould  adt  with  greater  pride,  than  moderation,  and  deftre
the  fenate  to  expofe  themfelves  to  every  danger  for  his  fake,
he  fliewed  him  that  he  would  be  the  caufe  either  of  an
unhappy  defeat,  or  of  an  opprobrious  vidtory  to  thofe,  who
had  fuffered  themfelves  to  be  perfuaded  by  him.  And,  upon
this  occaflon,  he  laid  himfelf  out  in  lamentations,  and
enumerated  the  moft  conftderable,  and  the  moft  obvious
misfortunes,  to  which  commonwealths  are  expofed  through
diflentions.

LV.  Thefe  things  having  been  uttered  with  many  real,
not  feigned,  and  affedted  tears,  by  a  man,  eminent  for  the
dignity  both  of  his  age,  and  virtue,  the  fenate  was  moved
with  his  difcourfe;  which  he  obferving,  proceeded  with

H  h  2  greater


236  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookVII.

greater  confidence  :  <c  But,  fays  he,  if  any  of  you,  fathers,
*c  are  alarmed  with  an  apprehenfion  that  you  will  introduce
C(  a  pernicious  cuftom  into  the  commonwealth,  if  you  grant
“  the  people  a  power  of  giving  their  fuffrages  againft  the
u  patricians,  and  entertain  an  opinion  that  the  tribunitian
“  power,  if  confiderably  ftrengthened,  will  prove  of  no
<c  advantage,  let  them  learn  that  their  opinion  is  erroneous,
cc  and  their  imagination  contrary  to  found  reafoning:  For,
<c  if  any  meafure  can  tend  to  preferve  this  commonwealth,
“  to  affure  both  her  liberty,  and  power,  and  to  eftablifh  a
tc  perpetual  union,  and  harmony  in  all  things,  the  moft
“  effectual  will  be  to  give  the  people  a  fhare  in  the  govern-
u  ment :  And  the  moft  advantageous  thing  to  us  will  be,
u  not  to  have  a  fimple,  and  unmixed  form  of  government,
iC  neither  23  a  monarchy,  an  oligarchy,  nor  a  democracy,


23*  I7oAi7«av  uxgcJov,  jUj/kMONAPXIAN,
jurji  ohiyaqx »av,  ju>j7e  Jtjucx.guha.v.  I  am
very  much  furprifed  that  none  of  the
learned  men,  who  have  bellowed  their
pains  upon  Dionyfius,  faw  the  necef-
fity  of  adding  y.o\u^x ,oivi  which  is  o-
mitted  in  all  the  ed  tions,  and  manu-
feripts.  Without  this  addition,  our
author’s  language  is  not  Greek,  and
his  reafoning  is  im perfect.  The  firft
of  thefe  alfertions  will  appear,  when
it  is  confidered  that,  after  he  has  men¬
tioned  thefe  different  forms  of  govern¬
ment,  he  fays,  AIlAZflN  ts /!«»

xsoicriv  whereas,  if  he  had  fpoken
but  of  two,  he  would  have  faid,
£tju$oltgot)v  txIwv.  Again,  inllead  of  rs flav
EKAZTON  twv  zvoAilivjualwv,  he  would
have  faid  hcchfov,  if  he  had,  before,
mentioned  but  two  forts  of  govern¬


ment.  I  lhall,  now,  defire  the  reader
to  confider  the  context.  Our  author*
in  the  next  paragraph,  fhews  by  what
means  the  excelfes  of  monarchy,  oli¬
garchy,  and  democracy  may  be  cor-
redled,  and  begins  with  monarchy*
This  I  mull  think  very  abfurd,  if  he
had  no*,  before,  mentioned  it.  But
he  goes  on,  and  fays,  the  Romans  had
taken  all  polfible  care  that  the  monar¬
chical  power  Ihouldnot  degenerate  into
tyranny,  by  invelting  two  perfons  with,
it,  inllead  of  one,  and  by  confiningthe
exercife  of  it  to  a  year ;  and,  then,
proceeds  to  the  properell  methods  of
preferving  both  the  fenate  from  a  lu¬
xurious  abufe  of  power,  and  the  peo¬
ple  from  licentioufnefs.  This  recapi¬
tulation  I  think,  plainly  proves  that,
in  deferibing  the  different  forms  of

“  but


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I S.  237
<c  but  a  conditution  tempered  with  all  of  them  :  For  each
u  of  thefe  forms,  when  fimple,  very  eafily  deviates  into
u  abufe,  and  excefs ;  but,  when  all  of  them  are,  equally,
“  mixed,  that  part,  which  happens  to  innovate,  and  to  ex-
ceed  the  cudomary  bounds,  is,  always,  reftrained  by  an-
*  other,  that  is  fober,  and  adheres  to  the  edablifhed  order,
“  Thus  monarchy,  when  it  becomes  cruel  and  infolent,  and
u  begins  to  purfue  tyrannical  meafures,  is  fubverted  by  an
“  oligarchy  confiding  of  good  men:  And  an  oligarchy,
“  compofed  of  the  bed  men,  which  is  your  form  of  govern-
“  ment,  when,  elated  with  riches,  and  dependants,  it  pays
<c  no  regard  to  judice,  or  to  any  other  virtue,  is  dedroyed
“  by  a  wife  people :  And,  in  a  democracy,  when  the  people,
“  from  being  moded  in  their  deportment,  and  obfervant  of
“  the  laws,  begin  to  run  into  diforders,  and  excefies,  they
u  are  forced  to  return  to  their  duty  by  the  power,  with
“  which,  upon  thofe  occafions,  the  bed  man  of  the  com-
<c  monwealth  is  inveded.  You,  fathers,  have  ufed  all  pod
cc  fible  precautions  to  prevent  monarchical  power  from  de-
cc  generating  into  tyranny  :  For,  indead  of  a  fingle  perfon,
cc  you  have  inveded  two  with  the  fupreme  power ;  and,
“  though  you  committed  this  magidracy  to  them  not  for

government  at  firft,  he  did  not  omit  rived  this  true  political  fyftem  ;  that
monarchy.  Upon  the  whole,  if  the  every  one  of  them,  when  fimple,  and
reader  pleafes  to  call  his  eye  upon  the  unmixed,  which  the  former  calls,  very
fixth  book  of m  Polybius,  he  will  there  properly,  octtMv  kou  i uovoeifo,  is  faulty
find  the  fame  reafoning  upon  the  and  that  the  only  perfeft  form  is  That,
threeforms  of  government, from  which  which  confifts  in  an  union  of  all  three „
reafoning  our  author,  probably,  de-

,n  P-  459-

u  an


238  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

££  an  indefinite  time,  but  only  for  a  year,  you,  neverthe-
tl  lefs,  appointed  three  hundred  patricians,  the  moft  re-
“  fpe&able  both  for  their  virtue,  and  their  age,  of  whom
“  this  fenate  is  compofed,  to  watch  over  their  conduct :  But
££  you  do  not  feem,  hitherto,  to  have  appointed  any  to
££  watch  over  your  own,  and  to  keep  you  within  proper
“  bounds.  As  for  yourfelves,  I  am,  as  yet,  under  no  appre-
£C  henfions  left  you  fhould  fuffer  your  minds  to  be  corrupted
“  by  great,  and  accumulated  profperity,  who  have,  lately,
<c  delivered  your  country  from  a  long  tyranny;  and,  through
“  continual,  and  lafting  wars,  have  not,  as  yet,  had  leifure
££  to  grow  infolent,  and  luxurious ;  but,  with  regard  to  your
u  fucceflors,  when  I  confider  how  great  alterations  length
££  of  time  brings  with  it,  I  am  afraid  left  the  men  of  power
££  in  the  fenate  fhould  innovate,  and,  filently,  transform  our
“  conftitution  to  a  monarchical  tyranny.

LVI.  <£  Whereas,  if  you  admit  the  people  to  a  fhare  in
££  the  government,  no  mifchief  can  fpring  from  the  fenate  ;
“  but  the  man,  who  aims  at  greater  power  than  the  reft  of
“  his  fellow- citizens,  and  has  formed  a  faction  in  the  fenate
u  of  all,  who  are  willing  to  partake  of  his  counfels,  and  his
<£  crimes  (for  thofe,  who  deliberate  concerning  public  affairs,
££  ought  to  forefee  every  thing,  that  is  probable)  this  great,
C£  this  awful  perfon,  I  fay,  when  called  upon  by  the  tri—
££  bunes  to  appear  before  the  people,  muft  give  an  account
££  both  of  his  actions,  and  thoughts  to  this  people,  incon-
<£  fiderable  as  they  are,  and  fo  much  his  inferiors;  and,
“  if  found  guilty,  fuffer  the  puniftiment  he  deferves.  And,

££  left


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  239

“  left  the  people  themfelves,  when  vefted  with  fo  m-eat  a
“  power,  mould  grow  wanton  ;  and,  feduced  by  the  worft
C£  of  demagogues,  become  dangerous  to  the  heft  citizens
“  (for  the  multitude,  generally,  give  birth  to  tyranny)  feme
“  perfon  of  confummate  prudence,  created  dictator  by  you r-
“  felves,  will  guard  againft  this  evil,  and  not  allow  them  to
S£  run  into  excefs ;  and,  being  inverted  with  abfolute  power,
££  and  fubjetrt  to  no  account,  will  cut  off  the  infe&ed  part
“  of  the  commonwealth,  and  not  fuffer  That,  which  is  not
££  yet  inhered,  to  be  vitiated  ;  reform  the  laws ;  excite  the
££  citizens  to  virtue,  and  appoint  fuch  magiftrates,  as  he
££  thinks  will  govern  with  the  greateft  prudence;  and,  hav-
c£  ing  effected  thefe  things  within  the  (pace  of  fix  months,
“  he  will,  again,  become  a  private  man,  without  receiving
C£  any  other  reward  for  thefe  actions,  than  That  of  being
C£  honoured  for  having  performed  them.  Induced,  therefore,
££  by  thefe  confiderations,  and  convinced  that  this  is  the
££  moft  perfect  form  of  government,  debar  the  people  from
££  nothing  ;  but,  as  you  have  granted  them  a  power  of
££  chufing  the  annual  magiftrates,  who  are  to  prefide  over
££  the  commonwealth ;  of  confirming,  and  repealing,  laws;

££  of  declaring  war,  and  making  peace  ;  which  are  the
u  greateft,  and  the  moft  important  affairs,  that  come  under
£C  theconfiderationof  our  government,  notone  of  which  you
££  have  fubmitted  to  the  abfolute  determination  of  the  fe~

£C  nate,  allow  them,  in  like  manner,  the  power  of  trying
££  offenders,  particularly  fuch,  as  are  accufed  of  crimes
££  againft  the  ftate,  of  railing  a  fedition,  of  aiming  at  ty-

u  rannv


240  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  T  IE  S  OF  Book  VII.

€*  ranny,  of  concerting  meafures  with  our  enemies  to  betray
<£  the  commonwealth,  or  of  any  other  crimes  of  the  like
“  nature :  For,  the  more  formidable  you  render  the  tranf-
“  grefiion  of  the  laws,  and  the  alteration  of  difcipline,  by
“  appointing  many  infpedtors,  and  many  guards  over  the
cc  infolent,  and  the  ambitious,  the  more  will  your  conftitu-
u  tion  be  improved.”

LVIL  After  he  had  faid  this,  and  other  things  to  the
fame  purpofe,  he  ended.  And  the  reft  of  the  fenators,  who
rofe  up  after  him,  except  a  few,  concurred  with  him  in
opinion.  When  the  previous  order  of  the  fenate  was  to  be
drawn  up,  Marcius  defired  leave  to  fpeak,  and  faid  :  “You
“  all  know,  fathers,  in  what  manner  I  have  adted  with  re-
“  gard  to  the  commonwealth;  that  my  zeal  for  your  in-
“  tereft  has  brought  me  into  this  danger,  and  that  your
<c  behaviour  to  me  upon  this  occafton  is  contrary  to  my
cc  expectation  ;  and  you  will,  ftill,  be  more  convinced  of
“  this,  when  my  affair  is  determined.  However,  ftnce  the
“  opinion  of  Valerius  prevails,  may  thefe  meafures  prove  of
“  advantage  to  you,  and  may  I  form  a  wrong  judgement  of
“  future  events.  But,  that  you,  who  are  to  draw  up  the
“  previous  order,  may  know  upon  what  terms  you  are  going
“  to  deliver  me  up  to  the  people  ;  and  that  I  myfelf  may,
“  alfo,  know  for  what  I  am  to  be  tried,  I  defire  you  will
“  order  the  tribunes  to  declare,  in  your  prefence,  what  the
cc  crime  is  they  defign  to  accufe  me  of,  and  what  kind  of
“  title  they  will  give  to  thecaufe.”


LVIII.


Book  VIL  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SE NS  I S.  241

LVIII.  He  faid  this  from  an  opinion  that  he  was  to  be
tried  for  the  words  he  had  fpoken  in  the  fenate  ;  and,  alfo,
from  a  defire  that  the  tribunes  might  acknowledge  they  de~
figned  to  ground  their  accufation  on  them.  But  the  tribunes,
alter  confulting  together,  declared  they  accufed  him  of  aim¬
ing  at  tyranny ;  and  ordered  him  to  prepare  himfelf  to  make
his  defence  againft  that  charge :  For  they  were  unwilling
to  confine  their  accufation  to  one  article,  and  That,  neither
ftrong  in  itfelf,  nor  acceptable  to  the  fenate ;  but  chofe
rather  to  leave  to  themfelves  a  latitude  of  accufing  him  of
what  they  fhould  think  fit :  By  which  means,  they  expe&ed
to  deprive  Marcius  of  the  afiiftance  of  the  fenators.  Upon
which,  Marcius  faid  ;  “If  this  is  the  crime  I  am  to  be  tried
“  for,  I  fubmit  myfelf  to  the  judgement  of  the  plebeians,
“  and  let  the  previous  order  be  drawn  up  without  oppofi-
“  tion.”  The  greateft  part  of  the  fenators  were  well  pleafed
that  he  was  to  be  tried  upon  this  charge,  for  two  reafons ;
the  firft,  that,  from  thenceforward,  it  would  not  be  criminal
for  any  perfon  to  deliver  his  fentiments,  freely,  in  the  fenate ;
and  the  other,  that  Marcius,  whofe  courfe  of  life  had,  al¬
ways,  been  modeft  and  irreprehenfible,  would,  eaiily,  clear
himfelf  of  that  accufation.  After  this,  the  previous  order  for
the  trial  was  drawn  up;  and  Marcius  had  time  given  him
to  prepare  for  his  defence  till  the  third  market  day  :  For  the
Romans  had,  then,  markets,  as  they  now  have,  every  ninth
day ;  and,  upon  thefe  days,  the  plebeians  reforted  to  the
city  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  exchanged  the  product
of  their  lands  for  what  they  wanted ;  decided  their  contefls
Vol.  III.  I  i


in


242  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

in  a  judicial  way, and,  by  their  votes,  gave  their  fan&ion  to  thofe
public  affairs,  which  either  the  laws  fubmitted,  or  the  fenate
referred,  to  their  determination  :  And,  as  the  greateft  part
of  them  were  employed  in  labor,  and  poor,  they  paffed  the
interval,  confifting  of 24  feven  days,  in  the  country.  As  foon,
therefore,  as  the  tribunes  received  the  previous  order  of  the
fenate,  they  went  to  the  forum  ;  and,  calling  the  people
together,  gave  great  commendations  to  the  fenate ;  and,
having  read  the  order,  they  appointed  the  day  for  the  trial,
at  which  they  defired  all  the  citizens  to  be  prefent,  as  affairs
of  the  greateft  moment  would,  then,  be  fubmitted  to  their
deliberation.

LIX.  When  thefe  tranfacfions  came  to  be  divulged,
the  plebeians,  and  patricians  appeared  againft  one  an¬
other  with  great  zeal,  and  oppolition  ;  the  former  defiring


24*  Enla,  yfAtpoit.  Cafaubon,  and,  af¬
ter  him,  M.  *  *  *,  fay  that  either  our
author,  or  the  tranfcriber,  has,  by  mif-
take,  faid  eirlx,  inftead  of  ox la>,  which,
they  fay,  is  the  true  reading.  In  this  I
cannot  agree  with  them  •,  becaufe,  as
the  Nundinae ,  among  the  Romans,  were
held  every  ninth  day,  it  is  plain  there
could  be  but  feven  days  between  each.
And,  that  the  Romans  underftood  it
fo  themfelves,  I  fhall  prove  from  un¬
doubted  authority.  n  Varro,  in  {peak¬
ing  of  the  encouragement  given  to
agriculture  in  the  early  days  of  the
commonwealth,  fays  •,  Itaque  ( major es
nojlri )  annum  ita  diviferunt ,  ut  nonis
modo  diebus  urbanas  res  ufurparent ,  re-
liquis  feptem  ut  rura  colerent.  The


nundinal  letters  were  the  eight  firft
letters  of  the  alphabet  ;  and,  in  what¬
ever  year,  the  A  was  the  firft  nundi¬
nae,  every  nundinae  in  that  year  fell
upon  an  A  •,  and,  going  round  from
A  to  A,  it  is  plain  that  there  were  no
more  than  feven  intervening  letters.
The  dominical  letters,  being  the  feven
firft  letters  of  the  alphabet,  were,  with
many  other  things,  borrowed  from  the
old  Romans  by  the  Chriftians ;  and,
in  whatever  year,  the  firft  Sunday
falls  upon  an  A,  every  Sunday  in  that
year  will,  alfo,  fall  upon  an  A  *,  and
it  is  equally  plain,  that,  from  A  to
A,  there  are  no  more  than  fix  inter¬
vening  days.


PB.  ii.  De  Re  Pecuavia.  In  the  preface.


to


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSENSIS.  243

to  chaftife  the  moft  arrogant  of  all  men ;  and  the  latter  to
prevent  the  champion  of  the  ariftocracy  from  falling  a  victim
to  his  enemies ;  both  parties  looking  upon  their  preservation,
and  their  liberty  to  depend  upon  the  event  of  this  trial.
When  the  third  market  day  was  come,  there  was  fuch  a
concourfe  of  people  from  the  country,  as  had,  never  before,
been  known,  who  got  pofleffion  of  the  forum  by  break  of
day.  The  tribunes,  then,  caufed  the  people  to  affemble  in
their  tribes,  having,  beforehand,  divided  the  forum  with
ropes,  and  appointed  a  feperate  ftand  for  each  tribe.  And
this  was  the  25  firft  time  the  people  of  Rome  were  ever


a5*  Ktfi  role  uTowlov  lytvilo  P ujuouotg

ux.A>i<rix  n  cpvAthw.  Our  author  fliews
the  difference  between  the  comitia  cen-
turiata ,  and  tributa ,  to  fully,  together
with  the  reafons,  which  induced  the
tribunes  to  infift  upon  the  latter,  that
it  would  be  to  very  little  purpofe  to
add  any  thing  to  what  he  has  faid  upon
this  fubje£t  •,  particularly,  fince  0 1  have
treated  it  at  large  upon  another  occa-
fion.  I  {hall,  therefore,  only  fay  that,
by  the  inftitution  of  the  comitia  tributa ,
the  people  were  reftored  to  a  right
they  had,  ever,  enjoyed  from  the  foun¬
dation  of  their  city,  till  they  were  de¬
prived  of  it  by  Servius  Tullius,  when
he  introduced  the  comitia  centuriata  •,
which,  however  reafonable  in  other
refpeds,  were,  moil  certainly,  injuri¬
ous  to  the  people,  as  to  their  right  of
voting:  For,  till  then,  the  only  comitia
were  the  curiata ,  in  which  the  vote  of
every  Roman  citizen  was  of  equal  im¬
portance  :  The  majority  of  the  curiae
carried  every  queftion  -,  £nd  the  ma¬


jority  of  fingle  votes  determined  the
vote  of  every  curia.  Whereas,  in  the
comitia  centuriata ,  the  firft  clafs,  which
confifted  alone  of  eighty  centuries  of
foot,  and  eighteen  of  horfe,  all  com-
pofed  of  the  richeft  fubjedls  of  the
commonwealth,  made  a  majority  of
three :  Confequently,  if  they  all  agreed,
it  was  to  no  purpofe  to  take  the  votes
of  the  remaining  ninety  five  centuries:
By  which  method  ofvoting,the  follow¬
ing  clafles  werefeldom,  and  the  inferior
claffes,  fcarce  ever,  called  upon  to  give
their  votes.  As  to  the  comitia  tributa ,
the  citizens  voted  in  thefe,  as  they  did
in  the  comitia  curiata  :  The  majority  of
tribes  was  concluiive  ;  and  the  vote
of  every  tribe  was  known  by  the  ma¬
jority  of  fingle  votes  in  that  tribe.  By
this  detail,  it  appears  that,  by  the  in¬
ftitution  of  xhe  tributa  comitia ,  the
people  gained  no  new  right;  but  were,
only,  reftored  to  a  right  their  anceftors
had,  before,  enjoyed.


See  the  izzA  annotation  on  the  fecond  book.

I  i  2


afiembled


244  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

aflembled  in  their  tribes  to  give  their  votes.  This  the  pa¬
tricians,  violently,  oppofed,  and  infifted  on  their  affembling
the  people  in  their  centuries,  according  to  the  eftabliilied
cuftom  :  For,  before  that  time,  when  the  people  were  to
give  their  votes  upon  any  point  referred  to  them  by  the
feriate,  the  confuls  aflembled  them  in  their  centuries,  after
they  had  offered  up  the  facrifices  appointed  by  law ;  and,
to  this  day,  feme  of  thefe  are  performed  :  Then  the  people
aflembled  in  the  field  of  Mars,  before  the  city,  drawn  up  under
their  centurions,  and  their  enfigns,  as  in  war  :  They  did
not  give  their  votes  promifeuoufly,  but  each  in  their  refp ac¬
tive  centuries,  when  called  upon  by  the  confuls:  And
there  being,  in  all,  one  hundred  and  ninety  three  centuries,
and  thefe  diftributed  into  fix  claffes,  that  clafs  was  firft
called,  and  gave  its  vote,  which  confifted  of  thofe  citizens,
whofe  fortunes  wTere  of  the  greateft  value  upon  the  regifter,
and  who  flood  in  the  foremoft  rank  in  battle :  In  this  were
comprifed  eighteen  centuries  of  horfe,  and  eighty  of  foot :
The  clafs,  that  voted  in  the  fecond  place,  was  compofed  of
thofe  of  inferior  fortunes,  whofe  poft,  in  a&ions,  was  in  the
fecond  rank,  and  who  were  armed  in  a  different,  and  lighter
manner,  than  thofe  in  the  firft  rank ;  all  thefe  formed  twenty
centuries,  and  to  them  were  added  two  centuries  of  carpen¬
ters,  and  armourers,  and  other  artificers  employed  in  making
warlike  engines :  Thofe  who  were  called  to  vote  in  the  third
clafs,  completed  twenty  centuries ;  thefe  had  fmaller  fortunes,
than  thofe  of  the  fecond  clafs,  and  were  ported  behind  them,
and  not  armed  like  thofe  of  the  fecond  rank :  The  next

“  called.


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI CA  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  245
called,  were  inferior  in  fortune  to  the  laft,  and  had  a  fafer
poft:  in  battle,  and  their  armour  was  more  calculated  for
expedition:  Thefe,  alfo,  were  divided  into  twenty  centuries ;
and  to  them  were  added  two  centuries  of  blowers  on  the
horn,  and  trumpeters :  The  clafs,  which  was  called  in  the
fifth  place,  confifted  of  fuch,  as  had  very  fmall  fortunes ;
and  whofe  arms  were  javelins,  and  flings  :  Thefe  had  no
certain  poft,  when  the  army  was  drawn  up  ;  but,  being
light  armed  men,  and  prepared  for  expedition,  they  attended
the  heavy  armed  men,  and  were  diftributed  into  thirty  cen¬
turies  :  The  pooreft  of  the  citizens,  who  were  not  lefs  nu¬
merous  than  all  the  reft,  voted  laft,  and  made  but  one  cen¬
tury  :  Thefe  were  exempt  from  ferving  in  the  army,  and
from  the  taxes  paid  by  the  reft  of  the  citizens  in  propor¬
tion  to  their  pofieflions ;  and,  for  both  thefe  reafons,  their
fuffrages  were  of  the  leaft  weight.  If,  therefore,  ninety  feven
of  the  firft  centuries,  which  confifted  of  the  horfe,  and  of
fuch  of  the  foot,  as  flood  in  the  firft  rank  in  time  of  acftion,
were  of  the  fame  opinion,  the  poll  was  at  an  end,  and  the
remaining  ninety  fix  centuries  were  not  called  to  give  their
votes :  But,  if  it  were  otherwife,  the  fecond  clafs,  compofed
of  twenty  two  centuries,  was  called,  and,  then  the  third  ;
and  fo  on,  till  ninety  feven  centuries  were  of  the  fame  opi¬
nion  :  Generally  the  points  in  difpute,  were  determined  by
the  votes  of  the  firft  clafies :  So  that,  it  was  needlefs  to  take
Thofe  of  the  laft.  And  it  feldom  happened  that  a  point  was
fo  doubtful,  as  to  make  it  neceflary  to  have  recourfe  to  the
votes  of  the  pooreft  citizens,  of  whom  the  laft  clafs  was

com-


246  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

compofed  :  But,  if  the  firft  hundred  and  ninety  two  centuries
were,  equally,  divided,  the  laft  vote,  added  to  either  fide,
was  in  the  nature  of  a  final  determination,  and  turned  the
fcale.  The  advocates,  therefore,  of  Marcius  defired  that  this
kind  of  affembly,  founded  on  the  pofleffions  of  the  citizens,
might  be  called,  from  an  expectation  that  he  might,  poffibly,
be  acquitted,  upon  the  firft  call,  by  the  ninety  eight  centuries ;
if  not,  at  leaft  upon  the  fecond,  or  third.  On  the  other  fide,
the  tribunes,  fufpeCting  this,  thought  it  their  intereft  to  call
an  affembly  of  the  people  in  their  tribes,  and  to  impower
that  kind  of  affembly  to  decide  this  caufe  ;  to  the  end,  that
neither  the  poor  might  be  in  a  worfe  condition,  than  the
rich  ;  nor  the  light  armed  men  be  placed  in  a  lefs  honour¬
able  ftation,  than  the  heavy  armed ;  nor  the  body  of  the
people,  by  being  thrown  off  to  the  laft  calls,  ftand  excluded
from  an  equality  of  fuffrage  :  But  that,  all  the  citizens
might  be  equal  in  their  votes,  and  equal  in  their  ranks,  and,
at  one  call,  give  their  votes  in  their  tribes.  The  claim  of
the  tribunes  feemed  to  be  the  beft  founded ;  becaufe  they
contended  that  the  tribunal  of  the  people  ought  to  be  a
popular,  not  an  oligarchical,  tribunal,  and  that  the  cogni¬
zance  of  crimes  committed  againft  the  commonwealth  ought
to  be  common  to  all.

LX.  The  tribunes  having  obtained  this,  alfo,  from  the
patricians,  though  not  without  difficulty,  when  it  was  time
for  the  trial  to  begin,  Minucius,  one  of  the  confuls,  was  the
firft  perfon,  who  afcended  the  roftrum,  and  fpoke  in  the
manner  the  fenate  had  directed  him  :  And  firft,  he  put  the

people


Book VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  247

people  in  mind  of  all  the  benefits  they  had  received  from  the
patricians;  then  he  defired  that,  in  return  for  fo  many  good
offices,  the  people  would  grant  them  one  favor,  which  they
were  under  a  neceffity  of  requefting,  as  it  would  tend  to  the
good  of  the  commonwealth.  After  this,  he  difplayed  the
advantages  of  concord,  and  peace,  (hewing  the  great  hap-
pinefs,  which  each  of  them  brought  to  every  government ;
and  inveighed  againft  difcord,  and  civil  wars,  by  which,  he
told  them,  many  cities  had  been  deftroyed,  with  all  their
inhabitants,  and  whole  nations  extirpated :  He  exhorted
them  not  to  indulge  their  refentment  fo  far,  as  to  prefer
deftrudlive,  to  falutary,  counfels,  but,  with  calm  reafon,  to
contemplate  future  events,  nor  to  take  the  word;  of  their
fellow- citizens  for  their  advifers  in  affairs  of  the  greateft
importance ;  but  thofe  they  efteemed  the  beft,  from  whom
they  knew  their  country  had  received  many  advantages  both
in  peace,  and  war,  and  whom,  as  if  their  natures  were
changed,  they  would  not  think  it  reafonable  to  diftruft.
However,  the  (ingle  aim  of  his  whole  difcourfe  was  to  per-
fuade  them  to  pafs  no  vote  againft  Marcius ;  but  to  acquit
the  man,  for  his  own  fake,  particularly  when  they  remem¬
bered  in  what  manner  he  had  adted  with  regard  to  the
commonwealth,  and  how  many  battles  he  had  gained  in
fighting  for  her  liberty,  and  fovereignty;  and  that  they  would
adt  neither  with  piety,  juft  ice,  nor  a  due  regard  to  themfelves,
if  they  refented  his  unguarded  words,  and  were  ungrateful
to  his  glorious  adtions :  This,  he  told  them,  was  the  proper

feafon  for  them  to  acquit  him,  when  he  himfelf  was  come

t©


248  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.
to  yield  up  his  perfon  to  his  adverfaries,  and  was  ready  to
acquiefce  in  whatever  they  fhould  think  fit  to  determine :
But,  if  it  was  impoflible  for  them  to  be  reconciled  to  him,
and  they,  itill,  continued  fevere  and  inexorable,  he  defired
them  to  confider  that  the  fenate,  confifting  of  three  hundred,
all  the  beft  men  of  the  city,  were  come  to  intercede  for  him,
and  begged  of  them  to  feel  fome  compaffion,  and  relent ;  and
not,  for  the  fake  of  punifhing  one  enemy,  to  rejedt  the  in-
terceffion  of  fo  many  friends ;  but  to  difregard  the  chaftife-
ment  of  a  fingle  man,  in  favor  of  fo  many  worthy  perfons.
Having  faid  this,  and  many  things  to  the  fame  purpofe,  he
ended  his  fpeech  with  this  fuggeftion  ;  that,  if  they  acquitted
the  man  by  their  votes,  it  would  be  looked  upon  that  they
acquitted  him  becaufe  they  thought  him  not  guilty  of  any
crime  towards  the  people ;  but,  if  they  put  a  ftop  to  the  pro¬
ceedings,  they  would  appear  to  have  gratified  his  interceflors.

LXL  When  Minucius  had  done  fpeaking,  Sicinnius,  the
tribune,  prefented  himfelf,  and  faid,  that  he  would  neither
betray  the  liberty  of  the  plebeians  himfelf,  nor,  willingly,
fuffer  others  to  betray  it :  But,  if  the  patricians,  really,  con-
fented  that  the  man  fhould  be  tried  by  the  plebeians,  he
would  take  their  votes,  and  do  nothing  more.  After  this,
Minucius  advancing,  faid  :  “  Since,  tribunes,  you  defire,  at
“  all  events,  that  the  people  fhould  give  their  votes  con-
C(  cerning  this  man,  confine  yourfelves  to  the  charge  you
“  have  brought  againft  him ;  and,  as  you  have  alledged  that
€C  he  aims  at  tyranny,  fhew  this,  and  bring  your  evidence  to
a  prove  it ;  but  neither  mention,  nor  charge  him  with,  the

“  words


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  249

“  words  you  accufe  him  of  having  fpoken  in  the  fenate
“  again  ft  the  people  :  For  the  fenate  have,  by  their  votes,
C£  acquitted  him  of  this  accufation,  and  thought  proper  that
“  he  fhould  appear  before  the  people,  upon  the  terms  con-
“  tained  in  their  order.”  After  which,  he  read  the  previous
order ;  and,  having  faid  this,  and  conjured  them  to  adhere
to  it,  he  defcended  from  the  roftrum.  Sicinnius  was  the
firft  of  the  tribunes,  who  opened  the  charge,  which  he  did
in  a  ftudied,  and  elaborate  fpeech,  attributing  every  thing
the  man  had,  ever,  faid,  or  done  againft  the  intereft  of  the
people  to  a  formed  defign  of  tyranny.  When  he  had  done
fpeaking,  the  moft  eloquent  of  the  tribunes  purfued  the
accufation.

LXII.  After  this,  Marcius  made  his  defence  ;  and,  begin¬
ning  from  his  firft  entrance  into  the  world,  he  enumerated  all
the  campaigns  he  had  made  in  the  fervice  of  his  country ;  the
crowns  he  had  received  from  the  generals  as  rewards  of  victory;
the  prifoners  he  had  taken,  and  the  citizens  he  had  faved  in
battle ;  And,  upon  every  occafion,  he  produced  thefe  rewards,
cited  the  generals,  as  witnefles,  and  called  upon  the  citizens
he  had  faved,  by  name :  Thefe  prefented  themfelves  with  la¬
mentations,  and  intreated  their  fellow-citizens  not  to  deftroy,
as  an  enemy,  the  man,  to  whom  they  owed  their  prefervation,
begging  one  life  in  return  for  many, and  offering  themfelves,
in  his  room,  to  be  treated  by  them  as  they  thought  fit.
The  greateft  part  of  thefe  were  plebeians,  and  men,  ex¬
tremely,  ufeful  to  the  commonwealth  :  Their  afpecft,  and
intreaties  raifed  fuch  a  fenfe  of  ftiame  in  the  people,  that
Vol.  III.  K  k  they


250  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

they  melted  into  commiferation,  and  tears.  Then  Marcius,
rending  his  garment,  (hewed  his  bread:  full  of  wounds,  and
every  other  part  of  his  body  covered  with  fears,  and  afked
them  if  they  thought  that  to  preferve  many  in  war,  and  to
deftroy  the  preferved  in  time  of  peace,  were  actions  of  the  fame
man  ;  and,  if  any  one,  who  forms  a  defign  of  tyranny,  ever
expels  the  common  people  from  a  city,  by  whom  tyranny  is,
chiefly,  abetted,  and  nourifhed.  While  he  was  yet  (peaking,
thofe  among  the  people,  who  were  inclined  to  moderation,
and  lovers  of  merit,  cried  out  to  acquit  the  man ;  and  were
aihamed  that  one,  who  had,  fo  often,  defpifed  his  own  life  to
preferve  them  all,  fhould,  even,  have  been  brought  to  his  trial
upon  fuch  an  imputation  :  But  thofe,  who  were  by  nature
envious,  enemies  to  virtue,  and  eafy  to  be  led  into  any  kind
of  fedition,  were  forry  they  were  going  to  acquit  him,  but
found  they  could  do  no  otherwife,  flnee  they  faw  no  manifeft
proof  of  his  having  aimed  at  tyranny,  which  was  the  point,
upon  which  they  were  to  give  their  votes.

LXIII.  This  being  obferved  by  Lucius,  who  had  fpoken
in  the  fenate,  and  prevailed  on  them  to  pafs  the  previous
order  for  the  trial,  he  rofe  up  ;  and,  having  commanded
filence,  faid;  “  Since,  citizens,  the  patricians  have  acquitted
“  Marcius  of  the  words  he  fpoke  in  the  fenate,  and  of  the
violent,  and  overbearing  actions,  that  flowed  from  them,
“  and  do  not,  even,  fuffer  us  to  accufe  him  of  either,  hear
<£  what  an  adfion,  independent  of  thofe  words,  this  valiant
“  man  has  been  guilty  of,  how  infolent  and  tyrannical ;
“  and  learn  of  what  nature  that  law  is,  which  he,  though  a

“  private


BookVir.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  251

u  private  perfon,  has  violated:  You  all  know  this  law  or-
C£  dains  that  the  fpoils,  taken  by  us  from  the  enemy  by  our
££  valor,  {hall  belong  to  the  public,  and  that  it  is  fo  far  from
“  being  in  the  power  of  any  private  perfon  to  difpofe  of
<£  them,  that  even  the  general  himfelf  has  not  this  power;  but
“  the  quaeftor,  receiving  them,  fells  them,  and  brings  the
c£  money  into  the  public  treafury.  And  this  law  no  one
££  has,  yet,  found  fault  with,  fince  we  have  inhabited  this
“  city,  fo  far  from  violating  it  :  Marcius  is  the  only  man,
“  who  has  defpifed  the  authority  of  this  law  ;  he  alone  has
“  thought  fit  to  appropriate  to  himfelf  thofe  fpoils,  citizens,
“  that  belong  to  us  in  common ;  this  he  did  laft  year ;  his
“  crime  is  of  no  long  date :  For,  when  you  made  an  incur-
l£  fion  into  the  territory  of  the  Antiates,  and  took  many
<c  prifoners,  many  cattle,  and  a  great  quantity  of  corn,  to-
“  gether  with  many  other  effects,  he  neither  produced  thefe
“  before  the  quaeftor,  nor  fold  them  himfelf,  and  brought
tc  the  money  into  the  treafury;  but  diftributed,  and  lavnhed
££  the  whole  booty  among  his  own  friends.  This  a&ion  I
t£  aver  to  be  a  proof  of  his  aiming  at  tyranny.  How  fhould
“  it  be  other  wife,  when  he  applied  the  public  money  to  the
<£  gratification  of  his  flatterers,  his  guards,  and  the  accom-
C£  plices  in  the  tyranny  he  meditated  ?  And  this  I  maintain
cc  to  be  an  open  violation  of  the  law.  Let  Marcius,  then,
££  ftand  up,  and  prove  one  of  thefe  twro  things,  either  that
“  he  did  not  diftrihute  the  fpoils  he  took  from  the  enemy’s
a  country  among  his  own  friends,  or  that,  in  doing  fo,  he
*£  did  not  violate  the  laws :  Neither  of  which  will  he  be  able

K  k  2


to


252  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

u  to  prove  before  you  :  For  you  yourfelves  are  acquainted
<c  with  both ;  you  know  the  law,  you  know  the  fa£t ;  and,
cc  if  you  acquit  him,  your  refolution  mu  ft  be  looked  upon
<c  as  contrary  both  to  juftice,  and  your  oaths.  Away  then,
<c  Marcius,-  with  your  crowns,  your  rewards  of  valor,  your
u  wounds,  and  all  the  reft  of  your  oftentation  ;  and  anfwer
“  to  thefe  points :  For  I  ftill  give  you  liberty  to  do  it.”

LXIV.  This  accufation  caufed  a  great  alteration  to  the
other  lide :  For  thofe  among  the  people,  who  were  moft
moderate,  and  earned:  for  the  acquittal  of  Marcius,  upon
hearing  thefe  things,  grew  more  remifs  ;  and  all  the  ill-
difpofed,  who  were  the  greateft  part,  defiring  to  deftroy  him
at  all  events,  were  ftill  the  more  encouraged  to  his  ruin,  by
laying  hold  of  this  ftrong,  and  manifeft  proof :  For  the
diftribution  of  the  fpoils  was  fadt,  but  done  with  no  ill
intention,  nor  to  promote  a  defign  of  tyranny,  as  Lucius
alledged  againft  him  ;  but  from  the  beft  motive,  and  to
redrefs  the  miferies  of  the  public :  For  the  fedition,  then,
continuing,  and  the  people  being  divided  from  the  patricians,
their  enemies,  defpifing  them,  infefted  their  country,  and
plundered  it  without  intermiflion ;  and,  whenever  the  fenate
thought  fit  to  order  an  army  to  be  fent  out  to  its  relief,  not
one  of  the  plebeians  would  ferve  in  it,  but  rejoiced  at  the
defolation,  and  buffered  it  to  continue ;  and  the  forces  of
the  patricians  alone  were  not  fufficient  to  defend  the  country.
Marcius,  obferving  this,  promifed  the  confuls,  that  he  would
march  againft  the  enemy  with  an  army  of  voluntiers,  if  they
would  give  him  the  command  of  it,  and,  foon,  take  revenge

on


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  253

on  them.  Marcius,  being  authorifed  in  the  manner  he  had
defired,  affembled  his  clients,  and  friends,  and  fuch  of  the
citizens,  as  were  willing  to  fhare  the  advantages  expe&ed
from  the  general’s  fortune  in  war,  and  his  valor :  When  he
thought  the  forces  he  had  affembled  equal  to  the  propofed
expedition,  he  led  them  againft  the  enemy,  who  had  no
intelligence  of  his  defign:  And,  entering  their  country,
which  was  well  ftored  with  every  thing  valuable,  he  pof-
fefled  himfelf  of  a  vaft  booty,  all  which  he  diftributed  among
his  foldiers,  to  the  end  that  thofe,  who  had  affifted  him  in
this  expedition,  by  receiving  the  fruit  of  their  labor,  might,
chearfully,  ingage  in  the  fervice  upon  other  occaftons ;  and
that  the  others,  who  had  declined  it,  feeing  what  advantages
they  had  loft  through  their  fedition,  might  acft  with  greater
prudence,  when  other  expeditions  were  propofed.  This
was  the  intention  of  the  man  in  that  affair;  but  to  the
jealous,  and  invidious  multitude,  this  aCtion,  when  conft-
dered  by  itfelf,  appeared  a  kind  of  flattery  of  the  people,
and  a  corruption  tending  to  tyranny.  So  that,  the  forum
was  full  of  clamor,  and  tumult ;  and,  as  the  charge  ap¬
peared  uncommon  and  unexpected,  neither  Marcius  himfelf,
the  conful,  nor  any  other  perfon,  could  make  any  defence  to
it.  When  nothing  further  was  faid  in  his  favor,  the  tribunes
called  upon  the  tribes  to  give  their  votes,  and  confined  the
punifhment  of  Marcius  to  perpetual  banifhment  3  fearing,,
I  imagine,  left,  if  they  had  extended  it  to  death,  he  fhoulcf
have  been  acquitted.  After  they  had  all  voted,  upon  count¬
ing  the  fuffr ages,  the  difference  did  not  appear  conftderable  t

For


254  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

For  there  being,  at  that  time,  26  twenty  two  tribes,  that
voted,  nine  of  them  acquitted  Marcius:  So  that,  it  two


i6,  Mf ci(  yao  x.<y.i  «no<n  toIz  xcruv.

There  is,  I  believe,  no  paffage  in  this,
or  in  any  other  author,  upon  which
the  commentators  havebeftowed  more
pains  to  lets  purpofe  :  Which  I  am
not  at  all  furprifed  at,  fince,  as  the
text,  now,  ftands  in  all  the  editions,
and  manufcripts,  it  is  not  pofhble  to
reconcile  it  to  figures,  which  are  of
greater  authority  than  any  editions,
and  manufcripts  whatfoever.  But,  be¬
fore  I  give  my  own  opinion  upon  this
paffage,  1  final  1  lay  before  the  reader
the  different  expedients  different  com¬
mentators  have  had  recourfe  to  j  in
order  to  convince  him  that,  as  the
text,  now,  (lands,  it  is  impofiible  to
be  explained.  Our  author  fays  that
Marcius  was  acquitted  by  nine  tribes  j
and  that,  if  two  more  tribes  had  voted
for  him,  he  would  have  been  acquitted
by  reafon  of  the  equality  of  votes,  as
the  law  required.  Now,  the  number
of  twenty  one  tribes,  as  it  Hands  in  the
text,  will  not  agree  either  with  the  fa£l,
as  our  author  Hates  it,  or  with  the  con-
fequence  he  draws  from  that  fa£t  :
For,  if  nine  tribes  of  the  twenty  one
acquitted  Marcius,  twelve  muH  have
condemned  him  •,  take  two  from  the
twelve,  which  condemned  him,  and
add  them  to  the  nine,  that  acquitted
him,  according  to  the  fuppofition  of
our  author,  the  confequence  will  be,
that  eleven  will  acquit  him,  and  ten
condemn  him  •,  in  which  cafe,  he  will
not  be  acquitted  by  an  equality  of
votes,  as  our  author,  alfo,  fuppofes,
but  by  a  majority  of  one  vote.  The


number  of  tv/enty  one,  therefore,  will
not  anfwer  thefe  purpofes,  nor  any
other  number  but  twenty  two  •,  outot
which,  if  we  take  the  nine  votes,  that
were  for  him,  there  will  be  found  thir¬
teen  againH  him  :  From  this  number,
take  two,  and  add  them  to  the  firH
nine,  and  there  will  be  found  eleven
for  him,  and  as  many  againH  him  ;
by  virtue  of  which  equality,  he  muH
have  been  acquitted,  as  the  law  re¬
quired.  It  may  be  faid  this  folution
is  very  eafy  •,  but  that,  in  order  to
come  at  it,  I  mu  ft  alter  the  text  from
twenty  one  to  twenty  two  tribes.  This
I  own  :  But,  at  the  lame  time,  I  defire
the  reader  to  confider,  that,  as  the  rea,-
foning  of  our  author  depends  upon
numbers,  it  muft  be  explained  by
numbers  •,  and  no  other  pofiible  number
can  fupport  it,  but  That,  which  I  have
mentioned.  Every  one,  who  has  exa¬
mined  Greek  manufcripts,  muft  know
that  nothing  is  lo  common,  as  to  find
miftakes  committed  by  tranfcribers  in
relation  to  numbers ;  and  how  eafy
was  it  for  them  to  write  >:<*,  inftead  of
?  p  Manucius,  in  order  to  folve  the
difficulty  of  the  text,  which  all  the
commentators  have  adhered  to,  ima¬
gines  that  there  were,  at  that  time,
thirty  one  tribes  at  Rome,  of  which
only  twenty  one  voted  in  the  affair  of
Coriolanus.  This  fuppofition  is,  in-
tirely,  gratuitous,  and  founded  on  no
authority  :  However,  M.  *  *  *  has
adopted  it.  Le  Jay,  indeed,  rejedls
this  imagination  of  Manucius,'  but
fubftitutes  another  in  its  room,  which


P  De  Comit.  Rom.  c,  2.


more


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AJHCARN  ASSENS  IS.  255

more  had  voted  in  his  favor,  he  would  have  been  acquitted
by  reafon  of  the  equality  of  votes,  as  the  law  required.


is  as  little  founded  on  the  Greek  lan¬
guage,  and  the  Roman  laws,  as  the
other  is  on  the  Roman  hiftory.  He
fuppofes  that  k ro^yiQia  Signifies,  in  the
Greek  authors,  not  only,  an  equal
number  of  votes,  but  an  equal  force,
an  equal  authority  in  the  Suffrages,
although  the  number  of  them  be  not
equal ;  pas  feulement  an  nornbre  eg  a  l  de
voix  et  de  fuffrages ,  mais  une  egale  force,
v.ne  egale  authorite  dans  les  fuffrages  ;
quoyque  le  nombre  n'en  foit  pas  egaL
From  this  pofition,  for  which  he  nei¬
ther  has,  nor  pretends  to  have,  any
authority,  he  concludes  that,  as  Mar-
cius  had  nine  tribes  in  his  favor,  if
two  other  tribes  had  come  to  their  fup-
port,  the  law  would  have  laved  him  ;
becaufe  the  law  gave  to  the  eleven
tribes,  as  he  fays,  that  would,  then,
have  acquitted  him,  an  authority  equal
to  That  of  the  twelve  tribes,  that  con¬
demned  him.  Note,  that  le  Jay  has,
all  along,  contended,  and  endeavoured
to  prove,  that  there  were  only  twenty
one  tribes  in  being,  when  Coriolanus
was  tried  ;  and,  now,  he  makes  them
twenty  three.  But  he  goes  on,  and
fays  that  the  law,  here  mentioned  by
Dionyfius,  did  not  allow  a  criminal  to
be  condemned,  who  had  but  one  vote
more  againft  him,  than  for  him.  Here,
le  Jay  affumes  a  higher  character ;
and,  as  in  the  capacity  of  a  critic,  he
gave  a  fignification  to  a  word,  which
it,  never,  had  before  •,  fo  now,  in  That
of  a  legislator,  he  has  enabled  a  law,
which,  never  before  exifted.  I  Should
not  have  employed  fo  much  time  in


relating,  much  lefs  in  refuting,  fuch
abiurdities,  if  his  brother  je Suits-,  the
journalists  of  Trevoux,  had  not  dig¬
nified  thefe  very  abfurdities  with  the
title  of  s  fubtil  reflexions.  The  only
objection,  that  can  be  made  to  the  al¬
teration  I  contend  for,  is,  that  there
were  no  more  than  twenty  one  tribes
in  being,  when  Coriolanus  was  tried.
This  fuppofition,  I  know,  is  embraced
by  Several  men  of  learning  •,  notwith¬
standing  which,  I  cannot,  after  the
molt  Scrupulous  examination  of  this
queftion,  find  any  foundation  for  it.
It  is  a  fubjebt,  which  is  far  from  being
cleared  up  with  the  certainty  requisite
to  enable  any  one  to  form  a  judgement
either  way.  But,  that  I  may  conceal
nothing  from  the  reader’s  view,  I  Shall
State  every  thing  I  can  find  relative  to
this  queftion.  In  the  firft  place,  r  our
author  tells  us  that  Servius  T ullius  (for
I  think  it  to  no  purpofe  to  go  back  to
the  divifions  of  the  people  made  by
Romulus)  divided  the  city  of  Rome
into  lour  local  tiibes,  called  the  Pala-
tina ,  Suburana ,  Collin  a,  and  Efquilina ;
and  that  5  he,  alfo,  divided  the  whole
country  into  a  certain  number  of  ti  ibes,
which  he  does  not  Specify  ;  but  quotes
Fabius  for  faying  it  was  divided  into
twenty  fix,  and  Venonius  for  alledging
that  it  was  divided  into  thirty  one
tribes.  It  is  plain  that  he  follows  nei¬
ther  ;  Since  he  fays  that,  at  the  trial  of
Coriolanus,  which  happened  fo  many
years  after,  there  were  no  more  than
twenty  one,  or,  as  I  fay,  twenty  two
tribes.  *  We  are,  therefore,  at  a  lofs  to


S See  the  preface.  rB.  iv,  c.  14.  sId.  ib  c.  15.


LXV.


256  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

LXV.  This  was  the  fir  ft  citation  of  a  patrician  to  the  tribu¬
nal  of  the  people  :  And,  from  this  time,  it  became  cuftomary


know  how  many  ruftic  tribes  Servius
Tullius  inftituted.  Neither  do  we  hear
any  more  of  tribes,  till  the  year  of
Rome  259,  when  1  Livy  fays  there
were  twenty  one  tribes  at  Rome  ;  Ro-
mae  tribus  una  et  viginti  faftae,  as  Si-
gonius  reads  it,  though  all  the  other
editions  have  una  et  triginta ,  as  it  was,
alfo,  in  the  epitome  of  the  fame  book,
till  he  himfelf  altered  it  in  his  edition
of  Livy  ;  and  I  find,  by  his  note  upon
this  palfage,  that  the  chief  reafon  of
his  altering  it,  was,  becaufe  Dionyfius
fays  that,  at  the  trial  of  Coriolanus,
which  was  but  four  years  after,  there
were  prefent  twenty  one  tribes.  This
is  begging  the  queftion,  againft  which
I  contend.  And,  in  his  u  book,  de
antiquo  jure  civium  Romanorum ,  he
thinks  the  two  tribes  Crufiumina ,  and
Ocriculana  were  added  at  the  time  Livy
means.  That  they  were  Roman  tribes,

I  do  not  in  the  leaft  doubt,  but  rather
believe  them  to  have  been  two  of  the
ruftic  tribes  inftituted  by  Servius  Tul¬
lius*,  becaufe  the  towns,  from  which
they  took  their  names,  had,  before
that  time,  been  conquered  by  the  Ro¬
mans.  After  this,  that  is,  after  the  year
259,  we  find,  by  Livy,  that  many
tribes  were  inftituted  at  different  times,
no  lefs  than  twelve,  and  two  more,  in
the  epitome  of  his  nineteenth  book  ;
that  is,  the  Velina ,  and  uirina .  If
this  was  in  Livy  himfelf,  and  not  in
the  epitome,  it  would  weaken,  though
not  deftroy,  what  I  have  faid  becaufe
the  confequence  would  be  that,  by
fiippofing  Coriolanus  to  have  been

c  B.  ii.  c.  21.


tried  by  twenty  two  tribes,  I  make
thirty  fix  tribes  in  all;  whereas,  it  is
well  known,  that  their  number,  never,
exceeded  thirty  five.  But  it  is  certain,
and  muft  be  allowed  that  the  epitome
of  Livy  was  not  written  by  Livy  ;
becaufe  there  are  many  errors  in  it,
which  Livy  was  not  capable  of  com¬
mitting.  But  I  have  fomething  more
to  fay  againft  the  authority  of  this
epitome,  with  relation  to  thefe  two
tribes.  The  name  of  one  of  them,  viz.
Quirina ,  is  inferred  by  Sigonius  in  the
room  of  EJquilina ,  as  it  ftands  in  all
the  other  editions,  which  was  the  name
of  one  of  the  old  city  tribes:  However,
it  is  fcarce  poffible,  but  fome  of  thefe
fourteen  tribes  might  have  had  two
names  ;  and,  if  that  happened  to  have
been  the  cafe  but  of  one  of  them,  my
purpofe  is  anfwered  ;  and,  then,  there
will  not  be,  even  according  to  my  own
hypothefis,  above  thirty  five  tribes  in
all.  I  muft  beg  of  the  reader  not  to
look  upon  the  fuppofition  I  have  made
to  be  calculated  only  to  anfwer  an  ob¬
jection  :  There  is  frequent  mention
made, in  ancient  monuments,  of  Roman
tribes,  that  are  not  to  be  found  in  any
authors  ;  as,  the  tribes  Horatia ,  Papia ,
and  Camilla  ;  and,  in  later  times,  we
find  the  tribes  Juliay  Flavia ,  and  Ulpia ,
called  fo  in  compliment  to  Auguftus,
Vefpafian,  and  Trajan,  which  were
only  new  names  given  to  old  tribes;
fince  it  is  certain,  as  I  faid,  that  the
Romans,  never,  had  but  thirty  five
tribes.  I  know  it  may  be  faid  that,
if  there  were  twenty  two  tribes,

UP.  19.


for


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  257

for  thofe,  who  were,  afterwards,  inverted  with  the  tribunitian
power,  to  fummon  any  of  the  citizens  they  thought  fit  to
appear  before  the  people,  in  order  to  be  tried  by  them.
From  this  beginning,  the  power  of  the  people  rofe  to  a  great
height ;  while  the  ariftocracy  loft  much  of  its  ancient  dig¬
nity  by  admitting  the  plebeians  into  the  fenate,  and  allow¬
ing  them  to  ftand  candidates  for  magistracies ;  by  not
oppofing  their  being  inverted  with  the  priefthood,  and  by


tribes,  there  could  be  no  calling  vote  :
But  I  anfwer  that,  in  criminal  cafes,
when  the  tribes  were,  equally,  divided,
the  offender  would  have  been  acquit¬
ted  •,  and,  in  civil  contefls,  the  motion
would  have  been  rejected.  w  Ariftotle
gives  many  fubtil  reafons  in  favour  of
this  law  ;  one  of  which  1  Shall  lay  be¬
fore  the  reader  in  his  own  words  :  Et*

I /UiV  aSlKH  0  £K  Tff^OVOtag  aSlKOOV  Y]  0
y.t]  £K  zvgovotxg.  O  /usv  Sq  ovxoQavlcov  an  zx
wgovoiag  aSixn'  6  Se  Irtgov  Tt  aStxm,  tx
utv  St’  avayxtjv’  t a  Se  St  ayvctu v’  too  Si,
07 rag  (v  aStxnv  av\w  c-vy,7U7rIn.  Orav

Si  i<tmi  yevuvlai  al  yjipoi,  o  ytv  Stcoxcov  xixgi-
rai  V7 to  tcov  <nuv  ex  zs’^ovoiag  aStxe iv’  o'  Si
(pevycov,  v7ro  tcov  Konroov  av  aSixnv  yzv,  a
[Atiloi  y£  ex  u^ovotag.  £lge£7rn  aSixnv  yn^co
xexgilat  o  Stcoxuv  tx  (pevyovlcg ,  nxojoog  o
voyobelvjg  vixoov  exgive  t ov  too  gA mt\co  aSixxvlx.

44  Befides,  the  man,  who  offends  with
44  premeditation,  is  a  greater  delin-
44  quent  than  he,  who  offends  without
44  premeditation.  Now,  the  calumnia-
44  tor  always  offends  with  premedia-
44  tion  :  Whereas,  the  perfon,  who  is
44  guilty  of  any  other  crime,  fome-
44  times  offends  through  neceffity  ;
44  fometimes  through  ignorance ;  and
44  at  others,  as  he  may  happen  to  of-

w  Problem.  Se£t  z o.  Queft.  13.

VOL.  III.


4C  fend.  When,  therefore,  the  votes
44  are  equal,  the  prolecutor  is  judged
44  by  half  the  votes  to  offend  with  pre-
44  meditation  ;  and  the  defendant  is
44  judged  by  the  reft  to  offend  indeed,
44  but  not  with  premeditation.  So
44  that,  Since  the  profecutor  is  judged
44  to  be  a  greater  delinquent  than  the
44  defendant,  the  legiftator  wifely  de-
44  termined  that  the  leffer  delinquent
44  fhould  have  the  advantage  over  the
44  greater.”  The  law,  here,  mentioned
by  Dionyfius,  was  borrowed  from  the
Greeks  by  the  Romans,  and,  from
thefe,  by  the  greatefl  part  of  the  weft-
ern  world,  where  it  is,  ftill,  in  ufe,  as
it  is  with  us,  upon  many  occafions.
Praefumitur  fro  negante  feems  to  be  a
maxim,  generally,  received.  Euripides
derives  the  inflitution  of  this  law  from
the  trial  of  Qreftes,  before  the  areo-
pagus  for  the  murder  of  his  mother
Clytaemneftra,  when  he  was  acquitted
by  an  equality  of  votes ;  of  which  Mi¬
nerva  gives  this  account x;

Sv£x’  e^etrutToc.  erg,

K ou  <zgivy  Agnoig  iv  zzufoig  ^H$OTE  ISAS
K^voiff- ,  O^e got,  y.cti  voyicry  ng  Tavlo  ye
Nix<zv,  IZHPE12  ogtg  av  ^PREOYE  A«cy*


*  Iphig.  in  Taur.  f.  1469.

L  1


com-


253  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

communicating  to  all  themoft  confiderableof  their  other  dig¬
nities,  even  thofe,  that  were  peculiar  to  the  patricians ;  fome
of  which  conceffions  they  yielded  to  through  neceffity,  and
againft  their  will,  and  to  others  through  forefight,  and  wif-
dom:  All  which  I  fhall  mention  at  a  proper  feafon.  How¬
ever,  this  cuftom,  I  mean  That  of  citing  the  men  of  power
at  Rome  to  a  trial,  where  the  people  were  judges,  might
afford  a  fubjedl  for  many  reflexions  to  thofe,  who  are  dif-
pofed  either  to  commend,  or  blame  it:  For  it  is  certain  that
many  brave,  and  good  men  have  been  treated  in  a  manner
unworthy  of  their  virtue,  and  have  fu fibred  a  fhameful,  and
miferable  death,  at  the  inftigation  of  the  tribunes.  On  the
other  fide,  many  men  of  arrogant,  and  tyrannical  difpofitions,
being  compelled  to  give  an  account  of  their  lives,  andcondudl,
have  fufFered  the  punifhment  they  deferved.  When,  there¬
fore,  thefe  inquiries  have  been  purfued  with  the  beft  inten¬
tions,  and  the  pride  of  the  great  was,  juftly,  humbled,  this
infiitution  appeared  grand,  and  admirable,  and  met  with
general  applaufe :  But,  when  a  virtuous,  and  able  ftatefman
was  put  to  death  through  envy,  and  contrary  to  juftice,  the
reft  of  the  world  were  fhocked  at  the  inftitution,  and  the
authors  of  it  detefted.  The  Romans  have,  often,  deliberated
whether  they  fliould  repeal  thi^  inftitution,  or  preferve  it  in
the  fame  vigor  they  had  received  it  from  their  anceftors ;
but  never  came  to  any  refolution.  If  I  may  be  allowed  to
give  my  own  opinion  in  affairs  of  fo  great  moment,  I  look
upon  the  inftitution,  confidered  by  itfelf,  to  be  advantageous,
and,  abfolutely,  necefiary  to  the  Roman  commonwealth  ;

but


/


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  259

but  that  it  is  good,  or  bad,  according  to  the  different
characters  of  the  tribunes :  For,  when  this  power  falls  into
the  hands  of  juft,  and  prudent  perfons,  who  prefer  the  in-
tereft  of  the  public  to  their  own,  the  man,  who  has  injured
his  country,  when  punifhed  in  the  manner  he  deferves,  ftrikes
terror  into  the  minds  of  all,  who  are  prepared  to  commit
the  like  crimes;  while  the  worthy  man,  who  arts  in  the
adminiftration  with  the  moft  upright  intentions,  is  in  no
danger  of  being  brought  to  an  ignominious  trial,  or  accufed
of  crimes  inconfiftent  with  his  conduCt :  But  the  contrary
of  all  this  happens,  when  wicked,  abandoned,  and  interefted
men  are  inverted  with  fo  great  a  power.  So  that,  inftead  of
reforming  the  inftitution,  as  faulty,  they  ought  to  confider
by  what  means  good,  and  worthy  men  may  be  placed  at  the
head  of  the  people,  and  that  a  truft  of  the  greateft  impor¬
tance  may  not,  injudicioufly,  be  conferred  on  men  of  no
character.

LX VI.  Thefe  were  the  caufes,  and  this  was  the  event  of
the  firft  fedition,  that  happened  among  the  Romans  after  the
expulfton  of  their  kings.  I  have  related  all  the  circumftances
of  it  in  an  extenfive  manner ;  to  the  end  that  no  one  may
wonder  how  the  patricians  could  fubmit  to  invert  the  people
with  fo  great  a  power,  without  being  terrified  into  it  by  the
murder,  or  banifhment  of  the  moft  confiderable  of  their  order;
both  which  have  happened  in  many  other  citites  :  For,
when  extraordinary  events  are  related,  every  one  deilres  to
know  the  caufe,  that  produced  them,  and  confiders  That
alone,  as  the  fource  of  their  credibility.  I  reflected,  there-

L  1  2  fore*


o


260  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

fore,  that  the  relation  I  have  given  of  this  tranfa&ion  would
have  gained  little,  or  no  credit,  if  I  had  contented  myfelf
with  faying  that  the  patricians  refigned  their  power  to  the
plebeians,  and  that,  when  they  might  have  maintained  the
ariftocracy,  they  invefted  them  with  the  greateft  prerogatives,

and  had  omitted  the  motives,  that  induced  them  to  come  into

■

thefe  concefiions :  For  which  reafon,  I  have  related  them  all.
And,  fince  they  did  not  make  this  change  in  their  govern¬
ment  by  compulfion,  and  force  of  arms,  but  by  perfuafion,
I  thought  it,  abfolutely,  neceffary  to  infert  the  fpeeches,
which  the  heads  of  both  parties  made  upon  that  occafion.
I  am  furprifed  to  find  that  fome  hiftorians  think  themfelves
obliged  to  give  an  exatft  account  of  military  tranfa&ions,
and,  fometimes,  throw  away  many  words  in  the  relation  of
a  fingle  battle,  in  defcribing  the  fituation  of  the  places,  the
particular  arms,  the  difpofition  of  the  armies,  the  exhorta¬
tions  of  the  generals,  and  every  other  circumftance,  that
contributed  to  the  victory  on  either  fide ;  but,  when  they
come  to  give  an  account  of  civil  commotions,  and  feditions,
they  think  themfelves  under  no  obligation  of  relating  the
fpeeches,  by  which  extraordinary,  and  wonderful  events  were
brought  to  pafs :  For,  if  any  thing  in  the  Roman  common¬
wealth  deferves  to  be  admired,  and  to  be  imitated  by  all  man¬
kind,  this  circumftance,  in  my  opinion,  deferves  it,  or  rather
furpaffes,inits  luftre,  all  the  great  things,  which  moft  deferve
our  admiration,  that,  neither  the  plebeians,  in  contempt
oi  the  patricians,  took  arms  againft  them,  and,  after  mur¬
dering  many  of  the  beft  men,  feized  all  their  fortunes ;  nor,

on


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC A RN  A  S  S E  N S  I  S.  261
on  the  other  fide,  the  men  in  power,  by  their  own  forces,
or,  by  foreign  afliftance,  deftroyed  all  the  plebeians,  and,
after  that,  lived  in  the  city  without  moleftation  :  But,  con¬
ferring  together  upon  their  common  rights,  like  brothers
with  brothers,  or  children  with  their  parents  in  a  well  go¬
verned  family,  they  put  an  end  to  their  contefts  by  per-
fuafion,  and  a  communication  of  their  thoughts,  and,  never,
allowed  themfelves  to  commit  any  irreparable,  or  wicked
a&ion  againft  one  another;  fuch  as  the  Corcyraei  were
guilty  of  at  the  time  of  their  fedition ;  and,  alfo,  the  Argivi,
the  Milefii,  and  all  Sicily,  as  well  as  many  other  common¬
wealths.  For  thefe  reafons,  therefore,  I  chofe  to  make  my
narration  rather  accurate,  than  fhort ;  but,  let  every  one
judge  of  my  conduct,  in  this  particular,  as  he  thinks  fit.

LXVII.  This  having  been  the  event  of  the  trial,  the
people  went  away,  extravagantly,  elated,  and  thought  they
had  deftroyed  the  ariftocracy.  On  the  other  fide,  the  patri¬
cians  were  confounded,  and  dejected,  and  complained  of
Valerius,  by  whofe  perfuafion  they  had  been  induced  to
leave  the  trial  to  the  people  ;  and  thofe,  who  conducted
Marcius  home,  lamented,  and  fhed  tears,  in  commiferation
of  his  misfortune ;  but  he  himfelf  was  feen  neither  to  be¬
wail,  nor  lament  his  own  fate,  or  to  fay,  or  do  the  leaf!  thing
unworthy  the  greatnefs  of  his  mind.  When  he  went  home,
and  faw  his  wife,  and  mother  tearing  their  robes,  beating
their  breads,  and  uttering  fuch  lamentations  as  are  natural
to  women  in  the  like  calamities,  when  they  fee  themfelves
upon  the  point  of  being  feperated  from  their  deareft  relations

by


262  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

by  death,  or  banifhment,  he  {hewed  ftill  greater  fortitude,
and  refolution,  and  was  unmoved  at  their  tears,  and  their
lamentations ;  but,  only  fainted  them ;  and,  exhorting  them
to  fupport  their  misfortunes  with  firmnefs,  he  recommended
his  fons  to  them  ;  the  eldeft  of  whom  was  ten  years  old,
and  the  youngeft,  in  arms ;  and,  without  {hewing  any  other
marks  of  tendernefs,  or  taking  any  thing  with  him,  that
might  be  of  ufe  to  him  in  his  banifhment,  he  haftened  to
the  gates  of  the  city,  acquainting  no  one  to  what  place  he
propofed  to  retire.

LXVIIL  A  few  days  after  this,  the  time  came  for  the
eledion  of  magiftrates,  when  Quintus  Sulpicius  Camerinus,
andSpurius  Lartius  Flavuswere  created  con fuls,  thelaft  being
chofen  for  the  fecond  time.  The  city  was,  this  year,  greatly
alarmed  with  prodigies :  For  unufual  fights  were  feen  by
many,  and  voices  were  heard,  uttered  by  no  man ;  births,
both  of  children,  and  cattle,  extremely  unnatural,  incredible,
and  moniirous  were  faid  to  have  happened ;  oracles  were
given  in  many  places,  and  women,  pofleffed  with  a  divine
fury,  foretold  miferable,  and  dreadful  misfortunes  to  the  com¬
monwealth  ;  a  kind  of  contagious  diixemper  was,  alfo,  felt  by
the  people,  and  deftroyed  great  numbers  of  cattle  :  How¬
ever,  not  many  men  died  of  it,  the  mifchief  going  no  farther
than  a  malady.  Some  were  of  opinion  that  thefe  things
proceeded  from  the  will  of  the  gods,  who  were  angry  with
them  for  having  banifhed  the  moft  deferving  of  all  their
citizens ;  others,  that  nothing,  which  had  happened  was
the  work  of  Heaven,  but  that  both  thefe,  and  ajl  other

human


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HAL  ICARN  ASSEN.SIS.  263

human  events  were  fortuitous.  Afterwards,  a  certain  perfon,
whofe  name  was  Titus  Latinus,  being  ill,  was  brought  to  the
fenate  in  a  litter ;  he  was  a  man  advanced  in  years,  and  of
a  competent  fortune,  but  worked  with  his  own  hands,  and
paffed  the  greateft  part  of  his  life  in  the  country :  This  per¬
fon,  being  brought  into  the  fenate,  affirmed  that  the  Capito-
line  Jupiter  had,  as  he  thought,  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream,
and  faid,  “  Go,  Latinus,  and  let  your  fellow-citizens  know
cc  that,  in  the  late  procefiion,  they  did  not  give  me  an  ac-
u  ceptable  27  leader  of  the  dance  ;  let  them  renew  the
cc  feftivals,  and  perform  others  from  the  beginning,  for  I
“  have  not  accepted  thefe:”  He  added,  that,  when  he
waked,  he  difregarded  the  vffion,  and  looked  upon  it  as  a
common,  and  deceitful  dream ;  that,  afterwards,  the  fame
apparition  of  the  god  prefenting  itfelf  to  him,  again,  in  his
lleep,  was  angry,  and  difpleafed  with  him  for  not  having
acquainted  the  fenate  with  the  orders  he  had  received,  and
threatened  him  that,  if  he  did  not  prefently  do  it,  he  ffiould
learn,  by  the  experience  of  fome  great  calamity,  not  to
negled  fupernatural  injundions :  That  he  had  no  better
opinion  of  the  fecond  dream,  than  of  the  firfl; ;  and,  at  the

27*  Tov  jj 'yaiAtvov  ogx*! s^v.  y  Livy  calls  fhould  make  ufe  of  it.  The  noble,
this  dancer,  praefultatorem.  I  believe,  though  partial,  hiftory  of  the  Earl  of
or,  at  leaft,  hope,  that  the  generality  Clarendon  is,  alfo,  difcoloured  with  a
of  my  readers  will  be  as  much  tired  dieam,  as  I  have  faid,  not  very  unlike
with  reading  prodigies,  as  I  am  with  to  this :  However,  all  authors  may  be
tranflating  them  •,  or,  which  is  better,  allured  that  the  moft  effectual  way  to
that  they  will  fkip  over  the  prodigies,  lull  their  readers  afleep  is  to  talk  to
till  they  find  fomething  more  worthy  them  of  dreams.  It  is  as  contagious
of  their  attention  :  If  a  tranflator  had  as  gaping  in  company,
the  fame  liberty,  I  am  very  fure  I

y  B.  ii.  c.  36.


fame


264  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

fame  time,  was  afhamed,  being  a  perfon,  who  worked  with
his  own  hands,  and  an  old  man,  to  talk  to  the  fenate  of
ominous,  and  frightful  dreams,  for  fear  of  being  laughed  at :
However,  a  few  days  after,  he  faid,  his  fon,  who  was  young
and  beautiful,  died,  fuddenly,  without  ficknefs,  or  any  other
apparent  caufe  of  death :  After  this,  the  god,  again,  ap¬
peared  to  him  in  his  deep,  and  faid  that  he  had,  already,
been  puniflred  in  part,  for  his  contempt,  and  negled  of  the
orders  he  had  received,  by  the  lofs  of  his  fon,  and  fhould
foon  feel  other  punifhments :  That,  when  he  heard  this,
he  received  the  threats  with  pleafure,  and,  being  weary  -
of  life,  defired  to  die  ;  however,  that  the  god  did  not  inflid
this  punifhment  on  him,  but  fent  fuch  intolerable,  and  fharp
pains  into  all  his  limbs,  that  he  could  not  move  a  joint
without  the  greateft  torment :  Being  in  this  condition,  he
communicated  what  had  happened  to  his  friends ;  and,
by  their  advice,  was  come  to  the  fenate.  While  he  was
giving  this  account,  his  pains  feemed  to  leave  him  by  de¬
grees  ;  and,  after  he  had  related  every  thing,  he  rofe  from
the  litter ;  and,  having  invoked  the  god,  walked  home
through  the  city  in  perfed  health.

LXIX.  Upon  this,  the  fenate  were  full  of  fear ;  every  one
was  aftonifhed,  and  at  a  lofs  to  guefs  what  was  meaned  by
the  god,  and  who  fhould  be  the  leader  of  the  dance  in  the
proceffion,  who  appeared  unacceptable  to  him.  At  laft,  one
of  them,  remembering  the  thing,  related  it  to*  the  reft,  and
all  of  them  confirmed  it  by  their  teftimony.  It  was  this :

A  Roman  citizen  of  no  obfcure  condition,  having  ordered

one


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALXCARN  ASSENSIS.  265

one  of  his  flaves  to  be  put  to  death,  delivered  him  to  his
companions  to  lead  him  to  his  punifhment ;  and,  with  a  view
to  render  the  chaftifement  the  more  exemplary,  he  dire&ed
them  to  drag  him  through  the  forum,  and  every  other  con-
fpicuous  part  of  the  city,  as  they  whipped  him;  and  that
he  fhouldgo  before  the  procefllon,  which  the  Romans  were,
at  that  time,  performing  in  honor  of  that  god.  The  men,
ordered  to  lead  the  flave  to  the  place  of  punifhment,  having
extended  both  his  arms,  and  fattened  them  to  two  pieces
of  wood,  which  reached  crofs  his  bread:,  and  flioulders  as
far  as  his  wrifts,  followed  him,  tearing  his  naked  body  with
whips :  The  criminal,  fubdued  by  the  fe verity  of  fuch  treat¬
ment,  cried  out ;  and,  not  only,  uttered  execrations,  fug-
gefted  by  the  torture,  but  threw  himfelf  into  indecent  con¬
tortions  at  every  ftroke.  All  thought  this  man  to  be  the
unacceptable  dancer,  fignified  by  the  god.

LXX.  Since  I  am  come  to  this  part  of  the  hiftory,  I
ought  not,  in  my  opinion,  to  omit  any  thing  performed  by
the  Romans  on  the  occaflon  of  this  feftival :  In  this,  I  have
no  deflgn  to  render  my  narration  more  agreeable  by  the
addition  of  theatrical  entertainments,  and  florid  difcourfes,
but  to  prove  fomething  neceffary,  which  is,  that  the  nations,
who  joined  in  founding  the  city  of  Rome,  were  Greek
colonies,  fent  out  from  places  of  the  greateft  repute ;  and
not,  as  fome  imagine,  Barbarians,  and  vagabonds :  For  I
promifed  at  the  end  of  the  firft  book,  which  I  compofed,
and  publifhed  concerning  their  origin,  that  I  would  prove
what  I,  then,  advanced,  by  a  great  number  of  arguments,
Vol.  III.  M  m  drawn


266  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.

drawn  from  their  ancient  cuftoms,  laws,  and  inftitutions,
which  they  preferve  to  this  day,  fuch  as  they  received  them
from  their  anceftors :  For  I  am  of  opinion  that  it  is  not
enough  for  thofe,  who  write  ancient,  and  local  hiftories,
faithfully  to  relate  fads,  as  they  have  received  them  from
the  inhabitants  of  the  country  ;  but  that  they  ought,  alfo,
to  fupport  thofe  fads  by  many  indifputable  tefti monies,  if  they
exped  their  relations  fhould  find  credit.  Among  thefe  tefti-
monies,  I  look  upon  the  firft,  and  the  mo  ft  confiderable  of  all
others  to  be  the  ceremonies  relative  to  the  eftablifhed  worfhip
of  the  gods,  and  genius’s,  which  are  performed  in  every  city :
Thefe,  both  the  Greeks,  and  Barbarians,  have  preferved  for
the  greateft  length  of  time,  and  have,  never,  thought  fit  to
make  any  innovation  in  them,  being  reftrained  from  it  by
their  fear  of  the  divine  anger ;  this  fear  makes  the  greateft
impreftions  upon  the  Barbarians  for  many  reafons,  which  I
do  not  think  this  a  proper  opportunity  to  alledge  ;  and
no  length  of  time  has,  hitherto,  induced  either  the  Egyptians,
the  Libyans,  the  Celtae,  the  Scythians,  the  Indians,  or  any
other  Barbarous  nations  whatever,  to  abandon,  or  tranfgrefs
any  thing  relating  to  the  worfhip  of  their  gods;  unlefs  fome
of  them  have  been  fubdued  by  a  foreign  power,  and  com¬
pelled  to  exchange  their  own  inftitutions  for  Thofe  of  the
conqueror.  Whereas,  the  Roman  commonwealth,  never,
experienced  fuch  a  misfortune ;  but  has  herfelf,  always,
given  laws  to  others.  If,  therefore,  the  Romans  had  been,
originally,  Barbarians,  they  would  have  been  fo  far  from
abandoning  their  firft  rites,  and  the  cuftoms  eftablifhed  in

their


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR N  A S S  E N S  I S.  267

their  country,  by  which  they  had  arrived  to  fo  great  pro-
fperity,  that  they  would,  even,  have  made  it  the  23  intereft
of  all  their  fubjedls  to  worfhip  the  gods,  according  to  the
Roman  ceremonies ;  and,  if  they  themfelves  had  been
Barbarians,  nothing  could  have  hindered  all  Greece,  which
has,  now,  been  fubject  to  the  Romans  near  29  feven  genera¬
tions,  from  being  rendered  Barbarous  by  them.


Ev  /ictXct)  xulectitroiv.  I  do  not  think
that  any  of  the  tranflators  have  given
the  fenfe  of  this  pafifage.  SyJburgins
has  paraphrafed  it.  Portus  has  faid,
aliis  omnibus ,  quibus  imperabant ,  prae-
clarum  fore  exiftimaffcnt.  Le  Jay  has
rendered  it,  Us  fe  feroient  fait  un  devoir
defaire  honor er  leurs  dieux,  and  M.  ***
il  fe  feroient  fait  un  devoir  d’introduire
leurs  ceremonies.  Nothing  of  all  this
gives  the  fenfe  of  theGreek  text.  Ev  kx-
hu  fignifies  opportunely ,  advantageoufly.
2  Thucydides  ufes  it  in  the  laft  fenfe,
when  he  lays,  Ev  n

tcz&xi ;  which  is,  very  well,  explained
by  the  Greek  fcholiaft,  mi  cufA®t(>ovli.
To  apply  this  to  the  paffage  before  us;
I  think  it  very  plain  that  ol  P coucuai  tv

KOtXa  XMlemC-CiV  TOIS  aAAon  UTTOKTiV  uv  jj^ov
T Hi  bias  to i?  <r$tli goto  riuxv  vcppojf,  flg-

nifies  that  the  Romans  would  have
made  it  the  intereft  of  all  their  fub-
jects  to  honour  the  gods,  as  they  hon¬
oured  them  •,  that  is,  to  embrace  their
religion.  This  is  a  piece  of  policy,
by  which  molt  princes  of  Europe,  at
this  day,  regulate  their  condudt.  I
with  they  would  flop  here,  and  not
perfecute  thofe,  who  refufe  to  con¬
form  to  the  religion  of  their  courts,
where  there  is,  feldom,  any  to  be  found.

*B.  v.  c.  59.  *


29*  EGhytjju  ytvtuv.  I  find  here  a
note  of  Glareanus  in  Sylburgius, which
M.  ***  has  tranflated  without  the  leaft
acknowledgement.  In  this  note,  Gla¬
reanus  thinks  thefe  generations  ought
to  be  computed  from  the  vidtory  gain¬
ed  by  the  Romans  over  Perfeus,  king
of  Maced  on,  or  from  the  end  of  the
fecond  Punic  war,  when,  he  fays,  the
Romans  had  lome  footing  in  Greece.
I  cannot  approve  of  either  of  thefe
aeras.  The  firft  is  not  early  enough  :
And  the  little  the  Romans  poftefled  in
Greece  at  the  laft  aera  does  not  de-
ferve  the  application  of  the  word  xox-
tx/mvov  :  So  that,  I  would  rather  date
the  conqueft  of  Greece  from  the  con-
fulfhip  of  L.  Furius  Purpureo,  and
M.  Claudius  Marcellus,  which  fell  out
in  the  year  of  Rome  55 8  ;  when  T.
Quindtius  Flamininus,  after  he  had
defeated  Philip  of  Macedon  atCynof-
cephelae,  caufed  that  famous  decree
to  be  publifhed  at  the  lfthmian  games.
By  this  decree,  all  the  Greek  cities,
which  had  been  under  the  dominion
of  Philip,  were  declared  free:  * Senatus
populufque  Romanus  liber  os,  immune s,
fuis  legibus  ejfe  jubei :  Then  follow  the
names  of  the  cities,  that  were  to  enjoy
this  noble  benefit.  Sure  no  nation,

Livy,  B.  xxxiii.  c.  32.

M  m  2


LXXI.


268  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I  T  IE  S  OF  Book  VII.

LXXI.  The  ceremonies,  now  pratftifed  by  the  Romans,
might,  poffibly,  be  looked  upon  by  others  as  no  fmall  indi¬
cations  of  their  ancient  inftitutions.  But,  left  any  one  fhould
think  this  a  weak  argument,  and  continue  to  ground  their
opinion  on  this  improbable  notion,  that,  after  the  Romans
had  conquered  all  Greece,  they  might  forfake  their  own
cuftoms,  and,  willingly,  embrace  others,  that  were  better,
1  fliall  deduce  my  proof  from  the  time,  when  they  were
not  yet  mailers  of  Greece,  or  of  any  other  country  on  the
other  fide  of  the  fea:  and  fupport  it  by  the  authority  of
Quintus  Fabius,  without  having  recourfe  to  That  of  any
other  author :  For  he  is  the  mo  it  ancient  of  all  the
Roman  hiftorians,  and  proves  what  he  afterts,  not  only,
from  the  information  of  others,  but,  alfo,  from  his  own
knowledge.  This  feftival,  therefore,  the  Roman  fenate,
ordered  to  be  celebrated,  as  I  faid,  purfuant  to  the  vow
made  by  the  dictator,  Aulus  Poftumius,  when  he  was
upon  the  point  of  giving  battle  to  the  Latines,  who  had
revolted  from  the  Romans,  and  were  endeavouring  to  reftore
Tarquinius  to  the  fovereignty  :  In  confequence  of  this  vow,
they  ordered  30  live  hundred  rninae  of  iilver  to  be  expended,
every  year,  in  the  facrifices,  and  the  games ;  and  this  fum
the  Romans  laid  out  on  the  feftival,  till  the  time  of  the

ever,  ufed  their  victory  with  fo  much  by  their  repeated  acclamations,  made
generofity.  Livy  fays  this  proclama-  it  evident,  that,  of  all  benefits,  liberty
tion  raifid  fuch  an  ecltacy  of  joy  in  is  the  greateft.

the  minds  of  all  the  Greeks,  who  were  3°-  n ev1ocv.o<rias  yvag.  1614  /.  1  is.Sd.

prefent  at  thefe  games,  that  they  could  of  our  money.  See  the  twenty  fecond
fcarce  contain  it:  They  caufed  the  annotation  on  the  fourth  book,
proclamation  to  be  read  again,  and,


Funic


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  269

Punic  war  :  And,  during  thefe  holidays,  many  things  were
performed,  according  to  the  cuftoms  of  the  Greeks,  fuch
as  the  general  aflemblies,  the  reception  of  ftrangers,  and  the
ceffiation  of  hoitilities ;  all  which  it  would  take  up  a  great
deal  of  time  to  defcribe  ;  but  fuch  as  relate  to  the  pro¬
ceffion,  the  facrifice,  and  the  games  (for  from  thefe  a  judge¬
ment  may  be  formed  of  thofe  I  have  not  mentioned)  are
as  follows.

LXXIL  Before  the  games  began,  the  principal  magiftrates
performed  a  proceffion  in  honor  of  the  gods,  from  the  capitol
through  the  forum  to  the  great  Circus  :  Thofe,  who  led  the
proceffion,  were  the  fonS  of  the  Romans,  approaching  to  man¬
hood,  and  of  an  age  to  bear  a  part  in  this  ceremony,  who
marched  on  horfeback,  if  their  fathers  were  intitled,  by  their
fortunes,  to  be  knights ;  while  the  others,  who  were  de-
figned  to  ferve  in  the  infantry,  went  on  foot ;  the  former
in  fquadrons,  and  troops,  and  the  latter  in  batallions,  and
companies,  as  if  they  were  going  to  their  place  of  exercife  ;
to  the  end  that  ftrangers  might  fee  the  number,  and  beauty
of  thefe  youths,  who  were  growing  to  be  men  able  to  ferve
their  country.  Thefe  were  followed  by  charioteers,  fome
of  whom  drove  chariots  drawn  by  four  horfes  in  front,  and
fome  chariots  drawn  by  two,  while  others  rode  unyoked
horfes  :  After  thefe,  came  the  31  combatants  both  in  the
light,  and  heavy  games,  ail  naked  except  their  middle.

/  31*  Oj  TuvAfatipctlav  uymtfui.  AUJai  wreftlers,  runners,  boxers,  etc.  K at
is  a  general  word  in  Greek,  and  fig-  ot  yvuviKoi  /U£v  kv^iu 5  a,$Aflcu  jtfi«Aav7<&/,
nifies  all  the  gymnic  combatants,  as  fays  b  Julius  Pollux.

bB.iii.  Segm.  143.


This


270  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.


This  cuftom  continues,  even  to  this  day,  at  Rome  as  it
was,  originally,  pradtifed  by  the  Greeks ;  but  it  is,  now,
abolifhed  in  Greece,  the  Lacedaemonians  having  put  an  end
to  it :  The  firft  perfon,  who  attempted  to  appear  naked,  and
ran,  in  that  condition,  at  the  Olympic  games,  in  the  fifteenth
Olympiad,  was  Acanthus,  the  Lacedaemonian  :  For,  before
that  time,  all  the  Greeks  were  afhamed  to  appear,  intirely,
naked  in  the  games,  as  Homer,  the  moft  credible,  and  the
moft  ancient  of  all  witnefies,  fhews  by  introducing  his  heroes
girded  with  cindtures  :  Thus,  when  he  is  defcribing  the
wreftling  of  Ajax,  and  Ulyffes  at  the  funeral  of  Patroclus,
he  fays,  they  3Z girded  themf elves ,  and  adva?iced  to  the  middle
of  the  lift :  This  he  makes  ftill  plainer  in  the  Odyfiey,  upon
the  occafion  of  the  boxing  between  Xrus,  and  Ulyfies,  in
thefe  verfes;


32'  T CO  Si  iq  y.C(TCQV

ayuvci.  I  fuppofe  our  author  quoted
this  verfe  of  Homer  upon  memory ;
becaufe,  in  reality,  the  latter  applies  it
to  the  boxing  match  between  Epeus,
and  Euryalus  ;  and  not  to  the  wrefl-
iir.g  between  Ajax,  and  Ulyffes,  to
which  he  applies  the  following  verfe  c;

’Zutj&y.iVW  S’d^X  TCtifi  fictlqV  sq  [MlTUOV  dfaivoi.

This  was  fcarce  worth  taking  notice
cf ;  neither  fhould  1  have  mentioned
it,  had  it  not  been  to  fhew  the  great
implicitnefs,  which  the  French  tranf-
lators  pay  all  along  to  their  guides,
the  Latin  tranfiators.  Hudfon  calls
the  verfe,  quoted  by  our  author,  the
685th,  in  which  they  have  followed
him  :  But,  if  either  Hudfon,  or  they,
had  read  the  context  in  Homer,  they


would  have  found  the  two  verfes  to
have  been  applied  in  the  manner  I
have  mentioned.  I  am  fo  great  an
admirer  of  Pope’s  tranflation  of  the
Iliad,  that  I  fhould,  certainly,  have
given  the  reader  his  tranfiation  of  this
verfe,  as  I  fhall  of  the  others,  which
our  author  will,  prefently,  quote,  if  he
had  not,  I  fuppofe  to  avoid  a  repeti¬
tion,  left  out  of  his  tranflation  the  very
circumftance,  for  which  our  author
quotes  this  verfe,  I  mean,  the  word
y  a-x/xivoo.  However,  he  has  not  omit¬
ted  it  a  little  before,  where  he  has,  very
properly,  rendered

Sc  61  sr^alov  ZFUgoiKixGQoihev,

Ojficiouswith  the  cinhhire girds  him  round.

Though  the  reader  will  find  that  he  has,
arterwards,  lei t  out  peA/r^f

lheru


c  Iliad,  if-  f-  710.


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  271

Then,  girding  his  Jlrong  loins,  the  king  prepares
To  clofe  in  combat ,  and  his  body  bares  ;

Broad  fpread  his  Jhoulders ,  and  his  nervous  thighs
By  jujl  degrees ,  like  well  turn  d  columns  rife  ;

Ample  his  chef ,  &  arms  are  round  and Jlrong.

Pope.

And,  when  he  introduces  the  beggar  unwilling  to  ingage,  and,
through  fear,  declining  the  combat;  he  fays,  Thus  they  /poke  ;
But  Irus  fckened  with  fear  ;  however,  the  fuitors  forced  him ,
even  in  this  condition ,  to  be  girded ,  and  dragged  him  trembling
to  the  combat .  Thus  it  is  plain  that  the  Romans,  who  preferve
this  ancient  Greek  cuftom  to  this  day,  did  not  learn  it  from
us  afterwards,  nor,  even,  change  it  in  procefs  of  time,  as  we
have  done.  The  combatants  were  followed  by  bands  of  dan¬
cers,  in  three  divifions ;  the  firft  confifting  of  men ;  the  fecond,
of  youths ;  and  the  third,  of  boys ;  thefe  were  accompanied  by
players  on  the  flute,  who  made  ufe  of  ancient  flutes,  fmall  and
fhort,  fuch  as  are  ufed  at  this  time ;  and  by  players  on  the
lyre,  who  ftruck  ivory  lyres  with  feven  firings,  called  fiotfljoc ,
barbita  ;  the  ufe  of  which  is  left  off,  at  this  day,  among
the  Greeks,  though  pradtifed  by  their  anceftors ;  but  preferved
by  the  Romans  in  all  the  ancient  ceremonies  relating  to
their  facrifices  :  The  dancers  were  dreffed  in  fcarlet  vefts,
girded  with  brafs  cindtures,  from  which  hung  their  fwords,
and,  in  their  hands,  they  carried  fpears  fhorter  than  ordi¬
nary;  the  men  had,  brazen  helmets,  adorned  with  beautiful
crefts,  and  plumes :  Each  band  had  its  leader,  who  pre-
fcribed  the  figure  of  the  dance  to  the  reft,  and,  generally,

repre-


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VII.


reprefented  warlike,  and  quick  motions,  in  the  j3  time  he
beat.  This,  alfo,  was  a  very  ancient  Greek  inPdtution,  I
mean,  the  armed  dance,  called  the  Pyrrhic ;  whether  it  was
invented  by  Minerva,  who  firft  began  to  lead  bands  of
dancers,  and  to  dance  in  arms  upon  the  defhudtion  of  the
Titans,  in  order  to  celebrate  the  victory  by  this  token  of  her
joy,  or  whether  the  Curetes,  ftill  earlier  introduced  it,  when,
nurfing  Jupiter,  they  defired  to  divert  him  by  the  clashing
of  arms,  and  the  motion  of  their  limbs  in  time,  according
to  the  fable.  Homer  fhews,  in  many  places,  the  antiquity
of  this  alfo,  and  that  it  was  a  national  cuftom  among  the
Greeks ;  but,  particularly,  in  enumerating  the  ornaments  of
the  fhield,  which,  he  fays,  Vulcan  made  a  prefent  of  to
Achilles :  For,  having  reprefented  in  it  two  cities,  one  flou-
rifhing  in  peace,  the  other  fuffering  by  war,  in  That,  on
which  he  has  beftowed  the  happier  fate,  he  defcribes  feftivals,
marriages,  and  entertainments,  the  natural  effe&s  of  hap-
pinefs,  faying,


33’  Pu6|U0jf.  The  fignification  of  this
word  is  fo  much  altered,  that  we  have
almoft  loft  the  original  fenfe  of  it.  In
Greek,  it  fignifies  time,  not  tune  \  and
modern  languages  have  reduced  the
word  to  fignify  the  bane  of  all  poetry,
rime.  We  have,  indeed,  almoft  lhaken
oft'  this  monkifti  yoke  •,  at  leaft,  we
have  banifhed  it  from  the  ftage •,  where
it  is,  ftill,  in  fo  great  admiration  in
France,  that,  not  only,  tragedies,  but
comedies,  alfo,  muft  be  in  rime  :  Nay
I  have  been  told  in  France,  that  the
Mifanthrope  of  Moliere,  one  of  the
beft  comedies,  that,  ever,  appeared  in
any  language,  was  written  by  him  in


profe,  and  drefied  in  rime  to  pleafe
the  extraordinary  tafte  of  his  country¬
men.  This  is  the  more  furprifing,
becaufe  it  muft  be  allowed  that  the
French  dramatic  poetry,  for  regula¬
rity,  decency,  and  every  thing  but
ftrength,  excels  all  the  performances
of  that  kind,  which  our  country,  or
any  other  has  produced,  fince  the  re-
furre&ion  of  letters.  If  an  Englifh
reader  would  allow  me  to  render  iv
ioig  rs-^oKirivcr[A.ocliKoti  fvQfAoic,  in proceleuf-
matic  rythms ,  as  M.  *  *  *  has  faid,  en
rythmes  proceleufmatiques ,  it  would  lave
a  tranflator  a  great  deal  of  trouble.


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNAS  SENS  I S.  273

Fhe  youthful  dancers  in  a  circle  bounds
To  the  foft  flute ,  and  cittern s  fiver  found:

Through  the  fair  freets ,  the  matrons  in  a  row
Stand  in  their  porches ,  and  enjoy  the  fhow.

Pope*

And,  again,  in  defcribing  another  Cretan  band  of  dancers,
that  confifted  of  youths,  and  maidens,  with  which  the
fhield  was  adorned,  he  fpeaks  in  this  manner;

A  figurd  dance  fucceeds ;  fuch  as  was  feen
In  lofty  Gnoffus ,  for  the  Cretan  queen ,

Form  d  by  Daedalean  art .  A  comely  band
Of  youths ,  and  maidens ^  bounding  hand  and  hand \

Pope*

And,  in  defcribing  the  drefs  of  thefe  dancers,  in  order  to
fhew  that  the  youths  danced  in  arms,  he  fays ;

Of  thofe  the  loch  with  flowry  wreaths  inrolF d^

Of  thefe  the  fdes  adorn  d  with  fwords  of  gold ,

Float  glittring  gay  from  fiver  belts  depend .

Pope.

And,  when  he  introduces  the  leaders  of  the  dance,  who
prefcribed  the  figure  of  it  to  the  reft,  and  began  it,  he

fays ;

Fhe  gazing  multitudes  admire  around  ;

Two  aElive  tumblers  in  the  center  bound ;

Now  high ,  now  low ,  their  pliant  limbs  they  bend \

And  genral  fongs  the  fprightly  revel  end.

Pope.

N  n


VOL.  III.


It


Book  VII.


2.74  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

It  is,  not  only,  from  the  warlike,  and  ferious  dance,  which
the  Romans  employed  in  their  facrifical  ceremonies,  and
proceflions,  that  any  one  may  obferve  their  affinity  to  the
Greeks,  but,  alfo,  from  That,  which  is  fatyrical,  and  jocofe:
For,  after  the  armed  bands,  others  marched  in  procefiion,
perfonating  fatyres,  and  reprefented  a  Greek  dance,  called
34  Sicinnis  :  Thofe,  who  perfonated  the  Sileni,  were  dreffed
in  hairy  veils,  called  by  fome,  35  Chortaei ,  and  in  mantlets
of  various  flowers :  And  thofe,  who  reprefented  fatyres,
had  cin&ures,  and  wore  Ikins  of  goats ;  and,  on  their  heads,
the  manes  of  fome  animals  Handing  upright,  wTith  other
things  of  the  like  nature  :  Thefe  rallied,  and  mimicked  the
ferious  motions  of  the  others  by  counterfeiting  them  ridicu-
loufly.  The  triumphal  proceflions,  alfo,  fliew  that  raillery,
and  fatyrical  jokes  were  an  ancient,  and  national  entertain¬
ment  among  the  Romans :  For  the  foldiers,  who  attend  the
triumphs,  are  allowed  to  fatyrize,  and  ridicule  the  moft
conflderable  men,  without  fparing  their  generals,  in  the
fame  manner  as  the  Athenians,  who  rode  in  proceflion  in
carts  formerly,  were  permitted  to  rally  every  one  they  met :
Now,  they  flng  extemporary  verfes :  And  I  have  feen,  even,
in  the  funerals  of  illuftrious  perfons,  bands  of  dancers  per-
fonating  fatyres,  who,  together  with  the  reft  of  the  fhow,

34*  Ijjuvhv.  I  fhall  lay  before  the  <r«go9 •<*/,  xat  kivh&ou'  >j  axo  Xntxvx  tx
reader  the  account,  given  by  the  au-  A^vcauv  (&ot<rihiug‘ o)  Je  utto  Txmaidxywyx
thor  of  the  Etymologic um  magnum ,  of  t m  ux\$uv  Zmxvx.

the  fatyrical  dance,  called  by  theGreeks,  35-  XoeUw.  Xotfctw  is,  thus,  ex-

Xdiiwk.  That  author  fays  it  was  <r«7v-  plained  by  Suidas,  and  other  lexicon
oqxws’  Tgayntti’  jco^a£  writers,  Sxwq  jcai  ju othhulog  It  is

xwjUtxt?.  64$qlxi  cmwis  to  derived  from^los-,  which  fignifiesiwy,

preceded


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  AS  SE  N  S  IS.  275

preceded  the  bier,  and  imitated,  in  their  motions,  the  dance,
called  Sicinnis,  which  is,  particularly,  pradtifed  in  the  fu¬
nerals  of  the  rich  :  And,  that  this  fatyrical  manner  of  rally¬
ing,  and  the  dance,  I  have  fpoken  of,  was  not  the  invention
either  of  the  Ligures,  the  Umbri,  or  of  any  other  Barbarians,
who  inhabited  Italy,  but  of  the  Greeks,  I  fhall  not  go  about
to  prove,  left  I  fhould,  even,  difguft  my  readers  in  endea¬
vouring  to  confirm,  by  more  arguments,  a  thing,  univerfally,
allowed.  After  thefe  bands  of  dancers,  came  a  great  number
of  players  on  the  lyre,  and  the  flute :  And,  after  them,  the
perfons,  who  carried  the  cenfers,  in  which  perfumes  and
frankincenfe  was  burned  all  the  way  they  went ;  and,  alfo,
the  men,  who  bore  the  pageants  made  of  gold,  and  filver,
both  Thofe,  that  were  appropriated  to  religion,  and  Thofe,
that  belonged  to  the  public.  The  images  of  the  gods  clofed
the  procefllon ;  they  were  borne  on  mens  fhoulders ;  and
appeared  in  the  fame  fhape  with  Thofe  made  by  the  Greeks,
and  had  the  fame  habits,  the  fame  fymbols,  and  prefents,  of
which  each  of  them  is  faid  to  have  been  the  inventor,  and
the  giver  to  mankind :  Thefe  were  the  ftatues,  not  only,  of
Jupiter,  Juno,  Minerva,  Neptune,  and  of  the  reft,  whom
the  Greeks  reckon  among  the  twelve;  but,  alfo,  of  Thofe
36  more  ancient,  of  whom  the  fables  fay  the  twelve  were  bom

36*  A KAot  Kxt  t uv  tt$oytvf?t£6uv.  The  fchool  of  mankind  for  two  things
reader  will  find  by  many  paffages  in  feemingly  inconfiftent,  learning,  and
Herodotus,  and  Diodorus  Siculus,  that  fuperftition.  How  the  moft  learned
the  Greeks  borrowed  the  names  of  al-  nation,  of  all  others,  came  to  be  the
moft  all  their  gods,  and  the  whole  moft  fuperftitious,  contrary  to  reafon,
fyftem  of  their  abfurd  religion  from  and  contrary  to  experience  in  all  other
the  Egyptians ;  whofe  country  was  the  parts  of  the  world,  is  not  fo  eafy  to  be

N  n  2  (as,


276  ROMAN  ANTI

(as  of  Saturn,  Rhea,  Themis,
mofyne,  and  of  all  the  reft,

accounted  for :  The  folution  may  be
this;  that  the  learning,  and  the  fuper¬
ftition  were  in  different  hands  :  For  I
imagine  that  the  priefts  had  learning
without  fuperftition ;  and  the  laity
fuperftition  without  learning.  To  this
it  may  be  objedted,  that,  if  the  laity
had  fuperftition,  they  learned  it  from
their  priefts ;  no  doubt ;  but,  we  are
not  to  conclude,  that,  becaufe  the
priefts  taught  fuperftition,  they  were
themfelves  fuperftitious ;  on  the  con¬
trary,  many  paflfages  in  the  ancient
writers  give  us  great  reafon  to  believe,
and  hope,  that,  in  the  earlieft  times,
they  were  Deifts ;  and,  when  they,
afterwards,  taught  fuperftition,  they
preached,  not  the  dodtrine  they  be¬
lieved,  but  the  dodtrine  they  were  to
live  by;  becaufe  they  were  fenfible  that
fyftems,  and  ceremonies  would  afford
a  more  abundant  crop  to  the  prieft-
hood,  than  a  religion,  which,  inftead
of  wanting,  defpifes  the  foppery  of
both.  If  I  faid  that  the  Egyptians
were,  originally,  Deifts,  I  am  juftified
in  it  by  d  Ladiantius,  whofe  words  I
fhall  quote  at  length.  In  fpeaking  of
Thot,  or  Thoth,  whom  we  find  by
Sanchoniathon  in  eEufebius  to  have
invented  letters,  contrary  to  the  opi¬
nion  of  many  divines,  who  have  a  great
mind  that  Mofes  fhould  be  efteemed
the  inventor  of  them,  he  fays.  Hie
feripfit  librcs ,  et  quidem  multos ,  ad  cog-
nitionem  divinarum  rerum  pertinent esy  in
quibus  majejiatem  fummi  ac  Jingularis
dei  afferit :  iifdemque  nominibus  appellate

d  B.  i.  c.  6.  c  De  praepar.*  evang,  B.  i.  c.

s.De  praepar.  evang.  B.  i.  c.  9,  10.


JUITIES  OF  Book  VII.

Latona,  The  Deftinies,  Mne-
to  whom  temples,  and  holy

quibus  nos ,  delim,  et  patrem  :  ac  ne
quis  nomen  ejus  requireret ,  uvawuov  efj'e
dixit ,  eo  quod  nominis  proprietate  non
egeat ,  ob  ipfam  f cilice  t  unit  at  era :  Ipfius
haec  verba  funt ,  0  bt  Qiog  «?,  o'  Je  ovo-
I uotlog  a  zs-goffbeziai.  ya(>  0  m  avuiwy.og.
Deo  igitur  nomen  non  eft,  quia  folus  eft  ;
nec  opus  eft  proprio  vocabulo ,  nifi  cumdift
crimen  exigit  multitudo ,  ut  unamquamque
perfonam  fud  notd  et  appellatione  dejig-
nes ;  Deo  autem ,  quia  J'emper  unus  cfty
proprium  nomen  Deus.  This  was  the
religion  taught  by  this  great  Egyp¬
tian  philofopher,  and  legiOator  ;  ‘  in
honor  to  whom  the  Egyptians  called
the  firft  month  of  their  year  by  his
name.  It  is,  now,  impoffible  to  know
when  he  lived  ;  but,  by  a  quotation
of g  Eufebius  from  Sanchoniathon,  it
appears  that  his  laws  were  written  on
pillars,  and  copied  by  Mercurius  Trif-
megiftus  in  hieroglyphical,  or  hiero-
grammatical  charadlers  after  the  flood :
Though  I  am  much  afraid  that  thefe
laft  words,  yilx  rev  KalattAviTjUov,  are  not
the  words,  or  the  fenfe  of  the  words,
ufed  by  Sanchoniathon.  This  I  fay,
becaufe  every  one,  who  is  converfant
with  the  manner  of  Eufebius,  muft
know  that  he  is  a  very  unfair  quoter ;
and,  if  Sanchoniathon  had  given  an
account  of  the  flood,  we  fhould  have
heard  of  it  from  him  in  at  leaft  as
ample  a  manner,  as  the  other  had  re¬
lated  it.  This,  however,  we  may  ga¬
ther  from  his  quotation,  that  Thot
lived,  at  leaft,  a  thoufand,  and  nobody
knows  how  many  thoufand,  years  be-

10.  f  Cicero  De  Nat.  Deor.  B.  iii.  c.  22.

#

places


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  $  E  N S  I  S.  277

places  are  dedicated  among  the  Greeks ;  and  of  thofe,  who
are  fabled  to  have  lived  afterwards,  from  whom  Jupiter
received  the  kingdom)  and  of  Proferpina,  Lucina,  the
Nymphs,  the  Mufes,  the  Seafons,  the  Graces,  Bacchus,  and
the  Demigods,  whofe  fouls,  alter  they  had  left  their  mortal
bodies,  are  faid  to  have  afcended  to  Heaven,  and  to  have
obtained  the  fame  honors  with  the  gods ;  fuch  as  Hercules,
Aefculapius,  Caftor  and  Pollux,  Helena,  Pan,  and  many
others.  But,  if  the  founders  of  Rome,  and  the  inflitutors  of
this  feftival  had  been  Barbarians,  what  could  have  induced
them  to  abandon  their  national  gods,  and  genius’s,  and  to
worfhip  all  Thofe  of  the  Greeks  ?  Or,  let  any  one  fhew  any
other  people  befldes  the  Greeks,  among  whom  this  was  the
eftablifned  worfhip ;  and,  then,  let  him  cenfure  this  proof,
as  groundlefs.  After  the  proceflion  was  ended,  the  confuls,
and  the  priefts,  to  whom  it  was  allowed,  with  their  afliftants,
prefently  facrificed  oxen.  The  manner  of  which  facrifice
was  the  lame  as  with  us  :  For,  after  they  had  wafhed  their
hands,  and  purified  the  vi&ims  with  clear  water,  they
fprinkled  flower  on  their  heads,  and  prayed ;  and,  then,  gave
orders  to  their  miniftersto  facrifice  them  :  Some  of  whom,
while  the  victim  was  yet  Handing,  ftruck  it  on  the  temples
with  a  club ;  others  received  it,  as  it  fell,  upon  knives,  made
for  that  purpofe :  Alter  which,  they  flayed  it,  and  cut  it  up,

fore  Mofes,  in  whofe  time,  as  it  ap-  other  paffage  in  the  h  Scripture,  it  alio
pears  from  numberlefs  p adages  in  the  appears  that  even  the  Ifraelites  them-
Pentateuch,  the  Egyptians  had  ex-  felves  had,  during  their  fervitude  in
changed  the  noble  inftitutions  of  Thot  Egypt,  caught  the  infection,  and  were
for  a  wretched  idolatry  ;  and,  by  an-  become  idolaters.

h  Jofliua,  c.  xxiv.  1 4.

taking


Book  VII.


278  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

taking  off  a  piece  from  each  of  the  inwards,  and  from  every
limb,  as  a  firfc  offering ;  which  they  fprinkled  with  the
*  flower  of  barley,  and  carried  to  the  facrificers  in  bafkets:
Thefe  placed  them  on  the  altars ;  and,  making  a  Are  under
them,  poured  wine  upon  them,  while  they  v/ere  burning.
It  is  eafy  to  colled:  from  Homer’s  writings,  that  every  one  of
thefe  ceremonies  was  performed  according  to  the  cuftoms
eftabliflied  by  the  Greeks  in  relation  to  facrifices :  For  he
introduces  the  heroes  both  wafhing  their  hands,  and  uflng
barley  cakes,  where  he  fays  ;  'Then  they  wafhed  their  hands ,
and  took  up  barley  cakes  :  And,  alfo,  cutting  off  the  hair  from
the  head  of  the  vidim,  and  placing  it  on  the  fire,  faying
thus :  But  hey  beginning  the  facrifice ,  threw  the  hair  of  the
head  into  the  fire .  He,  alfo,  reprefents  them  ftriking  the
foreheads  of  the  vidims  with  clubs,  and  ftabbing  them,
when  they  were  fallen,  as  in  the  facrifice  of  Eumaeus :

A  knotty  flake  then  aiming  at  his  heady

Down  dropp'd  he  groaning,  and  the  fpirit  fled  :

The  fcorching  flames  climb  round  on  ev  ry  fide .

Pope.

He  fays  alfo,  that  they  took  the  firft  offerings  from  the  inwards,
and  the  limbs,  and  fprinkled  them  with  flower,  and  burned
them  upon  the  altars,  as  in  the  fame  facrifice :  The  fwme-
herd  took  the  firft  offerings  from  all  the  limbsy  andy  wrapping
thetn  up  in  the  faty  laid  them  upon  the  altar ,  while  they  were
yet  raw ;  theny  fipewing  them  with  flowery  he  threw  them
into  the  fire .


Thefe


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  IC  A  RN  A  SSE  N  S  IS.  279


Thefe  things  I  am  acquainted  with,  by  having  feen  the
Romans  perform  them,  even  in  my  time  ;  and,  contented
with  this  fingle  proof,  I  am  convinced  that  the  founders  of
Rome  were  not  Barbarians,  but  Greeks,  aflembled  together
from  many  places :  It  is,  indeed,  poftible  that  fome  Bar¬
barians,  alfo,  may  perform  a  few  cuftoms,  relating  to  facri-
fices,  and  feftivals,  in  the  fame  manner  with  the  Greeks ;
but,  that  they  fhouid  obferve  all  thefe,  is  not  to  be  believed.

LXXIII.  It,  now,  remains  for  me  to  give  a  fhort  account
of  the  games,  which  the  Romans  performed  after  the  pro-
ceffion :  The  firft  was  a  race  of  chariots,  drawn  by  four  horfes
in  front,  and  by  two,  and  of  unyoked  horfes,  as  it  was  pracftifed
by  the  Greeks,  anciently,  at  the  Olympic  games,  and  is  fo  to
this  day.  In  the  chariot  races,  two  very  ancient  cuftoms  are,
to  this  very  time,  obferved  by  the  Romans,  in  the  fame  manner
as  they  were,  firft,  inftituted ;  one  of  which  relates  to  the
chariots  drawn  by  three  horfes,  which  is,  indeed,  difufed  by
the  Greeks,  though  an  ancient,  and  heroical  inftitution,  which
Homer  fays  the  Greeks  ufed  in  battle  :  For  to  the  two  horfes
that  were  yoked,  in  the  fame  manner  as  when  chariots  are
drawn  by  two,  a  third  was  added  in  front,  that  was  fattened
to  the  chariot  by  traces ;  which  horfe  the  ancients  called,
37  II«f jjojov,  an  additional  horfe ,  becaufe  he  was  fattened,  and


37*  Hotovjo^cv.  Cafaubon  has  a  note
upon  this  word,  which  le  Jay  has  tranf-
lated  without  taking  the  lead  notice
of  him.  In  this  note,  Cafaubon  con¬
tends  that  the  led  horfes,  introduced
by  the  emperor  Theophilus,  and  call¬
ed,  by  the  Greeks,  of  thofe  times,


crvflvg  \tt TTxr,  took  their  rife  from  the
ancient  Greek  cuftom  of  adding  a
third  horfe  in  front,  called  zs-agyofog,
to  the  two,  called  gvyiot.  It  is  true  that
this  third  horfe  was,  alfo,  called  tret^ator.
But  this  word,  which  is  derived  from
c ■«$#,  has  not  the  lead  analogy  with.

joined


280  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VII.
joined  to  the  others.  The  other  inftitution  is  the  race,  run
by  thofe  perfons,  who  late  with  the  charioteers  ;  which  is,
ftill,  obferved  in  a  few  Greek  cities  upon  the  occanon  of
fome  ancient  facrifices  :  For,  after  the  horfe  races  were
ended,  thofe,  who  fate  with  the  charioteers,  whom  the  poets
call  38  U oc£Qc€oc]k;,  and  the  Athenians  A TioSocjac,  leap  from
their  chariots,  and  run  with  one  another  in  the  ftadium  :
So  that,  when  the  horfe  races  were  over,  thofe,  who  con¬
tended  in  their  own  perfons,  entered  the  lifts,  that  is,  the
foot  racers,  the  boxers,  and  the  wreftlers :  For  thefe  were  the
three  games  in  ufe  among  the  ancient  Greeks,  as  Homer
fhews  in  the  funeral  of  Patroclus.  And,  in  the  intervals


t rvflot,  which  is  derived  from  :
The  ufe,  alfo,  of  thefe  horfes  was  as
different  as  their  names.  The  Imrog
zragpogog,  or  o-Mgcact,  was  faftened  to
the  chariot,  and  drew  with  the  two
others  :  Whereas,  the  cvflog  Imrog  was
no  other  than  what  we  call  a  led  horfe.
In  1  Homer,  the  chariot  of  Achilles
was  drawn  by  three  horfes,  Xanthus,
Balius,  and  Pedafus;  the  laft  of  which
was  the  imrog  zvottfo^og  we  are  confi-
dering.

TuSe  kmiAv1oiu^uiv  V7r«fs  £vfov  cdKSotg  I7r7rxg,
ZoivQov  xczi  BasAiov,  t u)oc[xcc  zzvoiytn  ztelsS-yv.

Ev  Si  zragiiogijicriv  ay.Vfji.ovoi  TlyiSacov  lei.

After  this,  poor  Pedafus  is  killed  by
Sarpedon  ;  and,  falling,  puts  the  other
two  horfes  in  diforder  •,  but  Autome-
don  drew  his  fword  ;  and,  by  cutting
the  traces  of  Pedafus,  fet  every  thing
right  again,

‘Iliad  nr.  jr.  148.  kIb.


'S,7roiiTiTiXfMvog  Toivvyxeg  aopsra^iogzs’apa  ju ijpv,

A i%ag  antno^i  IIAPHOPON  k.

38-  TLxfatGtxlxg.  This  is,  indeed,  the
word  ufed  by  the  Greek  poets,  or  ra¬
ther  ■sraga&xlat,  for  the  fake  of  the
metre  ;  but  the  word  is,  ftill,  the  fame.

1  Homer  diftinguifhes  the  &a%cu£xlai
from  the  ijViopcoi,  when  he  is  fpeaking
of  the  Myrmidons,  who,  by  the  order
of  Achilles,

Av  S'  iGxv  ev  zrctgouGoilcii,  yvio%oi  ts.

The  three  games,  prefently  fpoken  of
by  Dionyfius,  fucceed  the  chariot  race
in  Homer,  though  not,  exactly,  in  this
order;  which  I  mention,  becaufe  Gla-
reanus  feems  to  think  that  our  author
fuppofed  the  chariot  race  to  have  been
one  of  them  :  Whereas,  nothing  can
be  plainer  than  that  he  fays  thefe  three
did  not  begin,  till  the  horfe  races
were  ended  ;  nAic&evluv  Se  ruv  imrixm

SgOfAUV.

.473.  1  Iliad  jh  *32,

between


Book  VII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I S.  281

between  the  games,  they  obferved  a  cuftom  the  moft
agreeable  to  the  genius  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  molt  com¬
mendable  of  all  others,  which  was,  to  crown  the  perfons,
and  proclaim  the  names,  of  thofe  they  honoured  as  their
benefa&ors  (as  it  was  practifed  at  Athens,  during  the  feftivals
of  Bacchus)  and  expofe  to  the  view  of  all  the  fpedlators  the
fpoils  they  had  taken  in  war.  But,  concerning  thefe  things,
as  it  would  not  have  become  me  to  make  no  mention  of
them,  when  the  fubjedt  required  it  ;  fo  it  would  be  im¬
proper  to  extend  the  relation  farther  than  is  neceffary.  It  is,
now,  time  to  return  to  the  narration  we  have  interrupted.
After  the  fenate  were  informed  of  all  the  circumftances
relating  to  the  Have,  who  had  been  led  to  punifhment  by
the  order  of  his  mafter,  and  had  preceded  the  proceffion,
by  the  perfon,  who  remembered  what  had  happened
upon  that  occafion,  they  concluded  that  this  man  was  the
unacceptable  leader  of  the  dancers,  pointed  out  by  the  god,
as  I  faid  ;  and,  inquiring  after  the  mafter,  who  had  ufed  his
flave  fo  cruelly,  they  punifhed  him  as  he  deferved ;  and
ordered  another  proceffion  to  be  performed  in  honour  of  the
god,  and  other  games  to  be  exhibited,  at  double  the  expence
of  the  former.  And  thefe  were  the  tranfadlions  of  this
confulfhip.


The  end  of  the  Seventh  book.


O  o


VOL.  III.


THE


THE


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES

O  F

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.

-  *  _

THE  EIGHTH  BOOK.

THE  confuls,  who  were  chofen  after  thefe,  were
Caius  Julius  lulus,  and  Publius  Pinarius  Rufus,
who  entered  upon  their  magiftracy  in  the  feventy
third  Olympiad,  at  which  Aftylus  of  Croton  won  the  prize
of  the  ftadium,  Anchifes  being  archon  at  Athens;  Thefe
magiftrates,  who  were  not,  in  the  lead,  warlike  men,  and,
for  that  reafon  chiefly,  had  obtained  the  confulfhip  from
the  people,  were,  contrary  to  their  inclination,  ingaged  in
many  great  dangers ;  a  war  breaking  out  in  their  magiftracy,
which  had  like  to  have  deftroyed  the  commonwealth  from
its  foundation :  For  Marcius  Coriolanus,  who  had  been
accufed  of  aiming  at  tyranny,  and  condemned  to  perpetual
baniftiment,  refenting  his  misfortune,  and,  at  the  fame  time,
defiring  to  revenge  himfelf  upon  his  enemies,  confidered  by
what  means,  and  by  the  forces  of  what  nation,  he  might
effedt  it;  and  found  that  the  Volfci  were,  at  that  time,  the

only


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  SS  ENS  I  S.  283

only  people,  whofe  power  was  able  to  encounter  That  of
the  Romans,  if  they  could  be  brought  to  unite,  and  make
war  upon  them  under  an  able  general.  He  concluded,  there¬
fore,  that,  if  he  could  prevail  on  the  Volfci  to  receive  him,
and  to  give  him  the  command  of  the  war,  his  defign  would
eafily,  and  prefently,  be  brought  to  bear.  On  the  other  fide,
his  hopes  were  checked  by  the  conlideration  of  the  cala¬
mities  he  had  often  brought  upon  them  in  battle,  and  in
forcing  many  cities  to  forfake  their  alliance.  However,  the
greatnefs  of  the  danger  did  not  deter  him  from  the  attempt ;
on  the  contrary,  he  refolved  to  ruflh  into  thefe  very  dangers,
and  fuffer  whatever  might  be  the  confequence.  Taking  the
advantage,  therefore,  of  a  dark  night,  he  went  to  Antium,
the  moft  conliderable  city  of  the  Volfci,  at  the  time  when
the  inhabitants  were  at  fupper ;  and,  going  into  the  houfe
of  a  man  in  power,  who,  by  reafon  of  his  birth,  his  riches,
and  his  military  actions,  had  a  high  opinion  of  himfelf,  and,
generally,  led  the  whole  nation,  whofe  name  was  Tullus
Attius,  he  became  his  fupplicant,  and  1  fate  down  at  the

Annotations  on  the  Eighth  Book.

1  *  tin  tvis  Isiol?.  Cafaubon  Moloffians ;  who,  not  being  at  home,

has  fhewn  great  fagacity  in  reading  his  wife  inftruCted  him  what  he  was  to
xa0e{ojuevo?,  inftead  of  as  it  do,  in  order  to  gain  the  protection  of

ftands  in  all  the  editions ;  this  does  him  her  hufband,  fays,  6  JW,  t> j?  yuvoa kos
the  greater  honor,  as  it  is  plain  he  had  UHm  yuo^voc,  annul  vV  aultjf  to,v
never  feen  the  Vatican  manulcript,  vrotnfot  <r<pwv  AocGuv  im  t>jv

where  we  find  :  Cafaubon  or,  rarher,  as  I  think,  |s -/«?.

juftifies  his  correction  by  aThucydides,  Cafaubon  goes  on,  and  confirms  his
who,  in  fpeaking  of  Themiftocles,  reading  by  quotations  from  many
when  he  fled  to  Admetus,  king  of  the  other  authors,  which  I  think  it  need-

*B.i.  c.  136.

O  O  2


foot


284  ROMAN  ANTIQJJI  TIE  S  OF  Book  VIII.


foot  of  the  altar  confecrated  to  his  houAiold  gods :  Then,
having  related  to  him  the  neceflity,  which  had  reduced  him
to  fly  to  his  enemies,  he  begged  of  him  to  entertain  fenti-
ments  of  moderation,  and  humanity  with  regard  to  a  perfon,
who  was  become  his  fupplicant,  and,  no  longer,  to  look  upon
that  man  as  an  enemy,  who  was  in  his  power ;  nor  to  exert
his  ftrength  againfl:  the  unhappy  and  the  humbled  ;  but
to  conflder  that  the  fortunes  of  men  are  not  permanent.
“  This,  fays  he,  you  may  learn,  in  a  particular  manner,
“  from  myfelf,  who  was,  once,  looked  upon  as  the  moil
<c  conflderable  perfon  in  the  moft  renowned  city,  and  am,
“  now,  deferted,  banifhed,  reduced  to  an  abjedt  condition,
and  expofed  to  any  treatment  you,  who  are  my  enemy,


lefs  to  repeat,  fince  we  are  in  pofifef-
fion  of  the  true  reading  by  the  afTift-
ance  or  the  Vatican  manufcript.  M.
*  *  *  has  taken  all  thefe  authorities
from  Cafaubon  verbatim,  and  adorned
himfelt  with  his  fpoils,  without  the
leaft  acknowledgement  to  the  bird,
whofe  plumes  he  borrowed  :  However,
I  thought  it  a  piece  of  juftice  to  ftrip
the  jackdaw,  and  to  reftore  the  gaudy
feathers  to  the  right  owner.  To  what
I  have  quoted  from  Cafaubon,  I  fhall
add  a  word,  or  two  of  my  own,  con¬
cerning  the  fignification  of  the  word
ts •,«,  becaufe  I  do  not  think  that  either
focus  in  the  Latin,  or  foyer  in  the
French,  tranflators,  explains  the  fenfe
of  it  in  this  place  :  For,  neither  of
thofe  words  fignifies  any  thing  more
than  a  fire ,  or  a  hearth  \  whereas  the
proper  fignification  of  was  an  altar

b  Pro  dom.  c.  41.


eredted  in  every  houfe  to  the  Dii  Pe¬
nates  :  This  is  explained  by  b  Cicero  :
Quid,  eft  fanblius ,  quid  omni  religione
muni  tins ,  quam  domus  uniufcujufque  ci-
vium  ?  Hie  arae  funt,  hie  foci ,  hie  dii
Penates ,  hie  facra ,  religiones ,  caeremoniae
continentur:  Hoc  per fugium  eftitafanffum
omnibus ,  ut  inde  abripi  neminem  fas  fit .
This  UlyfTes,  in  c  Homer,  calls
upon  to  witnefs  to  the  truth  of  what
he  is  faying,

Is'nj  t  cJWjjc?  df/,\Jfxovo?,  jju  #<p<jcava>.

Where  isiy,  or  I5 ■«*,  is,  very  properly,
explained  by  the  Greek  fcholiaft,  6
ftuuog  tvs  is-iczg.  Jn  this  fen!e  alio,
Hobbes,  who,  feldom,  miftakes  his
author,  has  tranllated  x«0*£eo9 ai  net  ty,9
Is -las  in  the  paffage  I  quoted  from
Thucydides,  and  fit  down  at  the  altar
of  the  houfe.


c  Odyff.  s.  f.  158,


u  fhall


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  285

u  fhall  think  fit  to  inflidl  upon  me.  But  I  promife  you  that
“  I  will  perform  as  great  Ter  vices  to  the  Volfci,  if  I  become
“  their  friend,  as  I  occafioned  calamities  to  them,  when  I
“  was  their  enemy  :  However,  if  you  refolve  upon  my  ruin,
u  let  loofe  your  refentment  at  once,  and  grant  me  the
<c  fpeedieft  death,  by  facrificing  a  fupplicant  with  your  own
u  hand,  and  at  the  foot  of  your  own  altar.”

II.  While  he  was  yet  fpeaking,  Tullus  gave  him  his  hand;
and,  railing  him  from  the  altar,  defired  he  would  allure
himfelf  that  he  fhould  not  be  treated  in  a  manner  unworthy
of  his  virtue;  and  faid  he  thought  himfelf  under  great
obligations  to  him  for  coming  to  his  houfe,  and  fhewed  that
he  looked  upon  even  This  as  no  fmall  honor  :  He  pro-
mifed  him,  alfo,  that  he  would  make  all  the  Volfci  his
friends,  and  begin  with  his  own  fellow’-citizens  :  All  which
promifes  he  made  good.  Soon  after,  Marcius,  and  Tullus
conferred  together  in  private,  and  came  to  a  refolution  to
begin  a  war  againft  the  Romans.  Tullus  propofed  to  put
himfelf,  immediately,  at  the  head  of  all  the  Volfci,  and
march  to  Rome,  while  the  Romans  were  yet  divided,  and
had  unexperienced  generals.  On  the  other  fide,  Marcius
infifted  that  they  ought  firft  to  lay  a  pious,  and  juft  foun¬
dation  for  the  war ;  and  fhewed  him  that  the  gods  interpofed
in  all  tranfa&ions,  particularly  in  Thofe  relating  to  war,  by
how  much  they  are  of  greater  confequence  than  any  others,
and  fubjecft  to  uncertain  events.  It  happened  that  there  was,
at  that  time,  a  ceflation  of  arms,  and  a  truce  fubfifting
between  the  Romans,  and  the  Volfci,  and  alfo,  a  treaty  for

two


286  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

two  years,  lately  entered  into  between  them  :  cc  If,  there-
“  fore,  you  make  war  upon  them  inconfiderately,  fays  he,
u  and  with  precipitation,  you  will  be  the  caufe  of  the
“  treaties  being  diffolved,  and  Heaven  will  not  be  propitious
“  to  you  :  Whereas,  if  you  flay  till  they  do  this,  you  will
“  be  thought  to  ad  upon  the  defenfive,  and  to  punifh  them
u  for  their  breach  of  treaty.  How  this  may  be  -  effected,
“  and  by  what  means  they  may  firft  violate  this  treaty,  and  1
“  we  feem  to  make  war  upon  them  with  piety,  and  juitice,
<c  I  have  difcovered,  after  long  confideration.  2  It  is  necefiary
“  the  Romans  fhould  be  deceived  by  us,  and  be  led,  by  that
“  deceit,  firft  to  tranfgrefs  the  law  of  nations.  The  manner
“  of  this  deceit  (which  I  have,  hitherto,  concealed  in  ex-
“  pedation  of  a  proper  feafon  to  put  it  in  practice ;  but,
“  feeing  you,  now,  eager  for  adion,  I  am  forced  to  diiclofe
“  it  fooner  than  I  propofed)  is  this:  The  Romans  are  going
<c  to  perform  facrifices,  and  exhibit  very  magnificent  games,
“  at  a  great  expence  :  At  which  great  numbers  of  ft  rangers
“  will  be  prefent,  as  fpedators.  When  this  time  comes,  go

A  *  v<p' r'/uuov  ctvlxf  e^oi7Toi1v](iivlui.  to  have  been  fo  far  blinded  by  his  refent-
This  is  a  poor  fubterfuge  in  Coriola-  ment  againft  his  country,  as  to  facri flee
nus,  and  ftrange  advice  from  a  man,  every  confideration  to  his  defire  of  re-
who  had,  juft  before,  faid  that  Heaven  venge  :  The  impetuofity  of  this  paf-
vvould  not  be  propitious  to  the  Vollci,  fion  made  him  tranfgrefs  the  moft  im-
if  they  were  the  aggreflors  in  the  war;  portant  maxim  of  political  morality,
as  if  there  could  be  any  difference  be-  which  renders  it  infamous,  in  the
tween  taking  arms  againft  the  Romans,  higheft  degree,  for  any  man,  how  un-
and  circumventing  them  by  this  mean  juftly  foever  he  may  have  been  treated
device  :  The  end  of  both  was  the  fame,  by  his  country  (which,  by  the  way,
that  is,  to  force  the  Romans  into  a  war,  was  not  his  cafe)  even  to  affift  her
and  the  means  he  employed  to  effedl  enemies  with  his  counfel,  much  more
that  end,  was,  of  the  two,  the  leaft  to  take  arms  againft  her.
honourable.  But  he  leems  throughout


“  thither


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  287

“  thither  yourfelf,  and  ingage  as  many  of  the  Volfci  as  you
£C  can,  to  go  alfo,  and  fee  the  games:  And,  when  you  are
u  at  Rome,  fend  one  of  your  friends  you  can  mold  con-
“  fide  in,  to  the  confuls,  and  let  him  acquaint  them,  pri-
“  vately,  that  the  Volfci  have  formed  a  defign  to  attack
“  the  city  in  the  night  ;  and  that  it  is  with  this  view  they
“  are  come  to  Rome  in  fo  great  numbers :  For  you  may  be
“  allured  that,  if  they  hear  this,  they  will  expel  you  the  city
“  without  hefitation,  and  furniffi  you  with  a  motive  for  a
tc  juft  refentment.”

III.  When  Tullus  heard  this,  he  was  highly  pleafed  ;
and,  putting  off  the  defign  of  a  prefent  expedition,  employed
himfelf  in  preparing  for  the  war.  When  the  day,  appointed
for  the  commencement  of  the  feftival,  was  come,  Julius,
and  Pinarius,  having,  already,  entered  upon  their  magiftracy,
the  choicefl:  youth  of  the  Volfci  came  from  every  city,  at
the  defire  of  Tulius,  to  fee  the  games  :  And  the  greateft
part  of  them  were  obliged  to  lie  in  tents  fet  up  both  in  the
facred,  and  public  places ;  neither  the  houfes  of  public
entertainment,  nor  Thofe  of  the  Romans,  with  whom  they
had  an  intercourfe  of  hofpitality,  fufficing  for  their  reception  :
And,  when  they  walked  in  the  ftreets,  they  appeared  in
bodies,  and  companies :  So  that,  there  was,  already,  a  report
in  the  city,  and  ftrange  fufpicions  raifed  concerning  them.
In  the  mean  time,  the  informer,  fuborned  by  Tullus  pur-
fuant  to  the  advice  of  Marcius,  went  to  the  confuls  ;  and,
pretending  that  he  had  a  fecret  practice  to  reveal  to  his
enemies  againft  his  friends,  he  bound  the  confuls  by  oaths,

as


288  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

as  well  in  regard  to  his  own  fafety,  as  that  none  of  the
Volfci  fhould  know  who  had  given  the  information  againft
them  :  After  which,  he  gave  an  account  of  the  pretended
treachery.  The  confuls  gave  credit  to  the  relation,  and
immediately  fummoned  all  the  fenators,  man  by  man ;  and
the  informer,  being  brought  before  the  fenate,  and,  having
received  from  them,  alfo,  the  fame  afiurances,  he  confirmed
the  account  he  had  given.  The  fenators  had,  even  long
before,  looked  upon  it  as  a  circumftance  full  of  fufpi-
cion,  that  fuch  numbers  of  young  men  fhould  come  to  fee
the  games  from  one  nation,  who  were  their  enemies :  But,
by  the  acceffion  of  this  information,  the  deceit  of  which
they  were  ftrangers  to,  their  opinion  was  turned  into  cer¬
tainty.  The  refolution,  therefore,  they  all  came  to,  was,  to
fend  the  men  out  of  the  city  before  funfet,  and  to  order
proclamation  to  be  made,  that  all,  who  refufed  to  obey,
fhould  be  put  to  death ;  and  that  the  confuls  fhould  take
care  that,  in  departing,  they  fhould  neither  be  infulted,  nor
expofed  to  any  danger.

IV.  After  the  fenate  had  paffed  this  order,  fome  went
through  the  ftreets  giving  notice  to  the  Volfci  to  depart  the
city  immediately,  and  that  they  fhould  all  go  out  at  one
gate,  which  was  That  called  Capena  ;  while  others,  together
with  the  confuls,  conduced  them  in  their  departure  :  And,
as  they  all  went  out  of  the  city  at  the  fame  time,  and  at  the
fame  gate,  it  appeared,  by  that  means,  how  numerous  they
were,  and  how  fit  they  were  all  for  fervice.  Tullus  firft
went  out  with  great  expedition  ;  and,  making  a  Hand  at  a

proper


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  2S9

proper  place,  not  far  from  the  city,  he  received  thofe,  who
came  after  him:  And,  when  they  were  all  together,  he
harangued  them,  ufing  many  inve&ives  againft  the  Romans,
and  fhewed  that  the  infult  the  Vollcians  had  received  from
them  was  heinous,  and  inexpreflible,  they  being  the  only
ftrangers,  who  were  driven  out  of  Rome  :  He  deflred  that
every  man  would  publifh  thefe  proceedings  in  the  cities,  to
which  he  belonged,  and  take  proper  meafures  to  put  a
flop  to  this  infolence  of  the  Romans,  by  punifhing  them  for
their  unwarrantable  behaviour:  After  he  had  faid  this,  and
fharpened  the  refen tment  of  the  Volfci,  who  were,  already,
exafperated  at  the  ufage  they  had  met  with,  he  difmiffed
the  affembly.  When  they  returned  home,  every  one  related
to  his  fellow-citizens  the  infult  he  had  received,  with  ag¬
gravations,  which  inflamed  all  the  cities  to  that  degree  they
were  unable  to  contain  their  refentment:  And,  fending  to
another,  they  appointed  a  general  affembly  of  the  Volfcian
nation,  in  order  to  confult  in  common  concerning  the  war:
All  this  was  done,  chiefly,  at  the  inftigation  of  Tullus.
And  the  magiftrates  from  every  city,  together  with  great
multitudes  of  other  people,  aflembled  at  Echetra  (for  this
city  feemed  the  moft  conveniently  fituated  for  a  general
affembly)  and,  after  many  fpeeches  were  made  by  the  ma¬
giftrates  of  the  cities,  the  votes  of  all  prefent  were  taken ;
and  it  was  carried  to  begin  the  war,  flnce  the  Romans  had
flrft  violated  the  treaty.

V.  After  the  magiftrates  had  propofed  to  the  aflembly
to  conflder  in  what  manner  they  ought  to  carry  on  the  war
Vo l.  III.  P  p  againft


2qo  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

againft  them,  Tullus  prefented  himfelf,  and  advifed  them
to  call  in  Marcius,  and  inquire  of  him  by  what  means  the
power  of  the  Romans  might  be  fubverted:  For  he  knew,
better  than  any  man,  both  the  weaknefs,  and  the  ftrength
of  that  commonwealth.  This  was  approved  of ;  and  pre-
fently  they  all  cried  out  to  call  in  the  man.  Then  Marcius,
having  the  opportunity  he  defired,  rofe  up  with  grief  in  his
looks,  and  tears  in  his  eyes  ;  and,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  fpoke
as  follows  :  44  If  I  thought  you  all  entertained  the  fame

44  opinion  of  my  misfortune,  I  fhould  not  think  it  neceflary
4  to  make  any  apology  for  it ;  but,  when  I  confider  that,
4  among  many  men  of  different  characters,  it  is  probable
4  fome  may  be  poflefled  with  an  opinion,  neither  true  in
4  itfelf,  nor  deferved  by  me,  that  the  people  of  Rome  did
1  not  banifh  me  without  a  real,  and  juft  caufe,  I  think
c  myfelf  obliged,  above  all  things,  firft  to  clear  my  conduCt
4  in  a  public  manner,  and  before  you  all,  from  any  impu-
4  tation  relating  to  my  banifihment :  But,  I  conjure  you,
4  by  the  gods,  that  even  thofe  among  you,  who  are  beft
4  acquainted  with  what  I  have  fuffered  from  my  enemies,
4  and  beft  know  that  I  have  not  deferved  this  misfortune,
4  will  allow  me  to  proceed,  and  that  you  will  not  defire  to
4  be  advifed  what  you  are  to  do,  before  you  have  inquired
4  into  the  character  of  the  ad  viler.  The  account  I  fhall  give
4  of  thefe  things  will  be  fhort,  though  I  fhould  date  it  from
4  their  beginning.  The  original  conftitution  of  the  Romans
4  was  compofed  of  monarchy,  and  ariftocracy  :  Afterwards,

4  Tarquinius,  their  laft  king,  thought  fit  to  change  the

44  govern-


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  291

“  government  to  a  tyranny  :  For  which  reafon,  the  leading
“  men  of  the  ariftocracy,  entering  into  an  affociation  againft
cc  him,  expelled  him  the  city ;  and,  taking  upon  themfelves
“  the  adminiftration  of  the  public  affairs,  formed  fuch  a
<c  fyflem  of  government,  as  all  men  acknowledge  to  be  the
“  beft  and  wifeft.  But,  not  long  after,  that  is,  within  three,
u  or  four  years,  the  poorefl  and  idleft  of  the  citizens,  excited
“  by  bad  leaders,  committed  many  infolences,  and,  at  laft,
endeavoured  to  fubvert  the  ariftocracy.  Upon  this,  all  the
“  leading  men  of  the  fenate  grew  uneafy,  and  thought
cc  proper  to  confider  of  the  means  to  reprefs  the  infolence
*c  of  thefe  difturbers  of  the  government.  Of  all  the  fup-
“  porters  of  the  ariftocracy,  Appius,  a  man,  who,  on  many
accounts,  deferves  to  be  commended,  moil  diftinguifhed
xc  himfelf  among  the  elder  fenators,  as  I  myfelf  did  among
u  the  younger  :  And,  upon  every  occafion,  we  fpoke  with
“  freedom  in  the  fenate,  notfo  much  with  a  view  of  making
“  war  upon  the  people,  as  from  a  jealoufy  left  the  government
<c  fhould  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  worft  citizens ;  neither
“  did  we  defire  to  inflave  any  of  the  Romans,  but  to  pre-
u  ferve  the  liberty  of  all,  and  that  the  power  might  be  re-
fic  ftored  to  the  beft  men.

VI.  “  This  being  obferved  by  thofe  moil  pernicious
“  leaders  of  the  people,  they  refolved  to  remove  us  two,
“  whomoft  profeiledly  oppofed  them,  firft  out  of  their  way,
“  not  by  attacking  us  both  at  once,  left  the  attempt  fhould
cc  appear  both  invidious  and  odious,  but  to  begin  with  me,
“  who  was  the  younger,  and  the  eafier  to  be  oppreffed.

P  p  2  “  In


292  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

££  In  the  firft  place  therefore,  they  endeavoured  to  deftroy
“  me  without  a  trial ;  and,  after  that,  they  required  to  have
“  me  delivered  up  by  the  fenate  in  order  to  be  put  to  death  :
“  But,  being  difappointed  in  both,  they  fummoned  me  to
££  a  trial,  in  which  they  themfelves  were  to  be  my  judges,
cc  and  charged  me  with  aiming  at  tyranny  :  They  did
££  not  conlider  that  tyrants  never  make  war  upon  the
££  people  in  conjunction  with  the  beft  men;  but,  on  the
£C  contrary,  deftroy  the  beft  men  in  conjunction  with  the
££  people  :  Neither  did  they  fuffer  the  people  aftembled  in
££  their  centuries  to  be  my  judges,  according  to  the  efta-
“  blifhed  cuftom,  but  appointed  fuch  an  aflembly  to  try  me,
££  as  all  allow  to  coniift  of  the  moft  profligate  judges,  a
££  tribunal  ereCted  againft  me,  and  me  alone,  in  which
££  labourers,  vagabonds,  and  thole,  who  form  defigns
££  againft  the  poffeffions  of  others,  were  fure  to  prevail  over
££  good  and  juft  men,  and  fuch  as  aim  at  the  fafety  of
££  the  commonwealth.  And  fo  far  was  I  from  appearing
££  guilty  of  any  crime,  that,  though  tried  by  the  populace,
££  of  which  the  greateft  part  were  enemies  to  virtue,  and,
££  for  that  reafon,  to  me,  I  was  3  condemned  by  two  votes
££  only,  while  the  tribunes  threatened  to  refign  their  power,
££  if  I  was  acquitted,  alledging  that  they  expeCted  the

3-  Av<r<  povov  laxuv  T< Marcius,  to  him,  there  would,  then,  have  been
like  an  able  orator,  artfully  extenuates  eleven  for  him,  and  as  many  againft
the  number  of  votes,  that  condemned  him,  and,  confequently,  as- our  author
him,  and  yet  advances  nothing,  that  has  already  told  us,  he  would  have
is  not  literally  true  :  For,  though  nine  been  acquitted  by  reafon  of  the  equa-
votes  oi  ly  acquitted,  and  thirteen  con-  lity  of  votes,  as  the  law  required.  See
demned,  him,  yet  it  is  true  that,  if  two  the  twenty  fixdi  annotation  on  the
of  thofe  thirteen  votes  had  come  over  feventh  book.


££  worft


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALI C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  293

££  worft  of  treatment  from  me,  and,  with  all  eagernefs  and
tc  pafiion,  preffed  my  condemnation.  After  I  had  been  thus
££  treated  by  my  fellow-citizens,  1  thought  my  future  life
££  would  prove  a  fcene  of  mifery  to  me,  urilefs  I  took  re-
£C  venge  on  them:  And,  for  this  reafon,  when  I  was  at
££  liberty  to  live,  with  eafe,  either  in  any  of  the  Latin  cities
££  I  thought  fit  by  reafon  of  our  confanguinity,  or  in  the
££  colonies  lately  planted  by  our  fathers,  I  declined  it;  and
£C  chofe  rather  to  fly  to  you,  whom  I  knew  to  have  received
££  the  greateft  injuries  from  the  Romans,  and  to  entertain
££  the  greateft  refentment  againft  them ;  to  the  end  that,  in
££  conjunction  with  you,  I  might  take  revenge  on  them  to
££  the  utmoft  of  my  power  both  by  my  words,  where  words
££  were  wanted,  and,  by  my  aCtions,  where  they  were  fo.
££  And  I  think  myfelf  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  reception
££  you  have  given  me,  and  ftill  more  for  the  honor  you  fliew
££  me,  without  either  refenting,  or  confidering,  the  mifchiefs
££  you  received  from  me  during  the  wars.

VII.  ££  What  character,  then,  fhould  I  deferve,  if,  deprived
££  as  I  am  of  the  glory,  and  honors  I  ought  to  have  received
££  from  my  fellow-citizens,  to  whom  I  have  rendered  great
££  fervices,  and,  befides,  driven  away  from  my  country,  my
££  family,  my  friends,  from  the  gods,  and  fepulchres  of  my
££  anceftors,  and  from  every  other  enjoyment ;  and  if,  finding
££  all  thefe  among  you,  whom  I  have  made  war  againft  for
££  their  fake,  I  fhould  not  annoy  thofe,  who  have  behaved
££  themfelves  to  me  like  enemies,  inftead  of  fellow-citizens,
££  and  ferve  thofe,  who  have  fhewn  themfelves  my  friends,

££  inftead


294  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

C£  inftead  of  enemies  ?  For,  whoever  entertains  neither  re-
u  fentment  againft  thofe,  who  feek  his  ruin,  nor  affedtion
£  for  thofe,  who  endeavour  his  prefervation,  deferves  not,

£  in  my  opinion,  the  name  of  a  man.  I  acknowledge  not
c  that  nation  for  my  country,  which  has  renounced  me,
£  but  That,  of  which,  though  a  ftranger,  I  am  become  a
£  citizen ;  nor  the  country,  in  which  I  have  been  injured,
c  as  my  friend,  but  That,  in  which  I  find  my  fecurity.
c  And,  if  I  am  aflifted  by  Heaven,  and  feconded  by  you
£  with  all  the  alacrity  I  have  reafon  to  expedt,  I  hope  there
£  will  be  a  great,  and  hidden  change :  For  you  know  that
£  the  Romans,  after  the  experience  of  many  enemies,  fear
£  none  more  than  you ;  neither  is  there  any  thing  they
£  have  ever  fought  more  earneftly,  than  the  means  of  weak-
£  ening  your  nation.  And,  to  this  end,  they  have  poflefled
£  themfelves  of  fome  of  your  cities  by  force  in  time  of
£  war,  and  deluded  others  to  fubmit  to  them  by  vain
£  promifes  of  their  friendfhip,  left  all  of  you  fhould  unite,
£  and  ingage  in  a  common  war  againft  them.  If,  therefore,
£  youperfift  in  your  refolution  of  counteradfing  their  defigns
£  with  vigor,  and  ail  unite  in  carrying  on  the  war,  as  you
now  feem  determined  to  do,  you  will  eafily  put  an  end  to
{£  their  power.

VIII.  ££  As  to  the  operations  of  the  war,  and  your  con-
(t  dudt  in  this  enterprife,  fince,  from  your  opinion  either  of
££  my  experience,  or  affedtion  to  you,  or  both,  you  defire
“  that  I  fhould  give  my  advice,  I  fhall  give  it,  without
££  concealing  any  thing.  In  the  fir  ft  place,  therefore,  I  advife

££  you


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H AL ICA RNA SSE N S IS.  295

“  you  to  confuler  by  what  means  you  may  find  a  pious,  and
“juft  caufe  of  war :  Hear  then,  what  caufe  of  war  will,
<c  not  only,  be  pious  and  juft,  but  profitable  to  you  at  the
“  fame  time  :  The  country,  which,  originally,  belonged  to
C£  the  Romans,  is  of  fmall  extent,  and  barren ;  but  That,
“  which  they  have  acquired  by  robbing  their  neighbours,  is
<£  large  and  fertil :  And,  if  each  of  the  injured  nations  fhould
<£  redemand  their  own,  nothing  would  be  fo  inconfiderable,
“  fo  weak,  and  fo  diftrefted,  as  the  Roman  ftate.  Of  this
“  you  ought,  I  think,  to  fhew  the  example  :  Send,  there-
“  fore,  embafladors  to  them  to  demand  reftitution  of  your
C£  cities  they  are  in  pofleftion  of ;  to  defire  them  to  evacuate
“  all  the  ftrong  places  they  have  erecfted  in  your  country,
<£  and  to  perfuade  them  to  reftore  every  thing  elfe  belonging
<£  to  you,  which  they  have  ufurped  by  force.  But,  commence
<£  not  the  war,  till  you  have  received  their  anfwers  :  For,  if
<£  you  follow  this  advice,  you  will  obtain  one  of  the  two
<£  things  you  defire  ;  you  will  either  acquire  reftitution  of
<£  all,  that  belongs  to  you,  without  danger,  and  expence  ;
“  or  be  furnifhed  with  an  honourable,  and  a  juft  caufe  of
“  war.  For,  not  to  covet  the  pofleffions  of  others,  but  to
“  redemand  one’s  own,  and,  not  obtaining  it,  to  declare  war,
<c  will,  by  all  men,  be  allowed  an  honourable  proceeding.
C£  What  refolution,  then,  do  you  think  the  Romans  will
££  take,  if  you  purfue  my  advice?  Do  you  think  they  will
<£  reftore  the  places  to  you  ?  If  they  do,  what  fhould
££  hinder  them  from  relinquifhing  every  thing,  that  belongs
££  to  others  ?  For  the  Aequi,  the  Albans,  the  Tyrrhenians,

“  and


\  '

296  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

££  and  many  others  will  come,  each  to  redemand  their  own.
cc  Or  do  you  think  they  will  retain  thefe  places,  and  refufe
££  all  your  juft  demands?  This  is  my  opinion.  Protefting,
<c  therefore,  that  you  have  been  firft  injured  by  them,  you
££  will,  neceffarily,  have  recourfe  to  arms ;  and  you  will  have,
££  for  your  allies,  all,  who,  having  been  deprived  of  their
<£  poffeffions,  defpair  of  recovering  them  by  any  other  means,
££  than  by  a  war  :  And  Fortune  has  prepared  for  the  in-
t£  jured  an  opportunity  they  could  never  have  expe&ed,
<£  and,  of  all  others,  the  moft  favourable,  of  attacking  the
££  Romans,  while  they  are  divided,  and  fufpedl  one  another,
C£  and  while  their  generals  are  unexperienced  in  war.  Thefe,
C£  therefore,  are  the  things,  which  I  thought  proper  to  fug-
cc  geft  to  you,  as  to  perfons  I  wifh  well  to ;  and  are  delivered
c£  with  all  affedfion,  and  fincerity.  As  to  Thofe,  which  it
<£  will  be  neceffary  to  forefee,  and  contrive  upon  every  occa-
t£  fion,  when  thefe  defigns  are  to  be  carried  into  execution,
“  leave  them  to  your  generals  :  For  you  may  depend  upon
££  my  zeal  for  your  fervice,  in  whatever  poft  you  fhall  think  fit
££  to  place  me;  and  I  fhall  endeavour  to  do  my  duty  with
££  no  lefs  bravery  than  any  of  your  common  foldiers,  or
££  your  inferior,  or  fuperior  officers.  Employ  me,  therefore,
££  wherever  I  may  be  of  any  ufe  to  you;  and  be  aflured
££  that,  if,  when  I  fought  againft  you,  I  was  able  to  do  you
££  great  mifchief,  when  I  fight  on  your  fide,  I  fhall,  alfo,  be
££  able  to  do  you  great  fervice.”

IX.  Thus  Marcius  fpoke  :  And,  while  he  was  yet  fpeak-
ing,  it  was  vifible  that  the  Volfci  heard  him  with  admiration.

And,


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  297

And,  after  he  had  done,  they  fignified  their  approbation  of
his  advice  by  loud  acclamations ;  and,  {offering  no  one  elfe
to  fpeak,  they  confirmed  it  by  a  refolution  of  the  aflembly.
After  the  order  was  drawn  up,  they  made  choice  of  the
moft  confiderable  men  out  of  every  city,  and  fent  them  to
Rome  in  quality  of  embaffadors.  And,  as  to  Marcius  him-
felf,  they  voted  that  he  fhould  be  admitted  into  the  fenate
in  every  city ;  be  capable  of  the  magiftracy  every  where ;
and  partake  of  all  other  honors,  that  were  in  the  greateft
requeft  among  them.  And,  without  flaying  for  the  anfwer
of  the  Romans,  they  all  went  to  work,  and  employed  them-
felves  in  warlike  preparations ;  and  every  one,  who  had
,  been,  till  then,  dejedled  by  their  former  defeats,  grew,  now,
elated,  in  confidence  of  fubverting  the  power  of  the  Romans.
In  the  mean  time,  the  embaffadors  they  had  fent  to  Rome,
being  introduced  into  the  fenate,  faid  that  the  Volfci  were
very  defirous  of  feeing  an  end  put  to  their  complaints
againft  the  Romans ;  and  that,  for  the  future,  they  might
be  friends  and  allies,  without  fraud  or  deceit :  And  that
they  fhould  look  upon  the  reftitution  of  the  lands,  and  the
cities,  which  had  been  taken  from  them,  as  a  fure  pledge  of
their  mutual  friendfhip ;  otherwife,  there  could  be  neither
peace,  nor  lafting  friendfhip  between  them  ;  the  injured
being  by  nature  an  enemy  to  the  injurer :  And  they  defired
the  Romans  not  to  reduce  them  to  a  necefiity  of  making
war,  by  refufing  them  juftice.

X.  After  the  embafiadors  had  done  fpeaking,  the  fenators
ordered  them  to  withdraw ;  and  held  a  confutation  among
Vol.  III.  Qj\  them-


298  ROiMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

themfelves :  Then,  having  refolved  upon  the  anfwer  they
were  to  give,  they  called  them  again  into  the  fenate,  and
fpoke  to  them  as  follows  :  “  We  are  not  ignorant,  Volfci,
u  that  you  do  not  feek  peace,  but  only  a  fpecious  pretence
u  for  war  :  For  you  come  to  demand  thofe  things  of  us,
(C  which  you  well  know  you  will  never  obtain,  fince  your
<s  demands  are  unjuft  and  impoffible.  If,  indeed,  you  had
<c  delivered  up  thefe  places  to  us,  and,  changing  your  minds,
“  came  now  to  redemand  them,  it  would  have  been  unjuft
ic  not  to  reftore  them  ;  but,  being  deprived  of  them  by  war,
“  and  having,  no  longer,  any  right  to  them,  you  ad  unjuftly
tc  in  coveting  the  poflefiions  of  others.  •  As  for  us,  we  look
“  upon  thofe  acquifitions  to  be  founded  on  the  beft  title,
u  that  are  founded  on  our  victories.  We  are  not  the  firft:,
“  who  have  eftabliftied  this  law,  neither  do  we  look  upon
“  it  to  flow  from  men,  but  from  the  gods.  And,  as
“  we  know  that  all  nations,  both  Greeks,  and  Barbarians,
“  make  ufe  of  this  law,  we  are  refolved  to  relax  in  nothing,
“  nor  to  relinquifh  any  of  our  conquefts :  For  it  would  fhew
“  a  great  want  of  fpirit  in  us  to  lofe,  through  fear  and  folly,
“  what  we  have  acquired  by  virtue,  and  valor.  We  neither
“  force  you  into  a  war,  if  you  do  not  deflre  it ;  nor  deprecate
<c  a  war,  if  you  do  :  But,  if  you  begin  it,  we  flhall  defend
“  ourfelves.  Return  this  anfwer  to  the  Volfci ;  and  let  them
tc  know  that  they  will  be  the  firft  to  take  up  arms,  and  we
“  the  laft  to  lay  them  down.”

XI.  T  he  embafiadors,  having  received  this  anfwer,  made
their  report  to  the  commonwealth  of  the  Volfci :  Upon

which,


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  EN  S  IS.  299

which,  another  affembly  being  called,  a  decree  paffed,  with
the  concurrence  of  the  whole  nation,  to  declare  war  againft
the  Romans.  After  this,  they  appointed  Tullus,  and  Mar-
cius  to  command  their  armies  with  abfolute  authority  ;  and
voted  men  to  be  levied,  money  to  be  raifed,  and  preparations
to  be  made  of  every  thing  they  thought  necefiary  for  the
war.  When  the  affembly  was  going  to  be  difmiffed,  Marcius
rofe  up,  and  faid ;  £C  The  votes  of  this  afiembly  deferve
“  commendation,  and  let  them  be  carried  into  execution,
“  each  in  their  own  time:  But,  while  you  are  railing  men,
“  and  making  other  preparations,  which,  in  all  probability,
“  will  employ  you  for  fome  time,  and  create  delays,  Tullus
<c  and  I  will  begin  the  work.  As  many  of  you,  therefore,
“  as  are  willing  to  plunder  the  enemy’s  country,  and  to  gain
<c  a  great  booty,  let  them  go  with  us.  I  undertake,  with  the
u  affiftance  of  Heaven,  to  procure  them  many  rich  fpoils:
<c  For  the  Romans,  obferving  that  our  forces  are  not  yet
“  drawn  together,  are  unprepared  to  receive  us :  So  that,
“  we  fhall  have  an  opportunity  of  overrunning  as  great  a
u  part  of  their  country  as  we  pleafe,  without  moleftation.”

XII.  The  Volfci  approving  this  propofal  alfo,  the  generals
marched  out,  immediately,  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army
of  voluntiers,  before  the  Romans  were  informed  of  their
defign  :  With  part  of  which  Tullus  invaded  the  territories
of  the  Latines,  in  order  to  prevent  them,  by  this  diverfion,
from  fending  any  affiftance  to  the  Romans ;  while  Marcius
led  the  remaining  part  of  the  army  into  the  Roman  terri¬
tories.  As  this  misfortune  fell  unexpectedly  on  the  inhabi-

Quj  2  ■  tants


300  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

tants  of  the  country,  many  Romans  of  free  condition  were
taken,  and  many  Haves,  and  no  fmall  quantity  of  oxen,
beafts  of  burden,  and  other  cattle.  And,  as  to  the  corn
that  was  left  Handing,  the  iron  tools,  and  other  inftru-
ments,  with  which  the  land  is  tilled,  fome  were  carried
away,  and  others  deftroyed  :  For  the  Volfci,  at  laft,  fet  fire
to  the  country  houfes ;  fo  that,  it  would  be  a  long  time,
before  the  owners  could  repair  them.  The  pofieftions  of  the
plebeians  fuffered  mold  upon  this  occafion,  while  Thofe  of
the  patricians  remained  unhurt ;  or,  if  thefe  received  any
damage,  it  fell  only  on  their  flaves,  and  cattle.  For  Marcius
had  given  thefe  orders  to  the  Volfci,  w7ith  a  view  of  en-
creafing  the  jealoufy  of  the  plebeians  againft  the  patricians,
and  to  keep  the  fedition  alive ;  which  happened  accordingly  :
For,  when  the  Romans  were  informed  of  this  devaluation
of  their  country,  and  that  the  calamity  had  not  fallen  on
all  alike,  the  poor  clamoured  againft  the  rich,  accufing
them  of  having  brought  Marcius  againft  them  ;  and  the
patricians  faid  in  their  defence,  that  this  was  fome  malicious
artifice  in  the  general :  But  neither  of  them  put  themfelves
in  a  pofture,  through  mutual  jealoufies,  and  fear  of  treachery,
either  to  fuccour  that  part  of  the  country,  which  was  laying
wafte,  or  to  prefer ve  That,  which  remained  untouched.
So  that,  Marcius  had  full  liberty  to  return  with  his  army,
and  to  bring  home  all  his  men,  after  they  had  done  as  much
damage  as  they  thought  fit,  but  fuffered  none,  and  inriched
themfelves  with  a  great  booty.  Soon  after,  Tullus  alio
arrived  from  the  territories  of  the  Latines,  bringing  with

him


i


Book  VIII.  DIONYS  IUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  301

him  a  great  number  of  fpoils :  For  there  the  inhabitants,
being  unprepared,  and  the  calamity  falling  upon  them
unexpectedly,  were  alfo  unfurnifhed  with  an  army  to  with-
ftand  the  enemy.  By  this  means,  all  the  cities  of  the  Volfci
were  elevated  with  hopes  ;  the  army  was  raifed,  and  every
thing  elfe  the  generals  had  occafion  for  was  fupplied,  fooner
than  could  have  been  expeCted.

XIII.  When  all  their  forces  were  afiembled,  Marcius
confulted  with  his  collegue  concerning  the  future  operations
of  the  war,  and  faid  to  him :  “  In  my  opinion,  Tullus,  it
<c  will  be  beft  for  us  to  divide  our  army  into  two  bodies ;
“  and  that  one  of  us  take  with  him  the  ableft,  and  braveft
“  of  our  troops,  and  lead  them  againft  the  enemy  in  order
cc  to  ingage  them ;  and,  if  they  do  not  decline  the  ingage-
<c  ment,  decide  the  conteft  by  one  battle;  but,  if  they
cc  are  unwilling,  as  I  think  they  will  be,  to  commit  the  fate
“  of  the  war  to  a  new  raifed  army,  and  unexperienced
“  generals,  then  let  him  lay  wafte  their  country  ;  employ
u  their  allies  in  their  own  defence ;  deftroy  their  colonies,
“  and  annoy  them  by  every  other  means  he  can :  And  let
“  the  other  remain  here,  and  defend  both  the  country,  and
“  the  cities,  left  the  enemy  fall  upon  them  unawares,  if  they
<c  are  unguarded,  and  we  ourfelves  fuffer  the  moft  fhameful
“  of  all  difgraces  in  lofing  what  we  have,  while  we  are  en-
C£  deavouring  to  gain  what  we  have  not.  It  will  be,  alfo,
<c  necefiary  that  the  perfon,  who  ftays  here,  fhould  repair  the
<c  walls  of  the  cities  that  are  fallen  down,  cleanfe  the  ditches,
t£  and  fortify  the  cafties,  to  ferve  as  places  of  refuge  for  the

“  hufband-


302  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

u  hufbandmen  :  He  fhould,  alfo,  raife  another  army ;  fupply
<c  the  forces,  that  are  in  the  field,  with  provifions  ;  prepare
u  arms,  and  furnifh,  with  expedition,  every  thing  elfe,  that

is  neceflary.  Now  I  give  you  the  choice,  whether  you  will
u  command  the  army,  that  is  to  take  the  field,  or  That,
u  which  is  to  remain  here.”  While  he  was  fpeaking,  Tullus
was  in  admiration  at  his  propofal  ;  and,  knowing  the  acti¬
vity,  and  good  fortune  of  the  man,  yielded  to  him  the
command  of  the  army,  that  was  to  take  the  field.

XIV.  Marcius,  without  lofing  any  more  time,  marched
with  his  army  to  the  town  of 4  Circeii,  in  which  there  was
a  Roman  colony,  who  lived  intermixed  with  the  inhabitants,
and  made  himfelf  matter  of  the  town,  as  foon  as  he  appeared
before  it.  For,  when  the  Circeienfes  faw  their  country  in
the  power  of  the  Volfci,  and  their  army  approaching  the
walls,  they  opened  their  gates  ;  and,  coming  out  unarmed  to
meet  the  enemy,  defired  them  to  take  poffefilon  of  the  town.
This  preferved  them  from  all  irreparable  mifchief :  For  the
general  caufed  none  of  the  inhabitants  to  be  put  to  death,
or  expelled  the  city:  But,  having  taken  clothes  for  his
foldiers,  and  provifions  for  a  month,  together  with  a  mode¬
rate  fum  of  money,  he  drew  off  his  forces,  leaving  a  fmall
garrifon  in  the  town,  as  well  to  preferve  the  inhabitants
from  being  ill  treated  by  the  Romans,  as  to  reftrain  them
from  innovating  for  the  future.  The  news  of  thefe  trans¬
actions  being  brought  to  Rome,  encreafed  the  tumult,  and
diforder ;  the  patricians  reproaching  the  people  with  having,

4-  arc* iv.  See  the  feventy  fourth  annotation  on  the  fourth  book.

by


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN ASSENS  IS.  -jo?
by  a  falfe  accufation,  driven  out  of  the  city  a  great  warriour,
a  man  of  activity,  and  of  a  generous  fpirit ;  and  contrived  to
make  him  general  of  the  Volfci.  On  the  other  fide,  the
leaders  of  the  people  inveighed  againfl  the  fenate,  and  faid
the  whole  affair  was  a  piece  of  treachery  formed  by  them,
and  that  the  war  was  not  di reded  againfl:  all  the  Romans  in
general,  but  only  againfl  the  plebeians :  Thefe  were  fup-
ported  by  the  moft  profligate  among  the  people.  But
neither  of  them  had  fo  much  as  a  thought  of  raifing  an
army,  of  fending  to  their  allies  for  afliftance,  or  making  the
neceflary  preparations;  by  reafon  of  their  mutual  hatred,
and  their  accufations  of  one  another,  whenever  the  people
were  affembled.

XV.  This  being  obferved  by  fuch  of  the  Romans,  as
were  moft  advanced  in  years,  they  affembled  together,  and
perfuaded  the  moft  feditious  of  the  plebeians,  both  in  public,
and  in  private,  to  put  a  flop  to  their  jealoufies,  and  invedives
againfl  the  patricians.  Since,  they  faid,  by  the  banishment
of  one  man  of  diftindion,  the  commonwealth  was  brought
into  fo  great  danger,  what  were  they  to  exped,  if,  by  their
abufes,  they  forced  the  greateft  part  of  the  patricians  to  en¬
tertain  the  fame  fentiments?  Thefe  men  appeafed  the  dif-
order.  After  this  great  tumult  was  fupprefled,  the  fenate
met,  and  gave  this  anfwer  to  the  embaffadors,  who  were
come  from  the  commonwealth  of  the  Latines  to  defire
fuccours ;  that  it  was  no  eafy  matter  for  them  to  fend  a£-
fiftance  at  prefent :  However,  that  they  gave  them  leave  to
raife  an  army  themfelves,  and  chufe  their  own  generals,  and

to


3o4  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

to  fend  into  the  field  an  equal  number  of  forces  with  the
Romans :  For,  by  the  treaty  of  friendfhip  they  had  made
with  the  latter,  both  thofe  things  were  forbidden.  At  the
fame  time,  the  fenate  ordered  the  confuls  to  raife  an  army  ;
to  guard  the  city ;  and  to  call  upon  their  allies  to  fend  them
fuccours  ;  but  not  to  take  the  field  till  all  things  were  in
readinefs.  Thefe  refolutions  were  ratified  by  the  people.
By  this  time,  the  magiftracy  of  the  confuls  was  near  expiring :
So  that,  they  could  execute  none  of  thefe  refolutions,  but
left  every  thing  half  finifhed  to  their  fuccefiors.

XVI.  Thefe  were  Spurius  Nautius,  and  Sextus  Furius,
who  raifed  as  great  a  number  of  Roman  citizens  as  they
poffibly  could,  and  placed  beacons,  and  fentries  in  the  moft
convenient  fortrefles,  to  the  end  they  might  be  acquainted
with  every  thing,  that  paffed  in  the  country  :  They.,  alfo,
raifed  money,  and  provided  a  great  quantity  of  corn,  and
arms,  in  a  fhort  time.  By  this  means,  all  their  domeftic  pre¬
parations  were  in  fo  good  a  pofture,  that  nothing  feemed  to
be  wanting  :  But,  their  allies  did  not  all  obey  their  fummons
with  alacrity ;  neither  were  they  difpofed  to  ailift  them
voluntarily  in  the  war ;  and  the  confuls  did  not  think  fit  to
compel  them,  for  fear  of  treachery.  Some  of  their  allies  had,
even  openly,  deferred  them,  and  joined  the  Volfci.  TheAequi
fet  the  example  of  this  defertion,  as  foon  as  the  war  was
declared,  by  going  prefently  to  the  Volfci,  and  entering  into
an  alliance  with  them,  which  they  confirmed  by  their  oaths :
And  thefe  fent  to  Marcius  the  moft  numerous  army,  and
the  beft  difpofed  to  aftift  him.  After  thefe  had  begun,  many

of


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARNASSENSIS.  305
of  their  other  allies,  alfo,  fecretly  aflifted  the  Volfci,  and  fent
them  fuccours,  though  not  by  virtue  of  any  public  order,
or  in  the  name  of  the  commonwealth ;  but,  if  any  of  their
people  defired  to  enter  into  the  fervice  of  Marcius,  they  were
fo  far  from  diftuading  them  from  it,  that  they  even  encou¬
raged  it.  So  that,  the  Volfci  had,  in  a  fhort  time,  a  more
numerous  army  than  they  had  ever  been  mafters  of  in  the
moft  flouriftiing  ftate  of  their  affairs.  At  the  head  of  this
army,  Marcius  made  another  irruption  into  the  territories  of
the  Romans ;  and,  incamping  there  for  many  days  together,
laid  wafte  all  that  part  of  the  country,  which  he  had
fpared  in  his  former  expedition.  However,  he  did  not,  in
this  inroad,  take  many  perfons  of  free  condition  :  For  the
inhabitants  had,  long  before,  retired  with  every  thing  that
was  moft  valuable ;  fome  to  Rome,  and  others  to  fuch  of
the  neighbouring  fortreffes,  as  were  moft  capable  of  defence.
But  he  took  all  the  cattle  they  had  not  been  able  to  drive
away,  together  with  their  fervants,  who  tended  them  ;  and
carried  off  all  the  corn,  that  lay  upon  the  floors,  and  all  the
other  fruits  of  the  earth,  whether  then  gathering,  or  already
gathered.  Having  ravaged,  and  laid  wafte  the  country,  none
daring  to  encounter  him,  he  returned  home  with  his  army,
now  burdened  with  the  multitude  of  fpoils,  by  gentle
marches.

XVII.  The  Volfci,  feeing  the  vaft  quantity  of  the  fpoils,
that  were  bringing  home,  and  being  informed  of  the  pufil-
lanimity  of  the  Romans,  who,  having,  till  then,  been  ufed
to  ravage  their  neighbours  country,  could,  now,  bear  to  fee
Vol.  III.  R  r  their


3o6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

their  own  laid  wafte  with  impunity,  grew  wonderfully  elated,
and  conceived  hopes  of  the  fovereignty,  looking  upon  it  as  an
eafy,  and  a  ready  undertaking  to  fubvert  the  power  of  their
adverfaries.  They  offered  facrifices  to  the  gods,  in  thankf-
giving  for  their  fuccefs,  and  adorned  their  temples,  and
public  places  with  the  fpoils;  and  all  paffed  their  time  in
feftivals,  and  rejoicings,  in  which  they  never  ceafed  to  ad¬
mire,  and  celebrate  Marcius,  as  a  warriour,  of  all  others,  the
moft  confummate,  and  a  greater  general,  than  Rome,  Greece,
or  any  Barbarous  nation  had  ever  produced:  But,  above  all,
they  admired  him  for  his  fuccefs,  feeing  every  thing  he  under¬
took  eafily  fucceeded  according  to  his  defire:  So  that,  no
man,  who,  by  his  age,  was  capable  of  bearing  arms,  declined
ferving  under  him  ;  but  all  were  eager  to  fhare  in  his  aftions,
and  flocked  to  him  from  every  city.  The  general,  after  he
had  confirmed  the  zeal  of  the  Volfci,  and  reduced  the  for¬
titude  of  the  enemy  to  a  low,  and  unmanly  diftrefs,  led  his
army  againft  the  cities  of  their  allies,  who  yet  remained
faithful  to  them  :  And,  having,  foon,  prepared  every  thing,
that  was  neceflary  for  a  fiege,  he  marched  againft  the
5  Tolerini,  a  Latin  nation :  Thefe,  having,  long  before,
made  the  neceflary  preparations  for  a  war,  and  tranf-
ported  all  the  effe&s  they  had  in  the  country,  into  the  city,
bravely  received  his  attacks;  and  flood  out  fome  time,
fighting  from  their  walls,  and  wounding  many  of  the  enemy;
till,  being  driven  from  thence  by  the  {lingers,  and  fatigued


5*  T oM^nias,  *  'toleria  was  a  city  of  the  Latines  fituated  near  the  frontiers  of
the  Aequi.

d  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.iii.  c.  4.

with


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARNAS  SE NS  I S.  307

with  a  refinance,  which  had  lafted  till  night,  they  aban¬
doned  feveral  parts  of  the  wall.  When  Marc ius  was  informed
of  this,  he  ordered  fome  of  the  foldiers  to  plant  ladders
againft  thofe  parts  of  the  walls,  that  were  left  naked;
while  he  himfelf,  with  the  chofen  men  of  his  army,  ran  to
the  gates,  amidft  a  fhower  of  darts,  that  were  thrown  at
him  from  the  towers;  and,  breaking  the  bars  afunder,  was
the  firft  who  entered  the  city.  Clofe  to  the  gates  flood  a
large,  and  ftrong  body  of  the  enemies  troops :  Thefe  re¬
ceived  him  vigoroufly,  and  continued  the  combat  for  a  long¬
time  ;  till  many  of  them  being  killed,  the  reft  gave  way ;
and,  difperftng  themfelves,  fled  through  the  ftreets.  Marcius'
followed,  putting  all  to  death  he  could  come  up  with,  ex¬
cept  thofe,  who,  throwing  down  their  arms,  begged  their
lives :  While  this  was  doing,  the  men,  who  had  afcended
by  the  ladders,  made  themfelves  mafters  of  the  walls.  The
town  being  taken  in  this  manner,  Marcius  feledted  fuch  of
the  fpoils,  as  were  proper  to  be  confecrated  to  the  gods,
and  to  adorn  the  cities  of  the  Volfci,  and  the  reft  he  gave
to  the  foldiers.  Many  prifoners  were  taken,  a  great  deal  of
money,  and  a  confiderable  quantity  of  corn  :  So  that,  it  was
not  eafy  for  the  conquerers  to  remove  every  thing  in  one
day ;  but  they  were  forced  to  employ  much  time,  while  they
fucceeded  one  another  in  carrying  away  fome  part  of  the
fpoils  themfelves,  and  the  reft  on  beafts  of  burden.

XVIII.  The  general,  after  all  the  prifoners,  and  ef¬
fects  were  conveyed  out  of  the  city,  left  it  defolate,  and
drew  off  his  forces  to  another  town  belonging  to  the

R  r  2  Bolani :


Book  VIII.


308  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

6  Bolani :  Thefe,  alfo,  had  been  apprized  of  his  defign  to
befiege  them,  and  prepared  every  thing,  that  was  neceflary
for  their  defence.  Marcius,  who  expe&ed  to  take  the  town
by  ftorm,  made  his  attacks  upon  many  parts  of  the  wall  at
the  fame  time.  But  the  Bolani,  watching  a  favorable  oppor¬
tunity,  opened  their  gates ;  and,  fallying  out  with  numerous
forces,  and  in  good  order,  attacked  the  front  of  the  enemy;
and,  having  killed  many  of  them,  and  wounded  more,  and
forced  the  reft  to  a  fhameful  flight,  they  retired  into  the
city.  When  Marcius  was  informed  that  the  Volfci  were  routed
(for  he  happened  not  to  be  prefen t,  where  this  defeat  hap¬
pened)  he  came  up  in  all  hafte  with  a  few  of  his  men  ;  and,
'rallying  thofe,  who  were  difperfed  in  the  flight,  formed
them  into  a  body,  and  encouraged  them  ;  Then,  placing
them  in  their  ranks,  he  told  them  what  they  were  to  do,
and  ordered  them  to  attack  the  town  at  the  fame  gates.
Here,  the  Bolani  having  recourfe  to  the  fame  expedient,
and  fallying  out  in  great  numbers,  the  Volfci  did  not  ftand
their  ground ;  but,  giving  way,  fled  down  a  declivity,  pur-
fuant  to  the  orders  of  their  general ;  and  the  Bolani,  ignorant
of  the  ftrategem,  purfued  them  a  conflderable  way  :  When
they  were  at  a  diftance  from  the  town,  Marcius  fell  upon
them  with  a  body  of  chofen  youth  :  Here  many  of  the

6-  B uhotim.  *  Bolae,  a  city  of  the  to  be  an  error  of  fome  late  tranfcriber*
Aequi,  as  Cluver  fays,  near  the  bor-  who  made  ufe  of  a  V,  inftead  of  a  B  ;
ders  of  the  Latines,  not  far  from  Prae-  which  miftake  crept  in  about  the  time,
nefte.  It  has,  long  fin ce,  been  fo  far  when  theGreeks,  then  half  Barbarians,,
deftroyed,  that  no  traces  of  it  are  to  be  changed  the  power  of  their  B,  to  Thar
found.  I  look  upon  Volant ,  in  f  Livy,  of  a  V.

c  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  1 6.  fB.  iv.  c.  49.


Bolani


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  ICARN  ASSEN  SIS.  309

Bolani  fell,  fome  defending  themfelves,  and  others  endea¬
vouring  to  efcape.  Marcius'  purfued  thofe,  who  were  haften-
ing  to  the  town,  and  forced-  his  way  in,  before  they  could
fhut  the  gates.  After  the  general  had  once  made  himfelf
mafter  of  the  gates,  the  reft  of  the  Volfci  followed  in  great
numbers.  Upon  this,  the  Bolani  abandoned  the  walls,  and
fled  to  their  houfes.  Marcius,  having  pofiefled  himfelf  of
this  city  alfo,  gave  leave  to  his  foldiers  to  make  flaves  of  the
inhabitants,  and  to  feize  their  effects :  And,  after  he  had
carried  away  all  the  booty  at  his  leifure,  and  with  full  liberty,
as  before,  he  fet  fire  to  the  town.

XIX.  From  thence,  he  marched  with  his  army  to  7Labicum:
This  was,  alfo,  a  city  of  the  Latines ;  and,  like  the  reft,  a
colony  of  the  Albans.  In  order,  therefore,  to  intimidate  the
inhabitants,  as  foon  as  he  entered  their  territories,  he  fet  fire  to
thofe  villages,  the  flame  of  which  might,  with  the  greateft
eafe,  be  difcerned  by  them.  However,  the  Labicani,  finding
themfelves  defended  by  a  ftrong  wall,  were  neither  aftonifhed
at  his  invafion,  nor  relaxed  in  any  refpetft,  but  made  a  brave
refiftance  ;  and,  often,  repulfed  the  enemy,  as  they  were
fcaling  the  walls.  Notwithftanding  this,  they  were  not  able
to  refill  to  the  laft,  being  but  few  in  number,  and  obliged
to  oppofe  a  large  army  without  the  leaft  refpite  :  For  many
attacks  were  made  upon  all  parts  of  the  city  by  the  Volfci,

7*  AaGmeivug.  s  Labicum,  a  city  of  the  treatment  from  thofe  ignorant  tran-
Latines,  fifteen  Roman  miles  north  fcribers,  and  is,  by  them,  often  writ-
eaft  of  Rome,  now  called  Zagaruola.  ten  Lavicum .

This  city  has,  alfo,  buffered  the  fame

e  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii,  c.  4,


who


3 1 o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookVIII.

who  fucceeded  one  another;  thofe,  who  were  fatigued,
always  retiring,  and  frefh  forces  taking  their  poft.  Againft
whom  the  inhabitants,  fighting  all  day,  and  even  all  night
without  intermiflion,  were  forced,  through  fatigue,  to  aban¬
don  the  walls.  Marcius,  having  taken  this  town  alfo,  made
Haves  of  the  inhabitants,  and  allowed  his  foldiers  to  divide
the  fpoils.  Thence,  he  marched  to  8  Pedum  (This,  alfo,  was
a  city  of  the  Latines)  and,  advancing  with  his  army  in  good
order,  as  foon  as  he  came  near  the  walls  he  took  the  town
by  ftorm  :  And,  having  treated  it  in  the  fame  manner  with
Thofe  he  had,  before,  taken,  he  led  his  forces,  early  the  next
morning,  to  9  Corbio.  As  he  was  approaching  the  walls,  the
inhabitants  opened  their  gates ;  and,  prefenting  themfelves
before  him  TOwith  the  marks  of  fuppliants,  delivered  the
town  to  him  without  ftriking  a  ftroke.  Marcius  commended
them  for  having  taken  fuch  a  refolution,  as  beft  fuited  their
own  intereft,  and  ordered  them  to  fupply  his  army  with
what  they  wanted,  money,  and  corn  :  And,  his  orders  being
complied  with,  he  led  his  army  to^Corioli:  This  city,
alfo,  the  inhabitants  furrendered  without  refiftance ;  and,
as  they  furnifhed  his  army  with  provifions,  and  money,  and
every  thing  elfe  they  were  ordered,  with  great  chearfulnefs,
he  marched  through  their  territories,  as  through  a  country
belonging  to  his  allies :  For  he,  always,  took  great  care  that

8*  U'Joivuv.  h  Pedum ,  another  city  of  tion  on  the  fixth  book,
the  Latines,  about  feventeen  miles  10,  See  the  feventeenth  an-

north  eaft  of  Rome.  It  is,  now,  called  notation  on  the  fixth  book.

Gallicano,  ”•  Ko^oa«vwv.  See  the  fifty  fourth

91  K ofiiuw.  See  the  fecond  annota-  annotation  on  the  fourth  book.

h  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  4.


thofe,


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S E NS  I  S.  311

thofe,  who  furrendered  their  cities  to  him,  fhould  fuffer  none
of  the  mifchiefs  incident  to  war ;  but  fhould  have  their  lands
reftored  to  them  unhurt,  and  all  the  cattle,  and  Haves  they
had  left  in  their  country  houfes :  Neither  would  he  fuffer
his  army  to  quarter  in  the  cities,  left  any  mifchief  might
happen  by  their  rapine,  or  theft;  but  always  incamped
without  the  walls.

XX.  From  Corioli,  he  marched  to  Bovillae,  a  city,
then,  of  note,  and  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  leading  cities
of  the  Latin  nation.  As  the  inhabitants,  confiding  in  the
ftrength  of  their  works,  and  the  number  of  the  garrifon,
refufed  to  receive  him,  Marcius  encouraged  his  men  to
fight  bravely ;  and,  having  promifed  great  rewards  to  thofe,

w  BoiAAa?.  Thus  we  mull  read  the  Bolae .  But  both  of  them  forgot  that
name  of  this  city,  and  not  BwAa?,  as  it  our  author  ufes  the  fame  expreffion  in
Hands  in  theeditionvandmianufcripts.  fpeaking  of  the  fiege  of  Bolae  \  where
The  Latin  name-of  this  city  is  1  Bo-  he  fays  of  the  Volfci,  efahivotvles  t(pevfov
villae :  It  ftood  on  the  Appian  road,  xxlot  tx  ar^av*?.  The  mention  of  a
about  nine  Roman  miles  from  Rome,  declivity,  therefore,  may  be  a  reafon
and  near  three  from  Albanum  :  Here  for  reading  Bovillae  in  neither  place,
it  was  that  the  famous  Clodius  was  but  can  be  none  for  tranfpofing  the
killed  by  Milo,  as  famous  a  man  in  names  of  thefe  cities.  I  do  not  wonder
his  own  way.  Our  author  has,  already,  at  the  original  doubt  in  Cluver,  who
told  us  that  Marcius  took  Bolae ,  be-  may  well  be  fuppofed  to  have  read  no
fore  he  befieged  Bovillae  ;  and  that  the  more  of  Dionyfius  at  once,  than  was
inhabitants  of  the  latter,  in  a  Tally,  necefiary  to  enable  him  to  give  an  ac-
drove  the  Volfci  down  a  declivity,  count  of  the  cities,  and  places  he  was
kmIx  tx  which  does  not  agree  treating  of;  but,  that  a  tranflator  of

with  Bovillae ,  as  it  was  fituated  in  Dionyfius,  who  copied  that  doubt,
a  plain.  After  Cluver  has  quoted  fhould  not  have  remembered  that  he
this  paflage  from  our  author,  he  read  xofla,  tx  in  the  page  imme-

doubts,  and,  after  him,  M.  *** doubts,  diately  preceding,  if  he  did  read  it
whether  we  fhould  read  Bovillae ,  in  there,  is  very  furprifing.
this  place,  or  in  the  other,  inflead  of

j  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  4.


who


312  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

who  fhould  fird  mount  the  walls,  he  began  the  attack,  which
was  maintained  with  great  vigor  on  both  fides :  For  the
Bovillani  did,  not  only,  repulfe  the  afTailants  from  the  walls,
but,  even,  threw  open  their  gates ;  and,  Tallying  out  in  a
body,  forced  thofe,  who  oppofed  them,  down  a  declivity  ;
and,  here  was  the  greated  daughter  of  the  Volfci;  and  the
attack  was  drawn  out  to  a  great  length,  every  one  defpairing
of  taking  the  town :  But  the  general  rendered  the  lofs  of
thofe,  who  were  dain,  imperceptible,  by  fubdituting  others
in  their  room  ;  and  infpired  with  frefh  courage  thofe,  who
were  fpent  with  toil,  by  going  himfelf  to  that  part  of  the
army,  which  differed  mod  :  Where,  not  only,  his  words,
but  his  actions,  alfo,  were  incentives  to  valor  :  For  he  faced
every  danger,  and  was  prefent  at  every  attempt,  till  the  town
was  taken.  Having,  at  lad,  made  himfelf  mader  of  this
city  alfo,  and  put  fome  of  the  enemy  he  took  to  death  upon
the  fpot,  and  made  others  prifoners,  he  withdrew  his  forces ;
and,  after  a  mod  glorious  victory,  returned  laden  with  a
great  number  of  mod  magnificent  fpoils,  and  inriched  his
army  with  the  vad  fums  of  money  he  took  in  this  city,
-where  it  was  found  in  greater  quantity,  than  in  any  other
he  had  taken.

XXI.  After  this,  all  the  country  he  marched  through,
fubmitted  to  him  ;  and  no  city  made  any  refidance,  but
I3Lavinium,  which  \Vas  the  fird  city  built  by  the  Trojans,
who,  with  Aeneas,  landed  in  Italy ;  and  from  which  the
Romans  derive  their  original,  as ,  I  have,  before,  flhewn.

jy  A  xahiov.  Seethe  fixty  third  chapter  of  the  firft  book.


The


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  ASSENSIS.  313

The  inhabitants  of  this  city  thought  themfelves  obliged  to
fuffer  any  extremity,  rather  than  break  their  faith  with  the
Romans,  whom  they  looked  upon  as  their  defendants.
Here,  therefore,  fome  brilk  attacks  were  made  upon  the
walls,  and  fharp  ingagements  before  the  works :  However,
the  walls  were  not  carried  at  the  fir  ft  aflault ;  but  the  fiege
feemed  to  be  a  work  of  time.  Upon  this,  Marcius  gave  over
the  attack,  and  drew  a  line  of  contravallation  round  the
town,  which  he  fortified  with  palifades,  and  placed  guards
upon  all  the  roads,  that  neither  provifions,  nor  fuccours
might  come  to  them  from  without.  In  the  mean  time,  the
Romans,  being  informed  both  of  the  deftrutftion  of  the
towns,  that  were  already  taken,  and  of  the  necefilty,  which
had  reduced  others  to  join  Marcius;  and  importuned  with
the  deputations  for  fuccours,  which  came  to  them,  every  day,-
from  thofe,  that  continued  firm  to  their  intereft ;  and  being,
alfo,  alarmed  at  the  blocade  of  Lavinium,  then  actually
formed;  and  concluding  that,  if  this  place  was  taken,  the  war
would,  prefently,  be  brought  to  the  gates  of  Rome,  thought
the  only  remedy  for  all  thefe  evils,  would  be  to  pafs  a  vote
for  the  return  of  Marcius.  This  was  the  cry  of  the  whole
people,  and  the  tribunes  were  defirous  to  bring  in  a  law  for
the  repeal  of  his  condemnation ;  14  but  the  patricians  oppofed

*4*  aaa.’  01  arccl^Kioi  evotvliufatrav  otvloif.  country, nor  the  apprehenflon  of  feeing
It  mult  be  owned  that  this  behaviour  a  Volfcian  army  elated  with  luccefs
of  the  patricians  was  truly  great.  They  under  a  victorious,  and  exafperated  ge-
had  employed  all  their  power,  and  in-  neral  at  the  gates  of  Rome,  could  ter-
tereft  to  fave  Coriolanus  •,  but,  the  mo-  rify  them  into  a  compliance  with  the
ment  he  became  a  rebel,  they  oppofed  people,  when  thefe  had  fo  little  refo-
his  return  •,  and,  neither  the  diftrefs  lution  as  to  defire  the  repeal  of  his
he  had,  already,  brought  upon  their  fentence.

Vol.  III.  '  S  s  them,


3 14  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

them,  being  determined  not  to  reverfe  any  part  oi  the
fentence,  which  had  been  pronounced  :  And,  as  no  previous
vote  was  palled  by  the  fenate,  neither  did  the  tribunes  think
fit  to  propofe  the  affair  to  the  people.  It  may  well  be  won¬
dered  what  motive  could  induce  the  fenate,  who  had,  before,
fo  warmly  appeared  in  favor  of  Marcius,  now  to  oppofe  the
people,  when  they  defired  to  recal  him.  Whether  their
intention  was  to  found  the  inclinations  cf  the  people ;  or  to
inflame  their  defire  of  reftoring  him  by  their  own  back-
wardnefs  in  gratifying  it ;  or,  poffibly,  to  clear  themfelves
of  the  accufations,  with  which  they  were  charged,  by  fhew-
ing  that  they  had  neither  given  occafion  to,  nor  been  ac¬
complices  in,  any  of  the  a&ions  which  Marcius  had  been
guilty  of :  For,  as  their  deliberation  was  fecret,  it  is  difficult
to  form  any  conjectures  relating  to  the  motives  of  it.

XXII.  Marcius,  being  informed  of  thefe  things  by  fome
deferters,  marched,  immediately,  towards  Rome  in  a  rage,
leaving  a  fufficient  number  of  forces  to  carry  on  the  blocade
of  Lavinium,  and  incamped  at  a  place,  called  15  The  Cluilian
ditches ,  within  forty  ftadia  of  the  city.  When  the  Romans
heard  of  his  being  there,  they  were  in  great  diforder,  not
doubting  but  his  defign  was,  prefently,  to  befiege  them  :
So  that,  fome  took  arms,  and  ran  to  the  walls  without
orders ;  others  went  in  a  body  to  the  gates  without  any
one  to  command  them  ;  fome  armed  their  flaves,  and  pre¬
pared  to  defend  their  own  houfes ;  while  others  feized  the
fortrefs,  and  the  capitol,  and  other  ftrong  places  of  the  city :
And  the  women,  with  their  hair  diffievelled,  ran  to  the  holy
*5-  kao*a<«j  See  the  third  Annotation  on  the  third  book.


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  SS  EN  S  I  S.  315

places,  and  to  the  temples,  lamenting,  and  praying  to  the
gods  to  avert  the  threatening  danger.  After  the  night  was
pafled,  and  the  greateft  part  of  the  following  day,  and  none
of  the  evils  they  had  feared,  befell  them,  but  Marcius  re¬
mained  quiet,  all  the  plebeians  flocked  to  the  forum,  and
called  upon  the  patricians  to  aflemble  in  the  fenate,  and  let
them  know  that,  if  they  did  not  pafs  the  previous  vote  for
the  return  of  Marcius,  they  themfelves  would  take  fuch
refolutions,  as  the  fenfe  of  their  being  betrayed  fhould  didate.
Upon  this,  the  patricians  met  in  the  fenate,  and  refolved  to
fend  five  per fons  of  thofe,  who  were  the  moft  advanced  in
years,  and  the  moft  acceptable  to  Marcius,  to  treat  with  him
of  a  reconciliation,  and  friendfhip.  The  perfons  appointed
were  Marcus  Minucius,  Foftumus  Cominius,  Spurius  Lartius,
Publius  Pinarius,  and  Quintus Sulpicius,  all  confular  fenators.
When  they  came  to  the  camp,  and  Marcius  was  informed
of  their  arrival,  he  placed  himfelf  in  the  midft  of  the  moft
confiderable  among  the  Volfci,  and  their  allies,  where  every*
thing,  that  was  faid,  might  be  heard  by  numbers  of  people,
and  ordered  the  deputies  to  be  admitted.  When  they  came
in,  Minucius,  who,  during  his  confuhhip,  had  been  the  moft
adive  in  his  favor,  and  diftinguiflied  himfelf  by  his  oppo-
fition  to  the  plebeians,  fpoke  firft,  and  faid  as  follows.

XXIII.  “  We  are  all  fenfible,  Marcius,  that  the  people
“  have  treated  you  with  great  injuftice  in  driving  you  out
“  of  your  country  under  a  foul  accufation ;  and  do  not
u  wonder  to  fee  you  refent  it,  and  bear  your  misfortune
<c  with  indignation  :  For,  by  an  univerfal  law  of  nature,

S  s  2  “  the


3 1 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

/

££  the  injured  is  an  enemy  to  the  injurer.  But  we  wonder
<£  that  you  do  not,  with  a  calm  confideration,  examine  who
tc  thofe  are  whom  you  ought  to  punifh,  and  take  revenge
“  on,  and  that  you  obferve  no  moderation  in  punifhing,
<£  but  involve  the  innocent  with  the  guilty,  and  friends  with
££  enemies ;  that  you  violate  the  inviolable  laws  of  nature,
<c  confound  the  duties  of  religion,  and  have  even  forgotten
“  who  you  are,  from  whom  defcended,  and  where  you  were
C£  born.  You  fee  before  you  the  moft  ancient  of  the  patri-
“  cians,  and  the  moft  zealous  of  your  friends,  fent  by  the
<c  commonwealth  to  lay  before  you  our  defence  mixed
u  with  a  deprecation,  and  to  inform  you  upon  what  con-
u  ditions  we  deftre  you  to  be  reconciled  to  the  people;
<£  and,  alfo,  to  advife  you  to  act  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  we
u  think  will  be  moft  for  your  reputation,  and  advantage.

XXIV.  <£  I  ftiall  fir  ft  fpeak  to  the  point  of  right.  The
t£  plebeians,  inflamed  by  their  tribunes,  confpired  againft
<£  you ;  and,  becaufe  they  feared  you,  came  with  a  defign
1£  to  put  you  to  death,  without  a  trial :  This  a£t  we,  who
“  are  of  the  fenate,  prevented,  and  took  care  that  you
<£  fhould,  upon  that  occafion,  fuffer  no  injuftice.  After
u  this,  the  fame  men,  who  were,  thus,  prevented  from  de-
€£  ftroying  you,  fummoned  you  to  a  trial,  charging  you  with
u  having  fpoken  ill  of  them  in  the  fenate.  This  likewife,  you
cc  know,  we  oppofed,  and  would  not  fuffer  you  to  be  tried
C£  either  for  the  opinion  you  gave,  or  the  words  you  fpoke.
<£  Difappointed  of  this  alfo,  they  applied,  at  laft,  to  us,  and
€£  accufed  you  of  affecting  tyranny  :  This  charge  you  your-

££  felf


/


V

Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  SIS.  317

<£  felf  fubmitted  to  make  your  defence  to,  ft  nee  you  were
u  far  from  being  guilty  of  it,  and  confented  that  the  people
“  fhould  pafs  judgement  upon  you ;  the  fenate  were,  then  alfo,
C£  prefent,  and  ufed  many  interceffions  in  your  favor.  Which
££  of  thefe  misfortunes,  therefore,  have  we  been  the  caufe
££  of?  And  why  do  you  make  war  upon  us,  who  fhewed
££  fo  much  affedion  to  you,  during  that  conteft  ?  But  it
C£  appears  that  not  even  all  the  plebeians  defired  your
C£  banifhment :  For  you  were  16  condemned  by  two  votes
C£  only :  So  that,  you  cannot,  with  juftice,  be  an  enemy  even
u  to  thefe,  who  acquitted  you.  But  I  will  fuppofe,  if  you
cc  pleafe,  that  all  the  people,  by  their  votes,  and  the  whole
££  fenate,  by  their  refolutions,  brought  this  calamity  upon
“  you,  and  that  your  hatred  againft  11s  all  is  juft  ;  what
<£  injury  have  the  women  done  to  you,  Marcius,  that  you
££  fhould  declare  war  againft  them  ?  By  what  vote  did  they
C£  condemn  you  to  banifhment?  What  fpeeches  did  they
<c  make  againft  you?  By  what  injurious  actions,  or  thoughts
u  have  our  children  deferved  to  be  expofed  to  captivity,  and
u  to  every  other  misfortune,  if  the  city  fhould  be  taken  ?
cc  You  do  not  determine  juftly,  Marcius,  if  you  think  you
<£  ought  to  hate  thofe,  who  are  guilty,  and  your  enemies,
££  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  not  to  fpare  even  thofe,  who  are
<£  innocent,  and  your  friends :  This  way  of  thinking  is
“  unbecoming  a  good  man.  But,  to  omit  all  thefe  things,
“  what  anfwer  could  you  make,  in  the  name  of  Jupiter,  if

16.  a \><n  yoi^  iuXaos  /uov^/r.  See  the  twenty  fixth  annotation  on  the

feventh  book.

4£  any
*


3  iB  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

<£  any  one  fhould  afk  you,  what  injury  you  have  received
C£  from  your  anceftors  to  induce  you  to  deftroy  their  fepul-
C£  chres,  and  deprive  them  of  the  honors  they  receive  from
“  men?  What  injury  can  provoke  you  to  fpoil,  burn,  and
*£  demolifh  the  altars  of  the  gods,  their  confecrated  places,
€£  and  temples,  and  not  to  fuffer  them  to  receive  the  worfhip,

that  has  always  been  paid  to  them?  What  anfwer  could
C£  you  make  to  thefe  things  ?  For  my  part,  I  know  of  none.
££  Concerning  the  point  of  right,  let  thefe  reafons  be  alledged
u  in  favor  of  ourfelves,  of  the  fenate,  and  of  the  other  citi-
(C  zens,  whom,  unprovoked  by  any  injury,  you  defire  to
<£  deftroy,  and  in  favor  of  the  fepulchres,  the  temples,  and
<c  the  city,  to  which  you  owe  both  your  birth,  and  edu-
4£  cation.

XXV.  “  Is  it  reafonable  that  all  men,  even  thofe,  who
€i  have  not  wronged  you,  together  with  their  wives,  and
cc  children  fhould  perifh  to  gratify  your  revenge,  and  that
(C  all  the  gods,  the  heroes,  and  the  genius’s,  the  city,  and  the
££  country,  fhould  fufFer  for  the  madnefs  of  the  tribunes,  and
C£  that  nothing  fhould  be  exempted,  nothing  go  unrevenged?
££  Have  you  not  already,  fufficiently,  punifhed  us  all  by  the
££  {laughter  of  fo  many  men,  the  devaftation  of  fo  large  a
6i  country  with  fire,  and  fword,  the  utter  fubverfion  of  fo
C£  many  cities,  the  abolifhing  the  feftivals,  the  facrifices,  and
££  the  worfhip  of  the  gods,  and  genius’s,  whom  you  have
££  deprived  of  their  feftivals,  their  facrifices,  and  their
££  eftablifhed  honors :  For  my  part,  I  cannot  think  that  a
cc  man,  who  has  the  leaft  regard  for  virtue,  ought  either  to

££  involve


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  3  r9

C£  involve  his  friends  in  the  fame  ruin  with  his  enemies,  or
££  to  fhew  himfelf  fierce,  and  inexorable  in  his  anger  to
C£  thofe,  who  have,  in  any  degree,  offended  him ;  particu-
<£  larly,  if  he  has,  many  times,  punifhed  them  with  feverity..
£C  Thefe,  therefore,  are  the  reafons  we  had  to  offer  you,  both,
£c  to  excufe  ourfelves,  and  deprecate  your  anger  in  favor  of
££  the  plebeians ;  and  thefe  the  motives,  which  we,  who  are
££  the  moft  dignified  of  all  your  friends,  are  come  to  fuggeft
££  to  you  through  pure  affedion;  and  the  promifes  we
££  make,  if  you  think  fit  to  be  reconciled  to  your  country.
££  While  your  power  is  at  the  greatefl:  height,  and  Heaven.
C£  yet  favours  you,  we  advife  you  to  ad  with  moderation^
££  and  ufe  your  good  fortune  with  economy,  when  you  con-
££  fider  that  all  things  are  fubjed  to  change,  and  that  nothing,
C£  continues  long  in  the  fame  fituation.  Eminence,  when
C£  arrived  to  its  greatefl:  luftre,  raifes  the  indignation  of  the
££  gods,  and  finks,  again,  into  obfcurity :  This,  chiefly,  hap-
££  pens  to  fevere,  and  haughty  minds,  which  exceed  the
££  bounds  of  human  nature.  You  have,  now,  an  opportunity
££  of  putting  an  end  to  the  war  upon  the  moft  honourable
C£  conditions:  For  the  whole  fenate  are  defirous  to  pafs  a.
“  vote  for  your  return,  and  the  people  ready  to  repeal,  by
“  a  law,  the  fentence  of  your  perpetual  banifhment.  What
u  fhould  hinder  you,  then,  from  feeing,  once  more,  thofe
cc  perfonsyou  love, and  honour  moft;  from  being  reftored  to
LC  your  country,  the  thing,  of  all  others,  the  moft  worthy  to
“  be  contended  for;  from  governing,  as  you  may  well  exped,
c<  thofe,  who  govern  others ;  from  commanding  thofe,  who

££  com-


320  '  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

cc  command  others,  and  from  leaving  the  greateft  glory  to  your
‘c  children,  and  pofterity.  We  are  the  fureties  for  the  im-
u  mediate  performance  of  all  thefe  promifes.  It  would  not
cc  become  the  fenate,  or  people  to  pafs  a  mild,  or  relenting
<c  vote  in  your  favor,  while  you  are  in  arms,  and  commit
“  hoftilities  againft  us ;  but,  if  you  lay  down  your  arms,
cc  the  order  for  your  return  will  foon  be  brought  to  you
“  by  us.

XXVI.  “  Thefe  will  be  the  advantages  you  will  reap
cc  from  your  reconciliation  :  Whereas,  if  you  perfift  in  your
“  refentment,  and  are  inflexible  in  your  hatred  to  us,  many
cc  misfortunes  will  befal  you  ;  of  which  I  fhall  mention  two,
“  as  the  moft  confiderable,  and  the  moft  evident :  Firft,
cc  you  are  infatuated  with  a  defire  to  accomplifh  a  difficult,
“  rather  an  impoffible  thing,  which  is,  to  fubvert  the  power
“  of  the  Romans,  and  That  by  the  arms  of  the  Volfci.
<c  Secondly,  if  you  fucceed,  and  accomplifh  your  defire,
“  you  will  be  looked  upon  as  the  moft  miferable  of  all  men.
“  Hear  then,  Marcius,  the  reafons,  that  induce  me  to  enter-
cc  tain  this  opinion  concerning  you  ;  and  be  not  offended
u  at  the  liberty  I  fhall  take  in  laying  them  before  you.
“  Confider,  firft,  the  impoffibility  of  fucceeding.  The
tc  Romans,  as  you  yourfelf  know,  abound  in  a  numerous
“  youth  of  their  own  nation,  whom  (if  the  fedition  is  once
cc  banifhed  from  among  them,  as  banifhed  it  mu  ft  be,  pre-
C£  fently,  by  this  war ;  for  common  fear  reconciles  all
“  differences)  neither  the  Volfci,  nor  even  any  other  Italian
cc  nation,  will  be  able  to  overcome,  Great,  alfo,  is  the

“  power


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSENSIS.  321

“  power  of  the  Latines,  and  of  the  reft  of  our  allies,
€£  and  colonies;  moft  of  whom,  you  may  be  aftured,
C£  will  fly  to  our  aftiftance.  We  have  generals  of  the  fame
“  merit  with  yourfelf,  both  old,  and  young,  in  a  greater
“  number  than  are  to  be  found  in  any  other  city.  But  the
££  greateft  afliftance  of  all,  and  That,  which,  in  the  moft
C£  threatening  dangers,  has  never  fruftrated  our  hopes,
“  and  is  alone  of  greater  efficacy  than  all  human  power,
<£  is  the  favor  of  Heaven,  by  which  our  city  has,  not  only,
££  preferved  her  liberty  17  near  eight  generations,  but  is  be-
“  come  flourifhing,  and  the  fovereign  of  many  nations.
££  Neither  ought  you  to  compare  us  to  the  Pedani,  the
“  Tolerini,  or  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  fmall  towns  you
££  have  reduced:  For  a  general  lefs  able  than  yourfelf,  and
“  with  fewer  troops,  might  have  forced  places  defended  by
££  fmall  garrifons,  and  flight  works.  But  confider  the  great-
<£  nefs  of  our  city,  the  luftre  of  her  military  a&ions,  and  the
“  favor  of  the  gods,  always  prefent  to  her,  by  which  fhe
<£  was,  from  a  fmall  beginning,  raifed  to  the  grandeur  fhe
C£  now  enjoys ;  and  imagine  not  that  the  forces,  with  which
££  you  are  undertaking  fo  great  an  enterprife,  are  changed;
££  but  remember  well  that  your  army  conflfts  of  Volfci,  and
££  of  Aequi,  whom  the  prefent  race  of  our  countrymen  have

defeated  in  many  battles,  that  is,  as  often  as  they  have
££  dared  to  come  to  an  ingagement  v/ith  us.  Know  then
a  that,  with  troops  inferior  in  bravery,  you  are  going  to
££  encounter  thofe,  that  are  fupcrior  to  them;  and,  with

J7*  Oyfoyv  y$y)  t»jv  wv  ytvutv.  See  the  fourteenth  annotation  on  the  firft  book.

Vol.  III.  T  t  “  troops


322  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

44  troops  always  beaten,  thofe,  that  are  always  victorious.
44  But,  if  the  contrary  of  this  was  true,  it  would,  however,
44  be  a  thing  to  be  wondered  at  how  you,  who  are  experienced
44  in  military  affairs,  fhould  not  know  that  thofe,  who  invade
44  the  pofleilions  of  others,  are  not  fo  daring  as  thofe,  who
44  defend  their  own  :  For  the  former,  if  they  fucceed  not,
44  receive  no  damage;  but  the  others,  if  they  are  defeated,
44  have  nothing  left.  And  this  is  the  chief  reafon,  why
44  armies,  fuperior  both  in  number,  and  goodnefs,  are  often
44  beaten  by  thofe,  that  are  inferior  to  them  in  both.  For
44  neceffity  is  powerful;  and  every  man,  when  his  all  is  at
44  flake,  is  infpired  with  a  boldnefs,  which  nature  had,  before,
44  denied  him.  I  had  many  other  things  to  fay  concerning  the
44  impofiibility  of  your  undertaking;  but  let  thefe  fuffice.

XXVII.  44  I  have  one  confideration  ftill  to  fuggeft  to  you,
44  which,  if  you  judge  of  it  by  reafon,  not  paffion,  will,  not
44  only,  gain  your  approbation,  but,  alfo,  ingage  you  to
44  repent  of  what  you  are  doing.  What  is  this  confideration  ?
44  That  the  gods  have  never  given  to  any  mortal  man  the
44  certain  knowledge  of  future  events ;  neither  will  you  find,
44  in  any  age,  a  man  fuccefsful  in  all  his  undertakings,  un-
44  fuccefsful  in  none.  For  which  reafon,  thofe,  who  excel
44  others  in  prudence,  the  fruit  of  a  long  life,  and  great
44  experience,  think  it  reafonable,  before  they  begin  any
4 4  enterprife  whatever,  firfl  to  confider  the  event  of  it,  not
44  only  the  event  they  wifh  for,  but  the  other  alfo,  which
44  may,  poflibly,  happen  contrary  to  their  defire  :  This  is,
44  particularly,  the  duty  of  generals,  as  the  affairs  they  have

44  the


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SE  NS  I S.  323

“  the  conduct  of  are  of  the  greateft  importance ;  and  as
“  all  the  world  attributes  to  them  the  caufes  both  of  victories,
“  and  defeats :  After  they  have,  thus,  confidered  things,  if
“  they  find  that  the  want  of  fuccefs  will  be  attended  with
“  fmall,  or  few,  mifchiefs,  or  with  none  at  all,  they  under-
“  take  it;  but,  if  with  great,  and  many  inconveniences,
“  they  abandon  it.  Follow  their  example  ;  and,  before  you
<c  ingage  yourfelf,  confider  what  you  are  to  expedt,  if  you
“  fhould  be  unfortunate  in  this  war,  and  every  thing  fhould  not
“  fucceed  according  to  your  defire.  You  will  be  reproached
“  by  thofe,  who  have  received  you,  with  having  undertaken
<c  things  impofiible  ;  and,  when  our  army,  in  return,  fhall
“  march  into  their  territories,  and  lay  them  wafte  (for  we
“  fhall  never  fubmit  to  fuch  injuries  without  revenging  our-
cc  felves  on  the  aggreffors)  you  will  never  be  able  to  avoid
u  this  alternative ;  you  will  be  put  to  death  in  a  fhameful
“  manner,  either  by  the  Volfci  themfelves,  as  the  caufe  of
u  the  great  calamities  they  will  have  fuffered,  or  by  us,
“  whom  you  defigned  to  deftroy,  and  inflave.  But  it  may,
“  pofiibly,  happen  that  the  former,  before  any  mifchief  be-
<c  fals  them,  may,  in  order  to  a  reconciliation,  think  fit  to
u  deliver  you  up  to  be  punifhed  by  us ;  which  is  a  thing,
<c  that  many,  both  Barbarians,  and  Greeks,  when  reduced  to
“  fuch  extremities,  have  been  obliged  to  fubmit  to.  Do  you
“  look  upon  thefe  as  fmall  things,  and  not  worth  your  con-
u  fideration  ?  And  that  you  ought  to  defpife  them,  or  rather
“  to  efteem  them  as  the  greateft  of  all  evils  ?


T  t  2


XXVIII,


324  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

XXVIII.  “  On  the  other  fide,  if  you  fucceed,  what  won-
<c  derful,  what  deferable  advantage  will  you  obtain  ?  Or  what
u  glory  will  you  acquire  ?  For  this,  alfo,  you  ought  to  exa-
“  mine.  In  the  firft  place,  you  will  have  the  misfortune  to
tc  be  deprived  of  thofe  perfons,  who  are  the  deareft,  and  the
“  moft  nearly  related,  to  you  ;  of  an  unfortunate  mother,
“  to  whom  you  make  no  grateful  return  for  your  birth,  and
<c  education,  and  for  all  the  other  trouble  fhe  underwent  on
<c  your  account ;  fecondly,  of  a  virtuous  wife,  who,  by
cc  reafon  of  your  ab fence,  fits  in  folitude,  and  widowhood,
Ci  and  laments  day,  and  night  your  banifhment ;  befides,
<£  you  will  be  deprived  of  two  fons,  who,  as  they  are  de~
“  fcended  from  worthy  anceftors,  are  intitled  to  the  enjoy-
iC  ment  of  their  honors,  and  to  flourifh  in  a  flourilhing
cc  commonwealth :  Of  the  miferable,  and  unfortunate  ca-
<c  taftrophe  of  all  thefe  you  will  be  compelled  to  be  a  fpec-
<c  tator,  if  you  dare  to  approach  the  walls  with  your  army  :
“For  you  may  be  allured  that  no  mercy  will  be  fhewn  to
<c  any  of  your  relations  by  thofe,  who  are  in  danger  of  lofing
“  their  own,  and  are  treated  by  you  with  the  fame  cruelty  ;
iC  but,  forced  by  their  calamities,  they  will  inflidt  on  them
<£  dreadful  torments,  cruel  infults,  and  all  other  kinds  of
“  abufe :  And  of  all  thefe  things,  not  the  a&ors,  but  you,
“  who  forced  them  to  act  in  this  manner,  will  be  the  caufe.
“  Thefe  will  be  the  pleafures  you  will  enjoy,  if  your  enter-
<c  prife  fucceeds.  As  to  the  praife  you  will  acquire,  the
admiration,  and  the  honors,  which  all  good  men  ought
iC  to  aim  at,  confider  of  what  nature  they  will  be  :  You  will

be


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  325

“  be  called  the  parricide  of  your  mother,  the  murderer  of
££  your  children,  the  aflaflin  of  your  wife,  and  the  fcourge
££  of  your  country  ;  and  no  man,  who  has  any  regard  either
£C  to  religion,  or  juftice,  will  partake  of  the  fame  facrifices,
££  or  libations  with  you,  or  live  under  the  fame  roof  whither-
££  foever  you  go :  Even  thofe,  for  whofe  fake  you  do  thefe
££  things,  will  not  efteem  you  ;  but  every  one  of  them,  after
££  they  have  reaped  fome  advantage  from  your  impious
££  actions,  will  deteft  your  implacable  temper.  I  need  not
££  put  you  in  mind  that,  beftdes  the  deteftation  of  the  beft
££  men,  you  will  be  envied  by  your  equals,  and  feared  by
££  your  inferiors ;  and,  for  both  thefe  reafons,  expofed  '‘to
££  treachery,  and  to  many  other  mifchiefs,  which  muft,  ne-
££  ceflarily,  befal  every  man,  who  isdeftitute  of  friends,  and
££  refides  in  a  foreign  country.  I  fay  nothing,  alfo,  of  the
££  Furies,  fent  by  the  gods,  and  genius’s  to  punifh  thofe,
££  who  have  been  guilty  of  wicked,  and  flagitious  actions,
££  by  whom  they  are  tormented  both  in  their  minds,
££  and  bodies,  and,  after  a  wretched  life,  die  a  miferable
££  death.  Conflder  thefe  things,  Marcius ;  change  your  refo-
££  lution,  and  forget  your  refen tment  to  your  country  ;  look
££  upon  Fortune  to  have  been  the  caufe  of  all  the  mifchiefs
££  you  have  either  fuffered  from  our  hands,  or  inflicted  on
££  us;  return  with  joy  to  your  family;  and,  once  more,
££  receive  the  moft  affectionate  embraces  of  your  mother,
££  the  moft  indearing  carefies  of  your  wife,  and  the  moft
££  ingaging  tendernefs  of  your  children  ;  and,  by  reftoring
££  yourfelf  to  your  country,  repay  the  glorious  debt

££  yon


326  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

iC  you  owe  to  her,  for  having  given  birth,  and  education  to
((  fo  great  a  man.”

XXIX.  Minucius  having  fpoken  in  this  manner,  Marcius,
after  a  fhort  paufe,  replied  :  “  I  own  myfelf  a  friend  to  you,
“  Minucius,  and  to  all  the  reft,  who  are  fent  hither  together
“  with  you  by  the  fenate  ;  and  am  ready  to  do  you  any
<c  fervice  in  my  power,  becaufe,  even  before,  when  I  was  your
€C  fellow-citizen,  and  had  a  fhare  in  the  adminiftration  of
“  the  public  affairs,  you  affifted  me  on  many  difficult  occa-
“  lions ;  and,  after  my  baniffiment,  you  did  not  difregard
“  me  from  a  contempt  of  my  then  unhappy  fituation,
u  as  if  it  had  rendered  me  incapable,  any  longer,  either  to
C£  ferve  my  friends,  or  hurt  my  enemies ;  but  continued  to
“  fhew  your  benevolence,  and  friendfhip  for  me,  by  taking
<c  care  of  my  mother,  my  wife,  and  children,  and  alleviating
C(  their  misfortunes  by  your  good  offices:  But  I  am  an
<c  enemy  to  the  reft  of  the  Romans,  and  do  every  thing  in
u  my  power  to  diftrefs  them,  and  lliall  never  ceafe  to  hate
“  thofe,  who,  in  return  for  the  many  glorious  actions,  for
“  which  I  deferved  honor,  drove  me  out  of  my  country  with
tc  ignominy,  as  if  I  had  been  guilty  of  the  moft  heinous
“  crimes  againft  the  commonwealth;  and  ffiewed  neither
“  refpedt  to  my  mother,  compaffion  to  my  children,  nor
“  any  other  marks  of  fenfibility  for  my  misfortunes.  Now
“  you  are  apprized  of  my  refolutions,  if  you  defire  any
<c  thing  of  me  with  regard  to  yourfelves,  make  no  difficulty
“  to  let  me  know  it,  and  be  affined  that  you  may  com-
“  mand  any  thing  in  my  power:  But,  concerning  friendfhip,

4(  and


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNA  S  SENS  I  $.  327

<c  and  a  reconciliation,  which  you  defire  me  to  enter  into
cc  with  the  people,  upon  the  profped:  of  my  return,  ceafe
tc  to  fay  any  thing.  Shall  I  look  upon  it  as  a  lingular  favor
cc  to  return  to  a  city,  where  vice  receives  the  reward  of  virtue,
“  and  innocence  the  punifhment  of  guilt  ?  Let  me  know,
u  in  the  name  of  the  gods,  for  what  crime  have  I  myfelf
“  experienced  this  misfortune?  What  action  have  I  com-
<c  mitted,  that  is  unworthy  of  my  anceftors  ?  I  made  my
“  firft  campaign  when  I  was  very  young,  at  the  time  we
tc  fought  againft  the  kings,  who  were,  then,  endeavouring
“  to  force  their  reftoration.  In  this  engagement,  I  faved  a
<c  citizen,  and  Hew  an  enemy,  and  was  honoured  by  the
u  general  with  13  the  crowns  due  to  fuperior  valor.  After


l8,  Apseion  stQotvois.  By  thefe  words,
our  author  means  the  Corona  civica
becaufe  he  makes  Marcius  fay  that  he
received  this  honor  as  a  reward  for
having  faved  a  citizen,  and  flain  an
enemy.  As  the  Civic  crown  was  the
moft  honourable  of  all  others,  the
reader  may  not  be  difplealed  to  find
here  fome  particulars  relating  to  it.
This  crown  was  firft  made  of  a  branch
of  the  Ilex ;  afterwards,  of  the  M f cuius  ^
and,  at  laft,  of  the  oak  with  the  acorns.
This  might  be  fufficient  if  all  my  rea¬
ders  were  gardeners  ;  but,  as  that  may
not  happen  to  be  the  cafe,  I  think  it
neceffary  to  fhew  the  difference  between
the  two  firft  trees,  and  the  laft,  with
which  they  are,  often,  confounded.
The  Ilex  of  k  Pliny,  and  the  of
Theophraftus,is  the  fcarlet  oak,  which
bears  the  fcarlet  grain,  the
of  the  Greeks,  and  the  Kernes  of  the


Arabians,  being  an  excrefcence  occa-
fioned  by  the  pundure  of  a  fly,  which
lays  its  eggs  there:. This  grain  is,
fometimes,  ufed  by  the  dyers ;  but
was  much  more  fo,  before  they  were
acquainted  with  Cochineal.  The  AZf-
culus ,  called  by  Theophraftus,
and,  by  1  Pliny,  Hemeris ,  is  the  dwarf
oak.  EveryRoman  foldier,  of  whatever
degree,  was  intitled  to  a  civic  crown,
if  he  had  faved  a  citizen,  and  killed  an
enemy  ;  and  the  latter  muft  have  ftood
upon  the  fame  fpot,  where  the  affair-
happened,  that  day  :  The  citizen  faved
muft  own  it ;  otherwife,  no  witnefies
were  admitted  to  prove  the  fad  ;  the
perfon  faved  muft  be  a  Roman  citizen:
After  the  foldier  had  received  a  civic
crown,  he  had  the  privilege  of  wearing
it  always :  When  he  entered  any  place,
where  public  games  were  celebrating,
all  the  fpedators,  even  the  ferrate,  rofe


k  Nat.  Hift.  B.  xvi,  c.  8,  1  lb.  c.  6.

“  that,


Book  VIII.


328  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

u  that,  in  every  other  action  I  was  ingaged  in,  whether  of
u  the  horfe,  or  foot,  I  diftinguilhed  myfelf  in  all,  and,  in  all,
u  received  the  rewards  appropriated  to  the  braved:  man ;
“  neither  was  there  any*town  taken  by  ftorm,  of  which
cc  I  did  not  mount  the  walls  either  the  firft,  or  among  the
u  firft  ;  nor  was  the  enemy  ever  put  to  flight,  but  all,  who
cc  were  prefen t,  acknowledged  that  I  had  been  the  chief  caufe
u  of  it ;  or  any  other  fignal,  or  brave  a&ion  performed  in
cc  war  without  the  affiftance  either  or  my  valor,  or  fortune.

XXX.  “  It  is  poffible  that  any  other  brave  man  alfo
cc  may  alledge  fuch  exploits,  if  not  fo  many,  in  his  favor  ;
iC  but,  what  general,  or  inferior  officer  has  reafon  to  glory
“  in  taking  any  town,  in  the  manner  I  took  Corioli  ?  And
5C  that  the  fame  man,  the  fame  day,  defeated  the  enemy’s
cc  army,  as  I  defeated  That  of  the  Antiates,  who  were
<c  coming  to  the  affiftance  of  the  befieged  ?  I  ffiall  not  add
iC  that,  alter  I  had  given  fo  many  proofs  of  my  valor,  when
a  I  might  have  received  out  of  the  fpoils  a  large  quantity  of
“  gold,  and  filver,  of  flaves,  beafts  of  burden,  and  cattle,
<£  and  of  fertii  land  to  a  great  extent,  I  refufed  them  all  ;
cc  and,  from  a  defire  to  fecure  my  fell  as  much  as  poffible
u  againft  envy,  took  only  a  war-horfe  of  all  the  fpoils ;

up  to  do  him  honor  :  Upon  thofe  00  nil  profunt ;  ut  civis  fuerit : _ Accept  a

cations,  he  had  a  right  of  fitting  next  licet  uti  perpetuo  :  Ludos  ineunti  femper
to  the  fenators  :  The  foldier  himfelf,  ajfurgi ,  etiam  ab  fenatu ,  in  more  ejl  :
his  father,  and  his  grandfather,  were  Sedendi  jus  in  proximo  fenatui :  Vacaiio
freed  from  all  public  duties.  m  Civem  munerum  omnium  ipfi ,  patrique ,  et  avo
fervare ,  hojiem  occidtre  :  XJtque  eum  lo-  paterno.  There  is  fomething  in  this
cummin  quo  fit  ablum,  hojiis  obtineat  eo  inftitution  too  great  not  to  be  ex-
die:  Ut  fervatus  jateatur  ;  alias  tefies  plained,  or  imitated.

w  Pliny,  Nat.  Hilt.  B.  xvi.  c.  4.;


u  and,


Book  VIII.  DIO'NYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  BN  S I S.  329

<£  and,  of  all  the  prifoners,  only  one  perfon,  with  whom  I
<£  had  an  intercourse  of  hofpitality  ;  and  all  the  reft  of  the
“  riches  I  refigned  to  the  public.  Did  I,  then,  for  thefe
C£  a&ions  deferve  punifhment,  or  honor?  And  to  be  fubjecft
££  to  the  moft  profligate  of  the  citizens,  or  to  command  my
“  inferiors  ?  However,  it  feems,  the  people  did  not  banifti
££  me  for  thefe  things ;  but  becaufe,  in  the  reft  of  my  a<ftions,
“  I  was  intemperate,  expenftve,  and  irregular :  But,  who
cc  can  name  the  man,  who  has  been  deprived  either  of  his
(C  country,  his  liberty,  or  his  fortune,  or  involved  in  any
££  other  calamity,  to  gratify  my  irregular  appetites  ?  No  one
“  even  of  my  enemies  everaccufed,  or  charged  me  with  any
C£  thing  of  this  kind,  but  all  bore  witnefs  that  the  whole
<£  tenor  of  my  life  was  irreprehenflble.  But,  it  may  be  faid,
“  your  political  principles,  detefted  by  all  men,  brought  this
<£  misfortune  upon  you :  For,  when  you  had  it  in  your
“  power  to  chufe  the  better  flde,  you  chofe  the  worfe  :
££  And  all  your  words,  and  actions,  conftantly,  tended  to
<£  fubvert  the  eftabliflied  ariftocracy  ;  and  to  throw  the
C£  whole  power  of  the  commonwealth  into  the  hands  of  the
cc  ignorant,  and  abandoned  multitude:  On  the  contrary,
<£  the  meafures  I  purfued,  Minucius,  were  the  very  reverfe
“  of  all  this,  and  tended  to  maintain  the  fenate  in  the  ad-

t

“  miniftration  of  the  public  affairs  for  ever,  and  to  perpe-
<£  tuate  the  eftabliflied  conftitution.  But,  in  return  for  thefe
££  glorious  meafures,  which  our  anceftors  thought  worthy  of
££  emulation,  I  have  received  this  happy,  this  blefled  retribu-
“  tion  from  my  country,  in  being  banifhed,  not  by  the  people
Vol.  III.  U  u  ii  only,


330  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

££  only,  Minucius,  but,  long  before,  by  the  fenate,  who  encou-
£  raged  me,  at  firft,  with  vain  hopes,  while  I  was  oppofing
c  the  tribunes  in  their  pretenfions  to  tyranny,  that  they  them-
£  felves  would  provide  for  my  fecurity  ;  and,  upon  the  firft
£  fufpicionof  fome  danger  from  the  plebeians,  abandoned  me,
£  and  delivered  me  up  to  my  enemies.  You  yourfelf  were
c  conful,  Minucius,  when  the  fenate  pafled  the  previous
£  vote  concerning  my  trial,  and  when  Valerius,  who  advifed
£  them  to  deliver  me  up  to  the  people,  gained  great  applaufe
c  by  his  fpeech  :  And  I,  fearing  left,  if  the  queftion  had
£  been  put,  I  fhould  be  condemned  by  the  fenate,  ac-
c  quiefced,  and  promifed  to  appear,  and  take  my  trial.

XXXI.  ££  Anfwer  me  now,  Minucius,  whether  I  did  not
£  feem  to  the  fenate,  alfo,  to  deferve  puniftiment  for  having
c  promoted,  and  purfued  the  beft  of  all  meafures,  or  to  the
£  people  only  ?  For,  if  you  were  all  of  this  opinion  at  that
c  time,  and  if  all  of  you  banifhed  me,  it  is  plain  that  all  of
£  you,  who  concurred  in  this,  are  enemies  to  virtue,  and
£  that  there  is  no  place  in  your  city,  where  merit  can  be
£  fecure.  But,  if  the  fenate  were  forced  to  comply  with  the
£  people,  and  their  compliance  was  not  voluntary,  but  ex-
£  torted  by  neceffity,  you  muft  allow  that  they  are  under
£  the  government  of  the  wicked,  and  have  not  the  power
£  to  a <ft  in  any  thing,  as  they  think  fit.  After  this,  do  you
£  defire  me  to  return  to  a  city  thus  conftituted,  in  which
£  the  beft  men  are  governed  by  the  worft  ?  You  muft,

£  certainly,  think  me  capable  of  committing  a  great  folly.
££  But,  fuppofe  I  yield  to  your  felicitations  ;  and,  putting

££  an


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C  AR N  A  S S  E N  S  I S.  331

<c  an  end  to  the  war  as  you  defire,  return  ;  what  fentiments
“  fhall  I  entertain  after  this  ?  And  what  conduct  fhall  I
cc  obferve?  Shall  I  confult  my  own  fecurity,  and  fafety  ;
“  and,  in  order  to  obtain  magiftracies,  honors,  and  the  other
“  advantages  I  think  myfelf  worthy  of,  fubmit  to  court  the
“  multitude,  who  alone  have  the  power  of  beftowing  them  ?
cc  If  I  did  this,  I  fhould  be  transformed  from  a  good,  to  a
cc  bad  man,  and  reap  no  benefit  from  my  former  virtue:
“  Or  fhall  I  preferve  the  fame  chara&er;  and,  adhering  to
“  the  fame  principles  of  government,  oppofe  all,  who  are  of
“  a  different  opinion  ?  And  is  it  not  manifeft  that  the  people
“  would,  again,  perfecute  me,  and  meditate  another  revenge,
“  and  make  this  their  firft  charge  againfl:  me,  that,  having,
“  obtained  my  return  through  their  indulgence,  I  did  not
“  flatter  their  paffions  in  every  meafure  I  purfued  ?  This
“  cannot  be  denied.  Then,  fome  other  bold  demagogue
“  will  fpring  up,  like  Sicinnius,  or  Lucius,  who  will  accufe
<c  me  of  fowing  difcord  among  the  citizens,  of  forming
<c  treacherous  defigns  againfl;  the  people,  of  betraying  my
cc  country  to  the  enemy,  or,  of  affecting  tyranny,  with
cc  which  Lucius  charged  me,  or,  of  any  other  crime  he
“  fliall  think  fit :  For  an  enemy  will  never  be  at  a  lofs  for
cc  an  accufation  :  And,  to  fill  up  the  meafure  of  my  iniqui-
“  ties,  I  fliall  foon  be  accufed,  alfo,  of  every  thing  I  have
“  done  in  this  war ;  that  I  have  laid  wafte  your  country,
<(  carried  off  a  great  booty,  taken  your  towns,  flain  fome
“  of  thofe,  who  defended  them,  and  delivered  up  others
u  to  the  enemy:  If  my  accufers  charge  me  with  thefe

U  u  2  “  things,


332  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

££  things,  what  can  I  fay  in  my  defence  ?  What  affiftance
££  can  I  rely  on  ?

XXXII.  ££  Is  it  not,  therefore,  plain,  Minucius,  that  you
££  make  ufe  of  fair  words,  and  diflimulation ;  and,  with  a
“  fpecious  name,  cover  a  wicked  defign  ?  For,  inftead  of
££  giving  me  leave  to  return,  you  lead  me,  as  a  vidim,  to
££  the  people  :  Even  this  may  be  your  view  ;  for  I  can,  no
££  longer,  entertain  any  good  opinion  of  you.  However,  if  you
££  defire  it,  I  will  fuppofe  that  you  do  not  forefee  any  thing
t£  I  fhall  fuffer :  But,  what  advantage  fhall  I  reap  from  your
££  ignorance,  or  folly  ;  fince  it  will  not  be  in  your  power,
“  fhould  you  even  defire  it,  to  oppofe  any  thing;  but  you
££  will  be  compelled  to  gratify  the  people  even  in  this,  as  well
££  as  in  other  things  ?  I  think  it  unnecefiary,  after  this,  to
££  employ  many  words,  in  order  to  convince  you  that* I  fhall
££  find  no  fecurity  in  what  you  call  a  return,  but  I,  the  road,
££  that  will,  quickly,  lead  me  to  defir  udion.  Learn,  now,
££  in  your  turn,  that  I  can  find  in  it  neither  reputation,
££  honor,  nor  piety,  fince  you  defire  me,  with  great  reafon,
££  Minucius,  to  have  a  regard  to  thefe,  but,  that  I  fhall  ad:
c£  in  a  mofk  fhameful,  and  impious  manner,  if  I  follow
££  your  advice.  I  was  an  enemy  to  the  Volfei,  and  did  them
“  great  injuries  during  the  war,  while  I  was  acquiring  fo-
<£  vereignty,  power,  and  glory  for  my  country.  Was  it  not
c£  reafonable,  therefore,  that  I  fhould  be  honoured  by  thofe  I
C£  had  obliged,  and  hated  by  thofe  I  had  injured?  Certainly,
££  if  reafon  had  taken  place:  But  Fortune  has  defeated  both
<£  thefe  expedations,  and  given  a  contrary  turn  to  their

££  dif-


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICA  RN  ASSEN  SIS.  333

“  difpofitions :  For  you,  for  whofe  fake  I  was  an  enemy  to
“  thefemen,  have  deprived  me  of  all  my  fortunes,  and,  hav-
“  ing  reduced  me  to  the  lowed:  condition,  you  caft  me  off;
u  while  thefe,  who  had  fuffered  the  greateft  calamities  from
cc  me,  received  into  their  cities  this  indigent,  this  abjedt
“  man,  who  had  been  driven  from  his  habitation,  and  from
“  his  country ;  and,  not  contented  with  this  illuftrious,  this
“  magnanimous  adfion,  they  granted  to  me  the  rights  of
u  a  citizen  in  all  their  cities,  and  inverted  me  with  thofe
u  magiftracies,  and  honors,  that  are  in  the  greateft  requeft
“  among  them.  I  omit  the  reft :  They  have,  now,  appointed
“  me  to  command,  with  unlimited  authority,  the  army  they
“  have  fent  out  of  their  country,  and  committed  to  me  alone
cc  the  whole  power  of  their  commonwealth.  What  infenfi-
<c  bility  then  fhould  I  be  guilty  of,  if  I  betrayed  thofe,  by
“  whom  I  have  been  adorned  with  fuch  honors,  without
“  being  provoked  to  it  by  the  leaft  injury  ?  Unlefs,  indeed,
“  their  favors  are  injurious  to  me,  as  mine  are  to  you.  I
u  fhould,  certainly,  gain  a  fine  reputation  in  the  world,  if
“  I  was  known  to  be  guilty  of  a  double  treachery.  And
cc  who  could  not  chufe  but  praife  me,  when  they  heard
“  that,  finding  my  friends,  from  whom  I  ought  to  have
u  received  benefits,  to  become  my  enemies,  and  my  ene-
<c  mies,  by  whom  I  ought  to  have  been  deftroyed,  to  become
my  friends,  inftead  of  hating  thofe  who  hate  me,  and
u  loving  thofe  who  love  me,  I  entertained  contrary  fenti-
u  ments  ?


XXXIII,


334  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

XXXIII.  “  Confider,  now,  Minucius,  in  what  difpofition
C£  the  gods  are  to  me  at  prefen t,  and  in  what  difpofition
“  they  will  be  to  me,  during  the  reft  of  my  life,  if  I  am
tfc  prevailed  upon  by  you  to  betray  the  truft  repofed  in  me
“  by  thefe  people.  At  prefent,  they  affift  me  in  every
“  enterprife  I  undertake  againftyou,  and  I  fucceed  in  every
££  attempt.  How  great  a  proof  do  you  think  this  is  of  my
<£  piety?  For,  if  I  had  undertaken  an  impious  war  againft
“  my  country,  the  gods  ought  to  have  oppofed  me  in  every
££  thing ;  but,  fince  Fortune  favors  my  arms  with  an  au-
cc  fpicious  gale,  and  every  thing  I  attempt  is  crowned  with
<£  fuccefs,  it  is  plain  that  I  am  a  pious  man,  and  that  my
“  defigns  are  honourable.  What,  therefore,  can  I  expecft,  if
“  I  change  my  conduct,  and  endeavour  to  encreafe  your
<£  power,  and  reduce  theirs  ?  Have  I  not  reafon  to  expedt
<£  the  contrary  of  all  this,  and  that  the  gods,  exafperated  at
<£  my  perfidy,  will  revenge  the  injured  ?  And,  as  by  the
<c  affiftance  of  the  gods,  I  have  been  raifed  from  a  low
iC  condition  to  greatnefs,  fhall  I  not,  again,  fall  from  great-
u  nefs  to  a  low  condition,  and  my 19  fufferings  become  leffons
t£  to  the  reft  of  the  world?  Thefe  are  my  thoughts  concern-
C£  ing  the  gods ;  and  I  am  perfuaded  that  thofe  Furies  you
4£  mentioned,  Minucius,  fo  formidable,  and  inexorable  to
££  the  wicked,  will  perfecute  me,  and  torment  both  my  foul,
<£  and  body,  whenever  I  fhall  abandon,  and  betray  thofe,
££  who  preferved  me  after  you  had  ruined  me,  and,  at  the
££  fame  time  they  preferved  me,  conferred  many  illuftrious

*9-  Ucifaipeila  muiStvpotlK.  See  the  thirty  third  annotation  on  the  firft  book.

££  marks


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  AS  SENS  IS.  335
<c  marks  of  their  favor  on  me,  to  whom  I  gave  this  affu  ranee,
cc  to  which  I  called  the  gods  to  witnefs,  that  I  did  not
u  come  among  them  with  a  defign  to  do  them  an y  injury,
“  and  pledged  that  faith  to  them,  which  I  have,  hitherto,
“  preferved  pure  and  inviolate.

XXXIV.  “  When,  Minucius,  you  call  thofe,  ftill,  my
<c  friends,  who  have  banifhed  me,  and  that  nation,  my
cc  country,  which  has  renounced  me  ;  when  you  appeal,  to
“  the  laws  or  nature,  and  difplay  the  duties  of  religion,  you
“  feem  to  be  unacquainted  with  the  moft  common  things,
c<  and  to  be  alone  ignorant  of  Thofe,  which  no  man  elfe  is
“  ignorant  of;  that  friends,  or  enemies  are  not  diftinguifhed
<c  either  by  their  looks,  or  their  names,  but  by  experience,
“  and  by  their  behaviour.  We  all  love  thofe,  who  do  us
“  good,  and  hate  thofe,  who  do  us  harm  ;  this  lawT  we  have
“  not  received  from  the  inftitution  of  men,  neither  is  it  in
“  their  power  to  abrogate  it,  when  they  pleafe  :  It  is  the
u  univerfal,  and  eternal  law  of  nature  given  to  ail,  who
“  partake  of  fenfe,  and  will  ever  continue  in  force.  For
“  this  reafon,  we  renounce  our  friends,  when  they  injure  us,
“  and  are  reconciled  to  our  enemies,  when  we  receive  fome
“  favors  from  them ;  and  we  cherifh  the  country,  that  gave
“  us  birth,  when  we  receive  a  benefit  from  it;  but,  when
“  an  injury,  we  abandon  it,  and  are  not  fond  of  it  for  the
“  fake  of  the  place,  but  of  the  advantage  we  receive  from
<c  it.  Thefe  are  not  the  fentiments  of  private  men  only,  but
“  of  whole  cities,  and  nations:  So  that,  whoever  follows  this
cc  maxim  contradicts  neither  the  divine  laws,  nor  the  received

u  opinion


336  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

ii  opinion  of  all  men.  While,  therefore,  I  in  this  manner,
<c  I  look  upon  myfelf  to  a£t  with  juftice,  with  advantage
“  to  myfelf,  and  with  honor  ;  and  that  my  behaviour  is,  at
<c  the  fame  time,  highly  acceptable  to  the  gods :  Since  my
u  actions  are  pleafing  to  them,  I  have  no  occafion  to  make
“  men  judges  of  thofe  actions,  who  judge  of  truth  by  con-
<c  jedture,  and  opinion ;  neither  do  I  efteem  the  enterprife  I
cc  have  undertaken  to  be  impoffible,  fince  the  gods  are  my
cc  guides ;  particularly,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  guefs  of  the
tc  future  by  the  part.

XXXV.  u  Concerning  the  moderation  you  recommend
<c  to  me,  and  that  I  would  not,  utterly,  deftroy  the  Roman
cc  nation,  nor  fubvert  their  city  from  the  foundations,  I
“  could  anfwer,  Minucius,  that  this  does  not  belong  to  my
<c  province,  neither  is  this  requeft,  properly,  addrefied  to  me,
tc  who  am,  indeed,  general  of  the  army,  but  thefe  have  the
<c  foie  power  of  making  peace,  and  war  :  So  that,  you  ought
“  to  apply  to  them  for  a  truce  in  order  to  a  peace,  and  not
<c  to  me.  However,  I  fhall  not  give  you  this  anfwer  3  but,
c<  from  the  veneration  I  pay  to  the  gods  of  our  fathers,  and
£C  the  refpedt  I  bear  to  the  fepulchres  of  our  anceftors,  and
“  to  my  native  country,  the  compaffion  I  feel  for  your  wives
Cc  and  children,  who,  though  innocent,  will  fuffer  for  the
<c  errors  of  their  fathers,  and  hufbands,  and  from  my  regard
l<  to  you,  who  are  fent  hither  by  your  commonwealth,
“  which  is  not  the  lead:  confederation,  Minucius,  I  fhall  re-
“  turn  this  anfwer :  If  the  Romans  will  reftoreto  the  Volfci
“  the  lands  they  have  taken  from  them,  and  the  cities  they

“  are


/


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  337

u  are  in  poffefllon  of,  recal  their  colonies,  enter  into  a  league
cc  of  perpetual  friendfhip  with  them,  communicate  to  them
“  the  rights  of  Roman  citizens,  in  the  fame  manner  as  they
“  have  communicated  them  to  the  Latines,  and  confirm
“  this  treaty  by  oaths,  and  imprecations  againft  the  tranf-
cc  greffors  of  it,  I  will  put  an  end  to  the  war.  Fir  ft  then,

“  make  your  report  to  them  of  thefe  things,  and  urge  to
“  them  the  conftderation  of  juftice  with  the  fame  energy
“  you  have  reprefented  it  to  me  ;  tell  them  that  it  is  a
“  glorious  thing  for  every  man  to  enjoy  his  own  poffeflions,
<c  and  live  in  peace,  and  highly  valuable  to  have  no  enemy,
<c  no  crifis  to  fear ;  but  that  it  is  no  lefs  fhameful,  by  grafp-
“  ing  at  the  poffeffions  of  others,  to  expofe  ourfelves  to  an
“  unneceffary  war,  in  which  we  run  the  hazard  of  lofing
“  even  all  we  enjoy  ;  lay  before  them  the  confequences,
“  that  attend  thofe,  who  covet  the  territories  of  others,
“  when  they  do  not  fucceed,  as  well  as  when  they  do  ;  add
iC  too,  if  you  pleafe,  that  thofe,  who  defire  to  feize  the
c£  towns  of  the  injured,  if  they  do  not  overcome  them,
<c  often  lofe  both  their  own  territories,  and  their  own  cities ;
“  and,  beftdes  this,  fee  their  wives  expofed  to  the  greateft
“  indignities,  their  children  to  inful ts,  and  their  decrepit
<c  parents  to  flavery :  And  let  the  fenate  know,  at  the  fame
“  time,  that  they  could  have  no  reafon  to  attribute  thefe
“  evils  to  Marcius,  but  to  their  own  folly;  fince,  when  they
“  have  it  in  their  power  to  do  juftice,  and  to  avoid  every
“  calamity,  they  chufe  to  hazard  all  from  the  great  delight
“  they,  always,  take  in  the  pofTeflions  of  others.  You  have
Vol.  III.  x  x  “  my


33B  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

“  my  anfwer,  to  which  you  will  not  prevail  upon  me  to  add
<c  any  thing.  Return  now,  and  confider  what  you  ought  to  do.
cc  I  will  allow  you  thirty  days  for  your  deliberation.  In  the
u  mean  time,  to  fhew  my  regard  for  you,  Minucius,  and
“  for  the  reft  of  the  deputies,  I  will  withdraw  my  troops
<c  from  your  territories;  for  they  would  occafion  great  da-
a  mage  to  you  fhould  they  remain  here :  And,  on  the
<£  thirtieth  day,  exped  my  return  in  order  to  receive  your
anfwer.”

XXXVI.  Having  faid  this,  he  rofe  up,  and  difmifted  the
aflembly :  And,  the  following  night,  decamped  with  his
army  about  the  20  laft  watch,  and  marched  to  the  reft  of  the
Latin  cities  (either  really  informed  that  the  Romans  were
to  receive  fome  fuccours  from  thence,  as  Minucius  had  ad¬
vanced  in  his  fpeech,  or,  having  himfelf  caufed  fuch  a
report  to  be  fpread)  to  the  end  it  might  not  appear  that  he
had  given  over  the  war  to  gratify  his  enemies.  And,  having
attacked  a  town,  called 21  Lonp-ola,  he  made  himfelf  mafter
of  it  without  any  difficulty,  and  treated  it  in  the  fame
manner  he  had  treated  the  reft,  by  making  ftaves  of  the
inhabitants,  and  plundering  the  town.  Then  he  marched
to  the  city  of  the  22  Satricani  ;  and,  having  taken  this,  alfo,
after  a  ffiort  reiiftance,  and  ordered  a  detachment  of  his
army  to  convey  the  booty,  taken  in  both  thefe  towns,  to
23  Echetra,  he  went  with  the  reft  of  his  forces  to  a  town,

I  O  -  .  A  •  *

20,  tkv  ithiv.uiav  <pvA otKKv.  See  22*  See  the  fixty  firft

the  Sixtieth  annotation  on  the  third  chapter  of  the  fifth  book,
book.  ■-  '  23*  E^il^uv.  See  the  fifty  Sixth  an-

**•  A ofyoK#.  See  the  ninety  firft  notation  on  the  fourth  book,
chapter  of  the  Sixth  book.


called


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNAS  SENS  IS.  339

called  2+  Cetia  :  After  he  had  taken  this  place  alfo,  and
pillaged  it,  he  made  an  irruption  into  the  territories  of  the
25  Polufcani ;  who,  being  unable  to  withstand  him,  he  took
their  city,  alfo,  by  ftorm :  And,  then  advanced  to  the  fol¬
lowing  towns ;  26  Lavinium,  and  27  Vitellia  he  took  by
affault ;  and  2S  Corioli  by  compolition.  Having  thus  made
himfelf  mafter  of  feven  cities  in  thirty  days,  he  returned  to
Rome  with  an  army  much  more  numerous  than  the  former;
and  incamped  on  the  road,  that  leads  to  Tufculum,  at  the
diftance  of  fomething  more  than  thirty  ftadia  from  the  city.


24*  Kshav.  I  find  that  n  Cluver  can
make  nothing  of  the  name  of  this
town ;  for  which  reafon,  I  fhall  not
attempt  to  corred  it.  In  all  probabi¬
lity,  the  text  is  corrupted.

25*  noA vcKoivuv.  See  the  forty  feventh
annotation  on  the  fixth  book.

26,  Aa£<>jW  Sylburgius  thinks, with
great  reafon,  that  we  ought  to  read
Aax'ivKxlaf  *,  becaufe,  Lavinium,  as  we
have  feen,  was  blocked  up  before
Coriolanus  advanced  fo  near  to  Rome,
as  the  Cluilian  ditches.

27*  MotyiAccnwc.  I  very  much  fufped
that  here  is  another  error  in  the  Greek
text  •,  becaufe  I  can  find  no  fuch  town
in  Italy,  as  Mugilla :  And  the  reafon
given  by  Jac.  Gronovius  to  prove
there  was  fuch  a  town,  is,  in  my  opi¬
nion,  very  inconclufive,  though M.***
has  adopted  it.  Gronovius  contends
that  there  muft  have  been  fuch  a  town,
becaufe  the  cognomen  of  Lucius  Papi-
rius  was  Mugillanus.  If  this  is  a  rea-
lon,  the  confequence  will  be,  that  all
the  Roman  cognomina  were  derived

n  Ttal.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  8.  cIb.  B.ii.  c.  1 6.
f  lb.  B.  iii.  c.  8.


from  towns :  But  this  was  far  from
being  the  cafe,  as  we  fee  by  thefe  cog¬
nomina  P.  Cornelius  Scipio ;  M.
Tullius  Cicero  ;  C.  Julius  Caefar,  and
many  others.  I  fhall,  therefore,  adhere
to  the  corredion  of0  Cluver,  who  reads
OuitzAAixvxc,  inflead  of  MoiyiAaivx?.
In  this,  he  is  fupported  by  p  Livy,  who
reckons  Vitellia  among  the  cities  taken
by  Coriolanus  :  Corbionem ,  Vitelliam,
Trebiam ,  Labicos ,  Pedum  cepit.  Vitellia
flood  on  the  borders  of  the  Latines,
and  the  Aequi.

28*  KoqioActvisi.  This  cannot  be  the
true  reading  ;  becaufe  our  author  has
told  us  that  he  had,  before,  taken
Corioli.  q  Cluver  thinks  we  ought  to
read  K ooguvxg.  But r  he  himfelf,  in  an¬
other  place,  makes  Cora  to  have  been
a  city  ol  the  Volfci;  which  makes  it
impoffible  that  Cora  fhould  have  been
one  of  the  towns  taken  by  them  under
Coriolanus  :  As,  therefore,  I  am  at  a
lofs  what  city  to  fubflitute  in  the  room
of  Corioli,  I  have  fuffered  it  to  remain
in  the  text.

P  B.  ii.  c.  39.

X  X  2


s  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  16.

While


340  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

While  Marcius  was  employed  in  taking,  and  conciliating
the  cities  of  the  Latines,  the  Romans,  after  many  conful-
tations  upon  his  demands,  refolved  to  do  nothing  unworthy
of  their  commonwealth;  but,  if  the  Volfci  would  depart
from  their  territories,  and  from  Thofe  of  their  allies,  and
fubje&s,  and,  putting  an  end  to  the  war,  fend  embaffadors  to
treat  of  friendfhip,  the  fenate  wmild  pafs  a  previous  vote  to
fettle  the  terms  of  that  friendfhip,  and  lay  before  the  people
the  refult  of  their  deliberations ;  but  that,  while  they  re¬
mained  in  their  territories,  and  in  Thofe  of  their  allies,
committing  adls  of  hoftility,  they  would  come  to  no  refo-
lution  in  their  favor  :  For  it  was,  always,  the  great  concern
of  the  Romans  to  do  nothing  by  command,  or  to  yield  to
an  enemy  through  fear ;  but,  when  once  their  adverfaries
had  made  peace,  and  acknowledged  themfelves  their  fubje&s,
to  gratify  them,  and  yield  to  any  thing  they  could,  rea-
fonably,  defire.  And  this  greatnefs  of  mind  the  common¬
wealth  has  preferved  to  this  day,  under  many  great  dangers
both  in  foreign,  and  domeftic  wars.

XXXVII.  The  fenate  having  come  to  this  refolution,
appointed  ten  other  confular  fenators  to  go  to  Marcius  in
quality  of  embaffadors  with  inftrudtions  to  defire  him  not
to  command  any  thing,  that  was  fevere,  or  unworthy  of
their  commonwealth  ;  but  to  lay  afide  his  refentment,  and,
withdrawing  his  forces  from  their  territories,  to  endeavour
to  obtain  the  terms  he  propofed  by  perfuafion,  and  concilia¬
tory  language,  if  he  defired  to  unite  the  two  nations  by  a
firm,  and  everlafting  peace ;  fince  all  treaties,  both  public

and


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  341

and  private,  that  are  entered  into  through  neceffity,  or  in
fubferviency  to  conjunctures,  are  foon  diffolved,  when  the
conjunctures,  or  the  neceffity  ceafes.  The  embafladors  ap¬
pointed  by  the  fenate,  being  informed  of  the  arrival  of
Marcius,  repaired  to  him,  and  ufed  many  arguments  to  gain
him,  preferving,  however,  in  every  thing  they  faid,  the
dignity  of  their  commonwealth.  Marcius  made  them  no
other  anfwer  than  that  he  advifed  them  to  take  fome  better
refolution,  and  to  return  within  three  days ;  after  which,
the  truce  ffiould  expire.  And,  when  the  deputies  were
preparing  to  make  fome  anfwer  to  this,  he  would  not  fuffer
it;  but  ordered  them  to  leave  the  camp  immediately,
threatening,  if  they  did  not,  to  treat  them  as  fpies :  Upon
which,  they  withdrew  in  ffience,  and  prefently  departed.
The  fenate,  being  informed  by  the  deputies  both  of  the
haughty  anfwers,  and  threats  of  Marcius,  did  not,  even  then,
come  to  a  refolution  of  fending  out  an  army,  from  a  diftruft
either  of  the  inexperience  of  their  foldiers,  moft  of  them
being  new  raifed,  or  of  the  puffilanimity  of  the  confuls ;
as  thefe  had  not  the  leaft  ffiare  of  activity :  For  which
reafons,  they  thought  it  dangerous  to  hazard  a  battle  of  fo
great  confequence.  It  is  poffible  alfo,  that  the  gods,  the
aufpices,  the  Sibylline  books,  or  fome  received  fcruples  of
religion  may  have  deterred  them  from  it ;  which  the  men
of  that  age  did  not  think  fit  to  negleCt,  like  Thofe  of  this:
However,  they  refolvedto  guard  the  city  with  greater  caution,
and  to  defend  themfelves  from  their  works,  whenever  they
fhould  be  attacked.


XXXVIII*


342  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

XXXVIII.  While  they  were  employed  in  thefe  prepara¬
tions,  and  had  not  yet  given  over  all  hopes  of  prevailing  on
Marciusto  relent,  if  they  fent  embafiadors  of  greater  weight,
and  dignity  to  intercede  for  them,  they  refolved  to  depute
the  pontifs,  the  augurs,  and  all  the  reft,  who  were  inverted
with  any  holy  dignity,  or  public  miniftry  relating  to  divine
worfhip :  There  being  among  them  great  numbers  of  priefts,
and  minifters  of  religion,  who  are  the  moft  diftinguifhed  of
all  others  on  account  both  of  their  families,  and  their  own
virtues ;  and  that  thefe  ftiould  carry  with  them  the  fymbols
of  the  gods,  whofe  rites,  and  worfhip  they  performed,  and
go  in  a  body  to  the  enemy’s  camp,  clad  in  their  prieftly
garments,  and  ufe  the  fame  intreaties  with  the  former  de¬
puties.  After  they  were  arrived,  and  had  acquainted  Mar-
cius  with  the  inftructions  they  had  received  from  the  fenate,
he  made  no  other  anfwer  even  to  thefe,  than  to  give  them
notice  either  to  depart,  and  obey  his  commands,  if  they
defired  peace,  or  to  expedt  the  war  at  their  gates :  And
forbid  any  application  to  him  for  the  future.  When  the
Romans  found  themfelves  difappointed  in  this  attempt  alfo,
they  abfolutely  defpaired  of  peace,  and  prepared  for  a  fiege,
difpofing  the  ableft  of  their  men  near  the  ditch,  and  at  the
gates  ;  and  thofe,  who  were  difcharged  from  the  fervice,
but  not  yet  incapable  of  bearing  the  fatigues  of  war,  they
placed  upon  the  walls.

XXXIX.  In  the  mean  time,  their  wives,  feeing  the  danger
at  hand,  and  forgetting  the  decency  of  domeftic  retirement,
ran  to  the  temples  of  the  gods  with  lamentations,  and
d  i  .  threw


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  ENS I  S.  343
threw  themfelves  at  the  feet  of  their  ftatues :  And  every
holy  place,  particularly  the  temple  of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter,
was  filled  with  the  cries,  and  fupplications  of  the  women.
Then  it  was  that  one  of  them,  by  name  Valeria,  a  lady
diftinguiftied  by  her  birth,  and  dignity,  and  indued  with
the  greateft  prudence,  the  effecft  of  her  age,  and  fifter  to
Poplicola,  one  of  thofe,  who  freed  the  commonwealth
from  the  tyranny  of  their  kings,  moved  by  fome  divine
impulfe,  placed  herfelf  upon  the  upper  landing  of  the
flairs,  that  lead  to  the  temple ;  and,  calling  the  reft  of  the
women  to  her,  file  firft  comforted,  and  encouraged  them,
defiring  they  would  not  be  aftonifhed  at  the  danger,  that
threatened  them :  She  then  affined  them  there  was  one
hope  left  to  preferve  their  country,  which  was  placed  in
them  alone,  if  they  would  do  their  duty  :  Upon  this,  one  of
them  faid;  cc  And  what  can  we  women  do  to  fave  our
“  country,  when  the  men  have  given  it  up  for  loft  ?  What
u  ftrength  fo  great  are  we  weak,  and  miferable  women
<c  poftefted  of?”  u  We  have  no  occafion  for  arms,  or
tc  ftrength,  replied  Valeria  (for  nature  has  excufed  us  from
u  the  ufe  of  thefe)  but  for  zeal,  and  eloquence.”  And  all
crying  out,  and  begging  of  her  to  explain  what  afixftance
fhe  meant,  Valeria  faid;  “  Let  us  go  to  the  houfe  of  Ve- •
“  turia,  the  mother  of  Marcius,  in  this  mourning,  and
“  negligent  apparel,  and  take  with  us  the  reft  of  the  women,
cc  and  their  children ;  and,  placing  thefe  at  her  feet,  let  us
“  intreat  her  with  tears  to  have  compaffion  both  of  us,  who
“  have  given  her  no  caufe  of  grief,  and  of  her  country,

now


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.


c£  now  expofed  to  the  greateft  danger  ;  and  that  fhe  will
££  go  to  the  enemy’s  camp  with  her  grandchildren,  and
“  their  mother,  and  take  us  all  with  her  (for  we  muft  attend
<£  her  with  the  children)  and,  making  fupplication  to  her
<£  fon,  beg  and  conjure  him  not  to  inflidt  any  irreparable
“  mifchief  on  his  country :  For,  while  fhe  is  lamenting,  and
<£  intreating,  compaflion,  and  humanity  will  find  their
<c  way  to  his  heart,  which  is  not  fo  obdurate  and  inexorable,
C£  as  to  allow  him  to  fee  his  mother  at  his  feet  without
C£  emotion.”

XL.  This  advice  being  approved  of  by  all  the  women  who
were  prefent,  fhe  prayed  to  the  gods  to  infpire  their  inter-
cefiion  with  perfuafion,  and  the  Graces ;  and  then  went  from
the  temple ;  the  others  followed  her  ;  and,  after  that,  taking
with  them  the  reft  of  the  women,  they  went  all  together  to
the  houfe  of  the  mother  of  Marcius.  Volumnia,  his  wife,
faw  them  coming,  as  fhe  fate  near  her  mother-in-law  ;  and,
being  furprifed  at  their  arrival,  faid  ;  ££  What  occafion,
<£  ladies,  has  brought  you  in  fuch  numbers  to  an  unfortu-
C£  nate,  and  diftrefied  family  ?”  Then  Valeria  replied  ;
<£  Both  we  ourfelves,  and  thefe  children,  now  expofed  to
“  the  greateft  danger,  fly  to  you,  Veturia,  with  fupplica-
“  tions,  as  to  our  only  help,  and  intreat  you,  firft,  to  take
<£  compaflion  of  our  common  country;  and  not  to  fuffer
“  that  country,  which  has  been  hitherto  unconquered,  to
c<  be  inflaved  by  the  Volfci;  unlefs,  indeed,  they  themfelves
££  fhould  fpare  it  after  their  conqueft,  and  not  endeavour,
££  utterly,  to  deftroy  it :  And,  in  the  next  place,  we  intreat


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARNAS  SENS  I S.  345

<c  you  in  favor  of  ourfelves,  and  of  thefe  unfortunate  children,
“  that  vve  may  not  be  expofed  to  the  infults  of  the  enemy,
u  we,  who  have  occadoned  none  of  the  evils,  that  have
“  befallen  your  family.  If  there  yet  remains  in  you  any
“  fpark  of  a  mild,  and  humane  difpofition,  you,  who  are  a
“  woman,  Veturia,  have  mercy  on  women,  who,  once,
“  partook  with  you  of  the  fame  facrifices,  and  of  the  fame
“  rites;  and,  taking  with  you  Volumnia,  the  virtuous  wife
“  of  Marcius,  and  her  children,  and  us  alfo,  who  are  your
“  fuppliants,  with  thefe  infants  in  our  arms,  goto  your  fon;
tc  perfuade,  prefs,  ceafe  not  to  intreat,  and  afk  this  one  favor
“  of  him  in  return  for  many,  that  he  will  make  peace  with
“  his  fellow-citizens,  and  return  to  his  country,  that  longs
(C  to  receive  him.  Be  allured  that  you  will  prevail;  a  man
“  of  his  piety  will  not  fuffer  you  to  lie  proftrate  at  his  feet
cc  in  vain :  And,  when  you  have  brought  your  fon  back  to
cc  Rome,  you  yourfelfwill  gain  immortal  glory,  as  you  may
u  well  expedt,  for  having  freed  your  country  from  fo  great
“  a  danger,  and  fuch  an  alarm  ;  and  you  will  caufe  us  to  be
“  honoured  by  our  hufbands,  for  having  ourfelves  compofed
“  a  war,  which  it  was  not  in  their  power  to  difpel ;  and  we
“  fhall  fhew  ourfelves  to  be  the  true  defendants  of  thole
“  women,  who,  by  their  own  interpolation,  put  an  end  to
C£  the  war,  in  which  Romulus,  and  the  Sabines  were  ingaged ;
u  and,  by  reconciling  both  the  commanders,  and  the  nations,
c£  raifed  this  city,  from  a  fmall  beginning,  to  its  prefent
u  greatnefs.  It  is  a  glorious  attempt,  Veturia,  to  recover
your  fon,  to  free  your  countiy,  to  fave  your  fellow-
Vol.  III.  Y  y  “  citizens,


346  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

“  citizens,  and  leave  an  immortal  glory  to  pofterity.  Grant
cc  us  this  favor  with  chearfulnefs,  and  alacrity,  and  haften
iC  your  departure,  Veturia :  For  the  danger  is  fwift,  and
<c  admits  neither  deliberation,  nor  delay.”

XLI.  Having  faid  this,  and  ihed  many  tears,  fhe  was
filent ;  and  the  other  women  lamenting  alfo,  and  adding
many  intreaties,  Veturia,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  and  weeping,
faid  ;  £c  You  fly  to  a  weak,  and  flender  hope,  Valeria,  the
“  aliiftance  of  us  wretched  women,  who  love,  indeed,
C£  our  country,  and  deflre  the  prefervation  of  our  fellow-
“  citizens,  however  they  may  deferve  it ;  but  want  the
“  ftrength,  and  power  to  do  what  we  defire.  Marcius  is
“  averfe  to  us,  Valeria,  from  the  time  the  people  pafied  that
£t  fevers  fentence  againft  him ;  and  hates  his  whole  family,
££  together  with  his  country.  This  we  can  aflure  you  of,  as
“of  a  thing  we  know  from  Marcius  himfelf,  and  from  no
“  other  perfon  :  For,  when,  after  his  condemnation,  he
“  came  home  conduced  by  his  friends,  and  found  us  in
££  diftrefs,  and  clad  in  mourning,  with  his  children  upon  our
££  knees,  lamenting  with  reafon,  and  bewailing  the  unhappy'
“  fate,  to  which  the  lofs  of  him  would,  now,  expofe  us,  he
a  flood  at  a  fmall  diftance;  his  eyes  were  like  Thofe  of  a
u  ftatue,  without  tears,  and  without  motion;  Mother,  fays
££  he,  and  you,  Volumnia,  the  beft  of  women,  you  have  loft
<£  Marcius ;  he  is  expelled  the  city  by  his  fellow-citizens,
££  becaufe  he  was  a  brave  man,  and  a  lover  of  his  country,
<£  and  fuftained  many  contefts  for  her  fake ;  do  you  bear
££  this  calamity,  like  women  of  worth,  without  defcending

u  to


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H AL IC  A RN AS S E N S IS.  347

££  to  any  unbecoming,  any  ungenerous  action  ;  and  educate
££  thefe  children,  the  confolation  of  my  abfence,  in  a  manner
£c  worthy  both  of  me,  and  of  their  birth;  and,  when  they
££  are  grown  up,  may  the  gods  grant  them  29  better  fortune
££  than  their  father,  and  not  lefs  virtue :  Farewell ;  I  now
“  depart,  and  leave  a  city,  in  which  there  is,  no  longer,  any
££  room  for  a  good  man  ;  and  you,  my  houfhold  gods,  and
££  my  paternal  altar,  and  you  genius’s,  who  prefide  over  this
££  place,  farewell.  After  he  had  faid  this,  we,  unfortunate
££  women,  gave  way  to  thofe  lamentations,  which  ourdidrefs
C£  fuggeded;  and,  beating  our  breads,  hung  about  him  to
C£  receive  his  laft  embraces  ;  1  had,  then,  the  elded  of  theie
“  his  fons  by  the  hand,  and  the  younged  his  mother  carried
C£  in  her  arms :  But  he  turned  from  us;  and,  thruding  us
££  back,  faid;  Marcius,  from  this  time,  fhall  neither  be  your
ct  fon,  mother,  my  country  having  deprived  you  of  the  fup-
£C  port  of  your  age  ;  nor  your  hufband,  Volumnia,  from
££  this  day,  may  you  be  happy  in  another,  more  fortunate
££  than  I  am !  Neither  fhall  I  be  your  father,  mod  dear

29-  jusv  ^eirlovct  t*  aralgof,  a^slyjv  occafion  :  Cafaubon  has  not  faid  in
h  fXYi  xn^ovoc.  It  is  very  ungenerous  in  what  tragedy  of  that  poet  thefe  verfes
the  French  tranflators  to  tranflaJ:e  the  are  to  be  found:  However,  they  are
notes  in  Hudfon,  word  for  word,  with-  in  his  /uus-iyoPcgof,  where  Ajax

cut  the  lead  acknowledgement  to  the  fays  to  his  fon  :
commentators,  from  whom  they  took
them.  This  I  have,  often,  taken  notice  £

of;  and  am  forry  they  give  me  fo  fre-  ^  T *  *  “AA  «»  *  “=««•

quent  occafions  to  take  notice  of  it.  The  reader  will  obferve  that  this  paf-
Here,  le  Jay  has  tranflated  a  note  of  fage  of  our  author  is  very  far  from
Cafaubon,  who  obferves  that  our  au-  being  a  dole  imitation  of  Sophocles,
thor  has  imitated  Sophocles  upon  this

55°-

Yy  2


££  children,


348  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VITL

<f  children;  but  I  muft  leave  you  orphans,  and  deftitute,
c<  to  be  brought  up  by  thefe  women,  till  you  are  men*
<c  Having  faid  this,  he  went  out  of  the  houfe  alone,  without
“  taking  any  care  of  his  domeftic  affairs,  giving  any  orders,  or
€£  faying  whither  he  was  going,  without  a  fervant,  without
“  money,  and  without  taking  from  his  own  fortunes,  wretch-
<£  ed  man,  enough  for  the  fupport  even  of  one  day.  This  is
<£  the  fourth  year,  fince  he  was  banifhed  ;  and,  during  that
“  time,  he  has  looked  upon  us  all  as  flrangers,  neither
“  writing,  nor  fending  to  us,  nor  defiring  to  hear  any  thing
cc  concerning  us.  On  a  mind  fo  formed,  fo  hard  and  in-
“  flexible,  Valeria,  what  influence  can  we,  by  our  intreaties
“  have,  from  whom,  when  he  left  his  houfe  for  the  lafl:  time,
“  he  withheld  his  embraces,  his  tendernefs,  and  every  other
££  mark  of  affedion?

XLII.  ££  But,  if  you  defire  even  this,  ladies,  and  are,  ab-
<£  folutely,  refolved  to  fee  us  ad  this  unbecoming  part,
££  imagine  that  I,  andVolumnia,  with  thefe  children,  prefent
££  ourfelves  before  him  :  In  what  manner  fhall  I,  his  mother,
££  firft  addrefs  him  ?  What  intreaty  fhall  I  employ  to  my
<£  fon  ?  Tell  me,  and  teach  me  what  I  am  to  fay.  Shall  I
<£  exhort  him  to  fpare  his  fellow-citizens,  by  whom,  though
££  innocent,  he  was  expelled  his  country?  That  he  fhould
“  be  merciful,  and  compaffionate  to  the  plebeians,  from
<£  whom  he  found  neither  mercy,  nor  compaflion  ?  That  he
t£  fhould  abandon,  and  betray  thofe,  who  received  him,
££  when  an  exile  ;  and,  notwithfianding  the  many  dreadful
££  calamities  he  had  infiided  on  them,  treated  him,  not

££  with


#


Book  VIII.  D I O  N  Y  S I  US  HALIC ARN  A  S  S  E  NS  I  S.  349

“  with  the  hatred  of  an  enemy,  but  with  the  benevolence
“  of  friends,  and  relations  ?  What  fentiments  muff  I  enter-
u  tain  to  defire  my  fon  to  love  thofe  who  have  ruined  him,
“  and  to  injure  thofe  who  have  preferved  him  ?  This  is  not
£C  the  language  of  a  fenfible  mother  to  her  fon,  nor  of  a
“  confiderate  wife  to  her  hufband.  Compel  us  not,  ladies,
C£  to  defire  thofe  things  of  him,  that  are  neither  juft  with
<c  regard  to  men,  nor  pious  with  regard  to  the  gods ;  but
u  fuffer  us  miferable  women  to  continue  in  the  low  condi-
<£  tion,  to  which  Fortune  has  reduced  us,  without  expofing
£C  ourfelves,  ffill  more,  by  an  unbecoming  behaviour.'’

XLIII.  After  fhe  had  done  fpeaking,  there  was  fo  great
a  lamentation  of  the  women  who  were  prefent,  and  the
houfe  refounded  with  cries  fo  loud,  that  the  noife  was  heard
through  great  part  of  the  city,  and  the  ffreets,  near  the
houfe,  were  filled  with  aconcourfe  of  people.  Then  Valeria
again  urged,  with  greater  warmth,  many  long  and  afiedfing
intreaties,  and  all  the  reft  of  the  women,  who  had  any  con¬
nexion  of  friendfhip,  or  relation  with  either  of  them*
continued  prefilng  them,  and  laying  hold  on  their  knees :
So  that,  Veturia,  unable  to  refift  their  lamentations,  and
reiterated  intreaties,  yielded,  and  promifed  to  undertake  the
embafly  in  favor  of  her  country,-  accompanied  by  the  wife  of
Marcius,  and  his  children,  and  by  as  many  Roman  matrons,
as  were  willing  to  join  them.  The  ladies  rejoiced  exceed¬
ingly  at  this,  and  invoked  the  gods  to  accomplifh  their
hopes ;  then,  going  out  of  the  houfe,  informed  the  confuls
of  every  thing  that  had  pafied  :  Thefe,  having  commended

_  their


Book  VIII.


350  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

their  zeal,  aflembled  the  fenate,  and  called  upon  the  fenators
to  deliver  their  opinions,  feparately,  whether  they  ought  to
fuffer  the  women  to  go  upon  this  embafty.  Several  fpeeches
were  made,  upon  this  occafion,  by  many  of  the  fenators ;
and  they  continued  till  the  evening  in  great  perplexity  :

For  fome  alledged  that,  to  fuffer  the  women  with  their
children  to  go  to  the  enemy’s  camp,  was  to  expofe  the  city
to  no  fmall  danger;  fince,  if  the  Volfci  fhould,  in  contempt
of  the  eftablifhed  rights  of  embaffadors,  and  fuppliants,  not  o
think  Ft,  afterwards,  to  difmifs  them,  the  city  would  be
taken  without  a  ftroke.  And  thefe  advifed  not  to  fuffer
any  other  women  to  go,  but  Thofe,  who  were  related  to
Marcius,  together  with  his  children.  Others  were  of  opinion
that  not  even  thefe  fhould  be  fuffered  to  go ;  but  that  they
ought  to  keep  them  fafe,  and  efteem  them  as  effe&ual
pledges  to  fecure  the  city  from  any  outrageous  attempt  of
the  enemy.  But  others  advifed  to  give  leave  to  all  the
women,  who  defired  it,  to  go  upon  this  occafion ;  with  this
view,  that  the  relations  of  Marcius  might  intercede  in  favor
of  their  country  with  the  greater  dignity  :  And,  to  preferve
them  from  all  danger,  they  faid,  they  would  have  for  their
fureties,  firft,  the  gods,  the  prote&ors  of  fuppliants;  and,
then,  the  man  himfelf,  to  whom  they  were  going,  wFofe
life  was  pure,  and  free  from  every  ftain  of  injuftice,  and
impiety.  At  laft,  the  opinion  allowing  the  women  to  go
carried  it,  greatly  to  the  praife  both  of  the  fenate,  and  of
Marcius :  Of  the  firft,  for  their  prudence  in  forming  the  beft:
judgement  of  this  incident,  and  in  forefeeing  what  would

happen,


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H AL ICARN ASSEN SIS.  35!

happen,  without  being  deterred  by  fo  great  a  danger  :  And
of  Marcius,  for  his  piety,  who,  though  an  enemy,  was
thought  incapable  of  any  thing  impious  towards  the  weak
part  of  the  city,  when  he  fhould  have  them  in  his  power.
After  the  decree  was  drawn  up,  the  confuls  went  to  the
forum  ;  and,  affembling  the  people,  it  being  now  dark,
informed  them  of  the  contents  of  it ;  giving  orders,  at  the
fame  time,  that  all  of  them  fhould,  early  the  next  morning,
prefent  themfelves  at  the  gates,  to  attend  the  women  when
they  went  out ;  and  allured  the  people  they  would  take
care  of  every  thing,  that  was  neceffary.

XL IV.  When  it  was  near  break  of  day,  the  women  went
with  torches  to  the  houfe  of  Veturia,  leading  their  children  ;
and,  taking  her  with  them,  proceeded  to  the  gates.  In  the
mean  time,  the  confuls,  having  prepared  mules,  chariots,
and  many  other  carriages,  conduced  them  a  conliderable
way.  The  women  were  followed  by  the  fenators,  and  many
other  citizens,  who,  by  their  vows,  commendations,  and
prayers,  gave  a  luflre  to  the  procellion.  As  foon  as  they
were  difeovered  at  a  diftance  by  thofe  in  the  camp,  Marcius
fent  fome  horfe,  with  orders  to  inquire  what  multitude  it  was,
that  advanced  from  the  city,  and  what  was  the  caufe  of  their
coming :  And,  being  informed  by  them  that  the  wives  of
the  Romans,  together  with  their  children,  were  coming  to
him,  and  that  they  were  preceded  by  his  mother,  his  wife,
and  his  fons,  he  was,  at  firft,  aftonifhed  at  the  affurance  of
the  women,  in  refolving  to  come  with  their  children  into  an
enemy’s  camp,  unattended  by  men,  without  any  regard  to  the

modefty


352  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

modefty  becoming  women  of  free  condition,  and  virtue,
which  forbids  them  to  be  feen  by  ftrangers,  and  without
apprehending  the  danger,  w'hich  they  expofed  themfelves  to,
if  his  foldiers,  preferring  their  intereft  tojuftice,fhould  think
fit  to  make  a  profit,  and  advantage  of  them.  But,  when
they  approached,  he  refolved  to  go  out  of  the  camp,  with  a
few  of  his  men,  and  to  meet  his  mother  ;  having  ordered
his  lidors  to  lay  afide  the  axes,  which  are,  ufually,  carried
before  generals ;  and,  when  he  came  near  his  mother,  to
lower  the  rods.  This  is  a  cuftom  obferved  by  the  Romans,
when  inferior  magiftrates  meet  Thofe,  who  are  their  fupe-
riors,  which  continues  to  this  day.  In  obedience  to  this
cuftom,  Marcius,  as  going  to  prefent  himfelf  before  a  fuperior
power,  laid  afide  all  the  enfigns  of  his  own  dignity.  So
great  was  his  veneration,  and  piety  to  his  parent.

XLV.  When  they  came  near  to  one  another,  his  mother,
firft,  advanced  to  falute  him.  Her  mourning  apparel,  and
her  eyes  fwimming  in  tears,  rendered  her  an  objed  of  great
compafiion  :  Whom  when  Marcius  faw,  who,  till  then,  had
fhewn  an  infenfibility,  and  firmnefs  fuperior  to  all  impref-
fions  of  grief,  he  became,  no  longer,  mafter  of  his  refolution,
but  was  hurried,  by  his  affedions,  into  fentiments  of  huma¬
nity  ;  and,  embracing  her,  ufed  the  moft  tender  appella¬
tions  ;  and,  for  a  long  time,  continued  weeping  ;  and  che-
rifhed,  and  fupported  her  while  fhe  was  fainting,  and  finking
to  the  ground  :  After  he  had  fatisfied  his  tendernefs  to  his
mother,  he  embraced  his  wife,  and  children,  and  faid;
“  Volumnia,  you  have  aded  the  part  of  a  good  wife,  in

*  •  “  living


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSI5.  353

<c  living  with  my  mother;  and,  by  not  abandoning  her  in
£c  her  folitude,  you  have  done  me  the  greateft  of  all  favors.”
After  this,  he  took  both  his  children  in  his  arms ;  and,
having  embraced  them  with  the  tendernefs  of  a  father,  he
turned,  again,  to  his  mother,  and  begged  her  to  let  him
know  what  (lie  came  to  defire  of  him.  His  mother  anfvvered,
that  file  would  acquaint  him  with  it  in  public,  lince  fhe
had  nothing  criminal  to  requeft  of  him  ;  and  defired  him
to  give  her  audience  in  the  fame  place,  in  which  he  ufed
to  adminifter  juflice  to  the  people.  Marcius,  willingly,
accepted  the  propofal,  not  doubting  but  he  fhould  be  able,
with  numberlefs  reafons,  to  defeat  the  interceffion  of  his
mother;  and  he  looked  upon  it,  at  the  fame  time,  as  an
honourable  proceeding  to  give  his  anfwer  in  public.  When
he  came  to  the  general’s  tribunal,  the  firft  thing  he  did  was
to  order  the  li&ors  to  remove  the  feat  that  flood  there,  and
to  place  it  on  the  ground  ;  as  thinking  it  unbecoming  in
him  to  lit  in  a  higher  place  than  his  n>other,  or  to  make  a
fhew  of  any  power  where  fhe  was.  Then,  caufing  the  mod:
confiderable  of  the  generals,  and  the  other  officers  to  fit  by
him,  and  permitting  every  one,  who  was  willing,  to  be  pre-
fent,  he  defired  his  mother  to  fpeak.

XLVI.  Upon  which,  Veturia,  having  placed  the  wife  of
Marcius,  with  his  children,  and  the  moll  diftinguifhed  of
the  Roman  matrons  near  her,  fir  ft  wept,  fixing  her  eyes  on
the  ground  for  a  confiderable  time,  and  raifed  great  com¬
panion  in  all  prefent ;  then,  recovering  herfelf,  fhe  find  ;
“  Thefe  ladies,  Marcius,  my  fon,  alarmed  at  the  infults,  and

Vol.  III.  Zz  “  every


/


354  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

<£  every  other  calamity  they  will  be  expofed  to,  if  the  enemy
“  flial  1  become  matters  of  Rome,  and  defpairing  of  all  other
<£  aftiftance,  ttnce  you  gave  haughty,  and  fevere’anfwers
<£  to  their  hufbands  when  they  dettred  peace,  accompanied
££  with  their  children,  and  drefled  in  this  mourning  apparel,
“  have  fled  for  refuge  to  me  your  mother,  and  to  Volumnia
££  your  wife;  and  intreated  us  not  to  fuffer  them  to  be
<c  afflidled  with  the  greateft  of  all  human  evils  by  your
££  means,  ttnce  they  have  never  done  us  the  leaft  injury  ;
<£  but,  on  the  contrary,  have  fhewn  great  benevolence  to  us
<£  in  our  profperity,  and  compattion  in  our  adverttty :  For
<£  we  can  teftify  in  their  favor  that,  ttnce  your  departure,
“  when  we  were  left  defolate,  and  reduced  to  the  loweft
cc  condition,  they,  conftantly,  vifited  us  under  our  misfortunes,
“  and  condoled  with  us :  In  remembrance,  therefore,  of
C£  thefe  things,  neither  did  I  myfelf,  nor  your  wife,  who  lives
“  with  me,  rejedt  their  fupplication  ;  but,  as  they  dettred,
££  we  fubmitted  to  come  to  you,  and  intercede  in  favor  of
££  our  country.”

XLVII.  While  floe  was  yet  fpeahing,  Marcius  interrupted
her,  and  faid;  ££  Mother,  you  are  come  to  dettre  impofllbi-
<£  lities,  in  requiring  me  to  betray  to  thofe,  who  have  driven
<£  me  out  of  their  country,  a  nation,  that  has  received  me;
“  and,  to  thofe,  who  have  deprived  me  of  all  my  fortunes,
££  a  people,  who  have  conferred  on  me  the  greateft  of  human
££  advantages ;  and  to  whom,  when  I  accepted  this  com-
££  mand,  I  gave  my  faith,  and  called  upon  the  gods,  and
u  genius’s,  as  fureties  for  my  ttncerity,  that  I  would

££  neither


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  KALI C  ARN  A S S  EN  S  I  S.  355

C£  neither  betray  their  commonwealth,  nor  make  peace
££  without  the  confent  of  the  Whole  natioh.  Induced,  there-
££  fore,  by  the  veneration  I  pay  to  the  gods,  by  whom  I
££  have  fworn,  and  by  the  refpedl  I  bear  to  the  men,  to
££  whom  I  have  pledged  my  faith,  I  fhall  continue  to  make
“  war  upon  the  Romans  to  the  lad:  But,  if  they  will  reftore
“  to  the  Volfci  the  lands,  of  which  they  have  poffeiTed
££  themfelves  by  force,  receive  them  into  the  number  of  their
££  friends,  and  communicate  to  them  the  fame  equality  of
“  all  rights  they  have  conferred  on  the  Latines,  I  will
££  put  an  end  to  the  war;  otherwife,  not.  Return,  therefore,
££  ladies,  and  acquaint  your  hufbands  with  thefe  things,  and
££  perfuade  them  not  to  take  delight  in  the  unjufl:  pofleffion
££  of  what  belongs  to  others ;  but  to  be  contented,  if  they
££  are  fullered  to  enjoy  their  own  ;  nor,  in  confidence  of
££  their  having  pofiefled  themfelves  of  the  Volfcian  territories
££  by  arms,  to  ftay  till  they  are  again  deprived  of  them  by
£C  arms :  For  the  conquerors  will  not  be  fatisfied  with  reco-
££  vering  their  own,  but  will,  alfo,  think  themfelves  intitled
“  to  all,  that  belongs  to  the  conquered.  However,  if  they
££  perfift  in  their  haughtinefs,  and  refolve  to  run  all  hazards,
“  rather  than  part  with  what  they  have  no  right  to,  impute
££  to  them  all  the  miferies  that  will  befall  them,  not  to
££  Marcius,  to  the  Volfci,  nor  to  any  others.  And  I  beg  of
££  you,  mother,  in  my  turn,  your  fon  begs  of  you,  not  to
££  invite  him  to  wicked,  and  unjufl:  actions  ;  not  to  efpoule
££  the  caufe  of  thofe  men,  who  are  the  mod  implacable  both
<£  to  me,  and  to  yourfelf ;  nor  to  look  upon  thofe,  as  your

Z  z  2  ££  enemies,


356  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

“  enemies,  who  are  your  greateft  friends:  But  live  with  me,
££  as  it  is  reafonablb  you  fhould,  refide  in  the  fame  country
<£  where  I  refide,  and  in  the  fame  houfe  ;  enjoy  my  honors,
£C  fhare  in  my  glory,  and  look  upon  my  friends,  and  ene-
“  mies,  as  your  own  :  Lay  afide  this  mourning,  which  my
££  banifhment  induced  you,  miferable  wbman,  to  put  on,
££  and  ceafe  to  torment  me  with  this  habit :  For  all  other
££  advantages  have  been  conferred  on  me  ipoth  by  the  gods,
C£  and  men,  above  my  hopes,  and  above  my  wifhes :  But
££  the  difquiet  I  have  felt  for  you,  whofe  age  I  have  not
C£  cherifhed  in  return  for  all  your  pains,  has  taken  fuch  pof-
££  fefiion  of  my  mind,  as  to  imbitter  my  life,  and  render  ail
££  the  e  bleflings  of  no  ufe  to  me:  Whereas,  if  you  will
££  efpoufe  my  intereft,  and  partake  of  every  thing  I  enloy,
££  I  fhall,  then,  want  no  happinefs,  which  human  nature  is
££  capable  of.”

XL VI II.  When  he  had  ended,  Veturia,  after  a  fhort
paufe,  which  laded  till  the  great,  and  iterated  applaufes  of
the  affembly  ceafea,  fpoke  to  him  as  follows ;  ££  Neither  do
££  I  myfelf  deflre  you,  Marcius,  my  fon,  to  betray  the  Volfci,
££  who  received  you  when  an  exile ;  and,  among  other
££  honors,  intruded  you  with  the  command  of  their  army ;
££  or  that,  contrary  to  your  agreement,  and  to  the  oaths  you
££  fwore  to  them,  when  you  accepted  that  command,  you
££  fhould  put  an  end  to  the  war  by  your  own  authority
C£  without  the  confent  of  the  whole  nation  :  Neither  fhould
<c  you  imagine  that  the  gods  have  fofar  deprived  your  mother
i£  of  her  fenfes,  as  to  make  her  capable  of  exhorting  her  dear,

££  and


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSEN  SIS.  357

“  and  only  fon  to  fhameful,  and  wicked  actions :  All  that
<£  I  defire  of  you  is,  that  you  will  lay  down  your  arms  by  a
“  general  confent,  after  you  fhall  have  perfuaded  the  Volfci
“  to  ufe  moderation  with  regard  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty;
“  and  to  make  fuch  a  peace,  as  fhall  be  honourable  and
“  advantageous  to  both  nations :  This  may  be  done,  if  you
“  will  make  a  truce  for  a  year,  and,  now,  withdraw  your
££  forces.  In  the  mean  time,  you  may,  by  fending,  and  re-
cc  ceiving  embaffadors,  efted  a  real  peace,  and  a  firm  accom-
<£  modation.  And  be  allured  that  the  Romans  will  be  in-
££  duced  by  perfuafion,  and  exhortation  to  fubmit  to  any
££  thing,  that  is  neither  importable,  nordiflhonourable  :  But,
<£  if  you  attempt  to  compel  them,  which  is  the  method  you*
££  now,  think  fit  to  ufe,  they  will  not  grant  any  favors  to  you
u  whatever,  as  you  may  learn  from  many  other  inftances*
££  but  particularly,  from  the  concefiions  they,  lately,  made  to
££  the  Latines,  after  they  laid  down  their  arms.  The  Volfci
££  are  grown  extremely  haughty,  which,  ufually,  happens  to
<£  thofe,  who  have  great  fuccefs ;  but,  if  you  will  give  them
££  to  under ftand  that  any  peace  is  preferable  to  war ;  that  a
££  voluntary  agreement  between  friends  is  more  lafiing  than
a  concefiions  extorted  by  neceffity ;  that  it  is  the  part  of
££  wife  men,  when  their  affairs  feem  profperous,  to  ufe  their
££  good  fortune  with  economy ;  and,  when  they  are  in  a
“  diftreffed,  and  unfortunate  fituation,  to  fubmit  to  nothing
££  that  is  ungenerous.  If  you  make  ufe  of  thefe,  and  other
££  arguments,  calculated  to  infpire  fentiments  of  humanity,
“  and  moderation,  which  you,  who  have  the  management

a  of


353  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

cc  of  civil  affairs,  are  beft  acquainted  with,  they  will,  volun-
u  tarily,  defcend  from  their  prefent  exaltation,  and  give  you
<c  power  to  do  every  thing,  which  you  fhail  judge  moftcon-
<c  ducive  to  their  intereft :  But,  if  they  oppofe  you  ;  and,
“  elated  with  the  advantages  they  have  gained  by  your  means,
“  and  under  your  command,  as  if  they  were  always  to  laft,
“  refufe  to  admit  your  reafons,  refign  the  command  publicly;
“  and  make  yourfelf  neither  a  traitor  to  thofe,  who  have  tr lifted
<c  you,  nor  an  enemy  to  thofe,  who  are  neareft  to  you  :  For
“  both  are  impious.  Thefe  are  the  favors  I  am  come  to  afk
of  you,  Marcius,  my  fon,  which  are  neither  impoilible  to
“  be  granted,  as  you  fay ;  neither  do  they  imply  any  con-
“  fcioufnefs  of  injuftice,  or  impiety.

XLIX.  t(  But,  it  feems,  you  are  afraid,  if  you  do  what  I
cc  advife,  of  incurring  the  infamy  of  ingratitude  to  your
cc  benefadtors,  who  received  you,  when  you  were  their  enemy,
cc  and  communicated  to  you  all  the  advantages,  which  their
“  natural  born  citizens  are  intitled  to :  For  thefe  are  the
<c  things  you  are,  ever,  magnifying.  And  have  you  not
<£  made  them  many  illuftrious  returns  ?  And,  by  the  inftances
u  you  have  given  them  of  your  gratitude,  which  are  bound-
<c  lefs  both  in  their  extent,  and  number,  exceeded  their
c<  favors  ?  They  placed  their  whole  fatisfadfion,  and  greateft
“  happinefs  in  being  fuffered  to  enjoy  their  liberty  :  You
<c  have,  not  only,  fecured  them  in  the  poffeftion  of  it,  but
“  enabled  them,  already,  to  deliberate  whether  it  is  more
cc  for  their  intereft  to  fubvert  the  power  of  the  Romans,  or
“  to  partake  of  it,  by  forming  a  commonwealth,  in  which

a  both


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  359

“  both  nations  will  have  an  equal  /hare.  I  fay  nothing  of
“  the  fpoils,  with  which  you  have  adorned  their  cities,  nor  of
<c  the  immenfe  riches  you  have  beftowed  upon  thofe,  who
“  accompanied  you  in  your  expeditions.  When  they  have
“  been  thus  aggrandized  by  you,  and  raifed  to  fuch  pro-
“  fperity,  do  you  think  they  will  not  reft  fatisfied  with  the
“  advantages  they  poffefs,  but  be  angry  with  you,  and  ex-
“  afperated,  if  you  do  not,  alfo,  pour  out,  by  their  hands,
“  the  blood  of  your  fellow-citizens  ?  For  my  part,  I  do  not
“  think  fo.  There,  yet,  remains  one  point  for  me  to  fpeak
“  to,  which,  if  you  judge  of  it  by  your  reafon,-  will  have
“  great  weight  with  you  ;  but,  if  by  your  paffion,  none:
T  This  relates  to  the  unjuft  hatred  you  bear  to  your  country ;
“  which  was  neither  in  a  ftate  of  health,  nor  governed  by
“  her  eftablifhed  laws,  when  fhe  pronounced  that  unjuft
“  fentence  againft  you,  but  diftempered,  and  tolled  in  a
“  violent  tempeft;  neither  did  all  the  people  concur  in  it;
“  the  worft  part  of  them  only,  milled  by  evil  leaders,  de~
64  daring  themfelves  againft  you.  But,  if,  not  only,  the
“  worft  of  the  citizens,  but  all  the  reft  had  concurred  in
“  your  condemnation,  and  you  had  been  banifhed  by  them,
u  as  a  promoter  of  meafures  not  of  the  beft  fort ;  even  in
u  that  cafe,  it  did  not  become  you  to  bear  any  refen tment

“  againft  your  country  :  For  the  fame. thing  has,  alfo,  hap-

\

cc  pened  to  many  others,  who  purfued  the  beft  meafures ;

<c  and  there  are  few,  whofe  virtue,  though  acknowledged,

<c  has  not  been  expofed  to  the  unjuft  envy  of  their  fellow-
u  citizens:  But  all  generous  men  bear  thefe  calamities  like

a


men,


360  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  T  I E  S  OF  Book  VIII.

4£  men,  and  with  moderation;  and  remove  to' other  cities,
44  in  which  they  live  without  giving  offence  to  their  country.
44  This  was  the  condudt  of  Tarquinius,  furnamed  Collatinus
44  (a  domeftic  example,  and  proper  for  you  to  imitate)  the
££  lame  perfon,  who  affifted  in  delivering  his  country  from
44  the  tyrants ;  and,  being,  afterwards,  accufed  of  ingaging
44  in  the  confpiracy  to  reftore  them,  and,  for  that  reafon,
44  banifhed,  he  retained  no  refentraent  againft  thofe,  who
44  had  banifhed  him,  neither  did  he  invade  his  country  in
44  conjunction  with  the  tyrants,  nor  fuffer  his  actions  to  prove
44  the  truth  of  that  charge  ;  but,  retiring  to  Lavinium,  our
u  mother  city,  he  fpent  the  remainder  of  his  life  there,  and
44  continued  an  affectionate  friend  to  his  country.

L.  C£  However,  let  all,  who  have  fuffered  great  injuries,
<£  be  allowed  not  to  diftinguifh  whether  thofe,  who  have
44  injured  them,  are  friends,  or  enemies,  but  to  extend  their
44  anger  alike  to  all  ;  even  in  that  cafe,  have  you  not  taken
44  a  fufficient  revenge  on  fuch  asabufed  you,  by  laying  wafce
44  the  beft  part  of  their  country,  by  facking  the  towns  of  their
M  allies,  which  they  had  acquired  with  great  labor,  and
44  reducing  them,  now  for  the  third  year,  to  a  great  want  of
u  all  neceflaries?  But  you  carry  your  wild,  and  mad  revenge
44  fo  far,  as  to  defire  even  to  inflave  them,  and  fubvert  their
44  city.  You  fhewed  no  regard  either  to  the  perfons  deputed
44  to  you  by  the  fenate,  men  of  worth,  and  your  friends,
44  who  came  to  offer  you  your  pardon,  and  leave  to  return
££  to  your  family ;  or  to  the  priefts,  whom  the  common-
44  wealth  fent  laft  to  you,  whofe  age  deferved  refped,


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  AS  SENS  I  S.  361

“  as  well  as  the  holy  garlands  of  the  gods,  which  they  bore
££  in  their  hands ;  but  thefe,  alfo,  you  rejedted,  and  gave
££  haughty,  and  imperious  anfwers  to  them,  as  to  a  con-
u  quered  enemy.  For  my  part,  I  cannot  commend  thefe
££  fevere,  and  overbearing  pretenfions,  which  exceed  the
“  bounds  of  human  nature,  fince  I  obferve  that  Applications,
££  and  prayers,  when  the  injurer  flies  to  the  injured  with
“  humility,  have  been  found  out  as  a  refuge  for  all  men,
*£  and  a  deprecation  of  their  mutual  offences  ;  a  cuftom
££  eftablifhed  by  the  gods  for  our  imitation:  By  thofe  all
“  anger  is  foftened,  and,  inftead  of  hating  our  enemy,  we
<£  pity  him  :  But  I  obferve,  alfo,  that  the  haughty,  and  all
££  who  infult  over  the  prayers  of  their  fuppliants,  incur  the
“  indignation  of  the  gods,  and  come  to  a  miferable  end  :
£C  For  the  gods  themfelves,  who  flrft  inftituted,  and  delivered
££  to  us  thefe  laws,  forgive  the  offences  of  men,  and  are,
££  eaflly,  reconciled  ;  and  many  there  are,  who,  after  they
c£  had,  greatly,  offended  them,  have  appeafed  their  anger
££  by  prayers,  and  facrifices :  Unlefs  you  are  of  opinion,
££  Marcius,  that  the  anger  of  the  gods  ought  to  be  mortal ;
££  but  That  of  men,  immortal.  You,  therefore,  will  a£t  with
“  jufti  ce,  and  in  a  manner  that  becomes  you,  if  you  alfo  for-
££  give  the  offences  of  your  country,  who  repents,  defires  to
££  be  reconciled,  and  reftores  to  you  every  thing  fhe  has
££  taken  from  you.

LI.  ££  But,  if  you  are  irreconcileable  to  her,  grant  this
££  honor,  and  favor  to  me,  from  whom  you  have  received
££  benefits  not  of  the  leaft  value,  which  noneelfe  can  claim,

Vol.  III.  A  a  a  ££  and


362  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

/

“  and  fuch  as  are  of  the  greateft  confederation,  and  efteem,
u  and  with  which  you  have  acquired  every  thing  elfe  you
<c  are  pofiefled  of,  I  mean,  your  body,  and  your  mind  :
cc  Thefe  are  debts  you  owe  to  me,  which  no  place,  no  time
“  can  ever  deprive  me  of;  neither  can  the  favors  of  the
“  Volfci,  or  of  all  the  reft  of  mankind,  however  extenftve,
a  fo  far  prevail,  as  to  efface,  and  furpafs,  the  rights  of  nature ;
C(  but  you  will  be  ever  mine;  and  you  will  owe  to  me,
cC  preferably  to  all  others,  the  favor  of  life,  and  you  will  oblige
u  me  in  every  thing  I  defire,  without  alledging  any  excufe ;
“  For  this  is  a  right,  which  the  law  of  nature  has  prefcribed
“  to  all,  who  partake  of  fenfe,  and  reafon.  Confiding  in
<c  this  law,  Marcius,  my  fon,  I  beg  of  you  not  to  make  war
“  upon  your  country;  and,  if  you  offer  violence,  I  oppofe
tc  you :  Either,  therefore,  fir  ft,  facrifice  with  your  own  hand
<c  to  the  Furies  your  mother,  who  oppofes  you,  and,  then,
cc  begin  the  war  againft  your  country  ;  or,  trembling  at  the
“  crime  of  parricide,  yield  to  your  mother,  and  grant,  my
“  fon,  this  favor  willingly.  Supported,  and  affifted  by  this
<£  law,  which  no  time  has  ever  repealed,  I  do  not  think  fit,
a  Marcius,  to  be  alone  deprived  by  you  of  the  honors  I  am
u  intitled  to  under  it.  But,  to  omit  this  law,  remember  the
good  offices  you  have  received  from  me,  and  confider  how
*£  many,  and  how  great  they  are:  You  were  left  an  orphan
“  by  your  father,  and  an  infant,  when  I  took  you  under
Ci  my  care  ;  for  your  fake,  I  continued  a  widow,  and  under-
u  went  the  trouble  of  bringing  you  up,  fhewing  myfelf
a  not  only  a  mother  to  you,  but  alfo  a  father,  a  nurfe,  a

“  fifter,


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  AkNASSENSIS.  363

C£  fider,  and  every  thing,  that  is  mod  endearing.  When
u  you  were  a  man,  and  it  was  in  my  power  to  be  freed  from
“  thefe  cares  by  marrying  another,  to  breed  up  other  chil—
<£  dren,  and  prepare  for  myfelf  the  hopes  of  many  fupports  of
££  my  old  age,  I  would  not  do  it,  but  remained  in  the  fame
C£  houfe,  and  contented  myfelf  with  the  fame  courfe  of  life  ;
<£  placing  all  my  pleafures,  and  all  my  advantages  in  you
££  alone  :  Of  thefe  you  have  difappointed  me,  partly  againft
“  your  will,  and  partly  of  your  own  accord,  and  have  made
“  me  the  mod  wretched  of  all  mothers.  What  time  have  I
<c  paffed,  fince  I  brought  you  up  to  manhood,  without  grief,
u  or  fear  ?  Or  when  had  I  achearful  mind  on  your  account,
<c  feeing  you,  always,  undertaking  wars  upon  wars,  ingag-
C£  ed  in  battles  upon  battles,  and  receiving  wounds  upon
“  wounds?

LII.  ££  But,  fince  you  had  a  fhare  in  the  government,
<£  and  in  the  adminidration  of  public  affairs,  your  mother,
“  perhaps,  has  enjoyed  fome  pleafure  by  your  means:  Then
“  was  I  mod  unhappy,  feeing  you  deeply  ingaged  in  a
“  party.  For  thofe  very  meafures,  which  you  feemed  to
<£  purfue  with  applaufe,  in  oppofing  the  plebeians  with  fo
“  much  fpiritin  favor  of  the  aridocracy,  filled  me  with  fear,
<c  when  I  confidered  that  30  human  events  dand  upon  a

3°*  Tov  civ^ooirivov  iSiov.  Both  the  other  things,  human  events  •,  which  is
Latin  tranflators  have  rendered  this,  the  fenfe  I  have  given  to  this  paflage  :
vita  hurnana  •,  in  which  they  have  been  And  in  this  fenfe  it  is  ufed  by  1  Thucy-
followed  by  the  French  tranflators.  dides;  when,  fpeaking  of  the  Athenians
B.of  is  a  word  of  a  very  extenfive  fig-  after  their  inifcarriage  in  Sicily,  he  fays;
nification  in  Greek:  It  fignifi.es,  among  «  c h  n  rj  tou  av9ga7 retoig  TOT  BIOT

*B.  viii.  c.  24.

A.  a  a  2


<c  pointy


✓


364  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.


“  point ;  and  knew,  by  the  many  inftances  I  had  heard,  and
“  feen,  that  fome  divine  wrath,  always,  oppofes  illuftrious
“  men,  or  human  envy  attacks  them :  And  the  event  has
«  too  well  juftified  my  prediction.  The  envy  of  your  fellow-
“  citizens  31  rufhed  on  you,  like  a  torrent,  and  carried  you
“  far  from  your  country.  From  this  time,  my  life  (if  I
“  may  call  it  fo,  fince  you  departed  leaving  me  defolate  with
“  thefe  children)  has  been  fpent  in  this  wretched  condition,
tc  and  in  this  mourning  apparel.  In  return  for  all  thefe
<c  things,  I,  who  was  never  uneafy  to  you,  nor  ever  fhall  be
“  while  I  live,  afk  this  favor  of  you,  that  you  will,  at  laft,
“  be  reconciled  to  your  fellow-citizens,  and  lay  alide  your
<(  implacable  anger  againft  your  country.  The  favor  I  afk
“  will  prove  an  advantage  to  us  both,  and  not  to  me  alone :
“  For,  if  you  hearken  to  me,  and  commit  no  irreparable
<c  crime,  you  will  enjoy  a  mind  pure,  and  free  from  all
“  apprehen lions  of  the  divine  anger  ;  and  my  life  will  be
“  rendered  happy  by  the  honor  I  fhall  receive  from  my
“  fellow-citizens  of  both  fexes  while  I  live;  and  that  honor,
“  when  it  fhall  be  paid  to  my  memory,  as  it  may  well  be


nroi^xKoyoio.  ar(px\yi<rccv.  Our  author
feems  to  have  had  a  thought  of u  Ho¬
mer  in  his  eye,  though  he  has  given
it  a  different  drefs :  After  the  Tro¬
jans  had  approached  the  navy  of  the
Greeks  with  their  vidtorious  troops,
Neftor  fays  to  Diomed,

Nuv  yu(>  zravltoviv  tin  t-vcx  Iralat  ootp>if.

The  fenfe  of  which,  Pope  has,  very
y?ell,  expreffed  i


Each  ftngUGreek ,  in  this  conclujive  Jirifey
S tands  on  the jharpeft  edge  of  death ,or  lif  e.

3X*  E7ripi>otZots-—xvt](>'7rci<rev.  Neither
the  Latin,  nor  the  French  tranflators
have  preferved  the  force  of  thefe  words
in  their  verfions.  They  are,  plainly,
relative  to  a  torrent  *,  and  are  the  fame,
which  the  beft  Greek  writers  make  ufe
of  in  fpeaking  of  a  torrent.


cc


u  I!,  K.  f.  173.


ex-


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  365

“  expected,  after  I  am  dead,  will  caufe  my  name  to  be  for
“  ever  celebrated  :  And,  if  there  is  any  place  appointed  for
u  the  reception  of  human  fouls,  after  they  are  dilmgaged
C£  from  the  body,  that  fubterraneous,  and  gloomy  place,  the
u  habitation,  as  it  is  faid,  of  the  unfortunate,  will  not  receive
u  mine,  nor  the  field  of  Lethe,  as  it  is  called  ;  but  the
<c  exalted,  and  pure  ether,  where,  they  fay,  thofe,  who  are
<c  defcended  from  the  gods,  lead  a  happy,  and  a  blefied  life  ;
“  to  whom  fhe  will  relate  your  piety,  and  the  favors,  with
“  which  you  adorned  her,  and,  always,  beg  of  the  gods  to
“  make  you  fome  illuftrious  returns.

LIII.  “  But,  if  you  treat  your  mother  with  indignity,  and
“  fend  her  away  with  difhonor,  what  fufferings  you  may
“  draw  upon  yourfelf  for  this,  I  fhall  not  pretend  to  fay ;
“  but  I  forefee  nothing  happy  :  However,  this  I  know,  that,
<c  fhould  you,  even,  be  fortunate  in  every  thing  elfe,  for  I
“  will  fuppofe  this,  the  pain  occafioned  by  me,  and  my
“  affli&ions,  will  perfecute  you,  never  give  reft  to  your
<c  mind,  and  render  your  life  infenfible  of  every  pleafure  :
u  For  Veturia,  after  this  cruel,  and  irreparable  ignominy
<c  received  before  fo  many  witnefies,  will  not  bear  to  live  a
“  moment :  But  I  will  kill  myfelf  in  the  prefence  of  all
u  thefe,  both  friends,  and  enemies,  and  bequeath  to  you,  in
“  my  room,  a  dreadful  imprecation,  and  dire  Furies  to  be
u  my  avengers.  May  there  be  no  occafion  for  this,  O  gods,
“  who  guard  the  Roman  empire  ;  but  infpire  Marcius  with
“  fentiments  of  piety,  and  honor :  And,  as,  juft  now  at  my
“  approach,  he  ordered  the  axes  to  be  laid  afide,  the  rods

“  to


Book  VIII.


366  ,  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

4<  to  be  lowered,  and  his  feat  to  be  taken  from  the  tribunal,
u  and  placed  on  the  ground  ;  and,  of  all  the  other  enfigns,
“  that  are  the  ufual  ornaments  of  abfolute  magiftracy,  fome
“  he  leflened,  and  others  he  quite  removed,  with  an  inten-
“  tion  to  make  it  manifeft  to  all,  that  he  had  a  right  to
u  command  others,  and  his  mother  to  command  him :  So
“  may  he,  now  alfo,  make  me  honoured,  and  confpicuous ;
“  and,  by  remitting  our  common  country  at  my  requeft,
“  inftead  of  the  molt  unfortunate,  render  me  the  moft
u  fortunate,  of  all  women.  If  it  was  becoming,  and  lawful
u  for  a  mother  to  throw  herfelf  at  the  feet  of  her  fon,  even
<£  to  this,  and  every  other  pollute,  and  office  of  humility
u  would  I  fubmit,  to  fave  my  country.”

LI  V.  Having  faid  this,  fhe  threw  herfelf  upon  the  ground ;
and,  embracing  the  feet  of  Marcius  with  both  her  hands,  fhe
killed  them :  As  foon  as  fhe  fell  proftrate,  all  the  women
cried  out  together,  uttering  a  loud,  and  long  lamentation.
Even  the  Volfci,  who  were  prefent  at  the  affembly,  could
not  bear  the  unufual  light,  but  turned  away  their  eyes.
And  Marcius  himfelf,  leaping  from  his  feat,  took  his  mother
in  his  arms ;  and,  railing  her  up  from  the  ground  fcarce
breathing,  he  embraced  her,  and  with  many  tears  faid  ;
“  O  mother,  you  have  gained  a  vi&ory,  that  will  prove
<c  fatal  both  to  your  fell,  and  me  :  For  you  have  faved  your
“  country,  but  ruined  me  your  pious,  and  affectionate  fon.”
After  he  had  faid  this,  he  went  to  his  tent,  and  delired  his
mother,  his  wife,  and  his  children  to  follow  him ;  where
he  paffed  the  reft  of  the  day  in  conlidering  with  them,  what

was


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSEN SIS.  367

was  to  be  done  :  And  the  refolutions  they  came  to  were
thefe  :  That  the  fenate  fliould  lay  nothing  before  the  people
relating  to  his  return,  nor  thefe  pafs  any  vote  concerning  it,
till  all  the  articles  of  friendfhip,  and  peace  fhould  be  fettled
with  the  Volfci :  That  Marcius  fliould  withdraw  his  forces,
and  march  through  the  Roman  territories,  as  through  the  ter¬
ritories  of  his  allies:  And,  after  he  had  given  an  account  to
the  Volfci  of  his  condudt  in  the  command  of  their  army,
and  difplayed  the  fervices  he  had  done  them,  that  he  fliould
delire  thofe,  who  had  intruded  him  with  that  command,  by
all  means  to  admit  their  enemies  into  the  number  of  their
friends,  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  them  founded  on  juftice,
and  to  commiflion  him  to  take  care  that  the  terms  of  that
treaty  were  equal  to  both  nations,  and  not  infldious :  But
if,  elated  with  pride  from  their  late  fucceffes,  they  rejected
an  accommodation,  that  he  fliould  refign  the  command.
For  they  concluded  that  the  Volfci  would  either  not  bear
the  thoughts  of  chufing  another  commander  for  want  of  a
good  general ;  or,  if  they  did  run  the  hazard  of  giving  the
command  of  their  forces  to  any  other,  their  great  lofs
would  teach  them  to  purfue  fuch  meafures,  as  fliould  be
to  their  advantage.  Thefe  were  the  fubje&s  of  their
conlideration,  and  thefe  their  refolutions  ;  which  they
looked  upon  to  be  juft,  pious,  and  reputable,  the  point
Marcius  had  moft  at  heart.  But  they  were  alarmed  with  a
fufpicion,  mixed  with  fear,  left  the  thoughtlefs  multitude,  now
buoyed  up  with  the  opinion  of  having,  already,  conquered
the  enemy,  fhould  refent  the  difappointment  in  an  out¬
rageous


368  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

rageous  manner ;  and,  in  confequence  of  that  refentment,
put  him  to  death  with  their  own  hands,  as  a  traitor,  without
giving  him  time  to  fay  any  thing  in  his  defence.  However,
they  determined  to  fubmit  even  to  this,  or  to  any  other
danger  ftill  more  formidable,  which  they  might  be  expofed
to  in  performing  their  ingagement  with  fidelity.  And,  when
it  was  near  fun  fet,  they  embraced  one  another,  and  went
out  of  the  tent :  After  which,  the  women  returned  to  the
city.  Then  Marcius,  affembling  his  troops,  laid  before  them
the  reafons,  which  had  induced  him  to  put  an  end  to  the
war ;  and  ufed  many  intreaties  with  his  foldiers  both  to
forgive  him,  and,  when  they  returned  home,  to  protect  him
from  the  violence  of  their  fellow-citizens,  in  remembrance
of  the  benefits  they  had  received  from  him :  And,  having
faid  many  other  things  to  ingage  them  in  his  defence,  he
ordered  them  to  prepare  themfelves  to  decamp  the  following
night. .

LV.  When  the  Romans  heard  that  the  danger  was  over
(for  the  report  of  it  was  brought  to  Rome  before  the  arrival
of  the  women)  they  ran  out  of  the  city  with  great  joy  to
meet  them  ;  and,  embracing  them,  fung  triumphal  fongs  ;
and  all  in  general,  and  every  one  in  particular,  fhewed  all
thofe  figns  of  exultation,  which  men,  who  emerge  out  of
great  dangers  to  unexpe&ed  felicity,  exprefs  both  in  their
words,  and  actions.  That  night,  therefore,  they  pafled  in
feafts,  and  rejoicings.  The  next  day,  the  fenate,  being  af-
fembled  by  the  confuls,  refolved  to  poftpone  the  honors  de¬
fined  to  be  conferred  on  Marcius  to  a  more  proper  feafon  :


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  369

But  ordered  that  praife  fhould,  immediately,  be  given  to  the
women,  in  return  for  their  "zeal ;  which  praife  fhould  be
perpetuated  to  pofterity  by  a  public  infcription ;  and  fuch
a  reward,  as  to  the  women,  who  were  to  receive  it,  fhould.
appear  mod:  grateful  and  honourable.  Thefe,  after  confu¬
tation,  refolved  not  to  afk  any  invidious  gift,  but  to  defire
the  fenate  would  give  them  leave  to  eredt  a  temple  to
Female  Fortune  32  in  the  fame  place,  where  they  had  inter¬
ceded  for  their  country  ;  and  that  they  might  affemble,  and
perform  annual  facrifices  to  her  on  the  day  they  had  put  an
end  to  the  war.  And  the  fenate,  and  people  decreed  that  an
33  area  fhould  be  purchafed  with  the  public  money,  and  confe-
crated  to  the  goddels,  and  that,  upon  it,  a  temple,  and  an
altar  fhould  be  eredted  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  the  pontifs

32,  Ev  u  tx{  tvs  zroAsuic  t7TQiyi<Toiv]o  urbis  maternae preces  repulerunt :  From
idiots  xuZ‘V‘  F°rtus  has  miftaken  this  this  paffage,  Sylburgius  concludes  that
paffage,  both  in  his  tranflation,  and  in  this  temple  was  ere£ted  in  the  fame
his  note  referring  to  it,  in  which  he  place,  where  the  mother  of  Coriolanus
reads  sroi«<r<xiv7o,  for  t7row<rav1o.  This  prevailed  on  her  fon  to  fpare  his  coun-
Sylburgius  has  obferved,  and,  with  try.  I  agree  with  him  that  the  temple
great  fagacity,  fubftituted  xu^‘V  *n  was  ere&ed  in  the  fame  place  ♦,  but
room  of  xuZig  5  which  alteration  is  This  I  gather  from  the  words  of  our
juftified  by  the  Vatican  manufcript,  author,  not  from  the  paffage  he  has
though  it  is  plain  he  had  never  feen  it:  quoted  ;  becaufe,  it  is  plain,  by  all  the
Sylburgius,  alfo,  fhews  from  a  paffage  rules  of  Grammar,  that  quo  relates  to
in  Valerius  Maximus,  that  the  tern-  eo  tempore,  not  to  quart um  milliarium .
plum  Fortunae  muliebris ,  ere&ed  upon  M.  *  *  *  has  inferted  this  note  of  Syl-
this  occafion,  Hood  near  the  Latin  burgius  among  his  own  without  men-
way,  four  miles  from  Rome  :  The  tioning  his  name.  Le  Jay  has  tranf-
words  of  w  Valerius  Maximus  are  as  lated  the  fame  note,  and  the  fame
follows :  Fortunae  etiam  Muliebris fimu-  miftake.

iacrum ,  quod  eft  in  Via  Latina  ad  quar-  33*  Te^suof.  See  the  io^  annotation

turn  milliarium ,  eo  tempore  cum  aede  fud  on  the  firft  book,
confecratum ,  quo  Coriolanum  ab  excidio

w  B.  i.  c.  8.

B  b  b


Vol.  III.


iliould


ROMAN  ANTIQJ7ITIES  OF  Book VIII.


fhould  direct,  and  facrifiees  performed  at  the  public  expence  ;
and  that  a  woman,  to  be  chofefi  by  themfelves,  fhould  begin
the  facrifice,  and  prefide  in  this  ceremony.  After  this  decree
of  the  fenate,  Valeria,  who  had  firft  propofed  the  embafly,
and  prevailed  upon  the  mother  of  Marcius  to  concur  in  it,
was  appointed  prieftefs  by  the  women.  And  thefe  offered
up  the  firPc  facrifice  for  the  people,  Valeria  prefiding,  upon
the  altar  raifed  on  the  area,  before  the  temple  and  the
ftatue  were  ere&ed,  in  the  month  of  December  in  the  fol¬


lowing  year,  on  the  day  of

34*  Hv  EAA>jvs?  (j.iv  vx/uqviav,

Si  K«A avSoig  aoiAiitn.  The  year,  at  that
time  in  ufe  among  the  Romans,  was
the  Pompilian  year,  instituted  by  Nu-
ma  Pompilius,  which  continued  till
Julius  Caefar  reformed  it.  This  year
was,  properly,  luni-folar  *,  becaufe,
though  the  twelve  fynodical  months,
of  which  it  confided,  did  not  amount
to  more  than  354  days,  yet  this  defect
was  Supplied  by  intercalary  days,  by
which  this  lunar  year  was  brought
nearly  to  the  folar  year  :  The  Greek
year  alfo,  which,  being  lunar,  con¬
fided  of  no  more  than  354  days,  was
brought  to  the  folar  year  by  an  inter¬
calation  of  feven  months  in  nineteen
years,  invented  by  Meton,  and,  from
him,  this  luni-folar  year  was  called
Milcovof  ivtavlof.  The  or  the

day  of  the  new  moon,  was  the  fird
day  of  the  month  with  the  Greeks,
and  the  calends  the  fird  day  of  the
month  with  the  Romans  :  Thefe  had,
alfo,  their  nones,  and  ides*,  both  which
were  moveable, and  their  calends  fixed:

*  Sat.  i


the  new  moon,  34  which  the

As  for  example  ;  the  nones  of  March,
May,  July,  and  October  fell  on  the
Seventh  days  of  thole  months,  which
nones  were,  for  that  reafon,  called  No¬
me  feptimanae  *,  and  the  nones  of  all
the  red  of  the  months  on  the  fifth  days
of  thole  months,  and  were  called  No¬
me  quint  anae.  The  ides,  called  fo,  as
xMacrobius  fays,  from  the  Tufcan
word  iduare ,  which  Signified  to  divide,
were  governed  by  the  nones  :  For,  as.
the  ides  were  nine  days  after  the  nones,
including  both,  when  the  nones  hap¬
pened  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  month,
the  ides  fell  out  on  the  thirteenth  *,
and,  when  the  nones  were  on  the  Se¬
venth,  the  ides  were  on  the  fifteenth.
By  all  this  it  appears,  that  the  day
before  the  nones  of  Quintilis  (July)
was  the  Sixth  of  that  month,  as  the
text  has  been  corrected  by  Glareanus,
and  Portus  ;  and  the  dedication  of  this
temple  dands  in  the  old  Roman  ca¬
lendar,  I  find,  on  that  day,  and  not
on  the  Seventh,  as  it  is  in  all  the  edi¬
tions,  and  manulcripts.  This  lad

„  c.  15.

Greeks


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  SS  EN  S  I  S.  371


Greeks  call  Nspjwtfv,  and  the  Romans,  Kalendas  ,  this  being
the  day,  that  put  an  end  to  the  war.  The  year  after  the  firft:
facrifice,  the  temple,  built  at  the  expence  of  the  public,
was  fmifhed,  and  confecrated,  exactly,  on  the  ftxth  day  of
the  month  Quintilis  according  to  the  courfe  of  the  moon  ;
this  being,  as  the  Romans  compute,  the  day  before  the
nones  of  the  month  Quintilis.  The  perfon,  who  confecrated
this  temple,  was  Proculus  Virginius,  one  of  the  confuls.

LVI.  It  may  be  agreeable  to  the  purpofe  of  this  hiftory,
and  conducive  to  the  reformation  of  thofe,  who  think  that
the  gods  are  neither  pleafed  with  the  honors  they  receive
from  men,  nor  difpleafed  with  impious,  and  unjuft  adtions,
to  relate  the  manifeftation  this  goddefs  gave  of  her  prefence
at  that  time,  not  once,  but  twTice,  as  it  is  recorded  in  the
35  books  of  the  pontifs ;  to  the  end  that  thofe,  who,  reli-
gioufly,  adhere  to  the  opinions  they  have  received  from
their  anceftors  concerning  the  gods,  may  have  no  caufe
either  to  repent  of  their  belief,  or  ever  to  change  it;  and
that  fuch,  as  defpife  the  cuftoms  of  their  forefathers,  and


reading,  however,  has  been  efpoufed
by  M.  *  *  *,  though  not  by  Je  Jay  :
The  former  fupports  it  by  a  very  ex¬
traordinary  fuppofition  in  his  note
upon  this  p adage  j  he  imagines  that
Dionyfius  found  in  the  Latin  authors,
from  whom  he  collected  his  hiftory,
that  the  temple  of  For  tuna  muliebris
was  dedicated  ante  diem  nonas  Quintilis ,
j pour  marquer  le  jour  des  nones ,  which
he  translated,  literally,  into  Greek.
In  the  firft  place,  I  ihall  not,  readily,
allow  that  Dionyfius  could  have  met


with  that  exprefiion  in  any  good  Ro¬
man  writer  for  the  nones  of  Quintilis :
They  would  have  rather  faid,  I  ima¬
gine,  noniS)  for  the  day  of  the  nones,
and  pridie  nonas ,  for  the  day  before.
But,  whatever  exprefiion  he  might
have  found  in  any  Roman  hiftorian,  I
am  apt  to  believe  that  he  underftood
the  force  of  it,  better  than  either  that
gentleman  who  condemns  him,  or  I
who  defend  him.

35'  ItooQuduv — •y^oKpou.  See  the234tl1
annotation  on  the  firft  book.

B  b  b  2


hold


372  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

hold  that  the  gods  have  no  power  over  the  defigns  of  men,
may,  if  poflible,  alter  their  opinion ;  but,  if  they  are  in¬
curable,  that  they  may  become  ftill  more  odious  to  the  gods,
and,  confequently,  more  miferable.  It  is  recorded,  there¬
fore,  that  the  fenate  having  ordered  that  the  whole  expence
both  of  the  temple,  and  of  the  ftatue,  fhould  be  defrayed  by
the  public ;  and  the  women  having  caufed  another  ftatue
to  be  made  with  the  money  they  had  contributed  among
themfelves ;  and  both  of  them  being  dedicated  together
on  the  firft  day  of  the  confecration  of  the  temple,  one  of
the  ftatues,  being  That  which  the  women  had  provided,
fpoke  intelligibly,  and  loudly,  in  the  Latin  tongue,  many
being  prefent:  The  words  being  tranflated  into  Greek,  the
fenfe  of  them  is  this;  36  Oaiw  'zzroAewc  vopco,  yvvcwtse  yc([Jt,eJou,
SsS'uxotjs  (jis :  Matrons ,  in  due  form  have  you  dedicated  me.
The  women,  who  were  prefent,  as  it  ufually  happens  in
relation  to  uncommon  voices,  and  fights,  would  not  eafily
believe  that  the  ftatue  fpoke,  but  took  it  for  fome  human

36,  Oi nee  vroMui  vouco ,  etc.  Sylbur-  inquire  whether  this  is  the  firft  ex-
gius  has  given  us  the  words  fuppofed  ample  in  hiftory  of  a  fpeaking  ftatue;
to  have  been  fpoken  by  this  ftatue  in  if  it  is,  the  hint  has  been,  fince,  im-
Latin  from  y  Valerius  Maximus, which  proved  to  very  fubftantial  purpofes  :
are  thefe  :  Rite  me,  matronae ,  vidijiie ,  However,  it  is  a  melancholy  inftance
riteque  dedicajtis.  Where,  rite,  explains  of  fuperftition,  or  of  fomething  worfe,
ccuo  vro-Xiug  vcp u  ;  matronae ,  ywaixtt  both  in  heathens,  and  many  chriftians,
yxfjt.il oa  ;  and  dedicajlis ,  htimddi.  As  for  to  alledge  fuch  idle  ftories  in  proof  of
1 ndijiis,  which  :s  not  in  our  author,  I  a  Providence,  when  every  fingle  ob-
do  not  think  it  worth  while  to  inquire  jetft  in  this  wonderful  frame  of  nature
how  Valerius  came  to  infert  that  word  can  fupply  them  with  a  demonftration
in  his  relation  of  this  ridiculous  tale,  of  it.

Neither  do  I  think  it  worth  while  to


y  B.  i.  c.  8.


voice ;


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  373
voice  ;  thofe,  particularly,  who  happened,  at  that  time,  to
be  thinking  of  fomething  elfe,  and  did  not  fee  what  it  was
that  fpoke,  would  not  believe  fuch  as  hard  feen  it.  After¬
wards,  when  the  temple  was  full,  and  there  happened  to  be
the  greateft  filence,  the  fame  ftatue  pronounced  the  fame
words  in  a  louder  voice :  So  that,  there  was,  no  longer,  any
doubt  concerning  it.  The  fenate,  hearing  what  had  palled,
ordered  other  facrifices,  and  rites  to  be  performed  every
year,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  the  pontifs  fhould  dired:  :  And
the  women,  by  the  advice  of  their  prieftefs,  eftablifhed  it  as
a  cuftom  that  no  women,  who  had  been  twice  married,
fhould  crown  this  ftatue  with  garlands,  or  touch  it  with
their  hands ;  but  that  the  whole  honor,  and  miniftry  relating
to  this  ftatue,  fhould  be  committed  to  new  married  women.
But,  concerning  thefe  things,  it  became  me  neither  to  omit
a  fad  recorded  by  the  Roman  hiftorians,  nor  to  dwell  any
longer  upon  it.  I,  now,  return  from  whence  I  digreffed.

LVII.  After  the  departure  of  the  women,  Marcius  de¬
camped  with  his  army  by  break  of  day,  and  marched  through
the  territories  of  the  Romans,  as  through  a  friend’s  country :
And,  when  he  came  to  That  of  the  Volfci,  he  divided  all
the  booty  among  his  foldiers,  without  referving  the  leaft
thing  for  himfelf,  and  fent  them  to  their  refpedive  homes.
The  troops,  who  had  ferved  under  him  in  his  battles,  re¬
turning  loaded  with  riches,  were  not  difpleafed  with  refling
from  the  war ;  and,  as  they  loved  the  man,  they  thought
he  deferved  to  be  forgiven  for  having  defifted  from  profe-
cuting  the  war  to  the  laft,  in  companion  to  the  diftrefs,  and

prayers


374  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

prayers  of  his  mother.  But  the  young  men,  who  had  ftaid
at  home,  envying  the  foldiers  on  account  of  the  great  booty
they  had  acquired,  and  being  difappointed  in  their  hopes  of
feeing  the  pride  of  the  Romans  humbled,  when  their  city
fhould  be  taken,  were  exafperated  againft  the  general,  and
full  of  refentment ;  and,  at  laft,  when  they  found  their
hatred  countenanced  by  the  men  of  the  greateft  power  in
the  nation,  they  grew  wild  with  rage,  and  committed  an
impious  action.  The  perfon,  who  contributed  not  a  little  to
inflame  them  againft  Marcius,  was  Tullus  Attius,  who  was
fupported  by  a  great  fadtion  collected  out  of  every  city.  This
man,  who  could  not  command  his  envy,  had,  long  fince,
refolved  if  Marcius  iucceeded,  and,  after  he  had  deftroyed
Rome,  returned  to  the  Volfci,  to  murder  him  in  a  private,
and  infidious  manner;  or,  if  he  mifcarried,  and  returned
without  effedting  his  deftgn,  to  deliver  him  over  to  his  fadtion
as  a  traitor,  and  put  him  to  death ;  which  was  the  method
he,  then,  took.  And,  aflembling  a  conftderable  number  of
his  people,  he  accufed  the  man;  forming  conjedtures  of
falfe  things  by  true,  and  of  fuch  as  were  never  to  come  to
pafs,  by  thofe  which  had  already  happened ;  then  ordered
him  to  refign  his  command,  and  give  an  account  of  his
condudt :  For,  as  I  faid  before,  he  was  general  of  the  forces,
which  had  been  left  in  the  cities ;  and  had  power  both  to
affemble  the  people,  and  to  fummon  any  man  he  thought
fit  to  a  trial.

/  *  •

LVIII.  Marcius  did  not  think  proper  to  oppofe  either  of

thefe  demands ;  but  objedted  to  their  order:  For  heinfifted

that


o


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  AS  SENS  IS.  375
that  he  ought,  firft,  to  give  an  account  of  his  conduct  in
the  war ;  after  which,  he  confented  to  refign  his  command,
if  all  the  Volfci  fhould  be  of  that  opinion  :  But  he  thought
that  the  determination  of  thefe  points  fhould  not  be  com¬
mitted  to  any  particular  city,  of  which  the  greateft  part  was
corrupted  by  Tullus,  but  to  a  legal  affembly  of  the  whole
nation,  to  which  it  was  the  cuflom  for  them  to  fend  deputies
from  every  city,  when  they  were  to  deliberate  upon  affairs
of  the  greateft  importance.  This  Tullus  oppofed ;  well
knowing  that  a  man  of  his  eloquence,  when  he  came  to
give  an  account  of  the  many  great  adfions  he  had  performed,
if  he  ftill  retained  his  dignity  of  general,  would  juftify  his
conduct  to  the  multitude ;  and  be  fo  far  from  being  punifhed
as  a  traitor,  that  he  would  become  ftill  more  illuftrious,  be
more  honoured  by  them,  and  authorized,  by  a  general  con-
fent,  to  put  an  end  to  the  war  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  he  fhould
think  proper.  This  ftruggle  lafted  for  a  conftderable  time,
and  was  carried  on  every  day  in  the  aftemblies,  and  the
forum,  with  great  eagernefs  by  words,  and  mutual  contefts :
For  neither  of  them  could  employ  force  againftc  the  other;
becaufe  both  were  defended  by  the  dignity  of  an  equal
command.  But,  there  being  no  end  of  this  contention,
Tullus  appointed  a  day  for  Marcius  to  refign  his  command,
and  take  his  trial  for  the  treafon  he  flood  accufed  of ;  and,
having  prevailed  upon  fome  of  the  moft  daring,  with  the-
hopes  of  rewards,  to  be  the  ringleaders  in  the  wicked  adlion
he  meditated,  he  came  to  the  affembly  on  the  day  appointed  ;
and,  placing  himfelf  in  the  tribunal,  ufed  many  inve&ives

‘  againfi


o


376  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  T  I E  S  OF  Book  VIII.

againft  Marcius,  and  exhorted  the  people  to  depofe  him  by
force,  if  he  would  not,  voluntarily,  refign  the  command.

LIX.  Marcius  having  afcended  the  tribunal  in  order  to
make  his  defence,  the  iadion  of  Tullus  hindered  him  from
fpeaking  by  their  clamor ;  and,  upon  their  crying  out,  Kill
hit#,  Kill  him,  the  moft  daring  furrounded  him,  and  ftoned
him  37  to  death.  While  he  lay  ftretched  upon  the  ground  in
the  forum,  both  thofe,  who  had  been  prefent  at  this  tragedy,
and  thofe,  who  came  thither  after  he  w7as  dead,  bewailed  the
misfortune  of  the  man,  who  had  found  fo  ill  a  return  from
them,  and  recounted  all  the  fervices  he  had  done  to  the
commonwealth,  defiring  to  apprehend  the  murderers  for
having  fet  the  example  of  an  adion  illegal  in  itfelf,  and  of
pernicious  confequence  to  their  cities,  in  killing  a  man,  and,
particularly,  their  general,  by  an  ad  of  violence,  without
fuffering  him  to  make  his  defence  :  But  thofe,  who  had
ferved  under  him,  fhewed  the  greateft  indignation  at  the
ufage  he  had  met  with  ;  and  fince,  when  he  was  living,  they
had  not  been  able  to  prevent  his  misfortune,  they  refolved  to
fhew  their  juft  acknowledgement  to  him  after  he  was  dead,
by  bringing  into  the  forum  every  thing,  that  was  necefiary
to  the  honor  of  a  brave  man ;  and,  when  all  things  were

37*  AttokIivw^o-i.  Livy,  alfo,  fays  hiftorians,  aflerts  that  he  lived  to  a
that  Coriolanus  was  put  to  death  by  great  age  ;  and  that,  when  he  was
the  Volfci,  in  refentment  for  his  hav-  very  old,  he  ufed,  often,  to  fay  that
ing  withdrawn  his  forces  from  the  ter-  exile  was  the  moft  feverely  felt  by  an
ritories  of  the  Romans ;  and  that  old  man  :  z  Refert  certe  (Fabius)  banc
others  give  a  different  account  of  his  faeps  eum  ex  a  bid  aetate  ufurpajje  vocem>
death:  But,  Fabius,  he  fays,  who  was  Multo  miferins  feni  exilium  ejje.
by  much  the  moft  ancient  of  their

ii.  c.  40..

ready,


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSENSIS.  377

ready,  they  clothed  him  in  the  habit  of  a  general,  and
placed  him  on  a  bier  adorned  in  a  moft  fumptuous  manner;
and,  cauflng  the  booty,  the  fpoils,  and  the  crowns,  together
with  the  reprefentations  of  the  towns  he  had  taken,  to  be
carried  before  him,  the  young  men,  who  were  the  moft  di-
ftinguifhed  by  their  military  achievements,  took  up  the  bier ;
and,  carrying  it  to  the  moft  conftderable  part  of  the  fuburbs,
placed  it  on  a  funeral  pile,  before,  prepared  for  its  reception,
all  the  citizens  accompanying  the  body  with  lamentations,
and  tears :  Then,  having  killed  a  great  number  of  viftims
in  honor  to  him,  and  offered  up  all  the  flrft  offerings
that  are,  ufually,  made  at  the  funeral  piles  of  kings,  or
generals,  thofe,  who  had  been  moft  attached  to  him,  re¬
mained  there,  till  the  flame  was  extinguiftied  ;  after  which,
they  gathered  together  his  remains,  and  buried  them  in  the
fame  place ;  and,  having  raifed  a  high  mound  by  the  af-
flftance  of  many  hands,  they  erefted  a  handfome  monument.

LX.  Such  was  the  cataftrophe  of  Marcius,  the  greateft
general  of  his  age :  He  was  fuperior  to  all  thofe  pleafures
that  tyrannize  youth  ;  and  praftifed  juftice  not  with  re¬
in  fiance,  and  through  fear  of  the  punifhment  impofed  by
X.  the  law,  but  voluntarily,  and  from  his  natural  propen-
fity  to  it :  He  did  not  look  upon  the  not  doing  an  injury
to  be  any  part  of  virtue ;  and,  not  only,  took  care  to  be
exempt  from  all  vice  himfelf,  but,  alfo,  thought  it  his  duty
to  compel  others  to  be  fo  too:  He  was  a  man  of  great
fpirit,  and  liberality,  and  moft  ready  to  relieve  the  wants  of
his  friends,  as  foon  as  he  was  informed  of  them :  He  was
Vo l.  III.  C  c  c  inferior


373  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

inferior  to  none  of  the  ariftocratical  party  in  his  talents  for
civil  affairs ;  and,  if  the  contrary  faction  had  not  oppofed
his  meafures,  the  Roman  commonwealth  would  have  re¬
ceived  the  greate.fi:  accefiion  of  power  from  them  :  But  it
was  not  pofiible  for  all  the  virtues  to  meet  in  the  fame
compofition ;  neither  will  there  ever  appear  a  man  produced
from  a  mortal,  and  frail  original,  who  is  perfect  in  all  things.

LXI.  Heaven,  therefore,  that  hePcowed  thefe  virtues  on
him,  blended  them  with  unhappy  defects,  and  imperfedtions:
For  there  was  no  mildnefs,  no  chearfulnefs  in  his  behaviour;
nor  any  thing  winning  in  him,  when  he  fainted,  and  fpoke
to  his  acquaintance  ;  no  difpofition  to  be  reconciled,  or  to
mitigate  his  refen tment,  when  he  was  angry  with  any  one;
nor  that  grace,  which  adorns  all  human  abtions ;  but  he
was  always  harfh,  and  fevere.  Thefe  qualities  hurt  him  in
many  refpedts ;  but,  mod  of  all,  his  immoderate,  and  in¬
exorable  rigor  in  liipporting  juilice,  and  the  laws,  without
the  leaf!  mixture  of  clemency  :  And  the  38  opinion  of  the
ancient  philofophers  feems  true,  that  moral  virtues  confift


3s  •  To  V7T0  TUV  CtgXCi,C0V  teyOfAWM

$1  xotoQuv.  This  is  the  dodtrine  of
a  Ariftotle,  which  is  here,  I  believe,
alluded  1:0,  arid  which  he  explains  in
the  following  manner  in  his  ethics :
His  pofition  is,  that  virtue  con  lilts  in
the  mean,  ur-c-cl^  :  I  his  b  he

illuftrates  by  many  examples  drawn
from  the  paffions,  and  affections ;  in
all  which  xa  pao-ov,  the  mean ,  is  found
to  be  virtuous,  and  r &  ccKgct,  the  ex¬
tremes ,  to  be  vicious  :  Thus,  Bravery
is  j uiw,  the  mean  •,  Rafhnefs,  jj

aiB.  ii.  c.  6.


vVsg&Aij,  the  excefs  ;  and  Cowardice,
rf  jAAf.-if/r,  the  deficiency.  Again,  Libe¬
rality  is  the  mean  ;  Prodigality,  the
excefs ;  and  Avarice,  the  deficiency.
Ariftotle  has  applied  this  dodhine,
even,  to  converfation,  where  Faceti-
oufnefs  is  the  mean  ;  Buffoonry,  the
excefs  ;  and  Rufticity,  the  deficiency.
This  is  not  the  firft  opportunity  I
have  had  of  fhewing  how  great  a  de¬
ference  our  author  pays  to  the  ethics
of  Ariftotle.


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNAS  SENS  I  S.  379

in  the  mean,  and  not  in  the  extremes,  particularly  juftice :
For  fhe  is  unprofitable  to  her  poftefiors,  not  only,  when  fhe
does  not  arrive  to  this  mean,  but,  alfo,  when  fhe  exceeds  it ;
and,  fometimes,  the  caufe  of  great  calamities,  and  leads
to  miferable  deaths,  and  irreparable  mifchiefs  :  Nothing
elfe  but  the  purfuit  of  exa<ft,  and  extreme  juftice  drove
Marcius  out  of  his  country,  and  deprived  him  of  all  the
other  enjoyments  of  life  :  For,  when  he  ought  to  have  made
reafanable  conceflions  to  the  plebeians,  and  might,  by
yielding  to  their  defires  in  fome  particulars,  have  gained
the  firft  place  in  their  afFe&ions,  he  would  not  do  it ;  but,
by  oppofing  them  in  every  thing  that  was  not  juft,  he
incurred  their  hatred,  and  was  banifhed  by  them:  And,
when  he  had  it  in  his  power  to  refign  the  command  of  the
Volfcian  army  the  moment  he  had  put  an  end  to  the  war,
and  to  remove  to  any  other  place,  till  his  country  had  granted
him  leave  to  return,  and  not  expofe  himfelf  to  the  fnares  of
his  enemies,  and  the  folly  of  the  multitude ;  though  he
confidered  all  this,  he  did  not  think  fit  to  ufe  any  of  thefe
precautions ;  but,  efteeming  it  his  duty  to  prefent  himfelf
before  thofe,  who  had  intrufted  him  with  that  command,  in
order  to  give  an  account  of  his  conduct  while  he  was  inverted
with  it,  and,  after  he  had  given  that  account,  if  he  was
found  guilty  of  any  crime,  to  undergo  the  punifhment  or¬
dained  by  the  laws,  he  did  not  receive  the  reward,  which  his
extreme  juftice  deferved.

LXIL  If  therefore,  when  the  body  is  deftroyed,  the  fub-
ftance  of  the  foul,  whatever  that  fubftance  may  be,  perifhes

Ccc  2  together


380  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

together  with  it,  and  ceafes  to  exift,  I  know  not  how  I  can
conceive  thofe  to  be  happy,  who  have  received  no  advantage
from  their  virtue ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  have  been  undone
by  it :  Whereas,  if  our  fouls  remain  for  ever  incorruptible,
as  fome  think,  or,  if  they  fubfift  fome  time  after  their  fepa-
ration  from  the  body,  Thofe  of  good  men  enjoying  the
longeft,  and  Thofe  of  the  wicked  the  fhorteft,  duration,  the
applaufe  of  the  living,  and  the  prefervation  of  their  memory
to  the  latefl  ages,  feem  to  be  an  honor  fufficient  for  the
virtuous,  though  Fortune  was  their  enemy  :  Which  honor
happened  to  this  man  :  For,  not  only,  the  Volfci  mourned
for  his  death,  and  Pali  honor  him,  as  a  man  of  the  greateft
merit ;  but  the  Romans  alfo,  when  they  were  informed  of
his  tragical  end,  looked  upon  it  as  a  great  calamity  to  their
commonwealth,  and  mourned  for  him  both  in  private,  and
in  public :  And  their  wives,  as  their  cuftom  is  at  the  death
of  their  neareft  relations,  laid  afide  their  gold,  and  purple,
and  all  the  reft:  of  their  ornaments ;  and  dreffing  themfelves
in  black,  mourned  for  him  a  whole  year :  And  near  five
hundred  years  being,  now,  elapfed  fince  his  death,  his  me¬
mory  is  not  obliterated,  but  he  is,  Fill,  praifed  and  celebrated
by  all,  as  a  pious,  and  juft  man.  Thus  ended  the  danger,
with  which  the  Romans  had  been  threatened  by  the  invafion
of  the  Volfci,  and  Aequi,  under  the  command  of  Marcius;
a  danger  greater  than  any  they  had,  ever,  been  expofed  to,
which  had  like  to  have  deftroyed  the  whole  city  from  its
foundations.


LXIII.


BookVIII.  DIONYSIUS  H AL ICARN ASSE N S IS.  381

LXIIL  A  few  days  after,  the  Romans  took  the  field  with
a  numerous  army  commanded  by  both  the  confuls ;  and,
advancing  to  the  confines  of  their  own  territories,  incamped
on  two  hills,  each  of  the  confuls  having  his  camp  apart,  very
ftrongly  fituated.  However,  they  returned  to  Rome  without
effe&ing  any  thing,  though  fair  opportunties  were  given
them  by  the  enemy  of  performing  fome  gallant  action  :
For,  before  this,  the  Volfci,  and  the  Aequi  had  invaded
the  Roman  territories,  refolving  not  to  lofe  the  opportunity  ;
but  to  attack  them,  while  they  feemed  to  be,  ftill,  in  a
confirmation,  fuppofing  that  fear  would  induce  them  to
furrender  of  their  own  accord  :  But,  quarrelling  among  one
another  about  the  command,  they  ran  to  arms,  and  ingaged
without  keeping  their  ranks,  or  receiving  orders,  but  with
all  the  confufion,  and  diforder  imaginable ;  fo  that,  many
were  killed  on  both  fides:  And,  if  the  fetting  of  the  fun
had  not  prevented  further  mifchief,  both  armies  had  been,
utterly,  deftroyed.  Yielding  therefore,  though  unwillingly,
to  the  night,  which  put  an  end  to  the  conteft,  they  were
parted,  and  each  army  retired  to  their  own  camp  :  And,
decamping,  early  the  next  day,  each  returned  home.  The
confuls,  though  informed  both  by  the  prifoners  they  had
taken,  and  by  the  deferters,  who  had  efcaped  from  the
a&ion,  of  the  madnefs,  and  fury  the  enemy  had  been  pof-
feffed  with,  neither  took  advantage  of  an  opportunity  fo
much  to  be  wiflied,  when  they  were  not  diftant  from  them
above  thirty  ftadia,  nor  purfued  them  in  their  retreat,  in
which  their  own  troops  being  frefh,  and  following  in  their

ranks.


382  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

ranks,  might  eafil y  have  defbroyed,  to  a  man,  Thofe  of
the  enemy,  that  were  fatigued,  wounded,  reduced  to  a  fmall
number,  and  retiring  in  diiorder.  However,  the  confuls
decamped  alfo,  and  returned  to  Rome ;  either  contented
with  the  advantage  Fortune  had  given  them,  or  having  no
confidence  in  their  troops  that  were  undifciplined,  or  highly
fatisfied  with  not  having;  differed  the  lead  lofs.  But,  when
they  came  to  Rome,  they  were  treated  with  great  ignominy,
and  their  behaviour  was  charged  with  cowardice.  And,
without  undertaking  any  other  expedition,  they  furrendered
their  magiftracy  to  their  fucceffors.

LXIV.  The  next  year,  39  Caius  Aquilius,  and  Titus
Sicinus,  both  men  of  experience  in  war,  entered  upon  the
confulfbip.  The  fenate,  alter  the  confuls  had  propofed  to
them  to  confider  of  the  war,  ordered  that  embaffadors  fhould
be  fent  to  the  Hernici  to  demand  of  them,  as  of  their
friends  and  allies,  fuch  fatisfa&ion,  as  they  were  in  titled  to
by  their  treaties  (for  the  commonwealth  had  been  injured  by
them  at  the  time  of  the  invafion  of  the  Volfci,  and  Aequi,
by  the  robberies  they  had  committed,  and  the  incurfions
they  had  made  upon  that  part  of  the  Roman  territories,
which  lay  contiguous  to  theirs)  and  that,  in  the  mean  time,
and  until  they  fhould  receive  their  anfwers,  the  confuls
fhould  raife  all  the  forces  they  could,  and  demand  the  af-
fiftance  of  their  allies  by  embaffies ;  and,  alfo,  that  they

39*  Taioi  Ax.uAiof,  non  Tilo?  Zmvot.  Fafti  confulares.  In  1  Livy,  the  latter  is
Thefe  confuls  are  called  C.  Aquilius  named  X.  Sicinius,  poffibly  through  a
Tufcus,  and  T.  Sicinus  Sabinus  in  the  miftake  in  the  tranfcriber.

c  B.  ii.  c.  40.


fhould


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  383

fliould,  by  employing  a  great  number  of  men,  prepare  corn,
arms,  money,  and  all  other  things,  that  were  neceftary  for  the
war,  with  the  greateft  expedition.  When  the  embaffadors
returned  from  the  Hernici,  they  made  their  report  to  the
fenate  of  the  anfwers  they  had  received  from  them ;  the
fubftance  of  which  was,  that  they  faid  there  never  had  been
any  treaty  between  them,  and  the  Romans  in  general ;
that  the  convention  they  had  made  with  Tarquinius  was
diffolved  both  by  his  expulfton,  and  by  his  death  in  a  foreign
country ;  and  that,  if  any  depredations  had  been  committed,
or  incurftons  made  upon  the  territories  of  the  Romans  by
bands  of  robbers,  thefe  did  not  flow  from  the  general  confent
of  their  nation,  but  from  the  avarice  of  particular  perfons ;
that  it  was  not  even  in  their  power  to  deliver  up  to  juftice  the
men,  who  had  been  guilty  of  thefe  things ;  that  they  tliem-
felves,  having,  alfo,  fuffered  damages  of  the  fame  nature,  had
the  fame  complaints  to  make  ;  and  that  they,  chearfully,
accepted  the  war.  The  fenate,  having  heard  the  report  of
their  embafladors,  ordered  the  youth  already  raifed  to  be
divided  into  three  bodies:  And  that,  with  one  of  them,
Caius  Aquilius  fhould  march  againft  the  Hernici  (for  thefe
were  already  in  arms)  That  Titus  Sicinus,  the  other  conful,
fliould  lead  the  fecond  againft  the  Volfci ;  and  that  Spurius
Lartius,  who  had  been  appointed  governor  of  Rome  by  the
confuls,  fliould,  with  the  third,  defend  that  part  of  the
country,  that  lay  neareft  to  the  city  :  That  thofe,  who  were
above  the  military  age,  but  ftili  in  a  condition  to  bear

arms.


O


3 B 4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

arms,  fhould  be  difpofed  under  their  enfigns,  and  guard  the
fortreffes  of  the  city,  and  the  walls,  to  present  any  fudden
attempt  of  the  enemy,  while  all  the  youth  were  in  the  field :
And  that  Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus,  a  confular  perfon,
fhould  have  the  command  of  thefe  forces.  All  thefe  orders
were  foon  executed.

LXV.  Aquilius  therefore,  one  of  the  confuls,  finding
the  army  of  the  Hernici  waiting  for  him  in  the  country  ol
the  Praeneftini,  incamped  as  near  to  them  as  he  could,  at
the  diftance  of  little  more  than  two  hundred  ftadia  from
Rome.  The  third  day  after  he  had  formed  his  camp,  the
Hernici,  coming  out  of  theirs,  advanced  to  the  plain  in
order  of  battle,  and  gave  the  fignal  for  the  combat :  Upon
which,  the  conful  marched  out  to  meet  them  with  his  army
alfo  drawn  up,  and  difpofed  in  their  refpe&ive  divifions :
And,  when  they  approached  one  another,  they  fhouted,  and
ran  to  the  ingagement,  which  was  begun  by  the  light  armed
men  on  both  fides,  who,  with  darts,  arrows,  and  Pcones  from
their  flings,  gave  one  another  many  wounds:  Then  the
hone  charged  the  horfe  in  troops ;  and  the  foot  ingaged  the
foot  in  companies :  And,  now,  the  battle  raged;  both  armies
fighting  bravely;  and,  for  a  long  time,  maintaining  the
ground  where  they  were  polled.  At  length,  the  firft  line
of  the  Romans  began  to  give  way,  this  being  the  firft  battle
they  had  been  ingaged  in  for  a  long  time.  Aquilius,  oh~
ferving  this,  ordered  the  freili  troops  referved  for  this  very
purpofe,  to  take  the  place  of  thofe  who  were  fatigued,  and
the  wounded  men,  and  thofe  who  were  fpent  with  the

labor


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  385
labor  of  the  day,  to  retire  to  the  rear.  The  Hernici,  feeing
their  troops  in  motion,  imagined  the  Romans  were  beginning
to  fly ;  and,  animating  one  another,  and  clofing  their  files,
they  fell  upon  thofe  parts  of  the  enemy’s  army,  that  were  in
motion,  and  the  frefh  troops  of  the  Romans  received  their
onfet ;  and,  both  fighting  refolutely,  the  battle  was,  now,
renewed  with  great  violence :  For  the  cohorts  of  the  Hernici
were  alfo,  continually,  reinforced  with  frefh  troops  fent  by
their  generals,  in  the  room  of  thofe,  who  were  fatigued.
The  evening  was  now  coming  on,  when  the  conful,  en¬
couraging  the  horfe  to  exert  themfelves  upon  this  occafion,
put  himfelf  at  their  head,  and  charged  the  right  wing  of  the
enemy  ;  who,  after  a  fhort  refiftance,  gave  way,  and  a  great
Daughter  infued:  While  the  right  wing  of  the  Hernici
Differed,  and  loft  ground,  the  left,  ftill,  maintained  the  fight,
and  had  the  advantage  over  the  right  wing  of  the  Romans :
But,  in  a  fhort  time,  That  too  gave  way  :  For  A.quilius,  tak¬
ing  with  him  the  brave ft  of  the  youth,  ran  to  their  afiiftance
alfo;  and,  exhorting  his  people,  and  calling  upon  every  man,
who  ufed  to  diftinguifh  himfelf  in  former  battles,  by  his
name,  and  fnatching  the  ftandards  of  thofe  cohorts,  that  did
not  feem  to  do  their  duty,  from  their  bearers,  he  threw  them
into  the  midft  of  the  enemy  ;  that  the  dread  of  the  punish¬
ment  ordained  by  the  laws,  if  they  did  not  recover  their
ftandards,  might  compel  them  to  fight  valiantly  ;  and  he
himfelf  always  relieved  every  part,  that  wanted  fuccour,
till  he  forced  this  wing,  alfo,  to  give  way.  Both  the  flanks
being  now  left  naked,  even  the  center  did  not  ftand  their
Vol.  III.  Ddd  ground;


386  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

ground  ;  but  the  Hernici  fled  to  their  camp  in  confufion,
and  diforder,  and  the  Romans  purfued  them  with  great
execution.  The  Roman  army  fought,  that  day,  with  fo
much  eagernefs,  that  fome  of  the  men  endeavoured  even
to  mount  the  intrenchments  of  the  enemy’s  camp,  in  ex-
petflation  of  taking  it  by  ftorm ;  which  attempt  the  conful
obferving  to  be  hazardous  and  unavailing,  ordered  a  re¬
treat  to  be  founded,  and  that  his  men  fhould  give  over  the
attack,  which  they  were  defirous  to  continue,  fearing  left,
by  being  galled  with  the  mifiive  weapons,  which  the  enemy
were,  continually,  throwing  from  above,  they  fhould  be
forced  to  retire  with  fhame,  and  great  lofs,  and,  by  that
means,  deface  the  glory  of  their  former  vi&ory  :  So  that,
the  Romans,  it  being  now  near  fun  fet,  returned  to  their
camp  rejoicing,  and  finging  fongs  of  triumph.

LXVI.  The  following  night,  there  was  a  great  noife,
and  outcry  heard  in  the  camp  of  the  Hernici,  and  the  light
of  many  torches  feen :  For  they,  defpairing  of  being  able  to
ftand  another  ingagement,  had  refolved  to  leave  their  camp
of  their  own  motion  ;  and  this  was  the  caufe  of  the  diforder,
and  outcry  :  Since  every  man  fled  with  all  the  ftrength,  and
fpeed  he  was  mafter  ot,  calling  to,  and  called  upon  by,  one
another,  without  fhewing  the  lead  regard  to  the  lamenta¬
tions,  and  intreaties  of  thofe,  who  were  left  behind  on  ac¬
count  of  their  wounds,  or  ficknefs.  The  Romans,  who  knew
nothing  of  this,  but  had,  before,  been  informed  by  the  pri-
foners  that  another  army  of  the  Hernici  was  expe&ed  to
come  to  the  afllftance  of  their  countrymen,  and  imagining

that


i


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I S.  387

that  this  outcry,  and  tumult  was  occafioned  by  their  arrival,
took  their  arms  again ;  and,  lining  the  intrenchments,  left
any  attack  Should  be  made  upon  them  in  the  night,  forne-
timesall  ftruck  their  fhields  with  their  fwords,  and,  at  others,
Shouted  frequently,  as  if  they  were  going  to  ingage.  All
thefe  things  alarmed  the  Hernici,  alfo,  to  a  great  degree,  who,
thinking  themfelves  purfued  by  the  enemy,  difperfed,  and
fled  different  ways.  After  it  was  day,  and  the  horfe,  fent
out  to  difeover  the  enemy’s  motions,  had  reported  that  no
frefh  forces  were  come  to  their  affiftance,  and  that  Thofe
they  had  been  ingaged  with  the  day  before,  were  fled,
Aquilius  marched  out  with  his  army,  and  pofieffed  him-
felf  of  the  enemy’s  camp,  which  was  full  of  beafts  of
burden,  provisions,  and  arms ;  and  there,  alfo,  he  took  their
wounded  men,  not  fewer  in  number  than  thofe,  who  had
fled ;  and,  fending  the  horfe  in  purfuit  of  fuch,  as  had
difperfed  themfelves  in  the  roads,  and  woods,  he  made  many
of  them  prifoners :  Then  he  overrun  the  territories  of  the
Hernici,  and  laid  them  wafte  with  impunity,  none  now  daring
to  encounter  him.  Thefe  were  the  exploits  of  Aquilius.

LXVII.  The  other  conful,  Titus  Sicinus,  who  had  been
fent  againft  the  Volfci  with  the  flower  of  the  army,  made
an  irruption  into  the  country  of  the  Veliterni:  For  Tullus
Attius,  the  Volfcian  general,  was  pofted  there  at  the  head
of  a  very  ‘gallant  army,  which  he  had  raifed  with  a  view
firft  to  harrafs  the  country  of  their  allies,  asMarcius  had  done
when  he  begun  the  war,  thinking  that  the  Romans,  conti¬
nuing  ftill  under  the  fame  confternation,  would  not  fend  any

D  d  d  2  fuccours


388  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

fuccours  to  thofe,  who  were  expofed  to  danger  for  their  fake.
As  foon  as  the  two  armies  were  feen  by,  and  faw,  one  an¬
other,  they  ingaged  without  delay :  The  ground  between
their  camps,  on  wThich  they  were  obliged  to  fight,  was  a
rocky  hill,  furtounded  with  many  broken  precipices,  where
the  horfe  could  be  of  no  ufe  to  either.  The  Roman  horfe,
obferving  this,  thought  it  would  be  a  fhame  for  them  to  be
prefentat  the  adtion,  without  afiifting  in  it;  and,  coming  to
the  conful  in  a  body,  defired,  if  he  approved  of  it,  that  he
would  permit  them  to  quit  their  horfes,  and  fight  on  foot :
The  conful  gave  them  great  commendations ;  and,  ordering
them  to  difmount,  drew  them  up,  and  kept  them  about  him
both  to  obferve  what  part  of  the  army  might  want  relief,
and  to  relieve  it.  And  thefe  were  the  caufe  of  the  vidtory  the
Romans  then  gained ;  a  vidtory,  that  well  deferved  the  great
applaufe  it  afterwards  met  with  :  For  the  foot,  on  both
fides,  were  as  equal  aspoffible  in  number,  and  armed  alike,  and
had  no  advantage  over  one  another  in  order,  difcipline,  ex¬
perience  in  fighting,  in  attacks,  or  retreats,  in  dealing  their
blows,  or  in  warding  them  off :  For  the  Volfci  had  changed
every  part  of  their  military  difcipline,  fince  they  had  been
commanded  by  Marcius,  and  adopted  the  cuftoms  of  the
Romans :  So  that,  the  foot  in  both  armies  continued  fight¬
ing  moft  part  of  the  day  with  equal  fuccefs,  the  ground,  by
its  inequality,  giving  to  each  many  advantages.  But  the
Roman  horfemen  dividing  themfelves  into  two  bodies,  one
of  them  attacked  the  enemy’s  right  wing  in  flank,  while  the
other,  going  round  the  hill,  charged  them  in  the  rear ;  after

which,


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  AR N  A  S S  E N  S  I  S.  389


which,  fome  of  them  darted  their  fpears  at  the  Volfci,  and
others,  with  their  horfemens  fwords,  which  are  longer  than
thofe  of  the  infantry,  flafhed  the  arms,  and  hams  of  thofe
they  encountered,  and  cut  off  the  hands  of  many  of  them,
together  with  the  bucklers,  and  fwords  they  were  holding
either  to  defend  themfelves,  or  annoy  the  enemy ;  and,  by
inflicting  deep  wounds  on  the  knees,  and  ankles  of  feveral,
they  left  them  half  dead  upon  the  ground,  where  they  had
flood,  before,  with  the  greateft  firmnefs.  And  now  the  Volfci
were,  on  all  fides,  furrounded  with  ruin  ;  the  foot  preffing
them  in  front,  and  the  horfemen  on  their  flank,  and  in  the
rear :  So  that,  after  having  fhewn  a  bravery  ’  beyond  their
ftrength,  and  given  many  proofs  of  refolution,  and  expe¬
rience,  their  right  wing  was  almoft  all  cut  in  pieces.  When
thofe  in  the  center,  and  in  the  other  wing,  faw  their  right
wing  broken,  and  the  Roman  horfemen  coming  up  to  charge
them  in  the  fame  manner,  they  caufed  their  40  files  to  coun-


4°*  E|?/M foivle?  Tg?  Ao^vc.  The  fenfe
of  this  expreflion,  is  vifibly  miftaken
by  the  Latin,  and  French  translators  :
The  former  have  faid  explicates  ordini-
bus ,  which  M.  *  *  *  has  tranflated  lite¬
rally,  ils  deploient  leurs  bataillons.  Le
Jay  has  faid,  ils  font  defiler  leurs  troupes,
which  is  not  much  more  to  the  purpofe.
In  order  to  come  at  the  fenfe  of  this
expreflion,  we  muft  confult  the  Greek
mailers  of  tallies,  and,  among  the  reft,
Arrian,  who  explains  the  different
kinds  of  the  ^e\iy/xo(.  W  ithout  en¬
tering  into  the  lubdivifions  of  this
evolution,  I  fhall  content  myfelf  with


mentioning  the  divifion  of  it :  The
t^Kiypos  was  either  nujx  a o%xf,  or  notice
£vycc  :  d  The  firft  is,  when  the  files  of
a  batalion  countermarch  ;  and  the  fe-
cond,  when  the  ranks  do  the  fame.
In  the  firft  evolution,  c  Ao%ayo$  to*

t g  af-oiyx  aAot/j.Qoivit  iottqv-,  o  Si  xgecyog
tqv  tx  ho%ay*,  non  avh  ry?  xalct  7T(ic<ra)7rov

£7 n  xctloTriv  :  Here,  the  file
leaders  take  the  place  of  the  bringers
up,  and  thefe  of  the  file  leaders,  and
the  front  becomes  the  rear :  This  was
the  t^tKiyy.0?,  which  our  author  fays
the  Volfci  made  ufe  of,  to  lecure  their
retreat  >  and  a  very  proper  one,  no


d  Ev  rtyjt.  Taxi.  p.  58.  Ed.  of  Amfterd,

termarch.


390  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

termarch,  and  retired  {lowly  towards  their  camp,  and  the
horfemen  followed  in  their  ranks :  And,  when  they  came  to
the  intrenchments,  another  fharp  fight  infued,  and  the
horfemen,  in  endeavouring  to  climb  over  the  palifades  in  dif¬
ferent  parts  of  the  camp,  were  repulfed.  The  conful,  feeing
the  Romans  diftreffed,  ordered  the  foot  to  bring  fafcines,
and  fill  up  the  ditches ;  and,  putting  himfelf  at  the  head  of
the  braveft  horfemen,  he  marched  over  the  paffage  they  had
made,  to  the  gate  of  the  camp,  that  was  moft  fortified  ;
and,  having  forced  the  guard,  that  defended  it,  and  cut
afunder  the  portcullis,  he  got  within  the  intrenchments,
and  let  in  his  foot  that  followed.  Here  T ullus  Attius  charged
him  with  the  ftrongeft,  and  braveft  of  the  Volfci;  and,  af¬
ter  he  had  performed  many  gallant  a&ions  (for  he  was  a  va¬
liant  foldier,  but  not  qualified  for  a  general)  at  laft,  fpent
with  labor,  and  the  many  wounds  he  had  received,  he  fell
dead.  After  the  camp  was  taken,  fome  of  the  Volfci  died
fighting  ;  and  others  threw  down  their  arms,  and  implored
the  clemency  of  the  conquerors ;  and  a  few  of  them  faved
themfelves  by  flight,  and  returned  home.  When  the  cou¬
riers  fent  by  the  confuls  arrived  at  Rome,  the  people
were  filled  with  joy,  and,  immediately,  ordered  facrifices  of
thankfgiving  to  be  offered  to  the  gods,  and  decreed  the

doubt.  I  fhall  juft  fay  a  word,  or  tumvjua  tv  toi?  <h^oi<r :  Here,  the  ranks
two,  to  explain  the  other  countermarch  -,  that  is,  one  wing  of

though  it  does  not  properly  relate  to  the  batalion  exchanges  its  ground
the  expreffion,  now,  before  us.  By  with  the  other ;  the  right  wing  be-
the  tZiKiypog  xxlct  £vy»>  the  commander  comes  the  left  *  and  the  left  wing,  the
rci  C4  zv  t oti  ivuvv[Aon  x«9jc7ij<r/,  ^  t oi  right.


honors


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  391

honors  of  a  triumph  to  the  confuls;  but  not  the  fame
to  both  :  For,  as  Sicinus  feemed  to  have  freed  the  common¬
wealth  from  the  greater  fear,  by  deftroying  the  infulting
army  of  the  Volfci,  and  killing  their  general,  fo  they
granted  to  him  the  greater  triumph:  And  he  entered  the
city  in  a  chariot,  drawn  by  horfes  with  golden  bridles,
he  himfelf  being  drefled  in  royal  robes,  as  is  ufual  in  the
greater  triumphs :  He  was  41  preceded  by  the  fpoils,  and
the  prifoners;  and  followed  by  his  victorious  army.  To
Aquilius  they  decreed  the  leffer  triumph,  called,  by  them,
Ovatio .  I  have,  before,  42  fhewn  the  difference  between
this,  and  the  greater  triumph.  And  this  perfon  entered  the
city  on  foot,  with  the  other  ornaments  of  the  proceflion.
Thus  the  year  ended.

LX VII I.  Thefe  confuls  were  fucceeded  by  43  Proculus
Virginius,  and  Spurius  Callius,  then  conful  for  the  third  time,
who  took  the  field  with  their  national  forces,  and  thofe  of
their  allies.  It  fell  to  the  lot  of  Virginius  to  lead  his  army

41'  Aj/iwv  t a  hctfiv^et  xou  which  Le  Jay  is  fo  far  from  evading,

rar.  This  word  uyuv,  as  it  is  in  the  that  he  leaves  the  reader  no  room  to
Vatican  manufcript,  or  as  it  (lands  doubt  of  his  error  :  II  entra  dans  Rome
in  the  editions,  is  applied  to  the  fpoils,  au  milieu  des  depouilles  des  ennemies ,  and
the  prifoners,  and  the  army  ;  and  yet  traifnant  apres  foy  un  grand  nombre  de
it  is  certain  that  the  triumphal  car  captifs .

was  preceded  by  the  fpoils  firft,  and  42*  AtJyKului  y,oi.  See  the  fifth  book,
then  by  the  prifoners,  and  followed  by  chapter  47.

the  army.  The  ignorance  of,  or  in-  43-  ii^okvAo?.  This  conful  is  called
attention  to,  this  particular,  has  milled  Proculus  Virginius  both  by  e  Livy,
the  French  tranflators,  and  particu-  and  thtfaftt  confulares  •,  for  which  rea-
larly  Le  Jay  :  The  other  has  faid,  il  fon,  I  have  inferted  Proculus  in  the
entra  dans  Rome  accompagne  de  ceux  qui  text,  inftead  of  IIoTrA/of,  which  is  the
portoient  les  depouilles  ;  this  rathef  e-  reading  of  all  the  editions,
vades,  than  explains  the  difficulty  ;

.  cb.  11.  C41.  aeainft


392  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

againft  the  Aequi ;  and  to  That  of  Caflius  to  march  againft
the  Hernici,  and  the  Volfci.  The  Aequi,  having  fortified
their  cities,  and  removed  thither  out  of  the  country  every
thing  that  was  moft  valuable,  fuftered  their  lands  to  be  laid
wafte,  and  their  country  houfes  to  be  fet  on  fire :  So  that,
Virginius,  with  great  eafe,  harrafled,  and  lpoiled  as  much  of
their  country  as  he  thought  fit,  fince  no  one  offered  to
defend  it;  and,  then,  returned  to  Rome  with  his  army.
The  Volfci,  and  the  Hernici,  againft  whom  Caflius  marched,
had  refolved  to  fuffer  their  lands  to  be  laid  wafte,  and
all  taken  refuge  in  their  cities.  However,  they  did  not  ad¬
here  to  their  refolution  :  But,  induced  by  their  regret  to  fee
the  defolation  of  a  fertil  country,  which  they  could  not  ex¬
pert  eafily  to  reftore  to  its  former  condition ;  and,  at  the
fame  time,  diftrufting  the  fortifications  they  had  fled  to,
which  were  not  very  ftrong,  they  fent  embafladors  to  the
conful  to  fue  for  peace:  The  Vollci  lent  firft;  and  firft
obtained  their  defires,  by  furnifliing  as  much  money  as  the
conful  ordered,  and  every  thing  elfe  the  army  wanted :  And
thefe  confented  to  become  fubjedt  to  the  Romans,  without
aiming,  any  longer,  at  an  equality.  After  them,  the  Her¬
nici,  finding  themfelves  left  deftitute,  treated  with  the
conful  concerning  peace,  and  friendfhip :  But  Caflius  ac-
cufed  them,  violently,  to  their  embafladors,  and  faid  they
ought,  firft,  to  a£t  like  men  conquered,  and  fubje&s,  and,
then,  treat  of  friendfhip.  The  embafladors  anfwering  that
they  would  do  everything,  that  was  poflible  and  reafonable,

he


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARNASSENSIS.  393

he  ordered  them  to  fupply  his  army 44  with  money,  and
with  provifions  for  a  month  :  And  to  the  intent  they  might
raife  thefe  fupplies  with  the  greater  cafe  on  the  day  ap¬
pointed,  he  granted  them  a  truce.  The  Hernici  perform¬
ing  every  thing  with  expedition  and  alacrity,  and  fending,
again,  embaffadors  to  treat  of  the  peace,  Caffius  commend¬
ed  them,  and  referred  them  to  the  fenate  ;  who,  after  ma¬
ny  deliberations,  came  to  a  refolution  to  receive  this  people
into  their  friendfhip :  That  Caffius  ffiould  confider,  and
fettle,  the  terms  of  the  treaty  :  And  that,  whatever  he  ap¬
proved  of,  they  would  ratify.

LXIX.  The  fenate  having  come  to  thefe  refolutions,
Caffius  returned  to  Rome,  and  demanded  a  45  iecond  tri¬
umph,  as  if  he  had  fubdued  the  greateft  nations,  feizing

*  ■*

\

44’  A gyvg/ov  re,  o  koit’  mg  ggot-  vifions,  the  fame  thing  will  be  repeat-
nulcug  etg  o^uviouTpov  E©OZ  HN  y.v,viav  ed  in  r gofiotg  a.7To($e(>etv  :  So  that,  I
The  commentators  obferve,  would  ftrike  out  the  intervening  fen-
that  the  numeral  word  before  is  tence,  as  an  interpolation,  and  read
omitted  in  the  Greek  text :  But  I  have  cc^yv^ov  re,  v.ai  uyvog  rgo<pag  a7ro<pegtiv.
an  objedtion  againft  the  whole  fen-  Something  like  this  we  had  juft  be-
tence.  If  o^uvioar^og  is  fuppofed  to  fore,  in  relation  to  the  orders  given
fignify  the  ufual  pay  of  the  Roman  by  the  other  conful  to  the  Yolfci, where
foldiers,  which  fignification  the  word  no  mention  is  made  of  the  fum,  any
will  bear,  a  plain  abfurdity  will  fol-  more  than  here,
low  ;  fmce  it  is  very  well  known  that  45-  A evle^ov.  So  we  muft  read  this
the  Roman  foidiers  received  no  pay,  with  the  Vatican  manufcript,  and  not
till  the  year  of  Rome  348,  when  the  fAiyis cv,  as  it  ftands  in  the  editions  :
fenate  ordered  f  ut  ftipendium  miles  de  Becaufe  Caffius  had,  already,  tri-
publico  ac riper et  quum  ante  id  tempus  umphed  for  the  vidtory  he  obtained
de  fuo  quifque  funftus  eo  munere  ejfet.  over  the  Sabines s,  where  he  killed
And,  if  o^uvioar/Aog  is  taken  in  the  10,300  of  them,  and  took  near  4000
more  common  fignification,  for  pro-  prifoners.

fLivy,  B.  iv.  c.  59.  s  See  the  fifth  book,  chap.  49.  ,

E  e  e


VOL.  III.


that


394  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

that  honor  by  favor,  rather  than  receiving  it  as  a  right  ;
fince  he  was  to  be  preceded  by  captives,  and  fpoils,  with
which  a  triumph  is  adorned,  without  having  ftormed  any
towns,  or  gained  a  battle  in  the  field.  This  a&ion  firft
drew  upon  him  the  reputation  of  a  proud  man,  and  the
envy  of  entertaining  more  exalted  thoughts,  than  the  reft
of  his  fellow-citizens.  After  he  had  prevailed  in  obtaining
the  triumph,  he  produced  the  treaty  he  had  made  with  the
Hernici ;  which  was  copied  from  That,  before,  made  with
the  Latines.  This,  greatly,  difgufted  the  moft  ancient,  and
the  moft  dignified  fenators,  who  began  to  fufped  him  ;  be-
caufe  they  thought  it,  highly,  unreafonable  that  the  Hernici,
who  were  ftrangers,  fhould  obtain  the  fame  honor  with  the
Latines,  who  were  their  relations ;  and  that  fuch,  as  had
not  done  them  the  leaft  fervice,  fhould  be  treated  with  the
fame  humanity,  as  thofe,  who  had  given  them  many  in-
ftances  of  their  affedion.  They  were,  alfo,  difpleafed  at
the  haughtinefs  of  the  man,  who,  after  he  had  been  ho¬
noured  by  the  fenate,  had  not  done  the  fame  honor  to
them,  but  produced  a  treaty  fettled  according  to  his  own
humour,  and  not  by  the  authority  of  the  fenate.  And,
indeed,  fuccefs  in  various  undertakings  is  a  dangerous,  and
a  prejudicial  thing  to  a  man :  For  it  is,  often,  the  fource
of  thouglitlefs  pride,  and  the  fecret  author  of  defires  ex¬
ceeding;  the  condition  of  human  nature  :  Which  was  the
cafe  of  Caffius :  For  being  the  only  perfon  at  that  time,
who  had  been  honoured  by  his  country  with  three  conful-
fhips,  and  two  triumphs,  he  now  took  upon  himfelf

greater


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARNAS  SENSIS.  395

greater  ft  ate,  and  entertained  a  defire  of  monarchical
power  :  And,  confidering  that  the  eafieft,  and  fafeft  way,
of  all  others,  for  thofe,  who  aim  at  monarchy,  or  tyranny,
is  to  gain  the  multitude  by  fome  gratifications,  "  and  to  ac-
cuftom  them  to  be  fed  by  the  hand  of  the  perfon,  who
diftributes  the  pofieffions  of  the  public,  this  he  purfued  :
And,  without  communicating  his  defign  to  any  one,  he  de¬
termined  to  divide  among  the  people  certain  lands  of  large
extent,  belonging  to  the  public,  which  lay  neglected,  and
were,  then,  in  the  pofleflion  of  the  richeft  men.  If  Caf-
fius  had  been  content  to  flop  here,  it  is  poflible  that  his  de¬
fign  might  have  fucceeded ;  but,  by  aiming  at  more,  he
raifed  a  violent  fedition ;  the  event  of  which  proved  fatal
to  himfelf:  For  he  thought  proper  to  comprehend  in  the
divifion  of  thefe  lands  not  only  the  Latines,  but  even
the  Hernici,  who  had  been,  juft  before,  admitted  citizens,
in  order  to  ingage  thefe  nations  in  his  intereft.

LXX.  Having  formed  this  plan,  the  day  after  his  tri¬
umph,  he  called  the  people  together  ;  and,  afcending  the
tribunal,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  thofe  who  have  tri¬
umphed,  he,  firft,  gave  an  account  to  them  of  his  a&ions ;
the  fum  of  which  was  as  follows :  That,  in  his  firft
confulfhip,  he  had  fubdued  the  Sabines,  who  claimed  the
fovereignty,  and  compelled  them  to  become  fubjedl  to  the
Romans :  That,  in  the  fecond,  he  had  appeafed  the  fedi¬
tion,  with  which  the  commonwealth  was  then  agitated,
and  brought  back  the  people  to  their  country ;  and  had
ingaged  the  Latines,  who,  though  of  the  fame  extra&ion

E  e  e  2  with


396  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

with  the  Romans,  yet  always  envied  their  fovereignty
and  glory,  to  become  their  friends,  by  communicating  to
them  the  fame  rights  with  the  Roman  citizens ;  fo  that,
they  looked  upon  Rome  no  longer  as  a  rival,  but  as  their
country  :  That,  being  the  third  time  inverted  with  the
fame  magiftracy,  he  had,  not  only,  compelled  the  Volfci,
from  enemies  to  be  their  friends,  but  had,  alfo,  induced  the
Hernici,  a  numerous,  and  warlike  nation,  and,  by  being
rttuated  near  them,  capable  of  doing  them  the  greateft  mif-
chief,  and  the  greateft  fervice,  to  a  voluntary  fubmiftion.
After  he  had  difplayed  thefe  things,  and  many  others  of  the
like  nature,  he  dertred  the  people  to  look  upon  him  as  a
perfon,  who  then  had,  and  always  fhould  have,  a  greater
zeal  for  the  intereft  of  the  commonwealth,  than  any  others
could  pretend  to.  He  concluded  with  faying  that  his  defign
was  to  confer  upon  the  people  fo  many  benefits,  and  of  fuch
a  nature,  as  to  furpafs  all  thofe,  who  wTere  commended
for  their  affedion  to  the  plebeians,  and  concern  for  their
prefer vation.  And  thefe  things,  he  faid,  he  would  foon  ac-
complifh.  He  then  difmiffed  the  aflembly ;  and,  without
the  leaft  delay,  caufed  the  fenate  to  meet  the  day  after,
who  were  already  in  fufpenfe,  and  terrified  with  his  dif-
courfe :  And,  before  he  entred  upon  any  thing  elfe,  he
laid  open  his  intention,  which  he  had  concealed  from  the
multitude,  defiling  the  fenate,  that,  as  the  people  both  by
fupporting  their  liberty,  and  by  enabling  them  to  command
others,  had  done  great  fervice  to  the  commonwealth,  they
would  fhew  a  regard  for  their  intereft,  in  dividing  among

them


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  ICARN  ASSENSIS.  397

them  the  conquered  lands,  which  were,  indeed,  called  public
lands,  but,  in  reality,  were  ufurped  by  the  moft  fhamelefs
among  the  patricians,  contrary  to  all  juftice ;  and  that  the
money  paid  for  the  corn,  fent  them  by  Gelo  king  of  Sicily
as  a  prefent,  which,  though  it  ought  to  have  been  divided
among  all  the  citizens  in  a  gratuitous  manner,  the  poor
had  purchafed,  might  be  repaid  to  the  buyers,  out  of  the

LXXI.  While  he  was  fpeaking,  prefently  a  great  tumult
arofe,  all  the  fenators  fhewing  their  diilike,  and  impatience
of  what  he  propofed.  And,  when  he  had  done,  not  only
his  collegue,  Virginius,  but  the  moft  ancient,  and  the  moft
dignified  fenators,  particularly  Appius  Claudius,  exclaimed
againft  him  with  great  vehemence,  for  defigning  to  raife  a
fedition.  And  thefetwo  continued,  for  a  long  time,  inflamed,
and  uttering  the  fevereft  reproaches  againft  one  another.
The  following  days,  Caflius,  afiembling  the  people  frequently,
gained  their  affections  by  his  popular  harangues,  difplayed
the  advantages,  that  would  flow  from  the  divifion  of  thefe
lands,  and  laid  himfelf  out  in  invectives  againft  his  oppofers.
On  the  other  fide,  Virginius  affembled  the  fenate  every  day,
and  concerted  meafures  with  the  patricians  to  guard  againft
his  defign,  and  to  prevent  its  fuccefs,  by  a  legal  oppofitiom
And  each  of  the  confuls  was  attended  by  a  ftrong  body  of
men,  to  fecure  them  from  being  infulted.  The  poor,  the
mean,  and  fuch  as  were  prepared  for  any  daring  enterprife,
were  under  the  command  of  Caflius :  And  thofe  of  the
greateft  birth,  and  character  adhered  to  Virginius,  Forfome

time.


39S  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

time,  the  vvorft  fide  carried  it  in  the  afTemblies  of  the  people,
by  a  great  majority.  After  that,  they  became  equal,  the
tribunes  joining  the  beft  fide;  pofllbly,  becaufe  they  did
not  think  it  advantageous  for  the  commonwealth  that  the
people  fhould  be  corrupted  by  bribes,  and  a  diftribution  of
the  public  lands,  and  thence  grow  idle,  and  profligate:
Poflibly  alfo,  through  envy,  becaufe  they  themfelves,  who
were  the  leaders  of  the  people,  had  not  been  the  authors  of
this  liberality,  but  another  perfon.  However,  there  is  no
reafon  to  conclude  that  they  were  influenced  by  any  other
motive,  than  the  apprehenfion  of  this  encreafe  of  power  in
Caflius,  which  was  greater  than  the  intereft  of  the  common¬
wealth  would  admit.  Thefe  now  oppofed,  therefore,  in
every  aflembly  of  the  people,  the  laws,  which  Caflius  was
introducing,  with  all  their  power :  They  reprefen  ted  to  them
that  it  was  not  juft  that  thofe  lands,  which  they  had  ac¬
quired  by  many  wars,  fhould  be  diftributed  among  any  but
the  Romans,  and  that,  not  only,  the  Latines,  who  had  not
been  prefen t  in  thofe  wars,  but  the  Hernici  alfo,  who  had,
but  lately,  entered  into  their  friendfhip,  and  who,  being
brought  into  it  by  war,  ought  to  be  fatisfied  if  they  were
not  deprived  of  their  own  territories,  fhould  have  an  equal
fhare  of  thofe  conquered  lands  with  the  Romans  themfelves.
The  people,  hearing  this,  fometimes  aflented  to  the  repre-
fentations  of  the  tribunes,  when  they  confidered  that  the
portion  of  the  public  lands,  that  would  fall  to  the  fhare
of  each,  would  be  fmall  and  inconfiderable,  if  both  the
Hernici,  and  the  Latines  were  to  partake  with  them  in  this  .

diftri-


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  E  NS  I  S.  399

diftribution  :  And,  at  others,  Caffius,  by  his  popular  ha¬
rangues,  made  them  change  their  opinion,  by  telling  them
that  the  tribunes  betrayed  them  to  the  patricians,  and
covered  their  oppofition  with  this  fpecious  pretence,  that
an  equal  {hare  of  thefe  lands  was  to  be  given  to  the  Hernici,
and  the  Latines,  whom  he  himfelf  had  comprehended  in  his
law,  with  a  view  of  adding  ftrength  to  the  poor,  and  of
defeating  any  attempt,  that  might,  hereafter,  be  made  to
difpoffefs  them  of  the  lands  that  were  granted  to  them;  fince
he  looked  upon  it  to  be  better  and  fafer  for  the  people  to
continue  in  the  undifturbed  pofleffion  of  a  fmall  fhare,  than,
by  expedting  a  greater,  to  be  difappointed  of  every  thing.

LXXII.  While  Caffius,  by  thefe  infinuations,  wrought
frequent  changes  in  the  minds  of  the  multitude,  Caius  Ra~
buleius,  one  of  the  tribunes,  a  man  of  no  mean  abilities,
prefen  ted  himfelf  before  the  people,  and  promifed  that  he
would,  foon,  put  an  end  to  this  conteft  between  the  confuls,
and  fhew  the  people  their  true  intereft.  This  being  followed
with  great  acclamations,  and,  after  that,  with  filence,  hefaid  ;
c<  Are  not  thefe,  Caffius,  and  Virginius,  the  chief  points  in
“  difpute  concerning  this  law  ;  the  firft,  whether  it  is  pro-
“  per  to  diffribute  the  public  lands  to  every  Roman  ;  and
“  the  other,  whether  the  Latines,  and  the  Hernici,  ought  to
“  have  a  fhare  of  them  ?  And  they  acknowledging  it  to  be
fo,  he  went  on  :  “  This  being  allowed,  you,  Caffius,  would
u  have  the  people  vote  for  both  thefe;  and  you,  Virginius,
“  let  us  know,  in  the  name  of  the  gods,  whether  you  oppofe
a  that  part  of  the  law  propofed  by  Caffius,  which  relates  to

the


Book  VIII.


400.  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

££  the  allies,  as  thinking  that  the  Hernici,  and  the  Latines
“  ought  not  to  have  an  equal  ihare  with  us ;  or  do  you
t£  oppofe  the  other  alfo,  and  infill  that  the  public  lands
££  fhould  not  be  divided  even  among  us  ?  Anfwer  to  thefe
C£  queftions  without  concealing  any  thing.”  And  Virginius
faying  that  he  was  againft  giving  an  equal  fhare  of  thefe
lands  to  the  Hernici,  and  the  Latines,  but  confented  to  their
being  diftributed  among  the  Roman  citizens,  if  all  the
people  were  of  that  opinion ;  the  tribune,  turning  to  the
affembly,  faid ;  “  Since,  therefore,  one  part  of  the  queftion  is
££  approved  of  by  both  the  confuls,  and  the  other  oppofedby
£C  one  of  them ;  and,  as  both  are  equal  in  dignity,  and  neither
C£  can  force  the  other  to  come  into  his  opinion,  let  us,  now,
££  receive  That,  which  both  agree  to  give  us,  and  put  off  the
C£  other,  concerning  which  they  differ.”  The  people  fignify-
ing,  by  their  acclamations,  that  his  advice  was  the  bell  that
could  be  given,  and  defiring  him  to  ftrike  out  of  the  law  that
part,  which  occafioned  the  conteft,  Cafilus  was  at  a  lofs  what
to  do ;  and,  being  unwilling  to  retradl  his  opinion,  and  unable
to  maintain  it,  while  the  tribunes  oppofed  him,  he  difmiffed
the  affembly  for  that  time.  The  following  days,  he  pretended
illnefs,  and  went  no  more  to  the  forum  ;  but,  continuing  at
home,  formed  a  defign  to  get  the  law  paffed  by  force,  and
violence ;  and  fent  for  as  many  of  the  Latines,  and  Hernici,
as  he  could,  to  come,  and  vote  for  it.  Thefe  affembled  in
great  numbers;  and,  prefently,  the  town  was  full  of  ftrangers.
Virginius  being  informed  of  thefe  things,  ordered  proclama¬
tion  to  be  made  in  the  llreets,  that  all,  who  were  not  inha¬
bitants,


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  I S.  401
bitan ts,  fhould  forthwith  depart  the  city.  On  the  other
fide,  Caflius  ordered  the  contrary  to  be  proclaimed,  that  all,
who  were  inti  tied  to  the  rights  of  citizens,  fhould  ftay,  till
the  law  was  palled.

LXXIII.  There  being  no  end  of  thefe  contefts,  the  pa¬
tricians,  fearing  left,  when  the  law  came  to  be  propofed,  the
people  fhould  take  arms,  and  have  recourfe  to  violence,  and
to  fuch  other  forcible  means,  as  are  frequently  ufed  in
divided  aflemblies,  met  in  the  fenate  to  conftder  of  fuch
methods,  as  fhould,  at  once,  put  a  flop  to  all  thefe  evils.
Appius  therefore,  being,  firft,  alked  his  opinion,  oppofed  this
diftribution  of  the  lands  among  the  people,  telling  them  that
an  idle  multitude,  accuftomed  to  devour  the  public  flock,
would  prove  troublefome,  and  ufelefs  cohabitants,  and  never
fuller  any  thing  belonging  to  the  public,  whether  lands,  or
money,  to  continue  in  the  poffefiion  of  the  public  :  And
that  it  would  be  a  fhameful  thing,  if  the  fenate,  who  accufed
Caflius  of  introducing  a  wicked,  and  difadvantageous  law,
and  of  corrupting  the  people,  fhould  themfelves,  by  common
confent,  eftablifh  that  law,  as  juft  and  advantageous :  He
deflred  them,  alfo,  to  conftder  that  the  poor,  if  thefe  lands
were  divided  among  them,  would  not,  even,  think  themfelves
obliged  to  thofe,  who  gave  their  confent,  and  fandtion  to
this  law,  but  to  Caflius,  who,  firft,  propofed  it,  and  feemed
to  have  compelled  the  fenate  to  ratify  it  againft  their  will.
Having  faid  this,  and  many  other  things  to  the  fame
purpofe,  he  ended  with  advifing  them  to  make  choice  of
fome  of  the  moft  dignified  fenators  to  fix  the  bounds  of
Vot.HI.  Fff  the


402  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

the  public  land  upon  the  fpot ;  and,  if  they  found  that
any  private  perfons,  by  fraud,  or  force,  either  fed,  or  tilled,
any  part  of  it,  to  take  cognizance  of  this  abufe,  and  re-
ftore  the  land  to  the  public:  And,  further,  that  the  land,
fo  bounded  by  them,  fhould  be  divided  into  a  certain
number  of  fhares,  and  diftinguifhed  by  handfome  pillars ;
and  that  one  part  of  this  land  fhould  be  fold,  particularly
that  part,  concerning  which  there  was  any  conteft  with
private  perfons ;  fo  that,  the  purchafers  might  plead  the
determination  of  thefe  commiflioners  againft  any,  who
fhould  claim  thefe  lands ;  and  the  other  part  be  let  for  five
years:  And  that  the  money,  arifing  from  thefe  rents,  be
applied  to  pay  the  forces,  and  to  the  neceflary  expences  of
wars :  “  For,  fays  he,  as  things  now  (land,  the  envy  of  the
“  poor  againft  the  rich,  who  have  ufurped,  and  ftill  con-
“  tinue  in  the  pofieftion  of,  the  public  lands,  is  welt
<c  grounded;  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  they  defire
€t  thofe  lands  fhould  be  divided  among  all  the  citizens,
<£  rather  than  ufurped  by  a  few,  and  thofe  the  moft  fhamelefs
tc  of  all  men  :  Whereas,  if  they  fee  the  perfons,  who  now
cc  enjoy  them,  quit  pofTeflion,  and  the  public  lands,  really
cc  become  public  lands,  they  will  ceafe  to  envy  us,  and  re-
“  linquifh  their  fondnefs  for  this  general  diftribution  of  them,
cc  when  they  know  that  thefe  lands  in  the  hands  of  the
“  public  will  be  of  greater  advantage  to  them,  than  the
<c  fmall  portion,  that  will  be  allotted  to  each.  Let  us
<c  fhew  them,  therefore,  how  much  their  intereft  is  here
“  concerned;  and  that,  if  each  of  the  poor  receives  for

“his


Book  VIII.  DIONYS  IUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  403
“  his  fhare  a  fmall  piece  of  land,  and  happens  to  have
<c  troublefome  neighbours,  he  neither  will  be  able  to  culti-
<c  vate  it  himfelf  by  reafon  of  his  poverty,  neither  will  he
“  find  any  man  to  hire  it  of  him,  but  a  neighbour :  Whereas,
“  if  large  farms,  requiring  various,  and  confiderable  culture,
“  are  let  by  the  public,  they  will  bring  in  great  revenues
“  to  the  commonwealth  :  And  that  it  is  better  for  them,
“  when  they  go  to  the  field,  to  receive  both  provifions,  and
“  their  pay  from  the  treafury,  than,  out  of  their  private
“  fortunes,  to  pay  in  their  contributions  to  the  46  treafury,
“  when  prefled,  as  it  often  happens,  with  want,  which  will
“  ft  ill  be  encreafed  by  providing  this  money.”

LXXIV.  After  Appius  had  delivered  this  opinion,  and
gained  great  applaufe  by  it,  Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus
was  called  upon  next,  and  faid ;  <c  In  the  firft  place,  I  muffc
“  commend  Appius,  as  a  man  very  capable  of  feeing  future
“  events  at  a  great  diftance;  one,  who  always  gives  the
“  moft  honourable,  and  the  moft  ufeful  advice  ;  firm,  and
<c  unmoved  in  his  refolutions ;  and  neither  yielding  to  fear,
“  nor  fwayed  by  favor :  For  I  ever  praife,  and  admire  him,
“  both  for  his  prudence,  and  the  courage  he  fhews  in  the
“  midft  of  dangers:  Neither  fhall  I  myfelf  offer  any  other
“  advice  ;  but  only  add  a  few  things,  which  Appius  feems
“  to  have  omitted :  Nor  am  I  of  opinion  that  the  Hernici,  or
“  the  Latines,  to  whom  we,  lately,  granted  the  rights  of

t otfM&cv.  Sylburgius  has  ob-  this  fentence,  which,  as  it  now  ftands,
ferved  that  is,  here,  wanting,  does  not  run  with  the  fmoothnefs,  and

whic  his  very  true  :  But  I  fufped  that  perfpecuity,  peculiar  to  our  author,
lomething  elfe  is  wanting  to  complete

F  f  f  2


“  Roman


404  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

“  Roman  citizens,  ought  to  have  a  fhare  of  our  lands :
“  For  we  have  not  acquired  thefe,  fince  they  acceded  to
“  our  friendfhip ;  but  long  before,  when,  by  our  own
££  dangers,  without  the  affiftance  of  any  others,  we  gained
t£  them  from  our  enemies.  And  let  us  give  them  this
<£  anfwer,  that  the  lands,  which  each  of  us  were  before,
“  refpeCtively,  poffeffed  of,  when  we  entered  into  the  treaty
“  of  friendfhip,  ought  to  remain  in  property,  and  unalienable
££  to  each :  And  that  of  Thofe  we  (hall  conquer  with  joint
££  forces,  fince  we  made  the  treaty,  each  (hall  have  his  fhare.
££  This  method  will  give  neither  to  our  allies  any  juft  caufe
<£  of  complaining  that  they  are  injured,  nor  to  the  people  any
££  apprehenfion  of  appearing  to  prefer  their  intereft  to  their
“  reputation.  As  to  the  appointment  of  perfons  to  fix  the
££  bounds  of  the  public  lands,  I,  intirely,  agree  with  Appius :
££  For  this  will  fet  us  at  liberty  with  regard  to  the  plebeians ;
££  fince  they  are,  now,  difpleafed  on  both  thefe  accounts,
££  becaufe  they  themfelves  reap  no  benefit  from  the  public
££  lands,  and  becaufe  fome  of  us  enjoy  them,  contrary  to
“  juftice  :  Whereas,  if  they  fee  thefe  lands  reftored  to  the
££  public,  and  the  produce  thereof  applied  to  the  neceflary
<£  ufes  of  the  commonwealth,  they  will  look  upon  it  to  make
££  no  difference  to  them,  whether  they  enjoy  the  land,  or
££  the  produce  of  it :  For  I  need  not  inform  you  that  fome
££  of  the  poor  are  more  delighted  with  the  Ioffes  of  others,
tc  than  with  their  own  advantages.  However,  I  do  not
<c  think  it  fufficient  to  infer t  thefe  two  things  in  the  decree ;
i£  but  we  ought,  in  my  opinion,  to  gain  their  affections,  and

££  relieve


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  405

“  relieve  them  by  fome  other  favor  alfo,  which  I  fhall,  pre-
££  fently,  acquaint  you  with,  after  I  have,  fii-ft,  laid  before
££  you  the  reafon,  or  rather  the  neceffity,  that  fhould  induce
££  us  to  come  into  this  meafure.

LXXV.  “  You  remember,  without  doubt,  what  the
££  tribune  faid  in  the  laid  aftembly  of  the  people,  when  he
“  afked  Virginius,  one  of  the  confuls,  what  were  his  thoughts
“  concerning  the  diviiian  of  the  lands,  whether  he  confented
u  to  their  being  divided  among  the  Roman  citizens,  but
“not  among  the  allies;  or  do  you  oppofe,  fays  he,  the
£  £  diftribution  of  our  own  public  lands,  even,  among  ourfelves  ?
££  And  the  other  anfwered,  that  he  did  not  oppofe  this
“  diftribution,  fo  far  as  it  related  to  the  Romans,  if  all  were
££  of  that  opinion.  This  conceflion,  not  only,  brought  over
££  the  tribunes  to  our  intereft,  but,  changed  the  difpofition
££  of  the  people  in  our  favor.  What  therefore  fhould  induce
££  us  to  revoke,  now,  what  we,  then,  confented  to?  Or
££  what  advantage  will  it  be  to  us  to  eftablifti  generous,  and
££  noble  inftitutions,  and  fuch  as  are  worthy  of  our  empire,
££  if  we  cannot  prevail  with  the  people  to  obferve  them  ?
<£  But  we  fhall  not  prevail  with  them;  and  this  none  of  you
££  are  ignorant  of :  And  we  fhall  find  thole,  who  are  difap-
££  pointed  in  their  hopes,  and  deceived  by  the  nonperformance
££  of  our  promifes,  more  uneafy  to  us,  than  thofe,  who  do  not
“  obtain  what  they  defire.  Some  other  magiftrate  will  ftart
££  up,  and,  to  flatter  the  people,  will,  again,  bring  in  thefelaws,
££  and,  then,  not  one  of  the  tribunes  will  afliftus.  Hear,  there-
£C  fore,  what  advice  I  give  you,  and  what  addition  I  make

££  to


4o6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

ct  to  the  opinion  of  Appius ;  but  do  ribt  rife  up,  or  create
<£  any  difturbance,  before  you  have  heard  all  I  have  to  fay.

“  After  you  have  appointed  commiflioners,  whether  ten,  or
“  whatever  number,  to  infpedf  the  land,  and  fix  the  bounds
“  of  it,  impower  them  to  determine  which,  and  how  great
c<  a  part  of  it,  ought  to  belong  to  the  public,  and,  by  being
sc  let  for  five  years,  to  encreafe  the  revenues  of  the  treafury  ;
u  and,  on  the  other  fide,  how  great  a  part  of  it,  and  which,
u  ought  to  be  divided  among  the  plebeians.  And  my  advice
is,  that,  whatever  land  they  fhall  appoint  to  be  divided,
“  you  order  it  to  be  divided  accordingly,  after  you  have
“  determined  whether  it  fhall  be  diftributed  among  all  the
c<  citizens,  or  among  thofe,  who  have  no  land,  or  who  have
cc  the  fmalleft  fortunes,  or  in  what  manner  foever  you  fhall
cc  think  proper :  And,  as  to  the  appointment  of  the  perfons
“  to  fix  the  bounds  of  the  land;  and  the  order  you  fhall
u  publifh  concerning  the  divifion  of  it,  and  every  thing  elfe
<c  that  is  necefiary,  fince  the  prefent  confulshave  but  a  fhort
“  time  to  continue  in  the  magiftracy,  that  their  fuccefiors
u  take  fuch  order  therein,  as  to  them  fhall  feem  beft:  For
<c  things  of  this  nature  require  no  fhort  time  to  fettle;
cc  neither  can  it  be  expected  that  the  prefent  confuls,  who
u  are  now  divided,  will  be  able  to  difcover  what  is  advan-
cc  tageous  with  greater  penetration,  than  their  fuccefiors,  if,
cc  as  we  hope,  they  fhall  agree:  For  delay  is,  upon  many
“  occafions,  a  ufeful  thing,  and,  of  all  others,  the  leait  dan-
<c  gerous ;  and  time,  often,  brings  about  great  changes  in
“  a  fingle  day :  Befides,  a  good  underftanding  between

“  thofe,


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  407

“  thofe,  who  preftde  in  the  ftate,  produces  the  greateft  ad-
c:  vantages.  Thus  have  I  delivered  my  opinion:  If  anyone
ic  has  any  thing  better  to  propofe,  let  him  fpeak.”

LXXVI.  When  he  had  ended,  all  prefent  applauded  him;
and  not  one  of  the  fenators,  who  were  afked  their  opinion
after  him,  gave  any  other  advice.  Upon  which,  the  decree
of  the  fenate  was  drawn  up  to  this  effetft :  That  ten  of  the
moft  ancient  confular  fenators  be  appointed  to  determine
the  boundaries  of  the  public  land;  and  to  declare  how  much
of  it  ought  to  be  let,  and*  how  much  to  be  divided  among  the
people  :  That  thofe,  to  whom  the  rights  of  citizens  v/ere
granted,  and  their  allies,  have  each  their  fhare,  according  to
the  treaties,  of  all  fuch  lands,  as  they  fhall,  afterwards,  con¬
quer  with  joint  forces :  And  that  the  fucceeding  confuls  take
care  that  the  election  of  the  decemvirs,  the  divifion  of  the
lands,  and  every  thing  elfe,  that  is  neceflary,  be  performed.
When  this  decree  was  laid  before  the  people,  it,  not  only,
put  a  flop  to  the  popular  harangues  of  Caffius,  but,  alfo,
prevented  the  growing  fedition  of  the  poor  from  making
any  further  progrefs.

LXXVII.  The  following  year,  when  the  feventy  fourth
Olympiad  was  drawing  near,  at  which  Aftyllus  ofSyracufe  won
the  prize  of  the  ftadium,  Leoftratus  being  archon  at  Athens,
and  Quintus  Fabius,  and  Servius  Cornelius  confuls  at  Rome,
two  patricians,  young  indeed  with  refpe<ft  to  their  age,  but
the  moft  diftinguifhed  of  their  body  on  account  of  the
dignity  of  their  anceftors,  men  of  great  power  founded  both
on  the  number  of  their  friends,  and  the  greatnefs  of  their

fortunes,


4oB  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book VIII.

fortunes,  and,  for  young  men,  inferior  to  none  of  mature  age
for  their  abilities  in  civil  affairs,  Caefo  Fabius,  brother  of
the  then'  conful,  and  Lucius  Valerius  Poplicola,  47  nephew
to  the  perfon,  who  expelled  the  kings,  being  quaeftors
at  the  fame  time,  and  having,  by  virtue  of  that  charge,  a
power  of  aflembling  the  people,  accufed  before  them  Spurius
Caffius,  the  conful  of  the  former  year,  who  had  dared  to
bring  in  the  Agrarian  laws,  for  aiming  at  tyranny :  And,
appointing  a  day,  cited  him  to  make  his  defence  before  the
people.  There  being  a  great  concourfeupon  the  day  appointed,
the  quaeftors  aflembled  them  ;  and,  entering  into  a  detail  of
all  his  actions  in  public  life,  {hewed  them  to  flow  from  no
good  defign :  Firft,  that,  when  he  was  conful,  he  had,  not
only,  granted  to  the  Latines,  the  privilege  of  Roman  citizens,
which  they  defired,.  and  would  have  been  contented  with,
and  have  thought  it  a  great  happinefs  even  to  obtain,  but,  alfo,
ordered  that  they  fhould  have  the  third  part  of  the  fpoils
taken  in  war,  when  carried  on  with  joint  forces :  Then,  with
regard  to  the  Hernici,  v/ho,  being  fubdued  by  war,  ought
to  have  been  fatisfied  in  not  being  punifhed  with  the  lofs  of
fome  part  even  of  their  own  country,  he  had  made  them
friends  inftead  of  fubjedts,  and  citizens  inftead  of  tributaries ;
and  ordered  they  fhould  receive  another  third  part  of  the
land,  and  the  booty,  that  fhould,  ever  after,  be  acquired :
So  that,  the  fpoils  being  divided  into  three  fhares,  the  fubjedts
of  the  Romans,  and  ftrangers  were  to  receive  two  of  them,

47*  tv  Kotla\vffotvlos  7%s  See  the  firft  annotation  on  the  fe-

venth  book.

and


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNAS  SENS  I S.  409

and  the  natives,  and  their  mailers  only  one.  They  made
it  appear  that,  from  hence,  one  of  thefe  moft  abfurd  things
would  befall  them,  if  ever  they  fhould  think  fit  to  honour
any  other  nations,  byreafon  of  their  many  great  fervices,  with
the  fame  grants,  with  which  they  had  honoured,  not  only,
the  Latines,  but  the  Hernici  alfo,  who  had  never  done
them  the  lead  fervice  :  For  there  being  but  one  third  left
for  them,  they  would  either  have  no  part  to  beftow  upon
their  benefactors,  or,  if  they  granted  them  the  fame  favour,  .
they  would  referve  nothing  for  themfelves.

LXXVIII.  They  added  that  Caftius,  in  propofing  to
divide  the  public  lands,  without  the  previous  vote  of  the
fenate,  or  the  confent  of  his  collegue,  fhewed  that  his  defign
was  to  get  the  law  paffed  by  force,  which  law  was,  not  on
this  account  alone,  unprofitable,  and  unjuft,  That,  when
the  previous  vote  of  the  fenate  was  neceftary,  and,  that
being  obtained,  it  ought  to  have  been  a  common  favor  of
all  the  magiftrates,  he  had  made  it  the  favor  of  one  man  ;
but  alfo  on  this  account,  which  is  a  confideration,  of  all
others,  the  moft  afflicting,  that  this,  which  was  called  a
grant  of  the  public  lands  to  all  the  citizens,  was,  in  reality,
a  deprivation ;  fince  the  Romans,  who  had  acquired  thefe
lands,  were  to  receive  but  one  third  of  them,  and  the  Her¬
nici,  and  the  Latines,  who  had  nothing  to  do  with  them,
the  other  two.  They  charged  him,  further,  that  he  had  paid
no  deference,  even,  to  the  tribunes,  when  they  oppofed  him,
and  defired  him  to  ftrike  out  that  part  of  the  law,  which
gave  an  equal  fhare  of  thefe  lands  to  ftrangers ;  but  con-
Vol.  III.  '  G  g  g  tinued


4io  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

tinned  to  a<ft  contrary  to  the  fenfe  of  the  tribunes,  of  his
colle<me,  of  the  fenate,  and  of  all,  whofe  counfels  were
ever  of  the  greateft  advantage  to  the  commonwealth.
After  they  had  gone  through  thefe  heads  of  their  charge,
and  called  upon  all  the  citizens  to  atteft  the  truth  of  them,
they,  then,  proceeded  to  the  fecret  proofs  oi  his  having
aimed  at  tyranny ;  that  the  Latines,  and  the  Hernici  had
jointly  fupplied  him  with  money,  and  provided  themfelves
with  arms ;  and  that  the  moft  daring  young  men  of
thefe  nations,  perpetually,  reforted  to  him,  holding  private
councils,  and  a&dng  for  his  fervice  in  many  other  inftances :
And,  to  prove  the  truth  of  thefe  allegations,  they  produced
many  witnefles,  both  Roman  citizens,  and  others  belonging
to  the  nations  in  alliance  with  them,  perfons  neither  mean,
nor  obfcure.  To  thefe  the  people  gave  credit ;  and,  with¬
out  either  fullering  themfelves  to  be  moved  with  the  fpeech
of  Caffius,  which  he  made  after  great  premeditation,  or
with  compaffion,  though  the  appearance  of  his  three  fons,
as  well  as  the  joint  lamentations  of  his  other  relations,  and
friends,  gave  him  a  great  opportunity  of  exciting  their
mercy,  or  paying  any  regard  to  his  military  actions,  by  which
he  had  railed  himfelf  to  the  greateft  honor,  they  condemned
him :  And  they  were  fo  exafperated  at  the  name  of  tyranny,
that  they  could  not  moderate  their  refentment  even  in  the
degree  of  his  punifhment,  but  fentenced  him  to  death :  For
they  were  afraid  left,  if  they  had  banifhed  him,  as  he  was  the
ableft  general  of  his  time,  he  might  have  followed  the  ex¬
ample  of  Marcius  ;  and,  by  calumniating  his  country,  and

forming


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  AS  S  E  NS  IS.  411

forming  a  conjunction  among  their  enemies,  have  brought
an  irreconcileable  war  upon  them.  This  being  the  event  of
his  trial,  the  quaeftors  led  the  man  to  the  top  of  the  precipice
that  commands  the  forum  ;  and,  in  the  prefence  of  all  the
citizens, 48  threw  him  down  from  the  rock  :  For  this  was


48,  Epp'(v|y«v  jca7<34  We  are

now  come  to  the  death  of  Caffius,  the
author  of  the  Agrarian  law,  in  which
he  failed  through  his  own  want  of
conduit,  and  the  fuperior  fid  11  of  the
patricians,  and  was  involved  in  its
ruin  :  However,  this  law  had,  after¬
wards,  better  fuccels,  when  it  fell  into
abler  hands  •,  and,  though  the  patri¬
cians  had  not  the  power  to  hinder  the
enabling  of  this  law,  they  had  the  art
to  obftruct  the  execution  of  it.  The
pernicious  defign  of  Caffius  in  aiming
at  tyranny  has  call  an  infamy  on  the
law  itfelf,  and  made  it  to  be  looked
upon  as  a  wicked  meafure,  becaufe  it
was  the  inftrument  to  a  wicked  inten¬
tion  :  By  this  means,  it  has  happened
that  the  Agrarian  law,  though  juft  in
itfelf,  and  reafonable  in  its  circum-
ftances,  has  fuffered  through  the  guilt
of  its  author,  and  been  loaded  with  an
infamy  not  its  own.  In  order,  there¬
fore,  to  be  convinced  of  the  juftice,
and  reafonablenefs  of  this  law,  we  muft
confider  it  unrelatively  to  the  defigns
of  its  author,  and  inquire  whether  it
was  agreeable,  or  repugnant  to  the
conftitution  of  the  Romans-,  whether
it  was  an  innovation  in,  or  a  part  of,
that  conftitution  whether  the  people
had  not  a  right  to  the  effeit  of  this
law,  before  the  law  itfelf  was  propofed;
*nd  whether  there  could  be  any  reafon


for  oppofing  it,  but  the  long  prefcrip-
tion  to  the  conquered  lands,  begun,
and  maintained  by  the  patricians,  com
trary  to  juftice,  and  to  the  very  ele¬
ments  of  their  conftitution.  We  fhall
be  affifted  in  this  inquiry  by  refieiting
on  what  h  our  author  has,  already,  faid
concerning  the  original  dillribution  of
lands  made  by  Romulus  in  the  infancy
of  their  government :  There  we  find
that  Romulus,  after  he  had  divided
the  whole  body  of  the  people  into
thirty  curiae,  divided,  alfo,  the  land
into  thirty  equal  parts,  one  of  which
he  allotted  to  every  curia,  referving
as  much  as  was  fuffieient  for  religious
ufes,  and  fome  part  of  it  for  the  public.
This  divifion,  our  author  fays,  both
of  men  and  land,  comprehended  the
greateft  equality  :  This  equality  was
fettled  by  their  conftitution  ;  and,  will
any  one  fay  that  the  ufurpation  of  the
lands,  which  the  Romans,  afterwards,
conquered,  by  the  patricians  without
dividing  any  part  of  them  among  the
conquerors,  referving  any  for  religious
ufes,  or  appropriating  any  part  to  the
public,  was  not  contrary  to  that  equa¬
lity,  and  to  the  parent  of  that  equality,
their  conftitution  ?  And  that  it  v/as  fo,
is,  we  fee,  owned  even  by  i\ppius,  as
well  as  by  Sempronius.  The  purport
of  the  Jaw7',  propofed  by  Caffius,  was
to  reftore  both  by  wrefting  thefe  con¬


i’  B.  ii.  c.  7.

G  g  g  2


the


412  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

the  eftabliilied  punifhment,  at  that  time  among  the  Ro¬
mans,  for  thofe,  who  were  condemned  to  die.

LXXIX.  This  is  themoft  probable  account  of  any,  that
have  been  delivered  down  to  pofterity,  concerning  this  man  :
However,  1  think  myfelf  obliged  not  to  omit  a  lefs  probable
one,  fince  this,  alfo,  is  believed  by  many,  and  recorded  in
hiftories  of  good  authority.  It  is  faid,  therefore,  by  fome
that,  while  the  meafures  he  was  purfuing  to  make  himfelf
tyrant,  were  as  yet  concealed  from  all  the  wTorld,  the  father  of
Caffius  was  the  firft,  who  fufpe&ed  him  ;  and,  after  making
the  flridteft  inquiry  into  the  matter,  he  went  to  the  fenate ;
then,  ordering  his  fon  to  appear,  he  became  both  the  in¬
former,  and  the  accufer ;  and  the  fenate  having,  alfo,  con¬


quered  lands  from  the  patricians,  and
dividing  them  among  the  people,
with  whofe  blood  they  had  been  pur-
chafed.  This  is  the  true  date  of  the
queftion :  For,  neither  the  Caffian
law,  which  was  rejected  ;  the  Licinian
law,  which  paffed  1 19  years  after  that
time  •,  nor  the  Sempronian  law,  for
propofing  which  the  author  of  it  was
murdered  by  the  patricians  353  years
after  the  fir  Pc  attempt  made  by  Caflius,
had  any  relation  to  private  poffeffions,
but  only  to  Thofe  which  belonged  to
the  public.  The  only  difference  be¬
tween  the  firft  lav/,  and  the  two  laft,
was  this  ;  by  the  firft,  it  was  propofed
to  divide  all  the  public  lands  among
the  people  ;  and  by  the  two  laft,  five
hundred  acres  of  thofe  lands,  and  no
more  we're  allowed  to  the  ufurpers  of
them  *,  1  nc  qiiis  ex  publico  agro  plus

‘Liv.  Epitora.  B.  lviii.  kC,  3.


quam  quingenta  jugera  pojjideret.  That
thefe  laws  related  folely  to  the  poffef-
fions  of  the  public  will  appear  mani-
feftly,  from  the  whole  tenor  of  Cicero’s
fpeech  againft  Rullus,  particularly
from  thefe  words,  k  licebit  enim ,  quod
•uidebitur ,  publicum  judicare j  qtiodjudi-
carint ,  vender e.  This  will  further  ap¬
pear  from  the  Agrarian  law  paffed  by
the  intereft,  and  violence  of  1  Julius
Caefar,  when  he,  and  Bibulus  were
conluls,  in  the  year  of  Rome  695  :
By  which,  two  large  traits  of  land
lying  in  Campania,  and  both  belong¬
ing  to  the  public,  were  divided  among
20,000  Roman  citizens  :  Campum  Stel-
latem  majoribus  confecratum,  agrum-
que  Campanum  ad  fubfidia  reipublicae
veitigalem  relict  urn  divifit  extra  for  tern,
ad  xx  millibus  civium ,  qttibus  term
plurejvs  liberi  ejfent.

1  Suet  life  of  Jul,  Caef.  c.  20.


dcmned


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALI CA RN  A  S  S  E N S I  S.  413
demned  him,  he  carried  him  to  his  own  houfe,  and  put  him
to  death.  The  fevere,  and  inexorable  refentment  of  fathers
againfl:  their  offending  ions,  particularly  in  the  Romans  at
that  time,  will  not  fuffer  11s  to  rejedl,  even,  this  account ;  ftnce,
before  this  tranfadlion,  Brutus,  who  expelled  the  kings,  con¬
demned  both  his  fons  to  die  the  death  of  malefactors,  and
they  loft  their  heads,  becaufe  they  appeared  to  have  been  ac¬
complices  in  the  confpiracy  for  reftoring  the  kings :  And,
after  that,  Manlius,  while  he  commanded  in  the 49  Gallic  war,
honoured,  indeed,  his  fon  with  the  crowns,  that  were  due  to  his
fuperior  valor  ;  yet  accufed  him  of  difobedience  for  not  flaying
in  the  fort,  in  which  he  was  pofted,  but  for  leaving  it,  con¬
trary  to  the  command  of  his  general,  in  order  to  ingage  the
enemy ;  and  inflidted  on  him  the  punifhment  eftablifhed
againfl:  foldiers  who  quit  their  poft,  by  putting  him  to  death.
And  many  other  fathers,  fome  for  greater,  and  others  for
lefler  faults,  have  (hewn  neither  mercy,  nor  compaftion  to
their  fons :  For  this  reafon,  I  would  not,  as  I  faid,  rejedl  this
account,  as  improbable.  But  the  following  arguments,
which  are  of  no  fmall  weight,  have  a  contrary  influence,
and  lead  me  to  the  other  opinion  :  The  houfe  of  Caftius,
after  his  death,  was  demolifhed ;  and,  to  this  day,  the  place
where  it  flood  remains  void,  except  that  part  of  it,  on

49*  Tw  raXctlmcp  <xoAs[au>.  m  Livy,  Cato  fay  in  his  fpeech  to  the  fenate,
who  gives  a  very  particular  account  when  the  fate  of  Catiline’s  accomplices
of  this  tranfa&ion,  fays,  it  happened  was  in  debate:  Apud  majores  nofir  os  -
in  the  war  with  the  Latines.  On  the  Aulas  (Titus)  Manlius  Torquatus  be! fa.
other  fide,  Salluft,  whom  it  is  very  Callico  filium  fuum ,  quod  is  contra  im~
pofiible  our  author  followed,  makes  perium in hofiem pugnaverat>  necari jujjii.

111  B*.  viii.  c.  7.


O


which


4T4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

which  the  Romans,  afterwards,  built  the  temple  of  the  Earth,
which  ftands  in  the  ftreet  leading  to  the  50  Carinae :  And
his  fortune  was  alfo  confiscated ;  which  the  date  employed
in  founding  the  firft  offerings  in  different  temples,  and,  alfo,
in  dedicating  the  brazen  ftatues  to  Ceres,  which,  51  by  their
infcriptions,  fhew  of  whofe  fortune  they  were  the  firft  offer¬
ings  :  Whereas,  if  his  father  had  been  the  informer,  the  ac-
cufer,  and  the  executioner  of  his  fon,  his  houfe  would  not
have  been  demolifhed,  nor  his  fortune  confifcated  :  For  the
Romans  have  nothing  in  property,  during  the  lives  of  their
fathers,  who  may  difpofe  both  of  the  fortunes,  and  perfons
of  their  fons,  as  they  think  proper :  So  that,  the  ftate  would
never  have  taken  away,  and  confifcated  the  fortune  of  the
father,  who  had  given  information  of  the  defign  of  tyranny,
for  the  offences  of  the  fon  :  For  thefe  reafons,  therefore,  I
prefer  the  former  account :  But  I  have  mentioned  both  of
them,  to  the  end  the  reader  may  adhere  to  which  he  pleafes.

LXXX.  There  being  an  attempt  made  by  fome  people
to  involve  the  fons  of  Caffius  in  the  punifhment  of  their
father,  the  fenate  looked  upon  it  as  a  cruel,  and  pernicious
precedent ;  and,  being  afiembled,  they  ordered  the  youths
to  be  acquitted,  and  to  live  with  all  impunity,  without  being
fubjed  to  banifhment,  difgrace,  or  any  other  calamity :
And,  from  henceforth,  this  cuftom  was  eftablifhed  among

the  Romans,  and  is  obferved  to  this  time,  that  the  fons

<

*

s®-  K See  the  217th  annota-  Livy  has  given  us  the  infcription  n  :
lion  on  the  firft  book.  ex  cassia  familia  datvm.

S1*  A vfyiavlxf  i-TTiyoafpoug  Jqhxviotg.

D  B.  ii.  c.  41.

{hall


%


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSfS.  425


ftiall  be  exempt  from  all  puniftiment,  whofe  fathers  are
offenders,  whether  they  happen  to  be  the  fons  of  tyrants,
of  parricides,  or  of  traitors,  which,  among  them,  is  the
greateft  of  all  offences.  And  thofe,  who  attempted  to  abolifh
this  cuftom  in  our  time,  after  the  end  of  the  Marfic,  and
civil  wars,  and  prohibited  the  fons  of  fuch,  as  had  been
profcribed  by  Sylla,  from  ftanding  candidates  for  their
fathers  honors,  and  from  being  admitted  into  the  fenate*  as
long  as  their  domination  lafted,  were  looked  upon  to  have
been  guilty  of  an  adion  deferving  both  the  indignation  of
men,  and  the  vengeance  of  the  gods :  For  which  reafon,  in
procefs  of  time,  a  blamelefs  punifhment,  the  avenger  of  their
crimes,  purfued  them,  by  which  they  themfelves  were  brought
down  from  the  greateft  height  of  glory,  to  the  loweft  degree
of  obfcurity  ;  and  none,  even,  of  their  race  are  now  left*
but  women.  However,  52  the  perfon,  who  overcame  thefe
men,  reftored  this  cuftom  to  its  ancient  vigor  :  This  law  is
not  in  ufe  among  all  53  the  Greeks ;  but  fome  of  them  think


52,  O  mlxs  xaQehav.  Le  Jay  fays,  in
his  marginal  note,  that  the  perfon  here
meant  was  Auguftus.  I  think  it  was
Julius  Caefar,  who  may  be,  properly,
faid  to  have  overcome  the  Syllan  fac¬
tion  revived  in  Pompey,  as  the  Marian
faction  revived  in  him.  By  the  Cor¬
nelian  law,  enaCted  by  0  Sylla,  when
he  was  dictator,  the  fons,  and  grand-
fons  of  the  profcribed  were  incapaci¬
tated  to  enjoy  any  magiftracy.  In  con¬
tradiction  to  this  law,  f  Julius  Caefar,
when  he  was  inverted  with  the  fame  dig¬
nity,  admitted  them  to  honors  •,  adrmfit
ad  honor  es  et  profcriptorum  liber  os.

0  Plutarch .  Life  of  Sylla.  P  Suetonius  Li


S31  TLoi^>  Ea.Ajjg-/.  Sylburgius  obferves,
from  ^  Ariftotle,  that  it  was  a  cuftom
among  the  Greeks  to  put  to  death  the
innocent  fons  of  offenders ;  to  which
purpofe  the  latter  cites  this  verle,

N>)7r/Of,o?  xJ  mot  cabas  xcclctXwrQio

Sylburgius,  alfo,  cites  the  example  of
Achilles,  who  facrificed  twelve  Tro¬
jans  to  the  manes  of  Patroclus.  This
haft  example  does  not  feem  much  to
the  prefent  purpofe  :  However,  the
two  French  translators  have  appropri¬
ated  this  note  to  themfelves,  without
any  thanks  to  Sylburgius.

:  of  J.  Caefar,  c.  41.  s  Pijlog.  B.  i.  Sc  ii;

.  it


4i 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookVIII.

it  reafcnable  to  put  to  death  the  fons  of  tyrants,  together
with  their  fathers  ;  and  others  punifli  them  with  perpetual
banifhment :  As  if  it  was  contrary  to  the  courfe  of  nature
for  virtuous  fons  to  be  the  offspring  of  wicked  fathers,  or
wicked  fons  of  virtuous  fathers.  But,  concerning  thefe
things,  whether  the  Greek,  or  Roman  cuftom  deferves  the
preference,  I  leave  to  the  confideration  of  thofe,  who  think
fit  to  employ  their  thoughts  that  way :  And,  now,  return
to  the  fubfequent  events.

LXXXI.  After  the  death  of  Caffius,  thofe,  who  fought  to
extend  the  power  of  the  ariftocracy,  grew  more  daring,  and
fhewed  greater  contempt  of  the  plebeians :  On  the  other  fide,
the  obfcure,  and  the  lower  fort,  were  call  down;  and,  finding
themfelves,  now,  deprived  of  the  beft  guardian  of  the  plebeian
party,  accufed  themfelves  of  great  folly  in  having  condemned
him.  Thecaufe  of  this  was,  that  the  confuls  did  not  carry  the
decree  of  the  fenate  concerning  the  divifion  of  lands  into
execution,  by  which  they  were  directed  to  appoint  the  de¬
cemvirs  to  fix  the  bounds  of  the  land,  and  to  move  the
fenate  to  determine  how  great  a  part  of  that  land,  and  among
whom,  it  fhould  be  diftributed.  Upon  which,  numerous
meetings  were  held  by  the  people,  where  they,  perpetually,
complained  of  this  impofition,  and  accufed  the  former  tri¬
bunes  of  having  betrayed  the  commonwealth.  And  the  tri¬
bunes,  now  in  charge,  frequently  affembled  "the  people,  and
demanded  a  performance  of  thofe  promifes.  The  confuls,
being  informed  of  this,  determined  to  remove  the  diforderly,
and  tumultuous  part  of  the  people,  under  the  color  of  a  war :

For


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  MALIC  ARNASSENS  IS.  417
For  it  happened  that  the  territories  of  the  commonwealth
were,  at  that  time,  harrafied  with  robberies,  and  incurfions
from  the  neighbouring  cities.  To  revenge  thefe  injuries,
they  expofed  the  fignals  of  war,  and  began  to  levy  forces :
But  the  poorer  fort  refufing  to  ferve,  and  the  confuls  finding
themfelves  unable  to  make  ufe  of  the  compulsion  of  the  law
againft  the  difobedient  (for  the  tribunes  defended  the  people,
and  were  prepared  to  oppofe  any  attempt  to  feize  either  the
perfons,  or  the  effeds  of  thofe,  who  refufed  to  ferve)  after
many  threats  againft;  all,  who  Should  excite  the  people  to
fedition,  they  gave  reafon  for  a  Secret  fufpicion  that  their
defign  was  to  create  a  didator;  who,  by  abrogating  the
other  magistracies,  Should  alone  be  inverted  with  a  tyrannical
power,  and  fubjed  to  give  no  account  of  his  condud.  As
foon  as  the  plebeians  entertained  this  fufpicion,  they,  fearing
left  Appius,  a  fierce,  and  rigorous  man,  Should  be  the
perfon  appointed,  refolved  to  bear  any  feverity  rather  than
this.

LXXXIL  After  the  armies  were  raifed,  the  confuls  led
them  out  againft  the  enemies.  Cornelius  made  an  irruption
into  the  territories  of  the  Veientes,  and  carried  off  all  the
booty  they  had  left  there :  After  which,  the  Veientes  fending
embafladors,  he  gave  them  leave  to  redeem  their  prifoners,
and  made  a  truce  with  them  for  a  year.  Fabius,  at  the  head
of  the  other  army,  marched  into  the  country  of  the  Aequi ;
and,  from  thence,  into  That  of  the  Volfci :  Thefe  Suffered
their  lands  to  be  plundered,  and  laid  wafte,  for  fome  time ;
after  which,  defpifing  the  Romans,  as  their  army  was  not

Vol.  III.  H  h  h  numerous,


4i3  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

numerous,  they  ran  to  arms,  and  marched  out  of  the  terri¬
tories  of  the  Antiates,  in  a  body,  to  the  relief  of  their
country ;  which  was  a  refolution  taken  with  greater  pre¬
cipitation,  than  regard  to  their  fecurity.  If,  indeed,  they
had  furprifed  the  Romans,  while  they  were  difperfed,  they
might  have  given  them  a  great  defeat  :  But  the  conful,
being  informed  of  their  approach  by  his  fcouts,  fuddenly
called  in  his  men,  then  difperfed  in  pillaging,  and  drew
them  up  in  proper  order.  The  Volfci,  coming  on  with
a  contempt  of  the  enemy,  and  with  confidence,  when,  con¬
trary  to  their  opinion,  they  faw  their  whole  army  in  a  dif-
pofition  to  receive  them,  they  were  ftruck  with  fear  at  the
unexpected  fight ;  and,  without  any  confideration  of  the
common  fafety,  every  man  confulted  his  own :  Turning
back,  therefore,  they  fled  with  all  the  fpeed  they  could,
fome  one  way,  and  fome  another ;  and  the  greateft  part
faved  themfelves  by  retiring  to  the  city  of  Antium  :  But  a
frnall  body  of  them,  which  was  leaft  in  diforder,  gained  the
top  of  a  hill ;  and,  Banding  to  their  arms,  continued  in
that  pofture  the  following  night.  Some  days  after,  the
conful  having  inverted  the  hill  with  his  forces,  and  fecured
every  pafs  with  guards,  they  were  compelled  by  hunger  to
furrender,  and  deliver  up  their  arms  :  After  which,  he  or¬
dered  the  quaeftors  to  fell  the  booty  he  had  taken,  the  fpoils,
and  the  prifoners,  and  to  pay  in  the  money  to  the  treafury :
And,  not  long  after,  withdrawing  his  forces  from  the  enemy’s
country,  he  returned  with  them  to  Rome,  it  being  the  end  of
the  year.  The  election  of  magiftrates  drawing  near,  and  the

patricians.


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  R  N  ASS'EN  SI  S.  419

patricians, perceiving  the  people  were  exafperated,  and  repented
of  their  having  condemned  Caflius,  refolved  to  guard  againft
them,  left,  by  being  flattered  with  the  hopes  of  donatives,
and  of  the  Agrarian  law  by  fome  powerful  demagogue,  fup-
ported  with  the  dignity  of  conful,  they  might  create  frefli
difturbances :  And  they  judged  that  the  rnoft  effeffual
means  to  prevent  thefe  deftres  of  the  people  was  to  raife
their  greateft  enemy  to  the  confulfhip:  Having  taken  this
refolution,  they  ingaged  Caefo  Fabius,  one  of  the  two  per-
fons  who  had  accufed  Caflius,  and  brother  to  Quintus,  who
was  then  conful ;  and,  among  the  other  patricians,  Lucius
Aemilius,  one  of  the  ariftocratical  party,  to  ftand  candidates
for  the  confulfhip.  When  thefe  offered  themfelves  for  that
dignity,  the  plebeians  had  not  power  to  hinder  their  ele&ion  ;
but  left  the  comitia,  and  withdrew  from  the  field  of  Mars,
where  they  wTereheld  :  For,  when  the  people  were  aflembled
in  their  centuries,  the  votes  of  the  moft  confiderable  perfons,
and  of  thofe  who  had  the  greateft  fortunes,  carried  every
queftion  :  And  it,  rarely,  happened  that  they  had  recourfe
to  the  votes  of  thofe  of  middling  fortunes  :  And  the  laft
century,  which  was  the  moft  numerous,  and  in  which  the
pooreft  of  the  plebeians  gave  their  fuffrages,  had  but  one  vote,
54  as  I  faid  before,  which  was,  always,  the  laft  called  for.

LXXXIII.  For  thefe  reafons,  therefore,  Lucius  Aemilius,
the  fon  of  Mamercus,  and  Caefo  Fabius,  the  fon  of  Caefo,
were  created  conftils  this  year,  being  the  two  hundred  and
feventieth  year  from  the  building  of  Rome,  when  Nicodemus
54*  fif  wfoleoov  filial  poi,  See  the  fifty  ninth  chapter  of  the  feventh  book.

H  hh  2  was


420  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

was  archon  at  Athens:  Whofe  confullhip,  according  to
their  wifh,  happened  not  to  be  difturbed  with  civil  diflfen-
hons,  the  commonwealth  being  furrounded  with  foreign
wars.  In  all  nations,  and  places,  as  well  among  the  Greeks,
as  Barbarians,  a  ceftation  from  foreign  evils  produces  civil,
and  domeftic  wars :  And  this  happens,  chiefly,  to  thofe,
who  chufe  a  military,  and  toilfome  life,  as  they  are  actuated
with  a  deflre  of  liberty,  and  dominion  :  For  a  fpirit  of  am¬
bition,  confirmed  by  ufe,  when  reftrained  from  its  ufual
employments,  grows  impatient.  For  which  reafon,  the
wife  ft  governors  are,  always,  feeding  the  flames  of  fame
foreign  quarrels,  from  a  perfuafion  that  it  is  better  to  make
war  in  an  enemy’s  country,  than  at  home.  It  happened  there¬
fore,  as  I  faid,  very  fortunately  at  that  time  for  the  confuls,
that  the  fubjects  of  the  Romans  again  took  arms  againft  them.
For  the  Volfci,  either  relying  on  the  domeftic  commotions
of  the  Romans,  and  imagining  the.  plebeians  to  be  in  a  ftate
of  war  with  the  magiftrates,  or  flung  with  the  fhame  of
their  former  defeat,  received  without  ftriking  a  ftroke,  or
elated  with  the  appearance  of  their  forces,  which  were  very
numerous  :  Or  induced  by  all  thefe  motives,  refolved  to
make  war  upon  the  Romans :  And,  drawing  together  the'
youth  of  all  their  cities,  they  marched,  with  one  part  of  their
army,  againft  the  towns  of  the  Flernici,  and  Latines;  and,
with  the  other,  which  was  the  moft  numerous,  and  con-
lifted  of  the  beft  troops,  they  propofed  to  receive  the  enemy,
when  they  came  to  beftege  their  own.  The  Romans,  being
informed  of  thefe  things,  determined  to  divide  their  army,

alfo*


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H A LIC  AR N  A S S  E N S  I  S.  421

alio,  into  two  bodies;  and,  with  one  of  them,  to  preferve
the  territories  of  the  Hernici,  and  the  Latines  from  the
inroads  of  the  enemy  ;  and,  with  the  other,  to  lay  wade
Thofe  of  the  Volfci.

LXXXIV.  The  confuls  having  drawn  lots  for  the  com¬
mand  of  the  armies  according  tocuftom,  That  of  the  body,
defigned  to  go  to  the  relief  of  their  allies,  fell  to  Caefo  Fabius;
and  Lucius  put  himfelf  at  the  head  of  the  other,  and  marched
towards  Antium.  When  he  drew  near  the  hills,  and  had  a
view  of  the  enemy’s  army,  he,  prefently ,  incamped  oppofite  to
them,  upon  an  eminence.  The  following  days,  the  enemy,
frequently,  quitted  their  camp  ;  and,  coming  into  the  plain,
challenged  the  conful  to  fight,  who,  when  he  faw  his  time,
led  out  his  army  ;  and,  before  they  ingaged,  he  harangued
his  troops  a  considerable  time  ;  and,  having  encouraged
them  to  do  their  duty,  he  ordered  the  trumpets  to  found  a
charge  :  And  the  Soldiers*  fhouting  as  ufual,  attacked  in
clofe  array,  both  horfe,  and  foot.  Alter  they  had  fpent  all
their  fpears,  and  javelins,  with  the  reft  of  their  miffive
weapons,  they  drew  their  fvvords,  and  clofed ;  both  ftdes
fhewing  an  equal  intrepidity,  and  eagernefs  for  the  victory.
Their  manner  of  fighting  was,  as  I  faid  before,  alike  ;  and,
neither  the  fkill,  and  experience  of  the  Romans  in  ingage-
ments,  by  which  they  were,  generally,  viftorious,  nor  their
conftancy,  and  endurance  of  toil,  acquired  by  many  battles,
gave  them  any  advantage  upon  this  occafion:  For  all  thefe
the  enemy  poflefied,  fince  they  had  been  commanded  by
Marcius,  the  greateft  general  among  the  Romans :  But  both

flood


422  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII."

flood  firm,  without  quitting  the  ground,  on  which  they,
firft,  were  placed.  Afterwards,  the  Volfci  began  to  retire  a
little,  but  in  order,  and  in  their  ranks,  and  received  the
Romans  as  they  prefled  upon  them :  But  this  was  a  flrategem
to  make  thefe  break  their  ranks,  and  to  draw  them  to  the
foot  of  an  eminence,  from  whence  they  might  be  charged
with  advantage.

LXXXV.  The  Romans,  thinking  they  were  beginning  to
fly,  followed  them  flowly,  and  in  good  order  alfo  :  But,  when
they  faw  them  running  towards  their  camp,  they  too,  purfued
them  fwiftly,  and  in  diforder:  And  thofe,  who  were  behind,
and  had  the  charge  of  the  rear,  began  to  ftrip  the  dead,  as
if  they  had,  already,  conquered ;  and  ran  to  plunder  the  coun¬
try.  The  Volfci  no  fooner  obferved  this,  but  fuch,  as  had
feigned  a  flight,  faced  about  as  foon  as  they  approached
their  intrenchments,  and  flood  their  ground  ;  and,  at  the
fame  time,  thofe,  who  had  been  left  to  guard  the  camp,
opened  the  gates,  and  ran  out  in  great  numbers  from  feveral
parts.  And,  now,  the  fortune  of  the  day  was  turned ;  the
purfuers  fled,  and  the  fugitives  purfued.  Here  many  brave
Romans  loft  their  lives,  as  may  well  be  imagined,  being
forced  down  a  defcent,  and  a  few  incompaffed  by  many  :
The  others,  who  had  employed  themfelves  in  {polling  the
dead,  and  in  plundering,  fuffered  the  fame  fate,  being  de¬
prived  of  the  opportunity  of  making  an  orderly,  and  regular
'  retreat :  For  thefe,  being  intercepted  by  the  enemy,  fome
of  them  were  killed,  and  others  made  prifoners  :  And  as
many  as  were  faved  both  of  thefe,  and  of  the  others,  who
:  -  had


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L ICA  RN  A  S  S  ENSIS.  423

had  been  forced  down  the  hill,  the  horfe  coming  to  their
relief,  returned  to  the  camp,  when  it  was  late.  A  violent
ftorm  of  rain  burfting  from  the  clouds,  and  a  darknefs,  like
That  produced  by  thick  mifcs,  feemed  to  have  prefer ved
them  from  being  all  put  to  the  fword  ;  which  made  the
enemy  unwilling  to  purfue  them  any  farther,  as  they  were
unable  to  fee  what  pafled  at  a  diftance.  The  following
night,  the  conful  decamped,  and  drew  off  his  army  in  filence,
and  good  order,  with  a  defign  to  conceal  his  march  from
the  enemy ;  and,  late  in  the  evening,  he  incamped  near  a
town,  called  Longula,  chufing  an  eminence  of  Strength  Suf¬
ficient  to  keep  off  the  enemy,  if  thefe  fhould  attack  him.
While  he  remained  there,  he  employed  himfelf  both  in  re¬
covering  the  wounded  with  proper  remedies,  and  in  railing
the  fpirits  of  thofe,  who  were  disheartened  with  the  fhame
of  their  unexpedfed  defeat,  by  adminiftring  comfort  to
them.

/

LXXXVI.  This  was  the  condition  of  the  Romans.  As
for  the  Volfci,  when  it  was  day,  and  they  knew  the  enemy
had  left  their  camp,  they  advanced,  and  formed  theirs  :
And,  having  dripped  the  dead,  and  carried  off  thofe,  who,
though  half-dead,  gave  hopes  of  life,  and  buried  their  own
men,  they  retired  to  Antium,  the  city  that  lay  next  to  them;
where,  Singing  fongs  of  triumph  for  their  victory,  and  offer¬
ing  facrifices  in  all  their  temples,  they  paffed  the  following
days  in  entertainments,  and  pleafures.  If,  therefore,  they
had  been  contented  with  this  victory,  and  attempted  nothing
further,  they  might  have  put  an  end  to  the  war  with  ad-

v  vantage ;


424.  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

vantage  :  For  the  Romans  would  not  have  dared,  any  more,
to  come  out  of  their  camp  to  give  them  battle;  but  would
have  thought  themfelves  happy  in  being  able  to  retire  out  of
the  enemy’s  country,  and  have  preferred  an  inglorious  flight,
to  certain  death:  But  the  Volfci,  aiming  ftill  at  more,  loft
even  the  glory  of  their  former  victory :  For,  being  informed
by  their  fcouts,  and  by  deferters,  that  the  Romans,  who  had
faved  themfelves,  were  very  few  in  number,  and  the  greateft
part  of  thefe  wounded,  they  entertained  a  great  contempt
of  them,  and,  prefently,  took  their  arms,  and  ran  to  attack
them :  Many  unarmed  people,  alfo,  came  out  of  the  city,
and  followed  them,  as  fpecftators  of  the  ingagement,  and
from  an  expectation  of  plunder,  and  booty.  But,  when  ar¬
rived  at  the  eminence,  they  invefted  the  camp,  and  endea¬
voured  to  pull  up  the  palifades,  firft  the  Roman  horfe,
obliged,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground,  to  flght  on  foot,
fallied  out  upon  them  ;  and,  behind  the  horfe,  thofe  they
call  the  Triarii,  with  their  files  doubled:  Thefe  are  the
oldeft  foldiers,  to  whom  they  commit  the  guard  of  the
camp  when  they  go  out  to  fight,  and,  to  thefe,  as  to  their
laft  hope,  they  are  forced  to  have  recourfe,  when  there
happens  any  great  daughter  of  the  younger  fort,  for  want
of  other  fuccour.  The  Volfci,  at  firft,  fuftained  their  onfet,
and  continued  the  fight  for  a  long  time  with  great  bravery :
After  which,  having  the  difad  vantage  of  the  ground,  they
gave  way ;  and,  at  laft,  after  they  had  done  fmall  damage
to  the  enemy,  and  That  not  worth  mentioning,  and  they
themfelves  fullered  a  much  greater,  they  retired  to  the  plain :

Where


V


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  425

Where  they  incamped  the  following  days,  and  often  drew
lip  in  order  of  battle,  challenging  the  Romans  to  fight  :
But  thefe  ftirred  not  out  of  their  camp.  When  the  Volfci
faw  this,  they  held  them  in  contempt ;  and,  fending  for  the
forces  of  all  their  cities,  prepared  to  force  their  camp  by
numbers ;  and  they  might,  eafily,  have  performed  a  great
adtion,  by  taking  both  the  conful,  and  the  Roman  army
either  by  force,  or  compofition  (for  there  was  a  want  of
provisions  in  the  camp)  had  they  not  been  prevented  by  the
fuccours  received  by  the  Romans,  which  hindered  the  Volfci
from  putting  an  end  to  the  war  with  the  greateft  glory  :
For  the  other  conful,  Caefo  Fabius,  hearing  to  what  Freights
the  army,  which  had  been  ingaged  with  the  Volfci,  was
reduced,  propofed  to  march,  that  inftant,  with  all  his  forces,
and  fall  upon  thofe,  who  were  befieging  the  camp  ;  but,
while  he  was  offering  facrifice,  and  confulting  the  augurs,
it  happened  that  the  vidfims,  and  omens  were  not  favourable;
and  the  gods  oppofing  his  march,  he  himfelf  ftaid  behind  ;
however,  he  fenthis  beft  fquadrons  of  horfe  to  his  collegue:
Thefe,  taking  by-roads,  and  marching,  generally,  in  the
night,  got  into  the  camp  without  being  perceived  by  the
enemy.  The  arrival  of  thefe  fuccours  gave  new  life  to
Aemilius.  On  the  other  fide,  the  enemy,  emboldened  both  by
the  encreafe  of  their  forces,  and  becaufe  the  Romans  did  not

•  i

come  out  to  fight,  doubled  their  files,  and  began  to  afcend
the  eminence  :  The  Romans,  buffered  them  to  come  up  at
their  leifure,  and  to  fpend  their  ftrength  in  endeavouring  to
pull  up  the  palifades ;  but,  when  the  fignal  of  battle  was
Vol.  III.  I  i  i  /  given?


\


426  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

given,  they  threw  down  the  intrenchments  in  feveral  places,
and  fell  upon  the  enemy ;  and  thofe,  who  came  to  a  clofe
fight  with  them,  made  ufe  of  their  fwords,  while  others
threw  ftones,  javelins,  and  fpears  at  them  from  the  intrench¬
ments,  none  of  which  miffed  their  mark,  the  enemy  being
crouded  in  a  narrow  compafs.  By  this  means,  the  Volfci
were  forced  from  the  hill  with  confiderable  lofs ;  and,  flying,
faved  themfelves  with  great  difficulty  by  retiring  to  their
camp.  The  Romans,  finding  themfelves  now  fecure,  went
down  to  harrafs  their  country,  from  whence  they  fupplied
their  camp  with  every  thing  they  wanted.

LXXXVII.  When  the  time  for  the  ele&ion  of  magiftrates
was  come,  Aemilius  ftaid  in  the  camp,  being  afhamed  to
enter  the  city  after  his  ignominious  defeat,  in  which  he  had
loft  the  beft  part  of  his  army ;  but  his  collegue,  leaving  his
inferior  officers  to  command  in  the  camp,  went  to  Rome ;
and,  affembling  the  people  in  order  to  the  election,  he  declined
propofing  thofe  perfons,  on  whom  they  defired  the  conful-
fhip  fhould  be  conferred,  who  were  confular  perfons,  fince
thefe  were  unwilling  toftand  for  it;  but  called  the  centuries
to  give  their  fuffrages  in  favor  of  fuch  as  fought  that  dignity,
and  took  their  votes.  Thefe  were  the  men  the  fenate  had
made  choice  of,  and  ordered  to  ftand  for  the  confulfhip,
who  were  not  very  agreeable  to  the  people.  By  this  means,
Marcus  Fabius,  fon  of  Caefo,  the  younger  brother  of  the
conful,  v/ho  prefided  at  the  election,  and  55  Lucius  Valerius,
the  fon  of  Marcus,  the  fame  perfpn  who  had  brought  Caflius

55  •  Amos  Ovategios  Mxgxa  tf os.  See  the  firft  annotation  on  the  feventh  book..


to


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARNASSENSIS.

to  his  trial,  after  he  had  been  thrice  conful,  for  aiming  at
tyranny,  and  caufed  him  to  be  put  to  death,  were  chofen
conful s  for  the  following  year.  Thefe,  having  taken  pof-
feflion  of  their  dignity,  delired  the  fenate  to  order  that  re¬
cruits  might  be  raifed  to  replace  thofe,  who  had  loft  their  lives
in  the  war  againft  the  Antiates,  that  the  deficiencies  in  the
feveral  companies  might  be  completed ;  and,  having  obtained
a  decree  of  the  fenate  for  that  purpofe,  they  appointed  a  day,
on  which  they  ordered  all,  who  were  of  the  military  age,  to
appear.  Upon  this,  there  was  a  great  tumult  in  every  part
of  the  city,  and  feditious  difcourfes  were  held  by  the  poorer
fort,  who  refufed  either  to  comply  with  the  orders  of  the
fenate,  or  to  obey  the  commands  of  the  confuls,  becaufe
they  had  violated  the  promifes  made  to  them  concerning
the  divifion  of  the  lands;  and,  going  in  great  numbers  to
the  tribunes,  they  upbraided  them  with  treachery;  and,
with  great  clamors,  implored  their  afliftance.  The  tribunes,
in  general,  did  not  think  it  a  proper  feafon,  when  they  wpre
ingaged  in  a  foreign  war,  to  renew  the  flames  of  civil  con-
tefts However,  one  of  them,  by  name  Caius  Manius,  faid,
that,  for  his  part,  he  would  not  betray  the  plebeians,  nor
fuffer  the  confuls  to  raife  an  army,  unlefs  they  fhould,  firfl,
appoint  commifiioners  for  fixing  the  bounds  of  the  public
lands,  draw  up  the  decree  of  the  fenate  for  the  divifion  of
them,  and  lay  it  before  the  people.  The  confuls  oppofing
this,  and  excufing  themfelves,  on  account  of  the  prefentwar,
from  granting  anything  he  delired,  the  tribune  replied  that
he  would  pay  no  regard  to  them,  but  hinder  them,  with  all

I  i  i  2  his


428  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

his  power,  from  making  levies :  And  he  kept  his  word ;
but  could  not  effect  what  he  propofed  :  For  the  confuls,
going  out  of  the  city,  ordered  their  confular  chairs  to  be
placed  in  the  adjacent  held,  and  there  inlifted  the  foldiers ;
and,  fince  it  was  not  in  their  power  to  feize  the  perfons  of
fuch,  as  refufed  obedience  to  the  laws,  they  fined  them  ;
and,  if  they  were  owners  of  eftates,  they  laid  them  wafte,
and  demolifhed  their  country  houfes ;  and,  if  farmers,  they
carried  away  every  thing,  that  was  neceffary  for  their  em¬
ployment,  their  oxen,  cattle,  hearts  of  burden,  and  all  the
implements,  with  which  the  land  is  tilled,  and  their  crops
brought  home;  the  tribune,  who  oppofed  the  railing  of
men,  having,  no  longer,  any  power:  For  thofe,  who  are
inverted  with  the  tribunefhip,  can  exercife  no  kind  of  au¬
thority  without  the  city ;  their  jurifdi&ion  being  con¬
fined  within  the  walls ;  neither  is  it  lawful  for  them  even
to  pafs  a  night  out  of  the  city,  unlefs  at  a  particular  time,
when  all  the  magiftrates  of  the  commonwealth  offer  up  a
common  facrifice  to  Jupiter  upon  the  Alban  hill,  for  the
profperity  of  the  Latin  nation.  This  curtom,  by  which  the
tribunes  are  not  allowed  to  exercife  any  fort  of  authority
without  the  city,  continues  to  this  day.  And  the  caufe,
among  many  others,  of  the  civil  war  among  the  Romans,
which  happened  in  our  time,  and  was  the  greateft  they
were  ever  ingaged  in,  was  though  t  to  be  this,  which  appear¬
ed  of  confequence  enough  to  divide  the  commonwealth;  that
fome  of  the  tribunes,  complaining  of  their  having  been  forci-


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  SI  S.  429

bly  driven  out  of  the  city  by  the  5Uperfon,  who  then  governed
Italy,  in  order  to  deprive  them  of  any  further  power,  fled
to  the  57  general,  who,  at  that  time,  commanded  the  armies


56,  T%  Tcjg  K«7f^OV<7Of  TOC  XtXIOi  TYdV

It<xAj«v.  So  we  mult  read  this  fentence
with  the  Vatican  manufcript.  Le  Jay
muft  have  been  very  little  acquainted
with  the  tranfadlions  of  this  important
period,  to  fay,  in  his  note  upon  this
paffage,  that  fome  particular  difcontent
muft  have  obliged  Pompey  to  drive
the  tribunes  out  of  Rome  ;  il font  que
quelque-mecontentement  particular  euji
oblige  Pompee  de  chajjer  de  Rome  les
tribuns.  This  particular  difcontent,  as
he  calls  it,  was  nothing  lefs  than  the
interceflion  of  the  tribunes  to  the  de¬
cree  of  the  fenate,  by  which  Caefar
was  commanded  to  difband  his  army.
Thefe  tribunes,  fearing  the  refentment
of  the  fenate  on  account  of  their  inter¬
ceflion,  fled  from  Rome,  and  went  to
Caefar,  complaining,  as  our  author
fays,  that  Pompey,  or,  which  is  the
fame  thing,  the  fenate  by  his  direc¬
tion,  had  forced  them  to  leave  the  city.
This  will  be  explained  in  the  follow¬
ing  note.

57*  Et n  t cv  iv  Ti 1  T a.\dhcc  toC  ottiSoc

xxliXovIvt.  Caefar  himfelf  is  the  laft  au¬
thor  we  muft  confult,  if  we  have  a
mind  to  unfold  his  ambitious  views,
and  to  ftrip  them  of  the  falfe  colors,
with  which  he,  all  along,  endeavours
to  difguife  them  from  the  eyes  both  of
the  age  he  lived  in,  and  of  pofterity.
In  his  hiftoryof  the  civil  wars,  he,  in¬
deed,  relates  the  fadts,  but  conceals  the
motives  •,  particularly  his  own  •,  and
gives  falfe  motives,  and  private  views

1 B.  i.  c.  4.


to  all  his  oppofers:  Thus  he  fays  that
Cato  oppofed  him,  from  an  ancient
enmity,  and  the  refentment  of  his  re¬
pul  fc  ;  r  Catonem  veteres  inimicitiae
Caefaris  incitant ,  et  dolor  rcpulfae  :  Pie
means  the  repulle  Cato  met  with  by
the  means  of  Caefar,  and  his  friends,
when  he  flood  candidate  for  the  prae-
torfhip.  The  reafon  why  Pompey,
and  Craftus,  then  confuls,  and  adling
in  conjundlion  with  Caefar,  would  not
fuffer  Cato  to  obtain  that  dignity,  is
very  well  explained  by  sDion  Caflius:
They  fufpedted  that  he  would  not  bear
their  adminiftration,  and  were  unwil¬
ling  to  add  a  legal  power  to  his  oppo-
fltion,  v7TL07rh\iov  Ti  yag  otvlov  ce,vi<;ic&oci

TOC  yiVOJMVUj  KCU  HX  iOiXyiTCiV  avjcp

eyvofxov  t oi(  ecvliAoyiocs  xtfiQ&eivou.

If,  therefore,  we  are  to  believe  Caefar,
he  himfelf  was  the  patriot,  who  had
no  other  view  than  to  fupport  the  laws
of  his  country ;  and  Cato  was  his  op-
pofer,  from  no  other  motive  than  pri¬
vate  enmity,  and  refentment.  This
endeavour  in  Caefar  to  juftify  himfelf
fhews  there  is  fuch  a  native  beauty  in
virtue,  that  the  moft  profligate  men  are
defirous  to  fhelter  themfelves  under  the
appearance  of  it.  Caefar  had  the  fame
advantage  with  many  other  men,  who
have  done  bad  things  with  worfe  mo¬
tives  i  and  then  juftifled  themfelves  by
faying  that  what  they  did  was  accord¬
ing  to  the  laws  of  their  country  :  This
is  catching  at  the  forms  of  law,  and
lofmg  the  fpirit  of  it  •,  in  confequence

*  B.  xxxix.  p.  117.


ill


4;o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book VIII.

in  Gaul,  as  to  their  only  refuge :  Who,  laying  hold  on  this
opportunity,  and  pretending  to  fupport,  with  piety  and


of  which,  fuch  men  have  often  (though
not  often  enough)  felt,  at  laft,  the
weight  of  both.  1  When  the  fenate
paflfed  the  memorable  decree,  by  which
Caefar  was  ordered  to  difband  his
legions,  and  Pompey  to  keep  his  on
foot,  only  two  fenators  difiented,
Caecilius,  an  obfcure  man,  and  Curio,
a  creature  of  Caefar,  from  whom  he
had  brought  a  plaufible  letter  to  the
fenate.  Notwithftanding  this  almoft
unanimous  confent  of  the  fenate,  the
decree  could  not  regularly  pafs,  b?-
caufe  two  of  the  tribunes  of  the  people
interceded,  as  they  called  it,  that  is,
they  oppofed  it :  Thefe  were  Antony,
afterwards  fo  much  known,  and  Quin¬
tus  (not  Caius)  Caflius.  This  they,
certainly,  had  a  power  to  do  by  law :
Nay  the  interceffion  of  a  fingle  tribune
was  fufficient  to  obftrud  a  decree  of
the  fenate.  Their  oppofition,  there¬
fore,  was  conftitutional :  But  the  dif-
regard  fhewn  by  the  fenate  to  their  op-
♦  pofition  was,  certainly,  not  fo  ;  much
lefs  the  threats  of  the  fenate  againft
thefe  oppofers,  and  their  expelling
them  afterwards.  The  tribunes,  ap¬
prehending  the  confequence  of  thefe
threats,  left  Rome  together  with  Curio,
and  Caecilius ;  and  went  to  Caefar,
who  was  then,  as  u  he  fays,  at  Ravenna.
This  irregular,  and,  if  I  may  call  it  fo,
injudicious  proceeding  of  the  fenate
gave  an  appearance  of  law,  and  popu¬
larity  to  the  enterprife  of  Caefar,  who,
though  he  made  the  mod  of  this  op-
preflion  of  the  tribunes,  as  he  terms  it,
would,  in  all  probability,  have  invaded

gDion  Caflius,  B.  xli.  p.  171.  u  B.  i.  c.  5.


his  country,  if  his  adverfaries  had  ne¬
ver  furnilhed  him  with  fo  plaufible  a
pretence.  That  he  magnified  this  cir-
cumftance  appears  from  his  fpeech  to
his  foldiers,  when  he  is  begging  them,
in  other  words,  to  affift  him  againft
his  country  :  He  there  complains  of
this  innovation,  by  which  the  tribuni-
tian  interceftion  was  cenfured  with
arms,  and  opprefied;  w  novum  in  re¬
publics,  intro  duff  um  exemplum  queritur ,
ut  tribunitia  inter cejjio  armis  notaretur ,
atque  opprimeretur.  This  had  the  de¬
fined  effed  with  his  foldiers,  who  cried
out  that  they  were  ready  to  revenge
the  injuries  done  to  their  general,  and
to  the  tribunes ;  fefe  paratos  ejfe  in:-
peratoris  fui  tribunorumque  plebis  inju-
rias  defendere.  If  I  faid  that  the  ufe
made  by  Caefar  of  this  flight  of  the
tribunes  was  only  a  pretence  to  cover
his  own  ambition,  I  am  juftified  in  it
by  his  condud,  not  long  after,  to  two
other  tribunes  of  the  people  :  x  Thefe
were  C.  Epidius,  and  L.  Cefitius  FJac-
cus,  who,  not  only,  profecuted  one  of
his  mob  for  calling  him  king,  but
caufed  public  notice  to  be  given,  that
they  could  not  perform  the  duties  of
their  fundion  with  freedom,  and  fe-
curity  :  Thefe  tribunes  he  procured
the  fenate  to  depofe,  and  expel  out  of
their  houfe;  which  they  had  no  more
power  to  do,  than  they  had,  before,  to
pafs  a  decree  for  the  expulfion  of  the
other  tribunes  :  But  thefe  he  pro-
teded,  becaufe  they  ferved  his  ambi¬
tion  ;  and  punifhed  the  former,  be¬
caufe  they  oppofed  it.

wId.  ib.  c.  7.  xDion  Caflius,  B.  xliv\  p.  277.


Book VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  43j

juftice,  the  facred  magiftrates  of  the  people,  who  had  been
deprived  of  their  authority,  contrary  to  the  oaths  of  the
ancient  Romans,  he  himfelf  entered  the  city  in  arms,  and
reftored  the  tribunes  to  the  fun&ions  of  their  magiftracy.

LXXXVIII.  The  plebeians,  finding,  upon  the  occafion
I  before  mentioned,  no  relief  from  the  Tribunitian  power,-
were  humbled;  and,  coming  to  the  perfons  appointed  to
raife  the  levies,  took  the  facred  oath,  and  lifted  under  their
enfigns.  When  the  deficiencies  in  the  feveral  companies
were  completed,  the  confuls  drew  lots  for  the  command  of
the  armies :  To  Fabius  was  allotted  the  army,  which  had
been  fent  to  the  affiftance  of  their  allies  :  And  to  Valerius
That,  which  lay  incamped  in  the  country  of  the  Volfci,,
to  which  were  added  the  new  levies.  When  the  enemy
were  informed  of  his  arrival,  they  refolved  to  fend  for  another
army,  to  incamp  in  a  place  of  greater  ftrength,  and  not,
rafhly,  to  expofe  themfelves  to  the  fame  danger,  from  a
contempt  of  the  Romans.  Thefe  refolutions  were  foon
executed,  and  the  generals  of  both  armies  entertained  the
fame  opinion  of  the  war ;  which  was  to  defend  their  own
intrenchments  if  they  were  attacked,  but  not  to  attempt
Thofe  of  the  enemy,  from  an  expe&ation  of  carrying  them
by  affault ;  and  the  fear  of  attempting  any  thing  againft
each  other  kept  them  both  inactive,  for  a  confiderable  time  :
However,  they  were  not  able  to  continue  their  refolutions
to  the  laft :  For,  whenever  any  detachments  were  fent  out
to  bring  in  provifions,  or  any  thing  elfe,  that  was  neceflary
to  both  armies,  thefe  met,  and  fought,  the  fame  detachments

not


432  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.

not  having,  always,  the  fame  advantage ;  and  thefe  fkir-
m idles  happening  often,  not  a  few  were  killed,  and  more
wounded.  But  the  Romans  received  no  fuccours  from  any
parts  to  replace  their  numbers,  that  were  continually  leflbn-
ing  ;  while  the  army  of  the  Volfci  was  greatly  encreafed  by
the  arrival  of  frefh.  forces  fucceffively ;  and  their  generals,
elated  with  this,  led  out  their  army  with  a  refolution  to  fight.

LXXXIX.  The  Romans  having  done  the  fame,  and
drawn  up  their  forces,  a  fharp  ingagement  infued,  as  well
of  the  horfe,  as  of  the  foot,  and  the  light  armed  men,  ail
fhewing  equal  valor,  and  experience,  and  every  man  placing
his  hopes  of  victory  in  himfelf  alone.  By  this  time,  many,
fallen  on  the  fpot  where  they  had  been  placed,  lay  dead  on
both  fides,  and  many  more  half  dead  ;  and  thofe,  who  con¬
tinued  the  fight,  and  yet  faced  the  dangers  of  the  field,
were  reduced  to  a  fmall  number;  and  even  thefe  not  capable
of  performing  their  duty,  while  their  fhields,  loaded  with
the  darts  that  ftuck  in  them,  weighed  down  their  left
hands,  and  would  not  fuffer  them  to  fuftain  the  onfet  of  the
enemy  ;  the  edge  of  their  fwords  was  blunted,  and  fome  of
them  were  fhivered  to  pieces,  and  now  ufelefs;  and  the  toil,
which  to  thofe  who  had  fought  the  whole  day,  was  ex-
ceftive,  flackened  their  finews,  and  weakened  their  ftrokes ;
and  fweat,  third,  and  want  of  breath,  all  which  mu  ft
happen  to  fuch,  as  fight  long  in  the  fufFocating  heat  of
fu miner,  affliding  both  armies,  the  event  of  the  battle  was,
in  no  degree,  confiderable ;  and  both,  as  foon  as  their  ge¬
nerals  ordered  a  retreat  to  be  founded,  willingly  returned  to

their


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  AS  S  E  N  S  IS.  433
their  camps.  From  this  time,  neither  ventured  out  to  fight;
but,  fitting  ftill,  obferved  each  other’s  motions,  when  any
went  out  for  neceflaries.  It  was  thought,  however,  and  the
report  was  common  at  Rome,  that  the  Roman  army  had
it,  then,  in  their  power  to  conquer ;  but  declined  perform¬
ing  any  great  action,  from  their  hatred  to  the  conful,  and
their  refentment  againft  the  patricians,  for  having  impofed
upon  them  in  regard  to  the  divifion  of  the  public  lands :
And  the  foldiers  themfelves,  fending  letters  to  their  friends,
accufed  the  conful,  as  unfit  to  command.  Thefe  were  the
tranlacftions  in  the  field :  But  in  Rome  itfelf  divers  prodigies
happened,  which  manifefted  the  divine  wrath,  both  by  voices,
and  unufual  fights:  All  which  concurred  in  this  (as  the
augurs,  and  the  interpreters  of  holy  things,  by  afiifting  one
another  with  their  experience,  declared)  that  fome  of  the
gods  were  difpleafed,  becaufe  they  did  not  receive  their
cuftomary  honors,  neither  was  their  worfhip  performed  with
purity,  and  fan&ity.  Upon  this,  ftricft  inquiry  was  made  by
every  one  ;  and,  at  laft,  the  pontifs  were  informed  that  one
of  theveftals,  who  preferve  the  holy  fire,  by  name, 58  Opimia,
had  loft  her  virginity,  and  polluted  the  holy  rites  :  The
pontifs,  having  by  tortures,  and  other  proofs,  found  the  in¬
formation  to  be  true,  took  from  her  head  the  fillets;  and,
conducing  her  through  the  forum,  buried  her  alive  within
the  walls  of  the  city ;  and,  caufing  the  two  men,  who  had

s8,  y  Livy  calls  this  veftal  virgin,  Of  pa,

y  B.  ii,  c,  42.

Vol.  III.  K  k  k  been


434  ROMAN  ANTI  QJLT I  TIE  S  OF  Book  VIII.

been  convi&ed  of  debauching  her,  to  be  whipped  in  public,
they  ordered  them,  prefently,  to  be  put  to  death.  After
which,  the  facrifices,  and  the  auguries  were  favourable,  the
wrath  of  the  gods  being  appeafed.

XC.  When  the  time  for  the  election  of  magiftrates
was  come,  and  the  confuls  were  returned  to  Rome,  there
was  a  great  conteft,  and  ftruggle  between  the  people,  and
the  patricians,  concerning  the  perfons,  who  were  to  be  in¬
verted  with  the  fupreme  magiftracy :  For  the  latter  defired
to  promote  to  the  confulfhip  fuch  of  the  young  men,  as
were  adtive,  and  leaft  inclined  to  the  intereft  of  the  plebeians ;
and,  by  their  direction,  the  fon  of  Appius  Claudius,  who
was  efteemed  the  greateft  enemy  of  the  people,  flood  for
that  dignity ;  a  perfon  exceflively  proud  and  daring,  and
the  mod;  powerful  man  of  his  time  by  the  number  of  his
friends,  and  clients*  On  the  other  fide,  the  people  named
fuch  of  the  elder  fenators,  and  of  thofe,  who  had,  al¬
ready,  given  proofs  of  their  moderation,  as  were  likely  to
confult  the  good  of  the  commonwealth  ;  and  defired  to
make  them  confuls.  The  magiftrates  were,  alfo,  divided,
and  fought  to  invalidate  one  another’s  authority  :  For,  when
the  confuls  affembled  the  people,  in  order  to  name  the  can¬
didates  for  the  confulfhip,  the  tribunes,  in  virtue  of  their
power  to  forbid  all  proceedings,  difmifled  the  comitia :  And
again,  when  thefe  affembled  the  people  to  chufe  their  ma¬
giftrates,  the  confuls  would  not  fuffer  them  to  proceed,  fince
they  had  the  power  of  calling  the  centuries  together,  and

of


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  435

of  giving  them  their  votes.  Mutual  accufations,  and  con¬
tinual  quarrels  parted  between  them ;  each  fide  being  fup-
ported  by  thofe  of  their  own  fadtion :  So  that,  even,  blows
were  exchanged  in  their  paffiofa ;  and  the  feditious  were  very
near  proceeding  to  arms.  The  fenate,  being  informed  of
thefe  things,  deliberated,  for  a  long  time,  what  courfe  to
take  in  this  jundture,  being  neither  able  to  force  the  people
to  a  fubmiffion,  nor  willing  to  fubmit  to  them.  Thofe,  who
were  for  carrying  things  with  a  high  hand,  advifed  to  create
a  di&ator  on  account  of  the  election,  one,  whom  they  fhould
moft  approve  of ;  and  that  the  perfon  inverted  with  this
power  fhould  banifh  the  authors  of  this  diftemper;  and,  if
the  former  magirtrates  had  been  guilty  of  any  fault,  that  he
fhould  reform  it ;  and,  after  he  had  regulated  the  govern¬
ment  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  he  fhould  think  fit,  appoint  the
beft  men  to  be  magirtrates.  But  the  more  moderate  propofed
to  chufe  interreges,  confiding  of  the  moft  ancient,  and  the
moft  dignified  fenators;  who  ihould  be  directed  to  take
care  that  the  election  of  magirtrates  be  carried  on  in  the
beft  manner,  as  it  was,  formerly,  pradtifed  after  the  demife
of  their  kings.  This  advice  being  approved  of  by  the  ma¬
jority,  Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus  was  created  interrex  by
the  fenate ;  and  all  the  other  magiftracies  ceafed.  After  he
had  governed  the  commonwealth  without  any  fedition,  as
many  days  as  he  was  authorized  by  his  commiflion,  he
appointed  another  interrex,  according  to  their  cuftom,  and
named Spurius  Lartius  to  that  dignity;  who,  afiembling  the

K  k  k  2  people


436  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  VIII.
people  in  their  centuries,  and  giving  them  their  votes  ac¬
cording  to  the  valuation  of  their  fortunes,  returned  for  con-
fuls,  with  the  approbation  of  both  parties,  59  Caius  Julius,
fur  named  lulus,  a  man  in  the  intereft  of  the  people  ;  and
Quintus  Fabius,  the  fon  of  Caefo,  for  the  fecond  time,  who
was  in  That  of  the  ariftocracy.  The  people,  who  had  not
been  ill  treated  by  him  in  his  former  confulfhip,  fuffered
him  to  obtain  this  honor  a  fecond  time,  through  their  hatred
to  Appius,  and  the  great  fatisfatftion  they  received  from  his
difgrace :  And  the  ariftocratical  party,  who  had  concerted
meafures  to  advance  to  the  confulfhip  a  man  of  a&ivity,
and  one,  who  fhould  relax  in  nothing  to  the  people,  looked
upon  the  event  of  the  {edition  to  have  been  favourable  to
their  defigns.

XCI.  During  the  confulfhip  of  thefe  perfons,  the  Aequi>
making  a  predatory  irruption  into  the  territories  of  the
Latines,  carried  off  a  great  number  of  {laves,  and  cattle  :
And  a  people  of  Tyrrhenia,  called  the  Veientes,  plundered
a  great  part  of  the  country  belonging  to  the  Romans.  The
fenate  refolved  to  put  off  the  war  againft  the  Aequi,  and
to  demand  fatisfa&ion  of  the  Veientes.  The  former,  finding
their  fir  ft  attempt  fuccefsful,  and  that  no  one  appeared  to
obftru6t  them  in  the  profecution  of  it, .  grew  elated  with  a
groundlefs  prefumption ;  and,  refolving  to  atft,  no  longer*

591  Taiov  tov  STrwaAXjUevcv  I«Aov.  called  C.  Julius  lulus  in  the  Fafti  con -
So  we  muft  read  thispaffage  with  the  fulares .

Vatican  manufcript;  becaufe  he  is


like


Book  VIII.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  R  N  ASSENSIS.  437

like  robbers,  they  marched  with  a  numerous  army  to  60  Hor-
tona,  and  took  it  by  ftorm ;  and,  after  they  had  plundered
both  the  country,  and  the  city,  returned  home  with  a  great
booty  :  As  to  the  Veientes,  the  anfwer  they  gave  to  the  Ro¬
man  embaffadors  was,  that  the  people,  who  had  laid  wafte
their  country,  did  -not  belong  to  their  nation,  but  to  the
other  Tyrrhenian  cities;  and,  then,  difmifled  them,  without
giving  them  any  fort  of  fatisfadtion  :  And  the  embaffadors,
in  their  return,  met  the  Veientes,  as  they  were  bringing
home  the  booty  they  had  taken  in  the  Roman  territories.
The  fenate,  being  informed  of  thefe  things  from  the  em¬
baffadors,  came  to  a  refolution,  not  only,  to  declare  war
againft  the  Veientes,  but  that  both  the  confuls  fhould  com¬
mand  their  army.  This  refolution  of  the  fenate  raifed  a
great  conteft,  and  many  oppofed  their  ingaging  in  this  war  ;
and  put  the  plebeians  in  mind  of  the  divifion  of  the  public
lands,  of  which  they  had  been  defrauded  after  a  vain  hope,
notwithftanding  the  decree  of  the  fenate,  pafled  near  five
years  before  for  carrying  it  into  execution :  They  fhewed
them,  alfo,  that  the  war  they  were  going  to  declare,  would
become  a  general  war,  if  all  Tyrrhenia,  by  joint  confent,
fhould  refolve  to  affift  their  countrymen.  However,  thefe.
feditious  reprefentations  had  no  effedl ;  the  people  confirmed
the  decree  of  the  fenate,  purfuant  to  the  opinion,  and  advice

co-  of  mot..  z  Cluver  has  fhewn  that  Una,  a  city  of  the  Latines  near  Prae-
we  ought  thus  to  read  the  name  of  this  nefte.
town,  which  the  Romans  called  Hor-

z  B.  iii.  p.  969,


433  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book. VIII.

of  Spurius  Lartius.  Upon  which,  the  confuls  marched  out
with  their  forces,  and  incamped  apart,  at  no  great  diftance
from  the  city  of  Veii:  And,  after  they  had  continued  there
feveral  days,  and  the  enemy  did  not  come  out  to  fight  them,
they  ravaged  as  great  a  part  of  their  country  as  they  could,
and  returned  home  with  the  army.'  And  nothing  elfe
worth  notice  happened,  during  their  confulfhip.


The  end  of  the  Eighth  Book.


ERRATA  in  VOL.  III.


AGE  i .  L.  4.  For  in  which.  Read  at

which.

P.  2.  laft  line.  f.  fuperintendance.  r.  fuperin-
„  tendence.

Pi  17.  L.  5.  f.  Lfcinnius.  r.  Licinius.

P.  35.  L.  1  i  f.  Malachus.  r.  Malacus.

P.  42.  L.  6.  f.  of.  r.  on.

P.  46.  Note  zo.  no  point  after  Taswa.

P.  50.  L.  5.  f.  Echetrani.  r.  Ecetrani.

P.  53.  L  3.  f.  in  which,  r.  at  which.

P.  64.  laft  line  but  three,  f.  they.  r.  the  ^Equi.
P.  74.  laft  line  but  three,  f.  dependance.  r.  de¬
pendence.

P.  75.  L.  io.  for  in  which,  r.  at  which.

P.  87.  laft  line  but  two.  f.  avaritious.  r.  avari¬
cious.

P.  93.  Column  2.  L.  5.  f.  Gelon.  r.  Gelo.

P.  109.  L.  1  8.  f.  thefe.  r.  them.

P.  129.  L.  2.  a  comma  after  thing.

P.  1 41.  laft  line  but  three,  f.  The  Women,
alfo.  r.  Even  the  women.

P.  146.  L.  2.  f.  fuperintendance.  r.  fuperin-
tendence.

P..  152.  L.  i.  f.  Licinnius.  r.  Licinius.

P.  I  59.  laft  line  but  one.  dele.  own.

P.  1 6 1 .  laft  line  but  one.  no  comma  after  thofe.
P.  165.  L.  1 1.  f.  umbrellos.  r.  umbrellas.

P.  1 77.  L.  2.  f.  or.  r.  nor.

P.  1 91.  L.  12  and  16.  f.  ediles.  r.  sediles.

Ib.  laft  line  but  one.  f.  plebeians,  r.  pa¬
tricians.

P.  192.  L.  15.  for  the  firft  they.  r.  the  patri¬
cians.

Ib.  L.  22  and  25.  f.  ediles.  r.  adiles.

P.  193.  L.  18.  f.  devaftatations.  r.  devaluations.
P.  195.  L.  7.  a  comma  after  ■proof, \  and  then
infert  by.

P.  202.  L.  13.  f.  the.  r.  their.

Ib.  L.  19  and  laft.  f.  ediles.  r.  asdiles*

P.  203.  L.  1  and  6.  f.  of.  r.  on.

P.  208.  C.  2.  L.  7.  f.  ediles.  r.  sediles.


P.  214.  laft  line  but  two.  f.  plebians.  r.  ple¬
beians.

lb.  laft  line.  f.  to  this  place,  r.  in  this  place.
P.  215.  L.  10.  f,  fecrefy.  r.  fecrecy.

P.  216.  L.  1.  a  comma  after  thofe.

P.  223.  L.  7.  f.  defire.  r.  intreat.

P.  235.  L.  4.  a  comma  after  and.  and  f.  that,
r.  fince.

P.  237.  L.  5  and  6.  f.  by  another,  that.  r.  by
that,  which.

Ib.  L.  1 1.  f.  dependants,  r.  dependents.

P.  243.  L.  10.  f.  feperate.  r.  feparate.

P.  252.  L.  14.  f.  of.  r.  on.

P.  253.  L.  t.  f.  Marcius  r.  :  And.

Ib,  L.  2.  after  defined,  r.  he.

P.  261.  laft  line.  f.  feperated.  r.  feparated.

P.  265.  laft  line  but  three,  f.  For.  r.  Since.

P.  273.  L.  11.  f.  hand  and  hand.  r.  hand  in
hand.

P.  277.  L.  17.  and  21.  f.  facrificed  and  facrifice,
r.  facrififed  and  facrifife.

Ib.  laft  line.  f.  flayed,  r.  fleaed.

P.  286.  L.  1 8.  f.  great  expence,  r.  vaft  expence.
P.  289.  L.  4.  f.  Volfcians.  r.  Volfci.

Ib.  L.  21.  f.  Echetra.  r.  Ecetra.

P.  299.  L.  2  1 .  after  approving,  r.  of.

P.  307.  L.  22.  f.  conquerers.  r.  conquerors.

P.  310.  L.  9.  a  comma  after  walls.

P.  3  1 1.  C.  I.  L.  12.  after  and,  infert  now  fays.

Ib.  C.  2.  L.  17.  after  be.r.  had.

P.  338.  L.  18.  f.  Longola.  r.  Longula.  (and  io
the  note.

Ib.  laft  line.  f.  Echetra.  r.  Ecetra.

P.  362.  L.  15.  f.  facrifice.  r.  facrifife.

P.  382.  L.  9.  f.  cowardice,  r.  cowardife.

Ib.  L.  15.  confider.  r.  confider.

P.  388.  L.  12.  f.  him.  r.  his  perfon.

P.  403.  C.  1.  L.  3.  f.  whicis.  r.  which  is,

P.  426.  L.  6.  f.  in.  r.  into.

P.  43  5.  L.  3.  no  comma  after  even.
